<BEGIN_okeeffe-1767-2>

<P_1>

<heading>

The She Gallant : or Square-Toes <font> Outwitted . <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,1.4

Act I . OKEEFFE-1767-2,1.5

Scene I . OKEEFFE-1767-2,1.6

<font> A Street . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,1.7

<$$heading>

<font> Enter <$$font> Delamour <font> and <$$font> Thady <font> in
travelling dresses , meeting Young <$$font> Woodville .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,1.9

Young <font> Woodville . <$$font> Ha ! <font> Delamour ! <$$font>
welcome from <font> Paris <$$font> , my dear friend <font> <paren>
embrace ; <$$paren> <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,1.10

and honest <font> Thady <$$font> , how dost do ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,1.11

<font> Tha. <$$font> Je vous remercies ; I am bravely , sir ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,1.12

thank your axing . OKEEFFE-1767-2,1.13

<font> Del. <$$font> The sight of my dear <font> Woodville <$$font> ,
in good health , gives me infinite pleasure . OKEEFFE-1767-2,1.14

I am well , <P_2> you see ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.15

but my heart , ah , <font> Woodville <$$font> , not all the sparkling
beauties of the <font> Louvre <$$font> have had power to efface my
charming <font> Emily's <$$font> dear , dear idea . OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.16

But how does the lovely girl ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.17

- say , is she in town , that I may fly - OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.18

ha ! what ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.19

Y. <font> Wood . <$$font> I am extremely sorry that I am oblig'd ,
like your evil genius , to meet you with ill news on your arrival ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.20

but all the consolation I can afford my dear friend , is an assurance of
my sister's constancy - OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.21

To keep you no longer in suspense - my father has promis'd her hand to
Sir <font> Geofry Ginkle <$$font> - OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.22

<font> Del. <$$font> Cursed , infernal avarice ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.23

What motive else could have induced , the hitherto kindest parent , to
make a sacrifice of his darling , his blooming <font> Emily <$$font> ,
to such an old - OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.24

By Heaven I@ @'ll go this instant , OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.25

and - OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.26

<font> Tha. <$$font> Arrah sir , sir , your putting yourself into
passions , and flurries , is mighty silly - mighty silly , upon my soul
- OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.27

Couggar - I@ @'ll be bound to put you in a way , that you may have your
own game with him . OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.28

I@ @'ll tell you , d'@ @ye see , I@ @'ll watch this Mr. <font> Gingle
<$$font> , if it@ @'s <font> Gingle <$$font> you call him , and
Marumshandoul , if I do@ @n't put the speak out of him ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.29

- and then , when the old devil is quiet in his grave , you may cuckold
him as fast as you please . OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.30

Eh , sir , <font> <paren> turning to <$$font> Woodville , <$$paren>
wou'd@ @n't there be some fun in that ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.31

<font> <paren> All this while <$$font> Delamour <font> walks about in
great disorder . <$$paren> <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,2.32

<P_3>

Y. <font> Wood . <$$font> What , <font> Thady <$$font> , sure you
would not commit murder . OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.34

<font> Tha. <$$font> Murther , arrah fat {COM:sic} , murther ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.35

an ould son of a whore that has one leg already in the grave , and if I
trip the other after it , is that murther ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.36

Oh the devil a murther in that , sure . OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.37

Y. <font> Wood . <$$font> Come , come , <font> Delamour <$$font> ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.38

do@ @n't be so uneasy , OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.39

your case is not desperate , OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.40

the indissoluble knot is yet to be tied . OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.41

<font> Del. <$$font> Happy <font> Woodville <$$font> , happy in being
conscious you posses my sister's heart unrivall'd , free from the harsh
injunctions of an obdurate parent to thwart your loves -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.42

but I - OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.43

Y. <font> Wood . <$$font> Ah , <font> Delamour <$$font> , I am no
object to be envied , and far from having an assurance of <font>
Florimel's <$$font> affections ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.44

happy , then , indeed should I be ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.45

but she is still the same gay , unthinking , lovely , witty rogue ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.46

if in the most unfeign'd rapture I breathe my love , the return is a
loud laugh , an opera tune , or a ridiculous simile , which , faith ,
sometimes makes me look very silly ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.47

indeed , in her more serious moments , which are but few , she , perhaps
, gives me an hearing , when all at once a crowd of gayer thoughts rush
on , and kill at once the hopes wherewith I was elated a few minutes
before . OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.48

<font> Del. <$$font> You shall find me a powerful advocate in your
cause , OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.49

but excuse me for deviating from the maxims of our modern professors of
the law ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,3.50

my proceedings in your favour , will not be <P_4> wholly disinterested ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,4.51

you must give me all the assistance in your power , to break the
measures of your father and Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,4.52

but how such a notion enter'd into his doating brain , is to me amazing
. OKEEFFE-1767-2,4.53

I@ @'ve often heard him express the utmost abhorrence to matrimony ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,4.54

but then , when I reflect upon my <font> Emily's <$$font> beauty , I ca@
@n't wonder at his being caught ; old goat - OKEEFFE-1767-2,4.55

Y. <font> Wood . <$$font> Love is far from being the sole motive of
Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> 's addresses to <font> Emily ; <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,4.56

the vain hopes of having an heir of his own begetting , to inherit his
estate , <paren> which , you know , is considerable , <$$paren> and to
mortify his nephew ; these are the spurs which prick him on , in the
road . which has hitherto appear'd so dreadful to him .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,4.57

I dare say , you know this nephew ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,4.58

as Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> had no children of his own , and intended
never to marry , he bred him up under his own care , OKEEFFE-1767-2,4.59

placed his chief felicity in having him receive those accomplishments ,
proper for a person , who <paren> as he was to inherit Sir <font> Geofry
<$$font> 's estate after his decease <$$paren> probably might make a
figure in the great world ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,4.60

these accomplishments , join'd to a natural fine genius , a graceful
person , and a beneficent courteous disposition , gain'd him the esteem
of all who knew him - OKEEFFE-1767-2,4.61

He was the darling of his uncle . OKEEFFE-1767-2,4.62

But in this happy state , he , following the dictates of love before
those of his interest , unknown to his uncle , espous'd a young lady
whose only want was a fortune sufficient to render <P_5> her a match
suitable for the heir of Sir <font> Geofry . <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,5.63

<font> Tha. <$$font> Upon my word I commend his notion .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,5.64

Y. <font> Wood . <$$font> This imprudence of the young gentleman so
exasperated the old knight , that , when he heard of it , he swore he
should never be a shilling the better for him ; refus'd to see him ; and
now this unfortunate couple are oblig'd to subsist upon a small
patrimony , left him by his father , in a remote part of <font> Cornwall
. <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,5.65

<font> Del. <$$font> By your account , I really pity them ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,5.66

and wish with my soul , for their sake as well as my own , the current
of his affections cou'd be turn'd to its former channel .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,5.67

Y. <font> Wood . <$$font> Oh 't@ @is the most inflexible , positive
Curmudgeon ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,5.68

you might as soon persuade a <font> Jewish Rabbi <$$font> to turn <font>
Jesuit . <$$font> . OKEEFFE-1767-2,5.69

<font> Tha. <$$font> A Rabbit turn Jeshit {COM:sic} - upon my soul a
comical change . OKEEFFE-1767-2,5.70

Howsomever , they@ @'ve very pretty boroughs ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,5.71

where we were they call 'em Colleges . OKEEFFE-1767-2,5.72

Y. <font> Wood . <$$font> He@ @'s so fix'd on the completion of this
marriage , that , to make sure of my father's consent , he has offer'd
to take <font> Emily <$$font> without a portion ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,5.73

there he touch'd the vein ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,5.74

my father , at first , shock'd at such an odd proposition , gave his old
friend very little encouragement ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,5.75

but the mention of no fortune , together with Sir <font> Geofry's
<$$font> great estate , stifled all parental tenderness ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,5.76

and he now exerts all his authority , to <P_6> oblige poor <font> Emily
<$$font> to name the day , and , till then , to look upon Sir <font>
Geofry <$$font> as a gentleman , whom his prudence has destin'd her for
a husband . OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.77

You may judge the distress these commands gave her , and the conflict
she suffers , between her aversion to Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> , and
the consequence of her acquiescence to her father's will .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.78

<font> Del. <$$font> Poor dear girl ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.79

But cou'd I not get a sight of her ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.80

<font> Wood . <$$font> Oh , by no means , OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.81

if my father knew of your arrival , 't@ @would bar all access to your
future happiness , as he@ @'d oblige her to marry Sir <font> Geofry
<$$font> immediately ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.82

as yet , I@ @'ll not inform <font> Emily <$$font> you@ @'re in town ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.83

I@ @'ll meet you this evening at <font> Fynmore's <$$font> in <font>
Pall-mall <$$font> , where , I hope , we@ @'ll think of some expedients
, for our mutual advantages ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.84

adieu , dear <font> Delamour . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.85

<font> Del. <$$font> Farewel , you@ @'ll not fail .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.86

Come <font> Thady : <$$font> <bracket> <font> Exit <$$font> Delamour .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.87

<font> Tha. <$$font> Sir , Sir - Sir , I@ @'ve one favor to beg of your
Honor . OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.88

<font> Wood . <$$font> Well , Thady , let me hear ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.89

if it@ @'s in my power to do you one , you may command me .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.90

<font> Tha. <$$font> I want to know , sir - you@ @'ll , pardon my
boldness - But - Sir , are you sure She is not - OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.91

<font> Wood . <$$font> Am I sure she is not ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.92

who is not - OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.93

what , or who do you mean ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.94

<font> Tha. Betty <$$font> , Sir , little <font> Betty <$$font> , madam
<font> Emily's <$$font> maid . OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.95

<font> Wood . <$$font> But am I sure she is not , what ?
OKEEFFE-1767-2,6.96

<P_7>

<font> Tha. <$$font> Married , sir . OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.98

Y. <font> Wood . <$$font> Oh - <font> Thady <$$font> , I understand
you ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.99

why <font> Thady <$$font> you@ @'re very far gone in love ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.100

and is little <font> Betty <$$font> so happy as to be the object of your
flame ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.101

<font> Tha. <$$font> Burn me , sur , OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.102

but I@ @'m in a flame , sure enough ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.103

but , sur , may_be some ould crab-jaw'd fellow or other , with a long
purse , has laid a claw over her , as well as her mistress -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.104

Ogn , I am very fond of <font> Betty . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.105

<font> Wood . <$$font> Well , <font> Thady <$$font> , to comfort you ,
I believe Mrs. <font> Betty <$$font> has kept both heart and hand for
you . OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.106

<font> Tha. <$$font> Oh , upon my word , she loves me well enough ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.107

oh , that the poor devil does . OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.108

<font> Y. Wood . <$$font> Farewel , honest Thady -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.109

But you must not think of seeing your little <font> Betty <$$font> , as
't@ @would be contrary to your master's interest , for any of our family
to know he@ @'s in town . OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.110

<font> Tha. <$$font> Oh , never fear , sur ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.111

I@ @'ll be bound she sha@ @n't know I@ @'m in <font> London ; <$$font>
no , no ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.112

but , sur , if you@ @'d give your kind love , and surreverance to her
for me , I@ @'d - OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.113

Y. <font> Wood . <$$font> Ha , ha , why <font> Thady <$$font> , that
wou'd be letting her know I had seen you . OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.114

<font> Tha. <$$font> Aarah now aghra - Oh , upon my soul so it wou'd be
sure enough ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.115

oh what a goose I am . OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.116

Y. <font> Wood . <$$font> Farewel , <font> Thady . <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.117

<font> Tha <$$font> , Sur , I@ @'m your most humble and obsquese .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.118

<bracket> <font> Exeunt at several doors . <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,7.119

<P_8>

<heading>

Scene II . OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.122

<$$heading>

<font> A Chamber in Sir <$$font> Anthony's <font> House <$$font> ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.124

Emily <font> is discovered sitting melancholy . <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.125

<font> Emily . <$$font> How cruel is it for fathers to assume so unjust
a prerogative , as to oblige children to marry who they please .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.126

- Because they are the means of bringing us into the world , they think
to be ever after the sole disposers , and masters of our inclinations ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.127

and will make us happy , or miserable , according to their capricious
tempers . OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.128

Ah , unkind <font> Delamour ! <$$font> after repeated vows of
inviolable constancy , to leave me to the perils I now suffer - on the
eve of being torn from you for ever . OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.129

- But here comes my father and my wrinkled Strephon -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.130

Heigh_ho - OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.131

<font> Enter Old <$$font> Woodville <font> and Sir <$$font> Geofry
Ginkle . OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.132

Sir <font> Ant. <$$font> Why , how now child , - <font> Milly <$$font>
, - what , still melancholy . OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.133

<font> Milly - <$$font> what the plague , you@ @'ll make me angry at
last . OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.134

- Come , OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.135

receive Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> as you ought . OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.136

<font> Emi. <$$font> But , dear sir , consider . OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.137

Sir <font> Ant. <$$font> I tell you I@ @'ll consider nothing , only -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.138

Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> , I beg your pardon ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.139

I was talking with my daughter , about some affairs relative to the
marriage . OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.140

- I must step to the <font> Bedford <$$font> Coffee-house for half an
hour , or so - to meet a gentleman - OKEEFFE-1767-2,8.141

Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> , as you@ @'ll eat a bit of <P_9> dinner with
us ; I hope to find you here when I come back ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.142

bye , bye , <font> Milly - <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.143

Servant , Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.144

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Ay , ay , <font> Sir Anthony ; <$$font> here ,
in the sun of my <font> Emilia's <$$font> presence , will I bask till
thy return . OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.145

Sir <font> Ant. <$$font> Ah , ha ! well said , Sir <font> Geofry ;
<$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.146

shew me a young dog of them a more ardent lover ; ah , ha !
OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.147

<bracket> <font> Exit . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.148

<font> Emil. <$$font> I wou'd , sir , that sun had sufficient power to
melt you into pity . OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.149

<paren> I must summon all my little rhetoric , to turn this persecution
from me , <font> aside . <$$paren> <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.150

Think , sir , the violence you are doing me , in separating me for ever
from the man I love ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.151

affinity in years , sentiment , circumstances , with him , all , all
conspire to render me unhappy , in marrying you ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.152

if so , you shall have my hand alone ; as my heart is the property of
another , OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.153

you ca@ @n't expect it . OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.154

- Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Zounds ! at that rate she@ @'d think
nothing of giving the possession of her whole body to him that has her
heart , if she@ @'d a good Opportunity ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.155

one comfort , he@ @'s in <font> Paris ; <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.156

wou'd to heaven some testy Monsieur wou'd run him through the body .
<paren> <font> Aside . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.157

<font> Emil. <$$font> What , sir , am I not worthy of an answer ?
OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.158

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Madam , I hope you@ @'ll pardon me .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,9.159

But I was considering , whether I should be married in a suit of brocade
, <paren> which , I assure you , is a very elegant suit , <$$paren> or a
suit of white <P_10> and silver : OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.160

Oh ! the white and silver is very pretty , very pretty , indeed !
OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.161

Now , Madam , I@ @'d consult your taste , which I know is exquisite ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.162

which do you think most proper ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.163

<font> Emi. <bracket> Aside . <$$bracket> <$$font> The monster mocks
me ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.164

well , I@ @'ll serve him in his turn . OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.165

- Oh , sir , white and silver , by all means , OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.166

<paren> I@ @'ll pluck up my spirit <$$paren> OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.167

how unfortunate am I , to be prepossess'd in favour of another ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.168

numbers of ladies of beauty and rank would be rejoiced , and with extasy
accept of the honor of being lady <font> Ginkle ; <$$font> setting your
fine person , your graceful figure , your polite address , your -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.169

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Dear madam , where are you going ?
OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.170

<paren> Ay , the girl@ @'s in love with me , OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.171

that@ @'s poz , tho' she wo@ @n't own it , OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.172

or how could she find out my perfections ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.173

She@ @'s a fine girl ! <$$paren> OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.174

<font> <paren> He struts about with an air <$$font> .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.175

<font> Emi. <$$font> I say , sir , setting aside these irresistible
perfections , your vast estate might captivate some gambling Dowager of
threescore . OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.176

Ha , ha , ha ! since I ca@ @n't bring him to reason , I@ @'ll give him
a surfeit of my company ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.177

I wish <font> Florimel <$$font> were here to help me out .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.178

<paren> Florimel <font> sings without <$$paren> . <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.179

Thank heaven , my wish is accomplish'd . OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.180

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Ah , zounds ! I wish I was out of the house ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.181

now will they cut me up ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.182

they@ @'ll have no more mercy upon me , than an alderman would have upon
a Turtle , at a city feast . OKEEFFE-1767-2,10.183

<P_11>

<font> Enter <$$font> Florimel ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.185

<font> she stops short at the sight of Sir <$$font> Geofry ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.186

<font> with seeming amazement walks round him . <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.187

<font> Flo. <$$font> Oh , bless me - <font> Emily - <$$font> where got
you this figure ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.188

Oh , at the sale at Spring-gardens , I suppose ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.189

't@ @is very pretty , quite antique , OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.190

moves admirably ; by clockwork , to be sure ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.191

the nose , for all the world , like a bunch of Grapes ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.192

- Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Zounds ! my nose like a bunch of Grapes ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.193

what the devil is she at ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.194

- Hem - Madam - I - OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.195

<font> Flo. <$$font> As I live and breathe , Sir <font> Geofry Ginkle ;
<$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.196

my dear knight , pardon me ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.197

I heard that <font> Williams <$$font> , the Chinaman , had imported some
new figures as large as life , OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.198

and as I knew <font> Emily <$$font> was , there yesterday , I protest ,
I took your worship for a purchase she had made ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.199

your head went admirably <font> <paren> mimicks <$$paren> <$$font>
better than any Mandarin , tho' you look more like an odious ,
old_fashioned British Druid ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.200

no , no , you do not neither , OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.201

for sweet simplicity sits on each contracted feature of that reverend
visage ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.202

I@ @'ll tell you ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.203

stand you two together , as I live , you put me in mind of <font>
Chaucer's <$$font> Tale of <font> January <$$font> and <font> May .
<$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.204

<paren> Emi. <font> and <$$font> Flo. <font> laugh ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.205

he looks confus'd . <$$paren> <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.206

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Ay , ay , 't@ @is what I expected , <font>
<paren> bows low . <$$paren> <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.207

Hem , ladies , I@ @'m obliged to mortify myself , by a little absence
from this amiable presence . OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.208

<font> Flo. <$$font> Oh , my dear sir , I protest you shall not leave
us , OKEEFFE-1767-2,11.209

<font> <paren> sings , <$$paren> <$$font> <P_12> <font> Thy presence
could ease me , When nothing <$$font> , &c. OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.210

<font> Emi <$$font> What , sir <font> Geofry <$$font> , is it thus you@
@'ll forsake me ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.211

inconstant , cruel sir <font> Geofry ; <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.212

and is all your boasted love no more than this ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.213

<font> <paren> affects to weep . <$$paren> <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.214

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Ah , poor thing ! she loves me ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.215

that@ @'s poz ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.216

my dear little <font> Emily <$$font> , do@ @n't cry ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.217

you know I love you . OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.218

<font> <paren> She bursts out laughing in his face . <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.219

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Very well , madam , very well ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.220

I see I@ @'m duped by my good nature , OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.221

but , by the la , I@ @'ll - OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.222

<font> Emi. <$$font> Oh , heaven ! he@ @'ll beat us ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.223

- you@ @'ll stay till my father comes , sir <font> Geofry . <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.224

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Madam , you@ @'ll excuse me ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.225

I hear your new gardener is come to town ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.226

I@ @'ve a curiosity to see his taste in laying out the tulip parterre ,
by the laurel walk . OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.227

<font> Flor. <$$font> Sir <font> Geofry - <$$font> a word ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.228

beware of going nigh the pond ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.229

oh , these ponds have been often fatal to despairing lovers - Sir .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.230

<font> Geo. <$$font> I wish to the lord , you were heels over head , to
the apron string , in it . OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.231

I@ @'ll marry <font> Emily <$$font> for mere spight , that I will -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.232

<font> Flor. <$$font> Sir <font> Geofry - <$$font> I@ @'ve something
else to say to you - OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.233

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Ay , - I must decamp . OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.234

<bracket> Florimel <font> goes to hold him , OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.235

he breaks from her , OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.236

and runs away . OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.237

They laugh . <$$bracket> <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,12.238

<font> Emi <$$font> , I believe , really , <font> Florimel <$$font> ,
you envy my happiness , in having such an accomplish'd swain <P_13> to
sigh at my feet ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.239

for whenever you come , you chase him away ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.240

but seriously , how to avert the danger that threatens me , I know not -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.241

I wish , with all my soul , your brother were in <font> London <$$font>
- OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.242

<font> Flor. <$$font> I must not let her know he@ @'s come home ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.243

' 't@ @would hinder her ever consenting to my scheme . <bracket> <font>
Aside . <$$bracket> OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.244

Emily <$$font> , do@ @n't make yourself uneasy for that ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.245

accept my service by way of proxy for him ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.246

but <font> Emily <$$font> , I@ @'ll give up my commission , when I@ @'ve
gone as far as a woman can go ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.247

the remainder I@ @'ll leave to himself - OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.248

<font> Emi. <$$font> Oh , my dear , mad girl , let me hear what project
has enter'd into that fertile brain of thine , to serve me -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.249

<font> Flor. <$$font> Project ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.250

I have , indeed , a project ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.251

but before you know it , I must have your promise of compliance to my
directions - OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.252

<font> Emi. <$$font> Oh , with pleasure , OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.253

for I@ @'m sure , it must be for my good ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.254

let me hear , my dear Sibyl - OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.255

<font> Flor. <$$font> Not so fast ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.256

act as I instruct you , and I@ @'ll lay my life sir <font> Geofry
<$$font> shall be as eager for breaking off the match , as ever he was
to forward it - OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.257

<font> Emi. <$$font> Well , well , I@ @'m all attention -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.258

<font> Flor. <$$font> Well , then , how wou'd you like a gallant ?
OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.259

Wou'd you take that gallant to your arms , to your bed -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.260

<font> Emi. <$$font> Fye , fye , <font> Florimel <$$font> , insult not
the afflictions of your friend ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.261

- <font> Flor. <$$font> Remember your promise ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,13.262

a gallant <P_14> you must have ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.263

but I@ @'ll turn traitor to you , and bring your father and sir <font>
Geofry <$$font> ; to a thorough conviction of the freedoms between this
spark and you . OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.264

<font> Emi. <$$font> Sure , my dear <font> Florimel <$$font> 's not in
earnest - OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.265

<font> Flor. <$$font> Oh , I see , madam , you@ @'ve no occasion for my
advice , or assistance ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.266

I wish your ladyship a good morning - OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.267

<font> Emi. <$$font> Oh ! I@ @'ll submit to whatever you propose for
my freedom . OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.268

<font> Flo. <$$font> Ha , ha , ha ! I see , <font> Emily <$$font> ,
you have not such an aversion to a youthful sprightly gallant ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.269

but faith you@ @'ll be deceiv'd , OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.270

for , behold that gay young fellow before you ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.271

what , my dear , wou'd you be afraid to venture between a pair of sheets
with me ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.272

you@ @'ll find me as harmless a bedfellow as Sir <font> Geofry <$$font>
himself - OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.273

<font> Emi <$$font> , Dear romantic girl , but what can all this tend to
? OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.274

- <font> Flor. <$$font> Can you trust your maid <font> Betty ?
<$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.275

if so , she@ @'ll be necessary - OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.276

<font> Emi. <$$font> With my life - OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.277

<font> Flor. <$$font> Well , then , you had better call her , to
receive her instructions - OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.278

<font> Emi. <$$font> Who@ @'s there ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.279

<bracket> <font> Enter <$$font> Footman <$$bracket>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.280

Send <font> Betty <$$font> here . OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.281

<font> Flor. <$$font> Now , pray do@ @n't interrupt me .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,14.282

Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> , notwithstanding his devoirs to you , has an
aversion to the sex , which , by the flattering hopes of an ample
revenge upon his nephew , <P_15> and your beauty , <font> <paren>
curtsies , <$$paren> <$$font> has been greatly abated :
OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.283

Now , I think our only way is , to revive that aversion , by some very
flagrant proofs of your levity . OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.284

<font> <paren> Enter <$$font> Betty . <$$paren> OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.285

How d'@ @ye do , ' Mrs. <font> Betty ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.286

- Bet. <$$font> At your ladyship's service , me'm -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.287

<font> Flor. <$$font> Now , if our petticoat triumvirate does not
counterplot , and defeat , the prudent schemes of our brace of wise grey
beards , may my doom be to die an old maid ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.288

but to business . OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.289

- I@ @'ll immediately write an anonymous letter to Sir <font> Geofry
<$$font> , as it were from an unknown friend - OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.290

I@ @'ll let him know , that the person he designs for his wife , is
unworthy of that honor , by having criminal connection with a certain
gentleman ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.291

- To corroborate this , I@ @'ll appoint a time , when he may have ocular
demonstration of her dishonour ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.292

he@ @'ll immediately fall into his old opinions , and , receiving this
as orthodox , fly to the place of appointment . OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.293

Now I@ @'ve two or three suits <font> of Delamour's <$$font> cloaths -
one suit remarkably rich - OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.294

these will I put on , OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.295

and at the time appointed , which may be some very unreasonable hour ,
will come , and be let in by <font> Betty - <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.296

Then you shall see me , <font> en cavalier ; <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.297

and you must own a figure less agreeable wou'd create a jealousy , in
one more proof against deception , than your old lover .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.298

<font> Emi. <$$font> Oh , my dear <font> Florimel <$$font> , the first
thing he@ @'ll do , is certainly to tell my father ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,15.299

and I <P_16> dread the effects of his rage . OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.300

- In his first transports of fury , he@ @'ll turn me out of doors ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.301

then my imaginary shame will be publick . OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.302

No , I could not bear to be esteemed what I most abhor .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.303

- Ah , <font> Florimel <$$font> , you have my sincere thanks ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.304

but I must not , can@ @not think of putting your scheme into execution .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.305

<font> Flor. <$$font> Come , come , OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.306

I must use you as a kind nurse would a froward child , force you to
what@ @'s for your good . OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.307

- You must , can , and shall carry this inimitable scheme into execution
. OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.308

- Faith , like a poor poet , I must praise the productions of my own
brain , since I can get no other to do it . OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.309

- Eh , Mrs. <font> Betty <$$font> , what do you think ?
OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.310

<font> Bet. <$$font> Indeed , ma'am , I think your scheme is <font>
unlimitable <$$font> , as your ladyship says ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.311

and I thinks as how , if my lady knows what@ @'s what , she@ @'d stop at
nothing to give sir <font> Geofry a gust <$$font> to her -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.312

<font> Emi. <$$font> A disgust , you mean . OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.313

<font> Bet. <$$font> Yes , ma'am <font> ; <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.314

and when the truth is afterwards known , it will resound to your
ladyship's credit , OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.315

and wo@ @n't hurt your character ; no , not in the least .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.316

<font> Flor. <$$font> Oh ! <font> Emily <$$font> , 't@ @would be a
precious husband , <font> <paren> Coughs , and mimicks Sir <$$font>
Geofry , <$$paren> with his flannel night cap and drawers -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.317

" Oh , this damn'd gout - OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.318

I@ @'m almost tipsy with all the Port I@ @'ve drank -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.319

yet no ease . OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.320

- <font> Mily <$$font> , come to bed , dear ; " OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.321

then , says you , " You know , sir , I@ @'m engag'd to my lady <font>
Cheatwell@ @'s <$$font> rout . " OKEEFFE-1767-2,16.322

<font> <paren> Coughs <$$paren> <$$font> <P_17> " Pshaw , pox on her
rout ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.323

come , come , OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.324

you@ @'ll find the good effects in the morning . OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.325

Lay my ptisan by the bedside - OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.326

Oh , lord ! oh , lord ! I was forgetting my swanskin wrapper .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.327

- Hand it to me , lovey . OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.328

- Help it on - there - there - OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.329

Zounds , my dear , take care of my toes . OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.330

- Oh ! this confounded rheumatism . " OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.331

- <font> Emi. <$$font> Well done , <font> Florimel ; <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.332

you@ @'ve frightened me so much , by your picture of the connubial state
with Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> , that I@ @'ll submit to whatever you@
@'ll have me . OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.333

<font> Flor. <$$font> That@ @'s a good child . OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.334

Now to my charms , and to my wily trains , of power to cheat the eye ,
with blear illusion , and offer false presentments . <font> <paren>
Heroically . <$$paren> <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.335

<font> Emil. <$$font> Well said , my dear enchantress .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.336

<font> Flor. <$$font> I@ @'ll go strait about my letter .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.337

Farewel , <font> Emily <$$font> , OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.338

and pray for my success . OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.339

<font> Emil. <$$font> With all my heart . OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.340

Come , <font> Betty . <$$font> <bracket> <font> Exeunt omnes <$$font> ,
<$$bracket> OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.341

<heading>

Scene , OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.343

a <font> Street . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.344

<$$heading>

<font> Sir <$$font> Geofry <font> Solus . <$$font> A mad wench , <font>
that Florimel ! <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.346

she never fails to make me look ridiculous before my wife , that is to
be ; which , when she is , I@ @'ll take care she shall have little of
her conversation . OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.347

- How the young fellows will fleer at my marriage ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.348

but my ungracious nephew - how he@ @'ll take it . OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.349

Zounds ! I wish she was pregnant this moment OKEEFFE-1767-2,17.350

<P_18>

- I@ @'ll soon do it ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.352

aye , aye , I do@ @n't fear - OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.353

yes , ' t'@ @will be a boy , OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.354

<bracket> <font> Enter a Porter , who eyes him with great circumspection
. <$$font> <$$bracket> OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.355

What does that fellow look at me so earnestly for -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.356

Now , if I was married , I should think he smoak'd my horns .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.357

Well , sir rascal , how do you like me ? - eh - OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.358

<font> Port. <$$font> Aye , aye , 't@ @is he - OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.359

this letter for your honour . OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.360

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Let@ @'s see - OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.361

thirty years ago I should think this came from some lady that eyed me
from a window - OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.362

Where@ @'s my spectacles ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.363

- hem - 't@ @is meet I put them on . OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.364

Now , sir , for our letter . OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.365

<font> <paren> Reads ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.366

while he@ @'s reading , the Porter sneaks {TEXT:sneak} off <$$paren>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.367

' Sir , ' <$$font> <paren> very well , <$$paren> ' <font> Though by the
manner you receive this , you might doubt the truths which it contains ,
yet , let your care to prove them convince you , 't@ @was dictated by a
disinterested friendship ' - <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.368

<paren> I@ @'m very much obliged to my friend - OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.369

Here , you sir - who sent you with this letter ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.370

- Eh - speak boldly , man - OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.371

<paren> <font> Takes off his spectacles , OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.372

and looks about . <$$paren> <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.373

The rascal@ @'s run away - OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.374

Well , to proceed - OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.375

<font> <paren> Reads . <$$paren> ' Know sir , the lady you intend to
take as a partner to your bed and fortune , has lavishly bestowed her
honour on a certain young gentleman ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.376

who he is , you may probably find out . OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.377

- Start not , sir , at this information , as I@ @'ll put you in a way ,
with your eyes to be a witness of her shame ' <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.378

<paren> The devil you will <$$paren> OKEEFFE-1767-2,18.379

<font> " At the hour of two exactly <$$font> , <P_19> <font> this night
, wait disguised at her father's door , and you@ @'ll see this gentleman
let in by <$$font> Betty <font> the maid . " <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.380

<paren> Ah ! the devil take <font> Betty <$$font> the maid ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.381

the bawd , you mean , my good friend . <$$paren> OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.382

<font> ' He , on these occasions , is let out in the same manner at six
in the morning ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.383

that by proving this , you may avoid a match so much to your dishonour ,
is the sincere wish , of , sir <$$font> , <font> ' Your unknown friend .
<$$font> Anonymous . ' OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.384

I@ @'m your most obedient humble servant , my good friend , ANONYMOUS -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.385

Very fine , this - OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.386

What a noose have I escap'd ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.387

Oh , lord ! - No , it@ @'s all a damn'd lie , OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.388

and I do@ @n't believe a word of it - OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.389

But zounds , am I not told the time , the place , each circumstance !
OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.390

- A@ @n't it at my own election to prove it - ha ! ha !
OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.391

I believe I@ @'ll catch 'em ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.392

they thought I would not get out of my warm bed at midnight -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.393

There they reckoned without their host - OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.394

Zounds ! I wish the hour was come - OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.395

Well , till then , I@ @'ll suspend my judgment - OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.396

But , hold - OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.397

for a disguise - let me see - OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.398

a livery ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.399

no - that would be too remarkable - OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.400

A great coat like a watchman , and a pale in my hand -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.401

ay , that@ @'s good - OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.402

my real person would spoil sport . OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.403

<bracket> <font> Exit . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,19.404

<P_20>

<heading>

Act II . OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.407

<$$heading>

Scene , OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.409

<font> the Street before Sir <$$font> Anthony <font> 's House ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.410

Enter Sir <$$font> Geofry <font> in his disguise . <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.411

Sir <font> Geofry . <$$font> 'T@ @is pretty dark .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.412

Stay , which is the house ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.413

Aye , this is it ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.414

now for our amorous spark - OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.415

I believe 't@ @is nigh the hour - OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.416

I@ @'ll draw as close to the door as possible ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.417

if I could get a sight of his face It@ @'s well I@ @'ve this disguise ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.418

if some of the collectors should find me in <font> propria persona
<$$font> , they@ @'d have a booty - OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.419

Hush ! who@ @'s that ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.420

eh , a man ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.421

no , it@ @s only a post ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.422

pox on it - I think I hear a door open ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.423

no , it@ @s the creaking of that damn'd sign . OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.424

<bracket> <font> The clock strikes two , OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.425

and the window opens . <$$font> <$$bracket> OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.426

Zounds ? the window opens - at the nick . OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.427

<font> Bet. at the window . <$$paren> <$$font> Sir , sir , are you
there ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.428

No ; it@ @'s a dark night . OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.429

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Not so dark , but I can see your iniquity .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.430

<font> Bet. <$$font> I wish he were come - OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.431

I hope my mistress will have such good opportunities when she@ @'s
married to Sir <font> Geofry . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.432

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> The devil doubt you . OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.433

<font> Bet. <$$font> Oh , yes , I@ @'ll warrant the old stupid cuckold
will be snoring fast at these hours . OKEEFFE-1767-2,20.434

<P_21>

Certainly , Sir <font> Geofry@ @'s <$$font> an ugly old devil faugh !
OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.436

I loath the thoughts of him . OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.437

<bracket> <font> Spits out . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.438

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Zounds ! the jade has spit upon my nose ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.439

I wish I had a charg'd pistol , OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.440

I@ @'d blow her off her perch , OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.441

<font> Bet. <$$font> I wish with all my heart he were come .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.442

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Ay , ay , he@ @'s come so often , he@ @'s
cloy'd . OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.443

<font> Bet. <$$font> 'T@ @is a fine still night - OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.444

I@ @'ll divert myself with a song . OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.445

<bracket> <font> Sings . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.446

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Damn your song - OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.447

There@ @'s a jade OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.448

there@ @'s a <font> Syren . OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.449

<bracket> Enter <$$font> Florimel <font> dressed in men's cloaths , and
a hackney coachman ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.450

pays the coachman . <$$bracket> <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.451

Zounds ! he@ @'s here - OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.452

Oh , my trusty friend , Anonymous - OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.453

Stay , I@ @'ve a good mind to give him a knock on the powder'd pate with
my pole . OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.454

<bracket> Florimel , <font> as accidentally , drops a paper ; <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.455

Betty <font> comes down OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.456

and lets her in . <$$bracket> <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.457

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Ha ! a letter ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.458

this may inform me something . OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.459

No , there@ @'s no name . OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.460

Shall I alarm the family ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.461

No ; I@ @'ll go after this coachman , and enquire the name of his fare .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.462

<bracket> <font> Exit . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.463

<font> Enter <$$font> Thady . OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.464

<font> Tha. <$$font> Well , upon my soul , this is comical enough -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.465

I cou'd take my oath upon the Bible Evangelist , that it was my master I
seen going to the hackney-coach . OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.466

I cou'd swear to the cloaths ; the very grand suit he brought from
<font> Venice - <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.467

Well , the directions he gave the coachman , was to drive like a devil
to Sir <font> Anthony Woodville's <$$font> , in <font> Bruton Street
<$$font> - OKEEFFE-1767-2,21.468

Arrah , what can <P_22> he be about . OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.469

Well , well , leave me alone for a good guess - OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.470

Upon my word , I think if he diverts himself an hour or so with madam
<font> Emilia <$$font> , I@ @'ve a good right to do the same with <font>
Betty <$$font> the maid - OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.471

Stay , I believe this is the house ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.472

ay , ay , I@ @'m right enough . OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.473

He@ @'s got in , OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.474

I see the coach drive at a devil of a rate . OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.475

I wish I@ @'d got up behind it - OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.476

Upon my soul , he@ @'d be a little surprized to see <font> Thady -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.477

By <$$font> this time they@ @'ve taken their first sleep .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.478

If I could see <font> Betty . OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.479

<bracket> Peeps thro' the key-hole . <$$bracket> OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.480

Betty ! Betty ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.481

- <$$font> Stay , I believe she remembers my voice -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.482

I@ @'ll sing a bit of a song - troth , OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.483

and <font> Betty <$$font> herself sings a good song .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.484

<bracket> <font> He sings . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.485

<font> After the Song , enter Sir <$$font> Geofry , <font> very dirty ,
and out of breath . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.486

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> What - what a confounded fall I@ @'ve got ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.487

that rascally coachman drove like <font> Jebu . OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.488

- <$$font> I wish I had overtaken him ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.489

then I@ @'d find out who this youth is . OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.490

<font> Tha. Betty - Betty - <$$font> aye , <font> Betty <$$font> 's
gone to bed ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.491

upon my soul I wish I was with her ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.492

she@ @'s a boogoorah little creature . OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.493

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Eh ! who the devil@ @'s that ?
OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.494

Another , going to take his turn . OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.495

<font> Tha. <$$font> Arrah , who@ @'s that ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.496

Oh - ay , it@ @'s a watchman - OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.497

Your servant , Mr. Watchman - OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.498

Arrah , did you see my master going into Sir <font> Anthony's <$$font>
here ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,22.499

<P_23>

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Zounds ! this is that bogtrotting <font>
Irish <$$font> son of a whore , <font> Delamour's <$$font> man -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.501

Oh , ho , so then he@ @'s come to <font> London - <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.502

Oh , then the riddle@ @'s expounded . OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.503

- Why , friend , who are you ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.504

or who is your master ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.505

<font> Tha. <$$font> Who am I ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.506

and who is my master ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.507

How inquisitive these old people are always - OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.508

Why , friend , my master is Mr. <font> Delamour <$$font> , who is just
after coming from <font> Paris <$$font> , and thought to be married to
Madam <font> Emilia <$$font> , Sir <font> Anthony Woodville's <$$font>
daughter , only for an old son of a whore , one Sir <font> Geofry Gingle
- <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.509

Monumshandoul , but the first place I catch him , I@ @'ll clapper-claw
him ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.510

but my master@ @'s doing his business for him ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.511

you know my master's leavings is good enough for such an old rotten
bell-weather - OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.512

Now you know about my master , you must know I@ @'m his servant , and my
name is <font> Thady Macbrogue . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.513

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> If my pole holds out , I@ @'ll break some of
this fellow's bones - OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.514

that will be some satisfaction - OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.515

Hearkee , I believe you@ @'re a rogue . OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.516

<font> Tha. <$$font> How ! I@ @'ll tell you what ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.517

I believe you@ @'re an old fool , if you do@ @n't go and cry your hour ,
Mr. Watchman . OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.518

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> So , friend , you@ @'re pimping for your
master ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.519

well , I@ @'ll reward you a little for your trouble ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.520

when you go to <font> Dublin <$$font> , remember that , and that ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,23.521

<P_24>

<font> Tha. <$$font> Ha , I see you want a thrashing ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.523

and , upon my soul , you shall have it . OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.524

<font> Sir <$$font> Geofry <font> strikes him twice with the pole .
<$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.525

Thady <font> closes with him , OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.526

trips up his heels , OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.527

wrests the pole out of his hand , OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.528

and is going to strike , OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.529

but stops his hand . <$$bracket> <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.530

<font> Tha. <$$font> There , you old wrangling son of a whore ; are you
easy ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.531

- No - I@ @'d scorn to strike you , and you down - OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.532

Get up , you rascal you - OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.533

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Help - OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.534

Murder - Murder - Thieves ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.535

<font> Tha. <$$font> Oh , ho ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.536

<bracket> <font> Exit <$$font> Thady . OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.537

<font> Enter <$$font> Constable <font> and <$$font> Watch .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.538

<font> Con. <$$font> Peace , in the King's name ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.539

what@ @'s the matter ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.540

- Hold the lanthorn ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.541

what have we here ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.542

- Eh , a watchman - OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.543

No , I do@ @n't know his face ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.544

some rogue in disguise - OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.545

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> You lie , you rascal , OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.546

I@ @'m a knight . OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.547

<font> Con. <$$font> Ay , ay , I believe you are , a knight of the pad
. OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.548

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Take care of me , you rogues .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.549

<font> Con. <$$font> Ay , we@ @'ll take care of you , I@ @'ll warrant
it , OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.550

<font> 1st Watch . <$$font> What , no dress would serve the rogue , but
a watchman's - OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.551

All the robberies this fellow has done to-night would <font> be <$$font>
left on one of us - OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.552

I@ @'m glad we@ @'ve caught him . OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.553

<font> 2d Watch . <$$font> Such a scandal to the honourable profession
of watchman ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.554

- I must give him a bang for that . OKEEFFE-1767-2,24.555

<P_25>

<font> Con. <$$font> Come , OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.557

bring him away to the Roundhouse ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.558

there we@ @'ll search him - OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.559

Take care of his hands ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.560

to be sure he has pistols - OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.561

If he comes down handsomely , I@ @'ll let him go - OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.562

Bring him away . OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.563

<bracket> <font> Exeunt omnes . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.564

Scene ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.565

<font> A Chamber . OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.566

Enter <$$font> Emily <font> and <$$font> Betty . OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.567

<font> Emi. <$$font> Is <font> Florimel <$$font> gone ?
OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.568

<font> Bet. <$$font> Yes , Me'em ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.569

she look'd amazingly handsome - OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.570

Oh , Madam , does she not make a very pretty man ?
OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.571

The very model of her brother , Mr. <font> Delamour . <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.572

<font> Emi. <$$font> Oh , <font> Betty <$$font> , do@ @n't trouble me
with idle discourse - OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.573

what to do I know not - OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.574

How shall I abide my father's anger ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.575

<font> Bet. <$$font> Why , to be sure , me'm , Sir <font> Geofry
<$$font> will make a dreadful story to my master ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.576

I shall come in for my share . OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.577

<bracket> <font> A knocking is heard at the door . <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.578

<font> Emi. <$$font> I am afraid that@ @'s Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.579

<font> Betty <$$font> , run and see . OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.580

<bracket> <font> Exit <$$font> Betty . <$$bracket>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.581

Oh , <font> Florimel ! <$$font> I fear no good will come of this plot
of thine . OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.582

<bracket> <font> Enter <$$font> Betty . <$$bracket>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.583

Well , <font> Betty . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.584

<font> Bet. <$$font> Set your heart at rest , madam ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.585

for 't@ @is Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> all in a fume ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.586

I heard him desiring <font> James <$$font> to tell his master he is here
. OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.587

<font> Emi. Betty <$$font> , do you go , OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.588

and find some means to listen to them , OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.589

and bring me word how my father takes it ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.590

I@ @'ll be in my own room . OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.591

What shall I do ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.592

<bracket> <font> Exeunt severally : <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,25.593

<P_26>

<font> Enter Sir <$$font> Geofry <font> and <$$font> Footman .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.595

<font> Foot . <$$font> Sir , my master will wait on you immediately .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.596

<font> Sir Geo. <$$font> Very well . OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.597

- <bracket> <font> Exit <$$font> Footman . <$$bracket>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.598

Let me think now of all the different disasters which I suffered last
night ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.599

first , after putting myself in a good sweat , by limping after an
hackney coach , and to no effect , I must cool myself , by tumbling over
head and heels , in a filthy kennel , by way of a Somerset ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.600

then I was in danger of suffocating , and the breaking of my neck ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.601

next , I that was never over valiant , must make a trial of my prowess ,
on an <font> Irishman <$$font> a fellow with muscles , firm as his
country oak ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.602

but , indeed I must do him the justice to own , that he exercis'd some
of the generosity of an <font> Irishman <$$font> , by not pounding me to
mummy , when he got me down , which I ca@ @n't deny but I deserv'd ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.603

then to be lugg'd to the Round-house , like a thief , where I was almost
stifled with tobacco - OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.604

Well , that expell'd viler scents , with which , I suppose , the place
abounded , among cut-throats , pickpockets - OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.605

Oh , here comes Sir <font> Anthony . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.606

<font> Enter Sir <$$font> Anthony . OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.607

Sir <font> Ant. <$$font> Ha ! <font> Sir Geofry <$$font> , a good
morning ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.608

you@ @'re a brisk lover ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.609

a-dod , you@ @'re resolv'd your mistress sha@ @n't forget you -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.610

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> I do@ @n't know how to open the matter to him
- <bracket> <font> Aside . <$$font> <$$bracket> OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.611

Sir <font> Anthony <$$font> , I thank you , OKEEFFE-1767-2,26.612

but <P_27> it gives me infinite concern , as I shou'd be proud of our
alliance , that I must be oblig'd to forget her - OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.613

But - OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.614

Sir <font> Ant. <$$font> But what ? what ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.615

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Tho' for reasons which , perhaps , you may
find out hereafter , I must stop all further proceedings , with regard
to my marriage with your daughter - OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.616

Sir <font> Ant. <$$font> How ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.617

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Yes , sir , with your daughter ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.618

yet , I hope it wo@ @n't break the friendship so long subsisting between
you and I - OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.619

Sir <font> Ant. <$$font> How ! stop the proceedings of the marriage !
OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.620

What@ @'s the meaning of all this ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.621

Stop the proceedings of the marriage ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.622

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Yes , sir , upon cool and proper reflection ,
I@ @'ve consider'd 't@ @would be a very imprudent thing for a person of
my age , in the wane of life , to espouse a lady so young , and
possessed of so much beauty , as Miss <font> Emily . <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.623

Sir <font> Ant - <$$font> Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> , Sir <font> Geofry
<$$font> , is this a time for your cool , and your proper reflections ?
OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.624

- Very well , sir , very well - Sir , sir , let me tell you , you@ @'ve
used me ill , in the tenderest point , sir , OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.625

and do@ @n't think it shall pass with impunity - OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.626

But , sir , I see , I see thro' the shallow gloss you@ @'ve given it ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.627

I see your mean , sordid reason for recanting , your repentance of the
offer you made me of taking my child without a portion ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.628

there , sir , is your reason . OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.629

Fye ! fye ! fye ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,27.630

<P_28>

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Ungenerous man ! to put such an evil
construction upon my concealing that , which you shall know to your
confusion since I@ @'ve no other means of justification ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.632

know , sir , your daughter@ @'s a prostitute ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.633

now , sir ; you know my reason , OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.634

<font> Delamour <$$font> 's the man who has dishonoured her ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.635

I saw him let into this house at two o'clock this morning ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.636

there@ @'s the mandate he obey'd ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.637

there , sir , read that , OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.638

perhaps you know your daughter's hand ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.639

<font> Delamour <$$font> accidentally dropt it out of his pocket ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.640

and I pick'd it up ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.641

besides , I heard it all from his servant . OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.642

Sir <font> Ant. <bracket> Reads <$$bracket> ' Come this night , exactly
at two o'clock , OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.643

and <$$font> Betty <font> will conduct you to the longing arms of
<$$font> Emily . ' OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.644

- Oh , unhappy girl ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.645

wretched , wretched father ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.646

- My friend , forgive me - OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.647

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> From my soul . OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.648

- I knew the effect the knowledge of this unfortunate affair would have
on you , OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.649

therefore I intended you should never know a syllable of it from me .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.650

Sir <font> Ant. <$$font> Here , <bracket> <font> Going to the wing ,
<$$font> <$$bracket> here , who@ @'s there ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.651

I@ @'ll turn the ungracious wretch out of my doors this instant , to
meet the infamy she deserves - OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.652

What , to make my house a brothel - OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.653

As for her seducer , I@ @'ll - OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.654

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> No , no , hear reason , OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.655

get the better of your choler ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.656

your exposing her in that manner would be wrong , quite wrong .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.657

Give me leave to advise you - OKEEFFE-1767-2,28.658

Keep the whole a secret , <P_29> even from your servants ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.659

as for <font> Betty <$$font> , she has been her confidant ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.660

send immediately to <font> Delamour <$$font> , OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.661

sound him about a marriage with <font> Emily - <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.662

I know his circumstances perfectly , as some of his land borders upon
mine . OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.663

He has a very pretty estate , but a little encumbered , owing to some
extravagancies incident to young men of his volatile disposition .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.664

The fortune which I refused with <font> Emily <$$font> , will help to
clear his estate , and pay off his sister <font> Florimel@ @'s <$$font>
fortune ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.665

these considerations , joined to an innate principle of honour , which I
never knew him deviate from , till now , perhaps may influence him to
accept of your offer ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.666

but do@ @n't you mention the least knowledge of their intercourse -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.667

What think ye ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.668

Sir <font> Ant. <$$font> Why , I do@ @n't know , my dear friend ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.669

you@ @'re too good , too good , indeed ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.670

and so should I be to follow your advice - OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.671

But though she has gone astray , yet she is still my child .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.672

- Were I sure he@ @'d cover her shame by marriage , with pleasure I@ @'d
double her portion - OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.673

But 't@ @is most amazing - OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.674

I did not think <font> Delamour <$$font> was return'd from <font> France
<$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.675

Oh , sure , if I knew he was in the same kingdom , I should have taken
better care of her ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.676

but , however , I@ @'ll send for him immediately - OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.677

But 't@ @is to no purpose - OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.678

a likely thing , a young fellow , like him , would for himself for life
to one he has gained upon such easy terms ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,29.679

and as for trusting to his honour , the young <P_30> fellows of this age
use the bare word as an instrument of deception on the weaker sex ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.680

the practice to them is a mere jest : OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.681

Indeed her fortune , I do@ @n't know what that may do ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.682

I wo@ @n't see her till I try my success with him , which , is so much
the better for her , OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.683

for I do@ @n't think but I should dash her brains out , were I to see
her . OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.684

I@ @'ll instantly send to him . OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.685

<bracket> <font> Exit . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.686

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Do . OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.687

Well , my friend Sir <font> Anthony <$$font> , I ca@ @n't say but you@
@'re rightly serv'd , for preferring the love of your self {TEXT:pelf} ,
to the future peace and happiness of your child . OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.688

Zounds ! what an old , blind fool I must be , to think of marrying a
girl of eighteen , as if I did not know the sex perfectly - I , that am
now - OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.689

let me see , how old am I now ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.690

- eh - adod , I@ @'m upwards of threescore ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.691

aye , I shall be sixty-two the eighteenth of next - aye , <font>
September - <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.692

I@ @'m greatly afraid that young dog <font> Delamour <$$font> will not
marry the girl - OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.693

I wish he wou'd - OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.694

I pity her , from my soul - OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.695

Well , well , I@ @'ll send to <font> Cornwall <$$font> for my poor
nephew and my pretty niece , and reinstate him in my favour -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.696

Poor <font> Ned <$$font> was always a good lad , OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.697

and how can I blame him for doing a thing I was upon the point of doing
myself ; more excusable in him , because of his youth -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.698

Farewel matrimony - OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.699

Well , if ever I marry , may this foolish sconce of mine be adorn'd with
a pair of horns , each as long as a barber's pole .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.700

<bracket> <font> Exit . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,30.701

<P_31>

Scene , OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.703

Delamour's <font> apartments . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.704

<font> Enter <$$font> Delamour , <font> and Young <$$font> Woodville .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.705

<font> Del. <$$font> There@ @'s a Card , I receiv'd this instant from
your father . OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.706

Y. <font> Wood . <$$font> From my father ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.707

<bracket> <font> Reads <$$bracket> ' Sir <$$font> Anthony Woodville's
<font> compliments , and congratulations of safe arrival , wait on Mr.
<$$font> Delamour , OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.708

<font> If Mr. <$$font> Delamour <font> 's disengag'd , Sir <$$font>
Anthony <font> requests the honour of seeing him immediately . '
<$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.709

<font> Del. <$$font> What do you think of that ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.710

Y. <font> Wood . <$$font> Upon my soul , I do@ @n't know what to think
; OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.711

perhaps the wheel has turn'd ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.712

like enough ; but Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> and he has had some pique ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.713

go to him directly - OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.714

<font> Del. <$$font> I will , if 't@ @was no more than to get a sight
of my <font> Emily . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.715

I@ @'ll go dress myself , and be with him immediately .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.716

<bracket> <font> Exeunt . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.717

Scene , OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.718

<font> the street before Sir <$$font> Anthony's <font> house . <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.719

<font> Enter <$$font> Delamour <font> and <$$font> Thady , Delamour
<font> with the same suit of cloaths which <$$font> Florimel <font> wore
. <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.720

<font> Del. <$$font> So , <font> Thady <$$font> , you@ @'ll persuade me
I came to this house this morning at two o'clock , in a hackney-coach .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.721

<font> Tha. <$$font> Musha , upon my soul you did ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.722

I saw either you , or your fetch , as sure as you are standing there .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.723

<font> Del. <$$font> You blundering blockhead , you were drunk ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.724

and mistook some other person for me - OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.725

Rap at the door - OKEEFFE-1767-2,31.726

<P_32>

<font> Tha. <$$font> Sir ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.728

<font> Del. <$$font> Rap at the door , OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.729

what does the oaf stare at ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.730

<font> Tha. <bracket> Knocks at the door . <$$bracket> <$$font> Oh ,
yes , to be sure I mistook you for somebody else ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.731

yes , I , indeed - ah roquer a braquough . OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.732

<bracket> Emilia <font> looks out of the window . <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.733

<font> Emi. <$$font> Oh , heavens , Mr. <font> Delamour !
OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.734

<bracket> A servant opens the door . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.735

<font> Del. <$$font> Is <font> Sir Anthony <$$font> at home ?
OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.736

<font> Tha. <$$font> Oh - now I@ @'ll see little <font> Betty .
<$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.737

<font> Ser. <$$font> Yes , sir . OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.738

<bracket> <font> they both go in . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.739

<heading>

Scene , OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.741

<font> a chamber . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.742

<$$heading>

<font> Enter <$$font> Delamour . OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.744

<font> Del. <$$font> Now I shall be bless'd with the sight of my lovely
<font> Emily . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.745

<font> Enter Sir <$$font> Anthony , OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.746

<font> they salute respectfully . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.747

Sir <font> Ant. <$$font> Mr. <font> Delamour <$$font> I am glad to see
you - OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.748

<font> Del. <$$font> I shou'd think myself extremely happy in the good
wishes or friendship of Sir <font> Anthony Woodville - <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.749

But as things have happen'd , since my leaving <font> England <$$font> ,
I protest I ca@ @n't account a reason for having the honour of seeing
him by his own command - OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.750

<font> Sir Ant. <$$font> Why , Mr. <font> Delamour <$$font> , to wave
all superfluous ceremony , I@ @'ve a proposal to make to you , which ,
as I@ @'ll make it entirely your interest to accept , you wo@ @n't
refuse . OKEEFFE-1767-2,32.751

<P_33>

<font> Del. <$$font> Sir , I@ @'m attention . OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.753

Sir <font> Ant. <$$font> Well , then , Mr. <font> Delamour <$$font> ,
if none of the <font> Parisian <$$font> girls has your heart in keeping
, what wou'd you think of a wife of your own country , a plain <font>
English <$$font> girl , with a good fortune ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.754

I say , what think you of my <font> Emily ; <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.755

you were once fond of her ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.756

<font> Del. <$$font> Oh , heavens , sir , your <font> Emily !
OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.757

- I <$$font> have always , and do still think of her , as the supreme
object at which all my hopes of future felicity are pointed -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.758

<font> Sir Ant. <$$font> Very well , sir ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.759

the fortune I intended to have given with <font> Emily <$$font> , if
married with my consent , was six_thousand pounds ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.760

now , sir , as I am conscious of your extraordinary merit , whereby I
think you are not indifferent to her , if you love her well enough to
marry her , I@ @'ll double that sum ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.761

what say you , sir ? OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.762

<font> Del. <$$font> This happiness so unexpected -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.763

Sir <font> Ant. <$$font> Oh , sir , then you wo@ @n't -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.764

<font> Del. <$$font> With the most unfeign'd joy , with rapture , sir ,
I accept your offer , free from a lucrative view ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.765

and my future study shall be to convince you your goodness was not
ill-plac'd - OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.766

<font> Sir Ant. <$$font> I take you at your word ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.767

and now , <font> Delamour <$$font> , as I see you@ @'re a man of honour
, I forgive you what@ @'s past . OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.768

Ah , <font> Delamour ! <$$font> be kind to my poor child ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.769

use her well - OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.770

Oh happy change ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.771

- Here , <font> Betty <$$font> , call your mistress -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,33.772

<P_34>

<font> Del. <$$font> Forgive me what@ @'s past ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.774

I do@ @n't understand him ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.775

however , as I know the caprice <font> of <$$font> his temper , I@ @'ll
make no enquiries . <bracket> <font> Aside . <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.776

<font> Enter <$$font> Emily . OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.777

<font> Sir Ant. <$$font> Come hither , <font> Emily <$$font> ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.778

there@ @'s your husband . OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.779

<bracket> <font> He presents her to Delamour , who takes her in his arms
. <$$bracket> <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.780

<font> Del. <$$font> My life - my dearest <font> Emily ! <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.781

<font> Emil. <$$font> Oh , <font> Delamour ! <$$font>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.782

<font> Del. <bracket> They both kneel . <$$bracket> <$$font> And now ,
sir , on my knees , I thank you for this precious gem , which to my
heart I@ @'ll ever hold most dear . OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.783

<font> Enter Sir <$$font> Geofry , <font> who starts back at seeing them
on their knees . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.784

Sir <font> Ant. <$$font> Heaven bless my children ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.785

and confirm my forgiveness . OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.786

<bracket> <font> To Sir <$$font> Geofry . <$$bracket> Come , my friend
, OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.787

wish me joy , which I owe to your advice - OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.788

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Ha , this , indeed , is joyful !
OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.789

Adod , I@ @'m glad of it ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.790

't@ @was more than I expected . OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.791

<font> Enter <$$font> Florimel <font> and Young <$$font> Woodville ,
<font> hand in hand , follow'd by <$$font> Thady <font> and <$$font>
Betty , <font> in the same manner - OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.792

The two former kneel to Sir <$$font> Anthony . OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.793

Y. <font> Wood . <$$font> Dearest father , extend to us your blessing
, that we may participate in the general joy - OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.794

<font> Sir Ant. <$$font> How ! since 't@ @is so , if your father's
blessing makes you happy , my children be so . OKEEFFE-1767-2,34.795

<P_35>

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Rare doings ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.797

- <font> Tha. <$$font> Ohono , since you@ @'re sharing the blessing , I
hope my spouse and I@ @'ll come in for snacks - OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.798

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Oh , ho , are you there ?
OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.799

<font> Del. <$$font> So , <font> Thady <$$font> , you@ @'ve got a mate
: OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.800

Well , I@ @'ll do something more than wish you joy -
OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.801

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> I ca@ @n't comprehend the meaning of all this
rightly ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.802

aded , I ca@ @n't fathom it - OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.803

Ah , there@ @'s a great deal of the profound in it .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.804

- <font> Flor. <$$font> Then , sir , since your sagacity@ @'s not of a
sufficient length to reach the bottom , I must give you a line to eke it
out , and to right my innocent friend , who has suffered so much in your
opinions . OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.805

Now , Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> , and you , Sir <font> Anthony <$$font>
, look upon <font> Emily <$$font> in a different light than what you@
@'ve lately done - OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.806

She had a gallant , OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.807

't@ @is true , OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.808

and here he stands , in the circumference of this simple petticoat , to
hinder a preposterous match between Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> and my
dear <font> Emily <$$font> , which would render her inevitably miserable
. OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.809

I wrote you , Sir <font> Geofry <$$font> , that anonymous letter , to
which you gave so much credit ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.810

and in that suit of cloaths , which now my brother wears , I personated
your imaginary rival , OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.811

dropt the billet of assignation , which you found and shew'd Sir <font>
Anthony . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.812

These machinations of mine having had such happy effects , and as my
real motive for deceiving you both , proceeded from my eagerness to
serve my dear <font> Emily <$$font> , - I hope you@ @'ll both forgive me
. OKEEFFE-1767-2,35.813

<P_36>

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> And is this all orthodox ?
OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.815

<font> Bet. <$$font> I do@ @n't know what <font> dox <$$font> it is ,
OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.816

but indeed , sir , 't@ @is true . OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.817

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> Ay , ay , you were a party concern'd :
OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.818

Well , I forgive you . OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.819

Sir <font> Ant. <$$font> So , 't@ @was a Female Gallant .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.820

<font> Tha. <$$font> Upon my soul , OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.821

and <font> Square-Toes outwitted . <$$font> OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.822

<font> Del. <$$font> I@ @'m as much amaz'd at this , as any one here ;
OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.823

for upon my honour , till now , I was entirely ignorant of every single
particular . OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.824

Sir <font> Geo. <$$font> And so , you mad wench , you were the
Cuckold-maker I so much dreaded , OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.825

and you@ @'ve bilk'd me of my wife . OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.826

- <font> Delamour <$$font> , with your leave , I@ @'ll <font> salute
<$$font> your intended - <bracket> <font> Kisses . <$$font> <$$bracket>
OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.827

Ah , you are a happy dog ! OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.828

- Mind your duty ; OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.829

for , by the la , I@ @'ll settle a_thousand pounds upon the first boy .
OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.830

Flor. <font> And you . wise father , when you wou'd compel Your child
to wed against her will , 't@ @were well , To thwart your schemes you
meet a <$$font> Florimel . OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.831

<bracket> Exeunt omnes . OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.832

FINIS OKEEFFE-1767-2,36.833

