<BEGIN_oman-1895-1>

<P_380>

<heading>

Chapter XXVII . OMAN-1895-1,380.4

The Great Civil War . OMAN-1895-1,380.5

1642 - 1651 . OMAN-1895-1,380.6

<$$heading>

Nine years of almost continuous war , broken by only one short interval
in 1647 - 48 , followed the raising of the royal standard at Nottingham
, on the 22nd of August , 1642 . OMAN-1895-1,380.8

The first half of the contest <paren> 1642 - 46 <$$paren> may be defined
as the struggle against the person of Charles , the second as the
struggle against the principle of kingly government after Charles
himself had fallen . OMAN-1895-1,380.9

When the war began there was hardly a man on either side who did not
believe that he was fighting in behalf of constitutional monarchy .
OMAN-1895-1,380.10

The king and his party disavowed all intention of restoring autocratic
government . OMAN-1895-1,380.11

On the royal standard and the royal coinage Charles bade the motto be
placed , " I will defend the laws of England , the liberties of
Parliament , and the Protestant religion . " OMAN-1895-1,380.12

He declared that he was in arms to protect the old constitution against
the encroachments of a Parliamentary faction who wished to degrade the
crown and to destroy the Church . OMAN-1895-1,380.13

The followers of Pym and Hampden , on the other hand , were equally loud
in protesting that they were in arms only to protect the ancient
liberties of the realm , not to set up a new polity .
OMAN-1895-1,380.14

They professed the greatest respect for the Crown , OMAN-1895-1,380.15

used the king's name in all their acts and documents ,
OMAN-1895-1,380.16

and stated that they were only anxious to come to terms with him on
conditions which should give sufficient guarantees for the future
welfare of the realm . OMAN-1895-1,380.17

But there was a fatal weakness in the programme , both of the <P_381>
royal and the Parliamentary party . OMAN-1895-1,381.18

The king's friends could never trust the Parliament's professions ,
because they believed it to be led by a band of fanatical schismatics .
OMAN-1895-1,381.19

The Parliamentarians could never bring themselves to confide in the
ruler against whom there stood the evil record of the years 1629 - 1640
, and the even more discreditable incident of the attempt to seize the
five members . OMAN-1895-1,381.20

When two enemies can@ @not trust each other's plighted word , they can
do nothing but fight out their quarrel to the bitter end .
OMAN-1895-1,381.21

At the moment when Charles marched from Nottingham , and Lord Essex from
London , in August , 1642 , neither party had yet any correct notion as
to its own or its enemy's strength . OMAN-1895-1,381.22

In every county and borough of England each side had a following ;
OMAN-1895-1,381.23

as to which following was the stronger in each case , it was hard to
make a guess . OMAN-1895-1,381.24

One thing only was clear - OMAN-1895-1,381.25

rural England was , on the whole , likely to cleave to the king ; urban
England to oppose him . OMAN-1895-1,381.26

Wherever the towns lay thick , Puritanism was strong ;
OMAN-1895-1,381.27

London , the populous Eastern Counties , Kent , the cluster of growing
places on the borders of Yorkshire and Lancashire , from Leeds to
Liverpool , were all Parliamentarian strongholds . OMAN-1895-1,381.28

On the other hand , in the West and the Northland among the Welsh hills
, the Church was still omnipotent , OMAN-1895-1,381.29

and Nonconformity was weak . OMAN-1895-1,381.30

These districts were led by the local peers , and still more by the
county gentry , OMAN-1895-1,381.31

and of both those classes a large majority held to the king .
OMAN-1895-1,381.32

But no general rule could be drawn . OMAN-1895-1,381.33

There were towns like Worcester , York , Oxford , Exeter , where for
various local reasons the king's party was the stronger .
OMAN-1895-1,381.34

Similarly , there were many peers - about a third of the House of Lords
- who adhered to the Parliamentary interest , OMAN-1895-1,381.35

and where they dominated the countryside it stood by the cause of the
Commons . OMAN-1895-1,381.36

We need only mention the local influence of the Earl of Warwick in his
own district of the Midlands , of the Earl of Manchester in
Huntingdonshire , of Lord Fairfax in Mid-Yorkshire , as examples of the
fact that the Parliamentary cause could draw much assistance from the
magnates of the land . OMAN-1895-1,381.37

Still more was this the case among the lesser landholders .
OMAN-1895-1,381.38

In the east of England a very large proportion of the gentry and all the
yeomanry <P_382> were zealous Puritans ; OMAN-1895-1,382.39

even in the west there was a sprinkling of " Roundheads " among the
Royalist majority . OMAN-1895-1,382.40

It was the saddest feature of the war , therefore , that every man had
to draw the sword against his nearest neighbour , and that the opponents
differed from each other , not so much on principle as on a point of
judgment - the doubt whether the king or the Parliamentary majority
could best be trusted to defend the old constitution .
OMAN-1895-1,382.41

On each side there were many who armed with a doubting heart , not fully
convinced that they had chosen their side wisely . OMAN-1895-1,382.42

This , at any rate , had one good effect - OMAN-1895-1,382.43

the war was , on the whole , mercifully waged ; OMAN-1895-1,382.44

there were few executions , no massacres , very little plundering .
OMAN-1895-1,382.45

If we compare it with the civil wars of France or Germany , we are
astonished at the moderation and self-restraint of our ancestors .
OMAN-1895-1,382.46

It was in August , 1642 , as we have already mentioned , that King
Charles bade his followers meet him at Nottingham . OMAN-1895-1,382.47

The Royalists of the Northern Midlands came to him in numbers far less
than he had expected , wherefore he moved west to Shrewsbury , to rally
his partisans from Lancashire , Cheshire , and Wales , where he knew
that they were many and loyal . OMAN-1895-1,382.48

They came forward in great strength , OMAN-1895-1,382.49

and Charles was able to begin to organize his army into regiments and
brigades . OMAN-1895-1,382.50

The cavalry was very numerous , if wholly untrained ; OMAN-1895-1,382.51

the nobles and gentry turned out in vast throngs , OMAN-1895-1,382.52

and brought every tenant and servant that could sit a horse .
OMAN-1895-1,382.53

The infantry were the weaker arm ; OMAN-1895-1,382.54

the squires preferred to serve among the cavalry ; OMAN-1895-1,382.55

the townsfolk and peasantry , who should have swelled the foot-levies ,
were often apathetic where they were not disloyal . OMAN-1895-1,382.56

It was only in certain limited districts - Wales , Cornwall , and the
North were the most noted - that the king could raise a trustworthy
foot-soldiery . OMAN-1895-1,382.57

In the army that mustered at Shrewsbury he had 6000 cavalry to 8000
infantry - far too large a proportion of the former .
OMAN-1895-1,382.58

Nor was it easy to arm the foot ; OMAN-1895-1,382.59

pikes and muskets were hard to procure , as compared with the trooper's
sword . OMAN-1895-1,382.60

The king gave the command of the army to Lord Lindsey ,
OMAN-1895-1,382.61

but made his nephew , Rupert of the Palatinate , general of the horse .
OMAN-1895-1,382.62

<P_383>

Among the troops which Essex was enrolling and drilling at Northampton ,
the exact reverse was the case . OMAN-1895-1,383.64

The infantry were numerous and willing ; OMAN-1895-1,383.65

the artisans of London and the men of the Eastern Counties had
volunteered in thousands . OMAN-1895-1,383.66

But the cavalry was weak ; OMAN-1895-1,383.67

the admixture of gentry and yeomen in its ranks did not suffice to
leaven the mass ; OMAN-1895-1,383.68

many were city-bred men , unaccustomed to riding , OMAN-1895-1,383.69

many more were wastrels who had enlisted to get the better pay of the
horse-soldier . OMAN-1895-1,383.70

Cromwell , who served in one of these regiments , denounced them to
Hampden as " mostly old decayed tapsters and serving-men , "
OMAN-1895-1,383.71

and asked , " How shall such base and mean fellows be able to encounter
gentlemen of honour and courage and resolution ? " OMAN-1895-1,383.72

In September the two raw armies were both moving westward ,
OMAN-1895-1,383.73

but when Charles had filled his ranks and got his men into some order ,
he determined to advance on London . OMAN-1895-1,383.74

Marching by Bridgenorth and Birmingham , he reached the slopes of
Edgehill , on the borders of Warwickshire and Oxfordshire , on October
23 . OMAN-1895-1,383.75

He had slipped round the flank of Lord Essex , who was waiting for him
at Worcester , OMAN-1895-1,383.76

and the Parliamentary army only overtook him by hard marching .
OMAN-1895-1,383.77

When he saw the enemy approaching , Charles ranged his order of battle
on the hillside , OMAN-1895-1,383.78

and charged down on Essex , who was getting into array on the plain
below . OMAN-1895-1,383.79

The incidents of Edgehill were typical of the whole struggle .
OMAN-1895-1,383.80

On each flank the king's gallant horsemen swept off the Parliamentarian
cavalry like chaff before the wind ; OMAN-1895-1,383.81

and a third of the infantry of Essex was also carried away in the
disaster . OMAN-1895-1,383.82

But the reckless Cavaliers , headed by Prince Rupert , were so maddened
by the joy of victory , that they rode on for miles , driving the
fugitives before them , and gave no thought to the main battle .
OMAN-1895-1,383.83

Meanwhile , in the centre , Lord Essex , at the head of the two-thirds
of his infantry which had stood firm , had encountered the king's foot
with very different results . OMAN-1895-1,383.84

After a short struggle , he burst through the Royalist centre ,
OMAN-1895-1,383.85

and captured the king's Standard and the whole of his artillery .
OMAN-1895-1,383.86

A few hundred Parliamentary horse - Oliver Cromwell was among them - had
escaped from the general flight of their comrades , OMAN-1895-1,383.87

and by their aid Essex cut several <P_384> regiments of the Royalists to
pieces , OMAN-1895-1,384.88

and thrust the rest in disorder up the slopes of Edgehill .
OMAN-1895-1,384.89

{COM:map_omitted} When Rupert and his horse returned at eventide , they
found to their surprise that they had taken part in a drawn battle , not
in a victory . OMAN-1895-1,384.90

Both sides were left in the same position as before the fight ,
OMAN-1895-1,384.91

but the king had one advantage - OMAN-1895-1,384.92

he was the nearer to London , OMAN-1895-1,384.93

and was able to march off in the direction of the capital .
OMAN-1895-1,384.94

Essex , with his cavalry gone and his infantry much mauled , could not
detain him , OMAN-1895-1,384.95

and was constrained to make for London by the long route of Warwick ,
Towcester , and St. Albans , while the king moved by a shorter line
through Oxford and Reading . OMAN-1895-1,384.96

But Charles lingered on the way , OMAN-1895-1,384.97

and the travel-worn troops of the earl reached the goal first .
OMAN-1895-1,384.98

Even now , if Charles had struck desperately at London , he might
perhaps have taken it . OMAN-1895-1,384.99

But his irresolute mind was cowed by a strong line of earthworks at
Turnham Green , behind which lay not only Essex , but the whole
train-bands of the capital , 20,000 strong . OMAN-1895-1,384.100

Instead of assaulting the lines , he drew back to Reading ,
OMAN-1895-1,384.101

and sent proposals of peace to the Parliament , hoping that their
confidence was sufficiently shaken to make them listen to his offers
<paren> November 11 <$$paren> . OMAN-1895-1,384.102

This retrograde movement was his ruin . OMAN-1895-1,384.103

The City had trembled while the host of the Cavaliers lay at Brentford
and Kingston ; OMAN-1895-1,384.104

but when it withdrew without daring an assault , the spirits of leaders
and people rose again , OMAN-1895-1,384.105

and there was no talk of surrender or compromise . OMAN-1895-1,384.106

For the rest of the <P_385> winter , however , the operations languished
, in front of London . OMAN-1895-1,385.107

The king retired to Oxford , which he made his arsenal and base of
operations ; OMAN-1895-1,385.108

the Parliamentarians remained quiet , guarding the capital .
OMAN-1895-1,385.109

While the campaign of Edgehill and Brentford was in progress , there was
fighting going on all over England . OMAN-1895-1,385.110

In each district the local partisans of king and Commons were striving
for the mastery . OMAN-1895-1,385.111

In the East the Roundheads carried the day everywhere ;
OMAN-1895-1,385.112

the whole coast from Portsmouth to Hull , with all the seaboard counties
, fell into their hands . OMAN-1895-1,385.113

In the West and North the result was very different ;
OMAN-1895-1,385.114

Sir Ralph Hopton beat the king's enemies out of Cornwall and the greater
part of Devon . OMAN-1895-1,385.115

The whole of Wales , except the single port of Pembroke , was won for
Charles . OMAN-1895-1,385.116

In Yorkshire there was fierce fighting between two local magnates , the
Marquis of Newcastle on the royal , Lord Fairfax on the Parliamentary
side . OMAN-1895-1,385.117

By the end of the winter Newcastle had got possession of the whole
county except Hull , and the cluster of manufacturing towns in the West
Riding and on the Lancashire border . OMAN-1895-1,385.118

He had raised an army of 10,000 men , OMAN-1895-1,385.119

and controlled the whole countryside from the borders of the Scots as
far as Newark-on-Trent . OMAN-1895-1,385.120

But in the Midlands the first campaign settled nothing ;
OMAN-1895-1,385.121

districts that held for the king and districts that held for the
Parliament were intermixed in hopeless confusion . OMAN-1895-1,385.122

It would obviously need much further fighting before any definite result
could be secured . OMAN-1895-1,385.123

After futile negotiations had filled the winter months , the spring of
1643 saw the renewal of operations all over the face of the land .
OMAN-1895-1,385.124

The negotiations , indeed , were but a foolish waste of time .
OMAN-1895-1,385.125

It was not likely that the king would accept the two conditions which
the Parliament made a <font> sine_qua_non <$$font> - the grant to them
of the power of the sword by the Militia Bill , and of the right to "
reform " the Church by turning it into a Presbyterian Kirk .
OMAN-1895-1,385.126

The struggle had to proceed , though both parties found it extremely
hard to maintain . OMAN-1895-1,385.127

The king more especially had the greatest difficulty in finding the "
sinews of war . " OMAN-1895-1,385.128

The sale of the crown jewels was but a temporary expedient ;
OMAN-1895-1,385.129

the loyal offerings of the Oxford Colleges , who sent all their gold and
silver plate to be melted down at the mint which the king had set up in
their midst , could not last for long . OMAN-1895-1,385.130

<P_386>

The Royalist gentry soon stripped their sideboards and strong_boxes bare
. OMAN-1895-1,386.132

The want of a regular supply of money was always checking the king's
movements . OMAN-1895-1,386.133

He called together a Parliament at Oxford , to which came a majority of
the House of Lords , and nearly a third of the House of Commons ,
OMAN-1895-1,386.134

and this body granted him the right to raise forced loans under his
privy seal , and to take excise duties all over the realm ;
OMAN-1895-1,386.135

but as the richest part of England was not in his hands , this financial
scheme was not very successful . OMAN-1895-1,386.136

Charles was always on the verge of seeing his army disband for want of
pay . OMAN-1895-1,386.137

The Parliamentarians were somewhat better off , owing to their control
of London and the other chief ports of the kingdom , OMAN-1895-1,386.138

but even they were often in dire straits for money , OMAN-1895-1,386.139

and heard unpaid regiments clamouring in vain for food and raiment .
OMAN-1895-1,386.140

The events of the campaign of 1643 were no more decisive than those of
the previous autumn . OMAN-1895-1,386.141

In the centre the king and Essex watched each other all through the
summer without coming to a pitched battle . OMAN-1895-1,386.142

The only event of note in these months was the death of Hampden , the
second man in importance among the Parliamentary leaders , in a cavalry
skirmish at Chalgrove Field . OMAN-1895-1,386.143

But on the two flanks the Royalists gained important successes .
OMAN-1895-1,386.144

Hopton , with the army of the West , swept over Somerset and Wilts ,
routing Sir William Waller - an enterprising but very unlucky general -
at Lansdown <paren> July 5 <$$paren> , and afterwards at Roundway Down
near Devizes <paren> July 13 <$$paren> . OMAN-1895-1,386.145

In consequence of these victories , Bristol , the second town in the
kingdom , fell into Royalist hands <paren> July 26 <$$paren> .
OMAN-1895-1,386.146

A further advance put the army of the West in possession of Hampshire
and Dorsetshire , OMAN-1895-1,386.147

so the Roundheads retained nothing in the South , except the ports of
Plymouth and Portsmouth , with a few scattered garrisons more .
OMAN-1895-1,386.148

At the same time , the Marquis of Newcastle beat Lord Fairfax and his
son Sir Thomas , the mainstays of the Parliamentary cause in the North -
at Adwalton Moor <paren> June 30 <$$paren> - a victory which enabled him
to conquer the Puritan stronghold in the West Riding , and to drive the
last wrecks of the enemy into Hull . OMAN-1895-1,386.149

Newcastle would have won Lincolnshire also , but for the resistance made
by a new force , the levy of the " Associated Counties . "
OMAN-1895-1,386.150

The shires of Norfolk , Suffolk , Essex , Cambridge , and Huntingdon ,
<P_387> had banded themselves together to raise a local army .
OMAN-1895-1,387.151

It was a zealous and well-disciplined force , commanded by Lord
Manchester , under whom Oliver Cromwell served as general of horse .
OMAN-1895-1,387.152

It was Cromwell's ability as a cavalry leader which saved Lincolnshire
to the Parliament , by the winning of the hard-fought engagements of
Gainsborough <paren> July 28 <$$paren> and Winceby <paren> October 11
<$$paren> . OMAN-1895-1,387.153

Charles should now have called in Hopton and Newcastle to his aid , and
marched straight on London . OMAN-1895-1,387.154

But both the West-country and the Yorkshire Royalists disliked leaving
their own districts . OMAN-1895-1,387.155

Hopton's and Newcastle's men protested against being called up to Oxford
before they had made a complete end of their own local enemies .
OMAN-1895-1,387.156

Charles was weak enough to yield to their wish , OMAN-1895-1,387.157

and meanwhile resolved to take Gloucester , the one great Roundhead
stronghold left in the West . OMAN-1895-1,387.158

He laid siege to it on August 10 ; OMAN-1895-1,387.159

but on the news of his march westward , the Parliament gave Lord Essex
peremptory orders to attempt its relief at all costs .
OMAN-1895-1,387.160

Reinforced by six strong regiments of London train-bands , zealous but
new to war , he marched with 15,000 men into the West .
OMAN-1895-1,387.161

When he approached the besiegers , Charles resolved not to fight in his
siege-lines , but to attack Essex in the open . OMAN-1895-1,387.162

He therefore raised the siege , OMAN-1895-1,387.163

allowed the earl to revictual Gloucester , OMAN-1895-1,387.164

but placed himself across the line of retreat to London .
OMAN-1895-1,387.165

At Newbury , in Berkshire , Essex found the king's army arrayed on both
sides of the London road , and ready to receive him <paren> September 19
<$$paren> . OMAN-1895-1,387.166

There followed a fierce fight among lanes and hedges , as Essex strove
to pierce or outflank the royal line . OMAN-1895-1,387.167

Prince Rupert threw away the best of his horsemen in attempts to break
the solid masses of the London train-bands , who showed a steady power
of resistance very admirable in such young soldiers .
OMAN-1895-1,387.168

In one of these desperate charges fell Lord Falkland , the wisest and
most moderate of the king's councillors , who is said to have
deliberately thrown away his life because of his sorrow at the long
continuance of the war . OMAN-1895-1,387.169

After a hard day's work , the earl had partly cut his way through ;
OMAN-1895-1,387.170

and in the night the king , alarmed at the fact that his infantry and
artillery had exhausted all their powder , ordered his army to retreat
on Oxford . OMAN-1895-1,387.171

Then the Parliamentarians were able to force their way to Reading
without further molestation . OMAN-1895-1,387.172

<P_388>

Thus the end of the campaign of 1643 left matters in the centre much as
they had been nine months before . OMAN-1895-1,388.174

But on the flanks , in Yorkshire and the south-west , the Royalists had
won much ground , OMAN-1895-1,388.175

and were in full communication with the king through their strong posts
in Bristol and Newark . OMAN-1895-1,388.176

While arms had proved unable to settle {COM:map_omitted} the struggle ,
both sides had been trying to gain help from without - the Parliament in
Scotland , the king in Ireland . OMAN-1895-1,388.177

The zealous Covenanters of the North , before consenting to give armed
support to the Roundheads , insisted on receiving pledges from their
allies . OMAN-1895-1,388.178

Accordingly , the Parliament swore a covenant with the Scots , " to
preserve the Kirk of Scotland in doctrine , worship , and governance ,
and to reform religion in the Church <P_389> of England according to
God's Holy Word . " OMAN-1895-1,389.179

The second clause implied the destruction of Episcopacy , and the
introduction of Presbyterianism into the southern kingdom <paren>
September 25 <$$paren> . OMAN-1895-1,389.180

In return for this pledge the Scots promised to send an army of 10,000
or 15,000 men over the Tweed in the following spring .
OMAN-1895-1,389.181

The conclusion of this treaty was the last work of Pym , the king of the
Commons , who died six weeks later . OMAN-1895-1,389.182

No civilian came forward among the ranks of the Parliamentarians to take
up his mantle . OMAN-1895-1,389.183

Meanwhile the king had sought aid from Ireland . OMAN-1895-1,389.184

Ever since the massacre of 1641 , the Irish rebels had been fighting
with the Marquis of Ormonde , Strafford's successor in the governance of
that unruly realm . OMAN-1895-1,389.185

They had occupied six-sevenths of the country , OMAN-1895-1,389.186

and held Ormonde's men pinned up in Dublin , Cork , and a few other
strongholds . OMAN-1895-1,389.187

Charles now conceived a scheme for patching up a peace with the rebels ,
and thus making it possible to bring over Ormonde's army , Strafford's
veteran regiments , to join in the English war . OMAN-1895-1,389.188

With this end he negotiated a truce called " the Cessation " with the
Irish <paren> September 15 <$$paren> , leaving the " Catholic
Confederates " to govern all the districts that were in their hands ,
and promising to devise a scheme of toleration for Romanists .
OMAN-1895-1,389.189

This truce enabled Ormonde to begin sending over his troops to England ;
OMAN-1895-1,389.190

it was also arranged that native Irish levies should be lent to the king
by the " Catholic Confederates , " OMAN-1895-1,389.191

and Lord Taaffe , one of the leading rebels , promised to make a
beginning by bringing over 2000 men . OMAN-1895-1,389.192

This alliance with the fanatical Romanists of Ireland , the perpetrators
of the Ulster Massacre of 1641 , did Charles much harm .
OMAN-1895-1,389.193

The Puritans began to dream of England dragooned by wild Irish Papists ,
OMAN-1895-1,389.194

and thought that the fires of Smithfield would ere long be relighted .
OMAN-1895-1,389.195

They grew fiercer than ever against the king . OMAN-1895-1,389.196

In December , 1643 , Ormonde's first regiments began to pass the Channel
and arrive at Chester . OMAN-1895-1,389.197

In January , 1644 , the Scots crossed the Tweed under the Earl of Leven
. OMAN-1895-1,389.198

Before winter was over the strife had begun , OMAN-1895-1,389.199

and the new forces on each side were engaged . OMAN-1895-1,389.200

In January Sir Thomas Fairfax , with the Yorkshire Parliamentarians ,
had slipped out of Hull , whose siege had been raised by the Marquis
<P_390> of Newcastle , OMAN-1895-1,390.201

and fell suddenly upon the Irish army at Nantwich , near Chester .
OMAN-1895-1,390.202

He completely routed it , OMAN-1895-1,390.203

and dispersed or took almost the whole . OMAN-1895-1,390.204

Meanwhile the Scots were slowly pushing southward , driving the marquis
before them through Durham and the North Riding . OMAN-1895-1,390.205

In April they joined Fairfax at Selby , near York , OMAN-1895-1,390.206

and the united forces so much outnumbered Newcastle's force , that he
sent in haste to the king at Oxford , to say that all the North would be
lost if he were not promptly aided by troops from the Midlands .
OMAN-1895-1,390.207

Charles , though he could ill spare men , gave his nephew Rupert a large
force of cavalry , OMAN-1895-1,390.208

and bade him march rapidly on York , picking up on his way all the
reinforcements he could raise in Shropshire , Cheshire , and Lancashire
. OMAN-1895-1,390.209

In June the prince reached York with nearly 10,000 men ,
OMAN-1895-1,390.210

and joined Newcastle's army . OMAN-1895-1,390.211

Even before his arrival the enemy received a corresponding reinforcement
: OMAN-1895-1,390.212

Lord Manchester and Oliver Cromwell , with the army of the " Associated
Counties , " had crossed the Trent and entered Yorkshire to join Fairfax
and the Scots . OMAN-1895-1,390.213

A great battle was imminent , and one that would be fought by forces far
larger than had yet met in line during the war , OMAN-1895-1,390.214

for each side mustered more than 20,000 men . OMAN-1895-1,390.215

The fate of the Northern Counties was settled by the meeting of the two
armies at Marston Moor , near York , on the 2nd of July .
OMAN-1895-1,390.216

The Parliamentarians and their Scottish allies had drawn themselves up
on a hillside overlooking the moor , Fairfax and his Yorkshiremen on the
right , the Scots in the centre , Manchester and the men of the Eastern
Counties on the left . OMAN-1895-1,390.217

Rupert marched out from York to meet them , OMAN-1895-1,390.218

and ranged his men on the moor below - he himself taking the right wing
, while Newcastle's northern levies had the left . OMAN-1895-1,390.219

Before the prince's host was fully arrayed , the enemy charged down the
hill , OMAN-1895-1,390.220

and the two armies clashed all along the line . OMAN-1895-1,390.221

On the Royalist left , Lord Goring with the northern horse completely
routed the troops of Fairfax , OMAN-1895-1,390.222

and then turned against the Scots , OMAN-1895-1,390.223

and broke their flank regiments to pieces . OMAN-1895-1,390.224

Then , thinking the day their own , the Cavaliers rushed on in pursuit ,
OMAN-1895-1,390.225

and swept off the field . OMAN-1895-1,390.226

But on the Royalist right the matter had gone very differently .
OMAN-1895-1,390.227

Cromwell , with the eastern horse , had there met the fiery Rupert in
person ; OMAN-1895-1,390.228

the struggle was long and fierce , OMAN-1895-1,390.229

but at last Cromwell's men , godly {COM:sic} <P_391> yeomen of Norfolk
and Cambridgeshire , whom their general had picked and trained with long
care , showed that religious fervour was even better in battle than the
reckless courage of the Cavaliers . OMAN-1895-1,391.230

Rupert's regiments were driven off the field , OMAN-1895-1,391.231

and then the cool-headed Cromwell , instead of flying in pursuit , led
his troopers to aid the much-@ @tried Scots in the centre .
OMAN-1895-1,391.232

By his charge the Royalist foot was broken , and Goring's horse
dispersed when it straggled back to the battle . OMAN-1895-1,391.233

The day , which had begun so doubtfully , ended in a complete victory
for the Parliament . OMAN-1895-1,391.234

Rupert rallied 6000 horse , OMAN-1895-1,391.235

and took them back to Oxford , OMAN-1895-1,391.236

but the rest of the Royalist army was lost . OMAN-1895-1,391.237

Four_thousand had fallen , {COM:map_omitted} many dispersed ,
OMAN-1895-1,391.238

the rest fell back into York , OMAN-1895-1,391.239

and there surrendered a few days later . OMAN-1895-1,391.240

Lord Newcastle , angry at Rupert's rashness before the fight and his
mismanagement in it , took ship to Holland , OMAN-1895-1,391.241

and never struck another blow for the king . OMAN-1895-1,391.242

Meanwhile Manchester and the Scots overran all the North ,
OMAN-1895-1,391.243

and the land beyond Humber was wholly lost to the king .
OMAN-1895-1,391.244

The northern Royalists had been utterly destroyed . OMAN-1895-1,391.245

This disaster would have been completely ruinous to the king , if he had
not partly preserved the balance of strength by winning a great victory
in the south . OMAN-1895-1,391.246

The Parliament had hoped to do great things with their home army ,
OMAN-1895-1,391.247

and had started the campaign successfully , OMAN-1895-1,391.248

for Sir William Waller had beaten the west-country troops <P_392> of
Lord Hopton at Cheriton in March , and driven the Royalists out of
Hampshire . OMAN-1895-1,392.249

But calamity followed this good fortune ; OMAN-1895-1,392.250

in the summer the Earl of Essex led a great host into Wilts and Somerset
, to complete Waller's success by recovering the whole of the
South-Western Counties . OMAN-1895-1,392.251

But the king dropped down from Oxford with his main army ,
OMAN-1895-1,392.252

and placed himself between Essex and London . OMAN-1895-1,392.253

The position was much the same as it had been a year before at Newbury
Field . OMAN-1895-1,392.254

But this time the earl displayed great indecision , OMAN-1895-1,392.255

and grossly mishandled his men . OMAN-1895-1,392.256

Instead of forcing his way home , at any cost , he retreated westward
before Charles , OMAN-1895-1,392.257

and was gradually driven into Cornwall , where the country was bitterly
hostile . OMAN-1895-1,392.258

After some ill-fought skirmishes , he was surrounded at Lostwithiel .
OMAN-1895-1,392.259

His cavalry cut their way out , OMAN-1895-1,392.260

and got back to Hampshire ; OMAN-1895-1,392.261

he himself escaped in a boat to Plymouth . OMAN-1895-1,392.262

But the whole of his infantry , guns , and stores were taken by the king
. OMAN-1895-1,392.263

The Parliamentarian army of the South was as completely wiped out in
September as the Royalist army of the North had been in July .
OMAN-1895-1,392.264

But there was one important difference in the cases -
OMAN-1895-1,392.265

Marston Moor stripped Charles not only of an army , but of six fair
counties ; OMAN-1895-1,392.266

Lostwithiel saw the troops of Essex annihilated , OMAN-1895-1,392.267

but did not give the king an inch of new ground . OMAN-1895-1,392.268

On the whole , the balance of the campaign of 1644 was against him .
OMAN-1895-1,392.269

To cover London from the king , the Parliament hastily summoned down
Manchester's victorious army from Yorkshire , OMAN-1895-1,392.270

and added to it Sir William Waller's force . OMAN-1895-1,392.271

Their united hosts fought the indecisive second battle of Newbury with
the royal troops on the 22nd of October . OMAN-1895-1,392.272

Here Manchester , by his sloth and indecision , left Waller to do all
the fighting , OMAN-1895-1,392.273

and almost lost the day . OMAN-1895-1,392.274

But in the end Charles withdrew to Oxford , leaving the field to his
enemies . OMAN-1895-1,392.275

The winter of 1644 - 5 was fraught with events of deep importance .
OMAN-1895-1,392.276

The Parliament made one final attempt to negotiate with the king , only
to receive the answer , " I will not part with these three things - the
Church , my crown , and my friends , OMAN-1895-1,392.277

and you will yet have much ado to get them from me . "
OMAN-1895-1,392.278

Irritated at the king's unbending attitude , they took a step which they
knew must render all further attempts at peace impossible .
OMAN-1895-1,392.279

Drawing out of prison the old Archbishop of Canterbury , they proceeded
to pass a bill of attainder against <P_393> him , OMAN-1895-1,393.280

and condemned him to death . OMAN-1895-1,393.281

Laud went piously and resolutely to the scaffold , asserting , and truly
, that he died the martyr of the Church of England , not the victim of
his political doings . OMAN-1895-1,393.282

This execution was an unpardonable act of cruelty and spite .
OMAN-1895-1,393.283

The old man had lingered three years in prison , OMAN-1895-1,393.284

was perfectly harmless , OMAN-1895-1,393.285

and was slain partly to vex the king , partly to satiate the religious
bigotry of the Presbyterians - a sect quite as intolerant as Laud
himself . OMAN-1895-1,393.286

But while Laud's attainder was passing , another important matter was in
hand . OMAN-1895-1,393.287

The campaign of the previous year had been fatal to the reputation of
the two chief Parliamentary generals , Essex and Manchester - the one
for losing his army at Lostwithiel , the other for his perverse
malingering at Newbury . OMAN-1895-1,393.288

Waller and several more were in little better odour .
OMAN-1895-1,393.289

Cromwell , who had long served as Manchester's second in command , led a
crusade against his chief , OMAN-1895-1,393.290

and accused him of deliberately protracting the war .
OMAN-1895-1,393.291

It was generally felt that the armies of the Parliament would fare much
better if they were entrusted to professional soldiers , and not to
great peers or prominent politicians . OMAN-1895-1,393.292

Hence came the celebrated " Self-denying Ordinance , " by which the
members of the two Houses pledged themselves to give up their military
posts , and confine their activity to legislative and administrative
work . OMAN-1895-1,393.293

One exception was made - OMAN-1895-1,393.294

Oliver Cromwell , whom all acknowledged to be the best cavalry officer
in the Parliamentary army , was permitted to keep his military post .
OMAN-1895-1,393.295

But Essex , Manchester , and the rest retired into civil life .
OMAN-1895-1,393.296

At the same time , the Parliament resolved to remodel its army .
OMAN-1895-1,393.297

Much inconvenience had arisen from the miscellaneous nature of the
forces which took the field . OMAN-1895-1,393.298

County militia , London train-bands , voluntary levies , " pressed men "
forced to the front , local organizations like the army of the "
Associated Counties , " had served side by side in some confusion .
OMAN-1895-1,393.299

The conscripts were wont to desert , OMAN-1895-1,393.300

the militia protested against crossing their county boundary ,
OMAN-1895-1,393.301

the train-bands melted back to their shops if they were kept too long
under arms . OMAN-1895-1,393.302

To do away with these troubles , the Parliament now created the "
New-Model Army , " a standing force of some 20,000 picked men , to be
led by Sir Thomas Fairfax , with Cromwell as his second in command .
OMAN-1895-1,393.303

This proved a very formidable <P_394> host . OMAN-1895-1,394.304

The troops were mainly veterans , OMAN-1895-1,394.305

all were zealous and willing , OMAN-1895-1,394.306

and the officers were most carefully selected . OMAN-1895-1,394.307

The horsemen more especially were vastly superior to the old
Parliamentary troopers . OMAN-1895-1,394.308

Cromwell modelled them on his own East-country regiment ,
OMAN-1895-1,394.309

filled the ranks with " men of religion , " who looked upon the war as a
crusade against Popery and tyranny , OMAN-1895-1,394.310

and drilled his cuirassiers - the " Ironsides , " as they were called -
into the highest state of efficiency OMAN-1895-1,394.311

Next spring the " New-Model " was sent out to try its fortune against
the Cavaliers . OMAN-1895-1,394.312

The king had led his army northward to restore the fortunes of his party
in the valley of the Trent , where Newark was now his most advanced post
. OMAN-1895-1,394.313

On his way he stormed the important Parliamentary town of Leicester ,
OMAN-1895-1,394.314

but his progress was then stayed by the news of the approach of
{COM:map_omitted} Fairfax . OMAN-1895-1,394.315

Despising the " New-Model , " the Cavaliers turned fiercely to attack it
, though the royal host was the smaller by several thousands .
OMAN-1895-1,394.316

They seem to have put only 9000 men into the field against 13,000 .
OMAN-1895-1,394.317

Charles and Fairfax met at Naseby , in Northamptonshire ,
OMAN-1895-1,394.318

and there fought out the decisive battle of the first civil war .
OMAN-1895-1,394.319

Once more it was Rupert <P_395> who lost the day , and Cromwell who won
it . OMAN-1895-1,395.320

The prince , with the right wing of the royal horse , routed his
immediate opponents , OMAN-1895-1,395.321

and rode off the field in reckless pursuit of them .
OMAN-1895-1,395.322

But on the king's left Cromwell and his Ironsides broke to pieces the
Cavaliers of the North , OMAN-1895-1,395.323

and then steadied their ranks OMAN-1895-1,395.324

and rode against the flank of the Royalist infantry .
OMAN-1895-1,395.325

Charles sent in his reserve to aid his flagging centre ,
OMAN-1895-1,395.326

and prepared to charge himself at the head of his body-guard .
OMAN-1895-1,395.327

" Will you go to your death ? " cried the Earl of Carnwarth , who
seized the royal rein , and turned his master out of the press .
OMAN-1895-1,395.328

Charles yielded , OMAN-1895-1,395.329

and rode back . OMAN-1895-1,395.330

Far better would it have been for him and for England if he had gone on
to make his end among the pikes . OMAN-1895-1,395.331

Cromwell's charge settled the day ; OMAN-1895-1,395.332

the Royalist foot were ridden down or captured ; OMAN-1895-1,395.333

the wrecks of the horse joined the late-returning Rupert ,
OMAN-1895-1,395.334

and escorted their master back to Oxford <paren> June 14 , 1645
<$$paren> OMAN-1895-1,395.335

Naseby decided the fate of the war . OMAN-1895-1,395.336

The king could never raise another army in the Midlands .
OMAN-1895-1,395.337

His whole infantry force was gone , OMAN-1895-1,395.338

and for the next eight months he rode helplessly about the shires with
2000 or 3000 horse , vainly trying to elude his pursuers and scrape
together a new body of foot . OMAN-1895-1,395.339

His only hope was in an ally who had arisen in Scotland .
OMAN-1895-1,395.340

James Graham , Marquis of Montrose , a Scottish peer who had grown
discontented with the Covenant , had raised the royal standard in the
Highlands in the preceding year . OMAN-1895-1,395.341

He was a born leader of men , OMAN-1895-1,395.342

and , though at first followed by a mere handful of wild clansmen , soon
made his power felt in the war . OMAN-1895-1,395.343

After routing two small armies in the north-east , he turned upon
Argyleshire , OMAN-1895-1,395.344

and almost extirpated the whole Covenanting clan of the Campbells at
Inverlochy <paren> January , 1645 <$$paren> . OMAN-1895-1,395.345

Then , descending upon the Lowlands , he cut to pieces a large army at
Kilsyth <paren> August 15 <$$paren> , OMAN-1895-1,395.346

seized Glasgow , OMAN-1895-1,395.347

and mastered the greater part of Scotland . OMAN-1895-1,395.348

Charles resolved on joining him , OMAN-1895-1,395.349

and trusted to turn the fate of the war by his aid .
OMAN-1895-1,395.350

But Montrose's Highland levies melted home to stow away their plunder ,
OMAN-1895-1,395.351

and he was left at the head of a comparatively small force for the
moment . OMAN-1895-1,395.352

Then Leslie led back across the Tweed the Scottish army which had been
serving in England , OMAN-1895-1,395.353

and surprised and routed Montrose at Philiphaugh <paren> September ,
1645 <$$paren> . OMAN-1895-1,395.354

There was no further hope for Charles from Scotland ,
OMAN-1895-1,395.355

and <P_396> his sole remaining army , the force in the West , under
Hopton and Goring , was also doomed . OMAN-1895-1,396.356

After Naseby , Fairfax led the " New-Model " into Somersetshire ,
OMAN-1895-1,396.357

beat Goring at Langport , OMAN-1895-1,396.358

and captured Bristol <paren> September , 1645 <$$paren> .
OMAN-1895-1,396.359

The Royalists were driven westward towards the Land's End .
OMAN-1895-1,396.360

In the next spring Fairfax followed them , OMAN-1895-1,396.361

took Exeter , OMAN-1895-1,396.362

beat Hopton at Torrington , OMAN-1895-1,396.363

and steadily drove the wrecks of the enemy onward till their back was to
the Cornish sea . OMAN-1895-1,396.364

Escape was impossible , OMAN-1895-1,396.365

and the king's army of the West laid down its arms <paren> March , 1646
<$$paren> . OMAN-1895-1,396.366

The king had now lost all hope , OMAN-1895-1,396.367

and when the Roundhead armies began to muster for the siege of Oxford ,
his last stronghold , he took a desperate measure . OMAN-1895-1,396.368

He thought that the Scottish Covenanters were less bitterly hostile to
him than the English Parliamentary party , OMAN-1895-1,396.369

and resolved to give himself up to them rather than to his English
subjects . OMAN-1895-1,396.370

Slipping out of Oxford in disguise , he rode to the Scottish camp at
Newark , OMAN-1895-1,396.371

and there surrendered himself <paren> April , 1646 <$$paren> .
OMAN-1895-1,396.372

He was not without hope that he might yet save his crown by coming to
terms with his subjects ; OMAN-1895-1,396.373

for he had an overweening belief in his own power of diplomacy ,
OMAN-1895-1,396.374

and did not understand how deeply his old evasions and intrigues had
shaken men's confidence in his plighted word . OMAN-1895-1,396.375

Yet he had his better side ; OMAN-1895-1,396.376

he sincerely believed in his own good intentions and his hereditary
rights , OMAN-1895-1,396.377

and there were two things which he would never give up under any
pressure - his crown and his adherence to the Church of England .
OMAN-1895-1,396.378

The Scots were delighted to have Charles in their hands ,
OMAN-1895-1,396.379

and proposed to restore him to his throne if he would promise to take
the Covenant and impose Presbyterianism on England .
OMAN-1895-1,396.380

This demand hit the king on a point where his conscience was fixed and
firm ; OMAN-1895-1,396.381

he would never sell the Church to its foes , OMAN-1895-1,396.382

so he temporized OMAN-1895-1,396.383

and dallied with the Scots' proposals , OMAN-1895-1,396.384

but would not accept them . OMAN-1895-1,396.385

Disgusted at his refusal , the Covenanters resolved to surrender him to
the English Parliament . OMAN-1895-1,396.386

After stipulating for the payment of all the arrears of the subsidies
which were owed them for their services in England , they gave up the
king to his enemies - a proceeding which contemporary opinion called "
selling their master for 400,000 +L {TEXT:L_400,000} " <paren> January ,
1647 <$$paren> . OMAN-1895-1,396.387

<P_397>

Even yet Charles had not abandoned all hope ; OMAN-1895-1,397.389

he knew that his victorious enemies were much divided among themselves ,
OMAN-1895-1,397.390

and thought that by embroiling them with one another he might yet secure
good terms for himself . OMAN-1895-1,397.391

The two parties which split the Parliament were the Presbyterians and
the Independents . OMAN-1895-1,397.392

The former , of whom we have heard so much already , were desirous of
organizing all England into a Calvinistic Church on the model of the
Scottish Kirk ; OMAN-1895-1,397.393

they were as intolerant as Laud himself in the matter of conformity ,
OMAN-1895-1,397.394

and intended to force the whole nation into their new organization .
OMAN-1895-1,397.395

Papists , Episcopalians , and Nonconformists of every kind were all to
be driven into the fold . OMAN-1895-1,397.396

This plan did not please the " Independents " - a party who consisted of
men of all sorts and conditions , who only agreed in disliking a State
Church and a compulsory uniformity . OMAN-1895-1,397.397

Some of the Independents were wild sectaries - Anabaptists , Levellers ,
and Fifth-Monarchy-men , who held the strangest doctrines of an
immediate Millennium . OMAN-1895-1,397.398

Others were men who merely insisted on the responsibility of the
individual for his own conscience , and thought that the State Church ,
with its compulsory powers , was a mistake , coming between God and man
where no mediator was required . OMAN-1895-1,397.399

Hence the watchword of the Independents was the toleration of all sects
, OMAN-1895-1,397.400

and they steadfastly resisted the Presbyterian doctrine of forced
conformity . OMAN-1895-1,397.401

The Independents were very strong in the army , OMAN-1895-1,397.402

and Cromwell , the coming man , was a pillar of their cause .
OMAN-1895-1,397.403

On the other hand , the Presbyterians had a decided majority among the
members of the Parliament . OMAN-1895-1,397.404

As representing the party of toleration , the Independents were quite
prepared to leave Episcopalians alone , OMAN-1895-1,397.405

and it was therefore with them , rather than with the rigid and bigoted
Presbyterians , that the king hoped to be able to ally himself .
OMAN-1895-1,397.406

But it was the Presbyterians who swayed the House , and had possession
of Charles's person ; OMAN-1895-1,397.407

with them , therefore , he had to treat . OMAN-1895-1,397.408

The Parliamentary majority did not yet dream of abolishing the monarchy
; OMAN-1895-1,397.409

they were bent on two things - on tying the present king's hands so
tightly that he should never again be a danger to the common weal , and
on forcing him to consent to the establishment of Presbyterianism as the
State religion . OMAN-1895-1,397.410

The former was a rational <P_398> end enough , OMAN-1895-1,398.411

for Charles could never be trusted ; OMAN-1895-1,398.412

the latter was a piece of insane bigotry , OMAN-1895-1,398.413

for the Presbyterians were a mere minority in the nation , far
outnumbered by the Episcopalians and the Independents .
OMAN-1895-1,398.414

The " Propositions " of the Parliament took the form of a demand that
Charles should surrender all claim to control the militia , the fleet ,
and taxation , for twenty years ; that he should take the Covenant
himself , assent to its being forced on all his subjects , and order the
persecution of all Romanists , OMAN-1895-1,398.415

He was also to assent to the outlawing of his own chief supporters in
the civil war . OMAN-1895-1,398.416

Now Charles had declared long ago that he would never sacrifice his
crown , his Church , or his friends , OMAN-1895-1,398.417

and in captivity he did his best to keep his vow , OMAN-1895-1,398.418

But his method was not to give a steady refusal , and bid his enemies do
their worst . OMAN-1895-1,398.419

He answered their demands by long counter-propositions , flagrant
evasions , and endless hair-splitting on every disputed point .
OMAN-1895-1,398.420

Where he might have appeared a martyr , he chose to stand as a quibbling
casuist . OMAN-1895-1,398.421

The Parliament kept him in easy and honourable confinement at Holmby
House , in Northamptonshire , while the negotiations were in progress ,
OMAN-1895-1,398.422

and he was so carelessly guarded that he was able to keep up secret
correspondence with all kinds of possible allies - the King of France ,
the Scots , and the chiefs of the Independent party .
OMAN-1895-1,398.423

But while king and Commons were haggling for terms , a new difficulty
arose . OMAN-1895-1,398.424

The Presbyterian majority in Parliament were anxious to disband the army
, both because of the expense of its maintenance , and still more
because they knew it to be a stronghold of their enemies , the
Independents . OMAN-1895-1,398.425

In March , 1647 , they issued an ordinance for the dismissal of the
whole force save a few regiments destined to suppress the Irish
rebellion . OMAN-1895-1,398.426

But the " New-Model " refused to be dismissed ; OMAN-1895-1,398.427

it hated Presbyterians , OMAN-1895-1,398.428

and it had learnt to look upon itself as a truer representative of the
Puritan party than an out-of-date House which had been sitting more than
seven years . OMAN-1895-1,398.429

Instead of disbanding , the army began to organize itself for resistance
, OMAN-1895-1,398.430

and each regiment named two deputies , or " agitators , " as they were
called , to form a central military committee . OMAN-1895-1,398.431

This was done with the approval of Fairfax and Cromwell , the leaders
<P_399> of the host . OMAN-1895-1,399.432

The movement was natural , but quite unconstitutional ;
OMAN-1895-1,399.433

still more so was the next step of the soldiery . OMAN-1895-1,399.434

An officer named Joyce , with the secret sanction of the agitators and
of Cromwell also , rode to Holmby with 500 men , OMAN-1895-1,399.435

seized the king's person , OMAN-1895-1,399.436

and took him to Newmarket , where the head-quarters of the army lay .
OMAN-1895-1,399.437

Next the army marched on London , OMAN-1895-1,399.438

and encamped before its gates <paren> June 16 , 1647 <$$paren> ,
OMAN-1895-1,399.439

Many Presbyterian members fled in dismay from the House of Commons ,
OMAN-1895-1,399.440

and the Independents got for a moment a majority in Parliament .
OMAN-1895-1,399.441

The victorious party then proceeded to treat with the king , offering
him liberal terms - the complete toleration of all sects , the
restriction of the royal power over the armed force of the realm for ten
years only , and a pardon for all exiled Royalists except five .
OMAN-1895-1,399.442

In a moment of evil inspiration the king refused this moderate offer .
OMAN-1895-1,399.443

Encouraged by the quarrel of the Presbyterians and the army , he had
formed a secret plot for freeing himself from both .
OMAN-1895-1,399.444

His old partisans all over England had agreed on a simultaneous rising ,
OMAN-1895-1,399.445

and they had obtained a promise of aid from the Scots ;
OMAN-1895-1,399.446

for those stern Presbyterians so hated the Independents and the English
army , that they were prepared to join the king against them .
OMAN-1895-1,399.447

On the 11th of November , 1647 , Charles slipped away from his military
captors , OMAN-1895-1,399.448

and succeeded in escaping to the Isle of Wight . OMAN-1895-1,399.449

Hammond , the governor of the island , kept him in security at
Carisbrooke , OMAN-1895-1,399.450

but did not send him back to the army . OMAN-1895-1,399.451

From Carisbrooke , the king sent new offers of terms of accommodation
both to the army and the Parliament , OMAN-1895-1,399.452

but he was merely trying to gain time for his friends to take arms .
OMAN-1895-1,399.453

On the 28th of April , 1648 , he saw his plot begin to work .
OMAN-1895-1,399.454

A body of north-country Royalists seized Berwick , OMAN-1895-1,399.455

and raised the royal standard . OMAN-1895-1,399.456

A few days later the Scots took arms OMAN-1895-1,399.457

and raised a large force , which was placed under the Duke of Hamilton ,
and ordered to cross the Border . OMAN-1895-1,399.458

At the same time a committee of Scots lords sent to France for the young
Prince of Wales , OMAN-1895-1,399.459

and invited him to come among them and put himself at the head of his
father's friends . OMAN-1895-1,399.460

The movement in Scotland was a signal for the general rising of the
English Royalists . OMAN-1895-1,399.461

Insurrections broke out in May and June all <P_400> over the land - in
Wales , Kent , Essex , Cornwall , and even among the Eastern Counties of
the " Association , " where Puritanism was so strong .
OMAN-1895-1,400.462

For a moment it looked as if the king would win . OMAN-1895-1,400.463

It seemed that the army would be unable to cope with so many
simultaneous risings . OMAN-1895-1,400.464

But Charles had not calculated on the military skill which Fairfax and
Cromwell could display in the hour of danger . OMAN-1895-1,400.465

In less than three months' hard fighting the two generals had put down
the whole insurrection , OMAN-1895-1,400.466

Fairfax routed the Kentishmen - the most dangerous body of insurgents in
the South - by storming their stronghold of Maidstone .
OMAN-1895-1,400.467

Then , crossing the Thames , he pacified the Eastern Counties ,
OMAN-1895-1,400.468

and drove all the insurgents of those parts into Colchester .
OMAN-1895-1,400.469

In Colchester he met a vigorous resistance ; OMAN-1895-1,400.470

the town held out for two months , OMAN-1895-1,400.471

and only yielded to starvation <paren> August 27 , 1648 <$$paren> ,
OMAN-1895-1,400.472

Meanwhile Cromwell had first struck down the Welsh Royalists , and then
ridden north to oppose the Scots . OMAN-1895-1,400.473

The Duke of Hamilton had already crossed the Tweed , OMAN-1895-1,400.474

and had been joined by 4000 or 5000 Yorkshiremen . OMAN-1895-1,400.475

He moved southward , intending to reach Wales , OMAN-1895-1,400.476

but in Lancashire Cromwell caught him on the march , with his army
spread out over many miles of road . OMAN-1895-1,400.477

Falling on the scattered host , Cromwell beat its rear at Preston
<paren> August 17 <$$paren> ; OMAN-1895-1,400.478

then , pressing on , he scattered or captured the whole army in three
days of fierce fighting , though his force was far inferior in numbers
to that of the enemy . OMAN-1895-1,400.479

But the imbecile Hamilton had so dispersed his men that he never could
concentrate them for a battle . OMAN-1895-1,400.480

On August 25 the duke , with the last wrecks of his army , surrendered
at Uttoxeter . OMAN-1895-1,400.481

The second civil war thus ended in utter disaster to the king's friends
. OMAN-1895-1,400.482

Moreover , it had sealed the fate of Charles himself .
OMAN-1895-1,400.483

There arose a large party among the victors who were determined that he
should be punished for the reckless intrigue by which he had stirred up
the dying embers of strife , and set the land once more aflame .
OMAN-1895-1,400.484

The temper of the army was so fierce that , for the first time since the
war began , numerous executions followed the surrender of the vanquished
Royalists . OMAN-1895-1,400.485

The Duke of Hamilton , who had led the Scots ; Lucas and Lisle , who had
defended Colchester ; <P_401> Lord Holland , who had been designated to
command the Royalists of the south , all suffered death .
OMAN-1895-1,401.486

Hundreds of prisoners of inferior rank were sent to serve as bondmen in
the plantations of Barbados . OMAN-1895-1,401.487

Charles himself was removed from Carisbrooke - he had made two
unsuccessful attempts to escape from its walls - and put under strict
guard at Hurst Castle . OMAN-1895-1,401.488

The Parliament still continued to negotiate with him , only making its
terms more rigorous . OMAN-1895-1,401.489

But the army did not intend that any such agreement should be concluded
. OMAN-1895-1,401.490

While the House of Commons was still treating , it was subjected to a
sudden military outrage . OMAN-1895-1,401.491

Colonel Pride , a leading Independent officer , marched his regiment to
Westminster on the 6th of December , 1648 , OMAN-1895-1,401.492

and , as the members began to muster , seized one by one all the chiefs
of the Presbyterian party . OMAN-1895-1,401.493

Forty-one were placed in confinement , OMAN-1895-1,401.494

ninety-six were turned back and warned never to come near the House
again . OMAN-1895-1,401.495

Only sixty Independent members were allowed to enter , a body which was
for the future known by the insulting name of " the Rump , " as being
the " sitting part " of the House . OMAN-1895-1,401.496

Thus ended the famous Long Parliament , destroyed by the military
monster which it had itself created . OMAN-1895-1,401.497

The " Rump , " a ridiculous remnant , the slave of the soldiery , was
alone left to represent the civil power in England .
OMAN-1895-1,401.498

The king's fate was now settled . OMAN-1895-1,401.499

The army had resolved to punish him , OMAN-1895-1,401.500

and the Parliament was to be the army's tool . OMAN-1895-1,401.501

On December 23 , the members of the Rump passed a bill for trying the
king . OMAN-1895-1,401.502

On January 1 , 1649 , they voted that " to levy war against the
Parliament and realm of England was treason , " OMAN-1895-1,401.503

and appointed a High Court of Justice to try the king for that offence .
OMAN-1895-1,401.504

When it was seen that the king's life as well as his crown was aimed at
, many of the leaders of the Independents , both military men and
civilians , began to draw back . OMAN-1895-1,401.505

Fairfax , the chief of the whole army , refused to sit in the High Court
, OMAN-1895-1,401.506

and of 135 persons designated to serve in it , only some seventy or
eighty appeared . OMAN-1895-1,401.507

But the majority of the army , and Cromwell , the guiding spirit of the
whole , were determined to go through with the business .
OMAN-1895-1,401.508

The High Court met , with an obscure lawyer named Bradshaw as its
president ; OMAN-1895-1,401.509

its ranks were packed with military men , who <P_402> were blind to all
legal considerations , and had come merely to condemn the king .
OMAN-1895-1,402.510

Charles was brought before the court , OMAN-1895-1,402.511

but refused to plead . OMAN-1895-1,402.512

Such a body , he said , had no right to try a King of England -
OMAN-1895-1,402.513

it was a mere illegal meeting , deriving its sole authority from a
factious remnant of a mutilated House of Commons . OMAN-1895-1,402.514

This was undoubtedly true , OMAN-1895-1,402.515

and , considering the temper of his judges , the king knew that all
defence was useless . OMAN-1895-1,402.516

The course that he took was the only one that suited his dignity and
conscience . OMAN-1895-1,402.517

While he stood dumb before his judges , they passed sentence of death
upon him <paren> January 26 , 1649 <$$paren> . OMAN-1895-1,402.518

Four days later he was led to execution on a scaffold placed before the
windows of Whitehall Palace . OMAN-1895-1,402.519

He died with a calm dignity that amazed the beholders .
OMAN-1895-1,402.520

He was suffered to make a short speech , in which he bade the multitude
remember that he died a victim to the " power of the sword , " that the
nation was now a slave to the army , and that it would never be free
again till it remembered its duty to its God and its king .
OMAN-1895-1,402.521

He must suffer , he said , because he would not assent to the handing
Church and State over to " an arbitrary sway ; " OMAN-1895-1,402.522

it was this that his captors had required of him . OMAN-1895-1,402.523

Finally , he said , he died a Christian according to the profession of
the Church of England , which he had always striven to maintain .
OMAN-1895-1,402.524

Then he laid his head upon the block OMAN-1895-1,402.525

and met the axe with unflinching courage , amid the groans of the people
. OMAN-1895-1,402.526

The hateful illegality of the king's trial , the violence of his enemies
, and the dignity of his end have half redeemed his memory .
OMAN-1895-1,402.527

In our dislike for those who slew him we almost forget his offences .
OMAN-1895-1,402.528

But when we condemn his slayers we must not forget their provocation .
OMAN-1895-1,402.529

Charles had ground the nation under his heel for eleven years of tyranny
. OMAN-1895-1,402.530

He had involved it in a bitter civil war that lasted four years more .
OMAN-1895-1,402.531

Then , when he fell into the victors' hands , he wasted two years in
shifty and evasive negotiations , which he never intended to bring to an
end . OMAN-1895-1,402.532

Finally , from his prison he had stirred up a second and wholly
unnecessary civil war . OMAN-1895-1,402.533

Contemplating these acts , we must allow that he brought his evil end
upon himself ; OMAN-1895-1,402.534

violent and illegal as it was , we can@ @not say that it was undeserved
. OMAN-1895-1,402.535

The king's execution was immediately followed by the proclamation of a
republic . OMAN-1895-1,402.536

The Independents and the army <P_403> wished to be rid of the monarchy ,
no less than of the person of Charles . OMAN-1895-1,403.537

Accordingly a sweeping series of bills , passed in February , 1649 ,
declared England a " Commonwealth , " OMAN-1895-1,403.538

and vested its government in a single House of Commons and a Council of
State . OMAN-1895-1,403.539

The House of Lords was abolished ; OMAN-1895-1,403.540

of late it had been little more than a farce , OMAN-1895-1,403.541

for not a_dozen peers had been wont to attend . OMAN-1895-1,403.542

But the " Rump , " which now assumed to be the representative of the
Commonwealth of England , was itself hardly more than a mockery .
OMAN-1895-1,403.543

It never permitted the victims of " Pride's purge " to return to its
benches , so that it was nothing better than a factious minority ,
depending on the swords of the army {COM:missing_period}
OMAN-1895-1,403.544

The Rump and the army were masters of England , OMAN-1895-1,403.545

but in Scotland and Ireland they were as yet powerless .
OMAN-1895-1,403.546

Ireland was entirely in the hands of the Catholic confederates , save
the two towns of Dublin and Londonderry . OMAN-1895-1,403.547

Scotland had never laid down its arms " after Preston ;
OMAN-1895-1,403.548

there was no republican party north of the Tweed , OMAN-1895-1,403.549

and when the news of the king's execution arrived , it only led the
Scots to proclaim his son the Prince of Wales , under the name of
Charles II . OMAN-1895-1,403.550

Unless England , Scotland , and Ireland were to part company , and
relapse into separate kingdoms , it was obvious that the new government
must try its sword upon the lesser realms . OMAN-1895-1,403.551

This it was fully prepared to do . OMAN-1895-1,403.552

In the spring of 1649 an expedition for the conquest of Ireland was
ordered , OMAN-1895-1,403.553

and the command of it was given to the formidable Cromwell , who since
the king's death had become more and more the recognized chief of the
army , Fairfax having stepped into the background . OMAN-1895-1,403.554

Before the expedition sailed , however , Cromwell had no small trouble
with his soldiery . OMAN-1895-1,403.555

The bad example which the generals and colonels had set in driving out
the Long Parliament and overturning the monarchy , had turned the rank
and file to similar thoughts . OMAN-1895-1,403.556

There had grown up among them a body of extreme democratic republicans ,
called the Levellers , from their wish to make all men equal ;
OMAN-1895-1,403.557

they were mostly members of obscure and fanatical sects , who looked for
the triumph of the saints and the coming of the millennium .
OMAN-1895-1,403.558

While the army was preparing for the Irish war , the Levellers broke out
into open insurrection , demanding the dismissal of the " Rump , " the
introduction of annual Parliaments , the abolition <P_404> of the
Council of State , and the grant of " true and perfect freedom in all
things spiritual and temporal . " OMAN-1895-1,404.559

The zealots , however , were weaker than they imagined ,
OMAN-1895-1,404.560

and their mutiny was easily put down . OMAN-1895-1,404.561

Cromwell shot three or four of their leaders , OMAN-1895-1,404.562

and pardoned the rest of the band . OMAN-1895-1,404.563

In August , 1649 , Cromwell took over a powerful army to Ireland , where
the civil war had never ceased since the rebellion eight years before .
OMAN-1895-1,404.564

The remnant of the Anglo-Irish Royalists , under the Marquis of Ormonde
, joined with the Romanists to oppose him , OMAN-1895-1,404.565

but their combined efforts were useless . OMAN-1895-1,404.566

So strong a man had never before laid his hand on Ireland .
OMAN-1895-1,404.567

Starting from Dublin , the only large town in Parliamentary hands , he
began by the conquest of Leinster . OMAN-1895-1,404.568

From the first he had determined to strike terror into the enemy .
OMAN-1895-1,404.569

His stern veterans were capable of any extreme of cruelty against
Romanists and rebels . OMAN-1895-1,404.570

But Cromwell is personally responsible for the two horrible blows that
broke the Irish resistance . OMAN-1895-1,404.571

The enemy had made himself strong in the two towns of Drogheda and
Wexford . OMAN-1895-1,404.572

Cromwell stormed them both , OMAN-1895-1,404.573

and forbade the giving of quarter , so that the whole garrison was in
each case slaughtered to a man . OMAN-1895-1,404.574

Eight or nine_thousand Irish perished , OMAN-1895-1,404.575

and such terror was struck into the rebels by these massacres that they
made little more resistance . OMAN-1895-1,404.576

Cromwell had overrun half the island , when pressing need recalled him
to England . OMAN-1895-1,404.577

He left part of his army under his son-in-law Ireton to complete the
conquest , OMAN-1895-1,404.578

and hastily returned with the remainder <paren> May , 1650 <$$paren> .
OMAN-1895-1,404.579

