<BEGIN_osmer-1759-2>

<P_1>

<heading>

A TREATISE , &c. OSMER-1759-2,1.4

CHAP. I . OSMER-1759-2,1.5

On SHOEING . OSMER-1759-2,1.6

<font> Sub Judice Lis est . <$$font> OSMER-1759-2,1.7

<$$heading>

I am afraid the People called <font> Blacksmiths <$$font> will be much
affronted with this Chapter , and hold it very cheap , because it
proposes to instruct them in the Art of Shoeing . OSMER-1759-2,1.9

If you pretend to have your Horse shod according to your own Mind , it
is a general Saying amongst these Men , that they do not want to be
taught ; which is as much as to <P_2> say , in other Words , there is
nothing known in their Art , or ever will be , but what they already are
acquainted with - OSMER-1759-2,2.10

And what is particular , there is not one of these Artists , how much
soever they differ in Method , but gives the same Answer , and has
Vanity enough to think , that he knows more than his Neighbour - Vanity
! The noblest Passion of the Mind , the best , the kindest Gift of
Heaven , given us to balance each human Failing . OSMER-1759-2,2.11

It has been a Maxim amongst wise Men of all Ages , and has been said by
twenty Authors , or more , that Nature does nothing in vain ; from the
Observation of which Truth , reasonable People have been apt to conclude
, that Nature should be the Guide of all our Operations .
OSMER-1759-2,2.12

Now , if you ask one of these Artists his Reason for acting in this or
that particular Manner , or should enquire of him the Use of any Part ,
assigned to some particular End , he can give no Answer ,
OSMER-1759-2,2.13

nor even pretends to have any Knowledge thereof , OSMER-1759-2,2.14

but is guided by Custom alone . OSMER-1759-2,2.15

<P_3>

Hence reasonable People will also conclude , that many Errors have arose
in the Execution of this Art , and that these Artists should not think
themselves aggrieved , by any Information they may receive from any Hand
. OSMER-1759-2,3.17

Be that as it will , my Intent is to explain the proper Manner ,
original Design , Use , and Abuse of Shoeing , as clearly and concisely
as I can , so that every Man of common Capacity may be able to judge for
himself in this Matter . OSMER-1759-2,3.18

When Time was young , when the Earth was in a State of Nature , and
Turnpike Roads as yet were not , the Horse needed not the Assistance of
this Artist ; OSMER-1759-2,3.19

for the Divine Artist had taken Care to give his Feet such Defence as it
pleased him ; OSMER-1759-2,3.20

and who is weak enough to suppose , His Wisdom was not sufficient to the
Purpose in such a State . OSMER-1759-2,3.21

But to prevent all Supposition and Cavilling on this Matter , let us
only appeal to our Senses , OSMER-1759-2,3.22

and we may every Day see Horses , Mares , and Colts , running about on
all Sorts <P_4> of Ground unshod , and uninjured in their Feet .
OSMER-1759-2,4.23

In many Parts of the World at this Day , where the Face of the Earth is
sandy , Horses are accustomed to carry their Riders unshod ,
OSMER-1759-2,4.24

and much to their Advantage it is in such Countries ; OSMER-1759-2,4.25

nay , even in this Kingdom , I have known several Horses rode for a
considerable Time unshod , and that on the Turnpike Roads about <font>
London <$$font> , without any Injury done to their Feet .
OSMER-1759-2,4.26

And , I believe , there are many Horses , whose Feet are of such a Kind
, as to enable them to travel their whole Life-time unshod on any Road ,
if they were rasped round and short at the Toe ; because some Feet ,
exposed to hard Objects , become thereby obdurate enough to resist them
, and to support the Weight without breaking . OSMER-1759-2,4.27

But because there always was a great Difference in the Nature and
Texture of Horses Feet , Mankind <paren> after certain Periods of Time ,
when the Face of the Earth became changed <$$paren> found themselves
under a Necessity of adding <P_5> some other Defence , besides the
natural one , to preserve the Crust of such Feet as were weak , and not
able to support them against new and hard Objects . OSMER-1759-2,5.28

From the Good of this Practice , tried and discovered on particular
Kinds of Feet <paren> though perhaps but a partial Good <$$paren> it is
no Wonder , that the Custom of putting Shoes on all Kinds of Feet became
general . OSMER-1759-2,5.29

Our Ancestors , the original Shoers , proposed nothing more , I dare say
, in their first Efforts , than to preserve the Crust from breaking away
, OSMER-1759-2,5.30

and thought themselves happy they had Skill enough so to do -
OSMER-1759-2,5.31

the Moderns also are wisely content with this in the Racing Way .
OSMER-1759-2,5.32

But , in Process of Time , the Fertility of Invention , and the Vanity
of Mankind , have produced Variety of Methods , almost all which are
productive of Lameness : OSMER-1759-2,5.33

And I think I shall be able to shew clearly , that various Lameness is
produced by want of Judgment in the Shoer , and that merely from not
understanding the Design of Nature . OSMER-1759-2,5.34

<P_6>

But waving all these modern Artists know , or do not know , I suppose it
will be universally assented to , that whatever Method of Shoeing
approaches nearest to the Law of Nature , such is likely to be the most
perfect Method ; OSMER-1759-2,6.36

and as the Feet of different Horses differ from each other , so , if we
would arrive at any Perfection in this Art , the human Reason must be
employed , in discovering and ascertaining wherein their Difference
consists , that each may be treated according to its Nature -
OSMER-1759-2,6.37

And yet with respect to each , and all , some general Rules may be still
allowed . OSMER-1759-2,6.38

For the Sake of those , who may be unacquainted with Horses Feet , and
for their Instruction , I shall describe such Parts only of the Foot ,
for the present , as offer themselves to our View , and come under our
Cognizance , as the immediate and principal Objects of Care , when
intended to be shod . OSMER-1759-2,6.39

These are the outer Sole , the Crust which like a Wall surrounds it ,
the Frog , the Bars , <P_7> one on each Side , and the spongy ,
skin-like Substance which covers the hinder and cellular Part of the
Foot , and is continued to the Heel of the Horse . OSMER-1759-2,7.40

With respect to the Treatment of some of these , the <font> Sieur la
Fosse <$$font> <paren> to whom the World is indebted for many ingenious
Observations <$$paren> has already laid down some Rules -
OSMER-1759-2,7.41

And though I dare say , every Man who has tried his Method of Shoeing ,
is convinced of its Impropriety , yet some useful Hints may be gathered
from his Doctrine . OSMER-1759-2,7.42

He says , the Sole should never be pared ; OSMER-1759-2,7.43

his Reason is very obvious and just ; namely , that the Sole , not pared
, acquires a great Degree of Firmness and Obduracy , whereby it is
enabled to resist all extraneous Bodies , such as Glass , Nails , Flint
, <font> &c. <$$font> OSMER-1759-2,7.44

There is another Reason equally obvious , which is , that the Wisdom of
the Creator intended this outer Sole , and its Obduracy , as a natural
and proper Defence to the inner Sole , which lies immediately under the
other , <P_8> between that and the Bone of the Foot - This inner Sole
being nothing else but the Expansion of the great Tendon , or Sinew of
the Leg , which is continued to the Bottom of the Foot , and overspreads
the Bone thereof . OSMER-1759-2,8.45

This tendinous Expansion , when the outer Sole is pared , and the Animal
put into violent Motion , is , for want of its Defence , susceptible of
great Pain , consequently liable to great Inflammation ;
OSMER-1759-2,8.46

and from this Cause many a Horse has been rendered lame , perhaps cast
his Hoofs , and been undone for ever . OSMER-1759-2,8.47

If it be asked what becomes of the Sole when not pared , it dries ,
separates , OSMER-1759-2,8.48

and scales away . OSMER-1759-2,8.49

<font> La Fosse <$$font> has also said , the Frog should never be pared
; OSMER-1759-2,8.50

his Reason is , that the Frog , being united to the great Tendon of the
Leg <paren> all which Tendons are unelastick Bodies <$$paren> is itself
an elastic Body , is placed there as a proper Point of Support , and
serves as a Basis , to relieve the Tendon at each Step , or Motion .
OSMER-1759-2,8.51

- But if the Frog be pared , it can@ @not be admitted <P_9> to touch the
Ground ; for want of which Support , the Tendon is elongated and
strained , OSMER-1759-2,9.52

hence frequent Lameness of the Tendons is occasioned ; OSMER-1759-2,9.53

and from this Cause also Wind-galls are most frequently produced .
OSMER-1759-2,9.54

I know there are many People who maintain Tendons to be elastick Bodies
, OSMER-1759-2,9.55

but it is a ridiculous and vulgar Error , because all Tendons or Muscles
are confined to their proper Sphere of Acting ; from whence it will
follow , that if they were elastick , the Force of any Muscle <paren>
Part of which is tendinous <$$paren> would be eluded , before such
tendinous Part could act on its proper Object . OSMER-1759-2,9.56

Moreover every Man's Eye will shew him , that Tendons are not elastick ,
from their loose uncontracted Figure which is easily to be perceived in
the hinder Leg of the Horse , when he moves gently . OSMER-1759-2,9.57

There are other Reasons why the Frog should not be pared .
OSMER-1759-2,9.58

<P_10>

If admitted to touch the Ground , it helps to stop the Horse in his
Career , as the Figure of it will plainly evince . OSMER-1759-2,10.60

The Frog , together with the Bars , occupying the hinder Part of the
Foot , is designed by Nature to distend and keep it open , which , when
cut away , suffer the Heels , the Quarters , and the coronary Ring to
become contracted , whereby another Lameness is produced , which shall
be treated of in its proper Place . OSMER-1759-2,10.61

The Bar is that Part situate between the Heel , the Frog and the Quarter
on each Side , OSMER-1759-2,10.62

and is not to be scooped out according to the general Custom , for the
Reason last mentioned , because , together with the Frog , its Use is to
keep open the hinder Part of the Foot , as well as to defend it .
OSMER-1759-2,10.63

The spongy , skin-like Substance is not to be cut away till it becomes
raggy , because it is the Expansion of the Skin round the Heel , its Use
being to unite more firmly the Foot and its Contents , and to keep the
cellular <P_11> Part of the Heel from growing rigid ; OSMER-1759-2,11.64

it also surrounds the coronary Ring , OSMER-1759-2,11.65

and may be observed to peel , and dry away as it descends on the Hoof .
OSMER-1759-2,11.66

These are general Rules to be observed , with respect to every Kind of
Foot . OSMER-1759-2,11.67

But because <font> la Fosse <$$font> has said , the Sole and Frog should
never be pared , many of our Countrymen , mistaking his Meaning , have
fallen into another Extreme , OSMER-1759-2,11.68

and so have not pared the Foot at all . OSMER-1759-2,11.69

- Yet it is necessary , that the Crust of all Horses which are shod ,
should be pared more or less , according to its different Degree of
Strength . OSMER-1759-2,11.70

- But no general Method can be laid down in this Respect , because the
Nature of Feet differ greatly from each other , by which alone the
Artist is to be guided . OSMER-1759-2,11.71

And to prove this Necessity of paring the Crust , it is to be observed ,
that the Superficies of the Crust of every Foot , whereon the Shoe rests
, becomes rotten in a few Weeks ; so that if a new Shoe be set upon an
unsound Foundation , it will not stand firm or <P_12> long .
OSMER-1759-2,12.72

- The Crust also , in such Case , will shell or break away .
OSMER-1759-2,12.73

Now where the Foot is deep and hollow , the Crust is generally thick and
strong , OSMER-1759-2,12.74

this can@ @not be pared down too low , <paren> so as not to fall into
the Quick <$$paren> because the Strength of the Crust alone will
occasion such a Compression on the interior Parts of the Foot , as to
produce a Lameness , which will be shewn in its proper Place .
OSMER-1759-2,12.75

In all broad , fleshy Feet , the Crust is thin , OSMER-1759-2,12.76

and should therefore suffer the least possible Loss .
OSMER-1759-2,12.77

- On such Feet , the Rasp alone is generally sufficient to make the
Bottom plain , and produce a sound Foundation , without the Use of the
desperate Buttress . OSMER-1759-2,12.78

And thus each Kind of Foot is to be treated , according to its different
Degree of Strength or Weakness . OSMER-1759-2,12.79

The Superficies of the Foot round the Outside , now made plain and
smooth , the Shoe is to be made quite flat ; OSMER-1759-2,12.80

and to prevent this flat Shoe from pressing on the Sole of the <P_13>
Horse , the Outside thereof is to be made thick , and the Inside
gradually thinner . OSMER-1759-2,13.81

In such a Shoe , the Frog is admitted to touch the Ground , the
Necessity of which has been already shewn ; OSMER-1759-2,13.82

- add to this , the Horse stands more firmly on the Ground , having the
same Points of Support , as in a natural State . OSMER-1759-2,13.83

Here now is a plain , easy Method , agreeable to common Sense and Reason
, conformable to the anatomical Structure of the Parts , and therefore
to the Design of Nature . - A Method so plain , that one would think
nobody could ever swerve from it , or commit any Mistake in an Art ,
where nothing is required , but to make smooth the Surface of the Foot ,
to know what Loss of Crust each Kind of Foot will bear with Advantage to
itself , and to nail thereon a Piece of Iron , adapted to the natural
Tread of the Horse ; the Design , Good , or Use of the Iron , being only
to defend the Crust from breaking , the Sole wanting no Defence , if
never pared . OSMER-1759-2,13.84

If we now examine the present Method of Shoeing , by comparing it with
what has been <P_14> already said , we shall easily perceive its sad
Effects , which shall be subject of the ensuing Chapter .
OSMER-1759-2,14.85

<heading>

CHAP. II . <font> Is relative to the First . <$$font>
OSMER-1759-2,14.87

<$$heading>

Now the modern Artist uses little Difference in the Treatment of any
Kind of Foot ; OSMER-1759-2,14.89

but with a strong Arm , and a sharp Weapon carries all before him ,
OSMER-1759-2,14.90

and will take more from a weak-@ @footed Horse at one paring , than
Nature can furnish again in some Months , whereby such are rendered lame
. OSMER-1759-2,14.91

If a strong-footed Horse , with narrow and contracted Heels , be brought
before him , such meets with Treatment yet more severe ;
OSMER-1759-2,14.92

the Bar is scooped out , the Frog trimmed , and the Sole drawn as thin
as possible , even to the Quick , under Pretence of giving him Ease ,
because he says , he is hot-footed or foundered . - By which Treatment
, the Horse is rendered more lame than he was before , as I shall
immediately shew . OSMER-1759-2,14.93

<P_15>

In the interior Part of the Foot , <paren> which few or none of these
Artists have ever examined , at least to little Purpose <$$paren> there
is a broad Cartilage annexed to each superior End , or Corner of the
Foot Bone ; OSMER-1759-2,15.95

there is also a small Bone , called the Nut Bone , placed transversely
in the Foot , between the Bone thereof and the coronary Bone ; the Ends
of which are articulated to the inner Sides of the Foot Bone , which
Ends are also cartilaginous ; OSMER-1759-2,15.96

and from the Situation and Concern of these in all Motion , it is
necessary they should be of a cartilaginous , and pliant , or yielding
Nature . OSMER-1759-2,15.97

Now when this same foundered Foot , <paren> as it is {TEXT:missing_"is"}
called <$$paren> is robbed of those Parts , which were designed to keep
it open , the Heels and the coronary Ring become more contracted than
they were before ; by which Means these Cartilages of the Foot Bone are
more compressed . OSMER-1759-2,15.98

All the tendinous Expansions of the Foot are compressed and inflamed ,
OSMER-1759-2,15.99

and the cartilaginous Ends of the Nut Bone are squeezed as in a Vice .
OSMER-1759-2,15.100

And it is to be observed , that whenever the Heels of the Horse are deep
or narrow <P_16> and there is a Stricture round the coronary Ring , all
such Feet are always more or less lame , after some Use , and that
merely from the Compression above named . - The Truth of which will be
more readily conceived , by examining the interior Structure of the Foot
. Because , as <font> Horace <$$font> says , <font> Segnius initant
animos demissa per aures , Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta <$$font>
fidelibus , OSMER-1759-2,16.101

- But the modern Artists , not content with ruining and destroying the
Work of Providence , seem resolved , that all their Operations shall be
of a-@ @Piece , OSMER-1759-2,16.102

and in every Thing act by Contraries . OSMER-1759-2,16.103

- And , to prove this , I shall demonstrate , that the Shoe commonly
made Use of , is contrary to Sense and Reason , as well as to the
natural Tread of the Foot . OSMER-1759-2,16.104

It is to be understood , that no Horse can go , if the Shoe rests upon
the Sole ; OSMER-1759-2,16.105

and to avoid this Evil , the modern Shoe must be formed , and stand
concave ; because the modern Shoe is made thinnest on the Outside , and
thickest on the Inside . OSMER-1759-2,16.106

<P_17>

Mark now the Inconveniences arising from the unequal Surface of such a
Shoe . OSMER-1759-2,17.108

The Horse having fewer Points of Support , is more liable to blunder ,
to strain the Tendons , injure the Cartilages and Ligaments , break the
Bones of the Foot , and to dislocate some of the Joints of the Fore Part
. OSMER-1759-2,17.109

The Weight of the Horse bears chiefly on the inner Side of this Shoe ,
which is the highest Part ; so that the Nails at the Heel , <paren> when
the Horse comes to act <$$paren> must break , or give Way , or tear the
Crust ; OSMER-1759-2,17.110

hereby the Shoe gets somewhat loose , OSMER-1759-2,17.111

the finer Sand insinuates itself between the Foot and the Shoe-Heel ,
OSMER-1759-2,17.112

and the Horse is , according to our Phrase , gravelled ;
OSMER-1759-2,17.113

perhaps , gets a Corn , with which he is lame for Life ; no Cure being
supposed to be had for this Evil . OSMER-1759-2,17.114

In this Kind of Shoe , tho' the Frog be not pared , it will be removed
to such a Distance from the Ground , that it can@ @not be admitted to
touch it ; by which Intervention of the <P_18> Shoe the great Tendon
loses its Support , as much as if the Frog was actually pared .
OSMER-1759-2,18.115

Further , the Heel of the Horse is corroded and eat away , and the Crust
more liable to be broke ; OSMER-1759-2,18.116

nevertheless , these Men are obstinate and weak enough to affirm the
contrary , and give it as a Reason for making the Outside of the Shoe
thinnest , not perceiving the Consequence of such unequal Pressure on
the Crust . OSMER-1759-2,18.117

Having now proved , that Variety of Lameness is produced by a wrong
Method of Shoeing , I shall leave what has been said to the
Consideration of the Reader ; the Truth of which , Observation and
Experience will make manifest . OSMER-1759-2,18.118

<P_19>

<heading>

CHAP. III . <font> Contains some further Observations on Shoeing .
<$$font> OSMER-1759-2,19.121

<$$heading>

Let the Shoe on every Horse stand wider at the Points of the Heels than
the Foot itself ; OSMER-1759-2,19.123

otherwise , as the Foot grows in Length , the Heel of the Shoe in a
short Time gets within the Heel of the Horse ; which Pressure often
breaks the Crust , produces a temporary Lameness , perhaps a Corn .
OSMER-1759-2,19.124

Let every Kind of Foot be kept as short at the Toe as possible , <paren>
so as not to affect the Quick <$$paren> OSMER-1759-2,19.125

for by a long Toe , the Foot becomes thin and weak , the Heels low ,
OSMER-1759-2,19.126

and the Tendons of the Leg are strained ; OSMER-1759-2,19.127

the shortness of the Toe helps also to widen narrow Heels .
OSMER-1759-2,19.128

In all thin weak-footed Horses , the Rasp should be laid on the Toe in
such a Manner , as to render it as thick as may be ; by which Means the
whole Foot becomes gradually thicker , higher , and stronger .
OSMER-1759-2,19.129

<P_20>

In all Feet , whose Texture is very strong , the Rasp may be laid
obliquely on the Fore Part of the Foot towards the Toe , and the Toe
itself thinned , whereby the Compression on the Parts may , perhaps , be
rendered somewhat less . OSMER-1759-2,20.131

But this Rasp is to be used with Discretion , least the Crust being
rendered too thin , and not able to support the Weight of the Horse , a
Sand-crack ensue ; which frequently happens , from too free , or
unskilful Use of this Tool , and from the natural rigid Texture of the
Coronet . OSMER-1759-2,20.132

The Heel of the Shoe , on all strong and narrow-heeled Horses , should
be made strait at the extreme Points ; the Form of the Shoe in some
Measure helping to distend the Heel of the Horse . OSMER-1759-2,20.133

It has been said already , that neither Frog or Sole should ever be
pared ; OSMER-1759-2,20.134

nevertheless , it must be understood , that it is impossible to pare the
Crust , without taking away some of the adjacent Sole , and it is also
requisite , in order to obtain a smooth and even Surface , <P_21> so far
as the Breadth of the Shoe reaches and no farther . OSMER-1759-2,21.135

The Frog also will become ragged , OSMER-1759-2,21.136

and loose Pieces will occasionally separate from the Body thereof ,
perhaps in one Foot , and not in the other . OSMER-1759-2,21.137

When this happens , it should be cut away with a Knife , to prevent the
Gravel lodging therein . OSMER-1759-2,21.138

- The inferior Point of the same , towards the Toe , may also be taken
down , in some Kinds of Feet , where it grows high .
OSMER-1759-2,21.139

<font> La Fosse <$$font> has given us a Caution against the Use of
Cramps , or what in <font> England <$$font> we call Corking ; that is ,
turning up the Shoe at the Points of the Heels . OSMER-1759-2,21.140

He says , that the Frog being hereby removed to a great Distance from
the Ground , the Tendon will be inevitably ruptured ;
OSMER-1759-2,21.141

- but this is true only in Part . OSMER-1759-2,21.142

- In the Summer-time , when the Ground is dry and hard , I think this
Effect would frequently happen , especially if the Horse was rode hard .
OSMER-1759-2,21.143

- But in the Winter-time , when the Ground is wet , this can@ @not
happen in a flat Shoe ; because <P_22> the Corking of the Shoe-Heels is
then buried in the Ground , whereby the Frog is still admitted to touch
the Ground , and to rest thereon . OSMER-1759-2,22.144

- And it is necessary that all Sportsmen , who hunt on hilly or slippery
Countries , should have the Shoe-Heels turned up a little in the
Winter-time , especially the hinder Ones , for the Security of their
Persons . OSMER-1759-2,22.145

This Method of treating the Foot , and such a kind of Shoe as has been
described , I have used many Years ; OSMER-1759-2,22.146

and , to the best of my Remembrance , have not had a Horse lame since ,
except when pricked by the Blacksmith ; OSMER-1759-2,22.147

- and it is a Matter of the greatest Astonishment to me , how any other
Form of a Shoe could ever come into general Use . OSMER-1759-2,22.148

Now this flat Shoe is not to be made with a smooth Surface , after the
<font> French <$$font> Manner , but channelled round , or what is called
fullered , after the <font> English <$$font> Manner ; by which the Horse
is better prevented from sliding about , and the Heads of the Nails are
less liable to be broke off ; both which Inconveniences attend the Shoe
whose Surface is smooth . OSMER-1759-2,22.149

<P_23>

But so ignorant are these our Artists , <paren> who do not want to be
taught , or , in other Words , know every Thing <$$paren> that not one
in Twenty of them can make these flat Shoes , tho' a Pattern lies before
them , for which Reason they generally dislike and condemn them .
OSMER-1759-2,23.151

It has hitherto been thought a difficult Matter to prevent Horses from
Cutting ; OSMER-1759-2,23.152

nevertheless , it is generally very easy . OSMER-1759-2,23.153

Whoever will be at the Trouble of examining the Feet of such Horses as
are accustomed to cut themselves , will at all Times , and in all Horses
, find the Cause to be the same ; namely , to turning out their Toes .
OSMER-1759-2,23.154

From hence also the Necessity of Boots , and Bolsters , and Bandages ,
round the Fetlocks of half the Horses that are trained at <font>
Newmarket <$$font> , to prevent knocking their Joints together .
OSMER-1759-2,23.155

Now the Colt standing to graze with an out-stretched Foot , which is no
uncommon Posture , rests chiefly on the Inside of it , by <P_24> which
Means that Part is worn lowest ; OSMER-1759-2,24.156

this is disregarded ; OSMER-1759-2,24.157

and , by a Habit of Standing , the Toe grows outward ,
OSMER-1759-2,24.158

and he becomes crooked from the Fetlock Joint downwards .
OSMER-1759-2,24.159

It may perhaps be said , that this Habit of turning out the Toe is
entailed by Nature ; OSMER-1759-2,24.160

but whether it be natural , or acquired , the true Cause of it is still
the same in all Horses , OSMER-1759-2,24.161

and depends on nothing else , but the inside Heel being lower than the
Outside . OSMER-1759-2,24.162

And to prove this Doctrine , as soon as you perceive the Colt's Toe
turning out , pare down the Outside of the Foot as much as you can ;
OSMER-1759-2,24.163

repeat it as often as the Foot will allow , OSMER-1759-2,24.164

and let the Inside alone ; OSMER-1759-2,24.165

so will he grow strait on his Legs and Feet , and never cut or knock
himself about when he comes into Use . OSMER-1759-2,24.166

This Method will also prevent grown Horses from Cutting , if the Crust
of the Foot be strong enough to bear a sufficient Loss ;
OSMER-1759-2,24.167

if not , the Substance of the Iron may be made thicker for the Inside of
the Foot , from the Heel to the Toe , than it is for the Outside ;
OSMER-1759-2,24.168

and where it is practicable , and shall <P_25> appear necessary , both
these Methods may be used , OSMER-1759-2,25.169

and both will assist for the Purpose . OSMER-1759-2,25.170

- I have rode a Horse treated in this Manner several Years ,
OSMER-1759-2,25.171

and have found but little Inconvenience to his Going , or to his Feet ,
much depending in this Case on the Goodness thereof .
OSMER-1759-2,25.172

Such of the Dealers , who are Masters of their Business , use this kind
of Shoe to raise the Inside of the Horse's Foot , and make him point ,
as they call it , or stand strait on his Feet ; OSMER-1759-2,25.173

and the Chapman , who thinks he has bought a strait_legged Nag , is much
surprized at the Alteration he perceives in him , the first Time he is
shod in other Shoes . OSMER-1759-2,25.174

The Crust should also be suffered to grow fullest on the Inside of the
Foot , and the outer Part thereof be rasped away as far as can be spared
. OSMER-1759-2,25.175

Nevertheless , the modern Shoers , acting in all Things by Contraries ,
rasp away as much as they can from the inner Part of the Feet .
OSMER-1759-2,25.176

<P_26>

<heading>

CHAP. IV . <font> Wherein it will be proved , that Shoeing is but a
partial Good . <$$font> OSMER-1759-2,26.179

<$$heading>

It has been said already , that all Horses , whose Feet are contracted
round the hinder Part , or whose Crust is deep and strong , are always
more or less lame , when they have been shod and used any Time ; and
that from a Compression on the Contents of the Foot .
OSMER-1759-2,26.181

And no Method of Shoeing whatsoever will prevent the Lameness of such
Feet ; OSMER-1759-2,26.182

and yet no Man ever saw a Horse <paren> with this , or any other kind of
Foot <$$paren> lame , but by some Injury whilst he remained unbroke ,
and running about in a State of Nature . OSMER-1759-2,26.183

There are many Men , who can often distinguish this Kind of Foot , and
pronounce with Certainty the Lameness thereof , even without seeing the
Horse move at all ; as readily as other Men shall distinguish Gold from
Silver , or Lead from Iron . OSMER-1759-2,26.184

<P_27>

But because all Men have not been attentive enough to make the same
Discoveries , some thro' Ignorance , or Prejudice to their own Opinions
, have asserted and maintained other Kinds of Lameness , which do not
exist at all ; OSMER-1759-2,27.186

and talk of Horses being Chest-foundered , and shook in the Shoulders ,
when the Disorder is in the Feet alone . Wherefore know all Men by
these Presents , that whosoever talks of Horses being Chest-foundered ,
or shook in the Shoulders , is an ignorant Pretender to the Knowledge of
this Animal , and is himself shaken in the Head . OSMER-1759-2,27.187

Now to prove the Truth of this Doctrine , and that Shoeing is but a
partial Good ; take this same narrow-heeled , or strong-footed Horse
<paren> which , because it is fair to the Eye , the Blacksmith perhaps
calls a very good one <$$paren> OSMER-1759-2,27.188

pare down the Crust as much as you can , OSMER-1759-2,27.189

cut the Toe off round and short , OSMER-1759-2,27.190

and turn him out to Grass bare-footed , OSMER-1759-2,27.191

he will become sound in a Course of Time , if the Bones or the
Cartilages of the Foot are not diseased . <P_28> The true Cause of
which is , that the Foot not being confined in a Shoe , the Weight of
the Horse expands the same ; the Crust , and the Stricture of the
coronary Ring , is relaxed by the Dews and Moisture , and the
Compression on the Parts is removed . OSMER-1759-2,28.192

And herein alone it is , that the unskillful are imposed upon by the
Farrier , who <paren> having done something to your Horse , for what he
calls a Lameness in the Shoulder , and ordered him to be turned to Grass
<$$paren> vainly believes such Soundness to be the Effect of his Remedy
; OSMER-1759-2,28.193

and you , for Want of better Knowledge of the Animal , are persuaded to
believe the same . OSMER-1759-2,28.194

Take the same Horse , whose Feet by their open Figure and relaxed State
are become sound , OSMER-1759-2,28.195

confine them again in a Shoe , OSMER-1759-2,28.196

keep him at House , OSMER-1759-2,28.197

in spite of all Art they will become contracted , and he lame again
perhaps the first Time of Riding ; especially if the Weather be hot and
dry , merely from the Compression above-named . OSMER-1759-2,28.198

<P_29>

Who now does not see the horrid Barbarities of Rowelling , Blistering ,
nay , even boreing the Shoulders with a red-hot Iron , <paren> under
Pretence of curing a Lameness therein <$$paren> committed on this most
noble Animal , by the Obstinacy , Pride , or Folly of Mankind .
OSMER-1759-2,29.200

Yet I would not be understood to mean , that there is no such Thing as a
Lameness in the Shoulder ; because the Muscles and Ligaments thereof are
liable to be strained , as well as other muscular and ligamentous Parts
. OSMER-1759-2,29.201

But that no Man may ever after be mistaken herein , I will lay down one
unerring Rule , whereby he may distinguish the Reality of this Disorder
, without consulting the Farrier at all ; which is , that the Horse , in
this Circumstance , always drags his Toe upon the Ground ;
OSMER-1759-2,29.202

for it is impossible that the Horse can extend his Foot to go on ,
without extending also the Muscles of the Shoulder , which Act of
Extension he , to avoid Pain , or from Inability , does not chuse to
have performed . OSMER-1759-2,29.203

<P_30>

It appears also , from the Nature of the Articulation of the humeral
Bone with the Scapula , or blade Bone , that such is capable of
Dislocation , either forward or backward ; OSMER-1759-2,30.205

for my own Part , I have never known any Instance thereof , in all the
various Kinds of Work that I have seen Horses perform ;
OSMER-1759-2,30.206

yet there are many Farriers in this Kingdom , who pretend to have cured
this Dislocation , by the Means of a Patten-shoe put on the Foot of the
lame Leg ; the Truth of which they would attest on Oath , perhaps , seal
with their Blood . OSMER-1759-2,30.207

Now if this does ever happen , the Appearance of it will be so
remarkable , that no Man can mistake it . OSMER-1759-2,30.208

But this Patten-shoe must of Necessity do Harm instead of Good ; because
it will force the Head of the humeral Bone further from it's
Articulation with the Scapula . OSMER-1759-2,30.209

The proper Method of reducing all Dislocations is by Extension , and
counter_Extension ; OSMER-1759-2,30.210

but I am of Opinion , if a Dislocation of this Joint was ever to happen
, the Ligaments of the same would be ruptured also .
OSMER-1759-2,30.211

<P_31>

From the Ossification of the Cartilages , contracted Form of the Feet ,
and subsequent Pain , the Muscles of the Shoulder may perhaps sometimes
waste away , OSMER-1759-2,31.213

and <paren> as I take it <$$paren> this is what is generally meant by
the Word Chest-foundered , or shook in the Shoulders ; which mistake
arises from not understanding the Nature of Feet . OSMER-1759-2,31.214

Now from the Pain occasioned by a Spavin , or other Disorders in the
Joint of the Hock , the Muscles of the Quarter will frequently waste
away also ; OSMER-1759-2,31.215

but it will be equally absurd in either of these Cases to say , that the
Lameness of the Horse is in the Shoulder , or in the Quarter .
OSMER-1759-2,31.216

From Blows also received on the Shoulder , the muscular Parts may waste
away , in like Manner as in the human Species , where the Nerve has been
affected ; OSMER-1759-2,31.217

but this last is a very uncommon Case , OSMER-1759-2,31.218

and when it happens is very distinguishable ; and for which , I believe
, there is no Remedy . OSMER-1759-2,31.219

<P_32>

To prove still further , that Shoeing is but a partial Good . - When
any other Kind of Foot is become shelly and broken , the Crust thin , or
the Heels low , turn the Horse out to Grass without Shoes ,
OSMER-1759-2,32.221

rasp the Foot short at the Toe , OSMER-1759-2,32.222

keep it constantly rasped as it grows , OSMER-1759-2,32.223

such Foot will in a short Time flourish again , and become just as it
was in a natural State , when he was a Colt . OSMER-1759-2,32.224

And here let it be remembered , that it is much to the Advantage of all
Colts to keep their Toes short ; OSMER-1759-2,32.225

Mares also in Foal will by this Means carry their Load much easier . -
Discretion being had thereunto , as in paring the human Nail , which ,
if cut too close , will cause a temporary Soreness .
OSMER-1759-2,32.226

Nevertheless no Harm , except an immediate Soreness , which will soon go
off , attends cutting the Toe of the Horse even to the Quick , as shall
be immediately shewn . OSMER-1759-2,32.227

If you have a Horse , whose Foot is fleshy , or what is generally called
pumiced , whose <P_33> Sole is higher than the Crust , take him
OSMER-1759-2,33.228

and cut him round at the Toe , till the Blood follows , and stands in
Drops ; OSMER-1759-2,33.229

turn him to Grass bare-footed , OSMER-1759-2,33.230

he will in a short Time make a new Shoot at the Coronet ,
OSMER-1759-2,33.231

the weak Crust will become by Degrees more solid , and the thin Sole
more obdurate , OSMER-1759-2,33.232

the Heels will get high and strong , OSMER-1759-2,33.233

and behold , where you could not before well find a Place to drive a
Nail , the whole Foot is now rendered tough and firm ,
OSMER-1759-2,33.234

will bear Hammering like a Piece of Board , OSMER-1759-2,33.235

will carry as flat a Shoe as any other Kind of Foot ,
OSMER-1759-2,33.236

and will continue so to do , if it be never pared or stopped . -
Provided always , the interior Parts of the Foot have not been injured
by Disease or Accident . OSMER-1759-2,33.237

By the same Means , Horses , who have had Corns in their Heels many
Years , are cured with Certainty . OSMER-1759-2,33.238

By the same Means , false Quarters are cured . OSMER-1759-2,33.239

By the same Means Sandcracks are cured ; OSMER-1759-2,33.240

but if you take three Parts of <font> Friar <$$font> 's Balsam , and one
Part of <font> Aqua Fortis <$$font> , mix these , dip <P_34> some Lint
therein , apply to the Part , and cover it with any unctious Medicine
spread on Tow , it will help to unite the divided Hoof sooner .
OSMER-1759-2,34.241

Nor are these Effects at all to be wondered at ; OSMER-1759-2,34.242

for by this cutting to the Quick , an entire new Hoof pushes itself out
; OSMER-1759-2,34.243

and as the Toe is kept cut , the fresh Shoots of the Foot are to be seen
descending on the Hoof below the coronary Ring ; OSMER-1759-2,34.244

and there is no Inconvenience at all attending this Operation , but a
Soreness of the Part when first cut ; OSMER-1759-2,34.245

nor does the Horse want any Care , but to be turned out on soft Land ,
the Foot seldom requiring to be cut to the Quick more than once ,
OSMER-1759-2,34.246

but must be kept as short as can be , till you want to use him .
OSMER-1759-2,34.247

For these Reasons it is manifest enough , that all Horses , when turned
to Grass for a Time , should have their Shoes taken off , and their Toes
kept rasped round and short . OSMER-1759-2,34.248

The Feet of Stallions are also best without Shoes , whether they are
kept at House or Abroad ; the Crust at the Bottom of the Foot <P_35>
being occasionally pared down , according to the Depth , and Strength ,
and Growth thereof . OSMER-1759-2,35.249

Let any Man keep one Foot of a Stallion so managed , and the other in a
Shoe , he will soon find a wide Difference between the two Feet .
OSMER-1759-2,35.250

Hence it will follow , that all Breeders of Horses should be well versed
in the Difference of Feet , the Laws of Nature seldom varying in this or
other Respects . OSMER-1759-2,35.251

And here occurs to me the wrong Judgment of the Grooms , in the
indiscriminate Custom of Stopping and Greasing all Sorts of Feet ;
OSMER-1759-2,35.252

for Greasing and Stopping such Feet , whose Crust is weak , and whose
Sole is spongy , will render them more weak and more spongy ;
OSMER-1759-2,35.253

such Feet can@ @not be kept too dry . OSMER-1759-2,35.254

Nevertheless , it is necessary to anoint the coronary Ring of such with
some cooling Oil , Ointment , or mucilaginous Composition , to keep it
pliant , and free from Contraction - OSMER-1759-2,35.255

Urine will also render the Crust of weak Feet tough , and help to
consolidate the Sole . OSMER-1759-2,35.256

<P_36>

On the other Hand , strong Feet can@ @not be kept too full of Oil ,
OSMER-1759-2,36.258

and for such , soft Clay is the best Stopping , all Dung rendering the
Parts more or less rotten . OSMER-1759-2,36.259

<heading>

CHAP. V . <font> Treats of various other Lameness . <$$font>
OSMER-1759-2,36.261

<$$heading>

La Fosse has given us various Accounts of fractured Bones in the Foot ;
OSMER-1759-2,36.263

for my own Part , I have never seen any such Thing , OSMER-1759-2,36.264

but can easily give Credit to the Possibility thereof .
OSMER-1759-2,36.265

Yet I have seen many Instances of sudden Lameness brought on Horses when
hunting , by a false Step , which Horses have continued lame their whole
Life-time ; and which , upon Examination , I have always found to be
owing to the Ossification of the Cartilages of the Bones , and an
Induration or Enlargement of the Ligaments , belonging to the Joint of
the Foot ; the Bones themselves being sometimes wasted , sometimes
enlarged - OSMER-1759-2,36.266

and it is no uncommon Thing to meet a Horse , whose Feet <P_37> are not
Fellows , the natural Form of the injured Foot being generally altered
hereby - OSMER-1759-2,37.267

And nothing can contribute more to such an Accident , than the unequal
Pressure of the Foot in our modern Concave Shoe . OSMER-1759-2,37.268

The Stricture of a deep Crust , and narrow Form of the Foot with hard
Riding , and much Use , will also produce an Ossification of the
Cartilages of the Joint of the Foot , from which a Stiffness in the Part
always ensues . OSMER-1759-2,37.269

- There is also a Disease of the Joint , called <font> Anchylosis
<$$font> , by which is to be understood a total Loss of Motion in such
Joint . OSMER-1759-2,37.270

In every Joint there are Glands , the Use of which is to pour forth in
Action a Mucus , that serves to lubricate the Heads of the Bones , all
which , for the Sake of Motion , are covered with a Cartilage or Gristle
. OSMER-1759-2,37.271

Now when these Glands are inflamed by Motion , they grow occasionally
rigid , OSMER-1759-2,37.272

pour forth more sparingly their Mucus , OSMER-1759-2,37.273

and at length become dry and indurated . OSMER-1759-2,37.274

- Hence I have been led to think , this Ossification of the Cartilages
is oftentimes no more than <P_38> a secondary Disorder , depending on
the State of the Mucus . OSMER-1759-2,38.275

That Inflammation attends the Glands , I have seen frequent Instances ,
where the Fetlock Joint of a hunted Stag has been cut asunder in the
Summer-time , when the Leaps have been strong , and the Ground hard and
dry ; the Mucus thereof having been of a very sanguine Colour .
OSMER-1759-2,38.276

Who now shall doubt , the same may happen to the Horse , especially when
another Weight is added to his own ? OSMER-1759-2,38.277

- Moreover , there are Instances , where the Mucus of the Joint in human
Bodies has been so diseased , either by Accident , or bad Habit of Body
, as to corrode the cartilaginous Heads of the Bones .
OSMER-1759-2,38.278

The Fetlock Joint is liable to frequent Lameness , from Blows received
thereon , whereby the Ligaments surrounding it become inflamed and rigid
, and the outer Tegument or Skin is thickened or indurated -
OSMER-1759-2,38.279

It is liable also to Dislocation . OSMER-1759-2,38.280

<P_39>

Lameness also will ensue from Windgalls , Running Thrushes , Splints ,
Ring-bone , Canker in the Foot , straining the Tendons , and what is
called a Letting-down , or Relaxation of the Sinew , and from broken
Bones . OSMER-1759-2,39.282

Now these which have been recited , are the only Kinds of Lameness ,
that I have ever been able to discover attending the Fore Part of the
Horse - Except such as are occasioned by the Crisis of a Fever , or by
Injuries received from extraneous Bodies - OSMER-1759-2,39.283

And I have been the more particular in setting forth the Nature of some
of these , that the Unskilful may not be imposed on by the Ignorance of
Farriers , nor the Horse punished for an incurable Disorder .
OSMER-1759-2,39.284

In the hinder Part of the Foot , Lameness is much less frequent than in
the Fore Part , and less various . OSMER-1759-2,39.285

A Dislocation of the Hip , or Whirl-bone , happens very seldom ,
OSMER-1759-2,39.286

and whenever it does , it proceeds from a Rupture of the round Ligament
<paren> occasioned by some Violence <$$paren> or an Elongation <P_40> of
the same , from a Disease of the Part ; Instances of both which I have
seen in a Bullock and a Horse , as well as of Fractures of the Head of
the Thigh Bone , and of the Os Ilium . OSMER-1759-2,40.287

Now to distinguish with Certainty the Reality of these , it must be
observed , that when the Bone is broke in either of these Cases , the
Animal will in a few Days begin to rest upon that Leg a little , and
gradually more and more , till the Bone consolidates , and becomes
united ; OSMER-1759-2,40.288

but when the Ligament is ruptured ; or elongated to a certain Degree ,
the Head of the Bone falls from the Socket , OSMER-1759-2,40.289

the Leg swings , OSMER-1759-2,40.290

the Animal can@ @not rest upon it at all , OSMER-1759-2,40.291

and by continually bearing all the Weight upon the other Leg , he soon
becomes lame of that also , OSMER-1759-2,40.292

and at last does not chuse to stand at all . OSMER-1759-2,40.293

- Moreover , in the Case of Elongation or Rupture of the Ligament , the
whole Limb becomes longer ; OSMER-1759-2,40.294

and in the Case of a Fracture of the Thigh-bone , it becomes shorter ;
OSMER-1759-2,40.295

but in a Fracture of the Os Ilium , this Abbreviation may or may not
happen , depending alone on the Nature or Manner of the Fracture .
OSMER-1759-2,40.296

<P_41>

But the common Lameness attending this Joint is occasioned by the
relaxed State of the Ligaments surrounding it , brought on by some
Strain at first , and by Exercise continued on such weak Part . - Which
Lameness is easily distinguished from a Lameness in the Stifle ; because
the Horse , in this latter Case , drags his Toe upon the Ground when put
in Motion , but in the other he does not . OSMER-1759-2,41.298

From a sudden Strain , or Exercise continued on a weak Part , a Swelling
will arise on the Hock , attended with Lameness . OSMER-1759-2,41.299

From a sudden Strain sudden Swellings will arise in the Cavities on each
Side the Hock , attended with great Pain . OSMER-1759-2,41.300

Of Spavins there are two Sorts , one called the Bone Spavin , the other
the Blood Spavin . OSMER-1759-2,41.301

A Curb is a Swelling on the Joint of the hinder Leg below the Hock -
OSMER-1759-2,41.302

All these are generally productive of Lameness . OSMER-1759-2,41.303

<P_42>

Another Lameness there is , which , according to the Jockies stile ,
proceeds from Humours . OSMER-1759-2,42.305

Now most of the learned World , who have wrote on this Subject , have
made themselves merry with the Jockies and Farriers , for using the Word
Humours , when the Horse is supposed to have a crazy Constitution , or
bad Habit of Body . OSMER-1759-2,42.306

And yet herein the Learned and Unlearned both mean the same Thing , as
appears from the Practice of the one , and Writing of the other -
OSMER-1759-2,42.307

The Unlearned in this Case administer Physick , and Pissing Drinks ,
OSMER-1759-2,42.308

put in Rowels , OSMER-1759-2,42.309

and turn to Grass ; OSMER-1759-2,42.310

the Learned recommend Purging , and Alteratives , and Salt Marshes .
OSMER-1759-2,42.311

But as all Words are arbitrary , and at the Will of the Imposer , it
seems to me of little Consequence what Choice we make of Words ,
provided always , they are used to bear a determinate Meaning - So that
, for the Sake of Peace , Distinction , and Custom , I am well <P_43>
content this good old Phrase should stand it's Ground unmolested .
OSMER-1759-2,43.312

There is Lameness then proceeding from Humours ; that is to say , the
Blood and Juices in some Constitutions are very viscid , and not passing
so readily thro' the various Canals of Circulation , Obstructions do
arise , by which the soft Parts are affected with Pain , and Lameness
ensues sometimes in one Part , sometimes in another .
OSMER-1759-2,43.313

Pray , Why is not the Word <font> Humours <$$font> as proper here , as
any other Word , if not applied to any other Purpose ?
OSMER-1759-2,43.314

<P_44>

Chap. VI . <font> Treats of the Management of these Kinds of Lameness
which have been already recited . <$$font> OSMER-1759-2,44.316

Now the Farriers , when the Cause of Lameness is not visible to them ,
do most frequently assert , that it is in the Shoulder , and by Chance ,
that it is in the Foot . OSMER-1759-2,44.317

When they allow this last to be the Case , their Method of acting is
first to blister , and then fire the coronary Ring all round , at
various Intervals of Space . OSMER-1759-2,44.318

But blistering inflames , and firing contracts the coronary Ring ,
OSMER-1759-2,44.319

and renders it more rigid ; the Effects of which seem to want no
Annotations . OSMER-1759-2,44.320

For deep or narrow Feet , which are always lame after some Use , keeping
at Grass is most beneficial ; OSMER-1759-2,44.321

and perhaps , many Horses with strong , deep Feet , might ride best , if
never shod at all , but rasped round at the Toe with Discretion .
OSMER-1759-2,44.322

<P_45>

For {TEXT:From} a Lameness arising from Compression , <font> La Fosse
<$$font> has proposed two Remedies ; one is to draw the Sole , the other
to bleed in the Foot ; both which our Farriers <paren> mistaking his
Meaning <$$paren> absurdly practice for Lameness arising from contracted
Feet ; neither of which can be of any Use in the Case , unless such
Practice could alter the Texture of the Crust , and Form of the Foot .
OSMER-1759-2,45.324

But if I understand <font> La Fosse <$$font> rightly , these Methods are
proposed to remove the Inflammation of the Parts , brought on by a
sudden Compression of the coronary Bone upon the Nut Bone , from a false
Step , and to prevent the Ossification of the Cartilages of these Bones
, and the Induration of the Ligaments . OSMER-1759-2,45.325

For Sandcracks , Corns , false Quarters , and pumiced Feet , where there
is no concomitant Disease or Injury , the Method of Cure has been
already shewn . OSMER-1759-2,45.326

Where the Cartilages are ossified , there is no Cure ;
OSMER-1759-2,45.327

- for an Anchylosis , there is no Cure ; OSMER-1759-2,45.328

- where the Bones of the Foot are enlarged or wasted , there is no Cure
. OSMER-1759-2,45.329

<P_46>

To remove the Inflammation of the Glands , and to prevent an Induration
of the ligamentous Parts , and the outer Tegument of the Fetlock Joint ,
the Consequence of repeated Violence , it is a good Custom for all
Sportsmen to cause these Joints of the Horse , after a Day's Hunting ,
to be well fomented with Flannels dipped in warm Water , or a Decoction
of some emollient Herbs ; OSMER-1759-2,46.331

and when the Parts are dry and well rubbed , such should be filled with
some cooling Oil or Ointment , <paren> because Punctures will
occasionally happen on the Part <$$paren> and some warm Flannel Cloths
be moderately bound thereon , for the ensuing Night .
OSMER-1759-2,46.332

For want of this , or some such Method , Induration of the Ligaments and
subsequent Lameness <paren> as was before said <$$paren> often happens
to this Joint . OSMER-1759-2,46.333

To cure this , the Farrier blisters and fires the Joint , by which
Methods the Parts become more indurated , and they are as contradictory
to the Disorder , as endeavouring to extinguish Fire , by pouring
Spirits of Wine <P_47> thereon . OSMER-1759-2,47.334

- For a Lameness of the Tendon he uses the same Methods .
OSMER-1759-2,47.335

Now the Tendon is enveloped in a Sheath , whereon are situate many small
Glands , that are forced by the Action of such Tendon to pour forth
their Mucus , which serves as Oil to lubricate the same , and to keep it
from growing dry and rigid , as otherwise it would do like any other
Cord or String . OSMER-1759-2,47.336

Between this Sheath and the Skin of the Leg , where nothing intervenes
but a thin Membrane , what Hand can determine the Boundaries of these
Bodies , whose Appearance {TEXT:Appearace} , by the Heat of the Iron is
made undistinguishable to the Eye . OSMER-1759-2,47.337

Mark now the Event . OSMER-1759-2,47.338

If the Fire reaches no further than the Skin , no Advantage can accrue
to the Tendon , OSMER-1759-2,47.339

but the Fibres of the Skin will become contracted , and less pliant ;
OSMER-1759-2,47.340

- if the Fire reaches the Sheath , some of its Glands are destroyed ,
OSMER-1759-2,47.341

and the Tendon becomes more or less rigid . OSMER-1759-2,47.342

- If the Tendon be burnt , the Consequence <P_48> will be still worse ,
OSMER-1759-2,48.343

and in either Case the Velocity of Motion will be impeded ; no Man ,
<paren> I believe <$$paren> remembering a Race-horse once fired , equal
to what he was before . OSMER-1759-2,48.344

In both these Cases , where the Skin or Ligaments surrounding the
Fetlock Joint , or the Tendon is thickened and indurated from repeated
Violence , or Exercise continued on a weak or inflamed Part , the
following Method may be used . OSMER-1759-2,48.345

Turn your Horse loose in some open Building , OSMER-1759-2,48.346

let the injured Parts be fomented twice a Day with the Decoction of some
emollient Herbs boiled in Water , such as White Lilly Roots , Mallows ,
Elder Leaves , and Flowers , Bay Leaves , or the like .
OSMER-1759-2,48.347

The Parts , when dry , are to be filled with some cooling Oil ,
OSMER-1759-2,48.348

and some of the Fomentation is to be thickened with Oatmeal , to the
Consistence of a Pultis , and kept thereon . OSMER-1759-2,48.349

When the Induration and Tension is gone off , a Cataplasm may be applied
twice a Day , composed of common Salt and the White of Eggs , mixed with
a little Vinegar and Oatmeal , <P_49> and the Parts bathed with cold
Vinegar <paren> Heat evaporating the subtle Spirit thereof <$$paren>
after the Use of which , for a Time , the Horse should be turned to
Grass , and indulged with proper Rest . OSMER-1759-2,49.350

With respect to Rest , the Farrier has a great Advantage by Blistering
and Firing , because the Leg is so inflamed hereby , that it is
impossible to ride the Horse for a considerable Time after the Operation
. OSMER-1759-2,49.351

- Hence , his Soundness is generally thought to be the Effect of
Blistering and Firing ; which ought , in Reality , to be imputed to the
Rest he has had . OSMER-1759-2,49.352

But when any other Method has been used for this Purpose , and the Part
looks fair to the Eye , the Rider mounts , OSMER-1759-2,49.353

his Horse is lame again the first Day , OSMER-1759-2,49.354

and the Groom wisely concludes , he will never stand sound without being
fired . OSMER-1759-2,49.355

Now let every Man , who has ever strained the Tendons of his Wrist or
Ancle , reflect on the Pain he has suffered from the least Motion of the
Parts ; and how long a Time has been required , before he has been able
to bear the <P_50> Extension of such Tendons , even when all Appearances
have been fair . OSMER-1759-2,50.356

- Will not the Case be such with the Horse . OSMER-1759-2,50.357

And here I can@ @not help censuring the Jockey , who , having his Horse
matched , and in his Exercise the Tendons are so inflamed , that he can@
@not be allowed to gallop , yet constantly takes him out Morning and
Evening to give him walking Exercise . OSMER-1759-2,50.358

But this walking Exercise can contribute little towards keeping him in
Wind , or making him fit for the Race , OSMER-1759-2,50.359

yet still helps to fatigue the Tendon . Whereas , if the Horse was kept
quiet , and proper Applications applied to the injured Part , it is very
possible he might recover soon enough for his Purpose .
OSMER-1759-2,50.360

- Therefore , when it is thought improper for him to gallop , it must be
much better for him to lie quite still ; OSMER-1759-2,50.361

and the most proper Applications I know of in this Case , are to bathe
the Parts with cold Vinegar , to rub in some cooling Oil when it is dry
, and to renew the Cataplasm of Salt twice a Day ; Salt externally used
, being the greatest Discutient I am acquainted with .
OSMER-1759-2,50.362

<P_51>

A high-heel'd Shoe will also be of Use in this Case , as it will help in
some Measure to keep the Tendon relaxed . OSMER-1759-2,51.364

- And the Use of Spirits on tendinous Parts do Harm , because they
render the Fibres rigid . OSMER-1759-2,51.365

Now I beg Leave to repeat what has been in Part said already ; namely ,
that all Lameness in the Tendon of a Draught , Road , or Running Horse ,
happens nineteen Times in Twenty from the unequal Pressure of the Foot
in our modern Concave Shoe , and from robbing the Tendon of its proper
Point of Support , by paring the Frog . OSMER-1759-2,51.366

- Hunters indeed many occasionally get a Lameness in the Tendon , from
various Injuries and Violence received in their different Kinds of Work
. OSMER-1759-2,51.367

The Method of curing Windgalls , according to the present Mode , is
various ; OSMER-1759-2,51.368

but before any Thing is said touching this Practice , it is necessary to
shew what they are . OSMER-1759-2,51.369

From Strains , or Blows received on the tendinous or membranous Parts ,
the Juices <P_52> of the Glands are poured forth , OSMER-1759-2,52.370

and become enveloped in a Cyst , or Bag . OSMER-1759-2,52.371

Its Contents are similar to the White of an Egg , OSMER-1759-2,52.372

and the Disease is correspondent to what the Surgeons call a Ganglion on
the human Wrist . OSMER-1759-2,52.373

Now some Farriers let out the Contents of this encysted Tumour with a
Knife or Lancet , which is always sure to be filled again when the Wound
is healed , after having been attended with much Pain .
OSMER-1759-2,52.374

Others blister , which for a Time seems to have discharged this Swelling
, OSMER-1759-2,52.375

but when the Horse comes into Use it soon fills again .
OSMER-1759-2,52.376

Others fire upon the Part , by which the outer Tegument or Skin is
rendered rigid and indurated ; OSMER-1759-2,52.377

hence the Pain occasioned by these Tumours is greater than it was before
, OSMER-1759-2,52.378

and the Horse is rendered fit for nothing but the Cart .
OSMER-1759-2,52.379

Now mark a short easy Cure for this incurable Disorder , by the
unskilful Management of which , Thousands {TEXT:Thousand} of good Horses
have been undone . OSMER-1759-2,52.380

<P_53>

Throw the Horse , OSMER-1759-2,53.382

make an oval Incision into the Skin , OSMER-1759-2,53.383

take off the same first , and after that the Bag and its Contents .
OSMER-1759-2,53.384

- This will soon get well with proper Dressings . - To be treated of in
the Chapter of Wounds . OSMER-1759-2,53.385

Dogs also are subject to this Disorder on the Knee , for the Cure of
which , Blistering and Firing are used ; OSMER-1759-2,53.386

thus many a good Fox-hound has been spoiled , that has been of more
Utility to the World than two Farriers . OSMER-1759-2,53.387

- Many of these last have I cut out with a Pair of Scissors
{TEXT:Scissars} leaving the Cure to be finished by Virtue of the Dog's
Tongue . OSMER-1759-2,53.388

Splints will sometimes occasion Lameness , OSMER-1759-2,53.389

but if not , it is much better not to meddle with them at all ;
OSMER-1759-2,53.390

the Use of Blisters on these does little more than inflame the Parts ,
OSMER-1759-2,53.391

and the Use of a hot Iron often rouses a sleeping Lion ; the Bone of the
whole Leg being occasionally enlarged thereby . OSMER-1759-2,53.392

I know of no better Method , when Splints occasion Lameness , than to
destroy them by a <P_54> Caustick , which may be prepared and used in
the following Manner . OSMER-1759-2,54.393

Take of <font> Spanish <$$font> Flies powdered , half an Ounce , Oil of
Origanum , Sublimate Corrosive , each one Drachm ; some sweet Oil , and
nerve Ointment , or any other , enough to make it of a proper
Consistence ; OSMER-1759-2,54.394

clip off the Hair , OSMER-1759-2,54.395

and apply some of this to the Part , repeating it occasionally a little
at a Time for several Days , till an Eschar begins to separate , keeping
the Horse's Head tied up all the while , lest {TEXT:least} he gnaw it .
OSMER-1759-2,54.396

- When this Eschar appears , the Medicine is to be scraped off , and the
Part oiled with some cooling Oil ; after which nothing more remains to
be done , but to turn the Horse to Grass , and keep the Part daily
touched with Train Oil . OSMER-1759-2,54.397

- By these Means , various Eschars will scale off one after another ,
till the Part becomes smooth and well . OSMER-1759-2,54.398

For the Effect <paren> which Mr. <font> Minors <$$font> , an eminent
Surgeon in <font> Chancery-Lane <$$font> , told me <$$paren> Spirit of
Salt had on Venereal Nodes , I am inclined to believe it might be of
Service in wasting Splints , perhaps Spavins also , OSMER-1759-2,54.399

but have not had an Opportunity of trying it . OSMER-1759-2,54.400

<P_55>

Now every Farrier , and almost every Stablekeeper , has a Nostrum for
this Evil , which appears to be of some Caustick Quality , such as Oil
of Origanum , Solution of Mercury , Aqua Fortis , Oil of Vitriol , or
the like , which sometimes do Good , but more frequently inflame the
Part , without doing any Service , according to my Observation .
OSMER-1759-2,55.402

