<BEGIN_owen-1857-2>

<P_1,1>

<heading>

Life of Robert Owen . OWEN-1857-2,1,1.4

Recollections of my Early Life . OWEN-1857-2,1,1.5

<$$heading>

As it appears in the family great Bible , I was born in Newtown ,
Montgomeryshire , North Wales , on the 14th of May , 1771 ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,1.7

and was baptised on the 12th of June following . OWEN-1857-2,1,1.8

My father was Robert Owen . OWEN-1857-2,1,1.9

He was born in Welsh Pool , OWEN-1857-2,1,1.10

and was brought up to be a saddler , and probably an ironmonger also ,
as these two trades were at that period often united in the small towns
on the borders of Wales . OWEN-1857-2,1,1.11

He married into the family of Williams , a numerous family , who were in
my childhood among the most respectable farmers around Newtown .
OWEN-1857-2,1,1.12

I think my mother <paren> who was deemed beautiful , as I was informed ,
when she was married <$$paren> was the eldest sister of the family , and
, for her class , superior in mind and manner . OWEN-1857-2,1,1.13

I suppose that on their marriage they settled in Newtown , - my father
taking up his own calling as a saddler and ironmonger .
OWEN-1857-2,1,1.14

He was also post-master as long as he lived . OWEN-1857-2,1,1.15

He had the general management of the parish affairs , being better
acquainted , as it appears , with its finances and business , than any
other party in the township . OWEN-1857-2,1,1.16

I never thought of enquiring of him for any particulars respecting his
father or mother , both being dead before I was born ;
OWEN-1857-2,1,1.17

and owing to the then very bad state of the roads there was
comparatively little communication for young persons between Newtown and
Welshpool . OWEN-1857-2,1,1.18

All that I can recollect respecting my father's family is , hearing my
father say , in a conversation with older members of the family , that
he lost an estate of the value of five_hundred pounds a year in a
lawsuit , which he afterwards ascertained was lost through his own
lawyer being bribed . OWEN-1857-2,1,1.19

Newtown was at this period a very small market town , not containing
more than one_thousand inhabitants , - a neat , <P_1,2> clean ,
beautifully situated country village , rather than a town , with the
ordinary trades , but no manufactures except a very few flannel looms .
OWEN-1857-2,1,2.20

I have not seen it since this clean village has been converted into a
dirty but thriving manufacturing town of some consequence .
OWEN-1857-2,1,2.21

At this period there was a bridge of wood over the river Severn , which
I remember with a deep impression , having nearly lost my life upon it ,
as I will relate hereafter . OWEN-1857-2,1,2.22

I was the youngest but one of a family of seven , - two of whom died
young . OWEN-1857-2,1,2.23

The survivors , - William , Anne , and John , were older , and Richard
was younger than myself . OWEN-1857-2,1,2.24

The principal adjacent estate was <font> Newtown Hall , <$$font> at the
period of my birth and for a few years afterwards the property and
residence of Sir John Powell Price , Bart ; OWEN-1857-2,1,2.25

- and my first recollection is of Sir John opening a glass door which
divided my father's shop from the dwelling part of the house , and
setting a bird flying towards us , saying there was something for the
children's amusement , and they must take care of it .
OWEN-1857-2,1,2.26

This must have been shortly before he left his estate , I suppose from
being in debt , OWEN-1857-2,1,2.27

for it soon passed into other hands . OWEN-1857-2,1,2.28

My next recollection is being in school in apartments in the mansion of
this estate , OWEN-1857-2,1,2.29

and a Mr. Thickness , or some such name , was the schoolmaster .
OWEN-1857-2,1,2.30

I must have been sent young to school , - probably at between four and
five years of age , - OWEN-1857-2,1,2.31

for I can@ @not remember first going there . OWEN-1857-2,1,2.32

But I recollect being very anxious to be first in school and first home
, OWEN-1857-2,1,2.33

and the boys had always a race from the school to the town ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,2.34

and , being a fast runner , I was usually at home the first , and almost
always the first at school in the morning . OWEN-1857-2,1,2.35

On one occasion my haste nearly cost me my life . OWEN-1857-2,1,2.36

I used to have for breakfast a basin of flummery , - a food prepared in
Wales from flour , and eaten with milk , and which is usually given to
children as the Scotch use oatmeal porridge . OWEN-1857-2,1,2.37

It is pleasant , and nutritious , OWEN-1857-2,1,2.38

and is generally liked by young persons . OWEN-1857-2,1,2.39

I requested that this breakfast might be always ready when I returned
from school , so that I might eat it speedily , in order to be the first
back again to school . OWEN-1857-2,1,2.40

One morning , when about five years old , I ran home as usual from
school , OWEN-1857-2,1,2.41

found my basin of flummery ready , and as I supposed sufficiently cooled
for eating , OWEN-1857-2,1,2.42

for no heat appeared to arise from it . OWEN-1857-2,1,2.43

It had skinned over as when quite cold ; OWEN-1857-2,1,2.44

but on my hastily taking a spoonful of it , I found it was quite
scalding hot , the body of it retaining all its heat .
OWEN-1857-2,1,2.45

The consequence was an instant fainting , from the stomach being scalded
. OWEN-1857-2,1,2.46

In that state I remained so long , that my parents thought life was
extinct . OWEN-1857-2,1,2.47

However , after a considerable period I revived ; OWEN-1857-2,1,2.48

but from that day my stomach became incapable of digesting food , except
the most simple and in small quantity at a time . OWEN-1857-2,1,2.49

This made me attend to the effects of different qualities of food on my
changed constitution , OWEN-1857-2,1,2.50

and gave me the habit of close <P_1,3> observation and of continual
reflection ; OWEN-1857-2,1,3.51

and I have always thought that this accident had a great influence in
forming my character . OWEN-1857-2,1,3.52

In schools in these small towns it was considered a good education if
one could read fluently , write a legible hand , and understand the four
first rules of arithmetic . OWEN-1857-2,1,3.53

And this I have reason to believe was the extent of Mr. Thickness's
qualification for a schoolmaster , - because when I had acquired these
small rudiments of learning , at the age of seven , he applied to my
father for permission that I should become his assistant and usher , as
from that time I was called while I remained in school .
OWEN-1857-2,1,3.54

And thence forward my schooling was to be repaid by my ushership .
OWEN-1857-2,1,3.55

As I remained at school about two years longer , those two years were
lost to me , except that I thus early acquired the habit of teaching
others what I knew . OWEN-1857-2,1,3.56

But at this period I was fond of and had a strong passion for reading
every thing which fell in my way . OWEN-1857-2,1,3.57

As I was known to and knew every family in the town , I had the
libraries of the clergyman , physician , and lawyer , - the learned men
of the town - thrown open to me , with permission to take home any
volume which I liked , OWEN-1857-2,1,3.58

and I made full use of the liberty given to me . OWEN-1857-2,1,3.59

Among the books which I selected at this period were Robinson Crusoe ,
Philip Quarle , Pilgrim's Progress , Paradise Lost , Harvey's
Meditations among the Tombs , Young's Night Thoughts , Richardson's ,
and all other standard novels . OWEN-1857-2,1,3.60

I believed every word of them to be true , OWEN-1857-2,1,3.61

and was therefore deeply interested ; OWEN-1857-2,1,3.62

and I generally finished a volume daily . OWEN-1857-2,1,3.63

Then I read Cook's and all the circumnavigators' voyages , - the history
of the world , - Rollin's ancient history , - and all the lives I could
meet with of the philosophers and great men . OWEN-1857-2,1,3.64

At this period , probably when I was between eight and nine years of age
, three maiden ladies became intimate in our family , OWEN-1857-2,1,3.65

and they were Methodists . OWEN-1857-2,1,3.66

They took a great fancy to me , OWEN-1857-2,1,3.67

and gave me many of their books to read . OWEN-1857-2,1,3.68

As I was religiously inclined , they were very desirous to convert me to
their peculiar faith . OWEN-1857-2,1,3.69

I read and studied the books they gave me with great attention ;
OWEN-1857-2,1,3.70

but as I read religious works of all parties , I became surprised ,
first at the opposition between the different sects of Christians ,
afterwards at the deadly hatred between the Jews , Christians ,
Mahomedans , Hindoos , Chinese , &c. , &c. , and between these and
what they called Pagans and Infidels . OWEN-1857-2,1,3.71

The study of these contending faiths , and their deadly hatred to each
other , began to create doubts in my mind respecting the truth of any
one of these divisions . OWEN-1857-2,1,3.72

While studying and thinking with great earnestness upon these subjects ,
I wrote three sermons , OWEN-1857-2,1,3.73

and I was called the little parson . OWEN-1857-2,1,3.74

These sermons I kept until I met with Sterne's works , in which I found
among his sermons three so much like them in idea and turn of mind ,
that it occurred to me as I read them that I should be considered a
plagiarist , OWEN-1857-2,1,3.75

<P_1,4>

and without thought , as I could not bear any such suspicion , I hastily
threw them into the fire ; which I often after regretted , as I should
like to know now how I then thought and expressed myself on such
subjects . OWEN-1857-2,1,4.77

But certain it is that my reading religious works , combined with my
other readings , compelled me to feel strongly at ten years of age that
there must be something fundamentally wrong in all religions , as they
had been taught up to that period . OWEN-1857-2,1,4.78

During my childhood , and for many years afterwards , it never occurred
to me that there was anything in my habits , thoughts , and actions ,
different from those of others of my age ; OWEN-1857-2,1,4.79

but when looking back and comparing my life with many others , I have
been induced to attribute any favorable difference to the effects
produced at the early period when my life was endangered by the spoonful
of scalding flummery . Because from that time I was compelled to notice
the effects produced by different kinds of food on my constitution ,
which had been also deeply injured in its powers of digestion .
OWEN-1857-2,1,4.80

I could not eat and drink as others of my age , OWEN-1857-2,1,4.81

and I was thus compelled to live in some respects the life of a hermit
as regards temperance . OWEN-1857-2,1,4.82

I entered however into the amusements of those of my own standing ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,4.83

and followed the games played by boys at that period in that part of the
country , - such as marbles , hand and foot ball , &c.
OWEN-1857-2,1,4.84

I also attended the dancing school for some time , OWEN-1857-2,1,4.85

and in all these games and exercises I excelled not only those of my own
age , but those two or three years older , OWEN-1857-2,1,4.86

and I was so active that I was the best runner and leaper , both as to
height and distance , in the school . OWEN-1857-2,1,4.87

I attempted also to learn music , and to play upon the clarionet ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,4.88

and during my noviciate , as my father's house was in the middle of the
principal street {TEXT:stree} , I fear I must have annoyed all the
neighbourhood , OWEN-1857-2,1,4.89

- for my " God Save the King " and similar tunes were heard almost all
over the town . OWEN-1857-2,1,4.90

But I do not recollect that any formal complaint was ever made .
OWEN-1857-2,1,4.91

I was too much of a favorite with the whole town for my benefit ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,4.92

and was often pitted against my equals , and sometimes against my
superiors in age , - sometimes for one thing and sometimes for another .
OWEN-1857-2,1,4.93

I have often reflected since how unjust such proceedings are in
principle , and how injurious in practice . OWEN-1857-2,1,4.94

One instance of this made a deep impression on my mind .
OWEN-1857-2,1,4.95

Some party bet with another that I could write better than my next
eldest brother , John , who was two years older ; OWEN-1857-2,1,4.96

and upon a formal trial , at which judges were appointed , it was
decided that my writing was the better , although as far as I could then
form an opinion I thought my brother's was as good as my own .
OWEN-1857-2,1,4.97

From that day I do not think my brother had as strong an affection for
me as he had before this unwise competition . OWEN-1857-2,1,4.98

I have said that such competitions are unjust , because , as no two
organisations are the same , there can be no just comparison <P_1,5>
between the competing efforts of any two individuals , - while the
successful one is thus taught vanity , and the unsuccessful , jealousy
and hatred . OWEN-1857-2,1,5.99

When between six and eight years of age , I was often a visitor at
Parson Drake's , of the Rowe , who was the rector or vicar of an
adjoining parish - OWEN-1857-2,1,5.100

I think it was the parish with the name of which I have often amused
myself with my English , Scotch , and other friends , by asking them ,
when speaking of it , to pronounce it after my spelling it , or to spell
it after my pronunciation . OWEN-1857-2,1,5.101

This puzzling name is spelled thus , Llanllwchaioin .
OWEN-1857-2,1,5.102

Those accustomed to it can easily pronounce it ; but not those who are
unacquainted with Welsh names and the mode of spelling them .
OWEN-1857-2,1,5.103

This clergyman was a direct descendant of Admiral Drake ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,5.104

and was very eccentric as a minister . OWEN-1857-2,1,5.105

He took me to church with him on a sunday after he had had a difference
with the squire of the parish , OWEN-1857-2,1,5.106

and to my surprise and the astonishment of the congregation he gave a
most severe personal lecture to the squire during his sermon , - so
personal and severe , that before its conclusion the squire , who was
present with his family , became extremely uneasy in his very
conspicuous pew , and at length prepared to leave it , when Mr. Drake
stopped , and looking towards him , said , " Do@ @n't be in a hurry ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,5.107

I shall have done soon OWEN-1857-2,1,5.108

and you had better sit quiet . " OWEN-1857-2,1,5.109

This scene made a deep impression upon me , OWEN-1857-2,1,5.110

and never left my memory . OWEN-1857-2,1,5.111

About this period also a young gentleman , a Mr. James Donne , who was
studying for the church , either at Oxford or at Cambridge , came upon a
visit to Newtown during a vacation , OWEN-1857-2,1,5.112

and I became his every_day companion . OWEN-1857-2,1,5.113

He was then about nineteen OWEN-1857-2,1,5.114

and I was between eight and nine . OWEN-1857-2,1,5.115

The country around Newtown is I believe generally considered to be
interesting and beautiful , OWEN-1857-2,1,5.116

and Mr. Donne and myself , while he remained upon his visit , rambled
about the woods and lanes and higher grounds to examine the scenery in
all directions . OWEN-1857-2,1,5.117

These excursions with a man of his cultivated taste and superior
conversation awakened in me a sense of pleasure which I ever afterwards
experienced in observing nature in its every variety - a pleasure which
as I advanced in years continued and increased . OWEN-1857-2,1,5.118

The friendship thus commenced , OWEN-1857-2,1,5.119

strengthened with our years , OWEN-1857-2,1,5.120

and continued to the death of Mr. Donne , who became well known and
highly respected as Dr. Donne of Oswestry . OWEN-1857-2,1,5.121

We had much correspondence , OWEN-1857-2,1,5.122

and when I had aroused the thinking faculties of the civilised world by
the great public meetings which I held in the City of London Tavern in
1817 , I was surprised by receiving a letter from my much valued friend
, Dr. Donne , to inform me that he had taken a pleasant task upon
himself , which was to trace my pedigree , and had discovered that I was
a regular descendant from the Princes of North Wales .
OWEN-1857-2,1,5.123

Good man ! OWEN-1857-2,1,5.124

I have no doubt he thought it was information that would <P_1,6> gratify
me , and that therefore he had taken all that trouble .
OWEN-1857-2,1,6.125

But being at that time occupied with great public questions and
extensive private business , I neglected this private affair ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,6.126

and never made the least enquiry respecting it , OWEN-1857-2,1,6.127

and I am afraid , owing to these circumstances , that I never made any
suitable acknowledgement for the kindness intended .
OWEN-1857-2,1,6.128

During the school holidays I was in the habit of visiting my relations ,
who were farmers living at no great distance from Newtown .
OWEN-1857-2,1,6.129

Among these I remember three . Turners of Penarth , Goodwins of the
Court , and Williams of Vaynor , but afterwards of Old Hall near Kerry ,
a village three or four miles from Newtown . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.130

The two first named were married to sisters of my mother , as I now
conjecture ; OWEN-1857-2,1,6.131

the third was brother to my mother , and I believe her only brother
living at that period . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.132

My most frequent visits was to this family , in which was an only child
, a son named Richard after his father , and one year younger than
myself . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.133

We were always great friends , much attached to each other and delighted
to be together . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.134

My cousin had the finest natural qualities I have ever seen in any youth
, OWEN-1857-2,1,6.135

and he had received a superior education for the time and for the
locality in which his father resided . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.136

He had been sent to a distant boarding school . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.137

Although a year younger , he was much my superior in almost everything -
OWEN-1857-2,1,6.138

for in whatever he attempted he far excelled all of his age .
OWEN-1857-2,1,6.139

And yet what he did was done in a quiet manner without apparent effort .
OWEN-1857-2,1,6.140

He seemed to be unconscious of his own extraordinary powers .
OWEN-1857-2,1,6.141

The Williamses , as I have said , were naturally a superior family of
their class , OWEN-1857-2,1,6.142

and the mother of my cousin was one of the best of women I ever saw in
her rank of life . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.143

Every one who knew her , loved her , OWEN-1857-2,1,6.144

and every one liked to enjoy the hospitality of the family , which was
well known over the country to a considerable distance .
OWEN-1857-2,1,6.145

Our grandfather lived with them until he was upwards of ninety ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,6.146

and one of my earliest recollections is the sight of this old man
sitting by the fire in his son's house . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.147

My cousin and I read and thought much , OWEN-1857-2,1,6.148

and yet we were both generally very active . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.149

But one very hot day in hay-harvest time we felt ourselves , being
over-clothed , quite overcome with heat while we sauntered from the
house towards a large field where numerous hay-makers were actively at
work . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.150

They appeared to us , who had been doing nothing and yet were overcome
with heat , to be cool and comfortable . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.151

I said " Richard ! how is this ? OWEN-1857-2,1,6.152

These active workpeople are not heated , OWEN-1857-2,1,6.153

but are pleasantly cool , OWEN-1857-2,1,6.154

and do not suffer as we do from the heat . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.155

There must be some secret in this . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.156

Let us try to find it out . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.157

Let us do exactly as they do , and work with them . "
OWEN-1857-2,1,6.158

He willingly agreed . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.159

I was , I suppose , between nine and ten years of age ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,6.160

and he was between eight and nine . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.161

We observed that all the men were without their coats and waistcoats ,
and had their shirts open . OWEN-1857-2,1,6.162

We adopted the same <P_1,7> practice , OWEN-1857-2,1,7.163

- procured the lightest rakes and forks - OWEN-1857-2,1,7.164

for both were used occasionally , OWEN-1857-2,1,7.165

- and Richard and I , unburthened of our heavy clothing , led the field
for several hours , OWEN-1857-2,1,7.166

and were cooler and less fatigued than when we were idle and wasting our
time . OWEN-1857-2,1,7.167

This became ever afterwards a good <font> experience <$$font> and <font>
lesson <$$font> to both ; OWEN-1857-2,1,7.168

for we found ourselves much more comfortable with active employment than
when we were idle . OWEN-1857-2,1,7.169

My cousin grew up the finest young man in the whole country round - a
lion in strength , active and courageous far beyond all his fellows ,
excelling in everything which he undertook , but yet quiet and
unpretending , and beloved by all who knew him . OWEN-1857-2,1,7.170

It always occurred to me that had he been favourably placed in superior
society , he would have made a second and perhaps a superior " Admirable
Crichton . " OWEN-1857-2,1,7.171

Being an only child , and such a child , he was doated upon by his
parents , OWEN-1857-2,1,7.172

and he was at all times , instead of being spoiled by such affection , a
most obedient and attentive son to them . OWEN-1857-2,1,7.173

But a single error of his father , who was obstinate in abiding by what
he deemed just , destroyed the high promise of this fine human being .
OWEN-1857-2,1,7.174

He fell in love , and deeply in love , with a cousin of his mother's
family , - in all ways his equal in station and property , and also an
only child . OWEN-1857-2,1,7.175

The fathers of the two lovers could not agree regarding the fortune to
be given to each . OWEN-1857-2,1,7.176

Richard's father could give and was willing to give his son a sum at
that time considered large to commence life with , OWEN-1857-2,1,7.177

and he wished the father of the young lady to advance an equal sum , as
he thought he could well afford it . OWEN-1857-2,1,7.178

But the latter either could not then , or would not agree to the terms
proposed ; OWEN-1857-2,1,7.179

and on this my cousin's father , anxious for his son's pecuniary
standing in society , refused his consent to the marriage , except on
the terms he thought just . OWEN-1857-2,1,7.180

Thus was destroyed the permanent happiness of his son , who was too fond
of his parents to act in opposition to their wishes , and too
high_spirited to complain . OWEN-1857-2,1,7.181

A coolness arose between the families . OWEN-1857-2,1,7.182

Richard suffered more than any one suspected . OWEN-1857-2,1,7.183

His feelings were strongly affected , OWEN-1857-2,1,7.184

but the obstinacy of his father was immoveable , having once declared
his determination . OWEN-1857-2,1,7.185

The son , who had previously been an example of temperance , began to
change in this habit , OWEN-1857-2,1,7.186

- gradually became intemperate , OWEN-1857-2,1,7.187

and died prematurely , a victim to the disappointment of his affections
; another warning to parents not unreasonably to interfere with the
settled affections of their children . OWEN-1857-2,1,7.188

While the families were estranged , the young lady married ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,7.189

and shortly afterwards she became heir to a relative , who left her
forty_thousand pounds . OWEN-1857-2,1,7.190

These particulars were given to me too late for interference ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,7.191

or , as I had influence with my uncle and aunt , I might perhaps have
given a very different result to these unfortunate proceedings .
OWEN-1857-2,1,7.192

There was a strong early imbibed affection between my cousin and myself
, OWEN-1857-2,1,7.193

and many years after , while I was directing Mr. Drinkwater's
establishment , I <P_1,8> felt a great inclination to send for him to
take part in it ; OWEN-1857-2,1,8.194

for among his other qualifications he had an extraordinary genius for
mechanical inventions , OWEN-1857-2,1,8.195

and he would have made a splendid engineer . OWEN-1857-2,1,8.196

I was withheld from following my inclination by the consideration that
he was an only son , the stay of his parents , - that he was already in
an independent position through the property of those parents , and that
their separation might be painful to all the parties .
OWEN-1857-2,1,8.197

When however I had been informed of the previous proceedings , I
regretted that I had not induced my cousin to join me ; as when I was 24
years of age , and he was 23 , I could have given him the situation
which I held at five_hundred a year . OWEN-1857-2,1,8.198

But it was not to be , OWEN-1857-2,1,8.199

for the influence of circumstance prevented it . OWEN-1857-2,1,8.200

But to return to my early life . I have narrated my narrow escape from
being killed by the scalding of my stomach . OWEN-1857-2,1,8.201

Shortly before this event , I was doing something with the key-hole of a
large door in a passage between my father's house and that of our next
neighbour , OWEN-1857-2,1,8.202

and by some means I got one of my fingers fast in the key-hole ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,8.203

and in my attempt to get it out it was twisted so painfully that I
fainted , OWEN-1857-2,1,8.204

and I know not how it came loose , OWEN-1857-2,1,8.205

for I was found in a swoon lying on the ground . OWEN-1857-2,1,8.206

On another occasion my life was periled , OWEN-1857-2,1,8.207

and I again escaped without knowing how . OWEN-1857-2,1,8.208

Newtown is situated on the banks of the river Severn , over which at
that time there was a bridge that had been erected many years before ,
of wood . OWEN-1857-2,1,8.209

It admitted of a wagon way with a narrow footpath on each side .
OWEN-1857-2,1,8.210

My father had a favorite cream_coloured mare , OWEN-1857-2,1,8.211

and her pasture fields were on the side of this bridge opposite to where
we lived . OWEN-1857-2,1,8.212

When my father required this mare , as it was a favorite of mine also ,
I frequently went for it to the field , OWEN-1857-2,1,8.213

and rode it home , although a young horseman , OWEN-1857-2,1,8.214

for at this period I was only six or seven years old .
OWEN-1857-2,1,8.215

One day when returning from the field mounted on this mare , I was
passing homeward over the bridge , OWEN-1857-2,1,8.216

but before I was half over , a wagon had made some progress from the
opposite side . OWEN-1857-2,1,8.217

There was not room for me to pass without my legs coming in contact with
the wheels of this wagon or with the rails of the bridge .
OWEN-1857-2,1,8.218

I had not sense enough to turn back , OWEN-1857-2,1,8.219

and endeavoured to pass the wagon . OWEN-1857-2,1,8.220

I soon found that my leg was in danger of being grazed by the wheels ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,8.221

and I threw it over the saddle , OWEN-1857-2,1,8.222

and in consequence I fell on the opposite side , OWEN-1857-2,1,8.223

but in falling I was so alarmed lest I should drop into the river or
should strike against the bridge , that I lost all recollection .
OWEN-1857-2,1,8.224

How I escaped I know not ; OWEN-1857-2,1,8.225

but on recovering I found myself on the footpath of the bridge , the
mare standing quietly near me , OWEN-1857-2,1,8.226

and the wagon had fairly passed , OWEN-1857-2,1,8.227

and I was unhurt . OWEN-1857-2,1,8.228

Since that occurrence I have always felt a more especial liking for
cream_colored horses than for any others . OWEN-1857-2,1,8.229

Our next neighbours were two maiden ladies of the name of Tilsley ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,8.230

and they kept a superior country shop for the sale of <P_1,9> drapery
and haberdashery on one side , and groceries on the other .
OWEN-1857-2,1,9.231

One of these ladies changed her situation by marrying a Mr. Moore ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,9.232

and as he enlarged the business so as to add a wholesale branch to their
former retail trade , they required more assistance ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,9.233

and as I was active , it was supposed I could be useful to them ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,9.234

and my services were borrowed , at first on market and fair days ;
OWEN-1857-2,1,9.235

and as I had then been two years in the capacity of usher , learning
nothing but how to teach , Mr. Moore requested my father to permit me
to be with them every day in the week , instead of , as hitherto , on
their more busy days only ; OWEN-1857-2,1,9.236

and thus I was occupied for one year , but living in my own family .
OWEN-1857-2,1,9.237

Having by this period read much of other countries and other proceedings
, and , with my habits of reflection and extreme temperance , not liking
the habits and manners of a small country town , I began to desire a
different field of action , OWEN-1857-2,1,9.238

and wished my parents to permit me to go to London .
OWEN-1857-2,1,9.239

I was at this time about nine years and half old ; OWEN-1857-2,1,9.240

and at length , although I was a great favorite at home , it was
promised that when I should attain my tenth year I should be allowed to
go . OWEN-1857-2,1,9.241

This promise satisfied me in the meantime , OWEN-1857-2,1,9.242

and I continued to gain knowledge of the business in which I was
occupied , - continuing also to read and to take lessons in dancing .
OWEN-1857-2,1,9.243

During the period I remained giving this friendly assistance to Mr.
Moore , a ludicrous circumstance occurred , which left an impression
which vividly remains . OWEN-1857-2,1,9.244

The parents of one of my schoolfellows , who was about my own age , kept
a grocer's shop in the town . OWEN-1857-2,1,9.245

Their stock of molasses , an article then much in demand , was exhausted
, OWEN-1857-2,1,9.246

and as Mr. Moore kept a wholesale supply of it , my schoolfellow ,
whose name was John Stanley , came with a tub with two upright handles ,
to purchase as much as the tub would hold . OWEN-1857-2,1,9.247

The wholesale stock was kept in a cellar below the shop ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,9.248

and the entrance to this cellar was through a trap-door in the centre of
the shop floor , and down the steps of a ladder . OWEN-1857-2,1,9.249

John had filled the tub quite full , OWEN-1857-2,1,9.250

and was bringing it up the ladder on his head , OWEN-1857-2,1,9.251

and on reaching the level of the floor , one of the handles of the tub
came in contact with part of the floor , OWEN-1857-2,1,9.252

and the tub was upset , the molasses running over his head , which was
uncovered , except with very thick hair . OWEN-1857-2,1,9.253

The molasses ran down over the whole of his clothes and person , making
him one of the most laughable and at the same time pitiable figures that
the imagination could paint . OWEN-1857-2,1,9.254

How he got rid of the nuisance when he arrived at home must be
conjectured , OWEN-1857-2,1,9.255

- but the disaster was always remembered to his annoyance by our
neighbours as long as I remained in Newtown . OWEN-1857-2,1,9.256

I mentioned that I continued to take lessons in dancing , of which I was
fond , until my departure from home . OWEN-1857-2,1,9.257

It was at these lessons that I first became conscious of the natural
sympathies and dislikes or jealousies of children . OWEN-1857-2,1,9.258

I was esteemed the <P_1,10> best dancer of my class ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,10.259

and at this period I was in the first class . OWEN-1857-2,1,10.260

The contest for partners among the girls was often amusing , but
sometimes really distressing . OWEN-1857-2,1,10.261

The feelings of some of them if they could not obtain the partners they
liked were so overpowering , that it was afflicting to see how much they
suffered . OWEN-1857-2,1,10.262

I have long thought that the mind and feelings of young children are
seldom duly considered or attended to , and that if adults would
patiently encourage them to express candidly what they thought and felt
, much suffering would be saved to the children , and much useful
knowledge of human nature would be gained by the adults .
OWEN-1857-2,1,10.263

I am now conscious there was much real suffering in that dancing room ,
which , had there been more knowledge of human nature in the dancing
master and in the parents of the children , might have been avoided .
OWEN-1857-2,1,10.264

The time had now drawn near for my departure from my parental roof , and
for me to undertake a journey which in the then state of the roads was
thought formidable for grown persons . OWEN-1857-2,1,10.265

From Shrewsbury I was to travel alone to London , inexperienced as I
then was . OWEN-1857-2,1,10.266

At that time I knew and was known to every man , woman , and child in
the town , OWEN-1857-2,1,10.267

and I called upon and took my leave of every one ; OWEN-1857-2,1,10.268

and I received many a keep-sake , and from the more wealthy , presents
of money . OWEN-1857-2,1,10.269

I deemed myself , at ten years of age , amply provided to seek my
fortune with forty shillings - the expenses of my coach hire being paid
for me . OWEN-1857-2,1,10.270

I may remark here that for two years or perhaps more before I left home
, my parents used to consult me when any matter of importance was to be
decided , but I did not know why they asked my opinion , and was
unconscious that I could give any useful advice . OWEN-1857-2,1,10.271

Before proceeding to narrate my journey I may state , that I was never
but once corrected by my parents . OWEN-1857-2,1,10.272

This correction took place under the following circumstances , and when
I was , I think , scarcely seven years old . OWEN-1857-2,1,10.273

I was always desirous to meet the wishes of both my parents ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,10.274

and never refused to do whatever they asked me to do .
OWEN-1857-2,1,10.275

One day my mother indistinctly said something to me to which I supposed
the proper answer was ' no , ' OWEN-1857-2,1,10.276

- and in my usual way I said ' no ' , - supposing I was meeting her
wishes . OWEN-1857-2,1,10.277

Not understanding me , and supposing that I refused her request , she
immediately , and to me rather sharply , - for her custom was to speak
kindly to me , - said " What ! Wo@ @n't you ? " OWEN-1857-2,1,10.278

Having said ' no , ' I thought if I said ' yes , I will , ' I should be
contradicting myself , and should be expressing a falsehood ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,10.279

and I said again ' no , ' but without any idea of disobeying her .
OWEN-1857-2,1,10.280

If she had then patiently and calmly enquired what my thoughts and
feelings were , a proper understanding would have arisen ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,10.281

and everything would have proceeded as usual . OWEN-1857-2,1,10.282

But my mother , not comprehending my thoughts and feelings , spoke still
more sharply and angrily , OWEN-1857-2,1,10.283

- for I had never previously disobeyed her , OWEN-1857-2,1,10.284

<P_1,11>

and she was no doubt greatly surprised and annoyed when I repeated that
I would not . OWEN-1857-2,1,11.286

My mother never chastised any of us , OWEN-1857-2,1,11.287

- this was left for my father to do , OWEN-1857-2,1,11.288

and my brothers and sisters occasionally felt a whip which was kept to
maintain order among the children , OWEN-1857-2,1,11.289

but I had never previously been touched with it . OWEN-1857-2,1,11.290

My father was called in , and my refusal stated . OWEN-1857-2,1,11.291

I was again asked if I would do what my mother required ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,11.292

and I said firmly ' no , ' OWEN-1857-2,1,11.293

and I then felt the whip every time after I refused when asked if I
would yield and do what was required . OWEN-1857-2,1,11.294

I said ' no ' every time I was so asked , OWEN-1857-2,1,11.295

and at length said quietly but firmly - " you may kill me ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,11.296

but I will not do it " - OWEN-1857-2,1,11.297

and this decided the contest . OWEN-1857-2,1,11.298

There was no attempt ever afterwards to correct me ;
OWEN-1857-2,1,11.299

but this difference was soon made up on both sides ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,11.300

and I continued to be the favorite I had always been .
OWEN-1857-2,1,11.301

From my own feelings , which I well remember when a child , I am
convinced that very often punishment is not only useless , but very
pernicious , and injurious to the punisher and punished .
OWEN-1857-2,1,11.302

Though alone in going to London , I was not to be alone when I arrived
there . OWEN-1857-2,1,11.303

My eldest brother , William , had been brought up by my father to his
own business , OWEN-1857-2,1,11.304

and when out of his apprenticeship , and after he had subsequently
worked some years with my father , he decided to go to London , when he
was between twenty and thirty , OWEN-1857-2,1,11.305

and he there obtained a situation with a Mr. Reynolds , a saddler , who
then lived at No. 84 , High Holborn . OWEN-1857-2,1,11.306

To him I was consigned , OWEN-1857-2,1,11.307

for by this time Mr. Reynolds had died , OWEN-1857-2,1,11.308

and my brother had taken the business OWEN-1857-2,1,11.309

and had married the widow . OWEN-1857-2,1,11.310

<heading>

Leaving Home . OWEN-1857-2,1,11.312

<$$heading>

My father took me to Welshpool , OWEN-1857-2,1,11.314

and thence I went to take coach for London at Shrewsbury , which was
then the nearest place to Newtown to which there was any public
conveyance to go to London . OWEN-1857-2,1,11.315

The coach left Shrewsbury at night , OWEN-1857-2,1,11.316

and an outside place had been taken for me , with the expectation that I
might travel inside during the night . OWEN-1857-2,1,11.317

The proprietor , who knew my family , was going to put me inside , when
some ill-tempered man , who had discovered that I had paid only for an
outside place , refused to allow me to enter . OWEN-1857-2,1,11.318

It was dark , OWEN-1857-2,1,11.319

and I could not see the objector , nor discover how crowded the coach
might be ; OWEN-1857-2,1,11.320

- for coaches then carried six inside . OWEN-1857-2,1,11.321

I was glad afterwards that I did not know who this man was ;
OWEN-1857-2,1,11.322

and I never discovered him , OWEN-1857-2,1,11.323

and therefore I could not be angry with him , as I should have been ,
for refusing admission to a child . OWEN-1857-2,1,11.324

I then had not fully learned the principles of the formation of
character , and the influences of circumstances over all that have life
, OWEN-1857-2,1,11.325

or I should not have been angry or surprised at such conduct .
OWEN-1857-2,1,11.326

I arrived safely in London , OWEN-1857-2,1,11.327

and was heartily welcomed by my brother , who was always partial to me ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,11.328

and his wife received me very kindly . OWEN-1857-2,1,11.329

<P_1,12>

My father had written respecting me to his friend , a Mr. Heptinstall ,
of No. 6 Ludgate Hill , who was a large dealer in lace foreign and
British ; OWEN-1857-2,1,12.331

and Mr. Moore had written in my favor to Mr. Tilsley , of No. 100
Newgate Street , who then kept what was deemed a large draper's shop .
OWEN-1857-2,1,12.332

This was in 1781 . OWEN-1857-2,1,12.333

I think I had been on this visit to my brother nearly six weeks , when
Mr. Heptinstall procured me a situation with a Mr. James McGuffog , of
whom he spoke highly as carrying on a large business for a provincial
town , in Stamford , Lincolnshire . OWEN-1857-2,1,12.334

The terms offered to me were for three years - the first without pay ,
the second with a salary of eight pounds , and the third with ten pounds
, and with board , lodging , and washing , in the house .
OWEN-1857-2,1,12.335

These terms I accepted , OWEN-1857-2,1,12.336

and being well found with clothes to serve me more than a year , I from
that period , ten years of age , maintained myself without ever applying
to my parents for any additional aid . OWEN-1857-2,1,12.337

<heading>

My Residence with Mr. McGuffog . OWEN-1857-2,1,12.339

<$$heading>

I left my brother's house in London , OWEN-1857-2,1,12.341

and arrived at Stamford , where I found Mr. McGuffog's establishment
all that was stated , and his house respectable and comfortable .
OWEN-1857-2,1,12.342

This was a most fortunate introduction for me into active life .
OWEN-1857-2,1,12.343

Mr. James McGuffog was a Scotchman , thoroughly honest , and a good man
of business , - very methodical , kind , and liberal , and much
respected by his neighbours and customers , and also , for his
punctuality and good sense , by those from whom he purchased his goods
for sale ; OWEN-1857-2,1,12.344

and I was fortunate in obtaining such a man for my first master .
OWEN-1857-2,1,12.345

He told me that he had commenced life in Scotland with half a crown ,
laid it out in the purchase of some things for sale , and hawked them in
a basket . That by degrees he changed his basket for a pack , with
which he travelled the country , acquiring knowledge through experience
, and increasing his stock until he got , first a horse , and then a
horse and covered van . OWEN-1857-2,1,12.346

He made his regular rounds among customers of the first respectability
in Lincolnshire and the adjoining counties , until he was requested by
the nobility and principal families and farmers around Stamford , to
open an establishment there for the sale of the best and finest articles
of female wear , for which , for some time in his travelling capacity ,
he had become celebrated . OWEN-1857-2,1,12.347

When I came to his house he had been some years established in it ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,12.348

and was beginning to be so independent that he made all his purchases
with ready money and was becoming wealthy . OWEN-1857-2,1,12.349

He had married a daughter of a well_doing middle class person ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,12.350

and they appeared to live on very good terms with each other ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,12.351

and both were industrious , always attending to their business , yet
respectable at all times in their persons , and altogether superior as
retail tradespeople , being quite the aristocracy of that class ,
without its usual weak vanities . OWEN-1857-2,1,12.352

They had at this time an assistant of <P_1,13> the name of Sloane ,
about thirty-five years of age , a bachelor ; and also a youth about my
own age , nephew to McGuffog . OWEN-1857-2,1,13.353

Here I was at once installed as a member of the family ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,13.354

and during my stay with them I was treated more like their own child
than as a stranger come from afar . OWEN-1857-2,1,13.355

I was by Mr. McGuffog carefully initiated into the routine of the
business , and instructed in its detail , so as to accustom me to great
order and accuracy . OWEN-1857-2,1,13.356

The business was carried on under a well-considered system , which in
its results was very successful . OWEN-1857-2,1,13.357

I suppose I was considered industrious and attentive to my instructions
, OWEN-1857-2,1,13.358

for I was seldom found fault with or unpleasantly spoken to by either
Mr. or Mrs. McGuffog - the latter often attending to the business .
OWEN-1857-2,1,13.359

The articles dealt in were of the best , finest , and most choice
qualities that could be procured from all the markets of the world ;
OWEN-1857-2,1,13.360

for many of the customers of the establishment were among the highest
nobility in the kingdom , OWEN-1857-2,1,13.361

and often six or seven carriages belonging to them were at the same time
in attendance at the premises . OWEN-1857-2,1,13.362

Mr. McGuffog's shop had become a kind of general rendezvous of the
higher class nobility . OWEN-1857-2,1,13.363

Among the frequenters of the house as customers were the families of
Burleigh , Westmoreland , Lowther , Ancaster , Browton , Noel , Trollope
, and many whose names I have forgotten . OWEN-1857-2,1,13.364

I had thus an opportunity of noticing the manners of these parties , and
of studying their characters when they were under the least restraint .
OWEN-1857-2,1,13.365

I thus also became familiar with the finest fabrics of a great variety
of manufactures , many of which required great delicacy in handling and
care in keeping from being injured . OWEN-1857-2,1,13.366

These circumstances , trivial as they may appear , were of essential
service to me in after life , when I became a manufacturer and
commercial man upon a large scale ; OWEN-1857-2,1,13.367

for they prepared me in some measure for the future intercourse I had
with what is called the great world . OWEN-1857-2,1,13.368

Mr. McGuffog was much respected by these parties for his honesty and
plain dealing , OWEN-1857-2,1,13.369

and was the country banker for the then Sir William Lowther , afterwards
the late Earl of Lonsdale , and who , with Lady Augusta Lowther and
family , were among the most constant frequenters of the establishment .
OWEN-1857-2,1,13.370

After I left Stamford I learned from Mr. McGuffog that Sir William had
made him a present of one of his favorite hunters , and that Mr.
McGuffog , after retiring from business , often hunted with Sir
William's hounds ; OWEN-1857-2,1,13.371

and he remained a favorite with every one to his death .
OWEN-1857-2,1,13.372

Mr. McGuffog had a well selected library , which I freely used ;
OWEN-1857-2,1,13.373

for our chief business was from ten in the morning to four in the
afternoon , OWEN-1857-2,1,13.374

and while I remained in Stamford I read upon the average about five
hours a day . OWEN-1857-2,1,13.375

One of the entrances to Burleigh Park was near the town ;
OWEN-1857-2,1,13.376

and in summer , and as long as the weather permitted , my chief pleasure
<P_1,14> was to go early into the park to walk , read , think , and
study , in those noble avenues which were then numerous in it .
OWEN-1857-2,1,14.377

Very often in the midst of summer I was thus in the park from between
three and four in the morning until eight , and again in the evening
from six or seven until nearly dark . OWEN-1857-2,1,14.378

I had transcribed many of Seneca's moral precepts into a book which I
kept in my pocket ; OWEN-1857-2,1,14.379

to ponder over them in the park was one of my pleasureable occupations ;
OWEN-1857-2,1,14.380

and in this park , which I made my study , I read many volumes of the
most useful works I could obtain . OWEN-1857-2,1,14.381

At the early hour mentioned the only one I used to see taking his first
walk for the day , was the Earl of Exeter , the uncle , I believe , of
his successor who married the miller's daughter , the subject of
Tennyson's exquisite poem , and who was the father of the present
Marquis . OWEN-1857-2,1,14.382

This old Earl's habits were peculiar . OWEN-1857-2,1,14.383

He never allowed himself to sleep a second time in one night .
OWEN-1857-2,1,14.384

At whatever hour he awoke , winter and summer , he rose ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,14.385

and in bad weather he went to his study , OWEN-1857-2,1,14.386

and walked when it was fine , OWEN-1857-2,1,14.387

and at four o'clock in the morning I have often seen him at his early
exercise . OWEN-1857-2,1,14.388

He was also so punctual in his habits that he had the first dish of his
dinner passing between the kitchen and dining_room as the first stroke
of the clock struck three , and he never waited for anyone who was
absent or who had not arrived at his time . OWEN-1857-2,1,14.389

But he was much respected and liked by all about him .
OWEN-1857-2,1,14.390

I often recur to the recollection of the many happy healthy hours I
enjoyed in that park - healthy both to body and mind .
OWEN-1857-2,1,14.391

Frequently in the morning I hailed the rising sun , OWEN-1857-2,1,14.392

and in the evening watched its setting and the rising of the moon .
OWEN-1857-2,1,14.393

In the second year of my apprenticeship our circle was increased in the
house by the addition of a sister and a niece of Mrs. McGuffog's - the
first about nineteen , and the second about ten years old ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,14.394

and our pleasure was increased ; OWEN-1857-2,1,14.395

for there was a mutual good feeling among all the members of the family
, except that the old bachelor , David Sloane , was the least satisfied
with himself and others , and seemed jealous of the general kindness
shown to me by all the members of the family , and of the preference to
be served by me shown by many of the regular customers when they could
make a choice between us . OWEN-1857-2,1,14.396

He was penurious in his habits and somewhat more selfish than is
suitable for creating friends . OWEN-1857-2,1,14.397

A ludicrous instance occurred to make these failings , which he could
not avoid , somewhat conspicuous . OWEN-1857-2,1,14.398

He slept in a room adjoining the wholesale department ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,14.399

and occasionally , when it was full and over_stocked , some of the
surplus was occasionally put into his room , OWEN-1857-2,1,14.400

and at the time of the event narrated , some fine and expensive articles
happened to be placed on a table in his room . OWEN-1857-2,1,14.401

He was very careful of his clothes , OWEN-1857-2,1,14.402

and took pleasure in preserving their new appearance as long as
practicable . OWEN-1857-2,1,14.403

He had just brought a new pair of <P_1,15> breeches -
OWEN-1857-2,1,15.404

for pantaloons had not then been introduced , OWEN-1857-2,1,15.405

- and in going to bed he put them on the table where these goods were
placed . OWEN-1857-2,1,15.406

On going into bed he had put out his light in such a manner that the
sparks or snuffing of the candle had fallen unperceived by him among
these goods , and near to his own new purchase . OWEN-1857-2,1,15.407

He fell asleep , OWEN-1857-2,1,15.408

and some of the articles upon the table were burnt , and among them
David's new purchase , except some of the buttons and some fragments .
OWEN-1857-2,1,15.409

The smell of fire soon aroused Mr. and Mrs. McGuffog , who immediately
raised the alarm , OWEN-1857-2,1,15.410

and all hastily arose in their night clothes . OWEN-1857-2,1,15.411

The smoke was discovered to issue from David's room ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,15.412

and on bursting open the door , David , who was asleep , hastily awoke .
OWEN-1857-2,1,15.413

The burning articles upon the table disclosed the cause of alarm ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,15.414

and water was immediately procured and {TEXT:aud} the fire soon put out
. OWEN-1857-2,1,15.415

When the danger was over , all the parties began to look at each other ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,15.416

- but David was the conspicuous figure . OWEN-1857-2,1,15.417

In his night shirt and coloured night-cap he stood by the table ,
looking most wofully , OWEN-1857-2,1,15.418

and taking up fragment after fragment of his burnt clothing , -
regardless of the danger which he had created , and of the loss
sustained by Mr. McGuffog through the goods which were burnt or spoiled
with the water , - he ejaculated , as he held up each piece or button ,
" Oh my new breeches ! - Oh my new breeches ! " OWEN-1857-2,1,15.419

and this for some time was all that could be obtained from him when
questioned as to the origin of the fire , until at length the scene
became so farcical and ludicrous that no one could avoid laughing at him
, and he was left , looking most miserable , to his own reflections
until the morning . OWEN-1857-2,1,15.420

But , poor fellow , - " Oh my new breeches ! " was never afterwards
forgotten , OWEN-1857-2,1,15.421

and it was a joke which at length none but those who desired to torment
him would recall to his remembrance . OWEN-1857-2,1,15.422

Many years afterwards , when we were both advanced in life , I met him
in Manchester , when , with great agitation taking me cordially by the
hand , he said with extraordinary earnestness , - " Will you forgive me
the injuries I have formerly done you ? " OWEN-1857-2,1,15.423

I said " I do not know of any injury I ever experienced from you ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,15.424

and therefore I have nothing to forgive . OWEN-1857-2,1,15.425

- " Yes , " he said , " you have , OWEN-1857-2,1,15.426

and it has often made me very unhappy , OWEN-1857-2,1,15.427

- and do say you forgive me . " OWEN-1857-2,1,15.428

" Whatever it may be , I know nothing of it , OWEN-1857-2,1,15.429

- but if it can be of any satisfaction to you , I forgive you with all
my heart , without wishing to know in what way you suppose the injury
was done to me . " OWEN-1857-2,1,15.430

The poor fellow seemed quite relieved from a burden upon his mind ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,15.431

and left me with a gratified countenance , again shaking me cordially by
the hand . OWEN-1857-2,1,15.432

Mr. McGuffog was of the church of Scotland , Mrs. McGuffog of the
church of England , OWEN-1857-2,1,15.433

and they agreed to go in the morning to the service of the one , and in
the afternoon to that of the other , OWEN-1857-2,1,15.434

and they always took me with them . OWEN-1857-2,1,15.435

I listened to the contending sermons , OWEN-1857-2,1,15.436

for they were often , and indeed most generally , either in reference
<P_1,16> to their own sectarian notions , or in opposition to some of
the opposing sects . OWEN-1857-2,1,16.437

But during the four years I remained with Mr. and Mrs. McGuffog , I
never knew a religious difference between them . OWEN-1857-2,1,16.438

I was all this time endeavouring to find out <font> the true religion ,
<$$font> OWEN-1857-2,1,16.439

and was greatly puzzled for some time by finding all of every sect over
the world , of which I read , or of which I heard from the pulpits ,
claim each for themselves to be in possession of <font> the true
religion . <$$font> OWEN-1857-2,1,16.440

I studied , and studied , OWEN-1857-2,1,16.441

and carefully compared one with another , OWEN-1857-2,1,16.442

for I was very religiously inclined , OWEN-1857-2,1,16.443

and desired most anxiously to be in the right way .
OWEN-1857-2,1,16.444

But the more I heard , read , and reflected , the more I became
dissatisfied with Christian , Jew , Mahomedan , Hindoo , Chinese , and
Pagan . OWEN-1857-2,1,16.445

I began seriously to study the foundation of all of them , and to
ascertain on what principle they were based . OWEN-1857-2,1,16.446

Before my investigations were concluded , I was satisfied that one and
all had emanated from the same source , and their varieties from the
same false imaginations of our early ancestors ; imaginations formed
when men were ignorant of their own nature , were devoid of experience ,
and were governed by their random conjectures , which were almost always
, at first , like their notions of the fixedness of the earth , far from
the truth . OWEN-1857-2,1,16.447

It was with the greatest reluctance , and after long contests in my mind
, that I was compelled to abandon my first and deep_rooted impressions
in favour of Christianity , OWEN-1857-2,1,16.448

- but being obliged to give up my faith in this sect , I was at the same
time compelled to reject all others , OWEN-1857-2,1,16.449

for I had discovered that all had been based on the same absurd
imagination , " that each one formed his own qualities , - determined
his own thoughts , will , and action , - and was responsible for them to
God and to his fellowmen . " OWEN-1857-2,1,16.450

My own reflections compelled me to come to very different conclusions .
OWEN-1857-2,1,16.451

My reason taught me that I could not have made one of my own qualities ,
- that they were forced upon me by Nature ; - that my language ,
religion , and habits , were forced upon me by Society ; and that I was
entirely the child of Nature and Society ; - that Nature gave the
qualities , and Society directed them . OWEN-1857-2,1,16.452

Thus was I forced , through seeing the error of their foundation , to
abandon all belief in every religion which had been taught to man .
OWEN-1857-2,1,16.453

But my religious feelings were immediately replaced by the spirit of
universal charity , - not for a sect or a party , or for a country or a
colour , - but for the human race , and with a real and ardent desire to
do them good . OWEN-1857-2,1,16.454

Before , however , I had advanced so far in knowledge , while I was yet
a Christian , and was impressed with the sacredness of the Christian
Sabbath , it seemed to me that in Stamford it was much disregarded ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,16.455

- and it came into my head , at the age of twelve or thirteen , to write
upon the subject to Mr. Pitt , who was then Prime Minister .
OWEN-1857-2,1,16.456

In my letter to him I stated the desecration which was going forward in
Stamford , OWEN-1857-2,1,16.457

and expressed a hope <P_1,17> that Government would adopt some measure
to enforce a better observance of the Sabbath . OWEN-1857-2,1,17.458

I had been sometime writing this letter , OWEN-1857-2,1,17.459

and after I had sent it through the post office Mr. and Mrs. McGuffog
{TEXT:M'Guffog} asked me what I had been so interested about .
OWEN-1857-2,1,17.460

I said " I have been writing a letter to Mr. Pitt . "
OWEN-1857-2,1,17.461

" To Mr. Pitt ! " they exclaimed with some astonishment -
OWEN-1857-2,1,17.462

" What could you have to say to Mr. Pitt ? " OWEN-1857-2,1,17.463

I said it was about the Sabbath being so shamefully employed as it was
by many in Stamford , some of whom even kept their shops open on that
day . OWEN-1857-2,1,17.464

They looked at each other OWEN-1857-2,1,17.465

and smiled ; OWEN-1857-2,1,17.466

- but at the time I thought there was nothing extraordinary in it .
OWEN-1857-2,1,17.467

In about eight or ten days afterwards , Mr. McGoffog brought a London
newspaper , OWEN-1857-2,1,17.468

and said to me , - " Here is an answer to your letter to Mr. Pitt . "
OWEN-1857-2,1,17.469

I expected no answer , OWEN-1857-2,1,17.470

and was taken by surprise , OWEN-1857-2,1,17.471

and blushed very much . OWEN-1857-2,1,17.472

I asked what was the answer - OWEN-1857-2,1,17.473

he said it was " a long proclamation from the goverment , recommending
all parties to keep the Sabbath more strictly . " OWEN-1857-2,1,17.474

I was of course quite gratified , having no doubt my letter had produced
that result ; when , no doubt , such a letter as I could then have
written would be opened and put into the waste paper basket , and would
never be heard of by Mr. Pitt . OWEN-1857-2,1,17.475

My letter going at that period must have been a mere coincidence ;
OWEN-1857-2,1,17.476

for the proclamation , as far as I can recollect , was a formal well
considered document of the government , OWEN-1857-2,1,17.477

and probably had been determined upon before my letter was in the post
office . OWEN-1857-2,1,17.478

It however pleased me at the time , OWEN-1857-2,1,17.479

and amazed Mr. and Mrs. McGuffog . OWEN-1857-2,1,17.480

After my three years had expired , Mr. McGuffog wished me to remain
with him , and to continue as an assistant for a year longer .
OWEN-1857-2,1,17.481

During this period I had acquired as much knowledge of the business in
which I was engaged as the situation afforded , OWEN-1857-2,1,17.482

and although I had lived most happily in this family , and could have
remained as long as I liked , my wishes were for the attainment of more
knowledge and an enlarged field of action . OWEN-1857-2,1,17.483

I therefore , reluctantly , on account of the kindness I had uniformly
experienced from Mr. and Mrs. McGuffog and their relatives , expressed
my desire to return to London . OWEN-1857-2,1,17.484

Very friendly offers were made to detain me ; OWEN-1857-2,1,17.485

but my determination was fixed , OWEN-1857-2,1,17.486

and with strong recommendations from Mr. McGuffog , I returned to my
brother's house in London , now between fourteen and fifteen years of
age . OWEN-1857-2,1,17.487

While I remained in Stamford , I never saw any one whom I had previously
known ; OWEN-1857-2,1,17.488

- but one day , as I was passing the Goerge Inn , the principal hotel in
the place , I saw a person at the entrance talking to a gentleman , and
who was so like my father , that I concluded it must be he ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,17.489

and while the conversation continued I walked past them
OWEN-1857-2,1,17.490

and returned several times , being more and more convinced it must be my
father . OWEN-1857-2,1,17.491

At length the conversation terminated , OWEN-1857-2,1,17.492

and I then came very near to my supposed father , so as to catch his eye
and <P_1,18> draw his attention to me , OWEN-1857-2,1,18.493

but there was no sign of recognition on his part , OWEN-1857-2,1,18.494

and it was only from that circumstance that I discovered my mistake ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,18.495

for the likeness still appeared to me perfect . OWEN-1857-2,1,18.496

My disappointment may be easily imagined . OWEN-1857-2,1,18.497

Having been so long absent from my relations and friends , I was glad to
spend some months with my brother William , OWEN-1857-2,1,18.498

for there was always a strong attachment between us ;
OWEN-1857-2,1,18.499

and I spent some time in seeing the sights of London , and becoming
acquainted with its principal localities , walking in the parks , and
particularly in Kensington Gardens on fine Sundays with my brother and
his wife . OWEN-1857-2,1,18.500

It was at this period I visited my parents and relatives in Wales .
OWEN-1857-2,1,18.501

I spent some time with my family in Newtown , and with my relatives in
the neighourhood . OWEN-1857-2,1,18.502

I was uncommonly well received by all parties , OWEN-1857-2,1,18.503

and spent some time with my cousin and former companion Richard Williams
, who was then living at his father's new purchase of Old Hall , near
Kerry , Montgomeryshire . OWEN-1857-2,1,18.504

I also visited my sister in Radnorshire , who had married a Mr. Davis .
OWEN-1857-2,1,18.505

My stay in Wales was but for a short period , OWEN-1857-2,1,18.506

for I was anxious to be again in business , OWEN-1857-2,1,18.507

and my funds required my expenses to be limited . OWEN-1857-2,1,18.508

I therefore returned to my brother's house in London ,
OWEN-1857-2,1,18.509

and only once afterwards to the present time have visited Newtown .
OWEN-1857-2,1,18.510

But I feel a great desire now to see it in its very altered state from
what it was when I first left it , OWEN-1857-2,1,18.511

and I hope to see it during the next summer should my health permit .
OWEN-1857-2,1,18.512

After some time of this relaxation from business it was necessary for me
to seek for a new situation , OWEN-1857-2,1,18.513

and through Mr. McGuffog's recommendation I procured one with Messrs
Flint and Palmer , an old established house on old London Bridge ,
Borough side , overlooking the Thames . OWEN-1857-2,1,18.514

It was a house established , and I believe the first , to sell at a
small profit for ready money only . OWEN-1857-2,1,18.515

The house was already wealthy , making all their purchases with money ,
and continuing very successful . OWEN-1857-2,1,18.516

The house was originally established by Mr. Flint , who made what was
then deemed a large fortune for a retail trade , OWEN-1857-2,1,18.517

and he had an only daughter , who was married to Mr. Palmer , a very
respectable and gentlemanly person for his position , and an honest and
practical man of business . OWEN-1857-2,1,18.518

When Mr. Flint died , the establishment and the large capital were left
to the widow and the son-in-law and daughter . OWEN-1857-2,1,18.519

Mr. Palmer had two younger brothers now in the business , - the
youngest of them about my age . OWEN-1857-2,1,18.520

There were a considerable number of both sexes , and some of advanced
age , old assistants , at this time employed to attend to different
departments in the business . OWEN-1857-2,1,18.521

My previous habits prepared me to take an efficient part in the retail
division of the business of serving . OWEN-1857-2,1,18.522

I was lodged and boarded in the house , OWEN-1857-2,1,18.523

and had a salary of twenty-five pounds a year , OWEN-1857-2,1,18.524

and I thought myself rich and independent , OWEN-1857-2,1,18.525

for I had more than sufficient to supply all my <P_1,19> personal wants
. OWEN-1857-2,1,19.526

Soon , however , as the spring advanced , I found this was a different
situation to the one I had enjoyed at Stamford . OWEN-1857-2,1,19.527

The customers were of an inferior class , OWEN-1857-2,1,19.528

- they were treated differently . OWEN-1857-2,1,19.529

Not much time was allowed for bargaining , a price being fixed for
everything , and , compared with other houses , cheap .
OWEN-1857-2,1,19.530

If any demur was made , or much hesitation , the article asked for was
withdrawn , OWEN-1857-2,1,19.531

and , as the shop was generally full from morning till late in the
evening , another customer was attended to . OWEN-1857-2,1,19.532

