<BEGIN_owen-1813-2>

<P_1,41>

<heading>

Second Essay OWEN-1813-2,1,41.4

<$$heading>

<font> The Principles of the Former Essay continued , and applied in
part to Practice <$$font> OWEN-1813-2,1,41.6

{COM:epigraph_omitted}

General principles only were developed in the First Essay .
OWEN-1813-2,1,41.8

In this an attempt will be made to show the advantages which may be
derived from the adoption of those principles into practice , and to
explain the mode by which the practice may , without inconvenience , be
generally introduced . OWEN-1813-2,1,41.9

Some of the most important benefits to be derived from the introduction
of those principles into practice are , that they will create the most
cogent reasons to induce each man ' to have charity for <font> all
<$$font> men ' . OWEN-1813-2,1,41.10

No feeling short of this can indeed find place in any mind which has
been taught clearly to understand that children in all parts of the
earth have been , are , and everlastingly will be , impressed with
habits and sentiments similar to those of their parents and instructors
; modified , however , by the circumstances in which they have been ,
are , or may be placed , and by the peculiar organizations of each
individual . OWEN-1813-2,1,41.11

Yet not one of these causes of character is at the command , or in any
manner under the control of infants , who <paren> whatever absurdity we
may have been taught to the contrary <$$paren> , can@ @not possibly be
accountable for the sentiments and manners which may be given to them .
OWEN-1813-2,1,41.12

And here lies the fundamental error of society ; OWEN-1813-2,1,41.13

and from hence have proceeded , and do proceed , most of the miseries of
mankind . OWEN-1813-2,1,41.14

Children are , without exception , passive and wonderfully contrived
compounds ; which , by an accurate previous and subsequent attention ,
<font> founded on a correct knowledge of the subject <$$font> , may be
formed collectively to have any human character . OWEN-1813-2,1,41.15

And although these compounds , like all the other works of nature ,
possess endless varieties , yet they partake of that plastic quality ,
which , by perseverance under judicious management , may be ultimately
moulded into the very image of rational wishes and desires .
OWEN-1813-2,1,41.16

In the next place these principles can@ @not fail to create feelings
which , <P_1,42> without force or the production of any counteracting
motive , will irresistibly lead those who possess them to make due
allowance for the difference of sentiments and manners , not only among
their friends and countrymen , but also among the inhabitants of every
region of the earth , even including their enemies .
OWEN-1813-2,1,42.17

With this insight into the formation of character , there is no
conceivable foundation for private displeasure or public enmity .
OWEN-1813-2,1,42.18

Say , if it be within the sphere of possibility that children can be
trained to attain <font> that <$$font> knowledge , and at the same time
to acquire feelings of enmity towards a single human creature ?
OWEN-1813-2,1,42.19

The child who from infancy has been rationally instructed in these
principles , will readily discover and trace <font> whence <$$font> the
opinions and habits of his associates have arisen , and <font> why
<$$font> they possess them . OWEN-1813-2,1,42.20

At the same age he will have acquired reason sufficient to exhibit to
him forcibly the irrationality of being angry with an individual for
possessing qualities which , as a passive being during the formation of
those qualities , he had not the means of preventing .
OWEN-1813-2,1,42.21

Such are the impressions these principles will make on the mind of every
child so taught ; OWEN-1813-2,1,42.22

and , instead of generating anger or displeasure , they will produce
commiseration and pity for those individuals who possess either habits
or sentiments which appear to him to be destructive of their own comfort
, pleasure , or happiness ; OWEN-1813-2,1,42.23

and will produce on his part a desire to remove those causes of distress
, OWEN-1813-2,1,42.24

and his own feelings of commiseration and pity may be also removed .
OWEN-1813-2,1,42.25

The pleasure which he can@ @not avoid experiencing by this mode of
conduct will likewise stimulate him to the most active endeavours to
withdraw those circumstances which surround any part of mankind with
causes of misery , and to replace them with others which have a tendency
to increase happiness . OWEN-1813-2,1,42.26

He will then also strongly entertain the desire ' to do good to <font>
all <$$font> men ' , and even to those who think themselves his enemies
. OWEN-1813-2,1,42.27

Thus <font> shortly <$$font> , <font> directly <$$font> , and <font>
certainly <$$font> may mankind be taught the essence , and to attain the
ultimate object , of all former <font> moral <$$font> and <font>
religious <$$font> instruction . OWEN-1813-2,1,42.28

These Essays , however , are intended to explain that which is <font>
true <$$font> , and not to attack that which is <font> false . <$$font>
OWEN-1813-2,1,42.29

For to explain that which is true may permanently improve , without
creating even temporary evil ; whereas to attack that which is false ,
is often productive of very fatal consequences . OWEN-1813-2,1,42.30

The former convinces the judgement when the mind possesses full and
deliberate powers of judging ; OWEN-1813-2,1,42.31

the latter instantly arouses irritation , OWEN-1813-2,1,42.32

and renders the judgement unfit for its office , and useless .
OWEN-1813-2,1,42.33

But why should we <font> ever <$$font> irritate ? OWEN-1813-2,1,42.34

Do not these principles make it so obvious as to place it beyond any
doubt , that even the present irrational ideas and practices prevalent
throughout the world are not to be charged as either a fault or a
culpable error of the existing generation ? OWEN-1813-2,1,42.35

The immediate cause of them was the partial ignorance of our forefathers
, who , although they acquired {TEXT:acquire} some vague disjointed
knowledge of the principles on which character is formed , could not
discover the connected chain of those principles , and consequently knew
not how to apply them to practice . OWEN-1813-2,1,42.36

They taught their children that which they had themselves been taught ,
that which <P_1,43> they had acquired , OWEN-1813-2,1,43.37

and in so doing they acted like their forefathers ; who retained the
established customs of former generations until better and superior were
discovered and made evident to them . OWEN-1813-2,1,43.38

The present race of men have also instructed their children as they had
been previously instructed , OWEN-1813-2,1,43.39

and are equally unblameable for any defects which their systems contain
. OWEN-1813-2,1,43.40

And however erroneous or injurious that instruction and those systems
may now be proved to be , the principles on which these Essays are
founded will be misunderstood , OWEN-1813-2,1,43.41

and their spirit will be wholly misconceived , if either irritation or
the slightest degree of ill will shall be generated against those who
even tenaciously adhere to the worst parts of that instruction , and
support the most pernicious of those systems . OWEN-1813-2,1,43.42

For such individuals , sects , or parties have been trained from infancy
to consider it their duty and interest so to act , OWEN-1813-2,1,43.43

and in so acting they merely continue the customs of their predecessors
. OWEN-1813-2,1,43.44

Let truth unaccompanied with <font> error <$$font> be placed before them
; give them time to examine it and to see that it is in unison with all
previously ascertained truths ; and conviction and acknowledgement of it
will follow of course . OWEN-1813-2,1,43.45

It is weakness itself to require assent <font> before <$$font>
conviction ; OWEN-1813-2,1,43.46

and <font> afterwards <$$font> it will not be withheld .
OWEN-1813-2,1,43.47

To endeavour to force conclusions without making the subject clear to
the understanding , is most unjustifiable and irrational ,
OWEN-1813-2,1,43.48

and must prove useless or injurious to the mental faculties .
OWEN-1813-2,1,43.49

In the spirit thus described we therefore proceed in the investigation
of the subject . OWEN-1813-2,1,43.50

The facts which by the invention of printing have gradually accumulated
now show the errors of the systems of our forefathers so distinctly ,
that they must be , when pointed out , evident to all classes of the
community , and render it absolutely necessary that new legislative
measures be immediately adopted to prevent the confusion which must
arise from even the most ignorant being competent to detect the
absurdity and glaring injustice of many of those laws by which they are
now governed . OWEN-1813-2,1,43.51

Such are those laws which enact punishments for a very great variety of
actions designated crimes ; while those from whom such actions proceed
are regularly trained to acquire no other knowledge than that which
compels them to conclude that those actions are the best they could
perform . OWEN-1813-2,1,43.52

How much longer shall we continue to allow generation after generation
to be taught crime from their infancy , and , when so taught , hunt them
like beasts of the forest , until they are entangled beyond escape in
the toils and nets of the law , {TEXT:?} when , if the circumstances of
those poor unpitied sufferers had been reversed with those who are even
surrounded with the pomp and dignity of justice , these latter would
have been at the bar of the culprit , and the former would have been in
the judgement seat . OWEN-1813-2,1,43.53

Had the present Judges of these realms been born and educated among the
poor and profligate of St Giles's or some similar situation , it is not
certain , inasmuch as they possess native energies and abilities , that
ere this they would <P_1,44> have been at the head of their <font> then
<$$font> profession and , in consequence of that superiority and
proficiency , would have already suffered imprisonment , transportation
, or death ? OWEN-1813-2,1,44.54

Can we for a moment hesitate to decide , that if some of those men whom
the laws dispensed by the present Judges have doomed to suffer capital
punishments , had been born , trained , and circumstanced , as these
Judges were born , trained , and circumstanced , that some of those who
had so suffered would have been the identical individuals who would have
passed the same awful sentences on the present highly esteemed
dignitaries of the law ? OWEN-1813-2,1,44.55

If we open our eyes and attentively notice events , we shall observe
these facts to multiply before us . OWEN-1813-2,1,44.56

Is the evil then of so small magnitude as to be totally disregarded and
passed by as the ordinary occurrences of the day , and as not deserving
of one reflection ? OWEN-1813-2,1,44.57

And shall we be longer told ' that the convenient time to attend to
inquiries of this nature is not yet come : that other matters of far
weightier import engage our attention , and it must remain over till a
season of more leisure ? ' OWEN-1813-2,1,44.58

To those who may be inclined to think and speak thus , I would say - '
Let feelings of humanity or strict justice induce you to devote a few
hours to visit some of the public prisons of the metropolis , and
patiently inquire , with kind commiserating solicitude , of their
various inhabitants , the events of their lives and the lives of their
various connections . OWEN-1813-2,1,44.59

Then will tales unfold that <font> must <$$font> arrest attention , that
will disclose sufferings , misery , and injustice , upon which , for
obvious reasons , I will not now dwell , but which previously , I am
persuaded , you could not suppose it possible to exist in any civilized
state , far less that they should be permitted for centuries to increase
around the very fountain of British jurisprudence . '
OWEN-1813-2,1,44.60

The true cause , however , of this conduct , so contrary to the general
humanity of the natives of these Islands , is , that a practical remedy
for the evil , on clearly defined and sound principles had not yet been
suggested . OWEN-1813-2,1,44.61

But the principles developed in this ' New View of the Society ' ,
<font> will point out a remedy which is almost simplicity itself ,
possessing no more practical difficulties than many of the common
employments of life ; and such as are readily overcome by men of very
ordinary practical talents . <$$font> OWEN-1813-2,1,44.62

That such a remedy is easily practicable , may be collected from the
account of the following very partial experiment . OWEN-1813-2,1,44.63

In the year 1784 the late Mr Dale , of Glasgow , founded a manufactory
for spinning of cotton , near the falls of the Clyde , in the county of
Lanark , in Scotland ; OWEN-1813-2,1,44.64

and about that period cotton mills were first introduced into the
northern part of the kingdom . OWEN-1813-2,1,44.65

It was the power which could be obtained from the falls of water that
induced Mr Dale to erect his mills in this situation ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,44.66

for in other respects it was not well chosen . OWEN-1813-2,1,44.67

The country around was uncultivated ; OWEN-1813-2,1,44.68

the inhabitants were poor and few in number ; OWEN-1813-2,1,44.69

and the roads in the neighbourhood were so bad , that the Falls , now so
celebrated , were then unknown to strangers . OWEN-1813-2,1,44.70

<P_1,45>

It was therefore necessary to collect a new population to supply the
infant establishment with labourers . OWEN-1813-2,1,45.72

This , however , was no light task ; OWEN-1813-2,1,45.73

for all the regularly trained Scotch peasantry disdained the idea of
working early and late , day after day , within cotton mills .
OWEN-1813-2,1,45.74

Two modes then only remained of obtaining these labourers ; the one , to
procure children from the various public charities of the country ; and
the other , to induce families to settle around the works .
OWEN-1813-2,1,45.75

To accommodate the first , a large house was erected , which ultimately
contained about 500 children , who were procured chiefly from workhouses
and charities in Edinburgh . OWEN-1813-2,1,45.76

These children were to be fed , clothed , and educated ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,45.77

and these duties Mr Dale performed with the unwearied benevolence which
it is well known he possessed . OWEN-1813-2,1,45.78

To obtain the second , a village was built ; OWEN-1813-2,1,45.79

and the houses were let at a low rent to such families as could be
induced to accept employment in the mills ; OWEN-1813-2,1,45.80

but such was the general dislike to that occupation at the time , that ,
with a few exceptions , only persons destitute of friends , employment ,
and character , were found willing to try the experiment ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,45.81

and of these a sufficient number to supply a constant increase of the
manufactory could not be obtained . OWEN-1813-2,1,45.82

It was therefore deemed a favour on the part even of such individuals to
reside at the village , OWEN-1813-2,1,45.83

and , when taught the business , they grew so valuable to the
establishment , that they became agents not to be governed contrary to
their own inclinations . OWEN-1813-2,1,45.84

Mr Dale's principal avocations were at a distance from the works , which
he seldom visited more than once for a few hours in three or four months
; OWEN-1813-2,1,45.85

he was therefore under the necessity of committing the management of the
establishment to various servants with more or less power .
OWEN-1813-2,1,45.86

Those who have a practical knowledge of mankind will readily anticipate
the character which a population so collected and constituted would
acquire . OWEN-1813-2,1,45.87

It is therefore scarcely necessary to state , that the community by
degrees was formed under these circumstances into a very wretched
society : OWEN-1813-2,1,45.88

every man did that which was right in his own eyes , OWEN-1813-2,1,45.89

and vice and immorality prevailed to a monstrous extent .
OWEN-1813-2,1,45.90

The population lived in idleness , in poverty , in almost every kind of
crime ; consequently , in debt , out of health , and in misery .
OWEN-1813-2,1,45.91

Yet to make matters still worse - although the cause proceeded from the
best possible motive , a conscientious adherence to principle - the
whole was under a strong sectarian influence , which gave a marked and
decided preference to one set of religious opinions over all others ,
OWEN-1813-2,1,45.92

and the professors of the favoured opinions were the privileged of the
community . OWEN-1813-2,1,45.93

The boarding-house containing the children presented a very different
scene . OWEN-1813-2,1,45.94

The benevolent proprietor spared no expense to give comfort to the poor
children . OWEN-1813-2,1,45.95

The rooms provided for them were spacious , always clean , and well
ventilated ; OWEN-1813-2,1,45.96

the food was abundant , and of the best quality ; OWEN-1813-2,1,45.97

the clothes were neat and useful ; OWEN-1813-2,1,45.98

a surgeon was kept in constant pay , to direct how to prevent or cure
disease ; OWEN-1813-2,1,45.99

and the best instructors which the country afforded were appointed to
teach such branches of education as were deemed likely to <P_1,46> be
useful to children in their situation . OWEN-1813-2,1,46.100

Kind and well-disposed persons were appointed to superintend all their
proceedings . OWEN-1813-2,1,46.101

Nothing , in short , at first sight seemed wanting to render it a most
complete charity . OWEN-1813-2,1,46.102

But to defray the expense of these well-devised arrangements , and to
support the establishment generally , it was absolutely necessary that
the children should be employed within the mills from six o'clock in the
morning till seven in the evening , summer and winter ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,46.103

and after these hours their education commenced . OWEN-1813-2,1,46.104

The directors of the public charities , from mistaken economy , would
not consent to send the children under their care to cotton mills ,
unless the children are received by the proprietors at the ages of six ,
seven and eight . OWEN-1813-2,1,46.105

And Mr Dale was under the necessity of accepting them at those ages , or
of stopping the manufactory which he had commenced .
OWEN-1813-2,1,46.106

It is not to be supposed that children so young could remain , with the
intervals of meals only , from six in the morning until seven in the
evening , in constant employment , on their feet , within cotton mills ,
and afterwards acquire much proficiency in education .
OWEN-1813-2,1,46.107

And so it proved ; OWEN-1813-2,1,46.108

for many of them became dwarfs in body and mind , OWEN-1813-2,1,46.109

and some of them were deformed . OWEN-1813-2,1,46.110

Their labour through the day and their education at night became so
irksome , that numbers of them continually ran away , and almost all
looked forward with impatience and anxiety to the expiration of their
apprenticeship of seven , eight , and nine years , which generally
expired when they were from thirteen to fifteen years old .
OWEN-1813-2,1,46.111

At this period of life , unaccustomed to provide for themselves , and
unacquainted with the world , they usually went to Edinburgh or Glasgow
, where boys and girls were soon assailed by the innumerable temptations
which all large towns present , and to which many of them fell
sacrifices . OWEN-1813-2,1,46.112

Thus Mr Dale's arrangements , and his kind solicitude for the comfort
and happiness of these children , were rendered in their ultimate effect
almost nugatory . OWEN-1813-2,1,46.113

They were hired by him and sent to be employed , OWEN-1813-2,1,46.114

and without their labour he could not support them ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,46.115

but , while under his care , he did all that any individual ,
circumstanced as he was , could do for his fellow creatures .
OWEN-1813-2,1,46.116

The error proceeded from the children being sent from the workhouses at
an age much too young for employment . OWEN-1813-2,1,46.117

They ought to have been detained four years longer , and educated ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,46.118

and then some of the evils which followed would have been prevented .
OWEN-1813-2,1,46.119

If such be a true picture , not overcharged , of parish apprentices to
our manufacturing system , under the best and most humane regulations ,
in what colours must it be exhibited under the worst ?
OWEN-1813-2,1,46.120

Mr Dale was advancing in years : OWEN-1813-2,1,46.121

he had no son to succeed him ; OWEN-1813-2,1,46.122

and , finding the consequences just described to be the result of all
his strenuous exertions for the improvement and happiness of his fellow
creatures , it is not surprising that he became disposed to retire from
the cares of the establishment . OWEN-1813-2,1,46.123

He accordingly sold it to some English merchants and manufacturers ; one
of <P_1,47> whom , under the circumstances just narrated , undertook the
management of the concern , and fixed his residence in the midst of the
population . OWEN-1813-2,1,47.124

This individual had been previously in the management of large
establishments , employing a number of workpeople , in the neighbourhood
of Manchester , OWEN-1813-2,1,47.125

and , in every case , by the steady application of certain general
principles , he succeeded in reforming the habits of those under his
care , and who always , among their associates in similar employment ,
appeared conspicuous for their good conduct . OWEN-1813-2,1,47.126

With this previous success in remodelling English character , but
ignorant of the local ideas , manners , and customs , of those now
committed to his management , the stranger commenced his task .
OWEN-1813-2,1,47.127

At that time the lower classes of Scotland , like those of other
countries , had strong prejudices against strangers having any authority
over them , and particularly against the English , few of whom had then
settled in Scotland , and not one in the neighbourhood of the scenes
under description . OWEN-1813-2,1,47.128

It is also well known that even the Scotch peasantry and working classes
possess the habit of making observations and reasoning thereon with
great acuteness ; OWEN-1813-2,1,47.129

and in the present case those employed naturally concluded that the new
purchasers intended merely to make the utmost profit by the
establishment , from the abuses of which many of themselves were then
deriving support . OWEN-1813-2,1,47.130

The persons employed at these works were therefore strongly prejudiced
against the new director of the establishment - prejudiced , because he
was a stranger , and from England - because he succeeded Mr Dale , under
whose proprietorship they acted almost as they liked - because his
religious creed was not theirs - and because they concluded that the
works would be governed by new laws and regulations , calculated to
squeeze , as they often termed it , the greatest sum of gain out of
their labour . OWEN-1813-2,1,47.131

In consequence , from the day he arrived amongst them every means which
ingenuity could devise was set to work to counteract the plan which he
attempted to introduce ; OWEN-1813-2,1,47.132

and for two years it was a regular attack and defence of prejudices and
malpractices between the manager and the population of the place ,
without the former being able to make much progress , or to convince the
latter of the sincerity of his good intentions for their welfare .
OWEN-1813-2,1,47.133

He , however , did not lose his patience , his temper , or his
confidence in the certain success of the principles on which he founded
his conduct . OWEN-1813-2,1,47.134

These principles ultimately prevailed : OWEN-1813-2,1,47.135

the population could not continue to resist a firm well-directed
kindness , administering justice to all . OWEN-1813-2,1,47.136

They therefore slowly and cautiously began to give him some portion of
their confidence ; OWEN-1813-2,1,47.137

and as this increased , he was enabled more and more to develop his
plans for their amelioration . OWEN-1813-2,1,47.138

It may with truth be said , that at this period they possessed almost
all the vices and very few of the virtues of a social community .
OWEN-1813-2,1,47.139

Theft and the receipt of stolen goods was their trade , idleness and
drunkenness their habit , falsehood and deception their garb ,
dissensions , civil and religious , their daily practice ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,47.140

they united only in a zealous systematic opposition to their employers .
OWEN-1813-2,1,47.141

<P_1,48>

Here then was a fair field on which to try the efficacy in practice of
principles supposed capable of altering any characters .
OWEN-1813-2,1,48.143

The manager formed his plans accordingly . OWEN-1813-2,1,48.144

He spent some time in finding out the full extent of the evil against
which he had to contend , and in tracing the true causes which had
produced and were continuing those effects . OWEN-1813-2,1,48.145

He found that all was distrust , disorder , and disunion ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,48.146

and he wished to introduce confidence , regularity , and harmony .
OWEN-1813-2,1,48.147

He therefore began to bring forward his various expedients to withdraw
the unfavourable circumstances by which they had hitherto been
surrounded , and to replace them by others calculated to produce a more
happy result . OWEN-1813-2,1,48.148

He soon discovered that theft was extended through almost all the
ramifications of the community , and the receipt of stolen goods through
all the country around . OWEN-1813-2,1,48.149

To remedy this evil , not one legal punishment was inflicted , not one
individual imprisoned , even for an hour ; OWEN-1813-2,1,48.150

but checks and other regulations of prevention were introduced ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,48.151

a short plain explanation of the immediate benefits they would derive
from a different conduct was inculcated by those instructed for the
purpose , who had the best powers of reasoning among themselves .
OWEN-1813-2,1,48.152

They were at the same time instructed how to direct their industry in
legal and useful occupations , by which , without danger or disgrace ,
they could really earn more than they had previously obtained by
dishonest practices . OWEN-1813-2,1,48.153

Thus the difficulty of committing the crime was increased , the
detection afterwards rendered more easy , the habit of honest industry
formed , and the pleasure of good conduct experienced .
OWEN-1813-2,1,48.154

Drunkenness was attacked in the same manner ; OWEN-1813-2,1,48.155

it was discountenanced on every occasion by those who had charge of any
department : OWEN-1813-2,1,48.156

its destructive and pernicious effects were frequently stated by his own
more prudent comrades , at the proper moment when the individual was
soberly suffering from the effects of his previous excess ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,48.157

pot - and public-houses were gradually removed from the immediate
vicinity of their dwellings ; OWEN-1813-2,1,48.158

the health and comfort of temperance were made familiar to them ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,48.159

by degrees drunkenness disappeared , OWEN-1813-2,1,48.160

and many who were habitual bacchanalians are now conspicuous for
undeviating sobriety . OWEN-1813-2,1,48.161

Falsehood and deception met with a similar fate : OWEN-1813-2,1,48.162

they were held in disgrace ; OWEN-1813-2,1,48.163

their practical evils were shortly explained ; OWEN-1813-2,1,48.164

and every countenance was given to truth and open conduct .
OWEN-1813-2,1,48.165

The pleasure and substantial advantages derived from the latter soon
overcame the impolicy , error , and consequent misery , which the former
mode of acting had created . OWEN-1813-2,1,48.166

Dissensions and quarrels were undermined by analagous expedients .
OWEN-1813-2,1,48.167

When they could not be readily adjusted between the parties themselves ,
they were stated to the manager ; OWEN-1813-2,1,48.168

and as in such cases both disputants were usually more or less in the
wrong , that wrong was in as few words as possible explained ,
forgiveness and friendship recommended , and one simple and easily
remembered precept inculcated , as the most valuable rule for their
whole conduct , and the advantages of which they would experience every
moment of their lives ; viz. - ' That in future they should endeavour
to use the same active <P_1,49> exertions to make each other happy and
comfortable , as they had hitherto done to make each other miserable ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,49.169

and by carrying this short memorandum in their mind , and applying it on
all occasions , they would soon render that place a paradise , which ,
from the most mistaken principle of action , they now made the abode of
misery . ' OWEN-1813-2,1,49.170

The experiment was tried : OWEN-1813-2,1,49.171

the parties enjoyed the gratification of this new mode of conduct ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,49.172

references rapidly subsided ; OWEN-1813-2,1,49.173

and now serious differences are scarcely known . OWEN-1813-2,1,49.174

Considerable jealousies also existed on account of one religious sect
possessing a decided preference over the others . OWEN-1813-2,1,49.175

This was corrected by discontinuing that preference , and by giving a
uniform encouragement to those who conducted themselves well among all
the various religious persuasions ; by recommending the same
consideration to be shown to the conscientious opinions of each sect ,
on the ground that all must believe the particular doctrines which they
had been taught , and consequently that all were in that respect upon an
equal footing , nor was it possible yet to say which was right or wrong
. OWEN-1813-2,1,49.176

It was likewise inculcated that all should attend to the essence of
religion , and not act as the world was now taught and trained to do ;
that is , to overlook the substance and essence of religion , and devote
their talents , time , and money , to that which is far worse than its
shadow , sectarianism ; another term for something very injurious to
society , and very absurd , which one or other well-meaning enthusiast
has added to <font> true religion <$$font> , which , without these
defects , would soon form those characters which every wise and good man
is anxious to see . OWEN-1813-2,1,49.177

Such statements and conduct arrested sectarian animosity and ignorant
intolerance ; OWEN-1813-2,1,49.178

each retains full liberty of conscience , OWEN-1813-2,1,49.179

and in consequence each partakes of the sincere friendship of many sects
instead of one . OWEN-1813-2,1,49.180

They act with cordiality together in the same departments and pursuits ,
OWEN-1813-2,1,49.181

and associate as though the whole community were not of different
sectarian persuasions ; OWEN-1813-2,1,49.182

and not one evil ensues . OWEN-1813-2,1,49.183

The same principles were applied to correct the irregular intercourse of
the sexes : OWEN-1813-2,1,49.184

such conduct was discountenanced and held in disgrace ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,49.185

fines were levied upon both parties for the use of the support fund of
the community . OWEN-1813-2,1,49.186

<paren> This fund arose from each individual contributing one sixtieth
part of their wages , which , under their management , was applied to
support the sick , and injured by accident , and the aged . <$$paren>
OWEN-1813-2,1,49.187

But because they had once unfortunately offended against the established
laws and customs of society , they were not forced to become vicious ,
abandoned , and miserable ; OWEN-1813-2,1,49.188

the door was left open for them to return to the comforts of kind
friends and respected acquaintances ; OWEN-1813-2,1,49.189

and , beyond any previous expectation , the evil became greatly
diminished . OWEN-1813-2,1,49.190

The system of receiving apprentices from public charities was abolished
; OWEN-1813-2,1,49.191

permanent settlers with large families were encouraged ,
OWEN-1813-2,1,49.192

and comfortable houses were built for their accommodation .
OWEN-1813-2,1,49.193

The practice of employing children in the mills , of six , seven and
eight years <P_1,50> of age , was discontinued , and their parents
advised to allow them to acquire health and education until they were
ten years old . OWEN-1813-2,1,50.194

<paren> It may be remarked , that even this age is too early to keep
them at constant employment in manufactories , from six in the morning
to seven in the evening . OWEN-1813-2,1,50.195

Far better would it be for the children , their parents , and for
society , that the first should not commence employment until they
attain the age of twelve , when their education might be finished , and
their bodies would be more competent to undergo the fatigue and
exertions required of them . OWEN-1813-2,1,50.196

When parents can be trained to afford this additional time to their
children without inconvenience , they will , of course , adopt the
practice now recommended . <$$paren> OWEN-1813-2,1,50.197

The children were taught reading , writing , and arithmetic , during
five years , that is , from five to ten , in the village school ,
without expense to their parents . OWEN-1813-2,1,50.198

All the modern improvements in education have been adopted ,
OWEN-1813-2,1,50.199

or are in process of adoption . OWEN-1813-2,1,50.200

<paren> To avoid the inconveniences which must ever arise from the
introduction of a particular creed into a school , the children are
taught to read in such books as inculcate those precepts of the
Christian religion , which are common to all denominations . <$$paren>
OWEN-1813-2,1,50.201

They may therefore be taught and well-@ @trained before they engage in
any regular employment . OWEN-1813-2,1,50.202

Another important consideration is , that all their instruction is
rendered a pleasure and delight to them ; OWEN-1813-2,1,50.203

they are much more anxious for the hour of school time to arrive than to
end ; OWEN-1813-2,1,50.204

they therefore make a rapid progress ; OWEN-1813-2,1,50.205

and it may be safely asserted , that if they shall not be trained to
form such characters as may be most desired , the fault will not proceed
from the children ; OWEN-1813-2,1,50.206

the cause will be in the want of a true knowledge of human nature in
those who have the management of them and their parents .
OWEN-1813-2,1,50.207

During the period that these changes were going forward , attention was
given to the domestic arrangements of the community .
OWEN-1813-2,1,50.208

Their houses were rendered more comfortable , OWEN-1813-2,1,50.209

their streets were improved , OWEN-1813-2,1,50.210

the best provisions were purchased , and sold to them at low rates , yet
covering the original expense , and under such regulations as taught
them how to proportion their expenditure to their income .
OWEN-1813-2,1,50.211

Fuel and clothes were obtained for them in the same manner ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,50.212

and no advantage was attempted to be taken of them , or means used to
deceive them . OWEN-1813-2,1,50.213

In consequence , their animosity and opposition to the stranger subsided
, OWEN-1813-2,1,50.214

their full confidence was obtained , OWEN-1813-2,1,50.215

and they became satisfied that no evil was intended them ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,50.216

they were convinced that a real desire existed to increase their
happiness upon those grounds alone on which it could be permanently
increased . OWEN-1813-2,1,50.217

All difficulties in the way of future improvement vanished .
OWEN-1813-2,1,50.218

They were <P_1,51> taught to be rational , OWEN-1813-2,1,51.219

and they acted rationally . OWEN-1813-2,1,51.220

Thus both parties experienced the incalculable advantages of the system
which had been adopted . OWEN-1813-2,1,51.221

Those employed became industrious , temperate , healthy , faithful to
their employers , and kind to each other ; while the proprietors were
deriving services from their attachment , almost without inspection ,
far beyond those which could be obtained by any other means than those
of mutual confidence and kindness . OWEN-1813-2,1,51.222

Such was the effect of these principles on the adults ; on those whose
previous habits had been as ill-formed as habits could be ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,51.223

and certainly the application of the principles to practice was made
under the most unfavourable circumstances . OWEN-1813-2,1,51.224

<paren> It may be supposed that this community was separated from other
society ; OWEN-1813-2,1,51.225

but the supposition would be erroneous , OWEN-1813-2,1,51.226

for it had daily and hourly communication with a population exceeding
its own number . OWEN-1813-2,1,51.227

The royal borough of Lanark is only one mile distant from the works ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,51.228

many individuals came daily from the former to be employed at the latter
; OWEN-1813-2,1,51.229

and a general intercourse is constantly maintained between the old and
new towns . <$$paren> OWEN-1813-2,1,51.230

I have thus given a detailed account of this experiment , although a
partial application of the principles is of far less importance than a
clear and accurate account of the principles themselves , in order that
they may be so well understood as to be easily rendered applicable to
practice in any community and under any circumstances .
OWEN-1813-2,1,51.231

Without this , particular facts may indeed amuse or astonish ,
OWEN-1813-2,1,51.232

but they would not contain that substantial value which the principles
will be found to possess . OWEN-1813-2,1,51.233

But if the relation of the narrative shall forward this object , the
experiment can@ @not fail to prove the certain means of renovating the
moral and religious principles of the world , by showing whence arise
the various opinions , manners , vices , and virtues of mankind , and
how the best or {TEXT:of} the worst of them may , with mathematical
precision , be taught to the rising generation . OWEN-1813-2,1,51.234

Let it not , therefore , be longer said that evil or injurious actions
can@ @not be prevented , or that the most rational habits in the rising
generation can@ @not be universally formed . OWEN-1813-2,1,51.235

In those characters which now exhibit crime , the fault is obviously not
in the individual , OWEN-1813-2,1,51.236

but the defects proceed from the system in which the individual was
trained . OWEN-1813-2,1,51.237

Withdraw those circumstances which tend to create crime in the human
character , and crime will not be created . OWEN-1813-2,1,51.238

Replace them with such as are calculated to form habits of order ,
regularity , temperance , industry ; and these qualities will be formed
. OWEN-1813-2,1,51.239

Adopt measures of fair equity and justice , and you will readily acquire
the full and complete confidence of the lower orders .
OWEN-1813-2,1,51.240

Proceed systematically on principles of undeviating persevering kindness
, yet retaining and using , with the least possible severity , the means
of restraining crime from immediately injuring society ; and by degrees
even the crimes now existing in the adults will also gradually disappear
; OWEN-1813-2,1,51.241

for the worst formed disposition , short of incurable insanity , will
not long resist a firm , determined , well-directed , persevering
kindness . OWEN-1813-2,1,51.242

Such a proceeding , whenever practised , will be found the most powerful
and effective corrector of crime , and of all injurious and improper
habits . OWEN-1813-2,1,51.243

<P_1,52>

The experiment narrated shows that this is not hypothesis and theory .
OWEN-1813-2,1,52.245

The principles may be with confidence stated to be universal , and
applicable to all times , persons , and circumstances .
OWEN-1813-2,1,52.246

And the most obvious application of them would be to adopt rational
means to remove the temptation to commit crimes , and increase the
difficulties of committing them ; while , at the same time , a proper
direction should be given to the active powers of the individual ; and a
due share provided of uninjurious amusements and recreation .
OWEN-1813-2,1,52.247

Care must also be taken to remove the causes of jealousy , dissensions ,
and irritation ; to introduce sentiments calculated to create union and
confidence among all the members of the community ; OWEN-1813-2,1,52.248

and the whole should be directed by a persevering kindness ,
sufficiently evident to prove that a sincere desire exists to increase ,
and not to diminish , happiness . OWEN-1813-2,1,52.249

These principles , applied to the community at New Lanark , at first
under many of the most discouraging circumstances , but persevered in
for sixteen years , effected a complete change in the general character
of the village , containing upwards of 2,000 inhabitants , and into
which , also , there was a constant influx of newcomers .
OWEN-1813-2,1,52.250

But as the promulgation of new miracles is not for present times , it is
not pretended that under such circumstances one and all are become wise
and good ; or , that they are free from error . OWEN-1813-2,1,52.251

But it may be truly stated , that they now constitute a very improved
society ; that their worst habits are gone , and that their minor ones
will soon disappear under a continuance of the application of the same
principles ; that during the period mentioned , scarcely a legal
punishment has been inflicted , or an application been made for parish
funds by any individual among them . OWEN-1813-2,1,52.252

Drunkenness is not seen in their streets ; OWEN-1813-2,1,52.253

and the children are taught and trained in the institution for forming
their character without any punishment . OWEN-1813-2,1,52.254

The community exhibits the general appearance of industry , temperance ,
comfort , health , and happiness . OWEN-1813-2,1,52.255

These are and ever will be the sure and certain effects of the adoption
of the principles explained ; OWEN-1813-2,1,52.256

and these principles , applied with judgement , will effectually reform
the most vicious community existing , and train the younger part of it
to any character which may be desired ; and that , too , much more
easily on an extended than on a limited scale . OWEN-1813-2,1,52.257

To apply these principles , however , successfully to practice , both a
comprehensive and a minute view must be taken of the existing state of
the society on which they are intended to operate .
OWEN-1813-2,1,52.258

The causes of the most prevalent evils must be accurately traced ,
OWEN-1813-2,1,52.259

and those means which appear the most easy and simple should be
immediately applied to remove them . OWEN-1813-2,1,52.260

In this progress the smallest alteration , adequate to produce any good
effect , should be made at one time ; OWEN-1813-2,1,52.261

indeed , if possible , the change should be so gradual as to be almost
imperceptible , yet always making a permanent advance <P_1,53> in the
desired improvements . OWEN-1813-2,1,53.262

By this procedure the most rapid practical progress will be obtained ,
because the inclination to resistance will be removed , and time will be
given for reason to weaken the force of long-established injurious
prejudices . OWEN-1813-2,1,53.263

The removal of the first evil will prepare the way for the removal of
the second ; OWEN-1813-2,1,53.264

and this facility will increase , not in an arithmetical , but in a
geometrical proportion ; until the directors of the system will
themselves be gratified beyond expression with the beneficial magnitude
of their own proceedings . OWEN-1813-2,1,53.265

Nor while these principles shall be acted upon can there be any
retrogression in this good work ; OWEN-1813-2,1,53.266

for the permanence of the amelioration will be equal to its extent .
OWEN-1813-2,1,53.267

What then remains to prevent such a system from being immediately
adopted into national practice ? OWEN-1813-2,1,53.268

Nothing , surely , but a general destitution of the knowledge of the
practice . OWEN-1813-2,1,53.269

For with the certain means of preventing crimes , can it be supposed
that British legislators , as soon as these means shall be made evident
, will longer withhold them from their fellow subjects ?
OWEN-1813-2,1,53.270

No : I am persuaded that neither prince , ministers , parliament , nor
any party in church or state , will avow inclination to act on
principles of such flagrant injustice . OWEN-1813-2,1,53.271

Have they not on many occasions evinced a sincere and ardent desire to
ameliorate the condition of the subjects of the empire , when
practicable means of amelioration were explained to them , which could
be adopted without risking the safety of the state ?
OWEN-1813-2,1,53.272

For some time to come there can be but one practicable , and therefore
one rational reform , which without danger can be attempted in these
realms ; a reform in which all men and all parties may join - that is ,
a reform in the training and in the management of the poor , the
ignorant , the untaught and untrained , or ill-taught and ill-trained ,
among the whole mass of British population ; OWEN-1813-2,1,53.273

and a plain , simple , practicable plan which would not contain the
<P_1,54> least danger to any individual , or to any part of society ,
may be devised for that purpose . OWEN-1813-2,1,54.274

That plan is a national , well-digested , unexclusive system for the
formation of character and general amelioration of the lower orders .
OWEN-1813-2,1,54.275

On the experience of a life devoted to the subject , I hesitate not to
say , that the members of any community may by degrees be trained to
live <font> without idleness , without poverty , without crime , and
without punishment <$$font> ; OWEN-1813-2,1,54.276

for each of these is the effect of error in the various systems
prevalent throughout the world . OWEN-1813-2,1,54.277

<font> They are all necessary consequences of ignorance . <$$font>
OWEN-1813-2,1,54.278

Train any population rationally , and they will be rational .
OWEN-1813-2,1,54.279

Furnish honest and useful employments to those so trained , and such
employments they will greatly prefer to dishonest or injurious
occupations . OWEN-1813-2,1,54.280

It is beyond all calculation the interest of every government to provide
that training and that employment ; OWEN-1813-2,1,54.281

and to provide both is easily practicable . OWEN-1813-2,1,54.282

The first , as before stated , is to be obtained by a national system
for the formation of character ; the second , by governments preparing a
reserve of employment for the surplus working classes , when the general
demand for labour throughout the country is not equal to the full
occupation of the whole : that employment to be on useful national
objects from which the public may derive advantage equal to the expense
which those works may require . OWEN-1813-2,1,54.283

The national plan for the formation of character should <font> include
<$$font> all the modern improvements of education , without regard to
the system of any one individual ; OWEN-1813-2,1,54.284

and should not <font> exclude <$$font> the child of any one subject in
the empire . OWEN-1813-2,1,54.285

Anything short of this would be an act of intolerance and injustice to
the excluded , and of injury to society , so glaring and manifest , that
I shall be deceived in the character of my countrymen if any of those
who have influence in church and state should now be found willing to
attempt it . OWEN-1813-2,1,54.286

Is it not indeed strikingly evident even to common observers , that any
further effort to enforce religious exclusion would involve the certain
and speedy destruction of the present church establishment , and would
even endanger our civil institutions . OWEN-1813-2,1,54.287

It may be said , however , that ministers and parliament have many other
important subjects under discussion . OWEN-1813-2,1,54.288

This is evidently true ; OWEN-1813-2,1,54.289

but will they not have high national concerns always to engage their
attention ? OWEN-1813-2,1,54.290

And can any question be brought forward of deeper interest to the
community than that which affects the formation of character and the
well-being of every individual within the empire ? A question , too ,
which , when understood , will be found to offer the means of
amelioration to the revenues of these kingdoms , far beyond any
practical plan now likely to be devised . OWEN-1813-2,1,54.291

Yet , important as are considerations of revenue , they must appear
secondary when put in competition with the lives , liberty , and comfort
of our fellow subjects , which are now hourly sacrificed for want of an
<font> effective legislative measure to prevent crime . <$$font>
OWEN-1813-2,1,54.292

And is an act of such vital importance to the well-being of all to be
longer delayed ? OWEN-1813-2,1,54.293

<font> Shall yet another year pass in which crime shall be forced on the
infant , who in ten , twenty , <$$font> <P_1,55> or thirty years hence
shall suffer death for being taught that crime ? OWEN-1813-2,1,55.294

Surely it is impossible . OWEN-1813-2,1,55.295

Should it be so delayed , <font> the individuals of the present
parliament , the legislators of this day , <$$font> ought in strict and
impartial justice to be amenable to the laws for not adopting the means
in their power to prevent the crime ; rather than the poor , untrained ,
and unprotected culprit , whose previous years , if he had language to
describe them , would exhibit a life of unceasing wretchedness , arising
<font> solely <$$font> from the errors of society .
OWEN-1813-2,1,55.296

Much might be added on these momentous subjects , even to make them
evident to the capacities of children : OWEN-1813-2,1,55.297

but for obvious reasons the outlines are merely sketched ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,55.298

and it is hoped these outlines will be sufficient to induce the
well-disposed of all parties cordially to unite in this vital measure
for the preservation of everything dear to society .
OWEN-1813-2,1,55.299

In the next Essay an account will be given of the plans which are in
progress at New Lanark for the further comfort and improvement of its
inhabitants ; and a general <font> practical <$$font> system be
described , by which the same advantages may be gradually introduced
among the poor and working classes throughout the United Kingdom .
OWEN-1813-2,1,55.300

<P_1,56>

Third Essay OWEN-1813-2,1,56.302

<font> The Principles of the Former Essays applied to a Particular
Situation <$$font> OWEN-1813-2,1,56.303

Truth must ultimately prevail over error OWEN-1813-2,1,56.304

<$$heading>

At the conclusion of the Second Essay , a promise was made that an
account should be given of the plans which were in progress at New
Lanark for the further improvement of its inhabitants ; and that a
practical system should be sketched , by which equal advantages might be
generally introduced among the poor and working classes throughout the
United Kingdom . OWEN-1813-2,1,56.306

This account became necessary , in order to exhibit even a limited view
of the principles on which the plans of the author are founded , and to
recommend them generally to practice . OWEN-1813-2,1,56.307

That which has been hitherto done for the community at New Lanark , as
described in the Second Essay , has chiefly consisted in <font>
withdrawing some of those circumstances which tended to generate ,
continue , or increase early bad habits ; that is to say , undoing that
which society had from ignorance permitted to be done . <$$font>
OWEN-1813-2,1,56.308

To effect this , however , was a far more difficult task than to train
up a child from infancy in the way he should go ; OWEN-1813-2,1,56.309

for that is the most easy process for the formation of character ; while
to unlearn and to change long acquired habits is a proceeding directly
opposed to the most tenacious feelings of human nature .
OWEN-1813-2,1,56.310

Nevertheless , the proper application steadily pursued did effect
beneficial changes on these old habits , even beyond the most sanguine
expectations of the party by whom the task was undertaken .
OWEN-1813-2,1,56.311

The principles were driven from the study of human nature itself
OWEN-1813-2,1,56.312

and they could not fail of success . OWEN-1813-2,1,56.313

Still , however , very little , comparatively speaking , had been done
for them . OWEN-1813-2,1,56.314

They had not been taught the most valuable domestic and social habits :
such as the most economical method of preparing food ; how to arrange
their dwellings with neatness , and to keep them always clean and in
order ; OWEN-1813-2,1,56.315

but , what was of infinitely more importance , they had not been
instructed how to train their children to form them into valuable
members of the community , or to know that principles existed , which ,
when properly applied to practice from infancy , would ensure from man
to man , without chance of failure , a just , open , sincere , and
benevolent conduct . OWEN-1813-2,1,56.316

It was in this stage of the progress of improvement , that it became
necessary to form arrangements for surrounding them with circumstances
which should gradually prepare the individuals to receive and firmly
retain those domestic <P_1,57> and social acquirements and habits .
OWEN-1813-2,1,57.317

For this purpose a building , which may be termed the ' new institution
' , was erected in the centre of the establishment , with an enclosed
area before it . OWEN-1813-2,1,57.318

The area is intended for a playground for the children of the villagers
, from the time they can walk alone until they enter the school .
OWEN-1813-2,1,57.319

It must be evident to those who have been in the practice of observing
children with attention , that much of good or evil is taught to or
acquired by a child at a very early period of its life ; that much of
temper or disposition is correctly or incorrectly formed before he
attains his second year ; and that many durable impressions are made at
the termination of the first twelve or even six months of his existence
. OWEN-1813-2,1,57.320

The children , therefore , of the uninstructed and ill-instructed ,
suffer material injury in the formation of their characters during these
and the subsequent years of childhood and of youth .
OWEN-1813-2,1,57.321

It was to prevent , or as much as possible to counteract , these primary
evils , to which the poor and working classes are exposed when infants ,
that the area became part of the New Institution . OWEN-1813-2,1,57.322

Into this playground the children are to be received as soon as they can
freely walk alone ; to be superintended by persons instructed to take
charge of them . OWEN-1813-2,1,57.323

As the happiness of man chiefly , if not altogether , depends on his own
sentiments and habits , as well as those of the individuals around him ;
and as any sentiments and habits may be given to all infants , it
becomes of primary importance that those alone should be given to them
which can contribute to their happiness . OWEN-1813-2,1,57.324

Each child , therefore , on his entrance into the playground , is to be
told in language which he can understand , that ' he is never to injure
his playfellows ; but that , on the contrary , he is to contribute all
in his power to make them happy . ' OWEN-1813-2,1,57.325

This simple precept , when comprehended in all its bearings , and the
habits which will arise from its early adoption into practice , <font>
if no counteracting principle be forced upon the young mind <$$font> ,
will effectually supersede all the errors which have hitherto kept the
world in ignorance and misery . OWEN-1813-2,1,57.326

So simple a precept , too , will be easily taught , and as easily
acquired ; OWEN-1813-2,1,57.327

for the chief employment of the superintendents will be to prevent any
deviation from it in practice . OWEN-1813-2,1,57.328

The older children , when they shall have experienced the endless
advantages from acting on this principle , will , by their example ,
soon enforce the practice of it on the young strangers :
OWEN-1813-2,1,57.329

and the happiness , which the little groups will enjoy from this
rational conduct , will ensure its speedy and general and willing
adoption . OWEN-1813-2,1,57.330

The habit also which they will acquire at this early period of life by
continually acting on the principle , will fix it firmly ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,57.331

it will become easy and familiar to them , or , as it is often termed ,
natural . OWEN-1813-2,1,57.332

Thus , by merely attending to the evidence of our senses respecting
human nature , and disregarding the wild , inconsistent , and absurd
theories in which man has been hitherto trained in all parts of the
earth , we shall accomplish with ease and certainty the supposed
Herculean labour of forming a rational <P_1,58> character in man , and
that , too , chiefly before the child commences the ordinary course of
education . OWEN-1813-2,1,58.333

The character thus early formed will be as durable as it will be
advantageous to the individual and to the community ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,58.334

for by the constitution of our nature , when once the mind fully
understands that which is true , the impression of that truth can@ @not
be erased except by mental disease or death ; while error must be
relinquished at every period of life , whenever it can be made manifest
to the mind in which it has been received . OWEN-1813-2,1,58.335

This part of the arrangement , therefore , will effect the following
purposes : OWEN-1813-2,1,58.336

The child will be removed , so far as is at present practicable , from
the erroneous treatment of the yet untrained and untaught parents .
OWEN-1813-2,1,58.337

The parents will be relieved from the loss of time and from the care and
anxiety which are now occasioned by attendance on their children from
the period when they can go alone to that at which they enter the school
. OWEN-1813-2,1,58.338

The child will be placed in a situation of safety , where , with its
future schoolfellows and companions , it will acquire the best habits
and principles , while at mealtimes and at night it will return to the
caresses of its parents ; OWEN-1813-2,1,58.339

and the affections of each are likely to be increased by the separation
. OWEN-1813-2,1,58.340

The area is also to be a place of meeting for the children from five to
ten years of age , previous to and after school-hours , and to serve for
a drill-ground , the object of which will be hereafter explained ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,58.341

and a shade will be formed , under which in stormy weather the children
may retire for shelter . OWEN-1813-2,1,58.342

These are the important purposes to which a playground attached to a
school may be applied . OWEN-1813-2,1,58.343

<P_1,59>

Those who have derived a knowledge of human nature from observation know
that man in every situation requires relaxation from his constant and
regular occupations , whatever they be : and that if he shall not be
provided with or permitted to enjoy innocent and uninjurious amusements
, he must and will partake of those which he can obtain , to give him
temporary relief from his exertions , although the means of gaining that
relief should be most pernicious . OWEN-1813-2,1,59.345

For man , irrationally instructed , is ever influenced far more by
immediate feelings than by remote considerations . OWEN-1813-2,1,59.346

Those , then , who desire to give mankind the character which it would
be for the happiness of all that they should possess , will not fail to
make careful provision for their amusement and recreation .
OWEN-1813-2,1,59.347

The Sabbath was originally so intended . OWEN-1813-2,1,59.348

It was instituted to be a day of universal enjoyment and happiness to
the human race . OWEN-1813-2,1,59.349

It is frequently made , however , from the opposite extremes of error ,
either a day of superstitious gloom and tyranny over the mind , or of
the most destructive intemperance and licentiousness .
OWEN-1813-2,1,59.350

The one of these has been the cause of the other ; the latter the
certain and natural consequence of the former . OWEN-1813-2,1,59.351

Relieve the human mind from useless and superstitious restraints ; train
it on those principles which facts , ascertained from the first
knowledge of time to this day , demonstrate to be the only principles
which are true ; and intemperance and licentiousness will not exist ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,59.352

for such conduct in itself is neither the immediate nor the future
interest of man ; OWEN-1813-2,1,59.353

and he is ever governed by one or other of these considerations ,
according to the habits which have been given to him from infancy .
OWEN-1813-2,1,59.354

The Sabbath , in many parts of Scotland , is not a day of innocent and
cheerful recreation to the labouring man ; OWEN-1813-2,1,59.355

nor can those who are confined all the week to sedentary occupations ,
freely partake , without censure , of the air and exercise to which
nature invites them , and which their health demands .
OWEN-1813-2,1,59.356

The errors of the times of superstition and bigotry still hold some sway
, OWEN-1813-2,1,59.357

and compel those who wish to preserve a regard to their respectability
in society , to an overstrained demeanour ; OWEN-1813-2,1,59.358

and this demeanour sometimes degenerates into hypocrisy ,
OWEN-1813-2,1,59.359

and is often the cause of great inconsistency . OWEN-1813-2,1,59.360

It is destructive of every open , honest , generous , and manly feeling
. OWEN-1813-2,1,59.361

It disgusts many , OWEN-1813-2,1,59.362

and drives them to the opposite extreme . OWEN-1813-2,1,59.363

It is sometimes the cause of insanity . OWEN-1813-2,1,59.364

It is founded on ignorance , OWEN-1813-2,1,59.365

and defeats its own object . OWEN-1813-2,1,59.366

While erroneous customs prevail in any country , it would evince an
ignorance of human nature in any individual to offend against them ,
until he has convinced the community of their error .
OWEN-1813-2,1,59.367

<P_1,60>

To counteract , in some degree , the inconvenience which arose from the
misapplication of the Sabbath , it became necessary to introduce on the
other days of the week some innocent amusement and recreation for those
whose labours were unceasing , and in winter almost uniform .
OWEN-1813-2,1,60.369

In summer , the inhabitants of the village of New Lanark have their
gardens and potato grounds to cultivate ; OWEN-1813-2,1,60.370

they have walks laid out to give them health and the habit of being
gratified with the ever-@ @changing scenes of nature -
OWEN-1813-2,1,60.371

for those scenes afford not only the most economical , but also the most
innocent pleasures which man can enjoy ; OWEN-1813-2,1,60.372

and all men may be easily trained to enjoy them . OWEN-1813-2,1,60.373

In winter the community are deprived of these healthy occupations and
amusements ; OWEN-1813-2,1,60.374

they are employed ten hours and three-quarters every day in the week ,
except Sunday , OWEN-1813-2,1,60.375

and generally every individual continues during that time at the same
work : OWEN-1813-2,1,60.376

and experience has shown that the average health and spirits of the
community are several degrees lower in winter than in summer ;
OWEN-1813-2,1,60.377

and this in part may be fairly attributed to that cause .
OWEN-1813-2,1,60.378

These considerations suggested the necessity of rooms for innocent
amusements and rational recreation . OWEN-1813-2,1,60.379

Many well-intentioned individuals , unaccustomed to witness the conduct
of those among the lower orders who have been rationally treated and
trained , may fancy such an assemblage will necessarily become a scene
of confusion and disorder ; instead of which , however , it proceeds
with uniform propriety ; it is highly favourable to the health , spirits
, and dispositions of the individuals so engaged ; and if any
irregularity should arise , the cause will be solely owing to the
parties who attempt to direct the proceedings being deficient in a
practical knowledge of human nature . OWEN-1813-2,1,60.380

It has been and ever will be found far more easy to lead mankind to
virtue , or to rational conduct , by providing them with well-regulated
innocent amusements and recreations , than by forcing them to submit to
useless restraints , which tend only to create disgust , and often to
connect such feelings even with that which is excellent in itself ,
merely because it has been judiciously associated .
OWEN-1813-2,1,60.381

Hitherto , indeed , in all ages and in all countries , man seems to have
blindly <P_1,61> conspired against the happiness of man , and to have
remained as ignorant of himself as he was of the solar system prior to
the days of Copernicus and Galileo . OWEN-1813-2,1,61.382

Many of the learned and wise among our ancestors were conscious of this
ignorance , OWEN-1813-2,1,61.383

and deeply lamented its effects ; OWEN-1813-2,1,61.384

and some of them recommended the partial adoption of those principles
which can alone relieve the world from the miserable effects of
ignorance . OWEN-1813-2,1,61.385

The time , however , for the emancipation of the human mind had not then
arrived : OWEN-1813-2,1,61.386

the world was not prepared to receive it . OWEN-1813-2,1,61.387

The history of humanity shows it to be an undeviating law of nature ,
that man shall not prematurely break the shell of ignorance ; that he
must patiently wait until the principle of knowledge has pervaded the
whole mass of the interior , to give it life and strength sufficient to
bear the light of day . OWEN-1813-2,1,61.388

Those who have duly reflected on the nature and extent of the mental
movements of the world for the last half-century , must be conscious
that great changes are in progress ; that man is about to advance
another important step towards that degree of intelligence which his
natural powers seem capable of attaining . OWEN-1813-2,1,61.389

Observe the transactions of the passing hours ; OWEN-1813-2,1,61.390

see the whole mass of mind in full motion ; OWEN-1813-2,1,61.391

behold it momentarily increasing in vigour , and preparing ere long to
burst its confinement . OWEN-1813-2,1,61.392

But what is to be the nature of this change ? OWEN-1813-2,1,61.393

A due attention to the facts around us , and to those transmitted by the
invention of printing from former ages , will afford a satisfactory
reply . OWEN-1813-2,1,61.394

