<BEGIN_owen-1847-2>

<P_26>

<heading>

Section II . OWEN-1847-2,26.4

The great Advantages of Education - To the World - To Distinct Nations -
OWEN-1847-2,26.5

The want of it the cause of Irish and Spanish Misery - OWEN-1847-2,26.6

Possessing it will tend to Prosperity , as in Ancient History and in the
case of Great Britain - OWEN-1847-2,26.7

Our present Ministry Educational - OWEN-1847-2,26.8

The successful Ministerial Measure on the Subject - OWEN-1847-2,26.9

An Hypothetical Address to the Premier - OWEN-1847-2,26.10

The late Struggle for Education - OWEN-1847-2,26.11

The happy effects of such a Boon on Britannia . OWEN-1847-2,26.12

<$$heading>

Here the advantages of Education come very naturally under our notice ,
which in reality are endless , boundless , and unspeakable ,
OWEN-1847-2,26.14

therefore we must not profess to exhaust the subject .
OWEN-1847-2,26.15

Indeed , were we to trace them all , even in connexion with the
individual man , the enumeration would far exceed the limits of a
lecture , OWEN-1847-2,26.16

and would burst the boundaries of our present exercise .
OWEN-1847-2,26.17

But were they traced in a national light , or what would be still more
overwhelming , in a mundane point of view , surely then their number
would emphatically become endless , their dimensions boundless , and
their value utterly unspeakable . OWEN-1847-2,26.18

Suppose now we were to glance very briefly at some of the advantages
accruing from education , to the world at large . OWEN-1847-2,26.19

Although a mere hasty <P_27> glance at them , we must confess , will not
be sufficient to cause one to form an adequate opinion of them , yet on
such fortuitous means , that circumstance must at present depend ; as we
must make but a few summary statements on the subject , rather than give
a full illustration or an essay upon it . OWEN-1847-2,27.20

Hence we would observe , that Education has already dispelled rather
extensively , under the blessing of the Most High , the dense moral
darkness that brooded for ages on the bosom of society .
OWEN-1847-2,27.21

It has , in a happy degree , removed despotism from many a continent ,
and barbarianism from many an island . OWEN-1847-2,27.22

It has in no small measure originated undisturbed amity between nations
and nations , and successfully suppressed grim cruelties in many an
empire . OWEN-1847-2,27.23

It has covered a goodly portion of our world's surface with the bloom of
paradise , and much of its moral aspect under the influence of heaven
and the gospel , with civilization , Christianity , and piety .
OWEN-1847-2,27.24

And we are looking forward , hopefully , to a period when education ,
having Christianity for its animus , and God for its object , will have
restored our world to a state superior , comparatively speaking , to
that of primeval innocency , over the bosom of which the freshest
breezes of creation sweetly breathed , while the loveliest dominion of
spiritual tranquillity , at the same time , extended its hallowing
influence , and its elevating and life-giving power . OWEN-1847-2,27.25

<P_28>

Next , the advantages of education are great in a national point of view
. OWEN-1847-2,28.27

It is hardly necessary to depict , by way of contrast , the depressing
disadvantages of ignorance ; and the derogating effects of it on the
feelings , life and character of a nation . OWEN-1847-2,28.28

No one with his eyes open can less than deeply deplore the unhappy case
of our sister isle , with the broils , and riots , and murders which ,
like volcanoes in nature , frequently heave and disturb the bosom of
society there ; then the squalid poverty , the oppressed condition , and
the abject servility which characterize her people . OWEN-1847-2,28.29

Now , viewing this band of evils , one is ready to ask what can conjure
from the pandemonium of the nether world such a group of imps to teaze ,
and trouble , and torment the unlucky inhabitants of Hibernia ?
OWEN-1847-2,28.30

The only answer is , that this necromancer can be none other than the
deep-seated ignorance that portentously broods over the minds of the
common people ; OWEN-1847-2,28.31

remove that , and we shall hear of none of these . OWEN-1847-2,28.32

Educate the Irish mind , and that nation will become as fair , mentally
, as their emerald isle is fertile ; OWEN-1847-2,28.33

and they will have no need of yielding the laurel to any superior as to
intellect , bold , energetic , penetrating , logical , philosophical ,
and even eloquent in the extreme , as fully demonstrated in many
isolated cases . OWEN-1847-2,28.34

And surely , had it not been for this gloomy ban of ignorance that
<P_29> beclouds that sea-girt spot , that nation might be standing forth
in bold relief before the world , instead of being the by-word of
everybody , and a proverb in every one's mouth . OWEN-1847-2,29.35

We may multiply these dark colours , and throw more gloom into the
back-ground {COM:sic} of our picture still , OWEN-1847-2,29.36

for the disadvantages arising from ignorance are very prolific , such as
anarchy , intestine wars , and political massacres , the gory block ,
and gloomy guillotine , a love for the stiletto , the bayonet , and the
sword , and a friendship with the midnight assassin , the grinning knave
, and the incarnation of demons , as in the doleful case of unfortunate
Spain , as well indeed as other countries over which are spread the
baneful wings of the apocalyptic dragon , under whose dark shadow below
grows the rankest deadly nightshade , mentally , morally , and
spiritually speaking , that can be found in the most arrant swamps of
our fallen world . OWEN-1847-2,29.37

But these disadvantages embody themselves in other and very different
forms in England , such as domestic feuds , imprudent demeanour , and
sordid avarice , individual misery , family indigence , and a Union
residence , crime of every grade , both against divine and human laws ;
then correction houses , prisons , the gallows , and the gibbet .
OWEN-1847-2,29.38

These are the revolting embodiments of ignorance among us , all arising
from the want of reflection and <P_30> knowledge . OWEN-1847-2,30.39

And as man is a reflective being , and knowledge a reflective element ,
hence the affinity between them is undeniable , OWEN-1847-2,30.40

and the combination of both would go a good way towards the total
suppression of evil . OWEN-1847-2,30.41

And now Education effects this twofold desideratum , viz. , the union
between man and mental nutriment , knowledge , and the partial , if not
the total , annihilation of evil ; OWEN-1847-2,30.42

and this leads us at once to the heart of our topic . The incalculable
advantages arising from Education in a national point of view .
OWEN-1847-2,30.43

Here we might reason thus : that if Education will prove the means of
suppressing in any degree , and removing ignorance , which is a certain
and prolific source of individual , and national misery ; and if it be
the happy medium whereby man may rise from degradation to honour , and
nations ascend to the height of prosperity , political
{COM:missing_comma} commercial , moral and religious , who would attempt
to price it or determine its worth ? OWEN-1847-2,30.44

Why , as a boon , it outvalues all earthly treasures , OWEN-1847-2,30.45

and , as a privilege , it defies , by the innumerable benefits it
confers , our utmost powers of computation . OWEN-1847-2,30.46

Now , these national advantages , yielded by the possession of knowledge
, may be substantiated both by history and experience .
OWEN-1847-2,30.47

History points us directly to Greece in the zenith of her grandeur , and
to ancient Rome , when , on the very summit of <P_31> worldly pomp and
power ; OWEN-1847-2,31.48

and should any one , while looking at these imposing displays of
national magnificence , feel disposed to ask , What could have invested
those ancient dynasties with so much imperial and regal greatness , and
cause such an aurora of majesty to follow them in their train , the
answer is furnished by the same pen that transmitted down to us their
illustrious fame , OWEN-1847-2,31.49

and it was this propitious circumstance - paying due attention to early
training , or imbuing the minds of the young with great principles , or
forming a right estimate of the diffusion of knowledge , or cherishing
extensively the love of science ; or , in short , countenancing national
Education . OWEN-1847-2,31.50

But , as soon as this was lost sight of , they were arrested with decay
. OWEN-1847-2,31.51

The halo of their glory past away like a midnight vision ,
OWEN-1847-2,31.52

and the rust of time corroded their power and possessions together ,
OWEN-1847-2,31.53

and crumbled both into antiquated dust . OWEN-1847-2,31.54

We have no need of drawing very copiously on this subject from ancient
history , as modern times may supply us with superior materials and more
convincing proofs , even were we to confine our attention to our own
empire , and ask , What has raised England to the surprising height of
glory where we find her at present , and what has given her the
overwhelming influence she possesses over the known world ?
OWEN-1847-2,31.55

Is all this attributable to her <P_32> ignorance , or knowledge ; to the
prowess of her arms , or the mighty power of information ?
OWEN-1847-2,32.56

Who would assign it either to ignorance or to the unchristian valour of
the battle-field {COM:sic} ? OWEN-1847-2,32.57

surely none that had any acumen whatever , and that were able to discern
a little beyond the flying clouds . OWEN-1847-2,32.58

No ; but the man of wisdom ascribes the honour , under God and religion
, to intellectual culture . OWEN-1847-2,32.59

He places , though cautiously , the tribute of praise on the altar of
knowledge , while he leaves the diadem of glory to rest on the head of
education . OWEN-1847-2,32.60

We speak , be it remembered , of second causes in this great exaltation
. OWEN-1847-2,32.61

We would exclaim , were it necessary , with our loudest voice , that the
praise is primarily due to the God of nations , even our spiritual
Israel's God . OWEN-1847-2,32.62

He being the source of the blessing , the glory is His .
OWEN-1847-2,32.63

And we would acknowledge yet one second cause before we come to this
under our notice , namely , Religion . OWEN-1847-2,32.64

As it is said in the book of truth , " Righteousness exalteth a nation ,
OWEN-1847-2,32.65

but sin is a reproach to any people . " OWEN-1847-2,32.66

But let us pursue our inquiry further , and ask , Wherein does England's
greatness consist ? OWEN-1847-2,32.67

The real answer is , in her knowledge , tempered by Christianity ; or
which would be a synonymous phrase , in her Education , perfumed with
Emmanuel's religion . OWEN-1847-2,32.68

And it may be distinctly asserted , that <P_33> knowledge apart from the
appendage we have given it , would be but an inglorious possession after
all , and a very doubtful boon ; so much so , that even with it , the
greatness of a nation would be entirely enfeebled , and that nation
possessing it would very soon run headlong to the brink of ruin , as
infidel France did within the memory of man . OWEN-1847-2,33.69

And we may add , moreover , that any people possessing knowledge
separate from an acknowledgment of their responsibility to God , that
knowledge would necessarily become the means of contracting the mind
instead of expanding it ; of shrivelling up the intellect , instead of
unfolding it . OWEN-1847-2,33.70

Yea , the people that were under such a heavy interdiction , would
spontaneously become morose and insufferable , ambitious and despotic ;
a plague to themselves and a torment to their neighbours , instead of
being amiable , tolerant , noble , loyal , liberal , and happy , as
would be , and literally is , the effect of Christianized knowledge .
OWEN-1847-2,33.71

Yes , history and experience would bear their ample testimonies to this
point , that this invaluable blessing is always liberal , and promotive
of individual , social , and national weal . OWEN-1847-2,33.72

Indeed the more genuine religion is blended with our knowledge , the
more kind and munificent and considerate it proves to be , and the less
selfish and oppressive to others . OWEN-1847-2,33.73

We may , in fact , find an instance at <P_34> hand to establish our
point , namely , our present ex-Premier of England , Sir R. Peel .
OWEN-1847-2,34.74

When he was found on his knees , placing the weighty affairs of the
Government at the feet of the great Governor of the universe , his late
ministry , unexpectedly as well as unprecedentedly , yielded us an
armful of blessings . OWEN-1847-2,34.75

And such conversions ensued from aristocratic contractions to liberalism
, that were all the folios of all the multitudinous histories of nations
examined through and through , it would be found a novel and an
unparalleled case . OWEN-1847-2,34.76

But to pursue the line of our argumentation , we might subjoin , that
the more symptoms of piety we hear of in our state councils , the better
enactments we may expect . OWEN-1847-2,34.77

The more the spirit of prayer is possessed by our Prime Ministers , the
more liberal will their measures always be . OWEN-1847-2,34.78

Yes , and we may still further aver , that the more the elements of
England's greatness are perfumed by Christianity , the longer and the
safer she will remain on the high pinnacle of glory to which she has
pre-eminently attained . OWEN-1847-2,34.79

We can@ @not leave this subject , however , without adverting very
briefly to our present auspicious ministry ; auspicious , especially as
the animus of it seems to be the subject under notice , Education .
OWEN-1847-2,34.80

In short , this appears to be the theme of other Governments besides
that of England . OWEN-1847-2,34.81

Even <P_35> the most despotic known in the nineteenth century , namely ,
the Ottoman Government , has been of late courting the smiles of
knowledge , and even enacting a law to establish schools for education
throughout its borders . OWEN-1847-2,35.82

Surely this must be viewed as really propitious , and as foreboding well
for future generations . OWEN-1847-2,35.83

Indeed , were we to take under our revision the proceedings of all the
European powers , we would find that they all , without an exception ,
virtually and increasingly concede that knowledge is power .
OWEN-1847-2,35.84

That man will live more in unison with the dignity of his character ,
enlighted than otherwise ; OWEN-1847-2,35.85

and that society is much more manageable , educated than rude ;
OWEN-1847-2,35.86

and every principle of wisdom as well as every experiment tried , will
justify the concession more and more . OWEN-1847-2,35.87

But to our subject . OWEN-1847-2,35.88

We have at length a cabinet in England , which promises fair to deal
properly with our topic ; a task which is , notwithstanding , no less
complicated than arduous , as it has been candidly and nobly confessed
by our present Premier , and as all , on due consideration , will
readily admit ; OWEN-1847-2,35.89

for there are , in these days , very many keen and vigilant eyes wide
open , OWEN-1847-2,35.90

and the wise would not on any consideration , advise them to be closed ,
nor to slumber , nor blink ; but to be awake and remain jealously
watchful ; OWEN-1847-2,35.91

we mean , of course , <P_36> holy jealousy , lest religious liberty be
infringed , and conscience should be shackled - lest the march of
intellect should be fettered , the wings of knowledge clipped , and the
flight of this restoring angel impeded ; OWEN-1847-2,36.92

and surely in this delusive world , watchfulness is no crime ,
OWEN-1847-2,36.93

nay , verily , it is in every sense commendable . OWEN-1847-2,36.94

However , this might be said ; OWEN-1847-2,36.95

the speeches of the cabinet members , as well as those of their noble
leader , Lord John Russell , delivered on the various hustings at their
re-elections , certainly breathed the finest spirit , OWEN-1847-2,36.96

and viewing them with a metaphorical eye , we might observe that they
were truly covered with an exceedingly fine blossom , which really
indicated an abundant crop . OWEN-1847-2,36.97

But lo ! the derogating thought is this : OWEN-1847-2,36.98

the blossom of fruit trees is subjected to so many contingencies ,
OWEN-1847-2,36.99

and there is oftentimes a great disparity between spring appearances and
harvest gleanings . OWEN-1847-2,36.100

But yet hope loves to linger among the flowers , OWEN-1847-2,36.101

and the passers_by are pleased with the appearance of fine blossom .
OWEN-1847-2,36.102

Again : the speeches at the debate in the House of Commons , on the 17th
of last July , when the vote of one_hundred_thousand pounds was past for
educational purposes , were not unworthy of their predecessors .
OWEN-1847-2,36.103

They did not abate the expectations raised and warranted on the subject
<P_37> before us , OWEN-1847-2,37.104

nor did they bring any chilly breezes and biting frost with them , to
nip the fine blossom that in the early spring of the ministry appeared
so promising and so fair , OWEN-1847-2,37.105

yet as to the sum voted , it was , although handsome , the veriest
trifle after all , in comparison with the advantages accruing to the
nation and the world , from the advancement of knowledge , and the
progress of Education . OWEN-1847-2,37.106

The real patriot's heart thrills with joy , when it ascertains that the
present Prime Minister of England is intently and diligently engaged in
maturing a bill of legislation on the difficult , delicate , and
momentous subject of national Education ; OWEN-1847-2,37.107

and who would not wish him wisdom and judgment commensurate with his
magnificent enterprise . OWEN-1847-2,37.108

It is well that his Lordship has entered upon his work under the full
conviction of its overwhelming weight , and its attendant difficulties .
And that he knows the almost insurmountable obstacles that lie in his
way . OWEN-1847-2,37.109

Although such impressions , under most other circumstances might prove
detrimental , yet no doubt , in this case , they will answer some very
salutary ends . OWEN-1847-2,37.110

They will tend to modify thoughts , to perfect arrangements , to warn
against dangers , and to suggest the absolute necessity of avoiding
religious sectarianism . OWEN-1847-2,37.111

They will tend also to prescribe to his Lordship the necessity of
placing the work intended to be done , not in the <P_38> hands of
political parasites , nor in those of religious sycophants , but in the
hands of men who are wise of heart , judicious , and of good
intellectual culture - men worthy of the stirring days in which we live
- selected and appointed to the office perfectly irrespective of this or
that , religious party . OWEN-1847-2,38.112

Then there will be some hopes for our happy land , OWEN-1847-2,38.113

and England will stand forth before future ages , as a monument of self
improvement , as an empress of intelligence , and as the gem of the
world . OWEN-1847-2,38.114

We anxiously and sincerely hope , that the expected political offspring
will really be a fair , full , and perfect child , worthy of the
ancestorial principles of its parent , having its constitution well
tempered with strong patriotic and philanthropic sentiments ; its form
and features full of benevolence to the nation , belonging unequivocally
to the Bedford family , OWEN-1847-2,38.115

and after it is born , we hope that it shall have for its play-ground
{COM:sic} , for the purpose of keeping supple its limbs and loins , by
good exercise , the broad ichnography of benefiting the nation .
OWEN-1847-2,38.116

These , and some additional qualifications would guarantee to it a warm
welcome into the bosom of a grateful people , as well as insure it the
continuous homage of a smiling empire . OWEN-1847-2,38.117

But if it will favour in any way , that shrivelled , withering urchin
that was obtruded to public notice by a <P_39> certain baronet , we can
, without any effort , predict its fate - that it will be strangled in
the birth - that it will be benighted before it shall see the light of
day - and that it will be lost for ever in the fogs and clouds of an
oblivious opposition . OWEN-1847-2,39.118

Now , to avert this predicted catastrophe {TEXT:catastrophy} , and to
ensure the opposite result , we would wish it were possible for our
voice to reach our noble Premier in his elevated position and office .
OWEN-1847-2,39.119

In such a case , we would say to him in the humblest tone of kindness
and of counsel , let your Lordship's presumptive bill , by all means ,
be founded on the broad basis of national mental improvement ;
OWEN-1847-2,39.120

let its liberal and enlightened principles boldly meet the wants of the
times ; OWEN-1847-2,39.121

let it prescribe Education unprejudiced to religion , leaving the
strictly religious education for its appropriate times and places , and
have no recourse whatever to creeds and catechisms , as they are the
appendages of religious sects and parties ; OWEN-1847-2,39.122

and besides , let it appoint no work to be done by sectarian hands ,
OWEN-1847-2,39.123

for such a proviso would convert it from being a boon into a ban ,
OWEN-1847-2,39.124

for we have a crumbling monument of the force of this assertion in that
magnificent failure of parochial education , a system that has borne the
misnomer of national schools . OWEN-1847-2,39.125

And this has been blighted with a withering mildew , we apprehend ,
simply because it gave a wrong bias to the mind , <P_40> not only of the
rising race , but to that of the spiritual officer : he minding to
improve the fleece instead of the flock . OWEN-1847-2,40.126

Why , a New Testament bishop ought to give his whole attention to the
cure of souls , OWEN-1847-2,40.127

and a New Testament minister should give himself , according to
apostolic rule , continually to prayer , and to the ministry of the word
, leaving the ministers of state to pursue their state affairs , and
intellectual cultivators to the work of disciplining the young mind .
OWEN-1847-2,40.128

But let the man of God stand on the eminency of his own office , and in
the prerogative of his divine commission , and by the light of heaven ,
OWEN-1847-2,40.129

and in the strength of inspiration , let him point the nation to the
cross , to the atonement , to heaven , and to God . OWEN-1847-2,40.130

In this manner , my Lord , every man shall be at his own work ,
especially as we know that there is work for every one to do .
OWEN-1847-2,40.131

We have had hitherto too much wrangling with reference to this question
- Education - for much work to have been executed ; some disputing the
way it ought to be done , and others the persons by whom .
OWEN-1847-2,40.132

And the ultimatum just amounts to this - the work still remains undone ,
with one honourable exception , namely , the British and Foreign School
system , which , by the bye , would be a splendid model , that would
work well , empowered with legislative influence and government <P_41>
exchequer . OWEN-1847-2,41.133

However , we really trust that at length the time is arrived when
something shall be effected . And when those that have combativeness
rather protuberant in connexion with their intellect , will have that
organ soothed down to a quiescent state , by having no objection to the
measure . OWEN-1847-2,41.134

Hence we anxiously hope , and it is not a solitary wish , that your
Lordship , in the spirit of Lycurgus , the Spartan lawgiver , will now ,
in earnest , view the rising race as the hope of England , and the young
as the germ of future generations . OWEN-1847-2,41.135

And like Agesilaus , the king of Sparta , you will not deem it
irrelevant {TEXT:irrevelant} , nor beneath your exalted rank or supreme
office , to propound regulations for the education of the young , or ,
in other words , regulations for emancipating the nation from the worst
of slavery - ignorance - regulations for indirectly , but certainly ,
healing the woes and relieving the wants of our population - and
regulations for raising the English character into a state of
intellectual wealth and majesty , that will reflect imperishable honours
, on your family , ministry , and the whole empire . OWEN-1847-2,41.136

Indeed , the age in which we live has invested the subject under
contemplation with that magnificence and unspeakable utility , that many
are looking aghast at their former unaccountable blindness .
OWEN-1847-2,41.137

In short , there is something transcendently mysterious in the <P_42>
times and in the confluence , or rather in the rush , of circumstances ,
which are continually forcing this overwhelming subject before the
public mind ; which must be regarded in the esteem of any enlightened
intellect as a portentous indication of the nigh approach of a most
momentous era , an era of which education seems to be the only efficient
forerunner . OWEN-1847-2,42.138

And in whatever light we look at this harbinger , it flushes apparently
with evidences of the most convincing character that it is the very
panacea we want for the removal of all the miseries of England , with
the addition of one ingredient perhaps , which is , though not at human
disposal , yet subjected to human importunity , namely , godliness .
OWEN-1847-2,42.139

Accompanied with this , education dealt out to the people by a proper
measure , without the intricacies of law and the intrigues of officials
, nay without any reserve or partiality , would make the mists of
ignorance , with all their accompaniments , to vanish from the mental
atmosphere , just like vapours dissolve before the warmth of solar beams
. OWEN-1847-2,42.140

And the consequence shall be that Britannia shall have reared
intellectually her majestic form amid surrounding powers and monarchies
, just as her prototype naturally does amid the ocean waves and rocks
and scenes . OWEN-1847-2,42.141

And then , with all the blandness of education and Christian benignity ,
she will hand , as her custom is , to her <P_43> neighbours all around
the sovereign balm that healed her wounds , the soothing cordial that
mitigated her woes , and the enriching boon that elevated her in the
scale of nations . OWEN-1847-2,43.142

With these impressions upon our mind we would say to all the young , in
an especial manner , bend now all your mental energies to the
acquisition and accumulation of substantial knowledge .
OWEN-1847-2,43.143

Let those that may be under educational training of any kind have their
minds duly impressed with this fact , that their present time might be
deemed as their golden days ; and if negligence in any measure should be
now shown , while gathering the golden ore of information , their future
may lawfully be interspersed with more or less mental poverty .
OWEN-1847-2,43.144

Indeed , many a sage , whether sciential or divine , has frequently in
after life to drawl over his chapters of lamentations on account of ever
squandering any of his educational days in idle play and vain drollery .
OWEN-1847-2,43.145

Those days appointed for the cultivation of the mind , and for laying a
good foundation for mature thinking , ought never to be vacantly thrown
away . OWEN-1847-2,43.146

But they should be cherished , nourished , and improved .
OWEN-1847-2,43.147

They should be wisely spent , judiciously managed , and prudently
conducted to a right end . OWEN-1847-2,43.148

Yes , they should be husbanded as the germ of the future , as the bud of
prosperity , and as the hope of riper years . OWEN-1847-2,43.149

<P_44>

Hence we would say even to the child in the nursery , or to the youth in
his academic walks , or to the student in his collegiate capacity - nay
, we would say to all , " Wisdom is the principal thing :
OWEN-1847-2,44.151

therefore , get wisdom ; OWEN-1847-2,44.152

and with all your getting get understanding . {COM:missing_close_quote}
OWEN-1847-2,44.153

Would that education were properly appreciated , and the supreme value
of an enlightened understanding were fully admitted by all ,
OWEN-1847-2,44.154

then private culture , as well as public instruction , would march in
concert with the progress of the times ; OWEN-1847-2,44.155

parents would willingly give their children knowledge , and eagerly seek
the crystal streams themselves ; OWEN-1847-2,44.156

and there would be an ingenuous acknowledgement very generally current
that education is a greater boon by far than it has been commonly deemed
, as it is a proper inlet to an ocean of intelligence , a distinctive
avenue to extensive improvement , and the high road to mental dignity .
OWEN-1847-2,44.157

As an accompaniment to human existence also , it has no need of yielding
to any in importance , in worth , in magnitude , and utility .
OWEN-1847-2,44.158

It demands peremptorily an elevated position in our sincerest esteem ,
and the choicest place in that of all nations . OWEN-1847-2,44.159

And thus it should be universally cherished as the most interesting ,
promising , and improving blessing of its kind . OWEN-1847-2,44.160

We would not be in an error were we to state <P_45> that education has
not been viewed until very lately in a right light , even by the
inhabitants of Great Britain . OWEN-1847-2,45.161

Formerly the rays of its halo were not properly distinguished ,
OWEN-1847-2,45.162

nor were the beams of its glory admired as they should be .
OWEN-1847-2,45.163

Hence the most enlightened nation in the world lived long under the foul
blot of being partially blind to its vast and paramount importance .
OWEN-1847-2,45.164

But , however , the following fact affords unfeigned joy to every lover
of his species , that at length this overwhelming subject has potently
roused the slumbering zeal of Britannia , and unprecedentedly engrossed
the mighty powers of her people . OWEN-1847-2,45.165

Yes , the zeal of Great Britain has been latterly roused in favour of
this boon , OWEN-1847-2,45.166

and the combined energies of her people have seized with a giant
strength on the shield of power , the sword of victory , and the diadem
of beauty , namely , secular , moral , and religious education .
OWEN-1847-2,45.167

And we might predict that as true as this has been done , the monster
evil that has been preying on our national vitals shall ere long be
successfully and totally eradicated . OWEN-1847-2,45.168

The foe that has so incessantly assailed us has had its doom for ever
sealed , OWEN-1847-2,45.169

and the unwholesome vapours that have so often tarnished our national
glory shall be finally dissipated to the four winds of heaven .
OWEN-1847-2,45.170

Yes , ignorance , the monster <P_46> evil to which we have referred ,
shall be driven from every rustic haunt to the sombre shades of oblivion
. OWEN-1847-2,46.171

Impiety of every hue , the real foe of our happiness , shall be
prostrated to the ground like Dagon before the ark . OWEN-1847-2,46.172

And error of every grade , the cloud that rests upon our brightest glory
, shall be blown away beyond the skirts of the universe , before the
strong breezes of eternal truth , raised by the radiating and rarifying
warmth of knowledge , both human and divine . OWEN-1847-2,46.173

We would reiterate the sentiment we have given utterance to , and taste
again its delicious nectar , namely , that England's zeal has been
kindled and yet burns on behalf of education , and that her energies are
bent upon promoting it to the utmost extent . OWEN-1847-2,46.174

In proof of this witness the fresh transactions which have so lately
transpired in our days , so very lately , as that the erasing hand of
time has had no space allowed it yet to obliterate the vivid impressions
produced even on the least tenacious memory of the most heedless
observer in our land - impressions which have been indelibly engraven on
our minds by the sharpest point of a special diamond - impressions which
are lastingly inscribed with an iron pen on the rocks of futurity - and
impressions cut with the chisel of steel on the marble sculpture of
perpetual history , to which <P_47> many a revolving thought of very
distant days will no doubt recur with throbbing interest and ineffable
pleasure . OWEN-1847-2,47.175

Verily , it is not an uninteresting occupation to recapitulate
occasionally some of those modern movements , which are yet fresh on the
tablet of the memory , which have rendered our days attractive in no
small degree , OWEN-1847-2,47.176

and education , the theme of almost every mind , - nay , it is
refreshing and edifying to take a retrospective view of the history of
this inspiring subject , and observe it at least in its progress during
the last half century . OWEN-1847-2,47.177

Then , when we come near the close of that period , with what intense
feeling do we witness it rapidly becoming an all-absorbing one ,
animating every bosom , warming every heart , and agitating every tongue
, erudite and rude , high and low , young and old ; acquiring a feature
which was unusual in Great Britain , namely , our sovereigns and princes
, our lords and legislators , our lawyers and literati were all found
distractedly in love with it , OWEN-1847-2,47.178

and loving it , they would forthwith legislate upon it , had the measure
proposed fully met the maturity of the times . OWEN-1847-2,47.179

At that juncture , what breathing thoughts , what burning words , what
glowing sentiments , and what oratorical displays were employed in its
service . OWEN-1847-2,47.180

The halls of state , the houses of legislature , and the metropolis of
our empire , echoed and <P_48> re-echoed with the notes of its praise ,
while again and again the ennobling theme swept along the varied masses
of society , so as that every class in its turn had to contemplate and
admire the subject throughout the length and breadth of the land .
OWEN-1847-2,48.181

And what has been the result ? OWEN-1847-2,48.182

Why , education has had an impetus given it , the force of which will be
felt , no doubt , by yet unborn and very remote generations .
OWEN-1847-2,48.183

It has engaged on its behalf an active spirit of the noblest kind ,
OWEN-1847-2,48.184

and it found , and we hope permanently , a streaming source of
liberality of the most generous description . OWEN-1847-2,48.185

We have no need of adducing instances to establish these positions ;
OWEN-1847-2,48.186

for there is hardly one of any observation that can have forgotten the
showers of gold that so bounteously descended into certain treasuries ,
or the rivers of wealth that were made to flow so freely into various
channels to irrigate this fertile soil under our notice ;
OWEN-1847-2,48.187

no , there is hardly one that can have forgotten the astonishing
excitement felt , not long since , throughout Great Britain , in
connexion with the educational question . The intelligence elicited ,
the rivalry manifested , the zeal experienced , the good resolutions
past , the wise plans concocted , and the unexpected munificence shown
on a scale positively unprecedented , and in every respect worthy of the
English character . OWEN-1847-2,48.188

Such was the extraordinary race run <P_49> by the voluntary principle ,
in consequence of the impetus communicated by our times to the subject
of education , OWEN-1847-2,49.189

and if government will as honourably run a parallel course , most
assuredly we shall have but to look forward for the realization of
almost miraculous results . OWEN-1847-2,49.190

Ere long , England shall have been exalted in an intellectual , moral ,
and religious point of view to an unexampled elevation - an elevation
that will really become the religious importance , monarchical greatness
, commercial influence , and political glory to which it has already
attained . OWEN-1847-2,49.191

Now , to facilitate the accomplishment of this desirable issue , we
cordially hail the establishment of all institutions that may have the
diffusion of knowledge in view , whether they are schools for education
, or societies for the arts and sciences , royal or rural ,
philosophical or religious , OWEN-1847-2,49.192

and to the same end let advocates of good principles be every where
cherished ; OWEN-1847-2,49.193

let educational and scientific lecturers be strongly countenanced ,
OWEN-1847-2,49.194

and let the ambassadors of peace be munificently supported ;
OWEN-1847-2,49.195

for , as the old adage will have it , " as many run to and fro ,
knowledge will increase , " OWEN-1847-2,49.196

mind will be emancipated , intellect dignified , and the nation become
free , fair , and fruitful . OWEN-1847-2,49.197

Hence the advantages of knowledge and education <P_50> in this light are
truly magnificent and inestimable , according to the hasty glances we
have now taken of them . For instance , the removal of the dark and
dense clouds of ignorance that so sadly vitiate and so foully disgrace
many a district of our happy land - the suppression of misery , crime ,
cruelty , poverty , and degradation , which are the inevitable and
detestable consequences of a deficiency in knowledge - an individual and
national exaltation in the scale of intellect , improvement , religion ,
and happiness . OWEN-1847-2,50.198

Then primitive Christianity accompanying all this , a pure language
shall be restored to the people , the bosom of society renovated , our
churches sanctified , our princes become our glory , our policy peace ,
and our exactors righteousness . OWEN-1847-2,50.199

Benevolence and benignity shall increase into their full measure ,
OWEN-1847-2,50.200

and shall swell into an overflowing tide , so as that the good enjoyed
by one nation shall be freely communicated to another and another ,
until the light shall thus rapidly fill the world , and the salvation of
the Lord become as a lamp that burneth . OWEN-1847-2,50.201

And , during this climax of improvement , human intellect shall be
prepared to witness the complete development of the deep and merciful
schemes of heaven , and the copious unfolding of the eternal purposes
with reference to our race . OWEN-1847-2,50.202

And surely , then , that <P_51> promised and long predicted period shall
be fully realized when " the light of the moon shall be as the light of
the sun , and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold as the light of
seven days , in the day that the Lord bindeth up the breach of his
people , and healeth the stroke of their wound . " OWEN-1847-2,51.203

Who , then , that has the least spark of real patriotism and
philanthropy in his bosom , would not toil hard and hail the appearance
of such an auspicious period ? OWEN-1847-2,51.204

Who would not try to hasten with his utmost influence , and pray that
that happy time would come on the swiftest wing - when England shall
stand forth before the world as a bright example of national weal ,
wealth , and wisdom , invested , at the same time , with all the majesty
, benignity , and power of knowledge , so as to be a becoming agent in
the Divine hand , to bless her surrounding neighbours , and
intellectually as well as Christianly illumine the whole world .
OWEN-1847-2,51.205

In closing our present class of observations , we are warranted to
suppose knowledge to be as the vital current , or the life-blood that
circulates throughout the frame ; and our institutions of various kinds
- religious , civil , scientific , and scholastic - as the arteries and
minute veins that thickly intersperse the constitution of that beauteous
and imperial form which artists pencil as <P_52> sitting on a huge rock
, with a helmet on her head , a terrestrial globe resting on her knee ,
a sceptre gracefully lying in the hand that holds this miniature of our
earth , and at her feet a couchant lion lies ; and in this posture ,
looking majestically over the ocean , as if fully conscious that she was
the empress of the seas . OWEN-1847-2,52.206

Need any ask who this delicate form is ? OWEN-1847-2,52.207

Why , it is Britannia - OWEN-1847-2,52.208

the head at present is our august Queen Victoria , the neck the royal
family , the shoulders our temples and parliament , the arms religion
and law , the hands mercy and justice , the trunk the mass of the people
, the legs agriculture and commerce , the feet the arts and sciences ,
the helmet our trust in heaven , the globe our extensive territories ,
the sceptre our government , the couchant lion barbarianism subdued ,
the ocean scene the millions that bow to our sway beyond , and the rock
on which she sits the stability of her throne . OWEN-1847-2,52.209

And with the ardour of genuine zeal we would say , that while the heart
, the arteries , and veins are in a sound and wholesome state , and the
vital stream of knowledge is in active circulation , this fair image of
England's glory shall remain in the possession of blooming health , and
in the enjoyment of prosperity on sea and land ; OWEN-1847-2,52.210

and with increasing zeal we would add - May God crown all Britannia's
<P_53> lawful enterprises {TEXT:enterprizes} with success ; preserve
peace within her borders ; feed her people with bread ; and bless with
his sovereign benignity our illustrious Queen , his royal highness
Prince Albert , and the royal family ; and send his saving health , unto
all nations ! OWEN-1847-2,53.211

<P_54>

<heading>

Section III . OWEN-1847-2,54.214

The Personal Advantages of Education - OWEN-1847-2,54.215

How to appreciate it - OWEN-1847-2,54.216

That it is Subject to Abuse - OWEN-1847-2,54.217

The Art of Reading , Writing , and Arithmetic - OWEN-1847-2,54.218

The Capabilities of the Human Mind - OWEN-1847-2,54.219

The Rude and the Erudite Compared . OWEN-1847-2,54.220

<$$heading>

We shall now proceed to another description of advantages accruing from
our subject to all and every individual of the myriad subdivisions that
make up the large community . OWEN-1847-2,54.222

Hence education puts the human being upon thinking , OWEN-1847-2,54.223

and gives him materials for thought . OWEN-1847-2,54.224

It furnishes him with wisdom to plan and deliberate , and prudence
afterwards to execute . OWEN-1847-2,54.225

It prepares him for the world , OWEN-1847-2,54.226

and fits him for future usefulness . OWEN-1847-2,54.227

It makes the mind full-fledged for future flights , OWEN-1847-2,54.228

and trains it at the same time to ponder , before it spreads its wings -
OWEN-1847-2,54.229

yes , it fills the lips with wisdom , and the mind with generous
thoughts , so as to dispose its happy possessor to fulfil the law of our
motto , " The lips of the wise disperse knowledge . "
OWEN-1847-2,54.230

Education refines the human mind , OWEN-1847-2,54.231

ennobles man , OWEN-1847-2,54.232

elevates him , OWEN-1847-2,54.233

and makes him worthy as well as conscious of his dignity .
OWEN-1847-2,54.234

It makes him a better <P_55> member of society , and much more pliant
under all circumstances . OWEN-1847-2,55.235

It arms him against difficulties . OWEN-1847-2,55.236

It renders him easier to be ruled ; and more able to govern , should
Providence ever yield him the reins . OWEN-1847-2,55.237

It smoothes all asperities of character , whether acquired or otherwise
. OWEN-1847-2,55.238

It polishes the whole of the man , OWEN-1847-2,55.239

and forms his life what it ought to be : that is , it will eventually
bring the gem out of its pebble state or earthy bed , to display its
innate lustre and intrinsic qualities . OWEN-1847-2,55.240

In short , it remodels the whole of the human being , OWEN-1847-2,55.241

and constitutes him wholly different to what he would have been
otherwise - different in his mind , in his thoughts , in his feelings ,
in his appearance , in his pursuits , in his taste , in his desires ,
yea , in his whole comportment , so as to be admired by his neighbours ,
and courted by the wise and good . OWEN-1847-2,55.242

Surely these , and such as these , are fruits that can@ @not be too
highly appreciated . OWEN-1847-2,55.243

They are advantages that far surpass in value and importance every
perishable object . OWEN-1847-2,55.244

Let the youth that undervalues education look at them over and over
again ; OWEN-1847-2,55.245

and as he ponders those advantages , let him bear in memory that they
claim affinity with mind , and extend , in their influence , over and
beyond the span of human existence ; and whatever is akin to mind ought
to be appreciated <P_56> accordingly ; and that which improves and
sublimates it is enhanced in worth and moment above all sublunary things
. OWEN-1847-2,56.246

It is very true that education might be abused , OWEN-1847-2,56.247

and it will be readily granted that such is the case in too many
instances ; OWEN-1847-2,56.248

but it being incident to that casualty , does not depreciate its
intrinsic value , nor decrease its real importance , any more than when
some wholesome aliment is taken into a deranged constitution :
OWEN-1847-2,56.249

though deteriorated thereby , yet the fault is not in the aliment , its
viscous or farinaceous quality being good and wholesome , but in the
disordered state of the man's frame . OWEN-1847-2,56.250

So it is exactly with reference to education when brought in contact
with base minds , OWEN-1847-2,56.251

though it is too often applied to ill purposes - yet that incident has
really as little to do with the subject of our encomium , as the
deterioration effected by the distempered constitution had with the
nutritious aliment . OWEN-1847-2,56.252

So in the misapplication of knowledge : the evil lies in the deranged
and base minds that abuse it . OWEN-1847-2,56.253

Also , as people will not refrain taking alimentary articles , because
they are perverted by defective constitutions : so the wise and the
discreet continue to regard education , and the knowledge resulting from
it , as an incomparable and invaluable boon . OWEN-1847-2,56.254

Therefore , as there <P_57> are many personal advantages that may be
derived from elemental education remaining yet unmentioned , we shall
proceed and notice - Reading . OWEN-1847-2,57.255

Now this is a faculty acquired by education ; OWEN-1847-2,57.256

and though it is certainly valued by many , yet it is not properly
appreciated by all , nor yet perhaps by the majority .
OWEN-1847-2,57.257

Therefore , without having a recourse to the didactic style , we shall
still keep to the point we have been attending to , namely , to induce a
right estimate of the subject . OWEN-1847-2,57.258

Hence we might remark that , by reading , we are introduced into the
company of the wise sages of antiquity ; by reading , we are led
{TEXT:lead} into an exhaustless store of intellectual wealth , and a
prolific source of mental improvement ; and by reading , we hold an
intimate intercourse with the studious of the past ages , and with the
literati of modern days . OWEN-1847-2,57.259

And is not this an invaluable acquisition : to be admitted into an
intimacy with philosophers , and all the learned and the wise of every
age , and to have a license to enrich the mind from their stores .
OWEN-1847-2,57.260

Would not a person consider it a real privilege to have free access to
the wealth of all the European powers , and the dominions of the world ,
and to have full liberty , at the same time , to apply anything to his
own comfort and aggrandizement , and thus roll in riches and live in
splendour ? OWEN-1847-2,57.261

No doubt many would <P_58> deem such a privilege the <font> summum bonum
<$$font> of human existence : OWEN-1847-2,58.262

but this opinion would be as false as it seems fair .
OWEN-1847-2,58.263

And some will be surprised when we advisedly say , that such a privilege
would bear no comparison with this that forms our present subject -
reading ; OWEN-1847-2,58.264

for by this we have free access to the intellectual wealth of the world
, OWEN-1847-2,58.265

and we are at the same time , welcome to apply as much as we please to
our own use and edification : OWEN-1847-2,58.266

and this wealth is permanent , and not like the other - transitory .
OWEN-1847-2,58.267

It is imperishable , OWEN-1847-2,58.268

and will not rust and pulverize in the using . OWEN-1847-2,58.269

And besides , when of the right kind , it will rise {COM:sic} its
possessor in station and dignity far above all the unregenerate monarchs
of the universe , at that tremendous crisis when time shall be
obliterated from the pages of eternity , or diminished into a mere point
when standing in contrast with infinite duration . OWEN-1847-2,58.270

Hence , he that neglects this real acquisition is very indiscreet ;
OWEN-1847-2,58.271

and he that undervalues such a possession , is as blind as a mole .
OWEN-1847-2,58.272

This valuable acquisition might be very justly compared to a disclosure
of a very rich stratum of the choicest ore , which , if the discoverer
does not foolishly neglect , he might become really enriched . And his
wealth would increase in proportion to the perseverance and assiduity
with which he applied <P_59> himself to the work of exhausting its
precious contents . OWEN-1847-2,59.273

Exactly so with reference to the ability of reading : OWEN-1847-2,59.274

it discloses such a rich vein of mental ore , which if one properly
delves in , he might become intellectually as rich as Croesus was
naturally . OWEN-1847-2,59.275

But Croesus' sordid wealth would bear no comparison for durability ,
conveniency , and worth . OWEN-1847-2,59.276

With this we obtain from the rich , deep , and extensive mines laid open
before us by a careful course of reading . OWEN-1847-2,59.277

Moreover , we would remark , pursuing our figure still , that it must be
borne in mind that as it is in natural so it is in intellectual pursuits
, our gain very much depends upon the character and value of the load we
may be boring {COM:sic} . OWEN-1847-2,59.278

For instance , a copper load is more valuable , and consequently , more
enriching than that of iron . OWEN-1847-2,59.279

A silver one is still better . OWEN-1847-2,59.280

But a gold mine stands in the superlative degree . OWEN-1847-2,59.281

Yet pearl gathering is still higher and more enriching , one might have
thought , according to all known estimates , especially in those
localities where pearls are to be obtained with certainty and in
abundance . OWEN-1847-2,59.282

So it is with reading , being a kind of intellectual mining ;
OWEN-1847-2,59.283

it is absolutely necessary to exercise the utmost discretion in our
choice in this respect , as there is an amazing quantity of worthless
and common earth to be met with in literature as well as in nature ; and
<P_60> not only common but poisonous and infectious ; yea , such as will
never enrich , but impoverish us , though we may burden ourselves ever
so much with it . OWEN-1847-2,60.284

But waiving {TEXT:waving} that now , we would say here : If we become in
earnest intellectual miners <paren> we use that term for want of a
better <$$paren> , let us by all means prefer that which would be the
most precious and profitable to us . OWEN-1847-2,60.285

Let us never neglect the pearl gathering , as we have placed that above
the superlative itself . OWEN-1847-2,60.286

Now , in our land of Bibles , the ability of reading may bring us
directly to that field where the pearl of great price is found , and
other pearls innumerable besides , every one of which will infinitely
surpass in real value all human or terrestrial estimates .
OWEN-1847-2,60.287

This pearly field is the Word of God . OWEN-1847-2,60.288

There a Saviour is made known to us . OWEN-1847-2,60.289

There we may peruse fully the developments of the plan of human
redemption . OWEN-1847-2,60.290

There is deposited the mind of heaven , even revealed and eternal truth
; yea , truth that has emanated , according to incontestible evidences ,
from the source of all truth , namely , from God . OWEN-1847-2,60.291

Now , this circumstance unspeakably enhances the importance of the
faculty under our notice , reading , that it capacitates an immortal
mind to peruse in intelligible language the thoughts and great purposes
of the God of heaven with reference to our world . OWEN-1847-2,60.292

Hence , how deplorable <P_61> is the case of the individual that can@
@not read his Bible . OWEN-1847-2,61.293

And O , how unspeakably so is that of him that can and will not read it
, as it contains the pearl of great price . OWEN-1847-2,61.294

With reference to the gold and silver mines , etc. , to which we have
made allusion , while the pearly field is not neglected , it will well
repay the studious for bestowing a goodly measure of diligence in
exhausting those works that contain golden thoughts on religious and
divine truths . OWEN-1847-2,61.295

These abound , OWEN-1847-2,61.296

and many of them are rich with golden ore of the finest quality .
OWEN-1847-2,61.297

But even this precious metal must be worked , purified , and moulded ,
before it becomes really useful . OWEN-1847-2,61.298

Also there are many literary productions that contain much silver ore in
them , which is very estimable and useful . OWEN-1847-2,61.299

Indeed , when this is converted into our social currency it obtains a
very extensive circulation ; OWEN-1847-2,61.300

and it is in no small degree acceptable . OWEN-1847-2,61.301

In the long run we are sure of this , that it helps the circulation of
the gold we have alluded to , OWEN-1847-2,61.302

and we are very much inclined to believe that it will wonderfully enable
us to appreciate the pearls better . OWEN-1847-2,61.303

In short , real philosophical knowledge and philosophical reading will
not , or at least ought not , to clash with revelation , as nature and
her great author never disagree . OWEN-1847-2,61.304

But this we would do well to keep in mind whenever we contrast together
<P_62> nature's volume and divine revelation - that they are not one ,
though in unison . OWEN-1847-2,62.305

Revelation is above nature , OWEN-1847-2,62.306

and will enlighten it just as the sun does our world ;
OWEN-1847-2,62.307

and as our earth yields to solar attraction , so natural knowledge ought
to bow to the divine . OWEN-1847-2,62.308

Indeed , whenever there is a discrepancy supposed between the book of
nature and the inspired Word , of this we may rest assured , that the
fault is not in the books , but in the interpreters .
OWEN-1847-2,62.309

It is not where some ascribe it to be , but in the mode of contrasting
the both and of deciphering each . OWEN-1847-2,62.310

One word more on reading . OWEN-1847-2,62.311

It is an admirable medium to enlighten the mind . OWEN-1847-2,62.312

This again enhances in value the advantageous ability under our notice
communicated by education . OWEN-1847-2,62.313

Now good books contain the lustre of other minds , OWEN-1847-2,62.314

and in perusing them we retain more or less of that so as to increase
our own stock . OWEN-1847-2,62.315

Thus the more we read the more this intellectual lustre increases within
us , especially as the mind , rightly constituted , possesses an amazing
reproductive power , so as to multiply , <font> ad infinitum , <$$font>
those rays it will receive from others . OWEN-1847-2,62.316

Knowledge to the intellect , as solar radiations in nature , imparts
perception , OWEN-1847-2,62.317

and yields guidance , joy , and pleasure . OWEN-1847-2,62.318

Hence we give it the same designation as the natural element we call
light ; OWEN-1847-2,62.319

but they differ in character as <P_63> far as mind varies from matter .
OWEN-1847-2,63.320

The perpetuation of intellectual light also differs from its prototype
at the same ratio . OWEN-1847-2,63.321

It is done by mental retention , OWEN-1847-2,63.322

and this is effected by appropriation , and not by reflection , as in
the material universe . OWEN-1847-2,63.323

Herein consists the difference between mind and matter possessing light
. OWEN-1847-2,63.324

The former appropriates it first to itself , OWEN-1847-2,63.325

and then emits it ; OWEN-1847-2,63.326

but the latter can only reflect it . OWEN-1847-2,63.327

The reason for this difference seems to be this - OWEN-1847-2,63.328

mind is essentially life , being a spark from God , though its existence
is dependent upon its original source ; OWEN-1847-2,63.329

but matter is only endowed with that property . OWEN-1847-2,63.330

Hence mind , life-like , has the power of assimilating and retaining ,
OWEN-1847-2,63.331

and with the light of knowledge , becomes itself luminous ; while matter
, having only the power of reflecting , soon becomes opaque again .
OWEN-1847-2,63.332

This is the case , then , when mind comes in contact with intellectual
radiancy ; OWEN-1847-2,63.333

it becomes enlightened , because it possesses the appropriating power we
have referred to . OWEN-1847-2,63.334

And this is the way that reading tends to enlighten mind ,
OWEN-1847-2,63.335

because myriads of radiations which have emanated from myriads of minds
, have been embodied in books , and perpetuated by means of the press ,
and by reading , the educated mind is enabled to bask in this blaze of
knowledge , OWEN-1847-2,63.336

and when well constituted it by_and_bye becomes itself as luminous with
intellectual <P_64> light as the solar atmosphere during meridian
splendour . OWEN-1847-2,64.337

And what a dignified creature is an enlightened man with his mental
faculties fully unfolded , and his mind expanded as the celestial canopy
; OWEN-1847-2,64.338

and in reading the revelations of heaven in Scripture he acquires the
rays that emanated from the Sun of Righteousness ; OWEN-1847-2,64.339

so when he is really heavenly illumined , his dignity increases ,
OWEN-1847-2,64.340

and becomes of the right kind , OWEN-1847-2,64.341

and as he accumulates more and more of this light he becomes in the
sight of pure spirits , increasingly noble , lovely , and angelic .
OWEN-1847-2,64.342

But to proceed , the next personal advantage arising from elemental
education is Writing . OWEN-1847-2,64.343

- This is not by any means an insignificant advantage attending
elemental education , although the term is become so familiar to us ,
that we hardly ever notice the vast importance which might be attached
to it . OWEN-1847-2,64.344

Why , suppose we were to inquire , What would be the amount of reading
for the improvement of the mind , and the real state of intelligence at
present in our world , had it not been for writing , and what would have
become of the social ties that are now preserved between relations ,
friends , and acquaintances in various parts of the country and in
foreign lands ? OWEN-1847-2,64.345

Nay , had it not been for the art of writing , where would be that
impulse of pleasure , and that <P_65> thrill of joy , that a letter
produces occasionally in the bosom of a family , which might come from a
beloved member of it that has been severed by time and space from its
warm endearments ? OWEN-1847-2,65.346

And where would the heart-strings of commerce be that cram our post
offices under the name of letters , and the very sinews of information
that interweave the bosom of society in the same way ?
OWEN-1847-2,65.347

In short , did we but think for a moment on the immense facility the art
of writing affords to preserve knowledge , to promote justice , to
quicken honesty , to mature piety , and to circulate the life-blood of
our community ; the ease it affords to carry on an incredible amount of
correspondence between the various ramifications of society , and to
perpetuate the essential and golden thread of confidential , commercial
, and intellectual communication between tens of thousands in diverse
localities , countries , and climes of our globe ; - did we view it , we
would say , in these beneficial and several tendencies , the faculty of
writing would assume a magnificence that but a few would be willing to
acknowledge . OWEN-1847-2,65.348

Indeed , were we to take just a peep into a general post office of any
of our European powers , during business hours , ink and paper would
seem to be the very cement of society , the pen the mighty wand that
manages the great and minute affairs of our world ; OWEN-1847-2,65.349

its touch ties nations <P_66> together by treaties and by bonds , while
from these to the little tablet that contains some daily memoranda we
may trace its magic and bewitching influence . OWEN-1847-2,66.350

We may enlarge our idea still of the utility of writing ,
OWEN-1847-2,66.351

for the view we have taken of it , notwithstanding its extent , has been
nevertheless rather circumscribed , when compared with the vast area of
its boundless influence . OWEN-1847-2,66.352

We have not presumed to remove the great covering of society , or draw
aside the veil , to inspect the profound arcana of human movements in
all its secrecies - the countless number of pens , some of which are
almost in constant motion , moved by countless motives , good and bad ,
for the purpose of perpetuating deeds , words and thoughts ; then the
loads of manuscripts that furnish intelligence for our thunder -
speaking as well as wonder-working press ; and the numberless tons of
these again that remain in escritoirs , and drawers , and desks ,
destined there to abide concealed from critics' eyes and public gaze .
OWEN-1847-2,66.353

Verily , to fix our attention for a moment on a studious and original
writer , in the act of oscillating between mind and matter , with his
noting apparatus before him , his pen going rapidly , and his thoughts
gliding in quick succession into legibility : such an object , to a keen
observer , is not an uninteresting sight . OWEN-1847-2,66.354

Indeed , on a close examination , <P_67> there is something
overwhelmingly beautiful in the simple act of first bringing into
existence the deep cogitations of a well-disciplined and intelligent
mind . OWEN-1847-2,67.355

When we seriously think of it , we hardly can help viewing it in the
light of dealing in magic arts , or of visiting the cave of a Cybele ,
or of handling the wand of a necromancer . OWEN-1847-2,67.356

Look at it again ; OWEN-1847-2,67.357

the hand guides the pen , it is true , OWEN-1847-2,67.358

and the writer moves the hand ; OWEN-1847-2,67.359

but the man is alone ; OWEN-1847-2,67.360

yet he converses . OWEN-1847-2,67.361

Surely , he must be holding an intercourse with an invisible agent ,
OWEN-1847-2,67.362

or he is conjuring to light those secrets that would otherwise remain in
darkness in spite of all human discovery , OWEN-1847-2,67.363

or he is revealing the useful but otherwise unseen productions of an
inscrutable apparatus called the human spirit . OWEN-1847-2,67.364

Yes ; and when this mysterious machine is set in order for working ,
there flows from it , very evidently , a something which we can@ @not
designate exactly , a fluid , OWEN-1847-2,67.365

for it is far more subtile than galvanism or electricity .
OWEN-1847-2,67.366

However , this glides insensibly , as far as the physical constitution
is concerned , under the name of thoughts , over the hand , into the
quill , thence unto the paper , OWEN-1847-2,67.367

and there , from an unseen state , they are presented before us in forms
which are pleasing , and visible , and legible . OWEN-1847-2,67.368

How mysterious is the thinking part of man ; how momentous the simple
ability of writing ; and how immeasurably <P_68> conducible to
perpetuate knowledge in the world ! OWEN-1847-2,68.369

And we would once more ask , What would we be , in point of intelligence
, were it not for our pens and pencils - were it not for our libraries
of books and galleries of arts ? OWEN-1847-2,68.370

And where is the observer , let him be as superficial as he may , who
does not see the immense importance and utility of the art of writing ?
OWEN-1847-2,68.371

It was not our intention to illustrate these subjects by examples , nor
minutely to analyse them , but just to display , in some humble measure
, their <P_69> paramount importance and value . OWEN-1847-2,69.372

Hence would we say , the course of rudimental education we are
advocating , though circumscribed , yet is very complete :
OWEN-1847-2,69.373

for the art of reading will make a knowing man , the art of writing a
useful man , and the art of computation a wise man ; OWEN-1847-2,69.374

and a person that has enjoyed an education that has made him knowing ,
useful , and wise , can not by any means be deemed incomplete , although
not perfect . OWEN-1847-2,69.375

Indeed , the human powers will hardly ever be perfected in improvement ,
because the height to which they are capable of rising is incomputable .
OWEN-1847-2,69.376

Those powers are really mysterious , OWEN-1847-2,69.377

and we were well nigh saying , that they were inscrutable ;
OWEN-1847-2,69.378

truly they are so in their nature , and in their being capable of
expanding , and unfolding themselves <font> ad infinitum <$$font> .
OWEN-1847-2,69.379

In connection with this last idea we have thrown out , with reference to
human powers , we beg leave to observe , that there is much yet of the
image of God to be discovered in the human soul , though it is a wreck
by sin , and in ruins . OWEN-1847-2,69.380

Yes , there are some beautiful traces of the fine lineages of that
original image to be seen , faintly surviving , as it were , the
crumbling effects of the fall , especially the vast capabilities we have
referred to ; capabilities which enable the philosopher to analyze
<P_70> nature , and reveal as well as unravel its deep and edifying
mysteries : capabilities that urge the man of science to multiply his
useful inventions until he obtains his reward from his contemporaries ,
whose comfort and happiness he has so highly promoted and increased :
capabilities that empower the astronomer to pursue his soaring flights
for the purpose of divulging the secrets of infinitude , and numbering ,
observing , measuring , and describing those ponderous orbs which move
hither and thither in the measureless bosom of immensity : and
capabilities which enable the Divine to toil usefully in his arduous
studies , so as often to bring heaven in sight , though it be far away ,
and to make the deep purposes of eternity to bear upon and balance the
varying experience of the true Christian . OWEN-1847-2,70.381

But these diversified efforts are not effected by ignorance , but
knowledge ; OWEN-1847-2,70.382

yet this is not man's natural inheritance , OWEN-1847-2,70.383

no , he is born in ignorance on account of sin . OWEN-1847-2,70.384

But happily many experience a renovating change wrought within them ,
namely , from darkness to light , from being injurious to be useful ,
from being fools to be wise . OWEN-1847-2,70.385

Then some one is ready to ask , How comes this change to pass ?
OWEN-1847-2,70.386

We would answer , if it be merely natural , then it is effected by human
training ; but if supernatural , it is done alone by divine teaching .
OWEN-1847-2,70.387

Hence we <P_71> would repeat our statement , that Education remodels
human life , and makes man wholly different to what he otherwise would
have been . OWEN-1847-2,71.388

Now that we might form some idea of this change , produced in character
and demeanour , by Education and knowledge , suppose we were to
institute a comparison here for a moment , and place in
contradistinction the rude , wicked , unskilful man , who may seem as if
he were transmuted into a mass of substantial ignorance , with the man
of Education , of piety , and of enlarged intellect .
OWEN-1847-2,71.389

How despicable would the dross appear in the presence of the shining
gold ! OWEN-1847-2,71.390

How dim would the dull stone seem by the brilliancy of the diamond !
OWEN-1847-2,71.391

Or to change our metaphor , suppose we were to regard both characters
under review as animated and rational beings , OWEN-1847-2,71.392

then on a close inspection the case would be as follows :
OWEN-1847-2,71.393

- The first would very much resemble a muckworm , crawling amid the
foulness of the earth , choosing rags for his raiment , and preferring
almost the serpent's food for his sustenance ; OWEN-1847-2,71.394

and other ennobled with ethereal and celestial aspirations , having
acquired pinions far superior to those of an eagle , would be soaring
aloft amid the luminaries of the universe , gathering to himself the
lustre of all the intellectual stars that shine in the bespangled
firmament around him , and thus adding himself to the constellations
<P_72> that will illumine in future the pathway of him who will seek to
live on the aliment of angels , rather than on the food of worms ; and
who will cherish a cordial preference to wisdom and improvement , to
dull ignorance and its base accompaniments from reasons far more
tangible , potent , and irresistable than those , whereupon the miser
chooses his gold to the sordid dust he tramples under his feet , or the
man of sloth his ease to " the toil of the diligent that maketh rich and
addeth no sorrow with it . " Feeling nobly anxious , at the same time ,
to rise all others to a level with himself ; OWEN-1847-2,72.395

for avarice is an alien to the bosom of angels , OWEN-1847-2,72.396

and selfishness flies the very atmosphere of real wisdom .
OWEN-1847-2,72.397

Generous deeds are compatible with true prudence , and the welfare of
others with our own weal . OWEN-1847-2,72.398

The wisdom of the prudent is a well-spring of benevolence ,
OWEN-1847-2,72.399

and its salutary streams are for the public good , OWEN-1847-2,72.400

for " The lips of the wise disperse knowledge . " OWEN-1847-2,72.401

<P_73>

<heading>

Section IV . OWEN-1847-2,73.404

The Two-Hours System - OWEN-1847-2,73.405

The Godless Plan of Education - OWEN-1847-2,73.406

Recommendations of the British System - OWEN-1847-2,73.407

Its Religious Spirit - OWEN-1847-2,73.408

Its Unsectarianism - OWEN-1847-2,73.409

Its Catholicity - OWEN-1847-2,73.410

Its Adaptation , and the Easy and Sure Mode of Instruction resorted to
by it . OWEN-1847-2,73.411

<$$heading>

In this part of our lecture , or , we may almost say , essay , we shall
endeavour to pay our humble homage to the Latin phrase <font> multum in
parvo <$$font> . OWEN-1847-2,73.413

Hence we shall try to condense as much as we can in as little compass as
possible . OWEN-1847-2,73.414

