<BEGIN_palgrave2-1863-2>

<P_389>

<heading>

Chapter IX PALGRAVE2-1863-2,389.4

Riad PALGRAVE2-1863-2,389.5

<$$heading>

<P_390>

Before us stretched a wild open valley , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,390.8

and in its foreground , immediately below the pebbly slope on whose
summit we stood , lay the capital , large and square , crowned by high
towers and strong walls of defence , a mass of roofs and terraces ,
where overtopping all frowned the huge but irregular pile of Feysul's
royal castle , and hard by it rose the scarce less conspicuous palace ,
built and inhabited by his eldest son , 'Abd-Allah .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,390.9

Other edifices too of remarkable appearance broke here and there through
the maze of grey roof-tops , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,390.10

but their object and indwellers were yet to learn .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,390.11

All around for full three miles over the surrounding plain , but more
especially to the west and south , waved a sea of palm-trees above green
fields and well-watered gardens ; while the singing droning sound of the
water-wheels reached us even where we had halted , at a quarter of a
mile or more from the nearest town-walls . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,390.12

On the opposite side southwards , the valley opened out into the great
and even more fertile plains of Yemamah , thickly dotted with groves and
villages , among which the large town of Manfoohah , hardly inferior in
size to Riad itself , might be clearly distinguished .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,390.13

Farther in the background ranged the blue bills , the ragged sierra of
Yemamah , compared some thirteen_hundred years since , by
'Amroo-ebn-Kelthoom the Shomerite , to drawn swords in battle array ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,390.14

and behind them was concealed the immeasurable Desert of the South , or
Dahna . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,390.15

On the west the valley closes in PALGRAVE2-1863-2,390.16

and narrows in its upward windings towards Derey'eeyah , while to the
south-west the low mounds of Aflaj are the division between it and Wadi
Dowasir . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,390.17

But eastward it communicates through undulating and broken ground with
the long valley of Soley' or Wadi Soley' , whose northerly branch runs
far up behind the inner chain of Toweyk under the mountain of 'Atalah ,
while its southerly extremity traverses a broad extent of sands , thinly
sprinkled with an occasional grove or village , and , passing through
them , ends at the town of Hootah , long the rival and now the
discontented vassal of Riad . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,390.18

Here the province of Hareek borders the desert , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,390.19

and encroaches on it northward and eastward , till it <P_391> almost
gives a hand to the outskirts of Katar and the limits of 'Omanite rule .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,391.20

Due east in the distance a long blue line marks the farthest heights of
Toweyk , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,391.21

and shuts out from view the low ground of Hasa and the shores of the
Persian Gulf . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,391.22

In all the countries which I have visited , and they are many , seldom
has it been mine to survey a landscape equal to this in beauty and in
historical meaning , rich and full alike to eye and mind .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,391.23

But should any of my readers have ever approached Damascus from the side
of the Anti-Lebanon , and surveyed the Ghootah from the heights above
Mazzeh , they may thence form an approximate idea of the valley of Riad
when viewed from the north . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,391.24

Only this is wider and more varied , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,391.25

and the circle of vision here embraces vaster plains and bolder
mountains ; while the mixture of tropical aridity and luxuriant verdure
, of crowded population and desert tracks , is one that Arabia alone can
present , and in comparison with which Syria seems tame , and Italy
monotonous . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,391.26

A light morning mist , the first we had witnessed for many days , hung
over the town , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,391.27

and bespoke the copious moisture of its gardens .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,391.28

But the hot sun soon dissipated the thin and transient veil ; whilst the
sensible increase of heat indicated a region not only more southerly in
latitude than that hitherto traversed , but also exposed to the burning
winds of the neighbouring desert , that lies beyond the inner verge of
Yemamah , like one vast furnace , up to the very shores of the Indian
Ocean . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,391.29

Barakat and myself stopped our dromedaries a few minutes on the height ,
to study and enjoy this noble prospect , and to forget the anxiety
inseparable from a first approach to the lion's own den .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,391.30

Aboo-'Eysa too , though not unacquainted with the scene , willingly
paused with us to point out and name the main features of the view , and
show us where lay the onward road to his home in Hasa .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,391.31

We then descended the slope PALGRAVE2-1863-2,391.32

and skirted the walls of the first outlying plantations which gird the
town . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,391.33

Here more than one whom we met saluted our guide in the friendly tone of
an old acquaintance ; but above all , a lad whom Aboo-'Eysa had picked
up some years before ; a destitute orphan of this vicinity , whose
education and means of livelihood he had , with a generosity less
remarkable in Arabia than it might be elsewhere , provided for , till
the youth was <P_392> able to work out for himself his own way in the
world . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.34

He now happened to be filling a water-skin from a well near the roadside
at the moment of our arrival . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.35

The boy ran up to kiss Aboo-'Eysa's hand , and to prove , by the evident
sincerity of his delight at seeing him again , that gratitude is no less
an Arab than a European virtue , whatever the ignorance or the
prejudices of some foreigners may have affirmed to the contrary .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.36

With a little knot of companions walking by our side , and laughing and
talking their fill , we entered on a byway leading between the royal
stables on one hand , and a spacious garden belonging to 'Abd-el-Lateef
, Kadee of the town , on the other . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.37

After a while we came out on the great cemetery , which spreads along
the north-eastern wall , and contains the population of many past years
- low tombs , without stone or memorial , inscription or date .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.38

Among these lies Turkee , father of the present monarch , and close
beside him his slaughtered rivals , Mesharee and Ebn-Theney'yan , with
many others of note in their day , now undistinguished from the meanest
and poorest of their fellow-countrymen . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.39

This burial-ground is intersected by several tracks , leading to the
different town-gates ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.40

we ourselves now followed a path ending at the north-eastern portal , a
wide and high entrance , with thick square towers on either side ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.41

several guardsmen armed with swords were seated in the passage .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.42

Aboo-'Eysa answered their challenge , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.43

and led us within the town . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.44

Here we found ourselves at first in a broad street , going straight to
the palace ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.45

on each side were large houses , generally two storeys high , wells for
ablution , mosques of various dimensions , and a few fruit-trees planted
here and there in the courtyards . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.46

After advancing two_hundred yards or rather more , we had on our right
hand the palace of 'Abd-Allah , a recent and almost symmetrical
construction , square in form , with goodly carved gates , and three
storeys of windows one above the other . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.47

We contemplated and were contemplated by groups of negroes and servants
, seated near the doors , or on the benches outside , in the cool of the
morning shade . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.48

A little farther on , to the left , we passed the palace of Djeloo'wee ,
brother of Feysul , and at this time absent on business in the direction
of Kela'at-Bisha' . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.49

At last we reached a great open square : PALGRAVE2-1863-2,392.50

its right side , the northern , consists of shops and warehouses ; while
the left is <P_393> entirely absorbed by the huge abode of Nejdean
royalty ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.51

in front of us , and consequently to the west , a long covered passage ,
upborne high on a clumsy colonnade , crossed the breadth of the square ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.52

and reached from the palace to the great mosque , which it thus joins
directly with the interior of the castle , and affords old Feysul a
private and unseen passage at will from his own apartments to his
official post at the Friday prayers , without exposing him on his way to
vulgar curiosity , or perhaps to the dangers of treachery .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.53

For the fate of his father and of his great-uncle , his predecessors on
the throne , and each of them pierced by the dagger of an assassin
during public worship , has rendered Feysul very timid on this score ,
though not at prayer-time only . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.54

Behind this colonnade , other shops and warehouses make up the end of
the square , or more properly parallelogram ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.55

its total length is about two_hundred paces , by rather more than half
the same width . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.56

In the midst of this space , and under the far-reaching shadow of the
castle walls , are seated some fifty or sixty women , each with a stock
of bread , dates , milk , vegetables , or firewood before her for sale ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.57

around are crowds of loiterers , camels , dromedaries , sacks piled up ,
and all the wonted accompaniments of an Arab market .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.58

But we did not now stop to gaze , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.59

nor indeed did we pay much attention to all this ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.60

our first introduction to the monarch and the critical position before
us took up all our thoughts . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.61

So we paced on alongside of the long blind wall running out from the
central keep , and looking more like the outside of a fortress than of a
peaceful residence , till we came near a low and narrow gate , the only
entry to the palace . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.62

Deep sunk between the bastions , with massive folding-doors iron-bound ,
though thrown open at this hour of the day , and giving entrance into a
dark passage , one might easily have taken it for the vestibule of a
prison ; while the number of guards , some black , some white , but all
sword-girt , who almost choked the way , did not seem very inviting to
those without , especially to foreigners . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.63

Long earth-seats lined the adjoining walls , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.64

and afforded a convenient waiting-place for visitors ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.65

and here we took up our rest at a little distance from the palace gate ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.66

but Aboo-'Eysa entered at once to announce our arrival , and the
approach of the Na'ib . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.67

The morning was not far advanced , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,393.68

it might be eight o'clock <P_394> or little later .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.69

The passers-by were many , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.70

for the adjoining market was open , and every one coming and going on
his daily business . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.71

However no one approached to question us , though several stared ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.72

we were somewhat surprised at this unwonted absence of familiarity , not
yet fully knowing its cause . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.73

After a good half-hour's waiting the ice was broken .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.74

The first who drew near and saluted us was a tall meagre figure , of a
sallow complexion , and an intelligent but slightly ill-natured and
underhand cast of features . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.75

He was very well dressed , though of course without a vestige of
unlawful silk in his apparel , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.76

and a certain air of conscious importance tempered the affability of his
politeness . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.77

This was 'Abd-el-'Azeez , whom , for want of a better title , and
without the smallest allusion to Downing Street , I shall call the
minister of foreign affairs , such being the approximate translation of
his official style , " 'Wezeer-el-Kharijeeyah . "
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.78

His office extends to whatever does not immediately regard the internal
administration , whether political , fiscal , or military .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.79

Thus it is his to regulate the reception of ambassadors from foreign
courts , or the expedition of such from Riad itself ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.80

to his department belongs the conveyance of government letters ,
messages , and all the detail of lessee-affairs regarding allies or
neighbours , especially where the Bedouin tribes of Nejed are concerned
; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.81

in his keeping are the muster-rolls of the towns and provinces ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.82

and lastly , he exercises an executive superintendence over export and
import duties - a profitable charge , particularly when in the hands of
one not over-famed for strictness of conscience or contempt of gain .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.83

His personal qualities are those which distinguish the majority of old
Riad families , and are indeed common enough throughout 'Aared . A
reserved and equable exterior , a smooth tongue , a courteous though
grave manner , and beneath this , hatred , envy , rapacity , and
licentiousness enough to make his intimacy dangerous , his enmity mortal
, and his friendship suspected . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.84

This is the peculiar stamp of the 'Aared race , the pith and heart of
the " Wahhabee government ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.85

we have already seen a sample of it in Mohanna at Bereydah ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.86

but here it is a province of Mohannas . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.87

" Hateful and hating each other , " were words constantly recurring to
my mind while amongst them ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,394.88

and Saul or Doeg , Joab or Achitophel , may furnish their correct
<P_395> type to my readers . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.89

However , the base-work and ground-colour of their character is envy and
hatred ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.90

rapacity and licentiousness , though seldom wholly wanting , are
accessory embellishments ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.91

pride is universal , vanity rare . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.92

Add to this , great courage , endurance , persistence of purpose , an
inflexible will united to a most flexible cunning , passions that can
bide their time , and audacity long postponed till the moment to strike
once , and once only ; and it will be easily understood why the empire
of these men is alike widely spread and widely hated , submitted to and
loathed , now firm in quiet pressure , and now varied by broad
blood-streaks and desolating terror . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.93

But before I enter on the details of the fifty days that followed in
this strange town , and whatever remains to relate regarding it , I must
draw somewhat largely on the stock of confidence and belief which I
trust that my readers kindly afford me as an Englishman , though a
traveller . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.94

I am quite aware that the events , the characters , the scenes which I
must now set before them are in their telling subject to a double
inconvenience ; the first that of appearing , to some at least , hardly
credible , the second that of making myself much more often than is
desirable the hero of my own tale . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.95

But either inconvenience , however great , must of necessity yield to
the truth of facts ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.96

so it looked , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.97

and so it happened ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.98

I can only relate , and leave comments to others .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.99

My object is to give as correct , indeed as complete an idea as may be
of a land , a government , a town , a people , not uninteresting nor
uninstructive when considered whether in themselves or in the analogies
they present with other nations , systems , or governments .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.100

Such analogies , most often suggested by themselves beside or against my
will , can@ @not fail to present themselves to the minds of my readers ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.101

nor , if example be of any use , is it amiss that they should ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.102

our best glass for seeing our own selves is our neighbour's face .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.103

May I be permitted to hope that , whoever may perchance consider his
natural face in this Eastern mirror , will not at once , like one of old
, go his way , and forget what manner of man he was , or is ?
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.104

These remarks will , I trust , suffice as preface and apology , where
needed , for what follows . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.105

Accompanied by some attendants from the palace , 'Abd-el-'Azeez came
stately up , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.106

and seated himself by our side . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,395.107

He <P_396> next began the customary interrogations of whence and what ,
with much smiling courtesy and show of welcome .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,396.108

After hearing our replies , the same of course as those given elsewhere
, he invited us to enter the precincts , and partake of his Majesty's
coffee and hospitality , while he promised us more immediate
communications from the king himself in the course of the day .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,396.109

Accordingly we followed him within the gate , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,396.110

and passing its long and obscure continuation came into a sort of
interior lane , or open corridor . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,396.111

On one side were the apartments occupied by the sovereign , his private
audience-room , his oratory , so to call it , or special Musalla , "
place of prayer , " and behind these the chambers of his numerous harem
, and of his unmarried daughter , an old maid of fifty at least , who
acts as her father's secretary in important correspondence , and with
whom , for this very reason , Feysul has never been willing to part , in
spite of her numerous and pressing suitors . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,396.112

This quarter of the palace is spacious and lofty , three storeys in
height , and between fifty and sixty feet from the ground to the
roof-parapet . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,396.113

In these very rooms was Mesharee killed by 'Abd-Allah , the father of
our old acquaintance Telal . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,396.114

In front of this mass of building , but on the inner side and on the
right of the passage just mentioned , is a square unroofed court ,
surrounded with seats , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,396.115

and here Feysul sometimes gives a half-public audience .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,396.116

From this court a private door , well guarded and narrow like the first
, lead to the apartments described , which form , so to speak , a
separate palace within the palace . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,396.117

They own , however , a second point of communication with the rest of
the building , by means of a covered way , thrown out from the second
storey across the passage where we now stood ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,396.118

a third is given by the long gallery that leads above its columns to the
mosque at about a_hundred yards' distance ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,396.119

on all other sides whatever intercourse from without is carefully
excluded . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,396.120

I ought here to add that all the windows are strongly cross-barred , and
the doors solid and provided with stout locks and bolts , while on the
outside a glacis encircles the lower part of the walls , and adds to
their thickness , besides giving them the appearance of regular
fortification . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,396.121

Lastly , the ground-storey has no windows , large or small , opening on
the exterior , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,396.122

<P_397>

On the other side of the passage the first door we meet with is that of
the K'hawah . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.124

To this apartment entrance is given by a vestibule wherein visitors
deposit their shoes or swords , or both if they have both ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.125

the K'hawah itself is sufficiently large , about forty feet in length
and of nearly equal width , but low and ill-lighted .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.126

Farther on is another door , conducting to the prison .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.127

I visited two of its chambers or cells ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.128

they would hardly have attracted the censure even of a Howard - large ,
airy , and provided with whatever might be requisite for the comfort of
their indwellers . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.129

The Habs-ed-Dem , literally " Prison of Blood , " that is , that for
state criminals of the first order , is underneath , below ground ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.130

and probably affords worse lodgings ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.131

but I did not think it prudent to ask admittance .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.132

Just beyond this prison , and opposite to the courtyard on the other
side already mentioned , a long flight of stairs leads up through the
open air to the second storey ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.133

here is a guest's dining-room , capable of admitting forty at a time ,
and pleasantly cool . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.134

Immediately behind it is said to exist in the very thickness of the wall
a small closet , communicating with the secret passage to the harem ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.135

and in this unworthy niche popular scandal ensconces Feysul , who may
thus himself unseen overhear through the thin partition whatever escapes
his unsuspecting guests in a moment of convivial freedom , and record it
for his own ends . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.136

A Hamlet's rapier were the best thing for such rats behind the arras ,
the more so since here " Is it the king ? " might be answered in the
affirmative . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.137

Beyond are rooms inhabited by servants and attendants .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.138

Farther on the passage enters the main body of the palace , passing
under the second storey , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.139

and at once branches off on either side . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.140

Right hand it leads to the great kitchen , next to the indoors Musalla ,
or oratory for the inhabitants of the palace , Feysul and his harem
alone excepted ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.141

and beyond terminates in a second and spacious courtyard , on one side
of which is the arsenal and powder-magazine , and on the other workshops
of various descriptions , a watchmaker's among the rest , all for the
king's immediate service . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.142

Hard by the kitchen are the rooms of 'Abd-el-Hameed , native of Balkh ,
a dubious character , supposed to be deeply engaged in religious study ,
and really busied in very different pursuits ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,397.143

but of him <P_398> more anon . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.144

On this same side inhabits our friend 'Abd-el-'Azeez , the foreign
minister ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.145

but I never entered his saloon , contenting myself with identifying the
door and locality for information's sake . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.146

The left branch passage leads to the large and handsome apartments
tenanted by Mahboob , prime minister of the empire .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.147

Exactly opposite lives the Metow'waa' , or chaplain of the palace , and
next door to him another learned Nejdean , both plunged in studies on
antecedent reprobation , and the polytheism of all sects , their own
excepted . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.148

Farther on are the extensive quarters of Djowhar , the state-treasurer
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.149

<paren> his name , which being interpreted means " Jewel , " is at least
appropriate <$$paren> , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.150

and opposite to these is a long suite of rooms where lives one Nasir , a
sort of court chamberlain , but which are also at the disposal of Sa'ood
, second son of Feysul , when he visits his father at Riad .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.151

Last , but not least , Aboo-Shems , head artilleryman of the army ,
inhabits this same section of the palace . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.152

Besides these notables , a crowd of full sixty or seventy attendants ,
mostly negroes , are lodged within the precincts ; while all and each ,
from the highest to the lowest , have their separate apartments for the
numerous wives with which orthodoxy blesses them ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.153

and , again , every single household is entirely distinct from the rest
: PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.154

hence my readers may imagine how vast and how ill-assorted this mass of
building must be . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.155

Lastly , there exists on the left a long courtyard or area ,
corresponding to that already mentioned on the right ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.156

and here too is situated the Bab-es-Sirr , or secret gate , constructed
to serve in the eventualities of a siege , of treason , or other
desperate emergencies . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.157

The entire hive of habitations is surrounded by high walls and hollow
round towers for defence ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.158

two-thirds of the circuit have the additional safeguard of a deep trench
, but without water . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.159

If my readers have seen , as most of them undoubtedly will , the Paris
Tuileries , they may hereby know that the whole extent of Feysul's
palace equals about two-thirds of that construction , and is little
inferior to it in height ; if indeed we except the angular pyramidal
roofs or extinguishers peculiar to the French edifice .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.160

But in ornament the Parisian pile has the better of it ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.161

for there is small pretension to architectural embellishment in this
Wahhabee Louvre . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,398.162

Without , within , every <P_399> other consideration has been sacrificed
to strength and security ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.163

and the outer view of Newgate bears a very strong resemblance to the
general effect of Feysul's palace , though I know not how far the
interior of the London felon-cage may be like that of the Nejdean den of
thieves . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.164

However , this latter is at any rate well furnished and fitted up ,
especially in the sections allotted to the royal family themselves , to
Mahboob and to Djowhar ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.165

the upstairs rooms too are fairly lighted ; not so the ground-storey ,
which would be all the better for gas , could it but be introduced here
. PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.166

I should have said that the quarter set apart for royalty , that is ,
Feysul and his many queens , is itself a quadrangle with an inner court
, PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.167

but into this I was never permitted to enter ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.168

these are family apartments on which no prying eye may look .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.169

The divan for special receptions , the only room hereabouts into which a
stranger can be introduced , is large and comfortable , being about
fifty feet long , twenty or more in breadth , and high in proportion .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.170

In the first court , and in that on the left where resides the valorous
Aboo-Shems , several rusty specimens of artillery strike awe into Arab
souls . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.171

I counted above twenty field-pieces , half a dozen of them still
available for service ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.172

there were , I was told , others , which I did not see .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.173

At Hasa and Kateef there exist about thirty more ; so that Feysul's
battery-list may sum up sixty or so of these warlike engines ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.174

a fourth of them in all , according to my personal inspection , are fit
for use ; and the rest " as good , for aught his kingship knows , "
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.175

but they are " honeycombed . " PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.176

Such is the palace , as I afterwards came to know it in detail , and
such its contents . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.177

For the present we stopped short at our visit to the K'hawah .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.178

The head coffee-maker was a good-natured fellow , and , strange to say ,
not a negro , nor even a man of 'Aared , but from the Hareek ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.179

several guests were seated around , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.180

and conversation followed , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.181

but every one was manifestly under restraint . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.182

The fact is , that in this town , and yet more of course in the palace ,
no one ambitious of sleeping in a whole skin can give his tongue free
play ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.183

and all have in consequence the manner of boys when the schoolmaster is
at home . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.184

However , the coffee was excellent ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,399.185

in that <P_400> point Riad and its K'hawahs are unrivalled ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.186

and we remained awhile in aromatic enjoyment , awaiting further orders
from 'Abd-el-'Azeez , or some other of the court .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.187

But the coincident arrival of the Na'ib and his train was too serious a
preoccupation to admit of much thought being yet given to us ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.188

and when noon came we were still sitting almost disregarded in the
K'hawah , while our baggage and camels waited patiently in the sun
outside . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.189

At last a negro slave came up , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.190

and invited us in the king's name to dinner within the guest-room
upstairs , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.191

and there accordingly we ate our rice and mutton with a garnish of dates
, PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.192

and on rising from table were reminded by our dusky Ganymede to pray God
for a long reign to Feysul our host . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.193

Aboo-'Eysa meanwhile , in company with the outriders sent from the
palace , had gone to meet the Na'ib and introduce him to the lodgings
prepared for his reception . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.194

Very much was the Persian astounded to find none of the royal family
among those who thus came , no one even of high name or office ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.195

but yet more was his surprise when , instead of immediate admittance to
Feysul's presence and eager embrace , he was quietly led aside to the
very guest-room whither we had been conducted , and a dinner not a whit
more sumptuous than ours was set before him , after which he was very
coolly told that he might pray for Feysul and retire to his quarters ,
while the king settled the day and hour whereon he would vouchsafe him
the honour of an audience . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.196

I never saw any one so unutterably disgusted as our Persian on this
occasion . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.197

In broken Arabic , and loud enough to be heard by half the palace , he
vented his spleen against Arabs , Bedouins , Wahhabees , Nejed , town ,
country , and all . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.198

The men of 'Aared , who heard and half understood , looked very grave ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.199

but were much too polite to say anything . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.200

Perhaps Feysul too was there , invisible in his recess , to overhear the
conversation . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.201

Aboo-'Eysa well knew that antipathy was in this case mutual , and that
if the Na'ib thought the Wahhabees and their king mere barbarians ,
unworthy , in European phrase , to black his shoes , they , in their
turn , looked on him as a despicable foreigner , an infidel , and a
destined log for hell-fire , thus fairly equalizing the balance of
reciprocal aversion . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,400.202

<P_401>

Hence he could not but feel the position to be very uncomfortable ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.204

and tried to console the indignant Shirazee with excuses and
explanations of the " se non vero , ben trovato " kind .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.205

All this in our presence , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.206

for the Iranian band arrived just at the conclusion of our meal .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.207

I had much ado not to laugh at both parties , thinking " six of one and
, " &c , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.208

but tried my utmost to look grave , in consideration of the Nejdeans
around , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.209

and took my cue from Aboo-'Eysa . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.210

Meanwhile we suggested to this latter , in an undertone , that for us
too lodging for man and beast would be very desirable , and that if we
had dined our dromedaries had not . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.211

Our guide was well acquainted with the ins and outs of the palace ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.212

and in less than no time had found out 'Abd-el-'Azeez , and arranged
matters with him in our behalf . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.213

Nay , the minister of foreign affairs condescended to come in person ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.214

and , sweetly smiling , informed us that our temporary habitation was
ready , and that Aboo-'Eysa would conduct us thither without delay .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.215

We then begged to know , if possible , the king's good will and pleasure
regarding our stay and our business in the town .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.216

For on our first introduction we had duly stated , in the most correct
Wahhabee phraseology , that we had come to Riad " desiring the favour of
God , and secondly of Feysul ; and that we begged of God , and secondly
of Feysul , permission to exercise in the town our medical profession ,
under the protection of God , and in the next place of Feysul . "
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.217

For Dogberry's advice to " set God first , for God defend but God should
go before such villains , " is here observed to the letter ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.218

whatever is desired , purported , or asked , the Deity must take the
lead . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.219

Nor this only , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.220

but even the subsequent mention of the creature must nowise be coupled
with that of the Creator by the ordinary conjunction " w' , " that is ,
" and , " since that would imply equality between the two - flat
blasphemy in word or thought . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.221

Hence the disjunctive " thumma , " or " next after , " " at a distance ,
" must take the place of " w' , " under penalty of prosecution under the
statute . " PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.222

Unlucky the man who visits Nejed without being previously well versed in
the niceties of grammar , " said Barakat ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.223

" under these schoolmasters a mistake might cost the scholar his head .
" PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.224

But of this more anon : PALGRAVE2-1863-2,401.225

to return to our subject , 'Abd-el-'Azeez , a true politician , answered
our second interrogation <P_402> with a vague assurance of good will and
unmeaning patronage . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.226

, Meantime the Na'ib and his train marched off in high dudgeon to their
quarters , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.227

and Aboo-'Eysa gave our dromedaries a kick , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.228

made them rise , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.229

and drove them before us to our new abode . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.230

This was in a section of Djeloo'wee's palace , now vacant , as before
stated , through the absence of the prince on a half-military ,
half-fiscal expedition . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.231

A spacious K'hawah , with two adjoining rooms and an upstairs chamber ,
had been set apart for our use . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.232

We put up the dromedaries in the courtyard , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.233

and installed ourselves in the K'hawah . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.234

But it is time to " shift the scene , to represent " what measures were
being taken behind the stage in the palace itself on our account , and
what effect this morning's incidents had produced on Feysul and his
court . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.235

We were not long in learning the particulars , equally ludicrous and
characteristic of the land and of its rulers , and well calculated to
assign the full measure of their weakness , no less than other
circumstances had given us that of their strength .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.236

The facts were as follow : PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.237

- When Feysul received intelligence of this bevy of strangers at his
door , the Persian " charge_d'affaires " with all his grievances , the
Meccans with their impudent mendicity , and the Syrians with their
medical pretensions , he fairly lost his balance of mind ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.238

and went next to mad . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.239

Old and blind , superstitious and timid , bigoted and tyrannical ,
whatever construction the utmost conjecture could put on this motley
band thus rushing almost unannounced into his very capital , nay ,
encamped at the doors of his own palace , served only to augment his
alarm , suspicion , and disgust . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.240

The sacred centre of Nejdean orthodoxy profaned in one and the same
moment by the threefold abomination of Persians , Meccans , and Syrians
, Shiya'ees , Sonnees , and Christians , heretics , polytheists , and
infidels , was surely enough to call down fire from heaven , or awake an
earthquake from beneath . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.241

An invasion of cholera was the very least that could be next anticipated
. PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.242

There was , however , worse yet : PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.243

the begging Meccans might indeed be easily got rid of ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.244

and a scanty gift would , it was to be hoped , purchase the relief of
the capital from the pollution of their presence .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.245

But the Na'ib , with Teheran and the Shah of Persia at his back , was a
very different affair ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,402.246

and Feysul knew too well that <P_403> the complaints now about to be
laid before him were over-true , and that for all vexations inflicted by
Aboo-Boteyn or Mohanna , he himself , their master , was really and
ultimately responsible . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.247

Besides , it was precisely by the Persian dagger of a Persian assassin
that his ancestor 'Abd-el-'Azeez-ebn-Sa'ood had fallen ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.248

and who could tell whether the Na'ib , or at any rate one of his
attendants , might not have a similar weapon ready for the Chief of the
Orthodox ? PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.249

For the two Syrians , worse still . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.250

They must be Christians , possibly assassins , certainly magicians .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.251

The least to be apprehended from them was a spell , an evil eye ,
perhaps a poisonous incantation . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.252

To sum up , one and all were spies ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.253

of that at least there could be no doubt . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.254

Whether Mahboob , 'Abd-el-'Azeez , and the court in general , seriously
partook in the terrors of Feysul , I know not , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.255

nor much think it . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.256

However , they had the prudence to sing in their master's tune ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.257

and all pronounced the danger real and imminent .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.258

What measures then might yet avail to avert it ?
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.259

or how dispose of so many enemies at once ? PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.260

The unanimous conclusion was that , prudence being the best part of
valour , his most sacred Majesty should , without delay , escape from
the capital , and from the ill-omened vicinity of so many infidels and
sorcerers , spies and assassins , and conceal his royal person in some
secure retreat , while due measures should in his absence be taken to
sound the intentions and watch the proceedings of these most suspicious
strangers , and to anticipate or prevent their perfidious designs .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.261

Accordingly , hardly had the Na'ib retired to his appointed dwelling and
we to ours , while the Meccans had been stowed away in another nook ,
but not far off , when Feysul , accompanied by Mahboob , 'Abd-el-'Azeez
, and a few others , passed in great secrecy through the Bab-es-Sirr ,
left the castle , traversed the town as quietly as possible , and buried
himself in the recesses of a secluded garden belonging to 'Abd-er-Rahman
the Wahhabee . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.262

Guards were placed all round the orchard , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.263

and hope revived that , what between the remoteness of the spot , the
blessings of the pure orthodoxy of its possessor , the thickness of the
foliage , and the swords of the negroes , Feysul might yet elude the
contaminations of polytheism and the perils of assassination , spells ,
and evil eyes . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,403.264

Meanwhile a respite was <P_404> thus assured , and leisure gained for
better detecting the mystery of iniquity , and baffling it of its aim .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.265

No time was , however , to be lost , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.266

and the great engine of Wahhabee government , its spy system , than
which no Tiberius ever organized a better , was set in play .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.267

Meanwhile the unconscious conspirators and magicians were innocently
engaged in arranging their baggage , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.268

and were indulging themselves in the narcotic vapours which they had
been unable hitherto from sheer politeness to enjoy ; but not till after
carefully closing doors and windows , lest the odour of the " shameful "
should diffuse itself through the hallowed breezes of the street .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.269

Sudden a modest knock sounds at the door . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.270

Quick , pipes are laid aside ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.271

Barakat goes to the vestibule to enquire who may be outside ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.272

and gives the tobacco-smoke time to evaporate by a minute's delay ,
before he opens the entrance . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.273

In glided a figure that we were little prepared to see in Riad .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.274

Clad in the dress proper to Affghanistan , with an elegant white turban
, and the unmistakable features of the north-west Punjab frontiers ,
'Abd-el-Hameed , the seeming student of the palace , stood before us .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.275

A better spy , or one more likely to throw us off our guard , could not
have been hit upon . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.276

For in addition to his being a stranger like ourselves , and therefore
well calculated to attract our sympathy and open our hearts , he was
possessed of all that grace of manner and apparent candour which his
countrymen can so skilfully assume when required , and of which some of
my readers may not improbably have made experience in the East .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.277

Master in the school of dissimulation , so much so that he had even
taken in the Wahhabees themselves , who believed him anything but what
he really was , he might trust to succeed even with us , in spite of our
spells and divining art . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.278

This man was by his own account son of the governor of Balkh , and an
orthodox Sonnee of the Haneefee class . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.279

Having set out from his native land on a pilgrimage to Mecca , with
riches , attendants , and what_not , the very king's son of the
fairy-tale , he had , so said he , suffered a disastrous shipwreck on
some unknown rock in the Persian Gulf ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.280

and , harder still , pirates had robbed him of whatever the greedy deep
had spared . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,404.281

Servantless , moneyless , companionless , he had arrived on the <P_405>
Wahhabee frontiers , where the fame of Feysul's generosity had attracted
him to Riad , in hope of receiving necessary aid wherewithal to complete
his pilgrimage and return to his anxious parents .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,405.282

But once in that earthly paradise of piety and learning , he had opened
his eyes to the pure light and unadulterated faith of the Wahhabee , and
henceforth resolved to renounce home and all its pleasures , and to pass
his remaining days in the study and practice of genuine Islam , amid
congenial souls , far from tobacco , celestial mediators , and
polytheism . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,405.283

Provided by Feysul's liberality with a suitable equipment of books and
wives , he edified palace and town by his devout prayers and composed
exterior ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,405.284

his time was divided between the mosque and the harem , his mouth always
full of the praises of God and Feysul , his conversation invariably of
piety or women . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,405.285

No doubt could be entertained touching the sincerity of his conversion ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,405.286

and the sacrifice made by the fervent proselyte of ancestral halls and
rule was everywhere extolled and appreciated . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,405.287

It may seem almost cruel to tarnish such pure gold , or to detract from
so justly earned a reputation . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,405.288

But we are now far away from Riad , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,405.289

and it will do 'Abd-el-Hameed no wrong if another and a truer version of
his history is published in England . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,405.290

Native not of Balkh but of Peshawur , not a Sonnee but a Shiya'ee of the
Shiya'ees , no governor's son but of very plebeian extraction and worse
than plebeian morals , he had in a market squabble stabbed a man , and
anticipated justice by flight . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,405.291

Wandering about in an exile from which prudence could not permit him for
some years to return , he had fixed on Riad as a convenient retreat till
the storm at home should have blown over , and practised on Nejdean
gullibility by assuming the disguise which now he bore .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,405.292

But a true Shiya'ee at heart , he never failed to couple every uttered
blessing on the Caliphs , the Sahhabah , and their living copies around
him , with an inward curse on them all , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,405.293

and amused himself with the credulity of men whom he held in his heart
for very fools and infidels . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,405.294

Besides , board and lodging , good clothes , and plenty of wives were
excellent things , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,405.295

and with such solaces his period of banishment passed by agreeably
enough , while waiting till circumstances should permit him a safe
return to his own land . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,405.296

All this we learned subsequently through the Na'ib , who , <P_406>
himself a native of a cognate country , and in his earlier years a
frequent traveller in the upper valley of the Indus , proved , diamond
cutting diamond , too sharp for our Peshawuree , and entertained me with
a Hindoostanee version of the whole affair . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.297

Once on this cue , I set my own wits to work , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.298

and drew out of 'Abd-el-Hameed <paren> though this name , too , was a
mere alias , but I have forgotten his authentic denomination <$$paren>
sufficient confirmation of whatever the Shirazee had told .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.299

These facts , however unimportant in themselves , are worth recounting ,
because illustrative of many parallel episodes in Oriental history .
Not that perhaps , on the whole , imposture is much easier in the East
than in the West , or in ancient than in modern times .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.300

We have our own examples too ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.301

and if Europeans and recent centuries have a superior advantage in point
of critical learning and scientific investigation , Orientals , and the
bygone ages that they even now represent , have often all the keener
eyesight for practical search and detection , because less dulled by "
poring over miserable books . " PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.302

However , be it that " all men are liars , " as some one said it in
haste ; all men in common are capable of being deceived too , even Arabs
and Nejdeans . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.303

Our Peshawuree or Balkhee sat down , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.304

and after a few indifferent remarks began to consult me about some
ailment of his outer man . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.305

But this not being the exact object of his visit , he soon got off the
tack , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.306

and commenced cross-questioning and throwing out hints like
angling-hooks , in hopes to fish up truth from the bottom of the well .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.307

Meanwhile the two Meccans had dropped in , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.308

and were in their turn submitted to the same interrogatory system ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.309

but were not detained long , since the main purport of their business ,
namely , begging , was soon understood . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.310

So 'Abd-el-Hameed returned to the charge with us ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.311

tried me with Hindoostanee , Persian , and even a few words of broken
English , but all in vain , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.312

and ended by inwardly concluding that the matter was far from
satisfactory . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.313

Then he rose in a rather abrupt manner , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.314

and left us to give his report to those who had sent him .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.315

That this report was highly unfavourable I afterwards learnt .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.316

Not that he sincerely imagined our coming to have any dangerous import
for the person of Feysul , or that we were in truth professors of the
black art . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,406.317

But he was afraid of rivals <P_407> in the good graces and favours of
the palace , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.318

and felt like a tradesman who sees an opposition shop opening across the
way ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.319

hence he prudently desired to see us as far off as possible ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.320

and to this effect spared neither suggestion nor calumny .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.321

Not long had the Peshawuree quitted us , when another and a very
different but even more dangerous agent presented himself at our door ,
with an air bespeaking authority , varnished over by studied meekness ,
and a downcast eye ever prying to observe unobserved .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.322

It was a " Meddey'yee , " or " Zelator , " one of the secret council and
intimate organization of the Riad government . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.323

But considering that my readers are perhaps not sufficiently acquainted
with these functionaries , it will be best here to give a slight
digression regarding the first origin , the character , and the progress
of the " Meddey'yee " institution , and of those who compose it .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.324

This will throw more light than anything yet said on the Wahhabee
organization , of which the Meddey'yees are , in fact , the mainspring
and directors . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.325

Their institution , at least in its present form , is by no means of
ancient date : PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.326

it belongs to the present reign , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.327

and is due to recent events . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.328

In the year 1854 or 1855 , for precise accuracy of chronology in these
countries is utterly hopeless , the worldwide visitation of the cholera
, after travelling over the more important and thickly-@ @peopled lands
and kingdoms of the East , bethought itself of Central Arabia , hitherto
, it might seem , forgotten or neglected by that scourge in the midst of
more urgent occupations . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.329

Crossing the desert from the west , it fell on Nejed like a thunderbolt
, PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.330

and began its usual ravages , with a success totally unchecked , my
readers may well imagine , by any preventive or curative measures .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.331

The upper mountain district of Sedeyr alone escaped ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.332

the lower provinces of Yema-mah , Hareek , Woshem , and Dowasir suffered
fearfully , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.333

and the 'Aared itself was one of the most severely treated .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.334

The capital , lying in a damp valley , and close-@ @built , was
depopulated ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.335

a third of its inhabitants are said to have perished within a few weeks
; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.336

among the victims were some members of the royal family , and many
others of aristocratic descent . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,407.337

Now , so it was , that for some years previous , relaxation in religious
and sectarian peculiarities had been introducing itself <P_408> into
Riad ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.338

prosperity , and yet more the preceding Egyptian occupation , followed
by frequent intercourse with the men and government of Cairo , an
intercourse continued during the entire reign of 'Abbas Basha , nor
wholly interrupted under that of Sa'eed , had combined to encourage this
deplorable falling-away . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.339

Usages which , when known only through the medium of polemical treatises
and controversial diatribe , excited just horror , now seemed less
abominable on practical acquaintance and closer view , so contagious is
bad example . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.340

The " shameful " had sent up its vapours in the K'hawahs of the capital
, PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.341

and heads had been seen profaned by the iniquity of silk and gold thread
. PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.342

No reasonable mind could hesitate whence the origin of the cholera ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.343

the crime was notorious , the punishment mere justice .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.344

Of course the best , indeed the only , remedy for the epidemic was a
speedy reform , and an efficacious return to the purity and intolerance
of better days . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.345

Feysul now convoked an assembly of all the principal men in the town .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.346

When met , he addressed them in a speech with which I shall not tire the
patience of my readers , though my own had to bear with its rehearsal .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.347

It consisted mainly of those arbitrary and unadvised interpretations of
the ways of Providence to man , unfortunately common everywhere , and
justifiable nowhere . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.348

The upshot was , that they had all done wrong , very wrong ; that great
scandals had been given or permitted ; that the fine gold had become
unquestionably dim , and the silver alloyed with dross , and that their
only hope lay in strict search and trial of their ways , with suitable
repentance and reform . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.349

But for himself , added the monarch , he was now old and infirm , nor
able unaided and alone to carry into effect measures proportioned to the
gravity of the occasion . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.350

Accordingly he discharged the obligation of his own conscience on theirs
, PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.351

and rendered them responsible before the God of Islam for the longer
duration of the cholera , or whatever else might take place , should his
timely warning be neglected . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.352

The elders of the town retired , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.353

held long consultation , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.354

and returning , proposed the following scheme , which received the
kingly ratification . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,408.355

From among the most exemplary and zealous of the inhabitants twenty-two
were to be selected , and entitled " Meddey'yeeyah , " " men of zeal , "
or " Zelators , " such being the <P_409> nearest word in literal
translation , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,409.356

and this I shall henceforth employ , to spare Arab cacophony .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,409.357

Candidates of the requisite number were soon found and mustered .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,409.358

On these twenty-two Feysul conferred absolute power for the extirpation
of whatever was contrary to Wahhabee doctrine and practice , and to good
morals in general , from the capital firstly , and then from the entire
empire . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,409.359

No Roman censors in their most palmy days had a higher range of
authority , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,409.360

or were less fettered by all ordinary restrictions .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,409.361

Not only were these Zelators to denounce offenders ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,409.362

but they might also in their own unchallenged right inflict the penalty
incurred , beat and fine at discretion , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,409.363

nor was any certain limit assigned to the amount of the mulct , or to
the number of the blows . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,409.364

Most comprehensive too was the list of offences brought under the
animadversion of these new censors : PALGRAVE2-1863-2,409.365

absence from public prayers , regular attendance five times a day in the
public mosques being henceforth of strict obligation ; smoking tobacco ,
taking snuff , or chewing <paren> this last practice , vulgarly entitled
" quidding , " had been introduced by the jolly tars of Koweyt and other
seaports of the Persian Gulf <$$paren> ; wearing silk or gold ; talking
or having a light in the house after night prayers ; singing , or
playing on any musical instrument ; nay , even all street games of
children or childish persons : these were some of the leading articles
on the condemned list , and objects of virtuous correction and severity
. PALGRAVE2-1863-2,409.366

Besides , swearing by any other name save that of God , any approach to
an invocation , or even ejaculation directed to aught but Him ; in short
, whatever in word or deed , in conversation or in conduct , might
appear to deviate from the exact orthodoxy of the letter of the Coran
and the Wahhabee commentary , was to be denounced , or even punished on
the spot . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,409.367

Lastly , their censorship extended over whatever might afford suspicion
of irregular conduct ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,409.368

for instance , strolling about the streets after nightfall , entering
too frequently a neighbour's house , especially at hours when the male
denizens may be presumed absent , with any apparent breach of the laws
of decorum or decency ; all these were rendered offences amenable to
cognizance and correctional measures . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,409.369

It is easy to imagine what so wide-reaching a power might become when
placed in the hands of interested or vindictive administrators .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,409.370

However , the number of the Zelators <P_410> themselves , and the innate
toughness and resistance of the Arab character , somewhat diminished the
ill consequences which might naturally have been expected from this
over-absolute and scarce-@ @defined authority , though many and most
atrocious instances of its exercise and abuse were related in my hearing
. PALGRAVE2-1863-2,410.371

These Zelators are bound to a very simple style of dress , devoid of
ornament or pretension ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,410.372

they may not even wear the sword , mark of directly temporal or military
authority . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,410.373

But in compensation , each one bears in hand a long staff , which serves
the double object of official badge and instrument of chastisement ,
much like the truncheon of our own policeman ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,410.374

this , combined with downcast eyes , slow walk , subdued tone of voice ,
the head-dress drawn cowl-fashion low over the forehead , but without
head-band , and a constant gravity of demeanour , suffices to
distinguish them at first sight from the ordinary crowd .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,410.375

Of course , in their conversation , pious texts and ejaculations ,
accompanied by the forefinger upraised every half-minute at least , in
season and out of season , to testify to the unity of God , are even
more frequent with them than among the common faithful .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,410.376

Pacing from street to street , or unexpectedly entering the houses to
see " if there is anything incorrect going on there , they do not
hesitate to inflict at once , and without any preliminary form of trial
or judgment , the penalty of stripes on the detected culprit , be he who
he may ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,410.377

and should their own staves prove insufficient , they straightway call
in the assistance of bystanders or slaves , who throw the guilty
individual prone on the ground , and then in concert with the Zelator
belabour him at pleasure . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,410.378

A similar process is adopted for those whom negligence has kept from
public prayer ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,410.379

the Zelator of the quarter , accompanied by a band of the righteous ,
all well armed with stout sticks , proceeds to the designated dwelling ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,410.380

and demands an entrance , which no one dares refuse .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,410.381

It is then a word and a blow , or rather many blows and few words , till
the undevout shortcomer is quickened into new fervour by the most cogent
of all <font> a posteriori <$$font> arguments .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,410.382

Should he happen to be absent from home at the moment of the visit , nay
, sometimes even after the administration of the healing chastisement ,
a pledge for future good conduct , as a cloak , a sword , a head-dress ,
or the like , is taken from <P_411> the house , nor restored till
several days of punctual attendance at the Mesjid have repaired the
scandal of past negligence , and proved the sincerity of the conversion
by its perseverance . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.383

But should any rash individual attempt to resist force by force , he may
be sure of the roughest treatment ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.384

and should he lift his hand against the sacred person of the Zelator ,
the sacrilegious member is destined to the block and the knife .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.385

However , where direct mutilation or capital punishment is due , for
instance , in a case of avowed and formal heresy or infidelity , the
crime is referred to the tribunal of Feysul himself ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.386

nor does he fail to prosecute the culprit with the utmost rigour .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.387

Furnished with such powers , and backed up by the whole weight of
government , it may be easily supposed that the new broom swept clean ,
and that the first institution of the Zelators was followed by
root-and-branch work . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.388

Rank itself was no protection , high birth no shelter ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.389

and private or political enmities now found themselves masters of their
aim . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.390

Djeloo'wee , Feysul's own brother , was beaten with rods at the door of
the king's own palace for a whiff of tobacco-smoke ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.391

and his royal kinsman could not or would not interfere to save him from
undergoing at fifty an ignominy barely endurable at fifteen .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.392

Soweylim , the prime minister , and predecessor of Mahboob , was on a
similar pretext , but in reality <paren> so said universal rumour
<$$paren> at the instigation of a competitor for his post , seized one
day while on his return homeward from the castle , thrown down , and
subjected to so protracted and so cruel a fustigation that he expired on
the morrow . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.393

If such was the chastisement prepared for the first personages in the
state , what could plebeian offenders expect ? PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.394

Many were the victims , many the backs that smarted , and the limbs
crippled or broken . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.395

Tobacco vanished , though not <font> in fumo , <$$font>
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.396

and torn silks strewed the streets PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.397

or rotted on the dunghills ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.398

the mosques were crowded , and the shops deserted .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.399

In a few weeks the exemplary semblance of the outward man of the capital
might have moved the admiration of the first Wahhabee himself .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.400

Similar measures were enforced throughout Nejed .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.401

Fervent Zelators , armed with rods and Corans , and breathing out
vengeance upon all " right-hand and left-hand defections , " visited the
various towns and villages with the happiest results ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,411.402

and <P_412> the entire 'Aared , Sedeyr , Woshem , Yemamah , and their
neighbours , were speedily reformed and remodelled on the pattern of
Riad . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.403

But the zeal for revival did not stop here . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.404

The " infidels " of Kaseem and Hasa , along with the backsliders of
Hareek , were now to learn that Feysul would not tolerate any longer
among them crimes reprobated by the genuine believers , and that they in
their turn must conform at least their exterior to the decencies of
orthodoxy , whatever might be the fashion of their hearts and minds .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.405

Missions , headed by Zelators , were organized ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.406

and a crusade against the prevailing scandals of the guilty provinces
was set on foot . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.407

But in spite of the practical arguments that accompanied the Word ,
orthodoxy was destined here to meet with but a partial triumph .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.408

A strong reaction manifested itself , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.409

and in some places , at Bereydah in Kaseem for example , and at Zekkarah
in Hasa , blows were returned with interest , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.410

and in one village of Kaseem at least , to my knowledge , the ardour of
the Zelator was allayed by a sound ducking in a neighbouring pond .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.411

A compromise now took place : PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.412

dresses wherein silk should not exceed a third part , or at most a half
, of the material , were permitted , though with a sigh ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.413

and tobacco vendors or smokers were henceforth to content themselves
with observing decent privacy in the sale or consumption of the
forbidden article , on which condition they might do as they chose ,
unmolested , save in the public streets or market-place .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.414

Compulsory attendance at prayers was rarely enforced ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.415

and the roll-call of names , customary in the mosques of Nejed , was
elsewhere prudently omitted . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.416

However , a certain degree of outward conformity had been attained ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.417

and with that Feysul and his Star Chamber were fain to content
themselves for the moment , and hope for better times .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.418

Of the Zelator mission at Ha'yel and in Djebel Shomer , with its exit ,
I have already spoken ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.419

further results of the Wahhabee revival remain for mention when our
narrative reaches in its course the provinces of the east .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.420

But even in Nejed and in Riad itself the overstretched cord ended by
relaxing a little , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.421

nor could the unpopularity of the new institution remain wholly
concealed . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,412.422

Yet it was kept up , though the cholera , scared no doubt by the
tremendous <P_413> outbreak of orthodox severity , had fled the land ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.423

nor was the theory of the new censorship changed ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.424

only its practical exercise assumed a milder form , while the thing
itself was carefully maintained , a bulwark against future heaven-sent
scourges or earthly fallings-away , and a powerful administrative engine
or rod when required . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.425

The slaves were indeed less busy than before , and the domestic visits
of rarer occurrence ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.426

chastisement was sometimes preceded by admonition , and the dorsal
vertebras of culprits more seldom broken . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.427

But the number of the Zelators was constantly filled up , whenever death
or retirement occasioned a vacancy ; the nomination of each new
candidate depending on themselves , and in concert with Feysul .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.428

Twice every week they have official right to a private audience of the
king ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.429

the days assigned are Monday and Thursday , the hour sunrise or a little
earlier . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.430

No small or unimportant favour this from a monarch whose public
audiences are at the very most once a month , and who in private is
almost inaccessible to all save his prime minister , his negro slaves ,
and his harem . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.431

The Zelators are , in fact , the real council of state ;
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.432

and no question of peace or war , alliance or treaty , but is suggested
or modified by them . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.433

They represent what we may with all due respect entitle the High
Conservative party , amid that inevitable tendency of all organized
society to advancement , from which not even Wahhabees are exempt .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.434

But more of this and of them hereafter . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.435

Meanwhile I might almost leave my readers to suppose in what light such
a body , and those who compose it , are regarded by the mass of the
population . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.436

Surrounded with all the deference and all the odium consequent on their
office and character , they meet everywhere with marks of open respect
and covert distrust and hatred . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.437

Are a circle of friends met in the freedom of conversation ?
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.438

let a Zelator enter , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.439

their voices are hushed ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.440

and when talk is resumed , it follows a tack in which the recording
angels of Islam themselves would find nothing to modify .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.441

Are a bevy of companions walking gaily with too light a gait down the
street ? PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.442

at the meeting of a Zelator , all compose their pace ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.443

and direct their eyes in momentary modesty on the ground .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.444

Is a stealthy lamp lighted at unreasonable hours ?
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,413.445

at a rap on the shutters suspected for <P_414> that of the Zelator , the
" glim is doused , " PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.446

and all is silent in darkness . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.447

Or , worse than all , is the forbidden pipe sending up its sinful fumes
in some remote corner ? PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.448

at the fatal tap on the outer door , the unholy implement is hastily
emptied out into the hearth , and then carefully hidden under the carpet
, while everyone hurries to wash his mouth and mustachios , and by the
perfume of cloves or aromatic herbs give himself an orthodox smell once
more . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.449

In short , schoolboys caught out by a severe under-master at an illicit
prank , pious ladies surprised in reading the last French novel , or
teetotallers suddenly discovered with a half-empty black bottle and
tumbler on the table , never look more awkward , more silly , and more
alarmed than Nejdeans on these occasions when a Zelator comes upon them
. PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.450

I was often more especially amused <paren> to anticipate incidents of
the following days <$$paren> by the figure Aboo-'Eysa used to make in
such a scrape . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.451

He knew the Zelators for what they were , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.452

and they too knew him for what he was ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.453

but high court protection and a position of wealth and influence in the
one party , and an official character not to be insulted with impunity
in the other , occasioned a degree of mutual forbearance , curiously
constrained and transparently comic . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.454

While the fury of religious renovation lasted , Aboo-'Eysa had prudently
kept out of harm's way ; PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.455

and if indispensable business drew him to Riad , would pitch a tent
without the walls , there with his boon-companions to smoke , eat and
drink , and curse the Zelators , nor enter the city save by stealth ,
and to visit the palace only . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.456

Now that the first fervour , like all first fervours , had somewhat
cooled down , he ventured on lodging within the town ,
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.457

and only took care to be out of the way on Fridays or at prayer-time .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.458

However , while he was in the capital his silken robe judiciously
disappeared , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.459

his ornamental head-kerchief was folded up and laid aside to make place
for an old cotton rag , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.460

and he studiously avoided certain devouter quarters of the town and the
vicinity of the great Wahhabee family . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.461

As for paying any one of them a visit , he would as soon have called on
the fiend himself . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.462

But when unavoidable necessity or chance brought him in their way , he
did his best to look very good , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.463

and measured his conversation with suitable decorum of phrase .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,414.464

They , on the other hand , condescendingly winked at frailties <P_415>
decently though imperfectly veiled , PALGRAVE2-1863-2,415.465

and affected not to notice what could not be wholly hidden .
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,415.466

However , in the moments of mutual absence neither spared the other :
PALGRAVE2-1863-2,415.467

Aboo-'Eysa named them " dogs , " " hypocrites , " and much more ; while
the fingers of the Zelators tingled to be at the praiseworthy occupation
of " purifying his hide , " PALGRAVE2-1863-2,415.468

for so the profane technicality of Nejed styles the merited chastisement
of dissenters and ill-doers . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,415.469

But it is time to return to our new acquaintance , the occasion of this
long digression . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,415.470

'Abbood , for such was his name , though I never met the like before or
after in Arabia Proper , however common it may be in Syria and Lebanon ,
took a different and a more efficacious mode of espionage than
'Abd-el-Hameed had done before him . PALGRAVE2-1863-2,415.471

