<BEGIN_palgrave1-185x-2>

<P_3,295>

<heading>

Chapter VI . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,295.4

The Invasion . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,295.5

1066 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,295.6

<$$heading>

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 1 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,295.8

Upon the death of Edward the Confessor , there were three claimants to
the crown - his good Cousin , William of Normandy - and his good
Brother-in-law , Harold - each of whom respectively founded their
pretensions upon the real or supposed devise of the late king - and
Edgar Atheling , the son of Edward the Outlaw , who ought to have stood
on firmer ground . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,295.9

If kindred had any weight , he was the real heir - the lineal descendant
of Ironside - and the only male now left of the house of Cerdic ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,295.10

and he also is said to have been nominated by Edward , as the successor
to the throne . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,295.11

Each of these competitors had his partisans : PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,295.12

but , whilst William was absent , and Edward young and poor , perhaps
timid and hesitating , Harold was on the spot ; a man of mature age , in
full vigour of body and mind ; possessing great influence and great
wealth . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,295.13

And on the very day that Edward was laid in his grave , Harold prevailed
upon or compelled the prelates and nobles assembled at Westminster , to
accept him as king ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,295.14

Some of our historians <P_3,296> say , that he obtained the diadem by
force . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,296.15

This is not to be understood as implying actual violence ; but simply ,
that the greater part of those who recognised him , acted against their
wishes and will . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,296.16

And if our authorities are correct , Stigand , Archbishop of Canterbury
, but who had been suspended by the Pope , was the only prelate who
acknowledged his authority . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,296.17

Some portions of the Anglo-Saxon dominions never seem to have submitted
to Harold . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,296.18

In others , a sullen obedience was extorted from the people , merely
because they had not power enough to raise any other king to the throne
. PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,296.19

Certainly the realm was not Harold's by any legal title .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,296.20

The son of Godwin could have no inherent right whatever to the
inheritance of Edward ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,296.21

nor had the Anglo-Saxon crown ever been worn by an elective monarch .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,296.22

The constitutional rights of the nation extended , at farthest , to the
selection of a king from the royal family ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,296.23

and if any kind of sanction was given by the Witan to the intrusion of
Harold , the act was as invalid as that by which they had renounced the
children of Ethelred , and acknowledged the Danish line .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,296.24

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 2 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,296.25

Harold is stated to have shewn both prudence and courage in the
government of the kingdom ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,296.26

and he has been praised for his just and due administration of justice .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,296.27

At the same time he is , by other writers , reprobated as a tyrant ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,296.28

and he is particularly blamed for his <P_3,297> oppressive enforcement
of the forest-laws . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,297.29

Towards his own partisans , Harold may have been ostentatiously just ,
while the ordinary exercise of the royal prerogative would appear
tyrannical to those who deemed him to be an usurper .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,297.30

Harold , as the last Anglo-Saxon ruler , has often been viewed with
peculiar partiality ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,297.31

but it is perhaps difficult to justify these feelings .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,297.32

He had no clear title to the crown in any way whatever .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,297.33

Harold was certainly not the heir ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,297.34

Edward's bequest in his favour was very dubious ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,297.35

and he failed to obtain that degree of universal consent to his
accession , which , upon the ordinary principles of political expediency
can alone legalize a change of dynasty . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,297.36

The Anglo-Saxon power had been fast verging to decay . As against their
common sovereign , the earls were rising into petty kings .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,297.37

North of the Humber , scarcely a shadow of regular government existed ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,297.38

and even if the Norman had never trod the soil of England , it would
have been scarcely possible for the son of Godwin to have maintained
himself in possession of the supreme authority .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,297.39

Any of the great nobles who divided the territory of the realm might
have preferred as good a claim , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,297.40

and they probably would have been easily incited to risk such an attempt
. PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,297.41

Hitherto , the crown , had been preserved ; from domestic invasion by
the belief that royalty belonged exclusively to the children of Woden .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,297.42

- Fluctuating as the rules of succession <P_3,298> had been , the
political faith in the " right royal kindred " excluded all competition
, except as amongst the members of a particular caste or family ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.43

but the charm was now broken - PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.44

the mist which had hitherto enveloped the sovereign magistracy was
dispelled - PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.45

and the way to the throne was opened to any competitor .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.46

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 3 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.47

William was hunting in the Park of Rouen , surrounded by a noble train
of knights , esquires , and damsels when a " Serjeant , " just arrived
from England , hastened into his presence , and related the events which
had happened : - Edward's death , and Harold's assumption of the crown .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.48

- The bow dropped out of the hand of the Norman ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.49

and he was unnerved by anxiety and surprise . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.50

William fastened and loosened his mantle , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.51

spake not , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.52

and looked so fierce and fell , that no one ventured to address him .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.53

Entering a skiff , he crossed the Seine , still silent ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.54

stalked into the great hall of his palace , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.55

threw himself into a seat , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.56

wrapped his head in his mantle , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.57

and bent his body downwards , apparently overwhelmed .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.58

- " Sirs " - said William de Breteuil the Seneschal , to the enquiring
crowd - " ye will soon know the cause of our lord's anxiety ; "
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.59

- and then , approaching his master , he roused the Duke by telling him
that everybody in the streets of Rouen would soon hear of the death of
Edward , and of his claims to the succession .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.60

William instantly recovered from his reverie ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,298.61

and upon the advice of a Norman baron , Fitz-Osbern <P_3,299> the Bold ,
it was determined that he should forthwith require Harold , the sworn
liegeman of William , to surrender the inheritance , and to perform the
engagements which he had contracted with the Norman Sovereign .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,299.62

Harold answered , that the kingdom was not his to bestow : implying no
doubt , that he could not make the transfer without the consent of the
Witenagemot . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,299.63

He also alleged distinctly , that he could not marry Adela without the
advice of the nobility of his realm . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,299.64

If this assertion be taken in its strict sense , we must suppose that ,
as the queen had some , though a very undefined share in the royal
authority , she could not be raised to that rank without the assent of
the legislature . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,299.65

But perhaps we must receive the expressions according to a more
qualified construction ; and suppose that Harold merely meant to say ,
that it was not expedient for an English king to choose a wife in such a
manner as might render him unpopular . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,299.66

But these excuses need not be weighed very accurately .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,299.67

Other parts of Harold's reply were scurrilous and insulting ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,299.68

and the whole is only to be considered as an intimation that the son of
Godwin defied the power of William , the Bastard of Normandy .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,299.69

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 4 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,299.70

Harold did not feel his own weakness , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,299.71

and he scarcely knew the resources of his adversary .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,299.72

Normandy , at this period , was in the height of its prosperity .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,299.73

Under the prudent government <P_3,300> of the late Dukes , Richard and
Robert , there had arisen a race of wise , active , and loyal nobility .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,300.74

The heads of the great houses of Beaumont , Montgomery , Fitz-Osbern ,
Mortimer , and Giffard , were stout of heart and strong of hand :
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,300.75

they could give the best counsel , and execute the counsel which they
gave ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,300.76

and in the great parliament assembled at Lillebonne , the barons
determined to assist their Sovereign in his contest with the English
usurper , the perjured Harold . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,300.77

In this memorable meeting , there was at first much diversity of opinion
. PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,300.78

The Duke could not command his vassals to cross the sea ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,300.79

their tenures did not compel them to such a service .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,300.80

William could only request their aid , to fight his battles in England ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,300.81

many refused to engage in this dangerous expedition ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,300.82

and great debates arose . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,300.83

Fitz-Osbern exhorted his peers to obey the wishes of their liege lord .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,300.84

After some discussion they allowed the intrepid Baron to be their
spokesman ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,300.85

and in their name did he engage that each feudatory should render double
the service to which he was bound by his tenure ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,300.86

and , moreover , he , Fitz-Osbern , promised to fit out , at his own
expense , sixty vessels , all filled with chosen warriors .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,300.87

Fitz-Osbern might make any promise on his own part , to which he was
stimulated by his loyalty . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,300.88

But the other barons had not empowered him to assent on their behalf to
bind <P_3,301> them to similar exertions ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,301.89

and whilst he was speaking , such an outcry of disapprobation arose that
it seemed as if the very roof of the Hall would be rent asunder .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,301.90

William , who could not restore order , withdrew into another apartment
: PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,301.91

and calling the barons to him one by one , he argued and reasoned with
each of these sturdy vassals separately , and apart from the others .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,301.92

He exhausted all the arts of persuasion ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,301.93

- their present courtesy - he engaged - should not be turned into a
precedent ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,301.94

the troops now granted as a favour should never be demanded as a right
by himself or his successors ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,301.95

and the fertile fields of England should be the recompense of their
fidelity . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,301.96

- Upon this prospect of remuneration , the barons assented ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,301.97

and , that they might not retract , the ready clerk wrote down in his
roll the number of knights and vassals which each prelate and baron
would furnish to this expedition . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,301.98

William did not confine himself to his own subjects .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,301.99

All the adventurers and adventurous spirits of the neighbouring States
were invited to join his standard . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,301.100

Armorica , now called Brittany , had become a fief of Normandy ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,301.101

and though the Duke could not compel the baronage of that country to
serve in his army , still they willingly yielded to his influence .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,301.102

Alan Fergant , and Bryan , the two sons of Eudo , Count of Brittany ,
came with a numerous train of Breton knights , all ready for the
conflict - <P_3,302> perhaps eager to avenge the wrongs of Arthur upon
the Saxons , who had usurped the land of their ancestors .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,302.103

Others poured in from Poitou and Maine ; from Flanders and Anjou ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,302.104

and to all , such promises were made as should best incite them to the
enterprise - lands , - liveries , - money , - according to their rank
and degree ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,302.105

and the port of St. Pierre-sur-Dive was appointed as the place where
all the forces should assemble . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,302.106

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 5 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,302.107

William had discovered four most valid reasons for the prosecution of
his offensive warfare against a neighbouring people : - the bequest made
by his Cousin ; - the perjury of Harold ; - the expulsion of the Normans
, at the instigation , as he alleged , of Godwin ; - and , lastly , the
massacre of the Danes by Ethelred on St. Brice's day .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,302.108

- The alleged perjury of Harold enabled William to obtain the sanction
of the Papal See . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,302.109

Alexander , the Roman Pontiff , allowed , nay , even urged him to punish
the crime , provided England , when conquered , should be held as the
fief of St. Peter . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,302.110

In this proceeding , His Holiness took upon himself to act judicially ,
and in solemn consistory ; not , however , without opposition ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,302.111

- but the measure was carried : PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,302.112

and Hildebrand , Archdeacon of the church of Rome , afterwards the
celebrated Pope Gregory VII. , greatly assisted by the support which he
gave to the decree . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,302.113

As a visible token of protection , the Pope <P_3,303> transmitted to
William the consecrated banner , the Gonfanon of St. Peter , and a
precious ring , in which a relic of the Chief of the Apostles was
enclosed . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,303.114

Nothing could be more futile than the pretext that the war was
undertaken for the purpose of redressing the wrongs sustained by
Archbishop Robert and his companions , or of avenging the slaughter
committed by Ethelred ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,303.115

and the sanction given by the Pope was in itself an attack upon the
temporal authority . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,303.116

Yet the colour of right , which William endeavoured to obtain , shows a
degree of deference to public opinion ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,303.117

he was anxious to prove that his attempt was not prompted by mere
ambition or avarice ; and that at all events , supposing Edward's
bequest might be disputed , he was justified in his attempt by good
conscience and honour . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,303.118

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 6 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,303.119

There was little regular communication between England and the Continent
; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,303.120

but it was impossible that the extensive preparations of William should
remain unknown to Harold ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,303.121

and he immediately began to provide for defence .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,303.122

He mustered his forces at Sandwich , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,303.123

and then he took his station at the Isle of Wight , during the whole of
the summer and part of the autumn . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,303.124

Such a navy as he could assemble guarded the coast , while his land
forces were encamped on the shore . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,303.125

During this period he transmitted a spy , to procure further particulars
of the forces which the Normans had raised . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,303.126

The agent was <P_3,304> discovered , and carried to William , by whom he
was received without either harshness or affectation of concealment ,
and dismissed without harm . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,304.127

The spy was informed by the Duke , that Harold need not take any trouble
or incur any expense for the purpose of ascertaining the Norman strength
; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,304.128

for he would see it , aye , and feel it too , within the year .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,304.129

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 7 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,304.130

The computation of the navy assembled by William has varied exceedingly
. PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,304.131

Master Wace , to whose Poetical Chronicle we are so largely indebted ,
relates , that he often heard his father say , that the number of
vessels amounted to six_hundred_and_ninety-six ; but that he found it
stated in writing , that upwards of three_thousand had been assembled .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,304.132

This latter computation , probably , included all the smaller barks ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,304.133

but , be that as it may , the fleet was the largest which had ever been
seen ! PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,304.134

William's own Vessel , which had been given to him by his wife Matilda ,
was distinguished above the rest ; at night by the cresset which flamed
on the top mast ; and in the day , by its resplendent ornaments and
decorations . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,304.135

The crimson sails swelled to the wind , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,304.136

the gilded vanes glittered in the sun , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,304.137

- and at the head of the ship was the effigy of a child , armed with a
bow and arrow and ready to discharge his shaft against hostile land .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,304.138

The gathering of the fleet at the mouth of the Dive had been delayed by
contrary gales , and <P_3,305> other mischances .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,305.139

The ships sailed to the Somme , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,305.140

but the winds were still unfavourable . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,305.141

The relics of St. Valery were brought forth from their shrine .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,305.142

On the eve of St. Michael , the patron of Normandy , a prosperous gale
arose , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,305.143

and the whole armament was wasted in safety across the waves .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,305.144

Want of provisions , and other circumstances , had compelled Harold to
draw off his forces from the coast , which was entirely unprotected ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,305.145

and when the Norman armada approached the shore of England , between
Hastings and Pevensey , not the slightest opposition could be offered to
the invaders . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,305.146

As the vessels approached , and as the masts rose higher and higher on
the horizon , the peasantry who dwelt on the coast , and who had
congregated on the cliffs , gazed with the utmost alarm at the hostile
vessels , which , as they well knew , were drawing near for the conquest
of England ; portended by the fearful comet blazing in the sky .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,305.147

The alarm spread - PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,305.148

and one of the few Thanes who were left in the shire of the South Saxons
- for the greater part were on duty in the north - galloped up to a
rising ground to survey the operations of the enemy .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,305.149

The Thane saw the boats pushing through the surf , glistening with
shields and spears ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,305.150

in others , stood the war-horses ; neighing and pawing at the prospect
of release from their irksome captivity . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,305.151

Now followed the archers , closely <P_3,306> shorn , arrayed in a light
and unincumbering garb ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,306.152

each held his long bow , strung for the fight , in his hand ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,306.153

and by his side hung the quiver , filled with those cloth-yard shafts ,
which , in process of time , became the favourite and national weapon of
the yeomanry of England . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,306.154

The archers leap out of the boats , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,306.155

disperse themselves on the shore , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,306.156

and station themselves in the out-posts , so as to protect , if
necessary , the heavy armed troops who are about to disembark .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,306.157

The knights are now seen ; carefully and heavily treading along the
planks , each covered with his hawbergeon of mail , his helmet laced ,
the shield well strengthened with radiating bars of iron , depending
from his neck , his sword borne by his attendant esquire .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,306.158

The gleaming steel-clad multitude cover the shingly beach in apparent
disorder , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,306.159

but they rapidly separate , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,306.160

and , in a few moments , each warrior is mounted upon his steed .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,306.161

Banners , pennons , and pennoncels are raised ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,306.162

the troops form into squadrons , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,306.163

and advance upon the land , which they already claim as their possession
. PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,306.164

Boat after boat poured out the soldiery of the various nations and races
assembled under the banner of William ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,306.165

and lastly , came the pioneers , with their sharp axes , well trained
and taught , and prepared to labour for the defence of the army which
they had accompanied . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,306.166

The quick eye of the Leader selected the spot for the stockades and
entrenchments . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,306.167

The timbers <P_3,307> and pavoises , and other materials , were floated
from the store-ships , and dragged to the position which had been
pointed out . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.168

The work began with the utmost skill and energy ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.169

and the Thane plainly saw that , before night-fall , the Norman Chief
would be entirely secured from surprise . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.170

He waited no more , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.171

but he instantly determined to bear the ill news to Harold .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.172

He turned his horse's head towards the north ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.173

and riding night and day , he neither tarried nor rested , until he
reached the city of York , where , rushing into the hall , he found
Harold , banqueting in festal triumph , with hands embrued in the blood
of a brother . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.174

<bracket> He was triumphing over Tostig and his ally , Harfager , of
Norway , defeated in the great battle of Stamford Bridge . <$$bracket>
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.175

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 8 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.176

It was on the morrow of this battle that the Thane of Sussex came to
Harold , and apprised him of the arrival of his most dreaded enemy .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.177

Harold immediately marched south , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.178

and halted at London , where he prepared to attack the invader .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.179

The best part of his troops had fallen ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.180

few others joined him , either as volunteers , or by virtue of their
tenures or of their allegiance . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.181

Edwin and Morcar stood aloof ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.182

they did not support their brother-in-law ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.183

Algitha , his wife , also quitted him , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.184

and abandoned him to his fate . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.185

Harold's army too plainly testified the danger of his cause ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.186

his ranks were imperfectly filled by hired soldiers , who served him
merely for their pay ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,307.187

and whatever force he had , was raised from <P_3,308> the south of the
Humber ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,308.188

not a man came from the north . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,308.189

Githa , his mother , sad and weeping for the loss of her son Tostig ,
earnestly dissuaded Harold from attempting to give battle to William ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,308.190

his other friends and relations joined her in such intreaties , none so
earnestly as Gurth , Earl of Suffolk , Harold's brother , praised for
his singular merit and virtue . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,308.191

Gurth pointed out to him that his troops were wearied and exhausted ,
the Normans fresh and confident ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,308.192

and furthermore , the Earl of Suffolk represented to Harold that the
violation of his oath would lie heavy upon his soul in the field of
battle . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,308.193

If Harold would send his troops against William , Gurth solicited that
he , who was unfettered by any such obligation ; might take the command
; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,308.194

for it appears that the oath was considered as binding merely upon the
individual Harold , and that it did not restrain him from sanctioning
hostility in others . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,308.195

But Harold was influenced by that obstinate , self-willed determination
, which leads the sinner on to his fate ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,308.196

and he persevered , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,308.197

and prepared to encounter his enemy . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,308.198

Near London , at Waltham , there was a monastery , founded for regular
or conventual canons of the order of St. Augustine , and containing a
crucifix , supposed to be endued with miraculous power .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,308.199

The Abbey of the " Holy Rood " had been richly endowed by Harold ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,308.200

and before he set out against the enemy , he offered <P_3,309> up his
orisons at the altar . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.201

Whilst Harold was in prayer , in the darkness and gloom of the choir ,
we are told that the crucifix bowed its head .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.202

The portent may have been fancied , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.203

but there was a presentiment of evil abroad .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.204

It was one of those periods when men's minds are oppressed by the
lowering of impending danger , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.205

and the Brethren of Waltham determined that two members of the convent ,
Osgod and Ailric , should accompany their benefactor on his march .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.206

Harold having arrayed his forces to the best of his power , directed his
course to the shore of Sussex . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.207

At <font> Senlac , <$$font> now better known as Battle , he halted .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.208

His camp was surrounded by entrenchments , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.209

and on the spot where the high altar of the Abbey was afterwards placed
, he planted his royal standard . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.210

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 9 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.211

William had been most actively employed . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.212

As a preliminary to further proceedings , he had caused all the vessels
to be drawn on shore and rendered unserviceable .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.213

He told his men that they must prepare to conquer or to die -
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.214

flight was impossible . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.215

He had occupied the Roman castle of Pevensey , whose walls are yet
existing , flanked by Anglo-Norman towers , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.216

and he had personally surveyed all the adjoining country ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.217

for he never trusted this part of a general's duty to any eyes but his
own . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.218

One Robert , a Norman Thane , who was settled in the neighbourhood ,
advised him to cast up entrenchments for the purpose of resisting Harold
. PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,309.219

William <P_3,310> replied , that his best defence was in the valour of
his army and the goodness of his cause ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,310.220

and throughout the whole of this expedition , the cool good sense by
which he increased the moral courage of his followers is singularly
remarkable . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,310.221

In compliance with the opinions of the age , William had an astrologer
in his train . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,310.222

An oriental monarch , at the present time , never engages in battle
without a previous horoscope , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,310.223

and this superstition was universally adopted in Europe during the
middle ages . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,310.224

But William's " Clerk " was not merely a star-gazer .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,310.225

He had graduated in all the occult sciences - PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,310.226

he was a necromancer ; or , as the word was often spelt , in order to
accommodate it to the supposed etymology , a <font> nigromancer
{COM:font_change_around_"nigro"} - a " Sortilegus " - and a soothsayer .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,310.227

These accomplishments in the sixteenth century , would have assuredly
brought the " clerk " to the stake . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,310.228

But in the eleventh , although they were highly illegal according to the
strict letter of the ecclesiastical law , yet they were studied as
eagerly as any other branch of <font> metaphysics , <$$font> of which
they were supposed to form a part . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,310.229

The <font> Sorcerer , <$$font> or " Sortilegus , " by casting <font> "
sortes , " <$$font> or lots , had ascertained that the Duke would
succeed , and that Harold would surrender without a battle , upon which
assurance the Normans entirely relied . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,310.230

After the landing , William inquired for his conjurer -
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,310.231

A pilot came forward , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,310.232

and told <P_3,311> him that the unlucky wight had been drowned in the
passage . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,311.233

William then immediately pointed out the folly of trusting to the
predictions of one who was utterly unable to tell what would happen unto
himself . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,311.234

When William first set foot on shore , he had shown the same spirit .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,311.235

He stumbled , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,311.236

and fell forwards on the palm of his hands . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,311.237

<font> " Mal signe est çi ! " <$$font> exclaimed his troops ,
affrighted at the omen . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,311.238

" No , " answered William , as he rose ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,311.239

" I have taken seizin of the country , " showing the clod of earth which
he had grasped , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,311.240

One of his soldiers , with the quickness of a modern Frenchman ,
instantly followed up the idea - PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,311.241

he ran to a cottage , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,311.242

and pulled o a bundle of reeds from the thatch , telling him to receive
that symbol also , as the seizin of the realm with which he was invested
. PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,311.243

These little anecdotes display the turn and temper of the Normans , and
the alacrity by which the army was pervaded .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,311.244

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 10 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,311.245

Some fruitless attempts are said to have been made at negotiation .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,311.246

Harold despatched a monk to the enemy's camp , who was to exhort William
to abandon his enterprise . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,311.247

The Duke insisted on his right ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,311.248

but , as some historians relate , he offered to submit his claim to a
legal decision , to be pronounced by the Pope , either according to the
law of Normandy , or according to the law of England ; or , if this mode
of adjustment did not please Harold , that the question should be
decided by single combat , <P_3,312> the crown becoming the meed of the
victor . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,312.249

The propositions of William are stated , by other authorities , to have
contained a proposition for a compromise , namely , that Harold should
take Northumbria , and William the rest of the Anglo-Saxon dominions .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,312.250

All or any of these proposals are such as may very probably have been
made . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,312.251

But they were not minuted down in formal protocols , or couched in
diplomatic notes - PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,312.252

they were verbal messages , sent to and fro on the eve of a bloody
battle , whereof the particulars were not related by historians until
many years had elapsed ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,312.253

and therefore we have no reason to be surprised at the diversity of such
narratives , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,312.254

nor is it at all necessary to attempt to reconcile them .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,312.255

The general truth is easily understood . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,312.256

It was evident to each of the chieftains , that they had respectively
ventured their whole fortunes on the cast of the die ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,312.257

and before engaging in a conflict which must prove fatal to one of them
, they made an attempt to avoid the danger . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,312.258

Fear prevailed in both camps . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,312.259

The English , in addition to the apprehensions which even the most
stout-hearted feel on the eve of a morrow whose close they may never see
, dreaded the papal excommunication , the curse encountered in support
of the unlawful authority of a usurper , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,312.260

When they were informed that battle had been decided upon , they stormed
and swore ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,312.261

and now the cowardice of conscience spurred them on to <P_3,313> riot
and revelry . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.262

The whole night was passed in debauch . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.263

<font> " Waes-heal " <$$font> and <font> " Drink-heal " <$$font>
resounded from the tents ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.264

the wine cups passed gaily round and round by the smoky blaze of the red
watch-fires , while the ballad of ribald mirth was loudly sung by the
carousers . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.265

In the Norman Leaguer , far otherwise had the dread of the approaching
morn affected the hearts of William's soldiery .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.266

No voice was heard excepting the solemn response of the Litany and the
chaunt of the Psalm . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.267

The penitents confessed their sins - PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.268

the masses were said PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.269

and the sense of the imminent peril of the morrow was tranquillized by
penance and prayer . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.270

Each of the nations , as we are told by one of our most trustworthy
English historians , acted according to their " national custom ; "
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.271

and severe is the censure which the English thus receive .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.272

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 11 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.273

The English were strongly fortified in their position by lines of
trenches and palisadoes ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.274

and within these defences they were marshalled according to the Danish
fashion , shield against shield , presenting an impenetrable front to
the enemy . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.275

The men of Kent formed the van-guard , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.276

for it was their privilege to be the first in the strife
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.277

The burgesses of London , in like manner , claimed and obtained the
honour of being the royal body-guard , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.278

and they were drawn up around the Standard . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,313.279

At the foot of this banner stood Harold , with his brothers , Leofwin
and Gurth , and a chosen body of the bravest Thanes , all <P_3,314>
anxiously gazing on that quarter , from whence they expected the advance
of the enemy . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,314.280

Before the Normans began their march , and very early in the morning of
the feast of St. Calixtus , William had assembled his barons around him
, and exhorted them to maintain his righteous cause .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,314.281

As the invaders drew nigh , Harold saw a division advancing , composed
of the volunteers from the County of Boulogne and from the Amiennois ,
under the command of William Fitz Osbern and Roger Montgomery .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,314.282

" It is the Duke " - exclaimed Harold - PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,314.283

" and little shall I fear him . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,314.284

By <font> my <$$font> forces , will <font> his <$$font> be four times
out-numbered ! " PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,314.285

Gurth shook his head , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,314.286

and expatiated on the strength of the Norman cavalry , as opposed to the
foot soldiers of England ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,314.287

but their discourse was stopped by the appearance of the combined
cohorts , under Aimeric , Viscount of Thouars , and Alan Fergant of
Brittany . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,314.288

Harold's heart sunk at the sight , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,314.289

and he broke out into passionate exclamations of fear and dismay .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,314.290

But now the third and last division of the Norman army was drawing nigh
. PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,314.291

The consecrated Gonfanon floats amidst the forest of spears ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,314.292

and Harold is now too well aware that he beholds the ranks which are
commanded in person by the Duke of Normandy .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,314.293

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 12 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,314.294

As the Normans were marshalled in three divisions , so they began the
battle , by simultaneous attacks upon three points of the <P_3,315>
English forces . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,315.295

Immediately before the Duke , rode Taillefer , the Minstrel , singing ,
with a loud and clear voice , the lay of Charlemagne and Roland , and
the emprizes of the Paladins who had fallen in the dolorous pass of
Roncevaux . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,315.296

Taillefer , as his guerdon , had craved permission to strike the first
blow , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,315.297

for he was a valiant warrior , emulating the deeds which he sung :
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,315.298

his appellation , <font> " Taille-fer , " <$$font> is probably to be
considered not as his real name , but as an epithet derived from his
strength and prowess ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,315.299

and he fully justified his demand , by transfixing the first Englishman
whom he attacked , and by felling the second to the ground .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,315.300

The battle now became general , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,315.301

and raged with the greatest fury . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,315.302

The Normans advanced beyond the English lines ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,315.303

but they were driven back , and forced into a trench , where horses and
riders fell upon each other in fearful confusion .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,315.304

More Normans were slain here , than in any other part of the field .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,315.305

The alarm spread ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,315.306

the light troops left in charge of the baggage and the stores thought
that all was lost , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,315.307

and were about to take flight , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,315.308

but the fierce Odo , Bishop of Bayeux , the Duke's half-brother , and
who was better fitted for the shield than for the mitre , succeeded in
reassuring them , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,315.309

and then , returning to the field , and rushing into that part where the
battle was hottest , he fought as the stoutest of the warriors engaged
in the conflict directing their movements and inciting them to slaughter
. PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,315.310

<P_3,316>

From nine in the morning till three in the afternoon , the successes on
either side were nearly balanced . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.312

The charges of the Norman cavalry gave them great advantage ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.313

but the English phalanx repelled their enemies ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.314

and the soldiers were so well protected by their targets , that the
artillery of the Normans was long discharged in vain .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.315

The bowmen , seeing that they had failed to make any impression ,
altered the direction of their shafts , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.316

and , instead of shooting point-blank , the flights of arrows were
directed upwards , so that the points came down upon the heads of the
men of England ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.317

and the iron shower fell with murderous effect !
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.318

The English ranks were exceedingly distressed by the vollies ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.319

yet they still stood firm ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.320

and the Normans now employed , a stratagem to decoy their opponents out
of their entrenchments . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.321

A feigned retreat on their part , induced the English to pursue them
with great heat . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.322

The Normans suddenly wheeled about , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.323

and a new and fiercer battle was urged . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.324

The field was covered with separate bands of foemen , each engaged with
one another . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.325

Here the English yielded - PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.326

there , they conquered . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.327

One English Thane , armed with a battle_axe , spread dismay amongst the
Frenchmen . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.328

He was cut down by Roger de Montgomery . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.329

The Normans have preserved the name of the Norman baron
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.330

but that of the Englishman is lost in oblivion .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,316.331

Some other English Thanes are also praised , as <P_3,317> having singly
, and by their personal prowess , delayed the ruin of their countrymen
and country . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.332

At one period of the battle , the Normans were nearly routed .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.333

The cry was raised , that the Duke was slain ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.334

and they began to fly in every direction . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.335

William threw off his helmet , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.336

and galloping through the squadrons , rallied his barons , though not
without great difficulty . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.337

Harold , on his part , used every possible exertion ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.338

and was distinguished as the most active and bravest amongst the
soldiers in the Host which he led on to destruction .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.339

A Norman arrow wounded him in the left eye ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.340

he dropped from his steed in agony , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.341

and was borne to the foot of the standard . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.342

The English began to give way , or , rather , to retreat to the standard
as their rallying point . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.343

The Normans encircled them , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.344

and fought desperately to reach this goal . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.345

Robert Fitz Ernest had almost seized the banner ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.346

but he was killed in the attempt . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.347

William led his troops on , with the intention , it is said , of
measuring his sword with Harold . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.348

He did encounter an English horseman , from whom he received such a
stroke upon his helmet that he was nearly brought to the ground .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.349

The Normans flew to the aid of their sovereign ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.350

and the bold Englishman was pierced by their lances .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.351

About the same time , the tide of battle took a momentary turn .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.352

The Kentish men and East Saxons rallied , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.353

and repelled the Norman barons ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,317.354

<P_3,318>

but Harold was not amongst them ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.356

and William led on his troops with desperate intrepidity .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.357

In the thick crowd of the assailants and the assailed , the hoofs of the
horses were plunged deep into the gore of the dead , and the dying .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.358

Gurth was at the foot of the standard , without hope , but without fear
- PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.359

he fell by the falchion of William . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.360

- The English banner was cast down , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.361

and the Gonfanon planted in its place , announced that William of
Normandy was the Conqueror . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.362

- Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 13 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.363

It was now late in the evening . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.364

The English troops were entirely broken , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.365

yet no Englishman would surrender . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.366

The conflict continued in many parts of the bloody field , long after
dark . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.367

The fugitives spread themselves over the adjoining country , then
covered with wood and forest ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.368

Wherever the English could make a stand , they resisted ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.369

and the Normans confess that the great preponderance of their force ,
alone enabled them to obtain the victory . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.370

By William's orders , a spot close to the Gonfanon was cleared ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.371

and he caused his pavilion to be pitched among the corpses which were
heaped around . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.372

He there supped with his barons ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.373

and they feasted among the dead . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.374

But when he contemplated the fearful slaughter , a natural feeling of
pity , perhaps allied to repentance , arose in his stern mind ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,318.375

and the Abbey of Battle , in which the prayer was to be offered up
perpetually for the repose of the souls of all <P_3,319> who had fallen
in the conflict , was at once the monument of his triumph , and the
token of his piety . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,319.376

The abbey was most richly endowed : PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,319.377

and all the land , for one league round about , was annexed to the
Battle franchise . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,319.378

The Abbot was freed from the authority of the Metropolitan of Canterbury
, and invested with archiepiscopal jurisdiction .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,319.379

The high altar was erected on the very spot where Harold's standard had
waved ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,319.380

and the Roll , deposited in the archives of the Monastery , recorded the
names of those who had fought with the Conqueror , and amongst whom the
lands of broad England were divided . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,319.381

But all this pomp and solemnity has passed away like a dream .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,319.382

The " perpetual prayer " has ceased for ever -
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,319.383

the roll of Battle is rent . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,319.384

- The shields of the Norman lineages are trodden in the dust .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,319.385

- The abbey is levelled with the ground - PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,319.386

and a dank and reedy pool fills the spot where the foundations of the
quire have been uncovered , merely for the gaze of the idle visiter , or
the instruction of the moping antiquary . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,319.387

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 14 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,319.388

The victor is now installed ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,319.389

but what has become of the mortal spoils of his competitor ?
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,319.390

If we ask the monk of Malmesbury , we are told that William surrendered
the body to Harold's mother , Githa , by whose directions the corpse of
the last surviving of her children was buried in the Abbey of the Holy
Cross . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,319.391

Those who lived nearer the time , however , relate in explicit terms
<P_3,320> that William refused the rites of sepulture to his
excommunicated enemy . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,320.392

Guillielmus Pictavensis , the chaplain of the Conqueror , a most
trustworthy and competent witness , informs us that a body of which the
features were undistinguishable , but <font> supposed , <$$font> from
certain tokens , to be that of Harold , was found between the corpses of
his brothers , Gurth and Leofwine , and that William caused this corpse
to be interred in the sands of the sea-shore .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,320.393

" Let him guard the coast , " said William , " which he so madly
occupied ; " PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,320.394

and though Githa , had offered to purchase the body by its weight in
gold , yet William was not to be tempted by the gift of the sorrowing
mother , or touched by her tears . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,320.395

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 15 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,320.396

In the Abbey of Waltham , they knew nothing of Githa .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,320.397

According to the annals of the Convent , the two Brethren who had
accompanied Harold , hovered as nearly as possible to the scene of war ,
watching the event of the battle : PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,320.398

and afterwards , when the strife was quiet in death , they humbly
approached William , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,320.399

and solicited his permission to seek the corpse .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,320.400

The Conqueror refused a purse , containing ten marks of gold , which
they offered as the tribute of their gratitude ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,320.401

and permitted them to proceed to the field , and to bear away not only
the remains of Harold , but of all who , when living , had chosen the
Abbey of Waltham as their place of sepulture .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,320.402

Amongst the loathsome heaps of the unburied , <P_3,321> they sought for
Harold , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,321.403

but sought in vain , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,321.404

- Harold could not possibly be discovered - PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,321.405

no trace of Harold was to be found PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,321.406

and as the last hope of identifying his remains , they suggested that
possibly his beloved Editha might be able to recognise the features so
familiar to her affections . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,321.407

Algitha , the wife of Harold , was not to be asked to perform this
sorrowful duty . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,321.408

Osgood went back to Waltham , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,321.409

and returned with Editha , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,321.410

and the two canons and the weeping woman resumed their miserable task in
the charnel field . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,321.411

A ghastly , decomposing , and mutilated corpse was selected by Editha ,
and conveyed to Waltham as the body of Harold ; and there entombed at
the east end of the choir , with great honour and solemnity , many
Norman nobles assisting in the requiem . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,321.412

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 16 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,321.413

Years afterwards , when the Norman yoke pressed heavily upon the English
, and the battle of Hastings had become a tale of sorrow , which old men
narrated by the light of the embers , until warned to silence by the
sullen tolling of the curfew , there was a decrepit anchorite , who
inhabited a cell near the Abbey of St. John at Chester , where Edgar
celebrated his triumph . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,321.414

This recluse , deeply scarred , and blinded in his left eye , lived in
strict penitence and seclusion . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,321.415

Henry I. once visited the aged Hermit , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,321.416

and had a long private discourse with him ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,321.417

and , on his <P_3,322> death-bed , he declared to the attendant monks ,
that the recluse was Harold . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,322.418

As the story is transmitted to us , he had been secretly conveyed from
the field to a castle , probably of Dover , where he continued concealed
until he had the means of reaching the sanctuary where he expired .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,322.419

The monks of Waltham loudly exclaimed against this rumour .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,322.420

They maintained most resolutely , that Harold was buried in their Abbey
: PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,322.421

they pointed to the tomb , sustaining his effigies , and inscribed with
the simple and pathetic epitaph , <font> " Hic jacet Harold infelix ; "
<$$font> PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,322.422

and they appealed to the mouldering skeleton , whose bones , as they
declared , showed , when disinterred , the impress of the wounds which
he had received . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,322.423

But may it not still be doubted whether Osgood and Ailric , who followed
their benefactor to the fatal field , did not aid his escape ?
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,322.424

- They may have discovered him at the last gasp ; restored him to
animation by their care ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,322.425

and the artifice of declaring to William , that they had not been able
to recover the object of their search , would readily suggest itself as
the means of rescuing Harold from the power of the Conqueror .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,322.426

The demand of Editha's testimony would confirm their assertion , and
enable them to gain time to arrange for Harold's security ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,322.427

and whilst the litter , which bore the corpse , was slowly advancing to
the Abbey of Waltham , the living Harold , <P_3,323> under the tender
care of Editha , might be safely proceeding to the distant fane , his
haven of refuge . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,323.428

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 17 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,323.429

If we compare the different narratives concerning the inhumation of
Harold , we shall find the most remarkable discrepancies .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,323.430

It is evident that the circumstances were not accurately known ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,323.431

and since those ancient writers who were best informed can@ @not be
reconciled to each other , the escape of Harold , if admitted , would
solve the difficulty . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,323.432

I am not prepared to maintain that the authenticity of this story can@
@not be impugned ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,323.433

but it may be remarked that the tale , though romantic , is not
incredible , and that the circumstances may be easily reconciled to
probability . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,323.434

There were no walls to be scaled , PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,323.435

no fosse was to be crossed , no warder to be eluded ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,323.436

and the examples of those who have survived after encountering much
greater perils , are so very numerous and familiar , that the incidents
which I have narrated would hardly give rise to a doubt , if they
referred to any other personage than a King .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,323.437

In this case we can@ @not find any reason for supposing that the belief
in Harold's escape was connected with any political artifice or feeling
. PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,323.438

No hopes were fixed upon the usurping son of Godwin .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,323.439

No recollection dwelt upon his name , as the hero who would sally forth
from his seclusion , the restorer of the Anglo-Saxon <P_3,324> power .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,324.440

That power had wholly fallen - PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,324.441

and if the humbled Englishman , as he paced the aisles of Waltham ,
looked around , and , having assured himself that no Norman was near ,
whispered to his son , that the tomb which they saw before them was
raised only in mockery , and that Harold still breathed the vital air -
he yet knew too well , that the spot where Harold's standard had been
cast down , was the grave of the pride and glory of England .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,324.442

<P_3,325>

<heading>

Chapter VII . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,325.445

England at the Time of the Conquest . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,325.446

<$$heading>

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 1 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,325.448

William and his army , when they spread themselves over this fertile and
much-coveted realm , beheld a country whose aspect differed strangely
from the prospects which hill and stream and plain offer at the present
day . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,325.449

What did England possess ? PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,325.450

riches - yet not such as ours . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,325.451

Theirs was not the age of great cities : PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,325.452

none of those centres of civilization and corruption , then existed in
portentous magnitude ; huge agglomerations , ramifying into the meads
and pastures , where the green grass , and the sweet cowslip , and the
bright ox-eyed daisy , shrink away from hard pavement and smoky sky .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,325.453

The landscape was not adorned and varied , as now , by the villa , the
work house , the manufactory , the gaol : PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,325.454

nor were there existing then any of the signs and wonders produced by
modern science and art , the viaducts , the railroads , the canals , at
once the causes and the effects of our activity and opulence .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,325.455

But were the differences confined to the works of man ?
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,325.456

Not so . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,325.457

They extended to the features and characters affecting the whole
<P_3,326> climate and region of the land . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,326.458

We have remarkable evidence that , within such limits as are consistent
with the fulfilment of the covenant made by the Creator , the face of
the globe , in so far as it depends upon the distribution of moist and
dry , heat and cold , nay , even hill and dale , and land and sea , has
sustained extensive change . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,326.459

We are warranted in asserting , from various incidental notices , too
minute to be suspected of inaccuracy , too simple to be the result of
exaggeration , that , even as late as the twelfth century , the general
temperature of the midland and southern parts of the island was not very
unlike that of Canada at the present day . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,326.460

Enter the vineyards flourishing at Glastonbury , whose fruit produces a
sweet and grateful wine ; ascend the mountains of Craig-Eyriri , covered
with unmelting snows , which then might have been called perpetual ,
from whence they derive their English or Saxon name ; and you thus may
mark the extremes of temperature prevailing within a comparatively
narrow zone . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,326.461

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 2 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,326.462

Probably one-third of the face of the island was covered with wood ;
another third , uncultivated heath and moor .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,326.463

Marshlands were very extensive . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,326.464

Towards the German Ocean , East Anglia was almost separated from the
Mercian shires by the fen country , extending more than an_hundred miles
in length , a waste of waters interspersed with sedgy shelves and
islands , <P_3,327> spreading its bleakness far around .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,327.465

On the same coast , the driftings of sand and accumulations of earth
have since converted many an aestuary into fertile fields , and filled
up many a channel , by which the <font> broads , <$$font> as they are
aptly called , communicated with the salt sea waves .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,327.466

The iron rings have shown how the vessels were moored against the walls
of the Roman Caister near Norwich ; whilst , much further inland , the
flint arrow-heads lying beneath the strata imbedding organic remains ,
may perplex , or perhaps confute , all calculations as to the age of the
deposit in which they are contained . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,327.467

In other places within the limits of the <font> Northfolk <$$font> and
the <font> Southfolk <$$font> , the recession of the waters - which
seems to have taken place much about the time that the ocean , bursting
over the Belgian lowlands , formed the Zuyder Zee - though less
extensive , is very remarkable . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,327.468

In the quiet village of Reedham , on the banks of the sluggish Yare , we
could hardly recognise the coast where , in the tenth century , Bruern
Brocard , the Scandinavian , was cast ashore by the tempest .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,327.469

Did we not possess the united testimony of charters and parliamentary
proceedings , and of historians , we might doubt that , in the reign of
Richard II. , Lake Lothing was the Kirkley road - the haven in which
the navies of England assembled in days of yore ;
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,327.470

and the ineffectual attempt which has been <P_3,328> made to re-open the
navigation from the Lowestoffe mouth to the capital of the county , is a
remarkable proof of the continued existence of the agency which
occasioned the change . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,328.471

More or less , the same oscillations of land and water have
characterized the whole of this eastern side of the island .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,328.472

Thanet , which , when occupied by Hengist and Horsa , was separated from
the mainland of Kent by a wide channel , is now entirely joined to the
continent ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,328.473

but Ravensburgh , the landing-place of Henry IV. , is submerged in the
waves . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,328.474

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 3 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,328.475

Considering the globe as a whole , it can@ @not be doubted but that the
great , though limited , powers which man possesses , do produce
correspondent effects , both in organic and inorganic nature .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,328.476

Many plants indigenous to Britain have disappeared : some within the
last quarter of a century . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,328.477

You find them in Gerard's Herbal , but not in the fields .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,328.478

Amongst animals there has been a more evident and more remarkable
process of destruction . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,328.479

Like the Dodos in the Mauritius , whole races have become extinct within
a recent historical period . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,328.480

The beaver built his house on the banks of the stream beneath that
summit where the eagle reared her young ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,328.481

and the British names of stream and of rock still remain , the witnesses
of the former existence of the inhabitants which have passed away ;
whilst the egret and the crane , the bittern and the bustard have been
lost within living memory . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,328.482

The <P_3,329> bear and the wild boar ranged the forests at the era of
the Conquest , the latter in the immediate vicinity of London .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,329.483

The wolf continued to infest the fold long after the supposed
extirpation of the foe by the tribute which the Basileus of Britain
imposed upon his British vassals ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,329.484

but in the loose nomenclature of popular speech , it is very probable
that the hyaena of Yorkshire may also have been included among the
animals to which the name of " wolf " was assigned , thus bringing the
ossuary of the Kirkdale cave within the period even of the last
population of the wolds . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,329.485

In connection with this subject , it is not unimportant to remark that
other notice may be found of the existence , within our historical
period , in Britain in particular , and in Europe in general , of other
species either banished from our regions , or wholly lost , as far as we
can ascertain , to animated nature . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,329.486

The elk reared its tall antlers in Ireland , and probably in Scotland ,
until after the invasion of the island by our Anglo-Normans .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,329.487

In the thick and damp forests of Gaul , the urus or buffalo ranged .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,329.488

We learn this fact by the relation of the cruel revenge with which
Gunthrum punished the wretch , suspected as the slaughterer of the royal
beast of chace . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,329.489

This was not far distant from the period , when , according to the
testimony of Alcimus Avitus and Sidonius Apollinaris , the volcanoes of
Central France were yet in activity . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,329.490

<P_3,330>

The <font> sarris <$$font> , a fierce , gigantic , and now wholly
extinct species of chamois , was commonly found in the forests of the
Pyrenees as late as the fifteenth century , being minutely described by
Gaston de Foix . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,330.492

And , since the tiger is even now in full vigour amidst the forests of
Siberia , we may consider this fact as affording support to the
narrative of the lion-hunts in the Niebelungen {COM:sic} lay .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,330.493

More perplexing are the numerous legends of huge dragons , inhabiting
rivers and lakes . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,330.494

Fabulous as they may appear in some instances , and strange in all ,
they yet raise a suspicion that there might exist some few surviving
gigantic reptiles of the Saurian class , such as those whose bones are
now found embedded in the strata , - individuals , the last , in each
locality , of their species , like the boa by which the army of Regulus
was assailed . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,330.495

Unquestionably , such relations were deeply tinged with credulity .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,330.496

The human mind was open to every kind of evidence , without examining
the different degrees of confidence which each ought to receive .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,330.497

Making , however , every degree of allowance for the absence of correct
observation , as well as for involuntary inaccuracies , and the tendency
to seek pleasure by the marvellous , yet there will always remain a
residuum , which , if we honestly endeavour to ascertain the truth ,
can@ @not be rejected consistently with right reason .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,330.498

Scepticism is as great a foe to profitable <P_3,331> knowledge as
credulity ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,331.499

if investigation is troublesome or disagreeable , or goes against our
received opinions , we then are very apt to take refuge in a flat denial
, and thus to discharge ourselves from the responsibility of inquiry ,
and the still greater trouble of having our preconceived opinions
disturbed . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,331.500

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 4 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,331.501

The period beginning with the partition - <paren> we use this term ,
because the Roman Empire in the West did not <font> fall <$$font> by the
extinction of the imperial authority in the person of Augustulus : - it
was <font> placed in commission <$$font> under the Barbarians until
Charlemagne arose <$$paren> - of the Western Empire amongst the Barbaric
kingdoms and powers , and ending about the twelfth century , exhibited
peculiar meteoric and atmospheric activity . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,331.502

The glaring parhelion , the pallid sun doubly reflected in the
snow-fraught cloud , now a phenomenon of rare occurrence , so that
perhaps few persons living have seen it , was repeatedly beheld in
portentous aspect . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,331.503

Flaming lances and fiery squadrons - the flickering streams of the
aurora , which , so long intermitted , appeared as a novelty to Newton
and to Halley - beamed across the welkin , blazing in blood-red gleams .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,331.504

Astral showers covered the heavens , as if the stars were driven like
chaff before a furious wind ; being evidently the same stream of
wandering fires , now again intersecting our sphere , and watched or
sought from the observatory : but then indicating , as <P_3,332> it was
deemed , the changes and the going forth of nations - the immediate
harbingers of the Crusades . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,332.505

But no appearance excited so much awe in England as the Great Comet of
1066 , such as never had been seen before . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,332.506

Pilgrim and merchant , monk and layman , had brought the frequent and
dread report that Duke William of Normandy , Edward's cousin and
appointed heir , was mustering his forces to gain and divide the land .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,332.507

Night after night did the appalled multitude gaze at the messenger of
evil , the " long-haired star , " darting his awful splendour from
horizon to zenith ; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,332.508

crowds , young and old , watched the token far beyond the midnight hour
; PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,332.509

and when they retired to their broken rest , its bright image , floating
before the eye , disturbed their slumbers . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,332.510

Even if this were but an idle opinion , yet it was an opinion which
became a reality as the moral world was then constituted .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,332.511

The conviction that the phenomena of nature and the destiny of mankind
were bound up in mystic unity , gave more boldness to the fortunate ,
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,332.512

increased the anxieties of the desponding . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,332.513

And the English , throughout the whole of the Anglo-Norman period ,
acknowledged their subjugation to be a national punishment .
PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,332.514

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 5 . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,332.515

Had William never held his great council at Lillebonne , never been
encouraged by the eager boldness and rapacity of his Norman barons ,
never been favoured by the wind , never landed <P_3,333> in safety ,
never been assisted by the cowardice or treachery of the northern Thanes
, never overthrown the whole force of England in the one decisive battle
, still it is fully evident to us <font> now , <$$font> that the
appointed time had arrived for the extinction of the Anglo-Saxon
monarchy . PALGRAVE1-185X-2,3,333.516

