<BEGIN_poore-1876-1>

<P_160>

<heading>

Chapter VII . POORE-1876-1,160.4

Electricity as an anodyne and sedative . POORE-1876-1,160.5

<$$heading>

Perhaps it would have been more scientifically accurate not to have made
a separate chapter for a discussion of the points to which the reader's
attention is now to be directed . POORE-1876-1,160.7

The power of the electric current over pain and spasm is probably due to
its stimulating action , POORE-1876-1,160.8

and , like alcohol , it not only has the power of quickening vital
processes but also of alleviating many of the most troublesome symptoms
of disease . POORE-1876-1,160.9

It is , however , more convenient and will probably be found more
practically useful to consider this division of our subject separately .
POORE-1876-1,160.10

Among the most valuable , most generally applicable , and most undoubted
effects of electricity is its power of annulling <font> pain . <$$font>
POORE-1876-1,160.11

It would almost seem to be one of the most powerful anodynes which we
possess , POORE-1876-1,160.12

and its power in this respect is hardly as yet fully appreciated by the
profession . POORE-1876-1,160.13

In the out-patient room we have been accustomed for some time past to
try the effect of the continuous current upon pain of all kinds ,
whether depending upon some obvious organic cause or upon causes not
obvious . POORE-1876-1,160.14

In many cases we have found that the pain has been <font> alleviated
<$$font> , POORE-1876-1,160.15

and in a large proportion of these it has been absolutely <font> cured .
<$$font> POORE-1876-1,160.16

In some instances , especially among the female hysterical class , the
mere sight of the battery and the application of the sponge-holders to
the suffering place , without any current at all , has had the desired
effect ; POORE-1876-1,160.17

and we have not unfrequently been amused as well as instructed in
watching the <P_161> power of the imagination and emotions in diverting
the mind from troubles real and fancied . POORE-1876-1,161.18

We may here remark that when one is using electricity for the treatment
of pain and other subjective symptoms , it is often a good plan <paren>
and , indeed , should , we think , always be the rule <$$paren> to begin
with a mock application of it , POORE-1876-1,161.19

and in this way we see how much of our result is due to the patient's
imagination and how much is due to the electricity .
POORE-1876-1,161.20

If we could as readily test the actual efficacy of many other
therapeutic agents which we employ , our knowledge of treatment and the
effect of drugs would become more accurate than it is .
POORE-1876-1,161.21

Electricity will often cure pain , POORE-1876-1,161.22

and much more often will alleviate it : POORE-1876-1,161.23

and as an alleviator of pain it is not open , if properly used , to the
objections which are applicable to most other anodyne therapeutic agents
. POORE-1876-1,161.24

By teaching a patient what are the anodyne effects of morphia , chloral
, Indian hemp , or alcohol , we may alleviate his sufferings , but only
at the expense of his physical and moral well-being .
POORE-1876-1,161.25

Again , the after-effects of anodyne drugs are often only less
disagreeable than the symptoms which they have removed .
POORE-1876-1,161.26

Electricity is not open to these objections , POORE-1876-1,161.27

for , if it does no good , it does not , we believe , do any harm ;
POORE-1876-1,161.28

and for this reason , if for no other , it deserves every trial as an
anodyne . POORE-1876-1,161.29

For a local pain , counter-irritation by means of a blister is often of
great use ; POORE-1876-1,161.30

but there is this practical objection to the use of blisters , that if
the pain return before the blistered surface has healed , we are
debarred from making a second similar application to the same spot .
POORE-1876-1,161.31

Electricity is a counter-irritant , and a very powerful and quickly
acting counter-irritant ; POORE-1876-1,161.32

but it is something more than this - POORE-1876-1,161.33

it has undoubted specific effects upon painful nerves ;
POORE-1876-1,161.34

and it is not open to the objection of other counter-irritants ,
POORE-1876-1,161.35

for it will not cause depression and exhaustion , POORE-1876-1,161.36

and , if used with due care , may be applied again and again to the same
region of the body . POORE-1876-1,161.37

<P_162>

The reader must not misunderstand these remarks , which are not meant as
a crusade against time-honoured and invaluable remedies , but merely as
an incentive when he has <paren> as in hospitals <$$paren> the necessary
apparatus at hand , to try the anodyne and counter-irritating effects of
electricity . POORE-1876-1,162.39

All three forms of electricity are employed for the relief of pain ,
POORE-1876-1,162.40

but the most generally useful for such purposes is undoubtedly galvanism
. POORE-1876-1,162.41

Some writers , when dealing with the anodyne effect of the galvanic
current , lay great stress upon always placing the <font> anode <$$font>
upon the painful spot . POORE-1876-1,162.42

It is always pleasant to be in accordance with physiological facts ,
POORE-1876-1,162.43

and it would increase our knowledge if we could be sure that the pain of
neuralgia were always due to an exaltation of physiological properties
which could be subdued by the production of anelectrotonus .
POORE-1876-1,162.44

Neither of these facts is certain , POORE-1876-1,162.45

and Meyer - certainly an authority - says that the positive pole is to
be applied near the centre , and the negative <paren> the cathode
<$$paren> on the painful spot . POORE-1876-1,162.46

For our own part , we have employed galvanism with much success for the
relief of pain , but without hitherto paying any attention either to the
direction of the current or the position of the poles .
POORE-1876-1,162.47

There is no relation , etymological or otherwise , between <font> anode
<$$font> and <font> anodyne . <$$font> POORE-1876-1,162.48

There are many cases of <font> neuralgia <$$font> on record which have
resisted every known method of treatment , but have yielded after a few
applications of the constant current . POORE-1876-1,162.49

In employing the current for this purpose , the true <font> locus morbi
, <$$font> if it can be made out , should be included between the poles
. POORE-1876-1,162.50

If there is tenderness over any of the vertebrae corresponding with the
part of the cord from which the painful nerves arise , one of the
rheophores should be placed at or a little above this spot .
POORE-1876-1,162.51

The other rheophore should be applied seriatim to the various ' painful
spots ' along the course of the nerve . POORE-1876-1,162.52

In employing galvanism for neuralgia of the trigeminus , care must be
taken - because of its effect upon the eyes - not to use too strong a
current . POORE-1876-1,162.53

<P_163>

We should not be doing justice to our subject did we not place on record
the very decided opinions expressed by the late Dr. Anstie on the
electrical treatment of neuralgia . POORE-1876-1,163.55

None who enjoyed the friendship of that distinguished physician will for
a moment suspect that his opinions were hastily formed ,
POORE-1876-1,163.56

and therefore it is that we have inserted some passages <font> verbatim
<$$font> from his work , ' Neuralgia and its Counterfeits ' : -
POORE-1876-1,163.57

{COM:quotation_omitted}

<P_164>

Dr. Anstie does not lay particular stress either on the position of the
poles or the direction of the current , POORE-1876-1,164.60

but thinks , with Benedict , that the <font> locus morbi <$$font> should
always be included , if possible , by the poles . POORE-1876-1,164.61

He rather , however , inclines to the method of placing the <font>
positive <$$font> rheophore on the <font> points douloureux <$$font>
when such exist , the <font> negative <$$font> being placed on the spine
opposite the point of origin of the nerves . POORE-1876-1,164.62

{COM:quotation_omitted}

<P_165>

The following case of <font> angina pectoris <$$font> occurred in the
practice of Dr. Ralfe at the Seamen's Hospital , Greenwich ,
POORE-1876-1,165.65

and is from notes supplied by Dr. Duncan : - POORE-1876-1,165.66

<heading>

Case XIII . POORE-1876-1,165.68

<$$heading>

<font> Angina Pectoris . <$$font> POORE-1876-1,165.70

- P. M. , aet. 42 , admitted into Seamen's Hospital for angina
pectoris , under Dr. Ralfe , Feb. 24 , 1874 . POORE-1876-1,165.71

<font> History of Attack . <$$font> POORE-1876-1,165.72

- Four weeks before admission , whilst <P_166> engaged at his work on
board ship , had a sudden attack of acute pain , starting from the
cardiac region and then coursing down the left arm as far as the fingers
. POORE-1876-1,166.73

This was accompanied by a feeling of great oppression in the chest .
POORE-1876-1,166.74

Has had three or four attacks since . POORE-1876-1,166.75

<font> Present Condition . <$$font> POORE-1876-1,166.76

- Aged appearance ; grey hairs plentiful ; slight arcus senilis ; pulse
slow , weak , intermittent ; enlarged area of cardiac dulness .
POORE-1876-1,166.77

Was treated with spirits of chloroform and Hoffman's anodyne at first .
POORE-1876-1,166.78

Had several attacks of the pain . POORE-1876-1,166.79

The voltaic battery was then ordered , March 20 . POORE-1876-1,166.80

After the third application , patient felt much better , the pain being
less severe . POORE-1876-1,166.81

About thirty cells of Foveaux's battery were applied .
POORE-1876-1,166.82

Still better after fourth application . POORE-1876-1,166.83

The method of application was to place the negative pole to the nape of
the neck , and the positive over the cardiac region and down the inner
side of the arm . POORE-1876-1,166.84

Dr. Ralfe , writing in reference to this patient , says : ' Not only is
the pain less , POORE-1876-1,166.85

but the general appearance has improved greatly ; POORE-1876-1,166.86

he looks less aged and anxious . POORE-1876-1,166.87

The pulse , which at first was very irregular , is now steady , though
feeble . ' POORE-1876-1,166.88

The author has had one case of angina under his care ,
POORE-1876-1,166.89

but the relief derived from the constant current was almost too slight
to be appreciable . POORE-1876-1,166.90

<heading>

Case XIV . POORE-1876-1,166.92

<$$heading>

<font> Cervico-brachial Neuralgia , treated by the Constant Current .
<$$font> POORE-1876-1,166.94

- Dr. Buzzard communicated the following case to the Clinical Society
on May 2 , 1871 . POORE-1876-1,166.95

Harriet P. , aet. 66 , first consulted Dr. Buzzard in January 1869 .
POORE-1876-1,166.96

The facts in her constitutional and family history were of negative
value . POORE-1876-1,166.97

Five months previously she had been seized with giddiness ,
POORE-1876-1,166.98

had fallen down , POORE-1876-1,166.99

and lay on the floor several hours . POORE-1876-1,166.100

A similar seizure followed a fortnight later , in which she lost
consciousness , and , on regaining sensibility , found constant shaking
of the right arm and leg , with thickness <P_167> and indistinctness of
speech , which was followed by giddiness and vomiting , &c.
POORE-1876-1,167.101

When Dr. Buzzard first saw her , her symptoms comprised
cervico-brachial neuralgia of the right side , great photophobia ,
vertigo , and tinnitus aurium . POORE-1876-1,167.102

Blistering and subcutaneous injection gave no relief ,
POORE-1876-1,167.103

but some benefit was derived from a belladonna liniment applied to the
right side of the occipital region . POORE-1876-1,167.104

Her symptoms gradually subsided , POORE-1876-1,167.105

and she went into the country in June 1869 . POORE-1876-1,167.106

On December 27 , 1870 , Dr. Buzzard saw her again .
POORE-1876-1,167.107

She had then been suffering for three months . POORE-1876-1,167.108

She complained of a fixed violent pain in the right arm , in the
situation of the middle of the biceps muscle , and repeated and sudden
daily and nightly ' paroxysms of agony ' shooting up and down the arm .
POORE-1876-1,167.109

There was no wasting of the right arm , POORE-1876-1,167.110

but its grasp was somewhat deficient . POORE-1876-1,167.111

There was pain and tenderness over the shoulder joint and on the umerus
. POORE-1876-1,167.112

Her paroxysms averaged one an hour during the day , or five during the
night . POORE-1876-1,167.113

It would occupy too much of our space to give the details of the
treatment , POORE-1876-1,167.114

but the following summary by Dr. Buzzard is full of interest : -
POORE-1876-1,167.115

{COM:quotation_omitted}

<P_168>

<heading>

Case XV . POORE-1876-1,168.119

<$$heading>

<font> Cervico-Brachial Neuralgia , apparently Cured by the Constant
Current . <$$font> <paren> Dr. Anstie , Clin. Soc. Trans. , vol.
iv . <$$paren> POORE-1876-1,168.121

- M. T. , a woman , aet. 48 , applied to Dr. Anstie at the
Westminster Hospital , in November 1870 . POORE-1876-1,168.122

About three weeks previously <paren> having been overdone with household
work and worry <$$paren> she had been suddenly attacked with a paroxysm
of pain on the right side of the neck , which with slight interruptions
had continued . POORE-1876-1,168.123

The pain of which she complained was centred in four different points :
<paren> 1 <$$paren> at the lower and posterior part of the neck ;
<paren> 2 <$$paren> on the shoulder <paren> corresponding to the
emergence of the superficial filets of the circumflex nerve
{COM:missing_close_paren} ; <paren> 3 <$$paren> in the axilla ; and
<paren> 4 <$$paren> at the inferior angle of the scapula .
POORE-1876-1,168.124

There was well-marked anaesthesia of the cutaneous surface of the
shoulder and the posterior part of the neck ; POORE-1876-1,168.125

and even in the absence of acute pain there was a weakness both of the
deltoid and the trapezius which really amounted <P_169> to partial
paralysis . POORE-1876-1,169.126

There were occasional fibrillary spasms to be noted in the deltoid .
POORE-1876-1,169.127

Quinine had given no relief ; POORE-1876-1,169.128

mustard plasters had afforded slight alleviation . POORE-1876-1,169.129

For two months she received ' every possible medicinal treatment ' at
the hands of Dr. Anstie , POORE-1876-1,169.130

and at the end of three months she was worse . POORE-1876-1,169.131

She was then iodised with no benefit . POORE-1876-1,169.132

At the beginning of March galvanism was tried - ten to fifteen cells of
Weiss's battery ; positive pole alternately over the foci of pain ,
negative <paren> a broad moist sponge <$$paren> on right side of lower
cervical vertebrae . POORE-1876-1,169.133

' In the very first séance complete arrest of the pain occurred ;
POORE-1876-1,169.134

and the next attack was less severe than usual . ' POORE-1876-1,169.135

At the end of sixteen days she had been free from pain for three days .
POORE-1876-1,169.136

At the twenty-fourth sitting she had not suffered for eleven days ,
POORE-1876-1,169.137

the anaesthesia was gone , and the muscular power nearly restored .
POORE-1876-1,169.138

No recurrence had taken place six weeks later . POORE-1876-1,169.139

<heading>

Case XVI . POORE-1876-1,169.141

<$$heading>

<font> Double Occipital Neuralgia , not Relieved by Electricity .
<$$font> <paren> Dr. Anstie , Clin. Soc. Trans. , vol. iv.
<$$paren> POORE-1876-1,169.143

{COM:quotations_omitted}

<P_170>

In some cases of neuralgia the pain is much aggravated by using the
muscles which derive their nervous supply from the painful nerve .
POORE-1876-1,170.146

In these cases it is well , when employing the current , to practise
during its continuance a rhythmical exercise of the affected muscles .
POORE-1876-1,170.147

In this way , the muscles , which have been thrown <font> hors_de_combat
<$$font> by the pain , recover their tone , POORE-1876-1,170.148

and it is only reasonable to suppose that the healthy exercise of the
muscular and nervous function has a beneficial effect upon the healthy
nutrition of the entire nerve , from its terminal twigs to its origin in
the spinal cord . POORE-1876-1,170.149

The rational treatment of pain is , as with every other ailment , to
remove the cause : POORE-1876-1,170.150

and the complete and often immediate cure effected in some instances by
electricity would seem to prove that the change produced in the nerves
by the current is sufficient for this purpose . POORE-1876-1,170.151

Many cases of neuralgia have been cured in this way at once .
POORE-1876-1,170.152

More than once we have completely removed a troublesome headache , not
only of the transient type , but also of the migrainous periodic type ,
by a single application , for a few moments , of a weak current to the
head . POORE-1876-1,170.153

The pain under the left breast , so common in anaemic women , is often
readily amenable to electrical treatment ; POORE-1876-1,170.154

<P_171>

and Dr. John Williams , of University College , tells us that he has
often found ovarian pain yield to the application of galvanism .
POORE-1876-1,171.156

When , however , the cause is something evidently beyond the reach of
electricity , we may nevertheless alleviate the pain for a time , often
for many hours , by employing a galvanic current . POORE-1876-1,171.157

We record the following instance of a patient of Charing Cross Hospital
who came suffering from ' lumbago . ' POORE-1876-1,171.158

That the ' lumbago ' was possibly caused by serious mischief in the cord
or its coverings was evident by the great tenderness of the spinal
column , the sensation of numbness in the feet , and occasional attacks
of spasmodic pain shooting into the lower limbs . POORE-1876-1,171.159

Nevertheless he derived much benefit from the current .
POORE-1876-1,171.160

<heading>

Case XVII . POORE-1876-1,171.162

<$$heading>

<font> ' Lumbago ' caused by Incipient Caries . <$$font>
POORE-1876-1,171.164

- The patient was a poor basket-maker , POORE-1876-1,171.165

and when first he came under observation he was scarcely able to move
because of his pain . POORE-1876-1,171.166

Counter-irritation and drugs having given him no relief , it was
determined one day to try the effects of the galvanic current .
POORE-1876-1,171.167

He was then unable to walk , POORE-1876-1,171.168

and was obliged to perform the journey to and from the hospital in an
omnibus . POORE-1876-1,171.169

The galvanic current was applied to the back , POORE-1876-1,171.170

the pain was completely alleviated , POORE-1876-1,171.171

and he was able to walk away with little or no difficulty to the nearest
railway station , half a mile off . POORE-1876-1,171.172

This alleviation lasted about twenty-four hours , when his troubles
returned . POORE-1876-1,171.173

After this upon several occasions he presented himself for the purpose
of having the current applied to his back , POORE-1876-1,171.174

for its application was always followed by many hours of freedom from
pain , while nothing else seemed capable of giving him relief .
POORE-1876-1,171.175

We then lost sight of him for six months , when he again presented
himself in the out-patient room , with a large lumbar abscess and every
sign of caries of the vertebrae , POORE-1876-1,171.176

and he was admitted to the hospital to be under the care of the surgeons
. POORE-1876-1,171.177

We mention this case merely as an <P_172> illustration of the power of
the current to alleviate pain , notwithstanding that such pain may be
caused by the gravest , most permanent , and incurable organic changes .
POORE-1876-1,172.178

<heading>

Case XVIII . POORE-1876-1,172.180

<$$heading>

<font> Occipito-Cervical Neuralgia caused by Disease of the Vertebrae .
<$$font> POORE-1876-1,172.182

- Another instance no less remarkable was in the case of a middle-aged
lady who was sent to the author by the late Dr. Anstie .
POORE-1876-1,172.183

For more than a year she had been a martyr to occipito-cervical
neuralgia of the left side , of a most excruciating character .
POORE-1876-1,172.184

An examination of the left side of the occiput and neck revealed slight
swelling , POORE-1876-1,172.185

and , on deep palpation , a crackling sensation could be felt in the
region of the transverse processes of the first two or three vertebrae .
POORE-1876-1,172.186

Whether this was due to rheumatic inflammation or caries one could not
determine , POORE-1876-1,172.187

but doubtless this mischief , whatever it was , was the cause of her
trouble , POORE-1876-1,172.188

and the patient was accordingly informed that galvanism would probably
do nothing for her . POORE-1876-1,172.189

Her pains were much aggravated when the trapezius or the rotators of the
head were moved . POORE-1876-1,172.190

The current was employed about half-a-dozen times , the positive pole
being placed at the occiput , and the negative moved in a labile fashion
over the side of the neck and shoulder . POORE-1876-1,172.191

The muscles were rhythmically exercised at the same time .
POORE-1876-1,172.192

Whenever the current was employed her pain was alleviated , the
alleviation lasting for varying periods . POORE-1876-1,172.193

On one occasion she was free from pain for nearly two days - a blessing
which she had not enjoyed for months . POORE-1876-1,172.194

Of course she was not <font> cured , <$$font> POORE-1876-1,172.195

and she is possibly now as bad as ever ; POORE-1876-1,172.196

but it surprised us not a little to find that , in the face of a grave
permanent cause , we could give so much <font> alleviation . <$$font>
POORE-1876-1,172.197

We have occasionally employed the current to alleviate the pains of
intestinal colic , and often , though not always , with success , which
in some cases was complete . POORE-1876-1,172.198

We have , on the other hand , found many cases of pain in which the
current apparently did no good whatever . POORE-1876-1,172.199

<P_173>

The galvanic current is , on the whole , the best for relieving pain ,
because it is itself the least painful form of electricity .
POORE-1876-1,173.201

Some writers - Meyer amongst them - strongly recommend faradisation ,
applied by means of a metallic brush or in the form of the ' electric
moxa ' to the painful spot . POORE-1876-1,173.202

Dr. Tibbits records a case of sciatica which was cured by
franklinisation , and also a case of facial neuralgia cured in the same
way . POORE-1876-1,173.203

The method employed was to ' charge ' the patient , and then to ' take
sparks ' along the course of the affected nerves . POORE-1876-1,173.204

There is a class of painful and sometimes semi-paralytic affections the
pathology of which is shrouded beneath that most connotative word '
<font> rheumatic <$$font> . ' POORE-1876-1,173.205

The ordinary ' stiff neck ' is one of these . POORE-1876-1,173.206

A man sits or sleeps in a draught with his neck in a strained position ,
POORE-1876-1,173.207

and the next morning he can@ @not move his head without suffering
agonies of pain . POORE-1876-1,173.208

Again , a coachman , exposed to all weathers on this box , finds that
the deltoid muscle of his left <paren> the driving <$$paren> arm , from
exposure to wind and damp , and from being kept in one position ,
refuses its office ; POORE-1876-1,173.209

he is unable to raise his elbow , POORE-1876-1,173.210

and the attempt to do so causes him much pain . POORE-1876-1,173.211

The stiffness felt in the adductors of the thighs after a long ride in
the wet , and the pain and stiffness about the region of the right
shoulder , which torment old sportsmen who have used the gun too much ,
belong to the same order of ailments . POORE-1876-1,173.212

Again , there are those various conditions which cause the symptoms of
true ' lumbago , ' situated at one time , we suppose , in the muscles of
the back , and another time in the thick aponeuroses which cover them .
POORE-1876-1,173.213

Sciatica is another of the ' rheumatic ' ailments , the characteristics
of which occasionally are that the pains do not follow the lines of
nerve distribution very exactly , and that the pain is as much '
muscular ' as ' nervous ' in character , and is much aggravated by
muscular movements . POORE-1876-1,173.214

Now in the vast majority of these cases it will be found that faradism
and galvanism , but especially the latter , act in <P_174> a way which
is little short of magical . POORE-1876-1,174.215

If we were asked to state for what class of diseases electricity was of
the greatest use , we should have little hesitation in saying the cases
which we are now discussing . POORE-1876-1,174.216

We believe it to be essential that the painful muscles should be made to
contract thoroughly . POORE-1876-1,174.217

This may either be done by employing faradism and so causing a strong
artificial contraction , POORE-1876-1,174.218

or we may use the constant current , and while the patient is under its
anodyne effects , make him thoroughly exercise all the muscles
implicated . POORE-1876-1,174.219

Not long ago the coachman of an eminent London surgeon came to the
author complaining of the ' rheumatism ' of his left shoulder .
POORE-1876-1,174.220

On examining him , it was found that his left deltoid muscle was almost
useless to him . POORE-1876-1,174.221

He could not , and had not , he said , for many years been able to raise
his elbow except in a very slight degree , and always with pain .
POORE-1876-1,174.222

He had exhausted the various liniments and oils , but with no benefit .
POORE-1876-1,174.223

We strongly faradised his deltoid muscle , POORE-1876-1,174.224

and in a few minutes he was able to raise his elbow quickly and
repeatedly above the level of his shoulder . POORE-1876-1,174.225

Cases are not uncommon in which a cure may be effected quite as quickly
and completely . POORE-1876-1,174.226

A very obstinate case of ' lumbago ' was put under the author's care in
Charing Cross Hospital by his friend and then colleague , Dr. Julius
Pollock ; POORE-1876-1,174.227

and as it shows very strongly what electricity will do in such cases ,
the facts are appended . POORE-1876-1,174.228

<heading>

Case XIX . POORE-1876-1,174.230

<$$heading>

<font> ' Lumbago ' of six years' standing . <$$font>
POORE-1876-1,174.232

- W. G. , a brass-finisher , aged thirty-five , was admitted as an
out-patient on July 16 , 1873 . POORE-1876-1,174.233

He was bent almost double , POORE-1876-1,174.234

walked with the greatest difficulty , POORE-1876-1,174.235

complained of intense ' lumbago ' pain , POORE-1876-1,174.236

and gave the following history : POORE-1876-1,174.237

- He had been accustomed to work a good deal with the lathe , standing
up and moving the treadle with his right foot . POORE-1876-1,174.238

About six years ago a pain came on gradually , affecting <P_175> the
back of the thighs and hips , which the medical man attending him called
sciatica . POORE-1876-1,175.239

The pain became so severe that he was obliged to give up work ,
POORE-1876-1,175.240

and had not since been able to resume his employment .
POORE-1876-1,175.241

The pain left his legs , POORE-1876-1,175.242

and finally settled in his back ; POORE-1876-1,175.243

it was most marked in the lower dorsal and lumbar regions ,
POORE-1876-1,175.244

and was of a plunging , shooting character , aggravated by the slightest
movement or the lightest touch , and implicating not only the dorsal
muscles , but the intercostals as well . POORE-1876-1,175.245

Movement had become so difficult that he was often as much as two or
three hours in dressing and undressing himself . POORE-1876-1,175.246

The back was considerably ' bowed , ' the curvature being far more
noticeable at night than in the morning . POORE-1876-1,175.247

There was no indication whatever of any disease of the vertebrae ,
POORE-1876-1,175.248

and the ailment seemed to be mainly muscular . POORE-1876-1,175.249

The positive pole was placed at the upper part of the spinal column , in
the middle line ; POORE-1876-1,175.250

and the lower part of the back , and the lateral regions of the thorax
were thoroughly sponged with the negative pole . POORE-1876-1,175.251

The sponging had the immediate effect of annulling his pain ,
POORE-1876-1,175.252

and produced great redness of the skin of the back and chest .
POORE-1876-1,175.253

While the current was being used he was made to exercise his muscles ,
to flex and extend his back , to rotate his spine , and to inspire and
expire rhythmically and repeatedly . POORE-1876-1,175.254

The result of this treatment was his rapid improvement ,
POORE-1876-1,175.255

and he was soon enabled to resume his employment , which he had
discontinued for six years . POORE-1876-1,175.256

<heading>

Case XX . POORE-1876-1,175.258

<$$heading>

<font> Tinnitus Aurium . <$$font> POORE-1876-1,175.260

- The following is an instance of relief afforded to a troublesome
condition . POORE-1876-1,175.261

The patient was a middle-aged man , POORE-1876-1,175.262

and when he applied for relief among the out-patients of Charing Cross
Hospital he was suffering , and had suffered for nine months , from that
most troublesome annoyance <font> Tinnitus Aurium . <$$font>
POORE-1876-1,175.263

There was , he said , a noise ' like the blowing-off of steam ' <P_176>
constantly going in his left ear . POORE-1876-1,176.264

The least jarring of his body , even when walking , was most painful to
him , POORE-1876-1,176.265

and the roar of the London streets had become intolerable .
POORE-1876-1,176.266

We will not hazard any opinion as to the pathology of this disease ;
POORE-1876-1,176.267

but it will , perhaps , suffice to say that a careful examination of the
ear revealed to us nothing physically wrong with it , and that the
clearing of the ears of wax , and the employment of nervine tonics and
nervine sedatives had proved of no use . POORE-1876-1,176.268

We then thought of giving galvanism a trial , POORE-1876-1,176.269

and putting one rheophore in the patient's hand , we applied the other
to the meatus of the affected ear . POORE-1876-1,176.270

He was immediately relieved ; POORE-1876-1,176.271

and at his next visit , a week later , he stated that he had been free
from the noise for five days , POORE-1876-1,176.272

and it then returned again , but not so severely . POORE-1876-1,176.273

We repeated the application , POORE-1876-1,176.274

and the result has been that he has almost entirely lost his trouble .
POORE-1876-1,176.275

Electricity is no panacea , POORE-1876-1,176.276

and often fails entirely to relieve pain , although we believe that on
the whole the cases in which it is effectual would outnumber those in
which it fails . POORE-1876-1,176.277

Unfortunately , we are unable to give any rules which should lead us to
expect either failure or success in any particular case .
POORE-1876-1,176.278

As our knowledge increases , our powers of prognosis will doubtless
increase also . POORE-1876-1,176.279

In cases where the functions of the brain are deranged , galvanism has
been of service . POORE-1876-1,176.280

The power of the galvanic current <paren> when applied to the head
<$$paren> over most of the ordinary forms of headache is a matter on
which the author has no doubt , POORE-1876-1,176.281

but he has had no experience of its efficacy in the graver disorders of
the brain . POORE-1876-1,176.282

It is stated to act as a powerful calming agent during periods of
excitement , and to serve as a valuable hypnotic in cases where
wakefulness arises from no obvious organic lesions .
POORE-1876-1,176.283

In cases of functional brain disorder we should feel very much inclined
to try the effects of the galvanic current . POORE-1876-1,176.284

One need hardly repeat the caution which has been before uttered ,
<P_177> that the mildest currents must be used at first , and that their
increase should be very gradual and their effect most carefully watched
. POORE-1876-1,177.285

Galvanism has been employed , and it is said with success , in the
treatment of <font> Exophthalmic Goitre , <$$font> or Graves's disease .
POORE-1876-1,177.286

The method pursued is to pass a mild continuous current across the
course of the cervical sympathetic . POORE-1876-1,177.287

The author has tried its effect on one such case , POORE-1876-1,177.288

but neither the pulse-rate , the protrusion of the eyes , nor the
enlargement of the thyroid gland were appreciably influenced .
POORE-1876-1,177.289

The symptoms improved , however , with small doses of digitalis .
POORE-1876-1,177.290

Dr. M. Meyer <paren> Berliner Klinische Wochenschrift , No. 39 , 1872
<$$paren> records four cases of this disease which were most
successfully treated by the application of the galvanic current to the
cervical sympathetic . POORE-1876-1,177.291

The treatment of <font> Spasmodic Diseases <$$font> by electricity is
not in high favour , POORE-1876-1,177.292

and , as a rule , but small success has followed its employment .
POORE-1876-1,177.293

We believe , however , that in a certain proportion of spasmodic
affections electricity is capable of giving relief ;
POORE-1876-1,177.294

and we shall endeavour to point out how to bring about that desired end
. POORE-1876-1,177.295

It will be necessary for us , at starting , to look at the broad
features of the subject , and endeavour to effect some classification of
spasm which may be of use to us in indicating the suitable therapeutic
measures . POORE-1876-1,177.296

What , then , are the variety of spasms ? POORE-1876-1,177.297

Writers are accustomed to speak of ' clonic spasm , ' or spasms of
momentary duration ; and of ' tonic spasm , ' or spasms of prolonged
duration . POORE-1876-1,177.298

A spasm we must define as an involuntary and irregular contraction of a
muscle . POORE-1876-1,177.299

Convulsions are attacks of spasm both clonic and tonic , affecting the
whole or considerable districts of the body ; POORE-1876-1,177.300

and it will , perhaps , clear the ground a little if we say that there
is no good evidence to show that electricity has ever been of the
slightest use in relieving general convulsive seizures , whether
dependent on ' teething , ' epilepsy , tetanus , uraemia , the puerperal
<P_178> state , or intracranial mischief . POORE-1876-1,178.301

It does not seem rational to expect that electricity could be of any
service in such cases . POORE-1876-1,178.302

Clonic spasms are general or local . POORE-1876-1,178.303

Chorea is a disease which is characterised by general clonic spasm .
POORE-1876-1,178.304

Of localised clonic spasms we have familiar examples in stammering
<paren> which is presumably due to clonic spasm of some of the muscles
used in vocalisation <$$paren> , and hiccuping <paren> which is due to
clonic spasm of the diaphragm <$$paren> . POORE-1876-1,178.305

The former of these troubles is not difficult to cure , or rather to
avoid , by attention to pitch and rhythm in speaking ,
POORE-1876-1,178.306

and we are not aware of any evidence as to the beneficial effects of
electricity , although it has been employed . POORE-1876-1,178.307

Satisfactory evidence as to the beneficial effect of any remedy in
stammering is difficult to obtain , because even the very worst
stammerers can , as a rule , obtain a certain mastery over their ailment
, POORE-1876-1,178.308

and it is impossible to determine whether or not improvement is due to
remedial agents , or to strength of will . POORE-1876-1,178.309

Another form of clonic spasm is that which affects the muscles of the
face . POORE-1876-1,178.310

This is seen in its mildest form in that little quivering of the lower
fibres of the orbicularis palpebrarum which patients sometimes speak of
as ' live-blood , ' and which is dependent apparently on a disordered
stomach . POORE-1876-1,178.311

Possibly the very delicate structure of this muscle makes it
particularly susceptible of reflex irritation . POORE-1876-1,178.312

In an aggravated form this clonic spasm attacks the whole of the muscles
supplied by the facial nerve , POORE-1876-1,178.313

and it is then called the ' histrionic spasm . ' POORE-1876-1,178.314

It sometimes depends on reflex causes , POORE-1876-1,178.315

and has been attributed to morbid conditions of some of the branches of
the trigeminal nerve . POORE-1876-1,178.316

More often it is due to direct irritation of the facial nerve itself .
POORE-1876-1,178.317

Two cases we have lately seen in the out-patient room were almost
certainly due to a morbid condition of the facial , POORE-1876-1,178.318

for in one of them it was accompanied by disturbance of hearing , and a
discharge from the ear , POORE-1876-1,178.319

and in the other there was distinct tenderness behind the jaw ,
POORE-1876-1,178.320

<P_179>

and the patient stated that the act of eating , which presumably caused
some mechanical disturbance of his nerve-trunk , invariably aggravated
his troubles . POORE-1876-1,179.322

In neither of these cases was electricity in any form of the least use ,
although they both yielded to large doses of bromide of potassium .
POORE-1876-1,179.323

Another form of local clonic spasm is that painful twitching of the
stumps of limbs which sometimes occurs after amputation , and which is
often accompanied by a bulbous condition of the nerves .
POORE-1876-1,179.324

We have tried the effect of the continuous current in one such case ,
and without the least success . POORE-1876-1,179.325

Not the least alleviation of either pain or spasm occurred .
POORE-1876-1,179.326

Another variety of clonic spasm is <font> tremor . <$$font>
POORE-1876-1,179.327

Now tremor may depend on many causes . POORE-1876-1,179.328

Emotional causes , such as rage or fear , will cause trembling of the
muscles . POORE-1876-1,179.329

The reason for this would seem to be that the mental power , being in
great part devoted to the emotions , is insufficient to control the
muscles . POORE-1876-1,179.330

For the healthy physiological action of a healthy muscle a certain
definite quantity of stimulation would seem to be necessary .
POORE-1876-1,179.331

If the stimulus is not forthcoming , we get paralysis .
POORE-1876-1,179.332

If it is insufficient in quantity , owing to emotional diversion or
impairment of conducting power in the spinal cord or nerves , we get
tremor . POORE-1876-1,179.333

The want of conducting power in the cord or nerves may be due to
permanent causes , such as senile degeneration , or to removable causes
, such as alcoholic or mercurial poisoning . POORE-1876-1,179.334

In cases of <font> Paralysis agitans <$$font> occurring in old people it
is rare to find improvement take place , although Dr. Reynolds has
recorded a case which was relieved by wearing a Pulvermacher's chain .
POORE-1876-1,179.335

If the cause of tremor is an immovable lesion , it is of course idle to
expect improvement by mere treatment of the symptoms .
POORE-1876-1,179.336

In cases of mercurial tremor we should be strongly inclined to recommend
faradisation of the muscles , because the thorough contraction of the
muscles thus brought about would certainly help to eliminate the poison
from the damaged tissue . POORE-1876-1,179.337

Faradism <P_180> has , in fact , been of great service in such cases .
POORE-1876-1,180.338

In mercurial tremor the muscular tissue presumably suffers as well as
the nervous tissue ; POORE-1876-1,180.339

but owing to the impossibility of separating the muscle from the nervous
twigs which ramify in it , it is impossible to say which is at fault .
POORE-1876-1,180.340

In certain morbid conditions of the muscle - as , for example , the
granulo-fatty degeneration which takes place in progressive muscular
atrophy - it is common to observe a fibrillary tremor of the muscle
which occurs wholly independently of volition . POORE-1876-1,180.341

This fibrillary tremor can , according to Duchenne , be arrested by
systematic faradisation of the muscle at fault , thus bringing about a
more active nutrition of it , POORE-1876-1,180.342

but in the author's experience continuous galvanisation is of more
decided service . POORE-1876-1,180.343

Another common cause of tremor is <font> Exhaustion . <$$font>
POORE-1876-1,180.344

It must have been a not uncommon experience of all of us that after
severe and unwonted muscular effort general tremor of the muscles has
set in , a tremor which , for the time being , gives an uncertainty to
all muscular movements , and makes us conscious of a peculiar jerking of
the muscles throughout the body . POORE-1876-1,180.345

This tremor is probably due partly to the exhaustion for the time being
of the muscular tissue , partly to the exhaustion of the voluntary
stimulus , POORE-1876-1,180.346

and possibly the lines of conduction may have become exhausted also .
POORE-1876-1,180.347

This tremor may be called the tremor of acute fatigue .
POORE-1876-1,180.348

Since <font> Fatigue <$$font> is by no means an uncommon cause of
disease it will be well in this place to make some general remarks on
the subject , and especially because the author believes that
electricity will be found of more genuine service , perhaps , in '
<font> fatigue diseases <$$font> ' than in any other class of maladies .
POORE-1876-1,180.349

Work results in fatigue , POORE-1876-1,180.350

and fatigue is a regular and constantly returning symptom experienced by
all of us . POORE-1876-1,180.351

Periods of functional activity invariably alternate with periods of
repose , during which the waste caused by the <P_181> exercise of
function is repaired . POORE-1876-1,181.352

We are indebted to Sir James Paget for having pointed out in his
Croonian Lecture , delivered some years since before the Royal Society ,
that ' rhythmic nutrition ' is a law of nature ; POORE-1876-1,181.353

but , although the truth of this dogma is recognised on all hands , and
may be said to be axiomatic , it has hardly received that careful
consideration at the hands of practical physicians which it deserves .
POORE-1876-1,181.354

Our whole life consists of a series of vibrations - periods of tension
alternating with periods of relaxation ; POORE-1876-1,181.355

and , although the rapidity of these vibrations varies immensely , they
are recognisable in all our acts , be they voluntary or involuntary .
POORE-1876-1,181.356

Let us look first to the ' vibrations ' of an organ the movements of
which are placed entirely beyond our own control - the heart .
POORE-1876-1,181.357

Now , the rate of vibration of the heart is 72 per minute ,
POORE-1876-1,181.358

and if the total period of each vibration be divided into ten parts , it
will be found that four of these parts are devoted to the process known
as <font> systole , <$$font> which may be looked upon as labour ;
POORE-1876-1,181.359

three are occupied by the <font> diastole , <$$font> which , although
hardly labour , is nevertheless exercise of function ;
POORE-1876-1,181.360

and the remaining three parts are occupied by the <font> pause ,
<$$font> during which the heart apparently enjoys absolute rest from any
exercise of function , and may be considered to be in a condition
analogous to sleep . POORE-1876-1,181.361

May we not apply the rate of action of this organ , which has been
regulated for us , to our voluntary acts , POORE-1876-1,181.362

and may not the heart be made to give the key-note , as it were , to
many questions , personal and social ? POORE-1876-1,181.363

If we divide the day of twenty-four hours into ten equal parts , and
give four of these to active work , three to functional exercise of
other kinds , and three to sleep , we shall find that nine_and_a_half
hours' work , seven_and_a_quarter hours' {TEXT:hours'_'} relaxation , '
and seven and a quarter hours' sleep , is what a normal man may , and ,
as a rule , does perform without injury to himself .
POORE-1876-1,181.364

To continue with the consideration of our ' vital vibrations , ' we may
remark that it is universally ordained among civilised <P_182> nations
that once in every seven days there shall be a remission of labour and a
change of occupation ; POORE-1876-1,182.365

and we further recognise the fact that it is highly advisable for those
who are occupied in monotonous pursuits to break away from them at least
once a year , and indulge in that variety of work which we call
amusement . POORE-1876-1,182.366

Monotonous repetitions of the same act are acknowledged , on all hands ,
to be the most potent causes of fatigue . POORE-1876-1,182.367

Fatigue occurs directly we attempt to alter the rhythm of our vital
vibrations by prolonging the periods of tension at the expense of the
periods of relaxation , or by demanding for any length of time a
quickening of the normal rate of vibration ; POORE-1876-1,182.368

and it is not unreasonable to suppose that every organ of the body has
its ' normal rate of vibration , ' if we could only determine what it is
. POORE-1876-1,182.369

We recognise the fact that athletes who ' over-train ' run risks of
cardiac troubles and loss of wind ; that the man who from any cause is
unable to sleep runs a serious risk of permanent impairment of health ;
POORE-1876-1,182.370

and when we find patients pursuing their avocations too zealously we
know that , if such offence against the laws of nature be persisted in ,
general paralysis or other form of ' break-down ' is likely to be the
result . POORE-1876-1,182.371

<font> Fatigue may be general or local , POORE-1876-1,182.372

and both forms may be either acute or chronic . <$$font>
POORE-1876-1,182.373

That fatigue in all its forms is due to impaired nutrition there can be
little doubt , POORE-1876-1,182.374

and we shall find that the symptoms of chronic fatigue are often the
prelude of definite and recognisable degenerative changes .
POORE-1876-1,182.375

As to <font> General fatigue , <$$font> it is recognisable with care
both in its acute and chronic forms . POORE-1876-1,182.376

There is a disability for performing either mental or physical work ,
POORE-1876-1,182.377

and this disability is noticed first in work requiring attention and
sustained effort and , lastly , in those acts which have become
automatic {COM:missing_period} POORE-1876-1,182.378

The symptoms of general fatigue are referable usually to the brain and
nervous system . POORE-1876-1,182.379

<P_183>

As to <font> local fatigue , <$$font> this , again , may be acute or
chronic , POORE-1876-1,183.381

and the symptoms of it are referable usually to the muscles ;
POORE-1876-1,183.382

but we must always bear in mind that muscle and motor-nerve are one and
indivisible , and that recent experiments have given great probability
to the idea that every muscle is connected with a certain definite spot
in the brain . POORE-1876-1,183.383

When , therefore , we speak of a sense of fatigue we must necessarily be
in doubt , notwithstanding the fact that the symptoms are referred to
the muscle , whether brain , nerve , or muscle , one or all of them , be
really at fault . POORE-1876-1,183.384

The symptoms of acute local fatigue are <paren> 1 <$$paren> <font> loss
of power <$$font> to a greater or less extent . POORE-1876-1,183.385

By too frequent or too prolonged stimulation the irritability of
muscular tissue becomes exhausted , POORE-1876-1,183.386

and it either refuses to respond POORE-1876-1,183.387

or responds but feebly to the stimulus of the will ;
POORE-1876-1,183.388

our power of adjusting the force of contraction to the act to be
accomplished is lessened , POORE-1876-1,183.389

and accuracy of movement and delicacy of co-ordination become impossible
. POORE-1876-1,183.390

<paren> 2 <$$paren> <font> Tremor <$$font> is a symptom of acute local
fatigue , which everyone who has been called upon for extraordinary
muscular effort must have experienced . POORE-1876-1,183.391

<paren> 3 <$$paren> <font> Cramp-like <$$font> contraction is the
symptom of local fatigue which disturbs our rest after a hard day's
walking or riding , or muscular efforts in the ball-room or elsewhere .
POORE-1876-1,183.392

<paren> 4 <$$paren> The <font> pain <$$font> of fatigue is familiar to
most of us , POORE-1876-1,183.393

and is readily distinguishable from other forms of pain .
POORE-1876-1,183.394

Local fatigue is caused far sooner by prolonged and sustained muscular
effort than by repetitions of short muscular efforts having due
intervals of relaxation between them . POORE-1876-1,183.395

Anyone who has attempted to hold out a weight at arm's-length knows the
impossibility of a long continuance of the effort , POORE-1876-1,183.396

and it is proverbially true that standing in one position is to most
people far more tiring than walking , the reason apparently being that
in standing the muscles which support the body are subjected to a
prolonged strain , while in walking we use the muscles on either side of
the body alternately . POORE-1876-1,183.397

The great increase of working power which we obtain by <P_184> this
alternating use of the muscles would seem to be one of the chief reasons
for the bilateral symmetry of the body . POORE-1876-1,184.398

Not only is sustained effort a far more potent cause of fatigue than
repeated effort , POORE-1876-1,184.399

but we find that , when fatigue supervenes , actions requiring sustained
effort , be they physical or mental , are the first to fail , while
automatic actions endure the longest , POORE-1876-1,184.400

and in this respect local fatigue resembles general fatigue .
POORE-1876-1,184.401

It is quite possible to exhaust a muscle by artificial stimulation ,
POORE-1876-1,184.402

and if one of the small interossei muscles of the hand be continuously
faradised , it will be found , as before stated , that in a short time
its power of contracting under any form of stimulus will be absolutely
abolished . POORE-1876-1,184.403

It is tolerably certain that the brain can have no share in artificial
fatigue thus produced , POORE-1876-1,184.404

and there seems good reason to suppose that in some people of energetic
temperament the irritability of a muscle may be exhausted while the
power of mental stimulation remains unimpaired . POORE-1876-1,184.405

Although the author dwells chiefly on the peripheral phenomena of
fatigue , he readily admits that these must be generally accompanied by
central changes . POORE-1876-1,184.406

What these latter are must remain a matter of speculation ,
POORE-1876-1,184.407

but in the peripheral phenomena we have something recognisable and
certain , and deserving of our most careful attention .
POORE-1876-1,184.408

<font> Chronic local fatigue <$$font> has causes and symptoms similar to
those of acute local fatigue , POORE-1876-1,184.409

and there can be little doubt that this condition is a common cause of
many of those chronic maladies which seem to result from overwork , and
which are characterised by irregular muscular action .
POORE-1876-1,184.410

That some cases of writer's cramp , torticollis , and hammer-palsy , are
due to chronic fatigue of the muscles employed , there can be little
doubt . POORE-1876-1,184.411

Duchenne and Mr. Brudenell Carter have pointed out how , in cases of
short sight , the prolonged strain of the internal recti has caused
troubles of vision and even cerebral symptoms ; POORE-1876-1,184.412

and quite lately Dr. C. B. Taylor , of Nottingham , has shown reason
for including in the category of ' fatigue diseases ' a peculiar form of
<P_185> nystagmus occurring amongst miners , who try their eyes by
working in the dark , POORE-1876-1,185.413

and the author has little doubt that , attention having been directed to
the symptoms and effects of fatigue , additional light on the subject
will be forthcoming . POORE-1876-1,185.414

For the better understanding of this subject of ' chronic fatigue , '
which we believe plays no unimportant part in many morbid conditions ,
we may pass on to the consideration of that condition in which the
author has chiefly studied it - viz. , <font> Writer's Cramp .
<$$font> POORE-1876-1,185.415

Writer's cramp or scrivener's palsy is one of those diseases which
Duchenne calls ' functional impotences , ' POORE-1876-1,185.416

and it is stated in text-books that the disease is characterised by
inability to perform the act of writing ; that all other acts , however
delicate , are performed perfectly well , but that immediately the
patient attempts to write he fails <paren> either at once or after
having written a few words <$$paren> , generally by the pen eluding his
grasp , or sometimes by tremblings of the fingers , or definite
objective spasm of some of the muscles employed in the act of writing .
POORE-1876-1,185.417

The pathology of this disease has been stated to be a ' derangement of
co-ordinative centres . ' POORE-1876-1,185.418

Duchenne is of opinion , and mainly , it would seem , because the
disease is uninfluenced by localised faradisation , that functional
spasm or impotence is due to a lesion of some point of the <font>
nervous centres . <$$font> POORE-1876-1,185.419

He is confirmed in his opinion because the left hand , in cases of
writer's cramp , is as liable to suffer <paren> should it be used for
writing <$$paren> as was the right one . POORE-1876-1,185.420

' Do not these facts , ' he says , ' tend to show that voluntary
stimulation , often repeated by such and such functions , has not only
produced at length a morbid condition in a given point of the spinal
cord , but that it has extended its action to a neighbouring point on
the opposite side ? ' POORE-1876-1,185.421

He says , further : ' One must also admit for the development of this
malady , as for all others , a particular predisposition .
POORE-1876-1,185.422

<P_186>

In point of fact , numbers of people abuse the functions of writing
without being afflicted by writer's cramp . ' POORE-1876-1,186.424

The late Mr. Solly was of opinion that the cause of writer's cramp was
a granular disintegration of the cervical portion of the spinal cord .
POORE-1876-1,186.425

Dr. Reynolds , after pointing out that for the production of a
complicated movement , such as writing , the integrity of a great number
of parts is necessary - the will , motor and sensory nerve-fibres ,
certain ganglia situate upon the nerve-trunks , the cerebellum , the
muscles , and the special senses - goes on to say that in the disease in
question ' it can@ @not be doubted that some changes take place in the
nutrition of the parts through which the lines of nerve action ,
regulating the secondarily automatic movements , run .
POORE-1876-1,186.426

It seems probable that the association of movement is effected by
ganglia , which are common to fibres passing through distinct but
contiguous nerve-trunks , and that it is owing to some nutrition change
in them - the result of persevering and forced effort - that the
perfection of movement is produced ; POORE-1876-1,186.427

associations at first caused by the will are at length produced
unconsciously . POORE-1876-1,186.428

What happens , then , in such maladies as writer's cramp is a perverted
nutrition of these parts ; a worn-out activity , or a degeneration which
may arise without over-exertion and destroy all that has been previously
achieved . ' POORE-1876-1,186.429

Dr. Julius Althaus is ' inclined to look upon scrivener's palsy as a
symptom of fatigue and functional irritability of the co-ordinative
centres in the upper portion of the spinal axis which have by education
been trained for the guidance of the mechanical act of writing . '
POORE-1876-1,186.430

Professor Niemeyer remarks that ' we know nothing positive as to the
pathogeny of the disease . ' POORE-1876-1,186.431

<P_187>

Dr. Crisanto Zuradelli , of Pavia , who has published two valuable
papers , ' Del Crampo degli Scrittori , ' holds that ' these perversions
of functions are not true spasms , but are due to paralysis of one or
other of the muscles used in writing , in consequence of which the
antagonising muscles get the mastery and occasion a spurious cramp . '
POORE-1876-1,187.433

He points out that the paralyses present are not paralyses in the
ordinary sense of the word , but are comparable to the condition which
other physicians have alluded to as ' <font> irritable weaknesses .
<$$font> ' POORE-1876-1,187.434

He shows that writing consists of <font> three <$$font> separate acts :
<paren> 1 <$$paren> the stroke-making movement of the pen ; <paren> 2
<$$paren> the movements of the hand from left to right ; and <paren> 3
<$$paren> the movements which take the hand to the ink-pot :
POORE-1876-1,187.435

and when any one of the muscles by which one or other of these movements
is effected becomes the seat of paralysis or irritable weakness , we get
a variety of ' Writer's Cramp . ' POORE-1876-1,187.436

