<BEGIN_pope-172x-2>

<P_154>

{ED:94_To_John,_Lord_Carteret}

To the Right Honourable the Lord Carteret , one of his Majesty's
Principal Secretaries {TEXT:Secretary's} of State POPE-172X-2,154.4

Twickenham POPE-172X-2,154.5

Feb. 16 . 1722 <slash> 3 . POPE-172X-2,154.6

I beg your Lordship will look upon this letter less as a presumption ,
than as an effect of the real respect I owe You . POPE-172X-2,154.7

I have long known how to bear my share in such false Reports and
Misconstructions as no Man is Exempt from ; POPE-172X-2,154.8

but there is one that touches me more nearly , POPE-172X-2,154.9

I am told <paren> and in Print <P_155> too by some of the Party
Scriblers <$$paren> that I@ @'ve been suspected of putting that vile
thing a Trick upon you , in being the procurer of your Licence to the
Duke of Buckingham@ @'s Book . POPE-172X-2,155.10

When I had the honour of waiting on your Lordship , I did not dream
there was any need of speaking on this Article : POPE-172X-2,155.11

But I now think my self oblig'd to assure you that I never look'd into
those Papers , or was privy to the Contents of 'em , when that Licence
was procured by Mr Barber , to secure his own property .
POPE-172X-2,155.12

Give me leave my Lord to pay you my thanks for your Intentions to
promote my design on Homer ; POPE-172X-2,155.13

but allow me to add , that if I am , <paren> however innocently
<$$paren> under the least displeasure of the Government : I desire not
to be oblig'd by those that dislike or think me unworthy .
POPE-172X-2,155.14

Indeed my Lord I love my Country , better than any Personal Friend I
have ; POPE-172X-2,155.15

but I love my Personal Friend so well , as not to abandon , or rail at
him , tho' my whole Country fell upon him . POPE-172X-2,155.16

And I assure your Lordship , tho' the King has many Subjects much more
valuable than my self , he has not one more Quiet ; POPE-172X-2,155.17

no Man is more Sensible of the Indulgence I enjoy from my Rulers ,
POPE-172X-2,155.18

I mean that which is common to every Subject from the Protection of a
Free Government . POPE-172X-2,155.19

But as to any particularly I take my self to be the only Scribler of my
Time , of any degree of distinction , who never receiv'd any Places from
the Establishment , any Pension from a Court , or any Presents from a
Ministry . POPE-172X-2,155.20

I desire to preserve this Honour untainted to my Grave ; and to have the
pleasure of saying ; I am as much obliged to my Lord Carteret <paren>
this way <$$paren> as to any Man living , ev'n to your Predecessor dead
, whom I lov'd above all Men . POPE-172X-2,155.21

I thought my self particularly favour'd by your late Treatment of me ,
POPE-172X-2,155.22

and in the Sense of it endeavour'd in this small Affair to do you all
the Justice I could , not only with truth but with warmth .
POPE-172X-2,155.23

I am with all respect | My Lord | Your &c. POPE-172X-2,155.24

<P_156>

{ED:95_To_Atterbury}

April 20 1723 POPE-172X-2,156.27

It is not possible to express what I think , and what I feel , only this
; that I have thought and felt for nothing but you , for some time past
, and shall think of nothing so long for the time to come .
POPE-172X-2,156.28

The greatest comfort I had was an intention which I would have made
practicable to have attended you in your journey , to which I had
brought that Person to consent , who only could have hindered me by a
Tye , which tho' it may be more tender , I do not think <bracket> can be
<$$bracket> more strong than that of friendship . POPE-172X-2,156.29

But <bracket> now I find that Malice , which could be no more foreseen
than , one would think , it could be contrived by any humane creature ,
has rendered every friendly , nay every grateful thought towards you
impracticable . <$$bracket> POPE-172X-2,156.30

I fear there will be no way left me to tell you this great truth , that
I remember you , that I love you , that I am grateful to you , that I
intirely esteem and value you , but that one <bracket> which I will find
, even though it were death to correspond with you . A way <$$bracket>
which needs no open warrant to authorize it , or secret conveyance to
secure it ; which no Bills can preclude , nor any Kings prevent : a way
which may reach to any part of the world where you may be , where the
very whisper , or even the wish of a friend must not be heard , or even
suspected . POPE-172X-2,156.31

By this way I dare tell my esteem and affection for you to your enemies
in the Gates , POPE-172X-2,156.32

and you , and they , and their Sons shall hear it . POPE-172X-2,156.33

You prove your self , my Lord , to know me for the <bracket> zealous
<$$bracket> friend I am , in judging that the manner of your defence ,
and your Glory in it , is a point of the highest concern to me ,
assuring {TEXT:assureing} me , that it will be , it shall be such , That
none of your Friends shall blush for you . POPE-172X-2,156.34

Let me further prompt you to do your self the best and most lasting
justice ; POPE-172X-2,156.35

the instruments of your fame to Posterity will be in your own hands .
POPE-172X-2,156.36

May it not be that Providence has appointed you to some great and useful
work , and calls you to it this Severe way . POPE-172X-2,156.37

You may more eminently and more effectually serve the Publick , even now
, than in the Stations you have so honourably fill'd .
POPE-172X-2,156.38

Think of Tully , Bacon , and Clarendon ; POPE-172X-2,156.39

is not the latter , the most disgraced part of their lives , what you
must envy , and which you would choose to have lived ?
POPE-172X-2,156.40

<P_157>

I am tenderly sensible of the wish you express , that no part of
misfortune may pursue me ; POPE-172X-2,157.42

But God knows <bracket> how short a time we may be suffered , or we may
desire to be suffered , to live in this Country . <$$bracket>
POPE-172X-2,157.43

I am every day less and less fond of it , POPE-172X-2,157.44

and begin <bracket> seriously <$$bracket> to consider a friend in exile
, a friend in death , one gone before , where I am not unwilling , nor
unprepared to follow after ; and where <paren> however various and
uncertain the Roads and voyages of another world may be <$$paren> I can@
@not but entertain a pleasing hope that we may meet again .
POPE-172X-2,157.45

<bracket> This <$$bracket> I faithfully assure you , that in the mean
time , there is no one living or dead , of whom I shall think oftener ,
or better than of you . POPE-172X-2,157.46

I shall look upon you as in a State between both , in which you will
have for me , all the passions , all the warm wishes that can attend the
living , and all the respect and tender sense of loss , that we feel for
the dead : POPE-172X-2,157.47

and I shall always depend upon your friendship , kind memory , and good
offices , as though I never were to hear , or see the effects of them .
Like the trust we have in benevolent Spirits , who , though we never see
or hear them , we think to be constantly serving us , and praying for us
. POPE-172X-2,157.48

Whenever I am wishing to write to you , I shall conclude that you are
intentionally doing so to me ; POPE-172X-2,157.49

and every time I think of you I will believe <bracket> that <$$bracket>
you are thinking of me . POPE-172X-2,157.50

I shall never suffer to be forgotten <paren> nay to be but faintly
remembered <$$paren> the honour , the pleasure , the pride , I must ever
have in reflecting how frequently you have delighted me , how kindly you
have distinguish'd me , how cordially you have advised me , in
conversation and in study ; <bracket> in which <$$bracket> I shall
always want you , and wish for you . POPE-172X-2,157.51

In my most lively , in my most thoughtful hours , I shall equally bear
about me the impressions of you : POPE-172X-2,157.52

and perhaps it will not be in this life only , that I shall have cause
to remember and acknowledge the friendship of the Bishop of Rochester .
POPE-172X-2,157.53

<bracket> Be assured that I wish for any occasion of publickly bearing
testimony of the truth in your behalf , and shall be glad to be called
upon , and so will the friend you mention . POPE-172X-2,157.54

Would to God we could act for you , POPE-172X-2,157.55

but if not that , at least let us appear for you . <$$bracket>
POPE-172X-2,157.56

<P_158>

{ED:96_To_Simon,_Viscount_Harcourt}

Munday POPE-172X-2,158.59

9 a clock POPE-172X-2,158.60

{ED:6_May_1723}

My Lord , - Your Lordship gave me a Hint , in relation to what I was to
say before the Lords , & to the proper manner of answering , which I
thought would be of great service to me , as well as extreamly obliging
in your Lordship . POPE-172X-2,158.62

I shall certainly to the best of my memory observe it .
POPE-172X-2,158.63

But I have chanc't to drop a paper in which I had sett it down , & where
I had enterd another memorandum to ask you about . Which makes me wish
I had found an opportunity this day , or early to_morrow , to talk
further to your Lordship hereon . POPE-172X-2,158.64

I resolve to take any opportunity of declaring <paren> even upon Oath
<$$paren> how different I am from what a reputed Papist is .
POPE-172X-2,158.65

I could almost wish , I were askd if I am not a Papist ?
POPE-172X-2,158.66

Would it be proper , in such case , to reply , That I do@ @n't perfectly
know the Import of the word , & would not answer any thing that might
for ought I know , be prejudicial to me , during the Bill against such ,
which is depending . But that <font> if to be a Papist be to profess &
hold many such Tenets of faith as are ascribd to Papists , I am not a
Papist . And if to be a Papist , be to hold any that are averse to , or
destructive of , the present Government , King , or Constitution ; I am
no Papist . <$$font> POPE-172X-2,158.67

I very much wish I had your Lordship's {TEXT:Lordships} opinion a little
more at large , since probably I may not be called upon this day or
to_morrow . POPE-172X-2,158.68

I know your humanity & particular Kindness to me , POPE-172X-2,158.69

& therefore {TEXT:therfore} will add no more , but that I am , what it
is Impossible for me not to be , highly sensible of it , & entirely |
Your Lordships | Most obligd | faithful Servant | A. Pope .
POPE-172X-2,158.70

<font> Endorsement <$$font> : POPE-172X-2,158.71

5 May 1723 | POPE-172X-2,158.72

Mr Pope | POPE-172X-2,158.73

to | Lord Vicount Harcourt POPE-172X-2,158.74

<P_159>

{ED:97_To_Atterbury}

May 1723 . POPE-172X-2,159.77

My Lord , - While yet I can write to you , I must and will correspond
with you , till the very moment that it is Felony ; POPE-172X-2,159.78

and when I can no longer write to you , I will write of you .
POPE-172X-2,159.79

To tell you that my heart is full of your Defense , is no more than I
believe the worst enemy you have must own of his . POPE-172X-2,159.80

You have really , without a figure , had all the triumph that antient
eloquence boasts of . POPE-172X-2,159.81

Their Passions and Consciences have done you right , though their Votes
will not . POPE-172X-2,159.82

You have met with the fate frequent to great and good men , to gain
applause where you are denyed justice . POPE-172X-2,159.83

Let me take the only occasion I have had in the whole Series of your
misfortunes , to congratulate you ; not you only , but Posterity , on
this Noble Defense . POPE-172X-2,159.84

I already see in what Lustre that Innocence is to appear to other Ages ,
which this has overborn and oppressed . POPE-172X-2,159.85

I know perfectly well what a share of credit it will be , for <bracket>
me <$$bracket> to have appeared on your side , or being called your
Friend . POPE-172X-2,159.86

I am far prouder of that word you publickly spoke of me , than of any
thing I have yet heard of my self in my whole life . POPE-172X-2,159.87

Thanks be to God , that I a Private man , concerned in no Judicature ,
and employed in no Publick cause , have had the honour , in this great
and shining incident , <paren> which will make the first figure in the
history of this time <$$paren> to enter , as it were , my Protest to
your Innocence , and my Declaration of your Friendship .
POPE-172X-2,159.88

Be assured , my Dear Lord , no time shall ever efface the memory of that
from my heart , should I be denyed the power of expressing it ever more
with my Pen , in this manner . POPE-172X-2,159.89

But could that permission be obtained , which you had once the extream
goodness to think of asking <paren> even of those from whom you would
ask nothing , I believe , but what lyes very near your heart <$$paren>
could the permission of corresponding be obtained , I do assure you , I
would leave off all other writing , and apply it wholly to you , where
it would please me best , and to the amusement , or , if I could be so
happy as to say , Comfort of your Exile ; till God and your Innocence ,
which will support you in it , restore you from it ; than which there is
not a Sincerer , or warmer Prayer , my Lord , in the breast of your ever
obliged and affectionate Friend . POPE-172X-2,159.90

<P_161>

{ED:98_To_Atterbury}

May 1723 . POPE-172X-2,161.93

Once more I write to you as I promis'd , POPE-172X-2,161.94

and this once I fear will be the last ! POPE-172X-2,161.95

the Curtain will soon be drawn between my friend and me , and nothing
left but to wish you a long good night . POPE-172X-2,161.96

May you enjoy a state of repose in this life , not unlike that sleep of
the soul which some have believ'd is to succeed it , where we lye
utterly forgetful of that world from which we are gone , and ripening
for that to which we are to go . POPE-172X-2,161.97

If you retain any memory of the past , let it only image to you what has
pleas'd you best ; sometimes present a dream of an absent friend , or
bring you back an agreeable conversation . POPE-172X-2,161.98

But upon the whole , I hope you will think less of the time past than of
the future ; as the former has been less kind to you than the latter
infallibly will be . POPE-172X-2,161.99

Do not envy the world your Studies ; POPE-172X-2,161.100

they will tend to the benefit of men against whom you can have no
complaint , I mean of all Posterity : POPE-172X-2,161.101

and perhaps at your time of life , nothing else is worth your care .
POPE-172X-2,161.102

What is every year of a wise man's life but a censure or critique on the
past ? POPE-172X-2,161.103

Those whose date is the shortest , live long enough to laugh at one half
of it : POPE-172X-2,161.104

the boy despises the infant , the man the boy , the philosopher both ,
and the Christian all . POPE-172X-2,161.105

You may now begin to think your manhood was too much a puerility ; and
you@ @'ll never suffer your age to be but a second infancy .
POPE-172X-2,161.106

The toys and baubles of your childhood are hardly now more below you ,
than those toys of our riper and of our declining years , the drums and
rattles of Ambition , and the dirt and bubbles of Avarice .
POPE-172X-2,161.107

At this time , when you are cut off from a little society and made a
citizen of the world at large , you should bend your talents not to
serve a Party , or a few , but all Mankind . POPE-172X-2,161.108

Your Genius should mount above that mist in which its participation and
neighbourhood with earth long involv'd it : POPE-172X-2,161.109

To shine abroad and to heav'n , ought to be the business and the glory
of your present situation . POPE-172X-2,161.110

Remember it was at such a time , that the greatest lights of antiquity
dazzled {TEXT:dazled} and blazed the most ; in their retreat , in their
exile , or in their death : POPE-172X-2,161.111

but why do I talk of dazzling {TEXT:dazling} or blazing ?
POPE-172X-2,161.112

it was then that they did good , and they gave light , and that they
became Guides to mankind . POPE-172X-2,161.113

Those aims alone are worthy of spirits truly great , POPE-172X-2,161.114

and such I therefore <P_162> hope will be yours . POPE-172X-2,162.115

Resentment indeed may remain , POPE-172X-2,162.116

perhaps can@ @not be quite extinguished , in the noblest minds ;
POPE-172X-2,162.117

but Revenge never will harbour there : POPE-172X-2,162.118

higher principles than those of the first , and better principles than
those of the latter , will infallibly influence men whose thoughts and
whose hearts are enlarged , and cause them to prefer the Whole to any
part of mankind , especially to so small a part as one's single self .
POPE-172X-2,162.119

Believe me , my Lord , I look upon you as a spirit enter'd into another
life , as one just upon the edge of Immortality , where the passions and
affections must be much more exalted , and where you ought to despise
all little views , and all mean retrospects . POPE-172X-2,162.120

Nothing is worth your looking back ; POPE-172X-2,162.121

therefore look forward , POPE-172X-2,162.122

and make <paren> as you can <$$paren> the world look after you :
POPE-172X-2,162.123

But take care , that it be not with pity , but with esteem and
admiration . POPE-172X-2,162.124

I am with the greatest sincerity , and passion for your fame as well as
happiness , Yours , &c. POPE-172X-2,162.125

{ED:99_To_Caryll}

Twittenham . POPE-172X-2,162.127

{ED:c._17_May_1723}

I sent you a few words to your lodgings in London , POPE-172X-2,162.129

but <paren> as I since understood <$$paren> you had been gone a week
before . POPE-172X-2,162.130

I fancied my letter might have been forwarded to you from thence
POPE-172X-2,162.131

and hoped to hear of you . POPE-172X-2,162.132

There was indeed no business in it , but only a kind of incitive
{COM:sic} to your writing and a renewal of a correspondance I ever
delighted in . POPE-172X-2,162.133

I now accost you again ; POPE-172X-2,162.134

and had this been dated yesterday , as I intended , it had been as free
from business as my last , whereas a thing has passed to_day that makes
me acquaint you with a private design of mine , which I now hear of a
probability of executing . POPE-172X-2,162.135

It is indeed a friend's right to tell you anything that relates to my
affairs , as knowing the kind interest you take in 'em , tho' you were
not concerned in 'em in any other regard . POPE-172X-2,162.136

But this will require my <P_163> drawing together what money I can in
order to purchase an advantageous annuity . POPE-172X-2,163.137

I could be glad of the principal 200 ll. which you have in your hands ,
for this End as soon as 't@ @is convenient for you to pay it ,
POPE-172X-2,163.138

but if it will be any way troublesome , let me know by the first
opportunity that I may procure it elsewhere , POPE-172X-2,163.139

and be pleased to tell me what time you will choose to repay it in :
POPE-172X-2,163.140

and I@ @'ll order my matters according to your conveniency .
POPE-172X-2,163.141

As for the year's interest due at Christmas last , I should be glad of
it now , unless you choose to send the whole in a shorter time than I
would press you to do it . POPE-172X-2,163.142

The worthy gentleman our friend , whom we went together to visit , gives
you his most hearty services , POPE-172X-2,163.143

and has given them you several times since <paren> as one of my letters
told you <$$paren> . POPE-172X-2,163.144

I see nothing but melancholy prospects for my friends ,
POPE-172X-2,163.145

and shall be a common sufferer with you ; yet I assure you , much more
from my concern for the sufferings of a great number of honest and
conscientious men , than from my own little part in 'em :
POPE-172X-2,163.146

yet if this Bill passes I shall lose a good part of my income
POPE-172X-2,163.147

and in this expectation I am providing the annuity I told you of , to
enable me to keep myself that man of honour which I trust in God ever to
be . POPE-172X-2,163.148

I believe firmly you and I shall never be ashamed of , or for , one
another . POPE-172X-2,163.149

I know I wish my country well POPE-172X-2,163.150

and if it undoes me , it shall not make me wish it otherwise .
POPE-172X-2,163.151

You see I go on acquainting you with my grievances , as I did upon
another occasion when you was {COM:sic} last in town .
POPE-172X-2,163.152

I know I need not put you in mind of doing that or any other sort of
justice or kindness to one who is so sincerely and by so long
established a title | Dear sir | Your most faithful | affect. Friend |
& servant | A. P. POPE-172X-2,163.153

My Mother is extremely your servant . POPE-172X-2,163.154

Lady Seafort has not been here a good while , POPE-172X-2,163.155

or I should have given you some account of her . POPE-172X-2,163.156

My faithful service to Mrs C. , Lady Mary , and your whole family with
all wishes for all your felicity . POPE-172X-2,163.157

<P_164>

{ED:100_To_Swift}

{ED:August_1723}

I find a rebuke in a late Letter of yours that both stings & pleases me
extreamly . POPE-172X-2,164.161

Your saying that I ought to have writt a Postscript to my friend Gay@
@'s , makes me not content to write less than a whole Letter ,
POPE-172X-2,164.162

& your seeming to receive His kindly gives me hopes you@ @'ll look upon
this as a sincere effect of friendship . POPE-172X-2,164.163

Indeed as I can@ @not but owne , the laziness with which you tax me , &
with which I may equally charge you <paren> for both of Us I beleive
have had & one of Us has both had & given a surfeit of writing <$$paren>
so I really thought you would know yourself to be so certainly entitld
to my Friendship , that t@ @was a possession , you cou'd not imagine
needed any further Deeds or Writings to assure you of it .
POPE-172X-2,164.164

<bracket> It is an honest Truth , there@ @'s no one living or dead of
whom I think oft'ner , or better than yourself . POPE-172X-2,164.165

I look upon You to be , <paren> as to me <$$paren> in a State between
both : POPE-172X-2,164.166

you have from me all the passions , & good wishes , that can attend the
Living ; & all that Respect & tender Sense of Loss , that we feel for
the Dead . <$$bracket> POPE-172X-2,164.167

Whatever you seem to think of your withdrawn & separate State , at this
distance , & in this absence , Dr Swift lives still in England , in
ev'ry place & company where he woud chuse to live ; POPE-172X-2,164.168

& I find him in all the conversations I keep , & in all the Hearts in
which I wou'd have any Share . POPE-172X-2,164.169

We have never met these many Years without mention of you .
POPE-172X-2,164.170

Besides my old Acquaintances I have found that all my Friends of a later
date , were such as were yours before . POPE-172X-2,164.171

Lord Oxford , Lord Harcourt , & Lord Harley , may look upon me as one
immediately entail'd upon them by You . POPE-172X-2,164.172

Lord Bolingbroke is now return'd <paren> as I hope <$$paren> to take me
, with all his other Hereditary Rights ; POPE-172X-2,164.173

& indeed he seems grown so much a Philosopher as to set his heart upon
some of 'em as little as upon the Poet you gave him .
POPE-172X-2,164.174

T@ @is sure my particular ill fate , that all those I have most lov'd &
with whom I have most liv'd , must be banish'd . POPE-172X-2,164.175

After both of You left England , my constant Host was the Bishop of
Rochester . POPE-172X-2,164.176

Sure this is a Nation that is cursedly afraid of being overrun with too
much politeness , & can@ @not regain one Great Genius but at the expense
of another . POPE-172X-2,164.177

I tremble for my Lord Peterborow <paren> whom I now lodge with <$$paren>
POPE-172X-2,164.178

he has too much wit , as well as Courage to make a solid General ,
POPE-172X-2,164.179

& if he escapes being banish'd by others , I fear he will banish himself
. POPE-172X-2,164.180

This leads me to give You some account of my manner of Life &
Conversation which has been infinitely more various & dissipated than
when You knew me , among all Sexes , Parties & Professions .
POPE-172X-2,164.181

A Glutt of Study & Retirement in the first part of my Life cast me into
this , POPE-172X-2,164.182

& this I begin to see will throw me again <P_165> into Study &
Retirement . POPE-172X-2,165.183

The Civilities I have met with from Opposite Sets of People have
hinder'd me from being either violent or sowre to any Party :
POPE-172X-2,165.184

but at the same time the observations & experiences I can@ @not but have
collected , have made me less fond of , & less surpriz'd at any .
POPE-172X-2,165.185

I am therefore the more afflicted & the more angry , at the violences &
Hardships I see practis'd by either . POPE-172X-2,165.186

The merry vein you knew me in , is sunk into a Turn of Reflexion , that
has made the world pretty indifferent to me , POPE-172X-2,165.187

& yet I have acquir'd a Quietness of mind which by Fitts improves into a
certain degree of chearfullness , enough to make me just so good_humourd
as to wish that world well . POPE-172X-2,165.188

My Friendships are increas'd by new ones , POPE-172X-2,165.189

yet no part of the warmth I felt for the old is diminish'd .
POPE-172X-2,165.190

Aversions I have none but to Knaves , POPE-172X-2,165.191

<paren> for {TEXT:f} Fools I have learn'd to bear with <$$paren>
POPE-172X-2,165.192

& those I can@ @not be commonly Civil to : POPE-172X-2,165.193

For I think those are next of knaves who converse with them .
POPE-172X-2,165.194

The greatest Man in Power of this sort , shall hardly make me bow to him
, unless I had a personal obligation <bracket> to him <$$bracket>
POPE-172X-2,165.195

& that I will take care not to have . POPE-172X-2,165.196

The Top-pleasure of my Life is one I learnd from you both how to gain ,
& how to use the Freedomes of Friendship with Men much my Superiors .
POPE-172X-2,165.197

To have pleasd Great men according to Horace is a Praise ;
POPE-172X-2,165.198

but not to have flatterd them & yet not to have displeasd them is a
greater . POPE-172X-2,165.199

I have carefully avoided all intercourse with Poets & Scriblers , unless
where by great Chance I find a modest one . POPE-172X-2,165.200

By these means I have had no quarrels with any personally ,
POPE-172X-2,165.201

& none have been Enemies , but who were also strangers to me .
POPE-172X-2,165.202

And as there is no great need of Eclaircissements with such , Whatever
they writ or said I never retaliated ; not only never seeming to know ,
but often really never knowing any thing of the matter .
POPE-172X-2,165.203

There are very few things that give me the anxiety of a wish :
POPE-172X-2,165.204

the strongest I have wou'd be to pass my days with you , & a few such as
you . POPE-172X-2,165.205

But Fate has dispers'd them all about the world . POPE-172X-2,165.206

& I find to wish it is as vain as to wish to live to see the millennium
, & the Kingdom of the Just upon Earth . POPE-172X-2,165.207

If I have sinned in my long silence Consider there is One , to whom You
yourself have been as great a Sinner . POPE-172X-2,165.208

As soon as you see his Hand you@ @'ll learn to do me justice , & feel in
your own heart how long a man may be silent to those he truly loves &
respects . POPE-172X-2,165.209

| I am Dear Sir | Your ever@ @faithfull Servant | A: Pope
POPE-172X-2,165.210

<P_166>

{ED:101_To_Henry_St_John,_Viscount_Bolingbroke}

April 9 . 1724 . POPE-172X-2,166.213

You will think me very Indolent till I tell you I have been very Sick ,
the only reason that has left your Letter unacknowledged so long by
Words which has every day been acknowledg'd in my heart .
POPE-172X-2,166.214

A severe fit of illness <paren> a sort of intermitting Fever <$$paren>
has made me unfit for all sorts of Writing and application .
POPE-172X-2,166.215

You will see <paren> I fear <$$paren> the effects of it in this Letter ,
which will be almost enough to convince you that all those mighty hopes
of the Improvement of the English Language , and the glory of its Poetry
, must rest upon some abler Prop than your Servant .
POPE-172X-2,166.216

To answer first to your Lordship's Charge against me as a translator
Convict ; I do confess I do@ @n't translate Homer as a great Work , but
as an easy one , which I really find less difficult than it seems Mr de
Sacy does to write Pliny into French Prose . POPE-172X-2,166.217

Whatever expectations my own Vanity , or your Partiality , might give me
of a better fate than my predecessors in Poetry ; I own I am already
arriv'd to an Age which more awakens my diligence to live Satisfactorily
, than to write unsatisfactorily , to my self : more to consult my
happiness , than my Fame ; or <paren> in defect of happiness <$$paren>
my Quiet . POPE-172X-2,166.218

<paren> Me@ @thinks quiet serves instead of happiness to Philosophers ,
as vanity serves instead of Fame to Authors , POPE-172X-2,166.219

for in either case the <font> Art of Contentment is all . <$$font>
<$$paren> POPE-172X-2,166.220

But when Men grow too Nice and too knowing , the Succidaneum will not do
to such delicate constitutions , POPE-172X-2,166.221

and the Author becomes miserable to himself in the degree that he grows
acceptable to others . POPE-172X-2,166.222

What you call a happy Author is the unhappiest Man ; and from the same
cause , that Men are generally miserable from aiming at a State more
perfect than Man is capable of . POPE-172X-2,166.223

<font> Victor virum Volitare per ora <$$font> may indeed sound nobly in
the Ears of the Ambitious , whether in the Field , the State , or the
Study ; POPE-172X-2,166.224

But sure that Consideration <paren> to a Man's self <$$paren> is not of
such weight , as to sacrifice to that alone all the more attainable and
the more reasonable aims of our Being . POPE-172X-2,166.225

To write well , lastingly well , Immortally well , must not one leave
Father and Mother and cleave unto the Muse ? POPE-172X-2,166.226

Must not one be prepared to endure the reproaches of Men , want and much
Fasting , nay Martyrdom in its Cause . POPE-172X-2,166.227

'T@ @is such a Task as scarce leaves a Man time to be a good Neighbour ,
an useful friend , nay to plant a Tree , much less to save his Soul .
POPE-172X-2,166.228

Pray my Lord may not one ask this question , of so just , so grateful ,
and so deserving a thing , as the present Age ? POPE-172X-2,166.229

Tanti est , ut placeam tibi perire ? POPE-172X-2,166.230

That present Age which you charge me as so much in debt to and which you
rank with my two other great Creditors , Posterity and my Country - To
the two first , truly I think I@ @'m <P_167> indebted just equally ;
POPE-172X-2,167.231

for one of 'em has done exactly as much for me as the other .
POPE-172X-2,167.232

But to my Country sure <paren> My Lord <$$paren> I owe nothing ,
POPE-172X-2,167.233

for it has driven away my best friends ; POPE-172X-2,167.234

I shall owe it something when it calls them back again .
POPE-172X-2,167.235

The general Reflection makes me shake my head at all the Encouragements
you muster up , to induce me to Write . POPE-172X-2,167.236

I own your observations , <paren> as to the possibility of fixing a
Language , and as to your necessity of good Original works to perpetuate
it <$$paren> to be just , and of a much greater strength & solidity than
the usual Arguments on that head : POPE-172X-2,167.237

I admire your remark that it is not always a consequence that Languages
must decay as Governments fall ; POPE-172X-2,167.238

and it is very truly as well as finely said , that Greek like
Christianity spread by persecution , as much as Latin like Mahometanism
by Victory : POPE-172X-2,167.239

But allow me to say , that for an Englishman to ground an opinion of the
Immortality of his Language from that of Homer , because the States of
Greece were then Inferior to what our Nation is at present ; wou'd be
just such a way of Reasoning as if five or six_hundred Rapparees getting
together to plunder a few Villages should hope to lay the foundations of
an Empire ; because that of the Ottoman's began much in the same manner
. POPE-172X-2,167.240

Neither do I think the Examples of the best Writers in our time , and
Nation , wou'd have that Prevalance over the bad ones , which your
Lordship observes them to have had in the Roman times .
POPE-172X-2,167.241

A State constantly divided into various Factions and Interests Occasions
an eternal swarm of bad Writers . POPE-172X-2,167.242

Some of these will be Encourag'd by the Government equally if not
Superiorly to the good ones , because the latter will rarely , if ever
dip their Pens for such ends : POPE-172X-2,167.243

And these are sure to be cry'd up , and follow'd by one half of the
Kingdom , and consequently possest of no small degree of Reputation .
POPE-172X-2,167.244

Our English Stile is more corrupted by the Party Writers , than by any
other cause whatever ; POPE-172X-2,167.245

they are universally read , and approv'd <paren> in proportion to their
degree of Merit <$$paren> much more than any other set of Authors in any
Science , as Mens passions and Interests are Stronger and surer than
their Tastes and Judgments . POPE-172X-2,167.246

It is but this Week that I have been well enough in my head to read the
Poem of the <font> League <$$font> with the attention it deserves .
POPE-172X-2,167.247

Next to my obligation to Mr de Voltaire for writing it , is that I owe
to you for sending it . POPE-172X-2,167.248

I can@ @not pretend to judge with any exactness of the beauties of a
foreign Language , which I understand but Imperfectly :
POPE-172X-2,167.249

I can only tell my thoughts in Relation to the design and conduct of the
Poem , or the sentiments . POPE-172X-2,167.250

I think the forming the Machines upon the Allegorical persons of Virtues
and vices very reasonable ; it being equally proper to Ancient and
Modern subjects , and to all Religions and times : POPE-172X-2,167.251

Nor do we look upon them so much <P_168> as Heathen Divinities as
Natural passions . POPE-172X-2,168.252

This is not the Case when Jupiter , Juno &c. are introduc'd who tho'
sometimes consider'd as Physical powers yet that sort of Allegory lies
not open enough to the apprehension . POPE-172X-2,168.253

We care not to Study , or Anatomize a Poem , but only to read it for our
entertainment . POPE-172X-2,168.254

It should certainly be a sort of Machinery , for the meaning of which
one is not at a loss for a Moment , POPE-172X-2,168.255

without something of this Nature , his Poem wou'd too much resemble
Lucan or Silius : POPE-172X-2,168.256

and indeed the Subject being so modern , a more violent or remote kind
of Fable or Fiction wou'd not suit it : POPE-172X-2,168.257

if I have any thing to wish on this head , it were to have a little more
of the <font> Fictitious <$$font> <paren> I dare not say the <font>
Wonderful <$$font> , for the reason just now given <$$paren>
POPE-172X-2,168.258

yet that would give it a greater resemblance to the Ancient Epick Poem .
POPE-172X-2,168.259

He has help'd it much in my opinion by throwing so much of the Story
into Narration , and entering at once into the middle of the Subject ;
as well as by making the Action single namely only the Siege of Paris .
POPE-172X-2,168.260

This brings it nearer the Model of Homer and Virgil ;
POPE-172X-2,168.261

yet I ca@ @n't help fancying if the fabulous part were a little more
extended into descriptions and Speeches &c. it wou'd be of service :
POPE-172X-2,168.262

And from this very cause me@ @thinks that Book which Treats of the
King's Love to Madam Gabrielle appears more of a Poem than the rest .
POPE-172X-2,168.263

Discord and Policy might certainly do and say something more ,
POPE-172X-2,168.264

and so I judge of some other occasions for Invention and description
which me@ @thinks are dropt too suddenly . POPE-172X-2,168.265

As to all the parts of the Work which relate to the actions or
Sentiments of Men , or to Characters and Manners , they are undoubtedly
excellent , and the <font> Fort <$$font> of the Poem .
POPE-172X-2,168.266

His Characters and Sentences are not like Lucan's {TEXT:Lucans} , too
profess'd or formal and particularized , POPE-172X-2,168.267

but fall short and Judicious , POPE-172X-2,168.268

and seem naturally to rise from an occasion either of telling what the
Man <font> was <$$font> , or what he thought . POPE-172X-2,168.269

It seems to me that his Judgment of Mankind , and his Observation of
human Actions in a lofty and Philosophical view , is one of the
principal Characteristicks of the Writer ; who however is not less a
Poet for being a Man of Sense , <paren> as Seneca and his Nephew were .
<$$paren> POPE-172X-2,168.270

Do not smile when I add , that I esteem him for that honest principled
Spirit of true Religion which shines thro' the whole ; and from whence
<paren> unknown as I am to Mr de Voltaire <$$paren> I conclude him at
once a Free thinker and a Lover of Quiet ; no Bigot , but yet no
Heretick one who honours Authority and National Sanctions without
prejudice to Truth or Charity , One who has Study'd Controversy less
than Reason , and the Fathers less than Mankind ; in a word , one worthy
from his rational temper of that share of Friendship & Intimacy with
which you honour him . POPE-172X-2,168.271

Notwithstanding you tell me of the Oracles of our Lady of Lasource
<P_169> are ceas'd and that She returns no more answers , I shall expect
the favour She promises to a poor Hermit on the banks of the Thames .
POPE-172X-2,169.272

In the mean time I see Visions of her and of Lasource .
POPE-172X-2,169.273

{COM:verse_omitted}

I can@ @not subscribe my self better than as Horace did .
POPE-172X-2,169.275

Vestris Amicum Fontibus et choris . POPE-172X-2,169.276

<P_170>

{ED:102_To_Martha_Blount}

June 22'd POPE-172X-2,170.279

{ED:1724?}

Madam , - I promised {TEXT:promisd} you an account of Sherborne , before
I had seen it , or knew what I undertook . POPE-172X-2,170.281

I imagind it to be one of those fine old Seats of which there are
Numbers scatterd over England . POPE-172X-2,170.282

But this is so peculiar and its Situation of so uncommon a kind , that
it merits a more particular description . POPE-172X-2,170.283

The House is in the form of an H . POPE-172X-2,170.284

The body of it , which was built by Sir Walter Rawleigh , consists of
four Stories , with four six-angled Towers at the ends .
POPE-172X-2,170.285

These have since been joind to four Wings , with a regular Stone
Balustrade at the top & four towers more that finish the building .
POPE-172X-2,170.286

The Windows & Gates are of a yellow Stone throughout ,
POPE-172X-2,170.287

and one of the flatt Sides toward the Garden has the wings of a newer
Architecture with beautiful Italian Window-frames done by the first Earl
of Bristol , which , if they were joind in the middle by a Portico
covering the Old Building , would be a noble Front .
POPE-172X-2,170.288

The design of such an one I have been amusing myself with drawing ,
POPE-172X-2,170.289

but t@ @is a question whether my Lord Digby will not be better amus'd
than to execute it . POPE-172X-2,170.290

The finest room is a Salon 50 ft. long , & a Parlor hung with very
excellent Tapistry of Rubens , which was a present from the King of
Spain to the E. of Bristol in his Ambassy there . POPE-172X-2,170.291

This stands in a Park , finely crownd with very high Woods , on all the
tops of the Hills , which form a great Amfitheatre sloping down to the
house . POPE-172X-2,170.292

On the Garden Sides the Woods approach close , so that it appears there
with a thick Line & Depth of Groves on each hand , & so it shows from
most parts of the Park . POPE-172X-2,170.293

The Gardens are so Irregular , that t@ @is very hard to give an exact
idea of 'em but by a Plan . POPE-172X-2,170.294

Their beauty rises from this Irregularity , POPE-172X-2,170.295

for not only the Several parts of the Garden itself make the better
Contrast {TEXT:Contraste} by these sudden Rises , Falls , and Turns of
ground ; POPE-172X-2,170.296

but the Views about it are lett in , POPE-172X-2,170.297

& hang over the Walls , in very different figures and aspects .
POPE-172X-2,170.298

You come first out of the house into a green Walk of Standard Lymes with
a hedge behind them that makes a Colonnade , thence into a little
triangular wilderness , from whose Centre you see the town of Sherborne
in a valley , interspersd with trees . POPE-172X-2,170.299

From the corner of this you issue at once upon a high green Terras the
whole breadth of the Garden , which has five more green Terras's hanging
under each other , without hedges , only a few pyramid yews & large
round Honisuckles between them . POPE-172X-2,170.300

The Honeysuckles hereabouts are the largest & finest I ever saw .
POPE-172X-2,170.301

You@ @'l be pleasd when I tell you the Quarters of the above mentiond
little Wilderness are filld with these & with Cherry trees of the best
kinds <P_172> all within reach of the hand . POPE-172X-2,172.302

At the ends of these Terras's run two long Walks under the Side walls of
the Garden which communicate with the other Terras's that front these
opposite . POPE-172X-2,172.303

Between , the Vally is layd level and divided into two regular Groves of
Horse chestnuts , and a Bowling-green in the middle of about 180 foot .
POPE-172X-2,172.304

This is bounded behind with a Canall , that runs quite across the Groves
& also along one Side , in the form of a T . POPE-172X-2,172.305

Behind this , is a Semicircular Berceau , and a Thicket of mixd trees
that compleats the Crown of the Amfitheatre which is of equal extent
with the Bowling-green . POPE-172X-2,172.306

Beyond that runs a natural River thro green banks of turf , over which
rises another Row of Terras's , the first supported by a slope Wall
planted with Vines POPE-172X-2,172.307

<paren> So is also the Wall that bounds the channel of the river .
<$$paren> POPE-172X-2,172.308

A second & third appeared above this , POPE-172X-2,172.309

but they are to be turnd into a Line of Wilderness with wild winding
walks for the convenience of passing from one side to the other in Shade
, the heads of whose trees will lye below the uppermost Terras of all ,
which compleats the Garden and overlooks both that & the Country .
POPE-172X-2,172.310

Even above the wall of this the natural Ground rises ,
POPE-172X-2,172.311

& is crownd with several venerable Ruins of an Old Castle , with Arches
& broken views , of which I must say more hereafter .
POPE-172X-2,172.312

When you are at the left corner of the Canal and the Chestnut
{TEXT:Chesnut} groves in the bottome , you turn of a sudden under very
old trees into the deepest Shade . POPE-172X-2,172.313

One walk winds you up a Hill of venerable Wood overarchd by nature , &
of a vast height , into a circular Grove , on one side of which is a
close high Arbour , on the other a sudden open Seat that overlooks the
Meadows & river with a large distant prospect . POPE-172X-2,172.314

Another walk under this hill winds by the River_side quite coverd with
high Trees on both banks , over_hung with Ivy , where falls a natural
Cascade with never-ceasing murmurs . POPE-172X-2,172.315

On the opposite hanging of the Bank <paren> which is a Steep of 50 ft.
{TEXT:ft} <$$paren> is plac'd , with a very fine fancy , a Rustick Seat
of Stone , flaggd and rough , with two Urns in the same rude taste upon
pedestals , on each side : from whence you lose your eyes upon the
glimmering of the Waters under the wood , & your ears in the constant
dashing of the waves . POPE-172X-2,172.316

In view of this , is a Bridge that crosses this Stream , built in the
same ruinous taste : POPE-172X-2,172.317

the Wall of the Garden hanging over it , is humourd so as to appear the
Ruin of another Arch or two above the bridge . POPE-172X-2,172.318

Hence you mount the Hill over the Hermit's {TEXT:Hermits} Seat <paren>
as they call it <$$paren> describd before , & so to the highest Terras ,
again . POPE-172X-2,172.319

On the left , full behind these old Trees , which make this whole Part
inexpressibly awful & solemn , runs a little , old , low wall , beside a
Trench , coverd with Elder trees & Ivyes which being crost by another
bridge , <P_173> brings you to the Ruins , to compleat the Solemnity of
the Scene . POPE-172X-2,173.320

You first see an old Tower penetrated by a large Arch , and others above
it thro which the whole Country appears in prospect , even when you are
at the top of the other ruins , POPE-172X-2,173.321

for they stand very high , POPE-172X-2,173.322

& the Ground slopes down on all sides . POPE-172X-2,173.323

These venerable broken Walls , some Arches almost entire of 30 or 40 ft
deep , some open like Portico's with fragments of pillars , some
circular or inclosd on three sides , but exposd at top , with Steps
which Time has made of disjointed Stones to climb to the highest points
of the Ruin : These I say might have a prodigious Beauty , mixd with
Greens & Parterres from part to part , and the whole Heap standing as it
does on a round hill , kept smooth in green turf , which makes a bold
Basement to show it . POPE-172X-2,173.324

The open Courts from building to building might be thrown into Circles
or Octagons of Grass or flowers , POPE-172X-2,173.325

and even in the gaming Rooms you have fine trees grown , that might be
made a natural Tapistry to the walls , & arch you over-head where time
has uncoverd them to the Sky . POPE-172X-2,173.326

Little paths of earth , or sand , might be made , up the half-tumbled
walls ; to guide from one View to another on the higher parts ; & Seats
placd here and there , to enjoy those views , which are more romantick
than Imagination can form them . POPE-172X-2,173.327

I could very much wish this were done , as well as a little Temple built
on a neighboring round Hill that is seen from all points of the Garden &
is extremely pretty . POPE-172X-2,173.328

It would finish some Walks , & particularly be a fine Termination to the
River to be seen from the Entrance into that Deep Scene I have describd
by the Cascade where it would appear as in the clouds , between the tops
of some very lofty Trees that form an Arch before it , with a great
Slope downward to the end of the said river . POPE-172X-2,173.329

What should induce my Lord D. the rather to cultivate these ruins and
do honour to them , is that they do no small honour to his Family , that
Castle , which was very ancient , being demolishd in the Civil wars
after it was nobly defended by one of his Ancestors in the cause of the
King . POPE-172X-2,173.330

I would sett up at the Entrance of 'em an Obelisk , with an inscription
of the Fact : which would be a Monument erected to the very Ruins ; as
the adorning & beautifying them in the manner I have been imagining ,
would not be unlike the Aegyptian Finery of bestowing Ornament and
curiosity on dead bodies . POPE-172X-2,173.331

The Present Master of this place <paren> and I verily believe I can
ingage the same for the next Successors <$$paren> needs not to fear the
Record , or shun the Remembrance of the actions of his Forefathers .
POPE-172X-2,173.332

He will not disgrace them , as most Modern Progeny do , by an unworthy
Degeneracy , of principle , or of Practise . POPE-172X-2,173.333

When I have been describing his agreable Seat , I can@ @not make the
reflection I@ @'ve often done upon contemplating the <P_174> beautiful
Villa's of Other Noblemen , raisd upon the Spoils of plunderd nations ,
or aggrandiz'd by the wealth of the Publick . POPE-172X-2,174.334

I can@ @not ask myself the question , What Else has this man to be lik'd
? POPE-172X-2,174.335

what else has he cultivated or improv'd ? POPE-172X-2,174.336

What good , or what desireable thing appears of him , without these
walls ? POPE-172X-2,174.337

I dare say his Goodness and Benevolence extend as far as his territories
; that his Tenants live almost as happy & contented as himself ; & that
not one of his Children wishes to see this Seat his owne .
POPE-172X-2,174.338

I have not lookd much about , since I was here : POPE-172X-2,174.339

All I can tell you of my own knowledge is , that going to see the
Cathedral in the town hard by , I took notice as the finest things , of
a noble Monument and a beautiful Altarpiece of Architecture ;
POPE-172X-2,174.340

but if I had not inquird in particular , he nor his , had ever told me
that both the one & the other was erected by Himself :
POPE-172X-2,174.341

The next pretty thing that catchd my eye was a neat Chappel for the use
of the Towns-people , <paren> who are too numerous for the Cathedral
<$$paren> POPE-172X-2,174.342

My Lord modestly told me , he was glad I lik't it , because it was of
his own architecture . POPE-172X-2,174.343

I hope this long letter will be some Entertainment to you ,
POPE-172X-2,174.344

I was pleased not a little in writing it ; POPE-172X-2,174.345

but do@ @n't let any Lady from hence imagine that my head is so full of
any Gardens as to forget hers . POPE-172X-2,174.346

The greatest proof I could give her to the contrary is , that I have
spent many hours here in studying for hers , & in drawing new plans for
her . POPE-172X-2,174.347

I shall soon come home , & have nothing to say when we meet , having
here told you all that has pleas'd me : POPE-172X-2,174.348

But Wilton is in my way , POPE-172X-2,174.349

& I depend upon that for new matter . POPE-172X-2,174.350

Believe me ever yours , with a sincerity as old-fashiond , and as
different from Modern Sincerity , as This house , this family , & these
ruins , are from the Court , & all its Neighbourhood .
POPE-172X-2,174.351

| Dear Madam , Adieu . POPE-172X-2,174.352

<P_175>

{ED:103_To_Edward,_Earl_of_Oxford}

My Lord , - I troubled your Lordship with a few lines at a time , when I
just expected to lose the most valuable thing I had in the world , a
tender Parent , POPE-172X-2,175.355

and nothing but the Certainty of your Lordships humanity in general , as
well as Friendlyness to me in particular , could excuse my taking upon
me to interest you so far , in what was purely a concern of my owne .
POPE-172X-2,175.356

Since that time , I have been so happy as to see her still alive , tho
in a weak languishing condition , which at so advanced an age as hers we
are yet obliged to call a Recovery . POPE-172X-2,175.357

God knows for how little a time he lends her to me !
POPE-172X-2,175.358

long it can@ @not be ; POPE-172X-2,175.359

and I am still in constant attendance upon her in the county ; excepting
one day that I stole to town , more I assure you in hope of finding you
there with one or two of those I most value , than for any other motive
. Tho if ever I attend my Subscription , I must do it now ; the time of
publication drawing so nigh , & I not having <paren> thro this
unfortunate accident <$$paren> yet publish'd the Proposals to the Town .
POPE-172X-2,175.360

I am at last determined to do it , & to take no further care about it
than to publish it : since I really can@ @not leave my poor Mother on
any account whatever . POPE-172X-2,175.361

I must desire to know in what manner to treat your Lordship & Lady
Oxford in the printed List , which I am to annex to this Proposal ?
POPE-172X-2,175.362

If I were to set you down for as many Subscriptions as You have procurd
me , half my List would lye at your door , POPE-172X-2,175.363

& I might fairly make you a Benefactor of the greatest number .
POPE-172X-2,175.364

Yet as I am sensible you care not to be known for the Good you do , I am
afraid to put you down in any distinguishing manner ;
POPE-172X-2,175.365

& Yet again , I can@ @not bear but the world should know , that you do
distinguish me . POPE-172X-2,175.366

I have set down the Duchess & Duke of Buckingham for five Setts ;
POPE-172X-2,175.367

will you allow me to do the same to your self & Lady Oxford ?
POPE-172X-2,175.368

Mr Walpole & Lord Townshend are sett down for Ten , each :
POPE-172X-2,175.369

I would not deny my obligations ; POPE-172X-2,175.370

& t@ @is all I owe Them . POPE-172X-2,175.371

But to the Duchess & to your Lordship I would keep some measures ;
POPE-172X-2,175.372

I am so much , & ever like to be so much , in her {TEXT:hers} & your
debt , that I will never tell how much , without your absolute command
or leave . POPE-172X-2,175.373

<P_176>

Let but the whole world know you favor me , POPE-172X-2,176.375

& let me enjoy to myself the satisfaction of knowing to what degree ?
POPE-172X-2,176.376

I have kept back my Proposal from the press till I have the honour of
your Commands on this subject . POPE-172X-2,176.377

In the melancholy & hurry I have been , I had forgot to send the Verses
on Durfey : POPE-172X-2,176.378

Here they are , as much corrected as they deserve , that is , but little
. POPE-172X-2,176.379

It would be a sincere satisfaction to me to hear that your Lordship ,
Lady Oxford , & Lady Margaret , enjoy all the health I wish them ; and
that you are moving toward the place where I may tell them how truly , &
with what unfeign'd respect , I am | My Lord | Your most obliged & |
most obedient faithfull Servant | A. Pope . POPE-172X-2,176.380

Twitenham . POPE-172X-2,176.381

| Decr 12th 1724 . POPE-172X-2,176.382

To | The Right Honourable , the | Earl of Oxford . POPE-172X-2,176.383

{COM:change_from_pope's_to_another_hand}

Att | Wimpole | Cambridgeshire | POPE-172X-2,176.385

By Royston Bagg . POPE-172X-2,176.386

<font> Frank <$$font> : Free . POPE-172X-2,176.387

<font> Postmark <$$font> : 15 <slash> DE POPE-172X-2,176.388

{ED:104_To_Jonathan_Richardson}

Twitenham , POPE-172X-2,176.390

Jan. 20 . POPE-172X-2,176.391

{ED:1725}

I had written you a letter by my waterman before I received that
melancholy one from your son , to which there can be no answer in words
, POPE-172X-2,176.393

but I assure you my heart is sorrowful for you . POPE-172X-2,176.394

I can@ @not but break through all the forms of the world so far as to
tell you just thus much . POPE-172X-2,176.395

For the rest you will remember the words of Job , which include all , on
these sad submissive subjects . POPE-172X-2,176.396

" God has given POPE-172X-2,176.397

and God has taken . " POPE-172X-2,176.398

I am confined by a severe illness to take physic every day ;
POPE-172X-2,176.399

I would not have told you that I am so bad , but that I am troubled to
be kept from you at a time when friendship is most felt .
POPE-172X-2,176.400

God send you and preserve to you other comforts to extenuate the bitter
sense of your present loss . POPE-172X-2,176.401

It is the hearty prayer of , dear sir , your faithful affectionate
friend and servant . POPE-172X-2,176.402

<P_177>

{ED:105_To_Bathurst}

Twitnam . POPE-172X-2,177.405

Saturday POPE-172X-2,177.406

{ED:1725?}

My Lord , - There was a Man in the Land of Twitnam , called Pope .
POPE-172X-2,177.408

He was a Servant of the Lord Bathurst of those days , a Patriarch of
great Eminence , for getting children , at home & abroad .
POPE-172X-2,177.409

But his Care for his Family , and his Love for strange women , caused
the said Lord to forget all his Friends of the Male-Sex ; insomuch that
he knew not , nor once rememberd , there was such a man in the Land of
Twitnam as aforesaid . POPE-172X-2,177.410

It were to be wisht , he would come & see ; POPE-172X-2,177.411

or if nothing else will move him , there are certain Handmaids belonging
to the said Pope which are comely in their goings , yea which go
comelily . POPE-172X-2,177.412

If he will not vouchsafe to visit either his Servant , or his handmaids
, let him <paren> as the Patriarchs anciently did <$$paren> send flocks
of Sheep & Presents in his stead : POPE-172X-2,177.413

For the grass of Marble hill springeth , POPE-172X-2,177.414

yea it springeth exceedingly POPE-172X-2,177.415

& waits for the Lambs of the <font> Mountains <$$font> , <paren> meaning
Riskins <$$paren> to crop the same POPE-172X-2,177.416

Till then , all Mrs Howard's Swains Must feed - <font> no <$$font>
flocks , upon - <font> no <$$font> plains . POPE-172X-2,177.417

My dear Lord , adieu , if <paren> <font> Adieu <$$font> be not too
impertinent , pretending , a word , where one has never once <font> met
. <$$font> <$$paren> POPE-172X-2,177.418

I am faithfully Your most Real Servant | A. Pope . POPE-172X-2,177.419

My hearty Service to all your Wives & Daughters . POPE-172X-2,177.420

{COM:on_verso,_near_the_edge} Patty is yours extremely .
POPE-172X-2,177.421

To the Rt. Hon. the | Lord Bathurst . POPE-172X-2,177.422

| St. James Square POPE-172X-2,177.423

{ED:106_To_William_Fortescue}

Twitnam POPE-172X-2,177.425

May 10th . POPE-172X-2,177.426

{ED:1725?}

I thank you for the Constant Memory of me which upon every occasion you
show , when <paren> God knows <$$paren> my daily infirmities make me
hardly capable of showing , tho very much so , of feeling the concerns
of a friend . POPE-172X-2,177.428

I am <P_178> glad your family are well arrived , POPE-172X-2,178.429

& your taking care first to tell me so , before I enquired , is a proof
you know , how glad I am of yours & their Welfare . POPE-172X-2,178.430

I intended to tell <font> you <$$font> first , how kind Sir R. Walpole
has been to me , POPE-172X-2,178.431

for you must know he <font> did <$$font> the thing , with more dispatch
, than I could use in <font> acknowledging or telling <$$font> the News
of it . POPE-172X-2,178.432

Pray thank him for obliging you , <paren> that is <font> me <$$font>
<$$paren> so readily : POPE-172X-2,178.433

and do it in strong terms , POPE-172X-2,178.434

for I was awkward in it , when I just mentioned it to him .
POPE-172X-2,178.435

He may think me a worse Man than I am , tho' he thinks me a better Poet
perhaps : POPE-172X-2,178.436

and he may not know that I am much more his Servant , than those who
would flatter him in their Verses . POPE-172X-2,178.437

I have more esteem for him , POPE-172X-2,178.438

& will stay till he is out of Power <paren> according to my Custome
<$$paren> before I say what I think of him . POPE-172X-2,178.439

It puts me in Mind of what was said to him once before by a Poet , In
Power , your Servant , out of Power , your friend . which a Critick
<paren> who knew that Poet's mind <$$paren> said should be alterd thus ,
In Pow'r your friend ; but out of Power - your Servant .
POPE-172X-2,178.440

Such most Poets are ! POPE-172X-2,178.441

but if Sir R. ever finds me the first low Character , let him expect me
to become the second . POPE-172X-2,178.442

In the Meantime I hope he will believe me his , in the same Sincere
disinterested Manner that I am | Dear Sir | Yours | A. Pope .
POPE-172X-2,178.443

Next Sunday I expect some Company here , POPE-172X-2,178.444

but that need {TEXT:needs} not hinder you from a Night's lodging in the
Country , if you like it . POPE-172X-2,178.445

To Wm Fortescue Esqr. at his House in | Bell-yard near Lincolns-Inn , |
London . POPE-172X-2,178.446

<P_179>

{ED:107_To_Edward_Blount}

June 2 , 1725 . POPE-172X-2,179.449

You shew your self a just Man and a Friend in those Guesses and
Suppositions you make at the possible reasons of my Silence ; every one
of which is a true one . POPE-172X-2,179.450

As to forgetfulness of you or yours , I assure you , the promiscuous
Conversations of the Town serve only to put me in mind of better , and
more quiet , to be had in a Corner of the World <paren> undisturb'd ,
innocent , serene , and sensible <$$paren> with such as you .
POPE-172X-2,179.451

Let no Access of any Distrust make you think of me differently in a
cloudy day from what you do in the most sunshiny Weather .
POPE-172X-2,179.452

Let the young Ladies be assured I make nothing new in my Gardens without
wishing to see the print of their Fairy Steps in every part of 'em .
POPE-172X-2,179.453

I have put the last Hand to my works of this kind , in happily finishing
the subterraneous Way and Grotto ; POPE-172X-2,179.454

I there found a Spring of the clearest Water , which falls in a
perpetual Rill , that echoes thro' the Cavern day and night .
POPE-172X-2,179.455

From the River <font> Thames <$$font> , you see thro' my Arch up a Walk
of the Wilderness to a kind of open Temple , wholly compos'd of Shells
in the Rustic Manner ; POPE-172X-2,179.456

and from that distance under the Temple you look down thro' a sloping
Arcade of Trees , POPE-172X-2,179.457

and see the Sails on the River passing suddenly and vanishing , as thro'
a Perspective_Glass . POPE-172X-2,179.458

When you shut the Doors of this Grotto , it becomes on the instant ,
from a luminous Room , a <font> Camera_obscura <$$font> ; on the Walls
of which all the objects of the River , Hills , Woods , and Boats , are
forming a moving Picture in their visible Radiations :
POPE-172X-2,179.459

And when you have a mind to light it up , it affords you a very
different Scene : POPE-172X-2,179.460

it is finished with Shells interspersed with Pieces of Looking-glass in
angular forms ; POPE-172X-2,179.461

and in the Ceiling {TEXT:Cieling} is a Star of the same Material , at
which when a Lamp <paren> of an orbicular Figure of thin Alabaster
<$$paren> is hung in the Middle , a_thousand pointed Rays glitter and
are reflected over the Place . POPE-172X-2,179.462

There are connected to this Grotto by a narrower Passage two Porches ,
with Niches and Seats ; one toward the River , of smooth Stones , full
of light and open ; the other toward the Arch of Trees , rough with
Shells , Flints , and Iron Ore . POPE-172X-2,179.463

The Bottom is paved with simple Pebble , as the adjoining Walk up the
Wilderness to the Temple , is to be Cockle-shells , in the natural Taste
, agreeing not ill with the little dripping Murmur , and the Aquatic
Idea of the whole Place . POPE-172X-2,179.464

It wants nothing to compleat it but a good Statue with an Inscription ,
like that beautiful antique one which you know I am so fond of ,
POPE-172X-2,179.465

{COM:latin_verse_and_translation_omitted}

<P_180>

You@ @'ll think I have been very Poetical in this Description ,
POPE-172X-2,180.468

but it is pretty near the Truth . POPE-172X-2,180.469

I wish you were here to bear Testimony how little it owes to Art ,
either the Place itself , or the Image I give of it .
POPE-172X-2,180.470

| I am , &c. POPE-172X-2,180.471

