<BEGIN_priestley-1769-1>

<P_151>

<heading>

Period IX . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,151.4

The experiments and discoveries of Dr. Franklin .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,151.5

Section I . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,151.6

Dr. Franklin's discoveries concerning the Leyden phial , and others
connected with them . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,151.7

<$$heading>

We have hitherto seen what had been done in electricity by the English
philosophers , and those on the continent of Europe , till about the
year 1750 ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,151.9

but our attention is now strongly called to what was doing on the
continent of America ; where Dr. Franklin and his friends were as
assiduous in trying experiments , and as successful in making
discoveries , as any of their brethren in Europe .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,151.10

For this purpose , we must look back a few years .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,151.11

As Dr. Franklin's discoveries were made intirely independent of any in
Europe , I was unwilling to interrupt the former general account , by
introducing them in their proper year . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,151.12

For the same reason , I imagine it will be generally more agreeable ,
<P_152> to see , at one view , what was done in America for some
considerable space of time , without interrupting this account with what
was doing , in the mean time , in Europe . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,152.13

I shall , therefore , digest , in the best manner I can , the three
first publications of Dr. Franklin , entitled <font> New Experiments
and Observations on Electricity , made at Philadelphia in America
<$$font> , communicated in several letters to Peter Collinson Esq. of
London , fellow of the Royal Society ; the first of which is dated July
28th . 1747 , and the last April 18th . 1754 .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,152.14

Nothing was ever written upon the subject of electricity which was more
generally read , and admired in all parts of Europe than these letters .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,152.15

There is hardly any European language into which they have not been
translated ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,152.16

and , as if this were not sufficient to make them properly known , a
translation of them has lately been made into Latin .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,152.17

It is not easy to say , whether we are most pleased with the simplicity
and perspicuity with which these letters are written , the modesty with
which the author proposes every hypothesis of his own , or the noble
frankness with which he relates his mistakes , when they were corrected
by subsequent experiments . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,152.18

Though the English have not been backward in acknowledging the great
merit of this philosopher , he has had the singular good fortune to be ,
perhaps , even more celebrated abroad than at home ; so that to form a
just idea of the great and deserved reputation of Dr. Franklin , we
must read the foreign publications on the subject of electricity ; in
many of which the terms <font> Franklinism <$$font> , <font> Franklinist
<$$font> , and the <font> Franklinian system <$$font> occur in almost
every page . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,152.19

In consequence of this , Dr. Franklin's principles bid fair to be
handed down to posterity , as equally expressive of the true principles
of electricity , as the Newtonian philosophy is of the true system of
nature in general . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,152.20

<P_153>

The zeal of Dr. Franklin's Friends , and his reputation , were
considerably increased by the opposition which the Abbé Nollet made to
his theory . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,153.22

The Abbé , however , never had any considerable seconds in the
controversy , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,153.23

and those he had , I am informed , have all deserted him .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,153.24

The rise of Dr. Franklin's fame in France was first occasioned by a bad
translation of his letters falling into the hands of Mr. Buffon ,
intendant of the French King's gardens , and author of the Natural
History for which he is famous . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,153.25

This gentleman , having successfully repeated Dr. Franklin's
experiments , engaged a friend of his , Mr. Dallibard , to revise the
translation ; which was afterwards published , with a short history of
electricity prefixed to it , and met with a very favourable reception
from all ranks of people . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,153.26

What contributed not a little to the success of this publication , and
to bring Dr. Franklin's principles into vogue in France , was a friend
of Mr. Dallibard's exhibiting Dr. Franklin's experiments for money .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,153.27

All the world , in a manner , flocked to see these new experiments ,
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,153.28

and all returned full of admiration for the inventor of them .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,153.29

Dr. Franklin had discovered , as well as Dr. Watson , that the
electric matter was not created , but collected by friction , from the
neighbouring non-electric bodies . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,153.30

He had observed , that it was impossible for a man to electrify himself
, though he stood upon glass or wax ; for that the tube could
communicate to him no more electricity than it had received from him in
the act of excitation . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,153.31

He had observed , that if two persons stood upon wax , one of which
rubbed the tube , and the other took the fire from it , they would both
appear to be electrified ; that if they touched one another after that
operation , a <P_154> stronger spark would be perceived between them ,
than when any other person touched either of them ; and that such a
spark would take away the electricity of both . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,154.32

These experiments led the Doctor to think , that the electric fluid was
conveyed from the person who rubbed the tube to him who touched it ;
which introduced some terms in electricity that had not been used before
, but have continued in use ever since . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,154.33

The person who touched the tube was said , by Dr. Franklin , to be
electrified <font> positively <$$font> , or <font> plus <$$font> ; being
supposed to receive an additional quantity of electric fire : whereas
the person who rubbed the tube was said to be electrified <font>
negatively <$$font> , or <font> minus <$$font> ; being supposed to have
lost a part of his natural quantity of the electric fluid .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,154.34

This observation was necessary to explain the capital discovery which
Dr. Franklin made with respect to the manner of charging the Leyden
phial ; which is , that when one side of the glass was electrified
positively or <font> plus <$$font> , the other side was electrified
negatively or <font> minus <$$font> ; so that whatever quantity of fire
is thrown upon one side of the glass , the same is thrown out of the
other ; and that there is really no more electric fire in the phial
after it is charged than before ; all that can be done by charging ,
being to take from one side , and convey to the other .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,154.35

Dr. Franklin also observed , that glass was impervious to electricity ,
and that , therefore , since the equilibrium could not be restored to
the charged phial , by any internal communication , it must be done by
conductors , externally , joining the inside and the outside .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,154.36

These capital discoveries he made by observing , that when a phial was
charged , a cork ball suspended on silk would be attracted <P_155> by
the outside coating , when it was repelled by a wire communicating with
the inside ; and that it would be repelled by the outside , when it was
attracted by the inside . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,155.37

But the truth of this maxim appeared more evident when he brought the
knob of the wire communicating with the outside coating within a few
inches of the wire communicating with the inside coating , and suspended
a cork ball between them ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,155.38

for , in that case , the ball was attracted by them alternately , till
the phial was discharged . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,155.39

The European electricians had observed , that a phial could not be
charged unless some conductor was in contact with the outside ;
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,155.40

but Dr. Franklin made the observation more general ,
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,155.41

and also was able , by the principle above-mentioned , to give a better
account of it . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,155.42

As no more electric fire , he says , can be thrown into the inside of a
phial when all is driven from the outside ; so , in a phial not yet
charged , none can be thrown into the inside when none can be got from
the outside . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,155.43

He also showed , by a beautiful experiment , that , when the phial was
charged , one side lost exactly as much as the other gained , in
restoring the equilibrium . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,155.44

Hanging a small linen thread near the coating of an electrified phial ,
he observed , that , every time he brought his finger near the wire ,
the thread was attracted by the coating . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,155.45

For as the fire was taken from the inside by touching the wire , the
outside drew in an equal quantity by the thread .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,155.46

He proved that , in discharging the phial , the giving from one side was
exactly equal to the receiving by the other , by placing a person upon
electrics , and making him discharge the phial through his body ; when
he observed , that no electricity remained <P_156> in him after the
discharge . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,156.47

He also hung cork balls upon an insulated conductor at the time of the
discharge of a phial hanging to it ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,156.48

and observed , that if they did not repel before the explosion , they
did not repel at the time , nor after . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,156.49

But the experiment which most completely {TEXT:compleatly} proved , that
the coating on one side received just as much as was emitted from the
discharge of the other , was the following . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,156.50

He insulated his rubber , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,156.51

then , hanging a phial to his conductor , he found it could not be
charged , even though his hand was held constantly to it ; because ,
though the electric fire might leave the outside of the phial , there
was none collected by the rubber to be conveyed into the inside .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,156.52

He then took away his hand from the phial , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,156.53

and forming a communication , by a wire from the outside coating to the
insulated rubber , he found that it was charged with ease .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,156.54

In this case , it was plain , that the very same fire which left the
outside coating was conveyed by the way of the rubber , the globe , the
conductor , and the wire of the phial , into the inside .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,156.55

Dr. Franklin's new theory of charging the Leyden phial led him to
observe a greater variety of facts , relating both to charging and
discharging it , than other philosophers had attended to .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,156.56

He found that the phial would be electrified as strongly if it were held
by the hook , and the coating applied to the globe or tube , as if it
were held by the coating , and the hook applied ; and , consequently ,
that there would be the same explosion , and shock , if the electrified
phial were held in one hand by the hook , and the coating touched with
the other , as when held by the coating , and touched at the hook .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,156.57

To take the charged phial <P_157> by the hook with safety , and not
diminish its force , he observes , that it must first be set down upon
electrics per_se . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,157.58

Dr. Franklin observed , that if a man held in his hand two phials , the
one fully electrified , and the other not at all , and brought their
hooks together , he would have but half a shock :
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,157.59

for the phials would both remain only half electrified , the one being
half charged , and the other half discharged . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,157.60

If two phials were charged both through their hooks , a cork ball
suspended on silk , and hanging between them , would first be attracted
, and then repelled by both ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,157.61

but if they were electrified , the one through the wire , and the other
through the coating , the ball would play vigorously between them both ,
till they were nearly discharged . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,157.62

The Doctor did not , at that time , take notice , that if the phials
were both charged through their coatings <paren> by which both the hooks
would have been electrified minus <$$paren> the ball would be repelled
by them both , as when they were electrified plus .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,157.63

And when he , afterwards , observed that two bodies electrified minus
repelled one another , he seems to have been surprised at the appearance
, PRIESTLEY-1769-1,157.64

and acknowledged that he could not satisfactorily account for it .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,157.65

It was known to every electrician , that a globe or tube wet on the
inside would afford little or no fire ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,157.66

but no good reason was given for it , before Dr. Franklin attempted its
explanation by the help of his general maxim . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,157.67

He says , that when a tube lined with any non-electric is rubbed , what
is collected from the hand by the downward stroke enters the pores of
the glass , driving an equal quantity out of the inner surface , into
the non-electric lining ; and that the hand , in passing up to take a
second stroke , takes out again what had been thrown into the outward
<P_158> surface , the inner surface at the same time receiving back
again what it had given to the non-electric lining ; so that the
particles of the electric fluid went in and out of their pores , upon
every stroke given to the tube . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,158.68

If , in these circumstances , a wire was put into the tube , he observed
, that , if one person touched the wire , while another was rubbing the
tube , and took care to withdraw his finger as soon as he had taken the
spark , which had been made to fly from the inside , it would be charged
. PRIESTLEY-1769-1,158.69

If the tube was exhausted of air , he observes , that a non-electric
lining in contact with the wire was not necessary ; for that , in vacuo
, the electric fire would fly freely from the inner surface , without a
non-electric conductor . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,158.70

Upon the same principle he accounts for the effects of an excited
electric being perceived through the glass in the vacuum beyond it .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,158.71

The tube and its excited atmosphere , being brought near a glass vessel
, repels the electric fluid from the inner surface , of the glass ;
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,158.72

and this fluid , issuing from the inner surface acts upon light bodies
in the vacuum , both in its passage from the glass , and likewise in its
return to it , when the excited electric on the outside is withdrawn .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,158.73

This maxim , that whatever the phial takes in at one surface it loses at
the other , led Dr. Franklin to think of charging several phials
together with the same trouble , by connecting the outside of one with
the inside of another ; whereby the fluid that was driven out by the
first would be received by the second , and what was driven out of the
second would be received by the third , &c. PRIESTLEY-1769-1,158.74

By this means he found , that a great number of bottles might be charged
with the same labour as one only ; and that they might be charged
equally high , were it not that every bottle <P_159> receives the new
fire , and loses its old with some reluctance , or rather gives some
small resistance to the charging . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.75

This circumstance , he says , in a number of bottles , becomes more
equal to the charging power , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.76

and so repels the fire back again on the globe sooner than a single
bottle would do . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.77

Upon this principle Dr. Franklin constructed an <font> electrical
battery <$$font> , consisting of eleven panes of large sash glass ,
coated on each side , and so connected , that charging one of them would
charge them all . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.78

Then having a contrivance to bring the giving sides in contact with one
wire , and all the receiving sides with another , he united the force of
all the plates , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.79

and discharged them all at once . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.80

When Dr. Franklin first began his experiments upon the Leyden phial ,
he imagined that the electric fire was all crowded into the substance of
the non-electric in contact with the glass ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.81

but he afterwards found , that its power of giving a shock lay in the
glass itself , and not in the coating , by the following ingenious
analysis of the bottle . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.82

In order to find where the strength of the charged bottle lay , he
placed it upon glass ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.83

then first took out the cork and the wire , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.84

and finding the virtue was not in them ; he touched the outside coating
with one hand , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.85

and put the finger of the other into the mouth of the bottle ; when the
shock was felt quite as strong as if the cork and wire had been in it .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.86

He then charged the phial again , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.87

and pouring out the water into an empty bottle insulated , expected that
if the force resided in the water it would give the shock ,
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.88

but he found it gave none . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.89

He then judged that the electric fire must either have been lost in
decanting , or must remain in the bottle , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.90

and the latter he found to be true ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,159.91

<P_160>

for , filling the charged bottle with fresh water , he found the shock ,
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,160.93

and was satisfied that the power of giving it resided in the glass
itself . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,160.94

The Doctor made the same experiment with panes of glass , laying the
coating on lightly , and changing it , as he had before changed the
water in the bottle , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,160.95

and the result was the same in both . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,160.96

This experiment is more satisfactory than the former ; because , when
the water is poured out of the phial , there still remains a thin
coating of the fluid , which might be thought to contain the power of
giving a shock . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,160.97

That the electric fire resided in the glass , was also further evident
from this consideration , that when glass was gilt , the discharging of
it would make a round hole , tearing off a part of the gilding , which ,
the Doctor thought , could only have been done by the fire coming out of
the glass through the gilding . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,160.98

He also says , that when the gilding was varnished even with turpentine
, this varnish , though dry and hard , would be burnt by the spark
driven through it , yielding a strong smell , and a visible smoke
{TEXT:smoak} . Also , that when a spark was driven through paper , it
would be blackened by the smoke , which sometimes penetrated several of
the leaves , and that part of the gilding which had been torn off was
found forcibly driven into the hole made in the paper by the stroke .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,160.99

He also observed , that when a thin bottle was broken by a charge , the
glass was broken inwards , at the same time that the gilding was broken
outwards . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,160.100

Lastly , Dr. Franklin discovered , that several substances . which
would conduct electricity in general , would not conduct the shock of a
charged phial . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,160.101

A wet packthread , for instance , <P_161> though it transmitted
electricity very well , sometimes failed to conduct a shock ; as also
did a cake of ice . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,161.102

Dry earth too rammed into a glass tube intirely failed to conduct a
shock , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,161.103

and indeed would convey electricity but very imperfectly .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,161.104

<P_162>

<heading>

Section II . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,162.107

Dr. Franklin's discoveries concerning the similarity of lightning and
electricity . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,162.108

<$$heading>

The greatest discovery which Dr. Franklin made concerning electricity ,
and which has been of the greatest practical use to mankind , was that
of the perfect similarity between electricity and lightning .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,162.110

The analogy between these two powers had not been wholly unobserved by
philosophers , and especially by electricians , before the publication
of Dr. Franklin's discovery . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,162.111

It was so obvious , that it had struck several persons .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,162.112

I shall give one instance , in the sagacious Abbé Nollet .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,162.113

The Abbé says , " If any one should take upon him to prove , from a well
connected comparison of phenomena , that thunder is , in the hands of
nature , what electricity is in ours , that the wonders which we now
exhibit at our pleasure are little imitations of those great effects
which frighten us , and that the whole depends upon the same mechanism ;
if it is to be demonstrated , that a cloud , prepared by the action of
the winds , by heat , by a mixture of exhalations , &c. is opposite
<P_163> to a terrestrial object ; that this is the electrized body , and
, at a certain proximity from that which is not ; I avow that this idea
, if it was well supported , would give me a great deal of pleasure ;
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,163.114

and in support of it , how many specious reasons present themselves to a
man who is well acquainted with electricity . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,163.115

The universality of the electric matter , the readiness of its action ,
its inflammability , and its activity in giving fire to other bodies ,
its property of striking bodies externally and internally , even to
their smallest parts , the remarkable example we have of this effect in
the experiment of Leyden , the idea which we might truly adopt in
supposing a greater degree of electric power , &c. all these points of
analogy , which I have been some time meditating , begin to make me
believe , that one might , by taking electricity for the model , form to
one's {TEXT:ones} self , in relation to thunder and lightning , more
perfect and more probable ideas than what have been offered hitherto ,
&c. " PRIESTLEY-1769-1,163.116

Mr. Winckler also enumerated many particulars , in which electricity
and lightning resemble one another . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,163.117

But though the Abbé , and others , had been struck with the obvious
analogy between lightning and electricity , they went no farther than
these arguments <font> a priori . <$$font> PRIESTLEY-1769-1,163.118

It was Dr. Franklin who first proposed a method of verifying this
hypothesis , entertaining the bold thought , as the Abbé Nollet
expresses it , of bringing lightning from the heavens , of thinking that
pointed iron rods , fixed in the air , when the atmosphere was loaded
with lightning , might draw from it the matter of the thunderbolt , and
discharge it without noise or danger into the immense body of the earth
, where it would remain as it were absorbed . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,163.119

<P_164>

Moreover , though Dr. Franklin's directions were first begun to be put
in execution {TEXT:excution} in France , he himself compleated the
demonstration of his own problem , before he heard of what had been done
elsewhere : PRIESTLEY-1769-1,164.121

and he extended his experiments so far as actually to imitate all the
known effects of lightning by electricity , and to perform every
electrical experiment by lightning . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,164.122

But before I relate any of Dr. Franklin's experiments concerning
lightning , I must take notice of what he observed concerning the power
of pointed bodies , by means of which he was enabled to carry his great
designs into execution . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,164.123

He was properly the first who observed the intire and wonderful effect
of pointed bodies , both in drawing , and throwing off the electric fire
. PRIESTLEY-1769-1,164.124

It was a small step towards discovering the effect of pointed bodies ,
that Carolus Augustus Van Bergen , professor of medicine at Frankfort on
the Oder , observed that sparks taken from a polished body were stronger
than those from a rough one . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,164.125

He could fire spirit easily with a polished conductor , but with
difficulty by means of one not polished . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,164.126

Mr. Jallabert was perhaps the first who observed that a body , pointed
at one end , and round at another , produced different appearances upon
the same body , according as the pointed , or round end was presented to
it . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,164.127

But as Mr. Nollet , in whose presence he made the experiment , says ,
the effect was not constant , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,164.128

and nothing was inferred from it . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,164.129

And the Abbé acknowledges , that Dr. Franklin was the first who showed
the property of pointed bodies , in drawing off electricity more
effectually , and at greater distances than other bodies could do it .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,164.130

He electrified an iron shot , three or four inches in diameter ,
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,164.131

and observed , that it would not attract a thread , when the point
<P_165> of a needle was presented to it ; but that this was not the case
, unless the pointed body had a communication with the earth ;
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,165.132

for , presenting the same pointed body , stuck on a piece of sealing_wax
, it had not that effect ; though the moment the pointed body was
touched with his finger , the electricity of the ball to which it was
suspended was discharged . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,165.133

The converse of this he proved , by finding it impossible to electrify
the iron shot when a sharp needle lay upon it .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,165.134

By observing points of different degrees of acuteness , Dr. Franklin
corrected the observation of Mr. Ellicott , and other English
electricians , that a pointed body , as a piece of leaf gold , would
always be suspended nearer to the plate which was unelectrified than
that which was electrified , if it were put between them .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,165.135

For the Doctor observed , that it always removed farthest from that
plate to which its sharpest point was presented , whether it was
electrified or not ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,165.136

and if one of the points was very blunt , and the other very sharp , it
would be suspended in the air by its blunt end , near the electrified
body , without any unelectrified plate being held below it at all .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,165.137

Dr. Franklin endeavoured to account for this effect of pointed bodies ,
by supposing that the base on which the electric fluid at the point of
an electrified body rested , being small , the attraction by which the
fluid was held to the body was slight ; and that , for the same reason ,
the resistance to the entrance of the fluid was proportionably weaker in
that place than where the surface was flat . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,165.138

But he himself candidly owns , that he was not quite satisfied with this
hypothesis . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,165.139

Whatever we think of Dr. Franklin's theory of the influence of pointed
conductors in drawing <P_166> and throwing off the electric fluid , the
world is greatly indebted to him for the practical use he made of this
doctrine . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,166.140

Dr. Franklin begins his account of the similarity of the electric fluid
and lightning by cautioning his readers not to be staggered at the great
difference of the effects in point of degree ; since that was no
argument of any disparity in their nature . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,166.141

It is no wonder , says he , if the effects of the one should be so much
greater than those of the other . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,166.142

For if two gun barrels electrified will strike at two inches distance ,
and make a loud report , at how great a distance will 10,000 acres of
electrified cloud strike , and give its fire , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,166.143

and how loud must be that crack ! PRIESTLEY-1769-1,166.144

I shall digest all Dr. Franklin's observations concerning lightning
under the several points of resemblance which he observed between it and
electricity , mentioning these points of similarity in the order in
which he himself remarked them ; only bringing into one place the
observations which may happen to lie in different parts of his letters ,
when they relate to the same subject . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,166.145

1. Flashes of lightning , he begins with observing , are generally seen
crooked , and waving in the air . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,166.146

The same , says he , is the electric spark always , when it is drawn
from an irregular body at some distance . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,166.147

He might have added , when it is drawn by an irregular body , or through
a space in which the best conductors are disposed in an irregular manner
, which is always the case in the heterogeneous {TEXT:heterogenious}
atmosphere of our globe . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,166.148

2. Lightning strikes the highest and most pointed objects in its way
preferably to others , as high hills , and trees , towers , spires ,
masts of ships , points of spears , &c. PRIESTLEY-1769-1,166.149

In like manner , all <P_167> pointed conductors receive or throw off the
electric fluid more readily than those which are terminated by flat
surfaces . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,167.150

3. Lightning is observed to take the readiest and best conductor .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,167.151

So does electricity in the discharge of the Leyden phial .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,167.152

For this reason , the Doctor supposes that it would be safer , during a
thunder storm , to have one's {TEXT:ones} cloaths wet than dry , as the
lightning might then , in a great measure , be transmitted to the ground
, by the water , on the outside of the body . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,167.153

It is found , says he , that a wet rat can@ @not be killed by the
explosion of the electrical bottle , but that a dry rat may .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,167.154

4. Lightning burns . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,167.155

So does electricity . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,167.156

Dr. Franklin says , that he could kindle with it hard dry rosin ,
spirits unwarmed , and even wood . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,167.157

He says , that he fired gunpowder , by only ramming it hard in a
cartridge , into each end of which pointed wires were introduced , and
brought within half an inch of one another , and discharging a shock
through them . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,167.158

5. Lightning sometimes dissolves metals . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,167.159

So does electricity , though the Doctor was mistaken when he imagined it
was by a cold fusion , as will appear in its proper place .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,167.160

The method in which Dr. Franklin made electricity melt metals was by
putting thin pieces of them between two panes of glass bound fast
together , and sending an electric shock through them .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,167.161

Some times the piece of glass , by which they were confined , would be
shattered to pieces by the discharge , and be broken into a kind of
coarse sand , which once happened with pieces of thick looking glass ;
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,167.162

but if they remained whole , the piece of metal would be missing in
several places where it had lain between them , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,167.163

and instead of it , a metallic stain would be seen on both <P_168> the
glasses , the stains on the under and upper glass being exactly similar
in the minutest stroke . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,168.164

A piece of leaf gold used in this manner appeared not only to have been
melted , but , as the Doctor thought , even vitrified , or otherwise so
driven into the pores of the glass , as to be protected by it from the
action of the strongest aquaregis . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,168.165

Sometimes he observed that the metallic stains would spread a little
wider than the breadth of the thin pieces of metal .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,168.166

True gold , he observed , made a darker stain , somewhat reddish , and
silver a greenish stain . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,168.167

Mr. Wilson supposes that , in this experiment , the gold was not driven
into the pores of the glass , but only into so near a contact with the
surface of the glass , as to be held there by an exceeding great force ;
such an one , he says , as is exerted at the surface of all bodies
whatever . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,168.168

6. Lightning rends some bodies . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,168.169

The same does electricity . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,168.170

The Doctor observes , that the electric spark would strike a hole
through a quire of paper . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,168.171

When wood , bricks , stone , &c. are rent by lightning , he takes
notice , that the splinters will fly off on that side where there is the
least resistance . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,168.172

In like manner , he says , when a hole is struck through a piece of
pasteboard by an electrified jar , if the surfaces of the pasteboard are
not confined and compressed , there will be a bur raised all round the
hole on both sides of the pasteboard ; but that if one side be confined
, so that the bur can@ @not be raised on that side , it will all be
raised on the other side , which way soever the fluid was directed .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,168.173

For the bur round the outside of the hole is the effect <P_169> of the
explosion , which is made every way from the center of the electric
stream , and not an effect of its direction . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,169.174

7. Lightning has often been known to strike people blind .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,169.175

And a pigeon , after a violent shock of electricity , by which the
Doctor intended to have killed it , was observed to have been struck
blind likewise . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,169.176

8. In a thunder storm at Stretham , described by Dr. Miles , the
lightning stripped off some paint which had covered a gilded molding of
a pannel of wainscot , without hurting the rest of the paint .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,169.177

Dr. Franklin imitated this , by pasting a slip of paper over the
filleting of gold on the cover of a book , and sending an electric flash
through it . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,169.178

The paper was torn off from end to end , with such force , that it was
broken in several places ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,169.179

and in others there was brought away part of the grain of the Turkey
leather in which the book was bound . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,169.180

This convinced the Doctor , that if it had been paint , it would have
been stripped off in the same manner with that on the wainscot at
Stretham . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,169.181

9. Lightning destroys animal life . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,169.182

Animals have likewise been killed by the shock of electricity .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,169.183

The largest animals which Dr. Franklin and his friends had been able to
kill were a hen , and a turkey which weighed about ten pounds .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,169.184

10. Magnets have been observed to lose their virtue , or to have their
poles reversed by lightning . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,169.185

The same did Dr. Franklin by electricity . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,169.186

By electricity he frequently gave polarity to needles ,
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,169.187

and reversed them at pleasure . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,169.188

A shock from four large jars , sent through a fine sewing needle , he
says , gave it polarity , so that it would traverse when laid on water .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,169.189

What is most remarkable <P_170> in these electrical experiments upon
magnets is , that if the needle , when it was struck , lay East and West
, the end which was entered by the electric blast pointed North , but
that if it lay North and South , the end which lay towards the North ,
would continue to point North , whether the fire entered at that end or
the contrary ; though he imagined , that a stronger stroke would have
reversed the poles even in that situation , an effect which had been
known to have been produced by lightning . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,170.190

He also observed , that the polarity was strongest when the needle was
struck lying North and South , and weakest when it lay East and West .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,170.191

He takes notice that , in these experiments , the needle , in some cases
, would be finely blued , like the spring of a watch , by the electric
flame ; in which case the colour given by a flash from two jars only
might be wiped off , but that a flash from four jars fixed it , and
frequently melted the needles . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,170.192

The jars which the Doctor used held seven or eight gallons ,
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,170.193

and were coated and lined with tinfoil . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,170.194

To demonstrate , in the compleatest manner possible , the sameness of
the electric fluid with the matter of lightning , Dr. Franklin ,
astonishing as it must have appeared , contrived actually to bring
lightning from the heavens , by means of an electrical kite , which he
raised when a storm of thunder was perceived to be coming on .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,170.195

This kite had a pointed wire fixed upon it , by which it drew the
lightning from the clouds . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,170.196

This lightning descended by the hempen string , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,170.197

and was received by a key tied to the extremity of it ; that part of the
string which was held in the hand being of silk , that the electric
virtue might stop when it came to the key . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,170.198

He found that the string would conduct electricity even when nearly dry
, but that when it was <P_171> wet , it would conduct it quite freely ;
so that it would stream out plentifully from the key , at the approach
of a person's finger . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,171.199

At this key he charged phials , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,171.200

and from electric fire thus obtained , he kindled spirits ,
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,171.201

and performed all other electrical experiments which are usually
exhibited by an excited globe or tube . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,171.202

As every circumstance relating to so capital a discovery as this <paren>
the greatest , perhaps , that has been made in the whole compass of
philosophy , since the time of Sir Isaac Newton <$$paren> can@ @not but
give pleasure to all my readers , I shall endeavour to gratify them with
the communication of a few particulars which I have from the best
authority . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,171.203

The Doctor , after having published his method of verifying his
hypothesis concerning the sameness of electricity with the matter of
lightning , was waiting for the erection of a spire in Philadelphia to
carry his views into execution ; not imagining that a pointed rod , of a
moderate height , could answer the purpose ; when it occurred to him ,
that , by means of a common kite , he could have a readier and better
access to the regions of thunder than by any spire whatever .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,171.204

Preparing , therefore , a large silk handkerchief , and two cross sticks
, of a proper length , on which to extend {TEXT:extended} it ; he took
the opportunity of the first approaching thunder storm to take a walk
into a field , in which there was a shed convenient for his purpose .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,171.205

But dreading the ridicule which too commonly attends unsuccessful
attempts in science , he communicated his intended experiment to no body
but his son , who assisted him in raising the kite .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,171.206

The kite being raised , a considerable time elapsed before there <P_172>
was any appearance of its being electrified . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,172.207

One very promising cloud had passed over it without any effect ; when ,
at length , just as he was beginning to despair of his contrivance , he
observed some loose {TEXT:lose} threads of the hempen string to stand
erect , and to avoid one another , just as if they had been suspended on
a common conductor . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,172.208

Struck with this promising appearance , he immediately presented his
knuckle {TEXT:knucle} to the key , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,172.209

and <paren> let the reader judge of the exquisite pleasure he must have
felt at that moment <$$paren> the discovery was complete .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,172.210

He perceived a very evident electric spark . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,172.211

Others succeeded , even before the string was wet , so as to put the
matter past all dispute , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,172.212

and when the rain had wet the string , he collected electric fire very
copiously . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,172.213

This happened in June 1752 , a month after the electricians in France
had verified the same theory , but before he heard of any thing they had
done . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,172.214

Besides this kite , Dr. Franklin had afterwards an insulated iron rod
to draw the lightning into his house , in order to make experiments
whenever there should be a considerable quantity of it in the atmosphere
; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,172.215

and that he might not lose any opportunity of that nature , he connected
two bells with this apparatus , which gave him notice , by their ringing
, whenever his rod was electrified . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,172.216

The Doctor being able , in this manner , to draw the lightning into his
house , and make experiments with it at his leisure ; and being certain
that it was in all respects of the same nature with electricity , he was
desirous to know if it was of the positive or negative kind .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,172.217

The first time he succeeded in making an experiment for this purpose was
the 12th of April 1753 , when it appeared that the lightning was
negative . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,172.218

Having found that <P_173> the clouds electrified negatively in eight
successive thunder gusts , he concluded they were always electrified
negatively , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,173.219

and formed a theory to account for it . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,173.220

But he afterwards found he had concluded too soon .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,173.221

For , on the sixth of June following , he met with one cloud which was
electrified positively ; upon which he corrected his former theory ,
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,173.222

but did not seem able perfectly to satisfy himself with any other .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,173.223

The Doctor sometimes found the clouds would change from positive to
negative electricity several times in the course of one thunder gust ,
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,173.224

and he once observed the air to be strongly electrified during a fall of
snow , when there was no thunder at all . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,173.225

But the grand practical use which Dr. Franklin made of his discovery of
the sameness of electricity and lightning , was to secure buildings from
being damaged by lightning , a thing of vast consequence in all parts of
the world , but more especially in several parts of North America ,
where thunder storms are more frequent , and their effects , in that dry
air , more dreadful , than they are ever known to be with us .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,173.226

This great end Dr. Franklin accomplished by so easy method , and by so
cheap , and seemingly trifling apparatus , as fixing a pointed metalline
rod higher than any part of the building , and communicating with the
ground , or rather the nearest water . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,173.227

This wire the lightning was sure to seize upon , preferable to any other
part of the building ; whereby this dangerous power would be safely
conducted to the earth , and dissipated , without doing any harm to the
building . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,173.228

Dr. Franklin was of opinion , that a wire of a quarter of an inch of
thickness would be sufficient to conduct a greater quantity of lightning
than was ever actually discharged from the clouds <P_174> in one stroke
. PRIESTLEY-1769-1,174.229

He found , that the gilding of a book was sufficient to conduct the
charge of five large jars , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,174.230

and thought that it would probably have conducted the charge of many
more . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,174.231

He also found by experiment , that if a wire was destroyed by an
explosion , it was yet sufficient to conduct that particular stroke ,
though it was thereby rendered incapable of conducting another .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,174.232

The Doctor also supposed , that pointed rods erected on edifices might
likewise often prevent a stroke of lightning in the following manner .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,174.233

He says , that an eye so situated as to view horizontally the underside
of a thunder cloud , will see it very ragged , with a number of separate
fragments , or petty clouds , one under another , the lowest sometimes
not far from the earth . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,174.234

These , as so many stepping stones , assist in conducting a stroke
between a cloud and a building . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,174.235

To represent these by an experiment , he directs us to take two or three
locks of fine loose cotton and connect one of them with the prime
conductor , by a fine thread of two inches <paren> which may be spun out
of the same lock <$$paren> another to that , and a third to the second ,
by like threads . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,174.236

He then bids us to turn the globe ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,174.237

and says we shall see these locks extending themselves towards the table
<paren> as the lower small clouds do towards the earth <$$paren> but ,
that , on presenting a sharp point , erect under the lowest , it will
shrink up to the second , the second to the first , and all together to
the prime conductor , where they will continue as long as the point
continues under them . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,174.238

A most ingenious and beautiful experiment ! PRIESTLEY-1769-1,174.239

May not , he adds , in like manner , the small electrified clouds ,
whose equilibrium {TEXT:equilibrum} with the earth is soon restored by
the point , rise up to the main body , and by that <P_175> means
occasion so large a vacancy , as that the grand cloud can@ @not strike
in that place . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,175.240

Mr. Wilcke , in his remarks on Dr. Franklin's letters , says , that on
the 20th of August 1758 , he saw this supposition verified ; as he was
viewing a large fringed cloud , strongly electrified , passing over a
forest of tall fir trees . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,175.241

The ragged and depending parts of the large cloud were first attracted
lower , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,175.242

and then suddenly rose higher , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,175.243

and joined the large cloud . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,175.244

He was also an eye witness of two clouds lying one over the other ,
approaching , and flashing into one another . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,175.245

The lightning spread itself over all the parts of the blacker cloud ,
which was negative , and which immediately began to dissolve in rain .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,175.246

<P_176>

<heading>

Section III . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,176.249

Miscellaneous discoveries of Dr. Franklin and his friends in America
during the same period . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,176.250

<$$heading>

Dr. Franklin , retaining the common opinion , that electrified bodies
have real atmospheres of the electric fluid <paren> consisting of
particles at some distance from the surface of the body , but always
going along with it <$$paren> observed that these atmospheres and the
air did not seem to exclude one another ; though , he says , this be
difficult to conceive , considering that they are generally supposed to
repel one another . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,176.252

An electric atmosphere , he says , raised round a thick wire , inserted
into a phial , drives out none of the air it contained ;
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,176.253

nor on withdrawing that atmosphere , will any air rush in , as he found
by a very curious experiment , accurately made ; whence he also
concluded , that the elasticity of the air was not affected by it .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,176.254

The experiment , as the Doctor informs me , was made with a small glass
syphon , one leg passing through the cork into the bottle .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,176.255

The other leg had in it a drop of red ink , which readily <P_177> moved
on the least change of heat or cold in the air contained in the phial ;
but not at all on the air's being electrified .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,177.256

He also made an experiment which would seem to prove the immobility , as
we may say , of these atmospheres by any external force , if they have
any existence at all ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,177.257

but others may think it is rather an argument against their existence .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,177.258

He electrified a large cork ball fastened to the end of a silk string
three feet long ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,177.259

and , taking the other end in his hand , he whirled it round , like a
sling , a_hundred times in the open air , with the swiftest motion he
could possibly give it ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,177.260

and observed , that it still retained its electric atmosphere , though
it must have passed through eight_hundred yards of air .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,177.261

To show that a body , in different circumstances of dilatation and
contraction , is capable of receiving , or retaining more or less of the
electric fluid on its surface , he made the following curious experiment
. PRIESTLEY-1769-1,177.262

He electrified a silver can , in which was about three yards of brass
chain , one end of which he could raise to what height he pleased , by
means of a pulley {TEXT:pully} and a silk cord .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,177.263

He suspended a lock of cotton by a silk string from the ceiling of the
room , making it to hang near the cup ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,177.264

and observed , that every time he drew up the chain , the cotton
approached nearer to the cup , and as constantly receded from it when
the chain was let down . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,177.265

From this experiment it was evident , he says , that the atmosphere
about the cup was diminished by raising the chain , and increased by
lowering it ; and that the atmosphere of the chain must have been drawn
from that of the cup when it was raised , and have returned to it again
when it was let down . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,177.266

To make electric atmospheres in some measure visible , the <P_178>
Doctor used to drop rosin on hot iron plates held under bodies
electrified ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,178.267

and , in a still room , the smoke would ascend , and form visible
atmospheres round the bodies , making them look very beautiful .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,178.268

In trying in what circumstances , the repellency between an electrified
iron ball , and a small cork ball would be altered , he observed , that
the smoke of rosin did not destroy their repellency , but was attracted
both by the iron and the cork . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,178.269

The Doctor observed , that silver exposed to the electric spark would
acquire a blue stain , that iron would seem corroded by it ;
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,178.270

but he could never perceive any impression made on gold , brass , or tin
. PRIESTLEY-1769-1,178.271

The spots on the silver or iron were always the same , whether they
received the spark from lead , brass , gold , or silver ;
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,178.272

and the smell of the electric fire was the same , through whatever
bodies it was conveyed . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,178.273

While we are attending to what was done by Dr. Franklin at Philadelphia
, we must by no means overlook what was done by Mr. Kinnersley , the
Doctor's friend , while at Boston in New_England .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,178.274

Some of his observations , of which an account is given in the Doctor's
letters , are very curious ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,178.275

and some later accounts , which he himself has transmitted to England ,
seem to promise , that , if he continue his electrical inquiries , his
name , after that of his friend , will be second to few in the history
of electricity . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,178.276

He first distinguished himself by re-discovering Mr. Du Faye's two
contrary electricities of glass and sulphur , with which both he and Dr.
Franklin were at that time wholly unacquainted .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,178.277

But Mr. Kinnersley had a great advantage over Mr. Du Faye ;
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,178.278

for , making his experiments in a more advanced state of the <P_179>
science , he saw immediately , that the two contrary electricities of
glass and sulphur were the very same positive and negative electricities
, which had just been discovered by Dr. Watson and Dr. Franklin .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,179.279

He observed , that a cork ball , electrified by a conductor from excited
glass , would be attracted by excited amber and sulphur , and repelled
by excited glass and china ; that electrifying the ball with the wire of
a charged phial , it would be repelled by excited glass , but attracted
by excited sulphur ; and that when he electrified it by sulphur or amber
, till it became repelled by them , it would be attracted by the wire of
the phial , and repelled by its coating . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,179.280

These experiments surprized him very much , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,179.281

but by analogy he was led to infer , <font> a priori <$$font> , the
following paradoxes , as he calls them , which were afterwards verified
by Dr. Franklin at his request . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,179.282

1. " If a glass globe be placed at one end of a prime conductor , and a
sulphur one at the other , both being equally in good order , and in
equal motion , not a spark of fire can be obtained from the conductor ,
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,179.283

but one globe will draw out as fast as the other gives in .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,179.284

2. If a phial be suspended on the conductor with a chain from its
coating to the table , and only one of the globes be made use of at a
time , twenty turns of the wheel , for instance , will charge it ; after
which , as many turns of the other wheel will discharge it ; and as many
more will charge it again . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,179.285

3. The globes being both in motion , each having a separate conductor ,
with a phial suspended on one of them , and the chain fastened to the
other ; the phial will become charged , one globe charging positively ,
and the other negatively . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,179.286

4. The phial being thus charged , hang it in like manner , <P_180> on
the other conductor . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,180.287

Set both wheels a going again , and the same number of turns that
charged it before will now discharge it , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,180.288

and the same number repeated will charge it again .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,180.289

5. When each globe communicates with the same prime conductor , having
a chain hanging from it to the table , one of them , when in motion
<paren> but which I can@ @not say <$$paren> will draw fire up through
the cushion , and discharge it , through the chain ;
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,180.290

and the other will draw it up through the chain , and discharge it
through the cushion . " PRIESTLEY-1769-1,180.291

When Mr. Kinnersley was advising his friend to try the experiments with
the sulphur globe , he cautions him not to make use of chalk on the
cushion , telling him that some fine powdered sulphur would do better .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,180.292

And he expresses his hope that if the Doctor should find the two globes
to charge the prime conductor differently , he would be able to discover
some method of determining which it was that charged positively .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,180.293

Dr. Franklin , when these experiments and conjectures were proposed to
him , had no idea of their having any real foundation ;
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,180.294

but imagined , that the different attractions and repulsions observed by
Mr. Kinnersley proceeded rather from the greater or smaller quantities
of the electric fire , obtained from different bodies , than from its
being either of a different kind , or having a different direction .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,180.295

But finding , upon trial , that the principal of Mr. Kinnersley's
suppositions were verified by fact , he had no doubt of the rest .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,180.296

In answer to the doubt of Mr. Kinnersley , whether the glass , or the
sulphur electrified positively , the Doctor gave it as his opinion ,
<P_181> that the glass globe charged positively , and the sulphur
negatively , for the following reasons . 1. Because , though the
sulphur globe seemed to work equally well with the glass one , yet it
could never occasion so large , and so distant a spark between his
finger and conductor as when the glass globe was used .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,181.297

But what he adds to confirm this proof does not seem to be satisfactory
. PRIESTLEY-1769-1,181.298

He supposes that bodies of a certain bigness can@ @not so easily part
with the quantity of electric fluid which they have , and hold attracted
within their substance , as they can receive an additional quantity upon
their surface , by way of atmosphere ; and that therefore so much could
not be drawn out of the conductor , as might be thrown on it .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,181.299

2. He observed that the stream or brush of fire , appearing at the end
of the wire connected with the conductor , was long , large , and much
diverging when the glass globe was used , and made a snapping or
rattling noise ; but that when the sulphur globe was used , it was short
, small , and made a hissing noise . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,181.300

He also observed , that just the reverse of both these cases happened
when he held the same wire in his hand , and the globes were worked
alternately . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,181.301

The brush was large , long , diverging , and snapping or rattling , when
the sulphur globe was turned ; but short , small , and hissing , when
the glass globe was turned . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,181.302

When the brush was long , large , and much diverging , it seemed to the
Doctor , that the body to which it joined was throwing the fire out ,
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,181.303

and when the contrary appeared , it seemed to be drinking in .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,181.304

3. He observed , that when he held his knuckle before the sulphur globe
, while it was turning , the stream of fire between <P_182> his knuckle
and the globe seemed to spread on its surface , as if it flowed from the
finger , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,182.305

but before the glass globe it was otherwise . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,182.306

3. He observed that the cool wind <paren> or what was called so
<$$paren> which is felt as coming from an electrified point , was much
more sensible when the glass globe , than when the sulphur one was used
. PRIESTLEY-1769-1,182.307

But these , though the best arguments which the senses can furnish , of
the course of the electric fluid , the Doctor acknowledges were but
hasty thoughts . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,182.308

Indeed , considering that the velocity of the electric fluid has been
found , by experiment , to be , nearly , {COM:sic} instantaneous in a
circuit of many miles , it can@ @not be supposed that the eye should be
able to distinguish which way it goes in the space of one or two inches
. PRIESTLEY-1769-1,182.309

I shall conclude this article with observing that the experiments ,
which the Doctor made with globes of glass and sulphur , are much more
easily exhibited by the conductor and insulated rubber of either of them
, all the effects being the reverse of each other .
PRIESTLEY-1769-1,182.310

I must now , for the present , take leave of this ingenious writer and
his friends , after having brought the history of their labours to the
year 1754 , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,182.311

and must return to see what was doing on the continent of Europe for two
or three years preceding this date , while we left it to go over to
America . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,182.312

<P_183>

Period X . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,183.314

The history of electricity , from the time that Dr. Franklin made his
experiments in America , till the year 1766 . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,183.315

We are now entering upon the last period into which the history of
electricity divides itself , in which the great variety of matter
presented to our view must oblige an historian to have recourse to the
strictest method ; PRIESTLEY-1769-1,183.316

for , otherwise , the narration would be extremely perplexed and
disgusting . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,183.317

As this period contains the events of a larger space of time than most
of the others , yet without any convenient resting place ; as the
business of electricity has been considerably multiplied in it , and a
greater number of labourers have been employed in gathering in the
harvest of discoveries , the seeds of which were sown by Dr. Watson ,
Dr. Franklin , and others , in the preceding periods ; I am obliged to
subdivide this into more distinct parts , PRIESTLEY-1769-1,183.318

but I hope they will not be found to be more than were necessary , in
order to prevent confusion . PRIESTLEY-1769-1,183.319

