<BEGIN_priestley-1765-2>

<P_160>

<heading>

Section III . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,160.4

<$$heading>

In the third place , I would observe , that an established code of
education , such as this writer contends for , allowing its tendency to
perpetuate the present constitution of this country in church and state
, tends to interrupt its progress to a state of greater perfection than
it has yet attained to . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,160.6

I can heartily join with Dr. Brown , or any person , in their encomiums
on the British constitution , when it is compared with that of any other
country in the world . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,160.7

I really think it to be the best actual scheme of civil policy ;
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,160.8

but if any person say that it is perfect , and that no alteration can be
made in it for the better , I beg leave to withold my assent .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,160.9

Dr. Brown himself does not hesitate to acknowledge , that there are
imperfections in it . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,160.10

How then can a real friend to his country <P_161> wish to fix its
imperfections upon it , and make them perpetual ?
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,161.11

I should object to a system of education , the best possible in every
other respect , if it had so unfavourable an aspect .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,161.12

It will be said , that alterations may , indeed , be made , but can@
@not be made with safety , and without the danger of throwing every
thing into confusion ; so that , upon the whole , things had better
remain as they are : PRIESTLEY-1765-2,161.13

but , allowing this , for the present , why should they be perpetuated
as they are ? PRIESTLEY-1765-2,161.14

If the proposed alterations were violent ones , that is , introduced by
violent measures , they might justly give alarm to all good citizens .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,161.15

I would endeavour to stop the ablest hand that should attempt to reform
in this manner ; because it is hardly possible but that a remedy so
effected must be worse than the disease . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,161.16

But still , why should we object to any state's gradually reforming
itself , or throw obstacles to the way of such reformations ?
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,161.17

All civil societies , and the whole science of civil government on which
they are founded , are yet in their infancy . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,161.18

Like other arts and sciences , they are gradually improving ,
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,161.19

but they improve more slowly ; because opportunities for making
experiments are fewer . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,161.20

Indeed , <P_162> hardly any trials in legislation have ever been made by
persons who had knowledge and ability to collect from history , and to
compare , the observations which might be of use for this purpose , or
had leisure to digest them properly at the time .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,162.21

Taking it for granted , therefore , that our constitution and laws have
not escaped the imperfections which we see to be incident to every thing
human ; by all means , let the closest attention be given to them ,
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,162.22

let their excellencies and defects be thoroughly laid open ,
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,162.23

and let improvements of every kind be made ; but not such as would
prevent all further improvements : because it is not probable , that any
improvements , which the utmost sagacity of man could now suggest ,
would be an equivalent for the prevention of all that might be made
hereafter . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,162.24

Were the best formed state in the world to be fixed in its present
condition , I make no doubt but that , in a course of time , it would be
the very worst . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,162.25

History demonstrates this truth with respect to all the celebrated
states of antiquity ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,162.26

and as all things , and particularly whatever depends upon science , has
of late years been in a quicker progress towards perfection than ever ;
we may safely conclude the same with respect to any political <P_163>
state now in being . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,163.27

What advantage did Sparta <paren> the constitution of whose government
was so much admired by the ancients , as is the method of giving
permanency to it by Dr. Brown <$$paren> reap from those institutions
which contributed to its longevity , but the longer continuance of ,
what I should not scruple to call , the worst government we read of in
the world ; a government which secured to a man the fewest of his
natural rights , and of which a man who had a taste for life would least
of all chuse to be a member . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,163.28

While the arts of life were improving in all the neighbouring nations ,
Sparta derived this noble prerogative from her constitution , that she
continued the nearest to her pristine barbarity ;
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,163.29

and in the space of near a_thousand years <paren> which include the
whole period in which letters and the arts were the most cultivated in
the rest of Greece <$$paren> produced not {TEXT:no} one poet , orator ,
historian , or artist of any kind . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,163.30

The convulsions of Athens , where life was in some measure enjoyed , and
the faculties of body and mind had their proper exercise and
gratification , were with me , far preferable to the savage uniformity
of Sparta . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,163.31

<P_164>

The constitution of Egypt was similar to that of Sparta ,
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,164.33

and the advantages this country received from it were similar .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,164.34

Egypt was the mother of the arts to the states of Greece ;
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,164.35

but the rigid institutions of this mother of the arts kept them in their
infancy ; so that the states of Greece , being more favourably situated
for improvements of all kinds , soon went beyond their instructress ;
while no improvements of any kind were ever made in Egypt , till it was
subdued by a foreign power . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,164.36

What would have been the state of agriculture , ship-building , or war ,
if those arts had been fixed in England two or three centuries ago ?
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,164.37

Dr. Brown will urge me with the authority of Plutarch , who largely
extols the regulations of Egypt and of Sparta , and censures the Roman
legislators for adopting nothing similar to them .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,164.38

But I beg leave to appeal from the authority of Plutarch , and of all
the ancients , as by no means competent judges in this case .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,164.39

Imperfect as the science of government is at present , it is certainly
much more perfect than it was in their time ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,164.40

else , the world has grown so much older to little purpose .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,164.41

On the authority of the ancients , Dr. Brown might <P_165> as well
contend for another institution of the famed Egyptians ; viz. their
obliging all persons to follow the occupations of their fathers ,
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,165.42

and perhaps this might be no bad auxiliary to his prescribed mode of
education , and prevent the springing up of faction in a state .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,165.43

It would likewise favour another object which the Dr. has professedly
in view , viz. checking the growth of commerce .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,165.44

Supposing this wise system of perpetuation had occurred to our ancestors
in the feudal times , and that an assembly of old English Barons , with
their heads full of their feudal rights and services , had imitated the
wise Spartans , and perpetuated the severe feudal institutions ; what
would England at this day have been <paren> with the unrivalled
reputation of uniformity and constancy in its laws <$$paren> but the
most barbarous , the weakest , and most distracted state in Europe ?
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,165.45

It is plain from fact , that divine providence had greater things in
view in favour of these kingdoms , and has been conducting them through
a series of gradual changes , <paren> arising from internal and external
causes <$$paren> which have brought us to our present happy condition ,
and which , if suffered to go on , will probably carry us <P_166> to a
pitch of happiness of which we can yet form no conception .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,166.46

Had the religious system of our oldest forefathers been established on
these wise and perpetual foundations , we had now been Pagans , and our
priests Druids . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,166.47

Had our Saxon conquerors been endowed with the same wisdom and foresight
, we had been worshipping Thor , and Woden ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,166.48

and had our ancestors three centuries ago catched this spirit , we had
been blind and priestridden Papists . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,166.49

The greatest blessing that can befall a state , which is so rigid and
inflexible in its institutions , is to be conquered by a people who have
a better government , and have made farther advances in the arts of life
than itself . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,166.50

And it is undoubtedly a great advantage which the Divine Being has
provided for this world of ours , that conquests and revolutions should
give mankind an opportunity of reforming their systems of government ,
and of improving the science of it , which they would never have found
themselves . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,166.51

In the excellent constitution of nature , evils of all kinds will , some
way or other , find their proper remedy ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,166.52

and when government , religion , education , and every thing that is
valuable in society seems to <P_167> be in so fine a progress towards a
more perfect state , is it not our wisdom to favour this progress ? and
to allow the remedies of all disorders to operate gradually and easily ,
rather than , by a violent system of perpetuation , to retain all
disorders till they force a remedy . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,167.53

In the excellent constitution of the human body we see a variety of
outlets provided for noxious humors , by means of which the system
relieves itself when any slight disorders happen to it .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,167.54

But we see that , if these outlets be obstructed , the whole system is
endangered by the convulsions which ensue . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,167.55

Some things in civil society do , in their own nature , require to be
established , or fixed by law for a considerable time ;
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,167.56

but that part of the system is sure , for the reasons mentioned above ,
to be the most imperfect ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,167.57

and therefore it is the wisdom of the legislature to make that part as
small as possible , and to let the establishments which are necessary be
as easy as is consistent with the tolerable order of society .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,167.58

It is an universal maxim , that the more liberty is given to every thing
which is in a state of growth the more perfect it will become , and when
it is grown to its {TEXT:is} full size , the more amply will it repay
its wise parent for the indulgence it gave in its <P_168> infant state .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,168.59

A judicious father will bear with the frowardness {COM:sic} of his
children , and overlook many flights of youth which can give him no
pleasure , but from the prospect they afford of his children becoming
useful and valuable men , when the fire of youth is a little abated .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,168.60

I do not pretend to define what degree of establishment is necessary for
religion , or for many other articles in civil society :
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,168.61

But I think it is very clear that education requires none .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,168.62

And thus much I think is also clear , that every system of policy is too
strict and violent , in which any thing , that may be the instrument of
general happiness , is under so much restraint , that it can never
reform itself from the disorders which may be incident to it ; when it
is so circumstanced , that it can@ @not improve as far as it is capable
of improvement , but that every reformation must necessarily be
introduced from some other quarter ; in which case it must generally be
brought about by force . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,168.63

Is it not a standing argument that religion , in particular , has been
too much confined in all countries , that the body of the clergy have
never been able to reform themselves , and that all reformations have
ever been forced upon them , and have generally been attended <P_169>
with the most horrible persecutions , and dangerous convulsions in the
state ? PRIESTLEY-1765-2,169.64

I can@ @not help thinking also , that every system of government is
violent and tyrannical , which incapacitates men of the best abilities ,
and of the greatest integrity from rendering their country any service
in their power , while those who pay no regard to conscience may have
free access to all places of power and profit . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,169.65

It seems to be the uniform intention of divine providence to lead
mankind to happiness in a progressive , which is the surest , though the
slowest method . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,169.66

Evil is ever made to lead to good , and imperfect to perfect .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,169.67

The Divine Being might , no doubt , have adopted a different plan , have
made human nature and human governments perfect from the beginning .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,169.68

He might have formed the human mind with an intuitive knowledge of truth
, without leading men through so many labyrinths of error .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,169.69

He might have made man perfectly virtuous , without giving so much
exercise to his passions in his struggles with the habits of vice .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,169.70

He might have sent an angel , or have commissioned a man to establish a
perfect form of civil government ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,169.71

and , a priori , this would seem to have been almost <P_170> as
essential to human happiness as any system of truth ;
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,170.72

at least , that it would have been a valuable addition to a system of
religious truth , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,170.73

but though it would be impiety in us to pretend to fathom the depths of
the divine councils , I think we may fairly conclude , that if this
method of proceeding had been the best for us , he , whom we can@ @not
conceive to be influenced by any thing but his desire to promote the
happiness of his creatures , would have pursued it .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,170.74

But a contrary method has been adopted in every thing relating to us .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,170.75

How many falls does a child get before it learns to walk secure .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,170.76

How many inarticulate sounds precede those which are articulate .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,170.77

How often are we imposed upon by all our senses before we learn to form
a right judgment of the proper objects of them .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,170.78

How often do our passions mislead us , and involve us in difficulties ,
before we reap the advantage they were entended to bring us in our
pursuit of happiness ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,170.79

and how many false judgments do we make , in the investigation of all
kinds of truth , before we come to a right conclusion .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,170.80

How many ages do errors and prejudices of all kinds prevail before they
are dissipated to the light of truth , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,170.81

and how <P_171> general and how long was the reign of false religion
before the propagation of the true ? PRIESTLEY-1765-2,171.82

How late was christianity , that great remedy of vice , and ignorance
introduced . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,171.83

How slow and how confined its progress ! PRIESTLEY-1765-2,171.84

In short , it seems to have been the intention of divine providence ,
that mankind should be , as far as possible , self taught ; that we
should attain to every thing excellent and useful as the result of our
own experience and observation ; that our judgments should be formed by
the appearances which are presented to them , and our hearts instructed
by their own feelings . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,171.85

But by the unnatural system of rigid unalterable establishments , we put
it out of our power to instruct ourselves , or to derive any advantage
from the lights we acquire from experience and observation ;
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,171.86

and thereby , as far as is in our power , we counteract the kind
intentions of the deity in the constitution of the world , and in
providing for a state of constant , though slow improvement in every
thing . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,171.87

A variety of useful lessons may be learned from our attention to the
conduct of divine providence respecting us . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,171.88

When history and experience demonstrate the uniform method of divine
providence to <P_172> have been what has been above represented , let us
learn from it to be content with the natural , though slow progress we
are in to a more perfect state . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,172.89

But let us always endeavour to keep things in this progress .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,172.90

Let us , however , beware lest by attempting to accelerate , we in fact
, retard our progress in happiness . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,172.91

But more especially , let us take heed , lest , by indeavouring to
secure and perpetuate the great ends of society , we , in fact defeat
those ends . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,172.92

We shall have a_thousand times more enjoyment of a happy and perfect
form of government , when we can see in history the long progress of our
constitution through barbarous and imperfect systems of policy , as we
are more confirmed in the truth , and have more enjoyment of it , by
reviewing the many errors by which we were milled in our pursuit of it .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,172.93

If the Divine Being saw that the best form of government , that even he
could have prescribed for us , would not have answered the end of its
institution , if it had been imposed by himself ; much less can we
imagine it could answer any valuable purpose , to have the crude systems
<paren> for they can be nothing more <$$paren> of short-sighted men for
ever imposed upon us . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,172.94

<P_173>

In more respects than one , doth this writer propose to raise the terms
on which we are to live in society ; so that , under his administration
, a man could enjoy little more than bare security in the possession of
his property , and that upon very hard terms . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,173.96

The care he would take to shackle men's minds , in the first formation
of their thinking powers , and to check their exertions when they were
formed , would , I apprehend , put an effectual stop to all the noble
improvements of which society is capable . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,173.97

Knowledge , particularly of the more sublime kinds , in the sciences of
Morals and Religion , could expect no encouragement .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,173.98

He would have more restrictions laid upon the publication of books ,
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,173.99

he complains , page 103 that , in the late reign , deistical
publications proceeded almost without cognisance from the civil
magistrate , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,173.100

and asserts , appendix page 29 , that there are many opinions or
principles tending evidently to the destruction of society or freedom ,
and which , therefore , ought not to be tolerated in a well ordered free
community . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,173.101

The civil magistrate then , according to this writer , ought to control
{TEXT:controll} the press , and therefore prevent , by means of
effectual penalties <paren> or else he doth nothing <$$paren> <P_174>
the publication of any thing , that might directly or indirectly ,
thwart his views of civil policy , which , in England , comprehends the
present form of our established religion . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,174.102

But so extensive is the connection of all kinds of truth , that if a man
would keep effectually clear of the subject of religion , he must not
indulge a free range of thought near the confines of it .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,174.103

The subjects of metaphysics , morals , and natural religion would be
highly dangerous . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,174.104

There might be {TEXT:missing_"be"} heresy , or the foundation of heresy
, without coming near revelation , or any of the peculiar doctrines of
christianity . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,174.105

We must only be allowed to think for ourselves , without having the
liberty of divulging , or , in any form , publishing our thoughts to
others , not even to our children . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,174.106

A mighty privilege indeed ! and for which we might think ourselves
obliged to Dr. Brown , if it were in the power of man to deprive us of
it . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,174.107

This is a privilege which the poor wretch enjoys who lives under the
same roof with a Spanish inquisitor . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,174.108

The subjects of the Grand Seignior enjoy far greater privileges than
those which Dr. Brown would indulge to Englishmen .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,174.109

For the greater part of them are allowed to educate their children in a
religion which teaches them to regard <P_175> Mohammed as an impostor .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,175.110

Nay the Pope himself permits those to live unmolested , and under his
protection at Rome , who look upon that church of which he calls himself
the head , as founded on fraud and falsehood , and to educate their
children in the same principles . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,175.111

Nor hath the Pope , or the Grand Seignior , ever seen reason to repent
of their indulgence . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,175.112

Were any more laws restraining the liberty of the press in force , it is
impossible to say how far they might be construed to extend .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,175.113

Those already in being are more than are requisite , and inconsistent
with the interests of truth . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,175.114

Were they to extend farther , every author would lie at the mercy of the
ministers of state , who might condemn indiscriminately , upon some
pretence or other , every work that gave them umbrage ; under which
circumstances might fall some of the greatest and noblest productions of
the human mind , if such works could be produced in those circumstances
. PRIESTLEY-1765-2,175.115

For if men of genius knew they could not publish the discoveries they
made , they could not give free scope to their faculties in making and
pursuing those discoveries . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,175.116

It is the thought of publication , and the prospect of fame which is ,
generally , the great incentive to <P_176> men of genius to exert their
faculties , in attempting the untrodden paths of speculation .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,176.117

In those unhappy circumstances , writers would entertain a dread of
every new subject . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,176.118

No man could safely indulge himself in any thing bold , enterprizing ,
and out of the road of the vulgar ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,176.119

and in all publications we should see a timidity incompatible with the
spirit of discovery . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,176.120

If any towering genius should arise in those unfavourable circumstances
, a Newton in the natural world , or a Locke , a Hutcheson , a Clarke ,
or a Hartley in the moral , the only effectual method to prevent their
diffusing a spirit of enterprise and innovation , which is natural to
such great souls , could be no other than that which Tarquin so
significantly expressed , by taking off the heads of all those poppies
which overlooked the rest . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,176.121

Such men could not but be dangerous , and give umbrage in a country
where it was the maxim of the government , that every thing of
importance should for ever remain unalterably fixed .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,176.122

What might be expected from the business of education being lodged , by
the state , in the hands of any one set of men , may be imagined from
the alarm which the Newtonian system , gave to all philosophers <P_177>
at the time of its first publication ; and from what passed at Oxford
with respect to Locke's Essay on the Human Understanding , which has
done honour to the English nation in the eyes of all the learned world .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,177.123

We are told in the life of Mr. Locke , in the Biographia Britannica ;
that " there was a meeting of the heads of houses at Oxford , where it
was proposed to censure and discourage the reading of this Essay ; and
that , after various debates , it was concluded ; that , without making
any public censure , each head of a house should endeavour to prevent
its being read in his own college . " PRIESTLEY-1765-2,177.124

This passed but a little before Mr. Locke's death , about fourteen
years after the first publication of the Essay .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,177.125

The whole of this system of uniformity appears to me to be founded on
very narrow and short-sighted views of policy .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,177.126

A man of extensive views will overlook temporary evils , with a prospect
of the greater good which may often result from , or be inseparably
connected with them . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,177.127

He will bear with a few tares , lest , in attempting to root them out ,
he endanger rooting up the wheat with them . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,177.128

Unbounded free enquiry upon all kinds of subjects may <P_178> certainly
be attended with some inconvenience , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,178.129

but it can@ @not be restrained without infinitely greater inconvenience
. PRIESTLEY-1765-2,178.130

The deistical performances Dr. Brown is so much offended at may have
unsettled the minds of some people , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,178.131

but the minds of many have been more firmly settled , and upon better
foundations than ever . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,178.132

The scheme of christianity has been far better understood , since those
deistical writings have occasioned the subject to be more thoroughly
discussed than it had been before . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,178.133

Besides if truth stand upon the false foundation of prejudice or error ,
it is an advantage to it to be unsettled ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,178.134

and the man who doth no more , and even means to do no more , is , in
fact , its friend . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,178.135

Another person seeing its destitute and baseless condition , may be
induced to set it upon its proper foundation . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,178.136

Far better policy would it be to remove the difficulties which still lie
in the way of free enquiry , than throw fresh ones into it .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,178.137

Infidels would then be deprived of their most successful method of
attacking christianity , namely , insinuation ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,178.138

and christian divines might , with a more manly grace , engage with
champions of deism , and in fact , engage with more advantage , <P_179>
when they both fought on the same equal ground .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,179.139

As things are at present , I should be ashamed to fight under the
shelter of the civil power , while I saw my adversary exposed to all the
severity of it . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,179.140

To the same purpose , I can@ @not help quoting the authority of the
learned and judicious Dr. Warburton , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,179.141

" Nor less friendly is this liberty to the generous advocate of religion
. PRIESTLEY-1765-2,179.142

For how could such an one , when in earnest convinced of the strength of
evidence in his cause , desire an adversary whom the laws had before
disarmed , or value a victory where the magistrate must triumph with him
? PRIESTLEY-1765-2,179.143

Even I , the meanest in this controversy , should have been ashamed of
projecting the defence of the great Jewish legislator , did not I know ,
that his assailants and defenders skirmished under one equal law of
liberty . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,179.144

And if my dissenting , in the course of this defence , from some common
opinions needs an apology , I should desire it may be thought , that I
ventured into this train with greater confidence , that I might shew ,
by not intrenching myself in authorized speculations , I put myself upon
the same footing with you <bracket> the Deists <$$bracket> and would
claim no privilege that was not enjoyed in common . " Divine Legation ,
page 7 . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,179.145

<P_180>

But sorry I am , and sorry must that worthy prelate be , that the
paragraph which immediately follows , how proper soever it might be when
it was written , would <font> now <$$font> look like a tantalizing of
his unfortunate adversaries . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,180.147

" This liberty , then , may you long possess , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,180.148

know how to use it , and gratefully to acknowledge .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,180.149

I say this , because one can@ @not , without indignation , observe ,
that , amidst the full enjoyment of it , you still continue , with the
meanest affectation , to fill your prefaces with repeated clamours
against the difficulties and discouragements attending the exercise of
free thinking ; and in a peculiar strain of modesty and reasoning , make
use of this very liberty to perswade the world you still want it .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,180.150

In extolling liberty we can join with you , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,180.151

in the vanity of pretending to have contributed most to its
establishment we can bear with you , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,180.152

but in the low cunning of pretending still to lie under restraints , we
can neither join nor bear with you . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,180.153

There was indeed , a time , and that within our memories , when such
complaints were reasonable , and meritorious ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,180.154

but , happy for you , gentlemen , you have outlived it .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,180.155

All <P_181> the rest is merely sir Martin , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,181.156

it is continuing to fumble at the lute though the music has been long
over . " PRIESTLEY-1765-2,181.157

Let Peter Annet <paren> if he dare <$$paren> write a comment on this
passage . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,181.158

So far are Deists from having free liberty to publish their sentiments ,
that even many Christians can@ @not speak out with safety .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,181.159

In present circumstances , a christian divine is not at liberty to make
use of those arguments which , he may think , would supply the best
defence of christianity . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,181.160

What are with many the very foundations of our faith are in a ruinous
condition , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,181.161

and must be repaired before it will be to any purpose to beautify and
adorn the superstructure ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,181.162

but the man who should have the true courage and judgement to go near
enough to such rotten foundations would be thought to mean nothing less
than to undermine them , and intirely destroy the whole fabric .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,181.163

His very brethren would stand off from him , and think him in league
with {TEXT:with_with} their adversaries ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,181.164

and , by an ill judging zeal , might call in the help of the
ill-directed civil power to stop his hand . In consequence of which ,
notwithstanding his most laudable zeal in favour of our holy religion ,
he might stand upon the same <P_182> pillory , and be thrown into the
same prison with poor and harmless infidels . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,182.165

Many undoubted friends of Christianity , and men of the most enlarged
minds , will know and feel what I mean . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,182.166

If any person should think that religion is not to be put upon the same
footing with other branches of knowledge <paren> which they allow to
require the aid of every circumstance favourable to their future growth
<$$paren> that , since the whole of Christianity was delivered at once ,
and is contained in the books of the new Testament , there is no reason
to expect more light than we already have with regard to it ; and that
they may therefore be justified in fixing the knowledge of it where it
now stands ; if they imagine that the objections of Deists may injure ,
but can be no real service to the cause , and that , therefore , they
ought to be restrained ; I can only say , I sincerely pity their
weakness , and prejudice . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,182.167

Hitherto , indeed , few of the friends of free enquiry among Christians
have been more than partial advocates for it . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,182.168

If they find themselves under any difficulty with respect to their own
sentiments , they complain , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,182.169

and plead strongly for the rights of conscience , of private judgment ,
and of <P_183> free enquiry ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,183.170

but when they have got elbow room enough for themselves , they are quite
easy , and in no pain for others . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,183.171

The Papist must have liberty to write against Pagans , Mohammedans , and
Jews ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,183.172

but he can@ @not bear with Protestants . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,183.173

Writers in defence of the Church of England justify their separation
from the church of Rome , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,183.174

but , with the most glaring inconsistency , call the Protestant
Dissenters schismatics , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,183.175

and many Dissenters , forgetting the fundamental principles of their
dissent , which are the same that are asserted by all Christians and
Protestants , in similar circumstances , discourage every degree of
liberty greater than they themselves have taken ,
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,183.176

and have as great an aversion to those they are pleased to call Heretics
, as Papists have for Protestants , or as Laud had for the old Puritans
. PRIESTLEY-1765-2,183.177

But why should we confine our neighbour , who may want more room , in
the same narrow limits with ourselves . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,183.178

The wider we make the common circle of liberty , the more of its friends
will it receive , and the stronger will be the common interest .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,183.179

Whatever be the particular views of the numerous tribes of searchers
after truth , under whatever denomination we may be ranked , whether we
be called , <P_184> or call ourselves Christians , Papists , Protestants
, Dissenters , Heretics , or even Deists <paren> for all are equal here
, all are actuated by the same spirit , and all engaged in the same
cause <$$paren> we stand in need of the same liberty of thinking ,
debating , and publishing . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,184.180

Let us , then , as far as our interest is the same , with one heart and
voice , stand up for it . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,184.181

Not one of us can hurt his neighbour , without using a weapon which , in
the hand of power , might as well serve to chastise himself .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,184.182

The present state of the English government <paren> including both the
laws , and the administration , which often corrects the rigour of the
law <$$paren> may , perhaps , bear my own opinions without taking much
umbrage ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,184.183

but I could wish to congratulate many of my brother free-thinkers , on
the greater indulgence which their more heretical sentiments may require
. PRIESTLEY-1765-2,184.184

To the honour of the Quakers be it spoken , that they are the only body
of Christians who have uniformly maintained the principles of christian
liberty , and toleration . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,184.185

Every other body of men have turned persecutors when they had power .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,184.186

Papists have persecuted the Protestants , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,184.187

the Church of England has persecuted the Dissenters ;
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,184.188

and the Dissenters , in losing their <P_185> name , lost that spirit of
christian charity , which seemed to be essential to them :
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,185.189

short was their sun-shine of power , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,185.190

and thankful may Britain , and the present Dissenters be , that it was
so . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,185.191

But the Quakers , though established in Pensylvania , have persecuted
none . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,185.192

This glorious principle seems so intimately connected with the
fundamental maxims of their sect , that it may be fairly presumed , the
moderation they have hitherto shown is not to be ascribed to the
smallness of their party , or to their fear of reprisals .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,185.193

For this reason , if I were to pray for the general prevalence of any
one sect of Christians <paren> which I should not think it for the
interest of christianity to take place , even though I should settle the
articles of it myself <$$paren> it should be that of the Quakers ;
because , different as my opinions are from theirs , I have so much
confidence in their moderation that I believe they would let me live ,
write , and publish what I pleased unmolested among them .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,185.194

And this I own , is more than I could promise myself from any other body
of christians whatever ; the Presbyterians , perhaps , least of all
excepted . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,185.195

The object of this forced uniformity is narrow and illiberal , unworthy
of human nature . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,185.196

Supposing it accomplished , what <P_186> is it possible to gain by it ,
but , perhaps , a more obstinate and blind belief in the vulgar ; while
men of sense , seeing they are debarred the very means of conviction ,
must of course be infidels ? PRIESTLEY-1765-2,186.197

In those circumstances , it would really be an argument of a man's want
of spirit , of sense , and even of virtue to be a believer .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,186.198

Who would not , with every appearance of justice , suspect any cause ,
when he was not allowed to examine the arguments against it , and was
only pressed with those in its favour ? PRIESTLEY-1765-2,186.199

What sensible and upright judge would decide a cause , where all the
witnesses on one side were by violence prevented from giving their
evidence ? PRIESTLEY-1765-2,186.200

Those who converse with Deists <paren> perhaps Dr. Brown never did
<$$paren> well know , that one of their strongest objections to
Christianity arises from hence , that none of the early writings against
it are preserved . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,186.201

How much stronger , and even unanswerable , would that objection have
been , if Christianity had been , from the beginning , so effectually
protected by the civil magistrate , that no person had dared to write
against it at all . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,186.202

Such friends to the evidence and true interests of Christianity are all
those who would suppress Deistical writings at this day !
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,186.203

<P_187>

Suppose any article in a system of faith , so established and guarded ,
to be wrong , which is certainly a very modest supposition ;
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,187.205

let Dr. Brown and the other advocates of this scheme say , how it is
possible it should ever be rectified : or that , if the truth should
insinuate it_self , by any avenue which they had not sufficiently
guarded , how it could bring its evidence along with it , so as to
command the attention , and acceptance of men of understanding .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,187.206

Indeed , it is not so much from the mistaken friends of truth that we
apprehend these measures of rigid uniformity ; but rather from those who
would sacrifice truth , and every other consideration to public
tranquility . From those mere statesmen who , looking upon all systems
of religion to be equally false , and not able to bear examination ,
will not suffer that examination to take place , for fear of destroying
a system which , however false , they imagine to be necessary to the
peace and well being of the state . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,187.207

The most unrelenting persecution is to be apprehended , not from bigots
, but from infidels . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,187.208

A bigot , who is so from a principle of conscience , may possibly be
moved by a regard to <P_188> the consciences of others ;
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,188.209

but the man who thinks that conscience ought always to be sacrificed to
political views , has nothing on which an argument in favour of
moderation can lay hold . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,188.210

Was not Bolingbroke the greatest promoter of the schism bill in England
, and Richelieu {TEXT:Richlieu} of the persecution of the protestants in
France ? PRIESTLEY-1765-2,188.211

I acknowledge {TEXT:acknowlege} with the statesman , that the proper
object of the civil magistrate is the peace and well being of society ,
and that whatever tends to disturb that peace and well_being , properly
comes under his cognisance . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,188.212

I acknowlege several religious and moral , as well as political
principles have a near connection with the well being of society .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,188.213

But there are many cases , in which the happiness of society is nearly
concerned , in which it would , nevertheless , be the greatest
impropriety in the world for the civil magistrate to interfere ; as in
many of the duties of private life , the obligations of gratitude &c.
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,188.214

In all such cases , where the well being of society is most nearly
concerned , the civil magistrate has no right to interfere , unless he
can do it to good purpose . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,188.215

There is no difference , I apprehend , to be made in this case , between
the right , and the wisdom of interference . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,188.216

<P_189>

If the interference would be for the good of the society upon the whole
, it is wise , and right ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,189.218

if it would do more harm than good , it is foolish and wrong .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,189.219

Let the sagacious statesman , therefore , consider , whether the
interference of the civil magistrate be , in its own nature , calculated
to prevent the violation of the religious and moral principles he may
wish to enforce . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,189.220

I think it is clear , that when they are in danger of being violated ,
his presence is so far from tending to remedy the evil , that it must
necessarily inflame it , and make it worse . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,189.221

It is universally understood , that reason and authority are two things
, and that they have generally been opposed to one another ;
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,189.222

the hand of power , therefore on the side of any set of principles can@
@not but be a suspicious circumstance . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,189.223

And though the injunction of the magistrate may silence <font> voices
<$$font> , it multiplies <font> whispers <$$font> ,
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,189.224

and those whispers are the things at which he has the most reason to be
alarmed . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,189.225

Besides , it is universally true , that where the civil magistrate has
the greatest pretence for interfering in religious and moral principles
, his interference <paren> supposing there were no impropriety in it
<$$paren> is the least necessary . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,189.226

If the opinions and principles <P_190> in question , be evidently
subversive of all religion and all civil society , they must be
evidently false , and easy to refute ; so that there can be no danger of
their spreading ; and the patrons of them may safely be suffered to
maintain them in the most open manner they chuse .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,190.227

To mention those religious and moral principles which Dr. Brown
produces , as the most destructive to the well_being of society ; namely
, that <font> there is no God , <$$font> and that <font> there is no
faith to be kept with heretics <$$font> . So far am I from being of his
opinion , that it is necessary to guard against these principles by
severe penalties , and not to tolerate those who maintain them , that I
think , of all opinions , surely such as these have nothing formidable
or alarming in them . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,190.228

They can have no terrors but what the magistrate himself , by his ill
judged opposition , may give them . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,190.229

Persecution may procure friends to any cause , and possibly to this ,
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,190.230

but hardly any thing else can do it . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,190.231

It is unquestionable , that there are more atheists and infidels of all
kinds in Spain and Italy , where religion is so well guarded , than in
England ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,190.232

and we are , perhaps , principally indebted to the laws in favour of
christianity for what there is of deism with us .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,190.233

<P_191>

For my own part , I can@ @not help thinking the principles of Dr. Brown
very dangerous in a free state , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,191.235

and therefore can@ @not but wish they were exterminated .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,191.236

But I should not think that silencing him would be the best method of
doing it . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,191.237

No , let him , by all means , be encouraged in making his sentiments
public ; both that their dangerous tendency , and their futility may
more clearly appear . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,191.238

Had I the direction of the press , he should be welcome to my <font>
imprimatur <$$font> for any thing he should please to favour the world
with ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,191.239

and ready , if I know myself , should I be , to furnish him with every
convenience in my power for that purpose . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,191.240

It is for the interest of truth that every thing be viewed in fair and
open day light , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,191.241

and it can only be some sinister purpose that is favoured by darkness or
concealment of any kind . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,191.242

My sentiments may be fallacious , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,191.243

but if nobody were allowed to write against me , how could that fallacy
be made to appear ? PRIESTLEY-1765-2,191.244

Be the prayer of the magnanimous Ajax ever mine , {COM:greek_omitted}
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,191.245

This writer artfully mentions only three opinions or principles , one
under each <P_192> class of Religion , Morals , and Politics , as
necessary to be guarded by civil penalties , and not to be tolerated ;
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,192.246

and no doubt he has chosen those principles which a friend to his
country would most wish to have suppressed , and with regard to which ,
he would least scrupulously examine the means that might be used to
suppress them . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,192.247

This , Britons , is the method in which arbitrary power has ever been
introduced : PRIESTLEY-1765-2,192.248

This is well known to have been the method used by the thirty tyrants of
Athens . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,192.249

They first cut off persons the most generally obnoxious , and such as
the standing laws could not reach . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,192.250

And even that intelligent people were so far duped by their resentment ,
that they were not aware , that the very same methods might be employed
to take off the worthiest men in the city . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,192.251

And if ever arbitrary power gain ground in England , it will be by means
of the seeming necessity of having recourse to illegal methods , in
order to come at opinions or persons generally obnoxious .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,192.252

But when these illegal practices have once been authorized , and have
passed into precedents , all persons and all opinions will lie at the
mercy of the prime minister , who will animadvert upon whatever gives
him umbrage . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,192.253

<P_193>

Happy would it be for the unsuspecting sons of liberty , if their
enemies would say , at first , how far they meant to proceed against
them . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,193.255

To say , as Dr. Brown does , that there are many opinions and
principles which ought not to be tolerated , and to instance only in
three , is very suspicious and alarming . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,193.256

Let him say , in the name of all the friends of liberty , I challenge
him to say , how many more he has thought proper not to mention , and
what they are ; that we may not admit the foot of arbitrary power ,
before we see what size of a body the monster has to follow it .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,193.257

Such is the connection and gradation of opinions , that if once we admit
there are some which ought to be guarded by civil penalties , it will
ever be impossible to distinguish , to general satisfaction , between
those which may be tolerated , and those which may not .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,193.258

No two men living , were they questioned strictly , would give the same
list of such fundamentals . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,193.259

Sure I am , that Dr. Brown and myself would differ greatly , were we
called upon to give in ours . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,193.260

Far easier were it to distinguish the animal , vegetable , and mineral
kingdoms in nature , which yet naturalists find to be impossible .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,193.261

But a happy circumstance it is for human society , <P_194> that , in
religion and morals , there is no necessity to distinguish them at all .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,194.262

The more important will guard themselves by their own evidence ,
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,194.263

and the less important do not deserve to be guarded .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,194.264

Political principles , indeed , may require penal sanctions ;
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,194.265

but then it is for the very same reason that religious and moral
principles require none . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,194.266

It is because they do not carry their own evidence along with them .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,194.267

Governments actually established must guard themselves by penalties and
intolerance , because forms of government , and persons presiding in
them being nearly arbitrary , it may not be very evident that a
different government , or different governors , would not be better for
a state . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,194.268

Laws relating to treason are to be considered as a matter of
self-preservation . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,194.269

But even with respect to civil government , it is better not to guard
every thing so strongly as that no alteration can ever be made in it .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,194.270

Nay , alterations are daily proposed , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,194.271

and daily take place in our civil government , in things both of great
and small consequence . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,194.272

They are improvements in Religion only that receive no countenance from
the state : a fate singular and hard ! PRIESTLEY-1765-2,194.273

Besides , so many are the subtle distinctions relating to religion and
morals , that <P_195> no magistrate , or body of magistrates , could be
supposed to enter into them ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,195.274

and yet , without entering into them , no laws they could make would be
effectual . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,195.275

To instance in the first of Dr. Brown's principles , and the most
essential of them , viz. the being of a God . The magistrate must
define strictly what he means by the term God , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,195.276

otherwise Epicureans and Spinozists might be no atheists ;
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,195.277

or Arians or Athanasians might be obnoxious to the law .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,195.278

The magistrate must likewise punish , not only those who directly
maintain the principles of Atheism PRIESTLEY-1765-2,195.279

<paren> for evasions are so easy to find , that such laws would hurt no
body <$$paren> PRIESTLEY-1765-2,195.280

but he must punish those who do it indirectly ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,195.281

and what opinions are there not , in religion , morals , and even
natural philosophy , which might not be said to lead to Atheism ?
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,195.282

The doctrine of equivocal generation , for instance , might certainly be
thought of this kind , as well as many others , which have been very
harmlessly maintained by many good christians .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,195.283

I am sensible , that in the few particulars which Dr. Brown has thought
proper to mention , his intolerant principles are countenanced by Mr.
Locke ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,195.284

but , as far as I can recollect , these are all the opinions <P_196>
which Locke would not tolerate ; whereas this writer asserts there are
many ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,196.285

to that he must provide himself with some other authority for the rest .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,196.286

Besides , I make no doubt , the great Mr. Locke would , without the
least reluctance , give up any of his assertions , upon finding so bad
an use made of them , and that the consequences of them were so very
unfavourable to his own great object , and contradictory to his leading
principles ; and that he would , with indignation , give up any
adherents to arbitrary power , who , from such a pretence as this ,
should claim his protection from the generous pursuit of the friends of
liberty , of reason , and of mankind . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,196.287

And , after all , the controversy is not about men , but principles .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,196.288

And so great an enemy as Mr. Locke was to all authority in matters of
opinion , would least of all except his own . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,196.289

Besides , as was in some measure observed before , all these systems of
uniformity , in political or religious institutions , are the highest
injustice to posterity . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,196.290

What natural right have we to judge for them , any more than our
ancestors had to judge for us ? PRIESTLEY-1765-2,196.291

Our ancestors , from the time of the Britons , had , no doubt , as high
an opinion of their political and religious institutions as we can have
of ours . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,196.292

But <P_197> should we not have thought the fate of Great Britain
singularly unhappy , if they had been entailed upon us ?
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,197.293

And the very same reason of complaint will our posterity have , if we
take any methods to perpetuate what we approve , as best for ourselves
in present circumstances ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,197.294

for farther than this we can@ @not pretend to see .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,197.295

Let us , by all means , make our own circumstances as easy as possible ;
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,197.296

but let us lay posterity under no difficulty in improving theirs , if
they see it convenient : PRIESTLEY-1765-2,197.297

rather , let all plans of policy be such as will easily admit of
extension , and improvements of all kinds , and that the least violence
, or difficulty of any kind , may attend the making of them .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,197.298

This is , at least , very desirable , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,197.299

and I believe it is far from being impracticable .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,197.300

However , though it should not be thought proper to unfix any thing
which is at present established , let us proceed no farther than is
manifestly necessary in those establishments . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,197.301

Let it be carefully noted , that I am by no means pleading against
religious establishments in general , nor mean to hint any thing
disrespectful of that which prevails in this nation ; but only argue
against fixing every thing so unalterably , that if a <P_198> change ,
in any particular , should be desired by a great majority of the clergy
themselves , they should not be able to accomplish it , without the
danger of throwing every thing into confusion .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,198.302

Such rigid establishments imply the authors of them to be well perswaded
of their own infallibility . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,198.303

For no man , who could suppose it possible for himself to be mistaken ,
would think it was reasonable , that , after the mistake was discovered
, and universally acknowledged to be a mistake , all persons <paren> if
they would enjoy the advantage of the establishment <$$paren> should
ever after be obliged to affirm , that they believed it to be no mistake
, but perfectly agreeable to truth . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,198.304

How far this is the case with the church of England , let those of her
clergy say , who may understand the subject of religion a little better
than the first reformers , just emerging from the darkness of popery ,
who may have some reluctance to subscribe what they do not believe , and
who may feel , notwithstanding every evasion to which they can have
recourse , that a church preferment is dearly bought at the expense of a
solemn falsehood . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,198.305

I do not appeal to those who may really believe all they subscribe , or
to those who may subscribe without <P_199> thinking at all , or to those
who would wait upon any minister of state in the world with a
carte_blanche ready signed . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,199.306

In saying this , I even hint no more than what many of the greatest
ornaments of the church have said again and again ; that some things ,
in our present establishment , are wrong , and want reformation ; and
that there are thinking and unthinking , honest and dishonest men in
this , as well as in every other profession . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,199.307

Posterity , it may be said , will never complain of our institutions ,
when they have been educated in a strong and invincible attachment to
them . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,199.308

It is true , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,199.309

and had we been Pagans or Papists , through a similar system of
education , fixed in a more early period , we should not have complained
. PRIESTLEY-1765-2,199.310

We , like the old Spartans , or the sons of bigotry in Spain and
Portugal at present , might have been hugging our chains , and have been
proud of them . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,199.311

But persons who could have made a comparison between our actual
condition , and what it would have been , had those institutions not
been made , would have complained for us . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,199.312

They would have seen us to be a less great , wise , and happy people ;
which affords the same argument against <P_200> throwing difficulties in
the way of future improvements . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,200.313

Highly as we think of the wisdom of our ancestors , we justly think
ourselves , of the present age , wiser , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,200.314

and , if we be not blinded by the mere prejudice of education , must see
, that we can , in many respects , improve upon the institutions they
have transmitted to us . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,200.315

Let us not doubt , but that every generation in posterity will be as
much superior to us in political , and in all kinds of knowledge , and
that they will be able to improve upon the best civil and religious
{TEXT:religions} institutions that we can prescribe for them .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,200.316

Instead then of adding to the difficulties , which we ourselves find in
making the improvements we wish to introduce , let us make this great
and desirable work easier to them than it has been to us .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,200.317

However , such is the progress of knowledge , and the enlargement of the
human mind , that , in future time , notwithstanding all possible
obstructions thrown in the way of human genius , men of great and
exalted views will undoubtedly arise , who will see through and detest
our narrow politics ; when the ill-advisers , and the ill-advised
authors of these illiberal , and contracted schemes will be <P_201>
remembered with infamy and execration : when , notwithstanding their
talents as statesmen or writers , and though they may have pursued the
same mind-enslaving schemes by more artful , and less sanguinary methods
, they will be ranked among the Bonners and the Gardiners of past ages .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,201.318

They must have been worse than Bonners or Gardiners , who could pursue
the same ends by the same means , in this more humane and more
enlightened age . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,201.319

This seems to be the time , when the minds of men are opening to large
and generous views of things . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,201.320

Politics are more extended in practice , and better understood in theory
. PRIESTLEY-1765-2,201.321

Religious knowledge is greatly advanced , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,201.322

and the principle of universal toleration is gaining ground apace .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,201.323

Schemes of ecclesiastical policy , which , in times of barbarity ,
ignorance , and superstition were intimately interwoven with schemes of
civil policy , and which , in fact , made the greatest part of the old
political mixed constitution , have been gradually excluded ; 'till , at
present , though ecclesiastical power be looked upon as an useful
support and auxiliary of civil government , it is pretty much detached
from it . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,201.324

And the more sensible part of mankind are evidently in a progress to the
belief , <P_202> that ecclesiastical and civil jurisdiction , being
things of a totally different nature , ought if possible , to be wholly
disengaged from one another . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,202.325

Religious sentiments , with respect to their influence on civil society
, will perhaps be regarded , in time , as a theory of morals , only of a
higher and more perfect kind , excellent to enforce a regard to
magistracy , and the political duties , but improperly adopted into the
same system , and enforced by the same penalties .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,202.326

Till we know whether this work , which seems to be going forward in
several parts of Europe , be of God , or not , let us not take , at
least any rigid and violent methods to oppose it , but patiently wait
the issue ; unless , in the mean time , the disorders of the state
absolutely force us into violent measures . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,202.327

At present notwithstanding some trifling alarms , perhaps artfully
raised and propagated , may seem to give a handle to the friends of
arbitrary power to make use of some degree of coercion {TEXT:coerction}
, more gentle measures seem better adapted to ensure tranquility .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,202.328

England hath hitherto taken the lead in almost every thing great and
good , PRIESTLEY-1765-2,202.329

and her citizens stand foremost in the annals of fame , as having shaken
off the fetters which hung upon the human mind , and <P_203> called it
forth to the exertion of its noblest powers . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,203.330

And her constitution has been so far from receiving any injury from the
efforts of these her free_born enterprising sons , that she is , in part
, indebted to them for the unrivalled reputation she now enjoys , of
having the best system of policy in Europe . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,203.331

After weathering so many real storms , let us not quit the helm at the
apprehension of imaginary dangers , but steadily hold on in what , I
trust , is the most glorious course that a human government can be in .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,203.332

Let all the friends of liberty and human nature join to free the minds
of men from the shackles of narrow and impolitic laws .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,203.333

Let us be free ourselves , and leave the blessings of freedom to our
posterity . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,203.334

<P_204>

<heading>

Section IV . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,204.337

<$$heading>

Hitherto I have argued against established methods of education upon
general principles , showing how unfavourable they are to the great ends
of all civil societies , and how they would tend to interrupt their
progress towards a more perfect state than they have yet arrived to ,
with only occasional references to the English constitution .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,204.339

And in these arguments , I have likewise supposed these methods of
education , whatever they are , actually established , and to have
operated to their full extent . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,204.340

I shall now add , that , before these methods can be established , and
produce their full effect , they must occasion a very considerable
alteration in the English constitution , and almost inevitably destroy
the freedom of it ; so that <P_205> the thing which would , in fact , be
perpetuated , would not be the present constitution of England , but
something very different from it , and more despotic .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,205.341

An alteration of so great importance , which tends to defeat one of the
principal objects of the English government , can@ @not but give just
cause of alarm to every friend of the present happy constitution and
liberties of this country . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,205.342

In support of this assertion , I desire no other argument than that with
which Dr. Brown himself furnishes me , from the influence he allows to
education , operating , likewise , in the very manner which he describes
, and to the very end for which he advises the establishment of its mode
. PRIESTLEY-1765-2,205.343

Education is considered by the Dr. only in a political view , as useful
to instil into the minds of youth particular maxims of policy , and to
give them an attachment to particular forms of it ; or as tending to
superinduce such habits of mind , and to give such a general turn of
thinking , as would correspond with the genius of a particular state .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,205.344

This education he would have to be universal and uniform ,
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,205.345

and indeed , if it were not so , it could not possibly answer the end
proposed . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,205.346

It must , therefore , <P_206> be conducted by one set of men .
PRIESTLEY-1765-2,206.347

But it is impossible to find any set of men , who shall have an equal
regard to all the parts of our constitution ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,206.348

and whatever part is neglected in such a system of education can not
fail to be a sufferer . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,206.349

The English government is a mixture of regal , aristocratical , and
democratical power ; PRIESTLEY-1765-2,206.350

and if the public education should be more favourable to any one of
these than to another , or more than its present importance in the
constitution requires , the balance of the whole would necessarily be
lost . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,206.351

Too much weight would be thrown in some of the scales , and the
constitution be overturned . PRIESTLEY-1765-2,206.352

