<BEGIN_purver-old-1764-1>

<P_1,1G>

<heading>

Notes upon the Bible , Critical and Explanatory , <font> &c. <$$font>
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.4

Notes upon the Book called Genesis . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.5

Chap. I . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.6

<$$heading>

God created the Heaven and the Earth at the Beginning .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.8

The Earth however was vacant and void , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.9

and Darkness overwhelmed the Deep ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.10

but the Spirit of God hovered atop of the Water .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.11

First God said , Let there be Light ; which there was accordingly .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.12

And God saw that the Light was good , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.13

so he separated it from the Darkness . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.14

God also called the Light Day , as he did the Darkness Night .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.15

It had then been Evening PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.16

and was Morning the first Day . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.17

Next he said , Let there be Air in the midst of Water , making a
Separation between the two Waters : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.18

Thus God made the Air , which {COM:sic} parting the Water that was below
from that which was above it self , there was so {COM:sic} .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.19

Besides he named the Air Heaven . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.20

And it having been Evening was Morning the second Day .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.21

Moreover God commanded that the Water under the Heaven should flow
together into one Place , and that dry Ground should appear ; which was
so . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.22

The dry Ground too he called Earth , as he did the Water that was flowed
together Seas ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.23

and God saw that it was good . Who said , Let the Earth produce upon it
Grass , Herbs bearing Seed , Fruit-trees yielding Fruit of each Kind ,
in which there is a Kernel ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.24

and it was so . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.25

For the Earth brought forth Grass Herbs that bore Seed of each Kind ,
and Trees that yielded Fruit , whose Kernel was in it , of each Sort ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.26

and God saw that it was good . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.27

It had then been Evening PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.28

and was Morning the third Day . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.29

God further said ; Let there be Lights in the Firmament of Heaven , to
distinguish the Day from the Night ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.30

and let them be for Signs , and for appointed Times , as likewise for
Days and Years ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.31

Let them also be Lights there to shine upon the Earth ; which was so .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.32

Thus did God make two great Lights ; the greater one for the Government
of the Day , and the less for that of the Night together with the Stars
. Which he had no sooner put in that Expanse , to give light upon the
Earth , And to govern both the Day and the Night , as well as divide the
Light from the Darkness , but he saw that it was good .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.33

It had then been Evening PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.34

and was Morning the fourth Day . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,1G.35

<P_1,20G>

Afterwards God said , Let the Water breed living moving Creatures
abundantly , and Fowls which shall fly above the Earth , towards the
Face of the celestial Firmament . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.37

He thus created great Whales , and all living Creatures that stirred ,
which the Water bred abundantly of each Kind , with winged Fowls of all
Sorts ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.38

and God saw that it was good . Upon which he thus blessed them ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.39

Be fruitful , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.40

multiply , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.41

and fill the Water in the Seas ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.42

let the Fowl also multiply on the Earth . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.43

It had then been Evening PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.44

and was Morning the fifth Day . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.45

God likewise said , Let the Earth bring forth each Kind of living
Creatures , namely that of Cattle , Creeping Things , and wild Beasts ;
which was so . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.46

Thus he made both the wild Beasts and Cattle of each Kind , with all
manner of creeping Things of the Ground ; which he saw to be good .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.47

Then God said , Let us make Mankind in our Similitude , according to our
Likeness ; who shall rule over the Fish of the Sea , the Fowl of the Air
, the Cattle , the whole Earth , and all creeping Things that creep upon
it . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.48

Accordingly he created Mankind in his own Similitude , even each in that
of himself ; creating them Male and Female . Whom God blessed in the
following manner ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.49

Be fruitful , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.50

multiply , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.51

replenish the Earth , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.52

and subdue it ; as also rule over the Fish of the Sea , the Fowls of the
Air , and all living Things that stir upon the Ground .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.53

Behold I give you , continued God , all Herbs bearing Seed , which are
all over the Earth , with all Trees that have Fruit on them yielding a
Kernel , which shall be for you to eat ; And to all the Beasts of the
Earth , to all the Fowls of the Air , and to every Thing that creeps
upon the Earth , in which there is Life , all green Grass to eat : which
was so . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.54

Lastly God looked on all that he had made , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.55

and lo {COM:so?} it was very good . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.56

It had then been Evening PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.57

and was Morning the sixth Day . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,1,20G.58

<P_2,1G>

<heading>

Chap. II . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.61

<$$heading>

The Heaven and Earth thus finished , with all that belonged to them ; On
the seventh Day God having ended his Work which he made , rested then
from all of it that he had done . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.63

God also blessed that Day , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.64

and sanctified it ; because he rested on it from making all his Work
which he had created . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.65

These were the Generations of the Heaven and Earth , when they were
created . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.66

On the Day the Lord God had made the Earth and the Heaven , <font> He
made <$$font> likewise all the Plants of the Field before they were on
the Earth and all the Herbs of the Field before they grew ; when he had
not caused it to rain upon the Earth , and there was no Man to till the
Land ; Or Mist had come up out of the Earth , that watered any of the
Surface of the Ground . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.67

After this the Lord God forming the Man with Earth from the Ground ,
breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.68

so he became a living Soul . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.69

And the Lord God planted a Garden at the East in Eden ; that he might
put there the Man whom he had formed . Where the Lord God made grow out
of the Ground , all Trees which were pleasant to the Sight , and good
for Food ; with the Tree of Life in the middle of the Garden , and that
of the Knowledge of Good and Evil . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.70

Besides there was a River to water the Garden , which went out of Eden ;
from whence it parted , and became four Heads .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.71

The Name of the first was Pison ; which turns about by the whole Country
of Havilah , where there is Gold . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.72

And the Gold of that Country is good ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.73

there is Crystal , and Onyx-stones . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.74

The second River was named Gihon ; which turns about by the whole
Country of Cush . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.75

Hiddekel was the Name of the third , that runs towards the East of
Assyria ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.76

and the fourth River was Euphrates . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.77

Then the Lord God took Adam , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.78

and placed him in the Garden of Eden ; to cultivate it , and look after
it . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.79

Who also charged him as follows ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.80

Thou mayest freely eat of every Tree of the Garden ; Excepting that of
the Knowledge of Good and Evil , of which thou shalt not :
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.81

for on the Day thou dost , thou shalt quite die .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.82

The Lord God said further , It is not well for Adam to be alone ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.83

I will make him a Help according to his Need .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.84

For the Lord God bringing {COM:sic} all the Beasts of the Field , which
he had formed out of the Ground , and all the Fowls of the Air to Adam ,
to see what he would call them , that whatever he called each living
Creature , the same might be the Name of it ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,1G.85

<P_2,20G>

When Adam gave Names to all Cattle , to the Fowls of the Air , and all
the wild Beasts , there was not a Help found for him according to his
Need . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,20G.87

Upon this the Lord God caused a sound Sleep to fall upon him ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,20G.88

and while he slept , took one of his Ribs , closing up the Flesh in the
room of it . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,20G.89

And the Lord God made up the Rib which he took from Adam into a Woman ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,20G.90

and brought her to him . At which he said , This is now Bone of my
Bones , and Flesh of my Flesh ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,20G.91

this shall be called a Woman , because she was taken from a Man .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,20G.92

Therefore let a Man forsake his Father and Mother , that he may cleave
to his Wife , since they are one Flesh . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,20G.93

Now naked as Adam and his Wife each of them was , they were not ashamed
. PURVER-OLD-1764-1,2,20G.94

<P_3,1G>

<heading>

Chap. III . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.97

<$$heading>

Afterwards the Serpent , that was the most cunning of all the Beasts of
the Field which the Lord God had made , said to the Woman ; Much less
did God say , You shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden . Whom she
answered ; Of the Fruit of the Trees belonging to the Garden we may eat
; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.99

Only of the Fruit of that Tree which is in the middle of the Garden God
said , You shall neither eat , nor meddle with it , that you may not die
. PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.100

The Serpent however replied to her ; You will not die at all .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.101

For God knows , that at the Time when you eat of it , your Eyes will be
opened , so that you will be like Gods , knowing Good and Evil .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.102

Now the Woman seeing that the Tree was good for Food , and withal
delightful to the Eyes , nay a Tree to be desired that it might give
Understanding ; she not only took and eat of its Fruit ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.103

but gave to her Husband with her , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.104

and he eat . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.105

Then the Eyes of them both were opened , so that they knew themselves to
be naked ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.106

and sewing Fig-leaves together , they made them Girdles .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.107

At length they heard the Sound of the Lord God going through the Garden
in the Wind that Day ; for fear of whom Adam and his Wife hid themselves
, among the Trees there . Upon which the Lord God called Adam , and
said to him , Where art thou ? Who answered , I heard the Sound of thee
in the Garden , and being afraid because I was naked , I hid .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.108

But he replied , Who told thee that thou wast naked ?
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.109

Hast thou eat of the Tree of which I forbade thee to eat ?
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.110

That Woman , said Adam , whom thou didst put with me , giving me of it ,
I eat . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.111

And upon the Lord God@ @'s saying to the Woman , Why didst thou do this
? She answered , The Serpent so deceived me , that I eat .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.112

The Lord God then said to the Serpent ; Because thou hast done this ,
thou shalt be cursed from all Cattle , and every wild Beast :
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.113

upon thy Belly shalt thou go , and eat Dust as long as thou livest .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.114

Besides I will make Enmity between thee and the Woman , as also between
thy Off-spring and hers : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.115

he shall bruise thee on the Head , thou him but on the Heel .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.116

To the Woman he said , I will exceedingly multiply thy Sorrow with thy
Conception , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.117

thou shalt bear Children in Anguish ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.118

and thy Mind shall be to thy Husband , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.119

for he shall rule over thee . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.120

And he said to Adam ; Because thou hast hearkened to what thy Wife said
, and eat of the Tree which I commanded thee that thou shouldest not ;
the Ground shall be cursed for thy Sake , of which thou shalt eat with
Grief all the Days of thy Life . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.121

For it shall produce Thorns and Thistles to thee ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.122

and thou shalt eat the Herbs of the Field ; Nay eat Victuals in the
Sweat of thy Brows , till thou returnest to the Ground , since thou wast
taken out of it : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.123

for thou hast been Earth , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.124

and shalt turn to Earth again . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,1G.125

<P_3,20G>

And Adam named his Wife Eve , because she was the Mother of every one
living . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,20G.127

The Lord God also made Coats of Skins for Adam and his Wife ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,20G.128

and cloathed them . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,20G.129

However he said , Lo is Adam become like one of us , in knowing Good and
Evil ? PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,20G.130

Now therefore <font> care is to be taken <$$font> lest he should put
forth his Hand , and taking likewise of the Tree of Life , eat , that he
may live for ever . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,20G.131

So the Lord God sent him out of the Garden of Eden , to till the Ground
from whence he was taken . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,20G.132

And having driven him out , he placed Cherubs at the East of it , with a
flaming Sword that turned about , to keep the Way to the Tree of Life .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,3,20G.133

<P_6,1G>

<heading>

Chap. VI . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.136

<$$heading>

And when the Men began to multiply upon the Surface of the Ground , and
they had Daughters born ; The Sons of God seeing the Daughters of Men
that they were beautiful , took them Wives whomsoever they chose .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.138

Then the Lord said , My Spirit shall not always strive with Man ,
because even he is fleshly ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.139

his Time however shall be a_hundred_and_twenty Years .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.140

There were Giants on the Earth in those Days , and likewise afterwards ,
whom upon the Sons of God going in to the Daughters of Men they bore to
them : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.141

these were strong , who were renowned Men of old Time .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.142

And the Lord seeing that Man's Wickedness was great in the World , and
every Idea of the Thoughts of his Mind only evil daily ; He was sorry
because he had made Mankind on the Earth , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.143

and was grieved at his Heart . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.144

So the Lord said , I will destroy Man whom I have created , from the
Surface of the Ground ; and not only Man , but also the Beasts ,
creeping Things , and Fowls of the Air : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.145

for I am sorry because I made them . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.146

However Noah was in favour with the Lord . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.147

These were his Offspring , who was a righteous perfect Man in his Age ,
that walked continually with God : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.148

He begot three Sons , Shem , Ham and Japheth .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.149

But the Earth was corrupt before God ; it being full of Violence .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.150

And he took particular notice that it was corrupted , because all Flesh
had made its Way corrupt on the Earth . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.151

Upon this God said to Noah : The End of all Mortals is come before me ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.152

for the Earth is filled with Violence by their means ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.153

lo therefore I will destroy them with it . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.154

Make thee an Ark of Cypress-wood , doing it with Lodgings ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.155

and pitch it both on the Inside and Outside with Pitch .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.156

And in this manner shalt thou make it ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.157

let three_hundred Cubits be the Length of the Ark , fifty Cubits its
Breadth , and the Height of it thirty . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.158

Thou shalt make a Light to the Ark , and finish it a Cubit above , as
also put the Door of it in its Side : making it into lower , second and
third <font> Stories . <$$font> PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.159

For behold I my self will bring a Flood of Water upon the Earth , to
destroy all Flesh in which there is the Faculty of Life from under
Heaven : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.160

all that is on the Land shall die . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.161

But I confirm my Covenant with thee , that thou shalt go into the Ark ,
thy Sons , thy Wife , and Sons Wives along with thee ; And shalt have of
all living Things of all Flesh , two of every <font> Sort <$$font> into
the Ark , to keep alive with thee , which shall be Male and Female .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,1G.162

<P_6,20G>

Of the Fowls and Beasts of each Kind , of all manner of creeping Things
of the Ground ; two of every <font> Sort <$$font> shall come to thee ,
that thou mayest keep <font> them <$$font> alive .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,20G.164

Do thou therefore take thee of all Food that is eat {COM:sic} , which
thou shalt gather to thee ; that it may be for thee , and them to eat .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,20G.165

Thus Noah did , doing entirely according as God commanded him .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,6,20G.166

<P_7,1G>

<heading>

Chap. VII . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,1G.169

<$$heading>

The Lord afterwards said to him ; Go thou and all thy Family into the
Ark , since I have seen thee to be righteous before me in this Age :
Taking to thee of all clean Beasts by sevens , and of such as are
unclean two , of each the Male and his Female ; Of the Fowls of the Air
likewise by sevens , the Cock and the Hen ; to keep Off-spring alive all
over the Earth : Because seven Days hence I shall make it rain upon the
Earth , forty Days and forty Nights ; that I may destroy all living
Substance which I have made , from the Face of the Ground .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,1G.171

So did Noah altogether as the Lord commanded him ; He being in his
six_hundredth Year , when the Flood of Water was on the Earth :
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,1G.172

For Noah went , having his Sons , his Wife , and Sons Wives with him ,
into the Ark , by reason of the Water of the Flood .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,1G.173

Of the clean Beasts , and of those that were unclean , as likewise of
Fowls , and all Things which did creep on the Ground , There came by
Couples to Noah into the Ark , the Male and Female ; according as God
had ordered him . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,1G.174

And on the seventh Day the Water of the Deluge was upon the Earth .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,1G.175

In the six_hundredth Year of Noah's Life , on the seventeenth Day of the
second Month , were all the Fountains of the vast Ocean broken up , and
the Flood-gates of Heaven thrown open . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,1G.176

And there was a Storm of Rain upon the Earth , forty Days and forty
Nights . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,1G.177

That same Day did Noah , Shem , Ham and Japheth , his Sons , Noah's Wife
, and the three Wives of his Sons with them , go into the Ark ; As also
every Kind of Beasts , of Cattle , of Reptiles that creeped on the Earth
, and of Birds , all manner of winged Fowls .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,1G.178

Those went into the Ark to Noah , by Pairs of all Flesh , wherein there
was the Faculty of Life . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,1G.179

And they that entered , did Male and Female of all Flesh , as God had
commanded him ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,1G.180

and the Lord shut him in . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,1G.181

And the Deluge being forty Days on the Earth , the Water increased ,
insomuch that it lifted up the Ark , raising it up from the Ground .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,1G.182

Then it was powerful , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,1G.183

and increased exceedingly on the Earth , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,1G.184

and the Ark floated atop of the Water . Which at last had power on the
Earth so exceeding much , that all the high Mountains which were under
the whole Heaven being covered ; <P_7,20G> The Water prevailed fifteen
Cubits upward , when they were overwhelmed . Whereby all Flesh expired
that moved on the Earth , of the Fowls , Cattle , Beasts , and all
crawling Things that crawled upon the Ground ; with all Mankind .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,20G.185

Every Thing in whose Nostrils was the Breath of the Faculty of Life , of
all which was on the dry Land , died . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,20G.186

Thus all living Substance that was on the Surface of the Ground , both
Man and Beast , with the creeping Things , and Fowls of the Air , were
destroyed from the Earth ; so that Noah only was left , and such as were
with him in the Ark . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,20G.187

And the Water prevailed upon the Earth a_hundred_and_fifty Days .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,7,20G.188

<P_8,1G>

<heading>

Chap. VIII . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.191

<$$heading>

However as God remembred Noah , and all the Beasts and Cattle that were
with him in the Ark , he made a Wind pass over the Earth ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.193

and the Water asswaged . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.194

The Fountains also of the Ocean , and the Flood-gates of Heaven were
shut up , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.195

and the Rain from thence was restrained . Upon which the Water
returning from off the Earth , went on ebbing ; so that it failed at the
End of a_hundred_and_fifty Days . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.196

And the Ark rested on the seventeenth Day of the seventh Month , upon
the Mountains of Ararat . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.197

When the Water had kept on decreasing till the tenth Month , on the
first of it the Tops of the Mountains appeared .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.198

But at the End of forty Days , Noah opened the Window of the Ark which
he had made ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.199

And sent out a Raven , that went forth , going out and returning , till
the Water was dried up from the Earth . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.200

He likewise sent out a Dove from him , that he might see whether the
Water was abated from the Surface of the Ground . Whereas this finding
no Rest for the Sole of its Foot , came back to him at the Ark , because
the Water was all over the Earth ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.201

so he reached out his Hand , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.202

and taking it , pulled it into the Ark to him .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.203

Next he staid other seven Days longer , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.204

and sent it out again from thence . Which came to him at the
Eveningtime , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.205

and behold there was in its Mouth an Olive-leaf torn off ; whereby he
knew that the Water was abated from the Earth .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.206

And staying yet other seven Days , and sending out the Dove , it
returned to him again no more . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.207

So in the six_hundred_and_first Year , on the first of the first Month ,
the Water being dried up from the Earth , Noah took away the Covering of
the Ark , when he saw plainly that the Top of the Ground was dried .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.208

And on the twenty_seventh Day of the second Month , the Earth was become
quite dry . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.209

Besides God spoke to Noah as follows ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.210

Go out of the Ark , thou , thy Wife , thy Sons , and Sons Wives with
thee . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.211

Every living Thing that is with thee of all Flesh , of the Fowls ,
Beasts , and all creeping Things which creep on the Ground , bring out
with thee ; that they may breed abundantly upon the Earth , be fruitful
and multiply there . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.212

Accordingly he went forth ; as also his Sons , his Wife , and their
Wives with him . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.213

Every Beast , every creeping Thing , and every Fowl , all that stirred
upon the Earth after their Kinds , went out of the Ark .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,1G.214

<P_8,20G>

Then Noah built an Altar to the Lord ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,20G.216

and taking both of all clean Beasts and Fowls , offered up
Burnt-offerings on it . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,20G.217

And upon the Lord's smelling a pleasant Smell , he said kindly to him ;
I will no more curse the Ground for Man's Sake , tho' the Imagination of
his Heart be evil from his Youth : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,20G.218

nor will I yet again slay every living Thing , as I have done .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,20G.219

Henceforth as long as the Earth continues , Seed-time and Harvest , Cold
and Heat , Summer and Winter , Day and Night shall not cease .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,8,20G.220

<P_9,1G>

<heading>

Chap. IX . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.223

<$$heading>

God also blessed Noah and his Sons in the following manner :
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.225

Be fruitful , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.226

multiply , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.227

and replenish the Earth . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.228

And your Fear , and the Dread of you , shall be upon all the Beasts of
the Earth , all the Fowls of the Air , every Thing that moves <font> on
<$$font> the Ground , and all the Fish of the Sea ; which are committed
into your Power . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.229

Every moving Thing which is alive shall be for you to eat ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.230

I give you all like the green Herb . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.231

Only Flesh with its Life , the Blood of it , you shall not eat .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.232

And I will certainly require the Blood of your Lives , and that from the
Paw of any Beast : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.233

from the Hand likewise of Man , even of any one's Brother , will I
require the Life of a Man . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.234

He that sheds Man's Blood , shall have his own shed by Man ; because in
the Likeness of God he made Mankind . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.235

So do you be fruitful , and increase : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.236

produce abundantly on the Earth , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.237

and multiply upon it . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.238

Moreover God spoke to Noah , and his Sons with him , as follows :
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.239

And lo I my self confirm my Covenant with you , and your Offspring after
you , As also with every living Creature which shall be with you , that
is of Fowls , Cattle , and all wild Beasts ; not only all that go out of
the Ark , but every Creature which shall be on the Earth ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.240

I mean that all Flesh shall not be cut off any more by the Waters of a
Flood : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.241

for there shall no more be an Inundation to destroy the Earth .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.242

This is the Sign of the Covenant , continued God , which I make between
my self and you , as likewise all living Creatures that are with you ,
to perpetual Generations ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.243

I set my Bow in the Clouds , that it may be the Sign of the Contract
between me and the Earth . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.244

And when I make it cloudy over the Earth , the Bow shall appear in the
Clouds . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.245

Then will I remember my Covenant which is between me and you , with
every Creature living of all Flesh ; so that there shall not be Water
for a Deluge any more , to destroy it . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.246

For when the Bow is in the Clouds , I will look on it , to remember the
everlasting Covenant between my self and every living Creature of all
Flesh , that is upon the Earth . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.247

This , said God again to Noah , is the Sign of the Covenant which I
ratify betwixt me and all Flesh that is upon the Earth .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.248

And the Sons of Noah who went out of the Ark , were Shem , Ham and
Japheth ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.249

Ham also was the Father of Canaan . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.250

From these three Sons of his was the whole Earth spread about .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,1G.251

<P_9,20G>

Now Noah began to be a Husbandman , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,20G.253

and having planted a Vineyard ; He drank of the Wine ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,20G.254

and was drunk , uncovering himself within his Tent .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,20G.255

With that Ham the Father of Canaan saw his Father's Nakedness , who told
his two Brothers abroad . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,20G.256

Upon this Shem and Japheth took Cloaths , which they put on the
Shoulders of them both , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,20G.257

and going backward , covered it ; without seeing the same , as their
Faces were backward . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,20G.258

When Noah therefore awaked from his Wine , and knew what his youngest
Son had done to him ; He said , Cursed be Canaan ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,20G.259

he will be a Servant of Servants to his Brothers .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,20G.260

He also said ; Blessed be the Lord God of Shem ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,20G.261

and Canaan will be a Servant to them . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,20G.262

God will persuade Japheth to dwell in the Tents of Shem , while Canaan
is their Servant . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,20G.263

And Noah lived after the Flood three_hundred_and_fifty Years .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,20G.264

So all his Time was nine_hundred_and_fifty Years , when he died .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,9,20G.265

<P_12,1G>

<heading>

Chap. XII . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.268

<$$heading>

For the Lord had said to Abram ; Go thou out of thy Country , from thy
Kindred and Father's House , to the Country which I will shew thee And I
will make thee a great Nation , and bless thee , as also cause thy Name
to be great : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.270

so be thou blessed . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.271

Nay I will bless those who bless thee , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.272

and him that curses thee will I curse ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.273

and all Families of the Earth shall be blessed through thee .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.274

Upon this he went according as the Lord ordered him , Lot going with him
. PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.275

And Abram was in his seventy_fifth Year , when he went out of Haran .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.276

Then he took Sarai his Wife , and Lot his Brother's Son , with all their
Substance that they had gained , and the Persons whom they had got in
Haran ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.277

and they went forth to go to the Country of Canaan , whither they came :
And into which he passed , to a Place of Shechen at the Oaks of Moreh ;
the Canaanites being then in the Country . When the Lord appearing to
Abram , said , I will give this Country to thy Offspring : upon which he
built there an Altar to the Lord who appeared to him .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.278

He next removed away from thence , to a Mountain on the East of Bethel ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.279

and pitched his Tent ; Ai being on the East , as that on the West :
where he built an Altar to the Lord , and called on his Name .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.280

Afterwards Abram marched , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.281

and continued going on southward . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.282

And there being a Famine in that Country , he went down to Egypt to
sojourn there , because it was grievous . Which as he was got near to
enter into , he said to his Wife Sarai ; Behold now I am sensible that
thou art a Woman of a fair Countenance . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.283

Therefore it may be when the Egyptians see thee , that they will say ,
This is his Wife ; and will kill me , but keep thee alive .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.284

Do tell thou art my Sister ; that it may be well with me for thy Sake ;
and my Life may be preserved because of thee .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.285

And when he was come into Egypt , the Egyptians took notice of the Woman
that she was very fair . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.286

The Princes of Pharaoh likewise seeing her , praised her to him : upon
which she was taken into Pharaoh's House . Who did well to Abram for
her Sake : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.287

for he had Flocks , Herds , and He-asses , with Servant-men , and Maids
; as also She-asses , and Camels . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.288

But the Lord smote Pharaoh and his Family with great Plagues , by reason
of Sarai Abram's Wife . Whereupon he calls Abram , and says ; What is
it thou hast done to me ? PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.289

Why didst not thou tell me , that she was thy Wife ?
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.290

Why saidest thou , She is my Sister ? So that I might have married her
my self ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.291

but now here is thy Wife ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.292

take <font> her <$$font> , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.293

and go . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,1G.294

<P_12,20G>

Pharaoh also charged the Men concerning him ; who sent him away , with
his Wife , and all that he had . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,12,20G.296

<P_13,1G>

<heading>

Chap. XIII . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.299

<$$heading>

So Abram went up from Egypt , with his Wife , and all that he had ,
accompanied by Lot , into the South ; He being very wealthy in Cattle ,
in Silver and Gold . From whence he went on his Journeys to Beth-el ,
to the Place where his Tent was at first , between Beth-el and Ai ; The
same Place where he made an Altar in the Beginning :
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.301

and there he called on the Name of the Lord .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.302

And Lot likewise who went with him , had Flocks , Herds and Tents .
Insomuch that the Country would not bear them to dwell together ;
because their Substance was so great , that they could not .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.303

Besides there was a Quarrel betwixt them who fed the Cattle of Abram ,
and those that fed Lot's Cattle ; the Canaanites and Perizzites then
dwelling in the Country . At which Abram said to Lot ; Let there be no
Contention , I pray , either between me and thee , or between my Herdmen
and thine PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.304

for we are Kinsmen . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.305

Is not all the Country before thee ? PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.306

Do separate from me : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.307

if it be to the left Hand , I will go to the right ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.308

but if to the right Hand , I will go to the left .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.309

Lot then looking up , saw that the whole Plain of Jordan was all of it
watered <paren> before the Lord had destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah , like
the Garden of the Lord , like the Country of Egypt <$$paren> going to
Zoar . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.310

So he chose him all the Plain of Jordan , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.311

and journeyed on the East : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.312

thus they separated one from the other . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.313

Abram dwelt in the Country of Canaan ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.314

and Lot dwelt at the Cities of the Plain , pitching his Tent as far as
Sodom : The Men of which were exceeding wicked , and sinful against the
Lord . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.315

And the Lord says to Abram , after Lot was parted from him ; Look up now
, PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.316

and view from the Place where thou art , towards the North , South ,
East and West . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.317

For all the Country which thou canst see , will I give these , and thy
Offspring for ever . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.318

Nay I will make them as the Dust of the Earth ; so that if a Man can
count up that , thy Offspring also may be counted .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.319

Get ready , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.320

go about in the Country , to the Length and Breadth of it ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.321

for on thee will I bestow it . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.322

Upon this Abram removed his Tent , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.323

and came and dwelt among the Oaks of Mamre , which were in Hebron :
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.324

there he also built an Altar to the Lord . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1G.325

<P_14,1G>

<heading>

Chap. XIV . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.328

<$$heading>

And in the Time of Amraphel King of Shinar , Arioch King of Ellafar ,
Chedarlaomer King of Elam , and Tidal King of the Nations ; They made
War with Bera King of Sodom , with Birsha King of Gomorrah , Shinab King
of Admah , Shemeber King of Zeboiim , and the King of Bela , which is
Zoar : All those joining together at the Vale of Siddim , which is the
salt Sea . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.330

These had served Chedarlaomer twelve Years , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.331

and in the thirteenth Year rebelled . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.332

So he , and the Kings who were with him , went in the fourteenth Year ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.333

and smote the Giants at Ashteroth-karnaim , the Zuzites in Ham , the
Emites in the Plain of Kirjathaim , And the Horites on their Mount Seir
, to the Entrance of Paran , which is by the Wilderness .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.334

Next they went back to the Fountain of Judgment , which is Kadesh ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.335

and smote all the Country of the Amalekites ; and also the Amorites ,
who dwelt at Hazazon-tamar . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.336

With that the Kings of Sodom , Gomorrah , Admah , Zeboiim , and Bela ,
which is Zoar , went forth , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.337

and set the Battle in order with them in the Vale of Siddim ; Namely
with Chedarlaomer King of Elam , Tidal King of the Nations , Amraphel
King of Shinar , and Arioch King of Ellasar : four Kings being against
five . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.338

And the Vale of Siddim having many Pits for Mortar , the Kings of Sodom
and Gomorrah fled , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.339

and got down there ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.340

and those who were left ran away to the Mountains .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.341

So they took the whole Substance of Sodom and Gomorrah , with all their
Food , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.342

and went off . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.343

They also took away Lot , and his Substance , the Son of Abram's Brother
; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.344

for he dwelt in Sodom . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.345

But one who escaped comes , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.346

and tells Abram the Hebrew ; who dwelt among the Oaks of Mamre the
Amorite , the Brother both of Eshcol and Aner , who were Men in League
with Abram . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.347

And when he heard that his Nephew was taken Captive , he took out those
who were of his own training up , born of his Family ,
three_hundred_and_eighteen , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.348

and pursued <font> them <$$font> to Dan . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.349

Then coming upon them separately by Night , with his Servants , he beat
them , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.350

and pursued them to Hobah , which was on the left Side of Damascus .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.351

Nay he brought back all the Substance , particularly his Kinsman Lot@
@'s , with him , the Women and People . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.352

And the King of Sodom went out to meet him , after he was returned from
smiting Chedarlaomer and the Kings who were with him , to the Vale of
the Plain , which was the King's Vale . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.353

Melchi-zedek King of Salem too brought forth Bread and Wine ; who was
Priest of the Supreme God . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.354

Besides he blessed him thus ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.355

Let Abram be blessed of the Supreme God , Owner of Heaven and Earth .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1G.356

<P_14,20G>

And blessed be the Supreme God , who has delivered thy Enemies into thy
Power . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20G.358

And he gave him the Tenth of all . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20G.359

The King of Sodom also said to Abram , Give me the Persons ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20G.360

and take the Goods thy self . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20G.361

Whom Abram answered ; By my lifting up my Hand to the Supreme Lord God ,
Owner of Heaven and Earth , I will not take either a String , or the
Latchet of a Shoe , nor even of any Thing which is thine ; that thou
mayest not say , I made Abram rich : Excepting only what the young Men
eat , and their Share who went with me , Aner , Eshcol and Mamre ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20G.362

that let them receive . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20G.363

<P_22,1G>

<heading>

Chap. XXII . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.366

<$$heading>

After these Things God tried Abraham , saying to him , Abraham ; who
answered , Here am I . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.368

And he said , Take now thy Son , thy only one Isaac whom thou lovest ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.369

and get thee to the Country of Moriah ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.370

and offer him up there for a Burnt-offering upon one of the Mountains
that I will tell thee . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.371

Accordingly he got up early in the Morning , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.372

and saddled his Ass , taking two of his young Men with them , and Isaac
his Son ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.373

and having cleaved Wood for the Burnt-offering , he got ready to go to
the Place which God told him . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.374

On the third Day he looked up , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.375

and saw the Place far off . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.376

Then he said to his young Men , Stay here with the Ass , whilst I and
the Youth go yonder , and worshipping , come again to you .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.377

And Abraham took the Wood of the Burnt-offering ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.378

and put upon his Son Isaac ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.379

he also took Fire , and a Knife in his Hand :
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.380

thus they went on both of them together . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.381

In the mean_while Isaac spoke thus to Abraham his Father , My Father ;
who answered , Here am I , my Son ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.382

Behold , said he , the Fire and Wood ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.383

but where is the Lamb for the Burnt-offering ?
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.384

To which he replied , God will look a Lamb for the Burnt-offering , my
Son : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.385

so they both went on together . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.386

And when they came to the Place that God told him , Abraham erected
there an Altar , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.387

and put the Wood in order ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.388

then binding Isaac his Son , he laid him on the Altar above the Wood ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.389

He also reached out his Hand , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.390

and took the Knife to kill his Son . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.391

But the Angel of the Lord called to him thus from Heaven , Abraham ,
Abraham ; who answering , Here am I ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.392

He said , Put not forth thy Hand against the Lad ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.393

nor do any Thing to him ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.394

for now I know that thou fearest God , since thou hast not with-held thy
Son , thy only one , from me . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.395

At this Abraham looking up , saw indeed that there was a Ram behind held
in a Brake by his Horns ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.396

so he went , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.397

and took the Ram , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.398

and offered him up for a Burnt-offering instead of his Son .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.399

Therefore he called the Name of that Place The Lord will look ; whereby
it is said at this Time , On the Mountain of the Lord it will be seen .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.400

The Angel of the Lord like wise called to Abraham the second Time out of
Heaven , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.401

And said ; I swear by my self , says the Lord , forasmuch as thou hast
done this Thing , and not with-held thy own only Son ; That I will
throughly bless thee , and multiply thy Offspring abundantly , to be
like the Stars of Heaven , and the Sand which is upon the Sea-shore
{TEXT:Sea-shoar} : and they shall inherit the Gates of their Enemies .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.402

Nay all Nations of the Earth shall be blessed through thy Offspring ;
because thou hast hearkened to what I said .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.403

Abraham then went back to his young Men , who rose up ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.404

and they went together to Beer-sheba : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.405

for he dwelt there . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,22,1G.406

{COM:verses_20_to_24_omitted_as_in_helsinki_corpus}

<P_13,1N>

<heading>

Chap. XIII . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1N.410

<$$heading>

And the Lord spoke thus to Moses , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1N.412

Send Men to view the Country of Canaan , which I will give to the
Israelites ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1N.413

let them be one of each Tribe of their Fathers , and every one a Prince
among them . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1N.414

So he sent from the Wilderness of Paran at the Command of the Lord ,
such as were all of them principal Men of the Israelites . Whose Names
were : Shammua the Son of Zaccur , of the Tribe of Reuben ; Shaphat the
Son of Hori , of the Tribe of Simeon ; Caleb the Son of Jephunneh , of
the Tribe of Judah ; Igal the Son of Joseph , of the Tribe of Issachar ;
Hoshea the Son of Nun , of the Tribe of Ephraim ; Palti the Son of Raphu
, of the Tribe of Benjamin ; Gadiel the Son of Sodi , of the Tribe of
Zebulun ; Gaddi the Son of Susi , of the Tribe of Joseph , that which
was of Manasseh ; Ammiel the Son of Gemalli , of the Tribe of Dan ;
Sethur the Son of Michael , of the Tribe of Asher ; Nahbi the Son of
Vophsi , of the Tribe of Naphtali ; Geuel the Son of Machi , of the
Tribe of Gad . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1N.415

These were the Names of the Men whom Moses sent to view the Country ;
but he called Hoshea the Son of Nun Joshua . Which Country of Canaan he
sent them to view with the following Instructions ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1N.416

Go up there southward , and up the Mountain .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,1N.417

And see what the Country is ; and whether the People who dwell in it are
strong or weak , few or many ; Whether it be a good or bad Country , as
also whether the Cities which they reside in are Camps or Fortifications
; <P_13,20N> Besides whether the Ground is fat or lean , whether there
be Wood in it or not : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.418

and take courage to bring some of the Fruit of the Country .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.419

For it was the Time when Grapes are first ripe .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.420

They went up accordingly , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.421

and viewed the Country , from the Wilderness of Zin to Rehob , going to
Hamath . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.422

And in their going up southward , <font> Caleb <$$font> went to Hebron ,
where were Ahiman , Sheshai and Talmai , the Sons of Anak : Hebron being
built seven Years before Zoan in Egypt . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.423

At length they came to the Brook of Eshcol ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.424

and cut off there a Branch with a Bunch of Grapes , which they carried
on a Pole between two ; together with Pomegranates and Figs .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.425

That Place was called the Brook of Eshcol , by reason of the Bunch which
the Israelites cut off there . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.426

Thus they returned from viewing the Country at the End of forty Days ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.427

When arriving , they came into the Wilderness of Paran , to Moses ,
Aaron , and the whole Assembly of the Israelites at Kadesh ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.428

and not only brought back word to them all ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.429

but shewed them the Fruit of the Country . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.430

Directing their Speech to the former , they said ; We have been at the
Country to which thou sentest us , that flows indeed with Milk and Honey
, PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.431

and this is the Fruit of it . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.432

Nevertheless the People who dwell in it are strong ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.433

the Cities are fortified , <font> nay <$$font> very great ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.434

and withal we saw the Sons of Anak there . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.435

The Amalekites dwell in the south Country , as the Hittites , Jebusites
, and Amorites do on the Mountains , and the Canaanites by the Sea , and
the Side of Jordan . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.436

Caleb however kept the People silent to Moses , by saying , Let us go
quite up , and possess it ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.437

for we shall entirely prevail over it . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.438

On the contrary the Men who accompanied him said , We are not able to go
up against the People , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.439

for they are stronger than we . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.440

And they gave out this ill Report of the Country , which they had viewed
, to the Israelites ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.441

The Country which we have passed through to view it , is a Country that
consumes its Inhabitants , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.442

and all the People whom we saw in it were large Persons .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.443

Nay there we saw Giants , the Sons of Anak one of the Giants ; insomuch
that we appeared to our selves like Grashoppers ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.444

and so we did to them . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,13,20N.445

<P_14,1N>

<heading>

Chap. XIV . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.448

<$$heading>

Upon this the whole Assembly of the Israelites cried out aloud ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.450

and the People wept that Night . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.451

And they all murmured against Moses and Aaron , unanimously saying to
them ; Oh that we had died in the Country of Egypt , or else in this
Wilderness ! PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.452

For why did the Lord bring us into this Country , to fall by the Sword ,
for our Wives and Children to become a Prey ?
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.453

Is it not better for us to go back to Egypt ?
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.454

So they proposed one to another , Let us make a Captain , and return to
Egypt . At which Moses and Aaron fell upon their Faces , before all the
Congregation of the Israelites that were come together .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.455

Of those also who viewed the Country , Joshua the Son of Nun , and Caleb
the Son of Jephunneh , tore their Cloaths , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.456

And said thus to them all ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.457

The Country which we passed through to view it , is an exceeding good
one . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.458

If the Lord delights in us , he will bring us into this Country , which
flows with Milk and Honey , and give it to us .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.459

Only you must not rebel against him , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.460

therefore be not afraid of the People of it ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.461

for they will be <font> as <$$font> Bread to us ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.462

their Shelter is gone off from them , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.463

and the Lord is with us , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.464

do not fear them . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.465

Notwithstanding which the whole Assembly of the Israelites spoke of
stoning them with Stones ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.466

but the Glory of the Lord appeared at the publick Tent to them all .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.467

And he said to Moses ; How long will this People contemn me ?
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.468

And how long will they not believe in me , for all the Signs which I
have shewn among them ? PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.469

Let me smite them with the Pestilence , and disinherit them ; and I will
make thee a Nation greater and stronger than they .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.470

But Moses answered him : When the Egyptians hear of it <paren> because
thou broughtest up this People from among them by thy Power <$$paren>
They will tell it to the Inhabitants of this Country , who have heard
that thou Lord art among this People , how thou , O Lord , art seen Eye
to Eye , and thy Cloud remains over them , and thou goest before them in
a Pillar of a Cloud by Day , and of Fire by Night .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.471

Then , shouldest thou kill this People as one Man , the Nations that
have heard thy Fame , will say thus , Because the Lord was not able to
bring this People into the Country of which he sware to them , he slew
them in the Wilderness . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.472

Now therefore let the Power of my Lord be great , I beseech thee , as
thou hast spoken in the following manner ; The Lord is delaying of Anger
, and of great Kindness , forgiving Iniquity and Trespass ; as well as
not at all quitting , <font> but <$$font> punishing , for the Iniquity
of the Fathers , the Children in the third and fourth <font> Generation
. <$$font> PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.473

Vouchsafe to pardon the Iniquity of this People , according to the
Greatness of thy Mercy , and as thou hast forgiven them from Egypt to
this Place . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,1N.474

<P_14,20N>

And the Lord replied : I pardon according to thy Request .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.476

Yet surely , by my living , and the whole Earth being filled with the
Glory of the Lord ; Because all the Men , who when they had seen my
Glory , and my Signs which I shewed in Egypt , and the Wilderness , have
tempted me these ten times , and not hearkened to what I said ; They
shall not see the Country of which I sware to their Forefathers , nor
any of those who have contemned me . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.477

But as for my Servant Caleb , because he had another Spirit , and has
followed me entirely , I will bring him into the Country whither he went
, PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.478

and his Offspring shall possess it . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.479

Since the Amalekites and Canaanites dwell in the Vale , turn you about
to_Morrow , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.480

and march into the Wilderness , the Way to the Red Sea .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.481

The Lord thus also said to Moses and Aaron : How long do I hear what
this wicked Assembly murmur against me , the Murmurings which the
Israelites make at my self ? PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.482

Tell them the Lord says ; By my living , I will do to you just as you
have spoken in my Hearing . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.483

Your dead Bodies shall fall in the Wilderness , all the whole Number of
you who were counted from the twentieth Year upward , who have murmured
against me . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.484

None of you shall enter into the Country , for which I have lifted up my
Hand , that I would make you dwell in , excepting Caleb the Son of
Jephunneh , and Joshua the Son of Nun . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.485

As to your little ones , who you complained would be a Prey , I will
have them in , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.486

and they shall know the Country which you despise .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.487

But while your own Bodies are falling in this Wilderness , Your Children
shall be feeding in it forty Years , and bear your Whoredoms , till your
dead Bodies are there consumed . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.488

According as you were viewing the Country the Number of forty Days ,
each Day being for a Year , you shall bear your Iniquities so many Years
, and know a Rupture with me . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.489

I the Lord affirm , I will do that to all this wicked Assembly , who are
come together against me : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.490

they shall be consumed in this Wilderness , where they shall die .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.491

As for the Men that Moses sent to view the Country , who when they came
back made the whole Assembly murmur against him , by giving out an ill
Report concerning the same ; They who did it , died by a Plague before
the Lord . Whereas Joshua the Son of Nun , and Caleb the Son of
Jephunneh lived , of those who went to view the Country .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.492

And when Moses told those Words to all the Israelites , the People
mourned exceedingly . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,20N.493

<P_14,40N>

Afterwards they rose early in the Morning , that they might go up to the
Top of the Mountain , saying , Here we are ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,40N.495

and will go up to the Place which the Lord has spoken of ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,40N.496

for we have sinned . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,40N.497

But Moses replied ; Why would you transgress the Lord's Command ?
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,40N.498

For it will not prosper . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,40N.499

Go not up , that you may not be beat before your Enemies , because the
Lord will not be among you . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,40N.500

And as the Amalekites and Canaanites are before you there , you will
fall by the Sword : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,40N.501

for since you turn back from following the Lord , he will not be with
you . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,40N.502

Nevertheless they resolutely attempted to go up to the Top of the
Mountain , though the Ark of the Lord's Covenant and Moses did not
remove out of the Camp . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,40N.503

But the Amalekites , and Canaanites who dwelt on that Mountain coming
down , killed them , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,40N.504

and beat them to Hormah . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,14,40N.505

<P_16,1N>

<heading>

Chap. XVI . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.508

<$$heading>

And Korah the Son of Izhar , the Son of Kohath , the Son of Levi , took
both Dathan and Abiram the Sons of Eliab , and On the Son of Peleth ,
Reubenites , Who rose up before Moses , with two_hundred_and_fifty
Princes of the Assembly of the Israelites , famous renowned Men of the
Congregation ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.510

And being gathered together against Moses and Aaron , they said to them
, <font> You take <$$font> a great deal upon you ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.511

for all the Assembly are holy every one of them ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.512

and the Lord is among them : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.513

therefore why do you lift up your selves above the Congregation of the
Lord ? At the hearing of which Moses fell down upon his Face .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.514

He then spoke thus to Korah and all his Company ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.515

In the Morning the Lord will make known who is his , and is holy ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.516

and will , even he will , bring him whom he chooses near to himself .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.517

Do this , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.518

take you Censers , Korah , and all his Company ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.519

And put Fire into them , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.520

and lay Incense upon them , before the Lord to_Morrow ; who will choose
the Man that is holy : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.521

it is you Levites <font> take <$$font> a great deal upon you .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.522

He said further to Korah ; Hear now , you Sons of Levi ; Is it too
little for you , that the God of Israel has separated you from the
Assembly of Israel , to bring you near to himself , that you may do the
Service of his Tabernacle , and stand before the Assembly to minister to
them ? PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.523

When he has thus brought thee , and all thy Brethren the Levites with
thee near , do you seek the Priesthood also ? For which reason thou and
all thy Company are come together against the Lord :
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.524

for what is Aaron , that you should murmur at him ?
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.525

Next Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram , the Sons of Eliab :
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.526

but they said ; We will not come up . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.527

Was it a little Matter for thee to bring us up from a Country flowing
with Milk and Honey , to cause us to die in the Wilderness , that thou
hast also entirely made thy self a Prince over us ?
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.528

Besides thou hast not brought us into a Country that flows with Milk and
Honey , nor given us a Possession of Fields and Vine-yards .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.529

Wouldest thou put out the Eyes of these Men ?
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.530

We will not come up . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.531

Very angry at this , Moses prayed to the Lord , Have no regard to their
Offering ; I having not taken <font> so much as <$$font> an Ass from
them , nor hurt one of them . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.532

To Korah he said again ; Do thou , and thy whole Company , be with Aaron
before the Lord to_Morrow ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.533

And let each take his Censer , and bring it before the Lord , with
Incense put into them , two_hundred_and_fifty Censers , as like wise
<font> do <$$font> thou and Aaron yours . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.534

They accordingly took each his Censer , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.535

and putting Fire into them , and laying Incense upon them , stood at the
Door of the publick Tent , with Moses and Aaron . Whither Korah having
gathered the whole Assembly against them , the Glory of the Lord
appeared to them all . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,1N.536

<P_16,20N>

And he spoke thus to Moses and Aaron , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.538

Get apart from among this Assembly , that I may consume them in a Moment
. PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.539

But they falling on their Faces , remonstrated , O God , the God of the
Spirits of all Flesh , when one Man has sinned , wilt thou be in a Wrath
against the whole Assembly ? PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.540

The Lord then said to Moses as follows , Tell them , that they should go
up from about the Tabernacle of Korah , Dathan and Abiram .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.541

So Moses rose up , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.542

and went to Dathan and Abiram , the Elders of Israel following him :
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.543

And he desired the Assembly to depart from the Tents of those wicked Men
, and not touch any thing which belonged to them , lest they should be
destroyed in all their Sins . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.544

Therefore they went up from the Tabernacle of Korah , Dathan and Abiram
all round ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.545

and the two latter came out , standing at the Doors of their Tents ,
with their Wives , Children , and little ones .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.546

And Moses said ; By this you shall know that the Lord has sent me to do
all these Works , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.547

for it is not of my own Mind : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.548

If these die as Men generally do , or are punished with the Punishment
of others in general , the Lord has not sent me .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.549

But if he performs Something new , that the Ground shall open its Mouth
, and swallow them up with all that belong to them , and they go down
into the Grave alive ; you may know that these Men have contemned the
Lord . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.550

He had no sooner done speaking all these Words , but the Ground that was
under them cleaved asunder . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.551

And the Earth having opened its Mouth , swallowed them up , their
Families , and all the Men who belonged to Korah , with the whole
Substance . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.552

Both they and all theirs went down alive into the Grave ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.553

and the Earth covered them over , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.554

so they perished from among the Congregation .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.555

And all Israel who were round about them ran away at their Noise , lest
the Earth as they said , should swallow them up .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.556

There came out Fire too from the Lord , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.557

and consumed the two_hundred_and_fifty Men who brought Incense . After
which the Lord spoke as follows to Moses ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.558

Bid Eleazar the Priest Aaron@ @'s Son , take up the Censers out of the
Burning , because they are consecrated , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.559

and scatter thou the Fire further . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.560

As for the Censers of these who were Sinners against their own Lives ,
let them be made into broad Plates <font> for <$$font> a Covering to the
Altar , since they have brought them before the Lord , and they are
consecrated ; that they may be a Sign to the Israelites .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.561

Accordingly Eleazar the Priest took the Censers of Brass , which they
who were burnt had brought , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,20N.562

and they were beat out broad <font> for <$$font> a Covering to the Altar
; <P_16,40N> <font> To be <$$font> a Memorial to the Israelites , that
no strange Person , who is not of Aaron's Off-spring , may come to offer
Incense before the Lord , lest he should be like Korah and his Company ;
as the Lord said to him by the Ministry of Moses .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.563

Nevertheless the whole Assembly of the Israelites murmured against Moses
and Aaron the next Day , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.564

and said , You have killed the Lord's People .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.565

But when the Assembly were gathered together against Moses and Aaron ,
as they looked towards the publick Tent , behold the Cloud covered it ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.566

and the Glory of the Lord appeared . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.567

Then Moses and Aaron came before the publick Tent .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.568

Moreover the Lord said to Moses thus , Get up from among this Assembly ,
that I may consume them in a Moment : at which they fell on their Faces
. PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.569

And Moses said to Aaron , Take a Censer , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.570

and put Fire into it from the Altar , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.571

and laying on Incense , go speedily to the Assembly ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.572

and make atonement for them : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.573

for there is Wrath gone out from before the Lord ,
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.574

the Plague is begun . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.575

Thus Aaron taking such as Moses ordered , ran into the midst of the
Congregation , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.576

and the Plague being indeed begun among the People , he put on the
Incense , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.577

and made atonement for them ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.578

And standing between the Dead and the Living , the Plague was stopped .
In which fourteen_thousand_and_seven_hundred died , besides those who
died for Korah's Matter . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.579

And Aaron went back to Moses at the Door of the publick Tent , when the
Plague was stopped . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,16,40N.580

<P_17,1N>

<heading>

Chap. XVII . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.583

<$$heading>

Besides the Lord said to Moses as follows ; PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.585

Speak to the Israelites , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.586

and take of all their Princes twelve Staves , one apiece for each
Household of their Fathers , writing every one's Name upon his Staff .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.587

And write Aaron's Name upon the Staff of Levi ;
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.588

for there shall be one for the Head of a Family of their Fathers .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.589

Thou shalt also put them in the publick Tent , before the Testimony ,
where I meet you . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.590

And the Staff of the Man whom I choose shall bud out ; that I may be
quiet from the Murmurings of the Israelites , which they make against
you . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.591

This Moses told to the Israelites , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.592

and all the Princes gave him twelve Staves , each Prince one , for the
Household of their Fathers , Aaron's Staff being among theirs .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.593

And Moses put them before the Lord , in the Tent of the Testimony .
Into which going the next Day , behold the Staff of Aaron for the Family
of Levi was budded out ; and not only brought forth Buds , but blossomed
Flowers , and yielded Almonds . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.594

He then brought out all the Staves from before the Lord to all the
Israelites , who saw <font> it , <$$font> PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.595

and they took each his own . PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.596

Next the Lord said to him , Bring back Aaron's Staff before the
Testimony , to be kept for a Sign to the rebellious ; that thou mayest
end their Murmurings to me , that they may not die .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.597

Thus Moses did , doing entirely according as the Lord commanded him .
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.598

But the Israelites uttered themselves to Moses ; Behold , we are dying !
PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.599

we are perishing , PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.600

all of us perish ! PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.601

Every one who goes at all near to the Tabernacle of the Lord will be
killed : PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.602

shall we die entirely ? PURVER-OLD-1764-1,17,1N.603

