<BEGIN_pusey-187x-2>

<P_107>

<heading>

Sermon VI . PUSEY-187X-2,107.4

Eve . PUSEY-187X-2,107.5

- The Course of Temptation . PUSEY-187X-2,107.6

Genesis iii. 4 , 5 . PUSEY-187X-2,107.7

<font> " And the serpent said unto the woman , Ye shall not surely die :
PUSEY-187X-2,107.8

for God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof , then your eyes shall
be opened , PUSEY-187X-2,107.9

and ye shall be as gods , knowing good and evil . " <$$font>
PUSEY-187X-2,107.10

<$$heading>

Eve's temptation and fall is the forerunner and counterpart of the falls
of the sons and daughters of Eve , especially of those who are
relatively in her condition , innocence as yet not sharply tried , the
relative innocence of youth , before its first great fall .
PUSEY-187X-2,107.12

Her central temptation was , to seek against the Will of God , in a way
of her own , forbidden by God , a good which God willed to give her in
His way . PUSEY-187X-2,107.13

So much is this an image of us , that a school has been found , which
teaches , that Eve's act was a stage in human progress , " the first
bold venture of reason , the first beginning of moral being , the
happiest event of human history ; " " the eternal myth of man , whereby
he becomes man ; " " the freewilled <P_108> human spirit , bursting
through the bands of instinct and the narrow home of animal peace , to
soar unhindered to the hot struggle for hallowing . "
PUSEY-187X-2,108.14

" The narrator would shew , how man found his way out of moral ignorance
and unindependence , and attained to moral knowledge and self-dependence
, but therewith took on himself greater duties , than he had before to
fulfil . " As if a debasing slavery to evil were a necessary condition
of the knowledge of the difference of good and evil ; as if previous
estrangement from God were the essential preparation for being His
friend ; as if a ghastly independence of the All-wise were the necessary
pathway to matured wisdom ; as if the subjugation of our spirits to the
natures which we have in common with the beasts which perish , were the
indispensable stepping-stone and threshold to " the glorious liberty of
the sons of God , " and disobedience to our Creator were essential to
the perfection of beings created in His " image and likeness ; " as if
lawlessness were true liberty , wandering amid error the condition of
the attainment of truth , abuse of our God-given faculties the essential
practice of their use , unreason the handmaid of reason , moral darkness
the one only vestibule to the true Light , the Light in which God dwells
, the Light which He Is {COM:sic_here_and_passim} ! PUSEY-187X-2,108.15

But for sin , the Incarnation might have been without the horribleness
of the Passion ; PUSEY-187X-2,108.16

we might have been as God , yea , God-united , engodded ;
PUSEY-187X-2,108.17

and God might have been as one of us , without our being first as the
Evil One or as the brutes . PUSEY-187X-2,108.18

Heaven might have been , without those <P_109> everlasting cursings and
blasphemies ; the reign of Divine love , without that dark realm of hate
; the ever self-unfolding communication of the satisfying fulness which
God has and is , without that eternal impotent rejection of God which
would that He were not . PUSEY-187X-2,109.19

But God willed , for our endless well-being , to be loved with our full
free-will . PUSEY-187X-2,109.20

He would not <paren> even if it does not involve a contradiction
<$$paren> be loved without our free choice . PUSEY-187X-2,109.21

He willed to condescend to expose Himself <paren> so to speak <$$paren>
to the free choice or contempt of His creatures . PUSEY-187X-2,109.22

He empowered them , by His grace , to choose Him ; PUSEY-187X-2,109.23

He even made it a violence to their engraced nature , not to choose Him
. PUSEY-187X-2,109.24

But He subjected Himself to the vile indignity that He Who Alone Is ,
Who hath and is all Good , the perpetual Fountain of all Perfection as
of being , should be rejected by us , who have no being save from Him ,
who have from Himself the power of rejecting Him , rather than not
bestow on us the unspeakable dignity , freely to choose Him .
PUSEY-187X-2,109.25

And so , since that ever-to-be-repeated choice is of such infinite
moment , God gives us the history , not of the moving temptation only
and the fall , but of the order of Satan's wiles and Eve's tampering
with her tempter . PUSEY-187X-2,109.26

Satan prepares for the fall by exaggerating the prohibition .
PUSEY-187X-2,109.27

He would convey hard thoughts of God , without directly touching on the
prohibition itself . PUSEY-187X-2,109.28

" Can it then be , " he asks , " that the Deity <paren> he omits the
special name of God <$$paren> hath forbidden <P_110> you to eat of any
tree of the garden ? " PUSEY-187X-2,110.29

Much as he might say now , " Has the Deity forbidden all progress ?
PUSEY-187X-2,110.30

Has He put bars to the intelligence which He has created , and fettered
the free scope and use of the reason which He has made a created image
of His own ? " PUSEY-187X-2,110.31

Or , " Does God indeed mean to forbid us the enjoyment of the appetites
which He has given us ? " As though to restrain a mighty stream within
a prescribed channel , that it waste not itself and change not the fair
bright face of nature around it into a foul morass , were to dam its
course ! PUSEY-187X-2,110.32

Satan would not directly impinge on the commandment itself ; as now too
he never begins at once with suggesting the overt breach of some chief
commandment . PUSEY-187X-2,110.33

He knows well , " No one at once becomes all bad . "
PUSEY-187X-2,110.34

But he would familiarize the mind to , or lodge in it the thought , "
the Deity <font> could <$$font> be hard . " PUSEY-187X-2,110.35

It was the beginning of the fall , to hold intercourse with one who had
such thoughts , and had suggested them . PUSEY-187X-2,110.36

The idea , although set aside as a fact , was lodged in the soul , which
held parlance with him who had suggested it . PUSEY-187X-2,110.37

Not to reject the first insinuation of evil , is virtually to consent to
it . PUSEY-187X-2,110.38

Eve's answer agrees in two ways with our wont , when giving way .
PUSEY-187X-2,110.39

It seems most likely that she added of her own to God's command .
PUSEY-187X-2,110.40

For in this state of original righteousness , the command " not " to "
eat of the fruit of the tree , " and " not " to " touch it , " would
alike be positive commands . PUSEY-187X-2,110.41

Neither was wrong in itself , except in so far as it violated a command
of God . PUSEY-187X-2,110.42

Nature was whole <font> then . <$$font> PUSEY-187X-2,110.43

<P_111>

There was no temptation to contravene it . PUSEY-187X-2,111.45

Allegiance to its Creator was its only trial . PUSEY-187X-2,111.46

When God forbids <font> us <$$font> to do anything , for fear that the
first step should lead to the next , it is that the first is easier to
<font> us <$$font> , is a less wound to conscience than the other .
PUSEY-187X-2,111.47

So the thought or imagination of sin , such as is forbidden in the "
thou shalt not covet , " lies nearer to us than the violation of the
seventh or eighth commandment . PUSEY-187X-2,111.48

But in the state of man's innocency , when nature was not yet disordered
, there was no stronger temptation to eat , than to touch , what was
forbidden . PUSEY-187X-2,111.49

There was no occasion to place a fence round a further law , when to
break either would have been the same offence , the breach of a positive
law of God . PUSEY-187X-2,111.50

Had God forbidden to touch the fruit , to touch it had been to do what
God forbade . PUSEY-187X-2,111.51

Eve's answer , then , fair as the words sound , betrays that Satan's
poison had begun to work in her soul . PUSEY-187X-2,111.52

She made out , that God had forbidden more than He had ; the very
suggestion which Satan had just now , more broadly , made to her .
PUSEY-187X-2,111.53

" Of the trees in the garden we may eat , PUSEY-187X-2,111.54

and of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden God
hath said , Ye shall not eat of it PUSEY-187X-2,111.55

and ye shall not touch it . " PUSEY-187X-2,111.56

Then follows the other token of giving way . PUSEY-187X-2,111.57

She adds , " Lest ye die . " PUSEY-187X-2,111.58

Not the sin itself , not the loyalty to her God , not the ingratitude in
disobeying Him Who had so bountifully endowed her and surrounded her
with all things fair and beautiful , not the thought of that daily
converse with God , and His being with them as a Friend , not the dread
of the severance of that relation of love with Infinite love , which God
Is , is foremost in her mind ; but <P_112> the penal consequences to
themselves of the breach of the commandment , " Lest ye die . "
PUSEY-187X-2,112.59

True , God had said , " In the day that thou eatest thereof , thou shalt
die . " PUSEY-187X-2,112.60

True also , that the dread of hell is often , in our now fallen nature ,
the first beginning of a conversion to God . PUSEY-187X-2,112.61

True also , that , as it involves an eternal severance from and loss of
God , the fear of it may rightly quicken the converted soul in its
exceeding dread of that which is the true severance from God , sin .
PUSEY-187X-2,112.62

, But in our unfallen nature it was already a leaning to a fall , that
the penal consequences of sin were put forward , rather than the offence
against God . PUSEY-187X-2,112.63

It is not , " My God hath forbidden it , therefore I can@ @not do it ,
and sin against Him Who made me and daily continueth these peaceful
blessings to me ; " but , " Ye shall not eat thereof , neither shall ye
touch it , <font> lest ye die . " <$$font> PUSEY-187X-2,112.64

She speaks of God as an austere Master , PUSEY-187X-2,112.65

and forgets all His love . PUSEY-187X-2,112.66

Satan saw his advantage PUSEY-187X-2,112.67

and seized it . PUSEY-187X-2,112.68

Eve , thinking of the penalty to herself , not of her allegiance to her
God , laid herself open to and invited the bold lie , " Ye shall
assuredly not die . " PUSEY-187X-2,112.69

Nay , it was impossible that they should die . PUSEY-187X-2,112.70

It was in contradiction with other certain truth , with the very name of
that , the eating of which He forbade , " the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil . " PUSEY-187X-2,112.71

" For the Deity doth know , that in the day ye eat thereof , ye shall be
as the Deity Himself , <paren> i.e. thus far , in this point of knowing
good and evil , which , Satan suggests , God had grudged His creature
<$$paren> " knowing good and evil . " PUSEY-187X-2,112.72

If , then , the knowledge of good and evil was to be the result of
eating the fruit , then death <P_113> could not anyhow be the immediate
consequence of the act ; PUSEY-187X-2,113.73

else there would be no room or scope for those immediate effects , of
which God spake by the very name . PUSEY-187X-2,113.74

No , it could not be . PUSEY-187X-2,113.75

There was a long future before them ; a future , in which they should
exchange their holy simplicity , or rather <paren> as she would think
<$$paren> engraft upon it a knowledge , in its degree , like to that of
God Himself Who forbade it , the knowledge of good and evil .
PUSEY-187X-2,113.76

But therewith he insinuated also that God withheld that knowledge , not
in mercy , but grudgingly , PUSEY-187X-2,113.77

He Who made man in His likeness , willed not <paren> Satan would have it
<$$paren> that he should be altogether like Him . PUSEY-187X-2,113.78

He held back something , which would be good for His creature .
PUSEY-187X-2,113.79

Eve had lost sight of the thought of her allegiance and loving relation
to God , in the thought of the penal consequences . PUSEY-187X-2,113.80

The contradiction was plausible in itself , so soon as it was out of her
mind , <font> Who <$$font> had said it . PUSEY-187X-2,113.81

It had , as have most of Satan's lies , a mixture of truth , which gave
colour and gained entrance to the lie , which it disguised .
PUSEY-187X-2,113.82

So far they were to become like to God , that they should " know good
and evil . PUSEY-187X-2,113.83

" But how ? PUSEY-187X-2,113.84

By losing their Divine likeness to God , Who had made them " very good ,
" and united them to Himself by His grace ; knowing evil , not , as He
does , objectively , as something wholly alien from Himself and
excluding Himself , but by <font> becoming <$$font> evil .
PUSEY-187X-2,113.85

Just as now Satan offers freedom by breaking God's law , and substitutes
real slavery , the gradual weakening and almost destruction of free-will
, the slavery to evil habits , for the glorious liberty of
one-mindedness with God . PUSEY-187X-2,113.86

Then followed the typical course of sin . PUSEY-187X-2,113.87

She <P_114> looked , PUSEY-187X-2,114.88

she considered , PUSEY-187X-2,114.89

she weighed ; PUSEY-187X-2,114.90

but it was the one side only , the side of temptation .
PUSEY-187X-2,114.91

" She saw that the tree was good for food , and that it was a desire to
the eyes , and a tree to be desired to make one wise ,
PUSEY-187X-2,114.92

and she took of the fruit thereof PUSEY-187X-2,114.93

and did eat . " PUSEY-187X-2,114.94

Holy Scripture probably veils the fiery consequences of that eating ,
PUSEY-187X-2,114.95

and tells us only how Satan's promise was fulfilled .
PUSEY-187X-2,114.96

" Their eyes were opened , PUSEY-187X-2,114.97

and , " as the fruit of the tree of knowledge , " they knew " - what ?
" that they were naked . " PUSEY-187X-2,114.98

" They had become like God , " but severed from Him .
PUSEY-187X-2,114.99

They knew good and evil . PUSEY-187X-2,114.100

But instead of knowing evil afar , from the free height of good , they
now know good only from the deep abyss of evil , wherein they had fallen
. PUSEY-187X-2,114.101

" Their eyes were opened . " PUSEY-187X-2,114.102

" Had they been blind before ? PUSEY-187X-2,114.103

They had been blind only to the mere sight of sense .
PUSEY-187X-2,114.104

They saw that they were naked , PUSEY-187X-2,114.105

and saw it not ; PUSEY-187X-2,114.106

for they saw themselves in God , PUSEY-187X-2,114.107

saw all in Him , PUSEY-187X-2,114.108

referred all to Him ; PUSEY-187X-2,114.109

nought of sense occupied their minds ; PUSEY-187X-2,114.110

in all they saw , they looked beyond to God ; PUSEY-187X-2,114.111

a mantle was over all , PUSEY-187X-2,114.112

and that mantle was the glory of God . " PUSEY-187X-2,114.113

The flesh was fallen away from the might of the spirit ; the spirit from
the life in God . PUSEY-187X-2,114.114

Broken was the band between the spirit and God ; broken , the band of
the spirit and the flesh . PUSEY-187X-2,114.115

This alone remained , that having lost that robe of original
righteousness , with which God created them , they felt shame ; that
having sinned against their conscience , they did no violence to the
conscience which testified against their sin . PUSEY-187X-2,114.116

God has retained in us such likeness to Himself , even amid our
self-made unlikeness , such traces of <P_115> His image even amid our
defacing of it , such secret unintelligent longing for Himself , even
while we are wandering far from Him among His creatures , that , if we
will not seek Himself , we must seek some perverted likeness of Himself
. PUSEY-187X-2,115.117

The soul must , with the will , if faithful , or , without the will , if
unfaithful , still she must , in her blindness , dimly own her Creator .
PUSEY-187X-2,115.118

If she turn from Him , she must still seek , without Him , what she
findeth not pure or untainted , till she return to Him ,
PUSEY-187X-2,115.119

" In her very sins she seeks but a sort of likeness to God , in a proud
and perverted , and therefore slavish , freedom . "
PUSEY-187X-2,115.120

She could not , at first at least , be deceived but by " a false and
shadowy beauty . PUSEY-187X-2,115.121

" Pride , ambition , false tenderness , curiosity , sloth , prodigality
, covetousness , anger , alien as they are from God , what seek they but
to be as God ? PUSEY-187X-2,115.122

So S. Augustine traces out the deep thought . PUSEY-187X-2,115.123

" Pride doth imitate exaltedness , whereas Thou Alone art God , exalted
over all . PUSEY-187X-2,115.124

Ambition , what seeks it , but honours and glory ? PUSEY-187X-2,115.125

whereas Thou Alone art to be honoured above all , and glorious for
evermore . PUSEY-187X-2,115.126

- The tendernesses of the wanton would fain be counted love ;
PUSEY-187X-2,115.127

yet is nothing more tender than Thy charity , PUSEY-187X-2,115.128

nor is ought loved more healthfully than <font> that <$$font> , Thy
truth , bright and beautiful above all . PUSEY-187X-2,115.129

Curiosity makes semblance of a desire of knowledge , whereas Thou
supremely knowest all . PUSEY-187X-2,115.130

- Yea , sloth would fain to be at rest ; PUSEY-187X-2,115.131

but what stable rest besides the Lord ? PUSEY-187X-2,115.132

Luxury affects to be called plenty and abundance ; PUSEY-187X-2,115.133

but Thou art the fulness and never-failing plenteousness of <P_116>
incorruptible pleasures . PUSEY-187X-2,116.134

Prodigality presents a shadow of liberality ; PUSEY-187X-2,116.135

but Thou art the most overflowing Giver of all good .
PUSEY-187X-2,116.136

Covetousness would possess many things ; PUSEY-187X-2,116.137

and Thou possessest all things . PUSEY-187X-2,116.138

Anger seeks revenge ; PUSEY-187X-2,116.139

who revenges more justly than Thou ? PUSEY-187X-2,116.140

Grief pines away for things lost , the delight of its desires , because
it would have nothing taken away from it , as nothing can from Thee . "
PUSEY-187X-2,116.141

Wonderful nobility and community with Himself , in which God created us
! PUSEY-187X-2,116.142

Marvellous circumscription of our being by Him from Whom we evermore
derive it , that even in sinning , rebelling against God , turning away
from Him to His creatures , and turning them away from their rightful
use , we yet can@ @not wholly emancipate ourselves from Him ,
PUSEY-187X-2,116.143

we must seek some distorted likeness of Him , the more hideous , because
it is distorted from so Infinite a Good . PUSEY-187X-2,116.144

But then look at the magnificent counterpart . PUSEY-187X-2,116.145

Sin is an aweful , in itself an irremediable , mistake .
PUSEY-187X-2,116.146

It is to miss our real , our only , our everlasting Good , for which our
God in His love created us . PUSEY-187X-2,116.147

It is to have taken a fiery draught which burns through all our veins ,
for " the rivers of pleasure at His Right Hand . " PUSEY-187X-2,116.148

It is to have taken our enemy for our god , slavery for freedom , a
flickering meteor , an exhalation dancing around morasses , for the true
light ; PUSEY-187X-2,116.149

it is to have lost for eternity that , for which God in His Infinite
love created us . PUSEY-187X-2,116.150

But then , if we have chased the ever-@ @retreating shadow , the
substance is there ; PUSEY-187X-2,116.151

if we have mistaken the glass for the pearl , the counterfeit for the
royal image , the lie for the truth , still the counterfeit is the
pledge to us <P_117> of the existence of the glorious original ; the
forgery , of the true God-stamped image ; Satan's lie , of God's truth .
PUSEY-187X-2,117.152

God , Who made us for Himself , made nothing in us , for which He
provided not the full contentment ; and that , not hereafter only , but
now . PUSEY-187X-2,117.153

Long we for freedom ? PUSEY-187X-2,117.154

He will make us , " free indeed . " PUSEY-187X-2,117.155

He will give us freedom , which they who have it , know to be real .
PUSEY-187X-2,117.156

Long we for knowledge ? PUSEY-187X-2,117.157

He has spread wide open for us the boundless variety of His creation ,
PUSEY-187X-2,117.158

but above all , He gives us a real knowledge of Himself :
PUSEY-187X-2,117.159

He opens to us His own being and the mysteries of His love , where our
only darkness is from the excess of His light . PUSEY-187X-2,117.160

Long we for love ? PUSEY-187X-2,117.161

<font> Here <$$font> , too , pure love has an intensity of joy , an
image of heaven ; so that it has been truly said in a measure , that "
love is heaven and heaven is love ; " PUSEY-187X-2,117.162

and we scarcely turn from sin to God , but He sends a thrill of love
into the soul , the faintest touch of which is above all creation . And
beyond , PUSEY-187X-2,117.163

" The heart that loveth knoweth well What Jesus 't@ @is to love . "
PUSEY-187X-2,117.164

In many things <paren> would God I could think it was still in all , my
sons <$$paren> ye must be in that first stage , in which your temptation
is to a forbidden fruit , as yet untasted . PUSEY-187X-2,117.165

In whatever degree it has not been , ye know that the first stage is ,
to think that there can be anything good , besides or against the
expressed mind or will of God . PUSEY-187X-2,117.166

The next is to question , " Can God indeed have meant to forbid this ?
" PUSEY-187X-2,117.167

" Hath God indeed said ? " PUSEY-187X-2,117.168

- Can God indeed have meant to lay such and such restrictions on His
creature ? PUSEY-187X-2,117.169

To what end should He have placed the <P_118> tree of knowledge in the
midst of the garden , unless He meant us to eat thereof ?
PUSEY-187X-2,118.170

The soul dares not at once openly rebel against the known will of God .
PUSEY-187X-2,118.171

If it <font> will <$$font> not be of the same mind with God , it must
set itself to persuade itself that God is of the same mind with it .
PUSEY-187X-2,118.172

It is a necessity of our being , until we are lost , to be in harmony
with Him Who is the end of our being , God . PUSEY-187X-2,118.173

It is not all , {COM:sic} fear of punishment ; still less , slavish fear
. PUSEY-187X-2,118.174

It is holy dread to burst the band of union with God .
PUSEY-187X-2,118.175

Self-deceit is the soul's screen to hide from its eyes its severance
from God . PUSEY-187X-2,118.176

It dares not look its deed in the face , and do it .
PUSEY-187X-2,118.177

It snaps the bond of love , PUSEY-187X-2,118.178

but looks away . PUSEY-187X-2,118.179

The heathen persuaded themselves of old , that the gods were the patrons
of their sins . PUSEY-187X-2,118.180

" Shall I not do , what the great Jove did ? PUSEY-187X-2,118.181

I did it gladly . " PUSEY-187X-2,118.182

They consecrated their sins to their desecrating gods .
PUSEY-187X-2,118.183

The worst sins were , in nature-religions , the most consecrated .
PUSEY-187X-2,118.184

<font> They <$$font> said , " The gods meant this or that . "
PUSEY-187X-2,118.185

In Christianity , men say more modestly , " Must not the God of nature
have meant it ? " PUSEY-187X-2,118.186

After habituation to sin , the self-excuse is boldly laid aside ;
PUSEY-187X-2,118.187

the inured profligate says boldly , " God did mean , " - what God in the
most express terms forbade . PUSEY-187X-2,118.188

And so , as to faith . PUSEY-187X-2,118.189

Hath God indeed said , that on this very day Almighty God took our poor
human flesh to be united co-eternally with His Godhead , and that , in
the humility of the Virgin's womb ? PUSEY-187X-2,118.190

Has God indeed said , that He Who , in our human time , was two days old
, was Almighty God ? or that <P_119> God Himself , in our Flesh , was
crucified ? PUSEY-187X-2,119.191

Or has He indeed vouchsafed to tell us , how He Himself exists in His
Co-eternal Love , Father , Son , and Holy Ghost ? PUSEY-187X-2,119.192

Or has God indeed said , that He has set Himself as our free choice ,
freely by His grace to choose Him , or freely , despising His grace , to
reject Him , to be <paren> oh , misery of miseries ! <$$paren>
eternally miserable by eternally rejecting <font> Him <$$font> , Whom
the soul knows to be the end and centre of its being ?
PUSEY-187X-2,119.193

Indurated unbelief decrees peremptorily , " There is no God , "
PUSEY-187X-2,119.194

or " human nature is God , " PUSEY-187X-2,119.195

or " we have no freewill or no immortality , PUSEY-187X-2,119.196

but are like the beasts which perish . " PUSEY-187X-2,119.197

But unbelief ever begins , " Hath God indeed said ? " meaning , " We
can@ @not or will not think that He hath said it ; "
PUSEY-187X-2,119.198

and quickly there follows that further thought , PUSEY-187X-2,119.199

" He ought not to have said it , or so to have circumscribed the
judgement of His creature . " PUSEY-187X-2,119.200

Then follows , or is almost one with it , " Assuredly thou shalt not die
. " PUSEY-187X-2,119.201

For God plainly can@ @not punish what He has not forbidden , or count it
to be a rejection of His declared truth , to deny what His creatures
have ruled for Him , that He can@ @not have meant to reveal .
PUSEY-187X-2,119.202

Only Almighty God and we are somehow to change places .
PUSEY-187X-2,119.203

We are to be His critics and judges , not He our Judge ;
PUSEY-187X-2,119.204

we are to rule for Him , what He shall reveal to us .
PUSEY-187X-2,119.205

We are <paren> which it comes to <$$paren> to make our God , instead of
having as our God , Him before Whom the Seraphim with their burning love
veil their faces , from Whom the highest Intelligences are content ever
to receive something of His exhaustless Fulness ; Him , in Whose tender
love we reposed in our childhood ; Who never failed us ; Him <P_120> Who
made us ; and to depend on Whom was our peace , and the full contentment
of our joy . PUSEY-187X-2,120.206

Such were the foreruners of the fall . PUSEY-187X-2,120.207

Then followed the , alas ! so often-repeated history .
PUSEY-187X-2,120.208

" She saw , " PUSEY-187X-2,120.209

" she took , " PUSEY-187X-2,120.210

" she ate , " PUSEY-187X-2,120.211

" she gave to eat . " PUSEY-187X-2,120.212

She had got rid of the fear of God . PUSEY-187X-2,120.213

Why should He , how could He , punish so disproportionably an act so
slight ? PUSEY-187X-2,120.214

She had seen His bountifulness ; PUSEY-187X-2,120.215

she had not seen its withdrawal . PUSEY-187X-2,120.216

The seducing spirit who spake with her had disobeyed
PUSEY-187X-2,120.217

and had not died . PUSEY-187X-2,120.218

All other fruits in the garden had been harmless : PUSEY-187X-2,120.219

the fruit of the tree of life had , by God's appointment , some
mysterious influence for good ; PUSEY-187X-2,120.220

why should not the fruit of the tree of knowledge ?
PUSEY-187X-2,120.221

She had not <font> our <$$font> experience , to which everything speaks
of the death of the body ; PUSEY-187X-2,120.222

the sun shone on no new-made graves then ; PUSEY-187X-2,120.223

no parent's loss foretold the death of the child . PUSEY-187X-2,120.224

She would " rather believe that God could forgive the sin , " that He
could threaten what He would not fulfil , " than endure not to know ,
what this thing was , which He had forbidden , " or <font> why <$$font>
He had forbidden to eat thereof . PUSEY-187X-2,120.225

Satan can@ @not persuade <font> us <$$font> , against our daily
experience of human mortality , that we shall not die the death of the
body . PUSEY-187X-2,120.226

But it is the self-same argument , by which he prepares our fall ;
PUSEY-187X-2,120.227

" ye shall not die eternally . " PUSEY-187X-2,120.228

God threatens " the worm which shall never perish , " " the
inextinguishable fire . " PUSEY-187X-2,120.229

God is disbelieved ; PUSEY-187X-2,120.230

His creature's lie is believed . PUSEY-187X-2,120.231

Secure , then , from harm <paren> as she thought <$$paren> , <font> she
saw . <$$font> PUSEY-187X-2,120.232

She looked what it could be . PUSEY-187X-2,120.233

Alas , if one were to name in one word , the parent of sin , the
ante-dater {COM:sic} of all other temptations , the destroyer of purity
of <P_121> soul , the corrupter of the senses , the disputer with God
the Holy Ghost for the possession of His temple , the soul , - earlier ,
mightier than all passion but <font> that <$$font> which gives it its
food and nourishment , and strengthens its mastery , it is , - ye know ,
my sons , what I mean - <paren> Oh , how Satan repeats his hellish
triumph over Eve , when he has awakened it <$$paren> - <font> Curiosity
. <$$font> PUSEY-187X-2,121.234

Victory were , by God's grace , comparatively easy , were it not that
the devil's porter , curiosity , opened the gates , and brought in those
beasts of hell which lay waste the soul . PUSEY-187X-2,121.235

They who have not , in boyhood , indulged curiosity , are blessedly
exempt from a whole embattled army of trials which it lets in on the
poisoned soul . PUSEY-187X-2,121.236

The baleful poison of the tree of knowledge has not spoiled the
imagination , stirred up passions by nature happily asleep , created
longings which belong not to its age , nor taken the will captive , when
innocence would still start back from completed guilt .
PUSEY-187X-2,121.237

" Curiousness , first cause of all our ill , Is yet the plague which
most torments us still . " PUSEY-187X-2,121.238

Sins within the soul sometimes wound more gravely , PUSEY-187X-2,121.239

they are more perilous , PUSEY-187X-2,121.240

they can , in the nature of things , be more indefinitely multiplied
than outward sins , though the outward sins of the same kind are seldom
wanting . PUSEY-187X-2,121.241

" Every man is tempted , being drawn forth and enticed by his own sin ;
PUSEY-187X-2,121.242

then lust , having " by union with the will " conceived , bring-eth
forth sin ; PUSEY-187X-2,121.243

but sin being perfected , bringeth forth death . " PUSEY-187X-2,121.244

Eve saw that the fruit had its threefold attractions .
PUSEY-187X-2,121.245

She had seen it before , but without the desire to eat ;
PUSEY-187X-2,121.246

<P_122>

now she gazed outwardly at the lusciousness of its look , the
invitingness of its beauty ; PUSEY-187X-2,122.248

and inwardly she saw all those tempting properties , of which the
serpent had told her , the promised knowledge ; PUSEY-187X-2,122.249

and , gazing on these , she <paren> as we have learned from her
<$$paren> forgot all besides . PUSEY-187X-2,122.250

All other delights which God had spread so bountifully around her , the
delights of every sense , when the senses , too , were pure , and
everything of earth was transparent with the beauty of heaven ; her
innocent love for him , from whose being her own was derived ; her
immediate relation to God her Creator ; her intercourse with God as a
Friend - all was forgotten in that long , curious , empassioned gaze .
PUSEY-187X-2,122.251

" Why gazest thou , " says S. Bernard , " so intently on thy death ?
PUSEY-187X-2,122.252

Why love to gaze on what thou mayest not eat ? PUSEY-187X-2,122.253

Sayest thou , ' I stretch my gaze , not my hand ; PUSEY-187X-2,122.254

to see is not forbidden me , only to eat . ' PUSEY-187X-2,122.255

Fault though it be not , it is fault's index . PUSEY-187X-2,122.256

For whilst thou art intent on one thing , the serpent secretly glides
into thy heart , PUSEY-187X-2,122.257

speaks blandly to thee , PUSEY-187X-2,122.258

holds thy reason by his blandishments , thy fear by his lies , saying ,
' Thou shalt in no wise die . ' PUSEY-187X-2,122.259

He augments thy anxiety , while he stimulates appetite ;
PUSEY-187X-2,122.260

he sharpens curiosity , while he suggests cupidity ;
PUSEY-187X-2,122.261

at length he offers what was prohibited , PUSEY-187X-2,122.262

and robs of what was allowed ; PUSEY-187X-2,122.263

he offers an apple , PUSEY-187X-2,122.264

and steals away paradise ; PUSEY-187X-2,122.265

thou drinkest deep the poison , thyself to perish and to be the mother
of the perishing ! " PUSEY-187X-2,122.266

" She ate PUSEY-187X-2,122.267

and she gave to her husband with her , PUSEY-187X-2,122.268

and he did eat . " PUSEY-187X-2,122.269

O horrible aggravation of sin , with its almost impossibility of
perishing alone . PUSEY-187X-2,122.270

Eve was <P_123> emancipated from the yoke of the prohibition which she
had never felt until she rebelled against it ; PUSEY-187X-2,123.271

she was proud of her liberty , her progress , her independence ;
PUSEY-187X-2,123.272

she was all in all in herself ; PUSEY-187X-2,123.273

she had eaten PUSEY-187X-2,123.274

and she had not died ; PUSEY-187X-2,123.275

no remonstrance of God pleaded against her , PUSEY-187X-2,123.276

no sentence of God had condemned her , PUSEY-187X-2,123.277

the echoes of the " in the day that thou eatest thereof , thou shalt
surely die , " had faded away . PUSEY-187X-2,123.278

God's threatenings were not so real . PUSEY-187X-2,123.279

Intoxicated with her impunity , with a whole wide future of successive
triumphs before her , with proud hope of her self-acquired likeness to
God , she sought to associate her husband in this her new career , the
partner of that glorious course which she had opened to him .
PUSEY-187X-2,123.280

" He ate . " PUSEY-187X-2,123.281

The fall of humanity was completed ; PUSEY-187X-2,123.282

the robe of righteousness was gone ; PUSEY-187X-2,123.283

Adam had become her partner again , but in shame . PUSEY-187X-2,123.284

Dreadful fascination of sin ! PUSEY-187X-2,123.285

It is a miracle of mercy , if a sinner escape spreading the feverish
infection of the leprosy of his sin . PUSEY-187X-2,123.286

Such is the oft-repeated history ; such the sad wailing note of warning
, floating down , but too often unheeded , from the closed gates of our
lost paradise . PUSEY-187X-2,123.287

" If thou wouldest avoid completed sin , flee from beginnings ; "
PUSEY-187X-2,123.288

tamper not with it ; PUSEY-187X-2,123.289

let Christ's Cross , the seal on thy brow , fortify thee against
imaginings ; PUSEY-187X-2,123.290

trust not thyself to rule for thyself , that God may not have meant what
, as His Word is true , He has plainly said . PUSEY-187X-2,123.291

Remember the closing words of God's revelation to man :
PUSEY-187X-2,123.292

" If any one shall take away from the sayings of the book of this
prophecy , God shall take away his portion from the book of life . "
PUSEY-187X-2,123.293

<P_124>

Such was the fall . PUSEY-187X-2,124.295

In the mystery of to-day is the restoration . PUSEY-187X-2,124.296

" In very truth , " says S. Augustine , " we too confess that had the
Lord willed in such wise to become man , as not to be born of a woman ,
this had been easy to His Majesty . PUSEY-187X-2,124.297

For as He could be born of a woman without the man , so could He be born
, not even through a woman <paren> as was Adam <$$paren> .
PUSEY-187X-2,124.298

But this He did , that in neither sex His creature man might despair .
PUSEY-187X-2,124.299

If being man , as He was to be , He had not been born of a woman , women
might despair of themselves , remembering their first sin , that the
first man was deceived through a woman , PUSEY-187X-2,124.300

and they might think that they had no hope whatever in Christ .
PUSEY-187X-2,124.301

He came then as man , but born of a woman , as though saying to them , '
That ye may know that the creature of God is not evil ,
PUSEY-187X-2,124.302

but sinful pleasure perverted it ; PUSEY-187X-2,124.303

lo , I am born of a woman . PUSEY-187X-2,124.304

I do not then condemn the creature which I made , but the sins which I
made not . PUSEY-187X-2,124.305

Let each sex behold its glory , PUSEY-187X-2,124.306

let each confess its iniquity , and each hope for salvation . '
PUSEY-187X-2,124.307

The poisoned draught was given by a woman to man for his deceiving ;
PUSEY-187X-2,124.308

let salvation be given to man to drink through a woman for his salvation
. PUSEY-187X-2,124.309

Let woman compensate for the sin , that by her man was deceived ,
through conceiving Christ . PUSEY-187X-2,124.310

Thence also women first announced to the Apostles the risen God .
PUSEY-187X-2,124.311

The woman announced death to her husband in Paradise ;
PUSEY-187X-2,124.312

woman , too , announced to men salvation in the Church .
PUSEY-187X-2,124.313

The Apostles were to announce to the nations the Resurrection of Christ
; PUSEY-187X-2,124.314

women announced it to the Apostles . " PUSEY-187X-2,124.315

<P_125>

And not only so , PUSEY-187X-2,125.317

but as our Blessed Lord overcame for us , in fact and in ensample
{COM:sic} , the threefold temptation of Adam , the eating the forbidden
fruit in the " Command these stones , that they become bread ; " the
vainglory , " Ye shall be as God , " in the " Cast thyself down ; " the
covetousness , " Knowing good and evil , " in " The kingdoms of the
earth and the glory of them ; " so He vouchsafed to His Mother , at the
vestibule of the Incarnation , to reverse the temptations and
disobedience of Eve . PUSEY-187X-2,125.318

The vainglory of Eve was reversed in the God-given humility of Mary ,
when she was willing , if such should be God's Will , to become the
scorn of man ; the disobedience of Eve by the obedience of Mary ; the
faithlessness of Eve by the faith of Mary . PUSEY-187X-2,125.319

In the well-known words of the Father , " With a fitness , Mary the
Virgin is found obedient , saying , ' Behold Thy handmaid , O Lord ,
PUSEY-187X-2,125.320

be it unto me according to thy word ; ' PUSEY-187X-2,125.321

but Eve was disobedient , PUSEY-187X-2,125.322

for she obeyed not , while she was yet a virgin . PUSEY-187X-2,125.323

- As she , becoming disobedient , became the cause of death both to
herself and the whole human race , so also Mary , having the predestined
Man , and being yet a Virgin , being obedient , became to herself and to
the whole human race the cause of salvation . PUSEY-187X-2,125.324

The knot of Eve's disobedience received the unloosing through the
obedience of Mary ; PUSEY-187X-2,125.325

for what Eve , a virgin , bound by incredulity , that Mary , a virgin ,
unloosed by faith . " PUSEY-187X-2,125.326

Eve disbelieved through vainglory , longing to be as God ,
PUSEY-187X-2,125.327

and lost her place in the creation ; PUSEY-187X-2,125.328

Mary , through humility , blindly believed God's word by Gabriel ,
PUSEY-187X-2,125.329

<P_126>

and was placed above all simply created beings , or all possible
creations , in a nearness of love and glory which can@ @not be imagined
, as Theotokos , the Mother of God . PUSEY-187X-2,126.331

She was the Mother of our Redeemer , PUSEY-187X-2,126.332

and so from her , as the fountain of His human Birth came all which He
did , and was , and is to us . PUSEY-187X-2,126.333

She , being the Mother of Him Who is our Life , became the Mother of
Life ; PUSEY-187X-2,126.334

she was the Gate of Paradise , because she bore Him Who restored to us
our lost Paradise ; PUSEY-187X-2,126.335

she was " the gate of Heaven , " because He , born of her , " opened the
kingdom of heaven to all believers ; " PUSEY-187X-2,126.336

she was " the all-undefiled Mother of holiness ; " because " the Holy
One born of her was called the Son of God ; " PUSEY-187X-2,126.337

she was " the light-clad Mother of Light , " because He Who indwelt her
and was born of her , " was the true Light which lighteth every man that
cometh into the world . " PUSEY-187X-2,126.338

Such is the contrast , my sons , which this day suggests , of faith and
faithlessness , of self-elation and humility , of receiving all things
from God , or trying to wring them from Him : of dependence on God , or
a would-be independence of Him . PUSEY-187X-2,126.339

Eve willed to receive from Satan what God for the time gave in measure
only , PUSEY-187X-2,126.340

and sank our race in depths which we see around us , which we feel ,
alas ! in ourselves , the bondage of this death ; PUSEY-187X-2,126.341

and although she herself was saved , her name is a by-word .
PUSEY-187X-2,126.342

Mary willed blindly to receive whatever God should give , whatever He
should appoint . PUSEY-187X-2,126.343

And where is she ? PUSEY-187X-2,126.344

<P_127>

What has been , can@ @not cease to be . PUSEY-187X-2,127.346

She , who was the Mother of God-Man here , must be His Mother still .
PUSEY-187X-2,127.347

Little were it to be Queen of Angels . PUSEY-187X-2,127.348

<font> The <$$font> special bliss must be the special love of the human
Mother and the Divine Son . PUSEY-187X-2,127.349

Men tell you much of the grandeur of progress , the glory of
independence , the bursting of trammels , the laying aside of antiquated
notions , the being lords over yourselves . PUSEY-187X-2,127.350

God grant that you may be lords over yourselves by being subject to the
Infinite . PUSEY-187X-2,127.351

God give you to burst every trammel which binds you !
PUSEY-187X-2,127.352

For His service is perfect freedom . PUSEY-187X-2,127.353

God give you true progress , progress in God to the Infinite Wisdom in
God ! PUSEY-187X-2,127.354

It is not the question what ye shall seek , but from whom ye shall seek
it ; from him from whom Eve sought it , who can give you but a lying
semblance of the Gifts of God , or from Him Who Alone hath true
Knowledge , true Wisdom , true Light , true Riches , true Love ?
PUSEY-187X-2,127.355

Choose really , truly , fixedly , to whom you will belong , whose you
will be , whom ye will have ; PUSEY-187X-2,127.356

and may He direct and fix your choice , Who will be the everlasting
Portion and Joy of those who choose Him . PUSEY-187X-2,127.357

<P_128>

<heading>

Sermon VII . PUSEY-187X-2,128.360

Man's Self-Deceit and God's Omniscience . PUSEY-187X-2,128.361

S. Matt. vi. 22. 23 . PUSEY-187X-2,128.362

<font> " The light of the body is the eye ; PUSEY-187X-2,128.363

if therefore thine eye be single , thy whole body shall be full of light
. PUSEY-187X-2,128.364

But if thine eye be evil , thy whole body shall be full of darkness .
PUSEY-187X-2,128.365

If therefore the light which is in thee be darkness , how great is that
darkness ! " <$$font> PUSEY-187X-2,128.366

<$$heading>

Look all the world through , PUSEY-187X-2,128.368

who well-nigh is not persuaded that he is in the right ?
PUSEY-187X-2,128.369

I speak not of hereditary error , such as that of the Heathen , broken
in upon by no light of truth : nor even of such Christians , as abide
ignorantly , through some invincible prejudice , in the errors in which
they have been educated . PUSEY-187X-2,128.370

These , though they may sit in darkness and the shadow of death , are
not responsible for darkness which they did not gather round themselves
, or for any degrees of light , which did not shine in upon them .
PUSEY-187X-2,128.371

" The times of ignorance God winked at . " PUSEY-187X-2,128.372

He imputed not unto them ignorance , contracted through fault of their
distant forefathers , not their own . PUSEY-187X-2,128.373

Their trial lay in what they still saw , in the witness of Himself which
God still left and gave in His book of nature , or as to the secret
motions and <P_129> voices of His grace , heard by them alone in their
conscience . PUSEY-187X-2,129.374

He " overlooked {TEXT:over-looked} , " took no notice of what was the
fruit of involuntary ignorance . PUSEY-187X-2,129.375

This alone He " winked at . " PUSEY-187X-2,129.376

They had their own trial , though different from ours :
PUSEY-187X-2,129.377

they have each been brought into the judgement of God , but for what
they knew or might have known , not for what they could not know .
PUSEY-187X-2,129.378

" God overlooked ignorance , " S. Paul says . PUSEY-187X-2,129.379

He does not say that He overlooked wilful sin . PUSEY-187X-2,129.380

The most degraded types of humanity , the wildest savagery , had its own
trial of knowledge too ; PUSEY-187X-2,129.381

but it was , so far as they willed not " to retain God in their
knowledge , " not for the moral degradation , into which they had been
plunged , below the condition even of fallen man . PUSEY-187X-2,129.382

An hereditary cannibal might not be responsible for his cannibalism .
PUSEY-187X-2,129.383

Some forbearance towards an enemy , some touch of mercy , suggested by
the Omnipresent , ever-@ @operating Spirit of God , may be accepted for
him , for the sake of the unknown Redeemer Who died for the sins of the
whole world . PUSEY-187X-2,129.384

Cannibalism can@ @not be so offensive in the sight of God , as the
horrible barbarities which we have lately heard of in the un-Christian ,
anti-Christian warfare of men , who bear , and glory in , the Name of
Christ . PUSEY-187X-2,129.385

" What are called our " neglected " or " outcast population , " the "
young Arabs " of our streets , may not be so far from the kingdom of God
, as those who so call them ; those , whose neglect occasions them to be
what they are , our decent , orderly , selfish <paren> whoever they are
<$$paren> irreligious rich . PUSEY-187X-2,129.386

Self-deceit plainly must be self-wrought . PUSEY-187X-2,129.387

Its nature and offensiveness are , that men , in some or in <P_130> many
ways , darken their own conscience by shutting out the light of God .
PUSEY-187X-2,130.388

There must be the more scope for it , the greater the light , with which
any are surrounded . PUSEY-187X-2,130.389

Whatever crimes , violations of man's better nature , brutalities ,
brutishness , there may be among Heathen nations , there is the less
scope for self-deceit . PUSEY-187X-2,130.390

Among them , it can only find room , where men stifle the inward
workings of the Holy Spirit , the unknown God . PUSEY-187X-2,130.391

<font> Our <$$font> boast is of our light . PUSEY-187X-2,130.392

Therefore the largest reign of self-deceit must be among ourselves :
PUSEY-187X-2,130.393

therefore each one of us may the more apprehend that he suffers by it .
PUSEY-187X-2,130.394

So large and pervading is its reign , that whoso has not learned and
shaken off some of its dominion , may be morally certain that he is yet
under it , perhaps its slave . PUSEY-187X-2,130.395

Self-deceit is almost as varied as the human mind .
PUSEY-187X-2,130.396

For it is the working of nature , to exempt itself from the
uncomfortable operations of God's Holy Spirit upon it ; a false
conscience , dexterously framed to overlay and stifle the voice of the
true . PUSEY-187X-2,130.397

It is the outcome and result of repeated lies , which the soul tells to
itself ; first timidly whispered , then said hesitatingly , then with
less and less misgiving , or amid or after intervals of misgiving ,
until at last they are told to itself with effrontery , resenting all
contradiction . PUSEY-187X-2,130.398

It is as varied , as human finiteness admits of , forming as many
combinations , as those startling varieties of numbers which baffle all
calculation . PUSEY-187X-2,130.399

Its subject-matter is , whatsoever the soul , from self-love , or
passion , or pride , or ambition , or conceit , or covetousness , or
anger , or envy , or rivalry , or sloth , wishes not to see .
PUSEY-187X-2,130.400

It will take for its armour , the word of God , or human opinion ,
<P_131> or popular maxims , or spiritual guidance , which it has itself
taught and guided to misguide itself ; the multitude of evil-doers , or
misapplied sayings of saints ; or the idolatry of human intellect and
imaginary progress ; the saying of a self-confident master , or its own
self-confidence . PUSEY-187X-2,131.401

It will darken itself by mists of its own creation wherein it envelopes
itself , or by the enlightenment of the age , or by inspirations , as it
deems , of God ; by its own good or its neighbour's evil , nay the
vehemence of its own evil ; if by any means it may hide itself from the
strictness of God's law or the clearness of His word , or from judgement
to come . PUSEY-187X-2,131.402

Look at the variety of pleas , by which the poor Jews cozened themselves
, not to receive our Lord ; that they knew His human birth , or that He
was not born , where prophecy declared that He should be , and where He
was , born ; that no prophet , <paren> which was untrue <$$paren> came
out of Galilee ; that , working miracles on earth , He gave no sign from
heaven , and that yet He said , " I am the Bread which came down from
heaven ; " " the Bread which I will give is My Flesh which I will give
for the life of the world ; " or that working such miracles , that He
bare record of Himself ; that none of the rulers believed on Him ; or
that the Christ should abide for ever , and Jesus said that He should be
lifted up , i.e. , by what death He should die ; or that He Whose
teaching God the Father authenticated by miracles , which , <P_132>
according to their own belief also could not be wrought , except God
were with Him , broke the law of His Father , because by miracles or
teaching of mercy He enlarged the law of His servant Moses ; because He
, being , a man , made Himself God ; because He declared that He , the
Son of Man , had power on earth to forgive sins ; and not only broke the
Sabbath {TEXT:sabbath} , but said also that God was His father , making
Himself equal with God ; or because <paren> which that law no where
forbade <$$paren> He showed His love for publicans and sinners by eating
with them , as though He connived at the sin which He condemned , in
winning gently from it those for whom He came to die ; or , as though He
could not read the heart of the penitent Magdalene , because they could
not read it : PUSEY-187X-2,132.403

or again they turned their own sins against Him , that He allowed His
disciples to neglect the " traditions of the elders , " whereby they
themselves transgressed and taught others to transgress the commandment
of God ; or because , <paren> this at least they put forward to
themselves and among themselves <$$paren> temporal ruin might come upon
themselves and their people through <paren> they could hardly but think
<$$paren> a mistaken jealousy of the Romans . PUSEY-187X-2,132.404

They feared the loss of temporal things more than of eternal ,
PUSEY-187X-2,132.405

and so <paren> as many as repented not <$$paren> lost both .
PUSEY-187X-2,132.406

Such were the outward pleas , PUSEY-187X-2,132.407

but what were the inward grounds ? PUSEY-187X-2,132.408

That they loved the praise of man , more than the praise of God ; that
they received honour <P_133> one of another and sought not the honour
which cometh of God only ; because they were not of God and had not the
love of God in them ; because , as even Pilate , a heathen and a
bystander could see , he <font> knew <$$font> that for envy they had
delivered Him ; because they were an evil and adulterous generation ;
because they closed their eyes , and were blind leaders of the blind ;
because they were hypocrites ; because they taught to keep God's
commandments and did them not ; because they did all their works to be
seen of men ; because they did the lesser matters of the law and made
much of them and omitted the greater ; took heed to the outside , and
were unclean within ; because Jesus spake against them , and they feared
the diminution of their credit with the people . PUSEY-187X-2,133.409

What a world of unconscious motive ! PUSEY-187X-2,133.410

Outwardly , and what they doubtless said to themselves and to each other
, there was zeal for the truth of God and for the right faith in Him ,
and for the law which He had given by His servant Moses .
PUSEY-187X-2,133.411

The truths , for which they professed themselves to be zealous , for
which they were blindly jealous , were fundamental .
PUSEY-187X-2,133.412

They related to the Being of our Creator , or to our relation to Him as
His creatures . PUSEY-187X-2,133.413

God Himself had proclaimed the Unity of His Being .
PUSEY-187X-2,133.414

" Hear , O Israel , the Lord our God is One Lord . "
PUSEY-187X-2,133.415

It was the first of the commandments , given amid so much awe ,
PUSEY-187X-2,133.416

" Thou shalt have no other gods before Me . " PUSEY-187X-2,133.417

True was it which they said , " No one , who is not God , <P_134> could
without blasphemy make Himself equal with God . " PUSEY-187X-2,134.418

It will be the very central sin of Anti-Christ . PUSEY-187X-2,134.419

True , again , that God had set forth as His own attribute , " forgiving
iniquity and transgression and sin . " PUSEY-187X-2,134.420

True was the denial implied in their question , which we hear now so
often repeated , " Who can forgive sins , but God only ? "
PUSEY-187X-2,134.421

And what was within ? PUSEY-187X-2,134.422

Mainly this . PUSEY-187X-2,134.423

Love of what every one loves , unless his own conscience have taught him
its worthlessness , and even after he has in some degree learned it ,
the praise of his fellow-beings ; longing to be had in honour , and ,
consequently , passion against Him Who diminished it .
PUSEY-187X-2,134.424

This was their central sin . PUSEY-187X-2,134.425

Up to a certain point , their character was good . PUSEY-187X-2,134.426

Our Lord pictures one as saying <paren> He does not imply , untruly
<$$paren> , " I am not as other men are , extortioners , unjust ,
adulterers or even as this Publican {COM:sic} . " PUSEY-187X-2,134.427

He allows their self-denial , their exactness . PUSEY-187X-2,134.428

S. Paul speaks of his life , as one strict and , " touching the
righteousness which is in the law , blameless . " PUSEY-187X-2,134.429

" After the straitest , " most exact , " sect of our religion I lived ,
a Pharisee . " PUSEY-187X-2,134.430

But it all helped only the more to blind themselves .
PUSEY-187X-2,134.431

Dwelling on its own good and others' ill , it could not see its own ill
, or others' good . PUSEY-187X-2,134.432

The habit of censoriousness , formed by habitual judgement of others
misdeeds , incapacitated it from seeing good . Blindness , which could
not see humility in the Publican , nor penitence in the Magdalene !
Censoriousness , which , when become universal , ventured upon the
All-holy ! PUSEY-187X-2,134.433

Why allowed He this ? PUSEY-187X-2,134.434

Why did He <P_135> that ? PUSEY-187X-2,135.435

Until , at last in the Name of God , they committed Deicide ; they
gloried in their religion , and made murder of the Just One , an act of
religion . PUSEY-187X-2,135.436

But observe the process , by which they blinded themselves .
PUSEY-187X-2,135.437

For now too it is a very common one . PUSEY-187X-2,135.438

It was a false application of truth . PUSEY-187X-2,135.439

This is the parent of almost every heresy , by which people have hidden
from their own eyes or from others the truth of God .
PUSEY-187X-2,135.440

Dwelling upon one set of truths , or of texts which establish them
against another , men deny , in the Name of God , the truths of God .
PUSEY-187X-2,135.441

What a host of errors are dissipated by that explanation of the
Athanasian Creed , " Equal to the Father , as touching His Godhead , and
inferior to the Father as touching His Manhood ! " PUSEY-187X-2,135.442

Yet what is essential to the verity of His Human Nature , is still
alleged to contradict the Verity of His Divine . PUSEY-187X-2,135.443

God can@ @not pray to Himself . PUSEY-187X-2,135.444

Therefore He , our High Priest , could not pray for us , as Man , if He
is prayed to by us , as God , PUSEY-187X-2,135.445

He could not , being God , have said , as Man , " My God , My God , why
hast Thou forsaken Me ? {COM:missing_close_quote} or " Father , if it
be possible , let this cup pass from Me . " And so on .
PUSEY-187X-2,135.446

" He that believeth shall be saved ; " PUSEY-187X-2,135.447

therefore " Baptism in the Name of the Trinity " is useless .
PUSEY-187X-2,135.448

The heavens were to receive Jesus " until the time of the restitution of
all things , " PUSEY-187X-2,135.449

therefore , although He made Himself supernaturally present to S. Paul
, He can@ @not , in fulfilment of His own words , " This is My Body , "
make Himself supernaturally present on our altars .
PUSEY-187X-2,135.450

God Alone forgiveth <P_136> sin ; PUSEY-187X-2,136.451

therefore He can@ @not , by virtue of His words , " Whosesoever
{COM:sic} sins ye remit , they are remitted unto them , " empower man ,
as He did Nathan , to absolve from sin in His Name .
PUSEY-187X-2,136.452

" Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many ; "
PUSEY-187X-2,136.453

and since He ever , at the Right Hand of God , as our Great High Priest
, presenteth within the veil that Sacrifice which He once offered , such
pleading , in our belief , too , can@ @not interfere with the oneness of
that one Meritorious Sacrifice offered on the Cross ;
PUSEY-187X-2,136.454

but if it is taught that the priests are appointed by Him to make , by
virtue of the Real Presence a continual oblation of His death and merits
for the whole human race , - this <font> does <$$font> interfere .
PUSEY-187X-2,136.455

So , 1400 years ago , it was said to a heretic Emperor , " Remember that
there is no one heretic , who doth not say falsely , that what he
blasphemously says , he sets forth according to the Scriptures -
PUSEY-187X-2,136.456

One , which he understandeth not , ' I and the Father are one , ' hath
neither God the Father nor God the Son . PUSEY-187X-2,136.457

Another , through his frantic women , maintaineth another Comforter .
PUSEY-187X-2,136.458

Others hate the law , because the letter killeth , PUSEY-187X-2,136.459

and the devil is the prince of this world . PUSEY-187X-2,136.460

All speak the Scriptures without the meaning of Scripture ,
PUSEY-187X-2,136.461

and , without faith , put forth a faith . PUSEY-187X-2,136.462

For Scriptures are not in reading , but in understanding ; nor in
prevaricating , but in charity . " PUSEY-187X-2,136.463

" All heretics , " says another who was for thirty years engaged in
their conversion , " receive the Scriptures as an authority ;
PUSEY-187X-2,136.464

to themselves they seem to follow them , whereas they do follow their
own <P_137> errors , PUSEY-187X-2,137.465

and are heretics , not because they despise the Scriptures , but because
they understand them not . " PUSEY-187X-2,137.466

" The devil , the author of heresies , " says S. Athanasius , " because
of the ill-savour which attaches to evil , borrows Scripture language ,
as a cloak whereby to sow the ground with his own posion , and to seduce
the simple . " PUSEY-187X-2,137.467

Self-deceit has to veil from itself its contradiction of truth ;
PUSEY-187X-2,137.468

else it would be , not self-deceit but open rebellion .
PUSEY-187X-2,137.469

What marvel that <font> he <$$font> should employ Scripture as a bait
for our willingness to be deceived , when he dared to hold it out to Him
, the All-Holy ? PUSEY-187X-2,137.470

Each holds himself to be exempt from self-deceit . PUSEY-187X-2,137.471

Yet each holds all , who contradict him , to be deceived ;
PUSEY-187X-2,137.472

nay it has been assumed as a maxim , that those are most deceived who
hold an hereditary faith . PUSEY-187X-2,137.473

We hear much of doctrinal prejudices ; PUSEY-187X-2,137.474

we hear nothing of antidoctrinal prejudices : unless it be that firm
believers <paren> as we all do <$$paren> trust , that those invincible
prejudices are , in God's sight too , invincible , and will be looked on
as an excuse in the great Day for having in ignorance rejected his truth
. PUSEY-187X-2,137.475

We hear much of supposed traditional error , PUSEY-187X-2,137.476

we hear nothing of the possibility of self-originated error .
PUSEY-187X-2,137.477

Nay , because there have been large discoveries in things of time and
sense , it has become a rule with some , that in those too which God has
directly revealed , what is new is true ; PUSEY-187X-2,137.478

what is old , is false . PUSEY-187X-2,137.479

Or again men have taken this or that half-understood or un-understood
{COM:sic} truth of revelation , PUSEY-187X-2,137.480

and have said , " I can@ @not believe that God taught this or that ;
PUSEY-187X-2,137.481

therefore I will not believe " what , in despite of their unbelief , is
God's Word . PUSEY-187X-2,137.482

<P_138>

And so the Church of Christ is rent ; God's truth rejected ; charity
wounded ; humility lost ; the purposes of His love defeated ; his tender
care of us set at nought ; his grace baffled ; His Holy Spirit cast out
; the Fall renewed ; the recovery forfeited ; the Blood of Jesus wasted
, because men will not look , face to face , at what they are doing ,
and fall , hoodwinked , self-confident , seeing the less because they
think that they see , into Satan's snares . PUSEY-187X-2,138.484

" If ye were blind , " our Blessed Lord said to those who rejected Him ,
" ye should have no sin ; PUSEY-187X-2,138.485

but now ye say , ' we see , ' PUSEY-187X-2,138.486

therefore your sin remaineth . " PUSEY-187X-2,138.487

" Because they thought they saw , they sought not the Physician ;
PUSEY-187X-2,138.488

they remained in their sins . " PUSEY-187X-2,138.489

He who was blind from his birth saw both in mind and body .
PUSEY-187X-2,138.490

Had these been blinded through necessity of nature , the disease of
unbelief had been pardonable . PUSEY-187X-2,138.491

Now they saw the miracles , PUSEY-187X-2,138.492

but were not drawn to God Who gave them : PUSEY-187X-2,138.493

they made themselves out to be instructed in the law , to be
understanding in the Scripture : PUSEY-187X-2,138.494

therefore they had no plea for disowning Him " of Whom Moses and the
prophets did write . " PUSEY-187X-2,138.495

The self-deceit as to faith is limited , at least in individuals .
PUSEY-187X-2,138.496

It is a monotonous , caw-caw , repetition of the same lie or sophism or
false inference to a person's self , the same setting Scripture at
variance with Scripture , or the over-ruling of its plain meaning by the
same alleged impossibility , or by the Jewish , " How can these things
be ? " under which the human intellect shelters itself from the truth
which it wills not to receive . PUSEY-187X-2,138.497

<P_139>

Self-deceit as to life is well-nigh boundless . PUSEY-187X-2,139.499

One heresy is enough for most people , at least one central heresy .
PUSEY-187X-2,139.500

The mind lies asleep beneath its " refuge of lies , "
PUSEY-187X-2,139.501

and the light seldom anew penetrates or disturbs its recesses .
PUSEY-187X-2,139.502

Self-deceit as to life has need to be more active , more unremitting ,
more wary , because the occasions for blinding one's self occur daily ,
PUSEY-187X-2,139.503

and in each separate act the true conscience , until it is cauterised ,
will , by God's grace and the inspiration of His Spirit , rebel against
the false , which silences it . PUSEY-187X-2,139.504

How many thousand_thousand acts and enacted thoughts of pride , or
self-conceit , or self-complacency , or satire , or cunning , or
censoriousness , or obstinacy , or hardness , or voluptuousness , have
gone to stamp upon the countenance which was formed in the image of God
that unmistakeable expression , which nothing but a strong battle , by
the grace of God , will mitigate or efface . PUSEY-187X-2,139.505

And , meanwhile , no one is less conscious of it than the poor victim .
PUSEY-187X-2,139.506

And why ? PUSEY-187X-2,139.507

Because he is ignorant of himself , because he has never seen himself ,
because he has wished only to see one half of himself , and to hide from
himself that part of himself , which , if he saw , he must , by the
grace of God , change . PUSEY-187X-2,139.508

This is the first great element and motive of practical self-deceit .
PUSEY-187X-2,139.509

It is unnatural , not to be at peace with ourselves .
PUSEY-187X-2,139.510

Our end is everlasting peace with God . PUSEY-187X-2,139.511

Now we may be at peace in two ways . In healthful peace , because , by
God's grace , we are on our way towards that ever-blessed everlasting
peace ; because " the fruit of the Spirit is love , joy , <P_140> peace
. " PUSEY-187X-2,140.512

We count not our stumblings , our bruises , if we know that , with the
strain of every nerve , we are pressing onward to our everlasting home .
PUSEY-187X-2,140.513

We count not the buffeting of the billows , the reeling of our bark , or
its being half-submerged by the waves , if , drenched by the seas ,
staggered , quivering , stunned , reeling , it still disengages itself ,
and rises upward . PUSEY-187X-2,140.514

Or , men seek a peace by the absence of all struggle .
PUSEY-187X-2,140.515

This is , of course , a short road to peace , PUSEY-187X-2,140.516

and we all like short roads . PUSEY-187X-2,140.517

The problem is to satisfy ourselves , that all is right , and somehow to
keep out of sight what is wrong . PUSEY-187X-2,140.518

