<BEGIN_pusey-186x-1>

<P_278>

<heading>

Sermon XV . PUSEY-186X-1,278.4

The Conflict , in a Superficial Age . PUSEY-186X-1,278.5

Psalm xxxix. 6 , 7 . PUSEY-186X-1,278.6

<$$heading>

{COM:epigraph_omitted}

Or , to give the full meaning of the words , at the sacrifice of the
beauty of the translation - In a mere shadowy being doth man walk to and
fro ; PUSEY-186X-1,278.9

For a mere breath do they so tumultuate ; PUSEY-186X-1,278.10

He heapeth up , PUSEY-186X-1,278.11

and knoweth not who their ingatherer . PUSEY-186X-1,278.12

And now , Lord , what have I ever hoped ? PUSEY-186X-1,278.13

My longing expectation - it is for Thee . PUSEY-186X-1,278.14

Everything in this world of trial has a twofold aspect .
PUSEY-186X-1,278.15

Everything , although evil , may , through the grace of God , work to
man's true end , his salvation , and his life in God .
PUSEY-186X-1,278.16

Everything , although good , may , through man's contempt of the grace
of God , work to the endless loss of that for which God created him ,
the blissful sight and possession of God , in the deathless death of
separation from the love of God . PUSEY-186X-1,278.17

Things , unfavourable though they be in themselves , may , by God's
grace , be used to our salvation ; PUSEY-186X-1,278.18

things , favourable though they be in themselves , may , against that
grace , be abused to our damnation . PUSEY-186X-1,278.19

<P_279>

Natural dispositions , good or bad , outward circumstances ,
dispensations of God's providence , prosperous or adverse , may , and do
, turn either to good or evil to us , as by His grace we follow , or by
waste of His grace reject , God's purpose to us through them .
PUSEY-186X-1,279.21

God's judgements <paren> it has been long observed <$$paren> have been
seasons of intenser evil of those persevering in evil , or of conversion
and purification of those who used that grace of God which was offered
to all . PUSEY-186X-1,279.22

The concluding trial of the world is summed up to Daniel , " Many shall
be purified , and made white , and tried ; PUSEY-186X-1,279.23

and the wicked shall do wickedly : PUSEY-186X-1,279.24

and none of the wicked shall understand ; PUSEY-186X-1,279.25

and the wise shall understand . " PUSEY-186X-1,279.26

The wicked , not understanding , shall do yet more wickedly through the
same trial-times , whereby the fearers of God shall gain purity and
whiteness of soul , and purging away of dross . PUSEY-186X-1,279.27

Nothing , alas ! is more common than to see natural good run to seed ,
waste , even ally itself to evil ; so that the corn-crop , once so full
of promise , unnourished by grace , ends , at last , in ears thin ,
withered , blasted by the east wind , as profitless as the darnel .
PUSEY-186X-1,279.28

The natural good becomes a source of self-deceit , in that the soul
rests in it , and looks away from or condones its evil ;
PUSEY-186X-1,279.29

and the result is a beautiful , smooth , unwrinkled surface , chiselled
as by a Greek statuary , but as lifeless as his stone .
PUSEY-186X-1,279.30

Contrariwise , the hard outstanding natural faults , the rough irritable
temper at which people take such offence , may be God's instrument in
keeping the soul low , itself to be the last conquest of His grace .
PUSEY-186X-1,279.31

What , alas ! more common than that a graceful natural <P_280> easiness
of disposition is yielding , even to deadly sin ? PUSEY-186X-1,280.32

Moses' hasty , fiery temper , although it lost him Canaan , gained him
that especial praise of God , Whose grace transformed it into the "
exceeding meekness " above all the men upon the face of the earth .
PUSEY-186X-1,280.33

We have all of us this blended natural evil and good in us ; some ,
commonly some <font> one <$$font> , prominent disposition to good ,
which is the richest ore for Divine grace to sever from the dross , and
yield pure and glorious , grace-enkindled , to the glory of God .
PUSEY-186X-1,280.34

And we have some <font> one <$$font> chief evil disposition , the "
besetting sin , " which is the chief instrument within us , whereby
Satan would ensnare us to our destruction , and corrupt all our good .
PUSEY-186X-1,280.35

And one of these two results must be the end of each , the grace of God
penetrating the whole and leavening it , or the evil deceitfulness of
Satan corrupting the natural good and making all evil .
PUSEY-186X-1,280.36

This same blending of natural good and evil , which is found in the
individual , re-appears in the aggregate of individuals , in the nation
or the age . PUSEY-186X-1,280.37

We speak familiarly of " the national character " of all the nations
which we know , each with its blended good and evil .
PUSEY-186X-1,280.38

<paren> You will readily recall these several characteristics to
yourselves <$$paren> . PUSEY-186X-1,280.39

The successive ages in Europe have in such wise had each its own mark
impressed upon it , that writers have characterised them , and given to
each its name . PUSEY-186X-1,280.40

And , again , we ourselves , one by one , partake of the character of
the age in which we live , as , on the other hand , we each , like so
many drops in the huge <P_281> ocean , contribute to swell it .
PUSEY-186X-1,281.41

Over and above our natural character , we are , each of us , moulded in
our degree by the character of our age . PUSEY-186X-1,281.42

We are <paren> apart , at present , from grace <$$paren> other men than
we should have been , had we , with these same natural dispositions ,
lived in any other century than that in which God has placed us .
PUSEY-186X-1,281.43

And self-knowledge has this double office to perform , to understand
what we are of ourselves , and how we are influenced by that great world
around us , of which we are a part . PUSEY-186X-1,281.44

God the Holy Ghost has a distinct office to perform towards us , from
that which He would graciously have done for us in any other age , in
that He vouchsafes to give us grace , in reference not only to our
natural character , but also as that character is directed both to good
and evil by the influences around us . PUSEY-186X-1,281.45

Every age has its own natural good and evil ; its good , a help by the
grace of God , to good ; and its evil , an all-encompassing , ever-@
@recurring temptation to evil , pressing in upon us , thronging us ,
carrying us off our feet before we are aware , ubiquitous , represented
to us by most with whom we have converse , inhaled with almost every
breath . PUSEY-186X-1,281.46

Its good is an impulse , by grace helping us onward ; its evil a miasma
, out of which we can@ @not escape , poisonous , but , alas ! pleasant
. PUSEY-186X-1,281.47

Plainly , all the natural circumstances , under or amid which we are
placed , will form part of our trial , because they form part of our
life : PUSEY-186X-1,281.48

everything in this world , according as we use it , is " a savour of
life or a savour of death . " PUSEY-186X-1,281.49

But the most subtle danger of the spirit of the age is analogous to that
, incidental to the natural good in the individual , viz. that it
should form a character , <P_282> in which certain natural virtues
should be substituted for Divine grace . PUSEY-186X-1,282.50

It imports us , then , much to know , what are the natural advantages
and disadvantages of the age in which we live : its disadvantages , for
therein lies one special outward hindrance to our salvation ; its
advantages , because they are so many helps towards our salvation , if ,
by His grace , we use them rightly ; PUSEY-186X-1,282.51

and it should be a ground of thanksgiving to God that He has so far
surrounded us with a healthy atmosphere ; PUSEY-186X-1,282.52

and we should the less take them to ourselves or think any good of
ourselves for them ; PUSEY-186X-1,282.53

for plainly they are the less anything of ours , inasmuch as they belong
to most around us . PUSEY-186X-1,282.54

Now it <font> has <$$font> advantages for our soul's good , that we do
live in a refined , reading , intellectual , active age . Not , as I
said , that nature can do the work of grace , or that , without grace ,
these same things would not turn to evil or be a snare to us , or
minister the more fatally to self-deceit , or absorb us out of the
atmosphere of grace , or hide from us God and the invisible ; nor that
some of our trials do not lie in them . PUSEY-186X-1,282.55

Refinement , of itself , may only blind us the more , because its sins
are the more subtle . PUSEY-186X-1,282.56

Its sins are more malignant , more deliberate , more unawakening , more
directed against God , more diabolical . PUSEY-186X-1,282.57

A man sins in them more , face to face , against God .
PUSEY-186X-1,282.58

Still , in a refined age , sin is not so much obtruded upon us ;
PUSEY-186X-1,282.59

it does not so much seek us , if we do not seek it .
PUSEY-186X-1,282.60

It is veiled , PUSEY-186X-1,282.61

and we need not lift the veil unless we will . PUSEY-186X-1,282.62

We feel that we do violence to our conscience if we lift it .
PUSEY-186X-1,282.63

Then , again , shame may <P_283> keep men from shameful sins .
PUSEY-186X-1,283.64

It is much to have shame on the right side ! PUSEY-186X-1,283.65

We shall think so , if we think of that " shame of a less shamelessness
, " which becomes a temptation , when sin is openly and coarsely spoken
of . PUSEY-186X-1,283.66

Again , the world's refinement is based upon Christianity , even though
the world knows not of it . PUSEY-186X-1,283.67

Without Christianity it never did exist , PUSEY-186X-1,283.68

and could not exist ; PUSEY-186X-1,283.69

for it is based on principles which the Cross first taught ;
self-denying love , preferring others to self . PUSEY-186X-1,283.70

Yet to act aright , in daily outward things , is a great help towards
inward rightness . PUSEY-186X-1,283.71

It is a beautiful body , unensouled indeed as yet by the grace of God ,
yet ready for Him , in His goodness , to breath into it the breath of
life . PUSEY-186X-1,283.72

Then , again , we should thank God that He has placed us in an
intellectual or reading age . PUSEY-186X-1,283.73

For cultivation of mind , although without the grace of God it would
only sharpen an instrument for Satan , is in many ways very subservient
to grace . PUSEY-186X-1,283.74

First , it is a direct antagonist to the sensualism which is a vice ,
not so much of our age , as of our English nature , and which is , now
more than heretofore , a wide-spread destroyer of soul and body .
PUSEY-186X-1,283.75

Our proverbs tell us of the antagonism between intellect and sensuality
. PUSEY-186X-1,283.76

We see it in the countenance . PUSEY-186X-1,283.77

That most delicate organ of God , the human brain , is directly injured
by self-indulgence . PUSEY-186X-1,283.78

There are marvellous ways in which some sorts of self-indulgence <paren>
which some here , alas ! must know of <$$paren> impair fineness <P_284>
of intellect , make memory less tenacious , bring a cloud over the
understanding , cause a sudden collapse or snap in reasoning , mar the
creativeness of intellect . PUSEY-186X-1,284.79

The instrument suddenly gives way , because it has been , throughout
{TEXT:thoughout} , marred , disordered . PUSEY-186X-1,284.80

<paren> I speak of what I have been told of old by the sufferers .
<$$paren> PUSEY-186X-1,284.81

Grace has so much to do for our poor nature , and we so shrink from its
touch or from direct conflict , that it is a great thing to be able to
arm our higher nature against our lower , as an auxiliary and servant of
grace . PUSEY-186X-1,284.82

It is a poor thing ; PUSEY-186X-1,284.83

but the struggle is for our lives , PUSEY-186X-1,284.84

and we must be thankful for any shelter , however mean and homely and
unspiritual , which God provides for us , so we can take refuge in it
from that storm of sin . PUSEY-186X-1,284.85

Our intellect is a present gift which God has bestowed upon us , which
we can@ @not but value ; PUSEY-186X-1,284.86

and it is a good thing for us to know , that sensuality is a deadly foe
of our intellects as well as of our souls . PUSEY-186X-1,284.87

For men flatter themselves that repentance will make all right about our
souls , PUSEY-186X-1,284.88

<paren> God is so good , <$$paren> PUSEY-186X-1,284.89

but the injury to intellect is sensible , irreparable .
PUSEY-186X-1,284.90

But this requires thought . PUSEY-186X-1,284.91

Intellectual employments have this advantage , that , even without being
directly religious , they raise the soul into a higher , purer ,
atmosphere . PUSEY-186X-1,284.92

It is a great gain , when young , to elude the enemy , to fill the
imagination with pure healthy thoughts , to distract the mind from
subjects which would lead to sin . PUSEY-186X-1,284.93

The proverb tells us , that " idleness is the mother of all vices . "
PUSEY-186X-1,284.94

Occupation , then , at least , cuts off the occasion of a whole brood of
sins . PUSEY-186X-1,284.95

It does not bring us within the sphere of <P_285> grace ,
PUSEY-186X-1,285.96

but it is an outward and powerful protection against sins , which would
carry away youth as with a whirlwind out of it . PUSEY-186X-1,285.97

Experience , I think , will tell most of you , that your busiest times
have been the times freest from temptation . PUSEY-186X-1,285.98

We have , then , great reason to thank God for having placed us in an
intellectual , or , at least , a reading age . PUSEY-186X-1,285.99

Intellectual activity is one form only of the activity of our age ;
PUSEY-186X-1,285.100

and every form of activity , which is not itself evil , is , although
not connected with grace , a safety-valve for ourselves .
PUSEY-186X-1,285.101

Man's self is his worst foe ; PUSEY-186X-1,285.102

and , so far , everything is his friend which tends to take him out of
himself . PUSEY-186X-1,285.103

The habit , too , of activity is a preparation for activity in what is
good or beneficial to others . PUSEY-186X-1,285.104

We may mistake natural activity in good things for grace , all the more
because activity is instinctive to us . PUSEY-186X-1,285.105

Still , since sloth is a deadly sin , it is a great thing that its
contradictory , activity , is nature to us . PUSEY-186X-1,285.106

This channel for grace is at least unobstructed , ready to receive the
life-giving stream of the grace of God . PUSEY-186X-1,285.107

I have dwelt on this the bright side of our times , first , because it
is truthful ; then , because thankfulness to our good God requires it ;
then too , because gloominess is very disedifying , disennobling ,
paralysing . PUSEY-186X-1,285.108

But perhaps some of you may think that this which I have said about
intellectual activity supersedes the necessity of any warning about that
which has been assigned to me to speak of to you to-night , " The
Conflict in a Superficial Age . " PUSEY-186X-1,285.109

On the contrary , it is the very occasion of that warning .
PUSEY-186X-1,285.110

True , discovery has been most active . PUSEY-186X-1,285.111

It has seemed as if God had laid open to us His natural world , had
<P_286> bestowed upon us a new revelation of it , new powers and methods
of decyphering it , and as if He meant to unfold to us more and more of
the mysteries of His physical creation . PUSEY-186X-1,286.112

We could almost imagine that there would be no limits to our discoveries
, save that , being His creation , it is the finite expression of that
which is infinite , and that we are discovering only a chain of causes
and effects . PUSEY-186X-1,286.113

The first principles lie as much hidden from our sight as ever .
PUSEY-186X-1,286.114

Still He <font> is <$$font> unfolding to us marvel upon marvel of His
wonderful works . PUSEY-186X-1,286.115

Thanks be to Him for every instance of His marvellous goodness !
PUSEY-186X-1,286.116

But observe , PUSEY-186X-1,286.117

the question is not about the discoverers , but about the " age , " i.e.
about ourselves , who are the receivers of the knowledge .
PUSEY-186X-1,286.118

And <font> we <$$font> may be superficial in two ways , quite compatibly
with the brilliancy of the genius which discovers .
PUSEY-186X-1,286.119

We may be superficial in our way of appropriating knowledge , which it
requires a wondrous combination of God's gifts to discover .
PUSEY-186X-1,286.120

Then , too , the nature of that knowledge may tend <paren> of course
through our abuse of it <$$paren> to make us take up with knowledge
which is very superficial to <font> us <$$font> , touching only the
surface of what concerns our real being and our own souls .
PUSEY-186X-1,286.121

Our Lord has said , " What shall it profit a man , if he gain the whole
world and lose his own soul ? " PUSEY-186X-1,286.122

What then does it profit a man , if he gain the knowledge of the whole
world and lose the knowledge of God Who made his soul , and by the
knowledge of Whom his soul is to be saved ? PUSEY-186X-1,286.123

Yet these are just the abuses which people are making of that knowledge
which , in these days more <P_287> than in those before us , God is so
manifoldly unfolding to us . PUSEY-186X-1,287.124

Its very manifoldness tends to make us superficial .
PUSEY-186X-1,287.125

Men pause on nothing , PUSEY-186X-1,287.126

weigh nothing , PUSEY-186X-1,287.127

have an opinion on everything . PUSEY-186X-1,287.128

We think that we know much , because much is known .
PUSEY-186X-1,287.129

Yet what is all this doing with us , but forming a habit of imagining ,
that we have an adequate personal knowledge of what we , for ourselves ,
know nothing ? PUSEY-186X-1,287.130

The discoveries , also , are wholly as to things without us , God's
physical creation . PUSEY-186X-1,287.131

But of ourselves , the most marvellous mystery of that creation , whose
life of grace is the study of angels , whose lower nature only belongs
to the world of sense , who were formed in the image of God and
re-created in the likeness of God made Man , whose union is with God ,
whose soul is His dwelling-place , what more do we know of the mysteries
of our being , of the laws of our thought , of our supernatural life ,
of our intercourse with God , or of the manifold ways of God's love and
mercy with the soul ? PUSEY-186X-1,287.132

Men have closed almost everything spiritual to themselves , every deeper
thought of God , of their own being , because <font> there <$$font> they
found insoluble mysteries , PUSEY-186X-1,287.133

and <font> their <$$font> delight was in things which they could master
. PUSEY-186X-1,287.134

I said , in regard to us individually , that one main peril is , lest we
rest in that natural good which God endowed us with , lest we be content
with the lesser part instead of the whole , with the cultivation of the
natural instead of the supernatural , our natural selves unspiritualized
, unelevated , untransformed by the grace of God . PUSEY-186X-1,287.135

This same is the special danger of the spirit of the age , lest it
occasion us to take up with natural <P_288> beauty instead of holiness ,
with natural knowledge of God instead of divine revelation , with a
vague knowledge about God instead of a personal relation to Him and
union with Him by His indwelling Spirit . PUSEY-186X-1,288.136

Look at the modern tone of morals . PUSEY-186X-1,288.137

I speak not , of course , of those whom God has called out of the world
, or of those who are daily living near to God , resting on the merits
of Jesus in humility and meekness and self-abnegation .
PUSEY-186X-1,288.138

I mean , what is the ideal of the age ? PUSEY-186X-1,288.139

For it is " the age " which we are speaking of ; PUSEY-186X-1,288.140

it is " the age " which we are tempted to make our standard of the will
of God for us . PUSEY-186X-1,288.141

I think I might without injustice <paren> would to God it <font> were
<$$font> injustice ! <$$paren> sum it up as decorous and amiable .
PUSEY-186X-1,288.142

This would include that outward refinement which I spoke of ;
unwillingness to pain one present , a certain kindliness , the avoidance
of what would shock people's idol , public opinion , such as would be
vice in any of its coarser forms , drunkenness or actual adultery , or
flagrant dishonesty . PUSEY-186X-1,288.143

Then , of course , there must be a general recognition of one's duty ,
at least to one's neighbour , and so much of one's duty to God as is
involved in saying some prayer morning and evening <paren> would God
some real heart's-prayer , even if short , were always said <$$paren>
and going to church once , perhaps twice , on the Sunday .
PUSEY-186X-1,288.144

Men's end is to be comfortable with themselves , which includes that it
should not go wrong with them hereafter . PUSEY-186X-1,288.145

With this there must , of course , be a recognition that we are
imperfect creatures , who habitually fail , although mostly as an
anodyne to conscience , PUSEY-186X-1,288.146

" We are imperfect , PUSEY-186X-1,288.147

and we can@ @not help it . " PUSEY-186X-1,288.148

<P_289>

But where , then , is anything which involves any real conflict with
Satan or with self ? PUSEY-186X-1,289.150

What Scripture-description of a life to God , in God , could men even
think of as fitting to themselves ? PUSEY-186X-1,289.151

I do not ask as to our , in any way , fulfilling it , but only as to our
setting it before us as a thing , by God's grace , to be fulfilled .
PUSEY-186X-1,289.152

How would the words sound , were one - I will not say in any place of
amusement , but - in any domestic circle , to name the words '
perfection , ' ' devoutness , ' ' self-sacrifice , ' '
single-heartedness , ' ' sanctity , ' ' spirituality , ' '
responsibility , ' ' collectedness , ' ' self-abasement , ' ' contrition
, ' ' humiliation , ' ' zeal , ' ' meekness , ' ' poverty of spirit , '
' hunger and thirst after righteousness , ' ' prayer without ceasing , '
' thanksgiving in all things , ' ' doing <font> all <$$font> to the
glory of God ? ' PUSEY-186X-1,289.153

I have not spoken of any of the austerer graces , ' self-revenge , ' '
self-contempt , ' ' self-mortification , ' ' co-crucifixion with Christ
, ' of which S. Paul speaks ; nor again of contemplation , meditation
on God or on Jesus and His sufferings , communion with God , personal
love for God , union with God , and that continually growing ; nor yet ,
once more , of God's being " a jealous God , " jealous that the love to
Him should not be parted between Him and His creatures .
PUSEY-186X-1,289.154

But those words , which express only ordinary Christian graces , some of
them the subjects singled out by our Lord for blessing , or which S.
Paul speaks of as mere matters of course , so to say , in a Christian
life and passes on , would they not sound startlingly to the soul , as
if they had belonged to a different being ? PUSEY-186X-1,289.155

And truly they do belong to a different being . PUSEY-186X-1,289.156

For men are , unconsciously , living mere natural lives , without effort
, without aim , without <P_290> struggle , without victory , without
compass , without lode-star , crossing the perilous sea of this world ,
where countless souls are shipwrecked , without any consciousness of
peril , or any desire except to escape unrespectable sins , such as ,
they hope , that a moderate share of six deadly sins , pride ,
covetousness , gluttony , luxury , envy , anger , is not , nor an entire
possession by the seventh , sloth , as far as it is spiritual .
PUSEY-186X-1,290.157

Christians are leading natural lives , <paren> except as far as habitual
grace was , in baptism , bestowed upon them , and is kept feebly alive
by listless prayers , <$$paren> PUSEY-186X-1,290.158

and the Christian's life is supernatural . PUSEY-186X-1,290.159

But where , then , is the Christian's non-conformity with the world ?
where his transformation ? where his new creation ? where his
Christ-mindedness ? where Christ's life in him ? where " the fruit of
the travail " of the Redeemer's soul ? to what end the indwelling of
Christ ? PUSEY-186X-1,290.160

wherein is his sonship to God ? PUSEY-186X-1,290.161

what is sanctification {TEXT:santification} ? PUSEY-186X-1,290.162

or what means being " a temple of the Holy Ghost , " or " walking with
God " <paren> which the old patriarchs had before Christ died <$$paren>
, or the outpouring of the Spirit in our hearts ? PUSEY-186X-1,290.163

The higher , more penetrating requirements of God's law , the
consciousness of sin as an offence against the will of God <paren> not
as ' vice ' only , or a defect in ourselves and an offence against our
moral nature <$$paren> , and the supernatural aids of grace as the
antagonist of sinfulness and the enabler of men's weakness , have faded
out of popular literature together . PUSEY-186X-1,290.164

It is penetrated with an unconscious , simple-hearted Pelagianism ,
which ignores all deeper truth as to both God and man , because it has
lived too much in the outer <P_291> world of sense and its manifold
interests , ever to think seriously of its own needs , or of God's
ever-ready , ever-@ @inviting grace , or of its own unintermitting
relations and duties to God Who made it . PUSEY-186X-1,291.165

And so , in regard to what calls itself " the theology of the nineteenth
century , " it corresponds to this aspect of man . PUSEY-186X-1,291.166

To <font> us <$$font> , to whom God has disclosed something of the
nature of sin and of His aweful holiness , the centre of the Gospel is
His Divine , unspeakable mercy to us , His sinful creatures whom <font>
He <$$font> made , whom we unmade , whom He redeemed and recreates .
PUSEY-186X-1,291.167

We can never forget our own special relation to God .
PUSEY-186X-1,291.168

We are not , as yet , " like unto the angels ; " PUSEY-186X-1,291.169

we are " saved in hope " only ; PUSEY-186X-1,291.170

we are not in our home , but in an enemy's land . PUSEY-186X-1,291.171

And therefore awe enters so largely into our relation to God .
PUSEY-186X-1,291.172

Our Lord has said to us , " I will forewarn you , Whom ye shall fear .
PUSEY-186X-1,291.173

Fear Him , which , after He hath killed , hath power to cast into hell ;
PUSEY-186X-1,291.174

yea , I say unto you , Fear Him . " PUSEY-186X-1,291.175

What of the new theology ? PUSEY-186X-1,291.176

All which it proposes , which is not mere denial of truth , <paren>
hinted by some , avowed by others , <$$paren> is a more graphic
delineation of the outer circumstances which encompass the sacred
history . PUSEY-186X-1,291.177

To know the atmosphere in which David or S. Paul moved , is to shew men
more the mind of the Psalmist or the Apostle ! PUSEY-186X-1,291.178

Holy Scripture tells us of another haze which has to be broken through ,
than any supposed to lie on the history of the Jews , that we may see
clearly , what mists <P_292> of earthliness have to be dispelled by "
the Sun of Righteousness . " PUSEY-186X-1,292.179

It tells us of another veil than the veil of time ; the veil which lies
upon the natural unillumined heart of man , which veil is to be removed
, not by the knowledge of some outward history , but by conversion of
the heart to God . PUSEY-186X-1,292.180

" When it shall be turned to the Lord , the veil shall be taken away .
" PUSEY-186X-1,292.181

It tells us of another ground of understanding or not understanding the
mind of God , - whether a man have " received the spirit of the world ,
" or " the Spirit of God , to perceive the things freely given us by God
; " whether a man have simply his natural powers , <paren> be he , thus
far , as highly gifted as God has ever created the keenest intellect of
man , <$$paren> or whether he be illumined by the Spirit of God ;
whether he would , of himself , know the mind of God and teach Him ,
<paren> as men make their " moral sense " the interpreter of Divine
truth , <$$paren> or whether he " have " himself " the mind of Christ ,
" being taught of Himself to understand Him . PUSEY-186X-1,292.182

Pleasant is it to know anything which illustrates even the outward part
of the Word of God ; PUSEY-186X-1,292.183

useful is it , so far , if by any means the truth of the sacred history
be brought more vividly home to one who unhappily believes it not .
PUSEY-186X-1,292.184

Yet the knowledge of the natural can teach only the natural .
PUSEY-186X-1,292.185

The unhappy man who learnt to believe the existence of Jesus only from
the country which saw His mighty works , unillumined by His Spirit ,
unconverted by His grace , returned only to blaspheme Him .
PUSEY-186X-1,292.186

Better never to have known of Him ! PUSEY-186X-1,292.187

It was <P_293> the nearness only of the unconverted robber who looked
into that meek Face to blaspheme Him . PUSEY-186X-1,293.188

It was the nearness of the rude soldiers who beheld " the Lamb of God
Who taketh away the sins of the world " only to increase their own ; the
nearness of those who " spat in His face and buffeted Him . "
PUSEY-186X-1,293.189

Better far , not to have heard of the name of Christ than to delineate
Him as the enthusiast deteriorating into the conniver at imposture .
PUSEY-186X-1,293.190

The background of the mountains of Judah can throw no light on that
sacred Form which went about doing good , suffering , speaking " as
never man spake " among them . PUSEY-186X-1,293.191

When those scenes , now hallowed by remembrance of Him to those who love
Him , beheld Him present , " the Light of the world , " they who " loved
darkness rather than light , " who were blinded by their imagined sight
, hallowed those scenes the more by crucifying Him Who came to enlighten
them . PUSEY-186X-1,293.192

They shed the Blood which redeemed the world and sanctifieth it , as the
common blood of a malefactor and a deceiver . PUSEY-186X-1,293.193

The knowledge of human errors , which He came to correct , can cast no
light upon the Divine truth , which He was , which He came to reveal ,
which He heard from the Father . PUSEY-186X-1,293.194

He came to shine in the darkness , not to receive light from it .
PUSEY-186X-1,293.195

And what light is He to receive from us ? PUSEY-186X-1,293.196

" The more fully it is understood what He was , what He did , what is
meant by His life , by His death , by His resurrection , so much the
more fully , " we are told , " will the Church understand the sense in
which He was Divine , and the sense in which He was human . "
PUSEY-186X-1,293.197

<P_294>

This is to be the end of the new meditative study of our dear Lord's
incarnation , life , and death for us sinners , that we are to know in
what sense He , One God with the Father , " the Word , " Who " was with
God " in the beginning , " and was God , " and for us " men and for our
salvation " was made Flesh , Was God ; in what sense He Who was Perfect
Man was human . PUSEY-186X-1,294.199

The basis of this new theology is to be , to unlearn our God-given faith
; PUSEY-186X-1,294.200

its development is , not to expand but to destroy what God gave us .
PUSEY-186X-1,294.201

The denial of truth is to be the development of truth .
PUSEY-186X-1,294.202

The statement that future punishment is <font> not <$$font> everlasting
is to be the development of the faith that it <font> is . <$$font>
PUSEY-186X-1,294.203

Not-being is to be the development of being ; death , of life .
PUSEY-186X-1,294.204

And what is to be the end of this learning ? PUSEY-186X-1,294.205

In part , the simple words of God , to learn which needs no research ,
that " God is love ; " that He , Who is the source and pattern of all
perfection , is " a moral Being . " PUSEY-186X-1,294.206

O wonderful discovery of what every child can read in every page of the
Bible ! that God is holy , just , faithful , true , and alone good .
And then , that He " is a righteous Judge , Who will deal with us
according to truth . " PUSEY-186X-1,294.207

Strange Gospel for fallen man ! PUSEY-186X-1,294.208

" Enter not into judgement with Thy servant , O Lord ,
PUSEY-186X-1,294.209

for in Thy sight shall no man living be justified . "
PUSEY-186X-1,294.210

" Woe be even to the commendable life of men , if , laying aside mercy ,
Thou shouldest examine it . " PUSEY-186X-1,294.211

This , then , is the central superficialness of this age , and of what
calls itself its theology , that it is so occupied with things of sense
or intellect which do <P_295> not bear on man's inner nature , that it
forgets itself and its relation to God . PUSEY-186X-1,295.212

It treats with God - nay , it would be truer to say , it treats <font>
of <$$font> God - not with the tender familiarity of reverential love ,
but with the calm complacency of one whose rights God is bound to
respect , and who is , on the whole , on good terms with God .
PUSEY-186X-1,295.213

And therefore it is false and hollow to God and to itself .
PUSEY-186X-1,295.214

These two objects of knowledge , unlike as they are , of God and of
ourselves , mutually condition one another . And that , in part ,
because God has revealed Himself to us , chiefly in reference to
ourselves . PUSEY-186X-1,295.215

To " see God as He is , " is the reward of eternity :
PUSEY-186X-1,295.216

to " know as we are known " is God's gift , when , by His mercy , we
shall see Him " face to face . " PUSEY-186X-1,295.217

Now we see in a mirror only some reflection of His attributes and His
love . PUSEY-186X-1,295.218

But to see them in that mirror , our own inner eye must be cleansed ;
PUSEY-186X-1,295.219

no breath of self must dim the surface which is to reflect God .
PUSEY-186X-1,295.220

The soul , which knows not itself , and has not , by the grace of God ,
purified itself , will not see clearly the image of God , which it has
deformed in itself . PUSEY-186X-1,295.221

" He that hath this hope " of seeing God , S. John saith , " purifieth
himself , as He is pure . " PUSEY-186X-1,295.222

" We , " says S. Paul , " with face which hath been unveiled , "
<paren> {COM:greek_omitted} <$$paren> - mind , he says not , with face
which sees by any natural discernment of its own , but with face from
which the veil , which intercepted the light of Divine truth , has been
removed by another , that is by Christ and the Spirit of Christ , - " We
, with face unveiled " by Christ in our conversion to God , " beholding
in a mirror , " no <P_296> longer any reflection of our natural selves ,
but " the glory of God , " are illumined by that Divine light which we
behold ; PUSEY-186X-1,296.223

we receive in ourselves some of the effulgence of that glory which we
contemplate ; PUSEY-186X-1,296.224

we are changed and transformed into that same image of God which we gaze
upon ; and <font> that <$$font> " from glory to glory , " from one
degree of glory , to another , from one degree of transfiguring light to
another ; and <font> that <$$font> still , not of ourselves , but such
as He alone can work Who is the Lord of the soul , the Almighty
re-Creator , the Spirit of God , " as by the Lord , the Spirit . "
PUSEY-186X-1,296.225

This is a " progress " worthy of the name ; a progress from one degree
of Divine light to another , until the last perfecting on earth , the
last sanctifying , illumining grace yields the soul , cleansed by its
Redeemer's Blood , made meet for the unmerited gift of God , the eternal
beatific vision of Himself . PUSEY-186X-1,296.226

This is true illumining , because the soul is over-streamed by the light
of God . PUSEY-186X-1,296.227

This is true freedom , because it is wrought by Him Who makes those whom
He frees , " free indeed , " PUSEY-186X-1,296.228

" Where the Spirit of the Lord is , there is liberty ; " freedom from
the darkening power of sin ; freedom from ignorance and error and our
own dull conceptions ; freedom from prejudices , not from the light of
the old eternal truths , but from our own short-sighted guesses , and
uncertain speculations , and hasty prejudications of that truth which
God is {COM:in_capitals_in_original} and reveals , that we may be able
to receive in unclosed minds the irradiating , transforming light of God
. PUSEY-186X-1,296.229

Such is the goal , such the prize , deiformity ; to be <P_297> formed
<font> by <$$font> God <font> for <$$font> God , into a likeness of the
all-good God . PUSEY-186X-1,297.230

But step by step . PUSEY-186X-1,297.231

The first step is the cleansing of the soul . PUSEY-186X-1,297.232

The first condition of the removal of the veil , which over-spread the
whole world out of God , is to turn to God . PUSEY-186X-1,297.233

" When they shall turn unto the Lord , the veil shall be taken away . "
PUSEY-186X-1,297.234

" To depart from evil , that is understanding . " PUSEY-186X-1,297.235

Yes , dare to see thyself ! PUSEY-186X-1,297.236

Behold thy whole self , such as God will unveil thee to thee , some
image of the knowledge at the great day ; PUSEY-186X-1,297.237

place thyself under the penetrating light of God ; PUSEY-186X-1,297.238

pray Him to exhibit thee to thyself , all which thou ever hast been ,
all which thou art , all which thou wouldest hide from thyself , under
one ray of His Divine light . PUSEY-186X-1,297.239

Do this , having first set God before thee , not as " the Deity , " not
as a " First Cause , " but as " the living God , " out of Whose
Omnipresence thou canst not move ; in Whom thou hast sinned ; Whose
supporting strength thou hast abused against Himself to sin ; Whose love
, every selfish injury of another's soul has wounded in its tenderest
depth ; to Whose aweful justice thou art absolutely responsible ; Whose
individual loving-kindness for thee , in every rejection of any known
motion of grace thou hast despised ; Whose temple in thee , if thou
broughtest unclean thoughts into thy soul <paren> much more if there was
any sin in act <$$paren> , thou defiledst ; to Whom , by any deliberate
habit of sin , thou saidst in fact , " I will not have Thee to reign
over me . " PUSEY-186X-1,297.240

Set God thus before thee , PUSEY-186X-1,297.241

and , by His mercy , the Pharisee-religion of the day will not again be
thine . PUSEY-186X-1,297.242

Nor will God leave thy soul , from which He has <P_298> cast out the
Pharisaism or Pelagianism of the day , a blank . PUSEY-186X-1,298.243

Rather , it will then cease to be a blank . PUSEY-186X-1,298.244

He will take the pen of His Spirit , and write on thy soul His own
ineffaceable inscription , " Redeemed by the Blood of God , " " Redeemed
by the Blood of thine own God . " PUSEY-186X-1,298.245

Then will all things take their due place . PUSEY-186X-1,298.246

Then will thine existence cease to be " shadowy , " PUSEY-186X-1,298.247

for thou art sealed for eternity by the Blood of Jesus .
PUSEY-186X-1,298.248

Thine eternal life is begun . PUSEY-186X-1,298.249

Then will the things of the age cease to be superficial ;
PUSEY-186X-1,298.250

there will be no mere surface left ; PUSEY-186X-1,298.251

for everything will be filled with life , PUSEY-186X-1,298.252

everything will have its endless end , Almighty God .
PUSEY-186X-1,298.253

Thou wilt shrink into nothingness before His aweful Majesty , only to be
re-created , enlarged , filled by Him Who fills the universe .
PUSEY-186X-1,298.254

Then will intellectual activity be empowered to range freely , not
aiming , Phaethon-like , to snatch the reins of the horses of fire from
its Father's hand , but circling in the God-described orbit round the
eternal throne ; not less free , but " free indeed , " because it shall
freely choose the good for which it was chosen , its free-will
enfranchised , emancipated , disenthralled by Christ .
PUSEY-186X-1,298.255

Fetters are for the rebellious . PUSEY-186X-1,298.256

God's service is " perfect freedom , " freedom from one's worst tyrants
, one's self , or the craven fear of man's opinion .
PUSEY-186X-1,298.257

Then will science range freely , unhurried to rash conclusions ;
intuitive , because in its measure inspired by Him Who is the Indweller
of the soul , Whose enabling Spirit suggests every true thought ,
natural or supernatural . PUSEY-186X-1,298.258

O that you could know , that you may know , how joyous , how glorious ,
is the liberty of the soul , enfreed by God ; how magnificent the
dignity is , <P_299> throughout the common duties of the day , to have
God for one's end . PUSEY-186X-1,299.259

Nothing is irksome , nothing oppressive , nothing shallow , nothing
heartless . PUSEY-186X-1,299.260

For God ennobles everything , PUSEY-186X-1,299.261

lights up everything , PUSEY-186X-1,299.262

kindles everything with the ray of His love , which is at once Divine
light and Divine warmth . PUSEY-186X-1,299.263

Then thou shalt walk , not in a shadowy being , as this life would in
itself , at best , be , but up and down with God ; PUSEY-186X-1,299.264

in God thou shalt take thy rest ; PUSEY-186X-1,299.265

with God shalt thou rise ; with God converse ; PUSEY-186X-1,299.266

His wisdom shall be thy wisdom , His truth thy light , His love thy joy
. PUSEY-186X-1,299.267

And if this be the mirror , what the " face to face ? "
PUSEY-186X-1,299.268

" And now , Lord , what have I ever longed for ? PUSEY-186X-1,299.269

My longing expectation is for Thee . " PUSEY-186X-1,299.270

And now , my sons , go your way to this new world , upon which there
stream beams of light from the half-opening portals of heaven .
PUSEY-186X-1,299.271

Christ looks on you , His soldiers ; PUSEY-186X-1,299.272

Christ looks to see your victories in His strength ;
PUSEY-186X-1,299.273

Christ at this moment and evermore is interceding for you ;
PUSEY-186X-1,299.274

Christ , " Who will crown His own deeds in you , will Himself be crowned
in you , PUSEY-186X-1,299.275

yea , in you for whose salvation He thirsted on the Cross , " He shall
see of the travail of His soul , PUSEY-186X-1,299.276

and " <paren> amazing condescension of Jesus <$$paren> " shall be
satisfied . " PUSEY-186X-1,299.277

Only as you go , remember , for love of Him , those who , with you ,
were once made members of Christ ; whom man's selfishness and animal
passions have degraded ; whom Christ has plucked anew , " brands out of
the burning ; " whom Christ is anew purifying by His Spirit to shine
<paren> with us too , as , in His mercy , We trust <$$paren> with their
own brightness , as His redeemed in the kingdom of His Father .
PUSEY-186X-1,299.278

<P_300>

<heading>

Sermon XVI . PUSEY-186X-1,300.281

The Gospel , The Power of God . PUSEY-186X-1,300.282

S. Luke xxiv. 49 . PUSEY-186X-1,300.283

<$$heading>

{COM:epigraph_omitted}

Man's power had been weighed in the balance , PUSEY-186X-1,300.286

and had been found wanting . PUSEY-186X-1,300.287

Minds , as acute , as rich , as varied in their gifts , as any which God
had created , had done whatever could be done in the way of intellect .
PUSEY-186X-1,300.288

The intrinsic beauty of goodness , its fittingness , the moral duty of
seeking it for its own sake , and as the end of man , had been taught
with all the power of Greek intelligence . PUSEY-186X-1,300.289

The schools of philosophy had decayed . PUSEY-186X-1,300.290

Their lessons had become mostly powerless on those who taught in them .
PUSEY-186X-1,300.291

Socrates , Plato , Aristotle , were to use a world-wide influence within
their own province , the human intellect . PUSEY-186X-1,300.292

Their instantaneous failure , and three centuries of decay , had shewn
that they were not to be the moral teachers , or the regenerators of
mankind . PUSEY-186X-1,300.293

Rome had tried what man could do on the moral side .
PUSEY-186X-1,300.294

The stern , unloving warriors , strict with themselves <P_301> as with
others , had stamped on their polity and their people a rigid morality .
PUSEY-186X-1,301.295

It is a marvel to us , how at least fidelity on the wife's side could
become to such an extent a heathen virtue . PUSEY-186X-1,301.296

Contrast with the miseries and iniquities revealed and fostered by the
English Divorce Court , Roman faithfulness , through which , in a hot
climate , divorce was unknown for two_hundred_and_thirty , some say ,
for five_hundred_and_twenty years . PUSEY-186X-1,301.297

But the hard , icy virtues of the republic , frost-bound by the
necessity of discipline , had , under the warm glow of prosperity ,
melted into one stream of universal dissoluteness .
PUSEY-186X-1,301.298

The failure of a mighty effort leaves the greater hopelessness .
PUSEY-186X-1,301.299

It is a calm historian , who <paren> about our Lord's birth , <$$paren>
turned away sickened from his own times , in which , by a rapid but
complete declension , " we can bear , " he says , " neither our vices
nor remedies . " PUSEY-186X-1,301.300

Another , who could speak freely of iniquity at which he afterwards
connived , says , " Will the wise ever cease to be angry , if once he
begins ? PUSEY-186X-1,301.301

All is full of guilt and vice ; PUSEY-186X-1,301.302

more is committed than can be constrained . PUSEY-186X-1,301.303

A great war of wickedness is waged ; PUSEY-186X-1,301.304

daily the lust for sin is greater , the shame less .
PUSEY-186X-1,301.305

Casting out all regard for aught good or just , lust fastens where it
wills . PUSEY-186X-1,301.306

Guilt is no longer stealthy ; PUSEY-186X-1,301.307

it parades itself . PUSEY-186X-1,301.308

Iniquity is so sent abroad , has such might in the hearts of all , that
innocence is not rare only : it is <font> not . <$$font> "
PUSEY-186X-1,301.309

A widespread nature-worship , whose centre was the mystery <P_302> of
reproduced life , consecrated sensuality ; PUSEY-186X-1,302.310

the philosophy of Stoics or Epicureans , the most rigid or the most lax
, alike justified degrading sin ; PUSEY-186X-1,302.311

human nature cast itself willingly into the black pool , to whose edge
its gods beckoned it on . PUSEY-186X-1,302.312

Even Jewish life had decayed . PUSEY-186X-1,302.313

Its most esteemed sect was rigid in externals , in love heartless , in
inward life reprobate . PUSEY-186X-1,302.314

Ambition and hatred of their masters had desecrated the prophetic
promises of spiritual victories into temporal hopes .
PUSEY-186X-1,302.315

An Epicurean sensuality had bound down the hopes of a third class to the
things of this life . PUSEY-186X-1,302.316

It seems as though God had waited , until there could be no hope of the
moral regeneration of man from man , to work His own marvellous work .
PUSEY-186X-1,302.317

As He employed the poor , the illiterate , " unlearned and ignorant men
, " " the foolish things of the world , and the weak things of the world
, and base things of the world , and things despised , yea , things "
accounted as if they " were not " - to confound the wise and the mighty
and that which held that it alone <font> was <$$font> , in order " that
no flesh should glory in His Presence , " so He allowed man's keenest
intelligence , and strongest moral power , the instruments which He had
Himself formed in the natural order of things , to try their utmost and
fail , that the Divinity of Jesus and His revelation might stand out the
more clearly , after the recognition of the impotence of what was grand
, powerful , beautiful , perfect in its way , but - human .
PUSEY-186X-1,302.318

What was lacking , was not so much understanding , <P_303> or motives ,
as power . PUSEY-186X-1,303.319

The unwritten law written in men's consciences <paren> however , here or
there , it was obscured even in its primal laws <$$paren> was clear .
PUSEY-186X-1,303.320

" I see what is better , and approve it ; I follow what is worse , " is
a confession of human nature , just as our Lord was coming .
PUSEY-186X-1,303.321

Dissoluteness had not yet quite eaten out among the people the old
beliefs in a sort of heaven and hell , the Elysian fields and Tartarus ;
PUSEY-186X-1,303.322

but it was the powerless echo of a mighty truth , whose dying sounds
moved neither heart nor intellect . PUSEY-186X-1,303.323

Not , then , the inherent might of truth was wanting to the soul ;
PUSEY-186X-1,303.324

man had already more truth than he availed himself of .
PUSEY-186X-1,303.325

Not persuasive motives ; PUSEY-186X-1,303.326

what man had already , were powerless . PUSEY-186X-1,303.327

Motives will not enable one paralyzed to move . PUSEY-186X-1,303.328

The Gospel <font> has <$$font> constraining motives , stronger than hope
and fear , love for Him Who so loved us . PUSEY-186X-1,303.329

Yet love , too , has its constraining power to those alive , not to one
dead . PUSEY-186X-1,303.330

And human nature was dead to good , in its trespasses and sins .
PUSEY-186X-1,303.331

" What then was needed , besides all revealed truth , was " power . "
PUSEY-186X-1,303.332

Our blessed Lord came to give us that power , being Himself " the wisdom
of God , and the power of God . " PUSEY-186X-1,303.333

He came to give a new beginning to our nature , by Himself taking it .
PUSEY-186X-1,303.334

He took our human weakness , to impart to it His Divine might .
PUSEY-186X-1,303.335

The power which He was and had , He , by His Manhood , lodged in it .
PUSEY-186X-1,303.336

Mankind was redeemed by weakness ; PUSEY-186X-1,303.337

it was converted by power . PUSEY-186X-1,303.338

The power had been hidden in His humiliation , for the suffering of His
atoning Death . PUSEY-186X-1,303.339

The reason for <P_304> shrouding it was removed on His resurrection .
PUSEY-186X-1,304.340

Then He Who " was of the seed of David according to the flesh , " was ,
" according to the Spirit of holiness , " i.e. , according to His holy
and Divine Nature , " defined " or marked out to be " the Son of God
<font> in power <$$font> by the resurrection of the dead . "
PUSEY-186X-1,304.341

This power He laid as the groundwork of the Apostles' mission ;
PUSEY-186X-1,304.342

" All power is given to Me in heaven and in earth .
PUSEY-186X-1,304.343

Go ye therefore , PUSEY-186X-1,304.344

and disciple all nations ; PUSEY-186X-1,304.345

I am with you alway , unto the end of the world . "
PUSEY-186X-1,304.346

This power , which was His , He bade His Apostles wait until they should
be invested with it . PUSEY-186X-1,304.347

" I send the promise of My Father upon you ; PUSEY-186X-1,304.348

but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem , until ye be endowed with power
from on high . " PUSEY-186X-1,304.349

And this power was the indwelling of the Holy Ghost .
PUSEY-186X-1,304.350

In Him they were to be baptized , immersed , flooded .
PUSEY-186X-1,304.351

" Ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence . "
PUSEY-186X-1,304.352

" Ye shall receive power , after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you .
" PUSEY-186X-1,304.353

Doubtless this power included the gifts of superhuman works wrought by
the Apostles , as S. Peter speaks of our Lord Himself : " Ye know , how
God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and <font> with power
: <$$font> Who went about doing good , and healing all that were
oppressed with the devil ; PUSEY-186X-1,304.354

for God was with Him . " PUSEY-186X-1,304.355

Its first expression was in the gift of tongues ; PUSEY-186X-1,304.356

but the gift of tongues was only the vehicle of the Divine power .
PUSEY-186X-1,304.357

" We do hear them speak in our own tongues <font> the wonderful works
<$$font> of God . " PUSEY-186X-1,304.358

S. Paul , <P_305> in speaking of what " Christ " had " wrought by " him
" to the obedience of the Gentiles , by word or deed , " distinguishes
these two ; " in the power of signs and wonders , " " in the power of
the Holy Spirit , " an outward and supernatural power of miracles , and
an inward transforming power of the Spirit . PUSEY-186X-1,305.359

But the outward miracles were the body , not the soul .
PUSEY-186X-1,305.360

They were God's glorious works of Divine love attesting His Presence .
PUSEY-186X-1,305.361

The rending of the rocks , the earthquake , the fire , were but the
forerunners of the Lord ; PUSEY-186X-1,305.362

He was not <font> in <$$font> them ; PUSEY-186X-1,305.363

God manifested Himself in the still small voice . PUSEY-186X-1,305.364

The mighty works in the Gospel accredited God's messengers , as come
from Him ; PUSEY-186X-1,305.365

they disposed men's hearts to listen ; PUSEY-186X-1,305.366

but the might which converted the heart , was the Gospel itself , spoken
in the words of God to hearts which He opened to receive it .
PUSEY-186X-1,305.367

The Gospel itself was " the power of God unto salvation . "
PUSEY-186X-1,305.368

" The preaching of the cross was to them who perish foolishness ;
PUSEY-186X-1,305.369

but to us who are saved it is the power of God . " PUSEY-186X-1,305.370

" My words and my preaching were not in persuasive words of man's wisdom
, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power . "
PUSEY-186X-1,305.371

It was not " persuasiveness of man , " but " demonstration of God ; "
not demonstration of human <P_306> reasoning , but a divine power and
energy of heavenly grace . PUSEY-186X-1,306.372

It was an Almighty and ever-present power , working in and through them
. PUSEY-186X-1,306.373

" I became a minister of the Gospel , " says S. Paul , " according to
the gift of the grace of God , which was given to me , according to the
inworking of His power . " PUSEY-186X-1,306.374

And this power they bore about with them in this our decaying frame , "
in earthen vessels , that the transcendingness of the power , " they say
, " may be of God , and not from us . " PUSEY-186X-1,306.375

Yet they were but great eminent instruments of Divine power .
PUSEY-186X-1,306.376

" The Spirit of the Lord spake by " them , PUSEY-186X-1,306.377

" and His word was on " their " tongue . " PUSEY-186X-1,306.378

Speaking with Divine power , they brought over the world to God ;
PUSEY-186X-1,306.379

savages they persuaded to learn wisdom ; PUSEY-186X-1,306.380

all the whole order of the world they altered . PUSEY-186X-1,306.381

But they were only triumphant captains in the war of the Lord , under
the great Captain of our salvation , chiefs of the Church , lights of
the world . PUSEY-186X-1,306.382

They who so bare Christ upon their tongues , who had that seraphic love
, doubtless have their thrones with cherubim and seraphim .
PUSEY-186X-1,306.383

But the " power " itself they speak of , as the common possession of the
Church . PUSEY-186X-1,306.384

For it was one and the same Spirit which , having been given without
measure to our Lord , was thenceforth to be poured forth fully upon His
Church , giving to the whole Church <paren> when acting as a whole
<$$paren> that inerrancy which He gave to His Apostles ; streaming , in
its sanctifying powers , upon all its members ; in all , supernatural ,
lifting up the soul above nature , uniting it to God , and restoring His
<P_307> likeness in it . PUSEY-186X-1,307.385

In the Apostles , above all , were those gifts of the Spirit , which
were for the benefit of others . PUSEY-186X-1,307.386

Yet these , too , all but infallibility , continued on in individuals in
the Church since ; nay , even in its lesser members ;
PUSEY-186X-1,307.387

for if any one speaks so as to reach a brother's soul , our Lord's words
still come true of him ; PUSEY-186X-1,307.388

" It is not you that speak , but the Spirit of My Father " Who speaketh
in you . " PUSEY-186X-1,307.389

But in the conflict which belongs to all , the Apostles needed the same
armoury as we ; PUSEY-186X-1,307.390

we are gifted with that same endowment , whereby they trampled upon
Satan , subdued the flesh , despised the world . PUSEY-186X-1,307.391

To them , too , weakness was Divine might . PUSEY-186X-1,307.392

It is one of the few personal revelations to himself which S. Paul
records , PUSEY-186X-1,307.393

" My grace sufficeth for thee , PUSEY-186X-1,307.394

for My power is perfected in weakness . " PUSEY-186X-1,307.395

" Therefore , " he subjoins , " most sweetly will I rather boast in my
infirmities , that the power of Christ may reside upon me . "
PUSEY-186X-1,307.396

Apostles had the same weaknesses as we , save those which any of us
entail on ourselves by evil habits ; PUSEY-186X-1,307.397

we have , for victory , for eternal life , for glory , for that which is
the glory and the joy of eternal life , the love of God , the same helps
as they . PUSEY-186X-1,307.398

" The least grace , " it is a dogmatic saying , " is able to resist any
concupiscence , and to gain eternal life . " PUSEY-186X-1,307.399

But S. Paul , who glories in his own weakness , exults in the
superabundant might of grace deposited in the Church for each of us by
virtue of its union , and ours in it , with Christ , its Head .
PUSEY-186X-1,307.400

Inspiration itself <paren> since it must needs use our human words
<$$paren> does not seem to suffice him , as he piles up words upon
<P_308> words to utter as he may , that which is unutterable ; the
transcendentness of the might of the grace of God to usward .
PUSEY-186X-1,308.401

It is not to be uttered in words . PUSEY-186X-1,308.402

As " He who loveth , knoweth well What Jesus 't@ @is to love , " so he
who has used grace , knows something of the power of grace .
PUSEY-186X-1,308.403

Its fullest power <font> that <$$font> saint alone can know , who here
below used it most , and whom it has uplifted nearest to the throne of
God . PUSEY-186X-1,308.404

The Ephesians knew it . PUSEY-186X-1,308.405

They were a source of unceasing thanksgiving " to S. Paul for " the
faith in the Lord Jesus , which was among them , and the love to all the
saints . " PUSEY-186X-1,308.406

And therefore he prayed for them , that God would reveal to them by an
inward illumining of the eyes of the heart , - what ?
PUSEY-186X-1,308.407

Some fresh truth ? PUSEY-186X-1,308.408

Some larger knowledge of Himself ? PUSEY-186X-1,308.409

No : PUSEY-186X-1,308.410

but what is the transcendent greatness of the power of His grace which
they knew already . PUSEY-186X-1,308.411

" That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ , the Father of glory , would
give you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of
Him ; having the eyes of your heart enlightened , so that you may know ,
what is the hope of His calling , and what the riches of the glory of
His inheritance in the saints " - <paren> this relates to what eye hath
not seen nor ear heard , the glory of those already perfected , but he
adds , as equally an object of revelation , the might of grace which God
puts forth here below <$$paren> - " and what the transcending greatness
of His power to usward the believing , according to the working of the
strength of His might , which He worked in Christ , in that He raised
Him from the dead , and placed Him on His Right Hand in the <P_309>
heavenly places , far above all principality and <font> power <$$font>
and dominion , and every name which is named , not only in this world
but in that which is to come , and hath subjected all things under His
feet . " PUSEY-186X-1,309.412

And <font> Him <$$font> , Who is thus above all might He has given to be
the Source of the might lodged in all of us , who from that time to the
end are " the believers . " PUSEY-186X-1,309.413

" And Him He gave to be Head over all to the Church , which is His body
, the fulness of Him Who filleth all things in all . "
PUSEY-186X-1,309.414

He parallels " working " with " working ; " the greatness of His power
to usward who believe , with the might of His power whereby He raised
Christ from the dead . PUSEY-186X-1,309.415

The might of grace operating in us was involved in the might which gave
life to the dead Body of Jesus . " According to , " he says ; as the
effect is in the cause . PUSEY-186X-1,309.416

And what might ? PUSEY-186X-1,309.417

The might of Him Who is above all might which can be named or conceived
. PUSEY-186X-1,309.418

And why should this might , shewed forth in our Lord , redound to us ?
PUSEY-186X-1,309.419

Because we belong to Him . PUSEY-186X-1,309.420

He is our Head , PUSEY-186X-1,309.421

we are His members ; PUSEY-186X-1,309.422

and He vouchsafes to account something to be lacking to Himself , until
the last redeemed sinner , the price of His Precious Blood , shall be
gathered unto Him , because the Church , i.e. the whole multitude of
His redeemed , is , as being the body of Him Who is our Head , the
fullness , or filling up , of Him , Who , in His Godhead , filleth all
things in all . PUSEY-186X-1,309.423

We have seen the height , PUSEY-186X-1,309.424

look now at the breadth of this power , how he prays for those of
another Church , who had the same faith in Jesus , the same love towards
all saints , in whom the Gospel had been <P_310> not only fruit-bearing
but growing since they first heard of it . PUSEY-186X-1,310.425

He prayed unceasingly , that the grace and the knowledge of the will of
God should spread through their whole spiritual being , and <font> that
<$$font> , with power . PUSEY-186X-1,310.426

" That ye should be filled with the thorough knowledge of His will in
<font> all <$$font> wisdom and spiritual understanding , to walk
worthily of the Lord to <font> all <$$font> pleasing , fruit-bearing and
increasing in <font> all <$$font> good work , empowered in <font> all
<$$font> power according to the might of His glory , to <font> all
<$$font> endurance and long-suffering with joy . " PUSEY-186X-1,310.427

The glory of the might of Christ is manifested in being put forth to
strengthen us ; PUSEY-186X-1,310.428

the power , wherewith we are empowered , is in conformity with the might
of Christ , and universal . PUSEY-186X-1,310.429

And this he prays even for his most recent converts , that " our God
would count them worthy of His calling , and fullfil all good pleasure
in goodness , and all work of faith in power . " PUSEY-186X-1,310.430

And this power , lodged in us , stands opposed to our mute shrinking
from exertion . PUSEY-186X-1,310.431

" God did not give us a spirit of cowardice , but of power , and love ,
and of correction . " PUSEY-186X-1,310.432

This power they had , having been once powerless . PUSEY-186X-1,310.433

The Epistles embody spiritual facts . PUSEY-186X-1,310.434

They appeal to people's souls , what they had been , what God had done
for them , what they had become . PUSEY-186X-1,310.435

They had been , for the most part , like others . PUSEY-186X-1,310.436

Heathens , they had lived in heathen sins . PUSEY-186X-1,310.437

They had been dead to all spiritual things , in trespasses and sins ;
sold under sin ; slaves of sin ; PUSEY-186X-1,310.438

sin ruled over them by a law to which they were captive .
PUSEY-186X-1,310.439

