<BEGIN_reade-1863-1>

<P_204>

<heading>

Chapter XX . READE-1863-1,204.4

The Equatorial Savage . READE-1863-1,204.5

<$$heading>

His Education . - Religion . - Witchcraft . - Government . - Code
Moral . READE-1863-1,204.7

Among the natives of Equatorial Africa one finds as little variety as
among its features and natural productions . READE-1863-1,204.8

There appears to me to be no difference between the Mpongwe , Benga ,
Bakali , Shekani , etc. , except such as can be attributed to
circumstance and climate . READE-1863-1,204.9

Their strength , stature , complexion , manners , and dialects are
modified by their locality , their food , their isolation from their
fellows , and their intercourse with white men . READE-1863-1,204.10

The dialect of a great city is usually more soft than that of a
provincial town ; the latter less harsh and rugged than the scarcely
intelligible sounds which one hears in remote mining or agricultural
districts . READE-1863-1,204.11

The court lady is tall and elegant ; her skin smooth and transparent ;
READE-1863-1,204.12

her beauty has stamina and longevity . READE-1863-1,204.13

The girl of the middle classes , so frequently pretty , is very often
short and coarse , READE-1863-1,204.14

and soon becomes a matron ; while , if you descend to the lower classes
, you will find good looks rare , and the figure angular , stunted ,
sometimes almost deformed . READE-1863-1,204.15

The Mpongwe , with their melodious dialect , their courteous manners ,
and their graceful forms , inhabit Gaboon , the metropolis of <font>
Equatorial Africa . <$$font> READE-1863-1,204.16

Securing the best situations on the rivers , they laugh at the poor
Bushmen who plant their villages so far from these high-roads of
commerce , and who , with their guttural tongue and their degraded
appearance , are the rustics of the country . READE-1863-1,204.17

The Benga of Corisco and the Commi of the Fernand Vaz form the
middle-class link between the two . READE-1863-1,204.18

The Fans would appear to be the exceptional race , and to have descended
from the north ; while the others , as far as I could learn , had
originally migrated from the south . READE-1863-1,204.19

In their manners and customs the Fans do not appear to differ much from
the rest : READE-1863-1,204.20

like them , they are circumcised ; READE-1863-1,204.21

like them , the women wear brass rings on their legs and beads in their
hair . READE-1863-1,204.22

But their appearance , <P_205> with their light complexions and
rabbit-mouths , is peculiar ; READE-1863-1,205.23

and when I first entered a Fula village , I was much struck by the
resemblance of the races . READE-1863-1,205.24

They have a metal currency similar to that which is used on the Niger ;
READE-1863-1,205.25

their method of killing elephants I have already proved by Leo Africanus
to have been practiced in Nigritia ; READE-1863-1,205.26

and it seems to me extremely probable that these Fans are an offshoot of
that powerful race who have extended their conquests over so great a
part of Africa . READE-1863-1,205.27

I shall now attempt to describe the real existence of the savage ; his
progress from the womb to the grave ; the woman whom he rules ; the laws
which he obeys , and the gods whom he worships . READE-1863-1,205.28

If a negro of Equatorial Africa possessed an entailed estate , and
detested his heir-at-law , he could not wish more earnestly for children
. READE-1863-1,205.29

Owing to the evil climate of this country , to the poor food and vicious
habits of its people , propagation is a perfect struggle ;
READE-1863-1,205.30

polygamy becomes a law of nature ; READE-1863-1,205.31

and even with the aid of this institution , so favorable to reproduction
, there are fewer children than wives . READE-1863-1,205.32

The child is introduced into the world without medical assistance ,
READE-1863-1,205.33

and is cordially welcomed . READE-1863-1,205.34

It is rubbed every day with palm-oil , especially on its neck , back ,
and loins . READE-1863-1,205.35

The mother is treated with great respect , READE-1863-1,205.36

and is exempt from all labor while she continues to suckle her child ,
which she continues to do while her milk lasts - generally two or three
years : READE-1863-1,205.37

I have seen a child tall enough to take the breast standing by its
mother's side ; READE-1863-1,205.38

but that , I imagine , must be an exceptional case .
READE-1863-1,205.39

During this time , and also from the moment that impregnation becomes
apparent , the mother no longer cohabits with her husband .
READE-1863-1,205.40

Otherwise , say the natives , the child would be born sickly or crippled
<paren> in which case it would be killed <$$paren> , and the milk would
be spoiled . READE-1863-1,205.41

There are , unfortunately , no such sanitary precautions for the
preservation of the child when once born . READE-1863-1,205.42

Carried in a sling across the breast , or perched on a bustle behind ,
it is exposed to all weathers ; READE-1863-1,205.43

and a large proportion of infants perish . READE-1863-1,205.44

Babies , which in England resemble skinned rabbits , soon lose that
carnation hue in Africa . READE-1863-1,205.45

It rapidly changes to a yellow frog-color , READE-1863-1,205.46

and then deepens into black . READE-1863-1,205.47

After a certain period they are released from the sling or bustle ,
which is their only cradle , READE-1863-1,205.48

and are left to crawl about on the ground till instinct teaches them to
walk . READE-1863-1,205.49

Then a string is tied round their waist , READE-1863-1,205.50

and their education <P_206> commences . READE-1863-1,206.51

Both sexes are taught at the tenderest age to drink palm wine , as if
intoxication were a virtue ; READE-1863-1,206.52

and little girls are given lessons in dancing . READE-1863-1,206.53

I no longer wondered at the intricate steps which these women perform
when I saw a child of two years old circled by women , who were clapping
their hands and singing the nursery refrain , <font> Fear the he-goat ,
ya ! ya ! ya ! Fear the he-goat ! ya ! ya ! ya ! <$$font> while
it wriggled its little body into the queerest shapes imaginable .
READE-1863-1,206.54

These children are absurdly precocious . READE-1863-1,206.55

Africa is a great hothouse , in which they are forced by the sun , and
in which they perish prematurely . READE-1863-1,206.56

They can always talk when they are twelve months old .
READE-1863-1,206.57

At four or five years I have seen them listening with twinkling eyes to
the immoral songs of their seniors , READE-1863-1,206.58

and at eight or nine nature permits them to put in practice those
theories which , incredible as it may seem , they have actually studied
beforehand . READE-1863-1,206.59

So much for savage chastity ; READE-1863-1,206.60

and I fear that I can say as little for parental affection .
READE-1863-1,206.61

The father wishes to have a child partly because nature has planted
within his breast an instinct for reproduction second only in power to
that of self-preservation , and partly because that child , if a son ,
will help him to hunt or fish , or paddle his canoe , and will give him
food when he is old : if a daughter , he will sell her to a suitor , and
will receive sufficient in return to make him a man of status in his
tribe . READE-1863-1,206.62

He kills the sickly or crippled child because it will cost him one more
mouth to feed without affording him any thing in return .
READE-1863-1,206.63

The maternal instinct which we see so powerful in the mere animal
creation is not absent from the negress . READE-1863-1,206.64

Ananga accompanied her father , Quenqueza , when I left Ngumbi .
READE-1863-1,206.65

She and her mother both cried very much when she went , although it was
only for a few days . READE-1863-1,206.66

By secluding mothers during the nursing period , the child has no rival
, while the respect which is paid to the woman because she is a mother
must increase her love for her offspring , as the miseries which some
poor girls endure in our own country have been known to sour all those
feelings which nature has planted within their breasts .
READE-1863-1,206.67

The prettiest song which I ever heard was sung by a mother to her child
in the Balengi country . READE-1863-1,206.68

If we can believe it , fathers also have sometimes a little love for
their infants : READE-1863-1,206.69

Why dost thou weep , my child ? READE-1863-1,206.70

The sky is bright ; READE-1863-1,206.71

the sun is shining : READE-1863-1,206.72

why dost thou weep ? READE-1863-1,206.73

<P_207>

Go to thy father ; READE-1863-1,207.75

he loves thee : READE-1863-1,207.76

go , READE-1863-1,207.77

tell him why thou weepest . READE-1863-1,207.78

What ! thou weepest still . READE-1863-1,207.79

Thy father loves thee ; READE-1863-1,207.80

I caress thee : READE-1863-1,207.81

yet still thou art sad . READE-1863-1,207.82

Tell me then , my child , why dost thou weep ? READE-1863-1,207.83

Before they are permitted to wear clothes , marry , and rank in society
as men and women , the young have to be initiated into certain mysteries
. READE-1863-1,207.84

I received some information upon this head from Mongilomba , after he
had made me promise that I would not put it in my book - a promise which
I am compelled to break by the stern duties of my vocation .
READE-1863-1,207.85

He told me that he was taken into a fetich-house , stripped , severely
flogged , and plastered with goat-dung ; READE-1863-1,207.86

this ceremony , like those of masonry , being conducted to the sound of
music . READE-1863-1,207.87

Afterward there came from behind a kind of screen or shrine uncouth and
terrible sounds such as he had never heard before . READE-1863-1,207.88

These , he was told , emanated from a spirit called <font> Ukuk .
<$$font> READE-1863-1,207.89

He afterward brought to me the instrument with which the fetich-man
makes this noise . READE-1863-1,207.90

It is a kind of whistle made of hollowed mangrove wood , about two
inches in length , and covered at one end with a scrap of bat's wing .
READE-1863-1,207.91

For a period of five days after initiation the novice wears an apron of
dry palm-leaves , which I have frequently seen . READE-1863-1,207.92

The initiation of the girls is performed by elderly females who call
themselves <font> ngembi . <$$font> READE-1863-1,207.93

They go into the forest , READE-1863-1,207.94

clear a place , READE-1863-1,207.95

sweep the ground carefully , READE-1863-1,207.96

come back to the town , READE-1863-1,207.97

and build a sacred hut which no male may enter . READE-1863-1,207.98

They return to the clearing in the forest , taking with them the <font>
igonji <$$font> , or novice . READE-1863-1,207.99

It is necessary that she should have never been to that place before ,
and that she fast during the whole of the ceremony , which lasts three
days . READE-1863-1,207.100

All this time a fire is kept burning in the wood . READE-1863-1,207.101

From morning to night , and from night to morning , a <font> ngembi
<$$font> sits beside it READE-1863-1,207.102

and feeds it , singing with a cracked voice , <font> The fire will never
die out ! <$$font> READE-1863-1,207.103

The third night is passed in the sacred hut ; READE-1863-1,207.104

the <font> igonji <$$font> is rubbed with black , red , and white paints
, READE-1863-1,207.105

and , as the men beat drums outside , she cries <font> Okanda , yo ! yo
! yo ! <$$font> which reminds one of the <font> Evohe ! <$$font> of
the ancient Bacchantes . READE-1863-1,207.106

The ceremonies which are performed in the hut and in the wood are kept
secret from the men , READE-1863-1,207.107

and I can say but little of them . READE-1863-1,207.108

Mongilomba had evidently been playing the spy , READE-1863-1,207.109

but was very reserved upon the subject . READE-1863-1,207.110

Should it be known , he said , that he had told me what he had , the
women would drag him into a fetich-house , READE-1863-1,207.111

and would flog him , perhaps , till he was dead . READE-1863-1,207.112

<P_208>

It is pretty certain , however , that these rites , like those of the
Bona Dea , are essentially of a Phallic nature ; READE-1863-1,208.114

for Mongilomba once confessed that , having peeped through the chinks of
the hut , he saw a ceremony like that which is described in Petronius
Arbiter . READE-1863-1,208.115

I do not think that Mongilomba's fear of the <font> ngembi <$$font> was
affected . READE-1863-1,208.116

They are really a powerful body , READE-1863-1,208.117

and are held in great respect , perhaps in a little terror , by the men
. READE-1863-1,208.118

They pretend to find out the secrets of their enemies , and to detect
thieves ; READE-1863-1,208.119

and I am inclined to believe that the origin of this institution was to
protect wives from being harshly treated by their husbands .
READE-1863-1,208.120

During the novitiate which succeeds initiation , the girls are taught
religious dances , READE-1863-1,208.121

the men are instructed in the science of fetich . READE-1863-1,208.122

It is then that they are told that there are certain kinds of food which
are forbidden to their clan . READE-1863-1,208.123

One clan may not eat crocodile , nor another hippopotamus , nor a third
buffalo . READE-1863-1,208.124

These are relics of the old animal worship . READE-1863-1,208.125

The spirit <font> Ukuk <$$font> <paren> or Mwetyi , as he is called in
the Shekani country <$$paren> is supposed to live in the bowels of the
earth , and to come to the upper world when there is any business to
perform . READE-1863-1,208.126

He is then supposed to dwell in the fetich house , which is built in a
peculiar form , covered with dried plantain-leaves , and is always kept
perfectly dark . READE-1863-1,208.127

Thence issue strange sounds , like the growling of a tiger , which make
the women and children shudder and run to their houses .
READE-1863-1,208.128

When the mangrove-tube is thus heard to be at work , the initiated
repair to the house , READE-1863-1,208.129

and " a lodge " is held . READE-1863-1,208.130

The natives of Equatorial Africa worship also the spirits of their
ancestors , a worship for which their minds are prepared by the
veneration which they pay to old age . READE-1863-1,208.131

Young men never enter the presence of an aged person without courtesying
, and passing in a stooping attitude , as if they were going under a low
door . READE-1863-1,208.132

When seated in his presence , it is always at a humble distance .
READE-1863-1,208.133

If they hand him a lighted pipe or a mug of water , they fall on one
knee . READE-1863-1,208.134

If an old man , they address him as <font> rera <$$font> - father ; if
an old woman , as <font> ngwe <$$font> - mother . READE-1863-1,208.135

It is customary for only the old people to communicate bad news to one
another ; READE-1863-1,208.136

and it is not to be wondered at that we find the negroes such perfect
courtiers , since it is the etiquette of the country that the aged
should only be addressed in terms of flattery and adulation .
READE-1863-1,208.137

When they die their relics are honored . READE-1863-1,208.138

In the Congo country <P_209> their bodies are dried into mummies .
READE-1863-1,209.139

Here , their bones are sometimes stored up and visited at set periods .
READE-1863-1,209.140

Or , when a person noted for his wisdom has died , his head , when
partially decomposed , is often cut off and suspended , so as to drip
upon a mass of chalk placed underneath . READE-1863-1,209.141

This matter is supposed to be the wisdom which formerly animated the
brain , and which , rubbed upon the foreheads of others , will
communicate its virtue . READE-1863-1,209.142

The worship of their spirits follows the veneration of their relics
naturally enough . READE-1863-1,209.143

They believe that the shades of their ancestors exercise a beneficent
influence over their lives and fortunes . READE-1863-1,209.144

They will send messages to their relatives by those who are dying ;
READE-1863-1,209.145

and a son has been known to kill his old mother , under the belief that
she would be of more use to him as a spirit than as a substance .
READE-1863-1,209.146

This is the <font> ne plus ultra <$$font> of utilitarianism .
READE-1863-1,209.147

The words which they hear and the sights which they see in their dreams
come to them from spirits . READE-1863-1,209.148

Always talking of these dreams , and relating them to one another , they
dream the more . READE-1863-1,209.149

The higher type of negro , with his nervous temperament , and his
imagination lively and vivid as that of a woman , would make an
excellent " medium . " READE-1863-1,209.150

In times of peril or distress one may witness a very touching sight
among these people . READE-1863-1,209.151

They will assemble in clans on the brink of some mountain brow or on the
skirt of a dense forest , READE-1863-1,209.152

and , extending their arms to the sky , while the women are wailing and
the very children weep , they will cry to the spirits of those who have
passed away . READE-1863-1,209.153

There is also a curious ceremony which Mongilomba thus related to me :
READE-1863-1,209.154

" The people which are dead , when they are tired of staying in the bush
, then they come for one of their people which they like .
READE-1863-1,209.155

And one ghost will say , ' I am tired of staying in the bush ,
READE-1863-1,209.156

please to build a little house for me in the town close to your house .
' READE-1863-1,209.157

He tells the man to dance and sing too ; READE-1863-1,209.158

so the man calls {TEXT:call} plenty of women by night to dance and sing
. " READE-1863-1,209.159

He told me that the next day the people would go to the grave of the
<font> obambo <$$font> , or ghost , and make a rude idol ; then take the
bamboo frame on which the body had been carried to the grave , and which
is always left there , and some of the grave-dust itself , and carry
them into a little hut which they build near the house of the visited ,
and the door of which they cover with a white cloth .
READE-1863-1,209.160

It is worth while mentioning that during the singing and dancing which
accompany this ceremony , like as in all their religious <P_210>
ceremonies , there is one line which is remarkably striking ,
READE-1863-1,210.161

for it makes us conclude that they have a legend like that of Charon and
the Styx . READE-1863-1,210.162

They are singing to the ghost , READE-1863-1,210.163

and the verse is , <font> " You are well dressed , READE-1863-1,210.164

but you have no canoe to go over to the other side . " <$$font>
READE-1863-1,210.165

These natives have their Naiads and Dryads ; their spirits which inhabit
lakes , and mountains , and forests , and high places .
READE-1863-1,210.166

They have also their Typhon and their Osiris , their Evil Genius and
their Good Spirit . READE-1863-1,210.167

The former <paren> <font> Mbwiri <$$font> <$$paren> they worship piously
, being always anxious to deprecate his anger . READE-1863-1,210.168

They regard him as the Prince of this world ; as a tyrant whom they hate
, but before whom they must prostrate themselves . READE-1863-1,210.169

The Good Spirit , on the other hand , they do not deem it necessary to
pray to in a regular way , because he will not harm them .
READE-1863-1,210.170

The word by which they express this Supreme Being answers exactly to our
word of God . READE-1863-1,210.171

Like the <font> Jehovah <$$font> of the Hebrews , like that word in
masonry which is only known to masters , and never pronounced but in a
whisper and in full lodge , this word they seldom dare to speak ,
READE-1863-1,210.172

and they display uneasiness if it is uttered before them .
READE-1863-1,210.173

Twice only I remember having heard it : READE-1863-1,210.174

once , as I have related , when we were in a dangerous storm , the men
threw their clenched hands upward READE-1863-1,210.175

and cried it twice ; READE-1863-1,210.176

and again , when I was at Ngumbi , taking down words from an Ashira
slave , I asked him what was the word for God in the language of his
country . READE-1863-1,210.177

He raised his eyes , READE-1863-1,210.178

and pointing to heaven , said , in a soft voice , <font> Njambi .
<$$font> READE-1863-1,210.179

Among most illiterate nations , diseases of an epileptic character are
ascribed to demoniac possession . READE-1863-1,210.180

In Africa it is Mbwiri which enters the possessed , and who can only be
driven out by the assistance of the fetich or medicine-man .
READE-1863-1,210.181

A shanty is built in the middle of the street , READE-1863-1,210.182

and this is occupied by the patient , the priest , and his disciples .
READE-1863-1,210.183

Then for ten days or a fortnight there is one perpetual dance to the
sound of flute and drum , every_body who is invited eating and drinking
as much as he can , Mbwiri being peculiarly averse to good living .
READE-1863-1,210.184

All this is done at the expense of the next of kin .
READE-1863-1,210.185

The patient dances , usually shamming madness , till the real fit comes
on , with its wild stare , convulsions of limbs , gnashing of teeth ,
and foaming at the mouth . READE-1863-1,210.186

Whatever the man does at such a period is supposed not to be done by the
man , but by the demon which possesses him . READE-1863-1,210.187

When a cure has been made , real or affected , the patient builds a
little fetich <P_211> house , READE-1863-1,211.188

avoids certain kinds of food , READE-1863-1,211.189

and performs certain duties . READE-1863-1,211.190

Sometimes the patient has been known to become quite insane ; to run
away to the bush , hide from all human beings , and live on the roots
and berries of the forest . READE-1863-1,211.191

Such cases , as I have been credibly informed , are by no means rare .
READE-1863-1,211.192

These fetich-men are priest-doctors , like those of the ancient Germans
. READE-1863-1,211.193

They have a profound knowledge of herbs , and also of human nature ,
READE-1863-1,211.194

for they always monopolize the real power in the state ;
READE-1863-1,211.195

but it is very doubtful whether they possess any secrets save that of
extracting virtue and poison from plants . READE-1863-1,211.196

During the first trip which I made into the bush I sent for one of these
doctors . READE-1863-1,211.197

At that time I was staying among the Shekani , who are celebrated for
their fetich . READE-1863-1,211.198

He came attended by half_a_dozen disciples . READE-1863-1,211.199

He was a tall man , dressed in white , with a girdle of leopard's skin ,
from which hung an iron bell , of the same shape as our sheep-bells .
READE-1863-1,211.200

He had two chalk-marks over his eyes . READE-1863-1,211.201

I took some of my own hair , READE-1863-1,211.202

frizzled it with a burning-glass , READE-1863-1,211.203

and gave it him . READE-1863-1,211.204

He popped it with alacrity into his little grass bag ;
READE-1863-1,211.205

for white man's hair is fetich of the first order .
READE-1863-1,211.206

Then I poured out some raspberry vinegar into a glass ,
READE-1863-1,211.207

drank a little of it first , country fashion , READE-1863-1,211.208

and offered it to him , telling him that it was blood from the brains of
great doctors . READE-1863-1,211.209

Upon this he received it with great reverence , READE-1863-1,211.210

and , dipping his fingers into it as if it was snap-dragon , sprinkled
with it his forehead , both feet between the two first toes , and the
ground behind his back . READE-1863-1,211.211

He then handed his glass to a disciple , who emptied it , and smacked
his lips afterward in a very secular manner . READE-1863-1,211.212

I then desired to see a little of his fetich . READE-1863-1,211.213

He drew on the ground with red chalk some hieroglyphics , among which I
distinguished the circle , the cross , and the crescent .
READE-1863-1,211.214

He said that if I would give him a fine " dash , " he would tell me all
about it . READE-1863-1,211.215

But as he would not take any thing in reason , and as I knew that he
would tell me nothing of very great importance in public , negotiations
were suspended . READE-1863-1,211.216

The belief in the supernatural powers of the fetich-man is general among
the natives . READE-1863-1,211.217

" When a Mpongwe , " said Mongilomba , " wants to get a white man to
come to his house to trade , he goes to Camma , where the best fetich
live , READE-1863-1,211.218

and he says , {COM:missing_open_quote} Doctor , I want a medicine for
white man . ' READE-1863-1,211.219

' What will you give me ? ' READE-1863-1,211.220

' I will give you two slaves . ' READE-1863-1,211.221

' Your mother is alive ? ' READE-1863-1,211.222

' Yes . ' READE-1863-1,211.223

' Then you must give me your mother . ' READE-1863-1,211.224

' No , I ca@ @n't give you my mother . ' READE-1863-1,211.225

' Then you must take hold of the branch of that tree . '
READE-1863-1,211.226

He <P_212> takes hold of the branch , READE-1863-1,212.227

and it jumps up READE-1863-1,212.228

and takes the man into the tree - READE-1863-1,212.229

fetich , sir , Mr. Reade . READE-1863-1,212.230

' Now , ' says the doctor , ' will you give me your mother ? '
READE-1863-1,212.231

' Yes , ' says the man , ' you must have my mother . '
READE-1863-1,212.232

So he comes down , READE-1863-1,212.233

and the doctor shows him his mother in the looking-glass .
READE-1863-1,212.234

This is called okundu . READE-1863-1,212.235

Then the doctor ties together a branch , a stone , an iron bar , and a
long stick , READE-1863-1,212.236

and tells the Mpongwe to put it in water , what place white man's ship
come for anchor . READE-1863-1,212.237

When he come back from Camma no man gives him <font> mbolo <$$font>
<paren> the salutation <$$paren> , READE-1863-1,212.238

for they think that he has gone to Camma to get bad fetich .
READE-1863-1,212.239

Proper bad fetich live at Camma . READE-1863-1,212.240

But when the white man comes to his house , then all people say , ' He
has mbumba . ' " READE-1863-1,212.241

The fetich-man is not only a doctor and a priest , READE-1863-1,212.242

he is a witch-finder , READE-1863-1,212.243

and that is perhaps his most important office . READE-1863-1,212.244

It is a curious thing that , though these people , if you speak to them
about death , will acknowledge that it is a natural visitation , as
indeed may be seen by the verse of a song - Rich man and poor fellow ,
all men must die ; Bodies are only shadows . Why should I be sad ? -
yet when a man of rank dies they say that he has been bewitched ,
READE-1863-1,212.245

and a victim is chosen with the aid of a fetich-man .
READE-1863-1,212.246

This custom is <font> universal <$$font> in Africa ,
READE-1863-1,212.247

and , as I shall show you , is interesting on account of the striking
analogies which it presents with the witchcraft of mediaeval Europe .
READE-1863-1,212.248

I shall begin in the words of Mongilomba . READE-1863-1,212.249

" When a man is sick a long time , " said he , " they call <font> ngembi
<$$font> , and if she ca@ @n't make it well , the fetich-man .
READE-1863-1,212.250

He comes at night , in white dress , with cock's feathers on his head ,
and having his bell and his little glass . READE-1863-1,212.251

He calls two or three relations together into a room .
READE-1863-1,212.252

He does not speak , READE-1863-1,212.253

but always looks in his glass . READE-1863-1,212.254

Then he tells them that the sickness is not of Mbwiri , nor of Obambo ,
nor of God , but that it comes from a witch . READE-1863-1,212.255

They say to him , ' What shall we do ? ' READE-1863-1,212.256

He goes out READE-1863-1,212.257

and says , ' I have told you ; READE-1863-1,212.258

I have no more to say . ' READE-1863-1,212.259

<paren> It seems that there are consulting physicians in Africa .
<$$paren> READE-1863-1,212.260

They give him a dollar's worth of cloth ; READE-1863-1,212.261

and every night they gather together in the streets ,
READE-1863-1,212.262

and they cry , ' <font> I know that man who witch my brother .
READE-1863-1,212.263

It is good for you to make him well . ' <$$font> READE-1863-1,212.264

Then the witch make him well . " READE-1863-1,212.265

But if the man no get well , they call Bush doctor from Shekani country
. READE-1863-1,212.266

He sings in the language of the Bush . READE-1863-1,212.267

At night he goes into the street ; READE-1863-1,212.268

all people come about him . READE-1863-1,212.269

He has tiger-cat <P_213> skin in his hand . READE-1863-1,213.270

He walk in and out among the people , READE-1863-1,213.271

and lay the skin at the feet of the witch , singing all the while .
READE-1863-1,213.272

When the song is done , the people seize the witch READE-1863-1,213.273

and put him in chains , saying , ' If you do@ @n't make our brother well
, we kill you . ' " READE-1863-1,213.274

One evening , as we were sitting in a mission-house at Corisco with the
windows open , we heard a wild and piteous cry rising from a village at
a little distance . READE-1863-1,213.275

My friends immediately became grave and silent . READE-1863-1,213.276

The school was in the next room , READE-1863-1,213.277

and two girls who belonged to that village began crying too .
READE-1863-1,213.278

I was told that it was the death-wail , and that it was the knell of
more lives than one . READE-1863-1,213.279

A chieftain had been some time in a hopeless state ,
READE-1863-1,213.280

and a woman had been accused of bewitching him . READE-1863-1,213.281

She had a son about seven years of age , READE-1863-1,213.282

and , fearing lest he should avenge her when he grew up , they had
accused him also of the crime . READE-1863-1,213.283

They were now prisoners , READE-1863-1,213.284

and as soon as the chief was dead they would be killed .
READE-1863-1,213.285

The next morning , which was Sunday , I went up with Mackey to the
village . READE-1863-1,213.286

The man was not yet dead ; READE-1863-1,213.287

he had suddenly become speechless , which had made them believe that he
had died . READE-1863-1,213.288

I went into the house , READE-1863-1,213.289

and found him lying in a state of stupor on the bamboo bedstead .
READE-1863-1,213.290

The house was completely filled with women , who had taken off their
clothes and shaved their heads in token of mourning , and who were
<font> raining <$$font> tears in their hired and admirably acted grief .
READE-1863-1,213.291

Sometimes one of them would sit by his side , READE-1863-1,213.292

and , throwing her arms round him , would cry , almost in the very words
of the Irish death-lament , " Why did ye die , darling ;
READE-1863-1,213.293

why did ye die ? " READE-1863-1,213.294

for they looked upon him as really dead , since he could no longer speak
to them or look at them . READE-1863-1,213.295

In grave contrast with their shrill sorrow sat the men , also naked , in
the chief house of the town , silent and fasting . READE-1863-1,213.296

On the ground , in their midst , crouched the child , the marks of a
severe wound visible on his arm , and his wrists bound together by a
piece of withy . READE-1863-1,213.297

I shall never forget that child's face . READE-1863-1,213.298

It wore that expression of dogged endurance which is one of the
traditional characteristics of the savage . READE-1863-1,213.299

While I was there one of the men held an axe below his eyes :
READE-1863-1,213.300

it was the brute's idea of humor . READE-1863-1,213.301

The child looked at it without showing a spark of emotion .
READE-1863-1,213.302

Some , equally fearless of death , would have displayed contempt , anger
, or acted curiosity ; READE-1863-1,213.303

but he was the perfect stoic . READE-1863-1,213.304

His eye flashed for a moment when his name was first mentioned , but
only for a moment . READE-1863-1,213.305

He showed the same indifference when he heard his <P_214> life being
pleaded for as when , a little while before , he had been taunted with
his death . READE-1863-1,214.306

We did not see the mother . READE-1863-1,214.307

I was told afterward that she had been flogged till she had confessed
that she , and she only , had bewitched the man . READE-1863-1,214.308

Her son had confessed the crime as soon as he was taxed with it .
READE-1863-1,214.309

Though confessions extracted by torture are easily explained , it is a
remarkable fact that the <font> witches <$$font> <paren> I use it as a
generic term for both sexes <$$paren> frequently accuse themselves of
the crime , as every_body knows they used to do in Europe :
READE-1863-1,214.310

they will even enter into minute details , such as directing the people
to look in some particular place , where they will find the witch-power
, which is usually a buried spider or a bundle of dried plants .
READE-1863-1,214.311

Mr. Mackey said that he had come to speak to <font> Okota <$$font> ,
the nearest of kin , upon whom , in such cases , all responsibilty
devolves . READE-1863-1,214.312

Okota came from the midst , READE-1863-1,214.313

and , taking a stool near the feet of the missionary , listened to him
with great attention . READE-1863-1,214.314

" Death , " said the missionary , " must come to all .
READE-1863-1,214.315

It is foolish to think that if a man dies he is bewitched . "
READE-1863-1,214.316

" Death must come to all , " said Okota , " but not always from God .
READE-1863-1,214.317

Sometimes it comes from the hand of man . " READE-1863-1,214.318

" But how do you know that this comes from the hand of man ? "
READE-1863-1,214.319

" The woman has been given <font> quai <$$font> to drink . "
READE-1863-1,214.320

<paren> This <font> quai <$$font> is the drink of ordeal . <$$paren>
READE-1863-1,214.321

" The <font> quai <$$font> says that she has bewitched him . "
READE-1863-1,214.322

" But <font> quai <$$font> can sometimes be wrong .
READE-1863-1,214.323

When Cabinda went to the Muni , he was lost a long time .
READE-1863-1,214.324

All people said that he was dead . READE-1863-1,214.325

A man , you said , was the witch ; READE-1863-1,214.326

you gave him <font> quai ; READE-1863-1,214.327

quai <$$font> said that he had killed him ; READE-1863-1,214.328

but Cabinda came back alive , READE-1863-1,214.329

and <font> quai <$$font> was wrong . " READE-1863-1,214.330

At this there was a roar of laughter . READE-1863-1,214.331

" It is not only <font> quai <$$font> , " said Okota .
READE-1863-1,214.332

" The woman confesses that she has bewitched . READE-1863-1,214.333

What man comes to you and says ' I have stolen your fowl , ' if he has
not stolen it ? READE-1863-1,214.334

This woman is killing my brother ; READE-1863-1,214.335

when my brother is dead I will kill her . " READE-1863-1,214.336

It was the first time , so Mr. Mackey told me , that a man had ever
spoken so plainly . READE-1863-1,214.337

They generally pretended to be convinced by his arguments ,
READE-1863-1,214.338

and endeavored afterward to kill the witch without his knowing of it .
READE-1863-1,214.339

The ordeal-drink of Equatorial Africa is not the famous red water of
Northern Guinea . READE-1863-1,214.340

It is prepared from the root of a small shrub called <font> Nkazya
<$$font> , or <font> Quai . <$$font> READE-1863-1,214.341

Half a pint of this decoction is <P_215> given to the accused .
READE-1863-1,215.342

Small sticks are laid down at the distance of two feet apart ,
READE-1863-1,215.343

and , after drinking , he is required to step over them five times .
READE-1863-1,215.344

If it acts upon him as a diuretic , he is pronounced innocent ;
READE-1863-1,215.345

but sometimes it produces vertigo : READE-1863-1,215.346

the sticks rise before him like great logs , READE-1863-1,215.347

and in his awkward efforts to stride over them , he reels ,
READE-1863-1,215.348

falls to the ground , READE-1863-1,215.349

and is considered guilty . READE-1863-1,215.350

The chief died after I had gone to Bapuku . READE-1863-1,215.351

The woman and the boy were both killed : READE-1863-1,215.352

Oshupu was present , READE-1863-1,215.353

and described their execution . READE-1863-1,215.354

The woman was taken out to sea in a boat , killed with an axe , and
thrown overboard . READE-1863-1,215.355

The boy was burnt alive ; READE-1863-1,215.356

bags of gunpowder were tied to his legs , which made him " jump like a
dog , " as Oshupu expressed it . READE-1863-1,215.357

I inquired why the boy should be subjected to a death so much more cruel
than that of his mother . READE-1863-1,215.358

Oshupu was astounded : READE-1863-1,215.359

" Burning more bad ! READE-1863-1,215.360

No , Mr. Reade , burning and drowning all the same . "
READE-1863-1,215.361

<P_216>

This explains well enough the cruelty of the negro :
READE-1863-1,216.363

it is the cruelty of the boy who spins a cockchafer on a pin ;
READE-1863-1,216.364

it is the cruelty of ignorance . READE-1863-1,216.365

A twirling cockchafer , and a boy who " jumps like a dog , " are
ludicrous sights to those who do not possess the sense of sympathy .
READE-1863-1,216.366

How useless it is to address such people as these with the logic of
reason , religion , and humanity ! READE-1863-1,216.367

Such superstitions can only be quelled by laws as ruthless as themselves
. READE-1863-1,216.368

Among these equatorial tribes the government is patriarchal , which is
almost equivalent to saying that there is no government at all .
READE-1863-1,216.369

The tribes are divided into clans . READE-1863-1,216.370

Each clan inhabits a separate village or group of villages ,
READE-1863-1,216.371

and at the head of each is a patriarch , the parody of a king .
READE-1863-1,216.372

They are distinguished from the others by the grass-woven cap which they
wear on their heads , and by the staff which they carry in their hands .
READE-1863-1,216.373

They are always rich and aged , READE-1863-1,216.374

therefore they are venerated . READE-1863-1,216.375

But , though they can exert influence , they can not
{COM:sic_here_and_passim} wield power : READE-1863-1,216.376

they can advise , READE-1863-1,216.377

but they can not command . READE-1863-1,216.378

In some instances , as in that of Quenqueza , king of the Rembo , the
title and empty honors of royalty are bestowed upon the most influential
patriarch in a district . READE-1863-1,216.379

This is a vestige of higher civilization and of ancient empire , which
disappears as one descends among the lower tribes .
READE-1863-1,216.380

And in the lowest of all that I have seen , in the small and expiring
tribe of the Bapuku , occupying their patch of coast to the north of the
River Muni , I had the rare privilege of studying that Utopia of
philosophy - a republic in which there existed no invidious distinctions
of rank or wealth , where the men were all equal , and where all
property was common . READE-1863-1,216.381

In this commonwealth , were it not for the women , the men would have
starved . READE-1863-1,216.382

There the woman is cook , gardener , woodcutter , porter ,
READE-1863-1,216.383

and makes herself generally useful when there is any hard work to be
done . READE-1863-1,216.384

Her lord swings in a hammock , READE-1863-1,216.385

smokes tobacco , READE-1863-1,216.386

drinks palm wine , READE-1863-1,216.387

and talks scandal with his friends . READE-1863-1,216.388

These people are the most indolent and dishonest middle-men upon the
Coast . READE-1863-1,216.389

If one of them does bring ebony and rubber from the interior , he
carefully hides it , READE-1863-1,216.390

and sells it on the sly , so violating the principles of the
constitution . READE-1863-1,216.391

And even then his wealth is useless to him . READE-1863-1,216.392

If he builds a house of better materials than the others , or if he
indulges in the foreign luxury of a new cloth , his brothers , with
pious indignation , pull the one down READE-1863-1,216.393

or <P_217> tear the other off his back . READE-1863-1,217.394

When men are equal , therefore , the women become their beasts of burden
and their slaves . READE-1863-1,217.395

Where goods are common there can be no progress , READE-1863-1,217.396

for how can there be progress when every incentive to industry is
carefully removed , and when every spark of ambition is stifled in its
birth ? READE-1863-1,217.397

Among the wealthier Mpongwe the married women do not lead so laborious a
life . READE-1863-1,217.398

The Bush-man can generally afford but one wife , who must find him his
daily bread , and who is robustly beaten if she fails to do so ;
READE-1863-1,217.399

but the rich man can indulge in the institutions of polygamy and
domestic slavery , which render the necessary work light enough among so
many . READE-1863-1,217.400

It will seem strange to us that the women should be the stoutest
supporters of polygamy ; READE-1863-1,217.401

but , to be able to judge of these matters correctly , you must look at
them from an African , and not from a European point of view .
READE-1863-1,217.402

The wife in Africa is sold by the father to the husband , to whom she
becomes a valuable possession . READE-1863-1,217.403

She is his servant ; READE-1863-1,217.404

she can give him children , which he can sell , or which will also
become his servants . READE-1863-1,217.405

If she is tolerably good-looking , she can be used to entrap young
bachelors , who have to pay through the nose for their indiscretion .
READE-1863-1,217.406

Matrimony is there a very practical institution . READE-1863-1,217.407

They have not in their language any words either for <font> jealousy
<$$font> or <font> conjugal love <$$font> , passions which probably do
not exist among them . READE-1863-1,217.408

If a man marries , and his wife thinks that he can afford another spouse
, she pesters him to marry again , READE-1863-1,217.409

and calls him " a stingy fellow " if he declines to do so .
READE-1863-1,217.410

These women live together , as far as I could judge , in great amity ,
READE-1863-1,217.411

but unite in cordially detesting their common husband .
READE-1863-1,217.412

There are few vices of polished life which are not vulgarly represented
here . READE-1863-1,217.413

Elopements , for instance , are common enough ; READE-1863-1,217.414

and the husband , who is as sensitive as he is brutal , suffers under a
great indignity . READE-1863-1,217.415

Among the semi-civilized tribes the separation is sealed by " damages ;
" among the Bush tribes by a melodrama . READE-1863-1,217.416

The Bush-man who has thus lost the wife of his bosom , or , more
properly , of his plantation , walks out with his gun
READE-1863-1,217.417

and shoots the first person whom he meets . READE-1863-1,217.418

He then proclaims that he has done this because a man has run away with
his wife . READE-1863-1,217.419

The clansmen of the murdered man are enraged , not against the husband -
who has simply complied with a usage of society - but because the duty
of the avenger is now cast upon them . READE-1863-1,217.420

As the gay Lothario <P_218> is out of their reach , they kill a man
belonging to the next village ; READE-1863-1,218.421

his friends retaliate on their unsuspecting neighbors ;
READE-1863-1,218.422

and so rolls on this ball of destruction till the whole country is on
the alert . READE-1863-1,218.423

The gates of all the villages are closed and barricaded ,
READE-1863-1,218.424

and some luckless clan can gain no opportunity of washing out their
wrong in somebody else@ @'s blood . READE-1863-1,218.425

The chief of that clan then summons a council , READE-1863-1,218.426

and puts forward his claim against the man who has run away with the
wife . READE-1863-1,218.427

The husband has no longer any thing to do with the matter .
READE-1863-1,218.428

The chief of the culprit's clan offers pecuniary compensation ,
READE-1863-1,218.429

and general concord is restored . READE-1863-1,218.430

This practice may appear not only barbarous , but absurd .
READE-1863-1,218.431

But it is only by some means of this kind that private ills , in such a
lawless community , can be made public wrongs . READE-1863-1,218.432

Even among these savages there is something which corresponds with our
ideas of a code moral . READE-1863-1,218.433

A girl who disgraces her family by wantonness is banished from her clan
; READE-1863-1,218.434

and , in cases of seduction , the man is severely flogged .
READE-1863-1,218.435

Theft is also punishable by flogging , and adultery by the payment of a
large sum of money , in default of which death or slavery is at the
option of the husband . READE-1863-1,218.436

It is curious that these people should have a remarkable antipathy to
widows . READE-1863-1,218.437

Women never marry twice ; READE-1863-1,218.438

they are compelled to go on the town on the death of their husband , and
to pay all their earnings to their brothers . READE-1863-1,218.439

It is an error to suppose that vice is an exotic , and that it can only
flourish when fed with artificial manure . READE-1863-1,218.440

Besides those brutal habits which , vices among us , are simple customs
among savages , they have real vices , recognized as such among
themselves , and among themselves openly paraded . READE-1863-1,218.441

Public opinion has no terrors for the culprits of society ;
READE-1863-1,218.442

they fear only the anger and revenge of those whom they have wronged .
READE-1863-1,218.443

That a husband should offer one of his wives to a visitor , as he offers
him a seat in his house and at his table , argues a want of refinement
only . READE-1863-1,218.444

The custom was anciently common enough . READE-1863-1,218.445

But the husband who uses his wife , as is done all over Africa , to
decoy young men to ruin , slavery , and death , practices a vice which
seldom occurs among civilized nations . READE-1863-1,218.446

In the most disgraceful period of Venetian history , we learn from Daru
that mothers used to sell their daughters to wealthy <P_219> patricians
publicly and without shame . READE-1863-1,219.447

But even then it must have been regarded as a vice ; while , not only in
savage Africa , but in semi-civilized Sierra Leone , this disgraceful
commerce is at the very root of their social institutions .
READE-1863-1,219.448

Adultery is regarded by the Africans as a kind of theft .
READE-1863-1,219.449

It is a vice , therefore , and so common that one might write a
Decameron of native tales like those of Boccaccio .
READE-1863-1,219.450

And what in Boccaccio is more poignant and more vicious than this song
of the Benga , which I have often heard them sing , young men and women
together , when no old men were present ? READE-1863-1,219.451

The old men young girls married . READE-1863-1,219.452

The young girls made the old men fools , READE-1863-1,219.453

For they loved to kiss the young men in the dark , Or beneath the green
leaves of the plantain-tree . READE-1863-1,219.454

The old men then threatened the young men , READE-1863-1,219.455

And said , you make us look like fools ; READE-1863-1,219.456

But we will stab you with our knives till your blood runs forth !
READE-1863-1,219.457

Oh stab us , READE-1863-1,219.458

stab us , cried the young men , gladly , READE-1863-1,219.459

<font> For then your wives will fasten up our wounds . <$$font>
READE-1863-1,219.460

Such is the child of nature ! Such the noble savage ! Such the
primitive condition of man , which philosophers , who had never studied
it , have dared to hold up to our example ! READE-1863-1,219.461

What is it , then , that they would have us imitate ?
READE-1863-1,219.462

Must we instruct our children in vice at the tenderest possible age ,
and sell them for marriage as soon as they arrive at puberty ?
READE-1863-1,219.463

Must we make our wives mothers when they are scarcely girls ; treat them
as slaves when they are women , and kill them when they are old ?
READE-1863-1,219.464

Must we place no restraints upon our passions , but abandon our youth to
dissipation and debauchery , that we may have gray hairs on young heads
, and all the foul diseases which spring from the diet and habits of a
brute ? READE-1863-1,219.465

For so does man in an uncivilized condition . READE-1863-1,219.466

The savage lives a life without a future or a past , without hope or
regret , READE-1863-1,219.467

and dies the death of a coward and a dog , for whom the grave brings
darkness , and nothing more . READE-1863-1,219.468

<P_220>

<heading>

Chapter XXI . READE-1863-1,220.471

Volcanic Flower-Gardens . READE-1863-1,220.472

<$$heading>

Prince's Island . READE-1863-1,220.474

- African Champagne . READE-1863-1,220.475

- Mulatto Politeness . READE-1863-1,220.476

- St. Thomas . READE-1863-1,220.477

- The Dutchman's Church-yard . READE-1863-1,220.478

- Senhor Pereira . READE-1863-1,220.479

- I become a Spy . READE-1863-1,220.480

That night , Saturday , June 2 , I slept between sheets , in all the
dignity of civilization . READE-1863-1,220.481

The next day I gave up to a Sabbath repose , which I had , for once in
my life , fairly earned , and which I devoutly enjoyed .
READE-1863-1,220.482

The morning after , at daybreak , my labors began again .
READE-1863-1,220.483

That day I was to leave Equatorial Africa . READE-1863-1,220.484

In a few hours all my preparations must be made . READE-1863-1,220.485

So I called my men together , READE-1863-1,220.486

culled a few necessaries from my outfit , READE-1863-1,220.487

stowed them in a couple of stout bullock-trunks , READE-1863-1,220.488

cleaned my rifle READE-1863-1,220.489

and locked it up in a leather case , READE-1863-1,220.490

and packed up my very modest toilet apparatus , with my precious MSS. ,
in a small valise . READE-1863-1,220.491

The rest of my property , less valuable than voluminous , I left with my
good friends , who offered to sell that which was salable , and to send
the rest home for me . READE-1863-1,220.492

In the middle of the day the time came for me to go ,
READE-1863-1,220.493

and I bade them farewell , hoping that which I scarcely dared to hope ,
that we might meet again . READE-1863-1,220.494

The barque " Guilford " was bound for Fernando Po .
READE-1863-1,220.495

It was my intention to go to that island , where I should find a
man-of-war come there to meet the mails , and to beg a passage to the
South Coast . READE-1863-1,220.496

It happened , however , that a Mr. Sparrhawk , a very intelligent
American trader , discovered before we sailed that he had left behind
him a box of important papers at the Ilha da Princa , from which he had
come a few days previously . READE-1863-1,220.497

Mr. Knight , agent of the firm <paren> Messrs. Hutton and Cookson
<$$paren> to which the barque belonged , consented to touch there , as
it was but little out of the way , and as fair winds at this time of the
year can always be depended on going north . READE-1863-1,220.498

In less than twenty-four hours we " rose " the island ,
READE-1863-1,220.499

and by evening we laid at anchor in its harbor . READE-1863-1,220.500

There was a schooner <P_221> lying near us , a beautiful ,
wicked-looking jewel of a craft , with rakish tapering masts , and a
fluttering top-sail like a white bonnet . READE-1863-1,221.501

Ships have their physiognomies , READE-1863-1,221.502

and this seemed a <font> lorette <$$font> of the ocean - a <font>
traviata <$$font> of the high seas . READE-1863-1,221.503

I fell in love with her on the spot , READE-1863-1,221.504

and asked what her name was , and where she was bound , in the same way
that I would have inquired the name and address of a handsome girl who
had suddenly inspired me with " the divine passion . "
READE-1863-1,221.505

When I heard that she was the Mondego , bound for San Thomé , I felt an
irresistible inclination to offer her my company . READE-1863-1,221.506

From San Thomé I could go by a Portuguese line of steamers to Loanda .
READE-1863-1,221.507

Mr. Sparrhawk , who knew the captain , said that the matter could be
easily arranged ; READE-1863-1,221.508

the schooner would sail in four days' time ; READE-1863-1,221.509

the passage would take about four days , READE-1863-1,221.510

and I should have to pay about four pounds . READE-1863-1,221.511

He would introduce me to a gentleman at whose house I could reside while
I remained in the island . READE-1863-1,221.512

Accordingly , at 10 P.M. , I found myself standing on Portuguese land .
READE-1863-1,221.513

A light was glimmering in the distance , growing smaller and smaller ,
till it became a twinkling speck and disappeared . READE-1863-1,221.514

This was the " Guilford " sailing before the wind , and bound for
Fernando Po . READE-1863-1,221.515

I then remembered that I had only 20 +L {TEXT:+L20} in cash ; that I
could not speak Portuguese ; that I had letters for no one in Loanda ;
that , in short , having with me no credentials of any kind , an amount
of luggage which was not imposing , and very indifferent wearing apparel
, there was nothing in the world to distinguish me from a <font>
chevalier d'industrie . <$$font> READE-1863-1,221.516

However , reflecting that it was useless to waste thought on such
trifles , I took my companion's arm , READE-1863-1,221.517

returned to his house , READE-1863-1,221.518

and soon forgot my little difficulties . READE-1863-1,221.519

The next morning I had leisure to look about me . READE-1863-1,221.520

I was in the town of San Antonio . READE-1863-1,221.521

Its bay is the arena of the loveliest amphitheatre one can conceive .
READE-1863-1,221.522

Tier over tier of forest trees form the sides , READE-1863-1,221.523

and a volcanic peak , also covered with trees , might be regarded as a
kind of gallery . READE-1863-1,221.524

The continuous rustling of the leaves in the wind , and the dull moan of
the waters falling on the beach , reminded me of the hum of human crowds
. READE-1863-1,221.525

My host was a mulatto ; a fact to be recognized not only by his skin and
hair , but also by his curiosity respecting my relatives , his
reiteration of the same remarks , and the pompous nature of his
hospitality . READE-1863-1,221.526

He kept a small shop , READE-1863-1,221.527

and had two plantations , with about seventy slaves .
READE-1863-1,221.528

This enabled him to live on the produce <P_222> of his farm .
READE-1863-1,222.529

He drank his own coffee , of which and of cocoa he sold sufficient to
buy him clothes and other necessaries . READE-1863-1,222.530

He ate baked yams as a substitute for bread ; also great quantities of
<font> farinha <$$font> , a flour made from cassada or manioc , and
which closely resembles sawdust . READE-1863-1,222.531

His farm afforded him fowls , sheep , and pigs in no great quantity ;
READE-1863-1,222.532

but the food of the poor people is principally vegetable -
READE-1863-1,222.533

For beef is rare within these ox-less isles , etc. READE-1863-1,222.534

I found only six white men on this island , three of whom were
government officials . READE-1863-1,222.535

The houses of the town are well built , but execrably furnished : bare ,
ghastly rooms , with an isolated chair or sofa sprinkled here and there
, and looking as if they never had been sat upon , nor were meant to be
. READE-1863-1,222.536

On the unpapered walls hung some of those solemn portraits which one
meets in England in the dining-rooms of the middle classes , and which
are said to be striking likenesses of individuals , but bear little
resemblance to human beings generally . READE-1863-1,222.537

There was a profusion of churches , READE-1863-1,222.538

and it was curious to see the black priests walking about in their
bombazine gowns and lace collars . READE-1863-1,222.539

They have a school , in which they teach the small negroes to read and
write ; READE-1863-1,222.540

those who are intended for the Church are also instructed in dog-Latin .
READE-1863-1,222.541

Many novices are sent forth from this island <paren> but more still from
San Thomé <$$paren> as missionaries to various parts of the Coast ,
READE-1863-1,222.542

and so contribute their mite to the great work of civilization .
READE-1863-1,222.543

It is true that these priests , from all that I have heard , are not
models of virtue , READE-1863-1,222.544

but this may partly be owing to the charming laxity of public manners .
READE-1863-1,222.545

Plato has been much blamed because in his Republic he made the wives
common . READE-1863-1,222.546

In this little island I had an opportunity of studying this system ,
which there exists and flourishes . READE-1863-1,222.547

I have certainly never seen so many happy people in Africa as I saw upon
Prince's Island , nor so many pretty girls . READE-1863-1,222.548

A very large proportion are slaves ; READE-1863-1,222.549

but they are required to do but little work , READE-1863-1,222.550

for the fertile soil requires small assistance ; READE-1863-1,222.551

and the domestic slaves are more numerous , idle , and tyrannical in a
merchant's house in Princa than the servants in Belgravia .
READE-1863-1,222.552

All day long one may see those fascinating creatures tripping about in
the streets in long flowing cotton robes , with handkerchiefs bound
elegantly round their heads ; READE-1863-1,222.553

when they see one , they give a smile <P_223> which would bewitch a
saint <paren> imagine the effect upon a sinner ! <$$paren> ,
READE-1863-1,223.554

and prattle away to you with such gushes of girlish laughter that one's
heart , which Africa has already a little deadened , warms and flushes
into life . READE-1863-1,223.555

Then other black eyes shine upon you , READE-1863-1,223.556

and soft hands play at hide_and_seek in your European hair ;
READE-1863-1,223.557

and then you sit beneath some noble palm , as says Linnaeus , a prince
of the vegetable kingdom ; READE-1863-1,223.558

and there one may sit and drink cocoa-nut milk , and take lessons in
Portuguese patois , and enjoy one's noonday siesta , feeling almost
inclined at times to turn one's back on ambition and the passions of the
world , and there to dream , dream , dream one's life away .
READE-1863-1,223.559

Having led a life of extreme self-denial for some little time , I
suddenly fancied a bottle of Champagne ; READE-1863-1,223.560

so I went into my host's shop , READE-1863-1,223.561

and asked him if he had any . READE-1863-1,223.562

He replied that he had , READE-1863-1,223.563

and , opening a Champagne bottle , poured me out a tumbler of a still ,
very sweet , dark brown wine , which I immediately recognized as a
<font> viño branco <$$font> of the lowest order . READE-1863-1,223.564

To all my arguments that this wine was not Champagne , nor any thing
like it , he replied by showing me the label on the bottle ;
READE-1863-1,223.565

and although , providentially , he could not compel me to drink it , I
had to pay for it , and as dearly as if I had bought it at Cremorne .
READE-1863-1,223.566

Great men are never discouraged by difficulties . READE-1863-1,223.567

I had made the acquaintance of a young man named Francisco , who spoke
English remarkably well , and whom I paid a dollar a day to act as my
interpreter and general informant . READE-1863-1,223.568

He had taken me to several coffee and cocoa plantations ,
READE-1863-1,223.569

and had shown me the churches and the cemetery , the barracks and the
fort . READE-1863-1,223.570

I asked him if it was possible to obtain a bottle of Champagne in the
island . READE-1863-1,223.571

He said he did not think that it could be bought , but that his friend
the collector of customs had some , and , if I went to see him , would
be sure to offer some . READE-1863-1,223.572

Accordingly , we walked through the town , READE-1863-1,223.573

crossed a stream by means of stepping-stones , READE-1863-1,223.574

passed through a grove of cocoa-nut-trees , READE-1863-1,223.575

ascended a hill-path skirted by plantations , READE-1863-1,223.576

and entered the picturesque dwelling of the Collector of Customs .
READE-1863-1,223.577

He was a good-natured little mulatto , READE-1863-1,223.578

and was celebrated in the island as the possessor of an opera-glass .
READE-1863-1,223.579

The view from his house was worthy of the glass , READE-1863-1,223.580

and appeared doubly beautiful to one who had passed five months among
the dreary forests of the continent . READE-1863-1,223.581

These islands of Princa and San Thomé may be called volcanic
flower-gardens . READE-1863-1,223.582

With Annobom , they seem to belong to <P_224> a range of mountains
resembling in features the Sierra del Crystal on the main land .
READE-1863-1,224.583

The peak of Cameroons is 14,000 feet high ; READE-1863-1,224.584

that of Fernando Po <paren> in the same latitude <$$paren> is 10,000 ;
San Thomé , 8000 ; Annobom , 2000 . READE-1863-1,224.585

In the same manner , the Sierra del Crystal range , which may be said to
commence with the Cameroons , appears also to dwindle as it runs south ,
READE-1863-1,224.586

and presents the same forest-crowned features , and , as far as I can
judge , the same geological characters . READE-1863-1,224.587

As Francisco had predicted , the collector asked me whether I preferred
gin or Champagne , READE-1863-1,224.588

and , on receiving my answer , brought in a pint bottle with a large
label on its side - <font> Fine Crab-apple Cider . <$$font>
READE-1863-1,224.589

This he opened , READE-1863-1,224.590

and , with many fears of the colic , I helped to drink it ; after which
he asked me , with unblushing effrontery , if I liked the quality of the
wine . READE-1863-1,224.591

The words <font> cider <$$font> and <font> cidra <$$font> being so much
alike , and this same drink being afterward offered to me at other
houses in the same manner , I concluded crab-apple cider at Prince's
Island to hold the same position as gooseberry wine in England ; and
that among certain classes the most undisguised imitation is offered
with audacity , and received with well-bred ignorance .
READE-1863-1,224.592

We dined with the good collector , who told me that the revenue of the
island to government was about 1000 +L {TEXT:+L1000} .
READE-1863-1,224.593

The taxes were very heavy , READE-1863-1,224.594

and one had lately been levied upon slaves . READE-1863-1,224.595

On returning to the town , we found it tastefully illuminated by means
of oranges hollowed and filled with palm-oil and a cotton wick .
READE-1863-1,224.596

It was some feast-day . READE-1863-1,224.597

Then we met a procession of young girls , playing musical instruments ,
and singing as they went . READE-1863-1,224.598

Joachim told me that every night the girls went to dance at one of the
houses , a different house being taken each night , the host or hostess
providing refreshments . READE-1863-1,224.599

I admired this genial custom , READE-1863-1,224.600

and wondered whether I was really in a land of slavery .
READE-1863-1,224.601

Joachim , having spoken with one of the young ladies , told me that
feasting and dancing would that night be kept up till daybreak , and
with unusual vigor . READE-1863-1,224.602

Seven days ago a child had been born in the house they were going to .
READE-1863-1,224.603

It was a popular belief that on the seventh day the midwife can
transform herself into an owl , and will come to suck the child's blood
. READE-1863-1,224.604

But , as the witch can not endure good company , these girls crowd to
the house toward evening . READE-1863-1,224.605

There they watch and sing ; also dancing , eating , and drinking till
the dawn . READE-1863-1,224.606

This effectually disturbs the scheme of the witch and the slumbers of
the neighborhood . READE-1863-1,224.607

<P_225>

On the third day of my residence , my mulatto entertainer told me
<paren> he could speak a little bad French <$$paren> that the " Mondego
" would sail on the morrow ; that it would be necessary for me to take a
passport , which it would give me a great deal of trouble to get myself
, and that , if I liked , he would arrange the matter for me .
READE-1863-1,225.609

To this I consented ; READE-1863-1,225.610

and he contrived to arrange it so ingeniously that I paid for my
passport a price which I believe no son of Adam ever paid before .
READE-1863-1,225.611

What with this petty larceny , and with the few things which I had
bought from his shop , and for which he charged cent per_cent. , I
reckoned that I paid for his hospitality at the same rate that I should
have paid at the Clarendon or the Clarges ; READE-1863-1,225.612

but I preferred to do that rather than lie under an obligation to him .
READE-1863-1,225.613

But the captain of the " Mondego , " who heard of it afterward , was
very indignant , READE-1863-1,225.614

and declared that he would expose the fraud to the governor :
READE-1863-1,225.615

he also expressed an opinion that mulattoes inherited the vices of both
races - a maxim which I had heard often enough before , and which is not
altogether without truth for its foundation . READE-1863-1,225.616

I found this captain and his first officer extremely agreeable and
well-informed men . READE-1863-1,225.617

The vessel sailed close to the wind , which , as we were going south ,
was always against us , READE-1863-1,225.618

and we made the passage in four days . READE-1863-1,225.619

There lay the island of San Thomé , with its peak towering to the clouds
, and its sides dotted with Nature's richest mantle of leaves and
flowers . READE-1863-1,225.620

A very pretty town , Santa Anna de Chaves , lay smiling in the bay ,
READE-1863-1,225.621

and the chimes from the bells of her seven churches made me believe that
I once more approached civilization . READE-1863-1,225.622

We landed , READE-1863-1,225.623

and our captain exchanged greetings with a number of merchants , who
stood by the door of the custom-house watching the disembarkation of a
cargo . READE-1863-1,225.624

I was then introduced to Senhor Pereira , the owner of the schooner ,
and the Monte Christo of the island . READE-1863-1,225.625

He had begun life as mate or master of a slave ship , which was taken by
an English cruiser . READE-1863-1,225.626

He was set ashore , in accordance with the regular rule , at the first
place they touched , which happened to be Prince's Island .
READE-1863-1,225.627

He had two dollars in his pocket , READE-1863-1,225.628

and he had only his pocket in the world . READE-1863-1,225.629

He came over to San Thomé , READE-1863-1,225.630

and speculated so cleverly in <font> black ivory <$$font> ,
READE-1863-1,225.631

and applied himself so closely to business - never touching wine nor
taking any kind of pleasure - that he became rich , and was now the
owner <P_226> of two fine vessels , and could lay his hand <paren> so
they said <$$paren> on a million of dollars when he pleased .
READE-1863-1,226.632

His house was furnished with a gaudy want of taste ,
READE-1863-1,226.633

and his drawing-room reminded me of those in which one is so often
received in small country houses , and which are evidently never used
except to receive visitors . READE-1863-1,226.634

He had , however , a good table , READE-1863-1,226.635

and every day dined a_dozen guests . READE-1863-1,226.636

On this occasion we were served with a very excellent <font> purée
<$$font> , to which the Portuguese added black olives , like those which
grow in the south of France . READE-1863-1,226.637

They laughed to distraction when I said that the English preferred
olives with their wine . READE-1863-1,226.638

Then came a grand <font> bouilli <$$font> <paren> rare luxury in Africa
<$$paren> , and a fair variety of <font> entrées <$$font> and <font>
entremets . <$$font> READE-1863-1,226.639

A cup of home-grown coffee concluded the feast . READE-1863-1,226.640

The coffee grown on these two islands is celebrated ,
READE-1863-1,226.641

and is bought up by the grandees of the Peninsula .
READE-1863-1,226.642

It is kept till it is four years of age ; READE-1863-1,226.643

for coffee , like port , improves by time . READE-1863-1,226.644

Then it is prepared with the greatest nicety ; READE-1863-1,226.645

you take it without sugar or milk , READE-1863-1,226.646

and you find that you have arrived at an epoch in your life :
READE-1863-1,226.647

an exquisite aroma gently ascends your nostrils ; READE-1863-1,226.648

you kiss the dark potion with your lips ; READE-1863-1,226.649

and , as it trickles across your palate , you feel an exquisite thrill
throughout your frame . READE-1863-1,226.650

I noticed that only one bottle of wine , and that of an ordinary kind
<paren> <font> vino_tinto <$$font> <$$paren> , had been placed upon the
table . READE-1863-1,226.651

Except myself , scarcely any one had touched it . READE-1863-1,226.652

I had drank it all but a glass or so , which I had left for manners .
READE-1863-1,226.653

I had heard that the Portuguese on the Coast were hard drinkers ,
READE-1863-1,226.654

and was astonished at this abstinence . READE-1863-1,226.655

But I was informed that , in the first place , only the Portuguese
traders in the Congo affect to keep pace with true Britons in the way of
drink ; secondly , that the island was under a cloud , and that all were
living in great temperance . READE-1863-1,226.656

Dysentery in an epidemic form had raged during a month ,
READE-1863-1,226.657

and in a small population of white men the deaths had averaged five a
day . READE-1863-1,226.658

That was why I saw so few white men , they told me .
READE-1863-1,226.659

" To live strictly by rule , " says Rochefoucauld , " is one of the most
troublesome diseases that there is ; " READE-1863-1,226.660

so I lived as usual , except that I took care to eat plenty of fruit ;
READE-1863-1,226.661

for I have observed that dysentery is almost always preceded by
constipation , of which it is , in fact , the result .
READE-1863-1,226.662

The dysentery of San Thomé is of a peculiar kind , which the French call
<font> gras fondu . <$$font> READE-1863-1,226.663

This island of San Thomé had always a bad name ; READE-1863-1,226.664

and in those days when the Hollanders and the Portuguese fought in these
<P_227> dull seas , fleet against fleet , and won these colonies and
lost them turn by turn , it used to be called the Dutch Church-yard .
READE-1863-1,227.665

More fertile than Principe , it is also more malarious ;
READE-1863-1,227.666

and it is this terrible fertility which exhales life-destroying vapors ,
and which is too rich even for the sugar-cane . READE-1863-1,227.667

John II. of Portugal in 1484 , finding that the climate was so
unhealthy , gave the Jews in his kingdom the agreeable choice of being
baptized or of colonizing San Thomé . READE-1863-1,227.668

Great numbers were sent out , READE-1863-1,227.669

and married with women brought over from Angola . READE-1863-1,227.670

From this union arose a mixed race , which the Portuguese firmly
perpetuated . READE-1863-1,227.671

I could detect no relic of the Jewish type , which is decidedly
providential , READE-1863-1,227.672

for a union of the Jew and the negro would be , commercially speaking ,
dangerous to Christianity . READE-1863-1,227.673

There is also an exotic race upon the island . READE-1863-1,227.674

In the year 1544 a slaver dropped her anchor off Sete Pedras Megras to
water . READE-1863-1,227.675

The negroes , seeing land , assassinated their officers
READE-1863-1,227.676

and escaped . READE-1863-1,227.677

They were well received by the savages who inhabited the south part of
the island , and who called them <font> Angolares <$$font> , a name they
have preserved . READE-1863-1,227.678

Requiring wives , this youthful republic had recourse to a rape
resembling that of the Sabines . READE-1863-1,227.679

They hid themselves in the neighborhood of Santa Anna de Chaves ,
READE-1863-1,227.680

and carried off a number of women to the bush . READE-1863-1,227.681

In forty years' time , having become very numerous , they attacked the
people to the north , and afterward the plantations of the Portuguese .
READE-1863-1,227.682

During more than a century the depredations of these bandits continued .
READE-1863-1,227.683

This had much to do with the emigration of the traders to Brazil , and
the consequent ruin of the colony , then prosperous .
READE-1863-1,227.684

At last , in 1693 , General Antonio Pereira de Berredo , having
commanded Captain Mathews Pires to attack them in their mountain
strongholds , the expedition proved successful ; READE-1863-1,227.685

two thirds of the enemy were killed or taken captive ,
READE-1863-1,227.686

and the <font> guerra do matto <$$font> <paren> bush war <$$paren> was
ended . READE-1863-1,227.687

The remnant of the Angolares joined the people of Angora de San João ,
READE-1863-1,227.688

entered semi-civilized life , READE-1863-1,227.689

and took to the city wares to sell , consisting of large canoes , fruits
, birds , calabashes . READE-1863-1,227.690

The purity of this race is preserved by their intermarriages , and also
by their pride , READE-1863-1,227.691

for they will do no menial work . READE-1863-1,227.692

They form a colony within a colony , READE-1863-1,227.693

and they have customs which are said to be extremely curious .
READE-1863-1,227.694

The eight days which I was forced to pass at this island were not spent
very profitably . READE-1863-1,227.695

I lived on board the " Mondego " all the while . READE-1863-1,227.696

There was a very simple reason for this : READE-1863-1,227.697

the residents <P_228> would not receive me in their houses ,
READE-1863-1,228.698

and there were no public hotels . READE-1863-1,228.699

It seems that I had become a secret emissary of Lords Palmerston and
Russell , having been sent here to watch the <font> modus operandi
<$$font> of the slave-trade ; to send secret intelligence to the
commanders of the cruisers ; and to communicate to the government some
Utopian plan for the abolition of the slave-trade .
READE-1863-1,228.700

The Portuguese can not understand , and will not believe , that a man
can leave London , to visit this plague-spot of creation at his own
expense , from motives of enterprise and curiosity .
READE-1863-1,228.701

It was plain to them that I was not a trader . READE-1863-1,228.702

Having already learned to swear fluently in Portuguese , and having
plainly no pretension to superior virtue , I could scarcely be a
missionary - even a heretic . READE-1863-1,228.703

Argal , I was a spy ; READE-1863-1,228.704

I was a Fosco , a Machiavel , a Mephistopheles ; READE-1863-1,228.705

I was a serpent who desired to warm myself in their confiding breasts ,
that I might distill the poison more freely from my fangs !
READE-1863-1,228.706

