<BEGIN_reeve-1777-1>

<P_1>

<heading>

The Champion of Virtue . REEVE-1777-1,1.4

A Gothic Story . REEVE-1777-1,1.5

<$$heading>

In the minority of Henry the Sixth , king of England , who also was
crowned king of France , when the renowned John duke of Bedford was
regent of France , and Humphrey the good duke of Gloucester was
protector of England ; a worthy knight , called sir Philip Harclay ,
returned from his travels , to England , his native country .
REEVE-1777-1,1.7

- He had served under the glorious king Henry the Fifth with
distinguishing valour , REEVE-1777-1,1.8

had acquired an honourable fame , REEVE-1777-1,1.9

and was no less esteemed for christian virtues than for deeds of
chivalry . REEVE-1777-1,1.10

After the death of his prince , he entered into the service of the Greek
emperor , REEVE-1777-1,1.11

and distinguished his courage against the encroachments of the Saracens
. REEVE-1777-1,1.12

In a battle there , he took prisoner a certain gentleman , by name M.
Zadisky , of Greek extraction , but brought up by a Saracen officer ,
REEVE-1777-1,1.13

this man he converted to the christian faith , after which he bound him
to himself by the tyes of friendship and gratitude , and he resolved to
continue with his benefactor . REEVE-1777-1,1.14

After <P_2> thirty years travel and warlike service , he determined to
return to his native land , and to spend the remainder of his life in
peace , and by devoting himself to works of piety and charity , prepare
for a better state hereafter . REEVE-1777-1,2.15

This noble knight had in his early youth contracted a strict friendship
with the only son of the lord Lovel , a gentleman of eminent virtues and
accomplishments . REEVE-1777-1,2.16

During sir Philip's residence in foreign countries , he had frequently
written to his friend , REEVE-1777-1,2.17

and had for a time received answers , REEVE-1777-1,2.18

the last informed him of the death of the old lord Lovel , and the
marriage of the young one ; REEVE-1777-1,2.19

but from that time he heard no more from him . REEVE-1777-1,2.20

Sir Philip imputed it not to neglect or forgetfulness , but to the
difficulties of intercourse , common at that time to all travellers and
adventurers . REEVE-1777-1,2.21

- When he was returning home , he resolved , after looking into his
family affairs , to visit the castle of Lovel , and enquire into the
situation of his friend . REEVE-1777-1,2.22

- He landed in Kent , attended by his Greek friend and two faithful
servants , one of which was maimed by the wounds he had received in the
defence of his master . REEVE-1777-1,2.23

- Sir Philip went to his family seat in Yorkshire , REEVE-1777-1,2.24

he found his mother and sister were dead , and his estates sequestered
in the hands of commissioners appointed by the protector .
REEVE-1777-1,2.25

- He was obliged to prove the reality of his claim , and the identity of
his person , <paren> by the testimony of some of the old servants of his
family <$$paren> after which every thing was restored to him .
REEVE-1777-1,2.26

He took possession of his own house , REEVE-1777-1,2.27

established his household , REEVE-1777-1,2.28

settled the old servants in their former stations , REEVE-1777-1,2.29

and placed those he brought home in <P_3> the upper offices of his
family . REEVE-1777-1,3.30

He left his friend to superintend his domestic affairs ,
REEVE-1777-1,3.31

and attended by only one of his old servants , he set out for the castle
of Lovel , in the west of England . REEVE-1777-1,3.32

- They travelled by easy journeys , REEVE-1777-1,3.33

but towards the evening of the second day , the servant was so ill and
fatigued he could go no further , REEVE-1777-1,3.34

he stopped at an inn where he grew worse every hour , REEVE-1777-1,3.35

and the next day expired . REEVE-1777-1,3.36

Sir Philip was under great concern for the loss of his servant , and
some for himself , being alone in a strange place ; REEVE-1777-1,3.37

however he took courage , REEVE-1777-1,3.38

ordered his servant's funeral , REEVE-1777-1,3.39

attended it himself , REEVE-1777-1,3.40

and having shed a tear of humanity over his grave , proceeded alone on
his journey . REEVE-1777-1,3.41

As he drew near the estate of his friend , he began to enquire of every
one he met , whether the lord Lovel resided at the seat of his ancestors
; REEVE-1777-1,3.42

he was answered by one , he did not know , - by another he could not
tell , - by a third , that he never heard of such a person .
REEVE-1777-1,3.43

Sir Philip thought it strange that a man of lord Lovel's consequence
should be unknown in his own neighbourhood , and where his ancestors had
usually resided . REEVE-1777-1,3.44

- He ruminated on the uncertainty of human happiness ; REEVE-1777-1,3.45

this world , said he , has nothing for a wise man to depend upon ,
REEVE-1777-1,3.46

I have lost all my relations , and most of my friends ;
REEVE-1777-1,3.47

and I am uncertain whether any are remaining . REEVE-1777-1,3.48

- I will however be thankful for the blessings that are spared to me ,
REEVE-1777-1,3.49

and I will endeavour to replace those that I have lost .
REEVE-1777-1,3.50

- if my friend lives he shall share my fortune while I live ,
REEVE-1777-1,3.51

and his children shall have the reversion of it ; REEVE-1777-1,3.52

and I will share his comforts in return . REEVE-1777-1,3.53

- But perhaps my friend may have met <P_4> with troubles that have made
him disgusted with the world . REEVE-1777-1,4.54

Perhaps he has buried his amiable wife , or his promising children , and
tired of public life , REEVE-1777-1,4.55

he is retired into a monastery {TEXT:monastry} , REEVE-1777-1,4.56

- at least I will know what all this silence means . REEVE-1777-1,4.57

When he came within a mile of the castle of Lovel , he stopped at a
cottage , REEVE-1777-1,4.58

and asked for a draught of water , REEVE-1777-1,4.59

a peasant , master of the house brought it , REEVE-1777-1,4.60

and asked if his honour would alight and take a moment's {TEXT:moments}
refreshment . REEVE-1777-1,4.61

- Sir Philip accepted his offer , being resolved to make farther enquiry
before he approached the castle . REEVE-1777-1,4.62

- He asked the same questions of him , that he had before to others ,
REEVE-1777-1,4.63

which lord Lovel , said the man , does your honour enquire after ?
REEVE-1777-1,4.64

the man whom I knew , was called Arthur , said sir Philip ,
REEVE-1777-1,4.65

ay , said the peasant , he was the only surviving son of Richard , lord
Lovel as I think ? REEVE-1777-1,4.66

- very true friend , he was so . REEVE-1777-1,4.67

- alas sir , said the man , he is dead ! REEVE-1777-1,4.68

he survived his father but a short time . REEVE-1777-1,4.69

- dead say you . REEVE-1777-1,4.70

- how long since ? REEVE-1777-1,4.71

- about fifteen years to the best of my remembrance . REEVE-1777-1,4.72

- sir Philip sighed deeply - REEVE-1777-1,4.73

alas , said he , what do we by living long , but survive all our friends
! REEVE-1777-1,4.74

- but pray tell me how he died . REEVE-1777-1,4.75

- I will sir to the best of my knowledge . REEVE-1777-1,4.76

An@ @'t please your honour , I heard say , that he attended the king
when he went against the Welch rebels , and he left his lady big with
child ; REEVE-1777-1,4.77

and so there was a battle fought , REEVE-1777-1,4.78

and the king got the better of the rebels , - REEVE-1777-1,4.79

there came first a report that none of the officers were killed ,
REEVE-1777-1,4.80

but a few days after there came a messenger with an account very
different , that several were wounded , and that the lord Lovel was
slain , which sad news overset us all with <P_5> sorrow ,
REEVE-1777-1,5.81

for he was a noble gentleman , a bountiful master , and the delight of
all the neighbourhood . REEVE-1777-1,5.82

- He was indeed , said sir Philip , all that is amiable and good ,
REEVE-1777-1,5.83

he was my dear and noble friend , REEVE-1777-1,5.84

and I am inconsolable for his loss . REEVE-1777-1,5.85

- but the unfortunate lady , what became of her ? REEVE-1777-1,5.86

why an@ @'t please your honour , they said she died of grief for the
loss of her husband , REEVE-1777-1,5.87

but her death was kept private for a time , REEVE-1777-1,5.88

and we did not know it for certain till some weeks afterwards -
REEVE-1777-1,5.89

The will of heaven be obeyed , said sir Philip , REEVE-1777-1,5.90

but who succeeded to the title and estate ? REEVE-1777-1,5.91

- the next heir , said the peasant , a kinsman of the deceased , sir
Walter Lovel by name . REEVE-1777-1,5.92

I have seen him , said sir Philip , formerly , REEVE-1777-1,5.93

but where was he when these events happened ? REEVE-1777-1,5.94

at the castle of Lovel , sir , REEVE-1777-1,5.95

he came there on a visit to the lady , REEVE-1777-1,5.96

and waited there to receive my lord , at his return from Wales ;
REEVE-1777-1,5.97

when the news of his death arrived , sir Walter did every thing in his
power to comfort her , REEVE-1777-1,5.98

and some said he was to marry her , REEVE-1777-1,5.99

but she refused to be comforted , REEVE-1777-1,5.100

and took it so to heart that she died . REEVE-1777-1,5.101

And does the present lord Lovel reside at the castle ?
REEVE-1777-1,5.102

- no sir , - REEVE-1777-1,5.103

who then ? REEVE-1777-1,5.104

- the lord baron Fitz-Owen . REEVE-1777-1,5.105

- and how came sir Walter to leave the seat of his ancestors ?
REEVE-1777-1,5.106

- why sir he married his sister to this said lord , REEVE-1777-1,5.107

and so he sold the castle to him , REEVE-1777-1,5.108

and went away , REEVE-1777-1,5.109

and built himself a house in the north country , as far as
Northumberland , I think they call it . REEVE-1777-1,5.110

That is very strange , said sir Philip , REEVE-1777-1,5.111

- so it is please your honour , REEVE-1777-1,5.112

but this is all I know about it - REEVE-1777-1,5.113

I thank you friend for your intelligence , REEVE-1777-1,5.114

I have taken a long journey to no purpose , REEVE-1777-1,5.115

and have met with nothing but cross accidents . REEVE-1777-1,5.116

- This <P_6> life is indeed a pilgrimage , REEVE-1777-1,6.117

- pray direct me the nearest way to the next monastery {TEXT:monastry} ,
REEVE-1777-1,6.118

- noble sir , said the peasant , it is full five miles off ,
REEVE-1777-1,6.119

the night is coming on , REEVE-1777-1,6.120

and the ways are bad ; REEVE-1777-1,6.121

I am but a poor man REEVE-1777-1,6.122

and can@ @not entertain your honour as you are used to ,
REEVE-1777-1,6.123

but if you will enter my poor cottage , that , and every thing in it ,
are at your service . REEVE-1777-1,6.124

My honest friend I thank you heartily , said sir Philip ,
REEVE-1777-1,6.125

your kindness and hospitality might shame many of higher birth and
breeding , REEVE-1777-1,6.126

I will accept your kind offer ; REEVE-1777-1,6.127

but pray let me know the name of my host ? REEVE-1777-1,6.128

- John Wyat , sir , an honest man though a poor one , and a christian
man , though a sinful one . {TEXT:,} REEVE-1777-1,6.129

Whose cottage is this ? REEVE-1777-1,6.130

- it belongs to the lord Fitz-Owen . REEVE-1777-1,6.131

- what family have you ? REEVE-1777-1,6.132

- a wife , two sons and a daughter , who will all be proud to wait upon
your honour ; REEVE-1777-1,6.133

let me hold your honour's stirrup whilst you alight .
REEVE-1777-1,6.134

He seconded these words by the proper action , REEVE-1777-1,6.135

and having assisted his guest to dismount , he conducted him into his
house , REEVE-1777-1,6.136

called his wife to attend him , REEVE-1777-1,6.137

and then led his horse under a poor shed , that served him as a stable .
REEVE-1777-1,6.138

Sir Philip was fatigued in body and mind , REEVE-1777-1,6.139

and was glad to repose himself any_where . REEVE-1777-1,6.140

The courtesy of his host engaged his attention , REEVE-1777-1,6.141

and satisfied his wishes . REEVE-1777-1,6.142

He soon after returned , followed by a youth of about eighteen years ,
REEVE-1777-1,6.143

make haste John , said the father , and before you say neither more nor
less than what I have told you . REEVE-1777-1,6.144

I will father , said the lad , REEVE-1777-1,6.145

and immediately set off , REEVE-1777-1,6.146

run like a buck across the fields , REEVE-1777-1,6.147

and was out of sight in an instant . REEVE-1777-1,6.148

I hope friend , said sir Philip , you have not sent your son to provide
for my entertainment , REEVE-1777-1,6.149

I am a soldier , used <P_7> to lodge and fare hard , REEVE-1777-1,7.150

and if it were otherwise , your courtesy and kindness would give a
relish to the most ordinary food . REEVE-1777-1,7.151

I wish heartily , said Wyatt , it was in my power to entertain your
honour as you ought to be , REEVE-1777-1,7.152

but as I can@ @not do so , I will , when my son returns acquaint you
with the errand I sent him on . REEVE-1777-1,7.153

After this they conversed together on common subjects , like fellow
creatures of the same natural form and endowments , tho' different kinds
of education had given a conscious superiority to the one , a conscious
inferiority to the other ; REEVE-1777-1,7.154

and the due respect was paid by the latter , without being exacted by
the former . REEVE-1777-1,7.155

- In about half an hour young John returned - REEVE-1777-1,7.156

thou hast made haste , said the father ; REEVE-1777-1,7.157

not more than good speed , quoth the son - REEVE-1777-1,7.158

tell us then how you sped ? REEVE-1777-1,7.159

- shall I tell all that passed , said John . {TEXT:?}
REEVE-1777-1,7.160

- all , said the father , REEVE-1777-1,7.161

I do@ @nt want to hide any thing . REEVE-1777-1,7.162

John stood with his cap in his hand , REEVE-1777-1,7.163

and thus told his tale . REEVE-1777-1,7.164

- I went straight to the castle as fast as I could run ,
REEVE-1777-1,7.165

it was my hap to light on young master Edmund first , REEVE-1777-1,7.166

so I told him just as you bad me , that a noble gentleman was come a
long journey from foreign parts to see the lord Lovel , his friend , and
having lived abroad many years , he did not know that he was dead , and
that the castle was fallen into other hands ; that upon hearing these
tidings he was much grieved and disappointed , and wanting a night's
lodging to rest himself before he returned to his own home , he was fain
to take up with one at our cottage ; that my father thought my lord
would be angry with him , if he were not told of the stranger's journey
and intentions , especially to <P_8> let such a man lye at our cottage ,
where he could neither be lodged nor entertained according to his
quality . REEVE-1777-1,8.167

Here John stopped , REEVE-1777-1,8.168

and his father exclaimed , a good lad . {COM:?} REEVE-1777-1,8.169

- you did your errand very well ; REEVE-1777-1,8.170

and tell us the answer - REEVE-1777-1,8.171

John proceeded - REEVE-1777-1,8.172

master Edmund ordered me some beer , REEVE-1777-1,8.173

and went to acquaint my lord of the message ; REEVE-1777-1,8.174

he stayed a while , REEVE-1777-1,8.175

and then came back to me . REEVE-1777-1,8.176

John , said he , tell the noble stranger , that the baron Fitz-Owen
greets him well , and desires him to rest assured , that though lord
Lovel is dead , and the castle fallen into other hands , his friends
will always find a welcome there ; and my lord desires that he will
accept of a lodging there , while he remains in this country -
REEVE-1777-1,8.177

so I come away directly , REEVE-1777-1,8.178

and made haste to deliver my errand . REEVE-1777-1,8.179

Sir Philip expressed some dissatisfaction at this mark of old Wyatt's
respect - REEVE-1777-1,8.180

I wish , said he , that you had acquainted me with your intention before
you sent to inform the baron I was here . REEVE-1777-1,8.181

I choose rather to lodge with you , REEVE-1777-1,8.182

and I propose to make amends for the trouble I shall give you .
REEVE-1777-1,8.183

Pray sir do@ @n't mention it , said the peasant , REEVE-1777-1,8.184

you are as welcome as myself , REEVE-1777-1,8.185

I hope no offence ; REEVE-1777-1,8.186

the only reason of my sending was , because I am both unable and
unworthy to entertain your honour . REEVE-1777-1,8.187

- I am sorry , said sir Philip , you should think me so dainty ,
REEVE-1777-1,8.188

I am a christian soldier , REEVE-1777-1,8.189

and him I acknowledge for my prince and master , accepted the
invitations of the poor , REEVE-1777-1,8.190

and washed the feet of his disciples . REEVE-1777-1,8.191

Let us say no more on this head , REEVE-1777-1,8.192

I am resolved to stay this night in your cottage , REEVE-1777-1,8.193

tomorrow I will wait on the baron , and thank him for his hospitable
invitation . REEVE-1777-1,8.194

- That shall <P_9> be as your honour pleases , since you will condescend
to stay here . REEVE-1777-1,9.195

John , do you run back and acquaint my lord of it ; REEVE-1777-1,9.196

not so , said sir Philip , REEVE-1777-1,9.197

it is now almost dark , REEVE-1777-1,9.198

- 't@ @is no matter , said John , REEVE-1777-1,9.199

I can go it blindfold . REEVE-1777-1,9.200

Sir Philip then gave him a message to the baron in his own name ,
acquainting him that he would pay his respects to him in the morning .
REEVE-1777-1,9.201

John flew back the second time , REEVE-1777-1,9.202

and soon returned with new commendations from the baron , and that he
would expect him on the morrow . REEVE-1777-1,9.203

Sir Philip gave him an angel of gold , REEVE-1777-1,9.204

and praised his speed and abilities . REEVE-1777-1,9.205

He supped with Wyatt and his family upon new laid eggs and rashers of
bacon , with the highest relish . REEVE-1777-1,9.206

They praised the Creator for His gifts , REEVE-1777-1,9.207

and acknowledged they were unworthy of the least of his blessings .
REEVE-1777-1,9.208

They gave the best of their two lofts up to sir Philip ,
REEVE-1777-1,9.209

the rest of the family slept in the other , the old woman and her
daughter in the bed , the father and his two sons upon clean straw .
REEVE-1777-1,9.210

sir Philip's bed was of a better kind , and yet as much inferior to his
usual accommodations ; REEVE-1777-1,9.211

nevertheless the good knight slept as well in Wyatt's cottage , as he
could have done in a palace . REEVE-1777-1,9.212

During his sleep , many strange and incoherent dreams arose to his
imagination . REEVE-1777-1,9.213

He thought he received a message from his friend lord Lovel , to come to
him at the castle , that he stood at the gate and received him , that he
strove to embrace him , but could not , but that he spoke to this effect
. REEVE-1777-1,9.214

- Though I have been dead these fifteen years , I still command here ,
REEVE-1777-1,9.215

and none can come here without my permission , REEVE-1777-1,9.216

know that it is I that invite , and bid <P_10> you welcome ,
REEVE-1777-1,10.217

the hopes of my house rest upon you . REEVE-1777-1,10.218

Upon this he bid sir Philip follow him , REEVE-1777-1,10.219

he led him through many rooms , till at last he sunk down ,
REEVE-1777-1,10.220

and sir Philip thought he still followed him , till he came into a dark
and frightful cave , where he disappeared , REEVE-1777-1,10.221

and in his stead he beheld a compleat suit of armour stained with blood
, which belonged to his friend , REEVE-1777-1,10.222

and he thought he heard dismal groans from beneath .
REEVE-1777-1,10.223

Presently after , he thought he was hurried away by an invisible hand ,
and led into a wild heath , where the people were inclosing the ground ,
and making preparations for two combatants ; REEVE-1777-1,10.224

the trumpet sounded , REEVE-1777-1,10.225

and a voice called out still louder , forbear ! REEVE-1777-1,10.226

- it is not permitted to be revealed till the time is ripe for the event
. REEVE-1777-1,10.227

- Wait with patience on the decrees of heaven - REEVE-1777-1,10.228

He was then transported to his own house , where going into an
unfrequented room he was again met by his friend , who was living , and
in all the bloom of youth , as when he first knew him .
REEVE-1777-1,10.229

He started at the sight , REEVE-1777-1,10.230

and awoke . REEVE-1777-1,10.231

The sun shone upon his curtains , REEVE-1777-1,10.232

and perceiving it was day , he sat up REEVE-1777-1,10.233

and recollected where he was . REEVE-1777-1,10.234

The images that impressed his sleeping fancy remained strongly on his
mind waking ; REEVE-1777-1,10.235

but his reason strove to disperse them ; REEVE-1777-1,10.236

it was natural that the story he had heard should create these ideas ,
that they should wait on him in his sleep , and that every dream should
bear some relation to his deceased friend . REEVE-1777-1,10.237

The sun dazzled his eyes , REEVE-1777-1,10.238

the birds serenaded him REEVE-1777-1,10.239

and diverted his attention , REEVE-1777-1,10.240

and a woodbine forced its way through the window , REEVE-1777-1,10.241

and regaled his sense of smelling with its fragrance .
REEVE-1777-1,10.242

- He arose , REEVE-1777-1,10.243

paid his devotions to <P_11> heaven , REEVE-1777-1,11.244

and then carefully descended the narrow stairs , REEVE-1777-1,11.245

and went out at the door of the cottage . REEVE-1777-1,11.246

- There he saw the industrious wife and daughter of old Wyatt at their
morning work , the one milking her cow , the other feeding her poultry .
REEVE-1777-1,11.247

He asked for a draught of milk , which , with a slice of rye bread ,
served to break his fast . REEVE-1777-1,11.248

He walked about the fields alone , REEVE-1777-1,11.249

for old Wyatt and his two sons were gone out to their daily labour .
REEVE-1777-1,11.250

He was soon called back by the good woman , who told him that a servant
from the baron waited to conduct him to the castle .
REEVE-1777-1,11.251

He took leave of Wyatt's wife , telling her he would see her again
before he left the country . REEVE-1777-1,11.252

The daughter fetched his horse , which he mounted , and set forward with
the servant , of whom he asked many questions concerning his master's
family . REEVE-1777-1,11.253

How long have you lived with the baron ? REEVE-1777-1,11.254

- Ten years . REEVE-1777-1,11.255

- Is he a good master ? REEVE-1777-1,11.256

- Yes sir , and also a good husband and father . REEVE-1777-1,11.257

- What family has he ? REEVE-1777-1,11.258

- Three sons and a daughter . REEVE-1777-1,11.259

- What age are they of ? REEVE-1777-1,11.260

- the eldest son is in his seventeenth year , the second in his
sixteenth , the others several years younger ; REEVE-1777-1,11.261

but beside these my lord has several young gentlemen brought up with his
own sons , two of which are his nephews ; REEVE-1777-1,11.262

he keeps in his house a learned clerk to teach them languages ;
REEVE-1777-1,11.263

and as for all bodily exercises , none come near them ;
REEVE-1777-1,11.264

there is a fletcher to teach them the use of the cross bow ; a master to
teach them to ride ; another the use of the sword ; REEVE-1777-1,11.265

another learns them to dance ; REEVE-1777-1,11.266

and then they wrestle and run , REEVE-1777-1,11.267

and have such activity in all their motions , that it does one good to
see them ; REEVE-1777-1,11.268

and my lord thinks <P_12> nothing too much to bestow on their education
. REEVE-1777-1,12.269

Truly , says sir Philip , he does the part of a good parent ,
REEVE-1777-1,12.270

and I honour him greatly for it ; REEVE-1777-1,12.271

but are the young gentlemen of a promising disposition ?
REEVE-1777-1,12.272

- yes indeed sir , answered the servant , REEVE-1777-1,12.273

the young gentlemen , my lord's sons are hopeful youths ,
REEVE-1777-1,12.274

but yet there is one who is thought to exceed them all , though he is
the son of a poor labourer . REEVE-1777-1,12.275

- And who is he , said the knight . {TEXT:?} REEVE-1777-1,12.276

One Edmund Twyford , the son of a cottager in our village ,
REEVE-1777-1,12.277

he is to be sure as fine a youth as ever the sun shone upon , and of so
sweet a disposition that nobody envies his good fortune .
REEVE-1777-1,12.278

- What good fortune does he enjoy ? REEVE-1777-1,12.279

- why sir about two years ago , my lord , at his son's {TEXT:sons}
request , took him into his own family , REEVE-1777-1,12.280

and gives him the same education as his own children ;
REEVE-1777-1,12.281

the young lords doat upon him , especially master William , who is about
his own age . REEVE-1777-1,12.282

It is supposed that {TEXT:they} he will attend the young lords when they
go to the wars , which my lord intends they shall bye_and_bye .
REEVE-1777-1,12.283

What you tell me , said sir Philip , increases every minute my respect
for your lord , REEVE-1777-1,12.284

he is an excellent father and master , REEVE-1777-1,12.285

he seeks out merit in obscurity , REEVE-1777-1,12.286

he distinguishes and rewards it ; REEVE-1777-1,12.287

I honour him with all my heart . REEVE-1777-1,12.288

In this manner they conversed together till they came within view of the
castle . REEVE-1777-1,12.289

In a field near the house they saw a company of youths with cross bows
in their hands , shooting at a mark . REEVE-1777-1,12.290

There said the servant , are our young gentlemen at their exercises .
REEVE-1777-1,12.291

Sir Philip stopped his horse to observe them , REEVE-1777-1,12.292

he heard two or three of them cry out - Edmund is the victor -
REEVE-1777-1,12.293

he wins the prize ! REEVE-1777-1,12.294

I must , said sir Philip , take a view <P_13> of this Edmund -
REEVE-1777-1,13.295

he jumped off his horse , REEVE-1777-1,13.296

gave the bridle to the servant , REEVE-1777-1,13.297

and walked into the field . REEVE-1777-1,13.298

- The young gentlemen came up , REEVE-1777-1,13.299

and paid their respects to him , REEVE-1777-1,13.300

he apologized for intruding upon their sports , REEVE-1777-1,13.301

and asked which was the victor , upon which the youth he spoke to
beckoned to another , who immediately advanced , and made his obeisance
, REEVE-1777-1,13.302

- as he drew near , sir Philip fixed his eyes upon him , with so much
attention , that he seemed not to observe his courtesy and address .
REEVE-1777-1,13.303

- at length he recollected himself , REEVE-1777-1,13.304

and said , What is your name young man ? REEVE-1777-1,13.305

Edmund Twyford , replied the youth , REEVE-1777-1,13.306

and I have the honour to attend upon the lord Fitz-Owen@ @'s sons .
REEVE-1777-1,13.307

- pray noble sir , said the youth who first addressed sir Philip , are
not you the stranger who is expected by my father ? REEVE-1777-1,13.308

- I am sir , answered he , REEVE-1777-1,13.309

and I go to pay my respects to him - REEVE-1777-1,13.310

will you excuse our attendance sir ? REEVE-1777-1,13.311

we have not yet finished our exercises - REEVE-1777-1,13.312

my dear youth , said sir Philip , no apology is necessary ,
REEVE-1777-1,13.313

but will you favour me with your proper name , that I may know to whose
courtesy I am obliged - REEVE-1777-1,13.314

my name is William Fitz-Owen , REEVE-1777-1,13.315

that gentleman is my eldest brother , master Robert , that other my
kinsman , master Richard Wenlock - REEVE-1777-1,13.316

very well , I thank you , gentle sir , REEVE-1777-1,13.317

I beg you not to stir another step , REEVE-1777-1,13.318

your servant holds my horse , REEVE-1777-1,13.319

farewell {TEXT:farewel} sir , said master William , REEVE-1777-1,13.320

I hope we shall have the pleasure of meeting you at dinner -
REEVE-1777-1,13.321

the youths returned to their sports , REEVE-1777-1,13.322

and sir Philip mounted his horse REEVE-1777-1,13.323

and proceeded to the castle ; REEVE-1777-1,13.324

he entered it with a deep sigh , and melancholy recollections .
REEVE-1777-1,13.325

The baron received him with the utmost respect and courtesy -
REEVE-1777-1,13.326

<P_14>

he gave a brief account of the principal events that had happened in the
family of Lovel during his absence ; REEVE-1777-1,14.328

- he spoke of the late lord Lovel with respect , of the present with the
affection of a brother . REEVE-1777-1,14.329

- Sir Philip in return gave a brief recital of his own adventures abroad
, and of the disagreeable circumstances he had met with since his return
home : REEVE-1777-1,14.330

he pathetically lamented the loss of all his friends , not forgetting
that of his faithful servant on the way ; saying he could be contented
to give up the world , and retire to a religious house , but that he was
withheld by the consideration , that some who depended entirely upon him
, wou'd want his presence and assistance , and beside that , he thought
he might be of service to many others . REEVE-1777-1,14.331

The baron agreed with him in opinion , that a man was of much more
service to the world who continued in it , than one who retired from it
, and gave his fortunes to the church , whose servants did not always
make the best use of it . REEVE-1777-1,14.332

- Sir Philip then turned the conversation , REEVE-1777-1,14.333

and congratulated the baron on his hopeful family - REEVE-1777-1,14.334

he praised their persons and address , REEVE-1777-1,14.335

and warmly applauded the care he bestowed on their education .
REEVE-1777-1,14.336

He listened with pleasure to the honest approbation of a worthy heart ,
REEVE-1777-1,14.337

and enjoyed the true happiness of a parent - REEVE-1777-1,14.338

sir Philip then made further enquiry concerning Edmund , whose
appearance had struck him with an impression in his favour .
REEVE-1777-1,14.339

That boy , said the Baron , is the son of a cottager in this
neighbourhood , REEVE-1777-1,14.340

his uncommon merit and gentleness of manners , distinguishes him from
those of his own class ; REEVE-1777-1,14.341

from his childhood he attracted the notice and affection <P_15> of all
that knew him , REEVE-1777-1,15.342

he was beloved everywhere but at his father's house ,
REEVE-1777-1,15.343

and there it should seem that his merits were his crimes ;
REEVE-1777-1,15.344

for the peasant his father hated him , REEVE-1777-1,15.345

treated him severely , REEVE-1777-1,15.346

and at length threatened to turn him out of doors - REEVE-1777-1,15.347

he used to run here and there on errands for my people ,
REEVE-1777-1,15.348

and at length they obliged me to take notice of him ;
REEVE-1777-1,15.349

my sons earnestly desired I would take him into my family ,
REEVE-1777-1,15.350

I did so about two years ago , intending to make him their servant ,
REEVE-1777-1,15.351

but his extraordinary genius and disposition has obliged me to look upon
him in a superior light ; REEVE-1777-1,15.352

perhaps I may incur the censure of many people , by giving him so many
advantages , and treating him as the companion of my children ;
REEVE-1777-1,15.353

- his merit must justify or condemn my partiality for him ,
REEVE-1777-1,15.354

however , I trust that I have secured to my children a faithful servant
of the upper kind , and a useful friend to my family .
REEVE-1777-1,15.355

Sir Philip warmly applauded his generous host , REEVE-1777-1,15.356

and wished to be a sharer in his bounty to that fine youth , whose
appearance indicated all the qualities that had indeared him to his
companions . REEVE-1777-1,15.357

At the hour of dinner the young men presented themselves before their
lord and his guest - REEVE-1777-1,15.358

sir Philip addressed himself to Edmund , REEVE-1777-1,15.359

he asked him many questions , REEVE-1777-1,15.360

and received modest and intelligent answers , REEVE-1777-1,15.361

and he grew every minute more pleased with him . REEVE-1777-1,15.362

After dinner the youths withdrew with their tutor to pursue
{TEXT:persue} their studies - REEVE-1777-1,15.363

sir Philip sat for some time , wrapt up in meditation .
REEVE-1777-1,15.364

After some minutes , the baron asked him if he might not be favoured
with the fruits of his contemplations - REEVE-1777-1,15.365

you shall my lord , answered he , REEVE-1777-1,15.366

for you have a right to <P_16> them - REEVE-1777-1,16.367

I was thinking that when many blessings are lost , we should cherish
those that remain , and even endeavour to replace the others -
REEVE-1777-1,16.368

my lord , I have taken a strong liking to that youth whom you call
Edmund Twyford , REEVE-1777-1,16.369

- I have neither children nor relations to claim my fortune , nor share
my affections - REEVE-1777-1,16.370

your lordship has many demands upon your generosity -
REEVE-1777-1,16.371

I can provide for this promising youth without doing injustice to any
one , REEVE-1777-1,16.372

will you give him to me ? REEVE-1777-1,16.373

he is a fortunate boy , said the baron , to gain your favour so soon .
REEVE-1777-1,16.374

My lord , said the knight , I will confess to you , that the first thing
that touched my heart in his favour , is a strong resemblance he bears
to a certain dear friend I once had , REEVE-1777-1,16.375

and his manner resembles him as much as his person ; REEVE-1777-1,16.376

his qualities deserve that he should be placed in a higher rank ,
REEVE-1777-1,16.377

I will adopt him for my son , and introduce him into the world as my
relation , if you will resign him to me , REEVE-1777-1,16.378

what say you ? REEVE-1777-1,16.379

- sir , said the baron , you have made a noble offer ,
REEVE-1777-1,16.380

and I am too much the young man's friend to be a hindrance to his
preferment - REEVE-1777-1,16.381

it is true that I had intended to provide for him in my own family ,
REEVE-1777-1,16.382

but I can@ @not do it so effectually as by giving him to you , whose
generous affection being unlimited by other tyes , may in time prefer
him to a higher station as he shall deserve it - REEVE-1777-1,16.383

I have only one condition to make , that the lad shall have his option ,
REEVE-1777-1,16.384

for I would not oblige him to leave my service against his inclination .
REEVE-1777-1,16.385

- you say well , replied sir Philip , REEVE-1777-1,16.386

nor would I take him upon other terms - REEVE-1777-1,16.387

agreed then , said the baron , REEVE-1777-1,16.388

let us send for Edmund hither . REEVE-1777-1,16.389

A servant was sent to <P_17> fetch him , REEVE-1777-1,17.390

he came immediately , REEVE-1777-1,17.391

and his lord thus bespoke him - REEVE-1777-1,17.392

Edmund you own eternal obligations to this gentleman , who perceiving in
you a certain resemblance to a friend of his , and liking your behaviour
, has taken a great affection for you , insomuch that he desires to
receive you into his family - REEVE-1777-1,17.393

I can@ @not better provide for you than by disposing of you to him ,
REEVE-1777-1,17.394

and if you have no objection you shall return home with him , when he
goes from hence . REEVE-1777-1,17.395

The countenance of Edmund underwent many alterations during this
proposal of his lord , REEVE-1777-1,17.396

it expressed tenderness , gratitude , and sorrow , REEVE-1777-1,17.397

but the last was predominant , REEVE-1777-1,17.398

- he bowed respectfully to the baron and sir Philip ,
REEVE-1777-1,17.399

and after some hesitation spoke as follows - REEVE-1777-1,17.400

I feel very strongly the obligations I owe to this gentleman , for his
noble and generous offer - REEVE-1777-1,17.401

I can@ @not express the sense I have of his goodness to me , a peasant
boy , only known to him by my lord's kind and partial mention -
REEVE-1777-1,17.402

this uncommon bounty claims my eternal gratitude . REEVE-1777-1,17.403

To you my honoured lord , I owe every thing , even this gentleman's good
opinion - REEVE-1777-1,17.404

you distinguished me when nobody else did , REEVE-1777-1,17.405

and next to you , your sons are my best and dearest benefactors ,
REEVE-1777-1,17.406

they introduced me to your notice . REEVE-1777-1,17.407

My heart is unalterably attached to this house and family ,
REEVE-1777-1,17.408

and my utmost ambition is to spend my life in your service -
REEVE-1777-1,17.409

but if you have perceived any great and grievous faults in me , that
make you wish to put me out of your family , and if you have recommended
me to this gentleman in order to be rid of me , in that case I will
submit to your pleasure as I would if you should sentence me to death .
- REEVE-1777-1,17.410

<P_18>

During this speech the tears made themselves channels down Edmund's
cheeks , REEVE-1777-1,18.412

and his two noble auditors , catching the tender infection , wiped their
eyes at the conclusion . REEVE-1777-1,18.413

My dear child , said the baron , you overcome me by your tenderness and
gratitude - REEVE-1777-1,18.414

I know of no faults you have committed , that I should wish to be rid of
you - REEVE-1777-1,18.415

I thought to do you the best service by promoting you to that of sir
Philip Harclay , who is both able and willing to provide for you ,
REEVE-1777-1,18.416

but if you prefer my service to his , I will not part with you .
REEVE-1777-1,18.417

Upon this Edmund kneeled to the baron , REEVE-1777-1,18.418

he embraced his knees - REEVE-1777-1,18.419

my dear lord , I am and will be your servant , in preference to any man
living , REEVE-1777-1,18.420

I only ask your permission to live and die in your service -
REEVE-1777-1,18.421

you see sir Philip , said the baron , how this boy engages the heart ;
REEVE-1777-1,18.422

how can I part with him ? REEVE-1777-1,18.423

I can@ @not ask you any more , answered sir Philip , REEVE-1777-1,18.424

I see it is impossible , REEVE-1777-1,18.425

but I esteem you both still higher than ever , the youth for his
gratitude , and your lordship for your noble mind and true generosity ,
REEVE-1777-1,18.426

blessings attend you both ! REEVE-1777-1,18.427

Oh , sir , said Edmund , pressing the hand of sir Philip , do not think
me ungrateful to you , REEVE-1777-1,18.428

I will ever remember your goodness , and pray to heaven to reward it -
REEVE-1777-1,18.429

the name of sir Philip Harclay shall be engraven upon my heart , next to
my lord , and his family for ever . REEVE-1777-1,18.430

Sir Philip raised the youth REEVE-1777-1,18.431

and embraced him , saying , if ever you want a friend , remember me ,
REEVE-1777-1,18.432

and depend upon my protection , so long as you continue to deserve it .
REEVE-1777-1,18.433

Edmund bowed low REEVE-1777-1,18.434

and withdrew with his eyes full of tears of sensibility and gratitude .
REEVE-1777-1,18.435

- When he was gone , sir Philip said , I am thinking <P_19> that tho'
young Edmund wants not my assistance at present , he may hereafter stand
in need of my friendship . REEVE-1777-1,19.436

I should not wonder if such rare qualities as he possesses , should one
day create envy , and raise him enemies , in which case he might come to
lose your favour , without any fault of yours or his own .
REEVE-1777-1,19.437

I am obliged to you for the warning , said the baron ,
REEVE-1777-1,19.438

I hope it will be unnecessary , REEVE-1777-1,19.439

but if ever I part with Edmund , you shall have the refusal of him .
REEVE-1777-1,19.440

I thank your lordship for all your civilities to me ,
REEVE-1777-1,19.441

I leave my best wishes with you and your hopeful family ,
REEVE-1777-1,19.442

and I humbly take my leave . REEVE-1777-1,19.443

Will you not stay one night in the castle ? said my lord ,
REEVE-1777-1,19.444

you shall be as welcome a guest as ever . REEVE-1777-1,19.445

- I acknowledge your goodness and hospitality , REEVE-1777-1,19.446

but this house fills me with melancholy recollections ,
REEVE-1777-1,19.447

I came hither with a heavy heart , REEVE-1777-1,19.448

and it will not be lighter while I remain here . REEVE-1777-1,19.449

- I shall always remember your lordship with the highest respect and
esteem , REEVE-1777-1,19.450

and I pray God to preserve you , and increase your blessings !
REEVE-1777-1,19.451

After some further ceremonies , sir Philip departed ,
REEVE-1777-1,19.452

and returned to old Wyatt's , ruminating on the vicissitude of human
affairs , and thinking on the changes he had seen ! REEVE-1777-1,19.453

- At his return to Wyatt's cottage , he found the family assembled
together - REEVE-1777-1,19.454

he told them he would take another night's lodging there , which they
heard with great pleasure , REEVE-1777-1,19.455

for he had familiarised himself to them in the last evening's
{TEXT:evenings} conversation , insomuch that they began to enjoy his
company - REEVE-1777-1,19.456

he told Wyatt of the misfortune he had sustained by losing his servant
on the way , REEVE-1777-1,19.457

and wished he could get one to attend him home in his place -
REEVE-1777-1,19.458

young <P_20> John looked earnestly at his father , REEVE-1777-1,20.459

he returned a look of approbation . REEVE-1777-1,20.460

I perceive one in this company , said he , that would be proud to serve
your honour ; REEVE-1777-1,20.461

but I fear he is not brought up well enough . REEVE-1777-1,20.462

- John coloured with impatience , REEVE-1777-1,20.463

he could not forbear speaking . REEVE-1777-1,20.464

Sir I can answer for an honest heart , a willing mind , and a light pair
of heels , REEVE-1777-1,20.465

and though I am somewhat awkward , I shall be proud to learn , to please
my noble master , if he will but try me . REEVE-1777-1,20.466

You say well , said sir Philip , REEVE-1777-1,20.467

I have observed your qualifications , REEVE-1777-1,20.468

and if you are desirous to serve me , I am equally pleased with you ,
REEVE-1777-1,20.469

if your father has no objection I will take you - REEVE-1777-1,20.470

objection sir , said the old man ! REEVE-1777-1,20.471

it will be my pride to prefer him to such a noble gentleman .
REEVE-1777-1,20.472

I will make no terms for him , but leave it to your honour , to do for
him as he shall deserve . REEVE-1777-1,20.473

Very well , said sir Philip , REEVE-1777-1,20.474

you shall be no loser by that , REEVE-1777-1,20.475

I will charge myself with the care of the young man .
REEVE-1777-1,20.476

The bargain was struck , REEVE-1777-1,20.477

and sir Philip purchased a horse for John of the old man .
REEVE-1777-1,20.478

The next morning they set out , REEVE-1777-1,20.479

the knight left marks of his bounty with the good couple
REEVE-1777-1,20.480

and departed laden with their blessing and prayers .
REEVE-1777-1,20.481

He stopped at the place where his good servant was buried ,
REEVE-1777-1,20.482

and caused masses to be said for the repose of his soul ,
REEVE-1777-1,20.483

went home by easy journeys , without meeting any thing remarkable by the
way - REEVE-1777-1,20.484

his family rejoiced at his return , REEVE-1777-1,20.485

he settled his new servant in attendance upon his person ,
REEVE-1777-1,20.486

he then looked round his neighbourhood for objects of his charity -
REEVE-1777-1,20.487

when he saw merit in distress , it was his delight to raise and support
it - REEVE-1777-1,20.488

he spent his <P_21> time in the service of his Creator ,
REEVE-1777-1,21.489

and glorified him in doing good to his creatures - REEVE-1777-1,21.490

he reflected frequently upon every thing that had befallen him in his
late journey to the west , REEVE-1777-1,21.491

and at his leisure took down all the particulars in writing .
REEVE-1777-1,21.492

<font> Here {TEXT:Hear} follows an interval of four years , as by the
manuscript , REEVE-1777-1,21.493

this omission seems intended by the writer . <$$font>
REEVE-1777-1,21.494

<P_22>

About this time the prognosticks of sir Philip Harclay began to be
verified , that Edmund's good qualities might one day excite envy and
create him enemies - REEVE-1777-1,22.496

the sons and kinsmen of his patron began to seek occasion to find fault
with him , and to depreciate him with others - REEVE-1777-1,22.497

the baron's eldest son and heir , master Robert , had several contests
with master William , the second son upon his account .
REEVE-1777-1,22.498

This youth had a warm affection for Edmund , REEVE-1777-1,22.499

and whenever his brother and kinsmen treated him slightly , he supported
him against their malicious insinuations . REEVE-1777-1,22.500

Mr. Richard Wenlock and John Markham were the sisters sons of the lord
Fitz-Owen , REEVE-1777-1,22.501

and there were several other more distant relations , who with them ,
secretly envied Edmund's fine qualities , and strove to lessen him in
the esteem of the baron and his family - REEVE-1777-1,22.502

by degrees they excited a dislike in master Robert , that in time was
fixed into habit , and fell little short of aversion .
REEVE-1777-1,22.503

Young Wenlock's hatred was confirmed by an additional circumstance ,
REEVE-1777-1,22.504

he had a growing passion for the lady Emma , the baron's only daughter ,
REEVE-1777-1,22.505

and as love is eagle-eyed , he saw , or fancied he saw her cast an eye
of preference on Edmund . REEVE-1777-1,22.506

An accidental service that she received from him , had excited her
grateful regards and attentions towards him . REEVE-1777-1,22.507

The incessant view of his fine person and qualities , had perhaps
improved her esteem into a still softer sensation , though she was yet
ignorant of it , but thought it only the tribute due to gratitude and
friendship . REEVE-1777-1,22.508

<P_23>

One Christmas time , the baron and all his family went to visit a family
in Wales - crossing a ford , REEVE-1777-1,23.510

the horse that carried the lady Emma , who rode behind her cousin
Wenlock , stumbled REEVE-1777-1,23.511

and fell down , REEVE-1777-1,23.512

and threw her off into the water - REEVE-1777-1,23.513

Edmund dismounted in a moment , REEVE-1777-1,23.514

and flew to her assistance - REEVE-1777-1,23.515

he took her out so quick , that the accident was not known to some part
of the company - REEVE-1777-1,23.516

from this time Wenlock strove to undermine Edmund in her esteem ,
REEVE-1777-1,23.517

and she conceived herself obliged in justice and gratitude to defend him
against the malicious insinuations of his enemies - REEVE-1777-1,23.518

she one day asked Wenlock , why he in particular should endeavour to
recommend himself to her favour , by speaking against Edmund , to whom
she was under great obligations ? REEVE-1777-1,23.519

- he made but little reply , REEVE-1777-1,23.520

but the impression sunk deep into his rancorous heart -
REEVE-1777-1,23.521

every word in Edmund's behalf was like a poisoned arrow that rankled in
the wound , REEVE-1777-1,23.522

and grew every day more inflamed - REEVE-1777-1,23.523

sometimes he would pretend to extenuate Edmund's supposed faults , in
order to load him with the sin of ingratitude upon other occasions -
REEVE-1777-1,23.524

rancour works deepest in the heart that strives to conceal it ,
REEVE-1777-1,23.525

and when covered by art , frequently puts on the appearance of candour ;
REEVE-1777-1,23.526

by these means did Wenlock and Markham impose upon the credulity of
master Robert and their other relations , REEVE-1777-1,23.527

only master William stood proof against all their insinuations .
REEVE-1777-1,23.528

- The same autumn that Edmund completed his eighteenth year , the baron
declared his intention of sending the young men of his house to France
the following spring , to learn <P_24> the art of war , and signalize
their courage and abilities . REEVE-1777-1,24.529

Their ill will towards Edmund was so well concealed , that his patron
had not discovered it , REEVE-1777-1,24.530

but it was whispered among the servants , who are generally close
observers of the manners of their principals . REEVE-1777-1,24.531

Edmund was a favorite with them all , which was a strong presumption
that he deserved to be so , REEVE-1777-1,24.532

for they seldom shew much regard to dependents , or to superiour
domestics , who are generally objects of envy and dislike .
REEVE-1777-1,24.533

Edmund was courteous , but not familiar with them , REEVE-1777-1,24.534

and by this means gained their affections without soliciting them .
REEVE-1777-1,24.535

Among them was an old serving man , called Joseph Howell ,
REEVE-1777-1,24.536

this man had formerly served the old Lord Lovel , and his son ,
REEVE-1777-1,24.537

and when the young Lord died , and Sir Walter sold the castle to his
brother-in-law , the lord Fitz-Owen , he only of all the old servants
was left in the house , to take care of it , and to deliver it into the
possession of the new proprietor , who retained him in his service -
REEVE-1777-1,24.538

he was a man of few words but much reflection , REEVE-1777-1,24.539

without troubling himself about other peoples affairs , he went silently
and properly about his own business - more solicitous to discharge his
duty , than to recommend himself to notice , and not seeming to aspire
to any higher office than that of a serving man . REEVE-1777-1,24.540

This old man would fix his eyes upon Edmund , whenever he could do it
without observation - REEVE-1777-1,24.541

sometimes he would sigh deeply , REEVE-1777-1,24.542

and a tear would start from his eye , which he strove to conceal from
observation - REEVE-1777-1,24.543

one day Edmund surprized him in this tender emotion , as he was wiping
his eyes with the <P_25> back of his hand . REEVE-1777-1,25.544

- Why said he , my good friend , do you look at me so earnestly and
affectionately ? REEVE-1777-1,25.545

because I love you , master Edmund , said he , REEVE-1777-1,25.546

because I wish you well , REEVE-1777-1,25.547

I thank you kindly , answered Edmund , REEVE-1777-1,25.548

I am unable to repay your love , otherwise than by returning it , which
I do sincerely . REEVE-1777-1,25.549

I thank you , sir , said the old man REEVE-1777-1,25.550

that is all I desire , and more than I deserve - REEVE-1777-1,25.551

do not say so , said Edmund , REEVE-1777-1,25.552

if I had any better way to thank you , I would not say so much about it
, REEVE-1777-1,25.553

but words are all my inheritance - REEVE-1777-1,25.554

upon this he shook hands with Joseph , who withdrew hastily to conceal
his emotion , saying , God bless you master , REEVE-1777-1,25.555

and make your fortune equal to your deserts ! REEVE-1777-1,25.556

- I can@ @not help thinking you were born to a higher station than what
you now hold . REEVE-1777-1,25.557

- you know to the contrary , said Edmund , REEVE-1777-1,25.558

but Joseph was gone out of sight and hearing . REEVE-1777-1,25.559

- the notice and observation of strangers , and the affection of
individuals , together with that inward consciousness that always
attends superiour qualities , would sometimes kindle the flames of
ambition in Edmund's heart , REEVE-1777-1,25.560

but he checked them presently by reflecting upon his low birth and
dependent {TEXT:dependant} station - REEVE-1777-1,25.561

he was modest yet intrepid , gentle and courteous to all , frank and
unreserved to those that loved him , discreet and complaisant to those
who hated him , generous and compassionate to the distresses of his
fellow-creatures in general , humble but not servile to his patron and
superiors . REEVE-1777-1,25.562

- once when he with a manly spirit justified himself against a malicious
imputation , his young lord Robert taxed him with pride and arrogance to
his kinsmen , REEVE-1777-1,25.563

<P_26>

Edmund denied the charge against him with equal spirit and modesty -
REEVE-1777-1,26.565

master Robert answered him sharply - REEVE-1777-1,26.566

how dare you contradict my cousins , REEVE-1777-1,26.567

do you mean to give them the lye ? REEVE-1777-1,26.568

not in words sir , said Edmund , REEVE-1777-1,26.569

but I will behave so as that you shall not believe them -
REEVE-1777-1,26.570

master Robert haughtily bad him be silent and know himself , and not
presume to contend with men so much his superiors in every respect -
REEVE-1777-1,26.571

these heart-burnings in some degree subsided by their preparations for
going to France . REEVE-1777-1,26.572

Master Robert was to be presented at court before his departure ,
REEVE-1777-1,26.573

and it was expected that he should be knighted . REEVE-1777-1,26.574

The baron designed Edmund to be his esquire , REEVE-1777-1,26.575

but this was frustrated by his old enemies , who persuaded Robert to
make choice of one of his own domestics , called Thomas Hewson ;
REEVE-1777-1,26.576

him did they set up as a rival to Edmund , REEVE-1777-1,26.577

and he took every occasion to affront him - REEVE-1777-1,26.578

all that master Robert gained by this step , was the contempt of those
who saw Edmund's merit , and thought it want of discernment in him not
to distinguish and reward it - REEVE-1777-1,26.579

Edmund requested of his lord that he might be master William's attendant
, REEVE-1777-1,26.580

and when , said he , my patron shall be knighted , as I make no doubt he
shall one day , he has promised that I shall be his esquire .
REEVE-1777-1,26.581

- the baron granted Edmund's request , REEVE-1777-1,26.582

and being freed from servitude to the rest , he was devoted to that of
his beloved master William , who treated him in public as his principal
domestic , but in private as his chosen friend and brother .
REEVE-1777-1,26.583

The whole cabal of his enemies consulted together in what manner they
should vent their <P_27> resentment against him , REEVE-1777-1,27.584

and it was agreed that they should treat him with indifference and
neglect , till they should arrive in France , and when there , they
should contrive to render his courage suspected , and by putting him
upon some desperate enterprize , rid themselves of him for ever .
REEVE-1777-1,27.585

About this time died the great duke of Bedford , to the irreparable loss
of the English nation - REEVE-1777-1,27.586

he was succeeded by Richard Plantagenet , duke of York , as regent of
France , of which great part had revolted to Charles the dauphin -
REEVE-1777-1,27.587

frequent actions ensued - REEVE-1777-1,27.588

cities were lost and won , and continual occasions offered to exercise
the courage and abilities of the youth of both nations .
REEVE-1777-1,27.589

The young men of baron Fitz-Owen's house were recommended particularly
to the regent's notice . REEVE-1777-1,27.590

Master Robert was knighted , with several other young men of family ,
who distinguished themselves by their spirit and activity upon every
occasion - REEVE-1777-1,27.591

the youth were daily employed in warlike exercises , and frequent
actions , REEVE-1777-1,27.592

and made their first essay in arms in such a manner as to bring into
notice all that deserved it . REEVE-1777-1,27.593

Various arts were used by Edmund's enemies to expose him to danger ,
REEVE-1777-1,27.594

but all their contrivances recoiled upon themselves ,
REEVE-1777-1,27.595

and brought increase of honour upon Edmund's head ; REEVE-1777-1,27.596

he distinguished himself upon so many occasions that sir Robert himself
began to pay him more than ordinary regard to the infinite mortification
of his kinsmen and relations - REEVE-1777-1,27.597

they laid many schemes against him , REEVE-1777-1,27.598

but none took effect . REEVE-1777-1,27.599

<font> From this place the characters in the manuscript are effaced by
time and moisture - REEVE-1777-1,27.600

here and there <P_28> some sentences are legible but not sufficient to
pursue {TEXT:persue} the thread of the story . REEVE-1777-1,28.601

Mention is made of several actions in which the young men were engaged -
that Edmund distinguished himself by intrepidity in action , by
gentleness , humanity and modesty in the cessations - that he attracted
the notice of every person of observation , and also that he received
personal commendation from the regent . REEVE-1777-1,28.602

<paren> The following incidents are clear enough to be transcribed ,
REEVE-1777-1,28.603

but the beginning of the next succeeding pages , is obliterated ;
REEVE-1777-1,28.604

however we may guess at the beginning by what remains . <$$paren>
<$$font> REEVE-1777-1,28.605

<P_29>

As soon as the cabal met in sir Robert's tent , mr. Wenlock thus began
. REEVE-1777-1,29.607

You see my friends that every attempt we make to humble this upstart ,
turns into applause , to raise his pride still higher -
REEVE-1777-1,29.608

something must be done , REEVE-1777-1,29.609

or his praise will go home before us , at our own expence ,
REEVE-1777-1,29.610

and we shall seem only foils to set off his glories -
REEVE-1777-1,29.611

any thing would I give to the man who should execute our vengeance upon
him . REEVE-1777-1,29.612

Stop there cousin Wenlock , said sir Robert , REEVE-1777-1,29.613

though I think Edmund proud and vainglorious {TEXT:vain-glorious} , and
would join in any scheme to humble him and make him know himself ; I
will not suffer any man to use such base methods to effect it .
REEVE-1777-1,29.614

Edmund is brave , REEVE-1777-1,29.615

and it is beneath an Englishman to revenge himself by unworthy means ,
REEVE-1777-1,29.616

if any such are used I will be the first man to bring the guilty to
justice , REEVE-1777-1,29.617

and if I hear another word to this purpose , I will inform my brother
William , who will acquaint Edmund with your mean intentions .
REEVE-1777-1,29.618

Upon this the cabal drew back , REEVE-1777-1,29.619

and mr. Wenlock protested that he meant no more than to mortify his
pride , and make him know his proper station , REEVE-1777-1,29.620

soon after sir Robert withdrew , REEVE-1777-1,29.621

and they resumed their deliberations . REEVE-1777-1,29.622

Then spoke Thomas Hewson , REEVE-1777-1,29.623

there is a party to be sent out tomorrow night , to intercept a convoy
of provisions for the relief of Rouen ; REEVE-1777-1,29.624

I will provoke mr. Edmund to make one of this party ,
REEVE-1777-1,29.625

and when he is engaged in the action , I and my companions will draw off
, and leave him to the enemy , who I trust will so handle him , that you
shall no more be troubled with him - REEVE-1777-1,29.626

this will do , said mr. Wenlock , REEVE-1777-1,29.627

<P_30>

but let it be kept from my two cousins and only known to ourselves ,
REEVE-1777-1,30.629

if they offer to be of the party , I will persuade them off it ;
REEVE-1777-1,30.630

and you Thomas , if you bring this scheme to a conclusion , may depend
upon my eternal gratitude - REEVE-1777-1,30.631

and mine , said Markham , REEVE-1777-1,30.632

and so said all . REEVE-1777-1,30.633

The next day the affair was publickly mentioned , REEVE-1777-1,30.634

and Hewson , as he promised , provoked Edmund to the trial ;
REEVE-1777-1,30.635

several young men of family offered themselves , among the rest sir
Robert and his brother William . REEVE-1777-1,30.636

Mr. Wenlock persuaded them not to go , REEVE-1777-1,30.637

and set the danger of the enterprize in the strongest colours -
REEVE-1777-1,30.638

at last sir Robert complained of the tooth-ach , REEVE-1777-1,30.639

and was confined to his tent , REEVE-1777-1,30.640

Edmund waited on him , REEVE-1777-1,30.641

and judging by the ardor of his own courage of that of his patron , thus
bespoke him . REEVE-1777-1,30.642

I am greatly concerned dear sir , that we can@ @not have your company at
night , REEVE-1777-1,30.643

but as I know what you will suffer in being absent , I would beg the
favour of you to let me use your arms and device , REEVE-1777-1,30.644

and I will promise not to disgrace them . REEVE-1777-1,30.645

No Edmund I can@ @not consent to that , REEVE-1777-1,30.646

I thank you for your noble offer , REEVE-1777-1,30.647

and will remember it to your advantage , REEVE-1777-1,30.648

but I can@ @not wear honours of another man's getting ;
REEVE-1777-1,30.649

you have awakened me to a sense of my duty , REEVE-1777-1,30.650

I will go with you , and contend with you for glory ,
REEVE-1777-1,30.651

and William shall do the same . REEVE-1777-1,30.652

In a few hours they were ready to set out ; REEVE-1777-1,30.653

Wenlock and Markham , and their dependants found themselves engaged in
honour to go upon an enterprize they never intended ,
REEVE-1777-1,30.654

and set out with heavy hearts to join the party . REEVE-1777-1,30.655

- they marched in silence in the horrors of a dark <P_31> night , and
wet roads ; REEVE-1777-1,31.656

they met the convoy where they expected , REEVE-1777-1,31.657

and a sharp engagement ensued . REEVE-1777-1,31.658

The victory was some time doubtful , REEVE-1777-1,31.659

but the moon rising on the backs of the English , gave them the
advantage . REEVE-1777-1,31.660

They saw the disposition of their enemies , REEVE-1777-1,31.661

and availed themselves of it - REEVE-1777-1,31.662

Edmund advanced the foremost of the party , REEVE-1777-1,31.663

he drew out the leader on the French side , REEVE-1777-1,31.664

he slew him . REEVE-1777-1,31.665

Mr. William pressed forward to assist his friend , sir Robert , to
defend his brother - Wenlock and Markham from shame to stay behind .
REEVE-1777-1,31.666

Thomas Hewson and his associates drew back on their side ,
REEVE-1777-1,31.667

the French perceived it REEVE-1777-1,31.668

and pursued {TEXT:persued} the advantage . REEVE-1777-1,31.669

Edmund pushed them in front , REEVE-1777-1,31.670

the young nobles all followed him ; REEVE-1777-1,31.671

they broke through the detachment , REEVE-1777-1,31.672

and stopped the waggons . REEVE-1777-1,31.673

The officer who commanded the party , encouraged them to go on ;
REEVE-1777-1,31.674

the defeat was soon compleat , and the provisions carried in triumph to
the English camp . REEVE-1777-1,31.675

Edmund was presented to the regent as the man to whom the victory was
chiefly owing - REEVE-1777-1,31.676

not a tongue presumed to lift itself against him , REEVE-1777-1,31.677

even malice and envy were silenced . REEVE-1777-1,31.678

Approach young man , said the regent , that I may confer upon you the
honour of knighthood , which you have well deserved .
REEVE-1777-1,31.679

- Mr. Wenlock could no longer forbear speaking , REEVE-1777-1,31.680

knighthood , said he , is an order belonging to gentlemen ,
REEVE-1777-1,31.681

it can@ @not be conferred on a peasant - REEVE-1777-1,31.682

what say you sir , said the regent , REEVE-1777-1,31.683

is this youth a peasant ? REEVE-1777-1,31.684

he is , said Wenlock , REEVE-1777-1,31.685

let him deny it if he can . REEVE-1777-1,31.686

Edmund with a modest bow ; it is true indeed I am a peasant ,
REEVE-1777-1,31.687

and <P_32> this honour is too great for me , REEVE-1777-1,32.688

I have only done my duty . REEVE-1777-1,32.689

The duke of York whose pride of birth equalled any man living or dead ,
sheathed his sword immediately . REEVE-1777-1,32.690

Though said he , I can@ @not reward you as I intended , I will take care
that you shall have a large share in the spoils of this night ,
REEVE-1777-1,32.691

and I declare publickly that you stand first in the list of gallant men
in this engagement . REEVE-1777-1,32.692

Thomas Hewson and his associates made a poor figure in their return ;
REEVE-1777-1,32.693

they were publickly reproved for their backwardness .
REEVE-1777-1,32.694

Hewson was wounded in body , and more in mind , for the ill success of
his ill laid design . REEVE-1777-1,32.695

He could not hold up his head before Edmund , who unconscious of their
malice , administered every kind of comfort to them .
REEVE-1777-1,32.696

He spoke in their behalf to the commanding officer , imputing their
conduct to unavoidable accidents . REEVE-1777-1,32.697

He visited them privately , REEVE-1777-1,32.698

he gave them a part of the spoils allotted to himself ,
REEVE-1777-1,32.699

by every act of valour and courtesy , he strove to engage those hearts
that hated , envied and maligned him , REEVE-1777-1,32.700

but where hatred arises from envy of superior qualities , every display
of those qualities increases the cause from whence it arises .
REEVE-1777-1,32.701

<font> Another pause ensues . <$$font> REEVE-1777-1,32.702

The young nobles and gentlemen who distinguished Edmund , were prevented
from raising him to preferment by the insinuations of Wenlock and his
associates , REEVE-1777-1,32.703

he never failed to set before them his low descent , his pride and
arrogance in presuming to rank with gentlemen . REEVE-1777-1,32.704

<P_33>

<font> Here the manuscript is not legible for a long way .
REEVE-1777-1,33.706

There is mention about this time of the death of the lady Fitz-Owen ,
but not the cause . REEVE-1777-1,33.707

Wenlock rejoiced to find that his schemes took effect that they should
be recalled at the approach of winter . REEVE-1777-1,33.708

The baron was glad of a pretence to send for them home ,
REEVE-1777-1,33.709

for he could no longer endure the absence of his children after the loss
of their mother . REEVE-1777-1,33.710

The manuscript again defaced by moisture for many leaves ,
REEVE-1777-1,33.711

at length the letters come more legible , REEVE-1777-1,33.712

and the remainder of it is quite perfect every page . <$$font>
REEVE-1777-1,33.713

<P_34>

From the time the young men returned from France , the enemies of Edmund
employed their utmost abilities to ruin him in the baron's opinion , and
get him dismissed from the family - REEVE-1777-1,34.715

they insinuated a_thousand things against him that happened , as they
said , during his residence in France , and therefore could not be known
to his master ; REEVE-1777-1,34.716

but when the baron privately enquired of his two elder sons , he found
there was no truth in their reports . REEVE-1777-1,34.717

Sir Robert though he did not love him , scorned to join in untruths
against him . REEVE-1777-1,34.718

Mr. William spoke of him with the warmth of fraternal affection -
REEVE-1777-1,34.719

the baron perceived that his kinsmen disliked Edmund ,
REEVE-1777-1,34.720

but his own good heart hindered him from seeing the baseness of theirs -
REEVE-1777-1,34.721

it is said that continual dropping will wear away a stone ,
REEVE-1777-1,34.722

so did their incessant reports by insensible degrees produce a coolness
in his patron's behaviour towards him - REEVE-1777-1,34.723

if he behaved with manly spirit , it {TEXT:._is} was misconstrued into
pride and arrogance , REEVE-1777-1,34.724

his generosity was imprudence , REEVE-1777-1,34.725

his humility was hippocrisy , the better to cover his ambition -
REEVE-1777-1,34.726

Edmund bore patiently all the indignities that were thrown upon him ,
REEVE-1777-1,34.727

and though he felt them severely in his bosom , yet he scorned to
justify his conduct at the expence of {TEXT:of_of} even his enemies -
REEVE-1777-1,34.728

perhaps his gentle spirit might at length have sunk under this treatment
, REEVE-1777-1,34.729

but providence interposed in his behalf , REEVE-1777-1,34.730

and by accidental circumstances , conducted him imperceptibly towards
the crisis of his fate . REEVE-1777-1,34.731

Father Oswald , who had been preceptor to the young men , had a strong
affection for Edmund , <P_35> from a thorough knowledge of his heart -
REEVE-1777-1,35.732

he saw through the mean artifices that were used to undermine him in his
patron's favour , REEVE-1777-1,35.733

he watched their machinations REEVE-1777-1,35.734

and strove to frustrate their designs . REEVE-1777-1,35.735

This good man used frequently to walk out with Edmund ,
REEVE-1777-1,35.736

they conversed upon various subjects , REEVE-1777-1,35.737

and the youth would lament to him the unhappiness of his situation , and
the peculiar circumstances that attended him - REEVE-1777-1,35.738

the father by his wholesome advice comforted his drooping heart ,
REEVE-1777-1,35.739

and confirmed {TEXT:cenfirmed} his patience and fortitude to bear
unavoidable evils , by conscious innocence , and the assurance of a
future and eternal reward . REEVE-1777-1,35.740

One day , as they were walking in a wood near the castle , Edmund asked
the father what meant the preparations for building , the cutting down
trees and burning of bricks . REEVE-1777-1,35.741

- what said Oswald , have you not heard that my lord is going to build a
new apartment on the west side of the castle , REEVE-1777-1,35.742

and why said Edmund , should my lord be at that expence when there is
one on the east side that is never occupied ? REEVE-1777-1,35.743

- that apartment , said the friar , you must have observed is always
shut up ; REEVE-1777-1,35.744

I have observed it often , said Edmund . REEVE-1777-1,35.745

but I never presumed to ask any questions about it - REEVE-1777-1,35.746

you had then , said Oswald , less curiosity and more discretion than is
common at your age . REEVE-1777-1,35.747

You have raised my curiosity , said Edmund , REEVE-1777-1,35.748

and if it be not improper I beg you to gratify it - REEVE-1777-1,35.749

we are alone , said Oswald , REEVE-1777-1,35.750

and I am so well assured of your prudence , that I will explain this
mystery in some degree to you . REEVE-1777-1,35.751

