<BEGIN_richardson-1858-2>

<P_1>

<heading>

Coagulation of the blood . RICHARDSON-1858-2,1.4

Chapter I . RICHARDSON-1858-2,1.5

Historical memoranda on the supposed causes of the coagulation of the
blood . RICHARDSON-1858-2,1.6

<$$heading>

" Every physician will and ought to make observations from his own
experience ; RICHARDSON-1858-2,1.8

but he will be able to make a better judgment and juster observations by
comparing what he <font> reads <$$font> and what he <font> sees <$$font>
together . RICHARDSON-1858-2,1.9

The searcher of authors has the benefit of other men's experience as
well as his own , RICHARDSON-1858-2,1.10

and it is by the joint concurrence of these that we can hope for any
considerable advancement in knowledge . RICHARDSON-1858-2,1.11

Were it not for this , the oldest practitioner would always be the best
physician , RICHARDSON-1858-2,1.12

and there would be little difference , even as regards the scientifical
part , between an old woman and the most regular professor . " - Friend
. RICHARDSON-1858-2,1.13

It is not my intention in this chapter to follow up in chronological
order the labours and discoveries of those who , either in ancient or in
modern times , have endeavoured to solve the problem of the cause of the
Coagulation of the Blood . RICHARDSON-1858-2,1.14

My object in these memoranda is simply to collate the various theories
and hypotheses , which have been advanced regarding coagulation .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,1.15

The authors , advocates , or opponents of such theories or hypotheses
will , however , receive attention incidentally , as they may have
originated , supported , or opposed the various opinions or arguments
which have to be narrated . RICHARDSON-1858-2,1.16

It will be my endeavour to condense what has here to be said , as far as
is consistent with plain writing and fairness of description ; while ,
to prevent the interruptions which always <P_2> occur to the reader from
repeated references to footnotes , the works of the authors mentioned ,
as the history proceeds , will be tabulated at the end in an
alphabetical list . RICHARDSON-1858-2,2.17

Should it happen that the views of any writer are omitted , I crave
pardon , RICHARDSON-1858-2,2.18

and explain that as this essay is mainly the record of an original
inquiry , no strain has been made towards historical display .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,2.19

I place before the reader , in fact , in acknowledgment of good and
learned assistance , the names merely of such authorities as have
answered fully to certain matters of fact and argument , which I was
anxious to obtain before embarking in original work , and to bear in
mind afterwards . RICHARDSON-1858-2,2.20

For I hold it as a rule , that no one can pursue an original inquiry ,
who does not know that true originality of thought includes two
principles ; the one consisting in a knowledge of what is not original ,
<font> i.e. <$$font> , of what has been done ; the other in an
appreciation of what remains to be originally done , and how to do it .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,2.21

The subject of the coagulation of the blood did not escape the attention
of the old physiologists of Greece ; RICHARDSON-1858-2,2.22

and even at the early period when they lived , the cause of this
phenomenon was supposed to depend on a net-work or fibre in blood ,
which , by coming together and contracting , gives rise to coagulation -
a supposition which has been sustained to the present day .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,2.23

Plato , in his <font> Timaeus <$$font> , very distinctly remarks , that
throughout the blood are scattered a number of fibres , which give to
the fluid certain measures of tenuity and density ; so that it may
neither flow through the " thin " structures , nor , from its density ,
become unadapted to motion , and thus find a difficulty in flowing back
by the veins . RICHARDSON-1858-2,2.24

And he further observes , that the blood is <P_3> under the natural
guardianship of the fibres ; because , if these are collected together
in dead blood , all the remaining blood becomes diffused ;
RICHARDSON-1858-2,3.25

and when blood is let out quickly , it coagulates in consequence of the
cold surrounding it . RICHARDSON-1858-2,3.26

Dr. John Davy points out also that Aristotle paid attention to the same
question , and considered that a substance in the blood , which we must
believe to be the same as that now called fibrin , is liquid so long as
the blood is in motion in the living body , like the matter of curd in
uncoagulated milk , and solid only and fibrous after extraction , the
coagulation being the effect of the change . RICHARDSON-1858-2,3.27

The process of coagulation did not , however , receive much further
attention until the Harveian discovery of the circulation .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,3.28

This discovery acknowledged , certain pathological states of the blood
became subjects of special study ; RICHARDSON-1858-2,3.29

and Malpighi was led to discover and point out accurately the fact ,
that the buffy coat is made up of a substance natural to the blood , its
concrete or reticulated part , and identical with the white clots not
unfrequently found after death in the circulatory system , and
particularly in the heart . RICHARDSON-1858-2,3.30

Again , even for a long period after Malpighi , great confusion existed
regarding the different parts of the blood . RICHARDSON-1858-2,3.31

A few observing men , it is true , distinguished correctly the
differences between corpuscles , serum , and " spontaneously coagulable
lymph " , RICHARDSON-1858-2,3.32

but their views were not accepted . RICHARDSON-1858-2,3.33

By other men , serum and " spontaneously coagulable lymph " were
confounded as one and the same . RICHARDSON-1858-2,3.34

By a third and more numerous body , this lymph was ignored altogether ,
RICHARDSON-1858-2,3.35

and the globules were turned to as everything , so that the phenomenon
of coagulation was <P_4> considered merely to consist in an aggregation
of these , brought about by some force of attraction .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,4.36

There is not a more interesting historical subject in physiology than
the one here noticed . RICHARDSON-1858-2,4.37

But I do not discuss it at length , because Mr. Gulliver , in his
introduction to Hewson's works , has said all that can be said , with
such masterly judgment , candour , and critical learning , that it were
impossible to dwell on the topic without trespassing on his domain .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,4.38

Referring to the views , correct , at least , in part , of Malpighi ,
Lower , Borelli , Boyle , Collins , Ruysch , Petit , Butt , Glaubius ,
and Quesnay ; and to the incorrect and confused views of Leeuwenhoeck ,
Boerhaave , Haller , and Senac , Mr. Gulliver shews that the
speculations connected with Leeuwenhoeck's microscopical researches
supplanted accurate experimental inquiries into the properties of blood
. RICHARDSON-1858-2,4.39

When , therefore , " the errors consequent on this state of things began
to wane , the blood sank into neglect , RICHARDSON-1858-2,4.40

and the just observations of Malpighi , Lower , and Borelli were lost
for the greater part of a century . " RICHARDSON-1858-2,4.41

In England , the errors continued to the year 1760 ; on the continent ,
even later than 1771 , the year when Hewson first published his labours
. RICHARDSON-1858-2,4.42

To Dr. Richard Davies Mr. Gulliver assigns the credit of " having
revived and established that correct knowledge of the three parts of the
blood which was taught afterwards by Hewson , Fordyce , and the Hunters
. " RICHARDSON-1858-2,4.43

This may be so ; RICHARDSON-1858-2,4.44

and , indeed , Hewson himself laid no claim to the discovery of the
constituent parts of the blood , RICHARDSON-1858-2,4.45

but I take it , that he <paren> Hewson <$$paren> held more correct views
on this matter than any of his predecessors . RICHARDSON-1858-2,4.46

He described <font> the red or colouring part <$$font> - red corpuscles
; the <font> lymph <$$font> , or spontaneously coagulable part - fibrin
<paren> so called <P_5> thirty years later by Fourcroy <$$paren> ; and
the <font> serum <$$font> ; the latter containing , as he taught , a
constituent which , agreeing with the white of egg , remains fluid when
exposed to the air , but coagulates when exposed to heat - albumen .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,5.47

It is but fair , moreover , to give to Hewson the credit of having been
the first to demonstrate that the transition of the coagulable lymph
from the liquid to the solid state , is an essential and independent
part of the process of coagulation . RICHARDSON-1858-2,5.48

This view was theorised on before ; RICHARDSON-1858-2,5.49

but was not proved by experiment until Hewson skimmed off the size from
the blood of a physical patient , and observed its spontaneous
separation into colourless clot and serum . RICHARDSON-1858-2,5.50

Since 1771 there has been confusion again ; some sort of retrogression
towards Leeuwenhoeck's speculations ; some progression , without
experiment , into profound and mystical controversies and descriptions .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,5.51

So science , like the great ocean , fluctuates ; RICHARDSON-1858-2,5.52

but , by fluctuating , encroaches and advances , her vitality and sign
of existence being her unceasing unrest . RICHARDSON-1858-2,5.53

At the present moment , Hewson's definition of the parts of the blood is
the one generally accepted . RICHARDSON-1858-2,5.54

Historically , then , we start with the knowledge , that the first true
steps in the problem on which we are engaged have consisted in the
discoveries of the " blood-fibre " <paren> in this day called fibrin
<$$paren> ; of the tendency of this fibre to coalesce under certain
favouring conditions ; and of this coalescence as one cause of the
phenomenon of coagulation . RICHARDSON-1858-2,5.55

The next step in the inquiry , Why does the fibrin concrete at all ? is
continued to modern times , RICHARDSON-1858-2,5.56

and opens for consideration numerous experiments , theories , and
hypotheses . RICHARDSON-1858-2,5.57

<P_6>

<heading>

The various theories and hypotheses . RICHARDSON-1858-2,6.60

Temperature . RICHARDSON-1858-2,6.61

<$$heading>

The first , and possibly the oldest hypothesis , is that which
attributes coagulation to loss of <font> temperature <$$font> .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,6.63

This seems to have been the hypothesis held by the Greeks ,
RICHARDSON-1858-2,6.64

and is in strict accordance with the general doctrines regarding heat
held by some of their philosophers , such as Heraclitus , who supposed -
not incorrectly in the abstract - that heat was the elementary and
moving principle of all things . RICHARDSON-1858-2,6.65

Thus Plato remarks , as I have already quoted , that the blood , " when
let out quickly , coagulates in consequence of the cold surrounding it .
" RICHARDSON-1858-2,6.66

Aristotle and Hippocrates seem to have entertained a similar opinion ;
RICHARDSON-1858-2,6.67

and the same was received , in after days , by the discoverer of the
circulation of the blood himself . RICHARDSON-1858-2,6.68

I need scarcely repeat the well known fact , that the fallacy of this
hypothesis was satisfactorily disposed of by Hewson , who proved ,
indeed , that the very reverse obtains ; and that , while an increase of
temperature favours the tendency to coagulation , a great decrease
causes the blood to remain longer in a fluid state .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,6.69

The following experiments , performed by Metcalfe , and described in his
work <font> On Calorie <$$font> , published in 1843 , confirm , in a
manner too striking to be omitted or forgotten , the correctness of
Hewson's views . RICHARDSON-1858-2,6.70

" A healthy pigeon " , says this writer <paren> Metcalfe <$$paren> " was
immersed in water at 47@ @=o= , with the exception of its head , when a
thermometer <font> in recto <$$font> fell from 108@ @=o= to 74@ @=o= in
twelve minutes ; RICHARDSON-1858-2,6.71

and the poor bird presented all the symptoms of approaching convulsions
, coma , and death . RICHARDSON-1858-2,6.72

In this state it was decapitated , and its blood made to flow into <P_7>
three saucers , one of which was placed in water at 130@ @=o= , another
in water at 110@ @=o= , while the third was exposed to the temperature
of the room at about 60@ @=o= ; when the blood in the first saucer began
to solidify in three minutes , that in the second in four minutes , and
that in the vessel at 60@ @=o= but slightly in seven minutes . "
RICHARDSON-1858-2,7.73

In another experiment , where a pigeon was treated in the same manner ,
but without previously reducing its temperature , the blood coagulated
sooner at 110@ @=o= than at 60@ @=o= , sooner at 130@ @=o= than at
either point , and more firmly in five minutes than the blood of the
other pigeon at the expiration of thirty minutes .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,7.74

In another experiment , Metcalfe found that , when half an ounce of
blood from the divided vessels of the neck of a healthy sheep was put in
a small tin cup , and surrounded by a freezing mixture of snow and salt
, it began to solidify just perceptibly in three minutes , and was quite
frozen in six minutes . RICHARDSON-1858-2,7.75

After remaining in this state above an hour , it was gradually thawed by
exposure to the atmosphere <paren> which was at 51@ @=o= <$$paren> ,
RICHARDSON-1858-2,7.76

and formed a loose coagulum . RICHARDSON-1858-2,7.77

After narrating several experiments of a most conclusive kind , Sir C.
Scudamore , in his <font> Essay on the Blood <$$font> , states that the
conclusion is clear , that a remarkably high temperature hastens the
coagulation of the blood ; and conversely , that the retarding influence
of the cold is still more marked . RICHARDSON-1858-2,7.78

The effects of temperature have moreover been inquired into by various
physiologists in relation to the coagulative power of the blood of warm
and of cold blooded animals , and to the effects of cold or of changes
of temperature on animals themselves : RICHARDSON-1858-2,7.79

and it has been shewn , first , that in cold blooded animals , <font>
caeteris paribus <$$font> , blood coagulates more slowly than in the
warm blooded ; <P_8> and , secondly , that the blood of an animal , if
drawn when the temperature of the body is low , coagulates much more
slowly than when the temperature is high , or at the natural standard .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,8.80

The condition of the blood in the fluid state , in animals hybernating ,
has often been adduced to shew that the effect of extreme cold on the
blood is that of preserving this fluid in an uncoagulable condition .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,8.81

The opinions of many writers , then <paren> opinions which receive , by
the way , the support of no less distinguished a writer than John Hunter
<$$paren> , all go to shew that the ideas of the first physiologists ,
with regard to the effects of loss of temperature on the blood , are
absolutely incorrect ; and , although they do not lend support to a
modern view , that temperature has no effect , they indicate that an
increase of temperature , whether derived from animal heat or from
external sources , tends , under favouring conditions , to increase the
rapidity of coagulation in healthy blood . RICHARDSON-1858-2,8.82

The following statements , according to Metcalfe , form a <font> resumé
<$$font> of the leading facts connected with the effects of temperature
on the blood , whether in or out of the living body :
RICHARDSON-1858-2,8.83

- " 1. The contractile power of the blood when removed from the body ,
like that of the muscular fibres , is in proportion to the quantity of
respiration , mean healthy temperature , and aggregate energy in the
different orders of animals ; being greater in birds than in mammalia ,
and greater in the latter than in reptiles and fishes .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,8.84

2. As the temperature of arterial is greater than that of the venous
blood , so does the former coagulate more quickly and firmly than the
latter . RICHARDSON-1858-2,8.85

<P_9>

3. As the vital energy of animals is always diminished by reducing
their temperature below the natural standard , so is coagulation of the
blood retarded by the same means , and wholly prevented by
long-continued cold . RICHARDSON-1858-2,9.87

4. The blood of individuals belonging to the sanguine or dynamic
temperament , coagulates sooner and more firmly than in such as are of a
weak and phlegmatic constitution , while its contractile power is
diminished by whatever impedes the function of respiration , as in
phthisis , asthma , disease of the heart , the cold stage of fever , and
all diseases of long standing , by which the powers of life are greatly
reduced . " RICHARDSON-1858-2,9.88

Regarding the influence of temperature on the blood as it escapes from
the body , Lehmann observes that we are still ignorant how far this may
affect the period of coagulation , RICHARDSON-1858-2,9.89

and he points out the difficulties that stand in the way in the
investigation of this problem . RICHARDSON-1858-2,9.90

The question , whether , during coagulation , heat is evolved from blood
, has been discussed on many occasions ; RICHARDSON-1858-2,9.91

Hunter and Dr. Davy took the negative view of this question .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,9.92

Dr. Gordon and Sir Charles Scudamore were of opinion that a slight
evolution does take place . RICHARDSON-1858-2,9.93

<heading>

Exposure to the air . RICHARDSON-1858-2,9.95

<$$heading>

Having disproved the ancient notion concerning the effects of
temperature , Hewson raised a theory of his own regarding coagulation ,
which attributed the occurrence of the phenomenon mainly to the air .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,9.97

He seems to have been led to this conclusion by discovering that blood ,
retained or tied up in a vessel - say a vein - of an animal , coagulates
much more slowly than when exposed <P_10> to the atmosphere , and by
observing the negative effects of a low temperature .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,10.98

This theory has not been very favourably received by succeeding
physiologists , who have shewn that blood , effused into serous cavities
or cellular structures , does sometimes coagulate , though not exposed
to the air ; and that even in the veins themselves , this change may
take place during life ; a fact which Hewson admitted .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,10.99

The condition of the blood when placed <font> in vacuo <$$font> has also
been inquired into by various experimenters . RICHARDSON-1858-2,10.100

Lehmann states that blood coagulates rapidly <font> in vacuo <$$font> ,
in consequence of the violent action induced in the molecules of the
blood by the rapid development of vesicles of gas and of aqueous vapour
. RICHARDSON-1858-2,10.101

Scudamore <paren> p. 27 <$$paren> came to three conclusions on the
effect of exposure <font> in vacuo <$$font> , viz. 1. That at a
reduced temperature <font> in vacuo <$$font> coagulation is hastened .
2. That atmospheric air being simply excluded in a stoppered bottle ,
the temperature not being reduced , coagulation is retarded . 3. That
all communication with atmospheric air being prevented , the temperature
not being reduced , coagulation is much retarded .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,10.102

This author was also of opinion that the extrication of gases ,
especially of carbonic acid gas , from the blood , influences materially
the period of coagulation . RICHARDSON-1858-2,10.103

Simple exclusion from the air , without the vacuum , <font> retards
<$$font> coagulation , in the opinion of Dr. Carpenter , who observes ,
that if blood be received in a vessel under oil , its coagulation will
take place slowly , a fact first noticed by Dr. Babington .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,10.104

The question of the effect of exposure to the air on coagulation was
further inquired into by Sir Humphry Davy , who found that the mere
exposure of blood to the atmosphere , nitrogen , nitrous acid , nitrous
oxide , and various other gases , does not materially affect the process
. RICHARDSON-1858-2,10.105

<P_11>

<heading>

Rest and motion . RICHARDSON-1858-2,11.108

<$$heading>

Another theory on the process of coagulation has been that it arises
simply from absolute rest . RICHARDSON-1858-2,11.110

I do not know who originated this theory ; RICHARDSON-1858-2,11.111

but it has been referred to incidentally by various authors .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,11.112

Thus Lancisi , in speaking of aneurism , remarks on the separation and
coagulation of glutinous chyle in aneurismal cavities ;
RICHARDSON-1858-2,11.113

and implies that , as this is merely held in mechanical suspension in
the blood , it is prone to separate and become deposited whenever the
motion of the blood is slow . RICHARDSON-1858-2,11.114

He compares an aneurism to a lake formed in the course of a river ;
RICHARDSON-1858-2,11.115

and concludes , that as the insoluble substances , which are
mechanically suspended in the natural current of the river , where the
motion is rapid , are laid down on the sides of the lake , where the
motion , from well known dynamical causes , is slow , so the blood ,
when flowing through the arteries , holds in suspension its solid
constituents , while , in flowing through an aneurism , where the motion
is impeded , it deposits these constituents on the sides of the sac .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,11.116

Rest and cold were assigned by Davies as the causes of coagulation .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,11.117

Dr. S. Collins , in his work on <font> Anatomy <$$font> , written in
1685 , contends that polypous concretions in the heart are identical in
structure with the buffy coat of coagulated blood , and that they arise
from a languid motion of the blood current , being deposited from the
blood in a manner analogous to the formation of stone in the bladder .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,11.118

Dr. Brown , too , writing in 1684 , remarks that depositions of fibrin
and firm clots of blood are most commonly found on the right side of the
heart , and most frequently in the right auricle ; an effect due mainly
to the slow motion of the returning blood through these parts of the
circulation . RICHARDSON-1858-2,11.119

Spallanzani <P_12> also taught indirectly that rest is the cause of
coagulation ; since blood stagnates and coagulates most quickly where
its motion is slowest , as in the extreme parts of the circulation .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,12.120

The same view has been supported by more modern physiologists and
pathologists , who have argued that the tendency to coagulate is
greatest in weakened animals . RICHARDSON-1858-2,12.121

Magendie , who entertained a similar opinion , made an experimental
trial by introducing a tube into the two extremities of a divided artery
, RICHARDSON-1858-2,12.122

and found that the blood remained fluid only so long as the action of
the heart continued to drive it forward . RICHARDSON-1858-2,12.123

Magendie also , with J. Simon and Carswell , refer to the experiment of
passing a ligature , or needle , transversely through an artery , and to
the fact , that a coagulum of fibrin forms upon the foreign substance
thus introduced into the circulation current . RICHARDSON-1858-2,12.124

On a similar basis of reasoning , reference has often been made to the
frequent coagulation of blood on the valve cords of the heart , on
indurated valves , and on any other points in the circulatory apparatus
which , from retarding the blood current , form favourable <font>
points_d'appui <$$font> for the formation of fibrinous clots .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,12.125

Dr. Bostock , in summing up the causes of coagulation , supports the
view that the process {TEXT:procees} depends on cessation of motion .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,12.126

He remarks , " that , as fibrin is gradually added to the blood ,
particle by particle , while this fluid is in a state of agitation in
the vessels , it has not opportunity of concreting ; but when it is
suffered to be at rest , either within or without the vessels , it is
then able to exercise its natural tendency . RICHARDSON-1858-2,12.127

In this respect , " he adds , " the coagulation of the fibrin of the
blood is very analogous to the formation of organised solids in general
, which only exercise their property of concreting or coalescing under
certain circumstances , and when <P_13> those causes , either chemical
or mechanical , which would tend to prevent the operation , are not in
action . RICHARDSON-1858-2,13.128

Upon this principle , we shall be induced to regard the coagulation of
the blood as analogous rather to the operation by which the muscular
fibre is originally formed , than to that by which its contractile power
is afterwards occasionally called into action . "
RICHARDSON-1858-2,13.129

On the other side , it has been forcibly urged that the mere statical
condition of the blood has little , if anything , to do with its
coagulation . RICHARDSON-1858-2,13.130

The fact stated by Hewson , and supported by Scudamore , and lately by
Stromeyer , that if a portion of blood be tied up in the vein of a
living animal it does not coagulate for some hours , unless let out ,
when it may coagulate rapidly , is thought by some to settle negatively
the stasis theory . RICHARDSON-1858-2,13.131

Instances have been related , moreover , where blood effused into the
cellular tissue , or other soft parts , has remained fluid for weeks ,
and has coagulated immediately on being let to escape into a vessel .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,13.132

There have thus been adduced , to oppose the theory of rest as a cause
of coagulation , the very arguments which have been brought forward by
its supporters as fully <font> substantiating <$$font> their idea .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,13.133

It has been further urged , that if the particles of fibrin were merely
mechanically suspended in the blood , they would be as easily
distinguishable by the microscope in an isolated form as are the blood
corpuscles . RICHARDSON-1858-2,13.134

Some interesting inquiries on this point , favouring the mechanical
suspension view , have been made by Dr. A. Buchanan ;
RICHARDSON-1858-2,13.135

and Dr. Milne Edwards is inclined to believe that fibrin , like the
proper globules , is merely suspended in the mass of the blood in a
state of extreme subdivision , and possessed of transparency too perfect
to be distinguished in the surrounding fluid . RICHARDSON-1858-2,13.136

<P_14>

<heading>

Vital force . RICHARDSON-1858-2,14.139

<$$heading>

The idea that the coagulation of the blood is due to some peculiar
principle of vitality , is included in the well known hypothesis of John
Hunter . RICHARDSON-1858-2,14.141

However carefully the works of this physiologist are studied , one finds
a difficulty in understanding what he precisely meant by the " vital
principle , " or its effects in promoting the coagulation of blood .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,14.142

In one sentence he remarks , " This disposition to coagulate , when out
of the vessels , or when retained in them without motion , till the
consciousness of the use of motion , and , of course , of fluidity , is
lost , is one of the effects of the life of the blood . "
RICHARDSON-1858-2,14.143

This sentence , obscure as it is , includes , as fully as any other ,
Hunter's view . RICHARDSON-1858-2,14.144

That he himself was not satisfied , is obvious ;
RICHARDSON-1858-2,14.145

for he proceeds to remark on the use he has made of the word "
consciousness , " explaining that he has employed that term because we
have not language existing answerable to all his views of the animal
economy ; and that to coin words would not answer his purpose , because
he must then have a dictionary of his own . RICHARDSON-1858-2,14.146

In a further sentence , Hunter speaks of coagulation " as a species of
generation , or as the first action or establishment of a power of
action within itself , so as to form itself into muscular fibres - the
only powers in an animal . " RICHARDSON-1858-2,14.147

The only explanation of this hypothesis that can be arrived at , is ,
that it supposed to exist in the body a separate principle or entity ,
which , although taking part in , and overruling all the organic
processes , is yet distinct from them , and is itself unmodified by the
changes it excites . RICHARDSON-1858-2,14.148

This principle , therefore , acts on the blood in the body so as to form
it into the various structures ; RICHARDSON-1858-2,14.149

<P_15> but when blood is removed from the vessels , this fluid , being
still acted on by the living principle , undergoes coagulation - an
analogous phenomenon . RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.150

In order to add force to his hypothesis , Hunter relates several cases ,
where death took place from the instantaneous and complete abstraction
of the presumed vivifying principle . RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.151

A gentleman in perfect health dies instantaneously from passion ;
RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.152

and death takes place in every part at once . RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.153

A healthy woman , in giving birth to a child , dies instantaneously .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.154

A soldier receives a blow on the pit of the stomach ,
RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.155

and succumbs at once . RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.156

An animal is struck dead by lightning . RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.157

Two deer are hunted to death ; in which case they acted till every power
of action ceased . RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.158

In all these cases , the blood was in a fluid state ,
RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.159

and did not coagulate on being exposed ; RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.160

and the muscles were not rigid - a result due to the rapid abstraction
of the life of the solids and of the blood . RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.161

In other cases , he adds , where an animal dies in the common way , the
vital actions are first destroyed , RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.162

but life still exists : RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.163

for the muscles contract RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.164

and the blood coagulates . RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.165

In other parts of his works , Hunter dwells on the same hypothesis .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.166

" Coagulation , " he remarks , " I conceive to be an operation of life ;
RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.167

and I imagine it to proceed upon the same principle as the union by the
first intention . RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.168

It is particle uniting with particle by the attraction which in the
blood forms a solid . " RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.169

To these opinions of Hunter , regarding a vital influence , strict
obedience was for many years paid . RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.170

They lost ground as the labours of Magendie became more prominently
marked , and as the solution of the chemical problems of life advanced .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.171

In these present days , they are again being reverted to .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,15.172

Franz Simon , in his <P_16> desire to avoid particularising the causes
of coagulation , says , in a word , " it is a vital process , "
RICHARDSON-1858-2,16.173

and Dr. Carpenter , in one place , speaks of the coagulation of blood
as an evidence of vitality , RICHARDSON-1858-2,16.174

and says that a deficiency of coagulating power in blood is due " to the
want of due elaboration in the fibrin alone , or to the destruction of
its vital endowments by some agent which has a noxious influence upon it
. " RICHARDSON-1858-2,16.175

<heading>

Nervous influence . RICHARDSON-1858-2,16.177

<$$heading>

Thackrah was of opinion from his experiments , that blood , placed in an
organised structure removed directly from the body of a living animal ,
coagulated less speedily than when it was placed in a similar structure
from which the vitality had absolutely passed away .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,16.179

These conclusions receive opposition from certain experiments of
Scudamore directed to ascertain the same point .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,16.180

But Thackrah's views being in harmony with the hypothesis of the
existence of a nervous force , generated in the medullary substance of
the nerve-centres , and communicated by the nerve-cords to all parts of
the economy , supplying or governing nutrition , secretion , circulation
, and all the organic processes , it has been argued from them that the
fluidity of the blood in the living body is kept up by this nervous
force , which has been supposed by some to be communicated to the blood
in the lungs by the nerve-filaments . RICHARDSON-1858-2,16.181

To this hypothesis a kind of force has been added , by the argument that
the blood is found fluid in cases of death from electricity , and where
life has been destroyed by sheer exhaustion - in the parlance of the
neuro-physiologists , by <font> nervous <$$font> exhaustion .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,16.182

This hypothesis , which is now well-nigh exploded , has not unfrequently
been confounded with <P_17> the vital hypothesis of Hunter , whose
writings , indeed , tend not a little to support such a confusion of
ideas . RICHARDSON-1858-2,17.183

Thackrah's summary runs thus : " I conclude that the vital or nervous
influence is the source of the blood's fluidity . " <paren> <font>
Essay <$$font> , p. 91 . <$$paren> RICHARDSON-1858-2,17.184

<heading>

Chemical hypotheses . RICHARDSON-1858-2,17.186

<$$heading>

The advance of modern chemistry has led to not a few theories , or
rather hypotheses , regarding the cause of coagulation .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,17.188

One point that has been forcibly urged , is , that the blood , when
drawn from a vessel , is prevented from coagulating by the addition of
certain salts and other chemical substances . RICHARDSON-1858-2,17.189

Thus it has been stated , that the fixed alkalies completely prevent
coagulation ; and that some of the vegetable acids , as the acetic ,
have the same effect . RICHARDSON-1858-2,17.190

The various salts which are said to have this property are , common salt
, the tartrates and borates , nitrate of potash , acetate of potash ,
chloride of potassium , sulphate of copper , acetate of lead , tartrate
of potash , ammoniacal sulphate of copper , nitrate of lime , chloride
of iron , sulphate of potash , sulphate of magnesia , and chloride of
ammonium . RICHARDSON-1858-2,17.191

Among the vegetable salts are nitrate of strychnine and nitrate of
morphine , and the vegetable alkaloids , nicotine and morphine .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,17.192

Mr. Blake found that the blood was not coagulated after injection into
the veins of caustic soda , carbonate of soda , sulphate of soda ,
ammonia , nitrate of silver , sulphate of zinc , sulphate of iron ,
phosphoric acid , arsenic acid , arsenious acid , oxalic acid , infusion
of galls , infusion of digitalis , and alloxan .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,17.193

Magendie found a fluid condition after injection of putrid matters into
the circulation . RICHARDSON-1858-2,17.194

It has been stated that coagulation is favoured in <P_18> drawn blood by
the addition of acetate of morphine , solution of sugar , alcohol ,
ether , tannin , starch , alum , benzoic acid , or iodine .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,18.195

Magendie observed that the injection of a solution of bichloride of
mercury into the veins was followed by the coagulation and separation of
fibrin . RICHARDSON-1858-2,18.196

In the hands of Gaspard and Mr. Henry Lee , the injection of pus into
veins , or its addition to blood drawn from the body , has produced
rapid coagulation . RICHARDSON-1858-2,18.197

The injection of brain substance into the veins has led to a similar
result ; RICHARDSON-1858-2,18.198

and Mr. Blake found the blood coagulated after the injection of the
following matters : liquor potassae <paren> firmly <$$paren> , carbonate
of potash <paren> firmly <$$paren> , nitrate of potash <paren> firmly ,
blood scarlet <$$paren> , nitrate of soda , nitrate of ammonia , nitrate
of lime , nitrate of baryta , chloride of calcium , chloride of barium ,
chloride of strontian , sulphate of magnesia , sulphate of copper ,
acetate of lead , arsenite of potash , nitric acid , narcotine , tobacco
, strychnia , conium , hydrocyanic acid , euphorbium , and water in
quantity . RICHARDSON-1858-2,18.199

On the subject of salines and their effects on the blood , Nasse comes
to a general conclusion , differing , indeed , in a great degree from
that of any other observer . RICHARDSON-1858-2,18.200

He argues that almost all salts , when not used in too large quantities
, accelerate coagulation , though in small quantities they may retard it
. RICHARDSON-1858-2,18.201

Nasse believes , too , that water in small quantities hastens
coagulation , and in large quantities retards it . <paren> Lehmann ,
vol. ii , pp. 197 - 8 . <$$paren> RICHARDSON-1858-2,18.202

Gulliver points out that blood may be kept fluid for weeks by the
neutral salts , and may then be coagulated by dilution with water .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,18.203

It will be observed , that various contradictions exist in these
statements ; and that the effect which is produced by a given agent in
drawn blood in one experiment , seems to be just the reverse of what
occurs in <P_19> other experiments when the same agent has been injected
into the living circulation . RICHARDSON-1858-2,19.204

Franz Simon , in fact , seems to experience so much difficulty in
accounting for coagulation on the chemical process , that he refers it
to the old doctrine of vitality , as I have before shown .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,19.205

Other physiologists and pathologists , however , more daring than Simon
, seizing on the fact that the blood , when drawn from the body , may be
kept from coagulating by some alkaline solutions , have argued that upon
alkalinity of the liquid part of the blood depends the non-coagulability
of that fluid during life : in short , that fibrin is chemically
dissolved in the living blood . RICHARDSON-1858-2,19.206

Dr. Fuller , in his excellent work on <font> Rheumatism <$$font>
<paren> 1st edition <$$paren> , accepts this theory ,
RICHARDSON-1858-2,19.207

and argues that the cause of the deposition of fibrin on the valves of
the heart is due partly to its presence in unusual quantity , and partly
to the weak state of solution in which it is held , in consequence of
that extreme acidity of the system , which is so well marked in acute
rheumatic affections . RICHARDSON-1858-2,19.208

Further experimental researches of a chemical kind relate to the effects
of gaseous substances in retarding or increasing the coagulation of the
blood . RICHARDSON-1858-2,19.209

I have already referred to the experiments of Sir Humphry Davy on this
point , which shewed that the exposure of drawn blood to nitrogen ,
nitrous acid gas , oxygen , nitrous oxide , carbonic acid , carburetted
hydrogen , and atmospheric air , did not modify coagulation .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,19.210

Other experimentalists have shewn that the process is not retarded by
the fluid being placed <font> in vacuo <$$font> .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,19.211

From a long series of experiments performed by Dr. Polli of Milan ,
with great care , it would seem that coagulation takes place with equal
freedom in pure oxygen , nitrogen , and atmospheric air ; but that the
presence <P_20> of carbonic acid always impedes it .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,20.212

Carbonic acid gas , according to this author , is always given off from
blood during coagulation ; RICHARDSON-1858-2,20.213

and the more quickly this occurs , the more quickly the blood coagulates
. RICHARDSON-1858-2,20.214

The more carbonic acid gas the blood contains , the more slowly it
coagulates , according to Polli , RICHARDSON-1858-2,20.215

and the greater chance there is of a buffy coat being formed ; while a
buffy coat , formed over a dark clot without froth , is always a sign of
the blood being surcharged with carbonic acid .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,20.216

On the subject of the effects of gasses on the blood , Lehmann also
remarks that , since the blood contains gases , the different quantities
in which they occur modify coagulation ; RICHARDSON-1858-2,20.217

hence blood rich in carbonic acid coagulates less rapidly than when the
contrary is the case . RICHARDSON-1858-2,20.218

Scudamore , in his <font> Essay on the Blood <$$font> , in referring to
carbonic acid , states that he feels himself fully authorised in
concluding that the period of time in which the blood coagulates depends
, in a great measure , on the quick or slow extrication of carbonic acid
gas . RICHARDSON-1858-2,20.219

The evolution of this gas takes place most freely as the blood begins to
concrete , RICHARDSON-1858-2,20.220

and ceases when coagulation is completed . RICHARDSON-1858-2,20.221

It is evidently , he presumes , an essential circumstance in the process
of coagulation , as the same causes which retain the carbonic acid in
the blood delay coagulation . RICHARDSON-1858-2,20.222

In relation to the point now before us , there is an interesting and
curious paper in the <font> Philosophical Transactions <$$font> <paren>
vol. for 1818 , p. 81 <$$paren> , from the pen of Sir Everard Home ,
which I notice here incidentally only , but to which Scudamore refers at
length . RICHARDSON-1858-2,20.223

Sir Everard , in giving an account of the evolution of carbonic acid
from the blood during coagulation , relates some experiments made at his
request by Professor Brande , from which it was inferred , not only that
carbonic acid <P_21> gas exists in both the venous and the arterial
blood of man , but that as much as two cubic inches could be extracted
from every ounce of blood . RICHARDSON-1858-2,21.224

Sir Everard did not use this statement as one particularly bearing on
coagulation , but as supporting an hypothesis that as , in the
coagulation of dead blood , channels are made in it by the escape of
carbonic acid , so in the living body effused blood may be made vascular
by the blood-vessels transmitting blood into it , by channels similarly
produced . RICHARDSON-1858-2,21.225

Mr. Bauer seems to have been the first observer who stated that blood
in coagulating exhales carbonic acid . RICHARDSON-1858-2,21.226

Contrary to the views of Scudamore regarding carbonic acid , Dr. John
Davy held that the agitation of carbonic gas with blood does not retard
coagulation ; that newly drawn blood really <font> absorbs <$$font>
carbonic acid ; and that water charged with this gas and added to blood
does not affect the coagulating process . RICHARDSON-1858-2,21.227

Without endeavouring to define its nature , Spallanzani conceived that
there was in blood an elastic invisible gas . RICHARDSON-1858-2,21.228

In this view he was supported by his English translator , Dr. Hall ,
who urged this point on the notice of physiological inquirers , as one
deserving special notice , and as promising to explain many of the
phenomena connected with the blood and circulation .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,21.229

In speaking of the various chemical hypotheses which have been raised
regarding coagulation , it would be an error to omit that which is held
by Schmidt and Schulz , and in some degree supported by the writings of
Mulder ; viz. , that fibrin , <font> per_se <$$font> , does not exist
in the circulating living blood at all . RICHARDSON-1858-2,21.230

Schmidt's arguments are intended to prove " that , as blood escapes from
the circulation into a cup or other vessel , an acid albuminate of soda
, which previously existed in a state <P_22> of solution in the blood ,
becomes disintegrated into its component parts in such a manner that a
less acid , neutral , or basic albuminate of soda remains dissolved ;
while the other atom of albumen separates under the form of protein ,
which we call fibrin . " RICHARDSON-1858-2,22.231

The fibrin thus <font> formed <$$font> and separated , afterwards
contracts into the smallest possible volume , just as freshly
precipitated silica , alumina , and phosphate of lime contract when
isolated . RICHARDSON-1858-2,22.232

Respecting this peculiar hypothesis , Lehmann , to whom I am indebted
for its history , observes , that if we watch the separation of fibrin
into filaments during coagulation , it will be seen that " the analogy
with hydrated alumina affords no special support to this hypothesis ,
which , at first sight , seems sufficiently plausible . "
RICHARDSON-1858-2,22.233

<heading>

Effects of electricity and galvanism . RICHARDSON-1858-2,22.235

<$$heading>

Gerhard and Hufeland , according to F. Simon , have shewn by experiment
that an electric current , continuously passed through blood , tends to
keep that fluid in an uncoagulable state . RICHARDSON-1858-2,22.237

Scudamore tried the effects of both electricity and galvanism on drawn
blood . RICHARDSON-1858-2,22.238

The results of his experiments , with reference to electricity , differ
from those of Hufeland and Gerhard . RICHARDSON-1858-2,22.239

He found that blood exposed to the electric current gained in
temperature two degrees on the introduction of the current , but
coagulated as soon as did other blood removed at the same time from the
same person and allowed to concrete naturally ; and again , that the
blood treated by electricity coagulated more firmly .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,22.240

In experimenting with the galvanic current , he found also that the
temperature of the blood was raised . RICHARDSON-1858-2,22.241

In one case there was a copious evolution of gas at the negative pole ,
RICHARDSON-1858-2,22.242

and in all cases the current gave rise to a peculiar process of
coagulation and decomposition . RICHARDSON-1858-2,22.243

<P_23>

<heading>

Physical interchanges in the constituents of the blood .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,23.246

<$$heading>

Of late years , an hypothesis has been gaining ground , that the
fluidity of the blood is sustained during life by the constant
abstraction of fibrin from the circulation for the purposes of nutrition
. RICHARDSON-1858-2,23.248

This idea was hinted at indeed very broadly by Dr. Bostock , in the
passage I have already quoted from his work . RICHARDSON-1858-2,23.249

" As fibrin , " he says , " is gradually added to the blood , particle
by particle , while that fluid is in a state of agitation in the body ,
it <paren> the fibrin <$$paren> has no opportunity of concreting . "
RICHARDSON-1858-2,23.250

The idea present in Dr. Bostock's mind evidently was that fibrin passes
from the heart to the extremities of the circulation without any change
by the way ; and that , having arrived at its destination , it enters
into the construction of such solids as receive it as a part of their
structure . RICHARDSON-1858-2,23.251

By another and more extended view , it has been conceived that the
liquor sanguinis , being constantly pervaded by the red blood corpuscles
, is elaborated by them , and that the coagulable part is thus taken up
as quickly as it is formed . RICHARDSON-1858-2,23.252

This view is maintained by Mr. Wharton Jones , who does not , however ,
here undertake to answer the question , whether the process of
coagulation be a vital or a physical one ? but prefers to explain , as
above , why the blood circulating in the living body does <font> not
<$$font> coagulate . RICHARDSON-1858-2,23.253

By an extension of this view , Mr. Jones argues further , that the
elaboration supposed to be performed by the red corpuscles is probably
the conversion of one protein compound into another , albumen into
fibrin , a less into a more highly organised proximate principle .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,23.254

Mr. Gulliver points out that this hypothesis is an old <P_24> one
revived ; that it was virtually advanced by Quesnay in 1750 , and by
Bordenave in 1787 . RICHARDSON-1858-2,24.255

He objects to it , as well as to the hypothesis that fibrin is
elaborated by the white corpuscles , on the ground " that fibrin and its
fibrils may be produced merely by mixing together certain varieties of
serum , in which , before mixing , no fibrinous particles can be
discovered by the microscope . " RICHARDSON-1858-2,24.256

Mr. Dower shewed that in the fluid produced by a blister there exists a
fibrous part , which can be extracted by squeezing the fluid strongly
through a fine linen cloth . RICHARDSON-1858-2,24.257

The fibrous part is left on the cloth , RICHARDSON-1858-2,24.258

and resembles the fibrin of blood . RICHARDSON-1858-2,24.259

This observation , though important , is , however , less pointed ,
since it may be urged that coagulable lymph is effused , under the
blister , with the serum . RICHARDSON-1858-2,24.260

An hypothesis of the physical kind which is advocated by some
authorities is , that the period and the intensity of coagulation depend
on the quantity of fibrin , in relation to the blood corpuscles and
water . RICHARDSON-1858-2,24.261

When the corpuscles are few in proportion to the quantity of fibrin ,
the molecules of fibrin become more densely compressed together ,
RICHARDSON-1858-2,24.262

and thus render the formation of the clot more marked , and its
structure more firm . <paren> Lehmann , vol. ii , p. 199 . <$$paren>
RICHARDSON-1858-2,24.263

A further hypothesis , which is in part physical and in part chemical ,
is advanced by Dr. Carpenter : viz. , that coagulation consists in the
passage of blood from the soluble to the insoluble state , in which
transition it is not formed into an amorphous coagulum , but into a
network of fibres more or less definitely marked out .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,24.264

In a former page we saw that Dr. Carpenter considered coagulation to be
a <font> vital <$$font> process . RICHARDSON-1858-2,24.265

However , we now find him defining the process on simple principles .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,24.266

Prevost and Dumas , in speaking of coagulation , <P_25> thought that the
red corpuscles were essential to that process .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,25.267

They contended that " the attraction which keeps the red matter fixed
around the white particles having ceased when blood is drawn , together
with the motion of the fluid , these parts remain at liberty to obey the
force which tends to make them combine and form a net-work , in the
meshes or amid the plaits of which the colouring matter is included ,
with a quantity of particles which have escaped this spontaneous
decomposition . " RICHARDSON-1858-2,25.268

This speculation , as M. Edwards indicates , was entirely disproved by
Müller , who shewed that when the blood corpuscles were filtered off
from newly drawn blood , prior to coagulation , the fibrin now left with
the serum alone spontaneously solidifies . RICHARDSON-1858-2,25.269

It was further disproved by Dr. Babington , to whom we owe the term
<font> liquor sanguinis <$$font> , as distinguishing the fluid in which
the red corpuscles float during life . RICHARDSON-1858-2,25.270

This liquor sanguinis he believes to be no mere mixture of fibrin and
serum during life , but a homogeneous mass , which , after the vital
force is removed , separates into two distinct parts ; one part
spontaneously coagulable , the other fluid at ordinary temperatures -
fibrin and serum . RICHARDSON-1858-2,25.271

Dr. Babington skimmed off the liquor sanguinis from blood ,
RICHARDSON-1858-2,25.272

and observed the coagulation as a process independent of the corpuscles
. RICHARDSON-1858-2,25.273

<heading>

Specific gravity . RICHARDSON-1858-2,25.275

<$$heading>

The specific gravity of the blood , or of its parts , has been thought
to bear some relation to the rapidity and cause of coagulation .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,25.277

On this point it has been shown that viscid solutions , such as albumen
, or thick solution of gum , introduced into newly drawn blood , tend
materially to retard coagulation ; and that by this means a buffy coat
may be produced from healthy blood . RICHARDSON-1858-2,25.278

Hence it has <P_26> been inferred , that the density of the serum ,
relatively to the density of the other blood constituents in various
kinds of blood , has something to do with coagulation .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,26.279

We have also seen that a large dilution of blood with water is said to
retard the coagulating process . RICHARDSON-1858-2,26.280

On these points , Scudamore has the following observations , which
embody much that has been written before and since his time .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,26.281

" Blood , " he says , " possessing the highest specific gravity ,
coagulates the most quickly . RICHARDSON-1858-2,26.282

In blood of this description , there is the largest proportion of red
particles , which are the heaviest part of the mass .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,26.283

Blood which gives the fibrinous coat in a great degree , has a lower
specific gravity than healthy blood , RICHARDSON-1858-2,26.284

and is slower in coagulation . RICHARDSON-1858-2,26.285

Fibrin is lighter than the red particles , and also lighter than serum .
" RICHARDSON-1858-2,26.286

he further says that for the most part the specific gravity of the serum
is higher , in proportion as the quantity of fibrin is natural .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,26.287

Hunter states that dilution with water rather hastens coagulation , but
makes the clot neither firmer nor looser in texture .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,26.288

Scudamore's experiments led to an opposite result .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,26.289

With regard to the blood corpuscles and their specific gravity , Lehmann
remarks that they sink just as rapidly and just as slowly in
defibrinated blood , as in blood containing fibrin .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,26.290

Hence , the fibrin exerts no influence on this part of the phenomenon .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,26.291

The blood corpuscles unite and sink , in great part , from the
difference between the density of the cells themselves , and of the
intercellular fluid . RICHARDSON-1858-2,26.292

<heading>

Other circumstances relating to coagulation . RICHARDSON-1858-2,26.294

<$$heading>

There are yet a few points of a minor kind regarding coagulation , which
deserve notice , because they have <P_27> been almost unanimously agreed
upon by various writers , whose opinions on other matters of higher
importance have been widely different . RICHARDSON-1858-2,27.296

These points which we may call <font> facts <$$font> , are : - 1. That
blood drawn in a quick stream coagulates more slowly than blood drawn in
a gradual current . RICHARDSON-1858-2,27.297

This fact has been accounted for by the supposition that when the fluid
moves more slowly , and is thus exposed freely to the air , it gives off
with greater ease the carbonic acid or other gases , and the aqueous
vapour , which it contains . RICHARDSON-1858-2,27.298

2. That the shape of the vessel into which the blood is received makes
a great difference in the time of coagulation ; <font> i.e. <$$font> ,
that coagulation is retarded if the blood is received into a tall and
narrow vessel ; but that the reverse obtains if it is received into a
wide and shallow vessel . RICHARDSON-1858-2,27.299

This is accounted for as being due to the evaporation of gases , and of
aqueous vapour , on the principle laid down in the last paragraph .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,27.300

Lehmann states that in a long and narrow vessel the blood corpuscles
sink rapidly , leaving the fibrin above to coagulate alone .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,27.301

Dr. Babington , in referring to the effect of differently shaped
vessels on buffy blood , argues " that the space left by the gravitation
of the red particles , bears a proportion to the whole perpendicular
depth of the blood , so that in shallow vessels scarcely any buffed coat
may appear , where the same blood , in a deep vessel , would have
furnished such a coat of considerable thickness .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,27.302

It is a fact " , he continues , " that the quantity of crassamentum is
also dependent , within certain limits , on the form of the vessel
employed . RICHARDSON-1858-2,27.303

If this be shallow , the crassamentum will be abundant ;
RICHARDSON-1858-2,27.304

if <P_28> approaching in form the cube or sphere , it will be scanty .
RICHARDSON-1858-2,28.305

This difference is owing to the greater or lesser distance of the
coagulating particles of fibrin from a common centre , which causes a
more or less powerful adhesion and contraction of those particles . "
RICHARDSON-1858-2,28.306

