<BEGIN_roberts-1726-2>

<P_400>

<heading>

<font> The Isle of <$$font> May , <$$heading> Lies in the Latitude of
15@ @=o= - 12 ' North , and Longitude 5@ @=o= - 29 ' West , from <font>
Cape de Verd . <$$font> ROBERTS-1726-2,400.4

It bears from <font> Bona Vist {COM:sic} <$$font> South-by-West-Westerly
, about Fourteen Leagues , ROBERTS-1726-2,400.5

and is low Land , for the most Part like the former , having Three
Mountains , the highest being the South-Eastermost , called <font>
Pinosa <$$font> , the Northermost St. <font> Antonio . <$$font>
ROBERTS-1726-2,400.6

The North , and North-East Parts of this island , are very rocky , and
full of Shoals ; some lying off the Land a good Way ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,400.7

the most dangerous , is a Ledge of Rocks which extends from the
North-East Side the Length of a League , and at low Water is almost dry
in some Places : ROBERTS-1726-2,400.8

Between that and the Shore , is a Channel , where is Water <P_401>
enough for a Ship to run through , ROBERTS-1726-2,401.9

but is dangerous , unless one is well acquainted with it .
ROBERTS-1726-2,401.10

There are Two Roads for Ships to ride in , and several little Coves ,
where a Boat might run in ; ROBERTS-1726-2,401.11

but I shall not trouble myself , nor my Reader , with the Description of
the latter . ROBERTS-1726-2,401.12

The Northermost Road is called <font> Paa Seco <$$font> , where you may
anchor in Six , Seven , or Eight Fathom Water , bringing the Eastermost
Point of the Bay North-West of you ; ROBERTS-1726-2,401.13

the Ground is stony , ROBERTS-1726-2,401.14

but doth not much damage a Cable , except you chance to fall among the
Coral Rocks ; ROBERTS-1726-2,401.15

but letting go your Anchor in Seven or Eight Fathom , and the Point
North-West , or North-West-by-North , you will have the best of the Road
. ROBERTS-1726-2,401.16

The Coast down along almost to the Point of <font> Tingdost <$$font> ,
is full of stony Shoals and Banks ; ROBERTS-1726-2,401.17

some of them extend near Two Miles from the Shore .
ROBERTS-1726-2,401.18

About the Point of <font> Tingdost <$$font> , lies the <font> English
<$$font> Road , where the Salt Ships ride ; ROBERTS-1726-2,401.19

'T@ @is mostly foul Ground , and rocky towards the <font> Bluff Point
<$$font> , which makes the South Point of the Bay .
ROBERTS-1726-2,401.20

The Northermost Part of the Bay is almost as bad for cutting a Cable ,
but not liable to hook an Anchor , as the South Side is , by reason of
the Rocks . ROBERTS-1726-2,401.21

'T@ @is generally said , That the <font> West-of-England-Men <$$font>
fouled this Bay , by heaving their Stone Ballast over-board in it .
ROBERTS-1726-2,401.22

The Middle of the Bay is the clearest Ground , and from Twelve to Eight
Fathom , the best Depth to ride in , except in the latter End of <font>
June <$$font> , or <font> July <$$font> , when you expect shifting Winds
, ROBERTS-1726-2,401.23

and then it@ @'s better riding out in Fifteen or Eighteen Fathom .
ROBERTS-1726-2,401.24

The Inhabitants are much the same with those of <font> Bona Vist
<$$font> , but not altogether so well affected to the <font> English .
<$$font> ROBERTS-1726-2,401.25

They have run the same Calamity or want of Rain , as those of <font>
Bona Vist <$$font> , ROBERTS-1726-2,401.26

but have more Cows , and these generally the best and fattest <P_402> on
all the <font> Cape de Verd <$$font> Islands : ROBERTS-1726-2,402.27

They have also most of them Goats . ROBERTS-1726-2,402.28

They are mostly <font> Blacks <$$font> , having few <font> Molattoes
<$$font> , and no <font> Whites <$$font> among them ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,402.29

and are the hardest-favoured of all the Islands . ROBERTS-1726-2,402.30

They have Cotton on the Island sufficient for their Use , and to spare ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,402.31

but are so lazy , that they lose above half of it , for want of
gathering ; ROBERTS-1726-2,402.32

and formerly had more than they have now ; ROBERTS-1726-2,402.33

but the want of Rain , hath dried up a great Part of their Cotton Shrubs
, though they never had one Tenth of the Quantity that <font> Bona Vist
<$$font> hath . ROBERTS-1726-2,402.34

Their Habits are almost the same with those on <font> Bona Vist <$$font>
; ROBERTS-1726-2,402.35

but few wear wrought Shirts , Wastecoats , Shifts , <font> &c. <$$font>
as the Inhabitants of <font> Bona Vist <$$font> do .
ROBERTS-1726-2,402.36

This Island affords Fish , but not so Plenty as that of <font> Bona Vist
<$$font> ; ROBERTS-1726-2,402.37

and they catch Turtle {COM:sic} there , but not in any great Quantity .
ROBERTS-1726-2,402.38

The most noted Man in this Island , is Captain <font> Vincent Alva
<$$font> , commonly known to the <font> English <$$font> by the Name of
<font> Peter Vincent . <$$font> ROBERTS-1726-2,402.39

There are sometimes found here , small Quantities of Ambergrise .
ROBERTS-1726-2,402.40

The Number of Souls computed to be on this Island , is something above
Two_hundred . ROBERTS-1726-2,402.41

There is some Indigo here , but not much ; ROBERTS-1726-2,402.42

there is also here wild Fowl , the <font> Gallina Pintata <$$font> , or
<font> Guinea Hen . <$$font> ROBERTS-1726-2,402.43

There is on this Island , as on most of the others , and particularly at
<font> Bona Vist <$$font> , an Excrescence , or vegetable Stone which
grows and shoots in Stems or Stalks , much like the Head of a
Colliflower , or as Coral does , but is more porous , being of a greyish
Colour , and much like those Stones generated or produced by Shells ,
<font> &c. <$$font> ROBERTS-1726-2,402.44

<P_403>

This Island owes its Name of <font> May <$$font> , to its being
discovered on the First Day of the Month so called .
ROBERTS-1726-2,403.46

<heading>

<font> The Island of St. <$$font> Jago , <font> or St. <$$font> James
. <$$heading> Was also discovered the First Day of <font> May <$$font>
, the Festival of that Saint , which occasioned it to be called by that
Name . ROBERTS-1726-2,403.48

It lies in Latitude 15@ @=o= - 00 ' North , and Longitude 6@ @=o= - 05 '
West from the <font> Cape de Verd <$$font> , ROBERTS-1726-2,403.49

and was the first of these Islands that was inhabited by the <font>
Portuguese <$$font> , ROBERTS-1726-2,403.50

and is the principal , as well as the largest , and fruitfullest of them
all ; ROBERTS-1726-2,403.51

and as it hath the most Rains , so it hath the most running Brooks ,
best Pasture , and greatest Variety of Fruits . ROBERTS-1726-2,403.52

This Island always remained in the King's Hands , ROBERTS-1726-2,403.53

and enjoys the Privilege of obliging all Ships to clear there , that
trade by the Northward of <font> Sierra Leon <$$font> to <font> Guinea
<$$font> , ROBERTS-1726-2,403.54

and being a convenient Place to trade from to <font> Guinea <$$font> ,
occasioned several Merchants to settle , and a Manufactory of Barrafools
, to be carried on there , 'till , as I hinted before , that their Trade
declined ; ROBERTS-1726-2,403.55

however , it gave Occasion to replenish this Island with Inhabitants ,
who held their Lands by the Gift of the Crown , which was given for the
better Encouragement of People to settle there , without any Reservation
of Acknowledgement , by Way of Tax to the Crown to them and their Heirs
for ever ; ROBERTS-1726-2,403.56

and does mostly belong to the Whites , who are the fewest in Number , as
not holding the Proportion of Three to Forty of the Blacks .
ROBERTS-1726-2,403.57

<P_404>

The Certainty of the Land being theirs , and their Heirs for ever ,
encouraged them to make a better Improvement , than the other Islanders
, who shift their Landlords or Proprietors , as often as the King
pleases except the Island of St. <font> Philip <$$font> , which also
being in the King's Hands , is upon the same Foot as that of St. <font>
Jago . <$$font> ROBERTS-1726-2,404.59

This Island hath , as I observed , Plenty of Water , many Vallies ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,404.60

and , as it affords good Pasture , so it abounds with Cows and Goats ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,404.61

and hath a Sufficiency of Sheep , Hogs , Horses , Asses , Fowls of all
Sorts , as <font> Guinea <$$font> Hens , Peacocks , and other Hens ;
which last fly out in Flocks to feed on the Mountains , and return Home
to roost every Night , like Doves in <font> England . <$$font>
ROBERTS-1726-2,404.62

There are good Oranges here , both sweet and sour , Lemons , Tamarinds ,
Pine_Apples , Guavas , Custard Apple , Bananoes , Plantans , Cocoa_Nuts
in abundance , Maiz , Feshoon , <font> Guinea <$$font> Corn , Pompion ,
Water and Musk Melons , and Mandyokes in great Plenty ; as also
Sugar-cane , whereof they make some Sugar , but mostly Molasses
{TEXT:Molosses} ; ROBERTS-1726-2,404.63

they have likewise some Grapes , ROBERTS-1726-2,404.64

and the Natives say , Vines would thrive very well among them , which I
believe ; ROBERTS-1726-2,404.65

but they are not allowed to make Wine , the King , for some Reasons ,
having absolutely prohibited it . ROBERTS-1726-2,404.66

There are Four Towns on this Island , <font> viz. <$$font> St. <font>
Jago <$$font> , St. <font> Domingo <$$font> , St. <font> Domingo
Abaceu <$$font> , and <font> Villa de Praya <$$font> , besides the City
called <font> Cidada de Ribeira Grande <$$font> , where the Governor ,
Ovidore , <font> &c. <$$font> as also the Bishop , who is stiled Bishop
of St. <font> Jago <$$font> , of all the <font> Cape de Verd <$$font>
Islands , and of all the Coasts of <font> Guinea <$$font> , resides ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,404.67

and the latter hath his Country Seat about Three or Four Miles out of
the City , called <font> Trinidade <$$font> <paren> <font> i.e.
<$$font> Trinity <$$paren> {COM:missing_period} ROBERTS-1726-2,404.68

<P_405>

Here also is a religious House of Cordelier Friers , who are the only
Men on these Islands who constantly eat fresh-baked , as well as
fermented wheaten Bread ; flower , <font> &c. <$$font> being sent them
yearly from <font> Portugal . <$$font> ROBERTS-1726-2,405.70

They have very fine Gardens , stored with Salads , and the best Fruit on
the Island ; ROBERTS-1726-2,405.71

and have brought a Part of the running Brook of <font> Ribeira Grande
<$$font> , not only to run through their Gardens , but also , in a
manner , to every Part of their House , which , except the Cathedral ,
makes the best Prospect in or about the City . ROBERTS-1726-2,405.72

The present Bishop is of the same Order with those Friars ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,405.73

but yet they can@ @not agree ; insomuch that a while ago , he threatened
to shut them up in their Convent , if they ever concerned themselves
with any thing out of it , either Ecclesiastical or Civil ; before which
Time , they used to expose the Ignorance of the Negro Priests educated
at St. <font> Jago <$$font> ; but now are obliged to concern themselves
with the Business of their Convent only . ROBERTS-1726-2,405.74

Most of the Priests among these Islands , as also those sent to <font>
Guinea <$$font> , are black , ROBERTS-1726-2,405.75

and the present Bishop more esteems them <paren> as making better and
soberer Clergymen <$$paren> than those that are sent from <font>
Portugal <$$font> , who , for the most Part , are , I do not say
illiterate , ROBERTS-1726-2,405.76

for then I should include almost all the Clergy of <font> Portugal
<$$font> , they being confessedly the most illiterate and ignorant of
all the Clergy in <font> Europe <$$font> ; ROBERTS-1726-2,405.77

but those sent hither , are generally Men of such loose , vicious , and
scandalous Lives , that for the Credit of their Function , if they
expose themselves to no Crime liable to the Inquisition , they are sent
Abroad to the <font> Cape do Verd <$$font> Islands , <font> Guinea ,
Brasil <$$font> , &c. ROBERTS-1726-2,405.78

but this Bishop being a mild-tempered Man , and these Banditti , as I
may call them , partaking more of the Qualities <P_406> of <font> Mars
<$$font> and <font> Saturn <$$font> , than of <font> Jupiter <$$font> ,
it was impossible their Tempers should be very agreeable to each other .
ROBERTS-1726-2,406.79

It is possible , indeed , that there may be here and there a Person of
another Character among these profligate Priests , because sometimes ,
the Want of Friends to get into a Benefice , may oblige a sober Man to
desire a_Million Abroad , purely to keep him from Want .
ROBERTS-1726-2,406.80

They bring up abundance of young Blacks at St. <font> Jago <$$font> for
the Priestly Function , ROBERTS-1726-2,406.81

and as soon as they have resolved to be such , they and their Friends ,
endeavour to make an Interest with some of the Canons , or Chaplains of
the Bishop , who are <font> Europeans <$$font> <paren> no Black being
admitted to the Dignity of Bishop , Canon , or Chaplain to the Bishop
<$$paren> ROBERTS-1726-2,406.82

and when by Presents , Friends , <font> &c. <$$font> they have procured
one of those Dignitaries to become their Patron or Tutor , who yet
seldom endeavour or take any Pains to instruct them ; they next apply
themselves to the Bishop , to let him understand , that they have got a
Patron , who generally goes with them , or some Clergyman of his
Acquaintance , and acquaints him , that they are resolved to study and
qualify themselves for the Priestly Function ; ROBERTS-1726-2,406.83

the Bishop then asks them several Questions ROBERTS-1726-2,406.84

and lays before them the Dignity of the Office , and the Pains ,
Chastity , and Sobriety , required to qualify them for so high a Calling
, <font> &c. <$$font> to all which they promise to use their utmost
Endeavour to conform ; ROBERTS-1726-2,406.85

and then he gives them his Blessing ; ROBERTS-1726-2,406.86

and having obtained a <font> Latin Grammar <$$font> , with some
catachistical Books , explaining the common Parts of their Religion ,
they put themselves in a Student's Habit , which is a long close Garment
, and a Cloak , both made of black Bays . ROBERTS-1726-2,406.87

Out of these Books , they endeavour to get as much by Heart as they can
, ROBERTS-1726-2,406.88

and in the Evenings , they meet in some shady Street ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,406.89

<P_407>

there they argue , dispute , and ask one another Questions about what
they have studied , or got by Heart out of those Books ; the chiefest of
their Grammatical Disputes being about the Declensions of Nouns , few of
them attaining so far , as to vary a Verb through the Moods and Tenses ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,407.91

and consequently you must conceive , they can@ @not make one <font>
Latin <$$font> Sentence as it ought . ROBERTS-1726-2,407.92

As soon as they have learned as much as they can out of these Books , by
this Method , they are again introduced before the Bishop , who examines
as he thinks fit ; ROBERTS-1726-2,407.93

and those who are ripest , he orders them some other Books to study in ,
with Directions ; all which Books they pay for . ROBERTS-1726-2,407.94

As soon as they have a while practised themselves in these other Books ,
they make a Third Appearance before the Bishop , having first past their
Examination , before the <font> Palustre <$$font> , who is Vicar_General
under the Bishop , and first Judge of the Inquisition , and dignified
with the Title of <font> Doctor Theologiae {TEXT:Theologia} <$$font> ,
though , perhaps , he knows little of it ; who certifies the Bishop ,
who is qualified , and who is not ; which Qualification depends pretty
much upon the Greatness or Smallness of the Present , <font> &c.
<$$font> made him ; ROBERTS-1726-2,407.95

and according to this Certification , the Bishop gives the Ordination of
the lowest Order , ROBERTS-1726-2,407.96

and then they are sworn as well to Secrecy of those Mysteries which they
have learned , as those they shall learn , which , as yet are none of
the highest ; in which they continue 'till their Merit , or Interest ,
fits them to receive the Second Degree , or Order ; namely , The <font>
Evangelii <$$font> , ROBERTS-1726-2,407.97

and then they have Liberty to read and peruse the Liturgy ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,407.98

and may officiate in assisting the Mass-Priest , by reading the Epistles
and Gospels . ROBERTS-1726-2,407.99

<P_408>

The <font> Graduate <$$font> then makes all the Interest he can to
obtain the Third , and highest Degree , which is the <font> Missal
<$$font> Order ; before the Receiving of which , he is again sworn in
the most solemn Manner , to continue constant and obedient to Holy
Church , submitting to , and believing every thing commanded by her , as
likewise to keep secret all the Mysteries of Religion , not allowed by
Holy Church to be exposed to the Secularity and , without Doubt , much
more than can be expected any of them would declare to me : after which
, their chief Business is to make Interest for a Benefice as soon as
they can . ROBERTS-1726-2,408.101

These Blacks being , for the most Part , homebred , and ignorant Men ,
after they have been brought up to that Function , take great Care not
to commit any Crime , that would expose them to the Danger of the
Inquisition , or the Bishop's Displeasure , either of which , would be
sufficient to ruin them being prepossess'd with a Notion , that if they
were to flee away , they could expect no Reception in a foreign Land ,
especially in <font> Europe <$$font> , among Christians <paren> <font>
i.e. <$$font> Roman-Catholicks <$$paren> and that if they were to go to
the Hereticks , they must eternally be damned in the future State , and
certainly be Slaves during this Life . ROBERTS-1726-2,408.102

These Notions having imbib'd themselves , they take all Opportunities to
perswade their Auditors to the same Opinion , and to inculcate into the
poor People's Minds , that all those that are out of the Communion of
the Church of Rome , are certainly , as long as they so continue , in a
reprobate State ; and to make them the more odious , deny them the very
Name of Christians , insomuch , that many of their Priests , and most of
their People , believe , that even Baptism , which is , as it were , the
entering and registering a Man into that holy Community , is us'd by no
People <P_409> in the World , save the <font> Romish <$$font> Church
only : ROBERTS-1726-2,409.103

And , indeed , 't@ @is usual , both with Clergy and Laity , not only in
these Islands , where they know nothing but what they are taught , by
those who make it a great Part of their Study , to render the Reform'd
Religion as odious as the Mahometan ; ROBERTS-1726-2,409.104

but even in <font> Spain <$$font> and <font> Portugal <$$font> , if they
put the Question whether you are a Protestant or Roman , they ask ,
<font> If you are a Christian ? <$$font> which , they think , you can@
@not be , if you are not a Roman . ROBERTS-1726-2,409.105

This Island of St. <font> Jago <$$font> , on the South-East End , is
flat Land , ROBERTS-1726-2,409.106

but all the rest , except <font> Campo de Terra-fall <$$font> , is
mostly mountainous ; ROBERTS-1726-2,409.107

the highest is <font> Peek Antonio <$$font> , which is near the Middle
of the Island , and may be seen above the rest of the Mountains on
either Side of the Island , at the Distance of three or four Leagues off
; at a less Distance than which , the other Mountains intercept your
Sight . ROBERTS-1726-2,409.108

The high Hill of <font> Terra-fall <$$font> , if to the Eastward or
Westward of the Island , at the first making , shews like an Island ,
till you run nigh enough to raise the Low Land . ROBERTS-1726-2,409.109

The most noted Port for Shipping about this Island , is <font> Porto
Praya <$$font> ; which lies about the South-West Point of the Island ,
and is easy to be known by the Town and Fortification on a pretty high
flat Land , in the Middle of the Bay , and a Valley in each Side ,
making a pleasant Prospect : , diversify'd with Cocoa-Nut Trees , and
Palm Trees . ROBERTS-1726-2,409.110

There is an Island on the North-West Side of the Bay , behind which a
small Vessel may ride safer , as well smoother , than in the open Bay ;
which , however , is very large and clean , ROBERTS-1726-2,409.111

and you may ride in it from fifteen , to five or six Fathom , in clean
Sandy Ground , and in some Places Clay ; ROBERTS-1726-2,409.112

but within that Depth , till you come into three <P_410> Fathom , it is
tough Owse ; and within that Depth Sand again . ROBERTS-1726-2,410.113

About two Leagues from <font> Praya <$$font> , West-North-West , lies
<font> Cal-yete St. Martin <$$font> , which , if you are design'd to go
into , you must take a Black on Board at <font> Porto Praya <$$font> to
shew you the Land , there being nothing to hurt you but what you may see
. ROBERTS-1726-2,410.114

It@ @'s a narrow Cove , not above half a Cable's Length broad ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,410.115

and runs in from the Westermost Point about a Quarter of a Mile ; having
within about 16 or 18 Foot Water . ROBERTS-1726-2,410.116

You moor with an Anchor off , and a Stern-fast ashore to a Tree in the
Middle of the Beach , which is full of small Stones .
ROBERTS-1726-2,410.117

You may lie secure here all the rainy Season , ROBERTS-1726-2,410.118

and here you may Water also . ROBERTS-1726-2,410.119

It is about four Miles to the City by Land from this Place
ROBERTS-1726-2,410.120

and there is not much ascending or descending in the Journey ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,410.121

but the Way is very stony . ROBERTS-1726-2,410.122

The City lies about a League to the North-Westward , in a very ordinary
Road , being so very foul , that it@ @'s much but you cut your Cable ,
if you lie any Time ; or , if you miss that , you may probably so hook
your Anchor in the Rocks , that ten to one but you leave it behind you .
ROBERTS-1726-2,410.123

There have several Vessels been lost in this Road , which is the Reason
that of late few Ships go there , unless by chance a <font> Portuguese
<$$font> ; though formerly some of the <font> Dutch East India <$$font>
Ships have touch'd there for Refreshment and for Water , which runs into
the Sea there ; ROBERTS-1726-2,410.124

but for several Years past , <font> Porto Praya <$$font> hath been only
us'd , where is good Watering also . ROBERTS-1726-2,410.125

<font> Rivera de Plata <$$font> is a very good Bay , all over clean
Ground , where you may anchor in what Depth you please , from three and
a half to twelve or fourteen Fathom Water , ROBERTS-1726-2,410.126

and is a better Place <P_411> to water at than <font> Porto Praya
<$$font> , the Water running down to the Sea-side , where you may roll
{TEXT:rowl} your Cask into the River , and fill your Water at the Bung ,
without using Bucket or Funnel . ROBERTS-1726-2,411.127

You may have all Sorts of Refreshment at this Bay , as Fruit , Roots ,
Fowls , Goats , and Cows , much cheaper than you can buy them either at
<font> Porto Praya <$$font> , or the City ; ROBERTS-1726-2,411.128

and I have known when a Cow has been sold at <font> Porto Praya <$$font>
for eight Dollars , which is 6000 Reas , that a much better has been
sold at <font> Rivera de Plata <$$font> for 2500 Reas ; and when Maiz
has been sold at <font> Porto Praya <$$font> for 400 , it has , at the
same Time , been sold there for 200 Reas . ROBERTS-1726-2,411.129

<font> Terra-fall <$$font> is the next considerable Port , which ,
although it@ @'s a good Road when in , except in the shifting Winds
Season , yet it@ @'s very troublesome to turn up into , and a Place that
yields no Commodities for Trade . ROBERTS-1726-2,411.130

The next is <font> Porto Faciendo <$$font> , which is a fair large Bay ,
being clean , thwart the Beach , from ten to four Fathom Water .
ROBERTS-1726-2,411.131

You may also fill Water here ; ROBERTS-1726-2,411.132

but this Part of the Island being mostly Pasture Land , you can have
little other Refreshment , save Goats and Cows , which you may have as
cheap as on any Part of the Island . ROBERTS-1726-2,411.133

I remember I bought a young Bull , about two Years and half old , for an
old Shirt , which was not worth Sixpence in <font> England . <$$font>
ROBERTS-1726-2,411.134

You may have Monkeys here , and on all Parts of this Island which of all
the <font> Cape de Verd <$$font> Islands alone produces that Creature .
ROBERTS-1726-2,411.135

There are several Coves and little Bays betwixt this Road and the <font>
Bickude <$$font> , which is the Northermost : Point of St. <font> Jago
<$$font> ; ROBERTS-1726-2,411.136

but the Place is not only barren and uninhabited , but dangerous to
venture in , the Coast all along being rocky , some under , <P_412>
othersome above Water ; ROBERTS-1726-2,412.137

but do@ @n't lie above a Mile off from the Shore .
ROBERTS-1726-2,412.138

After you are about the <font> Bickude <$$font> , the Coast runs to the
Southward of <font> Porto sine Nome <$$font> , which I shall pass by any
farther Description of , as having had occasion to mention it before .
ROBERTS-1726-2,412.139

The next Bay is <font> Porto Formosa <$$font> , which is a fair Bay ,
being mud up at the Head of it round the Point , where a small Shallop
might lie Landlock'd from all Winds ; ROBERTS-1726-2,412.140

but not being convenient for Trade , I pass to the next Port ; which is
St. <font> Jago <$$font> ; which is remarkable enough to be known ,
there being a Church , the Outside of which is whited with Lime , and
cover'd with red Pantiles , and stands upon a rising Ground , and
therefore seen at a great Distance . ROBERTS-1726-2,412.141

It@ @'s thwart the Middle of the Bay , ROBERTS-1726-2,412.142

and has a Valley both on the South and North Side of the Church , well
planted with Cocoa-Nut and Palm Trees . ROBERTS-1726-2,412.143

The Bay is clean sandy Ground , ROBERTS-1726-2,412.144

and a Ship may safely anchor in ten or twelve Fathom Water .
ROBERTS-1726-2,412.145

A little to the Northward of the Church there commonly runs a great Sea
along Shore , which is sandy . ROBERTS-1726-2,412.146

This is one of the plentifullest Places on St. <font> Jago <$$font> ,
for whatsoever Things the Island produces ; ROBERTS-1726-2,412.147

and the People are very free , somewhat like the Temper of those of the
Isle of <font> St. John's . <$$font> ROBERTS-1726-2,412.148

South-by-East , about two or three Miles , lies the <font> Porto Madera
: <$$font> ROBERTS-1726-2,412.149

It@ @'s narrow going in , being not above a large Stone's-cast wide ,
between two rocky Points ; but steep too on both Sides , having nine ,
eight , seven , six Fathom Water in ; ROBERTS-1726-2,412.150

and after you are shot in about the Northermost Point , you have four ,
and further in , three Fathom and half . ROBERTS-1726-2,412.151

You are then Landlock'd for all Winds , ROBERTS-1726-2,412.152

and can see no Sea , ROBERTS-1726-2,412.153

and may secure a Ship of three_hundred Tons with a three Inch Rope ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,412.154

for <P_413> let the Wind blow which Way it will , you have very little
when in . ROBERTS-1726-2,413.155

Its Bottom is Sand , mixt with Clay ; ROBERTS-1726-2,413.156

but higher up it@ @'s soft Mud : ROBERTS-1726-2,413.157

It is a very good Harbour , when in , and neither dangerous , nor
difficult , there being nothing to hurt you going in ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,413.158

so you do@ @n't run ashore against the Rocks : ROBERTS-1726-2,413.159

It@ @'s difficult for a Stranger to find it , because one Point locks or
shuts in the other so , that you ca@ @n't perceive the Harbour till you
are past it , nor any thing remarkable enough to know it by :
ROBERTS-1726-2,413.160

The only way for a Stranger to run into it , would be , to take in one
of the Natives on Board at St. <font> Jago <$$font> , to shew him the
Port . ROBERTS-1726-2,413.161

There are several Bays betwixt <font> Porto Madera <$$font> and <font>
Porto Lobo <$$font> , but a little dangerous , having many sunken Rocks
lying along the Coast , but not any farther off the Shore than one Mile
, ROBERTS-1726-2,413.162

neither are they fit for Ships to ride in . ROBERTS-1726-2,413.163

<font> Porto Lobo <$$font> is a very safe Harbour , when in , for all
Winds : ROBERTS-1726-2,413.164

The Entrance is but narrow , not above half a Cable's Length broad ,
with several sunken Rocks lying on each Side of the Entrance , which
makes it too dangerous to venture into it without a Pilot , or unless a
Man had been in before : ROBERTS-1726-2,413.165

When you are in , it shews as if you were got into a Bason or Lake ,
being about three Quarters of a Mile every way ; ROBERTS-1726-2,413.166

but you have not above twelve or fourteen Foot Water within , except
under the Northermost Point , where you have eighteen or twenty Foot .
ROBERTS-1726-2,413.167

It@ @'s all muddy Ground till you run up to the Bottom of the Lake ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,413.168

and then it is Sand . ROBERTS-1726-2,413.169

A little to the Northward of <font> Porto Lobo <$$font> , the
mountainous Land of the Island of St. <font> Jago <$$font> terminates ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,413.170

and , except some Hills , is flat ; yet mostly high champion Land down
to <font> Porto Praya . <$$font> ROBERTS-1726-2,413.171

<P_414>

Betwixt <font> Porto Lobo <$$font> and <font> Praya <$$font> is the Road
of St. <font> Francisco <$$font> ; which is a fair sandy Bay , with
Cocoa_Nut and Palm Trees in the Valley , but is foul Ground in most
Places of the Bay ; ROBERTS-1726-2,414.173

neither is there any fresh Water there nigh the Sea .
ROBERTS-1726-2,414.174

About a League to the South-Westward from St. <font> Francisco <$$font>
, is a Cove call'd <font> Portet <$$font> , being a good Road for
Shallops , or small Vessels , but not fit for great Ships ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,414.175

There lies a sunken Rock about two thirds on the Starboard Side going in
. ROBERTS-1726-2,414.176

The next Road is <font> Porto Praya <$$font> , which was describ'd
before . ROBERTS-1726-2,414.177

There is Abundance of that Marchasite which the <font> Portuguese
<$$font> call <font> Beur d'ore <$$font> some of which is a little
transparent , and othersome more opake , being in the Shade of a dark
blueish or purple Colour ; but when the Sun-beams are reflected upon it
, casts a golden glistering Colour ; ROBERTS-1726-2,414.178

and I have heard some Gentlemen , who had resided some time in several
Parts of <font> Brasil <$$font> , and were conversant with People
concern'd in the Mines there , say , It was an infallible Sign of a Gold
Mine , where-ever any great Quantity of that <font> Beur d'ore <$$font>
was ; ROBERTS-1726-2,414.179

and likewise told me , That the said purplish Marchasite , if ground
fine , and mix'd with Oil , made any thing painted with it , look as if
it had been gilded ; which Experiment I never try'd .
ROBERTS-1726-2,414.180

The finest Red that ever I saw , was on this Island , in a Hill on the
North Part of St. <font> Jago <$$font> : ROBERTS-1726-2,414.181

It was much after the Manner of the Chalk in <font> England <$$font> ,
but softer ; ROBERTS-1726-2,414.182

and when I scrap'd some of it with a Knife , it felt as fine as the
finest Flower : ROBERTS-1726-2,414.183

It run {COM:sic} in Veins , ROBERTS-1726-2,414.184

and next to the deep , yet lively Red , run {COM:sic} a Vein of a
fainter Red , then a Vein yet fainter , next to that a Flesh Colour ,
then a Sort of Yellow , then a Yellow much of the Colour of common
Brimstone , after , or above that , variously colour'd ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,414.185

and so grew harder , the farther from the Red , till it came to the
Hardness of a common Rock . ROBERTS-1726-2,414.186

The red Stone was something heavier than Chalk . ROBERTS-1726-2,414.187

I had a Piece of that , and some of the <font> Beur d'ore <$$font> ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,414.188

but when I lost my Boat at St. <font> Nicholas <$$font> , I lost them ,
with several other Curiosities of the like Nature .
ROBERTS-1726-2,414.189

<heading>

<font> The Island of St. <$$font> Philip . ROBERTS-1726-2,414.191

<$$heading>

The Island of St. <font> Philip <$$font> , commonly call'd by the Name
of the Island of <font> Fogo <$$font> , or <font> Fire <$$font> , lies
about 16 Leagues from St. <font> Jago , viz. <$$font> from the Point
of <font> Terra-fall <$$font> , to the North-East Point of St. <font>
Philip <$$font> 's , ROBERTS-1726-2,414.193

and they bear West-South-West and East-North-East , being in the
Latitude of 15@ @=o= - 20 ' North , and Longitude <font> 6@ @=o= - 54 '
<$$font> West from the <font> Cape de Verd . <$$font>
ROBERTS-1726-2,414.194

This Island was discover'd by the <font> Portuguese <$$font> , the same
Day that the Isle of <font> May <$$font> and St. <font> Jago <$$font>
were , <font> viz. <$$font> the 1st Day of <font> May <$$font> ; so
that the Isle of <font> May <$$font> bore the Name of the Month , and
the other two the Name of the two Saints , whose Commemoration is
observ'd on that Day . ROBERTS-1726-2,414.195

This Island was uninhabited a great many Years after it was discover'd ,
till the King of <font> Portugal <$$font> granted to his Subjects , who
would people it , all the Land that they improv'd , to them and their
Heirs for ever . ROBERTS-1726-2,414.196

The Natives have a Tradition , which how true I shall not undertake to
determine , but is by them believ'd as undoubted Fact , that the first
Dwellers upon this Island were two Friars {TEXT:Fryers} , who chose to
be <P_416> put here to pass the Remainder of their Days in a hermitick
Life . ROBERTS-1726-2,416.197

Whether these two Fryers were Mineralists , Metalists , or Alchymists ,
or any , or all of them , I ca@ @n't tell ; ROBERTS-1726-2,416.198

but the Story goes they were Conjurers ; ROBERTS-1726-2,416.199

<paren> You must know when this Island was first discover'd , it had no
Peek , ROBERTS-1726-2,416.200

nor was there any burning upon it , the Peek growing but since the Fire
broke out ; ROBERTS-1726-2,416.201

and , by Report of the ancient People , hath sensibly increas'd within
their Times <$$paren> ROBERTS-1726-2,416.202

but whatever the Fryers were , they found a Gold Mine ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,416.203

and there took up their hermitical Abode ; ROBERTS-1726-2,416.204

and after they had got as much of that precious Metal as they thought
sufficient , they concluded to put an End to a hermitick Life , and take
the first Opportunity of a Ship to <font> Europe <$$font> :
ROBERTS-1726-2,416.205

But one of them , who suppos'd himself the Master , requir'd more than
half to his Share , which the other by no Means would grant ; whereupon
the Contest grew so high , that they fell to conjuring to do each other
a Mischief ; and conjur'd so long , that they set almost all the Island
in a Flame , in which they both perish'd ; after which the Fire went out
, except where the Peek now stands , which ever since hath continu'd to
burn and cast up Stones till this Day , ROBERTS-1726-2,416.206

and God knows how long it may continue . ROBERTS-1726-2,416.207

Indeed it is almost incredible to believe the vast Rocks which are cast
out , and to what a vast Height ; the Fall of which again , and their
breaking and rowling down , may very easily be heard eight or nine
Leagues in a still Air , ROBERTS-1726-2,416.208

and this my own Ears confirm'd to me . ROBERTS-1726-2,416.209

When they are blown up , you may hear a Report like a great Gun , or
rather Thunder . ROBERTS-1726-2,416.210

In the Night-time I have seen the Stones rowling down the Peek all of a
Flame , ROBERTS-1726-2,416.211

and the Inhabitants say , that they have seen Brimstone run down the
Peek like <P_417> a Torrent of Water down a steep Mountain ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,417.212

and sometimes may gather what Quantity they please .
ROBERTS-1726-2,417.213

I have had several Pieces of it , which the Inhabitants gave me :
ROBERTS-1726-2,417.214

It is like our Vulgar Brimstone , but of a much brighter Colour ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,417.215

and , in the burning , gives a brighter Flame . ROBERTS-1726-2,417.216

Sometimes this Vulcano heaves out such Quantities of Ashes , mix'd with
Cinders , that it covers the adjacent Parts , and hath smother'd some of
their Goats . ROBERTS-1726-2,417.217

The Island is much higher than any of the <font> Cape de Verd <$$font>
Islands , ROBERTS-1726-2,417.218

and is , as it were , one continu'd Mountain up to the Top ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,417.219

neither as you sail along it , can you perceive any Vallies , but , as
it were , one single Mountain , the Vallies appearing only as Gutters
made by the Waters running {TEXT:runing} off the Mountain in the Rains ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,417.220

but when a Man is ashore , and in one of those Gutters , they then
appear to be deep Vallies , and the Banks of those Gutters great high
Mountains . ROBERTS-1726-2,417.221

This Island , considering that it hath no running Brooks , and that it
is but in very few Places that fresh Water is to be had , insomuch ,
that the Inhabitants are forced , in some Parts , to go six or seven
Miles for their Water ; yet it@ @'s very fertile , for Pompion ,
Water-Melon , Feshoon , and Maiz ; ROBERTS-1726-2,417.222

but for want of Water , or low Vallies , produces no Banana's ,
Plantanes , or hardly any Tree-Fruit , save Wild Figs .
ROBERTS-1726-2,417.223

They have some few Guava Trees planted in some of their Gardens , also a
Crab Orange and Lemon , likewise Lime , and a Sort of Crab Apple ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,417.224

but they have here and there some good Vineyards , whereof they make
little Quantities of an indifferent good small Wine , something like the
white <font> Fyal <$$font> Wine ; ROBERTS-1726-2,417.225

but they generally <P_418> drink it all before it clears , or has done
fermenting . ROBERTS-1726-2,418.226

This Island was inhabited by <font> European Portuguese <$$font> , some
time after the Fire had been extinguish'd , except that of the Peek ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,418.227

and had the Land , by the Crown Gift , settled to them and their Heirs ,
as has been said ; which <font> Portuguese <$$font> brought Negro Slaves
with them , and a Stock of Cows , Horses , Asses , and Hogs ; the King
placing Goats there , which run wild on the Mountains ; the Profit of
their Skins being reserv'd to the Crown , ROBERTS-1726-2,418.228

and he that hath the Management of them , is call'd <font> Captain of
the Mountains <$$font> , none daring to kill any of them but by his
Licence . ROBERTS-1726-2,418.229

The Land is all taken up at present , only about the Peek , and that
great high Mountain which runs along South-East and North-West , and is
little inferior in Height {TEXT:Heighth} to the Peek , and where , at
present , those wild Goats haunt , and is the Limits of the <font>
Capiteen de Mountainbu's <$$font> Jurisdiction . ROBERTS-1726-2,418.230

The Customs of St. <font> Jago <$$font> are in use here <font> , viz.
<$$font> to free Blacks at their Death , ROBERTS-1726-2,418.231

and perhaps some manumitted Blacks might settle there from St. <font>
Jago <$$font> ; ROBERTS-1726-2,418.232

but however it was , they at present exceed the Whites a_hundred to one
. ROBERTS-1726-2,418.233

It@ @'s probable , when Trade decay'd , some of them might leave the
Island , as they had done at St. <font> Jago . <$$font>
ROBERTS-1726-2,418.234

They planted Cotton in abundance ; ROBERTS-1726-2,418.235

and this was the greatest Mart for Cotton Cloths of any of the <font>
Cape de Verd <$$font> Islands ; ROBERTS-1726-2,418.236

and here the <font> Portuguese European <$$font> Ships us'd to trade for
Cargoes of Barafools for <font> Guinea . <$$font>
ROBERTS-1726-2,418.237

The free Blacks , for the most Part , are Tenants to the Whites , who
have taken up most of the Land , especially near the Sea ; some Whites
having thirty or forty Slaves , ROBERTS-1726-2,418.238

and some of the free Blacks have Slaves , <P_419> which they purchase
for Cotton Cloths , which pass there in the room of Money , a Cloth
being valu'd , and passing current among them for 1000 Reas ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,419.239

but by the last Drought , all their Cotton Shrubs , in a Manner , were
dry'd up , so that that Cotton , which was before the chief Product of
their Island , is now a good Commodity to carry there :
ROBERTS-1726-2,419.240

And this Scarcity of Cotton here , and at St. <font> Jago <$$font> ,
and the <font> European Portuguese <$$font> understanding that the
<font> French <$$font> Ships , which traded there formerly , used to buy
those Cloths , as did likewise the <font> French <$$font> and <font>
English <$$font> at St. <font> Jago <$$font> , they procur'd an Order ,
with a Penalty on any one on those Islands , who sold Cloth to any but
Subjects of <font> Portugal <$$font> ; which Order is strictly observ'd
by the Officers of the Customs at St. <font> Jago <$$font> , tho' not
much minded here , by Reason there are no Duties paid at this Island ,
and consequently no Custom-house , or Office . ROBERTS-1726-2,419.241

Since the Trade of Cotton Cloths fail'd , they have sold a great many
Slaves to the <font> Portuguese <$$font> Ships trading there ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,419.242

but they are endeavouring to revive this Branch again , by planting
Cotton ; tho' , for want of a Sufficiency of Rain , it does not thrive
so well as it us'd to do . ROBERTS-1726-2,419.243

They us'd also to have a pretty good Trade with the <font> French
<$$font> for Mules , which they bred in good Quantities , and sold cheap
; ROBERTS-1726-2,419.244

but the dry Seasons destroy'd them almost all , so that they told me ,
that six Years ago , there were but two Mules on the Island :
ROBERTS-1726-2,419.245

but they have lately began to breed them again , ROBERTS-1726-2,419.246

and mightily wish some <font> European <$$font> Ships would come and
trade with them for them ; ROBERTS-1726-2,419.247

but whether it be that the <font> French <$$font> have found a better
Place to trade , or that their Islands in the <font> West-Indies
<$$font> do not require them now so much as formerly , or that they do
not yet know that they can be supply'd as heretofore , I ca@ @n't
<P_420> tell ; ROBERTS-1726-2,420.248

but since they have fail'd of Mules , there has been no <font> French
<$$font> Ship there to trade . ROBERTS-1726-2,420.249

They have a great Desire to trade with the <font> English <$$font> ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,420.250

and would , they say , reserve their Commodities for them
ROBERTS-1726-2,420.251

and notwithstanding the Prohibition of not selling Cotton Cloths to
Foreigners , yet they say if the <font> English <$$font> would trade
there , they would sell their Cloths to them . ROBERTS-1726-2,420.252

This Island is clean on the North-West , West , and South Parts ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,420.253

but on the South-East , East , and North-East Parts is rocky ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,420.254

tho' these Rocks do not lie above a Mile from the Shore , neither do
they lie thick , but here and there one , some above , and some under
Water , except one Rock , which lieth about four Miles off from the
North End of the Island , having , as I have been inform'd , twelve or
fourteen Foot Water on it . ROBERTS-1726-2,420.255

I have seen the Sea break over it , when it blew hard , else not .
ROBERTS-1726-2,420.256

It@ @'s not large , ROBERTS-1726-2,420.257

and is clean all round it . ROBERTS-1726-2,420.258

This Island hath not many Places to anchor at , and but two where you
can trade ; ROBERTS-1726-2,420.259

for at the rest , you can@ @not get up the Rocks ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,420.260

for it@ @'s all , except the <font> Villa La-Ghate <$$font> , and two or
three other Places on the Sea-coast , such steep high rocky Clifts ,
that you can@ @not get up any where else . ROBERTS-1726-2,420.261

The most noted Road is <font> Fonte de Villa <$$font> , which is right
against the Town , and is sandy , except when a strong North Wind blows
, which often sweeps or scours away the Sand , and leaves the Rocks at
Bottom bare , which is about <font> November , December <$$font> , and
<font> January <$$font> , ROBERTS-1726-2,420.262

and then 't@ @is not so safe riding as about the Point of <font> Nossa
Signora {TEXT:Singora} <$$font> , which is a sandy Point , to the
Southward of the Town ; to the Southward of which , on the Clift , is
the Church ; of <font> Nossa Singora <$$font> , from which the Bay and
Point took their Name . ROBERTS-1726-2,420.263

Here is good riding for a Northerly Wind , and better when the true
North-East <P_421> or North-East-by-North Trade Winds blow , being clean
and sandy at Bottom , except when a southerly Wind blows strong , or
sometimes by a southerly Sea , which now and then runs here in the
Months of <font> June , July , August <$$font> , and <font> September
<$$font> , when those Winds do not reach home to the Island , tho' , I
believe , they blow in the Offing , which sweep away the Sand , and
leave the Rocks bare at Bottom , as the Northerly Wind and Sea do at
<font> Fonte de Villa . <$$font> ROBERTS-1726-2,421.264

You may anchor in both those Roads , from 14 to 10 Fathom Water , in
clean sandy Ground , except in the Cases before mention'd .
ROBERTS-1726-2,421.265

More Southerly there is a little sandy Bay about a small Point of low
broken Rocks , and right against a Gully made by the Water running down
in the Time of the Rains : ROBERTS-1726-2,421.266

Here is smooth riding , as well as landing , the Surf {TEXT:Surff}
running but little here ; ROBERTS-1726-2,421.267

and you have Water pretty near , which you have not at the other two
Places ; ROBERTS-1726-2,421.268

and the Sea generally runs there with a great Swell on the Shore .
ROBERTS-1726-2,421.269

You must anchor right off the Gully , having it fair open ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,421.270

for if you shut it either to the Northward , or Southward , and anchor
so , you will have foul Ground ; ROBERTS-1726-2,421.271

neither is there Room for above two Ships to anchor there at once .
ROBERTS-1726-2,421.272

The chief and only Man for Trade there , is Captain <font> Thome Santee
<$$font> ; ROBERTS-1726-2,421.273

but there is not one on the Island , that can either speak or understand
<font> English . <$$font> ROBERTS-1726-2,421.274

They are on this Island all Roman_Catholicks
{COM:font_change_around_"Roman"} , ROBERTS-1726-2,421.275

yet have some Pagan Superstitions mingled with the Romish , by the
Mountaineer Blacks . ROBERTS-1726-2,421.276

Most of the Whites , with the Governor , live in the Villa ; tho' most
of them have their Country Houses abroad in the Country , on that Part
of their Estates which they keep in their own Hands , and manage by
their Slaves , which supplies them <P_422> with Food ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,422.277

and the Rents of those Plantations which they let to the Blacks , are
commonly paid in Cotton Cloths , which , as was said before , are used
there in the Stead of Money , as Tobacco was formerly wholly , and now
partly , in <font> Virginia <$$font> , and <font> Maryland <$$font> ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,422.278

and since their Cotton Shrubs were dried up , and for the most Part
perished , the Owners were forced to fill those Plantations with Hogs ,
Fowls , or what other Animals the Blacks could raise .
ROBERTS-1726-2,422.279

<heading>

<font> The Island of St. <$$font> John , <$$heading> Lieth in the
Latitude of 15@ @=o= - 25 ' North , and Longitude 7@ @=o= - 2 ' West ,
from the <font> Cape de Verd <$$font> , ROBERTS-1726-2,422.281

and the Villa of St. <font> Philip <$$font> , lies from <font> Fuurno ,
East about Six Leagues . ROBERTS-1726-2,422.282

I have mentioned a great many Things of this Island before ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,422.283

and to avoid Tautology , shall only take Notice here of such Things as I
omitted before . ROBERTS-1726-2,422.284

This Island is as fertile for Pompion , Water-Melon , Potatoes , Bananas
, Maiz , and Feshoon , as any of the <font> Cape de Verd <$$font>
Islands ; as likewise for Cows , Horses , Asses , and Hogs .
ROBERTS-1726-2,422.285

With respect to the Inhabitants , who do not reach to the Number of
Two_hundred Souls , the Natives are all black , and the most innocent
and harmless , as well as ignorant and superstitious , of all the
Islands . ROBERTS-1726-2,422.286

<P_423>

This Island hath not been inhabited above Two Ages , which might be the
Reason of giving it the Name of the Island of <font> Brava <$$font> , or
<font> wild Island <$$font> ; ROBERTS-1726-2,423.288

for <font> Brava <$$font> , both in the <font> Portuguese <$$font> and
<font> Creole <$$font> Tongue , signifies <font> wild . <$$font>
ROBERTS-1726-2,423.289

It was , for several Years , only inhabited by Two black Families , who
lived wholly in Heathenism , till , about Sixty Years past , a Famine
raging {TEXT:rageing} at St. <font> Philip <$$font> 's , some of the
poorer Sort of Blacks procured themselves to be put on the Island of St.
<font> John <$$font> , by a <font> Portuguese <$$font> Ship , who were
joyfully received , as well as relieved , by their Fellow Blacks the
first Inhabitants , who having much increased the Stock of Goats , Cows
, and especially Hogs , which the <font> Portuguese <$$font> had placed
on all the Islands when they first discovered them , those first
Inhabitants , understanding the <font> Portuguese <$$font> brought their
Fellow Blacks from St. <font> Philip <$$font> 's , purely out of
Compassion to prevent their being starved , freely offered to load the
Ship with Hogs , as a Reward for their Charity ; which so thinned their
Hogs , that by the Time the Ship was loaden , they had but few left ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,423.290

and so they catched and killed , or tamed the Remainder .
ROBERTS-1726-2,423.291

These Blacks which came from St. <font> Philip's <$$font> , soon begot
in them the Notion of Property ; so that he that could kill , catch , or
tame most , had most ; ROBERTS-1726-2,423.292

and soon reduced all the Cattle on the Island to <font> Meum_and_Tuum
<$$font> {COM:font_change_around_"and"} , except the Goats , which , to
this Day , remain wild ; but are claimed as the Property of the Lord of
the Soil , as are all the wild Goats on the Islands .
ROBERTS-1726-2,423.293

After these Blacks had been some Time settled on this Island , the St.
<font> Philip <$$font> 's Merchants having a large Boat , managed by a
<font> Portuguese <$$font> Sailor , whom they had hired , and used to
send to St. <font> Jago <$$font> with Cotton Cloths , when the <font>
Portuguese <$$font> Ships missed coming to trade there ; one of <P_424>
the Priests of St. <font> Philip's <$$font> , out of a Godly Romish
Zeal , to try what he could pick up among the poor Shepherdless Blacks
at St. <font> John's <$$font> , got the Proprietors of the Boat to lend
her with him over thither , ROBERTS-1726-2,424.294

and he making known the pious Occasion of his coming , and his Power of
pardoning their Sins , and thereby sending them easily , and yet
certainly , to Heaven , let their Actions be never so bad and the
Impossibility of their going thither , let their Actions be never so
good , without a Sacerdotal or Priestly Admittance by Absolution ; and a
great Part of these Notions being also instilled into those first
Inhabitants , by their Brother Blacks , who lately came from St. <font>
Philip's <$$font> , the pious Padre had little more to do , than to
baptize them as they were , without instructing them much further in the
Principles of Religion , it being sufficient to believe that they were
Christians by their Baptism , and , that they were sure to go to Heaven
, and , at the Resurrection , to be changed white , <font> &c. <$$font>
ROBERTS-1726-2,424.295

and so he mumbled over a Mass , which neither they that heard it , nor
he that read it , understood ; whereby he got what he went for ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,424.296

for those Blacks which came from <font> Fogo <$$font> , or St. <font>
Philip's <$$font> , having taught the others how to spin Cotton , which
naturally grew there , and to wear it <paren> they before going stark
naked , as most of the Negroes on the Coast of <font> Guinea <$$font> do
<$$paren> the Reverend Padre got Cloths of those that had them , and
single Breadths from others , Cotton Thread , or Yarn , from others ,
Cotton from those that neither had spun nor wove , and from others
Indigo , which likeways then grew common , though it does not now ; from
others Hogs , Fowls , <font> &c. <$$font> the good pious Padre refusing
nothing that was brought him , which he thought worth receiving ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,424.297

and when he had got as much as he thought he could well manage <P_425>
to get back in the Boat , he took his Leave of them ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,425.298

and prepared for his Return the poor deluded Souls waiting on him down
to the <font> Fuurno <$$font> , where his Boat lay ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,425.299

and he , in Return of their Kindness , freely gave them a parting Mass
in a Cave there , which , ever since , goes by the Name of <font> Fuurno
de Padre . <$$font> ROBERTS-1726-2,425.300

Accordingly he took his Leave of them , telling them , <font> That what
they had given was to God , and that he was God's Steward , or Receiver
<$$font> ; ROBERTS-1726-2,425.301

and , indeed , not only there , but in all the rest of the Islands , the
People are persuaded , that whatever is given to the Priest , is given
to God , unless they particularly dedicate it to some Saint , in which
Case , they think they lay an Obligation on the Saint to whom they make
the Present , to stand their Friend ; and for which Saints , the Priests
are also the Receivers , as well as of God : ROBERTS-1726-2,425.302

He promised , however , to return again , to give them a further
Absolution for what Sins they should commit in his Absence ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,425.303

and so he returned laden home , ROBERTS-1726-2,425.304

and visited them yearly , or as often as he could , or found it would
answer ; 'till after some Years , as he was giving his Benediction , and
saying a Mass for them in the afore-mentioned Cave , having not above
Thirty Auditors <paren> for it seems they began to suspect , for all
their Ignorance , that the principal Motive of his pretended Piety , was
Avarice , and therefore did not now so universally attend him down to
the Boat , as at first <$$paren> the Cave fell in , where the pious
Padre remains with all his Auditors , without being able to finish his
Mass , 'till this Day . ROBERTS-1726-2,425.305

They were heard groaning for Three Days after ; ROBERTS-1726-2,425.306

but the Rocks and great Stones which fell in , and stopped their coming
forth , could not be moved to let them out ; ROBERTS-1726-2,425.307

and it was happy for the rest of the Inhabitants , that their Zeal was
not <P_426> so vehement as at first ; ROBERTS-1726-2,426.308

for had they been all there , the same Fate would have befallen them ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,426.309

and the whole Island must have been intirely depopulated .
ROBERTS-1726-2,426.310

The Boat-Men perceiving their pious Master fixed , and no Possibility of
his coming forth , made the best of their Way home , where they gave the
doleful Account of <font> Signore {TEXT:Singore} Padre's <$$font> , and
his most zealous Auditors Imprisonment ; ROBERTS-1726-2,426.311

and so the black Flock of the Island of St. <font> Johns <$$font> ,
remained without an absolving Pastor for several Years , which gave them
such an Opportunity of mingling the <font> Pagan <$$font> and <font>
Romish <$$font> Superstitions so radically <paren> making good that ,
old Chymical Axiom , <font> that Like easily unites and incorporates
with its Like <$$paren> <$$font> that to this Day they remain
unseparated . ROBERTS-1726-2,426.312

Some Years after , the King of <font> Portugal <$$font> sent a Ship at
his own Charge , to carry the Bishop , <font> &c. <$$font> round the
Islands , as well as all the Coast of <font> Guinea <$$font> , for a
general Visitation , who , out of his most reverend Piety , placed a
Fellow there to be Priest ; ROBERTS-1726-2,426.313

and when I was there , the then Priest was the Fourth ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,426.314

and , I do@ @n't doubt , was a Patern of his Predecessors ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,426.315

or , it might be , exceeded them in Learning ; ROBERTS-1726-2,426.316

for he could make shift to read in his old Missal Book , which , I
suppose , the Reverend Bishop gave him when ordained to that Function ,
which he calls and believes to be the <font> Scriptura sagrade <$$font>
<paren> <font> i.e. <$$font> Holy Scriptures <$$paren> and told me so
himself ; ROBERTS-1726-2,426.317

and when I told him , that it was not , but that that Appellation was
alone given to the Bible ; his Answer was <paren> for I had told him
before , that my Country was separated from the <font> Romish <$$font>
Communion , on Account of the Tenets they held in Contradiction of the
undoubted Word of God <$$paren> <font> That to us the Bible might be the
best Book that we had , because it was certain , <P_427> that when we
apostatized from the Holy Catholick Church , that that holy Book of the
Mass , which far exceeds the Bible , was not given us by the holy Pope ,
it not being lawful for any to look into it , but Priests lawfully
ordained by a <$$font> Roman <font> Bishop . <$$font>
ROBERTS-1726-2,427.318

I urged , <font> His not knowing for the most Part what was contained in
it , it being in <$$font> Latin , <font> a Language which he did not
understand , any more than I , that never read it . <$$font>
ROBERTS-1726-2,427.319

He told me , <font> He did not think that was any Imperfection in him ,
unless he was of a higher Order ; and that to be able to understand it ,
was so sublime a Mystery , that it was not , that he knew of , taught to
any black Priest <$$font> ; ROBERTS-1726-2,427.320

and added , <font> That he knew enough <$$font> , viz. <font> What he
should read to baptize , and marry ; as likewise for the principal
Holidays , and for <$$font> Sundays ; <font> and whether he understood
or not , God would never fail blessing the Effects of those Sacraments :
<$$font> ROBERTS-1726-2,427.321

He also said , <font> That he could say or read the Office for
consecrating the Body and Blood of Christ and transubstantiating the
Wafer into that true Body and Blood , as often as he read the Words of
the Consecration , with an Intent to make the Sacrament ; though he did
not , he confessed , understand the Meaning of one Word that he read
<$$font> ; ROBERTS-1726-2,427.322

He urged the same for the <font> Absolution <$$font> , and <font>
Redeeming out of Purgatory <$$font> , by the <font> Absolution Office
<$$font> , and the <font> Masses for the Dead <$$font> , and a great
deal of such Stuff ; ROBERTS-1726-2,427.323

But notwithstanding all his high Pretensions , and the Ignorance of his
Flock , there are several of the thinking Sort of these poor Innocents ,
that reverence him only from the Teeth outwards , as we use to say .
ROBERTS-1726-2,427.324

He baptizes , marries , and buries ; ROBERTS-1726-2,427.325

but the Natives have intermixed with those Rites , some of their old
heathenish Superstitions , such as washing before Baptism , decking the
Bride with Flowers , and a Garland , on the Marriage Day giving her
<P_428> bodily Worship , stripping her of all at Night , and putting
Earth on her Head , in Token of Subjection , Sprinkling the Graves of
the Dead with Water , and sometimes with the Juice of Water-Melons , and
abundance of other Fooleries . ROBERTS-1726-2,428.326

This Island , as I told you before , is very high ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,428.327

yet being so near the Island of St. <font> Philip <$$font> , it seems ,
in Comparison of that , to be but low . ROBERTS-1726-2,428.328

It abounds the most with Salt-peter , of any of the <font> Cape de Verd
<$$font> Islands ; ROBERTS-1726-2,428.329

and the Governor offered to engage himself to procure me a Cargo
sufficient to load with it , that Sloop , or even bigger than I lost
there : ROBERTS-1726-2,428.330

It grows in several hollow earthen Caves there , ROBERTS-1726-2,428.331

and hangs , ROBERTS-1726-2,428.332

or covers all the Inside like a thick hoar Frost , and , in some Places
, in Strias like Isicles ; and in some hollow Rocks , and rocky Caves in
great Strias , as thick as a Man's Thumb . ROBERTS-1726-2,428.333

I tried several of the Earths of that Island , ROBERTS-1726-2,428.334

and extracted out of some , 1$$32 , others from 1$$10 to 1$$32 ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,428.335

and , indeed , most of the Rocks abound with Nitre , which I
experimented by taking those which crumbled , or separated into small
Particles like Dust , from which the moist Air dissolved the Salt ,
which , perhaps , is the Gluten that binds them together when compacted
as Stones ; ROBERTS-1726-2,428.336

but we will leave this for the natural Philosophers to discuss .
ROBERTS-1726-2,428.337

This Island , I believe , doth abound with Copper , and , perhaps , with
finer Metals , for which I will give you my Reasons .
ROBERTS-1726-2,428.338

There are several Acid Fountains , perhaps , not wanting much of the
Acidness of undephlegmated Oil of Vitriol , which I tried , for want of
a better Manner , thus . ROBERTS-1726-2,428.339

I put a clean Knife into these Fountains , ROBERTS-1726-2,428.340

and in about Half a Minute , it would be all over covered with Copper ,
looking near a Gold Colour , so thick , that I could not perceive any
Iron <P_429> as far as the Knife was immerged , and held in the Water ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,429.341

and this was not a bare Colouring of the Iron , but coppered over so by
letting it stand something longer , that when I had exposed the Knife to
the Sun 'till it was dry , I could , with another , scrape off the
Copper , which would be like Scales , and some in Powder ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,429.342

and where any Scratch , or the like , was in the Knife , it would lie as
if it had been enammell'd , <font> &c. <$$font> ROBERTS-1726-2,429.343

There are some of those Waters will much sooner copper a Knife over ,
than others ; ROBERTS-1726-2,429.344

and where they run at a Distance , the Acidity diminishes proportionable
to their Distance from the Fountain Head . ROBERTS-1726-2,429.345

There are several very heavy Sands and Earth of divers Colours , and
some of them exceeding Iron , and not much , if any thing , yielding to
Lead , in Ponderosity ; ROBERTS-1726-2,429.346

some are of a blueish Black , others of a purplish ; some of a
bright_redish , others of a dark_redish Colour . ROBERTS-1726-2,429.347

I remember , one Time I was a fishing on the South-Side of the Island ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,429.348

and being extreme hot , I laid by my Fishing-Craft ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,429.349

and scrambled up the Rocks to find a shady Place to smoak a Pipe of
Tobacco ; ROBERTS-1726-2,429.350

I found a Place to my Mind , ROBERTS-1726-2,429.351

and filling a Pipe , I took a Piece of dry Silk Cotton Tree ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,429.352

and cutting it into Two Pieces , by Friction I soon kindled it ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,429.353

and lighted my Pipe with it : ROBERTS-1726-2,429.354

As I was seriously smoaking it , contemplating , and looking about me ,
at a pretty Distance I perceived a Rock , on which the Sun reflecting
his Beams , it glittered like burnished Gold : ROBERTS-1726-2,429.355

My Curiosity led me thither to inform myself better of the Occasion of
it , and whether it was only the Sun Beams ; ROBERTS-1726-2,429.356

and when I had clambered up to it , it looked exactly as if it was all
thick gilt : ROBERTS-1726-2,429.357

I rubbed my Hand against it , ROBERTS-1726-2,429.358

but nothing came off ; whereupon I took my Knife , and found I could
scrape it off , ROBERTS-1726-2,429.359

but it was so thin , that I could collect scarce any of <P_430> it ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,430.360

and where I scraped it off , the Rock appeared , which was of a blackish
Colour : ROBERTS-1726-2,430.361

I observed , that the Rock was gilt only where the Water run {COM:sic}
down , in the Time of the Rains , from the Mountains .
ROBERTS-1726-2,430.362

I looked about , ROBERTS-1726-2,430.363

and espied another , which glistered with golden Spangles :
ROBERTS-1726-2,430.364

I went to that also , ROBERTS-1726-2,430.365

and found it all full of Gold Fibres , some as fine as Hairs , some as
thick as an ordinary Needle , whereupon I took my Knife , and
endeavoured to pick out some of this Gold , and got , I believe , near a
Dram Weight , which was solid Gold , as far as I could perceive by the
Eye ; ROBERTS-1726-2,430.366

I had got one little Bit , like a small flatted Wire , about Half an
Inch long , by cutting and raising the End up , ROBERTS-1726-2,430.367

and not being able to get any more out of the Rock , the Vein running
deeper in , I was forced to break it off , by bending it backwards and
forwards Three or Four Times , 'till it broke ; ROBERTS-1726-2,430.368

and breaking my Knife with the Experiment , I desisted ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,430.369

and came down again to my black Mates , without taking Notice to them of
what I had seen , ROBERTS-1726-2,430.370

and a little before I went from the Island , I told the Governor of it ,
who would fain have had me gone down with him to shew it him , which
Journey I found means to avoid ; ROBERTS-1726-2,430.371

neither was it ever observed by any of the Natives before ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,430.372

and as they were not told the Place , so it@ @'s a Question whether they
have found it yet . ROBERTS-1726-2,430.373

This Island abounds with Fish , especially about the little Islands ;
where also , some Tortoise resort at the Season of laying their Eggs ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,430.374

but they are not much regarded for Food , either here , or at St.
<font> Philip <$$font> 's , or at St. <font> Jago <$$font> ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,430.375

and yet at all the other Islands , they are accounted their most
delicious Food ROBERTS-1726-2,430.376

and , indeed , so they are . ROBERTS-1726-2,430.377

<P_431>

To these Islands , <font> viz. <$$font> The Isle of <font> May <$$font>
, but more to St. <font> Jago <$$font> , and most at St. <font> John
<$$font> 's , come at the usual Times of their Cooting , or what other
Term you please to give it , the <font> Baaleas <$$font> , which is a
Sort of <font> Whale <$$font> or <font> Grampus <$$font> , very common
also on the Coast of <font> Brasil <$$font> , where they catch them much
after the Manner that Whales are caught at <font> Greenland <$$font> ,
of which they make Train-Oil ; ROBERTS-1726-2,431.379

and some of those People do confidently affirm , That the Ambergris is
the Sperm of that kind of Fish , shed in the Water at the Time of their
Cooting , ROBERTS-1726-2,431.380

and will tell you , that at first it is like a Jelly , and whitish , but
acquires that dark Colour by degrees , in floating upon the Surface of
the Water , and hardens afterwards to that Consistence we see it in .
ROBERTS-1726-2,431.381

They say likewise , That the Virgin or First Sperm evacuated , is white
and transparent , and congeals white . ROBERTS-1726-2,431.382

I myself have seen of that white Ambergris ; ROBERTS-1726-2,431.383

but whether that be the Cause of its Whiteness , or that it proceeds
from the Sperm of those <font> Baaleas <$$font> , I leave to the
Judgment of others , 'till I have an ocular Demonstration , or at least
a Relation , which I may credit equal to such . ROBERTS-1726-2,431.384

I have seen a Male and Female play Three Days successively in the <font>
Fuurno <$$font> , and constantly every Night go out to Sea , and come in
again about Eight or Nine of the Clock the next Morning , and would lie
and sleep an Hour or Two together , lying in the Water like the Hull of
a Ship turned Bottom up , ROBERTS-1726-2,431.385

and it would not require much Skill or Pains , to strike a Harpoon into
either , or both of them ; ROBERTS-1726-2,431.386

the Male is not above half the Bigness of the Female .
ROBERTS-1726-2,431.387

There hath been formerly a great deal of Ambergris found about this
Island , but very little now ; ROBERTS-1726-2,431.388

there was a <font> Portuguese <$$font> about Thirty Years <P_432> past ,
that was banished from <font> Portugal <$$font> , for some Crime by him
committed , for a Term of Years , who got him a little Sloop , or
Shallop , and traded with her among these islands , and lighted on a
Piece of Ambergris of almost an incredible Bigness , with which he
purchased his Freedom to return to <font> Portugal <$$font> again ,
before the Term for his Exile was compleated ; and moreover , if my
Relator spoke Truth , purchased himself a plentiful Estate , and never
after went to Sea ; ROBERTS-1726-2,432.389

the Man's Name was <font> John Carneira <$$font> ,
ROBERTS-1726-2,432.390

and the Rock near to which he found it , which was between the Two
little Islands , is , at present called by his Name by the Natives , as
well as by the <font> Portuguese . <$$font> ROBERTS-1726-2,432.391

This Island of St. <font> John <$$font> 's , hath several Bays , or
Roads , where a Ship may anchor ; ROBERTS-1726-2,432.392

but the principal , and , indeed , the best about all the Island , is
the <font> Fuurno <$$font> , which , in their Tongue , signifies an
<font> Oven <$$font> , or <font> Cave <$$font> ; occasioned either by
the several Caves thereabouts , or else because the Harbour is a close
Bay , or Cave {COM:sic_not_"cove"} ; ROBERTS-1726-2,432.393

for , indeed , if you hale in near the Rock called the <font> Kaay
<$$font> , which is a very good Key , having Water enough for a
First-Rate Man of War to hale along Side of it , you will lie
Land-lock'd for all Winds ; ROBERTS-1726-2,432.394

neither is there any Wind that blows in there , except from the
South-by-East to the South-by-West , which heaves a Sea into the Bay ,
and makes it very well deserve the Name of a Harbour .
ROBERTS-1726-2,432.395

It@ @'s a little difficult to find , for one that never was in it ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,432.396

but I will endeavour to give as good Directions for that Purpose as I
can . ROBERTS-1726-2,432.397

- When you are about the North End of <font> Fogo <$$font> , or St.
<font> Philip's <$$font> , and bound for <font> Brava <$$font> , or St.
<font> John's <$$font> , if it be any thing clear , you will then see
the Island of St. <font> John's <$$font> ; ROBERTS-1726-2,432.398

but if it should be hazy , as oftentimes it is , steer away
North-by-West , if you be <P_433> within Two Leagues off St. <font>
Philip's <$$font> , ROBERTS-1726-2,433.399

and according as your Offing is more or less , order your Course ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,433.400

with that Offing , that Course will bring you fair for the little
Islands , the Eastermost having a Bluff Hommock on the South End , the
Westermost of the little Islands having a peeked Hommock ;
ROBERTS-1726-2,433.401

Run directly for the Eastermost of the little Islands , giving the North
End of it an indifferent good Birth . {TEXT:,} ROBERTS-1726-2,433.402

and so run down along it at about a Mile distant , 'till you are abreast
of the Bluff Hommock , on the South End of it , ROBERTS-1726-2,433.403

then steer directly for the North-East Point of the Island of St.
<font> John <$$font> , which is a low flat Point , which give a Birth
{COM:sic} to , of about half a Mile , 'till you are shot to the
Southward of it . {TEXT:,} ROBERTS-1726-2,433.404

