<BEGIN_ryder-1716-1>

<P_161>

<font> Sunday , January 1 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,161.3

Mr. Kingsford dined with us . RYDER-1716-1,161.4

The subject of his conversation generally turns upon himself
RYDER-1716-1,161.5

and he seems to have it always in his eye to raise in you a mighty
esteem for his riches and wealth , RYDER-1716-1,161.6

and though at the same time he is glad to get a dinner from any of his
friends , he would fain make you believe he is worth a prodigious estate
. RYDER-1716-1,161.7

A strange kind of ambition and vanity indeed to be thought a rich beggar
! A man that appears like a poor fellow and yet is worth 40,000 +L
{TEXT:+L_40,000} . RYDER-1716-1,161.8

He was complaining of the prodigious covetousness of his son-in-law
Venner and setting him forth in very lively colours as a man that would
sooner part with all his friends and relations than lose the least sum
of money by them . RYDER-1716-1,161.9

<font> Monday , January 2 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,161.10

Came to London in the morning with mother and father , to brother's .
RYDER-1716-1,161.11

Mr. Bayes came there to assist my brother in returning thanks to God
for my sister's deliverance from the smallpox . RYDER-1716-1,161.12

Went to John's coffee-house , RYDER-1716-1,161.13

met Mr. Smith and Mr. Porter and Jackson there . RYDER-1716-1,161.14

We went to the tavern together RYDER-1716-1,161.15

and fell of talking upon the women and matrimony . RYDER-1716-1,161.16

Mr. Porter has no inclination to marry at all . RYDER-1716-1,161.17

We talked about the free will of man and the prescience of God and their
seeming inconsistency to us . RYDER-1716-1,161.18

Mr. Porter was telling us that most of the young physicians were Deists
, as Dr. Hulse , Mead , Plumtre , &c. , RYDER-1716-1,161.19

and he wondered whence it should come to pass , RYDER-1716-1,161.20

for , for his own part , he thought the truth of religion was capable of
the greatest evidence . RYDER-1716-1,161.21

Came to brother's . RYDER-1716-1,161.22

Supped there . RYDER-1716-1,161.23

Played at cards . RYDER-1716-1,161.24

Lost a <P_162> little money . RYDER-1716-1,162.25

I do@ @n't know how , RYDER-1716-1,162.26

the losing though it does not concern me much , yet makes me that I can@
@not be merry and look pleasant . RYDER-1716-1,162.27

Came home at 11 . RYDER-1716-1,162.28

<font> Wednesday , January 4 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,162.29

Went to see the Thames which is froze over . RYDER-1716-1,162.30

I was extremely struck with the sight . RYDER-1716-1,162.31

It is all froze over , but by the snow and the tide , which has broke
the ice and heaped it one upon another , RYDER-1716-1,162.32

it looks the most wild and confused sight I ever saw .
RYDER-1716-1,162.33

It looks as if there had been a violent storm and it had froze the waves
, just as they were justling and beating against one another , and the
billows and foam and white froth were grown stiff just as they were at
the height of their hurry . RYDER-1716-1,162.34

Went to our club at London Coffee-House . RYDER-1716-1,162.35

Our discourse turned chiefly upon the management of the King since he
came to the crown , in which Mr. Witnoom talked very much against it
and thought it would have prevented the present rebellion to have passed
over the fault of the last ministers in the Queen's reign in relation to
the peace . RYDER-1716-1,162.36

But we all opposed this entirely RYDER-1716-1,162.37

and thought it was the best step the King could take to settle and
secure himself upon the throne to do justice to them that had betrayed
the nation , that had the King received the Tories into favour and into
his ministry it would have been the ready way to set the Pretender upon
the throne and dethrone the King . RYDER-1716-1,162.38

It is plain that the present rebellion is only the continuation of what
was begun in the Queen's time and not at all an effect of the King's
turning out the Tory ministers and calling them to account .
RYDER-1716-1,162.39

Instead of breaking out in Scotland it would have begun at London and
been carried on with much more success . RYDER-1716-1,162.40

However , he is still persuaded that he is in the right
RYDER-1716-1,162.41

and still dreads the consequences . RYDER-1716-1,162.42

We talked also about Lord Oxford . RYDER-1716-1,162.43

He argues very much also against his being guilty of treason
RYDER-1716-1,162.44

and thinks it impossible to prove him guilty of it according to the laws
of the land , RYDER-1716-1,162.45

and is very much concerned that they should go about to prove it ,
RYDER-1716-1,162.46

for he thinks they will strain the law which {TEXT:which_which} will be
breaking in upon the constitution and acting directly contrary to the
true and general principles of the Whigs themselves .
RYDER-1716-1,162.47

Indeed he is pleased with nothing that is done by the present government
RYDER-1716-1,162.48

and thinks the ministers act upon principles of revenge and not
according to reason . RYDER-1716-1,162.49

He thus exactly argues as a Tory does RYDER-1716-1,162.50

and yet I believe he is a true Whig . RYDER-1716-1,162.51

{COM:picture_omitted}

<P_163>

<font> Thursday , January 5 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,163.54

Mr. Ward came RYDER-1716-1,163.55

and breakfasted with me . RYDER-1716-1,163.56

We talked about Criticism . RYDER-1716-1,163.57

He said that he believed the elegant conciseness and strength of the
Latin and Greek tongues is almost wholly owing to their ellipses , viz.
their leaving out some words which in our modern languages we are
obliged to express . RYDER-1716-1,163.58

Went in the coach with Mr. Moreland with whom I talked a great deal of
politics and very well . RYDER-1716-1,163.59

He is himself mightily inclined to the melancholy side of affairs .
RYDER-1716-1,163.60

He thinks the Parliament wo@ @n't take off the Acts of Occasional
Conformity and Schism against the dissenters , and the clergy will still
get the better of the laity and perplex our affairs .
RYDER-1716-1,163.61

I was desired by Mr. Bunkley to come and take part in a country dance
at his house . RYDER-1716-1,163.62

I did so RYDER-1716-1,163.63

and had young Mrs. Gery for my partner . RYDER-1716-1,163.64

We were very merry RYDER-1716-1,163.65

and I danced pretty well upon the whole . RYDER-1716-1,163.66

Our conversation was nothing extraordinary RYDER-1716-1,163.67

and we had nothing of kissing . RYDER-1716-1,163.68

<font> Friday , January 6 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,163.69

Rose at past 9 . RYDER-1716-1,163.70

Did nothing but dress myself RYDER-1716-1,163.71

and called at Mr. Henry's who was to go with me to Hackney where I was
going to be merry with Cousin Ryder and Mrs. Loyd in choosing King and
Queen , it being Twelfth Day . RYDER-1716-1,163.72

We passed that afternoon and evening at cards during which we were very
merry and kissed Mrs. Loyd and cousin very much . RYDER-1716-1,163.73

At last brother William came RYDER-1716-1,163.74

and we played at blind_man's_buff and puss_in_the_corner , when we had
more kissing . RYDER-1716-1,163.75

We at 11 o'clock sat down together to the fire RYDER-1716-1,163.76

and had a pretty brisk conversation in which I maintained the chief part
with Mrs. Loyd . RYDER-1716-1,163.77

Cousin Ryder sat silent all the while excepting a few observations and
reflections which she would make upon what {TEXT:missing_"what"} I said
, taking notice of anything that looked like satire upon the Sex .
RYDER-1716-1,163.78

They are both of them unacquainted with the world RYDER-1716-1,163.79

and have seen little of polite conversation RYDER-1716-1,163.80

and are therefore suspicious and mighty jealous of their honour and very
captious at anything that seems to reflect upon their sex .
RYDER-1716-1,163.81

To bed at 2 . RYDER-1716-1,163.82

<font> Saturday , January 7 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,163.83

Rose at past 9 . RYDER-1716-1,163.84

Was merry with cousin and Mrs. Loyd . RYDER-1716-1,163.85

They stayed to dinner RYDER-1716-1,163.86

and went away at past 4 . RYDER-1716-1,163.87

Mrs. Loyd is a very smart girl , RYDER-1716-1,163.88

has good natural sense RYDER-1716-1,163.89

and reads pretty much , RYDER-1716-1,163.90

but wants something of good breeding . RYDER-1716-1,163.91

<P_164>

Cousin Ryder had good sense RYDER-1716-1,164.93

but has not the talent of conversation , RYDER-1716-1,164.94

says very little , RYDER-1716-1,164.95

reads much RYDER-1716-1,164.96

and delights mightily in books of gallantry , romances and tragedies
RYDER-1716-1,164.97

but her great defect is in her ignorance of mankind .
RYDER-1716-1,164.98

My brother William talks with them with the greatest freedom but without
any guard upon his words . RYDER-1716-1,164.99

His talk with them is prodigiously silly RYDER-1716-1,164.100

and sometimes a blunt thing comes out from him that is affronting
RYDER-1716-1,164.101

and yet by what I can perceive , though they despise him for his parts ,
they love his company because he is free with them , kisses and tumbles
them about and makes a mighty noise with them . RYDER-1716-1,164.102

So natural is it to women to like a man that rattles and talks with
assurance , though never so much from the purpose .
RYDER-1716-1,164.103

<font> Monday , January 9 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,164.104

Read Mr. Locke's third <font> Letter of Toleration . <$$font>
RYDER-1716-1,164.105

Cousin Robert Billio came to me to go a-skating . RYDER-1716-1,164.106

We went together to the Marsh RYDER-1716-1,164.107

and skated a little . RYDER-1716-1,164.108

Dined with him at home RYDER-1716-1,164.109

and went to London in the afternoon . RYDER-1716-1,164.110

Went to father to give me some money . RYDER-1716-1,164.111

Found him at the coffee-house in Aldersgate Street where was Mr. Freke
. RYDER-1716-1,164.112

I asked him how my Lord_Chief_Justice King did RYDER-1716-1,164.113

and after some little talk he told me he would introduce me to him and
take me with him to dine with him , which I was very well pleased with .
RYDER-1716-1,164.114

Began to write to Aunt Stevenson . RYDER-1716-1,164.115

In order to it read several letters of Voiture to help me to fall into
his way of thinking . RYDER-1716-1,164.116

I was extremely pleased with many of his thoughts .
RYDER-1716-1,164.117

<font> Tuesday , January 10 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,164.118

I paid Mrs. Hawksbee her rent RYDER-1716-1,164.119

and asked her to drink some tea with me which she did .
RYDER-1716-1,164.120

Talked with her about the present public affairs and the rebellion .
RYDER-1716-1,164.121

I find she has been prejudiced by the conversation of Mr. Bunbury but
does not seem to be very much so . RYDER-1716-1,164.122

I talked to her pretty well in the behalf of the King and his ministers
. RYDER-1716-1,164.123

She could not tell how to deny anything RYDER-1716-1,164.124

but still seemed not satisfied . RYDER-1716-1,164.125

Went out to the New River head with my skates where I diverted myself
upon the ice till 3 . RYDER-1716-1,164.126

The seven lords taken in the rebellion went up to the House of <P_165>
Lords where they heard their impeachment read against them and were
ordered to prepare their answers on Saturday and had the liberty of
having any one person apiece to advise them about their counsel ,
because the Scotch lords especially pleaded their ignorance of the
English lawyers and their unacquaintance with any of them .
RYDER-1716-1,165.127

<font> Wednesday , January 11 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,165.128

Went to dinner and then to the Thames . RYDER-1716-1,165.129

There were multitudes of people walking in the middle of it , where a
great many booths were erected ; RYDER-1716-1,165.130

but did not go on . RYDER-1716-1,165.131

Came to brother's . From thence to our club where we proceeded in our
civil law till past 7 o'clock . RYDER-1716-1,165.132

Went to our club at the Change where were Mr. Heathcote and others .
RYDER-1716-1,165.133

Mr. Porter thought nothing would effectually prevent the power and
mischief of the clergy as a law to hinder the parsons from preaching
anything of their own and to revive the ancient custom of reading
Homilies in the room of them . RYDER-1716-1,165.134

We were also lamenting the mischief that is like to come to the nation
by the means of the charity schools that are erected about London
especially , which are most of them in the hands of the Tories and the
clergy . RYDER-1716-1,165.135

If a law was made that no charity or free schools should have clergymen
for their masters it might be of great service to reform them .
RYDER-1716-1,165.136

<font> Thursday , January 12 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,165.137

Rose at past 8 . RYDER-1716-1,165.138

I intended to go out to Hackney betimes to skate with Cousin Billio ,
RYDER-1716-1,165.139

and therefore read what came next into my hands RYDER-1716-1,165.140

and that was an Italian book . RYDER-1716-1,165.141

Went to brother's at 11 , RYDER-1716-1,165.142

then went to the Thames which was froze over and a great many tents set
up , in which were coffee-houses and wine and ale and other things sold
. RYDER-1716-1,165.143

I went across the river upon the ice in a path that had been worn out ,
it being all rugged and uneven . RYDER-1716-1,165.144

Came home , RYDER-1716-1,165.145

read in Virgil to the end of the first book . RYDER-1716-1,165.146

To bed at 12 . RYDER-1716-1,165.147

<font> Friday , January 13 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,165.148

Cousin Billio came to me RYDER-1716-1,165.149

and we went to the Marsh RYDER-1716-1,165.150

and skated there till dinner . RYDER-1716-1,165.151

Came to brother's . RYDER-1716-1,165.152

John Dear , brother's tenant , was there . RYDER-1716-1,165.153

He is an honest cheerful man that does not grumble and be uneasy about
his paying his money . RYDER-1716-1,165.154

He is , too , a man of very good sense and sagacity RYDER-1716-1,165.155

and <P_166> talks well of the affairs in which he is conversant , viz.
farming , RYDER-1716-1,166.156

and seems to have a great memory . RYDER-1716-1,166.157

He is not able to write nor read RYDER-1716-1,166.158

and yet keeps a very exact account of his money and what he pays and
receives by his memory only . RYDER-1716-1,166.159

I am mightily pleased with the honest plainness and simplicity of the
man . RYDER-1716-1,166.160

Came home . RYDER-1716-1,166.161

Read part of the comedy of Molière's called <font> L'Escole des Femmes .
<$$font> RYDER-1716-1,166.162

To bed at 12 . RYDER-1716-1,166.163

<font> Saturday , January 14 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,166.164

After dinner went to brother's . RYDER-1716-1,166.165

Bought some oranges and lemons to send to Aunt Allen .
RYDER-1716-1,166.166

Stayed at brother's waiting for Mr. Hudson who promised to call me
there to go to Hackney . RYDER-1716-1,166.167

We went to Hackney together on foot . RYDER-1716-1,166.168

He is lately become clerk to Mr. Marsh RYDER-1716-1,166.169

and seems already to understand some of his business well .
RYDER-1716-1,166.170

I am in hopes by conversation with him to learn a good deal of the
practical part of the law and the methods of beginning the practice of
law from its first original . RYDER-1716-1,166.171

<font> Sunday , January 15 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,166.172

Nothing extraordinary . RYDER-1716-1,166.173

We went to prayers RYDER-1716-1,166.174

and my father read a sermon to the family instead of me , which made me
very uneasy all the time . RYDER-1716-1,166.175

I could not but observe it , RYDER-1716-1,166.176

though I endeavoured to quell these risings and uneasinesses in me I
could not do it . RYDER-1716-1,166.177

They proceeded from my vanity because I think I read very well .
RYDER-1716-1,166.178

Went to bed at 10 . RYDER-1716-1,166.179

<font> Tuesday , January 17 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,166.180

Went to brother's . RYDER-1716-1,166.181

Sister was brought to bed about 12 o'clock of a dead child .
RYDER-1716-1,166.182

She was frightened the night before by a fire that broke out in the shop
but was stopped . RYDER-1716-1,166.183

She is as well as can be expected in her case . RYDER-1716-1,166.184

Went to the new playhouse to see <font> Dioclesian . <$$font>
RYDER-1716-1,166.185

There are a great many very good dances in it and singing ,
RYDER-1716-1,166.186

but as for the drama I think that is but very indifferent .
RYDER-1716-1,166.187

The decorations are some of them very fine , RYDER-1716-1,166.188

but I think the Paris opera is much finer . RYDER-1716-1,166.189

There were choruses of singing just like the French operas .
RYDER-1716-1,166.190

Came home past 10 . RYDER-1716-1,166.191

<font> Wednesday , January 18 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,166.192

Went to dinner at the Marlborough Head . RYDER-1716-1,166.193

Met Mr. Bowes there . RYDER-1716-1,166.194

He promised to come and sit <P_167> with me till 4 o'clock .
RYDER-1716-1,167.195

When I came home Cousin Dudley Ryder met me just as he was going to his
ship for the East_Indies . RYDER-1716-1,167.196

He came upstairs with me RYDER-1716-1,167.197

but was in haste . RYDER-1716-1,167.198

I wished him a good voyage , RYDER-1716-1,167.199

kissed him RYDER-1716-1,167.200

and he promised to write to me . RYDER-1716-1,167.201

Mr. Bowes came to me presently , RYDER-1716-1,167.202

and we had no conversation that was considerable . RYDER-1716-1,167.203

At 3 o'clock we went together to the Thames RYDER-1716-1,167.204

and walked from the Temple Stairs almost to the bridge .
RYDER-1716-1,167.205

It is very surprising ; RYDER-1716-1,167.206

there is one continued road all along with booths built almost all the
way , in which are all sorts of toys and eating and drinking sold .
RYDER-1716-1,167.207

It is thronged all the way that sometimes it is difficult to get along
for the crowd . RYDER-1716-1,167.208

Came to our club . RYDER-1716-1,167.209

Did nothing there but converse together . RYDER-1716-1,167.210

On Monday Dr. Wake was consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury in the room
of Dr. Tenison who died , who was made so by King William upon the
death of Dr. Tillotson . RYDER-1716-1,167.211

Upon the death of Tillotson it was debated in council whether Dr.
Stillingfleet , or Tenison should have it RYDER-1716-1,167.212

and the council were for Stillingfleet as a man of learning and vigour ,
except Duke of Shrewsbury who stood out firmly against him for Dr.
Tenison . RYDER-1716-1,167.213

King William seeing one only differ and be so strongly against
Stillingfleet privately asked him the reasons of it .
RYDER-1716-1,167.214

He said he would tell His Majesty a story . RYDER-1716-1,167.215

When he was in Italy he had occasion to get into the acquaintance of a
certain nobleman in Italy who could do him a great deal of service and
was necessary to his affairs . RYDER-1716-1,167.216

In order to this he found there was no other means but by bribing his
servants , RYDER-1716-1,167.217

but none of them would accept any bribe till he came to the parson
RYDER-1716-1,167.218

and for money he introduced him into his lord's acquaintance .
RYDER-1716-1,167.219

He afterwards became very free and familiar with the nobleman
RYDER-1716-1,167.220

and it came into his head one day to ask him how it came to pass that he
was first acquainted with him RYDER-1716-1,167.221

<paren> for he had not observed the steps that were made use for it
<$$paren> . RYDER-1716-1,167.222

Upon that he told him that all the rest of his servants were faithful
and incorruptible but his priest , RYDER-1716-1,167.223

and wondered he would keep such a fellow in his house .
RYDER-1716-1,167.224

Upon that the nobleman told him he had chosen him as a fellow that was
just capable of performing the office of the priesthood and for that he
did very well but was every way a very worthless , silly fellow ,
<P_168> and if he could recommend him to one more silly and foolish than
he , he would turn this away and receive him . RYDER-1716-1,168.225

' For ' , says he , ' a man of sense will always be meddling in my
affairs RYDER-1716-1,168.226

and will either be at the head of my family and concerns
RYDER-1716-1,168.227

or else will certainly perplex or entangle them . '
RYDER-1716-1,168.228

' And ' , says Duke Shrewsbury , ' I leave your Majesty to make the
application . ' RYDER-1716-1,168.229

The King took his advice RYDER-1716-1,168.230

and made Tenison Archbishop , a plain , honest , well-meaning man who
would have no scheme nor designs in his head . RYDER-1716-1,168.231

This story Mr. Bourroughs told me . RYDER-1716-1,168.232

<font> Thursday , January 19 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,168.233

Rose at past 8 . RYDER-1716-1,168.234

Read several of Voiture's letters in order to give my mind the proper
turn for writing to Aunt Stevenson . RYDER-1716-1,168.235

I am mightily pleased with these letters . RYDER-1716-1,168.236

I think this is the best turn of raillery and the best manner in the
world of writing letters of gallantry and politeness that have nothing
of business or matters of importance . RYDER-1716-1,168.237

They are writ in a very free , negligent way with ease and without
anything of stiffness , RYDER-1716-1,168.238

but a certain agreeable familiarity runs through the whole , which are
full of wit and humour . RYDER-1716-1,168.239

I think this is the best epistolary style and manner I ever met with .
RYDER-1716-1,168.240

At 1 o'clock Mr. Leeds came to see me according to appointment to go to
the House of Lords to see the impeached lords come to the bar of the
House and give in their answer . RYDER-1716-1,168.241

Went there RYDER-1716-1,168.242

and after some difficulty got into the House of Lords with a crowd of
Parliament men . RYDER-1716-1,168.243

There is nothing like a good assurance and impudence to get in at such
places . RYDER-1716-1,168.244

The Lords Widdrington , Derwentwater , Nithsdale , Nairne , Kenmure and
the Earl of Carnwath pleaded all of them guilty RYDER-1716-1,168.245

and laid themselves at the King's mercy RYDER-1716-1,168.246

and desired that the Lords would intercede with His Majesty for them .
RYDER-1716-1,168.247

Some of the lords gave in their answers in writing .
RYDER-1716-1,168.248

The Lord Nithsdale said he would not affect delay RYDER-1716-1,168.249

and therefore confessed himself guilty of the rebellion
RYDER-1716-1,168.250

and was sorry for it RYDER-1716-1,168.251

but pleaded in extenuation of it that he was surprised into it and when
he came at Preston was willing to save the effusion of so much blood as
might have been spilt if they had continued obstinate , and that when he
surrendered he was promised to be recommended to His Majesty's mercy ,
&c. , to which effect most of them pleaded . RYDER-1716-1,168.252

But Lord Wintoun put in a petition to desire the Lords to assign him
counsel , because the other counsel assigned him would <P_169> not
accept it and that he might have further time to put in his answer
because he had matters of great importance that would be necessary for
him to put into his answer . RYDER-1716-1,169.253

And in his petition he also desired he might have a clergyman , one
Elliot , to come to him . RYDER-1716-1,169.254

It was debated in the House RYDER-1716-1,169.255

and Lord Harcourt said he thought his counsel could do him little good
RYDER-1716-1,169.256

but God knows what the parson may do . RYDER-1716-1,169.257

It was objected that the parson was a Nonjuror RYDER-1716-1,169.258

but it was ordered that he might have him come to him upon this
condition , that he should continue with him all the while and not be
permitted to go and come backwards and forwards . RYDER-1716-1,169.259

And a solicitor was allowed him also . RYDER-1716-1,169.260

The form of proceeding in the House of Lords is this .
RYDER-1716-1,169.261

The Lord Chancellor calls the prisoner who is kneeling at the bar
RYDER-1716-1,169.262

and upon his answering bids him rise RYDER-1716-1,169.263

and then tells him that he was impeached by the House of Commons of high
treason and that he had had all his time to give in his answer -
RYDER-1716-1,169.264

' What is it you answer to the impeachment ? ' RYDER-1716-1,169.265

When the prisoner had answered that he confessed himself guilty of the
treason , &c. , the Lord Chancellor asked the House whether his plea
should be received RYDER-1716-1,169.266

and upon the House's saying ' Yes ' he says ' Ordered ' .
RYDER-1716-1,169.267

I read the declaration of the Pretender's since he came to Scotland
wherein he invites all his subjects to come in to him , gives a general
pardon to all that should not be in arms after his coming against him
and complains of the hard usage he has met with . RYDER-1716-1,169.268

It is writ with a good deal of spirit to gain the common unthinking
people , but full of lies . RYDER-1716-1,169.269

Sir Richard Steele has published it with his answer to it , which he
calls the subject's answer to the Pretender's declaration .
RYDER-1716-1,169.270

It is done very well . RYDER-1716-1,169.271

Began to write letter to Aunt Stevenson RYDER-1716-1,169.272

but could not finish it before the bellman came . RYDER-1716-1,169.273

To bed at 12 . RYDER-1716-1,169.274

<font> Friday , January 20 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,169.275

Went to the coffee-house . RYDER-1716-1,169.276

Read <font> The Freeholder . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,169.277

It is an answer to the Pretender's declaration in the way of raillery .
RYDER-1716-1,169.278

It is writ with a great deal of wit and spirit . RYDER-1716-1,169.279

Supped at brother's . RYDER-1716-1,169.280

In my way home had a very ill fall upon my left side .
RYDER-1716-1,169.281

<P_170>

<font> Saturday , January 21 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,170.283

Went to Hackney with Cousin Joseph Billio . RYDER-1716-1,170.284

Found brother William at home . RYDER-1716-1,170.285

He had been at Aunt Bickley's . RYDER-1716-1,170.286

He had been there for above an hour RYDER-1716-1,170.287

and though the whole family were together in the same room he and Mrs.
Loyd got together whispering all the while . RYDER-1716-1,170.288

She is indeed a very strange girl , RYDER-1716-1,170.289

but I can resolve all her behaviour into nothing so well as into strong
desire to appear a wit and a beauty among men and the love of their
company . RYDER-1716-1,170.290

There is one thing which she and Cousin Ryder are very faulty in
RYDER-1716-1,170.291

and that is a manner of seeming never to be obliged by one :
RYDER-1716-1,170.292

though I have spent money upon them , lent them books and given them
several , I could scarce ever get so much as a single thanks for it all
. RYDER-1716-1,170.293

They are mightily afraid of owning any obligation to a man ,
RYDER-1716-1,170.294

but I take it it proceeds from an ignorance of the world and polite
breeding . RYDER-1716-1,170.295

Had my shoulder which pained me still bathed with some spirits
RYDER-1716-1,170.296

and took some Cucantellus's balsam . RYDER-1716-1,170.297

To bed at 10 . RYDER-1716-1,170.298

<font> Sunday , January 22 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,170.299

Rose at 9 . RYDER-1716-1,170.300

Neither father nor mother are at Hackney . RYDER-1716-1,170.301

My pain in my left shoulder is spread over my neck too and got a little
into my right shoulder . RYDER-1716-1,170.302

Did not therefore go to meeting . RYDER-1716-1,170.303

Read some of Cicero , <font> De Finibus , <$$font> where he is disputing
with an Epicurean about the <font> summum bonum . <$$font>
RYDER-1716-1,170.304

Read in the afternoon Dr. Bates upon the existence of God .
RYDER-1716-1,170.305

I think there is nothing of greater use than frequently to run over the
arguments for the being of God from his works and the evident signs and
tokens of an immeasurably wise and powerful and good Being that are
apparent in the formation of the world . RYDER-1716-1,170.306

Father came home at night . RYDER-1716-1,170.307

Had a pretty long dispute with him about election , against which I said
a great deal more than I really thought I could have done before I was
insensibly drawn out . RYDER-1716-1,170.308

And I do@ @n't know but those texts of Scripture which are applied to
this doctrine of an absolute election of particular persons to salvation
may be taken in a more general sense to signify the predetermination of
God to save mankind by the death of His Son and to justify this without
perfect obedience . RYDER-1716-1,170.309

My father could not tell what to say to this RYDER-1716-1,170.310

but seemed to be shocked . RYDER-1716-1,170.311

<P_171>

To bed at 10 after having drank some bottled ale with a design to sweat
in order to remove my pains . RYDER-1716-1,171.313

<font> Monday , January 23 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,171.314

Had but a very indifferent night's rest , RYDER-1716-1,171.315

the pains about my shoulders were much more sensible in the heat of the
bed and sweating than when I was up RYDER-1716-1,171.316

and has extended itself to my thighs , so that I believe they are
rheumatic . RYDER-1716-1,171.317

In the afternoon read in Virgil and in Perizonius's <font> Universal
History , <$$font> which I can still read , RYDER-1716-1,171.318

and this seems to be pretty good account of things .
RYDER-1716-1,171.319

<font> Tuesday , January 24 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,171.320

Wrote a letter to Mrs. Loyd and Cousin Ryder RYDER-1716-1,171.321

but could not tell how to send it so as not to let any of their family
suspect it . RYDER-1716-1,171.322

It came into my head to send a book with it and write a letter with that
to Cousin Ryder in which I would enclose the other .
RYDER-1716-1,171.323

I did so RYDER-1716-1,171.324

and sent it by John . RYDER-1716-1,171.325

As soon as they got {COM:sic} they laughed RYDER-1716-1,171.326

and ran away with it from Aunt Bickley , who saw them receive something
from John . RYDER-1716-1,171.327

<font> Wednesday , January 25 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,171.328

Went to brother's and then to concert of music at Mr. De la Fond which
he has every Wednesday night at 7 o'clock . RYDER-1716-1,171.329

There was pretty good music and a boy that belongs to St. Paul's of
about nine year old that sung several songs to the Harpsichord and viol
; RYDER-1716-1,171.330

he had the strongest and finest voice {TEXT:missing_"voice"} I ever
heard in my life from a child . RYDER-1716-1,171.331

<font> Thursday , January 26 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,171.332

Mr. Horseman came to me as he appointed yesterday to go together to
Westminster . RYDER-1716-1,171.333

He seems to understand it mighty well for so short a time as he has been
studying it . RYDER-1716-1,171.334

He told me Mr. Humphries is a man of very good natural parts , but has
had nothing of education but only at school . RYDER-1716-1,171.335

He has a great memory RYDER-1716-1,171.336

and used formerly to read Romances very much , which has given him a
very good style RYDER-1716-1,171.337

and he writes very well . RYDER-1716-1,171.338

The King came to the House of Lords RYDER-1716-1,171.339

and gave his assent to an Act for continuing the suspension of the
Habeas_Corpus <P_172> Act RYDER-1716-1,172.340

and he made a speech wherein he told them he was further assured the
Pretender was in Scotland and that he expected some foreign assistance .
RYDER-1716-1,172.341

On Monday the Commons presented an address to His Majesty to thank him
for his care of the public and promise all needful supplies for
suppressing the rebellion and effectually his resentment against any
foreign power that should assist him . RYDER-1716-1,172.342

The Earl of Seaforth has submitted to the King RYDER-1716-1,172.343

and the Marquis of Huntly is likely to do the same .
RYDER-1716-1,172.344

Lord Wintoun on Monday pleaded not guilty to the impeachment of high
treason RYDER-1716-1,172.345

and said he was forced into what he did . RYDER-1716-1,172.346

Read some of Spenser's <font> Fairy Queen . <$$font>
RYDER-1716-1,172.347

I was mightily pleased with it RYDER-1716-1,172.348

and intend to read it over . RYDER-1716-1,172.349

<font> Friday , January 27 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,172.350

I hear the King has sent a very sharp memorial to the Duke of Orleans
about his assisting the Pretender and desires he would tell him plainly
whether he intends it or no and not to pretend friendship and to assist
him underhand . RYDER-1716-1,172.351

It is said Mr. Iberville , the French ambassador here , is going away
and forbade the court and that the Earl of Stair has been ill-treated at
the Court of France . RYDER-1716-1,172.352

<font> Saturday , January 28 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,172.353

Dined with Mr. Samson and Mr. Bowes . RYDER-1716-1,172.354

He is a man pretty ignorant of the world but a sincere honest man that
is very prejudiced in favour of the Church and really thinks it the best
in the world and is concerned for it , RYDER-1716-1,172.355

but he is also one averse to popery and in the interest of King George .
RYDER-1716-1,172.356

We were talking about these affairs RYDER-1716-1,172.357

and Mr. Samson talked of the absurdity of an established Church
RYDER-1716-1,172.358

and said some things of that matter that offended him very much , that
he said , with a great deal of concern , that he was mighty sorry to see
whither things were tending . RYDER-1716-1,172.359

He could not bear the thoughts of popery and living under a popish
prince , RYDER-1716-1,172.360

and the Whigs were for subverting the Church , so that he thought the
nation was in a pitiful condition . RYDER-1716-1,172.361

Went to Hackney . RYDER-1716-1,172.362

Read in Chillingsworth at night . RYDER-1716-1,172.363

To bed at 11 . RYDER-1716-1,172.364

<P_173>

<font> Sunday , January 29 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,173.366

Went to cousin Billio after sermon with father . RYDER-1716-1,173.367

Aunt Billio said she heard brother William was brought off his time
RYDER-1716-1,173.368

and told my father she thought he would do well to get him a wife and so
settle him , that she could recommend one to him of a sweet temper , a
great deal of prudence , meekness , and humility , and moderate fortune
. RYDER-1716-1,173.369

Father said it was time enough . RYDER-1716-1,173.370

I do@ @n't know upon what account he said that , unless that he can@
@not part with money at this time to set him up . RYDER-1716-1,173.371

<font> Monday , January 30 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,173.372

Went to church , it being King Charles's Martyrdom ,
RYDER-1716-1,173.373

and I was mightily pleased to hear the parson , one Mr. Astor , make a
very loyal sermon in which he very handsomely exposed the folly and
villainy of the present rebellion . RYDER-1716-1,173.374

I remember there was a very different sermon preached this day last year
, a very violent one against the dissenters , RYDER-1716-1,173.375

but Mr. Newcome I believe is now persuaded that the interest of the
Whigs is so well established that he can expect no favour upon the
account of High Church principles and therefore has put up a man of
Whiggish sentiments to preach . RYDER-1716-1,173.376

When I came home found Aunt Lomax and Mr. Owen of Warrington here and
young Mr. Henry . RYDER-1716-1,173.377

Mr. Owen told us with relation to our victory at Preston that the
surrender of the rebels was gained by General Wills's bullying and
swearing rather than anything else . RYDER-1716-1,173.378

After the first attack when Wills had retired and invested the town ,
Derwentwater comes out with a trumpet RYDER-1716-1,173.379

and was brought into Wills's tent RYDER-1716-1,173.380

and told him that they were willing to stop the effusion of blood
RYDER-1716-1,173.381

and therefore offered to surrender the town in twelve days' time if they
had no relief . RYDER-1716-1,173.382

Upon this Wills swore a great oath RYDER-1716-1,173.383

and pulls his watch out of his pocket RYDER-1716-1,173.384

and swore that if they did not surrender within twelve hours' time he
would cut every man of them in pieces RYDER-1716-1,173.385

and swore he would not give them a moment's time longer .
RYDER-1716-1,173.386

This he confirmed by the most bitter oaths , curses and execrations in
the world , that Lord Derwentwater was perfectly terrified that his very
lips trembled , and he desired that he would let him stay with him
during the attack . RYDER-1716-1,173.387

But Wills told he would not let him . RYDER-1716-1,173.388

He should go into the town again , RYDER-1716-1,173.389

for he had a mind he should spread the terror among <P_174> the rest of
the rebels . RYDER-1716-1,174.390

And sent him back again . RYDER-1716-1,174.391

Soon after McIntosh came out RYDER-1716-1,174.392

and he being a man of passion and a terrible swearer as well as Wills
they fell into a perfect passion together , RYDER-1716-1,174.393

and McIntosh told him he had a_thousand of his Scotch Highlanders that
would every man of them fight two of his troops . RYDER-1716-1,174.394

Wills swore by all that was sacred that he , if he would bring out his
thousand men , he would only set Pitt's horse against them , and if they
did not cut them all to pieces he would be damned RYDER-1716-1,174.395

and promised he would not let any other soldiers assist them .
RYDER-1716-1,174.396

In short , he swore so violently and with such a terrible air that
McIntosh went back into the town and before the twelve hours were
expired they surrendered . RYDER-1716-1,174.397

Mr. William Crisp gave us an account of the state of Liverpool and the
country there , when the rebels came into that country .
RYDER-1716-1,174.398

He says when they first heard that the rebels were come to Penrith and
were going towards Preston , from whence they were to go either to
Liverpool or some other way , they were put into a mighty consternation
at Liverpool which is a place of trade and a majority of Whigs , the
Mayor also being a strong active Whig . RYDER-1716-1,174.399

They immediately resolved in council to put the town into the best
posture of defence they were capable of RYDER-1716-1,174.400

and immediately sent a crier about the town for all men that could work
to meet together at the market cross the next morning ,
RYDER-1716-1,174.401

and accordingly there met there a great number of workmen ,
RYDER-1716-1,174.402

and they were presently set on work to dig ditches and raise batteries
all about the town in the most convenient places , RYDER-1716-1,174.403

and in three or four days all the avenues were fortified
RYDER-1716-1,174.404

and several little forts or batteries were raised RYDER-1716-1,174.405

and several pieces of cannon were mounted , that at length there were
near eighty piece of cannon round the town . RYDER-1716-1,174.406

All the young men of the town that were on the side of the Government
formed themselves into companies RYDER-1716-1,174.407

and were disposed of in a military manner . RYDER-1716-1,174.408

The ships that were in the port assisted them with arms and ammunition
RYDER-1716-1,174.409

and the sailors were placed at the great guns to manage them .
RYDER-1716-1,174.410

In this posture of defence they continued till he came away
RYDER-1716-1,174.411

and are so still without <P_175> any attack made by the rebels upon them
but not without frequent alarms . RYDER-1716-1,175.412

Mr. Crisp was made a captain of one of their troops during this time .
RYDER-1716-1,175.413

Mr. Crisp went upon an expedition to search for my Lord Molyneux , a
very rich papist that lives within three miles of the town and known to
associate with the rebels . RYDER-1716-1,175.414

He went one time RYDER-1716-1,175.415

and nobody would open the house till he fired into one of the windows ,
RYDER-1716-1,175.416

but then he found nothing but a very few arms . RYDER-1716-1,175.417

But then another time , one Sunday morning , the mayor sends to him to
desire him to go to this lord's house , RYDER-1716-1,175.418

for he had intelligence that at that time there were to be a meeting of
several popish gentlemen at his house . RYDER-1716-1,175.419

So up he got RYDER-1716-1,175.420

and with a few more they go towards the house . RYDER-1716-1,175.421

In the way they heard that some gentlemen were rid very hard to Lord
Molyneux's as particularly Sir Roland Harley and his son and others .
RYDER-1716-1,175.422

He could not overtake them before they got into the house
RYDER-1716-1,175.423

but he comes to the door of the house RYDER-1716-1,175.424

and waits the arrival of his friends . RYDER-1716-1,175.425

When they were come they demanded entrance , which was granted them ,
RYDER-1716-1,175.426

but no gentlemen or men were to be found in the house , none but a few
ladies who said that my lord was gone out and they were all alone .
RYDER-1716-1,175.427

But this would not satisfy him RYDER-1716-1,175.428

and he said he knew my lord must be in the house and several other
gentlemen and that he would not go away without them .
RYDER-1716-1,175.429

By this time a vast mob of sailors and others were come from Liverpool
RYDER-1716-1,175.430

and had beset the house RYDER-1716-1,175.431

and threatened to pull it down and burn it if they would not deliver up
themselves , to prevent which my lord comes out and his son , but denied
there were anybody else , till at last he forced him to bring out Sir
Roland Stanley's son , but would produce no others .
RYDER-1716-1,175.432

So they went back to Liverpool RYDER-1716-1,175.433

and these men were committed to custody with two gentlemen more that
they took upon the road . RYDER-1716-1,175.434

This happened that very Sunday that the rebels surrendered themselves at
Preston RYDER-1716-1,175.435

and it was universally believed and with very probable reason that Lord
Molineux had agreed to join the rebels upon their approach to Liverpool
, though whether there be legal proof of that so as to condemn him he
can@ @not tell . RYDER-1716-1,175.436

The county of Lancaster is now very well filled with good officers in
the commissions of peace and militia , RYDER-1716-1,175.437

but it was a <P_176> long time before this was brought about .
RYDER-1716-1,176.438

My Lord Aylesford is Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster ;
RYDER-1716-1,176.439

all the commissions for the peace , &c. , must pass his hand ,
RYDER-1716-1,176.440

but he is a high Tory and suspected very justly of affection to the
Pretender's interest . RYDER-1716-1,176.441

My Lord Derby is Lieutenant for the County , an honest , true Whig and
an active man RYDER-1716-1,176.442

and often pressed the court to have the commissions of peace changed
RYDER-1716-1,176.443

but could never get it done till this rebellion . RYDER-1716-1,176.444

And when he was sent for to court and desired to go down to put a stop
to the rebellion , he answered he was very willing to go down but he was
afraid of being put into prison by the justices and that he would not go
till they were changed . RYDER-1716-1,176.445

Upon this Lord Aylesford was sent for to court RYDER-1716-1,176.446

and a list of justices was given him to put in . RYDER-1716-1,176.447

He pretended he would , RYDER-1716-1,176.448

but put in but seven . RYDER-1716-1,176.449

In short there were several orders about it before it was done , till my
Lord Derby told them he would not go down till he had the commissions
all of them changed and sealed and signed in his pocket , which he at
last gained but not without difficulty . RYDER-1716-1,176.450

The answer my Lord Townshend made him when he wondered at the delay was
that the Nottingham family was not at that time of day to be disobliged
, my Lord Aylesford being the Earl of Nottingham@ @'s brother .
RYDER-1716-1,176.451

Mr. Owen told us he put in that letter into the <font> Flying Post
<$$font> which gives an account of the new-invented gag of which there
are two hundred-weight found in one papist's house .
RYDER-1716-1,176.452

It is a matter much talked of among the dissenters whether the
Occasional Conformity and Schism bills will be taken off from the
dissenters , RYDER-1716-1,176.453

but I do@ @n't find that they think they will be taken off now .
RYDER-1716-1,176.454

The court Whigs are not in the interest of the dissenters
RYDER-1716-1,176.455

but are mightily for the Church : RYDER-1716-1,176.456

besides their interest leads them not admit the dissenters into posts of
profit of honour , RYDER-1716-1,176.457

for then as these were bought , by a greater number of men for them to
be divided among , their particular share in them would be lessened ,
RYDER-1716-1,176.458

and the Church Whigs as well as Tories are willing to keep the
preferments and advantages among themselves and within as narrow a
compass as possible , however willing they may be that the dissenters
should enjoy the liberty of <P_177> worshipping God according to their
consciences which is a matter of the least moment with them , that
nothing but an absolute necessity is ever likely to prevail upon them to
admit the dissenters into the preferments . RYDER-1716-1,177.459

Mr. Owen lay at our house RYDER-1716-1,177.460

and at night he and I had some little dispute about predestination ,
RYDER-1716-1,177.461

but I do@ @n't think {TEXT:missing_"think"} that he has so very clear a
head in the way of arguing . RYDER-1716-1,177.462

To bed . RYDER-1716-1,177.463

Mr. Henry lay with me . RYDER-1716-1,177.464

<font> Tuesday , January 31 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,177.465

Aunt Lomax told me that Mr. Bunkley told her the reason why I was not
invited to the last dancing at Bunkley's was that it had been talked of
in Hackney , upon the account of my being there once before , that it
was designed on purpose to give me an opportunity of gaining one of the
young ladies Gerys and their mother did not think that proper , as I was
only a student . RYDER-1716-1,177.466

If I had been at the bar and had business indeed there might be
something more said to it . RYDER-1716-1,177.467

And therefore she was not willing I should have any more of these
opportunities . RYDER-1716-1,177.468

It is a strange thing how tattling women will raise stories without any
the least foundation , RYDER-1716-1,177.469

but no doubt the good mother was very prudent when she had such a thing
put into her head not to hazard her daughter again .
RYDER-1716-1,177.470

It seems the young ladies have , 4,000 +L {TEXT:+L_4,000} apiece left
them by their father . RYDER-1716-1,177.471

Came to brother's . RYDER-1716-1,177.472

There was Mrs. Lee . RYDER-1716-1,177.473

She is a lady of an admirable sweet temper , perfectly good-humoured
RYDER-1716-1,177.474

and I am persuaded would make an excellent , prudent , discreet wife ,
much better than Mrs. Loyd , who is indeed better for a mistress to toy
and play with than a wife . RYDER-1716-1,177.475

Came home at 9 . RYDER-1716-1,177.476

Began to go on with my diary from Sunday , which I continued hitherto .
Till 12 o'clock . RYDER-1716-1,177.477

<font> Thursday , February 2 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,177.478

Mr. Whatley came to me at 12 o'clock RYDER-1716-1,177.479

and we played together some sonatas RYDER-1716-1,177.480

and went to dinner together . RYDER-1716-1,177.481

He told me he had just then been with my Lord_Chief_Justice King
RYDER-1716-1,177.482

and he told him that there was a stop put to the new levies of soldiers
because the King was very well satisfied now that the Pretender would
not be assisted by France . RYDER-1716-1,177.483

After dinner at past 3 o'clock we went to the Inner Temple Hall where
the judges were at dinner and a play was to be acted before them .
RYDER-1716-1,177.484

He got me in RYDER-1716-1,177.485

and I saw <font> The Chances <$$font> acted before <P_178> the judges
and the hall full of spectators . RYDER-1716-1,178.486

Went to brother's after this RYDER-1716-1,178.487

and supped there . RYDER-1716-1,178.488

<font> Friday , February 3 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,178.489

Went to Mr. Bailey's where brother William had a supper to treat his
friends upon the account of his being to-day out of his time .
RYDER-1716-1,178.490

Stayed there till past 12 o'clock . RYDER-1716-1,178.491

<font> Saturday , February 4 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,178.492

Met Mr. Porter in the way to Hackney RYDER-1716-1,178.493

and he turned back RYDER-1716-1,178.494

and walked with me to Hackney . RYDER-1716-1,178.495

Did not talk about Mr. Berkeley's notions . RYDER-1716-1,178.496

<font> Sunday , February 5 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,178.497

To meeting both morning and afternoon . RYDER-1716-1,178.498

I had a mind to have translated some of David's psalms into poetry which
I attempted but could not make it do . RYDER-1716-1,178.499

To bed at past 11 . RYDER-1716-1,178.500

<font> Monday , February 6 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,178.501

The Earl of Mar is gone from Perth RYDER-1716-1,178.502

and the Duke of Argyll has taken possession of it RYDER-1716-1,178.503

and is pursuing the rebels as fast as he can . RYDER-1716-1,178.504

Lechmere made a motion in the House of Commons for a general Act of
Indemnity RYDER-1716-1,178.505

but was opposed in it by Stanhope , Walpole and others .
RYDER-1716-1,178.506

Walpole said he had 60,000 +L {TEXT:+L_60,000} offered him to make such
a motion . RYDER-1716-1,178.507

After dinner went to Mr. Bowes's chambers where were both him and Mr.
Oxford . RYDER-1716-1,178.508

Our conversation at first turned upon Homer , whose translation by Pope
they had been just reading and admire extremely . RYDER-1716-1,178.509

Then we talked of the women . RYDER-1716-1,178.510

Mr. Bowes , I find , as most other young men do now , looks upon women
as only fit to be subservient to a man's lust and not to be an agreeable
companion . RYDER-1716-1,178.511

<font> Tuesday , February 7 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,178.512

Went to cousin Watkins to see his wife . RYDER-1716-1,178.513

She is a good agreeable woman but not a beauty . RYDER-1716-1,178.514

We played at cards RYDER-1716-1,178.515

and cousin would have had me stay at supper , RYDER-1716-1,178.516

but pretended an obligation to go . RYDER-1716-1,178.517

Came to brother's . RYDER-1716-1,178.518

Heard that there was a design formed for <P_179> the escape of the rebel
prisoners in Newgate , they having sawed through the iron bars that keep
the windows but it was discovered and a guard of soldiers sent . And
some of the principal men of them loaded with thongs and fetters .
RYDER-1716-1,179.519

Came home at 11 . RYDER-1716-1,179.520

To bed presently . RYDER-1716-1,179.521

<font> Wednesday , February 8 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,179.522

There is an express come that the Pretender was going away on board a
ship at Montrose but his men would not let him . RYDER-1716-1,179.523

General Sabine is sent after them with a considerable detachment
RYDER-1716-1,179.524

and our army is possessed of Dundee . RYDER-1716-1,179.525

Went to our club at Change . RYDER-1716-1,179.526

Part of our discourse was entirely bawdy which Mr. Heathcote talks with
a great deal of freedom . RYDER-1716-1,179.527

<font> Thursday , February 9 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,179.528

Mr. Porter came to call me to go to Westminster Hall to hear the
sentence passed upon the six impeached lords that pleaded guilty .
RYDER-1716-1,179.529

It was some time before we could find out a method of getting in within
the scaffolding . RYDER-1716-1,179.530

At last we bought two tickets at a crown apiece RYDER-1716-1,179.531

and got into the gallery , where we had a full view of the whole
assembly which was the largest I ever saw in my life , the Lords and
Commons being there and a greater number of spectators than both
together . RYDER-1716-1,179.532

I thought it one of the noblest sights my eyes ever beheld .
RYDER-1716-1,179.533

The lords came to their places , which was on the bottom , in their
robes , which was a very magnificent sight , RYDER-1716-1,179.534

and after them the Lord High Steward , who was my Lord Chancellor Cowper
, came in attended with twelve maces . RYDER-1716-1,179.535

He first took his place upon the woolpacks where he usually sits as
Chancellor RYDER-1716-1,179.536

and then the commission to make him High Steward was read . After which
he rose out of his former place and had a white wand delivered to him
and he went to the chair placed under the throne and sat down and then
he commenced High Steward . RYDER-1716-1,179.537

Then the crier spoke aloud that the lieutenant of the Tower should bring
his prisoners to the bar , RYDER-1716-1,179.538

and the Lord High Steward after they were come spoke to them ,
RYDER-1716-1,179.539

told them they were impeached of high treason RYDER-1716-1,179.540

and the articles of impeachment were <P_180> read aloud by the crier ,
RYDER-1716-1,180.541

and then their several answers they had put in before were read also .
RYDER-1716-1,180.542

Then the order of the day for giving sentence was read
RYDER-1716-1,180.543

and the Lord High Steward asked the prisoners whether they had anything
to offer in arrest of judgement why sentence should not pass against
them . Upon which they each of them made speeches .
RYDER-1716-1,180.544

Lord Derwentwater began first and so the rest . RYDER-1716-1,180.545

Being behind them I could not hear much of what they said
RYDER-1716-1,180.546

but in general they pleaded for mercy RYDER-1716-1,180.547

and offered nothing in arrest of judgement . RYDER-1716-1,180.548

When this was done , Lord High Steward told them and the House of Lords
he thought he was obliged to make such observations upon the pleas and
answers of the impeached lords as might vindicate the justice of the
sentence that was to be passed upon them . RYDER-1716-1,180.549

My Lord spoke his speech with a great deal of temperance and with an
excellent delivery and voice , RYDER-1716-1,180.550

and at last pronounced the sentence in a most solemn and tender manner .
RYDER-1716-1,180.551

Came away RYDER-1716-1,180.552

and dined with Mr. Porter at Charing Cross . RYDER-1716-1,180.553

We were very well pleased with our success . RYDER-1716-1,180.554

<font> Saturday , February 11 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,180.555

Went with Mr. Leeds to Westminster . RYDER-1716-1,180.556

I begin to understand a great deal more of the practice of the courts
than before RYDER-1716-1,180.557

and the law clears up more and more every day that I am in hopes now to
make a much greater progress in the law than before .
RYDER-1716-1,180.558

Uncle Dudley Ryder and Cousin Robert Ryder his son at Hackney to-night .
RYDER-1716-1,180.559

When uncle was gone to bed my father talked with me about brother's
estate which is so cumbered and the tenants so backward in paying their
rents that it is not likely to bring him in any profit these many years
. RYDER-1716-1,180.560

I advised my father to sell it RYDER-1716-1,180.561

and the overplus after debts paid would be so much in pocket and help my
brother extremely . RYDER-1716-1,180.562

<font> Sunday , February 12 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,180.563

Went to church with Uncle Ryder . RYDER-1716-1,180.564

Young Newcome preached . RYDER-1716-1,180.565

He is a man of but little sense . RYDER-1716-1,180.566

Went to church in the afternoon with uncle again . RYDER-1716-1,180.567

Heard Mr. <P_181> Strype who is an old man , preaches not politely but
tolerably good sense . RYDER-1716-1,181.568

Did very little that night , being obliged to keep my uncle company ,
who understands nothing at all but his own law affairs .
RYDER-1716-1,181.569

It came into my head to write to the occasional paper upon a subject
that fell into conversation by chance concerning the advantage of
encouraging foreigners to come into England and settle among us .
RYDER-1716-1,181.570

It is certainly the policy of any government whatsoever to attract as
many subjects to it as possible , both as their strengths and riches
consist in the multitude of inhabitants and also as it is the means of
drawing the trade of other nations to ourselves , learning their arts
and manufactures and gaining their artists . RYDER-1716-1,181.571

Now there is nothing more opposite to this maxim of government than
persecution or hindering people from enjoying their own religion with
freedom and ease . RYDER-1716-1,181.572

The miserable effects of persecution in this respect are very
sufficiently seen in France and Spain . RYDER-1716-1,181.573

It is to the refugees of France that we owe our silk manufactures and
the chief of the stuff ones and multitude of other things which were
formerly imported hither from France and now much better made at home
than there . RYDER-1716-1,181.574

<font> Monday , February 13 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,181.575

Went to Mr. Whatley's in the afternoon . Then to the playhouse .
RYDER-1716-1,181.576

Saw <font> The Spanish Friar . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,181.577

It is a very good play and well acted . RYDER-1716-1,181.578

I observed that most of the clappings were upon party accounts .
RYDER-1716-1,181.579

There happened to be some reflections upon the priests which the Whigs
clapped extremely and the Tories made a faint hiss .
RYDER-1716-1,181.580

The Pretender is certainly gone away from Scotland with Mar
RYDER-1716-1,181.581

and it is said he is arrived in France . RYDER-1716-1,181.582

<font> Tuesday , February 14 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,181.583

Read Coke till 12 o'clock , RYDER-1716-1,181.584

then I looked into Waller's poems in which I was very much pleased with
several thoughts that I light upon there . RYDER-1716-1,181.585

He seems to have been a man of the most lively ready genius .
RYDER-1716-1,181.586

Went to brother's where was Mr. Owen , who told me that the Government
were well assured that several foreign princes had furnished the
Pretender with 1,500,000 +L {TEXT:+L_1,500,000} for his expedition into
<P_182> Scotland . The Pope had promised him , 200,000 +L
{TEXT:+L_200,000} upon his landing and that he had already received the
greatest part of the whole one_million_and_half , the princes of Italy
and the Emperor having concurred in making up that sum .
RYDER-1716-1,182.587

The Government seems to expect an invasion upon Ireland
RYDER-1716-1,182.588

and therefore the Parliament there have qualified the dissenters there
to serve in military offices RYDER-1716-1,182.589

and lest the dissenters should refuse to accept they have voted all to
be disaffected to His Majesty who being qualified and capable of serving
in the militia refuse to act . RYDER-1716-1,182.590

Mr. Owen assures me that the King has ordered ten men-of-war to go to
Ireland . RYDER-1716-1,182.591

The Pretender run away RYDER-1716-1,182.592

and left his friends in the lurch RYDER-1716-1,182.593

and has thereby so much exposed himself to his friends that they are
ashamed to own him . RYDER-1716-1,182.594

Went to North's Coffee-House . RYDER-1716-1,182.595

It is said that the Earl of Stair has purchased a letter or two of my
Lord Oxford which will be sufficient to convict him .
RYDER-1716-1,182.596

Came home at 10 . RYDER-1716-1,182.597

<font> Wednesday , February 15 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,182.598

After dinner went to our club at Sue's . RYDER-1716-1,182.599

We were talking of some ingenious young men in the Temple that were
counsellors but had not much business . RYDER-1716-1,182.600

I find indeed it is not the way to get business and have the character
of a good lawyer to seem acquainted much with other things .
RYDER-1716-1,182.601

Went then to our club at Change . RYDER-1716-1,182.602

We there immediately fell into discourse about the lords that had
sentence passed upon them . RYDER-1716-1,182.603

Mr. Witnoom and Mr. Isles were pleading for mercy for them
RYDER-1716-1,182.604

and hoped the Government would pardon them all . RYDER-1716-1,182.605

That subject kept us almost all the while , they two against all the
rest of us , who thought justice upon them would be much more
serviceable to the nation . RYDER-1716-1,182.606

<font> Thursday , February 16 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,182.607

After dinner Mr. Bowes , Mr. Oxford and Mr. Tillyard upon my
invitation came to drink some tea with me . RYDER-1716-1,182.608

They desired me when they saw my bass viol to play <P_183> to them ,
which I did but was in a great deal of confusion that I played not near
so well as I do sometimes . RYDER-1716-1,183.609

They looked over my pictures . RYDER-1716-1,183.610

When we sat down to conversation we talked about that manner of writing
which was brought so much into fashion by the <font> Tatlers <$$font>
and <font> Spectators <$$font> and which the town has by this means got
a relish of . RYDER-1716-1,183.611

<font> The Freeholder <$$font> is writ now in the same manner , in which
they say Addison and Bishop of St. Asaph and Hoadly and some of the
greatest pens in England are engaged . RYDER-1716-1,183.612

<font> Friday , February 17 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,183.613

Went to see Mr. Horseman . RYDER-1716-1,183.614

Told me Mr. Humphries was one of the authors of the <font> Instructors
<$$font> and wrote about half of them . RYDER-1716-1,183.615

He showed them me RYDER-1716-1,183.616

and I looked over two or three of them which he said were his
RYDER-1716-1,183.617

and I was surprised to find them so well writ . RYDER-1716-1,183.618

They have the zeal and the spirit of the <font> Tatlers <$$font> and
<font> Spectators <$$font> in them , a good deal of humour and wit .
RYDER-1716-1,183.619

He is not above 20 years old now RYDER-1716-1,183.620

and is likely to become a considerable man in that way ,
RYDER-1716-1,183.621

but Mr. Horseman says that he has not fixedness of thought enough for a
larger composure and begins a great many things and leaves them off and
goes to others before he can finish them . RYDER-1716-1,183.622

He showed me some letters that were sent to Mr. Steele when he wrote
the <font> Spectators <$$font> which he had not made use of , that came
to him by Mr. Harris who was Steele's secretary and had all his letters
that he did not use . RYDER-1716-1,183.623

He told me my Lady Derwentwater went to court and would have been
introduced to the King by some of the nobility , but they would not
introduce her , and that she waited as the King came through the room
and then fell upon her knees to him and presented a petition , but he
could not accept of it and turned away from her . RYDER-1716-1,183.624

And she got admission to the princess RYDER-1716-1,183.625

and begged her to intercede for her husband , RYDER-1716-1,183.626

but the princess told her it was not in her power to do her any good ,
RYDER-1716-1,183.627

she could only mix her own tears with hers . RYDER-1716-1,183.628

Went to the Gill House . RYDER-1716-1,183.629

Mr. Northey came in . RYDER-1716-1,183.630

Mr. Bowes told me that he had a great deal of practice and that he had
spoke before the House of Commons as counsel for the hackney coachmen
who have petitioned the House . RYDER-1716-1,183.631

He seems to be but a heavy , dull sort of man and incapable of making a
good lawyer . RYDER-1716-1,183.632

Came home at 11 . RYDER-1716-1,183.633

<P_184>

<font> Saturday , February 18 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,184.635

Rose at 8 . RYDER-1716-1,184.636

Read Coke all the morning . RYDER-1716-1,184.637

Was tired with one long case which I could not well comprehend .
RYDER-1716-1,184.638

When that happens I am apt to think the law so difficult a study I shall
never be able to do anything at it , RYDER-1716-1,184.639

and at other times , when my thoughts are clear and steady and my
reasoning just , I am apt to fancy great things of myself and that I
shall make a great lawyer . RYDER-1716-1,184.640

After dinner went to coffee-house with Cousin Billio where was Mr.
Dolins with whom I conversed about the public affairs .
RYDER-1716-1,184.641

He said a Bill for the easier and speedier trial of the rebels that are
taken and shall be taken was passed yesterday , but it was very much
opposed by the Tories and Mr. Letchmere , who when it was just ready to
pass , after it was engrossed and himself was of the committee that
prepared it , stood up and told the House he had found out a fault in
the bill which he did not doubt but they would all be sensible of , and
it was about the word <font> now , <$$font> but he was immediately
answered by Mr. Vernon , Mr. Walpole , Stanhope and other of the
principal Whigs who were very angry with him for abusing the House so .
RYDER-1716-1,184.642

The chief answer the Tories made use of against the Bill was that it was
against the liberty of the subject to take away the ancient law of the
Kingdom in which every subject was entrusted and by which he was to be
tried by his country among his friends and acquaintances .
RYDER-1716-1,184.643

The deed warrant is signed and sent for the execution of the six
condemned lords next Friday . RYDER-1716-1,184.644

<font> Sunday , February 19 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,184.645

Brother William Ryder came into the meeting in a new black coat and
laced ruffles and new white gloves . RYDER-1716-1,184.646

I have been so much concerned about my brother's extravagance that it
has always of late put me into an uneasiness when he comes to Hackney so
fine , RYDER-1716-1,184.647

but to-day I think I never was in a greater . RYDER-1716-1,184.648

I could not help reflecting upon the ill consequences of his folly and
extravagance which I thought could not possibly be supported but either
by robbing the shop or borrowing money , either of which is a fair way
to ruin him . RYDER-1716-1,184.649

<font> Monday , February 20 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,184.650

After dinner Cousin Ryder and Mrs. <P_185> Loyd came to our house with
Aunt Lewis . RYDER-1716-1,185.651

We walked together into the garden for half an hour , where we were
pretty merry , RYDER-1716-1,185.652

but we had not much opportunity of being alone together there .
RYDER-1716-1,185.653

I walked home with them RYDER-1716-1,185.654

and we three walked by ourselves about the fields till it grew dark ,
during which time Mrs. Loyd mentioned one Parry , an humble servant it
seems of Cousin Ryder's , which made her a little angry and uneasy ,
RYDER-1716-1,185.655

and she mentioned one Woolridge , one that courted Mrs. Loyd .
RYDER-1716-1,185.656

Upon this there grew a kind of diffidence between them , that the chief
discourse was nothing but broad hints and intimations given by each of
them , one against the other . RYDER-1716-1,185.657

When we came to their house we stayed at the door together about half an
hour , talking about love . RYDER-1716-1,185.658

<font> Tuesday , February 21 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,185.659

Walked with Cousin Joseph Billio in the morning to Aunt Billio .
RYDER-1716-1,185.660

It was extremely pleasant walking in the fields , the first beginning of
the spring when the sun begins to warm the earth and gild the fields and
wonderfully agreeable to the mind RYDER-1716-1,185.661

and I feel a strong kind of cheerfulness and alacrity diffuses itself
all over me . RYDER-1716-1,185.662

Walked to London in the afternoon . RYDER-1716-1,185.663

At 6 o'clock went to the Grecian Coffee-House . RYDER-1716-1,185.664

There is a great deal of the best company there . RYDER-1716-1,185.665

Stayed by some of them , RYDER-1716-1,185.666

heard their talk . RYDER-1716-1,185.667

The six condemned lords are to be executed Friday .
RYDER-1716-1,185.668

My Lady Derwentwater was to-day at the Houses of Lords and Commons to
have presented a petition to them in favour of the condemned lords ,
RYDER-1716-1,185.669

but it wo@ @n't be presented to the Houses till to-morrow , when the
Duke of Richmond promised her he would present it to the House of Lords
RYDER-1716-1,185.670

and they say Sir Joseph Jekyll is to present it to the House of Commons
. RYDER-1716-1,185.671

The rebellion in Scotland is almost at an end RYDER-1716-1,185.672

and it is expected there will be no more trouble there ,
RYDER-1716-1,185.673

and the Duke of Argyll is coming to London . RYDER-1716-1,185.674

<font> Wednesday , February 22 . <$$font> RYDER-1716-1,185.675

Went to our club at Change . RYDER-1716-1,185.676

The House of Commons have adjourned till to-morrow seven-night .
RYDER-1716-1,185.677

Mr. Heathcote told us that Mr. Walpole and one Mr. <P_186> Fuller
stood up at once till Mr. Walpole carried it and the other sat down .
RYDER-1716-1,186.678

And he then told the House that they could not but be sensible that
there were several ladies without that were for petitioning the House in
behalf of the condemned lords , RYDER-1716-1,186.679

but as this would necessarily arouse some debates upon that which would
be improper <paren> meaning concerning the King's having the right or
not right to pardon the lords <$$paren> he proposed it to the House that
they should adjourn for a week that they might avoid entering into these
debates . RYDER-1716-1,186.680

He was then seconded by the Comptroller and Mr. Stanhope .
RYDER-1716-1,186.681

Mr. Fuller would then have presented the petition from the Lady
Derwentwater and others , RYDER-1716-1,186.682

but it was told him he could not enter into such matters till the former
was determined RYDER-1716-1,186.683

and there followed some warm debates upon the adjournment .
RYDER-1716-1,186.684

Mr. Steele was against it RYDER-1716-1,186.685

and after {COM:missing_"a"} great deal of debating upon the division it
was carried for an adjournment by seven majority , RYDER-1716-1,186.686

but he said he was well satisfied there were many voted against the
adjournment that would have been for rejecting the petition .
RYDER-1716-1,186.687

The House of Lords had the petition read to them RYDER-1716-1,186.688

and after a great many speeches and debates upon it it was carried to
address His Majesty in favour of the condemned lords .
RYDER-1716-1,186.689

This news very much displeased us of the club , because this would cast
the odium of their execution if they should be executed upon the King ,
as it seems likely he will still execute them , because the prince
stayed in the House and divided with them against the address .
RYDER-1716-1,186.690

