<BEGIN_salmon-1724-2>

<P_1,278>

<heading>

<font> Elizabeth . <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,278.4

<$$heading>

<font> Elizabeth <$$font> was the only Daughter of <font> Henry <$$font>
VIII. by his second Wife <font> Anne Bullen <$$font> <paren> Daughter
of <font> Thomas Bullen <$$font> Earl of <font> Wiltshire <$$paren>
<$$font> one of the Maids of Honour to Queen <font> Katherine .
<$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,278.6

She had an hereditary Title to the Crown , if King <font> Henry's
<$$font> Marriage with his Brother's Wife , the Princess <font>
Katherine , <$$font> was void , as the <font> English <$$font> Divines ,
and many of the foreign Universities held . SALMON-1724-2,1,278.7

But however that be , her Parliamentary Title was unquestionable , the
Succession of the Crown being limited to her by <font> Name , <$$font>
upon Failure of Issue of her eldest Sister <font> Mary . <$$font>
SALMON-1724-2,1,278.8

Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> was crown'd on the 13th of <font>
January <$$font> 1559 . SALMON-1724-2,1,278.9

She died a Virgin on the 24th of <font> March <$$font> , in the 45th
Year of her Reign , and the 70th of her Age , <font> A.D. <$$font> 1603
; of whom our Author gives the following Character .
SALMON-1724-2,1,278.10

He says , she died covered with all the Glories of this World , and
nobly qualify'd for those of the <P_1,279> next , having had all the
Virtues and Accomplishments of her mighty Father , and scarce any of his
Vices and Imperfections ; SALMON-1724-2,1,279.11

only she was in some Cases a little too parsimonious , and a little too
liable to Passion , and the Love of Flattery . SALMON-1724-2,1,279.12

The News of her Death immediately fill'd the Court , the City , and the
whole Nation , with such Floods of Tears , and produc'd such Marks of
inexpressible Sorrow , as were never known before :
SALMON-1724-2,1,279.13

And in reality , no Prince , since the Creation , had ever more
sincerely the Hearts of their Subjects , than this illustrious Queen .
SALMON-1724-2,1,279.14

We have before given the Character of her Person , and mentioned her
Qualifications , all which are still more compleatly learnt from the
History of her Reign ; which , if the Goodness and Excellency of it may
be measured by the great Happiness of the People , may justly be
esteemed the most glorious yet extant in our Annals .
SALMON-1724-2,1,279.15

The Wisdom , the Grandeur , and the Fame of it , have been largely
celebrated and display'd by the noblest Pens both at home and abroad .
SALMON-1724-2,1,279.16

At <font> Rome <$$font> , where she was both hated and excommunicated ,
Pope <font> Sixtus Quintus <$$font> us'd to speak with the greatest
Honour of her Government , SALMON-1724-2,1,279.17

and profanely wish'd he might enjoy her but one Night , that he might
beget a second <font> Alexander the Great . <$$font>
SALMON-1724-2,1,279.18

Her Court was as compleat an Academy of honourable Counsellors ,
illustrious Peers , gallant Courtiers , learned Professors , and
profound Politicians , as ever attended any Christian Prince .
SALMON-1724-2,1,279.19

And as her great Statesmen reflected new Lustre upon her own Wisdom and
Understanding , in making so worthy a Choice ; so she never was so happy
in her Choice , as when she governed by her own Judgment , without the
Advice of others . SALMON-1724-2,1,279.20

Having surmounted the chiefest Difficulties in Church and State , one of
her great Observations was , <font> That the People of <$$font> England
<font> were more <P_1,280> governable in Times of War than in Times of
Peace . <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,280.21

Tho' she never thirsted after any unjust Enlargement of her Dominions ,
yet the great Affairs of <font> Europe <$$font> principally depended
upon her Directions ; SALMON-1724-2,1,280.22

while sitting at the Helm of all , she arbitrated ,
SALMON-1724-2,1,280.23

and guided their Estates both in Peace and War . SALMON-1724-2,1,280.24

<font> Spain <$$font> endeavouring to overflow all , was driven back ,
and scarce able to maintain its own Banks . SALMON-1724-2,1,280.25

In <font> France , <$$font> the House of <font> Valois <$$font> was
happily supported by her Counsels ; that of <font> Bourbon <$$font>
advanced by her Countenance , Forces , and Treasure ; <font> Scotland
<$$font> reliev'd by her Love ; the <font> Netherlands <$$font> by her
Power ; <font> Portugal <$$font> 's King by her Bounty ; and <font>
Poland <$$font> by her Commiseration . SALMON-1724-2,1,280.26

Likewise <font> Germany , Denmark , <$$font> and <font> Swedeland ,
<$$font> often took up and laid down Arms at her Pleasure and Disposal .
SALMON-1724-2,1,280.27

Nor could the utmost Bounds of <font> Europe , Russia , <$$font> and
<font> Tartary <$$font> , limit the Extent of her great Fame ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,280.28

but it spread further into the more remote Parts of <font> Asia , Africa
, <$$font> and <font> America , <$$font> among the <font> Turks ,
<$$font> the <font> Persians , Barbarians , <$$font> and <font> Indians
<$$font> ; in most of whose Dominions , to the great enriching of her
Kingdom , she settled Commerce , and gain'd large Privileges for the
Encouragement of her Merchants , whom she cherished as a most necessary
and important Part of her Commonwealth . SALMON-1724-2,1,280.29

Notwithstanding all the Various Excellencies of this Reign , and the
admirable Virtues and Qualifications of the Queen herself , we ought not
to dismiss her Character , without taking notice of the real Spots and
Blemishes of the Government both as to Church and State .
SALMON-1724-2,1,280.30

The Establishment of the Reformation has been justly accounted one of
the great Glories of this Reign , and what procured the Blessings of
Heaven upon it for so many Years : SALMON-1724-2,1,280.31

Yet in the same Parliament the Queen consented to several unjustifiable
Incroachments upon the Lands and Revenues of the Church , for which it
suffers to <P_1,281> this Day , tho' some have been lately gloriously
restor'd ; not to mention several other bold Attempts in this Reign .
SALMON-1724-2,1,281.32

The other Blemish is the mysterious Proceedings in the <font> Scotch
<$$font> Affairs , and strange Treatment of the Queen of <font> Scotland
: <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,281.33

But this is candidly interpreted to be more her great Misfortune than
her real Fault ; as the other is thought by some to have been occasioned
more by her Ignorance in that very Case , and from the Necessities of
that infirm Juncture of Affairs ; though some Alienations of the Church
Revenues can@ @not be excus'd . SALMON-1724-2,1,281.34

Besides , these several Scandals have been charg'd upon her by some
implacable and malignant Pens , which being as much beneath the Dignity
of History , as they are short of Probability , are better omitted than
recited . SALMON-1724-2,1,281.35

But if we set aside the aforementioned Particulars , and consider the
whole Reign in general , we find in it the most surprizing and amazing
thing in the World , that all that is great and glorious should be
managed , and the chief Affairs of <font> Europe <$$font> should move
and be directed by a Woman's Nod . SALMON-1724-2,1,281.36

This , for a whole hundred Years , has been a continued Subject of
Admiration , 'till the new Wonders of our present Age began to eclipse
all the Glories of former Times ; and , to our inexpressible Joy , have
nobly convinced us , that as the greatest Magnanimity is agreeable to
the sweetest Disposition , so no Attempt can be too extensive , or
Enterprize too great for the Female Sex . SALMON-1724-2,1,281.37

Queen <font> Mary <$$font> dying the 17th of <font> November , <$$font>
the Parliament was acquainted with it the next Day ,
SALMON-1724-2,1,281.38

and Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> was proclaim'd with great Solemnity
. SALMON-1724-2,1,281.39

She was at that time at <font> Hatfield <$$font> in <font> Hertfordshire
, <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,281.40

and came to <font> London <$$font> on the 19th , being met in her Way
thither by all the Bishops at <font> Highgate , <$$font> whom she
received very graciously , except <font> Bonner , <$$font> Bishop of
<font> London <$$font> ; who having distinguish'd himself by his
<P_1,282> barbarous Cruelties to the Reformed , she thought fit to
discountenance . SALMON-1724-2,1,282.41

The Queen , it seems , notified her Accession to the Pope , as well as
other foreign Princes ; SALMON-1724-2,1,282.42

but the haughty old Gentleman taking upon him to resent her mounting the
Throne without his Leave , she recall'd her Ambassador ,
SALMON-1724-2,1,282.43

and kept no further Correspondence with that Court .
SALMON-1724-2,1,282.44

The Queen order'd all Prisoners to be discharg'd , who were committed on
account of Religion ; SALMON-1724-2,1,282.45

but still she thought fit to continue the Privy-Council her Sister left
; SALMON-1724-2,1,282.46

and declared against too hasty Changes in Religion , that were not
warranted by lawful Authority : Notwithstanding which , those who had
fled for their Religion being returned , and joining with the Mob , fell
to pulling down of Images in many Places . SALMON-1724-2,1,282.47

She celebrated the late Queen's Funeral with great Magnificence ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,282.48

and <font> White , <$$font> Bishop of <font> Winchester , <$$font>
preaching the Funeral Sermon , highly applauded the late Reign ,
SALMON-1724-2,1,282.49

and lamented the present State of Affairs ; for which he was confined to
his House . SALMON-1724-2,1,282.50

Archbishop <font> Heath , <$$font> not approving the Alterations in
Religion , which he saw were about to be made , resign'd the Great Seal
, which was given to Sir <font> Nicholas Bacon <$$font> <paren> Father
of the famous Sir <font> Francis <$$font> <$$paren> who was made Lord
Keeper . SALMON-1724-2,1,282.51

On the 13th of <font> January <$$font> 1559 , Queen <font> Elizabeth
<$$font> was crown'd at <font> Westminster , <$$font> according to the
<font> Roman <$$font> Pontifical , by Dr. <font> Oglethorp <$$font>
Bishop of <font> Carlisle , <$$font> all the other Bishops refusing to
assist at the Ceremony . SALMON-1724-2,1,282.52

The Queen being about to make great Alterations in Religion , and
finding the Treasury very much exhausted , thought fit to conclude a
Peace with <font> France <$$font> and <font> Scotland : <$$font> Whereby
it was stipulated , that the <font> French <$$font> should retain <font>
Calais <$$font> eight <P_1,283> Years , and then restore it , or pay the
Crown of <font> England <$$font> 500,000 Pounds .
SALMON-1724-2,1,283.53

These were the best Terms could be procur'd at that Juncture ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,283.54

for King <font> Philip , <$$font> on whose Account the <font> English
<$$font> had enter'd into the War with <font> France , <$$font> being
disgusted on the Queen's refusing to marry him , was about making a
separate Peace with <font> France . <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,283.55

A new Parliament being called to meet on the 23d of <font> January ,
<$$font> 1559 , their first Business was to undo all that had been done
in relation to Religion in the last Reign . SALMON-1724-2,1,283.56

They pass'd an Act abolishing all foreign Power , SALMON-1724-2,1,283.57

and restor'd the ancient jurisdiction of the Crown ,
SALMON-1724-2,1,283.58

repeal'd the Statutes against the Reformed , SALMON-1724-2,1,283.59

and impowered the Queen to appoint Commissioners to exercise
ecclesiastical Jurisdiction , and to visit , reform , redress , and
correct , all Errors , Heresies , Schisms , and Abuses in the Church .
SALMON-1724-2,1,283.60

Upon this Act the Authority of the High-Commission-Court was founded ,
<paren> which was so much clamour'd at in the following Reigns <$$paren>
SALMON-1724-2,1,283.61

and the Oath of Supremacy was by this Act requir'd to be taken by all
ecclesiastical Persons and civil Officers . SALMON-1724-2,1,283.62

Another Act pass'd in this Parliament recognizing the Queen's Title ,
wherein they acknowledge her to be their lawful Queen by a rightful and
<font> lineal Descent from the Blood Royal . <$$font>
SALMON-1724-2,1,283.63

They also restor'd the Tenths and First-fruits , and the Impropriations
, to the Crown , which Queen <font> Mary <$$font> had given away ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,283.64

and impower'd her Majesty to take such of the Bishops Lands as she
thought fit , upon the Vacancy of any See , allowing them an Equivalent
in Tithes : SALMON-1724-2,1,283.65

And in this first Session pass'd the Act for the Uniformity of publick
Prayers , and Administration of the Sacraments . SALMON-1724-2,1,283.66

And all religious Houses and Nunneries founded in Queen <font> Mary
<$$font> 's Reign were suppres'd . SALMON-1724-2,1,283.67

<P_1,284>

Upon the passing these Acts , fourteen Bishops , and near two_hundred
Clergymen more , dignified and not dignified , were depriv'd , for
refusing to conform and take the Oath of Supremacy ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,284.69

and several Popish Priests inveighing against these Proceedings , all
Clergymen were prohibited to preach without the Royal License .
SALMON-1724-2,1,284.70

And as in the last Reign , so in this , a Conference was appointed to be
held between the Protestant and Popish Divines , upon some of the
principal Points in Dispute between them ; with this Difference , that
the Dispute in the last Reign was held before a Committee of the
Convocation , at <font> Oxford <$$font> ; and this at <font>
Westminister-Abbey , <$$font> before the Council and both Houses of
Parliament . SALMON-1724-2,1,284.71

But the Voice of the People being now on the Protestant Side , the
Popish Bishops refus'd to continue the Conference ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,284.72

and the Bishops of <font> Winchester <$$font> and <font> Lincoln
<$$font> declar'd , <font> It was giving too great Encouragement to
Hereticks to dispute with them ; and that the Queen and Council ought to
be excommunicated for suffering Disputes against the Catholick Faith
before an unlearned Multitude . <$$font> Whereupon they were committed
to the <font> Tower . <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,284.73

But what will remain an eternal Honour to this Queen , and the
Reformation , is , that notwithstanding all the barbarous Cruelties
exercised upon the Protestants in the last Reign , they did not
endeavour to retaliate Injury for Injury , or Burning for Burning , or
use Severities towards any of the Papists ; SALMON-1724-2,1,284.74

and notwithstanding the Swarms of Sermons and seditious Libels that were
published against the present Establishment , only three Bishops were
detain'd in Prison , <font> viz. Bonner , White , <$$font> and <font>
Watson . <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,284.75

The rest , with the Nuns and Religious , had liberty to go out of <font>
England , <$$font> or stay , as they saw fit . SALMON-1724-2,1,284.76

And so little were the People offended with these Alterations , that
both Protestants and Papists came to Church , and conform'd , <P_1,285>
the first ten Years of this Reign ; till the Jesuits had instill'd their
rebellious King-killing principles into the <font> English <$$font>
Papists , and fomented wicked Plots and Conspiracies against the
Government : SALMON-1724-2,1,285.77

And then the Kingdom found it necessary to make some severe Laws against
them , to secure itself . SALMON-1724-2,1,285.78

But to look back a little : Dr. <font> Parker <$$font> was on the 17th
of <font> December <$$font> consecrated Archbishop of <font> Canterbury
<$$font> by four of the reformed Bishops , who had been deprived in the
last Reign ; SALMON-1724-2,1,285.79

and afterwards all the rest of the vacant Sees were filled .
SALMON-1724-2,1,285.80

The Parliament dreading another Alteration in Religion , if the Queen
should happen to die without Issue , they address'd her to marry ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,285.81

but could not prevail with her . SALMON-1724-2,1,285.82

And upon all Applications of this Nature , she shew'd great Aversion to
a married Life . SALMON-1724-2,1,285.83

She would sometimes entertain Proposals of this Nature from foreign
Princes , as she did particularly from the Duke of <font> Anjou ,
<$$font> and afterwards from the Duke of <font> Alençon , <$$font> who
came into <font> England , <$$font> and made his Addresses personally ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,285.84

but they never succeeded , the Queen seeming to have some other View in
these Negotiations , than the Disposal of her Person .
SALMON-1724-2,1,285.85

In the Year 1559 , the reformed Religion spread mightily in <font>
Scotland <$$font> ; SALMON-1724-2,1,285.86

but it was not introduc'd in that legal regular way it was in <font>
England . <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,285.87

The Protestant Lords , or Lords of the Congregation , as they were
call'd , actually rose in Rebellion , SALMON-1724-2,1,285.88

depos'd the Queen Regent , <paren> Mother to the present Queen , who was
with the Dauphin her Husband in <font> France <$$paren> <$$font>
SALMON-1724-2,1,285.89

plundered and rifled the Churches and religious Houses ,
SALMON-1724-2,1,285.90

and seiz'd the Possessions and Revenues of the Church by Violence .
SALMON-1724-2,1,285.91

And this they were induc'd to do by the preaching of one <font> Knox
<$$font> , a true Disciple of <font> Calvin , <$$font> who held the
Sovereignty of the People over their Princes , and the <P_1,286>
Legality of deposing them , when they resisted what they call'd the true
Religion , or when they did not , in their Opinion , study the true
Interest of the People . SALMON-1724-2,1,286.92

But whatever Justice there might be in the Cause , Queen <font>
Elizabeth <$$font> was soon convinc'd it was her Interest to support the
Lords of the Congregational Way ; SALMON-1724-2,1,286.93

and when the <font> French <$$font> sent Forces to the Assistance of the
Queen Regent , she sent an Army to the Assistance of the Lords .
SALMON-1724-2,1,286.94

But the Queen Regent soon after dying , and the Dauphin coming to be
King of <font> France , <$$font> a Treaty was set on Foot between him
and his Wife <font> Mary <$$font> Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> of the
one part , and Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> and the Protestants of
<font> Scotland <$$font> of the other ; wherein it was agreed , that the
<font> French <$$font> King , and <font> Mary <$$font> his Queen ,
should no longer quarter the Arms of <font> England <$$font> ; and that
during her Residence in <font> France , <$$font> the Regency of <font>
Scotland <$$font> should be committed to twelve of the Natives , <font>
of <$$font> whom seven should be named by the Queen of <font> Scots ,
<$$font> and five by the Lords of the Congregation ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,286.95

and Queen <font> Elizabeth , <$$font> by this seasonable Assistance she
had given the Protestants of <font> Scotland , <$$font> gain'd such a
Party there , that she influenc'd , or rather govern'd , the Affairs of
that Kingdom , during the rest of her Reign . SALMON-1724-2,1,286.96

And as the Pope was perpetually stirring up the Catholick Princes
against her , she was compell'd , for her own Preservation , to enter
into Alliances , and support all the Protestant Powers in <font> Europe
, <$$font> whether legally or illegally established .
SALMON-1724-2,1,286.97

She certainly did not do it with any Intention to countenance the
Rebellion of Subjects against their Sovereign , but purely to preserve
herself and her People from that Destruction which the Pope and his
Allies were continually contriving . SALMON-1724-2,1,286.98

But before the See of <font> Rome <$$font> enter'd into those violent
Measures against Queen <font> Elizabeth , <$$font> all the <P_1,287>
Arts of Persuasion and Condescension were us'd to induce her to return
to that Communion . SALMON-1724-2,1,287.99

'T@ @is said , Pope <font> Pius <$$font> offered to reverse the Sentence
against the Legality of her Mother's Marriage , to consent to the
Common-Prayer Book being used in <font> English , <$$font> and that the
Laity might receive the Communion in both Kinds ; and sent his Nuncio as
far as <font> Flanders <$$font> to treat with the Queen upon these Heads
; SALMON-1724-2,1,287.100

but she prohibited his coming to <font> England . <$$font>
SALMON-1724-2,1,287.101

In the Year 1560 , the Church of <font> England <$$font> was disturb'd
by the <font> German <$$font> Anabaptists , and other foreign Hereticks
, who deny'd the Divinity of our Saviour . SALMON-1724-2,1,287.102

They had transported themselves to <font> England , <$$font> looking
upon this Kingdom as a Refuge for all Sects that differed from the
Church of <font> Rome <$$font> ; SALMON-1724-2,1,287.103

but the Queen made them sensible of their Error ,
SALMON-1724-2,1,287.104

and banished them the Kingdom . SALMON-1724-2,1,287.105

This Year the Queen restor'd the Coin to its ancient Purity , having
been extreamly debased in the preceding Reigns .
SALMON-1724-2,1,287.106

She also increas'd and repair'd the Royal Navy , SALMON-1724-2,1,287.107

and fortify'd the Towns on the Borders of <font> Scotland , <$$font> and
on the Sea Coasts . SALMON-1724-2,1,287.108

In the Year 1561 , the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> having buried her
Husband <font> Francis <$$font> King of <font> France , <$$font>
return'd to <font> Scotland . <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,287.109

She did not endeavour to make any Alterations in the Protestant Religion
, that had got such Footing in the Kingdom , tho' it had been so
tumultuously introduc'd . SALMON-1724-2,1,287.110

But still there was no good Correspondence between her and Queen <font>
Elizabeth , <$$font> the Eyes of all the Popish Party being fix'd upon
the Queen of <font> Scots , <$$font> as next Heir to the Crown of <font>
England , <$$font> and on whose Head they would have been glad to have
fix'd it at present , and have deposed Queen <font> Elizabeth , <$$font>
of which she was very sensible ; SALMON-1724-2,1,287.111

and this was the real occasion of all those Hardships the Queen of
<font> Scots <$$font> afterwards underwent . SALMON-1724-2,1,287.112

<P_1,288>

In the Year 1562 , the Protestant Religion had made such a Progress in
<font> France , <$$font> that its Disciples became very formidable to
the Government there . SALMON-1724-2,1,288.114

The Prince of <font> Conde , <$$font> and many great Men , espoused
their Interest , SALMON-1724-2,1,288.115

and had made themselves Masters of several strong Towns .
SALMON-1724-2,1,288.116

But still apprehending the Government might suppress them , they apply'd
themselves to Queen <font> Elizabeth , <$$font> who sent them Supplies
of Men and Money , and had <font> Havre de Grace <$$font> put into her
Hands as a cautionary Town . SALMON-1724-2,1,288.117

But the next Year the Protestants and Papists in <font> France <$$font>
coming to an Accommodation , they united their Forces against the <font>
English , <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,288.118

and besieged <font> Havre de Grace <$$font> ; SALMON-1724-2,1,288.119

and the Queen having no Inclination to enter into a War with the whole
Kingdom , sent Orders to her Governor , the Earl of <font> Warwick ,
<$$font> to surrender the Town upon Terms , and return to <font> England
<$$font> with his Garrison ; which he did , and unfortunately brought
the Plague with him , whereby many thousands were swept away in <font>
London <$$font> and other Parts of the Kingdom .
SALMON-1724-2,1,288.120

Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> was not only jealous of the Queen of
<font> Scots , <$$font> who was next in Blood to the Crown of <font>
England <$$font> ; SALMON-1724-2,1,288.121

but was equally set against the Lady <font> Katherine Grey , <$$font>
who was next in Succession by the Will of <font> Henry <$$font> VIII .
SALMON-1724-2,1,288.122

This Lady , it seems , married <font> Edward Seymour <$$font> Earl of
<font> Hertford <$$font> without the Queen's Knowledge , and had a Son
by him ; which Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> was pleased to resent as
such a Contempt of her Authority , that she committed both of them to
the <font> Tower <$$font> ; where , by the Connivance or Negligence of
the Lieutenant , or his Warders , they came together again , and the
Lady <font> Katherine <$$font> was deliver'd of another Son ; at which
the Queen was so piqu'd , that she turn'd Sir <font> Edward Warner ,
<$$font> Lieutenant of the <font> Tower , <$$font> out of his Place ,
and caus'd the Earl to be fin'd five_thousand <P_1,289> Pounds in the
Star-Chamber , and continued him in Prison nine Years .
SALMON-1724-2,1,289.123

The Lady <font> Katherine <$$font> fell sick SALMON-1724-2,1,289.124

and died in the <font> Tower , <$$font> having first begg'd the Queen's
Pardon for marrying without her Privity , and recommended her Children
to her Clemency . SALMON-1724-2,1,289.125

And though Queen <font> Elizabeth , <$$font> to excuse these arbitrary
Severities , pretended they were never married according to Law ; yet
they have been deem'd Man and Wife ever since , SALMON-1724-2,1,289.126

and the Issue of this Marriage inherited their Ancestors private Estates
, though they never succeeded to the Crown , according to the Will of
King <font> Henry <$$font> VIII. any more than the Issue of the Lady
<font> Eleanor Brandon , <$$font> second Daughter of <font> Charles
Brandon <$$font> Duke of <font> Suffolk , <$$font> to whom the Crown was
limited by the said Act of Settlement , on Failure of lawful Issue of
the Lady <font> Frances <$$font> the elder Sister , of whose Legitimacy
there was no doubt . SALMON-1724-2,1,289.127

Probably , the Apprehension the People had entertained of the Benefits
that would accrue to the Kingdom , and to the Protestant Religion , by
the Union of the two Nations in King <font> James <$$font> I. together
with Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> 's appointing him her Successor ,
were the great Inducements to acquiesce in the <font> Scots <$$font>
Title , and reject that of the <font> Suffolk <$$font> Family , though
established by <paren> the now so much admired Method of <$$paren> an
Act of Parliament . SALMON-1724-2,1,289.128

And I do@ @n't find but the <font> Ailsbury <$$font> and <font> Derby
<$$font> Families , who descended from the Lady <font> Frances <$$font>
and the Lady <font> Eleanor , <$$font> the two Daughters of the Duke of
<font> Suffolk <$$font> and Queen <font> Mary <$$font> the younger
Sister of <font> Henry <$$font> VIII. have very contentedly let their
Claims lie dormant ever since ; SALMON-1724-2,1,289.129

and consequently , the Nation's Submission to the <font> Stuarts ,
<$$font> who are Heirs at Law , is very justifiable .
SALMON-1724-2,1,289.130

It is a little strange however , that notwithstanding the Severities
Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> us'd against the Queen of <font> Scots ,
<$$font> she should constantly recommend the Succession of her Issue and
arbitrarily <P_1,290> imprisoned Mr. <font> Hales <$$font> for writing
in Defence of the Title of the <font> Suffolk <$$font> Family , though
he had an Act of Parliament for his Authority , and even the very Act
that confirmed her own Title to the Crown . SALMON-1724-2,1,290.131

At a Parliament held in the Year 1563 , another Act pass'd , the better
to establish and confirm the Queen's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs
: SALMON-1724-2,1,290.132

And the Articles of the Church of <font> England <$$font> were the same
Year settled by the Convocation , and reduc'd to the Number of
thirty_nine , as they are at this Day . SALMON-1724-2,1,290.133

The Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> discovering some Disposition to marry
again , Queen <font> Elizabeth , <$$font> to divert her matching with a
Foreigner , propos'd her Favourite <font> Robert Dudley , <$$font>
afterwards Earl of <font> Leicester , <$$font> to her for a Husband ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,290.134

and promis'd to secure the Crown of <font> England <$$font> to the Queen
of <font> Scots <$$font> and her Issue , if she comply'd with the
Proposal . SALMON-1724-2,1,290.135

But it seems the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> chose rather to match
with the Lord <font> Darnley , <$$font> Son to the Earl of <font> Lenox
, <$$font> and Grandson to <font> Margaret <$$font> the eldest Daughter
of <font> James <$$font> IV. who after herself was next in Blood to the
Crown of <font> England . <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,290.136

Upon this Match the <font> Scots <$$font> took another Opportunity to
rebel ; SALMON-1724-2,1,290.137

but their Leaders were forced to fly into <font> England <$$font> for
Refuge , SALMON-1724-2,1,290.138

and were protected by Queen <font> Elizabeth , <$$font> who was equally
offended with the Match . SALMON-1724-2,1,290.139

About this time , we are told , <font> Robert Dudley , <$$font> Earl of
<font> Leicester , <$$font> had so ingross'd the Favour of Queen <font>
Elizabeth , <$$font> that he disposed of all Places of Honour and Profit
as he pleased , and tyranniz'd over the rest of the Nobility to a very
great Degree . SALMON-1724-2,1,290.140

And it is reckon'd some Reflection upon this Queen , that she was so
intimate with , and even govern'd by a Gentleman of no Principles , one
who was a perfect Rake and Debauchee , and sold her Favours to any that
<P_1,291> had Money to purchase them ; and had little to recommend him ,
but a beautiful Person , and good natural Parts , which I perceive his
Enemies are willing to allow he was possess'd of .
SALMON-1724-2,1,291.141

In the Year 1566 , the Queen visited <font> Oxford , <$$font> as she had
<font> Cambridge <$$font> two Years before , being a great Friend to the
Muses , and herself a Mistress of the learned Languages .
SALMON-1724-2,1,291.142

She was highly delighted with their Disputations , and the other
Entertainments she met with . SALMON-1724-2,1,291.143

At her return to <font> London <$$font> she received the News of the
Birth of Prince <font> James , <$$font> Son to the <font> Scotch
<$$font> Queen , and afterwards King of <font> England <$$font> as well
as <font> Scotland . <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,291.144

She was pleas'd to stand Godmother to him : SALMON-1724-2,1,291.145

But 't@ @is said she could not help repining a little at the Queen of
<font> Scots <$$font> Happiness , in having a Son to succeed her ; a
Happiness which it seems was soon interrupted , by the King's jealousy
of <font> David Rizzio , <$$font> an <font> Italian , <$$font> who was
once a Musician , and now advanced to be the Queen of <font> Scots
<$$font> Secretary . SALMON-1724-2,1,291.146

This Man the King was made to believe was too intimate with the Queen ;
whereupon one Evening , with some Assistants , he broke into the Queen's
Apartment ; and finding <font> David Rizzio , <$$font> and some other
Company , at Supper with her , they dragged <font> Rizzio <$$font> from
the Table , as he hung upon the Queen in hopes to save his Life ; and
having brought him into the Gallery , there they dispatched him with
their Swords . SALMON-1724-2,1,291.147

This created an irreparable Breach between the Queen and her Husband ,
according to the Expectation of their Enemies , who put the King upon
this Enterprize . SALMON-1724-2,1,291.148

And it seems they were not contented with alienating the Queen's
Affections from him ; SALMON-1724-2,1,291.149

but they a little after murdered him in his Bed ,
SALMON-1724-2,1,291.150

and then blew up the House with Gunpowder , as if it had happen'd by
Accident . SALMON-1724-2,1,291.151

<P_1,292>

The Earl of <font> Murray , <$$font> the Queen's Bastard Brother , who
had been the principal Contriver of the King's Death , propos'd her
marrying again to the Earl of Bothwell ; SALMON-1724-2,1,292.153

but he being obnoxious , on account of a Report of his being concern'd
in the King's Murder too , she insisted upon his clearing himself of
that Fact , before she would hearken to it . Whereupon a time was
solemnly appointed for his Trial , and the Prosecutors summoned to give
Evidence against him ; SALMON-1724-2,1,292.154

but no Body appearing against him , he was acquitted ; whereupon <font>
Bothwell <$$font> was married to the Queen . SALMON-1724-2,1,292.155

The Earl of <font> Murray , <$$font> by persuading his Sister to this
Match with a Person who was reported to be concerned in the Death of her
Husband , having render'd her odious to the People , conspired with
several other Lords , SALMON-1724-2,1,292.156

and rais'd a Rebellion against her ; SALMON-1724-2,1,292.157

and having got her into their Power , and drove Earl <font> Bothwell
<$$font> into <font> Denmark , <$$font> that pious Patriarch <font> Knox
, <$$font> with his Brethren the Fanatick Preachers , propos'd the
deposing and murdering of their Queen : SALMON-1724-2,1,292.158

And <font> Buchanan , <$$font> a Creature of the Earl of <font> Murray
<$$font> 's , in his Writings , makes no Scruple of charging the Queen
with every thing that@ @'s infamous ; SALMON-1724-2,1,292.159

and maintain'd , that the People had Power to make and depose their
Princes at their Pleasure . SALMON-1724-2,1,292.160

At length they so terrify'd the poor Queen , by threatning to murder her
, that they extorted from her a Resignation of the Crown to her Son ,
then but thirteen Months old ; and constituted <font> Murray <$$font>
Regent during his Minority , SALMON-1724-2,1,292.161

and <font> Knox <$$font> preach'd the Coronation Sermon .
SALMON-1724-2,1,292.162

<font> Murray , <$$font> to shew his Zeal against the late King's
Murderer's , and render himself acceptable to the People , executed
<font> John Hepburn , <$$font> and some other of <font> Bothwell
<$$font> 's Servants who were accus'd of having a Hand in the Murder :
SALMON-1724-2,1,292.163

But these Men unluckily declar'd at their Deaths , that <font> Murray
<$$font> himself was the principal <P_1,293> Contriver of it ,
SALMON-1724-2,1,293.164

and acquitted the Queen of any Knowledge of the Fact ; as did also
<font> Bothwell {TEXT:Bothwel} , Morton , <$$font> and others afterwards
: SALMON-1724-2,1,293.165

And even <font> Buchanan , <$$font> before he died , retracted the
Scandal he had thrown upon the Queen , SALMON-1724-2,1,293.166

and heartily repented of it . SALMON-1724-2,1,293.167

To proceed : The Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> made her Escape out of
Prison , SALMON-1724-2,1,293.168

and rais'd some Forces ; SALMON-1724-2,1,293.169

but being compos'd of People half armed and undisciplin'd , they were
defeated by <font> Murray's <$$font> Troops , SALMON-1724-2,1,293.170

and she was forced to fly into <font> England , <$$font> and intreat the
Protection of Queen <font> Elizabeth , <$$font> who had now an
Opportunity of making herself Umpire of the Differences between the
Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> and her Subjects , and of securing her
Person , so as to have no further Apprehensions of her Rival .
SALMON-1724-2,1,293.171

Accordingly , Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> caus'd her to be convey'd
to <font> Carlisle <$$font> under a Guard , alledging she could not in
Honour admit her to her Presence , till she had cleared herself of those
scandalous Reports charged on her by <font> Murray <$$font> and the
<font> Scots <$$font> Nobility . SALMON-1724-2,1,293.172

And Queen <font> Elizabeth , <$$font> to assert her Superiority over the
Kingdom of <font> Scotland , <$$font> and that she might have the more
Colour to confine the <font> Scots <$$font> Queen , commanded <font>
Murray <$$font> and his Adherents to appear before her Commissioners at
<font> York , <$$font> to give their Reasons for deposing their Queen ,
knowing they would not fail to furnish her with a Handle to use her
Rival as she saw fit . SALMON-1724-2,1,293.173

And according to the Queen of <font> England@ @'s <$$font> Expectations
, the <font> Scots <$$font> left no means unattempted to blacken the
Character of their own Prince , and justify their Rebellion against her
; SALMON-1724-2,1,293.174

and every little trifling Scandal that her Enemies had suggested was
remembred and accepted for Truth , how weakly soever supported ; it
being the Interest of the <font> English , <$$font> that were her Judges
, as well as her rebel Subjects , who were her Accusers , that they
<P_1,294> should be believ'd . SALMON-1724-2,1,294.175

And to render the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> still more obnoxious to
Queen <font> Elizabeth , Murray , <$$font> when he was at <font> York ,
<$$font> cunningly proposed the Match between their Queen and the Duke
of <font> Norfolk , <$$font> which in the end prov'd fatal to them both
, as will appear hereafter . SALMON-1724-2,1,294.176

But to proceed : Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> and the <font> Scots
<$$font> having now gain'd their Ends , in bringing these Matters to be
solemnly argued and debated in the Face of the World , the Commissioners
were recalled from <font> York <$$font> without determining any thing .
SALMON-1724-2,1,294.177

The Duke of <font> Norfolk <$$font> was unhappily induc'd by the <font>
Scots , <$$font> and some false Friends in the <font> English <$$font>
Court , to hearken to the <font> Scotch <$$font> Match , and then
betray'd to Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> by those very Men who had
put him upon it , SALMON-1724-2,1,294.178

and was committed to the <font> Tower <$$font> ; SALMON-1724-2,1,294.179

but the Queen , upon his Promise not to proceed in that Matter , some
time after discharged him . SALMON-1724-2,1,294.180

Notwithstanding the base Usage Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> had
receiv'd from the <font> French <$$font> Protestants at <font> Havre de
Grace , <$$font> she was , in the Year 1568 , again prevail'd with to
assist them with Money and warlike Stores ; SALMON-1724-2,1,294.181

and she receiv'd such as fled from thence , and from <font> Flanders ,
<$$font> on account of their Religion ; SALMON-1724-2,1,294.182

and disposed of them about <font> Canterbury , Colchester , <$$font> and
<font> Norwich , <$$font> where they very much improv'd our Manufactures
. SALMON-1724-2,1,294.183

In the Year 1569 , the Earls of <font> Northumberland <$$font> and
<font> Westmorland <$$font> rais'd an Insurrection in the North of
<font> England , <$$font> on account of the Alteration of Religion ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,294.184

but the Rebels dispersed without coming to a Battel , when they found
the Government in a Condition to oppose them , SALMON-1724-2,1,294.185

and the two Earls fled into <font> Scotland . <$$font>
SALMON-1724-2,1,294.186

Sixty-six of their Adherents were hang'd at <font> Durham , <$$font>
besides many more at <font> York <$$font> and in other Places .
SALMON-1724-2,1,294.187

<P_1,295>

The same Year <font> Leonard Dacres , <$$font> Son to the Lord <font>
Dacres , <$$font> rais'd a Rebellion ; SALMON-1724-2,1,295.189

and having assembled about three_thousand Men , fought the Queen's
Forces under the Lord <font> Hunsdon <$$font> ; SALMON-1724-2,1,295.190

but was defeated , SALMON-1724-2,1,295.191

and fled into <font> Flanders . <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,295.192

In the Year 1570 , Pope <font> Pius <$$font> caus'd a Bull to be fix'd
on the Gates of the Bishop of <font> London <$$font> 's Palace , whereby
he did not only absolve the Queen's Subjects from their Allegiance , but
commanded them to rise up in Arms , and dethrone her , on pain of
Damnation ; declaring , that he had a Power over all Nations and
Kingdoms , to destroy , consume , plant , and build , according to his
Pleasure . SALMON-1724-2,1,295.193

<font> Felton , <$$font> who had set up the Bull on the Bishop's Palace
, confessed the Fact , SALMON-1724-2,1,295.194

and was hang'd , SALMON-1724-2,1,295.195

and gloried in it at his Death ; for which 't@ @is said he was look'd
upon as a Martyr by the Papists . SALMON-1724-2,1,295.196

This Bull occasioned some other trifling Insurrections ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,295.197

but they were suppress'd before they came to a Head .
SALMON-1724-2,1,295.198

The Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> being thought to encourage these
Discontents , was more strictly guarded , and depriv'd of all her
Servants but ten . SALMON-1724-2,1,295.199

And the next Year , 1572 , the Parliament met , SALMON-1724-2,1,295.200

and pass'd several Acts in order to prevent any Disturbances from the
Papists for the future : SALMON-1724-2,1,295.201

They made it High Treason to deny the Queen's Title , or that an Act of
Parliament could not limit the Succession of the Crown ; and that those
who should reconcile any Subject of the Queen's {TEXT:Queens} to the
Church of <font> Rome , <$$font> or should be reconcil'd , should incur
the Guilt of High Treason . SALMON-1724-2,1,295.202

The Duke of <font> Norfolk <$$font> being again drawn in to proceed in
the Match with the Queen of <font> Scots , <$$font> and being charg'd
with a Conspiracy to release her , and to introduce a foreign Power to
depose Queen <font> Elizabeth , <$$font> was again clapt up in the
<font> Tower , <$$font> and try'd by his Peers in the Year 1572 ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,295.203

and on the <font> second <$$font> <P_1,296> of <font> June , <$$font>
four Months after his Tryal , was executed on <font> Tower-hill .
<$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,296.204

The Earl of <font> Northumberland <$$font> also , being delivered up by
the <font> Scots <$$font> for a Sum of Money , was the same Year
beheaded at <font> York . <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,296.205

In the Year 1573 , the Puritans began to grow troublesome ; whereupon
the Queen caused the Acts of Uniformity to be strictly put in Execution
: SALMON-1724-2,1,296.206

Nor was she less watchful against this Sect than against the Papists ,
knowing their Principles to be equally pernicious and destructive of
Government ; SALMON-1724-2,1,296.207

and by her steady and prudent Management , she prevented their rising to
any great Head in her Reign . SALMON-1724-2,1,296.208

Don <font> John , <$$font> the Governour of the <font> Netherlands ,
<$$font> proposing to marry the Queen of <font> Scots , <$$font> and
entring into a Conspiracy with the Pope , and other Princes , to set up
her Title to the Crown of <font> England , <$$font> and depose Queen
<font> Elizabeth , <$$font> the Queen made no Scruple of assisting the
<font> Dutch <$$font> openly against <font> Spain <$$font> ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,296.209

and accordingly in the Year 1577 she entred into an Alliance with the
States , whereby she engaged to furnish them with a_thousand Horse , and
five_thousand Foot . SALMON-1724-2,1,296.210

And the Queen being daily threatned with an Invasion by foreign Princes
, and in Danger of being assassinated by <font> Popish <$$font> Zealots
at home , who were made to believe it meritorious to destroy her , the
Nation voluntarily entred into an Association , for the Preservation of
the Queen's Person , in the Year 1584 . SALMON-1724-2,1,296.211

The Queen of <font> Scots , <$$font> whose Deliverance seem'd to be one
principal End of all these Conspiracies , was taken out of the Custody
of the Earl of <font> Shrewsbury , <$$font> who had been her Keeper for
fifteen Years , and committed to the Care of Sir <font> Amias Paulet
<$$font> and Sir <font> Drue Drury , <$$font> in order to be more
strictly guarded . SALMON-1724-2,1,296.212

The Intention of the <font> Popish <$$font> <P_1,297> Princes was , it
seems , to have married the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> to some
Prince or Nobleman of their own Communion , and then set up her Title to
the Crown of <font> England , <$$font> and depose Queen <font> Elizabeth
. <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,297.213

And such Influence had the <font> Jesuits <$$font> over their Votaries ,
that even Gentlemen of Quality were induc'd to become Assassins to
promote the Cause . SALMON-1724-2,1,297.214

Mr. <font> Parry , <$$font> a Doctor of the Civil Law , and a Member of
the House of Commons , being charg'd with such a Design , acknowledg'd
he had often come into the Queen's Presence with an Intention to have
kill'd her , being satisfied of the Justice of the Action , by reading
some Popish Books . SALMON-1724-2,1,297.215

The Doctor was convicted and executed ; SALMON-1724-2,1,297.216

and the Parliament being assembled , they ratified the association ,
which had been entred into the Year before for the Preservation of the
Queen's Person ; SALMON-1724-2,1,297.217

and by the same Act provided , that whoever should be found to conspire
against Queen <font> Elizabeth , <$$font> should be incapable of
enjoying the Crown of <font> England , <$$font> and prosecuted capitally
; SALMON-1724-2,1,297.218

and appointed twenty_four of the Nobility and Council , before whom any
Person might be arraigned and tried , who should be guilty of such
Conspiracy . SALMON-1724-2,1,297.219

This was principally aim'd at the Queen of <font> Scots , <$$font> to
deter her from tampering any more with foreign Princes to depose Queen
<font> Elizabeth . <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,297.220

The distressed States of <font> Holland <$$font> imploring the Queen's
Protection again this Year , <paren> 1585 , <$$paren> the Earl of <font>
Leicester <$$font> was sent over with an Army to their Assistance ,
SALMON-1724-2,1,297.221

and <font> Flushing , Ramekins <$$font> and the <font> Brill <$$font>
were delivered to the Queen as cautionary Towns , for reimbursing the
Expence she should be at in their Protection . SALMON-1724-2,1,297.222

<font> Leicester <$$font> was made Captain_General of the confederate
Troops , SALMON-1724-2,1,297.223

and had a more unlimited Power given him by the <font> Dutch , <$$font>
than ever they trusted the Prince of <font> Orange <$$font> with .
SALMON-1724-2,1,297.224

They <P_1,298> chose to throw themselves absolutely upon the <font>
English , <$$font> rather than come any more under the <font> Spanish
<$$font> Yoke . SALMON-1724-2,1,298.225

In the following Year <paren> 1586 <$$paren> was discovered another Plot
to assassinate the Queen , which went by the Name of <font> Babington's
Conspiracy , <$$font> wherein were concerned ten or a_dozen young
Gentlemen of the best Families ; SALMON-1724-2,1,298.226

and the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> being found to have fomented and
encouraged it , after <font> Babington <$$font> and his Associates were
convicted and executed , a Commission issued to try the Queen of <font>
Scots , <$$font> in pursuance of the late Act of Parliament .
SALMON-1724-2,1,298.227

She insisted on her Independence as a Sovereign Prince ,
SALMON-1724-2,1,298.228

and would not acknowledge the Court could have any Jurisdiction over her
: SALMON-1724-2,1,298.229

But in order to clear herself of so foul an Aspersion , as the
assassinating the Queen of <font> England , <$$font> and to manifest her
Innocence , she said she would submit to answer .
SALMON-1724-2,1,298.230

As to the Letters that were produced against her , she insisted that
they were counterfeit ; SALMON-1724-2,1,298.231

and for the Evidence that was given against her by her Secretaries
<font> Nawe , Curle , <$$font> and others that had been convicted of the
Plot , this she said had been extorted from them by Fear of Death .
SALMON-1724-2,1,298.232

However , I perceive , she did not make any Difficulty to acknowledge
that she had applied herself to the King of <font> Spain , <$$font> and
the <font> Guises , <$$font> to procure her Deliverance by Force of Arms
, if other Means did not take Effect ; SALMON-1724-2,1,298.233

and she said she thought it but natural for every one to desire and
endeavour their own Liberty : SALMON-1724-2,1,298.234

But as to any Designs directly against the Life of Queen <font>
Elizabeth , <$$font> this she utterly denied . SALMON-1724-2,1,298.235

And 't@ @is very possible she might not be concerned in that Part of the
Conspiracy ; SALMON-1724-2,1,298.236

but she was most certainly engaged in such Measures , as , if they had
succeeded , must have ended in the Destruction of Queen <font> Elizabeth
: <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,298.237

And why , when the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> had <P_1,299> armed
foreign Princes against the Queen of <font> England , <$$font> and
invited her own Subjects to depose her , she might not as well be deemed
an Enemy , as if she had invaded the Kingdom , I am at a Loss to
discover . SALMON-1724-2,1,299.238

And in that Case none could have called it Injustice to have depriv'd
her of her Life : SALMON-1724-2,1,299.239

To take off an Enemy in her own just Defence , reflects no Dishonour
upon the Queen , or her Ministry . SALMON-1724-2,1,299.240

However , Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> shew'd all the Reluctance
imaginable to put the Sentence of her Commissioners in Execution against
the Queen of <font> Scots , <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,299.241

and would gladly have found out a Mean to prevent it ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,299.242

but while she was deliberating how to dispose of her , the <font> French
<$$font> Ambassador hired Assassins to murder Queen <font> Elizabeth .
<$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,299.243

This , with the Reflection on the Murder of the Prince of <font> Orange
, <$$font> who had been dispatch'd by a Popish Cut-throat in her Reign ,
and the repeated Addresses of her People in Parliament to consent to the
Execution , and prevent hers and her Subjects Ruin , prevail'd on the
Queen to sign the death {TEXT:dead} Warrant . SALMON-1724-2,1,299.244

Whether she intended it should have been executed suddenly or not , does
not seem very material , the Thing appearing so highly just as well as
necessary . SALMON-1724-2,1,299.245

Possibly few private Men would make a Scruple of taking away a Man's
Life who lay in wait for theirs , especially if there was no other way
of preserving their own : SALMON-1724-2,1,299.246

How much more , when the Fate of a whole Nation was concerned , and they
saw all the Popish Princes arming against them , and daily exciting
Assassins to destroy that Life on whom their Security depended ?
SALMON-1724-2,1,299.247

Had their Designs succeeded against Queen <font> Elizabeth , <$$font>
and the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> had step'd into the Throne , how
would the Nation and all the Protestant Powers have lamented the
Supineness of our Government , who had received such repeated Warning of
their approaching <P_1,300> Ruin , and yet neglected the only Means for
its Preservation ? SALMON-1724-2,1,300.248

Another bloody Persecution would probably have been the Effect of their
Easiness , and Superstition and Ignorance once again overspread the Face
of <font> Europe <$$font> ; for the Preservation whereof we are not a
little indebted to the Wisdom and Steadiness of those who were then in
the Administration . SALMON-1724-2,1,300.249

But , notwithstanding the Death of the Queen of <font> Scots , <$$font>
the <font> Spaniard <$$font> continued his Preparations to invade <font>
England , <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,300.250

and the Pope consecrated the Expedition , SALMON-1724-2,1,300.251

and invited all Catholick Princes to take upon them the Crusado , and
assist in the Enterprize , as more meritorious than a War with Infidels
. SALMON-1724-2,1,300.252

Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> was already deposed , as far as a Decree
of the Papal Chair could do it : SALMON-1724-2,1,300.253

Her Subjects were absolved from their Allegiance , and her Kingdom given
to the Prince that could make a Conquest of it .
SALMON-1724-2,1,300.254

And in the Year 1588 , the greatest Fleet that ever appear'd upon the
Ocean , was mann'd out by <font> Philip <$$font> King of <font> Spain ,
<$$font> to make a Descent upon <font> England , <$$font>
SALMON-1724-2,1,300.255

and had they not been dispers'd and destroy'd by Storms , and
disappointed of the Land Forces with which the Prince of <font> Parma
<$$font> was to have join'd them from <font> Flanders , <$$font> I do@
@n't see how the <font> English <$$font> could have resisted them ,
their Men of War being of a Size so much superior to the <font> English
. <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,300.256

'T@ @is true , they proved so very heavy and unwieldy {TEXT:unweildy} ,
that they could but little annoy their Enemies , who attack'd them , and
retir'd as they saw fit . SALMON-1724-2,1,300.257

But the <font> English <$$font> could never have prevented a Descent ,
if the Prince of <font> Parma <$$font> had been ready with his Land
Forces to have join'd the <font> Spanish <$$font> Fleet from <font>
Flanders . <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,300.258

All that the <font> English <$$font> Fleet could do , was to pelt them
at a Distance , and cut their Masts and Rigging :
SALMON-1724-2,1,300.259

There was no such thing as sinking them , or grappling with Ships that
were so tall , and strongly <P_1,301> built and mann'd , by Ships that
were little bigger than our Frigates are now . SALMON-1724-2,1,301.260

One Stratagem indeed the <font> English <$$font> try'd with great
Success , SALMON-1724-2,1,301.261

and that was the sending Fireships amongst them , while they lay at an
Anchor before <font> Calais , <$$font> waiting for the Land Forces under
the Prince of <font> Parma . <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,301.262

This so terrified the <font> Spanish <$$font> Fleet , it seems , that
they cut their Cables , and put to Sea , and never durst come to Anchor
on the Coast of <font> Flanders <$$font> again ; but stood to the <font>
North <$$font> ; and having sail'd round <font> Scotland <$$font> and
<font> Ireland , <$$font> returned to <font> Spain , <$$font> having
receiv'd great Damage by Storms , tho' very little from their Enemies ,
who could not grapple with them , SALMON-1724-2,1,301.263

and their Ordnance were too small to sink them , that if ever any
Deliverance is to be ascrib'd to Providence , this certainly might .
SALMON-1724-2,1,301.264

Indeed , the Queen had raised three great Armies against this Invasion ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,301.265

but whether they would have been a Match for those Veteran Troops the
Prince of <font> Parma <$$font> was to bring from <font> Flanders ,
<$$font> and those taken on Board in <font> Spain , <$$font> is a very
great Question . SALMON-1724-2,1,301.266

And I am apt to think , that the true Reason the Prince of <font> Parma
<$$font> could not spare the Troops he had promised , was the great
Diversion the <font> English <$$font> and <font> Dutch <$$font> gave him
in <font> Flanders <$$font> ; SALMON-1724-2,1,301.267

for I find afterwards the <font> Dutch <$$font> urging the great Efforts
they had made this Year against the <font> Spaniard , <$$font> when the
Queen demanded the Money she had disbursed in their Defence .
SALMON-1724-2,1,301.268

And would the <font> Dutch <$$font> be contented with their Share of
Trade , it must certainly ever be the Interest of the two Nations to
entertain a friendly Correspondence ; SALMON-1724-2,1,301.269

for while they do so , 't@ @will be difficult for the greatest Princes
in <font> Europe <$$font> to make any Impression on either .
SALMON-1724-2,1,301.270

But we ought to follow the Precedent Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> set
us , that is , to assist them with Forces sufficient to defend their own
Territories , and not with vast Armies to extend <P_1,302> their
Dominions , while we ruin and impoverish our own .
SALMON-1724-2,1,302.271

It can never be our Interest to make the <font> Dutch <$$font> a more
powerful People than our selves , who are the greatest Rivals we have in
Trade . SALMON-1724-2,1,302.272

To return : The <font> Spaniards <$$font> having ruin'd the greatest
Fleet that ever put to Sea , were now in no Condition to act offensively
; SALMON-1724-2,1,302.273

and the <font> English <$$font> the next Year returned their Visit ,
SALMON-1724-2,1,302.274

and infested the Coasts of <font> Spain : <$$font>
SALMON-1724-2,1,302.275

They attempted to rescue <font> Portugal <$$font> out of the Hands of
the <font> Spaniards , <$$font> and set Don <font> Antonio <$$font> upon
the Throne . SALMON-1724-2,1,302.276

But in this they did not meet with the Success they expected , the
<font> Portugese <$$font> not revolting , as they had been made to
believe they would , upon Don <font> Antonio <$$font> 's appearing
amongst them . SALMON-1724-2,1,302.277

About this time <paren> 1589 <$$paren> <font> France <$$font> was
miserably distracted with Factions and Civil Wars ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,302.278

and the Duke of <font> Guise <$$font> insulting the <font> French
<$$font> King , and driving him from <font> Paris , <$$font> the King
procured the Duke , and his Brother the Cardinal , to be murdered ,
which was soon returned upon him in kind ; SALMON-1724-2,1,302.279

for the League or Popish Party caus'd the King himself to be
assassinated by <font> James Clement <$$font> a Monk ; whereupon <font>
Henry <$$font> King of <font> Navarre <$$font> succeeded to that Crown :
SALMON-1724-2,1,302.280

But meeting with the same Opposition his Predecessor had , he was forced
to beg the Assistance of Queen <font> Elizabeth , <$$font> who supply'd
him with Men and Money . SALMON-1724-2,1,302.281

And notwithstanding the Assistance she gave the <font> Dutch <$$font>
and the <font> French , <$$font> and the Expence she was at in opposing
the <font> Spaniard , <$$font> still she kept the Government clear of
Debts ; SALMON-1724-2,1,302.282

how urgent soever her Occasions were , she never mortgag'd the Kingdom
in the Quarrel . SALMON-1724-2,1,302.283

And surely no Prince , that ever sat upon the <font> English <$$font>
Throne , had more powerful Enemies to contend with , or fewer Allies to
support her . SALMON-1724-2,1,302.284

<P_1,303>

During the War with the <font> Spaniards , <$$font> the Queen employ'd
her Shipping in annoying their Trade both in <font> Europe <$$font> and
the <font> West-Indies <$$font> ; SALMON-1724-2,1,303.286

and took almost Prizes enough to bear the Charges of the War :
SALMON-1724-2,1,303.287

But in the Year 1596 she fitted out a great Fleet , commanded by the
Lord <font> Charles Howard , <$$font> with Land Forces on Board , under
the Command of the Earl of <font> Essex . <$$font>
SALMON-1724-2,1,303.288

They set sail from <font> Plymouth <$$font> the beginning of <font> June
, <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,303.289

and on the 20th cast Anchor before <font> Cadiz . <$$font>
SALMON-1724-2,1,303.290

The Earl of <font> Essex <$$font> took the Town by Storm ,
SALMON-1724-2,1,303.291

and the Castle surrendered the next Day , SALMON-1724-2,1,303.292

and gave Hostages for the Payment of four_hundred_and_twenty_thousand
Ducats for their Ransom . SALMON-1724-2,1,303.293

The Fleet having destroyed abundance of Shipping in the Harbour , and
the Town being plundered and demolished , they set sail with their
Hostages for <font> England . <$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,303.294

The whole Damage the <font> Spaniard <$$font> sustained in the
Expedition is computed at twenty Millions of Ducats .
SALMON-1724-2,1,303.295

The Plunder of the Town , which was very great , was given to the
Soldiers and Sailors ; SALMON-1724-2,1,303.296

and every private Man brought home something as a Reward and Testimony
of his Valour . SALMON-1724-2,1,303.297

The Earl of <font> Essex <$$font> was now the great Favourite at Court ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,303.298

but being a Gentleman of a free open Conversation , and pretty much a
Stranger to the Courtier's Arts , his Enemies soon brought about his
Ruin . SALMON-1724-2,1,303.299

And indeed the Queen had so indulg'd him , that he knew not how to put
any Bounds to his Ambition , but expected she should submit to his
Judgment in the Disposal of every Place or Office .
SALMON-1724-2,1,303.300

And the Queen once proposing to send a Governor to <font> Ireland ,
<$$font> whom he did not approve of , he contemptuously turn'd his Back
upon her Majesty , SALMON-1724-2,1,303.301

and sneer'd in her Face , which so provok'd the Queen , that she hit him
a Box of the Ear . Whereupon in a great Rage he left the Court :
SALMON-1724-2,1,303.302

<P_1,304>

And although he was afterwards seemingly reconciled to her Majesty , and
made General of her Forces in <font> Ireland , <$$font> it appeared he
never forgot the Blow she had given him ; SALMON-1724-2,1,304.304

for instead of promoting the Service there , he entered into a
Conspiracy to compel her to discard all his Enemies , and put the
Administration into such Hands as he thought fit to direct .
SALMON-1724-2,1,304.305

Whether he had any Design upon the Queen's Life , may be made a Question
; SALMON-1724-2,1,304.306

but he was certainly guilty of conspiring to govern her Counsels ,
SALMON-1724-2,1,304.307

and actually fortify'd his House , SALMON-1724-2,1,304.308

and attempted to raise the City for these Ends ; so that the Queen was
compell'd to proceed capitally against him , tho' she would gladly have
sav'd his Life on account of his former Services in <font> Spain .
<$$font> SALMON-1724-2,1,304.309

As to the foolish Stories of a Passion the Queen entertain'd for him ,
beyond what Princes generally do towards their Favourites , I see no
manner of Grounds to give any Credit to them . SALMON-1724-2,1,304.310

In the Year 1601 , several Patents having been obtain'd for Monopolies ,
it was represented in Parliament , how illegal as well as injurious they
were to the Subject . Whereupon the Queen , without staying for an
Address from the Houses , immediately ordered a Proclamation for
recalling them ; SALMON-1724-2,1,304.311

and the Commons deputing about eight of their Number to return her their
Thanks , she declared she was ignorant of the ill Consequences of them ;
and that she had rather her Heart or Hand should perish , than that
either one or the other should allow such Privileges to Monopolists , as
should be prejudicial to her People . SALMON-1724-2,1,304.312

She assured them she never desired an arbitrary Rule , or to found her
own Grandeur on the Ruin of her Subjects ; but on the contrary would
resign both her Kingdom and her Life to serve them .
SALMON-1724-2,1,304.313

The <font> Spaniards , <$$font> her constant Enemies , still endeavoured
to foment a Rebellion in <font> Ireland , <$$font>
SALMON-1724-2,1,304.314

and this <P_1,305> Year <paren> 1601 <$$paren> sent over a Body of
Troops to that Kingdom to join the Rebels ; SALMON-1724-2,1,305.315

but the Queen's Forces had the good Fortune to defeat them , and reduce
that Kingdom to an entire Obedience ; so that before her Death her
Dominions enjoy'd an universal Tranquility . SALMON-1724-2,1,305.316

And as she was of Opinion , that the most effectual way to continue it ,
was the uniting the whole Island under one Head , in her last Illness
she advised her Ministers to promote the Succession of King <font> James
<$$font> VI. of <font> Scotland <$$font> ; though the <font> Suffolk
<$$font> Family were appointed by her Father King <font> Henry <$$font>
's Will to succeed to the Crown , and that Will had the Authority of an
Act of Parliament to support it . SALMON-1724-2,1,305.317

From this Review of the Queen's Reign , Mr. <font> Echard's <$$font>
Character of her seems so very just and full , that it seems entirely
unnecessary to attempt another ; SALMON-1724-2,1,305.318

and therefore I proceed to the following Reign .
SALMON-1724-2,1,305.319

<heading>

<font> James <$$font> I . SALMON-1724-2,1,305.321

<$$heading>

<font> James <$$font> I. {TEXT:I,} of <font> England , <$$font> and VI.
of <font> Scotland , <$$font> was the Son of <font> Henry Stuart ,
<$$font> Lord <font> Darnley , <$$font> by <font> Mary <$$font> Queen of
<font> Scots , <$$font> who was the only Child of <font> James <$$font>
V. King of <font> Scots , <$$font> who was the eldest Son of <font>
James <$$font> IV. King of <font> Scots , <$$font> and <font> Margaret
<$$font> his Wife , eldest Daughter of <font> Henry <$$font> VII. King
of <font> England . <$$font> So that it appears that King <font> James
<$$font> I. was great Grandson of the Princess <font> Margaret ,
<$$font> the eldest Daughter of <font> Henry <$$font> VII. and that
upon Failure of Issue of <font> Henry <$$font> VIII. who <P_1,306> was
the only surviving Son of <font> Henry <$$font> VII. King <font> James
<$$font> I. had an unquestionable Title by Descent to the Crown of
<font> England <$$font> , which was strengthened {TEXT:strengthned} also
by the Appointment of Queen <font> Elizabeth . <$$font>
SALMON-1724-2,1,306.323

He was crown'd the 25th of <font> July <$$font> 1603 .
SALMON-1724-2,1,306.324

To King <font> James <$$font> 's it has been objected , that the
Succession of the Crown was limited by the 35th of <font> Henry <$$font>
VIII. <paren> upon Failure of Issue of the Princesses <font> Mary
<$$font> and <font> Elizabeth <$$font> <$$paren> to such Person as King
<font> Henry <$$font> should appoint by his last Will : And that <font>
Henry <$$font> VIII. afterwards made his Will , and appointed , that on
Failure of Issue of his Daughters <font> Mary <$$font> and <font>
Elizabeth <$$font> , the Crown should <font> remain and come <$$font> to
the Heirs of the Body of the Lady <font> Frances , <$$font> eldest
Daughter to his Sister <font> Mary <$$font> the <font> French <$$font>
Queen , lawfully begotten ; and for Default of Issue of the Body of the
said <font> Frances <$$font> , to the Heirs of the Body of the Lady
<font> Eleanor <$$font> , second Daughter to the said <font> French
<$$font> Queen , Remainder to his own right Heirs .
SALMON-1724-2,1,306.325

This <font> Mary <$$font> the <font> French <$$font> Queen was the
younger Sister of <font> Henry <$$font> VIII . SALMON-1724-2,1,306.326

She first married <font> Lewis <$$font> XII. the <font> French <$$font>
King , who died in a little time , and left no Issue by her ; whereupon
King <font> Henry <$$font> married her to his great Favourite <font>
Charles Brandon , <$$font> Duke of <font> Suffolk <$$font> , by whom she
had Issue the Lady <font> Frances <$$font> , and the Lady <font> Eleanor
<$$font> ; to the Issue of whose Bodies , sucessively , King <font>
Henry <$$font> VIII. limited the Succesion of the Crown , as above .
SALMON-1724-2,1,306.327

From the eldest of these Sisters , <font> viz. <$$font> the Lady <font>
Frances <$$font> , descended the <font> Ailesbury <$$font> Family ;
SALMON-1724-2,1,306.328

and from the youngest , namely , the Lady <font> Eleanor <$$font> ,
descended the <font> Derby <$$font> Family . SALMON-1724-2,1,306.329

How the Nation came to prefer the <font> Scots <$$font> Line before
either of them , contrary to the Act of Settlement , I have hinted
already ; SALMON-1724-2,1,306.330

and since they have neither of them made any Claim to the Crown , our
Allegiance is certainly <P_1,307> due to the <font> Stuarts <$$font> ,
who have the Right of Blood on their Side , as well as an Act for
recognizing their Title , 1 <font> Jac. <$$font> I <font> Cap.
<$$font> 1 . wherein the two Houses say : That being bounden thereunto
both by the Laws of God and Men , they do recognize and acknowledge ,
that immediately upon the Dissolution and Decease of Queen <font>
Elizabeth <$$font> , the Crown of <font> England <$$font> did by
inherent Birth-right , and lawful and undoubted Succession , descend and
come to King <font> James <$$font> , as being lineally , justly , and
lawfully next and sole Heir of the Blood Royal . And that by lawful
Right of Descent , his Majesty is of the Realms and Kingdoms of <font>
England <$$font> , <font> France <$$font> , <font> Ireland <$$font> ,
King , and thereby more able to protect and govern his Subjects , than
any of his Progenitors . SALMON-1724-2,1,307.331

And they do most humbly and faithfully submit and oblige themselves .
<font> their Heirs and Posterities <$$font> , to his Majesty and <font>
his royal Progeny and Posterity for ever . <$$font>
SALMON-1724-2,1,307.332

King <font> James <$$font> I. married <font> Anne <$$font> the Daughter
of <font> Frederick <$$font> II. King of <font> Denmark <$$font> , by
whom he had Issue , 1. <font> Henry <$$font> his eldest Son , who died
at eighteen Years of Age unmarried ; 2. <font> Robert , <$$font> who
died in his Infancy ; 3. <font> Charles <$$font> , who succeeded his
Father by the Name of <font> Charles <$$font> I .
SALMON-1724-2,1,307.333

He had Issue also by Queen <font> Anne <$$font> three Daughters , <font>
viz. <$$font> 1. <font> Elizabeth , <$$font> <paren> married to <font>
Frederick <$$font> V. Count Palatine of the <font> Rhine <$$font> ,
Elector , Cup-bearer , and High Steward of the Empire , sometimes stiled
King of <font> Bohemia <$$font> <$$paren> from whom his present Majesty
King <font> George <$$font> is descended ; 2. <font> Margaret <$$font>
, who died in her Infancy ; 3. <font> Mary , <$$font> who lived two
Years , five Months , and eight Days ; 4. <font> Sophia <$$font> , who
died three Days after she was born . SALMON-1724-2,1,307.334

King <font> James <$$font> I. died the 27th of <font> March <$$font> ,
in the 59th Year of his Age , and the 23d of his Reign , <font> A.D.
<$$font> 1625 . SALMON-1724-2,1,307.335

