<BEGIN_sheridan-1756-2>

{COM:In_this_text,_possessive_"its"_is_always_spelled_"it's"}

<P_192>

<heading>

Chap. III . SHERIDAN-1756-2,192.5

<font> That the Greek and Roman languages owed their stability and
permanence to oratory . SHERIDAN-1756-2,192.6

With some animadversions upon the neglect of studying the English
language . <$$font> SHERIDAN-1756-2,192.7

<$$heading>

The same means which brought these languages to a state of perfection ,
were also necessary to preserve them in that state .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,192.9

As the practice of orators had introduced the study of language , which
was the cause of it's refinement , so when it was refined to the utmost
, the necessity of continuing the <P_193> study of language was greater
than before . SHERIDAN-1756-2,193.10

For the taste of the people being now much improved and refined , by
constantly hearing such as spoke in the most pure and perfect manner ,
would immediately be sensible of the least deviation from what was right
, and be offended at any improper tone , or use of words in their
publick speakers . SHERIDAN-1756-2,193.11

There are many instances recorded of their great delicacy in this
respect . SHERIDAN-1756-2,193.12

The story of the old Athenian herb-woman and Theophrastus is well known
. SHERIDAN-1756-2,193.13

' That old woman called Theophrastus <paren> a man in general remarkable
for elocution <$$paren> a stranger , only on account of observing in him
too nice an exactness in the pronunciation of a single word ;
SHERIDAN-1756-2,193.14

and being asked her reason , said she had no other , but that he spoke
too Attically . ' SHERIDAN-1756-2,193.15

Cicero says of the Athenians in general , <font> Atticorum aures teretes
& religiosae <$$font> . SHERIDAN-1756-2,193.16

He shews also that the Romans in his time were as nice , when he <P_194>
says , ' that in the repetition of a verse the whole theatre was in an
uproar , if a single syllable was pronounced a little longer or shorter
than it ought to be . Not that the crowd was at all acquainted with the
quantity of poetick feet , or had any notion of numbers ; nor could they
tell what it was which gave them offence , or why , or in what respect
it was a fault . ' SHERIDAN-1756-2,194.17

Whence could this arise but from that general good taste infused into
them by being habituated to hear nothing but what was pure and correct ?
SHERIDAN-1756-2,194.18

and how much pains must have been taken by such as intended to speak in
publick , with respect to pronunciation , when the least deviation from
propriety would be perceived by the meanest of the people ?
SHERIDAN-1756-2,194.19

Accordingly we find , that after the care of their morals , this was the
principal object of attention in the education of youth , whose chief
employment was the study of their own language . SHERIDAN-1756-2,194.20

<P_195>

The Greeks studied only their own , SHERIDAN-1756-2,195.22

and consequently had much labour saved . SHERIDAN-1756-2,195.23

The Romans studied the Greek , SHERIDAN-1756-2,195.24

but it was only with a view to improvement in the knowlege of their own
, which had ever the preference with them , and employed the greatest
part of their time . SHERIDAN-1756-2,195.25

They took such care with respect to pronunciation that it extended even
to their choice of nurses and servants , who were to be about them in
their infant age . SHERIDAN-1756-2,195.26

What shall we say then to our practice , so contrary to that of those
polished nations , which we admire so much , and pretend to emulate ;
who take great pains in studying all languages but our own ? Who are
very nice and curious in our choice of preceptors for the antient and
modern tongues , yet suffer <P_196> our children to be vitiated in the
very first principles of our own , by committing them to the care of
some of the most ignorant and lowest of mankind .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,196.27

Is it because that the knowlege of our language is so easily acquired ,
that it can scarce be missed ? SHERIDAN-1756-2,196.28

This surely can not be said , when it is universally allowed , that
there are hardly any who speak or write it correctly .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,196.29

Is it because we have less use for it than any other ?
SHERIDAN-1756-2,196.30

Can that be supposed , when it is the only one used upon all important
as well as common occasions of life ? SHERIDAN-1756-2,196.31

When we consider that after the Greek and Roman languages were brought
to a standard of perfection , when their youth had the advantage of
established invariable rules upon which to found their knowlege ; of
able preceptors to instruct and guide them ; of the noblest examples and
most perfect patterns for their imitation ; that with all these aids
they still found it necessary to apply a great portion of their time in
their more adult years , to make themselves masters of it ; shall we who
have none of these advantages , without any pains or application expect
to have a <P_197> competent knowlege of one , which in it's present
state is far more difficult to be learned than theirs ?
SHERIDAN-1756-2,197.32

This omission in our education is the more wonderful , whether we
consider the great importance of the point to the state in general , or
it's universal use to all the individuals who compose it .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,197.33

Mr. Locke has represented and complained of this defect in the
strongest terms . SHERIDAN-1756-2,197.34

' To write and speak correctly , gives a grace , SHERIDAN-1756-2,197.35

and gains a favourable attention to what one has to say :
SHERIDAN-1756-2,197.36

and since 't@ @is English that an English gentleman will have constant
use of , that is the language he should chiefly cultivate , and wherein
most care should be taken to polish and perfect his style .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,197.37

To speak or write better Latin than English , may make a man be talked
of , SHERIDAN-1756-2,197.38

but he will find it more to his purpose , to express himself well in his
own tongue , that he uses every moment , than to have the vain
commendation of others for a very insignificant quality .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,197.39

This I find universally neglected , nor no care taken any where to
improve young men in their own language , that they <P_198> may
thoroughly understand and be masters of it . SHERIDAN-1756-2,198.40

If any one among us have a facility or purity more than ordinary in his
mother tongue , it is owing to chance , or his genius , or any thing ,
rather than his education , or any care of his teacher .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,198.41

To mind what English his pupil speaks or writes , is below the dignity
of one bred up amongst Greek and Latin , tho' he have but little of them
himself . SHERIDAN-1756-2,198.42

These are the learned languages fit only for learned men to meddle with
and teach ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,198.43

English is the language of illiterate vulgar : tho' yet we see the
polity of some of our neighbours hath not thought it beneath the publick
care to promote and reward the improvement of their own language .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,198.44

Polishing and enriching their tongue is no small business amongst them ;
SHERIDAN-1756-2,198.45

it hath colleges and stipends appointed it , SHERIDAN-1756-2,198.46

and there is raised amongst them a great ambition and emulation of
writing correctly : SHERIDAN-1756-2,198.47

and we see what they are come to by it , and how far they have spread
one of the worst languages possibly in this part of the world , if we
look upon it as it was in <P_199> some few reigns backwards , whatever
it be now . SHERIDAN-1756-2,199.48

The great men among the Romans were daily exercising themselves in their
own language ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,199.49

and we find yet upon record , the names of orators , who taught some of
their emperors Latin , tho' it were their mother tongue .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,199.50

'T@ @is plain the Greeks were yet more nice in theirs ;
SHERIDAN-1756-2,199.51

all other speech was barbarous to them but their own ,
SHERIDAN-1756-2,199.52

and no foreign language appears to have been studied or valued amongst
that learned and acute people ; tho' it be past doubt that they borrowed
their learning and philosophy from abroad . SHERIDAN-1756-2,199.53

I am not here speaking against Greek and Latin ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,199.54

I think they ought to be studied , and the Latin at least understood
well by every gentleman . SHERIDAN-1756-2,199.55

But whatever foreign languages a young man meddles with <paren> and the
more he knows the better <$$paren> that which he should critically study
, and labour to get a facility , clearness , and elegancy to express
himself in , should be his own , SHERIDAN-1756-2,199.56

and to this purpose he should daily be exercised in it . '
SHERIDAN-1756-2,199.57

<P_200>

In another place he says , ' There can scarce be a greater defect in a
gentleman , than not to express himself well either in writing or
speaking . SHERIDAN-1756-2,200.59

But yet I think , I may ask my reader , whether he doth not know a great
many , who live upon their estates , and so , with the name , should
have the qualities of gentlemen , who can not so much as tell a story as
they should , much less speak clearly , and persuasively in any business
. SHERIDAN-1756-2,200.60

This I think not to be so much their fault as the fault of their
education ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,200.61

for I must without partiality do my countrymen this right , that where
they apply themselves , I see none of their neighbours outgo them .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,200.62

They have been taught rhetorick , but yet never taught how to express
themselves handsomely with their tongues or pens in the language they
are always to use ; as if the names of the figures that embellished the
discourses of those who understood the art of speaking , were the very
art and skill of speaking well . SHERIDAN-1756-2,200.63

This , as all other things of practice , is to be learned not by a few
or a great many rules given , but by exercise , and application ,
<P_201> according to good rules , or rather patterns , 'till habits are
got , and a facility of doing it well . ' SHERIDAN-1756-2,201.64

Mr. Addison has many passages wherein he lays open , and laments this
defect ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,201.65

and it is one of bishop Berkley's quaere's , ' Whether half the learning
and study of these kingdoms is not useless , for want of a proper
delivery , and pronunciation , being taught in our schools and colleges
? ' SHERIDAN-1756-2,201.66

Indeed there is not any one of the least understanding , who has either
wrote or spoke upon this subject , that has not allowed this shameful
neglect of our own language to be one of the greatest of our national
evils . SHERIDAN-1756-2,201.67

Is it not therefore astonishing that no remedy has hitherto been thought
of ? SHERIDAN-1756-2,201.68

Would it be credited , were it not warranted by fact , that a polished
and rational people should be at great expence of labour , time , and
money , to have their children instructed in languages which never can
be of any use to them in life , and seldom even contribute to their
pleasure ; whilst they neglect entirely to have them instructed in one
which would be of perpetual use or ornament to them , <P_202> in
whatever rank or station they were placed , upon matters of the highest
importance , as well as the common occurrences of life ; and which might
be a principal means of procuring them profit and promotion ?
SHERIDAN-1756-2,202.69

It may be said by some , that being our mother tongue , we have no
occasion to learn it by rule , and that without study , we shall of
course acquire a sufficient knowlege of it . SHERIDAN-1756-2,202.70

But is this assertion warranted by experience ? SHERIDAN-1756-2,202.71

If the contrary be true ; if it must be allowed that people are almost
universally deficient both in understanding and speaking it , the
argument for studying it will be so much the stronger on account of it's
being a mother tongue . Because if it be generally ill spoken , it will
not be possible but that boys in their childhood , and youths as they go
more abroad into the world , must habitually fall into errors , and
contract bad customs , which can be remedied by nothing but study and
application . Whereas there is no such danger in any of the other
languages , when learned from the mouth of a judicious and skilful
master . SHERIDAN-1756-2,202.72

There are few schools in these realms <P_203> which may not bear
testimony to the truth of this ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,203.73

for in those it is a common observation , that boys are often able to
write exercises in pure and correct Latin , who at the same time can not
express their thoughts with the least grace or propriety in their own
language . SHERIDAN-1756-2,203.74

Indeed it might astonish any one to think , that we should still persist
in so gross an error , who has not sufficiently weighed the force of
fashion , or considered the difficulty of making any alteration in
national customs when they have been once established .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,203.75

It may therefore be worth while to trace this defect to it's original ,
by which we may perceive , that tho' our ancestors were wise in chusing
the method of education which they established in their days , as best
suited to the circumstances of the times , yet we are very unwise in
persevering in the same system without variation , when times and
circumstances are so much changed . SHERIDAN-1756-2,203.76

The true <P_204> way of imitating the wisdom of our forefathers is , not
to tread exactly in their steps , and to do the same things in the same
manner ; but to act in such a way as we might with reason suppose they
would , did they live in these days , and things were so situated as
they are at present . SHERIDAN-1756-2,204.77

<heading>

Chap. IV . SHERIDAN-1756-2,204.79

<font> Causes of the neglect hitherto of studying the English language .
<$$font> SHERIDAN-1756-2,204.80

<$$heading>

The time of establishing a general system of education in England , was
not till the reformation was first begun . SHERIDAN-1756-2,204.82

Previous to that , our schools and colleges were chiefly for the use of
those destined to the function of the priesthood ,
SHERIDAN-1756-2,204.83

and what little knowlege and learning were in the kingdom , seem to have
been pretty much monopolized by that order . SHERIDAN-1756-2,204.84

The laity were in general so illiterate , that many even of the nobility
and gentry could neither read nor write . SHERIDAN-1756-2,204.85

The language was then so rude and barbarous , that few <P_205> books
were written in it which were either fit for entertainment or use ;
SHERIDAN-1756-2,205.86

consequently there could be no inducements to the study of it .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,205.87

At the same time it was so subject to change , that what was spoke in
one century could not be understood in another . Insomuch that the
history of persons and times must have come to us in a very maimed and
imperfect manner , had not the records been preserved in the Latin of
the monks ; which however mangled and deformed it might be when compared
with it's beautiful original , yet had still the advantage over the
modern tongues , of stability ; and was of course fitter for preserving
and transmitting events to posterity . SHERIDAN-1756-2,205.88

It must be remembered that not long previous to this period of time ,
the arts and sciences had revived in Europe , and the Greek and Roman
languages began to be taught in their purity . SHERIDAN-1756-2,205.89

This was owing to the inundation of Barbarians , and Turks , which had
overrun Greece , whose dispersed inhabitants furnished all the countries
in Europe with masters . SHERIDAN-1756-2,205.90

The liberal arts , and the two learned languages , were welcomed in all
<P_206> places as illustrious strangers ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,206.91

they treated at courts with high marks of distinction ,
SHERIDAN-1756-2,206.92

and the pope , Francis the first , Charles the fifth , and Henry the
eighth , vied with each other in the encouragement which they gave them
. SHERIDAN-1756-2,206.93

As these languages were the repositaries of all the knowlege and wisdom
of antiquity , no wonder they were made the chief object of education .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,206.94

It was by the study of these alone , that knowlege could then be
acquired . SHERIDAN-1756-2,206.95

There were as yet few or no translations into our language of the Greek
and Roman authors ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,206.96

and indeed it was so very defective , that it was not capable of giving
any just or satisfactory idea of them . SHERIDAN-1756-2,206.97

Besides this , there were at that time many other motives and
inducements to the general study of those languages , both of necessity
and use , which do not hold now . SHERIDAN-1756-2,206.98

After the writings of Luther and Calvin had appeared , all Europe was
embroiled in religious disputes , in which we were necessarily involved
by our secession from the church of Rome . SHERIDAN-1756-2,206.99

None of the modern languages were sufficiently refined or fixed <P_207>
to become of general use . SHERIDAN-1756-2,207.100

As it was necessary to the several combatants of the different nations ,
that someone language understood by all should be pitched upon , in
which they should manage their disputes , the Latin was chosen by common
consent , SHERIDAN-1756-2,207.101

and obtained a general currency . SHERIDAN-1756-2,207.102

On this account that language was then spoken and written by all the
learned in Europe , with as much fluency and facility as the polite now
speak or write French . SHERIDAN-1756-2,207.103

A knowlege of the Greek was also necessary , as the new testament ,
which contained the subjects of controversy , and furnished them chiefly
with materials to support it , was written in that language .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,207.104

As the interests and passions of princes and of parties mingled
themselves in these contests , men of the greatest abilities and most
distinguished talents , were of course favoured and encouraged by them
to be champions in the cause which they espoused .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,207.105

The roads to the temples of fame and fortune were not passable then ,
without first going thro' Greek and Latin ; so that all who had either
in view , must necessarily pass thro' those , whatever expence of time
or <P_208> labour it might cost them . SHERIDAN-1756-2,208.106

As these religious controversies were the main objects of view in the
state at that time , so in the mode of education they seem to have been
chiefly considered . SHERIDAN-1756-2,208.107

After the two languages , logick and metaphysicks were the principal
studies , to make them able disputants , to assist them in unravelling
fallacies , or in perplexing and confounding their opponents .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,208.108

The laity being just freed from the tyrannical power exercised over
their minds by the clergy , which was chiefly supported by an opinion of
superior knowlege and learning in that order , were now resolved not to
be behind-hand {COM:sic} with them in those points ,
SHERIDAN-1756-2,208.109

and therefore greedily embraced the same method of education .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,208.110

Thus it happened that all persons whatever , designed for professions
ever so different , ecclesiastical , civil , or military , the pulpit ,
senate-house , bar , physick , or army , were all trained exactly in one
and the same way . SHERIDAN-1756-2,208.111

To understand , speak , and write Latin well , as the language by which
they could acquire most knowlege , and which would be of the greatest
use to them in life , was of <P_209> course the universal study ; whilst
their own , which on account of it's poverty could only serve them in
common offices , was little regarded . SHERIDAN-1756-2,209.112

This general attention to Greek and Latin , as it was founded on reason
and the necessity of the times , so was it also productive of the best
consequences in regard to the English language ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,209.113

for without having that particular point in view , all the learned were
daily and imperceptibly improving and enriching their own by words and
phrases borrowed from those two excellent languages ,
SHERIDAN-1756-2,209.114

and habitually made that which was before wild and anomalous , conform
to the regularity and order of those , as much as it's genius and
particular construction would admit . SHERIDAN-1756-2,209.115

What a mighty progress was made in this respect during the reign of
queen Elizabeth , may be seen by comparing the authors of that time with
those who preceded them . SHERIDAN-1756-2,209.116

That this was entirely owing to their skill in the learned languages ,
may be shewn by observing that there are no traces of the English having
been particularly studied , or made part of education during her <P_210>
reign . SHERIDAN-1756-2,210.117

Nor was there any society of men either of publick or private
institution , whose office it might be to examine and fix rules to our
language . SHERIDAN-1756-2,210.118

That wise princess knew that the time was not yet come for such a work .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,210.119

It had not yet arrived at it's maturity ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,210.120

and to attempt before that , to fix it to a standard , might effectually
stop it's growth . SHERIDAN-1756-2,210.121

She therefore judiciously chose to give all manner of encouragement to
the study of the learned languages , by which it was nourished and
supported , and daily grew in size and strength .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,210.122

Had her successors taken as much pains to give liability to our language
, as she did to bring it to perfection , it might at this day even vie
with those of antiquity , and far excel any now spoken in the world .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,210.123

For want of this , it is the opinion of one whose authority must be of
great weight , <paren> as no man hath perhaps more closely studied the
point , none certainly hath wrote more correctly <$$paren> that our
language has suffered as many corruptions since her time , as it has
received <P_211> improvement . SHERIDAN-1756-2,211.124

The passage being curious and to the point , I shall here set it down .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,211.125

' The period wherein the English tongue received most improvement , I
take to commence with the beginning of queen Elizabeth's reign , and to
conclude with the great rebellion in forty-two .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,211.126

It is true , there was a very ill taste both of style and wit , which
prevailed under king James the first ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,211.127

but that seems to have been corrected in the first years of his
successor ; who , among many other qualifications of an excellent prince
, was a great patron of learning . SHERIDAN-1756-2,211.128

From that great rebellion to this present time , I am apt to doubt
whether the corruptions in our language have not , at least , equalled
the refinements of it , SHERIDAN-1756-2,211.129

and these corruptions very few of the best authors in our age have
wholly escaped . SHERIDAN-1756-2,211.130

During the usurpation , such an infusion of enthusiastick jargon
prevailed in every writing , as was not shaken off in many years after .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,211.131

To this succeeded that licentiousness which entered with the restoration
; and from infecting our religion and morals , fell <P_212> to corrupt
our language : which last was not like to be much improved by those ,
who at that time made up the court of king Charles the second ; either
such who had followed him in his banishment , or who had been altogether
conversant in the dialect of those fanatick times ; or young men , who
had been educated in the same company ; so that the court , which used
to be the standard of propriety , and correctness of speech , was then ,
and I think hath ever since continued , the worst school in England for
that accomplishment ; and so will remain , until better care be taken in
the education of our young nobility . ' SHERIDAN-1756-2,212.132

It may be matter of wonder , that whilst the other countries in Europe ,
the French , Italians , Spaniards , &c. &c. in proportion to their
progress in learning , after having enriched and illustrated their
several languages by the aids and lights borrowed from the Greek and
Roman , were employed with the utmost industry , to refine , correct ,
and ascertain them by fixed and stated rules , the English alone left
<P_213> theirs to the power of chance and caprice ; insomuch that it is
but within a few months that even a dictionary has been produced here .
Whilst in all the others , many excellent grammars and dictionaries have
long since been published , the labours of publick societies , as well
as of private persons . SHERIDAN-1756-2,213.133

This is the more astonishing , when it is considered that such a work
seemed to be of more absolute necessity to us , than to any other nation
, and that on many accounts . SHERIDAN-1756-2,213.134

In the first place , after the separation from the church of Rome , our
own language alone was used in all acts of publick worship ; whereas in
the Roman_Catholick countries , all prayers and religious ceremonies
were in Latin . SHERIDAN-1756-2,213.135

From the nature of our constitution we had more constant occasion for
the publick use of it in debates , and consequently stronger inducements
to the study of it . SHERIDAN-1756-2,213.136

Add to this , that there were three different nations , the Scotch ,
Irish , and Welsh {TEXT:Welch} , who made up a considerable part of the
British dominions , both in power and extent , who spoke in tongues
different from the English , and <P_214> who were far from being firmly
united with them in inclinations , and of course were pursuing different
interests . SHERIDAN-1756-2,214.137

To accomplish an entire union with these people , was of the utmost
importance to them , to which nothing could have more effectually
contributed , than the universality of one common language .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,214.138

And it is obvious enough that this could not be brought about , unless
the language were established upon certain principles , and made capable
of being taught by rule . SHERIDAN-1756-2,214.139

Add to this , that even in England itself for want of such a method ,
there were such various dialects spoken , that persons born and bred in
different and distant shires , could scarce any more understand each
others speech , than they could that of a foreigner , which is notorious
even now . SHERIDAN-1756-2,214.140

It may therefore be worth while to enquire how a point of such
importance , contrary to the practice of the ancient , and example of
modern nations , came to be so wholly neglected by us even to this day .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,214.141

As this work was not begun in the reign of Q. Elizabeth , when the
language <P_215> had made the most vigorous shoots , it was hardly a
thing to be wished in the time of her successor , as the taint of
pedantry had infected every thing which regarded knowlege , or discourse
. SHERIDAN-1756-2,215.142

The violent commotions and civil wars , which raged during the greatest
part of the reign of Charles the first , rendered all attempts that way
impracticable , tho' otherwise that would have been the most auspicious
aera for setting about such a task , as the prince was a great
encourager of the arts and sciences . SHERIDAN-1756-2,215.143

During the usurpation , such an inundation of cant and jargon had
overwhelmed our language , as gave but little prospect of it's rising
again . SHERIDAN-1756-2,215.144

On the restoration however , all might have been amended ;
SHERIDAN-1756-2,215.145

but from the dissolute manners and universal corruption in the reign of
Charles the second , there could be no expectation that any useful
scheme for the publick benefit should take place .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,215.146

The short period of his successor's government was too full of troubles
and commotions , SHERIDAN-1756-2,215.147

and at the time of the revolution , and during king William's reign ,
the minds of men were too much taken up in <P_216> establishing our
noble constitution , and their attention too much engaged by the wars
waged for the preservation of the liberties of Europe , to give heed to
any other matters , however important in themselves .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,216.148

The first proposal , that we know of , for an attempt of that kind , was
made by Dr. Swift , towards the latter end of queen Anne's reign , in a
letter to the lord high treasurer . SHERIDAN-1756-2,216.149

And it is generally thought that the scheme would certainly have been
reduced to practice , had it not been for the sudden death of that
princess , soon after the publication of that piece .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,216.150

Let others enquire into the causes why it has ever since lain dormant ;
SHERIDAN-1756-2,216.151

it is sufficient to my purpose to say , that hither_to no attempt has
been made towards the regulation of our language , which like our
commons is suffered to lie desolate , uncultivated , and waste , to the
great prejudice , in point of wealth , as well as ornament , of this
fair island . SHERIDAN-1756-2,216.152

<P_217>

<heading>

Chap. V . SHERIDAN-1756-2,217.155

<font> That those causes no longer operate , nor are of any force .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,217.156

The great necessity of studying our language shewn <$$font>
SHERIDAN-1756-2,217.157

<$$heading>

The motives which induced our ancestors , upon the first establishment
of a general system of education , to lay such a stress upon the study
of Latin and Greek , and to dedicate such a vast portion of time to the
acquisition of skill in those languages , when at the same time their
own was totally neglected , are no longer of any force .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,217.159

There is neither the same necessity to spur us now , nor the same
advantages to induce us to such a close application to those , whether
we consider the general utility resulting from them to the publick , or
the private emoluments to individuals . SHERIDAN-1756-2,217.160

The learned languages are no longer the sole repositaries of knowlege ;
SHERIDAN-1756-2,217.161

on the contrary , the English is become an universal magazine not only
of antient but of all modern wisdom . SHERIDAN-1756-2,217.162

All the great authors of antiquity , as well <P_218> as of the present
times , of whatever nation , or in whatever language , may now be read
in English ; tho' not perhaps with equal delight , yet with equal
advantage in point of knowlege . So that the laity need no longer be
afraid of the clergy in that respect , even tho' they were entirely to
give up to them the superior toil and labour of reading the originals .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,218.163

Add to this , that we have had since those days , many excellent writers
of our own , upon subjects of much more importance to us than any that
have been handed down to us in the books of antiquity , and which were
untouched by them . Not to mention that even in regard to those works
calculated to give delight , and from which they claim their chief
pre-eminence , there have not been wanting in this country , men of
perhaps as great reach of fancy , and genius , whose writings , if they
were as much studied , and whose beauties <paren> paradoxical as the
opinion may seem <$$paren> if they were as well understood , as those of
the admired antients , might perhaps afford as much pleasure , and in no
respect yield the palm to them . SHERIDAN-1756-2,218.164

The publick <P_219> contests in regard to religion , wherein all the
able pens of the several nations of Europe were engaged , and in which
the disputes were carried on in Latin , have long since ceased ;
SHERIDAN-1756-2,219.165

and it is more than a century since we have been embroiled in civil
contests with various sects at home , wherein the controversy has been
entirely managed in English , So that however necessary to promotion ,
and distinction , skill in Latin might formerly have been to a clergyman
, of late years knowlege of the English language would be much more
conducive to those points . SHERIDAN-1756-2,219.166

Besides , the language itself has been so much enlarged and improved
since those days , that it is rendered capable of answering every end ,
whether of profit or pleasure , to us at least , better than all the
others put together , and consequently is become more worthy to be
studied . SHERIDAN-1756-2,219.167

To state the account in short between our forefathers and us , they
shewed great wisdom and good sense in making the learned languages the
chief study in their days , because , however round_about the way ,
knowlege was then to be acquired in <P_220> none other and because our
own , then poor and uncultivated , could be no other way enriched or
resined . SHERIDAN-1756-2,220.168

Private persons were in the right to labour at perfection in those ,
because , besides the knowlege which they could not otherwise have
obtained , they were sure of meeting suitable rewards in point of
reputation and fortune . SHERIDAN-1756-2,220.169

But the very same motives which urged them so powerfully to apply to
Latin and Greek , are now more cogent with us to study chiefly our own
language . Because a greater quantity of useful knowlege can with more
ease and less time be acquired in that than in any , I had almost said
all the others : and because the soil is now so luxurious that it
requires more than ordinary cultivation and tillage , in order to
produce useful and profitable crops , instead of being over-run with
gawdy flowers , and noxious weeds . SHERIDAN-1756-2,220.170

And as to individuals , it need scarce be mentioned that no skill in
other languages can contribute in any degree , either to their fame or
profit , so much as in their own . SHERIDAN-1756-2,220.171

If these points are true , what cause can be assigned that we still
proceed in the old method ? SHERIDAN-1756-2,220.172

Is it <P_221> a blind veneration paid to the institutions and customs of
old ? SHERIDAN-1756-2,221.173

Upon the same principle we might just as reasonably meet our enemies in
the same sort of armour as was worn by our countrymen before the
invention of guns . SHERIDAN-1756-2,221.174

But customs , of which the immediate absurdity or detriment are at once
seen and felt , upon change of circumstances , are easily and
necessarily altered ; whereas those , the ill consequences of which lie
more remote , and the bad effects whereof are not sensibly perceived
'till after a number of years have rolled away , are often suffered to
remain , 'till time gives them fast root , and age sanctifies them .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,221.175

Their duration becomes an argument of their goodness ,
SHERIDAN-1756-2,221.176

and people instead of weighing their intrinsick merit in the scale of
reason , are apt at once to form a conclusion that they could not have
lasted so long had they not been right . SHERIDAN-1756-2,221.177

If it were not for this fort of prepossession , how is it possible to
account for the absurd notions of so many parents , that Greek and Latin
are still the high roads to fortune , because they were so two centuries
ago , notwithstanding the many flagrant instances to <P_222> the
contrary before their eyes ? SHERIDAN-1756-2,222.178

How many excellent scholars , now pining in want , make no other use of
their Latin but to lament in Virgilian strains , that ever they were
acquainted with Virgil , or knew any other but their mother tongue ?
SHERIDAN-1756-2,222.179

With what sorrow do they look back upon their past time irretrievably
mispent , tho' not thro' their own fault , and wish it had been employed
in learning some trade by which they might be sure of acquiring a
comfortable subsistence ? SHERIDAN-1756-2,222.180

Is not the ingenious and learned translator of Milton's paradise lost ,
a work which may do the highest honour to this country , as it will make
that noblest of our productions universally known thro' Europe , and may
become one of the strongest inducements to foreigners to study our
language , in order to read so excellent a piece in the original ; is
not this man , I say , to the disgrace of the age , now starving <paren>
and probably doomed to do so for the rest of his life <$$paren> upon a
poor curacy in a remote part of the country ? SHERIDAN-1756-2,222.181

And shall many fathers expect that their sons will be able to outdo him
in learning , or have nobler <P_223> opportunities of displaying it ?
SHERIDAN-1756-2,223.182

But indeed in many cases this may not be the effect of choice , or
prejudice , but of necessity . SHERIDAN-1756-2,223.183

Numbers there are who see the absurdity of this conduct , but can find
no remedy . SHERIDAN-1756-2,223.184

They have not the means of giving their sons such an education as they
could wish , SHERIDAN-1756-2,223.185

and therefore are obliged to follow the reigning mode .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,223.186

Nor can it be doubted , that if the means of acquiring skill in the
English were as easy and common , if it could be taught by as certain
rules , and the preceptors were as knowing in that as in the learned
languages , infinitely a greater number would apply themselves to a
critical study of that , both from views of interest and inclination ,
than to the others . SHERIDAN-1756-2,223.187

That I may not be misunderstood here , I shall set down part of a
passage , tho' quoted before , from Mr. Locke , as at once fully
expressive of , and at the same time giving a sanction to my own
sentiments . SHERIDAN-1756-2,223.188

' I am not here speaking against Greek and Latin ;
SHERIDAN-1756-2,223.189

I think they ought to be studied , and the Latin , at least , understood
well by every gentleman . SHERIDAN-1756-2,223.190

But <P_224> whatever foreign languages a young man meddles with <paren>
and the more he knows the better <$$paren> that which he should
critically study , and labour to get a facility , clearness , and
elegancy to express himself in , should be his own ,
SHERIDAN-1756-2,224.191

and to this purpose he should daily be exercised in it . '
SHERIDAN-1756-2,224.192

Far be it from me indeed to depreciate the study of those languages ,
without which I know it is impossible we can ever understand our own
with accuracy . SHERIDAN-1756-2,224.193

But the great fault complained of is , that this important end seems to
be entirely forgotten , thro' a spirit of pedantry in the teachers ; by
whom instructions in Greek and Latin are given as if they were
desireable only for their own sakes . Whereas , were their uses
constantly pointed out to them towards illustrating their own language ,
young gentlemen would not only go thro' those laborious studies with
more immediate delight to themselves , but would ever after in life
endeavour to keep up and improve what skill they had acquired in those ,
as greatly contributing to so useful a purpose .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,224.194

By a contrary practice , it is well known , that very few , <P_225>
thro' a disgust conceived of what appears to them an unprofitable toil ,
ever arrive at sufficient perfection in those languages to read the
antient authors with ease and pleasure in the original , and therefore
when their necessary course is over , lay them totally aside , and in a
few years entirely forget what little they had acquired .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,225.195

If they continue to read , it is only in books written in English , with
the principles of which being totally unacquainted , they form their
notions of style upon such authors as happen to please them most . In
the choice of which , the matter whereof they treat , not the manner in
which it is handled , is chiefly considered . SHERIDAN-1756-2,225.196

' Too many of this sort pass upon vulgar readers for great authors and
men of profound thought , not on account of any superiority either in
sense or style , both which they possess in a very moderate degree , nor
of any discoveries they have made in arts and sciences , which they seem
to be little acquainted with : but purely because they flatter the
passions of corrupt <P_226> men , who are pleased to have the clamours
of conscience silenced , and those great points of the christian
religion made suspected , which withheld {TEXT:with-held} them from many
views of pleasure and interest , or made them uneasy in the commission
of them . ' SHERIDAN-1756-2,226.197

The same argument will hold in regard to writings upon any other
subjects which flatter the passions , please the humours , or fall in
with the party-notions of men ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,226.198

and this alone is sufficient to account for the general bad taste which
is allowed to prevail , as well as the quantity of false knowlege , far
worse than none ; for that amazing number of wretched pamphlets written
to the times as the phrase is , which are daily published , and daily
find a sufficient number of as wretched readers ; in short , for those
heaps of trash which are constantly exposed to sale in the windows of
booksellers , like unripe fruit greedily devoured by green sickness
appetites , and which fill the mind with crudities as pernicious to the
understanding , as those of the other are to the body .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,226.199

Of <P_227> the great increase of this evil Dr. Swift complained many
years ago in a letter to the author of the Tatler .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,227.200

' I can not but observe to you , that until of late years a Grub-street
book was always bound in sheep-skin , with suitable print and paper the
price never above a shilling ; and taken off wholly by common tradesmen
, or country pedlars . SHERIDAN-1756-2,227.201

But now they appear in all sizes and shapes , and in all places :
SHERIDAN-1756-2,227.202

they are handed about from lapfuls in every coffee-house to persons of
quality ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,227.203

are shewn in Westminster-hall , and the court of Requests .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,227.204

You may see them gilt , and in royal paper , of five or six_hundred
pages , and rated accordingly . SHERIDAN-1756-2,227.205

I would engage to furnish you with a catalogue of English books ,
published within the compass of seven years past , which at the first
hand would cost you an_hundred pounds , wherein you shall not be able to
find ten lines together of common grammar or common sense . '
SHERIDAN-1756-2,227.206

It must be allowed , that if English were studied and commonly well
<P_228> understood , and that consequently a general good taste
prevailed amongst readers , none of these miserable productions could
meet with a sufficient sale , and they would therefore be stifled in
their birth . SHERIDAN-1756-2,228.207

If a correct style should once become a necessary requisite to the
success of any book which may be offered to the publick , what an army
of able-bodied writers must then be obliged to lay down the pen , who
instead of corrupting the hearts and poisoning the understandings of
their fellow subjects , would become useful members of society by
carrying muskets against the enemies of their country .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,228.208

If it be granted that at this day English is the language most
universally read by Englishmen ; that even by those who have made the
greatest progress in Latin and Greek , the number of books read in their
own is out of all proportion greater than in the learned languages ;
that the principal view in reading those , or other authors in foreign
tongues , is amusement , whilst our own are chiefly studied for useful
purposes ; it must be allowed , that nothing can be a greater national
concern than the <P_229> care of our language . SHERIDAN-1756-2,229.209

There is such an intimate connection between ideas and words , language
and knowlege , that whatever deficiency , or fault , there may be in the
one , necessarily affects the other . SHERIDAN-1756-2,229.210

Clearness , or confusion of ideas , arise from obscurity or precision in
their marks , SHERIDAN-1756-2,229.211

and the quantity , as well certainty of knowlege , depends upon the ease
and exactness with which a language is read or understood .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,229.212

If the glass be not right , the images reflected by it will not be exact
. SHERIDAN-1756-2,229.213

If the channel be muddy , the stream which flows thro' it can not be
clear ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,229.214

if there lie heaps of rubbish in it , the water can not pass swiftly ,
or smoothly . SHERIDAN-1756-2,229.215

Should it therefore be the case of any country , that an infinite number
of books were read there , and very little knowlege obtained ; that
there should be much speaking , and little understanding ; that disputes
upon all manner of topicks should be carried on both in conversation ,
and writing , without ever coming to an end ; it would not follow that
the intellectual faculties of such a people were inferior to others , as
the whole might easily be solved <P_230> by considering the state of
their language . SHERIDAN-1756-2,230.216

So far as that is obscure or ill understood , so far must the knowlege
acquired in it be confused or erroneous . SHERIDAN-1756-2,230.217

This is at once seen by any person who reads in a foreign language , as
he can not pretend to understand any author in that , without first
knowing the precise meaning of his words and phrases ; to obtain which ,
he is obliged to close application and study ; wherein he is assisted by
certain and stated rules . SHERIDAN-1756-2,230.218

But it has been before observed , that in a mother tongue , where we
have no rules to guide us , whose use and knowlege are obtained from the
people we usually converse with , or the books we usually read , we are
much more liable to fall into errors than in any other , and
consequently in that have much more occasion for study and application .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,230.219

When it is considered , that a single term in a proposition not
understood exactly in the same manner , tho' perhaps very nearly , by
two different persons , may furnish out matter of dispute to run thro'
many volumes , and to last for ages ; and when it is considered , what
little care is taken to come at an accurate <P_231> knowlege of a
language , the most copious , and on many other accounts the most
difficult to be well understood of any in the known world , there will
be no occasion to wonder that we should be the most unsettled in our
notions , and the most divided in our opinions of any people , since the
time of the reparation of philosophy from the study of rhetorick ,
amongst the Greeks . SHERIDAN-1756-2,231.220

It is well known , that the destruction of all useful knowlege soon
followed that separation amongst them , SHERIDAN-1756-2,231.221

and it is to be feared , that the restoration of it amongst us can be
effected no other way than by their reunion . SHERIDAN-1756-2,231.222

Seneca attributes the corruptions which had crept into the style and
language of the Romans in his days , to a decay of knowlege .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,231.223

May not the converse proportion be true in regard to us , that our want
of knowlege is chiefly owing to the neglect of studying our language ?
and the corruptions of our understanding to those of our style ?
SHERIDAN-1756-2,231.224

Are not our minds chiefly stored with ideas by words ,
SHERIDAN-1756-2,231.225

and must not clearness or obscurity in the one , necessarily produce the
same in the other ? SHERIDAN-1756-2,231.226

<P_232>

The only remedy that could be effectual in this case , he said , was to
cure the mind . SHERIDAN-1756-2,232.228

When that was sound and strong , the discourse would consequently be so
too . SHERIDAN-1756-2,232.229

But must not the mind be cured , and reason strengthened by the medium
of language ? SHERIDAN-1756-2,232.230

It is from the mind , says he , that all our sentiments and words
proceed . SHERIDAN-1756-2,232.231

But must not the sentiments come out cloathed in words according to the
conception had of them when admitted ? SHERIDAN-1756-2,232.232

However just his reasoning may be in regard to the Romans , yet it will
not hold in regard to us , unless our language were in an equal state of
perfection , and established upon as solid principles , as theirs .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,232.233

There is a great difference between persons who thro' wantonness , or
caprice , wander from the way , yet have always the right road open to
them whenever they recover from their infatuation , and those who may
find themselves in an error , and wish to correct it , but have no clue
to guide them to what is right . SHERIDAN-1756-2,232.234

<P_233>

It may be argued from the great perspicuity visible in the reasonings of
several of our eminent writers , wherein they do not at all yield to the
antients , that the English language is capable of conveying knowlege to
the mind , and displaying it afterwards , in as clear a manner as that
of the Greeks or Romans . SHERIDAN-1756-2,233.236

But this argument properly traced , may perhaps lead to a contrary
conclusion . SHERIDAN-1756-2,233.237

Some of our most distinguished writers appeared in an age when all
knowlege was acquired in the learned languages ; such as Bacon , Raleigh
, Hooker , and many more . SHERIDAN-1756-2,233.238

In the more advanced state of the English , it is apparent to all who
read his works , from what stores Milton heaped together that immense
treasure of ideas . SHERIDAN-1756-2,233.239

In such of their writings as are in English , they seem to labour and
struggle with the language to give birth to their thoughts , in the same
maturity and perfection with which they were conceived ,
SHERIDAN-1756-2,233.240

and are therefore constantly obliged to have recourse to expressions
borrowed from the Latin : whilst the Juno Lucina of the antients seemed
always at hand when their <P_234> thoughts were delivered in the Roman
language . SHERIDAN-1756-2,234.241

It is well known , that Newton and Locke studied , thought , and writ
chiefly in Latin , as most capable of that precision so necessary to
their subjects . SHERIDAN-1756-2,234.242

Dryden , Addison , Berkley , Swift , and such of our writers as are
deemed most classical , had their minds constantly impregnated with
ideas from the antient languages . SHERIDAN-1756-2,234.243

Nor can there perhaps be a single instance produced of any man who never
read or thought but in English , that deserves the name of an author .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,234.244

If Shakespear be allowed to be an exception <paren> which yet remains to
be proved , as there is good reason to believe that he at least
understood Latin well <$$paren> there is no forming a rule from a single
instance of so prodigious a birth , nor fixing a standard of measurement
to others from one mind of so gigantic a stature .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,234.245

The difficulty of writing with clearness and accuracy in our language ,
can appear from nothing more strongly than this , that it seems
generally allowed by those of the greatest discernment , and who have
most considered the point , that out of the <P_235> infinite number who
have published their works , we have but very few who have written pure
and correct English . SHERIDAN-1756-2,235.246

And they who were well acquainted with Dr. Swift , must have often
heard him say , that the exactness of his style was the chief study and
labour of his life . SHERIDAN-1756-2,235.247

How must such difficulty and constant attention check the progress of
those possessed of the most elevated genius , SHERIDAN-1756-2,235.248

and what noble productions may they not have been the occasion of losing
to the world ? SHERIDAN-1756-2,235.249

The artist would make but a slow progress , were he obliged himself to
provide and prepare all his materials ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,235.250

but when they are ready to his hand , he can dispatch a great deal in a
little time , and with ease . SHERIDAN-1756-2,235.251

Nor is it to be doubted , that if they had been early trained and
instructed in their own language , so as to acquire an habit of writing
it with correctness and facility , when they first thought of publishing
, but that even our most eminent authors would have left behind them
works far superior both in <P_236> quantity and quality to what they are
at present . So that we may safely say with Dr. Swift , in his letter
to the lord high treasurer , ' That nothing would be of greater use
towards the improvement of knowlege and politeness , than some effectual
method for correcting , enlarging , and ascertaining our language . '
SHERIDAN-1756-2,236.252

There is no one will hesitate to allow , that nothing could be more
desirable , nothing could more effectually contribute to the benefit and
glory of this country , than if it were possible to bring the English
language to as great a degree of perfection , liability , and general
use , as those of Greece and Rome . SHERIDAN-1756-2,236.253

In order to see whether this be practicable or not , I shall hereafter
consider it with relation to the Roman language only , as well to avoid
fruitless repetitions <paren> since all arguments conclusive with
respect to the one , will be equally so in regard to the other <$$paren>
as because we have a more distinct knowlege of the rise and progress of
the Roman , than of the Greek , as well as the means by which it was
brought to it's maturity . SHERIDAN-1756-2,236.254

First then , as to it's perfection : I shall endeavour to shew that the
means to arrive at it are equally in our <P_237> power , that our
inducements are stronger , and that we might in all probability compass
the end in a shorter space of time , and with less labour than they did
. Secondly , as to stability : That if our language were once brought
to a standard , we have more powerful and certain means to fix and
preserve it in it's state of perfection than they had . Thirdly , as to
general use : That we have it more in our power than they had to
propagate our language , and make it universal .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,237.255

<heading>

Chap. VI . SHERIDAN-1756-2,237.257

<font> That the means to arrive at perfection in our language are
equally in our power , that our inducements to it are stronger , and
that we might in all probability compass our end in a shorter space of
time , and with less labour , than the Romans did . <$$font>
SHERIDAN-1756-2,237.258

<$$heading>

It has been already shewn , that the means by which the Roman language
was improved , and arrived at it's state of perfection , were the study
and practice of rhetorick , and oratory . SHERIDAN-1756-2,237.260

An attention to <P_238> those necessarily induced an attention to
language . SHERIDAN-1756-2,238.261

The power of words , whether in regard to sense or sound , became a
point of essential consideration to those who were to speak in publick .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,238.262

To assist them in their progress , the Romans had the benefit of the
precepts and example of the Greeks . SHERIDAN-1756-2,238.263

But in this respect we have rather the advantage , since we have theirs
also added to those of Greece . SHERIDAN-1756-2,238.264

It may be presumed that from the writings of Aristotle , Plutarch ,
Longinus , Cicero , and Quintilian , a better treatise of rhetorick
might be compiled now , than any which was in use amongst the Romans ,
at least previous to the time that their language had arrived at
perfection . SHERIDAN-1756-2,238.265

It is true , that the Greek rhetoricians did not a little contribute to
the progress of their pupils , by joining example to precept , in an art
which above all others requires to be learned immediately from the mouth
of a master . SHERIDAN-1756-2,238.266

But if the same encouragement were now given , it is not to be doubted
but that many masters would soon arise , equally well qualified with
them both as instructors , and models for imitation .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,238.267

<P_239>

That the inducements to the study of oratory , and consequently of
language , are more powerful with us than with the Romans , may be
easily seen , by considering that there is not a single point in which
it was useful or necessary to them , wherein it is not equally so to us
. SHERIDAN-1756-2,239.269

But there is one article , wherein it's utility is beyond all degrees of
comparison greater and more extensive than in all the rest , which is
peculiar to us , SHERIDAN-1756-2,239.270

I mean the article of religion . SHERIDAN-1756-2,239.271

That we might in all probability bring our language to a state of
perfection in a much shorter space of time , and with less labour and
difficulty , than the Romans did theirs , may be judged by a comparative
view of the state of theirs , at the period when the introduction of the
study of eloquence first engaged them in that task , with ours as it
stands at present . SHERIDAN-1756-2,239.272

It must be observed , that at that juncture the Roman language was far
from having arrived at a state of maturity ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,239.273

it was weak , and poor , SHERIDAN-1756-2,239.274

and was gradually strengthened and enriched by what it borrowed by
little and little from the Grecian stores . <P_240> Whereas ours has
long since arrived at it's full size , and is copious even to exuberance
. SHERIDAN-1756-2,240.275

They were obliged to wait the slow growth of the tree ;
SHERIDAN-1756-2,240.276

but ours has long since borne fruit , SHERIDAN-1756-2,240.277

and is likely to become barren only thro' the luxuriance of the branches
. SHERIDAN-1756-2,240.278

It is apparent enough how much less time it requires to prune away what
is superfluous , than to wait the gradual increase of what is useful .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,240.279

Besides , they had then no books written in Latin that could be of any
great assistance to them . SHERIDAN-1756-2,240.280

If the judgement of Horace is to be relied on , even the best authors of
those times wrote in a very coarse inelegant style . On which account
scarce any of them have been handed down to us , except some of the
works of Plautus . SHERIDAN-1756-2,240.281

And we know in what estimation his writings , as well as those of his
contemporaries , were held in the Augustan age .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,240.282

Ennius , Pacuvius , &c. are known to us only by name . Whereas we have
in our language at present , several works which may at once <P_241>
serve as rules to guide us in our enquiries , and standards to fix our
knowledge {TEXT:knowlege} when attained . SHERIDAN-1756-2,241.283

The learned and ingenious author of our English dictionary has delivered
it as his opinion , that ' From the authors which rose in the time of
Elizabeth , a speech might be formed adequate to all the purposes of use
and elegance . SHERIDAN-1756-2,241.284

If the langauge of theology were extracted from Hooker and the
translation of the Bible ; the terms of natural knowlege from Bacon ;
the phrases of policy , war , and navigation , from Raleigh ; the
dialect of poetry and fiction from Spenser and Sidney ; and the diction
of common life from Shakespear ; few ideas would be lost to mankind ,
for want of English words , in which they might be expressed . '
SHERIDAN-1756-2,241.285

To this we may add , that as models of style , Milton in the poetick ,
and Shakespear in the dramatick , Swift , Addison , Dryden , and Sir
William Temple <paren> in some of his works <$$paren> in prose , may be
considered as truly classical , as the Virgil , Caesar , Tully and
Sallust of the Romans ; SHERIDAN-1756-2,241.286

<P_242>

nor is there any reason that they should not be handed down as such
equally to the end of time , unless by abandoning our language entirely
to the fantastical caprices of novelty , it should come to be so changed
and metamorphosed , as that they shall be as little understood , and
read with as little pleasure , two or three centuries hence as the
prceding authors of that date are now by us . At which time perhaps
some scribbler of the day may be employed to modernize them ; by passing
thro' whose filtring stone , they may indeed be made more clear , but
must entirely lose their spirit . SHERIDAN-1756-2,242.288

And who knows but that if a total ignorance of the force and harmony of
numbers should be suffered to continue , and the vile Gothick taste for
rhime should increase , but that some future versifier shall be rewarded
, and obtain universal praise , for chiming the divine numbers of
Paradise lost , and fitting them to the vitiated ears of the age .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,242.289

Nor will this seem an improbable conjecture , when we consider with what
pleasure , at this day , the fiery Pegasus of Homer is beheld in
trammels , ambling along in a <P_243> shuffling pace , to the jingle of
his silver bells . SHERIDAN-1756-2,243.290

<heading>

Chap. VII . SHERIDAN-1756-2,243.292

<font> That if our language were once brought to a standard , we have
more powerful and certain means to fix and preserve it in it's state of
perfection than they had . <$$font> SHERIDAN-1756-2,243.293

<$$heading>

The stability of language may be considered in regard to two points ,
pronunciation , and meaning . SHERIDAN-1756-2,243.295

To the first it is necessary that the same words should always be
sounded in the same manner ; to the last , that they should be always
understood in the same sense . SHERIDAN-1756-2,243.296

The use of speech is chiefly instrumental to the former , of books to
the latter . SHERIDAN-1756-2,243.297

The more universally therefore a language is well and uniformly spoken
by any people , the more likely it is to acquire permanence as to
pronunciation : SHERIDAN-1756-2,243.298

the greater number of correct authors there are in it , who agree in the
use of words , and the more generally they are read , the greater
prospect is there of giving it stability as to <P_244> meaning .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,244.299

To consider these two points separately . SHERIDAN-1756-2,244.300

First , as to sound . SHERIDAN-1756-2,244.301

To make a language universally and uniformly well spoken by any people ,
it is necessary that the pronunciation should be formed upon known
invariable rules , and that the customary speech should be conformable
to those rules . SHERIDAN-1756-2,244.302

For as the bulk of the people can not be supposed to be acquainted with
those , custom must in that case , as well as in most others , supply in
them the want of knowlege . SHERIDAN-1756-2,244.303

Both these points were admirably provided for amongst the Romans .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,244.304

They did not leave the sound of their langauge to chance or caprice ,
SHERIDAN-1756-2,244.305

it was established upon rational and certain rules , to which all their
publick speakers conformed . SHERIDAN-1756-2,244.306

This uniformity of pronunciation in their orators necessarily diffused a
general good taste thro' their hearers , which supplied the place of
rules , SHERIDAN-1756-2,244.307

and at the same time furnished them with a sure criterion , by which
they might discover any impropriety in the sound of words .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,244.308

For being accustomed to hear their words always sounded in the same
manner , they would be immediately <P_245> sensible of the least
alteration , SHERIDAN-1756-2,245.309

and the being new was a sufficient mark to them of the pronunciation's
being vitious . SHERIDAN-1756-2,245.310

It is impossible to conceive a more immoveable standard to language ,
considered in regard to sound only , or a stronger bulwark against
innovations , than this was . SHERIDAN-1756-2,245.311

For when the laws of pronunciation were once established by the orators
, upon certain and rational principles , it was no longer in their power
to break thro' them : SHERIDAN-1756-2,245.312

on the contrary , they were obliged to a more strict and exact
observation of the rules than any others , SHERIDAN-1756-2,245.313

and from thenceforth were compelled to follow custom , not choice .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,245.314

For what publick speaker in his sense would venture thro' an affectation
of novelty , to expose himself to the censure or ridicule of the meanest
of his hearers ? SHERIDAN-1756-2,245.315

Thus the body of the people become the guardians of their language , as
well as their liberties , SHERIDAN-1756-2,245.316

and it is observable that they both fell together .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,245.317

Nor is this at all wonderful , or without it's <P_246> foundation in
reason . SHERIDAN-1756-2,246.318

For tho' the multitude have not understanding to form political systems
, or fix rules to languages , nay tho' they are incapable of knowing or
comprehending their fitness after they are established , yet they will
be always found their true and natural supports ,
SHERIDAN-1756-2,246.319

and it is by them alone that either the one or the other can be
preserved , or destroyed . SHERIDAN-1756-2,246.320

However ingenuity and design may be the property of the few , labour and
execution depend upon the many . SHERIDAN-1756-2,246.321

Reason and law may be the province of one , SHERIDAN-1756-2,246.322

but strength and custom belong to the other . SHERIDAN-1756-2,246.323

It was to the frequent opportunities they had of hearing their publick
speakers , that the Romans were indebted for their general exactness of
pronunciation ; from which also resulted it's fixed state .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,246.324

Now if we compare our opportunities with theirs , it will at once appear
, that in this respect the advantage lies greatly on our side .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,246.325

For besides those of the senate-house , bar , &c , which we have in
common with them , our churches furnish one of more frequent , regular ,
and general use , than <P_247> all the others . SHERIDAN-1756-2,247.326

These are daily open to all ranks and orders , SHERIDAN-1756-2,247.327

and it is part of the duty of every person in the nation to attend
divine service at least one day in the week . SHERIDAN-1756-2,247.328

If therefore the pronunciation of our language were fixed by certain
rules , and were uniformly and invariably observed by all the clergy ,
if they had also an equal power with the orators of old of captivating
attention , and charming the ear , is it to be doubted but that a
general good taste , and exactness of speech , would be diffused thro'
the whole people , proportionably superior to the Romans , as our
advantages and opportunities would be greater and more frequent ?
SHERIDAN-1756-2,247.329

This must be allowed , unless the people of this country are inferior to
them both in sensitive and intellectual faculties ; a point which will
hardly be granted . SHERIDAN-1756-2,247.330

Now to consider language with respect to it's meaning .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,247.331

It will not require much pains to prove , that we have it in our power
to establish that as certainly , and more universally than the Romans
had . SHERIDAN-1756-2,247.332

Here it is to be observed , that the intellectual faculty is chiefly
concerned , whereas <P_248> pronunciation is obtained only thro' the
sense of hearing . SHERIDAN-1756-2,248.333

By the invention of writing the meaning of words can be conveyed to the
mind as perfectly by the eye , as thro' the ear .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,248.334

And that method which gives the greatest room and most time for the
understanding to exert itself , will bid the fairest for procuring the
greatest accuracy in the knowlege of words . SHERIDAN-1756-2,248.335

There can be no doubt therefore that this is to be acquired more
perfectly , and with more certainty , by study , and books , than by
conversation , and publick harangues ; for this plain reason , that in
the one case a man commands his own time , and can appropriate as much
of it as he thinks proper , to weigh the force of every word ;
SHERIDAN-1756-2,248.336

in the other , his understanding is obliged to keep pace with the
speaker . SHERIDAN-1756-2,248.337

In this respect , the invention of printing has given us an amazing
advantage over the antients . SHERIDAN-1756-2,248.338

As their books were all transcribed , their number of copies could not
be so easily multiplied , nor consequently fall into so many hands .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,248.339

And the expence of purchasing those written copies was so great , that
most persons , except those of <P_249> fortune , were in a manner
precluded from the use of them . SHERIDAN-1756-2,249.340

Accordingly we find that the people in general were wholly illiterate .
Whereas amongst us , by means of the press , and the cheapness of books
, there are hardly any so low who may not acquire knowlege by the eye ,
as well as by the ear . SHERIDAN-1756-2,249.341

Hence it is manifest that skill in our own language might easily become
more universal now , than it could in their days .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,249.342

And that it might in a much shorter space of time , with more ease , and
equal certainty , be reduced to rules , and fixed to a standard , has
been already shewn . SHERIDAN-1756-2,249.343

It is true that the two great articles , the pulpit , and the press ,
which give us such a vast superiority over the antients , may produce
effects directly opposite to what we have been speaking of .
SHERIDAN-1756-2,249.344

The pulpit , which as it is the most general , ought to be the most
fixed standard of pronunciation , may be made the chief source of
diversity and corruption in point of sound . SHERIDAN-1756-2,249.345

And the press , which might be the grand conduit of knowlege and
clearness , may become the main channel of obscurity and <P_250>
confusion as to meaning . SHERIDAN-1756-2,250.346

