<BEGIN_skeavington-184x-1>

<P_15.C2>

<heading>

Feeding of Horses . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,15.C2.4

<$$heading>

The food of the Horse , only consisting of hay , a little clover , oats
, and , on some occasions , a few beans , and his drink only water , may
be thought of such simple and inoffensive qualities , <font> that only
withholding them from the Horse <$$font> would do him injury ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,15.C2.6

but quality and quantity , proportioned to his habit of body or
constitution , must be attended to . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,15.C2.7

If the quality is bad , it will make him foul ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,15.C2.8

and will not afford the nutriment that clean wholesome food yields :
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,15.C2.9

if you feed too plentifully for the work or exercise the Horse has , you
will make him what is termed too fleshy and gross , and , probably ,
what is termed in <font> horse language <$$font> fly to pieces ; that is
, he will become languid and dull , from the circulation of the blood
being retarded , his stomach overcharged , and want of digestion ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,15.C2.10

in all probability <font> fever ensues , the grease <$$font> ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,15.C2.11

and subjects him to breakings out in the legs and those places most
remote from the heart , where a free circulation of the blood is
prevented . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,15.C2.12

Again , if you disproportion your feed , by giving him too much hay ,
this will cause him to drink freely , and make him run to belly ;
blowing him out with this description of food which affords the least
nutriment ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,15.C2.13

a Horse thus fed can@ @not endure much labour ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,15.C2.14

and his wind becomes distressed . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,15.C2.15

Hay is the natural food for the Horse , but not sufficiently
strengthening for Horses to work upon now-a-days ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,15.C2.16

therefore , a Horse to be kept in condition , must be fed sparingly of
hay , and that of the very best quality . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,15.C2.17

To ascertain the quantity of hay a Horse should have , depends much on
his size , his constitution , the nature of his work , &c. , &c.
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,15.C2.18

<P_16.C1>

Hence , if a Horse is put to fast work , his food should be of that
quality that affords the most nutriment , and that lays in the smallest
compass , and requires the least water to digest it ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C1.20

consequently , the Horse's wind will be the least distressed .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C1.21

If his work be hard , that is , continued for several hours , but not at
any extraordinary speed , he may have more abundantly of hay , and even
beans with his oats . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C1.22

Chaff , if sweet and good , is proper for some Horses , such as have
thin light carcases , and do not work hard .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C1.23

Those Horses that eat their corn greedily without masticating it , and
it comes away with their dung , a handful or two of good sweet clover
chaff with such Horses will be infinitely serviceable , as they will be
obliged to chew or masticate the oats with the chaff before they can
swallow it . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C1.24

But though chaff is filling , it must be <font> sparingly <$$font> given
to Horses required to be in condition , as it fills them up , and makes
them inclined to drink , by which they will appear plump and fair to the
eye , <font> but not in condition for work . <$$font>
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C1.25

It is most proper for slow draught Horses . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C1.26

To convey some idea of the quantity of hay that may be necessary for a
saddle Horse , I shall say from eight to sixteen pounds per day
according to sizes , constitution , &c. , &c. ; so that , if we take
the medium , about twelve pounds will be found generally sufficient ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C1.27

but large carriage Horses will require more ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C1.28

we may say , from sixteen to twenty pounds per day .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C1.29

Having mentioned an indefinite quantity , judgment according to
circumstances must direct the remainder . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C1.30

If your Horses get lank and more hollow in the flank and quarters than
you like , you must increase their allowance ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C1.31

but , on the contrary , you must not , for the sake of having your
Horses fat and plump , supply them with too much hay and water .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C1.32

A Horse <P_16.C2> when fat is less fit for work than when lean and poor
, provided that poverty was not occasioned by starvation ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C2.33

for a Horse may be lean and poor by his work exceeding his keep ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C2.34

or , if a Horse is stinted to an allowance that would keep him in
tolerable condition with only a little walking exercise , and then put
to work without an increase of food , he will of course become thin ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C2.35

but if you have not taken so much out of him as to exhaust his strength
, as well as his flesh , he will become nothing the worse for it ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C2.36

increase his food , and he will be better for work than before .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C2.37

A Horse that is full of flesh , though it may be in consequence of good
and wholesome food , with good looking_after and regular exercise , is ,
nevertheless , not in that condition that is most desirable ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C2.38

for his flesh in this state is an incumbrance ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C2.39

and were you to put him to an excessive day's work , before you had
gradually reduced him , it might occasion some inflammatory disease .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C2.40

Good oats is the most nutritious food for saddle Horses , if given in
proper quantities ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C2.41

this must , in some measure , be proportioned to the work or exercise
the Horse has to contend with . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C2.42

You may keep a Horse in condition with three quarters of oats per day ,
provided his work is no more than exercise ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C2.43

but if your work be much , you must increase his food proportionably ,
and according to his constitution ; some Horses being much heartier
feeders than others . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C2.44

If the Horse be kept to constant hard work , you are in no danger of
over-feeding him , if you were to give him as much as he could eat ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C2.45

but high feed , without work , would , as I have observed , make him
gross and unfit for work . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,16.C2.46

Beans are excellent and stimulating food for Horses , that is , hard
working Horses , but not <P_17.C1> by any means proper for light working
Horses , nor for Horses that are required to go at speed , as they
require more water to digest them , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.47

consequently , they swell in the stomach ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.48

and I have known cases where the stomach has been ruptured by feeding
too heartily of beans , and then the Horse put into immediate work :
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.49

they also exceedingly , in some constitutions , distress the Horse's
wind , especially if the Horse be required to go fast ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.50

they may be allowed to Horses that travel at a moderate rate , such as
draught Horses , without that extreme caution required with others .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.51

They are good feed for coach or omnibus Horses , if given in small
quantities and with caution , and due attention to the constitution of
the Horse . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.52

Water is usually given twice a day ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.53

some , however , give it three times ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.54

but this plan of watering will not do for travelling Horses ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.55

but may do very well for draught Horses . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.56

Soft water is esteemed preferable to hard spring water ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.57

hence rivers and running streams are better than water pumped from a
fine spring : SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.58

where such are not handy , springs that supply ponds , where the water
gets impregnated and softened by a loamy {TEXT:loomy} or chalky soil ,
will be better than hard spring water . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.59

The quantity in this must be directed by circumstances , size of the
Horse , constitution , &c. SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.60

Some Horses will not drink immoderately , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.61

and may be left to their discretion ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.62

while others , if you let them will swill , and render themselves
incapable of work , causing immoderate perspiration , and distress of
wind . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.63

Such must be restrained to a moderate quantity , that they may be fit
for work if they are instantly wanted . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.64

When the work is done for the day , water may be allowed in reason ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.65

but some Horses will always be required to be allowanced ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C1.66

or they would drink greedily , <P_17.C2> and make their bellies what is
called wash_bellied : SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.67

it is not a bad sign , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.68

nor should a Horse be rejected on account of a large belly ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.69

it is a sign of a good constitution , and a good feeder ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.70

and nothing is more easy , with proper feeding and exercise , to bring
it into proper shape . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.71

Half a stable-pail of water is generally sufficient for the morning ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.72

in the evening the Horse may drink more plentifully , if his belly does
not appear to increase or get too large , which must be particularly
attended to ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.73

for by that you are to regulate his allowance of hay and water .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.74

<heading>

Groom's Duty . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.76

<$$heading>

The foregoing remarks , relative to feeding may suffice for the present
; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.78

I shall make some further observations , as it may occur in the daily
employment in the stable , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.79

and shall proceed to notice things in that routine , which is daily to
be pursued . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.80

Stable hours should be kept with strict regularity ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.81

all animals appear to have a knowledge of time ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.82

and it may be observed , in many instances , they observe the periods as
correctly as we , who have recourse to time-pieces ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.83

witness the dog , who , if he is accustomed to receive any thing from
your plate at meals , never fails to attend at the dinner-hour , though
in the intervening time he will be roving a great distance ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.84

the poultry that scratch and seek for insects and worms round adjacent
places , will , at the accustomed hour assemble at the door they are fed
at , and appear to know the time with great exactness : pigs and cows in
like manner : SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.85

no wonder that the Horse , which , I may aver is not less sensible than
any of these , should know his stated hours ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,17.C2.86

and if he is not attended to particularly to feed and water at the
accustomed <P_18.C1> time , will be watching and fretting with much
anxiety , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.87

and oftentimes will call and ask for his food , in such manner , as
those accustomed to Horses can@ @not fail to understand .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.88

Regular and stated hours should be punctually attended to , with as
little variation , as the season or circumstances may require ; five
o'clock in summer ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.89

but as the days shorten a later hour is admissible , unless Horses are
to be ready at an early hour for hunting , or otherwise ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.90

in such cases , two hours at least before they are wanted , the stable
should be visited : SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.91

if you do not allow yourself sufficient time , things can@ @not be done
as they should . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.92

The first thing to be done on going to stable {COM:sic} , after casting
your eye round to see if any Horses are loose , cast , or the like , is
to rack and feed . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.93

The judgment in racking is to give the Horse but little at a time , that
he may eat it with an appetite , first clearing out his rack , &c. ,
&c. SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.94

If a Horse leaves hay that is good and sweet , some cause must be
assigned for it , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.95

and it must be examined into ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.96

sometimes cats will foul the hay , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.97

and Horses are very nice in their food , when not kept scanty .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.98

If the Horse appears to be in health , and the hay has not been blown on
by other horses , but is fresh and sweet , I should judge he is too
plentifully fed , and leaving hay for the sake of oats -
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.99

this should be guarded against ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.100

therefore , if you give hay that is good and clean in moderation , I
would recommend to shorten his allowance of oats , to bring his stomach
to the small quantity of hay that I recommended to be given .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.101

His morning's racking should be one quarter of his daily allowance ,
which , on the average , is about three pounds to his breakfast ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.102

for abundant feeding in the morning is not good ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.103

a Horse can@ @not work pleasant to himself when over-full ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C1.104

<P_18.C2>

and therefore feed sparingly in the morning SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C2.106

and if you want some exertion from him , do not suppose that a full
belly will make him perform the better , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C2.107

it is the food that he has digested , and from which he has obtained
that nutriment and its consequent stimulus that is to support him in his
work , and not what you cram into him at the time you want him for great
exertion : SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C2.108

a good Horse , in proper condition , will not flag in twelve hours , if
you require that much of him ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C2.109

and I have rode a Horse many times for twelve hours ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C2.110

and on a moderate computation , suppose he has carried me a_hundred
miles , without <paren> as it is termed <$$paren> drawing bit ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C2.111

but this is not to be expected from every Horse ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C2.112

none but thorough good Horses , in proper condition , can undergo such
extraordinary exertions . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C2.113

But to return . The quantity of hay that is given should be well shaken
, to clear it from dust and seeds , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C2.114

and if it is very dry , as it sometimes will be , sprinkling it with
water will be more agreeable to the Horse , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C2.115

and he will eat it with better appetite . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C2.116

I have known many Horses , when they perceive or think they are going
out with the hounds , or have seen the rider come into the stable with
his <font> scarlet coat on , and his white cords <$$font> , refuse to
eat their hay or oats : SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C2.117

this arises from an impatient and pleasing anxiety of mind , the
animating prospect of the chase , of which most horses are fond , but
some uncommonly so ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C2.118

but whether they disregard their food from this pleasing anxiety , as
children will , when the prospect of pleasure is arrived , or whether
they refuse their food , knowing they will be better able to gallop with
an empty stomach , I will not pretend to determine ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,18.C2.119

but certain it is , the Horses that have come within my knowledge ,
never performed <P_19.C1> the worse for it ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C1.120

and , I likewise noticed they were not off their feed when the day was
over ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C1.121

therefore , a Horse refusing his food under such circumstances , I do
not esteem a bad prognostic . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C1.122

But it is very common for a Horse to be off his food after any great
exertion , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C1.123

and this is by no means a pleasant circumstance , especially to a <font>
true horse-man . <$$font> SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C1.124

After having racked with hay , you next feed , as it is termed , that is
serving the oats . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C1.125

I proceed in the routine that is to be daily observed ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C1.126

for , were I to treat of things out of the regular order , young hands
might be studying what they should do , and what ought to be done first
, SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C1.127

and it is no uncommon thing to see <font> some , <$$font> that have been
in the stable employment for a length of time , not know what thing to
do first , and occasion themselves trouble and loss of time , by going
wrong about things . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C1.128

Now , in serving the oats , whatever is deemed a sufficient allowance
for the Horse , for the day , whether it may be three quarterns or a
peck , one-fourth of the quantity should now be given :
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C1.129

as sweet and clean food is most agreeable to the Horse , as well as
beneficial , carefully sift the corn from dust ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C1.130

blow away the chaff , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C1.131

and pick out any thing you perceive is unfit or unpleasant , which will
sometime be found among them , frequently rat's dung and cat's dung ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C1.132

then clear the manger with a whisp of hay or straw ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C1.133

and throwing in the oats , spread them with your hand , to prevent the
Horse from taking too greedy a mouthful at a time , whereby he would be
induced to swallow them without chewing . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C1.134

While the Horses are eating this first feed of corn , which you will
recollect is to be given immediately on your entering the stable in the
morning , prepare your saddles and <P_19.C2> exercising bridles ready to
take them out ; which being all ready and placed on for exercise , give
your Horses a few go_downs of water ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.135

then , if it be an establishment of some considerable extent , give
orders to the stable boy to make fair the stable during your absence ,
in the following manner : SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.136

<paren> if it should be a single_horse stable , this process may not be
required so minutely <$$paren> ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.137

first , throw all the dung off the litter , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.138

clear out behind , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.139

then turn up the driest and best of the litter under the manger ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.140

the wet and muck you turn out behind ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.141

this being removed to the dung-heap , sweep clear out ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.142

then , taking a bucket of water , wash the stall out well ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.143

after the water is run and swept away , take your bedding that has been
put under the manger , and place behind the horse's stall against the
wall ; by doing so you remove all the disagreeable smell that may
probably arise from the bedding being allowed to remain under the manger
, SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.144

and in all probability prevent your horse from being affected with
diseases of the eyes , glanders , inflamed lungs , &c. , &c ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.145

this being done , take a little of the litter
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.146

and shake in the stall , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.147

for most Horses stale on first coming into the stable from exercise ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.148

and this will induce them to do so freely ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.149

thus , you have your stable free from any effluvia from the dung and
urine . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.150

<heading>

Directions for Dressing Horses . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.152

<$$heading>

The stable being made clean , next commence cleaning your Horses ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.154

this is a work that requires more knowledge and judgment than at first
appears . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.155

The curry-comb is the first thing applied , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.156

and great attention should be paid to its being applicable to the Horse
, SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.157

some Horses require much of the curry-comb , others , none ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,19.C2.158

this depends on the state the <P_20.C1> Horse is in , time of year , &c.
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C1.159

Horses that have their coats long and full of dust , such as are just
taken up from grass , or those just come out of persons' {TEXT:person's}
hands , that either do not know , or do not take the pains to keep a
Horse's coat clean and fine , will require the free use of the
curry-comb ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C1.160

and the teeth and sharpness of the comb should be proportioned to the
thickness , length , and foulness of the coat ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C1.161

while Horses that have been kept in stable and properly groomed , have
their coats fine , thin , soft , and clean , requiring no other use of
the curry-comb than merely to clean the brush , or occasionally to rub
off any dung the Horse may have laid on ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C1.162

the teeth of such a comb should be remarkably even and dull not to
scratch him . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C1.163

These things being attended to , after stripping the cloaths off , you
should then use the curry-comb , always beginning on the near side at
the hind quarters , and using it in proportion to the length and
foulness of the coat ; that is , if the coat is fast on , long , full of
dust , and very filthy , you may use it freely to loosen the coat , or
the sweat that is dried and fastened on the skin and roots of the hair ,
appearing like a white and saltish dust ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C1.164

but , though I say you may use it freely for this purpose , you are not
to expect you are to get it all out at once ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C1.165

it must be a work of time , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C1.166

and to attempt , by using the curry-comb too much , you would set the
coat on end , open the pores of the skin , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C1.167

and the Horse would in consequence be very liable to take cold , which
would obstruct that imperceptible perspiration which in a healthy state
is always going on , but if prevented , an ichorous {TEXT:ichorsus}
discharge is frequently set up , which will dry into small scabs ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C1.168

the coat will then stare , and put on a rusetty appearance ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C1.169

therefore , when I said , <P_20.C2> use the comb freely , I mean
comparatively to what you do with Horses whose coats are fine and clean
, such as the race-horse , or the hunter , when got into proper
condition {COM:missing_period} SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C2.170

Another thing to be observed is , that if it be at the season the Horse
is changing his coat , at which the hair will come off freely with the
curry-comb , I would not advise too free a use of the comb for the
purpose of removing the coat , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C2.171

but let it have its time to come off ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C2.172

for with good feed you will obtain this end quicker than by scratching
the Horse's skin with the comb . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C2.173

Providence has wisely so ordered things , that the Horse's coat , if
exposed to cold , shall grow long , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C2.174

and if you keep him warm , his coat will be the shorter .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C2.175

Proceeding then to curry on the hind quarter , for the purpose of
unmatting the hair and loosening the dust , you descend down the
quarters , particularly remembering to rub off all dried dung , and
taking care not to injure or scratch the horse's legs .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C2.176

Remember , you are not to use the curry-comb below the Horse's hock ,
unless any dung may be there ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C2.177

here you must handle the comb very light , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C2.178

and with grey or white Horses these stains are very troublesome to
remove ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C2.179

but if you take a wet sponge , and well moisten the hair where the stain
is , then take a knob of common <font> stone blue <$$font> <paren> such
as used by washer-women <$$paren> , put this in a piece of flannel , and
rub well on the stains ; by this means you will be able to remove all
stains : SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C2.180

when this is dry , it must be well brushed off .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C2.181

But to return . After having curried the Horse's hind quarter , proceed
on to the back loins , flank , belly , shoulders , arms , chest , and
neck , omitting no part the comb can be conveniently applied to ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C2.182

but tender places , or those thin of hair , need not be touched ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,20.C2.183

the <P_21.C1> head also need not be touched .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C1.184

Horses are not ticklish when they are full of the dust occasioned by the
natural and imperceptible perspiration of the body ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C1.185

but as they get clean , and their coats short and fine , they are
exceedingly ticklish , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C1.186

and you must be careful to stand in a secure place .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C1.187

After having curried the near side , proceed in like manner to curry the
off side ; but with this difference , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C1.188

it will be necessary to use your left hand , which after a while you
will find most handy and convenient {COM:missing_period}
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C1.189

This done , you next proceed to whisp off the dust you have raised by
the curry-comb , and to rub and whisp well those places which were not
proper for the comb to touch . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C1.190

For this purpose , you make a whisp of some half-worn straw ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C1.191

but a hay-band is better , which prepare for the purpose by half
untwisting it ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C1.192

loosening it thus , you double it to about a foot in length , loosely
twisting it together that it may not scatter too fast , till you have it
as thick as you can grasp : SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C1.193

if it be dry and harsh , sprinkle it with water ; this will make it work
pleasanter , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C1.194

and the dust you intend to remove will adhere to it , and not fly about
so much . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C1.195

You begin to whisp the Horse at his head , taking the whisp in the left
hand for the near side of the horse , and resting the right hand on the
most convenient part of the Horse to steady yourself , while you apply
the whisp ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C1.196

you change its situation , beginning first at the top of the neck , down
to the shoulders , the under part of the neck , the chest , particularly
between the fore legs , down the arms , knees , and the sinews and
fetlocks , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C1.197

and well rub out the dirt from the heels , where you could not get your
curry-comb ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C1.198

proceed on in the order of his carcase , on the back , sides , belly ,
croup , and so on to his hind legs , which clean as <P_21.C2> carefully
as the fore ones ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.199

you then whisp his off side in the same manner , only changing the whisp
from the left to the right hand . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.200

You now proceed to brush your Horse over , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.201

after having first cleaned your brush well with the curry-comb , begin
at the croup or rump , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.202

and well brush the Horse's body backwards and forwards , the brush being
in the left hand ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.203

for the near side , work your way up in all parts as before ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.204

and finish at the top of the neck ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.205

then in leaving it , brush the Horse the straight way of the hair ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.206

and finish at the near fetlock and heel behind :
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.207

the same operation must be gone through on the off side , changing the
brush to the right hand . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.208

Now , many stable-men attend most to those places that are most
conspicuous to the eye , such as the fall of the neck , the shoulders ,
and hind quarters ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.209

these places shine the most , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.210

and they do not fail to point out these to you , and say how well they
look , which may satisfy some persons , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.211

but a judge will not be deceived by external appearances ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.212

he expects the parts not immediately in view to be equally attended to .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.213

After the brushing , which causes much of the dust to be floating about
, and a part of it will again settle on the Horse , you should have a
linen cloth to wipe him over with , the linen cloth being much easier
washed than any other article ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.214

with this you wipe him all over , beginning with the whisp or brush , at
the head , and so proceeding to every part , which , being done , you
put on his cloaths before you finish with his head , mane , tail , and
legs , that the Horse may not chill or take cold while you are about
them . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,21.C2.215

I would have it understood , I am only treating on the method to be
pursued in the <P_22.C1> hackney stable , and not in the racing and
hunting stable , though there is very little difference in treating the
hunter and the hack , except it be in a greater addition of clothing and
more dressing , the days he may be laying at rest .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.216

The cloth being properly on without wrinkles , but perfectly smooth ,
and that especially under the roller , loosen the Horse's head ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.217

take off his stall-collar , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.218

and turn him round in the stall , to give his head and ears a complete
rubbing and brushing , which was not so practicable with the
stall-collar on . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.219

You now brush his head over in every part , particularly at the root of
the ears , and under the throat ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.220

then after , with your dusting cloth , rub and wipe him well ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.221

then pull his ears through your hands , observing they are clean and
soft , and moderately cool ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.222

then comb out his mane and foretop , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.223

then with a sponge or water-brush , wet the top or roots of the mane ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.224

and pass a small cloth for that purpose over it :
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.225

this cloth being passed from the near side at the top of the mane , and
pulled over to the off side , will make the mane lay smooth .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.226

You next put on his stall collar , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.227

and comb out his tail , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.228

wipe away any dirt or filth that may be remaining under the tail with a
wet sponge , and after with your cloth . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.229

The Horse's feet are next to be examined , and the dung and litter
picked clean out , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.230

and if necessary must be washed . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.231

And , lastly , the legs are to be rubbed with a clean loose whisp of
straw in each hand ; for which purpose , you should go down on both
knees , pass the whisp down the legs and tendons , then finish with
passing your hands down in like manner , to feel that they are smooth ,
and no particles of the straw or thistles , which might be among it ,
adhere or stick in the hair . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C1.232

These <P_22.C2> rubbings will increase the circulation ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.233

and , consequently , will promote the absorption of any fluid that may
be detained in those parts , which too frequently occasion swelled legs
; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.234

and , if neglected , the heels may crack , and produce grease , which ,
with a little extra trouble , may at all times be prevented .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.235

The morning's business of the stable being thus completed , the Horse
will require nothing until noon . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.236

Before I proceed further , I shall show the reasons for feeding the
hackney ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.237

for I would not have it understood , that this is the manner to feed for
extraordinary cases , or hunters . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.238

A hackney should be always ready to perform ordinary work , with ease to
himself , and comfort to his rider . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.239

I account it moderate exercise for a good hackney , to go thirty or
forty miles on {TEXT:an} end , without drawing bit , at the rate of from
eight to ten miles an hour ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.240

this I call ordinary work : SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.241

but to gallop twenty miles , or trot sixteen in an hour , I call
extraordinary work , which requires a Horse to go through a regular mode
of training . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.242

But to return . At noon , give him the like quantity of hay as in the
morning , and his feed of corn : SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.243

set the stable fair , that is , put his litter to rights
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.244

and remove the dung . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.245

This is all that is necessary till watering time , which is about four
o'clock , at which time , you strip the horse , and brush him well over
. SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.246

I have had lads that could hardly be persuaded of the necessity of this
, alleging that they had cleaned them perfectly well in the morning ;
that the Horse had not been out of the stable , and that the clothing
prevented dust from settling on them {TEXT:_hem} ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.247

therefore , they could not conceive the necessity of it ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.248

and many others may be of the same opinion :
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,22.C2.249

but <P_23.C1> the imperceptible perspiration , which is always going on
, occasions a scruf , which the Horse is much relieved by having it
removed ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C1.250

besides , stripping the cloths off , and brushing him over , greatly
refreshes the Horse , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C1.251

and puts the blood into a freer circulation .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C1.252

Wipe your Horse down as before finishing with rubbing his legs , which
must never be omitted , combing the mane and tail , &c. , then watering
. SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C1.253

If there is not a probability of the Horse going out , let him have a
greater quantity of water than in the morning , and if he be not a
greedy Horse for water , he will not drink more than will do him good ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C1.254

but , if you perceive his belly gets too large , and he appears washy ,
you must allowance him . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C1.255

Set your stable fair , and you have done until the final doing up for
the night . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C1.256

At about eight o'clock go to your stable , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C1.257

and finish for the night . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C1.258

You must now give him his remaining allowance of hay , being double what
you gave in the morning , and his remaining feed of corn .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C1.259

You give more abundantly at night , because it will be in so forward a
state of digestion in the morning , as not to occupy so much room ,
which , when working , would press upon the lungs , and , consequently ,
distress the wind ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C1.260

this will be a guide how you should vary it upon particular occasions ,
so as to have your Horse in good heart and spirits , but empty , when
wanted for expeditious purposes . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C1.261

The last thing is making up the beds , and setting all fair .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C1.262

Now , in making up the beds , you contrive to lay all the worst of the
litter on the middle or bottom , where the Horse is most likely to spoil
it ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C1.263

in throwing down the litter you placed behind the Horse in the morning ,
reserve the cleanest and driest part to top the bed with , making the
bed up high <P_23.C2> on each side , and fullest towards the hind
quarters , that it may be soft and pleasant to the Horse , which_ever
side he may lay on , as they will sometimes turn frequently in the
course of the night : SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.264

throw out all dung , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.265

and sweep clean ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.266

see that all the stall-collars are secure , loose cloths taken off , and
every thing set fair , which finishes the routine of the stable .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.267

<heading>

Exercise . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.269

<$$heading>

Exercise is so essentially necessary and beneficial to the Horse , that
all the feeding and grooming would be of little use , if work or
exercise be omitted . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.271

It is admitted , that great numbers of Horses are killed or spoiled with
being over-worked ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.272

and , it is a doubt with me , if as many are not spoiled in London for
want of work . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.273

There are several persons in London who keep Horses , but who are so
occupied with business , that they can@ @not ride them out oftener than
once in a week , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.274

and many that I know , do@ @n't ride them once in a month ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.275

their Horses stand at livery , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.276

and they order them to be exercised . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.277

Men employed in livery-stables have seldom less than six or eight ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.278

and I have known some to have ten livery-horses to look after :
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.279

these men , if they rub off the dung , and occasionally give them a
brush over , <font> omit exercise , <$$font> not finding time for it .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.280

Gentlemen do not like to see or know boys are permitted to ride their
horses ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.281

and without they keep grooms of their own , their Horses will go short
of exercise . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.282

Consider , then , those Horses that are confined in a livery-stable from
week's end to week's end , and many stables confined and filthy ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,23.C2.283

if they are sometimes moved about which they <font> call exercise ,
<$$font> it is on a ride , perhaps , fifty or sixty yards long , made up
of <P_24.C1> litter and dung , with a smoking dung-hill at some part of
it , so that the Horse literally breathes only air strongly impregnated
with the evaporation of dung . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C1.284

I think , frequently , it is surprising they are so well as they are .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C1.285

The disorders it brings on them are principally <font> cough , <$$font>
not improperly called <font> a stable cough , <$$font> also weakness in
the legs , so that they frequently make a drop , as it is termed ;
various humorial diseases , such as <font> swelled legs , grease , farcy
, <$$font> and , in all probability , inflamed lungs and glanders .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C1.286

At their best , when they look plump and well to the eye , they are
faint , and what is termed foggy , and unable to perform more than would
be <font> common exercise <$$font> for Horses in condition .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C1.287

Since , therefore , exercise and air are so beneficial , let us consider
in what manner exercise should be given , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C1.288

this is to be regulated according to circumstances .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C1.289

Where Horses work two or three days in the week , the resting days
require no more than airing exercise , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C1.290

for every Horse should have at least two days in the week , such work or
exercise that will give him a good sweating ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C1.291

this throws out through the pores of the skin , what might lodge in the
system and create diseases ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C1.292

it likewise frees the Horse of the scurf , adhering to the skin ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C1.293

and occasions the coat to look fine ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C1.294

those days , therefore , that the Horse is not wanted for work , he must
be exercised for the fresh air , which is bracing and strengthening to
his limbs , refreshes the body , and creates appetite ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C1.295

and the early part of the day is preferable for this ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C1.296

but in wet weather you must embrace the best opportunity you can .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C1.297

If but one Horse be kept by a gentleman , order his groom , as soon as
the stable has been cleaned out in the morning , which is <P_24.C2>
while the Horse is eating his first feed , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.298

brush him over , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.299

and put on his exercising saddle and bridle ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.300

in cold weather , if you only intend walking him , you may keep the
cloth or sheet on him under the saddle ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.301

in warm weather I do not recommend it , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.302

for , though a Horse's coat may be something the finer by being kept
warm , yet he is certainly the more liable to take cold when he is
necessarily deprived of it . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.303

The most open and airy places should be taken for exercise ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.304

and this is the most favourable opportunity to improve a Horse's walk ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.305

for when he has only walking exercise , you should at least walk him two
hours , which will be sufficient ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.306

and by <font> aiming to extend his walk , <$$font> you may greatly
improve it ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.307

thus , you exercise the Horse SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.308

and improve him at the same time . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.309

At your return thoroughly clean him , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.310

give him his feed , &c. SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.311

If you had convenience , or opportunity , while you were out , you might
give him his water . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.312

If a Horse is hearty , and inclined to flesh , I would rather recommend
the like exercise in the afternoon , where persons have time and
convenience , than to shorten his feed for that purpose ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.313

it would be much better for the Horse ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.314

but every one can@ @not allow the time to be so taken up ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.315

for it would be nearly equal to training , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.316

and may not be thought necessary ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.317

it is more than the generality of Horses require ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.318

and many inferior-bred Horses , who look well to the eye , can@ @not for
a continuance stand the ordinary work that a Horse has in training ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.319

such is the amazing difference of Horses : SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.320

if you enquire of training grooms , concerning some high_bred colt or
other , why he is not <font> brought out , <$$font> they will answer "
he would not stand his training ; " though , I think in a great many
cases , training is screwed up to too tight a pitch in the present day .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,24.C2.321

<P_25.C1>

Should the Horse's work be so moderate as not to occasion a sweat , I
think it beneficial , about twice a week , to give exercise strong
enough to sweat him ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.323

this may be done in the pace he is most <font> rode in , <$$font> that
he may be practised and improve in it ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.324

if he be admired for his trot , it would be wrong to gallop him , which
might unsettle him in his esteemed pace , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.325

therefore , trot him out for the space of two miles to bring him to a
comfortable sweat , and walk him back ; thus , you extend his limbs ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.326

supple his muscles , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.327

and strengthen his ligaments and tendons ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.328

for we know not our strength , unless we are put to it ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.329

inactivity debilitates , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.330

and over_exertion may sprain and weaken , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.331

but moderate exertion is good both for man and beast .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.332

Sweating of Horses occasions considerable labour to clean ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.333

and indolent grooms , and those who have several Horses to look after ,
avoid this part of their business as much as possible :
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.334

some would persuade you , there was no necessity for it ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.335

but reason and experience teach us otherwise .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.336

When a Horse comes in from work or exercise , if in a sweat , or wet and
dirty with sloppy roads and rain , they should not be left until made
completely dry , clean , and comfortable : SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.337

some Horses , in good condition , will rub dry and clean in a short time
, SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.338

but others , with long and curly coats , and some from constitution or
ill condition are a long time getting dry ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.339

hence , of late years , clipping has been introduced ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.340

but this I am decidedly opposed to , as it is to be prevented altogether
by good grooming ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.341

besides , clipt Horses are apt so frequently to take cold , if hunters ,
especially of a slack day . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C1.342

I have known an industrious groom to work at a Horse for four hours ,
and not leave him until perfectly dry , while others <P_25.C2> will
cover them with a cloth , and leave them to dry , before they will clean
them . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C2.343

Much depends on the habit the Horse has been used to , <font>
constitution , condition , <$$font> &c. , whether the Horse will take
injury from being left in his wet and dirt ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C2.344

but those Horses that have been properly groomed , having all care taken
of them to keep their coats fine , and on all occasions made dry and
comfortable , would be liable to take cold , which might be the
forerunner of other diseases , if neglected at these times .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C2.345

<heading>

Physicking and bleeding . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C2.347

<$$heading>

Some persons are fond of physicking or bleeding their Horses , when
there is no apparent cause or reason for it .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C2.349

Grooms , in general , take upon themselves to bleed and physic at their
own discretion ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C2.350

it is therefore necessary to assign some reason , and to shew when , and
for what purpose , such methods are to be pursued .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C2.351

It is best to pursue such methods as to preclude the necessity of either
; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C2.352

for , with proper feeding , exercising , and grooming , there will
seldom be occasion for physic , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C2.353

but sloth or idleness is the parent of disease ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,25.C2.354

and thus it happens with Horses , when they are well fed , and have
little or no work <paren> Horses not being intended to stand in a stall
, and fatten like a bullock <$$paren> , the blood-vessels get filled ,
and overcharged , and a partial stagnation <P_26.C1> takes place , so
that the economy of the whole system becomes obstructed , and can@ @not
perform their several functions ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C1.355

<font> the stomach <$$font> can@ @not digest its contents ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C1.356

<font> the lungs <$$font> become oppressed ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C1.357

and have not that free expansion they require ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C1.358

consequently , if timely relief be not given , a catalogue of disorders
must ensue , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C1.359

for nature always strives to unburthen herself in some way or other .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C1.360

When any symptoms of approaching illness or disorder appears , which may
discover itself in various ways , such as refusing his food , languour
or dullness , heaviness of the eyes , heat in the mouth , swelling of
the legs , itchings , breakings out in various parts , &c. , it then
will , in general , be proper to bleed , as a check , and also to lessen
the irritability of the system , which will arrest the advancing malady
; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C1.361

in these cases bleed according to size , constitution , and nature of
the Horse's foreboding attack . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C1.362

If a Horse be very fat , you must not take the quantity from him as if
in good working condition ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C1.363

for his fat , in the first place , debilitates , him ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C1.364

and then taking blood in large quantities still increases the debile
state . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C1.365

I have frequently known fat Horses fall , in consequence of five or six
quarts of blood being taken from them at a time , the idea impressed
having been , that because he was fat , he could lose so much more blood
. SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C1.366

If , on showing any of the preceding named symptoms , and he happens to
be over-loaded with fat , be exceedingly cautious of bleeding , as to
abstracting too great a quantity ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C1.367

but with Horses in condition for work you may take five or six quarts
without the least fear . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C1.368

In bleeding , sometimes , after pinning up the orifice , you may
perceive the Horse shake himself ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C1.369

you then may be assured you have gained your object , as when this
occurs , it is a favourable omen that you have <P_26.C2> reduced that
inflammatory action that was going on in the system .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C2.370

But if you compare symptoms and circumstances together , to account for
, if possible , the cause of complaint ; if the Horse has been well kept
, consequently full of flesh , and little or no work ; for I do not call
walking a Horse about to stretch his limbs <paren> which lazy grooms
will do , and are afraid of sweating them , because of the trouble of
cleaning them <$$paren> , sufficient to keep a Horse in health ; you may
reasonably conclude , the blood-vessels are prevented from performing
their natural functions , and evacuations must relieve them .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C2.371

In this case , I prefer a course of alteratives {COM:sic} to violently
physicking Horses ; it being less dangerous , and more compatible with
the opinion of my late respected friend , John Abernethy , who used to
observe , " <font> I do not like bullying any man's guts into good order
. <$$font> " SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C2.372

It may so happen , that a Horse over-fed and too little worked , may not
discover any symptoms until after a day's riding , and work as some
would call it , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C2.373

and from that circumstance , you might at first not attribute it to the
want of exercise ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C2.374

but in this you deceive yourself , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C2.375

for disease , or the seeds of disease , might have been lurking in the
Horse , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C2.376

and could not develop {TEXT:develope} themselves until the Horse was put
to unusual exertion , which might cause the discovery sooner than
otherwise it would . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C2.377

If the Horse has been in regular work or exercise , young and tender
constitutions will sicken at unusual exertion , which is termed , <font>
taking too much out of him ; <$$font> SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C2.378

in this case , the loss of a little blood , with two or three days rest
, will restore him . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,26.C2.379

But , sometimes taking too much blood , and , at the same time , when
the Horse is very hot , suffering him to cool too <P_27.C1> fast , will
, in all probability instead of decreasing , increase any inflammatory
disposition the system may be susceptible of ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C1.380

but if you notice at the first , that the Horse does not dung , or empty
himself freely , as Horses generally do when in health , this will draw
your attention to the Horse , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C1.381

and he must have speedy relief , to prevent disease coming on in a more
dangerous form . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C1.382

<heading>

On the Management of Hunters . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C1.384

<$$heading>

After what has been said in the preceding article , there remains to be
noticed the method to get your hunters into condition , and the care and
management of them through the season . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C1.386

Hunters are usually turned into good grass after the season is over ,
though a great deal has been said by " Nimrod " against such a practice
; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C1.387

still I have seen its good effects as often as stabling them ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C1.388

and , perhaps , it is a good thing that we should not all be of the same
opinion , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C1.389

and , for this reason , we can@ @not always tell how to draw the line ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C1.390

one man may have convenience to stable his hunters all the summer , and
ten others not ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C1.391

consequently , an additional expence would be incurred ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C1.392

and pounds , shilling , and pence , is a material object of the present
day , and with those who it would be the least suspected of
{TEXT:missing_"of"} . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C1.393

But as this treatise on the management of hunters is for the use of
hunting men in general , I shall go upon general principles , which I
know to be correct , and the manner in which I have treated my own
Horses . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C1.394

Grass , it is well known , be it of ever so good <P_27.C2> in quality ,
is not a substantial food , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C2.395

it is cooling an opening ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C2.396

and though it makes a Horse fleshy , it , nevertheless , is not that
description of flesh as the Horse could work on :
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C2.397

if you were to attempt to gallop him to that excess , as you are
necessitated when hunting , you would find the Horse faint and weak ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C2.398

the fat that had accumulated in the cellular membranous cavities , which
intersect the muscle all over the body , would evaporate in the form of
a white lathering sweat ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C2.399

and , if checked , might produce inflammation of the lungs , and the
Horse become a subject for the knackers ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C2.400

therefore , the first thing to be done to alter this state of the system
in the best and most expeditious manner , is to bleed and physic , but
that with caution , always paying great attention to the constitution of
the Horse . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C2.401

No person has a greater aversion to bleeding and physicking than myself
. SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C2.402

I have been always in the habit of treating my own Horses much after the
same manner that I would myself ; which was , never to take medicine
unless I perceived an absolute necessity for it ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C2.403

for I have made a remark , that all medical men that I have been
intimate with <paren> and I have known a great many <$$paren> , have
prescribed medicine to their patients for the most trifling complaints ,
but took none themselves , unless they were extremely ill , and thought
there was some danger . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C2.404

Judging I must be right in following their example , I , therefore ,
never take medicine myself , or administer it to my Horses , unless I am
fully persuaded there is a real necessity for it :
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,27.C2.405

however , to return to our subject . In the case of Horses being taken
up from grass , the warmth of the stable is very apt to make them have
an inclination to itch , and , <P_28.C1> consequently , rub themselves a
great deal . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.406

When Horses are so inclined , bleeding is highly necessary :
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.407

but we will first proceed to shoeing the Horse , and then give our
instructions how to proceed in their due course .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.408

The first thing , therefore , to be done , is to get the Horse shod ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.409

for Horses usually have their shoes taken off when turned out to grass ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.410

and , if not , they generally become loose before they are taken up ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.411

then bleed , according to the size of the Horse ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.412

from two to four quarts of blood will be sufficient ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.413

and let him stand quiet , with his head tied up to the rack , without
food of any kind for three or four hours . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.414

While he is full of grass , he will not drink much water ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.415

but after living on dry food , he will drink plentifully if you let him
. SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.416

There is no necessity for your stinting him in water until he has taken
his physic . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.417

His coat will be exceedingly foul , and full of nits ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.418

therefore , he will require some good dressings ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.419

the opening his coat , and taking the dirt out , will require him to be
clothed : SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.420

buckle a cloth on with a good broad roller , pretty tight , to assist in
reducing the size of his belly ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.421

and if he has been in the stable three or four days , and emptied the
grass out of him , you may give him his first dose of physic ;
preparatory to which , the day on which he takes his medicine , keep him
on cold bran mashes ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.422

then , at night , say an hour before you last visit the stable , give
him his medicine . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C1.423

Having done this , either tie him up <P_28.C2> close , or put on a
muzzle , so that he be kept without food all night ; this will , on
giving him a little exercise in the morning , occasion his medicine to
operate much quicker than any other way . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C2.424

Immediately on returning to stable , give the Horse a handful of the
best hay you have <paren> first having offered him some chilled water to
drink <$$paren> , and a bran mash slightly warmed ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C2.425

for , from the sickness occasioned by the medicine , Horses are
sometimes with difficulty to be persuaded to eat any thing warm during
the operation of physic ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C2.426

but in such cases , I have invariably horned down about two quarts of
gruel at intervals , which has restored the tone of the stomach in a
short time . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C2.427

This treatment , and good hay , is the only food necessary till his
physic is set , as it is termed , that is , done working ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C2.428

were you to give more substantial food , it might lessen the effect or
operation of the physic , or be thrown out whole and undigested ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C2.429

consequently , it is best not to give any .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C2.430

I would here caution the gentleman or the groom , to be certain that the
quality of the drugs , of which the medicine is composed , are genuine
and good . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C2.431

I do not know a more serious evil , than the compounding of medicines
with <font> bad and cheap <$$font> drugs ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C2.432

and I have experienced this evil very considerably when in the country ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C2.433

for , when I have sent a prescription to be made up , whether it has
been from the ignorance of the quality of the drugs , they might have
had imposed upon themselves , or whether from avarice , thinking a cheap
or spurious article might do for a Horse , I will not pretend to say ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C2.434

but physic , prepared with bad materials , not only deceives and
disappoints you , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C2.435

but may do infinite mischief , even the loss of the Horse , be it ever
so valuable ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,28.C2.436

therefore , I recommend you to <P_29.C1> procure your physic or persons
who are respectable , and that prepare great quantities .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.437

It is most likely , from their using large quantities , that it is not
prepared with stale drugs , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.438

and also from experience , they are good judges of the quality :
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.439

but , giving a Horse-prescription to an apothecary , or a country
druggist , it is likely to be made up of drugs that have been years in
his shop , and , perhaps , originally , not of the best quality .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.440

By the continued use of one person's physic , you will become acquainted
with its strength and quality , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.441

and may , with confidence , if you think necessary , for either small ,
young , or weakly Horses , diminish the dose , suitable to the
constitution you wish to {TEXT:missing_"to"} give it to .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.442

Every groom should be expert and handy in giving a ball ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.443

for there is an art in giving a Horse a ball , which a looker-on can@
@not easily discover ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.444

and , it being a material thing to give it well , I shall point out such
particulars as may assist the young practitioner .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.445

The generality of things may be done with deliberation ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.446

but the giving a ball must be done expert and quick ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.447

if not , it becomes disagreeable to the Horse , and difficult to the
operator . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.448

A balling-iron is frequently used by those who are not expert at it ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.449

and it may be best for those who are not in the habit of giving balls ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.450

but those who are accustomed to give balls , will do it as well , and
sooner , without . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.451

First , you should be certain you are tall enough to reach , should the
Horse raise his head before you make the attempt ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.452

if so , you must stand on something to raise you .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C1.453

Let the person who stands on the near side , and holds the Horse's mouth
open , put the ball partly into your waistcoat pocket , so much
remaining out , that you easily take hold of it <P_29.C2> when you have
drawn the Horse's tongue out . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.454

Stand before the Horse , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.455

and take the farthest hold of the tongue with your left hand , drawing
as much out of the mouth as it will admit , and in such manner , that
you are able to press it against his grinders , which effectually
prevents him from shutting his mouth , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.456

folding your right hand in as small a compass as you can , hold the ball
at the extreme end with the three first fingers ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.457

and put it over the root of the tongue , thrusting it as far as you can
; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.458

withdraw your hand , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.459

and let go the tongue , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.460

and bridle the nose in a little , to prevent his coughing it up :
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.461

you must wait patiently until you see it pass down , and be very
attentive , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.462

for you can@ @not be too certain of having seen him swallow it .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.463

If he hesitates to swallow it , elevate his head a little , and again
bridle in the nose , and that will occasion him to swallow ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.464

for some Horses will , if you are not mindful , hold the ball at the top
of the throat , till you loosen the head , and then cough it up again ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.465

or it may be lodged at the extremity of the grinders ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.466

you will perceive him chewing it , and at last put it out of his mouth .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.467

I have seen awkward persons spoil several balls , before they could put
one fairly down : SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.468

if you are not expert , the Horse will make the more resistance .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.469

Water may be given , as much as he will drink ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.470

warm water will occasion the physic to operate the sooner , if he will
drink it ; SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.471

but , as before stated , give gruel , if he refuse the tepid water ;
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.472

and after a few hours , give water that has been standing in the stable
some hours , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.473

the raw chill will then be taken off , SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.474

and will not hurt him . SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,29.C2.475

If the physic be prepared without <font> calomel <$$font> , or other
mercurials , which is not proper medicine for conditioning of Horses ,
on such occasions cold water should never be <P_30.C1> given .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,30.C1.476

If all things go on well , and as much to your wish as possible , you
must not strip his cloth off , nor dress him till his physic has done
working , which generally will be about the third day .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,30.C1.477

While his physic is operating , you must not take him out , though , if
you have convenience , you may put him in a loose box , which will
afford him exercise quite sufficient until his physic is set :
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,30.C1.478

be careful in keeping his hocks , legs , and thigh clean ,
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,30.C1.479

for at times , the discharge is very irritating .
SKEAVINGTON-184X-1,30.C1.480

