<BEGIN_smollett-175x-2>

<P_42>

{ED:Letter_26_To_John_Moore}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.4

Decr. 11 , 1755 SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.5

Dear Sir , I never repined so much at my own want of Importance as at
this Conjuncture when you have Occasion for the Interest of your Friends
; SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.6

and it is with great Mortification I now assure you that I have no sort
of Connexion with the Great Man who is to decide between you and your
Competitor . SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.7

Far from being used to the Great , as you seem to imagine , I have
neither Interest nor acquaintance with any Person whose Countenance or
Favour could be of advantage to myself or my friends .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.8

I live in the shade of obscurity , neglecting and neglected
SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.9

and spend my vacant hours among a Set of honest , phlegmatic Englishmen
whom I cultivate for their Integrity of Heart and Simplicity of Manners
. SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.10

I have not spoke to a Nobleman for some years ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.11

and those I once had the Honour of knowing were either such as had
little Interest of their own , or very little Consideration for me .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.12

I am heartily sorry to find your Cause is so slenderly supported with
the Duke of Argyle because , without his Concurrence or rather his
creative Word , I believe no Professorship can be filled up .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.13

Merit is altogether out of the Question . SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.14

Every thing here as well as in your Country is carried by Cabal ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.15

and in Scotland , the Cabal of the Campbells will always preponderate .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.16

The Time is fast approaching when all the Lands , all the Places of
Honour , Power and Profit will be in the possession of that worthy Clan
. SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.17

Then you may exclaim <font> non Numinis sed Campbellorum omnia plena !
<$$font> SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.18

Present my best wishes to Mrs. Moore and all your family ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.19

and be assured <paren> if such a Declaration can be of any Consequence
to a man whom I can@ @not serve in any thing essential <$$paren> that I
am with equal Truth and affection , Dear Sir , Your very humble Servt.
, T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.20

If you are acquainted with Capt. Walter Graham of Kilmannan , make my
Compts. to him SMOLLETT-175X-2,42.21

and tell him that I intend one of these days to answer his Letter , with
which I was favoured some weeks <P_43> ago . SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.22

I should likewise be glad to be remembered to Bob Barclay , Andrew
Blackburn , Will Wood , and the rest of my Glasgow friends .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.23

{ED:Letter_27_To?_James_Smollett,_Esq.,_of_Bonhill}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.25

March 9th , 1756 SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.26

Dear Sir , Your very kind Letter afforded me real Pleasure because it
breathes genuine Friendship and Sincerity . SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.27

Such Language of the Heart I prefer to all the Frippery of Eloquence ,
to all the Bribes of Ostentation . SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.28

The Circumstances of our Cousin Theophilus is to me amazing ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.29

and resembles the suggestion of a Dream . SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.30

I feel a strange Curiosity to see the man . SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.31

What says Mrs. Bethune and the females of our Family ?
SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.32

Considering the low Ebb to which we are reduced , this is a sort of
acquisition to the Name . SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.33

I begin to think we were originally Malet or Molet and came from
Normandy with the Conqueror . SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.34

He had followers of both names , SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.35

and they settled in the north . SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.36

William Malet was governour of York and a very gallant officer .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.37

The S. may have shifted its place from the End of the Prenomen to the
Beginning of the Surname . SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.38

There is a Norman who keeps a public House in the skirts of Chelsea , of
the name of Jonas Mollet . SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.39

I have by me an old Diploma signed at Caen about an_hundred years ago ,
SMALET antiquior Scholae Medicinalis Magister . SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.40

I should be very glad to know if you have any anecdotes of our little
Family ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.41

I have been told they were freeholders in Dumbarton four_hundred years
ago . SMOLLETT-175X-2,43.42

By the bye I find Dumbarton was once the Capital of the Kingdom of
Arecluyd inhabited by Britons or Cumbrians , whence its {TEXT:it} name
of Dunbritton ; that this <P_44> Kingdom extended westerly to the
Extremity of Cunningham or the Cumera Islands in the mouth of the Clyde
; that it was bounded by the Forth on one Side and the Irish
{TEXT:irish} Channel on the other . SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.43

The greatest part of Dumbarton has been destroyed by an Inundation .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.44

I myself when a Boy have felt the Stones of the Pavement under water
between what is called the College and the Town's End .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.45

I think I remember to have seen the Ruins of old Stone Houses on the
other side of the Sands , SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.46

and on your Ground at the Stony flat there are many Remains of Druid
Worshipping Places . SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.47

I am persuaded that an antiquarian would find much entertainment about
Dumbarton , and even some noble monuments of roman Antiquity ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.48

for there was a stationary Camp within three miles of the Place , at
Kilpatrick , for the Guard of the Wall built by Lollius Urbieus in the
Reign of Antoninus , commonly called Graeme's Dyke , which Buchannan
ignorantly confounds with the wall built by Severus from the Esk to the
Tyne in the North of England ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.49

and as the Britons of Arecluyd were under the roman Protection , they
must have entertained an intimate Intercourse , SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.50

and without doubt the Roman Generals and officers of Rank lived at
Dunbritton . SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.51

You will think this is a strange Rhapsody , SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.52

but to me the subject is interesting . SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.53

I have had occasion lately to inquire into the antiquities of our
Country . SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.54

I find the Scots came from Ireland but yesterday , in comparison with
the antiquity of the Caledonians and Britons of Arecluyd .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.55

I would fain derive myself from these last , SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.56

but whether antient Scot , Briton or Norman , I certainly am with equal
affection and Esteem , Dr. Sir , Your very humble Servt. , T.=s=
Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.57

My wife presents her best wishes for Mrs. Smollett and you .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.58

I hope mine will also be acceptable . SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.59

{ED:Letter_28_To_Dr._George_Macaulay}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.61

April 6 , 1756 SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.62

Dear Doctor , I have been last week threatened with writs of arrest ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,44.63

and some <P_45> tradesmen in Chelsea have been so clamorous that I
actually promised to pay them in the beginning of this week .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,45.64

I had recourse to Mr. Rivington , who happens to be out of cash , in
consequence of breaking up partnership with his brother .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,45.65

My proposal was that he should advance 100 l. which I would pay at the
rate of four guineas per week , deducted from the History ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,45.66

and at that rate I should have liquidated the debt in about
three-and-twenty weeks . SMOLLETT-175X-2,45.67

He had no sort of objection to the scheme , SMOLLETT-175X-2,45.68

and agrees to join with me in security for the money if it can be
borrowed for six months or longer . SMOLLETT-175X-2,45.69

As he is a sufficient man , and this disgrace hovers over my imagination
so as that I shall be rendered incapable of prosecuting my scheme , I
have recourse to your advice and assistance . SMOLLETT-175X-2,45.70

If you can command the sum , the deduction of four guineas a week shall
be made into your own hands ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,45.71

and even after the payment of that sum I shall go on towards a general
clearance until I am enabled to discuss the rest of my debt to you by
remittances from the West or East_Indies . SMOLLETT-175X-2,45.72

This proposed scheme of liquidation , added to the unquestionable
security of Mr. Rivington , and the consideration of my condition ,
will , I doubt not , prevail upon you to exert yourself in behalf of ,
dear Sir , yours , etc. , {ED:T.=s=_Smollett} SMOLLETT-175X-2,45.73

{ED:Letter_29_To_John_Moore}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,45.75

Augt. 3 , 1756 SMOLLETT-175X-2,45.76

Dear Sir , I am sorry to find that the young Gentleman you recommended
to my acquaintance had the Trouble of calling at my House without <P_46>
seeing me . SMOLLETT-175X-2,46.77

I was so liable to Intrusion from the situation of my House and the
number of my friends that I found it absolutely necessary to give my
servant a general order to deny me to all those with whom I had no
express Business ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,46.78

but , if Mr. Dougal had left his name or mentioned your's , I should
have had the Pleasure of seeing him . SMOLLETT-175X-2,46.79

You may assure yourself that every Person whom you introduce shall
always be welcome to my best offices , which , God knows , are very
inconsiderable . SMOLLETT-175X-2,46.80

By your asking if I am engaged in any new Performance , and ,
immediately after , mentioning the Critical Review , I conclude you have
been told I am concerned in that work . SMOLLETT-175X-2,46.81

Your information has been true . SMOLLETT-175X-2,46.82

It is a small Branch of an extensive Plan which I last year projected
for a sort of Academy of the belles_Lettres , a Scheme which will one
day , I hope , be put in Execution to its utmost Extent .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,46.83

In the meantime the Critical Review is conducted by four Gentlemen of
approved abilities , SMOLLETT-175X-2,46.84

and meets with a very favourable Reception . SMOLLETT-175X-2,46.85

Tho' I never dabble in Politics , I can@ @not help saying that there
seems to have been no Treachery in delivering up St Philip's fort , nor
even in the scandalous affair with the french fleet , which was owing to
the personal Timidity of our admiral , who is at present <P_47> the
object of the public Detestation . SMOLLETT-175X-2,47.86

Indeed , the People seem to be in a ferment , SMOLLETT-175X-2,47.87

and there are not wanting rascally Incendiaries to inflame their
Discontent so that in a populace less phlegmatic the Consequences would
in all probability be very mischievous . SMOLLETT-175X-2,47.88

Make my kind Compliments to Dr. Stevenson , Messrs. Barclay ,
Blackburn , Fogo , and all my Glasgow friends , SMOLLETT-175X-2,47.89

and allow me to be unalterably Dr John , your very affectionate humble
servt. , T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,47.90

If Lieutenant William Wood be in Glasgow , give my service to him ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,47.91

and tell him I am infinitely obliged to him for the pains he took in the
affair which he knows . SMOLLETT-175X-2,47.92

I think I wrote to him on this subject , SMOLLETT-175X-2,47.93

and should be glad to know if my memory serves me right as to that
Particular . SMOLLETT-175X-2,47.94

I must likewise desire you will present my best Respects to your Mother
, and Mrs. Moor , who , I hope , has brought you all the Comforts of
Wedlock . SMOLLETT-175X-2,47.95

{ED:Letter_30_To_Samuel_Richardson}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,47.97

Augt. 10 , 1756 SMOLLETT-175X-2,47.98

Sir , I was extremely concerned to find myself suspected of a silly ,
mean Insinuation against Mr. Richardson's Writings , which appeared
some time ago in the Critical Review SMOLLETT-175X-2,47.99

and I desired my friend Mr. Millar to assure you in my name that it was
inserted <P_48> without my privity or Concurrence .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,48.100

Tho' you received his Explanation with your usual Candour , I think it
my Duty to corroborate what he has said in my Vindication by protesting
in the most solemn Manner that I never once mentioned Mr. Richardson's
name with disrespect , nor ever reflected upon him or his writings by
the most distant hint or allusion ; and that it is impossible I should
ever mention him either as a writer or a man without Expressions of
admiration and applause . SMOLLETT-175X-2,48.101

I am not much addicted to Compliment ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,48.102

but I think Such an Acknowledgement is no more than a piece of Justice
due to that amiable Benevolence , sublime morality and surprizing
Intimacy with the human Heart , which must ever be the objects of
Veneration among People of good Sense and Integrity .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,48.103

I am very much obliged to you for your judicious Remarks on the Plan of
my History , SMOLLETT-175X-2,48.104

and shall be proud of your advice on any future Occasion ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,48.105

in the meantime I beg leave to profess myself with the most perfect
Esteem , {TEXT:.} Sir , your very humble Servt. , T.=s= Smollett
SMOLLETT-175X-2,48.106

{ED:Letter_31_To_Dr._George_Macaulay}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,48.108

September 10 , 1756 SMOLLETT-175X-2,48.109

Dear Doctor , The fund which I appropriated for the payment of that note
I have been obliged to pay on another score . SMOLLETT-175X-2,48.110

I would willingly have concealed the affair from your knowledge ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,48.111

but it must now come out in my own justification .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,48.112

About two years ago , Captain <P_49> Crawfurd had a law-suit with his
servant about wages , &c. SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.113

He was bailed by Dr. Macculloch and me . SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.114

He left the suit to the care of Adam Gordon , SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.115

and went to Scotland . SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.116

Gordon neglected the suit , SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.117

and judgment being given against the defendant , we , his bail , were
obliged to pay damages , costs , &c. to the amount of 95 l.
SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.118

I drew upon Crawfurd for the money : SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.119

after {TEXT:aftre} some shuffling , he agreed to accept of a bill ,
payable in eight months . SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.120

The bill was sent down for him for his acceptance ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.121

he never answered the letter . SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.122

We have instituted a process against him , SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.123

and were forced to pay the bill , with costs , on its being returned
protested . SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.124

This is the truth , and nothing but the truth . SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.125

So help me God ! SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.126

The money will be recovered , as he is a man of fortune .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.127

In the meantime , I will endeavour to borrow as much as will take up
Hamilton's note . SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.128

If I can@ @not and they should prove troublesome , I must remove to some
corner where I may work without being distracted and distressed ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.129

for here I can do nothing . SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.130

I have done very little for these two months past ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.131

and am engaged to finish the History by Christmas , so that you may
guess my situation . SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.132

When I sat down to this work I was harrassed by duns ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.133

I have paid above one_hundred pounds of debts , which I could no longer
put off , and maintained my family . SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.134

I have since paid 120 +L {TEXT:+L120} to different tradesmen from a
small remittance which we lately received . SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.135

I could not have disposed of that money otherwise without being
disgraced . SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.136

We have granted ample powers to Tom Bontein to sell our Negroes in the
West_Indies . SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.137

He has promised , upon honour , to remit what is already due <paren>
amounting to above 1000 +L {TEXT:+L1000} sterling <$$paren> with the
first opportunity . SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.138

We expect daily remittances from the Harvies , SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.139

and I am determined to make no use of what comes , except for the
payment of debts , until the whole are liquidated .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.140

You have interposed so often with Mr. Maclean that I am ashamed to
mention any expedient of that sort . SMOLLETT-175X-2,49.141

I have <P_50> some irons in the fire for borrowing a little money to
satisfy those gentlemen . SMOLLETT-175X-2,50.142

I have desired my agent to offer any premium rather than be disappointed
, SMOLLETT-175X-2,50.143

and I will let you know the result of his endeavours .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,50.144

I am , as ever , dear Doctor , your most affectionate and much obliged
humble servant , etc. , {ED:T.=s=_Smollett} SMOLLETT-175X-2,50.145

{ED:Letter_32_To_Dr._Macaulay}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,50.147

Novr. 24 , 1756 SMOLLETT-175X-2,50.148

Dr. Dr. , I think I may now with Confidence beg your Interposition
with Mr. Maclane about Hamilton's Note , as the Farce which is coming
on immediately will undoubtedly enable me to discharge that obligation .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,50.149

I just now recieved an Intimation from him requiring immediate Payt .
which is as much out of my power as the imperial Crown of England .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,50.150

I need say no more than that I am , Dr. Sir , Yours intirely , T.=s=
Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,50.151

{ED:Letter_33_To_William_Huggins}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,50.153

Decr. 7 , 1756 SMOLLETT-175X-2,50.154

Dear Sir , I send my Spaniard to return the Compliment I have recieved
<P_51> by your Italian . SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.155

Cervantes was a warm Admirer of Ariosto , SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.156

and therefore Don Quixote can@ @not be disagreable to a Lover of Orlando
furioso . SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.157

Though I do not pretend to compare my Prose with your Poetry , I beg you
will accept of my Translation as a mark of that Perfect Esteem with
which I have the Honour to be Sir , Your most obedt. humble servt. ,
T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.158

{ED:Letter_34_To_Dr._Macaulay}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.160

Decr. 14 , 1756 SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.161

Dear Doctor , I am again sollicited in behalf of that poor man Mr.
Hamilton . SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.162

His account is settled to the satisfaction of every Body .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.163

He wants to go to Scotland , SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.164

is starving in London , and in danger of being arrested for small Debts
. SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.165

He says if Mr. Maclean will pay the money on the Attachment's being
laid , he will find Sureties for an Indemnification .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.166

In that Case he can@ @not possibly be a Loser . SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.167

I am really shocked at giving you so much trouble about myself and other
miserable Suppliants , SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.168

but this man makes me extremely unhappy ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.169

and I know you take pleasure in the Exercise of Benevolence .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.170

Besides , Mr. Milne is his Creditor , and at present in great Want of
money for his Christmas Payments . SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.171

He is likewise mine , SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.172

and if this money can be procured for Mr. Hamilton , he will excuse me
for the present . SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.173

We must therefore once more have Recourse to your good offices .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,51.174

Mr. Garrick in a very civil Letter <P_52> gave me to understand that it
will be proper to defer the Representation of my Piece till after the
Holidays . SMOLLETT-175X-2,52.175

I have inclosed a begging Card belonging to a Countryman of ours , one
Forbes . SMOLLETT-175X-2,52.176

The man I know not , SMOLLETT-175X-2,52.177

but the prize is an Elegant Book . SMOLLETT-175X-2,52.178

I am with glowing Gratitude and affection , Dear Sir , yours intirely ,
T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,52.179

I wish you could get an Article for the next number of the Review , on
painting , Statuary or Engraving . SMOLLETT-175X-2,52.180

What do you think of the Bacchus ? SMOLLETT-175X-2,52.181

Upon second Thoughts I have sent you two Cards . SMOLLETT-175X-2,52.182

Perhaps Dr. Hunter or Dr. Clephane will take one .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,52.183

{ED:Letter_35_To_David_Garrick}

{ED:c._January,_1757}

Sir , Understanding from Mr. Derrick that some officious people have
circulated reports in my name with a view to prejudice me in your <P_53>
opinion , I , in justice to myself , take the liberty to assure you that
if any person accuses me of having spoken disrespectfully of Mr.
Garrick , of having hinted that he solicited for my farce , or had
interested views in bringing it up on the stage , he does me wrong ,
upon the word of a gentleman . SMOLLETT-175X-2,53.186

The imputation is altogether false and malicious .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,53.187

Exclusive of other considerations , I could not be such an idiot
{TEXT:ideot} to talk in that strain when my own interest so immediately
required a different sort of conduct . SMOLLETT-175X-2,53.188

Perhaps the same insidious methods have been taken to inflame former
animosities , which , on my part , are forgotten and self-condemned .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,53.189

I must own you have acted in this affair of the farce with that candour
, openness , and cordiality , which even mortify my pride while they lay
me under the most sensible obligation ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,53.190

and I shall not rest satisfied until I have an opportunity to convince
Mr. Garrick that my gratitude is at least as warm as any other of my
passions . SMOLLETT-175X-2,53.191

Meanwhile I profess myself , Sir , Your humble Servant , T. Smollett
SMOLLETT-175X-2,53.192

{ED:Letter_36_To_David_Garrick}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,53.194

Feby . 4 , 1757 SMOLLETT-175X-2,53.195

Sir , You will give me leave to express my warmest acknowledgements for
the frank and generous manner in which you {TEXT:your} received my
Performance , and the friendly Care you have exerted in preparing it for
the stage . SMOLLETT-175X-2,53.196

I am still more particularly obliged by your allotting the sixth Night
for my Benefit , instead of the Ninth to which only I was intitled by
the Custom of the Theatre , SMOLLETT-175X-2,53.197

and your acting on my Night I consider as an additional Favour .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,53.198

To Crown all these Benefits , you will , I hope , order the Piece to be
acted occasionally that it may have some Chance of being saved from
<P_54> Oblivion ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,54.199

but , whether you shall think it proper to comply with this Request , or
judge it convenient to let the Tars go to bottom , I shall ever retain
the most gratefull Sense of your Friendship , and eagerly seize every
opportunity of manifesting that sincerity with which I am , Sir , your
most obliged , and obedt. Servt. , T.=s= Smollett
SMOLLETT-175X-2,54.200

Should it ever lie in my way to serve Mr. Garrick , I hope he will
command me without Reserve . SMOLLETT-175X-2,54.201

He can@ @not do any thing that will more oblige his humble servant .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,54.202

{ED:Letter_37_To_William_Huggins}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,54.204

Feby . 19 , 1757 SMOLLETT-175X-2,54.205

Dear Sir , The Pleasure I received in reading your Friend's Performance
was equal to the Honour you have done me in submitting it to my Perusal
. SMOLLETT-175X-2,54.206

The Characters are in my opinion artfully contrasted and well sustained
. SMOLLETT-175X-2,54.207

The Fable is interesting and the Diction spirited ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,54.208

but indeed that stream must needs flow delicious which takes its origin
from the Fountain of Ariosto . SMOLLETT-175X-2,54.209

Why was old Scotia robbed of the Honour of the scene ?
SMOLLETT-175X-2,54.210

Not but that I think the names are altered for the Better .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,54.211

Areodante , Genevra , and Polenessa are not such tragical appellations
as Polydore , Isabella and Alphonso . SMOLLETT-175X-2,54.212

I think the Catastrophe would have a fine Effect upon the English stage
, SMOLLETT-175X-2,54.213

but I would wish to have seen a tender Scene between Isabella and
Polydore , which I imagine would interest the Audience still more in
their behalf , and the better prepare it for the excessive Grief
manifested by Isabella at the supposed Death of her Lover .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,54.214

Are not the two successive soliloquies by Isabella and Villario towards
the End of the third act too long ? SMOLLETT-175X-2,54.215

Will not the audience observe that the Deception at the Balcony is a
stratagem practised <P_55> in the Play of Much ado about Nothing ?
SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.216

How comes Villario into the Forrest in the Beginning of the fourth act ?
SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.217

In this act , there are three long soliloquies , two by Alphonso and one
by Argio , which I could wish to see curtailed . SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.218

There are likewise some Expressions which I think might be altered for
the better in different scenes of the Performance .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.219

These are all the Animadversions I shall presume to make upon a Piece
replete with Merit . SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.220

If you desire that I should put it into the Hands of Mr. Garrick , I
will immediately comply with your Request , though I apprehend it as
altogether impracticable to exhibit it this Season , which is already
almost exhausted . SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.221

Besides , my Interest with Mr. Garrick is so very low that I believe it
would be much better received from any other Hand than mine .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.222

I congratulate you upon the Proficiency you have made in the Spanish .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.223

I have read part of your Translation of Ariosto with equal Pleasure and
Surprise , SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.224

and am with inviolable Esteem , Dear Sir , Your most obliged humble
Servt. , T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.225

{ED:Letter_38_To_William_Huggins}

London , SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.227

April 13 , 1757 SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.228

Dear Sir , I have just finished the third Volume of my History ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.229

and am as sick of writing as ever an Alderman was of Turtle ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.230

nevertheless , I have begun to read the Translation of Ariosto as a
Critick , SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.231

and perceive I shall make a very favourable Report of it to the Public .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.232

I propose to have the Pleasure of seeing you about whitsuntide ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,55.233

<P_56>

and in the mean time hope you will excuse the abruptness of this address
in consideration of the Labour I have lately undergone .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,56.235

I am with equal sincerity and affection , Dear Sir , Your much obliged
Servt. , T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,56.236

{ED:Letter_39_To_Mr._James_Rivington}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,56.238

April 14 , 1757 SMOLLETT-175X-2,56.239

Dear Sir , My neighbour John Lewis Bookbinder , alias Strap , wants ten
Copies of the History , which are bespoke by his Customers .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,56.240

The money will be returned as soon as he can deliver the Books ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,56.241

but he will expect to have them at Bookseller's Price .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,56.242

You will let him have them accordingly and oblige , Dr. Sir , Yours
Sincerely , T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,56.243

{ED:Letter_40_To_John_Moore}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,56.245

May 12 , 1757 SMOLLETT-175X-2,56.246

Dear Sir , You will forgive me for not having answered your Letter
sooner in consideration of the Hurry and Fatigue to which I have been
exposed in bringing out my History of England . SMOLLETT-175X-2,56.247

I sincerely rejoice in your success in Business , as well as in the
Happiness you <P_57> seem to enjoy amidst the Comforts of matrimony ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.248

and I beg leave to make a Tender of my best wishes to Mrs. Moore as the
source of my friend's Happiness . SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.249

The little irishman about whom you express some Curiosity was my
Amanuensis , SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.250

and has been occasionally employed as a Trash reader for the Critical
Review , SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.251

but you are not to number him among my Companions ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.252

nor indeed does his Character deserve any further Discussion .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.253

The Bearer , Captain Robert Man , is my Neighbour in Chelsea ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.254

and I recommend him to your friendship and acquaintance as a brave
experienced officer and an honest Tar in whom there is no Guile .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.255

He is appointed Captain of the Porcupine sloop stationed in the Frith of
Clyde , SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.256

and being an utter stranger in that part of the world , you must
introduce him to your and my friends at Glasgow , and assist
{TEXT:asist} him with your advice and Directions .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.257

His Father was a Scotsman , and , I believe , a native of your Town .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.258

My Friend Bob has been round the Globe with Anson and proved in fourteen
or fifteen Sea Engagements , during which he behaved with remarkable
Gallantry ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.259

but his good nature is equal to his Courage , SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.260

and indeed he is the most inoffensive man alive .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.261

If you want to know how I spend my Time in this Retreat , he can satisfy
you in that Particular , SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.262

for he has been my Club companion these seven long years .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.263

Pray give my Compliments to Captain Graham SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.264

and tell him I had never once seen Dr. Brisbane till I met him
accidentally about a month ago at Mr. Barclay's Lodgings .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.265

He seems to be in good Health and spirits , SMOLLETT-175X-2,57.266

<P_58>

and that is all I know of the matter . SMOLLETT-175X-2,58.268

Excuse haste SMOLLETT-175X-2,58.269

and believe me to be , Dear John , Your affectionate friend and Servt.
, T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,58.270

{ED:Letter_41_To_John_Moore}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,58.272

June 4 , 1757 SMOLLETT-175X-2,58.273

Dear Sir , I sympathize in your affliction which I hope has neither been
so {TEXT:missing_"so"} immoderate nor so unmanly as to hinder you from
acting the part of a Comforter to the Companion of your sorrows .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,58.274

I am pleased with the kind Expressions in which you mention my
Dedication to Mr. Pitt , who has treated me with that genuine
Politeness by which he is as much distinguished in private Life , as by
his superior Talents in the service of his Country .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,58.275

I am afraid the History will not answer the Expectations that seem to be
raised among my friends in Scotland . SMOLLETT-175X-2,58.276

The fourth volume is now in the Press , SMOLLETT-175X-2,58.277

and will <paren> I believe <$$paren> be published in three months , if
no un-forseen accident should intervene . SMOLLETT-175X-2,58.278

You are right in your Conjecture with regard to the Criticism upon '
Douglas ' , which I assure you I did not see untill it was in print .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,58.279

I did not write one article in that whole Number .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,58.280

By this time you have <paren> I suppose <$$paren> received my Letter by
Capt. Mann so that you will excuse me from writing at large on this
occasion , especially as I am so fatigued with the un-intermitting
Labour of the Pen that I begin to loathe the sight of Paper .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,58.281

I am truly sorry for the Death of poor Dick , for whom I <P_59> had a
sincere Regard and warm affection . SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.282

Present my Compliments and best wishes of Health and Happiness to Mrs.
Moore . SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.283

Let me be remembered to Dr. Stevenson , SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.284

and tell Mr. Barclay I was much mortified to find he had left London
without having crossed my Threshold . SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.285

I understand he spent a genial Evening with some friends before he took
his Departure . SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.286

Though I am not a punctual Correspondent , I shall always be glad to
hear from you , SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.287

and it shall go hard SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.288

but I will find means to acknowledge the Receipt of your favours .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.289

Meanwhile I profess myself your affectionate humble Servt. , T.=s=
Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.290

{ED:Letter_42_To_William_Huggins}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.292

June 14 , 1757 SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.293

Dear Sir , I thank you heartily for the Entertainment I have received
from your Claudian . SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.294

I likewise acknowledge your obliging favour which this day came to my
hands , SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.295

and I shall never forget your Friendship and Hospitality .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.296

I never once dreamed of translating Dante , a Task to which I am
altogether unequal , a Task which ought to be reserved for the
Translator of Orlando furioso . SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.297

Perhaps it might not run off like a Novel all at once ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.298

perhaps you are a little chagrined at the slowness of the English
Ariosto , SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.299

but you will consider that it is not a Book for the mob of Readers .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.300

Yet the Character of it is established . SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.301

The first Impression will drop away gradually , SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.302

and in time it will become a standard Translation .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.303

This also might be the Fate of Dante , SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.304

but I should be sorry such a Consideration should deter you from the
Undertaking . SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.305

You yourself observe you do not write in a Garret , nor are you a slave
to Fame or Famine - <font> Macte virtute esto <$$font>
SMOLLETT-175X-2,59.306

You will not doubt that I should be proud of a Partnership <P_60> that
would do me so much Honour ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,60.307

but I am so involved in the History of England , and different Provinces
of the Universal History that I shall not for some years be able to
engage in any other work . SMOLLETT-175X-2,60.308

I wonder you should make an apology for the Prolixity of that which I
always find too short and transistory , SMOLLETT-175X-2,60.309

but I hope you will not wonder that I should ask forgiveness for my
Brevity which is really owing to Hurry and Distraction .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,60.310

Were I less perplexed , I should with pleasure expatiate on any subject
that might yield you Amusement , or tend to convince you of that Esteem
and affection with which I am , Dear Sir , your obliged humble servt. ,
T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,60.311

I believe I shall trouble you with another Visit before the End of
Autumn . SMOLLETT-175X-2,60.312

I beg leave to present my Compts. to good Mrs. Erskine , and to be
kindly remembered to the two Divines . SMOLLETT-175X-2,60.313

{ED:Letter_43_To_William_Huggins}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,60.315

June 20 , 1757 SMOLLETT-175X-2,60.316

Dear Sir , If I could ride as hard as you do Pegasus , I should be at
Headly Park with a <font> Whoop <$$font> and at Chelsea with a <font>
Hollow . <$$font> SMOLLETT-175X-2,60.317

What ! are you visited like Milton , in the night only ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,60.318

or does your familiar stand always at your Elbow ?
SMOLLETT-175X-2,60.319

You are quite the Muse's Mill that grinds all weathers without
Intermission . SMOLLETT-175X-2,60.320

Your specimen I like as I do every <P_61> thing that comes <font> ex tuâ
Pharetrâ . <$$font> SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.321

I am dubious about some of the rhymes , such as <font> sight <$$font>
and <font> quit ; <$$font> SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.322

but I have no objection to the Triplets if they are not too thick sown .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.323

Your scheme I shall be glad to know , as I suppose you have in your Eye
some rich Mine from which a {TEXT:missing_"a"} store of precious metal
may be extracted . SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.324

I thank you cordially for your Kindnesses , SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.325

and wish it may be in my Power to make a suitable Return .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.326

There is no occasion for comparing your Claudian with the Original .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.327

You know I read part of the Latin while you recited the Translation ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.328

but I have not yet examined it with that Care which I would bestow if
you intended it immediately for the Press . SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.329

Alas ! I have nothing but the Fag_End of a tedious day to employ in
answering your Letter . SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.330

You talk of the <font> Pistrinum <$$font> or Cart's Tail ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.331

that is , according to the Spanish Proverb , no more than <font>
panpintado <$$font> , Cakes and Gingerbread to what I undergo .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.332

I have been groaning all day under the weight of Tindal , Ralph , Burnet
, Feuquieres , Daniel , Voltaire , Burchet &c , &c.
SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.333

and I have just spirits left to declare that I am , Dear Sir ,
Unalterably yours , T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.334

Let me be respectfully remembred to Mrs. Erskine .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.335

I have not yet seen my friend Monkhouse , SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.336

and I am nettled at his not coming to Chelsea . SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.337

Franks I have in plenty , SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.338

so you need not afflict yourself on that Score . SMOLLETT-175X-2,61.339

<P_62>

{ED:Letter_44_To_William_Strahan}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,62.342

Monday Octr. 24 , {ED:?_1757} SMOLLETT-175X-2,62.343

Dear Sir , As soon as I can spare a Day , I will let you know , and come
to Town that you may not have the Trouble to come to the Country .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,62.344

I have perused the m.s. from Dr. R-y , which is very sensible and
correct , SMOLLETT-175X-2,62.345

but I can@ @not well prepare it for the Press without having the
Synopsis and L-s's Pamphlet , which I desire may be sent out ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,62.346

and I shall take care to return them in good Condition .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,62.347

I am obliged to you for your kind Interposition with Dr. Harvie .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,62.348

It is a very hard case that I should be troubled with Duns for very
small Sums when there are actually fifteen_hundred pounds Sterling at
the most moderate Computation due to us at Jamaica .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,62.349

I will not forget D - SMOLLETT-175X-2,62.350

and am always your obliged humble servt. and Sincere friend , T.=s=
Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,62.351

{ED:Letter_45_To?_Dr._George_Macaulay}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,62.353

Novr. 5 , 1757 SMOLLETT-175X-2,62.354

Dear Sir , After thanking you for all favours , I have only to add that
I must infallibly find 50 +L {TEXT:+L50} in a few days in order to
maintain myself in <P_63> any sort of Tranquility .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,63.355

I do not see how I can hasten my agreement with Mr. Millar any other
way than by dispatching the work in which I am engaged ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,63.356

and that will certainly be finished by the end of the month .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,63.357

I commit myself to your Protection , SMOLLETT-175X-2,63.358

and am yours always , T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,63.359

{ED:Letter_46_To?_Dr._Alexander_Carlyle}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,63.361

Wednesday Evening {ED:?_1758} SMOLLETT-175X-2,63.362

Dear Sir , I was in hopes of hearing from you before this time .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,63.363

My affairs are very pressing . SMOLLETT-175X-2,63.364

I shall be glad to see you at Forrest's on Friday evening at six o'clock
. SMOLLETT-175X-2,63.365

I am ever Yours , T.=s= S=tt= SMOLLETT-175X-2,63.366

{ED:Letter_47_To?}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,63.368

Wednesday noon {ED:?_November-December,_1757} SMOLLETT-175X-2,63.369

Dear Sir , I have sent two Copies of P. P. vol. 3 . - Lady V-e's
story . SMOLLETT-175X-2,63.370

You may compose from that which is incompleat in the other <P_64> Parts
; SMOLLETT-175X-2,64.371

and if you think proper , you may prefix the two Letters in manuscript .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,64.372

The remaining part of the 3d. volume you will find corrected in the
other copy . SMOLLETT-175X-2,64.373

The fourth shalt be done as soon as possible . SMOLLETT-175X-2,64.374

I will take care of Mr. Johnston's Papers and lick them up in a very
little time for their appearance . SMOLLETT-175X-2,64.375

I wish you would send the proofsheets of Pickle to me to be corrected .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,64.376

As soon as I am at Leisure I intend to wait of you , to complain of our
friend Mr. Millar , who , I understand , has done me ill offices about
the History , and these in a very dishonourable manner ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,64.377

but of this more at meeting . SMOLLETT-175X-2,64.378

He is mistaken if he thinks my being in his Debt authorizes him to do me
Injuries with impunity . SMOLLETT-175X-2,64.379

I shall not fail to insist upon Mr. Derrick's doing you Justice ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,64.380

and I am very truly , Dear Sir , Your much obliged humble servt. ,
T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,64.381

{ED:Letter_48_To_John_Moore}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,64.383

Jany . 2 , 1758 SMOLLETT-175X-2,64.384

Dear Sir , I deferred answering your kind Letter untill I should have
finished my History which is now compleated . SMOLLETT-175X-2,64.385

I was agreably <P_65> surprised to hear that my work had met with any
approbation at Glasgow , SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.386

for it was not at all calculated for that meridian .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.387

The last Volume will , I doubt not , be severely censured by the west
country whigs of Scotland ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.388

but , for you and other persons of sense and probity , I desire you will
divest yourself of Prejudice , at least as much as you can , before you
begin to peruse it , and consider well the Facts before you give
Judgement . SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.389

Whatever may be its defects , I protest before God I have , as far as in
me lay , adhered to Truth without espousing any faction , though I own I
sat down to write with a warm side to those principles in which I was
educated . SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.390

But in the Course of my Inquiries , the whig ministers and their
abettors turned out such a Set of sordid Knaves that I could not help
stigmatising some of them for their want of Integrity and Sentiment .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.391

I have for some time done very little in the Critical Review :
SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.392

The Remarks upon Home's Tragedy I never saw untill they were in print ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.393

and as yet I have not read one Line of the Epigoniad .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.394

I am told the work has merit , SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.395

and am truly sorry that it should have been so roughly handled .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.396

Notwithstanding the Censures that have been so freely bestowed upon
these and other Productions of our Country , the Authors of the C.
Review have been insulted and abused as a <font> Scotch Tribunal .
<$$font> SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.397

The Truth is there is {TEXT:missing_"is"} no Author so wretched but he
will meet with Countenance in England if he attacks our Nation in any
shape . SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.398

You can@ @not conceive the Jealousy that prevails against us .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.399

Nevertheless , it is better to be envied than despised .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.400

I wish you and your family all Happiness , SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.401

and am , Dr. Sir , Your affectionate humble servt. , T.=s= Smollett
SMOLLETT-175X-2,65.402

<P_66>

{ED:Letter_49_To?}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,66.405

Jany . 6 , 1758 SMOLLETT-175X-2,66.406

Dear Sir , I wrote to Mr. Palmer of Ironmonger's Hall that he should
certainly hear from me this week , persuaded that I should have been
able to transact that affair with Mr. M - , so as to settle with Mr.
Palmer ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,66.407

but I have been taken with a violent Cold which had like to have fallen
upon my Lungs , and has confined me since Monday last .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,66.408

I have an appointment with Mr. M - on Monday next ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,66.409

but in the mean time I should take it as a great favour if you would see
Mr. Palmer , and tell him the Cause of my Delay ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,66.410

for I have received two different Messages from him , and one from Mr.
McLean , importing that I am to expect no further Forbearance .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,66.411

I beg pardon for giving you this Trouble , SMOLLETT-175X-2,66.412

and am , Dear Sir , your much obliged humble servt. , T.=s= Smollett
SMOLLETT-175X-2,66.413

I have a negotiation on foot for borrowing a Sum of money , in
conjunction with another Gentleman ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,66.414

I do not believe it will succeed , SMOLLETT-175X-2,66.415

but if any person comes to inquire my character of you , you will not be
surprised . SMOLLETT-175X-2,66.416

{ED:Letter_50_To_Mr._William_Strahan}

Jany . 24 , 1758 SMOLLETT-175X-2,66.418

Dear Sir , I have to_day writt a Letter to Mr. Millar on the subject
you know . SMOLLETT-175X-2,66.419

It is not couched in a begging stile , which I shall never use .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,66.420

I , <P_67> nevertheless , am afraid he will decline my Proposal ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,67.421

and therefore I hope you will second it , in case he should ask your
Advice , which in all probability he will . SMOLLETT-175X-2,67.422

I am the more anxious on this Score , as a Refusal from him will oblige
me to take certain Measures which , perhaps , he may dislike in the
Sequel ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,67.423

for you know the money must be had , and that speedily ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,67.424

and I am not at all disposed to trouble Mr. Telfer , whose friendship
is too valuable to be risqued without an absolute necessity .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,67.425

I am very truly , Dr. Sir , Your obliged humble servt. , T.=s=
Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,67.426

{ED:Letter_51_To_William_Huggins}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,67.428

Feby . 17 , 1758 SMOLLETT-175X-2,67.429

Dear Sir , I am much obliged to you for your kind Intention with Regard
to Claudian , as indeed I have reason to be for many other Favours which
shall not be forgotten . SMOLLETT-175X-2,67.430

But with respect to the proposal , I can@ @not help differing in opinion
from my good friend . SMOLLETT-175X-2,67.431

The Dedicatee , as you are pleased to call him , has given me no opening
to present him with that or any other Compliment .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,67.432

Indeed , he is too much engaged in affairs of much greater Consequence
for me to expect the least Notice or attention . SMOLLETT-175X-2,67.433

Besides , it is not at all improbable that he dislikes the Execution of
my Work . SMOLLETT-175X-2,67.434

I declare I know nothing to the contrary . SMOLLETT-175X-2,67.435

How far our friend Hamilton might find his account in printing the Piece
I can@ @not judge . SMOLLETT-175X-2,67.436

This I know , that Poetry , at present , seems to be quite out of
fashion . SMOLLETT-175X-2,67.437

There is a compleat Translation of Claudian by Hughes , and , as I am
told , well executed , now lying as Lumber in a Bookseller's <P_68>
Warehouse . SMOLLETT-175X-2,68.438

Shall I venture to drop a Hint of advice ? SMOLLETT-175X-2,68.439

Suppose our friend should publish it in his own Name , inscribed to Mr.
Pitt . SMOLLETT-175X-2,68.440

Such a Compliment from a Country Gentleman who could not be suspected of
an Author's interested Views must meet with a favourable reception .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,68.441

This Consideration would even attract the notice of the Publick and give
the Piece a fair chance for being read . SMOLLETT-175X-2,68.442

But this I submit to your better Judgement . SMOLLETT-175X-2,68.443

Please let my compts . be offered to Mrs. Erskine ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,68.444

and allow me to be with equal Esteem and affection , Dear Sir , Your
much obliged humble Servt. , T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,68.445

{ED:Letter_52_To_William_Strahan}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,68.447

June 24 , 1758 SMOLLETT-175X-2,68.448

Dr. Sir , Receive {TEXT:Recieve} inclosed a note for 50 +L {TEXT:+L50}
. SMOLLETT-175X-2,68.449

In a few days I shall be with you . SMOLLETT-175X-2,68.450

I have recieved good news from the East_Indies SMOLLETT-175X-2,68.451

and am always yours , T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,68.452

{ED:Letter_53_To_William_Huggins}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,68.454

July 2d , 1758 SMOLLETT-175X-2,68.455

Dear Sir , I think myself very much obliged to any Person who will take
the Trouble to point out any Errors or Mistakes I may have committed
<P_69> in writing the History of England . SMOLLETT-175X-2,69.456

I can safely say I had no other view in the Execution of that work than
historical Truth , which I have displayed on all occasions to the best
of my Knowledge without Fear or affection . SMOLLETT-175X-2,69.457

I have kept myself independent of all Connexions which might have
affected the Candour of my Intention . SMOLLETT-175X-2,69.458

I have flattered no Individual ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,69.459

I have cultivated no Party . SMOLLETT-175X-2,69.460

I look upon the Historian who espouses a Faction , who strains Incidents
or willfully suppresses any Circumstances of Importance that may tend to
the Information of the Reader , as the worst of Prostitutes .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,69.461

I pique myself upon being the only Historian of this Country who has had
Honesty , Temper and Courage enough to be wholly impartial and
disinterested . SMOLLETT-175X-2,69.462

I may be allowed to speak so far in my own Commendation , considering
how I have been treated in public and private by Envy , Malice and
Ingratitude . SMOLLETT-175X-2,69.463

When I said impartial , I ought to have excepted the Infirmities of
human Nature in which I own myself involved . SMOLLETT-175X-2,69.464

I have such a natural Horrour of Cruelty that I can@ @not without
uncommon Warmth relate any Instance of Inhumanity .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,69.465

What I have said of Bambridge I learned from the Journals of the House
of Commons , in which I found such a Detail of Cruelties exercised upon
Sir Wm. Rich , Jacob Mendes Solas , Capt. John Mackpheadris , Robert
Castell , and Capt. David Sinclair , as excited the strongest Emotions
of Horrour , Pity , and Indignation . SMOLLETT-175X-2,69.466

Now , my good Sir , I always thought that in recounting matters of Fact
an Historian could not have Recourse to better Authority than the
Journals of the House of Commons , which are indeed , public Records
authenticated by the Sanction of the Legislature .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,69.467

What private Motives might have influenced the Committee in giving their
Report I know not , SMOLLETT-175X-2,69.468

and shall be glad of any Information on the Subject .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,69.469

But I can hardly think the Proto-corrupter , as you are pleased to call
him , <P_70> had any Connexion with the Committee , the Chairman of
which was then at Variance with the Ministry . SMOLLETT-175X-2,70.470

I congratulate you on your having finished the Translation of Ariosto ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,70.471

and am with perfect Esteem , Dear Sir , Your affect. humble Servt. ,
T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,70.472

{ED:Letter_54_To_William_Huggins}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,70.474

July 24 , 1758 SMOLLETT-175X-2,70.475

Dear Sir , I was favoured with both your Letters in due Course , which I
acknowledge as further Instances of your Friendship and generosity .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,70.476

When I conversed with Mr. Boult at Farnham , I had a young Physician in
my Eye , whom I would have ventured to recommend to your Countenance and
Protection . SMOLLETT-175X-2,70.477

But I now find he is other wise engaged , SMOLLETT-175X-2,70.478

and I , at present , know no other Person duly qualified who wants a
Settlement in the Country . SMOLLETT-175X-2,70.479

I am , nevertheless , eternally obliged to Mr. Huggins for the warmth
and Kindness with which he expressed himself on this Subject .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,70.480

As to what concerns Martinelli , I will frankly give my opinion .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,70.481

If he foresees any advantage to himself in closing with your proposals ,
he will doubtless embrace them , and perhaps cheat you into the Bargain
. SMOLLETT-175X-2,70.482

If he is an associate of Baretti , I think it will be neither for your
Reputation <P_71> nor Convenience to be connected with him in any shape
, as , in all probability , he will be governed by the advice and
Direction of that Adventurer . SMOLLETT-175X-2,71.483

His opinion of the work may be obtained at a smaller Risque .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,71.484

A particular friend of mine is well acquainted with Martinelli ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,71.485

but is now in Norfolk from whence he will return in a few weeks .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,71.486

I will then , if you please , commission him to talk with Martinelli on
the subject of Dante , and whet his Curiosity in such a manner that he
of himself shall beg a perusal of the Specimen . SMOLLETT-175X-2,71.487

In that case it shall be read to him with those precautions you mention
in your Letter to Ham . SMOLLETT-175X-2,71.488

If you desire that the affair should be otherwise conducted , be so good
as to signify your Commands which shall be executed with Pleasure by ,
Kind sir , your much obliged and affectionate humble Servt. , T.=s=
Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,71.489

I beg leave to present my best respects and warmest wishes to the Ladies
, to Mr. Gatehouse and Master Billy . SMOLLETT-175X-2,71.490

I have returned your letter to Martinelli . SMOLLETT-175X-2,71.491

{ED:Letter_55_To_William_Huggins}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,71.493

Augt. 2 , 1758 SMOLLETT-175X-2,71.494

Dear Sir , I am much obliged to you for your present of Venison which
<P_72> came safe to hand , though I am out of Countenance at the Trouble
you gave yourself for my Pleasure and Convenience .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,72.495

I condole you on the miserable weather by which our Spirits have been
depressed these six weeks , SMOLLETT-175X-2,72.496

but you are the less to be pitied as your situation is dry , and you can
amuse yourself so agreeably within doors . SMOLLETT-175X-2,72.497

When my friend comes to Town I will write you further concerning
Martinelli . SMOLLETT-175X-2,72.498

I approve much of your specimen and scheme SMOLLETT-175X-2,72.499

and intirely agree with you in the liking the stanza preferable to the
common Metre . SMOLLETT-175X-2,72.500

I beg my Compts. to the Ladies at Headly Park and to Mr. Monkhouse ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,72.501

and I am <paren> in some haste <$$paren> , Dear Sir , Your much obliged
humble servt. , T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,72.502

I thank you heartily for your kind concern touching my Health which at
present is such that I have no Reason to complain .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,72.503

{ED:Letter_56_To_John_Moore}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,72.505

Septr. 28 {ED:?_1758} SMOLLETT-175X-2,72.506

Dear Sir , I sometime ago was favoured with yours , which I should have
answered sooner had not I been extremely busied in correcting my History
for a new Impression . SMOLLETT-175X-2,72.507

That Task is now finished , and the Book , I hope , rendered less
unworthy of the public Acceptance . SMOLLETT-175X-2,72.508

I am much obliged to you for the generous warmth with which you have so
often interposed in behalf of my Reputation . SMOLLETT-175X-2,72.509

Of this , and every other Instance of Friendship which I have
experienced at your hands , I shall ever retain a cordial Remembrance .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,72.510

I am not so much surprised at my Book's meeting with Censurers and
Enemies <P_73> in Glasgow as that it should find any number of Friends
and Favourers among People so deeply infected with Prejudice and
Fanaticism . SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.511

I speak not of the few who think like Philosophers , abstracted from the
notions of the Vulgar . SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.512

The little petulant Familiarities of our friend Urie I can forgive in
consideration of the good will he has always manifested towards me and
my Concerns . SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.513

He is mistaken , however , in supposing I have imbibed priestly notions
. SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.514

I consider the Church not as a religious but as a political
Establishment so minutely interwoven in our Constitution that the one
can@ @not be detached from the other , without the most imminent danger
of Destruction to both . SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.515

The use which your friend makes of the Critical Review is whimsical
enough , SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.516

but I shall be glad if he uses it at any rate . SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.517

I have not had Leisure to do much in that work for some time past ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.518

therefore I hope you will not ascribe the articles indiscriminately to
me SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.519

for I am equally averse to the Praise and Censure that belong to other
men . SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.520

Indeed , I am sick of both SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.521

and wish to God my circumstances would allow me to consign my Pen to
oblivion . SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.522

I really believe in my Conscience that mankind grows every day more and
more malicious . SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.523

I have taken some pains to live like an honest , inoffensive man ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.524

I will venture to say that nothing base or dishonourable can be justly
charged upon my Character . SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.525

Yet , I am daily persecuted by the most malicious slanders merely
{TEXT:meerly} because I have written with some Success .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.526

You will be not sorry to hear that the weekly Sale of the History has
increased to above Ten_thousand . SMOLLETT-175X-2,73.527

A french Gentleman of Talent and Erudition has <P_74> undertaken to
translate it into that Language , SMOLLETT-175X-2,74.528

and I have promised to supply him with the Corrections .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,74.529

My best wishes are in behalf of Mrs. Moor SMOLLETT-175X-2,74.530

and I am , Dear John , Yours affectionately , T.=s= Smollett
SMOLLETT-175X-2,74.531

{ED:Letter_57_To_Philip_Miller}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,74.533

Jany . 20 , 1759 SMOLLETT-175X-2,74.534

Dear Sir , If you are at Leisure I should beg as an addition to all your
favours your opinion of this late Performance of Hill's , which I send
with the Bearer , together with your Essay on the Papyrus
SMOLLETT-175X-2,74.535

your other Book I shall transmit one of these days .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,74.536

If we could have your Thoughts on the method of producing double Flowers
from single , in a few days , so that they could be inserted in the
number for this month , it would be a double obligation on , Sir , your
obliged , humble servt. , T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,74.537

<P_75>

{ED:Letter_58_To_John_Wilkes}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,75.540

March 16 , 1759 SMOLLETT-175X-2,75.541

Dear Sir , I am again your Petitioner in behalf of that great Cham of
Literature , Samuel Johnson . SMOLLETT-175X-2,75.542

His Black Servant , whose name is Francis Barber , has been pressed on
board the Stag Frigate , Capt. Angel , SMOLLETT-175X-2,75.543

and our Lexicographer is in great Distress . SMOLLETT-175X-2,75.544

He says the Boy is a sickly Lad of a delicate frame , and particularly
subject to a malady in his Throat which renders him very unfit for his
majesty's Service . SMOLLETT-175X-2,75.545

You know what matter of animosity the said Johnson has against you ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,75.546

and I dare say you desire no other opportunity of resenting it than that
of laying him under an obligation . SMOLLETT-175X-2,75.547

He was humble enough to desire my assistance on this occasion , though
he and I were never cater-cousins , SMOLLETT-175X-2,75.548

and I gave him to understand that I would make application to my Friend
Mr. Wilkes who perhaps by his Interest with Dr. Hay and Mr. Elliot
might be able to procure the Discharge of his Lacquey .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,75.549

It would be superfluous to say more on the subject which I leave to your
Consideration , SMOLLETT-175X-2,75.550

but I can@ @not let slip this opportunity of declaring that I am with
the most inviolable Esteem and Attachment , Dear Sir , your affectionate
, obliged humble Servt. , T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,75.551

<P_76>

{ED:Letter_59_To_John_Wilkes}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,76.554

March 24 , 1759 SMOLLETT-175X-2,76.555

Dear Sir , Ecce iterum Crispinus . SMOLLETT-175X-2,76.556

Your generosity with respect to Johnson shall be the Theme of our
applause and Thanksgiving . SMOLLETT-175X-2,76.557

I shall be very proud to find myself comprehended in your League
offensive and defensive ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,76.558

nay , I consider myself already as a contracting Party
SMOLLETT-175X-2,76.559

and have Recourse to the assistance of my Allies .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,76.560

It is not , I believe , unknown to you that Admiral Knowles has taken
Exception at a Paragraph in the Critical Review of last May and
commenced a Prosecution against the Printer . SMOLLETT-175X-2,76.561

Now , whatever termination the Trial may have , we shall infallibly be
exposed to a considerable Expence , SMOLLETT-175X-2,76.562

and therefore I wish to see the Prosecution quashed .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,76.563

Some Gentlemen who are my friends have undertaken to find out and talk
with those who are supposed to have influence with the said Admiral .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,76.564

May I beg the same favour of you and your friends ?
SMOLLETT-175X-2,76.565

The Trial will come on in the Beginning of May , SMOLLETT-175X-2,76.566

and if the affair can@ @not be compromised , we intend to kick up a dust
and die hard . SMOLLETT-175X-2,76.567

In a word , if that foolish Admiral has any regard for his own <P_77>
character , he will be quiet rather than provoke further the Resentment
of , Dr. Sir , your very obliged humble servt. , T.=s= Smollett
SMOLLETT-175X-2,77.568

{ED:Letter_60_To_John_Wilkes}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,77.570

April 1 , {ED:1759} SMOLLETT-175X-2,77.571

Dear Sir , Nothing could give me more Pleasure than such an agreable
opportunity of being known to Mr. Fitzherbert . SMOLLETT-175X-2,77.572

But I must at present deny myself that Pleasure in consequence of an
Engagement a week old , which Engagement I should make no scruple of
breaking on this occasion , if I were not on my good behaviour with some
friend whom I dissappointed a Fortnight ago . SMOLLETT-175X-2,77.573

As for Johnson I wish you may find him sensible of the obligation he
owes you . SMOLLETT-175X-2,77.574

I desire my Printer to tell him what you had done with respect to his
black servant ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,77.575

but I have heard nothing of his acknowledgment . SMOLLETT-175X-2,77.576

On the Contrary I saw a very petulant Card which he had sent to the
Printer concerning an Article in the last Review .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,77.577

I am , Dear Sir , with inviolable Esteem and attachment , your much
obliged and obedt. servt. , T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,77.578

I know you will not forget our affair with K- SMOLLETT-175X-2,77.579

<P_78>

{ED:Letter_61_To_Samuel_Richardson}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,78.582

April 4 , 1759 SMOLLETT-175X-2,78.583

Dear Sir , I have just received from your house eight printed sheets of
the Modern History , four of vol. xv. and four of vol. xvi , which I
suppose have been written by Mr. Shirley ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,78.584

but I protest I know not what I am to do with them .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,78.585

Pray , Sir , are these proof sheets to be corrected for the press ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,78.586

or are they already printed off ? SMOLLETT-175X-2,78.587

There is an intimation in the margin of the last page that Mr. Shirley
goes no farther , and that you have been at a stand for several months .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,78.588

But this defect I can@ @not remedy until I shall have completed the
chasm upon which I am at work ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,78.589

and now I talk of that chasm , I can@ @not help repeating my complaint
that Dr. Campbell should have left the task to me of filling up a chasm
of fifteen or sixteen sheets , with a description of a country which all
the art of man can@ @not spin out to half the number .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,78.590

I have before me all that ever was written on the subject ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,78.591

and find the task altogether impossible unless we throw into this place
the discovery and description of the Straits of Magellan , Terra del
Fuego , the Straits of Le Maire , Cape Horn , and an account of the
voyages of some Navigators who have sailed round it into the South Sea .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,78.592

I do not see any impropriety in this expedient , as the subject
naturally belongs to , or at least has an affinity with , that of the
countries situated towards the Antarctic {TEXT:Anntartic} circle , and
South Pole . SMOLLETT-175X-2,78.593

I wish you would reflect upon this proposal , and favour me with your
sentiments of it , that <P_79> I may proceed accordingly .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,79.594

Meanwhile , I am , with inviolable esteem , Dear Sir , Your very humble
servt. , T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,79.595

{ED:Letter_62_To_John_Wilkes}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,79.597

April 20 , 1759 SMOLLETT-175X-2,79.598

Dear Sir , Were I not restrained by a sore Throat and consciousness of a
very capricious Constitution , I should certainly avail myself of your
kind Invitation . SMOLLETT-175X-2,79.599

The Truth is I love the Country , especially at this Season , and I long
to see your House at Aylsbury as much as ever Akenside , or Gilbert
Cooper , or any other wrong-headed Platonist longed to visit the Groves
of Academus . SMOLLETT-175X-2,79.600

I am sure I should there find much more agreable Company , and much
better Chear than ever Plato , or at least than ever his master Socrates
knew ; nor , at your Table should I have any Reason to complain that the
<font> Sal atticum <$$font> was wanting . SMOLLETT-175X-2,79.601

But for the present I am obliged to enjoy these Pleasures in Speculation
only ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,79.602

and even this feast of Imagination am I fain to snatch as a momentary
Respite from reading dull books and writing dull Commentaries <font>
invitâ Minervâ {TEXT:Minerva} <$$font> , <P_80> a Task almost as
dissagreable as that of dining with our friend Armstrong , when the wind
blows from the East , on a Loin of Veal roasted with Butter sauce .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,80.603

I wish to God you who have so much Influence over our friend would
persuade him to write an ode to <font> Eoster <$$font> , the Goddess of
the East wind , so religiously cultivated by our Saxon Progenitors ,
especially in the month of April . SMOLLETT-175X-2,80.604

It would doubtless be the finest Satire that ever appeared .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,80.605

It would contain the very Essence of peevish Delicacy inflamed
{ED:?_inflamed} to a poetical Orgasm . SMOLLETT-175X-2,80.606

I can@ @not express the Sense I have of all your Kindness or
sufficiently acknowledge my obligation to you and Mr. Fitzherbert for
the Pains you have taken to pacify our incensed Admiral , who is , it
seems , determined to proceed to Trial - SMOLLETT-175X-2,80.607

but - <font> Turno tempis erit , magno cum optaverit emptum - intactum
Pallanta <$$font> . SMOLLETT-175X-2,80.608

I wish you uninterrupted Happiness at Aylesbury , SMOLLETT-175X-2,80.609

and indeed in such company I do not see how you can be otherwise than
happy , SMOLLETT-175X-2,80.610

and I am with unshaken attachment , Dear Sir , Your faithfull Servt. ,
T.=s= Smollett SMOLLETT-175X-2,80.611

{ED:Letter_63_To_William_Strahan}

Chelsea , SMOLLETT-175X-2,80.613

July 20 , 1759 SMOLLETT-175X-2,80.614

Dear Sir , I should have answered the Letter you sent me some time ago ,
SMOLLETT-175X-2,80.615

but conscious of my own Innocence with respect to some Insinuations
therein contained , and of your entertaining some Jealousy <P_81> which
I knew Time and my Conduct would easily dissipate , I thought it would
have been unnecessary to vindicate myself any other way from a Suspicion
I had not justly incurred . SMOLLETT-175X-2,81.616

I can say with a safe Conscience that , with respect to Mr. Strahan , I
never once deviated from Those Thoughts which every honest man ought to
entertain for an old friend to whom he has been essentially obliged .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,81.617

You will never find any Just Reason to believe me capable of acting in
another manner . SMOLLETT-175X-2,81.618

I rejoice as much as ever in your Prosperity , SMOLLETT-175X-2,81.619

and only regret that you are so little connected with me and so much
with some Persons who I know to be my inveterate Enemies .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,81.620

The first is not owing to any fault in me ; SMOLLETT-175X-2,81.621

nor do I impute the other to any abatement in your friendship for me ,
but to inevitable chances in the Course of Business .
SMOLLETT-175X-2,81.622

I wish you a great deal of Pleasure in your proposed Excursion ;
SMOLLETT-175X-2,81.623

and shall take it kind , if when at Edinburgh {TEXT:Ed} , you will visit
Commissary Smollett , to whom and his Lady you will present my best
respects . SMOLLETT-175X-2,81.624

I repeat it that there is no Person on Earth who wishes you better than
does , Dear Sir , Your obliged friend and servt. , T.=s= Smollett
SMOLLETT-175X-2,81.625

