<BEGIN_southey-1813-1>

<P_174>

<heading>

Chapter VII SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.4

<$$heading>

Nelson was welcomed in England with every mark of popular honour .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.6

At Yarmouth , where he landed , every ship in the harbour hoisted her
colours . SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.7

The mayor and corporation waited upon him with the freedom of the town ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.8

and accompanied him in procession to church , with all the naval
officers on shore , and the principal inhabitants .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.9

Bonfires and illuminations concluded the day ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.10

and , on the morrow , the volunteer cavalry drew up
SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.11

and saluted him as he departed , SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.12

and followed the carriage to the borders of the county .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.13

At Ipswich the people came out to meet him , SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.14

drew him a mile into the town , and three miles out .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.15

When he was in the <font> Agamemnon <$$font> he wished to represent this
place in Parliament , SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.16

and some of his friends had consulted the leading men of the corporation
: SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.17

the result was not successful ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.18

and Nelson , observing that he would endeavour to find a preferable path
into Parliament , said there might come a time when the people of
Ipswich would think it an honour to have had him for their
representative . SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.19

In London he was feasted by the City , drawn by the populace from
Ludgate Hill to Guildhall , SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.20

and received the thanks of the Common Council for his great victory ,
and a golden-hilted sword studded with diamonds . SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.21

Nelson had every earthly blessing except domestic happiness :
SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.22

he had forfeited that for ever . SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.23

Before he had been three months in England he separated from Lady Nelson
. SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.24

Some of his last words to her were : " I call God to witness , there is
nothing in you , or your conduct , that I wish otherwise . "
SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.25

This was the consequence of his infatuated attachment to Lady Hamilton .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.26

It had before caused a quarrel with his stepson , SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.27

and occasioned remonstrances from his truest friends , which produced no
other effect than that of making him displeased with them , and more
dissatisfied with himself . SOUTHEY-1813-1,174.28

<P_175>

The Addington administration was just at this time formed ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,175.30

and Nelson , who had solicited employment , and been made vice-admiral
of the blue , was sent to the Baltic , as second in command , under Sir
Hyde Parker , by Earl St. Vincent , the new First Lord of the Admiralty
. SOUTHEY-1813-1,175.31

The three northern courts had formed a confederacy for making England
resign her naval rights . SOUTHEY-1813-1,175.32

Of these courts , Russia was guided by the passions of its emperor ,
Paul ; a man not without fits of generosity and some natural goodness ,
but subject to the wildest humours of caprice , and crazed by the
possession of greater power than can ever be safely , or , perhaps ,
innocently , possessed by weak humanity . SOUTHEY-1813-1,175.33

Denmark was French at heart ; ready to co-operate in all the views of
France , to recognise all her usurpations , and obey all her injunctions
. SOUTHEY-1813-1,175.34

Sweden , under a king whose principles were right and whose feelings
were generous , but who had a taint of hereditary insanity , acted in
acquiescence to the dictates of two powers , whom it feared to offend .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,175.35

The Danish navy , at this time , consisted of twenty-three ships of the
line , with about thirty-one frigates , and smaller vessels , exclusive
of guard-ships . SOUTHEY-1813-1,175.36

The Swedes had eighteen ships of the line , fourteen frigates and sloops
, seventy-four galleys and smaller vessels , besides gunboats :
SOUTHEY-1813-1,175.37

and this force was in a far better state of equipment than the Danish .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,175.38

The Russians had eighty-two sail of the line and forty frigates .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,175.39

Of these , there were forty-seven sail of the line at Cronstadt , Revel
, Petersburgh , and Archangel : SOUTHEY-1813-1,175.40

but the Russian fleet was ill-manned , ill-officered , and ill-equipped
. SOUTHEY-1813-1,175.41

Such a combination , under the influence of France , would soon have
become formidable ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,175.42

and never did the British Cabinet display more decision than in
instantly preparing to crush it . SOUTHEY-1813-1,175.43

They erred , however , in permitting any petty consideration to prevent
them from appointing Nelson to the command . SOUTHEY-1813-1,175.44

The public properly murmured at seeing it intrusted to another :
SOUTHEY-1813-1,175.45

and he himself said to Earl St. Vincent , <P_176> that , circumstanced
as he was , this expedition would probably be the last service that he
should ever perform . SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.46

The Earl , in reply , besought him , for God's sake , not to suffer
himself to be carried away by any sudden impulse .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.47

The season happened to be unusually favourable : SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.48

so mild a winter had not been known in the Baltic for many years .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.49

When Nelson joined the fleet at Yarmouth , he found the admiral " a
little nervous about dark nights and fields of ice . "
SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.50

" But we must brace up , " said he ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.51

" these are not times for nervous systems . SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.52

I hope we shall give our northern enemies that hailstorm of bullets
which gives our dear country the dominion of the sea .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.53

We have it , SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.54

and all the devils in the North can@ @not take it from us if our wooden
walls have fair play . " SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.55

Before the fleet left Yarmouth , it was sufficiently known that its
destination was against Denmark . SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.56

Some Danes who belonged to the <font> Amazon <$$font> frigate , went to
Captain Riou , SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.57

and telling him what they had heard , begged that he would get them
exchanged into a ship bound on some other destination .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.58

" They had no wish , " they said , " to quit the British service ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.59

but they entreated that they might not be forced to fight against their
own country . " SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.60

There was not in our whole navy a man who had a higher and more
chivalrous sense of duty than Riou . SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.61

Tears came into his eyes while the men were speaking :
SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.62

without making any reply , he instantly ordered his boat ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.63

and did not return to the <font> Amazon <$$font> till he could tell them
that their wish was effected . SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.64

The fleet sailed on the 12th of March . SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.65

Mr. Vansittart sailed in it , the British Cabinet still hoping to
obtain its end by negotiation . SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.66

It was well for England that Sir Hyde Parker placed a fuller confidence
in Nelson than the Government seems to have done at this most important
crisis . SOUTHEY-1813-1,176.67

Her enemies might well have been astonished at learning that any other
man should , for a moment , have been thought of for <P_177> the command
. SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.68

But so little deference was paid , even at this time , to his intuitive
and all-commanding genius , that when the fleet had reached its first
rendezvous , at the entrance of the Cattegat , he had received no
official communication whatever of the intended operations .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.69

His own mind had been made up upon them with its accustomed decision .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.70

" All I have gathered of our first plans , " said he , " I disapprove
most exceedingly . SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.71

Honour may arise from them ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.72

good can@ @not . SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.73

I hear we are likely to anchor outside of Cronenburg Castle , instead of
Copenhagen , which would give weight to our negotiation .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.74

A Danish minister would think twice before he would put his name to war
with England , when the next moment he would probably see his master's
fleet in flames , and his capital in ruins . SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.75

The Dane should see our flag every moment he lifted up his head . "
SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.76

Mr. Vansittart left the fleet at the Scaw , SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.77

and preceded it in a frigate , with a flag of truce .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.78

Precious time was lost by this delay , which was to be purchased by the
dearest blood of Britain and of Denmark : SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.79

according to the Danes themselves , the intelligence that a British
fleet was seen off the Sound produced a much more general alarm in
Copenhagen than its actual arrival in the roads ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.80

for their means of defence were , at that time , in such a state , that
they could hardly hope to resist , still less to repel , an enemy .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.81

On the 21st Nelson had a long conference with Sir Hyde ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.82

and the next day addressed a letter to him , worthy of himself and of
the occasion . SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.83

Mr. Vansittart's report had then been received . SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.84

It represented the Danish Government as in the highest degree hostile ,
and their state of preparation as exceeding what our Cabinet had
supposed possible : SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.85

for Denmark had profited , with all activity , of the leisure which had
so impoliticly been given her . SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.86

" The more I have reflected , " said Nelson to his commander , " the
more I am confirmed in opinion , that not a moment should be lost in
attacking the enemy . SOUTHEY-1813-1,177.87

<P_178>

They will every day and hour be stronger : SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.89

we never shall be so good a match for them as at this moment .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.90

The only consideration is , how to get at them with the least risk to
our ships . SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.91

Here you are , with almost the safety - certainly with the honour - of
England more intrusted to you than ever yet fell to the lot of any
British officer . SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.92

On your decision depends whether our country shall be degraded in the
eyes of Europe , or whether she shall rear her head higher than ever .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.93

Again do I repeat , never did our country depend so much on the success
of any fleet as on this . SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.94

How best to honour her and abate the pride of her enemies , must be the
subject of your deepest consideration . " SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.95

Supposing him to force the passage of the Sound , Nelson thought some
damage might be done among the masts and yards ; though , perhaps , not
one of them but would be serviceable again . SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.96

" If the wind be fair , " said he , " and you determine to attack the
ships and Crown Islands , you must expect the natural issue of such a
battle - ships crippled , and , perhaps , one or two lost ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.97

for the wind which carries you in will , most probably , not bring out a
crippled ship . SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.98

This mode I call taking the bull by the horns . SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.99

It , however , will not prevent the Revel ships , or the Swedes , from
joining the Danes : SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.100

and to prevent this is , in my humble opinion , a measure absolutely
necessary ; and still to attack Copenhagen . " SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.101

For this he proposed two modes . SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.102

One was to pass Cronenburg , taking the risk of danger ; take the
deepest and straitest channel along the Middle Grounds ; and then coming
down the Garbar , or King's Channel , attack the Danish line of floating
batteries and ships , as might be found convenient .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.103

This would prevent the junction , SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.104

and might give an opportunity of bombarding Copenhagen .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.105

Or to take the passage of the Belt , which might be accomplished in four
or five days ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.106

and then the attack by Draco might be made , and the junction of the
Russians prevented . SOUTHEY-1813-1,178.107

Supposing them through the Belt , he proposed that a detachment <P_179>
of the fleet should be sent to destroy the Russian squadron at Revel ;
and that the business at Copenhagen should be attempted with the
remainder . SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.108

" The measure , " he said , " may be thought bold ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.109

but the boldest measures are the safest . " SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.110

The pilots , as men who had nothing but safety to think of , were
terrified by the formidable report of the batteries of Elsineur , and
the tremendous preparations which our negotiators , who were now
returned from their fruitless mission , had witnessed .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.111

They , therefore , persuaded Sir Hyde to prefer the passage of the Belt
. SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.112

" Let it be by the Sound , by the Belt , or anyhow , " cried Nelson , "
only lose not an hour ! " SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.113

On the 26th they sailed for the Belt , SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.114

but , after a few hours , this resolution was changed ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.115

and the fleet returned to its former anchorage . SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.116

The difficulty of the course is said to have been one reason ; Nelson's
advice another . SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.117

The next day was more idly expended in despatching a flag of truce to
the governor of Cronenburg Castle , to ask whether he had received
orders to fire at the British fleet ; as the admiral must consider the
first gun to be a declaration of war on the part of Denmark .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.118

A soldier-like and becoming answer was returned to this formality .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.119

The governor said that the British minister had not been sent away from
Copenhagen , but had obtained a passport at his own demand .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.120

He himself , as a soldier , could not meddle with politics ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.121

but he was not at liberty to suffer a fleet , of which the intention was
not yet known , to approach the guns of the castle which he had the
honour to command ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.122

and he requested , if the British admiral should think proper to make
any proposals to the King of Denmark , that he might be apprised of it
before the fleet approached nearer . SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.123

During this intercourse , a Dane , who came on board the commander's
ship , having occasion to express his business in writing , found the
pen blunt ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,179.124

and , holding it up , sarcastically said : " If your guns are not better
pointed than your <P_180> pens , you will make little impression on
Copenhagen ! " SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.125

On that day intelligence reached the admiral of the loss of one of his
fleet , the <font> Invincible , <$$font> 74 , wrecked on a sandbank as
she was coming out of Yarmouth , 400 of her men perishing in her .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.126

Nelson , who was now appointed to lead the van , shifted his flag to the
<font> Elephant , <$$font> Captain Foley , a lighter ship than the
<font> St. George , <$$font> and therefore fitter for the expected
operations . SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.127

The two following days were calm . SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.128

Orders had been given to pass the Sound as soon as the wind would permit
; SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.129

and , on the afternoon of the 29th , the ships were cleared for action ,
with an alacrity characteristic of British seamen .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.130

At daybreak , on the 30th , it blew a top-sail breeze from N.W .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.131

The signal was made , SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.132

and the fleet moved on in order of battle - Nelson's division in the van
, Sir Hyde's in the centre , and Admiral Graves' in the rear .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.133

Great actions , whether military or naval , have generally given
celebrity to the scenes from whence they are denominated ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.134

and thus petty villages , and capes , and bays , known only to the
coasting trader , become associated with mighty deeds ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.135

and their names are made conspicuous in the history of the world .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.136

Here , however , the scene was every way worthy of the drama .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.137

The political importance of the Sound is such , that grand objects are
not needed there to impress the imagination ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.138

yet is the channel full of grand and interesting objects , both of art
and nature . SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.139

This passage , which Denmark had so long considered as the key of the
Baltic , is , in its narrowest part , about three miles wide ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.140

and here the city of Elsineur is situated ; except Copenhagen , the most
flourishing of the Danish towns . SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.141

Every vessel which passes lowers her top-gallant-sails ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,180.142

and pays toll at Elsineur : a toll which is believed to have had its
origin in the consent of the traders to that sea , Denmark taking upon
itself the charge of constructing <P_181> lighthouses , and erecting
signals , to mark the shoals and rocks from the Cattegat to the Baltic :
and they , on their part , agreeing that all ships should pass this way
, in order that all might pay their shares : none from that time using
the passage of the Belt ; because it was not fitting that they , who
enjoyed the benefit of the beacons in dark and stormy weather , should
evade contributing to them in fair seasons and summer nights .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,181.143

Of late years about ten_thousand vessels had annually paid this
contribution in time of peace . SOUTHEY-1813-1,181.144

Adjoining Elsineur , and at the edge of a peninsular promontory , upon
the nearest point of land to the Swedish coast , stands Cronenburg
Castle , built after Tycho Brahe's design - a magnificent pile - at once
a palace , and fortress , and state prison , with its spires and towers
, and battlements and batteries . SOUTHEY-1813-1,181.145

On the left of the strait is the old Swedish city of Helsingburg , at
the foot , and on the side of a hill . SOUTHEY-1813-1,181.146

To the north of Helsingburg the shores are steep and rocky ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,181.147

they lower to the south ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,181.148

and the distant spires of Landscrona , Lund , and Malmoe are seen in the
flat country . SOUTHEY-1813-1,181.149

The Danish shores consist partly of ridges of sand ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,181.150

but more frequently their slopes are covered with rich wood , and
villages and villas , denoting the vicinity of a great capital .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,181.151

The isles of Huen , Saltholm , and Amak , appear in the widening channel
; SOUTHEY-1813-1,181.152

and at the distance of twenty miles from Elsineur stands Copenhagen , in
full view - the best built city of the North , and one of the finest
capitals of Europe , visible , with its stately spires , far off .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,181.153

Amid these magnificent objects , there are some which possess a peculiar
interest for the recollections which they call forth .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,181.154

The isle of Huen , a lovely domain , about six miles in circumference ,
had been the munificent gift of Frederic the Second to Tycho Brahe .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,181.155

Here most of his discoveries were made ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,181.156

and here the ruins are to be seen of his observatory , and of the
mansion where he was visited by princes , and where , with a princely
spirit , he received and <P_182> entertained all comers from all parts ,
and promoted science by his liberality , as well as by his labours .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,182.157

Elsineur is a name familiar to English ears , being inseparably
associated with <font> Hamlet , <$$font> and one of the noblest works of
human genius . SOUTHEY-1813-1,182.158

Cronenburg had been the scene of deeper tragedy : SOUTHEY-1813-1,182.159

here Queen Matilda was confined , the victim of a foul and murderous
court intrigue . SOUTHEY-1813-1,182.160

Here , amid heart-breaking griefs , she found consolation in nursing her
infant . SOUTHEY-1813-1,182.161

Here she took her everlasting leave of that infant , when , by the
interference of England , her own deliverance was obtained ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,182.162

and , as the ship bore her away from a country , where the venial
indiscretions of youth and unsuspicious gaiety had been so cruelly
punished , upon these towers she fixed her eyes , SOUTHEY-1813-1,182.163

and stood upon the deck , obstinately gazing toward them till the last
speck had disappeared . SOUTHEY-1813-1,182.164

The Sound being the only frequented entrance to the Baltic , the great
Mediterranean of the North , few parts of the sea display so frequent a
navigation . SOUTHEY-1813-1,182.165

In the height of the season , not fewer than an_hundred vessels pass
every four-and-twenty hours , for many weeks in succession ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,182.166

but never had so busy or so splendid a scene been exhibited there as on
this day , when the British fleet prepared to force that passage , where
, till now , all ships had vailed their top-sails to the flag of Denmark
. SOUTHEY-1813-1,182.167

The whole force consisted of fifty-one sail , of various descriptions ,
of which sixteen were of the line . SOUTHEY-1813-1,182.168

The greater part of the bomb and gun vessels took their station off
Cronenburg Castle , to cover the fleet ; while others , on the larboard
, were ready to engage the Swedish shore . SOUTHEY-1813-1,182.169

The Danes , having improved every moment which ill-timed negotiation and
baffling weather gave them , had lined their shore with batteries ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,182.170

and as soon as the <font> Monarch , <$$font> which was the leading ship
, came abreast of them , a fire was opened from about a_hundred pieces
of cannon and mortars : SOUTHEY-1813-1,182.171

our light vessels immediately , in return , opened their fire upon
<P_183> the castle . SOUTHEY-1813-1,183.172

Here was all the pompous circumstance and exciting reality of war ,
without its effects ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,183.173

for this ostentatious display was but a bloodless prelude to the wide
and sweeping destruction which was soon to follow .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,183.174

The enemy's shot fell near enough to splash the water on board our ships
: SOUTHEY-1813-1,183.175

not relying upon any forbearance of the Swedes , they meant to have kept
the mid channel : SOUTHEY-1813-1,183.176

but , when they perceived that not a shot was fired from Helsingburg ,
and that no batteries were to be seen on the Swedish shore , they
inclined to that side , so as completely to get out of reach of the
Danish guns . SOUTHEY-1813-1,183.177

The uninterrupted blaze which was kept up from them till the fleet had
passed , served only to exhilarate our sailors , and afford them matter
for jest , as the shot fell in showers a full cable's length short of
its destined aim . SOUTHEY-1813-1,183.178

A few rounds were returned from some of our leading ships , till they
perceived its inutility ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,183.179

- this , however , occasioned the only bloodshed of the day , some of
our men being killed and wounded by the bursting of a gun .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,183.180

As soon as the main body had passed , the gun vessels followed ,
desisting from their bombardment , which had been as innocent as that of
the enemy ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,183.181

and , about mid-day , the whole fleet anchored between the island of
Huen and Copenhagen . SOUTHEY-1813-1,183.182

Sir Hyde , with Nelson , Admiral Graves , some of the senior captains ,
and the commanding officers of the artillery and the troops , then
proceeded in a lugger to reconnoitre the enemy's means of defence ; a
formidable line of ships , radeaus , pontoons , galleys , fire-ships ,
and gunboats , flanked and supported by extensive batteries , and
occupying , from one extreme point to the other , an extent of nearly
four miles . SOUTHEY-1813-1,183.183

A council of war was held in the afternoon . SOUTHEY-1813-1,183.184

It was apparent that the Danes could not be attacked without great
difficulty and risk ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,183.185

and some of the members of the council spoke of the number of the Swedes
and the Russians , whom they should afterwards have to engage , as a
consideration which ought to be <P_184> borne in mind .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.186

Nelson , who kept pacing the cabin , impatient as he ever was of
anything which savoured of irresolution , repeatedly said , " The more
numerous the better : SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.187

I wish they were twice as many , - SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.188

the easier the victory , depend on it . " SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.189

The plan upon which he had determined , if ever it should be his fortune
to bring a Baltic fleet to action , was to attack the head of their line
, and confuse their movements . SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.190

" Close with a Frenchman , " he used to say , SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.191

" but out-manoeuvre a Russian . " SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.192

He offered his services for the attack , requiring ten sail of the line
, and the whole of the smaller craft . SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.193

Sir Hyde gave him two more line-of-battle_ships than he asked ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.194

and left everything to his judgment . SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.195

The enemy's force was not the only , nor the greatest , obstacle with
which the British fleet had to contend : SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.196

there was another to be overcome before they could come in contact with
it . SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.197

The channel was little known , and extremely intricate ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.198

all the buoys had been removed ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.199

and the Danes considered this difficulty as almost insuperable ,
thinking the channel impracticable for so large a fleet .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.200

Nelson himself saw the soundings made and the buoys laid down , boating
it upon this exhausting service , day and night , till it was effected .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.201

When this was done , he thanked God for having enabled him to get
through this difficult part of his duty . SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.202

" It had worn him down , " he said , SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.203

" and was infinitely more grievous to him than any resistance which he
could experience from the enemy . " SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.204

At the first council of war , opinions inclined to an attack from the
eastward : SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.205

but the next day , the wind being southerly , after a second examination
of the Danish position , it was determined to attack from the south ,
approaching in the manner which Nelson had suggested in his first
thoughts . SOUTHEY-1813-1,184.206

On the morning of the 1st of April , the whole fleet removed to an
anchorage within two leagues of the town , and off the N.W. end of the
Middle Ground , a shoal lying <P_185> exactly before the town , at about
three-quarters of a mile distance , and extending along its whole
sea-front . SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.207

The King's Channel , where there is deep water , is between this shoal
and the town ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.208

and here the Danes had arranged their line of defence , as near the
shore as possible ; - nineteen ships and floating batteries , flanked ,
at the end nearest the town , by the Crown Batteries , which were two
artificial islands at the mouth of the harbour , - most formidable works
; the larger one having , by the Danish account , sixty-six guns ; but ,
as Nelson believed , eighty-eight . SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.209

The fleet having anchored , Nelson with Riou in the <font> Amazon
<$$font> made his last examination of the ground ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.210

and , about one o'clock , returning to his own ship , threw out the
signal to weigh . SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.211

It was received with a shout throughout the whole division ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.212

they weighed with a light and favourable wind ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.213

the narrow channel between the island of Saltholm and the Middle Ground
had been accurately buoyed ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.214

the small craft pointed out the course distinctly ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.215

Riou led the way : SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.216

the whole division coasted along the outer edge of the shoal ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.217

doubled its farther extremity , SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.218

and anchored there off Draco Point just as the darkness closed , the
headmost of the enemy's line not being more than two miles distant .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.219

The signal to prepare for action had been made early in the evening ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.220

and , as his own anchor dropped , Nelson called out , " I will fight
them the moment I have a fair wind . " SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.221

It had been agreed that Sir Hyde , with the remaining ships , should
weigh on the following morning , at the same time as Nelson , to menace
the Crown Batteries on his side , and the four ships of the line which
lay at the entrance of the arsenal ; and to cover our own disabled ships
as they came out of action . SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.222

The Danes , meantime , had not been idle : SOUTHEY-1813-1,185.223

no sooner did the guns of Cronenburg make it known to the whole city
that all negotiation was at an end , that the British fleet was passing
the Sound , and that the dispute between the two crowns must now be
decided by arms , <P_186> than a spirit displayed itself most honourable
to the Danish character . SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.224

All ranks offered themselves to the service of their country ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.225

the university furnished a corps of twelve_hundred youths , the flower
of Denmark : - SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.226

it was one of those emergencies in which little drilling - or discipline
is necessary to render courage available ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.227

they had nothing to learn but how to manage the guns ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.228

and day and night were employed in practising them .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.229

When the movements of Nelson's squadron were perceived , it was known
when and where the attack was to be expected , SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.230

and the line of defence was manned indiscriminately by soldiers ,
sailors , and citizens . SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.231

Had not the whole attention of the Danes been directed to strengthen
their own means of defence , they might most materially have annoyed the
invading squadron , and , perhaps , frustrated the impending attack ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.232

for the British ships were crowded in an anchoring-ground of little
extent ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.233

it was calm , so that mortar-boats might have acted against them to the
utmost advantage ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.234

and they were within range of shells from Amak Island .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.235

A few fell among them ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.236

but the enemy soon ceased to fire . SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.237

It was learnt afterwards , that , fortunately for the fleet , the bed of
the mortar had given way ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.238

and the Danes either could not get it replaced , SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.239

or , in the darkness , lost the direction . SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.240

This was an awful night for Copenhagen , - far more so than for the
British fleet , where the men were accustomed to battle and victory ,
and had none of those objects before their eyes which render death
terrible . SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.241

Nelson sat down to table with a large party of his officers ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.242

he was , as he was ever wont to be when on the eve of action , in high
spirits , SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.243

and drank to a leading wind , and to the success of the morrow .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.244

After supper they returned to their respective ships , except Riou , who
remained to arrange the order of battle with Nelson and Foley , and to
draw up instructions ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,186.245

Hardy , meantime , went in a small boat to examine the channel between
them and the enemy ; <P_187> approaching so near that he sounded round
their leading ship with a pole , lest the noise of throwing the lead
should discover him . SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.246

The incessant fatigue of body , as well as mind , which Nelson had
undergone during the last three days , had so exhausted him that he was
earnestly urged to go to his cot ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.247

and his old servant , Allen , using that kind of authority which long
and affectionate services entitled and enabled him to assume on such
occasions , insisted upon his complying . SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.248

The cot was placed on the floor , SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.249

and he continued to dictate from it . SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.250

About eleven Hardy returned , SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.251

and reported the practicability of the channel , and the depth of water
up to the enemy's line . SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.252

About one , the orders were completed ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.253

and half_a_dozen clerks , in the foremost cabin , proceeded to
transcribe them , Nelson frequently calling out to them from his cot to
hasten their work , SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.254

for the wind was becoming fair . SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.255

Instead of attempting to get a few hours of sleep , he was constantly
receiving reports upon this important point . SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.256

At daybreak it was announced as becoming perfectly fair .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.257

The clerks finished their work about six . SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.258

Nelson , who was already up , breakfasted , SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.259

and made signal for all captains . SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.260

The land forces , and five_hundred seamen , under Captain Freemantle and
the Honourable Colonel Stewart , were to storm the Crown Battery as soon
as its fire should be silenced ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.261

and Riou , - whom Nelson had never seen till this expedition , but whose
worth he had instantly perceived , and appreciated as it deserved , -
had the <font> Blanche <$$font> and <font> Alcmene <$$font> frigates ,
the <font> Dart <$$font> and <font> Arrow <$$font> sloops , and the
<font> Zephyr <$$font> and <font> Otter <$$font> fire-ships , given him
, with a special command to act as circumstances might require ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.262

- every other ship had its station appointed . SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.263

Between eight and nine the pilots and masters were ordered on board the
admiral's ship . SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.264

The pilots were mostly men who had been mates in Baltic traders ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,187.265

and their hesitation about the bearing of the east end of the shoal ,
and the exact line of deep water , gave <P_188> ominous warning of how
little their knowledge was to be trusted . SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.266

The signal for action had been made , SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.267

the wind was fair - not a moment to be lost . SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.268

Nelson urged them to be steady - to be resolute , and to decide ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.269

- but they wanted the only ground for steadiness and decision in such
cases ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.270

and Nelson had reason to regret that he had not trusted to Hardy's
single report . SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.271

This was one of the most painful moments of his life ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.272

and he always spoke of it with bitterness . SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.273

" I experienced in the Sound , " said he , " the misery of having the
honour of our country intrusted to a set of pilots , who have no other
thought than to keep the ships clear of danger , and their own silly
heads clear of shot . SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.274

Everybody knows what I must have suffered ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.275

and if any merit attaches itself to me , it was for combating the
dangers of the shallows in defiance of them . " SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.276

At length Mr. Bryerly , the master of the <font> Bellona , <$$font>
declared that he was prepared to lead the fleet : SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.277

his judgment was acceded to by the rest : SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.278

they returned to their ships , SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.279

and , at half-@ @past nine , the signal was made to weigh in succession
. SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.280

Captain Murray , in the <font> Edgar , <$$font> led the way ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.281

the <font> Agamemnon <$$font> was next in order ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.282

but , on the first attempt to leave her anchorage , she could not
weather the edge of the shoal , SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.283

and Nelson had the grief to see his old ship , in which he had performed
so many years' gallant services , immoveably aground , at a moment when
her help was so greatly required . SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.284

Signal was then made for the <font> Polyphemus , <$$font>
SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.285

and this change in the order of sailing was executed with the utmost
promptitude : SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.286

yet so much delay had thus been unavoidably occasioned , that the <font>
Edgar <$$font> was for some time unsupported : SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.287

and the <font> Polyphemus , <$$font> whose place should have been at the
end of the enemy's line where their strength was the greatest , could
get no further than the beginning , owing to the difficulty of the
channel : SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.288

there she occupied , indeed , an efficient station , but one where , her
presence was less required . SOUTHEY-1813-1,188.289

<P_189>

The <font> Isis <$$font> followed , with better fortune ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.291

and took her own berth . SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.292

The <font> Bellona , <$$font> Sir Thomas Boulden Thompson , kept too
close on the starboard shoal , SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.293

and grounded abreast of the outer ship of the enemy :
SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.294

this was the more vexatious , inasmuch as the wind was fair , the room
ample , and three ships had led the way . SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.295

The <font> Russell , <$$font> following the <font> Bellona , <$$font>
grounded in like manner : SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.296

both were within reach of shot ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.297

but their absence from their intended stations was severely felt .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.298

Each ship had been ordered to pass her leader on the starboard side ,
because the water was supposed to shoal on the larboard shore .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.299

Nelson , who came next after these two ships , thought they had kept too
far on the starboard direction , SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.300

and made signal for them to close with the enemy , not knowing that they
were aground : SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.301

but , when he perceived that they did not obey the signal , he ordered
the <font> Elephant's <$$font> helm to starboard ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.302

and went within these ships : thus quitting the appointed order of
sailing , and guiding those which were to follow .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.303

The greater part of the fleet were probably , by this act of promptitude
on his part , saved from going on shore . SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.304

Each ship , as she arrived nearly opposite to her appointed station ,
let her anchor go by the stern , SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.305

and presented her broadside to the Danes . SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.306

The distance between each was about a half-cable .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.307

The action was fought nearly at the distance of a cable's length from
the enemy . SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.308

This , which rendered its continuance so long , was owing to the
ignorance and consequent indecision of the pilots .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.309

In pursuance of the same error which had led the <font> Bellona <$$font>
and the <font> Russell <$$font> aground , they , when the lead was at a
quarter less five , refused to approach nearer , in dread of shoaling
their water on the larboard shore : a fear altogether erroneous ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.310

for the water deepened up to the very side of the enemy's line .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.311

At five minutes after ten the action began . SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.312

The first half of our fleet was engaged in about half an hour ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,189.313

and by half-@ @past eleven the battle became <P_190> general .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.314

The plan of the attack had been complete : SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.315

but seldom has any plan been more disconcerted by untoward accidents .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.316

Of twelve ships of the line , one was entirely useless , and two others
in a situation where they could not render half the service which was
required of them . SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.317

Of the squadron of gun-brigs only one could get into action :
SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.318

the rest were prevented , by baffling currents , from weathering the
eastern end of the shoal ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.319

and only two of the bomb-vessels could reach their station on the Middle
Ground , and open their mortars on the arsenal , firing over both fleets
. SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.320

Riou took the vacant station against the Crown Battery , with his
frigates ; attempting , with that unequal force , a service in which
three sail of the line had been directed to assist .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.321

Nelson's agitation had been extreme when he saw himself , before the
action began , deprived of a fourth part of his ships of the line .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.322

But no sooner was he in battle , where his squadron was received with
the fire of more than a_thousand guns , than , as if that artillery ,
like music , had driven away all care and painful thoughts , his
countenance brightened ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.323

and , as a bystander describes him , his conversation became joyous ,
animated , elevated , and delightful . SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.324

The commander-in-chief , meantime near enough to the scene of action to
know the unfavourable accidents which had so materially weakened Nelson
, and yet too distant to know the real state of the contending parties ,
suffered the most dreadful anxiety . SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.325

To get to his assistance was impossible ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.326

both wind and current were against him . SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.327

Fear for the event , in such circumstances , would naturally
preponderate in the bravest mind ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.328

and , at one o'clock , perceiving that , after three hours' endurance ,
the enemy's fire was unslackened , he began to despair of success ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.329

and thinking it became him to save what he could from the hopeless
contest , he made signal for retreat . SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.330

Nelson was now in all the excitement of action , pacing the quarter-deck
. SOUTHEY-1813-1,190.331

A shot through the mainmast <P_191> knocked the splinters about ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.332

and he observed to one of his officers , with a smile : " It is warm
work ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.333

and this day may be the last to any of us at a moment " : -
SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.334

and then stopping short at the gangway , added , with emotion - " But
mark you : I would not be elsewhere for thousands . "
SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.335

About this time the signal lieutenant called out that No. 39 <paren>
the signal for discontinuing the action <$$paren> was thrown out by the
commander-in-chief . SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.336

He continued to walk the deck , SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.337

and appeared to take no notice of it . SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.338

The signal officer met him at the next turn , SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.339

and asked if he should repeat it . SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.340

" No , " he replied ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.341

" acknowledge it . " SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.342

Presently he called after him , to know if the signal for close action
was still hoisted , SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.343

and being answered in the affirmative , said , " Mind you keep it so .
" SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.344

He now paced the deck , moving the stump of his lost arm in a manner
which always indicated great emotion . SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.345

" Do you know , " said he to Mr. Ferguson , " what is shown on board
the commander-in-chief ? SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.346

No. 39 ! " SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.347

Mr. Ferguson asked what that meant ? SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.348

- ' Why , to leave off action ! " SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.349

Then shrugging up his shoulders , he repeated the words - " Leave off
action ! SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.350

Now damn me if I do ! SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.351

You know , Foley , " turning to the captain , " I have only one eye , -
SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.352

I have a right to be blind sometimes , " - SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.353

and then putting the glass to his blind eye , in that mood of mind which
sports with bitterness , he exclaimed , " I really do not see the signal
! " SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.354

Presently he exclaimed , " Damn the signal ! SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.355

Keep mine for closer battle flying ! SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.356

That@ @'s the way I answer such signals . SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.357

Nail mine to the mast ! " SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.358

Admiral Graves , who was so situated that he could not discern what was
done on board the <font> Elephant , <$$font> disobeyed Sir Hyde's signal
in like manner : SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.359

whether by fortunate mistake , or by a like brave intention , has not
been made known . SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.360

The other ships of the line , looking only to Nelson , continued the
action . SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.361

The signal , however , saved Riou's little squadron ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.362

but did not save its heroic leader . SOUTHEY-1813-1,191.363

This squadron , which was nearest the commander-in-chief , <P_192>
obeyed , SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.364

and hauled off . SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.365

It had suffered severely in its most unequal contest .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.366

For a long time the <font> Amazon <$$font> had been firing , enveloped
in smoke , when Riou desired his men to stand fast and let the smoke
clear off , that they might see what they were about . A fatal order ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.367

for the Danes then got clear sight of her from the batteries ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.368

and pointed their guns with such tremendous effect that nothing but the
signal for retreat saved this frigate from destruction .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.369

" What will Nelson think of us ! " was Riou's mournful exclamation when
he unwillingly drew off . SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.370

He had been wounded in the head by a splinter , SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.371

and was sitting on a gun , encouraging his men , when , just as the
<font> Amazon <$$font> showed her stern to the Trekroner battery , his
clerk was killed by his side , SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.372

and another shot swept away several marines who were hauling in the
mainbrace . SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.373

" Come then , my boys ! " cried Riou , SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.374

" let us die all together ! " SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.375

The words had scarcely been uttered , before a raking shot cut him in
two . SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.376

Except it had been Nelson himself , the British navy could not have
suffered a severer loss . SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.377

The action continued along the line with unabated vigour on our side ,
and with the most determined resolution on the part of the Danes .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.378

They fought to great advantage , because most of the vessels in their
line of defence were without masts : SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.379

the few which had any standing had their topmasts struck ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.380

and the hulls could only be seen at intervals . SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.381

The <font> Isis <$$font> must have been destroyed by the superior weight
of her enemy's fire , if Captain Inman , in the <font> Desirée <$$font>
frigate , had not judiciously taken a situation which enabled him to
rake the Dane , and if the <font> Polyphemus <$$font> had not also
relieved her . SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.382

Both in the <font> Bellona <$$font> and the <font> Isis <$$font> many
men were lost by the bursting of their guns . SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.383

The former ship was about forty years old , SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.384

and these guns were believed to be the same which she had first taken to
sea : SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.385

they were , probably , originally faulty , SOUTHEY-1813-1,192.386

for the fragments were full of little <P_193> air-holes .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.387

The <font> Bellona <$$font> lost seventy-five men ; the , <font> Isis
<$$font> one_hundred_and_ten ; the <font> Monarch <$$font>
two_hundred_and_ten . SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.388

She was more than any other line-of-battle_ship exposed to the great
battery ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.389

and supporting at the same time the united fire of the <font> Holstein
<$$font> and the <font> Zealand , <$$font> her loss this day exceeded
that of any single ship during the whole war . SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.390

Amid the tremendous carnage in this vessel , some of the men displayed a
singular instance of coolness : SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.391

the pork and peas happened to be in the kettle ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.392

a shot knocked its contents about ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.393

they picked up the pieces , SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.394

and ate and fought at the same time . SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.395

The Prince Royal had taken his station upon one of the batteries , from
whence he beheld the action and issued his orders .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.396

Denmark had never been engaged in so arduous a contest ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.397

and never did the Danes more nobly display their national courage - a
courage not more unhappily , than impoliticly , exerted in subserviency
to the interest of France . SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.398

Captain Thura , of the <font> Indfoedsretten , <$$font> fell early in
the action ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.399

and all his officers , except one lieutenant and one marine officer ,
were either killed or wounded . SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.400

In the confusion , the colours were either struck or shot away ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.401

but she was moored athwart one of the batteries in such a situation that
the British made no attempt to board her ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.402

and a boat was despatched to the prince , to inform him of her situation
. SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.403

He turned to those about him , SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.404

and said , " Gentlemen , Thura is killed ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.405

which of you will take the command ? " SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.406

Schroedersee , a captain who had lately resigned on account of extreme
ill health , answered , in a feeble voice , " I will , "
SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.407

and hastened on board . SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.408

The crew , perceiving a new commander coming alongside , hoisted their
colours again , SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.409

and fired a broadside . SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.410

Schroedersee , when he came on deck , found himself surrounded by the
dead and wounded , SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.411

and called to those in the boat to get quickly on board :
SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.412

a ball struck him at that moment . SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.413

A lieutenant , who had accompanied him , then took the command ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,193.414

and continued <P_194> to fight the ship . SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.415

A youth of seventeen , by name Villemoes , particularly distinguished
himself on this memorable day . SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.416

He had volunteered to take the command of a floating battery , which was
a raft , consisting merely of a number of beams nailed together , with a
flooring to support the guns : SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.417

it was square , with a breast-work full of portholes and without masts ,
carrying twenty-four guns and one_hundred_and_twenty men .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.418

With this he got under the stern of the <font> Elephant , <$$font> below
the reach of the stern-chasers ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.419

and , under a heavy fire of small arms from the marines , fought his
raft , till the truce was announced , with such skill , as well as
courage , as to excite Nelson's warmest admiration .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.420

Between one and two the fire of the Danes slackened ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.421

about two it ceased from the greater part of their line ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.422

and some of their lighter ships were adrift . SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.423

It was , however , difficult to take possession of those who struck ,
because the batteries on Amak Island protected them , and because an
irregular fire was kept up from the ships themselves as the boats
approached . SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.424

This arose from the nature of the action ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.425

the crews were continually reinforced from the shore :
SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.426

and fresh men coming on board , did not inquire whether the flag had
been struck , SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.427

or , perhaps , did not heed it ; - many , or most of them , never having
been engaged in war before , - knowing nothing , therefore , of its laws
, and thinking only of defending their country to the last extremity .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.428

The <font> Danbrog <$$font> fired upon the <font> Elephant's <$$font>
boats in this manner , though her commodore had removed her pendant and
deserted her , though she had struck , and though she was in flames .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.429

After she had been abandoned by the commodore , Braun fought her till he
lost his right hand , SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.430

and then Captain Lemming took the command . SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.431

This unexpected renewal of her fire made the <font> Elephant <$$font>
and <font> Glatton <$$font> renew theirs , till she was not only
silenced , but nearly every man in the praams , ahead and astern of her
, was killed . SOUTHEY-1813-1,194.432

When the smoke of their guns <P_195> died away , she was seen drifting
in flames before the wind ; those of her crew who remained alive , and
able to exert themselves , throwing themselves out at her portholes .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.433

Captain Rothe commanded the <font> Nyeborg <$$font> praam ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.434

and perceiving that she could not much longer be kept afloat , made for
the inner road . SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.435

As he passed the line he found the <font> Aggershuus <$$font> praam in a
more miserable condition than his own ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.436

her masts had all gone by the board , SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.437

and she was on the point of sinking . SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.438

Rothe made fast a cable to her stern , SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.439

and towed her off ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.440

but he could get her no further than a shoal , called Stubben , when she
sunk ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.441

and soon after he had worked the <font> Nyeborg <$$font> up to the
landing-place , that vessel also sunk to her gunwale .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.442

Never did any vessel come out of action in a more dreadful plight .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.443

The stump of her foremast was the only stick standing ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.444

her cabin had been stove in ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.445

every gun , except a single one , was dismounted ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.446

and her deck was covered with shattered limbs and dead bodies .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.447

By half-@ @past two the action had ceased along that part of the line
which was astern of the <font> Elephant , <$$font> but not with the
ships ahead and the Crown Batteries . SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.448

Nelson , seeing the manner in which his boats were fired upon when they
went to take possession of the prizes , became angry ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.449

and said he must either send on shore to have this irregular proceeding
stopped , or send a fire-ship and burn them : SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.450

and , with a presence of mind peculiar to himself , and never more
signally displayed than now , he availed himself of this occasion to
secure the advantage which he had gained , and open a negotiation .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.451

He retired into the stern gallery , SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.452

and wrote thus to the Crown Prince : " Vice-Admiral Lord Nelson has been
commanded to spare Denmark , when she no longer resists .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.453

The line of defence which covered her shores has struck to the British
flag , SOUTHEY-1813-1,195.454

but if the firing is continued on the part of Denmark , he must set on
fire all the prizes that he has taken , without having the power of
saving the <P_196> men who have so nobly defended them .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.455

The brave Danes are the brothers , and should never be the enemies , of
the English . " SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.456

A wafer was given him ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.457

but he ordered a candle to be brought from the cockpit ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.458

and sealed the letter with wax , affixing a larger seal than he
ordinarily used . SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.459

" This , " said he , " is no time to appear hurried and informal . "
SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.460

Captain Sir Frederic Thesiger , who acted as his aide-de-camp , carried
this letter with a flag of truce . SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.461

Meantime the fire of the ships ahead , and the approach of the <font>
Ramillies <$$font> and <font> Defence , <$$font> from Sir Hyde's
division , which had now worked near enough to alarm the enemy , though
not to injure them , silenced the remainder of the Danish line to the
eastward of the Trekroner . SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.462

That battery , however , continued its fire . SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.463

This formidable work , owing to the want of the ships which had been
destined to attack it , and the inadequate force of Riou's little
squadron , was comparatively uninjured : SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.464

towards the close of the action it had been manned with nearly
fifteen_hundred men , SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.465

and the intention of storming it , for which every preparation had been
made , was abandoned as impracticable . SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.466

During Thesiger's absence , Nelson sent for Free-mantle from the <font>
Ganges , <$$font> SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.467

and consulted with him and Foley , whether it was advisable to advance ,
with those ships which had sustained least damage , against the yet
uninjured part of the Danish line . SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.468

They were decidedly of opinion that the best thing which could be done
was , while the wind continued fair , to remove the fleet out of the
intricate channel from which it had to retreat . SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.469

In somewhat more than half an hour after Thesiger had been despatched ,
the Danish adjutant-general Lindholm came , bearing a flag of truce :
upon which the Trekroner ceased to fire , and the action closed , after
four hours' continuance . SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.470

He brought an inquiry from the prince , SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.471

What was the object of Nelson's note ? SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.472

The British admiral wrote in reply : " Lord Nelson's object in sending
the flag of truce was humanity : SOUTHEY-1813-1,196.473

he therefore consents that hostilities <P_197> shall cease , and that
the wounded Danes may be taken on shore . SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.474

And Lord Nelson will take his prisoners out of the vessels , and burn or
carry off his prizes as he shall think fit . SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.475

Lord Nelson , with humble duty to His Royal Highness the Prince , will
consider this the greatest victory he has ever gained , if it may be the
cause of a happy reconciliation and union between his own most gracious
Sovereign and His Majesty the King of Denmark . "
SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.476

Sir Frederic Thesiger was despatched a second time with the reply ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.477

and the Danish adjutant-general was referred to the commander-in-chief
for a conference upon this overture . SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.478

Lindholm assenting to this , proceeded to the <font> London , <$$font>
which was riding at anchor full four miles off ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.479

and Nelson , losing not one of the critical moments which he had thus
gained , made signal for his leading ships to weigh in succession .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.480

They had the shoal to clear ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.481

they were much crippled ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.482

and their course was immediately under the guns of the Trekroner .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.483

The <font> Monarch <$$font> led the way . SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.484

This ship had received six-and-twenty shot between wind and water .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.485

She had not a shroud standing : SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.486

there was a double-headed shot in the heart of her foremast ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.487

and the slightest wind would have sent every mast over her side .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.488

The imminent danger from which Nelson had extricated himself soon became
apparent ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.489

the <font> Monarch <$$font> touched immediately upon a shoal , over
which she was pushed by the <font> Ganges <$$font> taking her amidships
; SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.490

the <font> Glatton <$$font> went clear ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.491

but the other two , the <font> Defiance <$$font> and the <font> Elephant
, <$$font> grounded about a mile from the Trekroner ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.492

and there remained fixed for many hours , in spite of all the exertions
of their wearied crews . SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.493

The <font> Desirée <$$font> frigate also , at the other end of the line
, having gone , toward the close of the action , to assist the <font>
Bellona , <$$font> became fast on the same shoal .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.494

Nelson left the <font> Elephant , <$$font> soon after she took the
ground , to follow Lindholm . SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.495

The heat of action was over ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,197.496

and that kind of feeling which the surrounding scene of havoc was so
well fitted <P_198> to produce , pressed heavily upon his exhausted
spirits . SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.497

The sky had suddenly become overcast ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.498

white flags were waving from the mastheads of so many shattered ships -
SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.499

the slaughter had ceased , SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.500

but the grief was to come ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.501

for the account of the dead was not yet made up , SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.502

and no man could tell for what friends he might have to mourn .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.503

The very silence which follows the cessation of such a battle becomes a
weight upon the heart at first , rather than a relief ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.504

and though the work of mutual destruction was at an end , the <font>
Danbrog <$$font> was , at this time , drifting about in flames ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.505

presently she blew up ; while our boats , which had put off in all
directions to assist her , were endeavouring to rescue her devoted crew
, few of whom could be saved . SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.506

The fate of these men , after the gallantry which they had displayed ,
particularly affected Nelson : SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.507

for there was nothing in this action of that indignation against the
enemy , and that impression of retributive justice , which , at the Nile
, had given a sterner temper to his mind , and a sense of austere
delight , in beholding the vengeance of which he was the appointed
minister . SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.508

The Danes were an honourable foe ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.509

they were of English mould as well as English blood ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.510

and now that the battle had ceased , he regarded them rather as brethren
than as enemies . SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.511

There was another reflection also which mingled with these melancholy
thoughts , and predisposed him to receive them . SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.512

He was not here master of his own movements , as at Egypt ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.513

he had won the day by disobeying his orders ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.514

and , in so far as he had been successful , had convicted the
commander-in-chief of an error in judgment . SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.515

" Well , " said he , as he left the <font> Elephant , <$$font> " I have
fought contrary to orders , SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.516

and I shall , perhaps , be hanged . SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.517

Never mind : SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.518

let them ! " SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.519

This was the language of a man who , while he is giving utterance to an
uneasy thought , clothes it half in jest , because he half repents that
it has been disclosed . SOUTHEY-1813-1,198.520

His services had been too eminent on that day , his judgment too
conspicuous , his success too <P_199> signal , for any commander ,
however , jealous of his own authority , or envious of another's merits
, to express anything but satisfaction and gratitude , which Sir Hyde
heartily felt , and sincerely expressed . SOUTHEY-1813-1,199.521

It was speedily agreed that there should be a suspension of hostilities
for four-and-twenty hours , that all the prizes should be surrendered ,
and the wounded Danes carried on shore . SOUTHEY-1813-1,199.522

There was a pressing necessity for this : SOUTHEY-1813-1,199.523

for the Danes , either from too much confidence in the strength of their
position , and the difficulty of the channel ; or supposing that the
wounded might be carried to shore during the action , which was found
totally impracticable ; or , perhaps , from the confusion which the
attack excited , had provided no surgeons : so that , when our men
boarded the captured ships , they found many of the mangled and
mutilated Danes bleeding to death for want of proper assistance - a
scene , of all others , the most shocking to a brave man's feelings .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,199.524

The boats of Sir Hyde's division were actively employed all night in
bringing out the prizes , and in getting afloat the ships which were on
shore . SOUTHEY-1813-1,199.525

At daybreak , Nelson , who had slept in his own ship , the <font> St.
George , <$$font> rowed to the <font> Elephant , <$$font>
SOUTHEY-1813-1,199.526

and his delight in finding her afloat seemed to give him new life .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,199.527

There he took a hasty breakfast , praising the men for their exertions ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,199.528

and then pushed off to the prizes , which had not yet been removed .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,199.529

The <font> Zealand , <$$font> 74 , the last which struck , had drifted
on the shoal under the Trekroner ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,199.530

and relying , as it seems , upon the protection which that battery might
have afforded , refused to acknowledge herself captured ; saying , that
though it was true her flag was not to be seen , her pendant was still
flying . SOUTHEY-1813-1,199.531

Nelson ordered one of our brigs and three longboats to approach her ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,199.532

and rowed up himself to one of the enemy's ships to communicate with the
commodore . SOUTHEY-1813-1,199.533

This officer proved to be an old acquaintance , whom he had known in the
West_Indies : SOUTHEY-1813-1,199.534

so he invited himself on board ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,199.535

and , with <P_200> that urbanity , as well as decision , which always
characterised him , urged his claim to the <font> Zealand <$$font> so
well that it was admitted . SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.536

The men from the boats lashed a cable round her bowsprit ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.537

and the gun-vessel towed her away . SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.538

It is affirmed , and probably with truth , that the Danes felt more pain
at beholding this than at all their misfortunes on the preceding day ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.539

and one of the officers , Commodore Steen Bille , went to the Trekroner
Battery , SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.540

and asked the commander why he had not sunk the <font> Zealand <$$font>
rather than suffer her thus to be carried off by the enemy .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.541

This was indeed a mournful day for Copenhagen . SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.542

It was Good Friday ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.543

but the general agitation , and the mourning which was in every house ,
made all distinction of days be forgotten . SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.544

There were , at that hour , thousands in that city who felt , and more ,
perhaps , who needed , the consolations of Christianity , but few or
none who could be calm enough to think of its observances .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.545

The English were actively employed in refitting their own ships ,
securing the prizes , and distributing the prisoners ; the Danes , in
carrying on shore and disposing of the wounded and the dead .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.546

It had been a murderous action . SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.547

Our loss , in killed and wounded , was nine_hundred_and_fifty-three :
SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.548

part of this slaughter might have been spared . SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.549

The commanding officer of the troops on board one of our ships asked
where his men should be stationed ? SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.550

He was told that they could be of no use ; that they were not near
enough for musketry , and were not wanted at the guns ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.551

they had , therefore , better go below . SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.552

This , he said , was impossible , - it would be a disgrace that could
never be wiped away . SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.553

They were , therefore , drawn up upon the gangway , to satisfy this
cruel point of honour ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.554

and there , without the possibility of annoying the enemy , they were
mown down ! SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.555

The loss of the Danes , including prisoners , amounted to about
six_thousand . SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.556

The negotations , meantime , went on ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,200.557

and it was agreed that Nelson should have an interview with the prince
<P_201> the following day . SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.558

Hardy and Freemantle landed with him . SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.559

This was a thing as unexampled as the other circumstances of the battle
. SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.560

A strong guard was appointed to escort him to the palace - as much for
the purpose of security as of honour . SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.561

The populace , according to the British account , showed a mixture of
admiration , curiosity , and displeasure , at beholding that man in the
midst of them , who had inflicted such wounds upon Denmark .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.562

But there were neither acclamations nor murmurs .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.563

" The people , " says a Dane , " did not degrade themselves with the
former , nor disgrace themselves with the latter :
SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.564

the admiral was received as one brave enemy ever ought to receive
another - SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.565

he was received with respect . " SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.566

The preliminaries of the negotiation were adjusted at this interview .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.567

During the repast which followed , Nelson , with all the sincerity of
his character , bore willing testimony to the valour of his foes .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.568

He told the prince that he had been in a_hundred_and_five engagements ,
but that this was the most tremendous of all . SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.569

" The French , " he said , " fought bravely ; SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.570

but they could not have stood for one hour the fight which the Danes had
supported for four . " SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.571

He requested that Villemoes might be introduced to him ;
SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.572

and , shaking hands with the youth , told the prince that he ought to be
made an admiral . SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.573

The prince replied : " If , my lord , I am to make all my brave officers
admirals , I should have no captains or lieutenants in my service . "
SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.574

The sympathy of the Danes for their countrymen who had bled in their
defence was not weakened by distance of time or place in this instance .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.575

Things needful for the service , or the comfort of the wounded , were
sent in profusion to the hospitals , till the superintendents gave
public notice that they could receive no more . SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.576

On the third day after the action the dead were buried in the naval
churchyard . SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.577

The ceremony was made as public and as solemn as the occasion required :
SOUTHEY-1813-1,201.578

such a procession had never before been <P_202> seen in that , or ,
perhaps , in any other city . SOUTHEY-1813-1,202.579

A public monument was erected upon the spot where the slain were
gathered together . SOUTHEY-1813-1,202.580

A subscription was opened on the day of the funeral for the relief of
the sufferers , and collections in aid of it made throughout all the
churches in the kingdom . SOUTHEY-1813-1,202.581

This appeal to the feelings of the people was made with circumstances
which gave it full effect . SOUTHEY-1813-1,202.582

A monument was raised in the midst of the church , surmounted by the
Danish colours : SOUTHEY-1813-1,202.583

young maidens , dressed in white , stood round it , with either one who
had been wounded in the battle or the widow and orphans of some one who
had fallen : SOUTHEY-1813-1,202.584

a suitable oration was delivered from the pulpit ,
SOUTHEY-1813-1,202.585

and patriotic hymns and songs were afterwards performed .
SOUTHEY-1813-1,202.586

Medals were distributed to all the officers , and to the men who had
distinguished themselves . SOUTHEY-1813-1,202.587

Poets and painters vied with each other in celebrating a battle , which
, disastrous as it was , had yet been honourable to their country :
SOUTHEY-1813-1,202.588

some , with pardonable sophistry , represented the advantage of the day
as on their own side . SOUTHEY-1813-1,202.589

One writer discovered a more curious , but less disputable ground of
satisfaction , in the reflection that Nelson , as may be inferred from
his name , was of Danish descent , SOUTHEY-1813-1,202.590

and his actions , therefore , the Dane argued , were attributable to
Danish valour . SOUTHEY-1813-1,202.591

