<BEGIN_st-john-1711-2>

<P_2,15>

{ED:To_the_Earl_of_Strafford}

Whitehall , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,15.4

November 27th , 1711 . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,15.5

My Lord , I acknowledge the honour of your Excellency's letters of the
2d of December , and of the 4th , N. S. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,15.6

To tell you that the Queen is extremely satisfied with your conduct , is
no compliment , but strictly the truth . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,15.7

In the midst of clamour , as well as artifice , you have pursued her
Majesty's instructions with that steadiness and vigour , which only
could have produced the compliance we now meet with .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,15.8

Your Excellency may depend upon my exactness in sending you accounts of
all that passes relating to the negociation . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,15.9

I know too well how necessary it is , that you <P_2,16> should have all
the light , and all the assistance {TEXT:asstance} we can procure for
you , to omit any article of this kind . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,16.10

Her Majesty , having approved of the minute of council , which was drawn
on the proposition made by Monsieur Buys , I wrote to Monsieur de Torcy
, on Sunday , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,16.11

and a copy of my letter comes herewith inclosed .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,16.12

The truth is , the caution appeared to every one here entirely vain ;
since , in common sense , the Ministers of those three princes can be no
parties at the treaty , until their masters' interests are settled , and
until it be agreed in what qualities they shall be acknowledged by the
allies ; since , if the condition of France be as bad as the advocates
for war pretend , and as I incline to believe it is , we have no reason
to imagine the French will , by artificial delays , expose this treaty
to the events of another campaign ; and since , from the first moment
that there have been <font> pour-parlers <$$font> about the peace , it
has been always understood and agreed that the negociation should be
singly carried on with France . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,16.13

However , the Queen , who is desirous in every thing , where her honour
, and the <P_2,17> interest of Britain will allow thereof , to comply
with the measures of the States , and the proposals of their Ministers ,
thought fit to give way upon this occasion ; considering farther , that
the answer to my letter may return time enough for the passports to be
sent from hence in less than a fortnight . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,17.14

The hopes which Monsieur Buys has given to his masters concerning their
barrier and commerce are very well founded . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,17.15

We have not yet entered into any particulars with him upon that head ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,17.16

tomorrow , I believe , we shall ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,17.17

and , in the mean time , I think your Excellency will do well to renew
the Queen's assurances to them . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,17.18

You may imagine it was some check to us , to find that several Ministers
among the States , had expressed their dislike of the Queen's
proceedings , and even of their own concurrence with them ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,17.19

and he must play a very dangerous game , who shows all his cards to the
man that bets openly on the other side . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,17.20

But they begin , however , now to take the sure , and , I add , the only
way of obtaining the Queen's confidence . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,17.21

Monsieur Buys must have justice done him , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,17.22

his conduct here has been irreproachable , though <P_2,18> many
temptations and many snares were laid in his way .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,18.23

As to the rest of our allies , they will have no reason to complain ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,18.24

and her Majesty commands me particularly to mention to your Excellency ,
the pleasure with which she received the account which your last
dispatches gave of the King of Prussia@ @'s conduct , and of his answer
to the extraordinary letter of the Emperor . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,18.25

The Queen , my Lord , expected no less from the affection of so good an
ally , and from the generosity of so great a prince ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,18.26

and she is firmly resolved to show her sense of the obligation , by
supporting the interests of his Prussian Majesty , in the course of this
negociation , and by taking all opportunities of uniting , still more
closely , the bands of alliance between the two crowns , as well during
the war , as after the peace . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,18.27

When we have gone over the particular interests of the allies with
Monsieur Buys , I shall be able to speak more clearly , and with better
authority to your Excellency , than I can do at present , for which
reason I avoid entering on that subject . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,18.28

I hope , that long before this reaches you , <P_2,19> our letters will
be come to hand , with the accounts of the steps made here , in concert
with Mr. Buys , when we first received the resolution of the States ,
of the 21st of last month ; and that , by consequence , the Ministers
will be no more in doubt , whom your Excellency represents under so much
uneasiness . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,19.29

As to my little friend , Del Borgo , be pleased to let him know , that
if his intelligence concerning a treaty , signed with Mesnager , costs
him any thing , it costs him too much ; and me@ @thinks , after so many
solemn assurances on the Queen's part , that she has made no separate
treaty with the enemy , it does not very well become him , or any one
else , to suppose it . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,19.30

Mr. Tilson takes care to send your Excellency a copy of what I write to
Mr. Scott , concerning the affairs of the North , which is all that her
Majesty thinks can be resolved upon at this time , and in these
circumstances . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,19.31

We shall press on here as much as possible , the recruit of our troops ,
and the <P_2,20> preparations for the next year , in order to which ,
several treaties are to be renewed . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,20.32

I do not foresee any great difficulty in any , except that of Saxony ,
and that of Denmark . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,20.33

Surely , my Lord , both these might be made on easier terms , whilst
there is an expectation of a peace with France , and by consequence of
our being no longer in the condition of receiving the law .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,20.34

The Queen desires your Excellency should speak with the Pensionary in
this affair , and particularly tell him , that she hopes the States will
agree with her , in choosing rather not to have the Saxon troops at all
, than to have them on such precarious terms , and in so lamentable a
state , as we had them the last summer . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,20.35

I am , &c. H. St. John . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,20.36

{ED:To_the_Earl_of_Strafford}

Whitehall , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,20.38

November 27th , 1711 . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,20.39

My Lord , hurried as I am , you shall have two words in private from me
. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,20.40

I can@ @not help thinking , your answer to <P_2,21> the Pensionary very
just , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,21.41

and I suppose your Excellency will hear no more of that complaint ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,21.42

they should be less apt to dispute with the Queen , about a prerogative
which they have been obliged to her for getting , and must be obliged to
her for keeping . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,21.43

Barlow's simplicity was very ridiculous ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,21.44

the fellow is , I think , strictly honest and punctual ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,21.45

and I have always trusted him . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,21.46

We are , in truth , ill provided with messengers ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,21.47

and it is a little absurd that they , whose only business is to attend
the Secretaries of State , and to be employed by them , are under the
Chamberlain's direction . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,21.48

The Duke of Shrewsbury has had but one vacancy in his time .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,21.49

The paragraph in my public letter , relating to the King of Prussia , is
calculated for your Excellency , to show his Minister , or to send to
Berlin , according to her Majesty's order . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,21.50

The Parliament is prorogued to the 7th of next month , at which time we
shall sit without fail . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,21.51

I am , ever , &c. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,21.52

<P_2,22>

{ED:To_the_Earl_of_Strafford}

Whitehall , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,22.55

30th November , 1711 . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,22.56

My Lord , a commission is ordered to be prepared to pass under the great
seal , empowering your Excellency to renew such treaties for troops ,
for the service of the next year , as are necessary .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,22.57

Some of them , as particularly that with the Elector of Hanover , are
matters of form , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,22.58

and have been yearly renewed in the same words ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,22.59

but others will , perhaps , meet with some difficulties , and require
your Excellency's address in getting them settled advantageously .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,22.60

When the full power is ready , I will take care to have it dispatched to
you . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,22.61

In the mean time , your Excellency will be pleased to turn your thoughts
that way , and forward the matter as much as possible .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,22.62

As to the renewal of the treaties for the Danish troops , and those of
King Augustus , that will depend on the negociations at the Hague ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,22.63

and your Excellency is already sufficiently instructed concerning the
Queen's intentions , for your conduct in that affair .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,22.64

<P_2,23>

In relation to the Prussian troops , it is her Majesty's pleasure , that
you should consult with the States , how we shall best secure the
service of that whole corps for another year , if we want them , without
any danger of having them withdrawn , particularly in regard to the
eight_thousand men in Italy ; the treaty for which , I find , has not
been renewed for these two years past , but their service has been
continued , upon a promise of paying them as before , though the treaty
were not made in form . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,23.66

Upon this subject I must inform your Excellency , that Monsieur Bonet
has procured a full power to himself to sign a convention , for the
Queen's two-thirds of the seventy_thousand crowns , demanded for the
charge of recruiting the Italian corps ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,23.67

he got this power sent to him from his court , upon an objection made by
Mr. Brydges , the paymaster of the forces , among other expedients used
to delay the payment of that money as long as possible , that he could
not have his accounts passed , according to the rules of the exchequer ,
unless the demand he made was grounded upon some formal agreement
<P_2,24> between the two crowns . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,24.68

But I find this full power to have only a retrospect , and to authorize
him no farther than to sign a convention for the year 1710 , and for
this year ; which seems a little absurd . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,24.69

However , the artifice that lies hid under this proceeding , is to get
this arrear paid before they enter upon any treaty with us for the
continuance of their troops in our service this next year ; which is
just the thing we ought to avoid , since we may certainly make a new
treaty much more easily , and upon better terms , whilst we keep such a
sum of money in our hands , than we should , if we once let it go .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,24.70

We hope we shall be able to make this treaty without any such demands
from the Prussian court , as hindered the renewing of it for these two
last years , and without any other demands which may entangle us still
farther , and draw us into fresh expences , or other inconveniencies ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,24.71

and , in that case , I believe the Queen would be glad to have the
renewal made in form , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,24.72

otherwise your Excellency will please to speak to the Pensionary
concerning the properest expedient for being sure of these troops ;
which in all likelihood will be less difficult , since at this <P_2,25>
time that the negociations of peace are going to be opened , the King of
Prussia will stand so much in need of her Majesty's good offices in his
pretensions . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,25.73

What your Excellency mentions in your's of the 2d of December , from
Monsieur Gersdoff , has been done already ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,25.74

and it is some time ago since her Majesty wrote such a letter as is
desired to the Electress Dowager of Saxony upon the subject of the
danger of the young Prince Electoral@ @'s changing his religion .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,25.75

The conferences continue with Monsieur Buys ; but I must say upon no
very good foot , in my opinion , since he is not empowered to agree to
any thing relating to our common interests in the future treaty , since
he can only speak as Monsieur Buys , and expects that we should speak
from the Queen . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,25.76

In a week's time I shall be able to send your Excellency the result of
these debates . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,25.77

The Count de Maffei was this morning at the cockpit , with the Lords of
the Council . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,25.78

He pressed with great earnestness that the Queen would enter into an
immediate and <P_2,26> formal engagement with his master , both as to
his barrier against France , and as to his aggrandisement on the side of
Italy . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,26.79

An answer will in the beginning of the next week , be given him , when
his instances have been reported to the Queen . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,26.80

On the head of the barrier , there can be no difficulty ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,26.81

our engagements and the common interest exact from us that we should
take care of his security . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,26.82

His aggrandisement is a matter of more difficult discussion ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,26.83

and will depend on the disposition of the Spanish monarchy .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,26.84

I am , &c. H. St. John . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,26.85

{ED:To_the_Earl_of_Strafford}

Whitehall , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,26.87

November 30 , 1711 . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,26.88

My Lord , there are so many things {COM:sic} are proper or even
necessary to be said to your Excellency , which are , at the same time ,
not conveniently to be inserted in a public dispatch , that I am obliged
to give you , almost every post , the trouble of a private letter .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,26.89

I must observe , and I think your Excellency may give the hints
sometimes where <P_2,27> you are , that they do not entirely keep up
with the Queen to that character of confidence and open heartedness ,
which they recommend to our practice , as absolutely necessary for the
mutual advantage of both nations in this critical conjuncture of affairs
. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,27.90

We have for many months insinuated to the Dutch Ministers ; nay , your
Excellency , before you came from Holland in the summer , actually and
expressly told the Pensionary , that the Queen intended to proceed
without any reserve towards the States , that she was ready to give and
to receive a free communication of thoughts , and to concert in such a
manner that England and Holland might act as one power .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,27.91

What has all this produced ? ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,27.92

For several months Vryberge was here whom we could not trust ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,27.93

after that , no minister , on their part , resided at the Queen's court
; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,27.94

when your Excellency came over , they refused to instruct you in any
particulars ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,27.95

and now the Pensionary of Amsterdam is here , he neither knows the minds
of his masters on the subject of the barrier , commerce , or any other
head . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,27.96

My Lord , we are not deceived , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,27.97

we see through this slight veil . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,27.98

They propose two things to <P_2,28> themselves , first pumping our
secret , and engaging the Queen , without disclosing their own , or
binding themselves . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,28.99

Secondly , they appear to negociate , and by this amusement gain time ,
till they see what turn the parliament will take , and what is likely to
be the effect of the cabals of their friends the Whigs :
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,28.100

by these artifices they may hurt the common interest ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,28.101

but they will do themselves no service . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,28.102

I find the Duke of Savoy grows cool , as to the proposition of marriage
; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,28.103

he would fain get the rest of Milan , under pretence of being
recompenced for the loss of his reversion of the Spanish monarchy ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,28.104

and he likes the fortune best without the wife , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,28.105

or else hopes to obtain something farther as a dower with the
Arch-Duchess . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,28.106

Is it impossible that this new turn may be taken in concert with France
? ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,28.107

I hope the King of Prussia will be pleased with the Queen's sense of his
proceeding . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,28.108

We know very well how much his conduct must be owing to your
Excellency's good council ; and prevalent influence .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,28.109

Mr. Breton will go to Berlin in a short time ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,28.110

but as he is not yet declared , I <P_2,29> desire you to mention his
name yet a while to nobody . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,29.111

I am ever , my Lord , &c. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,29.112

{ED:To_the_Earl_of_Strafford}

Whitehall , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,29.114

December 4 , 1711 . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,29.115

My Lord , as I sat down early this morning to begin my dispatches , in
answer to your Excellency's letters of the 8th and 11th , N. S.
{COM:missing_comma} Barlow arrived , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,29.116

and brought me those of the 12th . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,29.117

I must begin by taking notice of those frequent reproaches which I meet
with from your Excellency , as if you was not trusted even in those
matters which belong to the negociation at this time in your hands .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,29.118

I am sorry , my Lord , that my manner of acting is so awkward as to make
me appear reserved , where I endeavour most to be frank .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,29.119

On the other side , your Excellency must allow me to tell you , that you
very frequently over-think the point , imagine great secrets to lie
latent where really there are none ; and , by consequence , blame your
friends for not communicating what they do not know .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,29.120

Besides , there are some things of no small consequence that escape me
in <P_2,30> writing , like the prorogation of the parliament .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,30.121

These become matters of moment in Holland , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,30.122

and your Excellency wonders that you do not hear of them from me .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,30.123

For God's sake , my Lord , lay aside these jealousies ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,30.124

little omissions would be made sometimes by the greatest men , if they
were involved in as much business as the Queen thinks fit to trust to me
, ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,30.125

much more may I be allowed to mistake . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,30.126

The tenor of my conduct shall be always right ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,30.127

and as to your Excellency in particular , I am not conscious to myself
that in the least article I have ever departed from the strictest
friendship , and the most unlimited confidence .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,30.128

You will be of opinion , I believe , when you have read my tedious
relation , that the Queen's servants have left Buys without any reproach
to make . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,30.129

Since he first spoke against the method of proceeding without specific
preliminaries , I do not know that he has either instructions or powers
upon any one article ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,30.130

and yet whenever he has called upon my Lords , to open themselves to him
, they have done it with the utmost frankness . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,30.131

I think your Excellency should take the trouble of talking with the
Pensionary , with <P_2,31> Monsieur Goslinga , and with any others who
may be well intentioned , and yet imposed upon by false alarms , that
you should show them how much better it is to proceed with frankness ,
by which they will entirely gain the Queen , than to endeavour to
overreach us by negociation , in which I hardly believe they will
prevail . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,31.132

Let them remove the danger which we apprehended from the barrier-treaty
by proper expedients ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,31.133

let them consider with themselves , how far they may safely or prudently
yield in this article , and what they must finally insist upon ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,31.134

the Queen is ready not only to join With her best endeavours , but to
declare to the French , that unless her good allies the States are
gratified in these demands , she will think of peace no more , but will
break the negociation , and renew the war . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,31.135

As to the particulars which your Excellency enters into , I must observe
to you , that her Majesty's part in this whole affair is that of a
mediatrice ; and that it will be the address of her Ministers to make
use of occurrences , to act <font> pro re natâ , <$$font> in a great
<P_2,32> measure , to avoid , on one hand , suffering our allies to
break the peace by excessive demands , or by unreasonable difficulties ;
and , on the other hand , to hinder the enemy from imposing on us and
them : ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,32.136

for instance , in my own opinion , I think that if we obtain for the
barrier of the States from France , besides those towns belonging to
Spain which they are to have , Furnes , Ypres , Menin , Tournay , Lisle
, or even the first of these two last , together with the Chatellenies
and countries belonging to them , we make a very good bargain , and such
an one as the Dutch ought to be contented with ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,32.137

at the same time my private opinion is , that we ought , in compliance
to their desires , to endeavour to prevail for more .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,32.138

The project which came some time ago from France is of no manner of use
, ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,32.139

and the knowledge of it could only have an ill effect .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,32.140

The enemy must go a great many lengths further , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,32.141

and intends to do so ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,32.142

but that Court is not able to lay aside their habits of chicane ,
however unreasonable . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,32.143

We deferred sending any answer till we had proceeded with Monsieur Buys
, and till we had farther lights into the pretensions of other allies ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,32.144

<P_2,33>

but now I believe a memorial in reply will be drawn ; and sent to
Monsieur Torcy , sufficient to refute his reasonings ; and to show them
, that they must make larger advances towards the several parties
engaged with us in the present war , if they expect a peace , which may
remove that which has hitherto been the great stumbling block .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,33.146

We have used great firmness towards our confederates ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,33.147

otherwise we could have expected no peace at all .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,33.148

We must exercise the same towards our enemies , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,33.149

otherwise a good peace can@ @not possibly ensue .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,33.150

I send you the project above-mentioned ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,33.151

but as it has never been laid before the Cabinet Council , I must desire
your Excellency never to part with it out of your own custody , nor to
leave a possibility to any man living to know the contents of it .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,33.152

Use both this private dispatch , and the public one , as you think fit ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,33.153

and shew to the Pensionary what you judge proper .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,33.154

On the subject of Prince Eugene , the Queen commands me to tell your
Excellency , that you are to affect to say , that whoever comes from the
Emperor will be welcome to her Majesty , but that his Highness can@ @not
<P_2,34> come over hither without great speculation . - That in this
critical time , when jealousies run so high , the Queen will take no
single measure except in concert with the States ; for which reason ,
every thing will be transacted much more speedily at the Hague than here
. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,34.155

Friday next the peace will be attacked in Parliament , indirectly ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,34.156

I am glad of it , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,34.157

for I hate a distant danger which hovers over my head :
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,34.158

we must receive their fire , and rout them once for all .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,34.159

Adieu , my Lord , &c. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,34.160

{ED:To_the_Earl_of_Strafford}

Whitehall , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,34.162

4th Dec. 1711 . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,34.163

My Lord , after having considered on Friday among themselves in what
manner and method to proceed with Monsieur Buys , the Lords of the
Council met him on Saturday morning at another conference ; where it
fell to my share to tell him , that since the end proposed by these
meetings and debates was to come to a right understanding in each
<P_2,35> others intentions , to settle the principal points of the
future negociation of peace , and to prevent , by a previous concert
between the Queen and the States , any difference which might arise in
the course of the treaty , it was to be wished that his instructions had
been more particular , and his powers more ample , that we might have
treated with him in the Queen's name , and have finally concluded
several points which ought to be decided between us before we come to
the congress ; but , however , to do all that is possible to so good a
purpose on our part , that my Lords of the Council had given me
directions to acquaint him with some of the reflections which they have
made , and with some of the opinions which they are come to , when they
have had amongst themselves the great affair of peace under
consideration . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,35.164

After this introduction , Monsieur Buys was told , that though the
pretence of obtaining a barrier for the States-General be only their
greater security against France , yet my Lords observed , that by the
treaty between her Majesty and his masters , as it now stands , infinite
prejudice may arise to the trade of Great Britain in the Spanish
Netherlands : ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,35.165

by the <P_2,36> 15th article of this treaty , in consequence of what is
stipulated in the treaty of Munster , article the 14th , her Majesty
engages that commerce shall not be rendered , directly or indirectly ,
more easy by the sea-ports of Flanders than by the river of Schelde and
by the canals on the side of the Seven Provinces .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,36.166

My Lords took notice , that here was a very great , and a very unfair
omission , since although , when the treaty of Munster was made , in
which , by the way , Britain had little or no share , and as long as the
neighbouring countries are in the possession of Spain , France , or any
third power , this article was , and will be , equal and reasonable ;
yet the case becomes widely altered when considerable parts of these
provinces are to {TEXT:missing_"to"} be put into the hands of the Dutch
. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,36.167

The question was illustrated by this instance : ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,36.168

a British merchant imports by Ostend , and a Dutch merchant by the
Schelde , two pieces of cloth , of the same value , and paying the same
duty . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,36.169

They carry afterwards this cloth <P_2,37> to Lisle , which is in the
hands of the French , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,37.170

and there again they pay such a duty as , by the tariffs of France , is
established . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,37.171

In all this , there is no partiality whatsoever :
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,37.172

and thus far , and no farther , would the treaty of Munster affect our
commerce . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,37.173

But when Lisle shall belong to the States-General , as by the
barrier-treaty it is to do , then may the Dutch merchant , who imported
his cloth by the Schelde , enter the same , perhaps , custom-free , at
this town , whilst a high duty , or even a prohibition , may be laid
upon that cloth which the British merchant imported by Ostend .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,37.174

Upon these considerations , and many more which were urged , my Lords
told Monsieur Buys , very frankly , their opinion was , that if the
States expected the Queen should , in good earnest , and with vigour ,
support the treaty of barrier , and their demands both of France and of
the House of Austria upon that head , they ought to enter into a
previous and formal engagement , that the subjects of Great Britain
shall trade on as free and advantageous foot to all the countries and
places , which shall become , by virtue of any former or any future
treaty , the barrier of the States-General , as <P_2,38> they did in the
time of the late King of Spain , Charles the Second , or as the subjects
of the States-General themselves shall do . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,38.175

The omission of this was certainly a very great defect in the treaty
made by my Lord Townshend . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,38.176

And it was represented to Monsieur Buys , that we hoped the States would
never scruple rectifying a mistake so injurious to that nation , without
the blood and treasure of which , they could have had no barrier at all
. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,38.177

Upon this Monsieur Buys attempted to say a good deal , by way of
compliment , and extenuation ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,38.178

but being unable to answer the reasons that were urged , he at last
acquiesced ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,38.179

and said , that on the hints which had been given him before , he had
already writ for instructions , by which to govern himself in this case
. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,38.180

We proceeded next to the article of commerce ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,38.181

and my Lords agreed with the Envoy , that it was reasonable her Majesty
should insist upon , and endeavour to obtain for the States , what is
stipulated in their favour by the treaty of Ryswick , the tarif of 1664
, the suppression of all posterior tarifs , and edicts repugnant
thereunto , and the exemption <P_2,39> of fifty pence per ton ; the
whole to be so settled as not to be exclusive of Britain .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,39.182

Our discourse concerning the barrier , was divided into three parts : as
to those places which were demanded of France by the 22d article of the
preliminaries , and which were yielded by the project sent by Monsieur
de Torcy , in January , 1710 ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,39.183

and as to those of Douay , Bethune , St. Venant , Aire , and Bouchain ,
which have been since that time conquered , my Lords made no difficulty
to agree with Monsieur Buys , that they ought to be insisted upon .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,39.184

But there was some dispute on the last point relating to this article ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,39.185

my Lords thought the Queen might agree to concur with the states in
obtaining for them the <font> jus praesidii <$$font> in those places ,
which did belong to the late king of Spain Charles the Second , at the
time of his death , provided such of them were excepted , as would
render the trade of Britain to the Spanish Low-Countries precarious ,
and even put it into the power of the States , whenever they thought fit
, to shut that door upon <P_2,40> us . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,40.186

Monsieur Buys asserting that there was no colour for this exception ,
affecting to fear that under this pretence we might , to use his own
expression , <font> rasler tout le reste , <$$font> and insisting that
some particular instance should be produced ; Newport was named to him
directly , and the Castle of Ghent and Dendermond , touched upon .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,40.187

The substance of what he said was this : that he hoped the Queen would
not , from imaginary fears , expose the States to a real danger ; that
we were under a panic terror , that in settling the barrier , a security
against France had been the sole view , and that they had never had the
least thought in Holland of improving their own commerce , or of
prejudicing ours thereby ; that it were to be wished , that Ostend had
been included in their barrier , but that since the tide of this nation
run strongly against it , they had contented themselves with Newport ;
that France might attack them hereafter by sea , and therefore , that
the last-named place was necessary for their defence ; that they could
not support their barrier , unless their communication with it was
secured to them ; and that , in this respect also , the places which my
Lords <P_2,41> seemed to object to , were absolutely necessary ; that
they had already , in the Elector of Bavaria , had one fatal instance ,
what mischief the treachery of a governor , in the Spanish Low-Countries
may bring upon them ; and , therefore , that he thought the safety of
Holland , and of Britain too , required that all these places should be
given up to the Dutch , without any exception . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,41.188

The reply to this reasoning was , that we could not look upon these
fears to be imaginary , because some things had passed already , which
pointed towards that evil , which we apprehend ; that if , even now ,
they can@ @not forbear making use of the barrier , which they are in
possession of , to infest our commerce , we have reason to expect much
worse , whenever they shall be in the quiet possession of it ; that this
might prove an eternal ball of dissension between two nations , whose
happiness depends upon their union , and was , therefore , by early ,
moderate , <P_2,42> and prudent measures , to be provided against : that
it was true , the tide of the nation had run against putting Ostend into
the hand of the Dutch ; that whenever the present case came to be known
, the same tide would , for the same reason , run against the other
places mentioned ; and that our people would look upon themselves to
have been lulled asleep , and imposed upon by the cession of Ostend ,
and the retention of what may be equally prejudicial to them ; that the
panic terror which he objected to us , might , much more justly , be
retorted on him , since the arguments were built on such suppositions ,
as could hardly be made in earnest ; that those arguments like wise
proved too much , which was as great a fault as proving too little , for
that by the same rule , Ostend and Antwerp ought to be given to them ,
to prevent an invasion of France , and all the rest of the Spanish
Low-Countries , to prevent other Governors from doing what the Elector
of Bavaria once did ; that when we came to press the Emperor to make
good the treaty of barrier to them , we should have a very ill grace in
making use of a supposition , that the persons , to whose government
under him , these <P_2,43> countries and towns are to be trusted , will
prove a pack of traitors ; , that , in short , Monsieur Buys would be in
the right , if the sovereignty of the Spanish Low_Countries was to be
yielded to an enemy , but that his arguments are of no force , when it
is to be given to a friend . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,42.189

Upon the whole matter , we at last centered in this proposition : that
the States ought to have whatever is really essential to the security of
their barrier against France , but no more ; and that some amicable
expedient should be found for removing our fears , and settling the
interest of Britain upon this last head . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,42.190

Valenciennes , which is mentioned in the barrier treaty , but specified
neither in the preliminary articles , nor in the project of 1710 , was
taken notice of , and agreed to be insisted on , like the rest .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,42.191

When the conference had proceeded thus far , Monsieur Buys was told ,
that though the Queen , my Lords made no doubt , would insist upon all
these points , in behalf of her allies the States , yet they believed
her Majesty looked upon his masters to be too reasonable to break off
the treaty , rather than not obtain the utmost of their demands ;
<P_2,44> that it was impossible the ultimatum , from whence there could
be no receding , should be settled here , unless he was instructed to
speak upon that subject ; that , sooner or later , that point ought to
be concerted , and that whenever it was , he might depend on the Queen's
showing as much firmness , as the States themselves could desire ; that
we understood her Majesty's opinion to be , that the best way of
securing the common interest in the future treaty , and of preventing
that danger , which Monsieur Buys has so frequently represented , the
division of the allies by the artifices of the French , in the course of
a long negociation , was to concert between the Queen's ministers , and
those of the States , with a due regard and decency to the other
confederates , such a plan , as might amount to a safe and honourable
peace . In which case , as soon as it appeared proper , the French
plenipotentiary who is in the whole secret of his court , might be told
, that it would be vain to amuse each other any longer ; that on such
terms , the peace would be immediately concluded ; and that the
conferences must cease , if they were not <P_2,45> without delay , and
without exception , granted . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,44.192

After this we proceeded to speak of the interests of the Duke of Savoy ,
of the King of Portugal , of the Elector of Hanover , and of the barrier
of the empire ; in all which , there was no dispute concerning what the
Queen and States ought jointly to insist upon . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,44.193

And now , my Lord , I think we have gone farther with the Minister of
the States , than could have been expected from us , since he was only
empowered to hear and not to speak . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,44.194

I must not conclude this relation without observing to you , that
Monsieur Buys did , in recapitulating what had passed , more than once ,
although he was interrupted , and set right , repeat <font> sans quoi la
Reine ne fera point la paix . <$$font> ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,44.195

We used this expression , <font> la Reine insistera dessus ; <$$font>
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,44.196

and whenever they please , we are ready to use the other .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,44.197

Monsieur Buys has not said the least syllable about the plan of a treaty
concerted here , and put into his hands . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,44.198

Two separate articles to that alliance might perhaps adjust all our
difference about the barrier . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,44.199

<P_2,46>

My letter is already grown to an immeasurable size , for which reason I
will say nothing to your Excellency upon other heads of business , but
conclude by subscribing myself , My Lord , &c. H. St. John .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,46.201

{ED:To_the_Earl_of_Strafford}

Whitehall , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,46.203

December 7th , 1711 . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,46.204

My Lord , upon what your Excellency writes in your letter of the 8th , I
directed search to be made in the books remaining in my office , about
the style given to the Elector of Treves , and to the Duke of Wirtemberg
in her Majesty's letters to them , concerning which their Ministers at
the Hague had made their complaint to you . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,46.205

I find the style to the Elector of Treves , as likewise to the Elector
of Mentz , as Ecclesiastical Electors , has been constantly , ever since
the time of King Charles II , <font> Celsissimo et Eminentissimo
Principi <$$font> and the same style was followed to this present
Elector <P_2,47> having no precedent of any other ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,47.206

his style when he was Bishop of Osnabrug , was <font> Reverendissimo &
Celsissimo Principi , <$$font> without the word <font> Serenissimus ,
<$$font> ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,47.207

and no complaint , as I hear of , was ever made .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,47.208

He has now the style of Elector and Bishop joined ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,47.209

and if his quality , as a younger Prince of the family of Lorrain ,
entitles him to any thing more than what is given to an ecclesiastical
Elector , his minister will please to set forth his pretensions , with
the titles he receives from Princes of the same rank with her Majesty ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,47.210

and they shall be considered . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,47.211

What Monsieur Heespen alledged as to his master , the Duke of Wirtemberg
, is true in that particular letter , which was his recredential in
April , 1697 ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,47.212

it is entered with the style of <font> Serenissimus ; <$$font>
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,47.213

but it does not appear how that change came to be made then , or why it
was not followed ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,47.214

for all the letters to that Duke , both before and since that time ,
have had no other title but <font> Illustrissimus & Celsissimus ,
<$$font> ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,47.215

and no representation has been made upon it , till the complaint lately
mentioned by your Excellency . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,47.216

I refer myself to the next post for what <P_2,48> I have farther to say
; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,48.217

and am , with much respect , My Lord , &c. H. St. John .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,48.218

{ED:To_the_Earl_of_Strafford}

Whitehall , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,48.220

December 8th , 1711 . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,48.221

My Lord , the fatigue of yesterday was so great , that I was not very
fit , after the rising of the House , to dispatch my letters ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,48.222

and besides I was willing to see the Queen again to-day , before I writ
to your Excellency upon a subject which is of such unspeakable
importance . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,48.223

My Lord Treasurer@ @'s narration informs <P_2,49> you of what passed in
the two houses : of the additional words proposed in each ; of <P_2,50>
the adverse party's prevailing by two in the Upper , and of their losing
it by 126 in the <P_2,51> Lower House ; of the cabals of the foreign
Ministers against the Queen , particularly of Buys and Bothmar ; and of
the distribution of money , in which the last of these was actually
concerned . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,49.224

Your Excellency will please , leaving out the circumstance of money , to
speak of this event as produced by a trick , and which therefore will
turn upon the contrivers of it , and upon the actors in it .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,49.225

You will please to show great dryness and reserve to the Pensionary ,
and to the Dutch Ministers , letting them know that the Queen thinks
herself ill treated , and that they will soon hear what effects these
measures will have on a mild and good temper , wrought up by repeated
provocations to resentment ; that they may have the war <P_2,52>
continue if they please ; but the Queen will not be forced to make it
after their manner ; neither will she suffer them to make her peace , or
to settle the interests of her kingdoms . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,52.226

Your accounts , your Excellency will please to say , are short , having
been dispatched in haste ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,52.227

by the next post , you may insinuate , that you expect farther orders .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,52.228

As to Prince Eugene , and his journey hither , the Queen commands me to
repeat her orders to your Excellency , that you should say to every one
, and even to him , that the other allies , and not her Majesty , want
exhortations to increase their efforts ; and that the Queen will concert
nothing upon the scheme of the war here ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,52.229

let the project be agreed abroad , and her Majesty's resolutions upon
them will be soon taken , and soon signified . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,52.230

In short , your Excellency is to discourage as much as possible , this
Prince from coming over . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,52.231

It is high time to put a stop to this foreign influence on British
councils ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,52.232

and we must either emancipate ourselves now , or be for ever slaves .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,52.233

My Lord , I write to you without reserve , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,52.234

<P_2,53>

the occasion requires it , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,53.236

and my friendship exacts no less . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,53.237

The whole turns on the Queen's resolution ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,53.238

if she has vigour and firmness enough to assert her own dignity , she
will unite the bulk of the nation in her interest , and leave the
faction nothing but impotent malice , wherewith to torment themselves ,
but not to hurt her , or those who serve her . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,53.239

It is inconceivable how much mankind is alarmed at Bothmar's memorial ,
and at his conduct ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,53.240

once more , if she is true to herself , the success of the Whigs in the
House of Lords will be their ruin and her salvation .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,53.241

I hope she will , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,53.242

I believe she will ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,53.243

and by the next post your Excellency will know what has passed ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,53.244

for the crisis is come , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,53.245

and the delay can@ @not be longer . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,53.246

In the mean time , my Lord , be assured that you are joined to men who
have acted <P_2,54> honestly , and have therefore all the assurance and
courage which become men conscious of merit ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,54.247

we are determined to stand and fall together , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,54.248

and your Excellency will in all cases be satisfied that you was not
deceived when you engaged with us . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,54.249

I would trust these letters to no conveyance but that of a messenger ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,54.250

be pleased to keep Barlow till you have received my Tuesday's letters ,
and then dispatch him back . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,54.251

I am , for ever , &c. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,54.252

{ED:To_the_Earl_of_Strafford}

Whitehall , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,54.254

Dec. 12th , 1711 . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,54.255

My Lord , I kept the messenger till to-day , that I might be able to
write more fully to your Excellency upon a subject , and at a time when
you can@ @not fail to be under some uneasiness .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,54.256

It will be agreeable to know that her Majesty's resolution is at last
taken ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,54.257

the <P_2,55> particulars I am not able to inform you of ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,55.258

but an entire turn will be made in favour of those who have obeyed and
served her , and in opposition to those who have used her own power
against herself , and upon whom her moderation had no other effect than
to render them more implacable . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,55.259

I take it for granted that the changes will begin at the right end ,
that is to say at the top . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,55.260

This spirit , exerted and continued , will retrieve the Queen's
reputation , which one set of people has made it their business to
depress ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,55.261

will give her measures their due weight abroad , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,55.262

and will make her servants safe in the execution of her commands at home
. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,55.263

The courier , which your Excellency's letters of the 18th prepared us
for , is arrived ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,55.264

and Mr. Hoffman , the Imperial Resident , having yesterday called me
out of the Committee of Council , told me , that he desired a yatch and
convoy might be ordered to attend Prince Eugene , who is coming over ,
with letters from the Emperor to the Queen . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,55.265

I promised to lay before her Majesty what he communicated to me ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,55.266

but I told him , at the same time , that I had already orders <P_2,56>
to say , that Prince Eugene was a man for whom the Queen had a very
great regard , and that he would be always welcome at her Court ; that ,
however , if he came to settle any scheme about the war , his intended
journey would be fruitless , since her Majesty has determined to act
herein no otherwise than in concert with the allies ; that this concert
must be made on the other side of the water , where the deficiency lay ,
and where the want of vigour was justly to be complained of ; that our
preparations for another campaign were going forward as usual ; that if
the war , particularly in Spain , went on , it must for the future be a
common cause in reality , and not in words only ; and therefore till the
Queen saw what the Emperor and Dutch , &c. were ready to do , that she
would not promise or engage for any thing . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,56.267

In short , I said so much to Hoffman , that he replied he understood me
very well , and that the Prince would not be welcome to the Queen ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,56.268

I told him , that if the Prince had a mind to divert himself at London ,
we would do our utmost to entertain him ; and that for my own part , I
would endeavour to treat him <font> chère entière , <$$font> <P_2,57>
but that I must repeat that we should not be allowed to concert or
settle with him any project , for the reasons above-mentioned .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,57.269

Your Excellency sees by this account , what language is used ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,57.270

and you will please to speak in the same style ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,57.271

for though we are not afraid of seeing this Prince , nor of any efforts
which the new confederacy can make , yet it is for the Queen's , and for
the public service to take all possible measures towards bringing the
present ferment to subside , instead of allowing fresh fuel to be thrown
into the flame . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,57.272

Your Excellency sees by my other letter , all that passed with Monsieur
Buys last night ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,57.273

it was thought proper to show him , how little these artifices would
avail , and how impossible it is for the foreign ministers , and a
faction , whose only support is the public distress , to run counter to
the sense of the nation , and the declared intention of the Queen .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,57.274

All that you have said of this Pensionary is true .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,57.275

For God's sake , my Lord , speak to those on whom you judge it will have
a <P_2,58> good effect ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,58.276

tell them plainly , that they are upon a wrong scent ; that their
Minister here mistakes ; that we have promised and will perform all that
they can ask of us relating to their barrier , and to their trade ; and
that Mr. Buys is very unfair in his proceeding , if he has not told
them as much : but that we proceed , in some respects , on a new scheme
of politics ; that we will no longer struggle for impossibilities , nor
be bantered by words ; that this country comes every day more and more
to its senses ; and that the single dispute now is , whether they will
join with a faction against the Queen , or with the nation for her ?
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,58.277

It is now several months ago , since letters of mine , to this effect ,
as well as of my Lord Treasurer , have been writ , in order to be shown
to Pensionary Heinsius and to Monsieur Buys . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,58.278

The latter trots on in the old path , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,58.279

wants sagacity to discern , and resolution to take at once the true pli
; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,58.280

the other has more genius , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,58.281

and I hope better from him . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,58.282

Be pleased , my Lord , to add , that these representations are made ,
and these pains are taken by your Excellency there , and by your
fellow-servants here , not <P_2,59> from any want that we have of a
foreign interest to support us . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,59.283

They have in Holland been courted by a faction , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,59.284

and they have condescended to the jobs of that faction ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,59.285

we ask nothing of that kind from them , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,59.286

and it is for their sake that we press them into these measures .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,59.287

Mr. Buys has , I find by him , received full powers to sign the treaty
between the Queen and the States ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,59.288

but he mentions to me another point , which I wonder not a little at :
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,59.289

- his masters are , he says , desirous that a private article should be
added , <font> sub spe rati , <$$font> concerning those terms of peace ,
without which we may stipulate not to agree with the enemy .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,59.290

Now , my Lord , this character , as well as the manner in which he is
impowered to treat , will not allow the Queen to enter into engagements
of this sort . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,59.291

Besides , the congress approaches , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,59.292

and there is not time to settle an ultimatum ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,59.293

and we must expect some satisfaction to those objections upon that
infamous treaty of barrier , before we go farther in tying ourselves
down to Holland . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,59.294

I have , my Lord , in this , and in my former letters , spoke to your
Excellency as <P_2,60> clearly as I am capable of doing ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,60.295

and I shall be sorry if you are not of opinion that our conduct is very
direct . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,60.296

I do not know that we have been four months in treaty with France ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,60.297

I know indeed that it is nine months since we were applied to from
thence , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,60.298

but the intervals of inaction have been long . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,60.299

We have offered very fair to the Dutch ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,60.300

but , my Lord , they must behave themselves to the Queen , as becomes
them to do to a Princess who has nothing to ask of them , and from whom
they have every thing to expect . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,60.301

Your Excellency's intelligence about the memorials , may be right ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,60.302

two indeed I have seen from Louis d'Aenha , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,60.303

but both were in a very submissive style ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,60.304

and I hope your Excellency will let the minister you mention know , that
the nation is with the ministry ; and that the farther this matter is
pressed , and the conduct of the allies opened , the <P_2,61> more
strength we shall have . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,61.305

But enough of this , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,61.306

wise men foresee , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,61.307

and take their measures , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,61.308

the weak are only taught by experience . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,61.309

I am , my Lord , &c. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,61.310

I begin to-morrow to prepare your instructions for the congress ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,61.311

I have solicited your allowances in the manner you desired ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,61.312

and they are granted ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,61.313

the warrants are gone out of my hands . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,61.314

{ED:To_the_Earl_of_Strafford}

Whitehall , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,61.316

December 12th , 1711 . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,61.317

My Lord , the inclosed letter from Monsieur de Torcy arrived on Sunday
last , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,61.318

and whilst the Cabinet was sitting on Monday , I received your
Excellency's of the 18th of this month . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,61.319

There can be no doubt of the Queen's ordering a yatch and convoy for
Prince Eugene , which Monsieur Hoffman solicits .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,61.320

But I doubt it will be impossible to come to <P_2,62> any agreement on
this side of the water , about the next year's war .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,62.321

The manner in which your Excellency reasoned with this Prince , and the
arguments you made use of , are approved by her Majesty .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,62.322

You will please to go on to use the same language whenever the same
occasion offers ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,62.323

and we must hope , that our friends on your side of the water will be
glad to have us for allies , when by our steadiness to these measures
they are once persuaded that we will be no longer dupes .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,62.324

As to the Count de Gallas , and the conduct which it may be proper for
your Excellency to observe towards him , I think , on one hand , that a
person who is so much under the displeasure of the Queen , your mistress
, has no title to your intimacy ; and on the other , that if he is
received at the Hague , as the Emperor's Minister , your Excellency can@
@not refuse , however coldly , to treat him as such .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,62.325

Upon the subject of the renewal of the treaty with Prussia , I
understand the Queen's pleasure to be , to pay the arrear which they
demand , if she can by no tolerable shift avoid it .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,62.326

But the imposition is so gross , <P_2,63> that I believe she will comply
with reluctancy ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,63.327

and the longer you Excellency puts it off , and the better terms you can
get at last , in consideration of it , the more agreeably you will serve
her Majesty . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,63.328

Del Borgo has acted like a minister of Savoy ; that is , very prudently
in adhering to your Excellency , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,63.329

but in putting off the house which he has hired at Utrecht , he would
have been very ridiculous ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,63.330

and I can@ @not help thinking this affectation and grimace .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,63.331

At a conference which was held last night , with Monsieur Buys , the
answer received from France was communicated to him .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,63.332

Your Excellency will be surprized to hear , that although the
declaration is made in terms full as strong as those in which it was
demanded , yet this minister objected to it , upon account of those
words in the preamble to the fourth article , <font> sans attendre les
ministres du Roi d'Espagne , qui ne peuvent arriver que de très
long-tems , n'étant pas encore partis de Madrid . <$$font>
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,63.333

He pretended that this was an artifice of France , and that some mighty
mischief was latent under it . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,63.334

I confess to you , my Lord , <P_2,64> the reproach of chicane was turned
upon him , and he was told , that provided the enemy submitted to our
demands , the Queen would concern herself very little what reasons
induced them to do so . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,64.335

He was afterwards asked , whether he thought it yet time to deliver the
passports ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,64.336

and this morning he filled them up , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,64.337

and put them into my hands . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,64.338

The conference lasted some time longer , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,64.339

but nothing more worth your Excellency's notice occurred .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,64.340

The inclosed extract of a letter which I have received from the
Post-master_General , answers a point which your Excellency writ to me
upon , some time ago . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,64.341

I am , &c. H. St. John . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,64.342

<P_2,69>

{ED:To_the_Earl_of_Strafford}

Whitehall , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,69.345

15th Dec. 1711 . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,69.346

My Lord , by Barton , who arrived this morning , I had the honour to
receive your Excellency's dispatches of the 22nd of this month .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,69.347

I send the same messenger back to you , not knowing what occasion you
have of him , and being unwilling to trust any of my letters at this
time to the common conveyance . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,69.348

The Committee of Council not sitting till to-morrow night , nor the
Cabinet till Monday , I can have at present materials but for a very
short letter . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,69.349

On Tuesday , your Excellency may expect that I shall fully inform you of
the Queen's sense , in every particular . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,69.350

<P_2,70>

With this packet , you will receive the full powers , by which your
Excellency is authorised to renew the several treaties for troops .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,70.352

As to the battalions of Treves and Ottingez , I shall be able to speak
with more certainty the next time I write ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,70.353

only as to the latter , I can now say , that we shall have no occasion
for it another year , unless the Saxons , or some troops at present in
the Queen's service , are withdrawn , and it become {COM:sic} by
consequence necessary to hire others , in order to replace them .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,70.354

The five battalions , which were drawn last Spring out of Flanders ,
were part of seven which we had in that country , over and above our
quota , so that we are under no obligation of sending others in their
stead . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,70.355

But if her Majesty should think fit to supply that number , those very
regiments are now recruiting in Britain , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,70.356

and may be made use of for that service . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,70.357

The passports for the French Plenipotentiaries , have been put by
Monsieur Buys into my hands , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,70.358

and I have received her Majesty's orders to dispatch them , this evening
, into France . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,70.359

They will probably come just <P_2,71> in time , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,71.360

and that is all which can be expected ; so that one great fear , which
the Pensionary of Amsterdam had , is over , and we are no longer in
danger of those fatal consequences , which would have followed <paren>
according to him <$$paren> if the French Minister could have arrived in
Utrecht , sooner than those of the allies were ready .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,71.361

The full powers for the Lord Privy Seal , and for your Excellency , who
are the only two ministers whom the Queen has thought fit as yet to name
, were this morning signed . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,71.362

Your joint instructions will be ready by Tuesday .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,71.363

The treaties and other papers necessary for your information , are
almost all got together , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,71.364

and some time in the next week , make no doubt , but the Bishop will set
forward . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,71.365

If Prince Eugene intends still to come over , the convoy and yatch which
passes upon this occasion , may serve him . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,71.366

I am , &c. H. St. John . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,71.367

I had almost forgot to tell your Excellency , that I send you copies of
the French and Dutch passports , by comparing of which , <P_2,72> your
Excellency will observe that the Dutch passport is only to come to
Utrecht , whereas that of France is , <font> d'aller & venir <$$font> ;
and that some material words are likewise omitted in that of the States
, by which the ministers have power to give copies of their passport ,
which shall be a security to any person belonging to them , in coming
and going . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,72.368

I send you likewise a copy of my letter to Monsieur de Torcy ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,72.369

and hope that these defects , if desired , will be supplied .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,72.370

<P_2,73>

{ED:To_the_Earl_of_Strafford}

Whitehall , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,73.373

December 15 , 1711 . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,73.374

My Lord , You are in the right , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,73.375

we are the worst politicians , and the best party-men under the sun .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,73.376

Those who oppose the Queen's measures , know , as well as we who pursue
them , that the war is become impracticable ; that the end which they
pretend to aim at , is chimerical ; and that they ruin their country by
driving on this vain , gaudy scheme , which has so many years dazzled
our eyes : ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,73.377

but they venture this , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,73.378

and would sacrifice more , if more can be sacrificed , in order to
regain , <P_2,74> dominion , which nothing can give , at least secure in
their hands , but national distress . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,74.379

The true , real , genuine strength of Britain , belongs to other people
; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,74.380

their power is built upon an adventitious strength , created by the
public necessity , and nursed up by the advantage which dexterous men
have taken , and which they will be able to take no longer when the war
ceases . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,74.381

Now my pen is in my hand , I can@ @not forbear saying , that I sincerely
think this the most important conjuncture , that any Prince has been in
, since the time that your Excellency's ancestor was attacked by the
faction which begun with him , and did not conclude their tragedy even
with his master . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,74.382

That king sealed the warrant of his own execution , when he gave up his
servant , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,74.383

and our mistress has no way of securing herself , but exerting her power
to protect her ministers , who have rescued her from domestic bondage ,
and are going on to relieve her from foreign oppression .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,74.384

I will never deceive you , <P_2,75> my Lord , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,75.385

I would not do it , even in the most pardonable , the most agreeable
manner , by concealing real dangers , and giving false hopes ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,75.386

you may therefore , depend upon me when I tell you that I think all safe
, and the Queen determined . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,75.387

The only difficulty she laboured under , besides a little natural
slowness , was the habit which she has with the Duchess of Somerset ,
and the apprehension of not finding somebody to fill a place so near her
person , whom she could like . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,75.388

I need make no apology for entering so minutely into these matters since
your Excellency is too much engaged in the Queen's cause , not to be
desirous of knowing every particular how it fares .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,75.389

The Queen was much pleased with your Excellency's bait for Prince Eugene
, ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,75.390

and if he comes over , nothing can be , in my opinion , more proper ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,75.391

but upon the whole matter , it is better he should stay where he is .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,75.392

The faction would show him about , and make him their tool many ways ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,75.393

and though I have no apprehensions of any effort they <P_2,76> can make
, provided the Queen be true to herself , yet they are capable of any
thing ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,76.394

neither tumults , nor the consequences of them , would stop their
measures , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,76.395

and it is our business to keep the ferment as long as we can at home ,
while we are carrying on so great a work . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,76.396

Your Excellency will have seen by my dispatches , what style Monsieur
Buys ought to have writ to his masters in , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,76.397

and nothing has passed with him , of which I have not given you constant
and exact relations . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,76.398

Buys has , I know , dropped , that upon condition we would yield to let
the Dutch into half the advantages of trade which we are to have , he
would undertake to procure a resolution of the States , counter to that
of our House of Lords ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,76.399

but this is a meanness which those who have the honour to serve the
Queen , are incapable of submitting to . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,76.400

Let the peace be a good one for Holland , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,76.401

but let it be most advantageous for Britain , who suffered most by the
war . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,76.402

I hope your Excellency will be able to <P_2,77> make our friends at
Amsterdam , and in other places , concur more heartily and more openly
with you ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,77.403

let them think for themselves of the particulars , which will compose a
secure barrier ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,77.404

there is no plan which a Dutchman , who sincerely desires the peace ,
can form upon this head , into which the Queen will not very readily
come . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,77.405

Assure them of this , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,77.406

and fear not being disavowed ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,77.407

but tell them at the same time , that they must walk uprightly with the
Queen . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,77.408

In point of commerce , your Excellency sees what the Queen has promised
to insist upon , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,77.409

and I can assure you , her word will be kept . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,77.410

The passports go to-night to France ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,77.411

what Buys means , by saying the delay was occasioned by an objection
started in our Cabinet , I can@ @not imagine ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,77.412

he proposed the step , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,77.413

the whole council thought it unnecessary , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,77.414

and at last agreed with him , purely out of complaisance .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,77.415

You will have found this matter stated in former letters of mine .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,77.416

For God's sake , make no scruple about the number of messengers whom you
send , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,77.417

leave <P_2,78> always as little to hazard as is possible ;
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,78.418

I shall dispatch another to you on Tuesday . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,78.419

I have not time yet to read over the book which you are pleased to
transmit ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,78.420

I fear , if it should be worth an answer , that we have no one capable
of doing it , whom I should care to trust . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,78.421

My good Lord , adieu , I am , etc. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,78.422

{ED:To_the_Earl_of_Peterborough}

December 15th , 1711 . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,78.424

My Lord , I beg of you to believe , that if you have been longer without
letters from me than usual , it has been owing to no reason but the
uncertainty whither to send safely , and the daily expectation of
writing by a courier , who I thought would have carried you dispatches
from the other office . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,78.425

<P_2,79>

The suspense which the intrigues of our confederates , and the allies
here , have kept us in , has been prodigious . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,79.427

I hope , by perseverance , we shall settle into some measure for peace
or war , at last . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,79.428

If you come over , I shall embrace you with the greatest pleasure , and
open such a scene to you , as will make you think , if possible , of
some people worse than you do already ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,79.429

if you do not come home yet , I will transmit to you in cypher , the
clearest account I can of our secret history . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,79.430

Your nephew , Mr. Mordaunt , I have had the honour to introduce to the
Queen , to whom he presented a letter from the Duke of Savoy .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,79.431

He is worthy of your family . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,79.432

I never knew a prettier youth , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,79.433

my best services shall attend him . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,79.434

I am , &c. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,79.435

<P_2,80>

{ED:To_the_Earl_of_Strafford}

Whitehall , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,80.438

Dec. 18th , 1711 . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,80.439

My Lord , though the Committee of Council sat extremely late this
evening , I can@ @not neglect writing a few lines , to give you an
account of a passage which is pretty extraordinary .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,80.440

Monsieur Buys being with my Lord Privy Seal , the Earl of Dartmouth ,
and myself , this morning , in order to sign the treaty , whereof your
Excellency will receive a copy , let himself in to say , that he thought
we ought , in respect to the friendship between the two nations , to
acquaint him with the advantages which have been stipulated for Great
Britain ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,80.441

and he looked upon his country to be entitled by treaty , to share them
with us . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,80.442

He added , that there was another reason , why we should at present be
still more inclined to comply with him , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,80.443

for since the resolution of the House of Lords , he took it for granted
, it would be a hazardous point for us to give up Spain ; and there_fore
, that we would do well to induce the States to help us out of this
difficulty . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,80.444

I <P_2,81> took up this harangue with some real , but more affected ,
warmth ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,81.445

and told him , that there was not any man in the Queen's council capable
of so great a <font> lâcheté <$$font> ; that any thing injurious to
Holland , any thing which might justly tend to break the good
correspondence between us , would , I am confident , be at all times
readily departed from , but that we scorned to screen ourselves at the
expence of our country ; that the resolution he mentioned , and which
was in a great measure owing to foreign ministers intermeddling in our
affairs , might , and I believed would have an effect , which the
projectors of it had not foreseen ; that if the peace was rendered
impracticable , the House of Commons would certainly put the war on
another foot , and reduce the public expence to such a compass , as our
treaties in the strictest sense requires , and as we are able to bear ;
after which the partisans for war , must see , how to supply the
deficiency . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,81.446

I found this reply had its effect upon him , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,81.447

and I believe the same language may be of use , on some occasions ,
where your Excellency is . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,81.448

I am , &c ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,81.449

<P_2,82>

{ED:To_the_Earl_of_Strafford}

Whitehall , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,82.452

December 18th , 1711 . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,82.453

My Lord , I have only time , by this night's post , to transmit to your
Excellency the inclosed copy of the treaty signed this morning between
her Majesty and the States-General ; in which your Excellency will
observe , that the mention of the former alliances between these two
nations is omitted ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,82.454

and , indeed , since the Emperor and other Princes and States are to be
invited to become parties thereof , it would have been absurd to have
stipulated a revival and confirmation of treaties , with which they have
no concern . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,82.455

The <font> brouillon <$$font> of the instructions for the Congress has
been read to_night ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,82.456

and will on Thursday be finally settled . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,82.457

By Friday's post your Excellency shall not fail to receive them .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,82.458

My Lord Privy Seal will set forward about that time ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,82.459

but whether he gets over soon enough or not , I judge that the Queen's
<P_2,83> intention will be , that your Excellency should repair to
Utrecht by the 12th of January , N. S. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,83.460

I am , &c. H. St. John . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,83.461

<P_2,85>

{ED:To_the_Earl_of_Strafford}

Whitehall , ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,85.464

December 21st , 1711 . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,85.465

My Lord , the Queen got cold yesterday in the House of Lords ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,85.466

and has a little fit of the gout , which will hinder me from dispatching
the messenger , as I intended to have done , by this packet .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,85.467

My Lord Privy Seal sets out on Monday . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,85.468

Buys will , I believe , have his last audience on Sunday .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,85.469

The address of the House of Commons will show how far those are from
obtaining their aim , who thought hindering the peace was a true and
effectual method to make us continue the war on the old foot .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,85.470

It is a misfortune that the enemy should see Britain determined to
contract her expences ; ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,85.471

but they must be blamed who have brought the Parliament to this temper ,
and who have made it reasonable for the Ministers not to oppose the
measure . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,85.472

Instead of cabaling with our factions , had the allies treated with the
Queen , we should all have found our account better in it .
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,85.473

I believe , however , that nothing will contribute more to determine the
Dutch and the Imperialist <P_2,86> to make peace than a conviction that
they are going to lose their bubbles . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,86.474

Your Excellency will believe that I was surprized when Bonet told me
to-day , that the King of Prussia must demand 100,000 crowns more <font>
per_annum <$$font> for his troops in Italy , which will bring the whole
expence of the corps to 500,000 crowns a year . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,86.475

The two Houses will adjourn to-morrow for a fortnight ,
ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,86.476

and I hope , that during the recess , the Queen will settle her
government . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,86.477

She has had experience sufficient how essentially necessary it is to do
so . ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,86.478

I am , &c. ST-JOHN-1711-2,2,86.479

