<BEGIN_statutes-171x-1>

<P_5,50>

<heading>

Anno Regni Georgii Regis Magnae Britanniae , Franciae & Hiberniae ,
primo . STATUTES-171X-1,5,50.4

<$$heading>

At the Parliament begun and holden at <font> Westminster <$$font> the
seventeenth Day of <font> March , Anno Domini <$$font>
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_fourteen , in the first Year of the Reign
of our Sovereign Lord George , by the Grace of God of <font> Great
Britain , France <$$font> , and <font> Ireland <$$font> , King ,
Defender of the Faith , <font> &c <$$font> , being the first Session of
this present Parliament : And from thence continued by several
Adjournments to the ninth Day of <font> January <$$font>
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_fifteen , in the second Year of his
Majesty's Reign . STATUTES-171X-1,5,50.6

<heading>

Cap. XXX . STATUTES-171X-1,5,50.8

<$$heading>

An Act for continuing the Act of this present Session of Parliament ,
intituled , <font> An Act to impower his Majesty to secure and detain
such Persons as his Majesty shall suspect are conspiring against his
Person and Government . <$$font> STATUTES-171X-1,5,50.10

EXP.

<heading>

Cap. XXXI . STATUTES-171X-1,5,50.13

<$$heading>

An Act for granting an Aid to his Majesty by a Land-Tax in <font> Great
Britain <$$font> , for the Service of the Year
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen . STATUTES-171X-1,5,50.15

EXP.

4 s. in the Pound . STATUTES-171X-1,5,50.17

<heading>

Cap. XXXII . STATUTES-171X-1,5,50.19

<$$heading>

An Act to attaint <font> John <$$font> Earl of <font> Mar , William
Murray , <$$font> Esq; commonly called Marquess of <font> Tullibardine
<$$font> , <font> James <$$font> Earl of <font> Linlithgow <$$font> ,
and <font> James Drummond <$$font> , Esq; commonly called Lord <font>
Drummond <$$font> , of High Treason . STATUTES-171X-1,5,50.21

PR

<heading>

Cap. XXXIII . STATUTES-171X-1,5,50.24

<$$heading>

An Act for the more easy and speedy Trial of such Persons as have levied
or shall levy War against his Majesty . STATUTES-171X-1,5,50.26

EXP.

<heading>

Cap. XXXIV . STATUTES-171X-1,5,50.29

<$$heading>

An Act for preventing Mutiny and Desertion , and for the better Payment
of the Army and their Quarters . STATUTES-171X-1,5,50.31

EXP.

<heading>

Cap. XXXV . STATUTES-171X-1,5,50.34

<$$heading>

An Act to appoint a Commissioner for taking , examining and stating the
Debts due to the Army , in the Room of <font> Thomas Smith <$$font> ,
Esq; deceased ; and for continuing the former Act until the tenth Day of
<font> March <$$font> , one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,50.36

EXP.

<P_5,51>

<heading>

Cap. XXXVI . STATUTES-171X-1,5,51.40

<$$heading>

An Act for charging and continuing the Duties on Malt , Mum , Cyder and
Perry , for the Service of the Year
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen ; and for compelling several
Receivers to finish and clear their Accounts ; and for making Duplicates
of Exchequer-Bills , Lottery-Tickets and Orders , lost , burnt or
destroyed ; and for enlarging the Time for adjusting Claims to certain
Benefit-Tickets ; and for allowing the Charge of executing the
Lottery-Act , for the Service of the Year
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_ten ; and for recovering Monies of
several Land-Taxes , resting in the Hands of Collectors or Constables at
<font> St. Albans <$$font> ; and for preventing Frauds in the Duties
upon Sope ; and for limiting a Time for Persons who have certain
Annuities for Life or Lives , to demand the Payments thereupon at the
Exchequer ; and for preventing Frauds in the Duties relating to printed
and painted Paper , Callicoes , and other Things therein mentioned .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,51.42

XIV. And whereas by an Act made in the tenth Year of the Reign of our
late Sovereign Lady Queen <font> Anne <$$font> , amongst other Things ,
for laying several Duties upon all Sope made in <font> Great Britain
<$$font> , or imported into the same ; It is enacted , That if any
Makers of Sope shall fraudulently hide or conceal , or cause to be hid
or concealed , any Sope chargeable by the said Act , or any the
Materials for making the same , to the Intent to deceive her Majesty of
the just Duties by the said Act granted , that then , and in every such
Case , the Party so offending shall forfeit for every such Offence the
Sum of twenty Pounds : STATUTES-171X-1,5,51.43

And whereas by one other Act made in the twelfth Year of the Reign of
her said late Majesty , amongst other Things , for laying additional
Duties on Sope , farther Duties are granted upon Sope ; and by the said
last mentioned Act it is amongst other Things enacted , That all the
Powers , Authorities , Rules , Directions , Penalties and Forfeitures ,
Clauses , Matters and Things whatsoever , contained in the said Act of
the tenth Year of her said Majesty's Reign , for raising , receiving ,
levying , recovering , securing and paying the said Duties on Sope , as
are by the said last mentioned Act charged with new or additional Duties
thereupon , should be continued , practised and put in Execution , for
raising , receiving , levying , recovering , securing and paying the
same new or additional Duties by the said last mentioned Act granted ,
and all Arrearages thereof , as fully and effectually , to all Intents
and Purposes , as if they were particularly and at large repeated in the
Body of the said last mentioned Act ; except in such Cases only where
any Alteration therein is specially made by the said last mentioned Act
, as by the said several Acts more at large may appear :
STATUTES-171X-1,5,51.44

And whereas the Penalties by the before-mentioned Acts provided , to
prevent the Hiding and Concealing of Sope , have by Experience been
found ineffectual , and not sufficient to prevent or restrain the
fraudulent Hiding and Concealing thereof , in regard the Duties of one
Boiling of Sope so hid and concealed , may and often do amount to fifty
Pounds or more , whereby some ill-disposed Persons have been encouraged
and induced to hide and conceal several great Quantities of Sope , to
the great Diminution of the Revenues arising by the Duties laid upon
Sope , and to the great Discouragement of other fair Traders and Makers
of Sope , who duly pay the full Duties upon Sope , according to the true
Intent and Meaning of the said several recited Acts .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,51.45

For Remedy whereof , Be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid ,
That if at any Time after the sixteenth Day of <font> April <$$font> ,
in the Year of our Lord one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen , any
Maker of Sope shall fraudulently hide and conceal , or cause to be hid
or concealed , any Sope chargeable by the said several recited Acts , or
any the Materials for making the same , to the Intent to deceive his
Majesty of the just Duties by the said Acts granted , that then and in
every such Case the Party or Parties offending shall forfeit the Sum of
five_hundred Pounds for every such Offence , and also all the Sope so
hid and concealed . STATUTES-171X-1,5,51.46

XV. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That the
Penalties for hiding and concealing of Sope , and Materials for making
of Sope by this Act imposed , shall and may be sued for , recovered ,
levied and mitigated by such Ways and Means and Methods , as any Penalty
or Forfeiture imposed by any of the Laws of Excise may be sued for ,
recovered , levied and mitigated ; and that one Moiety of such Penalties
and Forfeitures shall be for the Use of his Majesty , his Heirs and
Successors , and the other Moiety for the Use of the Person or Persons
that shall inform or sue for the same . STATUTES-171X-1,5,51.47

XVI. And whereas by an Act passed in the third Year of the Reign of her
late Majesty Queen <font> Anne <$$font> , intituled , <font> An Act for
raising Monies by Sale of several Annuities , for carrying on the
present War <$$font> , it was enacted , That it should and might be
lawful to and for any Person or Persons , Natives or Foreigners , to
contribute , advance and pay into the Receipt of her then said Majesty's
Exchequer for her Majesty's Use , at or before the respective Days and
Times in the said Act limited in that Behalf , any Sum or Sums of Money
, not exceeding in the whole the Sum of
eight_hundred_seventy-seven_thousand_nine_hundred_and_thirty Pounds
nineteen Shillings and three Pence , for purchasing such several and
respective Annuities for ninety-nine Years as are therein mentioned :
STATUTES-171X-1,5,51.48

And whereas Liberty was given by the said Act of the third Year of her
said late Majesty , That any Person or Persons being as original
Contributors , or by mesne {COM:sic} Assignments , or by any other
lawful Ways and Means , entitled to any Estate for one , two , or three
Lives in Being , of or in any Annuity purchased or obtained upon an Act
of the second Year of the Reign of her said late Majesty , intituled ,
<font> An Act for granting an Aid to her Majesty for carrying on the War
, and other her Majesty's Occasions , by selling Annuities at several
Rates , and for such respective Terms or Estates as are therein
mentioned <$$font> , for changing or converting the said Estate for one
, two , or three Lives , into a certain Term for ninety-nine Years ,
upon and for the Considerations therein expressed :
STATUTES-171X-1,5,51.49

And whereas some of <P_5,52> the Nominees for whose Lives some of the
said Annuities are held , are Foreigners , or live in foreign or remote
Parts of this Kingdom , so as that they can@ @not be found or heard of ;
and that the Parties that are or were entitled to such Annuities do not
come or send to demand the said Annuities , whereby it is become
uncertain whether such Nominees be living or dead , or were so at the
Time of purchasing such Reversions , whereby the Titles of the
Purchasers of such Reversions are become , and will become disputable :
STATUTES-171X-1,5,52.50

For Remedy whereof , Be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That in
case any of the said Annuity or Annuities <paren> whereupon the
Reversion or Reversions were or shall be purchased , as aforesaid
<$$paren> have not , or shall not be demanded at the Exchequer for the
Space of two Years next after the same did become , or shall become
payable ; and in case Certificates of the Life and Lives of any Nominee
or Nominees , upon whose Life or Lives any Annuities do depend , have
not been or shall not be produced to the Officers of his Majesty's
Exchequer , or sufficient Proof made thereof , according to the Rules
prescribed by former Acts , within two Years next after the said
Annuities have or shall from Time to Time become payable ; then and from
thenceforth , and from and after the Expiration of the said two Years ,
such Nominee and Nominees , of whose Life or Lives no such Certificate
hath been or shall be produced , or Proof made , as aforesaid , shall be
taken to be dead , and the Person or Persons that hath purchased , or
shall hereafter purchase such Reversion or Reversions of such Annuity or
Annuities , expectant upon the Death of such Nominee or Nominees , of
whose Life or Lives no such Certificate hath or shall be produced , or
Proof made , as aforesaid , shall receive the said respective Annuity
and Annuities , from Time to Time , until such Certificates shall be
produced , or Proof made , and shall not be accountable for such Part of
the said Annuity as he shall then have actually received for default of
such Certificate or Proof ; any Thing in this , or in any former Act or
Acts of Parliament contained to the contrary notwithstanding .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,52.51

XVII. And for the more effectual preventing Frauds relating to the Duty
laid upon printing , painting , or staining Paper to serve for Hangings
or other Uses : Be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That
from and after the first Day of <font> June <$$font>
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen , before any such Paper shall be
printed , painted or stained , the Officers for the said Duties on such
printed , painted or stained Paper , as aforesaid , shall be permitted
to take Accounts of the Quantities and Dimensions of all Paper for
printing , painting or staining , which at any Time or Times shall be in
the Custody or Possession of any such Printer , Painter or Stainer , and
upon taking such Account thereof , shall mark or stamp every Sheet and
Piece thereof with a Stamp or Seal already provided , or hereafter to be
provided , in pursuance of the Act for granting of the said Duties for
the marking or stamping of Silks , Callicoes , Linens or Stuffs ,
printed , painted , stained or dyed {TEXT:died} , thereby to denote that
such Account has been taken of such Paper ; STATUTES-171X-1,5,52.52

and in case any Officer or Officers shall miss any Quantity or
Quantities of such Paper whereof he had before taken such Accounts , and
shall not upon reasonable Demand receive Satisfaction what is become of
the same , then and in such Case it shall and may be lawful for such
Officer to charge such Printer , Painter or Stainer of Paper , with the
Duties of such Paper so missing , as if the same were actually printed ,
painted or stained . STATUTES-171X-1,5,52.53

XVIII. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That no
Person or Persons , who shall print , paint , stain or dye any Paper
chargeable with the said Duty , shall remove , carry or send away , or
suffer to be removed , carried or sent away , any Paper by him , her ,
or them printed , painted or stained respectively , until such Time as
the proper Officer shall have taken an Account of every particular
Quantity of such Paper so to be carried away , and until every
particular Piece and Parcel of such Paper shall be duly marked with such
Stamp or Seal , as aforesaid , denoting the charging of the said Duty ,
on Pain to forfeit twenty Pounds for every such Offence ;
STATUTES-171X-1,5,52.54

and that all the printed , painted or stained Paper , so carried away
without being marked with such Stamp or Seal denoting the charging the
said Duty , and being found in the Possession of any Stationer , or
other Trader or Dealer therein , or of any other Person or Persons for
the Use of such Stationer , Trader or Dealer for Sale , shall and may be
seised and recovered , one Moiety thereof for the Use of his Majesty ,
his Heirs and Successors , and the other Moiety for the Use of the
Seisor or Informer . STATUTES-171X-1,5,52.55

XX. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That all
Fines , Penalties and Forfeitures by this Act imposed , relating to the
said Duties on Paper , shall be sued for , levied and recovered , or
mitigated by such Ways , Means and Methods , as any Fine , Penalty or
Forfeiture , is or may be recovered or mitigated by any Law or Laws of
Excise , or by Action of Debt , Bill , Plaint or Information , in any of
his Majesty's Courts of Record at <font> Westminster <$$font> , or the
Court of Session , Court of Justiciary , or Court of Exchequer in <font>
Scotland <$$font> respectively ; and that one Moiety of every such Fine
, Penalty and Forfeiture , shall be to his Majesty , his Heirs and
Successors , and the other Moiety to him , her , or them , that shall
discover , inform or sue for the same . STATUTES-171X-1,5,52.56

XXI. And whereas several Persons do travel in several Parts of this
Kingdom , and print , paint , stain or dye Silks , Callicoes , Linens
and Stuffs , but remove from the Places where they so print , paint ,
stain or dye the same , to Parts remote , without paying any Duty for
the same , by means whereof the said Duties are lost and can@ @not be
recovered : STATUTES-171X-1,5,52.57

For Remedy whereof , Be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid ,
That from and after the first Day of <font> June <$$font>
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen , where any Person or Persons
shall take upon him , her , or them , to print , paint , stain , or dye
any Silks , Callicoes , Linens or Stuffs , at any other Place than the
Place of his , her , or their usual Residence , or Exercise of his , her
, or their Trade , all such Persons shall , before he , she , or they
print , paint , stain or dye any such Silks , Callicoes , Linens or
Stuffs , make a particular Entry of all such Silks , Callicoes , Linens
<P_5,53> intended to be printed , painted , stained or dyed , upon
printing , painting , staining or dying the same , before he , she , or
they proceed to print , paint , stain or dye such Goods , or any Part
thereof ; STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.58

and if such Person or Persons shall print paint , stain or dye any such
Silks , Callicoes , Linens or Stuffs , without making such Entry , and
paying down the Duties thereof , as aforesaid , the Person or Persons
offending therein shall for every such Offence forfeit the Sum of fifty
Pounds , to be recovered and levied as aforesaid STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.59

and moreover all such Silks , Callicoes , Linens and Stuffs so printed ,
painted , stained or dyed , without such Entry and Payment of Duty , as
aforesaid , shall be , and may be seised immediately by such Officer ;
one Moiety of such Penalties and Forfeitures to be paid to his Majesty ,
his Heirs and Successors , and the other Moiety to the Person or Persons
that shall sue or inform for the same . STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.60

<heading>

Cap. XXXVII . STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.62

<$$heading>

An Act to enable his Majesty to grant the Regalities and Lands now
remaining in the Crown in <font> North Wales <$$font> and <font> South
Wales <$$font> , and County of <font> Chester <$$font> , to his Royal
Highness the Prince of <font> Wales <$$font> , in such Manner and Form
as the Principality of <font> Wales <$$font> and Earldom of <font>
Chester <$$font> have formerly been granted to the Princes of <font>
Wales <$$font> ; and also to enable his said Royal Highness to make
Leases of Lands , Parcel of his Royal Highness's Duchy {TEXT:Dutchy} of
<font> Cornwall <$$font> , or annexed to the same .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.64

EXP.

<heading>

Cap. XXXVIII . STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.67

<$$heading>

An Act for enlarging the Time of Continuance of Parliaments , appointed
by an Act made in the sixth Year of the Reign of King <font> William
<$$font> and Queen <font> Mary <$$font> , intituled , <font> An Act for
the frequent Meeting and Calling of Parliaments . <$$font>
STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.69

Whereas in and by an Act of Parliament made in the sixth Year of the
Reign of their late Majesties King <font> William <$$font> and Queen
<font> Mary <$$font> <paren> of ever Blessed Memory <$$paren> intituled
, <font> An Act for the frequent Meeting and Calling of Parliaments :
<$$font> It was among other Things enacted , That from thenceforth no
Parliament whatsoever , that should at any Time then after be called ,
assembled or held , should have any Continuance longer than for three
Years only at the farthest , to be accounted from the Day on which by
the Writ of Summons the said Parliament should be appointed to meet :
STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.70

And whereas it has been found by Experience , that the said Clause hath
proved very grievous and burthensome , by occasioning much greater and
more continued Expences in order to Elections of Members to serve in
Parliament , and more violent and lasting Heats and Animosities among
the Subjects of this Realm , than were ever known before the said Clause
was enacted ; and the said Provision , if it should continue , may
probably at this Juncture , when a restless and Popish Faction are
designing and endeavouring to renew the Rebellion within this Kingdom ,
and an Invasion from abroad , be destructive to the Peace and Security
of the Government ; STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.71

Be it enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of the same , That this
present Parliament , and all Parliaments that shall at any Time
hereafter be called , assembled or held , shall and may respectively
have Continuance for seven Years , and no longer , to be accounted from
, the Day on which by the Writ of Summons this present Parliament hath
been , or any future Parliament shall be appointed to meet , unless this
present , or any such Parliament hereafter to be summoned , shall be
sooner dissolved by his Majesty , his Heirs or Successors .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.72

<heading>

Cap. XXXIX . STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.74

<$$heading>

An Act to indemnify such Persons who have acted in Defence of his
Majesty's Person and Government , and for the Preservation of the
publick Peace of this Kingdom , in and about the Time of the late
unnatural Rebellion , from vexatious Suits and Prosecutions .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.76

EXP.

<heading>

Cap. XL . STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.79

<$$heading>

An Act for the free Importation of Cochineal , during the Time therein
limited . STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.81

EXP.

<heading>

Cap. XLI . STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.84

<$$heading>

An Act for giving Liberty to Persons who have served their
Apprenticeships to any Part of the Woollen Manufacture in <font>
Colchester <$$font> , to work at their said Trades , and at the making
Bays within the said Town . STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.86

PR.

<heading>

Cap. XLII . STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.89

<$$heading>

An Act for the Attainder of <font> George <$$font> Earl of <font>
Marischal <$$font> , <font> William <$$font> , Earl of <font> Seaforth
<$$font> , <$$font> James <$$font> Earl of <font> Southesque <$$font> ,
<font> James <$$font> Earl of <font> Ponmuir <$$font> , and others of
High Treason , unless they shall render themselves to Justice by a Day
certain therein mentioned . STATUTES-171X-1,5,53.91

PR.

<P_5,54>

<heading>

Cap. XLIII . STATUTES-171X-1,5,54.95

<$$heading>

An Act to continue Duties for encouraging the Coinage of Money ; and to
charge the Duties on Senna as a Medicinal Drug ; and for the
appropriating several Supplies granted to his Majesty .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,54.97

I. May it please your most excellent Majesty ; STATUTES-171X-1,5,54.98

Whereas great Benefit and Advantage did accrue to <font> England
<$$font> by one Act of Parliament passed in the eighteenth Year of the
Reign of his Majesty King <font> Charles <$$font> the Second , intituled
, <font> An Act for encouraging of Coinage <$$font> , and continued by
another Act made in the twenty-fifth Year of the Reign of his said
Majesty King <font> Charles <$$font> , intituled , <font> An Act for
continuing a former Act concerning Coinage <$$font> ; both which said
Acts were revived by an Act made in the first Year of the Reign of his
Majesty King <font> James <$$font> the Second , and were continued by an
Act made in the fourth Year of King <font> William <$$font> and Queen
<font> Mary <$$font> , of Blessed Memory , and were further continued by
an Act made in the twelfth Year of the Reign of the said late King
<font> William <$$font> , and were further continued by an Act made in
the seventh Year of the Reign of her late Majesty Queen <font> Anne
<$$font> , of Blessed Memory , to be in Force for seven Years from the
first Day of <font> March <$$font> one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_eight
, and until the End of the first Session of Parliament then next
following , and no longer ; so that unless the said Acts be revived and
continued , the Encouragement given thereby will cease , and this
Kingdom be deprived for the future of so great a Good as it hath for
many Years last past enjoyed : STATUTES-171X-1,5,54.99

Now we your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal Subjects , the Commons of
<font> Great Britain <$$font> in Parliament assembled , do give and
grant unto your Majesty the Rates , Duties , and Impositions herein
after mentioned , for and during the Term and Time herein after
expressed , STATUTES-171X-1,5,54.100

and do humbly pray that it may be enacted ; STATUTES-171X-1,5,54.101

And be it enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of the same
, That such and the like Rates , Duties and Impositions , as by the said
Act of Parliament of the eighteenth Year of the Reign of King <font>
Charles <$$font> the Second were granted , and by the said subsequent
Acts were continued , for and upon the Importation of Wines , Vinegar ,
Cyder , Beer , Brandy , and Strong-Waters imported , during the
respective Terms therein mentioned , shall be further continued , and be
paid and payable to his Majesty , his Heirs and Successors , for and
upon all Wines , Vinegar , Cyder , Beer , Brandy , and Strong-Waters ,
which shall be imported or brought into <font> Great Britain <$$font>
within or during the Space of seven Years , to commence from the first
Day of <font> March <$$font> one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_fifteen ,
and until the End of the first Session of Parliament then next following
, and no longer ; STATUTES-171X-1,5,54.102

and that all the said former Acts , and all other Acts of Parliament
concerning Coinage , and every of them , and every Clause , Article ,
and Sentence in them or any of them contained , now , being in Force ,
shall be and are by virtue of this Act revived and continued , and shall
be in Force , and be duly put in Execution , for and during all such
Term and Time as are before mentioned , as fully and effectually as if
the same were particularly repeated and re-enacted in the Body of this
present Act . STATUTES-171X-1,5,54.103

II. And to the End the Importers of Gold and Silver into the Mints of
<font> England <$$font> and <font> Scotland <$$font> respectively , may
not be discouraged by any Deficiency of the Revenue by this Act settled
for defraying the Coinage thereof : Be it further enacted by the
Authority aforesaid , that it shall and may be lawful to and for the
Commissioners of the Treasury , or any three or more of them now being ,
or the Lord High Treasurer , or any three or more of the Commissioners
of the Treasury for the Time being , out of the Monies arising by this
Act , or out of any other the publick Supplies granted or to be granted
by Parliament , to cause so much Money to be applied , as shall be
necessary for defraying the Expences of the said Mints of <font> England
<$$font> and <font> Scotland <$$font> respectively , by way of Imprest ,
and upon Account , for that Service , so as the same , together with the
Coinage-Duties arising by this Act , do not exceed , in any one Year ,
the Sum of fifteen_thousand Pounds , and so as the said Monies be issued
out of the Exchequer of <font> Great Britain <$$font> to the Master of
the Mint in <font> England <$$font> , and the General of the Mint in
<font> Scotland <$$font> respectively , for the said Purposes .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,54.104

III. And whereas the Book of Rates annexed to an Act made in the
twelfth Year of the Reign of King <font> Charles <$$font> the Second ,
intituled , <font> A Subsidy granted to the King of Tonnage and Poundage
, and other Sums of Money payable upon Merchandise exported and imported
<$$font> , a Rate is fixed upon Senna under the Title of Drugs , in
order to pay the Duty charged thereon by the said Act ; which Act has
been continued by several subsequent Acts now in Force :
STATUTES-171X-1,5,54.105

And whereas the said Duty is by a subsequent Act increased , and further
Duties are by several other Acts laid upon the Importation of all Drugs
, all which Acts are still in Force : STATUTES-171X-1,5,54.106

And whereas by several of the said last mentioned Acts , Drugs used in
Dying are exempted from Payment of the respective Duties thereby granted
; and for the better adjusting the Duties upon Goods used in Dying , by
an Act of the third Year of the Reign of her late Majesty for continuing
Duties on Low-Wines and other Things therein mentioned ; it is declared
what Goods are meant to be used in Dying , amongst which Senna is
contained ; nevertheless it being notorious that Senna is not or ever
was used in the Dying Trade , but was inserted in the said last
mentioned Act , by Mistake , to the great Loss of his Majesty's Revenue
in the Duties intended to be paid for the same :
STATUTES-171X-1,5,54.107

For Prevention thereof for the future , Be it enacted and declared by
the Authority aforesaid , That all Senna imported into <font> Great
Britain <$$font> , after the ninth Day of <font> May <$$font>
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen , shall be subject and liable to
the Payment of the Duties charged by the said Act of Tonnage and
Poundage , and by the several <P_5,55> Acts for increasing and
continuing the same , and to all and every other the respective Duties
laid , or intended to be laid by other respective Acts , as if the said
Exemptions in the several Acts for Goods or Drugs used in Dying had not
been therein inserted ; any Law or Statute to the contrary
notwithstanding . STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.108

On Exportation Duty discharged . STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.109

The twelve Months for Exportation enlarged to three Years by 7 Geo. 1 .
Stat. 1 . c. 21 . f. 10 . STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.110

Appropriations not to obstruct making good Deficiencies to the South-Sea
Company , by virtue of the Act 1 Geo. 1 . Stat. 2 . c. 21 .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.111

On {TEXT:Or} the Salaries to the Commissioners of Accounts , &c.
STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.112

Continued by 9 Geo. 1 . c. 19 . <font> And farther by 19 Geo. 2 .
c. 14 . 27 Geo. 2 . c. 11 . and Geo. 3 . c. 16 . <$$font>
STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.113

<heading>

Cap. XLIV . STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.115

<$$heading>

An Act for the continuing the Duty of two Pennies <font> Scots <$$font>
, or one Sixth of a Penny Sterling , on every Pint of Ale and Beer that
shall be vended or sold within the City of <font> Glasgow <$$font> and
Privileges thereof , for the Benefit of the said City .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.117

PR.

<heading>

Cap. XLV . STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.120

<$$heading>

An Act for holding the Assise for the County of <font> Cornwall <$$font>
at a convenient Place within the said County . STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.122

Whereas the Justices of Assise , of <font> Nisi prius <$$font> , <font>
Oyer_and_Terminer {COM:font_change_around_"and"} <$$font> <$$font> , and
General Goal-Delivery for the County of <font> Cornwall <$$font> , have
, for many Years past , constantly held and kept the Assises for the
said County at <font> Launceston <$$font> in the said County ; which
constant Holding has been oftentimes found inconvenient :
STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.123

For Remedy whereof , Be it therefore enacted by the King's most
Excellent Majesty , by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal , and the Commons , in this present Parliament
assembled , and by Authority of the same , That from and after the
twentieth Day of <font> May <$$font> in the Year of our Lord
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen , the holding of the Assises and
General Gaol-Delivery for the said County shall not be confined to the
said Town of <font> Launceston <$$font> , but that it shall and may be
lawful to and for the Lord High Chancellor , or Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal of <font> Great Britain <$$font> , for the Time being , with the
Advice of the Justices of Assise , from Time to Time , to appoint
{TEXT:appointed} a convenient Place within the said County of <font>
Cornwall <$$font> for the holding and executing all and every Commission
and Commissions of Assise , and <font> Nisi prius <$$font> , <font>
Oyer_and_Terminer {COM:font_change_around_"and"} <$$font> , and General
Gaol-Delivery for the said County , in such Manner as he is by Law
authorized to do for any other County within that Part of the Kingdom of
<font> Great Britain <$$font> called <font> England <$$font> ; any Law ,
Statute , Custom or other Matter or Thing to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding . STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.124

<heading>

Cap. XLVI . STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.126

<$$heading>

An Act to prevent the Mischiefs by manufacturing Leaves or other Things
to resemble Tobacco , and the Abuses in making and mixing of Snuff .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.128

I. Whereas Tobacco is one of the chief Products of <font> Virginia
<$$font> and <font> Maryland <$$font> , upon which their Welfare and
Subsistence doth much depend ; and by the Importation thereof the
Navigation and Trade of this Kingdom , and the publick Revenues of the
same , are very much increased : STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.129

And whereas it is found by Experience , that of late several evil
Persons have cut , cured , manufactured and sold Walnut-tree Leaves ,
Hop Leaves , Sycomore Leaves , or other Leaves , Herbs , Plants , or
Materials , resembling Tobacco of the Growth or Product of the <font>
British <$$font> Plantations , to the Prejudice of his Majesty's
Plantations in <font> America <$$font> , and of the Navigation and Trade
of this Kingdom , and of the publick Revenues arising upon Tobacco :
STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.130

For Remedy whereof for the future , Be it enacted by the King's most
Excellent Majesty , by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons , in this present Parliament
assembled , and by the Authority of the same , That all and every Person
and Persons whatsoever , who at any Time or Times after the twentieth
Day of <font> June <$$font> in the Year of our Lord
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen , shall cut , or cause or procure
to be cut , any Walnut-tree Leaves , Hop Leaves , Sycomore Leaves , or
any other Leaves , Herbs , Plants , or Materials whatsoever , <paren>
not being Tobacco Leaves or Plants <$$paren> into the Form or in
Imitation of any the usual Sizes or Cuts which Tobacco has been or shall
be cut into , for Sale , or shall colour or cure , or cause or procure
to be coloured or cured any such Leaves , Herbs , Plants , or Materials
, to make the same resemble Tobacco , for Sale , or shall sell , or
cause or procure to be sold , or agree or offer to sell knowingly , any
such Leaves , Herbs , Plants or Materials , mixed or unmixed with
Tobacco , as if the same were Tobacco , shall , for every Pound-weight
of such Leaves , Herbs , Plants , or Materials so cut , coloured , cured
, sold or agreed for , or knowingly offered to Sale , and for every
Pound-weight of such Mixture as aforesaid , forfeit and lose the Sum of
five Shillings , and after that Rate for a greater or lesser Quantity ;
STATUTES-171X-1,5,55.131

that is to say , one Moiety of half Part thereof to the Use of his
Majesty , his Heirs and Successors , <paren> he or they bearing the
Charge of Prosecution out of the Moiety so accruing to the Crown , and
not otherwise <$$paren> and the other Moiety or half Part thereof to the
Use of such Person or Persons as will inform or Sue for the same , to be
recovered <paren> with full Costs of Suit <$$paren> by Action of Debt ,
Bill , Plaint , or Information in any his Majesty's <P_5,56> Courts of
Record at <font> Westminster <$$font> , or in the Exchequer of <font>
Scotland <$$font> , wherein no Essoin , Protection , Wager of Law , or
more than one Imparlance shall be allowed . STATUTES-171X-1,5,56.132

II. And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That all and every
Person and Persons whatsoever who at any Time or Times after the said
twentieth Day of <font> June <$$font> in the Year of our Lord
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen shall export or cause to be
exported , or shall lade or put on board , or cause or procure to be
laden or put on board for Exportation , any such Leaves , Herbs , Plants
, or Materials , or such Mixture as aforesaid , or endeavour to obtain ,
a Drawback for the same , as if the same were Tobacco which had paid or
secured his Majesty's Duties thereupon , shall , for every such Offence
, forfeit and lose the Sum of five Shillings for every Pound-weight ,
and proportionably for a greater or lesser Quantity , over and above all
other Penalties which may be inflicted for such Offence by any Law now
in Force , to be recovered and distributed in such Manner as aforesaid .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,56.133

III. And be it also enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That all the
Leaves , Herbs , Plants , and Materials so cut , coloured , cured or
manufactured , sold , contracted for or knowingly offered to Sale as
aforesaid and all such Mixtures as aforesaid , and all Engines ,
Utensils , and Tools made use of in the cutting , colouring , curing ,
or manufacturing the same , or prepared for such Use , shall and may be
searched for and seized by any Officer of the Customs , or by any Person
or Persons thereunto specially authorized by Writing under the Hands and
Seals of the Commissioners of the Treasury , or any three or more of
them , or of the Lord Treasurer for the Time being , or of the
Commissioners of the Customs in <font> England <$$font> or <font>
Scotland <$$font> respectively , or any three or more of them for the
Time being . STATUTES-171X-1,5,56.134

IV. Provided always , and it is hereby enacted , That no House or
Warehouse whatsoever shall be opened to search for or seize such Leaves
, Herbs , Plants , Materials or Mixtures , or such Engines , Utensils ,
or Tools , but at reasonable Hours , and not without a special Warrant
first had and obtained from two or more Justices_of_the_Peace of the
County or Place where such Search is to be made ; and that the Leaves ,
Herbs , Plants , and Materials , and the said Mixtures , Engines ,
Utensils , and Tools , which shall , at Time or Times , be found and
seized within the Limits of any Port , or within six Miles of the same ,
shall be brought to the next Custom-house Warehouse ; and if found and
seized at any greater Distance from any Port , shall be secured by Order
of any two Justices_of_Peace of the County or Place where they shall be
found , at the King's Charge ; till the Cause of such Seizure shall be
determined by the Justices_of_Peace in their Quarter-Sessions ; and that
the Cause of every such Seizure shall be heard and determined at the
next Quarter-Sessions , or <paren> at farthest <$$paren> at the second
Quarter-Sessions after such Seizure made ; and all such Leaves , Herbs ,
Plants , Materials , Mixtures , Engines , Utensils , and Tools , <paren>
after Condemnation or Recovery by Judgment of such Sessions <$$paren>
shall be openly burnt or destroyed by Order of the same at his Majesty's
Charge . STATUTES-171X-1,5,56.135

V. And it is hereby further enacted , That all Servants and Labourers
which shall be employed in the cutting , colouring , curing , or
manufacturing any such Leaves , Herbs , Plants , or Materials , to
resemble Tobacco , or in the making any such Mixture as aforesaid , or
in knowingly vending the same , and shall be convicted thereof by the
Oath of any one or more credible Persons , before any two
Justices_of_the_Peace of the County or Place where the Offence shall be
committed , shall or may , by Order of such Justices , be committed to
the common Gaol or House of Correction , there to remain and be kept to
hard Labour for any Time not exceeding six Months , without Bail or
Mainprize . STATUTES-171X-1,5,56.136

VI. And be it likewise enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That if any
Person or Persons shall be sued or prosecuted for what he or they shall
do in Pursuance or Execution of this Act , such Person or Persons may
plead the General Issue <paren> Not guilty <$$paren> and after Issue
joined may give this Act and the special Matter in Evidence ; and if the
Plaintiff or Prosecutor shall be nonsuit , or forbear further
Prosecution , or suffer Discontinuance , or if a Verdict pass against
him , the Defendant shall recover treble Costs , for which he shall have
the like Remedy as in Cases where Costs by Law are given to Defendants .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,56.137

VII. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That if any
Person or Persons shall , at any Time after the said twentieth Day of
<font> June <$$font> in the Year of our Lord
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen , make , mix or colour , or cause
to be made , mixed or coloured , any Sort of Snuff with any Sort of
Okers , Umber or any other Kind of Colouring , except with Water tinged
with the Colouring commonly called <font> Venetian Red <$$font> only ;
or shall mix or cause to be mixed with any Sort of Snuff , any Fustick
or yellow Ebony , Touchwood , or any other Sort of Wood , or any Dirt or
Sand , or Dust sifted from Tobacco ; or shall knowingly sell , or expose
to Sale , any Snuff so made , mixed or coloured as aforesaid , every
such Person so offending shall , for every Pound-weight of Snuff so made
, mixed or coloured , forfeit the said Snuff , and likewise the Sum of
three Pounds , and proportionably for any greater or lesser Quantity ,
to be recovered by Action of Debt , Bill , Plaint , or Information , in
any of his Majesty's Courts of Record at <font> Westminster <$$font> ,
or in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer in <font> Scotland <$$font> ,
wherein no Essoin , Privilege , Protection or Wager of Law shall be
allowed , nor any more than one Imparlance ; one Moiety of which
Forfeiture shall be to the Use of his Majesty , his Heirs and Successors
, and the other Moiety to the Use of such Person or Persons who shall
seize , inform , or sue for the same . STATUTES-171X-1,5,56.138

<P_5,57>

<heading>

Cap. XLVII . STATUTES-171X-1,5,57.141

<$$heading>

An Act for the more effectual and exemplary Punishment of such Persons
as shall seduce Soldiers to desert , or who , being Papists , shall
inlist themselves in his Majesty's Service in <font> Great Britain
<$$font> or <font> Ireland <$$font> , or in the Islands of <font> Jersey
<$$font> or <font> Guernsey . <$$font> STATUTES-171X-1,5,57.143

I. Whereas a pernicious and dangerous Practice has been industriously
carried on in these Kingdoms of <font> Great Britain <$$font> and <font>
Ireland <$$font> , by Papists and other evil-disposed Persons ,
disaffected to his Majesty's Title and Government , under false and
groundless Pretences , to delude his good Subjects , who had engaged
themselves as Soldiers in the Service of his Majesty and their Country ,
and to prevail with them by corrupt and direct Means to desert the same
, oftentimes in order to procure their Assistance for a Popish Pretender
, the avowed Enemy of the Protestant Religion , and the Laws and
Liberties of these Kingdoms ; STATUTES-171X-1,5,57.144

for which wicked Purposes the said Papists and other evil-disposed
Persons have with great Diligence frequented the Publick-houses , and
other Places where the said Soldiers used to resort , or are quartered ,
and by Entertainments , seditious Speeches , and vain Promises , have
often seduced his Majesty's said Subjects from their Duty and Allegiance
; STATUTES-171X-1,5,57.145

For Remedy whereof for the future , and for the more effectual and
exemplary Punishment of all Offenders in that Behalf , Be it enacted by
the King's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the Advice and Consent
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons , in this present
Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of the same , That if any
Person or Persons whatsoever <paren> other than such as are or shall be
inlisted as Soldiers , against whom sufficient Remedy is already
provided by Law <$$paren> shall , from the first Day of <font> June
<$$font> in the Year of our Lord one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen
, in <font> Great Britain <$$font> or <font> Ireland <$$font> , or the
Isles of <font> Jersey <$$font> or <font> Guernsey <$$font> , by Words
or other Means whatsoever , directly , or indirectly , persuade or
procure any Soldier or Soldiers in the Service of his Majesty , his
Heirs , or Successors , to desert or leave such Service , or shall go
about and endeavour in Manner aforesaid , to persuade , prevail on or
procure such Soldier or Soldiers to desert or leave such Service as
aforesaid , every such Person or Persons so offending as aforesaid , and
being thereof lawfully convicted , shall , for every such Offence ,
forfeit to his Majesty , his Heirs , or Successors , or to any other
Person or Persons who shall sue for the same , the Sum of forty Pounds ,
to be recovered by Bill , Plaint , or Information , in any of his
Majesty's Courts of Record at <font> Westminster <$$font> , wherein no
Essoin , Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed ;
STATUTES-171X-1,5,57.146

and if it shall happen that any such Offender so convicted as aforesaid
, hath not any Goods and Chattels , Lands , or Tenements , to the Value
of forty Pounds , to pay and satisfy the same , or that from the
Circumstances and Heinousness of the Crime it shall be thought proper ,
and convenient , the Court , before which the said Conviction shall be
made , as aforesaid , shall award the said Offender to Prison , there to
remain for any Time not exceeding six Months , without Bail or Mainprize
, and also to stand in the Pillory for the Space of one Hour , in some
Market-town next adjoining to the Place where the Offence was committed
, in open Market there , or in the Market-town itself where the said
Offence was committed . STATUTES-171X-1,5,57.147

II. Provided always , and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid ,
That no such Action shall be brought or Prosecution carried on by virtue
of this Act , unless the same be commenced within six Months after the
Offence committed . STATUTES-171X-1,5,57.148

III. And whereas to carry on the Service of the said Pretender , and
for other wicked Purposes , many Papists pretending themselves
Protestants , and taking the Oath of Abjuration , and subscribing the
Test , when thereunto required , being so allowed to do by the Pope ,
and their other spiritual Superiors , the better to disguise and conceal
their Designs , do inlist themselves in his Majesty's Troops , whereby
the greatest Danger may arise to these Kingdoms , if not timely
prevented : STATUTES-171X-1,5,57.149

Be it therefore enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That any Person or
Persons having professed the Popish Religion , who since the first Day
of <font> February <$$font> , one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_fifteen ,
have been inlisted in his Majesty's Troops , and who shall not , after
the first Day of <font> June <$$font>
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen , in <font> Great Britain
<$$font> or <font> Ireland <$$font> , or in the Isles of <font> Guernsey
<$$font> or <font> Jersey <$$font> , produce a Testimonial of his having
publickly renounced the same , or shall not , at the Time of his
inlisting , declare to the Officer or Soldier who so inlisteth him ,
that he hath been , or at present is of the Popish Religion , shall in
such Case be liable to , and receive such corporal Punishment , not
extending to Loss of Life , as a Court Martial shall inflict for the
same , who are hereby impowered so to do . STATUTES-171X-1,5,57.150

<heading>

Cap. XLVIII . STATUTES-171X-1,5,57.152

<$$heading>

An Act to encourage the Planting of Timber-Trees , Fruit-Trees , and
other Trees , for Ornament , Shelter , or Profit ; and for the better
Preservation of the same ; and for the preventing the Burning of Woods .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,57.154

I. Whereas the Raising and Planting of Timber-trees , Fruit-trees and
other Trees is of very great Profit and Advantage to the Kingdom of
<font> Great Britain : <$$font> STATUTES-171X-1,5,57.155

And whereas divers lewd and disorderly Persons , and others , have
riotously , and sometimes in a clandestine and malicious Manner , broke
down , cut up , or otherwise destroyed such Timber-trees , Fruit-trees ,
and other Trees , to the <P_5,58> great Discouragement of the Planters
and Owners thereof , and the Parties whose Trees are so destroyed are
remediless , for lack of knowing the Parties so offending :
STATUTES-171X-1,5,58.156

Therefore for the better encouraging of Persons to raise , plant and
preserve Timber-trees , Fruit-trees , and other Trees , in Fields ,
Hedgerows , Gardens and Walks , and elsewhere , either for Ornament ,
Shelter , or Profit , and for the preventing the malicious destroying or
spoiling the same , and to give Remedy to such Persons for making them
Satisfaction for all Damages to be occasioned by such breaking down ,
cutting up , spoiling , or otherwise destroying such Trees ; Be it
enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons , in this
present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of the same , That
if any Person or Persons whatsoever , from and after the twenty-fourth
Day of <font> June <$$font> in the Year of our Lord
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen , shall maliciously break down ,
cut up , pluck up , throw down , bark , or otherwise destroy , deface ,
or spoil any Timber-tree , or Trees , Fruit-tree or Trees , or any other
Tree or Trees , the Person or Persons , Body Politick or Corporate ,
that is are , shall or may be damaged by the same , shall receive such
Satisfaction and Recompence of and from the Inhabitants of the Parish ,
Town , Hamlet , Vill or Place , where such Tree or Trees shall be so
maliciously broken down , cut up , pluckt up , thrown down , barked ,
destroyed , defaced or spoiled , STATUTES-171X-1,5,58.157

and to be viewed , and Damages and Costs to be recoverable and recovered
against such Parish , Town , Hamlet , Vill or Place , by the Person or
Persons , whose Tree or Trees shall be so maliciously broke down , cut
up , pluckt up , thrown down , barked , destroyed , defaced or spoiled ,
in the same Manner and Form as Hedges and Dikes overthrown by Persons in
the Night , in and by an Act of Parliament made in the thirteenth Year
of the Reign of King <font> Edward <$$font> the First , intituled ,
<font> Lords may approve against their Neighbours : Usurpations of
Commons during the Estate of particular Tenants <$$font> , are to be
levied , and Damages yielded ; STATUTES-171X-1,5,58.158

and where such Offence or Offences shall be committed in that Part of
<font> Great Britain <$$font> called <font> Scotland <$$font> , to be
recoverable and recovered by way of summary {TEXT:summar} Action , and
in the same Manner and Form as Damages in other Cases of Riot are to be
recovered by the Laws there , unless the Party or Parties so offending
shall by such Parish , Town , Hamlet , Vill , or Place , be convicted of
such Offence , within the Space of six Months from the committing such
Offence or Offences ; any Law or Construction to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding . STATUTES-171X-1,5,58.159

II. And be it further enacted and declared by the Authority aforesaid ,
That it shall and may be lawful to and for any two or more
Justices_of_the_Peace of the County , Riding , Division , Stewartry ,
Regality , City , Town , Borough , or Corporation , wherein any such
Offence or Offences shall be committed , or the Justices in open
Sessions , upon Complaint to them made by any Inhabitant of the
aforesaid Parish , Hamlet , Vill , or Place , or of the Owner of such
Tree or Trees , or of any other , to cause such Offender or Offenders to
be apprehended for the Trespasses and Offences aforesaid , or any of
them , and to hear and finally determine and adjudge all and every the
Offence and Offences aforesaid ; STATUTES-171X-1,5,58.160

and if such Justices shall convict any Person or Persons of all or any
the Trespasses or Offences aforesaid , then such Justices , immediately
after such Conviction , shall commit such Offender and Offenders to the
House of Correction , there to continue and be kept to hard Labour for
the Space of three Months , without Bail or Mainprize ;
STATUTES-171X-1,5,58.161

and where there are no Houses of Correction in any County , Riding ,
Division , Stewartry , Regality , City , Town or Borough where such
Offender or Offenders shall be convicted , the said Justices shall
commit such Offender or Offenders to such Prison as is appointed for
other Criminals , there to continue for the Space of four Months ;
STATUTES-171X-1,5,58.162

and shall also order and adjudge that such Offender and Offenders shall
be publickly whipt by the Master of such House of Correction , once
every Month , during such three Months , in such Borough or Corporation
, if the Offence be committed therein , and not otherwise ; or in the
Market-Town where such House of Correction stands , or in the next
Market-Town next adjacent to such House of Correction , and in the
County where such Offence shall be committed , on the Market-day of such
Town , between the Hours of eleven and two of the Clock ;
STATUTES-171X-1,5,58.163

and in such Places where there is no House of Correction , the said
Justices shall order and adjudge that such Offender or Offenders shall
be publickly whipt by the Hand of the common Hangman or Executioner once
every Month , during such four Months , on the Market-day of any Borough
or Corporation where such Offender shall be committed , or on the
Market-day of some Town , between the Hours of eleven and two of the
Clock . STATUTES-171X-1,5,58.164

III. And it is hereby further enacted , That before any such Offender
or Offenders shall be discharged , he , she , and they shall find
sufficient Sureties for his , her , or their good Behaviour for the
Space of two Years thence next ensuing ; any Law , Custom or
Construction to the contrary notwithstanding . STATUTES-171X-1,5,58.165

IV. And whereas divers Woods , Underwoods and Coppices have been
heretofore , and lately set on Fire , or burnt , to the great
Discouragement of Planting : STATUTES-171X-1,5,58.166

Be it therefore enacted and declared by the Authority aforesaid , That
if any Person or Persons shall , from and after the said twenty-fourth
Day of <font> June <$$font> one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen ,
maliciously set on Fire , or burn , or cause to be burnt , any Wood ,
Underwood , or Coppice , or any Part thereof , such malicious setting on
Fire , burning or causing to be burnt , shall be and is hereby declared
and made Felony , and the Offender and Offenders shall suffer , and be
liable to all the Penalties and Forfeitures , as other Felons by the Law
now are ; and where such Offences are committed in that Part of <font>
Great Britain <$$font> called <font> Scotland <$$font> , such Offender
and Offenders shall suffer and be liable as wilful Fire-raisers ,
according to an Act passed in the seventh Year of her late Majesty Queen
<font> Anne <$$font> , intituled , <font> An Act for improving the Union
of the two Kingdoms ; <$$font> any Thing in this Act contained , or in
any other Law or Statute to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,58.167

<P_5,59>

<heading>

Cap. XLIX . STATUTES-171X-1,5,59.170

<$$heading>

An Act to revive and continue an Act of the eighth and ninth Years of
the Reign of his late Majesty King <font> William <$$font> , for Repair
of the Piers of <font> Bridlington <$$font> alias <font> Burlington
<$$font> , in the <font> East-Riding <$$font> of the County of <font>
York . <$$font> STATUTES-171X-1,5,59.172

The Act 8 & 9 W. 3 . c. 29 . revived and continued to <font> June
<$$font> 24 , 1730 . STATUTES-171X-1,5,59.173

Trustees appointed , STATUTES-171X-1,5,59.174

and to have the same Powers as the Trustees in the said Act .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,59.175

PR.

<heading>

Cap. L . STATUTES-171X-1,5,59.178

<$$heading>

An Act for appointing Commissioners to enquire of the Estates of certain
Traitors , and of Popish Recusants , and of Estates given to
superstitious Uses , in order to raise Money out of them severally for
the Use of the Publick . STATUTES-171X-1,5,59.180

EXP.

XXXI. And whereas several of the Traitors , whose Estates are to be
enquired of , as above , were on the said twenty-fourth of <font> June
<$$font> one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_fifteen in Possession of
heritable Jurisdictions annexed to their Families , commonly called
Constabularies , Regalities , Admiralties , Stewartries or Sheriffships
; all which heritable Jurisdictions so possessed by particular Families
, without any immediate Commission from the Crown , have been found by
Experience to occasion great Obstruction to Justice , and to prevent the
Influence and Use of the many good and laudable Laws of this Realm :
STATUTES-171X-1,5,59.182

Be it therefore enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That all the said
heritable Jurisdictions , commonly called Constabularies , Regalities ,
or Admiralties , which were in the Possession of the above-mentioned
Traitors on the said twenty-fourth Day of <font> June <$$font>
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_fifteen , and which are or shall become
forfeited within the Times above limited , shall from and after the
first Day of <font> November <$$font> in the Year
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen be suppressed and extinguished ,
and so remain in all Time to come ; so that it shall not be lawful , at
any Time after the said first Day of <font> November <$$font> in the
Year one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_sixteen , to sell or grant any
manner of Way , nor by any Title of Conveyance whatsoever , any of the
aforesaid forfeited heritable Jurisdictions , commonly called
Constabularies , Regalities or Admiralties , to any Person or persons
Family or Families , nor to erect any such heritable Jurisdictions in
the Room of the said forfeited heritable Jurisdictions .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,59.183

XXXII. Provided always , That the several forfeited Sheriffships
{TEXT:sheriffships} and Stewartries shall subsist and remain with the
same Powers and Privileges which belonged to them at the Time of the
said Forfeiture ; and that the said forfeited Sheriffships and
Stewartries be , and they are hereby declared to be annexed to the Crown
, so as not to be alienated by any Gift or Grant , otherwise than to
such Person or Persons as his Majesty , his Heirs and Successors shall
think fit to grant them , during Pleasure only .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,59.184

XXXIII. Provided also , That the several Places , Towns , Villages and
Bounds , which were subject to the said Jurisdictions , commonly called
Constabularies or Regalities , to be suppressed , as above , shall , and
they are hereby ordained and appointed to become subject to the several
Sheriffships or Stewartries within the Bounds of which they lie , in the
same Manner that the other Places , Towns , Villages and Bounds which
were not erected in or made subject to Constabularies or Regalities ,
are and were subject to their respective Sheriffships or Stewartries ;
and that the Places and Bounds subject to the Admiralties or
Vice-admiralties , which are forfeited and suppressed , as above , shall
and they are hereby ordained and appointed to become subject to , and
under the immediate Jurisdiction of the Court of Admiralty established
in <font> Scotland <$$font> , and reserved by the Articles of Union ;
any Thing herein , or any other Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding . STATUTES-171X-1,5,59.185

<heading>

Cap. LI . STATUTES-171X-1,5,59.187

<$$heading>

An Act for repealing so much of the Act of the twelfth and thirteenth
Years of the Reign of King <font> William <$$font> the Third , intituled
, <font> An Act for the further Limitation of the Crown , and better
securing the Rights and Liberties of the Subject <$$font> , as enacts ,
That no Person who should come to the Possession of the Crown , shall go
out of the Dominions of <font> England <font> , <font> Scotland <$$font>
or <font> Ireland <$$font> , without Consent of Parliament .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,59.189

Whereas it has pleased Almighty God to place his Majesty on the Throne
of his Ancestors , and farther to bless these Nations with a numerous
Progeny of his said Majesty's Royal Family , and in particular , with a
Prince endowed with all Virtues and Qualifications requisite to render
Posterity flourishing and happy : STATUTES-171X-1,5,59.190

And whereas it is agreeable to the ancient Constitution of these
Kingdoms , that the Person of the King or Queen should freely enjoy all
and every the just and undoubted Rights , Liberties and Privileges of
the Crown : STATUTES-171X-1,5,59.191

And whereas by an Act of Parliament passed in the twelfth and thirteenth
years of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King <font> William
<$$font> the Third <paren> of glorious Memory <$$paren> intituled ,
<font> An Act for the farther Limitation of the Crown , and better
securing the Rights and Liberties of the Subject <$$font> , It was
<paren> amongst other Things <$$paren> enacted , That no Person who
should thereafter come to the Possession of the Crown , should go out of
the Dominions of <font> England <$$font> , <font> Scotland <$$font> or
<font> Ireland <$$font> , without Consent of <P_5,60> Parliament , which
Restriction may prove inconvenient with regard to the Service of our
Sovereign Lord the King , <paren> by God's Mercy now possessed of the
Crown <$$paren> and of his Heirs and Successors :
STATUTES-171X-1,5,60.192

Be it therefore enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty , by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and
Commons , in this present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of
the same , That the Clause in the said recited Act contained , which
provided and enacted , That no Person who should come to the Possession
of the Crown , should go out of the Dominions of England <$$font> ,
<font> Scotland <$$font> or <font> Ireland <$$font> , without Consent of
Parliament , and the Restriction by the same Clause meant or intended ,
are and shall be repealed , and shall for ever be and be deemed and
taken to be void and of none Effect ; any Thing in the said recited Act
, or any other Act to the contrary notwithstanding .
STATUTES-171X-1,5,60.193

