<BEGIN_statutes-1835-1>

<P_75,1>

<heading>

The Statutes at Large . STATUTES-1835-1,75,1.4

Anno Regni Gulielmi IV. Britanniarum Regis , Quinto .
STATUTES-1835-1,75,1.5

<$$heading>

At the Parliament begun and holden at <font> Westminster <$$font> , the
Nineteenth Day of <font> February <$$font> , <font> Anno Domini <$$font>
1835 , in the Fifth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord William the
Fourth , by the Grace of God , of the United Kingdom of <font> Great
Britain <$$font> and <font> Ireland <$$font> , King , Defender of the
Faith : being the First Session of the Twelfth Parliament of the United
Kingdom of <font> Great Britain <$$font> and <font> Ireland . <$$font>
STATUTES-1835-1,75,1.7

<heading>

Cap. I . STATUTES-1835-1,75,1.9

<$$heading>

An Act to explain an Act of the First Year of His present Majesty , for
the more effectual Administration of Justice in <font> England <$$font>
and <font> Wales <$$font> , so far as relates to the Execution of
Criminals in the County of <font> Chester . <$$font>
STATUTES-1835-1,75,1.11

<bracket> 20th <font> March <$$font> 1835 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1835-1,75,1.12

Whereas by an Act passed in the First Year of His present Majesty ,
intituled <font> An Act for the more effectual Administration of Justice
in <$$font> England <font> and <$$font> Wales , the Jurisdiction , Power
, and Authority of His Majesty's Court of Session of the County Palatine
of <font> Chester <$$font> , and of the Judges thereof , was abolished ;
and it was , among other Things , enacted , that the Assizes should be
held for the Trial and Despatch of all Matters Criminal and Civil within
the County of <font> Chester <$$font> , under and by virtue of
Commissions of Assize , Oyer_and_Terminer , Gaol_Delivery , and other
Writs and Commissions to be issued in like Manner and Form as had been
usual for the Counties in <font> England <$$font> ,
STATUTES-1835-1,75,1.13

and that all Laws and Statutes then in force relating to the Execution
of such Commissions when issued for Counties in <font> England <$$font>
should extend and be applied to the Execution of the Commissions issued
for the County of <font> Chester <$$font> under the Authority of that
Act ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,1.14

and it was provided and enacted , that nothing in that Act contained
should be construed to abolish or affect the Obligations and Duties or
the Jurisdiction or Rights then lawfully imposed upon , performed , or
claimed and exercised by the Mayor and Citizens of <font> Chester
<$$font> in the Courts of the County of the City of <font> Chester
<$$font> or otherwise , save and except that such Writs of Error or
false Judgment as might <P_75,2> then by any Charter or Usage of the
said Corporation be brought upon the Judgments of the said Courts , or
any of them , before any of the Courts abolished by that Act , should
thereafter be issued , as in other Cases , from inferior Courts , and be
returnable into His Majesty's Court of King's Bench :
STATUTES-1835-1,75,2.15

And whereas before the passing of the said Act the Sheriffs of the
County of the City of <font> Chester <$$font> were by Law liable , and
were used and accustomed , to execute all Criminals convicted and
condemned to Death and ordered for Execution for Offences committed
within the County Palatine of <font> Chester : <$$font>
STATUTES-1835-1,75,2.16

And whereas since this passing of the said Act the Sheriffs of the
County of the City of <font> Chester <$$font> have executed Criminals
convicted for Offences committed within the County of <font> Chester
<$$font> , and sentenced to Death by virtue of Commissions issued under
the Authority of the said Act ; but Doubts are entertained whether the
Sentence of Death pronounced on Criminals for Offences committed within
the County of <font> Chester <$$font> ought to be executed by the
Sheriff of the County or by the Sheriffs of the County of the City of
<font> Chester : <$$font> STATUTES-1835-1,75,2.17

For the Removal therefore of such Doubts , and for better effecting the
Intention of the said Act , be it enacted by the King's most Excellent
Majesty , by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal , and Commons , in this present Parliament assembled , and by
the Authority of the same , That from and after the passing of this Act
the Sheriffs of the County of the City of <font> Chester <$$font> for
the Time being shall execute the Sentence of Death upon all Criminals
condemned to die for Offences committed within the County of <font>
Chester ; <$$font> and the Judges or any One of them , named in the
Commissions of Oyer_and_Terminer and Gaol_Delivery issued or from Time
to Time to be issued for the County of <font> Chester <$$font> , shall
have full Power and Authority to make such Orders on the Constable of
the Castle of <font> Chester <$$font> for delivering such Criminals to
the Sheriffs of the County of the City of <font> Chester <$$font> , and
on the said Sheriffs for the Execution of such Criminals by the said
Sheriffs , as such Judges or Judge shall think fit ; all which Orders
the said Constable and Sheriffs shall be and they are hereby required to
obey according to the Exigency thereof . STATUTES-1835-1,75,2.18

II. Provided always , and be it enacted , That if at any Time it shall
seem fit to any Judge before whom any Criminal shall be convicted and
sentenced to die for any Offence committed within the County of <font>
Chester <$$font> , that such Criminal should be executed at any Place
not within the Jurisdiction of the Sheriffs of the City of <font>
Chester <$$font> , but within the County of <font> Chester <$$font> , it
shall be lawful for such Judge to make any Order which he may think fit
upon the Sheriff of the County of <font> Chester <$$font> to execute
such Criminal at such Place , and also upon the Constable of the Castle
of <font> Chester <$$font> to deliver such Criminal to the Sheriff of
the County , and to do and perform , {TEXT:.} and suffer to be done and
performed , all such Matters and Things as may be necessary for carrying
into effect and executing such Sentence ; and the said Sheriff and
Constable shall be liable and are hereby required to obey all such
Orders . STATUTES-1835-1,75,2.19

<P_75,3>

<heading>

Cap. II . STATUTES-1835-1,75,3.22

<$$heading>

An Act to amend an Act of the Thirty-eighth Year of King <font> George
<$$font> the Third , for preventing the Mischiefs arising from the
printing and publishing Newspapers , and Papers of a like Nature , by
Persons not known , and for regulating the Printing and Publication of
such Papers in other respects ; and to discontinue certain Actions
commenced under the Provisions of the said Act .
STATUTES-1835-1,75,3.24

<bracket> 20th <font> March <$$font> 1835 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1835-1,75,3.25

Whereas by an Act passed in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Reign of His
late Majesty King <font> George <$$font> the Third , intituled <font> An
Act for preventing the Mischiefs arising from the printing and
publishing Newspapers , and Papers of a like Nature , by Persons not
known , and for regulating the Printing and Publication of such Papers
in other respects <$$font> , certain Affidavits or Affirmations ,
containing such Matters and Things in the said Act specified and set
forth , relating to Newspapers and other Papers in the said Act
described , are required to be made and signed , and sworn or affirmed ,
and delivered to the Commissioners for managing His Majesty's Stamp
Duties , or to some of their Officer or Officers as therein mentioned ;
and it is by the said Act , amongst other Things , also enacted , that
in some Part of every Newspaper or other such Paper as aforesaid there
shall be printed the true and real Name and Names , Addition and
Additions , and Place and Places of Abode of the Printer and Printers
and Publisher and Publishers of the same , and also a true Description
of the Place where the same is printed : STATUTES-1835-1,75,3.26

And whereas certain Penalties are by the said Act imposed for any
Neglect or Omission to comply with the aforesaid Provisions ; and it is
by the said Act provided that the said Penalties respectively shall be
recovered by Action of Debt , Bill , Plaint , or Information in any of
His Majesty's Courts of Record at <font> Westminster <$$font> , and that
the same when recovered shall be , as to one Moiety thereof , to and for
the Use of His Majesty , His Heirs and Successors , and , as to the
other Moiety thereof , to and for the Use of the Person who shall inform
or sue for the same : STATUTES-1835-1,75,3.27

And whereas the Printers , Publishers , and Proprietors of divers
Newspapers have inadvertently neglected to comply with some of the
aforesaid Provisions of the said recited Act , and many Actions , Suits
, Informations , and Prosecutions have been brought and commenced
against such Printers , Publishers , and Proprietors , or some of them ,
by Persons who sue , inform , and prosecute , as well on their own
Behalf as on behalf of His Majesty , to recover various Penalties
incurred or alleged to have been incurred under or by virtue of the said
Act by reason of such Neglect ; and it is expedient that all further
Proceedings in such Actions , Suits , Informations , and Prosecutions
should be prevented , and such other Provision made in relation thereto
, and otherwise , as is herein-after mentioned : STATUTES-1835-1,75,3.28

Be it therefore enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty , by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and
Commons , in this present Parliament assembled , and <P_75,4> by the
Authority of the same , That immediately from and after the passing of
this Act it shall be lawful for any Person or Persons against whom any
Original Writ , Suit , Action , Bill , Plaint , or Information shall
have been sued out , commenced , or prosecuted on or before the Day of
the passing of this Act , for the Recovery of any pecuniary Penalty or
Penalties incurred under the said Act , except in the Cases herein-after
provided , to apply to the Court in which such Original Writ , Suit ,
Action , Bill , Plaint , or Information shall have been sued out ,
commenced , or prosecuted if such Court shall be sitting , or , if such
Court shall not be sitting , to any Judge of either of the Superior
Courts at <font> Westminster <$$font> for an Order that such Writ , Suit
, Action , Bill , Plaint , or Information shall be discontinued , upon
Payment of the Cost thereof out of Pocket incurred to the Time of such
Application being made , such Costs to be taxed according to the
Practice of such Court ; and every such Court or Judge is hereby
authorized and required , upon such Application , and Proof that
sufficient Notice has been given to the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs , or to
his or their Attorney , of the Application , to make such Order as
aforesaid ; and upon the making such Order and Payment or Tender of such
Costs as aforesaid , such Writ , Suit , Action , Bill , Plaint or
Information shall be forthwith discontinued . STATUTES-1835-1,75,4.29

II. Provided always , and be it enacted , That in all Cases in which
any such Writ , Suit , Action , Bill , Plaint , or Information sued out
or commenced on or before the Fourth Day of <font> March <$$font>
One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_thirty-five shall have been renewed or
continued before the passing of this Act , or upon which any Declaration
shall have been filed or delivered , or other Proceeding had , after the
said Fourth Day of <font> March <$$font> and before the passing of this
Act , it shall be lawful for such Court or Judge , upon such Application
and Proof as aforesaid , to make such Order as aforesaid for
discontinuing the same , upon Payment of the Costs out of Pocket of all
Proceedings had on or before the said Fourth Day of <font> March
<$$font> , to be taxed as aforesaid and of such Costs out of Pocket , if
any , of any Proceedings had after the said Fourth Day of <font> March
<$$font> , as the Court or Judge making such Order shall direct ; and
upon making such Order , and Payment or Tender of such Costs , such Writ
, Suit , Action , Bill , Plaint , or Information shall be forthwith
discontinued . STATUTES-1835-1,75,4.30

III. Provided always , and be it enacted , That in all Cases which any
such Writ , Suit , Action , Bill , Plaint , or Information shall have
been sued out or commenced at any Time subsequent to the said Fourth Day
of <font> March <$$font> , it shall be competent for such Court or Judge
as aforesaid to make such Order as aforesaid for discontinuing the same
, without Payment of any Costs ; and upon making such Order , such Writ
, Suit , Action , Bill , Plaint , or Information shall be forthwith
discontinued . STATUTES-1835-1,75,4.31

IV. Provided always , and be it enacted , That nothing here contained
shall extend or be construed to extend to any Action , Bill , Plaint ,
or Information in which any Judgment or Conviction shall have passed on
or before the Day of the passing of the Act , or to any Action , Bill ,
Plaint , or Information which shall have been or shall be commenced ,
prosecuted , entered , or filed <P_75,5> by or in the Name of His
Majesty's Attorney_General or Solicitor_General for and on behalf of His
said Majesty . STATUTES-1835-1,75,5.32

V. And be it enacted , That from and after the passing of this Act all
Fines , Penalties , and Forfeitures imposed by or incurred or which may
be incurred under the said recited Act shall go and be applied to the
Use of His Majesty , His Heirs and Successors , and may be sued or
prosecuted for in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record at <font>
Westminster <$$font> , or in His Majesty's Court of Exchequer in <font>
Scotland <$$font> , as the Case may arise in <font> England <$$font> or
<font> Scotland <$$font> respectively , wherein no Essoign , Privilege ,
Protection , Wager of Law , or more than One Imparlance shall be allowed
; any thing in the said recited Act or in any other Act contained to the
contrary thereof notwithstanding . STATUTES-1835-1,75,5.33

VI. Provided always , and be it enacted , That from and after the
passing of this Act it shall not be lawful for any Person or Persons
whatsoever to commence , prosecute , enter , or file , or cause or
procure to be commenced , prosecuted , entered , or filed , any Action ,
Bill , Plaint , or Information in any of His Majesty's Courts , or
before any Justice or Justices_of_the_Peace , against any Person or
Persons for the Recovery of any Fine , Penalty , or Forfeiture made or
incurred or which may be incurred by virtue of the said recited Act ,
unless the same be commenced , prosecuted , entered , or filed in the
Name of His Majesty's Attorney_General or Solicitor_General in that Part
of <font> Great Britain <$$font> called <font> England <$$font> , or His
Majesty's Advocate for <font> Scotland <$$font> <paren> as the Case may
be respectively <$$paren> , or in the Name of the Solicitor of Stamps
and Taxes , or some other Officer of His Majesty's Stamp Duties in
<font> England <$$font> or <font> Scotland <$$font> respectively ; and
if any Action , Bill , Plaint , or Information shall be commenced ,
prosecuted , entered , or filed in the Name or Names of any other Person
or Persons than is or are in that Behalf before mentioned , the same and
every Proceeding thereupon had are hereby declared and the same shall be
null and void to all Intents and Purposes . STATUTES-1835-1,75,5.34

VII. And be it enacted , That this Act may be amended , altered , or
repealed by any Act or Acts to be passed in this present Session of
Parliament . STATUTES-1835-1,75,5.35

<heading>

Cap. III . STATUTES-1835-1,75,5.37

<$$heading>

An Act to apply certain Sums to the Service of the Year
One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_thirty-five . STATUTES-1835-1,75,5.39

<bracket> 20th <font> March <$$font> 1835 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1835-1,75,5.40

There shall be applied , for the Service of the Year 1835 , 2,000,000
<font> l. <$$font> now in the Exchequer ; also any Sums paid into the
Exchequer in respect of Exchequer Bills issued for Public Works and
Fisheries ; also 60,000 <font> l. <$$font> to be paid by the <font>
East India <$$font> Company ; and any Balance paid in by the Bank of
<font> England <$$font> on or before the Fifth of <font> April <$$font>
One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_thirty-six pursuant to 56 <font> G.
<$$font> 3 . <font> c. <$$font> 97 . ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,5.41

provided that if at any Time the Balance shall be reduced to less than
100,000 <font> l. <$$font> then so much of the Monies advanced by the
Bank as shall be equal to the Sum by which the said Balance shall be
less than 100,000 <font> l. <$$font> shall be repaid .
STATUTES-1835-1,75,5.42

<P_75,6>

<heading>

Cap. IV . STATUTES-1835-1,75,6.45

<$$heading>

An Act for raising the Sum of Fifteen Millions by Exchequer Bills , for
the Service of the Year One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_thirty-five .
STATUTES-1835-1,75,6.47

<bracket> 20th <font> March <$$font> 1835 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1835-1,75,6.48

<heading>

Cap. V . STATUTES-1835-1,75,6.50

<$$heading>

An Act for punishing Mutiny and Desertion , and for the better Payment
of the Army and their Quarters . STATUTES-1835-1,75,6.52

<bracket> 13th <font> April <$$font> 1835 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1835-1,75,6.53

<bracket> <font> Number of Forces <$$font> , 81,271 .
STATUTES-1835-1,75,6.54

<font> This Act is the same , except as to Dates , and the Parts here
inserted , as <$$font> 4 <font> & <$$font> 5 <font> W. <$$font> 4.
<font> c. <$$font> 6 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1835-1,75,6.55

IX. And be it enacted , That a District or Garrison Court-martial shall
consist of not less than Seven Commissioned Officers except in <font>
Bermuda <$$font> , the <font> Bahamas <$$font> , <font> Africa <$$font>
, and <font> New South Wales <$$font> , where it may consist of not less
than Five Commissioned Officers and may sentence any Soldier to any
Imprisonment , with or without hard Labour , in any public Prison or
other Place which such Court , or the Officer commanding the Regiment or
Corps to which the Offender belongs or is attached , shall appoint , and
may also direct that such Offender shall be kept in solitary Confinement
for the Whole or any Portion or Portions of such Imprisonment , or of
such Imprisonment with hard Labour , or may sentence any Soldier to
Corporal Punishment , not extending to Life or Limb , for Immorality ,
Misbehaviour , or Neglect of Duty and such Court may , in addition to
either of the said Punishments , sentence a Soldier to Forfeiture of all
Advantage as to additional Pay , and to Pension on Discharge , for
disgraceful Conduct , In wilfully maiming or injuring himself , or any
other Soldier at the Instance of such Soldier , with Intent to render
himself or such Soldier unfit for Service : In tampering with his Eyes :
In malingering , feigning Disease , absenting himself from Hospital
whilst under Medical Care , or other gross Violation of the Rules of any
Hospital , thereby wilfully producing or aggravating Disease or
Infirmity , or wilfully delaying his Cure : In purloining or selling
Government Stores : In stealing any Money or Goods , the Property of a
Comrade of a Military Officer , or of any Military or Regimental Mess :
In producing false or fraudulent Accounts or Returns : In embezzling or
fraudulently misapplying Public Money entrusted to him : Or in
committing any petty Offence of a felonious or fraudulent Nature , to
the Injury of or with Intent to injure any Person Civil or Military : Or
for any other disgraceful Conduct , being of a cruel , indecent , or
unnatural Kind : STATUTES-1835-1,75,6.56

And such Offender may be further put under Stoppages , not exceeding Two
Thirds of his daily Pay , until the Amount be made good of any Loss or
Damage arising out of his Misconduct ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,6.57

<P_75,7>

and if any Soldier shall be convicted of any such disgraceful Conduct ,
and shall be sentenced to Forfeiture of his Claim to Pension , the Court
may further recommend him to be discharged with Ignominy from His
Majesty's Service ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,7.59

and any such Court shall deprive a Soldier , if convicted of a Charge of
habitual Drunkenness , of his Liquor when issued in Kind , or of his
Allowance in lieu of Beer or Liquor , or of such Proportion thereof , or
of such Portion of his additional or regular Pay , for such Period , not
exceeding Two Years , as may accord with His Majesty's Articles of War ,
subject to Restoration on subsequent good Conduct ;
STATUTES-1835-1,75,7.60

and in addition to any such Punishment , the Court may , if it shall
think fit , sentence such Offender to Imprisonment or to Corporal
Punishment ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,7.61

provided that in all the foregoing Cases the Sentences of a District or
Garrison Court-martial shall be confirmed by the General Officer ,
Governor , or Senior Officer in command of the District , Garrison ,
Island , or Colony ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,7.62

and the President of every Court-martial , other than a General
Court-martial , not being under the Rank of Captain , shall be appointed
by the Officer convening such Court-martial ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,7.63

provided that such Court-martial shall not have Power to pass any
Sentence of Death or Transportation . STATUTES-1835-1,75,7.64

XXII. And be it enacted , That it shall be lawful for the Constable of
any Place where any Person reasonably suspected to be a Deserter shall
be found , or of any adjoining Place , and if no such Constable can be
immediately met with , then for any Officer or Soldier in His Majesty's
Service , to apprehend or cause such suspected Person to be apprehended
, and to cause him to be brought before any Justice living in or near
such Place , and acting for the same or any adjoining County , who hath
hereby Power to examine such suspected Person ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,7.65

and if by his Confession , or the Testimony of One or more Witnesses
upon Oath , or by the Knowledge of such Justice , it shall appear that ,
such suspected Person is a Soldier , and ought to be with the Corps to
which he belongs , such Justice shall forthwith cause him to be conveyed
to some public Prison in such Place , or if there be no public Prison in
such Place , then , at the Discretion of such Justice_of_the_Peace , to
the nearest or most convenient public Prison in the same or any next
adjoining County , or to the Provost Marshal in case such Deserter shall
be apprehended within the City or Liberties of <font> Dublin <$$font> or
Places adjacent ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,7.66

or if such Deserter shall be apprehended by any Party of Soldiers of his
own Regiment , or shall be apprehended in the Vicinity of the Head
Quarters or of any Depôt of the Regiment to which he shall belong , then
such Justice may deliver such Deserter to the Party of his Regiment ,
STATUTES-1835-1,75,7.67

or may order such Deserter to be taken to the Head Quarters or Depôt of
the Regiment to which he shall belong , instead of committing him to
Prison ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,7.68

and such Justice shall transmit an Account thereof , in the Form
prescribed in the Schedule annexed to this Act , to the Secretary at War
, specifying at the Foot thereof the Commitment to Prison , or Delivery
of such Deserter to the Party of his Regiment in order for his being
taken to the Head Quarters or Depôt of his Regiment , as the Case may be
, to the end that such Person may be removed by an Order from the Office
of the said Secretary at War , and proceeded <P_75,8> against according
to Law ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,8.69

and such Justice shall also send to the Secretary at War a Report ,
stating the Names of the Persons by whom the Deserter was apprehended
and secured ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,8.70

and the Secretary at War shall transmit to such Justice an Order for the
Payment to such Persons of such Sum , not exceeding Forty Shillings , as
the Secretary at War shall be satisfied they are entitled to , according
to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act : STATUTES-1835-1,75,8.71

Provided also , that the Fee or Reward taken by any Justice or his Clerk
, in respect of any Information , Commitment , or Report as aforesaid ,
shall in no Case exceed the Sum of Two Shillings .
STATUTES-1835-1,75,8.72

XXVIII. And be it enacted , That the Gaoler or Person having the
immediate Inspection of any Prison , Gaol , or House of Correction in
every Part of His Majesty's Dominions shall diet and supply every
Soldier with Fuel and other Necessaries according to the Regulations of
the Prison to which he shall be committed , and shall receive on account
of every Soldier , during the Period of his Imprisonment , Sixpence
<font> per_Diem <$$font> , which the Secretary at War shall cause to be
issued out of the Subsistence of such Soldier , upon Application in
Writing , signed by any Justice within whose Jurisdiction such Place of
Confinement shall be locally situated , together with a Copy of the
Order of Commitment , and which Sum of Sixpence <font> per_Diem <$$font>
shall be carried to the Credit of the Fund from which the Expence of
such Prison or House of Correction is defrayed ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,8.73

and such Gaoler is hereby required to receive and confine every Deserter
who shall be delivered into his Custody by any Soldier conveying such
Deserter under lawful Authority , on Production of the Warrant of the
Justice_of_the_Peace on which such Deserter shall have been taken , or
some Order from the Office of the Secretary at War , which Order shall
continue in force until the Deserter shall have arrived at his
Destination , STATUTES-1835-1,75,8.74

and such Gaoler shall be entitled to One Shilling for the safe Custody
of the said Deserter while halted on the March , and to such Subsistence
for his Maintenance as shall be directed by His Majesty's Regulations .
STATUTES-1835-1,75,8.75

XXXIV. And be it enacted , That every Person who shall receive
Enlisting Money from any Person employed in the Recruiting Service , he
being an Officer , Non-commissioned Officer , or an attested Soldier ,
shall be deemed to be enlisted as a Soldier in His Majesty's Service ,
and while he shall remain with the Recruiting Party shall be entitled to
be billetted ; and every Person who shall enlist any Recruit shall first
ask the person offering to enlist whether he does or does not belong to
the Militia , and shall cause to be taken down , in Writing , the Name
and Place of Abode of such Recruit ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,8.76

and when any Person shall be enlisted as a Soldier in His Majesty's Land
Service he shall within Four Days , any intervening <font> Sunday
<$$font> not included , but not sooner than Twenty-four Hours after such
Enlisting , appear , together with some Person employed in the
Recruiting Service of the Party with which he shall have enlisted ,
before a Justice , or , in <font> Scotland <$$font> , before any Baillie
of a Royal Burgh , residing within the Vicinity of the Place , and
acting for the Division or District where such Recruit shall have been
enlisted , and not being an Officer in the Army ;
STATUTES-1835-1,75,8.77

and if such Recruit shall declare <P_75,9> his having voluntarily
enlisted , the said Justice shall put to him the several Questions
contained in the Schedule to this Act annexed , STATUTES-1835-1,75,9.78

and shall record or cause to be recorded in Writing his Answers
thereunto ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,9.79

and the said Justice is hereby required forthwith to cause the Answers
so recorded in Writing , and the First and Second Articles of the Second
Section of the Articles of War against Mutiny and Desertion , to be read
over in his own Presence to such Recruit , and to administer to such
Recruit the Oath in the Schedule to this Act annexed for limited or
unlimited Service , or for Service in the Forces of the <font> East
India <$$font> Company , as may be applicable to the Case of the Recruit
, and no other Oaths , any thing in any Acts to the contrary
notwithstanding ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,9.80

and the said Justice is hereby required to give , under his Hand , the
Certificate in the Schedule to this Act annexed ;
STATUTES-1835-1,75,9.81

and if any such Recruit so to be certified shall refuse to take the Oath
in the Schedule to this Act annexed before the said Justice , it shall
be lawful for the Officer or Non-commissioned Officer with whom he
enlisted to detain and confine such Person until he shall take the said
Oath of Fidelity . STATUTES-1835-1,75,9.82

XXXVI. And be it enacted , That if any Recruit shall receive the
Enlisting Money from any Person employed in the Recruiting Service
<paren> knowing it to be such <$$paren> , and shall abscond or refuse to
go before such Justice , or shall thereafter absent himself from the
Recruiting Party or Person with whom he enlisted , and shall not
voluntarily return to go before some Justice within such Period of Four
Days aforesaid , such Recruit shall be deemed to be enlisted and a
Soldier in His Majesty's Service , as fully to all Intents and Purposes
as if he had been duly attested , and may be apprehended and punished as
a Deserter , or for being absent without Leave , under any Articles of
War made for Punishment of Mutiny and Desertion ; and such Recruit shall
not be discharged by any Justice_of_the_Peace after the Expiration of
such Four Days as aforesaid , unless it shall be proved to the
Satisfaction of such Justice that the true Name and Residence of the
Recruit was disclosed and known to the Recruiting Party , and that no
Notice was given to the Recruit , or left at his usual Place of Abode ,
of his having so enlisted ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,9.83

provided that in every Case wherein any Recruit shall have received
Enlisting Money , and shall have absconded from the Party , so that it
shall not be possible immediately to apprehend and bring him before a
Justice , the Officer or Non-commissioned Officer commanding the Party
shall produce to the Justice before whom the Recruit ought regularly to
have been brought for Attestation a Certificate of the Name and Place of
Residence of such Recruit ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,9.84

and the Justice to whom such Certificate shall be produced shall , after
satisfying himself that the Recruit who had absconded can@ @not be found
and apprehended , transmit a Duplicate thereof to His Majesty's
Secretary at War , in order that , in the event of such Recruit being
afterwards apprehended and reported as a Deserter , the Facts of his
having received Enlisting Money , and having absconded after having been
enlisted , may be ascertained , before he be finally adjudged to be a
Deserter ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,9.85

and any Recruit who shall enlist into His Majesty's Forces , and who
shall be discovered to be incapable of active Service ; by reason of any
<P_75,10> Infirmity concealed or not declared by such Recruit before the
Justice at the Time of his Attestation , and mentioned therein , may be
transferred into any Garrison or Veteran or Invalid Battalion , or into
His Majesty's Marine Forces , notwithstanding he shall have enlisted for
any particular Regiment , STATUTES-1835-1,75,10.86

and shall be entitled to receive such Proportion or Residue of Bounty
only as His Majesty may allow in that Behalf , instead of the Bounty
upon which such Man shall have been enlisted , any thing in any Act or
Acts , or any Rules and Regulations relating to Soldiers , to the
contrary notwithstanding ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,10.87

and it shall be lawful for any Two Justices before whom such Recruit
shall be brought , and who shall be proved , upon Oath before them , to
have concealed his having been a Soldier and discharged , or to have
concealed his having been discharged upon any prior Enlistment , or to
have wilfully concealed any such Infirmity upon being attested , or to
have designedly made any false Representation as aforesaid , to adjudge
such Person to be a Rogue and Vagabond , and to sentence him to such
Punishment as by any Law now in force may be inflicted upon Rogues and
Vagabonds and Vagrants and incorrigible Rogues ;
STATUTES-1835-1,75,10.88

and any Recruit who shall designedly make any false Representation of
any Particular contained in the Oaths and Certificates in the Schedule
to this Act annexed , before the Justice , at the Time of his
Attestation , and shall obtain any Enlisting Money or Bounty for
entering into His Majesty's Service , or any other Money , shall be
deemed guilty of obtaining Money under false Pretences , within the true
Intent and Meaning , if in <font> England <$$font> , of an Act ,
intituled <font> An Act for consolidating and amending the Laws in
<$$font> England <font> relative to Larceny and other Offences connected
therewith ; <$$font> and if in <font> Ireland <$$font> , of an Act
passed in the Ninth Year of the Reign of His late Majesty , intituled
<font> An Act for consolidating and amending the Laws in <$$font>
Ireland <font> relative to Larceny and other Offences connected
therewith ; <$$font> STATUTES-1835-1,75,10.89

and the Production of such Certificate , and Proof of the Handwriting of
the Justice giving such Certificate , shall be sufficient Evidence of
such Party having represented the several Particulars contained in the
Oath sworn by him , and specified in the Certificate of the Justice at
the Time of his being attested ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,10.90

and that Proof by the Oath of One or more credible Witnesses , that the
Person so prosecuted hath voluntarily acknowledged that at the Time of
his Enlistment he belonged to the Militia , or to any Regiment in His
Majesty's Service , or to His Majesty's Navy or Marines , shall be
deemed and taken as Evidence of the Fact so by him acknowledged ,
without Production of any Roll or other Document to prove the same ;
STATUTES-1835-1,75,10.91

and any Man having been enrolled to serve in the Militia at the Time of
offering to enlist that {TEXT:missing_"that"} shall deny that he is a
Militia Man then actually enrolled and engaged to serve , or shall deny
to the Justice before whom he shall be attested that he belongs to the
Militia , shall , on Conviction thereof before any One Justice in the
United Kingdom , either upon Oath of One Witness or upon his own
Confession , or upon the Production of the Attestation , and the
before-mentioned Declaration of such Person , certified by the Secretary
at War or Deputy Secretary at War , be committed to the Common Gaol or
House of Correction , there to remain without Bail or Mainprize
<P_75,11> for and during any Time not exceeding Six Calendar Months ,
over and above any Penalty or Punishment to which such Person so
offending may be otherwise liable , STATUTES-1835-1,75,11.92

and shall , from the Day on which his Engagement to serve in the Militia
shall end , and not sooner , belong as a Soldier to the Corps of His
Majesty's Regular Forces , or of the <font> East India <$$font>
Company's Forces , into which he shall have so enlisted ;
STATUTES-1835-1,75,11.93

provided that every such Person shall be liable to serve , within the
United Kingdom of <font> Great Britain <$$font> and <font> Ireland
<$$font> , in any Regiment , Battalion , or Corps of His Majesty's
Regular Forces , or of the <font> East India <$$font> Company's Forces ,
in which he has so enlisted , during all the Time the Militia to which
he shall belong shall remain disembodied , or shall not be called out
for Training or Exercise , and shall during all such Time be subject to
all the Provisions of this Act , and liable to be apprehended and dealt
with and punished as a Deserter from the Corps in which he shall have so
enlisted , if he shall neglect or refuse to join and serve in such Corps
as aforesaid . STATUTES-1835-1,75,11.94

XLV. And be it enacted , That any Soldier who shall absent himself
without Leave , or who shall desert , shall , on Conviction by a General
or other Court-martial , in addition to any Punishment awarded by such
Court , forfeit his Pay for the Days on which he has so absented himself
without Leave , or on which he has been absent by such Desertion , and
that no Soldier shall be entitled to Pay or to reckon Service towards
Pay or Pension when in Confinement under any Sentence of any Court , or
during any Absence from Duty by Commitment under the Civil Power on a
Charge of any Offence cognizable by a Civil or Criminal Court , or by
reason of any Arrest for Debt , or as a Prisoner of War , or while in
Confinement under any Charge of which he shall afterwards be convicted ;
STATUTES-1835-1,75,11.95

provided that any Soldier acquitted of the Offence for which he was
committed shall , upon Return to his Duty in his Corps be entitled to
receive all Arrears of Pay growing due , and to reckon Service during
his Absence or Confinement ; and upon rejoining His Majesty's Service
from being a Prisoner of War , due Inquiry shall be made by a
Court-martial , and if it shall be proved to the Satisfaction of such
Court that the said Soldier was taken Prisoner without wilful Neglect of
Duty on his Part , and that he hath not served with or under or in any
Manner aided the Enemy , and that he hath returned as soon as possible
to His Majesty's Service , he may thereupon be recommended by such Court
to receive either the Whole of such Arrears of Pay , or a Proportion
thereof , and to reckon Service during his Absence ;
STATUTES-1835-1,75,11.96

provided that it shall be lawful for His Majesty's Secretary at War to
order or withhold the Payment of the Whole or any Part of the Pay of any
Officer or Soldier during the Period of Absence by any of the Causes
aforesaid . STATUTES-1835-1,75,11.97

LXI. And be it enacted , That all His Majesty's Officers and Soldiers ,
being in proper Staff or Regimental or Military Uniform , Dress or
Undress , and their Horses , <paren> but not when passing in any hired
or private Vehicle , <$$paren> and all Carriages and Horses belonging to
His Majesty , or employed in His Service , when conveying Persons or
Baggage under the Provisions of this Act , or returning therefrom ,
shall be exempted from Payment of any <P_75,12> Duties and Tolls on
embarking or disembarking from or upon any Pier , Wharf , Quay , or
Landing Place , or passing Turnpike Roads or Bridges , otherwise
demandable by virtue of any Act already made or hereafter to be made ;
and any Toll Collector who shall demand and receive Toll from any of His
Majesty's Officers or Soldiers , they being in proper Staff or
Regimental or Military Uniform , Dress or Undress , or for their Horses
, every such Toll Collector shall forfeit and pay any Sum not exceeding
Five Pounds for every such Offence , for which Forfeiture and Penalty he
shall be prosecuted before a Justice_of_the_Peace , and in no other Way
; STATUTES-1835-1,75,12.98

provided that nothing herein contained shall exempt any Boats , Barges ,
or other Vessels employed in conveying the said Persons , Horses ,
Baggage , or Stores along any Canal , from Payment of Tolls , in like
Manner as other Boats , Barges , and Vessels are liable thereto , except
when employed in Cases of Emergency as herein-before enacted .
STATUTES-1835-1,75,12.99

LXIII. And be it enacted , That if any Constable or other Person , who
by virtue of this Act shall be employed in billetting any Officers or
Soldiers in any Part of the United Kingdom , shall presume to billet any
such Officer or Soldier in any House not within the Meaning of this Act
, without the Consent of the Owner or Occupier thereof ; or shall
neglect or refuse to billet any Officer or Soldier on Duty , when
thereunto required , in such Manner as is by this Act directed ,
provided sufficient Notice be given before the Arrival of such Troops ;
or shall receive , demand , or agree for any Money or Reward whatsoever
, in order to excuse any Person from receiving such Officer or Soldier ;
or shall quarter any of the Wives , Children , Men or Maid Servants of
any Officer or Soldier in any such Houses , against the Consent of the
Occupiers ; or shall neglect or refuse to execute such Warrants of the
Justices as shall be directed to him for providing Carriages , Horses ,
or Vessels , or shall demand more than the legal Rates for the same ; or
if any Person appointed by such Constable to provide Carriages , Horses
, or Vessels shall do any Act or Thing by which the Execution of such
Warrants shall be hindered ; or if any Constable shall neglect to
deliver in to the Justices at Quarter Sessions Lists of Officers and
Soldiers of the Foot Guards quartered according to the Provisions of
this Act , or shall cause to be delivered defective Lists of the same ,
or if any Person , liable by this Act to have any Officer or Soldier
quartered upon him , shall refuse to receive and to afford proper
Accommodation or Diet in the House of such Person in which he is
quartered , and to furnish the several Things directed to be furnished
to Officers and Soldiers , or shall neglect or refuse to furnish good
and sufficient Stables , together with good and sufficient Hay and Straw
, for each Horse , at the Rate established by this Act , and in such
Quantities as shall be fixed by His Majesty's Regulations , not
exceeding Eighteen Pounds of Hay and Six Pounds of Straw <font> per_Diem
<$$font> for each Horse ; or if any Innkeeper or Victualler not having
good and sufficient Stables shall refuse to pay over to the Person or
Persons who may provide Stabling such Allowance by way of Compensation
as shall be directed by any Justice_of_the_Peace , or shall pay any Sum
or Sums of Money to any Soldier on the March in lieu of furnishing in
Kind the Diet and Small <P_75,13> Beer to which such Soldier is entitled
; such Constable , Victualler , or other Person respectively shall
forfeit for every such Offence , Neglect , or Refusal any Sum not
exceeding Five pounds or less than Forty Shillings .
STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.100

<heading>

Questions to be put separately by the Justice to a Recruit .
STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.102

<$$heading>

<font> Enlisting for unlimited Service . <$$font>
STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.104

1. What is your Name ? STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.105

2. In what Parish , and in or near what Town , and in what County ,
were you born ? STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.106

3. What is your Age ? STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.107

4. What is your Trade or Calling ? STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.108

5. Are you an Apprentice ? STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.109

6. Are you married ? STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.110

7. Are you ruptured or lame ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.111

have you ever been subject to Fits ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.112

or have you any Disability or Disorder which impedes the free Use of
your Limbs , or unfits you for ordinary Labour ?
STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.113

8. Are you willing to be attested to serve in the Regiment of
{COM:blank_in_text} until you shall legally be discharged ?
STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.114

9. On what Day and by whom were you enlisted ?
STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.115

10. For what Bounty did you enlist ? STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.116

11. Do you now belong to the Militia ? STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.117

12. Do you belong to any other Regiment , or to the Marines , Ordnance
, or Navy ? STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.118

13. Have you ever served in the Army , Marines , Ordnance , or Navy ?
STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.119

Note . STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.120

- The Justice is directed , in putting the Eleventh Question to the
Recruit , and before he receives his Answer , distinctly to apprize the
Recruit that if he belongs to the Militia , and denies the Fact , he is
liable to Six Months {COM:sic_without_apostrophe} Imprisonment .
STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.121

<font> Enlisting for limited Service . <$$font>
STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.122

The preceding Questions to be put by the Justice , except Question 8 ,
which is to be as follows : STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.123

8. Are you willing to be attested to serve in the Regiment of
{COM:blank_in_text} for the Period of {COM:blank_in_text} <bracket>
<font> this Blank to be filled up by the Justice with Seven Years for
Infantry , Ten Years for Cavalry , and Twelve Years for the Artillery ,
if the Person enlisted is of the Age of Eighteen Years or upwards ; but
if under the Age of Eighteen Years , then the Difference between his Age
and Eighteen to be added to such Seven , Ten , or Twelve Years , as the
Case may be <$$font> , <$$bracket> Years , provided His Majesty should
for so long require your Service , and also for such further Term , not
exceeding Six Months , as shall be directed by the Commanding Officer on
any Foreign Station , and not exceeding Three Years , as shall be
directed by any Proclamation of His Majesty , such additional Period ,
in the latter Case , to determine whenever Six Months of continued Peace
, to be reckoned from the Ratification of any definitive Treaty , shall
have elapsed subsequent to the Expiration of the said <bracket> Seven ,
Ten , <font> or <$$font> Twelve , <font> as the Case may be <$$font> ,
<$$bracket> Years ? STATUTES-1835-1,75,13.124

<P_75,14>

<font> Enlisting for either His Majesty's or the <$$font> East India
<font> Company's Service . <$$font> STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.126

Question 8 is to be put by the Justice as follows :
STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.127

8. Are you willing to be attested to serve in His Majesty's Army , or
in the Forces of the <font> East India <$$font> Company , according as
His Majesty shall think fit to order , until you shall be duly and
legally discharged ? STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.128

<font> Enlisting for the <$$font> East India <font> Company's Service .
<$$font> STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.129

Question 8 to be put by the Justice as follows :
STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.130

8. Are you willing to be attested to serve the <font> East India
<$$font> Company until you shall be legally discharged ? <font>
<bracket> Or if the Recruit enlists for limited Service then insert
<$$font> , for the Period of Twelve Years , <font> <bracket> if the
Person enlisting is of the Age of Eighteen Years or upwards , but if
under Eighteen Years , then the Difference between his Age and Eighteen
to be added to such Twelve Years , as the Case may be , and such Period
to be inserted instead of Twelve Years , <$$bracket> <$$font> provided
the said United Company should so long require your Service ?
STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.131

Oath to be taken by a Recruit enlisting for unlimited or limited Service
. STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.132

I {COM:blank_in_text} do make Oath , That the above Questions have been
separately put to me ; that the Answers thereto have been read over to
me ; and that they are the same that I gave , and are true .
STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.133

I do also make Oath , That I will be faithful and bear true Allegiance
to His Majesty , His Heirs and Successors , and that I will , as in Duty
bound , honestly and faithfully defend His Majesty , His Heirs and
Successors , in Person , Crown , and Dignity , against all Enemies , and
will observe and obey all Orders of His Majesty , His Heirs and
Successors , and of the Generals and Officers set over me .
STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.134

So help me God . STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.135

Witness my Hand {COM:blank_in_text} STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.136

Signature of Recruit . {COM:blank_in_text} STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.137

Witness present . STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.138

Sworn before me at this {COM:blank_in_text} Day of
One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_blank STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.139

Signature of Justice {COM:blank_in_text} STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.140

<font> If enlisting for either His Majesty's or the <$$font> East India
<font> Company's Service , the following Addition is to be made to the
foregoing Oath . <$$font> STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.141

And that if His Majesty , His Heirs or Successors , shall please to
appoint me to serve in the Forces of the <font> East India <$$font>
Company , then I swear , that I will also be true to the said United
Company , and will duly observe and obey all their Orders , and the
Orders of their Generals and Officers who shall be lawfully set over me
. STATUTES-1835-1,75,14.142

<P_75,15>

<font> If enlisting for the <$$font> East India <font> Company's Service
, the following is to be added to the Oath . <$$font>
STATUTES-1835-1,75,15.144

And that I will also be true to the said United Company , and will duly
observe and obey all their Orders , and the Orders of their Generals and
Officers who shall be lawfully set over me . STATUTES-1835-1,75,15.145

<heading>

Cap. VI . STATUTES-1835-1,75,15.147

<$$heading>

An Act to indemnify the Governor_General and other Persons in respect of
certain Acts done in the Administration of the Government of the <font>
British <$$font> Territories in the <font> East_Indies <$$font>
subsequent to the Twenty-second Day of <font> April <$$font>
One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_thirty-four , and to make those Acts
valid . STATUTES-1835-1,75,15.149

<bracket> 13th <font> April <$$font> 1835 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1835-1,75,15.150

Whereas under and by virtue of an Act of Parliament made and passed in
the Fourth Year of the Reign of His present Majesty , intituled <font>
An Act for effecting an Arrangement with the <$$font> East India <font>
Company , and for the better Government of His Majesty's <$$font> Indian
<font> Territories , till the Thirtieth Day of <$$font> April <font>
One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_fifty-four <$$font> , the Superintendence
, Direction , and Control of the whole Civil and Military Government of
all the <font> British <$$font> Territories and Revenues in <font> India
<$$font> is vested in a Governor_General and Councillors , styled " The
Governor_General of <font> India <$$font> in Council " ; and it is
thereby enacted that there shall be Four Ordinary Members of the said
Council , to be appointed by the Court of Directors of the said Company
, as therein mentioned ; and it is thereby enacted that the Person who
should be Governor_General of the Presidency of <font> Fort William
<$$font> in <font> Bengal <$$font> on the Twenty-second Day of <font>
April <$$font> One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_thirty-four should be the
First Governor_General of <font> India <$$font> under that Act , and
that such Persons as should be Members of Council of the same Presidency
on that Day should be respectively Members of the Council constituted by
that Act ; and it is also enacted that the said Council shall from Time
to Time assemble at such Place or Places as shall be appointed by the
said Governor_General in Council within the said Territories ; and
various Provisions are made for the Administration of the Government of
the said Territories , all of which it is thereby enacted shall commence
and take effect from and after the Twenty-second Day of <font> April
<$$font> then next , <paren> that is to say , <$$paren> from and after
the Twenty-second Day of <font> April <$$font>
One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_thirty-four : STATUTES-1835-1,75,15.151

And whereas by a Commission under the Seal of the Honorable the <font>
East India <$$font> Company , bearing Date the Twenty-seventh Day of
<font> December <$$font> One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_thirty-three ,
duly issued by Order of the Court of Directors of the said Company in
that Behalf , the said Court did appoint Lord <font> William Cavendish
Bentinck <$$font> to be Governor_General of <font> India <$$font> , to
take upon himself the said Office upon and from the Twenty-second Day of
<font> April <$$font> One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_thirty-four , and
did further appoint <font> William Blunt <$$font> Esquire , <font>
Alexander Ross <$$font> Esquire , <font> William Byam Martin <$$font>
Esquire , and <font> Thomas Babington Macaulay <$$font> Esquire , to be
respectively the First , Second , Third , and Fourth <P_75,16> Ordinary
Members of the said Council ; and by another Commission bearing the same
Date the said Court did appoint Sir <font> Charles Theophilus Metcalfe
<$$font> Baronet to be Governor of the Presidency of <font> Agra
<$$font> , which Presidency is by the said recited Act directed to be
constituted , to take upon himself the said Office upon and from the
said Twenty-second Day of <font> April <$$font>
One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_thirty-four : STATUTES-1835-1,75,16.152

And whereas under and by virtue of the former Appointments of the Court
of Directors of the said Company at the Time of issuing the said
Commissions , and from thence until the Twenty-second of <font> April
<$$font> One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_thirty-four , the said Lord
<font> William Cavendish Bentinck <$$font> was Governor of the
Presidency of <font> Fort William <$$font> in <font> Bengal <$$font> ,
and the said Sir <font> Charles Theophilus Metcalfe <$$font> and the
said <font> William Blunt <$$font> and <font> Alexander Ross <$$font>
were respectively Members of the Council of the said Presidency , and in
virtue of the Provisions of former Acts the said Sir <font> Charles
Theophilus Metcalfe <$$font> was also Vice President of the said Council
: STATUTES-1835-1,75,16.153

And whereas on the said Twenty-second Day of <font> April <$$font>
One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_thirty-four the said Lord <font> William
Cavendish Bentinck <$$font> was , in consequence of Ill-health , at
<font> Ootacamund <$$font> in the Presidency of <font> Madras <$$font> ,
and the said Sir <font> Charles Theophilus Metcalfe <$$font> and the
aforesaid <font> William Blunt <$$font> were at <font> Calcutta <$$font>
, and the said <font> Alexander Ross <$$font> , <font> William Byam
Martin <$$font> and <font> Thomas Babington Macaulay <$$font> were not
in the <font> East_Indies <$$font> and Lieutenant Colonel <font> William
Morrison <$$font> , who had been appointed by the said Court a
Provisional Councillor of <font> India <$$font> , was in <font> Mysore ;
<$$font> and for these and other Reasons the Government of the said
Presidency and other the Territories belonging to the <font> East India
<$$font> Company in <font> India <$$font> was administered for a Time
otherwise than in accordance with the said recited Act ; and it is
expedient that the said Lord <font> William Cavendish Bentinck <$$font>
and Sir <font> Charles Theophilus Metcalfe <$$font> and <font> William
Blunt <$$font> , and the other Persons by whom the said Government was
so administered , and all Persons acting under the Order of them or any
or either of them , should be indemnified in manner herein after
mentioned , and their Acts rendered valid : STATUTES-1835-1,75,16.154

Be it therefore enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty , by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and
Commons , in this present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of
the same , That the said Lord <font> William Cavendish Bentinck <$$font>
, Sir <font> Charles Theophilus Metcalfe <$$font> , and <font> William
Blunt <$$font> , and also the several Persons who at any Time after the
said Twenty-second Day of <font> April <$$font>
One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_thirty-four were or acted as Members of
the Council of <font> India <$$font> , and also the Persons acting under
the Authority of them or any or either of them , shall be and they are
jointly and severally hereby indemnified , freed , and discharged from
and against all Actions , Suit , Prosecutions , and Penalties whatsoever
, for or on account or in respect of all or any Acts , Matters , and
Things whatsoever done , ordered , directed , or authorized by the said
Governor_General and Vice President and Members of Council , or any or
either of them , or by any Person or Persons acting under the Authority
of them or of any or either of them ; so only and provided the such Acts
, Matters , and Things shall have been done , ordered <P_75,17> directed
, or authorized <font> bonâ_fide <$$font> in the Exercise of the
Administration of the Government of the <font> British <$$font>
Territories in the <font> East_Indies <$$font> , between the said
Twenty-second Day of <font> April <$$font>
One_thousand_and_eight_hundred_and_thirty-four and the First Day of
<font> January <$$font> one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_thirty-five .
STATUTES-1835-1,75,17.155

II. And be it further enacted and declared , That all such Acts ,
Matters , and Things shall be as valid and effectual , and shall be and
be deemed to be of as much Force , Validity , and Effect , as the same
had been expressly authorized by the said recited Act .
STATUTES-1835-1,75,17.156

<heading>

Cap. VII . STATUTES-1835-1,75,17.158

<$$heading>

An Act for the Regulation of His Majesty's Royal Marine Forces while on
Shore . STATUTES-1835-1,75,17.160

<bracket> 13th <font> April <$$font> 1835 . <$$bracket> <font>
STATUTES-1835-1,75,17.161

This Act is the same , except as to Dates and the Sections here inserted
, as <$$font> 4 <font> & <$$font> 5 <font> W. <$$font> 4 . <font> c.
<$$font> 4 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1835-1,75,17.162

VI. And be it enacted , That a General Court-martial convened in any
Part of the King's Dominions , <paren> <font> Bermuda <$$font> , <font>
Africa ; <$$font> and <font> New South Wales <$$font> excepted ,
<$$paren> or in the Settlements of the <font> East India Company
<$$font> , or elsewhere , shall consist of not less than Thirteen
commissioned Officers , and if convened in <font> Bermuda <$$font> or
out of the King's Dominions <paren> excepting <font> Africa <$$font> and
<font> New South Wales <$$paren> <$$font> shall have not less than Seven
, and in <font> Africa <$$font> and <font> New South Wales <$$font> not
less than Five Commissioned Officers ; and in all Cases no judgement of
Death shall pass without the Concurrence of Two Thirds at the least of
the Members present ; and the President shall in no Case be the Officer
commanding in chief or Governor of the Garrison where the Offender shall
be tried , nor under the Degree of a Field Officer , unless where a
Field Officer can@ @not be had , nor in any Case whatsoever under the
Degree of a Captain . STATUTES-1835-1,75,17.163

IX. And whereas it may be expedient in many Cases that Officers of the
Land Forces should be associated with Royal Marine Officers for the
Purpose of holding Courts-martial ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,17.164

be it enacted , That when and as often as it shall be deemed necessary
it shall and may be lawful for Officers of Royal Marines and of the Land
Forces to sit in conjunction on any Court-martial to be held under the
Authority of this Act , and to proceed on the Trial of any Marine
Officer , Non-commissioned Officer , Drummer , or Private Man , in like
Manner to all Intents and Purposes as if such Court-martial were
composed of Marine Officers only , and whether the Officer by whose
Order such Court-martial is assembled belong to the Land or the Marine
Forces ; and the Officers composing such Court shall in such Cases take
Rank according to the Seniority of their Commissions in either Service .
STATUTES-1835-1,75,17.165

XI. And be it enacted , That a District or Garrison Court-Martial shall
consist of not less than Seven Commissioned Officers , except in <font>
Bermuda <$$font> , <font> Africa <$$font> , and <font> New South Wales
<$$font> , where it may consist of not less than Five Commissioned
Officers ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,17.166

and that it shall be lawful for such Court , although assembled under
the Authority of an Act of the present Session of Parliament , for
punishing Mutiny and Desertion , and for the better Payment of the Army
and their Quarters , to proceed to try any Marine or Marines below the
Rank of a Commissioned Officer for any <P_75,18> Offence committed by
any of them while serving in conjunction with His Majesty's Land Forces
, and to sentence any such Marine to any Imprisonment , solitary or
otherwise , and with or without hard Labour , in any public Prison or
other Place which such Court may appoint , or to Corporal Punishment not
extending to Life or Limb , for Immorality , Misbehaviour , or Neglect
of Duty and such Court may , in addition to either of the said
Punishments , sentence a Marine to Forfeiture of all Advantage as to
additional Pay , and to Pension on Discharge , for disgraceful Conduct
in wilfully maiming or injuring himself , or any other Marine at the
Instance of such Marine , with Intent to render himself or such other
Marine unfit for the Service ; in tampering with his Eyes ; in
malingering , feigning Disease , absenting himself from Hospital while
under Medical Care , or other gross Violation of the Rules of any
Hospital , thereby wilfully producing or aggravating Disease or
Infirmity , or wilfully delaying his Cure ; in purloining or selling
Government Stores ; in stealing any Money or Goods the Property of a
Comrade , of a Military Officer , or of any Military or Divisional or
Regimental Mess ; in producing false or fraudulent Accounts or Returns ;
in embezzling or fraudulently misapplying Public Money intrusted to him
; or for any other disgraceful Conduct , being of a cruel , indecent ,
unnatural , felonious , or fraudulent Nature ; and such Offender may be
further put under Stoppages , not exceeding Two Thirds of his daily Pay
until the Amount be made good of any Loss or Damage arising out of his
Misconduct ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,18.167

and if any Marine shall be convicted on any such disgraceful Conduct ,
and shall be sentenced to Forfeiture of his Claim to Pension , the Court
may further recommend him to be discharged with Ignominy from His
Majesty's Service ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,18.168

and any such Court shall deprive a Marine , if convicted of the Charge
of habitual Drunkenness , of his Liquor when issued in Kind or of his
Allowance in lieu of Beer or Liquor , or additional Pay , or of such
Portion of his daily Pay , for any Period not exceeding Two Years , as
may accord with the Rules and Articles of War , subject to Restoration
on subsequent good Conduct ; STATUTES-1835-1,75,18.169

and in addition to any such Punishment the Court may if it shall think
fit , sentence such Offender to Imprisonment or Corporal Punishment ;
STATUTES-1835-1,75,18.170

provided that in all the aforegoing Cases the Sentence of a District or
Garrison Court-martial shall be confirmed by the General Officer ,
Governor , or Senior Officer in command of the District , Garrison ,
Island , or Colony ; and the President of every Court-martial other than
a General Court-martial , not being under the Rank of Captain , shall be
appointed by the Officer convening such Court-martial :
STATUTES-1835-1,75,18.171

Provided always that such Court-martial shall not have Power to pass any
Sentence of Death or Transportation . STATUTES-1835-1,75,18.172

