<BEGIN_statutes-1775-1>

<P_8,428>

<heading>

Anno Regni Georgii III. Decimo Quinto . STATUTES-1775-1,8,428.4

<$$heading>

At the Parliament begun and holden at <font> Westminster <$$font> , the
twenty-ninth Day of <font> November , Anno Domini <$$font>
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_seventy-four , in the fifteenth Year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord <font> George <$$font> the Third , by
the Grace of God , of <font> Great Britain <$$font> , <font> France
<$$font> , and <font> Ireland <$$font> , King , Defender of the Faith ,
<font> &c. <$$font> being the first Session of the fourteenth
Parliament of <font> Great Britain . <$$font> STATUTES-1775-1,8,428.6

<heading>

Cap. I . STATUTES-1775-1,8,428.8

<$$heading>

An Act to allow the Importation of <font> Indian <$$font> Corn and Maize
, under certain Restrictions . STATUTES-1775-1,8,428.10

Whereas by an Act passed in the thirteenth Year of the Reign of his
present Majesty , intituled , <font> An Act to regulate the Importation
and Exportation of Corn <$$font> , it was , among other Things ,
provided , That when the Price of several Sorts of Grain exceeded
certain Prices therein mentioned , that the same , and other Grain and
Pulse , should be imported , paying a small Duty :
STATUTES-1775-1,8,428.11

And whereas the Grain , commonly called <font> Indian Corn <$$font> and
<font> Maize <$$font> , was in the said Act omitted , although
applicable to the same Purposes with some of the other Grains in the
said Act enumerated and permitted to be imported , as aforesaid ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,428.12

may it therefore please your Majesty that it may be enacted ; and be it
enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons , in this
present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of the same , That
from and after the passing of this Act , when Barley is allowed by the
said Act to be imported into this Kingdom , upon the Payment of a Duty
of two Pence <font> per <$$font> Quarter , the Importation of <font>
Indian <$$font> Corn and Maize be permitted , on the Payment of a Duty
of one Penny <font> per <$$font> Quarter , and no more , under the like
Provisions and Regulations , and with the like Appropriation of the Duty
on the same , as Barley is allowed to be imported by the said Act ; any
Law , Custom , or Usage , to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding . STATUTES-1775-1,8,428.13

<heading>

Cap. II . STATUTES-1775-1,8,428.15

<$$heading>

An Act for continuing and granting to his Majesty certain Duties upon
Malt , Mum , Cyder , and Perry for the Service of the Year
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_seventy-five . STATUTES-1775-1,8,428.17

<heading>

Cap. III . STATUTES-1775-1,8,428.19

<$$heading>

An Act for granting an Aid to his Majesty by a Land-tax to be raised in
<font> Great Britain <$$font> , for the Service of the Year
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_seventy-five . STATUTES-1775-1,8,428.21

<heading>

Cap. IV . STATUTES-1775-1,8,428.23

<$$heading>

An Act for the Regulation of his Majesty's Marine Forces while on Shore
. STATUTES-1775-1,8,428.25

<P_8,429>

<heading>

Cap. V . STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.28

<$$heading>

An Act to repeal so much of an Act made in the fourteenth Year of the
Reign of his present Majesty , intituled , <font> An Act to prevent the
Exportation to Foreign Parts of Utensils made use of in the Cotton ,
Linen , Woollen , and Silk Manufactures of this Kingdom <$$font> , as
relates to Wool Cards used in the Woollen Manufactures of this Kingdom ,
intended to be exported to any of his Majesty's Colonies or Plantations
in <font> America . <$$font> STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.30

Whereas by a Clause in an Act passed in the fourteenth Year of the Reign
of his present Majesty , intituled , <font> An Act to prevent the
Exportation to Foreign Parts of Utensils made use of in the Cotton ,
Linen , woollen , and Silk Manufactures of this Kingdom <$$font> , the
collecting of Tools and Implements used in the Woollen Manufacture ,
with Intent to export the same , is prohibited under certain Penalties
and Forfeitures : STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.31

And whereas the Exportation of Wool Cards to his Majesty's Colonies in
<font> North America <$$font> , hath been very beneficial for a great
Number of Years past , both to this Country and the said Colonies , and
the Prohibition of the exporting of them having proved extremely
prejudicial to great Numbers of poor Families in <font> England <$$font>
, by the Stoppage of the Trade of making such Wool Cards ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.32

be it enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of the same
, That so much of the said Clause as prohibits the collecting or
obtaining of Implements and Tools used in the Woollen Manufacture of
this Kingdom , for the Purpose of exporting the same to some other Part
or Place than <font> Great Britain <$$font> or <font> Ireland <$$font> ,
shall be , and the same is hereby repealed , as far as relates to Wool
Cards , or Stock Cards , not exceeding in Value four Shillings <font>
per <$$font> Pair , and Spinners Cards , not exceeding in Value one
Shilling and Sixpence <font> per <$$font> Pair , used in the said
Woollen Manufacture , intended to be exported to any of his Majesty's
Colonies or Plantations in <font> America . <$$font>
STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.33

<heading>

Cap. VI . STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.35

<$$heading>

An Act for punishing Mutiny and Desertion ; and for the better Payment
of the Army and their Quarters . STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.37

<heading>

Cap. VII . STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.39

<$$heading>

An Act to continue for a further Time an Act made in the eighth Year of
his present Majesty's Reign , intituled , <font> An Act to continue and
amend an Act made in the fifth Year of the Reign of his present Majesty
<$$font> , intituled , <font> An Act for Importation of Salted Beef ,
Pork , Bacon , and Butter , from <$$font> Ireland , <font> for a limited
Time , and for allowing the Importation of Salted Beef , Pork , Bacon ,
and Butter , from the <$$font> British <font> Dominions in <$$font>
America , <font> for a limited Time ; and for extending the Provisions
of the said Acts to Potatoes , and all Kinds of Pulse . <$$font>
STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.41

5 <font> Geo. <$$font> 3 . 8 <font> Geo. <$$font> 3 . and 9 , 10 ,
11 , 12 , 13 , and 14 <font> Geo. <$$font> 3 . further continued till
<font> March <$$font> 30 , 1776 . STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.42

Potatoes , &c. from <font> Ireland <$$font> may be imported Duty-free .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.43

<heading>

Cap. VIII . STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.45

<$$heading>

An Act for defraying the Charge of the Pay and Clothing of the Militia
in that Part of <font> Great Britain <$$font> called <font> England
<$$font> , for one Year , beginning the twenty-fifth Day of <font> March
<$$font> one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_seventy-five .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.47

<heading>

Cap. IX . STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.49

<$$heading>

An Act to amend an Act made in the ninth Year of the Reign of his
present Majesty , for making and maintaining a Navigable Canal from the
<font> Coventry <$$font> Canal Navigation to the City of <font> Oxford .
<$$font> STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.51

<heading>

Cap. X . STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.53

<$$heading>

An Act to refrain the Trade and Commerce of the Provinces of <font>
Massachuset's Bay <$$font> , and <font> New Hampshire <$$font> and
Colonies of <font> Connecticut <$$font> , and <font> Rhode Island
<$$font> , and <font> Providence Plantation <$$font> , in <font> North
America <$$font> , to <font> Great Britain <$$font> , <font> Ireland
<$$font> , and the <font> British <$$font> Islands in the <font>
West_Indies <$$font> , and to prohibit such Provinces and Colonies from
carrying on any Fishery on the Banks of <font> Newfoundland <$$font> ,
or other Places therein mentioned , under certain Conditions and
Limitations . STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.55

<heading>

Cap. XI . STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.57

<$$heading>

An Act to amend an Act , made in the eleventh Year of his present
Majesty's Reign , <font> For improving and completing the Navigation of
the Rivers <$$font> Thames <font> and <$$font> Isis , <font> from the
City of <$$font> London <font> to the Town of <$$font> Cricklade <font>
in the County of <$$font> Wilts . STATUTES-1775-1,8,429.59

<P_8,430>

<heading>

Cap. XII . STATUTES-1775-1,8,430.62

<$$heading>

An Act to enable the Commissioners , acting by virtue of an Act , made
in the twenty-seventh Year of the Reign of his Majesty King <font>
George <$$font> the Second , for draining and preserving the North Level
, Part of the Great Level of the Fens , called <font> Bedford Level
<$$font> , and divers Lands adjoining thereto , in the Manor of <font>
Crowland <$$font> , to charge further Taxes upon the said North Level ,
and the said adjoining Lands . STATUTES-1775-1,8,430.64

<heading>

Cap. XIII . STATUTES-1775-1,8,430.66

<$$heading>

An Act for the better Relief and Employment of the Poor within the
Hundreds of <font> East <$$font> and <font> West Flegg <$$font> , in the
County of <font> Norfolk . <$$font> STATUTES-1775-1,8,430.68

<heading>

Cap. XIV . STATUTES-1775-1,8,430.70

<$$heading>

An Act to explain and amend an Act , made in the fourteenth Year of his
present Majesty , intituled , <font> An Act to amend an Act , made in
the twenty-second year of the Reign of his late Majesty King <$$font>
George <font> the Second <$$font> , intituled , " <font> An Act for the
more effectual preventing of Frauds and Abuses committed by Persons
employed in the Manufacture of Hats , and in the Woollen , Linen ,
Fustian , Cotton , Iron , Leather , Fur , Hemp , Flax , Mohair , and
Silk Manufactures <$$font> ; <font> and for preventing unlawful
Combinations of Journeymen Dyers and Journeymen Hot Pressers , and of
all Persons employed in the said several Manufactures ; and for the
better Payment of their Wages . <$$font> " STATUTES-1775-1,8,430.72

Whereas by an Act made in the fourteenth Year of the Reign of his
present Majesty <paren> intituled , <font> An Act to amend an Act , made
in the twenty-second Year of the Reign of his late Majesty King <$$font>
George the <font> Second <$$font> , intituled , " An Act for the more
effectual preventing of Frauds and Abuses committed by Persons employed
in the Manufacture of Hats , and in the Woollen , Linen , Fustian ,
Cotton , Iron , Leather , Fur , Hemp , Flax , Mohair , and Silk
Manufactures ; and for preventing unlawful Combinations of Journeymen
Dyers and Journeymen Hot Pressers , and of all Persons employed in the
said several Manufactures ; and for the better Payment of their Wages
<$$paren> ; " certain Penalties therein mentioned are inflicted on
Persons convicted of reeling false or short Yarn , but no Provision is
made for Recovery of the said Penalties , or of the Costs and Charges
attending such Prosecutions , by means whereof the good Purposes
intended by the said Act are rendered ineffectual ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,430.73

May it therefore please your Majesty that it may be enacted ; and be it
enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons , in this
present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of the same , That
from and after the passing of this Act , the several pecuniary Penalties
inflicted by the said Act upon Persons who shall be convicted of reeling
false or short Yarn , together with the Costs and Charges attending such
Prosecutions , shall <paren> in case the same are not paid according to
the Order of the Justice or Justices before whom such Person or Persons
shall be so convicted <$$paren> be levied by Distress and Sale of the
Goods and Chattels of the Offender or Offenders , by Warrant or Warrants
under the Hand and Seal , or Hands and Seals , of the Justice or
Justices before whom such Offender or Offenders shall be so convicted ,
together with the Costs and Charges of making such Distress and Sale ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,430.74

and if no Goods and Chattels belonging to such Offender or Offenders can
be found sufficient to answer the said Penalties , together with the
Costs and Charges of such Distress and Sale , then such Justice or
Justices shall and may cause such Offender or Offenders to be committed
to the common Gaol , or House of Correction , of the County , Riding ,
Division , City , Liberty , Town , or Place , where such Offence shall
be committed , there to remain without Bail or Mainprize for the Space
of one Calendar Month , unless such Penalties and Forfeitures , and the
reasonable Charges of such Distress and Sale , shall be sooner paid and
satisfied . STATUTES-1775-1,8,430.75

II. Provided nevertheless , and be it further enacted , That if any
Person or Persons shall think him , her , or themselves aggrieved by any
Thing done in pursuance of this Act , it shall and may be lawful for
such Person or Persons to appeal to the Justices_of_the_Peace , at the
next General or Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the
County , Riding , City , or Place , where the Cause of Complaint shall
arise ; and the Justices , in their said General or Quarter Sessions ,
are hereby required to hear and determine the Matter of every such
Appeal , and to make such Order therein as to them shall seem reasonable
, and according to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act ; which
Determination of the said Justices in Sessions , on every and any such
Appeal , shall be and are hereby declared to be final and conclusive .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,430.76

<heading>

Cap. XV . STATUTES-1775-1,8,430.78

<$$heading>

An Act to amend and render more effectual in his Majesty's Dominions in
<font> America <$$font> , an Act , passed in the present Session of
Parliament , intituled , <font> An Act for punishing Mutiny and
Desertion , and for the better Payment of the Army and their Quarters
<$$font> , and for extending the Provisions of the said Act to his
Majesty's Marine Forces in <font> America . <$$font>
STATUTES-1775-1,8,430.80

<P_8,431>

<heading>

Cap. XVI . STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.83

<$$heading>

An Act to enable Sir <font> Nigel Gresley <$$font> Baronet , and <font>
Nigel Bowyer Gresley <$$font> Esquire , his Son , to make and maintain a
navigable Cut or Canal from certain Coal Mines in <font> Apedale
<$$font> to <font> Newcastle under Lyme <$$font> , in the County of
<font> Stafford . <$$font> STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.85

<heading>

Cap. XVII . STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.87

<$$heading>

An Act to indemnify such Persons as have omitted to qualify themselves
for Offices and Employments ; and to indemnify Justices_of_the_Peace ,
or others , who have omitted to register or deliver in their
Qualifications within the Time limited by Law , and for giving further
Time for those Purposes ; and to indemnify Members and Officers , in
Cities , Corporations , and Borough Towns , whose Admissions have been
omitted to be stamped according to Law , or , having been stamped , have
been lost or mislaid ; and for allowing them Time to provide Admissions
duly stamped ; and to give further Time to such Persons as have omitted
to make and file Affidavits of the Execution of Indentures of Clerks to
Attornies and Solicitors . STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.89

<font> <bracket> Further Time given for these Purposes , to 25th
December <$$font> 1776 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.90

<heading>

Cap. XVIII . STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.92

<$$heading>

An Act to restrain the Trade and Commerce of the Colonies of <font> New
Jersey <$$font> , <font> Pennsylvania <$$font> , <font> Maryland
<$$font> , <font> Virginia <$$font> , and <font> South Carolina <$$font>
, to <font> Great Britain <$$font> , <font> Ireland <$$font> , and the
<font> British <$$font> Islands in the <font> West_Indies <$$font> ,
under certain Conditions and Limitations . STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.94

<heading>

Cap. XIX . STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.96

<$$heading>

An Act to enable the Commissioners for executing the Office of Treasurer
of his Majesty's Exchequer , or the Lord High Treasurer for the Time
being , to compound with the Representatives of <font> Hugh Barlow
<$$font> , <font> Herbert Lloyd <$$font> , and <font> William Skyrme
<$$font> , a Debt due to his Majesty from <font> William Williams
<$$font> , deceased . STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.98

<heading>

Cap. XX . STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.100

<$$heading>

An Act to amend and render more effectual two Acts , passed in the sixth
and tenth Years of the Reign of his present Majesty , for making a
navigable Cut or Canal from the River <font> Trent <$$font> , at or near
<font> Wilden Ferry <$$font> , in the County of <font> Derby <$$font> ,
to the River <font> Mersey <$$font> , at or near <font> Runcorn-Gap .
<$$font> STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.102

<heading>

Cap. XXI . STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.104

<$$heading>

An Act for the better Relief and Employment of the Poor within the
Parish of <font> Saint Mary le Bone <$$font> , in the County of <font>
Middlesex <$$font> ; and for building a Workhouse in the said Parish .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.106

<heading>

Cap. XXII . STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.108

<$$heading>

An Act for vesting Part of the Garden of the Society of <font> Lincoln's
Inn <$$font> , in the County of <font> Middlesex <$$font> , in the
Accountant_General of the Court of Chancery , and his Successors , for
ever , for the Purpose of erecting thereon Offices for the
Accountant_General , and for the Register of the said Court .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.110

<heading>

Cap. XXIII . STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.112

<$$heading>

An Act for building a Workhouse , and for the better Relief and
Employment of the Poor , within the Parish of <font> Saint James
<$$font> , <font> Clerkenwell <$$font> , in the County of <font>
Middlesex . <$$font> STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.114

<heading>

Cap. XXIV . STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.116

<$$heading>

An Act for incorporating certain Persons , for the Relief of poor Widows
and Children of Clergymen within the County <font> of Huntingdon .
<$$font> STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.118

<heading>

Cap. XXV . STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.120

<$$heading>

An Act for taking down the Common Goal of the County of <font> Hertford
<$$font> , and for building a New Gaol in a more commodious Situation .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.122

<heading>

Cap. XXVI . STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.124

<$$heading>

An Act for appointing Commissioners for putting in Execution an Act of
this Session of Parliament , intituled <font> An Act for granting an Aid
to his Majesty by a Land Tax , to be raised in <$$font> Great Britain ,
<font> for the service of the Year
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_seventy-five . <$$font>
STATUTES-1775-1,8,431.126

<P_8,432>

<heading>

Cap. XXVII . STATUTES-1775-1,8,432.129

<$$heading>

An Act for admeasuring Waggons and other Carriages used in loading Coals
on board Ships at the several Ports of this Kingdom , in the same Manner
as at the Ports of <font> Newcastle <$$font> and <font> Sunderland .
<$$font> STATUTES-1775-1,8,432.131

Whereas by an Act of Parliament , made in the sixth and seventh Years of
the Reign of his late Majesty King <font> William <$$font> the Third ,
intituled , <font> An Act for the better Admeasurement of Keels and
Keel_Boats in the Port of <$$font> Newcastle , <font> and the Members
thereunto belonging <$$font> ; and by another Act , made in the eleventh
Year of the Reign of his late Majesty King <font> George <$$font> the
Second , Keels , and all other Carriages used for the Carriage of Coals
in the Ports of <font> Newcastle upon Tyne <$$font> and <font>
Sunderland <$$font> , upon the River <font> Wear <$$font> , and all
other Places within the Counties of <font> Northumberland <$$font> and
<font> Durham <$$font> , are to be admeasured and marked , as in and by
the said first-@ @recited Act is directed : STATUTES-1775-1,8,432.132

And whereas the said Admeasurement of Keels and other Carriages , used
for the Conveyance of Coals , in order to be shipped from those Ports ,
hath been found by Experience to tend greatly to the Accommodation of
Trade , and the Security of the Publick Revenue ; and it is expedient
that the Carriages used in loading Coals on board Ships or Vessels in
other Parts of <font> Great Britain <$$font> should be also admeasured
and marked , in order that the Coal Trade throughout the Kingdom may be
put upon a more equal Footing , and the Duties payable to his Majesty
thereon may be more effectually secured and collected ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,432.133

May it therefore please your Majesty that it may be enacted ; and be it
enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons , in this
present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of the same , That
from and after the fifth Day of <font> July <$$font>
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_seventy-five , it shall and may be lawful
for his Majesty , his Heirs and Successors , by his or their Commission
or Commissions issuing out of the Court of Exchequer in <font> England
<$$font> or <font> Scotland <$$font> respectively , to nominate and
appoint Commissioners for the admeasuring and marking all Keels , Boats
, Waggons , Barrows , Carts , and Coups , and all other Vessels or
Carriages whatsoever , which now are or hereafter may be used in the
Carriage of Coals , in order to be laden on board any Ship or Vessel for
Exportation to Foreign Parts , or to be carried Coastwise from any other
Port or Place of this Realm , in the same Manner as such Commissioners
are appointed in pursuance of the said first-@ @recited Act for
admeasuring and marking of Keels and other Carriages used for the
Carriage of Coals in the said Ports of <font> Newcastle <$$font> and
<font> Sunderland <$$font> ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,432.134

which Commissioners , so to be appointed in pursuance of this Act , or
any three or more of them , shall cause all Keels , Boats , Waggons ,
Barrows , Carts , and Coups , and all other Vessels and Carriages
whatsoever , so used as aforesaid , at every other Port in this Kingdom
, to be admeasured , weighed , numbered , and marked , at such Times and
Places , and by such Person and Persons , as the said Commissioners
shall respectively direct and appoint for that Purpose , in the Manner
hereafter expressed ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,432.135

that is to say , all Keels , Boats , Waggons , Barrows , Carts , and
Coups , and all other Vessels and Carriages whatsoever , used as
aforesaid in the Carriage of such Coals as are usually sold by the
Chalder , shall be measured with good middling Coals , by the Bushel
commonly called <font> the Coal Bushel <$$font> , made round , with a
plain and even Bottom nineteen Inches and an Half from Outside to
Outside , and to contain one <font> Winchester <$$font> Bushel and one
Quart of Water , according to the Standard for the <font> Winchester
<$$font> Bushel , described by an Act of Parliament made in the
thirteenth Year of the Reign of his late Majesty King <font> William
<$$font> the Third , for settling a Duty upon Malt , allowing thirty-six
Bushels heaped up to one Chalder ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,432.136

and all Keels , Boats , Waggons , Barrows , and all other Vessels and
Carriages used as aforesaid in the Carriage of such Coals as are usually
sold by Weight , shall be measured by the Ton , containing twenty
hundred_Weight , each hundred_Weight to contain one_hundred_and_twelve
Pounds Weight Avoirdupois {TEXT:Avoirdupoise} ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,432.137

and every such Waggon , Cart , Coup , or other Land Carriage , so
admeasured as aforesaid , shall be numbered , marked , and nailed , on
the Head and each Side thereof ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,432.138

and each and every Keel , Boat , or other Vessel , or Water Carriage so
used as aforesaid in the Carriage of such Coals as are usually told by
Weight , shall be admeasured by a dead Weight of Lead or Iron , allowing
twenty hundred_Weight Avoirdupois {TEXT:Avoirdupoise} to the Ton ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,432.139

and every such Keel , Boat , or other Vessel or Carriage , so used as
aforesaid in the Carriage of any Coals by Water , whether usually sold
by the Chalder or by Weight , so admeasured as aforesaid , shall be
numbered , marked , and nailed on each Side of the Stem and Stern and
Midship thereof , or in such other Manner as the said Commissioners
shall respectively direct , to denote what Quantity of Coals each
respective Carriage will hold and carry up to the Mark so set thereon ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,432.140

and the several and respective Duties due and payable to his Majesty ,
his Heirs and Successors , for and upon such Coals , shall be charged ,
collected , and paid for the same , according to the Quantity of Coals
such Keels , Boats , Waggons , Barrows , Carts , Coups , or other
Vessels , or Carriages , shall respectively contain up to the Mark so
set thereon ; any Law , Custom , or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding . STATUTES-1775-1,8,432.141

II. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That the
said Commissioners appointed in pursuance of this Act , or any three of
them , shall give three Days Notice of the Time and Place of such
Admeasurement to the Owner or Owners of such Keels , Boats , Waggons ,
Barrows , Carts , Coups , or other Vessels or Carriages ; and if after
such Notice given , any Keel or other Carriage whatsoever shall be used
or employed in the Carriage or Removal of any Coals , in order to be
laden on board any Ship or Vessel for Exportation to Foreign Parts , or
to be carried Coastwise in this Kingdom , before the same shall be
measured , numbered , marked , and nailed , as aforesaid , every such
Keel , Boat , Waggon , Barrow , Cart , Coup , or other Vessel or
Carriage , together with the Coals which shall be laden thereon , shall
be forfeited , <P_8,433> and the same shall and may be seized by any
Officer or Officers of the Customs , and prosecuted in the Manner
herein-after directed . STATUTES-1775-1,8,433.142

III. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That in
case after the admeasuring , numbering , marking , and nailing , of any
Keel , Boat , Waggon , Barrow , Cart , Coup , or other Vessel or
Carriage , the Number or Mark so set thereon as aforesaid , or any Part
thereof , shall be removed or altered , in order to frustrate the Intent
and Meaning of this Act , such Keel , Boat , Waggon , Barrow , Cart ,
Coup , or other Vessel or Carriage , and the Coals , if any shall be
laden thereon , shall be forfeited , and shall and may be seized and
prosecuted as aforesaid ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,433.143

and the Owner or Owners of such Keel , Boat , Waggon , Barrow , Cart ,
Coup , or other Vessel or Carriage , and each and every Person or
Persons who shall be any-ways {COM:sic} concerned in or privy to the
doing thereof , and who shall be convicted of such Offence upon the
Evidence of one or more credible Witness or Witnesses before any one or
more Justice or Justices_of_the_Peace for the County , Town , or Place ,
where the Offence shall be committed , shall respectively forfeit the
Sum of ten Pounds ; to be levied upon his , her , or their Goods and
Chattels by Distress and Sale thereof , by Warrant under the Hand and
Seal of such Justice or Justices , rendering the Overplus , if any , to
the Person or Persons distrained upon ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,433.144

and for Want of sufficient Distress , the Owner or Owners of such Keel ,
Boat , Waggon , Barrow , Cart , Coup , or other Vessel or Carriage , and
the Person or Persons so convicted of such Offence , shall , by like
Warrant , be committed to the Common Gaol for the County , Town , or
Place , where the Offence shall be committed , there to remain for the
Space of three Months without Bail or Main_prize , unless the said
Penalty of ten Pounds shall be paid before the Expiration of that Time .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,433.145

IV. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That from
and after the said fifth Day of <font> July , <$$font> any Officer or
Officers of the Customs appointed to examine and take an Account of the
Quantity of any Coals , Culm , or Cinders , which shall be laden or
shipped on board any Ship or Vessel at any Port or Place whatsoever in
this Kingdom , to be exported into Foreign Parts , or to be carried
Coastwise from such Port or Place to any other Port , Member , or Creek
, within the same Port , or to any other Port or Place in <font> Great
Britain <$$font> , shall and may freely enter and remain in and upon any
Staith , Wharf , or other Place , from whence such Coals , Culm , or
Cinders , are laden , or intended to be shipped off and laden , as
aforesaid ; and every Person who shall hinder , obstruct , molest , or
oppose any Officer or Officers of the Customs in the due Execution of
his or their Duty required and directed by this Act , shall , for every
such Offence , forfeit the Sum of one_hundred Pounds .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,433.146

V. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That all the
Forfeitures and Penalties herein before mentioned <paren> after
deducting the Charges of seizing , prosecuting , and recovering the same
<$$paren> shall be divided , one Moiety to his Majesty , his Heirs and
Successors , and the other Moiety to such Officer or Officers of the
Customs as shall seize or sue for the same ; and the said Forfeitures
and Penalties <paren> excepting in such Cases where other Directions are
given in this Act <$$paren> shall and may be prosecuted and sued for in
his Majesty's Court of Exchequer in <font> England <$$font> or <font>
Scotland <$$font> respectively . STATUTES-1775-1,8,433.147

VI. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That from
and after the said fifth Day of <font> July <$$font>
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_and_seventy-five {COM:sic_"and_and"} ,
the Collector and Comptroller , or other principal Officer of the
Customs , at every Port or Place in this Kingdom , where any Keels ,
Boats , Waggons , Barrows , Carts , or other Vessels or Carriages
whatsoever , shall be measured and marked in pursuance of the Directions
of this Act , or of any former Act or Acts of Parliament now in force ,
shall register , or cause to be registered , in a Book to be kept for
that Purpose , an Account of the Time and Place when and where the said
Keels , Boats , Waggons , Barrows , or other Vessels or Carriages , were
measured , marked , and nailed , with the Dimensions , and the Name of
the Owner or Owners thereof , and the Quantity of Coals each Keel , Boat
, Waggon , Barrow , or other Vessel or Carriage , will respectively hold
and carry up to the Mark set thereon ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,433.148

and every Person appointed , or to be appointed , to measure , mark ,
and nail such Keels , Boats , Waggons , Barrows or other Vessels or
Carriages , or to examine and take an Account of the Quantity of Coals
laden there from on board any Ship or Vessel , shall take an Oath before
the Collector and Comptroller , or other principal Officer of the
Customs at the Port or Place where he shall be so appointed , for the
true and faithful Performance and Discharge of his Duty , according to
the Directions and Instructions such Officer shall receive for that
Purpose from the respective Commissioners of his Majesty's Customs in
<font> Great Britain <$$font> , which Oath the said Collector and
Comptroller , or other principal Officer of the customs are hereby
authorised and impowered to administer . STATUTES-1775-1,8,433.149

VII. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That if any
Action or Suit shall be commenced against any Person or Persons for any
Thing done in pursuance of this Act , such Action or Suit shall be
commenced and prosecuted in the Court of Exchequer only in that Part of
<font> Great Britain <$$font> called <font> England <$$font> , or in the
Court of Session or Exchequer only in that Part of <font> Great Britain
<$$font> called <font> Scotland <$$font> respectively , within the Space
of four Calendar Months next after the Fact shall be committed or done :
STATUTES-1775-1,8,433.150

And if such Action or Suit shall be commenced or prosecuted in <font>
England <$$font> , the Defendant or Defendants in any such Action or
Suit may plead the General Issue , and give this Act and the Special
Matter in Evidence at any Trial to be had thereupon , and that the same
was done in pursuance and by the Authority of this Act ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,433.151

and if it shall appear so to have been done , the Jury shall find for
the Defendant or Defendants ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,433.152

and if the Plaintiff shall be nonsuited or discontinue his Action after
the Defendant or Defendants shall have appeared , or if Judgment shall
be given upon any Verdict or Demurrer against the Plaintiff , the
Defendant or Defendants shall and may recover Treble Costs , and have
the like Remedy for the same , as any Defendant or Defendants hath or
have in other Cases by Law ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,433.153

And if such Action or Suit shall be commenced or prosecuted in that Part
of <font> Great Britain <$$font> called <font> Scotland <$$font> , the
said Court of Session or Exchequer , before whom such Action or Suit
shall be brought , shall allow the Defendant to plead <P_8,434> this Act
on his Defence , STATUTES-1775-1,8,434.154

and if the Pursuer shall not insist on his Action , or if Judgement
shall be given against the Pursuer , the Defendant shall and may recover
the full and real Expences he may have been put to by any such Action or
Suit . STATUTES-1775-1,8,434.155

<heading>

Cap. XXVIII . STATUTES-1775-1,8,434.157

<$$heading>

An Act for altering , explaining , and amending several Acts of the
Parliament of <font> Scotland <$$font> , respecting Colliers ,
Coal-bearers , and Salters . STATUTES-1775-1,8,434.159

Whereas by the Statute Law of <font> Scotland <$$font> , as explained by
the Judges of the Courts of Law there , many Colliers and Coal-bearers
and Salters are in a State of Slavery or Bondage , bound to the
Collieries and Salt-works where they work for Life , transferable with
the Collieries and Salt-works , when their original Masters have no
further Use for them : STATUTES-1775-1,8,434.160

And whereas Persons are discouraged and prevented from learning the Art
or Business of Colliers or Coal-bearers , and Salters , by their
becoming bound to the Colleries and Salt-works for Life , where they
shall work for the Space of one Year , by Means whereof there are not a
sufficient Number of Colliers , Coal-bearers , and Salters , in <font>
Scotland <$$font> , for working the Quantities of Coal and Salt
necessarily wanted ; and many new-discovered Coals remain unwrought ,
and many are not sufficiently wrought , nor are there a sufficient
Number of Salters for the Salt-works , to the great Loss of the Owners
and Disadvantage to the Publick : STATUTES-1775-1,8,434.161

And whereas the emancipating or setting free the Colliers , Coal-bearers
, and Salters in <font> Scotland <$$font> , who are now in a State of
Servitude , gradually and upon reasonable Conditions , and the
preventing others from coming into such a State of Servitude , would be
the Means of increasing the Number of Colliers , Coal-bearers , and
Salters , to the great Benefit of the Publick , without doing any Injury
to the present Masters , and would remove the Reproach of allowing such
a State of Servitude to exist in a free Country ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,434.162

may it therefore please your Majesty that it may be enacted ; and be it
enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons , in this
present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of the same , That
from and after the first Day of <font> July <$$font> , in this present
Year one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_seventy-five , no Person who shall
begin to work as a Collier , Coal-bearer , or Salter , or in any other
Way in a Colliery or Salt-work , in <font> Scotland <$$font> , shall be
bound to such Colliery or Salt-work , or to the Owner thereof , in any
Way or Manner different from what is permitted by the Law of <font>
Scotland <$$font> with regard to Servants and Labourers ; and that they
shall be deemed free , and shall enjoy the same Privileges , Rights ,
and Immunities with the rest of his Majesty's Subjects ; any Law or
Usage in <font> Scotland <$$font> to the contrary notwithstanding .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,434.163

II. Provided always , That it shall be lawful for all Owners and
Lessees of Collieries and Salt-works , and for Colliers , Coal-bearers ,
and Salters , to take Persons bound by Contract , or Indenture , as
Apprentices , to learn the Art or Business of Coal-hewing , Coal-bearing
, or making Salt , for any Term of Years permitted by the Law of <font>
Scotland <$$font> with regard to Apprentices in other Arts and Mysteries
. STATUTES-1775-1,8,434.164

III. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That all
Persons under the Age of Twenty-one Years , upon the said first Day of
<font> July <$$font> , employed as Colliers , Coal-bearers , or Salters
, in <font> Scotland <$$font> , and bound to any Colliery or Salt-work ,
shall , after seven Years Service from the said first Day of <font> July
<$$font> , be free from their Service and Servitude , and at Liberty to
engage themselves as Servants or Labourers in any other Colliery , or
Salt-work , or in any other Kind of Labour whatever .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,434.165

IV. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That all
bound Colliers and Salters in <font> Scotland <$$font> , above the Age
of twenty-one Years , and under the Age of thirty-five Years , upon the
said first Day of <font> July <$$font> , after a Service of ten Years ;
and all Colliers and Salters above the Age of thirty-five Years , but
under the Age of forty-five Years , at the said first Day , of <font>
July <$$font> , after a Service of seven Years ; and after their having
respectively found and sufficiently instructed a Person as an Apprentice
, if required so to do by the Master or Lessee of the Colliery or
Salt-work , within one Year after the said first Day of <font> July
<$$font> next , in the Art or Mystery of Coal-hewing or making of Salt ,
of the Age of eighteen Years at least ; when such Instruction shall be
perfected , shall be free from any other Servitude or Bondage to the
Colliery or Salt-work to which they were bound .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,434.166

V. And be it also enacted , That all Colliers and Salters , bound to
any Colliery or Salt-work in <font> Scotland <$$font> , above the Age of
forty-five Years , upon the said first Day of <font> July <$$font> next
, shall , after three Years , be free and discharged from any further
Servitude or Bondage to the Colliery or Salt-work to which they are
bound . STATUTES-1775-1,8,434.167

VI. Provided always , and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid ,
That if any bound Collier or Salter shall not sufficiently instruct an
Apprentice in the Art or Mystery of Coal-hewing or making of Salt , if
required by the Master or lessee of the Colliery or Salt-work to which
he is bound , as directed by this Act , such Collier or Salter shall
nevertheless be free , after the Performance of an additional Service of
three Years at the Colliery or Salt-work to which he is bound .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,434.168

VII. Provided always , That every Collier or Salter , claiming Liberty
under the Authority of this Act , shall , prior to his being freed from
his Servitude or Bondage , obtain a Decree of the Sheriff Court of the
County in which he resides , finding and declaring that he is intitled
unto his Freedom , under the Authority of this Act .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,434.169

VIII. And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That for the
Purpose of obtaining such Decree , it shall and may be lawful for the
Collier or Salter claiming his Freedom to present a Petition to the
Sheriff Depute or Substitute of the County where he resides , stating
his Claim of Freedom , and offering to prove the Facts which intitle him
to it , STATUTES-1775-1,8,434.170

and the Sheriff Depute or Substitute is hereby authorised and required
<P_8,435> to order the Petition to be served upon the Owner , Lessee ,
or Overseer , of the Colliery or Salt-works to which the Petitioner is
bound , and to order an Answer to be put in to the Petition in ten Days
after Service , stating the Objection or Objections to the Freedom
claimed , if any such , are intended to be made ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,435.171

and the Sheriff shall thereafter proceed in a summary Way in taking the
Proofs , and all other Procedure , necessary , until a Decree shall be
pronounced ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,435.172

and if the Decree of the Sheriff shall be against the Petitioner ,
finding him not intitled to freedom , it shall nevertheless be competent
to such Petitioner , at any Period after the Expiration of one Year , to
present a second Petition , stating his Claim of Liberty of new , and
which shall be proceeded upon in the same manner as the former ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,435.173

and if the Petitioner fails in obtaining a Decree for him on the second
Petition , he may , after the Expiration of one Year from the Date of
the second Decree , present a third Petition , which shall likewise be
proceeded upon in the same Manner ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,435.174

and if he fails in obtaining a Decree upon his third Petition , he may
present a fourth , and so on , till he obtains a Decree declaring his
Freedom , one Year at least being expired after a Decree upon one
Petition before it shall be competent to present another .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,435.175

IX. Provided always , That in case it shall be proved to the
Satisfaction of the said Sheriff , that the Person so applying by
Petition has , subsequent to the passing of this Act , been guilty of
entering into any unlawful Combination with the other Colliers or
Salters to leave off working , in order to distress or injure the
Proprietor or Lessee of such Coal or Salt-work , or in order to compel
him to increase the Wages or Allowances usually paid for the said Work ;
or that the Person so applying shall have wilfully deserted the said
Works ; then , and in that Case , the Person guilty of such Offences
shall not be intitled to the Benefit of the said Act until the
Expiration of two Years after the respective Periods at which , in Terms
of this Act , he would have been intitled to his Freedom , if he had not
been guilty of such Offences . STATUTES-1775-1,8,435.176

X. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That it shall
not be competent for the Respondent or Respondents to such Petition to
remove the Proceedings upon it into the Court of Session in <font>
Scotland <$$font> , by Advocation , or to complain of any Decree by
Appeal or Suspension , or to sue for Reduction of any such Decree ; and
that every Decree upon such Petition , finding and declaring the Freedom
of the Petitioner , shall be final and conclusive against the Person to
whom the Petitioner was bound . STATUTES-1775-1,8,435.177

XI. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That when
Colliers or Salters obtain their Freedom under the Authority of this Act
, their Wives and Children in Family with them , and all others who make
Part of their Family , and are Coal-bearers , or otherwise assistant to
them , shall likewise be free . STATUTES-1775-1,8,435.178

XII. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That all
Coal-bearers and other Labourers in Collieries or Salt-works , who are
bound to any Colliery or Salt-work in <font> Scotland <$$font> , and do
not belong to the Family of any particular Collier or Salter , shall ,
if under the Age of forty-five Years , after seven Years Service , from
the said first Day of <font> July <$$font> , be free from their Service
and Servitude , and at Liberty to engage themselves as Servants or
Labourers in any other Colliery or Salt-work , or in any other Kind of
Work whatsoever , and if above the Age of forty-five Years they shall be
free after a Service of three Years . STATUTES-1775-1,8,435.179

XIII. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That from
and after the first Day of <font> July <$$font> , in this present Year
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_seventy-five , all Colliers and Salters
then free , and all Persons that may thereafter become Colliers and
Salters , and all Colliers and Salters bound to any Colliery or
Salt-work upon the said first Day <font> of July <$$font> , from the
Time of obtaining their Freedom under the Authority of this Act , shall
be intitled to the Benefit of an Act made in the Parliament of <font>
Scotland <$$font> , in the Year one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_one ,
intituled , <font> Act for preventing wrongous Imprisonment , and
against undue Delays in Trials ; <$$font> any Thing in the said Act to
the contrary notwithstanding . STATUTES-1775-1,8,435.180

<heading>

Cap. XXIX . STATUTES-1775-1,8,435.182

<$$heading>

An Act to repeal two Acts , made in the Parliament of <font> Scotland
<$$font> , the twenty-eighth Day of <font> June <$$font>
one_thousand_six_hundred_and_thirty-three , intituled , <font> Act anent
the Clan <$$font> Gregour ; and the fifteenth Day of <font> June
<$$font> one_thousand_six_hundred_and_ninety-three , intituled , <font>
Act for the Justiciary in the Highlands <$$font> , so far as relates to
the <font> Mac_Gregours <$$font> ; and to revive an Act of the said
Parliament of the twenty-sixth Day of <font> April <$$font>
one_thousand_six_hundred_and_sixty-one , relative to the People called
<font> Mac_Gregours . <$$font> STATUTES-1775-1,8,435.184

<heading>

Cap. XXX . STATUTES-1775-1,8,435.186

<$$heading>

An Act for allowing the Officer appointed to mark or stamp the Weights
to be made use of in weighing the Gold and Silver Coin of this Kingdom ,
in pursuance of an Act made in the last Session of Parliament , to take
certain Fees in the Execution of his Office . STATUTES-1775-1,8,435.188

Whereas by an Act , made in the fourteenth Year of the Reign of his
present Majesty , intituled , <font> An Act for regulating and
ascertaining the Weights to be made use of in weighing the Gold and
Silver Coin of this Kingdom <$$font> , it is enacted , That exact
Duplicates or Copies of the several Standard Weights therein mentioned
shall be delivered to and lodged in the Custody of an Officer , to be
from Time to Time appointed for that Purpose , with a Salary not
exceeding the yearly Sum of two_hundred_and_fifty Pounds ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,435.189

and that , from and after the Day therein mentioned , all Weights to be
made use of for weighing <P_8,436> the said Gold and Silver Coin shall
be ascertained by the said Duplicates or Copies ; and after having been
tried and compared therewith , and found to be just and true , shall ,
in Testimony thereof , be marked by the said Officer with a Stamp or
Mark , which the said Officer is thereby directed to provide ; and is
also required , upon Application made to him , at all reasonable Hours ,
to stamp or mark , in Manner therein mentioned , all Weights to be used
for weighing the said Gold and Silver Coin which should be brought to
him for that Purpose , and which he should find to be just and true ,
according to the said Duplicates or Copies of the Standard Weights of a
Guinea , and of a Shilling , and of the Parts and Multiples thereof
respectively , by the said Act directed to be lodged in his Custody ,
without Fee or Reward , and without wilful Delay :
STATUTES-1775-1,8,436.190

And whereas the Officer appointed for the Purpose aforesaid , in
pursuance of the said Act , hath hitherto duly executed the same , but
is unable by himself to give that Dispatch therein which the present
Demands of the Publick require ; and it would greatly tend to the speedy
carrying the Intention of the said Act into Execution , if the said
Officer were permitted to take a small Fee for the stamping or marking
the said Weights , towards reimbursing him the necessary Expence of
procuring an extraordinary Number of Assistants adequate to the said
Demands , which , as the Law now stands , he is not allowed to do :
STATUTES-1775-1,8,436.191

May it therefore please your Majesty that it may be enacted ; and be it
enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons , in this
present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of the same , That
from and after the passing of this Act , it shall and may be lawful to
and for <font> John Whitehurst <$$font> , the Present Officer , and
every other Officer , to be from Time to Time appointed for the Purpose
aforesaid , in pursuance of the said Act , and he and they are hereby
respectively authorised and impowered , to ask , demand , and receive ,
of and from all and every Person and Persons bringing Weights to the
said Office , to be stamped or marked in pursuance of the said Act , any
Sum of Money not exceeding one Penny for every twelve Weights so stamped
or marked before he delivers the same ; any Thing in the said recited
Act contained to the contrary in anywise notwithstanding .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,436.192

<heading>

Cap. XXXI . STATUTES-1775-1,8,436.194

<$$heading>

An Act for the Encouragement of the Fisheries carried on from <font>
Great Britain <$$font> , <font> Ireland <$$font> , and the <font>
British <$$font> Dominions in <font> Europe <$$font> , and for securing
the Return of the Fishermen , Sailors , and others employed in the said
Fisheries , to the Ports thereof , at the End of the Fishing Season .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,436.196

Whereas the Fisheries carried on by his Majesty's Subjects of <font>
Great Britain <$$font> and of the <font> British <$$font> Dominions in
<font> Europe <$$font> have been found to be the best Nurseries for able
and experienced Seamen , always ready to man the Royal Navy when
Occasions require ; and it is therefore of the highest national
Importance to give all due Encouragement to the said Fisheries , and to
endeavour to secure the annual Return of the Fishermen , Sailors , and
others employed therein , to the Ports of <font> Great Britain <$$font>
, and of his Majesty's Dominions before mentioned , at the End of every
Fishing Season : STATUTES-1775-1,8,436.197

Now , in order to promote these great and important Purposes , and with
a View , in the first place , to induce his Majesty's Subjects to
proceed early from the Ports of <font> Great Britain <$$font> to the
Banks of <font> Newfoundland <$$font> , and thereby to prosecute the
Fishery on the said Banks to the greatest Advantage , may it please your
Majesty that it may be enacted ; and be it enacted by the King's most
Excellent Majesty , by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons , in this present Parliament
assembled , and by the Authority of the same , That from and after the
first Day of <font> January <$$font>
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_seventy-six , the respective Bounties
herein after mentioned shall be paid and allowed annually , for eleven
Years , for a certain Number of Ships or Vessels employed in the <font>
British <$$font> Fishery on the Banks of <font> Newfoundland <$$font> ,
under the Limitations and Restrictions herein after expressed ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,436.198

that is to say , Such Vessels shall appear by their Register to be
<font> British <$$font> built , and owned by his Majesty's Subjects
residing in <font> Great Britain <$$font> or <font> Ireland <$$font> ,
or the islands of <font> Guernsey <$$font> , <font> Jersey , <$$font> or
<font> Man <$$font> ; and be of the Burthen of fifty Tons or upwards ,
and navigated with not less than fifteen Men each , Three-fourths of
whom , besides the Master , shall be his Majesty's Subjects ; and in
other Respects qualified and subject to the same Rules and Restrictions
, as are described by an Act made in the tenth and eleventh Years of the
Reign of the late King <font> William <$$font> the Third <paren>
intituled , <font> An Act to encourage the Trade to <$$font>
Newfoundland <$$paren> ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,436.199

and shall be fitted and cleared out from some Port in <font> Great
Britain <$$font> after the said first Day of <font> January <$$font>
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_seventy-six , and after that Day in each
succeeding Year , STATUTES-1775-1,8,436.200

and shall proceed to the Banks of <font> Newfoundland <$$font> ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,436.201

and having catched a Cargo of Fish upon those Banks , consisting of not
less than ten_thousand Fish by Tale , shall land the same at one of the
Ports on the Southern or Eastern Side of the Island of <font>
Newfoundland <$$font> , between <font> Cape Ray <$$font> and <font> Cape
de Grat <$$font> , on or before the fifteenth Day of <font> July
<$$font> in each Year ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,436.202

and shall make one more Trip at least to the said Banks , and return
with another Cargo of Fish catched there to the same Port ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,436.203

in which Case , the twenty_five Vessels first arriving at the said
Island of <font> Newfoundland <$$font> from the Banks thereof , with a
Cargo of Fish catched there , consisting of ten_thousand Fish by Tale at
the least and after landing the same at one of the Ports within the
Limits before mentioned in <font> Newfoundland <$$font> , shall proceed
again to the said Banks , and return to the said Island with another
Cargo of Fish , shall be intitled to forty Pounds each ; and one_hundred
Vessels which shall so arrive the next in Order of Time , on or before
the said fifteenth Day of <font> July <$$font> in each Year , at the
said Island , with a like Cargo , and shall proceed again to the said
Banks , and return from thence in the Manner herein before mentioned ,
shall be intitled to twenty Pounds each ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,436.204

and one_hundred other Vessels which shall so arrive the next in Order of
Time on or <P_8,437> before the said fifteenth Day of <font> July
<$$font> in each Year , at the said Island , with a like Cargo , and
shall proceed again to the said Banks , and return from thence in the
Manner herein before mentioned , shall be intitled to ten Pounds each ,
upon the Master or Owner of such Vessels producing to the Collector of
his Majesty's Customs at the Port in <font> Great Britain <$$font> from
whence such Vessel was cleared out , a Certificate , under the Hand and
Seal of the Governor of <font> Newfoundland <$$font> , that the Master
of such Vessel had produced to him a Certificate under the Hands of the
Collector and Comptroller of the Customs at the Port from whence such
Vessel was cleared out , testifying that such Vessel was duly qualified
to proceed on such Fishery , in pursuance of the before-mentioned Act ,
made in the tenth and eleventh Years of King <font> William <$$font> the
Third ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,437.205

and that it has been made {TEXT:missing_"to"} appear to his Satisfaction
, by a Certificate under the Hand and Seal of the Naval Officer of the
District in <font> Newfoundland <$$font> where such Fish was landed , or
, where there is no Naval Officer , under the Hand and Seal of the
Commander of any of his Majesty's Ships stationed there , or of such
Officer as the Governor shall approve , specifying the Time of such
Vessel's Arrival , in Manner before directed , that such Vessel was
intitled by the Priority and Time of her Arrival to one or other of the
Bounties therein mentioned , as the Fact may be ; and that the Master
and Mate of such Vessel had made Oath before such Naval or other Officer
as aforesaid , that the Number of Fish taken on the first Trip amounted
to ten_thousand at least by Tale , that he had made two Trips at least ,
and that all the Fish on both Trips were catched on the Banks of <font>
Newfoundland <$$font> ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,437.206

which Certificate and Oath the said Governor and Naval or other Officer
as aforesaid are hereby impowered and required to grant and administer
to the Master and Mate of such Vessel without Fee or Reward ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,437.207

and upon delivering up the said Certificate to such Collector , the
respective Bounties therein mentioned shall be paid by such Collector
out of any Money remaining in his Hands arising by the Duties of Customs
or other Subsidies upon foreign Goods imported into this Kingdom ;
STATUTES-1775-1,8,437.208

and in case such Collector shall not have sufficient money in his Hands
to pay the said Bounties , he shall certify the same to the
Commissioners of his Majesty's Customs in <font> England <$$font> or
<font> Scotland <$$font> respectively , who are hereby authorised and
required to order the same to be paid by the Receiver_General of the
Customs , out of any Money in his Hands arising by any of the Duties and
Revenues under their Management respectively .
STATUTES-1775-1,8,437.209

II. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That , for
the better Accommodation of the Persons belonging to Vessels employed in
the <font> Newfoundland <$$font> Fishery , it shall and may be lawful
for the Masters and Crews belonging to any Vessels fitted out and
employed in that Fishery , in pursuance of this or any other Act , to
occupy and use , for the purpose of curing , salting , drying , and
husbanding their Fish , any vacant or void Space whatever on any Part of
<font> Newfoundland <$$font> which is not then occupied and used for the
said Fishery , without any Let , Disturbance , or Hindrance , from any
Person or Persons whatsoever , although such unoccupied Places may not
before have been reputed Ships Rooms ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,437.210

and all such unoccupied Places shall from henceforth be deemed and taken
to be Ships Rooms ; any Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding
. STATUTES-1775-1,8,437.211

III. And in order to induce his Majesty's Subjects in <font> Great
Britain <$$font> and <font> Ireland <$$font> , and the Islands of <font>
Guernsey <$$font> , <font> Jersey <$$font> , and <font> Man <$$font> ,
to carry on the Whale Fishery on the Coasts of <font> Newfoundland
<$$font> , and the Seas adjacent , be it further enacted by the
Authority aforesaid , That the several Bounties hereafter mentioned
shall be allowed annually , for eleven Years , for five Vessels employed
in that Fishery , under the Limitations and Restrictions herein after
expressed ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,437.212

that is to say , Such Vessels shall appear by their Register to be
<font> British <$$font> built , and owned by his Majesty's Subjects
residing in <font> Great Britain <$$font> , <font> Ireland <$$font> , or
the islands of <font> Guernsey <$$font> , <font> Jersey <$$font> , or
<font> Man <$$font> , and navigated with Three-fourths of his Majesty's
Subjects of <font> Great Britain <$$font> , <font> Ireland <$$font> , or
the Islands of <font> Guernsey <$$font> , <font> Jersey <$$font> , or
<font> Man <$$font> , besides the Master , STATUTES-1775-1,8,437.213

and shall be fitted and cleared out from some Port in <font> Great
Britain <$$font> or <font> Ireland <$$font> , or the Islands of <font>
Guernsey <$$font> , <font> Jersey <$$font> , or <font> Man <$$font>
after the first Day of <font> January <$$font> ,
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_seventy-six , and after that Day in each
succeeding Year , STATUTES-1775-1,8,437.214

and shall take and kill one Whale at least in the <font> Gulf of Saint
Lawrence <$$font> , or on the Coasts of <font> Labrador <$$font> ,
<font> Newfoundland <$$font> , or in any Seas to the Southward of the
<font> Greenland <$$font> Seas and <font> Davis's Streights <$$font> ,
STATUTES-1775-1,8,437.215

and shall return within the same Year to some Port in <font> England
<$$font> with the Oil of such Whale or Whales so taken as aforesaid
STATUTES-1775-1,8,437.216

and on the Master and Mate of such Vessel , and two of the Mariners
belonging to her , making Oath before the Collector and Comptroller of
the Customs at the Port of her Arrival <paren> which Oath they are
hereby authorised and required to administer <$$paren> , that such Oil
is the Produce of one or more Whale or Whales taken and killed by the
Crew then belonging to such Vessel mentioning the Time when she departed
from <font> Great Britain <$$font> , <font> Ireland <$$font> , or the
islands of <font> Guernsey <$$font> , <font> Jersey <$$font> , or <font>
Man <$$font> , and from what Port , and the Time and Place where such
Whale or Whales was or were taken and killed , such Oil may be landed
without Payment of any Duty whatsoever ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,437.217

and the Collector and Comptroller of such Port shall thereupon forthwith
transmit such Oath to the commissioners of his Majesty's Customs at
<font> London <$$font> , any four or more of whom are hereby authorised
and required to order the Receiver_General of his Majesty's Customs to
pay , out of any Money in his Hands arising by any Duties under their
Management , for the vessel which shall so arrive in each Year with the
greatest Quantity of Oil taken as aforesaid , five_hundred Pounds ; for
the Vessel which shall in like Manner arrive in the same Year with the
next greatest Quantity of Oil so taken as aforesaid , four_hundred
Pounds ; for the Vessel which shall in like Manner arrive in the same
Year with the next greatest Quantity of Oil so taken as aforesaid ,
three_hundred Pounds ; for the Vessel which shall in like Manner arrive
in the same Year with the next greatest Quantity of Oil so taken as
aforesaid , two_hundred Pounds ; and for the Vessel which shall so
arrive in the same Year with the next greatest Quantity of Oil so taken
as aforesaid , one_hundred Pounds ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,437.218

the said Oil so to be imported by each of the said Vessels being the
Produce of one Whale at the least ; STATUTES-1775-1,8,437.219

which said several and respective Bounties shall be paid by such
Receiver_General , within two Months after the Expiration of each Year
in which such Vessel shall arrive , to the Owner or Owners of such
Vessels so intitled thereto , or their Assigns duly authorised to demand
the same . STATUTES-1775-1,8,437.220

<P_8,438>

IV. And in order to obviate any Doubts that have arisen , or may arise
, to whom the Privilege or Right of drying Fish on the Shores of <font>
Newfoundland <$$font> does or shall belong , under the before mentioned
Act , made in the tenth and eleventh Years of the Reign of King <font>
William <$$font> the Third , which Right or Privilege has hitherto only
been enjoyed by his {TEXT:missing_"his"} Majesty's Subjects of <font>
Great Britain <$$font> , and the other <font> British <$$font> Dominions
in <font> Europe <$$font> ; be it enacted and declared by the Authority
aforesaid , That the said Right and Privilege shall not be held and
enjoyed by any of his Majesty's Subjects arriving at <font> Newfoundland
<$$font> from any other Country except from <font> Great Britain
<$$font> , or one of the <font> British <$$font> Dominions in <font>
Europe <$$font> . STATUTES-1775-1,8,438.222

V. And it is hereby further enacted by the Authority aforesaid , That
it shall and may be lawful for any of his Majesty's Subjects residing in
<font> Ireland <$$font> to ship and lade there , and to transport
directly from thence to <font> Newfoundland <$$font> , or to any Part of
<font> America <$$font> where the Fishery is now , or shall hereafter be
carried on , on board any Ship or Vessel which may lawfully trade or
fish there , any Provisions , and also any Hooks , Lines , Netting , or
other Tools or Implements necessary for and used in the Fishery by the
Crews of the Ships or Vessels carring out the same , and the Craft
belonging to and employed by such Ships or Vessels in the said Fishery ,
such Provisions , Hooks , Lines , Netting , or other Tools or Implements
, being the Product and Manufacture of <font> Great Britain <$$font> or
<font> Ireland <$$font> ; and that it shall and may be lawful for any of
his Majesty's Subjects residing in the <font> Isle of Man <$$font> in
like Manner to export directly from thence any of the Articles herein
before mentioned for the Purpose aforesaid , such Articles being the
Product or Manufacture of <font> Great Britain <$$font> , or the said
<font> Isle of Man <$$font> any Law , Custom , or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding . STATUTES-1775-1,8,438.223

