<BEGIN_statutes-1895-1>

<P_32,1>

<heading>

Chapter 1 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,1.4

<$$heading>

An Act to amend and explain the Local Government <paren> Scotland
<$$paren> Act , 1894 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,1.6

<bracket> 14th March 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,1.7

Whereas it is desirable to amend the Local Government <paren> Scotland
<$$paren> Act , 1894 , and to remove doubts which have arisen as to the
construction of the said Act : STATUTES-1895-1,32,1.8

Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and
with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and
Commons , in this present Parliament assembled , and by the authority of
the same , as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,1.9

1. This Act may be cited as the Local Government <paren> Scotland
<$$paren> Act , 1894 , Amendment Act , 1895 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,1.10

2. Whereas doubts have arisen with regard to the construction of
subsection <paren> 4 <$$paren> of section fifty-six of the Local
Government <paren> Scotland <$$paren> Act , 1894 ,
STATUTES-1895-1,32,1.11

it is hereby enacted that , where any parish has been divided into wards
for the purpose of the election of a parish council , it shall not be
necessary that the polling place at the first or any other election of
parish councillors for any such ward shall be situated within the ward .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,1.12

<heading>

Chapter 2 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,1.14

<$$heading>

An Act to provide for the Supply of Seed Potatoes to Occupiers and
Cultivators of Land in Ireland . STATUTES-1895-1,32,1.16

<bracket> 14th March 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,1.17

Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the authority of the same
, as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,1.18

1. This Act may be cited as the Seed Potatoes Supply <paren> Ireland
<$$paren> Act , 1895 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,1.19

2. The Guardians of any poor law union may apply to the Local
Government Board for a loan under this Act for the use of any electoral
division of their union , STATUTES-1895-1,32,1.20

and if they satisfy the Local Government Board that the occupiers of
land in that division are <P_32,2> generally unable , through poverty
and the extent of the failure of the potato crop , to procure an
adequate supply of seed potatoes , the Local Government Board may
approve of the application , STATUTES-1895-1,32,2.21

and in that case shall transmit it to the Board of Works , who may ,
with the consent of the Treasury , make , out of any moneys at their
disposal for the purpose of local loans , a loan to such Board of
Guardians , on the security of the poor rate , leviable in the said
electoral division , and without requiring any further or other security
. STATUTES-1895-1,32,2.22

3. - <paren> 1. <$$paren> Such loan shall be repayable by the
Guardians to the Board of Works by two equal instalments , the first of
which shall be paid on the first day of August
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-six , and the second on the first
day of August one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-seven .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,2.23

<paren> 2. <$$paren> The interest on such loan or on so much as is for
the time being not repaid shall be at the lowest rate fixed by the
Treasury for interest on local loans in Ireland ,
STATUTES-1895-1,32,2.24

and shall be paid by equal half-yearly payments to the Board of Works
out of the Irish Church Temporalities Fund . STATUTES-1895-1,32,2.25

<paren> 3. <$$paren> When any such loan is made for the benefit of any
electoral division , all poor rates leviable in the division shall
become forthwith charged , without any deed of mortgage or other
instrument , with the repayment by the said instalments of the loan .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,2.26

4. If at any time the Board of Works certify that any sum is payable to
them by the Guardians of any union on account of any loan under this Act
for the benefit of an electoral division , the Local Government Board
shall , by order under their seal , assess that sum on the electoral
division , STATUTES-1895-1,32,2.27

and shall send copies of the order to the Guardians and to the treasurer
of the union ; STATUTES-1895-1,32,2.28

and thereupon the treasurer of the union shall , out of any money then
in his hands to the credit of the Guardians , or if such money is
insufficient , then out of all moneys subsequently received by him on
account of the Guardians , pay the amount mentioned in the order to the
Board of Works . STATUTES-1895-1,32,2.29

The Guardians shall debit the electoral division with the amount so
assessed . STATUTES-1895-1,32,2.30

5. - <paren> 1. <$$paren> Where the Guardians obtain a loan under this
Act for the benefit of any electoral division , they may apply the whole
or any part thereof in purchasing seed potatoes , and in defraying all
expenses incurred for carriage , storage , or otherwise in providing the
same for sale , STATUTES-1895-1,32,2.31

and shall , when required by the Local Government Board , repay to the
Board of Works any portion of the loan which is not so applied .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,2.32

<paren> 2. <$$paren> The Guardians shall sell such seed subject to the
following provisions : STATUTES-1895-1,32,2.33

- <paren> <font> a. <$$font> <$$paren> Seed shall not be sold to any
occupier of land the rateable value of which exceeds fifteen pounds ,
nor for less than the net price paid by the guardians for it , including
all expenses incurred for carriage , storage , or otherwise in providing
such seed for sale : STATUTES-1895-1,32,2.34

<P_32,3>

<paren> <font> b. <$$font> <$$paren> The Guardians may sell to any such
occupier of land a quantity of seed potatoes not exceeding twelve@
@hundred_weight : STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.36

<paren> <font> c. <$$font> <$$paren> They may sell to any person , who
cultivates for his own use any land under a contract made by him with
the occupier of the land for the purpose of growing potatoes , seed
potatoes not exceeding six hundredweight : STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.37

Provided that upon any such sale the Guardians shall obtain such
security as they may think sufficient for the payment of the price of
the seed sold : STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.38

<paren> <font> d. <$$font> <$$paren> Seed shall not be sold to any
person unless the Guardians , or such persons as the Local Government
Board may nominate in that behalf , are satisfied that the land into
which it is to be put has been properly prepared , and is ready for
sowing : STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.39

<paren> <font> e. <$$font> <$$paren> An abatement of one-fifth shall be
made in the price of all seed which is paid for in cash ;
STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.40

and any loss thereby occasioned shall be charged on and paid out of the
Irish Church Temporalities Fund : STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.41

<paren> <font> f. <$$font> <$$paren> All sums received for seed paid
for in cash shall be paid by the Guardians to the Board of Works at the
prescribed times , STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.42

and shall be applied in repayment of the loan with which the seed was
bought . STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.43

6. - <paren> 1. <$$paren> The amount due to the Guardians on account
of any seed sold shall be paid by two equal instalments .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.44

<paren> 2. <$$paren> For obtaining payment of each such instalment due
from any person the Guardians shall levy the amount , where the person
is rated to the poor rate , either as part of the poor rate payable by
such person , or by a special rate to be added to the poor rate assessed
on the tenements occupied by such person , and to be collected therewith
. STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.45

<paren> 3. <$$paren> Where such person is not rated to the poor rate
the Guardians shall make a special rate for the purposes of this Act in
which he shall be rated . STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.46

<paren> 4. <$$paren> Every such special rate shall be recoverable in
the same manner and with the same remedies by the collectors of the poor
rate as if it were poor rate , STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.47

and shall be lodged to the credit of the Guardians with the treasurer of
the union , STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.48

and shall be transmitted by the Guardians at their next meeting to the
Board of Works . STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.49

<paren> 5. <$$paren> Provided that no person shall be entitled to make
any deduction from his rent on account of any such special rate .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.50

<paren> 6. <$$paren> The first of such special rates shall be made by
the Guardians at the same time as the first ordinary poor rate made
after the first day of July one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five ,
STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.51

and the second of such special rates shall be made by the Guardians at
the same time as the first ordinary poor rate made after the first day
of July one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-six .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.52

The first instalment payable by each purchaser of seed shall be due on
the day on which the first of such special rates is made ,
STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.53

and the second instalment shall be due on the day on which the second of
such special rates is made . STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.54

Any such instalment may be paid to the Board of Guardians at any earlier
date . STATUTES-1895-1,32,3.55

<P_32,4>

7. The Lord Lieutenant , with the consent of the Treasury , may , on
the application of any Guardians made through the Local Government Board
, postpone the payment of any instalment due from or to the Guardians
under this Act to any day not later than the first day of August
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-nine ; STATUTES-1895-1,32,4.57

and the time of making the special rates for the purpose of obtaining
payment of any instalment so postponed shall be postponed for a
corresponding period ; STATUTES-1895-1,32,4.58

and the postponed instalment shall become due on the day on which such
postponed special rate is made . STATUTES-1895-1,32,4.59

8. - <paren> 1. <$$paren> The Lord Lieutenant , on the application of
the Local Government Board , may , with the consent of the Treasury ,
appoint inspectors to assist the Guardians in the purchase of seed
potatoes under this Act , and in all arrangements for the inspection ,
storage , and distribution of the same , STATUTES-1895-1,32,4.60

and those inspectors shall be paid out of moneys provided by Parliament
such remuneration as the Lord Lieutenant with the approval of the
Treasury may direct . STATUTES-1895-1,32,4.61

<paren> 2. <$$paren> All purchases by the Guardians of seed potatoes
under this Act shall be made subject to the approval of the Local
Government Board . STATUTES-1895-1,32,4.62

<paren> 3. <$$paren> Any member of the Board of Guardians of the union
, or any person nominated by the Guardians , or any inspector appointed
under this Act , may at all reasonable times enter into and examine any
land occupied or tilled by a purchaser of seed under this Act from such
Guardians , for the purpose of ascertaining whether the seed has been
properly sown , STATUTES-1895-1,32,4.63

and may do all acts reasonably necessary for that purpose .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,4.64

<paren> 4. <$$paren> For the purpose of facilitating such examination
the Guardians shall keep a list of the names and addresses of all
purchasers of seed , STATUTES-1895-1,32,4.65

and shall permit such list to be inspected by any person having
authority to enter and examine under this Act . STATUTES-1895-1,32,4.66

<paren> 5. <$$paren> If any person refuses to a Guardian or other
person acting in execution of the powers conferred by this section
admission to any land which such Guardian or person is entitled to enter
or examine , or obstructs or impedes him in so entering or examining ,
the person so offending shall be liable , on summary conviction , to a
fine not exceeding five pounds . STATUTES-1895-1,32,4.67

9. If any purchaser of seed from Guardians under this Act does not
properly sow such seed , the Guardians may forthwith recover the price
of such seed , whether the amount is more or less than two pounds ,
before the justices in petty sessions , in the manner prescribed by the
Act of the session of the twenty-second year of the reign of Her present
Majesty , chapter fourteen , and any Acts amending it ;
STATUTES-1895-1,32,4.68

and the provisions of such Acts shall apply as if the amount was under
two pounds . STATUTES-1895-1,32,4.69

10. The Local Government Board may make general rules and regulations
as regards , - STATUTES-1895-1,32,4.70

<paren> <font> a <$$font> <$$paren> the times and manner of summoning
and holding meetings of Guardians for the purposes of this Act :
STATUTES-1895-1,32,4.71

<paren> <font> b <$$font> <$$paren> the time within which applications
are to be made under this Act : STATUTES-1895-1,32,4.72

<P_32,5>

<paren> <font> c <$$font> <$$paren> the information to be given by
Guardians to the Local Government Board in respect of the persons in the
several electoral divisions in the unions who are in need of , but are
unable to procure , seed potatoes , and who the Guardians believe would
be willing to purchase the same under this Act : STATUTES-1895-1,32,5.74

<paren> <font> d <$$font> <$$paren> the forms of all estimates ,
circulars , notices , and receipts to be used by the Guardians under
this Act : STATUTES-1895-1,32,5.75

<paren> <font> e <$$font> <$$paren> the times at which sums received by
Guardians as the price of seed paid for in cash are to be paid to the
Board of Works : STATUTES-1895-1,32,5.76

<paren> <font> f <$$font> <$$paren> any other matter or thing , whether
similar or not to those before mentioned , in respect of which it may
seem to the Local Government Board expedient to make rules and
regulations for the purpose of carrying this Act into effect .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,5.77

11. - <paren> 1. <$$paren> Nothing in this Act shall prejudice or
affect any proceedings which might have been instituted by the Board of
Works or by any Guardians for the enforcement of any contract or the
recovery of any debt . STATUTES-1895-1,32,5.78

<paren> 2. <$$paren> No electoral disability or loss of parliamentary
or other franchise shall be incurred by any voter by reason of the
purchase of seed under this Act . STATUTES-1895-1,32,5.79

12. If at any time within three months before the passing of this Act
the Board of Works have advanced money to any Guardians for the purchase
of seed , the sum so advanced , or any part thereof remaining unpaid ,
shall be a charge upon the rates leviable on such electoral divisions in
the union as the Local Government Board appoint ;
STATUTES-1895-1,32,5.80

and such sum or part shall be repaid in the same manner as sums lent by
the Board of Works to Guardians under the authority of this Act ,
STATUTES-1895-1,32,5.81

and the provisions of this Act relative to the repayment of loans made
under the authority of this Act shall apply to such loans made before
the passing of this Act . STATUTES-1895-1,32,5.82

13. If at any time within three months before the passing of this Act
any outlay has been made by any Guardians , with the sanction of the
Local Government Board , for the purchase of seed for sale to occupiers
of land or other persons qualified to purchase such seed under this Act
in the union , such outlay , and all resolutions and proceedings of the
board and of their officers in relation thereto , shall be ratified and
confirmed and be as valid and effectual as if the outlay had been made ,
and the resolutions and proceedings had been passed and taken , under
the authority and in compliance with the provisions of this Act ;
STATUTES-1895-1,32,5.83

and all persons who have acted in any manner in making any loan to any
Guardians , or in making any advance of money to the Board of Works for
the purpose of any such loan , or in making such outlay for seed , shall
be released and indemnified from and against any penalties and
surcharges in consequence thereof . STATUTES-1895-1,32,5.84

14. In this Act - The expression " poor rate " means any rate leviable
under the Acts made for the relief of the poor in Ireland :
STATUTES-1895-1,32,5.85

The expression " rateable value " means the annual rateable value under
the Irish Valuation Acts , STATUTES-1895-1,32,5.86

and , where any land occupied <P_32,6> is not separately valued under
those Acts , means such value as the Guardians of the union determine
would be the rateable value if such premises were so separately valued :
STATUTES-1895-1,32,6.87

The expression " Local Government Board " means the Local Government
Board for Ireland : STATUTES-1895-1,32,6.88

The expression " Board of Works " means the Commissioners of Public
Works in Ireland : STATUTES-1895-1,32,6.89

The expression " Guardians " means a Board of Guardians :
STATUTES-1895-1,32,6.90

The expression " Irish Church Temporalities Fund " means the fund under
the control of the Land Commission by virtue of the Irish Church Act
Amendment Act , 1881 : STATUTES-1895-1,32,6.91

The expression " prescribed " means prescribed by rules made in
pursuance of this Act . STATUTES-1895-1,32,6.92

<heading>

Chapter 3 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,6.94

<$$heading>

An Act to amend the Law with respect to Customs Duties in the Australian
Colonies . STATUTES-1895-1,32,6.96

<bracket> 28th March 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,6.97

Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the authority of the same
, as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,6.98

1. The enactments specified in the schedule to this Act , being
enactments restricting the powers of the Legislatures of the Australian
Colonies in respect of the imposition of Customs duties , are hereby
repealed . STATUTES-1895-1,32,6.99

2. This Act may be cited as the Australian Colonies Duties Act , 1895 .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,6.100

{COM:schedule_omitted}

<P_32,7>

<heading>

Chapter 4 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,7.104

<$$heading>

An Act to apply certain sums out of the Consolidated Fund to the service
of the years ending on the thirty-first day of March
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-four ,
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five , and
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-six . STATUTES-1895-1,32,7.106

<bracket> 28th March 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,7.107

Most Gracious Sovereign , We , Your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal
subjects , the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland , in Parliament assembled , towards making good the supply which
we have cheerfully granted to Your Majesty in this session of Parliament
, have resolved to grant unto Your Majesty the sums herein-after
mentioned ; STATUTES-1895-1,32,7.108

and do therefore most humbly beseech Your Majesty that it may be enacted
; STATUTES-1895-1,32,7.109

and be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with
the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons
, in this present Parliament assembled , and by the authority of the
same , as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,7.110

1. The Treasury may issue out of the Consolidated Fund of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , and apply towards making good the
supply granted to Her Majesty for the service of the years ending on the
thirty-first day of March one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-four ,
and one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five , the sum of
five_hundred_and_fifty-one_thousand_nine_hundred_and_nine pounds nine
shillings and twopence . STATUTES-1895-1,32,7.111

2. The Treasury may issue out of the Consolidated Fund of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , and apply towards making good the
supply granted to Her Majesty for the service of the year ending on the
thirty-first day of March one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-six the
sum of ten_million_one_hundred_and_thirty-six_thousand_six_hundred
pounds . STATUTES-1895-1,32,7.112

3. The Treasury may borrow from any person , and the Bank of England
may advance to the Treasury on the credit of the said sums any sum or
sums not exceeding in the whole the sum of
ten_million_six_hundred_and_eighty_eight_thousand_five_hundred_and_nine
pounds nine shillings and twopence , STATUTES-1895-1,32,7.113

and the Treasury shall repay the moneys so borrowed with interest not
exceeding five pounds per_centum per_annum , out of the growing produce
of the Consolidated Fund at any period not later than the next
succeeding quarter to that in which the said moneys were borrowed .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,7.114

Any sums so borrowed shall be placed to the credit of the account of the
Exchequer , STATUTES-1895-1,32,7.115

and shall form part of the said Consolidated Fund , and be available in
any manner in which such fund is available . STATUTES-1895-1,32,7.116

4. {TEXT:3} This Act may be cited as the Consolidated Fund <paren> No.
1 <$$paren> Act , 1895 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,7.117

<P_32,8>

<heading>

Chapter 5 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,8.120

<$$heading>

An Act to amend the Shop Hours Act , 1892 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,8.122

<bracket> 9th April 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,8.123

Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the authority of the same
, as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,8.124

1. If any employer fails to keep exhibited the notice required by
section four of the Shop Hours Act , 1892 , in manner required by that
section , he shall be liable to a fine not exceeding forty shillings .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,8.125

2. This Act may be cited as the Shop Hours Act , 1895 ,
STATUTES-1895-1,32,8.126

and shall be construed as part of the Shop Hours Act , 1892 , and the
Shop Hours Acts , 1892 and 1893 , STATUTES-1895-1,32,8.127

and this Act may be cited collectively as the Shop Hours Acts , 1892 to
1895 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,8.128

<heading>

Chapter 6 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,8.130

<$$heading>

An Act to amend the Convention of Royal Burghs <paren> Scotland
<$$paren> Act , 1879 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,8.132

<bracket> 9th April 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,8.133

Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the authority of the same
, as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,8.134

1. This Act shall be read as one with the Convention of Royal Burghs
<paren> Scotland <$$paren> Act , 1879 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,8.135

2. Sections two and three of the Convention of Royal Burghs <paren>
Scotland <$$paren> Act , 1879 , shall be read as if the words " or
police " were inserted after the word " parliamentary , " and the words
" or burgh commissioners " after the words " town council " in each
place where those words occur . STATUTES-1895-1,32,8.136

3. The expression " police burgh " shall mean a populous place , the
boundaries of which shall have been fixed under the General Police Acts
, as defined in the Burgh Police <paren> Scotland <$$paren> Act , 1892 ,
or under any Local Police Act , or under the Burgh Police <paren>
Scotland <$$paren> Act , 1892 , or under any Act amending the same .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,8.137

4. This Act may be cited as the Convention of Royal Burghs <paren>
Scotland <$$paren> Act , 1879 , Amendment Act , 1895 .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,8.138

<P_32,9>

<heading>

Chapter 7 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,9.141

<$$heading>

An Act to provide , during twelve months , for the Discipline and
Regulation of the Army . STATUTES-1895-1,32,9.143

<bracket> 9th April 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,9.144

Whereas the raising or keeping of a standing army within the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in time of peace , unless it be
with the consent of Parliament , is against law :
STATUTES-1895-1,32,9.145

And whereas it is adjudged necessary by Her Majesty and this present
Parliament , that a body of forces should be continued for the safety of
the United Kingdom and the defence of the possessions of Her Majesty's
Crown , and that the whole number of such forces should consist of
one_hundred_and_fifty-five_thousand_four_hundred_and_three men ,
including those to be employed at the depôts in the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland for the training of recruits for service at
home and abroad , but exclusive of the numbers actually serving within
Her Majesty's Indian possessions : STATUTES-1895-1,32,9.146

And whereas it is also judged necessary for the safety of the United
Kingdom , and the defence of the possessions of this realm , that a body
of Royal Marine forces should be employed in Her Majesty's fleet and
naval service , under the direction of the Lord High Admiral of the
United Kingdom , or the Commissioners for executing the office of Lord
High Admiral aforesaid : STATUTES-1895-1,32,9.147

And whereas the said marine forces may frequently be quartered or be on
shore , or sent to do duty or be on board transport ships or vessels ,
merchant ships or vessels , or other ships or vessels , or they may be
under other circumstances in which they will not be subject to the laws
relating to the government of Her Majesty's forces by sea :
STATUTES-1895-1,32,9.148

And whereas no man can be forejudged of life or limb , or subjected in
time of peace to any kind of punishment within this realm by martial law
, or in any other manner than by the judgment of his peers and according
to the known and established laws of this realm ; yet nevertheless it
being requisite , for the retaining all the before-mentioned forces ,
and other persons subject to military law , in their duty , that an
exact discipline be observed , and that persons belonging to the said
forces who mutiny or stir up sedition , or desert Her Majesty's service
, or are guilty of crimes and offences to the prejudice of good order
and military discipline , be brought to a more exemplary and speedy
punishment than the usual forms of the law will allow :
STATUTES-1895-1,32,9.149

And whereas the Army Act will expire in the year
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five on the following days :
<paren> <font> a. <$$font> <$$paren> In the United Kingdom , the
Channel Islands , and the Isle of Man , on the thirtieth day of April ;
and <paren> <font> b. <$$font> <$$paren> Elsewhere in Europe ,
inclusive of Malta , also in the West_Indies and America , on the
thirty-first day of July ; and <paren> <font> c. <$$font> <$$paren>
Elsewhere , whether within or without Her Majesty's dominions , on the
thirty-first day of December : STATUTES-1895-1,32,9.150

Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and
with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and <P_32,10>
Temporal , and Commons , in this present Parliament assembled , and by
the authority of the same , as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,10.151

- 1. This Act may be cited as the Army <paren> Annual <$$paren> Act ,
1895 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,10.152

2. - <paren> 1. <$$paren> The Army Act shall be and remain in force
during the periods herein-after mentioned , and no longer , unless
otherwise provided by Parliament ; that is to say , <paren> <font> a.
<$$font> <$$paren> Within the United Kingdom , the Channel Islands , and
the Isle of Man , from the thirtieth day of April
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five to the thirtieth day of April
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-six , both inclusive ; and <paren>
<font> b. <$$font> <$$paren> Elsewhere in Europe , inclusive of Malta ,
also in the West_Indies and America , from the thirty-first day of July
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five to the thirty-first day of
July one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-six , both inclusive ; and
<paren> <font> c. <$$font> <$$paren> Elsewhere , whether within or
without Her Majesty's dominions , from the thirty-first day of December
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five to the thirty-first day of
December one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-six , both inclusive ;
STATUTES-1895-1,32,10.153

and the day from which the Army Act is continued in any place by this
Act is in relation to that place referred to in this Act as the
commencement of this Act . STATUTES-1895-1,32,10.154

<paren> 2. <$$paren> The Army Act , while in force , shall apply to
persons subject to military law , whether within or without Her
Majesty's dominions . STATUTES-1895-1,32,10.155

<paren> 3. <$$paren> A person subject to military law shall not be
exempted from the provisions of the Army Act by reason only that the
number of the forces for the time being in the service of Her Majesty ,
exclusive of the marine forces , is either greater or less than the
number herein-before mentioned . STATUTES-1895-1,32,10.156

3. There shall be paid to the keeper of a victualling house for the
accommodation provided by him in pursuance of the Army Act the prices
specified in the schedule to this Act . STATUTES-1895-1,32,10.157

<font> Amendments of Army Act . <$$font> STATUTES-1895-1,32,10.158

4. To section one_hundred_and_thirty-six of the Army Act shall be added
the words " or by any law passed by the Governor-General of India in
Council . " STATUTES-1895-1,32,10.159

5. Section one_hundred_and_fifty-one of the Army Act shall be repealed
. STATUTES-1895-1,32,10.160

6. In section one_hundred_and_sixty-three , sub-section <paren> 1
<$$paren> , paragraph <font> <paren> c <$$paren> <$$font> of the Army
Act , after the words " Queen's regulations " shall be inserted the
words " or regulations referred to in section one_hundred_and_forty-two
of this Act , " STATUTES-1895-1,32,10.161

and after the word " circulars " in each place where it occurs shall be
inserted the words " or orders . " STATUTES-1895-1,32,10.162

<P_32,11>

7. - <paren> 1. <$$paren> In section one_hundred_and_eighty ,
sub-section <paren> 2 <$$paren> <font> <paren> c <$$paren> <$$font> , of
the Army Act for the words " Governor of any presidency in India " shall
be substituted the words " Governor-General of India , "
STATUTES-1895-1,32,11.164

and the words " within such presidency " shall be omitted .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,11.165

<paren> 2. <$$paren> In paragraph <font> <paren> d <$$paren> <$$font>
of the same sub-section for the words following " entitled " shall be
substituted the following words : - " may complain to the officer
appointed in that behalf by the Commander-in-Chief of the forces in
India with the approval of the Governor-General ,
STATUTES-1895-1,32,11.166

and that officer shall cause his complaint to be inquired into , and
thereupon report to the Governor-General in order to receive the further
directions of the Governor-General . " STATUTES-1895-1,32,11.167

<paren> 3. <$$paren> In paragraph <font> <paren> f <$$paren> <$$font>
of the same sub-section , for the words " The Governor of any of the
presidencies in India " shall be substituted the words " The
Governor-General of India , " STATUTES-1895-1,32,11.168

and the words " who is serving in or belonging to such presidency "
shall be omitted . STATUTES-1895-1,32,11.169

8. In section eighty-three , sub-section <paren> 6 <$$paren> , and
section one_hundred_and_ninety , sub-section <paren> 15 <$$paren> of the
Army Act , for the words " army hospital corps " shall be substituted
the words " medical staff corps . " STATUTES-1895-1,32,11.170

9. In section one_hundred_and_ninety , sub-section <paren> 8 <$$paren>
of the Army Act , the word " Fencible " shall be omitted .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,11.171

{COM:schedule_omitted}

<P_32,12>

<heading>

Chapter 8 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,12.175

<$$heading>

An Act to amend the Grand Jury <paren> Ireland <$$paren> Laws .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,12.177

<bracket> 14th May 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,12.178

Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the authority of the same
, as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,12.179

1. - <paren> 1. <$$paren> Where , at the time of the holding of the
presentment sessions at which application for payment for the execution
of any work of maintenance under the Grand Jury <paren> Ireland
<$$paren> Act , 1836 , and any Act amending the same is made , the
county surveyor is unable , by reason of the time for completing such
work not having expired , to furnish a certificate that such work has
been completed , it shall be sufficient for any contractor for such work
, and he is hereby required , to produce to the presentment sessions and
to the grand jury at the next ensuing assizes respectively the
certificates herein-after mentioned . STATUTES-1895-1,32,12.180

<paren> 2. <$$paren> It shall be lawful for the presentment sessions to
allow an application for payment on the part of any such contractor for
such sum as he would be entitled to under the terms of his contract at
or before the next ensuing assizes , on the production of a certificate
from the county surveyor of the due execution of the work up to a period
of seven days before the date of the holding of such presentment
sessions , which certificate the county surveyor is hereby empowered to
give : STATUTES-1895-1,32,12.181

Provided always , that no grand jury at the said ensuing assizes shall
allow any such application unless a certificate from the county surveyor
be produced to it of the due execution up to the said ensuing assizes of
the work according to the terms of the contract , which said further
certificate the said county surveyor is hereby empowered to give .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,12.182

2. No application for payment as aforesaid which , before the passing
of this Act , was allowed by the presentment sessions shall be
disallowed by reason only that the certificate on which such allowance
was made was premature , STATUTES-1895-1,32,12.183

but before allowing any such application it shall be the duty of the
grand jury to ascertain from the county surveyor whether in the interval
between the presentment sessions and the assizes the contractor has duly
performed his work according to the terms of his contract .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,12.184

3. Every contract entered into under the Grand Jury <paren> Ireland
<$$paren> Act , 1836 , and any Act amending the same for maintenance
works shall imply a term for half-yearly payments , unless the contrary
be therein expressly declared . STATUTES-1895-1,32,12.185

4. This Act may be cited as the Grand Jury <paren> Ireland <$$paren>
Act , 1895 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,12.186

<P_32,13>

<heading>

Chapter 9 . <$$heading> STATUTES-1895-1,32,13.189

An Act to apply the Documentary Evidence Acts to the Board of
Agriculture . STATUTES-1895-1,32,13.190

<bracket> 14th May 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,13.191

Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the authority of the same
, as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,13.192

1. The Documentary Evidence Act , 1868 , as amended by the Documentary
Evidence Act , 1882 , shall apply to the Board of Agriculture in like
manner as if that Board were mentioned in the first column of the
schedule to the first-mentioned Act , and the President or any member of
the Board , or the Secretary of the Board , or any person authorised by
the president to act on behalf of the Secretary of the Board , were
mentioned in the second column of that schedule , and as if the
regulations referred to in those Acts included any document issued by
the Board . STATUTES-1895-1,32,13.193

2. This Act may be cited as the Documentary Evidence Act , 1895 , and
the Documentary Evidence Act , 1868 , and the Documentary Evidence Act ,
1882 , STATUTES-1895-1,32,13.194

and this Act may be cited collectively as the Documentary Evidence Acts
, 1868 to 1895 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,13.195

<heading>

Chapter 10 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,13.197

<$$heading>

An Act for settling and securing an Annuity upon the Right Honourable
Arthur Wellesley Peel in consideration of his eminent Services .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,13.199

<bracket> 14th May 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,13.200

Most Gracious Sovereign , Whereas the Commons of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland did , by an humble address to Your Majesty ,
pray Your Majesty that you would be graciously pleased to confer some
signal mark of your royal favour upon the Right Honourable Arthur
Wellesley Peel , Speaker of the House of Commons , for his eminent
services during the important period in which he had with such
distinguished ability and dignity presided in the Chair of the House ,
and did assure Your Majesty that whatever expense Your Majesty should
think proper to be incurred upon that account the said House would make
good the same : STATUTES-1895-1,32,13.201

And whereas Your Majesty in answer to the said address was graciously
pleased to declare that Your Majesty was desirous , in compliance with
the wishes of your faithful Commons , to confer upon the said Right
Honourable Arthur Wellesley Peel some signal mark of your royal favour ,
but as the same could not be effectually granted and secured without the
concurrence of Parliament , Your Majesty recommended to the House of
Commons the adoption of such measures as might be necessary for the
accomplishment of that purpose ; STATUTES-1895-1,32,13.202

<P_32,14>

Now we , Your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects the Commons of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , in Parliament
assembled , have resolved that the annual sum of four_thousand pounds be
granted to Your Majesty out of the Consolidated Fund of the United
Kingdom , to begin upon the day upon which the Right Honourable Arthur
Wellesley Peel , late Speaker of the House of Commons , ceased to hold
the office of Speaker of the House of Commons , to be settled in the
most beneficial manner upon , and to continue during the life of , the
{TEXT:him_the} said Right Honourable Arthur Wellesley Peel ,
STATUTES-1895-1,32,14.204

and do most humbly beseech Your Majesty that it may be enacted ,
STATUTES-1895-1,32,14.205

and be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with
the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons
, in this present Parliament assembled , and by the authority of the
same , as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,14.206

- 1. One annuity of four_thousand pounds shall be charged upon and
payable quarterly out of the Consolidated Fund of the United Kingdom ,
or the growing produce thereof , to the Right Honourable Arthur
Wellesley Peel , during his natural life , beginning on the day upon
which he ceased to hold the office of Speaker of the House of Commons ;
STATUTES-1895-1,32,14.207

provided that one half of the annuity shall abate and be suspended
during any period that the said Right Honourable Arthur Wellesley Peel
hereafter holds any place , office , or employment under Her Majesty of
equal or greater amount in salary , profits , or emolument than the
amount of the annuity . STATUTES-1895-1,32,14.208

2. The Treasury are hereby authorised and required by warrants under
their hands to direct the payment of the said annuity according to the
provisions of this Act . STATUTES-1895-1,32,14.209

3. This Act may be cited as Mr. Speaker's Retirement Act , 1895 .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,14.210

<heading>

Chapter 11 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,14.212

<$$heading>

An Act to amend the Law relating to the Taxation of Costs under the
Lands Clauses Acts . STATUTES-1895-1,32,14.214

<bracket> 14th May 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,14.215

Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the authority of the same
, as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,14.216

- 1. - <paren> 1. <$$paren> Where under the Lands Clauses
Consolidation Act , 1845 , or any Act incorporating the same , any
question of disputed compensation is determined by the verdict of a jury
, or by arbitration , the costs of and incidental to the inquiry or to
the arbitration and award <paren> as the case may be <$$paren> , shall ,
if either party so requires , be taxed and settled as between the
parties by one of the masters of the Supreme Court ,
STATUTES-1895-1,32,14.217

and such fees shall be taken in respect of the taxation as may be fixed
in pursuance of the enactments <P_32,15> relating to the fees to be
taken in the offices of those masters ; STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.218

and all those enactments <paren> including the enactments relating to
the taking of fees by means of stamps <$$paren> shall extend to the fees
in respect of such taxation . STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.219

<paren> 2. <$$paren> Section forty-five of the Regulation of Railways
Act , 1868 , and section one of the Lands Clauses Consolidation Act ,
1869 , are hereby repealed . STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.220

2. This Act may be cited as the Lands Clauses <paren> Taxation of Costs
<$$paren> Act , 1895 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.221

<heading>

Chapter 12 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.223

<$$heading>

An Act to make provision for the temporary absence of the Receiver for
the Metropolitan Police District . STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.225

<bracket> 14th May 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.226

Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the authority of the same
, as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.227

1. If and whilst the receiver for the metropolitan police district is
temporarily absent from his duties a person appointed by warrant under
the hand of the Secretary of State may temporarily act as and shall be
deemed for all purposes to be such receiver . STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.228

2. This Act may be cited as the Metropolitan Police <paren> Receiver
<$$paren> Act , 1895 , STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.229

and shall be read with the Metropolitan Police Acts , 1829 to 1890 .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.230

<heading>

Chapter 13 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.232

<$$heading>

An Act to amend the Cruelty to Animals <paren> Scotland <$$paren> Act ,
1850 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.234

<bracket> 30th May 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.235

Whereas it is expedient to amend the Cruelty to Animals <paren> Scotland
<$$paren> Act , 1850 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.236

Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the authority of the same
, as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.237

1. This Act may be cited as the Cruelty to Animals <paren> Scotland
<$$paren> Act , 1895 , STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.238

and it shall be read and construed along with the Cruelty to Animals
<paren> Scotland <$$paren> Act , 1850 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.239

2. The definition of the word " animal " in section eleven of the
recited Act shall be amended by adding at the end thereof the words " or
any game or fighting cock , or other domestic fowl or bird , "
STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.240

and every person who shall in any manner encourage , aid , or assist at
any cock fight , whether in a place kept for that purpose or otherwise ,
shall be guilty of an offence under the said Act .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,15.241

<P_32,16>

<heading>

Chapter 14 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,16.244

<$$heading>

An Act to provide for the Regulation of Fees payable in the Courts of
Law in Scotland . STATUTES-1895-1,32,16.246

<bracket> 30th May 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,16.247

Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the authority of the same
, as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,16.248

1. This Act may be cited as the Courts of Law Fees <paren> Scotland
<$$paren> Act , 1895 , STATUTES-1895-1,32,16.249

and shall apply to Scotland only . STATUTES-1895-1,32,16.250

2. From and after the passing of this Act , it shall be lawful for the
Lords Commissioners of the High Court of Justiciary as to that Court ,
and for the Lords of Council and Session as to the Court of Session and
Sheriff Courts , with the approval , in each case , of the Commissioners
of Her Majesty's Treasury , to make by Act of Adjournal , or Act of
Sederunt , respectively , such rules and regulations as may , in their
judgment , from time to time be necessary for carrying out the following
purposes , viz. : - <paren> <font> a. <$$font> <$$paren> To alter or
otherwise regulate the amount of any fees for the time being payable in
any of the above-named Courts of Law , or in any office connected
therewith , or to the officers thereof , and to prepare or approve of
amended tables of fees in place of the fees now payable : <paren> <font>
b. <$$font> <$$paren> To frame regulations as to the time and place of
payment of the said fees , and to prescribe forms of books to be kept in
any office in which such fees are payable . STATUTES-1895-1,32,16.251

Provided always , that when , under any Act of Parliament , it is
enacted that the fees to be drawn from any office or department shall
not be greater than may be reasonably sufficient for defraying the
expenses of such office or department , such provision shall receive
effect in any regulation of fees under this Act .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,16.252

3. All accounts of expenses found due in the High Court of Justiciary ,
or in any inferior Court whose judgment has been brought under the
review of the High Court of Justiciary , by suspension or appeal , or
otherwise , unless the amount of the expenses found due shall have been
determined or modified by the said High Court , shall be remitted to the
auditor of the Court of Session to be examined and taxed in like manner
, and subject to the same regulations , as accounts of expenses in
actions in the Court of Session . STATUTES-1895-1,32,16.253

4. It shall be lawful for the Commissioners of Her Majesty's Treasury ,
by warrant under their hands , to regulate , alter , and amend the table
of fees payable to the keepers of the London Gazette , and of the
Edinburgh Gazette , for notices under the Bankruptcy <paren> Scotland
<$$paren> Act , 1856 ; STATUTES-1895-1,32,16.254

and section one_hundred_and_eighty-three of the said Act is hereby
repealed . STATUTES-1895-1,32,16.255

5. All Acts of Parliament or Acts of Sederunt , in so far as
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act , are hereby repealed .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,16.256

<P_32,17>

<heading>

Chapter 15 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,17.259

<$$heading>

An Act to apply a sum out of the Consolidated Fund to the service of the
year ending on the thirty-first day of March
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-six . STATUTES-1895-1,32,17.261

<bracket> 30th May 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,17.262

Most Gracious Sovereign , We , Your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal
subjects , the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland , in Parliament assembled , towards making good the supply which
we have cheerfully granted to Your Majesty in this session of Parliament
, have resolved to grant unto Your Majesty the sum herein-after
mentioned ; STATUTES-1895-1,32,17.263

and do therefore most humbly beseech Your Majesty that it may be enacted
; STATUTES-1895-1,32,17.264

and be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with
the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons
, in this present Parliament assembled , and by the authority of the
same , as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,17.265

1. The Treasury may issue out of the Consolidated Fund of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , and apply towards making good the
supply granted to Her Majesty for the service of the year ending on the
thirty-first day of March one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-six ,
the sum of
seven_million_eight_hundred_and_fifty-five_thousand_two_hundred_and_sixty-eight
pounds . STATUTES-1895-1,32,17.266

2. The Treasury may borrow from any person , and the Bank of England
may advance to the Treasury on the credit of the said sum , any sum or
sums not exceeding in the whole the sum of
seven_million_eight_hundred_and_fifty-five_thousand_two_hundred_and_sixty-eight
pounds , STATUTES-1895-1,32,17.267

and the Treasury shall repay the moneys so borrowed with interest not
exceeding five pounds per_centum per_annum , out of the growing produce
of the Consolidated Fund at any period not later than the next
succeeding quarter to that in which the said moneys were borrowed .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,17.268

Any sums so borrowed shall be placed to the credit of the account of the
Exchequer , STATUTES-1895-1,32,17.269

and shall form part of the said Consolidated Fund , and be available in
any manner in which such fund is available . STATUTES-1895-1,32,17.270

3. This Act may be cited as the Consolidated Fund <paren> No. 2
<$$paren> Act , 1895 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,17.271

<P_32,18>

<heading>

Chapter 16 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,18.274

<$$heading>

An Act to grant certain Duties of Customs and Inland Revenue , to repeal
and alter other Duties , and to amend the Law relating to Customs and
Inland Revenue and to make Provision for the Financial Arrangements of
the Year . STATUTES-1895-1,32,18.276

<bracket> 30th May 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,18.277

Most Gracious Sovereign , We , Your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal
subjects , the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland in Parliament assembled , towards raising the necessary supplies
to defray Your Majesty's public expenses , and making an addition to the
public revenue , have freely and voluntarily resolved to give and grant
unto your Majesty the several duties herein-after mentioned ;
STATUTES-1895-1,32,18.278

and do therefore most humbly beseech your Majesty that it may be enacted
, STATUTES-1895-1,32,18.279

and be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with
the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons
, in this present Parliament assembled , and by the authority of the
same , as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,18.280

<heading>

Part I . STATUTES-1895-1,32,18.282

Customs and Excise . STATUTES-1895-1,32,18.283

<$$heading>

1. The duty of customs now payable on tea shall continue to be charged
, levied , and paid , on and after the first day of August
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five until the first day of August
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-six , on the importation thereof
into Great Britain or Ireland <paren> that is to say <$$paren> : - Tea ,
the pound - - - Fourpence . STATUTES-1895-1,32,18.285

2. - <paren> 1. <$$paren> In addition to the duties of customs payable
on and after the first day of July
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five , on beer of the descriptions
called mum , spruce , or black beer , imported into Great Britain or
Ireland , there shall be charged , levied , and paid , on and after the
said first day of July until the first day of July
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-six , the duties following <paren>
that is to say <$$paren> : - For every thirty-six gallons of beer where
the worts thereof are or were before fermentation of a specific gravity
- Not exceeding one_thousand_two_hundred_and_fifteen degrees +L <font>
s. <$$font> 2 <font> d. <$$font> Exceeding
one_thousand_two_hundred_and_fifteen degrees +L <font> s. <$$font> 2
<font> d. <$$font> 4 STATUTES-1895-1,32,18.286

<P_32,19>

<paren> 2. <$$paren> This section shall extend to Berlin white beer ,
and other preparations , whether fermented or not fermented , of a
character similar to mum , spruce or black beer .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,19.288

3. In addition to the duties of customs payable on and after the first
day of July one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five , on every
description of beer <paren> other than is specified in the last
preceding section <$$paren> imported into Great Britain or Ireland ,
there shall be charged , levied , and paid , on and after the said first
day of July until the first day of July
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-six , the duty following <paren>
that is to say <$$paren> : - For every thirty-six gallons where the
worts thereof were before fermentation of a specific gravity of
one_thousand_and_fifty-five degrees +L <font> s. <$$font> <font> d.
<$$font> 6 STATUTES-1895-1,32,19.289

and there shall be allowed and paid in and for the same period in
respect of all such beer a similar addition to the drawback granted on
exportation , shipment for use as stores , or removal to the Isle of Man
, by section four of the Customs and Inland Revenue Act , 1881 . And so
, as to both duty and drawback , in proportion for any difference in
gravity . STATUTES-1895-1,32,19.290

4. In addition to the duty of excise payable on and after the first day
of July one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five in respect of beer
brewed in the United Kingdom , there shall be charged , levied , and
paid , on and after that day until the first day of July
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-six - For every thirty-six gallons
where the worts thereof were before fermentation of a specific gravity
of one_thousand_and_fifty-five degrees , the duty of sixpence , and so
in proportion for any difference in quantity or gravity .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,19.291

5. In addition to the drawback of excise otherwise payable in respect
of beer exported from the United Kingdom as merchandise or shipped for
use as ships's stores , there shall be allowed and paid in respect of
beer brewed in the United Kingdom between the thirtieth day of June
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five and the first day of June
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-six - For every thirty-six gallons
of an original gravity of one_thousand_and_fifty-five degrees , the duty
of sixpence , and so in proportion for any difference in quantity or
gravity . STATUTES-1895-1,32,19.292

6. Regulations of the Commissioners of Inland Revenue , under section
one_hundred_and_fifty-nine of the Spirits Act , 1880 , may regulate the
removal for exportation of methylated spirits ,
STATUTES-1895-1,32,19.293

and where spirits used for methylation are removed from a place of
methylation and exported in accordance with those regulations , there
shall be paid to the exporter an allowance of twopence for every gallon
of such spirits , computed at hydrometer proof ,
STATUTES-1895-1,32,19.294

and subsection three of section three of the Customs and Inland Revenue
Act , 1885 , shall apply , as if the spirits were exported and the
allowance made in pursuance of that section . STATUTES-1895-1,32,19.295

<P_32,20>

7. After the thirty-first day of December
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five , section
one_hundred_and_nineteen of the Customs Consolidation Act , 1876 <paren>
which limits the time for the payment of a drawback on the exportation
of goods <$$paren> , shall extend to the payment of any allowance in
respect of spirits exported , used , or deposited , which is payable
under section three of the Customs and Inland Revenue Act , 1885 , as
amended by section twenty-one of the Revenue Act , 1889 , and to an
allowance in respect of methylated spirits exported which is payable
under this Act , and to the payment of any drawback of excise which is
allowed on the exportation of any goods , in like manner as if it were
in terms made applicable thereto , and the date of user or deposit were
the date of shipment . STATUTES-1895-1,32,20.297

8. Spirits to which any sweetening or colouring matter or any other
ingredient has been added in warehouse , and spirits warehoused by a
rectifier of spirits for exportation or ship's stores , and British
liqueurs , may , if bottled and packed in cases when delivered from a
warehouse , be removed , notwithstanding anything in sections
seventy-four and ninety-five of the Spirits Act , 1880 , to another
warehouse for exportation or ship's stores . STATUTES-1895-1,32,20.298

<heading>

Part II . STATUTES-1895-1,32,20.300

Stamps . STATUTES-1895-1,32,20.301

<$$heading>

9. - <paren> 1. <$$paren> Exemption numbered eight under the head "
Receipt " in the First Schedule to the Stamp Act , 1891 , is hereby
repealed ; STATUTES-1895-1,32,20.303

and the duty shall be charged as if the exemption had not been contained
in that schedule ; STATUTES-1895-1,32,20.304

provided that neither the name of a banker <paren> whether accompanied
by words of receipt or not <$$paren> written in the ordinary course of
his business as a banker upon a bill of exchange or promissory note duly
stamped , nor the name of the payee written upon a draft or order , if
payable to order , shall constitute a receipt chargeable with stamp duty
. STATUTES-1895-1,32,20.305

<paren> 2. <$$paren> This section shall take effect as from the first
day of July one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,20.306

10. The duty imposed by the Stamp Act , 1891 , upon the admission of
any person to the degree of doctor of medicine in either of the
universities in Scotland , shall cease to be payable .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,20.307

11. The stamp duty on a letter or power of attorney for the sale ,
transfer , or acceptance of any government or parliamentary stocks or
funds shall be - Where the nominal amount of the stocks of funds does
not exceed 100 <font> l. <$$font> 2 <font> s. <$$font> 6 <font> d.
<$$font> STATUTES-1895-1,32,20.308

12. Where after the passing of this Act , by virtue of any Act ,
whether passed before or after this Act , either - <paren> <font> a
<$$font> <$$paren> any property is vested by way of sale in any person ;
or <paren> <font> b <$$font> <$$paren> any person is authorised to
purchase property ; <P_32,21> such person shall within three months
after the passing of the Act , or the date of vesting , whichever is
later , or after the completion of the purchase , as the case may be ,
produce to the Commissioners of Inland Revenue a copy of the Act printed
by the Queen's printer of Acts of Parliament or some instrument relating
to the vesting in the first case , and an instrument of conveyance of
the property in the other case , duly stamped with the ad valorem duty
payable upon a conveyance on sale of the property ;
STATUTES-1895-1,32,21.309

and in default of such production , the duty with interest thereon at
the rate of five per_cent. per_annum from the passing of the Act , date
of vesting , or completion of the purchase , as the case may be , shall
be a debt to Her Majesty from such person . STATUTES-1895-1,32,21.310

13. Whereas section ninety-eight of the Stamp Act , 1891 , provides
that " a policy of insurance against accident " includes a notice or
advertisement in a newspaper or other publication which purports to
insure the payment of money upon the death of or injury to the holder or
bearer of the newspaper or publication from accident , and doubts have
arisen as to the like notices or advertisements in other cases ,
STATUTES-1895-1,32,21.311

it is hereby for the removal of doubts declared that " a policy of
insurance for any payment agreed to be made during the sickness of any
person or his incapacity from personal injury " within the meaning of
the Stamp Act , 1891 , includes a notice or advertisement in a newspaper
or other publication which purports to insure such payment .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,21.312

14 Where foreign securities within the meaning of sections eighty-two
and eighty-three of the Stamp Act , 1891 , are issued in the United
Kingdom , and the interest thereon is not payable in the United Kingdom
, and such evidence of the amount of the securities as the Commissioners
of Inland Revenue require is produced to them , then the Commissioners ,
if in their discretion they consider it expedient to do so , may accept
payment of the amount of stamp duty which would be payable if all the
said securities were duly stamped , STATUTES-1895-1,32,21.313

and on such payment may dispense with the necessity of the securities
being stamped . STATUTES-1895-1,32,21.314

The Commissioners shall give notice in the London Gazette of any such
dispensation . STATUTES-1895-1,32,21.315

15 So much of section fifteen of the Stamp Act , 1891 , as limits the
time within which the Commissioners of Inland Revenue may mitigate or
remit any penalty payable on stamping shall be repealed .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,21.316

16 Section one_hundred_and_forty-four of the Bankruptcy Act , 1883
<paren> which exempts from stamp duty certain documents relating to the
estates of bankrupts and to bankruptcies <$$paren> , shall apply to the
estates of companies wound up by order of the Court under the Companies
Winding-up Act , 1890 , and to such winding up , in like manner as if
the company were a bankrupt and the winding up were a bankruptcy ;
STATUTES-1895-1,32,21.317

and proceedings under section fifteen of the latter Act shall for this
purpose be part of the proceedings in the winding up .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,21.318

<P_32,22>

<heading>

Part III . STATUTES-1895-1,32,22.321

Income Tax . STATUTES-1895-1,32,22.322

<$$heading>

17. - <paren> 1. <$$paren> There shall be charged , levied , and paid
for the year which began on the sixth day of April
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five , in respect of all property
profits and gains respectively described or comprised in the several
Schedules A. , B. , C. , D. , and E. in the Income Tax Act , 1853 ,
the following duties of income tax <paren> that is to say <$$paren> :
For every twenty shillings of the annual value or amount of property
profits and gains chargeable under the said Schedules A. , C. , D. ,
or E. , the duty of eightpence ; and For every twenty shillings of the
annual value of the occupation of lands tenements hereditaments and
heritages chargeable under the said Schedule B. , the duty of
threepence . STATUTES-1895-1,32,22.324

<paren> 2. <$$paren> All such enactments relating to income tax as were
in force on the fifth day of April
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five shall have full force and
effect with respect to the duties of income tax hereby granted , so far
as those enactments are consistent with this Act .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,22.325

18. - <paren> 1. <$$paren> The annual value of any property which has
been adopted for the purpose of income tax under Schedules A. and B.
in the Income Tax Act , 1853 , or for the purpose of inhabited house
duty during the year which began on the sixth day of April
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-four , shall be taken as the
annual value of such property for the same purpose during the year which
began on the sixth day of April
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_ninety-five : STATUTES-1895-1,32,22.326

Provided that this section - <paren> <font> a <$$font> <$$paren> so far
as respects the duty on inhabited houses in Scotland , shall be
construed with the substitution of the twenty-fifth day of May for the
sixth day of April ; and <paren> <font> b <$$font> <$$paren> shall not
apply to the metropolis as defined by the Valuation <paren> Metropolis
<$$paren> Act , 1866 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,22.327

<paren> 2. <$$paren> The inspectors or surveyors of taxes shall be the
assessors of the income tax under the said Schedules A. and B. , and
of the house duty . STATUTES-1895-1,32,22.328

<heading>

Part IV . STATUTES-1895-1,32,22.330

Miscellaneous STATUTES-1895-1,32,22.331

<$$heading>

19. The Act mentioned in the schedule to this Act is hereby repealed ,
to the extent in the third column of that schedule mentioned .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,22.333

20. This Act may be cited as the Finance Act , 1895 .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,22.334

<P_32,23>

{COM:schedule_omitted}

<heading>

Chapter 17 . STATUTES-1895-1,32,23.338

<$$heading>

An Act for enabling Children to be sent from the Channel Islands to
Reformatory or Industrial Schools in Great Britain .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,23.340

<bracket> 20th June 1895 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1895-1,32,23.341

Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled and by the authority of the same ,
as follows : STATUTES-1895-1,32,23.342

1. Where , under any law of any of the Channel Islands , it is lawful
for any court in the Channel Islands to sentence a young person to be
sent to a reformatory or industrial school in Great Britain , and
provision is made under any such law to the satisfaction of a Secretary
of State - <paren> 1 <$$paren> for the expenses of the conveyance of the
young person to the school to which he is sent , and for his
re-conveyance to the Channel Islands on his discharge from the school ;
and <paren> 2 <$$paren> for the expenses of his maintenance at the
school and <paren> 3 <$$paren> for the contribution <paren> if any
<$$paren> to be made by his parent , step-parent , guardian , or other
person liable to maintain him , and the mode in which that contribution
is to be raised ; the government of any of the Channel Islands may
contract with the managers of any reformatory or industrial school in
Great Britain for the reception of young persons sentenced to be sent to
any school by a court in the Channel Islands .
STATUTES-1895-1,32,23.343

