<BEGIN_statutes-1865-1>

<P_105,1>

Anno Regni Victoriae , Britanniarum Reginae , Vicesimo Octavo et
Vicesimo Nono . STATUTES-1865-1,105,1.3

At the Parliament begun and holden at <font> Westminster <$$font> , the
Thirty-first Day of <font> May <$$font> , <font> Anno Domini <$$font>
1859 , in the Twenty-second Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady
<font> Victoria <$$font> , by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of
<font> Great Britain <$$font> and <font> Ireland <$$font> , Queen ,
Defender of the Faith : And from thence continued , by several
Prorogations , to the Seventh Day of <font> February <$$font> 1865 ;
being the Seventh Session of the Eighteenth Parliament of the United
Kingdom of <font> Great Britain <$$font> and <font> Ireland <$$font> .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,1.4

<heading>

Cap. I . STATUTES-1865-1,105,1.6

<$$heading>

An Act to amend certain clerical Errors in the Civil Bill Courts
Procedure Amendment Act <paren> <font> Ireland <$$font> <$$paren> , 1864
. STATUTES-1865-1,105,1.8

<bracket> 3d <font> March <$$font> 1865 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1865-1,105,1.9

Whereas it is expedient that certain clerical Errors in the Civil Bill
Courts Procedure Amendment Act <paren> <font> Ireland <$$font> <$$paren>
, 1864 , shall be rectified : STATUTES-1865-1,105,1.10

Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and
Commons , in this present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of
the same , as follows : STATUTES-1865-1,105,1.11

1. The following Alterations shall be introduced in the said Act , and
read as if originally Part thereof : STATUTES-1865-1,105,1.12

In the Eighth Section the Word " Seventeenth " shall be substituted for
the Word " Sixteenth : " STATUTES-1865-1,105,1.13

In Paragraph 9 , Part 2 of Schedule B . , the Figures " 12 " shall be
substituted for the Figures " 11 : " STATUTES-1865-1,105,1.14

In Paragraph 1 , Part 3 of Schedule B . , the Figures " 45 " and " 53 "
shall be substituted for the Figures " 44 " and " 52 : "
STATUTES-1865-1,105,1.15

In Paragraph 2 , Part 3 of Schedule B . , the Figures " 50 " shall be
substituted for the Figures " 49 : " STATUTES-1865-1,105,1.16

<P_105,2>

In Paragraph 1 , Part 4 of Schedule B . , the Figures " 12 " shall be
substituted for the Figures " 11 : " STATUTES-1865-1,105,2.18

In Paragraph 2 , Part 4 of Schedule B . , the Figures " 44 " shall be
substituted for the Figures " 43 ; " STATUTES-1865-1,105,2.19

and in Paragraph 3 , Part 4 of Schedule B . , the Figures " 45 " and "
53 " shall be substituted for the Figures " 44 " and " 52 . "
STATUTES-1865-1,105,2.20

<heading>

Cap. II . STATUTES-1865-1,105,2.22

<$$heading>

An Act to extend the Powers now vested in Justices_of_the_Peace to grant
Licences to deal in Game to the Divisional Magistrates within the Police
District of <font> Dublin <$$font> Metropolis .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,2.24

<bracket> 27th <font> March <$$font> 1865 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1865-1,105,2.25

Whereas by an Act passed in the Twenty-third and Twenty-fourth Years of
Her present Majesty , Chapter Ninety , it is amongst other things
enacted that all the Provisions of Two several Acts passed respectively
in the First and Second Years of King <font> William <$$font> the Fourth
, Chapter Thirty-two , and in the Second and Third Years of Her present
Majesty , Chapter Thirty-five , relating to the granting of Licences by
Justices_of_the_Peace to deal in Game , and to the holding of Special
Sessions by said Justices in their respective Division or Districts for
the Purpose of granting such Licences , shall , so far as is consistent
with the Express Provisions of the said first-recited Act , extend to
and be in full Force and Effect in and throughout the whole of the
United Kingdom : STATUTES-1865-1,105,2.26

And whereas it is expedient that within the Police District of <font>
Dublin <$$font> Metropolis , any Two or more Divisional Magistrates of
Police should have the same Powers of granting Licences to deal in Game
as can be exercised by Justices at Special Sessions under the said Acts
: STATUTES-1865-1,105,2.27

Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of the same
, as follows : STATUTES-1865-1,105,2.28

1. From and after the passing of this Act all the Powers vested in
Justices_of_the_Peace under the said recited Acts relating to the
granting of Licences to deal in Game , may , within the Police District
of <font> Dublin <$$font> Metropolis , be exercised by any Two or more
Divisional Magistrates of Police , STATUTES-1865-1,105,2.29

and it shall be lawful for the said Divisional Magistrates of Police ,
or any Two or more of them , to grant said Licences to deal in Game .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,2.30

2. This Act and the said recited Acts shall be construed together as
One Act . STATUTES-1865-1,105,2.31

<heading>

Cap. III . STATUTES-1865-1,105,2.33

<$$heading>

An Act for the Protection of Inventions and Designs exhibited at certain
Industrial Exhibitions in the United Kingdom . STATUTES-1865-1,105,2.35

<bracket> 27th <font> March <$$font> 1865 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1865-1,105,2.36

Whereas Exhibitions of Objects of Art and Industry manufactured or
contributed wholly or in part by Members of the Industrious Classes of
Her Majesty's Subject have <P_105,3> lately been held , and may be from
Time to Time hereafter held , in divers Parts of the United Kingdom ;
and it is expedient to encourage such Exhibitions by granting to Persons
desirous of exhibiting at the same new Inventions or new Designs such
Protection as is herein-after mentioned : STATUTES-1865-1,105,3.37

Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of the same
, as follows : STATUTES-1865-1,105,3.38

1. This Act may be cited as the " Industrial Exhibitions Act , 1865 .
" STATUTES-1865-1,105,3.39

2. It shall be lawful for the Lords of the Committee of Her Majesty's
Privy Council for Trade and Foreign Plantations , upon the Application
of any Persons desirous of holding any such Exhibition as aforesaid in
any Part of the United Kingdom , to certify , if they shall think fit ,
that the Exhibition so proposed to be held is in their Judgment
calculated to promote <font> British <$$font> Art and Industry , and to
prove beneficial to the Industrious Classes of Her Majesty's Subjects ,
either generally or in or near the Place where such Exhibition is
proposed to be held ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,3.40

and every such Certificate shall mention the Place at which and the Time
during which such Exhibition is proposed to be held ;
STATUTES-1865-1,105,3.41

and the Time mentioned in any such Certificate may afterwards , if the
Lords of the said Committee shall so think fit , be enlarged and
extended by a further Certificate , but so that the whole Time allowed
and certified for the holding of the same Exhibition shall in no Case
exceed the total Period of Six Months ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,3.42

and every such Exhibition so certified , if and so long as the same
shall be held at the Place and within the Time mentioned in any such
Certificate , shall be deemed to be an Industrial Exhibition entitled to
the Benefit of this Act . STATUTES-1865-1,105,3.43

3. The Exhibition of any new Invention at any Industrial Exhibition
entitled to the Benefit of this Act shall not , nor shall the
Publication during the Period of the holding of such Exhibition of any
Description of such Invention , nor shall the User of such Invention for
the Purposes of such Exhibition and within the Place where the same may
be held , or elsewhere by any Person using the same during the Period of
such Exhibition , without the Privity and Consent of the true and first
Inventor thereof , prejudice the Right of any Person to register
provisionally such Invention , or invalidate any Letters Patent which
may be granted for such Invention . STATUTES-1865-1,105,3.44

4. The Exhibition at any Industrial Exhibition entitled to the Benefit
of this Act of any new Design capable of being registered provisionally
under the " Design Act , 1850 , " or of any Article to which such Design
is applied , shall not , nor shall the Publication during the Period of
the holding of such Exhibition of any Description of such Design ,
prejudice the Right of any Person to register , provisionally or
otherwise , such Design , or invalidate any Provisional or other
Registration which may be granted for such Design .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,3.45

<P_105,4>

<heading>

Cap. IV . STATUTES-1865-1,105,4.48

<$$heading>

An Act to apply the Sum of
One_hundred_and_seventy-five_thousand_six_hundred_and_fifty Pounds out
of the Consolidated Fund to the Service of the Year ending the
Thirty-first Day of <font> March <$$font>
One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_sixty-five . STATUTES-1865-1,105,4.50

<bracket> 27th <font> March <$$font> 1865 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1865-1,105,4.51

<heading>

Cap. V . STATUTES-1865-1,105,4.53

<$$heading>

An Act for the Incorporation of the Territories of <font> British
Kaffraria <$$font> with the Colony of the <font> Cape of Good Hope
<$$font> . STATUTES-1865-1,105,4.55

<bracket> 27th <font> March <$$font> 1865 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1865-1,105,4.56

Whereas it is expedient that the Territories of <font> British Kaffraria
<$$font> <paren> hereafter in this Act called <font> British Kaffraria
<$$font> <$$paren> and the Colony of the <font> Cape of Good Hope
<$$font> <paren> hereafter in this Act called the <font> Cape of Good
Hope <$$font> <$$paren> be united for all Purposes of Government and
Legislation : STATUTES-1865-1,105,4.57

Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and
Commons , in this present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of
the same , as follows : STATUTES-1865-1,105,4.58

1. This Act may be cited as The <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> Act ,
1865 . STATUTES-1865-1,105,4.59

2. In this Act the Term " Governor " applied to the <font> Cape of Good
Hope <$$font> and to <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> respectively
includes an Officer for the Time being lawfully administering the
Government thereof . STATUTES-1865-1,105,4.60

3. If before such Proclamation as next herein-after mentioned is made
the Parliament of the <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font> makes Provision
for the Incorporation of <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> with the
<font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font> <paren> which they are hereby
empowered to do <$$paren> , and the Governor of the <font> Cape of Good
Hope <$$font> as Governor of <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> assents
to such Provision by an Instrument under his Hand and under the Seal of
<font> British Kaffraria <$$font> , then from and after the Date of such
Assent <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> shall become incorporated with
the <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font> on the Terms of such Provision ,
for all Purposes whatever , as if <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> had
always formed Part of the <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font> .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,4.61

4. The Governor of the <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font> , if he thinks
fit , may at any time before he has given such Assent declare by
Proclamation in the Government Gazette of the Colony , that the
subsequent Provisions of this Act shall take effect ,
STATUTES-1865-1,105,4.62

and those Provisions shall accordingly take effect from the Date of such
Proclamation ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,4.63

but if such Proclamation is not made , then this Act shall operate as if
the subsequent Provisions of this Act , or any of them , had not been
inserted in this Act . STATUTES-1865-1,105,4.64

5. Four Members shall be added to the Number of the Members of the
House of Assembly of the <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font> <paren> to
which Members so added the Term " additional Members of the House of
Assembly " when hereafter used in this Act refers <$$paren> .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,4.65

6. <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> shall be divided into Two Parts ,
which shall be Electoral Divisions within the Meaning and for the
Purposes <P_105,5> of the Ordinance constituting a Parliament for the
<font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font> <paren> hereafter in this Act called
the Constitution Ordinance <$$paren> , in like Manner and with the like
Effect in all respects <paren> subject to the other Provisions of this
Act <$$paren> as if those Electoral Divisions had been expressly
constituted and named as such in that Ordinance .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,5.66

7. Two of the additional Members of the House of Assembly shall be
elected for each Electoral Division of <font> British Kaffraria <$$font>
, STATUTES-1865-1,105,5.67

and the additional Members shall hold their Seats in the House of
Assembly for the same Period and subject to the same Conditions as if
they had been elected under the Provision of the Constitution Ordinance
. STATUTES-1865-1,105,5.68

8. In relation to the first Election of additional Members of the House
of Assembly the Governor of <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> shall have
all such Powers and Authorities as the Governor of the <font> Cape of
Good Hope <$$font> has in relation to the Election of Members of the
House of Assembly under the Constitution Ordinance .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,5.69

9. With respect to the Election of Members of the Legislative Council
of the <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font> , the Two Electoral Divisions
of <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> shall be comprised in and form Part
of the Eastern Districts , within the Meaning and for the Purposes of
the Constitution Ordinance , in like Manner and with the like Effect in
all respects <paren> subject to the other Provisions of this Act
<$$paren> as if those Electoral Divisions had been expressly constituted
Part of the Eastern Districts in that Ordinance .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,5.70

10. For the Purposes of the voting in <font> British Kaffraria <$$font>
for Members of the Legislative Council , and of the electing of the
additional Members of the House of Assembly , the Governor of <font>
British Kaffraria <$$font> shall make such Ordinances and issue such
Proclamations as seem to him necessary or proper for defining and naming
the Two Electoral Divisions of <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> , and
for regulating the Registration of Voters therein , and for appointing
Returning Officers , and fixing the Times and Places of voting and
Election , and generally for regulating the Conduct of such voting and
electing ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,5.71

but no such Ordinance or Proclamation shall alter the Qualification of
the Electors or Elected as declared by the Constitution Ordinance ;
STATUTES-1865-1,105,5.72

and , subject to such Ordinances and Proclamations , the voting in
<font> British Kaffraria <$$font> for Members of the Legislative Council
, and the electing of the additional Members of the House of Assembly ,
shall be conducted in like Manner as if they were voted for and elected
under the Provisions of the Constitution Ordinance .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,5.73

11. Nothing in this Act shall prevent the Parliament of the <font> Cape
of Good Hope <$$font> from altering in any respect the Constitution
Ordinance , or from making such Provision as to them from Time to Time
seems fit respecting any Matter regulated by any of the foregoing
Provisions of this Act . STATUTES-1865-1,105,5.74

12. On the First Election of the additional Members of the House of
Assembly being completed , the Governor of the <font> Cape of Good Hope
<$$font> shall , by Proclamation in the Government Gazette of the Colony
, declare their Names and the Fact of their Election ,
STATUTES-1865-1,105,5.75

and from and after the Date of such Proclamation <font> British
<P_105,6> Kaffraria <$$font> shall become incorporated with the <font>
Cape of Good Hope <$$font> on the Terms of this Act , for all Purposes
whatever , as if <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> had always formed
Part of the <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font> .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,6.76

13. Until the Incorporation of <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> with
the <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font> in consequence of such
Proclamation <paren> hereafter in this Act called the Incorporation
<$$paren> takes effect , all Powers and Authorities vested in or
exercised by the Governor of <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> shall
remain as if this Act had not been passed , STATUTES-1865-1,105,6.77

and on the Incorporation those Powers and Authorities shall absolutely
cease . STATUTES-1865-1,105,6.78

14. Until the Parliament of <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font> otherwise
provides , all Laws and Customs which at the Time of the Incorporation
are in force in <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> shall continue in
force there after the Incorporation . STATUTES-1865-1,105,6.79

15. Until the Parliament of the <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font>
otherwise provides , the Jurisdiction and Authority of the Supreme Court
of the <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font> and of the Court of the Eastern
Districts thereof shall from and after the Incorporation extend to
<font> British Kaffraria <$$font> , as if <font> British Kaffraria
<$$font> had always formed Part of the <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font>
, and were comprised in the Eastern Districts thereof ;
STATUTES-1865-1,105,6.80

and nothing in this Act shall discontinue or otherwise interfere with
any Suit or Proceeding , Civil or Criminal , pending at the Time of the
Incorporation in the Supreme Court of <font> British Kaffraria <$$font>
, save only that on the Incorporation all such Suits and Proceedings
shall , by virtue of this Act , stand transferred to the Court of the
Eastern Districts of the <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font> ,
STATUTES-1865-1,105,6.81

and the same may be carried on , tried , heard , and determined in and
by that Court , STATUTES-1865-1,105,6.82

and an Appeal shall lie therein from that Court , in like Manner as
nearly as may be in all respects as if they had been instituted or taken
in that Court after the Incorporation ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,6.83

nor shall anything in this Act discontinue or otherwise interfere with
any Appeal from the Supreme Court of <font> British Kaffraria <$$font>
pending at the Time of the Incorporation , STATUTES-1865-1,105,6.84

and the same may be prosecuted , heard , and determined ,
STATUTES-1865-1,105,6.85

and any Judgment , Decree , or Order therein may be made , executed ,
and enforced , in like Manner as nearly as may be in all respects as if
this Act had not been passed , save only that in relation to any such
Appeal , Judgment , Decree , or Order , the Court of the Eastern
Districts of the <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font> shall be substituted
for the Supreme Court of <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,6.86

16. Until the Parliament of the <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font>
otherwise provides , all Ordinances and Proclamations made and issued by
the Governor of <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> in pursuance of this
Act relative to the voting in <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> for
Members of the Legislative Council , or to the electing of the
additional Members of the House of Assembly , shall continue in force
after the Incorporation . STATUTES-1865-1,105,6.87

17. Until the Parliament of the <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font>
otherwise provides , there shall , from and after the Incorporation , be
payable every Year to Her Majesty , out of the Revenue accruing within
<font> British Kaffraria <$$font> after the Incorporation , the Sum of
Eighteen_thousand_two_hundred_and_twenty-five Pounds , for defraying the
<P_105,7> Expenses of the several Services described in the Schedule to
this Act ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,7.88

and that Sum shall be issued by the Treasurer of the <font> Cape of Good
Hope <$$font> in discharge of such Warrant or Warrants as may be from
Time to Time directed to him under the Hand and Seal of the Governor of
the <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font> . STATUTES-1865-1,105,7.89

18. Subject to the last foregoing Provision , all Revenue accruing
within <font> British Kaffraria <$$font> after the Incorporation shall
be taken to be Part of the Revenue of the <font> Cape of Good Hope ;
<$$font> STATUTES-1865-1,105,7.90

and all Money at that Time due on account of <font> British Kaffraria
<$$font> shall thenceforth be deemed to be due on account of the <font>
Cape of Good Hope <$$font> . STATUTES-1865-1,105,7.91

Schedule . STATUTES-1865-1,105,7.92

Salary of the Governor as High Commissioner 1,000 +L {TEXT:+L_1,000}
STATUTES-1865-1,105,7.93

Other Civil Services , including Compensations for Loss of Office
consequent on the Incorporation awarded with the Approval of One of Her
Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State 17,225 +L {TEXT:+L_17,225}
STATUTES-1865-1,105,7.94

{COM:total} 18,225 +L {TEXT:+L_18,225} STATUTES-1865-1,105,7.95

<heading>

Cap. VI . STATUTES-1865-1,105,7.97

An Act for the Protection of Inventions and Designs exhibited at the
<font> Dublin <$$font> International Exhibition for the Year
One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_sixty-five . STATUTES-1865-1,105,7.98

<bracket> 27th <font> March <$$font> 1865 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1865-1,105,7.99

<$$heading>

Whereas it is expedient that such Protection as is hereinafter mentioned
should be afforded to Persons desirous of exhibiting new Inventions or
new Designs at the International Exhibition to be held at <font> Dublin
<$$font> in the present Year : STATUTES-1865-1,105,7.101

Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of the same
, as follows : STATUTES-1865-1,105,7.102

1. This Act may be cited for all Purposes as " The Protection of
Inventions and Designs Amendment Act , 1865 . "
STATUTES-1865-1,105,7.103

2. The Exhibition of any new Invention at the <font> Dublin <$$font>
International Exhibition shall not , nor shall the Publication during
the Period of the holding of such Exhibition of any Description of such
Invention , nor shall the User of such Invention for the Purposes of the
said Exhibition , prejudice the Right of any Person to register
provisionally such Invention , or invalidate any Letters Patent that may
be granted for such Invention . STATUTES-1865-1,105,7.104

3. The Exhibition at the <font> Dublin <$$font> International
Exhibition of any new Design capable of being registered provisionally
under the Designs Act , 1850 , or of any Article to which such Design is
<P_105,8> applied , shall not , nor shall the Publication during the
Period of the holding of such Exhibition of any Description of such
Design , prejudice the Right of any Person to register , provisionally
or otherwise , such Design , or invalidate any provisional or other
Registration that may be granted for such Design .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,8.105

<heading>

Cap. VII . STATUTES-1865-1,105,8.107

An Act to confirm a Provisional Order under " The General Police and
Improvement <paren> <font> Scotland <$$font> <$$paren> Act , 1862 , "
relating to the Burgh of <font> Perth <$$font> .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,8.108

<bracket> 7th <font> April <$$font> 1865 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1865-1,105,8.109

<$$heading>

Whereas the Secretary of State for the Home Department , being One of
Her Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State , has , under the Provision
of " The General Police and Improvement <paren> <font> Scotland <$$font>
<$$paren> Act , 1862 , " duly made the Provisional Order which is
contained in the Schedule hereto annexed , and it is provided by the
said Act that no such Order shall be of any Validity unless the same has
been confirmed by Parliament ; and it is expedient that the said Order
should be so confirmed : STATUTES-1865-1,105,8.111

Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of the same
, as follows : STATUTES-1865-1,105,8.112

1. The Provisional Order contained in the Schedule to this Act annexed
shall , from and after the passing of this Act , be absolute , and be as
binding and of the like Force and Effect as if the Provision of the same
had been expressly enacted in this Act . STATUTES-1865-1,105,8.113

2. This Act may be cited for all Purposes as " The General Police and
Improvement <paren> <font> Scotland <$$font> <$$paren> Supplemental Act
, 1865 . " STATUTES-1865-1,105,8.114

Schedule referred to in this Act . STATUTES-1865-1,105,8.115

Provisional Order relating to the Burgh of Perth .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,8.116

<heading>

Cap. VIII . STATUTES-1865-1,105,8.118

An Act to amend " The Election Petitions Act , 1848 , " in certain
Particulars . STATUTES-1865-1,105,8.119

<bracket> 7th <font> April <$$font> 1865 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1865-1,105,8.120

<$$heading>

Whereas it is expedient to amend " The Election Petitions Act , 1848 , "
<paren> herein-after called the Principal Act , <$$paren> in certain
Particulars hereafter mentioned : STATUTES-1865-1,105,8.122

Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and Commons ,
in this present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of the same
, as follows : STATUTES-1865-1,105,8.123

1. If any Select Committee appointed under the Principal Act have
Occasion to apply to or report to the House , and the House be adjourned
for more than Twenty-four Hours , such Committee shall adjourn to the
Day immediately following that on which the House shall be appointed to
meet for the Despatch of Business , unless that Day shall happen to be a
<font> Sunday , Christmas Day , <$$font> or <P_105,9> <font> Good Friday
, <$$font> STATUTES-1865-1,105,9.124

and in that Case the Committee shall adjourn to the next following Day .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,9.125

2. In case the House from any Cause shall happen not to sit for the
Despatch of Business on the Day appointed for that Purpose , the
Committee shall again , and so from Time to Time , adjourn till after
the House shall sit for the Despatch of Business ;
STATUTES-1865-1,105,9.126

but no Adjournment shall be made for any longer Period than to the Day
next after the Day the House shall actually sit for the Despatch of
Business , unless such Day shall happen to be a <font> Sunday ,
Christmas Day , <$$font> or <font> Good Friday , <$$font>
STATUTES-1865-1,105,9.127

and in that Case the Adjournment shall be to the next following Day .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,9.128

3. In case it shall become necessary to adjourn the Consideration of
any Application or Report made by any Committee to the House , the House
may , if it shall so think fit , direct the Committee to adjourn their
Sitting again , and from Time to Time , and for such reasonable Time as
shall be sufficient to enable the House to decide on such Application
and Report , STATUTES-1865-1,105,9.129

and such Committee shall adjourn accordingly .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,9.130

4. If at any Time after the Appointment of a Committee under the
Principal Act it shall appear to the House that , from any Error ,
Irregularity of Proceeding , Oversight , or other Cause , such Committee
has become dissolved , or unable to continue its Sittings for any Cause
not provided for by the Principal Act , another Committee shall be
appointed to decide on the Petition referred to such Committee , unless
the House shall otherwise order , within Three sitting Days , as
herein-after provided ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,9.131

and for the Purpose of appointing such other Committee the General
Committee and the Members of the Chairmen's Panel shall meet as soon as
conveniently can be after the Expiration of Three sitting Days from the
Time the Occasion for such new Committee shall be reported to or brought
under the Notice of the House by any Member , at a Day and Hour to be
appointed by the General Committee ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,9.132

and Notice of such Meeting shall be published with the Votes ,
STATUTES-1865-1,105,9.133

and all the Proceedings of such former Committee shall be of no Effect .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,9.134

5. In all Cases where a Committee shall have become dissolved by any
Error , Irregularity of Proceeding , Oversight , or other Cause , not
involving the Death or permanent Illness of any of its Members , the
House may , if it shall so think fit , within Three sitting Days after
such Event shall have been reported to or brought under the Notice of
the House by any Member , order such Committee to stand revived , and to
meet , and continue its Sittings ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,9.135

and in such Case no new Committee shall be appointed , unless for any
subsequent Cause ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,9.136

and the Proceedings of such new Committee shall have the same Force and
Effect and be as valid as if no such Dissolution thereof had taken place
. STATUTES-1865-1,105,9.137

6. A Committee ordered to stand revived shall meet at the Time
mentioned in such order , STATUTES-1865-1,105,9.138

and shall in its subsequent Sittings and Adjournment be regulated by all
the Provisions of the Principal Act and of this Act .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,9.139

<P_105,10>

<heading>

Cap. IX . STATUTES-1865-1,105,10.142

An Act to allow Affirmations or Declarations to be made instead of Oaths
in all Civil and Criminal Proceedings in <font> Scotland <$$font> .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,10.143

<bracket> 7th <font> April <$$font> 1865 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1865-1,105,10.144

<$$heading>

Whereas Doubts have arisen whether the Provision of the Eighteenth and
Nineteenth of <font> Victoria , <$$font> Chapter Twenty-five , intituled
<font> An Act to allow Affirmations or Declarations to be made instead
of Oaths in certain Cases in <$$font> Scotland , be applicable to all
Courts of Civil Judicature , and to all Civil Proceedings :
STATUTES-1865-1,105,10.146

And whereas the Relief afforded by that Act to Persons refusing or being
unwilling from conscientious Motives to be sworn in Courts of Civil
Judicature has since been extended to all Courts of Criminal
Jurisdiction , and to all Criminal Proceedings , by the Twenty-sixth and
Twenty-seventh of <font> Victoria , <$$font> Chapter Eighty-five ; and
it is desirable to remove such Doubts , and to make the Law as to
Affirmations uniform for all Courts and for all Proceedings , whether
Civil or Criminal : STATUTES-1865-1,105,10.147

Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and
Commons , in this present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of
the same , as follows : STATUTES-1865-1,105,10.148

1. The said recited Acts shall be and the same are hereby repealed .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,10.149

2. If any Person called as a Witness in any Court of Civil or Criminal
Jurisdiction in <font> Scotland , <$$font> or required or desiring to
make an Affidavit or Deposition in the Course of any Proceeding , or in
any Matter , whether Civil or Criminal , shall refuse or be unwilling
from alleged conscientious Motives to be sworn , it shall be lawful for
the Court or Judge , or other presiding Officer or Person qualified to
take Affidavits or Depositions , upon being satisfied of the Sincerity
of such Objection , to permit such Person , instead of being sworn , to
make his or her solemn Affirmation or Declaration in the Words following
: STATUTES-1865-1,105,10.150

' I <font> A. B. <$$font> do solemnly , sincerely , and truly affirm
and declare , That the taking of any Oath is , according to my Religious
Belief , unlawful ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,10.151

and I do also solemnly , sincerely , and truly affirm and declare ,
<font> &c. <$$font> ' STATUTES-1865-1,105,10.152

Which solemn Affirmation and Declaration shall be of the same Force and
Effect as if such Person had taken an Oath in the usual Form .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,10.153

3. If any Person making such solemn Affirmation or Declaration shall
wilfully , falsely , and corruptly affirm or declare any Matter or thing
which , if the same had been sworn in the usual Form , would have
amounted to wilful and corrupt Perjury , every such Person so offending
shall incur the same Penalties as by the Laws and Statutes of this
Kingdom are or may be enacted or provided against Persons convicted of
wilful and corrupt Perjury . STATUTES-1865-1,105,10.154

4. This Act may be cited for all Purposes as " The Affirmations <paren>
<font> Scotland <$$font> <$$paren> Act , 1865 . "
STATUTES-1865-1,105,10.155

<P_105,11>

<heading>

Cap. X . STATUTES-1865-1,105,11.158

An Act to apply the Sum of Fifteen Millions out of the Consolidated Fund
to the Service of the Year One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_sixty-five .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,11.159

<bracket> 7th <font> April <$$font> 1865 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1865-1,105,11.160

<$$heading>

<heading>

Cap. XI . STATUTES-1865-1,105,11.163

An Act for punishing Mutiny and Desertion , and for the better Payment
of the Army and their Quarters . STATUTES-1865-1,105,11.164

<bracket> 7th <font> April <$$font> 1865 . <$$bracket>
STATUTES-1865-1,105,11.165

<$$heading>

<bracket> <font> The Sections now printed are either entirely new
STATUTES-1865-1,105,11.167

or have been altered in some respect ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,11.168

and s. <$$font> 75 , <font> and ss. <$$font> 98 <font> to <$$font> 102
, <font> of the Act of <$$font> 1864 <font> are omitted this Year .
<$$font> <$$bracket> STATUTES-1865-1,105,11.169

Whereas the raising or keeping a Standing Army within the United Kingdom
of <font> Great Britain <$$font> and <font> Ireland <$$font> in Time of
Peace , , unless it be with the Consent of Parliament , is against Law ;
STATUTES-1865-1,105,11.170

And whereas it is adjudged necessary by Her Majesty and this present
Parliament that a Body of Forces should be continued for the Safety of
the United Kingdom , the Defence of the Possessions of Her Majesty's
Crown , and the Preservation of the Balance of Power in <font> Europe ,
<$$font> and that the whole Number of such Forces should consist of
One_hundred_and_forty-two_thousand_four_hundred_and_seventy-seven Men ,
including Nine_thousand_one_hundred_and_nine , all Ranks , to be
employed with the Depôts in the United Kingdom of <font> Great Britain
<$$font> and <font> Ireland <$$font> of Regiments serving in Her
Majesty's <font> Indian <$$font> Possessions , but exclusive of the
Numbers actually serving within Her Majesty's <font> Indian <$$font>
Possessions : STATUTES-1865-1,105,11.171

And whereas no Man can be forejudged of Life or Limb , or subject in
Time of Peace to any Kind of Punishment within this Realm by Martial Law
, or in any other Manner than by Judgment of his Peers , and according
to the known and established Laws of this Realm ; yet nevertheless it
being requisite , for the retaining all the before-mentioned Forces in
their Duty , that an exact Discipline be observed , and that Soldiers
who shall mutiny or stir up Sedition , or shall desert Her Majesty's
Service , or be guilty of Crimes and Offences to the Prejudice of good
Order and Military Discipline , be brought to a more exemplary and
speedy Punishment than the usual Forms of the Law will allow :
STATUTES-1865-1,105,11.172

Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty , by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal , and
Commons , in this present Parliament assembled , and by the Authority of
the same , as follows : STATUTES-1865-1,105,11.173

2. All the Provisions of this Act shall apply to all Persons who are or
shall be commissioned or in Pay as an Officer , or who are or shall be
listed or in Pay as a Non-commissioned Officer or Soldier , and to all
Warrant Officers , and to all Persons employed on the Recruiting Service
receiving Pay , and all Pensioners receiving Allowances in respect of
such Service , and to Persons who are or shall be hired to be employed
in the Royal <P_105,12> Artillery , Royal Engineers , and to Master
Gunners , and to Conductors of Stores , and to the Corps of Royal
Military Surveyors and Draftsmen , and to all Officers and Persons who
are or shall be serving on the Commissariat Staff or in the Commissariat
Staff Corps , and to Officers serving in the Military Store Department ,
and to Persons in the War Department , who are or shall be serving with
any Part of Her Majesty's Army at home or abroad , under the Command of
any Commissioned Officer , and <paren> subject to and in accordance with
the Provision of an Act passed in the Sixth and Seventh Years of the
Reign of Her present Majesty , Chapter Ninety-five , <$$paren> to any
Out-pensioners of the Royal Hospital , <font> Chelsea , <$$font> who may
be called out on Duty in aid of the Civil Power , or for Muster or
Inspection , or who having volunteered their Services for that Purpose
shall be kept on Duty in any Fort , Town , or Garrison , and to all
Military Store Officers and other Civil Officers who are or shall be
employed by or act under the Secretary of State for War at any of Her
Majesty's Establishments in the Islands of <font> Jersey , Guernsey ,
Alderney , Sark , <$$font> and <font> Man , <$$font> and the Islands
thereto belonging , or at Foreign Stations ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,12.174

and all the Provisions of this Act shall apply to all Persons belonging
to Her Majesty's <font> Indian <$$font> forces who are or shall be
commissioned or in Pay as Officers , or who shall be listed or in Pay as
Non-commissioned Officers or Soldiers , or who are or shall be serving
or hired to be employed in the Artillery or any of the Trains of
Artillery , or as Master Gunners or Gunners , or as Conductors of Stores
, or who are or shall be serving in the Department of Engineers , or in
the Corps of Sappers and Miners , Ordnance or Public Works or
Commissariat Departments , and to all Storekeepers and other Civil
Officers employed under the Ordnance , and to all Veterinary Surgeons ,
Medical Storekeepers , Apothecaries , Hospital Stewards , and others
serving in the Medical Department of the said Forces , and to all
Licensed Suttlers , and all Followers in or of any of the said Forces ;
STATUTES-1865-1,105,12.175

provided that nothing in this Act contained shall extend to affect any
Security which has been or shall be given by any Military Store Officer
, Barrack Master , or other Officer , or their Sureties , for the due
Performance of their respective Offices , but that all such Securities
shall be and remain in full Force and Effect .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,12.176

6. For the Purpose of bringing Offenders against this Act and against
the Articles of War to Justice , Her Majesty may from Time to Time , in
like Manner as has been heretofore used , grant Commissions under the
Royal Sign Manual for the holding of Courts-martial within the United
Kingdom of <font> Great Britain <$$font> and <font> Ireland , <$$font>
STATUTES-1865-1,105,12.177

and may grant Commissions or Warrants under the said Royal Sign Manual
to the Chief Governor or Governors of <font> Ireland , <$$font> the
Commander of the Forces , or the Person or Persons commanding in chief ,
or commanding for the Time being , any Body of Troops belonging to Her
Majesty's Army , as well within the United Kingdom of <font> Great
Britain <$$font> and <font> Ireland <$$font> and the <font> British
Isles , <$$font> as in any of Her Majesty's Garrisons and Dominions or
elsewhere beyond Seas , for convening Courts-martial , <P_105,13> and
for authorizing any Officer under their respective Commands to convene
Courts-martial , as Occasion may require , or the Trial of Offences
committed by any of the Forces under the Command of any such
last-mentioned Officer , whether the same shall have been committed
before or after such Officer shall have taken upon him such Command :
STATUTES-1865-1,105,13.178

Provided that the Officer so authorized be not below the Degree of a
Field Officer , except in detached Situations beyond Seas where a Field
Officer is not in Command , STATUTES-1865-1,105,13.179

in which Case a Captain may be authorized to convene District or
Garrison Courts-martial : STATUTES-1865-1,105,13.180

Every Officer so authorized to convene Courts-martial may confirm the
Sentences of any Court-martial convened by him according to the Terms of
this Warrant . STATUTES-1865-1,105,13.181

13. All General and other Courts-martial shall administer an Oath to
every Witness or other Person who shall be examined before such Court in
any Matter relating to any Proceeding before the same ;
STATUTES-1865-1,105,13.182

and every Person , as well Civil as Military , who may be required to
give or produce Evidence before a Court-martial , shall , in the Case of
General Courts-martial , be summoned by the Judge Advocate_General , or
his Deputy , or the Person officiating as Judge Advocate , and in the
Case of all other Courts-martial by the President of the Court ;
STATUTES-1865-1,105,13.183

and all Persons so summoned and attending as Witnesses before any
Court-martial shall , during their necessary Attendance in or on such
Courts , and in going to and returning from the same , be privileged
from Arrest , STATUTES-1865-1,105,13.184

and shall , if unduly arrested , be discharged by the Court out of which
the Writ of Process issued by which such Witness was arrested , or if
such Court be not sitting , then by any Judge of the Superior Courts of
<font> Westminster <$$font> or <font> Dublin , <$$font> or of the Court
of Session in <font> Scotland , <$$font> or of the Courts of Law in the
<font> East <$$font> or <font> West_Indies , <$$font> or elsewhere ,
according as the Case shall require , upon its being made to appear to
such Court of Judge , by any Affidavit in a summary Way , that such
Witness was arrested in going to or attending upon or returning from
such Court-martial ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,13.185

and all Witnesses so duly summoned as aforesaid who shall not attend on
such Courts , or attending shall refuse to be sworn , or being sworn
shall refuse to give Evidence , or not produce the Documents under their
Power or Control required to be produced by them , or to answer all such
Questions as the Court may legally demand of them , shall be liable to
be attached in the Court of Queen's Bench in <font> London <$$font> or
<font> Dublin , <$$font> or in the Court of Session or Sheriff or
Stewart Courts in <font> Scotland , <$$font> or in Courts of Law in the
<font> East <$$font> or <font> West_Indies , <$$font> or in any of Her
Majesty's Colonies , Garrisons , or Dominions in <font> Europe <$$font>
or elsewhere respectively , upon Complaint made , in like Manner as if
such Witness , after having been duly summoned or subpoenaed , had
neglected to attend upon a Trial in any Proceeding in the Court in which
such Complaint shall be made : STATUTES-1865-1,105,13.186

Provided always , that nothing in this Act contained shall be construed
to render an Oath necessary in any Case where by Law a solemn
Affirmation may be made instead thereof : STATUTES-1865-1,105,13.187

It shall be lawful for the President of any Court-martial to administer
an <P_105,14> Oath to a Shorthand Writer to take down , according to the
best of his Power , the Evidence to be given before the Court .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,14.188

16. In all Cases where the Punishment of Death shall have been awarded
by a General Court-martial or Detachment General Court-martial it shall
be lawful for Her Majesty , or , if in any Place out of the United
Kingdom or <font> British Isles , <$$font> for the Commanding Officer
having Authority to confirm the Sentence , instead of causing such
Sentence to be carried into execution , to order the Offender to be kept
in Penal Servitude for any Term not less than Five Years , or to suffer
such Term of Imprisonment , with or without Hard Labour , and with or
without Solitary Confinement , as shall seem meet to Her Majesty , or to
the Officer commanding as aforesaid . STATUTES-1865-1,105,14.189

17. Any Officer or Soldier of Her Majesty's Army , or any Person
employed in the War Department , or in any way concerned in the Care or
Distribution of any Money , Provisions , Forage , Arms , Clothing ,
Ammunition , or other Stores belonging to Her Majesty's Army or for Her
Majesty's Use , who shall embezzle , fraudulently misapply , wilfully
damage , steal , or receive the same , knowing them to have been stolen
, or shall be concerned therein or connive thereat , may be tried for
the same by a General Court-martial , and sentenced to be kept in Penal
Servitude for any Term not less than Five Years , or to suffer such
Punishment of Fine , Imprisonment , Dismissal from Her Majesty's Service
, Reduction to the Ranks of {TEXT:if} a Warrant or Non-commissioned
Officer , as such Court shall think fit , according to the Nature and
Degree of the Offence ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,14.190

and every such Offender shall , in addition to any other Punishment ,
make good at his own Expense the Loss and Damage sustained ,
STATUTES-1865-1,105,14.191

and in every such Case the Court is required to ascertain by Evidence
the Amount of such Loss or Damage , and to declare by their Sentence
that such Amount shall be made good by such Offender ;
STATUTES-1865-1,105,14.192

and the Loss and Damage so ascertained as aforesaid shall be a Debt to
Her Majesty , STATUTES-1865-1,105,14.193

and may be recovered in any of Her Majesty's Courts at <font>
Westminster <$$font> or in <font> Dublin , <$$font> or the Court of
Exchequer in <font> Scotland , <$$font> or in any Court in Her Majesty's
Colonies , or in <font> India , <$$font> where the Person sentenced by
such Court-martial shall be resident , after the said Judgment shall be
confirmed and made known , STATUTES-1865-1,105,14.194

or the Offender , if he shall remain in the Service , may be put under
Stoppages not exceeding One Half of his Pay and Allowances until the
Amount so ascertained shall be recovered . STATUTES-1865-1,105,14.195

19. Whenever any Sentence of Penal Servitude heretofore or hereafter
passed upon any Offender by any Court-martial holden in <font> India ,
<$$font> or in any other Part of Her Majesty's Foreign Dominions , or
elsewhere beyond the Seas , is to be carried into execution for the Term
specified in such Sentence or for any shorter Term , or when Sentence of
Death passed by any such Court-martial has been or shall as aforesaid be
commuted to Penal Servitude , the same shall be notified by the Officer
commanding Her Majesty's Forces at the Presidency or Station where the
Offender may come or be , or in his Absence by the Adjutant_General for
the Time being , to some Judge of One of the <P_101,15> Supreme Courts
of Judicature in <font> India , <$$font> or the Chief_Justice , or some
other Judge , as the Case may be , in any Part of Her Majesty's Foreign
Dominions , who shall make Order for the Penal Servitude or intermediate
Custody of such Offender ; STATUTES-1865-1,101,15.196

and upon any such Order being made it shall be duly notified to the
Governor of the Presidency if in <font> India , <$$font> or to the
Governor of the Colony if in any of Her Majesty's Colonies , or to the
Person who shall for the Time being be exercising the Office of Governor
of such Presidency or Colony , who , on Receipt of such Notification ,
shall cause such Offender to be removed or sent to some other Colony or
Place , or to undergo his Sentence within the Presidency or Colony where
the Offender was so sentenced , or where he may come or be as aforesaid
, in obedience to the Directions for the Removal and Treatment of
Convicts which shall from Time to Time be transmitted from Her Majesty
through One of Her Principal Secretaries of State to such Presidency or
Colony ; STATUTES-1865-1,101,15.197

and such Offender shall according to such Directions undergo the
Sentence of Penal Servitude which shall have been passed upon him either
in the Presidency or Colony in which he has been so sentenced , or in
the Colony or Place to which he has been so removed or sent ,
STATUTES-1865-1,101,15.198

and whilst such Sentence shall remain in force shall be liable to be
imprisoned , and kept to Hard Labour , and otherwise dealt with under
such Sentence in the same Manner as if he had been sentenced to be
imprisoned , with Hard Labour , during the Term of his Penal Servitude ,
by the Judgment of a Court of competent Jurisdiction in such Presidency
or Colony , or in the Colony or Place to which he has been so removed or
sent respectively : STATUTES-1865-1,101,15.199

And elsewhere out of Her Majesty's Dominions , the Officer commanding
shall have Power to make an Order in Writing for the Penal Servitude or
intermediate Custody of such Offender ; STATUTES-1865-1,101,15.200

and such Offender shall be liable by virtue of such Order to be
imprisoned and kept to Hard Labour and otherwise dealt with under the
Sentence of the Court in the same Manner as if he had been sentenced to
be imprisoned with Hard Labour during the Terms of his Penal Servitude
by the Judgment of a Court of competent Jurisdiction in the Place where
he may be ordered to be kept in such intermediate Custody , or in the
Place to which he may be removed for the Purposes of undergoing this
Sentence of Penal Servitude . STATUTES-1865-1,101,15.201

20. In any Case where a Sentence of Penal Servitude shall have been
awarded by a General or Detachment General Court-martial it shall be
lawful for Her Majesty , or , if in any Place out of the United Kingdom
or <font> British Isles , <$$font> for the Officer commanding in chief
Her Majesty's Forces there serving , instead of causing such Sentence to
be carried into execution , to order that the Offender be imprisoned ,
with or without Hard Labour , and without Solitary Confinement , for
such Term not exceeding Four Years as shall seem meet to Her Majesty ,
or to the Officers commanding as aforesaid . STATUTES-1865-1,101,15.202

26. On the first and on every subsequent Conviction for Desertion the
Court-martial , in addition to any other Punishment , may order the
Offender to be marked Two Inches below and One <P_101,16> Inch in rear
of the Nipple of the Left Breast with the Letter D , such Letter not to
be less than an Inch long , and to be marked upon the Skin with some Ink
or Gunpowder , or other Preparation , so as to be clearly seen , and not
liable to be obliterated ; STATUTES-1865-1,101,16.203

a Court-martial recommending that an Offender be discharged with
Ignominy may also recommend that he be marked on the Right Breast with
the Letters B. C. , STATUTES-1865-1,101,16.204

and such Recommendation may legally be carried into effect by the
General or other Officer empowered to confirm the Proceedings of the
Court-martial . STATUTES-1865-1,101,16.205

31. In the Case of a Prisoner undergoing Imprisonment under the
Sentence of a Court-martial in any public Prison other than the Military
Prisons set apart by the Authority of this Act , or in any Gaol or House
of Correction in any Part of the United Kingdom , it shall be lawful for
the General commanding in chief , or the Adjutant_General , or the
Officer who confirmed the Proceedings of the Court , or the Officer
commanding the District or Garrison in which such Prisoner may be , to
give , as often as Occasion may arise , an Order in Writing directing
that the Prisoner be discharged , or be delivered over to Military
Custody , whether for the Purpose of being removed to some other Prison
or Place in the United Kingdom , there to undergo the Remainder or any
Part of his Sentence , or for the Purpose of being brought before a
Court-martial either as a Witness or for Trial ;
STATUTES-1865-1,101,16.206

and in the Case of a Prisoner undergoing Imprisonment or Penal Servitude
under the Sentence of a Court-martial in any public Prison other than
such Military Prison as aforesaid , or in any Gaol or House of
Correction in any Part of Her Majesty's Dominions other than the United
Kingdom , it shall be lawful for the General commanding in chief or the
Adjutant_General of Her Majesty's Forces in the Case of any such
Prisoner , and for the Commander-in-Chief in <font> India <$$font> in
the Case of any Prisoner so confined in any Part of Her Majesty's <font>
Indian <$$font> Dominions , and for the General commanding in chief in
any Presidency in <font> India <$$font> in the Case of a Prisoner so
therein confined , and for the Officer commanding in chief or the
Officer who confirmed the Proceedings of the Court at any Foreign
Station in the Case of a Prisoner so there confined , to give , as often
as Occasion may arise , an Order in Writing directing that the Prisoner
be discharged or be delivered over to Military Custody , whether for the
Purpose of being removed to some other Prison or Place in any Part of
Her Majesty's Dominions , there to undergo the Remainder or any Part of
his Sentence , or for the Purpose of being brought before a
Court-martial either as a Witness or for Trial ;
STATUTES-1865-1,101,16.207

and in the Case of any Prisoner who shall be removed by any such Order
from any such Prison , Gaol , or House of Correction either within the
United Kingdom or elsewhere to some other Prison or Place either in the
United Kingdom or elsewhere , the Officer who gave such Order shall also
give an Order in Writing directing the Governor , Provost Marshal ,
Gaoler or Keeper of such other Prison or Place to receive such Prisoner
into his Custody , and specifying the Offence of which such Prisoner
shall have been convicted , and the Sentence of the Court , and the
Period of <P_105,17> Imprisonment which he is to undergo , and the Day
and the Hour on which he is to be released ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,17.208

and such Governor , Provost Marshal , Gaoler or Keeper shall keep such
Offender in a proper Place of Confinement , with or without Hard Labour
, and with or without Solitary Confinement , according to the Sentence
of the Court , and during the Time specified in the said Order , or
until he be duly discharged or delivered over to Military Custody before
the Expiration of that Time under an Order duly made for the Purpose ;
STATUTES-1865-1,105,17.209

and in the Case of a Prisoner undergoing Imprisonment or Penal Servitude
under the Sentence of a Court-martial in any Military Prison in any Part
of Her Majesty's Dominions , the Secretary of State of the War
Department , or any Person duly authorized by him in that Behalf , shall
have the like Powers in regard to the Discharge and Delivery over of
such Prisoners to Military Custody as may be lawfully exercised by any
of the Military Authorities above mentioned in respect of any Prisoners
undergoing Confinement as aforesaid in any public Prison other than a
Military Prison , or in any Gaol or House of Correction in any Part of
Her Majesty's Dominions ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,17.210

and such Prisoner in any of the Cases here-before mentioned shall
accordingly , on the Production of any such Order as is herein-before
mentioned , be discharged or delivered over , as the Case may be :
STATUTES-1865-1,105,17.211

Provided always , that the Time during which any Prisoner under Sentence
of Imprisonment by a Court-martial shall be detained in such Military
Custody under such Order as aforesaid shall be reckoned as Imprisonment
under the Sentence for whatever Purpose such Detention shall take place
; STATUTES-1865-1,105,17.212

and such Prisoner may during such Time , either when on board Ship or
otherwise , be subjected to such Restraint as is necessary for his
Detention and Removal . STATUTES-1865-1,105,17.213

50. If any Man while belonging to a Militia Regiment shall enlist in
and be attested for Her Majesty's Army , he shall be liable to be tried
before a Court-martial on a Charge for Desertion ;
STATUTES-1865-1,105,17.214

but it shall be lawful for the Secretary of State for the War Department
, on the Confession thereof by such Man , to order that in lieu of his
being so tried he shall be subjected to a Stoppage of One Penny a Day of
his Pay for Eighteen Calendar Months , to be applied as the said
Secretary of State shall direct , and further to determine whether such
Man shall be returned to his Militia Regiment after such Sum shall have
been made good , or shall be deemed to be a Soldier , in the same Manner
as he would have been if he had not been a Militiaman at the Time of
this Attestation , in which latter Case his Service as a Soldier shall
not be reckoned for Pension until the Day on which his Engagement for
the Military would have expired : STATUTES-1865-1,105,17.215

Provided that if the Regiment of Militia from which the Man has deserted
be within the United Kingdom the Secretary of State for the War
Department shall not make such Order without the Consent of the
Commanding Officer of such Regiment . STATUTES-1865-1,105,17.216

If any Non-commissioned Officer of the Volunteer Permanent Staff enlists
in Her Majesty's Army he may be tried and punished as a Deserter ,
STATUTES-1865-1,105,17.217

but if he confesses his Desertion the Secretary of State for the War
Department , instead of causing him to be tried and punished as a
<P_105,18> Deserter , may cause him to be returned to his Service on the
Volunteer Permanent Staff , to be there put under Stoppages from his Pay
until he has repaid the Amount of any Bounty received by him and the
Expenses attending his Enlistment , and also the Value of any Arms , &c.
issued to him while on the Volunteer Permanent Staff and not duly
delivered up by him ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,18.218

or may cause him to be held to his Service in Her Majesty's Army , with
a Direction , if it seems fit , that his Time of Service therein shall
not be reckoned for Pension until the Time when his Engagement on the
Volunteer Permanent Staff would have expired ;
STATUTES-1865-1,105,18.219

and may further cause him to be put under Stoppages of One Penny a Day
of his Pay until he has repaid the Expense attending his Engagement or
Attestation on the Volunteer Permanent Staff , and also the Value of any
Arms , Clothing or Appointments issued to him while on the Volunteer
Permanent Staff and not duly delivered up by him .
STATUTES-1865-1,105,18.220

52. It shall be lawful for any Justice_of_the_Peace or Person
exercising the Office of a Magistrate within any of Her Majesty's
Dominions abroad , or in any Colony for any other Person duly authorized
in that Behalf by the Governor or Officer administering the Government
of such Colony , or in Her Majesty's Dominions in <font> India <$$font>
for any Person duly authorized in that Behalf by the Governor_General or
Lieutenant Governor or other Officer administering the Government of any
Presidency , Division , or Province , or within the Territories of any
Foreign State in <font> India <$$font> for the Person performing the
Duties of the Office of <font> British <$$font> Resident there , or for
any other Person duly authorized in that Behalf by the Governor_General
, to enlist and attest or to re-engage within the local Limits of their
several Authorities any Soldiers or Persons desirous of enlisting or
re-engaging in Her Majesty's Army ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,18.221

and any such Magistrate or Person as aforesaid shall have the same Power
in that Behalf as are by this or any other Act of Parliament given to
Justices in the United Kingdom for all such Purposes of Enlistment and
Attestation ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,18.222

but no such Magistrate or other Person authorized to enlist and attest
as above mentioned shall be a General Officer or hold any Regimental
Commission ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,18.223

and all such Appointments , past and future , and everything done or to
be done under them , shall be valid and of full Effect , notwithstanding
the Expiration of this Act or of any other Act of Parliament ;
STATUTES-1865-1,105,18.224

and any Person so attested shall be deemed to be an attested Soldier ;
STATUTES-1865-1,105,18.225

and as often as any Corps shall be relieved or disbanded at any Station
beyond the Seas it shall be lawful for any Officers thereunto authorized
by the Officer commanding in chief at such Station to receive as
Transfers as many of the Soldiers belonging to the Corps leaving the
Station as shall be willing and fit for Service for any Corpus appointed
to remain ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,18.226

and every Soldier so transferred is hereby deemed to be discharged from
his former Corps , STATUTES-1865-1,105,18.227

and an attested Certificate of Transfer shall be delivered to the
Soldier . STATUTES-1865-1,105,18.228

53. It shall be lawful for the Commander-in-Chief , or for any Officer
authorized by him in that Behalf , to direct that any Soldier attested
for any one Branch of the Service shall , on the Application <P_105,19>
of his Commanding Officer , and with his own Consent , be transferred to
some other Branch of the Service , or to some other Regiment or Corps in
the same Branch of the Service , either within the United Kingdom or
elsewhere ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,19.229

and every Soldier so transferred shall be deemed to be discharged from
his former Corps , STATUTES-1865-1,105,19.230

and shall have a Certificate of Transfer delivered to him ;
STATUTES-1865-1,105,19.231

but any Soldier attested for the Infantry , and at his own Request
transferred to the Cavalry , Artillery , or Engineers , shall be bound
to serve for the full Term of such Service as if originally enlisted
therein , STATUTES-1865-1,105,19.232

and any Soldier at his own Request transferred from either of such
before-mentioned Services to the Infantry shall be liable to serve for
the Term of his original Enlistment : STATUTES-1865-1,105,19.233

Provided always , that any Soldier who may have volunteered for the
Corps of Armourer Serjeants , or the Army Hospital Corps , shall be
liable , by Order of the Military Authorities above mentioned , to be
re-transferred to his former Corps , or to any other Corps on the
Station on which he is serving at the Time , for Misconduct , Unfitness
, or any other reasonable Cause . STATUTES-1865-1,105,19.234

54. Any Soldier at any Time during the last Six Months of the Term of
limited Service for which he shall have first engaged , or after the
Completion of such Term , with the Consent of his Commanding Officer or
any Person having been a Soldier , and having received his Discharge ,
may , if approved by competent Military Authority as a fit Person for
Her Majesty's Service , be re-engaged to serve for the further Term of
Eleven Years in the Infantry , and Twelve Years in the Cavalry , and
Nine Years in the Artillery or Engineers , upon making a Declaration ,
in the Form given in the Schedule annexed to this Act , before any One
of Her Majesty's Justices_of_the_Peace in <font> Great Britain <$$font>
or <font> Ireland <$$font> or if not in <font> Great Britain <$$font> or
<font> Ireland <$$font> before any Person duly appointed to enlist and
attest out of <font> Great Britain <$$font> or <font> Ireland <$$font>
any Soldiers or Persons desirous of enlisting or re-engaging in Her
Majesty's Service ; STATUTES-1865-1,105,19.235

and on the Expiration of the Second Term of limited Service for which
any Soldier shall have engaged , the said Second Term of limited Service
may be prolonged for such further Time , not exceeding Two Years , as
shall be directed by the Commanding Officer of the Station where such
Soldier may be at the Time of the Expiration of such Service ;
STATUTES-1865-1,105,19.236

and any Soldier who shall give Notice to his Commanding Officer , after
completing his Second Term of limited Service , that he is desirous of
continuing in Her Majesty's Service , and being approved by competent
Military Authority , may be continued in such Service as a Soldier so
long as he shall desire to be so continued , and until the Expiration of
Three Calendar Months after he shall have given Notice to his Commanding
Officer of his Wish to be discharged , STATUTES-1865-1,105,19.237

and for that Purpose shall be considered in all respects during such
Time as if his Term of Service were still unexpired :
STATUTES-1865-1,105,19.238

Provided always , that in reckoning Service under the original
Enlistment or Re-engagement of a Soldier the Boon Service granted by the
Governor_General of <font> India , <$$font> dated Twelfth of <font>
October <$$font> One_thousand_eight_hundred_and_fifty-nine <P_105,20> ,
shall be reckoned as actual Service , and allowed towards Pension and
Discharge . STATUTES-1865-1,105,20.239

