<BEGIN_statutes-1805-1>

<P_45,545>

The Statutes at Large , &c. <font> Anno regni <$$font> Georgii III.
Britanniarum Regis , quadragesimo quinto . STATUTES-1805-1,45,545.3

At <font> the Parliament begun and holden at <$$font> Westminster ,
<font> the Sixteenth Day of <$$font> November , <font> Anno Domini
<$$font> 1802 , <font> in the Forty-third Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord <$$font> George <font> the Third , by the Grace of God ,
of the United Kingdom of <$$font> Great Britain <font> and <$$font>
Ireland , <font> King , Defender of the Faith ; and from thence
continued , by several Prorogations , to the Fifteenth Day of <$$font>
January 1805 ; <font> being the Third Session of the Second Parliament
of the United Kingdom of <$$font> Great Britain <font> and <$$font>
Ireland . STATUTES-1805-1,45,545.4

<heading>

Cap. I . STATUTES-1805-1,45,545.6

<$$heading>

An act for continuing and granting to his Majesty certain duties upon
malt , in Great Britain , for the service of the year
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_five . STATUTES-1805-1,45,545.8

- <bracket> February 7 , 1805 . STATUTES-1805-1,45,545.9

<$$bracket>

<heading>

Cap. II . STATUTES-1805-1,45,545.12

<$$heading>

An act for continuing and granting to his Majesty a duty on pensions ,
offices , and personal estates , in England ; and certain duties on
sugar , malt , tobacco , and snuff , in Great Britain , for the service
of the year one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_five .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,545.14

- <bracket> February 7 , 1805 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1805-1,45,545.15

<heading>

Cap. III . STATUTES-1805-1,45,545.17

<$$heading>

<font> An act to remedy certain omissions in an act , passed in the last
session of parliament , intituled <$$font> , An act for the relief of
certain insolvent debtors . STATUTES-1805-1,45,545.19

- <bracket> February 7 , 1805 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1805-1,45,545.20

Whereas <font> an act , passed in the last session of parliament ,
intituled <$$font> , An act for the relief of certain insolvent debtors
, <P_45,546> did not contain provision adequate to the relief of all the
persons to whom it was meant to extend , by reason that several
prisoners who were in custody on the first day of <$$font> January
<font> one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_four , and had continued in
custody from that time to the time of the passing of the said act , and
also until and at the time of the making out of the lists , by the said
act directed to be made , during the time of such their imprisonment ,
had {TEXT:missing_"had"} been removed by writ of <$$font> Habeas_Corpus
, <$$font> or by other means from one prison to another , after the said
first day of <$$font> January <font> one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_four
, and before the making out of such lists ; and also because the form of
the lists by that act required to be made and delivered by the several
gaolers or keepers of prisons within this kingdom , and the form of the
oath by them severally in and by the same act required to be taken , do
not comprehend and apply to the case of prisoners so removed as
herein-before mentioned : <$$font> STATUTES-1805-1,45,546.21

for remedy whereof be it enacted by the King's most excellent majesty ,
by and with the advice and consent of the lords spiritual and temporal ,
and commons in this present parliament assembled , and by the authority
of the same , That , from and after the passing of this act , all and
every gaoler or gaolers , keeper or keepers of any prison within this
kingdom , shall be , and are hereby required , in addition to the list
in and by the said act directed to be made , to make a true , exact ,
and perfect list , alphabetically , of the name or names of all and
every person or persons who having been , upon the first day of <font>
January <$$font> one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_four , a prisoner or
prisoners in the custody of some gaoler or gaolers , keeper or keepers
of some prison in this kingdom , shall have since continued to be a
prisoner or prisoners in actual custody , and at the time of making out
every such list so hereby required shall be really an actual prisoner or
prisoners in the custody of the gaoler or gaolers , keeper or keepers of
the prison , making and delivering such list ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,546.22

which list , when made , shall be delivered and dealt with in like
manner , and be effectual for the like purpose , as in and by the said
act is directed in respect to the lists therein mentioned .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,546.23

II. And be it further enacted , That the warden of his Majesty's prison
of the Fleet and marshal of the King's-Bench prison , and every other
gaoler and gaolers , keeper and keepers of any other prison within this
kingdom , shall , severally , on the delivering in of any such list of
prisoners as herein-above required , take an oath in the open court of
general quarter session of the peace , or at some adjournment thereof ,
to the following effect ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,546.24

that is to say , ' I <font> A. B. <$$font> upon my corporal oath , in
the presence of Almighty God , do solemnly swear , profess , and declare
, That all and every person and persons whose name or names is or are
inserted and contained in the list , by me now delivered in and
subscribed , now are really and truly prisoners in my actual custody ,
in the prison of {COM:blank_in_text} and have , to the best of my
knowledge and belief , continually so been ever since the respective
days and times of their being committed to my custody , in such lists
mentioned ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,546.25

<P_45,547>

and that it appears by the several returns and affidavits of the several
gaoler or gaolers , keeper or keepers of prisons , in whose custody the
said several persons have been previous to their being committed to my
custody , and which several returns and affidavits are true to the best
of my knowledge and belief , that they were really and truly prisoners
in actual custody on the first day of <font> January <$$font>
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_four , and have ever afterwards continued
so to be until and at the respective days and times of their being
committed to my custody , as in such list are mentioned .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,547.27

So help me God . ' STATUTES-1805-1,45,547.28

Which said oath , and the words thereof , lists , and copies of lists ,
shall be entered , kept , and dealt with , in manner in the said act
directed respecting the oath , lists , and copies of lists , therein
mentioned . STATUTES-1805-1,45,547.29

III. And be it further enacted , by the authority aforesaid , That all
and every the clauses , powers , provisions , penalties , regulations ,
and directions , in the said act mentioned , shall apply to the cases of
prisoners meant to be discharged under this act , in the same manner as
if the said clauses , powers , provisions , penalties , regulations ,
and directions , were herein expressly inserted and enacted :
STATUTES-1805-1,45,547.30

provided always , That nothing in this present act contained shall
extend , or be construed to extend , to the case of any prisoner , or in
any manner to authorise the discharge of any prisoner , who should not
have been entitled to be discharged under and by virtue of the said act
herein-above mentioned , if such prisoner , being in the custody of any
gaoler or gaolers , keeper or keepers of any prison within this kingdom
, on the first day of <font> January <$$font>
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_four , had afterwards continued in
custody in the same prison up to the time of passing the said act , and
of making out the lists by that act directed to be made , and had not
been removed therefrom as is herein-above mentioned .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,547.31

IV. <font> And whereas it may have happened in some instances that
prisoners who were in custody on the first day of <$$font> January
<font> one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_four , and had so continued from
that time to the time of passing the said act , but who , during the
time of such their imprisonment had been removed as is herein-above
mentioned , may , through inadvertence and mistake as to the extent and
meaning of the provisions of the said act passed in the said last
session of parliament , have been unduly discharged in supposed
pursuance of the same ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,547.32

and whereas it is expedient that such discharges , and all orders made
and acts done relative thereto , should be rendered valid and effectual
, and that all persons concerned therein should be indemnified and saved
harmless on account of the same , in all cases wherein the prisoners so
discharged would have been entitled to be discharged if this present act
had then been made : <$$font> STATUTES-1805-1,45,547.33

be it therefore further enacted by the authority aforesaid , That the
discharge of every prisoner heretofore made under the supposed authority
of the said act of parliament in that behalf , shall be good and
effectual in law to all intents and purposes , and in respect to all
persons whatsoever in every case in <P_45,548> which the prisoner so
discharged would have been entitled to be discharged if this present act
had then been made ; and all and every the clauses , powers , provisions
, penalties , regulations , and directions , in the said act mentioned ,
shall apply to and be available in respect of the case of every such
prisoner so discharged as last aforesaid ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,548.34

and that if any action of escape , or any other action or suit , shall
have been or shall hereafter be brought against any justice or justices
of peace , sheriff , the warden of his Majesty's prison of the Fleet ,
the marshal of the King's-Bench prison , or any other keeper or keepers
, gaoler or gaolers of any prison in this kingdom , or other person
concerned in such discharge for or on account of the discharge , of any
such prisoner under the supposed authority of the said act in that
behalf , that then , in every such case , he or they may plead the
general issue , and give this act and the special matter in evidence in
bar of such action or suit ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,548.35

and if the plaintiff or plaintiffs therein be nonsuited , or a verdict
shall pass , or judgement be had therein , upon demurrer against him or
them , the defendant or defendants shall have his or their treble costs
; STATUTES-1805-1,45,548.36

provided that , in case any such action of escape , or other action or
suit , brought on the account aforesaid , shall be depending at the time
of the passing of this act , the plaintiff or plaintiffs therein shall
be at liberty to discontinue the same without payment of costs .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,548.37

<heading>

Cap. IV . STATUTES-1805-1,45,548.39

<$$heading>

An act to continue , until six weeks after the commencement of the next
session of parliament , an act , made in the last session of parliament
, for continuing an act to empower the lord-lieutenant or other chief
governor or governors of Ireland , to apprehend and detain such persons
as he or they shall suspect for conspiring against his Majesty's person
and government - STATUTES-1805-1,45,548.41

<bracket> Februrary 22 , 1805 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1805-1,45,548.42

<heading>

Cap. V . STATUTES-1805-1,45,548.44

<$$heading>

<font> An act for explaining and amending an act made in the forty-third
year of his present Majesty , for consolidating certain of the
provisions contained in any act or acts relating to the duties under the
management of the commissioners for the affairs of taxes , and for
amending the same , so far as relates to the power of acting as
commissioners in certain districts . <$$font> STATUTES-1805-1,45,548.46

- <bracket> Februrary 22 , 1805 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1805-1,45,548.47

Whereas <font> by an act , passed in the forty-third year of the reign
of his present Majesty , intituled <$$font> , An act for consolidating
certain of the provisions contained in any act or acts relating to the
duties under the management of the commissioners for the affairs of
taxes , and for amending the same , <font> the commissioners appointed
to carry into execution the said act , and other acts to be executed
under the regulations thereof , are required to possess certain
qualifications therein-@ @mentioned , and to be resident in the district
for which they act ; and it is expedient to remove the said restrictions
in the cases herein-@ @mentioned : <$$font> STATUTES-1805-1,45,548.48

may it therefore please your Majesty that it may be enacted ; and be it
enacted by the King's most excellent majesty , by and with the advice
and <P_45,549> consent of the lords spiritual and temporal , and commons
, in this present parliament assembled , and by the authority of the
same , That the said acts shall not be construed to restrain any bencher
of any of the inns of court from acting as such commissioner for such
inn of court , and the inns belonging thereto , whether of law or equity
; nor any of the officers who , by virtue of their offices , have
heretofore acted in the execution of the land-tax act , from acting as
such commissioner in the liberty of the palaces of <font> Whitehall
<$$font> and <font> Saint James's <$$font> ; and no other qualification
shall be required of any such bencher or officer aforesaid , than the
possession of such places or offices respectively , and who respectively
shall and may act therein , although they shall not be resident within
the district for which they shall act . STATUTES-1805-1,45,549.49

II. And be it further enacted , That persons residing in either of the
parishes of <font> Saint Clement's Danes <$$font> , <font> Saint Mary le
Strand <$$font> , or <font> Saint John the Baptist <$$font> , in the
liberty of the <font> Savoy <$$font> , parts thereof being situate in
the county of <font> Middlesex <$$font> and other parts in the city and
liberty of <font> Westminster <$$font> , being especially named and
appointed commissioners for the said county of <font> Middlesex <$$font>
or for the said city and liberty of <font> Westminster <$$font> , and
being duly qualified as directed by the said first-mentioned act , may
act as such commissioners for any or all of the divisions or districts
within the said parishes , or any of them ; any thing in the said
first-mentioned act contained to the contrary notwithstanding .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,549.50

III. And be it further enacted , That no person hereby authorised to
act as a commissioner for the districts before named , shall be liable
to any penalty inflicted by the said first-mentioned act , for having
acted in the execution thereof in the manner in this act directed ; nor
shall any act by them done , according to the regulations of this act ,
in the several inns of court and the liberty of the palaces aforesaid ,
be impeached for or on account of the want of such qualification as is
required by the said act , nor in any of the districts mentioned in this
act , for or on account of the non-residence in the districts for which
they act . STATUTES-1805-1,45,549.51

<heading>

Cap. VI . STATUTES-1805-1,45,549.53

<$$heading>

An act to indemnify such persons in the United Kingdom as have omitted
to qualify themselves for offices and employments ; and for extending
the times limited for those purposes respectively until the twenty-fifth
day of December one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_five , and to permit such
persons in Great Britain as have omitted to make and file affidavits of
the execution of indentures of clerks to attornies and solicitors to
make and file the same on or before the first day of Michaelmas term ,
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_five . STATUTES-1805-1,45,549.55

- <bracket> February 22 , 1805 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1805-1,45,549.56

<heading>

Cap. VII . STATUTES-1805-1,45,549.58

<$$heading>

An act for raising the sum of three milions by loans or exchequer-bills
, for the service of Great Britain , for the year
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_five . STATUTES-1805-1,45,549.60

- <bracket> February 22 , 1805 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1805-1,45,549.61

Commissioners of the treasury may raise 3,000,000 <font> l. <$$font> by
loans and exchequer-bills , in like manner as is prescribed by the malt
act of this session , c. I. concerning loans . &c.
STATUTES-1805-1,45,549.62

The clauses , &c. in the said act relating to <P_45,550> loans or
exchequer-bills , <paren> exception <$$paren> extended to this act .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,550.63

Exchequer-bills to bear an interest not exceeding 3 <font> d <$$font> 2
<font> q {COM:sic} <$$font> per_centum per_diem .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,550.64

Exchequer-bills so issued not to be received again in payment of any
taxes , nor exchanged before Jan. 5 , 1806 . STATUTES-1805-1,45,550.65

Action not to lie for such refusal . STATUTES-1805-1,45,550.66

Principal and interest , with charges , to be repaid out of the supplies
to be granted in this session . STATUTES-1805-1,45,550.67

Bank of England authorised in advance the whole sum on the credit of
this act . STATUTES-1805-1,45,550.68

Cap. VIII . STATUTES-1805-1,45,550.69

<font> An act for amending an act , passed in the last session of
parliament , for granting additional annuities to the proprietors of
stock created by two acts , passed in the thirty-seventh and
forty-second years of his present Majesty . <$$font> -
STATUTES-1805-1,45,550.70

<bracket> March 1 , 1805 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1805-1,45,550.71

Whereas <font> an act , passed in the thirty-seventh year of the reign
of his present Majesty , intituled <$$font> , An act for raising the sum
of eighteen millions by way of annuities : <font>
STATUTES-1805-1,45,550.72

and whereas an act , passed in the forty-second year of the reign of his
present Majesty , intituled <$$font> , An act for granting annuities to
satisfy certain exchequer-bills , <font> whereby certain annuities were
created , at and after the rate of five pounds <$$font> per_centum
per_annum , <font> and were made part of the capital or joint stock of
annuities created by the said first recited act :
STATUTES-1805-1,45,550.73

and whereas it was by the said first recited act enacted , that , after
two years from the end of the then present war and ratification of the
definitive treaty of peace thereupon , at any period of six months ,
ending on the fifth day of <$$font> April <font> or the tenth day of
<$$font> October <font> in any year , it should and might be lawful for
any contributor , his , her , or their executors or administrators ,
successors or assigns to make application to the governor and company of
the bank of <$$font> England , <font> to have the said annuities , after
the rate of five pounds <$$font> per_centum <font> thereby granted ,
redeemed or paid off , or converted into other annuities , as therein
after is mentioned , at his , her , or their election ; and that after
six months previous notice of such his , her , or their intention , the
said annuities should be redeemed and paid off , or converted into such
annuities accordingly : STATUTES-1805-1,45,550.74

and whereas the commons of <$$font> Great Britain <font> in parliament
assembled did , on the eighth day of <$$font> December <font>
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_ninety-six , resolve that the sum of
eighteen millions be raised by annuities ; and did also resolve that
every contributor to the said sum of eighteen millions should , for
every one_hundred pounds contributed and paid , be entitled to the
principal sum of one_hundred_and_twelve pounds ten shillings in
annuities after the rate of five pounds <$$font> per_centum per_annum ,
<font> to commence from the tenth day of <$$font> October <font>
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_ninety-six , and to be irredeemable ,
unless with the consent of the proprietors thereof , until the
expiration of three years from the period at which the existing
annuities , after the rate of five pounds <$$font> per_centum per_annum
, <font> should be redeemed and paid off , or the interest payable
thereon reduced ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,550.75

that every proprietor of the said annuities should , at his desire , on
three months notice , be entitled at any period of time , not less than
two years after the end of the present war and ratification of the
definitive treaty of peace thereupon , to have the said annuities
redeemed , either by the payment of one_hundred pounds for <P_45,551>
every one_hundred pounds of such annuities , or of
one_hundred_and_thirty-three pounds six shillings and eight-pence
capital in the three pounds <$$font> per_centum <font> consolidated
annuities , at the option of such proprietor ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,551.76

and whereas an act passed in the last session of parliament , intituled
<$$font> , An act for granting additional annuities to the proprietors
of stock created by two acts , passed in the thirty-seventh and
forty-second years of his present Majesty : STATUTES-1805-1,45,551.77

<font> and whereas certain of the proprietors of stock , created by the
two first recited acts , have , in pursuance of the provisions of the
said last-recited act , taken annuities granted by the said act for such
stock : STATUTES-1805-1,45,551.78

and whereas certain of the other proprietors of such stock to the amount
of
four_millions_four_hundred_and_forty-eight_thousand_eight_hundred_and_seventeen
pounds four shillings and six-pence capital stock , did , on or before
the tenth day of <$$font> October <font>
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_four , signify to the governor and
company of the bank of <$$font> England <font> their election to have
the same paid off in money on the fifth day of <$$font> April <font>
next : STATUTES-1805-1,45,551.79

and whereas it is expedient that provision should be made for redeeming
and paying off the said annuities by converting the same into other
annuities at the option of such proprietors on certain terms : <$$font>
STATUTES-1805-1,45,551.80

may it therefore please your Majesty that it may be enacted ; and be it
enacted by the King's most excellent majesty , by and with the advice
and consent of the lords spiritual and temporal , and commons , in this
present parliament assembled , and by the authority of the same , That
all persons and bodies politick and corporate , possessed of any capital
stock in the annuities after the rate of five pounds <font> per_centum
per_annum <$$font> , granted by the said recited acts of the
thirty-seventh and forty-second years aforesaid , who did , on or before
the tenth day of <font> October <$$font>
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_four , signify to the governor and
company of the bank of <font> England <$$font> their election to have
the same paid off in money on the fifth day of <font> April <$$font>
next ; and who shall , by themselves or any agents duly authorised ,
further signify to the said governor and company of the bank of <font>
England <$$font> , on or before the eleventh day of <font> March
<$$font> one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_five , their desire to take the
benefit of the terms contained in this act , shall , from and after the
fifth day of <font> April <$$font> one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_five ,
be entitled to receive , for every one_hundred pounds of such capital
stock , and in lieu thereof , so much capital stock , either in the
consolidated annuties after the rate of five pounds <font> per_centum
per_annum <$$font> , created by an act , made in the twenty-fourth year
of his present Majesty , and several subsequent acts , receiving thereon
one half year's dividend on the fifth day of <font> July <$$font>
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_five , or so much capital stock in
reduced annuities after the rate of three pounds <font> per_centum
per_annum <$$font> , and shall be equal in value to one_hundred pounds
sterling , together with such further sum in the said last-mentioned
capital stock as shall be equal in value to ten shillings sterling on
every one_hundred pounds of such capital stock in reduced annuities
after the rate of three pounds <font> per_centum per_annum <$$font> ,
the interest whereon to commence from the fifth day of <font> April
<$$font> one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_five ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,551.81

<P_45,552>

or to have any proportion thereof in such annuities after the rate of
five pounds <font> per_centum per_annum <$$font> or of three pounds
<font> per_centum per_annum <$$font> respectively , as shall be
specified by any such persons or bodies politick or corporate
respectively , at the time of signifying such desire to take the benefit
of the terms of this act as aforesaid ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,552.83

the value of such several annuities to be computed and taken on the
average price of such annuities respectively , on the last ten days
previous to the twenty-sixth day of <font> February <$$font>
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_five , on which any transfer shall have
been made in the said last-mentioned capital stocks at the bank of
<font> England <$$font> , after making a deduction of the amount of the
dividend due or accruing thereon ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,552.84

such average as aforesaid to be settled and declared by the governor and
deputy governor of the bank of <font> England <$$font> .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,552.85

II. And be it further enacted , That in case any persons or bodies
politick or corporate possessed of any such five pounds <font>
per_centum <$$font> annuities , and who shall have signified such
election as aforesaid , shall not , on or before the said eleventh day
of <font> March <$$font> one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_five , by
themselves or any agents duly authorised , further signify to the
governor and company of the bank of <font> England <$$font> their desire
to take the benefit of the terms contained in this act , it shall be
lawful for the lords-commissioners of his Majesty's treasury , or any
three or more of them , to contract and agree with any person or persons
, or bodies politick or corporate , to contribute such sums as shall be
necessary to pay the same off on the fifth day of <font> April <$$font>
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_five , and to give , for every
one_hundred pounds in money to be paid by such person or persons ,
bodies politick or corporate , on or before the fifth day of <font>
April <$$font> one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_five , at the bank of
<font> England <$$font> , such amount of capital stock , either in
annuities after the rate of five pounds <font> per_centum per_annum
<$$font> , or of three pounds <font> per_centum per_annum <$$font> , or
any proportion of either of such annuities , upon such and the like
terms and conditions , and with such benefits as are by this act given
to any persons entitled to take the benefit of this act as aforesaid .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,552.86

III. And be it further enacted , That all the annuities , after the
rate of five pounds <font> per_centum <$$font> , to which any persons or
bodies politick or corporate may become entitled under this act , in
lieu of any former annuities , shall be deemed , reputed , and taken to
be one capital or joint stock , and shall be added to and made part of
the joint stock of annuities with , and shall be redeemable at the same
time and in like manner as , the annuities carrying an interest after
the rate of five pounds <font> per_centum per_annum <$$font> ,
established by an act , made in the twenty-fourth year of the reign of
his present Majesty , and several subsequent acts ; and that all persons
and corporations whatsoever , in proportion to the money to which they
shall become entitled as aforesaid by virtue of this act , shall have or
be deemed to have a proportional interest and share in the said stock of
annuities at the rate aforesaid . STATUTES-1805-1,45,552.87

IV. And be it further enacted , That all the annuities , after
<P_45,553> the rate of three pounds <font> per_centum per_annum <$$font>
, to which any persons or bodies politick or corporate may become
entitled by virtue of this act , shall be added to the joint stock of
annnuities transferable at the bank of <font> England <$$font> , which ,
by an act , made in the twenty-third year of the reign of his late
Majesty , were reduced from four pounds <font> per_centum per_annum
<$$font> to three pounds <font> per_centum per_annum <$$font> , and
shall be deemed part of the said joint stock of annuities , subject
nevertheless to redemption by parliament , in such manner and upon such
notice as in the several acts by which the said annuities , after the
rate of four pounds <font> per_centum per_annum <$$font> were
respectively granted , are directed in respect of the annuities
redeemable by virtue thereof ; and that all persons and corporations
whatsoever , in proportion to the annuities to which they shall become
entitled as aforesaid by virtue of this act , shall have and be deemed
to have a proportional interest and share in the said joint stock of
annuities at the rate aforesaid . STATUTES-1805-1,45,553.88

V. And be it further enacted , That all such annuities shall be payable
half-yearly at the bank of <font> England <$$font> , at the most usual
days of payment in the year for such respective annuities ; that is to
say , the fifth day of <font> January <$$font> and the fifth day of
<font> July <$$font> in every year for and in respect of the said
several annuities after the rate of five pounds <font> per_centum
per_annum <$$font> ; and the fifth day of <font> April <$$font> and the
tenth day of <font> October <$$font> in every year for and in respect of
the said several annuities after the rate of three pounds <font>
per_centum per_annum <$$font> ; the first payment on the said several
annuities after the rate of five pounds <font> per_centum per_annum
<$$font> to be due on the fifth day of <font> July <$$font>
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_five , and on the said reduced annuities
after the rate of three pounds <font> per_centum per_annum <$$font> on
the tenth day of <font> October <$$font>
one_thousand_eight_hundred_and_five ; and that all persons and
corporations entitled to any such annuity or annuities aforesaid , and
his , her , and their administrators , successors , and assigns
respectively , all persons and corporations lawfully claiming under him
, her , or them , shall have good , sure , absolute , and indefeasible
estates and interests in the said respective annuities , according to
the true tenor and meaning of this act , until the redemption or
expiration thereof in the manner herein directed .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,553.89

VI. And be it further enacted , That all the said annuities shall be
charged and chargeable upon and payable out of the consolidated fund of
<font> Great Britain <$$font> , after paying , or serving sufficient to
pay , all such sums of money as have been directed by any former act or
acts of parliament to be paid out of the same ; and that the said
several annuities of five pounds <font> per_centum per_annum <$$font>
and of three pounds <font> per_centum per_annum <$$font> respectively ,
shall be subject to redemption by parliament in manner mentioned in this
act . STATUTES-1805-1,45,553.90

VII. <font> And , for the more easy and sure payment of the annuities
established by this act <$$font> , it is hereby enacted , That the said
governor and company of the bank of <font> England <$$font> , and their
successors , shall , from time to time , appoint and employ one or more
sufficient <P_45,554> person or persons within their office in the city
of <font> London <$$font> to be their chief or first cashier or cashiers
, and one other person or persons within the same office to be their
accountant-general ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,554.91

and that so much of the monies from time to time , being in the receipt
of the exchequer of the said consolidated fund , by this act made
applicable for the purposes , as shall be sufficient to answer the said
annuities , shall , by the order of the commissioners of the treasury ,
or any three or more of them , or the high treasurer for the time being
, without any further or other warrant to be sued for , had , or
obtained in that behalf , from time to time , at the respective days of
payment in this act appointed , be issued and paid at the said receipt
of the exchequer , to the first or chief cashier or cashiers of the said
governor and company of the bank of <font> England <$$font> , and their
successors for the time being , by way of imprest , and upon account for
the payment of the said annuities ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,554.92

and that such cashier or cashiers , to whom the said monies shall from
time to time be issued , shall , from time to time , without delay ,
apply and pay the same accordingly , and render his or their accounts
thereof according to the due course of the exchequer .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,554.93

VIII. And it is hereby also enacted , That the said accountant-general
for the time being shall , from time to time , inspect and examine all
receipts and payments of the said cashier or cashiers , and the vouchers
relating thereto , in order to prevent any fraud , negligence , or delay
. STATUTES-1805-1,45,554.94

IX. And be it further enacted , That the said respective capitals or
joint stocks , or any share or interest in either of them , shall
<paren> except so far as by this act is provided <$$paren> be assignable
and transferable as this act directs and not otherwise ;
STATUTES-1805-1,45,554.95

and that there shall constantly be kept in the office of the
accountant-general for the time being , within the city of <font> London
<$$font> , a book or books , wherein all assignments or transfers of the
said respective capitals or joint stocks , or any part thereof and the
proportional annuities attending the same , at the rates aforesaid ,
shall be entered and registered ; which entries shall be conceived in
proper words for that purpose , and shall be signed by the parties
making such assignments or transfers , or if any such party or parties
be absent , by his , her , or their attorney or attornies thereunto
lawfully authorised by writing under his , her , or their hands and
seals , to be attested by two or more credible witnesses ;
STATUTES-1805-1,45,554.96

and that the person or persons to whom any such transfer shall be made ,
shall respectively underwrite his or their acceptance thereof ;
STATUTES-1805-1,45,554.97

and that no other method of assigning or transferring the said
respective capitals or joint stocks , and the annuities attending the
same , or any part thereof , or any interest therein , shall be good and
available in law ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,554.98

and that no stamp-duties whatsoever shall be charged on the said
transfers , or any of them : STATUTES-1805-1,45,554.99

provided always , that all persons possessed of any share or interest in
any of the said several joint stocks of annuities , or any estate or
interest therein , may devise the same by will in writing , attested by
two or more credible witnesses ; but that no payment shall be made upon
any such devise <P_45,555> until so much of the said will as relates to
such estate , share , or interest be entered in the respective offices ;
and that in default of such transfer or devise as aforesaid , such share
, estate , or interest , shall go to the executors , administrators ,
successors , and assigns . STATUTES-1805-1,45,555.100

X. And be it further enacted , That all persons who shall be entitled
to any of the annuities hereby granted , and all persons lawfully
claiming under them , shall be possessed thereof as of a personal estate
, which shall not be descendible to heirs , nor liable to any foreign
attachment by the custom of <font> London <$$font> or otherwise ; any
law , statute , or custom to the contrary notwithstanding .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,555.101

XI. Provided also , and be it further enacted , That the said governor
and company of the bank of <font> England <$$font> , and their
successors , notwithstanding the redemption of all or any of their own
funds , in pursuance of the acts for establishing the same , or any of
them , shall continue a corporation for the purposes of this act , until
all the said annuities shall be redeemed as aforesaid ; and the said
governor and company , or any member thereof , shall not incur any
disability for or by reason of his or their doing any matter or thing in
pursuance of this act . STATUTES-1805-1,45,555.102

XII. Provided always , and be it further enacted , That the
commissioners of the treasury , or any three or more of them now being ,
or the high treasurer , or any three or more of the commissioners of the
treasury for the time being , shall have power , and they are hereby
authorised , out of the said consolidated fund , to reward all such
persons as shall be any ways employed in the execution of this act , for
their service , pains , and labour ; and also to defray such incident
charges as shall necessarily attend the same ; and also to settle and
appoint such allowances as they shall think proper for the service ,
pains , and labour of the cashier or cashiers of the said governor and
company of the bank of <font> England <$$font> , for receiving , paying
, and accounting for the said annuities made payable by this act ; and
also for the service , pains , and trouble of the said
accountant-general of the said governor and company , for performing the
duty and trust incumbent on or reposed in him by this act ; all which
allowances to be made as aforesaid in respect of the service , pains ,
and labour of any officer or officers of the said governor and company ,
and at their disposal only ; any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding . STATUTES-1805-1,45,555.103

XIII. And be it further enacted , That if any person or persons shall
at any time or times be sued , moslested , or prosecuted for any thing
by him or them done or executed in pursuance of this act , or of any
matter or thing therein contained , such person or persons shall and may
plead the general issue , and give the special matter in evidence for
his or their defence ; and if a verdict shall pass for the defendant or
defendants , or the plaintiff or plaintiffs shall discontinue his or
their action , or be nonsuited , or judgement shall be given against him
or them , upon demurrer or otherwise , then such defendant or defendants
shall have treble costs to him or them awarded against such plaintiff or
plaintiffs . STATUTES-1805-1,45,555.104

<P_45,556>

<heading>

Cap. IX . STATUTES-1805-1,45,556.107

<$$heading>

An act for allowing vessels employed in the Greenland whale-fishery , to
complete their full number of men at certain ports for the present
season . STATUTES-1805-1,45,556.109

- <bracket> March 1 , 1805 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1805-1,45,556.110

<heading>

Cap. X . STATUTES-1805-1,45,556.112

<$$heading>

<font> An act for making further provision for the effectual performance
of quarantine <$$font> . STATUTES-1805-1,45,556.114

- <bracket> March 12 , 1805 . <$$bracket> STATUTES-1805-1,45,556.115

Whereas <font> by an act , passed in the thirty-ninth and fortieth years
of the reign of his present Majesty , intituled <$$font> , An act for
erecting a lazaret on <font> Chetney Hill <$$font> , in the county of
<font> Kent <$$font> , and for reducing into one act the laws relating
to quarantine , and for making further provisions therein , <font> and
by other acts antecedent thereto , provision was made as well for
purchasing lands for erecting a lazaret as for defraying the expences of
building the same , and for maintaining a proper establishment of
officers necessary for enforcing a due performance of quarantine ; in
pursuance of which , lands were purchased at <$$font> Chetney Hill ,
<font> in the county of <$$font> Kent , <font> and progress was made in
the erection of a lazaret there ; but the funds granted by the said act
of the thirty-ninth and fortieth years of his present Majesty having
been found insufficient for completing the same , and for the payment of
competent salaries to the officers who were to have the charge thereof ,
and other necessary expences attendant on the quarantine service ,
according to the plan which had been approved of and directed by his
Majesty , by and with the advice of his privy council , a further sum
was granted by an act of the last session of parliament :
STATUTES-1805-1,45,556.116

and whereas it is expedient that provision should be made for a due
application of the same <$$font> ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,556.117

be it therefore enacted by the King's most excellent majesty , by and
with the advice and consent of the lords spiritual and temporal , and
commons , in this present parliament assembled , and by the authority of
the same , That it shall and may be lawful for the lords-commissioners
of his Majesty's treasury , or any three or more of them , or the lord
high-treasurer for the time being , from and after the commencement of
this act , to give directions for completing the said lazaret , upon the
said lands so purchased on <font> Chetney Hill <$$font> , in the county
of <font> Kent <$$font> , with all necessary and convenient
accommodations for the purpose of performing quarantine , according to
the plan which has been approved of and directed by his Majesty , by and
with the advice of his privy council ; or to such other plan as his
Majesty , by and with the advice of his privy council , may from time to
time approve and direct ; and for defraying the expences attending the
same , to cause any part of the money so granted , to be issued when it
shall be necessary for the said service ; and the said lazaret when
completed , and all the buildings and accommodations thereto belonging ,
shall be under the management , order , and directions of such officers
as shall be appointed by the lords-commissioners of his Majesty's
treasury , or any three or more of them , or the lord high-treasuerer
for the <P_45,557> time being , for keeping the same fit and ready for
the reception of persons and goods , and for their due performance of
quarantine ; and such officers respectively shall have such salaries as
shall from time to time be appointed by his Majesty , by and with the
advice of his privy council ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,557.118

and the salaries of the said officers , and all contingent expences ,
shall be defrayed out of the funds , and in the manner in which the
charges and expences of performing quarantine are at present defrayed ,
until such time as a revenue shall be raised sufficient for those
purposes , in the manner herein-after mentioned .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,557.119

II. Provided always , and be it enacted , That until the said lazaret
shall be in a state fit and proper to be used , it shall and may be
lawful for the lords-commissioners of his Majesty's treasury to provide
one or more floating lazarets , which shall be used for all the purposes
for which the said lazaret is intended by this act ; and all the rules ,
regulations , and provisions in this act contained , shall be deemed and
taken , for all intents and purposes , to be applicable to such floating
lazaret or lazarets , until the lazaret on shore shall , by his Majesty
, his heirs or successors , by and with the advice of his or their privy
council , and by order of the same , notified by proclamation or
published in the <font> London Gazette <$$font> , have been declared to
be fit for the due performance of quarantine therein .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,557.120

III. <font> And whereas it is reasonable that the owners of ships ,
vessels , and cargoes , which in future shall have to perform quarantine
, should defray the charge incurred thereby <$$font> ;
STATUTES-1805-1,45,557.121

be it further enacted , That there shall be raised , levied , collected
, and paid to his Majesty , his heirs and successors , the several and
respective duties of customs herein-after mentioned ;
STATUTES-1805-1,45,557.122

that is to say , For every ton burthen of every ship or vessel , which
ship or vessel , or the cargo of which or any part whereof shall have
performed quarantine in any port or place in <font> Great Britain
<$$font> , or the islands of <font> Guernsey <$$font> , <font> Jersey
<$$font> , <font> Alderney <$$font> , <font> Sark <$$font> or <font> Man
<$$font> , and which shall have arrived from any part of <font> Turkey
<$$font> , or from any port or place in <font> Africa <$$font> , within
the streights of <font> Gibraltar <$$font> , or in the <font> West
Barbary <$$font> on the <font> Atlantic <$$font> ocean , with a clean
bill of health , seven shillings and sixpence :
STATUTES-1805-1,45,557.123

For every ton burthen of every such ship or vessel , which shall have so
arrived without a clean bill of health , fifteen shillings :
STATUTES-1805-1,45,557.124

For every ton burthen of every such ship or vessel , which ship or
vessel , or the cargo of which or any part whereof shall have performed
quarantine in any port or place in <font> Great Britain <$$font> , or
the islands aforesaid , and which shall have arrived from any port or
place whatever , <paren> except from any part of <font> Turkey <$$font>
, or from any port or place in <font> Africa <$$font> , within the
streights of <font> Gibraltar <$$font> , or in the <font> West Barbary
<$$font> on the <font> Atlantic <$$font> ocean <$$paren> with a clean
bill of health , three shillings : STATUTES-1805-1,45,557.125

For every ton burthen of every such ship or vessel which shall have so
arrived without a clean bill of health , ten shillings :
STATUTES-1805-1,45,557.126

For every ton burthen of every such ship or vessel arriving in any
<P_45,558> port or place in <font> Great Britain <$$font> , or the
islands aforesaid , with a cargo which in whole or in part shall consist
of goods , wares , or merchandize , the growth , produce , or
manufacture of <font> Turkey <$$font> , or of any port or place in
<font> Africa <$$font> , within the streights of <font> Gibraltar
<$$font> , or in the <font> West Barbary <$$font> on the <font> Atlantic
<$$font> ocean , and which ship or vessel , or the cargo of which or any
part whereof shall have performed quarantine in any port or place in
<font> Great Britain <$$font> , or the islands aforesaid , and which
shall have arrived from any port or place whatever , seven shillings and
sixpence : STATUTES-1805-1,45,558.127

For every ton burthen of every ship or vessel which shall have so
arrived under such circumstances as shall induce his Majesty , by and
with the advice of his privy council , or the lords or others of the
privy council , or any three or more of them , under the authority
herein-after given , to subject such ship or vessel to the like
quarantine as ships arriving from <font> Turkey <$$font> with clean
bills of health , seven shillings and sixpence :
STATUTES-1805-1,45,558.128

For every ton burthen of every ship or vessel which shall have so
arrived under such circumstances as shall induce his Majesty , by and
with the advice aforesaid , or the lords or others of the privy council
, or any three or more of them as aforesaid , to subject such ship or
vessel to the like quarantine as ships arriving from <font> Turkey
<$$font> without clean bills of health , fifteen shillings :
STATUTES-1805-1,45,558.129

For every ton burthen of every ship or vessel , which ship or vessel ,
or the cargo of which or of any part whereof shall have performed
quarantine in any port or place in <font> Great Britain <$$font> , or
the islands aforesaid , and which ship or vessel shall enter inwards in
the port of <font> London <$$font> , an additional duty of one shilling
: STATUTES-1805-1,45,558.130

All which several and respective duties shall be raised , levied ,
collected , and paid , and shall be sued for , recovered , and accounted
for in the same manner , and subject to the same rules , regulations ,
penalties , and forfeitures , as any duties of customs are now subject
to by law , as far as the same are applicable thereto :
STATUTES-1805-1,45,558.131

provided always , that no ship or vessel of war , or transport or other
ship or vessel employed in the service of his Majesty's government , nor
any ship or vessel which shall not be bound to any port or place in
<font> Great Britain <$$font> , or the islands of <font> Guernsey
<$$font> , <font> Jersey <$$font> , <font> Alderney <$$font> , <font>
Sark <$$font> or <font> Man <$$font> , and which shall have really put
into any port or place in <font> Great Britain <$$font> , or the islands
aforesaid , in distress ; nor any ship or vessel which shall have been
obliged to perform quarantine only by reason of having certain goods ,
wares , and merchandize on board , and not producing the proper
declaration or document as to their growth , produce , or manufacture ;
nor any ship or vessel arriving in any port or place in <font> Great
Britain <$$font> , or the islands aforesaid , with a clean bill of
health , from any port or place whatever , except from any part of
<font> Turkey <$$font> , or from any port or place in <font> Africa
<$$font> , within the streights of <font> Gibraltar <$$font> , or in the
<font> West Barbary <$$font> on the <P_45,559> <font> Atlantic <$$font>
ocean , in ballast , or whose cargo shall consist wholly of salt ; nor
any ship or vessel which shall , together with its cargo , have duly
performed quarantine in the lazarets of <font> Malta <$$font> , <font>
Ancona <$$font> , <font> Venice <$$font> , <font> Messina <$$font> ,
<font> Leghorn <$$font> , or one of them , and shall sail from thence ,
and arrive at any port or place in <font> Great Britain <$$font> , or
the islands aforesaid , with proper documents and vouchers attesting the
same , to the satisfation of his Majesty , his heirs or successors , or
of his or their privy council , shall be liable to or charged with any
duty under this act . STATUTES-1805-1,45,559.132

IV. Provided always , and be it further enacted , That if after making
good <paren> in the manner herein-after mentioned <$$paren> to the
consolidated fund of <font> Great Britain <$$font> , of the sums of
sixty-five_thousand pounds , granted by the act of the thirty-ninth and
fortieth years of his present Majesty , and of thirty_thousand pounds ,
granted by an act of the last session of parliament , or of so much
thereof as shall be found necessary to issue for the services aforesaid
, it shall appear to the lord high-treasurer , or the
lords-commissioners of his Majesty's treasury for the time being , that
the duties hereby granted are more than sufficient to defray the charges
and expences already incurred , and also such further expences as may be
necessary for carrying the several purposes of this act into execution ,
it shall and may be lawful for the said lord high-treasurer , or
lords-commissioners for the time being , from time to time , by any
warrant or warrants under the hands of the said lord high-treasurer , or
of the said lords-commissioners for the time being , or of any three or
more of the said lords-commissioners , to order and direct , that the
duties hereby granted shall be reduced in such proportion and manner as
they shall think proper , and also by like warrant or warrants <paren>
in case the said necessary expences should afterwards require an
increase of the said duties <$$paren> to order and direct that the same
shall be again raised and increased to any amount not exceeding the sums
which have been before granted by parliament as aforesaid ; and such
warrant or warrants shall be sufficient authority to the commissioners
and officers of the customs , for raising , levying , collecting , and
recovering the several and respective duties specified and contained in
such warrant or warrants ; any law or usage to the contrary
notwithstanding . STATUTES-1805-1,45,559.133

V. And be it further enacted , That no ship or vessel upon which the
tonnage-duty by this act imposed shall be due and payable shall be
permitted to be cleared inwards in any port of <font> Great Britain
<$$font> , or the islands of <font> Guernsey <$$font> , <font> Jersey
<$$font> , <font> Alderney <$$font> , <font> Sark <$$font> , or <font>
Man <$$font> , unless the said tonnage-duty shall have been first duly
paid to the proper officers of the customs appointed to receive the same
, or the commissioners of the customs shall otherwise direct ; and that
the tonnage of every ship or vessel shall be computed and taken , for
the purpose of ascertaining the said duties according to the register
thereof , under the provisions of an act , passed in the twenty-sixth
year of his present Majesty's reign , intituled , <font> An act for the
further increase and encouragement of shipping and navigation <$$font> ;
and in case of any dispute or doubt <P_45,560> relative thereto , the
same shall be ascertained by admeasurement , in the mode and manner
prescribed in the said last-mentioned act . STATUTES-1805-1,45,560.134

VI. And be it further enacted , That it shall and may be lawful for the
owner or owners of any ship or vessel , in respect of which any of the
duties imposed by this act shall have been paid , to demand and recover
from the respective importers , proprietors , or consignees of any goods
or merchandize brought or imported in any such ship or vessel , such sum
or sums of money as shall be equal to the just and reasonable
contribution which the proportion of tonnage that such goods and
merchandize bear to the tonnage-burthen of the ship shall require , and
no more ; such proportion of tonnage to be ascertained according to the
usage of merchants in like cases . STATUTES-1805-1,45,560.135

VII. And be it further enacted , That the monies arising from the
duties hereby granted shall be paid into the receipt of his Majesty's
exchequer , and carried to and made part of the consolidated fund of
<font> Great Britain <$$font> ; and that in the office of the auditor of
the receipt of his Majesty's exchequer there shall be provided and kept
a book or books , in which all the monies arising from the said duties
and paid into the said receipt shall be entered separate and apart from
all other monies paid or payable to his Majesty , his heirs or
successors , upon any account whatsoever . STATUTES-1805-1,45,560.136

VIII. And be it further enacted , That the money so raised , levied ,
collected , and paid , shall be applied in the first place to defray the
annual expences of the said floating lazaret , and land lazaret , and
all other annual expences which shall be incurred in the execution of
this act ; and in the next place to make good any money that shall have
been issued for purchasing the lands on <font> Chetney Hill <$$font> ,
and for the erecting of the said lazaret , and for providing the
necessary and convenient accommodations thereto belonging , in manner
herein-before mentioned , and to no other purposee whatsoever .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,560.137

IX. <font> And whereas it is expedient that the said herein-before
recited act , passed in the thirty-ninth and fortieth years of the reign
of his present Majesty , and every other act or acts heretofore passed
concerning quarantine , together with such further provisions as are
found to be necessary to be made in respect thereof , should be reduced
into one act <$$font> ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,560.138

be it therefore enacted , That the said act so passed in the
thirty-ninth and fortieth years of the reign of his said present Majesty
, as aforesaid , be repealed , and that every other act or acts
heretofore passed , in so far as the same do or may be deemed or
construed to relate to the performance of quarantine , shall be and the
same are hereby repealed ; save and except so much of the said act
passed in the thirty-ninth and fortieth years of the reign of his
present Majesty as relates to the repeal of former acts , and to the
payment and recovering of any duties imposed by the said act , which
shall be due and unpaid at the time of passing this act , and also save
and except as to any offence or offences done or committed before the
passing of this <P_45,561> act , by any person or persons , against any
law concerning quarantine ; and as to any fine , penalty , forfeiture ,
or punishment , fines , penalties , forfeitures , or punishments , to
which any such person or persons may be liable by reason of the same ;
and also as to any action , suit , prosecution , or other proceeding
brought or commenced , or which shall hereafter be brought or commenced
, for or on account of any such offence or offences so done or committed
as aforesaid . STATUTES-1805-1,45,561.139

X. And be it further enacted , That all ships and vessels , as well his
Majesty's ships of war as all others , coming from or having touched at
any place from whence his Majesty , his heirs or successors , by and
with the advice of his or their privy council , shall have adjudged and
declared it probable that the plague or any other infectious disease or
distemper , highly dangerous to the health of his Majesty's subjects ,
may be brought ; and all ships , vessels , and boats receiving any
person , goods , wares , and merchandize , packets , packages , baggage
, wearing apparel , books , letters , or any other articles whatever ,
from or out of any ships or vessels so coming from or having touched at
such infected place as aforesaid , whether such persons , goods , wares
, and merchandize , packets , packages , baggage , wearing apparel ,
books , letters , or other articles , shall have come or been brought in
such ships or vessels , or such persons shall have gone , or articles
have been put on board the same , either before or after the arrival of
such ships or vessls at any port or place in <font> Great Britain
<$$font> , or the islands of <font> Guernsey <$$font> , <font> Jersey
<$$font> , <font> Alderney <$$font> , <font> Sark <$$font> , or <font>
Man <$$font> , and whether such ships or vessels were or were not bound
to any port or place in <font> Great Britain <$$font> or the islands
aforesaid ; and all persons , goods , wares , and merchandize , packets
, packages , baggage , wearing apparel , books , letters , or any other
articles whatever , on board of any such ships or vessels so coming from
or having touched at such infected place as aforesaid or on board of any
such receiving ships , vessels , or boats as aforesaid , shall be and be
considered to be liable to quarantine within the meaning of this act ,
and of any order or orders which shall be made by his Majesty , his
heirs or successors , by and with the advice of his or their privy
council concerning quarantine , and the prevention of infection from the
time of the departure of such ships or vessels from such infected places
as aforesaid , or from the time when such persons , goods , wares ,
merchandize , packets , packages , baggage , wearing apparel , books ,
letters , or other articles shall have been received on board
respectively ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,561.140

and all such ships , vessels , and boats as aforesaid , and all persons
, <paren> as well pilots as others <$$paren> , goods , wares , and
merchandize , and other articles as aforesaid , whether coming or
brought in such ships , vessels , or boats , from such infected place as
aforesaid , or going , or being put on board the same , either before or
after the arrival of such ships , vessels , or boats , at any port or
place in <font> Great Britain <$$font> , or the islands aforesaid ; and
all persons , goods , wares , and merchandize , and other articles as
aforesaid , on board any such receiving ship , vessel , or boat as
aforesaid shall , upon their arrival <P_45,562> at any such port or
place , be obliged to perform quarantine in such place or places , for
such time and in such manner as shall from time to time be directed by
his Majesty , his heirs or successors , by his or their order or orders
in council , notified by proclamation , or published in the <font>
London Gazette <$$font> ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,562.141

and that until such ships , vessels , and boats , persons , goods ,
wares , and merchandize , and other articles as aforesaid , shall have
respectively performed and shall be duly discharged from such quarantine
, no such person , goods , wares , or merchandize , or other articles as
aforesaid , or any of them , shall , either before or after the arrival
of such ships , vessels , or boats , at any port or place in <font>
Great Britain <$$font> or the islands aforesaid , come or be brought on
shore , or go and be put on board any other ship , vessel , or boat , in
order to come or be brought on shore , in any such port or place ,
although such ships or vessels so coming from such infected place as
aforesaid may not be bound to any port or place in <font> Great Britain
<$$font> , or the islands aforesaid , unless in such manner and in such
cases , and by such licence as shall be directed or permitted by such
order or orders made by his Majesty , his heirs or successors , in
council as aforesaid ; STATUTES-1805-1,45,562.142

and all such ships , vessels , and boats , whether coming from such
infected place as aforesaid , or being otherwise liable to quarantine as
aforesaid , and all persons , <paren> as well pilots as others <$$paren>
, goods , wares , and merchandize , and other articles as aforesaid ,
whether coming or brought in such ships , vessels , or boats , or going
or being put on board the same , either before or after the arrival of
such ships , vessels , or boats , at any port or place in <font> Great
Britain <$$font> or the islands aforesaid , although such ships ,
vessels , or boats shall not be bound to any port or place in <font>
Great Britain <$$font> , or the islands aforesaid , and all commanders ,
masters , or other persons having the charge or command of any such
ships , vessels , or boats , whether coming from any infected place , or
being otherwise liable to quarantine , as aforesaid , shall be subject
to all the provisions , rules , regulations , and restrictions contained
in this act , or in any order or orders which shall be made by his
Majesty , his heirs and successors , in council as aforesaid ,
concerning quarantine and the prevention of infection , and to all the
pains , penalties , forfeitures , and punishments , contained in this
act , for any breach or disobedience thereof , or of any order or orders
of his Majesty in council , made under the authority thereof .
STATUTES-1805-1,45,562.143

