<BEGIN_stokes-1887-2>

<P_289>

<heading>

Lecture III . STOKES-1887-2,289.4

<$$heading>

<font> Light as subservient to vision - STOKES-1887-2,289.6

General structure of the eye in relation to the formation of images -
STOKES-1887-2,289.7

Theoretical imperfections of the image formed of no practical importance
in a normal eye - STOKES-1887-2,289.8

Structure of the retina - STOKES-1887-2,289.9

Rods and cones - STOKES-1887-2,289.10

Probable seat of the perception - STOKES-1887-2,289.11

Photochemical changes in the retina - STOKES-1887-2,289.12

Analogy of fluorescence - STOKES-1887-2,289.13

Power of adjustment for focus - STOKES-1887-2,289.14

Perception of colour - STOKES-1887-2,289.15

Theory of distinct primary sensations of colour - STOKES-1887-2,289.16

Coloured globules : STOKES-1887-2,289.17

their possible function - STOKES-1887-2,289.18

Single vision with the two eyes - STOKES-1887-2,289.19

Theory of corresponding points - STOKES-1887-2,289.20

Muscles for turning the eyeball in all directions - STOKES-1887-2,289.21

Functions of these muscles in procuring singleness of vision . <$$font>
STOKES-1887-2,289.22

We so habitually use light for our guidance , for informing ourselves of
what is passing at a distance , for enriching our minds with the
thoughts of others by reading , for conveying information by writing to
those at a distance , that we probably think of such things as these as
forming the use of light . STOKES-1887-2,289.23

Yet inestimable as these uses are , there are others of still <P_290>
more vital importance ; STOKES-1887-2,290.24

and in the two preceding lectures I have endeavoured to point out how
absolutely essential light is to our very being , constituted as we are
; how without it the earth would be a silent abode of darkness and of
death . STOKES-1887-2,290.25

But supposing light to be supplied as it is , and that under its
influence plants grow and animals are fed on them , and obtain the
warmth which they require , still light would be useless for purposes of
guidance and information were we not furnished with organs adapted to
its reception and to the utilisation of it for such purposes as those
above mentioned . STOKES-1887-2,290.26

To-day I would draw your attention to some points connected with the
construction and functions of that marvellous organ for the reception of
light with which we are furnished . STOKES-1887-2,290.27

I shall mainly confine myself to the human eye . STOKES-1887-2,290.28

The general construction of the eye is so familiarly known that I need
not dwell upon it . STOKES-1887-2,290.29

The eyeball is approximately spherical , fitting into a bony socket
lined with fat and connective tissue , in which it is free to turn in
all directions with hardly any friction . STOKES-1887-2,290.30

It is invested with a very tough covering , the sclerotic .
STOKES-1887-2,290.31

The investing membrane is mostly white and opaque , STOKES-1887-2,290.32

but in front it is beautifully transparent , forming the cornea .
STOKES-1887-2,290.33

This front portion is not exactly a continuation of the general nearly
spherical surface of the <P_291> eyeball , STOKES-1887-2,291.34

but is slightly more protuberant , so that its surface resembles that of
a prolate spheroid of revolution rather than that of a sphere , the axis
of revolution being the axis of the eye . STOKES-1887-2,291.35

Unlike the other parts of the body , which are opaque , or merely
translucent , the body of the eye is beautifully transparent and
colourless . STOKES-1887-2,291.36

It is divided into two chambers by the crystalline lens and its support
; the anterior chamber being filled with the so-called aqueous humour ,
the posterior with the vitreous humour . STOKES-1887-2,291.37

The refractive indices of these humours very little exceed that of water
. STOKES-1887-2,291.38

The crystalline lens , which is shaped in a general way very much like a
lens formed by the optician , is more refractive , its refracting power
placing it at about two-thirds of the way from water to crown glass .
STOKES-1887-2,291.39

It has been found that the refractive power of the substance of which
the lens consists varies a good deal in different parts , increasing on
the whole from the external layers to the centre . STOKES-1887-2,291.40

The breadth of the pencil of light from any luminous point which enters
the cornea , in proportion to the diameter of the eyeball , is enormous
compared with anything we have in a telescope , STOKES-1887-2,291.41

but it is stopped down to a suitable aperture by an opaque screen , the
iris , in the centre of which is a hole , the pupil , circular in man ,
though of different forms in some other animals , for example cats and
horses . STOKES-1887-2,291.42

It is hardly necessary to mention <P_292> what is so familiarly known ,
that the pupil contracts or expands spontaneously , that is
involuntarily , according as more or less light enters the eye ,
remaining , in man , circular at all sizes . STOKES-1887-2,292.43

Up to the formation of distinct images on the retina , which , as is
well known , is the condition of distinct vision , the eye acts simply
as an ordinary optical instrument , STOKES-1887-2,292.44

and we can give a full account of its functions according to the
ordinary laws of refraction . STOKES-1887-2,292.45

In a similar optical system formed of media bounded by spherical
surfaces , the image of a point would be approximately a point ,
STOKES-1887-2,292.46

but would be a little diffuse , from the effects of spherical and
chromatic aberration . STOKES-1887-2,292.47

The question arises , do these exist in the eye , and do they impair
sharpness of vision ? STOKES-1887-2,292.48

First , as to spherical aberration . STOKES-1887-2,292.49

The principal refraction takes place at the surface of the cornea ,
where the light passes out of air into a medium slightly more refractive
than water , whereas the media it encounters in its subsequent passage
do not any of them greatly surpass water in refracting power , and
therefore the refraction in passing out of one into another is not
nearly so great , for equal angles of incidence , as in the former case
. STOKES-1887-2,292.50

Now when light from a distant radiant point falls on a homogeneous
medium bounded by a surface of revolution in the axis of which the
radiant point is situated , it may <P_293> be shown that the form of the
surface necessary to cause the refracted pencil to converge accurately
to a point is that of a prolate spheroid of revolution , the axis of
revolution passing through the radiant point , and the eccentricity of
the generating ellipse being the reciprocal of the refractive index .
STOKES-1887-2,293.51

Now it is remarkable that the cornea is approximately just such a
surface . STOKES-1887-2,293.52

Again , the defect of spherical aberration in an ordinary lens bounded
by spherical surfaces , when used for refracting to a real focus light
proceeding from a radiant point in its axis , consists in this , that
the rays which fall nearer to the edge are too much refracted to be
brought exactly to the same focus as those refracted nearer to the
centre . STOKES-1887-2,293.53

One way in which this defect might conceivably be remedied would be by
making the density of the medium increase , in a suitably continuous
manner , in passing from the edge to the centre . STOKES-1887-2,293.54

It is not within the power of the glass manufacturer and of the optician
to produce such a lens , STOKES-1887-2,293.55

but in the crystalline lens of the eye we have one of that character ,
and accordingly more or less approximately fulfilling the desired
condition . STOKES-1887-2,293.56

The result is that , though there is still a certain quantity of
residual spherical aberration , its amount is not such as to cause any
serious departure from <P_294> perfect sharpness of definition in the
image ; STOKES-1887-2,294.57

in fact , it is only by somewhat refined modes of observation that we
can establish the existence of that residual spherical aberration of
which I spoke . STOKES-1887-2,294.58

Next , as to chromatic aberration . STOKES-1887-2,294.59

This arises from the fact that when light enters glass , water , &c. ,
the refraction increases from the red to the blue , STOKES-1887-2,294.60

and therefore in a convex lens the blue rays are brought to a focus
before the red , and the rays of intermediate refrangibilities at
intermediate distances , so that at no one distance are all the rays
collected in a common focus . STOKES-1887-2,294.61

Hence at the best focus for the rays coming from a radiant point of
white light , that namely where the rays from the brightest part of the
spectrum are collected , the red and the blue rays are somewhat diffused
, the red rays not yet having reached their focus , while the blue rays
have passed theirs . STOKES-1887-2,294.62

Before the discovery of the different dispersive power of different
media , this constituted a most formidable obstacle to the improvement
of telescopes . STOKES-1887-2,294.63

Object-glasses of most inconveniently great focal lengths were used , in
refracting telescopes , in order to diminish the imperfections of the
image which were due to chromatic dispersion . STOKES-1887-2,294.64

For example , an old object-glass of Huyghens's is in possession of the
Royal Society of London which is 9 inches in aperture and no less than
122 feet in focal length . STOKES-1887-2,294.65

Nowadays a telescope <P_295> of similar aperture would be made with a
focal length of about 9 feet only . STOKES-1887-2,295.66

If then chromatic dispersion caused such a serious inconvenience in the
construction of telescopes , and the eye we know acts as a telescope ,
is there some such compensation in the eye as that which we have in the
achromatic object-glass , STOKES-1887-2,295.67

and if not , must not the want of it be a most serious inconvenience ?
STOKES-1887-2,295.68

To the first question the answer is , there is no such compensation in
the eye , and the eye is not achromatic . STOKES-1887-2,295.69

A pretty way of showing this is by throwing a pure spectrum on a page of
small print , in an otherwise darkened room . STOKES-1887-2,295.70

At the ordinary distance of reading the words are seen quite sharply in
the brightest part of the spectrum , but somewhat indistinctly in the
red from long-sightedness , and very indistinctly in the violet from
short-sightedness . STOKES-1887-2,295.71

Are we then to regard the want of achromatism as an imperfection in the
eye ? STOKES-1887-2,295.72

The answer to that question depends on what we regard as the object of
the eye . STOKES-1887-2,295.73

If the answer be , to guide us in the daily wants of ordinary life ,
then the want of achromatism ought not to be deemed an imperfection
unless it diminished the sharpness of vision for ordinary purposes .
STOKES-1887-2,295.74

But in reality it requires some rather refined experiments , such as
that mentioned above , or some very unusual condition as regards the use
of <P_296> the eyes , such as viewing objects through a deep cobalt_blue
glass , to render the fact of the want of achromatism in the eye
sensible at all . STOKES-1887-2,296.75

Of the twelve_hundred millions or so of human beings who inhabit our
earth , how few are the philosophers who concern themselves with optical
experiments ! STOKES-1887-2,296.76

And for those who do , what a small portion of their time is occupied in
experiments of the kind compared with the time during which they are
using their eyes for common purposes ! STOKES-1887-2,296.77

And even in experiments there are very few indeed where the
non-achromatism of the eye is any disadvantage ; STOKES-1887-2,296.78

and if in some special case inconvenience should arise in the first
instance , the man has only to set his wits to work to devise some plan
for getting over it . STOKES-1887-2,296.79

As regards the ordinary requirements of life , the want of achromatism
in the eye is of no consequence whatsoever . STOKES-1887-2,296.80

Up to the formation of images on the retina we can fully explain the
functions of the eye , provided at least , so far as the iris is
concerned , that we confine our attention to the effect produced by the
varying limitation of the pencil , and do not mean to include an
explanation of the mode in which the motions of the iris are brought
about . STOKES-1887-2,296.81

But now we come to a part of the structure respecting the functions of
which we have only a very imperfect knowledge ; that part , namely ,
which is destined to receive the <P_297> impression of the external
agent , and convey the influence to the sensorium .
STOKES-1887-2,297.82

The coating of the eye from the outside at the back of the eyeball to
the vitreous humour , is distinguished into three coats ; the hard ,
white outer coat called the sclerotic , already mentioned , an
intermediate coat called the choroid , and inside this again , between
it and the vitreous humour , the retina . STOKES-1887-2,297.83

These coats are further subdivided into layers , the retina more
especially presenting a highly complex and curious structure .
STOKES-1887-2,297.84

I am no anatomist or histologist myself , STOKES-1887-2,297.85

and I do not propose to describe to you at second-hand , except very
briefly , the microscopic structure of this curious organ .
STOKES-1887-2,297.86

As we proceed from the centre of the eyeball outwards , that is ,
towards the socket , and accordingly in the direction in which the light
travels , we first meet with a plexus of extremely fine nerve fibres ,
the general course of which is parallel to the surface of the eyeball ,
and which unite in the optic nerve , which runs into the brain .
STOKES-1887-2,297.87

This layer of nerve fibres is followed by several other layers ,
containing " granules , " or " ganglionic cells , " or " molecules , "
until at last we come to a remarkable and very peculiar structure , the
" bacillary layer . " STOKES-1887-2,297.88

This series consists of a set of elongated bodies , arranged radially ,
and closely set in lateral directions . STOKES-1887-2,297.89

They are of two kinds , which are denominated <P_298> respectively rods
, and cones . STOKES-1887-2,298.90

Each of these consists of two portions , an outer , highly refracting
portion or outer limb , and an inner portion or inner limb not thus
highly refracting , the two portions further differing as regards the
effect produced on them by certain reagents . STOKES-1887-2,298.91

Each inner limb on its inner side runs into a fibre , apparently a nerve
fibre , which proceeds in a direction towards the nerve plexus , but
runs into certain roundish bodies , " granules " &c. , on the way .
STOKES-1887-2,298.92

On the other hand the nerve fibres of the plexus turn on the outer side
into an oblique direction , running on in the direction of the rods and
cones . STOKES-1887-2,298.93

There seems every reason to believe that the nerve fibres of the plexus
are continuous with the fibres seen running out of the inner limbs ,
though the continuity has not actually been traced quite the whole way .
STOKES-1887-2,298.94

Consider for the present the action of a single eye , reserving for
future consideration the joint action of the two eyes .
STOKES-1887-2,298.95

We know that the image of a point on the retina gives rise to the
sensation of a point in the field of view , and that the part of the
field that the point seen appears to occupy depends on the part of the
retina on which the image fell . STOKES-1887-2,298.96

The images of a variety of points in the field of view necessarily
follow the same order of sequence with regard to lateral direction as
that of the actual points from whence the <P_299> pencils come , the
image of a point to the right of the axis of the eye falling on a point
of the retina to the left of that on which falls the image of a point in
the axis ; the image of a point above the axis falling on a point of the
retina below the axis , and so on . STOKES-1887-2,299.97

The order of sequence of the sensations is that of the sequence of the
points of the retina affected ; STOKES-1887-2,299.98

and that an inverted image should give rise to the sensation of an erect
object need not create any difficulty , as there is no reason <font> a
priori <$$font> that we can see why the order of the sensation as to up
and down , right and left , should be the same as the order of the
points of the retina affected rather than the opposite .
STOKES-1887-2,299.99

It remains to enquire whether there is anything in the structure of the
retina which appears calculated to give rise to separate sensations when
separate points of the retina are stimulated , even though those points
should lie very close to each other , and again whether there is
anything which appears calculated to receive impression from light , at
the expense of energy on the part of the light so impressing it , and
thus to become an organ of perception . STOKES-1887-2,299.100

Now there is just this one part of the retina , the bacillary layer ,
where we have a vast number of separate elements closely set in lateral
directions , while elongated comparatively speaking in a radial
direction . STOKES-1887-2,299.101

These elements are provided with fibres , <P_300> which , there is every
reason to believe , are nerve fibres , running towards the layer of
nerve fibres which forms the first layer of the retina as we proceed
from the centre of the eye outwards . STOKES-1887-2,300.102

Moreover the lateral distance between the cones in the part of the human
retina immediately about the axis , where the vision is most distinct ,
agrees very closely with the distance on the retina of the images of two
points which can just be seen as two . STOKES-1887-2,300.103

It is found that the smallest angle subtended at the eye by two points
which can just be seen as two is about 1 ' , from whence the distance of
the two images on the retina can be calculated . STOKES-1887-2,300.104

It comes out about 4 thousandths of a millimetre , STOKES-1887-2,300.105

and the lateral distance apart of the cones near the axis of the eye is
according to Schultze about 3 thousandths of a millimetre , or very
little over the ten-thousandth of an inch . STOKES-1887-2,300.106

There are still further arguments leading to the same conclusion ,
namely , that the rods and cones are the percipient organs .
STOKES-1887-2,300.107

I have said rods <font> and <$$font> cones ; STOKES-1887-2,300.108

for that both are concerned in vision , which is possible with either ,
is shown by the fact that some animals <paren> as for example lizards
<$$paren> have got only cones , while in others <paren> as the owl
<$$paren> there is little else than rods , and in bats , nothing but
rods . STOKES-1887-2,300.109

In the human eye , we have over the greater part of the yellow spot
cones only , while <P_301> over the greater part of the rest of the
retina the rods are much more numerous than the cones ;
STOKES-1887-2,301.110

and we know that while we see most distinctly over a small portion of
the field of view surrounding the point to which we direct our eyes , we
do see simultaneously over a very large field . STOKES-1887-2,301.111

But while it is certain that either structure is adapted to vision , it
is at present only a matter of conjecture , or perhaps I should say
probable inference , in what respect the functions of the rods and cones
differ from each other . STOKES-1887-2,301.112

It is to be remarked that the layer of nerve fibres is the first thing
the light meets with after passing across the vitreous humour .
STOKES-1887-2,301.113

Hence the light must go right across the layer of nerve fibres <paren>
as well as certain other intermediate layers <$$paren> before it can
reach the bacillary layer . STOKES-1887-2,301.114

Hence the mere passage of the light across these nerves , nerves of
vision though they be , produces no sensation of vision , nor indeed
sensation of any kind . STOKES-1887-2,301.115

If it did , light might be perceived as such , STOKES-1887-2,301.116

but there could be no distinct vision . STOKES-1887-2,301.117

For it appears to be a rule that the stimulation of a given nerve
produces a given sensation , no matter to what part of the nerve the
stimulus be applied . STOKES-1887-2,301.118

Hence if one of these visual nerve fibres were capable of being
stimulated directly by light , the visual sensation corresponding to it
ought to be produced <paren> mixed it may be with other sensations
<$$paren> when the point from <P_302> which the light came occupied not
merely one but a whole series of positions , becoming a line when
projected on the visual sphere , those , namely , whose images on the
retina lay on the various points of the nerve fibre in question .
STOKES-1887-2,302.119

The same conclusion , namely , that the nerves of vision are not
directly stimulated by light , follows from the well-known phenomenon of
the blind spot of the retina . STOKES-1887-2,302.120

The nerve fibres belonging to the layer mentioned above unite in the
optic nerve , which runs into the brain , being led out of the eye
through a hole in the sclerotic , not in the axis of the eye , but to
one side towards the nose . STOKES-1887-2,302.121

Now images of points in the field of view must be formed on this spot as
well as elsewhere on the retina , STOKES-1887-2,302.122

but the common experiments in relation to the <font> punctum caecum
<$$font> show , that no visual sensation is produced by the light which
falls here . STOKES-1887-2,302.123

This oblique position of the optic nerve is accordingly a matter of the
utmost importance to us . STOKES-1887-2,302.124

We might perhaps have expected at first sight that the fibres would have
been arranged symmetrically with respect to the axis , and have been led
out into an optic nerve at the centre of the back of the eyeball .
STOKES-1887-2,302.125

Had this been so , we should have been blind to the point of the field
at which we looked , and for a little way round it .
STOKES-1887-2,302.126

As it is , the centre of the field , which is the place where vision is
<P_303> most distinct , is seen with both eyes , STOKES-1887-2,303.127

and though there is a small patch to the right of the centre of the
field for which the right eye is blind , it is taken up by the left eye
; and similarly as regards the blind spot of the left eye .
STOKES-1887-2,303.128

The well-known experiment of Purkinje's figures affords a further proof
that the nerves are not stimulated by the light which crosses them .
STOKES-1887-2,303.129

In this experiment the forms of the blood-vessels of the retina are seen
in the field of view , in consequence of the partial interception of the
light which falls upon them . STOKES-1887-2,303.130

This shows that they must be situated in front of , and not far from ,
the percipient organ , so that their shadows may fall on it as on a
screen ; STOKES-1887-2,303.131

and their motion , when the candle used in the experiment is moved ,
shows on the other hand that they do not actually touch it .
STOKES-1887-2,303.132

Now it is found on dissection that the blood-vessels run among the nerve
fibres , STOKES-1887-2,303.133

and therefore the percipient organ must be situated a little further
back , that is , a little outwards , reckoning from the centre of the
eyeball . STOKES-1887-2,303.134

Such is the situation of the layer of rods and cones .
STOKES-1887-2,303.135

The office of the nerve fibres appears to be simply one of conveyance ,
notice of a change of condition of the recipient organ at the nerve end
being conveyed in some way by the nerve to the brain , and then in some
manner which seems likely always to remain a <P_304> mystery , giving
rise to the sensation . STOKES-1887-2,304.136

Perhaps the subject may be made clearer by a rough analogy drawn from
common life . STOKES-1887-2,304.137

Take the sending of a telegram . STOKES-1887-2,304.138

The image painted on the retina is analogous to the message handed in to
the telegraph clerk , the percipient organ to the instrument manipulated
by the clerk , the nerve to the line wire , the sensation to the
delivery of the message at the other end . STOKES-1887-2,304.139

The general surface of the outer ends of the rods , or <paren> in the
central part of the retina where there are no rods <$$paren> of the
cones , is in contact with a layer of cells containing a black pigment ;
cells which also extend some way inwards so as to come between the rods
, and still further inwards when stimulated by light , so as in that
case to reach to the cones , with which they are in contact
independently of the stimulus of light , in that part of the retina
where there are no rods to keep them off . STOKES-1887-2,304.140

The office of the black pigment is generally supposed to be to absorb
stray light , like the lamp-black with which the optician coats the
inside of the tubes of his telescopes . STOKES-1887-2,304.141

Since however light must be more or less absorbed in order to produce a
change in the percipient organ , and there is no substance in the
neighbourhood , at least in the case of the human eye , capable of
exercising so intense an absorption as the black pigment , it has been
doubted whether its office may not be <P_305> more direct .
STOKES-1887-2,305.142

But that it is not at any rate essential to vision is shown by the fact
that it is wanting in albinos , who nevertheless are able to see .
STOKES-1887-2,305.143

What the particular part of the rods or cones may be at which the change
takes place from light to some effect produced by light which gives rise
to the sensation of vision , and what the nature of that effect may be ,
are questions to which we are not at present able to give determinate
answers . STOKES-1887-2,305.144

It has I believe been suggested that the outer segments are the seat of
the change , and that the change is of a photochemical nature ; that is
to say , that under the influence of light certain chemical
decompositions take place , and that the new products thus formed act as
a stimulus on the nerves . STOKES-1887-2,305.145

It is noteworthy that in most vertebrates the outer limbs of the rods
are suffused with a purple colouring matter , which has been called
visual purple , which has the property of being turned yellow and then
bleached under the influence of light , while in the dark the purple
colouring matter is regenerated provided the eye is sufficiently fresh ,
and the rods are in contact with the choroidal epithelium .
STOKES-1887-2,305.146

The visual purple possesses accordingly some of the properties which we
should expect on the supposition that vision is produced by a
photochemical action : STOKES-1887-2,305.147

but its changes are not sufficiently prompt to allow us to suppose that
<P_306> it is through its means that vision is obtained , besides which
it has not been found in the cones , but only in the rods , and some
animals are destitute of rods , nor are there rods , but only cones , in
the part of the human retina which is in the immediate neighbourhood of
the axis , though objects in the corresponding part of the field of view
are not only seen but seen with special distinctness .
STOKES-1887-2,306.148

There are several arguments which may be urged in support of the
photochemical view , which has much to commend it .
STOKES-1887-2,306.149

At the same time I confess that it seems to me not altogether exempt
from difficulty . STOKES-1887-2,306.150

The sensation remains as long as the eyes are kept open and light
supplied , with no apparent change beyond a somewhat greater
sensitiveness of the organ on the first admission of light after it has
been kept for some time in the dark ; STOKES-1887-2,306.151

and yet when the light is cut off , as by removal or failure of the
source or by closing the eyelids , the sensation seems immediately to
stop . STOKES-1887-2,306.152

I am not speaking , you will understand , of the phenomenon of so-called
after-images , but of the ordinary sensation of vision .
STOKES-1887-2,306.153

It is true that the cessation of the sensation is not instantaneous ,
STOKES-1887-2,306.154

for the steadiness of the impression produced by a rapidly fluctuating
light shows that the sensation lasts for a finite though short time ,
which has been estimated at the tenth of a second ,
STOKES-1887-2,306.155

and it is much enfeebled in <P_307> a considerably shorter time .
STOKES-1887-2,307.156

It may be remarked in passing that the duration depends upon the colour
; being distinctly longer for blue than for red light .
STOKES-1887-2,307.157

We can@ @not of course say for certain that this demonstrates a brief
finite duration in the change of state produced in the percipient organ
, though that appears to be the most probable explanation ,
STOKES-1887-2,307.158

for it might depend on the time that the influence on the end of a nerve
takes to travel along it , though the time seems much too long for that
if we may judge by the time an influence takes to travel along nerves of
touch ; STOKES-1887-2,307.159

or again it might depend on the sensation of impressions in the
sensorium . STOKES-1887-2,307.160

Now , supposing the duration of the impression to depend on the duration
of a change of state in the percipient organ , it seems to me that there
is one physical phenomenon in which a change of state is produced by the
action of light , the behaviour of which in respect of duration is
strikingly analogous to what we require in the percipient organ .
STOKES-1887-2,307.161

I allude to phosphorescence of brief duration , of such duration that it
might be called indifferently phosphorescence or fluorescence .
STOKES-1887-2,307.162

Take for example uranium glass . STOKES-1887-2,307.163

The glass is yellow by transmitted light , from the absorption of the
most refrangible rays . STOKES-1887-2,307.164

But if we regard it in such a direction as to look across the rays , as
soon as the light is let on we see a green <P_308> colour , which is due
to phosphorescence . STOKES-1887-2,308.165

This remains as long as the light continues to fall upon the glass ;
STOKES-1887-2,308.166

and when the incident light is cut off , the green phosphorescence seems
immediately to cease . STOKES-1887-2,308.167

It lasts however an appreciable time , the thousandth of a second or so
, as may be shown by Becquerel's phosphoroscope and by other means .
STOKES-1887-2,308.168

Now the change of state in the glass , the existence of which is made
known to us by the phosphorescence , is , so far as the relation between
the time of action of the exciting causes and the duration of the effect
goes , precisely such a change as we require in the percipient organ .
STOKES-1887-2,308.169

This tempts us to enquire whether possibly the change in the latter case
may not be of a similar nature to the change in the former .
STOKES-1887-2,308.170

Now , what takes place in the glass is doubtless this :
STOKES-1887-2,308.171

the incident ethereal vibrations throw the ultimate molecules of the
uranium compound into a state of internal agitation ,
STOKES-1887-2,308.172

and they in turn become centres of disturbance to the ether ,
STOKES-1887-2,308.173

and so give out light . STOKES-1887-2,308.174

When the incident light is cut off the molecular agitation does not at
once cease , STOKES-1887-2,308.175

but rapidly dies away , partly by communication to the ether , but
mainly , as I have long thought , by communication of an agitation to
continually widening groups of neighbouring molecules of the glass ,
which form vibrating systems of greater extent and increased period of
<P_309> vibration . STOKES-1887-2,309.176

When the light falls continuously on the glass the molecular agitation
tends to be renewed as fast as it tends to die away ,
STOKES-1887-2,309.177

and a permanent condition is maintained . STOKES-1887-2,309.178

Now , if a similar kind of molecular agitation is excited in the
ultimate molecules of the substance or substances of which the
percipient organ is composed , and if being excited it is able to affect
the nerves , we have just such an apparatus as we require .
STOKES-1887-2,309.179

I throw out this conjecture for the consideration of physiologists , of
whom I have no pretensions to be one myself , and merely as a
conceivable alternative to the photochemical theory which it seems worth
while to bear in mind , even though the latter should appear the more
probable . STOKES-1887-2,309.180

I would just observe that the presence or absence of fluorescence in the
percipient organ would not by itself alone go far either to confirm or
to refute the suggested explanation . STOKES-1887-2,309.181

For fluorescence is so common in organic substances that it might very
well be present without having anything to do with vision .
STOKES-1887-2,309.182

On the other hand , molecular agitations similar in their nature to
those in uranium glass might very well be present , and yet not give
rise to any visible light , as their period or periods might be such as
to belong to rays beyond the red . STOKES-1887-2,309.183

When a person uses a telescope for viewing objects at different
distances , and some of them not far off , he <P_310> is obliged to
re-focus his instrument in passing from one object to another , as
otherwise he would not see them all distinctly . STOKES-1887-2,310.184

Now the eye acts as a telescope , STOKES-1887-2,310.185

and if it remained invariable in form we could not see quite distinctly
objects at very different distances . STOKES-1887-2,310.186

The focal length of the eye being but small , an object at a moderate
distance would be as good as at an infinite distance so far as sharpness
of vision is concerned , STOKES-1887-2,310.187

and therefore a person who could see distant objects distinctly , would
also see distinctly objects at a moderate distance without any change in
the eye . STOKES-1887-2,310.188

But when we come to nearer objects , as in reading , the vision would be
indistinct , unless assisted by spectacles , if there was not some
change in the eye itself answering to the re-focussing of a telescope .
STOKES-1887-2,310.189

But we are provided with such an adjustment <paren> at least during
youth and middle age , for the power is diminished or lost in old age
<$$paren> , by the exercise of which we can see distinctly at very
different distances . STOKES-1887-2,310.190

What the changes are which constitute the adjustment has given rise to
some conjectures , STOKES-1887-2,310.191

but it is now ascertained to consist essentially in an alteration of
curvature of the anterior surface of the crystalline lens .
STOKES-1887-2,310.192

The lens being somewhat more refractive than the aqueous humour , an
increased curvature of the anterior surface shortens the focus , which
is what is required for distinct vision of a nearer <P_311> object .
STOKES-1887-2,311.193

The adjustment ordinarily accompanies , apparently automatically , the
voluntary act of making the axes of the two eyes converge on a nearer or
more distant object , though some persons appear to have the power of
altering the adjustment at will independently of an alteration in the
convergence of the axes . STOKES-1887-2,311.194

Hitherto I have spoken only of the perception of light as such .
STOKES-1887-2,311.195

But the objects which we see are not presented to us simply in light and
shade as in a photograph ; STOKES-1887-2,311.196

we see them with a great variety of colours , which contributes very
much to our enjoyment , and helps us in the ordinary concerns of life by
the means of discrimination which it affords . STOKES-1887-2,311.197

The means whereby the difference of sensation produced by lights of
different composition as regards refrangibility is brought about , are
far from being understood ; STOKES-1887-2,311.198

we can only feel our way towards a partial explanation .
STOKES-1887-2,311.199

It has long been recognised that there appears to be a triplicity of
some kind about the various colours which we are able to perceive , as
if they were referable to a mixture of three primary colours , though
some confusion was formerly made in the subject from regarding the
colour produced by a mixture of coloured pigments as the same thing with
a mixture of the colours which the pigments separately exhibit , which
in fact is a totally different thing . STOKES-1887-2,311.200

Now , assuming the <P_312> existence of say three primary colours , the
difference between them might be objective or subjective ; that is to
say , there might be three kinds of light , usually mixed together in
any light presented to us , each affecting us with the same sensation as
to colour , different from that with which the two others affect us ; or
else we might have as it were three senses in relation to light , such
that if one were alone affected we should have a particular sensation as
to colour , which would remain the same though other circumstances ,
such for example as the refrangibility of the light , might change .
STOKES-1887-2,312.201

On the former supposition , an element of a pure spectrum would contain
three kinds of light though not separable by refraction , the
proportions of which would change from one part of the spectrum to
another ; STOKES-1887-2,312.202

on the latter , the light of the element would be homogeneous ,
STOKES-1887-2,312.203

but would be capable of exciting our colour senses simultaneously , but
in proportions differing according to the place of the element in the
spectrum . STOKES-1887-2,312.204

Of these two suppositions , the second , which is that of Dr Young , is
by far the simplest . STOKES-1887-2,312.205

For even if there were a triplicity in the object , we should still
require a triplicity in our organization in order that the objective
difference might be subjectively perceived as a difference ; whereas ,
if a triplicity in the organization be admitted , we have no need to
assume a triplicity in <P_313> the object , of which we have no
experimental evidence . STOKES-1887-2,313.206

It is true indeed that Brewster thought that he had succeeded by the use
of absorbing media in modifying the tint of a given part of a pure
spectrum . STOKES-1887-2,313.207

But the phenomena on which Brewster relied have since been shown to be
due to illusions of contrast . STOKES-1887-2,313.208

There are cases indeed in which the apparent tint of a given part of the
spectrum changes somewhat with the intensity of the light ,
independently altogether of contrast . STOKES-1887-2,313.209

But this affords no proof that light homogeneous as to refrangibility is
nevertheless heterogeneous as to colour . STOKES-1887-2,313.210

The experiments of Helmholtz and Maxwell appear to show , that the
supposition of the existence of three primary colour sensations suffices
to account by their union for the various shades of colour which we
perceive . STOKES-1887-2,313.211

In particular Maxwell has shown by his colour top , and more recently by
mixing colours of the spectrum , that if we take three standard colours
<font> X , Y , Z , <$$font> any colour <font> C <$$font> may be
expressed by the formula {COM:equation_omitted} where <font> a , b , c
<$$font> are numerical coefficients which may be positive or negative ;
= means matches in colour and intensity ; + means superposed on , and -
, in case any of the coefficients should be negative , means that the
term must be transferred to the other side of the equation .
STOKES-1887-2,313.212

If the standard colours are well chosen the <P_314> coefficients <font>
a , b , c <$$font> in most cases will be positive .
STOKES-1887-2,314.213

The best colours to choose for standards appear to be red , green and
blue . STOKES-1887-2,314.214

Microscopic examination of the retinas of the eyes of mammals has not
hitherto revealed the existence of a difference of structure in the
different elements which would naturally suggest a triplicity of
function . STOKES-1887-2,314.215

We have it is true rods and cones , STOKES-1887-2,314.216

but in the central parts of the human retina there are only cones ,
which appear alike ; STOKES-1887-2,314.217

and yet in the centre of the field our appreciation of colour is
specially good . STOKES-1887-2,314.218

But it is remarkable that in the retinas of birds and reptiles the inner
limbs of the cones are furnished with highly coloured globules , which
the light has to pass through on its way to the outer limbs .
STOKES-1887-2,314.219

The actual colours appear to vary somewhat from one kind of animal to
another , but to be generally yellow , ruby , colourless , and a few
green . STOKES-1887-2,314.220

The globules of one colour may be more numerous than those of another ,
STOKES-1887-2,314.221

but the globules of the different colours appear to be very equally
mixed among one another . STOKES-1887-2,314.222

So remarkable a structure can hardly be imagined to be destitute of
function , STOKES-1887-2,314.223

and it has naturally been supposed to be connected with the perception
of colour by these animals . STOKES-1887-2,314.224

The cones in the same species of animal may be classified according to
the colour of their globules , STOKES-1887-2,314.225

and it seems not unreasonable to suppose that the sensation excited
<P_315> by the stimulation of the fibres coming from cones of one class
may differ from that produced by the stimulation of those from cones of
another class , and that this difference may correspond to a difference
of the colour perceived . STOKES-1887-2,315.226

It can hardly be doubted that when light produces vision it is absorbed
in doing so . STOKES-1887-2,315.227

Now the coloured globules absorb the rays of part of the spectrum
STOKES-1887-2,315.228

and let pass those of another part . STOKES-1887-2,315.229

The ruby globules , for example , let through the red rays
STOKES-1887-2,315.230

and absorb those that are more refrangible . STOKES-1887-2,315.231

If we suppose the globule and its immediate neighbourhood to be the
percipient organ , the stimulating rays will be those above the red ,
the assemblage of which would excite in us the sensation of green .
STOKES-1887-2,315.232

But if , as seems more probable , the organ in which light first
produces those changes that result in vision be the outer limbs of the
cones , the globule would stand as a porter at the gate , letting
through none but the red rays , which on this latter supposition would
be the stimulating rays . STOKES-1887-2,315.233

The retinas of mammals however are not provided with these coloured
globules , which shows that at any rate colour vision may be obtained
without them . STOKES-1887-2,315.234

They are nevertheless so far confirmatory of the theory of three primary
sensations of colour as that they show the existence , in certain races
of <P_316> animals , of different classes of cones , those of each class
being on the whole very equally mixed among those of the other classes ;
STOKES-1887-2,316.235

and it seems not at all unlikely that the nerves which end in the cones
of these different classes respectively may on stimulation give rise to
sensations of different kinds respectively . STOKES-1887-2,316.236

In the human eye the cones on being traced inwards lead to a sort of
fine thread , which at its base divides into excessively fine fibres .
STOKES-1887-2,316.237

It has been conjectured that these different fibres may on stimulation
give rise to different colour sensations , so that each cone would as a
rule furnish fibres of each class ; STOKES-1887-2,316.238

and a plausible conjecture might be offered to account for the
proportion between the stimulation of the fibres of different classes
being different with exciting lights of different refrangibility .
STOKES-1887-2,316.239

On this supposition , the parts of objects which were only
distinguishable from one another by colour would be more sharply defined
with man than with those classes of animals where different colour
sensations belong to different cones , if indeed such be the case with
those animals which are provided with coloured globules .
STOKES-1887-2,316.240

But I fear I have been indulging too much in what is only speculative .
STOKES-1887-2,316.241

I have hitherto considered almost exclusively the action of a single eye
with reference to vision . STOKES-1887-2,316.242

But though we have two eyes , each of which gives us <P_317> perfect
vision of an object , which for the present I will treat as a point ,
when we use both eyes together we do not ordinarily see the object as
two but one . STOKES-1887-2,317.243

It is perfectly easy , however , to see it as two .
STOKES-1887-2,317.244

We have only to squint , or if we prefer it , to hold a small object in
a line with the first , but at a different distance , and direct our
eyes to it , STOKES-1887-2,317.245

and instantly the first object is seen double . STOKES-1887-2,317.246

In the first case , the axes of the two eyes were directed to the object
, STOKES-1887-2,317.247

and its images fell on the centres of the two retinas , in which case as
we have seen the sensation is that of a single point in the field of
view . STOKES-1887-2,317.248

In the second case the axes are directed to the second object , which I
will suppose to be nearer than the first , and will treat as a point ,
STOKES-1887-2,317.249

and it accordingly is now seen single in the centre of the field .
STOKES-1887-2,317.250

But as the first object lies to the right of the axis of the right eye ,
its image falls to the left of the centre , STOKES-1887-2,317.251

and it is accordingly seen by the right eye to the right of the second
object . STOKES-1887-2,317.252

Similarly it is seen by the left eye to the left of the object .
STOKES-1887-2,317.253

In a similar way it appears that if the eyes be directed to the first
object , the second is seen double ; STOKES-1887-2,317.254

but now , as seen by the right eye , it appears to the left of the
object seen single , and similarly as regards the other eye .
STOKES-1887-2,317.255

Suppose now , that while the eyes are directed to the near object the
further one is moved to the right . STOKES-1887-2,317.256

<P_318>

Both its images will appear to move to the right , STOKES-1887-2,318.258

and presently they will both appear to the right of the second object
but at very unequal distances from it , the one previously to the right
, which is the one seen by the right eye , being the more distant .
STOKES-1887-2,318.259

Suppose now , the first object brought nearer to the eyes than the
second and placed in a line with it . STOKES-1887-2,318.260

Then , of its two images , it is now the one to the left that is seen by
the right eye . STOKES-1887-2,318.261

Hence , if the first object be moved to the right , till both its images
are seen to the right of that of the second , the one seen by the right
eye is now the <font> less <$$font> distant from it .
STOKES-1887-2,318.262

Now suppose the first object held always to the right of the second , so
that both its images appear to the right of the second ,
STOKES-1887-2,318.263

and let it be moved from a distance from the eyes decidedly greater than
to a distance decidedly less than that of the second object .
STOKES-1887-2,318.264

Then the distance of the image seen by the right eye from that of the
second object will at first be the longer , and at last the smaller of
the two distances . STOKES-1887-2,318.265

Hence , as the first object is moved continuously from the first to the
second position , for some intermediate position the two distances will
be the same , STOKES-1887-2,318.266

and the first object will appear single though it is to the second that
the eyes are directed . STOKES-1887-2,318.267

Hence , not only do the centres of the two retinas correspond , in the
sense that when the images of a point fall on them the point is seen
single , STOKES-1887-2,318.268

<P_319>

but other pairs of points possess the same property .
STOKES-1887-2,319.270

In fact , to each point of one retina corresponds a point in the other
in the sense above indicated . STOKES-1887-2,319.271

According to this definition it would be a matter of experiment to
determine the relations between the positions of corresponding points in
the two eyes ; STOKES-1887-2,319.272

and as we can@ @not at all accurately judge of the coincidence or
non-coincidence of position of two points when they are well out of the
axis , near which only we see with full distinctness , the experimental
determination could not be very accurately made . STOKES-1887-2,319.273

When however we look straight forward at one point of a distant object
the rest of the object appears single . STOKES-1887-2,319.274

Hence , the two points on which fall the images of any one point of the
object are corresponding points , at least within the limit of errors of
observation . STOKES-1887-2,319.275

This condition is accordingly usually taken as the <font> definition
<$$font> of correspondence ; though I confess it seems to me that the
natural definition is that derived from singleness of vision ;
STOKES-1887-2,319.276

and the fact that under the condition named , the two images of the same
point in the object fall on corresponding points of the two retinas , is
to be taken as a proposition established by experiment .
STOKES-1887-2,319.277

There can be no doubt that the stimulation of a given point of the
retina of either eye by the image of a point falling upon it , produces
a given sensation <P_320> no matter how the eye-ball {COM:sic} be turned
in its socket . STOKES-1887-2,320.278

Suppose then , we have single vision of an object , say a distant object
, using both our eyes . STOKES-1887-2,320.279

Then the pairs of foci from the various points of the object fall on
pairs of corresponding points on the two retinas .
STOKES-1887-2,320.280

If now , while one eyeball remained fixed , the other rotated round any
axis , immediately the pairs of points on which pairs of foci fell would
become non-corresponding , STOKES-1887-2,320.281

and we should have double vision . STOKES-1887-2,320.282

Hence , there must be a determinate adjustment between the angular
positions of the two eyes in order that vision may be single .
STOKES-1887-2,320.283

Now the most general angular displacement of a body , and accordingly of
either eyeball , may be given by three rotations about determinate axes
, suppose vertical , horizontal running right and left , and horizontal
running forwards . STOKES-1887-2,320.284

Now it is remarkable that the eye-ball is provided with six muscles ,
one straight pair in a horizontal plane , the contraction of one or
other of which turns the ball in one direction or the contrary round a
vertical axis ; one straight pair in a vertical plane , which similarly
turn it round a horizontal axis running right and left , and a third
pair of oblique muscles , which turn it round its own axis .
STOKES-1887-2,320.285

By means of these the requisite relative adjustment of the eyeballs can
be and is effected . STOKES-1887-2,320.286

The horizontal muscles are in constant use for not <P_321> merely
turning but turning unequally the two eyeballs , as we have occasion to
make the axes converge on objects at various distances , from a few
inches up to a large distance for which the axes may be deemed parallel
. STOKES-1887-2,321.287

We have no occasion to make them diverge , STOKES-1887-2,321.288

but there is no difficulty in doing so up to a few degrees of divergence
, by holding before one eye a slender prism with its edge vertical and
its thick side next the nose , and viewing a distant object till it
appears single . STOKES-1887-2,321.289

Unlike the horizontal , the vertical straight muscles are not called
upon in ordinary life to act differently for the two eyes .
STOKES-1887-2,321.290

But that they are capable of doing so may be shown by looking at an
object and holding a slender prism with its edge horizontal before one
eye . STOKES-1887-2,321.291

The object is at first seen double , one image being above the other ,
STOKES-1887-2,321.292

but if the separation be not too great they can be readily united after
a little . STOKES-1887-2,321.293

The experiment , as Maxwell showed me , can be made with still simpler
apparatus , nothing but a pair of common spectacles being required .
STOKES-1887-2,321.294

Viewing an object through the spectacles , turn them gradually and not
too much round an axis passing through the ridge and perpendicular to
the planes of the glasses . STOKES-1887-2,321.295

One can easily maintain single vision , STOKES-1887-2,321.296

and if the spectacles be now suddenly removed the vision is found to be
double at first , one image being over the <P_322> other .
STOKES-1887-2,322.297

This shows that the vertical muscles afford sensible play for adjustment
. STOKES-1887-2,322.298

Lastly , the use of the oblique muscles in adjustment may be shown by a
simple experiment which I have not seen mentioned .
STOKES-1887-2,322.299

Take two slips of glass varnished at the back to stop the second
reflection , STOKES-1887-2,322.300

and holding them one under each eye view by reflection at a high angle
of incidence the images say of the string of a blind as it hangs down
and is seen against the sky . STOKES-1887-2,322.301

Adjust the glasses to make the images blend into one in the most
comfortable manner , STOKES-1887-2,322.302

and then turn one of the glasses slightly round an axis pointing
forwards . STOKES-1887-2,322.303

The two images are seen to cut at a small angle , STOKES-1887-2,322.304

but on continuing to gaze at them they presently blend into one .
STOKES-1887-2,322.305

How the unity of sensation between corresponding points is brought about
, is more than we can tell . STOKES-1887-2,322.306

The optic nerves after entering the brain unite in the optic commissure
, from whence run nerves to the right and left sides of the brain .
STOKES-1887-2,322.307

The course of the fibres in the commissure , and the extent to which the
fibres from the right eye cross over to the left side of the brain or
keep to their own side , are not I believe as yet made out for certain ,
so difficult is the histological investigation of these fine and complex
structures . STOKES-1887-2,322.308

What the object of this mode of crossing may be , and whether it has
anything to do with singleness <P_323> of vision , is not at present
known . STOKES-1887-2,323.309

But whatever be the mode in which the unity of sensation is brought
about , there appears to be no doubt that as a matter of fact the
elements of the retinas of the two eyes do correspond in pairs , and
that the six muscles of the eyeballs supply the mechanism required for
adjustment to single vision . STOKES-1887-2,323.310

<P_324>

<heading>

Lecture IV . STOKES-1887-2,324.313

<font> Original object of the Burnett Trust . STOKES-1887-2,324.314

- Possibility at first sight of contemplating the motions of the
heavenly bodies as having gone on as they are from a past eternity -
STOKES-1887-2,324.315

Such a view negatived {COM:sic} by their physical condition -
STOKES-1887-2,324.316

This scientific conclusion greatly strengthened when we consider living
things - STOKES-1887-2,324.317

Scientific investigation is adverse to the hypothesis of the spontaneous
origination of life - STOKES-1887-2,324.318

Our inability to explain by mere natural causes the vast variety of
forms of life , and their changes in geological time -
STOKES-1887-2,324.319

Difficulties of the Darwinian theory if regarded as a solution of the
problem - STOKES-1887-2,324.320

Evidences of design afforded by an examination of the structure of
living things - STOKES-1887-2,324.321

Marvellous adaptation of the eye to its uses - STOKES-1887-2,324.322

Self-existence , beyond which we can@ @not go , not attributable to the
visible universe - STOKES-1887-2,324.323

The evidence of design leads to the contemplation of a designing mind ,
of whom self-existence has been affirmed - STOKES-1887-2,324.324

Further evidence derived from the study of mind - STOKES-1887-2,324.325

Inadequacy of the human mind to take in together the ideas of
personality and exemption from limitations of time and space -
STOKES-1887-2,324.326

The character of God revealed to us through the Son . <$$font>
STOKES-1887-2,324.327

<$$heading>

In the order of the Home Secretary by which a new direction was given to
the Burnett Foundation , it <P_325> is prescribed that the Trustees
shall instruct the lecturer to have regard , in treating of the special
subject prescribed , to the illustration afforded by it to the theme
proposed by the testator . STOKES-1887-2,325.329

Hitherto I have touched only incidentally on this topic ;
STOKES-1887-2,325.330

but I think that I shall not be acting otherwise than in accordance with
the wishes of the Trustees by devoting the present lecture , the last I
shall deliver as Burnett Lecturer , to this special subject .
STOKES-1887-2,325.331

Let us in imagination so separate ourselves from ourselves as to use our
intellect , while conceiving ourselves unconscious of our own existence
and of all that that involves ; STOKES-1887-2,325.332

and under this restriction let us contemplate the heavenly bodies , more
especially those of the Solar System , from the point of view of an
astronomer who observes and records the places of these bodies from time
to time , and reduces their motions , at first complicated and to a
considerable extent lawless , to order under the guidance of the law of
universal gravitation , but who avoids , as foreign to his subject , any
speculation as to the physical condition of the bodies other than that
they consist of matter obeying the law of gravitation .
STOKES-1887-2,325.333

Such a person ascertains that the motions of those bodies take place in
accordance with his calculations . STOKES-1887-2,325.334

He finds that he is able to determine years beforehand what the places
of those bodies shall be , STOKES-1887-2,325.335

and when <P_326> the time comes they are found in their predicted places
; STOKES-1887-2,326.336

or , if there be minute discrepancies beyond the limits of casual errors
of observation , he finds that by revising his calculations , which are
excessively complicated , and can only be carried out approximately ,
though there is no limit to the accuracy to which the calculations may
with patience be carried , these minute discrepancies gradually
disappear ; STOKES-1887-2,326.337

or if there be still a slight outstanding error the presumption is that
it only needs a yet still more refined and laborious calculation to
account for it . STOKES-1887-2,326.338

There is no intimation of any error in the principles on which the
calculation is founded ; STOKES-1887-2,326.339

and it is proved mathematically that according to those principles the
motions are periodic and capable of indefinite continuation .
STOKES-1887-2,326.340

