<BEGIN_strutt-1890-1>

<P_3,318>

<heading>

164 . On bells . STRUTT-1890-1,3,318.4

<$$heading>

The theory of the vibrations of bells is of considerable difficulty .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,318.6

Even when the thickness of the shell may be treated as very small , as
in the case of air-pump receivers , finger-bowls , claret glasses , &c.
, the question has given rise to a difference of opinion .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,318.7

The more difficult problem presented by church bells , where the
thickness of the metal in the region of the <font> sound-bow <$$font>
<paren> where the clapper strikes <$$paren> is by no means small , has
not yet been attacked . STRUTT-1890-1,3,318.8

A complete theoretical investigation is indeed scarcely to be hoped for
; STRUTT-1890-1,3,318.9

but one of the principal objects of the present paper is to report the
results of an experimental examination of several church bells , in the
course of which some curious facts have disclosed themselves .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,318.10

In practice bells are designed to be symmetrical about an axis ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,318.11

and we shall accordingly suppose that the figures are of revolution , or
at least differ but little from such . STRUTT-1890-1,3,318.12

Under these circumstances the possible vibrations divide themselves into
classes , according to the number of times the motion repeats itself
round the circumference . STRUTT-1890-1,3,318.13

In the gravest mode , where the originally circular boundary becomes
elliptical , the motion is once repeated , that is it occurs <font>
twice . <$$font> STRUTT-1890-1,3,318.14

The number of nodal meridians , determined by the points where the
circle intersects the ellipse , is <font> four <$$font> , the meridians
corresponding <paren> for example <$$paren> to longitudes 0@ @=o= and
180@ @=o= being reckoned separately . STRUTT-1890-1,3,318.15

In like manner we may have 6 , 8 , 10 . . . nodal meridians ,
corresponding to 3 , 4 , 5 . . . cycles of motion .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,318.16

A class of vibrations is also possible which are symmetrical about the
axis , the motion at any point being either in or perpendicular to the
meridional plane . STRUTT-1890-1,3,318.17

But these are of no acoustical importance . STRUTT-1890-1,3,318.18

<P_3,319>

The meaning here attached to the word <font> nodal <$$font> must be
carefully observed . STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.20

The meridians are not nodal in the sense that there is no motion , but
only that there is no motion <font> normal to the surface . <$$font>
STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.21

This can be best illustrated by the simplest case , that of an
infinitely long thin circular cylinder vibrating in two dimensions .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.22

The graver vibrations are here purely flexural , the circumference
remaining everywhere unstretched during the motion .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.23

If we fix our attention upon one mode of vibration of <font> n <$$font>
cycles , the motion at the surface is usually both radial and tangential
. STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.24

There are , however , 2 <font> n <$$font> points distributed at equal
intervals where the motion is purely tangential , and other 2 <font> n
<$$font> points , bisecting the intervals of the former , where the
motion is purely radial . STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.25

There are thus no places of complete rest ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.26

but the first set of points , or the lines through them parallel to the
axis , are called nodal , in the sense that there is at these places no
normal motion . STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.27

The two systems of points have important relations to the place where
the vibrations are excited . STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.28

" When a bell-shaped body is sounded by a blow , the point of
application of the blow is a place of maximum normal motion of the
resulting vibrations , STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.29

and the same is true when the vibrations are excited by a violin-bow ,
as generally in lecture-room experiments . STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.30

Bells of glass , such as finger-glasses , are , however , more easily
thrown into regular vibration by friction with the wetted finger carried
round the circumference . STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.31

The pitch of the resulting sound is the same as that elicited by a tap
with the soft part of the finger ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.32

but inasmuch as the tangential motion of a vibrating bell has been very
generally ignored , the production of sound in this manner has been felt
as a difficulty . STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.33

It is now scarcely necessary to point out that the effect of the
friction is in the first instance to excite tangential motion , and that
the point of application of the friction is the place where the
tangential motion is greatest , and therefore where the normal motion
vanishes . " STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.34

When the symmetry is complete , the system of nodal meridians has no
fixed position , STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.35

and may adapt itself so as to suit the place at which a normal blow is
delivered . STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.36

If the point of application of the blow be conceived to travel round a
circle symmetrical with respect to the axis , <paren> say , for brevity
, a circle of <font> latitude <$$font> <$$paren> the displacement will
make no difference to the vibration considered as a whole ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.37

but the effect upon an observer who retains a fixed position will vary .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.38

If the bell be situated in an open space , or if the ear of the observer
be so close that reflexions are relatively unimportant , the sound
disappears as nodes pass by him , swelling to a maximum when the part
nearest to the ear is one of the places of maximum normal motion , which
for brevity we will call <font> loops . <$$font> STRUTT-1890-1,3,319.39

In listening to a particular note it would thus be <P_3,320> possible to
determine the number of nodal meridians by watching the variations of
intensity which occur as the place of the blow travels round a circle of
latitude . STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.40

In practice the symmetry is seldom so complete that this account of the
matter is sufficient . STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.41

Theoretically the slightest departure from symmetry will in general
render determinate the positions of the nodal systems .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.42

For each number <font> n <$$font> of cycles , there is one determinate
mode of vibration with 2 <font> n <$$font> nodes and 2 <font> n <$$font>
intermediate loops , and a second determinate mode in which the nodes
and loops of the first mode exchange functions . STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.43

Moreover the frequencies of the vibrations in the two modes are slightly
different . STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.44

In accordance with the general theory , the vibrations of the two modes
, as dependent upon the situation and magnitude of the initiating blow ,
are to be considered separately . STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.45

The vibrations of the first mode will be excited , unless the blow occur
at a node of this system ; and in various degrees , reaching a maximum
when the blow is delivered at a loop . STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.46

The intensity , as appreciated by an observer , depends also upon the
position of his ear , STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.47

and will be greatest when a loop is immediately opposite .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.48

As regards the vibrations of the second mode , they reach a maximum when
those of the first mode disappear , and conversely .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.49

Thus in the case of <font> n <$$font> cycles , there are 2 <font> n
<$$font> places where the first vibration is not excited and 2 <font> n
<$$font> places , midway between the former , where the second vibration
is not excited . STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.50

At all 4 <font> n <$$font> places the resulting sound is free from beats
. STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.51

In all other cases both kinds of vibration are excited ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.52

and the sound will be affected by beats . STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.53

But the prominence of the beats depends upon more than one circumstance
. STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.54

The intensities of the two vibrations will be equal when the place of
the blow is midway between those which give no beats .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.55

But it does not follow that the audible beats are then most distinct .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.56

The condition to be satisfied is that the intensities shall be equal
<font> as they reach the ear <$$font> , STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.57

and this will depend upon the situation of the observer as well as upon
the vigour of the vibrations themselves . STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.58

Indeed , by suitably choosing the place of observation it would be
theoretically possible to obtain beats with perfect silences , wherever
<paren> in relation to the nodal system <$$paren> the blow may be
delivered . STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.59

There will now be no difficulty in understanding the procedure adopted
in order to fix the number of cycles corresponding to a given tone .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.60

If , in consequence of a near approach to symmetry , beats are not
audible , they are introduced by suitably loading the vibrating body .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.61

By tapping cautiously round a circle of latitude the places are then
investigated where the beats disappear . STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.62

But here a decision must not be made too hastily .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.63

The inaudibility of the beats may be favoured by an unsuitable position
of the ear , or of the mouth of the resonator in connexion with the ear
. STRUTT-1890-1,3,320.64

By travelling <P_3,321> round a situation is soon found where the
observation can be made with the best advantage .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.65

In the neighbourhood of the place where the blow is being tried there is
a loop of the vibration which is most excited and a <paren> coincident
<$$paren> node of the vibration which is least excited .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.66

When the ear is opposite to a node of the first vibration , and
therefore to a loop of the second , the original inequality is redressed
, STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.67

and distinct beats may be heard even although the deviation of the blow
from a nodal point may be very small . STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.68

The accurate determination in this way of two consecutive places where
no beats are generated is all that is absolutely necessary .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.69

The ratio of the entire circumference of the circle of latitude to the
arc between the points represents 4 <font> n <$$font> , that is four
times the number of cycles . STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.70

Thus , if the arc between consecutive points proved to be 45@ @=o= , we
should infer that we were dealing with a vibration of two cycles - the
one in which the deformation is elliptical . STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.71

As a greater security against error , it is advisable in practice to
determine a larger number of points where no beats occur .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.72

Unless the deviation from symmetry be considerable , these points should
be uniformly distributed along the circle of lattitude .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.73

In the above process for determining nodes we are supposed to hear
distinctly the tone corresponding to the vibration under investigation .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.74

For this purpose the beats are of assistance in directing the attention
; STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.75

but with the more difficult subjects , such as church bells , it is
advisable to have recourse to resonators . STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.76

A set of Helmholtz's pattern , manufactured by Koenig , are very
convenient . STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.77

The one next higher in pitch to the tone under examination is chosen and
tuned by advancing the finger across the aperture .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.78

Without the security afforded by resonators , the determination of the
octave is in my experience very uncertain . STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.79

Thus pure tones are often estimated by musicians an octave too low .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.80

Some years ago I made observations upon the tones of various glass bells
, of which the walls were tolerably thin . STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.81

A few examples may be given : - I. <font> c' <$$font> , <font> e''
{COM:flat_symbol} , c''' <$$font> {COM:sharp_symbol} . II. <font> a
<$$font> , <font> c'' <$$font> {COM:sharp_symbol} , <font> b'' <$$font>
. III. <font> f' <$$font> {COM:sharp_symbol} , <font> b'' . <$$font>
STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.82

The value of <font> n <$$font> for the gravest tone is 2 , for the
second 3 , and for the third 4 . STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.83

On account of the irregular shape and thickness only a very rough
comparison with theory is possible ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,321.84

but it may be worth mention that for a thin uniform hemispherical bell
the frequencies of the three slowest vibrations should be in the ratios
1 : 2.8102 : 5.4316 ; <P_3,322> so that the tones might be <font> c
<$$font> , <font> f' <$$font> {COM:sharp_symbol} , <font> f'' <$$font> ,
approximately . STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.85

More recently , through the kindness of Messrs. Mears and Stainbank , I
have had an opportunity of examining a so-called hemispherical metal
bell , weighing about 3 cwt. STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.86

A section is shown in Fig. 1 . STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.87

Four tones could be plainly heard , <font> e <$$font> {COM:flat_symbol}
, <font> f' <$$font> {COM:sharp_symbol} , <font> e'' <$$font> , <font>
b'' <$$font> , the pitch being taken from a harmonium .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.88

The gravest tone has a long duration . STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.89

When the bell is struck by a hard body , the higher tones are
{COM:figure_omitted} at first predominant , STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.90

but after a time they die away , STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.91

and leave <font> e <$$font> {COM:flat_symbol} in possession of the field
. STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.92

If the striking body be soft , the original preponderance of the higher
elements is less marked . STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.93

By the method above described there was no difficulty in showing that
the four tones correspond respectively to <font> n <$$font> = 2 , 3 , 4
, 5 . STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.94

Thus for the gravest tone the vibration is elliptical with 4 nodal
meridians , STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.95

for the next tone there are 6 nodal meridians , and so on .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.96

Tapping along a meridian showed that the sounds became less clear as the
edge was departed from , and this in a continuous manner with no
suggestion of a nodal circle of latitude . STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.97

A question , to which we shall recur in connexion with church bells ,
here suggests itself . STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.98

Which of the various co-existing tones characterizes the pitch of the
bell as a whole ? STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.99

It would appear to be the third in order , STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.100

for the founders give the pitch as E nat {COM:sic} .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.101

My first attempts upon church bells were made in September 1879 , upon
the second bell <paren> reckoned from the highest <$$paren> of the
Terling peal ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.102

and I was much puzzled to reconcile the pitch of the various tones ,
determined by resonators , with the effective pitch of the bell , when
heard from a distance in conjunction with the other bells of the peal .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.103

There was a general agreement that the five notes of the peal were
<font> f <$$font> {COM:sharp_symbol} , <font> g <$$font>
{COM:sharp_symbol} , <font> a <$$font> {COM:sharp_symbol} , <font> b
<$$font> , <font> c <$$font> {COM:sharp_symbol} , according to harmonium
pitch , so that the note of the second bell was <font> b . <$$font>
STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.104

A tone of pitch <font> a <$$font> {COM:sharp_symbol} could be heard ,
but at that time nothing coincident with <font> b <$$font> or its
octaves . STRUTT-1890-1,3,322.105

Subsequently , in January 1880 , the <font> b <$$font> was found among
the <P_3,323> tones of the bell , but at much higher pitch than had been
expected . STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.106

The five gravest tones were determined to be <font> d' <$$font> , <font>
a' <$$font> {COM:sharp_symbol} , <font> d'' <$$font> , <font> g''
<$$font> {COM:sharp_symbol} + , <font> b'' <$$font> ; so that the
nominal note of the bell agreed with the fifth component tone , and with
no graver one . STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.107

The octaves are here indicated by dashes in the usual way , the <font>
c' <$$font> immediately below the <font> d' <$$font> being the middle
<font> c <$$font> of the musical scale . STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.108

Attempts were then made to identify the modes of vibration corresponding
to the various tones , but with only partial success .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.109

By tapping round the sound-bow it appeared that the minima of beats for
<font> d' <$$font> occurred at intervals equal to 1$$8 of the
circumference , indicating that the deformation in this mode was
elliptical <paren> <font> n <$$font> = 2 <$$paren> , as had been
expected . STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.110

In like manner <font> g'' <$$font> {COM:sharp_symbol} gave <font> n
<$$font> = 3 ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.111

but on account of the difficulty of experimenting in the belfry , the
results were not wholly satisfactory , STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.112

and I was unable to determine the modes for the other tones .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.113

One observation , however , of importance could be made .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.114

All five tones were affected with beats , from which it was concluded
that none of them could be due to symmetrical vibrations , as , till
then , had been thought not unlikely . STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.115

Nothing further worthy of record was effected until last year , when I
obtained from Messrs Mears and Stainbank the loan of a 6-cwt. bell .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.116

Hung in the laboratory at a convenient height , and with freedom of
access to all parts of the circumference , this bell afforded a more
convenient subject for experiment , STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.117

and I was able to make the observations by which before I had been
baffled . STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.118

Former experience having shown me the difficulty of estimating the pitch
of an isolated bell , I was anxious to have the judgement of the
founders expressed in a definite form , STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.119

and they were good enough to supply me with a fork tuned to the pitch of
the bell . STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.120

By my harmonium the fork is <font> d'' <$$font> .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.121

By tapping the bell in various places with a hammer or mallet , and
listening with resonators , it was not difficult to detect 6 tones .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.122

They were identified with the following notes of the harmonium <font> e'
<$$font> <paren> 4 <$$paren> , <font> c'' <$$font> <paren> 4 <$$paren> ,
<font> f'' <$$font> + <paren> 6 <$$paren> , <font> b'' {COM:flat_symbol}
<$$font> <paren> 6 <$$paren> , <font> d''' <$$font> <paren> 8 <$$paren>
, <font> f''' . <$$font> STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.123

As in the former case , the nominal pitch is governed by the fifth
component tone , whose pitch is , however , an octave higher than that
of the representative fork . STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.124

It is to be understood , of course , that each of the 6 tones in the
above series is really double , and that in some cases the components of
a pair differ sufficiently to give rise to somewhat rapid beats .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,323.125

<P_3,324>

The sign + affixed to <font> f'' <$$font> indicates that the tone of the
bell was decidedly sharp in comparison with the note of the instrument .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.127

I now proceeded to determine , as far as possible , the characters of
the various modes of vibration by observations upon the dependence of
the sounds upon the place of tapping in the manner already described .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.128

By tapping round a circle of latitude it was easy to prove that for
<paren> each of the approximately coincident tones of <$$paren> <font>
e' <$$font> there were 4 nodal meridians . STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.129

Again , on tapping along a meridian to find whether there were any nodal
circles of latitude , it became evident that there were none such .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.130

At the same time differences of intensity were observed .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.131

This tone is more fully developed when the blow is delivered about
midway between the crown and rim of the bell than at other places .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.132

The next tone is <font> c'' . <$$font> STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.133

Observation showed that for this vibration also there are four , and but
four , nodal meridians . STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.134

But now there is a well-defined nodal circle of latitude , situated
about a quarter of the way up from the rim towards the crown .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.135

As heard with the resonator , this tone disappears when the blow is
accurately delivered at some point of this circle ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.136

but revives with a very small displacement on either side .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.137

The nodal circle and the four meridians divide the surface into segments
, over each of which the normal motion is of one sign .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.138

To the tone <font> f'' <$$font> correspond 6 nodal meridians .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.139

There is no well-defined nodal circle . STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.140

The sound is indeed very faint , when the tap is much removed from the
sound-bow ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.141

it was thought to fall to a minimum when the tap was about halfway up .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.142

The three graver tones are heard loudly from the sound-bow .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.143

But the next in order , <font> b'' <$$font> {COM:flat_symbol} , is there
scarcely audible , unless the blow be delivered to the rim itself in a
tangential direction . STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.144

The maximum effect occurs at about halfway up . STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.145

Tapping round the circle , we find that there are 6 nodal meridians .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.146

The fifth tone , <font> d''' <$$font> , is heard loudly from the
sound-bow , STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.147

but soon falls off when the locality of the blow is varied ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.148

and in the upper three fourths of the bell it is very faint .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.149

No distinct circular node could be detected . STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.150

Tapping round the circumference showed that there were here 8 nodal
meridians . STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.151

The highest tone recorded , <font> f''' <$$font> , was not easy of
observation , STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.152

and I did not succeed in satisfying myself as to the character of the
vibration . STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.153

The tone was perhaps best heard when the blow was delivered at a point a
little below the crown . STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.154

All the above tones , except <font> f'' <$$font> , were tolerably close
in pitch to the corresponding notes of the harmonium .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,324.155

<P_3,325>

Although the above results seemed perfectly unambiguous , I was glad to
have an opportunity of confirming them by examination of another bell .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.157

This was afforded by a loan of a bell cast by Taylor , of Loughborough ,
and destined for the church of Ampton , Suffolk , where it now hangs .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.158

Its weight is somewhat less than 4 cwt. , STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.159

and the nominal pitch is <font> d <$$font> . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.160

The observations were entirely confirmatory of the results obtained from
Messrs. Mears' bell . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.161

The tones were <font> e' <$$font> {COM:flat_symbol} - 2 <paren> 4
<$$paren> , <font> d'' <$$font> - 6 <paren> 4 <$$paren> , <font> f''
<$$font> + 4 <paren> 6 <$$paren> , <font> b'' <$$font> {COM:flat_symbol}
- <font> b'' <$$font> <paren> 6 <$$paren> , <font> d''' <$$font> <paren>
8 <$$paren> , <font> g''' <$$font> ; the correspondence between the
order of the tone and the number of nodal meridians being as before .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.162

In the case of <font> d'' <$$font> there was the same well-defined nodal
circle . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.163

The highest tone , <font> g''' <$$font> , was but imperfectly heard ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.164

and no investigation could be made of the corresponding mode of
vibration . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.165

In the specification of pitch the numerals following the note indicate
by how much the frequency of the bell differed from that of the
harmonium . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.166

Thus the gravest tone <font> e' <$$font> {COM:flat_symbol} gave 2 beats
per second , STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.167

and was flat . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.168

When the number exceeds 3 , it is the result of somewhat rough
estimation STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.169

and can@ @not be trusted to be quite accurate . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.170

Moreover , as has been explained , there are in strictness two
frequencies under each head , STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.171

and these often differ sensibly . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.172

In the case of the 4th tone , <font> b'' <$$font> {COM:flat_symbol} -
<font> b'' <$$font> means that , as nearly as could be judged , the
pitch of the bell was midway between the two specified notes of the
harmonium . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.173

The sounds of bells may be elicited otherwise than by blows .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.174

Advantage may often be taken of the response to the notes of the
harmonium , to the voice , or to organ-pipes sounded in the
neighbourhood . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.175

In these cases the subsequent resonance of the bell has the character of
a pure tone . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.176

Perhaps the most striking experiment is with a tuning-fork .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.177

A massive <font> e' <$$font> {COM:flat_symbol} <paren> <font> e <$$font>
on the <font> c' <$$font> = 256 scale <$$paren> fork , tuned with wax ,
and placed upon the waist of the Ampton bell , called forth a
magnificent resonance , which lasted for some time after removal and
damping of the fork . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.178

The sound is so utterly unlike that usually associated with bells that
an air of mystery envelops the phenomenon . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.179

The fork may be excited either by a preliminary blow upon a pad <paren>
in practice it was the bent knee of the observer <$$paren> , or by
bowing when in contact with the bell . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.180

In either case the adjustment of pitch should be very precise ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.181

and it is usually necessary to distinguish the two nearly coincident
tones of the bell . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.182

One of these is to be chosen STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.183

and the fork is to be held near a loop of the corresponding mode of
vibration . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.184

In practice the simplest way to effect the tuning is to watch the course
of things after the vibrating fork has been brought into contact with
the bell . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.185

When the tuning is good the sound swells continuously .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.186

Any beats that are heard must be gradually slowed down by adjustment of
wax , until they disappear . STRUTT-1890-1,3,325.187

<P_3,326>

{COM:table_omitted}

<P_3,327>

Observations upon the two bells in the laboratory having settled the
modes of vibration corresponding to the five gravest tones , other bells
of the church pattern can be sufficiently investigated by simple
determinations of pitch . STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.191

I give in tabular form results of this kind for a Belgian bell , kindly
placed at my disposal by Mr. Haweis , and for the five bells of the
Terling peal . STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.192

For completeness' sake the Table includes also the corresponding results
for the two bells already described . STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.193

It will be seen that in every case where the test can be applied it is
the fifth tone in order which agrees with the nominal pitch of the bell
. STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.194

The reader will not be more surprised at this conclusion than I was ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.195

but there seems to be no escape from it . STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.196

Even apart from estimates of pitch , an examination of the tones of the
bells of the Terling peal proves that it is only from the third and
fifth tones that a tolerable diatonic scale can be constructed .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.197

Observations in the neighbourhood of bells do not suggest any special
predominance of the fifth tone , STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.198

but the effect is a good deal modified by distance .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.199

It has been suggested , I think by Helmholtz , that the aim of the
original designers of bells may have been to bring into harmonic
relations tones which might otherwise cause a disagreeable effect .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.200

If this be so , the result can@ @not be considered very successful .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.201

A glance at the Table shows that in almost every case there occur
intervals which would usually be counted intolerable , such as the false
octave . STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.202

Terling <paren> 5 <$$paren> is the only bell which avoids this false
interval between the two first tones ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.203

but the improvement here shown in this respect still leaves much to be
desired , when we consider the relation of these two tones to the fifth
tone , and the nominal pitch of the bell . STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.204

Upon the assumption that the nominal pitch is governed by that of the
fifth tone , I have exhibited in the second part of the above Table the
relationship in each case of the various tones to this one .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.205

One of my objects in this investigation having been to find out , if
possible , wherein lay the difference between good and bad bells , I was
anxious to interpret in accordance with my results the observations of
Mr. Haweis , who has given so much attention to the subject .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.206

The comparison is , however , not free from difficulty .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.207

Mr. Haweis says : - " The true Belgian bell when struck a little above
the rim gives the dominant note of the bell ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.208

when struck two-thirds up it gives the third ; and near the top the
fifth ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.209

and the ' true ' bell is that in which the third and fifth <paren> to
leave out a multitude of other partials <$$paren> are heard in right
relative subordination to the dominant note . " STRUTT-1890-1,3,327.210

If I am right in respect of the dominant note , the <font> third
<$$font> spoken of by Mr. Haweis must be the minor third <paren> or
rather , major sixth <$$paren> presented by <P_3,328> the tone third in
order , which it so happens is nearly the same interval in all cases .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.211

The only <font> fifth <$$font> which occurs is that of the tone fourth
in order . STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.212

Thus , according to Mr. Haweis's views , the best bell in the series
would be Terling <paren> 1 <$$paren> , for which the minor chord of the
last three tones is nearly true . STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.213

It must be remarked , however , that the tone fourth in order is
scarcely heard in the normal use of the bell , so that its pitch can
hardly be of importance directly , although it may afford a useful
criterion of the character of the bell as a whole .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.214

It is evident that the first and second tones of Terling <paren> 1
<$$paren> are quite out of relation with the higher ones .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.215

If the first could be depressed a semitone and the second raised a whole
tone , harmonic relations would prevail throughout .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.216

Judging from the variety presented in the Table , it would seem not a
hopeless task so to construct a bell that all the important tones should
be brought into harmonic relation ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.217

but it would require so much tentative work that it could only be
undertaken advantageously by one in connexion with a foundry .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.218

As to what advantage would be gained in the event of success , I find it
difficult to form an opinion . STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.219

All I can say is that the dissonant effect of the inharmonious intervals
actually met with is less than one would have expected from a musical
point of view ; although the fact is to a great extent explained by
Helmholtz's theory of dissonance . STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.220

One other point I will touch upon , though with great diffidence .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.221

If there is anything well established in theoretical acoustics it is
that the frequencies of vibration of similar bodies formed of similar
material are inversely as the linear dimensions - a law which extends to
<font> all <$$font> the possible modes of vibration .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.222

Hence , if the dimensions are halved , all the tones should rise in
pitch by an exact octave . STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.223

I have been given to understand , however , that bells are not designed
upon this principle of similarity , and that the attempt to do so would
result in failure . STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.224

It is just possible that differences in cooling may influence the
hardness , and so interfere with the similarity of corresponding parts ,
in spite of uniformity in the chemical composition of the metal ;
STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.225

but this explanation does not appear adequate . STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.226

Can it be that when the scale of a bell is altered it is desirable at
the same time to modify the relative intensities , or even the relative
frequencies , of the various partials ? STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.227

Observations conducted about ten years ago upon the manner of bending of
bell-shaped bodies - waste-paper baskets and various structures of
flexible material - led me to think that these shapes were especially
stiff as regards the principal mode of bending <paren> with four nodal
meridians <$$paren> to forces applied normally and near the rim , and
that possibly one of the objects of the particular form adopted for
bells might be to diminish the preponderance of the gravest tone .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,328.228

To illustrate this I made calculations , according to the theory of the
paper already alluded to , of the deformation by pure bending of thin
shells in the form of hyperboloids of revolution , and in certain
<P_3,329> composite forms built up of cylinders and cones so as to
represent approximately the actual shape of bells .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,329.229

In the case of the hyperboloid of one sheet <paren> Fig. 2 <$$paren> ,
completed by a crown in the form of a circular disk through the centre ,
and extending across the aperture , it appeared that there was no nodal
circle for <font> n <$$font> = 2 . STRUTT-1890-1,3,329.230

The investigation is appended to this paper . STRUTT-1890-1,3,329.231

The composite forms , Figs. 4 and 5 , represent the actual bell <paren>
Fig. 3 <$$paren> as nearly as may be . STRUTT-1890-1,3,329.232

At the top is a circular disk , STRUTT-1890-1,3,329.233

and to this is attached {COM:figure_omitted} a cylindrical segment .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,329.234

The expanding part of the bell is represented by one <paren> Fig. 4
<$$paren> , or with better approximation by two <paren> Fig. 5
<$$paren> , segments of cones . STRUTT-1890-1,3,329.235

The calculations are too tedious to be reproduced here ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,329.236

but the results are shown upon the figures . STRUTT-1890-1,3,329.237

In both cases there is a circular node <font> N <$$font> for <font> n
<$$font> = 2 , not far removed from the rim , and in Fig. 5 very nearly
at the place which represents the sound-bow of an actual bell .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,329.238

In the latter case there is a node <font> N' <$$font> for <font> n
<$$font> = 3 near the middle of the intermediate conical segment .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,329.239

The nodal circle for <font> n <$$font> = 2 has been verified
experimentally upon a bell constructed of thin sheet zinc in the form of
Fig. 5 . STRUTT-1890-1,3,329.240

The gravest note , G {COM:sharp_symbol} , and the corresponding mode of
vibration , could be investigated exactly in the {COM:figure_omitted}
manner already described . STRUTT-1890-1,3,329.241

In each mode of this kind there were four nodal meridians , and a very
well defined nodal circle . STRUTT-1890-1,3,329.242

The situation of this circle was not quite so low as according to
calculation ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,329.243

it was almost exactly in the middle of the lower conical segment .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,329.244

By merely handling the model it was <P_3,330> easy to recognize that it
was stiff to forces applied at <font> N <$$font> , but flexible higher
up , in the neighbourhood of <font> N' <$$font> .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,330.245

It is clear that the actual behaviour of a church bell differs widely
from that of a bell infinitely thin ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,330.246

and that this should be the case need not surprise us when we consider
the actual ratio of the thickness at the sound-bow to the interval
between consecutive nodal meridians . STRUTT-1890-1,3,330.247

I think , however , that the form of the bell does really tend to render
the gravest tone less prominent . STRUTT-1890-1,3,330.248

{COM:appendix_omitted}

<P_3,351>

<heading>

Foam . STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.252

<$$heading>

When I was turning over in my mind the subject for this evening , it
occurred to me to take as the title of the lecture , " Froth . "
STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.254

But I was told that a much more poetical title would be " Foam , " as it
would so easily lend itself to appropriate quotations .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.255

I am afraid , however , that I shall not be able to keep up the poetical
aspect of the subject very long ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.256

for one of the things that I shall have most to insist upon is that
foaming liquids are essentially impure , contaminated - in fact , dirty
. STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.257

Pure liquids will not foam . STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.258

If I take a bottle of water and shake it up , I get no appreciable foam
. STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.259

If , again , I take pure alcohol , I get no foam .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.260

But if I take a mixture of water with 5 per_cent. of alcohol there is a
much greater tendency . STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.261

Some of the liquids we are most familiar with as foaming , such as beer
or ginger-beer , owe the conspicuousness of the property to the
development of gas in the interior , enabling the foaming property to
manifest itself ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.262

but of course the two things are quite distinct .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.263

Dr Gladstone proved this many years ago by showing that beer from which
all the carbonic acid had been extracted <font> in vacuo <$$font> still
foamed on shaking up . STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.264

I now take another not quite pure but strong liquid , acetic acid ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.265

and from it we shall get no more foam than we did from the alcohol or
the water . STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.266

The bubbles , as you see , break up instantaneously .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.267

But if I take a weaker acid , the ordinary acid of commerce , there is
more , though still not much , tendency to foam .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.268

But with a liquid which for many purposes may be said to contain
practically no acetic acid at all , seeing that it consists of water
with but one-thousandth part of acid , the tendency is far stronger ;
STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.269

and we get a very perceptible amount of foam . STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.270

These tests with the alcohol and acetic acid are sufficient to
illustrate the principle that the property of foaming depends on
contamination . STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.271

In pure ether we have a liquid from which the bubbles break even more
quickly than from alcohol or water . STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.272

They are gone in a moment . STRUTT-1890-1,3,351.273

In some experiments I made at home I found that water containing a small
proportion of ether <P_3,352> foamed freely ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.274

but on attempting two or three days ago to repeat the experiment , I was
surprised to find a result very different . STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.275

I have here some water containing a very small fraction of ether , about
1$$240th part . STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.276

If I shake it up , it scarcely foams at all ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.277

but another mixture made in the same proportion from another sample
shows more tendency to foam . STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.278

This is rather curious , because both ethers were supposed to be of the
same quality ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.279

but one had been in the laboratory longer than the other ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.280

and perhaps contained more greasy matter in solution .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.281

Another liquid which foams freely is water impregnated with camphor .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.282

Camphor dissolves sparingly ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.283

but a minute quantity of it quite alters the characteristics of water in
this respect . STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.284

Another substance , very minute quantities of which communicate the
foaming property to water , is glue or gelatine .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.285

This liquid contains only 3 parts in 100,000 of gelatine ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.286

but it gives a froth entirely different from that of pure water .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.287

Not only are there more bubbles , STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.288

but the duration of the larger bubbles is quite out of proportion .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.289

This sample contains 5 parts in 100,000 , nearly double as much ;
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.290

but even with but 1 part in 100,000 , the foaming property is so evident
as to suggest that it might in certain cases prove valuable for
indicating the presence of minute quantities of impurities .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.291

I have been speaking hitherto of those things which foam slightly .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.292

They are not to be compared with , say , a solution of soap in water ,
which , as is well known to everybody , froths very vigorously .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.293

Another thing comparable to soap , but not so well known , is saponine .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.294

It may be prepared from horse chestnuts by simply cutting them in small
slices and making an infusion with water . STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.295

A small quantity of this infusion added to water makes it foam strongly
. STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.296

The quantity required to do this is even less than in the case of soap ;
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.297

so the test is more delicate . STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.298

It is well known that rivers often foam freely .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.299

That is no doubt due to the effect of saponine or some analogous
substance . STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.300

Sea-water foams , but not , I believe , on account of the saline matter
it contains ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.301

for I have found that even a strong solution of pure salt does not foam
much . STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.302

I believe it has been shown that the foaming of sea-water , often so
conspicuous , is due to something extracted from seaweeds during the
concussion which takes place under the action of breakers .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.303

Now let us consider for a moment what is the meaning of foaming .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.304

A liquid foams when its films have a certain durability .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.305

Even in the case of pure water , alcohol , and ether , these films exist
. STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.306

If a bubble rises , it is covered for a moment by a thin film of the
liquid . STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.307

This leads us to consider the properties of liquid films in general .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.308

One of their most important and striking properties is their tendency to
contract . STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.309

Such surfaces may be regarded as being in the condition of a stretched
membrane , as of india-rubber , - only with this difference , that the
tendency to contract never ceases . STRUTT-1890-1,3,352.310

<P_3,353>

We may show that by blowing a small soap bubble , and then removing the
mouth . STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.312

The air is forced back again by the pressure exerted on the bubble by
the tension of the liquid . STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.313

This ancient experiment suffices to prove conclusively that liquid films
exercise tension . STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.314

A prettier form of the same experiment is due to Van der Mensbrugghe ,
who illustrated liquid tension by means of a film in which he allowed to
float a loop of fine silk , tied in a knot . STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.315

As long as the interior of the loop , as well as the exterior , is
occupied by the liquid film , it shows no tendency to take any
particular shape : STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.316

but if , by insertion of , say , a bit of blotting paper , the film
within the loop be ruptured , then the tension of the exterior film is
free to act , STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.317

and the thread flies instantaneously into the form of a circle , in
consequence of the tendency of the exterior surface to become as small
as possible . STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.318

The exterior part is now occupied by the soap film ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.319

and the interior is empty <bracket> shown <$$bracket> .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.320

Many other illustrations of this property of liquids might be given ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.321

but time does not permit . STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.322

In the soap film , as in the films which constitute ordinary foam , each
thin layer of liquid has two surfaces ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.323

each tends to contract ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.324

but in many cases we have only one such surface to consider , as when a
drop of rain falls through the air . STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.325

Again , suppose that we have three materials in contact with one another
, - water , oil , and air . STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.326

There are three kinds of surfaces separating the three materials , one
separating water and oil , another oil and air , and a third surface
separating the water from the air . STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.327

These three surfaces all exert a tension , STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.328

and the shape of the mass of oil depends upon the relative magnitudes of
the tensions . STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.329

As I have drawn it here <paren> Fig. 1 <$$paren> , it is implied that
the tension of the water-air surface is less than the sum of the other
two tensions - those of the water-oil surface and the air-oil surface ;
because the two latter acting obliquely balance the former .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.330

It is only under such conditions that the equilibrium of the three
materials as there drawn in contact with one another is possible .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.331

If the tension of the surface separating water and air exceeded the sum
of the other two , then the equilibrium as depicted would be impossible
. STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.332

The water-air tension , being greater , would assert its superiority by
drawing out the edge of the lens , STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.333

and the oil would tend to spread itself more and more over the surface .
{COM:figure_omitted} STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.334

And that is what really happens . STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.335

Accurate measurements , made by Quincke and others , show that the
surface tension separating water and air is really greater than the sum
of the two others . STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.336

So oil does tend to spread upon a surface of water and air .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,353.337

That this is the fact , we can prove by <P_3,354> a simple experiment .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.338

At the feet of our chairman is a large dish , containing water which at
present is tolerably clean . STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.339

In order to see what may happen to the surface of the water , it is
dusted over with fine sulphur powder , and illuminated with the electric
light . STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.340

If I place on the surface a drop of water , no effect ensues ;
STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.341

but if I take a little oil , or better still a drop of saponine , or of
soap-water , and allow that to be deposited upon the middle of the
surface , we shall see a great difference . STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.342

The surface suddenly becomes dark , the whole of the dust being swept
away to the boundary . STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.343

That is the result of the spread of the film , due to the presence of
the oil . STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.344

How then is it possible that we should get a lens-shaped mass of oil ,
as we often do , floating upon the surface of water ?
STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.345

Seeing that the general tendency of oil is to spread over the surface of
water , why does it not do so in this case ? STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.346

The answer is that it has already spread , and that this surface is not
really a pure water surface at all , but one contaminated with oil .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.347

It is in fact only after such contamination that an equilibrium of this
kind is possible . STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.348

The volume of oil necessary to contaminate the surface of the water is
very small , as we shall see presently ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.349

but I want to emphasise the point that , so far as we know , the
equilibrium of the three surfaces in contact with one another is not
possible under any other conditions . STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.350

That is a fact not generally recognised . STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.351

In many books you will find descriptions of three bodies in contact ,
and a statement of the law of the angles at which they meet ; that the
sides of a triangle , drawn parallel to the three intersecting surfaces
, must be in proportion to the three tensions . STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.352

No such equilibrium , and no such triangle , is possible if the
materials are pure ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.353

when it occurs , it can only be due to the contamination of one of the
surfaces . STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.354

These very thin films , which spread on water , and , with less freedom
, on solids also , are of extreme tenuity ; STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.355

and their existence , alongside of the lens , proves that the water
prefers the thin film of oil to one of greater thickness .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.356

If the oil were spread out thickly , it would tend to gather itself back
into drops , leaving over the surface of the water a film of less
thickness than the molecular range . STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.357

One experiment by which we may illustrate some of these effects I owe to
my colleague , Professor Dewar . STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.358

It shows the variation in the surface tension of water , due to the
presence on it of small quantities of ether . STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.359

I hold in my hand masses of charcoal , which can be impregnated with
ether . STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.360

The greater part of the surface of the charcoal is covered with paraffin
wax , STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.361

and , in consequence , the ether which has already penetrated the
charcoal can only escape from it again on one side .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.362

The result is that the water in the rear of this boat of charcoal will
be more impregnated with ether than the part in front ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.363

so the mass of charcoal will enter into motion , STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.364

and the motion will extend over a considerable interval of time .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.365

As long as the ether remains in sufficient quantity to contaminate the
water in the rear , so long is there a tendency to movement of the mass
. STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.366

The water covered with the film of ether has less tension than the pure
water in front , STRUTT-1890-1,3,354.367

and the balance of tensions <P_3,355> being upset , the mass is put in
motion . STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.368

If the nature of the case is such that the whole surface surrounding the
solid body is contaminated , then there is no tendency to movement , the
same balance in fact obtaining as if the water were pure .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.369

Another body which we may use for this purpose is camphor .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.370

If we spread some camphor scrapings on a surface of pure water , they
will , if the surface is quite clean , enter into vigorous movement , as
you now see . STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.371

This is because the dissolved camphor diminishes the surface tension of
the water . STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.372

But if I now contaminate the water with the least possible quantity of
grease , the movements of the camphor will be stopped .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.373

I merely put my finger in , STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.374

and you observe the effect . STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.375

There is not much poetry about that ! STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.376

A very slight film , perfectly invisible by ordinary means , is
sufficient so to contaminate the water that the effect of the dissolved
camphor is no longer visible . STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.377

I was very desirous to ascertain , if possible , the actual thickness of
oil necessary to produce this effect , because all data relating to
molecules are , in the present state of science , of great interest .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.378

From what I have already said , you may imagine that the quantity of oil
required is very small , and that its determination may be difficult .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.379

In my experiments , I used the surface of water contained in a large
sponge bath three feet in diameter . STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.380

By this extension of the surface , I was able to bring the quantity of
oil required within the range of a sensitive balance .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.381

In Diagram 2 <bracket> see Vol. III. p. 349 <$$bracket> , I have
given a number of results obtained at various dates , showing the
quantity of oil required to produce the effects recorded in the fourth
column . STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.382

Knowing the weight of the oil deposit , and the area of the water
surface upon which it was uniformly spread , it was easy to calculate
the thickness of the film . STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.383

It is seen that a film of oil about 1_1$$2_millionth of a millimetre
thick is able to produce this change . STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.384

I know that large numbers are not readily appreciated ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.385

and I will therefore put the matter differently .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.386

The thickness of the oil film thus determined as sufficient to stop the
motions of the camphor is 1$$400 of the wave-length of yellow light .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.387

Another way of saying the same thing is that this thickness of oil bears
to one inch the same ratio that one second of time bears to half a year
. STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.388

When the movement of the camphor has been stopped by the addition of a
minute quantity of oil , it is possible , by extending the water surface
enclosed within the boundary , without increasing the quantity of oil ,
to revive the movements of the camphor ; or , again , by contraction ,
to stop them . STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.389

I can do this with the aid of a flexible boundary of thin sheet brass ;
STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.390

and you see that the camphor recovers its activity , though a moment ago
it was quite dead . STRUTT-1890-1,3,355.391

It would be an interesting subject for investigation to determine what
is the actual tension of an oily surface contaminated to an <P_3,356>
extent just sufficient to stop the camphor movements ;
STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.392

but it is not an easy problem . STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.393

Usually we determine surface tensions by the height to which the liquids
will rise in very fine tubes . STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.394

Here , however , that method is not available , because if we introduce
a tube into such a surface , there is no proof that the contamination of
the inner surface in the tube is the same as that prevailing outside .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.395

Another method , however , may be employed which is less open to the
above objection , STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.396

and that is to substitute for the very fine or capillary tube , a
combination of two parallel plates open at their edges .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.397

We have here two such plates of glass , kept from absolutely closing by
four pieces of thin metal inserted at the corners , the plates being
held close against these distance-pieces by suitable clamps .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.398

If such a combination be inserted in water , the liquid will rise above
the external level , STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.399

and the amount of the rise is a measure of the surface tension of the
water . STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.400

You see now the image on the screen . STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.401

<font> A <$$font> is the external water surface ;
STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.402

<font> B <$$font> is the height of the liquid contained between the
glass plates , so that the tension may be said to be measured by the
distance <font> AB . <$$font> STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.403

If a little oil be now deposited upon the surface , it will find its way
between the plates . STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.404

The fall which you now see shows that the surface tension has been
diminished by the oil which has found its way in .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.405

A very minute quantity will give a great effect .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.406

When the height of the pure water was measured by 62 , a small quantity
of oil changed the 62 into 48 , STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.407

and subsequent large additions of oil could only lower it to 38 .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.408

But after oil has done its worst , a further effect may be produced by
the addition of soap . STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.409

If Mr Gordon now adds some soap , we shall find that there is a still
further fall in the level , showing that the whole tension now in
operation is not much more than one-third of what it was at first .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.410

This is an important point , because it is sometimes supposed that the
effect of soap in diminishing the tension of water is due merely to the
formation upon the surface of a layer of oil by decomposition of the
soap . STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.411

This experiment proves the contrary , because we find that soap can do
so much more than oil . STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.412

There is , indeed , something more or less corresponding to the
decomposition of the soap and the formation of a superficial layer of
oil . STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.413

But the decomposition takes place in a very peculiar manner , and under
such conditions that there is a gradual transition from the soapy liquid
in the interior to the oily layer at the top , and not , as when we
float a layer of oil on water , two sudden transitions , first from
water to oil , and secondly from oil to air . STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.414

The difference is important , because , as I showed some years ago
<bracket> Vol. I. p. 234 <$$bracket> , capillary tension depends on
the suddenness of change . STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.415

If we suppose that the change from one liquid to another takes place by
slow stages , though the final change may be as before , the capillary
tension would absolutely disappear . STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.416

There is another very interesting class of phenomena due to oil films ,
which I hope to illustrate , though I am conscious of the difficulty of
the task , - namely , the action of oil in preventing the formation of
waves . STRUTT-1890-1,3,356.417

From <P_3,357> the earliest times we have records of the effect of oil
in stilling waves , STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.418

and all through the Middle Ages the effect was recognised , though
connected with magic and fanciful explanations .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.419

Franklin , than whom , I suppose , no soberer inquirer ever existed ,
made the thing almost a hobby . STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.420

His attention was called to it accidentally on board ship from noticing
the effect on the waves caused by the greasy debris of a dinner .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.421

The captain assured him that it was due to the oil spread on the water ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.422

and for some time afterwards Franklin used to carry oil about with him ,
so as never to miss a chance of trying an experiment .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.423

A pond is necessary to illustrate the phenomena properly ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.424

but we shall get an idea of it by means of this trough six feet long ,
containing water . STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.425

Along the surface of the water we shall make an artificial wind by means
of a fan , driven by an electro-motor . STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.426

In my first experiments I used wind from an organ bellows , which is not
here available . STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.427

Presently we shall get up a ripple , STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.428

and then we will try the effect of a drop of oil put on to windward .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.429

I have now put on the drop , STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.430

and you see a smooth place advancing along . STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.431

As soon as the waves come up again , I will repeat the experiment .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.432

While the wind is driving the oil away , I may mention that this matter
has been tested at Peterhead . STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.433

Experiments were there made on a large scale to demonstrate the effect
of oil in facilitating the entrance of ships into harbour in rough
weather . STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.434

Much advantage was gained . STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.435

But here a distinction must be observed . STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.436

It is not that the large swell of the ocean is damped down .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.437

That would be impossible . STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.438

The action in the first instance is upon the comparatively small ripples
. STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.439

The large waves are not directly affected by the oil ;
STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.440

but it seems as if the power of the wind to excite and maintain them is
due to the small ripples which form on their backs , and give the wind ,
as it were , a better hold of them . STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.441

It is only in that way that large waves can be affected .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.442

The immediate effect is on the small waves which conduce to that
breaking of the large waves which from the sailor's point of view is the
worst danger . STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.443

It is the breaking waters which do the mischief ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.444

and these are quieted by the action of the oil .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.445

I want to show also , though it can only be seen by those near , the
return of the oil when the wind is stopped . STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.446

The oil is at present driven to one end of the trough ;
STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.447

when the wind stops , it will come back , because the oil film tends to
spread itself uniformly over the surface . STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.448

As it comes back , there will be an advancing wave of oil ;
STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.449

and as we light the surface very obliquely by the electric lamp , there
is visible on the bottom of the trough a white line , showing its
progress . STRUTT-1890-1,3,357.450

<P_3,358>

Now , as to the explanation . STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.452

The first attempt on the right lines was made by the Italian physicist ,
Marangoni . STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.453

He drew attention to the importance of contamination upon the surface of
the water , and to its tendency to spread itself uniformly ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.454

but for some reason which I can@ @not understand , he applied the
explanation wrongly . STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.455

More recently Reynolds and Aitken have applied the same considerations
with better success . STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.456

The state of the case seems to be this : - STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.457

Let us consider small waves as propagated over the surface of clean
water . STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.458

As the waves advance , the surface of the water has to submit to
periodic extensions and contractions . STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.459

At the crest of a wave the surface is compressed , while at the trough
it is extended . STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.460

As long as the water is pure there is no force to oppose that ,
STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.461

and the wave can be propagated without difficulty ;
STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.462

but if the surface be contaminated , the contimination strongly resists
the alternate stretching and contraction . STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.463

It tends always , on the contrary , to spread itself uniformly ;
STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.464

and the result is that the water refuses to lend itself to the motion
which is required of it . STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.465

The film of oil may be compared to an inextensible membrane floating on
the surface of the water , and hampering its motion ;
STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.466

and under these conditions it is not possible for the waves to be
generated , unless the forces are very much greater than usual .
STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.467

That is the explanation of the effect of oil in preventing the formation
of waves . STRUTT-1890-1,3,358.468

