<BEGIN_sturt-1914-2>

<P_2,690>

{ED:1914}

<font> 1 January . <$$font> STURT-1914-2,2,690.4

An interesting letter reached me today from Mrs. Forrester , with notes
about Arnold Bennett's novels which I think worth copying .
STURT-1914-2,2,690.5

She writes : - ' No wonder people read Bennett so greedily -
STURT-1914-2,2,690.6

but I wish Dickens would come alive again ; STURT-1914-2,2,690.7

for when I begin one of Bennett's books I feel intensely how good and
clever they are , STURT-1914-2,2,690.8

but they distinctly depress me , STURT-1914-2,2,690.9

so I do@ @n't finish them . STURT-1914-2,2,690.10

I see their truth to the life of the class he depicts ;
STURT-1914-2,2,690.11

but they seem to me the very - what shall I say ? Well , the very least
worth it - all their good solid qualities so tinged , even saturated ,
with not only stupid conceit , but a sort of meanness which I ca@ @n't
think really typical of the Midlands . ' STURT-1914-2,2,690.12

The letter then goes on to eulogise the Midland people Mrs. F. herself
belonged to - a less money-making and successful folk than Bennett's own
set . STURT-1914-2,2,690.13

But even without this , I think the criticism a singularly just and
penetrating one ; STURT-1914-2,2,690.14

and it applies , perhaps , to modern fiction of the best sort , all
round . STURT-1914-2,2,690.15

It is , largely , my own experience with Bennett's novels .
STURT-1914-2,2,690.16

Not long ago I tried to read ' Clayhanger ' a second time ,
STURT-1914-2,2,690.17

and could@ @n't stand it ... STURT-1914-2,2,690.18

At the present , Wells's ' Marriage ' is , even at first reading ,
proving so tedious to me , STURT-1914-2,2,690.19

it bores me so , that , though half way through with it , I do@ @n't
know how to go on reading it . STURT-1914-2,2,690.20

The people bore me : STURT-1914-2,2,690.21

I have@ @n't , so far , derived from the book one single impression to
repay me for the several hours I have spent in reading it ;
STURT-1914-2,2,690.22

and what the artist thinks he is doing is more than I can conceive .
STURT-1914-2,2,690.23

'T@ @is <font> 536 <$$font> pages of rather witty chatter , about
subjects that really are not worth as many lines .
STURT-1914-2,2,690.24

How account for this waste , as it seems to me , of art ?
STURT-1914-2,2,690.25

For one thing , I think it@ @'s <font> easier <$$font> for the artist to
show up people's foibles , and to write ironically , than to exhibit
their deeper human nature . STURT-1914-2,2,690.26

Easier to do in itself : STURT-1914-2,2,690.27

and also it ministers more readily to the writer's and to his public's
feeling of being superior . STURT-1914-2,2,690.28

These writers will unbend from their god-like indifference <P_2,691> so
far as to sneer at human weaknesses ; STURT-1914-2,2,691.29

but they are exceeding shy of seeming to admire human goodnesses .
STURT-1914-2,2,691.30

For , to do this , is it not to be guilty of ' sentiment ' - to fall
into the errors of Dickens ? STURT-1914-2,2,691.31

So I begin to see the objection to sentiment . STURT-1914-2,2,691.32

Indulging it , you become one of the crowd ; STURT-1914-2,2,691.33

you lose your superiority - so dear to the readers and to the writers of
modern fiction . STURT-1914-2,2,691.34

For , in fact , your sentiments are no higher than other people's , and
no more penetrating . STURT-1914-2,2,691.35

You ' know what you like ' , STURT-1914-2,2,691.36

but you know it instinctively , without any artistic choiceness of
liking . STURT-1914-2,2,691.37

If you@ @'re a fiction artist , therefore , you eschew writing about
what you <font> like <$$font> , STURT-1914-2,2,691.38

and devolve upon what you <font> think <$$font> . STURT-1914-2,2,691.39

Wells's brilliancy is all a brilliancy of indicating shades of <font>
opinion : <$$font> STURT-1914-2,2,691.40

and if you try to see the likeable human nature at back of his '
characters ' , you find it a very conventional type - the brainy
clean-run man , the pretty Oxford-trained girl . STURT-1914-2,2,691.41

Bennett does , I think , cut a good bit deeper than that , with his
pictures of midland misers and business-headed women , whom you like
mildly . STURT-1914-2,2,691.42

I incline more and more to think that Fiction as an art , as practised
by Bennett and Wells , is a failure ; and for the reasons indicated
overleaf . STURT-1914-2,2,691.43

The writers do not bring to their art any profound understanding of
human nature . STURT-1914-2,2,691.44

They criticise it from ' advanced ' stand-points , thinking the thoughts
suggested by socialism , woman's suffrage , and so on ;
STURT-1914-2,2,691.45

and this gives to their work a superficial character of up-to-date
cleverness : STURT-1914-2,2,691.46

but in their <font> taste <$$font> for human nature - their appreciation
of its beauty and wonder , - they have nothing to offer us , save the
taste developed by successful commercialism . STURT-1914-2,2,691.47

There has been a change of opinion in their minds ,
STURT-1914-2,2,691.48

but there has been no change of heart . STURT-1914-2,2,691.49

In the current number of the ' Nation ' is a study by Galsworthy ,
called ' Butter-cup night ' , which looks very much as if he , for one ,
has experienced a change of heart . STURT-1914-2,2,691.50

He is approaching his world , his ' subjects ' , with a new light ,
instead of the old <P_2,692> materialist light which Bennett and Wells
have not changed , though their incisive intellect makes it more
dazzling . STURT-1914-2,2,692.51

Galsworthy's study , however , has@ @n't much to do with ' human nature
' , perhaps . STURT-1914-2,2,692.52

<font> 8 January . <$$font> STURT-1914-2,2,692.53

The notes on H. G. Wells's fiction a few pages back are not at all
fair . STURT-1914-2,2,692.54

The latter half of his ' Marriage ' turns romantic and true ,
STURT-1914-2,2,692.55

and perhaps is the better for being set against the tedious chatter of
the first half . STURT-1914-2,2,692.56

At the same time , though 't@ @is a really fine bit of ' human nature '
he shows to the reader , I do@ @n't know that it is in any sense a
deeper vision than plenty of less brilliant writers have found .
STURT-1914-2,2,692.57

The interest of it depends largely on the freshness of opinions aired in
the chapters ; STURT-1914-2,2,692.58

't@ @is too much a work of Thought , too little a work of Art .
STURT-1914-2,2,692.59

<font> 11 February . <$$font> STURT-1914-2,2,692.60

... The old notion of industry before child is less general than it
used to be , even amongst the hard-worked peasants , so badly in want of
the small earnings of their children . STURT-1914-2,2,692.61

And the children and youths of the village are not now , I think ,
affected by the old traditions of industry being the sole end and aim of
man . STURT-1914-2,2,692.62

Every now and then I hear of boys leaving school at 14 and - not so much
refusing , as omitting to get employment . STURT-1914-2,2,692.63

And there is no lack of employment in the neighbourhood , for boys and
girls . STURT-1914-2,2,692.64

{COM:editorial_material_omitted} <font> 13 and 14 February . <$$font>
{COM:editorial_material_omitted} STURT-1914-2,2,692.65

The bronchial catarrh that has spoilt my winter <paren> since Dec. 21
<$$paren> is all but gone : STURT-1914-2,2,692.66

and on these two mornings I have found ideas a bubble in my head again .
STURT-1914-2,2,692.67

On each of these days , however , I have come round to evening , and
fatigue , and dulness , before there was any leisure for writing ...
STURT-1914-2,2,692.68

<font> 15 February <$$font> <paren> Sunday <$$paren> .
STURT-1914-2,2,692.69

There came into my head yesterday morning - when there was no time to do
anything in the matter - a number of ideas for a new book , to follow
the book <paren> ' Democratic <P_2,693> Faith ' <$$paren> I have been
trying to shape out during the last thirty months .
STURT-1914-2,2,693.70

This new book , which might be called ' The Sweetness of Life ' , would
discuss the sources of Well-being , and show how we shoot past them in
our eagerness for Wealth . STURT-1914-2,2,693.71

Civilisation <paren> I should argue <$$paren> , has gone astray :
STURT-1914-2,2,693.72

instead of finding out How to Live , we have gone on pillaging -
pillaging the earth's stores with violence , when we should be getting
into close personal intimacy of friendship with her ways .
STURT-1914-2,2,693.73

Already in this Journal , a number of notes show the direction of the
argument ... STURT-1914-2,2,693.74

That note of the rural labours that still went on , during the great
Coal-strike two years ago , opens up another aspect of the same idea .
STURT-1914-2,2,693.75

Pillaging the stores of coal , England gets wealth and luxuries , but no
happiness . STURT-1914-2,2,693.76

We are too greedy , to live well . STURT-1914-2,2,693.77

These spoliations bring us no intimacies with the Earth :
STURT-1914-2,2,693.78

they make us violators of her sweetness . STURT-1914-2,2,693.79

Other examples of pillage would be found from the discovery and
ransacking of America - the destruction of the Buffalo , of the Redwood
Forests , the Indian tribes ... STURT-1914-2,2,693.80

... this would lead up to a criticism of those conveniences , those
labour-saving appliances , that we applaud so ... STURT-1914-2,2,693.81

How if , instead of making a trouble of getting our necessary things ,
we made a delight of it ? STURT-1914-2,2,693.82

... Do we know how lovely a thing water is , unless we get it from the
living stream , or draw it - a limpid crystalline mineral - from a well
? STURT-1914-2,2,693.83

... The pillage of England's Coal-fields has made all our life a '
Black Country ' , I should say in my book , STURT-1914-2,2,693.84

and then I should want to talk of those who have known better how to
live - who have not been pillagers greedy for wealth , but sane men -
Thoreau , for instance . STURT-1914-2,2,693.85

Above all , there would have to be suggested a new reading of Christ .
STURT-1914-2,2,693.86

... I would look at him <paren> if only for a change <$$paren> as a
keen eager-eyed ' wild ' man - lover of country , of craftsmanship , of
animals and flowers and children - a man tinglingly alive ; not half so
much a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief as a man of intense
enjoyments and acquainted with delight ; scornful of the dead-and-alive
pleasures of luxury . STURT-1914-2,2,693.87

<P_2,694>

And out of all this would come <paren> it came to me yesterday morning
<$$paren> a suggestion that the Object of Religion <paren> as of Poetry
<$$paren> is to keep us in mind of , and bring us back to , our
wonderful and lovely <font> Animal <$$font> nature : to persuade us to
be , as Christ said , like little children : to remind us that the Life
<paren> ' animal ' , mysterious , ' spiritual ' as well as bodily '
<$$paren> is more than meat : to draw us away from our crazy pillagings
that bring no happiness , and from the folly of pulling down our barns
to build greater , as the ' Rich Fool ' did . STURT-1914-2,2,694.89

<font> 11 March . <$$font> STURT-1914-2,2,694.90

<paren> I am busy with the ' Principle of Contacts ' just now , in my
book ' The Democratic Faith ' <$$paren> ... STURT-1914-2,2,694.91

A suffragist yesterday slashed the ' Rokeby Venus ' in the National
Gallery . STURT-1914-2,2,694.92

All the Papers <paren> Labour papers included <$$paren> this morning are
aflame with indignation at the outrage . STURT-1914-2,2,694.93

In the Police-court , the woman stated that she had tried to spoil the
beautiful picture of a woman , in protest against the injury to
beautiful women <paren> meaning chiefly Mrs. Pankhurst <$$paren> by the
Government under the ' Cat and Mouse ' Act . STURT-1914-2,2,694.94

This explanation is stigmatised as crazy , by the righteous papers .
STURT-1914-2,2,694.95

To my mind it is a fine expression of a most vital truth .
STURT-1914-2,2,694.96

Nowhere , for a long time , have I seen anything printed , so true as
this , that a living woman <paren> the ' beautiful ' is unnecessary
<$$paren> is of more importance than any picture .
STURT-1914-2,2,694.97

The reverence for the ' beauty ' <paren> sacredness , I would rather say
<$$paren> of live flesh and blood - oh , this is the beginning of all
that matters - the very soul of the democratic idea ...
{COM:editorial_material_omitted} STURT-1914-2,2,694.98

<P_2,695>

<font> 29 March <$$font> <paren> Sunday <$$paren> .
STURT-1914-2,2,695.100

{COM:editorial_material_omitted} <font> 10 April <$$font> <paren> Good
Friday <$$paren> . STURT-1914-2,2,695.101

{COM:editorial_material_omitted} <font> 21 April <$$font> <paren>
Saturday <$$paren> . STURT-1914-2,2,695.102

<bracket> <font> Memorandum <$$font> . STURT-1914-2,2,695.103

This morning I suggested to Mr. Arnold , that for the Stock in Trade
and Goodwill of my business , the Purchase price would be in the
neighbourhood of 2,000 +L {TEXT:+L2,000} . STURT-1914-2,2,695.104

I stated that the price would be partly determined by the Value of
Book-debts at time of Purchase , since I desired to realise in all about
2,900 +L {TEXT:+L2,900} to 3,000 +L {TEXT:+L3,000} .
STURT-1914-2,2,695.105

I do@ @n't think anything was said about ' Unfinished Work ' .
STURT-1914-2,2,695.106

The suggested time of purchase was either next 30th June or 30th
September - when the books could be made up . <$$bracket>
STURT-1914-2,2,695.107

Several days ago , speaking of ' Premises ' , I told Mr. A. that the
Rent would be , 110 +L {TEXT:+L110} ; and also that I should not be in a
position to carry out any alterations . STURT-1914-2,2,695.108

<font> 20 May . <$$font> ... STURT-1914-2,2,695.109

<font> {COM:editorial_material_omitted} The foregoing has some bearing
on recent cogitations , in which I have been dreaming of a little book
to be called ' Resident Trippers ' ... STURT-1914-2,2,695.110

They were stimulated - these cogitations - by an invitation that came
some days ago from Maude Egerton King , to contribute to the monthly
magazine she edits - ' The Vineyard ' . STURT-1914-2,2,695.111

To a letter so agreeably turned , and to aims so well-meaning , I have
<P_2,696> wanted to reply cordially . STURT-1914-2,2,696.112

Yet there has grown up in me a suspicion of the ' Country Life ' , so
admired , so worshipped even , by kindly cultured folk .
STURT-1914-2,2,696.113

I do@ @n't think it possible to get to anything really vital , by this
appreciation from outside . STURT-1914-2,2,696.114

It@ @'s my own way - STURT-1914-2,2,696.115

see my own ' country ' books ; STURT-1914-2,2,696.116

it@ @'s the only way perhaps that is open to outsiders .
STURT-1914-2,2,696.117

But I do@ @n't think we can get at the meaning of ' The Country ' by any
sort of aesthetic appreciation . STURT-1914-2,2,696.118

Your true countryman becomes a part of his country :
STURT-1914-2,2,696.119

his clothes turn to the colour of the earth he works in :
STURT-1914-2,2,696.120

his mind turns perhaps a little stupefied ; STURT-1914-2,2,696.121

he does@ @n't stop to think if things are ' nice ' ;
STURT-1914-2,2,696.122

but they are his home - dear to him as his fire-side .
STURT-1914-2,2,696.123

To leave his own valley and go elsewhere is , to him , as painful as to
a wild animal to be caged in a travelling menagerie ; and for this
reason : that his personal unfolding has become adapted to just that one
spot , and all his ' acquired characteristics ' belong to it and make
him fit into it . STURT-1914-2,2,696.124

The people who admire the country from the outside <paren> like myself
<$$paren> are intruders . STURT-1914-2,2,696.125

And many of them are impertinent intruders , who bring with them the
attitude of the Tripper , and keep up that attitude even when they
become ' Residents ' . STURT-1914-2,2,696.126

They do not wed themselves to the countryside : STURT-1914-2,2,696.127

but they take their pleasure with it - STURT-1914-2,2,696.128

make of it a prostitute , a harlot : STURT-1914-2,2,696.129

trick it out in finery , of gardens and costly houses ,
STURT-1914-2,2,696.130

and then , wearying of it , are ready to sell it and be off ...
STURT-1914-2,2,696.131

The Radical Press is very cock-a-whoop now-a-days , in the expectation
that Feudalism will soon receive its quietus . STURT-1914-2,2,696.132

But I think on the whole it is no change for the better , to have
replaced the old-fashioned Lord of the Manor by the Resident Tripper .
STURT-1914-2,2,696.133

The former did at least know and value the country-side , as a
countryman : STURT-1914-2,2,696.134

the latter is making of it his pleasure-place , so that , here near
London at any rate , country life is dying out fast , in proportion as
its feudal characteristics disappear . STURT-1914-2,2,696.135

And I do@ @n't believe that well-meaning reformers , like the Vineyard
People , the ' Peasants Arts ' people , and so on , are ever likely to
benefit the Country to any appreciable extent . STURT-1914-2,2,696.136

It is@ @n't much good to look on - to be an enraptured appreciator , or
a ' George Bourne ' . STURT-1914-2,2,696.137

The real thing is more solid , more hard ; STURT-1914-2,2,696.138

has <P_2,697> its disagreeables , its dirtinesses :
STURT-1914-2,2,697.139

is not cultured , or ' refined ' ; STURT-1914-2,2,697.140

but its clothes , and hands , and speech , and personality , become part
of the ' countryside ' , very often rank and sweaty and coarse , even as
the cattle-keepers and ploughmen have to be . STURT-1914-2,2,697.141

Where there is true country life , there is no room for the ' resident '
; none for his residence , his villa . STURT-1914-2,2,697.142

The house of the countryman - the real old-fashioned farmhouse - was as
native to its fields as the lark's nest , STURT-1914-2,2,697.143

and looked as well there . STURT-1914-2,2,697.144

How different are these well-kept villas , with their trim lawns , and
hedges and pergolas ! STURT-1914-2,2,697.145

... Where the Tripper goes , he spoils everything for the native
dweller , whether he goes for a day , or for years .
STURT-1914-2,2,697.146

He is loud <paren> listen to the motor hootings <$$paren> , discordant ,
STURT-1914-2,2,697.147

does@ @n't understand : STURT-1914-2,2,697.148

has his silly romping jokes STURT-1914-2,2,697.149

<paren> listen again to the frivolity of the cultured , as you pass
their gardens <$$paren> STURT-1914-2,2,697.150

rides roughshod over native people , STURT-1914-2,2,697.151

yet has@ @n't the sense to know that they find him distasteful .
STURT-1914-2,2,697.152

<paren> Look at all the retired Colonels , Parsons etc. etc. who
infest this valley now . <$$paren> STURT-1914-2,2,697.153

<font> 22 - 26 May . <$$font> {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,697.154

<font> 7 June . <$$font> {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,697.155

<font> 10 June . <$$font> {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,697.156

... it occurred to me last night that he is almost the only man I know
who has made a successful art of living . STURT-1914-2,2,697.157

He has done it , not consciously , but by keeping up the old
country-side traditional good behaviour - brave , patient , contented
with little , keeping close in touch with natural things .
STURT-1914-2,2,697.158

He is no ' peasant ' : STURT-1914-2,2,697.159

but would have been a yeoman a century ago . STURT-1914-2,2,697.160

The country - its materials , its products , soil , animals , and people
- with all these he worked , part of them all : not as a connoisseur ,
but as an expert amongst them . STURT-1914-2,2,697.161

<P_2,698>

{COM:editorial_material_omitted} And further they brought ' ballads ' .
STURT-1914-2,2,698.163

<paren> This word was pronounced so that at first I thought it ' pallats
' , STURT-1914-2,2,698.164

and asked what they were . STURT-1914-2,2,698.165

Throughout the final ' t ' sounded . <$$paren> STURT-1914-2,2,698.166

These were of ' thin tissue paper ' , on which were printed two songs :
STURT-1914-2,2,698.167

and I think that in my uncle's mind the whole thing - 2 songs , paper
and all - made a ' ballad ' . STURT-1914-2,2,698.168

' Grown_up chaps ' and others valued them - STURT-1914-2,2,698.169

would fold them up very carefully to carry away in their pockets ,
STURT-1914-2,2,698.170

and would very soon learn to sing the songs - adapting any tune , it
seems . STURT-1914-2,2,698.171

<paren> Probably the appropriate tune was suggested , at the top of the
verses <$$paren> . STURT-1914-2,2,698.172

I asked where the two sailors got them : STURT-1914-2,2,698.173

but could@ @n't trace any further <paren> any nearer to their origin
<$$paren> than Bagshot . STURT-1914-2,2,698.174

{COM:editorial_material_omitted} <font> 14 June . <$$font>
{COM:editorial_material_omitted} STURT-1914-2,2,698.175

<font> 2 August . <$$font> {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,698.176

<font> 14 August . <$$font> STURT-1914-2,2,698.177

... My eczema became so bad that I could scarce move about :
STURT-1914-2,2,698.178

and on the 3rd <paren> Bank Holiday <$$paren> came the news of <P_2,699>
the outbreak of war ... STURT-1914-2,2,699.179

This news altered all the sentiment of the sea . STURT-1914-2,2,699.180

The horizon no longer meant romance , adventure ; STURT-1914-2,2,699.181

it meant national catastrophe . STURT-1914-2,2,699.182

The little red light on the Cobb in the early dawn - all the friendly
peacefulness , which it had spelt for generations - was lost .
STURT-1914-2,2,699.183

Without definite thought , one brooded all day over this calamity .
STURT-1914-2,2,699.184

It seemed wrong , to be at Lyme trying to enjoy ourselves at such a time
. STURT-1914-2,2,699.185

And we came home , before we had meant to return , on Monday the 10th to
this house at the Bourne , where the Topps <paren> with Nellie Franklin
<$$paren> are also staying , while their new cottage is in the builder's
hands . STURT-1914-2,2,699.186

<font> 12 August <$$font> <paren> 8.0 a._m. <$$paren>
STURT-1914-2,2,699.187

... Three quarters of an hour ago , they called me out of sleep :
STURT-1914-2,2,699.188

Harry Goatcher was at the door wishing to see me ...
STURT-1914-2,2,699.189

He came up to me in bed , to tell me he had taken the first steps
<paren> last night <$$paren> towards enlistment ' for one year or as
long as the war lasts ' , etc. etc. STURT-1914-2,2,699.190

Poor boy - STURT-1914-2,2,699.191

he was in a subdued gasp of excitement : STURT-1914-2,2,699.192

had probably this morning <paren> to say nothing of previous times
<$$paren> had to encounter opposition from his mother , who is , he said
, ' a bit cut up ' . STURT-1914-2,2,699.193

Had she sent him to me , as a last hope that I might dissuade him ?
STURT-1914-2,2,699.194

That possibility occurs to me now : STURT-1914-2,2,699.195

but I did not dissuade . STURT-1914-2,2,699.196

Or had the boy come , to get my consent , if possible , and do the
decent thing by me as a friend ? STURT-1914-2,2,699.197

'T@ @was this view I took ... <paren> 7.0 p._m. <$$paren>
STURT-1914-2,2,699.198

And this latter view seems to have been the right one .
STURT-1914-2,2,699.199

There is a strange subdued excitement about . STURT-1914-2,2,699.200

Swain <paren> of Swain and Jones <$$paren> has enlisted on the same
terms as Harry Goatcher : i.e. as an ' artificer ' at 6 <slash> - a day
for a week of 7 days . STURT-1914-2,2,699.201

Langham , part-owner of the ' Herald ' , is offering his services as a
motor-cycle scout : STURT-1914-2,2,699.202

and I hear of perhaps half_a_dozen others , all gone or ready to go .
STURT-1914-2,2,699.203

Meanwhile the business places are in difficulties : Heath and Wiltshire
making 3$$4 time , Warrens 1$$2 time : my own place short time :
STURT-1914-2,2,699.204

the builders are in want of materials : STURT-1914-2,2,699.205

the gravel company can@ @not get trucks <paren> railway <$$paren> to
send their gravel away , STURT-1914-2,2,699.206

and scarce know how to keep their men at work . STURT-1914-2,2,699.207

Half the motor cars , and more than half the horses in the neighbourhood
have been commandeered by the military . STURT-1914-2,2,699.208

The milkmen can@ @not get <P_2,700> their milk delivered :
STURT-1914-2,2,700.209

't@ @is said that farmers can@ @not get their corn harvested , for want
of horses . STURT-1914-2,2,700.210

The tale is everywhere that troops were hurried down to Southampton last
Friday night and shipped <paren> for an unknown destination <$$paren>
there and then . STURT-1914-2,2,700.211

Today there were no newspapers : STURT-1914-2,2,700.212

we learned on getting to Farnham that the train service is practically
suspended . STURT-1914-2,2,700.213

There have been one or two trains <font> down <$$font> from Waterloo ;
STURT-1914-2,2,700.214

there was probably to be one <font> up <$$font> this evening .
STURT-1914-2,2,700.215

But the line is wanted for the military . STURT-1914-2,2,700.216

At present there is@ @n't any acute alarm felt , I think :
STURT-1914-2,2,700.217

yet this secrecy is likely enough to breed alarm .
STURT-1914-2,2,700.218

At the same time everybody allows that it is quite right :
STURT-1914-2,2,700.219

everybody is rejoicing that Kitchener <paren> to whom the secrecy and
the urgent movement are attributed <$$paren> is at the War Office .
STURT-1914-2,2,700.220

The national confidence in that man is a very remarkable thing .
STURT-1914-2,2,700.221

Today I arranged with Mrs. Goatcher to let me have control of the
garden at South View : STURT-1914-2,2,700.222

- her son being gone , her ability to deal with it is gone too :
STURT-1914-2,2,700.223

and I have arranged with Reeves <paren> an old painter , who was
dismissed a week before the outbreak of war <$$paren> to start tomorrow
getting the place in order and planted . STURT-1914-2,2,700.224

This is the sort of thing many are doing , in view of the great danger
of scarcity of food-stuffs in the coming winter ...
{COM:editorial_material_omitted} STURT-1914-2,2,700.225

<font> 30 August <$$font> <paren> Sunday <$$paren> .
STURT-1914-2,2,700.226

In these times of war , one's days are by turns elated and depressed ,
but always pre-occupied . STURT-1914-2,2,700.227

... <font> Cheered yesterday by news of a naval victory at Heligoland
and a report that Russian troops were being brought across the North Sea
to assist the French and British armies . STURT-1914-2,2,700.228

During the evening to see the Duttons , who are in trouble because Jack
Button is enlisting <$$font> ... STURT-1914-2,2,700.229

But , today , has come the fit of depression . STURT-1914-2,2,700.230

I think it began with Arthur Topp's gloomy forebodings that Boulogne
might be lost , and the British communications cut off .
STURT-1914-2,2,700.231

I saw him before we <P_2,701> went down to Frank's :
STURT-1914-2,2,701.232

and , getting there , learnt that Boulogne had actually been abandoned .
STURT-1914-2,2,701.233

As the morning wore on , there settled down on my spirits a realisation
of the truth , that in fact the allied armies are slowly retreating
before the Germans ; that Paris is daily in greater danger ; that our
efforts so far have not been sufficient to turn back the Prussian armies
from their invasion of Western civilisation ... STURT-1914-2,2,701.234

Returning home , I learnt <paren> from papers Bessie had brought in
<$$paren> that part of the German forces that have been overpowering the
French and British have <paren> 't@ @is but a rumour , though <$$paren>
been recalled to meet the Russian advance . STURT-1914-2,2,701.235

It sounded like good news : STURT-1914-2,2,701.236

yet ... it did not wipe away the consciousness of our insufficient
resistance in north-eastern France . STURT-1914-2,2,701.237

To emphasise one's feeling that this was a calamitous fact , there was
the recollection of yesterday's increasingly grave warnings from the
Government etc. , that more and more men were urgently needed ; that
the brunt of the struggle is still to be borne ; and so on .
STURT-1914-2,2,701.238

All this in the background of my mind - and not so very far in the
background , either - seems to paralyse my own initiative .
STURT-1914-2,2,701.239

Possibly , were the attempt made , I could go on soberly writing my book
<paren> ' The Democratic Faith ' <$$paren> : STURT-1914-2,2,701.240

but something I have@ @n't fully faced prevents me from trying .
STURT-1914-2,2,701.241

It@ @'s as if there were illness in the house , or pestilence in the
town . STURT-1914-2,2,701.242

And the lovely early autumn weather ... calls for attention
STURT-1914-2,2,701.243

and yet may not be attended to , because one feels that to gloat over it
would be an indulgence that should not be allowed in these times .
STURT-1914-2,2,701.244

... <font> The conduct of the war and comments upon it likely to lead
to a better understanding : STURT-1914-2,2,701.245

futile to grow indignant about the destruction of art-treasures at
Louvain , without realising war's toll of human misery <$$font> ...
STURT-1914-2,2,701.246

... entwined with this <paren> not very closely , perhaps <$$paren> is
a dull amazement at the Prussian attitude , and at our ignorance of it .
STURT-1914-2,2,701.247

Many people may have had suspicion of it : STURT-1914-2,2,701.248

but it is fairly certain that the majority of English people not only
never dreamt , but even yet are unable to realise , what an infamous
outlook has been dominating the Prussian ruling classes , these many
years . STURT-1914-2,2,701.249

I find that folk still refuse to believe the tales of ferocity that
reach <P_2,702> us , and are only too well corroborated .
STURT-1914-2,2,702.250

And up to now , we as a nation <paren> it may fairly be said <$$paren>
have failed altogether to understand what the Prussians as a nation must
have been thinking for several generations . STURT-1914-2,2,702.251

Nobody has told it , in a way to carry conviction .
STURT-1914-2,2,702.252

<font> We could not understand <$$font> - perhaps for the reason that we
, in England and France and Belgium and even Russia , have been groping
for an entirely different understanding , in our dim slovenly way .
STURT-1914-2,2,702.253

What , then , is this understanding we have been groping for ?
STURT-1914-2,2,702.254

If I could get my eye on that , should@ @n't I be nearer to a view of
what democracy means ? STURT-1914-2,2,702.255

... <paren> This <$$paren> is , indeed , of all wars , perhaps the most
genuinely religious that ever men fought in : STURT-1914-2,2,702.256

it goes nearer home to our conscience than any struggle ever did .
STURT-1914-2,2,702.257

For here , in the sanctity of life ... here is involved what English
folk have instinctively been feeling their way towards since the
Reformation ; England in her comely village customs , her dear '
L'Allegro ' attitude : in Wordsworth's outlook , in Gray's , in
Tennyson's , and later in Dickens's , and William Morris's .
STURT-1914-2,2,702.258

It is for music , for skill , for adventure and Romance ; for kindliness
, for ' tea-time ' and all the gentleness that involves , for the
pleasant corn-fields and country lanes ... because all these things
foster that divine coming together of flesh and blood , that the
Prussian armies are outraging . STURT-1914-2,2,702.259

<paren> <font> 30 August <$$font> <paren> Sunday <$$paren> . <$$paren>
STURT-1914-2,2,702.260

... <font> The house now quiet , the Topps having left .
STURT-1914-2,2,702.261

A beautiful evening , calm and brilliant , the stars shining brightly
<$$font> ... STURT-1914-2,2,702.262

Yet we came in soon , I for one having little heart for it .
STURT-1914-2,2,702.263

For though all else was so still , so tranquil , there was one faint
sound to remind us of war , perhaps no more than two_hundred miles away
. STURT-1914-2,2,702.264

This is the fourth <paren> or is it only the 3rd ? <$$paren> night that
Farnham has heard it again <paren> since the time three weeks ago
<$$paren> - the sound of trains running through at night , carrying
soldiers to Southampton ... STURT-1914-2,2,702.265

Bessie brought home word from the town that these of tonight - or of
last night - are the Russian troops that have been talked of .
STURT-1914-2,2,702.266

It@ @'s possibly true : STURT-1914-2,2,702.267

and it@ @'s odd to think of Russians , travelling down our quiet South
English valleys in <P_2,703> this quiet starlit night , to help war for
western civilisation before the week is out . STURT-1914-2,2,703.268

<font> 1 September . <$$font> {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,703.269

In view of these stories , I think perhaps much discount should be taken
from the Continental tales of atrocities by the German armies .
STURT-1914-2,2,703.270

Yet the known utterances - savage commands or maxims - of the Prussian
military caste , do suggest that frightful barbarities would be
tolerated . STURT-1914-2,2,703.271

True , or false , these hideous tales have bitten deep into English
minds , STURT-1914-2,2,703.272

and are having their effect upon our national attitude , to make us feel
relentless towards the Kaiser . STURT-1914-2,2,703.273

{COM:editorial_material_omitted} It@ @'s true , I did@ @n't dream
<paren> that <$$paren> Imperialism contained the seeds of such frightful
savagery as it appears to have done : STURT-1914-2,2,703.274

I never thought it would lead up to the sack of Louvain , for instance .
STURT-1914-2,2,703.275

Yet the insolence , the ruthlessness , the contempt of small
nationalities , which are now the marks of Prussian aggression and are
making it detestable - was there not some reason for detecting them in ,
say , the Jameson Raid and the Boer War , in Dublin Castle Rule and
Coercion , in the domineering of India by supercilious officials , in
<paren> perhaps <$$paren> the Russian and British partition of Persia ,
in Kipling's praise of the British officer's bounce , and so on ?
STURT-1914-2,2,703.276

In all these things , wherever the White Man has lorded it over dusky
races , the taint we now detect as Prussianism or Kaiserism has been
sufficiently present to fill one with disquiet , though one never dreamt
of the dreadful lengths to which that sort of thing might go , once it
got its hand free . STURT-1914-2,2,703.277

<font> 2 September . <$$font> {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,703.278

<P_2,704>

<font> 5 September . <$$font> {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,704.280

A thing that has impressed me , this week , is the fine attitude of the
young men <paren> in my shop <$$paren> to their work .
STURT-1914-2,2,704.281

I think they want to fight ; STURT-1914-2,2,704.282

but it seems to me that they also look upon the practice of their
handicraft with a sort of reverence for it . STURT-1914-2,2,704.283

Harry Goatcher said three weeks ago , when the only option was to enlist
for 7 years <paren> it is now ' as long as the war lasts ' <$$paren> ' I
do@ @n't want to spoil my career ' : STURT-1914-2,2,704.284

and I think that is the feeling with the others - Gordon Ridgers , Dick
Elkins , Arthur Green , and probably Walter Stratford and Stanley Firmin
. STURT-1914-2,2,704.285

There are in them great depths of fine ' artisan ' feeling - fine
respect for their careers as English workmen ; STURT-1914-2,2,704.286

and this war is perhaps making them dimly aware of it ...
STURT-1914-2,2,704.287

An elderly man shouldering a long ladder was walking in the gutter just
in front of me on the pavement , on the way to Farnham this morning .
STURT-1914-2,2,704.288

His left hand , steadying the ladder , went into that strong clutching
shape I have so often delighted to see in good drawings ;
STURT-1914-2,2,704.289

and , as I watched the fine muscular curvings , all so true to the human
type , - the type delighted in by ancient Greek sculptors - it seemed to
me that there , in that vitality , was one of the things we worship ,
one of the things against which Kaiserism is at war .
STURT-1914-2,2,704.290

For is@ @n't this war , on the Kaiser's side , a deliberate ignoring of
the sacredness of vitality - a fiendish blasphemy against it ?
STURT-1914-2,2,704.291

... <font> 6 September . <$$font> STURT-1914-2,2,704.292

A memory of old times came up into my head the other day - a dim memory
of Carlyle's letter , during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 , in which
he poured scorn on the gaiety , fickleness , sentimentality , of France
, and spoke with admiration of the German strength .
STURT-1914-2,2,704.293

<P_2,705>

Conceivably the German strength was not then so hideous as it is now :
STURT-1914-2,2,705.295

conceivably the French lightness was more frivolous and foolish .
STURT-1914-2,2,705.296

Yet , in this Carlylean sympathy , I seemed to detect something deeper -
a very significant tendency . STURT-1914-2,2,705.297

For I suspect that the Scottish philosopher's dislike of France was ,
largely , a Puritan prejudice against Art , against dance , and music
etc. STURT-1914-2,2,705.298

The heavy Prussian manner was more agreeable to this old-fashioned
ascetic Puritan mind . STURT-1914-2,2,705.299

And so , we get a glimpse of an ancient origin for ' Prussianism ' .
STURT-1914-2,2,705.300

It springs , perhaps , from the Puritanism of Luther , of Calvin .
STURT-1914-2,2,705.301

This Puritanism , no longer tempered by Christianity , has fallen a prey
to the doctrines of Nietzsche , STURT-1914-2,2,705.302

and is the hideous thing we now see . STURT-1914-2,2,705.303

<font> 13 September . <$$font> {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,705.304

<font> 6 October . <$$font> STURT-1914-2,2,705.305

<paren> We are expecting Uncle Jack and Lizzie here in half an hour's
time . STURT-1914-2,2,705.306

I write hurriedly . <$$paren> STURT-1914-2,2,705.307

After 4 days at home <paren> bronchial trouble <$$paren> I got to
Farnham again this morning , STURT-1914-2,2,705.308

and it seemed to me that the town is much more ' military ' .
STURT-1914-2,2,705.309

Despatch riders on motor bicycles go tearing through at top speed :
STURT-1914-2,2,705.310

motor vans of all kinds <paren> often loaded with soldiers as well as
with baggage <$$paren> were going westwards - probably to Southampton
for the battle-front - which in fact is scarcely 200 miles away ...
STURT-1914-2,2,705.311

I was told today of billeting officers at work - STURT-1914-2,2,705.312

first I heard of them here in the Bourne , and again in Farnham .
STURT-1914-2,2,705.313

They are taking particulars of accommodation available in the houses ,
and the number of inmates - males so many , females so many .
STURT-1914-2,2,705.314

This is but one of the signs that the liberties of England are in
abeyance . STURT-1914-2,2,705.315

Today's papers publish police orders to London , for diminishing of
lights . STURT-1914-2,2,705.316

The orders are at the instigation of the Admiralty , I think : but
perhaps of the War Office . STURT-1914-2,2,705.317

Countless <P_2,706> other news items go to show the same thing .
STURT-1914-2,2,706.318

For the present , Lord Kitchener is practically the Dictator of England
: STURT-1914-2,2,706.319

and it@ @'s well for England that he is . STURT-1914-2,2,706.320

Anecdotes of his inflexible efficiency were the subject of a paragraph I
read , peeping over at my neighbour's paper in the 'bus as I came up the
road ... STURT-1914-2,2,706.321

A severely worded order is given : STURT-1914-2,2,706.322

but it is carried out . STURT-1914-2,2,706.323

One of these orders <paren> 2 months ago <$$paren> was to the effect
that 600 extra rifle ranges must be ready by 1 November .
STURT-1914-2,2,706.324

Apparently the staff at the W. D. will have to make all the
arrangements : STURT-1914-2,2,706.325

but the ranges will have to be ready . STURT-1914-2,2,706.326

<font> 11 October <$$font> <paren> Sunday <$$paren> .
STURT-1914-2,2,706.327

I have just read Family Prayers <paren> ! <$$paren> my uncle being here
. STURT-1914-2,2,706.328

He leaves us tomorrow - STURT-1914-2,2,706.329

and it@ @'s very doubtful to me if he will ever come here again .
STURT-1914-2,2,706.330

Yesterday , the day of the Fall of Antwerp to the Germans - was a
baddish day for me personally . STURT-1914-2,2,706.331

My clerk suddenly obtained much more profitable employment than mine ,
STURT-1914-2,2,706.332

and begins tomorrow . STURT-1914-2,2,706.333

A bolt from the blue , this : STURT-1914-2,2,706.334

but I could not dissuade him : or stand in his way .
STURT-1914-2,2,706.335

For Reginald Balchin has been a good fellow , STURT-1914-2,2,706.336

I have liked him well . STURT-1914-2,2,706.337

But his absence will tie me to the shop until I can get somebody else ;
STURT-1914-2,2,706.338

nor will it be for months that anybody else will be so helpful .
STURT-1914-2,2,706.339

In the intervals of bother over this , I was scared too by fear that ,
in coughing , this last few days , I may have started a rupture on the
right side . STURT-1914-2,2,706.340

I ruptured the left side , probably in coughing , during August of last
year . STURT-1914-2,2,706.341

But , back of these personal worries and troubles , was that Antwerp
business . STURT-1914-2,2,706.342

Probably the world never before spent such a day as yesterday .
STURT-1914-2,2,706.343

All Europe woke up , for the ordinary day's work , knowing that that
black crime was still going on ; STURT-1914-2,2,706.344

and as the hours wore on , the news of its completion trickled through ,
first as a ' rumour ' , then as a confirmed report .
STURT-1914-2,2,706.345

People said little , so far as I heard : STURT-1914-2,2,706.346

but , outside Germany and Austria , and the U.S.A. German colony , who
was there in all Europe and America that did not inwardly writhe with
helpless indignation ? STURT-1914-2,2,706.347

If anything was needed to strengthen our resolution against Germany , or
to inflame our hatred , I think yesterday's work supplied it .
STURT-1914-2,2,706.348

The town was burnt , or blown to pieces . STURT-1914-2,2,706.349

<P_2,707>

A feeling as of shame obsessed me : as though it were scarce decent to
be alive in communication with the decent things of Nature .
STURT-1914-2,2,707.351

The values of life were lowered . STURT-1914-2,2,707.352

The touch upon my senses of the many beautiful things I am wont to
delight in unawares ... this touch I instinctively repressed .
STURT-1914-2,2,707.353

I turned my eyes away . STURT-1914-2,2,707.354

I was not fit for such intercourse . STURT-1914-2,2,707.355

I realised that I was doing this ; STURT-1914-2,2,707.356

but probably half England was doing the same thing , though not
realising it ... STURT-1914-2,2,707.357

At the beginning of the war , Charles feared for civilisation ,
STURT-1914-2,2,707.358

and I felt none of his fears . STURT-1914-2,2,707.359

But the developments since then have altered the look of the situation .
STURT-1914-2,2,707.360

In fact , there was in Europe <paren> England too <$$paren> less
civilisation to lose , than we dreamed : STURT-1914-2,2,707.361

or rather , there was a taint of barbarism whose presence we did@ @n't
fully appreciate . STURT-1914-2,2,707.362

The disease the world was suffering from was not diagnosed .
STURT-1914-2,2,707.363

Now , however , it has broken out horribly - in the shape of '
Prussianism ' . STURT-1914-2,2,707.364

With that infection throughout the European social system , well enough
might we be perplexed : STURT-1914-2,2,707.365

well enough might we wonder at the slow progress of ' civilisation ' .
STURT-1914-2,2,707.366

There was a sort of cancer in the very vitals of Europe .
STURT-1914-2,2,707.367

The operations that will cut this out by the roots will leave Europe
impoverished for decades ; STURT-1914-2,2,707.368

and we shall <font> seem <$$font> to have stepped back in civilisation .
STURT-1914-2,2,707.369

But if the roots of the disease are destroyed , perhaps Europe may at
last make a real headway . STURT-1914-2,2,707.370

<font> 18 October . <$$font> STURT-1914-2,2,707.371

Modern civilisation is the method of living that has thrust out the
ancient folk habits , in favour of a more effective , because more
far-seeing , Prudence . STURT-1914-2,2,707.372

' Rule of Thumb ' has given place to scientific method : Tradition , to
proved experience and tireless investigation . STURT-1914-2,2,707.373

The history of western Europe and America for the last century or
century and a half has been largely the history of this transition .
STURT-1914-2,2,707.374

The ' Folk ' Civilisation of ' Use and Wont ' has struggled hard ,
STURT-1914-2,2,707.375

but has had to give way - in Industry and Law and Social Custom and
Fashion , in Politics , in Religion , in Art . STURT-1914-2,2,707.376

Instead of learning from the Folk , the modern artist tries to teach
them . STURT-1914-2,2,707.377

It is the day of individuality . STURT-1914-2,2,707.378

' Authority ' counts for less and less : Freedom for more and more .
STURT-1914-2,2,707.379

Free thought , free <P_2,708> taste , free morality - modern
civilisation must have all these , because the ' Rule of Thumb ' era of
the Folk is dying away , and the ' Scientific ' era of the Individual
has come . STURT-1914-2,2,708.380

For this reason , Democratic Government is a necessity to modern
civilisation . {COM:editorial_material_omitted} STURT-1914-2,2,708.381

The English , coming into the <paren> industrial <$$paren> tradition
longer ago and more gradually , have had far more time to adjust
themselves to the change . STURT-1914-2,2,708.382

The folk-civilisation did not tumble down about their ears , and leave
them spiritually homeless . STURT-1914-2,2,708.383

As it begun {COM:sic} gradually to crumble away , there rose up men and
women to carry on its tenderness and beauty into the new era .
STURT-1914-2,2,708.384

Wordsworth , Dickens , kept a roof over our heads .
STURT-1914-2,2,708.385

The Quaker element perhaps best of all saved England from rushing
violently down from the pastoral ' Folk ' stage , and perishing in the '
Scientific ' waters . STURT-1914-2,2,708.386

But , I am wondering , had Germany ever any help , such as England owes
to these influences ? STURT-1914-2,2,708.387

Or , in her survey of ' Culture ' , did she ever hear of <paren> I say
nothing of ' understanding ' <$$paren> the English humanitarian
movements ? STURT-1914-2,2,708.388

In England , thanks to these movements , we are not unprepared even for
the most momentous part of all the Folk-débacle .
STURT-1914-2,2,708.389

In the draft chapters of my book ' The Democratic Faith ' <paren>
chapters which will probably have to be re-written as a result of the
war <$$paren> I have tried to set down what this is : namely , the
dissolution of the primitive Folk idea of human nature as ' Body ' and '
Soul ' . STURT-1914-2,2,708.390

This idea - the old interpretation of life - has practically worn out ,
under the stress of ' modern civilisation ' ; STURT-1914-2,2,708.391

but , has Germany found any substitute for it ? STURT-1914-2,2,708.392

We , in England <paren> in France , America , too <$$paren> are feeling
our way to a new interpretation - thanks to the Wordsworthian or
humanitarian attitude . STURT-1914-2,2,708.393

And , as our civilisation gathers force and directness around this new
centre , we find the intenser need for purifying our democratic
aspirations . STURT-1914-2,2,708.394

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

<P_2,709>

In these days , I note with gratitude to Christianity what it has saved
England from becoming ... STURT-1914-2,2,709.397

I also note how , in its modern form , it tends to forget the
thaumaturgy of the system , to disregard the promises of another life ,
and to pay more heed to the conduct of this life .
STURT-1914-2,2,709.398

I was thinking today - We have regarded Christ's outlook and teaching as
a new and unheard-of thing ; STURT-1914-2,2,709.399

but , before he could have such ideas , what a wonderful folk-tradition
of kindliness must have flourished amongst the poor in Galilee , amongst
whom he grew up ! STURT-1914-2,2,709.400

And how ready the people must already have been , before his message
could have met with any response ! STURT-1914-2,2,709.401

<font> 6 November . <$$font> STURT-1914-2,2,709.402

Curious that , although Christ was a young man , Christianity has
developed into a religion of consolations for the middle-aged and
world-weary and disillusioned . STURT-1914-2,2,709.403

It was the remembered couplet from some Hymn or other that caused me to
realise this , this morning . STURT-1914-2,2,709.404

I ca@ @n't now recall the words : STURT-1914-2,2,709.405

but they expressed that sense of desolation - of the long-drawn-out
ineffectiveness of life , which steals over one at fifty , and at the
same time the swiftness with which the years of life vanish away .
STURT-1914-2,2,709.406

These impressions do not occur to a healthy young man or woman .
STURT-1914-2,2,709.407

To him or her , the end of life seems too remote to consider at all :
STURT-1914-2,2,709.408

there is limitless time ; STURT-1914-2,2,709.409

and yet it is never dreary , never anything but intensely interesting
and worth while . STURT-1914-2,2,709.410

Christianity <paren> so far as I can remember <$$paren> takes no account
of this youthful attitude , unless to insist on the illusionment of it .
STURT-1914-2,2,709.411

It would correct the young ; always from the point of view of the
elderly . STURT-1914-2,2,709.412

I am wondering if there has ever been a <font> Religion for Youth ?
<$$font> STURT-1914-2,2,709.413

<font> 8 November <$$font> <paren> Sunday <$$paren> .
STURT-1914-2,2,709.414

In spite of all the tales of horror that reach us , we in England - safe
from the Kaiser's armies - are in danger of being fooled by the glamour
and glory of war ... STURT-1914-2,2,709.415

By_and_by we shall hear it asked , ' Is not War worth while after all ?
STURT-1914-2,2,709.416

Shall we , too timid of danger , discomfort , death , deny to Englishmen
that sublimity of experience which the soldiers at the Front are tasting
now with such heroic gusto ? ' STURT-1914-2,2,709.417

<P_2,710>

Besides this - directly springing out of the war conditions , is a fine
emotion of national unity ; in which folk , far removed hitherto by
class differences and hatreds , look at one another now with
friendliness , appreciation , willingness to understand .
STURT-1914-2,2,710.419

Recriminations have died down ; STURT-1914-2,2,710.420

the voice of Party is held almost disgraceful . STURT-1914-2,2,710.421

Now , we want not to hinder one another , but rather to help .
STURT-1914-2,2,710.422

I have known nothing like it before , save just around Christmas day ...
{COM:editorial_material_omitted} STURT-1914-2,2,710.423

... in the Trenches , where men fight side by side , many of the
conditions that make for misery in normal life are absent .
STURT-1914-2,2,710.424

The meanness of aim , the self-seeking , can@ @not be found .
STURT-1914-2,2,710.425

Each man is there , and <font> knows it <$$font> , not chiefly or at all
for himself , but for his comrades , and for the Nation left at home ...
STURT-1914-2,2,710.426

... the adventure and the danger - most valuable stimulants these :
STURT-1914-2,2,710.427

and can Peace furnish any substitute for them ? STURT-1914-2,2,710.428

For a moment it looks impossible : STURT-1914-2,2,710.429

yet , how do they operate upon a man's temper ? STURT-1914-2,2,710.430

How is it that danger <paren> of which ' adventure ' is a variant
<$$paren> has such a stimulating effect ? STURT-1914-2,2,710.431

I think it must be <paren> and the Alpine climber's great joy lends
colour to the belief <$$paren> that , in danger , a man's faculties , on
their mettle , come more closely into touch with environment than at
other times . STURT-1914-2,2,710.432

For a moment , the Animal must re-awaken in him : the animal that is
exact and prompt as any artist ... STURT-1914-2,2,710.433

'T@ @is life , or vitality , in the highest , that is then enjoyed .
STURT-1914-2,2,710.434

Danger ? STURT-1914-2,2,710.435

No : it is not danger that is enjoyed , but that keen run of the blood
and stir of the senses to which danger gives rise .
STURT-1914-2,2,710.436

But , I have a strong suspicion that high skill promotes this same high
enjoyment of vitality , or that skill is the exercising of that same
vitality . STURT-1914-2,2,710.437

I talk now of the artisan's skill with tools : or the fisherman's , or
the engine driver's , or the shepherd's or the carter's , or the
rick-builder's . STURT-1914-2,2,710.438

In the exercise of the crafts , a man may come close to the stimulating
influences . STURT-1914-2,2,710.439

He may feel the life tingling through his nerves .
STURT-1914-2,2,710.440

He may be a denizen of the world of laws and substances , and get his
thrill of delight from <P_2,711> the fine grain of the oak , the
resistance of the red-hot iron , or of the sea waves and wind .
STURT-1914-2,2,711.441

To get this , of course , he must not depend on servants .
STURT-1914-2,2,711.442

You can@ @not have these experiences vicariously .
STURT-1914-2,2,711.443

And , dispensing with servants and ... putting ourselves in touch with
the common necessities of daily life in peace ; might we not come to the
sense of camaraderie which makes up so large a part of the glory of War
? STURT-1914-2,2,711.444

If we could take up our daily work without the baseness inseparable from
competitive industry : if we could do our scavenging , our gardening ,
our engine-stoking , valiantly with the consciousness of serving the
Community or the State <paren> or Human Life <$$paren> I think the
greatness of the Community would be felt , in these humble tasks ; and
Peace might give us some of that Glamour which War provides , in its
lamentable way . STURT-1914-2,2,711.445

<font> 11 November . <$$font> {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,711.446

... after the war , we shall turn to the country <paren> shall we not ?
<$$paren> in an altered mood , no longer as loving parishioners , but as
citizens of the world , doomed to look upon the valleys with a keener
eye to their use to the Nation . STURT-1914-2,2,711.447

In the course of generations , a nobler sentiment of the countryside may
grow out of this ; STURT-1914-2,2,711.448

but , for the present , one notes only that the sentiment which hitherto
has gladdened one is the sentiment of an era that has died out , with
the War . STURT-1914-2,2,711.449

For which of us , now , is making hedge-row lanes , or planting elms ,
or acquainting himself with the solitary heaths ?
STURT-1914-2,2,711.450

These things were for the villager ; the denizen .
STURT-1914-2,2,711.451

No one of us knows the country now , in that close and loving way ;
STURT-1914-2,2,711.452

nor is our life , any more , in loving touch with the life of the elm
trees . STURT-1914-2,2,711.453

{COM:editorial_material_omitted} The behaviour of Germany , in preparing
so long and deliberately for this war , and carrying it out so
ruthlessly , is a startling illustration of the force of ' religion ' ,
or ' philosophy ' . STURT-1914-2,2,711.454

I had held that the opinions of professors and their peoples made but
little difference to conduct : that people acted upon <P_2,712> instinct
much more than upon theoretical principle : STURT-1914-2,2,712.455

and I was disposed to think tradition so strong , that any new religious
idea would take ages , before it could alter the folk habits of outlook
and behaviour . STURT-1914-2,2,712.456

But apparently that is one of the opinions the War requires me to
correct . STURT-1914-2,2,712.457

Unless , indeed , already the German people <paren> forsaking their old
folk traditions of kindly home-life , about the beginning of the
industrial era <$$paren> had begun to degenerate spontaneously , -
unless this is so , one must suppose that about 50 years have sufficed
to corrupt their whole moral fibre . STURT-1914-2,2,712.458

Nietzsche , and after him the unhappy issue of the Franco-Prussian War
in 1870 - these influences begin , STURT-1914-2,2,712.459

and the tradition of centuries crumbles away , in so short a time .
STURT-1914-2,2,712.460

I repeat : I had not believed that Philosophic teaching could so
permeate a nation as to make all this difference .
STURT-1914-2,2,712.461

And , if indeed it has done so , the phenomenon is a tremendous argument
in favour of the importance of consciously held religion .
STURT-1914-2,2,712.462

<font> 13 November . <$$font> {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,712.463

<font> 17 November . <$$font> STURT-1914-2,2,712.464

This morning I got a step nearer to knowing what it is that I have
instinctively dreaded to miss from the English Country-side as a result
of the war ... STURT-1914-2,2,712.465

In craft work {COM:"In_craft_work"_supplied_by_editor} the motive is
supplied by taste , rather than by prudence . STURT-1914-2,2,712.466

And the same I think may be said with more or less truth of all the old
country crafts . STURT-1914-2,2,712.467

The end is well-nigh included in the beginning , STURT-1914-2,2,712.468

or at least is never out of sight . STURT-1914-2,2,712.469

If the meadow is laid up for grass , one can see the greater well-being
of the horses six months hence ... STURT-1914-2,2,712.470

If the beech tree is cut down in November , promptly one can realise in
fancy the hard axle-beds to be cut out of it for the waggon in four
years' time . STURT-1914-2,2,712.471

All the industry ends , where it begins , at home :
STURT-1914-2,2,712.472

all its courses keep close down to the needs of the day , and to the
very present laws of necessity - such as the necessities connected with
seasoning of timber . STURT-1914-2,2,712.473

<P_2,713>

And in the pursuit of industry on these simple terms , man needed not so
much to look abroad or to consider how his actions might affect other
men in other countries or valleys . STURT-1914-2,2,713.475

What others did was their concern : STURT-1914-2,2,713.476

and what he did was his . STURT-1914-2,2,713.477

He had to be right with his land , his woods , his rivers , his cattle :
to be companion to his own weather where he himself dwelt .
STURT-1914-2,2,713.478

And the ancient country traditions and country arts were the traditions
and arts of living in this simple uncalculating fashion .
STURT-1914-2,2,713.479

They grew up spontaneously , sporadically - seedlings of every hillside
and farm and forest : unhelped , but also unhindered , by the activities
of different places . STURT-1914-2,2,713.480

But , after the war , will not the nation need to <paren> or believe it
needs to <$$paren> ' organise ' itself ? STURT-1914-2,2,713.481

Will it not feel impelled to put away this simple spontaneity , and
freedom ; and submit its ways to calculations of prudence ?
STURT-1914-2,2,713.482

I know nothing of German ' Kultur ' ; STURT-1914-2,2,713.483

but it occurs to me as a possibility that when the Germans use that word
, what they mean has nothing to do with our English ' Culture ' , but
refers to this prudent fitting of the individual and his industry into a
larger , a national , scheme , too vast to allow him freedom , or to
foster that pleasant old intercourse with the countryside .
STURT-1914-2,2,713.484

So , his soldiering as a conscript is a part of his ' Kultur ' .
STURT-1914-2,2,713.485

No longer a peasant , he becomes an item with a special place in the
organised State . STURT-1914-2,2,713.486

His freedom is gone : STURT-1914-2,2,713.487

but he is ' Kultured ' - a cultivated product , no longer a spontaneous
growth . STURT-1914-2,2,713.488

I think it is the loss of this spontaneity out of England that I have
felt , with a sort of dismay . STURT-1914-2,2,713.489

<font> 19 November . <$$font> {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,713.490

It seems that , while we were there , here in Farnham a little scare was
growing up , which has if anything become more intense today .
STURT-1914-2,2,713.491

The town is full of alarmist rumours : - ' Disaster to the Fleet ' : '
Seven Men of War sunk in the North Sea ' : ' Sixty_Thousand Germans
landed in Scotland ' ... STURT-1914-2,2,713.492

I was feeling just now that , were I of the age , I should probably
enlist now . STURT-1914-2,2,713.493

It@ @'s the first time I have had that feeling ; STURT-1914-2,2,713.494

and I do@ @n't want any soldiering . STURT-1914-2,2,713.495

<P_2,714>

Yet , if it <font> were <$$font> true that England was invaded , what
could a man do so comfortable as take up the role of a soldier ?
STURT-1914-2,2,714.497

{COM:editorial_material_omitted} <font> 22 November . <$$font>
{COM:editorial_material_omitted} STURT-1914-2,2,714.498

He has made up his mind long ago what he would think ,
STURT-1914-2,2,714.499

and no change of circumstance is permitted any longer to alter his fixed
view . STURT-1914-2,2,714.500

He has taken an attitude , once for all . STURT-1914-2,2,714.501

He has to live up to his past , though the sky fall .
STURT-1914-2,2,714.502

And thus , though his opinions are so egregious , he is a pedant ,
narrow-minded and incorrigible as the worst . STURT-1914-2,2,714.503

In making up his mind what to say , not whether it is true is the chief
consideration , but whether it is appropriate to the part of G. B. S.
STURT-1914-2,2,714.504

And so he stands conspicuous as an example of what I take the Germans to
mean by ' Kultur ' . STURT-1914-2,2,714.505

As in that nation of pedants , so with Shaw : STURT-1914-2,2,714.506

the spontaneous movements of the individual life are subdued to a rule .
STURT-1914-2,2,714.507

He lives by a ready-made principle . STURT-1914-2,2,714.508

Nothing can touch him , through his armour of morality .
STURT-1914-2,2,714.509

He is ' Kultured ' - to a system of his own perhaps , but still to a
system . STURT-1914-2,2,714.510

It is the vice of the Pharisees : STURT-1914-2,2,714.511

and that is what Shaw must be reckoned 'spite {TEXT:reckoned'_spite} of
all his disguises : a Pharisee , a Pedant . STURT-1914-2,2,714.512

Pretending to care for freedom of thought , he will not allow thought to
stray aside from the narrow track he laid down for it five_and_twenty
years ago . STURT-1914-2,2,714.513

It must not explore any new fields of emotion , STURT-1914-2,2,714.514

nor may any new experiences of the man's own inner nature be subjected
to its analysis : STURT-1914-2,2,714.515

but everything must be made to yield the old results .
STURT-1914-2,2,714.516

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

<P_2,715>

<font> 23 November . <$$font> STURT-1914-2,2,715.519

Under the Peasant system folk were ... brought by the nature of their
circumstances really very close to the springs of well-being .
STURT-1914-2,2,715.520

There was I believe a sort of folk ' Kultur ' in every village : that is
to say , there was no idea of the individual being developed for his own
sake , but he was trained to take an allotted place , without regard to
his own proclivities . STURT-1914-2,2,715.521

Only , this training led him insensibly to an existence such as we now
see might have been , with very little adjustment , ideal .
STURT-1914-2,2,715.522

But this insensibility was the weakness of the folk ' Kultur ' , as has
twice been proved on a large scale . STURT-1914-2,2,715.523

The predatory instincts , the stupid valuation of wealth for wealth's
sake , were still practised within the narrow limits of the village ;
STURT-1914-2,2,715.524

and no-one had the sense to withstand them when the Discovery of America
opened up new vistas of getting wealth ... STURT-1914-2,2,715.525

A similar thing happened later , with the discovery of Steam power and
all that it involved . STURT-1914-2,2,715.526

Folk had not learnt the difference between working for their own wealth
, and getting other people to work for them . STURT-1914-2,2,715.527

This last became immensely possible , thanks to Steam :
STURT-1914-2,2,715.528

and once again the predatory instincts took control - in such fashion
that at last the old folk-life has all but vanished before them .
STURT-1914-2,2,715.529

And still we are no nearer to happiness , than they were in Chaucer's
time , if in fact we are as near . STURT-1914-2,2,715.530

We are no nearer , excepting in so far as here and there it has been
realised how happiness comes into a man's being , not from his
possessions , but from the contacts of his ' animal ' life with the
world of materials , and lovely elemental forces .
STURT-1914-2,2,715.531

<font> 27 November . <$$font> {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,715.532

... In a word , the village mind prevails there , although the business
has far outgrown the village dimensions under the capable management of
the two brothers and their sons and daughters
{COM:editorial_material_omitted} STURT-1914-2,2,715.533

<P_2,716>

{COM:editorial_material_omitted} At breakfast , waiting for the paper ,
I glanced up at the bookshelves STURT-1914-2,2,716.535

and was visited by a faint emotion which I recognised as related to that
odd dislike I have had , for seeing ' the country ' and rustic things ,
since the war began . STURT-1914-2,2,716.536

When peace comes , shall I then care to go back to the old bookish
interests , any more than to the old country interests ?
STURT-1914-2,2,716.537

It seemed somehow that the pre-war books had become obsolete , and their
subjects trifling . STURT-1914-2,2,716.538

The war is , as it were , wiping the slate clean ,
STURT-1914-2,2,716.539

and a new literature will have to begin . STURT-1914-2,2,716.540

The continuity is broken . STURT-1914-2,2,716.541

And , will anybody be satisfied to go back to the amiable dilettantism
that was so rudely interrupted in August ? STURT-1914-2,2,716.542

As one looks back , there seems to have been a want of purpose in our
lives then , compared to our life now ; STURT-1914-2,2,716.543

and I think many will feel it . STURT-1914-2,2,716.544

Though comfortable , pleasing in its shallow and timid way , life on
those terms was not too well worth the pains of living .
STURT-1914-2,2,716.545

It is better worth it , even now . STURT-1914-2,2,716.546

When the war is over , we shall feel that we have lost something , and
go back to our ordinary doings with a discontent bred of their
littleness , their inconsequence . STURT-1914-2,2,716.547

For , if you think of it , the War has supplied us with something we
needed , in this respect . STURT-1914-2,2,716.548

The daily doings , in themselves paltry as before , have to be valued
now somehow by their bearing upon the general well-being of England .
STURT-1914-2,2,716.549

And I think this is what people feel , when they find war ' glorious ' ;
STURT-1914-2,2,716.550

for the sense of belonging to and working for something truly important
makes even the hideous work of battle really worth doing ,
STURT-1914-2,2,716.551

and it is the absence of such a sense that leaves our arts , our
literatures , our daily tasks , so unimpressive and even mean .
STURT-1914-2,2,716.552

Selfishness , jealousy , suspicion , personal ambition , are able to
creep in , vitiating the activities which otherwise should be so
splendid ... STURT-1914-2,2,716.553

<font> 6 December <$$font> <paren> Sunday <$$paren> .
STURT-1914-2,2,716.554

Symptoms of another ' cold ' developing oblige me to stay indoors today
. STURT-1914-2,2,716.555

After a tiresome week of <P_2,717> ' business ' at Farnham , I can@ @not
afford the interruptions of a bronchial attack . STURT-1914-2,2,717.556

There is so much I want to write , if I could find the leisure and the
energy . STURT-1914-2,2,717.557

After waking this morning , I had visions of a larger book than the '
Democratic Faith ' which <paren> after 3 years <$$paren> is still only
half written . STURT-1914-2,2,717.558

In this larger book , there would be much about ' Tradition ' .
STURT-1914-2,2,717.559

I would also like to investigate a parallel which has suggested itself ,
between modern German arrogance , militarism , brutality , and the same
features that show so strongly in the history of Spain , when her
conquest of America had extended her amibtions and not yet led to her
downfall . STURT-1914-2,2,717.560

This fate of hers I believe to be largely explicable , as a too sudden
loss of the ancient Folk Traditions - just such a loss as Germany seems
to have suffered . STURT-1914-2,2,717.561

The German ' Kultur ' - what is that but a modern and pseudo-scientific
adaptation of the older Spanish belief in a World Empire ?
STURT-1914-2,2,717.562

And then , in this book I was projecting , I would show how it is upon
Tradition that all our Democratic Reforms should be brought to bear -
Tradition , not Heredity , as the Eugenists would have us believe ...
STURT-1914-2,2,717.563

<font> 8 December . {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,717.564

<font> 17 December . {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,717.565

<font> 25 December <$$font> STURT-1914-2,2,717.566

No newspapers today ; STURT-1914-2,2,717.567

and we failed to get one last night . STURT-1914-2,2,717.568

But , last night , a tale reached us from the town that newsboys were
crying out news of a bombardment of Dover , or of bombs thrown on Dover
. STURT-1914-2,2,717.569

<P_2,718>

It is likely enough . STURT-1914-2,2,718.571

The Germans seem to find a satisfaction in causing misery and pain not
only to soldiers fighting them , but to women and children of the '
enemy ' nation ... STURT-1914-2,2,718.572

And there is the reported doctrine of the disciples of Nietzsche and
Treitschke , to suggest that this malevolence is to some extent normal
with the Germans ; cultivated by them ; part of their Kultur .
STURT-1914-2,2,718.573

It must have been in view of this appearance that I began to wonder - on
this Christmas morning of all mornings ! - whether Peace with the
Germans was even a state to be desired : whether we ought not to give up
that dream , just as we have given up the dream of peace with wolves .
STURT-1914-2,2,718.574

The idea is too extravagant to be worth elaborating .
STURT-1914-2,2,718.575

I note it here simply as a sample of the sort of bewildered brain-work
that too often occupies my mind nowadays , in the endeavour to
comprehend what can have happened in Europe , to bring up the present
situation . STURT-1914-2,2,718.576

<font> 29 December . <$$font> {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,718.577

We spoke of the queer sense of discomfort the War is causing in his mind
no less than in mine . As if people had omitted for a week or two to
wash not their faces , but their minds . STURT-1914-2,2,718.578

Everything seems mentally untidy , dirty , out at elbows , or like
washing-day in a poky cottage . STURT-1914-2,2,718.579

The papers contribute to this feeling : not only saying what is@ @n't
true , but knowing themselves to be saying it , yet hoping it will do
for a time . STURT-1914-2,2,718.580

'T@ @is a make-shift down-at-heels thinking . STURT-1914-2,2,718.581

It somehow hopes that shams will pass muster for once .
STURT-1914-2,2,718.582

<P_2,719>

{ED:1915}

<font> 14 January . <$$font> {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,719.585

Somewhere on the Mytchett Road , as I passed a large loose-@ @built man
near the lamp light , the odd fancy came to me , of him by_and_by lying
dead , in his coffin : calm , no longer flapping along in the wind .
STURT-1914-2,2,719.586

And shifting the fancy to everybody else I met - the dark figures just
seen in the dark road - each one within the next fifty years or so to be
lying dead , calm , - shifting the fancy , I got a mental view of death
as a necessary phase of the process of Human Life , so that there was
nothing gruesome or ' macabre ' in it . STURT-1914-2,2,719.587

I doubted though if this would apply to my own personal case :
STURT-1914-2,2,719.588

yet fell to wondering , what particularly one wished to do with his own
life ? STURT-1914-2,2,719.589

... But later <paren> I ran down into Farnham to buy quinine , before
coming back home <$$paren> as I saw under the street lamps <paren> lots
of men in khaki , a good many civilians and especially shop boys and
young girls <$$paren> I felt that , if one were alive to this ' process
' of human vitality , which peoples the streets with folk fresh and
comely , it would seem a sufficient excitement merely to be a part of
the human ' process ' for the few years of one's life .
STURT-1914-2,2,719.590

Just to be ' in ' that wonderful thing , and then , dying , leave room
for the girls and the young boys to carry on its process - would@ @n't
this satisfy ? STURT-1914-2,2,719.591

With this idea of ' processes ' we may afford to drop the ideas we named
' Soul ' , ' God ' . Because , the real thing goes on just the same :
STURT-1914-2,2,719.592

but our ideas of it need freshening up ; STURT-1914-2,2,719.593

and probably we should do well to start fresh ideas of it altogether ,
with fresh names for them . STURT-1914-2,2,719.594

So , we might get livelier appreciation of the sacred Reality .
STURT-1914-2,2,719.595

<font> 14 February <$$font> STURT-1914-2,2,719.596

<paren> Sunday <$$paren> . {COM:editorial_material_omitted}
STURT-1914-2,2,719.597

Besides , there is the war , always with us . STURT-1914-2,2,719.598

War , and a westerly <P_2,720> gale , and drenching rain , yesterday
combined to drive us back upon our own resources in an unusual degree .
STURT-1914-2,2,720.599

For the bad weather made us want more fires : STURT-1914-2,2,720.600

and owing to the war , fuel is scarce . STURT-1914-2,2,720.601

We , in this house , are economising coal : trying to do with wood alone
; STURT-1914-2,2,720.602

and it is@ @n't a great success ... STURT-1914-2,2,720.603

We have no regular ' man ' now in the garden - STURT-1914-2,2,720.604

nor are we likely to get , until the war is over .
STURT-1914-2,2,720.605

Meanwhile , Freeland , who should have been here , is down with
influenza ... STURT-1914-2,2,720.606

My clerk a week ago , and on Friday , Mr. Arnold , failed with
influenza . STURT-1914-2,2,720.607

So I had to be at shop - manager , clerk , ' boss ' and all .
STURT-1914-2,2,720.608

The shop-foreman too did@ @n't turn up yesterday .
STURT-1914-2,2,720.609

Walking down , in almost a hurricane of rain , I myself got so wet that
<paren> the rain holding up a little <$$paren> I sent a boy up to fetch
me a pair of trousers to change ... STURT-1914-2,2,720.610

Getting home about 2.0 , to luncheon , I started again at 3.30 , on a
needful errand - to see Mr. Arnold . STURT-1914-2,2,720.611

The wind <font> and <$$font> rain , returning , took my breath -
STURT-1914-2,2,720.612

or at any rate induced an asthmatic cough that brought down on me a
great sense of feebleness . STURT-1914-2,2,720.613

In these ways - war and weather combined to deprive me of the help of
men I have been used to depend on ; STURT-1914-2,2,720.614

and weather at any rate thrust it home upon me that I am not strong
enough , this winter . STURT-1914-2,2,720.615

There is also upon me the fear of rupture <paren> on the right side :
STURT-1914-2,2,720.616

it may be only an alarm <$$paren> . STURT-1914-2,2,720.617

With this , and short breath , the act of wood-sawing and cleaving ,
which every previous winter has had such charm , is merely a weariness
now . STURT-1914-2,2,720.618

