<BEGIN_swift-1735-2>

<P_4,283>

{ED:Swift_to_the_Earl_of_Oxford}

{ED:Dublin,_6_January_1734-5}

My Lord . The Bearer of this Letter M=r= Hugh Lorinan , {TEXT:.} Has an
Appeal to be tryed before the House of Lords this ensuing Session .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,283.5

An eminent Person in the law here , and an intimate friend of mine upon
the score of Virtue learning and superior {TEXT:superiour} Knowledge in
his own Profession , did earnestly recommend his Case to me , as the
most equitable he ever knew , assuring me that M=r= Lorinan hath long
suffered by the Injustice Fraud and Oppression of his Adversaryes .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,283.6

I therefore humbly desire your Lordship will please to attend his Appeal
, if your other Affairs will permit you . SWIFT-1735-2,4,283.7

The Person who recommended him to me , is now a very eminent Judge ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,283.8

but was then onely one of the chief Lawyers . SWIFT-1735-2,4,283.9

I hope My Lady Oxford , as well as Your Lordship , are in perfect Health
. And that My Lord Duke and the Dutchess are and may ever continue in
as much happyness as this World can give , and be a constant addition to
that of yours ; which is the hearty Wish and Prayer of him who is with
all respect and truth My Lord Your Lordships most obedient and most
obliged Servant J: Swift . SWIFT-1735-2,4,283.10

Dublin . SWIFT-1735-2,4,283.11

Jan. 6=th= 1734 . SWIFT-1735-2,4,283.12

<P_4,284>

{ED:Swift_to_the_Duke_of_Dorset}

{ED:Dublin,_14_January_1734-5}

My Lord . I am well assured that Your Grace will soon receive severall
Representations of an Affair relating to the University here , from some
very considerable Persons . SWIFT-1735-2,4,284.16

However , I could not refuse the application made to me by a very worthy
Gentleman who is a Fellow of the College , and commissioned by some
principal Members of the Body to desire my poor good Offices to Your
Grace , because they believed You thought me an honest man , and because
they heard I had the honor to be known to you from Your early Youth .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,284.17

The Matter of their request related wholly to a dreadfull apprehension
they lye under of Doc=tr= Whitcomb's endeavor to procure a Dispensation
for holding his Fellowship together with that Church Preferment bestowed
on him by Your Grace . SWIFT-1735-2,4,284.18

... The Person sent to me on this Message gave me a written Paper ,
containing Reasons why they {TEXT:the} hope Your Grace will not be
prevayled upon to grant such a Dispensation . SWIFT-1735-2,4,284.19

I presume to send you as short an extract as I can , of those Reasons ;
because I may boldly assure Your Grace , that Party or Faction have not
the least Concern in the whole Affair . SWIFT-1735-2,4,284.20

And , as to my self , I am an entire Stranger to the Doctor .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,284.21

<P_4,285>

It is asserted , that this Preferment given to the Doctor consists of a
very large Parish in a very fine Country , thirty miles from Dublin :
That , it abounds very much with Papists , and is consequently a most
important Cure requiring the Rector's Residence , and perhaps that of
some Assistant which it can well afford , being worth near six_hundred
pounds a year . That , as to such dispensations , they find in their
College books but three or four Instances since the Revolution , and
these in cases very different from the present . SWIFT-1735-2,4,285.23

For , those few Livings which obtained Dispensations to be held with a
Fellowship , were Sine-cures {COM:sic} of small value , not sufficient
to induce a Fellow to leave his Colledge ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,285.24

and in the Body of those Dispensations , it is inserted as a Reason for
granting them , that they were such Livings as could be no hindrance in
the Discharge of their Duty as a Fellow . That , Dispensations are very
hurtfull to such a Society , because they put a Stop to the succession
of Fellowships , and thereby give a Check to that Emulation , Industry ,
and desire of Improvement in Learning , which the hopes of obtaining a
Fellowship will probably incite men to . That , if the Dispensation now
attempted should take place , it may be used as a precedent for the like
practice hereafter , which will be very injurious to the Society by
encouraging Fellows to apply for such Dispensations when they have
Interest to get Preferment , by which the Senior Fellows will be settled
in the Colledge for life . And thus for want of succession by any other
way than Death or Marriage all Encouragements to the young and most
deserving students will be wholly lost . That , a Junior Fellowship is
of very small Value , and to obtain it requires long and close Study ,
to which young Students are onely encouraged by hopes of succeeding in a
reasonable time to be one of the seven Seniors ; which hopes will be
quite cut off when those Seniors are perpetuated by Dispensations .
That , the Fellows at their admittance into their Fellowships take a
solemn Oath never to accept of any Church Preferment , above a certain
Value and distance from Dublin , as long as they continue Fellows , to
which Oath the accepting a Dispensation by D=r= Whitcomb , is directly
contrary in both Particulars of Value and Distance . <P_4,286> That ,
at this time there is a Set of very hopefull young men who have been in
long and close Study to stand for the first Vacant Fellowship , who will
be altogether discouraged , and drop their endeavors in pursuit of
Learning by being disappointed in their hopes of Doc=tr= Whitcombs
leaving the College , and opening a way for one of them to succeed in a
Fellowship . SWIFT-1735-2,4,286.25

I shall onely trouble Your Grace with a few Remarks of my own upon this
Subject . SWIFT-1735-2,4,286.26

You will please My Lord to know , that a Fellowship in this University
differs much in some very important Circumstances from most of those in
Oxford and Cambridge {COM:missing_period} SWIFT-1735-2,4,286.27

My Lord George will tell Your Grace that a Fellowship here is got with
much difficulty , by the strict examination they undergo in almost every
branch of Learning , to which must be added the Reputation of Regularity
in their Conduct . SWIFT-1735-2,4,286.28

It is also disposed of with much Solemnity . SWIFT-1735-2,4,286.29

For the Examiners , and all the senior Fellows take an Oath at the Altar
, to dispose of the Vacant Fellowship to the person who they think
deserves it best . SWIFT-1735-2,4,286.30

I must here by the Way take notice , that not onely the University but
even the whole Kingdom are full of Acknowledgements of the honor Your
Grace hath done them , in trusting the Care of educating one of Your
Sons to Dublin Colledge , which hopes to continue always under Your
Graces Favor and Protection . SWIFT-1735-2,4,286.31

This University is Patron of some Church Preferments , which are offered
to the severall Fellows according to their Seniority , and so downwards
to the lowest of them in holy Orders . SWIFT-1735-2,4,286.32

I desire Your Grace further to consider , that by the want of Trade here
, there is no Encouragement for Gentlemen to breed their Sons to
Merchandmen ; That not many great Employments in Church or Law or the
Revenue fall to the share of Persons born in Ireland ; and consequently
that the last resource of younger Brothers is to the Church , where if
well befriended they may possibly rise to some reasonable maintenance .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,286.33

<P_4,287>

Your Grace will not want Opportunityes during your continuance in this
Government , or afterwards by the favor you have with his Majesty , to
make D=r= Whitcomb easyer in his Preferm=t= by some addition , and in
such a Manner , that no Person or Society can have the least pretence to
complain of . SWIFT-1735-2,4,287.35

And therefore I humbly beg your Grace out of the high Veneration I bear
to your Person and Virtues , that you will please to let D=r= Whitcomb
content him self a while with that rich Preferment , one of the best of
the Kingdom , till it shall lye in your way further to promote him to
his own content . SWIFT-1735-2,4,287.36

If upon admittance to his Fellowship he took the usuall Oath never to
accept a Church living , but with the two usuall Limitations of distance
and value to hold with his Fellowship , it will be thought hardly
reconcileable to accept a Dispensation where the Case is so vastly
different . SWIFT-1735-2,4,287.37

I humbly intreat Your Grace to pardon this long Trouble I have given You
, wherein I have no sort of Interest , except that which proceeds from
an earnest desire , that You may continue as you began from Your Youth
without incurring the least censure from the World , or giving the least
Cause of discontent to any deserving Person . SWIFT-1735-2,4,287.38

I am with the greatest Respect Truth and Gratitude My Lord Your Grace's
most obedient and most obliged humble servant Jonath: Swift .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,287.39

Dublin . SWIFT-1735-2,4,287.40

Jan=r=. 14 1734 SWIFT-1735-2,4,287.41

I desire to present my most humble Respects to My Lady Dutchess ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,287.42

Being loth to give y=r= Grace further Trouble I desire you will command
My Lady E. Germain to let me Know that you do not disapprove of this
Letter . SWIFT-1735-2,4,287.43

<font> Endorsed : <$$font> 14=th= Jan=y= 1734 D. Swift
SWIFT-1735-2,4,287.44

<P_4,290>

{ED:Swift_to_Samuel_Gerrard}

{ED:Dublin,_6_February_1734-5}

S=r= I am very much obliged by your kind Endeavors to help me to a
purchase of Lands ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,290.48

for indeed I am the most helpless man alive in such Affairs .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,290.49

My manner of life hath quite estranged me from knowing how to deal with
the Cunning of Mankind . SWIFT-1735-2,4,290.50

And my health is so very uncertain that I dare not venture ten miles
from Town . SWIFT-1735-2,4,290.51

I find that M=r= Garstin values his land at 10@ @sh an Acre , and yet
expects to sell it at 24 years purchase ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,290.52

And what Friend have I who is able and willing to make the Bargain and
inquire into the Title , and fourty other Circumstances .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,290.53

All I am worth except about 1500@ @=ll= is <P_4,291> out in Mortgages ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.54

and I can@ @not command a penny {TEXT:peny} of it nor get any Interest .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.55

And the 1500@ @=ll= I have at the Bankers I am about lending to another
Person on a Mortgage . SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.56

Yet if I could be tolerably used for the Land you mention I would borrow
as much as would make it 2000@ @=ll= . SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.57

But I look on you as too honest to understand the Arts of Purchasers or
Sellers . SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.58

The Neighbouring Squires if they have money are onely proper for such
Jobbs , SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.59

and if they have none will all Joyn to cheat a Stranger .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.60

I have long wished that some skillfull man would take me into
guardian-ship . SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.61

If I had M=r= Garstin's land at 20 years purchase I would sink the rent
2 shill an Acre , and rather have 80@ @=ll= p_ann well payd than 100@
@=ll= upon the rack , SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.62

and so I should pay 24 years purchase . SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.63

Your Justice and good will I entirely rely on ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.64

and if you had a skillfull notable Friend upon whom you could equally
rely , something might be done . SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.65

M=r= Swift's Land you thought not worth 6@ @=s= p acre ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.66

this of Mr. Garstin's farther from Dublin is valued at ten , and 24
years purchase ; and the Title unknown to me . SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.67

If the Price could be fixed ; it would be no difficulty to consult
Lawyers upon the Title . SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.68

My head is ill , SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.69

and you may perceive it by my way of writing , and please to excuse it
SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.70

I am with true Esteem Your most obed=t= Ser=vt= J. Swift
SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.71

Dublin . SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.72

Febr. 6=th= 1734 - 5 SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.73

<font> Address : <$$font> SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.74

To M=r= Samuel Gerrard at Gibstown , SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.75

to be left at the Post House In Navan SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.76

<font> Frank : <$$font> Free Jo: Rochfort . SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.77

King's Hospital , Dublin SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.78

{ED:Swift_to_Humphrey_French}

{ED:Deanery_House,_7_February_1734-5}

S=r= I have so ill a State of Health , that I can not safely attend at
the Blue-coat Board this evening , SWIFT-1735-2,4,291.81

I must there=fore intreat you to <P_4,292> recommend Isaac Bullock , a
hopefull honest Boy to be admitted into the Hospitall , at my Request to
My Lord Mayor and the Board , wherein You will much oblige Your most
obedient servant Jonath: Swift . SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.82

Deanry-house SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.83

Febr 7=th= 1734 . SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.84

The Boy was recommended to me by the Lady Elizabeth Brownlow , from her
own Knowledge SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.85

<font> Address : <$$font> SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.86

To Humphry French Esqr Alderman of the City of Dublin .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.87

<font> Endorsed : <$$font> Dean of S=t= Patricks SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.88

To gett a Boy admitted SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.89

feb 7 1734 - SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.90

Isaac Bullock SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.91

{ED:Swift_to_Samuel_Gerrard}

{ED:11_February_1734-5}

Sir , As I always conceived a very good opinion of your honour and
justice , as well as your good sense , I am more inclined to rely upon
them all , than our time of acquaintance usually produceth .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.94

What I want is not to be dealt favourably with , but to be safe :
SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.95

I suppose Mr. Garstin will enter into all measures to make his title
appear good to my lawyers , SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.96

and then I will readily agree to buy his land at the price you advise me
; SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.97

but if I am set to <font> cant <$$font> with Alderman Quail , he is too
cunning a man for me to contend with ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.98

and if Mr. Garstin were my brother , I should not advise him to deal
with such a <font> brangling <$$font> man , to say no worse of him .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.99

However , Mr. Garstin's business is to sell as dear as he can ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.100

and the money , whensoever it comes , is the same thing to him .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,292.101

I must borrow 5 or 600@ @l. to make up the sum , <P_4,293> which I
believe I can do . SWIFT-1735-2,4,293.102

I am afraid , if the business goes on , I shall desire you to come to
town with Mr. Garstin , SWIFT-1735-2,4,293.103

for I neither can , nor will do any thing without you , who are as
necessary as my lawyer . SWIFT-1735-2,4,293.104

Please to answer this letter ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,293.105

and believe me to be , Your most obedient , &c. J. Swift .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,293.106

Feb. 11 , 1734 - 5 . SWIFT-1735-2,4,293.107

I must tell you in confidence , that Mr. Garstin's conduct has been
much censured . SWIFT-1735-2,4,293.108

He is said to have been a very ill tenant ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,293.109

he never paid his rents , but till he ran to an ejectment ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,293.110

and hath by extravagances put himself under a necessity of selling this
estate . SWIFT-1735-2,4,293.111

This I have been assured of from some of his neighbours , who have no
design to purchase his lands . SWIFT-1735-2,4,293.112

The characters of men are of great importance to be known on these
occasions . SWIFT-1735-2,4,293.113

<font> Address : <$$font> SWIFT-1735-2,4,293.114

To Mr. Samuel Gerrard SWIFT-1735-2,4,293.115

To be left at the Post-house , at Navan , County of Meath .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,293.116

<P_4,296>

{ED:Swift_to_Samuel_Gerrard}

Feb. 20 . 1734 SWIFT-1735-2,4,296.119

{ED:1734-5}

Sir , I beg ten_thousand pardons for the trouble I have given you .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,296.121

Mr. Garstin lies under so ill a character , that I was advised not to
deal with him . SWIFT-1735-2,4,296.122

And , in short , I find such a difficulty in purchasing land , that I
resolved not to meddle with it , but leave that trouble to my executors
. SWIFT-1735-2,4,296.123

I find the neighbouring gentlemen , where land is to be sold , are
continually watching like crows over a dead horse ; and we at a distance
know not how to deal among them . SWIFT-1735-2,4,296.124

I have been near 20 years endeavouring to be a purchaser ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,296.125

and have always been baulked , or tried to be cheated .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,296.126

I am much obliged to you for your endeavours , SWIFT-1735-2,4,296.127

and have not a better opinion of any other man's or gentleman's honesty
. SWIFT-1735-2,4,296.128

I have lately disposed of all my money , no less than 1500@ @l. , at
interest , at 5 L. {TEXT:L._5} , 6@ @s. 8@ @d. interest per hundred ,
which will yield me 80@ @l. per_annum . SWIFT-1735-2,4,296.129

It is to the son-in-law of a friend , who hath a good fortune ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,296.130

and I think it safe . SWIFT-1735-2,4,296.131

I hope I shall soon see you in town : SWIFT-1735-2,4,296.132

you slipt out of my hands last time ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,296.133

but I expect you to be my sojourner whenever you come , when I will tell
you the whole scheme of an hospital for lunatics and idiots , a charity
I find is the hardest point to settle well . SWIFT-1735-2,4,296.134

I will never leave any thing <P_4,297> to any other use ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.135

I will leave the whole to God's providence how it will be disposed of ,
who will forgive me if my good intentions miscarry .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.136

I am , Sir , with great esteem and truth , Sir , your most obedient
humble servant , Jon. Swift . SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.137

<font> Address : <$$font> SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.138

To Mr. Samuel Gerrard , at Gibbstown , in the County of Meath , near
Navan . SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.139

{ED:Swift_to_Mrs._Pendarves}

Dublin , SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.141

Feb. 22 , 1734 - 5 SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.142

Madam , I have observed among my own sex , and particularly in myself ,
that those of us who grow most insignificant expect most civility , and
give less than they did when they possibly were good for something .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.143

I am grown sickly , weak , lean , forgetful , peevish , spiritless ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.144

and for those very reasons expect that you , who have nothing to do but
to be happy , should be entertaining me with your letters and civilities
, although I never return either . SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.145

Your last is dated above two months ago , since which time <paren> as
well as a good while before <$$paren> I never had one single hour of
health or spirit to acknowledge it . SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.146

<font> It is your fault <$$font> ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.147

why did you not come sooner into the world or let me come later ?
SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.148

<font> It is your fault <$$font> for coming into Ireland at all ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.149

<font> it is your fault <$$font> for leaving it .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.150

I confess your case is hard , SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.151

for if <font> you return <$$font> you are a great fool to come among
<font> beggars and slaves <$$font> , SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.152

and if you do not , you are a <font> great knave <$$font> in forsaking
those you have seduced to admire you . SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.153

The complaint you make of a disorder in one of your eyes will admit no
raillery , SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.154

it is what I was heartily afflicted to hear , SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.155

but since you were able to write , I hope it hath entirely left you .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.156

I am often told that I am an ill judge of ladies' eyes , so that I shall
make you an ill compliment by confessing that I read in yours all the
accomplishments I found in your mind and conversation , and happened to
agree in my thoughts with better judges . SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.157

I only wish they could never shine out of Dublin ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.158

for then you would recover the only temporal blessings this town affords
, SWIFT-1735-2,4,297.159

I mean sociable dinners and <P_4,298> cheerful evenings , which ,
without your assistance , we shall infallibly lose ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.160

for Dr. Delany lives entirely at Delville , SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.161

the town air will not agree with his lady , SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.162

and in winter there is no seeing him or dining with him but by those who
keep coaches , SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.163

and they must return the moment after dinner . SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.164

But I have chid him into taking a house just next to his , which will
have three bedchambers , where his winter visitants may lie ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.165

and a bed shall be fitted up for you . SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.166

Your false reasons for not coming hither are the same in one article for
my not going among you ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.167

I mean the business of expense ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.168

but I can remove yours easily , SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.169

it is but to stay with us always , SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.170

and then you can live at least three times better than at home , where
everything is thrice as dear , and your money twelve in the hundred
better , whereas my sickness and years make it impossible for me to live
at London . SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.171

I must have three horses , as many servants , and a large house ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.172

neither can I live without constant wine , while my poor revenues are
sinking every day . SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.173

I am very sorry for the death of your couzin Lansdown .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.174

His son Graham is ruining himself as fast as possible ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.175

but I hope the young lady has an untouchable settlement .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.176

I am very much obliged to your care about that business with the Duke of
Chandos : SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.177

I hear he told a person he would grant my request , but that he had no
acquaintance with me . SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.178

I had a letter lately from Mrs. Donnellan , SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.179

and I command you to let her know that I will answer it with the first
hour of tolerable health . SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.180

Pray , Madam , preserve your eyes , how dangerous soever they may be to
us ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.181

and yet you ought in mercy to put them out , because they direct your
hand in writing , which is equally dangerous . SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.182

Well , Madam , pray God bless you wherever you go or reside !
SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.183

may you be ever as you are , agreeable to every Killala curate and
Dublin Dean , SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.184

for I disdain to mention temporal folks without gowns and cassocks .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.185

I will wish for your happiness , although I shall never see you , as
Horace did for Galatea when she was going a long voyage from home ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.186

pray read the verses in the original . SWIFT-1735-2,4,298.187

<P_4,299>

Sis licet felix , ubicunque mavis , Et memor nostri , Galatea , vivas ,
etc. SWIFT-1735-2,4,299.189

A year or two ago I would have put the whole into English verse and
applied it to you , SWIFT-1735-2,4,299.190

but my rhyming is fled with my health , SWIFT-1735-2,4,299.191

and what is more to be pitied is even my vein of satire upon ladies is
lost . SWIFT-1735-2,4,299.192

Dear Madam , believe me to be , with the truest respect and esteem Your
most obedient humble servant , J. Swift . SWIFT-1735-2,4,299.193

{ED:Swift_to_John_Barber}

Deanry-house , Dublin , SWIFT-1735-2,4,299.195

March 1 , 1734 - 5 . SWIFT-1735-2,4,299.196

My very good and old Friend , I received lately a very acceptable
present which you were pleased to send me , which was an engraved
picture of you , very handsomely <P_4,300> framed , with a glass over it
. SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.197

I take your remembrance of me very kindly , SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.198

and give you my hearty thanks . SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.199

I have no other way to show my gratitude at present , than by desiring
another favour from you , which however will be less expensive .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.200

Mr. Singleton , the King's Prime Serjeant here , is one of the first
among the worthiest persons in this kingdom ; of great honour , justice
, truth , good-sense , goodnature , and knowledge in his faculty :
SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.201

this gentleman , whom I have the honour to know , although his business
be too great to allow me the happiness of seeing him as often as I
desire , hath commanded me to recommend the bearer , Mr. Richardson ,
agent to the Deny Society , whereof you are a member .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.202

From such a recommendation as the Prime Serjeant's , I will engage that
Mr. Richardson is a very deserving man , and that whatever he desires
of you will be perfectly just and reasonable . SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.203

And now , my good friend , give me leave to inquire after your health ,
which , I hope , is much better than mine . SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.204

Are you often in your coach at Highgate and Hampstead ?
SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.205

Do you keep cheerful company ? SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.206

I know you can@ @not drink , SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.207

but I hope your stomach for eating is not declined ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.208

and how are you treated by the gout ? SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.209

These and many more particulars I desire to know .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.210

The people who read news have struck me to the heart , by the account of
my dear friend Dr. Arbuthnot@ @'s death ; although I could expect no
less , by a letter I received from him a month or two ago .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.211

Do you sometimes see Mr. Pope ? SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.212

We still correspond pretty constantly . SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.213

He publishes poems oftener and better than ever , which I wonder at the
more , because he complains with too much reason of his disorders .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.214

What a havoc hath death made among our friends since that of the Queen !
SWIFT-1735-2,4,300.215

As to myself , I am grown leaner than you were when we parted <P_4,301>
last , SWIFT-1735-2,4,301.216

and am never wholly free from giddiness and weakness , and sickness in
my stomach , SWIFT-1735-2,4,301.217

otherwise I should have been among you two or three years ago .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,301.218

But now I despair of that happiness . SWIFT-1735-2,4,301.219

I ride a_dozen miles as often as I can , SWIFT-1735-2,4,301.220

and always walk the streets , except in the night , which my head will
not suffer me to do . SWIFT-1735-2,4,301.221

But my fortune is so sunk , that I can@ @not afford half the necessaries
or conveniences that I can still make a shift to provide myself with
here . SWIFT-1735-2,4,301.222

My chief support is French wine , which , although not equal to yours ,
I drink a bottle to myself every day . SWIFT-1735-2,4,301.223

I keep three horses , two men and an old woman , in a large empty house
, SWIFT-1735-2,4,301.224

and dine half the week like a King by myself . SWIFT-1735-2,4,301.225

Thus I tell you my whole economy , which I fear will tire you by reading
. SWIFT-1735-2,4,301.226

Pray God keep you in health and happiness ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,301.227

and do me the justice to believe that I am , with true esteem and
friendship , dear Sir , Your most obedient humble servant , Jon. Swift
. SWIFT-1735-2,4,301.228

You see by many blottings and interlinings what a condition my head is
in . SWIFT-1735-2,4,301.229

<P_4,302>

{ED:Swift_to_William_Pulteney}

Dublin , SWIFT-1735-2,4,302.232

March 8 , 1734 SWIFT-1735-2,4,302.233

{ED:1734-5}

Sir , Mr. <font> Stopford <$$font> going to <font> England <$$font>
upon some particular affair , I gladly complied with his desire , that I
should do myself the honour of writing to you , because , as useless as
I am , and although I shall <P_4,303> never have the happiness to see
you , yet my ambition to have some small place in your memory , will
live as long as myself . SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.235

I will do an unmannerly thing , which is , to bequeath you an epitaph
for forty years hence , in two words , <font> Ultimus Britannorum .
<$$font> SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.236

You never forsook your party . SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.237

You might often have been as great as the court can make any man so ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.238

but you preserved your spirit of liberty , when your former colleagues
had utterly sacrificed theirs ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.239

and , if it shall ever begin to breathe in these days , it must intirely
be owing to yourself and one or two friends . SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.240

But it is altogether impossible for any nation to preserve its liberty
long under a tenth part of the present luxury , infidelity , and a
million of corruptions . SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.241

We see the <font> Gothic <$$font> system of limited monarchy is
extinguished in all the nations of <font> Europe . <$$font>
SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.242

It is utterly extirpated in this wretched kingdom ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.243

and yours must be the next . SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.244

Such hath ever been human nature , that a single man , without any
superior advantages either of body or mind , but usually the direct
contrary , is able to attack twenty millions , and drag them voluntary
at his chariot-wheels . SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.245

But no more of this . SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.246

I am as sick of the world as I am of age and disease , the last of which
I am never wholly without . SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.247

I live in a nation of slaves , who sell themselves for nothing .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.248

My revenues , though half sunk , are sufficient to support me in some
decency . SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.249

And I have a few friends of great worth , who , when I visit them , or
they me , agree together in discovering our utter detestation of all
proceeding both here and there . SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.250

<font> Haec est vita solutorum misera ambitione gravique . <$$font>
SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.251

I am under the displeasure of the Court for fixing up a true Whig
epitaph in my Cathedral , over the burying place of old <font> Schomberg
<$$font> , and for some other things of equal demerit or disaffection ,
wherewith I am charged ; perhaps also for some verses laid to my charge
, and published without my knowledge or consent ; wherein you and
another person are understood to be meant by initial letters .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,303.252

I desire your pardon for the trouble I gave in recommending a gentleman
to your protection , who hath an appeal before the house of lords ;
wherein I was prevailed on by an eminent person in the <P_4,304> law ,
who , by a miracle , was raised to the bench in these very times ,
although he be a man of virtue and learning in a great degree .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.253

Dear Sir , you have nothing to desire in this world but good health ,
good times , the prosperity of your family <paren> wherein you have my
constant prayers <$$paren> and deserving friends .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.254

I have often said , that I never knew a more easy man to live with than
yourself ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.255

and if you had only a poor forty_thousand pounds a year , I would
command you to settle one_thousand of it on me to live in your next
neighbourhood ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.256

but as for our friends at <font> Twickenham <$$font> and <font> Dawley
<$$font> , I have told them plainly that they are both too speculative
and temperate for me to accept their invitation , and infinitely too
philosophical . SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.257

The bearer , Mr. <font> Stopford <$$font> , hath such infinite
obligations to you for your favours to him , SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.258

and is , in all respects , so very deserving a gentleman , that I am
sure you never repented the good office you have done him at my
recommendation . SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.259

But he only attends you on perfect gratitude : SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.260

for he knows very well you are what is now called a disaffected person .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.261

You are in the modern sense a friend to popery , arbitrary power , and
the pretender ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.262

and therefore he has just politics enough not to trouble you with
helping him by the hand to better preferment ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.263

and I pray God , while things continue as they are , that it may be
never in your power to make a curate , or an exciseman .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.264

You will hear , perhaps , that one <font> Faulkner <$$font> hath printed
four volumes , which are called my works ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.265

he hath only prefixed the first letters of my name ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.266

it was done utterly against my will ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.267

for there is no property in printers or booksellers here ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.268

and I was not able to hinder it . SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.269

I did imagine , that , after my death , the several <font> London
<$$font> booksellers would agree among themselves to print what each of
them had by common consent ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.270

but the man here hath prevented it much to my vexation ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.271

for I would as willingly have it done even in <font> Scotland .
<$$font> SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.272

All this has vexed me not a little , as done in so obscure a place .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.273

I have never yet looked into them , SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.274

nor I believe ever shall . SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.275

You will find Mr. <font> Stopford <$$font> the same modest , virtuous ,
learned man that you last saw him ; but with a few more years , and a
great deal more flesh , beside the blessing of a wife and children .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.276

I desire to present my humble service to yours . SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.277

I pray God bless and assist you in your glorious endeavours for the
preservation of your country , SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.278

and remain , with the truest respect , Sir , your most obedient and
obliged humble servant , Jonath. Swift . SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.279

You will see , by the many blunders in words , syllables , and letters ,
what a condition my giddy head is in . SWIFT-1735-2,4,304.280

<P_4,305>

{ED:Swift_to_the_Rev._James_Stopford}

Deanery House , SWIFT-1735-2,4,305.283

8 March 1734 - 5 SWIFT-1735-2,4,305.284

Sr I heartily wish you a good Voyage and good Success ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,305.285

but I hope you will never advance your Fortunes by the favour of those
who are bent to ruin and enslave England , as they have already done
Ireland . SWIFT-1735-2,4,305.286

I desire my humble Service to my L=d= Bolingbroke , Mr. Pope , and my
oth=r= Friends with whom I brought you Acquainted .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,305.287

If you get preferment upon the foot that others do , you will lose the
esteem of all honest men . SWIFT-1735-2,4,305.288

My humble respects to my Lord Carteret , and my Lady , and to the
Countess of Granville , and Mr. Ford , if you see him .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,305.289

I am , Ever yours , J. S. SWIFT-1735-2,4,305.290

I desire you will present my humble service to Mr. Hart that my head
was so ill I could not write to him or any letters by him , but I wish
him all success , and entreat he would let all my friends of his
acquaintance know that I present my humble service to them .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,305.291

I have left the letter to Mr. Pulteney open , which I desire you will
seal after you have read it . SWIFT-1735-2,4,305.292

<font> Address : <$$font> SWIFT-1735-2,4,305.293

To the Reverend Mr. Stopford . SWIFT-1735-2,4,305.294

<P_4,307>

{ED:Swift_to_William_Fitzherbert}

March 19th , 1734 - 5 . SWIFT-1735-2,4,307.297

Sir , I had , some days ago , a very long letter from a young gentleman
whom I never saw ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,307.298

but , by the name subscribed , I found it came from a younger son of
yours , I suppose your second . SWIFT-1735-2,4,307.299

He lays before me , in a very particular manner , the forlorn condition
he is in , by the severities of you and your lady , his mother .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,307.300

He freely owns his boyish follies , when he was first brought up to town
, at fourteen years old ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,307.301

but he appeals to Dr. Sheridan for the improvement he made in the
Doctor's school , and to his tutor for his behaviour in the college ,
where he took his degree with particular credit , being made one of the
moderators of his class ; by which it appears that he passed for one of
the four best scholars in it . SWIFT-1735-2,4,307.302

His letter contains four large pages in folio , and written in a very
small hand ; where he gives a history of his life , from the age of
fourteen to the present time . SWIFT-1735-2,4,307.303

It is written with so much spirit , nature , and good sense , as well as
appearance of truth , that having first razed out the writer's name , I
have shown it to several gentlemen , my friends , of great worth ,
learning , and taste ; who all agree in my opinion of the letter ,
<P_4,308> and think it a pity that so hopeful a youth should not have
proper encouragement , unless he has some very disagreeable faults ,
whereof they and I are ignorant . SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.304

When I had written thus far , Dr. Sheridan came to see me :
SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.305

I read your son's letter to him , SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.306

and he was equally pleased with it , SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.307

and justified the progress the young man had made in his school .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.308

I went this evening to visit a Lady , who hath a very great esteem and
friendship for you and Mrs. Fitzherbert : SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.309

She told me that the young man's great fault was too much pertness and
conceit of himself , which he often shewed in your house , and even
among company . Which , I own , is a very bad quality in any young man
, and is not easily cured : SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.310

Yet , I think , if I had a son , who had understanding , wit , and
humour , to write such a letter , I could not find in my heart to cast
him off , but try what good advice and maturer years would do towards
amendment , and , in the mean time , give him no cause to complain of
wanting convenient food , lodging , and raiment .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.311

He lays the whole weight of his letter to me upon the truth of the facts
, SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.312

and is contented to stand or fall by them . SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.313

If he be a liar , he is into the bargain an unpardonable fool ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.314

and his good natural , as well as acquired parts , shall be an
aggravation to me , to render him more odious . SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.315

I hear he is turned of one-and-twenty years ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.316

and what he alledges seems to be true , that he is not yet put into any
way of living , either by law , physic , or divinity ; although in his
letter , he pretends to have studied the first , on your promise to send
him to the Temple : SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.317

But , your mind altering , and you rather choosing to send him to Leyden
, he applied himself to study physic , SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.318

and made some progress in it ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.319

but , for many months , he hath heard nothing more from you , so that
now he is in utter despair , loaden with the hatred of both his parents
, and lodges in a garret in William-street , with only the liberty to
dine at your house , and no further care taken of him .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.320

Sir , although I have seldom been in your company , it is many years
since I had the honour of being known to you , SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.321

and I always thought , as well as heard , that you were a gentleman of
great honour , truth , knowledge , modesty , good-nature , and candour .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.322

As to your Lady , I never saw her but once , and then but for a few
minutes : SWIFT-1735-2,4,308.323

She hath the character of being a very polite and accomplished <P_4,309>
person : SWIFT-1735-2,4,309.324

and therefore , very probably , her son's rough , overweening , forward
behaviour , among company with her , without that due deference which
only can recommend youth , may be very disgustful to her .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,309.325

Your son desires me , in his letter , to apply to some friends who have
most credit with you , that you will please to put him into some way of
life ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,309.326

and he wishes that those friends would be so generous to join in
contributing some allowance to support him at Leyden .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,309.327

I think , it would have been well if he had been sent to sea in the
proper time , or had now a commission in the army ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,309.328

Yet , if he were the original writer of that letter sent to me under his
name , I confess myself so very partial , as to be extremely sorry if he
should not deserve and acquire the favour of you and your lady ; in
which case , any parents might be forgiven for being proud of such a son
. SWIFT-1735-2,4,309.329

I have no acquaintance with his tutor , Dr. King ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,309.330

but , if I can learn from those who have , I shall be glad to hear that
he confirms the character of the young man's good parts and learning ,
as Dr. Sheridan hath done . SWIFT-1735-2,4,309.331

I intreat your pardon for this long letter , and for offering to
interfere in a domestic point , where I have no information but from one
side : SWIFT-1735-2,4,309.332

But I can faithfully assure you , that my regard is altogether for the
service and ease of you and your lady and family .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,309.333

I have always thought that a happy genius is seldom without some bent
towards virtue , and therefore deserves some indulgence .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,309.334

Most of the great villains I have known <paren> which were not a small
number <$$paren> have been brutes in their understandings , as well as
their actions . SWIFT-1735-2,4,309.335

But I have already run out my paper , as well as your patience .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,309.336

I shall therefore conclude with the sincere profession of being , with
great esteem and truth , Sir , Your most obedient , and Most humble
servant . SWIFT-1735-2,4,309.337

{ED:Swift_to_the_Duke_of_Dorset}

{ED:Dublin,_22_March_1734-5}

My Lord . Your Grace must please to remember that I carryed You to see
a Comedy of Terence acted by the Scholars of Doctor Sheridan , <P_4,310>
with which Performance You were very well pleased .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.340

The Doctor is the most learned Person I know in this Kingdom , and the
best School-master here in the memory of Man , having an excellent taste
{TEXT:tast} in all parts of Literature . SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.341

I prevayled on My Lord Carteret to make him one of his Chaplains , and
to bestow him a good Living , which the Doct=r= afterwards exchange=d=
for another about seven miles from Dublin ... SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.342

But his Health impairing by the Air of this Town , and being invited by
the Gentlemen of the County of Cavan to accept the Free School of Cavan
, which is endowed equall to his Living , and he being born in the
County , the present Schoolmaster one M=r= Knowlls is desirous to change
his School for the Doc=trs= Living of much the same value , Called
Dunboyn in Your Grace's gift . SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.343

This affair hath been so long managing , that it was in agitation before
you left us , SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.344

and I begged Your consent for the change , which , as a very reasonable
Request , not crossing any measures of Your Grace , you were pleased to
grant . SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.345

All things have been long agreed , SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.346

the Bp of Kilmore <paren> Hort <$$paren> hath writ to you upon it ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.347

so our Lords Justices have done , for some Months past
SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.348

but being a thing of no great Consequence to the publick State of the
Kingdom Your Secretaryes have forgot it . SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.349

In the mean time the poor Doc=tr= hath given up his School in toun , to
his great loss , SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.350

and hath parted with his House , continuing in uneasyness and Suspence
till your Lettr comes . SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.351

Therefore I humbly beg , you will please to order one of your
Secretaryes immediately to send the Letter , that will impower the
Doct=r= and Knowles the Schoolmater to exchange Stations .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.352

My Letter is the worst part of the matter , because it will cost you
three minutes to read , SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.353

but the Request is short and reasonable . SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.354

I writ some days ago to My Lady E. Germain on the same purpose
SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.355

but it is possible Her Ladyship might forget , which Your Grace to my
Knowledge is not capable of SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.356

I am with the highest Respect My Lord , Your {TEXT:You} Grace's most
obedient and most humble Servan=t= Jonath. Swift .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.357

Dublin . SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.358

March 22=d= 1734 SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.359

{ED:1734-5}

<font> Endorsed : <$$font> SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.361

22=d= March 1734 SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.362

D. Swift SWIFT-1735-2,4,310.363

<P_4,311>

{ED:Swift_to_a_Lady_Unknown}

Madam {ED:Deanery_House,_24_March_1734-5} I send you a Tribute of some
Oranges lately done for me by a Lady to whom I gave my Receit
SWIFT-1735-2,4,311.366

You are to keep them in some warm place within the smell of a fire ,
till they grow dry . SWIFT-1735-2,4,311.367

I am Madam Your most obedient humble Servant J: Swift .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,311.368

Deanry-House SWIFT-1735-2,4,311.369

Mar. 24 1735 SWIFT-1735-2,4,311.370

My most humble Service to the Ladyes SWIFT-1735-2,4,311.371

{ED:Swift_to_Theophilus_Harrison}

{ED:Deanery_House,_25_March_1735}

S=r= . Your Memorandum about borrowing for you from D=r= Helsham
Galen's Notes on Hippocrates , hath layn some days before me upon my
Table , SWIFT-1735-2,4,311.374

but I intended to see the Doc=tr= and desire it my self .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,311.375

At present my mind is Changed , SWIFT-1735-2,4,311.376

And finding among my Books three large Volumes of Galens Works of the
best Translation into Latin ; although it may affront your Skill in
Greek , I venture to make you a Present of them ; because I suppose the
Notes on Hippocrates are among them . SWIFT-1735-2,4,311.377

Pray spare your onely sixpence for your self , SWIFT-1735-2,4,311.378

and do <P_4,312> not give it to the Servant or the Porter ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,312.379

but send me the Cloth honestly back , SWIFT-1735-2,4,312.380

for M=rs= Whiteway shall not have it to dine on .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,312.381

My Service to Your Mother , and Miss Molly ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,312.382

I have a Letter of Miss Molly , to her Mother , which is all spelt right
; SWIFT-1735-2,4,312.383

I keep it indorsed among others for a rarity . SWIFT-1735-2,4,312.384

I am Your affect. {TEXT:"affect"_without_period} Servant Jonath: Swift
SWIFT-1735-2,4,312.385

Deanry-house SWIFT-1735-2,4,312.386

March 25=th= 1735 SWIFT-1735-2,4,312.387

<font> Address : <$$font> SWIFT-1735-2,4,312.388

To M=r= Harrison SWIFT-1735-2,4,312.389

<P_4,319>

{ED:Swift_to_Eaton_Stannard}

{ED:Deanery_House,_11_April_1735}

S=r= I believe you may possibly have heard from me or publick report of
my Resolution to leave my whole fortune except a few Legacyes , to build
an Hospital for Ideots and Lunaticks {TEXT:Lunatick} in this City or the
Suburbs , SWIFT-1735-2,4,319.393

and after long consideration I have been so bold to pitch upon you as my
Director in the methods I ought to take for rendring my Design Effectual
; SWIFT-1735-2,4,319.394

I have known and seen the Difficultyes of any such attempt by the
Negligence or Ignorance , or some worse dealing by Executors and
Trustees . SWIFT-1735-2,4,319.395

I have been so unfortunate for want of some able Friend of a publick
spirit , that I could never purchase one foot of Land . The
neighbouring Country Squires always watching like Crows for a Carcase
over every Estate that was likely to be sold ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,319.396

and that kind of Knowledge was quite out of the Life I have led , which
in the Strength of my days chiefly past at Courts and among Ministers of
State , to my great Vexation and Disappointment , for which I now repent
too late . SWIFT-1735-2,4,319.397

I therefore humbly desire You will please to take me into your
Gurardianship as far as the weight of your Business will permit .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,319.398

As the City hath agreed to give me a piece of Land , My Wish would be to
make the Lord Mayor Recorder and Aldermen my Trustees , Executors or
Governors , according as You shall please to advise .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,319.399

And out of these Committees may be appointed to meet at proper times -
SWIFT-1735-2,4,319.400

My thought is that the City will be carefull in an Affair calculated
wholly for the City's advantage . SWIFT-1735-2,4,319.401

If you would favor me so much as to fix any day during this Vacation to
dine at the Deanry , I shall be extremely obliged to You ; and give you
my very crude Notions of my Intentions . SWIFT-1735-2,4,319.402

I am with very great Esteem S=r= Your most obedient and obliged Servant
Jonath: Swift . SWIFT-1735-2,4,319.403

Deanry-house . SWIFT-1735-2,4,319.404

Aprl 11=th= 1735 SWIFT-1735-2,4,319.405

<font> Address : <$$font> SWIFT-1735-2,4,319.406

To Eaton Stannard Esq=r= Recorder of the City of Dublin
SWIFT-1735-2,4,319.407

<P_4,320>

{ED:Swift_to_Thomas_Beach}

Dublin , SWIFT-1735-2,4,320.410

12 April 1735 . SWIFT-1735-2,4,320.411

Sir . After the fate of all poets , you are no favourite of fortune ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,320.412

for your letter of March 31st did not come to my hands till two days
after Sr William Fownes's death , who , having been long afflicted with
the stone and other disorders , besides great old age , died about nine
days ago . SWIFT-1735-2,4,320.413

If he had recovered , I should certainly have waited on him with your
poem , and recommended it and the author very heartily to his favour .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,320.414

I have seen fewer good panygyrics than any other sort of writing ,
especially in verse , SWIFT-1735-2,4,320.415

and therefore I much approve the method you have taken ; I mean , that
of describing a person who possesseth every virtue , and rather waiving
that Sir William Fownes was in your thoughts , than that your picture
was like in every part . SWIFT-1735-2,4,320.416

He had indeed a very good natural understanding , SWIFT-1735-2,4,320.417

nor wanted a talent for poetry ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,320.418

but his education denied him learning , SWIFT-1735-2,4,320.419

for he knew no other language except his own ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,320.420

yet he was a man of taste and humour , as well as a wise and useful
citizen , as appeared by some little Treatise for regulating the
government of this city ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,320.421

and I often wished his advice had been taken . SWIFT-1735-2,4,320.422

I read your poem several times , SWIFT-1735-2,4,320.423

and showed it to three or four judicious friends , who all approved it ,
but agreed with me , that it wanted some corrections ; upon which I took
a number of lines , <P_4,321> which are in all
two_hundred_and_ninety-nine , the odd number being occasioned by what
they call a triplet , which was a vicious way of rhyming , wherewith
Dryden abounded , and was imitated by all the bad versifiers in Charles
the Second@ @'s reign . SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.424

Dryden , though my near relation , is one I have often blamed as well as
pitied . SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.425

He was poor , and in great haste to finish his plays , because by them
he chiefly supported his family , SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.426

and this made him so very uncorrect ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.427

he likewise brought-@ @in the Alexandrine verse at the end of his
triplets . SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.428

I was so angry at these corruptions , that about twenty-four years ago I
banished them all by one triplet , with the Alexandrine , upon a very
ridiculous subject . SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.429

I absolutely did prevail with Mr. Pope , and Gay , and Dr. Young , and
one or two more , to reject them . SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.430

Mr. Pope never used them till he translated Homer , which was too long
a work to be so very exact in ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.431

and I think in one or two of his last poems he hath , out of laziness ,
done the same thing , though very seldom . SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.432

I now proceed to what I would have corrected in your poem .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.433

Line 6 for <font> ha@ @n't <$$font> read <font> want <$$font> ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.434

I abhor those <font> han'ts <$$font> and <font> wo'nt's <$$font> etc. ,
etc. ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.435

they are detestable in verse as well as prose . SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.436

Line 19 , I would have you change the word <font> repel . <$$font>
SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.437

Line 5 , for <font> whilst <$$font> put <font> while . <$$font>
SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.438

Line 83 , <font> derives <$$font> : SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.439

I doubt there is no verb deponent , but always active .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.440

Line 106 , <font> if Noll usurps or James : SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.441

Noll <$$font> is too much a cant word for a grave poem ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.442

and as to <font> James <$$font> he was a weak bigoted Papist , desirous
like all Kings of absolute power , but not properly a tyrant .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.443

Line 109 , <font> and midst <$$font> : harsh and rough ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.444

the elision is unluckily placed . SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.445

Lines 115 , 116 , I can@ @not suffer an ill rhyme , such as <font> seen
<$$font> and <font> scene <$$font> - SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.446

I forgot the triplet in line 108 , which I wish were clipped of one of
its three wings , and line 110 , <font> to glory <$$font> :
SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.447

I wish it were <font> in glory . <$$font> SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.448

Line 118 , <font> does <$$font> : SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.449

this word should be avoided as a mere expletive .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.450

Line 155 , <font> does <$$font> : the same fault .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.451

Line 161 , <font> the ingrate <$$font> : SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.452

this verse is not right measure , SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.453

but sounds very ill . SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.454

Line 201 , <font> cheerful <$$font> , etc. : SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.455

this verse wants a verb as <font> are <$$font> or some other .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.456

Line 204 , <font> does . <$$font> SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.457

Line 217 , <font> pervade <$$font> : SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.458

it should be <font> pervades . <$$font> SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.459

Line 218 , <font> and grows <$$font> : SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.460

query , is not <font> or <$$font> more proper ? SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.461

Line 278 , <font> Cuzzoni fam'd <$$font> : SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.462

this is an expletive , not a proper epithet . SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.463

Line 289 , <font> that dares <$$font> ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.464

the word <font> that <$$font> as it is placed spoils the whole line ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.465

and is not proper , SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.466

for the right word should be <font> who . <$$font>
SWIFT-1735-2,4,321.467

<P_4,322>

Line 294 , <font> reascend : SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.469

<$$font> I know not the reason for this word ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.470

why not rather <font> ascend <$$font> ? SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.471

I slipped line 290 , <font> than <$$font> : SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.472

I suppose you only meant <font> then <$$font> ? SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.473

You will do right to read over your poem carefully , and observe where
there be any more oversights of the same kind with those I have noted ,
and to be corrected ; which you can do better than any other person .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.474

A friend can only see what is amiss , SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.475

but the writer can mend it more easily . SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.476

All you desire in relation to Sir William Fownes is at an end by his
death ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.477

otherwise I should gladly have performed it in the best and most
effectual manner I was able . SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.478

As to the publishing it here , I utterly differ from you .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.479

No printer in this beggarly town , and enslaved starving kingdom , would
print it without being paid his full charge of his labour ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.480

nor would be able to sell two_dozen unless he could afford it for a
penny . SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.481

I would rather advise you to have it published in London by Motte or
Lintot , or any other bookseller there who deals in poetry .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.482

It would bear a shilling price ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.483

but , as I presume you are not much known as a poet in that great city ,
you should get some person of consequence to recommend it .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.484

As to what things are printed here on supposition they were mine , the
thing was done directly against my inclination , out of the disdain I
had of their being published in so obscure and wretched a country .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.485

But I would have been well enough satisfied if the booksellers in London
could have agreed among themselves to print them there ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.486

and I believe they now repent they did not , because every printer there
hath a property in their copy , and what things are supposed to be mine
belonged to several booksellers , who might have shared equally ,
according to what copies they held . SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.487

I have been called away till evening : SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.488

however my paper could afford me but little room if I had stayed .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.489

I am , with true esteem , Sir , Your most humble servant , Jonathan
Swift . SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.490

<font> Address : <$$font> SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.491

To . Mr. Thomas Beach , merchant in Wrexham , Denbigshire ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.492

to be left at the Custom-House Warehouse in Chester , and given to
Stephen Lovel Esq. , Collector of the Customs in Chester .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,322.493

<P_4,323>

{ED:Swift_to_the_Duke_of_Dorset}

My Lord Your Grace must remember , that some days before You left us , I
commanded You to attend me to Doct=r= Delany's house , about a mile out
of this Toun , where you were to find Doc=tr= Helsham the Physician .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,323.496

I told you they were the two Worthyest Gentlemen in this Kingdom in
their severall Facultyes . SWIFT-1735-2,4,323.497

You were pleased to comply with me , SWIFT-1735-2,4,323.498

called on me {TEXT:missing_"me"} at the Deanry SWIFT-1735-2,4,323.499

and carryed me thither ; where you dined with apparent satisfaction .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,323.500

Now , this same D=r= Helsham hath ordered {TEXT:ordred} me to write to
Your Grace in behalf of one Alderman Aldrich ; who is master of the
Dublin Barrack , and is as high a Whig , and more at Your Devotion than
I could perhaps wish him to be ... SWIFT-1735-2,4,323.501

And yet he is a very honest Gentleman , and , what is more important , a
near Relation of the Grattans , who in Your Graces absence are Governors
of all Ireland , and your Viceregents {TEXT:Vicegerents} when you are
here , as I have often told You . SWIFT-1735-2,4,323.502

They consist of an Alderman whom you are to find Lord Mayor at
Michaelmas next ; of a Doct=r= who kills or Cures half the City , of two
Parsons my subjects as Prebendaryes , who rule the other half , and of a
vagrant Brother who governs the North . SWIFT-1735-2,4,323.503

They are all Brethren , SWIFT-1735-2,4,323.504

and Your Army of twelve_thousand Soldiers are not able to stand against
them ... SWIFT-1735-2,4,323.505

Now , Your Grace is to understand , that these Grattans will stickle to
death for all their Cousins to the five_and_fiftieth degree ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,323.506

and consequently this same Alderman Aldrich being onely removed two
degrees of kindred , and having a Son as great a Whig as the Father ,
hath prevayld with D=r= Helsham to make me write to Your Grace , that
the Son of such a Father may have the Mastership of a Barrack at Kinsale
, which is just vacant , SWIFT-1735-2,4,323.507

His Name is Michael Aldrich . SWIFT-1735-2,4,323.508

Both Your Grace and I love the Name for the sake of D=r= Aldrich Dean of
Christ-church , although I am afraid he was a piece of a Tory ...
SWIFT-1735-2,4,323.509

You will have severall Requests this Post with the same <P_4,324>
Request , perhaps for different Persons , SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.510

but You are to observe onely mine , because it will come three minutes
before any other . SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.511

I think this is the third Request I have made to Your Grace .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.512

You have granted the two first , SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.513

and therefore must grant the third . SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.514

For , when I knew Courts , those who had received a_dozen favors were
utterly disobliged if they were denyed the thirteenth .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.515

Besides if this be not granted , the Grattans will rise in Rebellion ,
which I tremble to think of . SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.516

My Lady Eliz. Germain uses me very ill in her Letters .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.517

I want a Present from her , SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.518

and desire that You will please to order , that it may be a Seal .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.519

Mine are too small for the fashion ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.520

and I would have a large one worth forty shillings at least .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.521

I had a Letter from her two days ago , SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.522

and design to acknowledge it soon , SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.523

but business must first be dispatched , SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.524

I mean the Request I have made to Your Grace , that the Young Whig may
have the Barrack of Kinsale worth 60 or 70@ @=ll= a year .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.525

I should be very angry as well as sorry if your Grace would think I am
capable of deceiving You in any Circumstance . SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.526

I hope and pray that my Lady Dutchess may recover Health at the Bath ,
and , that we may see her Grace perfectly recovered when You come over .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.527

And pray God preserve you and Your most noble Family in Health and
Happyness . SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.528

I am with the highest Respect My Lord Your Grace's most obedient most
obliged , and most humble Servant Jonath: Swift SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.529

Dublin SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.530

Ap=r= 15=th= 1735 SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.531

<font> Endorsed : <$$font> SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.532

15=th= April 1735 SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.533

Dean Swift SWIFT-1735-2,4,324.534

<P_4,328>

{ED:Swift_to_Lady_Elizabeth_Germain}

{ED:5_May_1735}

Mad=m= I find your Ladyship seems not very much pleased with y=r= Office
of Secretary which however you must be obliged to hold during the Dukes
Goverm=t= if I happen to outlive it , which for Your Comfort ,
considering my health is not very likely . SWIFT-1735-2,4,328.538

I have not been a troublesome Petitioner to his Grace
SWIFT-1735-2,4,328.539

and intend to be less , SWIFT-1735-2,4,328.540

and as I have always done , will principally consider My Ld Dukes honor
. SWIFT-1735-2,4,328.541

I have very few Friends in Want . SWIFT-1735-2,4,328.542

I have kindred enough , but not a grain of merit among them , except one
Female who is the onely Cousin I suffer to see me .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,328.543

When I had the Credit for some years at a Court , I provided for above
50 people in both Kingdoms of which not one was a Relation ...
SWIFT-1735-2,4,328.544

I have neither {TEXT:neithr} followers , nor fosterers nor Dependers .
So that if I lived now among the great , they might be sure I would
never be a solliciter out of any regard , but Merit and Virtue ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,328.545

and in that Case I would reckon I was doing them the best Service in my
Power , SWIFT-1735-2,4,328.546

and if they were good for any thing I would expect their thanks .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,328.547

For they want nothing so much as an honest judicious Recommender ; which
in perfect modesty I take my self to be ... SWIFT-1735-2,4,328.548

D=r= Sheridan is gone to his School in the Country ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,328.549

and was onely delayd so long on account of some very unnecessary forms
contrived <P_4,329> by His Grace's most cautious Deputyes
SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.550

My Letter is but just begun SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.551

the larger half remains , SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.552

and your Ladyship is to make a fresh use of y=r= Secretarys Employmt .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.553

The Countess of Kerry , my long friend and Mistress {COM:missing_comma}
commanded {TEXT:command} me to attend her yesterday .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.554

She told me that M=r= Deering late Deputy Clerk of the Council being
Dead , She had thoughts of solliciting the same office for her young=r=
son , M=r= John Fitz Mauris SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.555

Her eldest son L=d= Fitz-Maurice hath from some years been plagued by a
Wife and no Wits . SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.556

The Case hath been tryed in both Kingdoms , SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.557

and he stands excommunicated , and forced to live abroad , which is a
very great Misfortune to the Earl of Kerry and his Lady ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.558

and they have nothing left to comfort them but their young=r= son , who
hath lately marryed very honestly and undisputably .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.559

He is a young Gentleman of great Regularity , very well educated ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.560

but hath no Employment . SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.561

Therefore his Parents would be very desirous he should have one ,
SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.562

and this of Deputy Clerk of the Council here would be a very proper
Introduction to Business . SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.563

It is understood here that purchase of the Deputy Clerks office is the
usuall Perquisite of the Chief Clerk , with the Consent of the Chief
Governor ; - with which My Lord and Lady Kerry would very readily and
thankfully fall in SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.564

And as the Earl of Kerry is one of the most antient and noble familyes
of the Kingdom , his younger and onely son of which he hath any hopes
might well pretend to succeed in so small an office upon an equall foot
with any other Person . SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.565

I own this proposall of mine is more suitable to the Corruption of the
Times than to my own Speculative Notions of Virtue ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.566

but , I must give some allowance to the degeneracy of Mankind , and the
Passion I have to my Lady Kerry . SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.567

<font> Endorsed by Swift : <$$font> SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.568

May . 5=th= , 1735 SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.569

Copy of a Lett=r= to L=dy= E. G. concerning the C of K-=r@ @s= son
SWIFT-1735-2,4,329.570

<P_4,333>

{ED:Swift_to_Alexander_Pope}

{ED:12_May_1735}

Dear S=r= Your Letter was sent to me yesterday by M=r= Stopford who
landed the same day , SWIFT-1735-2,4,333.574

but I have not yet seen him . SWIFT-1735-2,4,333.575

As to my silence , God knows it is my great misfortune ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,333.576

I never am a day without frequent terrors of a fit of Giddyness ;
SWIFT-1735-2,4,333.577

my head is never well , SWIFT-1735-2,4,333.578

and I can@ @not walk after night-fall . SWIFT-1735-2,4,333.579

My Memory is going fast ; SWIFT-1735-2,4,333.580

my Spirits are sunk nine parts in ten . SWIFT-1735-2,4,333.581

You will find in this Letter probably fifty blunders , mistakes not only
litteral & verbal , but half sentences either omitted or doubled .
SWIFT-1735-2,4,333.582

Besides , my little domestick affairs are in great confusion by the
villany of Agents , and the miseryes of this Kingdom , where there is no
money to be had : {COM:rest_of_letter_omitted} SWIFT-1735-2,4,333.583

