<BEGIN_talbot-1901-1>

<P_89>

<heading>

VII

<font> The Living Religion <$$font> TALBOT-1901-1,89.5

" My soul thirsteth for God , for the living God . " TALBOT-1901-1,89.6

- <font> Ps. <$$font> xlii. 2 . TALBOT-1901-1,89.7

" Ye are come unto Mount Zion , and unto the city of the living God . "
TALBOT-1901-1,89.8

- <font> Heb. <$$font> xii. 22 . TALBOT-1901-1,89.9

<paren> <font> Preached at Trinity College , Dublin , November <$$font>
10 , 1901 . <$$paren> TALBOT-1901-1,89.10

<$$heading>

The greatest task of a man's life is the finding of his religion .
TALBOT-1901-1,89.12

I say the finding , TALBOT-1901-1,89.13

for though the man is happiest who starts with it as a precious heirloom
, yet he , too , must find for himself its truth . TALBOT-1901-1,89.14

A man's religion is the foundation of his knowledge , the spring of his
hopes , the force behind his conscience , the guarantee of his own true
worth . TALBOT-1901-1,89.15

But to find it , a man must needs think rightly what manner of thing it
will be . TALBOT-1901-1,89.16

It may truly be said that no doubt of doubter , no argument of sceptic ,
is so powerful as a mistaken idea or picture in the man's own mind of
what religion is . TALBOT-1901-1,89.17

The doubter's own doubt , indeed , may well have had the same cause ;
TALBOT-1901-1,89.18

and the sceptic's argument often deepens scepticism in himself
TALBOT-1901-1,89.19

and creates it in others , by unconscious misrepresentation or
caricature of that which he rejects . TALBOT-1901-1,89.20

It is the blessing of Scripture , as we believe and are <P_90> sure , to
bring us the claim of religion in its full purity and strength .
TALBOT-1901-1,90.21

But the witness of Scripture needs careful receiving ,
TALBOT-1901-1,90.22

for it is given in many parts and ways , with varying clearness , with
stages of progress . TALBOT-1901-1,90.23

No misunderstandings are stronger than those which fortify themselves by
a partial use of Scripture itself . TALBOT-1901-1,90.24

A moment's thought of what the highest religious truth must be - how
large , how deep , how vastly greater than our power to embrace it -
will help us to see that it must be conveyed , or convey itself to us ,
not in a sentence , or in a moment , but by parts , and under varying
aspects , and with great differences , and even apparent contradictions
of expression . TALBOT-1901-1,90.25

The words on which I have chosen to speak to you contain one great
central truth of religion as Scripture from end to end presents it ;
TALBOT-1901-1,90.26

one might almost say the bed-rock {COM:sic} of its foundation .
TALBOT-1901-1,90.27

It is a living religion , a living bond between the living God and
living men . TALBOT-1901-1,90.28

So far , at least , well . TALBOT-1901-1,90.29

Such , our hearts reply , if religion at all , our religion must be .
TALBOT-1901-1,90.30

All the faith in us demands it , TALBOT-1901-1,90.31

and the very things which sometimes seem opposed to religion , the dread
of forms or doctrines , conventions , or shibboleths , witness in their
way to this . TALBOT-1901-1,90.32

It must be profitable to think a little together , if you will , of this
Bible truth , its meaning , and its bearings . TALBOT-1901-1,90.33

The living God ! TALBOT-1901-1,90.34

Life is of all things the most impossible to describe , but the most
surely to be known , because we live . TALBOT-1901-1,90.35

Living and not dead , living and not mechanical , - those are clear
distinctions . TALBOT-1901-1,90.36

The belief in the living <P_91> God means that neither force , brute or
mechanical , nor chance , which is force at play , is the final power in
the universe . TALBOT-1901-1,91.37

Moreover life , as we know it in its higher forms , not only lives ,
TALBOT-1901-1,91.38

but is conscious that it lives ; TALBOT-1901-1,91.39

it feels TALBOT-1901-1,91.40

and knows TALBOT-1901-1,91.41

and loves . TALBOT-1901-1,91.42

So far we augur of Divine life from human . TALBOT-1901-1,91.43

So far Scripture speaks of God in human terms . TALBOT-1901-1,91.44

But in contrast to man , God , from Whom all proceeds , is not a
temporary tenant of life , TALBOT-1901-1,91.45

life is His intrinsically . TALBOT-1901-1,91.46

In Scripture He is the Source of life . TALBOT-1901-1,91.47

He reveals Himself under that strange but extraordinarily impressive
phrase as being what He is : " I am that I am , " underived , creative ,
conscious , abiding life . TALBOT-1901-1,91.48

Such a conception was not one to be reached in a day .
TALBOT-1901-1,91.49

It had to be wrought gradually into clearness , TALBOT-1901-1,91.50

it had to disentangle itself from cruder thoughts . TALBOT-1901-1,91.51

The fact that in Genesis i. and Exodus iii. it stands in a manner at
the head and outset of the Old Testament in the shape which that took at
a comparatively late stage in Israel's history , does not prevent us
from seeing that there had been earlier and cruder stages in Israel's
faith . TALBOT-1901-1,91.52

To know that there was but one God for themselves , went before the
knowledge that there was no other God anywhere or at all -
TALBOT-1901-1,91.53

Monolatry , in technical language , went before Monotheism .
TALBOT-1901-1,91.54

The faith in the living God emerges from among beliefs in many gods of
which the only permanent value is their testimony to man's instinct that
his god must in some true sense be a living being with whom he can deal
. TALBOT-1901-1,91.55

This , at least , characterized <P_92> the ' gods many . '
TALBOT-1901-1,92.56

Often , indeed , even this was lost behind idol-worship ;
TALBOT-1901-1,92.57

and in the Prophets we find the servants of the living God denouncing
the heathen as worshippers of dead things , stocks and stones , with
small regard to the plea , doubtless made then as now , that the idol
only represented a being for whom it stood . TALBOT-1901-1,92.58

A more formidable enemy still is less openly combated in Scripture .
TALBOT-1901-1,92.59

I mean the belief in some dark , unknown power behind the gods , a chaos
or a Brahm , out of whom or which they emerge , a fate behind Jupiter or
Zeus . TALBOT-1901-1,92.60

It is , I suppose , really met by some of the many passages which assert
the sovereign freedom of the living God . TALBOT-1901-1,92.61

And no greater service that I know of has been rendered of late to the
belief in the inspiration of Scripture , and in the revelation which is
unfolded to us therein , than was the publication from an Assyrian
source , of an account of creation , plainly akin to that of Genesis ,
but with this vital and revealing difference , that in it the gods are
an output of chaos ; while in Genesis , " In the beginning God created
the heavens and the earth . " TALBOT-1901-1,92.62

The faith in the living God , lodged somehow in Israel's heart from a
time beyond our tracing , and in a manner past our finding out , seems
<paren> to speak in metaphor <$$paren> to have been like ' the fire
infolding itself ' of Ezekiel's vision , and to have gradually unfolded
from within , the depths and truths of its own meaning ; to have been
progressively self-revealing . TALBOT-1901-1,92.63

<P_93>

The fact probably is that such a truth is its own best witness : that
the very best reason for believing it is the way in which it goes home
to man's whole heart , and mind , and consciousness as the truth .
TALBOT-1901-1,93.65

It is in this tone that it speaks in Scripture , confidently ,
commandingly , as that which has a native authority over man , and can
rely on that authority . TALBOT-1901-1,93.66

And man responds to it because he feels that the deepest evidence about
God that he can have , must somehow come out of himself :
TALBOT-1901-1,93.67

in spite of his earthliness , and littleness , and all that is so
undivine in him , his truest knowledge must be there .
TALBOT-1901-1,93.68

Deeper than his best arguments and reasonings , his own consciousness
and conscience is somehow his best witness to God , to " The Power which
every throb and swell Of human heart invites that human soul approach .
" TALBOT-1901-1,93.69

Browning , <font> Fifine <$$font> , 77 . TALBOT-1901-1,93.70

But perhaps we run too fast . TALBOT-1901-1,93.71

If the faith is so natural to man , what is our debt to Scripture ?
TALBOT-1901-1,93.72

Experience gives only too plain an answer . TALBOT-1901-1,93.73

It is a fragile faith easily broken , easily bewildered and confused .
TALBOT-1901-1,93.74

And God knows there is much to bewilder it . TALBOT-1901-1,93.75

It needs the helping hand , the confirming word , that God alone can
give . TALBOT-1901-1,93.76

Wordsworth has said it in a splendid metaphor - TALBOT-1901-1,93.77

those of you who know it best , will the most readily forgive me for
quoting it - TALBOT-1901-1,93.78

" 'T@ @is the most difficult of tasks to keep Heights which the soul is
competent to gain . TALBOT-1901-1,93.79

Man is of dust : TALBOT-1901-1,93.80

Ethereal hopes are his , Which when they should sustain themselves aloft
<P_94> Want due consistence : like a pillar of smoke , That with
majestic energy from earth Rises , but having reached the upper air
Melts , and dissolves , and is no longer seen . " TALBOT-1901-1,94.81

<font> Excursion <$$font> , bk. iv . TALBOT-1901-1,94.82

To watch some of the higher forms of thought is the best way to see and
feel how such a faith as this may fade and fail , how fatal is its loss
, and , accordingly , how deep our debt is to the Scripture which has
preserved it . TALBOT-1901-1,94.83

Israel , which went among the nations with the roll of Scriptures in its
breast , was recognized by those who hated Jews as having a secret
knowledge of God , living and true , contrasted alike with the
superstitions of many doubtful deities , and the straining and baffled
speculations of philosophy . TALBOT-1901-1,94.84

Islam , the religion of Mohammed , fixing its roots , as it did , on the
faith of Israel , has kept the faith in a living God , though the life ,
because it is not also love , comes painfully near to destiny ,
TALBOT-1901-1,94.85

and the faith of it has more power to drive man than to improve him .
TALBOT-1901-1,94.86

But Buddhism is an example of a great system , which lacking altogether
<paren> at least in any conscious form <$$paren> the belief in the
living God , leaves man with a dark void , and has no real message of
inspiration for life . TALBOT-1901-1,94.87

Watch the noble efforts of speculative Pantheism , which , seeing God in
all , makes the all to be God : and you will see that just so far as it
borrows from the heart's witness , or from revelation , or from
imagination , the thought of the living God , it is powerful , and
spiritual , and uplifting . TALBOT-1901-1,94.88

Just so far as it refuses <P_95> this , it fades with grievous results
of philosophical and moral consequence into materialism , helped out by
rhetoric . TALBOT-1901-1,95.89

You know how easily the idealisms evaporate into sentimentalisms .
TALBOT-1901-1,95.90

Such examples show us how things stand . TALBOT-1901-1,95.91

God forbid that I should speak in contempt of so much earnest religious
effort and high thought . TALBOT-1901-1,95.92

It is not wantonly , nor altogether wilfully , that man has so often
lost his God . TALBOT-1901-1,95.93

Is it not rather this , that the living God is also the Infinite and the
Eternal ? TALBOT-1901-1,95.94

He is the light , TALBOT-1901-1,95.95

but " clouds and darkness are round about Him . " TALBOT-1901-1,95.96

It is difficult to speak of these things without paradox .
TALBOT-1901-1,95.97

For is it not indeed true that part of what we know of God is His
unknowableness ? TALBOT-1901-1,95.98

He Who is the living God is also He Who is neither here nor there , but
everywhere , neither now nor then , but always . TALBOT-1901-1,95.99

With Him there is no limit : TALBOT-1901-1,95.100

life , which with us and all that we know , has its embodiment , is in
Him without body , parts , and passions . TALBOT-1901-1,95.101

All this belongs to His magnificence , His spirituality .
TALBOT-1901-1,95.102

These things , too , are necessary to any conception of God which is
really to satisfy man : and not to seem puny and unworthy .
TALBOT-1901-1,95.103

But these things are very overpowering to belief in the living God with
Whom we have to do , and to Whom we are dear . TALBOT-1901-1,95.104

The two sides of our knowledge strain almost to breaking our mental
power . TALBOT-1901-1,95.105

No wonder that the side which seems at first sight largest and <P_96>
vaguest , and most imposing , tends to overpower the other .
TALBOT-1901-1,96.106

No wonder that the one which seems to ask of man self-effacement , may
appeal to part of what is noblest in him . TALBOT-1901-1,96.107

May I put the same thing again in other words ? TALBOT-1901-1,96.108

If you were asked , after leaving this chapel , what my subject had been
, you might naturally say , " He spoke of belief in a personal God ! "
TALBOT-1901-1,96.109

In point of fact , you will notice that I have never used that word .
TALBOT-1901-1,96.110

And why ? TALBOT-1901-1,96.111

Is it because I do not believe - or that I shrink from the word ?
TALBOT-1901-1,96.112

On the contrary , I believe I should enforce with all my power , the
duty of believing in a personal God . TALBOT-1901-1,96.113

But I well understand why the word should rouse opposition in some whom
I wished to carry with me . TALBOT-1901-1,96.114

For the word " personal , " in our common use of it , reeks with
limitation , with the notions of separate individuality , of the life of
one among others . TALBOT-1901-1,96.115

And we can only use it rightly of God , if we remember that much of what
seems to us impersonal , and magnificent in its impersonality , is
equally true of Him . TALBOT-1901-1,96.116

But thought , as it deepens and enlarges , seems to take in more of all
this , to lean to this side . TALBOT-1901-1,96.117

Even Israel , in its later times before Christ , had lost , in the
immensity and sublimity of its faith , some of its courage .
TALBOT-1901-1,96.118

They dared not name , we know , the Holy Name . TALBOT-1901-1,96.119

They hid it behind the letters of another word . TALBOT-1901-1,96.120

And in like though different way , modern thought has seemed to make God
more shadowy by revealing more of the reign of fixed order and law , by
enlarging the very <P_97> areas of space and time , by revealing afresh
the overpowering import of such a word as " infinity . "
TALBOT-1901-1,97.121

Small wonder that the idea of a living Being , caring , providing ,
loving , has been endangered by seeming to be belittled .
TALBOT-1901-1,97.122

Yet how impossible that we should be really robbed of the faith in God ,
by knowing more of the ineffable magnificence which His best believers
have always declared to be ineffable ! TALBOT-1901-1,97.123

Can it be that the thought of God should become at once most sublime and
most untenable ? TALBOT-1901-1,97.124

Is there any balm for this wound , any issue from this perplexity ?
TALBOT-1901-1,97.125

It is the very meaning of our faith , brethren , that such there is .
TALBOT-1901-1,97.126

We return to Scripture , TALBOT-1901-1,97.127

and as we pass from the Old Testament to the New , we find that in a way
unforeseen and unforeseeable the belief in the living God has received a
wholly new impetus , and strength , and clearness .
TALBOT-1901-1,97.128

Never before was it said , " The hairs of your head are all numbered :
TALBOT-1901-1,97.129

not a sparrow falleth to the ground without your Father ... "
TALBOT-1901-1,97.130

That title of Heavenly Father means how much ! TALBOT-1901-1,97.131

has in it what new assurance and truth ! TALBOT-1901-1,97.132

Now we see men conscious with a great exultation that they become sons
of God . TALBOT-1901-1,97.133

Now we hear a voice declare that " God is Love . " TALBOT-1901-1,97.134

And the manner of this , as a matter of history , we know .
TALBOT-1901-1,97.135

It was that One appeared on earth , whose life's task was , He said , to
declare the Father's Name , to make men know God . TALBOT-1901-1,97.136

Somehow He convinced them . TALBOT-1901-1,97.137

So the Gospels show . TALBOT-1901-1,97.138

But the Epistles add this , that in some <P_98> manner His own
personality wrought itself into men's hearts , and was , they felt ,
inwardly revealed to them as being somehow a manifestation to them out
of the very heart of the living God , a means whereby they knew , as
never before , that God of their faith ; TALBOT-1901-1,98.139

they said that He had lit up for them a " knowledge of the glory of God
in the face of Jesus Christ . " TALBOT-1901-1,98.140

And the effect , they said , was in themselves . TALBOT-1901-1,98.141

Life is the best proof of life ; TALBOT-1901-1,98.142

and out of their experience , they said that the Spirit of God was life
in them in Jesus Christ . TALBOT-1901-1,98.143

I do not argue whether they were right or mistaken .
TALBOT-1901-1,98.144

But I wish you to see fully and distinctly what it was that thus
happened , believing , as I said before , that the meaning and manner
and fitness of the thing is its own best evidence .
TALBOT-1901-1,98.145

For I would have you realize just what was done . TALBOT-1901-1,98.146

That aspect of God which seemed to be endangered by His own very
vastness - the personal aspect , if you will , or the living and loving
nature - that for which man's whole higher nature was athirst , that to
which his most universal and unfailing instincts had pointed clearly or
dimly , nobly or grotesquely , that which seemed essential to the
authority of his conscience , and to his own value as a spiritual being
- that was brought to the front , TALBOT-1901-1,98.147

was made clear , in a way and to a degree which would have seemed
impossible . TALBOT-1901-1,98.148

There was no rending of the heavens ; TALBOT-1901-1,98.149

there was no dislocation of the tenor of the life which men had lived
and were to live . TALBOT-1901-1,98.150

But there was at one and <P_99> the same time a great reinforcement of
the witness of human consciousness , and therewith a felt response to
that witness . TALBOT-1901-1,99.151

Man's own best reason for believing in God had always been himself ;
TALBOT-1901-1,99.152

that reason was now indefinitely strengthened and cleared in the Son of
man from the blurring of sin . TALBOT-1901-1,99.153

And the work of the Son of man purporting to be , and accepted as , the
work of God's love , was such as to make a centre to history , to
ennoble man in the best sense , to throw a light upon the blank riddle
of life . TALBOT-1901-1,99.154

But further , everything was gained TALBOT-1901-1,99.155

and nothing was lost . TALBOT-1901-1,99.156

The Old Testament was brought down and carried on .
TALBOT-1901-1,99.157

Whatever had been sublime and infinite and invisible in God , His unity
, His awfulness , remained what it had been , untouched and undiminished
. TALBOT-1901-1,99.158

None of it was altered or contradicted by the coming out from Him of
Love in incarnate shape . TALBOT-1901-1,99.159

Life , which often stands to high teaching as painful contrast or pale
copy , asserted at last its true supremacy as the fullest and richest
utterance of truth ; TALBOT-1901-1,99.160

and it was felt that the source of such a revelation in living power
could be none other than an eternal fount of life .
TALBOT-1901-1,99.161

It was even true that by a paradox all those accommodations and
anthropomorphisms of the Old Testament which represented God under human
shapes , could be dispensed with and put away , since the manhood of
Jesus had become His sufficient revelation . TALBOT-1901-1,99.162

Here is a test which may well be applied to Christian belief .
TALBOT-1901-1,99.163

It will convict the faith of most , or all , of much pettiness and
unworthiness ; TALBOT-1901-1,99.164

but it can be <P_100> confidently applied to the Christian faith as that
faith appears in Scripture , and has been understood by its best
believers . TALBOT-1901-1,100.165

We ask whether it has by one degree damaged the conception of God , such
as the sublimest suggestions of Nature , or the most comprehensive
speculations of thought , have framed or shadowed that conception ?
TALBOT-1901-1,100.166

Fearlessly we may say " No . " TALBOT-1901-1,100.167

I go indeed a step further , TALBOT-1901-1,100.168

and say without hesitation that the belief in the living God behind and
in all the immensities and infinities is the only abiding source of real
awe , and of the nobleness which comes of awe . TALBOT-1901-1,100.169

Spirit bows before nothing but spirit ; TALBOT-1901-1,100.170

and the trembling but thinking reed , in Pascal's memorable phrase ,
knows itself greater than an unconscious universe .
TALBOT-1901-1,100.171

I recognize in the Pantheist a certain largeness and coherence of
thought ; TALBOT-1901-1,100.172

I recognize in the Agnostic a sense of the utter greatness and mystery
of the universe ; TALBOT-1901-1,100.173

I see a certain measure of moral result coming , as it always does come
, from any real grip of intellectual truth ; in the Pantheist a power of
diffusive sympathy , in the Agnostic a sober modesty .
TALBOT-1901-1,100.174

But I find nothing in the doctrines of either which needs to be borrowed
from them by any man to whom has been given faith in the living God ,
eternal and infinite , revealed as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ ,
and who has pondered on that faith . TALBOT-1901-1,100.175

Such a faith , my brethren , is sure of its own effect , if in deed and
truth we recognize and remember that it is <P_101> ours .
TALBOT-1901-1,101.176

To remind you of this - to bid you to this realization , to ask you to
take to heart the uniqueness of our possession and privilege in it -
this has been my object to-day . TALBOT-1901-1,101.177

A very few words may indicate to you some of the manifold ways in which
faith in the living God may tell upon our thought and character and life
. TALBOT-1901-1,101.178

<paren> 1 <$$paren> It determines finally and fully the true character
of our religion , say rather of our life ; that it is , namely , a
living relation of our living souls to the living God .
TALBOT-1901-1,101.179

Worship is the expression , or the quest , or the renewal of that
relationship . TALBOT-1901-1,101.180

Morality is the conformity of ready will to the living Holiness .
TALBOT-1901-1,101.181

It can@ @not , indeed , always be at every moment conscious .
TALBOT-1901-1,101.182

Yet ' pray without ceasing ; ' ' in everything give thanks ; ' ' be thou
in the fear of the Lord all the day long ; ' - are standards of
appreciable meaning . TALBOT-1901-1,101.183

And any one who has felt the power of the higher forms of human love ,
knows how nearly it is possible for living relationship to penetrate
with subtle and pervading influence almost the whole of life .
TALBOT-1901-1,101.184

If this convicts you , brethren , as it convicts me , of much dross in
our life , through many many hours without remembrance of God , and
through works at least partly dead because done without thought of God
or relation to Him , let us have the grace and modesty to acknowledge
our own fault , and not to disown the standard which condemns it .
TALBOT-1901-1,101.185

<paren> 2 <$$paren> It follows , then , that we know the use and purpose
<P_102> and proportion of the different parts and items of religion , of
doctrines , of forms , of moral precepts . TALBOT-1901-1,102.186

They may be , as our Catechism says of some of them , ' generally
necessary to salvation , ' TALBOT-1901-1,102.187

or they may be as others are , of much more variable value ;
TALBOT-1901-1,102.188

but of all alike , this is true , that what is to be sought and gained
through them is the living power of our God , and our living contact
with this , through Him Who is the Mediator of that contact , Jesus
Christ our Lord . TALBOT-1901-1,102.189

Sometimes , indeed , in the name of that great word ' spiritual , ' a
shallow attack is made upon all outward forms . TALBOT-1901-1,102.190

This is surely to assume an answer , and that not the true one , to the
question how spirit works . TALBOT-1901-1,102.191

It does not in experience work barely and abstractly ,
TALBOT-1901-1,102.192

it works through a_thousand media of spoken word , of silent gesture ,
of local associations , of nerve impression , of remembered pleasure ,
of imaginative picture . TALBOT-1901-1,102.193

Specially inconsequent is the language which would depreciate rites ,
while emphasizing doctrines ; as though a formula were necessarily more
living than a form ; as though a handshake may not say more than the
spoken ' good-bye ' which it accompanies . TALBOT-1901-1,102.194

But the form or the formula must be alive with life from the living God
, TALBOT-1901-1,102.195

or they only block the way between us and Him . TALBOT-1901-1,102.196

Our estimate of Sacraments can@ @not be too high , if only we can keep
it proportionate and subordinate , if only it makes us know how surely
we may then have access with confidence to the Father through the Christ
whose one desire is to bring us to Him , how liberally the power of the
Spirit works there to communicate to <P_103> us direct from the Christ
the actual power of His life , that Christ may dwell in our hearts by
faith . TALBOT-1901-1,103.197

With regard to these and all our worship , I have sometimes thought that
the twofold meaning in English of the word " familiar " expresses what
we need to secure . TALBOT-1901-1,103.198

Familiarity with God is the very thing which we are allowed , to which
we are bidden and urged . TALBOT-1901-1,103.199

Yet to be familiar in our dealings with the Most High is the very thing
which is most intolerable . TALBOT-1901-1,103.200

Perhaps we may gain the one and avoid the other if alternately we place
ourselves in thought as little children at a father's knee ; and go out
like Immanuel Kant under the solemn stars and the immeasurable firmament
and read , as he read , their witness to God . TALBOT-1901-1,103.201

No cheap familiarity can survive that . TALBOT-1901-1,103.202

To quicken and maintain this living relation between man and God is the
task which it is the distinction of the ordained ministry to have for
its special , continuous , and only purpose . TALBOT-1901-1,103.203

But its work is futile unless in all the professions and all the crafts
the witness of the living God is given by living men , not always less
powerful because indirect , because in living character and conduct even
more than in word . TALBOT-1901-1,103.204

<paren> 3 <$$paren> Finally , my sons - for to you my thoughts chiefly
turn with the earnest desire to speak a word for your help - remember
that belief in the living God determines and seals the value of life in
yourselves . TALBOT-1901-1,103.205

It is so with any such belief ; TALBOT-1901-1,103.206

but how doubly and trebly so with the belief which comes to us mediated
in Jesus Christ the man , and in the spirit which links us to Him !
TALBOT-1901-1,103.207

<P_104>

Your spirit is a spark , a ray , an emanation , the Pantheist may tell
you , from the Divine Spirit . TALBOT-1901-1,104.209

We will not quarrel with his language , TALBOT-1901-1,104.210

but we will not be content with it . TALBOT-1901-1,104.211

Your spirit is such as God can love , and such as can love God .
TALBOT-1901-1,104.212

If you are fighting your fight for purity and self-control , let this be
in you the deepest , noblest , and strongest of all your motives ,
TALBOT-1901-1,104.213

and reverence the life in yourself which comes from God and deals with
God . TALBOT-1901-1,104.214

Degrade it not ; TALBOT-1901-1,104.215

defile it not ; TALBOT-1901-1,104.216

for if it be kept pure , God can give it increase of sight to see Him ,
TALBOT-1901-1,104.217

can make it the instrument to reflect and transmit the life that is in
Himself . TALBOT-1901-1,104.218

Preserve it for your own sake , but not for your own sake alone .
TALBOT-1901-1,104.219

We know in Christ the method of the living God in revealing and putting
forth His life . TALBOT-1901-1,104.220

It is the method of embodiment in living manhood , and in the personal
influence of the spirit with which that manhood is clothed .
TALBOT-1901-1,104.221

We acknowledge that method when we profess our belief in Jesus Christ
His only Son our Lord , and in the Spirit of God , which ' if any man
have not , he is none of His . ' TALBOT-1901-1,104.222

But it has its minor and imperfect but still necessary applications in
the life of every child of God , of every disciple of Christ , through
whom the light is to shine , through whom the touch and presence of some
fragment of the power , the wisdom , the sympathy , the love of the
living God is to come , ministered by the life of living man , to living
men . TALBOT-1901-1,104.223

That is our duty to the children , and the juniors <P_105> that are to
come after us ; TALBOT-1901-1,105.224

that is our duty to the heathen who know not God as we know Him ;
TALBOT-1901-1,105.225

that is our duty to those who in squalor and penury can hardly see His
Light . TALBOT-1901-1,105.226

Set it before you for what it is , the one true aim and sufficient
dignity of your life , and wherever your lot be cast , however humble
your sphere may be , it will be bright with the only glory ,
TALBOT-1901-1,105.227

it will shine with the only Light . TALBOT-1901-1,105.228

<P_106>

<heading>

VIII

<font> The Recognition of Goodness In Many Shapes <$$font>
TALBOT-1901-1,106.232

" Finally , brethren , whatsoever things are true , whatsoever things
are honourable , whatsoever things are just , whatsoever things are pure
, whatsoever things are lovely , whatsoever things are of good report ;
if there be any virtue , and if there be any praise think on these
things . " TALBOT-1901-1,106.233

- <font> Phil. <$$font> iv. 8 . TALBOT-1901-1,106.234

<paren> <font> Preached in Lincoln's Inn Chapel and the Chapel Royal at
St. James's , <$$font> 1901 . <$$paren> TALBOT-1901-1,106.235

<$$heading>

The words are among the most beautiful in the Epistles .
TALBOT-1901-1,106.237

Like the familiar line of our own poet , which they almost instinctively
suggest - " We live by admiration , hope , and love , " - they have in
them the blending of high and homely , of pure aspiration and genial
humanity , which wins ready and general response .
TALBOT-1901-1,106.238

Their noble open-heartedness appeals to many who do not see deeper ; who
do not recognize what strong and illuminating moral power is required to
open the heart to such steady and impartial admiration of that which is
good , true , and pure ; what ready conscience and controlled attention
is needed to ' think on these things , ' as the Apostle would understand
<P_107> thinking ; and how far apart is the admiration which really
ennobles and constrains the heart from the languid sentiment which may
only leave us , as it passes , one degree more callous .
TALBOT-1901-1,107.239

But I wish now to take the text as a starting-point for some
consideration , in Christian light , of what I think would be recognized
by educated people as one feature or tendency of contemporary life .
TALBOT-1901-1,107.240

It is the tendency to ready recognition of goodness in many various and
unlikely forms , quarters , and surroundings . TALBOT-1901-1,107.241

Nothing , surely , is more characteristic of modern fiction , which is ,
perhaps , the most representative form of literature :
TALBOT-1901-1,107.242

Kipling with his " Tommies , " Bret Harte with his miners , Browning
with his Caponsacchi , are only prominent instances .
TALBOT-1901-1,107.243

Take any story at haphazard in a magazine , and we might almost wager
that if it be anything more than an adventure , if there is any moral in
it , the moral is of this kind - the reality of good in unlikely places
, or paradoxical forms , or the most unpromising company .
TALBOT-1901-1,107.244

Glints of good , grains of good , sparks of good , in dark , or muddy ,
or squalid matter , for these the modern eye has the keenest sense .
TALBOT-1901-1,107.245

It is not merely the normal opposition of unconventionality to drill and
pretension . TALBOT-1901-1,107.246

It is this emphasized and developed into a definite fashion and habit of
thought . TALBOT-1901-1,107.247

I do not dwell on its causes ; TALBOT-1901-1,107.248

they are various . TALBOT-1901-1,107.249

One of them , of course , is the influence of that amazingly powerful
thing , the inductive method and spirit ; the habit of going to fact ,
and of being true to fact . TALBOT-1901-1,107.250

Akin <P_108> to this or part of it is the quickened sense of complexity
as a characteristic of the objects of our human knowledge , and a
readiness to find that our provisional generalizations or formulae have
to give way or stretch under the pressure of new or more delicate
observation . TALBOT-1901-1,108.251

But whatever it causes , I would urge that this tendency <paren> which
certainly seems to echo the Apostle's words in the text <$$paren> has in
it something of special Divine guidance or inspiration .
TALBOT-1901-1,108.252

May we not be confident of this with regard to anything that goes really
deep , and which we feel to have in it promptings of truth and charity ?
TALBOT-1901-1,108.253

Has there ever been a time when the deeper thoughts of the time were not
God-led ? TALBOT-1901-1,108.254

Is it conceivable that there should be such a time ?
TALBOT-1901-1,108.255

Can we , without deepest ingratitude and infidelity , think that it has
been so in our time of all times , with all its gifts and all its
lessons ? TALBOT-1901-1,108.256

I take it for granted , then , that we may find in this tendency
something at least of blessing , something which reveals , or shows to
us from God , fuller and better knowledge . TALBOT-1901-1,108.257

It is not difficult , I think , to see signs that this is true .
TALBOT-1901-1,108.258

In the first place , there has been found in this a potent and specific
remedy against Pharisaism ; with its self-complacency on the one side ,
and on the other its cold scorn . TALBOT-1901-1,108.259

Such an attitude needs , and rests upon , an implied division between
those on one side who are all right , and those on the other side who
are all wrong . TALBOT-1901-1,108.260

<P_109>

This is sharply challenged when judgment is renewed and comparison drawn
afresh over each fresh emergency or incident of conduct , with the
result that in this or that case or particular the good show bad , and
the bad good . TALBOT-1901-1,109.262

But this is not all : TALBOT-1901-1,109.263

the recognition of particular bits and traces of good in unlooked-for
places raises yet wider questions . TALBOT-1901-1,109.264

Are the general distinctions with which they seem to clash as valid as
we thought them ? TALBOT-1901-1,109.265

Is there more in the same rock where these nuggets were found ?
TALBOT-1901-1,109.266

What has hindered an ampler growth of good on soil from which blossoms
like these have sprung ? TALBOT-1901-1,109.267

Is not fresh light thrown upon the old saying , that ' the Lord seeth
not as man seeth ' ? TALBOT-1901-1,109.268

Hence it is that along with this tendency there has come a great
increase in the power of sympathy , in respect for human nature in all
its forms ; and in wholesome , corporate , self-questioning by the
community as to the power of our social order to bring to birth and to
maturity the good which there is naturally in its members , to secure
full moral opportunity for all . TALBOT-1901-1,109.269

These are great results : humility in the virtuous and respectable , or
those who are thought and think themselves so ; charity and insight in
the treatment of all ; and , we may add , a quickened sense of truth in
minds relieved from the necessity of forcing facts to make the
experiences of conduct square with the supposed classification of
character . TALBOT-1901-1,109.270

<P_110>

But the gifts which God gives us through movements of human thought
often reach us adulterated with the faults and limitations to which such
thought is subject . TALBOT-1901-1,110.272

We are bound to sift for the gold , TALBOT-1901-1,110.273

and <paren> to continue the metaphor <$$paren> one of the commonest
forms of dross is reaction , by which exaggeration of the new injures
instead of expanding or completing the old . TALBOT-1901-1,110.274

The matter in question is a striking instance of this , as appears when
we throw upon it Christian light . TALBOT-1901-1,110.275

The Bible throughout , in {COM:sic} New Testament as well as Old ,
displays to us always one great conflict - the conflict of good and evil
, and men as ranged on one side or the other . TALBOT-1901-1,110.276

Right across human life there runs the great line of cleavage between
the righteous and the wicked - ' between him that serveth God , and him
that serveth Him not . ' TALBOT-1901-1,110.277

Often the line dips , as it were , below the surface ,
TALBOT-1901-1,110.278

and is visible to God alone ; TALBOT-1901-1,110.279

often lives seem to hover upon it , TALBOT-1901-1,110.280

or flashes from one side or the other shoot across into the other domain
; TALBOT-1901-1,110.281

often the same figures cross and recross the line .
TALBOT-1901-1,110.282

But there it is - a fact in the present , a presage of the future ,
charged with issues of awful significance . TALBOT-1901-1,110.283

For ourselves , in the treatment of our own consciences , it is far the
most necessary thing to be considered . TALBOT-1901-1,110.284

To talk of phases , and elements , and sides , and veins of good , of
redeeming features and amiable failings and noble faults , is in this
connection to play with poisonous anodynes . TALBOT-1901-1,110.285

The great moral alternative in conduct , in character , in the <P_111>
inmost heart and the set of the will , - this is the thing to be kept
before us , and pressed upon us ; TALBOT-1901-1,111.286

this is the ministrant of the fear , which is holy indeed .
TALBOT-1901-1,111.287

What helps us to evade this may do us the worst moral mischief ;
TALBOT-1901-1,111.288

and truth , if truth it be , can@ @not be more gravely misused .
TALBOT-1901-1,111.289

The same , of course , is true in dealing with others , when it is a
question , not of judging , but of helping them . TALBOT-1901-1,111.290

We must do to them as our best self would wish to be done by .
TALBOT-1901-1,111.291

We must make them feel the unchanged stress and urgency of the moral
alternative . TALBOT-1901-1,111.292

We must not allow them to be cajoled and weakened by the fatal sophistry
which would recognize no differences but those of a little more and less
, and treat all characters simply as amalgams in which the baser and
better metal are in varying proportions , TALBOT-1901-1,111.293

or we shall indeed have passed not so much from a cruder to a mellower
and more discriminating form of education , as from what was robust and
bracing to one of subtle enervation . TALBOT-1901-1,111.294

So , too , in the matter of the association , the closer association ,
of our lives . TALBOT-1901-1,111.295

We have learnt , no doubt , to see more clearly the danger of
identifying God's people with ' our set ; ' TALBOT-1901-1,111.296

we must be ready and eager to learn from good wherever we find it , in
whatever setting or context ; TALBOT-1901-1,111.297

we may even find stimulus , and be made ashamed , by the sight of moral
qualities , of energy , sacrifice , persistence , which evil draws into
its service , from features which make sin almost strong , and vice
almost <P_112> splendid , and give to earthly passion almost the glory
of self-devotedness . TALBOT-1901-1,112.298

But , none_the_less , the moral life must have its ' brethren and
companions {COM:missing_close_quote} ; TALBOT-1901-1,112.299

the distinctions between the good and evil , the self-denying and the
selfish , the worldly and the high-minded or spiritual , are not so
complicated by exceptions and inconsistencies but that they have a very
real working significance for us . TALBOT-1901-1,112.300

The moral life must choose its intimate company ; TALBOT-1901-1,112.301

Christian life has grown , and was meant to grow , in the warmth and
under the control of a fellowship of the like-minded .
TALBOT-1901-1,112.302

That is the ideal - TALBOT-1901-1,112.303

but it is also , in a marred but not ruined sense , the truth - of the
Christian Church . TALBOT-1901-1,112.304

No one , I think , who has reflected upon modern life , will seriously
doubt that the tendency to what I may call impartial recognition has
been misused to hinder vigorous moral decision and anything like open
steadiness of ordered life , moral and religious , or care and
particularity in the choice of associates . TALBOT-1901-1,112.305

There is a tendency to look upon all life as a changing kaleidoscope in
which good and evil mix , no doubt in varying proportions , but still
not so as to make contrasts of colour . TALBOT-1901-1,112.306

And this is definitely untrue and misleading . TALBOT-1901-1,112.307

It makes the path of life much harder to find for the young ;
TALBOT-1901-1,112.308

it makes the middle-aged and old much more timid and half-hearted in
taking the line that they desire to take , and showing the light that
they ought to show . TALBOT-1901-1,112.309

And the very good which underlies all this - that is <P_113> my special
point - makes the danger all the more . TALBOT-1901-1,113.310

The fear of being a Pharisee by saying , " I am right , and you are
wrong ; " by insisting on any rule or principle of one's own ; by
drawing the line anywhere ; the almost nervous remembrance that the lax
or vicious or self-indulgent may at any moment be found putting to shame
the men of virtue and of God by some brighter bit of generosity or
courage ; - these have become real moral obstacles .
TALBOT-1901-1,113.311

I venture to submit this to you as a matter well worthy of such serious
reflection , practical in interest , practical in results , as those who
hear me are well able to give . TALBOT-1901-1,113.312

One result , congenial to the time at which we are met at the opening of
Lent , may perhaps be an altered estimate of self-discipline , of the
habit of taking life to task , and of subjecting character and conduct
first to scrutiny , and then to detailed self-control .
TALBOT-1901-1,113.313

It is giving a great deal too much honour to moral spontaneousness , to
bright instinct and generous impulse , if we sacrifice to these all
steady attempt {COM:sic} to train character as a whole ; to bring it up
to standard and rule ; or , which is greater yet , to give opportunity
to those deeper motives which by their constraining power unify life and
pervade it with a single inspiration . TALBOT-1901-1,113.314

It is making a great deal too much of the defects of a trained virtue ,
if we let the fear of them banish from our life all such moral forces as
training and drill . TALBOT-1901-1,113.315

Perhaps , for example , it is hardly too much to say that the popular
attitude towards Lent <P_114> is little less than ludicrous ; for those
, I mean , who have any aspiration beyond pleasant days or professional
success . TALBOT-1901-1,114.316

For self-discipline has always been a great business for the more
earnest sort of men ; TALBOT-1901-1,114.317

and every sort of business requires its special instruments and times .
TALBOT-1901-1,114.318

We may be pretty sure that we are getting wrong if the ways of other
generations of men , below the surface things of costume and fashion ,
seem to us <font> merely <$$font> alien and foolish .
TALBOT-1901-1,114.319

We can hardly help being wrong if we are altogether out of touch with
the classics of spiritual life , with Jeremy Taylor's <font> Holy Living
, <$$font> and Andrewes' <font> Devotions , <$$font> and Law's <font>
Serious Call . <$$font> TALBOT-1901-1,114.320

No one who thinks can help being afraid that a fashion of amateurishness
in religion may rob us of a great deal of what is most robust and deep ,
while it certainly plays into the hands of those old and lasting enemies
, our own natural indolence and self-indulgence and complacency .
TALBOT-1901-1,114.321

These things disguise themselves , TALBOT-1901-1,114.322

and gain a power , which would never otherwise be theirs , by a misuse
of that tendency , itself noble , which we have seen to characterize the
life of to-day . TALBOT-1901-1,114.323

But a Christian should be preserved from this by remembering that ,
according to his faith , he has a standard by which to live ;
TALBOT-1901-1,114.324

the meaning of his self-discipline for him is not a drill or a set of
rules ; TALBOT-1901-1,114.325

it is the means by which he opens his heart to the power of the Christ ;
cuts back the things that hinder , and clears away those that blind ;
makes room and leisure for the <P_115> coming into him of a goodness
which is not his own , but which makes his own to be .
TALBOT-1901-1,115.326

Doubtless that Divine goodness finds illustration everywhere ;
TALBOT-1901-1,115.327

some gleam of it is reflected from many a broken life ;
TALBOT-1901-1,115.328

any conception of it with which we content ourselves is constantly
rebuked and corrected by bits of Christlikeness in most unlikely places
. TALBOT-1901-1,115.329

But the Christian is not left to collect his light from the tapers and
the glowworms , nor even from the reflected rays .
TALBOT-1901-1,115.330

For he lives in the light of the sun ; TALBOT-1901-1,115.331

and nothing but his own blindness can prevent his seeing by it .
TALBOT-1901-1,115.332

<P_190>

<heading>

XV

<font> The possibility of Goodness <$$font> TALBOT-1901-1,190.336

" He passed by on the other side . " TALBOT-1901-1,190.337

- <font> St. Luke <$$font> x. 31 . TALBOT-1901-1,190.338

<paren> <font> Preached in Westminster Abbey , June <$$font> 30 , 1901 ,
<font> and in St. Patrick's Cathedral , Dublin , November <$$font> 10 ,
1901 . <$$paren> TALBOT-1901-1,190.339

<$$heading>

Probably there is none of us here to whom the thought has not at some
time come , " I should like to be really good . " TALBOT-1901-1,190.341

If we knew what had happened to that thought and what had followed it ,
we should know the secret history , the true beauty , or the deep
tragedy , or the provoking emptiness of many lives .
TALBOT-1901-1,190.342

But this is certain , that it has been quickly followed by this second
thought , " I never shall . " TALBOT-1901-1,190.343

" I never shall be really good . " TALBOT-1901-1,190.344

That will mean different things in different people .
TALBOT-1901-1,190.345

In some it will mean , " I wo@ @n't take the trouble , " or " I ca@ @n't
stand the cost , " the trouble and the cost <paren> for they are great
<$$paren> of being really good . TALBOT-1901-1,190.346

Perhaps most of us feel that that is the reason why so little has come
of our wish . TALBOT-1901-1,190.347

But there is another way of saying , " I never shall " - which is
different ; a downhearted way - a really discouraged way , as of who
would say , " It is not for such as I am . " TALBOT-1901-1,190.348

It may be a poor-spirited thought , TALBOT-1901-1,190.349

or it <P_191> may be a beautifully modest thought .
TALBOT-1901-1,191.350

But anyhow , it deserves an answer ; TALBOT-1901-1,191.351

and Jesus Christ , Who loves the humble , and is always gentle to the
weak , would certainly have us try to answer it on His part .
TALBOT-1901-1,191.352

But what answer can we give ? TALBOT-1901-1,191.353

Shall we dare to put the words into His mouth ? TALBOT-1901-1,191.354

" Look to Me TALBOT-1901-1,191.355

and follow Me ; TALBOT-1901-1,191.356

I have given you an example . TALBOT-1901-1,191.357

I lived on earth your life , TALBOT-1901-1,191.358

and felt your difficulties , TALBOT-1901-1,191.359

and shared your temptations ; TALBOT-1901-1,191.360

yet in Me real goodness was found , perfect and without fault ;
TALBOT-1901-1,191.361

follow Me , TALBOT-1901-1,191.362

and be really good . " TALBOT-1901-1,191.363

Is that His answer ? TALBOT-1901-1,191.364

Perhaps it is . TALBOT-1901-1,191.365

But whether or no , I will only say that to many it would , by itself ,
only seem to make them more than ever sure , " I never shall . "
TALBOT-1901-1,191.366

For , " No doubt , " you may say , " it is true ; TALBOT-1901-1,191.367

that is what being really good means . TALBOT-1901-1,191.368

It means being like Jesus Christ . TALBOT-1901-1,191.369

And think of that for such as I ! TALBOT-1901-1,191.370

Not so absurd to compare Constitution Hill to Mont Blanc as to point
<font> me <$$font> to Jesus Christ the Good , and bid <font> me <$$font>
be really good like <font> Him . " <$$font> TALBOT-1901-1,191.371

Yes , no doubt . TALBOT-1901-1,191.372

But is that the end of the matter ? TALBOT-1901-1,191.373

Would Jesus Himself leave it so ? TALBOT-1901-1,191.374

I am sure that He would not . TALBOT-1901-1,191.375

Better than that , I find that He did not . TALBOT-1901-1,191.376

I can show you this , I think , if you will just think with me for a few
moments of what we find in the Gospels . TALBOT-1901-1,191.377

We find , of course , there Christ's own high holiness , His wonderful
teachings about goodness and more wonderful example of it , the glory of
His life , and the glory of His death . TALBOT-1901-1,191.378

It is like the splendour of the <P_192> high white mountain soaring in
the golden sunlight , while mist and clouds cover all below it .
TALBOT-1901-1,192.379

But do we not find also this , the pains that He took to show us that
perfect goodness and simple goodness are one and the same ?
TALBOT-1901-1,192.380

Just the simple instinct of a man's heart , quietly heard , faithfully
followed , will teach him how to do as Christ did , and be as Christ was
, in however distant , however imperfect a way . TALBOT-1901-1,192.381

I think there is much in the Gospels to show us this .
TALBOT-1901-1,192.382

When , for example , He took a child and set him in the midst of the
questioning disciples and bade " Turn and be like that ; become as
little children . " He said it very plainly . TALBOT-1901-1,192.383

If they were simply good in the way that even a child knows how , they
would be fit for His kingdom . TALBOT-1901-1,192.384

But perhaps no example is better than the passage from which I took my
text . TALBOT-1901-1,192.385

It is , of course , the parable of the Good Samaritan - perhaps the best
known of the Lord's teachings ; and certainly , to every one's mind ,
one of the simplest and most beautiful . TALBOT-1901-1,192.386

A traveller falls among robbers on the highway ; TALBOT-1901-1,192.387

they strip and wound him , leaving him half dead a little off the
roadway . TALBOT-1901-1,192.388

Two men pass by - ministers of religion - a priest first and then a
Levite . TALBOT-1901-1,192.389

The first gives him a wide berth . TALBOT-1901-1,192.390

He passes by on the other side of the road . TALBOT-1901-1,192.391

The second possibly has the curiosity to cross the road and have a look
at him ; TALBOT-1901-1,192.392

but then , like the other , he goes down the other side of the way .
TALBOT-1901-1,192.393

He passes by on the other side . TALBOT-1901-1,192.394

And then comes a stranger , a man thought of much as we , I am afraid ,
sometimes <P_193> think of a foreigner - or , in India , " a native . "
TALBOT-1901-1,193.395

He sees the wounded man , TALBOT-1901-1,193.396

and pity springs in his heart ; TALBOT-1901-1,193.397

and he listens to it without question , or delay , or fear lest the
robbers should return and do the same to himself ; TALBOT-1901-1,193.398

he takes trouble , TALBOT-1901-1,193.399

and spends what is needed , TALBOT-1901-1,193.400

and gives time and thought and care to the sufferer .
TALBOT-1901-1,193.401

" He went to him , TALBOT-1901-1,193.402

and bound up his wounds , pouring in oil and wine ,
TALBOT-1901-1,193.403

and set him on his own beast , TALBOT-1901-1,193.404

and brought him to an inn , TALBOT-1901-1,193.405

and took care of him . TALBOT-1901-1,193.406

And on the morrow , when he departed , he took out twopence
TALBOT-1901-1,193.407

and gave them to the host , TALBOT-1901-1,193.408

and said unto him , Take care of him , and whatsoever thou spendest more
, when I come again I will repay thee . " TALBOT-1901-1,193.409

Doing , you see , as his heart taught him , but doing it thoroughly and
thoughtfully , at his own trouble , and cost , and loss , and risk .
TALBOT-1901-1,193.410

Now , upon the hearing of this story two things strike us , as they
always have struck thoughtful people . TALBOT-1901-1,193.411

The first is , that in drawing the Good Samaritan , Jesus Christ was
drawing His own likeness . TALBOT-1901-1,193.412

It is not merely that if He had been in the Samaritan's place , we are
sure that He would have behaved as the Samaritan behaved .
TALBOT-1901-1,193.413

It is something deeper than that . TALBOT-1901-1,193.414

The story speaks to us as a parable ; TALBOT-1901-1,193.415

and we can@ @not help seeing in the poor wounded , beaten sufferer the
likeness of our poor suffering human race , and in the pity which bent
over him , and brought him help , the infinite pity of Christ for man .
TALBOT-1901-1,193.416

The oil and the wine seem to us to tell of all the comfort and all the
strengthening with which Christ <P_194> has comforted and strengthened
innumerable human souls ; TALBOT-1901-1,194.417

and the restoration of the man half dead to life and hope is the very
image of His lifegiving message and work . TALBOT-1901-1,194.418

That is one thing ; TALBOT-1901-1,194.419

but the second thing seems very different . TALBOT-1901-1,194.420

The goodness of the Good Samaritan is of the most simple elementary sort
. TALBOT-1901-1,194.421

It is what might be looked for from anybody , though the parable shows
it as only found in one of three , TALBOT-1901-1,194.422

and perhaps this is a high figure . TALBOT-1901-1,194.423

" I hardly think , " said Mr. Spurgeon , " that there is one good
Samaritan to two heartless persons . " TALBOT-1901-1,194.424

It is goodness which may be expected , to use a modern catchword , from
the " man in the street . " TALBOT-1901-1,194.425

Surely this is very striking , that we should find in the same portrait
by turns the Christ Himself , and the poorest man who helps a brother in
trouble . TALBOT-1901-1,194.426

It is so striking that it has always struck people .
TALBOT-1901-1,194.427

But they have often , I think , mistaken its meaning .
TALBOT-1901-1,194.428

They have made out of it a cheap comfort . TALBOT-1901-1,194.429

It does <font> not <$$font> mean that to be a Christian it is enough to
have a soft corner in your heart , and be a good-natured sort of person
. TALBOT-1901-1,194.430

That is no doubt a popular interpretation . TALBOT-1901-1,194.431

It forgets , even within the parable itself , the wine and the oil , the
personal risk , and the thoughtful pains , and the going out of his way
. TALBOT-1901-1,194.432

It forgets that the parable only shows us not a life , but a single
action , TALBOT-1901-1,194.433

and before we praise any life , we must know whether such an action is a
sample , and comes out of the heart of it and really shows us its inner
character . TALBOT-1901-1,194.434

It forgets , outside the parable , <P_195> many a word of Christ which
requires far more ; the word which bids , ' Strive to enter in , for
many shall seek to enter , and not be able ; ' the words which say , "
No man can serve two masters , " and " Follow Me . "
TALBOT-1901-1,195.435

There is something in all this much more than good nature ,
TALBOT-1901-1,195.436

and we make a terrible mistake if we use Christ's parables to let
ourselves off cheap . TALBOT-1901-1,195.437

But the true meaning and lesson is surely the one of which I spoke
before ; that simple goodness and real goodness are of the same stuff ;
that real goodness is within reach of any of us because we can all begin
upon it where we are , and find in the very simplest matters
opportunities of living and being like Jesus , the really Good .
TALBOT-1901-1,195.438

The school-doors , then , are open to all comers for the learning of
real goodness . TALBOT-1901-1,195.439

Suppose that we offer as scholars , TALBOT-1901-1,195.440

how does the Master's parable speak to us ? TALBOT-1901-1,195.441

It tells us that care for others is necessary to any real goodness .
TALBOT-1901-1,195.442

It must be ready , alive , and warm in the heart ; so that when the
moment comes for it it may at once show itself and help .
TALBOT-1901-1,195.443

We must take it as something which is matter-of-course , which we ought
to show , and are glad to show . TALBOT-1901-1,195.444

Nature itself teaches us this , you may say , without Christ .
TALBOT-1901-1,195.445

Yes , nature teaches it ; TALBOT-1901-1,195.446

pity , compassion , and sympathy are in us by nature ;
TALBOT-1901-1,195.447

but so are selfishness and idleness , and dislike of trouble .
TALBOT-1901-1,195.448

As our nature is , these will be the strongest if we do not take care .
TALBOT-1901-1,195.449

It <P_196> takes Christ , usually , to make good Samaritans out of our
selfish selves . TALBOT-1901-1,196.450

Look at the portraits in the parable . TALBOT-1901-1,196.451

The first man who passes - alas , he is a priest ! - will not look that
way . TALBOT-1901-1,196.452

He catches a glimpse , no doubt , of a man in trouble ;
TALBOT-1901-1,196.453

but he hastily draws his eyes away . TALBOT-1901-1,196.454

We need not credit him with lack of all sympathy ; TALBOT-1901-1,196.455

but other thoughts rise at once , TALBOT-1901-1,196.456

and push such sentiments down into their proper place .
TALBOT-1901-1,196.457

' I am in a hurry , TALBOT-1901-1,196.458

it will make me late ; ' TALBOT-1901-1,196.459

' I shall have to do something for him ; ' TALBOT-1901-1,196.460

' perhaps it is his own fault ; ' TALBOT-1901-1,196.461

' anyhow , it is no affair of mine . ' TALBOT-1901-1,196.462

It is the portrait of indifference - a thing of many forms .
TALBOT-1901-1,196.463

Sometimes it is merely thoughtless , TALBOT-1901-1,196.464

it is over-busy with work , or over-keen of pleasure .
TALBOT-1901-1,196.465

Sometimes <paren> or perhaps later in the same person <$$paren> it is
harder or more wilful , TALBOT-1901-1,196.466

' I will not be bothered with other troubles ; ' TALBOT-1901-1,196.467

' I have none too much time or money or pleasure for myself ; '
TALBOT-1901-1,196.468

' if others are worse off , let them take care of themselves . '
TALBOT-1901-1,196.469

But anyhow , it is deaf and blind to the needs and cares of the world .
TALBOT-1901-1,196.470

Nine-tenths of men , perhaps , are thus indifferent .
TALBOT-1901-1,196.471

They wear blinkers , like the horses , but of their own choosing .
TALBOT-1901-1,196.472

It is convenient not to see , TALBOT-1901-1,196.473

and it is very easy not to hear . TALBOT-1901-1,196.474

They pass by on the other side . TALBOT-1901-1,196.475

But there is another portrait . TALBOT-1901-1,196.476

The Levite perhaps is not quite like the priest . TALBOT-1901-1,196.477

He seems a little less absorbed in himself ; TALBOT-1901-1,196.478

he comes to the man TALBOT-1901-1,196.479

and looks at him . TALBOT-1901-1,196.480

It is not quite plain that the words of the parable say this .
TALBOT-1901-1,196.481

But at any rate it is often so in reality , TALBOT-1901-1,196.482

curiosity has first appearance of sympathy . TALBOT-1901-1,196.483

Others' woes and tragedies <P_197> make something to talk about .
TALBOT-1901-1,197.484

But in the end curiosity , like indifference , passes by on the other
side . TALBOT-1901-1,197.485

Very different is the behaviour of real goodness , however simple .
TALBOT-1901-1,197.486

It goes out of its way ; TALBOT-1901-1,197.487

it crosses the road ; TALBOT-1901-1,197.488

it takes pains ; TALBOT-1901-1,197.489

it finds the remedies ; TALBOT-1901-1,197.490

it goes through with its work . TALBOT-1901-1,197.491

Brethren , I believe that there is not one here who can@ @not , if he
will , find in these thoughts practical hints for real goodness .
TALBOT-1901-1,197.492

Watch the Good Samaritan . TALBOT-1901-1,197.493

First , when he comes where the sufferer is , he is moved with
compassion . TALBOT-1901-1,197.494

It is an instinct planted by God in every human breast .
TALBOT-1901-1,197.495

But this man has kept it pure and true . TALBOT-1901-1,197.496

He has done so , no doubt , by listening to it when it speaks .
TALBOT-1901-1,197.497

Every good instinct in us speaks more clearly to those who listen and
obey , more faintly to those who refuse . TALBOT-1901-1,197.498

The Samaritan has not let selfishness rise up and stifle his compassion
. TALBOT-1901-1,197.499

It springs at a touch like pure water , cool and refreshing .
TALBOT-1901-1,197.500

If you would be really good , watch your good instincts - instincts of
purity , modesty , charity , compassion ; TALBOT-1901-1,197.501

see how you treat them . TALBOT-1901-1,197.502

Do you strengthen them by use and compliance ? TALBOT-1901-1,197.503

or do you silence , or cheat , or argue with them till they are dumb ?
TALBOT-1901-1,197.504

It is a question for all . TALBOT-1901-1,197.505

Do not think that you are free of it because you are religious .
TALBOT-1901-1,197.506

It was a certain priest - it was another minister , a Levite - who "
passed by on the other side . " TALBOT-1901-1,197.507

Do not think , again , that you are all right about it , because you are
a simple person who does not trouble himself with rules and forms , but
just does as <P_198> his heart prompts . TALBOT-1901-1,198.508

The heart prompts selfishness as much as compassion .
TALBOT-1901-1,198.509

But then note the other point . TALBOT-1901-1,198.510

He went to him . {TEXT:,} TALBOT-1901-1,198.511

He crossed the road , TALBOT-1901-1,198.512

for the man was on the other side . TALBOT-1901-1,198.513

The things we ought to do , the people whom we ought to help , are often
just off our road . TALBOT-1901-1,198.514

It may be only the breadth of the pavement , or the other side of the
hedge , TALBOT-1901-1,198.515

but it is enough to let us pass hardly seeing , and not heeding .
TALBOT-1901-1,198.516

Perhaps the best way of learning this , and certainly the most beautiful
way , is by watching the life of a really kind and tender-hearted person
such as happily are to be found in all ranks of life .
TALBOT-1901-1,198.517

What a wonderful number of opportunities they find for their kindness ,
for comforting the sad , for helping those in trouble , for giving
happiness or lightening sorrow ! TALBOT-1901-1,198.518

How many things which we should have passed by , they just cross the
road and do ! TALBOT-1901-1,198.519

You wonder whether it is not all a gift which they have and you have not
, till you observe that the secret of it really is a constant
unselfishness , putting others first and self second or nowhere .
TALBOT-1901-1,198.520

