<BEGIN_temple-1914-2>

<P_162>

<heading>

XIV TEMPLE-1914-2,162.4

Energy TEMPLE-1914-2,162.5

<paren> St. Paul's Day <$$paren> TEMPLE-1914-2,162.6

<font> January <$$font> 25 , 1914 {COM:epigraphs_omitted}
TEMPLE-1914-2,162.7

<$$heading>

What a contrast between the master and the pupil ! TEMPLE-1914-2,162.9

And all in the master's favour , as it seems at first .
TEMPLE-1914-2,162.10

We have the picture of a somewhat excited assembly -
TEMPLE-1914-2,162.11

" they were cut to the heart TEMPLE-1914-2,162.12

and were minded to slay <P_163> them " ; TEMPLE-1914-2,163.13

and there rises a venerable old man , who for his learning and character
is universally revered ; TEMPLE-1914-2,163.14

he deprecates hasty action ; TEMPLE-1914-2,163.15

he has no clear verdict to pronounce himself , TEMPLE-1914-2,163.16

but he is sure that no religious movement can succeed unless the power
of God is in it . TEMPLE-1914-2,163.17

So he urges them to leave the new teachers alone , and see what comes of
their work . TEMPLE-1914-2,163.18

What could be wiser or more dignified ? TEMPLE-1914-2,163.19

A little later the same trouble is stirring again .
TEMPLE-1914-2,163.20

A good deal has happened in the interval ; TEMPLE-1914-2,163.21

in particular , St. Stephen has made it clear that Christianity made
the law of Moses obsolete ; TEMPLE-1914-2,163.22

and we do not know what Gamaliel thought at this later date .
TEMPLE-1914-2,163.23

But we find a young man rushing in where previously Gamaliel feared to
tread - " Saul , breathing out threatening and slaughter . "
TEMPLE-1914-2,163.24

If the story stopped there , the contrast would seem to be all in favour
of Gamaliel . TEMPLE-1914-2,163.25

But the story does not stop there . TEMPLE-1914-2,163.26

The fiery young man became the Apostle whom we commemorate to-day ,
while Gamaliel is now known chiefly as the master at whose feet once sat
the young Saul of Tarsus . TEMPLE-1914-2,163.27

<P_164>

Gamaliel may have been right , and Saul of Tarsus wrong ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,164.29

but there was more real virtue in the young man's error than in the old
man's wisdom . TEMPLE-1914-2,164.30

That sort of wisdom leads to no results ; TEMPLE-1914-2,164.31

the best of which it is capable is merely to prevent someone else from
checking progress . TEMPLE-1914-2,164.32

It is safe from the faults of partisanship ; TEMPLE-1914-2,164.33

but is equally far from the merit of effectiveness .
TEMPLE-1914-2,164.34

But the Saul who breathed out threatenings and slaughters was also the
Paul who laboured more abundantly than they all . TEMPLE-1914-2,164.35

There is no record in history of greater energy or greater effectiveness
. TEMPLE-1914-2,164.36

Try to imagine what travelling was like in those days , whether by sea
or land , TEMPLE-1914-2,164.37

and then recall the journeys of St. Paul . TEMPLE-1914-2,164.38

Remember the perils he faced - perils of rivers , of sea , perils among
strangers , among fellow-countrymen , among false brethren ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,164.39

scourged , imprisoned , shipwrecked ; never was such a life of hazard
and adventure ; TEMPLE-1914-2,164.40

and the spirit that sustained him in those labours for the Church , from
the time when he became convinced that the Church was right , was the
same which had made him the most ardent of persecutors <P_165> in the
days when he believed that the Church was wrong . TEMPLE-1914-2,165.41

One great lesson of his life - the lesson which I would impress upon our
minds to-day - is just this duty of acting with all our vigour for the
cause that seems to us right . TEMPLE-1914-2,165.42

The fact that there is a great deal to be said on the other side ought
not to diminish our energy one jot . TEMPLE-1914-2,165.43

There was a great deal to be said against Christianity in St. Paul's
time ; TEMPLE-1914-2,165.44

very many good people were saying it ; TEMPLE-1914-2,165.45

he had once said it all himself , TEMPLE-1914-2,165.46

so he was quite familiar with the points . TEMPLE-1914-2,165.47

But when once he is brought to believe that in spite of it all
Christianity is the truth , those familiar adverse points are powerless
to moderate his course . TEMPLE-1914-2,165.48

People sometimes discuss whether most is done in the world by
broad-minded or narrow-minded people ; TEMPLE-1914-2,165.49

it is suggested that breadth of mind and a capacity to see several sides
of a question are incompatible with vigour and directness .
TEMPLE-1914-2,165.50

But there is no evidence of this whatsoever . TEMPLE-1914-2,165.51

We all know several people who are peculiarly capable of seeing all
round a question and are also <P_166> full of energy ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,166.52

and we all know several people also who never see more sides than one
and yet do nothing . TEMPLE-1914-2,166.53

It is quite possible to be broad-minded and active ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,166.54

it is quite possible to be narrow-minded and sluggish .
TEMPLE-1914-2,166.55

Of course it is our duty to think out our course of action and its
effects as carefully as we can ; TEMPLE-1914-2,166.56

it is our duty to see it in all its bearings ; TEMPLE-1914-2,166.57

but when the time for action comes , we must make up our mind and act
with all our vigour . TEMPLE-1914-2,166.58

Very often it is difficult to decide what line to take .
TEMPLE-1914-2,166.59

The balance of argument seems very even ; TEMPLE-1914-2,166.60

but if it tips one way by the slightest movement , follow it
TEMPLE-1914-2,166.61

and act that way with all the force of which you are capable .
TEMPLE-1914-2,166.62

Never let the difficulty of deciding be transformed into a difficulty of
acting when you have decided . TEMPLE-1914-2,166.63

That is the only chance you have of accomplishing anything in this world
; TEMPLE-1914-2,166.64

and nothing is a thing which it is always wrong to have done .
TEMPLE-1914-2,166.65

This does not mean that provided we do something , it matters little
what we do . TEMPLE-1914-2,166.66

On the contrary , it matters infinitely . TEMPLE-1914-2,166.67

Mere worship of force or energy , divorced from <P_167> thought or
feeling , is stupid . TEMPLE-1914-2,167.68

And equally stupid is the notion that it is better to be a splendid
villain than a common-place good citizen . TEMPLE-1914-2,167.69

The splendid villain does not exist ; TEMPLE-1914-2,167.70

he is a figure made up of virtues and vices , TEMPLE-1914-2,167.71

and the splendour is all due to the virtues the courage , or generosity
or the like . TEMPLE-1914-2,167.72

No vice , on whatever scale , can ever appear admirable , except by
allying itself with some great virtue . TEMPLE-1914-2,167.73

We must want to do what is right ; TEMPLE-1914-2,167.74

and we must do absolutely all we can to make sure what is right ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,167.75

but when the time for action comes we must make up our minds to the best
of our ability and act with all our force . TEMPLE-1914-2,167.76

In most of our personal affairs duty is pretty plain ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,167.77

in work and games and our opportunities of usefulness in the House we
find the sphere where we are to show our energy . TEMPLE-1914-2,167.78

But we must come out of our own circle some day and take our part in the
work of God in the world . TEMPLE-1914-2,167.79

What right have we to pray " Thy Kingdom come " if we do nothing to
bring it nearer ? TEMPLE-1914-2,167.80

It was no petty point of personal conduct upon which St. Paul's
judgment was changed by <P_168> his vision on the Damascus road ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,168.81

it was his attitude to that great movement in regard to which Gamaliel
had expressed himself so wisely . TEMPLE-1914-2,168.82

And it is great movements that challenge our judgment now .
TEMPLE-1914-2,168.83

Democracy , Trade Unionism , Socialism , Syndicalism , Education ,
Nationalism , Imperialism , - all of these and many more are calling to
us ; TEMPLE-1914-2,168.84

and we must in our measure help them or resist them .
TEMPLE-1914-2,168.85

Do you ask why we should not leave them altogether alone , and go about
our own business ? TEMPLE-1914-2,168.86

I reply by asking why have we with a few thousand others been singled
out to receive so long and expensive a training , if it is not to fit us
for forming a judgment on great issues ? TEMPLE-1914-2,168.87

Our sympathies and affections have developed in comparative freedom from
the temptations which may distort and warp them ; TEMPLE-1914-2,168.88

we have leisure for the training of our minds when most Englishmen are
already in the mill or the workshop or the mine ; TEMPLE-1914-2,168.89

the school itself is a miniature society , in which we can learn if we
like the principles of loyalty , patriotism , and citizenship .
TEMPLE-1914-2,168.90

It is vital to our country's welfare <P_169> that someone should be
capable of seeing all the points of view on such great matters as I
mentioned ; TEMPLE-1914-2,169.91

and who shall do it if we refuse ? TEMPLE-1914-2,169.92

Do not then stand aside in Gamaliel's way and say with a spurious
reverence that you will leave these things alone to see whether God
prospers them or not . TEMPLE-1914-2,169.93

Make up your minds , as the time comes , TEMPLE-1914-2,169.94

and remember that your training here is your preparation for that
decision . TEMPLE-1914-2,169.95

You may decide wrongly ; TEMPLE-1914-2,169.96

and then , like St. Paul , you will have it on your conscience that you
persecuted the good cause . TEMPLE-1914-2,169.97

But if you have made your choice honestly , with the most diligent
thought that time and your own capacities permit , you will find your
mistake in course of time , whether by blinding illumination or by
gradual perception . TEMPLE-1914-2,169.98

Do the best you can , TEMPLE-1914-2,169.99

and then , but not till then , you may leave the issue in God's hands .
TEMPLE-1914-2,169.100

Do@ @n't stand on one side then , when the cause of God is calling .
TEMPLE-1914-2,169.101

For in the turmoil of our day His cause must either gain or lose .
TEMPLE-1914-2,169.102

And do not think to be devout , and leave the work to Him .
TEMPLE-1914-2,169.103

That is not being <P_170> devout ; TEMPLE-1914-2,170.104

it@ @'s being idle ; TEMPLE-1914-2,170.105

and in spite of the usual English opinion , the two things are not the
same . TEMPLE-1914-2,170.106

You ca@ @n't leave these matters in God's hands , because He has already
left them in yours . TEMPLE-1914-2,170.107

" The kingdom of heaven is as a man travelling into a far country , who
called his own servants and delivered unto them his goods . "
TEMPLE-1914-2,170.108

That is the way that God is King ; TEMPLE-1914-2,170.109

He leaves the welfare of His kingdom in our hands .
TEMPLE-1914-2,170.110

" Occupy till I come . " TEMPLE-1914-2,170.111

And if , after all that has been done for you , you are content with
keeping your own life straight and will not come to the help of the Lord
against the mighty , because the issue is so confused and it is so hard
to make up one's mind , you will have to come at last and say : " No
doubt I might have invested this talent that You gave me ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,170.112

but I never could hear of any investment that was absolutely safe ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,170.113

and as after all it was Your talent and not mine , I did not like to
risk it ; TEMPLE-1914-2,170.114

it is just as good as it ever was ; TEMPLE-1914-2,170.115

I took great care of it ; TEMPLE-1914-2,170.116

I wrapped it up in a napkin . " TEMPLE-1914-2,170.117

" Cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness . "
TEMPLE-1914-2,170.118

<P_171>

Has it ever struck you that there are two types not mentioned in that
parable of the talents ? TEMPLE-1914-2,171.120

There is no mention of the man who deliberately wastes his talent .
TEMPLE-1914-2,171.121

But we do@ @n't need that . TEMPLE-1914-2,171.122

If the servant who brings no profit is cast into outer darkness , we
need not inquire what awaits the servant who deliberately brings loss .
TEMPLE-1914-2,171.123

He is the traitor , of whom it is said : " Good were it for that man if
he had not been born . " TEMPLE-1914-2,171.124

But there is yet another type . TEMPLE-1914-2,171.125

We may imagine , may we not ? a man who came empty-handed ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,171.126

he had tried with all his powers ; TEMPLE-1914-2,171.127

but he had been unfortunate ; TEMPLE-1914-2,171.128

the money is all gone ; TEMPLE-1914-2,171.129

he tried , TEMPLE-1914-2,171.130

but he is a failure . TEMPLE-1914-2,171.131

Why is he not mentioned ? TEMPLE-1914-2,171.132

Surely because it is only our shortness of vision that lets us speak of
failure . TEMPLE-1914-2,171.133

In the end , no right endeavour ever fails . TEMPLE-1914-2,171.134

We may fall into error and failure for a time , TEMPLE-1914-2,171.135

but if in heart and will we are fellow workers with God , then His
wisdom will give us guidance and His power success .
TEMPLE-1914-2,171.136

So let us listen for the call of God not only in our own consciences ,
but in the great movements of our time . TEMPLE-1914-2,171.137

Let us pray for <P_172> God's help as we choose our course ,
TEMPLE-1914-2,172.138

and then , with the dauntless energy of St. Paul , forgetting the
things which are behind and stretching forth to the things which are
before , let us press on toward the goal unto the prize of the call
upwards which God gives in Christ Jesus . TEMPLE-1914-2,172.139

<P_173>

<heading>

XV TEMPLE-1914-2,173.142

Worship and Meditation TEMPLE-1914-2,173.143

<font> February <$$font> 8 , 1914 . TEMPLE-1914-2,173.144

<$$heading>

{COM:epigraph_omitted}

Without worship there can be no great depth of religion in a man's life
. TEMPLE-1914-2,173.147

But most of us give little thought or time to worship as distinct from
prayer or supplication . TEMPLE-1914-2,173.148

Our tacitly accepted religious belief constitutes a sort of background
to our life , TEMPLE-1914-2,173.149

and we attend to it when other things fail . TEMPLE-1914-2,173.150

Our religion is kept , like the Income Tax of earlier generations , for
some crisis or emergency . TEMPLE-1914-2,173.151

If we hear of some sick person for whom prayer has been offered , we
assume at once that he is at death's door ; TEMPLE-1914-2,173.152

why should men resort to any measure so extreme as prayer , we seem to
argue , unless ordinary medical skill <P_174> is failing ?
TEMPLE-1914-2,174.153

And in our own devotional life , though we <font> say <$$font> our
prayers indeed every day , it is not till we are in some serious danger
or harassing perplexity or desperate need that we really put ourselves
whole-heartedly into God's hands . TEMPLE-1914-2,174.154

There is some religion in our lives , TEMPLE-1914-2,174.155

but our lives as a whole are not religious . TEMPLE-1914-2,174.156

By worship as distinct from prayer or supplication I mean the seeking
and enjoying of the Presence of God , not for the sake of anything which
we may gain , not to make ourselves better or stronger , but merely for
the sake of being with Him . TEMPLE-1914-2,174.157

Most of us only turn to God when we want something ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,174.158

and when we have said what we want , we turn away again .
TEMPLE-1914-2,174.159

If we treated a human being so , he would rightly think us most
offensive . TEMPLE-1914-2,174.160

And we know that what we want of anyone for whom we care is not their
gifts but their company ; TEMPLE-1914-2,174.161

we may ask for this or that which we want sometimes ,
TEMPLE-1914-2,174.162

and we are glad of their presents ; TEMPLE-1914-2,174.163

but what we chiefly want is just to be with them .
TEMPLE-1914-2,174.164

And that is what we ought to want also of God . TEMPLE-1914-2,174.165

So it will be worth while to consider <P_175> why we do not feel more of
such a desire and how we may bring ourselves to feel it .
TEMPLE-1914-2,175.166

The answer is to be found in two practices which are inseparable from
one another - worship and meditation . TEMPLE-1914-2,175.167

Worship is itself the enjoyment of the Presence of God .
TEMPLE-1914-2,175.168

It is the pouring out of our soul to Him in sheer adoration of His
greatness and gratitude for His goodness . TEMPLE-1914-2,175.169

There should be in it no thought of ourselves at all , neither of our
sins nor our needs . TEMPLE-1914-2,175.170

It should be like the joy of going home after a long absence , joy which
is all in the present , with no hopes or expectations in it because the
mere pleasure of being there is enough to fill the soul .
TEMPLE-1914-2,175.171

The Church service is full of such worship ; TEMPLE-1914-2,175.172

think only of the <font> Te Deum <$$font> and the <font> Magnificat .
<$$font> TEMPLE-1914-2,175.173

The former , it is true , contains one or two brief petitions ,
TEMPLE-1914-2,175.174

but mostly it is a shout of joy in the thought of God being what He is .
TEMPLE-1914-2,175.175

Those two Canticles are the parts of the service in which , in this
Chapel , most people seem to join . TEMPLE-1914-2,175.176

But I expect that many of us think very little about what we are singing
. TEMPLE-1914-2,175.177

That does not make our singing worthless ; TEMPLE-1914-2,175.178

for the words lodge somewhere in our mind <P_176> as the result of our
perpetually uttering them , TEMPLE-1914-2,176.179

and help to create a temper or disposition which will be more capable of
genuine worship if we ever try to make our worship real .
TEMPLE-1914-2,176.180

But while it may be a preparation for worship , it is not yet actual
worship . TEMPLE-1914-2,176.181

Naturally if we thus miss opportunities put in our way , we are not
likely to make opportunities for ourselves . TEMPLE-1914-2,176.182

And most of us leave no room at all for real worship in our private
prayers . TEMPLE-1914-2,176.183

It is something that we have to learn , and which we only learn with
great effort . TEMPLE-1914-2,176.184

Why should we suppose that the supreme business of life will come easy ?
TEMPLE-1914-2,176.185

And there is only one way of learning either this or anything else ,
that is by doing it - feebly and badly at first , but perpetually better
as we go on trying . TEMPLE-1914-2,176.186

That is how you learn to write Latin prose or to throw a cricket-ball ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,176.187

and that is how you must learn to worship , if you are ever to be able
to do it . TEMPLE-1914-2,176.188

But , as I said just now , worship is inseparable from meditation .
TEMPLE-1914-2,176.189

We can@ @not feel joy in the Presence of God unless we know who He is .
TEMPLE-1914-2,176.190

We must give time to thinking <P_177> of Him . TEMPLE-1914-2,177.191

And again this must mean , not working out our reasons for believing
that He exists or how His Being is made known in His works <paren>
though that too is a right thing for some of us at least to do <$$paren>
, but thinking out for ourselves the meaning of what has been believed
by those who have known Him best . TEMPLE-1914-2,177.192

To some extent we do this already . TEMPLE-1914-2,177.193

If you were to make a list of your dozen favourite hymns , you would
find that a great number of them are not addressed to God at all .
TEMPLE-1914-2,177.194

They are addressed to ourselves : TEMPLE-1914-2,177.195

in them we remind ourselves of what we really know about God .
TEMPLE-1914-2,177.196

So it is in such a hymn as " When I survey the wondrous Cross . "
TEMPLE-1914-2,177.197

Let us take such hymns to help us in fixing in our minds what we really
know , or can know , about God . TEMPLE-1914-2,177.198

Let us sometimes say them to ourselves slowly and thoughtfully , trying
to bring their meaning home to ourselves . TEMPLE-1914-2,177.199

Let us do the same with the Canticles or with our favourite Psalms .
TEMPLE-1914-2,177.200

Do you ask when this is to be done ? TEMPLE-1914-2,177.201

Where is an opportunity to be found for such things ?
TEMPLE-1914-2,177.202

Well , of course there is no difficulty <P_178> if you really want to do
it . TEMPLE-1914-2,178.203

But the most obvious time is at your evening prayers .
TEMPLE-1914-2,178.204

Make it a rule never to ask God for anything until by really attentive
reading of some part of the Bible , or by use of a Psalm or Hymn , or in
some such way , you have brought vividly before your mind some part of
the fulness of God's nature . TEMPLE-1914-2,178.205

Those who are communicants have the best of all opportunities in the
time of waiting at the Communion Service . TEMPLE-1914-2,178.206

Do@ @n't spend all that time on yourselves , not even on your greatest
needs ; nor spend it all on thoughts of this world at all .
TEMPLE-1914-2,178.207

Let part always be given to the thought of God in Himself .
TEMPLE-1914-2,178.208

Try , as the service bids us , to lift up your hearts unto the Lord and
join in the unceasing adoration of the Angels and Archangels and the
whole company of Heaven . TEMPLE-1914-2,178.209

And beside this piecemeal realisation of the Divine , try to enter more
fully into the heritage of the knowledge of God which we can claim if we
will . TEMPLE-1914-2,178.210

Take the Creeds , the great summaries of God's revelation of Himself in
Christ , TEMPLE-1914-2,178.211

and try to realise the meaning of the separate clauses for your own
<P_179> life . TEMPLE-1914-2,179.212

It would be good for us to choose some period - say Advent or Lent - in
which every year on the successive Sundays we went through the Creeds
clause by clause , trying to see more clearly not only the meaning but
the importance of each , and why it matters . TEMPLE-1914-2,179.213

So we may consider the words " I believe in God the Father Almighty . "
TEMPLE-1914-2,179.214

First remember that to believe in a person does not mean merely to
believe in his existence but to put trust in him .
TEMPLE-1914-2,179.215

So we begin our Christian profession by saying , " I trust in God . "
TEMPLE-1914-2,179.216

That must mean that I intend to act in the world in accordance with the
will of God , in full confidence that He will give me strength to do it
; TEMPLE-1914-2,179.217

the Father " - who will not leave His children in the lurch ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,179.218

" Almighty , " so that His will is bound to prevail .
TEMPLE-1914-2,179.219

Nothing can be of so much practical importance as that belief .
TEMPLE-1914-2,179.220

Call it to your aid next time you see an action you ought to do or an
attempt you ought to make , but from which you shrink because you fear
failure . TEMPLE-1914-2,179.221

I believe , TEMPLE-1914-2,179.222

I trust , in God the Father Almighty - TEMPLE-1914-2,179.223

so failure is out of the question : TEMPLE-1914-2,179.224

" with God all things are possible " ; TEMPLE-1914-2,179.225

<P_180>

" I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me . "
TEMPLE-1914-2,180.227

Then do the action , TEMPLE-1914-2,180.228

or make the attempt . TEMPLE-1914-2,180.229

Or take the last paragraph of the Apostles' Creed .
TEMPLE-1914-2,180.230

" I believe in the Holy Ghost " ; - the Spirit of God , who proceedeth
from the Father and is at work in all the world ; but who works with
full power in the hearts of those who have been under the influence of
the Life and Death of Christ - " Who proceedeth from the Father and the
Son " - and whose aid therefore we can find best by turning our minds to
the Father Almighty or to Jesus Christ , His only Son , our Lord .
TEMPLE-1914-2,180.231

" The Holy Catholic Church " : TEMPLE-1914-2,180.232

- think what it means that our weak and intermittent trust in God should
be supported by the heroic faith of all the great saints and martyrs ;
what it means that the Body of Christ , the instrument through which He
does His work , should be this great society of which we are members ,
and what the claim of the Church upon our loyalty and service must
therefore be . TEMPLE-1914-2,180.233

" The Communion of Saints " : TEMPLE-1914-2,180.234

keep it before your mind that Death makes no division in the Fellowship
of Christ's disciples ; TEMPLE-1914-2,180.235

we <P_180> can still repay our debts to loved ones who are passed away ,
TEMPLE-1914-2,180.236

for at every stage of our advance there is joy in Heaven .
TEMPLE-1914-2,180.237

" The Forgiveness of Sins " : TEMPLE-1914-2,180.238

try to realise first the guilt of sin which costs God such agony as we
behold in the Passion and Cross of Christ , and then the depth of love
that is ready to bear that agony ; TEMPLE-1914-2,180.239

and be thankful that you are a member of that Society of the Church ,
that Fellowship of the Saints , which keeps alive in the world the story
of His love and so brings its influence to bear on you .
TEMPLE-1914-2,180.240

" The Resurrection of the Body and the Life Everlasting " :
TEMPLE-1914-2,180.241

let us look forward to the life beyond death as something richer ,
fuller , more interesting and valuable than our life here and now .
TEMPLE-1914-2,180.242

And then realise also how all of this fits together .
TEMPLE-1914-2,180.243

" I believe in the Holy Ghost , " who , working through " the Holy
Catholic Church , " builds up " the Communion of Saints , " through
membership of which we obtain " Forgiveness of Sins , " which is the
condition of " the Resurrection of the Body and the Life Everlasting .
" TEMPLE-1914-2,180.244

<P_181>

What I have said is a very sketchy illustration of the sort of
meditation that I mean . TEMPLE-1914-2,181.246

Each must do it for himself , with what help from books or sermons that
he can find . TEMPLE-1914-2,181.247

And if its full value is to be realised , it must be done regularly and
systematically . TEMPLE-1914-2,181.248

But if we try to win a perpetually fuller grasp of the faith which we
have inherited , we shall find ourselves drawn spontaneously to worship
. TEMPLE-1914-2,181.249

Worship consists of praise and thanksgiving ; TEMPLE-1914-2,181.250

thanksgiving is being glad that God has done what He has done ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,181.251

praise is being glad that He is what He is . TEMPLE-1914-2,181.252

If the faith of which the Creeds are a summary is becoming real to us ,
we shall be perpetually pouring out our hearts in praise and
thanksgiving . TEMPLE-1914-2,181.253

And the greatest of all themes of meditation , the greatest stimulus to
worship , I have so far omitted - the Life of Christ Himself .
TEMPLE-1914-2,181.254

Think of it part by part : TEMPLE-1914-2,181.255

but think of it also as a whole . TEMPLE-1914-2,181.256

Read the story of it over and over again , always expecting to find more
in it than you had seen before . TEMPLE-1914-2,181.257

And remember as you read that it is God Himself <P_182> whose character
you are studying . TEMPLE-1914-2,182.258

It is God who takes the little children in His arms and blesses them ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,182.259

it is God who lets the sinful woman wash His feet with her tears ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,182.260

it is God who dreads the pain by which alone mankind may be redeemed ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,182.261

it is God who by enduring that pain conquers death and sin .
TEMPLE-1914-2,182.262

Think of God , TEMPLE-1914-2,182.263

worship Him TEMPLE-1914-2,182.264

and pray to Him , as He is there made known . TEMPLE-1914-2,182.265

Take care that the picture of Christ is before your eyes or His Figure
before your imagination in your public or private prayers .
TEMPLE-1914-2,182.266

Then your prayer will become fervent and your worship spontaneous ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,182.267

for in prayer and worship you will feel that you are coming home and
spending time where you like best to spend it . TEMPLE-1914-2,182.268

" In Thy presence is the fulness of joy TEMPLE-1914-2,182.269

and at Thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore . "
TEMPLE-1914-2,182.270

" Thou hast made us for Thyself , " says St. Augustine , "
TEMPLE-1914-2,182.271

and our souls are restless until they find rest in Thee . "
TEMPLE-1914-2,182.272

<P_184>

{COM:verse_omitted}

Such worship will purify our hearts and control our conduct as nothing
else can do . TEMPLE-1914-2,184.275

But it is not to be sought merely as a means to what we ordinarily call
goodness . TEMPLE-1914-2,184.276

If we thus dwell with Christ - if we abide in Him and He in us - we
shall do His work . TEMPLE-1914-2,184.277

And thus sharing His Life of service manward and of worship Godward we
are lifted above the changes and chances of this fleeting world into the
presence of God's eternal changelessness , where things are as they have
always been and have been as they ever will be ; TEMPLE-1914-2,184.278

and thus we receive the promise of the Lord that where He is there also
shall His servant be . TEMPLE-1914-2,184.279

Come then , TEMPLE-1914-2,184.280

let us worship : TEMPLE-1914-2,184.281

for He is the Lord our God . TEMPLE-1914-2,184.282

<P_185>

<heading>

XVI Eternal Redemption TEMPLE-1914-2,185.285

<font> March <$$font> 29 , 1914 . {COM:epigraphs_omitted}
TEMPLE-1914-2,185.286

<$$heading>

Eternal sin - TEMPLE-1914-2,185.288

eternal redemption ; TEMPLE-1914-2,185.289

there are the two poles between which the life of men oscillates and by
which the value of our life is gauged . TEMPLE-1914-2,185.290

Sin is always terrible ; TEMPLE-1914-2,185.291

but some sins seem to be mere passing episodes in our life .
TEMPLE-1914-2,185.292

They do not represent our permanent nature or character .
TEMPLE-1914-2,185.293

Even if the actions resulting from them are the <P_186> worst possible ,
Yet sometimes we can say , " None the less , I know that those actions
do not really represent me ; TEMPLE-1914-2,186.294

if I am judged by them alone I shall be judged unjustly . "
TEMPLE-1914-2,186.295

And when we can say that - when we hate the evil that is in us , even if
we do not feel sure that we can resist - we are not guilty of an eternal
sin . TEMPLE-1914-2,186.296

And in just the same way we may sometimes be lifted above the ordinary
level of our lives , only to sink back again to that same level a little
later ; TEMPLE-1914-2,186.297

or after some wrong act we have made reparation , TEMPLE-1914-2,186.298

and feel that we have won forgiveness from God and men ,
TEMPLE-1914-2,186.299

and yet are not secure against repeating the wrong act in the future ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,186.300

and then we have not won eternal redemption . TEMPLE-1914-2,186.301

Let us see how the two phrases are introduced in the two passages before
us . TEMPLE-1914-2,186.302

In the former , we read how our Lord was accused of using evil powers to
work His miracles . TEMPLE-1914-2,186.303

He had offended the susceptibilities of the religious leaders by His
comparative indifference to the observance of the Sabbath ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,186.304

and so , though His works were manifestly good works , these bigots are
ready to ascribe <P_187> them to Beelzebub . TEMPLE-1914-2,187.305

What He had actually done was to restore speech and sight to a man who
had been dumb and blind ; TEMPLE-1914-2,187.306

nothing could be more manifestly good . TEMPLE-1914-2,187.307

And to these people who call it a work of evil powers He says in effect
- Say what you like about Me - TEMPLE-1914-2,187.308

" Whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of Man it shall be
forgiven him " TEMPLE-1914-2,187.309

- but if you call a plainly good work evil there is no hope - "
TEMPLE-1914-2,187.310

Whosoever shall blaspheme against the Holy Spirit hath never forgiveness
TEMPLE-1914-2,187.311

but is guilty of an eternal sin . " TEMPLE-1914-2,187.312

The sin here is eternal because its root is in the man's own spirit ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,187.313

it is not a part of him - some one desire or ambition - running counter
to the main purpose of his life , TEMPLE-1914-2,187.314

it is his whole being that is vitiated . TEMPLE-1914-2,187.315

We excuse those who do wrong through ignorance , if their ignorance was
unavoidable . TEMPLE-1914-2,187.316

And we hold guilty those who do wrong knowingly ; TEMPLE-1914-2,187.317

we speak of this as " sinning against the light " TEMPLE-1914-2,187.318

and think of it as the worst thing in the world . TEMPLE-1914-2,187.319

But it is not that ; TEMPLE-1914-2,187.320

there is a still worse state , in which there is no light to sin against
. TEMPLE-1914-2,187.321

" If the light that is in thee be darkness , how great is that darkness
. " TEMPLE-1914-2,187.322

Such a man does wrong <P_188> not , as we ordinarily use the words , in
ignorance ; TEMPLE-1914-2,188.323

there is no mistake which can be corrected by further understanding or
instruction ; TEMPLE-1914-2,188.324

he does wrong , knowing that men call it wrong , but not caring whether
it is wrong or not . TEMPLE-1914-2,188.325

Right and wrong have no value for him ; TEMPLE-1914-2,188.326

and so he can@ @not feel shame , TEMPLE-1914-2,188.327

he can@ @not repent , TEMPLE-1914-2,188.328

and therefore he can@ @not be forgiven . TEMPLE-1914-2,188.329

He is guilty of an eternal sin . TEMPLE-1914-2,188.330

He may still encounter something that will break up his whole temper of
mind and soul , so that a new life may yet open before him ,
TEMPLE-1914-2,188.331

but until that happens he is irredeemable . TEMPLE-1914-2,188.332

His sin is of the quality that belongs to the eternal world ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,188.333

it may be destroyed in some convulsion of his being ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,188.334

but while it lasts it is unpardonable ; TEMPLE-1914-2,188.335

while it lasts <paren> if the phrase may be allowed <$$paren> it is
eternal . TEMPLE-1914-2,188.336

This moral indifference and incapacity , to which we may sink or drift
through continuance in wrong_doing <paren> for every neglect of
conscience weakens the authority of conscience and blunts its
sensibility <$$paren> , this is one of the poles of human life .
TEMPLE-1914-2,188.337

And the other is eternal redemption . TEMPLE-1914-2,188.338

Let us ask how this is spoken of in the New Testament .
TEMPLE-1914-2,188.339

<P_189>

The Jewish religion had provided a whole system for making reparation
for sin . TEMPLE-1914-2,189.341

No doubt the whole of it was symbolic ; TEMPLE-1914-2,189.342

the blood of the animal-victim represented life , and that the life not
of the animal but of the penitent worshipper who offered it .
TEMPLE-1914-2,189.343

But there was no pretence that even the great Day of Atonement could
give new strength or change the heart and will ; TEMPLE-1914-2,189.344

it brought to the sincerely penitent an assurance of forgiveness for the
past , but no pledge of a changed purpose for the future .
TEMPLE-1914-2,189.345

It provided a momentary reparation , but not an eternal redemption .
TEMPLE-1914-2,189.346

That , as the Epistle to the Hebrews points out , is why these
sacrifices were offered perpetually ; TEMPLE-1914-2,189.347

they gained forgiveness for the past , TEMPLE-1914-2,189.348

but could not change character , TEMPLE-1914-2,189.349

so the sin was repeated , TEMPLE-1914-2,189.350

and the sacrifice was repeated also . TEMPLE-1914-2,189.351

" The law {COM:ellipsis} can never with the same sacrifices year by year
, which they offer continually , make perfect them that draw nigh .
TEMPLE-1914-2,189.352

Else would they not have ceased to be offered , because the worshippers
, having been once cleansed , would have had no more conscience of sins
? TEMPLE-1914-2,189.353

And every priest indeed standeth day by day <P_190> ministering and
oftentimes the same sacrifices , the which can never take away sins :
TEMPLE-1914-2,190.354

but he , when he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever , sat down
on the right hand of God . " TEMPLE-1914-2,190.355

What is the supreme difference between this sacrifice of Christ and all
other sacrifices , which fixes so deep a gulf between them ?
TEMPLE-1914-2,190.356

It lies just in this , that while they were momentary acts of devotion ,
this was a permanent and unshakable obedience expressing itself in the
life of unswerving loyalty to God and the death voluntarily accepted .
TEMPLE-1914-2,190.357

What we see in the last journey to Jerusalem - the journey that began on
the Mount of the Transfiguration and ended on the Hill of the
Crucifixion - is not a passing religious emotion nor the gratification
of a generous impulse ; TEMPLE-1914-2,190.358

it is the steady purpose to fulfil the destiny of a life .
TEMPLE-1914-2,190.359

And so we rightly apply to Him the words of the Psalm :
TEMPLE-1914-2,190.360

" In whole burnt offering and sacrifices for sin thou hadst no pleasure
; TEMPLE-1914-2,190.361

then said I , Lo , I am come to do Thy will , O God . "
TEMPLE-1914-2,190.362

Single acts of worship or of reparation were not what was demanded ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,190.363

God requires the dedication of <P_191> the whole of life :
TEMPLE-1914-2,191.364

" Lo , I am come to do Thy will , O God . " " By the which will , " the
writer goes on , " we have been sanctified , through the offering of the
body of Jesus Christ once for all . " TEMPLE-1914-2,191.365

Here is eternal redemption . TEMPLE-1914-2,191.366

Just as the eternal sin is sin which so completely expresses our nature
that we feel no shame at it , no better self condemning it , so eternal
redemption is the devotion of the whole being to God , with such
completeness that no part of us rebels - the obedience whose type for
evermore is the Life that was " obedient unto death , yea , even the
death of the Cross . " TEMPLE-1914-2,191.367

Now we often think that the unpardonable sin must be something of which
only great criminals are guilty ; Judas Iscariot , perhaps , and
Caiaphas , or Cesare Borgia , or Napoleon . TEMPLE-1914-2,191.368

But , as a matter of fact , every one of us is guilty .
TEMPLE-1914-2,191.369

The degree to which that sin , that indifference to right or wrong , has
actually infected our whole nature may vary greatly ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,191.370

but we are all touched by it . TEMPLE-1914-2,191.371

At one point or another we are allowing ourselves in wrongdoing or in a
wrong habit of mind ; TEMPLE-1914-2,191.372

we are content to be selfish , or dishonest <P_192> or untruthful , or
snobbish ; TEMPLE-1914-2,192.373

we are careless in the way we express our feelings or our thoughts , so
that we hurt people whom there was no call to hurt , and then rather
pride ourselves on that false sincerity ; TEMPLE-1914-2,192.374

or we let ourselves persist in thoughts or actions which in our hearts
we know to be unclean ; TEMPLE-1914-2,192.375

all of us in one way or another are failing to fulfil the law of Christ
, TEMPLE-1914-2,192.376

and are content so to fail . TEMPLE-1914-2,192.377

And so each of us in his own degree is guilty of an eternal sin - a sin
which can@ @not be treated as something momentary , and so pardoned ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,192.378

while it remains in us we are not fit for pardon ; TEMPLE-1914-2,192.379

our self-complacency must be broken up , TEMPLE-1914-2,192.380

and we must begin again . TEMPLE-1914-2,192.381

And so long as this sin of moral blindness remains in us , it will
inevitably be poisoning our whole nature , until perhaps at last our
whole character is infected with and we become altogether indifferent to
right and wrong , which is spiritual death . TEMPLE-1914-2,192.382

And quite equally is eternal redemption within everybody's reach .
TEMPLE-1914-2,192.383

For though it was won by Christ alone , by the Life and Death of
uttermost obedience , it is available for all , because in that Life and
Death is a <P_193> power to which we may submit and by which our lives
may be remodelled after the same pattern . TEMPLE-1914-2,193.384

By Christ's accomplishment of the will of God we are sanctified ,
through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all .
TEMPLE-1914-2,193.385

Do you ask how it can be true that Christ's merits and sufferings avail
to set us right with God ? TEMPLE-1914-2,193.386

It is not because God accepts his sufferings in place of the penalty due
to us ; TEMPLE-1914-2,193.387

but it is because the beauty of that perfect obedience , and the
knowledge of what our sin brings upon Him , reveals to us the odiousness
of our sin and wins us away from it . TEMPLE-1914-2,193.388

We can plead that sacrifice on our own behalf because it has
transforming power , TEMPLE-1914-2,193.389

and as we meditate upon it , it will purify and ennoble us .
TEMPLE-1914-2,193.390

That is why it is right that " between our sins and their reward We set
the Passion of Thy Son our Lord . " TEMPLE-1914-2,193.391

That is , or should be , what we mean when we pray - " Look , Father ,
TEMPLE-1914-2,193.392

look on His anointed Face , TEMPLE-1914-2,193.393

and only look on us as found in Him . " TEMPLE-1914-2,193.394

" As found in Him " - TEMPLE-1914-2,193.395

seen in the character that will be ours when His work upon us and
<P_194> within us is complete . TEMPLE-1914-2,194.396

Here is the eternal redemption - in obedience to God that arises from
the depths of the Spirit of Christ and enters into the depths of our
spirits , as His Spirit bears witness with our spirits that , however ,
we may disgrace our lineage , we are yet children of God .
TEMPLE-1914-2,194.397

To-day is Passion Sunday ; TEMPLE-1914-2,194.398

next week we shall be recalling the supreme act of Christ's obedience in
which was won eternal redemption . TEMPLE-1914-2,194.399

Between that obedience and eternal sin our lives are swaying .
TEMPLE-1914-2,194.400

Let us resolve to use that time of meditation so that Easter may be for
us a resurrection to newness of life . TEMPLE-1914-2,194.401

It is our sin that drives him to His Death ; TEMPLE-1914-2,194.402

yet His Death is the means whereby our sin may be destroyed .
TEMPLE-1914-2,194.403

" Having therefore , brethren , boldness " - for the power in which we
trust is Almighty and irresistible - " to enter into the holy place " -
the very presence of God - " by the blood of Jesus " - in the
inspiration of His obedience unto death - " by the way which He
dedicated for us " - TEMPLE-1914-2,194.404

He has trodden the path Himself - " a new and living way "
TEMPLE-1914-2,194.405

- for we must serve Him not only with our lips <P_195> but in our lives
- " through the veil , that is to say His flesh " -
TEMPLE-1914-2,195.406

for only as we shared his human life of obedience and sacrifice do we
find the Divinity expressed in it - TEMPLE-1914-2,195.407

" let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance " -
TEMPLE-1914-2,195.408

for He has been lifted up from the earth TEMPLE-1914-2,195.409

and if we will but remember Him , He will draw us to Himself .
TEMPLE-1914-2,195.410

<P_196>

<heading>

XVII TEMPLE-1914-2,196.413

Temptation TEMPLE-1914-2,196.414

<font> May <$$font> 3 , 1914 . TEMPLE-1914-2,196.415

{COM:epigraph_omitted}

<$$heading>

But if so , why does our Lord tell us to pray " Lead us not into
temptation " ? TEMPLE-1914-2,196.418

If we are to count it joy when we fall into it , why should we pray not
to be led into it ? TEMPLE-1914-2,196.419

St. James follows up the words I have quoted by giving the reason for
them . TEMPLE-1914-2,196.420

" The proof - or testing - of your faith worketh patience - or endurance
. " TEMPLE-1914-2,196.421

A character that has passed through temptation unstained and unwarped
has about it more strength and stability than it had before ever
temptation assailed it . TEMPLE-1914-2,196.422

Any temptation that comes to us unsought can be made an opportunity for
winning strength . TEMPLE-1914-2,196.423

So there is no ground for depression <P_197> of spirits when temptations
come ; TEMPLE-1914-2,197.424

on the contrary , we should count it all joy , because in overcoming the
temptation we shall gain strength of character which me may use for any
purpose in life . TEMPLE-1914-2,197.425

Moral strength must be won in exactly the same way as any other sort of
strength ; TEMPLE-1914-2,197.426

we always win strength by resistance to something .
TEMPLE-1914-2,197.427

If you want to develop your physical strength you exert your muscles
against some resisting force - usually against the force of gravitation
: TEMPLE-1914-2,197.428

if nothing resists , your strength is not exercised
TEMPLE-1914-2,197.429

and therefore is not developed . TEMPLE-1914-2,197.430

But when you have in this way developed the muscles of your body , you
can use them in whatever way you like . TEMPLE-1914-2,197.431

The strength can be employed not only in repeating the exercises by
which it was won but in countless other ways besides .
TEMPLE-1914-2,197.432

So too our intellectual powers are increased by being set perpetually to
tackle problems that give us some difficulty ; TEMPLE-1914-2,197.433

the difficulty must not be too great TEMPLE-1914-2,197.434

or we can never start upon it , just as the child can@ @not lift the
weight which the trained man carries easily . TEMPLE-1914-2,197.435

But we set our minds to work upon problems <P_198> which really tax our
strength , TEMPLE-1914-2,198.436

and as soon as we find that stage becoming easy we pass on to another so
that our strength may still be taxed and therefore may still develop .
TEMPLE-1914-2,198.437

And when our mental powers are so trained we can use them for any
purpose , and not only to do again what we have learnt at school to do .
TEMPLE-1914-2,198.438

The object of learning to write Latin prose is not that one may
afterwards write Latin prose , though there are some oddly constituted
people who do it for amusement ; TEMPLE-1914-2,198.439

but the object is partly to gain an understanding of the Latin language
which may help us to appreciate the great Roman writers ,
TEMPLE-1914-2,198.440

but much more it is to train us in accuracy of thought and expression -
an accomplishment of inestimable value for every occupation in life .
TEMPLE-1914-2,198.441

Our great statesmen have mostly been men trained in the classics , men
who have won the power , by which they guided our national destiny ,
through the study of literature , history and philosophy .
TEMPLE-1914-2,198.442

If there is anything that seems remote from such study it is finance ,
and the management of money . TEMPLE-1914-2,198.443

But Mr. Gladstone's biographer is emphatic that , while his minute
study of Homer and of <P_199> Dante was no doubt a source of endless
pleasure to himself , the full fruit of that study is to be found in the
combined largeness of grasp and mastery of detail which marked his
wonderful Budgets . TEMPLE-1914-2,199.444

One might pursue that theme at some length ; TEMPLE-1914-2,199.445

but my point just now is that in matters intellectual , strength when
won is available for any purpose in just the same way as bodily strength
. TEMPLE-1914-2,199.446

And the same is true also of moral strength . TEMPLE-1914-2,199.447

In meeting and resisting temptations we win a strength which can
afterwards be used not only against those temptations but against all
others , and not only against temptations but also for positive service
to the Kingdom of God . TEMPLE-1914-2,199.448

For this reason , one side of our education consists in submitting us to
steadily widening temptations . TEMPLE-1914-2,199.449

At first we are watched every minute of the day ; TEMPLE-1914-2,199.450

but as we grow out of infancy and early childhood we begin to be allowed
a little liberty , which means , as it always means , the power to
choose how we will spend our time . TEMPLE-1914-2,199.451

But the giving of liberty always means in greater or less <P_200> degree
its abuse . TEMPLE-1914-2,200.452

We must learn to stand on our own feet and to live our own lives ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,200.453

we shall trip and stumble sometimes , as we did in learning to walk ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,200.454

but there is no hope for it ; TEMPLE-1914-2,200.455

you ca@ @n't learn to swim first and only get into the water afterwards
; TEMPLE-1914-2,200.456

you ca@ @n't learn to live first and only begin to live afterwards .
TEMPLE-1914-2,200.457

But it is possible to learn to swim in calm water , and in the company
of friends who will help if necessary , before trying to swim alone in a
rough sea ; TEMPLE-1914-2,200.458

and it is possible to learn to live by stages , and with the helps that
will save us from serious disaster at the outset .
TEMPLE-1914-2,200.459

So we do not begin by trying to find some place for ourselves in the
turmoil of the work-a-day world , TEMPLE-1914-2,200.460

but we are sent to preparatory schools and later on to public schools ,
precisely that we may learn the use of liberty stage by stage .
TEMPLE-1914-2,200.461

At every stage there are fresh opportunities of wrong and new
temptations . TEMPLE-1914-2,200.462

That is the very value of the process . TEMPLE-1914-2,200.463

Gradually we become more and more completely masters of our own time ,
and of our own faculties . TEMPLE-1914-2,200.464

Very often people are distressed when <P_201> some wholly new temptation
begins to trouble them , especially if it is one of those which arise
from the growth of our own nature . TEMPLE-1914-2,201.465

It seems to them so terrible that they think they would never have even
felt such a temptation unless there were something wrong with them .
TEMPLE-1914-2,201.466

But that is quite untrue . TEMPLE-1914-2,201.467

There is nothing to be miserable about . TEMPLE-1914-2,201.468

We need to be as serious as we can and as much in earnest as we can .
TEMPLE-1914-2,201.469

But to be distressed will only weaken our resistance .
TEMPLE-1914-2,201.470

To every temptation that arises let us say , " Here is a new opportunity
of winning strength . TEMPLE-1914-2,201.471

If I yield , that is a step back ; TEMPLE-1914-2,201.472

but if I resist and at last drive the temptation right away , that is a
step forward . TEMPLE-1914-2,201.473

I shall not only have avoided doing wrong ; TEMPLE-1914-2,201.474

I shall have won more strength with which to work for God and men . "
TEMPLE-1914-2,201.475

" Count it all joy , then , when ye fall into manifold temptations . "
TEMPLE-1914-2,201.476

And yet , never seek them . TEMPLE-1914-2,201.477

You will find in life quite enough for discipline of character and the
winning of strength ; TEMPLE-1914-2,201.478

and if they come unsought , you will know that they are part of God's
plan for you , TEMPLE-1914-2,201.479

and He will help you to overcome them if you are in earnest in <P_202>
fighting them and trust to His power . TEMPLE-1914-2,202.480

But never seek them for yourself . TEMPLE-1914-2,202.481

It may be right for a man of high spirit to desire a career in which he
will be required to risk his life for his country ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,202.482

it can never be right to desire either work or pleasure in which he will
be required to risk his character . TEMPLE-1914-2,202.483

The ordinary course of life and duty may bring such risks ,
TEMPLE-1914-2,202.484

and then we will face them , taking the breastplate of righteousness and
shield of faith . TEMPLE-1914-2,202.485

But we can never <font> desire <$$font> to risk our character ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,202.486

" for what shall a man give in exchange for his soul ? "
TEMPLE-1914-2,202.487

Our Lord does not tell us to pray to be delivered from temptation as we
pray that we may be delivered from actual evil . TEMPLE-1914-2,202.488

" Lead us not into temptation , TEMPLE-1914-2,202.489

but deliver us from evil . " TEMPLE-1914-2,202.490

We will face whatever temptation beset {COM:sic} our appointed path ,
TEMPLE-1914-2,202.491

but we ask that we may never be led off that path to find temptations .
TEMPLE-1914-2,202.492

Perhaps we shall best see the meaning of this petition in the Lord's
Prayer if we contrast the right temper to which it gives expression with
the wrong temper opposed to it . TEMPLE-1914-2,202.493

This opposite temper of mind is that which <P_203> is ambitious to
increase its experience , to the neglect of right and wrong ; as when a
man says that you must try all the kinds of life before you can choose
which is the best , that you must experiment in this direction and in
that before you can say what manner of life is really good .
TEMPLE-1914-2,203.494

But that sort of policy is always fatal , TEMPLE-1914-2,203.495

for the material in which you experiment is itself the instrument by
which the result is to be tested . TEMPLE-1914-2,203.496

It is sheer folly to give oneself over to some indulgence just to see
what it is like because in the process you will develop appetites and
tastes which will bias your judgment . TEMPLE-1914-2,203.497

To satisfy an idle whim you may do irreparable damage .
TEMPLE-1914-2,203.498

Imagine a man looking at a beautiful statue and seized with a desire to
see how much it would be altered if some one feature were spoilt ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,203.499

he takes a hammer TEMPLE-1914-2,203.500

and smashes some part of the statue's face ; TEMPLE-1914-2,203.501

and he satisfies his curiosity . TEMPLE-1914-2,203.502

But he can never restore in real perfection the beauty he has spoilt .
TEMPLE-1914-2,203.503

So a man may throw away his innocence from a desire for wider experience
and a wish to feel that he knows all that there is to know ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,203.504

and at the end he will know chiefly this - that the innocence <P_204> he
threw away was better than all the knowledge he has gained , and that
innocence is gone beyond recall . TEMPLE-1914-2,204.505

The wrong lies in the desire to take our lives into our own keeping and
out of the keeping of God . TEMPLE-1914-2,204.506

He has marked out a path for us to follow . TEMPLE-1914-2,204.507

We shall find there problems and dangers that will tax all our faculties
for wisdom or courage . TEMPLE-1914-2,204.508

Loyalty to duty and God will prove to be as great a thing as we can ever
hope to achieve . TEMPLE-1914-2,204.509

The desire to leave that appointed path in order to be , or to be
thought , a sportsman or a man of spirit is itself one of the
temptations that many of us have to meet and conquer .
TEMPLE-1914-2,204.510

Let us take another illustration from the sculptor .
TEMPLE-1914-2,204.511

Our natures with all their ambitions and passions are the raw material
out of which we have to shape what kind of life we choose .
TEMPLE-1914-2,204.512

The sculptor stands before his marble block ; TEMPLE-1914-2,204.513

he can make of it what he likes ; TEMPLE-1914-2,204.514

he can make a noble figure that may stand before worshippers as the
likeness of their god , TEMPLE-1914-2,204.515

or he can make some hunch-back dwarf or other deformity .
TEMPLE-1914-2,204.516

So each of us has to choose what he will make of his natural gifts .
TEMPLE-1914-2,204.517

Perhaps <P_205> he may decide to indulge all his desires for a time ,
and after having his fill of pleasure to settle down to his duty as a
respectable citizen and to the service of his fellows .
TEMPLE-1914-2,205.518

But it is little duty or service that he will do with his faculties
wasted by indulgence , with his brain that can@ @not think accurately ,
with his will that can@ @not hold fast to any purpose .
TEMPLE-1914-2,205.519

To satisfy an idle whim he has made of his marble block a hunch-back
dwarf ; TEMPLE-1914-2,205.520

and though by ruthless lopping off and hacking away he may yet produce a
figure which is pleasant enough on a puny scale , he has lost for
evermore the chance of becoming in himself the likeness of God .
TEMPLE-1914-2,205.521

<P_206>

<heading>

XVII TEMPLE-1914-2,206.524

The Christian character TEMPLE-1914-2,206.525

<font> June <$$font> 14 , 1914 . TEMPLE-1914-2,206.526

{COM:epigraph_omitted}

<$$heading>

We find it very hard to believe that our Lord meant what He said .
TEMPLE-1914-2,206.529

Very many of his quite plain utterances we try to prune down to suit our
own notions or our own practice . TEMPLE-1914-2,206.530

And so we say that such words as these can@ @not mean quite what they
say ; TEMPLE-1914-2,206.531

indeed for a man to aspire after the perfection of God would be
presumptuous and almost profane . TEMPLE-1914-2,206.532

And thus we protect ourselves from this inconveniently large demand upon
our wills by means of pious-sounding phrases . TEMPLE-1914-2,206.533

But there the words are - plain enough " : TEMPLE-1914-2,206.534

" Ye therefore shall be perfect , as your heavenly Father is perfect .
" TEMPLE-1914-2,206.535

<P_207>

And our annoyance is not diminished when we come to ask what is the form
which God's perfection and ours must take ; TEMPLE-1914-2,207.537

for it is an unwavering kindness of heart , endless forgiveness ,
complete freedom from censoriousness or any approach to indignation .
TEMPLE-1914-2,207.538

" Love your enemies TEMPLE-1914-2,207.539

and pray for them that persecute you ; that ye may be the sons of your
Father which is in Heaven ; TEMPLE-1914-2,207.540

for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and the good
TEMPLE-1914-2,207.541

and sendeth rain on the just and the unjust . " TEMPLE-1914-2,207.542

The immense self-control and restraint which is needed if we are to obey
the command , find no compensation in a right thereby gained to sit in
judgment on our fellows ; TEMPLE-1914-2,207.543

for the perfection at which we are to aim is first and foremost a
universal and imperturbable kindness of heart . TEMPLE-1914-2,207.544

To any one who reflects upon the course of our whole civilisation it is
plain enough that we need some supreme virtue which shall regulate all
the others . TEMPLE-1914-2,207.545

If you ask an average Englishman what qualities he most admires , he
will probably give in answer : " Truthfulness , courage , sincerity ,
self-control , public spirit , self-devotion . " TEMPLE-1914-2,207.546

And those are no doubt <P_208> fine qualities and great virtues .
TEMPLE-1914-2,208.547

Yet we notice this about them ; TEMPLE-1914-2,208.548

any one of them may act as part of a motive to crime ,
TEMPLE-1914-2,208.549

and some of the greatest crimes in history have been committed by men
who had all these qualities in a conspicuous degree .
TEMPLE-1914-2,208.550

These virtues make a man efficient , TEMPLE-1914-2,208.551

but do not at all determine the direction in which he is to be efficient
. TEMPLE-1914-2,208.552

Whether they are efficient for good or for evil will depend upon whether
the man is more marked by kindness or by hardness of heart .
TEMPLE-1914-2,208.553

Charity is the very bond of peace and of all virtues ,
TEMPLE-1914-2,208.554

and without it whosoever liveth is counted dead before God .
TEMPLE-1914-2,208.555

So St. Paul says - " If I speak with the tongues of man and angels ,
and have not charity , I am become sounding brass , or a clanging cymbal
. " TEMPLE-1914-2,208.556

No self-sacrifice nor heroism is of avail if this quality be lacking .
TEMPLE-1914-2,208.557

" If I bestow all my goods to feed the poor , and if I give my body to
be burned , and have not charity , it profiteth me nothing .
TEMPLE-1914-2,208.558

Charity suffereth long TEMPLE-1914-2,208.559

and is kind " - TEMPLE-1914-2,208.560

and so on through the whole of the lyrical ode which is his portrait of
his Lord . TEMPLE-1914-2,208.561

With this as our starting point we could with much labour work out for
ourselves <P_209> the whole outline of the Christian character .
TEMPLE-1914-2,209.562

But that has been done for us in the series of points selected for
blessing in the Beatitudes with which this Sermon on the Mount begins .
TEMPLE-1914-2,209.563

As we look at them all together we become aware that they describe an
exquisitely delicate balance or poise of character .
TEMPLE-1914-2,209.564

The first and basic virtue is humility or poverty in spirit .
TEMPLE-1914-2,209.565

It is the temper of the man who makes no claim for himself ; who is
altogether detached from the attractions of worldly wealth or position ;
the man who all his life remains teachable and ready to learn ; just as
the scientist or historian or philosopher should set no store by his own
theory because it is his own , but be ready to follow the guidance of
facts as they are presented to him . TEMPLE-1914-2,209.566

This absence of all self-consciousness is the fundamental virtue without
which some at least of the others will be altogether odious .
TEMPLE-1914-2,209.567

What could be more offensive than a self-conscious peacemaker -
interfering with great sense of his own virtue in the quarrel of two
other people ? TEMPLE-1914-2,209.568

Yet what can be more lovely than the gentle and self-forgetting
character in whose presence quarrelling is impossible ?
TEMPLE-1914-2,209.569

<P_210>

But this humility is not to be a mere quiet and easy-going lack of
assertiveness . TEMPLE-1914-2,210.571

The man will not assert himself ; TEMPLE-1914-2,210.572

but he will assert his standard of right TEMPLE-1914-2,210.573

and will mourn over the failure of the world to reach them .
TEMPLE-1914-2,210.574

The possible weakness in humility is at once corrected by the insistence
on a standard that makes the world look vile and wretched .
TEMPLE-1914-2,210.575

" Blessed are the poor in spirit ; TEMPLE-1914-2,210.576

blessed are they that mourn . " TEMPLE-1914-2,210.577

But if so he will tend to be impatient and overbearing ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,210.578

he will see that the world is bad TEMPLE-1914-2,210.579

and will be eager to set it right . TEMPLE-1914-2,210.580

If others are indifferent or oppose his schemes , they must be fought
down in the name of God : TEMPLE-1914-2,210.581

surely grief over evil demands that we should deal sternly with those
who neglect or refuse the remedy . TEMPLE-1914-2,210.582

No ; it is not so in fact . TEMPLE-1914-2,210.583

No permanent good has ever yet been done by anger or violence or bluster
. TEMPLE-1914-2,210.584

For what we want is to promote universal kindness of heart
TEMPLE-1914-2,210.585

and that can never be done by aggressive methods .
TEMPLE-1914-2,210.586

" Blessed are the meek - or the gentle ; TEMPLE-1914-2,210.587

for they shall inherit the earth . " TEMPLE-1914-2,210.588

This meekness is no cringing quality ; TEMPLE-1914-2,210.589

it is only possible to those who are so strong that <P_211> they can@
@not be roused to violence of speech or action . TEMPLE-1914-2,211.590

" If a man can substitute reason for anger in himself he will also
substitute reason for anger in others . " TEMPLE-1914-2,211.591

It may take a long while ; TEMPLE-1914-2,211.592

the practical man may think such a method inefficient .
TEMPLE-1914-2,211.593

Judged by such a standard God is woefully inefficient ;
TEMPLE-1914-2,211.594

his action is so slow and gentle , His tolerance of evil so incredibly
patient , that even good men doubt whether He exists at all .
TEMPLE-1914-2,211.595

But though this method is slow , it is the only one that can entirely
succeed . TEMPLE-1914-2,211.596

To win by violence and aggression always leaves a minority , conquered
perhaps but unconverted ; TEMPLE-1914-2,211.597

only patience and gentleness can hope for a universal dominion .
TEMPLE-1914-2,211.598

" Blessed are the meek TEMPLE-1914-2,211.599

for they shall inherit the earth . " TEMPLE-1914-2,211.600

