<BEGIN_thackeray-1855-2>

<P_700>

<heading>

Chapter LXVII THACKERAY-1855-2,700.4

<font> Newcome and Liberty <$$font> THACKERAY-1855-2,700.5

<$$heading>

We have said that the Baronet's lecture was discussed in the midnight
senate assembled at the ' King's Arms , ' where Mr Tom Potts showed the
orator no mercy . THACKERAY-1855-2,700.7

The senate of the ' King's Arms ' was hostile to Sir Barnes Newcome .
THACKERAY-1855-2,700.8

Many other Newcomites besides were savage and inclined to revolt against
the representative of their borough . THACKERAY-1855-2,700.9

As these patriots met over their cups , and over the bumper of
friendship uttered the sentiments of freedom , they had often asked of
one another , where should a man be found to rid Newcome of its dictator
? THACKERAY-1855-2,700.10

Generous hearts writhed under the oppression : THACKERAY-1855-2,700.11

patriotic eyes scowled when Barnes Newcome went by :
THACKERAY-1855-2,700.12

with fine satire , Tom Potts at Brown the hatter@ @'s shop , who made
the hats for Sir Barnes Newcome's domestics , proposed to take one of
the beavers - a gold-laced one with a cockade and a cord - and set it up
in the market-place and bid all Newcome come bow to it , as to the hat
of Gessler . THACKERAY-1855-2,700.13

' Do@ @n't you think , Potts , ' says F. Bayham , who of course was
admitted into the ' King's Arms club ' , and ornamented that assembly by
his presence and discourse , ' do@ @n't you think the Colonel would make
a good William Tell to combat against that Gessler ? '
THACKERAY-1855-2,700.14

Ha ! THACKERAY-1855-2,700.15

Proposal received with acclamation - THACKERAY-1855-2,700.16

eagerly adopted by Charles Tucker , Esquire , attorney-at-law , who
would not have the slightest objection to conduct Colonel Newcome's , or
any other gentleman's , electioneering business in Newcome or elsewhere
. THACKERAY-1855-2,700.17

Like those three gentlemen in the plays and pictures of William Tell ,
who conspire under the moon , calling upon liberty and resolving to
elect Tell as their especial champion - like Arnold , Melchthal , and
Werner - Tom Potts , Fred Bayham , and Charles Tucker , Esquires ,
conspired round a punch-bowl , THACKERAY-1855-2,700.18

and determined that Thomas Newcome should be requested to free his
country . THACKERAY-1855-2,700.19

A deputation from the electors of Newcome , that is to say , these very
gentlemen , waited on the Colonel in his apartment the very next morning
, THACKERAY-1855-2,700.20

and set before him the state of the borough ; Barnes Newcome's tyranny
under which it groaned ; and the yearning of all honest men to be free
from that usurpation . THACKERAY-1855-2,700.21

Thomas Newcome received the deputation with great solemnity and
politeness , THACKERAY-1855-2,700.22

crossed his legs , THACKERAY-1855-2,700.23

folded his arms , THACKERAY-1855-2,700.24

smoked his <P_701> cheroot , THACKERAY-1855-2,701.25

and listened most decorously , as now Potts , now Tucker expounded to
him ; Bayham giving the benefit of his emphatic ' Hear hear ' to their
statements , and explaining dubious phrases to the Colonel in the most
affable manner . THACKERAY-1855-2,701.26

Whatever the conspirators had to say against poor Barnes , Colonel
Newcome was only too ready to believe . THACKERAY-1855-2,701.27

He had made up his mind that that criminal ought to be punished and
exposed . THACKERAY-1855-2,701.28

The lawyer's covert innuendoes , who was ready to insinuate any amount
of evil against Barnes which could safely be uttered , were by no means
strong enough for Thomas Newcome . THACKERAY-1855-2,701.29

' " Sharp practice ! exceedingly alive to his own interests - reported
violence of temper and tenacity of money " - say swindling at once , sir
, THACKERAY-1855-2,701.30

- say falsehood and rapacity - THACKERAY-1855-2,701.31

say cruelty and avarice , ' cries the Colonel - THACKERAY-1855-2,701.32

' I believe , upon my honour and conscience , that unfortunate young man
to be guilty of every one of those crimes . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,701.33

Mr Bayham remarks to Mr Potts that our friend the Colonel , when he does
utter an opinion , takes care there shall be no mistake about it .
THACKERAY-1855-2,701.34

' And I took care there should be no mistake before I uttered it at all
, Bayham ! ' cries F. B.'s patron . THACKERAY-1855-2,701.35

' As long as I was in any doubt about this young man , I gave the
criminal the benefit of it , as a man who admires our glorious
constitution should do , THACKERAY-1855-2,701.36

and kept my own counsel , sir . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,701.37

' At least , ' remarks Mr Tucker , ' enough is proven to show that Sir
Barnes Newcome Newcome {COM:sic} , Baronet , is scarce a fit person to
represent this great borough in Parliament . THACKERAY-1855-2,701.38

' Represent Newcome in Parliament ! THACKERAY-1855-2,701.39

It is a disgrace to that noble institution the English House of Commons
, that Barnes Newcome should sit in it . THACKERAY-1855-2,701.40

A man whose word you can@ @not trust ; a man stained with every private
crime . What right has he to sit in the assembly of the legislators of
the land , sir ? ' cries the Colonel , waving his hand as if addressing
a chamber of deputies . THACKERAY-1855-2,701.41

' You are for upholding the House of Commons ? ' inquires the lawyer .
THACKERAY-1855-2,701.42

' Of course , sir , of course . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,701.43

' And for increasing the franchise , Colonel Newcome , I should hope ?
' continues Mr Tucker . THACKERAY-1855-2,701.44

' Every man who can read and write ought to have a vote , sir ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,701.45

that is my opinion ! ' cries the Colonel . THACKERAY-1855-2,701.46

' He@ @'s a Liberal to the backbone , ' says Potts to Tucker .
THACKERAY-1855-2,701.47

' To the backbone ! ' responds Tucker to Potts .
THACKERAY-1855-2,701.48

' The Colonel will do for us , Potts . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,701.49

' We want such a man , Tucker ; THACKERAY-1855-2,701.50

the <font> Independent <$$font> has been crying out <P_702> for such a
man for years past . THACKERAY-1855-2,702.51

We ought to have a Liberal as second representative of this great town -
not a sneaking half-and-half Ministerialist like Sir Barnes , a fellow
with one leg in the Carlton and the other in Brooks's .
THACKERAY-1855-2,702.52

Old Mr Bunce we ca@ @n't touch . THACKERAY-1855-2,702.53

His place is safe ; THACKERAY-1855-2,702.54

he is a good man of business : THACKERAY-1855-2,702.55

we ca@ @n't meddle with Mr Bunce - THACKERAY-1855-2,702.56

I know that , who know the feeling of the country pretty well . '
THACKERAY-1855-2,702.57

' Pretty well ! THACKERAY-1855-2,702.58

Better than any man in Newcome , Potts ! ' cries Mr Tucker .
THACKERAY-1855-2,702.59

' But a good man like the Colonel , - a good Liberal like the Colonel ,
- a man who goes in for household suffrage - ' THACKERAY-1855-2,702.60

' Certainly , gentlemen . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,702.61

' And the general great Liberal principles - THACKERAY-1855-2,702.62

we know , of course - such a man would assuredly have a chance against
Sir Barnes Newcome at the coming election , could we find such a man - a
real friend of the people ! ' THACKERAY-1855-2,702.63

' I know a friend of the people if ever there was one , ' F. Bayham
interposes . ' A man of wealth , station , experience ; a man who has
fought for his country ; a man who is beloved in this place as <font>
you <$$font> are , Colonel Newcome : THACKERAY-1855-2,702.64

for your goodness is known , sir . THACKERAY-1855-2,702.65

- <font> You <$$font> are not ashamed of your origin ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,702.66

and there is not a Newcomite old or young but knows how admirably good
you have been to your old friend , Mrs - Mrs What-d'you-call-'em ? '
THACKERAY-1855-2,702.67

' Mrs Mason , ' from F. B. ' Mrs Mason . THACKERAY-1855-2,702.68

If such a man as you , sir , would consent to put himself in nomination
at the next election , every true Liberal in this place would rush to
support you ; and crush the oligarch who rides over the liberties of
this borough ! ' THACKERAY-1855-2,702.69

' Something of this sort , gentlemen , I own to you had crossed my mind
, ' Thomas Newcome remarked . THACKERAY-1855-2,702.70

' When I saw that disgrace to my name , and the name of my father's
birthplace , representing the borough in Parliament , I thought for the
credit of the town and the family , the Member for Newcome at least
might be an honest man . THACKERAY-1855-2,702.71

I am an old soldier ; THACKERAY-1855-2,702.72

have passed all my life in India ; THACKERAY-1855-2,702.73

and am little conversant with affairs at home ' THACKERAY-1855-2,702.74

<paren> cries of ' You are , you are ! ' <$$paren> .
THACKERAY-1855-2,702.75

' I hoped that my son , Mr Clive Newcome , might have been found
qualified to contest this borough against his unworthy cousin , and
possibly to sit as your representative in Parliament .
THACKERAY-1855-2,702.76

The wealth I have had the good fortune to amass will descend to him
naturally , and at no very distant period of time ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,702.77

for I am nearly seventy years of age , gentlemen . '
THACKERAY-1855-2,702.78

The gentlemen are astonished at this statement .
THACKERAY-1855-2,702.79

<P_703>

' But , ' resumed the Colonel , ' my son Clive , as friend Bayham knows
, and to my own regret and mortification , as I do@ @n't care to confess
to you , declares he has no interest in politics , nor desire for public
distinction - THACKERAY-1855-2,703.81

prefers his own pursuits - THACKERAY-1855-2,703.82

and even these I fear do not absorb him - THACKERAY-1855-2,703.83

declines the offer which I made him , to present himself in opposition
to Sir Barnes Newcome . THACKERAY-1855-2,703.84

It becomes men in a certain station , as I think , to assert that
station ; THACKERAY-1855-2,703.85

and though a few years back I never should have thought of public life
at all , and proposed to end my days in quiet as a retired dragoon
officer , since - since it has pleased Heaven to increase very greatly
my pecuniary means , to place me as a director and manager of an
important banking company , in a station of great public responsibility
, I and my brother directors have thought it but right that one of us
should sit in Parliament , if possible , THACKERAY-1855-2,703.86

and I am not a man to shirk from that or from any other duty . '
THACKERAY-1855-2,703.87

' Colonel , will you attend a meeting of electors which we will call ,
and say as much to them and as well ? ' cries Mr Potts .
THACKERAY-1855-2,703.88

' Shall I put an announcement in my paper to the effect that you are
ready to come forward ? ' THACKERAY-1855-2,703.89

' I am prepared to do so , my good sir . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,703.90

And presently this solemn palaver ended . THACKERAY-1855-2,703.91

Besides the critical article upon the Baronet's lecture , of which Mr
Warrington was the author , there appeared in the leading columns of the
ensuing number of Mr Potts' <font> Independent <$$font> some remarks of
a very smashing or hostile nature against the Member for Newcome .
THACKERAY-1855-2,703.92

' This gentleman has shown such talent in the lecturing business , ' the
<font> Independent <$$font> said , ' that it is a great pity he should
not withdraw himself from politics , and cultivate what all Newcome
knows are the arts which he understands best ; namely , poetry and the
domestic affections . THACKERAY-1855-2,703.93

The performance of our talented representative last night was so
pathetic as to bring tears into the eyes of several of our fair friends
. THACKERAY-1855-2,703.94

We have heard , but never believed until now , that Sir Barnes Newcome
possessed such a genius <font> for making women cry <$$font> .
THACKERAY-1855-2,703.95

Last week we had the talented Miss Noakes from Slowcome , reading Milton
to us ; THACKERAY-1855-2,703.96

how far superior was the eloquence of Sir Barnes Newcome Newcome , Bart.
, even to that of the celebrated actress ! THACKERAY-1855-2,703.97

Bets were freely offered in the room last night that Sir Barnes would
<font> beat any woman <$$font> , - bets which were not taken , as we
scarcely need say , so well do our citizens appreciate the character of
our excellent , our admirable representative . THACKERAY-1855-2,703.98

Let the Baronet stick to his lectures , THACKERAY-1855-2,703.99

and let Newcome relieve him of his political occupations .
THACKERAY-1855-2,703.100

He is not fit for them , THACKERAY-1855-2,703.101

he is too sentimental a man for us ; THACKERAY-1855-2,703.102

the men of Newcome want a sound practical person ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,703.103

the <P_704> Liberals of Newcome have a desire to be represented .
THACKERAY-1855-2,704.104

When we elected Sir Barnes , he talked liberally enough ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,704.105

and we thought he would do , THACKERAY-1855-2,704.106

but you see the honourable Baronet is so poetical !
THACKERAY-1855-2,704.107

we ought to have known that , and not to have believed him .
THACKERAY-1855-2,704.108

Let us have a straightforward gentleman . THACKERAY-1855-2,704.109

If not a man of words , at least let us have a practical man . If not a
man of eloquence , one at any rate whose word we can trust ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,704.110

and we ca@ @n't trust Sir Barnes Newcome's : THACKERAY-1855-2,704.111

we have tried him , THACKERAY-1855-2,704.112

and we ca@ @n't really . THACKERAY-1855-2,704.113

Last night , when the ladies were crying , we could not for the souls of
us help laughing . THACKERAY-1855-2,704.114

We hope we know how to conduct ourselves as gentlemen .
THACKERAY-1855-2,704.115

We trust we did not interrupt the harmony of the evening ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,704.116

but Sir Barnes Newcome prating about children and virtue , and affection
and poetry , this is really too strong . THACKERAY-1855-2,704.117

' The <font> Independent <$$font> , faithful to its name , and ever
actuated by principles of honour , has been , as our thousands of
readers know , disposed to give Sir Barnes Newcome Newcome , Bart. , a
fair trial . THACKERAY-1855-2,704.118

When he came forward after his father's death , we believed in his
pledges and promises , as a retrencher and reformer ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,704.119

and we stuck by him . THACKERAY-1855-2,704.120

Is there any man in Newcome , except , perhaps , our twaddling old
contemporary the <font> Sentinel <$$font> , who believes in Sir B. N.
any more ? THACKERAY-1855-2,704.121

We say no , THACKERAY-1855-2,704.122

and we now give the readers of the <font> Independent <$$font> , and the
electors of this borough , fair notice , that when the dissolution of
Parliament takes place , a good man , a true man , a man of experience ,
no dangerous radical , or brawling tap orator - Mr Hicks's friends well
understand whom we mean - but a gentleman of Liberal principles ,
well-won wealth , and deserved station and honour , will ask the
electors of Newcome whether they are or are not discontented with their
present unworthy Member . THACKERAY-1855-2,704.123

The <font> Independent <$$font> , for one , says , we know good men of
your family , we know in it men who would do honour to any name ; but
you , Sir Barnes Newcome Newcome , Bart. , we trust no more . '
THACKERAY-1855-2,704.124

In the electioneering matter , which had occasioned my unlucky
interference , and that subsequent little coolness upon the good
Colonel's part , Clive Newcome had himself shown that the scheme was not
to his liking ; THACKERAY-1855-2,704.125

had then submitted as his custom was : THACKERAY-1855-2,704.126

and doing so with a bad grace , as also was to be expected , had got
little thanks for his obedience . THACKERAY-1855-2,704.127

Thomas Newcome was hurt at his son's faint-heartedness ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,704.128

and of course little Rosey was displeased at his hanging back .
THACKERAY-1855-2,704.129

He set off in his father's train , a silent , unwilling partisan .
THACKERAY-1855-2,704.130

Thomas Newcome had the leisure to survey Clive's glum face opposite to
him during the whole of their journey , and to chew his mustachios , and
brood upon his wrath and wrongs . THACKERAY-1855-2,704.131

His life had been a sacrifice for that boy ! THACKERAY-1855-2,704.132

What darling schemes had he not formed in his behalf ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,704.133

and how superciliously <P_705> did Clive meet his projects !
THACKERAY-1855-2,705.134

The Colonel could not see the harm of which he had himself been the
author . THACKERAY-1855-2,705.135

Had he not done everything in mortal's power for his son's happiness ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,705.136

and how many young men in England were there with such advantages as
this moody , discontented , spoiled boy ? THACKERAY-1855-2,705.137

As Clive backed out of the contest , of course his father urged it only
the more vehemently . THACKERAY-1855-2,705.138

Clive slunk away from committees and canvassing ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,705.139

and lounged about the Newcome manufactories , whilst his father , with
anger and bitterness in his heart , remained at the post of honour , as
he called it , bent upon overcoming his enemy and carrying his point
against Barnes Newcome . THACKERAY-1855-2,705.140

' If Paris will not fight , sir , ' the Colonel said , with a sad look
following his son , ' Priam must . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,705.141

Good old Priam believed his cause to be a perfectly just one , and that
duty and his honour called upon him to draw the sword .
THACKERAY-1855-2,705.142

So there was difference between Thomas Newcome and Clive his son .
THACKERAY-1855-2,705.143

I protest it is with pain and reluctance I have to write , that the good
old man was in error - that there was a wrong-doer , and that Atticus
was he . THACKERAY-1855-2,705.144

Atticus , be it remembered , thought himself compelled by the very best
motives . THACKERAY-1855-2,705.145

Thomas Newcome , the Indian banker , was at war with Barnes , the
English banker . THACKERAY-1855-2,705.146

The latter had commenced the hostilities , by a sudden and cowardly act
of treason . THACKERAY-1855-2,705.147

There were private wrongs to envenom the contest ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,705.148

but it was the mercantile quarrel on which the Colonel chose to set his
declaration of war . THACKERAY-1855-2,705.149

Barnes's first dastardly blow had occasioned it ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,705.150

and his uncle was determined to carry it through .
THACKERAY-1855-2,705.151

This I have said was also George Warrington's judgment , who in the
ensuing struggle between Sir Barnes and his uncle , acted as a very warm
and efficient partisan of the latter . THACKERAY-1855-2,705.152

' Kinsmanship ! ' says George . THACKERAY-1855-2,705.153

' What has old Tom Newcome ever had from his kinsman but cowardice and
treachery ? THACKERAY-1855-2,705.154

If Barnes had held up his finger the young one might have been happy ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,705.155

if he could have effected it , the Colonel and his bank would have been
ruined . THACKERAY-1855-2,705.156

I am for war , and for seeing the old boy in Parliament .
THACKERAY-1855-2,705.157

He knows no more about politics than I do about dancing the polka ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,705.158

but there are five_hundred wiseacres in that assembly who know no more
than he does , THACKERAY-1855-2,705.159

and an honest man taking his seat there , in place of a confounded
little rogue , at least makes a change for the better . '
THACKERAY-1855-2,705.160

I dare say Thomas Newcome , Esquire , would by no means have concurred
in the above estimate of his political knowledge , and thought himself
as well informed as another . THACKERAY-1855-2,705.161

He used to speak with the greatest gravity about our constitution as the
pride and envy of the world , though he surprised you as much by the
latitudinarian reforms which he was eager to press forward , as by the
most singular old Tory <P_706> opinions which he advocated on other
occasions . THACKERAY-1855-2,706.162

He was for having every man to vote ; every poor man to labour short
time and get high wages ; every poor curate to be paid double or treble
; every bishop to be docked of his salary , and dismissed from the House
of Lords . THACKERAY-1855-2,706.163

But he was a staunch admirer of that assembly , and a supporter of the
rights of the Crown . THACKERAY-1855-2,706.164

He was for sweeping off taxes from the poor , THACKERAY-1855-2,706.165

and as money must be raised to carry on government , he opined that the
rich should pay . THACKERAY-1855-2,706.166

He uttered all these opinions with the greatest gravity and emphasis ,
before a large assembly of electors and others convened in the Newcome
Town Hall , amid the roars of applause of the non-electors , and the
bewilderment and consternation of Mr Potts , of the <font> Independent
<$$font> , who had represented the Colonel in his paper as a safe and
steady reformer . THACKERAY-1855-2,706.167

Of course the <font> Sentinel <$$font> showed him up as a most dangerous
radical , a sepoy republican , and so forth , to the wrath and
indignation of Colonel Newcome . THACKERAY-1855-2,706.168

He a republican ! THACKERAY-1855-2,706.169

He scorned the name ! THACKERAY-1855-2,706.170

He would die as he had bled many a time for his Sovereign .
THACKERAY-1855-2,706.171

He an enemy of our beloved Church ! THACKERAY-1855-2,706.172

He esteemed and honoured it , as he hated and abhorred the superstitions
of Rome . THACKERAY-1855-2,706.173

<paren> Yells from the Irish in the crowd . <$$paren>
THACKERAY-1855-2,706.174

He an enemy of the House of Lords ! THACKERAY-1855-2,706.175

He held it to be the safeguard of the constitution and the legitimate
prize of our most illustrious naval , military , and - and - legal
heroes <paren> ironical cheers <$$paren> . THACKERAY-1855-2,706.176

He repelled with scorn the dastard attacks of the journal which had
assailed him ; THACKERAY-1855-2,706.177

he asked , laying his hand on his heart , if as a gentleman , an officer
bearing her Majesty's commission , he could be guilty of a desire to
subvert her empire and to insult the dignity of her crown ?
THACKERAY-1855-2,706.178

After this second speech at the Town Hall , it was asserted by a
considerable party in Newcome , that Old Tom <paren> as the mob
familiarly called him <$$paren> was a Tory , while an equal number
averred that he was a Radical . THACKERAY-1855-2,706.179

Mr Potts tried to reconcile his statements , a work in which I should
think the talented editor of the <font> Independent <$$font> had no
little difficulty . THACKERAY-1855-2,706.180

' He knows nothing about it , ' poor Clive said with a sigh ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,706.181

' his politics are all sentiment and kindness , THACKERAY-1855-2,706.182

he will have the poor man paid double wages , THACKERAY-1855-2,706.183

and does not remember that the employer would be ruined .
THACKERAY-1855-2,706.184

You have heard him , Pen , talking in this way at his own table ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,706.185

but when he comes out armed <font> cap-à-pie , <$$font> and careers
against windmills in public , do@ @n't you see that as Don Quixote's son
I had rather the dear brave old gentleman was at home ? '
THACKERAY-1855-2,706.186

So this <font> fainéant <$$font> took but little part in the
electioneering doings , holding moodily aloof from the meetings , and
councils , and public-houses , where his father's partisans were
assembled . THACKERAY-1855-2,706.187

<P_707>

<heading>

Chapter LXVIII THACKERAY-1855-2,707.190

<font> A Letter and a Reconciliation <$$font> THACKERAY-1855-2,707.191

<$$heading>

Miss Ethel Newcome to Mrs Pendennis THACKERAY-1855-2,707.193

' Dearest Laura , - I have not written to you for many weeks past .
THACKERAY-1855-2,707.194

There have been some things too trivial , and some too sad , to write
about ; some things I know I shall write of if I begin , and yet that I
know I had best leave ; THACKERAY-1855-2,707.195

for of what good is looking to the past now ? THACKERAY-1855-2,707.196

Why vex you or myself by reverting to it ? THACKERAY-1855-2,707.197

Does not every day bring its own duty and task ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,707.198

and are these not enough to occupy one ? THACKERAY-1855-2,707.199

What a fright you must have had with my little goddaughter !
THACKERAY-1855-2,707.200

Thank Heaven she is well now and restored to you .
THACKERAY-1855-2,707.201

You and your husband I know do not think it essential ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,707.202

but I do , <font> most essential <$$font> , THACKERAY-1855-2,707.203

and am very grateful that she was taken to church before her illness .
THACKERAY-1855-2,707.204

Is Mr Pendennis proceeding with his canvass ? THACKERAY-1855-2,707.205

I try THACKERAY-1855-2,707.206

and avoid a certain subject , THACKERAY-1855-2,707.207

but it <font> will <$$font> come . THACKERAY-1855-2,707.208

You know who is canvassing against us here . THACKERAY-1855-2,707.209

My poor uncle has met with very considerable success amongst the lower
classes . THACKERAY-1855-2,707.210

He makes them rambling speeches at which my brother and his friends
laugh , but which the people applaud . THACKERAY-1855-2,707.211

I saw him only yesterday , on the balcony of the " King's Arms , "
speaking to a great mob , who were cheering vociferously below .
THACKERAY-1855-2,707.212

I had met him before . THACKERAY-1855-2,707.213

He would not even stop and give his Ethel of old days his hand .
THACKERAY-1855-2,707.214

I would have given him I do@ @n't know what , for one kiss , for one
kind word : THACKERAY-1855-2,707.215

but he passed on THACKERAY-1855-2,707.216

and would not answer me . THACKERAY-1855-2,707.217

He thinks me - what the world thinks me , worldly and heartless ; what I
<font> was <$$font> . THACKERAY-1855-2,707.218

But at least , dear Laura , you know that I always truly loved <font>
him <$$font> , and do now , although he is our enemy , though he
believes and utters the most cruel things against Barnes , though he
says that Barnes Newcome , my father's son , my brother , Laura , is not
an honest man . THACKERAY-1855-2,707.219

Hard , selfish , worldly , I own my poor brother to be ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,707.220

and pray Heaven to amend him ; THACKERAY-1855-2,707.221

but dishonest ! THACKERAY-1855-2,707.222

and to be so maligned by the person one loves best in the world !
THACKERAY-1855-2,707.223

This is a hard trial . THACKERAY-1855-2,707.224

I pray a proud heart may be bettered by it . THACKERAY-1855-2,707.225

And I have seen my cousin : once at a lecture which poor Barnes gave ,
and who seemed very much disturbed on perceiving Clive ; once afterwards
at good old Mrs Mason's , whom I have always continued to visit for
uncle's sake . THACKERAY-1855-2,707.226

The poor old woman , whose wits are very nearly gone , held both our
hands , THACKERAY-1855-2,707.227

and asked when we were going to be married ; THACKERAY-1855-2,707.228

and laughed , poor old <P_708> thing ! THACKERAY-1855-2,708.229

I cried out to her that Mr Clive had a wife at home ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,708.230

a dear young wife , I said . THACKERAY-1855-2,708.231

He gave a dreadful sort of laugh , THACKERAY-1855-2,708.232

and turned away into the window . THACKERAY-1855-2,708.233

He looks terribly ill , pale , and oldened . THACKERAY-1855-2,708.234

I asked him a great deal about his wife , whom I remember a very pretty
, sweet-looking girl indeed , at my Aunt Hobson's , but with a not
agreeable mother , as I thought then . THACKERAY-1855-2,708.235

He answered me by monosyllables , THACKERAY-1855-2,708.236

appeared as though he would speak , THACKERAY-1855-2,708.237

and then became silent . THACKERAY-1855-2,708.238

I am pained , and yet glad that I saw him . THACKERAY-1855-2,708.239

I said , not very distinctly , I dare say , that I hoped the difference
between Barnes and uncle would not extinguish his regard for mamma and
me , who have always loved him ; THACKERAY-1855-2,708.240

when I said loved him , he gave one of his bitter laughs again ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,708.241

and so he did when I said I hoped his wife was well .
THACKERAY-1855-2,708.242

You never would tell me much about Mrs Newcome ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,708.243

and I fear she does not make my cousin happy . THACKERAY-1855-2,708.244

And yet this marriage was of my uncle's making : another of the
unfortunate marriages in our family . THACKERAY-1855-2,708.245

I am glad that I paused in time , before the commission of that sin ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,708.246

I strive my best to amend my temper , my inexperience , my shortcomings
, and try to be the mother of my poor brother's children .
THACKERAY-1855-2,708.247

But Barnes has never forgiven me my refusal of Lord Farintosh .
THACKERAY-1855-2,708.248

He is of the world still , Laura . THACKERAY-1855-2,708.249

Nor must we deal too harshly with people of his nature , who can@ @not
perhaps comprehend a world beyond . THACKERAY-1855-2,708.250

I remember in old days , when we were travelling on the Rhine , in the
happiest days of my whole life , I used to hear Clive , and his friend
Mr Ridley , talk of art and of nature in a way that I could not
understand at first , but came to comprehend better as my cousin taught
me ; THACKERAY-1855-2,708.251

and since then , I see pictures , and landscapes , and flowers , with
quite different eyes , and beautiful secrets as it were , of which I had
no idea before . THACKERAY-1855-2,708.252

The secret of all secrets , the secret of the other life , and the
better world beyond ours , may not this be unrevealed to some ?
THACKERAY-1855-2,708.253

I pray for them all , dearest Laura , for those nearest and dearest to
me , that the truth may lighten their darkness , and Heaven's great
mercy defend them in the perils and dangers of their night .
THACKERAY-1855-2,708.254

My boy at Sandhurst has done very well indeed ; THACKERAY-1855-2,708.255

and Egbert , am happy to say , thinks of taking orders :
THACKERAY-1855-2,708.256

he has been very moderate at College . Not so Alfred ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,708.257

but the Guards are a sadly dangerous school for a young man :
THACKERAY-1855-2,708.258

I have promised to pay his debts , THACKERAY-1855-2,708.259

and he is to exchange into the line . THACKERAY-1855-2,708.260

Mamma is coming to us at Christmas with Alice ; THACKERAY-1855-2,708.261

my sister is very pretty indeed , I think , THACKERAY-1855-2,708.262

and I am rejoiced she is to marry young Mr Mumford , who has a tolerable
living , and who has been attached to her ever since he was a boy at
Rugby School . THACKERAY-1855-2,708.263

Little Barnes comes on bravely with his Latin ; THACKERAY-1855-2,708.264

and Mr Whitestock , <font> a most excellent and valuable <$$font> person
in this place , where there is so much Romanism and Dissent , speaks
highly of him . THACKERAY-1855-2,708.265

Little Clara is so like her unhappy mother in a_thousand ways and
actions , that I am often shocked ; and see my <P_709> brother starting
back and turning his head away , as if suddenly wounded .
THACKERAY-1855-2,709.266

I have heard the most deplorable accounts of Lord and Lady Highgate .
THACKERAY-1855-2,709.267

O dearest friend and sister ! - save you , I think I scarce know any
one that is happy in the world : THACKERAY-1855-2,709.268

I trust you may continue so - you who impart your goodness and kindness
to all who come near you - you in whose sweet serene happiness I am
thankful to be allowed to repose sometimes . THACKERAY-1855-2,709.269

You are the island in the desert , Laura ! THACKERAY-1855-2,709.270

and the birds sing there , THACKERAY-1855-2,709.271

and the fountain flows ; THACKERAY-1855-2,709.272

and we come THACKERAY-1855-2,709.273

and repose by you for a little while , THACKERAY-1855-2,709.274

and to-morrow the march begins again , and the toil , and the struggle ,
and the desert . THACKERAY-1855-2,709.275

Goodbye fountain ! THACKERAY-1855-2,709.276

Whisper kisses to my dearest little ones for their affectionate Aunt
Ethel . THACKERAY-1855-2,709.277

A friend of his , a Mr Warrington , has spoken against us several times
with extraordinary ability , as Barnes owns . THACKERAY-1855-2,709.278

Do you know Mr W. ? THACKERAY-1855-2,709.279

He wrote a dreadful article in the <font> Independent <$$font> about the
last poor lecture , which was indeed sad sentimental commonplace :
THACKERAY-1855-2,709.280

and the critique is terribly comical . THACKERAY-1855-2,709.281

I could not help laughing , remembering some passages in it , when
Barnes mentioned it : THACKERAY-1855-2,709.282

and my brother became so angry ! THACKERAY-1855-2,709.283

They have put up a dreadful caricature of B. in Newcome :
THACKERAY-1855-2,709.284

and my brother says he did it , THACKERAY-1855-2,709.285

but I hope not . THACKERAY-1855-2,709.286

It is very droll , though : THACKERAY-1855-2,709.287

he used to make them very funnily . THACKERAY-1855-2,709.288

I am glad he has spirits for it . THACKERAY-1855-2,709.289

Goodbye , again . THACKERAY-1855-2,709.290

- E. N. ' THACKERAY-1855-2,709.291

' He says he did it ! ' cries Mr Pendennis , laying the letter down .
THACKERAY-1855-2,709.292

' Barnes Newcome would scarcely caricature himself , my dear ! '
THACKERAY-1855-2,709.293

' " He " often means - means Clive - I think , ' says Mrs Pendennis , in
an off_hand manner . THACKERAY-1855-2,709.294

' Oh ! he means Clive , does he , Laura ? ' THACKERAY-1855-2,709.295

' Yes - and you mean goose , Mr Pendennis ! ' that saucy lady replies .
THACKERAY-1855-2,709.296

It must have been about the very time that this letter was written ,
that a critical conversation occurred between Clive and his father , of
which the lad did not inform me until much later days ; as was the case
- the reader has been more than once begged to believe - with many other
portions of this biography . THACKERAY-1855-2,709.297

One night the Colonel , having come home from a round of electioneering
visits , not half satisfied with himself , exceedingly annoyed <paren>
much more than he cared to own <$$paren> with the impudence of some rude
fellows at the public-houses , who had interrupted his fine speeches
with odious hiccups and familiar jeers , was seated brooding over his
cheroot by his chimney fire ; friend F. B. <paren> of whose
companionship his patron was occasionally tired <$$paren> finding much
better amusement with <P_710> the ' Jolly Britons' in the Boscawen Room
below . THACKERAY-1855-2,710.298

The Colonel , as an electioneering business , had made his appearance in
the club . THACKERAY-1855-2,710.299

But that ancient Roman warrior had frightened those simple Britons .
THACKERAY-1855-2,710.300

His manners were too awful for them ; THACKERAY-1855-2,710.301

so were Clive's , who visited them also under Mr Potts's introduction ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,710.302

but the two gentlemen - each being full of care and personal annoyance
at the time - acted like wet blankets upon the Britons , whereas F. B.
warmed them and cheered them , affably partook of their meals with them
, and graciously shared their cups . THACKERAY-1855-2,710.303

So the Colonel was alone , listening to the far-off roar of the Britons'
choruses by an expiring fire , as he sat by a glass of cold negus and
the ashes of his cigar . THACKERAY-1855-2,710.304

I dare say he may have been thinking that his fire was well nigh out ,
his cup at the dregs , his pipe little more now than dust and ashes -
when Clive , candle in hand , came into their sitting-room .
THACKERAY-1855-2,710.305

As each saw the other's face , it was so very sad and worn and pale ,
that the young man started back ; and the elder , with quite the
tenderness of old days , cried , ' God bless me , my boy ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,710.306

how ill you look ! THACKERAY-1855-2,710.307

Come THACKERAY-1855-2,710.308

and warm yourself - THACKERAY-1855-2,710.309

look , the fire@ @'s out . THACKERAY-1855-2,710.310

Have something , Clivy ! ' THACKERAY-1855-2,710.311

For months past they had not had a really kind word .
THACKERAY-1855-2,710.312

The tender old voice smote upon Clive , THACKERAY-1855-2,710.313

and he burst into sudden tears . THACKERAY-1855-2,710.314

They rained upon his father's trembling old brown hand as he stooped
down and kissed it . THACKERAY-1855-2,710.315

' You look very ill too , father , ' says Clive .
THACKERAY-1855-2,710.316

' Ill ? THACKERAY-1855-2,710.317

not I ! ' cries the father , still keeping the boy's hand under both
his own on the mantelpiece . THACKERAY-1855-2,710.318

' Such a battered old fellow as I am has a right to look the worse for
wear ; THACKERAY-1855-2,710.319

but you , boy , why do <font> you <$$font> look so pale ? '
THACKERAY-1855-2,710.320

' I have seen a ghost , father , ' Clive answered .
THACKERAY-1855-2,710.321

Thomas , however , looked alarmed and inquisitive , as though the boy
was wandering in his mind . THACKERAY-1855-2,710.322

' The ghost of my youth , father , the ghost of my happiness , and the
best days of my life , ' groaned out the young man .
THACKERAY-1855-2,710.323

' I saw Ethel to-day . THACKERAY-1855-2,710.324

I went to see Sarah Mason , THACKERAY-1855-2,710.325

and she was there . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,710.326

' I had seen her , THACKERAY-1855-2,710.327

but I did not speak of her , ' said the father .
THACKERAY-1855-2,710.328

' I thought it was best not to mention her to you , my poor boy .
THACKERAY-1855-2,710.329

And are - are you fond of her still , Clive ? '
THACKERAY-1855-2,710.330

' Still ! THACKERAY-1855-2,710.331

once means always in these things , father , does@ @n't it ?
THACKERAY-1855-2,710.332

Once means to-day , and yesterday , and for ever and ever . '
THACKERAY-1855-2,710.333

' Nay , my boy , you must@ @n't talk to me so , or even to yourself so .
THACKERAY-1855-2,710.334

You have the dearest little wife at home , a dear little wife and child
. ' THACKERAY-1855-2,710.335

' You had a son , THACKERAY-1855-2,710.336

and have been kind enough to him , God knows . THACKERAY-1855-2,710.337

<P_711>

<font> You <$$font> had a wife : THACKERAY-1855-2,711.339

but that does@ @n't prevent other - other thoughts .
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.340

Do you know you never spoke twice in your life about my mother ?
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.341

You did@ @n't care for her . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,711.342

' I - I did my duty by her : THACKERAY-1855-2,711.343

I denied her nothing . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.344

I scarcely ever had a word with her , THACKERAY-1855-2,711.345

and I did my best to make her happy , ' interposed the Colonel .
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.346

' I know , THACKERAY-1855-2,711.347

but your heart was with the other . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.348

So is mine . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.349

It@ @'s fatal ; THACKERAY-1855-2,711.350

it runs in the family , father . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,711.351

The boy looked so ineffably wretched that the father's heart melted
still more . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.352

' I did my best , Clive , ' the Colonel gasped out .
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.353

' I went to that villain Barnes THACKERAY-1855-2,711.354

and offered him to settle every shilling I was worth on you -
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.355

I did - THACKERAY-1855-2,711.356

you did@ @n't know that - THACKERAY-1855-2,711.357

I@ @'d kill myself for your sake , Clivy . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.358

What@ @'s an old fellow worth living for ? THACKERAY-1855-2,711.359

I can live upon a crust and a cigar . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.360

I do@ @n't care about a carriage , THACKERAY-1855-2,711.361

and only go in it to please Rosey . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.362

I wanted to give up all for you , THACKERAY-1855-2,711.363

but he played me false , THACKERAY-1855-2,711.364

that scoundrel cheated us both ; THACKERAY-1855-2,711.365

he did , THACKERAY-1855-2,711.366

and so did Ethel . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,711.367

' No , sir ; I may have thought so in my rage once ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.368

but I know better now . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.369

She was the victim and not the agent . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.370

Did Madame de Florae play <font> you <$$font> false when she married her
husband ? THACKERAY-1855-2,711.371

It was her fate , THACKERAY-1855-2,711.372

and she underwent it . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.373

We all bow to it , THACKERAY-1855-2,711.374

we are in the track THACKERAY-1855-2,711.375

and the car passes over us . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.376

You know it does , father . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,711.377

The Colonel was a fatalist ; THACKERAY-1855-2,711.378

he had often advanced this oriental creed in his simple discourses with
his son and Clive's friends . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.379

' Besides , ' Clive went on , ' Ethel does not care for me .
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.380

She received me to-day quite coldly , THACKERAY-1855-2,711.381

and held her hand out as if we had only parted last year .
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.382

I suppose she likes that Marquis who jilted her -
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.383

God bless her . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.384

How shall we know what wins the hearts of women ?
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.385

She has mine . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.386

There was my Fate . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.387

Praise be to Allah ! THACKERAY-1855-2,711.388

It is over . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,711.389

' But there@ @'s that villain who injured you .
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.390

His is@ @n't over yet , ' cried the Colonel , clenching his trembling
hand . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.391

' Ah , father ! Let us leave him to Allah too !
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.392

Suppose Madame de Florae had a brother who insulted you .
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.393

You know you would@ @n't have revenged yourself .
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.394

You would have wounded her in striking him . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,711.395

' You called out Barnes yourself , boy , ' cried the father .
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.396

' That was for another cause , and not for my quarrel .
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.397

And how do you know I intended to fire ? THACKERAY-1855-2,711.398

By Jove , I was so miserable then that an ounce of lead would have done
me little harm ! ' THACKERAY-1855-2,711.399

The father saw the son's mind more clearly than he had ever done
hitherto . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.400

They had scarcely ever talked upon that subject , which the Colonel
found was so deeply fixed in Clive's heart . THACKERAY-1855-2,711.401

He thought of his own early days , and how he had suffered ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,711.402

and beheld his son before <P_712> him racked with the same cruel pangs
of enduring grief . THACKERAY-1855-2,712.403

And he began to own that he had pressed him too hastily in his marriage
; and to make an allowance for an unhappiness of which he had in part
been the cause . THACKERAY-1855-2,712.404

' Mashallah ! Clive , my boy , ' said the old man ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,712.405

' what is done is done . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,712.406

' Let us break up our camp before this place , and not go to war with
Barnes , father , ' said Clive . THACKERAY-1855-2,712.407

' Let us have peace - and forgive him if we can . ' ' And retreat
before this scoundrel , Clive ? ' THACKERAY-1855-2,712.408

' What is a victory over such a fellow ? THACKERAY-1855-2,712.409

One gives a chimney-sweep the wall , father . '
THACKERAY-1855-2,712.410

' I say again - What is done is done . THACKERAY-1855-2,712.411

I have promised to meet him at the hustings , THACKERAY-1855-2,712.412

and I will . THACKERAY-1855-2,712.413

I think it is best : and you are right : and you act like a high-minded
gentleman - and my dear dear old boy - not to meddle in the quarrel -
though I did@ @n't think so - and the difference gave me a great deal of
pain - and so did what Pendennis said - and I@ @'m wrong - and thank God
I am wrong - and God bless you , my own boy ! ' the Colonel cried out
in a burst of emotion . THACKERAY-1855-2,712.414

And the two went to their bedrooms together , THACKERAY-1855-2,712.415

and were happier as they shook hands at the doors of their adjoining
chambers than they had been for many a long day and year .
THACKERAY-1855-2,712.416

<P_713>

<heading>

Chapter LXIX THACKERAY-1855-2,713.419

<font> The Election <$$font> THACKERAY-1855-2,713.420

<$$heading>

Having thus given his challenge , reconnoitred the enemy , and pledged
himself to do battle at the ensuing election , our Colonel took leave of
the town of Newcome , THACKERAY-1855-2,713.422

and returned to his banking affairs in London .
THACKERAY-1855-2,713.423

His departure was as that of a great public personage ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,713.424

the gentlemen of the Committee followed him obsequiously down to the
train . THACKERAY-1855-2,713.425

' Quick , ' bawls out Mr Potts to Mr Brown , the station-master ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,713.426

' quick , Mr Brown , a carriage for Colonel Newcome ! '
THACKERAY-1855-2,713.427

Half-a-dozen hats are taken off as he enters into the carriage , F.
Bayham and his servant after him , with portfolios , umbrellas , shawls
, despatch-boxes . THACKERAY-1855-2,713.428

Clive was not there to act as his father's aide-de-camp .
THACKERAY-1855-2,713.429

After their conversation together the young man had returned to Mrs
Clive and his other duties in life . THACKERAY-1855-2,713.430

It has been said that Mr Pendennis was in the country , engaged in a
pursuit exactly similar to that which occupied Colonel Newcome .
THACKERAY-1855-2,713.431

The menaced dissolution of Parliament did not take place so soon as we
expected . THACKERAY-1855-2,713.432

The Ministry still hung together , THACKERAY-1855-2,713.433

and by consequence , Sir Barnes Newcome kept his seat in the House of
Commons , from which his elder kinsman was eager to oust him .
THACKERAY-1855-2,713.434

Away from London , and having but few correspondents , save on affairs
of business , I heard little of Clive and the Colonel , save an
occasional puff of one of Colonel Newcome's entertainments in the <font>
Pall Mall Gazette <$$font> , to which journal F. Bayham still
condescended to contribute ; and a satisfactory announcement in a
certain part of that paper , that on such a day , in Hyde Park Gardens ,
Mrs Clive Newcome had presented her husband with a son .
THACKERAY-1855-2,713.435

Clive wrote to me presently to inform me of the circumstance , stating
at the same time , with but moderate gratification on his own part ,
that the Campaigner , Mrs Newcome's mamma , had upon this second
occasion made a second lodgment in her daughter's house and bedchamber ,
and showed herself affably disposed to forget the little unpleasantries
which had clouded over the sunshine of her former visit .
THACKERAY-1855-2,713.436

Laura , with a smile of some humour , said she thought now would be the
time when , if Clive could be spared from his bank , he might pay
<P_714> us that visit at Fairoaks which had been due so long ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,714.437

and hinted that change of air and a temporary absence from Mrs Mackenzie
might be agreeable to my old friend . THACKERAY-1855-2,714.438

It was , on the contrary , Mr Pendennis's opinion that his wife artfully
chose that period of time when little Rosey was , perforce , kept at
home and occupied with her delightful maternal duties , to invite Clive
to see us . THACKERAY-1855-2,714.439

Mrs Laura frankly owned that she liked our Clive better without his wife
than with her , THACKERAY-1855-2,714.440

and never ceased to regret that pretty Rosey had not bestowed her little
hand upon Captain Hoby , as she had been very well disposed at one time
to do . THACKERAY-1855-2,714.441

Against all marriages of interest this sentimental Laura never failed to
utter indignant protests ; THACKERAY-1855-2,714.442

and Clive's had been a marriage of interest , a marriage made up by the
old people , a marriage to which the young man had only yielded out of
good-nature and obedience . THACKERAY-1855-2,714.443

She would apostrophise her unconscious young ones , and inform those
innocent babies that <font> they <$$font> should never be made to marry
except for love , never - an announcement which was received with
perfect indifference by little Arthur on his rocking-horse , and little
Helen smiling and crowing in her mother's lap .
THACKERAY-1855-2,714.444

So Clive came down to us careworn in appearance , but very pleased and
happy , he said , to stay for a while with the friends of his youth .
THACKERAY-1855-2,714.445

We showed him our modest rural lions ; THACKERAY-1855-2,714.446

we got him such sport and company as our quiet neighbourhood afforded ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,714.447

we gave him fishing in the Brawl , THACKERAY-1855-2,714.448

and Laura in her pony-chaise drove him to Baymouth , and to Clavering
Park and town , and to visit the famous cathedral at Chatteris , where
she was pleased to recount certain incidents of her husband's youth .
THACKERAY-1855-2,714.449

Clive laughed at my wife's stories ; THACKERAY-1855-2,714.450

he pleased himself in our home ; THACKERAY-1855-2,714.451

he played with our children , with whom he became a great favourite ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,714.452

he was happier , he told me with a sigh , than he had been for many a
day . THACKERAY-1855-2,714.453

His gentle hostess echoed the sigh of the poor young fellow .
THACKERAY-1855-2,714.454

She was sure that his pleasure was only transitory , and was convinced
that many deep cares weighed upon his mind . THACKERAY-1855-2,714.455

Ere long my old schoolfellow made me sundry confessions , which showed
that Laura's surmises were correct . THACKERAY-1855-2,714.456

About his domestic affairs he did not treat much ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,714.457

the little boy was said to be a very fine little boy ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,714.458

the ladies had taken entire possession of him .
THACKERAY-1855-2,714.459

' I ca@ @n't stand Mrs Mackenzie any longer , I own , ' says Clive ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,714.460

' but how resist a wife at such a moment ? THACKERAY-1855-2,714.461

Rosa was sure she would die unless her mother came to her ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,714.462

and of course we invited Mrs Mack . THACKERAY-1855-2,714.463

This time she is all smiles and politeness with the Colonel :
THACKERAY-1855-2,714.464

the last quarrel is laid upon me , THACKERAY-1855-2,714.465

and <P_715> in so far I am easy , as the old folks get on pretty well
together . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,715.466

To me , considering these things , it was clear that Mr Clive Newcome
was but a very secondary personage indeed in his father's new fine house
which he inhabited , and in which the poor Colonel had hoped they were
to live such a happy family . THACKERAY-1855-2,715.467

But it was about Clive Newcome's pecuniary affairs that I felt the most
disquiet when he came to explain these to me . THACKERAY-1855-2,715.468

The Colonel's capital and that considerable sum which Mrs Clive had
inherited from her good old uncle , were all involved in a common stock
, of which Colonel Newcome took the management .
THACKERAY-1855-2,715.469

' The governor understands business so well , you see , ' says Clive ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,715.470

' is a most remarkable head for accounts ; THACKERAY-1855-2,715.471

he must have inherited that from my grandfather , you know , who made
his own fortune : THACKERAY-1855-2,715.472

all the Newcomes are good at accounts except me , a poor useless devil
who knows nothing but to paint a picture , and who ca@ @n't even do that
. ' THACKERAY-1855-2,715.473

He cuts off the head of a thistle as he speaks ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,715.474

bites his tawny mustachios , THACKERAY-1855-2,715.475

plunges his hands into his pockets and his soul into reverie .
THACKERAY-1855-2,715.476

' You do@ @n't mean to say , ' asks Mr Pendennis , ' that your wife's
fortune has not been settled upon herself ? ' THACKERAY-1855-2,715.477

' Of course it has been settled upon herself ; THACKERAY-1855-2,715.478

that is , it is entirely her own - THACKERAY-1855-2,715.479

you know the Colonel has managed all the business ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,715.480

he understands it better than we do . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,715.481

' Do you say that your wife's money is not vested in the hands of
trustees , and for her benefit ? ' THACKERAY-1855-2,715.482

' My father is one of the trustees . THACKERAY-1855-2,715.483

I tell you he manages the whole thing . THACKERAY-1855-2,715.484

What is his property is mine THACKERAY-1855-2,715.485

and ever has been : THACKERAY-1855-2,715.486

and I might draw upon him as much as I liked : THACKERAY-1855-2,715.487

and you know it@ @'s five times as great as my wife's .
THACKERAY-1855-2,715.488

What is his is ours , THACKERAY-1855-2,715.489

and what is ours is his , of course : THACKERAY-1855-2,715.490

for instance , the India Stock , which poor Uncle James left , that now
stands in the Colonel's name . THACKERAY-1855-2,715.491

He wants to be a Director : THACKERAY-1855-2,715.492

he will be at the next election - THACKERAY-1855-2,715.493

he must have a certain quantity of India Stock , do@ @n't you see ? '
THACKERAY-1855-2,715.494

' My dear fellow , is there then no settlement made upon your wife at
all ? ' THACKERAY-1855-2,715.495

' You need@ @n't look so frightened , ' says Clive .
THACKERAY-1855-2,715.496

' I made a settlement on her : THACKERAY-1855-2,715.497

with all my worldly goods I did her endow -
three_thousand_three_hundred_and_thirty-three pounds six and eightpence
, which my father sent over from India to my uncle , years ago , when I
came home . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,715.498

I might well indeed be aghast at this news , THACKERAY-1855-2,715.499

and had yet further intelligence from Clive , which by no means
contributed to lessen my anxiety . THACKERAY-1855-2,715.500

This worthy old Colonel , who fancied himself to be so clever <P_716> a
man of business , chose to conduct it in utter ignorance and defiance of
law . THACKERAY-1855-2,716.501

If anything happened to the Bundelcund Bank , it was clear that not only
every shilling of his own property , but every farthing bequeathed to
Rosey Mackenzie would be lost ; only his retiring pension , which was
luckily considerable , and the hundred pounds a year which Clive had
settled on his wife , would be saved out of the ruin .
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.502

And now Clive confided to me his own serious doubts and misgivings
regarding the prosperity of the Bank itself . THACKERAY-1855-2,716.503

He did not know why , THACKERAY-1855-2,716.504

but he could not help fancying that things were going wrong .
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.505

Those partners who had come home , having sold out of the Bank , and
were living in England so splendidly , why had they quitted it ?
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.506

The Colonel said it was a proof of the prosperity of the company , that
so many gentlemen were enriched who had taken shares in it .
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.507

' But when I asked my father , ' Clive continued , ' why he did not
himself withdraw , the dear old boy's countenance fell :
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.508

he told me such things were not to be done every day ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.509

and ended , as usual , by saying that I do not understand anything about
business . THACKERAY-1855-2,716.510

No more I do : THACKERAY-1855-2,716.511

that is the truth . THACKERAY-1855-2,716.512

I hate the whole concern , Pen ! THACKERAY-1855-2,716.513

I hate that great tawdry house in which we live ; and those fearfully
stupid parties ! THACKERAY-1855-2,716.514

Oh , how I wish we were back in Fitzroy Square !
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.515

But who can recall bygones , Arthur ; or wrong steps in life ?
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.516

We must make the best of to-day , THACKERAY-1855-2,716.517

and to-morrow must take care of itself . THACKERAY-1855-2,716.518

" Poor little child ! " I could not help thinking , as I took it crying
in my arms the other day , THACKERAY-1855-2,716.519

" what has life in store for you , my poor weeping baby ? "
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.520

My mother-in-law cried out that I should drop the baby , and that only
the Colonel knew how to hold it . THACKERAY-1855-2,716.521

My wife called from her bed ; THACKERAY-1855-2,716.522

the nurse dashed up THACKERAY-1855-2,716.523

and scolded me ; THACKERAY-1855-2,716.524

and they drove me out of the room amongst them .
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.525

By Jove , Pen , I laugh when some of my friends congratulate me on my
good fortune ! THACKERAY-1855-2,716.526

I am not quite the father of my own child , nor the husband of my own
wife , nor even the master of my own easel . THACKERAY-1855-2,716.527

I am managed for , do@ @n't you see ! boarded , lodged , and done for .
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.528

And here is the man they call happy . THACKERAY-1855-2,716.529

Happy ! THACKERAY-1855-2,716.530

Oh ! ! ! why had I not your strength of mind ?
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.531

and why did I ever leave my art , my mistress ? '
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.532

And herewith the poor lad fell to chopping thistles again ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.533

and quitted Fairoaks shortly , leaving his friends there very much
disquieted about his prospects , actual and future .
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.534

The expected dissolution of Parliament came at length .
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.535

All the country papers in England teemed with electioneering addresses ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.536

and the country was in a flutter with parti-coloured ribands .
THACKERAY-1855-2,716.537

Colonel Thomas Newcome , pursuant to his promise , offered himself to
the independent electors of Newcome in the Liberal journal of the family
<P_717> town , whilst Sir Barnes Newcome , Bart. , addressed himself to
his old and tried friends , and called upon the friends of the
constitution to rally round him , in the Conservative print .
THACKERAY-1855-2,717.538

The addresses of our friend were sent to us at Fairoaks by the Colonel's
indefatigable aide-de-camp , Mr Frederick Bayham .
THACKERAY-1855-2,717.539

During the period which had elapsed since the Colonel's last canvassing
visit and the issuing of the writs now daily expected for the new
Parliament , many things of great importance had occurred in Thomas
Newcome's family - events which were kept secret from his biographer ,
who was , at this period also , pretty entirely occupied with his own
affairs . THACKERAY-1855-2,717.540

These , however , are not the present subject of this history , which
has Newcome for its business , and the parties engaged in the family
quarrel there . THACKERAY-1855-2,717.541

There were four candidates in the field for the representation of that
borough . THACKERAY-1855-2,717.542

That old and tried Member of Parliament , Mr Bunce , was considered to
be secure ; THACKERAY-1855-2,717.543

and the Baronet's seat was thought to be pretty safe on account of his
influence in the place . THACKERAY-1855-2,717.544

Nevertheless , Thomas Newcome's supporters were confident for their
champion , and that when the parties came to the poll , the extreme
Liberals of the borough would divide their votes between him and the
fourth candidate , the uncompromising Radical , Mr Barker .
THACKERAY-1855-2,717.545

In due time the Colonel and his staff arrived at Newcome ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,717.546

and resumed the active canvass which they had commenced some months
previously . THACKERAY-1855-2,717.547

Clive was not in his father's suite this time , nor Mr Warrington ,
whose engagements took him elsewhere . THACKERAY-1855-2,717.548

The lawyer , the editor of the <font> Independent <$$font> , and F. B.
were the Colonel's chief men . THACKERAY-1855-2,717.549

His headquarters <paren> which F. B. liked very well <$$paren> were at
the hotel where we last saw him , and whence issuing with his
aide-de-camp at his heels , the Colonel went round to canvass personally
, according to his promise , every free and independent elector of the
borough . THACKERAY-1855-2,717.550

Barnes too was canvassing eagerly on his side , THACKERAY-1855-2,717.551

and was most affable and active ; THACKERAY-1855-2,717.552

the two parties would often meet nose to nose in the same street , and
their retainers exchange looks of defiance . THACKERAY-1855-2,717.553

With Mr Potts of the <font> Independent <$$font> , a big man , on his
left ; with Mr Frederick , a still bigger man , on his right ; his own
trusty bamboo cane in his hand , before which poor Barnes had shrunk
abashed ere now , Colonel Newcome had commonly the best of these street
encounters , THACKERAY-1855-2,717.554

and frowned his nephew Barnes , and Barnes's staff , off the pavement .
THACKERAY-1855-2,717.555

With the non-electors the Colonel was a decided favourite ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,717.556

the boys invariably hurrahed him ; whereas they jeered and uttered
ironical cries after poor Barnes , asking , ' Who beat his wife ? Who
drove his children to the workhouse ? ' and other unkind personal
questions . THACKERAY-1855-2,717.557

The man upon whom the <P_718> libertine Barnes had inflicted so cruel an
injury in his early days , was now the Baronet's bitterest enemy .
THACKERAY-1855-2,718.558

He assailed him with curses and threats when they met ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,718.559

and leagued his brother workmen against him . THACKERAY-1855-2,718.560

The wretched Sir Barnes owned with contrition that the sins of his youth
pursued him ; THACKERAY-1855-2,718.561

his enemy scoffed at the idea of Barnes's repentance ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,718.562

he was not moved at the grief , the punishment in his own family , the
humiliation and remorse which the repentant prodigal piteously pleaded .
THACKERAY-1855-2,718.563

No man was louder in his cries of <font> mea culpa <$$font> than Barnes
; THACKERAY-1855-2,718.564

no man professed a more edifying repentance . THACKERAY-1855-2,718.565

He was hat in hand to every black coat , established or dissenting .
THACKERAY-1855-2,718.566

Repentance was to his interest , to be sure , THACKERAY-1855-2,718.567

but yet let us hope it was sincere . THACKERAY-1855-2,718.568

There is some hypocrisy of which one does not like even to entertain the
thought ; especially that awful falsehood which trades with divine truth
, and takes the name of Heaven in vain . THACKERAY-1855-2,718.569

The ' Roebuck Inn , ' at Newcome , stands in the market-place , directly
facing the ' King's Arms , ' where , as we know , Colonel Newcome and
uncompromising toleration held their headquarters .
THACKERAY-1855-2,718.570

Immense banners of blue and yellow floated from every window of the '
King's Arms , ' THACKERAY-1855-2,718.571

and decorated the balcony from which the Colonel and his assistants were
in the habit of addressing the multitude . THACKERAY-1855-2,718.572

Fiddlers and trumpeters , arrayed in his colours , paraded the town
THACKERAY-1855-2,718.573

and enlivened it with their melodious strains .
THACKERAY-1855-2,718.574

Other trumpeters and fiddlers , bearing the true-blue cockades and
colours of Sir Barnes Newcome , Bart. , would encounter the Colonel's
musicians , on which occasions of meeting , it is to be feared , small
harmony was produced . THACKERAY-1855-2,718.575

They banged each other with their brazen instruments .
THACKERAY-1855-2,718.576

The warlike drummers thumped each other's heads in lieu of the
professional sheepskin . THACKERAY-1855-2,718.577

The town boys and street blackguards rejoiced in these combats ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,718.578

and exhibited their valour on one side or the other .
THACKERAY-1855-2,718.579

The Colonel had to pay a long bill for broken brass , when he settled
the little accounts of the election . THACKERAY-1855-2,718.580

In after times F. B. was pleased to describe the circumstances of a
contest in which he bore a most distinguished part .
THACKERAY-1855-2,718.581

It was F. B.'s opinion that his private eloquence brought over many
waverers to the Colonel's side , and converted numbers of the benighted
followers of Sir Barnes Newcome . THACKERAY-1855-2,718.582

Bayham's voice was indeed magnificent , THACKERAY-1855-2,718.583

and could be heard from the ' King's Arms ' balcony above the shout and
roar of the multitude , the gongs and bugles of the opposition bands .
THACKERAY-1855-2,718.584

He was untiring in his oratory - undaunted in the presence of the crowds
below . THACKERAY-1855-2,718.585

He was immensely popular , F. B. THACKERAY-1855-2,718.586

Whether he laid his hand upon his broad chest , took off his hat and
waved it , or pressed his blue and yellow ribands to his bosom , the
crowd shouted , ' Hurrah ! <P_719> silence ! bravo ! Bayham for ever
! ' THACKERAY-1855-2,719.587

' They would have carried me in triumph , ' said F. B. ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,719.588

' if I had but the necessary qualification , I might be Member for
Newcome this day or any other I chose . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,719.589

I am afraid , in his conduct of the Colonel's election , Mr Bayham
resorted to acts of which his principal certainly would disapprove , and
engaged auxiliaries whose alliance was scarcely creditable .
THACKERAY-1855-2,719.590

Whose was the hand which flung the potato which struck Sir Barnes
Newcome , Bart. , on the nose as he was haranguing the people from the
' Roebuck ' ? THACKERAY-1855-2,719.591

How came it that whenever Sir Barnes and his friends essayed to speak ,
such an awful yelling and groaning took place in the crowd below , that
the words of those feeble orators were inaudible ?
THACKERAY-1855-2,719.592

Who smashed all the front windows of the ' Roebuck ' ?
THACKERAY-1855-2,719.593

Colonel Newcome had not words to express his indignation at proceedings
so unfair . THACKERAY-1855-2,719.594

When Sir Barnes and his staff were hustled in the market-place and most
outrageously shoved , jeered , and jolted , the Colonel from the '
King's Arms ' organised a rapid sally , which he himself headed with his
bamboo cane ; THACKERAY-1855-2,719.595

cut out Sir Barnes and his followers from the hands of the mob ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,719.596

and addressed those ruffians in a noble speech , of which the bamboo
cane - Englishman - shame - fair-play , were the most emphatic
expressions . THACKERAY-1855-2,719.597

The mob cheered Old Tom as they called him - THACKERAY-1855-2,719.598

they made way for Sir Barnes , who shrank pale and shuddering back into
his hotel again - and who always persisted in saying that that old
villain of a dragoon had planned both the assault and the rescue .
THACKERAY-1855-2,719.599

' When the dregs of the people - the scum of the rabble , sir , banded
together by the myrmidons of Sir Barnes Newcome , attacked us at the "
King's Arms , " and smashed ninety-six pounds' worth of glass at one
volley , besides knocking off the gold unicorn's head and the tail of
the British lion ; it was fine , sir , ' F. B. said , ' to see how the
Colonel came forward , and the coolness of the old boy in the midst of
the action . THACKERAY-1855-2,719.600

He stood there in front , sir , with his old hat off , never so much as
once bobbing his old head , THACKERAY-1855-2,719.601

and I think he spoke rather better under fire than he did when there was
no danger . THACKERAY-1855-2,719.602

Between ourselves , he ai@ @n't much of a speaker , the old Colonel ;
THACKERAY-1855-2,719.603

he hems and hahs , THACKERAY-1855-2,719.604

and repeats himself a good deal . THACKERAY-1855-2,719.605

He has@ @n't the gift of natural eloquence which some men have ,
Pendennis . THACKERAY-1855-2,719.606

You should have heard my speech , sir , on the Thursday in the Town Hall
- THACKERAY-1855-2,719.607

that was something like a speech . THACKERAY-1855-2,719.608

Potts was jealous of it , THACKERAY-1855-2,719.609

and always reported me most shamefully . ' THACKERAY-1855-2,719.610

In spite of his respectful behaviour to the gentlemen in black coats ,
his soup tickets and his flannel tickets , his own pathetic lectures and
his sedulous attendance at other folks' sermons , poor Barnes could not
keep up his credit with the serious interest at Newcome ,
THACKERAY-1855-2,719.611

and the <P_720> meeting-houses and their respective pastors and
frequenters turned their backs upon him . THACKERAY-1855-2,720.612

The case against him was too flagrant : THACKERAY-1855-2,720.613

his enemy , the factory man , worked it with an extraordinary skill ,
malice , and pertinacity . THACKERAY-1855-2,720.614

Not a single man , woman , or child in Newcome but was made acquainted
with Sir Barnes's early peccadillo . THACKERAY-1855-2,720.615

Ribald ballads were howled through the streets describing his sin , and
his deserved punishment . THACKERAY-1855-2,720.616

For very shame , the reverend dissenting gentlemen were obliged to
refrain from voting for him ; THACKERAY-1855-2,720.617

such as ventured , believing in the sincerity of his repentance , to
give him their voices , were yelled away from the polling places .
THACKERAY-1855-2,720.618

A very great number who would have been his friends were compelled to
bow to decency and public opinion , THACKERAY-1855-2,720.619

and supported the Colonel . THACKERAY-1855-2,720.620

Hooted away from the hustings and the public places whence the rival
candidates addressed the free and independent electors , this wretched
and persecuted Sir Barnes invited his friends and supporters to meet him
at the ' Athenaeum Room ' - scene of his previous eloquent performances
. THACKERAY-1855-2,720.621

But though this apartment was defended by tickets , the people burst
into it ; THACKERAY-1855-2,720.622

and Nemesis , in the shape of the persevering factory man , appeared
before the scared Sir Barnes and his puzzled committee .
THACKERAY-1855-2,720.623

The man stood up THACKERAY-1855-2,720.624

and bearded the pale baronet . THACKERAY-1855-2,720.625

He had a good cause , THACKERAY-1855-2,720.626

and was in truth a far better master of debate than our banking friend ,
being a great speaker amongst his brother operatives , by whom political
questions are discussed , and the conduct of political men examined ,
with a ceaseless interest and with an ardour and eloquence which are
often unknown in what is called superior society .
THACKERAY-1855-2,720.627

This man and his friends round about him fiercely silenced the clamour
of ' Turn him out ! ' with which his first appearance was assailed by
Sir Barnes's hangers-on . THACKERAY-1855-2,720.628

He said , in the name of justice he would speak up ; if they were
fathers of families , and loved their wives and daughters , he dared
them to refuse him a hearing . THACKERAY-1855-2,720.629

Did they love their wives and their children ? THACKERAY-1855-2,720.630

it was a shame that they should take such a man as that yonder for their
representative in Parliament . THACKERAY-1855-2,720.631

But the greatest sensation he made was when , in the middle of his
speech , after inveighing against Barnes's cruelty and parental
ingratitude , he asked , ' Where were Barnes's children ? '
THACKERAY-1855-2,720.632

and actually thrust forward two , to the amazement of the committee and
the ghastly astonishment of the guilty baronet himself .
THACKERAY-1855-2,720.633

