<BEGIN_thompson-1859-2>

<P_122.C1>

<heading>

Chapter VII . THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C1.4

Tools , Instruments Machines , &c. Used in Gardens .
THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C1.5

<$$heading>

Many of the tools used in gardens are so familiar to almost every one ,
that a mere enumeration of them might be considered sufficient ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C1.7

yet the difference between a good and a bad one , both being employed
for the same purpose , is of great importance .
THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C1.8

The spade is one of the most commonly used implements ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C1.9

and it is not , perhaps , too much to say , that <P_122.C2> with one of
the modern improved kinds , a man could do , with the same exertion , 10
per_cent more work than he could with the comparatively dull working
kinds formerly in use . THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.10

But , besides the advantage from more work being performed , it is
always the case , that with a well adapted tool of a superior
description , the work is also better done . THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.11

On this account , tools that are very common are , nevertheless ,
noticed , in order to point out the good properties which they ought to
possess . THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.12

<heading>

I. - Tools . THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.14

<$$heading>

<font> Spades . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.16

- Of all tools employed in gardening , the spade is the most essential .
THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.17

With it alone most kitchen garden crops could be obtained ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.18

and plantations of fruit and forest trees could be formed .
THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.19

If a gardener were limited to the choice of only one implement , that
which he would retain as the most useful , would be the spade .
THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.20

{COM:figure_omitted}

The English spade has long been justly considered as the best in the
world ; THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.22

and it was thought that the utmost perfection in its manufacture had
been attained . THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.23

Great improvements have , however , been effected of late years .
THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.24

In Lyndon's patent <paren> Fig. 43 <$$paren> , the face of the spade
consists of a thin and exceedingly hard layer of steel ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.25

the back is comparatively soft ; THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.26

and as it wears from the steel facing , the latter forms a sharp edge .
THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.27

<font> Shovels . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.28

- These being broader and lighter than the spade , and having the edges
turned up , are better adapted for moving loose soil , gravel , or sand
. THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.29

The handle should have an upward bend , less stooping being then
required in using the tool . THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.30

<font> Picks . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.31

- There are several varieties of these , some having pointed , others
cutting ends . THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.32

As they are used for penetrating and loosening hard soils or gravel , or
for cutting roots among sandy or stony particles , these implements
require to have their ends well steeled and tempered .
THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.33

The <font> Common Pick <$$font> has both ends pointed ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,122.C2.34

and is curved , the curve nearly corresponding with the segment of a
circle , of which the radius is somewhat greater than that of the
<P_123.C1> curve described by the pick in making a stroke .
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C1.35

The <font> Pickaxe <$$font> is pointed at one end like the common pick ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C1.36

but the other end is wedge-shaped , and sharpened so as to cut roots of
trees , &c. , like an axe . THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C1.37

The cutting edge is in the direction of the handle .
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C1.38

Another form of pick , sometimes called a <font> mattock , <$$font> or
<font> planter's mattock , <$$font> has one end pointed , and the other
flattened , the edge being transverse , or at right angles to the
direction of the handle . THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C1.39

<P_123.C2>

The length of the head may be from 24 to 30 inches , that of the handle
about 3 feet , and the breadth of the flattened end from 3 to 4 inches ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.41

or by relaying , it may easily be made wider , if the work to which it
may be applied render such desirable . THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.42

This kind of pick is perhaps the most useful , THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.43

and if only one sort were allowed , this should be preferred .
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.44

<font> Mattock , <$$font> or <font> Grubbing-axe . <$$font>
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.45

- This is brought to a thin wedge shape at both ends ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.46

but one edge is in the direction of the handle , and the other
transverse to it ; so that it combines the two previously described
implements as regards the direction of the edges , but has not the
pointed end which they each possess for penetrating among hard compact
substances . THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.47

It is , however , well adapted for grubbing up trees ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.48

with the flat end facing the operator , the roots may be uncovered ,
undermined , and sometimes more conveniently cut , than with the
opposite end . THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.49

The <font> Hoe-axe , <$$font> also called a grubbing-axe or mattock , is
somewhat similar in its structure and application to that of the
transversely flattened end of the preceding implement .
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.50

It is like a long narrow hoe , but strongly made ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.51

and is fixed on a longer handle than that of the pick ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.52

and may be employed for cutting up bushes , &c.
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.53

It is , however , seldom used in gardens in this country .
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.54

The <font> Pickfork <$$font> <paren> Fig. 44 <$$paren> , also known as
the Canterbury hoe , is useful for loosening the soil when it has become
hardened from the effects of rain and sun . THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.55

By means of the fork end the surface may be broken up ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.56

and when this is too hard , or when clods have to be broken , the
mattock end may be employed . THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.57

{COM:figure_omitted} <font> Rakes . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.58

- A set of iron-headed rakes , of different sizes , are required .
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.59

The length of the head may be about 16 inches for ground that is either
uncropped , or occupied with plants widely apart .
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.60

The sizes may diminish by 2 inches in the length of the heads , so that
the latter may be respectively , 14 , 12 , 10 , 8 , 6 , 4 .
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.61

The last will be convenient for raking between crops sown in rows , and
for using between plants in flower gardens . THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.62

In the latter case , raking by drawing the teeth along the surface
between the plants is frequently not so much required as a kind of
chopping , so that the teeth may break down the clods .
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.63

It is a great mistake to use a rake that merely passes between the
plants ; THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.64

for when this is the case , the implement can@ @not be freely plied ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.65

and , consequently , the work can neither be so well nor so quickly
performed . THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.66

When the teeth of iron rakes are driven into the head-bar through merely
a square punched hole , and then clenched above , they are apt to break
off level with the under side of the bar . THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.67

The liability to this is , however , greatly diminished by forming a
shoulder on the tooth to fit a slight counter-sink made in the
under_side . THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.68

Rakes are sometimes secured to the handle by a prong which is driven
into the iron-ferruled end of the handle . THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.69

The soil , however , is apt to adhere about the lower end of the handle
. THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.70

It is , therefore , better that the handle should taper into a neat
socket , the upper side of which tapers into a strap .
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.71

Rakes with cylindrical wooden heads , into which iron teeth are driven ,
are occasionally used for smoothing the surface of beds for seeds .
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.72

Wooden rakes , the same as the common hay-rake , are required for raking
off grass and leaves . THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.73

Others , of a similar description , but made with greater care , and
with teeth of tough hard wood , may be sometimes employed with advantage
in light soils , instead of iron rakes . THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.74

Being much larger but lighter than the latter , they can be more easily
drawn over a surface of greater extent . THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.75

Wooden rakes , with short close teeth , may be made to take off short
grass from lawns so cleanly , as sometimes to render sweeping
unnecessary . THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.76

The <font> Daisy-rake <$$font> <paren> Fig. 45 <$$paren> has broad
teeth , {COM:figure_omitted} sharp on both edges ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,123.C2.77

it is employed for removing <P_124.C1> the flowers of daisies and other
plants from lawns . THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.78

<font> Forks <$$font> are employed in gardens for stirring the soil ,
turning dung and tan , and for various other purposes .
THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.79

Parkes' steel digging forks <paren> Figs. 46 and 47 <$$paren> , are
superior to all others for stirring the soil ; THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.80

and this they do so effectually , that they are in many cases
substituted for the spade . THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.81

These forks may also be used for turning tan , and for taking up certain
crops . THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.82

The prongs are made of steel , THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.83

they are elastic , THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.84

and taper to a point ; THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.85

and the whole weight of the fork part does not exceed 5 lbs.
THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.86

It is made with three , four , or five prongs , and of various sizes .
THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.87

{COM:figure_omitted}

The dung-fork has three prongs ; THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.89

it is necessary for turning and removing dung and litter , and for
shifting and turning dung linings . THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.90

A small short-handled fork with three prongs <paren> Fig. 48 <$$paren>
, is employed in pits and frames ; THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.91

it may also be used for taking up roots , and in weeding .
THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.92

A fork for leaves , which is very useful wherever any great quantity of
these is to be collected , has been invented by Mr. Toward , gardener
to her Majesty at Osborne . THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.93

Mr. Toward states <paren> <font> Gardener's Chronicle , <$$font> 1843 ,
p. 38 <$$paren> , that one person with this implement will take up ,
with greater facility , more leaves than two persons could do with any
other tool that he had seen used for the purpose .
THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.94

Mr. Toward describes it as being a large four-tined fork , made of wood
shod with iron ; THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.95

the tines are 18 inches long , THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.96

and are mortised into a head about 17 inches long , and 1_1$$2 inch by
2_1$$4 inches thick . THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C1.97

The tines are 1 inch in width , and 1_1$$2 inch in depth at the head ,
gradually tapering to a point , with a curve or bend <P_124.C2> upwards
. THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.98

The wood of which they are formed ought to be hard and tough ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.99

either oak or ash will do ; THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.100

but the <font> Robinia Pseud-acacia , <$$font> or locust - tree , is
preferable to either . THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.101

The head should be made of ash , with a T-handle of the same ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.102

and should be 2 feet 4 inches long . THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.103

Its recommendations are its size and lightness ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.104

the leaves also do not hang upon it as on a common fork , the large size
of the tines tearing them asunder . THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.105

We consider this fork to be superior to any other for collecting leaves
, THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.106

and it deserves to be better known and more generally adopted .
THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.107

<font> Hoes . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.108

- Of these there is a great variety of forms and sizes adapted for
introduction among plants requiring to be grown at greater or less
distances ; also for light and heavy soils , for drawing furrows or
drills , thinning crops , stirring the soil between the plants , and for
earthing up , &c. THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.109

Some of these are draw-hoes , others thrust , THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.110

and a form combining both modes of operation has been used .
THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.111

Draw-hoes have generally been made with a short neck and circular eye ,
through which the handle is fixed ; THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.112

but the latter is now preferably inserted in a socket , which is
connected with the blade by a solid neck more or less curved , as in
Fig. 49 . THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.113

This is a great improvement ; THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.114

for the soil does not clog the iron neck as it does the wood , the
latter affording a larger surface ; THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.115

and , besides , soil of an adhesive nature is compacted in the angle
between the {COM:figure_omitted} blade and the handle ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.116

but where there is no such angle , as is the case with the crane-neck ,
the soil can@ @not hold on . THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.117

The blades of hoes should be made of steel plates , which can now be
<font> shut , <$$font> that is , welded on iron necks , a process
formerly reckoned difficult , if not impossible .
THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.118

The length of the plates for the largest need not exceed 9 inches ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,124.C2.119

hoes for onions , &c. , are required as small as 2 {COM:figure_omitted}
<P_125.C1> inches , THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.120

and the Spanish or Vernon hoe <paren> Fig. 50 <$$paren> is pointed .
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.121

Some have the upper corners slightly rounded ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.122

others are made semicircular , or nearly so , THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.123

and are called <font> half-moon_shaped <$$font>
{COM:font_change_around_"half-moon"} . THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.124

The less , however , the line of draught by the handle is raised above
the edge , the steadier will be the cut , and the less easily will the
implement be turned aside . THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.125

Therefore , it is better that the plate should be a segment less than a
semicircle . THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.126

Hoes of a triangular form are used for drawing drills ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.127

and sometimes for this purpose the implement is made like a hollow
trowel , the convex side being towards the handle .
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.128

The Dutch or thrust hoes , are useful for cutting down weeds , and for
very shallow work on an even surface ; THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.129

but they are not so good as the draw-hoe when the ground is stiff and
lumpy . THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.130

The Dutch hoe can also be used to a considerable extent without going
out of the alleys , so that the ground is not trodden as it is in using
the draw-hoe . THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.131

A hoe combining the actions of the thrust and draw hoes has been used ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.132

the plate has a cutting edge back and front .
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.133

The handle is placed so that when raised by the man to the most
convenient height for operating , the plate lies flat on the ground .
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.134

Above this height the handle must , however , be raised when the
implement has to be pushed forward , in order that the fore-edge may
enter below the surface . THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.135

After being pushed forward , the handle must be depressed below the most
advantageous position for working a draw-hoe , in order that the back
edge may get hold of the soil . THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.136

This alternate raising and lowering of the handle not only occasions a
loss of time , but also a loss of power , in consequence of the handle
being moved out of the position most advantageous for the workman , when
making either a thrust or draw . THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.137

<font> Turf-spades <$$font> may be much more advantageously used for
cutting turf than the common spade . THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.138

The sort which appears to answer the purpose best has a heart-shaped
blade and a bent handle . THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.139

Before using this tool , however , the turf must be cut into strips by a
turf-raser . THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.140

Some turf-spades have one edge of the blade turned up , and made quite
sharp , so that the turf may be cut and raised at the same time .
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.141

<font> Turf-raser . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.142

- A very simple form of this is found to answer exceedingly well in the
hands of those who cut turf for lawns in the neighbourhood of London .
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C1.143

It is merely a stick <P_125.C2> bent at the end , where a straight knife
blade or cutter is inserted . THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.144

The bent part forms a sole , which is pushed along the surface by a line
, whilst the blade cuts the turf to a uniform depth .
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.145

Wheel verge-cutters are also used for cutting turf into strips ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.146

and this they do with great rapidity . THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.147

<font> Edging-irons <$$font> or <font> Verge-cutters . <$$font>
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.148

- A good simple form of these <paren> Fig. 51 <$$paren> , consists of a
crescent-shaped steel blade fixed by a socket to a wooden handle .
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.149

This sort of verge-cutter is better adapted for the outlines of small
figures than any other , as its action is more immediately guided by the
hand . THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.150

{COM:figure_omitted}

The wheel verge-cutter consists of a circular blade of steel , with a
very sharp edge , and turning upon an axle fixed in a handle .
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.152

When blunted , they are , however , very difficult to sharpen .
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.153

M'Intosh's verge-cutter <paren> Fig. 52 <$$paren> , is well
{COM:figure_omitted} adapted for cutting the grass edges of walks ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.154

and performs its work with great expedition ; THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.155

and by replacing the coulter , whenever it becomes blunted , with a
fresh one , the implement may be used a whole day without interruption
on account of sharpening . THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.156

<font> Turf-scraper . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.157

- In lawns where ants abound , and where their hills , or where
worm-casts require to be taken off , a long light scraper of wood or
iron , such as that used for roads , may be usefully employed .
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.158

<font> Dibbers . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.159

- These are generally made of the upper part of old spade handles .
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.160

Being made of hard wood , they are sometimes used without being shod ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.161

but where these implements are extensively used , the whole of the
cylindrical part is sheathed in steel . THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.162

This maintains a more polished surface than iron ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.163

and therefore perforates with less friction .
THOMPSON-1859-2,125.C2.164

Formerly <P_126.C1> a little at the point only was shod ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.165

and in some conditions of the soil this is preferable .
THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.166

For example , when the soil is adhesive , the metal leaves a polish on
the sides of the hole , which , if dry weather set in , prevents the
roots from penetrating so freely as they would when the wood leaves the
sides of the hole rougher or more porous . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.167

A piece of wood kneed , or bent at right angles at the top , to form a
handle , is sometimes used . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.168

For inserting cuttings , small rounded tapering pieces of wood are
employed . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.169

The <font> Potato-dibber <$$font> is adapted for making a hole
sufficiently large for allowing the set to drop to a proper depth .
THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.170

It has a cross handle at top , which can be grasped with both hands ,
and a projecting piece of iron or wood , serving as a tread for the foot
to press the dibber into the ground . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.171

The tread might be made so that it could be shifted , and fixed higher
or lower , according as the hole requires to be made of greater or less
depth . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.172

<font> Garden Trowel . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.173

- The common garden trowel below the handle and neck is like the curved
portion of the section of a cone . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.174

It is now made of steel , united to a curved iron neck .
THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.175

It is used for many purposes ; but chiefly for taking up plants and
replanting them , with balls of earth adhering .
THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.176

It is superior to the dibber , THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.177

for by the latter the roots are crowded and pressed together ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.178

but by the trowel a hole can be made to admit of the roots being spread
out . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.179

The <font> Turf-beetle <$$font> is a flat oblong piece of wood , used
for levelling and consolidating newly laid turf .
THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.180

It may be formed of a portion of 3-@ @inch deal , secured from splitting
by two iron plates , and having a handle inserted in the upper side .
THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.181

But this is often done in a manner very disadvantageous for the workman
, and for effect on the turf . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.182

This is chiefly owing to the handle being fixed too upright , so that
when raised up and brought down , it strikes on its heel or the edge
nearest the workman , instead of pressing equally on the turf with its
whole under surface . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.183

The handle should , therefore , be fixed at a sufficiently acute angle
with the sole of the beetle , to admit of the latter being easily
brought down flat . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.184

<font> Rammers <$$font> are frequently required for ramming the earth
about posts , tree-guards , &c. , and for consolidating turf and gravel
. THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.185

They are generally made of wood , in the form of the base part of a cone
, THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C1.186

and have an upright <P_126.C2> stem , into which two handles are
inserted for lifting . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.187

Rammers with cast-iron heads are also sometimes employed .
THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.188

<font> Rollers . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.189

- A heavy cast-iron roller is required for broad walks , gravel areas ,
and for lawns . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.190

In flower gardens , or where the walks are narrow , or their turnings
intricate , a narrow roller must be employed .
THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.191

A light wooden roller is used in the kitchen garden for rolling the
ground when sown with onions , &c. THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.192

<font> Brooms . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.193

- Those used for sweeping lawns , walks , &c. , are generally made of
birch twigs . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.194

They are tougher THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.195

and last much longer when the birch is cut early in winter , or before
the sap rises . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.196

They should , therefore , be made , or procured from the maker's ,
before this takes place , THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.197

and should be kept in a moderately dry , airy place , where they will
not be liable to mould . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.198

<font> Transplanters <$$font> are sometimes used instead of the trowel
or spade , in removing plants of small size with a ball .
THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.199

Two semicylindrical plates of iron with handles , and fastened together
, so that they may be separated at pleasure , may be employed for the
purpose . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.200

The mode of using this instrument is very simple .
THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.201

The plant to be raised is inclosed by the cylinder , which is formed by
the two pieces ; THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.202

this cylinder is then pressed or worked into the soil ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.203

and on being pulled up by the handle , it brings up the plant together
with the earth surrounding it . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.204

The transplanter is placed in the hole prepared for the plant ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.205

the fastenings are removed , and the sides withdrawn , the soil being
pressed round the ball at the same time to prevent its breaking .
THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.206

In this way a plant may be removed at any period of its growth without
injury resulting to it from the operation . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.207

There are various other transplanters , mostly modifications of the
preceding ; THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.208

some consist of a cylinder for raising the plant , fitting into a bottom
, to prevent the earth from falling away ; THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.209

others have blades , which , after having been forced into the ground ,
may be tightly closed by means of handles upon the soil surrounding the
plant . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.210

The above transplanters are only adapted for lifting plants of small
size . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.211

They are not much used in gardens , the trowel and spade being generally
substituted for them . THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.212

The contrivances employed in removing plants of large size , will be
adverted to in the chapter on transplanting .
THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.213

<font> Suckering Iron . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,126.C2.214

- One that answers well for removing suckers from gooseberries ,
currants , <P_127.C1> or other trees , is represented in Fig. 53 .
THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.215

It consists of a chisel-like steeled blade , 6 inches long , 2_1$$4
inches broad at the edge , and 1_5$$8 inch at the shoulder , where it
tapers to a straight round iron shank , the upper part of which forms a
socket for the insertion of a wooden handle .
THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.216

The length from the edge of the tool to the top of the socket is 34
inches , and from that to the top of the wooden handle 10 inches , the
whole length being 3 feet 8 inches . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.217

The edge is usually straight , THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.218

and is apt to slip past the sucker ; THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.219

but the figure represents an improvement made by Mr. Thornton , of
Turnham Green , the edge being concave . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.220

{COM:figure_omitted}

The <font> Dock-weeder <$$font> is employed for taking up such deep
tap-rooted weeds as docks ; THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.222

it consists of an iron blade , with two prongs fixed in a handle , like
that of a spade ; THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.223

a curved piece of iron on the back serves as a fulcrum ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.224

and in some forms of the implement , a projecting knob answers the same
purpose . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.225

<font> Crow-bar . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.226

- The usual form of this is a round straight bar of iron , with a pommel
top ; THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.227

the bar is thickened a little towards the lower end , near which it is
square , THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.228

and then tapers to a point . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.229

It is useful for making holes for stakes ; THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.230

and being sometimes made flattish and wedge-shaped at the end , it is
occasionally employed as a lever for loosening the soil below trees that
are to be removed . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.231

For large stakes , the lower part of the bar is formed like a short
inverted pyramid , THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.232

and the whole implement is not longer than admits of its being struck on
the top with a sledge hammer or heavy mall . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.233

<font> Hammer . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.234

- The principal use of a hammer in gardening is for nailing wall-trees .
THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.235

For this purpose the head should be rounded to serve as a fulcrum in
drawing nails , THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.236

and in this operation the claws should hold the nails without slipping ,
a property which too many of the hammers used for the purpose only
possess in a slight degree . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.237

The head , also , should not be too long , THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.238

otherwise , in drawing nails , it is apt to bruise adjoining branches ,
where these happen to be close together . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.239

<font> Mallet . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.240

- This is necessary when branches are to be cut off by the chisel , or
where that instrument is employed to smooth the place where branches
have been cut off by the saw . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C1.241

Different sizes are required for driving stakes , <P_127.C2> and other
purposes . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.242

Large ones ought to be secured by an iron hoop round each end .
THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.243

<font> Pincers <$$font> are requisite for drawing nails , and other
purposes . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.244

When the lid of a packing box is taken off , the nails can be readily
taken out by means of the pincers and hammer , without breaking off the
points of the nails , or bending them , so that they can@ @not be drawn
without tearing the wood . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.245

If the nail projecting through the under side of the lid be firmly
grasped with the pincers , say half-way between the point of the nail
and the under side of the board , and the opposite side of the board ,
near the head of the nail , be struck with the hammer the former will be
driven up so that the pincers can lay hold of it .
THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.246

All the nails being successively drawn in this manner , the board or lid
will be fit for being again nailed on when required .
THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.247

<font> Pliers <$$font> are occasionally required for drawing and
twisting wire , THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.248

and for this the blades , where they approach each other , should be
flat . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.249

Cutting pliers are very convenient , being adapted , not only for
drawing and twisting , but also for cutting wire .
THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.250

The <font> Screw-driver <$$font> is necessary in a garden , chiefly for
screwing down and unscrewing the lids of boxes ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.251

and it is indispensable wherever screws are employed for other
occasional purposes . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.252

The <font> Implement-cleaner <$$font> is a small wooden spatula , used
for cleaning spades and other implements . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.253

It is indispensable in working adhesive soils , where the tools become
clogged . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.254

It may be formed out of a bit of thin deal by the workman , and of any
form that he may prefer . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.255

<heading>

II. - Cutting Instruments . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.257

<$$heading>

<font> Knives , <$$font> of various kinds , are required in gardens ,
for pruning , budding , grafting , and other purposes .
THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.259

The <font> Pruning Knife <$$font> is the best instrument that can be
employed for pruning trees and shrubs ; besides which , it may be used
for a variety of other purposes . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.260

Pruning knives are made of various forms ; THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.261

the blade , in some kinds , is made with a joint , so as to fold in ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.262

and in others , it is fixed immoveably in the handle , and kept in a
pasteboard sheath when not in use . THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.263

Knives , with folding blades , possess the advantage of being more
portable , THOMPSON-1859-2,127.C2.264

and are therefore more convenient for occasional use ; whilst , on the
other hand , those with <P_128.C1> fixed blades are more steady in their
action ; and when constant pruning is carried on , are preferable .
THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C1.265

The handle should be made of buck's-horn , the rough surface of which
prevents the hand from slipping . THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C1.266

With regard to the shape of the blade , some prefer blades with straight
edges ; others , those the edges of which are more or less curved .
THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C1.267

For removing small shoots , a straight_edged blade is preferred ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C1.268

for a cleaner cut is produced ; THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C1.269

but where branches are to be cut off , a curved blade can be used with
greater effect . THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C1.270

A pruning knife , like the one represented in Fig. 54 , which has been
selected from a great variety of patterns , manufactured by Messrs.
Saynor and Cooke , of Sheffield , we consider preferable to all others
for general pruning and other purposes . THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C1.271

It has a slightly curved blade of well-tempered steel ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C1.272

and a considerable portion of the edge is straight , being only a little
curved near the point . THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C1.273

This is an advantage ; THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C1.274

for in drawing the cut , the pressure against the wood diminishes as the
cutting part is moved further from the handle ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C1.275

and this is , in a great measure , compensated by the curve near the
extremity of the blade . THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C1.276

{COM:figure_omitted}

The <font> Grafting Knife <$$font> <paren> Fig. 55 <$$paren> has a
thinner and narrower blade than the pruning knife , which , however ,
may frequently be substituted for it . THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C1.278

The <font> Budding_Knife <$$font> is made in various forms .
THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C1.279

The blade is generally either straight-edged or curved backwards towards
the point . THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C1.280

The handle , which is made of ivory , is usually rounded and thinned off
at the end , in order <P_128.C2> that it may be used for raising up the
bark . THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.281

The end of the handle is sometimes made heart-shaped ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.282

and this form admits of the bark being raised with greater facility .
THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.283

Instead of the handle being thinned at the end , some knives have a
common handle , and a small piece of ivory which folds in for the same
purpose . THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.284

Figs. 56 and 57 represent good forms of budding_knives .
THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.285

{COM:figure_omitted}

The <font> Vegetable Knife <$$font> has a larger and more curved blade
than the pruning knife . THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.287

It is chiefly employed for cutting vegetables and dressing off their
rough leaves . THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.288

<font> Shears <$$font> are required in gardens for clipping hedges ,
grass edgings , and for pruning . THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.289

<font> Hedge Shears . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.290

- A good form of these is represented in Fig. 58 .
THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.291

The dimensions are as follows : THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.292

- The length of the blades , from the pivot to their extremities is
10_1$$2 inches ; THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.293

the breadth of each is 2 inches . THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.294

The length of the handles is 12 inches ; THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.295

and when the blades are placed level , the under part of the extremity
of the handle is 3 inches above that level . THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.296

About 1_1$$4 inch of the edge next the pivot is formed circular and
convex in the one blade , and correspondingly concave in the other .
THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.297

This admits of branches being grasped and easily cut from being near the
fulcrum , THOMPSON-1859-2,128.C2.298

and is therefore very convenient for cutting snags , or branches that
may be occasionally met with , and which prove too thick for being
otherwise laid hold of , except at too great a {COM:figure_omitted}
<P_129.C1> distance from the fulcrum or pivot , to have a sufficient
purchase . THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C1.299

<font> Parrot-bill Shears <$$font> are employed for grasping and cutting
stronger branches than can be {COM:figure_omitted} done with the
ordinary hedge shears . THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C1.300

They are made with or without a slide space at the pivot , as seen in
Figs. 59 and 60 . THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C1.301

They should be fixed into strong wooden handles , {COM:figure_omitted}
about 3 feet in length , and broadly ferruled where the prongs are
inserted . THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C1.302

<font> Grass-edging Shears . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C1.303

- Some kinds of these are furnished with a small wheel to run along
close by the edge of the grass ; THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C1.304

but the form represented in Fig. 61 is less complicated ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C1.305

and is , on the whole , probably best adapted for general use .
THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C1.306

This kind of shears was formerly made with the handles at right angles
to the blades ; THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C1.307

but the handles should form with the edges of the blades an angle of
110@ @=o= , being 20@ @=o= wider than a right angle ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C1.308

or the top of <P_129.C2> the handle , nearly 3 feet in length , will be
about 11 inches back from the perpendicular .
THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C2.309

The axis or pin on which the blades turn should have a smoothly rounded
head {COM:figure_omitted} next the edging , that is , on the left-hand
side . THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C2.310

The other end of the axis should have a screw and nut with a washer ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C2.311

or there may be two thin nuts worked hard against each other , to
prevent their being turned by the movement of the blades .
THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C2.312

It is necessary that the end of the screw should be on the right-hand
side , THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C2.313

otherwise it would catch against the edging .
THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C2.314

<font> Pruning Shears . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C2.315

- There are various sizes of these , according to the greater or less
thickness of the shoots or small branches to be cut off .
THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C2.316

The pruning shears shown in Figs. 62 and 63 , are employed for the
removal of the shoots of fruit-trees ; THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C2.317

and the centres being {COM:figure_omitted} moveable , they produce a
draw cut like a knife , instead of a crushing cut like that of the
common shears . THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C2.318

The shears represented in Fig. 64 are useful for pruning gooseberries ,
currants , roses , and other plants . THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C2.319

They are very strong and effective ; THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C2.320

and being made without a slide , are not liable to get out of order .
THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C2.321

The <font> Averruncator <$$font> <paren> Fig. 65 <$$paren> is used for
the purpose of pruning standard trees , the branches of which are
situated at a considerable elevation . THOMPSON-1859-2,129.C2.322

There are several forms of this instrument , <P_130.C1> differing
slightly from the preceding ; THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C1.323

but they all consist of two blades , one of which is fixed to a handle ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C1.324

and the other is moved by a lever , to which a cord , passing
{COM:figure_omitted} over a pulley , is attached .
THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C1.325

By means of an averruncator , branches more than an inch in diameter ,
and at the height of 12 or 15 feet from the ground , may be cut off
without using either a ladder or steps ; THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C1.326

and if these are employed , branches at a much greater height may be
removed . THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C1.327

The <font> Sécateur <$$font> <paren> Fig. 66 <$$paren> is an instrument
, much used in France , for removing superfluous shoots .
THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C1.328

It possesses the advantage of being much more expeditious than the
pruning knife {COM:figure_omitted} , THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C1.329

and when well made , answers nearly as well .
THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C1.330

It is well adapted for summer pruning , <P_130.C2> and for shortening
one-year-old shoots , particularly in the case of the peach tree , where
the part left is at the next pruning entirely cut away .
THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.331

There are various forms of the sécateur . THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.332

In some the pivot is fixed ; THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.333

in others , it slides . THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.334

One of the latest modifications of the instrument is shown in Fig. 67 .
THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.335

Both blades are flat , sharp , and straight-edged , so that the
extremities of shoots nailed to a wall may easily be cut off without
bruising the bark or taking out the nails . THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.336

{COM:figure_omitted}

<font> Grape Scissors <$$font> <paren> Fig. 68 <$$paren> are used for
thinning out the berries of the bunches of grapes .
THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.338

They should have small tapering points ; but not too sharp ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.339

otherwise it is impossible to introduce them among the grapes without
pricking some of the berries not intended to be removed .
THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.340

The <font> Axe . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.341

- One of a convenient size is useful for many garden purposes , such as
sharpening stakes ; THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.342

and a large one , with a handle long enough to be used with both hands ,
is required , for felling trees . THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.343

The <font> Hedge Bill , <$$font> or <font> Pruning Bill . <$$font>
THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.344

- This instrument is employed for dressing the sides of hedges .
THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.345

It is a slightly curved blade , attached to a handle about 4 feet long .
THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.346

Whilst the blade is applied in a direction corresponding with that of
the side of the hedge , the handle deviates so far as to permit the
operator to stand clear of the hedge . THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.347

The <font> Bill-hook <$$font> <paren> Figs. 69 and 70 <$$paren> is used
instead of the axe for cutting hedges , lopping branches , sharpening
stakes , fagoting , and wherever the wood to be cut is of small diameter
. THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.348

{COM:figure_omitted}

<font> Chisels . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.350

- These are used for various horticultural purposes , for which
different kinds are adapted . THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.351

Some are similar to the carpenter's chisel , THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.352

and are used for cutting off branches too strong for the knife , and
situated where the saw could not work ; and also for smoothing the cuts
made by the saw or other instrument . THOMPSON-1859-2,130.C2.353

Chisels , with handles 10 , 20 , or <P_131.C1> even 30 feet in length ,
are occasionally employed for pruning ; THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.354

some are of the usual form , THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.355

others have one or two reflexed ears for cutting , by pulling downwards
any torn strip of wood or bark . THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.356

When the handle is very long it requires to be made of sufficient
thickness to prevent it from bending . THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.357

It has , therefore , a considerable weight , THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.358

and , consequently , its inertia offers much resistance to the blow ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.359

and would almost entirely counteract even a smart blow from a small
mallet ; THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.360

one as large as can be properly wielded will be found most effective in
this case . THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.361

Long-handled chisels are very useful in pruning , especially for
removing one of two competing leaders , in trees that are intended to be
grown with single straight stems . THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.362

The <font> Grafting Chisel <$$font> is not flat on one side , and
bevelled to an edge on the other , like the carpenter's chisel ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.363

but tapers on both sides , like a wedge . THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.364

It is , in fact , used as a sharp wedge for splitting the stems or
branches of trees , so as to admit of the graft being inserted - a mode
of grafting by no means to be recommended ; THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.365

for the old wood , when once separated , never heals .
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.366

<font> Scythe . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.367

- The usual form of scythe-blade answers for lawns , provided the neck
is set with the handle to take in a wider sweep ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.368

and it should also be turned up so that the under side of the blade may
be nearly flat with the surface of the ground .
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.369

When worked by a person in the easiest position for making the sweep ,
the back should be close on the ground , whilst the edge should be
slightly elevated . THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.370

The common bent handles are as good as any , if not the best .
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.371

Much depends on the placing of the two projecting handles for the grasp
; THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.372

their distance from the heel , and from each other , should be so
regulated , that the blade , when lifted up clear off the ground , will
balance parallel to the surface . THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.373

<font> Boyd's Self-adjusting Scythe <$$font> has a piece of iron , 4 or
5 inches in length , attached lengthwise to the under side of the handle
. THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.374

To the end of this another piece of iron is jointed , so that it may be
moved out or in horizontally , and be secured at any required angle by a
nut and screw . THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.375

The heel of the scythe is made with an eye , THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.376

and is secured to the end of the piece of iron last-mentioned , so that
the edge of the scythe can be set higher or lower without the assistance
of the blacksmith . THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.377

The two joints are equivalent to a universal joint ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C1.378

and , in short , this is the <P_131.C2> principle of the invention .
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.379

There was some difficulty in securing the screw at the heel so as not to
permit shifting . THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.380

A ratchet and key was therefore added , to prevent the scythe from
moving outwards on the joint . THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.381

The facility with which this kind of scythe can be adjusted , renders it
very convenient , and more especially so for those who do not understand
the setting of a scythe by the ring and wedge .
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.382

In sharpening a scythe , the stone should be drawn almost flatly along
the under side , so that the edge may not be turned up ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.383

the upper side should be more bevelled . THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.384

The <font> Asparagus Knife <$$font> <paren> Fig. 71 <$$paren> has a
serrated {COM:figure_omitted} blade , with a long iron shank fixed in a
wooden handle . THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.385

The blade should be made of hard tempered steel .
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.386

In using it , a little soil is removed with the blade from the side of
the shoot , in order to discover the direction of the latter ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.387

the blade is then pushed down somewhat slanting ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.388

and the shoot is cut , or rather sawed off , near its base .
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.389

In doing this , care must be taken not to injure the crown of the plant
, nor other shoots that may be coming up . THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.390

<font> Saws <$$font> are required for various purposes in gardens and
plantations ; THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.391

and , accordingly , several kinds are necessary .
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.392

A cross-cut saw is required for cutting down trees ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.393

and for large limbs the saws used by carpenters will answer ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.394

only the teeth may require to be wider set if the wood is soft and full
of sap . THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.395

Pruning saws are most required for ordinary pruning ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.396

they are employed for cutting off smaller branches than the preceding ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.397

and not being so broad , are better adapted for cutting close to the
fork of branches , or where a broader plate could not be introduced .
THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.398

The kind called <font> turning_saws <$$font> <paren> Fig. 72 <$$paren>
, such as {COM:figure_omitted} are used for cutting out circular spaces
in boards , answer exceedingly well , THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.399

and being made of the clippings taken off in cutting out other saws ,
they are not expensive . THOMPSON-1859-2,131.C2.400

In some cases , pruning saws with the teeth set with their cutting edges
in the direction of the handle , so as to cut by drawing , instead of by
<P_132.C1> pushing forward , are of use , THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.401

for these can be attached to a long pole handle , in order to reach high
branches . THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.402

In such cases , a saw with the teeth set in the usual way , would be apt
to warp or break at every thrust ; THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.403

but one adapted to cut by drawing is not liable to this inconvenience .
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.404

Before saws used in pruning are laid aside , they should , in the first
place , be perfectly cleaned from all juice , or other adhesive
substance , that may collect upon their surface .
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.405

They should then be well dried and oiled . THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.406

They will also work more easily , and cut more expeditiously , and with
less danger of breaking , if cleaned and oiled occasionally when in use
. THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.407

<font> Fruit <$$font> and <font> Flower Gatherers . <$$font>
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.408

- Of these there are several kinds . THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.409

For gathering fruit situated at a considerable height , the averruncator
, with a net attached , may be employed . THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.410

The grape gatherer <paren> Fig. 73 <$$paren> is useful for gathering
grapes and other fruit , as well as flowers which are situated beyond
the reach of the arm . THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.411

It consists of a pair of scissors constructed on the principle of the
wire-worker's pliers , so as to cut and hold at the same time .
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.412

The scissors are kept open by a spring , and attached to a light handle
. THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.413

Previously to using the instrument , the collar is pushed up to the knob
, THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.414

and the spring causes the cutting part to open .
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.415

By pulling the collar down by means of the cord attached to it , the
blades are closed , THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.416

the stalk is cut through , THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.417

and the part cut off is held securely . THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.418

There are several other kinds of fruit gatherers adapted for gathering
peaches , pears , and other fruits ; THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.419

but the hand is the most expeditious fruit gatherer we have ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.420

and it does not bruise the fruit if due care be taken .
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.421

<heading>

III. - Instruments Used in Laying Out Ground Lines .
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.423

<$$heading>

<font> Garden Line <$$font> and <font> Reel . <$$font>
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.425

- A garden line should be made of good materials ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.426

otherwise it soon gives way in stretching ; THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C1.427

but however good at first , a line will soon decay if rolled <P_132.C2>
closely up when wet . THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.428

It should , therefore , be wound on a reel , which not only permits the
line to dry more speedily than when closely rolled up , but also
facilitates its being readily extended and recoiled .
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.429

The reel has usually an upright pin , near one end of the upper cross
bar , for turning the reel ; THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.430

but this projection should turn within a handle , and not be fixed in it
. THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.431

When taken up or let out by turning the reel , the line , in either case
, is neither twisted nor untwisted in the operation ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.432

but if wound by hand on the reel , the line will be twisted either more
or less than it was before ; so that the strands of which the line is
composed are alternately opened and closed , and it consequently loses
on each occasion much of its original compactness and strength .
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.433

If a line be tightly stretched when dry , and allowed to get wet without
being slackened , it will either snap , owing to the contraction which
takes place in twisted fibre when wetted , THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.434

or it will be injured from the overstrain . THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.435

When a line rests on the ground , its weight does not affect the
straightness of the tracing ; THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.436

but when stretched and supported only between two points , with the
intention of indicating a straight line between them , the line should
combine strength with lightness , as , for instance , small whip-cord .
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.437

The <font> Chain <$$font> is indispensable where land , walks , or roads
have to be measured , THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.438

and it is always desirable that there should be one in a garden , at
least if it is of considerable extent . THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.439

The one commonly employed , and which is used by surveyors , is called
Gunter's chain . THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.440

It consists of 100 links , each of which is 7.92 inches in length ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.441

consequently , the whole length of the chain is 66 feet , = 22 yards ,
or 4 poles . THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.442

The long links should be connected by short oval ones ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.443

for these are not so apt to stretch as round links .
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.444

If an oval link should be compressed , its length will still be much the
same ; THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.445

but if a ring be at all compressed so as to alter its form , it must
assume an oval shape , THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.446

and , consequently , the chain will be too long .
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.447

Chains should be occasionally verified , and all bent links made
straight with a wooden mallet . THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.448

One great advantage of using the chain consists in the facility with
which areas calculated in links may be reduced to acres ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.449

for as there are 100,000 square links in an acre , we have only to point
off five figures to the right , THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.450

and the equivalent area in acres and decimals of an acre is obtained ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,132.C2.451

thus , if the area be <P_133.C1> 118,960 links , by pointing off the
five last figures we have l.1896O acre . THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.452

Accompanying the chain are ten small arrows , about 15 inches in length
, the use of which is to mark the termination of each chain's length .
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.453

A staff having been set up to show the direction of the line to be
measured , a person , called the leader , takes one end of the chain ,
holding at the same time the ten arrows in his hand ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.454

and proceeds in a straight line towards the staff .
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.455

The other end of the chain is held by the surveyor , who directs the
leader till the chain is stretched in a straight line in the direction
of the staff . THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.456

When this is done , the leader fixes an arrow in the ground at the end
of the chain , THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.457

and again starts off till another chain's length is measured ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.458

the chain is then directed and stretched , and an arrow fixed in the
ground as before . THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.459

The surveyor picks up the first arrow , which he retains ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.460

and continues picking up the arrows as the measurement progresses :
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.461

when the surveyor holds ten arrows , they are returned to the leader ,
and the circumstance noted . THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.462

The leader then starts afresh , THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.463

and the measurement is continued in the same way , till the whole
distance has been measured . THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.464

Each change is then counted as 1000 links , every arrow the surveyor
holds in his hand as 100 links , THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.465

and to this is added any links that there may be over ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.466

the sum will be the length of the line in links .
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.467

Thus , if there have been two changes , and the surveyor hold five
arrows , and there be 13 links more , the length of the line measured
will be 2513 links . THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.468

<font> Measuring-rods . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.469

- Without measures of some sort , there could be no regularity in
gardens ; THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.470

walks and borders could not be lined off to their proper width ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.471

the ground could not be portioned out for the different crops ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.472

nor could trees , &c. , be planted at proper distances , without some
metrical instrument . THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.473

Two thin rods , such as are used by surveyors , would be useful for very
particular dimensions ; THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.474

but for common use in the open ground , they would be liable to be
broken in carrying along with other implements .
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.475

A 10-@ @feet rod , of clean , well-seasoned deal , about 1_1$$4 inch
square in the middle , but tapered at each end to less than an inch
square , may , for common purposes , be substituted .
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.476

A copper fastening should be put round each end , to prevent splitting
and wearing . THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.477

When tapered so that the ends are lightened , the rod will neither bend
nor readily break ; THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C1.478

but it can@ @not be used as a <P_133.C2> straight-edge , which is
sometimes required . THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.479

A rod may therefore be made 1_1$$2 inch broad , with parallel straight
edges , and 3$$4 inch thick in the middle , but thinner at each end .
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.480

It is often necessary to measure ground work and garden allotments by
the pole or perch . THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.481

For this purpose , a measuring-rod , 16_1$$2 feet in length , divided
into 100 parts , will be found exceedingly convenient ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.482

for the length in rods and parts set down as decimals , has only to be
multiplied by the breadth set down in a like manner ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.483

and the area is at once obtained in rods and decimals of a rod .
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.484

<font> Stakes <$$font> - THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.485

For marking out lines for walks , boundaries , and divisions , stakes
are necessary , THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.486

and may be reckoned amongst the first requisites for the laying out of
gardens . THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.487

They are , in fact , necessary on many occasions , as when plantations ,
edgings , and lines have to be made out afresh .
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.488

Stakes for these purposes should be made of clean , well-seasoned deal ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.489

they should be 6 feet in length , 1 inch square , quite straight , and
the lower end regularly pointed . THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.490

When not in use , they should be kept in a dry place , strapped together
in bundles , ready to take out whenever they are wanted .
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.491

If thus taken care of , a set will last for a great number of years ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.492

and the first cost will be little compared with the loss of time in
searching after and preparing such as can be hastily obtained on every
occasion that stakes are indispensable . THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.493

The above description of stake will be found useful where ground has to
be levelled , as both the original and intended surface lines can be
relatively marked on them . THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.494

But before the ground work is commenced , a shorter and stouter
description of stake should be employed , so that it will bear to be
driven in so firmly as not to be easily moved whilst the work is going
on . THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.495

<font> Borning-rods . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.496

- These usually consist of three straight rods of equal length , each
with a cross-piece at right angles across the top .
THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.497

They are used for determining points that shall be either in a
horizontal or uniformly inclined plane . THOMPSON-1859-2,133.C2.498

For example , supposing the edging of a walk is required to run straight
between two fixed points ; then , if we place a borning-rod on each of
these points , and another anywhere between , by looking over the top of
one at either end , we may direct the person holding the intermediate
rod to raise or lower it , as the case may be , till it is seen to be in
a line with that at the further <P_134.C1> end .
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.499

For ordinary purposes , the above construction of rods will answer
tolerably well ; THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.500

but in using them , an imperfection is experienced , which may , however
, be easily remedied . THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.501

In looking over their tops , a fringing of the rays of light on the
edges prevents the latter from being exactly seen .
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.502

The following construction is therefore recommended .
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.503

Instead of the three cross pieces being of the same width and height ,
one of them should be about an inch broader and higher than the others .
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.504

If two have their upper edges , say 4 feet from the bottom of the rod ,
the upper edge of the other may be 4 feet 1 inch ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.505

but a line should be drawn exactly at 4 feet .
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.506

A very small hole should be pierced through the cross-piece , to form a
sight ; THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.507

the sides of the hole should be smooth and blackened , as should
likewise be the cross-piece , but not varnished .
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.508

The hole should not be wider than would admit a small pin .
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.509

On looking through it , the top of the intermediate rod can be easily
and much more correctly placed in line with the top of the further rod ,
than by looking over the tops of the three . THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.510

Usually three persons are employed in striking either a level line or
regular slope between two points , or one person for each rod .
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.511

The one between the two extremities is directed by one of the others to
raise or lower the ground till his rod is seen to be in line .
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.512

A number of intermediate points have usually to be determined in the
same way . THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.513

Instead , however , of three men being occupied , one will be sufficient
with the above improvement , after an intermediate point has been
ascertained . THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.514

At that point a stake or rod should be placed with a card fixed across ,
with its upper edge in line with those at the extremities .
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.515

Having obtained three fixed points , a workman can then raise or lower a
rod till he find it in line with two of those previously ascertained .
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.516

By using the rod with the sight hole , he will also be able to work with
greater exactness . THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.517

<font> Ground Compasses . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.518

- These may be occasionally used very conveniently in making geometrical
flower gardens . THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.519

They are constructed on the same principle as the common compasses ,
with the segment gauge used by mechanics . THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.520

The legs are made of hard wood , 5 or 6 feet in length , and shod with
iron . THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C1.521

Instead of a segment , a straight plate of sheet-iron , about 1_1$$2
inch broad , may be used , with a space cut out along the middle ,
through which <P_134.C2> the end of a fixed screw on each leg may pass ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.522

then by means of two thumb-screws , the legs can be secured at any
required distance apart . THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.523

In many cases where the above may be employed to describe circles , or
circular parts , a sort of beam compasses may be substituted .
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.524

Such may be formed of a piece of inch thick deal board , 2_1$$2 inches
wide , and 10 feet in length , with a slit along the middle to within
about 6 inches of each end , to admit of a screw 1$$2 inch in diameter ,
passing through and along . THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.525

There should be two screws , their lower ends being pointed .
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.526

The length of each screw may be 18 inches , THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.527

and each should be furnished with two nuts and two washers .
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.528

Supposing it may be required to have the beam raised about 6 inches
above the points , in order to clear any inequalities of surface which
it may have to pass over , screw up the nuts , so that the under side of
the beam may rest upon them at the above height ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.529

then screw down the nuts on the upper side of the beam , but only one of
them tightly , until the other screw is moved along the slit , so that
the points may be at the required distance apart ;
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.530

and when this is ascertained to be the case , let the other nut be
likewise screwed down , in order that a line may be traced without the
points being moved from the true distance in the course of the operation
. THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.531

As this instrument can be adjusted so that the points may be securely
fixed at any width , within certain limits , and as the beam can be
raised more or less , it may be used as a gauge for the breadth of walks
, or other distances between two points . THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.532

The <font> Plummet <$$font> may be very usefully employed in placing
objects correctly upright , such as posts , stakes , and trees .
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.533

The plummet should be formed with a conical point ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.534

and this point should be exactly in the line of suspension , so that
when the cord suspending the plummet is held in line with a row of
stakes , for instance , the point will touch or indicate the spot where
another stake should be driven . THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.535

The common straight-edge and plummet used by builders will seldom be
required by gardeners , for whom a plummet and line will generally be
sufficient . THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.536

With such it is easy to determine whether a tree or other object is
placed upright or not , THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.537

for this can readily be done by suspending the plummet at nearly arm's
length , and observing whether the object coincides with the plummet
line . THOMPSON-1859-2,134.C2.538

If it do , then the object is perpendicular as <P_135.C1> regards that
point of view . THOMPSON-1859-2,135.C1.539

By moving so as to view the object from a different point , if in a
direction at right angles to the former , so much the better ,
THOMPSON-1859-2,135.C1.540

and again observing the object with reference to the perpendicular line
, it will be seen whether it is upright , and if not so , in what
direction , and how far , it will be requisite to move it .
THOMPSON-1859-2,135.C1.541

In planting trees with stems more or less crooked , they should be
placed so that equal portions may be seen on each side of the plummet
line . THOMPSON-1859-2,135.C1.542

<font> Levels . <$$font> THOMPSON-1859-2,135.C1.543

- Wherever walks , roads , or drains are to be made , or indeed whenever
grounds are to be laid out , a level is indispensable .
THOMPSON-1859-2,135.C1.544

Though the surface of the ground may , to all appearance , be quite
level , yet it will often be found , when the level is used , to slope
considerably . THOMPSON-1859-2,135.C1.545

We know of a case where a person , deceived by an apparently level
surface , made a drain of considerable length and dimensions , affording
, as he thought , a sufficient fall for the water .
THOMPSON-1859-2,135.C1.546

