<BEGIN_thomson-1862-2>

<P_468>

<heading>

<paren> D <$$paren> . THOMSON-1862-2,468.4

On the Secular Cooling of the Earth THOMSON-1862-2,468.5

<$$heading>

<paren> <font> a. <$$font> <$$paren> For eighteen years it has pressed
on my mind , that essential principles of Thermo-dynamics have been
overlooked by those geologists who uncompromisingly oppose all
paroxysmal hypotheses , and maintain not only that we have examples now
before us , on the earth , of all the different actions by which its
crust has been modified in geological history , but that these actions
have never , or have not on the whole , been more violent in past time
than they are at present . THOMSON-1862-2,468.7

<P_469>

<paren> <font> b. <$$font> <$$paren> It is quite certain the solar
system can@ @not have gone on , even as at present , for a few
hundred_thousand or a few million years , without the irrevocable loss
<paren> by dissipation , not by <font> annihilation <$$font> <$$paren>
of a very considerable proportion of the entire energy initially in
store for sun heat , and for Plutonic action . THOMSON-1862-2,469.9

It is quite certain that the whole store of energy in the solar system
has been greater in all past time than at present ;
THOMSON-1862-2,469.10

but it is conceivable that the rate at which it has been drawn upon and
dissipated , whether by solar radiation , or by volcanic action in the
earth or other dark bodies of the system , may have been nearly equable
, or may even have been less rapid , in certain periods of the past .
THOMSON-1862-2,469.11

But it is far more probable that the secular rate of dissipation has
been in some direct proportion to the total amount of energy in store ,
at any time after the commencement of the present order of things , and
has been therefore very slowly diminishing from age to age .
THOMSON-1862-2,469.12

<paren> <font> c. <$$font> <$$paren> I have endeavoured to prove this
for the sun's heat , in an article recently published in <font>
Macmillan's Magazine <$$font> <paren> March 1862 <$$paren> , where I
have shown that most probably the sun was sensibly hotter a_million
years ago than he is now . THOMSON-1862-2,469.13

Hence , geological speculations assuming somewhat greater extremes of
heat , more violent storms and floods , more luxuriant vegetation , and
hardier and coarser_grained plants and animals , in remote antiquity ,
are more probable than those of the extreme quietist , or "
uniformitarian " school . THOMSON-1862-2,469.14

A middle path , not generally safest in scientific speculation , seems
to be so in this case . THOMSON-1862-2,469.15

It is probable that hypotheses of grand catastrophes destroying all life
from the earth , and ruining its whole surface at once , are greatly in
error ; THOMSON-1862-2,469.16

it is impossible that hypotheses assuming an equability of sun and
storms for 1,000,000 years , can be wholly true . THOMSON-1862-2,469.17

<paren> <font> d. <$$font> <$$paren> Fourier's mathematical theory of
the conduction of heat is a beautiful working out of a particular case
belonging to the general doctrine of the " Dissipation of Energy . "
THOMSON-1862-2,469.18

A characteristic of the practical solutions it presents is , that in
each case a <P_470> distribution of temperature , becoming gradually
equalized through an unlimited future , is expressed as a function of
the time , which is infinitely divergent for all times longer past than
a definite determinable epoch . THOMSON-1862-2,470.19

The distribution of heat at such an epoch is essentially <font> initial
<$$font> - that is to say , it can@ @not result from any previous
condition of matter by natural processes . THOMSON-1862-2,470.20

It is , then , well called an " <font> arbitrary <$$font> initial
distribution of heat , " in Fourier's great mathematical poem , because
that which is rigorously expressed by the mathematical formula could
only be realized by action of a power able to modify the laws of dead
matter . THOMSON-1862-2,470.21

In an article published about nineteen years ago in the <font> Cambridge
Mathematical Journal , <$$font> I gave the mathematical criterion for an
essentially initial distribution ; THOMSON-1862-2,470.22

and in an inaugural essay , " De Motu Caloris per Terrae Corpus , " read
before the Faculty of the University of Glasgow in 1846 , I suggested ,
as an application of these principles , that a perfectly complete
geothermic survey would give us data for determining an initial epoch in
the problem of terrestrial conduction . THOMSON-1862-2,470.23

At the meeting of the British Association in Glasgow in 1855 , I urged
that special geothermic surveys should be made for the purpose of
estimating absolute dates in geology , THOMSON-1862-2,470.24

and I pointed out some cases , especially that of the salt-spring
borings at Creuznach , in Rhenish Prussia , in which eruptions of
basaltic rock seem to leave traces of their igneous origin in residual
heat . THOMSON-1862-2,470.25

I hope this suggestion may yet be taken up , and may prove to some
extent useful ; THOMSON-1862-2,470.26

but the disturbing influences affecting underground temperature , as
Professor Phillips has well shown in a recent inaugural address to the
Geological Society , are too great to allow us to expect any very
precise or satisfactory results . THOMSON-1862-2,470.27

<paren> <font> e. <$$font> <$$paren> The chief object of the present
communication is to estimate from the known general increase of
temperature in the earth downwards , the date of the first establishment
of that <font> consistentior status , <$$font> which , according to
Leibnitz's theory , is the initial date of all geological history .
THOMSON-1862-2,470.28

<P_471>

<paren> <font> f. <$$font> <$$paren> In all parts of the world in which
the earth's crust has : been examined , at sufficiently great depths to
escape large influence of the irregular and of the annual variations of
the superficial temperature , a gradually increasing temperature has
been found in going deeper . THOMSON-1862-2,471.30

The rate of augmentation <paren> estimated at only 1$$110th of a degree
, {COM:sic_comma_after_"degree"} Fahr. , in some localities , and as
much as 1$$15th of a degree in others {TEXT:other} , per foot of descent
<$$paren> has not been observed in a sufficient number of places to
establish any fair average estimate for the upper crust of the whole
earth . THOMSON-1862-2,471.31

But 1$$50th is commonly accepted as a rough mean ; THOMSON-1862-2,471.32

or , in other words , it is assumed as a result of observation , that
there is , on the whole , about 1@ @=o= Fahr. of elevation of
temperature per 50 British feet of descent . THOMSON-1862-2,471.33

<paren> <font> g. <$$font> <$$paren> The fact that the temperature
increases with the depth implies a continual loss of heat from the
interior , by conduction outwards through or into the upper crust .
THOMSON-1862-2,471.34

Hence , since the upper crust does not become hotter from year to year ,
there must be a secular loss of heat from the whole earth .
THOMSON-1862-2,471.35

It is possible that no cooling may result from this loss of heat , but
only an exhaustion of potential energy , which in this case could
scarcely be other than chemical affinity between substances forming part
of the earth's mass . THOMSON-1862-2,471.36

But it is certain that either the earth is becoming on the whole cooler
from age to age , or the heat conducted out is generated in the interior
by temporary dynamical <paren> that is , in this case , chemical
<$$paren> action . THOMSON-1862-2,471.37

To suppose , as Lyell , adopting the chemical hypothesis , has done ,
that the substances , combining together , may be again separated
electrolytically by thermo-electric currents , due to the heat generated
by their combination , and thus the chemical action and its heat
continued in an endless cycle , violates the principles of natural
philosophy in exactly the same manner , and to the same degree , as to
believe that a clock constructed with a self-winding movement may fulfil
the expectations of its ingenious inventor by going for ever .
THOMSON-1862-2,471.38

<P_472>

<paren> <font> h. <$$font> <$$paren> It must indeed be admitted that
many geological writers of the " Uniformitarian " school , who in other
respects have taken a profoundly philosophical view of their subject ,
have argued in a most fallacious manner against hypotheses of violent
action in past ages . THOMSON-1862-2,472.40

If they had contented themselves with showing that many existing
appearances , although suggestive of extreme violence and sudden change
, may have been brought about by long-continued action , or by paroxysms
not more intense than some of which we have experience within the
periods of human history , their position might have been unassailable ;
THOMSON-1862-2,472.41

and certainly could not have been assailed except by a detailed
discussion of their facts . THOMSON-1862-2,472.42

It would be a very wonderful , but not an absolutely incredible result ,
that volcanic action has never been more violent on the whole than
during the last two or three centuries ; THOMSON-1862-2,472.43

but it is as certain that there is now less volcanic energy in the whole
earth than there was a_thousand years ago , as it is that there is less
gunpowder in a " Monitor " after she has been seen to discharge shot and
shell , whether at a nearly equable rate or not , for five hours without
receiving fresh supplies , than there was at the beginning of the action
. THOMSON-1862-2,472.44

Yet this truth has been ignored or denied by many of the leading
geologists of the present day , because they believe that the facts
within their province do not demonstrate greater violence in ancient
changes of the earth's surface , or do demonstrate a nearly equable
action in all periods . THOMSON-1862-2,472.45

<paren> <font> i. <$$font> <$$paren> The chemical hypothesis to account
for underground heat might be regarded as not improbable , if it was
only in isolated localities that the temperature was found to increase
with the depth ; THOMSON-1862-2,472.46

and , indeed , it can scarcely be doubted that chemical action exercises
an appreciable influence <paren> possibly negative , however <$$paren>
on the action of volcanoes ; THOMSON-1862-2,472.47

but that there is slow uniform " combustion , " <font> eremacausis ,
<$$font> , or chemical combination of any kind going on , at some great
unknown depth under the surface everywhere , and creeping inwards
gradually as the chemical affinities in layer after layer are
successively saturated , seems extremely improbable , although it can@
@not be pronounced to be absolutely impossible , or contrary to all
analogies in nature . THOMSON-1862-2,472.48

The less <P_473> hypothetical view , however , that the earth is merely
a warm chemically inert body cooling , is clearly to be preferred in the
present state of science . THOMSON-1862-2,473.49

<paren> <font> j. <$$font> <$$paren> Poisson's celebrated hypothesis ,
that the present underground heat is due to a passage , at some former
period , of the solar system through hotter stellar regions , can@ @not
provide the circumstances required for a palaeontology continuous
through that epoch of external heat . THOMSON-1862-2,473.50

For from a mean of values of the conductivity , in terms of the thermal
capacity of unit volume , of the earth's crust , in three different
localities near Edinburgh , deduced from the observations on underground
temperature instituted by Principal Forbes there , I find that if the
supposed transit through a hotter region of space took place between
1250 and 5000 years ago , the temperature of that supposed region must
have been from 25@ @=o= to 50@ @=o= Fahr. above the present mean
temperature of the earth's surface , to account for the present general
rate of underground increase of temperature , taken as 1@ @=o= Fahr. in
50 feet downwards . THOMSON-1862-2,473.51

Human history negatives {COM:sic} this supposition .
THOMSON-1862-2,473.52

Again , geologists and astronomers will , I presume , admit that the
earth can@ @not , 20,000 years ago , have been in a region of space 100@
@=o= Fahr. warmer than its present surface . THOMSON-1862-2,473.53

But if the transition from a hot region to a cool region supposed by
Poisson took place more than 20,000 years ago , the excess of
temperature must have been more than 100@ @=o= Fahr. ,
THOMSON-1862-2,473.54

and must therefore have destroyed animal and vegetable life .
THOMSON-1862-2,473.55

Hence , the further back and the hotter we can suppose Poisson's hot
region , the better for the geologists who require the longest periods ;
THOMSON-1862-2,473.56

but the best for their view is Leibnitz's theory , which simply supposes
the earth to have been at one time an incandescent liquid , without
explaining how it got into that state . THOMSON-1862-2,473.57

If we suppose the temperature of melting rock to be about 10,000@ @=o=
Fahr. <paren> an extremely high estimate <$$paren> , the consolidation
may have taken place 200,000,000 years ago . THOMSON-1862-2,473.58

Or , if we suppose the temperature of melting rock to be 7000@ @=o=
Fahr. <paren> which is more nearly what it is generally assumed to be
<$$paren> , we may suppose the consolidation to have taken place
98,000,000 years ago . THOMSON-1862-2,473.59

<paren> <font> k. <$$font> <$$paren> These estimates are founded on the
Fourier solution demonstrated below . THOMSON-1862-2,473.60

The greatest variation we have to make in them , to take into account
the differences in the ratios of conductivities <P_474> to specific
heats of the three Edinburgh rocks , is to reduce them to nearly half ,
or to increase them by rather more than half . THOMSON-1862-2,474.61

A reduction of the Greenwich underground observations recently
communicated to me by Professor Everett of Windsor , Nova Scotia , gives
for the Greenwich rocks a quality intermediate between those of the
Edinburgh rocks . THOMSON-1862-2,474.62

But we are very ignorant as to the effects of high temperatures in
altering the conductivities and specific heats of rocks , and as to
their latent heat of fusion . THOMSON-1862-2,474.63

We must , therefore , allow very wide limits in such an estimate as I
have attempted to make ; THOMSON-1862-2,474.64

but I think we may with much probability say that the consolidation can@
@not have taken place less than 20,000,000 years ago , or we should have
more underground heat than we actually have , nor more than 400,000,000
years ago , or we should not have so much as the least observed
underground increment of temperature . That is to say , I conclude that
Leibnitz's epoch of emergence of the <font> consistentior status
<$$font> was probably between those dates . THOMSON-1862-2,474.65

<paren> <font> l. <$$font> <$$paren> The mathematical theory on which
these estimates are founded is very simple , being , in fact , merely an
application of one of Fourier's elementary solutions to the problem of
finding at any time the rate of variation of temperature from point to
point , and the actual temperature at any point , in a solid extending
to infinity in all directions , on the supposition that at an initial
epoch the temperature has had two different constant values on the two
sides of a certain infinite plane . THOMSON-1862-2,474.66

The solution for the two required elements is as follows : -
{COM:equation_omitted} where <font> K <$$font> denotes the conductivity
of the solid , measured in terms of the thermal capacity of the unity of
bulk ; <font> V , <$$font> half the difference of the two initial
temperatures ; <font> v {COM:subscript_zero} , <$$font> their
arithmetical mean ; <font> t , <$$font> the time ; <font> x , <$$font>
the distance of any point from the middle plane ; <font> v , <$$font>
the temperature of the point <font> x <$$font> and <font> t <$$font> ;
and , consequently <paren> according to the notation of the differential
<P_475> calculus <$$paren> , <font> dv$$dx <$$font> the rate of
variation of the temperature per unit of length perpendicular to the
isothermal planes . THOMSON-1862-2,475.67

<paren> <font> m. <$$font> <$$paren> To demonstrate this solution , it
is sufficient to verify - <paren> 1. <$$paren> That the expression for
<font> v <$$font> satisfies Fourier's equation for the linear conduction
of heat , viz. : {COM:equation_omitted} . <paren> 2. <$$paren> That
when <font> t <$$font> = , the expression for <font> v <$$font> becomes
<font> v <$$font> {COM:subscript_zero} + <font> V <$$font> for all
positive , and <font> v <$$font> {COM:subscript_zero} - <font> V
<$$font> for all negative values of <font> x <$$font> ; and <paren> 3.
<$$paren> That the expression for <font> dv$$dx <$$font> is the
differential coefficient of the expression for <font> v <$$font> with
reference to <font> x <$$font> . THOMSON-1862-2,475.68

The propositions <paren> 1. <$$paren> and <paren> 3. <$$paren> are
proved directly by differentiation . THOMSON-1862-2,475.69

To prove <paren> 2. <$$paren> we have , when <font> t <$$font> = , and
<font> x <$$font> positive {COM:equation_omitted} , or according to the
known value , {COM:term_omitted} of the definite integral
{COM:term_omitted} , {COM:equation_omitted} ; THOMSON-1862-2,475.70

and for all values of <font> t , <$$font> the second term has equal
positive and negative values for equal positive and negative values of
<font> x , <$$font> so that when <font> t <$$font> = and <font> x
<$$font> negative , {COM:equation_omitted} . THOMSON-1862-2,475.71

The admirable analysis by which Fourier arrived at solutions including
this , forms a most interesting and important mathematical study .
THOMSON-1862-2,475.72

It is to be found in his <font> Théorie Analytique de la Chaleur .
<$$font> Paris , 1822 . THOMSON-1862-2,475.73

<paren> <font> n. <$$font> <$$paren> The accompanying diagram <paren>
page 477 <$$paren> represents , by two curves , the preceding
expressions for <font> dv$$dx <$$font> and <font> v <$$font>
respectively . THOMSON-1862-2,475.74

<paren> <font> o. <$$font> <$$paren> The solution thus expressed and
illustrated applies , for a certain time , without sensible error , to
the case of a solid sphere , primitively heated to a uniform temperature
, and suddenly exposed to any superficial action , which for ever after
keeps the surface at some other constant temperature .
THOMSON-1862-2,475.75

If , for instance , the case considered is that of a globe 8000 miles
diameter of solid rock , the solution will apply with scarcely sensible
error for more than 1000 millions of years . THOMSON-1862-2,475.76

For , if the rock be of a certain average quality as to conductivity and
specific heat , the value of <font> K , <$$font> as found in a previous
communication to the Royal <P_476> Society , will be 400 , for unit of
length a British foot and unit of time a year ; THOMSON-1862-2,476.77

and the equation expressing the solution becomes {COM:equation_omitted}
; THOMSON-1862-2,476.78

and if we give <font> t <$$font> the value 1,000,000,000 , or anything
less , the exponential factor becomes less than {COM:term_omitted}
<paren> which being equal to about 1$$210 , may be regarded as
insensible <$$paren> , when <font> x <$$font> exceeds 3,000,000 feet ,
or 568 miles . That is to say , during the first 1000_million years the
variation of temperature does not become sensible at depths exceeding
568 miles , and is therefore confined to so thin a crust , that the
influence of curvature may be neglected . THOMSON-1862-2,476.79

<paren> <font> p. <$$font> <$$paren> If , now , we suppose the time to
be 100_million years from the commencement of the variation , the
equation becomes {COM:equation_omitted} . THOMSON-1862-2,476.80

The diagram , therefore , shows the variation of temperature which would
now exist in the earth if , its whole mass being first solid and at one
temperature 100_million years ago , the temperature of its surface had
been everywhere suddenly lowered by <font> V <$$font> degrees , and kept
permanently at this lower temperature : the scales used being as follows
: THOMSON-1862-2,476.81

- <paren> 1 <$$paren> For depth below the surface , - scale along <font>
OX , <$$font> length <font> a , <$$font> represents 400,000 feet .
THOMSON-1862-2,476.82

<paren> 2 <$$paren> For rate of increase of temperature per foot of
depth , - scale of ordinates parallel to <font> OY , <$$font> length
<font> b , <$$font> represents 1$$354000 of <font> V <$$font> per foot .
THOMSON-1862-2,476.83

If , for example , <font> V <$$font> = 7000@ @=o= Fahr. this scale will
be such that <font> b <$$font> represents 1$$50.6 of a degree Fahr. per
foot . THOMSON-1862-2,476.84

<paren> 3 <$$paren> For excess of temperature , - scale of ordinates
parallel to <font> OY , <$$font> length <font> b , <$$font> represents
{COM:term_omitted} or 7900@ @=o= , if <font> V <$$font> = 7000@ @=o=
Fahr. THOMSON-1862-2,476.85

Thus the rate of increase of temperature from the surface downwards
would be sensibly 1$$51 of a degree per foot for the first 100,000 feet
or so . THOMSON-1862-2,476.86

Below that depth the rate of increase per foot would begin to diminish
sensibly . THOMSON-1862-2,476.87

At 400,000 feet it would have diminished to about 1$$141 of a degree per
foot . THOMSON-1862-2,476.88

At <P_477> {COM:graph_omitted} <P_478> 800,000 feet it would have
diminished to less than 1$$50 of its initial value , - that is to say ,
to less than 1$$2550 of a degree per foot ; and so on , rapidly
diminishing , as shown in the curve . THOMSON-1862-2,477.89

Such is , on the whole , the most probable representation of the earth's
present temperature , at depths of from 100 feet , where the annual
variations cease to be sensible , to 100 miles ; below which the whole
mass , or all except a nucleus cool from the beginning , is <paren>
whether liquid or solid <$$paren> , probably at , or very nearly at ,
the proper melting temperature for the pressure at each depth .
THOMSON-1862-2,477.90

<paren> <font> q. <$$font> <$$paren> The theory indicated above throws
light on the question so often discussed , as to whether terrestrial
heat can have influenced climate through long geological periods ,
THOMSON-1862-2,477.91

and allows us to answer it very decidedly in the negative .
THOMSON-1862-2,477.92

There would be an increment of temperature at the rate of 2@ @=o= Fahr.
per foot downwards near the surface 10,000 years after the beginning of
the cooling , in the case we have supposed . THOMSON-1862-2,477.93

The radiation from earth and atmosphere into space <paren> of which we
have yet no satisfactory absolute measurement <$$paren> would almost
certainly be so rapid in the earth's actual circumstances , as not to
allow a rate of increase of 2@ @=o= Fahr. per foot underground to
augment the temperature of the surface by much more than about 1@ @=o= ;
THOMSON-1862-2,477.94

and hence I infer that the general climate can@ @not be sensibly
affected by conducted heat at any time more than 10,000 years after the
commencement of superficial solidification . THOMSON-1862-2,477.95

No doubt , however , in particular places there might be an elevation of
temperature by thermal springs , or by eruptions of melted lava ,
THOMSON-1862-2,477.96

and everywhere vegetation would , for the first three or four_million
years , if it existed so soon after the epoch of consolidation , be
influenced by the sensibly higher temperature met with by roots
extending a foot or more below the surface . THOMSON-1862-2,477.97

<paren> <font> r. <$$font> <$$paren> Whatever the amount of such
effects is at any one time , it would go on diminishing according to the
inverse proportion of the square roots of the times from the initial
epoch . THOMSON-1862-2,477.98

Thus , if at 10,000 years we have 2@ @=o= per foot of increment below
ground , at {TEXT:At} 40,000 years we should have 1@ @=o= per foot .
THOMSON-1862-2,477.99

At 160,000 years we should have 1$$2@ @=o= per foot .
THOMSON-1862-2,477.100

At 4,000,000 years we should have 1$$10@ @=o= per foot .
THOMSON-1862-2,477.101

At 100,000,000 years we should have 1$$50@ @=o= per foot .
THOMSON-1862-2,477.102

<P_479>

It is therefore probable that for the last 96,000,000 years the rate of
increase of temperature under_ground has gradually diminished from about
1$$10th to about 1$$50th of a degree Fahrenheit per foot , and that the
thickness of the crust through which any stated degree of cooling has
been experienced has in that period gradually increased up to its
present thickness from 1$$5th of that thickness .
THOMSON-1862-2,479.104

Is not this , on the whole , in harmony with geological evidence ,
rightly interpreted ? THOMSON-1862-2,479.105

Do not the vast masses of basalt , the general appearances of
mountain-ranges , the violent distortions and fractures of strata ,
<font> the great prevalence of metamorphic action <$$font> <paren> which
must have taken place at depths of not many miles , if so much <$$paren>
, all agree in demonstrating that the rate of increase of temperature
downwards must have been much more rapid , and in rendering it probable
that volcanic energy , earthquake shocks , and every kind of so-called
plutonic action , have been , on the whole , more abundantly and
violently operative in geological antiquity than in the present age ?
THOMSON-1862-2,479.106

<paren> <font> s. <$$font> <$$paren> But it may be objected to this
application of mathematical theory - <paren> 1 <$$paren> , That the
earth was once all melted , or at least melted all round its surface ,
and can@ @not possibly , or rather can@ @not with any probability , be
supposed to have been ever a uniformly heated solid , 7000@ @=o= Fahr.
warmer than our present surface temperature , as assumed in the
mathematical problem ; and <paren> 2 <$$paren> No natural action could
possibly produce at one instant , and maintain for ever after , a
seven_thousand degrees' lowering of the surface temperature .
THOMSON-1862-2,479.107

Taking the second objection first , I answer it by saying , what I think
can@ @not be denied , that a large mass of melted rock , exposed freely
to our air and sky , will , after it once becomes crusted over , present
in a few hours , or a few days , or at the most a few weeks , a surface
so cool that it can be walked over with impunity .
THOMSON-1862-2,479.108

Hence , after 10,000 years , or , indeed , I may say after a single year
, its condition will be sensibly the same as if the actual lowering of
temperature experienced by the surface had been produced in an instant ,
and maintained constant ever after . THOMSON-1862-2,479.109

I answer the first objection by saying , that if experimenters will find
the latent heat of fusion , and the variations of conductivity and
specific heat of the earth's crust up to its melting point , it will be
easy to modify the solution given above , so as to make it applicable to
the case of a liquid globe gradually solidifying from without inwards ,
in consequence of <P_480> heat conducted through the solid crust to a
cold external medium . THOMSON-1862-2,480.110

In the meantime , we can see that this modification will not make any
considerable change in the resulting temperature of any point in the
crust , unless the latent heat parted with on solidification proves ,
contrary to what we may expect from analogy , to be considerable in
comparison with the heat that an equal mass of the solid yields in
cooling from the temperature of solidification to the superficial
temperature . THOMSON-1862-2,480.111

But , what is more to the purpose , it is to be remarked that the
objection , plausible as it appears , is altogether fallacious , and
that the problem solved above corresponds much more closely , in all
probability , with the actual history of the earth , than does the
modified problem suggested by the objection . THOMSON-1862-2,480.112

The earth , although once all melted , or melted all round its surface ,
did , in all probability , really become a solid at its melting
temperature all through , or all through the outer layer , which had
been melted ; THOMSON-1862-2,480.113

and not until the solidification was thus complete , or nearly so , did
the surface begin to cool . THOMSON-1862-2,480.114

That this is the true view can scarcely be doubted , when the following
arguments are considered . THOMSON-1862-2,480.115

<paren> <font> t. <$$font> <$$paren> In the first place , we shall
assume that at one time the earth consisted of a solid nucleus , covered
all round with a very deep ocean of melted rocks , and left to cool by
radiation into space . THOMSON-1862-2,480.116

This is the condition that would supervene , on a cold body much smaller
than the present earth meeting a great number of cool bodies still
smaller than itself , THOMSON-1862-2,480.117

and is therefore in accordance with what we may regard as a probable
hypothesis regarding the earth's antecedents . THOMSON-1862-2,480.118

It includes , as a particular case , the commoner supposition , that the
earth was once melted throughout , a condition which might result from
the collision of two nearly equal masses . THOMSON-1862-2,480.119

But the evidence which has convinced most geologists that the earth had
a fiery beginning , goes but a very small depth below the surface ,
THOMSON-1862-2,480.120

and affords us absolutely no means of distinguishing between the actual
phenomena , and those which would have resulted from either an entire
globe of liquid rock , or a cool solid nucleus covered with liquid to
any depth exceeding 50 or 100 miles . THOMSON-1862-2,480.121

Hence , irrespectively of any hypothesis as to antecedents from which
the earth's initial fiery condition may have followed by natural causes
, and simply assuming , as rendered probable by geological evidence ,
that there was at one time melted rock all over the surface , we need
not assume the <P_481> depth of this lava ocean to have been more than
50 or 100 miles ; although we need not exclude the supposition of any
greater depth , or of an entire globe of liquid .
THOMSON-1862-2,481.122

<paren> <font> u. <$$font> <$$paren> In the process of refrigeration ,
the fluid must <bracket> as I have remarked regarding the sun , in a
recent article in <font> Macmillan's Magazine <$$font> <paren> March ,
1862 <$$paren> , and regarding the earth's atmosphere , in a
communication to the Literary and Philosophical Society of Manchester
<$$bracket> be brought by convection , to fulfil a definite law of
distribution of temperature which I have called " convective equilibrium
of temperature . " That is to say , the temperatures at different parts
in the interior must <bracket> in any great fluid mass which is kept
well stirred <$$bracket> differ according to the different pressures by
the difference of temperatures which any one portion of the liquid would
present , if given at the temperature and pressure of any part , and
then subjected to variation of pressure , but prevented from losing or
gaining heat . THOMSON-1862-2,481.123

The reason for this is the extreme slowness of true thermal conduction ;
and the consequently preponderating influence of great currents
throughout a continuous fluid mass , in determining the distribution of
temperature through the whole . THOMSON-1862-2,481.124

<paren> <font> v. <$$font> <$$paren> The thermo-dynamic law connecting
temperature and pressure in a fluid mass , not allowed to lose or gain
heat , investigated theoretically , and experimentally verified in the
cases of air and water , by Dr Joule and myself , shows , therefore ,
that the temperature in the liquid will increase from the surface
downwards , if , as is most probably the case , the liquid contracts in
cooling . THOMSON-1862-2,481.125

On the other hand , if the liquid , like water near its <P_482>
freezing-point , expands in cooling , the temperature , according to the
convective and thermo-dynamic laws just stated <paren> sections
{TEXT:two_consecutive_section_symbols} <font> u , v <$$font> <$$paren> ,
would actually be lower at great depths than near the surface , even
although the liquid is cooling from the surface ; THOMSON-1862-2,482.126

but there would be a very thin superficial layer of lighter and cooler
liquid , losing heat by true conduction , until solidification at the
surface would commence . THOMSON-1862-2,482.127

<paren> <font> w. <$$font> <$$paren> Again , according to the
thermo-dynamic law of freezing , investigated by my brother , Professor
James Thomson , and verified by myself experimentally for water , the
temperature of solidification will , at great depths , because of the
great pressure , be higher there than at the surface if the fluid
contracts , or lower than at the surface if it expands , in becoming
solid . THOMSON-1862-2,482.128

<paren> <font> x. <$$font> <$$paren> How the temperature of
solidification , for any pressure , may be related to the corresponding
temperature of fluid convective equilibrium , it is impossible to say ,
without knowledge , which we do not yet possess , regarding the
expansion with heat , and the specific heat of the fluid , and the
change of volume , and the latent heat developed in the transition from
fluid to solid . THOMSON-1862-2,482.129

<paren> <font> y. <$$font> <$$paren> For instance , supposing , as is
most probably true , both that the liquid contracts in cooling towards
its freezing-point , and that it contracts in freezing , we can@ @not
tell , without definite numerical data regarding those elements ,
whether the elevation of the temperature of solidification , or of the
actual temperature of a portion of the fluid given just above its
freezing-point , produced by a given application of pressure is the
greater . THOMSON-1862-2,482.130

If the former is greater than the latter , solidification would commence
at the bottom , or at the centre , if there is no solid nucleus to begin
with , THOMSON-1862-2,482.131

and would proceed outwards ; THOMSON-1862-2,482.132

and there could be no complete permanent incrustation all round the
surface till the whole globe is solid , with , possibly , the exception
of irregular , comparatively small spaces of liquid .
THOMSON-1862-2,482.133

<paren> <font> z. <$$font> <$$paren> If , on the contrary , the
elevation of temperature , produced <P_483> by an application of
pressure to a given portion of the fluid , is greater than the elevation
of the freezing temperature produced by the same amount of pressure ,
the superficial layer of the fluid would be the first to reach its
freezing-point , and the first actually to freeze .
THOMSON-1862-2,483.134

<paren> <font> aa. <$$font> <$$paren> But if , according to the second
supposition of section {TEXT:section_symbol} <font> v , <$$font> the
liquid expanded in cooling near its freezing-point , the solid would
probably likewise be of less specific gravity than the liquid at its
freezing-point . THOMSON-1862-2,483.135

Hence the surface would crust over permanently with a crust of solid ,
constantly increasing inwards by the freezing of the interior fluid in
consequence of heat conducted out through the crust .
THOMSON-1862-2,483.136

The condition most commonly assumed by geologists would thus be produced
. THOMSON-1862-2,483.137

<paren> <font> bb. <$$font> <$$paren> But Bischof's experiments , upon
the validity of which , as far as I am aware , no doubt has ever been
thrown , show that melted granite , slate , and trachyte , all contract
by something about 20 per_cent. in freezing . THOMSON-1862-2,483.138

We ought , indeed , to have more experiments on this most important
point , both to verify Bischof's results on rocks , and to learn how the
case is with iron and other unoxydised metals . THOMSON-1862-2,483.139

In the meantime we must consider it as probable that the melted
substance of the earth did really contract by a very considerable amount
in becoming solid . THOMSON-1862-2,483.140

<paren> <font> cc. <$$font> <$$paren> Hence if , according to any
relations whatever among the complicated physical circumstances
concerned , freezing did really commence at the surface , either all
round or in any part , before the whole globe had become solid , the
solidified superficial layer must have broken up and sunk to the bottom
, or to the centre , before it could have attained a sufficient
thickness to rest stably on the lighter liquid below .
THOMSON-1862-2,483.141

It is quite clear , indeed , that if at any time the earth were in the
condition of a thin solid shell of , let us suppose 50 feet or 100 feet
thick of granite , enclosing a continuous melted mass of 20 per_cent.
less specific gravity in its upper parts , where the pressure is small ,
this condition can@ @not have lasted many minutes .
THOMSON-1862-2,483.142

The rigidity of a solid shell of superficial extent so vast in
comparison with its thickness , must be as nothing ,
THOMSON-1862-2,483.143

and the slightest disturbance would cause some part to bend down , crack
, and allow the liquid to run out over the whole solid .
THOMSON-1862-2,483.144

The crust itself would in consequence become shattered into fragments ,
which must all sink to the bottom , or meet in <P_484> the centre and
form a nucleus there if there is none to begin with .
THOMSON-1862-2,484.145

<paren> <font> dd. <$$font> <$$paren> It is , however , scarcely
possible , that any such continuous crust can ever have formed all over
the melted surface at one time , and afterwards have fallen in .
THOMSON-1862-2,484.146

The mode of solidification conjectured in section {TEXT:section_symbol}
<font> y , <$$font> seems on the whole the most consistent with what we
know of the physical properties of the matter concerned .
THOMSON-1862-2,484.147

So far as regards the result , it agrees , I believe , with the view
adopted as the most probable by Mr Hopkins . THOMSON-1862-2,484.148

But whether from the condition being rather that described in section
{TEXT:section_symbol} <font> z , <$$font> which seems also possible ,
for the whole or for some parts of the heterogeneous substance of the
earth , or from the viscidity as of mortar , which necessarily
supervenes in a melted fluid , composed of ingredients becoming , as the
whole cools , separated by crystallizing at different temperatures
before the solidification is perfect , and which we actually see in lava
from modern volcanoes ; it is probable that when the whole globe , or
some very thick superficial layer of it , still liquid or viscid , has
cooled down to near its temperature of perfect solidification ,
incrustation at the surface must commence . THOMSON-1862-2,484.149

<paren> <font> ee. <$$font> <$$paren> It is probable that crust may
thus form over wide extents of surface , and may be temporarily buoyed
up by the vesicular character it may have retained from the ebullition
of the liquid in some places , or , at all events , it may be held up by
the viscidity of the liquid ; until it has acquired some considerable
thickness sufficient to allow gravity to manifest its claim , and sink
the heavier solid below the lighter liquid . THOMSON-1862-2,484.150

This process must go on until the sunk portions of crust build up from
the bottom a sufficiently close ribbed solid skeleton or frame , to
allow fresh incrustations to remain bridging across the now small areas
of lava pools or lakes . THOMSON-1862-2,484.151

<paren> <font> ff. <$$font> <$$paren> In the honey-combed solid and
liquid mass thus formed , there must be a continual tendency for the
liquid , in consequence of its less specific gravity , to work its way
up ; whether by masses of solid falling from the roofs of vesicles or
tunnels , and causing earthquake shocks , or by the roof breaking quite
through when very thin , so as to cause two such hollows to unite , or
the liquid of <P_485> any of them to flow out freely over the outer
surface of the earth ; or by gradual subsidence of the solid , owing to
the thermodynamic melting , which portions of it , under intense stress
, must experience , according to views recently published by Professor
James Thomson . THOMSON-1862-2,485.152

The results which must follow from this tendency seem sufficiently great
and various to account for all that we see at present , and all that we
learn from geological investigation , of earthquakes , of upheavals ,
and subsidences of solid , and of eruptions of melted rock .
THOMSON-1862-2,485.153

<paren> <font> gg. <$$font> <$$paren> These conclusions , drawn solely
from a consideration of the necessary order of cooling and consolidation
, according to Bischof's result as to the relative specific gravities of
solid and of melted rock , are in perfect accordance with section
{TEXT:section_symbol} 832 ... 848 , regarding the present condition of
the earth's interior , - that it is not , as commonly supposed , all
liquid within a thin solid crust of from 30 to 100 miles thick , but
that it is on the whole more rigid certainly than a continuous solid
globe of glass of the same diameter , and probably than one of steel .
THOMSON-1862-2,485.154

<heading>

<paren> E. <$$paren> On the Age of the Sun's Heat .
THOMSON-1862-2,485.156

<$$heading>

The second great law of Thermodynamics involves a certain principle of
<font> irreversible action in nature . <$$font> THOMSON-1862-2,485.158

It is thus shown that , although mechanical energy is <font>
indestructible , <$$font> there is a universal tendency to its
dissipation , which produces gradual augmentation and diffusion of heat
, cessation of motion , and exhaustion of potential energy through the
material universe . THOMSON-1862-2,485.159

The result would inevitably be a state of universal rest and death , if
the universe were finite and left to obey existing laws .
THOMSON-1862-2,485.160

But it is impossible to conceive a limit to the extent of matter in the
universe ; THOMSON-1862-2,485.161

and therefore science points rather to an endless progress , through an
endless space , of action involving the transformation <P_486> of
potential energy into palpable motion and thence into heat , than to a
single finite mechanism , running down like a clock , and stopping for
ever . THOMSON-1862-2,486.162

It is also impossible to conceive either the beginning or the
continuance of life , without an overruling creative power ;
THOMSON-1862-2,486.163

and , therefore , no conclusions of dynamical science regarding the
future condition of the earth , can be held to give dispiriting views as
to the destiny of the race of intelligent beings by which it is at
present inhabited . THOMSON-1862-2,486.164

The object proposed in the present article is an application of these
general principles to the discovery of probable limits to the periods of
time , past and future , during which the sun can be reckoned on as a
source of heat and light . THOMSON-1862-2,486.165

The subject will be discussed under three heads : - I. The secular
cooling of the sun . II. The present temperature of the sun . III.
The origin and total amount of the sun's heat . THOMSON-1862-2,486.166

<heading>

Part I . THOMSON-1862-2,486.168

On the secular cooling of the sun . THOMSON-1862-2,486.169

<$$heading>

How much the sun is actually cooled from year to year , if at all , we
have no means of ascertaining , or scarcely even of estimating in the
roughest manner . THOMSON-1862-2,486.171

In the first place we do not know that he is losing heat at all .
THOMSON-1862-2,486.172

For it is quite certain that <font> some heat <$$font> is generated in
his atmosphere by the influx of meteoric matter ; THOMSON-1862-2,486.173

and it is possible that the <font> amount <$$font> of heat so generated
from year to year is sufficient to compensate the loss by radiation .
THOMSON-1862-2,486.174

It is , however , also possible that the sun is now an incandescent
liquid mass , radiating away heat , either primitively created in his
substance , or , what seems far more probable , generated by the falling
in of meteors in past times , with no sensible compensation by a
continuance of meteoric action . THOMSON-1862-2,486.175

It has been shown that , if the former supposition were true , the
meteors by which the sun's heat would have been produced during the last
2,000 or 3,000 years must have been during all <P_487> that time much
within the earth's distance from the sun , and must therefore have
approached the central body in very gradual spirals ; because , if
enough of matter to produce the supposed thermal effect fell in from
space outside the earth's orbit , the length of the year would have been
very sensibly shortened by the additions to the sun's mass which must
have been made . THOMSON-1862-2,487.176

The quantity of matter annually falling in must , on that supposition ,
have amounted to 1$$47 of the earth's mass , or to 1$$17,000,000 of the
sun's ; THOMSON-1862-2,487.177

and therefore it would be necessary to suppose the zodiacal light to
amount to at least 1$$5000 of the sun's mass , to account in the same
way for a future supply of 3,000 years' sun-heat .
THOMSON-1862-2,487.178

When these conclusions were first published it was pointed out that "
disturbances in the motions of visible planets " should be looked for ,
as affording us means for estimating the possible amount of matter in
the zodiacal light ; THOMSON-1862-2,487.179

and it was conjectured that it could not be nearly enough to give a
supply of 300,000 years' heat at the present rate .
THOMSON-1862-2,487.180

These anticipations have been to some extent fulfilled in Le Verrier's
great researches on the motion of the planet Mercury , which have
recently given evidence of a sensible influence attributable to matter
circulating as a great number of small planets within his orbit round
the sun . THOMSON-1862-2,487.181

But the amount of matter thus indicated is very small ;
THOMSON-1862-2,487.182

and , therefore , if the meteoric influx taking place at present is
enough to produce any appreciable portion of the heat radiated away , it
must be supposed to be from matter circulating round the sun , within
very short distances of his surface . THOMSON-1862-2,487.183

The density of this meteoric cloud would have to be supposed so great
that comets could scarcely have escaped , as comets actually have
escaped , showing no discoverable effects of resistance , after passing
his surface within a distance equal to 1$$8 of his radius .
THOMSON-1862-2,487.184

All things considered , there seems little probability in the hypothesis
that solar radiation is compensated , to any appreciable degree , by
heat generated by meteors falling in , at present ;
THOMSON-1862-2,487.185

and , as it can be shown that no chemical theory is tenable , it must be
concluded as most probable that the sun is at present merely an
incandescent liquid mass cooling . THOMSON-1862-2,487.186

How much he cools from year to year , becomes therefore a <P_488>
question of very serious import , THOMSON-1862-2,488.187

but it is one which we are at present quite unable to answer .
THOMSON-1862-2,488.188

It is true we have data on which we might plausibly found a probable
estimate , and from which we might deduce , with at first sight
seemingly well_founded confidence , limits , not very wide , within
which the present true rate of the sun's cooling must lie .
THOMSON-1862-2,488.189

For we know , from the independent but concordant investigations of
Herschel and Pouillet , that the sun radiates every year from his whole
surface about 6 x 10=30= <paren>
six_million_million_million_million_million <$$paren> times as much heat
as is sufficient to raise the temperature of 1 lb. of water by 1@ @=o=
Cent. THOMSON-1862-2,488.190

We also have excellent reason for believing that the sun's substance is
very much like the earth's . THOMSON-1862-2,488.191

Stokes's principles of solar and stellar chemistry have been for many
years explained in the University of Glasgow , THOMSON-1862-2,488.192

and it has been taught as a first result that sodium does certainly
exist in the sun's atmosphere , and in the atmospheres of many of the
stars , but that it is not discoverable in others .
THOMSON-1862-2,488.193

The recent application of these principles in the splendid researches of
Bunsen and Kirchhof <paren> who made an independent discovery of
Stokes's theory <$$paren> has demonstrated with equal certainty that
there are iron and manganese , and several of our other known metals ,
in the sun . THOMSON-1862-2,488.194

The specific heat of each of these substances is less than the specific
heat of water , which indeed exceeds that of every other known
terrestrial body , solid or liquid . THOMSON-1862-2,488.195

It might , therefore , at first sight seem probable that the mean
specific heat of the sun's whole substance is less , and very certain
that it can@ @not be much greater , than that of water .
THOMSON-1862-2,488.196

If it were equal to the specific heat of water we should only have to
divide the preceding number <paren> 6 x 10=30= <$$paren> , derived from
Herschel's and Pouillet's observations , by the number of pounds <paren>
4.23 x 10=30= <$$paren> in the sun's mass , to find 1.4@ @=o=
{TEXT:1=o=.4} Cent. for the present annual rate of <P_489> cooling .
THOMSON-1862-2,489.197

It might therefore seem probable that the sun cools more , and almost
certain that he does not cool less , than a centigrade degree and
four-tenths annually . THOMSON-1862-2,489.198

But , if this estimate were well founded , it would be equally just to
assume that the sun's expansibility with heat does not differ greatly
from that of some average terrestrial body . THOMSON-1862-2,489.199

If , for instance , it were the same as that of solid glass , which is
about 1$$40000 of bulk , or 1$$120000 of diameter , per 1@ @=o= Cent.
<paren> and for most terrestrial liquids , especially at high
temperatures , the expansibility is much more <$$paren> , and if the
specific heat were the same as that of liquid water , there would be in
860 years a contraction of one per_cent. on the sun's diameter , which
could scarcely have escaped detection by astronomical observation .
THOMSON-1862-2,489.200

There is , however , a far stronger reason than this for believing that
no such amount of contraction can have taken place , and therefore for
suspecting that the physical circumstances of the sun's mass render the
condition of the substances of which it is composed , as to
expansibility and specific heat , very different from that of the same
substances when experimented on in our terrestrial laboratories .
THOMSON-1862-2,489.201

Mutual gravitation between the different parts of the sun's contracting
mass must do an amount of work , which can@ @not be calculated with
certainty , only because the law of the sun's interior density is not
known . THOMSON-1862-2,489.202

The amount of work performed during a contraction of one-tenth per_cent.
of the diameter , if the density remained uniform through the interior ,
would , as Helmholtz showed , be equal to 20,000 times the mechanical
equivalent of the amount of heat which Pouillet estimated to be radiated
from the sun in a year . THOMSON-1862-2,489.203

But in reality the sun's density must increase very much towards his
centre , and probably in varying proportions , as the temperature
becomes lower and the whole mass contracts . THOMSON-1862-2,489.204

We can@ @not , therefore , say whether the work actually done by mutual
gravitation during a contraction of one-tenth per_cent. of the diameter
, would be <P_490> more or less than the equivalent of 20,000 years'
heat ; THOMSON-1862-2,490.205

but we may regard it as most probably not many times more or less than
this amount . THOMSON-1862-2,490.206

Now , it is in the highest degree improbable that mechanical energy can
in any case increase in a body contracting in virtue of cooling .
THOMSON-1862-2,490.207

It is certain that it really does diminish very notably in every case
hitherto experimented on . THOMSON-1862-2,490.208

It must be supposed , therefore , that the sun always radiates away in
heat something more than the Joule-equivalent of the work done on his
contracting mass , by mutual gravitation of its parts .
THOMSON-1862-2,490.209

Hence , in contracting by one-tenth per_cent. in his diameter , or
three-tenths per_cent. in his bulk , the sun must give out something
either more , or not greatly less , than 20,000 years' heat ;
THOMSON-1862-2,490.210

and thus , even without historical evidence as to the constancy of his
diameter , it seems safe to conclude that no such contraction as that
calculated above one per_cent. in 860 years can have taken place in
reality . THOMSON-1862-2,490.211

It seems , on the contrary , probable that , at the present rate of
radiation , a contraction of one-tenth per_cent. in the sun's diameter
could not take place in much less than 20,000 years , and scarcely
possible that it could take place in less than 8,600 years .
THOMSON-1862-2,490.212

If , then , the mean specific heat of the sun's mass , in its actual
condition , is not more than ten times that of water , the expansibility
in volume must be less than 1$$4000 per 100@ @=o= Cent. , <paren> that
is to say , less than 1$$10 of that of solid glass , <$$paren> which
seems improbable . THOMSON-1862-2,490.213

But although from this consideration we are led to regard it as probable
that the sun's specific heat is considerably more than ten times that of
water <paren> and , therefore , that his mass cools considerably less
than 100@ @=o= in 700 years , a conclusion which , indeed , we could
scarcely avoid on simply geological grounds <$$paren> , the physical
principles we now rest on fail to give us any reason for supposing that
the sun's specific heat is more than 10,000 times that of water ,
because we can@ @not say that his expansibility in volume is probably
more than 1$$400 per 1@ @=o= Cent. THOMSON-1862-2,490.214

And there is , on other grounds , very strong reason for believing that
the specific heat is really much less than 10,000 .
THOMSON-1862-2,490.215

For it is almost certain that the sun's mean temperature is even now as
high as 14,000@ @=o= <P_491> Cent. ; THOMSON-1862-2,491.216

and the greatest quantity of heat that we can explain , with any
probability , to have been by natural causes ever acquired by the sun
<paren> as we shall see in the third part of this article <$$paren> ,
could not have raised his mass at any time to this temperature , unless
his specific heat were less than 10,000 times that of water .
THOMSON-1862-2,491.217

We may therefore consider it as rendered highly probable that the sun's
specific heat is more than ten times , and less than 10,000 times , that
of liquid water . THOMSON-1862-2,491.218

From this it would follow with certainty that his temperature sinks 100@
@=o= Cent. in some time from 700 years to 700,000 years .
THOMSON-1862-2,491.219

<heading>

Part II . THOMSON-1862-2,491.221

On the sun's present temperature . THOMSON-1862-2,491.222

<$$heading>

At his surface the sun's temperature can@ @not , as we have many reasons
for believing , be incomparably higher than temperatures attainable
artificially in our terrestrial laboratories . THOMSON-1862-2,491.224

Among other reasons it may be mentioned that the sun radiates heat ,
from every square foot of his surface , at only about 7,000 horse power
. THOMSON-1862-2,491.225

Coal , burning at a rate of a little less than a pound per two seconds ,
would generate the same amount ; THOMSON-1862-2,491.226

and it is estimated <paren> Rankine , ' Prime Movers , ' p. 285 , Ed.
1859 <$$paren> that , in the furnaces of locomotive engines , coal burns
at from one pound in thirty seconds to one pound in ninety seconds , per
square foot of grate-bars . THOMSON-1862-2,491.227

Hence heat is radiated from the sun at a rate not more than from fifteen
to forty-five times as high as that at which heat is generated on the
grate-bars of a locomotive furnace , per equal areas .
THOMSON-1862-2,491.228

<P_492>

The interior temperature of the sun is probably far higher than that at
his surface , because direct conduction can play no sensible part in the
transference of heat between the inner and outer portions of his mass ,
and there must in virtue of the prodigious convective currents due to
cooling of the outermost portions by radiation into space , be an
approximate <font> convective <$$font> equilibrium of heat throughout
the whole , if the whole is fluid . That is to say , the temperatures ,
at different distances from the centre , must be approximately those
which any portion of the substance , if carried from the centre to the
surface , would acquire by expansion without loss or gain of heat .
THOMSON-1862-2,492.230

<heading>

Part III . THOMSON-1862-2,492.232

On the origin and total amount of the sun's heat .
THOMSON-1862-2,492.233

<$$heading>

The sun being , for reasons referred to above , assumed to be an
incandescent liquid now losing heat , the question naturally occurs ,
How did this heat originate ? THOMSON-1862-2,492.235

It is certain that it can@ @not have existed in the sun through an
infinity of past time , since , as long as it has so existed , it must
have been suffering dissipation , and the finiteness of the sun
precludes the supposition of an infinite primitive store of heat in his
body . THOMSON-1862-2,492.236

The sun must , therefore , either have been created an active source of
heat at some time of not immeasurable antiquity by an over-ruling decree
; THOMSON-1862-2,492.237

or the heat which he has already radiated away , and that which he still
possesses , must have been acquired by a natural process , following
permanently established laws . THOMSON-1862-2,492.238

Without pronouncing the former supposition to be essentially incredible
, we may safely say that it is in the highest degree improbable , if we
can show the latter to be not contradictory to known physical laws .
THOMSON-1862-2,492.239

And we do show this and more , by merely pointing to certain actions ,
going on before us at present , which , if sufficiently abundant at some
past time , must have given the sun heat enough to account for all we
know of his past radiation and present temperature .
THOMSON-1862-2,492.240

It is not necessary at present to enter at length on details regarding
the meteoric theory , which appears to have been first proposed in a
definite form by Mayer , and afterwards independently <P_493> by
Waterston ; or regarding the modified hypothesis of meteoric vortices ,
which the writer of the present article showed to be necessary , in
order that the length of the year , as known for the last 2,000 years ,
may not have been sensibly disturbed by the accessions which the sun's
mass must have had during that period , if the heat radiated away has
been always compensated by heat generated by meteoric influx .
THOMSON-1862-2,493.241

For the reasons mentioned in the first part of the present article , we
may now believe that all theories of complete , or nearly complete ,
contemporaneous meteoric compensation , must be rejected ;
THOMSON-1862-2,493.242

but we may still hold that - <font> " Meteoric action ... is ... not
only proved to exist as a cause of solar heat , but it is the only one
of all conceivable causes which we know to exist from independent
evidence . " <$$font> THOMSON-1862-2,493.243

The form of meteoric theory which now seems most probable , and which
was first discussed on true thermodynamic principles by Helmholtz ,
consists in supposing the sun and his heat to have originated in a
coalition of smaller bodies , falling together by mutual gravitation ,
and generating , as they must do according to the great law demonstrated
by Joule , an exact equivalent of heat for the motion lost in collision
. THOMSON-1862-2,493.244

That some form of the meteoric theory is certainly the true and complete
explanation of solar heat can scarcely be doubted , when the following
reasons are considered : THOMSON-1862-2,493.245

<paren> 1 <$$paren> No other natural explanation , except by chemical
action , can be conceived . THOMSON-1862-2,493.246

<paren> 2 <$$paren> The chemical theory is quite insufficient , because
the most energetic chemical action we know , taking place between
substances amounting to the whole sun's mass , would only generate about
3,000 years' heat . THOMSON-1862-2,493.247

<paren> 3 <$$paren> There is no difficulty in accounting for 20,000,000
years' heat by the meteoric theory . THOMSON-1862-2,493.248

<P_494>

It would extend this article to too great a length , and would require
something of mathematical calculation , to explain fully the principles
on which this last estimate is founded . THOMSON-1862-2,494.250

It is enough to say that bodies , all much smaller than the sun ,
falling together from a state of relative rest , at mutual distances all
large in comparison with their diameters , and forming a globe of
uniform density equal in mass and diameter to the sun , would generate
an amount of heat which , accurately calculated according to Joule's
principles and experimental results , is found to be just 20,000,000
times Pouillet's estimate of the annual amount of solar radiation .
THOMSON-1862-2,494.251

The sun's density must , in all probability , increase very much towards
his centre , THOMSON-1862-2,494.252

and therefore a considerably greater amount of heat than that must be
supposed to have been generated if his whole mass was formed by the
coalition of comparatively small bodies . THOMSON-1862-2,494.253

On the other hand , we do not know how much heat may have been
dissipated by resistance and minor impacts before the final
conglomeration ; THOMSON-1862-2,494.254

but there is reason to believe that even the most rapid conglomeration
that we can conceive to have probably taken place could only leave the
finished globe with about half the entire heat due to the amount of
potential energy of mutual gravitation exhausted .
THOMSON-1862-2,494.255

We may , therefore , accept , as a lowest estimate for the sun's initial
heat , 10,000,000 times a year's supply at present rate , but 50,000,000
or 100,000,000 as possible , in consequence of the sun's greater density
in his central parts . THOMSON-1862-2,494.256

The considerations adduced above , in this paper , regarding the sun's
possible specific heat , rate of cooling , and superficial temperature ,
render it probable that he must have been very sensibly warmer
one_million years ago than now ; and , consequently , that if he has
existed as a luminary for ten or twenty_million years , he must have
radiated away considerably more than ten or twenty_million times the
present yearly amount of loss . THOMSON-1862-2,494.257

It seems , therefore , on the whole most probable that the sun has not
illuminated the earth for 100,000,000 years , and almost certain that he
has not done so for 500,000,000 years . THOMSON-1862-2,494.258

As for the future , we may say , with equal certainty , that inhabitants
of the earth can@ @not continue to enjoy the light and heat essential to
their life , for many million years longer , unless sources now unknown
to us are prepared in the great storehouse of creation .
THOMSON-1862-2,494.259

