<BEGIN_thring-1883-2>

<P_155>

<heading>

Chapter IV . THRING-1883-2,155.4

The Practice of Teaching . THRING-1883-2,155.5

<font> Thought-stamps ; THRING-1883-2,155.6

not Argument . <$$font> THRING-1883-2,155.7

<$$heading>

The teacher preparing for his work has passed by ; THRING-1883-2,155.9

now let his class stand up and give some account of themselves .
THRING-1883-2,155.10

There are four main facts brought out by experience in dealing with the
young mind . THRING-1883-2,155.11

First , the reasoning power of the young , the power , that is , to
follow a logical chain of reasoning , is non-existent .
THRING-1883-2,155.12

Secondly , the young have no power of attention . THRING-1883-2,155.13

Attention has to be learnt as much as any other lesson .
THRING-1883-2,155.14

Thirdly , the memory of the young is very good , if they care for what
they are doing . THRING-1883-2,155.15

Fourthly , there is no power in a young boy to master a subject
thoroughly . THRING-1883-2,155.16

Thoroughness requires a strength which does not exist .
THRING-1883-2,155.17

These four facts , for facts they are , are <P_156> the four first
problems to be dealt with by the teacher . THRING-1883-2,156.18

The complete absence , practically , of the reasoning faculty , so far
as learning by means of it goes , determines at once the whole character
of good teaching at the beginning . THRING-1883-2,156.19

There must be simple statements , and simple explanations .
THRING-1883-2,156.20

The early stages require the new ideas and facts to be put like little
pictures before the pupil , without any attempt to show the mechanism ,
as it were , by which the effect is produced . THRING-1883-2,156.21

Logical progression is out of the horizon . THRING-1883-2,156.22

The all-important factor of the mind to be taught must be the starting
point . THRING-1883-2,156.23

If processes are shown , it must also be , so to say , pictorially , in
some subject already very familiar . THRING-1883-2,156.24

The inside of common things is intensely interesting to the curious
child , THRING-1883-2,156.25

witness the number of toys that have been the victims of scientific
research , and broken , to find out what was inside .
THRING-1883-2,156.26

But then they were toys , thorough property , entirely in the power ,
manual and mental , of the owners . THRING-1883-2,156.27

Wherever there is the feeling of thorough property , there is also the
wish for thorough knowledge , THRING-1883-2,156.28

and the child delights in having the structure of the familiar thing
laid bare . THRING-1883-2,156.29

But even then , much as they like to know all about what is their own ,
the knowledge is a knowledge by sight , not a matter of reasoning .
THRING-1883-2,156.30

This then is the principle of all early work , either eye-sight , or
mental sight . THRING-1883-2,156.31

<P_157>

Either actually show the bit of teaching , which often can be done ;
THRING-1883-2,157.33

or let the bit be a little , plain statement , a kind of stamp , which
the mind can see without trouble . THRING-1883-2,157.34

Trouble enough will come in due time . THRING-1883-2,157.35

This principle requires the teacher to lay aside the fascinating
shapeliness of a clear-cut system , and submit himself to the yoke of
the boy-mind . THRING-1883-2,157.36

Rigid , formulated , square statements , can@ @not find their way with
their corners into the little tortuous windings of the little mind ,
with all its blind mazes , passages that lead to nothing , obstructions
of previous ideas , mobs of small idolatries , idolatries of play ,
idolatries of day-dreams , combined with absolute incapacity to bear the
unyielding thrust of logic in its fine tissues . THRING-1883-2,157.37

The teacher must indeed have a logical plan of his own , which he does
not lose sight of ; THRING-1883-2,157.38

but the actual teaching has to be imparted bit by bit , as the learner
is fitted to take it , with many illustrations , and digressions , which
are not digressions , but round-about ways of arriving at points , where
the direct path is blocked . THRING-1883-2,157.39

A dull boy's mind is a wise man's problem . THRING-1883-2,157.40

Mind is the teacher's real subject ; and how to excite thought , and
arouse interest , without making much demand on the logical faculty ,
the first aspect which the work of mind presents . THRING-1883-2,157.41

Perhaps , considering what is almost universally done , the first rule
to be laid down is a prohibition . THRING-1883-2,157.42

<P_158>

Never try to fill the little mind with lumber , under colour of its
being of use by_and_by . THRING-1883-2,158.44

Lumber does not excite thought , THRING-1883-2,158.45

lumber does not interest , THRING-1883-2,158.46

lumber does breed disgust ; THRING-1883-2,158.47

nothing should be put into the mind which is not wanted immediately ,
and which is not also the easiest way of meeting the want .
THRING-1883-2,158.48

The pupil ought to be made to feel that thought is a pleasure , and a
power ; and that learning means being taught to think by easy steps .
THRING-1883-2,158.49

For example . He knows that the having learnt to read and write has
opened up to him treasures , which he would not now give up ,
THRING-1883-2,158.50

and therefore he can be made to believe that the new tasks , however
distasteful , are going to do the same thing in a still higher degree ,
and land him in unknown empires . THRING-1883-2,158.51

But why should they be so distasteful ? THRING-1883-2,158.52

Thought in its true sense is not distasteful . THRING-1883-2,158.53

When mind enters into the works of mind , and receives life from them ,
the new life is not distasteful . THRING-1883-2,158.54

The whole mighty realm of imagination is thought , whether it be the
imagination , which creates the Midsummer Night's Dream , or the
imagination , which sets the baby child in the nursery on the floor ,
and surrounds it with a living kingdom in the guise of broken toys , and
makes it lisp to a much-battered doll , " You are the Queen . "
THRING-1883-2,158.55

Imagination is not distasteful . THRING-1883-2,158.56

There are plenty of thought-pictures in common things for any one who
knows how to paint them , or , <P_159> better still , make his pupils
paint them . THRING-1883-2,159.57

And thought is the beginning , thought the middle , and thought the end
of a learner's work . THRING-1883-2,159.58

Let not the teacher pile in lumber that is not thought .
THRING-1883-2,159.59

The learner can be made to see without difficulty that new thoughts ,
and the power of receiving thoughts and thinking thoughts , are a gain
and a pleasure in the long run , because he has already found them to be
a pleasure , or ought to have done so . THRING-1883-2,159.60

The next step is easy . THRING-1883-2,159.61

The learner can be made to understand the obvious truth , that language
, and literature are the great exercise ground of thought , and mind ;
inasmuch as all thought passes through language . THRING-1883-2,159.62

Words are the every-day and all-day messengers of common life , as well
as the varied and intelligent expression afterwards of the thoughts of
the greatest thinkers . THRING-1883-2,159.63

There is no reason in the nature of things why the child in the nursery
should not understand , aye , and feel gratefully the meaning of
Teaching ; and be taught through the familiar sights and words the
pleasure of being taught , and led on to work with interest in
collecting new material , and in thinking over what has been collected .
THRING-1883-2,159.64

This truth is not impaired by the fact that much has to be taken on
trust at first , much to be learnt on faith , which can@ @not be fully
explained at the time . THRING-1883-2,159.65

It only means that there are grounds for this faith ; that these grounds
<P_160> should be made plain ; and that as the demands for labour and
patience increase , the faith should increase in proportion , from the
sense experienced daily of an increase in power and pleasure , which a
skilful teacher will unobtrusively keep up . THRING-1883-2,160.66

There is no more reason in the nature of things why a boy should rejoice
in the weak and inactive mind , than in the weak and inactive body .
THRING-1883-2,160.67

If bodily training consisted in carrying heavy stones from one hole to
another , and , as fast as they were thrown in , pulling them out , and
taking them back again , there would be no lack of feeble bodies .
THRING-1883-2,160.68

Every boy would be as weak as a resolute evasion of being employed in
doing nothing laboriously could make him . THRING-1883-2,160.69

How much of child labour in knowledge , falsely so called , is a doing
nothing laboriously , with much solemn jargon , and much real infliction
. THRING-1883-2,160.70

The simple formula , " give a beginner something to think about , " sets
this all straight at once . THRING-1883-2,160.71

Something to think about ! THRING-1883-2,160.72

This can@ @not be a sawn-out board of dry knowledge .
THRING-1883-2,160.73

Something to think about ! THRING-1883-2,160.74

This must be an object of interest , partly understood therefore ,
partly new , familiar , but unknown . THRING-1883-2,160.75

Nature has given this in the learner's native language , and its
treasures of beautiful thought . THRING-1883-2,160.76

Whenever the nations believe in the training of mind being the first
thing , and the heaping up of knowledge the <P_l6l> second , the
language and literature of each nation will be studied first .
THRING-1883-2,l6l.77

The mediaeval process of self-flagellation will be left off , and work
made as easy and delightful as possible , with the absolute certainty
that when the preliminaries are over , the stubborn realities of the
greater achievements of mind and their demands will give plenty of
labour , and plenty of pain , if pain is wanted . THRING-1883-2,l6l.78

The beginner ought to be made to feel that the gain is worth any pain by
the time he is called on to make the sacrifice . THRING-1883-2,l6l.79

This principle excludes all cut-and-dried definitions , packets of rules
, and formulated results . THRING-1883-2,l6l.80

It requires , if such an illustration may be allowed , that the young
should learn natural history and botany in the woods and fields first ,
and not be set down in a Museum to dried specimens , and stuffed animals
, and elaborate classification , till they have learnt the value of a
Museum , and its meaning . THRING-1883-2,l6l.81

There is another subject almost as much within reach as language , which
is entirely neglected as a training subject for mind , though equally
open to all , which demands nicety of hand and eye , great mechanical
skill , and introduces the dullest at once to strange discoveries in
common things , that greatest point of true Education .
THRING-1883-2,l6l.82

It is marvellous that the grand training of Drawing has never taken its
place as a teaching power . THRING-1883-2,l6l.83

The learner is met on the very threshold by the truth <P_162> of truths
, that he has eyes that see not , and hands which can@ @not do his will
. THRING-1883-2,162.84

He finds out that the lines go in a way he knows not , though they are
known . THRING-1883-2,162.85

He looks at a wall , THRING-1883-2,162.86

and sees what he sees , THRING-1883-2,162.87

but is utterly unable to record what he sees ; THRING-1883-2,162.88

all is wrong the moment he begins . THRING-1883-2,162.89

The very chair he sits in is a puzzle of untold difficulty .
THRING-1883-2,162.90

He is brought face to face with that grand fact of the wondrous
perfection of accurate power in the midst of which he has moved
unknowingly , THRING-1883-2,162.91

and he comes in sight of the highest truth that man can attain to , a
perception of his own unconscious ignorance , utter incapacity , and
clumsiness . THRING-1883-2,162.92

A fresh secret leaps out of every leaf , THRING-1883-2,162.93

there is not a pebble which is not turned into a world .
THRING-1883-2,162.94

The transformation which follows immediately the smallest child is made
to Draw , and set to observe the what ? and the why ? in things ,
THRING-1883-2,162.95

and attention turned on to the endless discoveries of ignorance which
are disclosed in this way , is more rapid , and complete perhaps than in
any other exercise of mind . THRING-1883-2,162.96

This is , or may be , the beginning . THRING-1883-2,162.97

Later on the art of composition , that is , of intelligent arrangement
of thought , is more effectually illustrated by a picture , than in any
other way . THRING-1883-2,162.98

It is no concern of this treatise to glorify the painter's skill ;
THRING-1883-2,162.99

but the neglected world of truest teaching , which is waiting to be used
whenever Drawing is taught as a matter <P_163> of mind , not of hand ,
and is recognized as one of the first great exercise grounds of mind ,
does belong to the Teacher's province . THRING-1883-2,163.100

The impossibility of jumbling ideas together in a Drawing without
detection in the first place , and a detection , which can be made plain
to the eye , in the second , is a virtue , which would be very valuable
in much teaching work in language ; THRING-1883-2,163.101

and most important of all , the one vivid impression with everything
leading up to it and back from it , which is the life of a picture , is
the life of a lesson also . THRING-1883-2,163.102

But how often a lesson has nothing pictorial , firm , or unblurred in it
. THRING-1883-2,163.103

Many men pass their days without ever having <font> composed <$$font> a
lesson in their lives . THRING-1883-2,163.104

Their statements are all equally forcible , or equally feeble , as the
case may be . THRING-1883-2,163.105

Faults are knocked about at random , as they occur , without the
slightest attempt to mark some strongly , and to drop others into the
background . THRING-1883-2,163.106

All is on the same level . No definite piece of teaching brought out ,
no high light ; no definite style of blunder unobtrusively stamped out .
THRING-1883-2,163.107

But in Drawing the difference between a true composition and this
chinese-plate work is seen at once ; and the necessity for decision and
skill in arrangement self-evident . THRING-1883-2,163.108

Every good Drawing is a model lesson , in which what has to be taught is
imprinted at once by a single skilful stroke . THRING-1883-2,163.109

And no one knows the skill which has <P_l64> blended so many parts into
one thought-stamp , until the confusion of untrained work is seen .
THRING-1883-2,l64.110

There is no work so untrained as the attempt of a master to uncoil a
chain of reasoning , and put it into the boy mind .
THRING-1883-2,l64.111

Long before the end is reached the beginning has disappeared .
THRING-1883-2,l64.112

Nothing that is not valuable piecemeal is valuable in teaching the young
. THRING-1883-2,l64.113

The best teaching will be like S. Paul's Epistles , where every single
verse is powerful and plain , however subtle or elaborate the argument
of the whole may be . THRING-1883-2,l64.114

Good teaching will at least have each impress powerful and plain , and
be working secretly towards a given end . THRING-1883-2,l64.115

A feeble stroke is useless . THRING-1883-2,l64.116

Too much giving of reasons is worse than useless .
THRING-1883-2,l64.117

A Teacher must be content to omit much , and not be concerned about the
glossiness of his work . THRING-1883-2,l64.118

The mind of a working , vigorous little boy is much like his clothes ,
very untidy , but very serviceable , entirely regardless of every thing
but the object at the moment . THRING-1883-2,l64.119

No doubt order and tidiness are part of the training ;
THRING-1883-2,l64.120

but dress boots wo@ @n't do for turnip fields , or mountains .
THRING-1883-2,l64.121

Strength is needed first . THRING-1883-2,l64.122

Strong ideas are wanted , put forth by an unseen plan .
THRING-1883-2,l64.123

Every good teacher will compose his lessons , and compose them on this
principle . THRING-1883-2,l64.124

Interest must be excited , faith inspired , mind dealt with .
THRING-1883-2,l64.125

<P_165>

<heading>

Chapter V . THRING-1883-2,165.128

The Practice of Teaching . THRING-1883-2,165.129

<font> Inattention , Indifference , Sleep . <$$font>
THRING-1883-2,165.130

<$$heading>

The next fact that has to be dealt with is attention .
THRING-1883-2,165.132

Much misapprehension exists on this head . THRING-1883-2,165.133

Because people are attentive , when strong interest is roused , there is
a common idea that attention is natural , and inattention a culpable
fault . THRING-1883-2,165.134

But the boy mind is much like a frolicking puppy , always in motion ,
restless , but never in the same position two minutes together , when
really awake . THRING-1883-2,165.135

Naturally his body partakes of this unsettled character .
THRING-1883-2,165.136

Attention is a lesson to be learned ; and quite as much a matter of
training as any other lesson . THRING-1883-2,165.137

A teacher will be saved much useless friction if he acknowledges this
fact , and instead of expecting attention , which he will not get ,
starts at once with the intention of teaching <P_166> it ; being well
assured that it would be just as sensible to look for the Latin Grammar
to be spun off the reel by the light of nature , without book , as for
attention to be got without training . THRING-1883-2,166.138

A teacher will treat this as a lesson , and exercise all his skill in
teaching it , and be patient with beginners , and command it by life ,
good humour , and go . THRING-1883-2,166.139

It is curious how entirely in most cases the progress of the lesson
reflects the temper of the master . THRING-1883-2,166.140

If this is true , it is obvious that the personal power of the master in
all bits of small discipline and the general swing of the class , will
decide absolutely in a fair time the habits of the class .
THRING-1883-2,166.141

A sleepy manner , however strong the real interest taken by the master
may be , produces in the taught either laziness and apathy in the lazy ,
or tricks in the puppy section . THRING-1883-2,166.142

It is most disastrous in anything belonging to discipline to overlook
beginnings . THRING-1883-2,166.143

No leak ever broke up a dyke more certainly than trifles passed over
break up the order of a class . THRING-1883-2,166.144

There is however a worse fault still , a fault which is almost universal
; THRING-1883-2,166.145

this is , to legalise insubordination by having a set of small routine
punishments , and imposing them regularly . THRING-1883-2,166.146

This makes a regular crop of the fault ; THRING-1883-2,166.147

and the fault becomes an established institution , THRING-1883-2,166.148

and what began as a bit of carelessness ends by being a tolerated crime
. THRING-1883-2,166.149

Little breaches of order ought to be <P_167> met by the personal
authority of the teacher's Words and influence . THRING-1883-2,167.150

If that is not enough , they should be promptly stamped out by real
severity . THRING-1883-2,167.151

Inattention creeps in at another door . THRING-1883-2,167.152

The operators are apt to forget the class , which is their real work ,
and to be absorbed in the book , and the boy doing it , whilst the rest
are comparatively disregarded . THRING-1883-2,167.153

The rest accordingly are inattentive , THRING-1883-2,167.154

for the operator is teaching them inattention by being inattentive to
them . THRING-1883-2,167.155

They are his main care , THRING-1883-2,167.156

and not to care for them brings its own punishment in not being cared
for . THRING-1883-2,167.157

First one , then another , takes advantage of the absent eye ,
THRING-1883-2,167.158

and disorder begins , THRING-1883-2,167.159

and in spite of spasmodic severity becomes the rule .
THRING-1883-2,167.160

Instant , watchful , if need be , pitiless repression of the first sign
of inattention is the only law of discipline . THRING-1883-2,167.161

Nothing ought to escape a teacher that the boys do ,
THRING-1883-2,167.162

for he is there to train the boys in what they do .
THRING-1883-2,167.163

Querulous complaints of disorder , and the inflicting of heavier , and
heavier punishments , - at intervals , are the sure indication of one
who forgets his duty to the class , and is inattentive to them , whilst
at best he mistakes the lesson for his subject , and at worst is sleepy
, capricious , and incapable himself . THRING-1883-2,167.164

As mind has to be dealt with mind must be there . THRING-1883-2,167.165

And however clever the performer may be , he might as well stand up ,
and solemnly set <P_168> about giving a lesson to the clothes of the
class hanging round the room on pegs , whilst the owners were playing
cricket , as to the so-called class , if the boys are careless , playing
, or noisy . THRING-1883-2,168.166

Culpable inattention in the boys is above all things a master's fault .
THRING-1883-2,168.167

Able , earnest men , who attend to the class , will always find the
class attend to them . THRING-1883-2,168.168

But inattention is not always wilful . THRING-1883-2,168.169

There is an unconscious kind that is very dangerous , though inoffensive
. THRING-1883-2,168.170

Many a good , disappointed boy has been disappointed , because he has
been allowed to blunder on in utter inattention when he thought he was
at work , and no one has ever made plain to him the difference between
sitting over his books , and an eager , intelligent love for the work to
be done . THRING-1883-2,168.171

How to learn ought sometimes to be taught , and delusions about work
done away with . THRING-1883-2,168.172

Sleep is sleep , whether the pillow be Aeschylus , or goose feathers ;
THRING-1883-2,168.173

and sitting in the most sacred chair is not study ; truths lamentably
lost sight of by many a meritorious , mistaken student .
THRING-1883-2,168.174

The state of mind necessary before anything can be done ; the state of
mind necessary whilst anything is being done will not be left out by any
Teacher , who has realised that his subject is mind .
THRING-1883-2,168.175

The toiler and moiler ought to be plainly told , and told again , and
again , the real object in view , and <P_169> the preliminary processes
necessary before any true work is done . THRING-1883-2,169.176

Nothing is more pitiable than the spectacle of a boy spending hours of
self-denial , stupefying himself by groaning over tasks unattended to ,
because he is groaning , and self-tortured ; when all might be spared ,
if anyone had ever given him a lesson on the subject of his own mind ,
and shown him the real purpose of the work he is supposed to be doing ,
and how surely , and quietly it can be done . Whereas a great nightmare
is on his soul , an infinity of unattainable knowledge fills all space
for him . THRING-1883-2,169.177

He is like one who should sit down , and mourn over the size of the
world , as a reason for not using the excellent pair of legs nature has
given him for traversing that portion of it which he has to do with .
THRING-1883-2,169.178

Granted however that the teacher is a teacher , and that the class knows
what it is about , and is not unwilling , mere arrangement has infinite
power for good or evil . THRING-1883-2,169.179

A class ought to sit , or stand , compactly , under the master's eye ,
so that at a glance he can take in all , and they all are in touch with
him . THRING-1883-2,169.180

The moment that from the numbers , or from the structure of the room ,
the master's presence does not pervade the whole body , and make itself
felt everywhere ; if whilst speaking to one he is cut off from the many
, there may be discipline , <P_170> if he is a man of decision ,
THRING-1883-2,170.181

but there will not be attention . THRING-1883-2,170.182

The mechanical necessities of attention have not been complied with ;
THRING-1883-2,170.183

an unreality , a working falsehood , has got into the work ,
THRING-1883-2,170.184

and the work will suffer . THRING-1883-2,170.185

For the same reason , no boy ought ever to sit with his back to the
master , unless he is writing ; in which case the paper he is writing on
, and what he is doing , is in front of the eye . THRING-1883-2,170.186

Still more important , if possible , is attitude .
THRING-1883-2,170.187

Attitude makes false work , as well as betrays false work .
THRING-1883-2,170.188

A competent judge shall tell in a moment by simply looking through the
window where a class is at work , whether good work can be going on
there . THRING-1883-2,170.189

The attitude of the boys will show . THRING-1883-2,170.190

For though there can be true outward observance in some degree without
inward truth , the converse is not possible . THRING-1883-2,170.191

There can@ @not be inward reality without producing an outside
corresponding to it . THRING-1883-2,170.192

It is a law of nature that the mind acts on the body , and makes it
follow any real emotion . THRING-1883-2,170.193

Everyone knows how difficult it is to restrain the outward look of anger
, if angry ; of sorrow , if sorrowful ; and so on , through the whole
range of feeling . THRING-1883-2,170.194

But what is the meaning of this excepting that any reality within of
necessity comes out in a corresponding bodily expression ; and - that
the bodily expression does show the absence of any real feeling , as
well as the presence . THRING-1883-2,170.195

<P_171>

This is a law of nature . THRING-1883-2,171.197

It is equally a law of nature that every outward gesture , or expression
, acts on the mind , and has a tendency to produce the inward feeling .
THRING-1883-2,171.198

Sir Charles Bell in his book on Expression , which every one ought to
read , tells us " It is a fundamental law of our nature that the mind
shall have its powers developed through the influence of the body , "
THRING-1883-2,171.199

and he goes on to say ; " How much influence the instrument of
expression has in first rousing the mind into that state of activity ,
which we call passion or emotion , we may learn from the power of the
body to control these affections . THRING-1883-2,171.200

I have often observed , says Burke , that on mimicking the looks and
gestures of angry , or placid , or frightened , or daring men , I have
involuntarily found my mind turned to that passion , whose appearance I
endeavoured to imitate . " THRING-1883-2,171.201

Here is a fact for consideration , THRING-1883-2,171.202

the outward gesture produced the inward feeling . THRING-1883-2,171.203

A very simple experiment , so simple as to disgust all who want their
prophet to come out and make a show , will convince anyone of the
infinite power of this fact . THRING-1883-2,171.204

There are things called arm-chairs , THRING-1883-2,171.205

an ordinary upholsterer can make them . THRING-1883-2,171.206

Nevertheless let a healthy person , comfortably warm , compose himself
in mystic fashion in their sacred precincts , and shut his eyes ,
THRING-1883-2,171.207

and a very few minutes sometimes will convince others , <P_172> however
much beyond the reach of conviction he may be himself , of the potency
of attitude . THRING-1883-2,172.208

The various ways in which indolent minds maltreat indolent bodies , and
are dullified by them in revenge , are an approach to this somnolence ,
and not calculated to increase the power of coping with difficulties of
learning . THRING-1883-2,172.209

A Teacher will not neglect this great law of nature .
THRING-1883-2,172.210

Few suspect how much the waters of Helicon are contaminated by the slime
which oozes in through this unguarded sluice . THRING-1883-2,172.211

Boys are permitted to stand up to construe with hand in pocket .
THRING-1883-2,172.212

And too often the slouching attitude , the sprawling , and lolling about
, is enough to reveal how little is really being done within , and alas
to prevent more from being done , even though the operator may be
successful in turning out prize winners ; THRING-1883-2,172.213

but as a rule this is not the case . THRING-1883-2,172.214

These are the quarters from which come complaints of the boys , of their
being disorderly and inattentive , of their disregard for authority ,
mixed with bewailings of pains taken in vain , and querulous talking of
throwing pearls before swine , varied by constant punishment , and
invoking of higher authority ; when all the time the operator has been
disregarding laws of nature ; and only had to make his class stand
upright , take their hands out of their pockets , hold up their heads ,
and comport themselves in an intelligent way , like persons eager
<P_173> to learn , instead of young neer-do-weels the first Sunday they
have escaped from the National School . THRING-1883-2,173.215

In some instances it is a good plan to make the boy called up to
construe come to a particular place as a kind of rostrum before he
begins . THRING-1883-2,173.216

It rouses attention , THRING-1883-2,173.217

and gives an idea of the importance of the work . THRING-1883-2,173.218

A system of taking places judiciously worked , and not made too much of
, may be very useful in the lower classes ; THRING-1883-2,173.219

there is a little value in the mere fact of being on the move .
THRING-1883-2,173.220

A better plan still , as far as it goes , since it does not take the
minds of masters , or pupils , off their work , and make the success ,
or failure of individuals so prominent , is the plan of making a first
class , after the boys have been at work two or three weeks , and
promoting and degrading those who deserve it , giving some privileges to
the first class as well as the honour of selection .
THRING-1883-2,173.221

Finally there is another most unfailing hot-bed of inattention , a
perfect invention for growing it , more fertile even than too great
numbers in a class , - the length of time spent in school .
THRING-1883-2,173.222

Pharaoh will have his tale of hours . THRING-1883-2,173.223

And nature will have her perquisites out of them .
THRING-1883-2,173.224

Let any adult , however practised , however zealous , under
five_and_twenty years of age , test himself for just one day , by an
hour-glass , and try and see how long he can continue to keep up his
attention at a stretch over <P_174> the acquiring of new knowledge ,
THRING-1883-2,174.225

and a sad experience will teach him , if he faithfully stops his
hour-glass the moment he relaxes , how ludicrously few are the minutes
during which he is actually hard at work , compared with the time he
believed himself to be spending . THRING-1883-2,174.226

But there is a far more rough and ready , yet sufficient , test of
attention . THRING-1883-2,174.227

Most people hear sermons . THRING-1883-2,174.228

A unanimous verdict will be given that the mind wanders occasionally
even during good sermons , eyelids have been known to droop , and
contemplation to be prodigal of nods , THRING-1883-2,174.229

yea there have been seen gracious men asleep , whose general appearance
scarcely betokened that ill health or exhaustion were the irresistible
causes of their slumber . THRING-1883-2,174.230

There have been dull sermons , THRING-1883-2,174.231

and will be again ; THRING-1883-2,174.232

it will be confessed that the percentage of actual sleep in a dull
sermon is a very appreciable quantity , a visible gauge of the condition
of some of the congregation ; whilst who shall pretend to calculate the
invisible torpor , or wandering of mind . THRING-1883-2,174.233

But it is worth considering that the dullest sermon ever preached is as
the blast of a trumpet compared with misunderstood lessons to a heavy ,
ignorant boy , who has no belief in education , no knowledge of its aims
or value , no confidence that he can get it even if it is worth having ,
and is only alive to the fact that he knows nothing , and hates it all .
THRING-1883-2,174.234

There <P_175> have been also dull operators in school , as well as dull
preachers in Church . THRING-1883-2,175.235

How can attention be secured under such circumstances ?
THRING-1883-2,175.236

Here then is a real problem . THRING-1883-2,175.237

There is natural waste also , a kind of leakage always going on , which
must be taken into account in fixing the times for study .
THRING-1883-2,175.238

The problem is very real . THRING-1883-2,175.239

If the times are too long , inattention is bred as in a hot-bed .
THRING-1883-2,175.240

If the times are not long enough the idle boys do nothing .
THRING-1883-2,175.241

Time to soak , so to say , as well as time to dip , is required .
THRING-1883-2,175.242

Natural incapacity forbids the crowding much into a small space .
THRING-1883-2,175.243

Strength , and energy , and training must be there before this can be
done . THRING-1883-2,175.244

And they are not there ; THRING-1883-2,175.245

they have , if possible , to be produced . THRING-1883-2,175.246

The pressure of external opinion , which judges by externals , generally
demands much too long a period of compulsory attendance .
THRING-1883-2,175.247

This form of difficulty can be met sometimes by allowing the class to go
out for ten minutes in fine weather , and ventilating the room , and
their brains . THRING-1883-2,175.248

Preparation of the lessons out of school , or , if in school , in a less
formal way , corrects in some degree this constraint .
THRING-1883-2,175.249

If Pharaoh still insists on too long school hours , and relief is
impossible in the matter of time and place , then graduation of the
subjects , beginning with the hardest , and ending with pleasanter tasks
, English <P_176> poetry , for instance , is the only refuge left .
THRING-1883-2,176.250

Indeed this graduation always ought to be pressed into service .
THRING-1883-2,176.251

Apparently , three quarters of an hour is the longest time that an
average class can be kept at work on the same subject by a master , with
advantage . THRING-1883-2,176.252

It will have been plain from these few remarks , first , that attention
has to be taught , and does not come by the light of nature ; secondly
that there is a common-sense science of the physical and mechanical
conditions necessary to secure attention ; and lastly , and most of all
, that attention rises or falls in the barometer in proportion to the
master's ability . THRING-1883-2,176.253

Inattention is a master's sin . THRING-1883-2,176.254

It is a weed which above all others grows on badly farmed ground .
THRING-1883-2,176.255

<P_177>

<heading>

Chapter VI . THRING-1883-2,177.258

The Practice of Teaching . THRING-1883-2,177.259

<font> Memory . THRING-1883-2,177.260

Feed it . <$$font> THRING-1883-2,177.261

<$$heading>

Memory next claims notice as the most powerful quality in the young .
THRING-1883-2,177.263

Every advantage ought to be taken of this to interest them , to fill
them with precious freightage , and new wonders , and material of the
best kind . THRING-1883-2,177.264

They ought never to be loaded , like the donkey , with salt , a heavy
weight all along the road , but which melts away , and leaves an empty
sack the first river that has to be crossed . THRING-1883-2,177.265

By memory is meant that strange carrying power , of which all partake ,
and which some have to a marvellous degree , by which the owner receives
and stores up , in many instances with no effort , whatever comes within
reach . THRING-1883-2,177.266

It is a natural gift , born with the possessor , and in no way dependent
on his intelligent appreciation in the beginning .
THRING-1883-2,177.267

It is a mere cart power which holds whatever is <P_178> thrown into it ,
even nonsense which jingles , mere sounds which run with any cadence ,
THRING-1883-2,178.268

and in fact is the faculty of an elaborate parrot catching sounds , and
by no means tied down to understanding . THRING-1883-2,178.269

This early faculty is entirely distinct from the power acquired
afterwards of fixing in the mind by conscious effort , and strong
interest , that which is judged worthy of being fixed .
THRING-1883-2,178.270

Memory in this first sense is an instinct of the young ,
THRING-1883-2,178.271

and often passes away in that shape as the owner grows older . Whereas
the strong impressions , by which the attentive mind stamps indelibly
what it wishes to retain , are the result of an effort ; and the
necessity for that effort , and the power of making it , are the result
of teaching , and can be definitely taught ; THRING-1883-2,178.272

the two are distinct . THRING-1883-2,178.273

The natural gift is now under consideration . THRING-1883-2,178.274

And the fact that the young are pre-eminently endowed with this natural
gift is most important in educating the young . THRING-1883-2,178.275

It simply amounts to this , that whilst the young are almost devoid of
any power of connected reasoning , they are superlatively endowed with
the power of receiving and collecting materials . THRING-1883-2,178.276

The child has memory in childhood , reasoning power in manhood as his
main life functions ; like the frog , which breathes through gills in
early life , and attains to lungs in its respectable years of discretion
. THRING-1883-2,178.277

Nature <P_179> prescribes accordingly that the main business of the
young is to collect material ; a business which the infinite novelty of
the new world not a little contributes to enliven .
THRING-1883-2,179.278

This determines the first great axiom , or what ought to be the first
great axiom of early teaching ; open Fairyland . THRING-1883-2,179.279

Endeavour to delight , interest , fascinate the child by judiciously
supplying melodious sounds , splendid imagery , touching narratives ,
noble adventure , noble endurance , noble sufferings .
THRING-1883-2,179.280

There is a fearful theory born and bred in the quagmires of
Marsh-dunce-land , that nothing is learning , unless it is disagreeable
, or worth having , unless it is difficult . As if the value of a
building consisted in the number of the bricks which built it .
THRING-1883-2,179.281

Thus the high beauty of the Waverley novels , the winsome charm of
ballads , the music of lyric poetry , the glorious metrical romances of
Scott , the holy organ tones of immortal song , are not considered to be
training because they delight . THRING-1883-2,179.282

But the world is large enough to tire the strongest .
THRING-1883-2,179.283

The more difficulties are removed , the farther the wayfarer can get .
THRING-1883-2,179.284

There is no fear that a too easy progress will ever do away with the
need of labour . THRING-1883-2,179.285

The path wants to be smoothed not roughened . THRING-1883-2,179.286

Would that a law could be passed , that no child should be taught any
language but its own , as a study , before ten years old .
THRING-1883-2,179.287

But then another law would have to be passed , that <P_180> no teacher
should teach , who could not make the pupils frame their own grammar
rules , by leading them to see that every necessity of grammar is but
common sense applied to words . THRING-1883-2,180.288

And a third law would be wanted to manufacture a supply of such teachers
at once . THRING-1883-2,180.289

Many other legislative feats would also be required before the
possibility of doing work so intelligent could begin .
THRING-1883-2,180.290

Here too , as in so many other cases , the finding easier ways of doing
work only means enabling a far higher standard to be reached in the
infinity of work to be done . THRING-1883-2,180.291

Even if it were otherwise , there is no danger that the path shall be
all flowers , and the demand on work cease for many a year ; and no
danger that an idle swallowing of pleasant surface literature , which is
no more sustenance than tartlets are beef , should take the place of
honest food . THRING-1883-2,180.292

The risks are all the other way ; THRING-1883-2,180.293

either lumps of rules to be of use by_and_by , or a thin paring of
Manuals , is the diet with which the stomachs of the young are loaded .
THRING-1883-2,180.294

By all means let there be work . THRING-1883-2,180.295

Careful selection of what has to be taken in and remembered is all that
is pleaded for . THRING-1883-2,180.296

Neither is the fact lost sight of that there is a grand capacity in the
youthful memory of accumulating with little effort , mere sounds ,
without understanding . THRING-1883-2,180.297

This prescribes that the most useful drudgery should be got through
early . THRING-1883-2,180.298

And it may fairly be said , that <P_181> if under present circumstances
this was interpreted to mean that an absolutely infallible accuracy of
declensions and conjugations was acquired , years of after toil would be
saved , and in many instances lifelong incapacity be turned into healthy
activity of mind . THRING-1883-2,181.299

No tongue can tell the hopeless state of muddle which is produced by
scrambling into the word-quagmire without a single bit of solid
knowledge to rest the sole of the foot on . THRING-1883-2,181.300

Nature therefore in giving the young a youthful memory lays down its own
laws , if any one would heed them . THRING-1883-2,181.301

First fill the great receptacle with everything that inspirits , and
interests , all treasures of melodious verse , all thrilling narrative
of daring deeds , all simple pathos of touching endurance , mingled with
the weird , wild truths of the wonders of the animal and physical world
. THRING-1883-2,181.302

And secondly , all drudgery necessary to be known , which is not better
learned in the practising it , word-forms , and everything belonging to
word-forms and their meaning , may well be stored up at once .
THRING-1883-2,181.303

But rules , and technical terms , should be avoided as much as possible
. THRING-1883-2,181.304

They pass for understanding without being understood ;
THRING-1883-2,181.305

and not unfrequently are the cause of all the entanglement of after
years ; when the stock names are answered to the stock questions ;
THRING-1883-2,181.306

and oftentimes neither teacher nor learner have the least idea of the
real purport of the words they use so glibly . THRING-1883-2,181.307

<P_182>

It is easy to learn books of rules , and never apply them .
THRING-1883-2,182.309

It is easy to answer them correctly and be quite ignorant why the answer
is correct . THRING-1883-2,182.310

Rules are the refuge of the brainless ; and the instrument of those who
have to produce some show without the time or machinery necessary for
true work . THRING-1883-2,182.311

This is bad enough , THRING-1883-2,182.312

but there is worse behind . THRING-1883-2,182.313

Bad repetition . THRING-1883-2,182.314

Bad repetition is grown as a regular crop by a well-calculated system of
cultivation in many instances . THRING-1883-2,182.315

Nothing is more common than the setting lessons too long to be
thoroughly learnt in the time allowed . THRING-1883-2,182.316

This is worse than lost time . THRING-1883-2,182.317

Experience shows that two different kinds of maimed power result from
this , each according to the kind of victim . THRING-1883-2,182.318

The slow , clumsy learner settles down into a heavy persistency that he
can@ @not learn , and that it is no use trying to do so . Which is
indeed only too true as long as a dull , unhelping hand above forces the
yoke down on a dull , repugnant mind below . THRING-1883-2,182.319

This process turns out the unbelievers in culture , the carnivorous
stags . THRING-1883-2,182.320

But the quick , clever wits acquire a fatal facility of quickly catching
up the task at the time , and forgetting it as quickly , to the
permanent injury of steady , retentive grasp . THRING-1883-2,182.321

But there is worse still behind . THRING-1883-2,182.322

Many operators allow nonsense to be repeated ; THRING-1883-2,182.323

in other words , they first permit the pupil to neglect the great fact
that <P_183> the sense is the strongest hook to fasten the words on to
the mind , and also the only thing worth fastening on ;
THRING-1883-2,183.324

and secondly , let him go off with innumerable errors fixed in his mind
instead of knowledge , as far as anything is fixed .
THRING-1883-2,183.325

Inaccuracy in fact is taught as a lesson . THRING-1883-2,183.326

How few apparently have any idea of instructing their pupils how to
learn . THRING-1883-2,183.327

The metre is neglected . THRING-1883-2,183.328

In other words , that rhythmical measure , which makes the melody of
poetry , and causes it to be easier to learn than prose , is allowed to
go for nothing . THRING-1883-2,183.329

Here again not mere forgetfulness is the evil , THRING-1883-2,183.330

but inaccuracy is taught as a lesson . THRING-1883-2,183.331

Then even the correct words are mumbled in such a fashion that it
matters little whether they are correct or not ; THRING-1883-2,183.332

all the life is gone out of them . THRING-1883-2,183.333

Indifference is taught as a lesson . THRING-1883-2,183.334

Yet these points are points of teaching , THRING-1883-2,183.335

and belong to a teacher . THRING-1883-2,183.336

Forgetfulness would be a light evil ; THRING-1883-2,183.337

but unmetrical , slipshod nonsense , full of words mangled ,
mispronounced , ungrammatical , mere dead lumps , shapeless , and vile ,
all this is poured into the memory , to reappear again , and again , any
number of times , in idiotic mistakes , and to form a ruinous habit of
never having accurate knowledge in anything . THRING-1883-2,183.338

No ! forgetfulness is a blessing , when inaccuracy is taught as a
lesson . THRING-1883-2,183.339

Happy would many teachers be , if the pupils they receive did forget .
THRING-1883-2,183.340

Forgetfulness is a blessing when inaccuracy <P_184> is taught as a
lesson , as it must be when too much is required to be learnt .
THRING-1883-2,184.341

The last point of those mentioned as belonging to the minds to be dealt
with is the demand for thoroughness . THRING-1883-2,184.342

This properly falls under the main head of the powers of reasoning , and
how far they are to be found in the young ; THRING-1883-2,184.343

but is so pretentious , and so frequently put forward , that a little
special notice given to it will not be out of place .
THRING-1883-2,184.344

There is something so wise , so unanswerable , in the modest , yet firm
requirement that the lessons must be done thoroughly , and a boy not
advance till he has mastered what he is doing , that the request
commands assent at once ; THRING-1883-2,184.345

there is also so real a truth underlying the dictum that the fallacy
involved in it easily escapes notice . THRING-1883-2,184.346

The fallacy is , - it can@ @not be done . THRING-1883-2,184.347

There is no power in the minds of the young to master a subject
thoroughly . THRING-1883-2,184.348

Thorough mastery is the perfection of trained skill ,
THRING-1883-2,184.349

and it is absurd to demand the perfection of trained skill from the
untrained beginner . THRING-1883-2,184.350

The map-work which transfers to the mind a complete plan of the country
belongs to men ; THRING-1883-2,184.351

it is enough , and more than enough , if the boy can find his way about
fairly well , and appreciate the landscape . THRING-1883-2,184.352

Any attempt to linger too long over the same work will only end in
weariness , and deadening the interest . THRING-1883-2,184.353

Words and work , when stale , become to the young mere empty sounds ,
<P_185> meaningless rote-work . THRING-1883-2,185.354

There must be change . THRING-1883-2,185.355

Looseness indeed is fatal . THRING-1883-2,185.356

What is known ought to be known with exactness ; THRING-1883-2,185.357

but a gap is no harm , unless it is in the middle of the main highway .
THRING-1883-2,185.358

Monotony is the greatest enemy a teacher has to deal with .
THRING-1883-2,185.359

There is much danger , where all is new , as it is with beginners , lest
a boy find a dead level without landmarks to guide .
THRING-1883-2,185.360

Where all is new , all can@ @not be mastered , THRING-1883-2,185.361

and in the first confusion , unless he moves on , there is nothing to
show what is intended to be done , or where he is to go .
THRING-1883-2,185.362

This perplexity is much increased very often by indiscriminate
fault-finding , which instead of marking a distinct narrow path through
the thicket , mixes up great and little , stumbling in the way , and
wandering off the way , errors of ignorance , and errors of laziness ,
non-work and bad work , mental peccadilloes , and mental crimes , in one
inextricable tangle from which there is no escape , because there is no
clear idea whatever given to the boy mind of anything . Whereas though
thoroughness is impossible , and there is far too much novelty to be
mapped out , there is no impossibility whatever in marking , pioneer
fashion , a track on which a boy shall feel perfectly safe .
THRING-1883-2,185.363

This feeling of perfect safety is the one thing no bad teacher dreams of
giving , and which every good teacher makes it the first business of his
life to try to impart . THRING-1883-2,185.364

Again , <P_186> many difficulties in learning can@ @not be mastered by
standing still over them ; THRING-1883-2,186.365

they can only be got rid of by movement . THRING-1883-2,186.366

They are like what happens to the traveller . THRING-1883-2,186.367

In the valley , on the low ground , the fog reigns ,
THRING-1883-2,186.368

and as long as the traveller stops in the valley , will continue to
reign , not to be wrestled with , or overcome ; THRING-1883-2,186.369

but let him move up , and move up , THRING-1883-2,186.370

and by degrees mere movement brings him into a clearer atmosphere ,
THRING-1883-2,186.371

the mist vanishes away , THRING-1883-2,186.372

and at the top of the hill the whole great landscape in all its beauty
is clear , THRING-1883-2,186.373

and the little hollows with their fog are mere specks , even if they
still are there . THRING-1883-2,186.374

So it is with the boy mind , THRING-1883-2,186.375

never let it stay too long in the hollows . THRING-1883-2,186.376

Movement is absolutely necessary , THRING-1883-2,186.377

at the same time the back work ought to be incessantly kept up by a
small portion of time being devoted weekly to foundation work .
THRING-1883-2,186.378

And the teachers throughout a School ought to have an Index
Expurgatorius of faults to be stamped out ; each class keeping in
communication with the one above , and below it , so as to waste no
labour , and to be aware what the idler boys ought to know .
THRING-1883-2,186.379

Extreme accuracy in the structure of common sentences , and the forms of
common words , ought to be universal . THRING-1883-2,186.380

No good teacher allows any shortcoming here . THRING-1883-2,186.381

But thoroughness in the ordinary sense of the word is impossible by the
laws of nature . THRING-1883-2,186.382

<P_187>

<heading>

Chapter VII . THRING-1883-2,187.385

Practice of Teaching . THRING-1883-2,187.386

<font> The Blurred Chromograph . THRING-1883-2,187.387

Sham Mistakes . THRING-1883-2,187.388

Snores . THRING-1883-2,187.389

Lunatic Mistakes . THRING-1883-2,187.390

No Answers . <$$font> THRING-1883-2,187.391

<$$heading>

The actual teaching comes next . THRING-1883-2,187.393

No words can exaggerate the importance of the first rule to be laid down
. THRING-1883-2,187.394

The observance of it would revolutionise the whole world of tuition .
THRING-1883-2,187.395

It is so simple that it can be observed . So simple , that few observe
it . So simple , that those who want talk , and will do anything , and
undergo anything rather than think , and act , will scorn to observe it
. THRING-1883-2,187.396

Many boys , who all their lives long know nothing because of early
tangle , would know . THRING-1883-2,187.397

All would save half their time . THRING-1883-2,187.398

What then is this talisman , this Columbus's egg , this simple magic and
magic simplicity , this <P_188> Aladdin's lamp , which is to whisk
everything into place , and create half a lifetime for all ?
THRING-1883-2,188.399

- Articulation . THRING-1883-2,188.400

- Nothing more than a rigid , absolute unfailing exacting of articulate
speech , and the pronouncing the final syllable of each word firmly ,
distinctly , and unmistakeably . THRING-1883-2,188.401

The full force of this statement is not seen at once .
THRING-1883-2,188.402

It has been proved that accuracy is the first , and main object of
training , both the power of accurate observation , and the power of
reproducing accurately what has been observed . THRING-1883-2,188.403

It has been proved also that one of the main advantages of an unspoken
language as an instrument of training consists in the number of
inflected forms , the changes , that is , in the final syllables .
THRING-1883-2,188.404

The orderly multitude of small word-labels , all calling for intelligent
observation , is that property of language which makes language in the
first instance such a valuable drill-master , apart from any other
consideration . THRING-1883-2,188.405

Every one has seen an imperfect chromograph . THRING-1883-2,188.406

Let us suppose for a moment a chromograph of a book in which every final
syllable was left out , or blurred , and this too in a foreign language
. THRING-1883-2,188.407

What would be the value of that copy to a learner with its pages full of
words cut in half ? THRING-1883-2,188.408

Precisely the same value , that inarticulately spoken lessons are to the
miserable victim , who is permitted to drop , or blur his final
syllables . THRING-1883-2,188.409

Add to <P_189> this that the human chromograph possesses the unenviable
faculty of filling in all the blurred or dropped portions incorrectly at
will , and so of keeping and cherishing not a merciful blank , but a
most cruel torment of endless mistakes . THRING-1883-2,189.410

And all this ruinous downward training is the necessary result of
inarticulate speech , and the not sounding the final syllables .
THRING-1883-2,189.411

A habit is formed of confusion and indecision . THRING-1883-2,189.412

Confusion and indecision breed constant disappointment , in a
hard-working boy especially ; THRING-1883-2,189.413

inaccuracy in time settles down into a conviction that nothing is
certain or fixed , or , at least , that he can@ @not by any possibility
arrive at it . THRING-1883-2,189.414

And this in later life leads to all those sloppy theories and careless
confident judgments which fill the air ; THRING-1883-2,189.415

and finally ends in utter and general unbelief in any one being really
master of his subject ; with the fitting corollary , that if no one is
master of his subject , any one is at liberty to express his own views
on it ; and the judgment of the skilled workman is of no more account
than the babble of the after-dinner talker . THRING-1883-2,189.416

Nothing is a more striking sign of the rotten state of education than
the absolute non-existence of any respect for the judgment of the
skilled workman in his own line , whatever that line may be .
THRING-1883-2,189.417

Only lawyers are exempt from this irony of being handled by the amateur
! THRING-1883-2,189.418

The evil of inarticulate speech has much <P_190> to do with this , by
destroying in the great majority the sense of precision .
THRING-1883-2,190.419

But to return to the learner at his task . THRING-1883-2,190.420

The pupil in language might be defined in his early stages as one whose
business it is to stamp on his memory the last syllable of words .
THRING-1883-2,190.421

Therefore he is allowed never to pronounce one of them distinctly .
THRING-1883-2,190.422

The blurred chromograph sprawls over his whole mental tablet , with an
ever increasing family of mistakes , till at last in hopeless
bewilderment he dubs himself utterly stupid , gives up the struggle and
leaves off trying to get on , accusing his poor calumniated mind , when
all the time the only culprit is his tongue , and the teacher , who has
not taught him how to use his tongue properly . THRING-1883-2,190.423

If articulate speech is really taught , and the accurate attention
necessary for articulate speech is the habit of the room , then the next
step is natural and easy . THRING-1883-2,190.424

Accuracy demands that the right thing should be known , and , if known ,
said at once . THRING-1883-2,190.425

Therefore - never allow a boy to correct himself . That is , inflict at
once whatever penalty the mistake carries with it without fail ,
THRING-1883-2,190.426

and then , and not till then , make the offender mend his ways .
THRING-1883-2,190.427

Or , at least , impose silence until your questions have exposed the
blunder . THRING-1883-2,190.428

There is a vast army of mistakes , which are no mistakes at all in the
sense of being wrong mistaken for right . THRING-1883-2,190.429

They <P_191> are merely the loose snores of the unwaked mind ; when the
construer , or answerer , knows perfectly well , as well as his master
does , the actual bit of knowledge to be produced , but has been
permitted again , and again , to spit out what came uppermost , and - to
correct it . THRING-1883-2,191.430

He has not made an intelligent mistake , THRING-1883-2,191.431

he has not even made an idle , unintelligent mistake ,
THRING-1883-2,191.432

he has simply snored , emitted an unthought_of sound out of a drowsy
cavern of non-life . THRING-1883-2,191.433

It is no mistake at all ; as he proves the next moment , and very often
will admit , by correcting it promptly and with ease .
THRING-1883-2,191.434

No correction ought ever to be allowed to avert blame , or penalty .
THRING-1883-2,191.435

This rule does not interfere with that most useful of all minor
inflictions , the pushing an idle , careless boy through the bit he is
maltreating , forcing him to flounder on , to sprawl about , to take
every word , and render each , as he takes them , however absurdly , in
all the hideous deformity of words unknown , grammar defied , and sense
nowhere ; and then when he has finished , reading out the result .
THRING-1883-2,191.436

There is no worse fault in teacher or taught than not keeping close to
the work , and working with certainty . THRING-1883-2,191.437

Real mistakes are one thing . THRING-1883-2,191.438

Sham mistakes are another . THRING-1883-2,191.439

And the learners ought to have the distinction sharply and strongly cut
across their minds . THRING-1883-2,191.440

A boy ought to be made to see always that what he <font> can <$$font> do
he <font> shall <$$font> <P_192> do . THRING-1883-2,192.441

Faults of ignorance are very real , THRING-1883-2,192.442

and faults of idleness are very real , THRING-1883-2,192.443

but at any given moment there may be great difficulty , nay ,
impossibility , of judging whether any blame or punishment is deserved
by the guilty , but unfortunate creature , who has made them .
THRING-1883-2,192.444

But sham mistakes admit of no such doubt ; THRING-1883-2,192.445

they are unpardonable ; THRING-1883-2,192.446

and if every teacher agreed in never allowing this preventible crime ;
never allowing a correction ; never allowing these senseless snores to
pass ; a great revolution would be effected . THRING-1883-2,192.447

It is not the knowledge of the miserable Tense , or Case , that is the
question , but the slackness of mind that is so deadly , the trained
activity that is at stake . THRING-1883-2,192.448

Sham mistakes should be exterminated promptly . THRING-1883-2,192.449

They are mere vacuity , total absence of training and thought .
THRING-1883-2,192.450

There are many varieties of the sham mistake . THRING-1883-2,192.451

Guessing pure and simple is akin to this absence of thought .
THRING-1883-2,192.452

The snorer and the guesser are twins . THRING-1883-2,192.453

" Both thrive under bad teaching . " THRING-1883-2,192.454

" Common mistakes , " writes one , " are those due to wild guessing .
THRING-1883-2,192.455

A boy takes a shot , as the question goes by , on the chance of getting
up . THRING-1883-2,192.456

Hence a verb may have twenty different Perfects and Supines given it as
it goes down the class . " THRING-1883-2,192.457

What a graphic picture ! THRING-1883-2,192.458

Twenty boys with necks outstretched , eagerly gasping at their chances
of making mistakes - in order to be promoted , THRING-1883-2,192.459

and - <P_193> the serene power in the clouds above permitting it .
THRING-1883-2,193.460

This is only too faithful a sketch of what is done , and ought not to be
done . THRING-1883-2,193.461

The artist has depicted with fidelity , from the life , the native
simplicity of English teaching . THRING-1883-2,193.462

But the guesser can easily be brought to book . THRING-1883-2,193.463

Let him be told to look steadily at the questioner , and be asked , what
boy , or tree , or picture , or whatever may be there , inside or
outside the room , is behind his back ; and be bantered when he can@
@not tell , and be bid guess , and laughed at for not guessing , and
when he has been made sufficiently uncomfortable , be shown how utterly
idiotic it is to make a guess at what he knows nothing about , with the
range of the whole world for his guesses to disport in , when he can@
@not even guess what is close to him , and one of the few things that
can be near him . THRING-1883-2,193.464

Next there is a distinct class of sham mistakes which may be called
lunatic mistakes . THRING-1883-2,193.465

The following dialogue will explain what is meant .
THRING-1883-2,193.466

A bit of stray nonsense is turned loose by a boy .
THRING-1883-2,193.467

<font> Master . <$$font> Are you deaf ? THRING-1883-2,193.468

<font> Boy . <$$font> No . THRING-1883-2,193.469

<font> M. <$$font> Are you blind ? THRING-1883-2,193.470

<font> B. <$$font> No . THRING-1883-2,193.471

<font> M. <$$font> An idiot ? THRING-1883-2,193.472

<font> B. <$$font> I do@ @n't think so . THRING-1883-2,193.473

<font> M. <$$font> Just imagine then that we two are out <P_194>
walking , and meet a dog . THRING-1883-2,194.474

I say " look at that calf . " THRING-1883-2,194.475

What do you do ? THRING-1883-2,194.476

<font> B. <$$font> Say it@ @'s a dog , it is@ @n't a calf .
THRING-1883-2,194.477

<font> M. <$$font> What ! contradict the Headmaster ?
THRING-1883-2,194.478

<font> B. <$$font> A dog@ @'s a dog . THRING-1883-2,194.479

I must , because it is a dog . THRING-1883-2,194.480

<font> M. <$$font> What ! venture to know better than the Headmaster ?
THRING-1883-2,194.481

<font> B. <$$font> I ca@ @n't help it . THRING-1883-2,194.482

It is a dog . THRING-1883-2,194.483

<font> M. <$$font> Well . To take another case , say 2 x 2 = 5 .
THRING-1883-2,194.484

<font> B. <$$font> But it does@ @n't . THRING-1883-2,194.485

<font> M. <$$font> What ! contradicting again ? THRING-1883-2,194.486

<font> B. <$$font> Yes , of course , I must . THRING-1883-2,194.487

<font> M. <$$font> Suppose I persist in saying it is 5 ?
THRING-1883-2,194.488

<font> B. <$$font> You would be mad . THRING-1883-2,194.489

<font> M. <$$font> What ! you able to judge that I was mad ?
THRING-1883-2,194.490

<font> B. <$$font> Why ! yes . THRING-1883-2,194.491

<font> M. <$$font> Well , let@ @'s move on . THRING-1883-2,194.492

Genitor is the genitive case . THRING-1883-2,194.493

<font> B. <$$font> But it is@ @n't . THRING-1883-2,194.494

<font> M. <$$font> Contradicting the Headmaster again ?
THRING-1883-2,194.495

<font> B. <$$font> I ca@ @n't help it . THRING-1883-2,194.496

<font> M. <$$font> Well then , 2 x 2 = 5 and Genitor the Genitive case
are as much signs of madness in me and you as calling a dog a calf ?
THRING-1883-2,194.497

<font> B. <$$font> Yes , certainly they are . THRING-1883-2,194.498

<font> M. <$$font> All I can say is we have made a most interesting
discovery this morning . THRING-1883-2,194.499

This is a most <P_195> flourishing Lunatic Asylum .
THRING-1883-2,195.500

Not a day passes in which dogs and calves are not jumbled in beautiful
confusion and perfect indifference as to which , by you and your
companions . THRING-1883-2,195.501

Many of these things you know quite as well as I do , if you would but
stick to what you know . THRING-1883-2,195.502

It is not true that you are ignorant . THRING-1883-2,195.503

You have already a considerable amount of real , solid knowledge under
your feet , on which you can stand firmly , and advance firmly , without
sticking in the mud , or tumbling into ditches ! THRING-1883-2,195.504

