<BEGIN_thring-187x-1>

<P_216>

<font> January 11th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,216.3

- Alas for the week that has passed . THRING-187X-1,216.4

Little Leo Beale was taken ill of scarlet fever the day after we started
, THRING-187X-1,216.5

and after seeming to have it favourably , died on Sunday ,
THRING-187X-1,216.6

and Mrs. Beale was taken ill on the Saturday also , THRING-187X-1,216.7

but I am thankful to say she is doing well . THRING-187X-1,216.8

Both were at the hospital . THRING-187X-1,216.9

I returned yesterday summoned by a telegram from Bisham ,
THRING-187X-1,216.10

and buried him to-day . THRING-187X-1,216.11

Poor Beale feels it very much , as may well be supposed .
THRING-187X-1,216.12

All my plans are broken off , as I fear the chance of being thought even
to bring infection . THRING-187X-1,216.13

God be thanked , THRING-187X-1,216.14

as yet we are all well , THRING-187X-1,216.15

and we trust , as the poor little boy was moved immediately , that there
is no infection . THRING-187X-1,216.16

It all seems like a dream . THRING-187X-1,216.17

<font> January 17th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,216.18

- Finished my Conference work this morning ; THRING-187X-1,216.19

took also the statement about the schoolroom negotiations to be printed
. THRING-187X-1,216.20

I shall want it in these coming days . THRING-187X-1,216.21

I have never felt so firm_hearted , so untroubled , so quietly resolute
as now . THRING-187X-1,216.22

And I thank God for it . THRING-187X-1,216.23

I thank Him for giving me a breathing time , and filling my heart with
courage and patience before the whirl begins again .
THRING-187X-1,216.24

I shall want it all before I have done , between work and battle ,
THRING-187X-1,216.25

but I feel He will be with me . THRING-187X-1,216.26

<font> January 18th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,216.27

- I believe to-day there was in the <font> Times <$$font> what I may
call the first personal thorough recognition of my working life from an
educational quarter ... . THRING-187X-1,216.28

It is the first time I have been quoted as an authority by an eminent
outsider , THRING-187X-1,216.29

and it is a striking fact . THRING-187X-1,216.30

There is much work cut out to be done . THRING-187X-1,216.31

Honour and wealth serve to snub fools and save much friction .
THRING-187X-1,216.32

So I hail a little honour as so much clear gain . THRING-187X-1,216.33

<P_217>

<font> January 29th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,217.35

- What a strange being is man ! THRING-187X-1,217.36

Here am I going to write , writing this very moment about that which I
am quite ignorant of myself . THRING-187X-1,217.37

Such a strange mixture of meanness and honesty , faith and unfaith ,
cowardice and bravery , hardness and weakness , vanity and humility ,
that one is all at the same moment . THRING-187X-1,217.38

One thing I see that I am very ungrateful to God for His great blessings
, and meanly sensitive to temporary trifles , - that I find it very hard
to attend to the detail of working life , and yet keep my heart broad
and open to the great impressions and results , very hard to feel the
Christian truths which one believes to the bottom of one's heart .
THRING-187X-1,217.39

<font> January 29th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,217.40

- This morning Mr. Eve's report on Oakham and Uppingham reached me .
THRING-187X-1,217.41

I am glad it is over . THRING-187X-1,217.42

He has done his work well on the whole , THRING-187X-1,217.43

but the fallacies inseparable to such an inspection are to my eyes there
as a matter of course . THRING-187X-1,217.44

How can it be otherwise ? ... THRING-187X-1,217.45

<font> February 6th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,217.46

- The feeling of no boys in my own house makes it quite like the
holidays to me still , THRING-187X-1,217.47

and I now know by experience for the first time the immeasurable
difference between a boarding-house master and a teacher , and how
absolutely necessary it is for a headmaster , at least , to have had
boarding-house experience , or else all the depth and truth of the
training power would be lost or non-existent . THRING-187X-1,217.48

I find , too , the practical force of my theory that a day school is an
entirely distinct institution from a boarding school , and a master in a
day school is well paid at half the rate of a boarding-house master .
... THRING-187X-1,217.49

I shall be obliged now to put off my boys' return .
THRING-187X-1,217.50

Still very anxious about fever both in my own house and other houses .
THRING-187X-1,217.51

<font> February 7th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,217.52

- We have been obliged to refuse boys this time . THRING-187X-1,217.53

The school is full to the last degree . THRING-187X-1,217.54

<font> February 9th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,217.55

- In the morning , before I started from here , I received a note from
Henry , stating he had heard that I had made a very unfavourable
impression on the Commissioners by refusing to co-operate with the
governors . THRING-187X-1,217.56

I wrote a long letter giving the facts , THRING-187X-1,217.57

and wound up with an indignant assertion that the Commissioners had to
be judged as well as to judge , and that I should fight out to the
uttermost any attempt to undo my work here . THRING-187X-1,217.58

He has not answered . THRING-187X-1,217.59

I hope he <P_218> will have the good sense not to .
THRING-187X-1,218.60

A very nice letter from Mrs. Charles Kingsley this afternoon <paren>
her husband is in S. America <$$paren> , which cheered me . ...
THRING-187X-1,218.61

The intense relief of having no boys back in one's house is beyond
expression . THRING-187X-1,218.62

Yet what a loss in depth and true work there would be in not having boys
in the house . THRING-187X-1,218.63

How could I value the training part rightly ? How direct , sympathise
with , and rightly honour masters without this experience ? ...
THRING-187X-1,218.64

<font> February 20th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,218.65

- This morning , perhaps , I should have begun with my old grumbling , "
A weary week , " etc. THRING-187X-1,218.66

To-night I feel as if I never should grumble again , such a spirit has
come on me . THRING-187X-1,218.67

It is as if my eyes were opened by God to see the self-spirit pass away
, and to be able with a clear glance to read truth .
THRING-187X-1,218.68

I feel so happy in the many blessings of being able to do His work , so
strong now that for a time the self-mist has rolled off my soul , so
ready for war , as if a great war was coming which God by his revelation
of Himself to me , and of myself to myself , has been preparing me to
fight in quiet , humble , unselfish faith . THRING-187X-1,218.69

Not that the old temptations will not come back , THRING-187X-1,218.70

but the memory of the clearer vision in my spirit to-night will come too
, and the power to endure patiently the wounds to vanity and
self-assertion , to resist idleness , and to rejoice in the blessings of
my home and Christ's service . THRING-187X-1,218.71

May God keep me and mine for ever . THRING-187X-1,218.72

Amen . THRING-187X-1,218.73

<font> February 25th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,218.74

- Alas , to-night Walter Earle came in to say one of his little ones has
the fever . THRING-187X-1,218.75

Poor fellow , it is a great trial , THRING-187X-1,218.76

and we are getting anxious for the school . THRING-187X-1,218.77

It will be strange if , after so many years , just before we have a
hospital , we are overwhelmed . THRING-187X-1,218.78

I trust we have not been " worshipping our nets , " and as we got our
machinery better , thought less of God . THRING-187X-1,218.79

One thing I hope I have learnt in these hard weeks , to be grateful for
the many ordinary blessings I have . THRING-187X-1,218.80

I knew I had them before , THRING-187X-1,218.81

but now God has made me feel them . THRING-187X-1,218.82

<font> March 2nd . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,218.83

- A letter from Harper this morning , enclosing a sort of model scheme
from the Commissioners , which he had got leave to send me .
THRING-187X-1,218.84

It is most disheartening . THRING-187X-1,218.85

The whole pivot of it is the absurd and pernicious governor idea ;
THRING-187X-1,218.86

not a glimpse of knowledge of school in it . THRING-187X-1,218.87

I am quite in despair , not that I believe in <font> laws <$$font> doing
beyond a certain amount to <P_219> kill or raise , THRING-187X-1,219.88

but yet it is fearful to have such a lying start on what ought to be
fresh life . THRING-187X-1,219.89

I am rather in hopes the magazine article has dropped through , either
from my paper being thought bad , or Macmillan repudiating the thing .
THRING-187X-1,219.90

I shall be much relieved if it has . THRING-187X-1,219.91

I can@ @not cook up half-truths for the present taste .
THRING-187X-1,219.92

Bradley's paper was very good , excepting from the one fatal defect
<paren> to me its chief merit <$$paren> , that he did not realise the
least the deadly character of his own admissions against hostels , and
proceeds at the end to suggest improvements . As if the only true thing
was not fairly to admit their great evils , and then if it can@ @not be
helped , to have them with eyes opened as being the best that can be got
, instead of whitewashing the sepulchre . THRING-187X-1,219.93

I am quite baffled how to act about the Commissioners .
THRING-187X-1,219.94

I dread the whole affair unspeakably . THRING-187X-1,219.95

My convictions are so intensely against all their principles <paren> as
far as they have any <$$paren> , THRING-187X-1,219.96

and I fear I shall only appear to them a cantankerous , self-asserting
bigot . THRING-187X-1,219.97

May God help me . THRING-187X-1,219.98

So alone do I seem to stand in the perception of the first principles of
schools and their value . THRING-187X-1,219.99

I want a talk very much with Robert Gladstone . THRING-187X-1,219.100

This Parliament work cuts the life and interest out of all one's work ,
THRING-187X-1,219.101

and leaves little but drudgery and slavery more or less gilded .
THRING-187X-1,219.102

Thank God I have done my main work before this frost has come on it .
THRING-187X-1,219.103

Yet I could wish I were younger , to contemplate beginning again more
calmly than I can . THRING-187X-1,219.104

<font> March 4th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,219.105

- This evening Walter Earle and I settled the inscription for the east
window : " First-fruits from Old Boys , A.D. 1870 . "
THRING-187X-1,219.106

<font> Laus Deo <$$font> . THRING-187X-1,219.107

There was a wish to put my name up , THRING-187X-1,219.108

but I stopped it for two reasons : THRING-187X-1,219.109

first , it does not represent the true kernel of things , the work for
God given by God ; THRING-187X-1,219.110

and , secondly , it reminds one of the inscriptions churchwardens stick
up . THRING-187X-1,219.111

We had a hearty laugh over it . THRING-187X-1,219.112

<font> March 10th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,219.113

- Back again home . THRING-187X-1,219.114

Thank God , much better in health , having done right good work , I
trust , and with a load off my mind on the subject of the Commissioners
more than I could have believed . THRING-187X-1,219.115

On Tuesday Harper , Pears , and myself went to the Charing Cross Hotel
THRING-187X-1,219.116

and held a long sitting over the scheme , THRING-187X-1,219.117

and were unanimous in proposing certain changes , not many or great in
appearance , but which will get things really right if we carry <P_220>
them , as I can@ @not but think we shall . THRING-187X-1,220.118

I have quite been set at ease , too , about our governors ;
THRING-187X-1,220.119

the whole Government theory and aim is against them ,
THRING-187X-1,220.120

so I feel quite secure . ... THRING-187X-1,220.121

It is very wonderful the way Harper , with his near connection with R-
and his bluff , manly , good-natured vigour , has been raised up to do
this work , THRING-187X-1,220.122

and a path has been opened out through him for me to get this work here
forward too , and for England generally , when two years ago I could not
have raised a finger . THRING-187X-1,220.123

It is another of the true miracles of which I have seen so many here .
THRING-187X-1,220.124

{COM:greek_omitted}

<font> April 4th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,220.126

- I was delighted this morning by Walter Earle bringing in a painted map
of sentence analysis . THRING-187X-1,220.127

In the first place it is an excellent idea ; THRING-187X-1,220.128

in the second , it shows they are thoroughly turning their minds to
teaching , THRING-187X-1,220.129

and I am at length successful in this , thanks to the Analysis .
THRING-187X-1,220.130

I am greatly pleased . THRING-187X-1,220.131

<font> April 28th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,220.132

- We are really so full even for Midsummer that it is useless putting
names down any more . THRING-187X-1,220.133

{COM:greek_omitted}

How different from the old racking expectancy and too often hope
deferred of a few boys coming . THRING-187X-1,220.135

<font> May 15th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,220.136

- An Indian newspaper mentioning <font> Education and School <$$font> in
high terms . THRING-187X-1,220.137

This may do good , as out there they are not choked up with powerful
shams as we . THRING-187X-1,220.138

As soon as things are looked at on their own merits and on principles my
system must conquer . THRING-187X-1,220.139

<font> May 17th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,220.140

- Freeman got a scholarship at Pembroke , Oxford .
THRING-187X-1,220.141

I am glad of that . ... THRING-187X-1,220.142

A master of Marlborough applied last week for information about houses ,
which I gave him . ... THRING-187X-1,220.143

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

<P_221>

<font> June 7th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,221.146

- An unpleasant note this morning from the editor of the <font> Stamford
Mercury <$$font> , saying there were painful rumours about concerning
expulsions and punishments here , THRING-187X-1,221.147

and he thought a cautious paragraph from me might do good and save worse
. THRING-187X-1,221.148

I thanked him , THRING-187X-1,221.149

but said I was unable to see my way to writing anything ; that I was
only too well aware of the power of evil reports , but if it was to be ,
I could only just bear it quietly now as I had done in worse times .
THRING-187X-1,221.150

But it is very hard that nothing can be done without a lying or
malicious curiosity publishing everything . THRING-187X-1,221.151

It makes honest work very hard . THRING-187X-1,221.152

Even now the prospect is by no means pleasant of a garbled account
getting into the papers . THRING-187X-1,221.153

<font> June 12th . <$$font> - ... THRING-187X-1,221.154

To-day was a glorious day , 189 communicants ; 147 boys actually present
. THRING-187X-1,221.155

A most impressive and comforting fact . THRING-187X-1,221.156

Skrine has got the Newdigate and Hamley a College scholarship .
THRING-187X-1,221.157

This is pleasant . ... THRING-187X-1,221.158

<font> August 15th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,221.159

- Sir George Couper brought his second son on Saturday ,
THRING-187X-1,221.160

and I had much talk with him yesterday , which left me immensely
strengthened in spirit . THRING-187X-1,221.161

When I see the deep conviction such a man as he is has of this work ,
and the gratitude he feels for having his sons here , my heart also
realises more my purpose and its reality , the sense of which gets
deadened and almost lost in the mud of Commissions and general jaw , so
that one's faith half gives way . THRING-187X-1,221.162

I feel now again what a noble work this is , and that my post is here ,
THRING-187X-1,221.163

and I am content it should be here . THRING-187X-1,221.164

May God bless us and strengthen us . THRING-187X-1,221.165

<font> August 21st . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,221.166

- To-day a Mr. G - , who used to have a private school near Liverpool ,
has been here on a visit of inspection . THRING-187X-1,221.167

This is good . THRING-187X-1,221.168

As soon as curiosity is roused , and intelligent men begin to look in at
us and examine the school questions , progress will begin , and the
prevailing ignorance stand a chance of getting dispersed somewhat .
THRING-187X-1,221.169

<font> August 27th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,221.170

- It is a strange epoch . THRING-187X-1,221.171

The dead French nation is now being shattered , THRING-187X-1,221.172

and standing armies are doomed . THRING-187X-1,221.173

For they can@ @not stand against armed nations as the German system is .
THRING-187X-1,221.174

And with the doom of standing armies wars of mere aggression must come
to an end , as it is not possible for all national life to enter into
war , and have everything brought to a standstill unless there is a
really national cause . THRING-187X-1,221.175

The <P_222> modern epoch which railways have made possible is by this
war thoroughly begun , and a new world , though as yet people little
suspect it . THRING-187X-1,222.176

<font> August 28th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,222.177

- The boys home and a happy day . THRING-187X-1,222.178

A collection for the sick and wounded ; special offertory , 28 +L
{TEXT:+L28} , 12@ @s . THRING-187X-1,222.179

Had the house in the garden as usual . ... THRING-187X-1,222.180

I feel so much nerved for work , and content to work on here in spite of
all my troubles when I see the life a school like this has in these evil
days . THRING-187X-1,222.181

<font> August 31st . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,222.182

- A great encouragement this morning ; THRING-187X-1,222.183

a letter from America from B - , who left a year or two ago , - such a
manly letter , telling us of his having schools for his negroes , and
how well they work , and that the Americans do@ @n't like the negro
schools , but please God they will do good . THRING-187X-1,222.184

Altogether so refreshing to find such a fellow a pioneer of good in a
strange land . THRING-187X-1,222.185

It has cheered me greatly . THRING-187X-1,222.186

<font> September 1st . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,222.187

- I dread more and more the false stamp the Government is going to put
on our schools . THRING-187X-1,222.188

Before all was open , gross ignorance indeed of all kinds , but no
pretence of unity . THRING-187X-1,222.189

Now the Government is going to give the impression of all the schools
having been put on a good basis , without ensuring that any one of them
shall be able to do true work at all . THRING-187X-1,222.190

This is terrible , THRING-187X-1,222.191

and I see no way of escape , no power of warning , no possibility of
even getting such a statement heard , much less believed .
THRING-187X-1,222.192

<font> September 18th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,222.193

- Have taken up six new boys into my division ; THRING-187X-1,222.194

all good , for the first time in seventeen years .
THRING-187X-1,222.195

No heavy weights amongst them . THRING-187X-1,222.196

This is a great comfort . THRING-187X-1,222.197

My Rugby candidate for the mastership came over to-day , Haslam .
THRING-187X-1,222.198

I am delighted with him , THRING-187X-1,222.199

and shall certainly write to-morrow to give him the appointment .
THRING-187X-1,222.200

I do not know when I have seen a man who has made a more favourable
impression on me - modest , refined , genuine , and working apparently .
THRING-187X-1,222.201

Thank God for bringing this to a happy ending . THRING-187X-1,222.202

<font> September 21st . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,222.203

- I feel so relieved at having found a master . THRING-187X-1,222.204

It is so difficult and anxious a thing . THRING-187X-1,222.205

<font> September 27th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,222.206

- I ca@ @n't get out of my mind poor Captain Cowper Coles going down in
his vessel the <font> Captain <$$font> . THRING-187X-1,222.207

What a life has his been for fifteen years ! THRING-187X-1,222.208

The upward struggle of the inventor and the genius against the
oppression of stupid power <P_223> and neglect , and all the trials a
poor man in England must endure from Government incapacity , and then to
die , and leave his ten young children , THRING-187X-1,223.209

and then all England acknowledges his greatness THRING-187X-1,223.210

and laments his loss , THRING-187X-1,223.211

and then in about a year or two our rich and generous land gives the
widow a pension , THRING-187X-1,223.212

and a notice appears in the <font> Times <$$font> , etc. , " To the
widow of Capt. Cowper Coles , for the distinguished services of her
late husband , 100 +L {TEXT:+L100} . " THRING-187X-1,223.213

Happy land , when the greatest inventor of his day after fifteen years
of anguish just gets a trial ; THRING-187X-1,223.214

happy land , where merit is rewarded at so costly a rate when once it is
thoroughly recognised . THRING-187X-1,223.215

<font> October 3rd . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,223.216

- I never realised before to-day how completely the righteous work of
having the classes not too large limits the numbers of a school .
THRING-187X-1,223.217

It has been brought home to me by the talk of fresh houses .
THRING-187X-1,223.218

We can@ @not have fresh houses without getting parallel classes , which
are a great evil . THRING-187X-1,223.219

I have determined , therefore , only to sanction the building of one
house , and so not to increase the school ultimately at all , or much
now , as I intend to drop the Bank house , and reduce Walter Earle's
present one to a twenty . THRING-187X-1,223.220

I am much easier in my mind since I came to this decision .
THRING-187X-1,223.221

<font> October 8th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,223.222

- Walter Earle showed me this morning a very nice new painted analysis
scheme , by which he brings out the sentence clauses into prominence one
by one . THRING-187X-1,223.223

I am much pleased by this teaching progress . THRING-187X-1,223.224

<font> October 10th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,223.225

- Played fives to-day ; Dory Bell and I against the school .
THRING-187X-1,223.226

Lost , but not ignobly ; THRING-187X-1,223.227

the first time we only got eight or ten , the second fourteen ,
THRING-187X-1,223.228

the last we won . THRING-187X-1,223.229

But I paid for it by a sick headache , THRING-187X-1,223.230

and I fear it is the last game I shall ever play in consequence .
THRING-187X-1,223.231

It is hard to give up the last reminiscence of youth ,
THRING-187X-1,223.232

but perhaps in one's forty-ninth year , and near the end of it , one may
be well content to have a reminiscence of this kind .
THRING-187X-1,223.233

<font> October 11th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,223.234

- I must get the hospital rules printed and send them to each master .
THRING-187X-1,223.235

That will keep them in some order . THRING-187X-1,223.236

I gave out strongly this morning that under three weeks in measles , and
six in scarlet fever , however light a case might be , a boy should not
come out of quarantine , and also that no boy should be sent home .
THRING-187X-1,223.237

Parents might come and take boys home , and in some cases have them sent
home , THRING-187X-1,223.238

but <P_224> the initiative should not come from a master .
THRING-187X-1,224.239

This was to check men getting rid of boys to escape trouble .
THRING-187X-1,224.240

It is very trying governing in a school . THRING-187X-1,224.241

There is always a leak somewhere . THRING-187X-1,224.242

You can@ @not deal with human beings like bales of goods ,
THRING-187X-1,224.243

neither can you be everywhere yourself to see that things go right .
THRING-187X-1,224.244

<font> October 12th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,224.245

- To-day two parents came to inspect ; a Mr. P- , an Irish barrister of
eminence , and a Mr. C- , a clergyman . THRING-187X-1,224.246

Spent a good deal of time with them . Mr. P- a particularly pleasant
fellow . THRING-187X-1,224.247

After various talk , he told me he had an intimate friend , a lady , at
Cambridge , and that she , at his desire , had inquired of the
authorities at all the Colleges in Cambridge of the character of
Uppingham men , and that there had been but one answer everywhere , that
it was exceptionally good morally . THRING-187X-1,224.248

This is very cheering , though we have heard it before .
THRING-187X-1,224.249

This is something worth working for . THRING-187X-1,224.250

{COM:greek_omitted}

<font> October 16th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,224.252

- Very pleased on Friday to find that my house had got up a little
entertainment of their own on Friday evening , - four of them ,
including my captain , Cameron , having practised some good songs to
sing . THRING-187X-1,224.253

We went in all of us as audience . ... THRING-187X-1,224.254

When I think of what a schoolboy's idea of a holiday evening amusement ,
and singing in particular , would have been in my day I could not feel
too thankful for what I saw . ... THRING-187X-1,224.255

<font> October 17th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,224.256

- here yesterday , bringing his brother ; THRING-187X-1,224.257

came straight from Harrow , THRING-187X-1,224.258

back there at work again to-day . THRING-187X-1,224.259

I was much pleased at his understanding feeling for Uppingham , and
quite surprised at the frank way in which he stated how far behind us
Harrow was in the means of doing thorough work . THRING-187X-1,224.260

It is something to find the question of proper machinery coming on .
... THRING-187X-1,224.261

Sir C. Adderley has let Walter Earle have the ground ,
THRING-187X-1,224.262

and he has undertaken to build a house worth 4000 +L {TEXT:+L4000} on it
. ... THRING-187X-1,224.263

The four houses up there will be very good and striking ,
THRING-187X-1,224.264

and I shall get rid of the " Bank " entirely , and of my brother's house
as a thirty house , and show the world I do not mean to increase the
numbers . A great many birds to kill with one stone . ...
THRING-187X-1,224.265

<font> October 25th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,224.266

- Some of the masters this morning made <P_225> a dead set at me on the
subject of raising the terms . THRING-187X-1,225.267

I met them resolutely and quietly . THRING-187X-1,225.268

I contested their figures , THRING-187X-1,225.269

and challenged any one to show by actual figures in detail that they got
less than 1000 +L {TEXT:+L1000} a year , boy expenses paid , with a full
house . THRING-187X-1,225.270

Then I took the argument about building houses which was advanced ,
THRING-187X-1,225.271

and said I was not concerned with that . THRING-187X-1,225.272

Since quite the beginning every man had built because he wished to .
THRING-187X-1,225.273

I had nothing to do but sanction it , THRING-187X-1,225.274

and had not encouraged any man , THRING-187X-1,225.275

and the early men I had rewarded by large concessions <paren> this was
put in by some of the later men <$$paren> , so that their risk was
minimised . THRING-187X-1,225.276

I said whilst I would give anything I could for good work , and only
wished I could do more , if they were going to debate the trade question
I should argue it like a thorough old Jew , THRING-187X-1,225.277

and I repudiated utterly that success , as such , gave them the
slightest claim for higher pay . THRING-187X-1,225.278

In that sense it was no trade ; THRING-187X-1,225.279

they came on a certain basis which success did not affect .
THRING-187X-1,225.280

I said that their only actual argument was the actual rise in provision
and wages which I was not inclined to put so high as they did .
THRING-187X-1,225.281

Some one said 100 +L {TEXT:+L100} a year , THRING-187X-1,225.282

but some statistics on the spot brought it down at once to 70 +L
{TEXT:+L70} . THRING-187X-1,225.283

All this talk occupied a long time , THRING-187X-1,225.284

was friendly , and so far good . THRING-187X-1,225.285

I intimated that I would not raise now in this intermediate state ; that
I thought it would be very impolitic to do it ; but that I should use
every endeavour before the Commissioners to get us higher terms , as on
principle I thought the first endowed school ought to be at a good level
. THRING-187X-1,225.286

Altogether I got out some very home truths in a good way .
THRING-187X-1,225.287

I am the headmaster now in a way I have never been before .
THRING-187X-1,225.288

The Commissioners have done this much . ... THRING-187X-1,225.289

<font> October 29th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,225.290

- The news of the fall of Metz yesterday . THRING-187X-1,225.291

If it is possible the power of lying will be taken from the French by
this , and the end draw near . Not , however , till Paris falls .
THRING-187X-1,225.292

But one thing is certain : THRING-187X-1,225.293

the great French bubble which for two_hundred years has been a fear and
a glitter in Europe has burst ; THRING-187X-1,225.294

that strange compound of cleverness , vanity , lies , lust , blood , and
robbery is come to an end . THRING-187X-1,225.295

What will be the next great European temptation and tempter ;
THRING-187X-1,225.296

is it England , with its greed of gain and money self-worship ?
THRING-187X-1,225.297

A new page is turned - THRING-187X-1,225.298

what is that page going to be ? THRING-187X-1,225.299

<P_226> <font> November 6th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,226.300

- Nothing is harder for a ruler than the having to deal with a vexatious
incapable who yet is not incapable enough to make it just to get rid of
him . THRING-187X-1,226.301

<font> November 14th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,226.302

- I have just had in a boy who was defiant in Anstey's class ,
THRING-187X-1,226.303

and quite subdued him THRING-187X-1,226.304

and sent him off in a right mind . THRING-187X-1,226.305

That is a blessing . THRING-187X-1,226.306

So also was an interview I had with a Mrs. M- on Saturday .
THRING-187X-1,226.307

The poor woman is going out in a fortnight to join her husband in India
, THRING-187X-1,226.308

and leaves two boys here . THRING-187X-1,226.309

I have promised solemnly to protect and help them should they need it .
Two more of my Indian orphans , as I may say . THRING-187X-1,226.310

It was touching to see her confidence and gratitude .
THRING-187X-1,226.311

I thanked God from my heart that He had given to me to be a shield to
the defenceless , and that the school was true as far as we could make
it , and that by God's blessing her sons would be safe here .
THRING-187X-1,226.312

{COM:greek_omitted}

<font> December 4th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,226.314

- Another case of fever in my house to-night . THRING-187X-1,226.315

I am so down about it , THRING-187X-1,226.316

and , what is worse , feel so rebellious in my heart against it , so
unsubmissive , that I am shocked at it . THRING-187X-1,226.317

It is such a disappointment just when we hoped all was going to be free
. Such a blow and additional work and worry , both of body and mind ,
that I can@ @not bear it calmly , THRING-187X-1,226.318

and yet how little it is ; THRING-187X-1,226.319

what a nothing ; THRING-187X-1,226.320

how thankful I should be for this if it was really a heavy sorrow .
THRING-187X-1,226.321

I am ashamed at myself and vexed , and yet so impatient .
THRING-187X-1,226.322

School life seems so hard with these immeasurable responsibilities .
Such a perpetual struggle and so little rest . THRING-187X-1,226.323

Yet I have many blessings , very many , very , very many .
THRING-187X-1,226.324

O God have mercy on us , THRING-187X-1,226.325

and make us love Thy will . THRING-187X-1,226.326

<font> December 9th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,226.327

- A letter from Edwin Palmer of Balliol to-day about the introduction of
the Latin pronunciation . THRING-187X-1,226.328

I informed him of the headmasters' meeting , and its being a subject we
were going to deal with , THRING-187X-1,226.329

and I thought it was certain to be carried . ... THRING-187X-1,226.330

<font> December 13th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,226.331

- Another manly , cheering letter from our South Carolina planter B - ,
telling me what he is doing amongst the negroes , teaching them , etc.
THRING-187X-1,226.332

This does cheer one . ... THRING-187X-1,226.333

It is certain we shall have waterworks in the town , I am thankful to
say . THRING-187X-1,226.334

Mr. Forster has got the thing in shape . THRING-187X-1,226.335

The school has undertaken some 1400 +L {TEXT:+L1400} worth of shares .
THRING-187X-1,226.336

<P_227> I am to be chairman , THRING-187X-1,227.337

and the committee will consist of town and school .
THRING-187X-1,227.338

I am rejoiced at this . THRING-187X-1,227.339

There are to be ten free cocks for the poor . THRING-187X-1,227.340

This is a great step . THRING-187X-1,227.341

It will furnish , too , at last a friendly common meeting ground on
business matters , whereas hitherto we have been always dealing with
hostile rectors and unfriendly Boards . THRING-187X-1,227.342

<font> December 16th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,227.343

- Last night I wound up the school , THRING-187X-1,227.344

and spoke strongly on the sordid point of looking on prizes as motives
to work instead of records of having worked . THRING-187X-1,227.345

<font> February 26th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,227.346

- Mr. Bell came on Wednesday , THRING-187X-1,227.347

and spent Thursday , giving us a nice lecture on the Boy's Home .
THRING-187X-1,227.348

We collected 19 +L {TEXT:+L19} : 13@ @s. for him this offertory . ...
THRING-187X-1,227.349

Next day our committee meeting . THRING-187X-1,227.350

Eton and Harrow both there . THRING-187X-1,227.351

The business very satisfactory , and felt to be so by all .
THRING-187X-1,227.352

We are to confer with Mr. Forster , the two Latin professors , and
delegates from both Universities , who will without doubt be sent to us
. THRING-187X-1,227.353

So the pot is boiling very briskly . THRING-187X-1,227.354

Butler was very cordial . THRING-187X-1,227.355

I have arranged to spend a Sunday at Harrow and preach in about three
weeks . THRING-187X-1,227.356

He has promised to come here . THRING-187X-1,227.357

All this intercourse does good . THRING-187X-1,227.358

Jex-Blake expressed a great desire to come here . THRING-187X-1,227.359

I asked him vigorously , THRING-187X-1,227.360

but he fears he will not be able to manage it this half-year .
THRING-187X-1,227.361

I returned last night very pleased with the whole result .
THRING-187X-1,227.362

<font> February 27th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,227.363

- Apportioned the gardens to-day ; THRING-187X-1,227.364

about forty-two given away as yet . THRING-187X-1,227.365

They are beginning to look very nice as the paths are getting fairly
forward . THRING-187X-1,227.366

It gave me great pleasure . ... THRING-187X-1,227.367

Everybody seemed to be delighted . THRING-187X-1,227.368

It really will be very pretty when finished . THRING-187X-1,227.369

I myself rejoice exceedingly at having got it set going at last .
THRING-187X-1,227.370

{COM:editorial_material_omitted} <P_228> <font> March 7th . <$$font>
THRING-187X-1,228.371

- Had to send a most disagreeable accusation of neglect to - in class
work last night . THRING-187X-1,228.372

He has been in , THRING-187X-1,228.373

and , I am thankful to say , has completely cleared himself .
THRING-187X-1,228.374

Indeed , I feel more confidence in his teaching than I ever have done ,
as he explained his whole processes , and showed intelligence , thought
, and zeal . THRING-187X-1,228.375

It is an immense relief to me . THRING-187X-1,228.376

A dull fear of bad work going on is dreadfully trying .
THRING-187X-1,228.377

<font> March 13th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,228.378

- The jaw about liberty of speech going on . THRING-187X-1,228.379

Some good will come out of it . A clearing in some degree .
THRING-187X-1,228.380

One would think , to hear the masters talk , that they were a set of
slaves , bound and gagged , whereas from my point of view they are
hunting me open-mouthed , and my object is - escape .
THRING-187X-1,228.381

<font> March 20th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,228.382

- Back from Harrow this afternoon after a most interesting visit .
THRING-187X-1,228.383

Dr. and Mrs. Butler exceptionally hospitable and anxious to welcome me
. Mrs. Butler charming ; just the genuine , fresh , womanly simplicity
that is both beauty and work in one . THRING-187X-1,228.384

Met old Munroe there , a most unexpected pleasure .
THRING-187X-1,228.385

He charged me like a bull on the Latin pronunciation question to my
great amusement . THRING-187X-1,228.386

Several of the masters invited to meet me . THRING-187X-1,228.387

The singing in Harrow chapel was very hearty . THRING-187X-1,228.388

Preached to the boys at evening service . THRING-187X-1,228.389

More masters in the evening . THRING-187X-1,228.390

On Monday one of the Whittings , whom I examined at Eton , came in as
examiner there , THRING-187X-1,228.391

and I had a very nice short walk with him , THRING-187X-1,228.392

and heard a great deal about King's and Eton . THRING-187X-1,228.393

When in bed this morning Campbell's letter announcing Maude's success at
Corpus came in , which was very seasonable . THRING-187X-1,228.394

They had the news in the <font> Times <$$font> shortly afterwards
THRING-187X-1,228.395

and congratulated me . THRING-187X-1,228.396

They had a good man in who did not win . THRING-187X-1,228.397

This came very much in the nick of time . THRING-187X-1,228.398

The Butlers are coming here on the 23rd . THRING-187X-1,228.399

This is good . Good for us , good also for them .
THRING-187X-1,228.400

Altogether the two days have been cram_full of incident for me , of
which these few lines give a very meagre sketch . THRING-187X-1,228.401

<font> March 22nd . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,228.402

- A most comically triumphant day . THRING-187X-1,228.403

The P-s were brought over here to lunch by Mr. - , my governor , a good
man , a gentleman , and intelligent , but who has never seen the school
, though he has been some six years or more a governor , and has been
here at their meetings every year . THRING-187X-1,228.404

Well , A- and I showed them all over , THRING-187X-1,228.405

and I have scarcely left off laughing since they left <P_229> at Mr.
S-'s gradual illumination as we went on . THRING-187X-1,229.406

It is impossible to narrate except at great length and as a literary
amusement , which I have no time for . THRING-187X-1,229.407

But the manner in which he began discussing educational questions <font>
ex cathedra <$$font> at luncheon , and subsided by degrees as he heard
and saw more and more , was enough to make a cat laugh .
THRING-187X-1,229.408

But what a satire on human life and English enlightenment , that a real
gentleman as he is , and no fool , should , after so many years in
office too over me , come here in supreme ignorance of everything !
THRING-187X-1,229.409

<font> April 1st . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,229.410

- F- going to give up . THRING-187X-1,229.411

My 100 +L {TEXT:+L100} gone , I fear . THRING-187X-1,229.412

However , so many hundreds of mine have gone through master criticisms
that this last one is no new feeling . THRING-187X-1,229.413

I am very vexed , though , to lose him . THRING-187X-1,229.414

A good confectioner is a great thing at a school .
THRING-187X-1,229.415

<font> April 28th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,229.416

- Went to see Walter Earle's house . THRING-187X-1,229.417

He really is carrying out our principles in a very true way .
THRING-187X-1,229.418

The boys' part is the best both internally and architecturally - in the
elevation . THRING-187X-1,229.419

This is very good , THRING-187X-1,229.420

and shows heart {COM:missing_comma} work and feeling for the cause .
THRING-187X-1,229.421

I care for this . THRING-187X-1,229.422

It is worth much . ... THRING-187X-1,229.423

<font> May 13th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,229.424

- An important meeting this morning . THRING-187X-1,229.425

A very important one in sundry particulars . THRING-187X-1,229.426

The English question was discussed with a temper and quiet good sense
quite new . THRING-187X-1,229.427

The unpleasant explanations this half-year seem to have borne good fruit
in that way . THRING-187X-1,229.428

I quite felt a new feeling of having a body of men able to be dealt with
, and willing to work together as an organised body .
THRING-187X-1,229.429

I trust it may be so . THRING-187X-1,229.430

The result was important too . THRING-187X-1,229.431

We decided to drop Greek entirely in the three lowest classes , with a
view of getting better work done later , and to substitute for it
English in three aspects . First , English Grammar and Language
Analysis , in which English is to be worked as we have hitherto worked
the classics ; secondly , English knowledge of a common sort , <font>
e.g. <$$font> air , physical geography , natural history , etc. ;
thirdly , a more complete preparation of the Latin lessons from an
English point of view , etc. , better translations , explanations of
Latin by English . THRING-187X-1,229.432

This is a great gain . THRING-187X-1,229.433

I have waited many years for this , THRING-187X-1,229.434

and now it begins to open . THRING-187X-1,229.435

<font> May 25th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,229.436

- It is most painful to me this want of earnestness .
THRING-187X-1,229.437

I sometimes fear that though the old plan of severity <P_230> made sad
work of it sometimes , that the danger of making boy life too pleasant ,
even if done lovingly , is great also . THRING-187X-1,230.438

<font> May 31st . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,230.439

- I was gratified exceedingly to-day by hearing that Rowe , on being
told by some of the masters that his statement looked as if I had
written it , answered he was glad of it . THRING-187X-1,230.440

He wished to follow me in all school things , and carry out my views .
THRING-187X-1,230.441

He had no children , THRING-187X-1,230.442

and wished to do something for England in extending the sphere of true
school work , and trying to make a school after my model .
THRING-187X-1,230.443

This is very cheering in all ways . THRING-187X-1,230.444

It cheers me for the future . THRING-187X-1,230.445

I did not think he was so decided , THRING-187X-1,230.446

and he is a good man , honest and high_minded , THRING-187X-1,230.447

and means what he says . THRING-187X-1,230.448

<font> September 9th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,230.449

- Nothing is more fatal in a school than obtrusive religion .
THRING-187X-1,230.450

<font> September 10th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,230.451

- Eighteen years ago on this day I stepped in here as headmaster first ,
and headmaster of what ? THRING-187X-1,230.452

O God , I thank Thee this day for all the blessing Thou hast given this
work , for the mighty powers of life Thou hast breathed into this place
. THRING-187X-1,230.453

To-night I was in the schoolroom at the rehearsal of Samson .
THRING-187X-1,230.454

My heart felt deep and strong as I listened and took in the wonderful
power there was in that work only . THRING-187X-1,230.455

A full quarter of the school was there rendering that glorious music
with disciplined , willing zeal as David led them .
THRING-187X-1,230.456

{COM:greek_omitted}

What was I when I came here ? THRING-187X-1,230.458

What am I now ? THRING-187X-1,230.459

Eighteen years , the bulk of my working life , however long I live .
THRING-187X-1,230.460

Thank God for the work . THRING-187X-1,230.461

<font> October 4th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,230.462

- I was sorry to write to Mullins expressing my aversion to a Divinity
prize . THRING-187X-1,230.463

But , apart from that , I think a school can easily have too many prizes
and scholarships , THRING-187X-1,230.464

and am not at all anxious to set them going here .
THRING-187X-1,230.465

One must have some , just as a bait , THRING-187X-1,230.466

but they do@ @n't reach the class I most care for , or only by accident
, - the good needy boys , - though I admit they are the only public way
of giving help . THRING-187X-1,230.467

I think if the headmaster could take a few boys at lower terms it would
be good . ... THRING-187X-1,230.468

I do@ @n't like many scholarships . THRING-187X-1,230.469

<font> October 5th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,230.470

- Well , at all events , I have founded this great school in its present
state , and staked my whole life on it , " built my heart into the
courses of the walls , " for the cause of Christ's apostolic Church and
His truth as represented best at this day by the Church of England .
THRING-187X-1,230.471

I believe in apostolic <P_231> succession in spite of modern sneers ,
and sacramental grace in spite of scientific chemistry , and a new life
in baptism in spite of Materialism . THRING-187X-1,231.472

If the swine come into this school and this chapel of ours , so be it .
THRING-187X-1,231.473

God knows best whether His Spirit shall dwell here or fly elsewhere .
THRING-187X-1,231.474

The world is wide . THRING-187X-1,231.475

I pray when God's truth is not living in this place that the place may
come to nought , and the walls be overthrown , unless God keep it as a
witness of what once has been . THRING-187X-1,231.476

<font> October 17th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,231.477

- Been attacked again to let masters take more boys . ...
THRING-187X-1,231.478

Year by year one has had to take a stand in adversity and prosperity
against suggestions that are treason deep and deadly to the truth by
which we live , and which would in early days have killed the life
before it grew , and sooner or later would kill it now .
THRING-187X-1,231.479

<font> October 18th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,231.480

- Mr. N - , the American , here to-day ; THRING-187X-1,231.481

has been talking over a plan of founding a school in America .
THRING-187X-1,231.482

He says some of his friends have had the matter at heart , but were at
sea as to what or how , that now he is prepared to lay down the law
about it , and to state that Uppingham satisfied the requirements .
THRING-187X-1,231.483

I have promised to give all the help in my power .
THRING-187X-1,231.484

I wonder if it will come to anything ? THRING-187X-1,231.485

It looks like an opening . THRING-187X-1,231.486

It is at all events cheering , as showing how God may be going to spread
true school-life , THRING-187X-1,231.487

and I accept it with gratitude and praise . THRING-187X-1,231.488

<font> November 18th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,231.489

- Bought the Chequers' Inn and premises ; THRING-187X-1,231.490

at least have agreed to give the terms finally proposed , viz. 1200 +L
{TEXT:+L1200} , the present owner to have it enfranchised , and pay 50
+L {TEXT:+L50} towards that . THRING-187X-1,231.491

I have not 1200 pence , THRING-187X-1,231.492

but it is of infinite importance getting hold of this now at a
reasonable price , which it is , when the Midland Railway Station is
going to make that road the thoroughfare of Uppingham ,
THRING-187X-1,231.493

and a large inn or a fatal price would undoubtedly be the alternative .
THRING-187X-1,231.494

<font> November 27th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,231.495

- The eventful day over . THRING-187X-1,231.496

One_hundred boys exactly confirmed to-day ; a very impressive sight and
service . THRING-187X-1,231.497

The bishop come and gone - THRING-187X-1,231.498

all satisfactory . THRING-187X-1,231.499

Nothing untoward happened . THRING-187X-1,231.500

I trust all now will go well . THRING-187X-1,231.501

I do@ @n't know when I have felt a greater relief , and also a more
exultant , thankful sense of present blessing than when I got back to my
study after seeing and hearing that noble sight and service .
THRING-187X-1,231.502

Glory be to God . THRING-187X-1,231.503

<P_232>

<font> December 3rd . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,232.505

- To-day we have had a Communion like King Josiah's .
THRING-187X-1,232.506

One_hundred_and_eighty-four boys actually present ; only about eight
voluntarily absent . THRING-187X-1,232.507

This was glorious and heart-cheering . THRING-187X-1,232.508

God has sent me many little springs of comfort too .
THRING-187X-1,232.509

I was greatly vexed at the mean spirit and blindness of some of the
masters , the impossibility of even feeling one in heart with them
thoroughly , when on Friday morning my house invited us to a concert for
that night <paren> praepostor holiday <$$paren> , got up by our two
houses , Haslam's and mine . THRING-187X-1,232.510

So we went , THRING-187X-1,232.511

and I had a most happy night . THRING-187X-1,232.512

It was so dreamlike , when I recollected my own school life , to sit and
listen to twenty of our sixty boys singing beautiful music of the best
kind , with the rest applauding , and not thinking the pleasure complete
unless we came and shared it , - so dreamlike that I could have cried
for joy at this proof of a new world and higher life .
THRING-187X-1,232.513

<font> January 26th , <$$font> 1872 . THRING-187X-1,232.514

- This week I have been at Lichfield a day with my cousin Bishop
Hobhouse , THRING-187X-1,232.515

and dined at the palace , THRING-187X-1,232.516

and renewed my acquaintance with Bishop Selwyn . THRING-187X-1,232.517

Both Abraham and Hobhouse were there . THRING-187X-1,232.518

It was very interesting , THRING-187X-1,232.519

but I was a little disappointed with the bishop's grasp of his subjects
; THRING-187X-1,232.520

it struck me as wanting breadth and power , THRING-187X-1,232.521

but I honour him THRING-187X-1,232.522

and like him much . THRING-187X-1,232.523

I attended early Communion in the palace chapel on the Conversion of St.
Paul , all of us having the martyred Patteson in our minds .
THRING-187X-1,232.524

<font> March 4th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,232.525

- My return of health has made my spirit so much more capable of active
effort , and less crushed by vexations . THRING-187X-1,232.526

This week we are going to have printed a detailed account of the money
invested here since 1854 , and the annual expenditure , - an interesting
document . THRING-187X-1,232.527

The expenditure , I believe , reaches 81,000 +L {TEXT:+L81,000} odds ,
against 3000 +L {TEXT:+L3000} by the Trust . THRING-187X-1,232.528

A copy is going to every governor as a pleasant preparation for next
week's work with the Commissioners . THRING-187X-1,232.529

<font> March 13th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,232.530

- A most momentous day to my feelings . THRING-187X-1,232.531

Yesterday I was in fearful dread that I had got on a nest of indecency .
THRING-187X-1,232.532

Some of this fear was dispelled last night , THRING-187X-1,232.533

but enough remained to make me very anxious . THRING-187X-1,232.534

Then this morning I received a most cheering letter from Mr. Gladstone
<paren> written on the receipt of our statement of expenditure <$$paren>
, and also the 1500 +L {TEXT:+L1500} he has lent me .
THRING-187X-1,232.535

Then came the <P_233> Commissioner . THRING-187X-1,233.536

After his session with the governors he spent the afternoon with me ,
THRING-187X-1,233.537

and I showed him about . THRING-187X-1,233.538

Our talk was very satisfactory to me . THRING-187X-1,233.539

All is well , I trust . THRING-187X-1,233.540

The governors have shown no teeth , THRING-187X-1,233.541

and I hope soon we shall be started in our new course .
THRING-187X-1,233.542

A great load is off my mind in this . THRING-187X-1,233.543

Then to-night I have investigated the indecency case ,
THRING-187X-1,233.544

and find it very reassuring on the whole , - slight , far back , and not
repeated . THRING-187X-1,233.545

I am more thankful than I can tell , and quite happy to be spared the
anguish of punishment . THRING-187X-1,233.546

Thank God for this . THRING-187X-1,233.547

To-day in the paper M- A-'s death . THRING-187X-1,233.548

I feel it much . THRING-187X-1,233.549

He was one of my most influential captains , much good , much evil mixed
, THRING-187X-1,233.550

but the good prevailed , THRING-187X-1,233.551

and I trust has prevailed . THRING-187X-1,233.552

But it searches my heart . THRING-187X-1,233.553

He filled such an important epoch in my school life .
THRING-187X-1,233.554

Pray God we meet in heaven , a happy meeting of old school memories and
human life . THRING-187X-1,233.555

My class gone , THRING-187X-1,233.556

my work for the day done . THRING-187X-1,233.557

A tight day over , but a day with much , very much to be thankful for in
all ways . THRING-187X-1,233.558

Thank God . THRING-187X-1,233.559

<font> March 19th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,233.560

- It vexes me day by day to see the bottom of the school , which I lay
so much stress on in my own heart , in such incompetent hands compared
with what it might be , THRING-187X-1,233.561

and yet I can@ @not bring myself to think that men who do honest work up
to a certain mark ought to be got rid of when once established here
because they failed to do better . THRING-187X-1,233.562

But it is one of the trials of my life , and a daily one .
THRING-187X-1,233.563

<font> April 9th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,233.564

- Dr. N - , the headmaster at Oscott , who was at my first school with
me , came . THRING-187X-1,233.565

I spent a pleasant four hours with him , THRING-187X-1,233.566

and showed him all I had to show . THRING-187X-1,233.567

He is a good man and thoughtful . THRING-187X-1,233.568

I am glad to find an opening with the Romanists , THRING-187X-1,233.569

and prize exceedingly any opportunity of showing Christian love and
friendship which I am sure is the only true life .
THRING-187X-1,233.570

Hate is of the devil . THRING-187X-1,233.571

<font> May 1st . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,233.572

- Commemoration Day , a lovely summer day . THRING-187X-1,233.573

My sermon over ; THRING-187X-1,233.574

it has been on my mind very much . THRING-187X-1,233.575

The day was to me solemn and sweet and sad , THRING-187X-1,233.576

for I feel more and more both the burden of this great work and the want
of money , and also the intense difficulty of getting any living life to
work . ... THRING-187X-1,233.577

Yesterday was a bitter day . THRING-187X-1,233.578

White came into me to offer to sell his property next our Quad for 700
+L {TEXT:+L700} - a <P_234> very reasonable sum - THRING-187X-1,234.579

and I agreed , intending if I could get it in no other way to borrow and
mortgage . THRING-187X-1,234.580

When I told Marie this she fairly broke down , THRING-187X-1,234.581

and all the suppressed trial of our long debt came out ,
THRING-187X-1,234.582

and I broke down too . THRING-187X-1,234.583

We were getting near level when my gardens and book payments pulled us
back again . THRING-187X-1,234.584

It is so hard , when expenses are necessarily great , to get clear the
moment interest begins to suck one's blood . THRING-187X-1,234.585

However , I must now make a great effort . THRING-187X-1,234.586

Grasmere must be given up after this year ; THRING-187X-1,234.587

we can@ @not give it up now ; THRING-187X-1,234.588

and I must never more , till I have something in hand , do any avoidable
thing that entails outlay . THRING-187X-1,234.589

I must try to get this money from the Domus Fund , THRING-187X-1,234.590

but if there is going to be any jaw I must give up the whole thing ,
important as it is in many respects . THRING-187X-1,234.591

I can@ @not endure a discussion with the masters on this subject .
THRING-187X-1,234.592

I must try to be patient and more trustful . THRING-187X-1,234.593

Debt is a fearful thing . THRING-187X-1,234.594

<font> May 2nd . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,234.595

- A terrible blow has fallen on us to-day . THRING-187X-1,234.596

Last night , perhaps even as I was writing the above , my dear friend
Robert Gladstone suddenly went to his rest . THRING-187X-1,234.597

I feel so lonely ; THRING-187X-1,234.598

in a sense he was my only friend . THRING-187X-1,234.599

In all the long battle here no man of power and wealth has been on my
side , so that I could trust and feel support in him , till I knew Mr.
Gladstone . THRING-187X-1,234.600

His very existence on earth , though far away , was a feeling of support
and friendship and power to which I believe I very largely owe the
recovery of my health in these last years . THRING-187X-1,234.601

The thought of his wisdom and friendship and strength has been such a
rest to me . THRING-187X-1,234.602

It has pleased God to take him , THRING-187X-1,234.603

and I am as one turned out into the storm again . THRING-187X-1,234.604

God help us all . THRING-187X-1,234.605

I should be far more crushed if I had not felt God again and again
taking earthly stays from us in our work here , and yet blessing it more
and more , THRING-187X-1,234.606

But the loss of his cheery , pleasant friendship is to me in itself
irremediable , another of the great heavenly links pulling one up from
earth . THRING-187X-1,234.607

Yesterday was indeed a commemoration day , a day much to be remembered
in my heart . THRING-187X-1,234.608

God help us all . THRING-187X-1,234.609

<font> May 5th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,234.610

- Heard this morning some account of my dear friend's peaceful end .
THRING-187X-1,234.611

I feel more and more what he was to me . THRING-187X-1,234.612

The funeral is on Tuesday . THRING-187X-1,234.613

Still my heart is quieter , and his memory beginning to be an upward
feeling already . THRING-187X-1,234.614

I thank God for having given him me these years . THRING-187X-1,234.615

I verily <P_235> believe both health of body and calmness of mind have
been partly restored to me through the having felt his sympathy and
power , and the rest it brought . ... THRING-187X-1,235.616

Another glimpse to-day of God's great purposes . THRING-187X-1,235.617

This afternoon R- came in with an offer to him to go to the Deccan as
tutor to the Nizam's sons and the young Mussulman nobles of the court .
THRING-187X-1,235.618

This is the first time in history such a thing has occurred , one of
those great openings of that strange new world which this generation is
seeing the birth of . THRING-187X-1,235.619

I shall miss him terribly if he goes , THRING-187X-1,235.620

yet if the post is what it seems , and his father willing , what can I
do but tell him to go . THRING-187X-1,235.621

For it may be a great world-hinge having such a Christian gentleman as
he is the first in such a post . THRING-187X-1,235.622

Truly this school work is wonderful . THRING-187X-1,235.623

I may say with St. Paul , that God tells me " My grace is sufficient
for thee , THRING-187X-1,235.624

for my strength is made perfect in weakness . " THRING-187X-1,235.625

But I want St. Paul's gladness and faith and courage sadly ,
THRING-187X-1,235.626

and get very downhearted and dull and spiritless .
THRING-187X-1,235.627

Yet this has cheered me . THRING-187X-1,235.628

<font> May 21st . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,235.629

- Back from Wellington College last night after a very interesting visit
. THRING-187X-1,235.630

Luckily had a fine day , THRING-187X-1,235.631

and enjoyed immensely a walk with Kempthorne and Benson in that glorious
country glowing with spring brightness . THRING-187X-1,235.632

I had some very satisfactory talks with Benson especially about the
Conference and its prospects and work . THRING-187X-1,235.633

The school , though in buildings a portentous mistake , has the
wonderful advantage of some 300 or 400 acres of its own , and all the
walks and freedom from annoyance that this gives .
THRING-187X-1,235.634

Benson himself is a good man ; THRING-187X-1,235.635

much good work is clearly done there . THRING-187X-1,235.636

<font> May 28th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,235.637

- To-day the Haileybury match . THRING-187X-1,235.638

The poor Haileybury team had us in first , THRING-187X-1,235.639

and we got over 370 runs , THRING-187X-1,235.640

and they have six wickets down for 26 runs or so .
THRING-187X-1,235.641

I am sorry for it . THRING-187X-1,235.642

They are a very nice set of fellows , THRING-187X-1,235.643

and it will so spoil their outing . THRING-187X-1,235.644

Moreover , I do@ @n't want the cricket to get too powerful in the school
here , and to be worshipped and made the end of life for a considerable
section of the school . THRING-187X-1,235.645

<font> May 29th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,235.646

- This afternoon <paren> I can@ @not help connecting the fact with the
cricket <$$paren> H- came to ask leave to hold a meeting of the
praepostors at 7 P.M. , THRING-187X-1,235.647

and about eight came to my study to ask counsel , as six of the eleven ,
the leading six , met in one of their studies <paren> a praepostor's
<$$paren> about a week ago , and <P_236> sent out for wine and made
claret cup . THRING-187X-1,236.648

This is one of the most utter acts of treason and mock manly meanness I
have ever had to deal with considering the circumstances .
THRING-187X-1,236.649

The deliberate , quiet , lying betrayal of trust by leaders in the
school . THRING-187X-1,236.650

I greatly fear it belongs to the professional and cricket as a science ,
and the setting up a rival power in the school by having so much made of
a thing not taught by a master . THRING-187X-1,236.651

It is very grievous in any case , THRING-187X-1,236.652

and I really do@ @n't know what to do . THRING-187X-1,236.653

I should dismiss W- at once , if the thing had come before me as found
out by me and not through the praepostors . THRING-187X-1,236.654

It is good finding the praepostors acting against the school heroes in
this way . THRING-187X-1,236.655

<font> May 31st . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,236.656

- I was rejoiced at H-'s saying they had the opinions of all worth
having in the school on their side in bringing this before me .
THRING-187X-1,236.657

This is indeed something to thank God for . THRING-187X-1,236.658

<font> June 1st . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,236.659

- It really is glorious the good faith , on the whole , that is now
rooted in the school , THRING-187X-1,236.660

C- and H - , the two principal characters of this late treason , have
been to me to-night , THRING-187X-1,236.661

and I have been thoroughly convinced of the general feeling and their
own . THRING-187X-1,236.662

When one considers that this sort of party is <font> the thing <$$font>
in most schools , to have the praepostors denounce it , and the chief
actors thoroughly acknowledge that it was good it should be so , come to
me to express their sorrow and make friends if possible , and uphold
this in the school , is a most happy victory of truth and right ,
THRING-187X-1,236.663

and I feel very thankful . THRING-187X-1,236.664

<font> June 4th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,236.665

- Back from Lichfield . THRING-187X-1,236.666

I am so glad I went . THRING-187X-1,236.667

Hubert Hobson met us at the station , THRING-187X-1,236.668

and then I went to the palace with the eleven , THRING-187X-1,236.669

and was received most heartily by the bishop's eldest son , who billeted
us . THRING-187X-1,236.670

I and Gale went to Bishop Hobhouse . THRING-187X-1,236.671

We had some time before dinner , THRING-187X-1,236.672

and all of us went to the cathedral at once THRING-187X-1,236.673

and saw that fairly , THRING-187X-1,236.674

then to dinner . THRING-187X-1,236.675

Mrs. Selwyn was particularly friendly and pleasant ,
THRING-187X-1,236.676

and after dinner we saw the alms dish sent over by the American Church
as their first gift to the English Mother Church , which Bishop Selwyn
is to present this summer in their name . THRING-187X-1,236.677

I was intensely interested by this wonderful bit of living history ,
stretching so far into the future , so sure to belong to all time ,
THRING-187X-1,236.678

and to see it in Bishop Selwyn's palace as <P_237> his guest was a great
fact . THRING-187X-1,237.679

It is a thing for the boys to remember for ever . THRING-187X-1,237.680

<font> August 9th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,237.681

- Home yesterday after a delightful holiday . THRING-187X-1,237.682

What has not happened ! THRING-187X-1,237.683

First of all God has broken the chains off me , THRING-187X-1,237.684

and I am at last free from debt . THRING-187X-1,237.685

Dear Cousin Maria Waldron has left me between 3000 +L {TEXT:+L3000} and
4000 +L {TEXT:+L4000} , which lifts me well out of the prison .
THRING-187X-1,237.686

Glory be to God for His goodness . THRING-187X-1,237.687

I know not how to be thankful enough . THRING-187X-1,237.688

I can scarcely believe it yet . THRING-187X-1,237.689

Our break-up day was fine , THRING-187X-1,237.690

and all went off well , THRING-187X-1,237.691

and on Saturday we got to Grasmere . THRING-187X-1,237.692

The time has passed like magic , like a dream . THRING-187X-1,237.693

We took the Gladstone children about a good deal , THRING-187X-1,237.694

and spent a happy time altogether , though his departure was often in
our hearts , sad for us ; THRING-187X-1,237.695

but why mourn for him ? THRING-187X-1,237.696

I am unusually well in health , THRING-187X-1,237.697

and I trust shall be able to do my work this half-year .
THRING-187X-1,237.698

We had many guests during the holidays , old boys and others .
THRING-187X-1,237.699

<font> August 11th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,237.700

- The first Sunday over with its sermon . THRING-187X-1,237.701

Always a great relief , THRING-187X-1,237.702

for I feel very doubtful and diffident about the fitness of many of my
sermons . ... THRING-187X-1,237.703

I feel it a grand thing to have such a true work to do as this .
THRING-187X-1,237.704

Even the holidays , when over , and I am once more at the work , do not
seem too attractive . THRING-187X-1,237.705

Yet I wish I was not so hunted , so pressed for time always .
THRING-187X-1,237.706

I think from what I hear that our system and constructive excellence are
beginning to make some impression abroad . THRING-187X-1,237.707

At all events encouraging stories reach us , which make my work here
easier by making the assistant masters feel proud of their places .
THRING-187X-1,237.708

But what matters ? THRING-187X-1,237.709

I feel sure of the living truth of the effort . THRING-187X-1,237.710

I feel sure of the blessing of God on us in touching many hearts .
THRING-187X-1,237.711

May God make me satisfied with this if nothing ever comes to the surface
. THRING-187X-1,237.712

<font> August 13th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,237.713

- A particularly nice set of new boys in my house in exchange for a
particularly unsatisfactory set who left . THRING-187X-1,237.714

It is a great temptation when prosperous to get rid of bad boys .
THRING-187X-1,237.715

But I have never yielded to it . THRING-187X-1,237.716

But this sweetens the change when it comes honestly as now .
THRING-187X-1,237.717

<font> August 15th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,237.718

- Great efforts being made to get me to pardon the six of the eleven who
played the traitor last half , and admit them to the old boys' supper ,
THRING-187X-1,237.719

but I will not . THRING-187X-1,237.720

A great <P_238> principle is at stake , THRING-187X-1,238.721

and the better the culprits the more their punishment will prove that no
individual merit shall in such a case of treason avail .
THRING-187X-1,238.722

I will shoot my mutineers all the more mercilessly because the
temptation was so slight , and their general character on the whole so
good . THRING-187X-1,238.723

W- has been at me . THRING-187X-1,238.724

He can@ @not see that this is no single arbitrary act , but a link in a
chain of nineteen years' forging , every link of which has been forged
on the same principle of kindly trust , and when the hour came , firm
and unflinching judgment . THRING-187X-1,238.725

He said I ought to take advice , that a jury of men eminent for goodness
would pardon them , etc. THRING-187X-1,238.726

I said I was acting on principle ; that I had had during all my early
life here to act in defiance of the advice of men considered wise .
That Uppingham was Uppingham because I had dared take my stand on new
principles , and work them steadily out in opposition to the opinions of
others . THRING-187X-1,238.727

He said " that means that you are infallible . " THRING-187X-1,238.728

" Not so , " I answered , " but that I understand a ruler's
responsibility and accept it . " THRING-187X-1,238.729

They none of them have any idea of the patient , ceaseless adherence to
principle both in pardoning and in punishing that has made this school
what it is , or indeed of any of the processes by which the higher tone
of thought and morality has been produced , THRING-187X-1,238.730

and in consequence they do often drag it down very much in their
ignorance . THRING-187X-1,238.731

It is very painful to me punishing these fellows , THRING-187X-1,238.732

and it spoils the match and supper for me besides exposing me to all
sorts of arguments ; THRING-187X-1,238.733

but I do not see any way by which the school can be reached but by
executing them , THRING-187X-1,238.734

and at this great crisis , when I am going to give way to the demand for
a resident professional , I must show that both the school honour and
the school government are above cricket . THRING-187X-1,238.735

I must give way on the professional . THRING-187X-1,238.736

It is better to make and control a movement than to be dragged by it .
THRING-187X-1,238.737

And not to have one has become equivalent to losing rank as a school ,
which would damage my work with the boys immensely .
THRING-187X-1,238.738

So I mean to give way , and take it in to our regular routine .
THRING-187X-1,238.739

<font> August 22nd . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,238.740

- I do not know that I ever in my life heard anything more inspiriting
{COM:sic} and touching than C. E. Green's statements in talking with
me before this , " that the stupidest boy who went out of Uppingham knew
and felt he had a <P_239> mission in life , " and much more to the same
purpose . THRING-187X-1,239.741

It is a glorious work of the Spirit of the living God when this living
feeling of true life catches fast hold of men like him , - a feeling , a
life , not a knowledge , power , or a school of thought , but a spirit
of holy effort . THRING-187X-1,239.742

Thank God for it . THRING-187X-1,239.743

<font> August 26th <$$font> . THRING-187X-1,239.744

- I have paid 10 +L {TEXT:+L10} today to P- at Stoke Dry , on an
arbitration for damage done by flood - reserving , however , all legal
rights for the future . THRING-187X-1,239.745

This is the first real claim made in nineteen years .
THRING-187X-1,239.746

No one has ever been able to frame a complaint against the boys into the
definite shape of a demand for damages . THRING-187X-1,239.747

P- behaved very civilly in the matter . THRING-187X-1,239.748

<font> September 4th <$$font> . THRING-187X-1,239.749

- I am almost amused at the way in which masters talk ... quite
forgetting , as they speak , that there was no school at all in its
present sense till I pulled it out of the depths of the sea .
THRING-187X-1,239.750

I quite feel as a pearl diver might do who sees in after_years the town
jewellers with his big pearl in their shop , which he brought out of
dark depths of the dangerous sea from the midst of the sharks and the
waters at the risk of life , whilst they have sat in the shop and put a
little setting and fixing work round it . THRING-187X-1,239.751

<font> September 9th <$$font> . THRING-187X-1,239.752

- How utterly different from my early dreams of combined work this has
been , this lonely toil at the stake with the perpetual baiting , and
the very imperfect realisation of the work I hoped for either in spirit
or in deed ! THRING-187X-1,239.753

But God will bless it some time or other , all that is of Him .
THRING-187X-1,239.754

That comforts me . THRING-187X-1,239.755

I never feel Him more than in these times of trial .
THRING-187X-1,239.756

How I should like to be released from this joyless government if it was
His will . THRING-187X-1,239.757

But I do@ @n't dare ask it . THRING-187X-1,239.758

I see so many signs that it is His will that it should be borne .
THRING-187X-1,239.759

<font> October 5th <$$font> . THRING-187X-1,239.760

- The fever cases going on well . THRING-187X-1,239.761

Very slight , THRING-187X-1,239.762

yet this treacherous illness may at any time kill ,
THRING-187X-1,239.763

and is just as infectious slight as severe . THRING-187X-1,239.764

A boy just come in saying he is sick , frightens me ;
THRING-187X-1,239.765

well , I trust not another case . THRING-187X-1,239.766

" The wicked flee when no man pursueth , " says the Psalmist ,
THRING-187X-1,239.767

and so do headmasters , so incessant is the storm of missiles of one
kind and another . THRING-187X-1,239.768

<font> October 16th <$$font> . THRING-187X-1,239.769

- I can@ @not feel free yet . THRING-187X-1,239.770

The weight has been on me so long . THRING-187X-1,239.771

But I do feel inexpressibly relieved at having at last , after so many
years waiting , been able to tell these <P_240> men plainly that there
were two sides to the question , and that I would go if they baited me
so incessantly and so foolishly . THRING-187X-1,240.772

It is a great fact the masters having absolutely withdrawn their
manifesto , instead of explaining and jawing , and taking the injured
innocence line , which I expected . THRING-187X-1,240.773

It shows how thoroughly the victory has been won at present .
THRING-187X-1,240.774

I only hope it will last . THRING-187X-1,240.775

<font> October 17th . <$$font> THRING-187X-1,240.776

- Can@ @not feel the strain off yet , though in a way I do feel it off .
THRING-187X-1,240.777

Yet one thing , all these struggles , however well they end , end less
well in most instances than no struggle at all . THRING-187X-1,240.778

The spirit needed to carry on a great and living work is seldom the
better for a fight when the fight has been from wrong grounds .
THRING-187X-1,240.779

True life needs to be drawn out , THRING-187X-1,240.780

and all the false striving , though it must be represeed , seldom turns
into healthy action . THRING-187X-1,240.781

Still for a time there is peace , THRING-187X-1,240.782

and so severe a lesson has been given to rebellion , that I trust never
again to have the like , THRING-187X-1,240.783

and at all events the ground is now clear ; THRING-187X-1,240.784

they know what it means , THRING-187X-1,240.785

and the nursery bickering and mere naughty child work can@ @not well
begin again . THRING-187X-1,240.786

