<BEGIN_tindall-1814-1>

<P_12>

<heading>

On the Horse in General . TINDALL-1814-1,12.4

<$$heading>

The distinguishing characteristics {TEXT:characterstics} of this genus
of animals are the foreteeth , TINDALL-1814-1,12.6

they are six in each jaw , the upper being erect and parallel , and the
lower more prominent ; TINDALL-1814-1,12.7

the canine teeth are single , placed at a distance from the rest and not
much longer ; TINDALL-1814-1,12.8

and the hoof is whole and undivided . TINDALL-1814-1,12.9

Of all quadrupeds , the horse appears to have received from nature the
greatest degree of beauty . TINDALL-1814-1,12.10

The noble extent of his form , the glossy smoothness of his skin , the
graceful ease of his motions , his strength , and above all his activity
and utility , render him one of the principal objects of human <P_13>
curiosity and care , TINDALL-1814-1,13.11

and teach us to regard him as an animal in whose welfare we are
interested . TINDALL-1814-1,13.12

He is the most generous and docile , spirited and yet obedient of all
creatures , and produced in almost every part of the world .
TINDALL-1814-1,13.13

Naturally mild in their dispositions , they are satisfied , even in a
wild state , with acting defensively against assailants , all their
precaution being to secure themselves against surprise .
TINDALL-1814-1,13.14

Convinced that the present Treatise will fall into the hands of numerous
young men , ignorant even of the external parts of a horse , and ,
anxious to render all the service I can to every class of readers ,
propriety calls upon me to point out the name and situation of such
parts , which can be no better done than by observing that the first
thing which offers itself to our notice , is the coat , or hair , called
when on the foretop , the topping : on the under lip , the beard : on
the upper part of the neck , the mane : the part that is most arched ,
the crest , TINDALL-1814-1,13.15

and when that sinks , a horse is said to be crest-fallen ;
TINDALL-1814-1,13.16

the tuft of hair which grows on the lower part of the leg behind , above
the heel , is termed the fetlock : TINDALL-1814-1,13.17

that which grows round over the top of the hoof , is called the crown :
TINDALL-1814-1,13.18

the hairs on the eye-lids are denominated <P_14> brills .
TINDALL-1814-1,14.19

Carcase is the common name by which the body of a horse is signified ;
whence arise the names large carcase , good carcase , &c.
TINDALL-1814-1,14.20

the forehead is often distinguished by the name of brow :
TINDALL-1814-1,14.21

the two hollows above the eyes , and which when deep are indicative of
old age , are termed the eye-pits : TINDALL-1814-1,14.22

the mark which frequently runs down the face is known by the name of
rache : TINDALL-1814-1,14.23

and the white spot in the forehead bears the name of star :
TINDALL-1814-1,14.24

the muzzle is formed by the lips and the tip of the nose :
TINDALL-1814-1,14.25

the back part of the head where it joins to the neck is called the poll
: TINDALL-1814-1,14.26

the place on the inside of the mouth where the tongue lies , is the
charnel , TINDALL-1814-1,14.27

and the bars are the fleshy rows that run across the upper part of the
mouth , and are very distinguishable in young horses :
TINDALL-1814-1,14.28

the top of the shoulder blades , and highest part of the spine , at the
setting on of the neck is named the withers , from the top of which a
horse is measured to know how many hands he is high :
TINDALL-1814-1,14.29

from the withers to the hind part of the back are reins , next to which
are the loins : TINDALL-1814-1,14.30

the extremity of the reins , above the hips to the tail , is called the
croup : TINDALL-1814-1,14.31

channel is the name of that part where the crupper lies ,
TINDALL-1814-1,14.32

and the tail is called the dock or runt : TINDALL-1814-1,14.33

<P_15>

the sinking of the back , if any , is named the sway :
TINDALL-1814-1,15.35

the flanks are the hinder part of the belly next the genitals , reaching
from the small ribs to the haunches : TINDALL-1814-1,15.36

the loose skin that covers the yard is the sheath , from which to the
brisket obtains the name of belly : TINDALL-1814-1,15.37

the point from the withers to the top joint of the thigh , inclosing the
whole breast on both sides is the shoulder , from whence the forelegs or
arms begin : TINDALL-1814-1,15.38

the hind part pointing towards the brisket is called the elbow :
TINDALL-1814-1,15.39

the middle joint is the knee , to which the foreleg reaches :
TINDALL-1814-1,15.40

the shank is the whole extent from the knee to the pastern ,
TINDALL-1814-1,15.41

and the strong tendon behind the shank is inserted into the heel , and
called the back sinew : TINDALL-1814-1,15.42

the fetlock joint is that place where the shank joins the pastern :
TINDALL-1814-1,15.43

the pastern reaches from the lower part of this joint to the foot ,
TINDALL-1814-1,15.44

and has a joint in the middle , by means of which , motion is
facilitated in the foot , TINDALL-1814-1,15.45

this joint distinguishes it into two parts , the great pastern next the
shank , and the lesser next the foot ; TINDALL-1814-1,15.46

the uniting of the lesser pastern with the foot is called the coffin
joint : TINDALL-1814-1,15.47

the hoof is sometimes called the horn , but more popularly the coffin :
TINDALL-1814-1,15.48

the tender part of the hoof next the heel has the name of the thrush ;
and the <P_16> ball of the foot the frog : TINDALL-1814-1,16.49

the sole is that horny part which covers the rest of the bottom of the
foot , and adheres to the verge of the hoof , where nails are driven
when a horse is shod : TINDALL-1814-1,16.50

the sides meeting on the heel are called the quarters :
TINDALL-1814-1,16.51

the haunches begin at the two bones at the back part of a horse , which
inclose the loins , and descend to the hough : TINDALL-1814-1,16.52

the stifle is the knee pan of a horse , seated in the middle joint of
the thigh , and outwardly that part which sets out from the thigh
towards the belly : TINDALL-1814-1,16.53

the thigh begins at the stifle , TINDALL-1814-1,16.54

and reaches to the bending of the hough : TINDALL-1814-1,16.55

the hough is the bending of the hind-leg , TINDALL-1814-1,16.56

and the round knob behind is called the heel of the hough , in which the
great master sinew is inserted : TINDALL-1814-1,16.57

the small part of the hind-leg bears the name of instep :
TINDALL-1814-1,16.58

that side of a horse which we approach in order to mount him is called
the near side , and the other the off side ; from whence we have the
terms of near foot , and off foot , the near eye , the off eye , and so
of the rest . TINDALL-1814-1,16.59

Having thus defined the external parts of a horse , and I trust in such
a manner as to enable the most inexperienced therein to know how to
affix proper names to the respective parts , when discoursing about so
useful <P_17> an animal , and to understand others when they shall make
use of the same . I next proceed to portray {TEXT:pourtray} the
properties of a good horse , a knowledge of which is of the greatest
importance to young speculators in an article , where a well informed
judgment is absolutely necessary to guard against imposition , and
insure satisfaction in the disposal of his money in the purchase thereof
; TINDALL-1814-1,17.60

and here it can@ @not be too strongly impressed on the mind , that , in
order to ascertain the beauties or defects of a horse , great caution
should be used , not merely by the novice , but the adept also ; without
which , faults may be overlooked till it is too late to remedy them ,
and the unwary have the mortification of sacrificing both judgment and
money . TINDALL-1814-1,17.61

One good qualification of a horse , is to possess thighs and legs clean
, and free from every kind of blemish : TINDALL-1814-1,17.62

the knees should be straight , not bending : the skin and shank thin :
the back sinews strong , and well braced : TINDALL-1814-1,17.63

the sinews and the bone should be evidently distinct , in such a manner
as to make the legs appear thin and lathy , not full and round ,
TINDALL-1814-1,17.64

for then they may be justly suspected : TINDALL-1814-1,17.65

the pastern joints should be free <P_18> from all disorders , never
large and round , which is a bad sign , TINDALL-1814-1,18.66

nor should there be any swelling near the coronet .
TINDALL-1814-1,18.67

The houghs should be lean and dry , not puffed up with wind , which you
may know by laying your finger upon it , TINDALL-1814-1,18.68

for the swelling will readily change its place . TINDALL-1814-1,18.69

With regard to the hoof , the coronet should be equally thick , the horn
shining and greyish , TINDALL-1814-1,18.70

for when the horn is white , indicates a bad foot , such a one as will
wear out in a short time . TINDALL-1814-1,18.71

A thin weak foot , that is , when the horn is thin , is liable to be
spoiled in shoeing , and by travelling hard on stony ground , by
droughts in hot seasons , and by too much moisture in winter :
TINDALL-1814-1,18.72

the thinness of the horn will best appear when the shoe is taken off ,
TINDALL-1814-1,18.73

for the verge all round the sole will appear thin , TINDALL-1814-1,18.74

and the horse will wince at the least touch of the pincers .
TINDALL-1814-1,18.75

The heel and frog likewise are often very tender to the touch ,
TINDALL-1814-1,18.76

and sometimes one point of the heel will stand higher than the other .
TINDALL-1814-1,18.77

A strong foot has the fibres of the foot very distinct , running in a
straight line from the coronet to the toe , like the grain of wood ,
TINDALL-1814-1,18.78

some such feet will last very well if care be taken to keep them moist
and pliable , which may be effected by an application of tar <P_19>
ointment ; TINDALL-1814-1,19.79

yet , if they are neglected when the horse travels much , especially on
stony ground , or when he stands long in a hot dry stable , they are apt
to go tender and lame , when there is no apparent defect in the foot ,
which is occasioned by the hardness of the hoof . TINDALL-1814-1,19.80

A narrow heel is likewise a defect ; TINDALL-1814-1,19.81

when the heel is not above two fingers in breadth , the foot is bad :
TINDALL-1814-1,19.82

both the feet should be of an equal size , and not flat or without depth
; TINDALL-1814-1,19.83

but if such a foot happens to be strong , the hoof smooth , the sole
firm , and the frog not decayed , rotten , or fleshy , the horse will
then endure the roads tolerably well ; TINDALL-1814-1,19.84

but when it is like an oyster with many rings or wrinkles , at the same
time that the sole is soft , and the frog fleshy and spongy , it is a
very great defect . TINDALL-1814-1,19.85

When the foot is too large in proportion to the rest of the body though
good in other respects , such a horse , at best , will be weak and heavy
, as well as unapt for vigorous actions . TINDALL-1814-1,19.86

The head of a horse should be small , at least not too long , nor too
large , rather lean than fleshy : TINDALL-1814-1,19.87

the ears should be small , erect , thin , sprightly , and pointed :
TINDALL-1814-1,19.88

his forehead should be neither too broad , nor too <P_20> flat ,
TINDALL-1814-1,20.89

and should possess a star or snip : TINDALL-1814-1,20.90

his nose should rise a little , and be well turned : his nostrils wide ,
which will empower him to breathe more freely : TINDALL-1814-1,20.91

his muzzle should be small , and his mouth between the two extremes of
deep and shallow , TINDALL-1814-1,20.92

the jaws of a good horse are thin and sufficiently wide , not
approaching too {COM:text_has_"to"_but_see_errata} near at the throat ,
nor too high upwards , near the onset ; TINDALL-1814-1,20.93

thus formed , he is enabled to carry his head in an easy , graceful
posture : TINDALL-1814-1,20.94

his eyes should be of a middle size , bright , lively and full of fire :
the tongue small , that the bit may not press too much upon it :
TINDALL-1814-1,20.95

the bars should be sharp_ridged and lean , which enables the rider to
govern him better by the bridle . TINDALL-1814-1,20.96

When a horse displays a mouthful of white froth , it is a good sign ,
TINDALL-1814-1,20.97

and shews that he will not easily be overheated . TINDALL-1814-1,20.98

The neck should be arched towards the middle , rising by a beautiful
gradation out of his breast and shoulders , diminishing as it approaches
towards the head : TINDALL-1814-1,20.99

the muscles should be distinct and not too full of flesh :
TINDALL-1814-1,20.100

the hair of the mane should be long , thin , and fine ,
TINDALL-1814-1,20.101

if a little frizzled , so much the better . TINDALL-1814-1,20.102

His shoulders should be thin from the withers , pretty long , and well
raised ; TINDALL-1814-1,20.103

a <P_21> thick_shouldered horse is not only disagreeable to the rider ,
TINDALL-1814-1,21.104

but he soon tires , TINDALL-1814-1,21.105

and trips , or stumbles very much , especially if he has a thick large
neck at the same time . TINDALL-1814-1,21.106

When the breasts of horses are so narrow , that their fore-thighs almost
touch , they are worth little , TINDALL-1814-1,21.107

for they have a weak fore-hand , TINDALL-1814-1,21.108

and by crossing their legs are apt to cut ; TINDALL-1814-1,21.109

also in gallopping they are liable to fall . TINDALL-1814-1,21.110

A horse of a middle size should have the distance of five or six inches
between his fore-thighs , TINDALL-1814-1,21.111

and when he stands strait upon his limbs , there should be less distance
between his feet than between his thighs near the shoulders .
TINDALL-1814-1,21.112

The body should be of a medial size , in proportion to his bulk ,
TINDALL-1814-1,21.113

for when it is too small , the horse is generally weak ;
TINDALL-1814-1,21.114

his back should sink a little below the withers , TINDALL-1814-1,21.115

but the other part should never be too low ; TINDALL-1814-1,21.116

when the back of a horse is higher behind than before , he is apt to be
pinched in his shoulders , TINDALL-1814-1,21.117

is very awkward in appearance , and generally weak .
TINDALL-1814-1,21.118

A horse should be home-ribbed , TINDALL-1814-1,21.119

but the short ribs should not approach too near the haunches ,
TINDALL-1814-1,21.120

for then he will breathe with difficulty ; TINDALL-1814-1,21.121

those that are open ribbed , are of a lax texture ,
TINDALL-1814-1,21.122

are loose in the flanks , and consequently weak , TINDALL-1814-1,21.123

besides , they are narrow in the <P_22> chine , TINDALL-1814-1,22.124

have little or no bellies , and totally unfit for a long journey , as
also for carrying a heavy burthen . TINDALL-1814-1,22.125

When a horse's back is very short in proportion to his bulk , and yet
otherwise well_limbed , he will hold out well enough on a journey ,
TINDALL-1814-1,22.126

but he is slow , TINDALL-1814-1,22.127

and never makes a good appearance ; TINDALL-1814-1,22.128

when he is tall at the same time , with very long legs , he is of little
value ; TINDALL-1814-1,22.129

his flanks should not be hollow , but smooth and full ,
TINDALL-1814-1,22.130

so his hind parts should not be higher than his shoulders ;
TINDALL-1814-1,22.131

and when his back is a little arched behind the saddle , it indicates
strength , and a fitness for either hunting or travelling .
TINDALL-1814-1,22.132

Having thus described the external properties constituting a good horse
, it may not be an useless task to remark , that , the temper of a horse
is a principal thing to be observed , but is not easily discoverable ,
or readily known , unless to an adept in their tricks ;
TINDALL-1814-1,22.133

however , there are some prognostics by which their dispositions may be
pretty accurately ascertained by the eye of a keen observer ; if
previously informed that a vicious horse generally lays his ears close
to his poll , shews the white of his eyes and looks sullen ;
TINDALL-1814-1,22.134

some have a frowning look , TINDALL-1814-1,22.135

and carry anger in their countenances , TINDALL-1814-1,22.136

such seem to stand in a <P_23> posture of defence , holding up their
heads very high , and advancing one of their hindlegs forward , which
they rest on their toe , as if preparing to kick the person that comes
near them . TINDALL-1814-1,23.137

A horse that is fearful and apt to start , often endangers the rider's
neck , TINDALL-1814-1,23.138

this temper is readily distinguished by his crouching creeping , and
sudden starting . TINDALL-1814-1,23.139

A hot fretful horse is never able to endure any fatigue ,
TINDALL-1814-1,23.140

for he is soon spent , and incapable of performing his allotted task .
TINDALL-1814-1,23.141

A horse of this kind will soon manifest his fretful temper , when once
taken out of the stable , TINDALL-1814-1,23.142

and seldom leaves it off till he has lost his spirits .
TINDALL-1814-1,23.143

The temper of a dull , sluggish horse , can@ @not easily be concealed by
the temporary tricks which are daily resorted to , in order to impose
upon the ignorant and unwary ; TINDALL-1814-1,23.144

some use sharp spurs , TINDALL-1814-1,23.145

others try to rouse him into action by the noise of the whip , and
various other stratagems ; TINDALL-1814-1,23.146

but nature , in defiance of such efforts , betrays his disposition ,
TINDALL-1814-1,23.147

for such a horse , under such treatment , always appears in a hurry ,
and fluttered ; TINDALL-1814-1,23.148

however , such horses as these will last long , TINDALL-1814-1,23.149

and often prove very useful animals for some sort of work :
TINDALL-1814-1,23.150

upon the whole , it appears insufficient that every single part of a
horse , when taken <P_24> to pieces , should be well formed , beautiful
, and free from blemish , TINDALL-1814-1,24.151

he should make a good appearance collectively considered , every limb
bearing a just proportion to each other , and an exact symmetry ,
gracing the whole ; TINDALL-1814-1,24.152

when this is the case , trifling defects may be overlooked , especially
if his motions are easy and graceful , and all his paces sprightly ,
just , and regular . TINDALL-1814-1,24.153

Every person who has occasion to purchase this noble animal , whether as
an article of commerce , for an employer , or for his own use , ought to
be acquainted how to ascertain the age of the horse he has in
contemplation , without which , he is liable to be grossly imposed upon
in the purchase thereof , and when it is too late , blame himself for
inadvertency in a matter so nearly connected with his pecuniary interest
, or of those for whom he may be empowered to act ;
TINDALL-1814-1,24.154

in order , then {COM:missing_comma} to guard the inexperienced against
impositions of this sort , it will be necessary to apprise such , that a
colt is foaled without teeth ; in a few days , he puts out four , which
are called pincers , or nippers ; soon after , appear the four
separators , next to the nippers ; it is sometimes three or four months
before the next , called the corner teeth , push forth ; these twelve
colt's <P_25> teeth , in the front of the mouth , continue without
alternation , till the colt is two years and a half old , which makes it
difficult , without great care , to avoid being imposed upon during that
interval , if the seller finds it his interest to make the colt pass for
either younger or older than he really is ; the only rule you then have
to judge by is his coat , and the hairs of his mane and tail .
TINDALL-1814-1,25.155

A colt of one year has a supple , rough coat , resembling that of a
water spaniel , TINDALL-1814-1,25.156

and the hair of his mane and tail feels like flax ,
TINDALL-1814-1,25.157

and hangs like a rope untwisted ; whereas , a colt of two years , has a
flat coat , and strait hairs like a full grown horse .
TINDALL-1814-1,25.158

At about two years and a half old , sooner or later , according as he
has been fed , a horse begins to change his teeth ;
TINDALL-1814-1,25.159

the nippers which came the first , are also the first that fall ; so
that at three years old , he has four horse's and eight colt's teeth ,
which are easily known apart , the former being larger , flatter and
yellower than the other , and streaked from the ends quite into the gums
. TINDALL-1814-1,25.160

These four horse pincers have , in the middle of their extremities , a
black hole , very deep ; whereas those of the colt are round and white .
TINDALL-1814-1,25.161

When the horse is coming four years old , he loses <P_26> his four
separators , or middle teeth , TINDALL-1814-1,26.162

and puts forth four others , which follow the same rule as the pincers ;
TINDALL-1814-1,26.163

he has now eight horse's teeth , and four colt's teeth .
TINDALL-1814-1,26.164

At five years old he sheds the four corner , which are the last of the
colt's , TINDALL-1814-1,26.165

he then acquires the name of horse : TINDALL-1814-1,26.166

during this year also , his four tusks <paren> which are chiefly
peculiar to horses <$$paren> come behind the others , the lower ones
often four months before the upper ; TINDALL-1814-1,26.167

but whatever may be vulgarly thought , a horse that has the two lower
tusks , if he has not the upper , may be judged to be under five years
old , unless the other teeth shew the contrary ; TINDALL-1814-1,26.168

for some horses that live to be very old , never have any tusks at all .
TINDALL-1814-1,26.169

The two lower tusks are one of the most certain rules that a horse is
coming five years old , notwithstanding his colt's may not be all gone .
TINDALL-1814-1,26.170

A practice very prevalent among breeders and jockies , who wish to make
their colts appear five years old , when they are but four , is to pull
out the last colt's teeth , TINDALL-1814-1,26.171

but should all the colt's be gone , and tusks not {TEXT:missing_"not"}
appear , you may be certain this trick has been played ;
TINDALL-1814-1,26.172

another artifice , cruel in its nature , is practised among this class
of men , which is done by beating the bars daily with a wooden mallet ,
<P_27> where the tusks are to appear , in order to make them hard as if
the tusks were ready to cut . TINDALL-1814-1,27.173

When a horse is coming six years old , the lower pincers fill up ,
TINDALL-1814-1,27.174

and instead of the holes before mentioned , shew only a black spot :
TINDALL-1814-1,27.175

betwixt six and seven the two middle teeth fill up in the same manner ;
TINDALL-1814-1,27.176

and between seven and eight the corner ones do the same ; after which it
is next to impossible to know certainly the age of a horse , he having
no longer any mark in the mouth . TINDALL-1814-1,27.177

When a horse has completed his teeth , his number is forty ,
TINDALL-1814-1,27.178

but as mares have usually no tusks , their teeth amount to no more than
thirty-six . TINDALL-1814-1,27.179

There are some sorts of horses whose teeth always appear white and short
, as if they were but six years old ; TINDALL-1814-1,27.180

when such fall into the hands of cheats , they often countermark them by
hollowing the corner teeth with an engraving tool , putting some double
ink immediately into the hole , and letting it dry there , which will
remain as long as the teeth continue hollow : TINDALL-1814-1,27.181

to prevent being imposed on by such villains {TEXT:villians} , observe ,
if there be any scratches on the outside of the hollow teeth , because
the graver sometimes slips and scratches the other parts of the teeth ,
TINDALL-1814-1,27.182

for then you may conclude him counter-marked , TINDALL-1814-1,27.183

<P_28>

and an artificial hollow , is much blacker than a natural one :
TINDALL-1814-1,28.185

take notice also of his upper tusks , the inside of which should be
grooved or hollow , till he is seven years old . TINDALL-1814-1,28.186

Other impostors burn a grain of rye in the hollows of the teeth , with a
red_hot iron , which make them perfectly black ; TINDALL-1814-1,28.187

for there issues from the rye a kind of oil , that by means of the
burning , cleaves fast to the hollows of the teeth newly cut .
TINDALL-1814-1,28.188

Query , TINDALL-1814-1,28.189

do not such practitioners deserve to be burnt in the hand ?
TINDALL-1814-1,28.190

Much more might be advanced on this subject , TINDALL-1814-1,28.191

but I trust these observations duly attended to , will be sufficient to
guard the inexperienced against the deceptive practices put in force
daily by men lost to all sense of shame , and who conceive all knowledge
consists in outwitting their neighbours , the sum total of whose creed
is , to do unto others , as they would not they should do unto them .
TINDALL-1814-1,28.192

I shall next proceed to lay down rules for choosing draught horses ,
which in farming , is a sort of coarse made horse , destined for the
service of cart or plow . TINDALL-1814-1,28.193

The draught horse should be large_bodied and strong_loined , and of such
a disposition , as rather to be too dull than too brisk , and rather to
crave the whip than to draw more than is needful .
TINDALL-1814-1,28.194

<P_29>

Mares are the fittest for this use for the farm , as they are kept cheap
, and not only do the work , but keep breeding , and give a yearly
increase of a foal . TINDALL-1814-1,29.196

They should have a good head , neck , breast and shoulder ,
TINDALL-1814-1,29.197

for the rest of the shape it is not of any very material consequence .
TINDALL-1814-1,29.198

Draught horses should be always kept to that employ ;
TINDALL-1814-1,29.199

some put them to the saddle occasionally , TINDALL-1814-1,29.200

but it alters their pace TINDALL-1814-1,29.201

and spoils them for labour . TINDALL-1814-1,29.202

He should have a broad head , with ears small , strait and upright ; the
nostrils large and open ; full and bold eyes , TINDALL-1814-1,29.203

for such promise well . TINDALL-1814-1,29.204

On the contrary , a sunk eye , and an elevated brow are bad signs .
TINDALL-1814-1,29.205

Horses best adapted for this purpose , should display large round
buttocks , which neither sink down nor cut ; TINDALL-1814-1,29.206

they must have firm and strong tails , TINDALL-1814-1,29.207

the docks should be thick and well set with hair , and placed neither
very high , nor very low : TINDALL-1814-1,29.208

the legs should be rather flat and broad than round ; such roundness
being a fault in a horse destined to hard labour , that will soon ruin
him . TINDALL-1814-1,29.209

As to the hinder-legs , the thighs should be fleshy and long ,
TINDALL-1814-1,29.210

and the whole muscle which shows itself on the outside of the thigh
should be large and very thick . TINDALL-1814-1,29.211

Nothing is so essential to the health of these <P_30> serviceable
creatures as cleanliness ; TINDALL-1814-1,30.212

if they are fed ever so well , and not kept clean , they are subject to
numerous diseases . TINDALL-1814-1,30.213

There can@ @not , in the nature of things be any infallible general rule
laid down for the shape of horses devoted to the turf , unless all men
could be induced to think alike on a subject which , however , admits of
multifarious and varied opinions ; TINDALL-1814-1,30.214

for while a fine slender make is the standard of perfection with some ,
others cry out as loudly against such delicacy , TINDALL-1814-1,30.215

and give a decided preference to one of a strong full body .
TINDALL-1814-1,30.216

If then , a medium between these extremes , is fixed on as a criterion ,
and it appears to me to be the likeliest way of reconciling jarring
opinions , and of escaping the revilings of the obstinate espousers of
each hypothesis , I may venture to lay it down as a rule , that a
running horse should be between fifteen and sixteen hands high , with
strength in proportion , and at the same time , free from every
appearance of clumsiness , shewing evident signs of briskness and
activity . TINDALL-1814-1,30.217

As to colour , fancy interferes as much as in the size , strength , &c.
TINDALL-1814-1,30.218

but a dark bay , with black eyes , is generally preferred ;
TINDALL-1814-1,30.219

though the goodness of a horse has no dependence on the stars and snips
of the face , yet most men prefer <P_31> such as have them , provided he
is in other respects equally good . TINDALL-1814-1,31.220

His head should be small , the forehead flat , the ears large , and not
placed at too great a distance from each other , playing with them , by
alternately depressing and raising them , as it is indicative of good
health . TINDALL-1814-1,31.221

He should possess eyes full and sprightly ; wide and thin nostrils ;
TINDALL-1814-1,31.222

his jawbones near the windpipe should be at a good distance asunder ,
TINDALL-1814-1,31.223

otherwise , by squeezing the windpipe his breath is affected ;
TINDALL-1814-1,31.224

his throttle should be loose and disengaged . TINDALL-1814-1,31.225

A neck of a moderate length enables him to fetch his breath with greater
ease , whereas , an over_long one renders the windpipe circular ,
preventing the wind from passing backward and forward with the necessary
freedom : TINDALL-1814-1,31.226

the neck should be well shaped in order to add beauty to the symmetry of
the whole animal . TINDALL-1814-1,31.227

Sound and large lungs he should have ; TINDALL-1814-1,31.228

a sign of the largeness of the lungs is , a capacious chest , with a
large and loose windpipe ; TINDALL-1814-1,31.229

indeed , no animal with a narrow chest , can have room for a free
expansion of the lungs , without which , such animal will feel a
oppression in breathing ; TINDALL-1814-1,31.230

such a circumstance ought never to be overlooked in running horses .
TINDALL-1814-1,31.231

Such a horse should bring <P_32> his haunches under him when he gallops
, lifting his fore-feet but a little off the ground , which enables him
to run with ease to himself , and often with advantage to his owner .
TINDALL-1814-1,32.232

The shoulders upon the chine should be moderately thin , the shoulder
blades rising in due proportion to the top of the withers , meeting
equally , and not playing up and down under the skin , which is a sign
of weakness . TINDALL-1814-1,32.233

The back of a running horse should be rather long than short , in which
case , if he is broad_filleted , he will be able to spring forward the
better , and that at a moment when such an exertion is " a consummation
devoutly to be wished . " TINDALL-1814-1,32.234

Broad_filleted horses are those that are full of flesh on their fillets
, or loins ; TINDALL-1814-1,32.235

he should neither be round_barrelled , nor very flat_ribbed but between
both : TINDALL-1814-1,32.236

his haunches should be large and wide ; the croup pretty straight , not
having too great a fall : TINDALL-1814-1,32.237

the thighs should be full and strong , but not fleshy :
TINDALL-1814-1,32.238

the pasterns should be proportionably long , TINDALL-1814-1,32.239

and he should stand upright upon them ; TINDALL-1814-1,32.240

for the horse whose pastern bones are long , will make the longer stroke
when he gallops : TINDALL-1814-1,32.241

the fore-hoofs should be pretty large , smooth and flattish .
TINDALL-1814-1,32.242

By men accustomed to rail at every fresh <P_33> publication , unless
deriving emolument therefrom , I may be taxed with giving too much of
the labours of other men ; TINDALL-1814-1,33.243

by men well acquainted with the horse , I may be accused of prolixity in
describing the different classes thereof ; TINDALL-1814-1,33.244

but as a book of this nature may fall into the hands of juvenile
adventurers , who want every information which one man can communicate
to another on the subject , I trust I shall be excused with the former ,
for trusting to others in some of the descriptive parts , whose talents
I revere : since our ideas are coincident , and founded on truth , our
language might have differed , but the intent would remain the same ,
and with the latter , when they reflect on the advantage such knowledge
must be of to those for whom it is written . TINDALL-1814-1,33.245

In the medicinal department , I shall trust to the result of many years
experience , not , as is too commonly the case , forming recipes by
analogy ; TINDALL-1814-1,33.246

and I expect escaping the accusation of being vain , when I declare
myself confident of success crowning a fair trial of those , found in
the subsequent pages of this work ; TINDALL-1814-1,33.247

they are what I have undeviatingly trusted to with the happiest effects
, and such <P_34> as I can conscientiously recommend to the use and
service of such persons as may have occasion to resort to them ;
TINDALL-1814-1,34.248

but before I lay down the method of cure , it will be necessary to
describe the malady with which this valuable quadruped is afflicted ,
TINDALL-1814-1,34.249

and as colds are generally the forerunners of most disorders , I shall
begin with observations on <heading> Colds and Coughs : <$$heading> in
doing which , it will be proper to remark , that by the wonderful
mechanism of nature , in the formation of animals , innumerable pipes
and vessels are contrived , as so many canals , through which the blood
and humours constantly circulate , when the animal is in a perfect state
of health , and that numberless exceeding fine particles are continually
flying off from the surface of such bodies , either in the form of
vapour , or that of a fluid . TINDALL-1814-1,34.250

Perspiration is the general name of such vapour , or fluid ,
TINDALL-1814-1,34.251

and is so copious as to exceed the aggregate amount of all the other
secretions . TINDALL-1814-1,34.252

The blood being constantly propelled towards the excretory pores of the
skin , by the constant dilation and contraction of the arteries , is the
cause of perspiration ; besides which , there is an internal heat , or
rarefying {TEXT:rarifying} virtue , that expands the fluids , opens the
pores , and resolves <P_35> moisture into exceeding fine vapours , from
which it is easy to infer , that the greater the force is , by which the
blood or humours are driven to the surface of the body of any animal ,
the more copious perspiration will be , unless prevented by the stoppage
of the pores ; TINDALL-1814-1,35.253

consequently , whatever accelerates the circulation of these fluids ,
increases perspiration , instanced in labour and exercise , which by
increasing the pulse , increases heat and perspiration .
TINDALL-1814-1,35.254

The motion of the heart must also be increased before sweat can be
promoted . TINDALL-1814-1,35.255

Observation has convinced the judicious , that the course of the fluids
, and the motion of the fibres are more quick and lively in a pure
serene air , than in a gross and troubled one ; from which , it is
reasonable to conclude , that perspiration will be more free in the
former case than in the latter . TINDALL-1814-1,35.256

One preventive of this secretion is , a great degree of internal heat ,
with a dryness of the skin at the same time , as in fevers .
TINDALL-1814-1,35.257

Another is , when the air is moderately hot and moist , the fine vessels
under the skin are dilated , and the skin itself rendered moist and
tumid , which tends to consume the redundant humours ;
TINDALL-1814-1,35.258

this preserves the vital fluids in their proper temperature , while the
former exhausts the strength , and <P_36> has a fatal tendency .
TINDALL-1814-1,36.259

All animals sweat more in summer than in winter , TINDALL-1814-1,36.260

and , as uninterrupted perspiration carries off many disorders , so , on
the contrary , when it is impeded , many diseases will be induced ,
which , if not of fatal , are of dangerous consequences , because a
superfluity of impure juices will be generated thereby , which are
disposed to corruption and putrefaction , particularly colds , coughs ,
running at the nose , rheumatisms , &c. TINDALL-1814-1,36.261

these redundant humours are more apt to affect the lungs and head than
any other parts , because when a horse has been heated , and suffered to
cool suddenly , the acrid scrum and perspirable matter , drove back from
the skin , falls upon the windpipe and lungs , and so occasions coughing
, which is an effort of nature , to rid herself of the peccant matter
which is so oppressive to her . TINDALL-1814-1,36.262

What then can be more likely to produce a cold , than to bring a horse
out of a hot stable into the cold air ? TINDALL-1814-1,36.263

it immediately closes the pores of the skin , TINDALL-1814-1,36.264

impels the acrid matter to the inward parts , especially to the
glanduluous coats of the throat , mouth , nostrils , and bronchia of the
lungs producing coughing , running at the nose , defluctions , catarrha
, inflammatory , and other fevers . TINDALL-1814-1,36.265

Another great cause of such effects is , after <P_37> hard riding , to
suffer the poor , panting animal to stand at some alehouse door ,
shivering and shaking , from the sudden transition , while his
thoughtless rider is indulging himself with exhilarating liquor , and
perhaps boasting of the feats of his neglected animal .
TINDALL-1814-1,37.266

There are others too , such as immuring them in cold , damp stables ,
neglecting to rub them well , and carefully wipe off {TEXT:of} the sweat
from their heated bodies , on their return from a journey ,
TINDALL-1814-1,37.267

for if the sweat be suffered to remain on , the cold air will soon
condense it , thereby stopping the pores of the skin , and consequently
preventing perspiration ; TINDALL-1814-1,37.268

fatal as these may often prove to animals deserving our best care and
attention , they may perhaps be considered as minor causes , compared
with that of urging a horse into a deep pond , or perhaps a river ,
while the fine vapours are exuding from every part of his body , heated
with over_exertion , and covering the surface of the water with
mist-like exhalations . TINDALL-1814-1,37.269

Do not such riders merit the severest castigation , from the very whip
which they use to compel the poor beast to plunge into an element , at a
time when nature prompts them to forego an immersion therein ?
TINDALL-1814-1,37.270

Sometimes epidemical colds appear in the <P_38> spring , from the vapour
the heat of the sun draws from the earth : likewise in autumn and winter
, when after a warm south wind , a cold one from the north suddenly
succeeds , producing the effects before mentioned .
TINDALL-1814-1,38.271

The first symptoms of a cold are coughing , heaviness , and dullness ,
which according to the degree of severity , is rendered more or less
perceptible ; TINDALL-1814-1,38.272

no sooner do the above symptoms manifest themselves than it becomes
necessary to feel between the jaws , and behind the ears , to ascertain
whether he has any swellings <paren> commonly called kernels <$$paren>
in those parts , such being evident signs of this disorder .
TINDALL-1814-1,38.273

Sometimes the eyes appear moist and watery ; TINDALL-1814-1,38.274

and as the cold increases in violence , he often falls off his appetite
, TINDALL-1814-1,38.275

becomes feverish , TINDALL-1814-1,38.276

and exhibits a working at his flanks . TINDALL-1814-1,38.277

When the cough is strong , and the horse does not refuse scalded bran ,
nor warm water , at the same time pricking up his ears and moving
briskly in his stall , it is a good sign ; as also when he dungs and
stales freely without pain : likewise , when his skin feels as it did
when he was in health , and when his mouth is moist without being clammy
; TINDALL-1814-1,38.278

but when he betrays signs exactly the reverse of all these , when his
belly appears tucked_up , there is <P_39> danger of a fever ;
TINDALL-1814-1,39.279

when he feels hotter than ordinary , with a working at his flanks ; when
he will not eat his meat , and refuses water ; when his eyes are very
moist , his mouth slimy , and his ears and feet cold , there is danger
of a malignant fever . TINDALL-1814-1,39.280

Aged horses are not so subject to colds as young ones ,
TINDALL-1814-1,39.281

for these often have a cough and slight fever in breeding their teeth ,
especially before they cut their tushes ; TINDALL-1814-1,39.282

some young horses are troubled with a cough in the beginning of summer ,
from worms , &c. TINDALL-1814-1,39.283

If a horse has got a cold , accompanied with a snorting , his appetite
being good , and attended only with a slight cough , you need only take
about two quarts of blood from him , keep him warm , exercise him , and
diet him with lineseed , or bran mashes , in which flour of brimstone
may be mixed , and plenty of warm water . TINDALL-1814-1,39.284

It is also very serviceable to dissolve a little nitre in his water ;
observing to allow him only a small quantity of hay ;
TINDALL-1814-1,39.285

the next morning if he breathes with difficulty , take three pints more
blood TINDALL-1814-1,39.286

and administer a dose of the following mixture , in the form of balls :
- TINDALL-1814-1,39.287

<heading>

Recipe . TINDALL-1814-1,39.289

<$$heading>

Antimony , 4 ozs. TINDALL-1814-1,39.291

Nitre pulverized , 4 ozs. TINDALL-1814-1,39.292

<P_40>

Gum Ammoniac , 2 ozs. TINDALL-1814-1,40.294

Castile Soap , 2 ozs. TINDALL-1814-1,40.295

Garlic , or Squills , 4 ozs. TINDALL-1814-1,40.296

With a sufficient quantity of balsam of capivi to give the whole the
consistency of balls ; the above quantity , when beat well together ,
and properly blended with the balsam , is to be divided into eight equal
parts , one of which , about the size of an egg , is to be given morning
and night ; TINDALL-1814-1,40.297

omit repeating it for three successive days , at the end of which time ,
if occasion requires , administer another dose as before , remembering
to give the lineseed , or bran mashes , two or three times a day .
TINDALL-1814-1,40.298

If the horse has a cough , and not attended with a great degree of fever
, prepare the following balls : - TINDALL-1814-1,40.299

<heading>

Recipe . TINDALL-1814-1,40.301

<$$heading>

Ginger in powder , 2 ozs. TINDALL-1814-1,40.303

Gum Opium , 1 oz. TINDALL-1814-1,40.304

Camphor , 1 oz. TINDALL-1814-1,40.305

Antimony , 2 ozs. TINDALL-1814-1,40.306

Castile Soap , 2 ozs. TINDALL-1814-1,40.307

Garlic , or Squills , 2 ozs. TINDALL-1814-1,40.308

Reduce these into a well incorporated mass , adding thereunto a
sufficient quantity of honey to make them into balls ;
TINDALL-1814-1,40.309

divide the whole into six parts , giving one , six successive nights ;
TINDALL-1814-1,40.310

omit three days as before , TINDALL-1814-1,40.311

and if occasion demands it , repeat on the fourth <P_41> night , and the
five next succeeding , being particularly careful to keep the horse from
cold , during the time he is taking the above balls , which require warm
water , lineseed , or bran mashes ; TINDALL-1814-1,41.312

and when he has recovered , give him a dose of gentle physic .
TINDALL-1814-1,41.313

If his mouth appears dry and parched , great relief will be afforded him
by frequently washing it with vinegar and honey . TINDALL-1814-1,41.314

Should his cough become obstinate , notwithstanding your exertions to
remove it , have recourse to the recipe given in the appendix for that
purpose , to which I have known the most inveterate cough to
{TEXT:missing_"to"} submit . TINDALL-1814-1,41.315

Epidemical colds attack great numbers at once , TINDALL-1814-1,41.316

and are attended with swellings in the glands , under the ears , and
about the throat , which are more considerable than the common disease
called by that name . TINDALL-1814-1,41.317

This is to be cured in the same manner as other colds ,
TINDALL-1814-1,41.318

but particular care must be taken to keep the head and neck warm , but
covering them . TINDALL-1814-1,41.319

Copious discharges from the nose is very common in two or three days
after they are attacked , generally continuing five or six days , which
makes them fall away very much , TINDALL-1814-1,41.320

but if the discharge is of a good colour and consistence , the horse may
be <P_42> considered out of danger . TINDALL-1814-1,42.321

As this distemper is infectious , policy points out the necessity of
removing those which are unaffected , to another place .
TINDALL-1814-1,42.322

Bleeding affords the speediest relief ; after which , administer such
pectoral medicines as are given in a common cold , with a diet of
scalded bran and hay . TINDALL-1814-1,42.323

Sometimes half a pint of white wine , with three ounces of squills will
be found useful to promote expectoration . TINDALL-1814-1,42.324

When horses have a cough at the time of cutting their teeth , it is
generally pretty strong , TINDALL-1814-1,42.325

and continues till all the teeth are grown ; TINDALL-1814-1,42.326

it is entirely symptomatical , TINDALL-1814-1,42.327

and arises from the consent of parts ; TINDALL-1814-1,42.328

here bleeding is found efficacious to alleviate the symptoms .
TINDALL-1814-1,42.329

It is no unusual thing for a swelling in the roof of the mouth to
supervene , known by the name of the lampass , which sometimes rises
higher than the teeth , in which case , the horse mangles his hay .
TINDALL-1814-1,42.330

While some are of opinion that the lampass should be left to itself ,
without attempting a cure , and others burn the part with a red_hot iron
, causing the teeth , by the time the horse has reached his twelfth year
, to appear long , the gums having the appearance of shrinking therefrom
, so that a dealer might pass him for one at sixteen , I will , in
<P_43> as brief a manner as I am able , describe my method of treating
the lampass , which gives immediate relief when dexterously executed ,
and preserves the horse's mouth from the very unpleasant marks
occasioned by the application of a red_hot iron as already noticed .
TINDALL-1814-1,43.331

Providing myself with a very sharp knife , opening the horse's mouth ,
and deliberately applying it to the second bar , I slit it , and the
first bar , by drawing the knife with an even hand in a direct line
towards my breast . TINDALL-1814-1,43.332

My reason for doing it deliberately is , to make sure of not going
beyond the second bar , because , inattention herein , may cause the
operator to cut the third , or even the fourth bar , in which is found
an artery , occasioning thereby a large effusion of blood , which , if
not properly stopped , might be attended with danger ; but which may be
remedied by attending to the following method of treatment :
TINDALL-1814-1,43.333

- Take a piece of sheet lead , of a circular form , and the size of a
crown piece ; TINDALL-1814-1,43.334

if it is to be met with , procure a leaf of lady's mantle ,
TINDALL-1814-1,43.335

bruise it TINDALL-1814-1,43.336

and lay it upon the lead , TINDALL-1814-1,43.337

but if you can@ @not meet with one , cover the lead over with the balsam
of poplar , which done , get a small linen bag filled with flour ,
TINDALL-1814-1,43.338

then applying the lead , &c. in a firm manner to the <P_44> roof of the
mouth , here cut , TINDALL-1814-1,44.339

place the bag in a judicious manner over the lead , tying it with
ligatures , to go round the horse's nostrils , and round his ears in the
form of a halter ; TINDALL-1814-1,44.340

tie him up to the rack for the space of ten hours , suffering him to
have nothing but bran mashes for twenty-four hours after you have bound
the lead on , which , if properly managed , will stop the flux of blood
in less than quarter of an hour . TINDALL-1814-1,44.341

Having been very verbose on colds and coughs , I shall now dismiss the
subject , and advance a few words on the <heading> Pulse : <$$heading>
In attending to which , numberless advantages offer to those who have
the care of sick horses ; TINDALL-1814-1,44.342

for the degree of violence of the disease is not only rendered familiar
to use thereby , but the probable issue , in a great measure , judged of
; TINDALL-1814-1,44.343

nor are these all the benefits derived from a close attention to
pulsation ; TINDALL-1814-1,44.344

the nature of the malady is often more clearly ascertained by it , a
knowledge of which , enables us to apply suitable and efficacious
remedies . TINDALL-1814-1,44.345

It is universally allowed that about forty pulsations in a minute , is a
good criterion of health in a horse . TINDALL-1814-1,44.346

The pulse may be distinctly felt either on the left side , or by an
application to an artery which passes <P_45> over the lower jawbone , or
, in fact to any other superficial artery . TINDALL-1814-1,45.347

When a horse neglects his food , or feeds irregularly , and at the same
time appears listless , examine his pulsations , TINDALL-1814-1,45.348

bring them to the standard of health , forty , which , if they exceed ,
use the fleam , and thereby prevent many dangerous , and sometimes
complicated disorders . TINDALL-1814-1,45.349

Ninety pulsations in a minute indicates danger , TINDALL-1814-1,45.350

but when they exceed one_hundred , death frequently terminates the
disease , baffling the skill of the veterinarian adept , as well as the
unlettered farrier . TINDALL-1814-1,45.351

<heading> Inflammation of the lungs <$$heading> is attended with several
symptoms , the same as a pleurisy , TINDALL-1814-1,45.352

only in the beginning he is less active , TINDALL-1814-1,45.353

and never offers to lie down during the whole time of his sickness ,
TINDALL-1814-1,45.354

his fever is strong , breathing difficult , and attended with a short
cough , TINDALL-1814-1,45.355

a copious discharge of ropy slime from the mouth , when it opens , and a
reddish or yellowish water from the nose , which is of a very glutinous
nature , distinguish between the two disorders ; TINDALL-1814-1,45.356

for , in a pleurisy , the horse's mouth is generally parched and dry ,
TINDALL-1814-1,45.357

working violently in the flanks , extreme <P_46> restlessness , and a
tucked_up belly , are also indications of a pleurisy ; whereas in an
inflammation of the lungs , he always shews fulness , the working of his
flanks is regular , except after drinking , and shifting his posture ,
his ears and feet are for the most part , cold , and often in damp
sweats . TINDALL-1814-1,46.358

It is a very dangerous disorder , throughout which , the animal requires
the greatest attention , TINDALL-1814-1,46.359

for , if by improper treatment , whether through ignorance or neglect ,
it is suffered to proceed , respiration becomes exceeding quick and
laborious , pulsation more quick , though weaker than when in a state of
perfect health . TINDALL-1814-1,46.360

A judicious observer will easily see anxiety and disquietude imprinted
on his countenance , TINDALL-1814-1,46.361

expanded nostrils , fixed , but dull eyes , and head inclining to the
ground bespeak an increase of the disorder ; TINDALL-1814-1,46.362

debility triumphs over the whole system , TINDALL-1814-1,46.363

and renders motion irksome to him , TINDALL-1814-1,46.364

unless rendered incapable of standing , by extreme weakness , he evinces
no desire to lie down , TINDALL-1814-1,46.365

and it is with the greatest difficulty that he moves about in his stall
; TINDALL-1814-1,46.366

but the disorder does not always advance with the same rapidity ,
TINDALL-1814-1,46.367

sometimes a remission is observable , TINDALL-1814-1,46.368

the horse begins to feed again , TINDALL-1814-1,46.369

his pulse becomes less frequent , <P_47> but more regular ,
TINDALL-1814-1,47.370

and the farrier is often led to give an erroneous opinion , founded on
symptoms , respecting such a horse , concluding him in a state of
convalescence , when the result too often proves the reverse ,
TINDALL-1814-1,47.371

the disorder returns with increased severity , TINDALL-1814-1,47.372

and puts an end to his sufferings and life together .
TINDALL-1814-1,47.373

Soon as this disease manifests itself , I would advise bleeding
copiously , say three quarts , by measure , TINDALL-1814-1,47.374

and repeat . TINDALL-1814-1,47.375

I have often witnessed four quarts drawn at one bleeding , with the
happiest effects , TINDALL-1814-1,47.376

indeed , I have frequently subdued the inflammation by plentiful
bleeding at its commencement . TINDALL-1814-1,47.377

Should the horse be of a costive habit of body at the time , or even if
the bowels are in a natural state , between the extremes of costiveness
and looseness , a pint of castor_oil , or for want thereof , the same
quantity of lineseed oil may be given advantageously , injecting a
glyster of water gruel , with a little salt superadded .
TINDALL-1814-1,47.378

Blistering extensively about the sides too , proves of infinite service
, at the same time wrapping the legs round with moistened hay ropes as
high as the knees and houghs , the intent of which is to increase
circulation . TINDALL-1814-1,47.379

With what ignorance , approaching to stupidity , do the major part of
grooms , carefully <P_48> exclude the atmospheric air from stables ,
where horses in this disease are pent up , by stopping the smallest
chinks and apertures in the walls , and about the doors , not
considering that by such treatment , the horse is obliged to respire
noxious air over and over again , which is prevented from making its
egress , by the misconceived notion already noticed .
TINDALL-1814-1,48.380

How , in the name of common sense , can such men hope for a state of
convalescence , when they are adding fuel to the fire kindled in the
suffering animal's frame , and which is already consuming its vitals ?
TINDALL-1814-1,48.381

Banish for ever such a pernicious practice , ye to whom such a valuable
creature is entrusted , TINDALL-1814-1,48.382

nor think yourselves too great adepts in knowledge , to receive useful
instruction from one who has observed with the deepest regret , such a
practice prevail among you , a practice replete with mischief to your
employers , and agonizing pangs to the objects of your trust and care ;
TINDALL-1814-1,48.383

for it is more meritorious to renounce error as soon as convinced of it
, though grown up with you from childhood , than to remain trammelled by
prejudice , through fear of being thought to have been in the wrong .
TINDALL-1814-1,48.384

If the disease suffers no abatement after a <P_49> lapse of twelve hours
from drawing blood , but on the contrary , is marked with more violence
, take two quarts more blood , TINDALL-1814-1,49.385

administer lineseed and bran mashes every sixth hour , allowing him a
little hay previously sprinkled with water . TINDALL-1814-1,49.386

After letting blood , give a ball agreeable to the following <heading>
Recipe : <$$heading> TINDALL-1814-1,49.387

Emetic Tartar , 2 Drams . TINDALL-1814-1,49.388

Nitre , 1 oz. TINDALL-1814-1,49.389

Squills , 1 dram . TINDALL-1814-1,49.390

Castile Soap , 1$$2 oz. TINDALL-1814-1,49.391

Roll it up in liquorice powder , TINDALL-1814-1,49.392

and wash it down with a pint of strong pennyroyal tea , repeating the
same for three successive days ; TINDALL-1814-1,49.393

if , however , notwithstanding you have given the above ball , the
animal's breathing becomes more difficult , give the following drink ,
twelve hours after you have given the ball . TINDALL-1814-1,49.394

<heading>

Recipe . TINDALL-1814-1,49.396

<$$heading>

Prepared Foxglove leaves , 2 drams . Pulverised Nitre , 1 oz. Which
infuse , and give in a quart of strong pennyroyal tea .
TINDALL-1814-1,49.398

Should this drink rob the horse of his appetite , which is often the
case , nevertheless , a temporary privation should always be submitted
to , before sacrificing the life of a valuable and useful horse , and
this <P_50> medicine persisted in ; TINDALL-1814-1,50.399

some may clamour against it when the horse refuses his meat ,
TINDALL-1814-1,50.400

but such will do well to try the experiment before they draw too hasty
conclusions . TINDALL-1814-1,50.401

When the animal is so far recovered as to shew no symptoms of
inflammation , two gentle doses of physic will prove very efficacious in
cleansing the blood , given at the distance of a week from each other ;
TINDALL-1814-1,50.402

out of the great number of preparations advised for this purpose , none
are fitter than the following <heading> Recipe : <$$heading>
TINDALL-1814-1,50.403

Barbadoes Aloes , 5 drams . TINDALL-1814-1,50.404

Ginger in powder , 2 drams . TINDALL-1814-1,50.405

Castile Soap , 4 drams . TINDALL-1814-1,50.406

Salt of Tartar , 4 drams . TINDALL-1814-1,50.407

Form the whole into a mass for one dose . TINDALL-1814-1,50.408

<heading> Inflammation of the Liver <$$heading> manifests
{TEXT:Manifests} itself in a horse by pantic gestures , often turning
short and looking to his near side , with a twisting or writhing of the
body , while the offside of his belly will feel hard , and appear
somewhat distended from the swelling of the liver ;
TINDALL-1814-1,50.409

difficulty of breathing is an indication of this complaint , with many
other symptoms common also in the jaundice , which will be fully laid
down in a subsequent part of this work . TINDALL-1814-1,50.410

<P_51>

Inflammation of the liver is pregnant with danger , commonly terminating
in dropsy , or a decay of the body , unless medical aid is afforded in
time ; TINDALL-1814-1,51.412

the first step towards effecting a cure is to draw blood , occasionally
repeating it as symptoms seem to render the use of the fleam necessary ,
rubbing as soon as possible the regions of the liver , with the
blistering ointment ; TINDALL-1814-1,51.413

these means employed in time , will be crowned with the happiest effects
; TINDALL-1814-1,51.414

should any thing more be wanting , laxative glysters will answer a good
purpose in bringing away the faeces , TINDALL-1814-1,51.415

for this disease is always attended with costiveness .
TINDALL-1814-1,51.416

Much good will accrue from using the following <heading> Recipe :
<$$heading> TINDALL-1814-1,51.417

Barbadoes Aloes , 4 drams . TINDALL-1814-1,51.418

Salt of Tartar , 4 drams . TINDALL-1814-1,51.419

Calomel , 2 drams . TINDALL-1814-1,51.420

Castile Soap , 1 oz. TINDALL-1814-1,51.421

Formed into a mass for one dose ; TINDALL-1814-1,51.422

observing to give one quart of smooth gruel , in which an ounce of nitre
is dissolved , four hours after taking the above ball , repeating as
occasion may require , and giving him mashes as directed for diseases of
the lungs . TINDALL-1814-1,51.423

<P_52>

<heading>

Of Inflammation of the Kidneys . TINDALL-1814-1,52.426

<$$heading>

Fever frequently attends this disorder ; TINDALL-1814-1,52.428

its symptoms commonly are a quick pulse ; staling in small quantities ,
nausea , &c. urine sometimes deep_coloured , at other times nearly
colourless ; TINDALL-1814-1,52.429

farriers judge it a favourable omen when it is thick and cloudy .
TINDALL-1814-1,52.430

A horse affected with this disease , when moved round , seems to have
great pain in his loins , turning with difficulty , from a certain
stiffness discernable therein , arising , doubtless , from a soreness in
the region of the kidneys . TINDALL-1814-1,52.431

Bleeding is essentially necessary in this complaint ,
TINDALL-1814-1,52.432

and oily glysters may be used to advantage , repeating as occasion may
demand , TINDALL-1814-1,52.433

but nothing will be found more efficacious than the following ball : -
TINDALL-1814-1,52.434

<heading>

Recipe . TINDALL-1814-1,52.436

<$$heading>

Gentian powdered , 1 oz. TINDALL-1814-1,52.438

Salt of Tartar , 1$$2 oz. TINDALL-1814-1,52.439

Nitre powdered , 1$$2 oz. TINDALL-1814-1,52.440

Gum Ammonicum , 2 drams . TINDALL-1814-1,52.441

Balsam Capavi , 2 drams . TINDALL-1814-1,52.442

Garlic or Squills , 1 dram . TINDALL-1814-1,52.443

<heading>

Of Fevers in General . TINDALL-1814-1,52.445

<$$heading>

The whole nervous system is affected by a fever , TINDALL-1814-1,52.447

all the functions of the body are disturbed <P_53> thereby ,
TINDALL-1814-1,53.448

the effects of it are also felt by the solids ; TINDALL-1814-1,53.449

pulsation , from the motion of the heart and arteries , ceases
{TEXT:cease} to maintain that regular and equal beat , which is so
sensibly observed in a state of perfect health ; TINDALL-1814-1,53.450

the circulation of the blood consequently ceases to be free and natural
, TINDALL-1814-1,53.451

and the secretions and excretions are no longer rightly performed .
TINDALL-1814-1,53.452

No age or quality can exempt the horse from the attacks of this
distemper , TINDALL-1814-1,53.453

immured within the walls of a stable , or ranging at large on the
extensive plains of nature , they become its victims with the same
facility . TINDALL-1814-1,53.454

Many valuable horses are sometimes seized with it in the same instant of
time , which constitutes what is called epidemical , which is allowed to
proceed from destructive particles contained in the air , and which may
be of a fermentative , putrid , or caustic nature ;
TINDALL-1814-1,53.455

such particles may proceed from corrupt stagnating water , which exhale
therefrom , and float in the atmosphere ; TINDALL-1814-1,53.456

for all motionless bodies of water soon turn putrid by the heat of the
sun , TINDALL-1814-1,53.457

and send off noxious effluvia . TINDALL-1814-1,53.458

Perhaps stagnant waters would not have such terrible effects alone , if
they did not produce innumerable insects , with which , whenever the
grass is contaminated , animals feeding thereupon , are <P_54> exposed
to the dangerous effects , TINDALL-1814-1,54.459

and horses are often subject to epidemical fevers from such causes as
these , which become infectious and approach nearly to the pestilential
kind ; TINDALL-1814-1,54.460

witness the disease called the murrain , which like a plague , has swept
away great numbers of horses , spreading dismay o'er the minds of the
suffering owners . TINDALL-1814-1,54.461

The worst fevers of this kind begin with a seeming stupidity , swelling
of the eyes , eyelids , and the kernel near the ears and throat ,
attended with a copious discharge , of a dusky colour , from the
nostrils and mouth , of a disagreeable and fetid smell .
TINDALL-1814-1,54.462

Sudden large swellings appear on the limbs , especially the joints ,
which are often attended with the staggers , resembling an apoplexy ,
TINDALL-1814-1,54.463

but this distemper does not often happen . TINDALL-1814-1,54.464

Many epidemical diseases are of a very slight nature , which , though
they seize great numbers at once , yet pass off without the assistance
of a farrier , or recourse being had to medicine .
TINDALL-1814-1,54.465

Sometimes a fever is symptomatical , as being the consequence of other
diseases , at the same time rendering them more dangerous and much more
difficult to be cured . TINDALL-1814-1,54.466

