<BEGIN_trevelyan-1911-2>

<P_5>

<heading>

Chapter I TREVELYAN-1911-2,5.4

The consequences of the capture of Palermo in Naples , Paris , Turin ,
and London TREVELYAN-1911-2,5.5

<$$heading>

{COM:epigraph_omitted}

In the first days of June 1860 , the news spread throughout Europe that
the capital of Sicily , guarded by 20,000 regular troops , by forts and
artillery , and by the Neapolitan fleet in the harbour , had been taken
after three days' fighting by Garibaldi and a_thousand North-Italian
volunteers in plain clothes , aided by a mob of half-armed Sicilians .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,5.8

How soon , men asked , and how far would the revolution advance ?
TREVELYAN-1911-2,5.9

When last Palermo had expelled its garrison in January 1848 , half
Europe had followed suit . TREVELYAN-1911-2,5.10

To the excited hopes of patriots and exiles , to the indignant fears of
kings and their chancellors , Palermo seemed but the first point fired
in a train of gunpowder laid through Messina and Reggio to Naples ,
through Naples and Rome to Venice , through Venice and Pesth to Vienna ,
through Vienna perhaps to Warsaw and back to the Tuileries .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,5.11

It was in the interest of every monarch who was not , like Victor
Emmanuel , out for revolution , to check by force or by diplomacy the
progress of the red-shirted portent . TREVELYAN-1911-2,5.12

The ' filibuster , ' having failed to be shot in the authorised manner ,
seemed an incarnation of the <P_6> improbable , TREVELYAN-1911-2,6.13

and for a while aroused hopes and fears , of which some were wildly
extravagant . TREVELYAN-1911-2,6.14

' A Caesar he , ere long , to Gaul , To Italy an Hannibal , And to all
States not free Shall climacteric be . ' TREVELYAN-1911-2,6.15

It was a case for a Holy Alliance of sovereigns to restore order in
Sicily , or , if that were no longer possible , at least for a Concert
of Europe to prevent the further spread of mischief .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,6.16

The first person to invoke the protection of the Powers by an appeal to
the common interest of all established governments , was the unfortunate
King Francis II of Naples , whose house was already on fire at one end ,
and was packed from roof to floor with combustible matter .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,6.17

The Neapolitan appeal for protection might take one of two forms .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,6.18

Either it might be addressed primarily to the powers of reaction ,
Russia and Austria , TREVELYAN-1911-2,6.19

and would in that case be accompanied by vigorous conduct of the war in
Sicily and by continued repression on the mainland ;
TREVELYAN-1911-2,6.20

or else , as actually occurred , it might be addressed primarily to the
more Liberal powers , to England and France , in which case efforts must
be made to patch up a truce with Garibaldi , and a constitution must be
granted on the mainland . TREVELYAN-1911-2,6.21

As the latter course was the actual path by which King Francis descended
so rapidly to his doom , it is easy to say now that the bolder policy
would have had a better chance of success . TREVELYAN-1911-2,6.22

But the House of Bourbon had twice before weathered the revolutionary
storms of the Bay of Naples by granting a charter , to be set aside when
the danger had passed by ; TREVELYAN-1911-2,6.23

and no one in <P_7> the Neapolitan Camarilla had the nerve of a
Strafford or a Bismarck openly to continue in the reactionary course
with Garibaldi in Palermo . TREVELYAN-1911-2,7.24

The only man among all Francis II@ @'s counsellors was his Bavarian
Queen , Maria Sophia , TREVELYAN-1911-2,7.25

and she , though ready , as she afterwards proved , to fight for her
crown behind the cannon of Gaeta , honestly desired a constitution and a
complete change of system . TREVELYAN-1911-2,7.26

Besides this , Russia and Austria , though more willing , were less able
to afford protection than either France or England .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,7.27

Russia , who had dominated the European situation in 1849 , when she had
invaded rebellious Hungary on behalf of Austria , had since then had a
fall on the ramparts of Sebastopol . TREVELYAN-1911-2,7.28

In whatever light the Crimean war may be viewed from the standpoint of
British or near-Eastern interests , there is no doubt that from the
point of view of Continental Liberalism and the freedom of action of
independent States , it had done much to secure the ' liberties of
Europe , ' the phrase inscribed at Macaulay's suggestion on the monument
to our soldiers at Scutari . TREVELYAN-1911-2,7.29

The great power of darkness had been disabled and discredited in
pan-European affairs , TREVELYAN-1911-2,7.30

and the new Czar had even begun the work of liberation at home .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,7.31

Austria , too , who had the most immediate reason to support the old
governments in Italy , and to check Garibaldi's advance , was in like
manner recovering from her Crimea , the Lombard war of 1859 .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,7.32

She dreaded that if she again moved to interfere in Italy the Hungarian
rebels would rise behind her , this time without fear of the Russian
armies , TREVELYAN-1911-2,7.33

for the ingratitude shown by Austria to Russia during the Crimean War
had dissolved the political friendship of the two Powers .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,7.34

Napoleon III and Cavour were both in constant communication <P_8> with
Kossuth , TREVELYAN-1911-2,8.35

and Cavour had a Hungarian rising ready primed to fire in case of an
Austrian war . TREVELYAN-1911-2,8.36

Partly for these reasons , and partly because the Sicilian and
Neapolitan situation was more easily commanded from the sea , it was
necessary for Francis II to appeal not so much to the Eastern as to the
Western and naval powers . TREVELYAN-1911-2,8.37

In spite of the constant bickering between France and England , the
deepest line of diplomatic division lay between East and West .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,8.38

The idea of an alliance with the principles of Russian despotism , even
for the purpose of scoring a point against a near neighbour , was
abhorrent to Napoleon III on one side of the Channel , and to Palmerston
and Lord John Russell on the other . TREVELYAN-1911-2,8.39

In fact when Russia early in July proposed to join with France in
policing the Mediterranean against Garibaldi's transports , the offer
coming from that quarter was promptly rejected . TREVELYAN-1911-2,8.40

If Napoleon interfered on behalf of Naples , it would be in concert with
Great Britain , and , if possible , with Piedmont , and only on behalf
of a reformed constitutional Kingdom . TREVELYAN-1911-2,8.41

The decision of the young King of Naples to adopt a Liberal policy , to
abandon the friendship with Austria and Russia so long traditional in
his family , to appeal to Napoleon III for help , and to conciliate
France , England , and his own subjects by the grant of a constitution ,
was taken in principle at Councils held on May 30 and June 1 , 1860 .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,8.42

They were the first-fruits of Garibaldi's success .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,8.43

On June 1 the King also sanctioned General Lanza's proposal to retreat
with 20,000 royal troops from the Palace to the suburbs of Palermo ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,8.44

and on June 4 he sanctioned his further proposal to capitulate with
Garibaldi <P_9> and to ship the whole royal army back from Palermo to
Naples . TREVELYAN-1911-2,9.45

The chief promoter in the Council of these important decisions was
General Filangieri the veteran Prince of Satriano , who had served with
equal fidelity the Napoleonic Kings of Naples , and the restored House
of Bourbon , who had reconquered Sicily for the Crown in 1849 , and
ruled it with wise moderation until recalled by his reactionary enemies
at Court . TREVELYAN-1911-2,9.46

He had often and in vain advised <font> Bomba <$$font> and his son after
him to break with Austria and the reaction , and to come to an
understanding with France abroad and with the Constitutionalists at home
. TREVELYAN-1911-2,9.47

His advice , rejected year after year so long as it would have saved the
throne , was now adopted a month too late , TREVELYAN-1911-2,9.48

and was with his own full concurrence coupled with the fatal policy of
military surrender at Palermo , at a moment when a renewed attack on
Garibaldi and the rebel town , headed by General Nunziante or by the
King in person , would not improbably have turned the tide of war .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,9.49

It might have been expected that Filangieri , having at length
completely overborne his reactionary enemies at the Council-board ,
would have helped to carry out the hard task , which he had himself set
to his royal master , of changing horses in the bed of a roaring torrent
which had already swept them all off their feet . TREVELYAN-1911-2,9.50

But he preferred to retire to his country-house near Sorrento , whence
at his ease he could watch the troubled city of Naples across the full
breadth of the Bay . TREVELYAN-1911-2,9.51

When the King sent General Nunziante to beg him to return to the head of
affairs and to revive the body politic by a constitutional regimen , he
replied with brutal frankness : ' Would you have me repeat the miracle
of Lazarus ? TREVELYAN-1911-2,9.52

I am not Christ , but a miserable mortal . ' TREVELYAN-1911-2,9.53

His interlocutor , <P_10> Nunziante , hitherto a staunch reactionary ,
who had been loaded with honours and emoluments by the late King , and
was esteemed and trusted by Francis II as the ablest man in the
Neapolitan service after Filangieri himself , had recently consented to
take up the command against Garibaldi , TREVELYAN-1911-2,10.54

and had drawn up plans for the reconquest of Palermo ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,10.55

but he was so deeply impressed by these words of Filangieri that he at
once determined not to go to Sicily , and then and there began to
calculate how best to desert the falling House of Bourbon , and to carry
over the army intact to the service of the House of Piedmont and United
Italy . TREVELYAN-1911-2,10.56

Before the end of June the King himself crossed the Bay of Naples to try
his own powers of persuasion on the recluse of Sorrento .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,10.57

When the royal yacht was unexpectedly seen approaching the landing-place
below the villa , Filangieri fled to his bedroom TREVELYAN-1911-2,10.58

and jumped into bed . TREVELYAN-1911-2,10.59

Not having time to take off his clothes , he drew the blankets over him
up to his chin , TREVELYAN-1911-2,10.60

and received his royal visitor so . TREVELYAN-1911-2,10.61

Was ever monarch before or since received in such fashion by the first
subject in his kingdom ? TREVELYAN-1911-2,10.62

Francis II held an hour's private conversation by the bedside of the
malingerer , TREVELYAN-1911-2,10.63

and then returned to Naples . TREVELYAN-1911-2,10.64

Filangieri , perhaps a little ashamed of himself , never disclosed even
to his nearest and dearest what had passed in that strange interview ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,10.65

but no one doubted that he had again been pressed to form a
constitutional Ministry , and that , pleading his feigned illness , he
had again refused . TREVELYAN-1911-2,10.66

Early in August , Filangieri went into voluntary exile at Marseilles .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,10.67

After the revolution was accomplished he returned to Italy ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,10.68

and till his death in 1867 resided as a loyal subject of Victor Emmanuel
, refusing office and honours from the new Government , but never
regretting the old . TREVELYAN-1911-2,10.69

The ideal of his life had been an independent <P_11> South Italy , with
a progressive and civilised Government of its own , such as that which
in his youth he had helped Murat to conduct . TREVELYAN-1911-2,11.70

After Waterloo the restored Bourbons and their subjects had left that
path , TREVELYAN-1911-2,11.71

and had since failed in numerous attempts to return to it again , in
spite of the efforts of men like Poerio and Filangieri .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,11.72

Poerio , convinced after 1848 that South Italy was by itself incapable
of maintaining a tolerable Government , had quickly come to believe in
the Union of all Italy as a positive good ; TREVELYAN-1911-2,11.73

and even Filangieri was at last forced to admit , after the event , that
Union was the least bad of all practicable solutions .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,11.74

Discouraged but not deterred by Filangieri's refusal to lend a hand in
carrying out his own policy , Francis II continued in the prescribed
course . TREVELYAN-1911-2,11.75

In the first days of June he had frankly thrown himself on the
protection of France . TREVELYAN-1911-2,11.76

De Martino had been sent as the bearer of an autograph letter of the
King of Naples to the Emperor . TREVELYAN-1911-2,11.77

Accompanied by Antonini , the regular Neapolitan Minister at Paris , he
went out to Fontainebleau on June 12 to interview Napoleon .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,11.78

The envoys met with a chilling reception from the French courtiers .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,11.79

Even Thouvenel , the Foreign Minister , though no friend to Italian
aspirations , was brutally rude to the representatives of the falling
cause , TREVELYAN-1911-2,11.80

and before the conference began was overheard by them saying in a loud
voice in the antechamber , ' Now I must go and hear what lies the two
Neapolitan orators will tell the Emperor . ' TREVELYAN-1911-2,11.81

Napoleon himself , though courteous and humane , held out no hope that
he would actively interfere . TREVELYAN-1911-2,11.82

He explained the difference between the claims of the King of Naples on
his protection and those of the Pope . TREVELYAN-1911-2,11.83

' The French flag , ' he said , is actually waving on the Pope's
territory , TREVELYAN-1911-2,11.84

and then there is the question of <P_12> religion .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.85

The Italians understand that if they attacked Rome I should have to act
. ' TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.86

But in the case of Naples he declared that as the victor of Solferino
and the liberator of Lombardy , he was bound not to stultify his own
past by using his troops on behalf of an opposite principle in South
Italy . TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.87

<font> ' Les Italiens sont fins , ' <$$font> he said ;
TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.88

' the Italians are shrewd ; TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.89

they clearly perceive that since I have shed the blood of my people for
the cause of nationality , I can never fire a cannon against it .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.90

And this conviction , the key to the recent revolution , when Tuscany
was annexed against my wishes and interests , will have the same effect
in your case . ' TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.91

The King of Naples@ @' concessions , the offer of the constitution ,
failed to impress him . TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.92

' It is too late , ' he said . TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.93

' A month ago these concessions might have prevented everything .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.94

To-day they are too late . ' TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.95

It was now June 12 . TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.96

On April 15 Victor Emmanuel had written to his ' dear cousin ' of Naples
, suggesting a mutual alliance on the principle of Italian nationality
and freedom , and ending with the words : ' If you allow some months to
pass without attending to my friendly suggestion , your Majesty will
perhaps experience the bitterness of the terrible words - <font> too
late . ' <$$font> TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.97

Eight weeks had sufficed to fulfil the prophecy , TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.98

and the ' terrible words ' were now on the lips of Napoleon himself .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.99

But there was still , said the Emperor to the Neapolitan envoys , one
chance for their master . TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.100

Let him humbly ask for the Piedmontese alliance , which he had himself
rejected earlier in the year when Victor Emmanuel had made the advances
. TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.101

' Piedmont alone , ' said Napoleon , ' can stop the course of the
revolution . TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.102

You must apply not to me but to Victor Emmanuel . '
TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.103

' We French do not wish , ' he added , ' for the annexation of South
Italy to the Kingdom of Piedmont , because we think it contrary to our
interests , TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.104

and it is for this reason that we advise you to adopt the only expedient
which can prevent or at least retard that annexation . '
TREVELYAN-1911-2,12.105

For the rest , he would <P_13> be delighted if the Neapolitan Royalists
proved able to defeat Garibaldi and the revolution with the force of
their own arms , TREVELYAN-1911-2,13.106

but he could not help them himself , partly for the reasons which he had
already given , and partly because he was determined to do nothing
contrary to the wishes of England . TREVELYAN-1911-2,13.107

His advice therefore to the Neapolitan envoys at Fontainebleau was
nothing more than a reasoned repetition of the programme which his
representative Brenier had several days before urged upon the Court at
Naples , namely : - <font> First <$$font> , a scheme of Sicilian Home
Rule under a Prince of the Royal House of Naples . <font> Secondly
<$$font> , a Constitution for the mainland . <font> Thirdly <$$font> ,
an alliance with Piedmont . TREVELYAN-1911-2,13.108

This triple programme was perforce adopted by the Neapolitan Court ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,13.109

but the first item depended for its fulfilment on Garibaldi and the
Sicilians , and the third on Cavour and the Piedmontese .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,13.110

The Constitution , indeed , could be published by the King without the
consent of any other party , TREVELYAN-1911-2,13.111

but whether it would at this twelfth hour conciliate the population of
the Neapolitan provinces still remained to be seen .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,13.112

The question was soon put to the proof . TREVELYAN-1911-2,13.113

A Council of Ministers sat on June 21 , TREVELYAN-1911-2,13.114

and after Antonini's report of the interview at Fontainebleau had been
read to them , decided by eleven votes to three to adopt the triple
programme laid down by the French Emperor . TREVELYAN-1911-2,13.115

A short while back the same men would have voted by an equally large
majority against any concession , TREVELYAN-1911-2,13.116

but in these weeks life-long opinions were changing with a rapidity
peculiar to the crisis of a great revolution . TREVELYAN-1911-2,13.117

Since the taking of Palermo most of the reactionary party , headed by
the <P_14> King's uncle , the Count of Aquila , had become ardent
Constitutionalists ; while the Constitutional party of former years ,
headed by the Duke of Syracuse , another uncle of the King <paren> the
Philippe Egalité of the Neapolitan revolution <$$paren> had turned
against the dynasty , and were working to bring in Victor Emmanuel .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,14.118

' A year ago , ' wrote Elliot , the British Minister , ' there was
hardly an annexationist to be found in this part of Italy ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,14.119

and now pretty nearly the whole country is so for the moment . '
TREVELYAN-1911-2,14.120

But even after the Council of June 21 the feeble King still hesitated .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,14.121

Although he would not go to Sicily and lead on his troops against
Garibaldi , he was almost equally unwilling to publish the Constitution
and to declare for the Piedmontese alliance . TREVELYAN-1911-2,14.122

All the pieties and instincts of his dumb nature were averse to the
change , TREVELYAN-1911-2,14.123

and he was upheld in his passive resistance by the clamours of his
stepmother Maria Theresa , ' the Austrian woman , ' whom he had been
accustomed since boyhood to obey . TREVELYAN-1911-2,14.124

But on the other side was his wife , Maria Sophia , whose influence upon
him was constantly growing throughout his brief reign , corresponding to
a perceptible increase of manliness on his part .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,14.125

For some days after the Council of June 21 a final struggle was waged
between the two Marias , ending in the victory of the younger .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,14.126

Her demand for constitutional reform was urgently supported by the
King's uncle , the Count of Aquila , and by the French Minister ,
Brenier , who were now in close partnership . TREVELYAN-1911-2,14.127

De Martino , mean_while , had been sent to Rome to obtain the Pope's
leave for the change of policy , which was grudgingly given on condition
that any alliance with Piedmont was not to be made at the expense of the
Papal territories or the privileges of the Church .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,14.128

The Pope's consent turned the scale in the King's mind ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,14.129

and on June 25 the Sovereign Act was published recalling to vigour the
Constitution of <P_15> 1848 , granting Home Rule to Sicily under a
Prince of the Royal House , and announcing that an alliance would be
made with Piedmont - the complete triple programme advised by Napoleon .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,15.130

The tricolour flag , symbolic of Italian nationality , was hauled up on
all the public buildings and on the ships of the fleet ;
TREVELYAN-1911-2,15.131

the political prisoners were let loose throughout the Kingdom ;
TREVELYAN-1911-2,15.132

the exiles returned amid processions and rejoicings ;
TREVELYAN-1911-2,15.133

pending the elections to Parliament , a Ministry of moderate Liberals
took over the authority of the State . TREVELYAN-1911-2,15.134

As far as the Government was concerned , everything was done in the most
approved manner according to the pattern of one of those joyous
Constitution-givings of the spring of 1848 , when monarchs and peoples
had wept in each other's arms . TREVELYAN-1911-2,15.135

But on this occasion it was only the monarch who opened his arms and
embraced the empty air . TREVELYAN-1911-2,15.136

When on June 26 the King and Queen drove out in an open carriage to
receive the ovations of liberated Naples , hats were respectfully raised
, TREVELYAN-1911-2,15.137

but hardly a cheer was heard in the whole length of the Toledo .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,15.138

The Constitution was still-born . TREVELYAN-1911-2,15.139

In some upland villages , especially in the district between Naples and
the Roman border , it was regarded as a Jacobinical betrayal of religion
; while the great mass of the King's subjects in the capital and in the
provinces south of the capital regarded it merely as a first step in the
direction of Italian unity , a means of freeing themselves from the
police and the censorship , so as to be better able to welcome ' him '
when he came . TREVELYAN-1911-2,15.140

' He ' was at Palermo , TREVELYAN-1911-2,15.141

he would soon be at the Straits , TREVELYAN-1911-2,15.142

and it was in that direction and not to the Palace of Naples that all
men's thoughts were turned . TREVELYAN-1911-2,15.143

The newly granted liberties were used to destroy the Government that had
conceded them . TREVELYAN-1911-2,15.144

Newspapers sprang up by the score ; TREVELYAN-1911-2,15.145

books , <P_16> pamphlets , and proclamations appeared everywhere ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,16.146

and nearly the whole output of the liberated press was anti-dynastic .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,16.147

Its only disputes turned on the rival merits of Cavour and Mazzini , of
Federation and Annexation and whether or not to await Garibaldi's coming
before beginning the revolution . TREVELYAN-1911-2,16.148

The new Ministry formed by Spinelli , with De Martino in charge of
Foreign affairs , consisted chiefly of mediocre but honest men ,
desirous of working the Constitution and saving the dynasty .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,16.149

But with one exception they had neither influence nor popularity , at a
time when the mere possession of office lent but little authority to the
opinions of its holder . TREVELYAN-1911-2,16.150

Yet even the Ministers , without intending to do so , further undermined
the stability of the throne . TREVELYAN-1911-2,16.151

For they busied themselves , as indeed it was their duty to do if the
Constitution was to be a reality , in turning out reactionaries and
putting in old constitutionalists as prefects , magistrates , and police
, regardless of the fact that the old constitutionalists were now for
Garibaldi almost to a man . TREVELYAN-1911-2,16.152

The expulsion of genuine royalists from the public service alienated the
enthusiasm of the King's friends , without reconciling his enemies , to
whom it gave the civil power in every Province from Calabria to Abruzzi
. TREVELYAN-1911-2,16.153

The bishops , more reactionary than their clergy , were the only persons
in authority who could not be summarily dismissed ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,16.154

but they were watched by spies who reported their sayings and movements
to the Minister of the Interior : TREVELYAN-1911-2,16.155

some of the prelates fled from their dioceses in real or affected fear
for their personal safety . TREVELYAN-1911-2,16.156

In every town the new authorities formed and armed the National Guard ,
chosen out of the middle class , which became in effect a military force
prepared to support the coming revolution . TREVELYAN-1911-2,16.157

The army alone was loyal to the King , TREVELYAN-1911-2,16.158

but as it still consisted of about 100,000 well-armed and well-drilled
men , it might still defeat Garibaldi , TREVELYAN-1911-2,16.159

and if it could once drive the red-shirts in rout no one doubted that
the Constitution , the National Guard , the Ministry , the press ,
<P_17> and the tricolour flags would all be huddled away in twenty-four
hours . TREVELYAN-1911-2,17.160

After all , there had been a Constitutional Ministry in 1848 ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,17.161

and shortly afterwards the principal Ministers were serving their time
in irons . TREVELYAN-1911-2,17.162

It was this supreme consideration which made real loyalty impossible for
any man , however much he cared for the dynasty , if he also cared for
the Constitution . TREVELYAN-1911-2,17.163

No one except the reactionaries really wished to hear of a victory over
the man who was in name the national enemy , and in reality the national
deliverer . TREVELYAN-1911-2,17.164

It was for this reason that the new Ministers were so unwilling to take
the offensive against him in Sicily . TREVELYAN-1911-2,17.165

For no Cabinet can be expected to conduct a war with vigour , when a
decisive victory would mean twenty years penal servitude for each of its
members . TREVELYAN-1911-2,17.166

General Pianell , the new War Minister , was a faithful and honest man ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,17.167

but he erred in accepting a post of which he could not , by the nature
of the case , heartily fulfil the duties . TREVELYAN-1911-2,17.168

Don Liborio Romano , the new Prefect of Police , was the sole exception
to the rule that the Ministers had neither popularity nor influence ;
TREVELYAN-1911-2,17.169

and he was also the exception to the rule that they were passively loyal
to the King . TREVELYAN-1911-2,17.170

' Don Liborio , ' as he was called in these days , was a native of lower
Apulia , skilled in the insinuating manners and arts of political
intrigue which the inhabitants of the region between Taranto and
Brindisi are said to have inherited from their Greek ancestors .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,17.171

He had been an active Liberal as early as 1820 , TREVELYAN-1911-2,17.172

and had often suffered as such at the hands of the police .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,17.173

But he belonged essentially to the world of Levantine intrigue , rather
than to the world of European revolution . TREVELYAN-1911-2,17.174

For this reason he was able from June to September , 1860 , to preserve
the confidence of the inhabitants of the capital by a kind of masonic
mutual understanding or sympathy of character , which a more
straightforward man would have failed to establish with the Neapolitans
. TREVELYAN-1911-2,17.175

After his retirement <P_18> he always asserted that he had taken office
, not in order to save the dynasty , which he believed to be already
lost , but in order to preserve his fellow-countrymen from anarchy and
civil war . TREVELYAN-1911-2,18.176

This account of his motives , if a considerable allowance be also made
for his vanity and ambition , is accepted by the most competent and
unbiassed authorities who knew the Naples of that day well ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,18.177

and they are also of opinion that at the moment of entering office he
did actually achieve his purpose and save the city and perhaps the whole
Kingdom from a terrible disaster . TREVELYAN-1911-2,18.178

The circumstances were as follows . TREVELYAN-1911-2,18.179

On June 27 , two days after the proclamation of the Sovereign Act , when
all the authorities of the old <font> regime <$$font> had lost their
power , but before the new Ministry was well in the saddle , and before
the National Guard or the new police had been formed , disorders broke
out in Naples . TREVELYAN-1911-2,18.180

The police of the old Government were hunted down , and their archives
burnt . TREVELYAN-1911-2,18.181

Unless the mob was checked , anarchy would soon prevail in its most
hideous form . TREVELYAN-1911-2,18.182

But there was at the moment no armed force deriving its authority from
the Constitution , TREVELYAN-1911-2,18.183

and if the regular army , aflame with reactionary passions , had been
called out to shoot the mob , civil war would have begun at once .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,18.184

In the circumstances Liborio Romano was entreated to become Prefect of
Police , on the ground that no one else could save Naples .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,18.185

He accepted the post on June 27 , TREVELYAN-1911-2,18.186

and on the next day the Prefecture of Police , till then execrated by
every one , became the resort of the leading Liberals .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,18.187

But the Liberals alone could not control the vicious and non-political
criminal class of Naples . TREVELYAN-1911-2,18.188

The <font> camorra <$$font> , hitherto in tacit league with the old
Royal Government , had now turned against all government .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,18.189

Don Liborio , to avoid the imminent social catastrophe , struck a
bargain with this secret association of criminals , in the name <P_19>
of the new Government , or at any rate of its Prefect of Police .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,19.190

The chiefs of the <font> camorra <$$font> were given places in the new
police force , along with other more respectable members of society .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,19.191

The consequence was that there were no more disturbances in Naples
during the next three months of turmoil , panic , and revolution ,
except on occasions when the reactionary soldiers broke loose from their
barracks . TREVELYAN-1911-2,19.192

In this ignominious manner Naples was saved . TREVELYAN-1911-2,19.193

The price paid by the Italian Government in later years was high , but
possibly not too high for the escape of society from promiscuous
bloodshed and rapine . TREVELYAN-1911-2,19.194

Having thus tided over the immediate danger , Don Liborio formed the
National Guard from among his own adherents in the respectable middle
class . TREVELYAN-1911-2,19.195

The National Guard , the police , and the <font> camorra <$$font> were
now at his disposal , not only in Naples but throughout the provinces .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,19.196

He was master of the situation TREVELYAN-1911-2,19.197

and held the stakes until either the King or Garibaldi conquered .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,19.198

Throughout July and August he was the real ruler of the country for all
domestic purposes except the command of the army .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,19.199

Francis II hated and distrusted Don Liborio , TREVELYAN-1911-2,19.200

but dared not dismiss him . TREVELYAN-1911-2,19.201

While the House of Bourbon was thus engaged at home in clothing its
enemies with authority and its friends with confusion , the Piedmontese
alliance , to obtain which all these sacrifices were being made , was
eagerly solicited at Turin . TREVELYAN-1911-2,19.202

Twice during the last twelve months Piedmont had asked for an alliance
and been rebuffed by the counsellors of Francis II ;
TREVELYAN-1911-2,19.203

it was now their turn to sue for the settlement which they had so
recently refused . TREVELYAN-1911-2,19.204

The House of Bourbon was on its knees , clad in the Constitution and the
Tricolour for a garb of penitence . TREVELYAN-1911-2,19.205

But the record of its perjuries prevented all confidence , and the
record of its cruelties all <P_20> forgiveness .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,20.206

The ' Neapolitan prisoners , ' whose woes Mr. Gladstone had made famous
, the victims of <font> Bomba's <$$font> dungeons , were now many of
them residing in Turin , several as Deputies in the North_Italian
Parliament which was then in full session . TREVELYAN-1911-2,20.207

Others , like Braico , had gone to Sicily with the Thousand .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,20.208

When the news of the fall of Palermo arrived , the Neapolitan exiles in
Turin met at the house of Mancini , one of their number ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,20.209

and at the instance of Carlo Poerio declared for the deposition of the
Bourbons . TREVELYAN-1911-2,20.210

When , some three weeks later , there arose the question of the alliance
of Piedmont with Naples , the uncompromising attitude of these men
strengthened Cavour's hands to resist the proposal .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,20.211

Poerio , the Conservative Minister of the late King during the
Parliamentary <font> regime <$$font> of 1848 , had been rewarded for his
undisputed loyalty to Crown and Constitution by a sentence of
twenty-four years in irons obtained by notoriously false witness , at
the instance of <font> Bomba <$$font> himself . TREVELYAN-1911-2,20.212

He had served eight years of that sentence , TREVELYAN-1911-2,20.213

and had come out of prison in 1859 converted to the programme of Italian
Unity . TREVELYAN-1911-2,20.214

He and his friends now put themselves at the head of the popular
agitation in North Italy , which made it impossible for Cavour , even if
he had so wished , to accept the alliance and to protect the Neapolitan
State from further invasion by Garibaldi . TREVELYAN-1911-2,20.215

On June 29 Poerio , from the tribune of the North_Italian Chamber ,
uttered sentiments which , coming from the mouth of one so moderate , so
reticent , and so just , carried the full weight of their literal
meaning . TREVELYAN-1911-2,20.216

' The Neapolitan Government , ' he said , ' has the tradition of perjury
, handed down from father to son . TREVELYAN-1911-2,20.217

That is why it now offers to swear to the Constitution , because it is
clear that in order to be perjured it is necessary first to swear .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,20.218

I trust that the Ministers of Victor Emmanuel will not stretch out their
hands to a Government which certainly is the most declared of the
enemies of Italian independence . ' TREVELYAN-1911-2,20.219

The roar of applause that followed him as he returned <P_21> to his seat
showed that the North_Italian Deputies had already made up their minds
about the proposed alliance . TREVELYAN-1911-2,21.220

The Neapolitan exiles , while they held this language in public ,
expressed themselves with no less vigour and decision in their private
correspondence . TREVELYAN-1911-2,21.221

Writing to Panizzi , the Librarian of the British Museum , and one of
the chief unofficial agents of the Italian cause in our country , Poerio
and his fellow-martyr Settembrini urged that the hour had struck to weld
Italy into one State , and that if a truce were now patched up , when
the trumpets should be sounding the final charge , ' enthusiasm would
cool with time ' and the principle of ' dualism with all its terrible
consequences ' would for ever divide the Italian Peninsula .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,21.222

Cavour was from the first aware that it was impossible to accept the
alliance . TREVELYAN-1911-2,21.223

On the very day of Poerio's speech in the Chamber , he telegraphed to
Villamarina , the Piedmontese Minister at Naples : ' Take care to render
impossible an agreement between the King of Naples and the national
party . TREVELYAN-1911-2,21.224

We must not allow Italy to believe that by complaisance or weakness we
are ready to fraternize with the King of Naples . '
TREVELYAN-1911-2,21.225

To accept the Neapolitan alliance would , as he knew , mean schism and
possibly civil war in North Italy . TREVELYAN-1911-2,21.226

And yet he dared not at once close the door on a proposal initiated by
France , regarded by Austria , Russia , and Prussia as only too liberal
, and at present supported officially by England herself .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,21.227

As soon as Hudson had finished persuading Lord John Russell to accept
frankly the idea of annexation and united Italy , a task upon which he
was busily engaged in a private and unofficial correspondence , Cavour
might take a bolder course . TREVELYAN-1911-2,21.228

But ' even if <P_22> we were helped by England , ' he wrote to Ricasoli
on July 8 , ' we could not fight both on the Mincio and on the Alps , '
against both Austria and France . TREVELYAN-1911-2,22.229

So he could not ' reject scornfully a proposed settlement presented
under French auspices and by French advice . ' TREVELYAN-1911-2,22.230

He determined , therefore , to entertain the Neapolitan envoys , Manna
and Winspeare , and to treat about the alliance on such terms as were
certain to be refused by King Francis , making demands tantamount to the
cession of Sicily and the further partition of the Pope's territory for
the benefit of Piedmont . TREVELYAN-1911-2,22.231

But the fear that the Italian people would suppose even these
negotiations to be serious constantly haunted him .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,22.232

' If we consent to the alliance we are lost . TREVELYAN-1911-2,22.233

If we reject it , what will Europe say ? TREVELYAN-1911-2,22.234

In my life I was never more embarrassed . ' TREVELYAN-1911-2,22.235

To retain the confidence of the patriotic party Cavour more and more
openly hastened the equipment and departure of the expeditions of
volunteers to join Garibaldi , TREVELYAN-1911-2,22.236

and that portion of the press which he inspired was observed to be
scornfully hostile to the Neapolitan alliance . TREVELYAN-1911-2,22.237

At the same time he tried to cut the knot of his difficulties by
engineering an immediate revolution in Naples . TREVELYAN-1911-2,22.238

The Piedmontese diplomatic representative , Villamarina , was the centre
of this movement and the Piedmontese Legation its house of call .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,22.239

Even in April , under the old <font> regime <$$font> of repression ,
Villamarina's house , with its immunities against police search , had
been used for the meetings of conspirators , and the forwarding of their
letters to North Italy . TREVELYAN-1911-2,22.240

And now in July he was instructed to act with Piedmontese agents of high
character like Emilio Visconti-Venosta , and with the best of the
Neapolitan exiles like Spaventa and Nisco , who openly came into Naples
, some <P_23> as naturalised Piedmontese subjects , others trusting to
the civil rights enjoyed under the new Constitution .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,23.241

Some came with money supplied by Cavour and Farini to start newspapers ;
TREVELYAN-1911-2,23.242

all came to talk to their old friends in the army and elsewhere , and to
stir up an annexationist movement . TREVELYAN-1911-2,23.243

Within a few days of his arrival in Naples , Venosta wrote home to
report that the army was Bourbonist in sympathy , and that the people
only understood the idea of revolution as connected with Garibaldi , for
whom they were waiting as for a second St. Januarius .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,23.244

But it was not until the end of August that Cavour could be persuaded by
his agents that a revolution without Garibaldi was impossible .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,23.245

It was indeed , neither a dignified nor an honest policy to pretend to
treat for alliance with the Government of a country while arming bands
of volunteers to invade its provinces , and sending emissaries to excite
a revolution in its capital . TREVELYAN-1911-2,23.246

But that was the system pursued by Cavour during July and August ,
because he believed the alternative to be the Austrian bayonets in Milan
and the French in Turin . TREVELYAN-1911-2,23.247

Danton once thundered out for all the world to hear , <font> Que mon nom
soit flétri , que la France soit libre . <$$font>
TREVELYAN-1911-2,23.248

Cavour's intellectually aristocratic temper had no such unsafe
confidences for the people at large , TREVELYAN-1911-2,23.249

but he said quietly to his friends one day : ' If we had done for
ourselves the things which we are doing for Italy , we should be great
rascals . ' TREVELYAN-1911-2,23.250

The magnificent integrity of Cavour's private character and the entire
disinterestedness of his public conduct , lends peculiar force to this
saying . TREVELYAN-1911-2,23.251

It must indeed be confessed that he bequeathed to the statesmanship of
the new Italy the old traditions of duplicity , which have sometimes
become low cunning in the hands of successors with neither his virtues ,
his abilities , nor his dire necessities for their <P_24> excuse .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.252

But before we condemn Cavour we must decide whether without a large
degree of duplicity he could , supported by England alone , have made
Italy against the will of a hostile Europe - against the destroyers of
Poland , ' the man of December , ' the Pope , and the perjured dynasty
of Naples . TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.253

This question I am unable to answer , TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.254

and I believe that no answer , however confidently given , can be
anything better than a reasoned guess . TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.255

There were not wanting at the time well-informed observers who believed
that Cavour could have avoided all this chicanery , that even in June he
could have carried out the bold and straightforward policy on which he
finally embarked in September . TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.256

' I wish , ' wrote Elliot to Lord John Russell on June 25 , ' Victor
Emmanuel would throw off the mask like a man and go to war .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.257

It would certainly be a very easy matter for him to roll down this
rickety dynasty , TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.258

and he would be received with enthusiasm by the nation . '
TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.259

It was natural for the British Minister at Naples to write in this
confident manner , TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.260

for what Elliot had close under his own eyes was the rottenness of the
Government to which he was accredited . TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.261

But it was not any fear of resistance at Naples that withheld Cavour ;
TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.262

it was the fear of counter-attack from Vienna and Paris .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.263

There were many riddles in the complicated problem which Cavour had to
solve , TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.264

but the chief one was to guess the true colour of the chameleon of the
Tuileries , the Liberal protector of the Pope , the friendly foe of
Italian unity . TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.265

If Cavour let loose the nation straining at the leash , if he made legal
war on Naples and invaded the Papal Marches and Umbria , would Napoleon
merely protest , TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.266

or would he actively interfere ? TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.267

Or if Austria attacked Piedmont when she was engaged in liberating the
South , on what terms , if any , would Napoleon lend his protection ?
TREVELYAN-1911-2,24.268

On this , the supreme problem of that summer , Cavour obtained a decided
opinion from the Emperor's cousin , <P_25> Jerome .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.269

This prince , a whole-hearted friend of Italian unity , deserves more
credit than he has got for his successful efforts in 1859 - 60 on behalf
of that policy , which for ever cut him off from all hope of an Italian
kingdom in Tuscany or elsewhere . TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.270

On June 30 he wrote to Cavour that the time had come when he could
attack South Italy without fear of the Emperor's veto .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.271

The letter is one of the most important in the history of Italy ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.272

for it foreshadows the course which Cavour adopted two months later .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.273

' Italy , ' wrote Prince Jerome , ' is in a supreme crisis .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.274

She must emerge from it united under the sceptre of my father-in-law
<bracket> Victor Emmanuel <$$bracket> with Rome as her capital ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.275

or else she will slide back under the oppression of priests and
Austrians , at Turin as well as at Naples and everywhere else
{COM:missing_period} TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.276

The die is cast . {COM:ellipsis} TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.277

Daring alone can save you to-day . TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.278

Be strong . TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.279

Do@ @n't trust to yourself , TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.280

no illusions , TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.281

no vanity , TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.282

you have need of France TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.283

and you can get her by means of the Emperor . TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.284

<font> <paren> Il vous faut la France par l'Empereur . <$$paren>
<$$font> TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.285

Be then completely open with him . TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.286

No more <font> finesse ; <$$font> TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.287

that served your turn for Tuscany ; TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.288

it will not serve your turn with Sicily , Naples , and Rome .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.289

Explain to him your views of the future , not only your end but your
means and your conduct . ' TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.290

Cavour did not at once adopt the course here prescribed for him by the
Prince , TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.291

but he did so before two months were out , when he opened his innermost
counsels to Napoleon , and mobilised the Italian army to invade the
territories of the Pope and of the King of Naples .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.292

The question is whether he could safely have ventured upon this policy
in the first days of July , on receipt of the Prince's letter , or
whether in fact it was necessary , as he judged , to wait until the
unofficial revolution under Garibaldi had spread from Palermo to the
gates of Naples . TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.293

Perhaps Prince Jerome ante-dated the readiness of his Imperial cousin to
condone the making of Italy . TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.294

It is true that Napoleon at the end of August accepted it as the only
alternative to anarchy , TREVELYAN-1911-2,25.295

but it was by no means <P_26> the only alternative prior to Garibaldi's
victory at Milazzo and march through Calabria . TREVELYAN-1911-2,26.296

Would Napoleon at the beginning of July have consented to throw over ,
at Cavour's request , all the proposals which he himself had just made
for a reformed Neapolitan kingdom allied to Piedmont ?
TREVELYAN-1911-2,26.297

It may be doubted - although the Emperor's gloomy words to the
Neapolitan envoys at Fontainebleau perhaps imply a weakening of his
resistance to Cavour . TREVELYAN-1911-2,26.298

But on July 6 Brenier , the French Minister at Naples , declared
strongly against annexation . TREVELYAN-1911-2,26.299

And at Turin the French Minister , M. de Talleyrand , was pressing
Cavour hard to grant the Neapolitan alliance , claiming first and
foremost that Victor Emmanuel should at once write to Garibaldi to bid
him make a truce . TREVELYAN-1911-2,26.300

Talleyrand found that Cavour ' sheltered himself behind England , ' and
put off his demands with fair words and excuses to gain time .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,26.301

Victor Emmanuel was conveniently away hunting in his beloved Alps ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,26.302

and his return must be awaited . TREVELYAN-1911-2,26.303

Meanwhile , in the better world up there , in the pine woods and beneath
the moraines , the descendant of twenty generations of hunting rulers of
Savoy unbosomed himself to his companions of the chase , the men to whom
he could talk gruffly and freely , to ease his rugged nature of its
weight of simple emotions . TREVELYAN-1911-2,26.304

' He talked much about Sicily , ' wrote one of these after their return
to the plains . TREVELYAN-1911-2,26.305

He said he envied Garibaldi , and would like to be able to lay about him
, like the Nizzard general . TREVELYAN-1911-2,26.306

Victor Emmanuel really loves Garibaldi . ' TREVELYAN-1911-2,26.307

The affection for Garibaldi which the Italian King could only express to
his confidants in the depths of the Alpine forest , was being proclaimed
aloud in the streets by all classes in Great Britain .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,26.308

In the uncertain diplomatic <P_27> situation , England's decided
attitude became the governing factor . TREVELYAN-1911-2,27.309

If at the beginning of July , when France asked for her support in
forcing a truce on Garibaldi in Palermo , England had supported the
other Powers in such a programme of interference , it is difficult to
see how Sicily could have been annexed to Piedmont .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,27.310

But England refused , TREVELYAN-1911-2,27.311

and without her concurrence Napoleon , who at this time highly valued
her friendship was unwilling to proceed to definite action .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,27.312

And again at the end of July , as will be told in a later chapter , she
refused to participate in Napoleon's scheme to prevent Garibaldi from
crossing the straits , TREVELYAN-1911-2,27.313

and thereby enabled the red-shirts to invade the mainland .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,27.314

This policy of Lord John's was not that of intervention in Italian
affairs , but of non-intervention with an implied veto on the
intervention of others . TREVELYAN-1911-2,27.315

The action of Great Britain in this summer , without which Italy could
not have been made , was due partly to the steady pressure of public
opinion , press , and Parliament on the Cabinet , and partly to the
personal attachment of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to the cause of
Italian freedom . TREVELYAN-1911-2,27.316

Lord John Russell had been brought up in boyhood and youth among the
friends of Fox , that small group of Liberal aristocrats who , no
fair-weather friends of freedom , had sacrificed their popularity and
their chance of influence and power for forty years , on behalf of the
principles of civil and religious liberty . TREVELYAN-1911-2,27.317

Russell had inherited their traditions , TREVELYAN-1911-2,27.318

had in early manhood led the great attack that re-established freedom in
Great Britain in 1832 , TREVELYAN-1911-2,27.319

and now in old age was prepared to do all that in him lay to overturn on
Italian soil worse <P_28> tyrannies than had ever been known in England
. TREVELYAN-1911-2,28.320

In this task Lord John was opposed by the Court ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,28.321

but he was supported by the public , by the press , by the petitions of
great municipalities , and by his two chief colleagues , Palmerston and
Gladstone , both converts , at different dates and for different reasons
, from those authoritarian principles in Church and State to which he
himself had sworn eternal hatred while he was still a boy .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,28.322

The British Minister for Foreign Affairs was therefore ready to take any
step consonant with British interests that would assist Italian freedom
, TREVELYAN-1911-2,28.323

and fortunately he had for his advisers , at Naples and at Turin
respectively , two men of marked ability who sympathised with these aims
. TREVELYAN-1911-2,28.324

Elliot and Hudson conducted a private correspondence with Lord John
behind their official dispatches , TREVELYAN-1911-2,28.325

and so enabled the British Minister to keep abreast of the rapid
development of the Italian situation in 1859 - 60 .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,28.326

It was for this reason that British policy never fell seriously behind
the ever-@ @increasing requirements of Cavour . TREVELYAN-1911-2,28.327

Before the middle of July 1860 both Hudson and Elliot had become
converts to the idea of Italian unity . TREVELYAN-1911-2,28.328

And both of them began to write private letters to prepare Lord John's
mind to accept the annexation of the whole Peninsula by Victor Emmanuel
. TREVELYAN-1911-2,28.329

But their support of this programme was due only to the Garibaldian
conquests . TREVELYAN-1911-2,28.330

Union had not previously been favoured even by Hudson himself .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,28.331

On May 18 , while Garibaldi with his Thousand were still in the
mountains overlooking Palermo , Hudson had argued in a long private
letter to Russell that the fusion of North and South Italy in one State
was difficult because of the intervening Papal territories , and not
desirable because of the moral corruption of the South .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,28.332

He had recommended as a compromise the possession of the throne of
Naples and Sicily by a cadet of the Royal House of Piedmont .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,28.333

But the fall of Palermo at the end <P_29> of May converted him to the
idea of complete Italian unity . TREVELYAN-1911-2,29.334

Meanwhile Lord John had not taken up with any warmth his suggestion of
placing a cadet of the House of Piedmont on the throne of Naples ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,29.335

and ' the tidal wave of unity which the victory of Palermo set in motion
carried that idea to the frozen sea of diplomatic nostrums , ' as its
author cheerfully acknowledged . TREVELYAN-1911-2,29.336

Therefore on July 16 Hudson wrote to Lord John again , declaring himself
this time ' cordially and entirely ' in favour of Italian unity under
Victor Emmanuel , ' because now that the notion of a Prince of the House
of Savoy has been set aside by the force of circumstances , ' he saw '
very great danger to the Balance of Power in the Mediterranean if France
should in the midst of the Neapolitan confusion find means to place a
creature of her own on that throne . ' TREVELYAN-1911-2,29.337

On July 27 he again wrote in favour of annexation ' as less prejudicial
to British interests <paren> of which you remind me <$$paren> than the
anarchy of Sicily and Naples , and the discontent of North Italy . '
TREVELYAN-1911-2,29.338

Finally on July 31 he wrote a long reasoned letter to Lord John to prove
that Italian unity was in accordance with British interests .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,29.339

In this important letter Hudson uses two main arguments . First that
annexation had now become the only possible form of stable government
for South Italy : TREVELYAN-1911-2,29.340

' are the respectable classes of Naples to be subjected to the
inconvenience of being shot , plundered , burnt , and violated because
the Foreign Powers dislike Unity ? ' TREVELYAN-1911-2,29.341

Secondly , when the whole Peninsula was united in one State , it would
be strong enough to be independent of France , TREVELYAN-1911-2,29.342

and would naturally gravitate to friendship with England and the German
Powers . TREVELYAN-1911-2,29.343

A good understanding between Austria , Prussia , Italy , and England ,
argued Hudson , would rid Europe of the nightmare of French domination
which then oppressed her . TREVELYAN-1911-2,29.344

' It is my duty , ' he concluded , ' under my instructions to support
Duality , TREVELYAN-1911-2,29.345

and I have <P_30> done so . TREVELYAN-1911-2,30.346

But I should greatly fail in my duty if I did not point out to your
Lordship the difficulties <paren> I may say the impossibility <$$paren>
which prevent its accomplishment . ' TREVELYAN-1911-2,30.347

These arguments , in which , as will be seen , the fear of French
predominance was the chief , sufficed to persuade the British statesmen
of 1860 that their earnest desire to help Italian freedom was compatible
with the material interests of Great Britain , and that it was not only
their pleasure but their duty to bring about the union of the whole
Peninsula under Victor Emmanuel . TREVELYAN-1911-2,30.348

Side by side with the love of Italy , the fear of France then dominated
Englishmen , and not least among them Lord John Russell .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,30.349

He was in constant anxiety at this period lest Cavour should purchase
from Napoleon the right to annex the rest of Italy by ceding the island
of Sardinia and the Genoese Riviera to France . TREVELYAN-1911-2,30.350

The rumour was in fact baseless . TREVELYAN-1911-2,30.351

But although Cavour and Farini hastened to deny it with the utmost
solemnity , Russell could not feel easy , remembering the protestations
of innocence that had preceded the barter of Nice and Savoy .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,30.352

Hudson endeavoured to relieve his chief's fears , pointing out that
Genoa was a vital part of Italy , whereas Nice had been a mere outpost .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,30.353

At the same time , with admirable skill , he turned Lord John's
remaining fears on this head into an argument that England herself
should support the Italian claims unconditionally , and so outbid the
French by doing the work for nothing . TREVELYAN-1911-2,30.354

' I perceive , ' he wrote on May 31 , replying to Lord John's fears
about the alleged cession of Genoa , ' that the more you hang back the
more easy do you make the propagation of French notions in Italy . '
TREVELYAN-1911-2,30.355

It is difficult to see where Lord John had been guilty of ' hanging back
. ' TREVELYAN-1911-2,30.356

In any case he was never seriously open to the charge again ,
TREVELYAN-1911-2,30.357

but made himself thenceforth a willing auxiliary to the plans of Hudson
and Cavour . TREVELYAN-1911-2,30.358

<P_31>

<heading>

Chapter II TREVELYAN-1911-2,31.361

Enthusiasm in North Italy . TREVELYAN-1911-2,31.362

The expeditions in aid of Garibaldi . TREVELYAN-1911-2,31.363

Mazzini , Bertani , and Cavour . TREVELYAN-1911-2,31.364

{COM:epigraphs_omitted}

<$$heading>

A new nation can@ @not be made solely by the skill of a great statesman
playing on the mutual jealousies of Foreign Powers .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,31.367

The making of nations requires the self-sacrifice of thousands of
obscure men and women who care more for the idea of their country than
for their own comfort or interest , their own lives or the lives of
those whom they love . TREVELYAN-1911-2,31.368

Cavour , with the help of England's attitude of ' non-intervention , '
could , at best , only keep the ring while the revolutionaries struck
down the Neapolitan Kingdom . TREVELYAN-1911-2,31.369

It remained to be seen whether volunteers would go out in sufficient
numbers to enable Garibaldi to defeat the 100,000 Bourbon troops <P_32>
who , even after the fall of Palermo , refused to embrace the national
cause . TREVELYAN-1911-2,32.370

The Italian revolution had produced martyrs by the hundred ;
TREVELYAN-1911-2,32.371

could it now produce effective soldiers by the thousand ?
TREVELYAN-1911-2,32.372

The active patriots came from among all classes of the town population ,
and from the leaders of the rural districts , TREVELYAN-1911-2,32.373

but the common peasantry of the North , though most of them had now been
converted to the National cause , did not cross the sea to join
Garibaldi . TREVELYAN-1911-2,32.374

A severe strain was therefore put on the cities of North Italy , not at
that date as wealthy as they have since become , to supply at a few
weeks' notice , out of the civil population , a complete army of
volunteers . TREVELYAN-1911-2,32.375

The strain was the more severe because so large a portion of the
patriotic youth of the Peninsula had already enlisted in the regular
army of Piedmont , which , so long as Garibaldi was on the warpath , was
urgently required for home defence against a possible attack from
Austria . TREVELYAN-1911-2,32.376

Yet within three months of the capture of Palermo more than 20,000
volunteers were shipped off south from Genoa and Leghorn .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,32.377

The great majority of these Northerners proved in the battle of the
Volturno that they could fight bravely . TREVELYAN-1911-2,32.378

And it is reasonable to suppose that nine-tenths of them went to the war
mainly from patriotic motives , TREVELYAN-1911-2,32.379

for there was no compulsion to enlist except public opinion , no reward
except mental satisfaction . TREVELYAN-1911-2,32.380

The pay offered was insufficient to supply their daily needs on a
campaign where the plunder even of food was punished by death , and
where the improvised commissariat was always insufficient , and often
non-existent . TREVELYAN-1911-2,32.381

When Garibaldi at Palermo heard complaints of the irregularity of the
pay , he said to Bandi : ' What do you want with pay ?
TREVELYAN-1911-2,32.382

When a patriot has eaten his bowl of soup and when the affairs of the
country are going well , what more can any one want ? '
TREVELYAN-1911-2,32.383

However , he agreed to fix a scale , TREVELYAN-1911-2,32.384

and thenceforward officers received two francs a day , and privates one
franc or less . TREVELYAN-1911-2,32.385

The Intendant_General calculated two <P_33> francs per man as the
average for pay and maintenance combined , including both officers and
privates in the estimate . TREVELYAN-1911-2,33.386

Neither was there any prospect that at the end of the war the spoils
would be divided among the actual victors . TREVELYAN-1911-2,33.387

For the South was to be liberated , not conquered ;
TREVELYAN-1911-2,33.388

and furthermore the Garibaldini well knew that they were fighting to win
a kingdom for a Royal Government suspicious of them if not of their
leader , and fully equipped with place-hunters of its own .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,33.389

Financially , far more was given up than was gained by the Garibaldino -
though exceptions could be named . TREVELYAN-1911-2,33.390

Physically , the campaign was no holiday ; TREVELYAN-1911-2,33.391

in the mountains of Sicily and Calabria these town-bred youths of an
unathletic community were exposed to the utmost hardships of hunger and
thirst , heat , cold , and rain , and to the thousand petty miseries of
campaigning in a half-barbarous country , all of which , as privileges
of a patriot's life , the old South-American guerilla expected his
followers to enjoy as much as he did himself . TREVELYAN-1911-2,33.392

All this they endured , and the tortures of wounds treated in
ill-provided field hospitals , with an uncomplaining courage which
aroused the wonder of their British companions in arms .
TREVELYAN-1911-2,33.393

