<BEGIN_trevelyan-1913-2>

<P_15>

<heading>

CHAPTER II TREVELYAN-1913-2,15.4

HOME LIFE , BUSINESS , AND POLITICS AT ROCHDALE , UP TO THE DEATH OF HIS
FIRST WIFE , 1827 - 41 . TREVELYAN-1913-2,15.5

<$$heading>

' There is no class of people in England more determined and more
unconquerable , whichever side they take , than are the people of the
county from which I come . TREVELYAN-1913-2,15.7

' - John Bright <font> in the House of Commons . <$$font>
TREVELYAN-1913-2,15.8

The life of John Bright , from the end of his schooldays until his death
, falls into two periods of unequal length , of which the exact point of
division is marked by the death of his first wife .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,15.9

The first part consists of these years <paren> 1827 to 1841 <$$paren>
when he took an active share in the business of his father's firm , and
did no political or public work except in Rochdale and the neighbouring
towns . TREVELYAN-1913-2,15.10

The second part covers the remaining forty-seven years of his life ,
during which he devoted most of his time and energies to politics at a
distance from Rochdale , his native town becoming to him a place of
domestic retreat rather than the scene of his labours .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,15.11

The period of his Rochdale activities , the subject of this chapter , is
the key to his subsequent career . TREVELYAN-1913-2,15.12

For in this period he formed all his economic , social and political
views , in which half a century of larger experience wrought little
change . TREVELYAN-1913-2,15.13

As the world appeared to him when he looked at it from Rochdale , such ,
in London , he found it still . TREVELYAN-1913-2,15.14

In the second quarter of the nineteenth century , many of the merchant
princes and cotton lords of Manchester were already almost as much cut
off from social intercourse with the hands whom they employed as were
their rivals , the squires , from the agricultural labourers starving in
a decent obscurity beyond the park gates . TREVELYAN-1913-2,15.15

This utter social division between rich and poor , in town and country
alike , is still , under much improved economic conditions , a
fundamental evil of our own age . TREVELYAN-1913-2,15.16

And the way in which it formerly exacerbated the acute miseries of the
poor in Manchester during the hungry ' thirties and <P_16> ' forties was
described by two keen observers - Engels and Mrs. Gaskell .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,16.17

In his capacity of German philosophic visitor , Engels noted , as
specially characteristic of the epoch and of the country , the long
lines of brilliant shop-frontage on the main streets of Manchester ,
through which the middle class passed from their comfortable homes
outside to their business premises in the centre , the whole being so
planned that the bourgeoisie need never catch sight of the squalid and
noisome regions where the workmen lived , and of which the great city in
fact mainly consisted . TREVELYAN-1913-2,16.18

Mrs. Gaskell , the wife of a Unitarian minister , after working for
many years at her husband's side in the slums of Manchester , delivered
her soul in <font> Mary Barton . <$$font> TREVELYAN-1913-2,16.19

According to her , the social division of rich and poor in the cotton
capital was in itself as great an evil as the difference of wealth that
caused it . TREVELYAN-1913-2,16.20

' At all times , ' she wrote , ' it is a bewildering thing to the poor
weaver to see his employer removing from house to house , each one
grander than the last , till he ends in building one more magnificent
than all , or sells his mills to buy an estate in the country , while
all the time the weaver , who thinks he and his fellows are the real
makers of his wealth , is struggling on for bread for his children ,
through the vicissitudes of lowered wages , short hours , few hands
employed , etc ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,16.21

The meeting face to face of the masters with the men's deputation , in
the sixteenth chapter of <font> Mary Barton <$$font> , shows the gulf
between the two worlds down which Mrs. Gaskell bade England look and
tremble . TREVELYAN-1913-2,16.22

Manchester of that day had many merits , TREVELYAN-1913-2,16.23

and there was as much public spirit and humanity in these merchant
princes and cotton lords as in any other class in the kingdom .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,16.24

But the new factory system was beginning to divide them off socially
from those whom they employed . TREVELYAN-1913-2,16.25

Now , if John Bright had been brought up in Manchester society , thus
divided against itself , he might have held with more qualification his
characteristic faith in the common interest of employer and employed ,
which rendered him so <P_17> persuasive a champion of the union of all
classes against the rural landlords ; TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.26

he would perhaps have been less puzzled by Lord Ashley's denunciations
of the cotton lords ; TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.27

and he might , as a human being , have been imbued with less of that
sense of his own oneness with the working men which enabled him to lead
them to the winning of the franchise , when Cobden stood aside .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.28

Although Greenbank mill at Rochdale was only ten miles from Manchester ,
in some respects it was worlds away . TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.29

In the smaller manufacturing towns of Lancashire and Yorkshire , many
masters were still relatively poor , TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.30

still preserved the simple habits of life and expenditure , and the old
way of mixing on more or less intimate terms with their men , that had
marked the manufacturers of former generations . TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.31

When John Bright at the age of fifteen began to ' help in the warehouse
, ' he was entering a society democratic in its atmosphere and
singularly free from social distinctions . TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.32

The ' cash nexus ' was far from being the only bond between his father ,
Jacob Bright , and the hands in the mill , which stood , as was said '
above , at the door of his own modest dwelling . TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.33

Jacob Bright knew each one of his employees , and much about their
families . TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.34

So good a Friend could not fail to take thought , after the manner of
his sect , for the human beings with whom he came in daily contact .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.35

He was often consulted by his people as to their private affairs ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.36

and in their quarrels and difficulties was welcomed as a judge in Israel
. TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.37

He was constantly helping their households in those bad times , out of
his private means . TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.38

When any one married he increased their wages . TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.39

The children employed in the factory were never allowed to be beaten :
TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.40

the leathern strap , hung up in so many mills in the bad days before the
factory acts , had never been seen at Greenbank .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.41

He had the children taught out of his own funds , TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.42

and finally built them a school . TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.43

' On winter nights , with a large lantern in his hand , and wrapped up
warmly in a thick overcoat , he would stand at his mill gates , giving
directions to the respective men to superintend the children on their
way home . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.44

He was ' owd Jacob ' with his men , many of whom continued through life
to call his sons plain ' John ' and ' Thomas ' when speaking to them .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.45

A story , that paints ' owd Jacob ' to the life , tells how coming up
the hill one day from town he found a neighbour in trouble on the road :
TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.46

a valuable beast of burden belonging to him had met with an accident
TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.47

and had to be killed . TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.48

The onlookers were thronging round the poor man with expressions of
sorrow ; TREVELYAN-1913-2,17.49

to one of the loudest of these Jacob Bright <P_18> turned
TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.50

and said : ' I@ @'m sorry five pounds . TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.51

How much art thou sorry ? ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.52

- and then and there raised a subscription . TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.53

In this half-democratic , half-patriarchal society John Bright was now
placed during the formative years of early youth .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.54

Some of the abler workmen became his companions and friends , from whom
he learnt the hot radicalism of that day and district ;
TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.55

he heard at first hand bitter memories of ' Peterloo ' from those who
had gone to attend a meeting and come back from a massacre ;
TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.56

he listened to the hopes of the artisans , that they might be admitted
as citizens to the franchise . TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.57

Thus he grew up , seeing some things , at least , with a working man's
eyes . TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.58

Of the various sects that have arisen since the corruption of the early
Christians by worldly success , the Society of Friends has most
consistently felt and taught the equality and fraternity of all mankind
. TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.59

To the Brights of Rochdale , far removed in temperament as they were
from the Jacobins , the doctrine of ' Liberty , Equality , Fraternity '
formed a part of their inherent and inbred religion .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.60

In the warehouse with him was one Nicholas Nuttall , who ' took in the
work from the mule spinners . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.61

' Nicholas , ' writes his renowned pupil , ' was a great politician of
the radical type . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.62

In December 1830 , a few weeks before the introduction of the Whig
Reform Bill , Nicholas , in common with all Lancashire Radicals , was
much excited because their leader , ' Orator Hunt , ' who eleven years
before had held the meeting that ended in the Peterloo massacre , was
candidate at a by-election in the borough of Preston .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.63

He had had the temerity to put himself up against the then Whig
potentate Edward Stanley , ' the Rupert of debate , ' ' afterwards Earl
of Derby and for many years leader {TEXT:"leader"_in_brackets} of the
Tory party , though at the time of this election Stanley was not
reckoned among the Tories . TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.64

His family had long had great influence in Preston ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.65

and it was thought a daring step for any one to enter the field against
him . TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.66

In those days elections were held for many days , I think for fourteen
days . TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.67

Day by day I heard from Nicholas the progress of the contest .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.68

His interest in it was extraordinary TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.69

and he communicated to me some of his enthusiasm ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.70

and through him I became something of a politician .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.71

The son of the great peer was defeated , TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.72

and Hunt became member for Preston to the great joy of Nicholas and to
my entire satisfaction . TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.73

At that time I knew little of the questions in dispute ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.74

but I sympathised with the multitude who supported the Radical candidate
. TREVELYAN-1913-2,18.75

<P_19>

' In fact , I could not be otherwise than Liberal .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.77

My father was Liberal , though we had no elections in our town and there
was rarely a contest for the county . TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.78

I was , as I now am , a member of the Society of Friends .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.79

I knew something of their history and of the persecutions they had
endured , and of their principles of equality and justice .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.80

I knew that I came of the stock of the martyrs , that one of my
ancestors , John Gratton of Monyash in Derbyshire , had been in prison
for several years because he preferred to worship in the humble
meeting-house of his own sect rather than in the church of the
law-favoured sect by whom he and his friends were barbarously persecuted
. TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.81

John Gratton's granddaughter was my father's grandmother .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.82

He was a man of influence in the part of the country where he lived ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.83

and I observed , many years after the time of which I am now writing ,
in a Parliamentary return for which I moved , that when Nonconformist
places of worship were legalised by the Toleration Act , all the
meeting-houses of Friends in Derbyshire were registered by and in the
name of John Gratton . TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.84

' I have said that my father was liberal in his views of political
affairs . TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.85

He took in the <font> Manchester Guardian , <$$font> a weekly Liberal
paper . TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.86

There were no daily papers in Lancashire , and few , if any , in the
Kingdom and in London . TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.87

The <font> Guardian <$$font> was published on Saturday ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.88

and on the evening of that day my father read his paper
TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.89

or I read it to him . TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.90

The Parliamentary reports were very brief , TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.91

and as I read the scraps of speeches in the House of Commons he would
ask me , " What did Joseph Hume say ? " TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.92

Joseph Hume was then , as he was during all his Parliamentary career ,
distinguished for his Liberal views , and especially for his anxiety to
prevent any waste of public money . TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.93

I have known him intimately in later years when I sat near him in the
House of Commons . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.94

In the following passage Bright tells us something of the order of the
day at Greenbank when he first began to help his father in the business
: TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.95

' Sladen came to our house every morning about half-@ @past five o'clock
, for the keys of the mill , TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.96

and it was my duty to get up and give them to him .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.97

In those days there were no lucifer_matches , TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.98

and I have not forgotten the trouble I had to strike a light with the
old tinder-box and flint and steel . TREVELYAN-1913-2,19.99

I had a room over the counting-house <P_20> which I fitted up for my own
use , with a comfortable chair , a desk , and a small cupboard with
shelves for a few books . TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.100

The door into the office was just opposite the furnace of one of the
boilers , TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.101

and the old " steam tenter , " Josiah Lee , or " old Siah " as he was
commonly called , brought a shovelful of fire from his furnace
TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.102

and carried it into the grate in my room , TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.103

and thus I had a good fire made in a few minutes .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.104

Here I often read a good deal before breakfast TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.105

and was undisturbed . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.106

In this way he supplied the gaps of his meagre school education .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.107

Besides history and poetry , to which he was devoted throughout life ,
we find him sending for books of statistics and studying the <font>
Spectator , <$$font> a new Radical weekly , which had early espoused
anti-Corn_Law views . TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.108

' The years 1831 and '32 are memorable for the great agitation which
produced the Reform Bill . TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.109

I was too young , ' he writes , ' to take much part in it ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.110

but I well remember the London papers bringing the news to Rochdale of
the great bill as it was first introduced in the House of Commons , and
the sensation which it caused throughout the country .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.111

Rochdale was not included in the first list , of new boroughs ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.112

and a public meeting was held in the newsroom to memorialise the
government to grant a member to our town . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.113

The petition met with success , TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.114

and the Whigs put down Rochdale for enfranchisement along with the other
great towns of the industrial north . TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.115

In later years he told his vivid recollection of a meeting held during
the crisis of the Reform Bill , in the market-place at Rochdale , when
young Dr. Kay was the speaker . TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.116

Bright as an old man recalled the emotion he felt that day in common
with thousands of his fellow townsmen , ready ripe for rebellion , when
the orator rolled out the magnificent lines of Shelley , which seemed to
have been prophetically written for that moment in English history : '
Rise like lions after slumber In unvanquishable number !
TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.117

Shake your chains to earth , like dew Which in sleep had fall'n on you :
TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.118

Ye are many , TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.119

- they are few . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,20.120

<P_21>

In October 1831 the Bill was lost in the Lords .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.122

But the next six months of almost revolutionary agitation caused its
second reading to be carried there by a majority of nine , at dawn on
the morning of April 14 , 1832 , after a night of fierce and uncertain
conflict . TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.123

During that night of high debate at Westminster , John Bright , not yet
one-and-twenty , was making his first journey to London , wrapped up on
the top of the ' Peveril of the Peak ' stage coach , the rain pouring
down upon him in torrents . TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.124

As yet no railway ran between Lancashire and the capital .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.125

They started from Manchester at eight in the evening of the 13th ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.126

and by dint of relays of four always excellent horses , were due to
reach London at five next afternoon . TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.127

At some point on the road , after the wet night was over , one of the
passengers ' observed something coming towards us , but still in the
distance , TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.128

and we all looked with great interest . TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.129

We saw horses galloping and carriages coming at a speed which would
quickly have left behind our coach if they had been going the same way .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.130

By-and-by we found they were chaises with four horses in each chaise ,
having two or three men inside , and they were throwing out placards
from each window . TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.131

These were express chaises coming from London , bringing the news to all
the people of the country - for there were no telegraphs then - of the
glorious triumph of popular principles even in the House of Lords .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.132

It has always been to me a pleasure to think of the excitement this
incident caused among us coach passengers when we found what was the
business and message of those gentlemen in the express . '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.133

Less than two months later , after the abortive attempt of the Duke of
Wellington to form a Tory Ministry , the people's wishes were fulfilled
TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.134

and they obtained ' the Bill , the whole Bill , and ' - as the Radicals
soon came to think in more senses than one - ' nothing but the Bill . '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.135

But at any rate it was a new era , TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.136

for the blank negation of perpetual privilege was gone ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.137

and henceforth the political tools were to him who could use them .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,21.138

<P_22>

In 1830 John Bright suffered his first great sorrow .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.140

His mother , a woman of very remarkable character , had become more
rather than less intimate with her elder children as they grew up ;
TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.141

and the relation meant most of all , perhaps , to John .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.142

' She was , ' he writes , ' about 41 years of age .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.143

She had had eleven children TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.144

and was never robust , TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.145

and now we had the grief to witness a gradual decline .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.146

As the summer drew nigh her weakness increased , TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.147

and we lost all hope of her recovery . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.148

' It was on the 18th of June that she passed from her family on earth to
one of the " many mansions " prepared for such as she was .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.149

It was late in the evening , TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.150

and we stood round her bed as her spirit left her poor wasted form .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.151

During that last day , when only partially conscious , she often
mentioned my name . TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.152

Though not her first-born child , I was her eldest living one ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.153

and I have a strong feeling that her motherly sympathy with me was even
more than usually strong . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.154

Her death , as he tells us , was a great calamity - ' a loss which never
could be repaired . TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.155

From it sprung many troubles and disappointments , which disturbed us in
after years . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.156

The father , a good , honest , plain man , with that additional touch of
conscientious humaneness which so many of the Friends took from their
religion , was neither in intellect nor in personality a match for the
leading spirits among his children , as the mother had always been .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.157

The six brothers and four sisters who survived their mother formed a
large party of high-spirited young people , now left very much to their
own guidance . TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.158

Most of them were clever , and even original , TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.159

and the girls were all of them handsome , especially Esther , a
singularly noble woman , who unfortunately died in 1850 shortly after
her marriage to James Vaughan . TREVELYAN-1913-2,22.160

Priscilla , destined to play a considerable part in her brother's life ,
had strong powers <P_23> both of mind and character .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,23.161

Jacob the younger , who was only nine in 1830 when his mother died , was
ere long to show that he had all John's fearless and unyielding temper ,
together with a greater measure of intellectual daring and suppleness -
qualities destined to earn him a place of his own in English political
life . TREVELYAN-1913-2,23.162

Throughout the ' thirties the absorbing passion of these brothers and
sisters was neither religion nor business , still less the forbidden
dances and pleasures of the world , but politics .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,23.163

Preoccupation with affairs of State was then very uncommon among Friends
; TREVELYAN-1913-2,23.164

many were studiously neutral , many patiently Conservative ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,23.165

and many like old Jacob Bright , were strong but quiet Liberals ,
neither speculative nor active in such matters .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,23.166

Ever since the death of Penn , the sect had avoided politics as being
more beset with worldly snares for the children of light than the common
business transactions in which so many of them managed to thrive without
endangering their principles . TREVELYAN-1913-2,23.167

Such seclusion from public life had been natural in former times , when
power was monopolised by the landlord class and by the adherents of the
State Church , " TREVELYAN-1913-2,23.168

but in the new and more liberal age now dawning , a closer relation to
politics was to be expected in people so actively philanthropic as the
Quakers . TREVELYAN-1913-2,23.169

In the Reformed Parliament <paren> 1832-3 <$$paren> Joseph Pease , in
the plain dress of the Friends , had successfully taken the affirmation
and his seat , the first of his sect to sit in the British House of
Commons , at least since the seventeenth century .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,23.170

The anti-slavery movement had been helped even by strict Friends , as
being non-political ; TREVELYAN-1913-2,23.171

and the fact that the elders had been active in that matter made it
easier for the young generation to answer more fully to many of the
other calls of good citizenship . TREVELYAN-1913-2,23.172

As the years went on , and drew John Bright deeper and deeper into a
merely political life , these worldly entanglements evoked , as we shall
see , much criticism from the older and the more religious members of
his society , including <P_24> some who loved him best .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.173

But prior to his marriage in 1839 his interest in politics met with no
such discouragement , TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.174

for the family of which he was already the real leader was
self-sufficing TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.175

and saw relatively little of other Friends . TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.176

The Meeting at Rochdale was neither large nor remarkable ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.177

and the Brights of Greenbank were a law unto themselves .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.178

John Bright was a zealous and fairly successful member of the Rochdale
Cricket Club until the year 1833 . TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.179

In that year he and a number of his fellow-citizens founded the '
Rochdale Literary and Philosophical Society , ' on the model of similar
educative and debating institutions then springing up in many northern
towns . TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.180

Its first meeting was presided over by John Bright , aged twenty-one .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.181

Thus early had his personal qualities made themselves felt in the arena
of his native town . TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.182

At one of the first meetings he proposed and carried by eighteen votes
to four a proposition the truth of which he never afterwards questioned
- namely , ' that a limited monarchy is best suited for this country at
the present time . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.183

At another meeting the company was unanimous in favour of the then very
advanced doctrine that ' Laws for restricting the importation of grain
are impolitic ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.184

On other occasions Bright was of opinion that ' the universal education
of the people is necessary , ' and that ' the moral tendency of public
amusements , such as the theatre , circus , etc. , is injurious . '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.185

In January 1834 he proposed and carried a resolution that Alfred was
more entitled than Alexander to the appellation of ' Great , ' doubtless
overwhelming the Rochdale doctors and tradesmen with stores of
historical learning , acquired before breakfast in front of the furnace
coals imported for his benefit by ' old Siah . '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.186

It was a full and generous life that he had already carved out for
himself , TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.187

and in spite of his being in the mill , it was at this period , on its
intellectual side , not wholly unlike the life of a clever undergraduate
at a college . TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.188

About this time he made the first of many visits to Ireland , in company
with a relation who was going there on business .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.189

' What I most remember of our journey was the crowd of beggars that
gathered round the coach at every place where we stopped to change
horses . TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.190

Nothing like it could be seen in England , ' even in those hard times .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.191

In June and July 1833 he made a pleasure tour in Belgium and the lower
Rhine , whence he returned ' speaking French with much greater facility
. ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,24.192

His letters home , written on the old self-folding paper before the days
of envelopes and postage stamps , tell his family how he admired the
cathedral at Brussels and the ' beautiful <P_25> pictures of the old
masters , and wondered at the ignorance of the Catholics , exhibited in
their supporting about 2000 priests for this Cathedral alone , ' the
unthrifty rascals , worse than Rochdale with its absentee vicar !
TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.193

He drove out to Waterloo TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.194

and spent nearly five hours viewing every detail with a guide , till ' a
thunderstorm came on which added greatly to the effect ' ;
TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.195

' there are plenty of bones scattered over the plain even now ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.196

and the land has been so much enriched by the blood and the interment of
the slain , that the wheat grows 7 or 8 feet high -
TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.197

as Byron says - ' " How the red rain has made the harvest grow . " '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.198

Finally , returning through Holland , where cholera is raging , he gets
ill himself , TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.199

but fortunately it turns out not to be cholera in his case ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.200

so the Rochdale Literary and Philosophical is not deprived of its most
active member . TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.201

He was already zealously engaged in Temperance lecturing in Rochdale and
the neighbouring towns , such as Burnley , TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.202

and had found a staunch ally for this and other causes in his friend ,
William Roberts . TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.203

Bright took his early efforts at oratory in the Literary and
Philosophical , the Bible meetings and Temperance lectures with the
seriousness natural to the great artist he was .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.204

His early morning studies , and his perfect familiarity with the Bible
and Milton , had not a little to do with the high standard of language
which he set before himself from the first . TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.205

' If my manner of speaking is good , ' he wrote when an old man , ' it
may have become so from reading what is good . '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.206

And again : ' It is a good thing to use few words and the best words ,
which are those which are simple and forcible , with no needless use of
adjectives , too many of which spoil speaking and writing .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.207

To assist in attaining to a practice like this , the reading of good
books - I mean well-written books - is helpful , so that the eye and the
ear and the mind may become familiar with good language . '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.208

It was natural for one starting with high and somewhat literary
ambitions of oratory , and with a nervous fear of breaking down , to
make the initial mistake - or adopt the necessary first precaution - of
writing out his speeches and committing them to memory .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.209

The first person to advise him to alter this method was a Baptist
minister , the Rev. John Aldis . TREVELYAN-1913-2,25.210

Being stationed at Manchester in the year 1832 , Aldis was invited
<P_26> over to Rochdale to speak at a Bible Society meeting in the
Friends' Meeting-House . TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.211

He was waiting near by in a tradesman's parlour in Yorkshire Street ,
when , as he tells us , ' a slender modest young gentleman came , who
soon surprised me by his intelligence and thoughtfulness .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.212

I took his arm on the way to the meeting , TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.213

and I thought he seemed nervous . TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.214

I think it was his first public speech , at all events in such
connection . TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.215

It was very eloquent and powerful TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.216

and carried away the meeting , TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.217

but it was elaborate and memoriter . TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.218

On our way back , as I congratulated him , he said that such efforts
cost him too dear , TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.219

and asked me how I spoke so easily . TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.220

I then took the full advantage of my seniority to set fully my notions ,
that in his case , as in most , I thought it would be best not to burden
the memory too much , but having carefully prepared and committed any
portions when special effect was desired , merely to put down other
things in the desired order , leaving the wording of them to the moment
. TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.221

Years rolled on . TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.222

I had entirely forgotten the name of the young Friend , when the Free
Trade Bazaar was held in London <bracket> 1845 <$$bracket>
{COM:brackets_in_original} . TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.223

One of those engaged for it - Mr. Barker of Stockport - calling on me ,
asked if I had called on Mr. Bright . TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.224

I said I had not been able to attend the meetings and did not personally
know him at all . TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.225

He replied " You must , TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.226

for I heard him say that you gave him his first lesson in public
speaking . " TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.227

I went to a subsequent meeting TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.228

and recognised the young Friend of 1832 . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.229

Bright did not venture to follow completely the advice given him by Mr.
Aldis in 1832 , until another four or five years had gone by .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.230

For when in 1876 Mr. Aldis' story was brought to his notice , he wrote
: ' I can@ @not say that I remember clearly what Mr. Aldis remembers .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.231

Mr. Cobden came over to Rochdale at my invitation to attend a meeting
on Education in the schoolroom of the Baptist Chapel , West Street ;
TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.232

that may have been the occasion on which Mr. Aldis was present .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,26.233

I spoke a carefully prepared speech , full I doubt not of the <P_27>
faults of youth and inexperience , TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.234

and it had cost me so much in preparation and in anxiety that I resolved
from that day never to speak another written speech ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.235

and I have kept my word . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.236

We may then , in any case , conclude that before he began his Corn Law
campaignings in the ' forties , he had already adopted his lifelong
custom of writing out only the heads of his argument , interspersed with
an occasional ' key-sentence , ' and ending up with the peroration
transcribed in full . TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.237

Jacob Bright the elder was no hard task-master to his sons .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.238

From August 1835 to April 1836 John took a tour in the Mediterranean -
analogous to a voyage round the world in our own day .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.239

He followed in Byron's tracks , quoting his poetry at every turn , with
a zeal which was the literary hall-mark of those who were young when the
news came from Missolonghi . TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.240

He went out by steamer , touching at Lisbon , TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.241

and journeyed in Greece , Egypt , Palestine , Sicily , and Italy ;
TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.242

he moved about the Levant in sailing-vessels , TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.243

spent altogether more than a month in quarantine ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.244

caught the fever at Athens , TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.245

and finally returned , full of enthusiasm , to entertain his
fellow-townspeople with a lecture on his travels .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.246

It can@ @not be said that like Cobden in his almost contemporaneous
Eastern tour , Bright formulated any new theories of Turkish misrule or
of British Foreign Policy - TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.247

but he benefited greatly in body and mind . TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.248

The untravelled but keen-witted family at Greenbank must have devoured
his letters home - bulletins on vast sheets of thin foolscap ,
beautifully written within and without in every available corner , and '
crossed ' in the elaborate manner which cheap paper and lower postage
rates have since happily driven out of fashion .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.249

From Malta <paren> ' 9th month , 3 , 1835 ' <$$paren> he writes : '
Hitherto I have read little on the voyage owing chiefly to the
depression caused by sickness - TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.250

have , however , finished the <font> History of the Ottoman Empire
<$$font> in 2 vols. , also Walter Scott's <font> Ivanhoe <$$font> -
TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.251

the evening on deck till near 12 admiring the setting of the silvery
moon , and watching the beautiful sparkling of the phosphorescent
appearances of the waves as they dash from the paddles . '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.252

He falls in with ' an Armenian Bishop , a deck passenger !
TREVELYAN-1913-2,27.253

He , poor fellow , knows little of the splendours of an English <P_28>
Bishopric TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.254

and dreams seldom of a translation to certain additional thousands per
year . TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.255

He eats little but olives and oil and bread . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.256

The British Consul at Smyrna is ' a puppy ' who draws 500 +L
{TEXT:+L500} a year , but will do nothing for his countrymen in their
quarantine difficulties . TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.257

They begin to go up into the Holy Land from Jaffa .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.258

They bivouac within two hours' ride of Jerusalem ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.259

and he asks his family to imagine the scene , ' under a fine palm tree
whose branches spread majestically from the top of the stem ' - ' two
Arabs and black Nubian bending o'er the fire watching its progress ,
myself and two or three more puffing away with long Turkish Chibouks
<paren> pipes <$$paren> , other lying stretched upon their hay couch ,
the stars shining with a brilliancy much greater than they ever favor us
with in my native land . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.260

Before dawn they start on again , ' passing up the mountains by an
excessively rough path . TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.261

My horse being very good I determined if possible to have first view of
the Holy City , TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.262

and therefore pushed on as rapidly as possible .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.263

At 4 minutes past 6 I reached the summit TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.264

and beheld the sun just rising over the city . TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.265

During the ascent we had a prospect perhaps unequalled for beauty .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.266

On the sides of the mountains was to be seen almost every variety of
color - patches of verdure here and there and a few olive trees of a
light green - spots of earth and sand of a reddish color ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.267

but in greater abundance than either was seen the bare rock shining like
polished marble , TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.268

and the whole had an appearance of a vast surface of marble . '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.269

As might be expected , the ' trumpery pictures , ' ' the mummery of an
ignorant priesthood , ' and ' the lamentable departure from the
simplicity of christianity , ' prevent him from feeling as he would have
wished at the Holy Sepulchre . TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.270

But the Bible scenery gives him unending delight TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.271

and he returns again and again to the description .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.272

' This is what the Scriptures call the " Hill Country of Judea , " very
properly too , TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.273

for hill succeeds hill in almost endless continuation - none immensely
high , but yet steep and difficult of ascent ; TREVELYAN-1913-2,28.274

they are <P_29> notwithstanding well cultivated and very productive ,
though apparently little more than barren rocks . '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.275

He describes the peasants' system of terracing in some detail .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.276

' Along these terraces are planted olive trees ; TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.277

these being set in straight rows the mountains have a very singular and
a very beautiful appearance . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.278

But he can still spare a thought for England . TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.279

' I am very much vexed about the Corporation Bill , which is foolish
enough , you will say , TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.280

but yet I should much like to see the Lords humbled .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.281

<font> Le jour viendra . <$$font> ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.282

After his return from the East , in April 1836 , Bright became more
active than ever as a local politician . TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.283

In January 1837 , he issued a spirited address ' To the Radical
Reformers of the Borough of Rochdale , ' calling on them to support
against the sitting Tory member the Liberal candidate , Mr. Fenton ,
who was pledged to Household Suffrage , Ballot , Short Parliaments ,
abolition of Corn Laws and of Church-rates . TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.284

At the general election in the summer , resulting from the death of King
William IV. , Mr. Fenton was elected by 374 votes to 349 .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.285

The numbers remind us how restricted was the franchise , even in
populous and democratic towns , under the provisions of the First Reform
Act . TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.286

Some time in 1836 or 1837 occurred a trivial incident which proved the
beginning of great things . TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.287

Bright , like other active-minded people within the radius of Manchester
influence , had just begun to hear the name of Richard Cobden , not in
connection with Free Trade , but as that of a man who , though in a
relatively humble position in the commercial world , was already
becoming known in the cotton capital as a reformer and a man of ideas .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.288

One of the causes he had at heart was popular education , then left by
the State to the private benevolence of citizens .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.289

John Bright , whose father already made provision for the teaching of
the children in his factory , ' went over to Manchester to call upon
Cobden to ask him if he would be kind enough to come to Rochdale and to
speak at an education meeting which was about to be held in the
schoolroom of the Baptist Chapel , in West Street of that town .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.290

I found him , ' said John Bright , recalling the scene after forty years
, ' in his office in Mosley Street . TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.291

I introduced myself to him . TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.292

I told him what I wanted . TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.293

His countenance lit up with pleasure to find that there were others that
were working in this question , TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.294

and he , without hesitation , agreed to come . TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.295

He came TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.296

and he spoke ; TREVELYAN-1913-2,29.297

<P_30>

and though he was then so young a speaker , yet the qualities of his
speech were such as remained with him so long as he was able to speak at
all - clearness , logic , a conversational eloquence , a persuasiveness
which it was almost impossible to resist . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,30.299

Thus began the most important , and perhaps the most intimate and
unclouded friendship in English political history .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,30.300

But five years passed away before its consequences began to be apparent
. TREVELYAN-1913-2,30.301

It was , as we shall see , Cobden who in the autumn of 1841 persuaded
Bright to leave Rochdale and become a national agitator ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,30.302

but until that date it is impossible to assign any of Bright's actions
or opinions to the direct promptings of his friend rather than to the
normal development of his own life and his own thoughts .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,30.303

Neither Cobden nor Bright were among the seven men who founded the
Anti-Corn_Law Association at the York Hotel , Manchester , on September
24 , 1838 . TREVELYAN-1913-2,30.304

In October , however , the name of John Bright was added to the '
Provisional Committee , ' actually a few days before that of Richard
Cobden . TREVELYAN-1913-2,30.305

In January 1839 Jacob Bright , senior , gave 50 +L {TEXT:+L50} to the
first of those famous subscription lists which paid for the overthrow of
the landed oligarchy , while in the same month his son John was again
chosen as a committee-man of the Association , together with some
hundred others , all except Bright and half_a_dozen more being
Manchester men . TREVELYAN-1913-2,30.306

In the following two months this ' Manchester Anti-Corn_Law Association
' was converted into the ' National Anti-Corn_Law League . '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,30.307

Cobden had become its recognised chief from the moment when , in his
first public appearance in the cause in December 1838 , he persuaded the
Manchester Chamber of Commerce to put itself in the forefront of the
battle . TREVELYAN-1913-2,30.308

Bright was as yet merely one of the most active members of the League in
provincial Lancashire . TREVELYAN-1913-2,30.309

On February 2 , 1839 , he held an open-air meeting at Rochdale to
denounce the Corn Laws . TREVELYAN-1913-2,30.310

About three_thousand working men were present . TREVELYAN-1913-2,30.311

Bright moved ' that the Corn Laws have had the effect of crippling the
commerce and the manufactures of the country , <P_31> have raised up
rival manufactories in foreign countries , have been most injurious and
oppressive in their operation with the great bulk of our population ,
and the working classes have been grievously injured by this monopoly of
the landed proprietors . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.312

But it turned out that the great majority of the artisans present ,
though Free Traders , were Chartists first and foremost .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.313

They carried the following reasoned amendment : ' That it is the opinion
of this meeting that though the Corn Law is an injurious tax , yet the
present House of Commons , or any other House of Commons constituted ,
on the present suffrage , will never repeal that law so as to be
beneficial to the working classes , TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.314

and this meeting is of opinion that the present Corn Law agitation is
made up for the purpose of diverting the minds of the people from the
only remedy of all political grievances ; TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.315

therefore it is necessary that the people must first be in possession of
their political rights to effect the repeal of these Corn Laws . '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.316

The meeting broke up with three cheers for the Chartist National
Convention , and three groans for the Chamber of Commerce of Manchester
. TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.317

There was much force and likelihood in the prophecy of the Rochdale
workmen that the Corn Laws would not be repealed till the franchise had
been extended . TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.318

The Manchester magnates who went up to London , full of consequence and
primed with the irrefutable arguments of their Cobden , were treated
with a contumely designed to make them feel their unimportance at
Westminster . TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.319

The landed oligarchy could scarcely have been more contemptuous if they
had been a deputation of their own workmen . TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.320

They were told that they could overthrow the monarchy sooner than repeal
the Corn Laws . TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.321

The House of Commons did not contain two_hundred Free Traders ;
TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.322

Whig or Tory , it was a landlords' house only a little less than before
the Reform Act of '32 . TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.323

And yet for all that , the workmen of Rochdale were wrong on the point
of tactics , as they themselves soon came to see .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.324

In seven years the House of Commons was brought round to total repeal ;
TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.325

and the extension of the suffrage eventually came not as a prelude but
as a consequence of that great economic revolution .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.326

Meanwhile a young Quaker walked back to Greenbank sadly enough , from
the fiasco of his first Anti-Corn_Law meeting . TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.327

But John Bright was not the man to be daunted . TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.328

He soon made Rochdale enthusiastic in the cause .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,31.329

In January 1840 <P_32> he started a Rochdale Anti-Corn_Law Association
principally composed of working men , TREVELYAN-1913-2,32.330

and by March could boast of a petition ' for a total , immediate repeal
of the accursed corn-laws , ' with 9700 signatures , ' being signed by
almost every male adult of the town . TREVELYAN-1913-2,32.331

' In 1836 - 38 Jacob Bright , senior , built a new cotton mill , about
two_hundred yards away from Greenbank on the other side of Cronkeyshaw
common , on the site over which the Brights' factory buildings have
since steadily expanded . TREVELYAN-1913-2,32.332

The original mill at Greenbank went on until it was closed during the
cotton famine caused by the American Civil War , after which it was not
thought worth while to reopen such antiquated premises .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,32.333

Shortly afterwards , when John Bright was engaged to be married , a
house was built a little higher up the moor for him to inhabit .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,32.334

He gave it the name of One Ash , in honour of an ash-tree which was a
conspicuous feature in the garden , and in memory of his favourite
ancestor John Gratton , whose Derbyshire home of long ago had been
called Monyash . TREVELYAN-1913-2,32.335

On the top of the hill overlooking Rochdale , there now stood Greenbank
, One Ash , and the new mills , three points of a family triangle with
part of the bare Cronkeyshaw common lying between them .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,32.336

So they stood throughout the rest of John Bright's life ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,32.337

and so they stand to-day . TREVELYAN-1913-2,32.338

Besides the weekly meeting for worship confined to one particular town
or village , the Friends from larger groups and districts attended
monthly , quarterly , and yearly meetings , which were great events not
only in the spiritual but in the social life of the community .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,32.339

The rule , then strictly observed , that Friends must marry only Friends
, bound the Society together - only too closely it may be ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,32.340

- stimulated social intercourse within its borders ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,32.341

and kept alive the desire of the young people and their parents in one
town to see something of those in another . TREVELYAN-1913-2,32.342

Before railways , travelling for pleasure was not common .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,32.343

But Friends often moved about the country on business , when they were
always received into other Friends' houses ; TREVELYAN-1913-2,32.344

and they assembled together from distant quarters for the periodical
meetings , which were always times of hospitality and good-will .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,32.345

In the summer of 1838 a general meeting was held at Ackworth <P_33> in
Yorkshire , in connection with the old school where John Bright had been
educated and his father before him . TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.346

To Ackworth meeting came the Brights out of the west , and out of the
north Elizabeth Priestman of Newcastle , taking care of her grandmother
Margaret Bragg , a noble old lady , famous in the Quaker world for her
religious journeys through England , and the power of the Spirit in her
when she preached . TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.347

Elizabeth was left by herself during the meeting , her grandmother
presumably being called up among the elders of the congregation ;
TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.348

but seeing two pleasant girls near by , Elizabeth asked if she might sit
with them . TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.349

They proved to be Sophia and Priscilla Bright , TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.350

and they were so much charmed by their new friend that when the meeting
was over , they ran up to their brother John - much in the spirit of two
young ladies at a ball in other circles , but in similar circumstances -
crying , ' Come here , John , TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.351

we@ @'ve some one who@ @'ll just suit thee . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.352

Many a true word is spoken half in jest . TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.353

Before the day was over John felt the power of love .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.354

Shortly after this , John and his sisters Priscilla and Esther went on a
journey to Scotland ; TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.355

on their way thither they found themselves at Newcastle upon the first
day , TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.356

and went to meeting . TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.357

After meeting , Priscilla made inquiries about Elizabeth Priestman from
a Friend who proved to be her father , Jonathan Priestman .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.358

He invited them up to his house , named Summerhill , at the top of
Westgate , then outside the town , a house where John Bright was
henceforth a frequent and a welcome guest . TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.359

' Elizabeth Priestman was reared in a home where intellectual activity
existed side by side with a strict form of Quakerism ; where the utmost
refinement of manner was combined with the warmest popular sympathies
and where the strongest opinions were urged in the gentlest tones .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.360

When brought into contact with such a family , John Bright's bluntness
and directness of speech stood out in marked contrast ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.361

but his manly honesty and uprightness were at once recognised ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.362

and it soon became evident that he would win the prize which he had come
to seek . TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.363

The manufacturing districts were a little-known part of England ;
TREVELYAN-1913-2,33.364

it then seemed a long way from Newcastle to <P_34> Rochdale ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.365

and North Country Friends felt that a precious possession was about to
be carried away . TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.366

" Who is this young man Bright whom Elizabeth Priestman is going to
marry ? " one of them asked in anxious tones of a Lancashire Friend .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.367

" A very popular young man very much thought of by our working people ,
" are the only words of the answer now remembered . '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.368

On the 27th of the 11th month , 1839 , John Bright and Elizabeth
Priestman took each other in marriage in the Friends' Meeting-House at
Pilgrim Street , Newcastle . TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.369

For their honeymoon they went to the : Lake district , to Hawkshead ,
the happy village by Esthwaite Water , where Wordsworth's mind had
unknowingly secreted such treasures during his schooldays .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.370

Chance has preserved for us a picture of the Brights' honeymoon , as it
lived in the memory of the survivor , after death had parted them :
TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.371

' To-day three years ago was just such a day as this as to the outward -
TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.372

all nature wore a smile even through the blight of winter .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.373

The air was mild , TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.374

the sun shone upon the fields . TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.375

The bells of Hawkshead Church gave out sweet music , as my precious
Elizabeth and myself walked leisurely to meeting . '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.376

And again , in 1882 , Bright as an old man revisited the scene :
TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.377

' Drive to Colthouse Meeting-house , where we , my bride and I ,
attended meeting the first time after our marriage .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.378

Drove on to Hawkshead , TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.379

found the house in which we then dined with the old and venerable John
and Margaret Bragg . TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.380

Nearly 43 years have since passed . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.381

This lady whom Bright made mistress of One Ash in the last weeks of 1839
was loved by all who knew her . TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.382

Her brothers and sisters almost worshipped Elizabeth Priestman ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.383

and so did her father's servants and workpeople at Newcastle .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.384

She was lively and open in disposition , TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.385

and threw herself into the interests of all her friends .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.386

If she had lived she would have played a great part in her husband's
life . TREVELYAN-1913-2,34.387

<P_35>

Her mother , Rachel Priestman , became very intimate with Bright ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.389

and in some measure filled the place of his own lost mother .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.390

He was often with his new relations on the Tyne ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.391

and they exercised an important influence over him .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.392

It was a different influence from that of his brothers and sisters at
Greenbank , less political and more religious , TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.393

for while the Brights were chiefly concerned with the application of
religion to conduct , the Priestmans possessed more of the mystic's
fervour , though mysticism among Friends is self-possessed and concerned
only with the hidden experiences of the soul . TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.394

Bright , much as he liked his father-in-law , reckoned his wife's
descent from the female side of her family , which had been remarkable
for three generations back . TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.395

Her mother Rachel Priestman , her grandmother Margaret Bragg , who had
taken her to Ackworth on that lucky day , and was much loved by John
Bright , and her great-grandmother Rachel Wilson , had all been or still
were preachers and missionaries , often travelling through England and
America to address and encourage Friends . TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.396

Rachel Priestman was a ' plain Friend , ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.397

and kept her love of nice things in very close bounds .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.398

Even in those days when most Friends still wore the plain dress , there
was a considerable difference in its cut and style , and the shade of
the grey or dove or drab . TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.399

All music and nearly all pictures were forbidden in the Priestman
household . TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.400

But the value set upon sincerity and simplicity encouraged a certain
style in the equipment of a house , which saved it from the invading
vulgarity of Victorian taste in furniture , while the love of beauty
found its outlet in china and linen , and above all in flowers .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.401

We shall see more , in later years after Elizabeth Bright's death , of
the long and friendly struggle of the Priestman influence against the
Bright nature , in the endeavours of John's mother-in-law to preserve
him from politics in order that he might possess and cultivate his own
soul . TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.402

The year 1840 , the one year of unclouded happiness which Bright enjoyed
with his young wife at Rochdale before her health began to give way ,
witnessed his epic battle with the vicar , a theme worthy not only of
the comic muse but of a glance from Clio herself ;
TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.403

for it reveals the men and the passions of that age in their native
colours . TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.404

To the biographer of Bright its importance lies in the fact that the
battle of the Rochdale Church-rates first showed to the world , as well
as to an astonished vicar , the stuff there was in one of his
parishioners . TREVELYAN-1913-2,35.405

In the period immediately following the Revolution of 1688 , <P_36> when
the dissenters were barely a twentieth part of the population , glad to
enjoy , under the shelter of the Whig magnates , a precarious and
limited toleration , it was not unnatural that all the inhabitants of a
parish should from time to time be subjected to a ' rate ' for the
purposes of the church where nearly all of them worshipped .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.406

But after the Wesleyan movement and the rapid growth of all forms of
dissent that followed on it , active nonconformists became as numerous ,
at least in North England , as active Churchmen ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.407

and Church-rates became , therefore , a most invidious privilege .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.408

In parish after parish trouble arose , growing ever more acute as the
nineteenth century wore on . TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.409

After the passing of the First Reform Bill the dissenters expected that
the compulsory rate would immediately be abolished ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.410

but the concession was most unwisely delayed until 1868 .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.411

It was indeed in the competence of a majority of parishioners to refuse
the churchwardens' demand to have the rate levied ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.412

but even this right was not always allowed by the Church without
litigation , TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.413

and if a majority of one could be secured , and all the due forms had
been observed , the rate was by law compulsory on every parishioner .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.414

Jacob Bright , senior , refusing to pay his Church-rate , had his
property distrained more than twenty times between 1811 and 1833 .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.415

His son used to recount these family reminiscences , when pestered in
his old age by fashionable ladies besieging him for subscriptions to
church bazaars . TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.416

In 1835 the Church-rate at Rochdale was defeated by a majority ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.417

but the wardens proceeded to act in spite of this vote ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.418

and distrained illegally on some of the poorest persons in the parish ,
from one of whom they carried off his Bible . TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.419

Five years later the story was told by John Bright to an assemblage of
several thousand parishioners , in the presence of the leading partisans
of the Church clergy , none of whom could deny its truth .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.420

' They entered , ' said Bright , ' the house of an inhabitant of
Spotland , poor James Brearley , who was then on his death-bed ;
TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.421

the illegal claim upon the poor weaver was fourpence ;
TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.422

they seized a looking-glass , TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.423

but this would not cover the costs , TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.424

and their ruthless hands then seized his family Bible ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.425

and sold it for an illegal rate . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.426

But there were dissenters rich enough to take the case up from court to
court until these proceedings were finally condemned as illegal .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,36.427

<P_37>

During this period of injudicious insistence on doubtful rights , the
churchmanship of Rochdale was continuously on the wane .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,37.429

The pluralist vicar , Mr. Hay , one of the famous magistrates of the '
Peterloo ' massacre , seldom resided in the parish ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,37.430

and left the field of religious work more and more to the dissenters ,
whom he rated for the benefit of his own emptying church , and who
retaliated by speaking of him as ' Peterloo . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,37.431

But in March 1840 Hay was succeeded by John Nassau Molesworth , a foeman
worthy of Bright's steel . TREVELYAN-1913-2,37.432

The new vicar was a man of devoted energy , destined to raise the Church
life of the town to a high level ; TREVELYAN-1913-2,37.433

but with many admirable virtues he combined a most pugnacious and
sometimes tyrannical temper . TREVELYAN-1913-2,37.434

His quarrels with his bishop , against whom he revived a false charge of
drunkenness , showed that his zeal could overflow the narrow bounds of
sect . TREVELYAN-1913-2,37.435

But most of all he loved to enforce the privileges of his Church against
her foes . TREVELYAN-1913-2,37.436

In the first few months of his arrival in Rochdale , Molesworth raised
again the question of the Church-rate , TREVELYAN-1913-2,37.437

and fought it to a finish in one last glorious struggle which convulsed
the town as no other event in its recorded history .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,37.438

A preliminary skirmish occurred on June 17 - thus described in John
Bright's diary : TREVELYAN-1913-2,37.439

' This morning a meeting was held in the Commissioner's Room to address
the Queen on her escape from assassination . TREVELYAN-1913-2,37.440

In the placard the Vicar was announced as chairman ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,37.441

but J. B. ' <paren> viz. the diarist <$$paren> ' compelled an appeal
to the meeting which decided against the Vicar , on the ground that he
had listened without rebuke to the disgraceful language uttered at a
public dinner in the City of Canterbury in 10th month last , disgraceful
to all who tamely heard it , and traitorous to the Queen . '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,37.442

Bright was here referring to a Tory banquet held at Canterbury in the
previous autumn , which had caused scandal because Mr. Bradshaw , M.P.
, had there expressed with unwise vehemence the natural resentment of
the Tories against Queen Victoria for her partiality to their rivals in
the Bedchamber Question . TREVELYAN-1913-2,37.443

John Bright told his fellow-townsmen that since Mr. Molesworth had been
present at this banquet , had heard the offending speech , and had
proposed <P_38> the health of the man who made it , he was therefore not
a fit person to take the chair at a meeting complimentary to her Majesty
in person . TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.444

The vicar , however , insisted that the chair was his by right , or at
least by previous arrangement with those who had summoned the meeting .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.445

An angry scene ensued between the two parties , which ended in the vicar
declaring the meeting dissolved , and leaving the room , ' followed by a
bevy of parsons and a sprinkling of Tories . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.446

The majority of the assembly remained behind , TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.447

and , after formally adjourning to an open space , held a mass meeting
of two_thousand people at which they carried their address , and sent it
up to Earl Stanhope for presentation to the Queen .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.448

' The principle maintained in this contest , ' concludes the diarist , '
was the right of a public meeting to appoint its chairman ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.449

and at the same time a fitting condemnation was passed upon those who
become disloyal to their monarch the moment she ceases or refuses to do
the bidding of their party . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.450

To give a complete picture of the attitude of Bright and his
fellow-townsmen to the monarchy , it is only fair to quote from his
diary of four months before : TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.451

' 1840 , 2 month , 10 . TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.452

This day the Queen is married ; TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.453

in Rochdale there is no appearance of rejoicing ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.454

and how or why should there be ? TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.455

The people are discontented , out of employ , short of food ;
TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.456

let the Government repeal the Corn Law , cease to plunder the mass for
the aggrandisement of the Aristocracy , and give them education in spite
of the Church , TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.457

and then they may reasonably be asked to feel and to show some pleasure
at a royal marriage . ' TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.458

But the attempted assassination of the young Queen , and the chance of a
fair hit at the vicar , had warmed John Bright's loyalty up to bloodheat
, even before the Repeal of the Corn Laws . TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.459

On July 10 following , the vicar and churchwardens demanded a rate ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.460

and refused the proposal that it should be optional .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.461

A poll was demanded , and held for five days , resulting in a defeat of
the compulsory rate by 4060 votes to 3976 . TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.462

The Church party , instead of accepting the decision , and falling back
on an optional rate , called another meeting for July 20 , to renew
their full demand . TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.463

This meeting was to be held at the church itself .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,38.464

<P_39>

The ancient church of St. Chad , on the brow of the steep hill to the
south of Rochdale , is reached from the town below by a long flight of
old stone steps , up which on July 20 flocked a clamorous mob of four or
five_thousand parishioners . TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.466

When the doors of the church were opened for the meeting , an ugly rush
took place to secure standing room inside , TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.467

hats were crushed and clothes torn , TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.468

and some determined persons made entry by the rude device of leaping
from points of vantage on to the massed heads of their
fellow-parishioners and being so carried into the church , as it were in
triumph . TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.469

The scene inside was a welter of rage and tumult that nothing could
reduce to order . TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.470

Finally , since not half the crowd could gain admittance , the
proceedings were adjourned to the graveyard outside .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.471

This was more convenient ground for a public meeting than most
cemeteries , as there are no grass plots and no enclosures to be
respected , the whole space being paved with flat stone tombs of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries . TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.472

A few of these flat grave-stones are raised two or three feet above the
rest , TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.473

and one of them , still shown to the visitor , served as improvised
hustings . TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.474

Bright , as he wrote in his diary that evening , ' stood on a tombstone
with the vicar and his brood of clergymen , TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.475

and told them more truth than they are accustomed to hear ! '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.476

The ' truth ' thus defiantly poured forth to a raging mob of friends and
foes , was afterwards printed on a broadsheet and widely circulated
throughout Lancashire . TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.477

A passage from this speech may serve to give some idea of Bright's early
eloquence , as yet imperfect and unchastened , but breathing the same
vigour , simplicity , and idealism that inspired his maturest art :
TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.478

' I hold that to quote scripture in defence of Church-rates is the very
height of rashness ; TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.479

the New Testament teems with passages inculcating peace , brotherly love
, mutual forbearance , charity , disregard of filthy lucre , and
devotedness to the welfare of our fellow-men . TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.480

In the exaction of Church-rates , in the seizure of the goods of the
members of his flock , in the imprisonment of those who refuse to pay ,
in the harassing process of law and injustice in the Church courts , in
the stirring up of strife and bitterness amongst his parishioners - in
all this a clergyman violates the precepts he is paid to preach ,
TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.481

and affords a mournful proof of the infirmity or the wickedness of human
nature , TREVELYAN-1913-2,39.482

I believe that in these contests for the <P_40> iniquitous exactions of
the Church , more mischief will be done , and more strife engendered ,
than will be atoned or compensated for by all the preaching of the
clergy of this parish during the rest of their lives .
TREVELYAN-1913-2,40.483

Fellow-townsmen , I look on that old building , that venerable building
, for its antiquity gives it a venerable air , with a feeling of pain -
TREVELYAN-1913-2,40.484

I behold it as a witness of ages gone by , as one of the numberless
monuments of the piety or zeal of our ancestors , as a connecting link
between this and former ages ; TREVELYAN-1913-2,40.485

I could look on it with a feeling of affection , did I not know that it
forms the centre of that source of discord with which our neighbourhood
has for years been afflicted , and did it not seem the genial bed
wherein strife and bitter jarring were perpetually produced to spread
their baneful influence over this densely-@ @peopled parish !
TREVELYAN-1913-2,40.486

I would that that venerable fabric were the representative of a really
reformed Church - of a Church separated from her foul connexion with the
State - of a Church depending upon her own resources , upon the zeal of
her people , upon the truthfulness of her principles , and upon the
blessing of her Spiritual Head ! TREVELYAN-1913-2,40.487

Then would the Church be really free from her old vices ;
TREVELYAN-1913-2,40.488

then would she run a career of brighter and still brightening glory ;
TREVELYAN-1913-2,40.489

then would she unite heart and hand with her sister Churches in this
kingdom , in the great and glorious work of evangelising the people of
this great Empire , and of every clime throughout the world ! '
TREVELYAN-1913-2,40.490

