<BEGIN_trollope-1879-2>

<P_1>

<heading>

<font> Chapter I <$$font> TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.4

When the Duchess was Dead TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.5

<$$heading>

No one , probably , ever felt himself to be more alone in the world than
our old friend , the Duke of Omnium , when the Duchess died .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.7

When this sad event happened he had ceased to be Prime Minister .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.8

During the first nine months after he had left office he and the Duchess
remained in England . TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.9

Then they had gone abroad , taking with them their three children .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.10

The eldest , Lord Silverbridge , had been at Oxford ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.11

but had had his career there cut short by some more than ordinary
youthful folly , which had induced his father to agree with the college
authorities that his name had better be taken off the college books , -
all which had been cause of very great sorrow to the Duke .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.12

The other boy was to go to Cambridge ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.13

but his father had thought it well to give him a twelvemonth's run on
the Continent , under his own inspection . TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.14

Lady Mary , the only daughter , was the youngest of the family ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.15

and she also had been with them on the Continent . TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.16

They remained the full year abroad , travelling with a large
accompaniment of tutors , lady's-maids , couriers , and sometimes
friends . TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.17

I do not know that the Duchess or the Duke had enjoyed it much ;
TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.18

but the young people had seen something of foreign courts and much of
foreign scenery , TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.19

and had perhaps perfected their French . TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.20

The Duke had gone to work at his travels with a full determination to
create for himself occupation out of a new kind of life .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.21

He had studied Dante , TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.22

and had striven to arouse himself to ecstatic joy amidst the loveliness
of the Italian lakes . TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.23

But through it all he had been aware that he had failed .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,1.24

<P_2>

The Duchess had made no such resolution , TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.26

- had hardly , perhaps , made any attempt ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.27

but , in truth , they had both sighed to be back among the war-trumpets
. TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.28

They had both suffered much among the trumpets , TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.29

and yet they longed to return . TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.30

He told himself from day to day , that though he had been banished from
the House of Commons , still , as a peer , he had a seat in Parliament ;
and that , though he was no longer a minister , still he might be useful
as a legislator . TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.31

She , in her career as a leader of fashion , had no doubt met with some
trouble , - with some trouble but with no disgrace ;
TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.32

and as she had been carried about among the lakes and mountains , among
the pictures and statues , among the counts and countesses , she had
often felt that there was no happiness except in that dominion which
circumstances had enabled her to achieve once , and might enable her to
achieve again - in the realms of London society . TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.33

Then , in the early spring of 187- , they came back to England , having
persistently carried out their project , at any rate in regard to time .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.34

Lord Gerald , the younger son , was at once sent up to Trinity .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.35

For the eldest son a seat was to be found in the House of Commons ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.36

and the fact that a dissolution of Parliament was expected served to
prevent any prolonged sojourn abroad . TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.37

Lady Mary Palliser was at that time nineteen , TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.38

and her entrance into the world was to be her mother's great care and
great delight . TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.39

In March they spent a few days in London , TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.40

and then went down to Matching Priory . TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.41

When she left town the Duchess was complaining of cold , sore throat ,
and debility . TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.42

A week after their arrival at Matching she was dead .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,2.43

Had the heavens fallen and mixed themselves <P_3> with the earth , had
the people of London risen in rebellion with French ideas of equality ,
had the Queen persistently declined to comply with the constitutional
advice of her ministers , had a majority in the House of Commons lost
its influence in the country , - the utter prostration of the bereft
husband could not have been more complete . TROLLOPE-1879-2,3.44

It was not only that his heart was torn to pieces , but that he did not
know how to look out into the world . TROLLOPE-1879-2,3.45

It was as though a man should be suddenly called upon to live without
hands or even arms . TROLLOPE-1879-2,3.46

He was helpless , TROLLOPE-1879-2,3.47

and knew himself to be helpless . TROLLOPE-1879-2,3.48

Hitherto he had never specially acknowledged to himself that his wife
was necessary to him as a component part of his life .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,3.49

Though he had loved her dearly , and had in all things consulted her
welfare and happiness , he had at times been inclined to think that in
the exuberance of her spirits she had been a trouble rather than a
support to him . TROLLOPE-1879-2,3.50

But now it was as though all outside appliances were taken away from him
. TROLLOPE-1879-2,3.51

There was no one of whom he could ask a question . TROLLOPE-1879-2,3.52

For it may be said of this man that , though throughout his life he had
had many Honourable and Right Honourable friends , and though he had
entertained guests by the score , and though he had achieved for himself
the respect of all good men and the thorough admiration of some few who
knew him , he had hardly made for himself a single intimate friend -
except that one who had now passed away from him . TROLLOPE-1879-2,3.53

To her he had been able to say what he thought , even though she would
occasionally ridicule him while he was declaring his feelings .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,3.54

But there had been no other human soul to whom he could open himself .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,3.55

There were one or two whom he loved , <P_4> and perhaps liked ;
TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.56

but his loving and his liking had been exclusively political .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.57

He had so habituated himself to devote his mind and his heart to the
service of his country , that he had almost risen above or sunk below
humanity . TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.58

But she , who had been essentially human , had been a link between him
and the world . TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.59

There were his three children , the youngest of whom was now nearly
nineteen , TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.60

and they surely were links ! TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.61

At the first moment of his bereavement they were felt to be hardly more
than burdens . TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.62

A more loving father there was not in England , TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.63

but nature had made him so undemonstrative that as yet they had hardly
known his love . TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.64

In all their joys and in all their troubles , in all their desires and
all their disappointments , they had ever gone to their mother .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.65

She had been conversant with everything about them , from the boys'
bills and the girl's gloves to the innermost turn in the heart and the
disposition of each . TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.66

She had known with the utmost accuracy the nature of the scrapes into
which Lord Silverbridge had precipitated himself , TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.67

and had known also how probable it was that Lord Gerald would do the
same . TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.68

The results of such scrapes she , of course , deplored ;
TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.69

and therefore she would give good counsel , pointing out how imperative
it was that such evil-doings should be avoided ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.70

but with the spirit that produced the scrapes she fully sympathised .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.71

The father disliked the spirit almost worse than the results ;
TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.72

and was therefore often irritated and unhappy . TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.73

And the difficulties about the girl were almost worse to bear than those
about the boys . TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.74

She had done nothing wrong . TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.75

She had given no signs of extravagance or other juvenile misconduct .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,4.76

But she <P_5> was beautiful and young . TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.77

How was he to bring her out into the world ? TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.78

How was he to decide whom she should or whom she should not marry ?
TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.79

How was he to guide her through the shoals and rocks which lay in the
path of such a girl before she can achieve matrimony ?
TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.80

It was the fate of the family that , with a world of acquaintance , they
had not many friends . TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.81

From all close connection with relatives on the side of the Duchess they
had been dissevered by old feelings at first , and afterwards by want of
any similitude in the habits of life . TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.82

She had , when young , been repressed by male and female guardians with
an iron hand . TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.83

Such repression had been needed , TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.84

and had been perhaps salutary , TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.85

but it had not left behind it much affection . TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.86

And then her nearest relatives were not sympathetic with the Duke .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.87

He could obtain no assistance in the care of his girl from that source .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.88

Nor could he even do it from his own cousins' wives , who were his
nearest connections on the side of the Pallisers . TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.89

They were women to whom he had ever been kind , but to whom he had never
opened his heart . TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.90

When , in the midst of the stunning sorrow of the first week , he tried
to think of all this , it seemed to him that there was nobody .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.91

There had been one lady , a very dear ally , staying in the house with
them when the Duchess died . TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.92

This was Mrs. Finn , the wife of Phineas Finn , who had been one of the
Duke's colleagues when in office . TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.93

How it had come to pass that Mrs. Finn and the Duchess had become
singularly bound together has been told elsewhere .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,5.94

But there had been close bonds , - so close that when the Duchess on
their return from the Continent had passed through London on her way to
Matching , ill at the time and <P_6> very comfortless , it had been
almost a thing of course , that Mrs. Finn should go with her .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.95

And as she had sunk , and then despaired , and then died , it was this
woman who had always been at her side , who had ministered to her , and
had listened to the fears and the wishes and hopes she had expressed
respecting the children . TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.96

At Matching , amidst the ruins of the old Priory , there is a parish
burying-ground , TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.97

and there , in accordance with her own wish , almost within sight of her
own bedroom-window , she was buried . TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.98

On the day of the funeral a_dozen relatives came , Pallisers and
M'Closkies , who on such an occasion were bound to show themselves , as
members of the family . TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.99

With them and his two sons the Duke walked across to the graveyard ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.100

and then walked back ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.101

but even to those who stayed the night at the house he hardly spoke .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.102

By noon on the following day they had all left him ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.103

and the only stranger in the house was Mrs. Finn .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.104

On the afternoon of the day after the funeral the Duke and his guest met
, almost for the first time since the sad event . TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.105

There had been just a pressure of the hand , just a glance of compassion
, just some murmur of deep sorrow , TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.106

- but there had been no real speech between them .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.107

Now he had sent for her , TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.108

and she went down to him in the room in which he commonly sat at work .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.109

He was seated at his table when she entered , TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.110

but there was no book open before him , and no pen ready to his hand .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.111

He was dressed of course in black . TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.112

That , indeed , was usual with him , TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.113

but now the tailor by his funeral art had added some deeper dye of
blackness to his appearance . TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.114

When he rose and turned to her she thought that he had at once become an
old man . TROLLOPE-1879-2,6.115

<P_7>

His hair was gray in parts , TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.117

and he had never accustomed himself to use that skill in managing his
outside person by which many men are able to preserve for themselves a
look , if not of youth , at any rate of freshness .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.118

He was thin , of an adust complexion , TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.119

and had acquired a habit of stooping which , when he was not excited ,
gave him an appearance of age . TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.120

All that was common to him : TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.121

but now it was so much exaggerated that he who was not yet fifty might
have been taken to be over sixty . TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.122

He put out his hand to greet her as she came up to him .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.123

' Silverbridge , ' he said , ' tells me that you go back to London
to-morrow . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.124

' I thought it would be best , Duke . TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.125

My presence here can be of no comfort to you . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.126

' I will not say that anything can be of comfort .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.127

But of course it is right that you should go . TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.128

I can have no excuse for asking you to remain . TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.129

While there was yet a hope for her - ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.130

Then he stopped , unable to say a word further in that direction ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.131

and yet there was no sign of a tear and no sound of a sob .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.132

' Of course I would stay , Duke , if I could be of any service . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.133

' Mr. Finn will expect you to return to him . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.134

' Perhaps it would be better that I should say that I would stay were it
not that I know that I can be of no real service : '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.135

' What do you mean by that , Mrs. Finn ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.136

' Lady Mary should have with her at such a time some other friend . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.137

' There was none other whom her mother loved as she loved you - none ,
none . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.138

This he said almost with energy . TROLLOPE-1879-2,7.139

' There was no one lately , Duke , with whom <P_8> circumstances caused
her mother to be so closely intimate . TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.140

But even that perhaps was unfortunate . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.141

' I never thought so . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.142

' That is a great compliment . TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.143

But as to Lady Mary , will it not be well that she should have with her
, as soon as possible , someone , - perhaps someone of her own kindred
if it be possible , or , if not that , at least one of her own kind ? '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.144

' Who is there ? TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.145

Whom do you mean ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.146

' I mean no one . TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.147

It is hard , Duke , to say what I do mean , TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.148

but perhaps I had better try . TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.149

There will be , - probably there have been , - some among your friends
who have regretted the great intimacy which chance produced between me
and my lost friend . TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.150

While she was with us no such feeling would have sufficed to drive me
from her . TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.151

She had chosen for herself , TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.152

and if others disapproved her choice that was nothing to me .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.153

But as regards Lady Mary , it will be better , I think , that from the
beginning she should be taught to look for friendship and guidance to
those - to those who are more naturally connected with her . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.154

' I was not thinking of any guidance , ' said the Duke .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.155

' Of course not . TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.156

But with one so young , where there is intimacy there will be guidance .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.157

There should be somebody with her . TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.158

It was almost the last thought that occupied her mother's mind .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.159

I could not tell her , Duke , TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.160

but I can tell you , that I can@ @not with advantage to your girl be
that some body . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.161

' Cora wished it . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.162

' Her wishes , probably , were sudden and hardly fixed . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.163

' Who should it be , then ? ' asked the father , after a pause .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,8.164

<P_9>

' Who am I , Duke , that I should answer such a question ? '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,9.166

After that there was another pause , TROLLOPE-1879-2,9.167

and then the conference was ended by a request from the Duke that Mrs.
Finn would stay at Matching for yet two days longer .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,9.168

At dinner they all met , - the father , the three children , and Mrs.
Finn . TROLLOPE-1879-2,9.169

How far the young people among themselves had been able to throw off
something of the gloom of death need not here be asked ;
TROLLOPE-1879-2,9.170

but in the presence of their father they were sad and sombre , almost as
he was . TROLLOPE-1879-2,9.171

On the next day , early in the morning , the younger lad returned to his
college , TROLLOPE-1879-2,9.172

and Lord Silverbridge went up to London , where he was supposed to have
his home . TROLLOPE-1879-2,9.173

' Perhaps you would not mind reading these letters , ' the Duke said to
Mrs. Finn , when she again went to him , in compliance with a message
from him asking for her presence . TROLLOPE-1879-2,9.174

Then she sat down TROLLOPE-1879-2,9.175

and read two letters , one from Lady Cantrip , and the other from a Mrs.
Jeffrey Palliser , each of which contained an invitation for his
daughter , and expressed a hope that Lady Mary would not be unwilling to
spend some time with the writer . TROLLOPE-1879-2,9.176

Lady Cantrip's letter was long , TROLLOPE-1879-2,9.177

and went minutely into circumstances . TROLLOPE-1879-2,9.178

If Lady Mary would come to her , she would abstain from having other
company in the house till her young friend's spirits should have
somewhat recovered themselves . TROLLOPE-1879-2,9.179

Nothing could be more kind , or proposed in a sweeter fashion .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,9.180

There had , however , been present to the Duke's mind as he read it a
feeling that a proposition to a bereaved husband to relieve him of the
society of an only daughter , was not one which would usually be made to
a father . TROLLOPE-1879-2,9.181

In such a position a child's <P_10> company would probably be his best
solace . TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.182

But he knew , - at this moment he painfully remembered , - that he was
not as are other men . TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.183

He acknowledged the truth of this , TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.184

but he was not the less grieved and irritated by the reminder .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.185

The letter from Mrs. Jeffrey Palliser was to the same effect ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.186

but was much shorter . TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.187

If it would suit Mary to come to them for a month or six weeks at their
place in Gloucestershire , they would both be delighted .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.188

' I should not choose her to go there , ' said the Duke , as Mrs. Finn
refolded the latter letter . TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.189

' My cousin's wife is a very good woman , TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.190

but Mary would not be happy with her . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.191

' Lady Cantrip is an excellent friend for her . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.192

' Excellent . TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.193

I know no one whom I esteem more than Lady Cantrip . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.194

' Would you wish her to go there , Duke ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.195

There came a wistful piteous look over the father's face .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.196

Why should he be treated as no other father would be treated ?
TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.197

Why should it be supposed that he would desire to send his girl away
from him ? TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.198

But yet he felt that it would be better that she should go .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.199

It was his present purpose to remain at Matching through a portion of
the summer . TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.200

What could he do to make a girl happy ? TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.201

. What comfort would there be in his companionship ?
TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.202

' I suppose she ought to go somewhere , ' he said .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.203

' I had not thought of it , ' said Mrs. Finn . TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.204

' I understood you to say , ' replied the Duke , almost angrily , ' that
she ought to go to someone who would take care of her . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.205

' I was thinking of some friend coming to her . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.206

' Who would come ? TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.207

Who is there that I could possibly ask ? TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.208

You will not stay . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.209

' I certainly would stay , if it were for her good .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,10.210

<P_11>

I was thinking , Duke , that perhaps you might ask the Greys to come to
you . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.212

' They would not come , ' he said , after a pause .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.213

' When she was told that it was for her sake , she would come , I think
. ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.214

Then there was another pause . TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.215

' I could not ask them , ' he said ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.216

' for his sake I could not have it put to her in that way .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.217

Perhaps Mary had better go to Lady Cantrip . TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.218

Perhaps I had better be alone here for a time . TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.219

I do not think that I am fit to have any human being here with me in my
sorrow . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.220

<heading>

<font> Chapter II <$$font> TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.222

Lady Mary Palliser TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.223

<$$heading>

It may as well be said at once that Mrs. Finn knew something of Lady
Mary which was not known to the father , and which she was not yet
prepared to make known to him . TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.225

The last winter abroad had been passed at Rome , TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.226

and there Lady Mary Palliser had become acquainted with a certain Mr.
Tregear , - Francis Oliphant Tregear . TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.227

The Duchess , who had been in constant correspondence with her friend ,
had asked questions by letter as to Mr. Tregear , of whom she had only
known that he was the younger son of a Cornish gentleman , who had
become Lord Silverbridge's friend at Oxford . TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.228

In this there had certainly been but little to recommend him to the
intimacy of such a girl as Lady Mary Palliser . TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.229

Nor had the Duchess , when writing , ever spoken of him as a probable
suitor for her daughter's hand . TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.230

She had never connected the two names together . TROLLOPE-1879-2,11.231

But Mrs. Finn had been clever enough to perceive that the Duchess had
become <P_12> fond of Mr. Tregear , and would willingly have heard
something to his advantage . TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.232

And she did hear something to his advantage , - something also to his
disadvantage . TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.233

At his mother's death this young man would inherit a property amounting
to about fifteen_hundred a year . TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.234

' And I am told , ' said Mrs. Finn , ' that he is quite likely to spend
his money before it comes to him . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.235

There had been nothing more written specially about Mr. Tregear ;
TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.236

but Mrs. Finn had feared not only that the young man loved the girl ,
but that the young man's love had in some imprudent way been fostered by
the mother . TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.237

Then there had been some fitful confidence during those few days of
acute illness . TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.238

Why should not the girl have the man if he were lovable ?
TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.239

And the Duchess referred to her own early days when she had loved , and
to the great ruin which had come upon her heart when she had been
severed from the man she had loved . TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.240

' Not but that it has been all for the best , ' she had said .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.241

' Not but that Plantagenet has been to me all that a husband should be .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.242

Only if she can be spared what I suffered , let her be spared . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.243

Even when these things had been said to her , Mrs. Finn had found
herself unable to ask questions . TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.244

She could not bring herself to inquire whether the girl had in truth
given her heart to this young Tregear . TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.245

The one was nineteen and the other as yet but two-and-twenty !
TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.246

But though she asked no questions she almost knew that it must be so .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.247

And she knew also that the father , as yet , was quite in the dark on
the matter . TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.248

How was it possible that in such circumstances she should assume the
part of the girl's confidential friend and monitress ?
TROLLOPE-1879-2,12.249

Were she to do so she must immediately tell the <P_13> father everything
. TROLLOPE-1879-2,13.250

In such a position no one could be a better friend than Lady Cantrip ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,13.251

and Mrs. Finn had already almost made up her mind that , should Lady
Cantrip occupy the place , she would tell her ladyship all that had
passed between herself and the Duchess on the subject .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,13.252

Of what hopes she might have , or what fears , about her girl , the
Duchess had said no word to her husband . TROLLOPE-1879-2,13.253

But when she had believed that the things of the world were fading away
from her , and when he was sitting by her bedside , - dumb , because at
such a moment he knew not how to express the tenderness of his heart , -
holding her hand , and trying so to listen to her words , that he might
collect and remember every wish , she had murmured something about the
ultimate division of the great wealth with which she herself had been
endowed . TROLLOPE-1879-2,13.254

' She had never , ' she said , ' even tried to remember what
arrangements had been made by lawyers , TROLLOPE-1879-2,13.255

but she hoped that Mary might be so circumstanced , that if her
happiness depended on marrying a poor man , want of money need not
prevent it . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,13.256

The Duke suspecting nothing , believing this to be a not unnatural
expression of maternal interest , had assured her that Mary's fortune
would be ample . TROLLOPE-1879-2,13.257

Mrs. Finn made the proposition to Lady Mary in respect to Lady
Cantrip's invitation . TROLLOPE-1879-2,13.258

Lady Mary was very like her mother , especially in having exactly her
mother's tone of voice , her quick manner of speech , and her sharp
intelligence . TROLLOPE-1879-2,13.259

She had also her mother's eyes , large and round , and almost blue ,
full of life and full of courage , eyes which never seemed to quail ,
and her mother's dark brown hair , never long but very copious in its
thickness . TROLLOPE-1879-2,13.260

She was , however , taller than her mother , and very <P_14> much more
graceful in her movement . TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.261

And she could already assume a personal dignity of manner which had
never been within her mother's reach . TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.262

She had become aware of a certain brusqueness of speech in her mother ,
a certain aptitude to say sharp things without thinking whether the
sharpness was becoming to the position which she held ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.263

and , taking advantage of the example , the girl had already learned
that she might gain more than she would lose by controlling her words .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.264

' Papa wants me to go to Lady Cantrip , ' she said .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.265

' I think he would like it , - just for the present , Lady Mary . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.266

Though there had been the closest possible intimacy between the Duchess
and Mrs. Finn , this had hardly been so as to the intercourse between
Mrs. Finn and the children . TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.267

Of Mrs. Finn it must be acknowledged that she was , perhaps
fastidiously , afraid of appearing to take advantage of her friendship
with the Duke's family . TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.268

She would tell herself that though circumstances had compelled her to be
the closest and nearest friend of a Duchess , still her natural place
was not among dukes and their children , TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.269

and therefore in her intercourse with the girl she did not at first
assume the manner and bearing which her position in the house would have
seemed to warrant . TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.270

Hence the ' Lady Mary . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.271

' Why does he want to send me away , Mrs. Finn ? '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.272

' It is not that he wants to send you away , but that he thinks it will
be better for you to be with some friend . TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.273

Here you must be so much alone . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.274

' Why do@ @n't you stay ? TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.275

But I suppose Mr. Finn wants you to be back in London . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.276

' It is not that only , or , to speak the truth , not that at all .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,14.277

Mr. Finn could come here if it were <P_15> suitable .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.278

Or for a week or two he might do very well without me .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.279

But there are other reasons . TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.280

There is no one whom your mother respected more highly than Lady Cantrip
. ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.281

' I never heard her speak a word of Lady Cantrip . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.282

' Both he and she are your father's intimate friends . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.283

' Does papa want to be - alone here ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.284

' It is you , not himself , of whom he is thinking . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.285

' Therefore I must think of him , Mrs. Finn . TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.286

I do not wish him to be alone . TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.287

I am sure it would be better that I should stay with him . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.288

' He feels that it would not be well that you should live without the
companionship of some lady . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.289

' Then let him find some lady . TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.290

You would be the best , because he knows you so well .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.291

I , however , am not afraid of being alone . TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.292

I am sure he ought not to be here quite by himself .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.293

If he bids me go , I must go , TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.294

and then of course I shall go where he sends me ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.295

but I wo@ @n't say that I think it best that I should go ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.296

and certainly I do not want to go to Lady Cantrip . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.297

This she said with great decision , as though the matter was one on
which she had altogether made up her mind . TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.298

Then she added , in a lower voice : ' Why does@ @n't papa speak to me
about it ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.299

' He is thinking only of what may be best for you . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.300

' It would be best for me to stay near him . TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.301

Whom else has he got ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.302

All this Mrs. Finn repeated to the Duke as closely as she could ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.303

and then of course the father was obliged to speak to his daughter .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.304

' Do@ @n't send me away , papa , ' she said at once .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.305

' Your life here , Mary , will be inexpressibly sad . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.306

' It must be sad anywhere . TROLLOPE-1879-2,15.307

I can@ @not go to college , <P_16> like Gerald , or live anywhere just
as I please , like Silverbridge . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.308

' Do you envy them that ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.309

' Sometimes , papa . TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.310

Only I shall think more of poor mamma by being alone ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.311

and I should like to be thinking of her always . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.312

He shook his head mournfully . TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.313

' I do not mean that I shall always be unhappy , as I am now . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.314

' No , dear ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.315

you are too young for that . TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.316

It is only the old who suffer in that way . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.317

' You will suffer less if I am with you ; wo@ @n't you , papa ?
TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.318

I do not want to go to Lady Cantrip . TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.319

I hardly remember her at all . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.320

' She is very good . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.321

' Oh yes . That is what they used to say to mamma about Lady Midlothian
. TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.322

Papa , pray do not send me to Lady Cantrip . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.323

Of course it was decided that she should not go to Lady Cantrip at once
, or to Mrs. Jeffrey Palliser , TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.324

and , after a short interval of doubt , it was decided also that Mrs.
Finn should remain at Matching for at least a fortnight .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.325

The Duke declared that he would be glad to see Mr. Finn ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.326

but she knew that in his present mood the society of any one man to whom
he would feel himself called upon to devote his time , would be a burden
to him , TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.327

and she plainly said that Mr. Finn had better not come to Matching at
present . TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.328

' There are old associations , ' she said , ' which will enable you to
bear with me as you will with your butler or your groom ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.329

but you are not as yet quite able to make yourself happy with company .
' TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.330

This he bore with perfect equanimity , TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.331

and then , as it were , handed over his daughter to Mrs. Finn's care .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,16.332

Very quickly there came to be close intimacy <P_17> between Mrs. Finn
and Lady Mary . TROLLOPE-1879-2,17.333

For a day or two the elder woman , though the place she filled was one
of absolute confidence , rather resisted than encouraged the intimacy .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,17.334

She always remembered that the girl was the daughter of a great duke ,
and that her position in the house had sprung from circumstances which
would not , perhaps , in the eyes of the world at large , have
recommended her for such friendship . TROLLOPE-1879-2,17.335

She knew - the reader may possibly know - that nothing had ever been
purer , nothing more disinterested than her friendship .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,17.336

But she knew also , - no one knew better , - that the judgment of men
and women does not always run parallel with facts .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,17.337

She entertained , too , a conviction in regard to herself , that hard
words and hard judgments were to be expected from the world , - were to
be accepted by her without any strong feeling of injustice , - because
she had been elevated by chance to the possession of more good things
than she had merited . TROLLOPE-1879-2,17.338

She weighed all this with a very fine balance , TROLLOPE-1879-2,17.339

and even after the encouragement she had received from the Duke , was
intent on confining herself to some position about the girl inferior to
that which such a friend as Lady Cantrip might have occupied .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,17.340

But the girl's manner , and the girl's speech about her own mother ,
overcame her . TROLLOPE-1879-2,17.341

It was the unintentional revelation of the Duchess's constant reference
to her , - the way in which Lady Mary would assert that ' Mamma used
always to say this of you ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,17.342

mamma always knew that you would think so and so ;
TROLLOPE-1879-2,17.343

mamma used to say that you had told her . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,17.344

It was the feeling thus conveyed , that the mother who was now dead had
in her daily dealings with her own child spoken of her as her nearest
friend , which mainly served to <P_18> conquer the deference of manner
which she had assumed . TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.345

Then gradually there came confidences , - and at last absolute
confidence . TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.346

The whole story about Mr. Tregear was told . TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.347

Yes ; she loved Mr. Tregear . TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.348

She had given him her heart , TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.349

and had told him so . TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.350

' Then , my dear , your father ought to know it , ' said Mrs. Finn .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.351

' No ; not yet . TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.352

Mamma knew it . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.353

' Did she know all that you have told me ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.354

' Yes ; all . TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.355

And Mr. Tregear spoke to her , TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.356

and she said that papa ought not to be told quite yet . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.357

Mrs. Finn could not but remember that the friend she had lost was not ,
among women , the one best able to give a girl good counsel in such a
crisis . TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.358

' Why not yet , dear ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.359

' Well , because - . TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.360

It is very hard to explain . TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.361

In the first place , because Mr. Tregear himself does not wish it . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.362

' That is a very bad reason ; the worst in the world . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.363

' Of course you will say so . TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.364

Of course everybody would say so . TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.365

But when there is one person whom one loves better than all the rest ,
for whom one would be ready to die , to whom one is determined that
everything shall be devoted , surely the wishes of a person so dear as
that ought to have weight . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.366

' Not in persuading you to do that which is acknowledged to be wrong .
' TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.367

' What wrong ? TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.368

I am going to do nothing wrong . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.369

' The very concealment of your love is wrong , after that love has been
not only given but declared . TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.370

A girl's position in such matters is so delicate , especially that of
such a girl as you ! ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,18.371

' I know all about that , ' said Lady Mary , with <P_19> something
almost approaching to scorn in her tone . TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.372

' Of course I have to be - delicate . TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.373

I do@ @n't quite know what the word means . TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.374

I am not a bit ashamed of being in love with Mr. Tregear .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.375

He is a gentleman , highly educated , very clever , of an old family , -
older , I believe , than papa's . TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.376

And he is manly and handsome ; just what a young man ought to be .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.377

Only he is not rich . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.378

' If he be all that you say , ought you not to trust your papa ?
TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.379

If he approve of it , he could give you money . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.380

' Of course he must be told ; but not now . TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.381

He is nearly broken-hearted about dear mamma . TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.382

He could not bring himself to care about anything of that kind at
present . TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.383

And then it is Mr. Tregear that should speak to him first . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.384

' Not now , Mary . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.385

' How do you mean not now ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.386

' If you had a mother you would talk to her about it . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.387

' Mamma knew . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.388

' If she were still living she would tell your father . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.389

' But she did@ @n't tell him though she did know .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.390

She did@ @n't mean to tell him quite yet . TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.391

She wanted to see Mr. Tregear here in England first .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.392

Of course I shall do nothing till papa does know . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.393

' You will not see him ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.394

' How can I see him here ? TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.395

He will not come here , if you mean that . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.396

' You do not correspond with him ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.397

Here for the first time the girl blushed . TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.398

' Oh Mary , if you are writing to him your father ought to know it . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.399

' I have not written to him ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,19.400

but when he heard how ill poor mamma was , then he wrote to me - <P_20>
twice . TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.401

You may see his letters . TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.402

It is all about her . TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.403

No one worshipped mamma as he did . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.404

Gradually the whole story was told . TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.405

These two young persons considered themselves to be engaged ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.406

but had agreed that their engagement should not be made known to the
Duke till something had occurred , or some time had arrived , as to
which Mr. Tregear was to be the judge . TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.407

In Mrs. Finn's opinion nothing could be more unwise ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.408

and she said much to induce the girl to confess everything to her father
at once . TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.409

But in all her arguments she was opposed by the girl's reference to her
mother . TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.410

' Mamma knew it . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.411

And it did certainly seem to Mrs. Finn as though the mother had
assented to this imprudent concealment . TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.412

When she endeavoured , in her own mind , to make excuse for her friend ,
she felt almost sure that the Duchess , with all her courage , had been
afraid to propose to her husband that their daughter should marry a
commoner without an income . TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.413

But in thinking of all that , there could now be nothing gained .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.414

What ought she to do - at once ? TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.415

The girl , in telling her , had exacted no promise of secrecy ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.416

nor would she have given any such promise ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.417

but yet she did not like the idea of telling the tale behind the girl's
back . TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.418

It was evident that Lady Mary had considered herself to be safe in
confiding her story to her mother's old friend . TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.419

Lady Mary no doubt had had her confidences with her mother , -
confidences from which it had been intended by both that the father
should be excluded ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.420

and now she seemed naturally to expect that this new ally should look at
this great question as her mother had looked at it .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,20.421

The father had been regarded as a great outside power , which could
hardly be overcome , but which might be evaded , <P_21> or made
inoperative by stratagem . TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.422

It was not that the daughter did not love him . TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.423

She loved him TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.424

and venerated him highly , - the veneration perhaps being stronger than
the love . TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.425

The Duchess , too , had loved him dearly , - more dearly in late years
than in her early life . TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.426

But her husband to her had always been an outside power which had in
many cases to be evaded . TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.427

Lady Mary , though she did not express all this , evidently thought that
in this new friend she had found a woman whose wishes and aspirations
for her would be those which her mother had entertained .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.428

But Mrs. Finn was much troubled in her mind , thinking that it was her
duty to tell the story to the Duke . TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.429

It was not only the daughter who had trusted her , but the father also ;
TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.430

and the father's confidence had been not only the first but by far the
holier of the two . TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.431

And the question was one so important to the girl's future happiness !
TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.432

There could be no doubt that the peril of her present position was very
great . TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.433

' Mary , ' she said one morning , when the fortnight was nearly at an
end , ' your father ought to know all this . TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.434

I should feel that I had betrayed him were I to go away leaving him in
ignorance . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.435

' You do not mean to say that you will tell ? ' said the girl ,
horrified at the idea of such treachery . TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.436

' I wish that I could induce you to do so . TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.437

Every day that he is kept in the dark is an injury to you . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.438

' I am doing nothing . TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.439

What harm can come ? TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.440

It is not as though I were seeing him every day . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.441

' This harm will come ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.442

your father of course will know that you became engaged to Mr. Tregear
in Italy , and that a fact so important to him has been kept back from
him . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,21.443

<P_22>

' If there is anything in that , the evil has been done already .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.445

Of course poor mamma did mean to tell him . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.446

' She can@ @not tell him now , TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.447

and therefore you ought to do what she would have done . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.448

' I can@ @not break my promise to him . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.449

' Him ' always meant Mr. Tregear . TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.450

' I have told him that I would not do so till I had his consent ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.451

and I will not . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.452

This was very dreadful to Mrs. Finn , TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.453

and yet she was most unwilling to take upon herself the part of a stern
elder , and declare that under the circumstances she must tell the tale
. TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.454

The story had been told to her under the supposition that she was not a
stern elder , that she was regarded as the special friend of the dear
mother who was gone , that she might be trusted to assist against the
terrible weight of parental authority . TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.455

She could not endure to be regarded at once as a traitor by this young
friend who had sweetly inherited the affection with which the Duchess
had regarded her . TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.456

And yet if she were to be silent how could she forgive herself ?
TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.457

' The Duke certainly ought to know at once , ' said she , repeating her
words merely that she might gain some time for thinking , and pluck up
courage to declare her purpose , should she resolve on betraying the
secret . TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.458

' If you tell him now , I will never forgive you , ' said Lady Mary .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.459

' I am bound in honour to see that your father knows a thing which is of
such vital importance to him and to you . TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.460

Having heard all this I have no right to keep it from him .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.461

If Mr. Tregear really loves you ' - Lady Mary smiled at the doubt
implied by this suggestion - ' he ought to feel that for your sake there
should be no secret from your father . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,22.462

<P_23>

Then she paused a moment to think . TROLLOPE-1879-2,23.464

" Will you let me see Mr. Tregear myself , and talk to him about it ?
' TROLLOPE-1879-2,23.465

To this Lady Mary at first demurred , TROLLOPE-1879-2,23.466

but when she found that in no other way could she prevent Mrs. Finn
from going at once to the Duke and telling him everything , she
consented . TROLLOPE-1879-2,23.467

Under Mrs. Finn's directions she wrote a note to her lover , which Mrs.
Finn saw , TROLLOPE-1879-2,23.468

and then undertook to send it , with a letter from herself , to Mr.
Tregear's address in London . TROLLOPE-1879-2,23.469

The note was very short , TROLLOPE-1879-2,23.470

and was indeed dictated by the elder lady , with some dispute , however
, as to certain terms , in which the younger lady had her way .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,23.471

It was as follows : TROLLOPE-1879-2,23.472

' Dearest Frank , I wish you to see Mrs. Finn , who , as you know , was
dear mamma's most particular friend . TROLLOPE-1879-2,23.473

Please go to her , as she will ask you to do . TROLLOPE-1879-2,23.474

When you hear what she says I think you ought to do what she advises .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,23.475

Yours for ever and always , M. P. ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,23.476

This Mrs. Finn sent enclosed in an envelope , with a few words from
herself , asking the gentleman to call upon her in Park Lane , on a day
and at an hour fixed . TROLLOPE-1879-2,23.477

<heading>

<font> Chapter III <$$font> TROLLOPE-1879-2,23.479

Francis Oliphant Tregear TROLLOPE-1879-2,23.480

<$$heading>

Mr. Francis Oliphant Tregear was a young man who might not improbably
make a figure in the world , should circumstances be kind to him , but
as to whom it might be doubted whether <P_24> circumstances would be
sufficiently kind to enable him to use serviceably his unquestionable
talents and great personal gifts . TROLLOPE-1879-2,24.482

He had taught himself to regard himself as a young English gentleman of
the first water , qualified by his birth and position to live with all
that was most noble and most elegant ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,24.483

and he could have lived in that sphere naturally and gracefully were it
not that the part of the ' sphere ' which he specially affected requires
wealth as well as birth and intellect . TROLLOPE-1879-2,24.484

Wealth he had not , TROLLOPE-1879-2,24.485

and yet he did not abandon the sphere . TROLLOPE-1879-2,24.486

As a consequence of all this , it was possible that the predictions of
his friends as to that figure which he was to make in the world might be
disappointed . TROLLOPE-1879-2,24.487

He had been educated at Eton , from whence he had been sent to Christ
Church ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,24.488

and both at school and at college had been the most intimate friend of
the son and heir of a great and wealthy duke . TROLLOPE-1879-2,24.489

He and Lord Silverbridge had been always together ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,24.490

and they who were interested in the career of the young nobleman had
generally thought he had chosen his friend well .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,24.491

Tregear had gone out in honours , having been a second-class man .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,24.492

His friend Silverbridge , we know , had been allowed to take no degree
at all ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,24.493

but the terrible practical joke by which the whole front of the Dean's
house had been coloured scarlet in the middle of the night , had been
carried on without any assistance from Tregear . TROLLOPE-1879-2,24.494

The two young men had then been separated for a year ;
TROLLOPE-1879-2,24.495

but immediately after taking his degree , Tregear , at the invitation of
Lord Silverbridge , had gone to Italy , TROLLOPE-1879-2,24.496

and had there completely made good his footing with the Duchess , - with
what effect on another member of the Palliser family the reader already
knows . TROLLOPE-1879-2,24.497

<P_25>

The young man was certainly clever . TROLLOPE-1879-2,25.499

When the Duchess found that he could talk without any shyness , that he
could speak French fluently , and that after a month in Italy he could
chatter Italian , at any rate without reticence or shame ; when she
perceived that all the women liked the lad's society and impudence , and
that all the young men were anxious to know him , she was glad to find
that Silverbridge had chosen so valuable a friend .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,25.500

And then he was beautiful to look at , - putting her almost in mind of
another man on whom her eyes had once loved to dwell .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,25.501

He was dark , with hair that was almost black , but yet was not black ;
with clear brown eyes , a nose as regular as Apollo's , and a mouth in
which was ever to be found that expression of manliness , which of all
characteristics is the one which women love the best .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,25.502

He was five feet ten in height . TROLLOPE-1879-2,25.503

He was always well dressed , and yet always so dressed as to seem to
show that his outside garniture had not been matter of trouble to him .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,25.504

Before the Duchess had dreamed what might take place between this young
man and her daughter she had been urgent in her congratulations to her
son as to the possession of such a friend . TROLLOPE-1879-2,25.505

For though she now and then would catch a glimpse of the outer man ,
which would remind her of that other beautiful one whom she had known in
her youth , and though , as these glimpses came , she would remember how
poor in spirit and how unmanly that other one had been , though she
would confess to herself how terrible had been the heart-shipwreck which
that other one had brought upon herself ; still she was able completely
to assure herself that this man , though not superior in external grace
, was altogether different in mind and character .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,25.506

<P_26>

She was old enough now to see all this and to appreciate it .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.508

Young Tregear had his own ideas about the politics of the day ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.509

and they were ideas with which she sympathised , though they were
antagonistic to the politics of her life . TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.510

He had his ideas about books too , as to manners of life , as to art ,
and even ethics . TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.511

Whether or not in all this there was not much that was superficial only
, she was not herself deep enough to discover . TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.512

Nor would she have been deterred from admiring him had she been told
that it was tinsel . TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.513

Such were the acquirements , such the charms , that she loved .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.514

Here was a young man who dared to speak , and had always something ready
to be spoken ; who was not afraid of beauty , nor daunted by superiority
of rank ; who , if he had not money , could carry himself on equal terms
among those who had . TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.515

In this way he won the Duchess's heart , TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.516

and having done that , was it odd that he should win the heart of the
daughter also ? TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.517

His father was a Cornwall squire of comfortable means , having joined
the property of his wife to his own for the period of his own life .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.518

She had possessed land also in Cornwall , supposed to be worth
fifteen_hundred a year , TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.519

and his own paternal estate at Polwenning was said to be double that
value . TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.520

Being a prudent man , he lived at home as a country gentleman ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.521

and thus was able in his country to hold his head as high as richer men
. TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.522

But Frank Tregear was only his second son ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.523

and though Frank would hereafter inherit his mother's fortune , he was
by no means now in a position to assume the right of living as an idle
man . TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.524

Yet he was idle . TROLLOPE-1879-2,26.525

The elder brother , who was considerably older than Frank , was an odd
man , much addicted to quarrelling with his family , and who spent his
time chiefly in travelling <P_27> about the world .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,27.526

Frank's mother , who was not the mother of the heir also , would
sometimes surmise , in Frank's hearing , that the entire property must
ultimately come to him . TROLLOPE-1879-2,27.527

That other Tregear , who was now supposed to be investigating the
mountains of Crim Tartary , would surely never marry .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,27.528

And Frank was the favourite also with his father , who paid his debts at
Oxford with not much grumbling ; who was proud of his friendship with a
future duke ; who did not urge , as he ought to have urged , that vital
question of a profession ; and who , when he allowed his son
four_hundred pounds a year , was almost content with that son's
protestations that he knew how to live as a poor man among rich men ,
without chagrin and without trouble . TROLLOPE-1879-2,27.529

Such was the young man who now , in lieu of a profession , had taken
upon himself the responsibility of an engagement with Lady Mary Palliser
. TROLLOPE-1879-2,27.530

He was tolerably certain that , should he be able to overcome the
parental obstacles which he would no doubt find in his path , money
would be forthcoming sufficient for the purposes of matrimonial life .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,27.531

The Duke's wealth was fabulous , TROLLOPE-1879-2,27.532

and as a great part of it , if not the greater , had come from his wife
, there would probably be ample provision for the younger children .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,27.533

And when the Duchess had found out how things were going , and had
yielded to her daughter , after an opposition which never had the
appearance even of being in earnest , she had taken upon herself to say
that she would use her influence to prevent any great weight of trouble
from pecuniary matters . TROLLOPE-1879-2,27.534

Frank Tregear , young and bright , and full of hearty ambitions , was
certainly not the man to pursue a girl simply because of her fortune :
TROLLOPE-1879-2,27.535

nor was he weak enough to be attracted simply by the glitter of rank :
TROLLOPE-1879-2,27.536

<P_28>

but he was wise enough with worldly wisdom to understand thoroughly the
comforts of a good income , TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.538

and he was sufficiently attached to high position to feel the advantage
of marrying a daughter of the Duke of Omnium . TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.539

When the Duchess was leaving Italy , it had been her declared purpose to
tell her husband the story as soon as they were at home in England .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.540

And it was on this understanding that Frank Tregear had explained to the
girl that he would not as yet ask her father for his permission to be
received into the family as a suitor . TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.541

Everyone concerned had felt that the Duke would not easily be reconciled
to such a son-in-law , and that the Duchess should be the one to bell
the cat . TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.542

There was one member of the family who had hitherto been half-hearted in
the matter . TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.543

Lord Silverbridge had vacillated between loyalty to his friend and a
certain feeling as to the impropriety of such a match for his sister .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.544

He was aware that something very much better should be expected for her
, TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.545

and still was unable to explain his objections to Tregear .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.546

He had not at first been admitted into confidence , either by his sister
or by Tregear , TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.547

but had questioned his friend when he saw what was going on .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.548

' Certainly I love your sister , ' Tregear had said ;
TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.549

' do you object ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.550

Lord Silverbridge was the weaker of the two , and much subject to the
influence of his friend ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.551

but he could on occasion be firm , TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.552

and he did at first object . TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.553

But he did not object strongly , TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.554

and allowed himself at last to be content with declaring that the Duke
would never give his consent . TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.555

While Tregear was with his love , or near her , his hopes and fears were
sufficient to occupy his mind ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,28.556

and immediately on his return , all the world <P_29> was nothing to him
, except as far as the world was concerned with Lady Mary Palliser .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.557

He had come back to England somewhat before the ducal party ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.558

and the pleasures and occupations of London life had not abated his love
, but enabled him to feel that there was something in life over and
beyond his love ; whereas to Lady Mary , down at Matching , there had
been nothing over and beyond her love - except the infinite grief and
desolation produced by her mother's death . TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.559

Tregear , when he received the note from Mrs. Finn , was staying at the
Duke's house in Carlton Terrace . TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.560

Silverbridge was there , TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.561

and , on leaving Matching , had asked the Duke's permission to have his
friend with him . TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.562

The Duke at that time was not well pleased with his son as to a matter
of politics , TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.563

and gave his son's friend credit for the evil counsel which had produced
this displeasure . TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.564

But still he had not refused his assent to this proposition .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.565

Had he done so , Silverbridge would probably have gone elsewhere ;
TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.566

and though there was a matter in respect to Tregear of which the Duke
disapproved , it was not a matter , as he thought , which would have
justified him in expelling the young man from his house .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.567

The young man was a strong Conservative ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.568

and now Silverbridge had declared his purpose of entering the House of
Commons , if he did enter it , as one of the Conservative party .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.569

This had been a terrible blow to the Duke ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.570

and he believed that it all came from this young Tregear .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.571

Still he must do his duty , and not more than his duty .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.572

He knew nothing against Tregear . TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.573

That a Tregear should be Conservative was perhaps natural enough -
TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.574

at any rate , was not disgraceful ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,29.575

that he should have his political creed sufficiently at heart to be able
<P_30> to persuade another man , was to his credit .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.576

He was a gentleman , well educated , superior in many things to
Silverbridge himself . TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.577

There were those who said that Silverbridge had redeemed himself from
contempt - from that sort of contempt which might be supposed to await a
young nobleman who had painted scarlet the residence of the Head of his
college - by the fact of his having chosen such a friend .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.578

The Duke was essentially a just man ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.579

and though , at the very moment in which the request was made , his
heart was half crushed by his son's apostasy , he gave the permission
asked . TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.580

' You know Mrs. Finn ? ' Tregear said to his friend one morning at
breakfast . TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.581

' I remember her all my life . TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.582

She used to be a great deal with my grandfather .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.583

I believe he left her a lot of diamonds and money , and that she would@
@n't have them . TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.584

I do@ @n't know whether the diamonds are not locked up somewhere now ,
so that she can take them when she pleases . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.585

' What a singular woman ! ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.586

' It was odd ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.587

but she had some fad about it . TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.588

What makes you ask about Mrs. Finn ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.589

' She wants me to go and see her . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.590

' What about ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.591

' I think I have heard your mother speak of her as though she loved her
dearly , ' said Tregear . TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.592

' I do@ @n't know about loving her dearly . TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.593

They were intimate , TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.594

and Mrs. Finn used to be with her very much when she was in the country
. TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.595

She was at Matching just now , when my poor mother died .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.596

Why does she want to see you ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.597

' She has written to me from Matching . TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.598

She wants to see me - ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,30.599

<P_31>

' Well ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.601

' To tell you the truth , I do not know what she has to say to me ;
though I can guess . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.602

' What do you guess ? ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.603

' It is something about your sister . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.604

' You will have to give that up , Tregear . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.605

' I think not . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.606

' Yes , you will ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.607

my father will never stand it . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.608

' I do@ @n't know what there is to stand . TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.609

I am not noble , TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.610

nor am I rich ; TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.611

but I am as good a gentleman as he is . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.612

' My dear fellow , ' said the young lord , ' you know very well what I
think about all that . TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.613

A fellow is not any better to me because he has got a title , nor yet
because he owns half a county . TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.614

But men have their ideas and feelings about it . TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.615

My father is a rich man , TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.616

and of course he@ @'ll want his daughter to marry a rich man .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.617

My father is noble , TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.618

and he@ @'ll want his daughter to marry a nobleman .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.619

You ca@ @n't very well marry Mary without his permission ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.620

and therefore you had better let it alone . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.621

' I have@ @n't even asked his permission as yet . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.622

' Even my mother was afraid to speak to him about it ,
TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.623

and I never knew her to be afraid to say anything else to him . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.624

' I shall not be afraid , ' said Tregear , looking grimly .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.625

' I should . TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.626

That@ @'s the difference between us . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.627

' He ca@ @n't very well eat me . ' ' Nor even bite you ;
TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.628

- nor will he abuse you . TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.629

But he can look at you , TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.630

and he can say a word or two which you will find it very hard to bear .
TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.631

My governor is the quietest man I know , TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.632

but he has a way of making himself disagreeable when he wishes , that I
never saw equalled . ' TROLLOPE-1879-2,31.633

<P_32>

' At any rate , I had better go and see your Mrs. Finn . '
TROLLOPE-1879-2,32.635

Then Tregear wrote a line to Mrs. Finn , TROLLOPE-1879-2,32.636

and made his appointment . TROLLOPE-1879-2,32.637

