<BEGIN_trollope-1882-1>

<P_158>

<heading>

Chapter XI . TROLLOPE-1882-1,158.4

The Crimean War ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,158.5

- Palmerston Prime Minister , 1855 . TROLLOPE-1882-1,158.6

<$$heading>

The war began in earnest with the naval conflict at Sinope .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,158.8

It was a terrible deed , and done , we must say , altogether in revenge
. TROLLOPE-1882-1,158.9

The English and French fleets had gone up the Dardanelles ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,158.10

and by doing so had offended the proud nature of Nicholas past all
immediate forgiveness . TROLLOPE-1882-1,158.11

The Russian ships came out from Sebastopol , TROLLOPE-1882-1,158.12

and , after hovering about the Black Sea for a fortnight , to see ,
probably , whether the combined fleet would interfere , and finding that
the small Turkish squadron lying at Sinope was at their mercy , went in
TROLLOPE-1882-1,158.13

and destroyed it altogether . TROLLOPE-1882-1,158.14

" It was believed by men in authority , " says Mr. Kinglake , " that
4,000 Turks were killed , and that less than 400 survived , and that all
these were wounded . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,158.15

England was full of wrath , TROLLOPE-1882-1,158.16

and nothing would appease her anger but a conviction that now , let the
Prime Minister say what he would , we should fight Russia .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,158.17

Looking back on the circumstance over many years , we must acknowledge
that the Emperor of Russia had on his side any legal rights which a
state of war can give . TROLLOPE-1882-1,158.18

He , out of his own mad sense of power , had crossed the Pruth ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,158.19

and we , - the French , that is , and ourselves , - had <P_159> on the
part of our allies taken our fleets up to Constantinople .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.20

The Russians had returned back across the Pruth ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.21

but Nicholas refused to say that he would give up his idea of a
protectorate . TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.22

The allies had therefore gone with their fleets into the Black Sea ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.23

and there could be no doubt that a state of war existed .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.24

But the Russian Admiral had six or seven ships of the line on the spot ,
whereas the Turks had but seven frigates . TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.25

There was no hope for them , TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.26

but still they fought bravely while they had a gun to fight ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.27

and perished at last almost to a man . TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.28

Our fleet , the meanwhile , was lying at the Bosphorus ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.29

and all England was angry . TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.30

Nothing but war could now serve to quiet the minds of Englishmen .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.31

On the 10th of December , 1853 , Lord Palmerston wrote to the Prime
Minister , recommending that we in England should at once prepare to
fight ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.32

- " What I would strongly recommend , therefore , is that which I
proposed some months ago to the Cabinet , namely , that the Russian
Government and the Russian Admiral at Sebastopol should be informed that
so long as Russian troops occupy the Principalities , or hold a position
in any other part of the Turkish territory , no Russian ships of war can
be allowed to show themselves out of port in the Black Sea . "
TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.33

Lord Aberdeen declined the advice thus given , TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.34

and on the 15th Lord Palmerston resigned . TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.35

But the Government could not go on without him . TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.36

" In truth , " says Mr. Kinglake , " he was gifted with the instinct
which enables a man to read the heart of a nation . "
TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.37

He was no sooner gone than the Cabinet in his absence did decide upon
sending the fleet into the Black Sea ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.38

and then the resignation was withdrawn . TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.39

Lord Aberdeen wrote to him as follows ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,159.40

- " I am glad <P_160> to find that you approve of a recent decision of
the Cabinet with respect to the British and French fleets , adopted in
your absence . TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.41

I feel sure you will have learnt with pleasure that , whether you are
absent or present , the Government are duly careful to preserve from all
injury the interests and dignity of the country . "
TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.42

On the 7th of February the Russian Ambassador was recalled ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.43

and troops were immediately sent to the East . TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.44

Then there was a dinner given to Sir Charles Napier at the Reform Club ,
for which Lord Palmerston was held to be specially responsible .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.45

It was not , perhaps , done in the best taste or with the most correct
judgment . TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.46

A triumphant banquet to a conquering hero should follow , and not
precede , the victories to be celebrated . TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.47

Lord Palmerston presided , TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.48

and was very triumphant and very jocund . TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.49

He told stories of all that the Admiral had done in the Mediterranean
and elsewhere , TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.50

and suggested all that he would do in the Baltic .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.51

Mr. Bright fell very foul of him , and perhaps deservedly .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.52

Lord Palmerston retorted on Mr. Bright with severity ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.53

and a considerable amount of ill-feeling was engendered .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.54

Mr. Bright belonged then , as now , to the Peace party ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.55

and found an ample scope for attack in the loud joy of a Minister who
was exciting his fellow-countrymen to war ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.56

and , undoubtedly , he had the best of it in the end , as Sir Charles
did not return triumphant . TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.57

The British troops now flocked into Turkey , TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.58

and the transit across from Varna to the Crimean Peninsula was quickly
achieved . TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.59

On the 14th of September the first detachments of the English and French
armies landed , TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.60

and a few days later the battle of the Alma was fought and won .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,160.61

We can still remember the feeling of triumph with which the news was
heard , and the spirit <P_161> of conquest which was enhanced by the
false tidings , believed at the time , that Sebastopol also had fallen .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,161.62

England did think for a few hours that she had already done that which
was to cost her twelve months of heart-rending anxieties , many millions
of taxes , and woe beyond measure . TROLLOPE-1882-1,161.63

Hitherto , as we have read the records of the preparations for the
campaign , it has appeared that Lord Palmerston , as Home Secretary ,
has had more to do with the war than any other Minister .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,161.64

But he escaped the personal annoyance to which those were subjected who
had the management of the details in their hands , and who were supposed
to be responsible for what was amiss . TROLLOPE-1882-1,161.65

But the time was soon to come in which he would cease to be an underling
; TROLLOPE-1882-1,161.66

- and then , such was his luck , all things went well .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,161.67

After the battle of the Alma things did not go prosperously .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,161.68

England , when she was brought back from the feeling of triumph which
had almost overpowered her on the false report of the fall of Sebastopol
, expected that though the stronghold had not yet fallen into her hands
, it should be made to do so very quickly . TROLLOPE-1882-1,161.69

She was unreasonable in the severity with which she treated her servants
, both civil and military , at home and in the Crimea .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,161.70

England , not being accustomed to war on a great scale for the last
forty years , could not at first carry it on as though she were used to
it , TROLLOPE-1882-1,161.71

and accused all her servants of " routine , " " red_tape , " blundering
, and ignorance . TROLLOPE-1882-1,161.72

We can look back now and see that such were the charges made by the
austere mistress , and remember the names of Lord Raglan and the Duke of
Newcastle with affection and respect , though we broke the heart of the
one and the spirit of the other by our usage . TROLLOPE-1882-1,161.73

But if the servants are noble-minded , as is <P_162> generally the case
with English servants in high places , even when broken-hearted , they
leave examples behind them which instigate others to renewed efforts .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,162.74

When the tidings of failures came Lord John Russell was himself the
first to declare that his own colleague at the War Department was unfit
for his position . TROLLOPE-1882-1,162.75

That colleague was the unfortunate Duke of Newcastle ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,162.76

and Lord John recommended that " before Parliament meets Lord Palmerston
should be entrusted with the seals of the War Department . "
TROLLOPE-1882-1,162.77

Lord Aberdeen , however , declined to dismiss the Duke of Newcastle ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,162.78

and then Mr. Roebuck moved for the appointment of a Select Committee to
inquire into the condition of our army . TROLLOPE-1882-1,162.79

Lord John immediately resigned , by no means with the goodwill of his
colleagues . TROLLOPE-1882-1,162.80

Lord John had been leader of the House , TROLLOPE-1882-1,162.81

and on his desertion the defence of Lord Aberdeen and of the Duke of
Newcastle was left to Lord Palmerston . TROLLOPE-1882-1,162.82

He said , which was true enough , that our misfortunes had come from the
inexperience caused by a long peace . TROLLOPE-1882-1,162.83

The House divided on Mr. Roebuck's motion , TROLLOPE-1882-1,162.84

and the Ministry were defeated by a great majority .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,162.85

It was found that 305 members followed Mr. Roebuck into the lobby
against only 148 , who supported the Government .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,162.86

It was clear , at any rate , that Lord Aberdeen must resign .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,162.87

But though Lord Palmerston must resign also with his chief , and
appeared for the time as the second in command of a beaten army , it was
to him a moment of great triumph . TROLLOPE-1882-1,162.88

There was no longer a question whether he should again serve under Lord
John or with Lord John , or whether he should be compelled on behalf of
his country to serve under one whose general politics were so
distasteful to him as those of Lord Aberdeen . TROLLOPE-1882-1,162.89

Lord <P_163> Derby was at once invited to form a Government , - but in
vain . TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.90

He applied to Lord Palmerston to help him ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.91

but it was not thus , we can fancy , that Lord Palmerston saw his way
through the future troubles . TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.92

Lord Derby could well understand that if he were to be a successful
Prime Minister in a War Cabinet , he must have Lord Palmerston as his
right-hand man . TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.93

But it was not so long since this same Lord Derby , then Lord Stanley ,
had brought against him in the House of Lords the bitterness of the Don
Pacifico arraignment . TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.94

It was not that this would have stood in Palmerston's way , had it been
possible for him to have thrown his heart into the work in conjunction
with Lord Derby . TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.95

But such a conjunction can@ @not be always attained by mere volition .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.96

Political coalitions are never firm , because they are formed of
individual men , TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.97

and each man has a heart in his bosom in which he carries his memories
of the past as well as his hopes for the future .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.98

" I have come to the conclusion , " he said , " that if I were to join
your Government , as proposed by you , I should not give to that
Government that strength which you are good enough to think would accrue
to you from my acceptance of office . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.99

Lord John was then sent for , TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.100

and made the attempt . TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.101

Lord Clarendon and others of the party would not serve with him , though
Lord Palmerston had consented to do so . TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.102

Lord John , in telling Lord Palmerston of his failure , offered to serve
with him , should the Queen require his services .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.103

There was no other alternative . TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.104

Indeed there was no other man than Lord Palmerston in England who could
have carried on the war . TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.105

The Queen sent for him , TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.106

and Lord John did join him . TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.107

" ... Quod optanti Divûm promittere nemo Auderet , volvenda dies en
attulit ultro . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,163.108

<P_164>

It was thus he signified his final triumph to his brother .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.110

- or intended so to signify it , TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.111

but quoted the passage wrongly . TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.112

There is in this a boyish feeling of the happiness of success .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.113

And yet he was seventy years old . TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.114

We can@ @not fancy such an expression coming from Lord John or Lord
Aberdeen . TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.115

Though either had felt it , he could not have so written to his brother
. TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.116

Here I am at last , - Prime Minister of England , in spite of all
accidents . TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.117

My old friend , Lord John , turned me out of the Foreign Office the
other day . TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.118

And I was obliged to go at his bidding . TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.119

And I had a bad quarter of an hour in the House of Commons when , for
reasons which are always paramount with an Englishman , I was unable to
take my own part . TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.120

They said I was crushed . TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.121

" There was a Palmerston . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.122

But when these times of war had come , I was wanted .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.123

And now my Lord John is my lieutenant . TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.124

All that was not loudly expressed in the " volvenda dies en attulit
ultro ; " TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.125

but it was understood both by the writer and by his brother .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.126

And he goes on : TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.127

" Here am I , writing to you from Downing Street as First Lord of the
Treasury . TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.128

The fact was , that Aberdeen and Newcastle had become discredited in
public estimation as Statesmen equal to the emergency ;
TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.129

Derby felt conscious of the incapacity of the greater portion of his
party , and their unfitness to govern the country ;
TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.130

and John Russell , by the way in which he suddenly abandoned the
Government , had so lost caste for the moment that I was the only one of
his political friends who was willing to serve under him . "
TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.131

" I think our Government will do very well . TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.132

I am backed by the general opinion of the whole country ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.133

and I have no reason to complain of the least want of cordiality or
confidence on the part of the Court . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,164.134

Lord Aberdeen <P_165> had himself done his best to make the matter easy
for Lord Palmerston . TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.135

I quote the following words from the " Life of the Prince Consort "
<paren> vol. iii. p. 209 <$$paren> ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.136

- " Lord Palmerston had good reason to appreciate the generosity with
which his old chief had interposed to remove this formidable impediment
to his success . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.137

Nor was Her Majesty less grateful ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.138

and in her letter , 6th of February , announcing to Lord Aberdeen that
Lord Palmerston had just kissed hands upon his appointment as Premier ,
she told him that she was now relieved from great anxiety and difficulty
, and felt that she owed much to Lord Aberdeen's kind and disinterested
assistance . TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.139

Then he states the terms which he intends to propose to the enemy ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.140

and in doing so prophesies the future almost exactly .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.141

" We must also <font> ask <$$font> for the destruction of the works at
Sebastopol , although we should not make that a <font> sine_quâ_non
<$$font> unless we had taken the place and had destroyed the works
ourselves . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.142

A majority of the House of Commons , led by Mr. Roebuck , and with the
people of the country to back them , insisted on inquiry , on punishment
, on improvement , and increased activity . TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.143

We still remember how " red_tape " and " routine " were in all our
mouths . TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.144

Mail after mail brought home news of increased suffering .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.145

Palmerston had become Prime Minister in February , 1855 ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.146

and it was during the winter then drawing to its close that the
sufferings and struggles of the Army had been most intense .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.147

Balaclava had been fought in October ; the battle of Mount Inkerman in
November ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.148

the great storm was on the 14th of that month ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.149

and , as the winter wore on , tidings of the difficulties of transit
from Balaclava to the heights reached us , - TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.150

and at last the road was made . TROLLOPE-1882-1,165.151

It was in the middle <P_166> of all these difficulties that Palmerston
had become Prime Minister , and that Mr. Roebuck urged on his committee
. TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.152

Sir James Graham , Mr. Gladstone , and Mr. Sydney Herbert then retired
; TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.153

but others came in their places , TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.154

and Lord Palmerston still went on ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.155

and during all the misery of the time , - for England was miserable with
the sense of failure , or , at least , of performance not perfected , -
he never quailed , TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.156

or expressed any diffidence as to the work to which he had been called .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.157

It was the nature of the man not to be diffident ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.158

and therefore he succeeded . TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.159

His courage was coarse and strong and indomitable , like that of a dog .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.160

We should say that he never trembled , even when he laid his head upon
his pillow , because of the task imposed upon him .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.161

He would go on , having England at his back , TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.162

and did not doubt but that the country would be found standing on its
legs when the struggle should come to an end . TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.163

I do not know that there was any one concerned in the matter whose heart
was exactly of the same calibre . TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.164

It was the very type of health , unadorned , - as also unalloyed , - by
romance or high feeling , or poetry , or even sentiment .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.165

In the midst of these things , in the early spring , the Emperor
Nicholas died , - TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.166

died broken-hearted , a victim to his own pride ;
TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.167

but the contest went on the same as ever . TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.168

A second conference , to which Lord John went on the part of England ,
was held at Vienna , to arrange , if possible , the terms of peace , and
to fix the four principal headings , - the condition of the
Principalities , the navigation of the Danube , the power which Russia
was to assume , or not to assume , in the Black Sea , and the
independence of the Porte . TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.169

In his operations there Lord John was held by the country to have failed
. TROLLOPE-1882-1,166.170

Indeed , he had never really succeeded in any political effort since the
<P_167> day on which he had ventured to dismiss Lord Palmerston .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.171

And yet Lord Palmerston had been true to him . TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.172

Lord Palmerston had never opposed him since the great blow by which he
had turned him out on the Militia Bill . TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.173

In truth , the people had not been with him , TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.174

and had ceased to trust him . TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.175

But to the other man the people had been true throughout
TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.176

Lord Palmerston had no capability for thought equal to that of which
Lord John was the master ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.177

but he possessed an instinctive sympathy with the masses which supported
him to the end of his days . TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.178

The Vienna Conference was broken up , TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.179

but the war still was carried on , certainly with the most exemplary
care on the part of the septuagenarian Prime Minister .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.180

He writes as follows to Lord Panmure , the Minister for War ;
TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.181

- " This is capital news from the Sea of Azoff , TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.182

and the extensive destruction of magazines and supplies in the towns
attacked must greatly cripple the Russian army in the Crimea .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.183

I am very sorry , however , to see so sad an account of the health of
the Sardinians , TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.184

and I strongly recommend you to urge Raglan , by telegraph to-day , to
move the Sardinian camp to some other and healthier situation .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.185

Such prevalence of disease as the telegraphic message mentions must be
the effect of some local cause . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.186

" As the cholera seems to be increasing among the troops , I should
advise you to send for the doctor I mentioned . "
TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.187

" We are 40,000 men short of the number voted by Parliament ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.188

and we shall be without the shadow of an excuse if we do not resort to
every possible means and every possible quarter to complete our force to
the number which Parliament has authorized {COM:sic} . "
TROLLOPE-1882-1,167.189

" Do not forget to suggest to our commissariat people in the Black Sea
that large supplies of oxen <P_168> to be eaten , and of horses to be
ridden and to draw , may be derived from the country on the eastern
shore of the Sea of Azoff . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.190

" It would be well also to point their attention to the projecting neck
of land or island called Krassnoi , in the Bay of Perekop , which is
said to abound in sheep and hay . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.191

From these quotations it will be seen how sleepless was his watchfulness
, and how minute his attentions to the affairs of the war .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.192

He writes to his brother in August of the same year ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.193

and speaks of the probable fall of Sebastopol . TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.194

" Our danger will then begin - a danger of peace , and not a danger of
war . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.195

" I must try to fight the battle of negotiation as well as the battle of
war , TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.196

and , fortunately , the spirit of the English nation will support us .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.197

I wish I could reckon with equal confidence on the steady determination
of the French . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.198

In September Sebastopol had fallen , TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.199

and the difficulties did in truth begin . TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.200

He had now to contend not only with Russia , but with Austria and also
with France . TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.201

It is said of course that his spirit of contention was simply
interference , and that in all things he wrote and spoke as a bully .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.202

It is difficult indeed to defend his manner ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.203

but that which he desired to get , he desired honestly .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.204

He desired it always on behalf of his country , TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.205

and he usually got it . TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.206

He writes as follows in January , 1856 , to our Ambassador at Vienna ;
TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.207

- " My dear Seymour , - Buol's statement to you the night before last
was what , in plain English , we should call impertinent .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.208

We are happily not yet in such a condition that an Austrian minister
should bid us sign a treaty without hesitation or conditions .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.209

The Cabinet of Vienna , forsooth , must insist upon our doing so !
TROLLOPE-1882-1,168.210

Why , really our friend Buol must have had his head turned by his
success at St. <P_169> Petersburg , and quite forgot whom he was
addressing such language to . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.211

" We know the exhaustion , the internal pressure , difficulties , and
distress of Russia quite as well as Buol does ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.212

but we know better than he does our own resources and strength .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.213

He may rest assured , however , that we have no wish to continue the war
for the prospect of what we may accomplish another year , if we can now
obtain peace upon the conditions which we deem absolutely necessary and
essential ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.214

but we are quite prepared to go on if such conditions can@ @not be
obtained . TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.215

The British nation is unanimous in this matter .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.216

I say unanimous , TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.217

for I can@ @not reckon Cobden , Bright , and Co. for anything . "
TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.218

And he was right . TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.219

The British nation did support him , TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.220

and , in spite of Mr. Cobden and Mr. Bright , would have supported no
minister who had acted otherwise . TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.221

The Emperor of the French , now that the war was over , - now rather
when it was possible to bring it to an end , - was desirous of softening
the terms for Russia . TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.222

But England was not specially desirous , - TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.223

was not in a hurry . TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.224

England was better able to continue the fight than she had been to begin
it , TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.225

and was by no means willing to give up any of those points for which she
had expended her blood and her money . TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.226

It had cost her fifty millions and 25,000 men . TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.227

Having paid so dearly for her whistle , she was determined to have as
much of it as might be possible . TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.228

Therefore it must , I think , be admitted , that Lord Palmerston , in
his arrogance , showed no more than the concentrated essence of an
Englishman . TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.229

It may be said that the feeling of the country was bulldog , turbulent ,
arrogant , and headstrong ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.230

but it was honest , TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.231

and in all that it did it was guided by the feeling that each man should
have that which was properly his own . TROLLOPE-1882-1,169.232

<P_170>

It would be vain in such a memoir as this to go back to the question of
the right or wrong of the Crimean War . TROLLOPE-1882-1,170.234

Lord Clarendon wittily declared that we had " drifted " into it .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,170.235

The word has been considered happy , TROLLOPE-1882-1,170.236

and , since our passion on the subject has been over , has been used
extensively to indicate our own folly in the matter .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,170.237

But if we had not gone to war , together with our French allies , would
not Nicholas have been allowed to drift into Constantinople ?
TROLLOPE-1882-1,170.238

It has been one of the chief efforts of Europe in the present century to
restrain the ambition of the Czar of Russia . TROLLOPE-1882-1,170.239

Whether this has or has not been a wise desire need not be discussed
here . TROLLOPE-1882-1,170.240

But it will , I think , be admitted , that when the Emperor's troops had
crossed the Pruth and occupied a position on Turkish territory , they
would not have receded without doing something on their master's behalf
- unless they had been made to do so . TROLLOPE-1882-1,170.241

Lord Aberdeen had thought that they could be made to go back by the
force of argument . TROLLOPE-1882-1,170.242

And the Czar had thought that he need not go back without gaining some
portion of his road to Constantinople , because Lord Aberdeen's thoughts
had been of so peaceful a nature . TROLLOPE-1882-1,170.243

Therefore Lord Palmerston was put into Lord Aberdeen's place ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,170.244

and the Czar had to go back - with terrible consequences to himself .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,170.245

How it might have ended had the English people been less turbulent and
headstrong , it would require a wise man to say .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,170.246

But had not Palmerston been there to their hand , some other Prime
Minister would have been found to do the work , and to do it probably
with less skill in the management . TROLLOPE-1882-1,170.247

The feelings of England with regard to Turkey , and also in regard to
Russia , have changed since the Crimean War . TROLLOPE-1882-1,170.248

And there has been reason for the change . TROLLOPE-1882-1,170.249

At <P_171> that time it had been the intention of the Emperor Nicholas
gradually to swallow the Sultan's dominions , - to swallow them , or to
have them swallowed by some other confederate and hungry animal .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.250

We all remember , as though it were yesterday , the proposal for the
partition of the sick man's goods . TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.251

The suggestion did not suit us . TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.252

But as we would have none of these goods for ourselves , neither would
we permit another to take them . TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.253

We felt that for us Russia would be a more dangerous occupant of the
Eastern Mediterranean than Turkey . TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.254

And though we thought but little of the Mahommedan , we thought almost
less of the Russian Christian . TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.255

It was , at any rate , indispensable for our purposes that the Turk
should be maintained . TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.256

The half of the population of Turkey in Europe were Christians , whom we
thought to be as near to civilization as the Muscovite from further
North ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.257

and we flattered ourselves that it might be possible for us to teach
them and their Mahommedan compatriots some touch of better manners .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.258

With the Russian we conceived that we could do nothing .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.259

There was much of mistaken vanity in this , because we had told
ourselves that this people , thoroughly averse to us in customs , might
be tamed and reduced and made like ourselves by the execution of a few
treaties and the loan of a good deal of money . TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.260

They took our money , TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.261

and increased their harems , TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.262

and laughed at our treaties . TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.263

But still we had gained our object in this , that the Turk and not the
Russian owned , and was likely to own , Constantinople .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.264

We had beaten back the Russian , to whom , though we did not begrudge
him the power to increase his borders in Asia , - except in our own
special direction , - we did refuse any advance in Europe .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.265

With these ideas , and on this theory , we went to war ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,171.266

and as we were by <P_172> treaty the joint protectors of Turkey , the
war was surely justifiable . TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.267

Whether we got a good investment for our fifty millions , and , also ,
for our 25,000 English lives , is a question which we can@ @not now
settle . TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.268

The way in which it is settled by each individual depends on his own
occupation in life . TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.269

Does he breed cattle , TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.270

or does he make carpets ? TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.271

But in the quarter of a century which has passed since the Crimean War
the Turk has done very much to make the blood of an Englishman boil .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.272

We lent him money on the promise of certain performances .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.273

He has spent our money , TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.274

but has performed none of his promises . TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.275

We have called upon him again and again to reform ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.276

and he has replied by expressing his desire for more money .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.277

He has done nothing to change his habits , TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.278

and has only proved to us that a Mahommedan Turk can@ @not become a good
Christian . TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.279

And this is the man for whom we expended 25,000 lives in war and fifty
millions in war expenses , for which we have no claim on any one , - and
many other millions in loans , as to which it would be better for our
peace of mind if also we had no claim ! TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.280

The Mahommedan must certainly be made to go out of Europe ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.281

but it must be by slow degrees , and not at the instance of a despotic
Emperor , who , under the name of a religious protectorate , would take
possession of the country . TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.282

Let any one who is still unhappy on the score of Turkey take the modern
map of Europe , and compare the lines as they are drawn now and as they
were drawn sixty years ago . He will see that the banishment of the
Turk has not been so very slow . TROLLOPE-1882-1,172.283

Not , therefore , from dislike to Turkish rule should the English reader
decide that the war into which he will <P_173> have been told we had
drifted , was inexpedient or more expensive than has been justified by
the objects attained . TROLLOPE-1882-1,173.284

That war was essentially one of Lord Palmerston's making .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,173.285

He advised it , TROLLOPE-1882-1,173.286

commenced it , TROLLOPE-1882-1,173.287

carried it on , TROLLOPE-1882-1,173.288

and completed it . TROLLOPE-1882-1,173.289

His hand - instant , urgent , and pressing - is to be seen in it
throughout . TROLLOPE-1882-1,173.290

We can@ @not yet say that it was all wise . TROLLOPE-1882-1,173.291

It may well be that the world shall never be able to say with any
certainty whether it was wise or foolish ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,173.292

but as far as the world has gone yet , no verdict has been given against
it . TROLLOPE-1882-1,173.293

<P_174>

<heading>

Chapter XII . TROLLOPE-1882-1,174.296

The Indian Mutiny . TROLLOPE-1882-1,174.297

<$$heading>

On the 12th of July , 1856 , at the Court at Buckingham Palace , Lord
Palmerston was made a Knight of the Garter , it being understood that
this was done in recognition of his services in reference to the Crimean
War . TROLLOPE-1882-1,174.299

When we remember what had occurred a few years back as to his dismissal
from the Foreign Office , we may allow that he was bound to accept this
token of her Majesty's favour . TROLLOPE-1882-1,174.300

Lord Melbourne is reported to have said some years earlier , when a
similar opportunity had come to him , that he had no need to bribe
himself ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,174.301

- and he died without having K.G. written after his name .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,174.302

It is probable that no such word was used by Lord Melbourne , and that
the cynical phrase was one merely made to suit the occasion .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,174.303

But there was a truth in it which took hold of men .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,174.304

There is , perhaps , a feeling that , as the Prime Minister is supposed
to recommend the recipients of this honour for Her Majesty's acceptance
, Palmerston would not now stand lower in the world's esteem had he
declined it . TROLLOPE-1882-1,174.305

Lord Fortescue , who was installed on the same day , could well afford
to accept the blue ribbon . TROLLOPE-1882-1,174.306

There was a reason why Lord Palmerston should accept it .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,174.307

But had he not done so , there would have been an increased glory in
going to his rest , as Lord <P_175> Melbourne had done , without
burdening his name with the additional title . TROLLOPE-1882-1,175.308

In August , 1856 , when Lord Palmerston was surrounded by the
difficulties incident to the completion of the war , he lost his only
brother ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,175.309

and with him those letters came to an end , which give us the freest
account of Lord Palmerston's thoughts , his ambition , his arrogance ,
and his justice . TROLLOPE-1882-1,175.310

We do not hear a word from him afterwards about his brother .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,175.311

He might have been the merest casual friend , chance-selected for some
smaller embassy . TROLLOPE-1882-1,175.312

For his elder brother had never pushed him up to the higher places at
Paris , Constantinople , Vienna , or St. Petersburg .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,175.313

Sir William Temple had probably lacked something either in intellect or
energy , or perhaps in discretion , of that fitness for the duties of an
ambassador which had been found in Lord Granville , Sir Stratford
Canning , and Sir Hamilton Seymour . TROLLOPE-1882-1,175.314

At any rate Lord Palmerston was determined that he would not be accused
of nepotism . TROLLOPE-1882-1,175.315

In expressions of grief there is somewhat of feminine feeling , which ,
to the nature of Lord Palmerston , was antipathetic .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,175.316

His brother had lived at Naples for many years , our Minister at a
third-rate Court . TROLLOPE-1882-1,175.317

Now he had come home and died , TROLLOPE-1882-1,175.318

and , as far as Lord Palmerston's outside life was concerned , there was
an end of him . TROLLOPE-1882-1,175.319

Early in the Session of 1857 there sprang up a difficulty in China in
reference to a small ship which has ever since been known as the lorcha
<font> Arrow . <$$font> TROLLOPE-1882-1,175.320

The <font> Arrow , <$$font> on a charge of piracy , was boarded by
certain Chinese from a war junk , TROLLOPE-1882-1,175.321

and Sir John Bowring , who was our Governor at Hong-Kong , demanded
reparation from Commissioner Yeh . TROLLOPE-1882-1,175.322

Then arose a quarrel and a fight , in which , of course , the English
got the better . TROLLOPE-1882-1,175.323

The <P_176> matter , which was of importance at the time , has by lapse
of years become so trivial as to be hardly worthy of notice here , - but
that it led to a dissolution of Parliament . TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.324

A motion was brought forward in the House of Lords by Lord Derby ,
blaming the Government , TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.325

and was carried by a majority of thirty-six . TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.326

Mr. Cobden brought a similar motion before the House of Commons ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.327

and was supported by Mr. Disraeli , Lord John Russell , Sir James
Graham , and Mr. Gladstone . TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.328

Mr. Disraeli twitted Lord Palmerston with having made his complaint to
the country , TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.329

and bade him follow his complaint by an appeal .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.330

The motion was carried by a majority of sixteen against the Government ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.331

and Lord Palmerston did appeal . TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.332

That Lord Palmerston , as Prime Minister , should have been distasteful
to Mr. Cobden and Mr. Gladstone we can understand .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.333

He was essentially a War Minister , TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.334

and had latterly dealt with war alone . TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.335

To Mr. Cobden and Mr. Gladstone he must have been the incarnation of
insular aggression . TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.336

But Lord Derby and Sir James Graham , Lord John Russell and Mr.
Disraeli , could have entertained none of this feeling .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.337

They had shown themselves at least anxious to conduct the war ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.338

and we can@ @not imagine that the question of the lorcha <font> Arrow
<$$font> can have so operated upon them as to make them feel it
imperative for the sake of England's glory to turn instantly upon the
man who had just brought England through her difficulties .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.339

It was simply a party conflict , in which Aristides had been too just .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.340

But Aristides resolved that he would follow his enemies' advice , and
see what the country would say to it . TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.341

He must have known when he went to the country what would be the result
. TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.342

He had just carried the war to a successful end ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,176.343

and the country would not see him <P_177> displaced .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,177.344

The normal Englishman was thoroughly proud of him , proud of his bad
jokes , proud of his unflinching energy , and proud of his years .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,177.345

He called his opponents , when they denied that they combined together
against him , " the fortuitous concourse of atoms . "
TROLLOPE-1882-1,177.346

The joke was better worth quoting than those he usually made .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,177.347

The country was even proud of him because he stuck to Tiverton instead
of accepting a more glorious seat . TROLLOPE-1882-1,177.348

To have deserted old friends in his glory , who had been true to him
before his glory came , would not have been like Palmerston .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,177.349

So he got his majority in spite of the lorcha <font> Arrow , <$$font>
TROLLOPE-1882-1,177.350

and Mr. Bright and Mr. Cobden were both excluded from the new
Parliament . TROLLOPE-1882-1,177.351

Then came upon us the Indian Mutiny ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,177.352

and men who had never doubted during the Russian campaign , though they
felt that England must strain every nerve for victory , began to fear
that the few who were there to bear the brunt must perish in the attempt
. TROLLOPE-1882-1,177.353

It was a common fear that if India was to belong to us for the future ,
India must be conquered a second time ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,177.354

and while men thought of this , their hearts fell within them as they
remembered what must be the fate of the British men , and children , and
women , who were doomed to suffer things many times worse than death .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,177.355

And there was a feeling by no means uncommon , and very deadly , that
India would be lost for ever , and with it all the glory of England .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,177.356

That this idea prevailed in France , which had just been our ally , and
in Russia , which had just been our enemy , and in the United States ,
which of all nations was the nearest akin to us , can@ @not be doubted .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,177.357

When men's hearts are so heavy they show it in their faces rather than
by their speech . TROLLOPE-1882-1,177.358

There were months in 1857 when men in England hardly dared to speak
aloud what they thought and <P_178> felt about India .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.359

But of Lord Palmerston it must be said that he was made of some stronger
and coarser fabric than other men , better prepared for hard wear , and
able to bear without detriment rain and snow and dirty weather .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.360

Through that period of the Indian Mutiny , - which must have been harder
, we think , for an English Prime Minister to bear even than the
temporary failures of the Crimea , - he never blanched .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.361

It was said by the <font> Edinburgh Review , <$$font> just before the
tidings of the Mutiny reached us , that " the past Session found Lord
Palmerston covered with the glory of having trodden down the wine-press
alone . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.362

This was the very pinnacle of the column of praise which was raised to
his honour on behalf of his steadfastness against Russia by those of the
Press who supported his side in politics . TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.363

But it was true . TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.364

He had done it alone . TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.365

If we look back we can find no other Minister who had not failed , or
hesitated , or remained in the background . TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.366

But yet we think that the effort made by him to suppress the Indian
Mutiny was the greater of the two . TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.367

It came easier to him because he had been made familiar with the efforts
necessary for such work by the Russian war ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.368

and coming , as the Mutiny did , close after the Russian war , and
dealing with matters less palpably open to the mind's eye than the
Russian quarrel , it created , with all its horrors and all its triumphs
, a less abiding thoughtfulness . TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.369

India had been ours , TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.370

and must be ours . TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.371

So we felt when India was again ours . TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.372

But it had nearly come to pass that India , at any rate for the time ,
was not ours . TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.373

But Palmerston went on governing the country through it all with
apparent equanimity . TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.374

In three months we had sent 30,000 troops to India , with all their
horses , appurtenances , clothing , and armour .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,178.375

When we remember <P_179> the distance , the rapidity required , the
scattered positions of the men to be collected , and of the transports
needed , I think we may boast that no other country ever made such an
effort . TROLLOPE-1882-1,179.376

After all , much of the hardest fighting was done by the army stationary
in India before the troops from England arrived .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,179.377

It would be unfair to say even a few words about the mutiny without
declaring this . TROLLOPE-1882-1,179.378

Delhi had been taken from the mutineers . TROLLOPE-1882-1,179.379

Outram , Havelock , the Lawrences , and Inglis had done their work .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,179.380

When all were true and all were heroes , there need be no jealousy of
praise . TROLLOPE-1882-1,179.381

But to Lord Canning , the son of Palmerston's old tutor in politics ,
the Canning who had been so hard on Palmerston in the Don Pacifico
debate , the Canning who had gone to India most unwillingly in obedience
to Palmerston's commands , the Canning to have said a word against whom
required the self-annihilation of a Minister , Canning who completed by
his death his victory in the country he had been sent to govern , - to
him and to those brave men whom the Mutiny , bursting from its swarthy
ranks , had found in India , the first praise for crushing it is due .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,179.382

Lord Palmerston in the Mansion House had to blow England's trumpet in
addressing the normal Mansion House audience . TROLLOPE-1882-1,179.383

" An Englishman , " he said , " is not so fond as the people of some
other countries are of uniforms , of steel scabbards , and of iron heels
; TROLLOPE-1882-1,179.384

but no nation can excel the English , either as officers or soldiers ,
in knowledge of the duties of the military profession , and in the zeal
and ability with which those duties are performed ;
TROLLOPE-1882-1,179.385

and whatever desperate deeds are to be <P_180> accomplished , - wherever
superior numbers are to be boldly encountered and triumphantly overcome
- wherever privations are to be encountered , wherever that which a
soldier has to confront is individually or collectively to be found ,
there , I will venture to say , there is no nation on the face of the
earth which can surpass , - I might , without too much national vanity ,
say , I believe there is no nation which can equal , - the people of the
British islands . TROLLOPE-1882-1,180.386

But , my Lord Mayor and gentlemen , while we all admire the bravery ,
the constancy , and the intrepidity of our countrymen in India , we must
not forget to do justice also to our countrywomen .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,180.387

In the ordinary course of life the functions of women are to cheer the
days of adversity , to soothe the hours of suffering , and to give
additional brilliancy to the sunshine of prosperity ;
TROLLOPE-1882-1,180.388

but our countrywomen in India have had occasion to show qualities of a
higher and nobler kind , TROLLOPE-1882-1,180.389

and when they have had either to sustain the perils of the siege , or
endure the privations of a difficult escape , to forget their own
sufferings in endeavouring to minister to the wants of others , the
women of the United Kingdom have , wherever they have been found in
India , displayed qualities of the noblest kind , such as have never
been surpassed in the history of the world . TROLLOPE-1882-1,180.390

Henceforth the bravest soldier may think it no disparagement to be told
that his courage and his power of endurance are equal to those of an
Englishwoman . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,180.391

We can hear the words of the old man now , and tell ourselves that this
was a moment in which national vanity might be forgiven .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,180.392

And we can hear the cheers , laden with vanity , as also with true glory
, with which they were received . TROLLOPE-1882-1,180.393

There had been some discussion <P_181> during the Mutiny as to the
expediency of accepting such foreign helps as had been offered .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.394

Two Belgian regiments had been suggested . TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.395

But Lord Palmerston had set his face against all assistance , even from
Belgium . TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.396

He wrote as follows to Lord Clarendon on the matter ;
TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.397

- " The more I think of it , the more I feel it is necessary for our
standing and reputation in the world that we should put down this mutiny
and restore order by our own means ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.398

and I am perfectly certain that we can do it , and that we shall do it .
" TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.399

And now it had been done . TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.400

We must pause for a moment here , to state that a Bill was now brought
before Parliament for entirely altering the system under which India was
governed . TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.401

My readers will probably know that up to this time the East India
Company did exist , with the power , which had gradually been curtailed
indeed , and brought more or less under Government control , of managing
the affairs of India as though it were simply the scene of certain
commercial transactions . TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.402

There was a Board of Control attached to the Government ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.403

but there was no Secretary of State for India . TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.404

There was a Board of Directors , but no Indian Council directly
appointed by Government . TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.405

And my readers also know that there is at present a Secretary of State ,
equal in rank to the other Secretaries ; and that India has become a
branch of our Government , - as the Colonies are , and Foreign Affairs .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.406

I do not know that I need go further into the nature of the change
effected than to say that it was carried out in conformity with the
proposition made by Lord Palmerston , and in compliance with the Queen's
Speech in the previous December . TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.407

This was done early in 1858 . TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.408

There was a long debate on the first reading , TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.409

and infinite delays were proposed . TROLLOPE-1882-1,181.410

<P_182>

This was chiefly due to Mr. Disraeli . TROLLOPE-1882-1,182.412

He declared that " at present we are undertaking an immense liability ;
TROLLOPE-1882-1,182.413

we are entering into engagements which will some day make us tremble ;
TROLLOPE-1882-1,182.414

and we have no security whatever that those who really possess power in
India , who really manage the resources of the country , will be in the
least controlled for our benefit . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,182.415

Nevertheless , upon a division , the Bill was carried by a majority of
145 , against an amendment moved , recommending delay .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,182.416

Such was the end of the East India Company as a ruling power ;
TROLLOPE-1882-1,182.417

and since that date India has been simply a dependency of the British
throne , as are Canada and the Australias . TROLLOPE-1882-1,182.418

This , too , is to be reckoned among the performances of Lord Palmerston
. TROLLOPE-1882-1,182.419

Then there arose a question on which Lord Palmerston was most absurdly
turned out of office ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,182.420

and he remained out from February , 1858 , to June , 1859 .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,182.421

It was done absurdly , because the matter in dispute was one in which
not only the country , but also the House of Commons , was altogether at
one with him . TROLLOPE-1882-1,182.422

An attempt had been made to murder the Emperor of the French .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,182.423

It had been done in a manner altogether reckless of human life , the
number killed and wounded when the Emperor escaped having been stated as
high as 150 . TROLLOPE-1882-1,182.424

And the horror was felt to have been aggravated when it was known that
the Empress had been with the Emperor when the attempt was made .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,182.425

Orsini , an Italian , was the leader of the gang by whom the grenades
were thrown beneath the Emperor's carriage ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,182.426

and it came out in evidence that Orsini , with his fellow-assassins ,
had lived in England , and had here constructed his murderous machine .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,182.427

The French Minister of the Emperor applied <P_183> to our Foreign Office
for co-operation in the matter , TROLLOPE-1882-1,183.428

and desired that the law might be so altered as to make it impossible
that suspected assassins , - assassins suspected to be so by the English
or French Government , - should be able to carry on their trade in
London . TROLLOPE-1882-1,183.429

Lord Palmerston assented , TROLLOPE-1882-1,183.430

and a Bill , intending to give the Ministry of the day the power of
dealing with such persons , was carried in the House of Commons by a
majority of no less than 200 . TROLLOPE-1882-1,183.431

This may be taken as the outspoken opinion of the House , when its
feeling was simply one of indignant wrath in regard to Orsini .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,183.432

But in the meantime the " French Colonels " had signalized themselves .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,183.433

The French Colonels were certain officers who were indignant on the
matter . TROLLOPE-1882-1,183.434

They had known that Orsini had brought his grenades from London ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,183.435

but had not known that the British Government was anxious to do as the
French Ministers would have them . TROLLOPE-1882-1,183.436

They consequently sent various addresses to the Emperor , in which the
abominable conduct of England was described in very strong language .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,183.437

The " Colonels " appeared to have thought that all England had been
engaged in making murderous weapons for the accommodation of Orsini .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,183.438

And these addresses were unfortunately published in the <font> Moniteur
, <$$font> whereby a quasi-official authority was attached to them ;
because all things published in the <font> Moniteur <$$font> were
supposed to have received an official stamp . TROLLOPE-1882-1,183.439

The French Ambassador expressed his regret , stating that the addresses
had passed into the <font> Moniteur <$$font> without notice ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,183.440

and Lord Palmerston urged the House to disregard the vapourings of the "
Colonels . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,183.441

But the insult to the nation was there , in <P_184> the columns of the
<font> Moniteur , <$$font> TROLLOPE-1882-1,184.442

and was much more widely known than the apology which had been sent .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,184.443

There does appear to have been some lack of official despatches which
might have been made known to the House . TROLLOPE-1882-1,184.444

At any rate , an amendment was now proposed , " That this House can@
@not but regret that Her Majesty's Government , previously to inviting
the House to amend the law of conspiracy at the present time , have not
felt it to be their duty to reply to the important despatch received
from the French Government , dated January 20 " -
TROLLOPE-1882-1,184.445

and this was carried by a majority of 19 . TROLLOPE-1882-1,184.446

When that former strong expression of opinion had been given by 299
votes to 99 , the Government had been supported by the desire of the
Tories at large , to keep down such a nest of hornets as Orsini and his
conspirators . TROLLOPE-1882-1,184.447

To banish them from the country , or to hang them if it were necessary ,
must have seemed good , TROLLOPE-1882-1,184.448

and did seem good , to Lord Derby's party . TROLLOPE-1882-1,184.449

And it was not the less good because of the French " Colonels " - who
after all were a gallant set of fellows enough , standing up for their
country and their Emperor . TROLLOPE-1882-1,184.450

But it was seen that an instant advantage might be taken of Lord
Palmerston and his Government ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,184.451

and they who led the Tory party were not slow to take advantage of it .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,184.452

Lord Palmerston , who seems to have been moved to wrath by such
desertion , resigned on the following day , TROLLOPE-1882-1,184.453

and Lord Derby came into office with Mr. Disraeli as his first
lieutenant . TROLLOPE-1882-1,184.454

Palmerston remained out for sixteen months ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,184.455

but before we go with him into comparative obscurity , we must point out
that he had now been dismissed - on the motion too of Mr. Milner Gibson
, one <P_185> of his old enemies , the peace-party , - not because as of
yore he was supposed to have been arrogant on the part of England , and
in the general course of his policy to have given offence to foreign
nations ; but because he was supposed , - erroneously supposed , - to
have truckled to French orders . TROLLOPE-1882-1,185.456

Palmerston was the same as ever ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,185.457

but so also was the English nation . TROLLOPE-1882-1,185.458

When he was accused of arrogance abroad , he was dear old Pam to the
normal Englishman . TROLLOPE-1882-1,185.459

But when he was foolishly conceived to have unduly yielded an inch to
French influence , there came instantly to his opponents the power of
turning him out , - which his opponents were not slow to do .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,185.460

During his holiday he took the chair at the Royal Literary Fund dinner ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,185.461

and there , as elsewhere , he made a speech serviceable to the occasion
. TROLLOPE-1882-1,185.462

To make a speech at the Literary Fund dinner seems to be a duty expected
from an ex-Prime Minister . TROLLOPE-1882-1,185.463

Then came a Reform Bill introduced by the Tories ;
TROLLOPE-1882-1,185.464

- this was in 1859 . TROLLOPE-1882-1,185.465

But Lord John was not going to accept a Reform Bill from the Tories as
long as he could avoid it . TROLLOPE-1882-1,185.466

The Government was left in a minority , Lord John having moved an
amendment condemning the Tory Bill . TROLLOPE-1882-1,185.467

Thereupon Lord Derby went out , TROLLOPE-1882-1,185.468

and the Queen was again called upon to form a Ministry .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,185.469

These formations of new Ministries seem to come very rapidly in the
record of one man's life , and to be passed by as though they were
matters of no real importance ! TROLLOPE-1882-1,185.470

But to us looking back now over the intervening years , - and
twenty-three years have intervened , - how momentous was that unexpected
sending for Lord Granville when Lord Derby retired !
TROLLOPE-1882-1,185.471

Lord John Russell and Lord <P_186> Palmerston had made a compact
together that , as the Queen might choose between them , either would
help the other ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,186.472

Lord Palmerston had by this time resolved to abandon his wrath ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,186.473

and Lord John , who expected probably to regain his ascendency , still
would not decline to serve a second time under his old colleague should
the Queen require him . TROLLOPE-1882-1,186.474

But the claims of the two were equal , TROLLOPE-1882-1,186.475

and Lord Granville , as being between them , was selected .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,186.476

When Lord Palmerston had before been asked to reconstruct a Ministry ,
the country had been at war , TROLLOPE-1882-1,186.477

and every Englishman was in earnest . TROLLOPE-1882-1,186.478

Then there had been no alternative . TROLLOPE-1882-1,186.479

But now there could be no reason why Lord Palmerston should not go back
to the ranks ; though there might be a reason why he should not serve
under Lord John . TROLLOPE-1882-1,186.480

When it was suggested to Lord Palmerston that he should serve under Lord
Granville he wrote as follows to the Queen ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,186.481

" Viscount Palmerston and Lord John Russell , before they called the
meeting at Willis's Rooms , came to an agreement to co-operate with each
other in the formation of a new Administration , whichever of the two
might be called upon by your Majesty to reconstruct your Majesty's
Government . TROLLOPE-1882-1,186.482

That agreement did not extend to the case of any third person ;
TROLLOPE-1882-1,186.483

but Viscount Palmerston conceives that the same sense of public duty
which had led him to enter into that engagement with Lord John Russell
should also lead him to give assistance to Lord Granville towards the
execution of your Majesty's commands . TROLLOPE-1882-1,186.484

Viscount Palmerston's promise to Lord Granville has , however , been
conditional . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,186.485

" The promise therefore , which he has given to Lord Granville has been
made conditional on Lord Granville's success in <P_187> organizing a
Government so composed as to be calculated officially to carry on the
public service , and to command the confidence of Parliament and of the
country . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,187.486

But Lord Granville was not successful . TROLLOPE-1882-1,187.487

He found , we are told , that Lord John was unwilling to serve under him
, and at the same time to leave the leadership of the House of Commons
in Lord Palmerston's hands . TROLLOPE-1882-1,187.488

Consequently Lord Palmerston was again sent for ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,187.489

and became a second time Prime Minister in his seventy-fifth year .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,187.490

<P_188>

Chapter XIII . TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.492

Palmerston as Prime Minister , from 1859 to his death .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.493

The unification of Italy was the first matter of importance to which
Lord Palmerston's new cabinet had to apply itself .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.494

Lord John Russell was Foreign Secretary , TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.495

but we perceive that Palmerston kept a hold of the reins himself .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.496

The things chiefly to be done were as follows . TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.497

Austria still held Venetia , TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.498

but had been made to abandon Lombardy by Marshal Mac Mahon at the battle
of Magenta . TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.499

Austria had to be put down and made to depart out of Venetia if possible
. TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.500

France had been victorious ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.501

but the Emperor claimed as his reward Savoy and Nice .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.502

It was too late for Palmerston to save Savoy and Nice .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.503

That blot on poor Cavour's name must remain a stain for ever .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.504

He had told our Minister at Turin that they were not to be given up ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.505

and had known when he said so that their doom had been spoken .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.506

But the Emperor must be stopped and not allowed to run headlong with the
<font> éclat <$$font> of his victories . TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.507

In this matter , too , the Emperor , too , had deceived him .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.508

And Italy must be encouraged to take her place among the nations of
Europe . TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.509

These were the matters as to which , in regard to Italy , the British
Cabinet was at the present moment anxious . TROLLOPE-1882-1,188.510

Palmerston's dislike to Austria , - <P_189> we might almost call it
hatred , - still remained hot as ever . TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.511

In a memorandum prepared for the Cabinet , Lord Palmerston defended
Napoleon as against Austria . TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.512

" Austria took our subsidies , TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.513

bound herself by treaty not to make peace without our concurrence ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.514

sustained signal defeat in battle , TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.515

and precipitately made peace without our concurrence .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.516

But on what occasion has the Emperor Napolean so acted ?
TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.517

- on none . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.518

This was written in January , 1860 ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.519

but a little later on , when the story of Savoy and Nice was known , he
shows his jealousy of Napoleon . TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.520

In April of the same year , he writes to Lord Cowley at Paris ;
TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.521

" The Emperor's mind is as full of schemes as a warren is full of
rabbits , TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.522

and , like rabbits , his schemes go to ground for the moment to avoid
notice or antagonism . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.523

And there is a record of a conversation which he had with Count Flahault
a few days previouslsy . TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.524

Count Flahault was just going to Paris , TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.525

and asked him what he should say to the Emperor .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.526

The Prime Minister was , what we shall call , very outspoken .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.527

England desired peace , he said , TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.528

but if the Emperor was desirous of war , he would find that England was
quite ready for him . TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.529

And he says in a letter to the Duke of Somerset ; " I have watched the
Emperor narrowly , TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.530

and have studied his character and conduct . TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.531

You may rely upon it , that at the bottom of his heart there rankles a
deep and inextinguishable desire to humble and punish England . "
TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.532

He says to Lord Cowley ; " The seizure of Savoy and Nice , and the
breach of promise towards Switzerland about the cession of the Swiss of
the neutralized district , are matters which can@ @not be got over
easily . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,189.533

From these quotations it will be seen how intent he was on keeping the
Emperor in his place , and saving this country , if it <P_190> might be
saved , from some future battle of Dorking . TROLLOPE-1882-1,190.534

But in regard to the state of Italy at the time , he had expressed
himself very strongly in the memorandum above quoted ;
TROLLOPE-1882-1,190.535

" There can be no reasonable doubt , therefore , that both France and
Sardinia would unite with England in maintaining the principle that the
Italians should be secured against foreign compulsion , and should be
left free to determine , according to their own will , what shall be
their future political condition . " TROLLOPE-1882-1,190.536

In all these matters Lord Palmerston and Lord John Russell were ,
between them , successful - at any rate in the accomplishment of their
wishes . TROLLOPE-1882-1,190.537

Austria was altogether driven out of Italy . TROLLOPE-1882-1,190.538

The French Emperor did not attempt to avenge Waterloo .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,190.539

And Italy has become a united nation , ruling herself in accordance with
her own will . TROLLOPE-1882-1,190.540

But in order to make good the boasts which he had made to Count Flahault
, it was necessary that the country should be on its guard .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,190.541

Its security , by military means , was always present to Lord
Palmerston's mind . TROLLOPE-1882-1,190.542

He had written a letter in December , 1869 , to Mr. Gladstone on the
subject , TROLLOPE-1882-1,190.543

and he must , we should think , have startled Mr. Gladstone by the
nonchalant audacity with which he proposed that ten or eleven millions
should be at once voted for fortifications to defend Portsmouth and
Plymouth . TROLLOPE-1882-1,190.544

Then he goes into the manner in which the money should be raised , - as
to which we can@ @not but imagine that Mr. Gladstone had his own way .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,190.545

But the millions were voted , TROLLOPE-1882-1,190.546

and the fortifications were erected ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,190.547

and the Volunteer Force was set on foot , - with what enormous results
is now patent to the whole country . TROLLOPE-1882-1,190.548

In consequence of what was then done , England has now got a <P_191>
double army , one for service abroad , and the other at home .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,191.549

It is only now beginning to be seen and understood that the defence of
our own shores may be trusted to men less expensively organized than in
regiments of the line . TROLLOPE-1882-1,191.550

In 1861 Lord Palmerston was installed as Warden of the Cinque Ports , by
which he obtained the use of what was believed to be a comfortable
residence near Dover . TROLLOPE-1882-1,191.551

As Broadlands and Brocket Hall , as well as Cambridge House , in
Piccadilly , to which he had long since removed , were all on his hands
, this could not have been much to him . TROLLOPE-1882-1,191.552

But the installation gave him at any rate the pleasure of going down
once more to Tiverton , and meeting his old friend Mr. Rowcliffe , the
butcher . TROLLOPE-1882-1,191.553

For the Wardenship was an office , so called , of profit ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,191.554

and the new election was necessary . TROLLOPE-1882-1,191.555

He was returned without a contest , but not without the usual
preliminary discussion with Mr. Rowcliffe . TROLLOPE-1882-1,191.556

It is hardly possible to refer to all the measures , or even to all
those of importance , with which Lord Palmerston was concerned at this
period of his life . TROLLOPE-1882-1,191.557

In 1860 the paper duties had been discussed ; TROLLOPE-1882-1,191.558

and now that this matter has been well-nigh forgotten among the things
that have been quickly settled , we can hardly realize the disturbance
to our feelings , and even the animosity , which they created .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,191.559

The House of Lords took upon itself to throw the bill out ; whereas a
remission of taxation is an affair which the Lower House conceives to
belong exclusively to itself . TROLLOPE-1882-1,191.560

But Palmerston , whose own heart was hardly in the matter , but who was
much concerned in keeping peace between the two Houses , contrived to
smooth matters down , so that the bill was passed in 1861 ,
TROLLOPE-1882-1,191.561

and nothing more has been since heard of the paper <P_192> duties .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,192.562

To us it seems that a penny is , and ever has been , the normal price of
a daily newspaper , - unless when the <font> Times , <$$font> or some
other daily journal if there be another , chooses on behalf of old
gentlemen and ladies to be absurdly luxurious at threepence .
TROLLOPE-1882-1,192.563

