<BEGIN_turner3-1722-2>

<P_1,11>

<heading>

<font> The <$$font> Phlegmon . TURNER3-1722-2,1,11.4

<$$heading>

This <font> Tumour <$$font> , from its Original , {COM:greek_omitted} ,
<font> denotes a Swelling on any Part of the Body , with great Heat and
Inflammation round about , attended with Fever , exceeding Pain ,
Tention and Throbbing , or Pulsation . <$$font> TURNER3-1722-2,1,11.6

The Fever is owing to an intestine Commotion of the Blood , by means of
some <font> Heterogeneous <$$font> Matter oftentimes admixt , or from an
Obstruction of the Vessels , through some outward <P_1,12> Violence
offer'd to the Liquor moving therein . TURNER3-1722-2,1,12.7

The <font> Pain <$$font> arises from the tearing in sunder the nervous
<font> Fibrillae <$$font> , the <font> Tention <$$font> from the heaving
up the Membranes by the Humours included , and the <font> Pulsation
<$$font> from the obstructed Circulation in the adjoining Artery , which
is now forced by a redoubled <font> Nisus <$$font> , or Vibration to
drive on its Contents . TURNER3-1722-2,1,12.8

The Cause of this <font> Tumour <$$font> is by the Antients , as we have
already taken Notice , deriv'd from <font> Blood <$$font> ; if it be a
true <font> Phlegmon <$$font> , or admix'd with the other Humours , when
it partakes of the <font> Erysipelas , Oedema <$$font> , or <font>
Schirrus . <$$font> TURNER3-1722-2,1,12.9

When it ariseth from <font> Blood <$$font> , there is a <font> Plethora
<$$font> supposed of the Vessels : TURNER3-1722-2,1,12.10

But here , surely we might expect , that Nature should rather ease
herself by a <font> Haemorrhage <$$font> , as she does sometimes , than
by raising of this Swelling ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,12.11

't@ @is true , we are not certain , but that when this Turgency of the
Vessels happens through their Fulness , the Force and Motion of the
Blood being stronger through the Arteries , than by the venous Chanels ;
some Parts may be let go by the capillary , or evanescent Arteries in
those Interstices , especially where the <font> Fibrillae <$$font> are
less Tense , or their <font> Oscillatory <$$font> Motion weakest , to
assist and protrude the Fluid that is tending to an Extravasation .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,12.12

But doubtless , we meet with this <font> Tumour <$$font> , where such
<font> Plethora <$$font> is wanting ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,12.13

and therefore I am induc'd to surmise at least , that when it happens
without Accident of Wound , Contusion , or other external Violence
offer'd to the Part , by which the Circuit of the Blood is therein
impeded , some foreign Matter being mixed with the Mass , raises first
of all this Commotion <P_1,13> or Effervescence , and inkindles a
feverish Heat therein , the same being Nature's Instrument , <bracket>
as the judicious <font> Sydenham <$$font> expresseth himself <$$bracket>
that she calls to her Assistance for expelling her Enemy , which having
by this <font> Ferment <$$font> fitted for such Expulsion , according to
the Nature thereof , and his Correspondency with her several Outlets ,
she casts forth by <font> Sweat <$$font> , by <font> Stool <$$font> , by
<font> Urine <$$font> , by <font> Expectoration <$$font> ; or if suited
to none of these , he is sometimes thrust out into the fleshy Parts , in
Form of an <font> Apostem <$$font> or <font> Abcess <$$font> , the
Disease before us : TURNER3-1722-2,1,13.14

And this by Physicians is called a <font> Crisis . <$$font>
TURNER3-1722-2,1,13.15

Having here more particularly , as perhaps also we may have in other
Places , Occasion to make Use of the Word <font> Nature <$$font> ; I
desire once for all , it may be noted , that <font> I use the Term with
some others , in a Sense Physico-mechanical , taking in a Complex of the
whole animal Fabric , or which includes the Circulation of the Blood and
nervous Fluid , together with the regular Disposition of all the Parts
of the Body , as to their several Mechanisms , which , at first put into
Motion by the supreme Author of their Being , are able of themselves
afterwards , through the Energy he has bestow'd upon them , to answer
the proper Ends intended them by their Structure . <$$font>
TURNER3-1722-2,1,13.16

The Helmontians by their Archaeus , the Platonists by their Anima Mundi
, the Cartesians by their Aether , and the common People by their
Instinct , mean surely much the same , if some of these obscure Phrases
have any true Meaning at all : TURNER3-1722-2,1,13.17

But to proceed . We have already observ'd , that a <font> Fever
<$$font> does accompany this Swelling , and light <font> Rigours
<$$font> or Shiverings also at some times intervene , especially ,
<P_1,14> if terminating by an <font> Abscess <$$font> , nor is the said
Fever <font> Symptomatic <$$font> only , as in the <font> Phlegmon
<$$font> from Punctures , Wounds , Contusions , <font> &c. <$$font> but
oftentimes , as when the Distemper ariseth from within , the primary
Disease : The <font> Tumour <$$font> , as we have already taken Notice
of , being the <font> Crisis <$$font> of such preceding <font> Fever
<$$font> , in the Way of <font> Translation <$$font> ; which is
sufficient Caution , I think , to the young Surgeon , that he by no
Means go about to repel such <font> Tumours <$$font> , or drive the
Matter back into the Blood . TURNER3-1722-2,1,14.18

Every Pustule in the Small_Pox , as Dr. <font> Morton <$$font> well
observes , is a <font> Phlegmon <$$font> of this kind ;
TURNER3-1722-2,1,14.19

and the striking in of the <font> variolous <$$font> Matter , is known
by all to be very fatal , which brings me to the <font> Prognostic .
<$$font> In Reference to which , we are to observe , as we remark'd
before , in those of <font> Tumours <$$font> in general , so here
particularly , the Danger is less or more , according to the Part it
affects . TURNER3-1722-2,1,14.20

And thus upon the <font> Larynx <$$font> or <font> Wind-pipe <$$font> ,
where it is called an <font> Angina <$$font> , more especially , when it
is seated on the internal Muscles , there is always extreme Danger ,
unless the <font> Bronchotomy <$$font> or Apertion betwixt the <font>
Rimulae <$$font> of the Wind-pipe steps in to ransome , as it has done
sometimes , the strangling Patient : TURNER3-1722-2,1,14.21

If on the Breast and Belly , upon or near unto the <font> Joints
<$$font> , there may be Danger of a <font> Fistula <$$font> being left
behind ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,14.22

again there will be more Danger , when arising from an inward Cause ,
than by the Occasion of some outward Hurt or Accident .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,14.23

In a Word , the <font> Phlegmon <$$font> , that can neither be brought
to <font> discuss <$$font> , nor yet to <font> suppurate <$$font> , is
full of Danger , on Account of the <font> Gangrene <$$font> and <font>
Mortification <$$font> that is like to follow . TURNER3-1722-2,1,14.24

<P_1,15>

In Order to the Cure of this <font> Tumour <$$font> , if the Disease
take Rise from an outward Cause , and that the Surgeon is call'd in Time
; he may endeavour to repell the Influx of Humour , with a Defensative
of <font> Diapalma <$$font> , <font> Bolus verus <$$font> , <font> cum
Aceto vini & oleo Rosarum , Ã¢ {COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron}
q. s. <$$font> melted down and mix'd in the Form of a <font> Cerate
<$$font> ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,15.26

or let him embrocate the Part <font> cum Oleo Rosar. & Aceto <$$font> ;
TURNER3-1722-2,1,15.27

also the <font> Oleum & Unguentum Sambucin. <$$font> serve well for
this Purpose ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,15.28

after which , a moderately streight <font> Bandage <$$font> may be
applied , but not so as to create any Uneasiness upon that Account to
the Patient , who must immediately be let Blood to 9 , 10 , 11 , or 12 ,
Ounces , according to the Age , Strength and <font> Temperament <$$font>
, or Constitution . TURNER3-1722-2,1,15.29

If the <font> Tumour <$$font> be on the Arm , a Vein in the Arm opposite
is to be open'd , otherwise in that , where the Vein lyes fairest for
the Lancet : TURNER3-1722-2,1,15.30

Let his Body be kept soluble by Clysters , or lenient Purgation ;
TURNER3-1722-2,1,15.31

and whilst you have any Hope of returning the Humour , or of discussing
it either , let his Diet be as spare as may be ; his Drink the good old
<font> Ptisane <$$font> of Barley Water with a little Licorish and a few
Raisins stoned , or some Liquor analogous thereto ; his Food also the
Barley or Water-grewel , <font> Panada <$$font> , or the like ; avoiding
all Sorts of Flesh , or even the strong Decoction thereof :
TURNER3-1722-2,1,15.32

In Case of great Pain , his Bowels being first emptied by Clyster , or
otherwise ; some gentle Anodyne , <font> ex Aq. Flor. Paralys.
{COM:symbol_for_ounce} ij. cum {COM:symbol_for_ounce} ll. {COM:sic}
{COM:symbol_for_dram} vj. vel {COM:symbol_for_ounce} j. Syr. de
Meconio <$$font> , may be allow'd at the Hour of Rest ; observing
farther , as well in this , as all other Distemperatures of like Kind ,
a due Regard to the other <font> Non-naturals <$$font> , such I mean ,
particularly as <font> Exercise <$$font> and <font> Passions <$$font> ,
Rest and an even Disposition of the <P_1,16> Mind conducing not a little
to your Patient's Recovery . TURNER3-1722-2,1,16.33

When I mention'd this spare Diet , I would not be so understood , as if
this rigorous Abstinence was to be enjoin'd to all without Exception ;
there being many Persons , who , by the Force of a wretched Habit , more
especially , since that detestable and fatal Practice of tipling strong
Waters , came into that Request it is in our Times , have made such
Liquors as familiar to them , as our common Ale and Beer , to the more
temperate ; so that he , who scarce ever sleeps without a Bottle or more
of Claret , or perhaps a Pint of the distill'd Spirits , must , even in
his Illness , be allow'd daily half a Pint of the one , or a Dram or two
of the other ; the Indications for which , the judicious Artist must
take from the <font> Languor <$$font> of the Spirits , or the Approach
of a <font> Deliquium <$$font> , to which these unhappy People are more
prone than others , when debar'd of their beloved Liquors .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,16.34

But if notwithstanding your first Application of repelling Topics to the
<font> Tumour <$$font> , with your other <font> Regimen <$$font> , the
Symptoms of <font> Pain <$$font> , with still greater <font> Tumefaction
<$$font> and <font> Inflammation <$$font> , should continue and increase
; some <font> Anodyne <$$font> Application in the Form of a <font>
Cataplasm <$$font> or <font> Pultis <$$font> to the Part , will be both
necessary and useful to relax the over_extended Fibre , sooth the
inraged Spirits , and qualify the <font> Orgasmus <$$font> therein
stir'd up ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,16.35

and from hence you will quickly discover , whither Discutients or
Suppuratives are to take Place . TURNER3-1722-2,1,16.36

The <font> Cataplasm <$$font> I propose , is that simple one of the
<font> Medulla panis in Lacte cocta cum pauculo Croci & Vitello Ovi
additis <$$font> , or a <font> Decoctum Fol. Rosar. Flor. Sambuc. &
Chamomel. in <P_1,17> Lactis vaccini q. s. & Mica panis inspissatum .
<$$font> TURNER3-1722-2,1,17.37

If after this , for two or three Days repeated , the Tumour should remit
or seem at a stand , you may endeavour to dissipate or discuss it with
the following <font> Fomentation <$$font> and <font> Cataplasm <$$font>
, with which some gentle Restringents may be decocted .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,17.38

For Instance : Rx. <font> Summit. Hyperic. Centaur. Min. a M ij.
flor. Chamom. Melilot. sambuc. Ã¢
{COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} M j. fol. Rosar. rub. M
ss. flor. Balaust. P. j. Coq. in p. ae. Aq. F. & Lact.
vaccin. q. s. pro {COM:symbol_for_pound} iij. Colaturae . <$$font>
TURNER3-1722-2,1,17.39

If you would have it more discutient , you may add the <font> Summit.
Absinth. rom. Rorismar. Fol. Laur. Bac. Juniper. Sem. Cymin.
&c. <$$font> TURNER3-1722-2,1,17.40

If more restringent , those above , in a double Proportion may be
sufficient : TURNER3-1722-2,1,17.41

But these hotter Simples are seldom wanted here , as by their Heat and
Subtilty too much attenuating , and increasing the Inflammation , altho'
excellently well suited to the <font> Oedema <$$font> , or other cold
and pituitous Swellings . TURNER3-1722-2,1,17.42

<font> N.B. <$$font> That the one half of this Colature , or strained
Liquor , may be reserved for the <font> Fotus <$$font> ; as is customary
where the <font> Magma <$$font> , or Remains of the same are not so fit
for pulping ; the other for the <font> Pultis <$$font> , which may be
now thicken'd with <font> Farina Fabarum <$$font> , instead of the
<font> Medulla Panis : <$$font> And in the Decline of the Tumour , if it
can be so brought about , for strengthening the Part , and recovering
the Tone of the Fibres , the Restringents being increased , the
Decoction may be made in the <font> Aq. Fabror. <$$font> or the
Forge-Water , adding towards the End , a quarter Part of good red Wine .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,17.43

Farther , when in Opposition to your Endeavours in repelling or
dissipating the inflowing Humour , the Disease encreaseth , and light
Rigours <P_1,18> or Shiverings <bracket> a frequent Attendant upon the
making of Matter , in these inflammatory Tumours <$$bracket> come on ,
you must hasten Suppuration with the following or the like <font>
Cataplasm . <$$font> TURNER3-1722-2,1,18.44

Rx. <font> Rad. Alth. Lil. Alb. Ã¢
{COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} {COM:symbol_for_ounce} ij.
Fol. Malvae M ij. ficuum ping. incis. {COM:symbol_for_ounce} iij.
Sem. Lini ac foenugr. Contus . Ã¢
{COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} {COM:symbol_for_ounce} i.
Coquit=r= . in lact. vaccin. dum pulpentur , Quae supra pannum
Crassiuscule extens . applicetur CalidÃ¨ modo Pultis , parti inflammato
. illinendo eandem Ol. Lil. priusquam applicetur . <$$font>
TURNER3-1722-2,1,18.45

If a larger Quantity be requir'd , both the Ingredients and the Liquor
may be augmented ; if a lesser , diminish'd ; the Figs and Lilly-Roots
alone , boiled and pulped ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,18.46

or , for want of an Opportunity of procuring either , the <font>
Unguent. Basilicon <$$font> , mix'd up with a Third of that <font> De
Althaea <$$font> , and spread thick upon a piece of Cloth , or fine soft
Leather , makes an excellent suppurative {COM:greek_omitted} .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,18.47

Observe in all <font> Cataplasms <$$font> thicken'd with Bread , but
more especially with Flower , some Oil or Ointment must be mixed , or
the Tumour well embrocated therewith , before they are laid on ;
TURNER3-1722-2,1,18.48

otherwise , in these inflammatory Affects , they will quickly grow stiff
and dry , to the great Disturbance of the Part , and Disquiet of your
Patient . TURNER3-1722-2,1,18.49

Thus in the repercutient <font> Cataplasm <$$font> , you may put in the
<font> Ol. Rosar. <$$font> in the <font> Discutient <$$font> , the
<font> Ol. <$$font> or <font> Unguent. Sambucinum <$$font> ; and in
the <font> Suppurative <$$font> , the <font> Ol. Hyper. Lill.
<$$font> or the <font> Unguent. Dialth. {COM:symbol_for_ounce} i.
<$$font> or more of the Oils , with <font> {COM:symbol_for_ounce} ij.
<$$font> or <font> iij. <$$font> of the Ointment to each Pound of the
Pultis . TURNER3-1722-2,1,18.50

I have been informed , that some Practitioners <bracket> but I think
those not of the best Note <$$bracket> have almost discarded , I suppose
for the Trouble of preparing <P_1,19> them , this good old Form of
Chyrurgic Application , and substituted the <font> Emplast: Ebolo
<$$font> to answer the first ; <font> De Bac. Laur. <$$font> the
second , and the <font> Diach. cum Gum . <$$font> for the last .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,19.51

But I can by no Means approve their Method , neither so fully answering
the Intention , TURNER3-1722-2,1,19.52

nor , I am sure , will they fit so easy upon so exquisitely painful a
Tumour , as is particularly that about which we are now discoursing .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,19.53

The Matter being once made , to be known by the remitting somewhat of
the Pain , the nervous <font> Fibrillae <$$font> having now undergone
their utmost Stretch , and ceasing to be longer halled asunder ; as also
by the said Matter collected , fluctuating more deep or superficial ,
under the Pressure of the Finger : The <font> Tumour <$$font> also
rising in the Middle into an Eminency or Cone , it must be let out or
discharged by an Opening for that Purpose , made either by <font>
Caustic <$$font> or <font> Incision . <$$font> TURNER3-1722-2,1,19.54

The former way is doubtless preferable in large <font> Apostems <$$font>
, not only carrying less of Terror to the poor Patient , but more secure
and advantageous . TURNER3-1722-2,1,19.55

'T@ @is true , the <font> Caustic <$$font> , however mild , will be
attended with Pain , more or less , during its Operation ;
TURNER3-1722-2,1,19.56

but this is after compensated by the Ease of the Dressing , when you
have no occasion to cram in Tents or Dossils , as you must to keep the
Lips of a recent Wound extended , and thereby choak in the Matter ; by
the one , encreasing the Pain ; by the other , the <font> Sinuosity :
<$$font> TURNER3-1722-2,1,19.57

And the <font> Probe Scissars <$$font> , by these Means , are generally
wanted , to finish what the <font> Lancet <$$font> has thus imperfectly
performed . TURNER3-1722-2,1,19.58

I can@ @not say , that these will never be wanted , after the <font>
Escharotic <$$font> ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,19.59

but I may say this , that I have not found them so often required :
TURNER3-1722-2,1,19.60

For if the Texture of the <font> Fibres <$$font> be not very much
injured <P_1,20> by the preceding Putrefaction , this easy way of
Discharge through the perforated <font> Eschar <$$font> , assisted by
suitable Compress and Bandage , does often bring some of the largest
Abscesses of this Kind , to a happy Conclusion , without farther Trouble
; it being very common for the Tumour to subside , the broken <font>
Fibres <$$font> to unite , the Ulcer to be <font> digested , deterged ,
incarned <$$font> , and ready for <font> cicatrizing <$$font> soon after
, if not presently upon the Fall of the said <font> Eschar <$$font> ,
when sometimes a little dry Lint alone , or some other <font> Epulotic
<$$font> , will be found sufficient to compleat the Cure .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,20.61

However , if the <font> Abscess <$$font> be small , or upon the Face ,
where Care is to be had for Prevention of a <font> Scar <$$font> , after
the healing up , I am not so fond of the <font> Caustic <$$font> , as
never to give way to the Point of a <font> Lancet <$$font> ; with which
, when the <font> Apostem <$$font> is open'd , tho' a Vent no bigger
than that for <font> Phlebotomy <$$font> , or letting Blood , may
suffice to let out the Matter : Yet , if the <font> Tumour <$$font> be
any thing considerable , I should prefer one that is much larger ; when
instead of the Tent stopping up the Matter , a light Dossil may be laid
down between the Lips of the Wound , armed with a <font> Digestive
<$$font> , if there be little or no Flux , or some <font> Restringent
<$$font> , as there may be found Occasion . TURNER3-1722-2,1,20.62

If the Cavity be deep , or in a Place where the Dossil slipping in , is
not easily recovered , you may tie a bit of Thread or Silk about the
same , for its more ready Extraction . TURNER3-1722-2,1,20.63

The <font> Digestive <$$font> for this Use , may be that common one of
<font> Terebinth. Venet. cum Ovi vitello <$$font> , to which a little
<font> Unguent. Basil. <$$font> is sometimes added , or this latter
mix'd with the <font> Linimentum Arcaei <$$font> , which of it self is a
most excellent Medicine , and generally made use of for Wounds , more
particularly of the Head and Face . TURNER3-1722-2,1,20.64

<P_1,21>

This way of Dressing by the Dossil , is not only easier to the Patient ,
but the Wound being more open , commodious for the draining away of
Matter , between the Times of Dressing , the same Compress and Bandage
here assisting , for uniting the <font> Sinuosity <$$font> , as if
open'd by the <font> Caustic <$$font> ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,21.66

and if by these you can@ @not agglutinate , you are to dilate as in
other <font> sinuous Ulcers <$$font> shall be directed .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,21.67

Having mentioned <font> Compression <$$font> and <font> Bandage <$$font>
, give me leave to add a Word or two in Commendation of these two noble
Assistants to Chyrurgic Practice ; which , if rightly understood , and
as rightly adapted , would prevent many a bitter Groan of the Patient ,
as well as Heart-ach of the conscientious Practitioner of this noble Art
. TURNER3-1722-2,1,21.68

I know they ca@ @n't be always , TURNER3-1722-2,1,21.69

but doubtless oftentimes both Knife and Scissars might be spared , were
these well cultivated , or duly and timely practised ; there being few
<font> Sinus's <$$font> from recent <font> Apostems <$$font> , or of the
<font> acute <$$font> Kind , where the Bone is cover'd , which might not
by Means hereof be well united , and consolidate if situate also for the
same . TURNER3-1722-2,1,21.70

Under the Name <font> Bandage <$$font> , I would have comprehended not
only the common <font> Roller <$$font> , but the laced <font> Sock ,
Stocking , Knee-piece <$$font> and <font> Trowse <$$font> , together
with the <font> Glove , Elbow <$$font> and <font> Arm-piece <$$font> ;
which by their equal Lacing , when well fitted to the several Members ,
oftentimes exceed the other , altho' managed by the most dextrous Hand .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,21.71

And by <font> Compress <$$font> , I mean more than a common <font>
Bolster <$$font> of Cloth rudely laid upon the grieved Part , and as
carelesly bound on . TURNER3-1722-2,1,21.72

The <font> Plaister Compress <$$font> is what I hint at , which both
keeps its Situation , and makes a truer Compression than the other
Bolster . TURNER3-1722-2,1,21.73

These may be very suitably prepared of your common <font> Defensative
<$$font> , 3 or 4 Folds of them stuck together , <P_1,22> and shaped ,
as near as may be , to the Compass or Dimension of the Cavity to be
compress'd ; observing heedfully to bring the Edge thereof even with the
Lips of the disjointed Part , over which a Bolster of soft Cloth , in
the ordering whereof , there is no such great Need of the former
Exactness or Circumspection . TURNER3-1722-2,1,22.74

As to the Management of your <font> Roller <$$font> , you are to take
Care , that the Circumvolution be made that way , whether to the Right
or Left , as may bear first upon the Extremity of the <font> Sinus
<$$font> , before it reach the Edge of the Wound or Ulcer ; by which you
will press out any contained Matter , and unite at the same time :
Whereas otherwise you may chance to agglutinate the outward Orifice ,
and shut in the same to the Hazard of a fresh <font> Abscess . <$$font>
TURNER3-1722-2,1,22.75

But here I must confess , what we call <font> Autopsy <$$font> , or
ocular Demonstration , exceeds the most graphical Description ; and the
most instructive Rules for <font> Bandage <$$font> fall short of their
being shewn by some compleat Proficient therein : The Length and Breadth
whereof , are to be taken from the Size of the Limb , or Parts they are
to encompass , with the Number of Circumvolutions round the same , that
are required : TURNER3-1722-2,1,22.76

And thus , for the Finger , about a Finger's Breadth ; for the Wrist , 2
Inches ; for the Leg , 3 or 4 Fingers ; and for the Thigh , a Hand's
Breadth , more or less , may be necessary . The same likewise for the
Trunk of the Body . TURNER3-1722-2,1,22.77

But to return to the <font> Apostem <$$font> , whence we have digress'd
, and to acquaint the young Practitioner what <font> Caustics <$$font>
are most convenient for his Purpose . He is to understand , that there
are three differing Forms or Orders thereof . TURNER3-1722-2,1,22.78

The strongest , I think , is reckon'd the <font> Lapis_Infernalis
<$$font> , or the first running of the Soap-makers Lees , called <font>
Lixivium <P_1,23> Capitale <$$font> , TURNER3-1722-2,1,23.79

this being boil'd up in a Brass or Copper Ladle to a Confidence , is ,
with a hot Knife , cut into Pieces of several Sizes , and kept close
stop'd from the Air , till the Time of Use . TURNER3-1722-2,1,23.80

A Piece of this , of the compass of a Silver Three-pence , will make an
<font> Eschar <$$font> near as large as a Six-pence ,
TURNER3-1722-2,1,23.81

and usually performs its Work in an Hour's Time .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,23.82

A milder than this , is made out of this <font> Lixivium <$$font> , with
the Powder of <font> Calx_viva <$$font> ; and a still gentler , called
from its Softness , I suppose , the <font> Velvet Caustic <$$font> , by
the Admixture of a little Soap with the said <font> Calx <$$font> , made
up into a Sort of Paste , which is used to Infants and tender Bodies ,
and suffered to lie on for Twenty-four Hours . TURNER3-1722-2,1,23.83

Observing , that in all these <font> Caustics <$$font> , which have an
<font> alkaline <$$font> or <font> lixivial <$$font> Salt for their
Foundation , you must keep them in a dry Place , as before observed ,
secured from the Air , in which they would run <font> per Deliquium
<$$font> , by a sound Cork and Bladder tied over the first , and a
Bladder also over the Gallypot containing the latter .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,23.84

I forbear mentioning some other <font> Escharotics <$$font> , prepared
from the several <font> Arsenics <$$font> or corrosive <font> Sublimates
<$$font> , which I look upon as dangerous Medicaments , having
frequently seen very unhappy Symptoms attending their Application , such
as <font> Spasms <$$font> or <font> Convulsions <$$font> , from their
malign Nature hereby communicated to the <font> nervous System <$$font>
; with horrid Pain , and symptomatic Fever ; also <font> Cardialgia
<$$font> and incessant Vomiting , with cold Sweats , and <font> Syncope
<$$font> or Fainting-away . TURNER3-1722-2,1,23.85

The way of applying <font> Caustics <$$font> is well enough known to be
by snipping a Hole in a piece of Plaister , of the Dimension of the
<font> Escharotic <$$font> intended , TURNER3-1722-2,1,23.86

and having stuck some narrow Bits of the same all round the said Hole ,
the better to let in and contain your <font> Caustic <$$font> , you are
to lay the Plaister upon <P_1,24> the <font> Tumour <$$font> , so as to
cover the same , with the Perforation on the most prominent Part , where
the Fluctuation of the Matter is the most perceptible , rather inclining
to the depending than otherwise , for the readier Discharge thereof and
, if possible , to prevent an after Dilatation . TURNER3-1722-2,1,24.87

Into this Hole or Cavity , the Bit of <font> Caustic <$$font> is placed
, with a Pledgit or dry Lint immediately thereon , and a Plaister upon
that ; also a cross Strap of the same adhesive Emplaster , with a
moderate Bandage to retain all on ; always remembring to proportion the
Size of your <font> Escharotic <$$font> to that of your intended <font>
Eschar <$$font> , lest you find yourself after deceived ;
TURNER3-1722-2,1,24.88

for they will be apt to spread upon the Solution of their Salts , in
spight of all your Precaution , and to make a Crust much larger than
their own Compass , when first laid on . TURNER3-1722-2,1,24.89

This Caution , how unnecessary soever it may seem , I thought the less
so , having frequently found an Ulcer the Effect of one of these <font>
Caustics <$$font> , as big as a Half-crown , and that too upon the Face
, Neck and Breasts of Gentlewomen , where the Scar , as much as possible
, ought to be avoided , which needed not to have exceeded the Compass of
a Silver Groat . TURNER3-1722-2,1,24.90

The <font> Eschar <$$font> being thus made , for which , as we remark'd
before , you are to allow Time , according to the Strength thereof ; you
are to penetrate or cut through the same , at this Time insensible to
the Lancet , and discharge what Matter flows forth freely , without
contusing or over-much pressing the Parts adjacent , to get out all at
once : TURNER3-1722-2,1,24.91

For that , if the <font> Abscess <$$font> be very large , might hazard
your Patient's fainting , with Suffocation of the native Heat of the
Part . TURNER3-1722-2,1,24.92

After letting forth the Matter , apply a Pledgit of Basilicon dip'd in
some of the same Ointment melted down in a Spoon over the Crust , with a
common Plaister of De Minio , or Diapalma , and a Bandage to retain your
Dressings , which is to be no other , than such for the first Days ,
till the Patient grows easy ; when the Compress and Deligation before-@
@mention'd , will be absolutely requisite , by which artfully manag'd ,
and the Continuance of the same digestive , till the Eschar separates ,
you may perhaps unite the Sinuosity , compleating your Patient's earnest
Desire , and finding nothing more wanting upon the Fall of the Crust ,
than some cicatrising Medicament , to finish the Work ; during the
Course of which , more especially in cold Weather , and antient People ,
a warm Stuph or two wrung hot , out of the discutient Fomentation , in
the Beginning taken Notice of , may be necessary not only to comfort the
Parts , and help to dissipate the Reliques of the Humour , but to
strengthen the relaxed Fibres , and recover their proper Tone .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,24.93

But if , notwithstanding your Endeavours to unite or agglutinate , the
Matter has so insinuated it self into the Parts about , or form'd such
Cavities , as will not this Way admit of healing , before you enterprise
the Dilatation ; especially of such as are large , deep , or intricate
in their Turnings and Windings ; you are to deliberate , whether or no ,
by choaking in the Matter with a Tent , TURNER3-1722-2,1,24.94

and here I must confess , if at any time , there is an Use of them you
may not force the same upon raising some new Abscess in a Place more
suitable for Discharge , or draining off the whole ; when by a second
Caustic , you may obtain , what you could not by the first : A Case very
common in the milky Abscesses of Women's Breasts , where we meet with
several Apostemations , one after another , that foil and baffle all our
Skill , till the Matter pent in , either by these Means , or naturally
subsiding to some more depending Part , is easily discharged thence ;
and what before had been the fruitless Work of several Weeks or Months ,
is now accomplish'd in as many Days . TURNER3-1722-2,1,24.95

In a Word , if it be found absolutely necessary to cut open the <font>
Sinuosity <$$font> , you are to proceed , as in <font> sinuous <$$font>
and <font> fistulous Ulcers <$$font> shall be hereafter directed .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,24.96

In the <font> Phlegmon <$$font> arising from an internal Cause , or
which is the <font> Crisis <$$font> of a Fever , the same Method is to
be observed ; unless that , omitting all restringent or repelling <font>
Topics <$$font> , you are from the first , to endeavour to discuss , or
failing therein , to hasten <font> Suppuration <$$font> , as we have
above directed . TURNER3-1722-2,1,24.97

An Instance or two of this last kind , we shall give as follows .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,24.98

A young Gentleman , at that Time about fourteen Years of Age , the Son
of a wealthy Merchant , then living in the <font> Spittle-Yard <$$font>
, since named <font> Bolingbrook <$$font> Square , having for some Days
been ill of a Fever , irregularly intermitting ; after the fourth <font>
Paroxysm <$$font> , complain'd of a Swelling , with a small Inflammation
, about a Hand's Breadth above the Joint of the Knee , which growing
harder , more painful , and inflam'd , I perceiv'd a true <font>
Phlegmon <$$font> , so far advanced , as to indicate no other than
<font> maturative <$$font> Applications ; and indeed if it had been
capable , by no means safe to have been treated otherwise ; the febrile
Matter being here separated by the Strength of Nature , and thrown out
of the Blood as inimical thereunto ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,24.99

for forwarding therefore the <font> Suppuration <$$font> , I directed
the following <font> Cataplasm . <$$font> TURNER3-1722-2,1,24.100

Rx. <font> Rad. Lill. alb. prius lotorum , & ab omni Sorditie
Mundat. {COM:symbol_for_pound} ss. Ficuum pinguium incis.
{COM:symbol_for_ounce} iv. Coq=tr= . in Aq. F. & Lact. vac. Ã¢
{COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} p. ae. q. s. donec in
pulpam reducantur , cui addendo Ol. Lil. {COM:symbol_for_ounce} ij.
f. instar Pultis , cujus pars tertia vel circiter , applicetur <P_1,27>
<font> parti Femoris tumefacto , renovando post 24 Horas . <$$font>
TURNER3-1722-2,1,27.101

The Day following the second Application , I perceiv'd the Matter
fluctuating , the <font> Tumour <$$font> prominent in the Middle , and
fit for the Discharge ; wherefore I applied a Piece of the milder
Caustic , <font> ex Calce cum Lixivio supradicto <$$font> , of the
Length of one Inch , and the Breadth of a quarter , over Night ;
TURNER3-1722-2,1,27.102

the next Morning , finding a proportionate <font> Eschar <$$font> , I
enter'd the same with a full-pointed Lancet , discharging near a Pint of
<font> Pus <$$font> well concocted ; upon which the Symptoms remitting ,
the young Gentleman grew easy . TURNER3-1722-2,1,27.103

The <font> Eschar <$$font> was drest up with a Pledgit of <font>
Basilicon <$$font> , dipt in some of the same , made warm in a Spoon ; a
Bolster Compress being placed on each Side , with a double-headed Roller
, for the more commodious pressing forth the <font> Matter <$$font> ;
which daily lessening by these means , the <font> Sinuosity <$$font>
above united , but the Crust separating the Flesh underneath , appear'd
spongy ; upon which sprinkling on the <font> Precipit. rubr. <$$font>
I changed the <font> Basilic. <$$font> for the <font> Linim. Arcoei
<$$font> , and continued this way of dressing , sometimes strewing on
the said <font> Precipit. <$$font> by it self , at others mixing it
with the Digestive ; till the Ulcer being fill'd up with a seeming sound
Flesh , and ready to <font> cicatrise <$$font> ; I drest it up with dry
Lint , concluding my Work accomplish'd . TURNER3-1722-2,1,27.104

But finding the Discharge one Morning increased , at least much greater
than could be reasonably expected from the superficial Sore , passing my
Probe through a small <font> papillary Excrescence <$$font> , or <font>
spongy Caruncle <$$font> , I found at that End next the <font> Patella
<$$font> , a <font> Sinus <$$font> passing deep under the <font> Rectus
<$$font> , TURNER3-1722-2,1,27.105

and was apprehensive of its penetrating into the Joint ; upon which
fitting a Plaister Compress , and endeavouring <P_1,28> by Bandage to
unite the said Cavity , I found the Trial fruitless ; the Matter still
discharging in great Quantity : So that acquainting his Parents with the
Necessity of enlarging the Wound , or to leave a Fistula , I first of
all introduced a Bit of Gentian-Root {COM:font_change_around_"Gentian"}
, to make more Way , and thin the said Cavity , for the easier dilating
of the same , either upon the <font> Directour <$$font> , or by the
<font> Probe Scissars <$$font> , as should be found most expedient .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,28.106

After a Day or two thus spent , we call'd in Mr. <font> Bernard
<$$font> , who examining the Case , and preferring a strong shank'd Pair
of Probe Scissars I had by me ; the <font> Sinus <$$font> , which was
near an Inch thick , and more than three Inches in Length , was
immediately cut open , the Wound being presently fill'd up with dry
Dossils and a Pad of Tow dipt in <font> Oxycrate <$$font> sprinkled over
with <font> Farina Tritici <$$font> , in regard of a small <font>
Haemorrhage <$$font> attending . TURNER3-1722-2,1,28.107

The next Day , taking out the Dressings , and having applied two or
three hot Stuphs express'd from a Decoction of the warm Plants <paren>
for it was Winter-time <$$paren> and the camphorated Spirit , we fill'd
up the Incisions with Dossils dip'd in the melted Liniment , also a
Pledgit of the same externally , TURNER3-1722-2,1,28.108

and roll'd him up for that Time : TURNER3-1722-2,1,28.109

But the Day after , examining the Wound more narrowly , and passing my
Instrument directly downwards , I felt the Bone of the <font> Femur
<$$font> denudated of its Cover the <font> Periosteum <$$font> ; upon
which , endeavouring to make more Way , I distended the Cavity with
Dossils of dry Lint made up hard for that Intention ,
TURNER3-1722-2,1,28.110

and clapt down close with the <font> Digestive <$$font> as before on the
outside , and suitable <font> Bandage . <$$font>
TURNER3-1722-2,1,28.111

At our Meeting , the Day after , my Assistant being by , taking out the
Dressings , he thrust down his Finger to the bottom of the Wound ,
TURNER3-1722-2,1,28.112

and plainly perceiv'd a large Piece of the outward , or <P_1,29>
cortical Part of the <font> Os Femoris <$$font> , in the manner of a
thin <font> Lamina <$$font> , already desquam'd or separated from the
sound {TEXT:sound.} Part , lying entangled only by some fleshy Fibres ,
or rather a <font> fungous Flesh . <$$font> TURNER3-1722-2,1,29.113

At this Dressing , we strow'd thereon a little of the <font>
Praecipitate <$$font> , TURNER3-1722-2,1,29.114

and as before , fill'd up the Cavity with Dossils ; when the second Day
after , meeting again by Appointment , and with my <font> Forceps
<$$font> extracting the lowermost of the said Dossils , the <font>
Exfoliation <$$font> came into Sight ; upon which placing the End of my
<font> Spathula <$$font> underneath , without any Force used , or Flux
ensuing , I lifted out a Piece of Bone very ragged all round the Edges ,
of an Inch and half from one Extremity to the other , and about half an
one over ; after which we laid in our Dossils , made more soft and easy
to the Wound , dip'd likewise in the dissolv'd <font> Liniment <$$font>
aforesaid , TURNER3-1722-2,1,29.115

and therewith sometimes mixing the <font> Praecipitate <$$font> ,
quickly after , the Obstacle to healing being now remov'd , the same was
<font> incarn'd <$$font> and <font> cicatrised <$$font> with dry Lint
only , without any farther Trouble . TURNER3-1722-2,1,29.116

And this Case I think the more remarkable , in that a Bone was found so
suddenly separated in a <font> tumour <$$font> of the <font> acute
<$$font> Kind , or made , as we say , by <font> Fluxion <$$font> , and
ensuing a febrile <font> Crisis <$$font> , without any external Violence
or Accident befalling the Part , but arising suddenly with <font> Pain ,
Inflammation <$$font> and <font> Pulsation <$$font> , after the manner
of a common <font> Phlegmon . <$$font> TURNER3-1722-2,1,29.117

It was the Opinion of his Physicians , that the Matter , tho' lodg'd so
short a Time upon the Place , had yet however , by its corrosive Quality
, eaten off the <font> Periosteum <$$font> ; to which I could not assent
, believing rather , that the Malady , as in some <font> strumous
<$$font> Affects , began at the Bottom ; and raised the <font> Tumour ,
Pain <$$font> , and <font> Inflammation <$$font> outwardly , and that
those irregular Fits , as they were termed of an <font> Intermittent
<$$font> , were mere <font> Rigours <$$font> usually <P_1,30> attending
these Affects of the <font> membranous <$$font> and <font> nervous
<$$font> Parts . TURNER3-1722-2,1,30.118

However , as I observed but now , it must be look'd upon somewhat
singular , that an <font> Exfoliation <$$font> from so hard a Bone ,
without any previous Appearance , should be so suddenly raised , as the
Space of a Fortnight , or thereabouts . TURNER3-1722-2,1,30.119

A Woman , middle-aged , of a <font> Scorbutic <$$font> Habit , after a
Feverish Indisposition of some Days , was let Blood in her Arm ;
TURNER3-1722-2,1,30.120

but whether by means of the Ligature intercepting the Circuit of the
Blood <font> pro tempore <$$font> , the Fluxion might be here as it were
invited <bracket> for it was apparent , that no Injury had been done
either to the <font> Tendon <$$font> or <font> Artery <$$font>
<$$bracket> or that a <font> Crisis <$$font> being at Hand , <font>
Nature <$$font> had otherwise thrown out the morbid Matter from the
Blood into the same Part ; it so happen'd , to the great Misfortune of
the Surgeon , who had been employ'd , the same Night an Inflammation
seised the Arm , extending it self from a little above the Joint of the
<font> Cubit <$$font> , to within a small Space of that of the <font>
Carpus <$$font> or Wrist . TURNER3-1722-2,1,30.121

The next Day , I was consulted , when in Justice to the Surgeon , I
declar'd , he was no other ways instrumental to the Accident , than in
the unlucky timing the State and Condition of the preceding Fever ,
bleeding her , before her Body had been prepar'd by some lenient
Purgation , or being hot and costive , the throwing up an emollient
Clyster , that might have deriv'd at least some Portion of the peccant
Matter by the inferior Passages . TURNER3-1722-2,1,30.122

For the <font> Despumation <$$font> being begun , and the noxious Humour
, like a Scum , ready to be thrown forth out of the Bosom of the Blood ;
the tying of a Ligature , as I observ'd but now , might probably make
way for its falling rather upon this , than any other Part of the Body ;
but which was out of any Man's Power , either to have foreseen <P_1,31>
or prevented ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,31.123

and indeed had not the Storm fallen here , it had in all Likelyhood
show'd it self elsewhere , or perhaps prov'd more dangerous to the Life
of the Patient , either by Continuance of the feverish Effervescence ,
or Translation of the Matter to some more noble Part .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,31.124

But considering the Nature and Cause of this Inflammation , I could by
no means advise a Repercutient , or repelling <font> Topic <$$font> ;
TURNER3-1722-2,1,31.125

and therefore , when I had order'd , that the Orifice should be dress'd
up with a Pledgit , arm'd with a Digestive ; I directed , that the Parts
affected should be gently embrocated , <font> cum unguento Sambuc. ac
pauculo Camph. in Spir. vini solut. <$$font> and afterwards an <font>
anodyne Cataplasm <$$font> laid on <font> ex decoct. Flor. Sambuci &
Chamomeli in Lacte , cum mica Panis in consistentiam redact. <$$font>
TURNER3-1722-2,1,31.126

The next Day , the Tention seem'd a little to relax ,
TURNER3-1722-2,1,31.127

and the Inflammation was somewhat less , the Orifice soft and pliable ,
and tending to close up ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,31.128

that Evening I prescrib'd a Clyster , advising a spare Diet , forbidding
Flesh , and all Liquors , except the small diluting ones allow'd in
<font> acute <$$font> Fevers , with her Grewels and Panada ; which was a
Penance , I perceived , very difficult to her , who had used herself to
more relishing Foods , as well as Liquors ; and , I was satisfied ,
transgres'd herein , by her own Servants : Upon which Account , for
abating the <font> Plenitude <$$font> , and making farther Derivation of
the Humours , I would have risqu'd a second <font> Vena-section <$$font>
in the opposite Arm , and readily offer'd my Service therein for her
greater Encouragement ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,31.129

but she would by no means comply , having let in an unalterable Belief ,
that her first Bleeding had been the Occasion of this Misfortune ; so
that at this second Opening , we only renew'd the Applications as before
, with farther <P_1,32> Orders of an <font> anodyne <$$font> Draught in
the Evening , after the <font> Clyster <$$font> had done working .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,32.130

Yet the next Day , notwithstanding all our Endeavours , a true <font>
Phlegmon <$$font> appear'd : TURNER3-1722-2,1,32.131

The Inflammation and larger Tumefaction again shew'd it self with great
Pain and Throbbing also , threatening an <font> Abscess . <$$font>
TURNER3-1722-2,1,32.132

However , once more I order'd the Arm to be <font> embrocated <$$font> ,
and the <font> Cataplasm <$$font> also to be laid on as at first .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,32.133

The Orifice was closed up , and that Part of the Bend of the <font>
Cubit <$$font> easy , less partaking of the Inflammation than those
below . TURNER3-1722-2,1,32.134

The fourth Day , perceiving our Labour vain towards a Resolution or
Discussing of the Humour , the Tumour still encreasing , I ordered a
<font> Cataplasm <$$font> of the <font> Rad. Lil. alb. fici ping.
Sem. Lini ac foenugr. in Lacte Cocta , & Pistilli ope ad instar Pulpae
Coacta : <$$font> TURNER3-1722-2,1,32.135

When the next , we found the same more manifestly enlarged , and rising
as it were <font> conical <$$font> , about four Fingers Breadth below
the Flexure of the Cubit , her Pain greatly encreased , and she restless
and impatient ; so that I had much Difficulty to reconcile her to admit
the young Man , who had bled her , to give Attendance ; nor would she
upon any other Terms , than my Promise of standing by , at the Times of
Dressing . TURNER3-1722-2,1,32.136

The Tumour , by the Day following , being now throughly <font>
suppurated <$$font> , and the Matter fluctuating , a piece of the <font>
Velvet Caustic <$$font> was laid on , and continued all Night : When
early the Day following , a Lancet was thrust thro' the <font> Eschar
<$$font> , and about half a Pint of a well concocted Matter let out ,
upon which she grew easy ; the Fever , Thirst , Inquietude , and other
Symptoms now going off . TURNER3-1722-2,1,32.137

The next Day after the Discharge ; a Fomentation was made use of to
comfort the Parts , strengthen <P_1,33> the relaxed Fibres , and breath
forth the Humours , <font> ex Decoct. Summit. Centaur. Flor.
Chamomel. Melilot. Sambuc. &c. cum tantillo Spir. Vini Camph.
<$$font> and as the same was capable of bearing <font> Compress <$$font>
and <font> Bandage <$$font> , to promote Agglutination of the Sinuosity
: Which after about a Week's Time , the Discharge daily lessening , and
the <font> Eschar <$$font> thrown off , was accomplish'd in the upper
Part ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,33.138

but the <font> Sinus <$$font> depending , and running down over the
<font> Radiaeus internus <$$font> , or <font> Flexor Carpi <$$font> ,
would not unite , TURNER3-1722-2,1,33.139

but laid us under a Necessity <bracket> tho' I did all I could that I
might obviate farther Clamour , to prevent it <$$bracket> of dilating ,
TURNER3-1722-2,1,33.140

and which I disccover'd , running above three Inches in Length .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,33.141

When I had , in the mildest Way possible , apprised her of the absolute
Necessity of such Proceeding , she at last complied ,
TURNER3-1722-2,1,33.142

and the <font> Apparatus <$$font> being got ready , with proper
Attendants ; after I had passed in a <font> Directour <$$font> , and
with the same bearing tight up against the Skin , as much as possibly
towards the outside of the Arm , for avoiding the tendinous Parts and
Blood-vessels , the Surgeon with his Knife cut along the <font> Sulcus
<$$font> , till we had opened the whole Length of the Cavity ,
TURNER3-1722-2,1,33.143

when dressing up with dry Dossils , rolled in the Powder of fine Bole ,
<bracket> by Reason of the <font> Haemorrhage <$$font> <$$bracket> and a
large Pledgit of Tow , wrung out of <font> Posca <$$font> , and
sprinkled thick with <font> Farina Fabar . <$$font> we rolled up the
Arm , securing it in the Napkin upon a Semiflexure .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,33.144

The Work being now fairly in View , the second Day after , loosening the
former Application , the recent Wound was dress'd up daily with softer
Dossils dip'd in the warm <font> Liniment <$$font> of <font> Arcoeus :
<$$font> TURNER3-1722-2,1,33.145

In some Parts , where the <font> Fascialis <$$font> lying long expos'd ,
was grown putrid and sloughy , strowing on a small Quantity of the
<font> Precipit. rub. <$$font> till digesting <P_1,34> off , and the
Ulcer mundified , the same Medicine , together with my <font> Cerate
<$$font> of <font> Lapis Calaminaris <$$font> and dry Lint , quickly
after accomplish'd the Work , as well of <font> Incarnation <$$font> ,
as <font> Cicatrisation <$$font> ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,34.146

and the Surgeon , who , I am well satisfied , was blameless , as to any
Mal-management of the Lancet in the letting of her Blood , was not only
obliged to stand the Censure of his Neighbourhood ; but to prevent the
farther Clamouring of his Patient , <bracket> much contrary to my
Persuasion <$$bracket> to bestow near six Weeks Attendance for the poor
Pittance of half a Crown he had at first receiv'd , for the unfortunate
Operation . TURNER3-1722-2,1,34.147

I well remember an Accident of Kin to the above-mention'd , befell my
self many Years ago ; when by the Advice of a Physician , I bled a
gross-habited Patient , then labouring with an <font> Erysipelas
<$$font> , on the Face and Neck , from whence the bilious Effervescence
was presently translated to the bleeding Arm ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,34.148

and it was not without great Difficulty and Pains , that I kept off a
<font> Gangrene <$$font> , and secur'd the Limb from a <font>
Mortification <$$font> ; which had such Accident ensued , or the Patient
miscarried at such a Juncture , I need not tell you , Gentlemen , who
have perhaps some of you had Experience thereof , on whom the Ignorant
would have cast the Censure . TURNER3-1722-2,1,34.149

And thus far in the Way of Hint , or Animadversion upon the ill timing
rather than inartificial Section of a Vein , in letting Blood , to shew
those who are less acquainted therewith , upon how slippery a Foundation
, at some Times , stands the Reputation of every Professor of this Art .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,34.150

The last and indeed the worst Way of Termination of this <font> Tumour
<$$font> , as we have already observed , is that by a <font> Gangrene
<$$font> and <font> Mortification . <$$font> TURNER3-1722-2,1,34.151

This being then the most dangerous of all others , and by which the poor
Patient oftentimes <P_1,35> compounds for his Life , with the Loss of a
Limb , and very frequently lays down Life it self , it will most highly
behoove {TEXT:behove} the Artist , to use his utmost Endeavour to
obviate the same . TURNER3-1722-2,1,35.152

When therefore the Matter of this <font> Tumour <$$font> can neither be
repell'd , where safely attempted , <font> discuss'd <$$font> , or
brought to <font> Suppuration <$$font> , but that the Swelling still
increaseth ; it must happen at length that not only the smaller <font>
Tubuli <$$font> , but the larger Vessels , will be obstructed by the
great Compression , the Juices therein stagnating ;
TURNER3-1722-2,1,35.153

the native Heat , by this interrupted Circulation , will quickly after
be overcome , and a putrid one succeed in its Place . The Signs of
which are first of all a Change of the bright Redness or Inflammation ,
for one of a more duskish or livid Complexion , which is owing to the
Stagnation aforesaid : TURNER3-1722-2,1,35.154

The <font> Tumour <$$font> begins to subside on a sudden , the <font>
Tention <$$font> going off , TURNER3-1722-2,1,35.155

and the musculous Flesh grows flabby ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,35.156

the Spirits having undergone their utmost Expansion , and being now put
, as it were , to Flight , a Coincidence of the Parts , which were
before kept elevated by such Expansion , must ensue of Course .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,35.157

A <font> Stupour <$$font> or Numbness comes on from those Spirits having
abandon'd their wonted Places of Residence , an Inactivity of the Limb ,
or Inability for Motion , from the same Cause : TURNER3-1722-2,1,35.158

<font> Vesications <$$font> arise from the putrefactive Ferment now
beginning , TURNER3-1722-2,1,35.159

and the stagnant Blood deprived of its natural Heat , and balsamic
Quality , runs out into an <font> ichorous Cruor <$$font> , which ousing
forth the <font> Capillaries <$$font> under the <font> Cuticula <$$font>
, raises the same up into small Bladders , after the manner , as in some
highly <font> malignant <$$font> Fevers , also in some kinds of the
Small-Pox , where the <font> Compages <$$font> of the Blood is broken ,
we find the like Bladders , implete with such a corrosive <font> Serum
<$$font> , and a <font> Gangrene <$$font> of the Parts underneath .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,35.160

Nor <P_1,36> is it strange , when the vital Union is thus dissolv'd ,
that Part , which without <font> actual <$$font> or <font> potential
<$$font> Fire , could scarce be separated before , should now give Way ,
and very easily be lifted up by the putrid <font> Ichor <$$font>
aforesaid . TURNER3-1722-2,1,36.161

It is from this parting of the <font> Cuticula <$$font> from its
subjacent <font> Cutis <$$font> , in Infants called <font> still-born
<$$font> , a near Judgment is to be made , how long the <font> Foetus
<$$font> has expir'd its last ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,36.162

but I forget my Subject . TURNER3-1722-2,1,36.163

So soon as ever these Symptoms begin to appear , let the Part be <font>
scarified <$$font> more superficially or profoundly , according to the
Sense thereof ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,36.164

let a strong <font> Lixivium <$$font> of Wood-Ashes , boil'd up with
some of the hottest of those Plants before-@ @mention'd , with others ,
as the <font> Summit. Absynth. Abrotan. Pulegii Rorismarini , fol.
Laur. hor. Chamomel. Lavendul. <$$font> and the like be used as a
<font> Fomentation : <$$font> Double Flanels being strongly express'd
out of the scalding or boiling Liquor , into which one half of some good
strong Wine , a fourth of Brandy , or an eighth of its rectified Spirit
with <font> Campher <$$font> <bracket> {COM:symbol_for_ounce} <font> j.
<$$font> to {COM:symbol_for_pound} <font> ij. <$$font> <$$bracket> has
been poured , upon taking it off the Fire , or a little before , so the
Liquor be boiling hot altogether , it is sufficient .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,36.165

After half an Hour or more thus spent , let your Scarifications , which
have been made so deep , as to fetch Blood , and in making which , you
are to be careful , that you observe the Course of the <font> Fibres
<$$font> , avoiding the large <font> Blood-vessels <$$font> especially
the <font> Arteries <$$font> , as also the <font> Tendons <$$font> ; let
these , I say , be fill'd up with small Dossils of Lint press'd lightly
out of your <font> Ol. Terebinth. <$$font> made hot , with about a
third Part of the <font> Tinct. Myrr. & Aloes <$$font> , over which a
Compress or Pad of Tow , press'd out of your camphorated Spirit , or as
is now customary among us , the <font> Theriaca Lond. <$$font> spread
thick upon a Cloth , and applied in the Manner of a <P_1,37> <font>
Cataplasm . <$$font> TURNER3-1722-2,1,37.166

Some take the Residue of the Decoction , TURNER3-1722-2,1,37.167

and pulping the same , mix it with the <font> Theriaca . <$$font>
TURNER3-1722-2,1,37.168

These Dressings are to be renewed once at least if not twice a-day , as
Occasion requires , till there appear Signs of <font> Digestion <$$font>
, or that <font> Matter <$$font> shew it self either in the scarified
Places , or round the Edges of the <font> gangren'd <$$font> Part ,
where the same is stop'd and begins to separate ; at which time your
Dressings must be milder , as the <font> Linim. Arcaei <$$font> , run
down with a little of the said <font> Ol. Tereb. <$$font> or the
<font> Bals. Tereb. <$$font> with more or less of its Oil , as the
Sense of the grieved Part shall require ; taking Heed always , that the
Strength of your Medicaments , at such Times , are thereunto
proportion'd : TURNER3-1722-2,1,37.169

For , as the Disease will get Ground under the less warm and spirituous
, so the over-hot and sharp , by exciting unnecessary Pain , will stir
up some new and troublesome Symptom . TURNER3-1722-2,1,37.170

'T@ @is a Sign , the Strength of them is duly qualified , when your
<font> Digestion <$$font> appears laudable , and the Patient feels only
a kind agreeable Warmth for some time after ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,37.171

thus , if immediately upon Dressing , he should make no Complaint at all
, or be perceptible in no wise thereof , 't@ @is an Argument , you are
upon an Extreme one way ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,37.172

as if the Heat and Smart continue , or prove intolerable , you are then
, 't@ @is to be fear'd upon the other . TURNER3-1722-2,1,37.173

When by these means , your Putrefaction is corrected , and your <font>
Sloughs <$$font> cast off , the Ulcer must be treated as in those with
Loss of Substance shall be directed , where we come to speak of Ulcers .
TURNER3-1722-2,1,37.174

But should the <font> Gangrene <$$font> resist your utmost Skill , and
bid Defiance , as it were , to your best Endeavours , getting still more
Ground and spreading , or turning into an absolute <font> Mortification
<$$font> , what then remains ? TURNER3-1722-2,1,37.175

Why , truly nothing that I know of , unless with the Poet , to pronounce
; <P_1,38> <font> - Immedicabile Vulnus , Ense recidendum est , ne pars
sincera trahatur . <$$font> TURNER3-1722-2,1,38.176

The Manner of <font> Amputation <$$font> , you will find in several
Authors , who have professedly treated of that and several other <font>
Chirurgic Operations : <$$font> Among others , <font> Monsieur Vauguion
<$$font> , <font> Le Clerc . Charrier <$$font> , as also in the Works
of that excellent Practitioner , <font> Guliel. Fabricius Hildanus
<$$font> ; TURNER3-1722-2,1,38.177

likewise Mr. <font> Richard Wiseman <$$font> , in his <font>
Chirurgical Treatises <$$font> , has given ample and good Instructions
for the younger Artists to pursue . TURNER3-1722-2,1,38.178

Having met however with one Example very particular in some of the
Circumstances , relating to this Matter , I shall communicate the same
as follows . TURNER3-1722-2,1,38.179

