<BEGIN_turner1-1799-1>

<P_25>

<heading>

Chap. II . TURNER1-1799-1,25.4

<font> Description of the Country inhabited by the Saxons . <$$font>
TURNER1-1799-1,25.5

<$$heading>

The infant state of this distinguished people exhibited nothing from
which human sagacity would have predicted greatness .
TURNER1-1799-1,25.7

A territory , on the neck of the Cimbric Chersonesus , and three small
islands , contained those who were destined to be the ancestors of
nations , which almost divide the empire of the world .
TURNER1-1799-1,25.8

The circle of Westphalia , the electorate of Saxony , the British
islands , the united states of North America , and the British colonies
in the two Indies , have been peopled by the prolific ramifications of
this small population . TURNER1-1799-1,25.9

With such disdain of human calculations do the agents of the great
providence operate , that empires , whose swollen ambition menace a
continent with slavery , are shattered into ruin in a single generation
, while spots scarce visible , or contemptuously overlooked , rise
gradually to an alpine grandeur , and inherit the veneration of mankind
. TURNER1-1799-1,25.10

The three islands , which the Saxons of Ptolemy inhabited , were those
which we now denominate <P_26> North Strandt , Busen , and Heiligland .
TURNER1-1799-1,26.11

North Strandt , formerly torn from South Jutland by the violence of the
waves , is situated opposite to Hesum , and above Eiderstede , from both
which it is separated by intervals of sea . TURNER1-1799-1,26.12

The Hever , a bay which flows below it , and washes the northern shore
of the Eiderstede , is favourable to commercial navigations .
TURNER1-1799-1,26.13

This island was formerly about 20 miles long , and in most parts 7 miles
broad . TURNER1-1799-1,26.14

It once contained 22 parishes , TURNER1-1799-1,26.15

and was noted for its agricultural produce , as well as its fish .
TURNER1-1799-1,26.16

The raging of the sea has materially damaged this island since the time
of the Saxons . TURNER1-1799-1,26.17

Four calamitous inundations are recorded to have happened in 1300 , 1483
, 1532 , and 1615 ; TURNER1-1799-1,26.18

but the most terrible of all began in the night of the 11th October 1634
; TURNER1-1799-1,26.19

the island was intirely overflowed ; TURNER1-1799-1,26.20

6,408 persons , 1,332 houses , and <P_27> 50,000 head of cattle , were
washed away into the sea . TURNER1-1799-1,27.21

Such dreadful devastations have almost annihilated the place .
TURNER1-1799-1,27.22

There is now remaining of Nord-strand only the small parish of Pelworm ,
which derives its safety from the height of its situation .
TURNER1-1799-1,27.23

Busen lies north of the mouth of the Elbe , and to the westward of
Ditmarsia ; TURNER1-1799-1,27.24

it looks towards Meldorp ; TURNER1-1799-1,27.25

its breadth is above two miles , and its length near three ;
TURNER1-1799-1,27.26

it is situated close upon the main land , of which it is suspected to
have once formed a part . TURNER1-1799-1,27.27

Being one even plain , the stormy ocean which environs makes it a
perilous habitation ; TURNER1-1799-1,27.28

it has therefore been surrounded by a strong dyke , to propel the
assaulting waves , and to give to its natives the sleep of security .
TURNER1-1799-1,27.29

Its vicinity to the continent invests it with a charm superior to the
attractions of the other islands and islets , which swarm round Jutland
. TURNER1-1799-1,27.30

It contains three or four parishes , and about as many villages .
TURNER1-1799-1,27.31

It boasts no pre-eminence of soil , TURNER1-1799-1,27.32

but it commonly yields its produce with moderate fertility .
TURNER1-1799-1,27.33

The verses transcribed by Pontanus announce its inhabitants <P_28> to
have been employed in agriculture , pasturage , and fishing .
TURNER1-1799-1,28.34

The same author with feeling energy attests the abundance of the latter
supply . TURNER1-1799-1,28.35

" An incredible multitude blesses the people of the islands with a
variety which is converted into tons of gold . " TURNER1-1799-1,28.36

He takes the trouble to enumerate the species . TURNER1-1799-1,28.37

But the most celebrated , and the most frequented of the Saxon islands
was Heilig-island . TURNER1-1799-1,28.38

The words literally mean the sacred island , TURNER1-1799-1,28.39

but the date and reason of this epithet are now lost .
TURNER1-1799-1,28.40

In the eleventh century it had two other names ; Farria , and
Fossetis-land , which have been written with various orthography .
TURNER1-1799-1,28.41

In the German Ocean , not 40 miles distant <P_29> from Eiderstadt , and
rather farther from the mouth of the Elbe , stands this venerated place
. TURNER1-1799-1,29.42

If a line from the Elbe to the peninsula of the Eider were supposed to
form the base of an equilateral triangle , Heiligland would be nearly at
the vertex . TURNER1-1799-1,29.43

In the middle of the sea an abrupt projection of lofty rocks rises
awfully from the bosom of the waves , TURNER1-1799-1,29.44

and , strong with the inassailable fortifications of nature , it
presents one entrance only to the friendly navigator .
TURNER1-1799-1,29.45

Viewed distinctly , two divisions of the stony mass are remarked ;
TURNER1-1799-1,29.46

one , the highland surnamed Klif , coloured by its red strata of earth ,
which is every year disclosing more and more of its solid base to the
invading waters , seemed once like a mighty wall erected to coerce the
ocean . TURNER1-1799-1,29.47

It ascends towards the sky with an elevation of 46 German ells .
TURNER1-1799-1,29.48

A scanty covering of rich clayey mould , from two feet and an half to
four in depth , produces some species of corn , which once excelled the
harvests of the Eiderstadt , and a few vegetables , but not sufficient
for the demands of its small population ; TURNER1-1799-1,29.49

no trees provide their grateful shade and agreeable prospect ;
TURNER1-1799-1,29.50

their absence is compensated by the happy want of all noxious reptiles .
TURNER1-1799-1,29.51

The domesticated animals of our food <P_30> and labour equalled the best
produce of Friesland ; TURNER1-1799-1,30.52

they are now reduced to about 60 cattle , and as many sheep :
TURNER1-1799-1,30.53

the sudden steeps occasion their wanderings to be restricted .
TURNER1-1799-1,30.54

This spot was formerly famous for the capture of herrings ;
TURNER1-1799-1,30.55

it is still abundant in fish . TURNER1-1799-1,30.56

The other part , the Duhnen or Downs , is sandy , with a small part of
rocky ground , on which stands a fourth of the dwellings of the
inhabitants , with the apparatus of their fishery .
TURNER1-1799-1,30.57

One_hundred_and_eighty steps compose the descent from the Klif .
TURNER1-1799-1,30.58

The red portion detains the waters of the sky when they fall .
TURNER1-1799-1,30.59

The Duhnen was formerly full of the sweetest fountains ,
TURNER1-1799-1,30.60

but at present the water of its two springs serve only the cattle and
common uses . TURNER1-1799-1,30.61

It affords no pasturage , TURNER1-1799-1,30.62

but it admits the vegetation of hemp , TURNER1-1799-1,30.63

and shelters the harmless colonies of the rabbit . TURNER1-1799-1,30.64

A mole secures it from the sea , TURNER1-1799-1,30.65

and a channel deep enough for moderate vessels , and about three
quarters of a mile broad , has , since 1728 , separated the Duhnen from
the Klif . TURNER1-1799-1,30.66

In the autumnal season , it is visited by innumerable successions of
winged emigrants , who <P_31> hope to find on a rock so secluse a safe
asylum and more congenial atmosphere ; TURNER1-1799-1,31.67

but its promises are deceitful , TURNER1-1799-1,31.68

for man occupies it , TURNER1-1799-1,31.69

and the pleasure of the monarch of creation demands a lavish sacrifice
of animal life ; TURNER1-1799-1,31.70

yet moralists admit , that the quantity of general happiness is in all
probability augmented in that system , which commands one being to
become the food of another . TURNER1-1799-1,31.71

To censure the established order of nature is to put our wisdom in
absurd competition with omniscient benevolence . TURNER1-1799-1,31.72

Its inhabitants imbibe health and vigour from its salubrious sky .
TURNER1-1799-1,31.73

They are indefatigable in their occupations , which are generally those
of the fisherman and the pilot . TURNER1-1799-1,31.74

Perpetually at sea , like their Saxon ancestors , they disregard the
terrors of the ocean , TURNER1-1799-1,31.75

and delight to display their intrepidity when the agitated waters
intimidate others . TURNER1-1799-1,31.76

Frugal in their domestic economy , the harvest of their nets , and the
friendly corn of the poor husbandman of the north , compose the food
which contents them . TURNER1-1799-1,31.77

Their agriculture is too simple to boast of those instruments , which
diminish the labour without , perhaps , impairing the supply .
TURNER1-1799-1,31.78

The horse is wanting . TURNER1-1799-1,31.79

They have not even the universal plough ; TURNER1-1799-1,31.80

the nature of the country may proscribe it . TURNER1-1799-1,31.81

The fair sex are the <P_32> farmers of the island ; TURNER1-1799-1,32.82

they condescend , or submit , to dig the land , sow , harrow , and reap
, and even patiently thresh , and with handmills grind what their
industry has obtained : TURNER1-1799-1,32.83

but it seems not to be brutality of disposition , but the imperious
necessities of situation , which impose such revolting toil upon the
weaker sex . TURNER1-1799-1,32.84

The men , in equal but in varied difficulties , employ their activity ,
TURNER1-1799-1,32.85

and add the bounty of Neptune to the gifts of their Ceres .
TURNER1-1799-1,32.86

A numerous population is not compatible with a life of such hazard and
labour . TURNER1-1799-1,32.87

The families who inhabit the rocks are few ; TURNER1-1799-1,32.88

the aggressions of the waves concur to prevent a multiplication .
TURNER1-1799-1,32.89

In ancient times , the extent of soil capable of cultivation was much
larger than the small portion which at present is visible .
TURNER1-1799-1,32.90

Though sacred in the estimation of man , the elements have not respected
it . TURNER1-1799-1,32.91

In the year 800 , a furious tempest <P_33> from the north-west
occasioned the greater portion to be swallowed up by the waves .
TURNER1-1799-1,33.92

In 1300 and 1500 it suffered materially from the same cause ;
TURNER1-1799-1,33.93

but the inundation of 1649 was so destructive , that but a small part of
the island survived it . TURNER1-1799-1,33.94

If another attack should wash away the sandy downs , scarce one-sixth of
the present population could subsist . TURNER1-1799-1,33.95

Surrounded by nations highly civilized , this island exists for the
benefit of all who navigate the Elbe . TURNER1-1799-1,33.96

This commercial river , from its dangerous coast , could not be entered
without it . TURNER1-1799-1,33.97

A sea-mark by day , a light-house by night , it points out the path of
safety to the anxious mariner , TURNER1-1799-1,33.98

and abounds with skilful pilots , who possess the local knowledge which
he needs . TURNER1-1799-1,33.99

They conduct vessels to the Elbe , the Weser , the Eider , or the Hever
. TURNER1-1799-1,33.100

But though now so useful to the navigator , it was in distant times his
most fatal terror . TURNER1-1799-1,33.101

Its capacious port , which opens to the south , will contain above
an_hundred vessels of burthen within its sheltering arms ,
TURNER1-1799-1,33.102

and defends them from the north and west . TURNER1-1799-1,33.103

So safe an harbour , a situation so contiguous to many marts of wealth
and industry , invited the adventurers of promiscuous piracy .
TURNER1-1799-1,33.104

From the age of the Saxons almost to our own it was thronged <P_34> with
maritime depredators . TURNER1-1799-1,34.105

The writers of every period annex this dismal feature to its description
; TURNER1-1799-1,34.106

and though we must condemn with delicacy the national employment of our
forefathers , we may rejoice that the energies of their posterity have
been directed to colonize , not to ravage ; to explore with insatiable
ardour the boundless fields of science and commercial industry , not to
watch like the sanguinary tyger for its unsuspecting victim , and
prosper by human misery . TURNER1-1799-1,34.107

It is a subject of geographical contest , whether it be the Actania of
Pliny and the island of the Castum Nemus of Tacitus .
TURNER1-1799-1,34.108

The territory which the original Saxons occupied on the continent , was
situated on the western side of the Cimbric peninsula , between <P_35>
the Elbe and the Eyder . TURNER1-1799-1,35.109

This latter river is the boundary of Denmark , TURNER1-1799-1,35.110

and has always been understood to denote the termination of the German
states . TURNER1-1799-1,35.111

It rises from a district which was anciently a vast forest ;
TURNER1-1799-1,35.112

and from Borsholm , passing Rensberg and Kiel , it continues its course
into the British ocean below Eiderstadt . TURNER1-1799-1,35.113

The region between the Eyder and the Elbe was denominated Nordalbingia ,
and its inhabitants Nordalbingi , in the earliest records we possess of
these parts . TURNER1-1799-1,35.114

North of the Eyder extended Sleswick , in South Jutland ,
TURNER1-1799-1,35.115

and beyond that the district of North Jutland was continued into Wendila
, TURNER1-1799-1,35.116

and ended in Skawen , from which in a clear atmosphere the rocks of
Scandinavia are visible . TURNER1-1799-1,35.117

Three districts , in ancient times , divided this country of
Nordalbingia or Eald Saexen . TURNER1-1799-1,35.118

These unequal portions which have preserved their nominal distinctions
to recent times , are Ditmarsia , Stormaria , and Holsatia .
TURNER1-1799-1,35.119

The progress of the <P_36> Slavi occasioned a fourth division in the
province of Wagria . TURNER1-1799-1,36.120

Ditmarsia is separated on the north from Sleswick by the Eyder , and
from Stormaria on the south by the Stoer . TURNER1-1799-1,36.121

It fronts the isles of Heiligland and Busen , TURNER1-1799-1,36.122

and extends in length thirty-seven miles , and in breadth twenty-three .
TURNER1-1799-1,36.123

Its general aspect is a soil low and marshy , TURNER1-1799-1,36.124

and strong mounds are necessary to keep the ocean to its natural limits
. TURNER1-1799-1,36.125

The land on the coast is favourable to corn and cattle ,
TURNER1-1799-1,36.126

but the interior is composed of sterile sands or marshes , not subjected
by human skill to the genius of cultivation . TURNER1-1799-1,36.127

Its inhabitants , like those of all unfruitful regions , have been
tenacious of the right of enjoying their poverty in independance ,
TURNER1-1799-1,36.128

and the nature of the country favoured their military exertions .
TURNER1-1799-1,36.129

Their habits of warfare and scanty livelihood produced a harshness of
disposition , which often amounted to ferocity . TURNER1-1799-1,36.130

<P_37>

Below Dithmarsia , and reaching to the Elbe , was Stormaria .
TURNER1-1799-1,37.132

The Stoer , which named the province , confined it on the north .
TURNER1-1799-1,37.133

The Suala , Trave , and Billa , determined the rest of its extent .
TURNER1-1799-1,37.134

It is almost one slimy marsh , TURNER1-1799-1,37.135

and it needs the perpetual defences of art against that element , whose
moderate presence fertilizes , but whose excess is destruction .
TURNER1-1799-1,37.136

The wet and low situation of Stormaria and Dithmarsia exactly correspond
with the Roman account of the Saxons living in inaccessible marshes .
TURNER1-1799-1,37.137

The Stoer is friendly to navigation and fishing . TURNER1-1799-1,37.138

Stormaria is somewhat quadrangular , TURNER1-1799-1,37.139

and its sides may be estimated at 33 miles . TURNER1-1799-1,37.140

Divided from Sleswick by the Levesou on the north , bounded by Wagria on
the east , and by the Trave on the south , Holsatia stretches its <P_38>
numerous woods to Ditmarsia . TURNER1-1799-1,38.141

The local appellation of the region thus confined has been , by a sort
of geographical catachresis , applied to denominate all that country
which is contained within the Eyder , the Elbe , and the Trave .
TURNER1-1799-1,38.142

In the age approaching the period of the continental residence of our
ancestors , the Holtzati were nominally as well as territorially
distinguished from the other states which we have considered .
TURNER1-1799-1,38.143

Their country received from the bounty of nature one peculiar
characteristic . TURNER1-1799-1,38.144

As the western and southern coasts of Eald Saexen were repetitions of
quagmires , the loftier Holsatia continually impeded and amused the
traveller by successions of crowded forests in vigorous vegetation ,
relieved by numerous intervals of plains , on which the plough could
exert its productive powers , and from which a vulgar agriculture might
obtain a competent harvest . TURNER1-1799-1,38.145

<P_39>

Strength and courage were qualities which grew up with the Holsatian in
common with his neighbours ; TURNER1-1799-1,39.147

he has been proverbed for his fidelity ; TURNER1-1799-1,39.148

his generosity has been also extolled ; TURNER1-1799-1,39.149

but an ancient writer diminishes the value of this rare virtue , by the
companions which he associates to it . TURNER1-1799-1,39.150

" They are emulous in hospitality , because to plunder and to lavish is
the glory of an Holsatian ; TURNER1-1799-1,39.151

not to be versed in the science of depredation is , in his opinion , to
be stupid and base . " TURNER1-1799-1,39.152

Of Wagria it need only be mentioned , that it extended from the Trave to
the Baltic , TURNER1-1799-1,39.153

and was occupied by a branch of the Slavi , who were ultimately driven
out by the Saxons . TURNER1-1799-1,39.154

<P_40>

<heading>

Chap. III . TURNER1-1799-1,40.157

<font> Circumstances favourable to the Increase of the Saxon Power .
<$$font> TURNER1-1799-1,40.158

<$$heading>

Above a century elapsed after Ptolemy , before the Saxons were mentioned
again by any author who has survived to us . TURNER1-1799-1,40.160

Eutropius is the second writer who noticed them . TURNER1-1799-1,40.161

In accounting for the rebellion of Carausius , and his assumption of the
purple , he states the Saxons to have united with the Francs , and to
have become formidable for their piratical enterprizes .
TURNER1-1799-1,40.162

Before the few historical fragments concerning our ancestors , which
exist in the classical authors , are collected , it may be proper to
consider three circumstances which had occurred in the interval , and to
each of which some part of the Saxon prosperity may be reasonably
ascribed . TURNER1-1799-1,40.163

These were , the repulse of the Romans from the Elbe to the Rhine ; the
rise of the Francs ; and the application of the Saxons to maritime
expeditions . TURNER1-1799-1,40.164

It was in the reign of Augustus , that the wasteful passion of ambition
prompted Drusus , <P_41> his son-in-law , to complete the design of
Caesar , and attempt the conquest of Germany . TURNER1-1799-1,41.165

The blood of the natives of the Rhine and Ems was poured out in
profusion by the unappalled Romans ; TURNER1-1799-1,41.166

misery and death stalked forwards to the Elbe ; TURNER1-1799-1,41.167

but before the Roman eagle could be carried over the river , the
conqueror received , from natural causes , the fate which he was
mercilessly dealing to others . TURNER1-1799-1,41.168

Tiberius succeeded to the station , though not to the abilities of
Drusus , TURNER1-1799-1,41.169

and at length passing the Weser , waved the imperial standards over the
Elbe . TURNER1-1799-1,41.170

His fleet triumphantly sailed up the river ; TURNER1-1799-1,41.171

he contemplated the collected warriors who lined its northern bank ,
TURNER1-1799-1,41.172

but hazarded no attack . TURNER1-1799-1,41.173

The successes of Maraboduus summoned Tiberius to the Danube ,
TURNER1-1799-1,41.174

and whilst he was there conflicting with the Marcomanni and their allies
, the avarice of Quintilius Varus provoked the Germans of the Rhine to
rebel . TURNER1-1799-1,41.175

Arminius stood forward as the champion of Germany ,
TURNER1-1799-1,41.176

and the Roman general and his army were destroyed .
TURNER1-1799-1,41.177

This misfortune struck Rome with consternation , TURNER1-1799-1,41.178

and the horrors of a Cimbric invasion were anticipated ;
TURNER1-1799-1,41.179

but Arminius was contented <P_42> to have merited the title of the
deliverer of his country . TURNER1-1799-1,42.180

He projected no mad schemes of offensive conquest or of vengeful
devastation . TURNER1-1799-1,42.181

He restored to his countrymen the possession of their native soil up to
the Rhine ; TURNER1-1799-1,42.182

and when Tiberius hastened to relieve the capitol from its dismay , the
imperial general could gain no decisive laurels from the cautious
patriot . TURNER1-1799-1,42.183

It was reserved for Germanicus to renew the victories of his father ,
and to endanger the independance of the continent .
TURNER1-1799-1,42.184

After suppressing a dangerous mutiny of four legions , he ruined the
<P_43> Marsi beyond the Rhine by a night attack , TURNER1-1799-1,43.185

and exerted one of the most direful prerogatives inhumanly arrogated by
war ; TURNER1-1799-1,43.186

for he desolated the country to an extent of fifty miles .
TURNER1-1799-1,43.187

It is to be regretted that youthful genius should employ its energies in
augmenting the calamities of mankind ; TURNER1-1799-1,43.188

but the conquest of the world was the delirious project of Rome ,
TURNER1-1799-1,43.189

and the myriads of victims which it yearly sacrificed raised not one
feeling of sympathy among the citizens of the Tibur ;
TURNER1-1799-1,43.190

a surname from a new country subdued , outbalanced all the tears of
humanity , and the clamours of violated right . TURNER1-1799-1,43.191

The justice of assaulting the world , in order to gain fame and plunder
, was never questioned , TURNER1-1799-1,43.192

but the trade of ambition was vehemently pursued through the fearful
road of war , though Greece had taught the Romans to philosophise on
morality , and orators , to destroy an obnoxious governor , could
sometimes declaim as if they had felt themselves the advocates of
mankind . TURNER1-1799-1,43.193

After surprising the Catti , and experiencing some perils , Germanicus
sailed up the Ems , TURNER1-1799-1,43.194

and marched his army to the Weser . TURNER1-1799-1,43.195

At this juncture Arminius was not wanting to his countrymen ;
TURNER1-1799-1,43.196

<P_44>

but the superior knowledge of his competitor , and the discipline of the
invading troops , advanced rapidly to annihilate the rude liberty of
Germany . TURNER1-1799-1,44.198

Its bravest tribes fell fruitlessly in its defence ;
TURNER1-1799-1,44.199

the survivors trembled for the awful issue , when the jealous policy of
Tiberius , who had succeeded to the empire , rescued them from absolute
conquest . TURNER1-1799-1,44.200

Tiberius called back Germanicus from the swelling tide of victory ,
although he asked but one year more to extend the Roman empire to the
Elbe . TURNER1-1799-1,44.201

Had his prayer been granted , the Saxons might have glided off the page
of history for ever ; TURNER1-1799-1,44.202

but this people was not destined to be entombed by the ambition of
lawless conquerors . TURNER1-1799-1,44.203

The Saxons have survived the fall of the capitol , TURNER1-1799-1,44.204

and have equalled the glory of its masters in pursuits of nobler merit .
TURNER1-1799-1,44.205

The recall {TEXT:recal} of Germanicus ended the progress of the Romans ;
TURNER1-1799-1,44.206

they retreated gradually towards the south , though not with perpetual
retrogression : TURNER1-1799-1,44.207

sometimes the interior of the country felt their presence ,
TURNER1-1799-1,44.208

and sometimes rejoiced in their absence ; TURNER1-1799-1,44.209

<P_45>

but at length the Rhine , near the modern Leyden , separated the Romans
and their allies from the free nations of the north ;
TURNER1-1799-1,45.211

it was not , indeed , an impassable boundary , TURNER1-1799-1,45.212

but the Roman generally kept within it , TURNER1-1799-1,45.213

and thus the nations beyond , and more especially the Saxons , who were
among the most remote , had full leisure to increase their population ,
and to improve the propitious circumstances which attended their
peculiar situation . TURNER1-1799-1,45.214

But this auspicious calm the savage Maximin at last disturbed .
TURNER1-1799-1,45.215

After the assassination of Alexander Severus , the ferocious Thracian
assumed the contaminated purple , TURNER1-1799-1,45.216

and announced his accession to the north of Germany in a series of
victorious slaughter and unrelenting devastation .
TURNER1-1799-1,45.217

So irresistible was the tempest , that unless <paren> says the historian
<$$paren> the Germans had escaped by their rivers , marshes , and woods
, he would have reduced all Germany into subjection .
TURNER1-1799-1,45.218

His furious valour once betrayed him into a situation <P_46> of so much
danger in a marsh , that he was saved with difficulty , while his horse
was drowning . TURNER1-1799-1,46.219

His haughty letters to the senate display the exultation and the
ferocity of his mind . TURNER1-1799-1,46.220

" We can@ @not relate to you how much we have done .
TURNER1-1799-1,46.221

For the space of 400 miles we have burnt the German towns ,
TURNER1-1799-1,46.222

we have brought away their flocks , enslaved their inhabitants , and
slain the armed . TURNER1-1799-1,46.223

We should have assailed their woods , if the depths of the marshes had
permitted us to pass . " TURNER1-1799-1,46.224

This destructive invasion , like many other evils , generated by the
magnitude of the necessity a proportionate benefit .
TURNER1-1799-1,46.225

By a conjecture more probable in itself , and more consistent with
contemporaneous facts than any other which has been mentioned , a modern
writer has very happily ascribed to it the formation of that important
confederation , which , under the name of Francs , withstood the Roman
arms , and preserved the liberties of Germany . TURNER1-1799-1,46.226

Upon the origin of the Francs , as upon every <P_47> similar subject of
antiquity , the historical artists have amused themselves with painting
many gaudy but contradictory scenes . TURNER1-1799-1,47.227

Some have participated in the folly of the world , TURNER1-1799-1,47.228

and eager to enjoy an ancestry which the Maeonian and Mantuan muses have
conspired to adorn , have claimed a descent from the warriors of Troy .
TURNER1-1799-1,47.229

In defence of Ilium it is said that the Francs checked the fury of
Achilles ; TURNER1-1799-1,47.230

and when the craft of the king of Ithaca had made bravery useless , they
quitted their burning country in search of safer shores .
TURNER1-1799-1,47.231

As Homer has unfortunately killed Hector , they could not
conscientiously assert him to have led their exiled bands ;
TURNER1-1799-1,47.232

but no such unwelcome evidence existed to forbid the right of increasing
the progeny of Andromache ; TURNER1-1799-1,47.233

hence Francus , the son of Hector , was created on purpose to conduct
the emigrants to the Seine , while Aeneas landed with a kindred train in
the neighbourhood of the Tyber . TURNER1-1799-1,47.234

But the human intellect impatiently demands the liberal exercise of the
imprescriptible right of free <P_48> though fantastic exertion .
TURNER1-1799-1,48.235

To be restricted to one opinion , whether it be falshood or whether it
be truth , is as odious and as slavish as to be corporally imprisoned .
TURNER1-1799-1,48.236

We shall not , therefore , wonder to read that Francus , though a son of
Hector , has been cashiered by some , that Francion might govern , or
that for these were deposed Friga , Priam , and Antenor .
TURNER1-1799-1,48.237

A direct course from Troy to Gaul has not pleased every one , because a
little history was in the way , TURNER1-1799-1,48.238

and therefore part of the Trojan Francs was dispatched to Macedon to
achieve {TEXT:atchieve} the victories of Alexander ,
TURNER1-1799-1,48.239

and the remainder was conveyed to the Danube ; TURNER1-1799-1,48.240

these journeyed to the sea of Azoph , TURNER1-1799-1,48.241

and remained there , till , ardent for novelty , they at last roamed to
Pannonia , TURNER1-1799-1,48.242

and in due course of time monopolized the Rhine . TURNER1-1799-1,48.243

If we doubt this genealogy , it is proper that we should recollect that
Francic Ossians attest the fact , that <P_49> most industrious
historians believe it , and that the name of Anchises was continued to a
distant descendant in memorial of the ancestry . TURNER1-1799-1,49.244

But as to some optics grass is not green but red , ale not brown but
green , and crimson , claret , and mud are very nearly alike , so many
persons contemplate historical incidents with a whimsical singularity of
perception and belief . TURNER1-1799-1,49.245

In the ninth century it was a tradition , that the Francs were the
children of the Danes ; TURNER1-1799-1,49.246

and even an ancient <P_50> geographer approximates their country to the
Elbe . TURNER1-1799-1,50.247

That they were Sicambri at least , if not Trojans , has been asserted ;
TURNER1-1799-1,50.248

and whence could they have proceeded so well as from Franconia ?
TURNER1-1799-1,50.249

To suit the humour of those who think no country worthy to have produced
Francs , but that which their modern offspring inhabit , writers have
maintained , that they lived originally in Gaul , but , for the sake of
freedom or of food , voluntarily quitted it about the time of Caesar ,
to return again a few ages afterwards . TURNER1-1799-1,50.250

Others have had a discernment keen enough to find Francs ambushing in
Cicero's epistolary <P_51> correspondence with Atticus ;
TURNER1-1799-1,51.251

and another , through an imaginary telescope of Strabo , has beheld them
starving on the Noric Alps . TURNER1-1799-1,51.252

One learned critic has laboured to outdo his competitors , by the
distance of his search and the peculiar evidence of his discovery ;
TURNER1-1799-1,51.253

after roaming the world in quest of his Proserpine , his fancy perceived
her half-shrouded with mist among the lakes of Scandinavia .
TURNER1-1799-1,51.254

In vain the dubious medium hinted a possible deception ,
TURNER1-1799-1,51.255

in vain counselled him to repress the throbs of too eager expectation ;
TURNER1-1799-1,51.256

determined to possess the prize which other adventurers had coveted in
vain , he boldly averred , that the inhabitants of Mount Sevo were the
Francs ; and that Ptolemy , who has presumed to place the Phirassi in
this region in their stead , has been guilty of an error , which the
glorious destiny of this author reserved for him to detect .
TURNER1-1799-1,51.257

<P_52>

To wed incongruities is the duty of wit , TURNER1-1799-1,52.259

and men are sometimes humourists without intending to be so :
TURNER1-1799-1,52.260

a witty author of this involuntary species has informed us , that the
French and Turks are brethren by descent ; that the Turks have claimed
this consanguinity , and , with a liberality natural to the enlarged
mind of a mussulman , have declared , that none ought to be chevaliers
but the French and Turks . TURNER1-1799-1,52.261

If the antiquary has a right to diversify his conjectures , the
etymologist may fairly demand the same privilege ; because , to chain
his fancy would be to annihilate his existence , which is a barbarity
that no individual can justify towards another . TURNER1-1799-1,52.262

It was , therefore , in a laudable exertion of intellectual independance
, that if one preferred Francos , which in the Attic , or in some <P_53>
Attuatic dialect , means fierce or noble , another looked more kindly on
{COM:greek_omitted} , fortified ; that some should derive the name from
the son of Hector , or from Francion , and that others should like
better a less obvious origin ; TURNER1-1799-1,53.263

in a word , that wranghe , rugged ; {COM:greek_omitted} , spear-bearers
; or frein-hans , free heroes ; or fri-ansi and fri-ancken , free
servants , should each boast a champion sturdy enough to assert a
superior claim in defiance of the rest , are circumstances very
analogous to human experience , and as dignified as many other
prolusions of our omnipotent mind . TURNER1-1799-1,53.264

But the derivation which the moderns have most favoured is from the word
franc , which in all the German languages is expressive of a freeman .
TURNER1-1799-1,53.265

<P_54>

That the French should disclaim their German origin has given great
offence to many learned men , who have invited them to recollect , that
it was no disgrace to have sprung from warriors , who ultimately subdued
the victorious genius of Rome . TURNER1-1799-1,54.267

But whatever passions may have misled former writers to look any where
rather than over the Rhine for their parents , it has become the candid
and unanimous opinion of the literati of France , that the Francs were
Germans . TURNER1-1799-1,54.268

Mr. Gibert has annexed to this admission a derivation of his countrymen
, which proves that the power of imagination may exist as strongly in a
dull antiquarian dissertation as in an interesting romance .
TURNER1-1799-1,54.269

In the reign of Augustus , Maraboduus led the Marcomanni into Bohemia ,
TURNER1-1799-1,54.270

and it has happened that some of the French kings were called
Merovingiens . TURNER1-1799-1,54.271

Now Maraboduus , stripped of its Latin termination , would , perhaps ,
in German be Mer-wue , and Merovingiens in Latin become Mur-wungii .
TURNER1-1799-1,54.272

Is <P_55> not this a proof that the Francs and the Marcomanni were the
same people {COM:missing_question_mark} TURNER1-1799-1,55.273

The most intelligent historian of the present age has remarked with
truth , that the most rational critics suppose , that about the year 240
a new confederation was formed , under the name of Francs , by the old
inhabitants of the Lower Rhine and Weser . TURNER1-1799-1,55.274

As the incursion of Maximin took place about the year 235 , the
additional supposition of Spener is very happy , that this confederation
arose from a general desire of security and revenge .
TURNER1-1799-1,55.275

The horizon of Rome was at this juncture darkening ;
TURNER1-1799-1,55.276

civil wars were consuming the strength of the empire ,
TURNER1-1799-1,55.277

and its Germanic enemies , who had many losses of liberty , life , and
property , to avenge , were learning the dangerous secret of the benefit
of union . TURNER1-1799-1,55.278

The Alemanni had <P_56> alarmed Marcus Aurelius with its first
exhibition . TURNER1-1799-1,56.279

The advantage of this confederation generated others , until the Roman
empire was overwhelmed by the accumulating torrent ,
TURNER1-1799-1,56.280

and her western provinces were parcelled out among those war-like
spoilers , whose improved posterity now govern Europe .
TURNER1-1799-1,56.281

This sagacious union of strength in a common cause was consecrated on
the Rhine by the general name of Francs , in which the peculiar
denominations of the tribes were absorbed . TURNER1-1799-1,56.282

Their valour atchieved its end ; TURNER1-1799-1,56.283

and as a patriotism serviceable to mankind at that time inspired them ,
we may hail their career with just acclamations . TURNER1-1799-1,56.284

Some vices , however , intermixed with their bravery , which alloy their
fame with a debasing barbarism ; TURNER1-1799-1,56.285

but their existence and general conduct was peculiarly useful to the
Saxon nation . TURNER1-1799-1,56.286

The safety and success of our <P_57> ancestors may have flowed from this
timely confederation . TURNER1-1799-1,57.287

The Saxon exploits on the ocean inflicted such wounds on the Roman
colonies and commerce , that a peculiar fleet was appointed to
counteract them , TURNER1-1799-1,57.288

and every historian mentions them with dread and hatred .
TURNER1-1799-1,57.289

It does not seem visionary to state , that it would have certainly been
one of the first employments of the Roman indignation to have
exterminated them by an expedition like those of Drusus , Germanicus ,
and Maximin , if the confederation of the Francs had not interposed an
impregnable barrier , and kept the imperial armies employed on the south
banks of the Rhine . TURNER1-1799-1,57.290

<P_58>

<heading>

Chap. IV . TURNER1-1799-1,58.293

<font> The Application of the Saxons to maritime Expeditions . <$$font>
TURNER1-1799-1,58.294

<$$heading>

The situation of the Saxons on the sea-coast of that part of Europe ,
which was in the neighbourhood of some fertile provinces of the Roman
empire , and yet remote enough to elude their vengeful pursuit , and the
possession of an island , with an harbour so ample and yet so guarded
against hostile assaults , were circumstances propitious to a system of
piracy . TURNER1-1799-1,58.296

But such a current of action is not hastily chosen by savage warriors ;
TURNER1-1799-1,58.297

it had been familiar to ancient Greece , TURNER1-1799-1,58.298

but it was as yet unknown to the wild nations of the north .
TURNER1-1799-1,58.299

The sea is naturally a scene of terror to barbarians .
TURNER1-1799-1,58.300

Distant voyages are fatal to them from their ignorance , and still more
formidable from their superstitions . TURNER1-1799-1,58.301

The Saxons might have lived amid their rocks and marshes , conflicting
with their neighbours , till they had mouldered away in the vicissitudes
in which so many tribes perished , if <P_59> one grand incident had not
expanded to their love of plunder , or of battle , a new theatre , on
which it might be gratified , and an inspiring example , in which the
first adventurers were brilliantly successful . TURNER1-1799-1,59.302

This impulsive event , which tinged with new and lasting colours the
destiny of Europe , by determining the Saxons to piratical enterprizes ,
was the daring atchievements of the Francs , whom Probus had transported
to the Pontus . TURNER1-1799-1,59.303

To break the strength of the barbaric myriads , who were every year
assaulting the Roman state with increasing momentum , this emperor had
recourse to the customary policy of settling colonies of their warriors
in places very distant from the region of their nativity .
TURNER1-1799-1,59.304

Among others , a numerous collection of Francs was stationed on the
Euxine . TURNER1-1799-1,59.305

To love the scenes of our childhood , wherein we have received the
endearments of those by whom we have been beloved ; to repine in our
absence from the spots where our most pleasing associations have been
formed ; and to be attached even to the cottages of penury and the
marshes of distemper , if the companions of our sports , or the friends
of our maturity inhabit them , is natural to man .
TURNER1-1799-1,59.306

What is affluence or luxury , if those <P_60> we revere , or those we
most passionately esteem , are unable to partake !
TURNER1-1799-1,60.307

The gold of India glitters like unvalued sand , TURNER1-1799-1,60.308

the most exquisite paradise is a loathsome prison , if the sympathy of
our feelings point towards other regions . TURNER1-1799-1,60.309

The magic of sensibility sometimes commands the uncivilized bosom as
powerfully as the most refined , in those endearing relations which flow
from the connubial and parental ties . TURNER1-1799-1,60.310

Hence the Francs on the Euxine sighed for the dreary wilds of their
nativity , because in them they first knew the tumult of love , the
fondness of maternal care , the manly exhortations of paternal tuition ,
and the eager emulations of juvenile friendship . TURNER1-1799-1,60.311

Anxious to enjoy once more these sweetest blessings of life , or to
behold the places consecrated by their experience , the exiled Francs
seized the earliest opportunity of abandoning their appointed settlement
; TURNER1-1799-1,60.312

they possessed themselves of many ships , TURNER1-1799-1,60.313

and formed the astonishing plan of falling back to the Rhine .
TURNER1-1799-1,60.314

Who were their pilots , or how they conceived , in their untutored minds
the possibility of a project so intricate , and for such barbarians so
sublime , has not been revealed to us . TURNER1-1799-1,60.315

Its novelty and <P_61> magnanimity ensured its success .
TURNER1-1799-1,61.316

They ravaged Asia and Greece ; TURNER1-1799-1,61.317

for not safety merely , but revenge and plunder were also their objects
: TURNER1-1799-1,61.318

landing in Sicily , they attacked and ravaged Syracuse with great
slaughter . TURNER1-1799-1,61.319

They carried their triumphant hostility to several districts of Africa ,
TURNER1-1799-1,61.320

and sailing adventurously to Europe , they concluded their insulting and
prosperous voyage by reaching in safety their native shores .
TURNER1-1799-1,61.321

In this amazing enterprize a system to endure for ages was established
at once . TURNER1-1799-1,61.322

It discovered to themselves and their neighbours , to all who heard and
could imitate , that from the Roman colonies a rich harvest of spoil
might be gleaned by those who would seek for it at sea .
TURNER1-1799-1,61.323

These Francs had desolated every province almost with impunity ;
TURNER1-1799-1,61.324

they had plunder to display which must have fired the avarice of every
needy spectator ; TURNER1-1799-1,61.325

they had acquired skill , which they who joined them might soon inherit
; TURNER1-1799-1,61.326

and perhaps the same adventurers , embarking again with new followers ,
evinced by fresh booty the practicability of similar attempts .
TURNER1-1799-1,61.327

The Saxons had come to their situation about <P_62> the Elbe by sea ,
though from what quarter is unknown . TURNER1-1799-1,62.328

If they kept up any intercourse with each other , some petty navigation
must have ensued , which may have produced their first taste for the
naval art . TURNER1-1799-1,62.329

Their situation was fitted for such expeditions as those of the Francs ,
TURNER1-1799-1,62.330

and it is therefore probable , that the Saxons of Heiligland were among
the first to emulate the exploits of the returned exiles .
TURNER1-1799-1,62.331

The piracies of the Francs and Saxons are not mentioned in the imperial
writers anterior to this wonderful navigation ; TURNER1-1799-1,62.332

but they seem to have become frequent after it ; TURNER1-1799-1,62.333

for within a few years subsequent , the Francs and Saxons so infested
the coasts of Belgium , Gaul , and Britain , that the Roman government
was compelled to station a powerful fleet at Bologne on purpose to
confront them . TURNER1-1799-1,62.334

The command was entrusted to Carausius , a Menapian , of the meanest
origin , but long skilful as a pilot , and valiant as a soldier .
TURNER1-1799-1,62.335

It was observed , that this commander attacked the pirates only after
they had accomplished their ravages , and never restored the capture to
the suffering provincials . TURNER1-1799-1,62.336

This conduct excited a suspicion , that by wilful <P_63> remissness , he
permitted the enemy to make the incursions , that he might obtain the
booty on their return . TURNER1-1799-1,63.337

This conduct was fatal to the design of suppressing the piracies of the
Francs and Saxons . TURNER1-1799-1,63.338

It permitted the habit of such enterprizes to become established ,
TURNER1-1799-1,63.339

and the success of those who eluded his avarice , on their return , kept
alive the eagerness for maritime depredations . TURNER1-1799-1,63.340

Another incident occurred to establish their propensity and power .
TURNER1-1799-1,63.341

The emperor , informed of the treasons of Carausius , ordered his
punishment . TURNER1-1799-1,63.342

Apprized of his impending fate , he took refuge in augmented guilt and
desperate temerity ; TURNER1-1799-1,63.343

he boldly assumed the purple , TURNER1-1799-1,63.344

and was acknowledged emperor by the legions in Britain .
TURNER1-1799-1,63.345

The perplexities in which the Roman state was at that time involved
favoured his usurpation , TURNER1-1799-1,63.346

and to maintain it he had recourse to one of those important expedients
which , originally intended for a temporary exigency , lead ultimately
to great revolutions . TURNER1-1799-1,63.347

As it was only by active warfare that his sovereignty could be
maintained , he made alliances with the Germans , and particularly with
the <P_64> Saxons and Francs , whose dress and manners he imitated , in
order to increase their friendship . TURNER1-1799-1,64.348

To make them of all the use he projected , he encouraged their
application to maritime affairs ; TURNER1-1799-1,64.349

he gave them ships and experienced officers , who taught them navigation
and the art of naval combat . TURNER1-1799-1,64.350

Thus fostered by an imperial alliance , and supplied with those
essential requisites , without which they could not have become
permanently formidable , they renewed their predatory attacks with
licensed severity . TURNER1-1799-1,64.351

Every coast which had not received Carausius as its lord was open to
their well-directed incursions . TURNER1-1799-1,64.352

They perfected themselves in their dangerous art , TURNER1-1799-1,64.353

and by the plunder which they were always gaining , they increased their
means as well as their avidity for such a system .
TURNER1-1799-1,64.354

The usurpation of Carausius , and the education of the Saxons to the
empire of the ocean , lasted seven years . TURNER1-1799-1,64.355

Sixty years afterwards a similar occurrence advanced the Saxon
prosperity . TURNER1-1799-1,64.356

Magnentius , another usurper of the bloody and restless sceptre of Rome
, having murdered Constans , endeavoured to preserve the perilous and
mocking dignity by an alliance of fraternization with the Francs <P_65>
and Saxons , whom in return he protected and encouraged .
TURNER1-1799-1,65.357

This was another of those auspicious incidents , which enhanced the
consequence and power of those tribes who had been invisible to Tacitus
, and who had been able to obtain but a hasty glance from the more
scrutinizing Alexandrian . TURNER1-1799-1,65.358

<P_66>

<heading>

Chap. V . TURNER1-1799-1,66.361

<font> The League of the Saxons with other States , and their
continental Aggrandizement . <$$font> TURNER1-1799-1,66.362

<$$heading>

But in the third century new scenes of power and glory began to open
their vistas to the Saxon race : TURNER1-1799-1,66.364

their prosperity may have kindled the emulation of their neighbours ,
who to share its advantages may have offered their alliance and services
. TURNER1-1799-1,66.365

The two emperors , who counted their assistance , may have proposed to
them a plan of union , to augment their numbers , prevent their
dissensions , and give efficacy to their exertion in their causes ;
TURNER1-1799-1,66.366

or , as man is prone to imitate whatever is successful , the example of
the confederation of the Francs may have stimulated the Saxons to a
similar policy . TURNER1-1799-1,66.367

Whatever was the causing incident , it is certain , that in the
beginning of the fourth century the Saxons were not alone on the ocean ;
TURNER1-1799-1,66.368

other states were moving in concert with them , whose nominal
distinctions were suspended or sacrificed to the Saxon name .
TURNER1-1799-1,66.369

This addition of strength multiplied the Saxon fleets ,
TURNER1-1799-1,66.370

gave new terror to <P_67> their hostility , TURNER1-1799-1,67.371

and recruited their losses with perpetual population .
TURNER1-1799-1,67.372

The league extended . TURNER1-1799-1,67.373

What emulation , policy , or rapacity may have first prompted , success
and fear made more universal . TURNER1-1799-1,67.374

They who could not be tempted to unite , dreaded the wrath of those
whose proffered alliance they refused . TURNER1-1799-1,67.375

At length , governed by these various motives , most of the nations
north of the Rhine assumed the name , TURNER1-1799-1,67.376

strengthened the association , TURNER1-1799-1,67.377

and fought to augment the predominance of the Saxons .
TURNER1-1799-1,67.378

The Chauci seem to have led the way in the march of federation .
TURNER1-1799-1,67.379

The Frisii , urged by kindred passion and a seductive position ,
willingly followed . TURNER1-1799-1,67.380

The precise date of the accession of others is not so clear ;
TURNER1-1799-1,67.381

but in some period of their power the Chamavi , and at last the Batavi ,
the Toxandri , and Morini , obeyed the obvious necessity .
TURNER1-1799-1,67.382

the Cimbri , the Jutes , the Angles , and others not so discernible ,
added their numbers to the formidable mass . TURNER1-1799-1,67.383

When the Angles migrated to Britain , the Saxon possessions beyond the
Elbe began to narrow . TURNER1-1799-1,67.384

The Cimbric Chersonesus abandoned the union . TURNER1-1799-1,67.385

The Frisians were strong enough to assert an independance .
TURNER1-1799-1,67.386

But if in these points the Saxons experienced a diminution of power ,
<P_68> they balanced the defection by the incorporation of other states
. TURNER1-1799-1,68.387

The Cherusci , the Angrivarii , part of the Attuarii , and at last the
Bructeri , though they long resisted , assumed the extending name ,
which in the end monopolized the first country of the Francs .
TURNER1-1799-1,68.388

Without detaining the reader by a detail of the modern chorography
answering to the position of these tribes , it may be sufficient to
state concisely , that as the boundaries of the Saxon states enlarged
with their leagues , the population between the Elbe and the Weser was
marshalled in their squadrons . TURNER1-1799-1,68.389

Advancing onwards , they stretched their mighty limbs , growing more
gigantic in every generation , from the Weser to the Ems ;
TURNER1-1799-1,68.390

still augmenting , they diffused themselves to the Rhine with varying
latitude , as the Francs , many of whose allies they seduced , quitting
that region , marched upon Gaul . TURNER1-1799-1,68.391

The extension of this new confederation was favoured by the change of
policy and position adopted by <P_69> the Francs .
TURNER1-1799-1,69.392

As this people stood foremost to the Roman vengeance they experienced
its effects . TURNER1-1799-1,69.393

They had many distressing wars to maintain , which in time compelled
them to abandon maritime expeditions , to consolidate their strength for
their continental conflicts . TURNER1-1799-1,69.394

Hence , the nearer we appraoch the period of the invasion of England ,
we find the Francs less and less united with the Saxons ,
TURNER1-1799-1,69.395

and even wars begin to be frequent between the rival friends .
TURNER1-1799-1,69.396

As the former moved onward to the conquest of Belgium and Gaul , the
Saxons appear to have been the only nation under whose name the vessels
of piracy were navigated . TURNER1-1799-1,69.397

From fear or friendship all their allies assumed or submitted to their
appellation . TURNER1-1799-1,69.398

Saxons were the enemies every where execrated , though under this title
several nations fought . TURNER1-1799-1,69.399

Some of the tribes on the maritime coast , who had composed the league
of the Francs , abandoned it , to share the easier warfare and ampler
booty of the Saxons . TURNER1-1799-1,69.400

At last this successful people diffused themselves into the interior of
Germany so victoriously , that the vast tracts of country embraced
between the Elbe , the Sala , and the Rhine , became subjected to their
power . TURNER1-1799-1,69.401

<P_70>

An old Belgic chronicle , in rhyme , makes Neder Sassen , Lower Saxony ,
to have been confined by the Scheld and the Meuse ;
TURNER1-1799-1,70.403

but this is a larger extent than others admit . TURNER1-1799-1,70.404

<P_71>

<heading>

Chap. VI . TURNER1-1799-1,71.407

<font> Their general Character . <$$font> TURNER1-1799-1,71.408

<$$heading>

As the Saxons became known to the Romans chiefly by successful
depredations on the maritime provinces , the accounts transmitted to us
of their character have been framed from their hostile exploits .
TURNER1-1799-1,71.410

Strength of body , patience in warlike labour , a ferocious courage ,
and a formidable activity , are the qualities by which they have been
commemorated . TURNER1-1799-1,71.411

Some authors have ascribed their success less to their personal courage
than to the unexpectedness of their attack . TURNER1-1799-1,71.412

The Saxons endeavoured rather to surprise than to combat , to plunder
rather than to subdue . TURNER1-1799-1,71.413

But this mode of warfare resulted from their great inferiority to their
mighty adversaries . TURNER1-1799-1,71.414

Pirates could not wrestle hand to hand with an empire , of which half
the world was the base ; TURNER1-1799-1,71.415

they could gain no advantage but where they were not foreseen ;
TURNER1-1799-1,71.416

they could not hope to make an impression unless they anticipated
preparation , or by stratagem could elude it . TURNER1-1799-1,71.417

It must be confessed , that the predominant characteristic of our
ancestors was an attachment <P_72> to piratical expeditions .
TURNER1-1799-1,72.418

Whether these were more atrocious than the campaigns of the ambitious ,
of Caesar , Alexander , or Gengis Chan , the judgment of mankind will
decide . TURNER1-1799-1,72.419

Unquestionably they were not more unjust ; TURNER1-1799-1,72.420

but one circumstance seems reasonably to stamp marauders with infamy ,
which is , that their hostilities are commonly directed against the
defenceless and the peacable . TURNER1-1799-1,72.421

In civilized war between states who recognize the law of nations ,
fleets glory to conflict with fleets , TURNER1-1799-1,72.422

and armies seek out armies to contend with . TURNER1-1799-1,72.423

The quiet occupant of the cottage and the town , unless by the most
unprincipled profligacy , is seldom wilfully invaded in his property of
his happiness ; TURNER1-1799-1,72.424

they who have chosen the military life are the principal sufferers ;
TURNER1-1799-1,72.425

and though humanity must hear of their wretchedness with a sigh , yet it
can@ @not but rejoice at a system of warfare , which narrows the sphere
of misfortune , and directs the evil chiefly on those who have the
courage voluntarily to brave it . TURNER1-1799-1,72.426

The Saxons conducted their depredations with cautious activity .
TURNER1-1799-1,72.427

So fearless was their disposition , or so fortunate their general
exertions , that they did not always select their victims by previous
deliberation . TURNER1-1799-1,72.428

They sailed into the ocean , <P_73> determined only upon plunder ,
TURNER1-1799-1,73.429

and they suffered the wind to waft them to whatever coast was in its
course . TURNER1-1799-1,73.430

This conduct , which resembled intrepid rashness , was frequently their
safest prudence ; TURNER1-1799-1,73.431

if it sometimes led them to parts so provided as to punish their
audacity , it oftener carried them to provinces where the inhabitants ,
amazed at their unforeseen descent , could give no effectual resistance
; TURNER1-1799-1,73.432

hence they usually returned rich in plunder . TURNER1-1799-1,73.433

It was from the frequency and fury of these attacks that the Saxons were
every where dreaded beyond any other nation . TURNER1-1799-1,73.434

The acquisition of booty was not all their atchievement .
TURNER1-1799-1,73.435

It is melancholy to add , that to secure their retreat , or perhaps to
indulge a ferocity of disposition , they sometimes desolated the regions
which they plundered with murderous and fiery ravages .
TURNER1-1799-1,73.436

They fought also for slaves . TURNER1-1799-1,73.437

<P_74>

Inland provinces were not protected from their invasion .
TURNER1-1799-1,74.439

From ignorance , necessity , or policy , they traversed the ocean in
boats framed of oziers , and covered with skins sewed together ;
TURNER1-1799-1,74.440

and such was their skill or their prodigality of life , that in these
they sported in the tempests of the British ocean .
TURNER1-1799-1,74.441

It is possible that men who had seen the vessels in which the Francs had
escaped from the Pontus , and who had been twice instructed by imperial
usurpers in the naval art , might have constructed more important war
ships if their judgment had approved . TURNER1-1799-1,74.442

Although their isles , and their maritime provinces of Ditmarsia and
Stormaria were barren of wood , yet Holsatia abounded with it ;
TURNER1-1799-1,74.443

and if their defective land-carriage prevented the frequency of this
supply , the Elbe was at hand to float down inexhaustible stores from
the immense forests of Germany . TURNER1-1799-1,74.444

<P_75>

They may have preferred their light skiffs , from an experience of their
superior utility . TURNER1-1799-1,75.446

When their fatal incursions had incited the Romans to fortify and to
garrison the frontier of Britain and Gaul , the Saxons directed their
enmity against the inland regions . TURNER1-1799-1,75.447

For their peculiar vessels no coast was too shallow , no river too small
; TURNER1-1799-1,75.448

they dared to ascend the streams for eighty or an_hundred miles ,
TURNER1-1799-1,75.449

and if other plunder invited or danger pressed , they carried their
vessels from one river to another , TURNER1-1799-1,75.450

and thus escaped with facility from the most superior foe .
TURNER1-1799-1,75.451

Of the Saxons , an author of the fifth century says to a friend who was
opposed to them , " You see as many piratical leaders as you behold
rowers , TURNER1-1799-1,75.452

for they all command , obey , teach , and learn the art of pillage .
TURNER1-1799-1,75.453

Hence , after your greatest caution , still greater care is requisite .
TURNER1-1799-1,75.454

This enemy is fiercer than any other ; TURNER1-1799-1,75.455

if you be unguarded , they attack , TURNER1-1799-1,75.456

if prepared , they elude you . TURNER1-1799-1,75.457

They despise the opposing TURNER1-1799-1,75.458

and <P_76> destroy the unwary ; TURNER1-1799-1,76.459

if they pursue they overtake , TURNER1-1799-1,76.460

if they fly they escape . TURNER1-1799-1,76.461

Shipwrecks discipline them , not deter ; TURNER1-1799-1,76.462

they do not merely know , they are familiar to all the dangers of the
sea ; TURNER1-1799-1,76.463

a tempest gives them security and success , TURNER1-1799-1,76.464

for it divests the meditated land of the apprehension of a descent .
TURNER1-1799-1,76.465

In the midst of waves and threatening rocks they rejoice at their peril
, because they hope to surprise . " TURNER1-1799-1,76.466

An enemy of this hardihood and perseverance might well be contemplated
with terror by the suffering provincials . TURNER1-1799-1,76.467

A most dismal feature of their character explains impressively the
peculiar horror which every where attended their presence .
TURNER1-1799-1,76.468

It was their custom after a successful enterprize , and before they
spread the sails of return , to select by lot a tenth of their captives
, and to massacre the devoted victims to their terrible superstitions .
TURNER1-1799-1,76.469

<P_77>

<heading>

Chap. VII . TURNER1-1799-1,77.472

<font> Sequel of their History to the Period of the English Invasion .
<$$font> TURNER1-1799-1,77.473

<$$heading>

The prosperity and contiguity of Britain invited frequent visits from
this adventurous nation , TURNER1-1799-1,77.475

and their attacks were favoured by the incursion of other enemies , who
are called by the historians , Picti , Scoti , and Attacotti .
TURNER1-1799-1,77.476

In 368 a similar combination of hostilities is recorded .
TURNER1-1799-1,77.477

Nectaridus , the commander of the Saxon shore , was slain ,
TURNER1-1799-1,77.478

and the general of the island , Fullo-faudes , perished in an ambush .
TURNER1-1799-1,77.479

Several officers were sent to succeed them from the imperial court ,
TURNER1-1799-1,77.480

but their exertions being inadequate to the necessity , Theodosius , an
experienced and successful leader , was appointed by Valentinian in
their room . TURNER1-1799-1,77.481

The various nations of the Picts and the co-operating tribes roamed in a
large circle of devastation within the island , while the Saxons and
their allies with every diversity of ruin , assaulted the maritime
coasts . TURNER1-1799-1,77.482

Arriving at Richborough he marched toward <P_78> London ,
TURNER1-1799-1,78.483

and dividing his army into battalions , correspondent to the positions
of the enemies , he attacked the wasteful robbers encumbered with their
plunder . TURNER1-1799-1,78.484

The bands that were carrying away the manacled inhabitants and their
cattle he destroyed , TURNER1-1799-1,78.485

and regained the spoil ; TURNER1-1799-1,78.486

of this he distributed a small share among his wearied soliders ,
TURNER1-1799-1,78.487

the residue he restored to its owners , TURNER1-1799-1,78.488

and entered the city , wondering at its sudden deliverance , with the
glories of an ovation . TURNER1-1799-1,78.489

Lessoned by experience , and instructed by the confessions of the
captives and deserters , he combated this mixture of ferocious enemies
with well-combined artifice and unexpected attacks .
TURNER1-1799-1,78.490

To recal those who in the confusion , from fear or from cowardice , had
abandoned their ranks or their allegiance , he proclaimed an amnesty .
TURNER1-1799-1,78.491

Power is wisely exerted to teach guilt to fear ; TURNER1-1799-1,78.492

but if the cherub Mercy flies to arrest the uplifted arm , and shelters
the penitent under her wings , the governor who obeys her voice imitates
the best attribute of his creator . TURNER1-1799-1,78.493

Such examples humanize the mind , TURNER1-1799-1,78.494

purify the sentiment , TURNER1-1799-1,78.495

and sublimely advance the morality of mankind . TURNER1-1799-1,78.496

To complete the benefit he had begun , he prosecuted the war with vigour
in the north of <P_79> Britain ; TURNER1-1799-1,79.497

he prevented by judicious movements the meditated attack ,
TURNER1-1799-1,79.498

and hence the Orkneys became the scene of his triumphs .
TURNER1-1799-1,79.499

The Saxons , strong in their numbers and intrepidity , sustained several
naval encounters before they yielded to his genius .
TURNER1-1799-1,79.500

They ceased at last to molest the tranquillity of Britain ,
TURNER1-1799-1,79.501

and the addition of a deserved sur-name proclaimed the services of
Theodosius . TURNER1-1799-1,79.502

He added the province of Valentia to Roman Britain ,
TURNER1-1799-1,79.503

restored the deserted garrisons , TURNER1-1799-1,79.504

and coerced the unruly borderers by judicious stations and a vigilant
defence . TURNER1-1799-1,79.505

The Saxon conferation might be defeated TURNER1-1799-1,79.506

but was not subdued . TURNER1-1799-1,79.507

Such was its power , that they were bold enough to defy the Roman armies
by land , TURNER1-1799-1,79.508

and invaded the regions on the Rhine with a formidable force .
TURNER1-1799-1,79.509

The imperial general was unable to repulse them ; TURNER1-1799-1,79.510

a reinforcement encouraged him . TURNER1-1799-1,79.511

The Saxons declined a battle , TURNER1-1799-1,79.512

and sued for an amicable accommodation . TURNER1-1799-1,79.513

It was granted . TURNER1-1799-1,79.514

A number of the youth fit for war was given to the Romans to augment
their <P_80> armies ; TURNER1-1799-1,80.515

the rest were to retire unmolested . TURNER1-1799-1,80.516

The Romans were not ashamed to confess their dread of the invaders by a
perfidious violation of the treaty . TURNER1-1799-1,80.517

They attacked the retreating Saxons from an ambush ,
TURNER1-1799-1,80.518

and after a brave resistance the unguarded barbarians were slain or made
prisoners . TURNER1-1799-1,80.519

It is to the disgrace of literature that the national historian of the
day has presumed , while he records , to apologise for the ignominious
fraud . TURNER1-1799-1,80.520

Before many years elapsed , they renewed their depredations ,
TURNER1-1799-1,80.521

and defeated Maximus . TURNER1-1799-1,80.522

At the close of the fourth century they exercised the activity and
resources of Stilicho ; TURNER1-1799-1,80.523

but the unsuccessful issue of the unequal struggle is commemorated by
the encomiastical poet , whose genius gilds with a departing ray the
darkening hemisphere of Rome . TURNER1-1799-1,80.524

After his death new eruptions commenced . TURNER1-1799-1,80.525

They supported the Armorici in their rebellion , TURNER1-1799-1,80.526

awed the Gothic Euric , TURNER1-1799-1,80.527

began to war with the Francs TURNER1-1799-1,80.528

and , extending <P_81> the theatre of their spoil , made Belgium , Gaul
, Italy , and Germany tremble at their presence ; TURNER1-1799-1,81.529

at length Charlemagne , having prosecuted against them one of the most
obstinate and destructive wars which history has recorded , their
predominance was abased , and their spirit of aggression destroyed .
TURNER1-1799-1,81.530

<P_82>

<heading>

Chap. VIII . TURNER1-1799-1,82.533

<font> The History of Britain , from the Death of Maximus in 388 , to
the Arrival of the Saxons in 449 . <$$font> TURNER1-1799-1,82.534

<$$heading>

As we are about to introduce the Saxons upon a new theatre of splendid
enterprize , it will be useful to contemplate awhile the state of the
country , for which many of their tribes abandoned their domestic wilds
. TURNER1-1799-1,82.536

A just perception of the events in Britain , which preceded their
arrival , will usefully illustrate the causes of their progress , and
remove some of the difficulties with which this portion of our history
is peculiarly embarrassed . TURNER1-1799-1,82.537

The transactions of the natives of Britain , from the fall of Maximus ,
have been clouded from our sight by the want of accurate
historiographies of this period . TURNER1-1799-1,82.538

The crude declamation of Gildas , Bede's extracts from him , the abrupt
intimations of Nennius , and the British romance of Tyffilio or Jeffry ,
are all the original documents <P_83> which either Britons or Saxons
have left us on this curious and important interval .
TURNER1-1799-1,83.539

