<BEGIN_turner4-1756-2>

<P_30>

<font> Fri. 20 Feb. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,30.3

At home all day . TURNER4-1756-2,30.4

A very sharp frost last night TURNER4-1756-2,30.5

and a great deal of snow remains on the ground . TURNER4-1756-2,30.6

This day Mr. Sam. Gibbs's daughter was christened .
TURNER4-1756-2,30.7

In the even John Chesham and Tho. Reeve were both at my house
concerning their late brother Thomas Tomsett@ @'s affairs ,
TURNER4-1756-2,30.8

and Reeve sold to Chesham at my house , in the presence of myself , wife
, Rob. Hook and my servant-maid , all his moiety and claim of that
money due from Mr. William Rabson of Ticehurst to their late brother
Tho. Tomsett at the time of his decease , which they said was in all 5
+L {TEXT:+L5} , for the sum of 30@ @s. TURNER4-1756-2,30.9

Chesham gave to Reeve a note of hand payable to him ... for the said
30@ @s. and witnessed by myself and Robt. Hook . TURNER4-1756-2,30.10

Reeve at the same time gave to Chesham a receipt for the said note ,
wherein he acknowledges that the said note when paid is in full for his
share of the above debt . TURNER4-1756-2,30.11

The receipt was witnessed both by myself and Robt. Hook .
TURNER4-1756-2,30.12

Reeve also gave his brother Chesham an order to Mr. Rabson for him to
receive the same of Mr. Rabson , and to acquaint him that Chesham's
receipt shall be his sufficient discharge , dated today and from this
place ; TURNER4-1756-2,30.13

and lastly Reeve gave his brother Chesham a note to pay him , or his
order , on demand , the full value of the 1$$2 part of the watch of the
late Mr. Tomsett , which Reeve has in possession , and has had ever
since the 9th May last . TURNER4-1756-2,30.14

This note Master Hook and I also attested . TURNER4-1756-2,30.15

At home all day . TURNER4-1756-2,30.16

In the even read 2 books of Homer's <font> Odyssey <$$font> , translated
by Pope . TURNER4-1756-2,30.17

<font> Sat. 21 Feb. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,30.18

...

In the even Robt. Hook brought me home 1 pair boots , value 18@ @s. ,
and my wife 1 pair pumps , value 3@ @s. 9@ @d. , both to be entered to
account TURNER4-1756-2,30.20

...

<font> Sun. 22 Feb. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,30.22

At church in the morn TURNER4-1756-2,30.23

...

Halland gardener came home with me TURNER4-1756-2,30.25

and dined with us . TURNER4-1756-2,30.26

I gave John Cayley a susi {COM:sic} handkerchief , value 2@ @s.
{TEXT:missing_comma} as a present for his sister for a twelve-month's
use of Mrs. Browne's seat in the church for my wife and I , they
refusing to receive the rent <paren> as I may call it <$$paren> that I
agreed with them for . TURNER4-1756-2,30.27

After dinner the gardener and I set out for to see Buxted Place and
gardens . TURNER4-1756-2,30.28

We called at my mother's as we went TURNER4-1756-2,30.29

and stayed there about <P_31> 25 minutes . TURNER4-1756-2,31.30

I found there Miss Fanny Smith <paren> which , I think , seems to be the
lady my brother Moses@ @' affections are settled , or settling , upon
<$$paren> . TURNER4-1756-2,31.31

Whether just or imaginary I can@ @not , no , I will not , say ,
TURNER4-1756-2,31.32

but I think I was received very coldly , not only by my mother but all
the family , Miss Smith only excepted . TURNER4-1756-2,31.33

After a stay of about 25 minutes as before mentioned , we set out for
Buxted . TURNER4-1756-2,31.34

My brother and Ed. Rowles went with us . TURNER4-1756-2,31.35

We see {COM:sic} the gardens and the outside of the place , neither of
which is any ways near completed . TURNER4-1756-2,31.36

But I think when they are both finished they will both be very curious
in their kind . TURNER4-1756-2,31.37

Gave Ed. Rowles 6@ @d. for going with us and showing us the gardens .
TURNER4-1756-2,31.38

We came back to Framfield about 4 o'clock . TURNER4-1756-2,31.39

Found Miss Smith there . TURNER4-1756-2,31.40

She and we drank tea there . TURNER4-1756-2,31.41

After tea Mr. Ed. Rowles sent for us over to his house ,
TURNER4-1756-2,31.42

and the gardener and I went ; TURNER4-1756-2,31.43

we stayed TURNER4-1756-2,31.44

and drank 1 mug of beer TURNER4-1756-2,31.45

and smoked 1 pipe , TURNER4-1756-2,31.46

then went again to my mother's ; TURNER4-1756-2,31.47

Miss Smith and my brother not there . TURNER4-1756-2,31.48

My mother and I had a great many words , TURNER4-1756-2,31.49

or at least my mother had with me . TURNER4-1756-2,31.50

What my friends would have with me I know not ; TURNER4-1756-2,31.51

I have always done to the utmost of my power to serve them .
TURNER4-1756-2,31.52

I can with justice to myself and all mankind say I have their interest
entirely at heart and never think myself more happy than in serving them
; TURNER4-1756-2,31.53

and were I assured I was to blame , I should even despise myself , and
even think myself not worthy to be ranked among the rest of mankind was
I to be cruel and undutiful to a mother , and one who is a widow ,
though doubtless I am not exempt from faults . TURNER4-1756-2,31.54

No , I am mortal , TURNER4-1756-2,31.55

but still how happy could I be , would my friends let but a free and
sincere commmunication of friendship once more be opened between us ,
and which has of late been shut up , TURNER4-1756-2,31.56

but upon what account I can@ @not tell . TURNER4-1756-2,31.57

I am , I think , quite despairing , uneasy , drove almost to distress of
want of money , TURNER4-1756-2,31.58

and my mother has at this time 40 +L {TEXT:+L40} of mine on book debts
which I never did ask for , no , nor hope I ever shall .
TURNER4-1756-2,31.59

Only do I sincerely wish I could spare them 500 +L {TEXT:+L500} was it
to serve them , TURNER4-1756-2,31.60

but still why should they estrange themselves from me ?
TURNER4-1756-2,31.61

But oh , let me stop my pen and say , ' May they all be ever happy ,
TURNER4-1756-2,31.62

and may the Supreme Being crown them all with His blessings in this
transitory state and forever make them happy in the divine regions of
eternal bliss . ' TURNER4-1756-2,31.63

We came home about 8 o'clock . TURNER4-1756-2,31.64

<font> Mon. 23 Feb. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,31.65

...

After dinner a man called at the door , who says his name is Matthews ,
with a horse loaded with horse-hair hats , corks and <P_32> glovetops .
TURNER4-1756-2,32.67

I sold him 20_1$$2 lbs. short horse-hair at 3_1$$2@ @d. per lb. and
1_1$$2 lbs. long <font> ditto <$$font> at 10@ @d. , and 17 skins for
4@ @s. 4@ @d. , all which he paid me for in ready money except 9 pair
of glovetops which I took of him at 5@ @d. per pair .
TURNER4-1756-2,32.68

What he bought of me I am to pay the carriage of to London
TURNER4-1756-2,32.69

...

<font> Weds. 25 Feb. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,32.71

...

This day I bought of Dame Mott the younger of Laughton 1 gold ring , for
which I gave her 8@ @s. , and 1 silver bosom buckle , for which I gave
her 6@ @d. TURNER4-1756-2,32.73

Paid for 1$$2 a gallon flour 3_1$$2@ @d. TURNER4-1756-2,32.74

In the even I posted my day book whilst my wife read that moving scene
of the funeral of Miss Clarissa Harlowe to me . TURNER4-1756-2,32.75

Oh , may the Supreme Being give me grace to lead my life in such a
manner as my exit may in some respect be like that divine creature's .
TURNER4-1756-2,32.76

Oh , how happy must that life be which is spent in virtue
TURNER4-1756-2,32.77

...

<font> Sat. 28 Feb. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,32.79

...

In the even my wife finished reading of <font> Clarissa Harlowe <$$font>
, which I look upon as a very well-wrote thing though it must be allowed
it is too prolix . TURNER4-1756-2,32.81

I think the author keeps up the character of every person in all places
; TURNER4-1756-2,32.82

and as to the manner of its ending , I like it better than if it had
terminated in more happy consequences . TURNER4-1756-2,32.83

<font> Sun. 29 Feb. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,32.84

...

My wife and I both at church in the afternoon ; TURNER4-1756-2,32.86

the text in Ecclesiastes 9 . 11 : ' I returned , TURNER4-1756-2,32.87

and saw under the sun , that the race is not to the swift , nor the
battle to the strong , neither yet bread to the wise , nor yet riches to
men of understanding , nor yet favour to men of skill ;
TURNER4-1756-2,32.88

but time and chance happeneth to them all . ' TURNER4-1756-2,32.89

From which words we had an excellent sermon to persuade us all to repent
that we may avert the wrath of heaven at this time when there are now
abroad in the world fires , earthquakes , and at a time when our happy
isle is in hourly expectation of an invasion from a powerful enemy who
wants nothing more than to reduce us to a
{TEXT:previous_word_missing_in_edition} state of slavery and , what will
be still worse , deprive us of our holy religion and in its stead
institute popery . TURNER4-1756-2,32.90

Then should we reflect on this our happy constitution and consider how
unhappy we should be by such a resolution , and if we have not then the
greatest reason to abandon <paren> in the best manner our frail nature
can be brought to let us <$$paren> all our wickednesses and irreligion
and turn to the Lord our God , who is full of goodness , long-suffering
and of great kindness TURNER4-1756-2,32.91

...

When I drew up my rules for regimen , I mentioned to breakfast one day
in every week on only dry bread for eatables , and likewise to eat no
meat one day in every week , as also to go to bed at the least one night
in every week without a supper . TURNER4-1756-2,32.93

I am come to a resolution to fix the following days for a due observance
of the said rules , <font> viz. <$$font> , to eat only dry bread on
Sunday morn , to eat no meat on Friday , and to go to bed without a
supper every Wednesday night . TURNER4-1756-2,32.94

<P_33>

<font> Tues. 2 Mar. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,33.96

This day was Shrove Tuesday . TURNER4-1756-2,33.97

At home all day . TURNER4-1756-2,33.98

Carried up to Mrs. Day's 1 cwt. raisins ; TURNER4-1756-2,33.99

drank tea there . TURNER4-1756-2,33.100

Received of Mr. Sam. Gibbs 8@ @s. 9@ @d. in full except for the
boy's schooling and 1 lb. gunpowder . TURNER4-1756-2,33.101

In the even Tho. Davy at our house . TURNER4-1756-2,33.102

We played at cribbage ; TURNER4-1756-2,33.103

I won 3@ @d. TURNER4-1756-2,33.104

We dined today on the remains of Sunday's dinner with the addition of 3
sausages . TURNER4-1756-2,33.105

Paid for sweeping my chimney 6@ @d. TURNER4-1756-2,33.106

Heard this day that the Duke of Cumberland is a-coming into Sussex to
view the seacoast . TURNER4-1756-2,33.107

<font> Ash Wednesday , 3 Mar. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,33.108

This day I appointed to go to Lewes to meet Mr. Step. Fletcher ,
TURNER4-1756-2,33.109

but did not go on account that I wanted but a small parcel , and the
roads very bad ; so that my trouble and expense would have been more
than the profits arising from what I should have bought .
TURNER4-1756-2,33.110

At home all day . TURNER4-1756-2,33.111

Dined {TEXT:Dine} on a piece of pickle pork , light pudding and greens .
TURNER4-1756-2,33.112

In the even I was sent for down to Halland . TURNER4-1756-2,33.113

Accordingly about 7 o'clock I called on Tho. Davy ,
TURNER4-1756-2,33.114

and we went down . TURNER4-1756-2,33.115

When I came , I found that it was Ann Smith had sent for me to ask my
advice in the following affair , as she tells it , to wit :
TURNER4-1756-2,33.116

About 8 years ago she kept the house of Tho. Baker in the parish of
Waldron , who being an elderly man , and at the same time in all
probability might have a feeble insurrection of an unruly member which
might prompt him to make his addresses to her , as she says he did ; and
as he found his affection slighted , and understanding she was indebted
to Mr. Venner of the same parish the sum of 2 +L {TEXT:+L2} 7@ @s. 0@
@d. , and as a means , as he simply imagined , to ingratiate himself in
her favour , he <paren> as she solemnly avers <$$paren> went and paid
the same without her knowledge or orders ; TURNER4-1756-2,33.117

and , when he had so done , never offered to make any drawback in her
wages when she left him , though she says he often told her he had paid
it ; TURNER4-1756-2,33.118

and when she went away , she went TURNER4-1756-2,33.119

and asked Mr. Venner whether she owed him anything , who answered , '
No ! ' TURNER4-1756-2,33.120

So it is plain Baker had paid the money . TURNER4-1756-2,33.121

But as Baker is now in low circumstances <paren> though still a single
person <$$paren> , he has lately made a demand of the same ,
notwithstanding it has been near 8 years since , and <paren> as she says
<$$paren> never pretended to have any demand on her before , and she
always looked upon it as a free gift . TURNER4-1756-2,33.122

Now my advice was as this , to wit : if what she repeated to me was true
and that he actually paid it without her knowledge and designed it as a
free gift to her without any proviso to the contrary , I thought she was
not obliged to pay it , only as change in circumstances and gratitude
should always oblige everyone to return favours where <P_34> they have
received any . TURNER4-1756-2,34.123

But if it was any ways by her order he paid it , or she was to outset it
in her wages or to make him any other gratuity and did not , I thought
in justice she ought to pay him . TURNER4-1756-2,34.124

Came home about 8.10 . TURNER4-1756-2,34.125

Read part of Homer's <font> Odyssey <$$font> . TURNER4-1756-2,34.126

At church in the morn . TURNER4-1756-2,34.127

<font> Tues. 9 Mar. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,34.128

At home all day . TURNER4-1756-2,34.129

In the afternoon I was sent for over to Mrs. Virgoe's to talk with Mr.
Dungate concerning her giving Mrs. Edwards security for the money due
from Mrs. Virgoe to Mrs. Edwards , TURNER4-1756-2,34.130

and we appointed to meet Mr. Dungate at Mrs. Edwards on Thursday next
at 3 o'clock . TURNER4-1756-2,34.131

John Watford a-gardening for me . TURNER4-1756-2,34.132

For dinner we had pork , light pudding and greens .
TURNER4-1756-2,34.133

Mrs. Virgoe drank tea with us . TURNER4-1756-2,34.134

In the even read the writings of a farm called Chillys in Mayfield ,
which was entailed to Mrs. Virgoe's father and his heirs for ever ,
TURNER4-1756-2,34.135

but he cut the said entailment off TURNER4-1756-2,34.136

and entailed it again to Mrs. Virgoe and her heirs for ever after the
death of her mother TURNER4-1756-2,34.137

...

<font> Thurs. 11 Mar. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,34.139

After dinner I carried Mrs. Virgoe to Mrs. Edwards's <paren> on a
horse of Tho. Fuller's <$$paren> where she gave Mrs. Edwards a bond
for 153 +L {TEXT:+L153} as a collateral security for the same sum due
from Mr. Isaac Virgoe deceased , with the addition of about 6 +L
{TEXT:+L6} for interest , the original debt being no more than 147 +L
{TEXT:+L147} 6@ @s. 3@ @d. TURNER4-1756-2,34.140

The bond was filled up by Mr. Dungate and witnessed by himself and Mr.
Richd. Coomber of Wadhurst TURNER4-1756-2,34.141

...

<font> Sun. 14 Mar. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,34.143

...

About 2 o'clock my brother Moses and sister Sally came to see us
TURNER4-1756-2,34.145

...

My sister Sally stayed all night TURNER4-1756-2,34.147

...

In the even I drew up the form of a will to send to Tho. Mepham on
board His Majesty's Ship <font> Torbay <$$font> in order for him to
write over again <paren> I wrote it at the desire of Robt. Hook , who
desired to get it wrote by Tho. Mepham <$$paren> , wherein he gives all
the moneys that may be due to him at the time of his death , either as
prize money or pay , to be equally divided between his brother Joseph
and sisters Eliz. , Martha and Lucy , share and share alike , and also
makes them all joint executor and executrices TURNER4-1756-2,34.149

...

<font> Mon. 15 Mar. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,34.151

...

After tea I went with Sally to Framfield , as did Robert Hook , who went
forward to Uckfield . TURNER4-1756-2,34.153

I went to talk with my mother concerning her leaving off trading .
TURNER4-1756-2,34.154

Robt. Hook called me at Framfield about 9.15 TURNER4-1756-2,34.155

and came home about 10.45 . TURNER4-1756-2,34.156

As we came by Whyly , we met with Tho. Fuller the chandler who was then
in his road home but , considering the coldness of the weather , thought
it better to come back home by the Street on proviso I would give him a
dram of gin . TURNER4-1756-2,34.157

Oh ! that baneful liquor ; TURNER4-1756-2,34.158

that mankind should be so infatuated as to give way to anything for an
opportunity to drench themselves with such a slow and lingering poison !
TURNER4-1756-2,34.159

...

<P_35>

<font> Tues. 16 Mar. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,35.162

...

In the even posted my day book to this day . TURNER4-1756-2,35.164

Trade I find to be very dull . TURNER4-1756-2,35.165

Not that I want to get an estate ; TURNER4-1756-2,35.166

no , if it will please the Supreme Being to bless me with only enough to
pay everyone their own and to maintain my family in an indifferent
manner , I am satisfied . TURNER4-1756-2,35.167

A very sharp wind these 3 or 4 days past which has dried the roads
prodigiously even to make the dust steam TURNER4-1756-2,35.168

...

<font> Weds. 17 Mar. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,35.170

...

In the afternoon Mr. Terry , tobacconist , called on me
TURNER4-1756-2,35.172

and drank tea with us TURNER4-1756-2,35.173

...

I went down to Jones's with Mr. Terry TURNER4-1756-2,35.175

and stayed until 2 o'clock ; TURNER4-1756-2,35.176

I spent 12@ @d. TURNER4-1756-2,35.177

Mr. Terry I think to be a very pushing man in his trade ;
TURNER4-1756-2,35.178

he is by birth a Yorkshireman , TURNER4-1756-2,35.179

has been abroad in the merchant's service in Virginia 1_1$$4 years ,
TURNER4-1756-2,35.180

and rode in the tobacco trade for Mr. Albiston before he entered into
trade for himself . TURNER4-1756-2,35.181

I was a little in liquor . TURNER4-1756-2,35.182

<font> Thurs. 18 Mar. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,35.183

...

My brother Moses and I went down to Mr. Peckham's to advise with him
about my mother's leaving off trade , TURNER4-1756-2,35.185

but he having company , could not get to consult him in the manner I
wanted to do . TURNER4-1756-2,35.186

But he has promised me to consider of it and that I shall hear from him
again TURNER4-1756-2,35.187

...

I came to John Jones's about 7.50 , TURNER4-1756-2,35.189

and there being a public vestry for the making a poor_book , I went in
TURNER4-1756-2,35.190

and found there Jer. French , Jo. Fuller , Jo. Burges , Jo. Currant
, Will. Piper , John Cayley , Robt. Hook and John Watford Jr.
TURNER4-1756-2,35.191

But some or most of them being a little in liquor , they could not agree
in some of their arguments . TURNER4-1756-2,35.192

We all broke up about 8.40 . TURNER4-1756-2,35.193

<font> Fri. 19 Mar. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,35.194

This day I found , by looking over my accounts , that when Mr. French
and I balanced accounts on the 8th day of January , he charged me with
only 6 load of wood in the year 1753 , though I think I must inevitably
have in that year 8 load , TURNER4-1756-2,35.195

for I well remember I had both wood and faggots of Mr. French in that
year , TURNER4-1756-2,35.196

and of Mr. John Vine I am assured I bought 2 cord .
TURNER4-1756-2,35.197

Now Mr. Jam. Hutson fetched all my wood that year
TURNER4-1756-2,35.198

<paren> for I bought it all in the place <$$paren> TURNER4-1756-2,35.199

and he charges me for the carriage of 10 load . TURNER4-1756-2,35.200

When Mr. Vine and I balanced , he had omitted the 2 cord of wood , but
that I have since told him of . TURNER4-1756-2,35.201

As Mr. French charged me with but 6 load , I must consequently owe him
for 2 load more TURNER4-1756-2,35.202

...

<font> Sat. 20 Mar. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,35.204

...

After supper read the 13th book of Homer's <font> Odyssey , <$$font>
wherein I think the soliloquy which Ulysses makes when he finds the
Phaeacians have , in his sleep , left him on shore with all his treasure
, and on his native shore of Ithaca <paren> though not known to him
<$$paren> , contains a very good lesson of morality
TURNER4-1756-2,35.206

...

<P_36>

<font> Sun. 21 Mar. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,36.209

I was at home all day , but not at church . TURNER4-1756-2,36.210

Oh fie ! no just reason for not being there TURNER4-1756-2,36.211

...

<font> Tues. 23 Mar. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,36.213

...

Molly French dined with us on the fillet of that leg of veal bought a-@
@Saturday last , roasted in the oven , with a pudding under it .
TURNER4-1756-2,36.215

This day I entertained my scholars with the sight of a show which was at
Jones's ; TURNER4-1756-2,36.216

the man performed in my schoolroom . TURNER4-1756-2,36.217

I think it was a very good performance of the kind .
TURNER4-1756-2,36.218

He performed several very curious balances , TURNER4-1756-2,36.219

ate fire and red_hot tobacco-pipes , brimstone etc.
TURNER4-1756-2,36.220

I gave him 12@ @d. TURNER4-1756-2,36.221

...

After schooltime I went down to Mr. Jer. French's to ask Mr. Sam.
Virgoe whether it made any difference or whether he insisted on my going
out of his house at New Lady Day . TURNER4-1756-2,36.223

He has given me leave to stay as long as I like , providing I will pay
him 12@ @d. per week for rent TURNER4-1756-2,36.224

...

<font> Sun. 28 Mar. <$$font> TURNER4-1756-2,36.226

Mr. Ormeroid breakfasted with us TURNER4-1756-2,36.227

and dined , as did Charles Diggens , on a roast goose , a piece of bacon
, plum batter pudding and broccoli . TURNER4-1756-2,36.228

We smoked a pipe or two TURNER4-1756-2,36.229

and then went down to Jones's , where we drank one bowl of punch and two
mugs of bumboo ; TURNER4-1756-2,36.230

Mr. Ormeroid went away after the punch . TURNER4-1756-2,36.231

I spent 12@ @d. TURNER4-1756-2,36.232

and came home again in liquor . TURNER4-1756-2,36.233

Oh ! with what horrors does it fill my breast to think I should be
guilty of doing so - and on a Sunday , too . TURNER4-1756-2,36.234

Let me once more endavour never , no , never , to be guilty of the same
again . TURNER4-1756-2,36.235

I am certain it proceeds , not from the love of liquor , but from a too
easy temper and want of resolution . TURNER4-1756-2,36.236

Not at church all day . TURNER4-1756-2,36.237

In the morn there was no churching , Mr. Porter not being well ,
TURNER4-1756-2,36.238

and in the afternoon Laughton curate preached here .
TURNER4-1756-2,36.239

I this day made an offer to Charles Diggens to take him in partners with
me in the Framfield shop , TURNER4-1756-2,36.240

and which he agreed to on my proposals , to wit : to bring in half the
value of the stock and , if he had not money enough , to be bound with
him to {TEXT:too} anybody so far as 100 +L {TEXT:+L100} , he paying the
interest , and if that was not enough , for him to pay me interest at 4
+L {TEXT:+L4} per_cent {TEXT:missing_period} for enough to make up half
the stock . TURNER4-1756-2,36.241

