<BEGIN_victoria-186x-official-letters-2>

<P_1,190>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_the_Earl_of_Clarendon}

{ED:Copy}

Balmoral , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,190.5

<font> 17th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} May <$$font> 1864 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,190.6

- It strikes the Queen that it would be <font> very <$$font> useful , if
Lord Clarendon would take an opportunity of seeing the Prince of Wales ,
and <$$font> preparing <$$font> him for what the Danish Government , in
<font> all <$$font> probability , will have to consent to ; and above
all , to show him that it will be for the <font> good <$$font> , and for
the permanent peace , of Denmark and of the <font> world <$$font> , not
to attempt to force a union which would only produce a constant
recurrence of what has taken place .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,190.7

The Queen would not wish Lord Clarendon to enter into too many details ,
or to {TEXT:so} say <font> anything <$$font> of a very <font>
confidential <$$font> nature ; but to speak generally , and in doing so
, to speak as he , and as Lord Russell did , to the Queen - in a true
spirit of <font> impartiality <$$font> ; showing that <paren> as Lord
Clarendon said to the Queen <$$paren> " you <font> can@ @not <$$font>
ignore the strong and unanimous feeling of whole Germany " ; and
cautioning the Prince of Wales against violent abuse of Prussia ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,190.8

for it {COM:missing_"it"} is fearfully dangerous for the Heir to her
throne to take up one side violently ; while he is bound by so many
<P_1,191> ties of blood to Germany , and only quite lately , by marriage
, to Denmark . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,191.9

The Queen knows it is not <font> easy <$$font> where one's feelings are
strongly moved ; VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,191.10

but if one is determined to act only in a spirit of justice and
conciliation <paren> would to God that this country had done so from the
very beginning ! <$$paren> , one can keep clear of violent partisanship
, VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,191.11

and one's own sympathies and affections never can interfere with one's
duty . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,191.12

In the interest of this country , above all , but also in the interest
of Denmark , it is most essential that the Prince of Wales should
understand this . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,191.13

And she feels sure that Lord Clarendon can do this better than anyone
else . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,191.14

The Prince of Wales was anxious to speak to the Queen about the
Conference , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,191.15

but there was no time , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,191.16

and Lord Clarendon might say the Queen had desired him to speak to him .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,191.17

It should be , as she before said , as <font> generally <$$font> as
possible . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,191.18

The Queen trusts that Lord Clarendon spoke to Sir A. Paget , and that
he will not return uninstructed what to say .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,191.19

<P_1,197>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Balmoral , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,197.22

<font> 27th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} May <$$font> 1864 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,197.23

- The Queen hears this evening , from Lord Granville , what passed
yesterday in the House of Lords ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,197.24

and though she has not seen what was said , she wishes to thank Lord
Russell for having spoken the <font> truth <$$font> .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,197.25

It is <font> not <$$font> the first time that Lord Russell has had to
defend the highest in the country from base calumny ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,197.26

and she <font> never <$$font> forgot what <font> he <$$font> did in '54
; VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,197.27

but she must own that she thought her terrible misfortunes , her
unprotected position without a <P_1,198> husband to stand by and protect
her , her known character for fearless straightforwardness , her
devotion <font> now <$$font> and ever to her country <paren> a proof of
which is her weakened health and strength <$$paren> , ought to have
prevented <font> such <$$font> an attack - which <font> to a lady
<$$font> she can only characterise as ungentlemanlike .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,198.28

It is enough to have suffered as the Queen has done the whole winter and
spring from anxiety on this unhappy question , to see her own country
hurried on by the Press and by many public men into violent and
passionate excitement against our <font> natural ally <$$font> , abusing
that great country till she returns it in the same manner - that country
from which <font> everyone <$$font> nearest and dearest to the Queen has
come , and to which she is bound by every possible tie - and to have
worked and striven to prevent further mischief , and to calm the excited
passions , on all sides , to guard England from being hurried on in her
blind passion into war , the results of which might be very alarming and
might leave us isolated ; VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,198.29

the Queen says , all this , unaided , uncheered by her great and good
husband , is surely enough without being exposed to such base
insinuations . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,198.30

The Queen hopes everyone <font> will <$$font> know <font> how <$$font>
she resents Lord Ellenborough's conduct and how she despises him !
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,198.31

But with a good <font> conscience <$$font> one must bear calumny with
patience ! VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,198.32

The Queen feels <font> very <$$font> anxious about to-morrow's
Conference . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,198.33

She trusts Germany will be satisfied and Denmark yield ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,198.34

but everything should be done to prevent a sudden breaking-up of the
Conference , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,198.35

and she trusts that every attempt will be made to consider every
proposal in detail before they are finally treated as inadmissible .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,198.36

<P_1,199>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

{ED:Telegram}

Balmoral , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,199.40

<font> 27th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} May <$$font> 1864
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,199.41

<paren> 5 p.m. <$$paren> VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,199.42

- Much concerned at your telegram .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,199.43

Would it be of any use the Queen writing to the King of Prussia ?
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,199.44

The Queen trusts to your not allowing the Conference to break off
abruptly , without trying every means of keeping Peace .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,199.45

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_the_Earl_of_Derby}

{ED:Private}

Balmoral , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,199.48

<font> 28th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} May <$$font> 1864 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,199.49

- The Queen has been <font> so much <$$font> shocked at what passed in
the House of Lords on Thursday evening , that she can@ @not help writing
a line to Lord Derby to express her feelings on the subject ; and her
regret that , when Lord Ellenborough made his malignant and unmanly
insinuations against her , Lord Derby , as head of the party to which
Lord Ellenborough belongs , and as one who , having been twice her Prime
Minister , must well know how <font> utterly <$$font> unfounded such
accusations are , should not have marked his condemnation by a few words
of contradiction or reproof . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,199.50

The Queen's Ministers , to whatever party they <P_1,200> may belong ,
<font> know well <$$font> how completely she has , on all occasions ,
set aside her personal and private feelings , and laboured
conscientiously and unceasingly for what she believes to be the interest
of the country . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,200.51

In this unhappy quarrel her sole anxiety has been to preserve this
country from war , and to see impartial justice done on all sides .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,200.52

... As for Lord Ellenborough himself , the Queen can only treat what he
says with the most profound contempt ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,200.53

but she must say she <font> had <$$font> thought that her heavy
affliction , her isolated position without her dear husband , her weak
health and shattered nerves , the result of a broken heart and of her
constant and unaided and uncheered labours for her country , ought to
have <font> protected her against <$$font> such unmanly and abominable
insinuations ! VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,200.54

<P_1,216>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,216.57

<font> 12th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} June <$$font> 1864 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,216.58

- The Queen hears with <font> much <$$font> regret of the decision at
which the Cabinet has arrived -
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,216.59

for it amounts to this : that if the Danes accept and Germany refuses
the offer of arbitration , England will be pledged to declare war
against Germany ! VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,216.60

Considering existing circumstances and the feeling of the country , the
Queen will not say that she will <font> ultimately <$$font> withhold her
consent to the proposal of the Government , <font> should it be <$$font>
for the <font> interests of this country <$$font> .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,216.61

It appears , however , to the Queen to be <font> too important <$$font>
a decision to be arrived at without the <font> fullest consideration
<$$font> . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,216.62

Have the Government contemplated the <font> nature <$$font> of the
assistance it would be in their power to afford to Denmark ? the
possibility , if not probability , of France taking the opposite side ,
of Russia and Sweden continuing to stand aloof ; not <P_1,217> to speak
of the effect it would have in uniting Germany to a man in the quarrel ?
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,217.63

The Queen <font> shudders <$$font> to think of the position in which
<font> this <$$font> country would thus be placed - standing alone in
support of Denmark against all Europe !
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,217.64

Under <font> no <$$font> circumstances should a threat of affording
material aid be a <font> one-sided <$$font> measure .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,217.65

In order to take away its offensive character it should be so worded as
to show to <font> both <$$font> belligerents , that <font> whichever
<$$font> side objected to a proposal , which must be regarded as
equitable in itself , would forfeit all claim to the support of the
English Government . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,217.66

The Queen thinks it would commit her Government less and would probably
be more likely to be successful , were some such expression used instead
of a peremptory threat of affording material aid to either party .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,217.67

The Queen can@ @not but think that , were it known to Austria and
Prussia , that the conditions respecting Rendsburg and Kiel would not be
insisted upon , they would be better disposed to agree to arbitration
respecting the frontier . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,217.68

The Queen would wish her letter to be brought before the Cabinet <font>
before any further step <$$font> is <font> taken <$$font> , and with as
little delay as possible . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,217.69

<P_1,225>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Viscount_Palmerston}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,225.72

<font> 22nd {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} June <$$font> 1864 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,225.73

- The Queen has naturally learnt with deep concern that the <font> hopes
<$$font> that arbitration or the proposal of the French to take by vote
the opinion of the mixed populations would be accepted have been
frustrated by the <font> total refusal <$$font> of everything
{COM:font_change_around_"every"} by the Danes .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,225.74

Lord Palmerston entirely agreed with the Queen yesterday that no stone
should be <font> left unturned <$$font> to try and prevent the
resumption of hostilities , and mediation the Queen thinks <font> might
<$$font> still be tried , as the German Powers would <font> all agree to
that <$$font> . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,225.75

But <font> what can <$$font> be done if <font> Denmark insanely and
incredibly refuses every proposal <$$font> but the <font> one <$$font>
line , which we know the other parties never could be brought to agree
to , and which the King of the Belgians wrote to the Queen the other day
it was <font> utterly impossible <$$font> the Germans could accept with
any chance of security for the future .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,225.76

Lord Russell's proposal , which was <font> not yet <$$font> sanctioned
by the Government , was to give material aid <paren> merely by sea
<$$paren> to Denmark , <font> if <$$font> she <font> accepted
arbitration <$$font> ; VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,225.77

but she has <font> absolutely refused <$$font> that , as well as
<P_1,226> <font> mediation <$$font> and the <font> last French proposal
<$$font> ! VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,226.78

<font> All <$$font> chance of bringing <font> her <$$font> to reason
seems therefore hopeless , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,226.79

and the Queen can@ @not but think that this country would do best were
she to declare that , after repeated efforts of one kind or another
which were first refused by one side and then by the other , she has
<font> no other course <$$font> but to <font> withdraw <$$font> and to
refuse to take <font> any further part <$$font> in this <font>
lamentable <$$font> contest . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,226.80

The French are evidently most anxious <paren> from Lord Cowley's letters
<$$paren> to get <font> us <$$font> into the quarrel and to set <font>
all <$$font> Europe in a blaze by rousing Italy , and by getting the
<font> Rhine ! VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,226.81

All <$$font> this points to <font> our <$$font> keeping out of it
altogether . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,226.82

The Queen concludes the Cabinet will meet tomorrow and perhaps they will
hit upon some further pacific measure ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,226.83

but she owns she fears the <font> total refusal <$$font> of the Danes ,
which puts <font> them entirely <$$font> in the wrong , seems to
preclude all hope of this . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,226.84

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,226.86

<font> 23rd {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} June <$$font> 1864 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,226.87

- The Queen returns Lord Cowley's letters , which alarm her very much .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,226.88

If the Emperor sanctions and is sincere in the half overtures made by M.
Drouyn de Luys , she trembles at the nature and extent of the contest in
which he would engage us , in alliance with France and Italy against the
rest of Europe . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,226.89

It seems , however , to the Queen , that the Emperor has no serious
intention of involving himself in a war with united Germany , supported
by Russia , in which , whether on the Rhine or in Italy , the whole
brunt of the struggle must fall on France , and that he has made these
overtures either under the influence of pique at the meeting of
Sovereigns at Kissingen or Carlsbad , or , which is still more likely ,
that he hopes to lead England so far in support of Denmark as to make it
impossible for us to draw back with honour .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,226.90

We should thus find ourselves , if we listened to <P_1,227> such
overtures , in the <font> very <$$font> position in which it has been
the object of the <font> Emperor <$$font> to place us , and that of
<font> her <$$font> Government to <font> avoid <$$font> , that , viz. ,
of being <font> committed <$$font> to afford <font> single-handed
<$$font> an <font> ineffectual <$$font> assistance to Denmark in the
renewed hostilities which now seem imminent .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,227.91

The Queen would refer Lord Russell to a letter she wrote last night to
Lord Palmerston , on hearing of the termination of the Conference .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,227.92

Though hastily written she can add little to what she there says ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,227.93

and she will only repeat that the <font> more <$$font> she <font>
reflects <$$font> on the present state of affairs the more she is
convinced that the <font> interests <$$font> of <font> this country
<$$font> imperatively demand that we should avail ourselves of the
opportunity offered by the <font> total <$$font> rejection by Denmark of
<font> all proposals <$$font> either of mediation or arbitration , to
declare to her in the most explicit manner , that , if hostilities were
in consequence renewed , she must look to no aid from us , and that we
should withdraw from all further attempts to reconcile the unhappy
differences between her and Germany .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,227.94

The German acceptance of " good offices " leaves a hope that they might
resolve into arbitration ; VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,227.95

the peremptory refusal of everything by Denmark excludes all hope
whatever . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,227.96

The Queen would wish , as usual , that her letter be communicated to the
Cabinet . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,227.97

P.S. - Lord Cowley seems to have gone a little far in " making capital
" of what , as far as the Queen knows , never occurred .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,227.98

Was any proposal made for arbitration - <font> the Emperor arbitrator
<$$font> ? VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,227.99

<P_1,228>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,228.102

<font> 23rd {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} June <$$font> 1864 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,228.103

- The Queen has just received Lord Russell's letter
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,228.104

and is glad to see that he shares <paren> as she was sure he would
<$$paren> her great alarm at the designs of France , and of what an
alliance with her against the rest of Europe would entail .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,228.105

The Queen feels <font> confident <$$font> that Lord Russell and the
whole Cabinet will see that , great as are the difficulties of the
present crisis , <font> far greater <$$font> are sure to arise from
allowing this country to get entangled in a war in which its <font>
interests <$$font> are not concerned .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,228.106

The consequences of such a course may be as interminable as they would
be disastrous to the <font> whole <$$font> of Europe .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,228.107

<P_1,230>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,230.110

<font> 25th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} June <$$font> 1864 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,230.111

- The Queen has received with much satisfaction Lord Russell's <P_1,231>
report of the decision of the Cabinet , to which she gives her most
entire approval ; feeling as she does that it is the only true one for
the <font> safety <$$font> and <font> dignity <$$font> of this country .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,231.112

The Queen feels sure that Lord Russell will make his statement on Monday
with his usual skill and eloquence , and that he will be able to show
that it is not the fault of this Government , if we have not succeeded
in our attempts to settle this unfortunate quarrel peaceably .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,231.113

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_the_Earl_of_Clarendon}

{ED:Copy}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,231.116

<font> 25th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} June <$$font> 1864 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,231.117

- Lord Clarendon will easily believe with what feelings of relief and
thankfulness she has received Lord Clarendon's and Lord Russell's
letters this evening . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,231.118

The terrible anxiety she experienced , unsupported and uncheered by her
beloved great husband <paren> by whose side she went through so many
trials and anxieties with a light heart , Nor could I weary , heart or
limb , When mighty Love would cleave in twain The lading of a single
pain and <font> part it <$$font> , giving half to him <$$paren> , was
almost wearing her out ; VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,231.119

for she felt so alarmed for this country , for Europe , for the world ,
were we dragged on by a blind infatuation ; not to speak of all she
would have suffered . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,231.120

To Lord Clarendon for his great skill , act , and conciliatory spirit in
the management of these concluding Conferences , the Queen's sincerest
thanks are due . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,231.121

The Queen doubts not Lord Palmerston and Lord Russell will make their
statements well . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,231.122

The extremely pacific tone of so many of the newspapers to-day has
struck the Queen much . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,231.123

But now the Cabinet must <font> insist <$$font> on a sensible ,
conciliatory tone on the part of our Agents abroad -
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,231.124

and the threatening , menacing tone <font> must <$$font> be given
<P_1,232> up . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,232.125

Can@ @not Lord Clarendon give some assistance in talking to Counts
Bernstorff and Apponyi unofficially , and point out what is wished here
, and what would prevent further complications ?
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,232.126

Much more will be effected by such a tone than by bluster and bully ,
which we see have entirely failed .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,232.127

The Queen believes that when Denmark sees she wo@ @n't be helped , she
will come to terms much sooner with the German Powers .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,232.128

<P_1,239>

{ED:_Queen_Victoria_to_Viscount_Palmerston}

{ED:Copy}

<font> 7th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} July <$$font> 1864 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,239.132

- The Queen acknowledges Lord Palmerston's letter of the 5th ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,239.133

and ... will approve of the Reverend Mr. Conway , Vicar of Rochester ,
to succeed the lamented Doctor Cureton as Canon of Westminster and
Rector of St. Margaret's . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,239.134

But she must add that she is much surprised at the tone of Lord
Palmerston's remarks , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,239.135

for he can never pretend that the Sovereign has not the right , as
everyone else has , to ask anyone she chooses about any person who is
recommended for an appointment to her .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,239.136

The Queen makes it a rule , as the Prince did , to make enquiries in
various quarters about the qualifications of those who are recommended
to her , whether high or low , for appointments , public or private ,
and then to take her decision accordingly .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,239.137

She has constantly asked for several names , from other departments , to
be submitted to her , in order that she might have a choice and decide
upon the best . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,239.138

If <$$font> one <$$font> only is submitted to her , the Queen has no
alternative , but either to approve or disapprove .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,239.139

It can@ @not be supposed or believed that Lord Palmerston can recommend
clergymen upon his own personal knowledge of them ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,239.140

and it does not necessarily <P_1,240> follow that the Queen should have
such implicit reliance upon Lord Palmerston's information , as not to
wish to have the power to consider the comparative merits of more than
one candidate , submitted by the Minister , before giving her sanction
to the appointment . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,240.141

<P_1,241>

{ED:_Queen_Victoria_to_Viscount_Palmerston}

Osborne , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,241.144

<font> 16th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} July <$$font> 1864 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,241.145

- ... The Queen is truly rejoiced at the armistice and intended
negotiations for peace , which seems <font> at last to be <$$font>
seriously intended ; VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,241.146

the Queen doubts not this is the <font> result <$$font> of the <font>
peace policy <$$font> here , and of the vote in the House of Commons .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,241.147

She is convinced that Denmark will be stronger and far safer <font>
without <$$font> than with even <font> any <$$font> portion of the
duchies . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,241.148

<P_1,242>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Sir_John_Lawrence}

Osborne , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,242.151

<font> 26th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} July <$$font> 1864 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,242.152

- The Queen ought and meant , long ere this , to have acknowledged Sir
J. Lawrence's letter of the 21st January , with very satisfactory
accounts of the state of her great Indian Empire .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,242.153

She regrets that he has not written again ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,242.154

but hopes to hear soon from him an account of the different places he
has visited , and the state of the people and country .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,242.155

Sir John will , she trusts , everywhere express the deep interest the
Queen takes in the welfare of her Indian subjects , and how doubly she
feels this interest , as her beloved great husband took so very deep an
interest in India , and was constantly occupied with everything which
could lead to the development of the resources of that great Empire ,
and to the prosperity and kind and just treatment of the natives ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,242.156

the Queen feels this is a sacred legacy ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,242.157

and wishes that her dear husband's great name should ever be looked upon
with love by her Indian subjects .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,242.158

The Queen concludes with every wish for Sir J. Lawrence's good health
and prosperity . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,242.159

<P_1,243>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Osborne , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,243.162

<font> 8th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} Aug. <$$font> 1864 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,243.163

- The Queen is extremely glad to hear of the intended exchange between
Sir A. Buchanan and Lord Napier , which she is sure will tend to a good
understanding between England and Prussia . ...
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,243.164

{ED:_Queen_Victoria_to_Viscount_Palmerston}

{ED:Draft}

<font> 27th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} Nov. <$$font> 1864 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,243.167

- The Queen returns the correspondence sent by Lord Palmerston , between
himself and Mr. Gladstone . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,243.168

She has read it with the most careful attention ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,243.169

and must express her cordial and unqualified approval of every word said
by Lord Palmerston . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,243.170

The Queen can@ @not express too strongly her <P_1,244> anxiety that her
Government shall not allow their deliberations as to the amount of force
to be kept up for the coming year , to be influenced by any
considerations connected with the elections , or , indeed , by any other
consideration than what the honour and safety of the country may demand
. VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,244.171

She feels that she may rely implicitly upon Lord Palmerston to prevent
any hasty and ill-advised reduction in our Army or Navy - any reduction
in which the Queen thinks would not be justified by the present aspect
of affairs abroad , and which , like most former reductions , would
probably prove to be anything but an economy in the end .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,244.172

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,244.174

<font> 8th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} Dec. <$$font> 1864 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,244.175

- The Queen would wish to say with reference to what Lord Russell said
to her this morning about the opening of Parliament , that she would be
thankful if he would take any opportunity that might offer to undeceive
people upon that head . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,244.176

The Queen was <font> always <$$font> terribly nervous on <font> all
<$$font> public occasions , but <font> especially <$$font> at the
opening of Parliament , which was what she <font> dreaded for days
<$$font> before , and hardly ever went through without suffering from
headache before or after the ceremony ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,244.177

but <font> then <$$font> she had the <font> support <$$font> of her dear
husband , whose presence alone seemed a tower of strength , and by whose
dear side she <font> felt safe <$$font> and <font> supported <$$font>
under <font> every <$$font> trial .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,244.178

<font> Now <$$font> this is <font> gone <$$font> ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,244.179

and no child can feel more shrinking and nervous than the poor Queen
does , when she has to <font> do <$$font> anything , which approaches to
representation ; VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,244.180

she dreads a Council <font> even <$$font> .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,244.181

Her nerves are <font> so <$$font> shattered that <font> any <$$font>
emotion , <font> any <$$font> discussion , <font> any <$$font> exertion
causes much disturbance and suffering to her whole frame .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,244.182

The constant anxieties inseparable from her difficult and unenviable
position as Queen , and as mother of a large <P_1,245> family <paren>
and that , a <font> Royal family <$$font> <$$paren> , without a husband
to guide , assist , soothe , comfort , and cheer her , are <font> so
<$$font> great that her nervous system has no power of recovery , but on
the contrary becomes weaker and weaker .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,245.183

This being the case , Lord Russell <paren> whose kind consideration she
fully appreciated <$$paren> will at once see that any great exertion
which would entail a succession of <font> moral shocks <$$font> as well
as very great fatigue , which the Queen must avoid as much as possible ,
would be <font> totally out of the question <$$font> .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,245.184

She has no wish to shut herself up from her loyal people ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,245.185

and has and will at any time seize any occasion which might offer to
appear amongst them <paren> painful as it ever is now <$$paren> ,
provided she could do so without the fatigue or exertion of any <font>
State <$$font> ceremony entailing full dress , etc.
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,245.186

Lord Russell may make what use he chooses of the <font> substance
<$$font> of this letter . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,245.187

<P_1,252>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,252.190

<font> 23rd {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} Feb. <$$font> 1865 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,252.191

- As this draft contains only a report of the conversation Lord Russell
has had with Mr. Adams , the Queen can@ @not object to it ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,252.192

but she would ask Lord Russell whether , having done all we legally can
do to prevent the acts of which the Federal Government certainly have
just cause to complain , it will not seem <paren> particularly after the
language towards England used by Mr. Seward himself <$$paren> that we
are seeking now to defend ourselves from any complicity in such acts in
a somewhat undignified manner .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,252.193

It will certainly be ascribed in the United States to the fear created
in England by the late successes of the Federal armies .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,252.194

The Queen must pause , too , before she gives her consent to the
proposed communication to the Confederates being made through the
Federal Government . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,252.195

It seems to her not only unnecessarily offensive towards the
Confederates , but to place her own Government in the humiliating
position of appearing still further to be acting under the dictation of
a Government which has not been sparing in the use of insulting and
threatening language . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,252.196

<P_1,254>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,254.199

<font> 24th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} Feb. <$$font> 1865 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,254.200

- The Queen returns the draft .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,254.201

She did not mean to object to its being sent , but simply to express her
fears that the course now taken by her Government may be misconstrued ,
and may not , at this late period of the contest , have the effect
expected . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,254.202

<P_1,261>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Viscount_Palmerston}

{ED:Draft}

<font> 13th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} March <$$font> 1865 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,261.206

- The Queen has taken some time to consider Lord Palmerston's last
letter relative to the promotion to the Peerage of Sir A. Cockburn .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,261.207

She is naturally at all times unwilling to refuse to accede to measures
which her Prime Minister informs her are important , either for the
support of the Government <P_1,262> or for the transaction of business
in the House of Lords . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,262.208

As it appears that a promise was made to Sir A. Cockburn , though
unauthorised by her , the Queen will sanction his Peerage ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,262.209

but her Majesty still retains her opinion of the absolute duty , which
devolves upon her , of requiring that Peerages shall not be conferred
upon any persons who do not in addition to other qualifications possess
a good moral character . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,262.210

<P_1,266>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Mrs._Lincoln}

{ED:Draft}

Osborne , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,266.214

<font> 29th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} April <$$font> 1865 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,266.215

Dear Madam , - Though a stranger to you , I can@ @not remain silent when
so terrible a calamity has fallen upon you and your country ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,266.216

and must express personally my deep and heartfelt sympathy with you
under the shocking circumstances of your present dreadful misfortune .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,266.217

No one can better appreciate than I can , who am myself utterly
broken-hearted by the loss of my own beloved husband , who was the light
of my life , my stay , my all , what your sufferings must be ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,266.218

and I earnestly pray that you may be supported by Him to Whom alone the
sorely stricken can look for comfort , in this hour of heavy affliction
! VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,266.219

With the renewed expression of true sympathy , I remain , dear Madam ,
your sincere friend , Victoria R.
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,266.220

<P_1,278>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Balmoral , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,278.223

19 <font> Oct. <$$font> 1865 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,278.224

- The melancholy news of Lord Palmerston's death reached the Queen last
night . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,278.225

This is another link with the past which is broken ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,278.226

and the Queen feels deeply , in her desolate and isolated condition ,
how one by one those tried servants and advisers are removed from her ,
whom experience and knowledge of past events rendered so valuable .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,278.227

Were her dear , great husband by her side all these trials would be easy
to bear ; VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,278.228

but now she stands alone , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,278.229

and it is very hard to bear .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,278.230

<P_1,279>

The Queen can turn to no other but to Lord Russell , an old and tried
friend of hers , to undertake the arduous duties of Prime Minister , and
to carry on the Government . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,279.232

She has otherwise nothing further to add to her letter of yesterday .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,279.233

<P_1,283>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,283.236

<font> 30th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} Oct. <$$font> 1865 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,283.237

- Since the Queen saw Lord Russell she has had a very anxious letter
from the Duke of Cambridge on the subject of the War Office , expressing
an <font> earnest <$$font> hope that <font> no <$$font> change would
take place in the <font> War <$$font> Office .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,283.238

The Queen of course will say nothing further to the Duke beyond assuring
him that the well-being of the Army , and its proper administration ,
will be one of her <font> first <$$font> objects .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,283.239

But she must say that on due consideration she feels that it would be
<font> very <$$font> serious <font> if both <$$font> the Secretary and
Under-Secretary of War were changed ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,283.240

and she wishes Lord Russell would well consider whether some other
arrangement could be made by which Lord De Grey or
{COM:previous_word_emphasized_in_original} Lord Hartington <P_1,284>
could be retained for that Office .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,284.241

So much depends on the judicious administration of that Office , and on
the good understanding which exists between the Horse Guards and the War
Office . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,284.242

<P_1,294>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Osborne , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,294.245

<font> 12th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} Jan. <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,294.246

- The Queen has received Lord Russell's letter of yesterday .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,294.247

She approves of Mr. Goschen's being appointed Chancellor of the Duchy
of Lancaster . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,294.248

Without <P_1,295> refusing her approval to his having a seat in the
Cabinet , she should wish to know what the opinion of the Cabinet is
upon it , whether it would not have been better , if he had first been a
year or so in the Government without a seat in the Cabinet .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,295.249

May it not create much jealousy ?
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,295.250

The Queen approves of Lady Palmerston being made a Viscountess in her
own right with remainder to her son Mr. Wm. Cowper .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,295.251

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Osborne , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,295.253

<font> 22nd {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} Jan. <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,295.254

- The Queen can assure Lord Russell that he need be under no
apprehension of her not arriving in time for the opening of Parliament .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,295.255

If she has the whole Monday open she can go when she likes ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,295.256

and with the <font> Alberta <$$font> she has no longer cause to fear a
bad passage . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,295.257

To enable the Queen to go through what she
{COM:previous_word_emphasized_in_original} <font> can <$$font> only
compare to an execution , it is of importance to keep the <font> thought
<$$font> of it as much from her mind as possible ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,295.258

and therefore the going to Windsor <font> to wait <$$font> two <font>
whole <$$font> days for this dreadful ordeal would do her positive harm
. VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,295.259

The Queen has never till <font> now <$$font> mentioned this painful
subject to Lord Russell , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,295.260

but she wishes once <P_1,296> for all to just express her own feelings .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,296.261

She must , however , premise her observations by saying that she <font>
entirely <$$font> absolves Lord Russell and his colleagues from <font>
any <$$font> attempt ever to <font> press <$$font> upon her what is so
very painful an effort . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,296.262

The Queen <font> must say <$$font> that she does feel <font> very
bitterly <$$font> the want of feeling of those who <font> ask <$$font>
the Queen to go to open Parliament .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,296.263

That the public should wish to see her she fully understands ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,296.264

and has <font> no <$$font> wish to prevent -
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,296.265

quite the contrary ; VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,296.266

but why this wish should be of so <font> unreasonable <$$font> and
unfeeling a nature , as to <font> long <$$font> to <font> witness
<$$font> the spectacle of a poor , broken-hearted widow , nervous and
shrinking , dragged in <font> deep mourning <$$font> , alone
{COM:previous_word_emphasized_in_original} <font> in <$$font> state
{COM:previous_word_emphasized_in_original} as a <font> Show <$$font> ,
where she used to go supported by her husband , to be gazed at , without
delicacy of feeling , is a thing <font> she can@ @not <$$font>
understand , and she never could wish her bitterest foe to be exposed to
! VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,296.267

She <font> will <$$font> do it <font> this time - as <$$font> she
promised it , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,296.268

but she owns she resents the unfeelingness of those who have <font>
clamoured <$$font> for it . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,296.269

Of the suffering which it will cause her - nervous as she now is - she
can give no idea , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,296.270

but she owns she hardly knows <font> how <$$font> she will go through it
. VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,296.271

Were the Queen a woman possessed of strong nerves , she would not mind
going through this painful exhibition ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,296.272

but her nerves - from the amount of anxiety , and constant and unceasing
work , which is quite overwhelming her , as well as from her deep sorrow
- are terribly and <font> increasingly <$$font> shaken ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,296.273

and she will suffer much for some time after , from the shock to her
nervous system which this <font> ordeal <$$font> will occasion .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,296.274

It is hard , when she works and slaves away all day and till late at
night , not to be spared at least such trials .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,296.275

<P_1,297>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Sir_Charles_Wood}

{ED:Copy}

Osborne , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,297.279

<font> 3rd {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} Feb. <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,297.280

- The Queen has received with the deepest concern Sir Charles Wood's
letter tendering his resignation of the important office which he
administered so ably . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,297.281

The Queen feels that she must accept it ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,297.282

but it is with the hope , the confident hope , that she may still retain
him as one of her Councillors .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,297.283

Alone , crushed , isolated , deprived of the help and advice of her
beloved husband , the Queen clings strongly to all her old and true
friends and advisers , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,297.284

and amongst them she has ever had reason to reckon Sir Charles Wood .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,297.285

Her dear husband had a strong sense of what the Queen owed to Sir
Charles in carrying through the amalgamation of the Indian Army ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,297.286

and the Prince and herself could never forget the assistance he rendered
us on various trying occasions by his advice .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,297.287

The Queen feels that Sir Charles Wood's retirement <P_1,298> will be
severely felt , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,298.288

for no one could more ably conduct the very important office of
Secretary of State for India than he has done for six years and a half .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,298.289

She , however , can@ @not conclude without expressing again a hope that
he will not find a seat in the Cabinet without any office too much for
his health . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,298.290

It would be a <font> great <$$font> satisfaction to hear !
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,298.291

<P_1,299>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Osborne , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,299.294

<font> 7th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} Feb. <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,299.295

- The Queen acknowledges Lord Russell's letter of yesterday .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,299.296

She wishes to know when she is to receive the Seals from Sir C. Wood ,
and deliver them to his successor and to Lord Hartington ?
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,299.297

The Queen hopes it may be delayed for some days , as she is feeling
terribly shaken , exhausted , and unwell from the violent <font> nervous
shock <$$font> of the effort she made on Tuesday ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,299.298

and Dr. Jenner says she <font> must <$$font> have <font> complete
<$$font> rest and quiet while she remains here , before returning to
Windsor , which she intends doing by the 20th or 21st .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,299.299

... VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,299.300

<P_1,300>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Osborne , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,300.303

<font> 18th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} Feb. <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,300.304

- The Queen has received Lord Russell's letter .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,300.305

She had always contemplated returning on the 21st to Windsor , till the
floods , which seemed still increasing , rendering a residence at
Windsor , in the opinion of Dr. Jenner , unwholesome , and making it
impossible for the Queen to get the air and exercise which are so
necessary to her , induced her to think of putting off her departure
from Osborne for a few days .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,300.306

She never , however , contemplated , under any circumstances , remaining
here beyond the end of this week , or the Monday following .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,300.307

The Queen will now return on Wednesday in accordance with the wishes of
her Ministers ; VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,300.308

but in return she hopes Lord Russell will in future trust to her doing
what she believes to be <font> necessary <$$font> for the good of the
Country , without her movement being dictated to her .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,300.309

If the Queen seems to shrink at this moment from returning to Windsor ,
it is that , knowing the importance of her life , and that it is her
<font> duty <$$font> in consequence to try and preserve her broken
health and <font> very <$$font> <P_1,301> shattered nerves <paren> every
day more and more shattered <$$paren> from becoming seriously worse ,
she fears she could not now at Windsor find the pure air or be able to
take the exercise so essential for this object .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,301.310

The Government may rely on her always doing what she <font> can <$$font>
without being pressed . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,301.311

It is only for the sake of the Country , of her people and her children
that she has any desire to live ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,301.312

but to <font> enable <$$font> her to live , she <font> must <$$font> do
what she believes to be indispensable for her health .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,301.313

The Queen desired Dr. Jenner to explain to Lord Russell the shattered
state of her nerves , and the necessity of entire change of air <paren>
to Scotland <$$paren> at least twice a year .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,301.314

She intends now to remain at Windsor till the middle of April , and then
to return here <paren> previous to going to Scotland <$$paren> unless
the continuance of the floods , making Windsor unwholesome , should
oblige her to return here sooner .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,301.315

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Osborne VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,301.317

{ED:undated;_?19th_Feb._1866}

- The Queen will knight Mr. Grant when she is at Windsor .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,301.319

She can@ @not say she thinks his selection a good one for Art .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,301.320

He boasts of <font> never <$$font> having been in Italy or studied the
old Masters . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,301.321

He has decidedly much talent ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,301.322

but it is the talent of an amateur .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,301.323

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,301.325

<font> 26th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} Feb. <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,301.326

- Though the Queen does not wish any appointment of a successor to her
valued and deeply lamented friend Sir C. Phipps to take place till the
end of this week or beginning of the next , she is anxious without
further delay to mention to Lord Russell what he will already have heard
from Mr. Gladstone . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,301.327

This is that General Grey's position should be a <font> recognised
<$$font> one - as her <P_1,302> Private Secretary .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,302.328

Every public man has one VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,302.329

<paren> the Prime Minister has two <$$paren> ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,302.330

and it is perfectly absurd to <font> pretend <$$font> that the Queen has
<font> none <$$font> , when she has for the last four years been
constantly obliged to use General Grey and poor Sir C. Phipps as her
Secretaries . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,302.331

General Grey being now nearly twenty-nine years in her service , having
been the Prince's Private Secretary for twelve years and acted as hers
for more than four years - it is absolutely necessary that his position
should <font> now <$$font> be recognised , as every year the Queen will
require more help and assistance instead of less , and a new person can
hardly be expected to understand the delicate and responsible task of
communicating the Queen's wishes to her Ministers when she is unable to
do so herself . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,302.332

The Queen therefore trusts Lord Russell will not object to what the
Queen feels to be an absolute necessity .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,302.333

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Lord_Charles_FitzRoy}

<font> Confidential . <$$font>
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,302.335

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,302.336

<font> 2nd {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} March <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,302.337

- The Queen has experienced so many proofs of Lord Charles FitzRoy's
devotion to her service and of his {COM:missing_"his"} consideration for
her feelings and comfort , that she thinks it due to him to enter
confidentially into the reasons which have influenced her choice , with
reference to the various changes which the most sad and serious loss of
our valued , dear , and faithful friend , Sir Charles Phipps , has
rendered necessary in her household .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,302.338

These changes the Queen intends should consist in the separation of the
various duties performed in conjunction by Sir Charles Phipps and
General Grey into two distinct offices : her Private Secretary to
transact the official business and her Privy Purse for financial duties
and those of a more domestic nature .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,302.339

The length of time that both General Grey <P_1,303> and Sir Thomas
Biddulph have been in the Queen's service , and the ability which they
have both displayed in their important offices , entitle them of course
to the offer of these posts to hold them as long as their health and
strength will allow . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,303.340

But the Queen does not hesitate to say that she thinks that Lord Charles
FitzRoy is well qualified to fill either post , and that she looks to
him with the object at some future time .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,303.341

There remains the Office of Master of the Household , vacant by the
appointment of Sir Thomas Biddulph to be Privy Purse .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,303.342

For this also it immediately occurred to the Queen , that she could find
no person as fit as Lord Charles FitzRoy .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,303.343

But she also recollected that even if , consistently with the care of
his children , he could possibly have accepted it , requiring , as it
does , residence wherever she is <paren> with rare exceptions <$$paren>
and in her house <paren> for Sir Thomas Biddulph's case was exceptional
and only acquiesced in , after some years , and to avoid the loss of his
services <$$paren> , that office had never been devolved on any person
of the rank of Lord Charles FitzRoy .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,303.344

The Queen has therefore selected , as the next best she could think of ,
Sir John Cowell , being unmarried , and , though young <paren> for the
Queen must gradually call up younger persons about her <$$paren> , very
steady and intelligent , and one to whom she is deeply indebted for all
the difficulties that he has encountered throughout his career with
Prince Alfred , now just finished , and for whom the beloved Prince
Consort entertained the sincerest regard and affection .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,303.345

The Queen , considering Lord Charles FitzRoy as one of those among her
gentlemen with whom her Master of the Household is brought much in
contact , will feel greatly obliged to him to lend him in every way he
can his assistance and advice in any difficulties he may meet with in
Society , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,303.346

and she is sure that Sir John will always receive such counsel from him
with gratitude and attention .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,303.347

The object of the Queen in this letter has been to <P_1,304> impress
upon Lord Charles FitzRoy the great wish she had to have included him ,
if possible , in some of the present arrangements , and the hope with
which she looks forward to him <paren> should she live <$$paren> on some
future occasion which in the course of time may arise .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,304.348

P.S. - Since writing the above the Queen finds that it is not certain
whether the titles of the above offices can be given according to
precedents . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,304.349

But if not , the same duties will be respectively performed by the
General and Sir Thomas Biddulph , as Joint Keepers of the Privy Purse .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,304.350

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,304.352

<font> 4th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} March <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,304.353

- The Queen accepts the arrangement as proposed by Lord Russell ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,304.354

but she must say she would have been better satisfied , and thinks the
Public also would be better satisfied , if the <font> honest <$$font>
course had been adopted by giving the proper name to the duties which it
is admitted that General Grey or someone else <font> must <$$font>
perform . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,304.355

<P_1,306>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Buckingham Palace , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,306.358

<font> 23rd {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} March <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,306.359

- The Queen has heard from Mr. Gladstone that the Cabinet is to meet
to-day to consider their course with respect to Lord Grosvenor's motion
. VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,306.360

She would therefore ask Lord Russell seriously to consider whether it
will not be better to yield to the very general desire that Reform
should be treated as a whole ; and , by postponing the present Bill till
the other measures are also ready for introduction , to avoid the risk
of a crisis which , taking place at this moment , would interfere so
injuriously with public business .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,306.361

<P_1,309>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Mr._Peabody}

{ED:Draft}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,309.365

<font> 26th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} March <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,309.366

- The Queen hears that Mr. Peabody intends shortly to return to America
, VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,309.367

and she would be sorry that he should leave England without being
assured by herself , how deeply she appreciates the noble act of more
than princely munificence by which he has sought to relieve the wants of
the poorer class of her subjects residing in London .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,309.368

It is an act , as the Queen believes , wholly without a parallel , and
which will carry its best reward in the consciousness of having
contributed so largely to the assistance of those who can little help
themselves . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,309.369

The Queen would not , however , have been satisfied without giving Mr.
Peabody some public mark of her sense of his munificence ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,309.370

and she would gladly have conferred upon him either a Baronetcy or the
Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath , but that she understands Mr.
Peabody to feel himself debarred from accepting such distinctions .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,309.371

It only remains , therefore , for the Queen to give <P_1,310> Mr.
Peabody this assurance of her personal feelings , which she would
further wish to mark by asking him to accept a miniature portrait of
herself which she will desire to have painted for him , and which , when
finished , can either be sent to him in America , or given to him on the
return , which she is happy to hear he meditates , to the country that
owes him so much . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,310.372

<P_1,318>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,318.375

<font> 10th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} April <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,318.376

- The Queen feels so painfully and strongly the monstrous wickedness ,
as well as the fearful results which a war in Germany will entail , that
she has felt it a <font> duty <$$font> as a near relation and friend of
the King's , to make a <font> strong <$$font> appeal to him <font>
personally <$$font> to desist ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,318.377

and she sends for Lord Russell and Lord Clarendon the translation of
what she has written ! VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,318.378

She has sent it off to-day by a servant of hers , enclosed by
Lieutenant-General Grey to Lord A. Loftus , asking him to deliver it
himself to the King , as <font> no one <$$font> can be relied on there ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,318.379

and she thinks it better to send it through <font> no <$$font> one else
. VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,318.380

<P_1,320>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Osborne , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.383

<font> 25th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} April <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.384

- The Queen has received Lord Russell's letter informing her of the
critical state of affairs . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.385

She trusts that the Government will have a majority ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.386

but , should they not , she thinks that it will require much careful
consideration as to what should be done .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.387

Under ordinary circumstances a dissolution so soon after another is a
thing much to be deprecated , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.388

and indeed under <font> any <$$font> it is much to be regretted .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.389

But there are many considerations on this occasion which must not be
lost sight of . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.390

<font> First . <$$font> The Country is said not to be anxious for a
change of Government . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.391

<font> Secondly . <$$font> Is there any chance , if there should be one
, of its being one <font> able <$$font> to stand ?
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.392

<font> Thirdly . <$$font> Ought not the Country to be asked to
pronounce its opinion on the subject of Reform ?
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.393

<font> Fourthly . <$$font> If a Conservative Government were to come in
, they would probably also ask for a dissolution ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.394

and considering that this Parliament was returned to support Lord
Palmerston , it might be difficult to refuse it ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.395

consequently the anger of agitation would not be avoided .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.396

It is not to be denied that a dissolution at this moment would be
fraught with much inconvenience and even risk to the Public Service ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.397

but so would a change of Government ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.398

and the Queen can@ @not help hoping that some course might be found
possible , by which , without lowering the dignity or injuring the
honour of the Government , the wishes of Parliament could be conciliated
. VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.399

These are the questions which strike the Queen as very important , and
which she wishes should be very carefully considered .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,320.400

<P_1,321>

The Government may rely on her support in any decision which they may
submit to her . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,321.402

<P_1,324>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Osborne , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,324.405

<font> 29th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} April <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,324.406

- The Queen thanks Lord Russell for his letter ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,324.407

and hears with much satisfaction of the intention of her Ministers not
to resign ; VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,324.408

for she looks with much anxiety and alarm to the consequence of a
political crisis in the present state of public affairs .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,324.409

At the same time she must express her anxious hope that Lord Russell
will give its due weight to the evident feeling of the House of Commons
, and that in determining not to abandon the Queen's service , he will
be careful to avoid anything which , from an idea that the honour and
consistency of the Government would require it , might have the effect
of shutting the door to such a settlement of this most difficult
question <paren> even if it should not be possible to effect it in the
course of this Session <$$paren> as may be accepted by all Parties .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,324.410

<P_1,326>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,326.413

<font> 7th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} May <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,326.414

- The Queen has seen a letter from Lord Russell to Lord Clarendon ,
<P_1,327> at the end of which he speaks of Mr. Gladstone's want of
conciliatoriness . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,327.415

She deeply regrets this , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,327.416

for she thinks that this question of Reform ought to be settled for the
good of the Country , in as quiet and conciliatory a manner as possible
, and that the Government should try and meet the wishes of Parliament
and the Country , as much as it is in their power to do .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,327.417

Should the Queen write in this sense to Mr. Gladstone ?
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,327.418

<P_1,328>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,328.421

<font> 25th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} May <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,328.422

- The Queen thinks it right to send this memorandum to Lord Russell
relative to her health . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,328.423

She <font> must <$$font> say that she feels she could
{COM:previous_word_emphasized_in_original} <font> not <$$font> go on
working as she does , <font> without any real <$$font> relaxation
<paren> for <P_1,329> she never is without her boxes and despatches ,
etc. ; which her Minister <font> often <$$font> are , for a few weeks
at least <$$paren> <font> if <$$font> she did <font> not <$$font> get
that change of scene and that pure air , which always gives her a <font>
little <$$font> strength <font> twice <$$font> a year .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,329.424

Nine or ten days are very short ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,329.425

but <font> still <$$font> they will do her some good ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,329.426

and she will have <font> more courage <$$font> to struggle onwards ,
though every year , which adds to her age , finds her nervous system and
general strength <font> more and more <$$font> shaken .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,329.427

She always fears some complete breakdown some day ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,329.428

and she is just now greatly in <font> want <$$font> of <font> something
<$$font> to revive her after an autumn , winter , and spring of great
anxiety , and many sorrows and annoyances of a domestic nature , which
shake her very nervous temperament very severely .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,329.429

The Queen's absence in Scotland has <font> never <$$font> caused <font>
any <$$font> inconvenience hitherto ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,329.430

and the Queen would talk over with Lord Russell and Lord Clarendon
<font> every possible <$$font> contingency which would have to be
decided , with great promptitude , so that a mere reference by cypher
<paren> and she could establish one specially between herself and Lord
Clarendon <$$paren> would give an answer without a moment's delay .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,329.431

The Queen goes to Cliveden to-morrow till the 2nd or 3rd June ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,329.432

but can see any of the Ministers there <font> any day <$$font> between
12 and 4 , if they will only let her know .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,329.433

Perhaps one could come on Tuesday , and again on Friday or Saturday .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,329.434

From the <font> 2nd or 3rd <$$font> till the 13th , the Queen would be
<font> here <$$font> . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,329.435

The Queen would , if it were <font> very important <$$font> , put off
going to Balmoral , to the 14th , but <font> not <$$font> longer as she
<font> must <$$font> be back on the 26th , on account of Princess
Helena's wedding on July 5th .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,329.436

{ED:Copy}

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_the_Earl_of_Derby}

{ED:Confidential}

Cliveden , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,329.440

<font> 29th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} May <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,329.441

- The Queen had hoped to have seen Lord Derby before this time ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,329.442

but was <P_1,330> prevented by the alarming illness of his dear little
grandson , at whose recovery she so truly rejoices .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,330.443

She , however , can@ @not refrain from writing him a few confidential
lines to express her great anxiety at the present state of affairs .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,330.444

The Queen has known Lord Derby long and well ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,330.445

and has had so many proofs of his loyalty and devotion to her person and
service , that she does not think she will appeal to him in vain , when
she expresses her earnest hope that no violent or factious opposition
will be pursued on this important question of Reform , which has for so
many years been the cause of so much difficulty to succeeding
Governments . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,330.446

However unpopular the question of Reform may be in itself , it is one ,
the calm and dispassionate discussion of which is of the utmost
importance . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,330.447

To raise agitation in the country , which is now , thank God , so quiet
, in the present state of foreign affairs , would be most unfortunate ,
not to say alarming . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,330.448

She does ask Lord Derby to try and use his influence with his Party to
treat this question <font> not <$$font> as a mere Party one , but with a
view of settling it and trying to come to some agreement upon it , so
that it may not become the cause of agitation and excitement in the
country , the results of which might be very serious .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,330.449

The Queen will not repeat what she has often said to Lord Derby , viz.
how worn , shaken , and shattered she feels ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,330.450

but she may say , how peculiarly unfit she feels at the present moment
to meet a crisis which can lead to no permanent good .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,330.451

She has gone through such anxiety and worry this winter and spring ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,330.452

and Dr. Jenner thinks it absolutely necessary that she should have some
complete change of air and scene ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,330.453

she is therefore going on the 13th June for <font> ten <$$font> days
only to Balmoral , the loss of her usual spring visit being considered
so very detrimental to her health .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,330.454

Hitherto that short change has kept her from suffering <font> seriously
<$$font> from the constant wear and tear of anxiety which since December
1861 she has been exposed to .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,330.455

The Queen writes this letter without the knowledge <P_1,331> of anyone .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,331.456

She hopes soon to see Lord and Lady Derby at Windsor .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,331.457

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Cliveden , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,331.459

<font> 31st {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} May <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,331.460

- The Queen grows so alarmed at the present aspect of public affairs ,
and at the prospect of a Ministerial crisis , while negotiations and
discussions on which the peace of the world may depend , are just about
to take place , that she must appeal strongly to Lord Russell and Mr.
Gladstone to endeavour to avert the danger which now again seems
imminent . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,331.461

From the nature of the amendments moved , from the quarters from which
they proceed , and from the tone of the debates in which they are
discussed , it seems to the Queen <font> absolutely <$$font> hopeless to
expect the Reform measure to pass during the present Session , or that
changes will not be carried in it , which the Government might think it
inconsistent with their pledges to accept .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,331.462

At the same time it is so evidently settled , that the Queen can@ @not
but hope , were <font> more time <$$font> given for deliberation , that
such changes might be made in the measure , as would conciliate the
support of those parties who now oppose it so vehemently .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,331.463

It is certain that the Redistribution of Seats Bill was brought in
somewhat hastily , in compliance with the pressure of the House of
Commons . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,331.464

If the Government should think it inconsistent with their honour , that
the Session should terminate without the settlement of the question ,
might not a long adjournment take place , with a view to the removal of
some of the <P_1,332> objections which have been made to the Bill in its
present shape , and the discussion be resumed in October with better
prospects of success ? VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,332.465

<font> Any <$$font> change at the Foreign Office at the <font> present
<$$font> moment would be most unfortunate , indeed <font> most <$$font>
serious ; VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,332.466

and it seems to the Queen that not only it would {COM:sic} not be
inconsistent with the honour of Government to postpone the further
discussion of the Reform Bill at <font> this <$$font> moment , on <font>
that <$$font> ground ; but that it would be their <font> duty <$$font>
towards <font> herself <$$font> and the <font> Country <$$font> to take
<font> this <$$font> or <font> any <$$font> other step which may avert a
crisis which can@ @not but have a <font> most injurious <$$font>
influence on the conduct of <font> those <$$font> negotiations on which
<font> the Peace of the world <$$font> depends !
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,332.467

The Queen hopes Lord Russell will communicate this urgent appeal from
her to his colleagues in the Cabinet .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,332.468

<P_1,334>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

{ED:Cypher_Telegram}

Balmoral , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,334.472

<font> 19th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} June <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,334.473

- The Queen considers it the bounden duty of her Government , in
<P_1,335> the present state of the Continent , to set aside all personal
considerations , and to continue at their posts .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,335.474

In fact , knowing the impossibility of forming another Government , the
Queen could not accept their resignations .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,335.475

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Balmoral , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,335.477

<font> 20th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} June <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,335.478

- The Queen has received Lord Russell's letter with the greatest concern
. VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,335.479

The adverse vote in the House of Commons , and the step which the
Ministers have thought it right to take in consequence , have taken her
completely by surprise , having understood from Lord Russell , and
others of the Government , whom she saw before going to Scotland , that
there was no fear of a crisis .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,335.480

In the present state of Europe , and the apathy which Lord Russell
himself admits to exist in the country on the subject of Reform , the
Queen can@ @not <P_1,336> think it consistent with the duty which the
Ministers owe to herself and to the country , that they should abandon
their posts in consequence of their defeat on a matter of detail <paren>
not of principle <$$paren> in a question which can never be settled
unless all sides are prepared to make concessions ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,336.481

and she must therefore ask them to reconsider their decision .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,336.482

Lord Russell knows how often and how earnestly the Queen has appealed
both to himself and Mr. Gladstone , not to incur the danger of
producing a Ministerial crisis in the present state of Continental
affairs , by forcing on the discussion of a question which all parties
in Parliament , except that section of the House of Commons holding
extreme opinions , were anxious to postpone .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,336.483

There has been no desire in any party to overthrow a Government which
has the general confidence of the country , particularly as regards its
Foreign policy , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,336.484

and instead of losing character by consenting to retain Office , the
Queen is sure their doing so would be appreciated by the country as an
act of duty and patriotism . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,336.485

The Queen must therefore repeat that she can@ @not accept the
resignations tendered to her , till the Ministers have again maturely
considered their position . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,336.486

<P_1,338>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Balmoral , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,338.489

<font> 23rd {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} June <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,338.490

- The Queen has received Lord Russell's letter of yesterday .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,338.491

She regrets that it will be quite impossible for her after her long
night journey to go to London on Tuesday ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,338.492

but she will be glad to receive Lord Russell or any other of her
Ministers who may wish for an audience , both that day and Wednesday at
Windsor . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,338.493

There is nothing in the conditions which Lord Russell mentions as
necessary to the continuance in <P_1,339> office of her present
Ministers , to which the Queen would not be prepared to accede ; though
she can@ @not but regret , in a question which requires , for any chance
of a settlement , considerable concessions on all sides , that her
Ministers adhere so rigidly to a particular amount of franchise .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,339.494

The Queen can have no objection to the statement Lord Russell proposes
to make in Parliament , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,339.495

and would even wish her hesitation to receive the resignation of her
Ministers , and her reasons for doing so , to be stated more strongly
and explicitly . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,339.496

The Queen will hope to see Lord Russell at one o'clock on Tuesday , or
at half past twelve , if there is a train which arrives at that time .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,339.497

<P_1,342>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,342.500

<font> 26th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} June <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,342.501

- The Queen has received Lord Russell's telegram informing her of the
final resignation of her Ministers , which she has now no longer any
alternative but to accept , and which she does with much regret .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,342.502

The Queen has to-night written to Lord Derby ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,342.503

and has asked him to undertake to form a Government .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,342.504

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_the_Earl_of_Derby}

{ED:Draft}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,342.507

<font> 27th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} June <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,342.508

- Her Ministers having placed their resignations in her hands , the
Queen turns to Lord Derby , as to the only person whom she believes
capable of forming such an Administration as will command the confidence
either of the country or herself , and have the best chance of
permanency . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,342.509

The differences of opinion as to the principles on which the Government
should be conducted , do not appear to the Queen to be such as ought to
make it impossible for Lord Derby to obtain the assistance of some , at
least , of those who have been supporters , or even Members , of the
late Government . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,342.510

And any assistance which it may be in the Queen's power to afford
towards the formation of a new Government on a more extended basis , she
will be most anxious to offer .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,342.511

The Queen will not name any time for seeing Lord Derby ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,342.512

but whenever he shall have had an opportunity of speaking to those
friends whom he may wish to consult in the first instance , and
expresses a wish to see her , she will be glad to receive him .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,342.513

<P_1,343>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_General_Grey}

{ED:Copy}

<font> 28th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} June <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,343.517

- The Queen wishes General Grey would tell Lord Derby that things are
naturally greatly changed and altered since the terrible misfortune
which laid low , for ever , the Queen's happiness ; that she depends
much on those who surround her ; that her health and nerves are much
shattered ; and that therefore she can@ @not be expected to change
<P_1,344> those who are in constant attendance on her like her Equerries
, VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,344.518

and in this Lord Russell has concurred .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,344.519

With respect to the Lord Chamberlain , the case <paren> in a different
way <$$paren> is equally important .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,344.520

The Queen can@ @not appear at her ordinary Court festivities ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,344.521

and requires a Lord Chamberlain of experience and character , who can
control the Court and be looked up to by the young and inexperienced
Prince and Princess of Wales ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,344.522

and therefore the Queen would wish to retain Lord Sydney if possible .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,344.523

All the other officers who change are at Lord Derby's disposal ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,344.524

but he must be so good as to communicate with no one , before submitting
the name to her , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,344.525

and perhaps Lord Derby would communicate about her Household
appointments through General Grey .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,344.526

<P_1,347>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Earl_Russell}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,347.529

<font> 28th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} June <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,347.530

- The Queen has delayed answering Lord Russell's letter on the subject
of further creations of Peers , till she had referred to former similar
occasions and ascertained what had usually been done .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,347.531

She is always sorry not to be able to comply with any request made by
Lord Russell , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,347.532

but she can@ @not find that it has been by any means the usual practice
to make fresh Peers on the recommendation of an outgoing Minister ,
particularly when several had only shortly before been created .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,347.533

It certainly was not done by Sir R. Peel or Lord Aberdeen , nor she
thinks by Lord Derby . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,347.534

Considering , therefore , that several Peers have already been created
since Lord Palmerston's death , the Queen must ask Lord Russell to limit
his recommendation to Lord Monck , who has well deserved the distinction
by his administration of Canada .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,347.535

She has no object to Lord Cremorne's promotion ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,347.536

and approves of Mr. May being made a K.C.B.
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,347.537

The Queen also consents to the creation of the Baronetcies recommended
by Lord Russell . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,347.538

<P_1,352>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_General_Grey}

Frogmore , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,352.541

<font> 30th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} June <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,352.542

- Does General Grey think it would be <font> possible <$$font> for the
Queen to say <font> something <$$font> of this kind to Lord Derby , as
she <font> owns <$$font> she is <P_1,353> <font> greatly alarmed
<$$font> at Lord Stanley's inability for that office ?
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,353.543

" The Queen has the greatest opinion of Lord Stanley's great abilities ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,353.544

but she would wish in <font> perfect <$$font> frankness to ask Lord
Derby whether he thinks the <font> Foreign Office <$$font> just the one
best suited to him . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,353.545

Has he sufficient knowledge of Continental affairs and foreigners for
that very difficult post ; VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,353.546

and may he not be inclined to go too far in the line of non-interference
{COM:font_change_around_"non"} , which might become serious , when
matters take a form which would require us in the interests of humanity
and Europe in general , to take a prominent part , in conjunction with
France , to put a stop to further bloodshed ? "
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,353.547

Could she say something of this kind ?
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,353.548

Lord Carnarvon would be far the best , the Queen thinks .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,353.549

<P_1,363>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Mr._Walpole}

{ED:Draft}

<font> 1st {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} Aug. <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,363.553

- The Queen must agree in the opinion expressed by Mr. Walpole .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,363.554

But it seems to her a very unsatisfactory state of things that the law
can@ @not be maintained , or the undoubted right of the Crown upheld ,
or the comfort of the people themselves consulted , without the danger
of a collision with those who seem determined to set all law and
authority at defiance . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,363.555

She trusts that the result of the consideration <P_1,364> which the
Government is giving to this question will be to avert this danger for
the future . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,364.556

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Lord_Stanley}

Osborne , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,364.558

<font> 7th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} Aug. <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,364.559

- The Queen would be quite ready and glad to see Mr. Flad , if Lord
Stanley would bring him here any day , before the 19th , in the hope of
being able to put an end to this sad captivity , or at least detention
of these unfortunate people .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,364.560

The Queen knows that Lord Derby spoke in her name to Lord Stanley about
Hanover , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,364.561

and she thinks it may be useful for him and Lord Derby to see the answer
she wrote to the Duke of Cambridge on the subject .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,364.562

The Queen thinks it highly important that England should not appear
utterly indifferent to what passes in Germany , a country allied in so
many ways to her , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,364.563

else the effect would be very injurious to the position and influence of
England . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,364.564

Germany's great wish is to be <font> united <$$font> under the supremacy
of Prussia , and not divided into North and South , the result of which
would be to throw the latter into the arms of France - than which
nothing could be worse . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,364.565

A strong , united , liberal Germany would be a most useful ally to
England . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,364.566

The Queen will take care to let Lord Stanley see any private
intelligence which she may receive , which can throw light on the
present state of feeling in Germany .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,364.567

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_the_Earl_of_Derby}

Osborne , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,364.569

<font> 8th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} Aug. <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,364.570

- The Queen has been much alarmed by the telegram from Lord Cowley which
she received this morning , in which he says that " France has asked
Prussia for the frontier of 1814 , and even more " ! !
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,364.571

<P_1,365>

England can@ @not remain a passive spectator of such proceedings ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,365.573

and the Queen relies on Lord Derby and his Cabinet giving this his
immediate and serious consideration .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,365.574

<P_1,367>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Lord_Charles_FitzRoy}

Balmoral , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,367.577

<font> 1st {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} Sept. <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,367.578

- The Queen felt <font> too <$$font> nervous to tell Lord Charles this
evening what she meant , viz. : that <font> unless <$$font> it were a
really rainy day , she had made up <font> her mind <$$font> to make the
great effort of going for a short while this year to the Gathering .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,367.579

It will be a great effort , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,367.580

and is a thing we always disliked ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,367.581

but she wishes <font> to do <$$font> what <font> she can <$$font> , to
appear in public , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,367.582

and <font> day occasions <$$font> are positively the <font> only ones
<$$font> when she <font> can <$$font> do it , without completely
knocking herself up . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,367.583

She <font> hears <$$font> that it would give great satisfaction in the
country , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,367.584

and the Queen thinks <$$font> Prince and Princess <$$font> Christian's
arrival a good occasion for her doing so .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,367.585

<P_1,376>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Dean_Wellesley}

{ED:Copy}

Windsor Castle , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,376.589

<font> 23rd {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} Nov. <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,376.590

- The Queen must write to the Dean upon a subject of the greatest
importance , and which she thinks she can no longer remain silent upon .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,376.591

She yesterday saw her valued friend Dr. Macleod <paren> who came here
on business <$$paren> , than whom there is no better , more
liberal-minded , or more thoroughly Christian a man ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,376.592

and he told the Queen that he considered this Episcopalian movement in
Scotland - countenanced and encouraged , as it was , by the Archbishop
of Canterbury - as <font> most serious , <$$font> and indeed <font>
alarming <$$font> to the safety of the Church of Scotland .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,376.593

With dissent <paren> the Free Church <$$paren> on the one side , and
this most shameful and openly avowed attempt to try and convert the
Presbyterians to Episcopalianism , he does not see how the Established
Church <font> can <$$font> stand .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,376.594

They have already succeeded in carrying with them the great bulk of the
aristocracy <P_1,377> in Scotland , and therefrom establishing a
religion for the rich , and another for the poor , and thus alienating
the people from their superiors , and producing a want of sympathy
between them . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,377.595

If it had been <font> merely <$$font> the Episcopalian Church of
Scotland , as they are dissenters in Scotland , Dr. Macleod said it
would <font> not <$$font> have signified ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,377.596

but when the Archbishop of Canterbury himself came to Scotland , and
permits the Bishops to speak of " <font> the <$$font> Church " -
implying , as they do , that the <font> Scotch <$$font> establishment is
<font> no <$$font> Church , and her Sacraments not to be considered as
such , which they openly do - the case becomes <font> very grave
<$$font> . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,377.597

Now the Queen takes a solemn engagement , on her accession , to maintain
the Established Church of Scotland ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,377.598

and any attempt to subvert it is <font> contrary <$$font> to Law , and
indeed subversive of that respect for <font> existing Institutions
<$$font> which , above all , the Archbishops and Bishops <font> ought
<$$font> to do <font> everything <$$font> to maintain ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,377.599

and she <font> will <$$font> maintain it .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,377.600

But , quite apart from this , the Queen considers this movement as
<font> most <$$font> mischievous .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,377.601

The Presbyterian Church is essentially <font> Protestant , <$$font> and
, as such , <font> most <$$font> valuable .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,377.602

The Reformation in this country was <font> never <$$font> fully
completed , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,377.603

and had we applied the pruning knife more severely , we should <font>
never <$$font> have been exposed to the dangers to which the Church of
England is <font> now <$$font> exposed , and for which the Queen thinks
it will be <font> absolutely <$$font> necessary to take some measures .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,377.604

The Queen feels , <font> more strongly <$$font> than words <font> can
<$$font> express , the duty which is imposed upon her and her family ,
to maintain the <font> true <$$font> and <font> real principles <$$font>
and <font> Spirit <$$font> of the <font> Protestant <$$font> religion ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,377.605

for her family was brought over and placed on the throne of these realms
<font> solely <$$font> to maintain it ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,377.606

and the Queen will <font> not <$$font> stand the attempts made to
destroy the simple and truly Protestant faith of the Church of Scotland
, and to bring the Church of England as near the Church of Rome as they
possibly can . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,377.607

The Queen meditates writing to the Archbishop <P_1,378> of Canterbury ,
or else asking him to come here , that she may speak to him as strongly
as she can . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,378.608

Which of the two does the Dean advise ?
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,378.609

<P_1,380>

{ED:Queen_Victoria_to_Dr._Macleod}

{ED:Copy}

Osborne , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,380.613

19 <font> Dec. <$$font> 1866 .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,380.614

- The Queen has to thank Dr. Macleod very much for his long and
<P_1,381> interesting letter on the Scotch Church ,
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,381.615

and wishes to tell him of her interview with the Archbishop .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,381.616

Her letter to the Dean was shown him
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,381.617

and the Queen saw him . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,381.618

He expressed the greatest concern at having done anything which could
cause annoyance to the Queen , or which could have had the effect of
injuring the Established Church of Scotland , which was so far from his
intentions that he had enquired , before he laid the first stone of the
Cathedral at Inverness , whether his doing so would not offend the
Presbyterians , VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,381.619

but he was assured it would not .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,381.620

He was <font> quite <$$font> innocent and unconscious , he assured the
Queen , of the effect produced by this act of his ;
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,381.621

that he had been asked to do it by an old friend of his , and had
thought it a good opportunity of <font> showing Scotland <$$font> to his
<font> daughters <font> . VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,381.622

Finally the Queen urged him to take an opportunity of stating publicly
that he <font> never had <$$font> intended to do anything hostile to the
Established Church of Scotland , which he promised to do .
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,381.623

The Queen hears further that all the English Bishops disapproved what
the Archbishop <paren> who is a mild and amiable man <$$paren> had done
. VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,381.624

Is there any chance of Dr. Macleod's coming south during the next two
months , so that we could see him <font> here <$$font> ?
VICTORIA-186X-OFFICIAL-LETTERS-2,1,381.625

