<BEGIN_walpole-179x-2>

<P_247>

They have left too a sad lesson to despotic princes , who will quote
this precedent of frantic Ã©tats against assembling any more , and
against all the examples of senates and parliaments that have preserved
rational freedom . WALPOLE-179X-2,247.3

Let me know when it will be convenient to you to receive me .
WALPOLE-179X-2,247.4

Adieu ! WALPOLE-179X-2,247.5

<heading>

Letter CXLI . WALPOLE-179X-2,247.7

<$$heading>

Strawberry-hill , WALPOLE-179X-2,247.9

Wednesday night , July 1790 . WALPOLE-179X-2,247.10

It is certainly not from having any thing to tell you , that I reply so
soon , but as the most agreeable thing I can do in my confinement .
WALPOLE-179X-2,247.11

The gout came into my heel the night before last , perhaps from the
deluge and damp . WALPOLE-179X-2,247.12

I increased it yesterday by limping about the house with a party I had
to breakfast . WALPOLE-179X-2,247.13

To-day I am lying on the settee , unable to walk alone , or even to put
on a slipper . WALPOLE-179X-2,247.14

However , as I am much easier this evening , I trust it will go off .
WALPOLE-179X-2,247.15

I do not love disputes , WALPOLE-179X-2,247.16

and shall not argue with you about Bruce ; WALPOLE-179X-2,247.17

but if you like him , you shall not choose an author for me .
WALPOLE-179X-2,247.18

It is the most absurd , obscure , and tiresome book I know .
WALPOLE-179X-2,247.19

I shall admire if you have a clear conception about most of the persons
and matters in his work - WALPOLE-179X-2,247.20

but , in fact , I do not believe you have . WALPOLE-179X-2,247.21

Pray , can you distinguish between his <font> cock <$$font> and <font>
hen <$$font> Heghes , and between all Yasouses and Ozoros ?
WALPOLE-179X-2,247.22

- and do you firmly believe that an old man and his son were sent for
and put to death , because the king had run into a thorn-bush , and was
forced to leave his clothes behind him ? WALPOLE-179X-2,247.23

Is it your faith , that one of their Abyssinian majesties pleaded not
being able to contribute towards sending for a new Abuna , because he
had spent all his money at Venice in looking-glasses ?
WALPOLE-179X-2,247.24

And do you really think that Peter Paez was a Jack-of-all-trades , and
built palaces and convents without assistance , and furnished them with
his own hands ? WALPOLE-179X-2,247.25

You , who are a little apt to contest most assertions , must have
strangely let out your credulity ! WALPOLE-179X-2,247.26

I could put forty questions to you as wonderful , WALPOLE-179X-2,247.27

and , for my part , could as soon credit . WALPOLE-179X-2,247.28

I am tired of railing at French barbarity and folly .
WALPOLE-179X-2,247.29

They are more puerile <P_248> now serious , than when in the long
paroxysm of gay levity . WALPOLE-179X-2,248.30

Legislators , a senate , to neglect laws , in order to annihilate coats
of arms and liveries ! to pull down a king , and set up an emperor !
WALPOLE-179X-2,248.31

They are hastening to establish the tribunal of the praetorian guards ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,248.32

for the sovereignty , it seems , is not to be hereditary .
WALPOLE-179X-2,248.33

One view of their fete of the 14th I suppose is to draw money to Paris -
WALPOLE-179X-2,248.34

and the consequence will be , that the deputies will return to the
provinces drunk with independence and self-importance , and will commit
fifty times more excesses , massacres , and devastations , than last
year . WALPOLE-179X-2,248.35

George Selwyn says , that <font> monsieur <$$font> , the king's brother
, is the only man of rank from whom they can@ @not take a title .
WALPOLE-179X-2,248.36

How franticly have the French acted , and how rationally the Americans !
WALPOLE-179X-2,248.37

- But Franklin and Washington were great men . WALPOLE-179X-2,248.38

None have appeared yet in France ; WALPOLE-179X-2,248.39

and Necker has only returned to make a wretched figure !
WALPOLE-179X-2,248.40

He is become as insignificant as his king ; WALPOLE-179X-2,248.41

his name is never mentioned , but now and then as disapproving something
that is done . WALPOLE-179X-2,248.42

Why then does he stay ? WALPOLE-179X-2,248.43

Does he wait to strike some great stroke , when every thing is
demolished ? WALPOLE-179X-2,248.44

His glory , which consisted in being minister though a protestant , is
vanished by the destruction of popery ; the honour of which , I suppose
, he will scarce assume to himself . WALPOLE-179X-2,248.45

I have vented my budget , WALPOLE-179X-2,248.46

and now good night ! WALPOLE-179X-2,248.47

I feel almost as if I could walk up to bed . WALPOLE-179X-2,248.48

<heading>

Letter CXLII . WALPOLE-179X-2,248.50

<$$heading>

Strawberry-hill , WALPOLE-179X-2,248.52

August 9 , at night . WALPOLE-179X-2,248.53

Mr. N- has offered to be postman to you ; <font> whereof <$$font> ,
though I have nothing , or as little as nothing , to say , I thought
<font> as how <$$font> it would look kinder to send nothing in writing
than by word of mouth . WALPOLE-179X-2,248.54

Nothing the first . WALPOLE-179X-2,248.55

So the peace is made , WALPOLE-179X-2,248.56

and the stocks drank its health in a bumper ; WALPOLE-179X-2,248.57

but when they waked the next morning , they found they had reckoned
without their host , and that their majesties the king of big Britain
and the king of little Spain have agreed to make peace some time or
other , if they can agree upon it ; WALPOLE-179X-2,248.58

and so the stocks drew in their horns : WALPOLE-179X-2,248.59

but having <P_249> great trust in some time or other , they only fell
two pegs lower . WALPOLE-179X-2,249.60

I , who never believed there would be war , keep my prophetic stocks up
to par , and my consolation still higher ; WALPOLE-179X-2,249.61

for when Spanish pride truckles , and English pride has had the honour
of bullying , I dare to say we shall be content with the ostensible
triumph , as Spain will be with some secret article that will leave her
much where she was before . - Vide Falkland's island .
WALPOLE-179X-2,249.62

Nothing the second . WALPOLE-179X-2,249.63

Miss -'s match with lord - - . You asserted it so peremptorily , that ,
though I doubted it , I quoted you . WALPOLE-179X-2,249.64

Lo ! it took its rise solely in poor old -'s dotage , that still harps
on conjunctions copulative - but now disavows it , as they say , on a
remonstrance from her daughter . WALPOLE-179X-2,249.65

Nothing the third . WALPOLE-179X-2,249.66

Nothing will come of nothing , says king Lear , and Your humble servant
Hor. Walpole . WALPOLE-179X-2,249.67

<heading>

Letter CXLIII . WALPOLE-179X-2,249.69

<$$heading>

Strawberry-hill , WALPOLE-179X-2,249.71

September 27 , 1791 . WALPOLE-179X-2,249.72

Your letter was most welcome , as yours always are ,
WALPOLE-179X-2,249.73

and I answer it immediately , though our post comes in so late that this
will not go away till to-morrow . WALPOLE-179X-2,249.74

- Nay , I write , though I shall see you on Sunday , and have not a
tittle to tell you . WALPOLE-179X-2,249.75

I lead so insipid a life , that , though I am content with it , it can
furnish me with nothing but repetitions . WALPOLE-179X-2,249.76

I scarce ever stir from home in a morning , WALPOLE-179X-2,249.77

and most evenings go WALPOLE-179X-2,249.78

and play at loto with the French at Richmond , where I am heartily tired
of hearing of nothing but their absurd countrymen ; absurd both
democrates and aristocrates . WALPOLE-179X-2,249.79

Calonne sends them gross lies , that raise their hopes to the skies :
WALPOLE-179X-2,249.80

and in two days they hear of nothing but new horrors and disappointments
; WALPOLE-179X-2,249.81

and then , poor souls ! they are in despair . WALPOLE-179X-2,249.82

I can say nothing to comfort them , but what I firmly believe , which is
, that total anarchy must come on rapidly . WALPOLE-179X-2,249.83

- Nobody pays the taxes that are laid , and which , intended to produce
eighty millions a month , do not bring in six . WALPOLE-179X-2,249.84

The new <P_250> assembly will fall on the old , probably plunder the
richest , and certainly disapprove of much they have done ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,250.85

for can eight_hundred new ignorants approve of what has been done by
twelve_hundred almost as ignorant , and who were far from half agreeing
? WALPOLE-179X-2,250.86

- And then their immortal constitution <paren> which , besides , is to
be mightily mended nine years hence <$$paren> will die before it has cut
any of its teeth but its grinders . WALPOLE-179X-2,250.87

The exiles are enraged at their poor king for saving his own life by a
forced acceptance ; WALPOLE-179X-2,250.88

and yet I know no obligation he has to his noblesse , who all ran away
to save their own lives ; not a gentleman , but the two poor gendarmes
at Versailles , having lost their lives in his defence .
WALPOLE-179X-2,250.89

I suppose La Fayette , Barnave , the Lamoths , &c. will run away too ,
when the new tinkers and coblers , of whom the present elect are and
will be composed , proceed on the levelling system taught them by their
predecessors , who , like other levellers , have taken good care of
themselves . WALPOLE-179X-2,250.90

Good Dr. Priestley's friend , good monsieur Condorcet , has got a place
in the treasury of 1000 <font> l. <$$font> a year : - exuno disce omnes
! WALPOLE-179X-2,250.91

- And thus a set of rascals , who might , with temper and discretion ,
have obtained a very wholesome constitution , witness Poland ! have
committed infinite mischief , infinite cruelty , infinite injustice ,
and left a shocking precedent against liberty , unless the Poles are as
much admired and imitated as the French ought to be detested .
WALPOLE-179X-2,250.92

I do not believe the emperor will stir - yet . WALPOLE-179X-2,250.93

He , or his ministers , must see that it is the interest of Germany to
let France destroy itself . WALPOLE-179X-2,250.94

His interference yet might unite and consolidate - at least check
farther confusion : WALPOLE-179X-2,250.95

- and though I rather think that twenty_thousand men might march from
one end of France to the other , as , though the officers often rallied
, French soldiers never were stout ; yet having no officers , no
discipline , no subordination , little resistance might be expected .
WALPOLE-179X-2,250.96

Yet the enthusiasm that has been spread might turn into courage .
WALPOLE-179X-2,250.97

Still it were better for Caesar to wait . WALPOLE-179X-2,250.98

Quarrels amongst themselves will dissipate enthusiasm ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,250.99

and if they have no foreign enemy , they will soon have spirit enough to
turn their swords against one another , WALPOLE-179X-2,250.100

and what enthusiasm remains will soon be converted into the inveteracy
of faction . WALPOLE-179X-2,250.101

This is speculation , not prophecy : WALPOLE-179X-2,250.102

- I do not pretend to guess what will happen : WALPOLE-179X-2,250.103

- I do think I know what will not : WALPOLE-179X-2,250.104

I mean , the system of experiments that they call a constitution , can@
@not last . WALPOLE-179X-2,250.105

Marvellous indeed would it be , if a set of military noble lads ,
pedantic academicians , curates of villages , and country advocates ,
could in two years , amidst the utmost confusion and altercation <P_251>
amongst themselves , dictated to or thwarted by obstinate clubs of
various factions , have achieved what the wisdom of all ages and all
nations has never been able to compose - a system of government that
would set four-and-twenty millions of people free , and contain them
within any bounds ! This too without one great man amongst them .
WALPOLE-179X-2,251.106

- If they had had , as Mirabeau seemed to promise to be -
WALPOLE-179X-2,251.107

but as we know that he was too - a consummate villain , there would soon
have been an end of their vision of liberty . WALPOLE-179X-2,251.108

And so there will be still , unless , after a civil war , they split
into small kingdoms or commonwealths . WALPOLE-179X-2,251.109

- A little nation may be free ; WALPOLE-179X-2,251.110

for it can be upon its guard . WALPOLE-179X-2,251.111

Millions can@ @not be so ; because , the greater the number of men that
are one people , the more vices , the more abuses there are , that will
either require or furnish pretexts for restraints ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,251.112

and if vices are the mother of laws , the execution of laws is the
father of power : WALPOLE-179X-2,251.113

- and of such parents one knows the progeny . WALPOLE-179X-2,251.114

I did not think of writing such a rhapsody when I began -
WALPOLE-179X-2,251.115

it shows how idle I am - WALPOLE-179X-2,251.116

I hope you will be so when you receive it . WALPOLE-179X-2,251.117

Adieu ! I have tired my hand . WALPOLE-179X-2,251.118

Yours ever , Hor. Walpole . WALPOLE-179X-2,251.119

P.S. The king of the French has written to the king of France and Great
Britain , to notify his accession to the throne of Fontainebleau , where
he is determined to reign as long as he is permitted , and obey all the
laws that have been made to dethrone him . WALPOLE-179X-2,251.120

N.B. The cardinal de Lomenie , whom they call the cardinal de <font>
l'Ignominie <$$font> with much reason , is the only gentleman elected
for the new chaos , WALPOLE-179X-2,251.121

and he has declined . WALPOLE-179X-2,251.122

<heading>

Letter CXLIV . WALPOLE-179X-2,251.124

<$$heading>

Strawberry-hill , WALPOLE-179X-2,251.126

August 31 , 1792 . WALPOLE-179X-2,251.127

Your long letter and my short one crossed one another upon the road .
WALPOLE-179X-2,251.128

I knew I was in your debt : WALPOLE-179X-2,251.129

but I had nothing to say but what <P_252> you know better than I ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,252.130

for you read all the French papers , WALPOLE-179X-2,252.131

and I read none , as they have long put me out of all patience : and
besides , I hear so much of their horrific proceedings , that they quite
disturb me , and have given me what I call <font> the French disease
<$$font> ; that is , a barbarity that I abhor , WALPOLE-179X-2,252.132

for I can@ @not help wishing destruction to thousands of human creatures
whom I never saw . WALPOLE-179X-2,252.133

- But when men have worked themselves up into tigers and hyaenas , and
labour to communicate their appetite for blood , what signifies whether
they walk on two legs or four , or whether they dwell in cities , or in
forests and dens ? WALPOLE-179X-2,252.134

- Nay , the latter are the more harmless wild beasts ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,252.135

for they only cranch a poor traveller now and then , and when they are
famished with hunger : WALPOLE-179X-2,252.136

- the others , though they have dined , cut the throats of some hundreds
of poor Swiss for an afternoon's luncheon . WALPOLE-179X-2,252.137

Oh ! the execrable nation ! WALPOLE-179X-2,252.138

I can@ @not tell you any new particulars , WALPOLE-179X-2,252.139

for mesdames de Cambis and d'Hennin , my chief informers , are gone to
Goodwood to the poor duchesse de Biron , of whose recovery I am
impatient to hear - WALPOLE-179X-2,252.140

and so I am of the cause of her very precipitate flight and panic .
WALPOLE-179X-2,252.141

She must , I think , have had strong motives ; WALPOLE-179X-2,252.142

for two years ago I feared she was much too courageous , and displayed
her intrepidity too publicly . WALPOLE-179X-2,252.143

If I did not always condemn the calling bad people mad people , I should
say all Paris is gone distracted : WALPOLE-179X-2,252.144

they furnish provocation to every species of retaliation , by publishing
rewards for assassination of kings and generals , WALPOLE-179X-2,252.145

and can@ @not rest without incensing all Europe against them .
WALPOLE-179X-2,252.146

The duchess of York gave a great entertainment at Oatlands on her duke's
birth-day , WALPOLE-179X-2,252.147

sent to his tradesmen in town to come to it , WALPOLE-179X-2,252.148

and allowed two guineas apiece to each for their carriage -
WALPOLE-179X-2,252.149

gave them a dance , WALPOLE-179X-2,252.150

and opened the ball herself with the prince of Wales .
WALPOLE-179X-2,252.151

A company of strollers came to Weybridge to act in a barn :
WALPOLE-179X-2,252.152

she was solicited to go to it , WALPOLE-179X-2,252.153

and did out of charity , WALPOLE-179X-2,252.154

and carried all her servants . WALPOLE-179X-2,252.155

Next day a methodist teacher came to preach a charity sermon in the same
theatre , WALPOLE-179X-2,252.156

and she consented to hear it on the same motive - WALPOLE-179X-2,252.157

but her servants desired to be excused , on not understanding English .
WALPOLE-179X-2,252.158

- " Oh ! " said the duchess , " but you went to the comedy , which you
understood less , WALPOLE-179X-2,252.159

and you shall go to the sermon ; " to which she gave handsomely , and
for them . WALPOLE-179X-2,252.160

I like this . WALPOLE-179X-2,252.161

<P_253>

Tack this to my other fragment , WALPOLE-179X-2,253.163

and then , I trust , I shall not be a defaulter in correspondence .
WALPOLE-179X-2,253.164

I own I am become an indolent poor creature : WALPOLE-179X-2,253.165

- but is that strange ? WALPOLE-179X-2,253.166

With seventy-five years over my head , or on the point of being so ;
with a chalk-stone in every finger ; with feet so limping , that I have
been but twice this whole summer round my own small garden , and so much
weaker than I was , can I be very comfortable , but when sitting quiet
and doing nothing ? WALPOLE-179X-2,253.167

All my strength consists in my sleep , which is as vigorous as at twenty
: WALPOLE-179X-2,253.168

- but with regard to letter-writing , I have so many to write on
business which I do not understand , since the unfortunate death of my
nephew , that , though I make them as brief as possible , half-a-dozen
short ones tire me as much as a long one to an old friend ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,253.169

and as the busy ones must be executed , I trespass on the others ,
WALPOLE-179X-2,253.170

and remit them to another day . WALPOLE-179X-2,253.171

Norfolk has come very mal-a-propos into the end of my life ,
WALPOLE-179X-2,253.172

and certainly never entered into my views and plans ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,253.173

and I , who could never learn the multiplication table , was not
intended to transact leases , direct repairs of farm-houses , settle
fines for church lands , negotiate for lowering interest on mortgages ,
&c. WALPOLE-179X-2,253.174

In short , as I was told formerly , though I know several things , I
never understood any thing useful . WALPOLE-179X-2,253.175

A-propos , the letter of which lady C- told you is not at all worth your
seeing . WALPOLE-179X-2,253.176

It was an angry one to a parson who oppresses my tenants , and will go
to law with them about tythes . WALPOLE-179X-2,253.177

She came in as I was writing it ; WALPOLE-179X-2,253.178

and as I took up the character of parson myself , and preached to him as
pastor of a flock , which it did not become him to lead into the paths
of law , instead of those of peace , I thought it would divert ,
WALPOLE-179X-2,253.179

and showed it to her . WALPOLE-179X-2,253.180

Adieu ! I have been writing to you till midnight ,
WALPOLE-179X-2,253.181

and my poor fingers ache . WALPOLE-179X-2,253.182

Yours ever , Orford . WALPOLE-179X-2,253.183

<heading>

Letter CXLV . WALPOLE-179X-2,253.185

<$$heading>

Strawberry-hill , WALPOLE-179X-2,253.187

June 13 , 1793 . WALPOLE-179X-2,253.188

I thank you much for all your information - WALPOLE-179X-2,253.189

some parts made me smile : WALPOLE-179X-2,253.190

- yet , if what you heard of - - proves true , I rather think it <P_254>
deplorable ! WALPOLE-179X-2,254.191

How can love of money , or the still vainer of all vanities , ambition
of wearing a high but most insignificant office , which even poor lord -
could execute , tempt a very old man , who loves his ease and his own
way , to stoop to wait like a footman behind a chair , for hours , and
in a court whence he had been cast ignominiously ?
WALPOLE-179X-2,254.192

I believe I have more pride than most men alive : WALPOLE-179X-2,254.193

I could be flattered by honours acquired by merit , or by some singular
action of eclat - WALPOLE-179X-2,254.194

but for titles , ribbands , offices of no business , which any body can
fill , and must be given to many , I should just as soon be proud of
being the top 'squire in a country village . WALPOLE-179X-2,254.195

It is only worse to have waded to distinction through dirt , like lord -
- . WALPOLE-179X-2,254.196

All this shifting of scenes may , as you say , be food to the Fronde - -
Sed defendit numerus . WALPOLE-179X-2,254.197

It is perfectly ridiculous to use any distinction of parties but the
<font> ins <$$font> and the <font> outs . <$$font>
WALPOLE-179X-2,254.198

Many years ago I thought that the wisest appellations for contending
factions ever assumed , were those in the Roman empire , who called
themselves <font> the greens and the blues : <$$font>
WALPOLE-179X-2,254.199

it was so easy , when they changed sides , to slide from one colour to
the other - WALPOLE-179X-2,254.200

and then a blue might plead that he had never been <font> true blue
<$$font> , but always a <font> greenish blue <$$font> ; and vice_versa .
WALPOLE-179X-2,254.201

I allow that the steadiest party man may be staggered by novel and
unforeseen circumstances . WALPOLE-179X-2,254.202

The outrageous proceedings of the French republicans have wounded the
cause of liberty , WALPOLE-179X-2,254.203

and will , I fear , have shaken it for centuries ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,254.204

for Condorcet and such fiends are worse than the imperial and royal
dividers of Poland . WALPOLE-179X-2,254.205

- But I do not see why detestation of anarchy and assassination must
immediately make one fall in love with garters and seals .
WALPOLE-179X-2,254.206

I am sitting by the fire , as I have done ever since I came hither ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,254.207

and since I do not expect warm weather in June , I am wishing for rain ,
WALPOLE-179X-2,254.208

or I shall not have a mouthful of hay , nor a noseful of roses .
WALPOLE-179X-2,254.209

- Indeed , as I have seen several fields of hay cut , I wonder it has
not brought rain , as usual . WALPOLE-179X-2,254.210

My creed is , that rain is good for hay , as I conclude every climate
and its productions are suited to each other . WALPOLE-179X-2,254.211

Providence did not trouble itself about its being more expensive to us
to make our hay over and over ; WALPOLE-179X-2,254.212

it only took care it should not want water enough .
WALPOLE-179X-2,254.213

Adieu ! WALPOLE-179X-2,254.214

<P_255>

<heading>

Letter CXLVI . WALPOLE-179X-2,255.217

<$$heading>

Strawberry-hill , WALPOLE-179X-2,255.219

Wednesday night , late , July 17 , 1793 . WALPOLE-179X-2,255.220

I am just come from dining with the bishop of London at Fulham , where I
found lord and lady F. C. who told me of the alarm you had from
hearing some screams that you thought lady A.'s , and the disorder
brought upon you by flying to assist her . WALPOLE-179X-2,255.221

I do not at all wonder at your panic , WALPOLE-179X-2,255.222

and rejoice it was not founded , and that you recovered so soon .
WALPOLE-179X-2,255.223

I am not going to preach against your acting so naturally :
WALPOLE-179X-2,255.224

- but as you have some complaint on your breast , I must hope you will
remember this accident , and be upon your guard against both sudden and
rapid exertions , when you have not a tantamount call .
WALPOLE-179X-2,255.225

I conclude the excessive heat we have had for twelve complete days
contributed to overpower you . WALPOLE-179X-2,255.226

It is much cooler to-day , yet still delicious ; WALPOLE-179X-2,255.227

for be it known to you that I have enjoyed weather worthy of Africa ,
and yet without swallowing mouthfuls of musketos , nor expecting to hear
hyaenas howl in the village , nor to find scorpions in my bed .
WALPOLE-179X-2,255.228

Indeed , all the way I came home , I could but gaze at the felicity of
my countrymen . WALPOLE-179X-2,255.229

The road was one string of stage-coaches loaded within and without with
noisy jolly folks , and chaises and gigs that had been pleasuring in
clouds of dust ; WALPOLE-179X-2,255.230

every door and every window of every house was open , lights in every
shop , every door with women sitting in the street , every inn crowded
with jaded horses , and every ale-house full of drunken topers ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,255.231

for you know the English always announce their sense of heat or cold by
drinking . WALPOLE-179X-2,255.232

- Well ! it was impossible not to enjoy such a scene of happiness and
affluence in every village , and amongst the lowest of the people - and
who are told by villainous scribblers that they are oppressed and
miserable . WALPOLE-179X-2,255.233

- New streets , new towns are rising every day and every where ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,255.234

the earth is covered with gardens and crops of grain .
WALPOLE-179X-2,255.235

How bitter to turn from this Elysium to the Temple at Paris !
WALPOLE-179X-2,255.236

The fiends there have now torn her son from the queen !
WALPOLE-179X-2,255.237

Can one believe that they are human beings , who 'midst all their
confusions sit coolly meditating new <P_256> tortures , new anguish for
that poor , helpless , miserable woman , after four years of unexampled
sufferings ? WALPOLE-179X-2,256.238

Oh ! if such crimes are not made a dreadful lesson , this world might
become a theatre of canibals ! WALPOLE-179X-2,256.239

I hope the checks in Bretagne are legends coined by miscreants at Paris
. WALPOLE-179X-2,256.240

What can one believe ? WALPOLE-179X-2,256.241

Well , I will go to bed , and try to dream of peace and plenty ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,256.242

and though my lawn is burnt , and my peas and beans , and roses and
strawberries parched , I will bear it with patience till the harvest is
got in . WALPOLE-179X-2,256.243

Saint Swithin can never hold his water for forty days , though he can do
the contrary . WALPOLE-179X-2,256.244

Good-night ! WALPOLE-179X-2,256.245

Yours ever , O. WALPOLE-179X-2,256.246

<heading>

Letter CXLVII . WALPOLE-179X-2,256.248

<$$heading>

Berkeley-square , WALPOLE-179X-2,256.250

January 10 , 1794 . WALPOLE-179X-2,256.251

I certainly sympathize with you on the reversed and gloomy prospect of
affairs , too extensive to detail in a letter ; WALPOLE-179X-2,256.252

nor indeed do I know any thing more than I collect from newspapers and
public reports ; WALPOLE-179X-2,256.253

and those are so overcharged with falsehoods on all sides , that , if
one waits for truth to emerge , one finds new subjects to draw one's
attention before firm belief can settle its trust on any .
WALPOLE-179X-2,256.254

That the mass and result are bad , is certain ; WALPOLE-179X-2,256.255

and though I have great alacrity in searching for comforts and grounds
of new hopes , I am puzzled as much in seeking resources , as in giving
present credit . WALPOLE-179X-2,256.256

Reasoning is out of the question : WALPOLE-179X-2,256.257

all calculation is baffled : WALPOLE-179X-2,256.258

nothing happens that sense or experience said was probable .
WALPOLE-179X-2,256.259

I wait to see what will happen , without a guess at what is to be
expected . WALPOLE-179X-2,256.260

A storm , when the parliament meets , will no doubt be attempted .
WALPOLE-179X-2,256.261

How the ministers are prepared to combat it , I do@ @n't know -
WALPOLE-179X-2,256.262

but I hope sufficiently - if it spreads no farther :
WALPOLE-179X-2,256.263

- at least I think they have no cause to fear the new leader who is to
make the attack . WALPOLE-179X-2,256.264

I have neither seen Mr. Wilson's book nor his answerers .
WALPOLE-179X-2,256.265

So far from reading political pamphlets , I hunt for any books , except
modern novels , that will not bring France to my mind , or that at least
will put it out for a <P_257> time . WALPOLE-179X-2,257.266

But every fresh person one sees , revives the conversation :
WALPOLE-179X-2,257.267

and excepting a long succession of fogs , nobody talks of any thing else
; WALPOLE-179X-2,257.268

nor of private news do I know a tittle . WALPOLE-179X-2,257.269

Adieu ! WALPOLE-179X-2,257.270

Yours ever , O. WALPOLE-179X-2,257.271

<heading>

Letter CXLVIII . WALPOLE-179X-2,257.273

<$$heading>

Strawb , WALPOLE-179X-2,257.275

July 2 , 1795 . WALPOLE-179X-2,257.276

I <font> will <$$font> write a word to you , though scarce time to write
one , to thank you for your great kindness about the soldier , who shall
get a substitute if he can . WALPOLE-179X-2,257.277

As you are , or have been in town , your daughter will have told you in
what a bustle I am , preparing - not to resist , but to receive an
invasion of royalties to-morrow - WALPOLE-179X-2,257.278

and can@ @not even escape them like admiral Cornwallis , though seeming
to make a semblance ; WALPOLE-179X-2,257.279

for I am to wear a sword , WALPOLE-179X-2,257.280

and have appointed two aides_de_camp , my nephews , George and Horace C-
- . WALPOLE-179X-2,257.281

If I <font> fall <$$font> , as ten to one but I do , to be sure it will
be a superb tumble , at the feet of a queen and eight daughters of kings
; WALPOLE-179X-2,257.282

for , besides the six princesses , I am to have the duchess of York and
the princess of Orange ! WALPOLE-179X-2,257.283

Woe is me , at 78 , and with scarce a hand and foot to my back !
WALPOLE-179X-2,257.284

Adieu ! WALPOLE-179X-2,257.285

Yours , &c. A Poor Old Remnant . WALPOLE-179X-2,257.286

<heading>

Letter CXLIX . WALPOLE-179X-2,257.288

<$$heading>

Strawberry-hill , WALPOLE-179X-2,257.290

July 7 , 1795 . WALPOLE-179X-2,257.291

I am not dead of fatigue with my royal visitors , as I expected to be ,
though I was on my poor lame feet three whole hours .
WALPOLE-179X-2,257.292

Your daughter , who kindly assisted me in doing the honours , will tell
you the particulars , and how prosperously I succeeded .
WALPOLE-179X-2,257.293

The queen was uncommonly condescending and gracious ,
WALPOLE-179X-2,257.294

and deigned to drink my health when I presented her with the last glass
, and to thank me for all my attentions . WALPOLE-179X-2,257.295

- Indeed my <P_258> memory de vieille cour was but once in default .
WALPOLE-179X-2,258.296

As I had been assured that her majesty would be attended by her
chamberlain , yet was not , I had no glove ready when I received her at
the step of her coach : WALPOLE-179X-2,258.297

yet she honoured me with her hand to lead her up stairs ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,258.298

nor did I recollect my omission when I led her down again .
WALPOLE-179X-2,258.299

Still , though gloveless , I did not squeeze the royal hand , as
vice-chamberlain Smith did to queen Mary . WALPOLE-179X-2,258.300

You will have stared , as I did , at the elector of Hanover deserting
his ally the king of Great Britain , and making peace with the monsters
. WALPOLE-179X-2,258.301

But Mr. F- - , whom I saw at my sister's on Sunday , laughs at the
article in the newspapers , WALPOLE-179X-2,258.302

and says it is not an unknown practice for stock-jobbers to hire an
emissary at the rate of five_hundred pounds , and dispatch to Franckfort
, whence he brings forged attestations of some marvellous political
event , and spreads it on 'Change ; which produces such a fluctuation in
the stocks , as amply overpays the expence of his mission .
WALPOLE-179X-2,258.303

This was all I learnt in the single night I was in town .
WALPOLE-179X-2,258.304

I have not redde the new French constitution , which seems longer than
probably its reign will be . WALPOLE-179X-2,258.305

The five sovereigns will , I suppose , be the first guillotined .
WALPOLE-179X-2,258.306

Adieu ! WALPOLE-179X-2,258.307

Yours ever , O. WALPOLE-179X-2,258.308

<P_609>

I do not mean , by what I am going to say , to extort another letter
from you before I have the pleasure of seeing you at Hampton ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,609.310

but I really shall be much obliged to you for a single line soon , only
to tell me if miss Williams is at Stoke with the duchess of Beaufort .
WALPOLE-179X-2,609.311

To a short note , can@ @not you add a short P.S. on the fate of earl
Goodwin ? WALPOLE-179X-2,609.312

Lac mihi - novum non frigore defit . WALPOLE-179X-2,609.313

Adieu , my amiable friend ! WALPOLE-179X-2,609.314

Yours most Sincerely , HOR. WALPOLE . WALPOLE-179X-2,609.315

<heading>

Letter XVII . WALPOLE-179X-2,609.317

<$$heading>

Berkeley-square , WALPOLE-179X-2,609.319

Feb. 20 , 1790 . WALPOLE-179X-2,609.320

It is very provoking that people must always be hanging or drowning
themselves , or going mad , that you forsooth , mistress , may have the
diversion of exercising your pity , and good nature , and charity , and
intercession , and all that beadroll of virtues that make you so
troublesome and amiable , when you might be ten times more agreeable by
writing things that would not cost one above half-@ @a-@ @crown at a
time . WALPOLE-179X-2,609.321

You are an absolutely walking hospital , WALPOLE-179X-2,609.322

and travel about into lone and by places with your doors open to house
stray casualties ! WALPOLE-179X-2,609.323

I wish at least that you would have some children yourself , that you
might not be plaguing one for all the pretty brats that are starving and
friendless . WALPOLE-179X-2,609.324

I suppose it was some such Goody two or three_thousand years ago that
suggested the idea of an alma-mater suckling the
three_hundred_and_sixty-five bantlings of the countess of Hainault .
WALPOLE-179X-2,609.325

- Well , as your newly-@ @adopted pensioners have <font> two <$$font>
babes , I insist on your accepting <font> two <$$font> guineas for them
instead of one at present <paren> that is , when you shall be present
<$$paren> . WALPOLE-179X-2,609.326

- If you can@ @not circumscribe your own charities , you shall not stint
mine , madam , who can afford it much better , and who must be dunned
for alms , and do not scramble over hedges and ditches in searching for
opportunities of flinging away my money on good works .
WALPOLE-179X-2,609.327

I employ mine better at <font> auctions , and in buying pictures and
baubles , and hoarding curiosities <$$font> , that in <P_610> truth I
can@ @not keep long , but that will last <font> for ever <$$font> in my
catalogue , and make me immortal ! WALPOLE-179X-2,610.328

- Alas ! will they cover a multitude of sins ? WALPOLE-179X-2,610.329

- Adieu ! I can@ @not jest after <font> that <$$font> sentence .
WALPOLE-179X-2,610.330

Yours most sincerely , HOR. WALPOLE . WALPOLE-179X-2,610.331

<heading>

Letter XVIII . WALPOLE-179X-2,610.333

<$$heading>

Berkeley-square , WALPOLE-179X-2,610.335

Sept. 29 , 1791 . WALPOLE-179X-2,610.336

My dear madam , I have been very sorry , but not at all angry , at not
hearing from you so long . WALPOLE-179X-2,610.337

With all your friendly and benevolent heart , I know by experience how
little you love writing to your friends - WALPOLE-179X-2,610.338

and I know why : WALPOLE-179X-2,610.339

you think you lose moments which you could employ in doing more
substantial good ; and that your letters only pamper our minds , but do
not feed or clothe our bodies : WALPOLE-179X-2,610.340

if they did , you would coin as much paper as the French do in assignats
. WALPOLE-179X-2,610.341

Do not imagine now that you have committed a wicked thing by writing to
me at last ; WALPOLE-179X-2,610.342

comfort yourself , that your conscience , not temptation , forced you to
write ; WALPOLE-179X-2,610.343

and be assured I am as grateful as if you had written from choice , not
from duty , your constant spiritual director . WALPOLE-179X-2,610.344

I have been out of order the whole summer , but not very ill for above a
fortnight . WALPOLE-179X-2,610.345

I caught a painful rheumatism by going into a very crowded church in a
rainy day where all the windows were open , to hear our friend the
bishop of London preach a charity sermon here at Twickenham .
WALPOLE-179X-2,610.346

My gout would not resign to a new incumbent , WALPOLE-179X-2,610.347

but came too ; WALPOLE-179X-2,610.348

and both together have so lamed my right arm , though I am now using it
, that I can@ @not yet extend it entirely , nor lift it to the top of my
head . WALPOLE-179X-2,610.349

However , I am free from pain ; WALPOLE-179X-2,610.350

and as Providence , though it supplied us originally with so many
bounties , took care we might shift with succedaneums on the loss of
several of them , I am content with what remains of my stock ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,610.351

and since all my fingers are not useless , and that I have not six hairs
left , I am not much grieved at not being able to comb my head .
WALPOLE-179X-2,610.352

Nay , should not such a shadow as I have ever been , be thankful , that
at the eve of seventy-five I am not yet passed away ?
WALPOLE-179X-2,610.353

<P_611>

I am so little out of charity with the bishop for having been the
innocent cause of the death of my shoulder , that I am heartily
concerned for him and her on Mrs. Porteus's accident .
WALPOLE-179X-2,611.355

It may have marbled her complexion , WALPOLE-179X-2,611.356

but I am persuaded has not altered her lively , amiable , good-humoured
countenance . WALPOLE-179X-2,611.357

As I know not where to direct to them , and as you can@ @not suppose it
a sin for a sheep to write to its pastor on a week-day , I wish you
would mark the interest I take in their accident and escape from worse
mischief . WALPOLE-179X-2,611.358

I thank you most cordially for your inquiry after <font> my <$$font>
wives . WALPOLE-179X-2,611.359

I am in the utmost perplexity of mind about them ; torn between hopes
and fears . WALPOLE-179X-2,611.360

I believe them set out from Florence on their return since yesterday
se'n-night , WALPOLE-179X-2,611.361

and consequently feel all the joy and impatience of expecting them in
five or six weeks : WALPOLE-179X-2,611.362

- but then , besides fears of roads , bad inns , accidents , heats and
colds , and the sea to cross in November at last ; all my satisfaction
is dashed by the uncertainty whether they come through Germany or France
. WALPOLE-179X-2,611.363

I have advised , begged , implored , that it may not be through those
Iroquois , Lestryons , Anthropophagi , the Franks ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,611.364

and then , hearing passports were abolished , and the roads more secure
, I half consented , as they wished it , WALPOLE-179X-2,611.365

and the road is much shorter ; WALPOLE-179X-2,611.366

and then I repented , WALPOLE-179X-2,611.367

and have contradicted myself again - WALPOLE-179X-2,611.368

And now I know not which route they will take ! WALPOLE-179X-2,611.369

nor shall enjoy any comfort from the thoughts of their return , till
they are returned safe . WALPOLE-179X-2,611.370

'T@ @is well I am doubly guarantied - WALPOLE-179X-2,611.371

or who knows , as I am as old almost as both her husbands together , but
Mrs. B- - might have cast a longing eye towards me ?
WALPOLE-179X-2,611.372

How I laughed at hearing of her throwing a second muckender to a
Methusalem ! a fat red-faced veteran , with a portly hillock of flesh .
WALPOLE-179X-2,611.373

I conclude all her grandfathers are dead ; or , as there is no
prohibition in the table of consanguinity against male ancestors , she
would certainly have stepped backwards towards the deluge , and
ransacked her pedigrees on both sides for some kinsman of the patriarchs
. WALPOLE-179X-2,611.374

I could titter <font> Ã  plusieurs reprises ; <$$font>
WALPOLE-179X-2,611.375

but I am too old to be improper , WALPOLE-179X-2,611.376

and you are too modest to be <font> impropered <$$font> to ,
WALPOLE-179X-2,611.377

and so I will drop the subject at the herald's office .
WALPOLE-179X-2,611.378

<P_612>

I am happy at and honour miss B-'s resolution in casting away golden ,
or rather gilt chains : WALPOLE-179X-2,612.380

others out of vanity would have worn them till they had eaten into the
bone . WALPOLE-179X-2,612.381

On that charming young woman's chapter I agree with you perfectly - not
a jot on <font> Deborah <$$font> - , whom you admire :
WALPOLE-179X-2,612.382

I have neither redde her verses nor will . WALPOLE-179X-2,612.383

As I have not your aspen conscience , I can@ @not forgive the heart of a
woman that is party per pale blood and tenderness , that curses our
clergy and feels for negroes . WALPOLE-179X-2,612.384

Can I forget the 14th of July , when they all contributed their faggot
to the fires that her Presbytyrants <paren> as lord Melcombe called them
<$$paren> tried to light in every Smithfield in the island , and which ,
as P-e and P- applauded in France , it would be folly to suppose they
did not only wish but meant to kindle here ? WALPOLE-179X-2,612.385

Were they ignorant of the atrocious barbarities , injustice , and
violation of oaths committed in France ? WALPOLE-179X-2,612.386

Did P- - not know that the clergy there had no option left but between
starving and perjury ? WALPOLE-179X-2,612.387

And what does he think of the poor man executed at Birmingham , who
declared at his death he had been provoked by the infamous hand-bill ?
- I know not who wrote it . WALPOLE-179X-2,612.388

- No , my good friend : <font> Deborah <$$font> may cant rhymes of
compassion , WALPOLE-179X-2,612.389

but she is a hypocrite ; WALPOLE-179X-2,612.390

and you shall not make me read her , WALPOLE-179X-2,612.391

nor with all your sympathy and candour can you esteem her .
WALPOLE-179X-2,612.392

<font> Your <$$font> compassion for the poor blacks is genuine , sincere
from your soul , most amiable ; hers , a measure of faction :
WALPOLE-179X-2,612.393

her party supported the abolition , WALPOLE-179X-2,612.394

and regretted the disappointment as a blow to the good cause .
WALPOLE-179X-2,612.395

I know this . WALPOLE-179X-2,612.396

- Do not let your piety lead you into the weakness of respecting the bad
, only because they hoist the flag of religion , while they carry a
stilletto in the flag-staff . WALPOLE-179X-2,612.397

Did not they , previous to the 14th of July , endeavour to corrupt the
guards ? WALPOLE-179X-2,612.398

What would have ensued , had they succeeded , you must tremble to think
! WALPOLE-179X-2,612.399

You tell me nothing of your own health - WALPOLE-179X-2,612.400

may I flatter myself it is good ? WALPOLE-179X-2,612.401

I wish I knew so authentically ! WALPOLE-179X-2,612.402

and I wish I could guess when I should see you , without your being
staked to the fogs of the Thames at Christmas - WALPOLE-179X-2,612.403

I can@ @not desire that . WALPOLE-179X-2,612.404

Adieu , my very valuable friend ! WALPOLE-179X-2,612.405

I am , though unworthy , Yours most cordially , HOR. WALPOLE .
WALPOLE-179X-2,612.406

<P_613>

<heading>

Letter XIX . WALPOLE-179X-2,613.409

<$$heading>

Berkeley-square , WALPOLE-179X-2,613.411

January I , 1792 . WALPOLE-179X-2,613.412

My much-esteemed friend , I have not so long delayed answering your
letter from the pitiful revenge of recollecting how long your pen is
fetching breath before it replies to mine - WALPOLE-179X-2,613.413

Oh ! no - You know I love to <font> heap coals of kindness <$$font> on
your head , and to draw you into little sins , that you may forgive
yourself , by knowing your time was employed on big virtues .
WALPOLE-179X-2,613.414

On the contrary , you would be revenged ; WALPOLE-179X-2,613.415

for here have you , according to <font> your <$$font> notions ,
inveigled me into the fracture of a commandment ; WALPOLE-179X-2,613.416

for I am writing to you on a <font> Sunday <$$font> , being the first
moment of leisure that I have had since I received your letter .
WALPOLE-179X-2,613.417

It does not indeed clash with my religious ideas , as I hold paying
one's debts as good a deed , as praying and reading sermons for a whole
day in every week , when it is impossible to fix the attention to one
course of thinking for so many hours for fifty-two days in every year .
WALPOLE-179X-2,613.418

- Thus you see I can preach too - WALPOLE-179X-2,613.419

But seriously - and indeed I am little disposed to cheerfulness now - I
am overwhelmed with troubles , and with business - and business that I
do not understand - WALPOLE-179X-2,613.420

Law , and the management of a ruined estate , are subjects ill-suited to
a head that never studied any thing that in wordly language is called
useful . WALPOLE-179X-2,613.421

The tranquillity of my remnant of life will be lost , or so perpetually
interrupted , that I expect little comfort - WALPOLE-179X-2,613.422

not that I am already intending to grow rich , WALPOLE-179X-2,613.423

but the moment one is supposed so , there are so many alert to turn one
to their own account , that I have more letters to write to satisfy - or
rather to dissatisfy them , than about my own affairs , though the
latter are all confusion . WALPOLE-179X-2,613.424

I have such missives , on agriculture , pretensions to livings , offers
of taking care of my game as I am incapable of it , self-recommendations
of making my robes , and round hints of taking out my writ , that at
least I may name a proxy , and give my dormant conscience to somebody or
other ! WALPOLE-179X-2,613.425

I trust you think better of my heart and understanding than to suppose
that I have listened to any one of these new <font> friends . <$$font>
WALPOLE-179X-2,613.426

Yet though I have negatived all , I have been forced to answer some of
them before you ; WALPOLE-179X-2,613.427

and that will convince you how cruelly ill I have passed my time lately
, besides having been made ill with vexation and fatigue -
WALPOLE-179X-2,613.428

But I am tolerably well again . WALPOLE-179X-2,613.429

<P_614>

For the other empty metamorphosis that has happened to the outward man ,
you do me justice in concluding that it can do nothing but tease me -
WALPOLE-179X-2,614.431

it is being called names in one's old age . WALPOLE-179X-2,614.432

I had rather be my lord mayor , WALPOLE-179X-2,614.433

for then I should keep the nickname but a year , WALPOLE-179X-2,614.434

and mine I may retain a little longer - not that at seventy-five I
reckon on becoming my lord Methusalem . WALPOLE-179X-2,614.435

Vainer however I believe I am already become ; WALPOLE-179X-2,614.436

for I have wasted almost two pages about myself , and said not a tittle
about your health , which I most cordially rejoice to hear you are
recovering , and as fervently hope you will entirely recover .
WALPOLE-179X-2,614.437

I have the highest opinion of the element of water as a constant
beverage , having so deep a conviction of the goodness and wisdom of
Providence , that I am persuaded that when it indulged us in such a
luxurious variety of eatables , and gave us but one drinkable , it
intended that our sole liquid should be both wholesome and corrective .
WALPOLE-179X-2,614.438

- Your system I know is different - WALPOLE-179X-2,614.439

You hold that mutton and water were the only cock and hen that were
designed for our nourishment - WALPOLE-179X-2,614.440

but I am apt to doubt whether draughts of water for six weeks are
capable of restoring health , though some are strongly impregnated with
mineral and other particles - WALPOLE-179X-2,614.441

Yet you have staggered me : WALPOLE-179X-2,614.442

the Bath water , by your account , is like electricity compounded of
contradictory qualities ; WALPOLE-179X-2,614.443

the one attracts and repels ; WALPOLE-179X-2,614.444

the other turns a shilling yellow , WALPOLE-179X-2,614.445

and whitens your jaundice . WALPOLE-179X-2,614.446

I shall hope to see you <paren> when is that to be ? <$$paren> without
alloy . WALPOLE-179X-2,614.447

I must finish , wishing you three_hundred_and_thirteen days of happiness
for the new year that is arrived this morning : WALPOLE-179X-2,614.448

the fifty-two that you hold in commendam , I have no doubt will be
rewarded as such good intentions deserve . WALPOLE-179X-2,614.449

Adieu , my <font> too <$$font> good friend ! My direction shall talk
superciliously to the postman ; WALPOLE-179X-2,614.450

but do let me continue unchangeably Your faithful and sincere HOR.
WALPOLE . WALPOLE-179X-2,614.451

<P_615>

<heading>

Letter XX . WALPOLE-179X-2,615.454

<$$heading>

Berkeley-square , WALPOLE-179X-2,615.456

February 9 , 1793 . WALPOLE-179X-2,615.457

My Holy Hannah , With your innate and usual goodness and sense , you
have done me justice by guessing exactly at the cause of my long silence
. WALPOLE-179X-2,615.458

You have been apt to tell me that my letters diverted you -
WALPOLE-179X-2,615.459

How then could I write , when it was impossible but to attrist you !
when I could speak of nothing but unparalleled horrors ! and but awaken
your sensibility , if it slumbered for a moment !
WALPOLE-179X-2,615.460

What mind could forget the tenth of August and the second of September -
and that the black and bloody year 1792 has plunged its murderous dagger
still deeper , and already made 1793 still more detestably memorable !
though its victim has at last been rewarded for four years of torture by
forcing from him every kind of proof of the most perfect character that
ever sat on a throne . WALPOLE-179X-2,615.461

Were these , alas ! themes for letters ? WALPOLE-179X-2,615.462

Nay , am I not sure that <font> you <$$font> have been still more
shocked by a crime that passes even the guilt of shedding the blood of
poor Louis - to hear of atheism avowed , and the avowal tolerated by
monsters calling themselves a National Assembly !
WALPOLE-179X-2,615.463

- But I have no words that can reach the criminality of such <font>
inferno-human <$$font> beings - WALPOLE-179X-2,615.464

but must compose a term that aims at conveying my idea of them -
WALPOLE-179X-2,615.465

For the future it will be sufficient to call them <font> the French
<$$font> - WALPOLE-179X-2,615.466

I hope no other nation will ever deserve to be confounded with them !
WALPOLE-179X-2,615.467

Indeed , my dear friend , I have another reason for wishing to burn my
pen entirely : WALPOLE-179X-2,615.468

all my ideas are confounded and overturned - WALPOLE-179X-2,615.469

I do not know whether all I ever learnt in the seventy-first years of my
seventy-five was not wrong and false : WALPOLE-179X-2,615.470

common sense , reasoning , calculation , conjecture from analogy and
from history of past events , all , all have been baffled ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,615.471

nor am I sure that what used to be thought the result of experience and
wisdom , was not a mass of mistakes - WALPOLE-179X-2,615.472

Have I not found , do I not find , that the invention of establishing
metals as the <font> signs <$$font> of property was an useless discovery
, or at least only useful till the art of making paper was found out ?
WALPOLE-179X-2,615.473

Nay , the latter is preferable to gold and silver .
WALPOLE-179X-2,615.474

If the ores were adulterated and cried down , nobody would take them in
exchange . WALPOLE-179X-2,615.475

Depreciate paper as much as you will , WALPOLE-179X-2,615.476

and it will still serve all the purposes of <P_616> barter .
WALPOLE-179X-2,616.477

Tradesmen still keep shops , WALPOLE-179X-2,616.478

stock them with goods , WALPOLE-179X-2,616.479

and deliver their commodities for those coined rags -
WALPOLE-179X-2,616.480

Poor Reason , where art thou ? WALPOLE-179X-2,616.481

To show you that memory and argument are of no value , at least with me
, I thought a year or two ago {TEXT:missing_"ago"} that this paper-mint
would soon blow up , because I remembered that when Mr. C- - F- - and
one or two more youths of brilliant genius first came to light , and
into vast debts at play , they imparted to the world an important secret
which they had discovered - WALPOLE-179X-2,616.482

It was , that nobody needed to want money , if they would pay enough for
it . WALPOLE-179X-2,616.483

Accordingly they borrowed of Jews at vast usury : WALPOLE-179X-2,616.484

but as they had made but an incomplete calculation , the interest so
soon exceeded the principal , that the system did not maintain its
ground for above two or three years . WALPOLE-179X-2,616.485

Faro has proved a more substantial speculation . WALPOLE-179X-2,616.486

- But I miscarried in applying my remembrance to the assignats , which
still maintain their ground against that long-decried , but as
long-adored corruptor of virtue , gold - WALPOLE-179X-2,616.487

Alack ! I do not hear that virtue has flourished more for the
destruction of its old enemy ! WALPOLE-179X-2,616.488

Shall I add another truth ? WALPOLE-179X-2,616.489

I have been so disgusted and fatigued by hearing of nothing but French
massacres , &c. and found it so impossible to shift conversation to any
other topic , that before I had been a month in town I wished miss G- -
would revive , that people might have at least one other subject to
interest the ears and tongues of the public . WALPOLE-179X-2,616.490

- But no wonder universal attention is engrossed by the present
portentous scene ! WALPOLE-179X-2,616.491

It seems to draw to a question , whether Europe or France is to be
depopulated ; whether civilization can be recovered , or the republic of
Chaos can be supported by assassination . WALPOLE-179X-2,616.492

We have heard of the golden , silver , and iron ages -
WALPOLE-179X-2,616.493

the brazen one existed , while the French were only predominately
insolent . WALPOLE-179X-2,616.494

- What the present age will be denominated , I can@ @not guess .
WALPOLE-179X-2,616.495

Though the paper age would be characteristic , it is not emphatic enough
, WALPOLE-179X-2,616.496

nor specifies the enormous sins of the fiends that are the agents .
WALPOLE-179X-2,616.497

I think it may be styled the diabolic age - WALPOLE-179X-2,616.498

The duke of Orleans has dethroned Satan , who since his fall has never
instigated such crimes as Orleans has perpetrated .
WALPOLE-179X-2,616.499

Let me soften my tone a little , and harmonise your poor mind by sweeter
accents . WALPOLE-179X-2,616.500

In this deluge of triumphant enormities , what traits of the sublime and
beautiful may be gleaned ! WALPOLE-179X-2,616.501

Did you hear of madame Elizabeth , <P_617> the king's sister ? a saint
like yourself . WALPOLE-179X-2,617.502

She doted on her brother , WALPOLE-179X-2,617.503

for she certainly knew his soul . WALPOLE-179X-2,617.504

In the tumult in July , hearing the populace and the poissardes had
broken into the palace , she flew to the king , WALPOLE-179X-2,617.505

and by embracing him , {TEXT:embracing,_him} tried to shield his person
. WALPOLE-179X-2,617.506

The populace took her for the queen . WALPOLE-179X-2,617.507

cried out , " <font> Voila cette chienne , cette Autrichienne !
<$$font> " WALPOLE-179X-2,617.508

and were proceeding to violence . WALPOLE-179X-2,617.509

Somebody , to save her , screamed , " <font> Ce n'est pas la reine ,
WALPOLE-179X-2,617.510

c'est - <$$font> " WALPOLE-179X-2,617.511

The princess said . " <font> Ah ! mon Dieu ! ne les dÃ©trompez pas .
" <$$font> WALPOLE-179X-2,617.512

If that was not the most sublime instance of perfect innocence ready
prepared for death , I know not where to find one .
WALPOLE-179X-2,617.513

Sublime indeed too was the sentence of good father Edgeworth , the
king's confessor , who thinking his royal penitent a little dismayed
just before the fatal stroke , cried out , " <font> Montez , digne fils
de St. Louis ! WALPOLE-179X-2,617.514

Le ciel vous est ouvert . <$$font> " WALPOLE-179X-2,617.515

- The holy martyr's countenance brightened up , WALPOLE-179X-2,617.516

and he submitted at once . WALPOLE-179X-2,617.517

Such Victims , such confessors as those , and monsieur de Malesherbes ,
repair some of the breaches in human nature made by Orleans , Condorcet
, Santerre , and a legion of evil spirits . WALPOLE-179X-2,617.518

The tide of horrors has hurried me much too far , before I have not
vented a note of my most sincere concern for your bad account of your
health . WALPOLE-179X-2,617.519

I feel for it heartily , WALPOLE-179X-2,617.520

and wish your frame were as sound as your soul and understanding .
WALPOLE-179X-2,617.521

What can I recommend ? WALPOLE-179X-2,617.522

I am no physician but for my own flimsy texture , which by studying ,
and by contradicting all advice , I have drawn to this great age .
WALPOLE-179X-2,617.523

Patience , temperance , nay , abstinence are already yours -
WALPOLE-179X-2,617.524

in short , you want to be corrected of nothing but too much piety , too
much rigour towards yourself , and too much sensibility for others .
WALPOLE-179X-2,617.525

Is not it possible to serve mankind , without feeling too great pity ?
WALPOLE-179X-2,617.526

- Perhaps I am a little too much hardened - WALPOLE-179X-2,617.527

I am grown too little alarmed for the health of my friends , from being
become far more indifferent to life - WALPOLE-179X-2,617.528

I look to the nearness of my end , as a delivery from spectacles of woe
. WALPOLE-179X-2,617.529

We have even amongst us monsters , more criminal , in speculation at
least , than the French - WALPOLE-179X-2,617.530

They had cause to wish for correction of a bad government , though ,
till <font> taught <$$font> to dislike it , three-fourths of the country
, I maintain , adored theirs . WALPOLE-179X-2,617.531

We have the perfectest ever yet devised - WALPOLE-179X-2,617.532

but if to your numerous readings of little pamphlets you would add one
more , called <font> Village-politics <$$font> , infinitely superior to
any thing on the <P_618> subject , clearer , better stated , and
comprehending the whole mass of matter in the shortest compass , you
will be more mistress of the subject than any man in England .
WALPOLE-179X-2,618.533

I know who wrote it , WALPOLE-179X-2,618.534

but will not tell you , because you did not tell me .
WALPOLE-179X-2,618.535

Your most faithful humble servant and friend , ORFORD .
WALPOLE-179X-2,618.536

<heading>

Letter XXI . WALPOLE-179X-2,618.538

<$$heading>

Berkeley-square , WALPOLE-179X-2,618.540

March 23 , 1793 WALPOLE-179X-2,618.541

I shall certainly not leave off taunting your virtues , my excellent
friend , WALPOLE-179X-2,618.542

for I find it sometimes makes you correct them . WALPOLE-179X-2,618.543

I scolded you for your modesty in not acquainting me with your <font>
Village-politics <$$font> even after they were published ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,618.544

and you have already conquered that unfriendly delicacy , and announced
another piece of which you are in labour . WALPOLE-179X-2,618.545

Still I see there wanted your ghostly father , the bishop of London , to
enjoin you to be <font> quite <$$font> shameless and avow your natural
child . WALPOLE-179X-2,618.546

I do approve his doctrine : WALPOLE-179X-2,618.547

calling it by your own name will make its fortune .
WALPOLE-179X-2,618.548

If , like Rousseau , you had left your babe among the enfans trouvÃ©s ,
it might never be heard of more than his poor issue have been ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,618.549

for I can but observe that the French patriots , who have made such a
fuss with his ashes , have not taken the smallest pains to attempt to
discover his real progeny , which might not have been impossible by
collating dates and circumstances . WALPOLE-179X-2,618.550

I am proud of having imitated you at a great distance , and been
persuaded , much against my will and practice , to let my name be put to
the second subscription for the poor French clergy , as it was thought
it might tend to animate that consumptive contribution .
WALPOLE-179X-2,618.551

I am impatient for your pamphlet , as not only being yours , but hoping
it will invigorate horror against French atheism , which I am grieved to
say did not by any means make due impression . WALPOLE-179X-2,618.552

I did very early apply to <font> your <$$font> <P_619> <font> confessor
<$$font> , to beg he would enjoin his clergy to denounce that shocking
impiety - WALPOLE-179X-2,619.553

I could almost recommend to you to add a slight postscript on the
massacre of that wretch <font> Manuel . <$$font> WALPOLE-179X-2,619.554

I do not love such insects , as we are , dispensing <font> judgments
<$$font> - WALPOLE-179X-2,619.555

yet if the punishment of that just victim might startle such profane
criminals , it might be charity to suggest the hint to them .
WALPOLE-179X-2,619.556

24th . WALPOLE-179X-2,619.557

I was interrupted , WALPOLE-179X-2,619.558

and could not finish my letter in a breath , as I meant the moment I had
received yours , from eagerness to thank you for the notice of your
<font> publication . <$$font> WALPOLE-179X-2,619.559

I wish you had added the name of your man-midwife the printer ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,619.560

but I trust to seeing you stand in a black and white sheet , the
newspaper . WALPOLE-179X-2,619.561

Mrs. Boscawen was so kind as to call on me the same day with the same
information from your letter to her - WALPOLE-179X-2,619.562

but in hers were some words on the late bankruptcies , more than were in
mine , that alarm us , and that , though not explicit , look as if you
yourself have suffered by those failures . WALPOLE-179X-2,619.563

You have such a friendly and feeling heart , that it is impossible to
discern whether any grief is not rather on account of others than on
your own . WALPOLE-179X-2,619.564

Pray be confidential enough to tell me ; WALPOLE-179X-2,619.565

for <font> I <$$font> have not such universal charity , as to lament the
loss of others as I should yours . WALPOLE-179X-2,619.566

I must modify the massacre of Manuel : WALPOLE-179X-2,619.567

he has been a good deal stabbed , WALPOLE-179X-2,619.568

but will , they say , recover . WALPOLE-179X-2,619.569

Perhaps it is better that some of those assassins should live to
acknowledge , that " Do not to others what you would not have done to
you " is not so silly a maxim , as most of the precepts of morality and
justice have lately been deemed by <font> philosophers and legislators
<$$font> - titles self-assumed by men , who have abolished all other
titles ; and who have disgraced and debased the former denomination ,
and under the latter have enjoined triple perjuries , and at last can@
@not fix on any code which should exact more forswearing .
WALPOLE-179X-2,619.570

I own I am pleased that that ruffian pedant Condorcet's new constitution
was too clumsy and unwieldy to go down the throats of those who have
swallowed every thing else . WALPOLE-179X-2,619.571

I did but just cast my eyes on the beginning and end ,
WALPOLE-179X-2,619.572

and was so lucky as to observe the hypocrite's contradiction :
WALPOLE-179X-2,619.573

he sets out with declaration of equality , WALPOLE-179X-2,619.574

and winds up with security of property . That is , we will plunder
every body , and then entail the spoils on ourselves and our <paren>
<font> wrong <$$font> <$$paren> heirs . WALPOLE-179X-2,619.575

Well ! that bloody chaos seems recoiling on themselves !
WALPOLE-179X-2,619.576

It looks as if civil <P_620> war was bursting out in many provinces ,
and will precipitate approaching famine . WALPOLE-179X-2,620.577

- When , till <font> now <$$font> , could one make such a reflection
without horror to one's self ? WALPOLE-179X-2,620.578

- But , alas ! have not the French brought it to the question , whether
Europe or France should be laid desolate ? WALPOLE-179X-2,620.579

Religion , morality , justice , have been stabbed , torn up by the roots
: WALPOLE-179X-2,620.580

every right has been trampled under foot . WALPOLE-179X-2,620.581

Marriage has been profaned and undermined by law :
WALPOLE-179X-2,620.582

and no wonder , that , amidst such excesses , the poor arts have shared
in the common ruin ! WALPOLE-179X-2,620.583

- And who have been the perpetrators of , or advocates for , such
universal devastation ? WALPOLE-179X-2,620.584

Philosophers , geometricians , astronomers - a Condorcet , a Baillie , a
bishop of Autun , and a doctor - , and the last the worst .
WALPOLE-179X-2,620.585

The French had seen grievances , crying grievances ! yet not under the
good late king . WALPOLE-179X-2,620.586

But what calamities or dangers threatened or had fallen on - {TEXT:dash}
, but want of papal power , like his predecessor Calvin ?
WALPOLE-179X-2,620.587

If you say his house was burnt - WALPOLE-179X-2,620.588

but did he intend the fire should blaze on that side of the street ?
WALPOLE-179X-2,620.589

<font> Your <$$font> charity may believe him innocent -
WALPOLE-179X-2,620.590

but your understanding does not . WALPOLE-179X-2,620.591

Well ! I am glad to hear he is going to - WALPOLE-179X-2,620.592

I hope he will not bring back scalping , even to that national assembly
of which he was proud of being elected a member !
WALPOLE-179X-2,620.593

I doubt if Cartouche would have thought it an honour .
WALPOLE-179X-2,620.594

It was stuck up in Lloyd's coffee-house lately , that the duke of
Orleans was named <font> Chef de la republique . <$$font>
WALPOLE-179X-2,620.595

I thought it should be <font> Chef de la Lie publique . <$$font>
WALPOLE-179X-2,620.596

For the best and most comfortable part of your letter I have not thanked
you yet , my dear friend ; WALPOLE-179X-2,620.597

I mean the prospect of seeing you next month , WALPOLE-179X-2,620.598

and thank the zodiac , next month is very near . WALPOLE-179X-2,620.599

I must now for my own sake , as well as yours , hope that your health
will continue to improve , as it is the condition of the bond -
WALPOLE-179X-2,620.600

A pleasant word , that <font> continue <$$font> ; WALPOLE-179X-2,620.601

it implies you have been mending . WALPOLE-179X-2,620.602

Your postscript said you had been telling me a lie -
WALPOLE-179X-2,620.603

So have I ; WALPOLE-179X-2,620.604

for , on reading your letter again , I find you had named your <font>
accoucheur <$$font> Cadell . WALPOLE-179X-2,620.605

I do not wonder he has been slow . WALPOLE-179X-2,620.606

I was told lately , that he has said that the public is so totally
engrossed by politics <paren> and many pieces of that sort I conclude
come from his press <$$paren> , that the receipts of his shop , which
used to <P_621> be fifteen_thousand a year , have this year decreased
two-thirds . WALPOLE-179X-2,621.607

- So the French par bricole have destroyed <font> our <$$font>
literature too . WALPOLE-179X-2,621.608

Adieu ! I long to see both you and your pamphlet ,
WALPOLE-179X-2,621.609

and am Most cordially yours , ORFORD . WALPOLE-179X-2,621.610

<heading>

Letter XXII . WALPOLE-179X-2,621.612

<$$heading>

April 27 , 1794 . WALPOLE-179X-2,621.614

This is no plot to draw you into committing even a good deed on a Sunday
, which I suppose the <font> literality <$$font> of your conscience
would haggle about , as if the day of the week constitutes the sin , and
not the nature of the crime . WALPOLE-179X-2,621.615

But you may defer your answer , till to-night is become to-morrow by the
clock having struck one ; WALPOLE-179X-2,621.616

and then you may do an innocent thing without any guilt , which a
quarter of an hour sooner you would think abominable .
WALPOLE-179X-2,621.617

- Nay , as an Irishman would say , you need not even <font> read
<$$font> this note till the canonical hour is past .
WALPOLE-179X-2,621.618

In short , my dear madam , I gave your obliging message to lady W- - ,
who will be happy to see you on Tuesday , at one o'clock .
WALPOLE-179X-2,621.619

But as her staircase is very bad , as she is in a lodging , I have
proposed that this meeting , for which I have been pimping between two
female saints , may be held here in my house , as I had the utmost
difficulty last night in climbing her <font> scala santa <$$font> , and
I can@ @not undertake it again . WALPOLE-179X-2,621.620

But if you are so good as to send me a favourable answer tomorrow , I
will take care you shall find her here at the time I mentioned , with
your true admirer , ORFORD , WALPOLE-179X-2,621.621

<heading>

Letter XXIII . WALPOLE-179X-2,621.623

<$$heading>

Berkeley-square , WALPOLE-179X-2,621.625

Saturday night , January 24 , 1795 . WALPOLE-179X-2,621.626

My best madam , I will never more complain of your silence ,
WALPOLE-179X-2,621.627

for I am perfectly convinced that you have no idle , no unemployed
moments . WALPOLE-179X-2,621.628

Your indefatigable <P_622> benevolence is incessantly occupied in good
works ; WALPOLE-179X-2,622.629

and your head and your heart make the utmost use of the excellent
qualities of both . WALPOLE-179X-2,622.630

You have given proofs of the talents of one , WALPOLE-179X-2,622.631

and you certainly do not wrap the still more precious talent of the
other in a napkin . WALPOLE-179X-2,622.632

Thank you a_thousand times for your most ingenious plan -
WALPOLE-179X-2,622.633

may great success reward you ! WALPOLE-179X-2,622.634

I sent one instantly to the duchess of Gloucester , whose piety and zeal
imitate yours at a distance ; WALPOLE-179X-2,622.635

but she says she can@ @not afford to subscribe just at this severe
moment , when the poor so much want her assistance - but she will on the
thaw , and should have been flattered by receiving a plan from yourself
. WALPOLE-179X-2,622.636

I sent another to lord H- - , who , I trust , will show it to a much
greater lady ; WALPOLE-179X-2,622.637

and I repeated some of the facts you told me of the foul fiends , and
their anti-More {COM:font_change_around_"More"} activity .
WALPOLE-179X-2,622.638

I sent to Mr. White for half a dozen more of your plans ,
WALPOLE-179X-2,622.639

and will distribute them wherever I have hopes of their taking root and
blossoming . WALPOLE-179X-2,622.640

- To-morrow I will send him my subscription ; WALPOLE-179X-2,622.641

and I flatter myself you will not think it a breach of Sunday ,
WALPOLE-179X-2,622.642

nor will I make this long , that I may not widen that fracture .
WALPOLE-179X-2,622.643

- Good night ! WALPOLE-179X-2,622.644

How calm and comfortable must your slumbers be on the pillow of every
day's good deeds ! WALPOLE-179X-2,622.645

Monday . WALPOLE-179X-2,622.646

Yesterday was dark as midnight . WALPOLE-179X-2,622.647

- Oh ! that it may be the darkest day in all respects that we shall see
! WALPOLE-179X-2,622.648

- But these are themes too voluminous and dismal for a letter , and
which your zeal tells me you feel too intensely for me to increase ,
when you are doing all in your power to counteract them .
WALPOLE-179X-2,622.649

One of my grievances is , that the sanguinary inhumanity of the times
has almost poisoned one's compassion , and makes one abhor so many
thousands of our own species , and rejoice when they suffer for their
crimes . WALPOLE-179X-2,622.650

I could feel no pity on reading the account of the death of Condorcet
<paren> if true , though I doubt it <$$paren> . WALPOLE-179X-2,622.651

He was one of the greatest monsters exhibited by history ;
WALPOLE-179X-2,622.652

and is said to have poisoned himself from famine and fear of the
guillotine - WALPOLE-179X-2,622.653

and would be a new instance of what I suggested to you for a tract , to
show , that though we must not assume a pretension to judging of divine
judgments , yet we may believe that the oeconomy of Providence has so
disposed causes and <P_623> consequences , that such villains as Danton
, Robespierre , the duke of Orleans , &c. &c. &c. do but dig pits for
themselves . WALPOLE-179X-2,623.654

- I will check myself , WALPOLE-179X-2,623.655

or I shall wander into the sad events of the last five years - down to
the rage of party that has sacrificed Holland ! WALPOLE-179X-2,623.656

What a fund for reflection and prophetic apprehension !
WALPOLE-179X-2,623.657

May we have as much wisdom and courage to stem our malevolent enemies ,
as it is plain , to our lasting honour , we have had charity to the
French emigrants , and have bounty for the poor who are suffering in
this dreadful season ! WALPOLE-179X-2,623.658

Adieu , thou excellent woman ! thou reverse of that hyaena in
petticoats , Mrs. - - , who to this day discharges her ink and gall on
Marie Antoinette , whose unparalleled sufferings have not yet stanched
that Alecto's blazing ferocity . WALPOLE-179X-2,623.659

Adieu ! adieu ! WALPOLE-179X-2,623.660

Yours from my heart , ORFORD . WALPOLE-179X-2,623.661

P.S. I have subscribed five guineas at Mr. White's to your plan .
WALPOLE-179X-2,623.662

