<BEGIN_walpole-174x-1>

<P_5,3>

{ED:Letter_I._To_the_Hon._Henry_Seymour_Conway}

Florence , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,3.4

March 6 , 1740 N. S. WALPOLE-174X-1,5,3.5

Harry , my dear , one would tell you what a monster you are , if one
were not sure your conscience tells you so every time you think of me .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,3.6

At Genoa , in the year of our Lord
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_thirty-nine , I received the last letter
from you ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,3.7

by your not writing to me since , I imagine you propose to make this
leap_year . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,3.8

I should have sent many a scold after you in this long interval , had I
known where to have scolded ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,3.9

but you told me you should leave Geneva immediately .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,3.10

I have dispatched sundry enquiries into England after you , all
fruitless . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,3.11

At last drops in a chance letter to lady Sophy Farmor from a girl at
Paris , that <P_5,4> tells her for news , Mr. Henry Conway is here .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.12

Is he indeed ? WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.13

and why was I to know it only by this scrambling way ?
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.14

Well , I hate you for this neglect , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.15

but I find I love you well enough to tell you so .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.16

But , dear now , do@ @n't let one fall into a train of excuses and
reproaches ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.17

if the god of indolence is a mightier deity with you than the god of
caring for one , tell me , and I wo@ @n't dun you ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.18

but will drop your correspondence as silently as if I owed you money .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.19

If my private consistency was of no weight with you ; yet is a man
nothing who is within three days journey of a conclave ?
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.20

nay , for what you knew I might have been in Rome .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.21

Harry , art thou so indifferent , as to have a cousin at the election of
a pope without courting him for news ? WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.22

I@ @'ll tell you , were I any where else , and even Dick H- were at Rome
, I think verily I should have wrote to him . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.23

Popes , cardinals , adorations , coronations , St. Peters !
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.24

oh , what costly sounds ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.25

and do@ @n't you write to one yet ? WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.26

I shall set out in about a fortnight , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.27

and pray then think me of consequence . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.28

I have crept on upon time from day to day here ; fond of Florence to a
degree : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.29

't@ @is infinitely the most agreeable of all the places I have seen
since London : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.30

that you know one loves , right or wrong , as one does one's nurse .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.31

Our little Arno is not boated and swelling like the Thames ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.32

but 't@ @is vastly pretty , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.33

and , I do@ @n't know how , being Italian , has something visionary and
poetical in its stream . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.34

Then one@ @'s unwilling to leave the gallery , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.35

and - WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.36

but - in short , one@ @'s unwilling to get into a post-chaise .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.37

I am as surfeited with mountains and inns , as if I had eat them .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.38

I have many to pass before I see England again , and no Tory to
entertain me on the road ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.39

Well , this thought makes me dull , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.40

and that makes me finish . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.41

Adieu ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.42

Yours ever , Hor. Walpole . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.43

P.S. Direct to me , <paren> for to be sure you will not be so
outrageous as to leave me quite off <$$paren> recommandé à mons. Mann ,
ministre de sa majesté Britannique à Florence . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,4.44

<P_5,5>

{ED:Letter_II}

Rome , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.47

April 23 , 1740 N. S. WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.48

As I have wrote you two such long letters lately , my dear Hal , I did
not hurry myself to answer your last ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.49

but chose to write to poor Selwyn upon his illness .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.50

I pity you excessively upon finding him in such a situation :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.51

what a shock it must have been to you ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.52

He deserves so much love from all that know him , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.53

and you owe him so much friendship , that I can scarce conceive a
greater shock . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.54

I am very glad you did not write to me till he was out of danger ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.55

for this great distance would have added to my pain , as I must have
waited so long for another letter . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.56

I charge you , do@ @n't let him relapse into balls ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.57

he does not love them , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.58

and , if you please , your example may keep him out of them .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.59

You are extremely pretty people to be dancing and trading with French
poulterers and pastry-cooks , when a hard frost is starving half the
nation , and the Spanish war ought to be employing the other half .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.60

We are much more public-spirited here ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.61

we live upon the public news , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.62

and triumph abundantly upon the taking Porto-Bello .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.63

If you are not entirely debauched with your balls , you must be pleased
with an answer of lord Hartington's to the governor of Rome .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.64

He asked him what they had determined about the vessel that the
Spaniards took under the cannon of Civita Vecchia , whether they had
restored it to the English ? WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.65

The governor said , they had done justice . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.66

My lord replied , " If you had not , we should have done it ourselves .
" WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.67

Pray reverence our spirit , lieutenant Hal . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.68

Sir , Moscovita is not a pretty woman , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.69

and she does sing ill ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.70

that@ @'s all . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.71

My dear Harry , I must now tell you a little about myself , and answer
your questions . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.72

How I like the inanimate part of Rome you will soon perceive at my
arrival in England ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.73

I am far gone in medals , lamps , idols , prints , &c. and all the
small commodities to the purchase of which I can attain ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.74

I would buy the Coliseum if I could : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.75

judge . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.76

My mornings are spent in the most agreeable manner ; my evenings ill
enough . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.77

Roman conversations are dreadful things ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.78

such untoward mawkins as the princesses ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.79

and the princes are worse . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.80

Then the whole city is littered with French and German abbés , who make
up a dismal contrast with the inhabitants . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,5.81

<P_5,6>

The conclave is far from enlivening us ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.83

its secrets do@ @n't transpire . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.84

I could give you names of this cardinal and that , that are talked of ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.85

but each is contradicted the next hour . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.86

I was there t'other day to visit one of them , and one of the most
agreeable , Alexander Albani . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.87

I had the opportunity of two cardinals making their entry :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.88

upon that occasion the gate is unlocked , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.89

and their eminencies come to talk to their acquaintance over the
threshold . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.90

I have received great civilities from him I named to you ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.91

and I wish he were out , that I might receive greater :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.92

a friend of his does the honours of Rome for him ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.93

but you know that it is unpleasant to visit by proxy .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.94

Card. Delci , the object of the Corsini faction , is dying ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.95

the hot weather will probably dispatch half_a_dozen more .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.96

Not that it is hot yet ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.97

I am now writing to you by my fire-side . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.98

Harry , you saw lord Deskfoord at Geneva ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.99

do@ @n't you like him ? WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.100

He is a mighty sensible man . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.101

There are few young people have so good understandings .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.102

He is mighty grave , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.103

and so are you ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.104

but you can both be pleasant when you have a mind .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.105

Indeed one can make you pleasant , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.106

but his solemn <font> Scotchery <$$font> is a little formidable :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.107

before you I can play the fool from morning to night , courageously .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.108

Good night . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.109

I have other letters to write , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.110

and must finish this . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.111

Yours ever , Hor. Walpole . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.112

{ED:Letter_III}

Florence , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.114

March 25 , 1741 N. S. WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.115

Dear Hal , You must judge by what you feel yourself of what I feel for
Selwyn's recovery , with the addition of what I have suffered from post
to post . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.116

But as I find the whole town have had the same sentiments about him ,
<paren> though I am sure few so strong as myself <$$paren> I will not
repeat what you have heard so much . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.117

I shall write to him to-night , though he knows without my telling him
how very much I love him . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.118

To you , my dear Harry , I am infinitely obliged for the three
successive letters you wrote me about him , which gave me double
pleasure , as they shewed your attention for me at a time that you knew
I must be so unhappy ; and your friendship for him .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,6.119

<P_5,7>

Your account of sir Robert's victory was so extremely well told , that I
made Gray translate it into French , and have showed it to all that
could taste it , or were inquisitive on the occasion .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.121

I have received a print by this post that diverts me extremely ; <font>
the Motion . <$$font> WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.122

Tell me , dear now , who made the design , and who took the likenesses ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.123

they are admirable : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.124

the lines are as good as one sees on such occasions .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.125

I wrote last post to sir Robert , to wish him joy ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.126

I hope he received my letter . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.127

I was to have set out last Tuesday , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.128

but on Sunday came the news of the queen of Hungary being brought to bed
of a son ; on which occasion here will be great triumphs , operas and
masquerades , which detain me for a short time . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.129

I wo@ @n't make you any excuse for sending you the following lines ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.130

you have prejudice enough for me to read with patience any of my
idlenesses . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.131

My dear Harry , you enrage me with talking of another journey to Ireland
; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.132

it will shock me if I do@ @n't find you at my return :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.133

pray take care WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.134

and be in England . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.135

I wait with some patience to see Dr. Middleton's Tully , as I read the
greatest part of it in manuscript ; though indeed that is rather a
reason for my being impatient to read the rest . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.136

If Tully can receive any additional honour , Dr. Middleton is most
capable of conferring it . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.137

I receive with great pleasure any remembrances of my lord and your
sisters ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.138

I long to see all of you . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.139

Patapan is so handsome that he has been named the silver fleece ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.140

and there is a new order of knighthood to be erected to his honour , in
opposition to the golden . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.141

Precedents are searching , and plans drawing up for that purpose .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.142

I hear that the natives pretend to be companions , upon the authority of
their dog-skin waistcoats ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.143

but a council that has been held on purpose has declared their
pretensions impertinent . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,7.144

Patapan has lately taken wife unto him , as ugly as he is genteel , but
of a very great family , being the direct heiress of Canis Scaliger ,
lord of <P_5,8> Verona : which principality we design to seize à la
Prussienne ; that is , as soon as ever we shall have persuaded the
republic of Venice , that we are the best friends they have in the world
. WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.145

Adieu , dear child ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.146

Yours ever , Hor. Walpole . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.147

P.S. I left my subscriptions for Middleton's Tully with Mr. Selwyn ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.148

I wo@ @n't trouble him , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.149

but I wish you would take care and get the books , if Mr. S. has kept
the list . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.150

{ED:Letter_IV}

Re di Cofano , vulg. Radicofani , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.152

July 5 , 1740 N. S. WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.153

You will wonder , my dear Hal , to find me on the road from Rome :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.154

why , intend I did to stay for a new popedom , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.155

but the old eminences are cross and obstinate , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.156

and will not choose one , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.157

the holy ghost does not know when . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.158

There is a horrid thing called the mal'_aria , that comes to Rome every
summer and kills one , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.159

and I did not care for being killed so far from Christian burial .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.160

We have been jolted to death ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.161

my servants let us come without springs to the chaise ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.162

and we are wore threadbare : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.163

to add to our disasters , I have sprained my ankle ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.164

and have brought it along , laid upon a little box of bawbles that I
have bought for presents in England . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.165

Perhaps I may pick you out some little trifle there ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.166

but do@ @n't depend upon it ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.167

you are a disagreeable creature , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.168

and may_be I shall not care for you . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.169

Though I am so tired in this devil of a place , yet I have taken it into
my head , that it is like Hamilton's Bawn , and I must write to you .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.170

'T@ @is the top of a black barren mountain , a vile little town at the
foot of an old citadel : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.171

yet this , know you , was the residence of one of the three kings that
went to Christ's birth-day ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.172

his name was Alabaster , Abarasser , or some such thing ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.173

the other two were kings , one of the East , the other of Cologn .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.174

'T@ @is this of Cofano , who was represented in an ancient painting ,
found in the Palatine Mount , now in the possession of Dr. Mead ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.175

he was crowned by Augustus . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.176

Well , but about writing - WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.177

what do you think I write with ? WALPOLE-174X-1,5,8.178

<P_5,9>

Nay , with a pen ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.180

there was never a one to be found in the whole circumference <font> but
one <$$font> , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.181

and that was in the possession of the governor , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.182

and had been used time out of mind to write the parole with :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.183

I was forced to send to borrow it . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.184

It was sent me under the conduct of a Serjeant and two Swiss , with
desire to return it when I should have done with it .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.185

'T@ @is a curiosity , and worthy to be laid up with the relics which we
have just been seeing in a small hovel of Capucins on the side of the
hill , and which were all brought by his majesty from Jerusalem .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.186

Among other things of great sanctity there is a set of gnashing of teeth
, the grinders very entire ; a bit of the worm that never dies ,
preserved in spirits ; a crow of St. Peter's cock , very useful against
Easter ; the crisping and curling , frizzling and frowncing of Mary
Magdalen , which she cut off on growing devout . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.187

The good man that showed us all these commodities was got into such a
train of calling them the blessed this , and the blessed that , that at
last he showed us a bit of the blessed fig-tree that Christ cursed .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.188

Florence , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.189

July 9 . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.190

My dear Harry , We are come hither , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.191

and I have received another letter from you with Hosier's Ghost .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.192

Your last put me in pain for you , when you talked of going to Ireland ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.193

but now I find your brother and sister go with you , I am not much
concerned . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.194

Should I be ? WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.195

You have but to say , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.196

for my feelings are extremely at your service to dispose as you please .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.197

Let us see : you are to come back to stand for some place ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.198

that will be about April . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.199

'T@ @is a sort of thing I should do too ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.200

and then we should see one another , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.201

and that would be charming : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.202

but it is a sort of thing I have no mind to do ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.203

and then we shall not see one another , unless you would come hither -
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.204

but that you can@ @not do : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.205

nay , I would not have you , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.206

for then I shall be gone . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.207

- So ! there are many <font> ifs <$$font> that just signify nothing at
all . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.208

Return I must sooner than I shall like . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.209

I am happy here to a degree . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.210

I@ @'ll tell you my situation . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.211

I am lodged with Mr. Mann , the best of creatures .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.212

I have a terreno all to myself , with an open gallery on the Arno ,
where I am now writing to you . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.213

Over against me is the famous Gallery ; and , on either hand , two fair
bridges . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.214

Is not this charming and cool ? WALPOLE-174X-1,5,9.215

The air is so serene , and so secure , that one sleeps with all the
windows and doors thrown open <P_5,10> to the river , and only covered
with a slight gauze to keep away the gnats . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.216

Lady Pomfret has a charming conversation once a week .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.217

She has taken a vast palace and a vast garden , which is vastly commode
, especially to the cicisbeo-part of mankind , who have free indulgence
to wander in pairs about the arbours . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.218

You know her daughters : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.219

lady Sophia is still , nay she must be , the beauty she was :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.220

lady Charlotte is much improved , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.221

and is the cleverest girl in the world ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.222

speaks the purest Tuscan like any Florentine . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.223

The princess Craon has a constant pharaoh and supper every night , where
one is quite at one's ease . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.224

I am going into the country with her and the prince for a little while ,
to a villa of the great duke's . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.225

The people are good-humoured here and easy ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.226

and what makes me pleased with them , they are pleased with me .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.227

One loves to find people care for one , when they can have no view in it
. WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.228

You see how glad I am to have reasons for not returning ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.229

I wish I had no better . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.230

As to Hosier's Ghost , I think it very easy , and consequently pretty ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.231

but , from the ease , should never have guessed it Glover's .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.232

I delight in your , <font> the patriots cry it up , and the courtiers
cry it down , and the hawkers cry it up and down <$$font> , and your
laconic history of the K. and sir R. on going to Hanover , and turning
out the D. of A. WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.233

The epigram too you sent me on the same occasion is charming .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.234

Unless I sent you back news that you and others send me , I can send you
none . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.235

I have left the conclave , which is the only stirring thing in this part
of the world , except the child that the queen of Naples is to be
delivered of in August . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.236

There is no likelihood the conclave will end , unless the messages take
effect which 't@ @is said the Imperial and French ministers have sent to
their respective courts for leave to quit the Corsini for the Albani
faction ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.237

otherwise there will never be a pope . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,10.238

Corsini has lost the only one he could <P_5,11> have ventured to make
pope , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.239

and him he designed ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.240

't@ @was Cenci , a relation of the Corsini's mistress .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.241

The last morning Corsini made him rise , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.242

stuffed a dish of chocolate down his throat , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.243

and would carry him to the scrutiny . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.244

The poor old creature went , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.245

came back , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.246

and died . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.247

I am sorry to have lost the sight of the pope's coronation ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.248

but I might have staid for seeing it till I had been old enough to be
pope myself . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.249

Harry , what luck the chancellor has ! first , indeed , to be in
himself so great a man ; but then in accidents : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.250

he is made chief_justice and peer , when Talbot is made chancellor and
peer : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.251

Talbot dies in a twelvemonth , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.252

and leaves him the seals at an age when others are scarce made
solicitors : - WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.253

then marries his son into one of the first families of Britain ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.254

obtains a patent for a marquisate and eight_thousand pounds a year after
the duke of Kent's death : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.255

the duke dies in a fortnight , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.256

and leaves them all ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.257

People talk of fortune's wheel that is always rolling :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.258

troth , my lord Hardwicke has overtaken her wheel , and rolled along
with it . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.259

I perceive miss Jenny would not venture to Ireland , nor stray so far
from London ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.260

I am glad I shall always know where to find her within three-score miles
. WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.261

I must say a word to my lord , which , Harry , be sure you do@ @n't read
. WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.262

<bracket> " My dear lord , I do@ @n't love troubling you with letters ,
because I know you do@ @n't love the trouble of answering them ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.263

not that I should insist on that ceremony , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.264

but I hate to burthen any one's conscience . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.265

Your brother tells me he is to stand member of parliament :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.266

without telling me so , I am sure he owes it to you .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.267

I am sure you will not repent setting him up ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.268

nor will he be ungrateful to a brother who deserves so much , and whose
least merit is not the knowing how to employ so great a fortune . "
<$$bracket> WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.269

There , Harry , I have done . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.270

Do@ @n't suspect me : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.271

I have said no ill of you behind your back . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.272

Make my best compliments to miss Conway . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.273

I thought I had done , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.274

and lo , I had forgot to tell you , that WALPOLE-174X-1,5,11.275

who d'@ @ye think <P_5,12> is here ? WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.276

- Even Mr. More ! our Rheims Mr. More ! the fortification , hornwork
, ravelin , bastion Mr. More ! <font> which is very pleasant sure .
<$$font> WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.277

At the end of the eighth side , I think I need make no excuse for
leaving off ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.278

but I am going to write to Selwyn , and to the lady of the mountain ;
from whom I have had a very kind letter . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.279

She has at last received the Chantilly brass . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.280

Good night : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.281

write to me from one end of the world to t'other .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.282

Yours ever , Hor. Walpole . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.283

{ED:Letter_V}

Florence , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.285

September 25 , 1740 N. S. WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.286

My dear Hal , I begin to answer your letter the moment I have read it ,
because you bid me ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.287

but I grow so unfit for a correspondence with any body in England , that
I have almost left it off . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.288

'T@ @is so long since I was there , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.289

and I am so utterly a stranger to every thing that passes there , that I
must talk vastly in the dark to those I write ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.290

and having in a manner settled myself here , where there can be no news
, I am void of all matter for filling up a letter .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.291

As , by the absence of the great duke , Florence is become in a manner a
country town , you may imagine that we are not without démêlés
{TEXT:demêlés} ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.292

but for a country town I believe there never were a set of people so
peaceable , and such strangers to scandal . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.293

'T@ @is the family of love , where every body is paired , and go as
constantly together as perroquets . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.294

Here nobody hangs or drowns themselves ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.295

they are not ready to cut one another's throats about elections or
parties ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.296

do@ @n't think that wit consists in saying bold truths , or humour in
getting drunk . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.297

But I shall give you no more of their characters , because I am so
unfortunate as to think that their encomium consists in being the
reverse of the English , who in general are either mad , or enough to
make other people so . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.298

After telling you so fairly my sentiments , you may believe , my dear
Harry , that I had much rather see you here than in England .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,12.299

'T@ @is an evil wish for you , who <P_5,13> should not be lost in so
obscure a place as this . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.300

I will not make you compliments , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.301

or else here is a charming opportunity for saying what I think of you .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.302

As I am convinced you love me , and as I am conscious you have one
strong reason for it , I will own to you , that for my own peace you
should wish me to remain here . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.303

I am so well within and without , that you would scarce know me :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.304

I am younger than ever , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.305

think of nothing but diverting myself , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.306

and live in a round of pleasures . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.307

We have operas , concerts , and balls , mornings and evenings .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.308

I dare not tell you all one's idleness ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.309

you would look so grave and senatorial , at hearing that one rises at
eleven in the morning , goes to the opera at nine at night , to supper
at one , and to bed at three ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.310

But literally here the evenings and nights are so charming and so warm ,
one ca@ @n't avoid 'em . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.311

Did I tell you lady - - is here ? WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.312

She laughs at my lady W- , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.313

scolds my lady Pomfret , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.314

and is laughed at by the whole town . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.315

Her dress , her avarice , and her impudence must amaze any one that
never heard her name . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.316

She wears a foul mob , that does not cover her greasy black locks , that
hang loose , never combed or curled ; an old mazarine blue wrapper ,
that gapes open and discovers a canvass petticoat .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.317

Her face swelled violently on one side with the remains of a -
{COM:word_omitted_in_original} , partly covered with a plaister , and
partly with white paint , which for cheapness she has bought so coarse ,
that you would not use it to wash a chimney . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.318

- In three words I will give you her picture as we drew it in the Sortes
Virgilianae - Insanam vatem aspicies . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.319

I give you my honour , we did not choose it ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.320

but Gray , Mr. Cooke , sir Fr. Dashwood and I , and several others ,
drew it fairly amongst a_thousand for different people , most of which
did not hit as you may imagine : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.321

those that did I will tell you . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.322

For our most religious and gracious - - Dii , talem terris avertite
pestem . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.323

For one that would be our most religious and gracious - Purpureus veluti
cum flos succisus aratro Languescit moriens , lassove papavera collo
Demisere caput , pluviâ cum fortè gravantur . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,13.324

<P_5,14>

For his son . Regis Romani ; primus qui legibus urbem Fundabit ,
Curibus parvis et paupere terrâ Missus in imperium magnum .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.326

For sir Robert . Res dura et regni novitas me talia cogunt Moliri , et
late sines custode tueri . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.327

I will shew you the rest when I see you . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.328

Hor. Walpole . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.329

{ED:Letter_VI}

London , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.331

1741 . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.332

My dearest Harry , Before I thank you for myself , I must thank you for
that excessive good nature you showed in writing to poor G- .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.333

I am less impatient to see you , as I find you are not the least altered
, but have the same tender friendly temper you always had .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.334

I wanted much to see if you were still the same -
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.335

but you are . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.336

Do@ @n't think of coming before your brother ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.337

he is too good to be left for any one living : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.338

besides , if it is possible , I will see you in the country .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.339

Do@ @n't reproach me , and think nothing could draw me into the country
: WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.340

impatience to see a few friends has drawn me out of Italy ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.341

and Italy , Harry , is pleasanter than London . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.342

As I do not love living en_famille so much as you <paren> but then
indeed my family is not like yours <$$paren> , I am hurried about
getting myself a house ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.343

for I have so long lived single , that I do not much take to being
confined with {COM:blank} WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.344

You wo@ @n't find me much altered , I believe ; at least , outwardly .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.345

I am not grown a bit shorter , or a bit fatter , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,14.346

but am just the same long lean creature <P_5,15> as usual .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.347

Then I talk no French , but to my footman ; nor Italian , but to myself
. WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.348

What inward alterations may have happened to me , you will discover best
; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.349

for you know 't@ @is said , one never knows that one's self .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.350

I will answer , that that part of it that belongs to you , has not
suffered the least change - WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.351

I took care of that . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.352

For virtù , I have a little to entertain you : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.353

it is my sole pleasure . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.354

- I am neither young enough nor old enough to be in love .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.355

My dear Harry , will you take care and make my compliments to that
charming lady Conway , who I hear is so charming , and to miss Jenny ,
who I know is so ? WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.356

As for miss Anne and her love <font> as far as it is decent <$$font> ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.357

tell her , decency is out of the question between us , that I love her
without any restriction . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.358

I settled it yesterday with miss Conway , that you three are brothers
and sister to me , and that if you had been so , I could not love you
better . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.359

I have so many cousins , and uncles and aunts , and bloods that grow in
Norfolk , that if I had portioned out my affections to them , as they
say I should , what a modicum would have fallen to each !
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.360

- So , to avoid fractions , I love my family in you three , their
representatives . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.361

Adieu , my dear Harry ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.362

Direct to me at Downing-street . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.363

Good_bye ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.364

Yours ever , Hor. Walpole . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.365

{ED:Letter_VII}

Arlington-street , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.367

July 20 , 1744 WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.368

My dearest Harry , I feel that I have so much to say to you , that I
foresee there will be but little method in my letter ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.369

but if upon the whole you see my meaning , and the depth of my
friendship for you , I am content . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,15.370

<P_5,16>

It was most agreeable to me to receive a letter of confidence from you ,
at the time I expected a very different one from you ; though , by the
date of your last , I perceive you had not then received some letters ,
which though I did not see I must call simple , as they could only tend
to make you uneasy for some months . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.372

I should not have thought of communicating a quarrel to you at this
distance ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.373

and I do@ @n't conceive the sort of friendship of those that thought it
necessary . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.374

When I heard it had been wrote to you , I thought it right to myself to
give you my account of it - WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.375

but , by your brother's desire , suppressed my letter ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.376

and left it to be explained by him , who wrote to you so sensibly on it
, that I shall say no more ; but that I think myself so ill used , that
it will prevent my giving you thoroughly the advice you ask of me ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.377

for how can I be sure that my resentment might not make me see in a
stronger light the reasons for your breaking off an affair , which you
know before I never approved ? WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.378

You know my temper is so open to any body I love , that I must be happy
at seeing you lay aside a reserve with me , which is the only point that
ever made me dissatisfied with you . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.379

That silence of yours has , perhaps , been one of the chief reasons that
has always prevented my saying much to you on a topic which I saw was so
near your heart . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.380

Indeed , its being so near was another reason ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.381

for how could I expect you would take my advice , even if you bore it ?
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.382

But , my dearest Harry , how can I advise you now ?
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.383

Is it not gone too far for me to expect you should keep any resolution
about it ; especially in absence which must be destroyed the moment you
meet again ? WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.384

And if you ever should marry and be happy , wo@ @n't you reproach me
with having tried to hinder it ? WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.385

- I think you as just , and honest , as I think any man living .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.386

But any man living in that circumstance would think I had been prompted
by private reasons . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.387

I see as strongly as you can , all the arguments for your breaking off ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.388

but indeed the alteration of your fortune adds very little strength to
what they had before . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.389

You never had fortune enough to make such a step at all prudent :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.390

she loved you enough to be content with that ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.391

I ca@ @n't believe this change will alter her sentiments ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.392

for I must do her the justice to say , that 't@ @is plain she preferred
you with nothing to all the world . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.393

I could talk on upon this head ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,16.394

but I will only leave you to consider , without <P_5,17> advising you on
either side , these two things : whether you think it honester to break
off with her after such engagements as yours <paren> how strong I do@
@n't know <$$paren> , after her refusing very good matches for you , and
show her that she must think of making her fortune ; or whether you will
wait with her till some amendment in your fortune can put it in your
power to marry her . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.395

My dearest Harry , you must see why I do@ @n't care to say more on this
head . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.396

My wishing it could be right for you to break off with her <paren> for ,
without it is right , I would not have you on any account take such a
step <$$paren> makes it impossible for me to advise it ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.397

and therefore I am sure you will forgive my declining an act of
friendship , which your having put in my power gives me the greatest
satisfaction . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.398

But it does put something else in my power , which I am sure nothing can
make me decline , and for which I have long wanted an opportunity .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.399

Nothing could prevent my being unhappy at the smallness of your fortune
, but its throwing it into my way to offer you to share mine .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.400

As mine is so precarious , by depending on so bad a constitution , I can
only offer you the immediate use of it . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.401

I do that most sincerely . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.402

My places still <paren> though my lord W. has cut off three_hundred
pounds a year to save himself the trouble of signing his name ten times
for once <$$paren> bring me in near two_thousand pounds a year .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.403

I have no debts , no connections ; indeed no way to dispose of it
particularly . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.404

By living with my father , I have little real use for a quarter of it .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.405

I have always flung it away all in the most idle manner .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.406

But , my dear Harry , idle as I am , and thoughtless , I have sense
enough to have real pleasure in denying myself bawbles , and in saving a
very good income to make a man happy for whom I have a just esteem and
most sincere friendship . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.407

I know the difficulties any gentleman and man of spirit must struggle
with , even in having such an offer made him , much more in accepting it
. WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.408

I hope you will allow there are some in making it .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.409

But hear me : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.410

if there is any such thing as friendship in the world , these are the
opportunities of exerting it , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.411

and it ca@ @n't be exerted without 't@ @is accepted .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.412

I must talk of myself to prove to you that it will be right for you to
accept it . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.413

I am sensible of having more follies and weaknesses and fewer real good
qualities than most men . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.414

I sometimes reflect on this , though I own too seldom .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.415

I always want to begin acting like a man and a sensible one , which I
think I might be if I would . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.416

Can I begin better , than by taking care of my fortune for one I love ?
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.417

You have seen <paren> I have seen you have <$$paren> that I am fickle ,
and foolishly fond of twenty new people : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,17.418

but I do@ @n't really love <P_5,18> them : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.419

I have always loved you constantly : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.420

I am willing to convince you and the world , what I have always told you
, that I loved you better than any body . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.421

If I ever felt much for any thing , which I know may be questioned , it
was certainly for my mother . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.422

I look on you as my nearest relation by her , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.423

and think I can never do enough to show my gratitude and affection to
her . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.424

For these reasons , do@ @n't deny me what I have set my heart on - the
making your fortune easy to you . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.425

{ED:The_rest_of_this_letter_is_wanting}

{ED:Letter_VIII}

Houghton , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.428

Oct. 6 , 1744 WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.429

My dearest Harry , My lord bids me tell you how much he is obliged to
you for your letter , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.430

and hopes you will accept my answer for his . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.431

I@ @'ll tell you what , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.432

we shall both be obliged to you if you will inclose a magnifying glass
in your next letters ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.433

for your two last were in so diminutive a character , that we were
forced to employ all Mrs. Leneve's spectacles , besides an ancient
family reading-glass with which my grandfather used to begin the psalm ,
to discover what you said to us . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.434

Besides this , I have a piece of news for you : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.435

sir Robert Walpole , when he was made earl of Orford , left the ministry
, and with it the palace in Downing-street ; as numbers of people found
out three years ago , who not having your integrity were quick in
perceiving the change of his situation . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.436

Your letter was full as honest as you ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.437

for , though directed to Downing-street , it would not , as other
letters would have done , address itself to the present possessor .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.438

Do but think if it had ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.439

The smallness of the hand would have immediately struck my lord Sandys
with the idea of a plot ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.440

for what he could not read at first sight , he would certainly have
concluded must be cypher . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.441

I march next week towards London , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,18.442

and have already begun to send my heavy artillery before me , consisting
of half_a_dozen books and part of my <P_5,19> linen ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.443

my light horse commanded by Patapan follows this day se'nnight .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.444

A detachment of hussars surprised an old bitch fox yesterday morning ,
who had lost a leg in a former engagement ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.445

and then having received advice of another litter being advanced as far
as Dasingham , lord Walpole commanded captain Riley's horse with a
strong party of fox-hounds to overtake them : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.446

but on the approach of our troops the enemy stole off ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.447

and are now encamped at Sechford common , whither we every hour expect
orders to pursue them . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.448

My dear Harry , this is all I have to tell you , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.449

and to my great joy , which you must forgive me , is full as memorable
as any part of the Flanders campaign . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.450

I do not desire to have you engaged in the least more glory than you
have been . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.451

I should not love the remainder of you the least better for your having
lost an arm or a leg ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.452

and have as full persuasion of your courage as if you had contributed to
the slicing off twenty pair from French officers .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.453

Thank God , you have sense enough to content yourself without being a
hero ; though I do@ @n't quite forget your expedition a hussar-hunting
the beginning of this campaign . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.454

- Pray , no more of those jaunts ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.455

I do@ @n't know any body you would oblige with a present of such game :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.456

for my part , a fragment of the oldest hussar on earth should never have
a place in my museum ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.457

they are not antique enough : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.458

and for a live one , I must tell you I like my raccoon {TEXT:racoon}
infinitely better . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.459

Adieu , my dear Harry ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.460

I long to see you . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.461

- You will easily believe , the thought I have of being particularly
well with you is a vast addition to my impatience ; though you know it
is nothing new to me to be overjoyed at your return .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.462

Yours ever , Hor. Walpole . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.463

{ED:Letter_IX}

Arlington-street , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.465

May 27 , 1745 . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.466

My dear Harry , As gloriously as you have set out , yet I despair of
seeing you a perfect hero ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,19.467

You have none of the charming violences that are so essential to that
<P_5,20> character . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,20.468

You write as coolly after behaving well in a battle , as you fought in
it . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,20.469

Can your friends flatter themselves with seeing you one day or other be
the death of thousands , when you wish for peace in three weeks after
your first engagement , and laugh at the ambition of those men who have
given you this opportunity of distinguishing yourself ?
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,20.470

With the person of an Orondates , and the courage , you have all the
compassion , the reason , and the reflection , of one that never read a
romance . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,20.471

Can one ever hope you will make a figure , when you only fight because
it was right you should , and not because you hated the French , or
loved destroying mankind ? WALPOLE-174X-1,5,20.472

This is so un-English , or so un-heroic , that I despair of you !
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,20.473

Thank Heaven , you have one spice of madness ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,20.474

Your admiration of your master leaves me a glimmering of hope that you
will not be always so unreasonably reasonable . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,20.475

Do you remember the humorous lieutenant , in one of Beaumont and
Fletcher@ @'s plays , that is in love with the king ?
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,20.476

Indeed your master is not behind hand with you ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,20.477

you seem to have agreed to puff one another . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,20.478

If you are all acting up to the strictest rules of war and chivalry in
Flanders , we are not less scrupulous on this side the water in
fulfilling all the duties of the same order . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,20.479

The day the young volunteer departed for the army <paren> unluckily
indeed it was after the battle <$$paren> , his tender mother Sisygambis
, and the beautiful Statira , a lady formerly known in your history by
the name of Artemisia , from her cutting off her hair on your absence ,
were so afflicted and so inseparable , that they made a party together
to Mr. <font> Graham's <$$font> <paren> you may read <font> Iapis
<$$font> if you please <$$paren> to be blooded .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,20.480

It was settled that this was a more precious way of expressing concern
than shaving the head , which has been known to be attended with false
locks the next day . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,20.481

For the other princess you wot of , who is not entirely so tall as the
former , nor so evidently descended from a line of monarchs - I do@ @n't
hear her talk of retiring . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,20.482

At present she is employed in buying up all the nose-gays in Covent
Garden , and laurel-leaves at the pastry-cooks' , to weave <P_5,21>
chaplets for the return of her hero . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,21.483

Who that is , I do@ @n't pretend to know or guess .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,21.484

All I know is , that in this age retirement is not one of the
fashionable expressions of passion . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,21.485

Hor. Walpole . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,21.486

{ED:Letter_X}

Arlington-street , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,21.488

July 1 , 1745 . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,21.489

My dear Harry , If it were not for that one slight inconvenience , that
I should probably be dead now , I should have liked much better to have
lived in the last war than in this ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,21.490

I mean as to the pleasantness of writing letters .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,21.491

Two or three battles won , two or three towns taken , in a summer , were
pretty objects to keep up the liveliness of a correspondence .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,21.492

But now it hurts one's dignity to be talking of English and French
armies , at the first period of our history in which the tables are
turned . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,21.493

After having learnt to spell out of the reigns of Edward the third and
Harry the fifth , and begun lisping with Agincourt and Cressy , one uses
one's self but awkwardly to the sounds of Tournay and Fontenoy .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,21.494

I do@ @n't like foreseeing the time so near , when all the young orators
in parliament will be haranguing out of Demosthenes upon the imminent
danger we are in from the overgrown power of king Philip .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,21.495

As becoming as all that public spirit will be , which to be sure will
now come forth , I ca@ @n't but think we were at least as happy and as
great when all the young Pitts and Lytteltons were pelting oratory at my
father for rolling out a twenty years peace , and not envying the
trophies which he passed by every day in Westminster-hall .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,21.496

But one must not repine ; rather reflect on the glories which they have
drove the nation headlong into . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,21.497

One must think all our distresses and dangers well laid out , when they
have purchased us Glover's Oration for the merchants , the admiralty for
the duke of Bedford , and the reversion of secretary at war for Pitt ,
which he will certainly have , unless the French king should happen to
have the nomination ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,21.498

and then I fear , as much obliged as that court is to my lord Cobham and
his nephews , they would be so partial as to prefer some <P_5,22>
illiterate nephew of cardinal Tencin's , who never heard of Leonidas or
the Hanover troops . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.499

With all these reflections , as I love to make myself easy , especially
politically , I comfort myself with what St. Evremond <paren> a
favourite philosopher of mine , for he thought what he liked , not liked
what he thought <$$paren> said in defence of cardinal Mazarin , when he
was reproached with neglecting the good of the kingdom that he might
engross the riches of it : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.500

" Well , let him get all the riches , and then he will think of the good
of the kingdom , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.501

for it will all be his own . " WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.502

Let the French but have England , and they wo@ @n't want to conquer it .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.503

We may possibly contract the French spirit of being supremely content
with the glory of our monarch , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.504

and then - WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.505

why then it will be the first time we ever were contented yet .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.506

We hear of nothing but your retiring , and of Dutch treachery :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.507

in short , 't@ @is an ugly scene ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.508

I know of no home news but the commencement of the gaming act , for
which they are to put up a scutcheon at White's for the death of play ;
and the death of Winnington's wife , which may be an unlucky event for
my lady - . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.509

As he has no children , he will certainly marry again ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.510

and who will give him their daughter , unless he breaks off that affair
, which I believe he will now very willingly make a marriage article ?
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.511

We want him to take lady Charlotte Fermor . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.512

She was always his beauty , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.513

and has so many charming qualities , that she would make any body happy
. WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.514

He will make a good husband ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.515

for he is excessively good-natured , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.516

and was much better to that strange wife than he cared to own .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.517

You wondered at my journey to Houghton ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.518

now wonder more , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.519

for I am going to Mount Edgecumbe . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.520

Now my summers are in my own hands , and I am not obliged to pass great
part of them in Norfolk , I find it is not so very terrible to dispose
of them up and down . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.521

In about three weeks I shall set out , and see Wilton and Doddington@
@'s in my way . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,22.522

Dear Harry , do but get a victory , and I will let off every cannon at
Plymouth ; reserving two , till I hear particularly that you have killed
two more Frenchmen with <P_5,23> your own hand .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.523

Lady Mary sends you her compliments ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.524

She is going to pass a week with miss Townshend at Muffits ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.525

I do@ @n't think you will be forgot . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.526

Your sister Anne has got a new distemper , which she says feels like
something <font> jumping <$$font> in her . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.527

You know my style on such an occasion , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.528

and may be sure I have not spared this distemper .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.529

Adieu ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.530

Yours ever , Hor. Walpole . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.531

{ED:Letter_XI}

Windsor still , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.533

Oct. 3 , 1746 . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.534

My dear Harry , You ask me if I am really grown a philosopher .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.535

Really I believe not ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.536

for I shall refer you to my practice rather than to my doctrine ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.537

and have really acquired what they only pretended to seek , content .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.538

So far indeed I was a philosopher even when I lived in town ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.539

for then I was content too ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.540

and all the difference I can conceive between those two opposite doctors
was , that Aristippus loved London , and Diogenes Windsor :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.541

and if your master the duke , whom I sincerely prefer to Alexander , and
who certainly can intercept more sunshine , would but stand out of my
way , which he is extremely in , while he lives in the park here , I
should love my little tub of forty pounds a year , more than my palace
dans la rue des ministres , with all my pictures and bronzes , which you
ridiculously imagine I have encumbered myself with in my solitude .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.542

Solitude it is , as to the tub itself , for no soul lives in it with me
; though I could easily give you room at the butt end of it , and with
vast pleasure ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.543

but George Montagu , who perhaps is a philosopher too , though I am sure
not of Pythagoras's silent sect , lives but two barrels off ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,23.544

and Ashton , a Christian philosopher of our acquaintance , <P_5,24>
lives at the foot of that hill which you mention with a melancholy
satisfaction that always attends the reflection .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.545

Apropos , here is an ode on the very subject , which I desire you will
please to like excessively : {COM:ode_omitted_in_edition}
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.546

You will immediately conclude , out of good breeding , that it is mine ,
and that it is charming . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.547

I shall be much obliged to you for the first thought ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.548

but desire you will retain only the second , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.549

for it is Mr. Gray's , and not Your humble servant's , Hor. Walpole .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.550

{ED:Letter_XII}

Windsor , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.552

October 24 , 1746 . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.553

Well , Harry , Scotland is the last place on earth I should have thought
of for turning any body poet : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.554

but I begin to forgive it half its treasons in favour of your verses ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.555

for I suppose you do@ @n't think I am the dupe of the highland story
that you tell me : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.556

the only use I shall make of it is to commend the lines to you , as if
they really were a Scotsman's . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.557

There is a melancholy harmony in them that is charming , and a delicacy
in the thoughts that no Scotchman is capable of , though a <font>
Scotchwoman <$$font> might inspire it . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.558

I beg both for Cynthia's sake and my own that you would continue your de
Tristibus , till I have an opportunity of seeing your muse , and she of
rewarding her : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.559

Reprens ta musette , berger amoureux ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.560

If Cynthia has ever travelled ten miles in fairy land , she must be
wondrous content with the person and qualifications of her knight , who
in future story will be read of thus : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.561

Elmedorus was tall and perfectly well made , his face oval , and
features regularly handsome , but not effeminate ; his complexion
sentimentally brown , with not much colour ; his teeth fine , and
forehead agreeably low , round which his black hair curled naturally and
beautifully . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.562

His eyes were black too , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,24.563

but had nothing of fierce or insolent ; on the contrary , a certain
melancholy swimmingness that described hopeless <P_5,25> love , rather
than a natural amorous languish . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.564

His exploits in war , where he always fought by the side of the renowned
Paladine William of England , have endeared his memory to all admirers
of true chivalry , as the mournful elegies which he poured out among the
desert rocks of Caledonia in honour of the peerless lady and his heart's
idol , the incomparable Cynthia , will for ever preserve his name in the
flowery annals of poesy . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.565

What a pity it is I was not born in the golden age of Louis the
fourteenth , when it was not only the fashion to write folios , but to
read them too ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.566

Or rather , it is a pity the same fashion do@ @n't {COM:sic} subsist now
, when one need not be at the trouble of invention , nor of turning the
whole Roman history into romance , for want of proper heroes .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.567

Your campaign in Scotland rolled out and well be-epitheted would make a
pompous work , and make one's fortune ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.568

at six-pence a number , one should have all the damsels within the
liberties for subscribers : whereas now , if one has a mind to be read ,
one must write metaphysical poems in blank verse , which though I own to
be still easier have not half the imagination of romances , and are dull
without any agreeable absurdity . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.569

Only think of the gravity of this wise age , that have exploded <font>
Cleopatra and Pharamond , <$$font> and approve <font> The Pleasures of
the Imagination , The Art of preserving Health , <$$font> and <font>
Leonidas ! <$$font> WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.570

- I beg the age's pardon : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.571

it has done approving these poems , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.572

and has forgot them . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.573

Adieu , dear Harry ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.574

Thank you seriously for the poem . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.575

I am going to town for the birth-day , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.576

and shall return hither till the parliament meets ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.577

I suppose there is no doubt of our meeting then .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.578

Yours ever , Hor. Walpole . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.579

P.S. Now you are at Stirling , if you should meet with Drummond's
History of the five king Jameses , pray look it over .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.580

I have lately read it , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.581

and like it much . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.582

It is wrote in imitation of Livy , the style masculine , and the whole
very sensible - WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.583

only he ascribes the misfortunes of one reign to the then king's loving
architecture , and " In trim gardens taking pleasure . "
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,25.584

<P_5,26>

{ED:Letter_XIII}

Arlington-street , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.587

April 16 , 1747 . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.588

Dear Harry , We are all skyrockets and bonfires to-night for your last
year's victory ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.589

but if you have a mind to perpetuate yourselves in the calendar , you
must take care to refresh your conquests . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.590

I was yesterday out of town , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.591

and the very signs as I passed through the villages made me make very
quaint reflections on the mortality of fame and popularity .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.592

I observed how the duke's head had succeeded almost universally to
admiral Vernon's , as his had left but few traces of the duke of Ormond@
@'s . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.593

I pondered these things in my heart , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.594

and said unto myself , Surely all glory is but as a sign !
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.595

You have heard that old Lovat's tragedy is over :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.596

it has been succeeded by a little farce , containing the humours of the
duke of Newcastle and his man Stone . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.597

The first event was a squabble between his grace and the sheriff about
holding up the head on the scaffold - a custom that has been disused ,
and which the sheriff would not comply with , as he received no order in
writing . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.598

Since that the duke has burst ten yards of breeches strings about the
body , which was to be sent into Scotland ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.599

but it seems it is customary for vast numbers to rise to attend the most
trivial burial . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.600

The duke , who is always at least as much frightened at doing right as
at doing wrong , was three days before he got courage enough to order
the burying in the Tower . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.601

I must tell you an excessive good story of George Selwyn :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.602

Some women were scolding him for going to see the execution ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.603

and asked him , how he could be such a barbarian to see the head cut off
? WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.604

" Nay , " says he , " if that was such a crime , I am sure I have made
amends , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.605

for I went to see it sewed on again . " WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.606

When he was at the undertaker's , as soon as they had stitched him
together , and were going to put the body into the coffin , George , in
my lord chancellor's voice , said , " My lord Lovat , your lordship may
rise . " WALPOLE-174X-1,5,26.607

My lady T- has picked up a little stable-boy in the Tower , <P_5,27>
which the warders have put upon her for a natural son of lord
Kilmarnock's , and taken him into her own house .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.608

You need not tell Mr. T. this from me . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.609

We have had a great and fine day in the house on the second reading the
bill for taking away the heritable jurisdictions in Scotland .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.610

Lyttelton made the finest oration imaginable ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.611

the solicitor_general , the new advocate , and Hume Campbell ,
particularly the last , spoke excessively well for it , and Oswald
against it . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.612

The majority was 233 against 102 . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.613

Pitt was not there ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.614

the duchess of Queensberry had ordered him to have the gout .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.615

I will give you a commission once more to tell lord Bury that he has
quite dropped me : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.616

if I thought he would take me up again , I would write to him ;
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.617

a message would encourage me . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.618

Adieu ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.619

Yours ever , Hor. Walpole . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.620

{ED:Letter_XIV}

Twickenham , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.622

June 8 , 1747 . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.623

You perceive by my date that I am got into a new camp , and have left my
tub at Windsor . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.624

It is a little play-thing-house that I got out of Mrs. Chenevix's shop
, WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.625

and is the prettiest bawble you ever saw . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.626

It is set in enamelled meadows , with philigree hedges :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.627

A small Euphrates through the piece is roll'd , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.628

And little finches wave their wings in gold . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.629

Two delightful roads , that you would call dusty , supply me continually
with coaches and chaises : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,27.630

barges as solemn as barons of the exchequer move under <P_5,28> my
window ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.631

Richmond-hill and Ham-walks bound my prospect ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.632

but , thank God ! the Thames is between me and the duchess of
Queensberry . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.633

Dowagers as plenty as flounders inhabit all around ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.634

and Pope's ghost is just now skimming under my window by a most poetical
moonlight . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.635

I have about land enough to keep such a farm as Noah's , when he set up
in the ark with a pair of each kind ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.636

but my cottage is rather cleaner than I believe his was after they had
been cooped up together forty days . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.637

The Chenevixes had tricked it out for themselves :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.638

up two pair of stairs is what they call Mr. Chenevix's library ,
furnished with three maps , one shelf , a bust of sir Isaac Newton , and
a lame telescope without any glasses . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.639

Lord John Sackville <font> predecessed <$$font> me here ,
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.640

and instituted certain games called <font> cricketalia , <$$font> which
have been celebrated this very evening in honour of him in a
neighbouring meadow . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.641

You will think I have removed my philosophy from Windsor with my
tea-things hither ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.642

for I am writing to you in all this tranquillity while a parliament is
bursting about my ears . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.643

You know it is going to be dissolved : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.644

I am told , you are taken care of , though I do@ @n't know where , nor
whether any body that chooses you will quarrel with me because he does
choose you , as that little bug - did ; one of the calamities of my life
which I have bore as abominably well as I do most about which I do@ @n't
care . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.645

They say the prince has taken up two_hundred_thousand pounds , to carry
elections which he wo@ @n't carry : WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.646

- he had much better have saved it to buy the parliament after it is
chosen . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.647

A new set of peers are in embryo , to add more dignity to the silence of
the house of lords . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.648

I make no remarks on your campaign , because , as you say , you do
nothing at all ; which , though very proper nutriment for a thinking
head , does not do quite so well to write upon .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.649

If any one of you can but contrive to be shot upon your post , it is all
we desire , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.650

shall look upon it as a great curiosity , WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.651

and will take care to set up a monument to the person so slain , as we
are doing by vote to captain - , who was killed at the beginning of the
action in the Mediterranean four years ago . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.652

In the present dearth of glory , he is canonized , though , poor man !
he had been tried twice the year before for cowardice .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,28.653

I could tell you much election-news , none else ; though not being
thoroughly <P_5,29> attentive to so important a subject , as to be sure
one ought to be , I might now and then mistake , and give you a
candidate for Durham in place of one for Southampton , or name the
returning-officer instead of the candidate . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,29.654

In general , I believe , it is much as usual - those sold in detail that
afterwards will be sold in the representation - the ministers bribing
Jacobites {TEXT:jacobites} to choose friends of their own - the name of
well-wishers to the present establishment , and patriots , outbidding
ministers that they may make the better market of their own patriotism :
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,29.655

- in short , all England , under some name or other , is just now to be
bought and sold ; though , whenever we become posterity and forefathers
, we shall be in high repute for wisdom and virtue .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,29.656

My great great grand-children will figure me with a white beard down to
my girdle ; WALPOLE-174X-1,5,29.657

and Mr. Pitt's will believe him unspotted enough to have walked over
nine_hundred hot ploughshares , without hurting the sole of his foot .
WALPOLE-174X-1,5,29.658

How merry my ghost will be , and shake its ears to hear itself quoted a
person of consummate prudence ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,29.659

- Adieu , dear Harry ! WALPOLE-174X-1,5,29.660

Yours ever , Hor. Walpole . WALPOLE-174X-1,5,29.661

