<BEGIN_weathers-1913-1>

<P_1,1>

<heading>

Section I WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.4

General Aspects of Commercial Gardening WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.5

<$$heading>

During the past fifty or sixty years horticulture has sprung into a
prominent position as one of the leading industries of the United
Kingdom . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.7

Horticulture , unlike its twin sister agriculture , is not represented
in Parliament , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.8

and the only legislative notice taken of it has been to make its
disciples pay rates and taxes on their skill and industry .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.9

When we have a Minister of Horticulture , as the French and Belgians
have , then perhaps the horticultural trade will receive as much
consideration as agriculture does in connection with the rating of the
land , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.10

and more importance will be attached to it as a national industry .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.11

Horticulture , as distinct from agriculture , has to deal with the
cultivation of all kinds of plants and flowers , fruits and vegetables ,
both in the open air and under glass . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.12

Besides our native hardy fruits , flowers , and vegetables , the
horticulturist also has to grow exotics from all parts of the world -
from the tropics , subtropics , and temperate regions , from the
mountains and valleys , and from all kinds of soils and situations .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.13

To bring these to perfection necessitates considerable skill , besides
great expense . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.14

The horticulturist has found out that the rather antediluvian methods of
the agriculturist would be of little use to him .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.15

He must mix his soils and composts in various ways to suit particular
crops , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.16

and he must regulate the temperature by means of glasshouses and frames
and hot-water apparatus if he is to succeed . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.17

This necessitates outlay in other directions , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.18

and the timber , glass , and iron trades benefit by his enterprise , as
well as many others that supply horticultural sundries .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.19

Indeed it is almost impossible to describe the intricate details of
horticultural practice , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.20

and it must suffice to say that they are such as would astonish the
average agriculturist . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.21

Although both farmer and gardener have to practise the same principles
of cultivation for outdoor crops , the gardener , even with these , will
devote far more attention to detail , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.22

and will spend an amount of money every year in cultivation that the
farmer would consider exorbitant or extravagant .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,1.23

The farmer leaves <P_1,2> a good deal to nature ; WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.24

but the gardener , and especially the commercial gardener , can@ @not
afford to leave his various crops altogether exposed to the mercies of a
somewhat fickle climate . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.25

He prepares his soil to a greater depth , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.26

and feeds it more richly with manure than does the farmer ;
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.27

and he also pays greater attention to cultural details .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.28

In addition , he must gather his crops , not for cattle , but for human
consumption , just when they are ready , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.29

and he must pack them in such a way that they will readily attract
buyers in the markets . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.30

At one time , indeed , the market gardener was little better than a
farmer in his cultural and business methods , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.31

and he sent produce to market in a very slipshod manner .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.32

The stress of competition at home and the importations from abroad ,
however , have completely changed the methods of the modern market
grower . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.33

He has found out by experience that the finer , better , and cleaner his
produce , and the better it is packed or displayed , the higher the
prices and the quicker the sales . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.34

He has learnt much in these respects from the way produce from the
Colonies and from the Continent is placed on the markets ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.35

and he realizes that good stuff badly displayed will often fetch
miserably low prices . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.36

This work on commercial gardening deals principally with those classes
of plants that are grown in large quantities either in the open air or
under glass for sale in the London and provincial markets , and also
those that are grown by nurserymen and hardy-plantsmen in fairly large
numbers to meet the demands of their customers who do not patronize the
markets . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.37

There are , indeed , so many ramifications of the horticultural trade ,
each intimately associated with the other , and dependent on each other
, that it may be well to say a few words about each to show how one is
linked up with the other . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.38

The Seed Trade . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.39

- This branch of commercial gardening has assumed immense proportions of
late years . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.40

In various parts of the kingdom firms have established trial grounds
where their seeds are not only saved , but where new varieties likely to
have a ready sale are also tested and proved before being placed upon
the market . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.41

This work necessitates great care and cultural skill ;
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.42

and expensive machinery , driven by steam or the more modern electricity
, is used to cleanse the seeds from impurities of every sort .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.43

Large warehouses have to be built to accommodate the stocks , not only
of home-saved seed , but also of that imported from sunnier climes than
our own . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.44

To give some idea as to the trade done in seeds it is only necessary to
state that one firm alone sells each year about 50,000 bus. of culinary
Peas : 51,000 bus. of root-crop seeds ; 6500 bus. of Beans ; 41 tons
of seeds of the various Cabbage crops ; 1300 bus. of Radish seeds ; 25
tons of Beet seed ; 1400 bus. of Spinach seed ; 10 tons of Onion seed ;
17 tons of Carrot seed ; 220 bus. of Parsley seed ; 10 tons of Parsnip
seed ; 15 tons of Sweet_Pea seed ; 14 tons of Nasturtium <paren>
Tropaeolum <$$paren> seed ; and 3 tons of Mignonette seed .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.45

Seeds of annuals , biennials , and perennials of all kinds are sold in
large quantities year after year , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.46

and are retailed in packets costing from 1 <font> d. <$$font> upwards .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,2.47

<P_1,3>

The Bulb Trade . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.49

- Although a large proportion of the bulb trade is undoubtedly
Continental , there has been a magnificent effort on the part of British
and Irish growers to produce large quantities at home .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.50

While such bulbs as Hyacinths and Tulips and Daffodils have been for
generations a staple industry of the Dutch growers , signs are not
wanting that equally good bulbs can be grown in several places in the
United Kingdom . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.51

With the exception perhaps of Hyacinths , other bulbs of a hardy nature
might be grown more extensively . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.52

In the Channel Islands and the Scilly Islands , in parts of Ireland and
England , Tulip and Daffodil bulbs are now grown on a large scale and of
the finest quality , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.53

but the methods of British growers in calling attention to their stocks
are far inferior to those adopted by the Dutch . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.54

The latter band themselves together for mutual trade benefit ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.55

and make a point of encouraging visits to their bulb farms every season
. WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.56

The trade practically commences in the spring , when Dutch growers book
orders from the visiting growers , and deliver the goods as early in
autumn as possible . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.57

During the summer months - from May to August - their travellers invade
the British Islands and America , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.58

and push the bulb trade so well that they take home fine fat orders for
early autumn delivery . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.59

From September to December the trade is brisk amongst retailers , while
the market grower has already boxed his bulbs of Tulips , Daffodils ,
Hyacinths , Crocuses , Snowdrops , &c. , to secure an early Christmas
and Easter trade . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.60

Tulips , Daffodils , Hyacinths , and Crocuses are abundant from
Christmas to Easter ; while <font> Lilium longiflorum <$$font> is now
practically in season throughout the year . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.61

Gladioli of the Colvillei and nanus sections are also useful for spring
work , while the Brenchleyensis , Childsi , and Nanceianus sections come
in for late summer or early autumn work . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.62

Apart from bulbs proper , such tuberous-rooted plants as Arum Lilies are
in great request from Christmas to Easter and Whitsuntide , the chief
trade being done in the blooms or spathes . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.63

Ixias , Freesias , Snowdrops , German , Spanish , and English Irises ,
Tuberoses , Montbretias , Solomon's Seal , Crown Imperials , Herbaceous
Paeonies , Eucharis , Dahlias , &c. , are amongst other bulbous and
tuberous plants that find a ready sale throughout the year at their own
particular season , for the cut-flower trade . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.64

Each group is dealt with in its proper place in Vol. II of this work .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.65

Amongst retail nurserymen and bulb merchants other bulbous and tuberous
plants dealt in , as well as those mentioned , are Begonias , Dicentras
, Gloxinias , Hippeastrum , Leucojum , Chionodoxa , Scilla ,
Alstroemeria , Brodiaea , Brevoortia , Galtonia , Haemanthus ,
Ranunculus , Winter Aconite <paren> Eranthis <$$paren> , Calochortus ,
Camassia , Colchicum , Erythronium or Dog's Tooth Violet , Eremurus ,
Incarvillea , Ixiolirion , Lyeoris , Milla or Triteleia , Muscari or
Grape Hyacinth , Ornithogalum or Star of Bethlehem , and many others ,
including the Water Lilies or Nymphaeas which have become popular of
late years . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.66

Most of these are practically hardy , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,3.67

and the trade in them is confined to nurserymen and hardy-plantsmen who
<P_1,4> deal with the owners of private establishments .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.68

Each genus is dealt with amongst the " Plants and Flowers " in Vol. II
. WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.69

The Hardy-plant Trade . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.70

- Of late years the trade in hardy plants has assumed almost gigantic
proportions . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.71

Not only are large quantities of hardy herbaceous perennials actually
sent to the various markets for sale packed in various ways and sold as
" roots " , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.72

but a still larger trade is done through the post , by means of
exhibitions , and by advertising in the papers . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.73

Owing to the cost of erecting glasshouses , the cost of fuel , and other
items of expense many private people have discarded glass altogether ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.74

or the newer generation has not taken a fancy to it owing to the trouble
and expense . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.75

To such , the hardy herbaceous perennials , and hardy annuals and
biennials , naturally appeal with great force . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.76

There is no need to have glasshouses of any description to grow these
plants , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.77

and even a cold frame can be dispensed with ; WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.78

and yet a magnificent display may be secured by a judicious selection of
plants that will flourish in the open air in most parts of the kingdom
without any artificial protection . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.79

This being the case , it is not to be wondered at that a large trade has
sprung up in these plants , and something like three or four_thousand
different species are now dealt in by various growers , some of whom
hold valuable stocks of the best-selling kinds , while others cater for
a select group of plant connoisseurs and botanical establishments .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.80

The grower of hardy plants , as a rule , does not go to market ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.81

and his methods of business are quite different from those of the market
grower . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.82

He relies very largely for his sales upon his catalogues <paren> which
are often works of art <$$paren> , upon exhibitions in all parts of the
kingdom , and upon judicious advertising , very much in the same way as
the seedsman and bulb merchant do . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.83

Thousands of people now interested in gardening will gladly pay a
reasonable price for a plant in which they are interested ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.84

and they will visit flower shows and exhibitions in the hope of seeing
something new , or something they would like to have in their collection
. WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.85

The hardy-plantsmen , therefore , who make a practice of displaying
their specialities at the various exhibitions up and down the country
stand an excellent chance of making new customers if they exhibit really
choice and well-grown stuff , and set it up with all the art of window
dressing . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.86

The old style of jumbling plants up " anyhow " at an exhibition is no
longer sufficient . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.87

The exhibitor adopts various devices , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.88

and when space permits he makes miniature herbaceous borders , rock
gardens , water gardens , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.89

and he arranges his goods in such an artistic way that the would-be
purchaser is at once captivated , and longs to produce a similar floral
picture in his own garden . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.90

This naturally leads not only to the sale of plants , but also to the
engagement of landscapemen , who know how to turn a piece of waste_land
into a smiling flower garden . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.91

Many firms now make a speciality of laying out gardens artistically and
naturally , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.92

and although some amateurs try their untrained hands at the business ,
they generally have to call in the aid of the man who knows his plants
and their nature and uses by everyday intercourse and experience .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,4.93

<P_1,5>

While exhibiting is one of the best means of doing business for the
grower of hardy plants , it must be remembered that it entails a large
expense . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.95

The mere carriage of the plants by rail or road , apart from hotel and
other expenses , often means a substantial sum , the recovery of which
will depend largely upon the weather and upon the class of visitors to
the exhibition . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.96

Some growers of hardy plants rarely exhibit , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.97

but rely upon the post and advertisements to dispose of their goods .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.98

Hundreds of thousands of young plants and cuttings are sent through the
post to the most remote parts of the kingdom , to fill orders that have
come to hand as the result of reading an advertisement .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.99

Some , indeed , spend from 50 +L {TEXT:+L50} to 100 +L {TEXT:+L100} a
week during the season in advertising alone , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.100

and this will give some idea as to the volume of the trade .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.101

Not only are hardy plants disposed of rapidly in this way , but also
half-hardy and tender plants during the season , as may be seen by
referring to the advertisement columns of the trade and amateur papers .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.102

From what has been said it will be gathered that the great trade in
hardy plants of all kinds , and in seeds and cuttings , as well as in
bulbous and tuberous plants , is largely done by means of judicious
advertising . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.103

The plant grower not only supports the newspapers ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.104

but he also places large orders with the printers for thousands of
catalogues that are issued broadcast , but not without considerable
expense . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.105

Some of the larger firms issue as many as eighty_thousand beautifully
prepared catalogues every year , weighing in the aggregate from 90 to
100 tons ; while smaller men print and distribute catalogues according
to their means . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.106

In all cases , however , the General Post Office , the printers , and
newspaper proprietors have had the first pick at the seedsman's or
hardy-plantsman's purse , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.107

and he is left to settle his account with a more or less fickle public .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.108

The Nursery Trade . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.109

- This branch of commercial gardening has extensive ramifications all
over the kingdom . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.110

All kinds of plants , fruits , flowers , and vegetables are grown for
sale in the open or under glass , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.111

and thousands of gardeners are employed to propagate and grow them .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.112

There are many special branches in the nursery trade .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.113

Thus some make a speciality of Roses , some of fruit trees , some of
ornamental trees and shrubs , some of stove and greenhouse plants , some
of Ferns , some of Orchids , some chiefly of forest trees , some of
hardy herbaceous perennials and alpines , and rock and water plants -
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.114

and perhaps not one of these nurserymen ever sends a plant to a market .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.115

The nurseryman is quite distinct in his methods of trading from the
market grower and the market gardener . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.116

He makes a speciality of various classes of plants ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.117

and has every nook and corner of the globe ransacked by horticultural
travellers , who are on the lookout for any new plant likely to attract
attention . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.118

Besides pushing his trade by means of travellers , advertisements , and
catalogues , the nurseryman proper also relies largely upon exhibitions
. WEATHERS-1913-1,1,5.119

These are held regularly not only in London , where the finest class of
trade is done , but in almost every town of any importance in the
kingdom , <P_1,6> at different periods of the year .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.120

In some cases exhibitions on the Continent are also visited ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.121

and in this way some firms have worked up a large international or
cosmopolitan trade . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.122

These exhibitions naturally cost much money , not only for transport ,
but for the maintenance and lodging of the necessary staff ;
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.123

and it is essential to reap a good harvest in the way of orders to
enable one to pay the expenses and leave a balance on the right side .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.124

Market Gardening and Market Growing . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.125

- The business of the market gardener and the market grower is different
in a technical sense . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.126

The market gardener proper , as a rule , grows fruits and vegetables on
a large scale in the same way that the farmer grows corn and root crops
. WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.127

If he indulges in glass at all it is a few frames at the most to raise
early supplies of seedlings to put out at the first favourable
opportunity in spring ; WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.128

or he may use bell glasses or clothes to protect his early cauliflowers
and marrows , much in the same way as the French cultivators do .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.129

Market gardening has been a great industry in the Thames valley for
generations , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.130

and notwithstanding the operations of the builder , and the enormous
growth of the London suburbs , there is still a large area around the
metropolis devoted to market gardening . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.131

Of course the market gardener is being pushed farther and farther out ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.132

but with improved methods of transit , and better roads , the man twenty
or thirty miles from London is probably in as good a position as his
predecessor was fifty or sixty years ago , when only a_dozen miles from
Covent Garden . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.133

Old market-garden districts like Deptford , Fulham , and Chelsea have
been wiped out by the builder , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.134

and buildings and roads now take the place of cabbages , rhubarb , fruit
trees and bushes that not so many years ago made those neighbourhoods
truly rural . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.135

This pressure from the centre has naturally driven the market gardener
farther out , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.136

and such places as Feltham , Ashford , Sipson , Staines , West Drayton ,
Harmondsworth , Bedfont , Shepperton , Stanwell , and Cranford , in
Middlesex , are becoming covered with fruit and vegetable gardens .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.137

Kent , Surrey , and Essex are being invaded in much the same way ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.138

and there seems to be a tendency to increase the acreage under these
crops . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.139

From Mortlake to Richmond and Petersham , on the south side of the
Thames , market gardens still exist , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.140

but it will probably not be for very long . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.141

Chiswick , on the north bank , still contains some of its ancient market
gardens , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.142

and these extend to Brentford , Isleworth , Heston , and Hounslow ;
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.143

but in these famous market-garden areas the builder is rapidly covering
the ground with bricks and mortar . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.144

The vale of Evesham in Worcestershire has become famous as a centre ,
not only for the market culture of fruits and vegetables , but also as
the first place in the British Islands where " intensive cultivation "
as practised around Paris was established . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.145

For particulars of this system the reader is referred to Vol. IV .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.146

While the market gardener is seeking fresh fields for his labours , the
market grower who brings his crops to maturity under glass has come very
much to the front during the past thirty or forty years .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,6.147

<P_1,7>

There are now enormous areas of glasshouses erected all round the
Metropolis , but more especially to the north in such places as Edmonton
, Ponder's End , Enfield , Waltham Cross ; in the north-west round
Finchley , Whetstone , and Potter's Bar ; and to the west at Isleworth ,
Foltham , Hillingdon , Uxbridge , Sipson , and West Drayton .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.149

In other parts of the kingdom , notably Worthing and the Channel Islands
<paren> principally Guernsey <$$paren> , large areas of ground have also
been covered with glass . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.150

This has naturally led to the development of other businesses , such as
the timber trade and the iron trade . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.151

Glasshouses are now built on quite different principles from what they
were twenty or thirty years ago , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.152

and growers are at last beginning to realize the great value of light to
their crops , and to appreciate structures that will allow the maximum
amount of sunshine through the glass . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.153

Less wood and more glass is now the rule . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.154

In the iron trade , enormous quantities of material are used for the
manufacture of boilers and pipes ; while the manufacturers of paint ,
putty , and other materials also do a brisk trade with market growers .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.155

To these must be added the various gas companies and colliery merchants
, who provide thousands of tons of coke or anthracite coal to feed the
furnaces attached to the glasshouses . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.156

The crops grown under glass are naturally of a quite different nature
from those grown in the open air . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.157

They require greater care and skill in cultivation ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.158

and frequent changes are made in accordance with the alterations in
fashion or the fluctuations of the market . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.159

Cucumbers , Tomatoes , Grapes , Ferns , Palms , Aspidistras ,
Chrysanthemums , bedding plants , Melons , Peaches , constitute some of
the chief crops grown extensively under glass , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.160

and they are all dealt with in their proper places in Vols. II , III ,
and IV of this work . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.161

Such outdoor crops , however , as Cabbages , Lettuces , Radishes , Mint
, Rhubarb , Sea Kale , Dwarf and Runner Beans , Marrows , &c. , are
also now grown extensively under glass by many to supply the early
markets and thus pander to the fashion of having everything in as early
as possible before its natural period . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.162

Notwithstanding the numbers of market growers who now send produce to
the London and provincial markets , it is astonishing to see the
enormous quantities of fruits , flowers , and vegetables that are
imported from the Continent and the Colonies . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.163

The increased speed of trains and steamboats now renders it possible to
bring supplies to market that a few years ago would have been considered
impossible . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.164

The introduction of the refrigerating system on trains and steamboats
has still further aided the introduction of colonial and foreign produce
to British markets - one of the surest signs that they are the most
lucrative in the world . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.165

If they were not , supplies would soon cease , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.166

and trade would flow to the markets where the " biggest penny " was to
be secured . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.167

The Florist Trade . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.168

- There is scarcely a town of any pretensions in the British Islands
that does not boast of at least one florist's shop .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.169

In large provincial towns there are many , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.170

and in the metropolis itself and its suburbs there are many hundreds .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,7.171

The floral trade has developed <P_1,8> enormously during the past twenty
or thirty years , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.172

and the florists' shops are the main outlets for most of the decorative
plants and flowers grown , by market nurserymen .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.173

It would indeed be a poor prospect for the latter if the business of the
florist was interfered with or hampered by increased burdens of taxation
. WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.174

The more florists there are in the country the better for the growers of
plants and flowers . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.175

Incidentally , the florists' shops are a sign of the general prosperity
of the people , because their trade may be regarded more in the light of
a luxury of art and taste than as an actual necessity .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.176

The business carried on by the florist is of a varied character .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.177

He is an adept at the making of bouquets of all kinds for weddings or
Court functions . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.178

Wreaths , crosses , anchors , pillars , cushions , and numerous other
floral emblems for the departed also come within his sphere of influence
, in addition to which he sells masses of cut flowers in a natural state
, as well as decorative pot plants , little shrubs , &c.
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.179

And where the florist happens to be also a nurseryman , he undertakes
landscape work and jobbing . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.180

In all these operations his raw material consists of plants and flowers
of all descriptions , hardy and tender , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.181

and he is ever on the watch to invent new designs , or to arrange his
flowers , &c. , in such a way that they will attract attention and
excite admiration . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.182

Some of the leading London florists have made their names famous by the
taste and original ideas they display not only in the making of wreaths
, bouquets , &c. , but in the artistic way they decorate or furnish
banquet halls , theatres , reception rooms , &c.
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.183

All important public functions in any town or city lead to business
being done by the florist ; WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.184

and he who displays the greatest taste , originality , and industry is
the one most likely to be patronized . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.185

The florist and furnishing trade indeed can@ @not be learned in a day .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.186

Many an excellent grower of plants and flowers used in floral
decorations would make but a sorry job of it if he had to arrange his
own produce for a public function . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.187

It takes years to become an expert florist , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.188

and in some branches of the trade , such as the making of wreaths ,
bouquets , &c. , women stand as good a chance as men , if not a better
. WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.189

The operator must be not only skilful and quick in " mounting " the
flowers on various kinds of wires and " foundations " ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.190

but must display considerable taste in the arrangement of the individual
flowers , and of their effects upon one another .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.191

It is quite possible for the choicest flowers to be as easily spoiled in
effect in the hands of an incompetent florist as it is for good viands
to be spoiled in the hands of an incompetent cook .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.192

A skilled florist will produce a finer effect with a few inexpensive
blossoms than an unskilled one will with a cartload of choice material ,
just as some women can dress charmingly at little expense while others
will look dowdy in the finest materials and jewellery .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.193

There is no end to learning in the florist's business ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.194

and the fashion of to-day may be out of date to-morrow .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,8.195

Great and wonderful changes have taken place within the past thirty
years in the way flowers are <P_1,9> arranged . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.196

Formerly bouquets were made in a round , flat , and dumpy style , having
row after row of flowers arranged in circles round the centrepiece .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.197

The whole arrangement was flat and formal , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.198

and was finished up with a collar of fancy paper .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.199

This heavy style of bouquet has long since disappeared ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.200

and a lighter and more graceful arrangement has taken its place .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.201

This has been brought about by the introduction of different kinds of
flowers and trailing plants , and the different methods of sending them
to market . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.202

Twenty and thirty years ago nearly all flowers were cut with very short
stalks , so that the florist , to produce any effect at all , was
obliged to mount many of them on wires to raise them above their
neighbours . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.203

In these days , however , florists insist on having flowers with the
natural stems as long as possible , so that a variety of designs is more
easily obtained . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.204

The grower who would now send short-@ @stemmed Roses or Carnations to
market would find his wares on his hands when the market closed .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.205

With some classes of flowers , such as Camellias , Tuberoses , and
Eucharis , it is impossible to supply long stems to the individual
flowers , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.206

and what they lack in this respect must be made up by the florist in
other ways . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.207

Amongst the most important of the florist's accessories are wires of
various kinds , and moss for the foundations of wreaths , crosses ,
anchors , and other emblems . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.208

The stiffish wires used for mounting flowers are known as stubs ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.209

and are of varying length and thickness , according to the purposes for
which they are required . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.210

Special wires are also used for the mounting of Roses , Camellias ,
Tuberoses , &c. , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.211

and it takes some considerable time for the beginner to find out , not
only the proper stubs and wires to be used for certain purposes , but to
acquire that manual dexterity which distinguishes the expert from the
tyro . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.212

The foundations of various sizes and shapes are made of strong
galvanized wire by the horticultural sundriesman , so that they will not
bend or twist when in use . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.213

These foundations are covered with soft moss tied on with string or wire
, WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.214

and into the moss the flowers , mounted on wires or stubs , are stuck .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.215

Years ago , before the use of stubs became common , flowers were tied
down to the moss foundations , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.216

and the general effect was flat and unrelieved .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.217

Nowadays , however , flowers can be arranged in various styles - some
flat , some slightly raised , some bunched boldly in certain places and
forming the <font> pièce_de_résistance <$$font> of the whole work - all
of which variations depend upon the artistic perceptions of the operator
. WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.218

Owing to the more frequent interchange between British and Continental
florists now than formerly , constant changes are taking place ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.219

and one notices how largely the ideas of the Continental florists are
being assimilated by their British brethren , and vice_versa .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.220

<font> Popular Florists' Flowers . <$$font> WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.221

- Perhaps the florist attaches more importance to the colour than to the
form of the flowers he uses in his business . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.222

As a rule , flowers with clear and distinct shades of colour are most
appreciated ; while those with confused tones or lacking in brilliancy
are practically useless . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,9.223

A colour that will not show up well at nighttime under <P_1,10>
gas-light or electric light is of little use , because a good deal of
the florist's art is seen under these conditions .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.224

<font> White Flowers . <$$font> WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.225

- Taking the colours all in all , white is undoubtedly the most popular
, WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.226

and enormous quantities of white-flowered plants must be grown to meet
the ever-@ @increasing demand . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.227

Amongst the most important plants used for a supply of white flowers to
the florists the following may be mentioned : Lily of the Valley ;
<font> Lilium longiflorum <paren> Harriai <$$paren> <$$font> ; <font>
Lilium speciosum <$$font> or <font> lancifolium album <$$font> ; <font>
Eucharis grandiflora <$$font> ; Camellias ; Tuberoses <paren> <font>
Palianthes <$$font> <$$paren> ; <font> Freesia refracta alba <$$font> ;
Tulip , La Reine ; Roman Hyacinths ; Florists' Hyacinth , La Grandesse ;
<font> Gladiolus Colvillei <$$font> , The Bride ; Stephanotis ; <font>
Lapageria alba <$$font> ; Bouvardia ; Rose , Niphetos ; Gardenias ;
Carnations ; Phlox ; Chrysanthemums ; Dahlias ; China Asters ; Stocks ;
Azaleas ; Pink , Mrs. Simkins and Her Majesty ; Zonal Pelargonium
Hermione <paren> double <$$paren> ; Gloxinias ; Snowdrops ; Paper-white
Narcissus ; Star of Bethlehem <paren> <font> Ornithogalum <$$font>
<$$paren> ; <font> Odontoglossum crispum <$$font> ; Christmas Roses
<paren> <font> Helleborus niger <$$font> <$$paren> ; Arum Lilies <paren>
<font> Richardia <$$font> <$$paren> ; <font> Hoteia <$$font> <paren>
<font> Spiroea <$$font> <$$paren> <font> japonica <$$font> ; <font>
Gypsophila paniculata <$$font> and <font> G. elegans ; Achillea
<$$font> , The Pearl ; Sweet_Peas ; Spanish Iris ; Florentine Iris ;
Paeonies ; <font> Phaloenopsis grandiflora , umabilis , Riemstedtiana ,
<$$font> &c. WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.228

Apart from white , flowers of all other colours are utilized in great
abundance , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.229

and the principal kinds used may be noted as follows : Roses of all
kinds ; Violets , double and single ; Carnations - Perpetual and Border
varieties ; Daffodils and Narcissi ; Tulips ; Hyacinths ; Gladiolus ;
Dahlias ; Chrysanthemums ; Phlox ; Forget-me-nots ; Zonal Pelargonium
Raspail , double scarlet ; Orchids such as Cattleyas , Dendrobiums ,
Oncidiums , Odontoglossums , Leelias , and Phalaenopsis .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.230

<font> Trailers . <$$font> WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.231

- For " shower " bouquets , festoons , and table decorations it is
useful to have certain plants with slender trailing stems and foliage
that will not soon wither . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.232

Amongst the best plants for this purpose are <font> Asparagus Sprengeri
<$$font> , <font> A. plumosus <$$font> , and <font> A. plumosus nanus
<$$font> <paren> all known as Asparagus " Ferns " <$$paren> , <font> A.
medeoloides <$$font> <paren> or <font> Myrsiphyllum asparagoides
<$$font> <$$paren> far better known to florists as " Smilax " .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.233

A great trade is done in the trails of these plants ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.234

and some growers make a speciality of their culture .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.235

<font> Foliage . <$$font> WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.236

- For backing up many flowers used in wreaths , crosses , bouquets , &c.
, it is sometimes essential to have foliage that will throw the blossoms
into greater relief , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.237

and a large number of plants are grown for this purpose .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.238

Until the various kinds of Asparagus were introduced , the fronds of the
Maidenhair Fern were used in enormous quantities for almost everything .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.239

Of late years , however , the foliage of other plants has been utilized
, WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.240

and florists now stock in the proper season the leaves of such plants as
: Crotons , Maples , Holly-leaved Barberry <paren> <font> Berberis
Aquifolium <$$font> <$$paren> , Copper Beech , Ivy , Copper Hazel ,
Purple Plum , Scarlet Oak , <font> Galax aphylla <$$font> , large-leaved
Myrtle , &c. , to which must be added for winter work sprays of
Mistletoe and of Holly in leaf and berry . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.241

There is still a great trade done in what is known as " French Fern "
<paren> <font> Asplenium adiantum nigrum {TEXT:adiantum-niqrum} <$$font>
<$$paren> , the fronds of which are sold in bunches .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,10.242

The old conventional <P_1,11> ideas , however , are gradually vanishing
, WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.243

and it is now customary to use the natural foliage of any flower that
may be used in floral work . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.244

Thus violet leaves are most appropriately used with violet blossoms , as
holly leaves are the most suitable adjuncts to the scarlet berries .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.245

Indeed there is no end to the methods employed by the modern florist to
produce a charming effect ; WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.246

and the plant and flower grower who will introduce a new plant , or
suggest a novel idea , is looked upon as a floral friend .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.247

Tree and Shrub Trade . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.248

- This is a very important branch of commercial horticulture , and one
about which the general public knows but little .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.249

It may be divided into two principal groups , viz. : <paren> 1
<$$paren> that dealing with forest trees , and <paren> 2 <$$paren>
ornamental flowering trees and shrubs . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.250

In regard to forest trees it is astonishing - what an enormous number of
young plants are raised every year in different parts of England ,
Ireland , and Scotland . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.251

Those who are under the impression that British forestry is a dead or
dying industry have no idea as to the amount of business done in forest
trees , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.252

and it is a pity that the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the officials
of the Board of Agriculture are not better informed as to what is being
done in this respect . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.253

There are hundreds of capable men , who could not only plant all the
waste_land in the United Kingdom in a comparatively short time , but who
could produce millions of young forest trees annually to fill the gaps
that might occur . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.254

And yet Mr. Lloyd George , when introducing his famous 1909 Budget ,
said in reference to the scheme of afforestation : " I am also told that
we can@ @not command the services in this country of a sufficient number
of skilled foresters to direct planting . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.255

I am advised , and , personally , I am disposed to accept that counsel
as the advice of prudence , that the great haste in this matter will
mean the less speed , and that to rush into planting on a huge scale
without first of all making the necessary experiments , organizing a
trained body of foresters , and taking all other essential steps to
ensure success when you advance , would be to court disaster which might
discourage all future attempts . " WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.256

It would be interesting to know whose advice the Chancellor of the
Exchequer relied upon when he stated that " we can@ @not command the
services in this country of a sufficient number of skilled foresters to
direct planting " , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.257

but there was no doubt about its misleading character .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.258

We wonder what kind of men they are who raise and plant thousands of
forest trees annually ? WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.259

Have they no knowledge of the trees they raise ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.260

and are they not skilled in planting and growing them ?
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.261

The Chancellor's somewhat misleading statement is calculated to injure
the reputation of a large number of skilful and hard-working men who
earn a living by carrying out the very duties which the Chancellor was
advised were not and could not at present be performed .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.262

These men , skilled in the raising , planting , and cultivation of
forest trees , may not , of course , be able to pass an examination in
Greek and Latin , or in Conic Sections and Trigonometry ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.263

nor have they had the disadvantage of a " public-school training " ;
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.264

but they know their business , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,11.265

and if the Chancellor of the Exchequer will only <P_1,12> start the
Government Afforestation Scheme at once , he will find plenty of skilful
foresters who will see that the preparation and planting of the
17,000,000 acres of waste ground in the United Kingdom are carried out
properly . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.266

<font> Raising Forest Trees . <$$font> WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.267

- The simplest method of raising these is from seeds .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.268

These are collected when ripe in autumn and carefully stored until the
spring . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.269

In some cases , however , like - the Willow , Poplar , Elm , in which
the seed ripens early , sowing may take place during the summer months .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.270

The seed land is prepared by ploughing or digging , and harrowing and
raking , until it is brought to a fine tilth . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.271

Drills are then drawn at regular distances apart , varying from 3 in.
to 12 in. according to the kind of seed that is sown , each kind being
covered with three or four times its own depth of soil , and afterwards
lightly rolled . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.272

In some cases seeds are sown broadcast over beds about 5 ft. wide ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.273

but generally speaking it is more economical , and better for the
seedlings , to sow thinly in drills . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.274

To allow for cultural attention like weeding , hoeing , watering , &c.
, the seedbeds should not be more than 4 to 5 ft. wide , with an alley
between , so that half the seed-bed may be attended to from one side and
half from the other without having to tread upon the soil between the
plants . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.275

The forest and other trees raised in large quantities from seed are Oaks
, Beeches , Birches , Ashes , Poplars , Sweet Chestnuts , Horse
Chestnuts , Elms , Hollies , Hawthorns , Hornbeams , Limes , Mountain
Ashes , Planes , Sycamores , False Acacias <paren> Robinia <$$paren> ,
Maidenhair Trees <paren> Gingko <$$paren> , Willows , Tulip Trees
<paren> Liriodendron <$$paren> , and such conifers as the Firs , Spruces
, Pines , the Arbor_Vitae , Cedars , Thuyas , Larches , Cypresses , &c.
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.276

Apart from the forest trees , there are hundreds of others of a more
ornamental character , chiefly used for the decoration of large parks
and gardens , public places and squares , streets , &c.
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.277

These are raised not only from seeds in the same way as forest trees ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.278

but in the case of special varieties , or when seeds are not ripened in
abundance , they are also raised by means of cuttings , layers , buds ,
grafts , and suckers . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.279

The most important plants in this group and in the forest section are
dealt with in Vol. II in the article on " Trees and Shrubs " , to which
the reader is referred . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.280

Of late years a great trade has sprung up , chiefly amongst nurserymen ,
in ornamental flowering shrubs , which are grown in pots and gently
forced into early bloom in Spring <paren> January to March and April
<$$paren> . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.281

The principal plants thus grown are Lilacs , Double Cherries , Azaleas ,
Almonds , Japanese Quinces , Wistaria , Double Plums , <font> Cydonia
Maulei <$$font> , <font> Pyrus spectabilis <$$font> , <font> Deutzia
gracilis <$$font> , <font> Staphyllea colchica <$$font> , <font> Prunus
triloba <$$font> , <font> Magnolia Soulangeana <$$font> , <font>
Forsythia suspensa <$$font> , <font> Ribes sanguineum <$$font> , &c.
&c. WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.282

A trade also has sprung up again in clipped trees and shrubs of an
evergreen character . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.283

Such trees as the Box and the Yew , the Poet's Laurel , and others are
cut into various shapes , some more or less fantastic - as shown in the
photograph <paren> fig. 1 <$$paren> . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.284

They are usually grown in tubs , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.285

and are utilized for what some people call decoration , but others
desecration , of large gardens . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,12.286

<P_1,13>

Japanese Gardening . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,13.288

- Although the introduction of the beautiful Japanese plants that now
contribute to the charm of British gardens belongs to the distant past ,
it was not until some fifty years ago that commercial cultivators gave
serious attention to the Japanese flora , with a view to obtain some
other of its members for the further enrichment of our gardens .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,13.289

If until the middle of the last century Japan was not exactly a sealed
book to the seeker after new forms of tree and plant life , the
restrictions imposed upon the members of other nationalities were such
as to render it extremely difficult for them to obtain access to the
country , much less to explore meadow or woodland , or plain or mountain
, and bring away on their return home the spoils of the exploration .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,13.290

The removal of these restrictions by the opening of the Japanese ports
to foreigners rather more than half a century ago gave <P_1,14> the
desired opportunity for collecting some of the many beautiful trees ,
shrubs , and other plants that were likely to succeed under the climatic
conditions that obtain in the United Kingdom , and placing them at the
disposal of the general body of plant lovers . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.291

Then as now the nursery firms of this country were remarkable for their
enterprise , and therefore not slow to take advantage of the opportunity
thus given them for enriching gardens with new and beautiful forms of
plant life . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.292

As a proof of this one example will be sufficient .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.293

In April , 1860 , the late John Gould Veitch , a member of the
well-known Chelsea firm , left England on a voyage to the Far East ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.294

and arrived at Nagasaki in the July following .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.295

He remained in Japan about twelve months , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.296

and during that period he sent home a large number of trees , shrubs ,
and bulbous and other plants , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.297

and of these the greater proportion have proved of so high a degree of
value as to obtain a place in gardens generally .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.298

Coniferous trees included <font> Abies firma <$$font> , <font> A.
microsperma <$$font> , <font> Cryptomeria japonica elegans <$$font> ,
<font> Juniperus chinensis aurea <$$font> , <font> Larix leptolepis
<$$font> , <font> Picea Alcockiana <$$font> , <font> P. ajanensis
<$$font> , <font> P. polita <$$font> , <font> Pinus densiflora <$$font>
, <font> P. parviflora <$$font> , <font> P. Thunbergi <$$font> , and
the varieties of <font> Retinospora obtusa . <$$font>
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.299

The deciduous trees included the varieties of <font> Acer palmatum
<$$font> , the climber <font> Ampelopsis tricuspidata <$$font> <paren>
or <font> Vitis inconstans <$$font> <$$paren> , and the plants <font>
Lilium auratum <$$font> , <font> Primula japonica <$$font> and <font> P.
cortusioides . <$$font> WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.300

The introduction of so many kinds of first-rate importance within so
short a period evinces much enterprise , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.301

for travelling in Japan was very different in those days from what it is
at the present time . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.302

The Abies , Cryptomeria , Piceas , and Pinus represent species that rank
high in their respective genera , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.303

and the varieties of <font> Retinospora obtusa <$$font> are so
diversified in form and colour , and withal so attractive , that they
have throughout the period that has elapsed since their introduction
enjoyed a high degree of popularity and have been freely used in the
creation of garden scenery . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.304

The varieties of <font> Acer palmatum <$$font> , in the varied form and
colour of their elegant foliage , are recognized as forming a group of
small-growing trees of immense value for garden decoration ;
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.305

and <font> Ampelopsis tricuspidata <$$font> is used more largely in
clothing wall surfaces than all the other climbers combined ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.306

and it contributes in no small degree to the amenities of town life .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.307

The richly coloured <font> Primula japonica <$$font> continues to be
highly appreciated as one of the best of the moisture-loving plants for
fringing streamlet and pool in shady positions ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.308

and as the result of the activities of various commercial
horticulturists the varieties of <font> Primula cortusioides <$$font>
have been so multiplied as to form a large group in which there is so
great a range of colour as to greatly enhance their value for various
decorative purposes both under glass and in the open .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.309

The plants thus briefly enumerated rapidly came into favour .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.310

They were largely used , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.311

and soon made an impression on the scenery of gardens where novelties of
merit received a welcome . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.312

They greatly enhanced the interest and attractions of gardens in which
they were given a place , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.313

and as a result they greatly stimulated an interest in Japanese plants ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,14.314

and <P_1,15> gave rise to so strong a demand as to tax severely the
resources of nurseries for a long series of years ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.315

and have an immense influence for good upon a great industry .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.316

They had another effect in their relation to the garden ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.317

and that was to quicken an interest in rare and beautiful plants from
other parts of the world , by showing that there were subjects other
than timber trees and the common laurel suitable for furnishing the
garden . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.318

In the case of <font> Lilium auratum <$$font> there was a brisk demand
for bulbs at a comparatively high rate , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.319

and when it became possible to supply them at a price which placed them
within the reach of practically all owners of gardens , the demand
increased to an enormous extent . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.320

For forty years or more the importations of the bulbs of this Lily have
annually been on such a large scale as to represent a trade of
considerable importance and to occupy a prominent position in the
business of those who are concerned with the distribution of bulbs .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.321

<font> Lilium longiflorum <$$font> , which was introduced to this
country in the year previous to John Gould Veitch's voyage to Japan ,
has enjoyed a higher degree of popularity than even that of <font> L.
auratum <$$font> , not because of its flowers being superior in beauty ,
but because of their adaptability for decorative purposes .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.322

To the florists they are of immense value , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.323

for they can be used more or less successfully in wellnigh all forms of
the decorative art , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.324

and with the aid of the refrigerator in retarding the bulbs they can be
had in abundance at all seasons of the year . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.325

British cultivators are no longer wholly dependent upon Japanese growers
for their supplies of bulbs , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.326

but they annually obtain large importations from them .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.327

The demand for this beautiful and useful Lily is very great ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.328

and the importation and distribution of the immense numbers of bulbs
that are annually required in market-growing establishments and private
gardens has become so important a detail of commercial horticulture that
one could wish statistics showing the exact quantities that annually
reach this country from Japan were available . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.329

<font> Lilium speciosum <$$font> , which also forms an important part of
the trade in Lily bulbs with Japan , was introduced from that country in
1833 ; WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.330

but since that year the Japanese growers of Lilies have sent us
varieties of this species which are so superior in the size , form , and
colouring of their flowers as to surpass those of the typical white and
coloured forms and to render them of quite secondary importance .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.331

Of much interest is <font> Iris Kaempferi <$$font> , which was
introduced to this country from Japan in 1857 , and attracted much
attention when the large handsome and richly coloured flowers were first
presented to public notice at the exhibitions , and began to make their
appearance here and there in private gardens . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.332

For a time they failed to make the headway that was anticipated ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.333

and this was in a large measure due to the cultural details being then
imperfectly understood . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,15.334

Many of those who planted this Iris in its varied forms failed to
recognize the fact that to achieve success the roots must have the run
of a rich and moist soil , an abundance <P_1,16> of moisture being
especially necessary during the season of growth .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.335

Hence large numbers were planted in beds or the mixed border , without
reference to their special requirements in the matter of food or
moisture . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.336

The growth was consequently unsatisfactory , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.337

and in course of time their cultivation was greatly reduced .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.338

Within the past few years there has been a great revival in the interest
evinced in this and other of the Japanese Irises .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.339

The lessons that the Japanese growers have been able to teach us have
been taken to heart , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.340

and moist positions are selected for the moisture-loving Irises ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.341

and , if these can@ @not be provided , care is taken to maintain the
soil in a thoroughly moist state throughout the whole period when the
plants are in an actively growing state . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.342

The influence of the Iris gardens of Japan has been felt in many gardens
of this country , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.343

and in not a few , large plantings have been made on the lake side and
along the margin of pools , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.344

and constitute delightful features . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.345

These examples are of interest as showing that if we can@ @not have
displays of Irises equal to those which have made the gardens of
Hori-kiri famous , we can with their aid have in this country floral
pictures of wondrous beauty . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.346

Among the Japanese trees and shrubs that have been introduced but have
not as yet been planted largely , mention may be made of <font> Magnolia
hypoleuca , <$$font> which attains noble proportions , but does not
produce its handsome flowers freely until it has attained a large size ;
the Japanese Horse-chestnut <paren> <font> Aesculus turbinata <$$font>
<$$paren> ; the elegant <font> Styrax japonicum <$$font> ; <font> Betula
Maximowiczi <$$font> , a handsome Beech remarkable for its large leaves
and yellow bark ; <font> Quercus acuta , Q. glabra latifolia <$$font> ,
two Evergreen Oaks of merit . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.347

Then there is <font> Daphniphyllum glaucescens <$$font> , one of the
most handsome of evergreen shrubs , and <font> Vitis Thunbergi <$$font>
, which surpasses in brilliancy of colouring <font> V. Coignetioe
<$$font> , long so popular for clothing trellises , wall spaces , and
tall pillars . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.348

With a fuller knowledge of the distinctive characteristics of the many
beautiful trees , shrubs , &c. , that had been introduced from Japan ,
and the increased facilities for becoming acquainted with the various
phases of garden design that had long found favour in that country , it
is not surprising that a strong desire should have been felt by many
owners of gardens within the British Isles to create gardens more or
less in accordance with Japanese ideas . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.349

Practical expression has in numerous instances been given to this desire
, and , as might have been expected , with varying results .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.350

Where the principles governing the making of gardens on the lines
followed by the Japanese landscape gardeners have been acted upon as
closely as circumstances would permit , the result has been a distinct ,
interesting , and pleasing addition to the pleasure grounds .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.351

On the other hand , where but scant attention was given to principles ,
the results have not been altogether satisfactory .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.352

The Japanese garden , as we understand the term , is not a swamp , as
suggested by some of the gardens that have come under our notice .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,16.353

Neither is it a lake surrounded by an irregular belt of trees and shrubs
<P_1,17> and a winding walk , with , it may be , a bridge or stepping
stones to cross it at the narrowest part . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.354

The Japanese garden does not consist of one or two features , but of
many , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.355

and one of the distinguishing characteristics of the Japanese landscape
gardener is the skill with which he combines the features of , it may be
, a whole countryside , in an area of quite moderate dimensions .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.356

Another attribute of his skill is the success that is achieved in
maintaining the relative proportions of the several features , and also
of the trees and shrubs with which the garden is embellished .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.357

In accomplishing this important object he has in many instances to use
trees , ornaments , &c. , of so small a size as to suggest to the
Western mind that the garden is intended as a model on a reduced scale
rather than for the enjoyment of the owner . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.358

The garden in Japan is regarded from a somewhat different standpoint
from that which we consider it in this country .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.359

Here , to state the case generally , we provide a garden adapted to the
requirements of the plants in which the owner is specially interested ,
with such embellishments as may be considered necessary ;
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.360

to the Japanese , plants primarily exist for the assistance they are
able to render in the production of artistic effects ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.361

and are utilized accordingly . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.362

One of the principal rules governing the work of the landscape gardener
in Japan is to follow nature as far as is practicable , and to arrange
the arborescent and other forms of plant life in their natural
associations . That is to say , plants which in a state of nature have
their home on the mountain side are not to be brought down to those
parts of the garden which represent the lowlands , and , it may be ,
used in the formation of a flowery fringe to running stream or silent
pool . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.363

In like manner the plants that luxuriate in the moist conditions that
obtain at the lakeside are not used in the clothing of the side of a
hill or mimic mountain . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.364

The Japanese garden artist would appear to give ready adherence to this
rule , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.365

for he can readily include in any given design the characteristic
features of any given portion of the native landscape .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.366

Another rule of some importance is to avoid as far as practicable the
planting of deciduous trees , with a few exceptions , in the more
prominent positions of the garden . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.367

The exceptions are deciduous trees remarkable for the beauty of their
flowers , such as the Cherries and Plums , which are not only immensely
attractive when yielding their wealth of flowers , but are great
favourites with the Japanese . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.368

If it is intended to plant a tree near the end of a bridge , one should
be selected which will spread its branches over it , and cast a shadow
on the water . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.369

It is not considered in accordance with the canons of garden-making to
show the whole of the volume of water tumbling over rocks ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.370

and therefore it is enjoined that in selecting a tree for planting
alongside a cascade that it will throw its branches partly over the
rushing water . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.371

Shade-giving trees are considered the most suitable for planting near
seats and tea houses , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.372

and Pines are the most generally selected for the purpose .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,17.373

Much the same rule applies to the planting of trees by the <P_1,18> side
of ponds and other small water areas , the object being to obtain a cool
retreat during the summer's heat . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.374

The selection of positions for trees in the gardens is considered by the
Japanese authorities as a matter of much importance ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.375

and they feel , as do those in this country who have had experience in
such work , that when trees are planted without the exercise of
sufficient judgment the desired effect is lost .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.376

For a long period Pines were the favourite garden trees ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.377

and they were trained to form round heads or to some quaint shape to
give a distinctive appearance to the spot in which they were placed .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.378

Of late years Western ideas would appear to have had some influence upon
the Japanese , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.379

for within the past decade or so trees more or less natural in growth
have come into favour , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.380

and the trees with formal heads or contorted branches are no longer
fashionable . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.381

The Japanese Maples , of which there are now so many beautiful forms in
cultivation , are not always a complete success in British gardens ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.382

and this is due in many instances to a failure to plant them in
positions most favourable to their full development .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.383

The Japanese , having a full knowledge of the elegance that
characterises the habit of these trees when growing under natural
conditions , and abundant opportunities for enjoying the glorious colour
effects produced by their leaves when the breath of autumn has passed
over them , freely use them in the creation of garden scenery .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.384

They by no means limit their selection to the kinds that do not take on
their rich colouring until the summer months have run their course ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.385

but group with freedom the many fine forms of <font> Acer palmatum
<$$font> that in the diversity in the form and colour of their leaves
afford a rare opportunity for the garden artist to produce colour
effects of the most beautiful description , extending from within a
short time of the bursting of the buds to the fall of the leaf .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.386

These Maples are of much value in gardens , whatever may be their design
, and particularly in those of small size ; WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.387

and although the demand for them continues to be great , there is room
for an acceleration in the rate at which they are being planted .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.388

The free use of stone in the making of Japanese gardens is a point of
much interest , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.389

and while it may not be regarded as of so much importance as the trees
with which the garden is furnished , sufficient care and attention are
bestowed upon its selection to ensure every piece being suited to the
position in which it is to be placed . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.390

Especially noteworthy , also , are the stone ornaments , of which the
lanterns of stone are the most important . WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.391

These lanterns may be of granite , sandstone , or limestone ,
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.392

and they take us far back into the distant past .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.393

For many centuries they were exclusively associated with the temples
that have a prominent place in many parts of the country ;
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.394

but in the course of the development of the landscape art some of the
leading exponents conceived the idea of using them in the adornment of
the garden , WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.395

and within a comparatively short period their use became general .
WEATHERS-1913-1,1,18.396

