<BEGIN_webster-1718-1>

<P_5>

<heading>

An Attempt Towards rendering the Education of Youth More Easy and
Effectual . WEBSTER-1718-1,5.4

<$$heading>

I am somewhat prevented in my Design , by a small Treatise a little Time
since publish'd , under the Title of <font> An Essay on the proper
Method for forming the Man of Business : <$$font> WEBSTER-1718-1,5.6

But as <P_6> the ingenious Author <paren> to whose very laudable
Undertaking I heartily wish Success <$$paren> has not entirely enter'd
into my present Intention , so I have still Scope enough to enlarge ;
WEBSTER-1718-1,6.7

and I hope I shall obtain his Pardon , if I find it necessary to touch
upon some Points he has already so skilfully handled .
WEBSTER-1718-1,6.8

The prevailing Method of Education at present , is , as soon as a Child
can stammer over a Chapter in the <font> Bible <$$font> , and before he
has well lost the uncouth Tone of Pronunciation , which he has perhaps
learnt of his Mistress , he is immediately sent to the <font> Latin
<$$font> School ; where , instead of studying his own Language , and
improving in the necessary Qualifications of reading it distinctly , and
with proper <font> Emphasis <$$font> , he is unreasonably enter'd upon a
<font> Latin <$$font> Grammar , and bewilder'd in unintelligible Jargon
. WEBSTER-1718-1,6.9

To learn an unknown <font> Science , <$$font> in an unknown <font>
Tongue <$$font> , must certainly be an hardy <paren> not to say foolish
<$$paren> Undertaking , <P_7> even in a grown Person , with the utmost
Application of his whole Thought and Reason ; WEBSTER-1718-1,7.10

how much more difficult and unreasonable must it then be , for Children
to go thro' the unaccountable Talk , and whilst they labour under the
Load , to stand liable to the Lash for every Failure of Capacity , as
well as Negligence of Duty ? WEBSTER-1718-1,7.11

But all the Discouragement is not in the Study ; WEBSTER-1718-1,7.12

for after , it may be , seven Years Pains are past , and the Youth
somewhat advanc'd in his Learning , either discourag'd by experienc'd
Hardships , or determin'd by his Friends Inclinations , his Studies are
chang'd , WEBSTER-1718-1,7.13

and he is immediately remov'd to the Writing-School , to be qualify'd
for Trade , or other Business ; where , entirely neglecting his former
Applications , the little <font> Latin <$$font> he had learnt , is lost
; WEBSTER-1718-1,7.14

and for all his Time and Labour past , he is perhaps unable to give the
Sense of a <font> Motto <$$font> or <font> Inscription <$$font> ;
WEBSTER-1718-1,7.15

nay , it may be , is <P_8> still uncapable of reading or writing <font>
English . <$$font> WEBSTER-1718-1,8.16

To remedy these Inconveniences , I would therefore earnestly recommend
it to those who have the Care of Children , early to observe their
Inclinations and Capacities ; and , as soon as possible , to come to a
Resolution how they intend to place them in the World ;
WEBSTER-1718-1,8.17

for tho' it is not possible so soon to fix upon any distinct Trade , or
Profession ; yet they may , and ought early to determine , whether they
intend them for <font> Scholars , Clerks , <$$font> or <font> Traders
<$$font> , that they may receive their Education accordingly .
WEBSTER-1718-1,8.18

For those who are to be brought up <font> Scholars <$$font> , it is out
of my Sphere to direct : WEBSTER-1718-1,8.19

I must leave them to the Management of the more learned , and only
observe , that if , before they were perplex'd with <font> Latin
<$$font> , they were taught the Grounds of Grammar in the <font> English
<$$font> Tongue , they would make their Advances <P_9> in that learned
Language with more Ease and Success , and would give their <font> Latin
- <$$font> Masters less Trouble , and more Credit . WEBSTER-1718-1,9.20

To that End , for the particular Use of my own Scholars , I have
compos'd an <font> English <$$font> Rudiment , built upon the Method of
the <font> Latin <$$font> Grammar , by which the Learner may not only
come to the perfect Knowledge of his Mother-Tongue , but be also fitly
prepar'd for the Study of other Languages , more especially the <font>
Latin <$$font> , the Difficulty of which will , by that Means , be in a
great Measure remov'd . WEBSTER-1718-1,9.21

At the same time that Children are thus learning <font> English <$$font>
, it will be proper they should be taught to <font> Write <$$font> ; not
only as it is a delightful Exercise , and easily attainable , but as it
is of absolute Use and Necessity for their future Advances , and
particularly to the performing their <font> Latin <$$font> Exercises .
WEBSTER-1718-1,9.22

<P_10>

For <font> Arithmetick <$$font> , it will be best for such to let it
alone 'till their more advanc'd Years , when it will be a proper
Introduction to their Mathematical Studies . WEBSTER-1718-1,10.24

Those who are intended <font> Clerks <$$font> , are the next under
Consideration ; WEBSTER-1718-1,10.25

and for these , having made the same Beginning as the others , it will
be necessary that they as well study the <font> French <$$font> as the
<font> Latin <$$font> Tongue , from both which they ought to be capable
of making a good Translation . WEBSTER-1718-1,10.26

<font> Writing <$$font> and <font> Accompts <$$font> are their very
Profession ; WEBSTER-1718-1,10.27

and therefore to be wanting in either of those Qualifications , is to be
deficient in Essentials , and unworthy the very Name of a Clerk .
WEBSTER-1718-1,10.28

Nor is it sufficient barely to write a fair Character ;
WEBSTER-1718-1,10.29

a Clerk should have an easy Freedom in his Hand , a bold Stroke with his
Pen , and the Skill and Command of striking a neat Capital , or proper
Ornament ; by which Means he will <P_11> not only be able to do his
Business without Difficulty , but also make it appear to Advantage .
WEBSTER-1718-1,11.30

'T@ @is a common Thing to find a young Man , who writ very tolerably at
the Writing-School , immediately upon his Entrance on Business , to lose
his Hand ; occasion'd by his falling at once from a slow Way of Practice
, to attempt Dispatch ; WEBSTER-1718-1,11.31

but if either at the Time of their Learning , they were brought by
Degrees from set Copies and Pieces , to write after larger Specimens ,
and real Presidents of Business , <paren> as is my constant Method with
my Scholars <$$paren> or on their first Entrance into Offices , <font>
&c. <$$font> they would themselves have the Prudence carefully and
leisurely to copy what is given them , and leave it to Time and Practice
to render them ready and expeditious , they would find their Account in
their Patience , and have their Diligence crown'd with Perfection .
WEBSTER-1718-1,11.32

<P_12>

And here I can@ @not forbear lamenting the Unhappiness of our Profession
, on account of its being so crowded with Quacks and Pretenders .
WEBSTER-1718-1,12.34

When a Man has try'd all Shifts , and still fail'd , if he can but
scratch out a fair Hand , tho' never so stiff and unnatural , and has
got but Arithmetick enough in his Head , to compute the Minutes in a
Year , or the Inches in a Mile , he makes his last Recourse to a Garret
, WEBSTER-1718-1,12.35

and , having got a Sign painted , sets up for a Teacher of <font>
Writing <$$font> and <font> Arithmetick <$$font> ; where , by taking
Scholars at any Rate , he not only spoils the Business , but what is
much worse , both robs the inconsiderate Parents of their Money , and
the unhappy Children of their Time . WEBSTER-1718-1,12.36

Again , others there are , who , tho' better <font> Writers <$$font> and
<font> Accomptants <$$font> than the former , are yet so shamefully
ignorant in other Respects , that they can neither write Sense , nor
spell <font> English . <$$font> WEBSTER-1718-1,12.37

And sure the Scholars of such Masters <P_13> are like to prove great
Proficients ! WEBSTER-1718-1,13.38

But to return ; <font> Arithmetick <$$font> is more the Business of the
Head than the Hand ; WEBSTER-1718-1,13.39

and he that proposes himself for a Clerk or Accomptant , ought to have a
particular Turn of Thought that Way : WEBSTER-1718-1,13.40

'T@ @is true , there are distinct peculiar Methods , and a common Road
of Practice in most Offices and Employments ; as , particularly , in the
<font> Custom-House <$$font> and <font> Excise <$$font> ; by which many
Men of but dull Genius , make Shift to rub through their Business ;
WEBSTER-1718-1,13.41

but what Satisfaction can a Man take in doing what he does not
understand ? WEBSTER-1718-1,13.42

And how much must he be out of Countenance if call'd upon for an
Explanation ? WEBSTER-1718-1,13.43

Whereas , he that works , with Knowledge , and can render a Reason for
what he does , not only goes on with Certainty and Pleasure to himself ,
but to the Satisfaction of others : WEBSTER-1718-1,13.44

Besides , he who is a Master of the Theory , and whose Business puts him
upon constant Practice , can <P_14> hardly fail of adding new
Improvements of his own , to the Discoveries of others in that
inexhaustible Art . WEBSTER-1718-1,14.45

But , as some Persons may be engag'd in Business , wherein is very
little Use of this Science , by which Means they may be liable to forget
what they had learn'd ; and others may be so hastily enter'd upon what
may very much require it , as not to have Time to obtain a sufficient
Knowledge therein , I some@ @time ago publish'd a little <font> Treatise
<$$font> , in a neat Pocket Volume , under the Title of <font>
Arithmetick in Epitome , or , a Compendium of all its Rules , both
Vulgar and Decimal . <$$font> Which Book , as it was chiefly intended ,
and , at first , particularly dedicated to the ingenious <font> Clerks
<$$font> and <font> Accomptants <$$font> of the several Offices of
<font> Great Britain <$$font> , so it has so far had the good Fortune to
please , as to have already past two Impressions . WEBSTER-1718-1,14.46

<P_15>

The next necessary Qualification of a <font> Clerk <$$font> , or <font>
Accomptant <$$font> , is that most excellent Art of <font> Italian
<$$font> Book-keeping ; a <font> Science <$$font> beyond the Praise of
Words , and without which a Man is neither fit for the Cabinet nor
Compting-House : WEBSTER-1718-1,15.48

And indeed the World now seems to be more than ever sensible of its
Value , every one almost being desirous of having those under their Care
instructed therein . WEBSTER-1718-1,15.49

In this Art too I have endeavour'd to serve the <font> Publick <$$font>
, by a small <font> Treatise <$$font> which is now near ready for the
<font> Press . <$$font> WEBSTER-1718-1,15.50

Having thus consider'd the proper Attainments of those who are intended
<font> Clerks <$$font> , <font> &c. <$$font> I now proceed to point out
what I think the proper Method of preparing those who are design'd for
<font> Trades . <$$font> WEBSTER-1718-1,15.51

And here , tho' I may perhaps offend the <font> Latin <$$font> Masters ,
I must entirely declare against such Children losing their Time about
that Language ; WEBSTER-1718-1,15.52

<P_16>

<font> Grammar , <$$font> which is the only Thing they can propose
thereby to learn , I have already shew'd may more easily and effectually
be taught them in their own Mother-Tongue : WEBSTER-1718-1,16.54

And for the general receiv'd Notion , that there is no attaining to
spell <font> English <$$font> without learning <font> Latin , <$$font>
it is an Observation false in Fact , and no better than a vulgar Error .
WEBSTER-1718-1,16.55

'T@ @is true , indeed , the <font> Latin <$$font> Scholar , by his daily
reading and constant Perusal of Books , can hardly fail of improving
himself in that Respect ; WEBSTER-1718-1,16.56

but then it is not because what he studies is <font> Latin <$$font> ,
WEBSTER-1718-1,16.57

but the same Application to <font> English <$$font> Authors would
produce a like or greater Effect ; WEBSTER-1718-1,16.58

for the main Difficulty of <font> Spelling <$$font> , is not in those
Words deriv'd of the <font> Latin <$$font> Tongue , which are indeed of
all others most easily spelt , by reason no superfluous Letters are
therein used , every Letter having its full Power , and every Syllable
exactly writ as sounded ; whilst the chief Difficulty is really found in
those Words <P_17> which are merely <font> English , <$$font> or of
<font> Saxon <$$font> Original . WEBSTER-1718-1,17.59

I would therefore , instead of the afore_mention'd fruitless Difficulty
, earnestly recommend the Study of the <font> French <$$font> Tongue ,
which will both be much easier attain'd , and prove much more
serviceable in Business , as being now almost the common Speech of
<font> Europe <$$font> ; and , consequently , not only qualifying a Man
to travel Abroad , and by that Means to improve his Trafick beyond the
Seas , but also of frequent Use in their Shops at Home , to their great
Advantage in serving their foreign Customers . WEBSTER-1718-1,17.60

To this useful Study , I must add another very necessary Qualification ,
of general Use to all Mankind , but more especially to those who are to
get their Living by the Invention of their Heads , and the Work of their
Hands ; WEBSTER-1718-1,17.61

I mean the ingenious Art of Drawing . WEBSTER-1718-1,17.62

How can he be suppos'd <P_18> capable of performing a Piece of Work ,
who is not able to give a Draught of his Design ? WEBSTER-1718-1,18.63

or what Content is he like to give to his Employers , who can@ @not lay
before them a Representation of what they are to expect ?
WEBSTER-1718-1,18.64

It is to this admirable Skill that we owe both the Invention and
Improvement of every useful Instrument , and every pleasing Curiosity .
WEBSTER-1718-1,18.65

Is it not strange then , that an Accomplishment so advantageous
{TEXT:advantagious} and necessary , should be so much slighted and
neglected , as that perhaps of fifty <font> British <$$font> Youths put
out to Business absolutely requiring it , scarce one shall be found
therein fitly qualify'd ? Upon which Account the Parents are not only
oblig'd to part with larger Sums to place them out , but the young Men
too uncapable of doing their Master's better Business , must be content
to be employ'd in Errants , and other mean Service , 'til such Time as
they become Proficients . WEBSTER-1718-1,18.66

Our Neighbour-Nations have another Opinion of <P_19> this Art : ,
WEBSTER-1718-1,19.67

and whatever they intend their Sons for , seldom fail of giving them
this Part of Education ; WEBSTER-1718-1,19.68

and I hope that being influenc'd by Consideration and Example , and
convinc'd by Experience , the same good Custom will in Time obtain in
<font> Great Britain <$$font> also . WEBSTER-1718-1,19.69

With this Art of <font> Drawing , <$$font> some Professions may require
a little Skill in <font> Mathematicks <$$font> ; WEBSTER-1718-1,19.70

but as this is not so generally needful , I shall content my self with
having mention'd it . WEBSTER-1718-1,19.71

If whilst they are learning these Accomplishments of <font> French
<$$font> and <font> Drawing <$$font> , young Men are remov'd from the
<font> Writing-School <$$font> , <paren> tho' they may very well be
carrying on their Improvements there at the same Time <$$paren> it will
be necessary , before they go out to Business , to return again , both
to brighten up their <font> Writing <$$font> , and to finish them in
<font> Accompts <$$font> ; which last , as it is the <P_20> soonest of
all other Things forgot , without Practice , so it should be always the
last Attainment ; WEBSTER-1718-1,20.72

and a young Man , having added a competent Knowledge in that Art to his
other Acquirements , can@ @not but make his Entrance into the World with
Advantage : When , if good Manners and Virtue also join his
Accomplishments , he will hardly fail of good Usage and Encouragement
from the Master he serves ; the utmost Endearments of his Friends and
Relations ; Civility and Respect from all about him ; in himself an
inward Satisfaction ; and what will undoubtedly crown all , God's
Blessing and Protection . WEBSTER-1718-1,20.73

I have thus set down what at present occurs to my Thoughts on the
Subject of <font> Education <$$font> , WEBSTER-1718-1,20.74

and would not have the Publication of it look'd upon as a Piece of
Arrogance or Vanity ; WEBSTER-1718-1,20.75

but hope the World will take it as it is truly intended , an Hint to
their Advantage , <P_21> and an Advertisement of the Practice in my own
School ; WEBSTER-1718-1,21.76

and as such I humbly submit it to their candid Reception .
WEBSTER-1718-1,21.77

Finis . WEBSTER-1718-1,21.78

