<BEGIN_wellesley-1815-1>

<P_833>

{ED:Vienna_921_To_Earl_Bathurst}

Vienna , WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.4

5th Feb. 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.5

I enclose letters , &c. , from - - of the - , and - - of the - , upon
their not being appointed Knights Commanders of the Order of the Bath .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.6

The letter of the former is somewhat imprudent , upon which I will
communicate to him a piece of my mind ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.7

but that shall not prevent me from assuring you that these two officers
are of the most respectable in the army ; and that , if I had been
desired to recommend those , or rather had seen the list of those ,
belonging to the army lately under my command , on whom it was intended
to confer this honor , I certainly should have mentioned their names in
preference to those of many , upon whom I see it has been conferred .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.8

I am afraid that nothing can now be done for them ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.9

but justice to them induces me to enclose their letters .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.10

{ED:922_To_-_-,_-_regt.}

Vienna , WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.12

5th Feb. 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.13

I received your letter of the 8th January this morning ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.14

and I have transmitted it to the Secretary of State , with my
recommendation of you . WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.15

The Government fixed the occasions on which medals should be granted to
the army , WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.16

and framed the rules , according to which I was bound to make the lists
of those to whom they were to be granted ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.17

and not having received their orders to recommend for medals for the
service at Arroyo Molinos , Alba de Tormes , or at Beja , or at Aire ,
or at Arriverete , it was impossible for me to recommend you for a medal
at Fuentes de Oñoro , or in the Pyrenees , according to the rules by
which I was ordered and bound to make out the lists of those I
recommended . WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.18

I have not an accurate recollection of the lists for Bayonne , the
Nivelle , Orthez , and Toulouse ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.19

but of this I am very certain , that I have never failed to do justice
to your services , as it was my earnest desire to render it to every
officer and soldier I had the honor of commanding .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.20

I have had nothing to say to the selection of the officers recently
appointed Knights Commanders of the Order of the Bath .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.21

I did not know their names , till I saw the list of them in the <font>
Gazette . <$$font> WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.22

If you had known these facts , I hope that the same spirit of justice ,
by which I have always been animated , would have induced you to spare
me the pain of reading the reproaches , and charges of injustice ,
contained in your letter , and that you would have defended me with the
-nd regiment ; and would have shown them that the regulation , and not I
, deprived you of those marks of honor which they wished to see you
obtain . WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.23

As these facts are in the knowledge of every body , it is scarcely
possible to believe that you were not aware of them ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,833.24

and I attribute the harshness of <P_834> your letter solely to the
irritation which you naturally feel in considering your own case .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.25

However , the expression of this irritation , however unjust towards me
, and unpleasant to my feelings , has not made me forget the services
which you and your brave corps rendered upon every occasion on which you
were called upon ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.26

and , although I am afraid it is too late , I have recommended you in
the strongest terms to the Secretary of State . WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.27

{ED:923_To_-_-,_-_regt.}

Vienna , WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.29

5th Feb. 1815 , WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.30

I have received your letter of the 13th January , and the copy of your
memorial , in answer to which I can only inform you , that I had no
concern whatever in the selection of the officers of the army lately
under my command to be Knights Commanders of the Order of the Bath ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.31

and as I see that the number limited is filled , I am quite certain that
no application I can make will answer any purpose .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.32

I will , however , forward your memorial , with my recommendation of
your services . WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.33

I will inquire about your claim to a medal for Fuentes de Oñoro .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.34

I have recommended you for the Portuguese Order of the Tower and Sword .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.35

{ED:924_To_Viscount_Castlereagh,_K.G.}

Vienna , WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.37

12th March , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.38

I received here on the 7th instant a dispatch from Lord Burghersh , of
the 1st , giving an account that Buonaparte had quitted the island of
Elba , with all his civil and military officers , and about 1200 troops
, on the 26th February . WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.39

I immediately communicated this account to the Emperors of Austria and
Russia , and to the King of Prussia , and to the Ministers of the
different Powers , WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.40

and I found among all one prevailing sentiment , of a determination to
unite their efforts to support the system established by the peace at
Paris . WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.41

As it was uncertain to what quarter Buonaparte had gone , whether he
would not return to Elba , or would even land on any part of the
Continent , it was agreed that it was best to postpone the adoption of
any measure till his farther progress should be ascertained ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.42

and we have since received accounts from Genoa , stating that he had
landed in France , near Cannes , on the 1st March ; had attempted to get
possession of Antibes , and had been repulsed , and that he was on his
march towards Grasse . WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.43

No accounts had been received at Paris as late as the middle of the day
of the 5th of his having quitted Elba , nor any accounts from any
quarter of his farther progress . WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.44

In the mean time the Sovereigns , and all persons assembled here , are
impressed with the importance of the crisis which this circumstance
occasions in the affairs of the world . WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.45

All are desirous of bringing to an early conclusion the business of the
Congress , in order that the whole and undivided attention and exertion
of all may be directed against the common enemy ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.46

and I do not entertain the smallest doubt that , even if Buonaparte
should be able to form a party for himself in France , capable of making
head against the legitimate Government of that country , such a force
will be assembled by the Powers of Europe , directed by such a spirit in
their councils , as must get the better of him .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,834.47

<P_835>

The Emperors of Austria and Russia and the King of Prussia have
dispatched letters to the King of France , to place at His Majesty's
disposal all their respective forces ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.49

and Austrian and Prussian officers are dispatched with the letters ,
with powers to order the movement of the troops of their respective
countries placed on the French frontiers , at the suggestion of the King
of France . WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.50

The Plenipotentiaries of the 8 Powers who signed the Treaty of Paris
assembled this evening , WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.51

and have resolved to publish a declaration , in which they will , in the
name of their Sovereigns , declare their firm resolution to maintain the
peace and all its articles with all their force , if necessary .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.52

I enclose the draught of what is proposed to be published , which , with
the alteration of some expressions and the omission of one or two
paragraphs , will , I believe , be adopted . WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.53

Upon the whole , I assure your Lordship that I am perfectly satisfied
with the spirit which prevails here upon this occasion ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.54

and I do not entertain the smallest doubt that , if unfortunately it
should be possible for Buonaparte to hold at all against the King of
France , he must fall under the cordially united efforts of the
Sovereigns of Europe . WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.55

{ED:925_To_Viscount_Castlereagh,_K.G.}

Vienna , WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.57

12th March , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.58

I have but little to add to my dispatch regarding Buonaparte's invasion
of France . WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.59

The intention is , as soon as it shall be ascertained that he can make
head against the King , to assemble 3 large corps ; one in Italy ,
solely Austrian , which will consist of 150,000 men ; one on the Upper
Rhine , Austrian , Bavarian , troops of Baden and Wurtemberg , which
will eventually consist of 200,000 men , but will at first consist of
only the troops of Bavaria , Baden , and Wurtemberg ; the third on the
Lower Rhine , consisting of the Prussian corps of Kleist , the Austrian
garrison of Mayence , and other troops on the Moselle , to be joined to
the British and Hanoverians in Flanders . WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.60

Of this corps they wish me to take the command .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.61

The Russian army , 200,000 men , is to be formed in reserve at Wurtzburg
, &c. &c. ; the remainder of the Prussian army , in reserve , on the
Lower Rhine . WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.62

The Emperor of Russia seems reconciled to the notion of the old system ,
of managing the great concern in a council , consisting of himself , the
King of Prussia , and Schwarzenberg . WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.63

He expressed a wish that I should be with him , but not a very strong
one ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.64

and , as I should have neither character nor occupation in such a
situation , I should prefer to carry a musket . WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.65

The Emperor intimated to me this day that , in case the movement of his
troops became necessary , he could do nothing without the assistance of
money from England . WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.66

I told him I should write to your Lordship upon the subject by this
courier ; and that , in my opinion , the first measure to be adopted was
, one something of the nature of the treaty of Chaumont , in which he
agreed ; and afterwards to think of subsidy , if England could grant
such a thing . WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.67

It is my opinion that Buonaparte has acted upon false or no information
, and that the King will destroy him without difficulty , and in a short
time . WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.68

If he does not , the affair will be a serious one ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,835.69

and a great and immediate <P_836> effort must be made , which will
doubtless be successful . WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.70

All the measures above stated to be in contemplation tend to this effort
; WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.71

and it will remain for the British Government to determine how far they
will act themselves , and how far second the effort of the Continent .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.72

I now recommend to you to put all your force in the Netherlands at the
disposition of the King of France . WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.73

I will go and join it if you like it , or do any thing else that
Government choose . WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.74

I think we shall have settled our concerns here , and signed the treaty
, if the Spaniard does not impede us , by the end of the month .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.75

We shall have finished every thing that is important much sooner , so
that I shall be ready whenever you please to call for me .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.76

{ED:926_To_Viscount_Castlereagh,_K.G.}

Vienna , WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.78

18th March , 1815 , WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.79

I have but little to add to my public dispatches .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.80

I should have waited for orders to go into the Netherlands , if I had
not been so pressed by the Allies , and had not thought it necessary
myself , and most satisfactory to Government . WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.81

I shall not go , however , I think , till I shall receive your first
instructions from London . WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.82

I recommend you to reinforce the army in the Netherlands as much as you
can , particularly in cavalry and artillery . WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.83

In the conference this morning , the Allies pressed very strongly for an
increase of subsidy , which I told them I was quite certain could not be
given . WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.84

{ED:927_To_Viscount_Castlereagh,_K.G.}

Vienna , WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.86

25th March , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.87

I likewise enclose the protocol of what passed at the conclusion of the
treaty this night , in which you will see the urgency with which they
all desire to be assisted by subsidies . WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.88

I believe your Lordship is perfectly aware that it will be quite
impossible for these Powers to make an effort adequate to the occasion ,
unless they should obtain this aid . WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.89

With such a force as they will bring into the field , there is every
reason to hope that , if there should be any resistance at all to
Napoleon on the part of the Royalist party In France , the contest will
be a very short one , and decidedly successful .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.90

Nothing can be done with a small or inefficient force ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.91

the war will linger on , WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.92

and will end to our disadvantage . WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.93

Motives of economy , then , should induce the British Government to take
measures to bring the largest possible force into action at the earliest
and the same period of time . WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.94

{ED:928_To_Viscount_Castlereagh,_K.G.}

Vienna , WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.96

26th March , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.97

I entirely concur in opinion with His Majesty's Government ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.98

and it is the decided opinion of the Sovereigns and Ministers here ,
that no measure of war ought to be adopted in regard to France ,
whatever may be our strength , excepting on the invitation of the King .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,836.99

Your Lordship , however , may depend upon it that , whatever may be the
determination and strength of the Allies , and however their
declarations may <P_837> be construed , Buonaparte and the French nation
will not allow them to remain at peace , WELLESLEY-1815-1,837.100

and they must be prepared either to give up all their conquests to the
Rhine , or for active hostilities . WELLESLEY-1815-1,837.101

It is the desire for war , particularly in the army , which has brought
Buonaparte back , and has formed for him any party , and has given him
any success ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,837.102

and all my observations , when at Paris , convinced me that it was the
King alone who kept Europe at peace , and that the danger which most
immediately threatened His Majesty was to be attributed to his desire to
maintain the peace , contrary to the wishes , not only of the army , but
of the majority of his subjects , of some of his Ministers , and even of
some of his family . WELLESLEY-1815-1,837.103

Your Lordship will then judge what chance there is of maintaining the
peace if Buonaparte should be entirely successful , considering his
disposition for war , adverting to the opinions he has delivered and
entertains upon the peace , and to the necessity under which he labors
to cultivate his popularity with the army , and to endeavor , at least ,
to flatter the vanity of the nation by military success .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,837.104

Depend upon it , my Lord , that if he succeeds in establishing himself ,
we have no chance of peace , except by resigning all our conquests to
the Rhine at least ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,837.105

and our chance then depends upon his moderation .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,837.106

However , His Majesty's Government may rely upon it that I shall
continue to act precisely according to their wishes , as far as I shall
be acquainted with them . WELLESLEY-1815-1,837.107

<P_838>

{COM:letter_929_omitted}

<P_839>

{ED:930_To_H.R.H._the_Duke_of_Kent}

Bruxelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,839.112

13th April , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,839.113

I wish it was in my power to answer your Royal Highness in an equally
satisfactory manner respecting the promotion of the officers you mention
, and who , I have reason to believe , are highly meritorious .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,839.114

Brevet promotion can@ @not be extended to all who may be deserving of it
, WELLESLEY-1815-1,839.115

and I was necessarily obliged to confine it to a small number of each
division which had distinguished itself upon any particular occasion ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,839.116

and it frequently happened that seniors were out of the way , sometimes
on account of their wounds , and juniors were promoted on account of any
distinguished conduct which had occurred . WELLESLEY-1815-1,839.117

{ED:931_To_H.R.H._the_Prince_Regent_of_Portugal}

Bruxelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,839.119

16th April , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,839.120

Your Royal Highness will have learned that I signed , on the 25th March
last , with the Plenipotentiaries of Austria , Russia , and Prussia , as
the Plenipotentiary of His Majesty , a treaty of alliance and
co-operation , applicable to the circumstances of the moment in Europe ,
occasioned by the return of Buonaparte to France , and of the usurpation
of the supreme authority in <P_840> that country .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,840.121

All the Powers of Europe are invited to accede to that treaty ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,840.122

and I imagine that the Plenipotentiaries of your Royal Highness consider
themselves authorised to accede to it on the part of your Royal Highness
. WELLESLEY-1815-1,840.123

The object of the treaty is to put in operation against Buonaparte the
largest force which the contracting or acceding parties can bring into
the field ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,840.124

and that upon which I wish to trouble your Royal Highness is the seat to
be chosen for the operation of your Royal Highness' troops .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,840.125

The natural seat for the operations would be the frontiers of Spain ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,840.126

but I am very apprehensive that the financial resources of His Catholic
Majesty are not of a nature , nor in a situation , to enable him to
equip and maintain an army to co-operate actively with that of your
Royal Highness ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,840.127

and yet , without that co-operation , and the assistance which your
Royal Highness would expect to derive from the country , it does not
appear that your Royal Highness' army could carry on their operations
with their accustomed credit in that quarter . WELLESLEY-1815-1,840.128

Under these circumstances , it has appeared to me that it would be
expedient , and I have recommended to your Royal Highness' Ministers at
Vienna , and have requested His Majesty's Ministers to recommend to the
Regency at Lisbon , that your Royal Highness' troops should be employed
with the allied army assembling at Flanders , and destined to act ,
under my command , against the common enemy . WELLESLEY-1815-1,840.129

I need not point out to your Royal Highness' penetration the advantages
to your Royal Highness' reputation of appearing in the field in this
part of Europe ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,840.130

but , as your troops can@ @not serve actively in the natural seat for
their operations , and they will serve here with their old companions
and under their old commanders , it appears to me that this measure is
to be recommended , if only as one of military expediency .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,840.131

I trust , then , that your Royal Highness will approve of my having
recommended it to your Ministers and to the Regency .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,840.132

{ED:932_To_Major_General_Darling}

Bruxelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,840.134

2nd May , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,840.135

I have nothing to say to any appointment to the Staff of this army of
any rank . WELLESLEY-1815-1,840.136

However flattered I may be , and however I may applaud the desire of an
officer to serve under my command in the field , it is impossible for me
to <P_841> recommend officers for employment with whose merits I am not
acquainted , in preference to those to whose services I am so much
indebted , particularly if the latter desire to serve again .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.137

But , as I before stated , I have no choice ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.138

and I beg you to apply in the quarter in which you will certainly
succeed , without reference to my wishes , whenever there shall be a
command vacant for you , which there is not at present .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.139

{ED:933_To_the_Right_Hon._W._Wellesley_Pole}

Bruxelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.141

5th May , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.142

The mode of attacking a servant of the public absent on the public
service , day after day , in speeches in Parliament , which has lately
been adopted by - - , appears to me most extraordinary and unprecedented
. WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.143

If I have done any thing wrong or unbecoming my own character , or that
of the station I filled , I ought to be prosecuted , or at least
censured for it , in consequence of a specific motion on the subject ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.144

but it is not fair to give to the act of any individual a construction
it will not fairly bear , a construction which no man breathing believes
it was intended to bear ; and to charge him home with being an assassin
day after day in speeches , and never in form .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.145

I say , first , that the Declaration has never been accurately
translated ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.146

and the meaning of the words <font> vindicte publique <$$font> is not "
public vengeance , " but " public justice . " WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.147

But , even if the meaning was " public vengeance , " the Declaration
does not deliver Buonaparte over to the dagger of the assassin .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.148

When did the dagger of the assassin execute the vengeance of the public
? WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.149

In regard to his being declared " hors la loi ; " first , it must be
recollected at what period and under what circumstances he was so
declared . WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.150

The period was the 13th March ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.151

and , although we knew Buonaparte had landed and had made progress in
France sufficient to create a contest there , we were not aware that he
could be established without firing a shot . WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.152

The object then of this part of the publication was to strengthen the
hands of the King of France by the opinion of the Congress .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.153

Secondly , was he not " hors la loi ? " WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.154

and had he , or not , broken all the ties which connected him with the
world ? WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.155

The only treaty by which he was connected with the world was that of
Fontainebleau : WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.156

that he broke . WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.157

Having quitted his asylum , he landed in France with such a force as
showed that he relied solely upon treachery and rebellion , not only for
success , but for safety . WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.158

He incurred all risks in order to gain the greatest prize in Europe ,
one which he had abandoned only 10 months before , under a treaty with
the Allied Powers ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.159

and is it possible that it can be gravely asserted that Buonaparte , an
individual like any other , should have been guilty by this act of only
a breach of treaty ? WELLESLEY-1815-1,841.160

If he was guilty of more , of which there can be no doubt , it was of
the crime of rebellion and treason , with a view to usurp the sovereign
authority of France ; a crime which has always been deemed " hors la loi
" so far as this , that all Sovereigns have in all times called upon
their subjects to raise their arms to protect them from him <P_842> who
was guilty of it . WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.161

The Declaration does no more . WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.162

This is my reasoning upon the subject . WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.163

I am perfectly satisfied with what you said on the night of the 28th
April ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.164

but I only hope that - - may not go off with the notion that I acted
without reflection upon this occasion . WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.165

I never knew any paper so discussed as the Declaration was ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.166

and I believe there never was a public paper so successful ,
particularly in Italy and France . WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.167

{ED:934_To_Lieut._General_Lord_Stewart,_G.C.B.}

Bruxelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.169

8th May , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.170

I say nothing about our defensive operations , because I am inclined to
believe that Blücher and I are so well united , and so strong , that the
enemy can@ @not do us much mischief . WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.171

I am at the advanced post of the whole ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.172

the greatest part of the enemy's force is in my front ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.173

and , if I am satisfied , others need be under no apprehension .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.174

In regard to offensive operations , my opinion is , that , however
strong we shall be in reference to the enemy , we should not extend
ourselves , further than is absolutely necessary in order to facilitate
the subsistence of the troops . WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.175

I do not approve of an extension from the Channel to the Alps ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.176

and I am convinced that it will be found not only fatal , but that the
troops at such a distance on the left of our line , will be entirely out
of the line of the operations . WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.177

We are now , or shall be shortly , placed on the French frontier in the
form of an <font> échelon <$$font> , of which the right , placed here ,
is the most advanced of the <font> échelon <$$font> , and the left ,
upon the Upper Rhine , is the most retired . WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.178

Paris is our object , WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.179

and the greatest force and greatest military difficulties are opposed to
the movements of the right , which is the most advanced part of our
general line . WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.180

Indeed , such force and difficulties are opposed to us in this part ,
that I should think that Blücher and I can@ @not move , till the
movements of others of the allied corps shall have relieved us from part
of the enemy's force opposed to us . WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.181

Then , it must be observed , that we can@ @not be relieved by movements
through Luxembourg . WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.182

In my opinion , then , the movement of the Allies should begin with the
left , which should cross the Rhine between Basle and Strasbourg .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.183

The centre collected upon the Sarre should cross the Meuse on the day
the left should be expected to be at Langres . WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.184

If these movements should not relieve the right , they should be
continued ; that is to say , the left should continue its movement on
both banks of the Marne , while the centre should cross the Aisne ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.185

and the distance between the two bodies , and between each and Paris ,
should be shortened daily . WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.186

But this last hypothesis is not probable ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.187

the enemy would certainly move from this front upon the earliest alarm
of the movements on the Upper Rhine ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.188

and the moment he did move , or that the operation should be practicable
, Blücher's corps and mine should move forward , and the former make the
siege of Givet , the latter of Maubeuge ; and the former likewise to aid
the movement of the centre across the Meuse . WELLESLEY-1815-1,842.189

<P_843>

If the enemy should fall upon the centre , it should either retire upon
Luxembourg or fight , according to the relative strength ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.191

and in either case Blücher should act upon the enemy's communication
upon the Aisne . WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.192

But the most probable result of these first movements would be the
concentration of the enemy's forces upon the Aisne ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.193

and accordingly we hear of the fortifications of Soissons and Laon , of
an intrenched camp at Beauvais , &c. &c. WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.194

We must , in this case , after the first operation , throw our whole
left across the Marne , and strengthen it if necessary from the centre ,
and let it march upon Paris , between the Seine and the Marne , while
the right and the centre should either attack the enemy's position upon
the Aisne , or endeavor to turn its left ; or the whole should
co-operate in one general attack upon the enemy's position .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.195

I come now to consider the strength required for these operations .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.196

The greatest strength the enemy is supposed to have is 200,000 effective
men , besides national guards for his garrisons .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.197

Of this number it can hardly be believed that he can bring 150,000 to
bear upon any one point . WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.198

Upon this statement let our proceedings be founded .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.199

Let us have 150,000 men upon the left , and 150,000 men upon the right ;
and all the rest , whatever they may be , in the centre , or after a
sufficient centre is formed , let the remainder be in reserve for the
right , left , or centre , as may be most convenient for their march and
subsistence , and I will engage for the result , as they may be thrown
where we please . WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.200

Let us begin when we shall have 450,000 men . WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.201

Before the Austrians upon the left shall be at Langres , the Russians
will have passed the Rhine , WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.202

and the whole Prussian army will be in line . WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.203

These are my general ideas , which I do not think differ much from
Knesebeck's . WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.204

Mind , when I think of the siege of Givet and Maubeuge , I do not mean
by the whole of the two armies of the right , but to be carried on by
detachments from them . WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.205

The centre should seize Sedan , which is not strong or garrisoned , and
observe Longwy , Thionville , and Metz . WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.206

The left will have to observe Huningue and the fortresses in Alsace .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.207

In regard to the force in Piedmont , I confess that I wish that the
whole Austrian army in Italy was actively employed against Murat , with
the exception of the garrisons . WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.208

Murat must be destroyed early , WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.209

or he will hang heavily upon us . WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.210

If any force should be employed from Piedmont , its operations should be
separate from those of the great confederacy . WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.211

They can@ @not be connected without disconnecting those of what I have
hitherto considered the left from the remainder of our great line ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.212

however they may be calculated to aid that left , particularly by being
directed upon Chambery , or by keeping that post in check .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.213

Their basis is , however , different , WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.214

and can@ @not easily be made otherwise . WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.215

These opinions are for yourself ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.216

God knows whether they can be acted upon , or whether the Allies will
allow their forces to be divided as I suppose ; and particularly when
the Prussians will act in 2 corps , one under Blücher here , and another
from Luxembourg with the centre ; or whether the other Allies will like
to commence till the whole Russian army is <font> en mesure . <$$font>
WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.217

But I am convinced that what I have proposed is so clearly the plan of
operations , that I do not doubt it will be adopted , with but little
variation . WELLESLEY-1815-1,843.218

<P_844>

{ED:935_To_Lieut._General_Lord_Hill,_G.C.B.}

Bruxelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,844.221

9th May , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,844.222

I return Sir W. Stewart's letter of the 30th April .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,844.223

I perfectly recollect the letter to which he refers .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,844.224

It appeared to me to be written in the anguish of mind occasioned by the
loss he had sustained in his action , and by his own sufferings ; and
that it did not do justice to himself or to his troops ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,844.225

and I did not send it home , or communicate it , I believe , to any body
, certainly not to Mr. Philippart , or to any other person calling
himself an author . WELLESLEY-1815-1,844.226

Indeed , I have invariably refused to communicate to any person
documents to enable him to write a history of the late war ; as I
consider the transactions too recent for any person to write a true
history , without hurting the feelings of nations , and of some
individuals . ' WELLESLEY-1815-1,844.227

{COM:letter_936_omitted}

<P_845>

{ED:937_To_H.R.H._the_Prince_of_Orange,_G.C.B.}

Bruxelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,845.231

11th May , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,845.232

In the situation in which we are placed at present , neither at war nor
at peace , unable on that account to patrole up to the enemy and
ascertain his position by view , or to act offensively upon any part of
his line , it is difficult , if not impossible , to combine an operation
, because there are no data on which to found any combination .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,845.233

All we can do is to put our troops in such a situation , as , in case of
a sudden attack by the enemy , to render it easy to assemble , and to
provide against the chance of any being cut off from the rest .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,845.234

{COM:material_in_original_apparently_omitted_in_edition}

They should delay the advance of the enemy upon that road as much as may
be in their power . WELLESLEY-1815-1,845.236

There is a position for a small body at Arquesnes ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,845.237

and the town of Nivelles would probably afford some means of defence for
a short time . WELLESLEY-1815-1,845.238

But whether the enemy is to be attacked by the 3rd British division , or
by the Prussians when advancing upon that road , must depend upon
circumstances of which it is impossible now to form a notion ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,845.239

and unless <P_846> a clear notion can be formed , any orders which I
might give with a view to such combination would only create confusion .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,846.240

{ED:938_To_the_Earl_of_Clancarty_G.C.B.}

Bruxelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,846.242

14th May , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,846.243

I can@ @not , however , conclude upon this subject , without expressing
my regret that the discussion of it should have occasioned so much
warmth , and that such a paper as M. de Stein's should have been
produced by the Prussian Legation . WELLESLEY-1815-1,846.244

In a crisis of the affairs of the world , the Powers of Europe are about
to embark in a great contest ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,846.245

and Great Britain , interested only in a secondary degree in the crisis
, that can be injured only in the injury which others will suffer ,
comes forward with all her resources , WELLESLEY-1815-1,846.246

and not only puts forth all the strength which circumstances and her
situation enable her to collect , WELLESLEY-1815-1,846.247

but assists with money all the Powers of Europe , small as well as great
, in proportion to their several exertions , and this at a moment of
unparalleled financial difficulty , occasioned by her exertions in a
similar manner in the last years of the late war .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,846.248

I should be sorry that public men in England ever became disgusted with
the affairs of the Continent , and that the interest felt in its
concerns should be diminished ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,846.249

and in this sense it is , and adverting to the impression which M. de
Stein's paper has made upon my mind , that I regret that such a document
was ever allowed to be brought forward . WELLESLEY-1815-1,846.250

{COM:letter_939_omitted}

<P_847>

{ED:940_To_H.H._Prince_Metternich}

Bruxelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,847.254

20th May , 1815 WELLESLEY-1815-1,847.255

I beg leave to congratulate your Highness upon the success of your
operations in Italy , which promise to bring the affairs in that country
to a happy conclusion in a short period of time .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,847.256

Their prosperous state will likewise materially forward our ulterior
views in another quarter . WELLESLEY-1815-1,847.257

From all that I hear and see , I hope that there exists no doubt of our
military success . WELLESLEY-1815-1,847.258

With the force which is assembling in all quarters , it appears to me
impossible that with common prudence and arrangement , we should fail in
our military operations ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,847.259

but I imagine that our difficulties will commence on the day that we
shall have completely succeeded in them , and shall have attained the
object which we propose to ourselves in our treaty .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,847.260

Your Highness will receive from other quarters the accounts of the state
of affairs in France and at Ghent , and the effect produced by the
opinions supposed to prevail at Vienna . WELLESLEY-1815-1,847.261

There are certainly some things to be regretted in the conduct of the
Government and of the Princes in the last fortnight of the month of
March ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,847.262

but upon the whole , I wish that our Government and yours had found
themselves in a situation to let their people know for what they were to
fight ; and that we had not been induced to hold out to their
imaginations the possibility that the people of France , having had a
fair opportunity of choosing whom they pleased for their governor ,
under what form they pleased , in the year 1814 , might perform the same
ceremony again in the year 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,847.263

However , I can@ @not judge so well upon this point as those upon the
spot ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,847.264

and probably neither you nor we could venture to depart , although only
in words , from the principle on which we had acted in the former war .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,847.265

But , although we have departed in words from our principle , I trust we
shall both adhere to it in reality . WELLESLEY-1815-1,847.266

I have frequently told your Highness , and every day's experience shows
me that I am right , that the only chance of peace for Europe consists
in the establishment in France of the legitimate Bourbons .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,847.267

The establishment of any other government , whether in the person of - -
, or in a Regency in the name of young Napoleon , or in any other
individual , or in a republic , must lead to the maintenance of large
military establishments to the ruin of all the Governments of Europe ,
till it shall suit the convenience of the French Government to commence
a contest which can be directed only against you , or others for whom we
are interested . WELLESLEY-1815-1,847.268

In this contest we shall feel the additional difficulty , that those who
are now <P_848> on our side will then be against us ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,848.269

and you will again find yourself surrounded by enemies .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,848.270

I am convinced that the penetration of your Highness will have shown you
the danger of all these schemes to the interests of the Emperor ; and
that you will defeat them all , by adhering firmly to that line of
conduct <paren> in which you will find us likewise <$$paren> which will
finally lead to the establishment in France of the legitimate Government
, from which alone Europe can expect any genuine peace .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,848.271

I will not trouble your Highness farther upon this subject ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,848.272

but , as I was writing to congratulate you upon your successes in Italy
, I could not avoid to advert to that which is the object of all our
anxieties here . WELLESLEY-1815-1,848.273

{ED:941_To_His_Excellency_Sir_C._Stuart,_G.C.B.}

Bruxelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,848.275

30th May , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,848.276

I had already received a complaint from the inhabitants of some villages
on the Yperlee , of the consequences of the inundations of that river ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,848.277

and I sent officers to ascertain the facts , and to see how far they
could be remedied ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,848.278

and every thing shall be done to remedy the evils complained of , which
is not inconsistent with the general safety . WELLESLEY-1815-1,848.279

It is very obvious , however , that no country , particularly one which
has at its command the means of inundation , can make an exertion for
its defence against a foreign enemy , without individual inconvenience
and injury ; and that complaints of this description must be expected ,
if it is intended to defend the country . WELLESLEY-1815-1,848.280

For this reason , the last person from whom I should have expected an
exaggerated statement of such complaints , and of the injuries resulting
from the measures adopted for the defence of His Majesty's dominions ,
is one of His Majesty's Ministers ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,848.281

and , in considering the substance of this complaint , I can@ @not avoid
noticing the tone in which it is made . WELLESLEY-1815-1,848.282

The order for forming the inundations was given at the moment it was
expected , from the intelligence received , that the enemy was about to
attack this country ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,848.283

and the order was given the sooner , because it was known that time
<P_849> would be required to form the inundations of fresh water ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,849.284

and it was determined not to do the country the permanent injury of
letting in the salt water . WELLESLEY-1815-1,849.285

The order was executed by the military officers in command of the posts
necessarily , because the people , and particularly every person
connected with the civil departments , opposed themselves , in some
instances with violence , to the formation of the inundations ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,849.286

and they have since done every thing in their power to draw them off .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,849.287

This was to be expected ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,849.288

but I acknowledge that I did not expect that such conduct would be
encouraged by the language used in a report by a Minister of State .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,849.289

However , I am disposed to do every thing in my power to diminish the
individual injury which must result from these measures .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,849.290

I had already manifested this disposition before I had received your
letter ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,849.291

and I shall now order an officer to communicate with the person named by
the - - , in order to carry into execution all the measures his
Excellency proposes , which shall not be inconsistent with the safety of
the country . ' WELLESLEY-1815-1,849.292

{COM:letter_942_omitted}

<P_850>

{COM:letter_943_omitted}

<P_851>

{ED:944_To_H.S.H._the_Duc_d'Orleans}

Bruxelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,851.298

6th June , 1815 WELLESLEY-1815-1,851.299

I received your Highness' letter in due course ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,851.300

and I should have answered it sooner , if I had not wished to give to
the subject to which it relates all the consideration which it deserves
. WELLESLEY-1815-1,851.301

In my opinion , the King was driven from his throne because he never had
the real command over his army . WELLESLEY-1815-1,851.302

This is a fact with which your Highness and I were well acquainted , and
which we have frequently lamented ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,851.303

and even if the trivial faults , or rather follies , of his civil
administration had not been committed , I believe the same results would
have been produced . WELLESLEY-1815-1,851.304

We must consider the King , then , as the victim of a successful revolt
of his army , and of his army only ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,851.305

for , whatever may be the opinions and feelings of some who took a
prominent part in the revolution , and whatever the apathy of the great
mass of the population of France , we may , I think , set it down as
certain that even the first do not like the existing order of things ,
and that the last would , if they dared , oppose it in arms .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,851.306

Now , then , this being the case , what ought to be the conduct of the
King ? WELLESLEY-1815-1,851.307

First , he ought to call for his allies to enable him to oppose <P_852>
himself to his rebellious army ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.308

and he ought , by his personal countenance , and the activity of his
servants and adherents , to do every thing in his power to facilitate
their operations , and to diminish , by good order and management , the
burdens of the war upon his faithful subjects , and to induce them to
receive his allies as friends and deliverers . WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.309

The King should give an interest to the Allies to support his cause ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.310

and this can be done only by his coming forward himself in it .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.311

So far your Highness will see that I differ in opinion with you
regarding the conduct of the King . WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.312

In regard to your Highness , I confess that I do not see how far your
Highness could have acted in a different manner up to the present period
. WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.313

It is not necessary that I should recite the different reasons you had
for keeping at a distance from the Court since it has been at Ghent ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.314

but I feel them all , WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.315

and I believe the King is not insensible of the weight of some of them .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.316

But if , as may be expected , the entrance and first successes of the
Allies in France should induce the people to come forward , and a great
party should appear in favor of the King in different parts of the
Kingdom , surely your Highness would then consider it your duty to come
forward in His Majesty's service . WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.317

I venture to suggest this conduct to your Highness , telling you at the
same time that I have not had any conversation with the King upon it .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.318

Your Highness will have read with pleasure the accounts of the Austrian
successes in Italy , upon which I beg leave to congratulate you .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.319

That affair has turned out , in all its details , nearly as we expected
; WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.320

and I hope we shall be equally successful in the other still greater
which we are about to undertake . WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.321

I beg your Highness to present my most respectful compliments to Madame
la Duchesse d'Orleans and to Mademoiselle . ' WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.322

{COM:letter_945_omitted}

{ED:946_To_H.H._Prince_Metternich}

Bruxelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.325

14th June , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.326

Baron Vincent has communicated to me the instructions which he has
received from your Highness of the 4th instant , regarding the
commissioners appointed by the King of France for providing for the
subsistence of the armies when in France , of which he has informed me
that the other Ministers of the Allies at the Court of the King of
France will receive from their several Sovereigns the counterpart ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,852.327

and I have now the honor to inform your Highness that I am directed by
my own Government <paren> and my sense of duty towards the Allies ,
whose troops I am commanding by common consent , <P_853> would induce me
<$$paren> to act in every respect on this subject in the same manner
with the other Allies . WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.328

Therefore this subject , like every other , may be considered as one of
general concern , in which all the Allies are equally interested ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.329

and it will , I doubt not , be decided with a view to the common
interest . WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.330

On the same day that your Highness dispatched your messenger to General
Baron Vincent , one was dispatched from hence with the draught of a
convention which it was proposed to conclude with the King of France ,
for regulating this matter of subsistence according to what is
stipulated in the article of the treaty of the 25th March .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.331

It was I who suggested this convention to the Ministers of the Allies ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.332

and when I did so , I considered that I was acting on the principles
likewise suggested by me , and , as I imagined , universally concurred
in , in a conversation which we had upon this subject in presence of
Prince Talleyrand , in a conference at your Highness' house at Vienna .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.333

I then recommended that we should make over the French districts which
should fall into the hands of the Allies to officers to be appointed by
the King of France . That the intendants or principal Commissaries of
the several armies should be put in communication with these officers to
be appointed by the King of France , and should make upon them the
requisitions for the several supplies they should require for their
armies respectively ; that the King of France@ @'s officers should
enforce these requisitions upon the country , taking care to give to the
owners proper receipts and vouchers for the property taken from them ;
and that these receipts and vouchers should be taken up , and should be
a charge upon the French Government , to be hereafter established .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.334

I conceived this system to have been entirely concurred in by your
Highness and by the other Ministers of the Allies ; and that the 5th
article of the treaty of the 25th March was framed with a view to its
eventual adoption ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.335

and , therefore , when the subject lately came under discussion here , I
proposed that it should be embodied in a convention .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.336

As the Ministers of the Allies here think it proper to refer this
subject for further consideration , I think it proper to trouble your
Highness with a few lines , to make you acquainted with my reason for
preferring it . WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.337

First ; It provides for taking that with regularity , and without loss
to individuals , from the country , which the country , however
unwillingly , must provide ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.338

and affords the best chance of tranquillity in the rear of the several
armies . WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.339

Secondly ; It tends to make partisans instead of enemies of those who
shall have given their property for the subsistence of the several
armies . WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.340

Every man who shall have in his possession a voucher or receipt on the
part of the officers of Louis XVIII. will feel an interest in the
success of the cause , in proportion as he shall value the property
taken from him . WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.341

Thirdly ; It will put an end to very disagreeable discussions between
the Commanders of the several armies , myself particularly , and Louis
XVIII . WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.342

His Majesty , being an acceding party to the treaty of alliance , will
naturally claim to take possession of the country which shall fall into
the hands of the Allies . WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.343

If this system should not be adopted , both parties , that is , His
Majesty Louis XVIII. and the Allies , will appoint officers to govern
that country ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,853.344

<P_854>

and disputes will arise , not very creditable to the Allies or
encouraging to the loyal party in France , or beneficial to the
operations of the Allies . WELLESLEY-1815-1,854.346

Fourthly ; By adopting this system , which is the most simple , and , as
I have above shown , the most beneficial to the allied armies , we
should at the same time hold out something to France to which the public
opinion might attach itself ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,854.347

and without , in any degree , pledging the Allies to any thing , we
should give the King's party , which I believe we all prefer , a fair
chance of success . WELLESLEY-1815-1,854.348

Fifthly ; We should avoid the evil of seizing the public treasures in
France ; an evil which it will be very difficult to avoid under any
other system , and which will be fatal to the discipline and reputation
of the allied armies , and will give but too much reason for the French
people to believe that the Allies have forgotten , or have omitted to
act upon , the system laid down in their public declarations and their
treaties . WELLESLEY-1815-1,854.349

On these grounds I recommended the system embodied in the convention of
which you have the draught , which I understood had been approved of ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,854.350

and I hope that upon reconsideration of the subject , and of the
dispatch received from England upon it , of which your Ministers have
the copy , that the convention will be approved of .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,854.351

If it should not , however , I repeat to your Highness that I am ready
to act upon any system which may be adopted by common accord .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,854.352

{COM:letter_947_omitted}

<P_855>

{ED:948_To_His_Excellency_Sir_C._Stuart,_G.C.B.}

Waterloo , WELLESLEY-1815-1,855.356

18th June , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,855.357

I enclose 2 letters , which I beg you to peruse and forward without loss
of time . WELLESLEY-1815-1,855.358

You will see in the letter to the Duc de Berri the real state of our
case and the only risk we run . WELLESLEY-1815-1,855.359

The Prussians will be ready again in the morning for any thing .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,855.360

Pray keep the English quiet , if you can . WELLESLEY-1815-1,855.361

Let them all prepare to move , but neither be in a hurry or a fright ,
as all will yet turn out well . WELLESLEY-1815-1,855.362

I have given the directions to the Governor of Antwerp to meet the
<font> crotchets <$$font> which I find in the heads of the King's
Governors upon every turn . WELLESLEY-1815-1,855.363

The post horses are embargoed in my name , I conclude , to prevent
people from running away with them ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,855.364

but give the man orders to allow any body to have them who goes with an
order from you . WELLESLEY-1815-1,855.365

<P_856>

{COM:letter_949_omitted}

{COM:Letter_950_omitted}

<P_857>

{ED:951_To_Earl_Bathurst}

Waterloo , WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.371

19th June , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.372

Buonaparte , having collected the 1st , 2nd , 3rd , 4th , and 6th corps
of the French army , and the Imperial Guards , and nearly all the
cavalry , on the Sambre , and between that river and the Meuse , between
the 10th and 14th of the month , advanced on the 15th
WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.373

and attacked the Prussian posts at Thuin and Lobbes , on the Sambre , at
daylight in the morning . WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.374

I did not hear of these events till in the evening of the 15th ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.375

and I immediately ordered the troops to prepare to march , and
afterwards to march to their left , as soon as I had intelligence from
other quarters to prove that the enemy's movement upon Charleroi was the
real attack . WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.376

The enemy drove the Prussian posts from the Sambre on that day ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.377

and General Ziethen , who commanded the corps which had been at
Charleroi , retired upon Fleurus ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.378

and Marshal Prince Blücher concentrated the Prussian army upon Sombref ,
holding the villages in front of his position of St. Amand and Ligny .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.379

The enemy continued his march along the road from Charleroi towards
Bruxelles ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.380

and , on the same evening , the 15th , attacked a brigade of the army of
the Netherlands , under the Prince de Weimar , posted at Frasne ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.381

and forced it back to the farm house , on the same road , called Les
Quatre Bras . WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.382

The Prince of Orange immediately reinforced this brigade with another of
the same division , under General Perponcher , WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.383

and , in the morning early , regained part of the ground which had been
lost , so as to have the command of the communication leading from
Nivelles and Bruxelles with Marshal Blücher's position .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.384

In the mean time , I had directed the whole army to march upon Les
Quatre Bras ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.385

and the 5th division , under Lieut. General Sir T. Picton , arrived at
about half past 2 in the day , followed by the corps of troops under the
Duke of Brunswick , and afterwards by the contingent of Nassau .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.386

At this time the enemy commenced an attack upon Prince Blücher with his
whole force , excepting the 1st and 2nd corps , and a corps of cavalry
under General Kellermann , with which he attacked our post at Les Quatre
Bras . WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.387

The Prussian army maintained their position with their usual gallantry
and perseverance against a great disparity of numbers , as the 4th corps
of their army , under General Bülow , had not joined ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.388

and I was not able to assist them as I wished , as I was attacked myself
, and the troops , the cavalry in particular , which had a long distance
to march , had not arrived . WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.389

We maintained our position also , WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.390

and completely defeated and repulsed all the enemy's attempts to get
possession of it . WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.391

The enemy repeatedly attacked us with a large body of infantry and
cavalry , supported by a numerous and powerful artillery .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.392

He made several charges with the cavalry upon our infantry ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.393

but all were repulsed in the steadiest manner .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,857.394

<P_858>

In this affair , H. R. H. the Prince of Orange , the Duke of
Brunswick , and Lieut. General Sir T. Picton , and Major Generals Sir
J. Kempt and Sir Denis Pack , who were engaged from the commencement of
the enemy's attack , highly distinguished themselves , as well as Lieut.
General C. Baron Alten , Major General Sir C. Halkett , Lieut.
General Cooke , and Major Generals Maitland and Byng , as they
successively arrived . WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.396

The troops of the 5th division , and those of the Brunswick corps , were
long and severely engaged , WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.397

and conducted themselves with the utmost gallantry .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.398

I must particularly mention the 28th , 42nd , 79th , and 92nd regts. ,
and the battalion of Hanoverians . WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.399

Our loss was great , as your Lordship will perceive by the enclosed
return ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.400

and I have particularly to regret H. S. H. the Duke of Brunswick ,
who fell fighting gallantly at the head of his troops .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.401

Although Marshal Blücher had maintained his position at Sombref , he
still found himself much weakened by the severity of the contest in
which he had been engaged , WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.402

and , as the 4th corps had not arrived , he determined to fall back and
to concentrate his army upon Wavre ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.403

and he marched in the night , after the action was over .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.404

This movement of the Marshal rendered necessary a corresponding one upon
my part ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.405

and I retired from the farm of Quatre Bras upon Genappe , and thence
upon Waterloo , the next morning , the I7th , at 10 o'clock .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.406

The enemy made no effort to pursue Marshal Blücher .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.407

On the contrary , a patrole which I sent to Sombref in the morning found
all quiet ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.408

and the enemy's vedettes fell back as the patrole advanced .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.409

Neither did he attempt to molest our march to the rear , although made
in the middle of the day , excepting by following , with a large body of
cavalry brought from his right , the cavalry under the Earl of Uxbridge
. WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.410

This gave Lord Uxbridge an opportunity of charging them with the 1st
Life Guards , upon their <font> débouché <$$font> from the village of
Genappe , upon which occasion his Lordship has declared himself to be
well satisfied with that regiment . WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.411

The position which I took up in front of Waterloo crossed the high roads
from Charleroi and Nivelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.412

and had its right thrown back to a ravine near Merke Braine , which was
occupied , and its left extended to a height above the hamlet Ter la
Haye , which was likewise occupied . WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.413

In front of the right centre , and near the Nivelles road , we occupied
the house and gardens of Hougoumont , which covered the return of that
flank ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.414

and in front of the left centre we occupied the farm of La Haye Sainte .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.415

By our left we communicated with Marshal Prince Blücher at Wavre ,
through Ohain ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.416

and the Marshal had promised me that , in case we should be attacked ,
he would support me with one or more corps , as might be necessary .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.417

The enemy collected his army , with the exception of the 3rd corps ,
which had been sent to observe Marshal Blücher , on a range of heights
in our front , in the course of the night of the 17th and yesterday
morning , WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.418

and at about 10 o'clock he commenced a furious attack upon our post at
Hougoumont . WELLESLEY-1815-1,858.419

I had occupied that post with a detachment from General Byng's <P_859>
brigade of Guards , which was in position in its rear ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.420

and it was for some time under the command of Lieut. Colonel Macdonell
, and afterwards of Colonel Home ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.421

and I am happy to add , that it was maintained throughout the day with
the utmost gallantry by these brave troops , notwithstanding the
repeated efforts of large bodies of the enemy to obtain possession of it
. WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.422

This attack upon the right of our centre was accompanied by a very heavy
cannonade upon our whole line , which was destined to support the
repeated attacks of cavalry and infantry , occasionally mixed , but
sometimes separate , which were made upon it . WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.423

In one of these the enemy carried the farm house , of La Haye Sainte ,
as the detachment of the light battalion of the German Legion , which
occupied it , had expended all its ammunition ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.424

and the enemy occupied the only communication there was with them .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.425

The enemy repeatedly charged our infantry with his cavalry ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.426

but these attacks were uniformly unsuccessful ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.427

and they afforded opportunities to our cavalry to charge , in one of
which Lord E. Somerset's brigade , consisting of the Life Guards , the
Royal Horse Guards , and 1st dragoon guards , highly distinguished
themselves , as did that of Major General Sir W. Ponsonby , having
taken many prisoners and an eagle . WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.428

These attacks were repeated till about 7 in the evening , when the enemy
made a desperate effort with cavalry and infantry , supported by the
fire of artillery , to force our left centre , near the farm of La Haye
Sainte , which , after a severe contest , was defeated ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.429

and , having observed that the troops retired from this attack in great
confusion , and that the march of General Bülow's corps , by
Frischermont , upon Planchenois and La Belle Alliance , had begun to
take effect , and as I could perceive the fire of his cannon , and as
Marshal Prince Blücher had joined in person with a corps of his army to
the left of our line by Ohain , I determined to attack the enemy ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.430

and immediately advanced the whole line of infantry , supported by the
cavalry and artillery . WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.431

The attack succeeded in every point : WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.432

the enemy was forced from his positions on the heights ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.433

and fled in the utmost confusion , leaving behind him , as far as I
could judge , 150 pieces of cannon , with their ammunition , which fell
into our hands . WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.434

I continued the pursuit till long after dark , WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.435

and then discontinued it only on account of the fatigue of our troops ,
who had been engaged during 12 hours , and because I found myself on the
same road with Marshal Blücher , who assured me of his intention to
follow the enemy throughout the night . WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.436

He has sent me word this morning that he had taken 60 pieces of cannon
belonging to the Imperial Guard , and several carriages , baggage , &c.
, belonging to Buonaparte , in Genappe . WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.437

I propose to move this morning upon Nivelles , and not to discontinue my
operations . WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.438

Your Lordship will observe that such a desperate action could not be
fought , and such advantages could not be gained , without great loss ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.439

and I am sorry to add that ours has been immense .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.440

In Lieut. General Sir T. Picton , His Majesty has sustained the loss
of an officer who has frequently distinguished himself in his service ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.441

and he fell gloriously leading his division to a charge with bayonets ,
by which one of the most serious attacks made by the enemy on our
position was repulsed . WELLESLEY-1815-1,859.442

The Earl of Uxbridge , after having successfully got through this
arduous day , received a wound by <P_860> almost the last shot fired ,
which will , I am afraid , deprive His Majesty for some time of his
services . WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.443

H. R. H. the Prince of Orange distinguished himself by his gallantry
and conduct , till he received a wound from a musket ball through the
shoulder , which obliged him to quit the field .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.444

It gives me the greatest satisfaction to assure your Lordship that the
army never , upon any occasion , conducted itself better .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.445

The division of Guards , under Lieut. General Cooke , who is severely
wounded , Major General Maitland , and Major General Byng , set an
example which was followed by all ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.446

and there is no officer nor description of troops that did not behave
well . WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.447

I must , however , particularly mention , for His Royal Highness'
approbation , Lieut. General Sir H. Clinton , Major General Adam ,
Lieut. General C. Baron Alten <paren> severely wounded <$$paren> ,
Major General Sir C. Halkett <paren> severely wounded <$$paren> ,
Colonel Ompteda , Colonel Mitchell <paren> commanding a brigade of the
4th division <$$paren> , Major Generals Sir J. Kempt and Sir D. Pack ,
Major General Lambert , Major General Lord E. Somerset , Major General
Sir W. Ponsonby , Major General Sir C. Grant , and Major General Sir
H. Vivian , Major General Sir J. O. Vandeleur , and Major General
Count Dornberg . WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.448

I am also particularly indebted to General Lord Hill for his assistance
and conduct upon this , as upon all former occasions .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.449

The artillery and engineer departments were conducted much to my
satisfaction by Colonel Sir G. Wood and Colonel Smyth ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.450

and I had every reason to be satisfied with the conduct of the
Adjutant_General , Major General Barnes , who was wounded , and of the
Quarter Master General , Colonel De Lancey who was killed by a
cannon_shot in the middle of the action . WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.451

This officer is a serious loss to His Majesty's service , and to me at
this moment . WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.452

I was likewise much indebted to the assistance of Lieut. Colonel Lord
FitzRoy Somerset , who was severely wounded , and of the officers
composing my personal Staff , who have suffered severely in this action
. WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.453

Lieut. Colonel the Hon. Sir A. Gordon , who has died of his wounds ,
was a most promising officer , WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.454

and is a serious loss to His Majesty's service .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.455

General Krüse , of the Nassau service , likewise conducted himself much
to my satisfaction ; as did General Trip , commanding the heavy brigade
of cavalry , and General Vanhope , commanding a brigade of infantry in
the service of the King of the Netherlands . WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.456

General Pozzo di Borgo , General Baron Vincent , General Müffling , and
General Alava , were in the field during the action ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.457

and rendered me every assistance in their power .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.458

Baron Vincent is wounded , but I hope not severely ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.459

and General Pozzo di Borgo received a contusion .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.460

I should not do justice to my own feelings , or to Marshal Blücher and
the Prussian army , if I did not attribute the successful result of this
arduous day to the cordial and timely assistance I received from them .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.461

The operation of General Bülow upon the enemy's flank was a most
decisive one ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.462

and , even if I had not found myself in a situation to make the attack
which produced the final result , it would have forced the enemy to
retire if his attacks should have failed , WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.463

and would have prevented him from taking advantage of them if they
should unfortunately have succeeded . WELLESLEY-1815-1,860.464

Since writing the above , I have received a report that Major General
Sir <P_861> W. Ponsonby is killed ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,861.465

and , in announcing this intelligence to your Lordship , I have to add
the expression of my grief for the fate of an officer who had already
rendered very brilliant and important services , and was an ornament to
his profession . WELLESLEY-1815-1,861.466

I send with this dispatch 3 eagles , taken by the troops in this action
, which Major Percy will have the honor of laying at the feet of His
Royal Highness . WELLESLEY-1815-1,861.467

I beg leave to recommend him to your Lordship's protection .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,861.468

<P_862_omitted>

<P_863_omitted>

<P_864>

{ED:952_To_the_Earl_of_Aberdeen,_K.T.}

Bruxelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.473

19th June , 1815 WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.474

You will readily give credit to the existence of the extreme grief with
which I announce to you the death of your gallant brother , in
consequence of a wound received in our great battle of yesterday .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.475

He had served me most zealously and usefully for many years , and on
many trying occasions ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.476

but he had never rendered himself more useful , and had never
distinguished himself more , than in our late actions .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.477

He received the wound which occasioned his death when rallying one of
the Brunswick battalions which was shaking a little ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.478

and he lived long enough to be informed by myself of the glorious result
of our actions , to which he had so much contributed by his active and
zealous assistance . WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.479

I can@ @not express to you the regret and sorrow with which I look round
me , and contemplate the loss which I have sustained , particularly in
your brother . WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.480

The glory resulting from such actions , so dearly bought , is no
consolation to me , WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.481

and I can@ @not suggest it as any to you and his friends ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.482

but I hope that it may be expected that this last one has been so
decisive , as that no doubt remains that our exertions , and our
individual losses will be rewarded by the early attainment of our just
object . WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.483

It is then that the glory of the actions in which our friends and
relations have fallen will be some consolation for their loss .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.484

Your brother had a black horse , given to him , I believe , by Lord
Ashburnham , which I will keep till I hear from you what you wish should
be done with it . WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.485

{ED:953_To_the_Duke_of_Beaufort,_K.G.}

Bruxelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.487

19th June , 1815 WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.488

I am very sorry to have to acquaint you that your brother FitzRoy is
very severely wounded , and has lost his right arm .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.489

I have just seen him , WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.490

and he is perfectly free from fever , and as well as anybody could be
under such circumstances . WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.491

You are aware how useful he has always been to me ; and how much I shall
feel the want of his assistance , and what a regard and affection I feel
for him ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.492

and you will readily believe how much concerned I am for his misfortune
. WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.493

Indeed , the losses I have sustained have quite broken me down ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.494

and I have no feeling for the advantages we have acquired .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.495

I hope , however , that your brother will soon be able to join me again
; and that he will long live to be , as he is likely to become , an
honour to his country , as he is a satisfaction to his family and
friends . WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.496

{ED:954_To_Earl_Bathurst}

Bruxelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.498

19th June , 1815 WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.499

I have to inform your Lordship , in addition to my dispatch of this
morning , that we have already got here 5000 prisoners , taken in the
action of yesterday , and that there are above 2000 more coming in
tomorrow . WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.500

There will probably be many more . WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.501

Amongst the prisoners are the Comte de Lobau , who commanded the 6th
corps , and General Cambrone , who commanded a division of the Guards .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.502

I propose to send the whole to England , by Ostend .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,864.503

<P_865>

{COM:letter_955_omitted}

{ED:956_To_Earl_Bathurst}

Nivelles , WELLESLEY-1815-1,865.507

20th June , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,865.508

I have received your letter of the 13th , WELLESLEY-1815-1,865.509

and I see from one from Lord Castlereagh that the Portuguese Government
have finally refused to employ their troops in the war at all .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,865.510

It is not worth while , therefore , to discuss Beresford's notion of
attacking Bayonne . WELLESLEY-1815-1,865.511

He should , in going to Bordeaux , attack Blaye , so as to have his
communication with the sea secure , WELLESLEY-1815-1,865.512

and then he should found his operations on Bordeaux itself .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,865.513

The Duc d'Angoulème will do no good with the Spanish troops .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,865.514

I consider the operations by emigrants , whether old or new , to be
nonsense . WELLESLEY-1815-1,865.515

<P_866>

{COM:letter_957_omitted}

<P_867>

{ED:958_To_Lieut._General_the_Earl_of_Uxbridge,_G.C.B.}

Le Cateau , WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.520

23rd June , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.521

I may be wrong , WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.522

but my opinion is , that we have given Napoleon his death blow ;
WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.523

from all I hear , his army is totally destroyed ,
WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.524

the men are deserting in parties , WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.525

even the Generals are withdrawing from him . WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.526

The infantry throw away their arms , WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.527

and the cavalry and artillery sell their horses to the people of the
country WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.528

and desert to their homes . WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.529

Allowing for much exaggeration in this account , and knowing that
Buonaparte can still collect , in addition to what he has brought back
with him , the 5th corps_d'armée , under Rapp , which is near Strasbourg
, and the 3rd corps , which was at Wavre during the battle , and has not
suffered so much as the others , and probably some troops from La Vendée
, I am still of opinion that he can make no head against us , - <font>
qu'il n'a qu'à se pendre . <$$font> WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.530

{ED:959_To_H.H._Prince_de_Talleyrand}

Le Cateau , WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.532

24th June , 1815 . WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.533

The King has arrived here , WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.534

and has , as I expected , been received with the utmost demonstrations
of joy by all his subjects , WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.535

and I only regret that your Highness did not accompany his Majesty .
WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.536

It was I who recommended to the King to enter France at present ,
because I was aware of the extent of our success in the battle of the
18th , and because I was desirous of having the influence of his
Majesty's name to give to that success all the advantages which it could
derive ; and because I was aware that it would occasion a crisis in the
King's affairs , particularly at Paris , to take advantage of which I
wished His Majesty should be on the spot , or as near it as
circumstances would permit . WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.537

I flatter myself , if I could have seen you , or if you could have known
the exact state of affairs when you advised the King at Mons not to
enter France , you would have given His Majesty different advice , and
would have followed His Majesty . WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.538

As things are now , I can only enclose you , in confirmation of my
opinion of the extent of our success , the <font> Journal de l'Empire
<$$font> , of the 22nd , in which you will find Buonaparte's account of
the action , the truth of which , as far as it goes against himself ,
can@ @not be doubted . WELLESLEY-1815-1,867.539

You will see in the same paper the proceedings in the Assembly of the
<P_868> Deputies regarding this action ; WELLESLEY-1815-1,868.540

and I enclose you copies of letters just received from Prince Frederick
of Orange , who is before Valenciennes , in which you will see that
Buonaparte has determined in consequence to abdicate the government in
favor of his son , and what persons are appointed to the provisional
government of France . WELLESLEY-1815-1,868.541

Having this information before you , I conclude that you can have no
scruple about joining the King forthwith , a measure which I earnestly
entreat you and the other members of the King's council to adopt without
loss of time . WELLESLEY-1815-1,868.542

