<BEGIN_wesley-174x-1>

<P_11>

<font> Wedn. <$$font> 15 . WESLEY-174X-1,11.3

We were inform'd of the Invasion intended by the <font> French ,
<$$font> who were expected to land every Hour . WESLEY-174X-1,11.4

I therefore exhorted the Congregation , in the Words of our Lord ,
<paren> Luke xxi. 36. <$$paren> <font> Watch ye WESLEY-174X-1,11.5

and pray always , that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these
Things , and to stand before the Son of Man . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,11.6

<font> Thurs. <$$font> 16 . WESLEY-174X-1,11.7

In the Evening , after expounding the third Chapter of <font> Jonah ,
<$$font> I besought every one to <font> turn from <$$font> his <font>
Evil Way , and cry mightily to <$$font> God : WESLEY-174X-1,11.8

and inlarged on these Words , <font> Who can tell if <$$font> God <font>
will turn and repent , and turn away from his fierce Anger that we
perish not ? <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,11.9

We observ'd <font> Frid. <$$font> 17. as a Day of solemn Fasting and
Prayer . WESLEY-174X-1,11.10

In the Afternoon , many being met together , I exhorted them , now ,
while they had Opportunity , to make to themselves , Friends of the
Mammon of Unrighteousness : to deal their Bread to the Hungry , to
clothe the Naked , and not to hide themselves from their own Flesh .
WESLEY-174X-1,11.11

And God open'd their Hearts , so that they contributed near Fifty Pounds
, which I began laying out the very next Hour , in Linen , Woollen and
Shoes , for them whom I knew to be diligent , and yet in Want .
WESLEY-174X-1,11.12

In the Evening I expounded <font> Daniel <$$font> 3 ; and those Words in
particular : <font> The <$$font> God <font> whom we serve is able to
deliver us from the burning fiery Furnace . WESLEY-174X-1,11.13

But if not , we will not serve thy Gods , nor worship the Golden Image
which thou hast set up . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,11.14

<font> Sat. <$$font> 18 . WESLEY-174X-1,11.15

I received an Account from <font> James Jones , <$$font> of another Kind
of Invasion in <font> Staffordshire . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,11.16

The Substance of it was as follows . WESLEY-174X-1,11.17

" On <font> Monday , January <$$font> 23 , a great Mob gathered together
, at <font> Darlaston , <$$font> a Mile from <font> Wednesbury .
<$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,11.18

They fell upon a few People who were going to <font> Wednesbury ,
<$$font> and among the rest , on <font> Joshua Constable's <$$font> Wife
of <font> Darlaston . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,11.19

Some of them threw her down , WESLEY-174X-1,11.20

and five or six held her down , that another might force her .
WESLEY-174X-1,11.21

But she continued to resist , till they changed their Purpose , beat her
much , and went away . WESLEY-174X-1,11.22

<P_12>

<font> Mond. Jan. <$$font> 30 . WESLEY-174X-1,12.24

The Mob gathered again , WESLEY-174X-1,12.25

broke into <font> Joshua Constable's <$$font> House ,
WESLEY-174X-1,12.26

pull'd Part of it down , WESLEY-174X-1,12.27

broke some of his Goods in Pieces , WESLEY-174X-1,12.28

and carried the rest away : particularly , all his Shop Goods , to a
considerable Value . WESLEY-174X-1,12.29

But not satisfied with this , they sought for him and his Wife ,
swearing , they would knock their Brains out . WESLEY-174X-1,12.30

Their little Children mean-time , as well as themselves , wandered up
and down , no one daring to relieve or take them in , least they should
hazard their own Lives . WESLEY-174X-1,12.31

<font> Tues. <$$font> 31 . WESLEY-174X-1,12.32

About a_Hundred of the Mob met together , on the Church-Hill at <font>
Wednesbury . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,12.33

But hearing some of <font> Wednesbury <$$font> were resolved to defend
themselves , they dispersed for that Time . WESLEY-174X-1,12.34

<font> Wedn. Feb. <$$font> 1 . WESLEY-174X-1,12.35

Mr <font> Charles Wesley <$$font> came to <font> Birmingham , <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,12.36

and the next Day preached at <font> Wednesbury . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,12.37

the whole Congregation was quiet and attentive , WESLEY-174X-1,12.38

nor had we any Noise or Interruption . WESLEY-174X-1,12.39

<font> Mond. <$$font> 6 . WESLEY-174X-1,12.40

I accompanied him Part of his Way , WESLEY-174X-1,12.41

and in the Afternoon came back to <font> Wednesbury . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,12.42

I found the Society met together , and commending themselves to God in
Prayer , having been inform'd , That many both at <font> Darlaston
<$$font> and other Places , had bound themselves by an Oath , To come on
<font> Shrove-Tuesday , <$$font> <paren> the next Day <$$paren> and
plunder all the <font> Methodists <$$font> in <font> Wednesbury .
<$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,12.43

We continued in Prayer till the Evening . WESLEY-174X-1,12.44

I desired as many as could , to meet me again {TEXT:agaiu} at Eight in
the Morning . WESLEY-174X-1,12.45

But I had scarce begun to speak , when one came running with all Speed ,
WESLEY-174X-1,12.46

and told us , a large Mob was coming into the Town , and had broke into
some Houses already . WESLEY-174X-1,12.47

I immediately retired to my Father's House : WESLEY-174X-1,12.48

but he did not dare to receive me . WESLEY-174X-1,12.49

Nor did any one else ; till at length <font> Henry Parks <$$font> took
me in ; whence early in the Morning I went to <font> Birmingham .
<$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,12.50

The Mob had been gathering all <font> Monday <$$font> Night ,
WESLEY-174X-1,12.51

and on <font> Tuesday <$$font> Morning they began their Work .
WESLEY-174X-1,12.52

They assaulted , one after another , all the Houses of those who were
called <font> Methodists . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,12.53

They first <P_13> broke all their Windows , suffering neither Glass ,
Lead , nor Frames to remain therein . WESLEY-174X-1,13.54

Then they made their Way in : WESLEY-174X-1,13.55

and all the Tables , Chairs , Chest of Drawers , with whatever was not
easily removable , they dashed in Pieces , particularly Shop-Goods , and
Furniture of every kind . WESLEY-174X-1,13.56

What they could not well break , as Feather-beds , they cut in Pieces ,
WESLEY-174X-1,13.57

and strew'd about the Room . WESLEY-174X-1,13.58

<font> William Sitch <$$font> 's Wife was Lying-@ @in :
WESLEY-174X-1,13.59

but that was all one ; WESLEY-174X-1,13.60

they pull'd away her Bed too , WESLEY-174X-1,13.61

and cut it in Pieces . " WESLEY-174X-1,13.62

<paren> Had the <font> French <$$font> come in their Place , would they
have done more ? <$$paren> WESLEY-174X-1,13.63

" All this Time none offered to resist them . WESLEY-174X-1,13.64

Indeed most Part , both Men and Women , fled for their Lives .
WESLEY-174X-1,13.65

Only the Children stayed , not knowing whither to go .
WESLEY-174X-1,13.66

Wearing Apparel , and Things which were of Value , or easily saleable ,
they carried away ; every Man loading himself with as much as he could
well carry , of whatever he liked best . WESLEY-174X-1,13.67

Some of the Gentlemen who had set the Mob to work , or threaten'd to
turn away Collier or Miner out of their Service , that did not come and
do his Part , now drew up a Paper , for those of the Society to sign ,
importing , That they would never invite or receive any <font> Methodist
<$$font> Preacher more . WESLEY-174X-1,13.68

On this Condition , they told them they would stop the Mob at once ;
WESLEY-174X-1,13.69

otherwise they must take what followed . WESLEY-174X-1,13.70

This they offer'd to several : WESLEY-174X-1,13.71

but they declar'd , one and all , We have already lost all our Goods :
WESLEY-174X-1,13.72

and nothing more can follow , but the Loss of our Lives , which we
<font> will <$$font> lose too , rather than wrong our Consciences .
WESLEY-174X-1,13.73

On <font> Wednesday <$$font> the Mob divided into two or three Companies
, one of which went to <font> Aldridge , <$$font> four Miles from <font>
Wednesbury , <$$font> and plundered many Houses there , as they had done
in several other Villages . WESLEY-174X-1,13.74

Here also they loaded themselves with Cloaths and Goods of all Sorts ,
as much as they could stand@ @under . WESLEY-174X-1,13.75

They came back through <font> Walsal <$$font> <P_14> with their Spoils .
WESLEY-174X-1,14.76

But the Gentlemen of <font> Walsal <$$font> being apprised of their
coming , raised a Body of Men , who met them , took what they had away ,
and laid it up in the Town-hall . WESLEY-174X-1,14.77

Notice was then sent to <font> Aldridge , <$$font> that every Man who
had been plundered , might come and take his own Goods .
WESLEY-174X-1,14.78

Mr. <font> Wood of Wednesbury <$$font> likewise told several .
WESLEY-174X-1,14.79

They should have what could be found of their Goods , on Condition they
would promise , Not to receive or hear those Preachers any more .
WESLEY-174X-1,14.80

On <font> Friday <$$font> in the Afternoon I went from {TEXT:form}
<font> Birmingham , <$$font> designing to go to <font> Tipton-Green .
<$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,14.81

But finding the Mob were still raging up and down , I returned to <font>
Birmingham , <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,14.82

and soon after <paren> having as yet no more Place in these Parts
<$$paren> set out for <font> London . <$$font> " WESLEY-174X-1,14.83

Any who desires to see a fuller and more particular Account of these
surprizing Transactions , may read a small Tract , intitled , " Modern
Christianity exemplified at <font> Wednesbury . <$$font> "
WESLEY-174X-1,14.84

Before I leave this Subject , it may be proper to insert an
Advertisement , which was not long after inserted in the publick Papers
. WESLEY-174X-1,14.85

In the <font> White-hall <$$font> and <font> London-Evening Post ,
Saturday , February <$$font> 18 , was a Paragraph with some Mistakes ,
which it may not be amiss to rectify . WESLEY-174X-1,14.86

" By a private Letter from <font> Staffordshire , <$$font> we have
Advice of an Insurrection <font> of <$$font> the People called
Methodists . " WESLEY-174X-1,14.87

The Insurrection was not <font> of <$$font> the People called Methodists
, but <font> against <$$font> them : WESLEY-174X-1,14.88

" Who upon some <font> pretended <$$font> Insults from the Church Party
, " - WESLEY-174X-1,14.89

They <font> pretended <$$font> no Insults from the Church Party ; being
themselves no other than <font> true <$$font> Members of the Church of
<font> England <$$font> ; WESLEY-174X-1,14.90

but were <font> more <$$font> insulted by a mixt Multitude of
Churchgoers <paren> who seldom , if ever , go near a Church <$$paren>
Dissenters and Papists : WESLEY-174X-1,14.91

- " have assembled themselves in a riotous Manner " -
WESLEY-174X-1,14.92

Here is another small Error Personae . WESLEY-174X-1,14.93

Many Hundreds of the Mob did assemble themselves in <P_15> a riotous
Manner , having given publick Notice several Days before <paren>
particularly by a Paper set up in <font> Walsal <$$font> Market-Place
<$$paren> That on <font> Shrove-Tuesday <$$font> they intended to come
and <font> destroy the Methodists , <$$font> and inviting all the
Country to come and join them . WESLEY-174X-1,15.94

" And having committed several Outrages - WESLEY-174X-1,15.95

without ever committing any , WESLEY-174X-1,15.96

they have suffered all Manner of Outrages for several Months past :
WESLEY-174X-1,15.97

They proceeded at last to burn the House of one of their Adversaries .
" WESLEY-174X-1,15.98

- Without burning any House , or making any Resistance , some Hundreds
of them , on <font> Shrove-Tuesday <$$font> last , had their own Houses
broken up , with Windows , Window-cases , Beds , Tools , Goods of all
Sorts , broke all to Pieces , or taken away by open Violence ; their
live Goods driven off , themselves forced to fly for their Lives , and
most of them stript of all they had in the World . WESLEY-174X-1,15.99

" Ever since the 20th of last <font> June <$$font> the Mob of <font>
Walsal , Darlaston , <$$font> and <font> Wednesbury , <$$font> hired for
that Purpose by their Betters , have broke open their poor Neighbour's
Houses at their Pleasure , by Night and by Day , extorted Money from the
few that had it , took away or destroyed their Victuals and Goods , beat
and wounded their Bodies , threatened their Lives , abused their Women
<paren> some in a Manner too horrible to Name <$$paren> and openly
declar'd , they would destroy every Methodist in the country : The
<font> Christian <$$font> country where his Majesty's innocent and loyal
Subjects have been so treated for Eight Months , and are now , by their
wanton Persecutors , publickly branded for Rioters and Incendiaries !
WESLEY-174X-1,15.100

' <font> Sund. <$$font> 19 . WESLEY-174X-1,15.101

Mr. <font> Viney <$$font> came to me from <font> Yorkshire , <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,15.102

and told me , " About a year ago , being then <font> Vor-steher <$$font>
<paren> a kind of President <$$paren> in the Church of <font> the
Brethren , <$$font> I proposed some Scruples I had concerning our
Discipline , with the Reasons on which they were grounded to Mr. <font>
Spangenberg , <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,15.103

and beg'd , that till these were remov'd , I might have Liberty to
remain , <P_16> not a Governor , but a private Member of the Church . "
' WESLEY-174X-1,16.104

To this Mr. <font> Spangenberg <$$font> would not comply .
WESLEY-174X-1,16.105

So at his Instant , I continued in my Office , WESLEY-174X-1,16.106

and the thing slept till <font> May <$$font> 1743 , when in a Meeting of
the <font> Labourers <$$font> <paren> so they term their Church-Officers
<$$paren> I was ordered to withdraw , WESLEY-174X-1,16.107

and the following Questions were proposed , 1 , Whether <font> Richard
Viney <$$font> were not of Satan , and an Enemy to the Church ? And 2.
Whether his Objections to the Discipline of the Brethren , did not
spring from Anger , and Self , and Pride ? WESLEY-174X-1,16.108

After a Debate of four Hours , I was call'd in and ask'd , " If I was
convinced those Objections were wrong ? WESLEY-174X-1,16.109

I said , I was not , WESLEY-174X-1,16.110

I desir'd they would cast Lots ; which after a little Debate , they did
. WESLEY-174X-1,16.111

The Lot came , " the Objections are just . " WESLEY-174X-1,16.112

So for a Time the Thing slept again . WESLEY-174X-1,16.113

" But in <font> November <$$font> following , they considered the Point
again : WESLEY-174X-1,16.114

the Result was , That they sent one to tell me , " I was of Satan ; had
raised Objections against the <font> Brethren <$$font> from Anger , and
Self , and Pride , and therefore I was cut off from the Church , and
deliver'd over to Satan . " WESLEY-174X-1,16.115

I was greatly surprized , but not disturb'd . WESLEY-174X-1,16.116

God gave me perfect Peace . WESLEY-174X-1,16.117

After much Prayer , I wrote to you , to know where I might meet you .
WESLEY-174X-1,16.118

I know it was the Will of God I should come , and that I should give
myself up to your Direction ; WESLEY-174X-1,16.119

and therefore I have spoke without any Disguise or Reserve . "
WESLEY-174X-1,16.120

I told him , " If you go back , you are welcome to go ,
WESLEY-174X-1,16.121

if you stay with me , you are welcome to stay . WESLEY-174X-1,16.122

Only whatever you do , do it with a clear Conscience , and I shall be
satisfied either way . " WESLEY-174X-1,16.123

After a few Days , he went back to <font> Yorkshire <$$font> to talk
with his Wife . WESLEY-174X-1,16.124

<font> The Brethren <$$font> saw him again , WESLEY-174X-1,16.125

and I saw him no more . WESLEY-174X-1,16.126

<font> Sat. <$$font> 25 . WESLEY-174X-1,16.127

In returning at Night from <font> Snow's-fields , <$$font> at the Corner
of <font> Joyner-Street , <$$font> the Coach , wherein five of us were ,
was overturn'd , but without any one's being hurt : although the Shock
was so <P_17> great as not only to dash the Fore-windows in Pieces , but
to break the Axle-tree in two . WESLEY-174X-1,17.128

<font> Mond. <$$font> 27 . Was the Day I had appointed to go out of
Town . WESLEY-174X-1,17.129

But understanding a Proclamation was just publish'd , requiring <font>
all Papists <$$font> to go out of <font> London , <$$font> before the
<font> Friday <$$font> following , I was determined to stay another Week
, that I might cut off all Occasion of Reproach . WESLEY-174X-1,17.130

I was the more willing to stay , that I might procure more Rayment for
the Poor , before I left <font> London . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,17.131

For this Purpose I made a second Collection , which amounted to about
Thirty Pounds . WESLEY-174X-1,17.132

But perceiving , That the whole Money received , would not answer one
third of the Expence , I determin'd to go round the Classes , and beg
for the rest , till I had gone thro' the whole Society .
WESLEY-174X-1,17.133

<font> Fri. March <$$font> 2 . WESLEY-174X-1,17.134

I began to put this in Execution . WESLEY-174X-1,17.135

While I was at an House in <font> Spittlefields , <$$font> a Justice of
Peace came , with the Parish-Officers , being on their Search for
Papists . WESLEY-174X-1,17.136

I was glad of the Opportunity to talk with them at large , both of our
Principles and Practice . WESLEY-174X-1,17.137

When I went out , a pretty large Mob attended me to the Door of the
House to which I was going . WESLEY-174X-1,17.138

But they did us no hurt , WESLEY-174X-1,17.139

only gaped , and stared , WESLEY-174X-1,17.140

and hallowed as loud as they could . WESLEY-174X-1,17.141

<font> Mond. <$$font> 5 . WESLEY-174X-1,17.142

I was much prest to write an Address to the King , which I did in the
following Terms : WESLEY-174X-1,17.143

" To the King's Most Excellent Majesty : WESLEY-174X-1,17.144

The humble Address of the Societies in <font> England <$$font> and
<font> Wales , <$$font> in Derision called <font> Methodists :
WESLEY-174X-1,17.145

" Most gracious Sovereign , <$$font> So inconsiderable as we are ,
<font> a people scattered and peeled , and trodden under Foot from the
Beginning hitherto , <$$font> we should in no wise have presumed , even
on this Great Occasion , to open our Lips to your Majesty , had we not
been induced , indeed constrained <P_18> so to do , by two
considerations : The One , that in spite of all our Remonstrances on
that head , we are continually represented , as a peculiar Sect of Men ,
separating ourselves from the established Church : The Other , that we
are still traduced as inclined to Popery , and consequently disaffected
to your Majesty . WESLEY-174X-1,18.146

Upon these considerations , we think it incumbent upon us , if we must
stand as a distinct Body from our Brethren , to tender for ourselves ,
our most dutiful Regards to your Sacred Majesty : and to declare in the
Presence of Him we serve , the King of Kings , and Lord of Lords , That
we are a Part <paren> however mean <$$paren> of that Protestant Church ,
established in these Kingdoms : That we unite together for this , and no
other End , to promote , so far as we may be capable , Justice , Mercy ,
and Truth , the Glory of God , and Peace and Good-will among Men : That
we detest and abhor the Fundamental Doctrines of the Church of <font>
Rome , <$$font> and are steadily attached to your Majesty's Royal Person
and illustrious House . WESLEY-174X-1,18.147

We can@ @not indeed say or do either more or less , than we apprehend
consistent with the written Word of God . WESLEY-174X-1,18.148

But we are ready to obey your Majesty to the uttermost , in all Things
which we conceive to be agreeable thereto . WESLEY-174X-1,18.149

And we earnestly exhort all with whom we converse , as they fear God ,
to honour the King . WESLEY-174X-1,18.150

We of the Clergy in particular , put all Men in mind , to revere the
higher Powers as of God ; WESLEY-174X-1,18.151

and continually declare , Ye must needs be subject , not only for Wrath
, but also for Conscience Sake . WESLEY-174X-1,18.152

Silver and Gold <paren> most of us must own <$$paren> we have none .
WESLEY-174X-1,18.153

But such as we have , we humbly beg your Majesty to accept ; together
with our Hearts and Prayers : WESLEY-174X-1,18.154

May He who hath bought us with his Blood , the Prince of all the Kings
of the Earth , fight against all the Enemies of your Majesty , with the
two-edged Sword that cometh out of his Mouth ! WESLEY-174X-1,18.155

And when he calleth your Majesty from this Throne , <P_19> full of Years
and Victories , may it be with that Voice , WESLEY-174X-1,19.156

Come , receive the Kingdom prepared for Thee , from the Beginning of the
World ! WESLEY-174X-1,19.157

These are the continual Prayers of your Majesty's Dutiful and Loyal
Subjects , JOHN WESLEY , etc. WESLEY-174X-1,19.158

But upon farther Consideration , it was judged best to lay it aside .
WESLEY-174X-1,19.159

<font> Sund. <$$font> 11 . WESLEY-174X-1,19.160

I found it was absolutely necessary for me , to spend a few Days at
<font> Bristol . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,19.161

In the Evening I set out . WESLEY-174X-1,19.162

As I rode thro' <font> Newbury <$$font> the next Day , my Horse fell
WESLEY-174X-1,19.163

and threw me into a deep Mire . WESLEY-174X-1,19.164

I was not hurt , WESLEY-174X-1,19.165

but after cleaning myself a little , went on , WESLEY-174X-1,19.166

and came to <font> Kingswood <$$font> between One and Two on <font>
Tuesday . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,19.167

I preached here with great Enlargement of Heart , as I did at <font>
Bristol <$$font> in the Evening . WESLEY-174X-1,19.168

<font> Wedn. <$$font> 14 . WESLEY-174X-1,19.169

I endeavour'd to clear up the Misunderstandings , which had arisen , by
hearing the contending Parties Face to Face . WESLEY-174X-1,19.170

It was as I suspected , a meer Strife of Words : of which they were all
so fully sensible , that I believe , they will not so easily again fall
into this Snare of the Devil . WESLEY-174X-1,19.171

<font> Thurs. <$$font> 15 . WESLEY-174X-1,19.172

I talk'd largely with the <font> Kingswood <$$font> Stewards ,
concerning the State of their Schools and Society ; and then with the
Master , Mistress , and Children , WESLEY-174X-1,19.173

and found great Cause to bless God on their Behalf .
WESLEY-174X-1,19.174

In the Evening I preached at <font> Bristol , <$$font> on <font> I will
love thee , O Lord , my Strength ; <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,19.175

commending myself to their Prayers , I rode to <font> Marshfield .
<$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,19.176

<font> Sat. <$$font> 17 . WESLEY-174X-1,19.177

We reached <font> London . WESLEY-174X-1,19.178

Sun. <$$font> 18 , was a Day of rest . WESLEY-174X-1,19.179

<font> Tues. <$$font> 20 . WESLEY-174X-1,19.180

Having receiv'd a Summons from the Justices of <font> Surry , <$$font>
to appear at their Court at St. <font> Margaret <$$font> 's Hill , I
did so , WESLEY-174X-1,19.181

and ask'd , " Has any one any thing to lay to my Charge ? "
WESLEY-174X-1,19.182

None made any Reply . WESLEY-174X-1,19.183

At length , one of the Justices said , " Sir , Are you willing to take
the Oaths to his Majesty ? and to sign the Declaration against Popery ?
" WESLEY-174X-1,19.184

I said , I am ; WESLEY-174X-1,19.185

which I accordingly did , and returned home . WESLEY-174X-1,19.186

<P_20>

<font> Thurs. <$$font> 22 . WESLEY-174X-1,20.188

I gave the Society an Account , of what had been done with regard to the
Poor . WESLEY-174X-1,20.189

By the Contributions and Collections , I had received about
one_hundred_and_seventy Pounds ; with which above
three_hundred_and_thirty Poor , had been provided with needful Clothing
. WESLEY-174X-1,20.190

Thirty or Forty remaining still in Want , and there being some Debts for
the Cloaths already distributed , the next Day , being <font>
Good-Friday , <$$font> I made one Collection more of about
six_and_twenty Pounds . WESLEY-174X-1,20.191

This Treasure , at least , neither Rust nor Moth shall corrupt , nor
Thieves break thro' and steal . WESLEY-174X-1,20.192

<font> Sat. <$$font> 24 . WESLEY-174X-1,20.193

My Brother and I agreed , it was enough for one of us to stay in Town ,
while the other endeavour'd to strengthen our Brethren in other Parts .
WESLEY-174X-1,20.194

So on <font> Mond. <$$font> 26 . I set out with <font> James Wheatley
, <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,20.195

and came in the Evening to <font> Newbury . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,20.196

While we were at Breakfast the next Day , two or three poor Men were
with many Oaths relating their Exploits the Day before .
WESLEY-174X-1,20.197

I turn'd , WESLEY-174X-1,20.198

and appeal'd to their own Hearts ; " Whether they were doing well ? "
WESLEY-174X-1,20.199

They own'd their Fault , WESLEY-174X-1,20.200

and were so loving we could scarce get away . WESLEY-174X-1,20.201

We called at an House in the Afternoon , wherein the first Person we met
, was so drunk , that she could not speak plain , and could but just
make shift to curse and swear . WESLEY-174X-1,20.202

In the next Room we found three or four more merry People , keeping
<font> Easter <$$font> in much the same Manner . WESLEY-174X-1,20.203

But their Mirth was soon spoiled . WESLEY-174X-1,20.204

They gave earnest heed to the Things they little regarded before ,
WESLEY-174X-1,20.205

and knew not how to express their Thankfulness for our Advice , and for
a few little Books which we left with them , WESLEY-174X-1,20.206

In the Evening I preached at <font> Bristol . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,20.207

On <font> Wedn. <$$font> and <font> Thurs. <$$font> I settled all
Thing there , WESLEY-174X-1,20.208

and on <font> Frid. <$$font> 30. rode to <font> Middlesey , <$$font>
where I preached to a small , serious Congregation .
WESLEY-174X-1,20.209

<font> Sat. <$$font> 31 . WESLEY-174X-1,20.210

Calling at <font> Chard , <$$font> I light upon a poor Woman , unawares
, who was earnestly groaning for Redemption . WESLEY-174X-1,20.211

At Noon we spent an Hour with a little Company in <font> Axminster ,
<$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,20.212

and <P_21> hastened on for <font> Crockern-Wells . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,21.213

But the Hail and Snow falling fast , we could not reach it , till past
Nine o'Clock . WESLEY-174X-1,21.214

<font> Sund. April <$$font> 1 . WESLEY-174X-1,21.215

I rode to <font> Sticklepath . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,21.216

At One I preached in an open Place , on <font> This is the Record , that
<$$font> God <font> hath given us Eternal Life , and this Life is in his
Son . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,21.217

A Storm of Rain and Hail began while I was preaching :
WESLEY-174X-1,21.218

but the Congregation did not move . WESLEY-174X-1,21.219

At Five I preached again . WESLEY-174X-1,21.220

Many of the poor People followed me to the House at which I lodged :
WESLEY-174X-1,21.221

and we could not consent to part , till I had spent another Hour in
Exhortation , and Prayer , and Thanksgiving . WESLEY-174X-1,21.222

I read To-day the strange Account of that <font> John Endicot , <$$font>
Governor of <font> New-England , <$$font> and his Associates there , who
beat and imprison'd so many of the poor Quakers , and murder'd <font>
William Robinson , Marmaduke Stephenson , <$$font> and Others .
WESLEY-174X-1,21.223

O who would have look'd for farther Inquisitors at <font> Boston !
<$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,21.224

Surely these Men did not cry out against <font> Popish <$$font> Cruelty
! WESLEY-174X-1,21.225

<font> Mond. <$$font> 2 . WESLEY-174X-1,21.226

I preached at Five , WESLEY-174X-1,21.227

and rode on toward <font> Launceston . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,21.228

The Hills were cover'd with Snow , as in the Depth of Winter .
WESLEY-174X-1,21.229

About Two we came to <font> Trewint , <$$font> wet and weary enough ,
having been battered by the Rain and Hail for some Hours .
WESLEY-174X-1,21.230

I preached in the Evening to many more than the House would contain , on
the Happiness of him whose Sins are forgiven . WESLEY-174X-1,21.231

In the Morning <font> Degory Isbel <$$font> undertook to pilot us over
the great Moor , all the Paths being cover'd with Snow , which in many
Places was driven together , too deep for Horse or Man to pass .
WESLEY-174X-1,21.232

The Hail followed us for the first seven Miles ; WESLEY-174X-1,21.233

we had then a fair , tho' exceeding sharp Day . WESLEY-174X-1,21.234

I preached at <font> Gwenap <$$font> in the Evening to a plain ,
simple-hearted People ; WESLEY-174X-1,21.235

and God comforted us by each other . WESLEY-174X-1,21.236

<font> Wedn. <$$font> 3 . WESLEY-174X-1,21.237

About Eleven we reached St. <font> Ives , <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,21.238

I was a little surprized at entering <font> John Nance <$$font> 's House
, being received by many who were waiting for me there with a loud
<paren> tho' not bitter <$$paren> Cry . WESLEY-174X-1,21.239

But they <P_22> soon recovered , WESLEY-174X-1,22.240

and we poured out our Souls together in Praises and Thanksgiving .
WESLEY-174X-1,22.241

As soon as we went out , we were saluted , as usual , with a Huzza , and
a few Stones or Pieces of Dirt . WESLEY-174X-1,22.242

But in the Evening none opened his Mouth while I proclaim'd , <font> I
will love thee , O Lord , my Strength . WESLEY-174X-1,22.243

- I will call upon the Lord which is worthy to be praised ;
WESLEY-174X-1,22.244

so shall I be safe from my Enemies . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,22.245

<font> Thurs. <$$font> 5 . WESLEY-174X-1,22.246

I took a View of the Ruins of the House which the Mob had pulled down a
little before , for Joy that Admiral <font> Matthews <$$font> had beat
the <font> Spaniards . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,22.247

Such is the <font> Cornish <$$font> Method of Thanksgiving !
WESLEY-174X-1,22.248

I suppose , if Admiral <font> Lestock <$$font> had fought too , they
would have knock'd all the <font> Methodists <$$font> on the Head .
WESLEY-174X-1,22.249

Both this Morning and Evening the Congregation was as large as the House
could well contain . WESLEY-174X-1,22.250

In the Society , God did indeed sit upon his People , as a Refiners Fire
. WESLEY-174X-1,22.251

He darted into all <paren> I believe , hardly one excepted <$$paren> the
melting Flame of Love : so that their Heads were as Water , and their
Eyes as Fountains of Tears . WESLEY-174X-1,22.252

<font> Frid. <$$font> 6 . WESLEY-174X-1,22.253

I spoke with the Members of the Society severally , WESLEY-174X-1,22.254

and observed with great Satisfaction , that Persecution had driven only
three or four away , and exceedingly strengthened the rest .
WESLEY-174X-1,22.255

The Persecution here was owing in great Measure to the indefatigable
Labourers of Mr. <font> Hoblin , <$$font> and Mr. <font> Simmons
<$$font> : Gentlemen worthy to be had in everlasting Remembrance for
their unwearied Endeavours to destroy Heresy . WESLEY-174X-1,22.256

<font> Fortunati ambo ! WESLEY-174X-1,22.257

Siquid mea pagina possit , Nulla dies unquam memorivos eximetcevo .
<$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,22.258

<font> Sat. <$$font> 7 . WESLEY-174X-1,22.259

I took down Part of the Account of the late Riot ; which <paren> to shew
the deep Regard of the Actors herein for his Majesty <$$paren> was on
the self_same Day on which his Majesty's Proclamation against Rioters
was read . WESLEY-174X-1,22.260

Yet I see much Good has been brought out of it already ; particularly ,
the great Peace we now enjoy . WESLEY-174X-1,22.261

<P_23>

About Eleven <font> John Nance <$$font> and I set out for <font> Morva ;
<$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,23.263

Having both the Wind and Rain full in our Faces , we were thoroughly wet
before we came to <font> Rosemargay , <$$font> where some of our
Brethren met us . WESLEY-174X-1,23.264

I found there had been a Shaking among them , occasioned by the
confident Assertions of some , That they had seen Mr. <font> Wesley ,
<$$font> a Week or two ago , with the Pretender in <font> France ;
<$$font> and Others , That he was in Prison at <font> London . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,23.265

Yet the main Body still stood firm together , WESLEY-174X-1,23.266

and were not removed from the Hope of Gospel . WESLEY-174X-1,23.267

The Wind and Rain beat hard upon us again , as we walk'd from <font>
Morva <$$font> to <font> St. Just , <$$font> which also frighted many
from coming . WESLEY-174X-1,23.268

However some Hundreds were there , to whom I declar'd , " if ye have
nothing to pay , God will frankly forgive you all . "
WESLEY-174X-1,23.269

It is remarkable , That those of <font> St. Just , <$$font> were the
Chief of the whole Country , for Hurling , Fighting , Drinking , and all
Manner of Wickedness . WESLEY-174X-1,23.270

But many of the Lions are become Lambs , WESLEY-174X-1,23.271

are continually praising God , and calling their old Companions in Sin ,
to come and magnify the Lord together . WESLEY-174X-1,23.272

<font> Sund. <$$font> 8 . WESLEY-174X-1,23.273

I preached here at Five and at Twelve , and in the Evening at <font>
Morva . WESLEY-174X-1,23.274

Mond. <$$font> 9 . WESLEY-174X-1,23.275

I preached at Noon on <font> Triggivary Downs , <$$font> about two Miles
from <font> Penzance , <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,23.276

a great Congregation was deeply attentive while I described the Sect
which is <font> every where spoken against . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,23.277

At Four I preached near <font> Gulval , <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,23.278

regulated the little Society WESLEY-174X-1,23.279

and returned to <font> St. Ives . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,23.280

<font> Tues. <$$font> 10 . WESLEY-174X-1,23.281

I was inquiring , how Dr. - , a Person of unquestioned Sense and
Learning , could speak Evil of <font> this Way , <$$font> after he had
seen such a Change in the most abandoned of his Parishioners ?
WESLEY-174X-1,23.282

But I was satisfied , when <font> Jonathan Reeves <$$font> inform'd me ,
" That on the Dr's. asking him , who had been the better for this
Preaching ? And his replying , " The Man before you <paren> <font> John
Daniel <$$font> <$$paren> for one , who never before <font> knew any
Work of <$$font> God <font> upon his Soul ; <$$font> " the Dr. answered
; " Get along ; you are a Parcel of mad , crazy-headed Fellows ; " and
taking him by the Shoulder , fairly thrust him to the Door . <P_24>
WESLEY-174X-1,24.283

See here , what it is , which the World accounts Madness ! The knowing
<font> a Work of <$$font> God <font> upon our Soul . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,24.284

In the Afternoon I walk'd over to <font> Zunnor , <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,24.285

and after Preaching , settled the infant Society . WESLEY-174X-1,24.286

<font> Wedn. <$$font> 11 . WESLEY-174X-1,24.287

Being the Publick Fast , the Church at <font> St. Ives <$$font> was
well filled . WESLEY-174X-1,24.288

After reading those strong Words , <font> If they have called the Master
of the House <$$font> Beelzebub , <font> how much {TEXT:mmch} more them
of his Household . <$$font> Mr. <font> H. <$$font> fulfilled them ,
by vehemently declaiming against <font> the New Sect , <$$font> as
Enemies of the Church , Jacobites , Papists , and what not !
WESLEY-174X-1,24.289

After Church , we met , WESLEY-174X-1,24.290

and spent an Hour in Prayer , not forgetting the poor Sinner against his
own Soul . WESLEY-174X-1,24.291

In the Evening I preached at <font> Gwenap . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,24.292

I stood on the Wall , in the calm , still Evening , with the setting Sun
behind me , and almost an innumerable Multitude before , behind , and on
either hand . WESLEY-174X-1,24.293

Many likewise sat on the little Hills , at some Distance from the Bulk
of the Congregation . WESLEY-174X-1,24.294

But they could all hear distinctly while I read , <font> The Disciple is
not above his Master , <$$font> and the rest of those comfortable Words
, which are Day by Day fulfilled in our Ears . WESLEY-174X-1,24.295

<font> Thur. <$$font> 12 . WESLEY-174X-1,24.296

About Eleven I preached at <font> Crovan . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,24.297

In the Afternoon we hear'd of the Success of Mr. <font> H. <$$font> 's
Sermon . WESLEY-174X-1,24.298

<font> James Wheatly <$$font> was walking through the Town in the
Evening , when the Mob gathered , and began to throw Stones from all
Quarters . WESLEY-174X-1,24.299

He stepped into a House . WESLEY-174X-1,24.300

but the Master of it followed him , like a Lion , to drag him out .
WESLEY-174X-1,24.301

Yet after a few Words , his Mind was changed , WESLEY-174X-1,24.302

and he swore , nobody should hurt him . WESLEY-174X-1,24.303

Meantime one went for a Justice of Peace , who came , and promised to
see him safe home . WESLEY-174X-1,24.304

The Mob followed , hollowing and shouting amain . WESLEY-174X-1,24.305

Near <font> John Painter <$$font> 's House the Justice left him :
WESLEY-174X-1,24.306

they quickly beset the House . WESLEY-174X-1,24.307

But a Messenger came from the Mayor , forbidding any to touch Mr.
<font> Wheatley , <$$font> at his Peril . WESLEY-174X-1,24.308

He then went home . WESLEY-174X-1,24.309

But between Seven and Eight the Mob came WESLEY-174X-1,24.310

and beset <font> John Nance <$$font> 's House . WESLEY-174X-1,24.311

<font> John Nance <$$font> and <P_25> <font> John Paynter <$$font> went
out WESLEY-174X-1,25.312

and stood before the Door , though they were quickly covered with Dirt .
WESLEY-174X-1,25.313

The Cry was " Bring out the Preacher ; WESLEY-174X-1,25.314

pull down the House : " WESLEY-174X-1,25.315

And they began to pull down the Boards which were nailed against the
Windows . WESLEY-174X-1,25.316

But the Mayor , hearing it , came without delay , WESLEY-174X-1,25.317

and read the Proclamation against Riots : Upon which , after many Oaths
and Imprecations , they thought proper to disperse .
WESLEY-174X-1,25.318

About Six I reached <font> Morva , <$$font> wet through and through ,
the Rain having continued with scarce any Intermission .
WESLEY-174X-1,25.319

However a little Company were gathered together , to whom I preached on
, <font> Ask , and it shall be given you . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,25.320

The next Day I had Time to dry my Cloaths at Mr. <font> John <$$font>
's near <font> Penzance . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,25.321

At Noon I preached on the Downs , not far from his House . About Three
at <font> Gulval , <$$font> and at <font> St. Ives <$$font> in the
Evening . WESLEY-174X-1,25.322

<font> Sat. <$$font> 14 . WESLEY-174X-1,25.323

I took my leave of <font> St. Ives ; <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,25.324

preached at two in <font> Cambourn , <$$font> and at <font> Gwenap
<$$font> in the Evening . WESLEY-174X-1,25.325

<font> Sund. <$$font> 15 . WESLEY-174X-1,25.326

I preached here again at Five , and at Eight in <font> Stithian <$$font>
Parish . WESLEY-174X-1,25.327

The Place was a green , triangular Plat , capable of holding eight or
ten_thousand Men . WESLEY-174X-1,25.328

I stood on one of the Walls that inclosed it . WESLEY-174X-1,25.329

Many sat on the other two . WESLEY-174X-1,25.330

Some Thousands stood between WESLEY-174X-1,25.331

and received the Word with all Readiness of Mind . WESLEY-174X-1,25.332

At Five I preached at <font> Gwenap , <$$font> on a little Hill , near
the usual Place . WESLEY-174X-1,25.333

It rained from the Time I began till I concluded . WESLEY-174X-1,25.334

I felt no Pain while I spoke , WESLEY-174X-1,25.335

but the Instant I had done , and all the Time I was with the Society ,
my Teeth and Head aked so violently , that I had hardly any Senses .
WESLEY-174X-1,25.336

I lay down as soon as I could , WESLEY-174X-1,25.337

and fell asleep . WESLEY-174X-1,25.338

In the Morning <paren> blessed be God <$$paren> I ail'd nothing .
WESLEY-174X-1,25.339

<font> Mond. <$$font> 16 . WESLEY-174X-1,25.340

In the Afternoon we came again to <font> Trewint . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,25.341

Here I learned . That Notice had been given of my preaching that
Evening in <font> Laneast <$$font> Church which was crouded exceedingly
. WESLEY-174X-1,25.342

Mr. <font> Bennet , <$$font> the Minister of <font> Laneast , <$$font>
carried me afterwards to his House , WESLEY-174X-1,25.343

and <paren> tho' above seventy Years old <$$paren> came with <P_26> me
in the Morning to <font> Trewint , <$$font> where I had promised to
preach at Five . WESLEY-174X-1,26.344

Before we parted , <font> Degory Isbel <$$font> informed me , of an
Accusation against me , current in those Parts . WESLEY-174X-1,26.345

It was really one which I did not expect : no more than that other ,
vehemently asserted at <font> St. Ives , <$$font> of my bringing the
Pretender with me thither last Autumn , under the Name of <font> John
Downes , <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,26.346

It was , That " I called myself <font> John Wesley , <$$font> whereas
every body knew Mr. <font> Wesley <$$font> was dead . "
WESLEY-174X-1,26.347

In the Afternoon we came to <font> Sticklepath ; <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,26.348

I preached at Five . WESLEY-174X-1,26.349

In the Evening the House was crouded as before . WESLEY-174X-1,26.350

After a short Exhortation , and an Hour spent in Prayer , I commended
them to the Grace of God . WESLEY-174X-1,26.351

<font> Wednes. <$$font> 18 . WESLEY-174X-1,26.352

Before Eight we reached <font> Crediton <$$font> <paren> or <font>
Kirton , <$$font> <$$paren> or rather the Ruins of it .
WESLEY-174X-1,26.353

For the Houses on both Sides were all in Ashes , for several hundred
Yards . WESLEY-174X-1,26.354

Lighting on a serious Woman I ask'd , " Are the People of this Place now
warn'd to seek God ? " WESLEY-174X-1,26.355

She answered , Although some of them perished in the Flames , the rest
are just as they were before , cursing , swearing , drinking , playing ,
and making merry , without God in all their Thoughts . "
WESLEY-174X-1,26.356

She added , " No longer ago than <font> Thursday <$$font> last , the Men
who were rebuilding one of the Houses , were bitterly cursing and
swearing one at another , and two of them above the rest , when an Arch
they were under fell , and crushed those Two , with all their Bones in
Pieces . " WESLEY-174X-1,26.357

Will ye not at length hear the Rod , and Him that hath appointed it ?
WESLEY-174X-1,26.358

Between Five and Six in the Evening we reached <font> Minehead .
<$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,26.359

Finding a general Expectation of it among the People , about Seven I
preached near the Sea-shore , to almost all the Inhabitants of the Place
. WESLEY-174X-1,26.360

Most of the Gentlemen of the Town were there , WESLEY-174X-1,26.361

and behaved with Seriousness and Decency . WESLEY-174X-1,26.362

<font> Thur. <$$font> 19 . WESLEY-174X-1,26.363

Having a Sloop ready , which came on purpose , we ran over the Channel
in about four Hours . WESLEY-174X-1,26.364

Some of our Friends were waiting for us on the Shore .
WESLEY-174X-1,26.365

About one we came to <font> Fonmon <$$font> Castle .
WESLEY-174X-1,26.366

<P_27>

I found a natural Wish , " O for Ease and a Resting-Place . "
WESLEY-174X-1,27.368

Not yet . WESLEY-174X-1,27.369

But Eternity is at hand ! WESLEY-174X-1,27.370

I preached at Six , and at Five in the Morning . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,27.371

Frid. <$$font> 20 . WESLEY-174X-1,27.372

About Ten we set out for <font> Cardiff : <$$font> where in the Evening
I preached in the Castle-Yard . WESLEY-174X-1,27.373

All were serious and attentive . {TEXT:,} WESLEY-174X-1,27.374

<font> Sat. <$$font> 21 . WESLEY-174X-1,27.375

I rode to <font> Garth <$$font> in <font> Brecknoc'shire <$$font> ,
WESLEY-174X-1,27.376

and on <font> Sund. <$$font> 22. preached in the Church there , both
Morning and Afternoon . WESLEY-174X-1,27.377

On <font> Mond. <$$font> 23. I preached in <font> Maesmennys <$$font>
Church , and afterwards in the Churchyard at <font> Builth . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,27.378

I observed only one Man with his Hat on : probably thro' Inattention ;
WESLEY-174X-1,27.379

for he likewise kneeled down on the Grass with the rest , as soon as I
began to pray . WESLEY-174X-1,27.380

<font> Tues. <$$font> 24 . WESLEY-174X-1,27.381

I preached at <font> Maesmennys <$$font> again , and about Five in
<font> Landdu <$$font> Church , near <font> Brecknock . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,27.382

Such a Church I never saw before . WESLEY-174X-1,27.383

There was not a Glass-Window belonging to it ; but only Boards , with
Holes bored here and there , through which a dim Light glimmered in .
WESLEY-174X-1,27.384

Yet even here may the Light of God's Countenance shine .
WESLEY-174X-1,27.385

And it has shone on many Hearts . WESLEY-174X-1,27.386

<font> Wedn. <$$font> 25 . WESLEY-174X-1,27.387

We rode over the still snowy Mountains . WESLEY-174X-1,27.388

At Twelve I preached at <font> Killigaer : <$$font> in the Evening at
<font> Caraiff , <$$font> and the next Evening at <font> Fonmon .
<$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,27.389

On <font> Sat. <$$font> 28. I returned to <font> Bristol . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,27.390

After resting here , for eight Days <paren> though not unemployed
<$$paren> on <font> Mond. May <$$font> 7. I set out for the North .
WESLEY-174X-1,27.391

I preached about Eight at <font> Acton : <$$font> in the Afternoon at
<font> Stroud : <$$font> in the Evening at <font> Painswick , <$$font>
and at Five the next Morning . WESLEY-174X-1,27.392

About Eight , <font> Tues. <$$font> 8 . I called at <font> Glocester ,
<$$font> designing only to speak with a Friend : WESLEY-174X-1,27.393

but finding an House full of People , I would not disappoint their
Expectation , WESLEY-174X-1,27.394

but stayed WESLEY-174X-1,27.395

and preached on The Form and the Power of Godliness .
WESLEY-174X-1,27.396

This made me somewhat later than I intended at <font> Cheltenham ,
<$$font> where I preached on <font> By grace ye are saved thro' Faith ,
<$$font> to a Company who seemed to understand just as much of the
Matter , as if I had been talking <font> Greek . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,27.397

I found a People of quite another <P_28> kind at <font> Gutherton ,
<$$font> to whom I preached on <font> Repent ye , and believe the Gospel
. <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,28.398

And many called upon God for Grace so to do , even with strong Cries and
Tears . WESLEY-174X-1,28.399

We had a remarkable Blessing again at Five in the Morning , <font> Wedn.
<$$font> 9 . WESLEY-174X-1,28.400

About Noon I preached at <font> Stanley , <$$font> <paren> a Mile from
<font> Gutherton <$$font> <$$paren> at Three in <font> Tewkesbury ,
<$$font> and in the Evening at the Abby in <font> Eversham . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,28.401

<font> Thurs. <$$font> 10 . WESLEY-174X-1,28.402

Riding by <font> Birmingham , <$$font> I called at a Village three Miles
beyond it . WESLEY-174X-1,28.403

Here a poor Man was cursing and swearing at so uncommon a rate , that I
was constrained to speak to him very plainly . WESLEY-174X-1,28.404

He received it , drunk as he was , in great Love , WESLEY-174X-1,28.405

and so did all his Companions . WESLEY-174X-1,28.406

<font> Frid. <$$font> 11 . WESLEY-174X-1,28.407

I preached at <font> Sheffield : <$$font> On <font> Sat. <$$font> 12.
about Ten , at <font> Barley-hall . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,28.408

In the Afternoon I rode to <font> Epworth , <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,28.409

and immediately went to Mr. <font> Maw <$$font> 's , to return him
Thanks for his good Offices to Mr. <font> Downes , <$$font> and his
honest and open Testimony for the Truth , before the Worshipful Bench at
<font> Kirton . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,28.410

It was not his Fault , that those <font> Honorable Men , <$$font>
regarded not the Laws either of God , or the King .
WESLEY-174X-1,28.411

But a Soldier they were resolved he should be , right or wrong - "
Because he was a Preacher . " WESLEY-174X-1,28.412

So to make all sure , they sent him away , a Prisoner to <font> Lincoln
<$$font> Goal ! WESLEY-174X-1,28.413

My first Design was , to have gone the shortest Way from <font>
Sheffield <$$font> to <font> Newcastle . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,28.414

But it was well I did not , considering the inexpressible Panick , which
had spread itself in all Places . So that I came just in Time to remind
all the poor frighted Sheep , That <font> even the Hairs of <$$font> our
<font> Head are all number'd . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,28.415

I preached thrice at <font> Epworth <$$font> on <font> Sunday ; <$$font>
and on <font> Mond. <$$font> 14. at <font> Terry . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,28.416

The Constable which took Mr. <font> Downes <$$font> for a Soldier ,
with one of the Church Wardens were of my Audience .
WESLEY-174X-1,28.417

I was inform'd , they had threatned great Things before I came .
WESLEY-174X-1,28.418

But their Threatnings vanished into Air . WESLEY-174X-1,28.419

<P_29>

At Two many of our Brethren at <font> Epworth <$$font> met , whom I
chearfully commended to the Grace of God . WESLEY-174X-1,29.421

We were riding gently toward <font> Fishlake , <$$font> when two or
three Persons met us , and begg'd " we would not go that Way ;
WESLEY-174X-1,29.422

for the Town , they said , was all up in Arms , and abundance were
waiting for us in the Way , many of whom had made themselves very Drunk
, and so were ripe for any manner of Mischief . " WESLEY-174X-1,29.423

We accordingly rode to <font> Sykehouse <$$font> another Way .
WESLEY-174X-1,29.424

Some came in all hast hither also , to tell us , " All the Men in the
Congregation would be prest . " WESLEY-174X-1,29.425

Others affirmed , " The Mob was just a coming , and that they would
certainly fire the House , or pull it down to the Ground . "
WESLEY-174X-1,29.426

I told them , " Then our only way was , to make the best Use of it while
it was standing . " WESLEY-174X-1,29.427

So I began expounding the Tenth Chapter of St. <font> Matthew .
<$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,29.428

But no Man opened his Lips against us . WESLEY-174X-1,29.429

<font> Tues. <$$font> 15 . WESLEY-174X-1,29.430

After comforting the little Flock at <font> Norton , <$$font> I rode the
shortest Way to <font> Birstal . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,29.431

Here I found our Brethren partly mourning , and partly rejoicing , on
Account of <font> John Nelson . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,29.432

On <font> Friday , <$$font> the 4th Instant <paren> they informed me
<$$paren> the Constables took him just as he had ended his Sermon at
<font> Artherton , <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,29.433

and the next Day carried him before the Commissioners at <font> Halifax
, <$$font> the most active of whom was Mr. <font> Coleby , <$$font>
Vicar of <font> Birstal . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,29.434

Many were ready to testify , That he was in no respect such a Person as
the Act of Parliament specified . WESLEY-174X-1,29.435

But they were not hear'd . WESLEY-174X-1,29.436

He was a Preacher ; WESLEY-174X-1,29.437

that was enough . WESLEY-174X-1,29.438

So he was sent for a Soldier at once . WESLEY-174X-1,29.439

At Seven I preached on the Hill , no Man interrupting me .
WESLEY-174X-1,29.440

Afterwards I inquired into the State of the Society ,
WESLEY-174X-1,29.441

and found great Cause to bless God , whose Grace , even in these trying
Times , was sufficient for them . WESLEY-174X-1,29.442

<P_30>

<font> Wedn. <$$font> 16 . WESLEY-174X-1,30.444

I talk'd at large with Mr. <font> Viney . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,30.445

He said , " His first Perplexity arose , from reading and reflecting
upon some Writings , which the Count published in <font> Pensylvania :
<$$font> and that the more deeply he considered the whole Affair , the
more thoroughly he was convinced , 1. That the Count was at least as
much the Head of Theirs , as the Pope of the <font> Roman <$$font>
Church . 2. That he had cruelly and unjustly broke up the Congregation
at <font> Pilger-ruh <$$font> in <font> Holstein , <$$font> because
<paren> in Obedience to the King of <font> Denmark , <$$font> their
lawful Prince <$$paren> they had disclaimed his Superiority over them .
3. That the Labourers among <font> the Brethren , <$$font> were
absolutely Arbitrary in their Government of the People ; and lastly ,
That they grosly abused <font> The Lot , <$$font> in Support of their
Arbitrary Power . WESLEY-174X-1,30.446

<font> Thurs. <$$font> 17 . WESLEY-174X-1,30.447

I preached at Five on <font> Matthew <$$font> the Tenth : at Noon ,
<font> Little Horton , <$$font> near <font> Bradford : <$$font> about
Three in the Afternoon at <font> Stickerlane , <$$font> and at <font>
Birstal <$$font> in the Evening . WESLEY-174X-1,30.448

<font> Frid. <$$font> 18 . WESLEY-174X-1,30.449

I rode to <font> Leeds , <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,30.450

and preached in great Peace . WESLEY-174X-1,30.451

<font> Sat. <$$font> 19 . WESLEY-174X-1,30.452

I went on to Mr. <font> Clayton <$$font> 's at <font> Wensley ;
<$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,30.453

and at <font> Sund. <$$font> 20. preached in <font> Redmire <$$font>
Church on Part of <font> John iii. <$$font> the Gospel for the Day .
WESLEY-174X-1,30.454

In the Afternoon I preached at <font> Bolton <$$font> Chapel on <font>
We know that we are of <$$font> God . WESLEY-174X-1,30.455

I was much pleased at the serious Behaviour of the Congregation , both
in the Morning and Afternoon : especially at <font> Redmire , <$$font>
where from a Village of about thirty Houses , we had more than fifty
Communicants . WESLEY-174X-1,30.456

<font> Mond. <$$font> 21 . WESLEY-174X-1,30.457

I rode to <font> Newcastle <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,30.458

and passed a quiet Week . WESLEY-174X-1,30.459

<font> Mond. <$$font> 28 . WESLEY-174X-1,30.460

I began visiting the Classes in the Town , and on <font> Sund. June
<$$font> 3 , those in the Country , which I had never found so much in
earnest before . WESLEY-174X-1,30.461

I trust , there is not only , not a disorderly Walker , but hardly a
Trifler left among them . WESLEY-174X-1,30.462

<font> Frid. <$$font> 8 . WESLEY-174X-1,30.463

I preached at Night on <font> John xvii. 3 . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,30.464

The House could not contain the Congregation : WESLEY-174X-1,30.465

and most of them stayed either within or without , till the End of the
Midnight Hymn . WESLEY-174X-1,30.466

<P_31>

<font> Sund. <$$font> 10 . WESLEY-174X-1,31.468

I preached at <font> Biddick , <$$font> about Eight : at <font> Tanfield
, <$$font> as soon as Morning Prayer was over . At <font> Spen <$$font>
about Three , and in <font> Newcastle <$$font> at Six .
WESLEY-174X-1,31.469

I concluded the Day , in praising God with the Society .
WESLEY-174X-1,31.470

<font> Mond. <$$font> 11 . WESLEY-174X-1,31.471

I left <font> Newcastle , <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,31.472

and in the Afternoon met <font> John Nelson <$$font> at <font> Durham ,
<$$font> with <font> Thomas Beard : <$$font> another quiet and peaceable
Man , who had lately been torn from his Trade and Wife and Children ,
and sent away as a Soldier : that is , banished from all that was near
and dear to him , and constrained to dwell among Lions , for no other
Crime either committed or pretended , than that of calling Sinners to
Repentance . WESLEY-174X-1,31.473

But his Soul was in nothing terrified by his Adversaries .
WESLEY-174X-1,31.474

Yet the Body , after a while , sunk under its Burden .
WESLEY-174X-1,31.475

He was then lodged in the Hospital at <font> Newcastle , <$$font> where
he still praised God continually . WESLEY-174X-1,31.476

His Fever increasing , he was let Blood . WESLEY-174X-1,31.477

His Arm festered , mortified WESLEY-174X-1,31.478

and was cut off : two or three Days after which God signed his Discharge
, and called him up to his eternal Home . WESLEY-174X-1,31.479

" Servant of God , well done ! WESLEY-174X-1,31.480

Well hast thou fought The better Fight ; who single hast {TEXT:host}
maintain'd Against revolted Multitudes the Cause Of God , in Word ,
mightier than they in Arms . " WESLEY-174X-1,31.481

<font> Tues. <$$font> 12 . WESLEY-174X-1,31.482

In the Evening I came to <font> Knaresborough . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,31.483

About Nine o'Clock I was informed , That the House in which we were ,
was beset on every Side , with Men , Women and Children ,
WESLEY-174X-1,31.484

and desired those within . to set open the Doors , and let all come in
that would . WESLEY-174X-1,31.485

When the House was full , I came down . WESLEY-174X-1,31.486

The Noise presently ceased , WESLEY-174X-1,31.487

and I proclaimed , <font> Christ our Wisdom , Righteousness ,
Sanctification and Redemption . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,31.488

Only one drunken Man gave a little Interruption ; WESLEY-174X-1,31.489

but his Companions soon thrust him out of Doors . WESLEY-174X-1,31.490

So let all Satan's Devices fall on his <P_32> own Head !
WESLEY-174X-1,32.491

I trust , this mob did not come together in vain . WESLEY-174X-1,32.492

<font> Wedn. <$$font> 13 . WESLEY-174X-1,32.493

I rode to <font> Leeds , <$$font> and thence to <font> Birstal .
WESLEY-174X-1,32.494

Tues. <$$font> 14 . WESLEY-174X-1,32.495

I accompanied <font> John Bennet <$$font> into <font> Lancashire .
<$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,32.496

I preached to a small Congregation at Eleven ; in the Afternoon at
<font> Woodley <$$font> in <font> Cheshire ; <$$font> and in the Evening
at <font> Chinley-End <$$font> in <font> Derbyshire , <$$font> on <font>
Repent ye and believe the Gospel . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,32.497

<font> Frid. <$$font> 15 I preached at <font> Chinley <$$font> at Five
: about Noon in <font> the Peak , <$$font> and in the Evening at <font>
Barley Hall . WESLEY-174X-1,32.498

Sat <$$font> 16. in the Evening I preach'd at <font> Sykehouse <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,32.499

And by setting out early in the Morning , <font> Sund. <$$font> 17. at
Eight preached in <font> Epworth . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,32.500

I came thither in season . WESLEY-174X-1,32.501

For two such Sermons as Mr. <font> Ramley <$$font> preached on this Day
, so exquisitely bitter , and totally false , I can@ @not say I ever
heard before . WESLEY-174X-1,32.502

After Evening Service I preached on <font> Rom. iii. 22. <$$font> to
a much larger Congregation than in the Morning . WESLEY-174X-1,32.503

And I believe all that were sincere of Heart , were exceedingly
comforted . WESLEY-174X-1,32.504

<font> Mond. <$$font> 18 . WESLEY-174X-1,32.505

I left <font> Epworth , <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,32.506

and on <font> Wedn. <$$font> 20. in the Afternoon met my Brother in
<font> London . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,32.507

<font> Mond. <$$font> 25. and the five following Days , we spent in
Conference with many of our Brethren <paren> come from several Parts
<$$paren> who desire nothing but to save their own Souls , and those
that hear them . WESLEY-174X-1,32.508

And surely as long as they continue thus minded , their Labour shall not
be in vain in the Lord . WESLEY-174X-1,32.509

The next Week we endeavoured to purge the Society of all that did not
walk according to the Gospel . WESLEY-174X-1,32.510

By this Means we reduced the Number of Members to less than
Nineteen_Hundred . WESLEY-174X-1,32.511

But Number is an inconsiderable Circumstance . WESLEY-174X-1,32.512

May God increase them in Faith and Love ! WESLEY-174X-1,32.513

<font> Mond , July <$$font> 9 . WESLEY-174X-1,32.514

My Brother set out for <font> Cornwall . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,32.515

I had much Trouble for the fortnight following , in endeavouring to
prevent an unwary Man from destroying his own , and many other Souls ,
WESLEY-174X-1,32.516

On <font> Mond. <$$font> 23. when I set out for <font> Bristol ,
<$$font> I flattered myself , that the Work was done .
WESLEY-174X-1,32.517

But upon my Return , I found I had done just nothing : so that on <font>
Thursday , <P_33> August <$$font> 2. I was constrained to declare in
the Society , That <font> Thomas Williams <$$font> was no longer in
connection with us . WESLEY-174X-1,33.518

<font> Fri. <$$font> 10 . WESLEY-174X-1,33.519

I preached to the Debtors in <font> Newgate , <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,33.520

and desired two or three of my Friends to attend them weekly .
WESLEY-174X-1,33.521

I had a serious , well-behaved Congregation . WESLEY-174X-1,33.522

Perhaps God may give us some Fruit here also . WESLEY-174X-1,33.523

<font> Tues. <$$font> 14 . WESLEY-174X-1,33.524

Mr. <font> Piers <$$font> rode over with me to <font> Shoreham ,
<$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,33.525

and introduced me to Mr. <font> Perronet . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,33.526

I hope to have Cause of blessing God for ever , for the Acquaintance
begun this Day . WESLEY-174X-1,33.527

<font> Wedn. <$$font> 15 . WESLEY-174X-1,33.528

I went to <font> Bedlam , <$$font> at the repeated Request of Mr.
<font> S. <$$font> who had been confined there above two Years .
WESLEY-174X-1,33.529

This was the Person who , while he was speaking against my Brother and
me to the Society at <font> Kingswood , <$$font> was in a Moment struck
raving Mad . WESLEY-174X-1,33.530

But it seems , God is at length intreated for him , and has restored him
to a sound Mind . WESLEY-174X-1,33.531

<font> Thurs. <$$font> 16 . WESLEY-174X-1,33.532

I received a remarkable Letter , Part of which is here subjoined :
WESLEY-174X-1,33.533

<font> Aug. <$$font> 14 , 1744 . WESLEY-174X-1,33.534

<font> Rev. Sir , <$$font> " I Was surprized on <font> Sunday ,
<$$font> when you was pleased to tell me , I carried things to Extremes
, in denying the lawful Pleasures in Eating , WESLEY-174X-1,33.535

I denied only Self-indulgence in Eating - WESLEY-174X-1,33.536

All which I advance is , That he who will be Christ's Disciple , must
absolutely deny himself . WESLEY-174X-1,33.537

It was once a great Self-denial to me , Not to go to a Play , or to
other Diversions . WESLEY-174X-1,33.538

But this is now no Self-denial to me at all . So that if I was now
called to deny myself in these Things only , I might take up with what
is past , and now live an agreeable , self-indulgent Life .
WESLEY-174X-1,33.539

But God forbid . WESLEY-174X-1,33.540

I plainly see every Hour produces Occasions of Self-pleasing .
WESLEY-174X-1,33.541

And this I apprehend is a sufficient Call for , and Rule of Self-denial
. WESLEY-174X-1,33.542

For Instance : in the Morning , it is a great Self-denial , to rise out
of a warm Bed . WESLEY-174X-1,33.543

But if I do not , I am immediately <P_34> condemned as a slothful
Servant . WESLEY-174X-1,34.544

If I do , I find a great inward Blessing . WESLEY-174X-1,34.545

Under the Preaching , it is Self-pleasing , to see who is here , who
there . WESLEY-174X-1,34.546

But if I do let my Eye wander , I become cold and lifeless :
WESLEY-174X-1,34.547

if I deny myself , I often find even a present Reward .
WESLEY-174X-1,34.548

In walking the Streets , I can please myself , by looking this way and
that ; on this Chariot , that House and Picture . WESLEY-174X-1,34.549

But if I deny myself , for Christ's Sake , his Consolations abound with
me . WESLEY-174X-1,34.550

But I may deny myself outwardly , and yet be Self-indulgent , namely by
allowing myself in vain and trifling Thoughts . WESLEY-174X-1,34.551

Here is a continual Fight , and an {COM:sic} hard Struggle I must have
before I conquer . WESLEY-174X-1,34.552

But when I do overcome , I lose nothing by it ; WESLEY-174X-1,34.553

for my Soul is delighted with secret Refreshments .
WESLEY-174X-1,34.554

At Noon , I may find many pleasant Things . WESLEY-174X-1,34.555

And of this it was , that I said to Mr. <font> Richards , <$$font> " If
there are two Dishes set before you , by the Rule of Self-denial , you
ought to eat of that which you like the least . " WESLEY-174X-1,34.556

And this Rule I desire to observe myself : always to choose what is
least pleasing and cheapest . WESLEY-174X-1,34.557

Therefore I feed much upon Milk , WESLEY-174X-1,34.558

It is pleasant enough , WESLEY-174X-1,34.559

and nothing I can find is so cheap . Whereas if one Sort of Food be
dearer than another , and yet I abuse it , because more agreeable to my
Appetite : this I apprehend is directly contrary to the Discipleship of
a self-denying Master . WESLEY-174X-1,34.560

And this Kind of self-indulgence <paren> not in Food only <$$paren> is
practis'd by too many that know the Truth . WESLEY-174X-1,34.561

I suppose , Sir , you now perceive , I do not condemn all pleasure in
Eating . WESLEY-174X-1,34.562

But I condemn all self-indulgence both in that and other things ,
particularly in Talking . WESLEY-174X-1,34.563

Many who think themselves Believers , please themselves with talking
more than is profitable , WESLEY-174X-1,34.564

they talk even of the Things of God , till they bring a Deadness , nay ,
an unaccountable Carelessness over their Spirits . WESLEY-174X-1,34.565

I do@ @n't say , they laugh or talk idly . WESLEY-174X-1,34.566

But still they are not deeply serious , WESLEY-174X-1,34.567

nor is their Conversation truly solid : whereas I should think the
Conscience of a true Believer , <P_35> is tender as the Apple of an Eye
; and that to such a one it would be less Pain to suffer the Rack , than
to trifle , either in Word or Deed . " WESLEY-174X-1,35.568

<font> Tues. <$$font> 21 . WESLEY-174X-1,35.569

I set out with a few Friends for <font> Oxford . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,35.570

On <font> Wednesday <$$font> my Brother met us from <font> Bristol .
WESLEY-174X-1,35.571

Frid. <$$font> 24 . WESLEY-174X-1,35.572

St. <font> Bartholomew <$$font> 's Day , I preached , I suppose , the
last Time at St. <font> Mary <$$font> 's . WESLEY-174X-1,35.573

Be it so . WESLEY-174X-1,35.574

I am now clear of the Blood of these Men . WESLEY-174X-1,35.575

I have fully delivered my own Soul . WESLEY-174X-1,35.576

The Beadle came to me afterwards , WESLEY-174X-1,35.577

and told me " The Vice-chancellor had sent him for my Notes . "
WESLEY-174X-1,35.578

I sent them without delay , not without admiring the wise Providence of
God . WESLEY-174X-1,35.579

Perhaps few Men of Note would have given a Sermon of mine the Reading ,
if I had put it into their Hands . WESLEY-174X-1,35.580

But by this Means it came to be read , probably more than once , by
every Man of Eminence in the University . WESLEY-174X-1,35.581

I left <font> Oxford <$$font> about Noon , WESLEY-174X-1,35.582

preached at <font> Wycombe <$$font> in the Evening ,
WESLEY-174X-1,35.583

and on <font> Sat. <$$font> 25. returned to <font> London . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,35.584

<font> Sat. Sep. <$$font> 1 . WESLEY-174X-1,35.585

I talked pretty largely with {TEXT:wrth} <font> George Newans , <$$font>
the supposed <font> Shropshire <$$font> Prophet . WESLEY-174X-1,35.586

I am inclined to think , he believes himself : WESLEY-174X-1,35.587

But I can@ @not believe God has sent him . WESLEY-174X-1,35.588

<font> Wedn. <$$font> 5 . WESLEY-174X-1,35.589

One sent me Word , " He had now found the right Way of worshipping God :
and therefore he must leave off Prayer and the rest of our Will-Worship
, and join himself with the <font> Quakers . <$$font> "
WESLEY-174X-1,35.590

However in the Evening , he ventured among us once more .
WESLEY-174X-1,35.591

And God smote him to the Heart : so that he knew and felt and declared
aloud , that he had no need of going elsewhere to find the Power of God
unto Salvation . WESLEY-174X-1,35.592

<font> Thurs. <$$font> 6 . WESLEY-174X-1,35.593

I committed to the Dust the Remains of <font> Elizabeth Marsh , <$$font>
a young Woman who had received {TEXT:reeeived} a Sense of the pardoning
Love of God about four Years before her Death , and had never left her
first Love . WESLEY-174X-1,35.594

She had scarce known Health or Ease from that Hour .
WESLEY-174X-1,35.595

But she never murmured or repined at <P_36> any thing .
WESLEY-174X-1,36.596

I saw her many times after she was confined to her Bed ;
WESLEY-174X-1,36.597

and found her always quiet and calm , always cheerful , praising God in
the Fires ; though longing to depart and to be with Christ .
WESLEY-174X-1,36.598

I could not learn that her Mind was ever clouded , no , not a Moment ,
from the Beginning of her Illness . WESLEY-174X-1,36.599

But a few Days before she died , she told me , " I am concerned I spoke
a hasty Word to-day . WESLEY-174X-1,36.600

One told me , You shall recover within ten Days . WESLEY-174X-1,36.601

And I said , " I do@ @n't want to recover . " WESLEY-174X-1,36.602

A little before her Speech fail'd , she beckoned one to her ,
WESLEY-174X-1,36.603

and said , " Go WESLEY-174X-1,36.604

and tell <font> Molly Brown <$$font> from me , she must come back to Mr.
<font> Wesley . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,36.605

I have not Breath to speak to her myself : WESLEY-174X-1,36.606

but do <font> you <$$font> tell her , she <font> must <$$font> come back
. " WESLEY-174X-1,36.607

She had lost her Voice when I prayed with her the last Time , and
commended her Soul to God . WESLEY-174X-1,36.608

But " Her Eye dropt Sense , distinct and clear , As any Muse's tongue
cou'd speak . " WESLEY-174X-1,36.609

It said , " To me , to die is gain . WESLEY-174X-1,36.610

I walk thro' the Valley of the Shadow of Death , WESLEY-174X-1,36.611

and fear no Evil . " WESLEY-174X-1,36.612

I could only speak a few Words at her Grave . WESLEY-174X-1,36.613

But when I returned to the <font> Foundery , <$$font> God made his Word
as a Flame of Fire . WESLEY-174X-1,36.614

I spoke from that passage in the <font> Revelation , And one of the
Elders said unto me , What are these who are arrayed in white Robes ;
WESLEY-174X-1,36.615

and whence came they ? WESLEY-174X-1,36.616

And I said , Sir , thou knowest . WESLEY-174X-1,36.617

And he said unto me , these are they which came out of great Tribulation
, and have washed their Garments , and made them white in the Blood of
the Lamb . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,36.618

A young Man , Servant to Mrs. <font> C. <$$font> of <font> Newington ,
<$$font> went home deeply affected . WESLEY-174X-1,36.619

The next Day he was taken ill , WESLEY-174X-1,36.620

and every Day grew worse ; so that when I came to the House on <font>
Monday , <$$font> the 10th , <paren> though I knew nothing of him , or
of his Illness {TEXT:Ilness} before <$$paren> he was just gasping for
Breath . WESLEY-174X-1,36.621

It was a melancholy Sight . WESLEY-174X-1,36.622

Both his Words and his Eyes " witnessed huge Affliction and Dismay . "
WESLEY-174X-1,36.623

Death stared him in the Face , WESLEY-174X-1,36.624

and he knew not God . WESLEY-174X-1,36.625

He could but just say , " For God's Sake , pray for me . "
WESLEY-174X-1,36.626

<P_37>

<font> John Nelson <$$font> coming in , we asked Life for our Brother ,
in full Confidence of the Promise . WESLEY-174X-1,37.628

All this Day as his Illness so his Terrors increased .
WESLEY-174X-1,37.629

But the next Day , God gave him Life from the Dead .
WESLEY-174X-1,37.630

He told me , " Now I am not afraid to die : WESLEY-174X-1,37.631

for I know God loves me . WESLEY-174X-1,37.632

I did not use to love you or your People : WESLEY-174X-1,37.633

but now I love you as my own Soul . WESLEY-174X-1,37.634

I love you all : WESLEY-174X-1,37.635

I know you are the People of God ; WESLEY-174X-1,37.636

and I am just going to Him . " WESLEY-174X-1,37.637

He continued praising God as often as he could speak ,
WESLEY-174X-1,37.638

and when he could not , his Eyes were fixt upwards .
WESLEY-174X-1,37.639

Between One and two on <font> Wednesday <$$font> Morning he cried out ,
" I have lost my God ? WESLEY-174X-1,37.640

where is He ? WESLEY-174X-1,37.641

I can@ @not see Him . " WESLEY-174X-1,37.642

But he soon recovered himself WESLEY-174X-1,37.643

and said , " Now I have found Him : WESLEY-174X-1,37.644

and I shall lose Him no more . " WESLEY-174X-1,37.645

About Seven I prayed with him , WESLEY-174X-1,37.646

and praised God on his Behalf ; WESLEY-174X-1,37.647

and not long after he fell asleep . WESLEY-174X-1,37.648

<font> Fri. <$$font> 14 . WESLEY-174X-1,37.649

I performed the last Office <paren> according to his Desire <$$paren>
over his Body , which was interr'd in the Presence of a vast Multitude
of People , at a small Distance from that of <font> Elizabeth Marsh .
<$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,37.650

<font> Sun. <$$font> 16 . WESLEY-174X-1,37.651

I buried near the same Place , one who had soon finished her Course ,
going to God in the full Assurance of Faith , when she was little more
than four Years old . WESLEY-174X-1,37.652

In her last Sickness <paren> having been deeply serious in her Behaviour
for several Months before <$$paren> she spent all the Intervals of her
Convulsions , in speaking of , or to God . WESLEY-174X-1,37.653

And when she perceived her Strength to be near exhausted , she desired
all the Family to come near , WESLEY-174X-1,37.654

and pray'd for them all , one by one ; then for her Ministers , for the
Church , and for all the World . WESLEY-174X-1,37.655

A short time after , recovering from a Fit , she lifted up her Eyes ,
WESLEY-174X-1,37.656

said , " Thy Kingdom come , " WESLEY-174X-1,37.657

and died . WESLEY-174X-1,37.658

All this Summer , our Brethren in the West had as hot Service , as those
in the North of <font> England . <$$font> The War against the <font>
Methodists , <$$font> so called , being every where carried on , with
far more Vigour than that against the <font> Spaniards . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,37.659

I had Accounts of this from all Parts : one of which was as follows .
WESLEY-174X-1,37.660

<P_38>

<font> Rev. Sir , <$$font> " The Word of God has free Course here ,
WESLEY-174X-1,38.662

it runs WESLEY-174X-1,38.663

and is glorified . WESLEY-174X-1,38.664

But the Devil rages horribly . WESLEY-174X-1,38.665

Even at <font> St. Ives , <$$font> we can@ @not shut the Doors of
<font> John Nance <$$font> 's House , to meet the Society , but the Mob
immediately threaten to break them open . WESLEY-174X-1,38.666

They now triumph over us more and more , saying , It is plain , nothing
can be done against them . WESLEY-174X-1,38.667

And in other Places it is worse . WESLEY-174X-1,38.668

I was going to <font> Crouan <$$font> on <font> Tuesday <$$font> was
sennight : WESLEY-174X-1,38.669

on the Road two of our Brothers met me . WESLEY-174X-1,38.670

When we came within a Mile of the House , we saw a great Mob at some
Distance ; WESLEY-174X-1,38.671

but they were going another Way . WESLEY-174X-1,38.672

We then left our Horses at the House of a Friend , WESLEY-174X-1,38.673

and went forward on Foot . WESLEY-174X-1,38.674

Within a Quarter of a Mile of the Place where I was to preach , two
Persons met us , who used to be Persecutors . WESLEY-174X-1,38.675

But they now desired me , for God's Sake , " Not to go up :
WESLEY-174X-1,38.676

for if I did , they said , there would surely be murder : if there was
not already ; WESLEY-174X-1,38.677

for many were knocked down before they came away . WESLEY-174X-1,38.678

By their Advice and the Intreaties of those that were with me , I turned
back to the House where we left our Horses . WESLEY-174X-1,38.679

We had been there but a short Time , when many of the People came ,
being very bloody , and having been beaten very bad .
WESLEY-174X-1,38.680

But the main Cry of the Mob was after the Preacher , whom they sought
for , in every Corner of the House ; swearing bitterly " They only
wanted to knock him on the Head , and then they should be satisfied . "
WESLEY-174X-1,38.681

Not finding me there , they said , However they should catch him on
<font> Sunday <$$font> at <font> Cambourn . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,38.682

But it was Mr. <font> Westell <$$font> 's Turn to go thither on <font>
Sunday . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,38.683

While he was preaching there , at <font> Mr. Harris <$$font> 's House ,
a tall Man came in , WESLEY-174X-1,38.684

and pulled him down . WESLEY-174X-1,38.685

Mr. <font> Harris <$$font> demanded his Warrant . WESLEY-174X-1,38.686

But he swore , " Warrant or no Warrant , he should go with them : "
WESLEY-174X-1,38.687

So he carried him out to the Mob , who took him away to the Church-town
. WESLEY-174X-1,38.688

They kept him there till <font> Tuesday <$$font> <P_39> Morning ,
WESLEY-174X-1,39.689

and then carried him to <font> Penzance : <$$font> where , in the
Afternoon , he was brought before three Justices , and asked abundance
of Questions , to which they required him to answer upon Oath .
WESLEY-174X-1,39.690

Then Dr. <font> Barlost <$$font> wrote his <font> Mittimus <$$font> ,
by Virtue of which he was to be committed to the House of Correction at
<font> Bodmin <$$font> as a Vagrant . WESLEY-174X-1,39.691

So they took him as far as <font> Cambourn <$$font> that Night ; and the
next Day , on to <font> Bodmin . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,39.692

I desire your continual Prayers for me , Your weak Servant in Christ ,
<font> Henry Milliard . <$$font> " WESLEY-174X-1,39.693

I pray , for what Pay , could we procure Men to do this Service ? To be
always ready , to go to Prison , or to Death ? WESLEY-174X-1,39.694

<font> Henry Milliard <$$font> did not long continue therein .
WESLEY-174X-1,39.695

After he had for some time fought a good Fight , he took the Small-pox ,
WESLEY-174X-1,39.696

and in a few Days , joyfully resigned his Spirit to God .
WESLEY-174X-1,39.697

The Justices who met at the next Quarter-Sessions at <font> Bodmin ,
<$$font> knowing a little more of the Laws of God and Man , declared Mr.
<font> Westell <$$font> 's Commitment to be contrary to all Law ,
WESLEY-174X-1,39.698

and set him at Liberty without delay . WESLEY-174X-1,39.699

<font> Tues. Oct. <$$font> 30 . WESLEY-174X-1,39.700

I was desired to call on a young Gentlewoman dangerously ill .
WESLEY-174X-1,39.701

But I soon found , she needed no Physician for her Soul , being full of
Righteousness and Good Works . WESLEY-174X-1,39.702

However I spoke to her with all Plainness : WESLEY-174X-1,39.703

and she awoke as one out of Sleep . WESLEY-174X-1,39.704

She drank in every Word , WESLEY-174X-1,39.705

and soon perceived the Want of a better Righteousness than her own
{COM:missing_period} WESLEY-174X-1,39.706

But her Companion sent her Father word , WESLEY-174X-1,39.707

and she was immediately removed ; so that I saw her no more .
WESLEY-174X-1,39.708

<font> Sun. Nov. {TEXT:Nov} <$$font> 4 . WESLEY-174X-1,39.709

Poor <font> Richard I. <$$font> who in spite of his former Conviction ,
was now determined to renounce us and join the <font> Quakers <$$font> ,
ventured however once more to the Lord's Table . WESLEY-174X-1,39.710

He had no sooner received , <P_40> than he dropt down ,
WESLEY-174X-1,40.711

and cried with a loud Voice , " I have sinned ; WESLEY-174X-1,40.712

I have sinned against God . " WESLEY-174X-1,40.713

At that Instant , many were pierced to the Heart . WESLEY-174X-1,40.714

I could hardly speak for some time . WESLEY-174X-1,40.715

Several Mourners were filled with strong Consolation .
WESLEY-174X-1,40.716

And all said , " Surely God is in this Place ! " WESLEY-174X-1,40.717

About this Time I received a Letter , dated from the Camp at <font>
Lisle . <$$font> WESLEY-174X-1,40.718

Part of it ran as follows . WESLEY-174X-1,40.719

" <font> May <$$font> 1 . WESLEY-174X-1,40.720

We marched to the Camp , near <font> Brussels . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,40.721

There a few of us join'd into a Society , being sensible , where two or
three are gathered together in His Name , there is our Lord in the midst
of them . WESLEY-174X-1,40.722

Our Place of Meeting was a small Wood near the Camp .
WESLEY-174X-1,40.723

We remained in this Camp eight Days , WESLEY-174X-1,40.724

and then removed to a Place called <font> Arsk . <$$font>
WESLEY-174X-1,40.725

Here I began to speak openly , at a small Distance from the Camp , just
in the middle of the <font> English <$$font> Army . "
WESLEY-174X-1,40.726

