<BEGIN_wesley-1750-2>

<P_3>

<heading>

Matt. vii. 13 , 14 . WESLEY-1750-2,3.4

<$$heading>

<font> Enter ye in at the strait Gate ; WESLEY-1750-2,3.6

for wide is the Gate , and broad is the Way which leadeth to Destruction
, WESLEY-1750-2,3.7

and many there be , which go in thereat : Because strait is the Gate and
narrow is the Way which leadeth unto Life , WESLEY-1750-2,3.8

and few there be that find it . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,3.9

1. Our Lord having warned us of the Dangers which easily beset us at
our first Entrance upon real Religion , the Hindrances which naturally
arise from within , from the Wickedness of our own Hearts : <P_4> Now
proceeds to apprize us of the Hindrances from without , particularly ill
Example and ill Advice . WESLEY-1750-2,4.10

By one or the other of these , Thousands who once ran well , have drawn
back unto Perdition : Yea , many of those who were not Novices in
Religion , who had made some Progress in Righteousness .
WESLEY-1750-2,4.11

His Caution therefore against these , he presses upon us , with all
possible Earnestness , WESLEY-1750-2,4.12

and repeats again and again , in Variety of Expressions , lest by any
Means we should let it slip . WESLEY-1750-2,4.13

Thus , effectually to guard us against the former , <font> Enter ye in
<$$font> , saith he , <font> at the strait Gate : WESLEY-1750-2,4.14

For wide is the Gate {COM:missing_comma} and broad is the Way that
leadeth to Destruction , WESLEY-1750-2,4.15

and many there be which go in thereat : Because strait is the Gate and
narrow is the Way which leadeth unto Life , and few there be that find
it . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,4.16

To secure us from the latter , <font> Beware <$$font> , saith he ,
<font> of false Prophets . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,4.17

We shall at present consider the former only . WESLEY-1750-2,4.18

2. <font> Enter ye in <$$font> , saith our blessed Lord , <font> at the
strait Gate ; WESLEY-1750-2,4.19

for wide is the Gate {COM:missing_comma} and broad is the Way that
leadeth to Destruction , WESLEY-1750-2,4.20

and many there be which go in thereat : Because strait is the Gate
<$$font> , <P_5> <font> and narrow is the Way which leadeth unto Life ,
and few there be that find it . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,5.21

3. In these Words we may observe , First , The inseparable Properties
of the Way to Hell : <font> Wide is the Gate , broad the Way that
leadeth to Destruction , and many there be that go in thereat : <$$font>
Secondly , The inseparable Properties of the Way to Heaven : <font>
Strait is that Gate , and few there be that find it : <$$font> Thirdly ,
A serious Exhortation grounded thereon . WESLEY-1750-2,5.22

<font> Enter ye in at the Strait Gate . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,5.23

I. 1. We may observe , First , The inseparable Properties of the Way
to Hell : WESLEY-1750-2,5.24

<font> Wide is the Gate , and broad is the Way , that leadeth to
Destruction , WESLEY-1750-2,5.25

and many there be , that go in thereat . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,5.26

Wide indeed is the Gate , and broad the Way that leadeth to Destruction
, WESLEY-1750-2,5.27

For Sin is the Gate of Hell , and Wickedness the Way to Destruction .
WESLEY-1750-2,5.28

And how wide a Gate is that of Sin ? WESLEY-1750-2,5.29

How broad is the Way of Wickedness ? WESLEY-1750-2,5.30

The <font> Commandment <$$font> of God is <font> exceeding broad
<$$font> , as extending not only to all our Actions , but to every Word
which goeth out of our Lips , yea , every <P_6> Thought that rises in
our Heart . WESLEY-1750-2,6.31

And Sin is equally broad with the Commandment , seeing any Breach of the
Commandment is Sin . WESLEY-1750-2,6.32

Yea , rather it is a_thousand Times broader : Since there is only one
Way of keeping the Commandment : WESLEY-1750-2,6.33

For we do not properly keep it , unless both the Thing done , the Manner
of doing it , and all the other Circumstances are right .
WESLEY-1750-2,6.34

But there are a_thousand Ways of breaking every Commandment . So that
this Gate is wide indeed . WESLEY-1750-2,6.35

3. To consider this a little more particularly . How wide do those
Parent Sins extend , from which all the rest derive their Being ?
<font> That carnal Mind which is Enmity against God <$$font> , Pride of
Heart , Self-will and Love of the World ? WESLEY-1750-2,6.36

Can we fix any Bounds to them ? WESLEY-1750-2,6.37

Do they not diffuse themselves through all our Thoughts , and mingle
with all our Tempers ? WESLEY-1750-2,6.38

Are they not the Leaven which leavens , more or less , the whole Mass of
our Affections ? WESLEY-1750-2,6.39

May we not , on a close and faithful Examination of ourselves , perceive
these Roots of Bitterness , continually springing up , infecting all our
Words , and tainting all <P_7> our Actions ? WESLEY-1750-2,7.40

And how innumerable an Offspring do they bring forth , in every Age and
Nation ? WESLEY-1750-2,7.41

Even enough to cover the whole Earth with <font> Darkness and cruel
Habitations . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,7.42

4. O who is able to reckon up their accursed Fruits ? To count all the
Sins , whether against God or our Neighbour , not which Imagination
might paint , but which may be Matter of daily melancholy Experience ?
WESLEY-1750-2,7.43

Nor need we range over all the Earth to find them . WESLEY-1750-2,7.44

Survey any one Kingdom , any single Country , or City or Town ,
WESLEY-1750-2,7.45

and how plenteous is this Harvest ? WESLEY-1750-2,7.46

And let it not be one of these , which are still overspread with
Mahometan or Pagan Darkness : But of those which name the Name of Christ
, which profess to see the Light of his glorious Gospel .
WESLEY-1750-2,7.47

Go no farther than the Kingdom to which we belong , the City wherein we
are now . WESLEY-1750-2,7.48

We call ourselves Christians : Yea , and that of the purest Sort ;
WESLEY-1750-2,7.49

we are Protestants ; reformed Christians ! WESLEY-1750-2,7.50

But alas ! who shall carry on the Reformation of our Opinions into our
Hearts and Lives ? WESLEY-1750-2,7.51

Is there not a Cause ? WESLEY-1750-2,7.52

For how innumerable <P_8> are our Sins ? WESLEY-1750-2,8.53

And those of the deepest Dye ? WESLEY-1750-2,8.54

Do not the grossest Abominations of every Kind , abound among us from
Day to Day ? WESLEY-1750-2,8.55

Do not Sins of every Sort cover the Land , as the Waters cover the Sea ?
WESLEY-1750-2,8.56

Who can count them ? WESLEY-1750-2,8.57

Rather go WESLEY-1750-2,8.58

and count the Drops of Rain , or the Sands on the Sea-shore .
WESLEY-1750-2,8.59

So <font> wide is the Gate , so broad is the Way that leadeth to
Destruction . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,8.60

5. <font> And many there be who go in at <$$font> that Gate : Many who
walk in that Way . Almost as many as go in at the Gate of Death , as
sink into the Chambers of the Grave . WESLEY-1750-2,8.61

For it can@ @not be denied , <paren> though neither can we acknowledge
it but with Shame and Sorrow of Heart <$$paren> that even in this which
is called a Christian Country , the Generality of every Age and Sex , of
every Profession and Employment , of every Rank and Degree , high and
low , rich and poor , are walking in the Way of Destruction .
WESLEY-1750-2,8.62

The far greater Part of the Inhabitants of this City , to this Day live
in Sin ; in some palpable , habitual , known Transgression of the Law
they profess to observe : Yea , in some outward Transgression , some
gross , <P_9> visible Kind of Ungodliness or Unrighteousness ; some open
Violation of their Duty , either to God or Man . WESLEY-1750-2,9.63

These then , none can deny , are all in the Way that leadeth to
Destruction . WESLEY-1750-2,9.64

Add to these those who <font> have a Name indeed , that they live ,
<$$font> but were never yet alive to God : Those that outwardly appear
fair to Men , but are inwardly full of all Uncleanness : Full of Pride
or Vanity ; of Anger , or Revenge ; of Ambition or Covetousness : Lovers
of themselves , Lovers of the World , Lovers of Pleasure more than
Lovers of God . WESLEY-1750-2,9.65

These indeed may be highly esteemed of Men ; WESLEY-1750-2,9.66

but they are an Abomination to the Lord . WESLEY-1750-2,9.67

And how greatly will these Saints of the World swell the Number of the
Children of Hell ? WESLEY-1750-2,9.68

Yea , add all , whatever they be in other Respects , whether they have
more or less of the Form of Godliness , who <font> being ignorant of
God's Righteousness , and seeking to establish their own Righteousness
<$$font> , as the Grounds of their Reconciliation to God and Acceptance
with him , of Consequence have <font> not submitted themselves unto the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,9.69

<P_10>

Now all these Things joined together in one , how terribly true is our
Lord's Assertion , <font> Wide is the Gate {COM:missing_comma} and broad
is the Way that leadeth to Destruction , WESLEY-1750-2,10.71

and many there be who go in thereat . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,10.72

6. Nor does this only concern the vulgar Herd , the poor , base ,
stupid Part of Mankind . WESLEY-1750-2,10.73

Men of Eminence in the World , Men who have many Fields and Yoke of Oxen
, do not desire to be excused from this . WESLEY-1750-2,10.74

On the contrary , <font> many wise Men after the Flesh , <$$font>
according to the human Methods of judging , <font> many mighty <$$font>
, in Power , in Courage , in Riches many <font> noble are called :
<$$font> Called into the broad Way , by the World , the Flesh and the
Devil ; WESLEY-1750-2,10.75

and they are not disobedient to that Calling . WESLEY-1750-2,10.76

Yea , the higher they are raised in Fortune and Power , the deeper do
they sink into Wickedness . WESLEY-1750-2,10.77

The more Blessings they have received from God , the more Sins do they
commit : Using their Honour or Riches , their Learning or Wisdom , not
as Means of working out their Salvation , but rather of excelling in
Vice , and so insuring their own Destruction . WESLEY-1750-2,10.78

<P_11>

II. 1. And the very Reason why many of these go on so securely in the
<font> broad Way <$$font> , is because it is broad : Not considering
that this is the inseparable Property of the Way to Destruction .
WESLEY-1750-2,11.80

<font> Many there be <$$font> , saith our Lord , <font> who go in
thereat : <$$font> for the very Reason why they should flee from it :
Even <font> because strait is the Gate and narrow the Way that leadeth
unto Life , and few there be that find it . <$$font>
WESLEY-1750-2,11.81

2. This is an inseparable Property of the Way to Heaven .
WESLEY-1750-2,11.82

So narrow is the Way that leadeth unto Life , unto Life everlasting , so
strait the Gate , that nothing unclean , nothing unholy can enter .
WESLEY-1750-2,11.83

No Sinner can pass through that Gate , until he is saved from all his
Sins . Not only from his outward Sins ; from his evil <font>
Conversation received by Tradition from his Fathers . <$$font>
WESLEY-1750-2,11.84

It will not suffice , that he hath <font> ceased to do evil <$$font> ,
and <font> learned to do well . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,11.85

He must not only be saved from all sinful Actions , and from all evil
and useless Discourse ; but inwardly changed , throughly renewed in the
Spirit of his Mind . WESLEY-1750-2,11.86

Otherwise he can@ @not pass thro' <P_12> the Gate of Life ,
WESLEY-1750-2,12.87

he can@ @not enter into Glory . WESLEY-1750-2,12.88

3. For <font> narrow is the Way that leadeth unto Life : <$$font> The
Way of universal Holiness . WESLEY-1750-2,12.89

Narrow indeed is the Way of Poverty of Spirit , the Way of holy Mourning
: The Way of Meekness , and that of hungring and thirsting after
Righteousness . WESLEY-1750-2,12.90

Narrow is the Way of Mercifulness , of Love unfeigned ; the Way of
Purity of Heart ; of doing Good unto all Men , and of gladly suffering
Evil , all Manner of Evil for Righteousness-sake . WESLEY-1750-2,12.91

4. <font> And few there be that find it . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,12.92

Alas , how few find even the Way of Heathen Honesty ?
WESLEY-1750-2,12.93

How few are there that do nothing to another , which they would not
another should do unto them ? WESLEY-1750-2,12.94

How few , that are clear before God from Acts either of Injustice or
Unkindness ? WESLEY-1750-2,12.95

How few , that do not <font> offend with their Tongue <$$font> ; that
speak nothing unkind , nothing untrue ? WESLEY-1750-2,12.96

What a small Proportion of Mankind , are innocent even of outward
Transgressions ? WESLEY-1750-2,12.97

And how much smaller a Proportion have their Hearts right before God ?
Clean and holy in his Sight ? WESLEY-1750-2,12.98

Where are they , <P_13> whom his all-searching Eye discerns to be truly
humble . To abhor themselves in Dust and Ashes in the Presence of God
their Saviour ? To be deeply and steadily serious , feeling their Wants
, and <font> passing the time of their Sojourning with Fear ? <$$font>
Truly meek and gentle , never <font> overcome of Evil , but overcoming
Evil with Good ? <$$font> Throughly a Thirst for God , and continually
panting after a Renewal in his Likeness ? WESLEY-1750-2,13.99

How thinly are they scattered over the Earth , whose Souls are inlarged
in Love to all Mankind ? And who love God with all their Strength , who
have given him their Hearts , and desire nothing else in Earth or Heaven
? WESLEY-1750-2,13.100

How few are those Lovers of God and Man , that spend their whole
Strength in doing Good unto all Men ? And are ready to suffer all
Things , yea , Death itself , to save one Soul from eternal Death ?
WESLEY-1750-2,13.101

5. But while so few are found in the Way of Life , and so many in the
Way of Destruction , there is great Danger , lest the Torrent of Example
, should bear us away with them . WESLEY-1750-2,13.102

Even a single Example , if it be always in our Sight , is apt to make
much Impression upon <P_14> us . Especially when it has Nature on its
Side ; when it falls in with our own Inclinations .
WESLEY-1750-2,14.103

How great then must be the Force of so numerous Examples , continually
before our Eyes ; and all conspiring together with our own Hearts , to
carry us down the Stream of Nature ? WESLEY-1750-2,14.104

How difficult must it be , to stem the Tide , and to keep ourselves
<font> unspotted in the World ? <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,14.105

6. What heightens the Difficulty still more is , that they are not the
rude and senseless Part of Mankind , at least not these alone , who set
us the Example who throng the downward Way : But the polite , the
well-bred , the genteel , the wise , the Men who understand the World :
The Men of knowledge , of deep and various Learning , the rational , the
eloquent ! WESLEY-1750-2,14.106

These are all , or nearly all , against us . WESLEY-1750-2,14.107

And how shall we stand against these ? WESLEY-1750-2,14.108

Does not their Tongue drop Manna ? WESLEY-1750-2,14.109

And have they not learned all the Arts of soft Persuasion ? And of
reasoning too : WESLEY-1750-2,14.110

For these are versed in all Controversies and Strife of Words .
WESLEY-1750-2,14.111

It is therefore a small Thing with them to prove , That the Way is
<font> right <$$font> , because it is <font> broad : <$$font> That he
who <P_15> follows a Multitude , can@ @not do Evil , but only he who
will not follow them : That your Way , must be <font> wrong <$$font> ,
because it is <font> narrow ; <$$font> and because there are so few that
find it . WESLEY-1750-2,15.112

These will make it clear , to a Demonstration , that Evil is Good , and
Good is Evil : That the Way of Holiness is the Way of Destruction , and
the Way of the World , the only Way to Heaven . WESLEY-1750-2,15.113

7. O how can unlearned and ignorant Men , maintain their Cause against
such Opponents ! WESLEY-1750-2,15.114

And yet these are not all with whom they must contend , however unequal
to the Task . WESLEY-1750-2,15.115

For there are many mighty and noble and powerful Men , as well as wise ,
in the Road that leadeth to Destruction ; WESLEY-1750-2,15.116

And these have a shorter Way of confusing , than that of Reason and
Argument . WESLEY-1750-2,15.117

They usually apply , not to the Understanding , but to the Fears of any
that oppose them . A Method that seldom fails of Success , even where
Argument profits nothing : As lying level to the Capacities of all Men :
WESLEY-1750-2,15.118

For all can fear , whether they can reason or no . WESLEY-1750-2,15.119

And all , who have not a firm Trust in God , a sure Reliance both on his
<P_16> Power and Love , can@ @not but fear to give any Disgust to those
, who have the Power of the World in their Hands . WESLEY-1750-2,16.120

What Wonder therefore if the Example of these is a Law , to all who know
not God ? WESLEY-1750-2,16.121

8. Many Rich are likewise in the broad Way . WESLEY-1750-2,16.122

And these apply to the Hopes of Men , and to all their foolish Desires ,
as strongly and effectually as the Mighty and Noble to their Fears . So
that hardly can you hold on in the Way of the Kingdom , unless you are
dead to all below , unless you are crucified to the World , and the
World crucified to you , unless you desire nothing more but God .
WESLEY-1750-2,16.123

9. For how dark , how uncomfortable , how forbidding , is the Prospect
on the opposite Side ? WESLEY-1750-2,16.124

A strait Gate ! WESLEY-1750-2,16.125

A narrow Way ! WESLEY-1750-2,16.126

And few finding that Gate ! WESLEY-1750-2,16.127

Few walking in the Way . WESLEY-1750-2,16.128

Besides , even those few , are not wise Men , not Men of Learning or
Eloquence . WESLEY-1750-2,16.129

They are not able to reason either strongly or clearly ;
WESLEY-1750-2,16.130

they can@ @not propose an Argument to any Advantage .
WESLEY-1750-2,16.131

They know not how to profess what they profess to believe ; or to
explain even what <P_17> they say they experience .
WESLEY-1750-2,17.132

Surely such Advocates as they will never recommend , but rather
discredit the Cause they have espoused . WESLEY-1750-2,17.133

10. Add to this , that they are not noble , not honourable Men :
WESLEY-1750-2,17.134

<paren> if they were , you might bear with their Folly . <$$paren>
WESLEY-1750-2,17.135

They are Men of no Interest , no Authority , of no Account in the World
. WESLEY-1750-2,17.136

They are mean and base , low in Life ; and such as have no Power , if
they had the Will to hurt you . WESLEY-1750-2,17.137

Therefore there is nothing at all to be feared from them :
WESLEY-1750-2,17.138

And there is nothing at all to hope . WESLEY-1750-2,17.139

For the greater Part of them may say , <font> Silver and Gold have I
none : <$$font> At least a very moderate Share . WESLEY-1750-2,17.140

Nay , some of them have scarce Food to eat or Raiment to put on .
WESLEY-1750-2,17.141

For this Reason , as well as because their Ways are not like those of
other Men , they are every_where spoken against , WESLEY-1750-2,17.142

are despised , WESLEY-1750-2,17.143

have their Names cast out as evil , WESLEY-1750-2,17.144

are variously persecuted , and treated as the Filth and Offscouring of
the World . So that both your Fears , your Hopes , and all your Desires
, <paren> except those which you have immediately from God <$$paren> yea
, all your natural Passions continually <P_18> incline you to return
into the broad Way . WESLEY-1750-2,18.145

III. 1. Therefore it is , that our Lord so earnestly exhorts , <font>
Enter ye in at the strait Gate . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,18.146

Or <paren> as the same Exhortation is elsewhere expressed <$$paren>
<font> Strive to enter in . <$$font> {COM:greek_omitted}
WESLEY-1750-2,18.147

Strive as in an Agony . WESLEY-1750-2,18.148

<font> For many <$$font> , saith our Lord , <font> shall seek to enter
in , <$$font> indolently strive , WESLEY-1750-2,18.149

<font> and shall not be able . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,18.150

2. 'T@ @is true , he intimates what may seem another Reason for this ,
for their <font> not being able to enter in <$$font> , in the Words
which immediately follow these . WESLEY-1750-2,18.151

For after he had said , <font> Many , I say unto you , will seek to
enter in , and shall not be able <$$font> , he subjoins , <font> When
once the Master of the House is risen up and hath shut to the Door , and
ye begin to stand without <$$font> <paren> {COM:greek_omitted} .
WESLEY-1750-2,18.152

Rather , <font> Ye stand without ; <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,18.153

for {COM:greek_omitted} seems to be only an elegant Expletive <$$paren>
WESLEY-1750-2,18.154

<font> and to knock at the door , saying Lord , Lord open unto us :
WESLEY-1750-2,18.155

He shall answer and say unto you , I know you not .
WESLEY-1750-2,18.156

Depart from me all ye Workers of Iniquity . WESLEY-1750-2,18.157

Luke <$$font> xiii. 26 , <font> &c. <$$font> 3 . WESLEY-1750-2,18.158

It may appear , upon a transient View of these Words , that their
delaying to seek at all , rather than their <P_19> Manner of seeking ,
was the reason why they were not able to enter in .
WESLEY-1750-2,19.159

But it comes , in Effect , to the same Thing . WESLEY-1750-2,19.160

They were therefore commanded to depart , because they had been <font>
Workers of Iniquity <$$font> , because they had walked in the broad Road
; In other Words , Because they had not agonized to enter in at the
strait Gate . WESLEY-1750-2,19.161

Probably they did <font> seek <$$font> , before the Door was shut :
WESLEY-1750-2,19.162

But that did not suffice . WESLEY-1750-2,19.163

And they did <font> strive <$$font> , after the Door was shut .
WESLEY-1750-2,19.164

But then it was too late . WESLEY-1750-2,19.165

4. Therefore , <font> strive <$$font> ye now in this your Day , <font>
to enter in at the strait Gate . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,19.166

And in order hereto , settle it in your Heart , WESLEY-1750-2,19.167

and let it be ever uppermost in your Thoughts , That if you are in a
broad Way , you are in the Way that leadeth to Destruction .
WESLEY-1750-2,19.168

If many go with you , as sure as God is true , both they and you are
going to Hell . WESLEY-1750-2,19.169

If you are walking as the Generality of Men walk , you are walking to
the bottomless Pit . WESLEY-1750-2,19.170

Are many wise , many rich , many mighty or noble travelling with you in
the same Way ? WESLEY-1750-2,19.171

<P_20>

By this Token , without going any farther , you know , it does not lead
to Life . WESLEY-1750-2,20.173

Here is a short , a plain , an infallible Rule , before you enter into
Particulars . WESLEY-1750-2,20.174

In whatever Profession you are engaged , you must be singular or be
damn'd . WESLEY-1750-2,20.175

The Way to Hell has nothing singular in it ; WESLEY-1750-2,20.176

but the Way to Heaven is Singularity all over : WESLEY-1750-2,20.177

If you move but one Step towards God , you are not as other Men are .
WESLEY-1750-2,20.178

But regard not this . WESLEY-1750-2,20.179

'T@ @is far better to stand alone , than to fall into the Pit .
WESLEY-1750-2,20.180

Run then with Patience the Race which is set before thee , though thy
Companions therein are but few . WESLEY-1750-2,20.181

They will not always be so . WESLEY-1750-2,20.182

Yet a little while and thou wilt <font> come to an innumerable Company
of Angels to the general Assembly and Church of the Firstborn , and to
the Spirits of just Men made perfect . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,20.183

5. Now then <font> strive to enter in at the strait Gate <$$font> ,
being penetrated with the deepest Sense , of the inexpressible Danger
your Soul is in , so long as you are in a broad Way : So long as you are
void of Poverty of Spirit and all <P_21> that inward Religion which the
Many , the Rich , the Wise account Madness . WESLEY-1750-2,21.184

<font> Strive to enter in <$$font> , being pierced with Sorrow and Shame
, for having so long run on with the unthinking Crowd , utterly
neglecting ; if not despising that <font> Holiness , without which no
Man can see the Lord . WESLEY-1750-2,21.185

Strive <$$font> as in an Agony of holy Fear , lest , <font> a Promise
being made you of entering into his Rest <$$font> , even that <font>
Rest which remaineth for the People of God <$$font> , you should
nevertheless <font> come short of it . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,21.186

Strive in all the Fervour of Desire , with <font> Groanings which can@
@not be uttered . <$$font> WESLEY-1750-2,21.187

Strive by Prayer without ceasing , at all Times , in all Places lifting
up your Heart to God , and giving him no Rest , till you <font> awake up
after his Likeness <$$font> and are <font> satisfied with it . <$$font>
WESLEY-1750-2,21.188

6. To conclude . <font> Strive to enter in at the strait Gate ,
<$$font> not only by this Agony of Soul , of Conviction , of Sorrow , of
Shame , of Desire , of Fear , of unceasing Prayer , but likewise by
<font> ordering <$$font> thy <font> Conversation right <$$font> , by
walking with all thy Strength , in all the Ways of God , the Way of
Innocence , of <P_22> Piety and of Mercy . WESLEY-1750-2,22.189

Abstain from all Appearance of Evil : WESLEY-1750-2,22.190

Do all possible Good to all Men : WESLEY-1750-2,22.191

Deny thyself , thy own Will , in all Things , WESLEY-1750-2,22.192

and take up thy Cross daily . WESLEY-1750-2,22.193

Be ready to cut off thy right Hand , to pluck out thy right Eye and cast
it from thee : To suffer the Loss of Goods , Friends , Health , all
Things on Earth , so thou mayest enter into the Kingdom of Heaven .
WESLEY-1750-2,22.194

The End of the First Sermon . WESLEY-1750-2,22.195

