<BEGIN_wesley-1755-2>

<P_5>

The Nature of Enthusiasm . WESLEY-1755-2,5.3

Acts xxvi. 24 . WESLEY-1755-2,5.4

<font> And <$$font> Festus <font> said with a loud Voice <$$font> , Paul
<font> Thou art beside thyself . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,5.5

I . And so say all the World , the Men who know not God , of all that
are of <font> Paul <$$font> 's Religion ; of every one who is so a
Follower of him , as he was of Christ . WESLEY-1755-2,5.6

It is true , there is a Sort of Religion , nay and it is called
Christianity too , which may be practised without any such Imputation ,
which is generally allowed <P_6> to be consistent with common Sense .
That is , a Religion of Form , a Round of outward Duties , performed in
a decent regular Manner . WESLEY-1755-2,6.7

You may add Orthodoxy thereto , a System of right Opinions ; yea , and
some Quantity of Heathen Morality . WESLEY-1755-2,6.8

And yet not many will pronounce , That <font> much <$$font> Religion
<font> hath made you mad . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,6.9

But if you aim at the Religion of the Heart , if you talk of
Righteousness and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost , then it will not be
long before <font> your <$$font> Sentence is past , WESLEY-1755-2,6.10

<font> thou art beside thyself . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,6.11

II . And it is no Compliment which the Men of the World pay you herein
. WESLEY-1755-2,6.12

They , for once , mean what they say . WESLEY-1755-2,6.13

They not only affirm , but cordially believe , That every Man is <font>
beside himself <$$font> , who says , The Love of God is shed abroad in
his Heart , by the Holy Ghost given unto him , and that God has enabled
him to rejoice in Christ , with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory .
WESLEY-1755-2,6.14

If a Man is indeed alive to God , and dead to all Things here below ; if
he continually sees <P_7> him that is invisible , and accordingly walks
by Faith and not by Sight : then they account it a clear Case ; beyond
all Dispute , WESLEY-1755-2,7.15

<font> much <$$font> Religion <font> hath made him mad . <$$font>
WESLEY-1755-2,7.16

III . It is easy to observe , That the determinate Thing which the
World accounts Madness , is that utter Contempt of all temporal Things ,
and steady Pursuit of Things eternal ; that divine Conviction of Things
not seen ; that rejoicing in the Favour of God ; that happy , holy Love
of God ; and that Testimony of his Spirit , with our Spirit that we are
the Children of God . WESLEY-1755-2,7.17

That is , in Truth , the whole Spirit and Life and Power of the Religion
of Jesus Christ . WESLEY-1755-2,7.18

IV . They will however allow , in other Respects , the Man acts and
talks like one in his Senses . WESLEY-1755-2,7.19

In other Things , he is a reasonable Man : WESLEY-1755-2,7.20

it is in these Instances only his Head is touched . WESLEY-1755-2,7.21

It is therefore acknowledged , that the Madness under which he labours ,
is of a particular Kind . WESLEY-1755-2,7.22

And <P_8> accordingly they are accustomed to distinguish it by a
particular Name , Enthusiasm . WESLEY-1755-2,8.23

V . A Term this , which is exceeding frequently used , which is scarce
ever out of some Men's Mouths . WESLEY-1755-2,8.24

And yet it is exceedingly rarely understood , even by those who use it
most . WESLEY-1755-2,8.25

It may be therefore not unacceptable to serious Men , to all who desire
to understand what they speak or hear , if I endeavour to explain the
Meaning of this Term , to shew what <font> Enthusiasm <$$font> is .
WESLEY-1755-2,8.26

It may be an Encouragement to those who are unjustly charged therewith :
WESLEY-1755-2,8.27

and may possibly be of Use , to some who are justly charged with it , at
least to others , who might be so , were they not cautioned against it .
WESLEY-1755-2,8.28

VI . As to the Word itself , it is generally allowed to be of Greek
Extraction . WESLEY-1755-2,8.29

But whence the Greek Word {COM:greek_omitted} , is derived , none has
yet been able to shew . WESLEY-1755-2,8.30

<P_9>

Some have endeavoured to derive it from {COM:greek_omitted} , <font> in
God <$$font> , because all <font> Enthusiasm <$$font> has Reference to
him . WESLEY-1755-2,9.32

But this is quite forced ; there being small Resemblance between the
Word derived , and those they strive to derive it from .
WESLEY-1755-2,9.33

Others would derive it from {COM:greek_omitted} , <font> in Sacrifice
<$$font> , because many of the <font> Enthusiasts <$$font> of old , were
affected in the most violent Manner , during the Time of Sacrifice .
WESLEY-1755-2,9.34

Perhaps it is a fictitious Word , invented from the Noise , which some
of those made who were so affected . WESLEY-1755-2,9.35

VII . It is not improbable , that one Reason why this uncouth Word has
been retained in so many Languages , was because Men were no better
agreed , concerning the {TEXT:the_the} Meaning than concerning the
Derivation of it . WESLEY-1755-2,9.36

They therefore adopted the Greek Word , because they did not understand
it : WESLEY-1755-2,9.37

they did not translate it into their own Tongues , because they knew not
how to translate it : it having been always a <P_10> Word of a loose ,
uncertain Sense , to which no determinate Meaning was affix'd .
WESLEY-1755-2,10.38

VIII . It is not therefore at all surprizing {TEXT:surprizng} , that it
is so variously taken at this Day : different Persons understanding it
in different Senses , quite inconsistent with each other .
WESLEY-1755-2,10.39

Some take it in a good Sense , for a divine Impulse or Impression ,
superior to all the natural Faculties , and suspending for the Time ,
either in whole or in part , both the Reason and the outward Senses .
WESLEY-1755-2,10.40

In this Meaning of the Word , both the Prophets of old , and the
Apostles were proper <font> Enthusiasts : <$$font> being at divers Times
so filled with the Spirit , and so influenced by Him who dwelt in their
Hearts , that the Exercise of their own Reason , their Sense , and all
their natural Faculties being suspended , they were wholly actuated by
the Power of God , and <font> speak <$$font> only <font> as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,10.41

<P_11>

IX . Others take the Word in an indifferent Sense , such as is neither
morally Good nor Evil . WESLEY-1755-2,11.43

Thus they speak of the <font> Enthusiasm <$$font> of the Poets ; of
<font> Homer <$$font> and <font> Virgil <$$font> in particular .
WESLEY-1755-2,11.44

And this a late eminent Writer extends so far as to assert , there is no
Man excellent in his Profession , whatsoever it be , who has not in his
Temper a strong Tincture of <font> Enthusiasm . <$$font>
WESLEY-1755-2,11.45

By <font> Enthusiasm <$$font> these appear to understand , an uncommon
Vigour of Thought , a peculiar Fervour of Spirit , a Vivacity and
Strength not to be found in common Men : elevating the Soul to greater
and higher Things , than cool Reason could have attained .
WESLEY-1755-2,11.46

X . But neither of these is the Sense wherein the Word <font>
Enthusiasm <$$font> is most usually understood . WESLEY-1755-2,11.47

The Generality of Men , if no farther agreed , at least agree thus far
concerning it , That it is something Evil : WESLEY-1755-2,11.48

and this is plainly the Sentiment of all those , who call the Religion
of the Heart , <font> Enthusiasm . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,11.49

<P_12>

Accordingly I shall take it in the following {TEXT:fol-} Pages , as an
Evil : a Misfortune , if not a Fault . WESLEY-1755-2,12.51

XI . As to the Nature of <font> Enthusiasm <$$font> , it is undoubtedly
a Disorder of the Mind ; and such a Disorder , as greatly hinders the
Exercise of Reason . WESLEY-1755-2,12.52

Nay sometimes , it wholly sets it aside : WESLEY-1755-2,12.53

it not only dims , but shuts the Eyes of the Understanding .
WESLEY-1755-2,12.54

It may therefore well be accounted a Species {TEXT:Spieces} of Madness ;
of Madness rather than of Folly : seeing a Fool is properly one who
draws wrong Conclusions from right Premises : where a Madman draws right
Conclusions , but from wrong Premises . WESLEY-1755-2,12.55

And so does an Enthusiast . WESLEY-1755-2,12.56

Suppose his Premise true , WESLEY-1755-2,12.57

and his Conclusions would necessarily follow . WESLEY-1755-2,12.58

But here lies his Mistake , WESLEY-1755-2,12.59

his Premises are false . WESLEY-1755-2,12.60

He imagines himself to be what he is not : WESLEY-1755-2,12.61

and therefore setting out wrong , the farther he goes , the more he
wanders out of the Way . WESLEY-1755-2,12.62

<P_13>

XII . Every <font> Enthusiast <$$font> then is properly a Madman .
WESLEY-1755-2,13.64

Yet his is not an ordinary , but a religious Madness .
WESLEY-1755-2,13.65

By religious , I do not mean , that it is any Part of Religion . Quite
the reverse : WESLEY-1755-2,13.66

Religion is , the Spirit of a sound Mind : WESLEY-1755-2,13.67

and consequently stands in direct Opposition to Madness of every Kind .
WESLEY-1755-2,13.68

But {TEXT:but} I mean , it has Religion for its Object ; it is
conversant about Religion . WESLEY-1755-2,13.69

And so the <font> Enthusiast <$$font> is generally talking of Religion ,
of God , or of the Things of God : But talking in such a Manner that
every reasonable Christian may discern the Disorder of his Mind .
WESLEY-1755-2,13.70

<font> Enthusiasm <$$font> in general may then be described in some such
Manner as this : a religious Madness arising from some falsely imagined
Influence or Inspiration of God : at least , from imputing something to
God which ought not to be imputed to him , or expecting something from
God which ought not to be expected from him . WESLEY-1755-2,13.71

XIII . There are innumerable Sorts of <font> Enthusiasts . <$$font>
WESLEY-1755-2,13.72

Those which are most common , <P_14> and for that Reason most dangerous
, I shall endeavour to reduce under a few general Heads , that they may
be more easily understood and avoided . WESLEY-1755-2,14.73

The First Sort of <font> Enthusiasm <$$font> which I shall mention , is
that of those who imagine they have the <font> Grace <$$font> which they
have not . WESLEY-1755-2,14.74

Thus some imagine , when it is not so , that they have <font> Redemption
<$$font> through Christ , <font> even the Forgiveness of Sin . <$$font>
WESLEY-1755-2,14.75

These are usually such as <font> have no Root in themselves <$$font> ;
no deep Repentance or thorough Conviction . WESLEY-1755-2,14.76

<font> Therefore they receive the Word with Joy . <$$font>
WESLEY-1755-2,14.77

And because <font> they have no Deepness of Earth <$$font> , no deep
Conviction in {COM:added_"in"} their Heart , therefore the Seed <font>
immediately springs up . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,14.78

There is immediately a superficial Change , which together with that
light Joy , striking in with the Pride of their unbroken Heart , and
with their inordinate Self-love , easily persuades them , they have
already <font> tasted the good Word of God , and the Powers of the World
to come . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,14.79

<P_15>

XIV . This is properly an Instance of the first sort of <font>
Enthusiasm : <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,15.81

it is a kind of Madness , arising from the Imagination , that they have
that Grace which in Truth they have not ; so that they only deceive
their own Souls . WESLEY-1755-2,15.82

Madness it may justly be termed : WESLEY-1755-2,15.83

for the Reasonings of these poor Men are right , were their Premises
good : WESLEY-1755-2,15.84

but as those are a mere Creature of their own Imagination
{TEXT:Imgination} , so all that is built on them falls to the Ground .
WESLEY-1755-2,15.85

The Foundation of all their Reveries is this : they imagine themselves
to have Faith in Christ . WESLEY-1755-2,15.86

If they had this , they would be <font> Kings and Priests to God
<$$font> , possessed {TEXT:possest} of a Kingdom which can@ @not be
moved . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,15.87

But they have it not . WESLEY-1755-2,15.88

Consequently , all their following Behaviour , is as wide of Truth and
Soberness , as that of the ordinary Madman , who fancying himself an
earthly King , speaks and acts in that Character . WESLEY-1755-2,15.89

<P_16>

XV . There are many other <font> Enthusiasts <$$font> of this Sort .
WESLEY-1755-2,16.91

Such , for instance , is the fiery Zealot for Religion ; or <paren> more
probably <$$paren> for the Opinions and Modes of Worship , which he
dignifies with that Name . WESLEY-1755-2,16.92

This Man also strongly imagines himself , to be a Believer in Jesus ,
yea , that he is a Champion for the Faith , which was once delivered to
the Saints . WESLEY-1755-2,16.93

Accordingly all his Conduct is formed , upon that vain Imagination .
WESLEY-1755-2,16.94

And allowing his Supposition to be just , he would have some tolerable
Plea for his Behaviour : whereas now it is evidently the Effect of a
distempered Brain , as well as of a distempered Heart .
WESLEY-1755-2,16.95

XVI . But the most common of all the <font> Enthusiasts <$$font> of
this Kind , are those who imagine themselves Christians , and are not .
WESLEY-1755-2,16.96

These abound not only in all Parts of our Land , but in most Parts of
the habitable Earth . WESLEY-1755-2,16.97

That they are not Christians is clear and undeniable , if we believe the
Oracles of God . WESLEY-1755-2,16.98

For Christians are holy ; WESLEY-1755-2,16.99

these <P_17> are unholy : WESLEY-1755-2,17.100

Christians love God ; WESLEY-1755-2,17.101

these love the World . WESLEY-1755-2,17.102

Christians are humble ; WESLEY-1755-2,17.103

these are proud : WESLEY-1755-2,17.104

Christians are gentle ; WESLEY-1755-2,17.105

these are passionate . WESLEY-1755-2,17.106

Christians have the Mind which was in Christ ; WESLEY-1755-2,17.107

these are at the utmost Distance from it . WESLEY-1755-2,17.108

Consequently they are no more Christians , than they are Archangels .
WESLEY-1755-2,17.109

Yet they imagine themselves so to be ; WESLEY-1755-2,17.110

and they can give several Reasons for it . WESLEY-1755-2,17.111

For they have been <font> called so <$$font> ever since they can
remember : WESLEY-1755-2,17.112

they were <font> christened <$$font> many Years ago :
WESLEY-1755-2,17.113

they embrace the <font> Christian Opinions <$$font> vulgarly termed ,
the Christian or Catholick Faith . WESLEY-1755-2,17.114

They use the <font> Christian Modes of Worship <$$font> , as their
Fathers did before them . WESLEY-1755-2,17.115

They live what is called a good , <font> Christian Life , <$$font> as
the rest of their Neighbours do . WESLEY-1755-2,17.116

And who shall presume to think or say , that these Men are not
Christians ? Though without one Grain of true Faith in Christ , or of
real , inward Holiness ! without ever having tasted the Love of God ,
or been <font> made Partakers of the Holy Ghost ! <$$font>
WESLEY-1755-2,17.117

<P_18>

XVII . Ah poor Self-deceivers ! WESLEY-1755-2,18.119

Christians ye are not . WESLEY-1755-2,18.120

But ye are <font> Enthusiasts <$$font> in an high Degree .
WESLEY-1755-2,18.121

Physicians heal yourselves . WESLEY-1755-2,18.122

But first , know your Disease : WESLEY-1755-2,18.123

your whole Life is <font> Enthusiasm : <$$font> as being all suitable to
the Imagination {TEXT:Imigination} , that you have received that Grace
of God which you have not . WESLEY-1755-2,18.124

In Consequence of this grand Mistake , you blunder on , Day by Day ,
speaking and acting under a Character which does in no wise belong to
you . WESLEY-1755-2,18.125

Hence arises that palpable , glaring Inconsistency , that runs thro'
your whole Behaviour : which is an aukward Mixture of real Heathenism
and imaginary Christianity . WESLEY-1755-2,18.126

Yet still , as you have so vast a Majority on your Side , you will
always carry it by mere Dint of Numbers , " That you {TEXT:your} are the
only Men in your Senses , and all are Lunaticks who are not as you are .
" WESLEY-1755-2,18.127

But this alters not the Nature of Things . WESLEY-1755-2,18.128

In the sight of God and his holy Angels , yea , and all the Children of
God upon Earth , you are mere Madmen , mere <font> Enthusiasts <$$font>
<P_19> all . WESLEY-1755-2,19.129

Are you not ? WESLEY-1755-2,19.130

Are you not <font> walking in a vain Shadow <$$font> , a Shadow of
Religion , a Shadow of Happiness ? WESLEY-1755-2,19.131

Are you not still <font> disquieting yourselves in vain ? <$$font> With
Misfortunes as imaginary as your Happiness or Religion ?
WESLEY-1755-2,19.132

Do you not fancy yourselves great or good ? WESLEY-1755-2,19.133

Very knowing , and very wise ! WESLEY-1755-2,19.134

How long ? WESLEY-1755-2,19.135

Perhaps till Death brings you back to your Senses ; to bewail your Folly
for ever and ever ! WESLEY-1755-2,19.136

XVIII . A second sort of <font> Enthusiasm <$$font> , is that of those
who imagine they have such <font> Gifts <$$font> from God as they have
not . WESLEY-1755-2,19.137

Thus some have imagined themselves to be endued with a Power of working
Miracles , of healing the Sick by a Word or a Touch , or restoring Sight
to the Blind ; yea , even of raising the Dead , a notorious Instance of
which is still fresh in our own History . WESLEY-1755-2,19.138

Others have undertaken to prophesy , to foretell Things to come , and
that with the utmost Certainty and Exactness . WESLEY-1755-2,19.139

But a little Time usually convinces these <font> Enthusiasts . <$$font>
WESLEY-1755-2,19.140

When plain Facts run counter to their Predictions , <P_20> Experience
performs what Reason could not , WESLEY-1755-2,20.141

and sinks them down into their Senses . WESLEY-1755-2,20.142

XIX . To the same Class belong those , who in Preaching or Prayer ,
imagine themselves to be so influenced by the Spirit of God as in Fact
they are not . WESLEY-1755-2,20.143

I am sensible indeed , that without him we can do nothing : more
especially in our publick Ministry ; That all our Preaching is utterly
vain , unless it be attended with his Power , and all our Prayer ,
unless his Spirit therein help our Infirmities . WESLEY-1755-2,20.144

I know , if we do not both preach and pray by the Spirit , it is all but
lost Labour : WESLEY-1755-2,20.145

seeing the Help that is done upon Earth , he doth it himself , who
worketh all in all . WESLEY-1755-2,20.146

But this doth not affect {TEXT:effect} the Case before us .
WESLEY-1755-2,20.147

Though there is a real Influence of the Spirit of God , there is also an
imaginary one ; WESLEY-1755-2,20.148

and many there are who mistake the one for the other .
WESLEY-1755-2,20.149

Many suppose themselves to be under that Influence , when they are not ,
when it is far from them . WESLEY-1755-2,20.150

And many others suppose , they are more <P_21> under that Influence then
they really are . WESLEY-1755-2,21.151

Of this Number , I fear , are all they who imagine , that God dictates
the very Words they speak : and that consequently , it is impossible
they should speak any Thing amiss , either as to the Matter or Manner of
it . WESLEY-1755-2,21.152

It is well known , how many <font> Enthusiasts <$$font> of this sort
also , have appeared during the present Century : some of whom speak in
a far more authoritative Manner , than either St. <font> Paul <$$font>
or any of the Apostles . WESLEY-1755-2,21.153

XX . The same sort of <font> Enthusiasm <$$font> , tho' in a lower
Degree , is frequently found in Men of a private Character .
WESLEY-1755-2,21.154

They may likewise imagine themselves to be influenced or directed by the
Spirit , when they are not . WESLEY-1755-2,21.155

I allow , <font> if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ , he is none
of his : <$$font> and that if ever we either think {COM:missing_comma}
speak or act aright , it is through the Assistance of that blessed
Spirit . WESLEY-1755-2,21.156

But how many impute Things to him , or expect Things from him , without
any rational or scriptural Ground ? WESLEY-1755-2,21.157

Such are <P_22> they who imagine , they either do or shall , receive
<font> particular Directions <$$font> from God , not only in Points of
Importance , but in Things of no Moment , in the most trifling
Circumstances of Life . Whereas in these Cases God has given us our own
Reason for a Guide : tho' never excluding the <font> secret Assistance
<$$font> of his Spirit . WESLEY-1755-2,22.158

XXI . To this Kind of <font> Enthusiasm <$$font> they are peculiarly
exposed , who expect to be directed of God , either in spiritual Things
or in common Life , in what is justly called , an <font> extraordinary
<$$font> Manner . WESLEY-1755-2,22.159

I mean , by Visions or Dreams , by strong Impressions , or sudden
Impulses on the Mind . WESLEY-1755-2,22.160

I do not deny , that God has of old Times manifested his Will in this
Manner . Or , that he can do so now . WESLEY-1755-2,22.161

Nay , I believe , he does , in some very rare Instances .
WESLEY-1755-2,22.162

But how frequently do Men mistake herein ? WESLEY-1755-2,22.163

How are they misled by Pride and a warm Imagination , to ascribe such
Impulses or Impressions , Dreams or Visions to God , as are <P_23>
utterly unworthy of him ? WESLEY-1755-2,23.164

Now this is all pure <font> Enthusiasm <$$font> , all as wide of
Religion as it is of Truth and Soberness . WESLEY-1755-2,23.165

XXII . Perhaps some may ask , " Ought we not then to enquire , what is
<font> the Will of God <$$font> in all Things ? WESLEY-1755-2,23.166

And ought not his Will to be the Rule of our Practice ? "
WESLEY-1755-2,23.167

Unquestionably it ought . WESLEY-1755-2,23.168

But how is a sober Christian to make this Enquiry ? To know , <font>
what is the Will of God ? <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,23.169

Not by waiting for supernatural Dreams . WESLEY-1755-2,23.170

Not by expecting God to reveal it in Visions . WESLEY-1755-2,23.171

Not by looking for any <font> particular Impressions <$$font> , or
sudden Impulses on his Mind . WESLEY-1755-2,23.172

No : But by consulting the Oracles of God . WESLEY-1755-2,23.173

<font> To the Law and to the Testimony . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,23.174

This is the general Method of knowing what is <font> the holy and
acceptable Will of God . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,23.175

XXIII . " But how shall I know what is <font> the Will of God <$$font>
, in such and such a particular Case ? WESLEY-1755-2,23.176

The Thing proposed is in <P_24> itself of an indifferent Nature , and so
left undetermined in Scripture . " WESLEY-1755-2,24.177

I answer , the Scripture itself gives you a general Rule , applicable to
all particular Cases , WESLEY-1755-2,24.178

<font> The Will of God is our Sanctification . <$$font>
WESLEY-1755-2,24.179

It is his Will that we should be inwardly and outwardly holy ; that we
should <font> be good and do good <$$font> in every Kind , and in the
highest Degree whereof we are capable . WESLEY-1755-2,24.180

Thus far we tread upon firm Ground . WESLEY-1755-2,24.181

This is as clear as the shining of the Sun . WESLEY-1755-2,24.182

In order therefore to know , what is <font> the Will of God <$$font> in
a particular Case , we have only to apply this general Rule .
WESLEY-1755-2,24.183

XXIV . Suppose , for Instance , it were proposed to a reasonable Man ,
to marry ; or to enter into a new Business : WESLEY-1755-2,24.184

in order to know , whether this is <font> the Will of God , <$$font>
being assured , " It is <font> the Will of God <$$font> concerning me ,
that I should be as holy and do as much Good as I can , " he has only to
inquire , " In which of these States can I be most holy , and do the
most Good ? " WESLEY-1755-2,24.185

And <P_25> this is to be determined , partly by Reason , and partly by
Experience . WESLEY-1755-2,25.186

Experience tells him what Advantages he has in his present State ,
either for being or doing Good : WESLEY-1755-2,25.187

and Reason is to shew , what he certainly or probably will have in the
State proposed . WESLEY-1755-2,25.188

By comparing these he is to judge , which of the two may most conduce to
his being and doing Good : WESLEY-1755-2,25.189

and as far as he knows this , so far he is certain , what is <font> the
Will of God . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,25.190

XXV . Meantime , the Assistance of his Spirit is supposed , during the
whole Process of the Inquiry . WESLEY-1755-2,25.191

Indeed it is not easy to say , in how many Ways , that Assistance is
conveyed . WESLEY-1755-2,25.192

He may bring many Circumstances to our Remembrance ,
WESLEY-1755-2,25.193

may place others in a stronger and clearer Light ; WESLEY-1755-2,25.194

may insensibly open our Mind to receive Conviction , and fix that
Conviction upon our Heart . WESLEY-1755-2,25.195

And to a Concurrence of many Circumstances of this Kind , in Favour of
what is acceptable in his Sight , he may superadd such an unutterable
<P_26> Peace of Mind , and so uncommon a Measure of his Love , as will
leave us no Possibility of doubting , That <font> this <$$font> even
<font> this <$$font> , is his Will concerning us . WESLEY-1755-2,26.196

XXVI . This is the plain , scriptural , rational Way to know , what is
<font> the Will of God <$$font> in a particular Case .
WESLEY-1755-2,26.197

But considering how seldom this Way is taken , and what a Flood of
<font> Enthusiasm <$$font> must needs break in , on those who endeavour
to know <font> the Will of God <$$font> by unscriptural , irrational
Ways : it were to be wished , that the Expression itself , were far more
sparingly used . WESLEY-1755-2,26.198

The using it , as some do , on the most trivial Occasions , is a plain
Breach of the third Commandment . WESLEY-1755-2,26.199

It is a gross Way of taking the Name of God in vain ,
WESLEY-1755-2,26.200

and betrays great Irreverence {TEXT:Irreverance} toward him .
WESLEY-1755-2,26.201

Would it not be far better then , to use other Expressions , which are
not liable to such Objections ? WESLEY-1755-2,26.202

For Example . Instead of saying on any particular Occasion , " I want
to know what is <font> the Will of God . <$$font> " Would it <P_27> not
be better to say , " I want to know , what will be most for my
Improvement : and , what will make me most useful . "
WESLEY-1755-2,27.203

This Way of speaking is clear and unexceptionable .
WESLEY-1755-2,27.204

It is putting the Matter on a plain , scriptural Issue , and that
without any Danger of <font> Enthusiasm <$$font> . WESLEY-1755-2,27.205

XXVII . A third very common sort of <font> Enthusiasm <$$font> <paren>
if it does not coincide {TEXT:co-incide} with the former <$$paren> is
that of those who think to attain the End without using the Means , by
the immediate Power of God . WESLEY-1755-2,27.206

If indeed those Means were providentially withheld , they would not fall
under this Charge . WESLEY-1755-2,27.207

God can , and sometimes does , in Cases of this Nature , exert his own
immediate Power . WESLEY-1755-2,27.208

But they who expect this when they have those Means , and will not use
them , are proper <font> Enthusiasts . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,27.209

Such are they who expect to understand the holy Scriptures , without
reading them and meditating thereon : yea , without using all such Helps
as are in their Power , and may probably conduce to <P_28> that End .
WESLEY-1755-2,28.210

Such are they who <font> designedly <$$font> speak in the publick
Assembly , without any Premeditation . WESLEY-1755-2,28.211

I say <font> designedly : <$$font> because there may be such
Circumstances , as at some Times make it unavoidable .
WESLEY-1755-2,28.212

But whoever <font> despises <$$font> that great Means of speaking
profitably , is so far an <font> Enthusiast . <$$font>
WESLEY-1755-2,28.213

XXVIII . It may be expected that I should mention what some have
accounted , a fourth sort of <font> Enthusiasm <$$font> , namely , The
imagining those Things to be owing to the Providence of God , which are
not owing thereto . WESLEY-1755-2,28.214

But I doubt . WESLEY-1755-2,28.215

I know not what Things they are , which are not owing to the Providence
of God : in ordering , or , at least , in governing of which , this is
not either directly or remotely concerned . WESLEY-1755-2,28.216

I except nothing but Sin : WESLEY-1755-2,28.217

and even in the Sins of others , I see the Providence of God to <font>
me . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,28.218

I do not say , his <font> general Providence <$$font> ;
WESLEY-1755-2,28.219

for this I take to be a sounding Word , which <P_29> means just nothing
. WESLEY-1755-2,29.220

And if there be a <font> particular Providence <$$font> , it must extend
to all Persons and all Things . WESLEY-1755-2,29.221

So our Lord understood it , WESLEY-1755-2,29.222

or he could never have said , <font> Even the Hairs of your Head are all
numbred . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,29.223

And , <font> Not a Sparrow falleth to the Ground , without the Will of
your Father which is in Heaven . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,29.224

But if it be so , if God presides <font> universis tanquam singulis , et
singulis tanquam universis <$$font> ; over the whole Universe as over
every single Person , over every single Person {TEXT:Per-} as over the
whole Universe : What is it <paren> except only our own Sin <$$paren>
which we are not to ascribe to the Providence of God ? So that I can@
@not apprehend , there is any Room here , for the Charge of <font>
Enthusiasm . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,29.225

XXIX . If it be said , The Charge lies here : " When you impute <font>
this <$$font> to Providence , you imagine yourself the peculiar
Favourite of Heaven . " I answer , you have forgot some of the last
Words I spoke , <P_30> <font> Praesidet universis tanquam singulis .
<$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,30.226

His Providence is over all Men in the Universe , as much as over any
single Person . WESLEY-1755-2,30.227

Do not you see , that he who believing this , imputes any Thing which
befalls him to Providence , does not therein make himself any more the
Favourite of Heaven , than he supposes every Man under Heaven to be ?
WESLEY-1755-2,30.228

Therefore you have no Pretence , upon this Ground , to charge him with
<font> Enthusiasm . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,30.229

XXX . Against every sort of this , it behooves {TEXT:behoves} to guard
, with the utmost Diligence : considering the dreadful Effects it has so
often produced , and which indeed naturally result from it .
WESLEY-1755-2,30.230

Its immediate Offspring is Pride ; WESLEY-1755-2,30.231

it continually increases this Source from whence it flows ,
WESLEY-1755-2,30.232

and hereby it alienates us more and more , from the Favour and from the
Life of God . WESLEY-1755-2,30.233

It dries up the very Springs of Faith and Love ; of Righteousness and
true Holiness . Seeing all these flow from Grace .
WESLEY-1755-2,30.234

But God <font> resisteth the <P_31> Proud , WESLEY-1755-2,31.235

and giveth Grace <$$font> only <font> to the humble . <$$font>
WESLEY-1755-2,31.236

XXXI . Together with Pride there will naturally arise an unadvisable
and unconvincible Spirit . So that into whatever Error or Fault the
<font> Enthusiast {TEXT:Enthusiasts} <$$font> falls , there is small
Hope of his Recovery . WESLEY-1755-2,31.237

For Reason will have little Weight with him <paren> as has been justly
and frequently observed <$$paren> who imagines he is led by an higher
Guide , by the immediate Wisdom of God . WESLEY-1755-2,31.238

And as he grows in Pride , so he must grow in Unadvisableness and in
Stubbornness also . WESLEY-1755-2,31.239

He must be less and less capable of being convinced , less susceptible
of Persuasion ; more and more attached to his own Judgment and his own
Will , till he is altogether fixt and immoveable . WESLEY-1755-2,31.240

XXXII . Being thus fortified both against the Grace of God , and
against all Advice and Help from Man , he is wholly left to the Guidance
of his own Heart , and of the <P_32> King of the Children of Pride .
WESLEY-1755-2,32.241

No Marvel then that he is daily more rooted and grounded in Contempt of
all Mankind , in furious Anger , in every unkind Disposition , in every
earthly and devilish Temper . WESLEY-1755-2,32.242

Neither can we wonder at the terrible outward Effects , which have
flowed from such Dispositions in all Ages : even all Manner of
Wickedness , all the Works of Darkness , committed by those who called
themselves Christians , while they wrought with Greediness such Things ,
as were hardly named even among the Heathens . WESLEY-1755-2,32.243

Such is the Nature , WESLEY-1755-2,32.244

such is the dreadful Effects , of that many-headed Monster <font>
Enthusiasm ! <$$font> From the Consideration of which , we may now draw
some plain Inferences , with regards to our own Practice .
WESLEY-1755-2,32.245

XXXIII . And , First , If <font> Enthusiasm <$$font> be a Term , though
so frequently used , yet so <P_33> rarely understood , take <font> you
<$$font> Care , not to talk of you know not what , not to use the Word ,
till you understand it . WESLEY-1755-2,33.246

As in all other Points , so likewise in this , learn to think before you
speak . WESLEY-1755-2,33.247

First know the Meaning of this hard Word ; WESLEY-1755-2,33.248

and then use it , if Need require . WESLEY-1755-2,33.249

XXXIV . But if so few , even among Men of Education and Learning , much
more among the common Sort of Men , understand this dark , ambiguous
Word , or have any fixt Notion of what it means : Then , Secondly ,
Beware of judging or calling any Man an <font> Enthusiast <$$font> upon
common Report . WESLEY-1755-2,33.250

This is by no Means a sufficient Ground , for giving any Name of
Reproach to any Man , WESLEY-1755-2,33.251

least of all is it a sufficient Ground , for so black a Term of Reproach
as this . WESLEY-1755-2,33.252

The more Evil it contains , the more cautious you should be , how you
apply it to any one : to bring so heavy an Accusation without full
<P_34> Proof , being neither consistent with Justice nor Mercy .
WESLEY-1755-2,34.253

XXXV . But if <font> Enthusiasm <$$font> be so great an Evil , beware
you are not intangled therewith yourself . WESLEY-1755-2,34.254

Watch and pray that you fall not into the Temptation .
WESLEY-1755-2,34.255

It easily besets those who fear or love God . WESLEY-1755-2,34.256

O beware you do not think of yourself more highly than you ought to
think . WESLEY-1755-2,34.257

Do not imagine you have attained the Grace of God , to which you have
not attained . WESLEY-1755-2,34.258

You may have much Joy : WESLEY-1755-2,34.259

you may have a Measure of Love , and yet not have Living Faith .
WESLEY-1755-2,34.260

Cry unto God that he would not suffer you , blind as you are , to go out
of the Way ; that you may never fancy yourself a Believer in Christ ,
till Christ is revealed in you , and till his Spirit witnesses with your
Spirit , and that you are a Child of God . WESLEY-1755-2,34.261

<P_35>

XXXVI . Beware you are not a fiery , persecuting <font> Enthusiast .
<$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,35.263

Do not imagine that God has called you , <paren> just contrary to the
Spirit of him you stile your Master <$$paren> to destroy Mens' Lives ,
and not to save them . WESLEY-1755-2,35.264

Neither dream of forcing Men into the Ways of God .
WESLEY-1755-2,35.265

Think yourself , WESLEY-1755-2,35.266

and let think . WESLEY-1755-2,35.267

Use no Constraint in Matters of Religion . WESLEY-1755-2,35.268

Even those who are farthest out of the Way , never <font> compel to come
in <$$font> , by any other Means , than Reason , Truth and Love .
WESLEY-1755-2,35.269

XXXVII . Beware you do not run with the common Herd of <font>
Enthusiasts <$$font> , fancying you are a Christian when you are not .
WESLEY-1755-2,35.270

Presume not to assume that venerable Name , unless you have a clear ,
scriptural Title thereto : unless you have the Mind which was in Christ
, and walk as he also walked . WESLEY-1755-2,35.271

<P_36>

XXXVIII . Beware you do not fall into the second sort of <font>
Enthusiasm <$$font> , fancying you have those <font> Gifts <$$font> from
God which you have not . WESLEY-1755-2,36.273

Trust not in Visions or Dreams ; in sudden Impressions , or Strong
Impulses of any Kind . WESLEY-1755-2,36.274

Remember , it is not by these you are to know , what is <font> the Will
of God <$$font> on any particular Occasion ; but by applying the plain
Scripture Rule , with the Help of Experience and Reason , and the
ordinary Assistance of the Spirit of God . WESLEY-1755-2,36.275

Do not lightly take the Name of God in your Mouth : WESLEY-1755-2,36.276

Do not talk of <font> the Will of God <$$font> on every trifling
Occasion . WESLEY-1755-2,36.277

But let your Words , as well as your Actions , be all tempered with
Reverence and godly Fear . WESLEY-1755-2,36.278

XXXIX . Beware , lastly , of imagining you shall obtain the End ,
without using the Means {TEXT:Meads} conducive to it .
WESLEY-1755-2,36.279

God <font> can <$$font> <P_37> give the End , without any Means at all ;
WESLEY-1755-2,37.280

but you have no Reason to think he <font> will . <$$font>
WESLEY-1755-2,37.281

Therefore constantly and carefully use these Means , which he has
appointed to be the ordinary Channels of his Grace .
WESLEY-1755-2,37.282

Use every Means which either Reason or Scripture recommends , as
conducive <paren> through the free Love of God in Christ <$$paren>
either to the obtaining , or increasing any of the Gifts of God .
WESLEY-1755-2,37.283

Thus expect a daily Growth in that pure and holy Religion , which the
World always did , and always will call <font> Enthusiasm : <$$font> but
which to all who are saved from real <font> Enthusiasm <$$font> , from
mere nominal Christianity , is the Wisdom of God and the Power of God ,
the glorious Image of the Most High : Righteousness and Peace : a
Fountain of living Water , springing up into everlasting Life !
WESLEY-1755-2,37.284

<font> Finis . <$$font> WESLEY-1755-2,37.285

