<BEGIN_whewell-1837-1>

<P_5>

<heading>

Chapter I . WHEWELL-1837-1,5.4

Of the Subjects of University Teaching . WHEWELL-1837-1,5.5

Sect. 1 . WHEWELL-1837-1,5.6

- Of the Distinction of Practical and Speculative Teaching .
WHEWELL-1837-1,5.7

<$$heading>

There are two modes of teaching , which , in a general view , may be
broadly distinguished from each other . WHEWELL-1837-1,5.9

In the one mode the lecturer expounds to his audience the doctrines or
results of some branch of knowledge , the speculations of antecedent
philosophers , or his own , while the office of the audience is only to
attend to him , to listen , to receive , think on , and treasure up what
the speaker delivers , without being called upon themselves to take any
active part ; without being required to produce , to test , or to apply
the knowledge thus acquired . WHEWELL-1837-1,5.10

In another mode of teaching , the learner has not merely to listen , but
to do something himself ; not merely to receive , but to produce his
knowledge : - as when the mathematical student proves the proposition
which is enunciated by his teacher , or solves a problem proposed to him
; - or when the classical scholar renders Horace or Thucydides into
English . WHEWELL-1837-1,5.11

The former I call <font> speculative <$$font> , the latter , <font>
practical <$$font> teaching . WHEWELL-1837-1,5.12

And I must beg the reader to recollect the manner in which I use these
terms ; <P_6> namely , with reference to the <font> mode <$$font> of
teaching , not the possible application of the <font> subject <$$font>
taught . WHEWELL-1837-1,6.13

It is because geometry is taught thus <font> practically <$$font> , and
not because it is what is commonly called " practical knowledge , " that
I designate the cultivation of geometry , in the manner which prevails
in English Universities , as Practical Teaching . WHEWELL-1837-1,6.14

In their marked forms , these two kinds of teaching are very clearly
distinguished . WHEWELL-1837-1,6.15

Lectures uncombined with any questions or practical demands on the
learner , are familiar to us in our own Universities , in those of
foreign lands , in the metropolis , and in the provinces ; as modes of
treating of physics and metaphysics , geology and political economy ,
taste and politics . WHEWELL-1837-1,6.16

All such lectures I speak of as speculative teaching , since they are
employed in delivering to the hearer the doctrine adopted by the teacher
, in a speculative form . WHEWELL-1837-1,6.17

Practical teaching , where the scholar , with voice , pen , or pencil ,
follows the track pointed out to him , and is constantly brought back
into it when he deviates , are still more familiar ; WHEWELL-1837-1,6.18

for by this method we learn everything that , in the most peculiar sense
, we learn at all . WHEWELL-1837-1,6.19

It is by such a process that we become able to read , to write , to cast
accounts , to translate Latin and Greek , to speak French and German ,
to solve equations , to obtain our own results in the highest branches
of mathematics . WHEWELL-1837-1,6.20

The teaching of mothers and fathers , of schools , and a great part of
the teaching of our English Universities , has hitherto been of this
practical kind . WHEWELL-1837-1,6.21

Now we may observe , that when we come to such branches of literature
and science as are likely to be <P_7> selected for the matter of
University teaching , some of these branches naturally and almost
inevitably require to be taught practically , while others as clearly
are more fitted for the speculative mode of teaching .
WHEWELL-1837-1,7.22

Languages and mathematics are of the former kind ; WHEWELL-1837-1,7.23

but many of the sciences , and those especially which are wide and
varied in their topics , which involve doubtful or newly-@ @established
principles , of which the foundations are constantly undergoing changes
, can hardly be taught otherwise than speculatively .
WHEWELL-1837-1,7.24

Such subjects are , for example , geology , political economy , and , as
appears to me , metaphysics . WHEWELL-1837-1,7.25

In such subjects as these , the student may listen , WHEWELL-1837-1,7.26

and may acquire such knowledge as the teacher possesses ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,7.27

but he is not , and can@ @not be called upon , as a part of the teaching
, to do something which depends on the knowledge thus acquired .
WHEWELL-1837-1,7.28

He may follow with the clearest apprehension , WHEWELL-1837-1,7.29

and it may be , with full and well-founded conviction , the views which
are presented to him by the teacher ; WHEWELL-1837-1,7.30

but still he is passive only ; WHEWELL-1837-1,7.31

he is a spectator , not an actor , in the intellectual scene .
WHEWELL-1837-1,7.32

He does not interpret and employ a peculiar acquired language , as he
does in his classical reading , or his algebraical calculations .
WHEWELL-1837-1,7.33

What I have called practical teaching prevails in the Colleges of our
English Universities . WHEWELL-1837-1,7.34

A large portion of the teaching , in those institutions , has always
consisted , as it still does , of exercises , in which the pupil
translates his Greek or Latin author , proves his proposition , or
solves his equation , in the hearing or under the eye of his tutor ; or
answers interrogatories , <P_8> in which he has to produce the knowledge
which he has acquired . WHEWELL-1837-1,8.35

I believe this to have been the mode of teaching employed among us from
the earliest times . WHEWELL-1837-1,8.36

In that College , at least , of which I know most , such a method is
enjoined in the statutes . WHEWELL-1837-1,8.37

Disputations are to be constantly held in the chapel ; verses written
and affixed in the hall ; WHEWELL-1837-1,8.38

and the lecturers are to employ half an hour in expounding their author
, but a whole hour in examining their class . WHEWELL-1837-1,8.39

But besides these practical lectures , we have always had lectures of
the speculative kind , delivered by the University professors .
WHEWELL-1837-1,8.40

Such lectures on history , morals , political economy , law , medicine ,
anatomy , geology , botany , mineralogy , chemistry , the mechanical
sciences , and other subjects , have constantly been going on in our
Universities ; WHEWELL-1837-1,8.41

and have , especially of late years , often excited very great attention
. WHEWELL-1837-1,8.42

We may , therefore , distinguish our practical and speculative teaching
, as <font> college lectures <$$font> and <font> professorial lectures ;
<$$font> WHEWELL-1837-1,8.43

- and such a distinction corresponds to the phraseology commonly in use
among us . WHEWELL-1837-1,8.44

It may be said , that with professorial lectures examinations may be
combined , and that such lectures may thus be converted into practical
teaching . WHEWELL-1837-1,8.45

Nor do I intend to deny that , under certain conditions , which I shall
afterwards endeavour to determine , this effect may be produced .
WHEWELL-1837-1,8.46

But without now entering <P_9> into this subject , I trust that the main
features of the distinction , which I am trying to point out , of the
two kinds of teaching , are already sufficiently clear .
WHEWELL-1837-1,9.47

Now it must be observed that , though all branches of science and
speculation , old and new , fixed and moveable , may be made the
subjects of exposition in lectures , practical teaching is applicable
only to a limited range of subjects ; - those , namely , in which
principles having clear evidence and stable certainty , form the basis
of our knowledge ; and in which , consequently , a distinct possession
of the fundamental ideas enables a student to proceed to their
applications , and to acquire the habit of applying them in every case
with ease and rapidity . WHEWELL-1837-1,9.48

The idea of space , of number , of the general relations of grammar and
the force of language , are necessary and immutable parts of the
furniture of the human mind . WHEWELL-1837-1,9.49

And mathematics and languages , which are the development
{TEXT:developement} and working of those ideas , can be practically
taught , WHEWELL-1837-1,9.50

for we can appeal to these ideas , and familiarize the mind with a
series of vast and varied , yet certain consequences , to which they
lead . WHEWELL-1837-1,9.51

But when we come to the wider physical sciences , we can only present
the facts as a matter of observation , and the speculation as dependent
on the facts . WHEWELL-1837-1,9.52

Here there is no room for acquiring habits of interpretation which can
be tested by the teacher . WHEWELL-1837-1,9.53

And in sciences which are not physical , as morals or metaphysics , the
philosophy of history , or of taste , the instruction is still more
inevitably of the speculative kind . WHEWELL-1837-1,9.54

The teacher must be content to tell , and the learner to receive , what
has been thought , <P_10> or ought to be thought , on these subjects .
WHEWELL-1837-1,10.55

He does not , by learning them , acquire a new faculty , which he must
practically exercise . WHEWELL-1837-1,10.56

Such subjects as I have just described , may , perhaps , without
impropriety , be distinguished by the collective title of " philosophy ;
" WHEWELL-1837-1,10.57

and if this be allowed , it will , I think , appear , that <font>
philosophy <$$font> is only fitted for speculative , as <font>
mathematical and classical <$$font> studies are for practical , teaching
. WHEWELL-1837-1,10.58

In saying this , I do not at all profess to know , whether I am
employing the term " philosophy , " in the sense attached to it by other
persons , who may have written on the subject ; WHEWELL-1837-1,10.59

but it may , I think , designate appropriately a large class of studies
, all of which admit of the same mode of communication to the student .
WHEWELL-1837-1,10.60

In such studies , moreover , even if examinations be added to lectures ,
they can hardly constitute a practical teaching ; WHEWELL-1837-1,10.61

for in such instances , the knowledge which lectures convey , is either
merely retained in the memory , WHEWELL-1837-1,10.62

or is employed as material for further speculation by the student ,
WHEWELL-1837-1,10.63

and is not assimilated and converted into a practical habit of
intellectual action . WHEWELL-1837-1,10.64

Examinations , therefore , in these cases , may test the goodness of the
memory , and the clearness of the apprehension or general faculties ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,10.65

and we may also conceive examinations of a higher kind , that call out
the powers of original thought , and detect the activity of talent and
genius . WHEWELL-1837-1,10.66

But the trial of mere memory and clearheadedness is not practical
teaching , in the same sense as the acquisition of a power of
interpretation or calculation ; WHEWELL-1837-1,10.67

and the higher kind of examination which we have mentioned , presupposes
that practical teaching of <P_11> which we here speak ,
WHEWELL-1837-1,11.68

and is not to be confounded with it . WHEWELL-1837-1,11.69

And thus , even with the addition of examinations on subjects of general
philosophy , there will still remain , between those studies and the
mathematical and classical pursuits of the English Universities , that
difference which I describe by calling the former speculative teaching .
WHEWELL-1837-1,11.70

Thus the distinction of speculative and practical instruction , which at
first sight appears to be a difference of the manner of teaching , is
found , on examination , to imply a difference of the subjects taught .
WHEWELL-1837-1,11.71

When we have determined that we will teach practically , we have decided
that we must lecture , not on philosophy , not on metaphysics or
speculative morals , or political economy , but on subjects of a
different kind ; - on the works of Greek and Latin authors ; - the
properties of space and number ; - the laws of motion and force .
WHEWELL-1837-1,11.72

Of course , I mean only , that <font> so far <$$font> as we teach
practically , we must select such subjects . WHEWELL-1837-1,11.73

Nothing prevents us , and as I have said , we have not been prevented ,
from giving , in addition to our college courses , professorial lectures
on all the other subjects which I have mentioned . WHEWELL-1837-1,11.74

But it is not on that account the less important to my purpose , to keep
the consideration of the two kinds of study distinct .
WHEWELL-1837-1,11.75

It is obvious also , that , in many cases , the same subject admits of
being dealt with in both ways . WHEWELL-1837-1,11.76

We may not only ascertain that our pupils can translate Sophocles ,
WHEWELL-1837-1,11.77

but we may present to them the widest speculative views at which critics
have arrived , <P_12> respecting the history and structure of the Greek
language , or the Greek drama . WHEWELL-1837-1,12.78

We may enter into discussions respecting the metaphysical grounds of the
axioms of geometry , the processes of algebra , the laws of motion .
WHEWELL-1837-1,12.79

Such speculations and discussions are of the highest interest and value
; WHEWELL-1837-1,12.80

but it is easy to see that they are something in addition to the
teaching of Greek and mathematics . WHEWELL-1837-1,12.81

They add immensely to the value of the practical acquisition of language
and mathematical habits , WHEWELL-1837-1,12.82

but they presuppose the acquisition ; WHEWELL-1837-1,12.83

and when these philosophical views are substituted for the practical
instruction , they are altogether empty and valueless as means of
education . WHEWELL-1837-1,12.84

But I do not here insist upon this point . WHEWELL-1837-1,12.85

In the present section , my object was to distinguish the two systems ,
before I compared them . WHEWELL-1837-1,12.86

Trusting that the distinction is now sufficiently clear , I proceed to
the comparison . WHEWELL-1837-1,12.87

And this I shall consider with reference to such points as these : - the
effect on the intellectual and on the moral character of those who are
educated , and on the general progress of national culture and
civilisation . WHEWELL-1837-1,12.88

<heading>

Sect. 2 . WHEWELL-1837-1,12.90

- Of the Effect of Practical Teaching on the Intellectual Habits .
WHEWELL-1837-1,12.91

<$$heading>

The advantages which belong to the study of mathematics , as an
intellectual discipline , have been often stated by various persons .
WHEWELL-1837-1,12.93

I may repeat language which I have already used : - WHEWELL-1837-1,12.94

" In mathematics , the student is rendered familiar with the <P_13> most
perfect examples of strict inference ; compelled habitually to fix his
attention on those conditions on which the cogency of the demonstration
depends ; WHEWELL-1837-1,13.95

and , in the mistaken or imperfect attempts at demonstration made by
himself or others , he is presented with examples of the most natural
fallacies , which he sees exposed and corrected . "
WHEWELL-1837-1,13.96

My Edinburgh reviewer expressed a wish , that these latter " novel
assertions had been explained and exemplified ; " WHEWELL-1837-1,13.97

and obviously , was really at a loss to understand them , although they
refer to the daily occurrences of the lecture-room .
WHEWELL-1837-1,13.98

This is a curious proof how entirely practical teaching is lost sight of
, amid the speculations of his school . WHEWELL-1837-1,13.99

I may observe , too , as I have done elsewhere , that reasoning , as a
practical habit , is taught with peculiar advantage by mathematics ,
because we are , in that study , concerned with long chains of reasoning
, in which each link hangs from all the preceding .
WHEWELL-1837-1,13.100

" The language contains a constant succession of short and rapid
references to what has been proved already ; WHEWELL-1837-1,13.101

and it is justly assumed , that each of these brief movements helps the
reasoner forwards in a course of infallible certainty and security .
WHEWELL-1837-1,13.102

Each of these hasty glances must possess the clearness of intuitive
evidence , and the certainty of mature reflection :
WHEWELL-1837-1,13.103

and yet must leave the reasoner's mind entirely free to turn instantly
to the next point of his progress . WHEWELL-1837-1,13.104

The faculty of performing <P_14> such processes well and readily , is of
great value ; " WHEWELL-1837-1,14.105

and this faculty can hardly be acquired and cultivated in any other way
, than by the study of mathematics . WHEWELL-1837-1,14.106

I shall not pursue the consideration of the beneficial intellectual
influence of mathematical studies . WHEWELL-1837-1,14.107

It would be easy to point out circumstances , which show that this
influence has really operated ; - for instance , the extraordinary
number of persons , who , after giving more than the common attention to
mathematical studies at the University , have afterwards become eminent
as English lawyers . WHEWELL-1837-1,14.108

It would be easy , also , to gather together a " cloud of witnesses , "
who have spoken with admiration and enthusiasm of mathematics as a
discipline of the mind . WHEWELL-1837-1,14.109

But this would be a very idle mode of treating the subject ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,14.110

for it might be possible also , to adduce a large bulk of testimony on
the other side . WHEWELL-1837-1,14.111

And what could be inferred from this array of cloud against cloud ?
WHEWELL-1837-1,14.112

Except we can get some clear insight into the subject ourselves , we can
never know whether the authors we adduce , are not speaking from views
as vague and confused as our own . WHEWELL-1837-1,14.113

When any one will point out any other study , as a mode of <font>
practically teaching <$$font> reasoning , which he maintains to be
preferable to mathematics , we may be tempted to make the comparison ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,14.114

but this has not been done , so far as I know . WHEWELL-1837-1,14.115

It may be said , that mathematical reasoning is but one kind of
reasoning , and that the study and practice of this alone , ought not to
be spoken of as the cultivation of the reasoning power in general .
WHEWELL-1837-1,14.116

To this , I reply , that <P_15> the faculty of reasoning , <font> so far
as it can be disciplined by practical teaching <$$font> , receives such
a discipline from mathematical study . WHEWELL-1837-1,15.117

If , for instance , any one says , " Why do you not cultivate the habit
of <font> inductive <$$font> as well as of <font> deductive <$$font>
reasoning ? " I answer , that the only cultivation of which inductive
reasoning admits , is that which is supplied by deductive reasoning .
WHEWELL-1837-1,15.118

For when we collect a new truth by induction from facts , what is the
process of our minds ? WHEWELL-1837-1,15.119

We acquire a new and distinct view , WHEWELL-1837-1,15.120

or hit upon a right supposition ; WHEWELL-1837-1,15.121

and we perceive that , in the consequences of our new notions , the
observed facts are included . WHEWELL-1837-1,15.122

The former part of this process , the new and true idea suited to the
emergency , the happy guess , no teaching can give the student .
WHEWELL-1837-1,15.123

All that we can do is , to fix the idea when he has it , and to teach
him to test his hypothesis by tracing its consequences .
WHEWELL-1837-1,15.124

And this , the cultivation of deductive habits does .
WHEWELL-1837-1,15.125

We can@ @not teach men to invent new truths ; WHEWELL-1837-1,15.126

we can@ @not even give them the power of guessing a riddle .
WHEWELL-1837-1,15.127

But those who have been inventors , have always had , not only that
native fertility of mind which no education can bestow , but also a
talent of clearly and rapidly applying their newly-sprung thoughts , in
which half their power consisted , and which is precisely that faculty
which mathematical habits may improve . WHEWELL-1837-1,15.128

And the distinctness of the fundamental ideas , a state of thought
essential alike to sound reasoning from old truths , and to the
discovery of new , is not unprovided for by the study of mathematics ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,15.129

for though deductive habits do not <font> give <$$font> distinct
fundamental ideas <P_16> they <font> demand <$$font> them ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,16.130

and , by the constant appeal to such ideas , they fix and develop
{TEXT:develope} them . WHEWELL-1837-1,16.131

A perception of the truth of mathematical axioms can@ @not be conveyed
into the mind by reasoning ; WHEWELL-1837-1,16.132

but still , the mathematical reasoner usually sees more clearly than
other men , the necessary truth of his axioms . WHEWELL-1837-1,16.133

Other persons may have the idea of space , as well as the geometer ; -
the idea of force and matter , as well as the mechanician ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,16.134

but these ideas shine with a clearer and steadier light in the minds of
those who constantly work by such lamps , and therefore , carefully tend
and trim them . WHEWELL-1837-1,16.135

Since the study of mathematics is thus useful , not only in teaching
habits of deduction , which are exemplified in its proofs , but also in
leading men to the distinct ideas which are expressed in its definitions
and axioms , we learn a lesson respecting the kind of mathematics which
we may most advantageously introduce in our education .
WHEWELL-1837-1,16.136

For since those clear ideas upon which the several mathematical sciences
depend are a valuable mental possession , both on their own account ,
and as examples of such a class of elements of truth , we ought not to
be content with one or two such ideas and their consequences ,
WHEWELL-1837-1,16.137

but should introduce the student to a wider range of mathematical proof
. WHEWELL-1837-1,16.138

We shall thus succeed best in repressing the evil consequences which
might arise from confining ourselves to one kind of reasoning .
WHEWELL-1837-1,16.139

We ought , therefore , to include in our course , not <P_17> only pure
mathematical sciences , geometry , arithmetic , and algebra , the
consequences of the fundamental ideas of space , number , and quantity ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,17.140

but we ought also to admit the consequences of other ideas , which lead
to rigorous mathematical sciences , such as the ideas of pressure and
matter , of rigidity and fluidity , of velocity and force ; of which
ideas , the developments {TEXT:developements} are found in the sciences
of Mechanics and Hydrostatics . WHEWELL-1837-1,17.141

This maxim I have already urged , in a former publication on this
subject . WHEWELL-1837-1,17.142

And I rejoice to say , that a recent alteration in the examinations of
the University of Cambridge , by which certain portions of Mechanics and
Hydrostatics are introduced into the lower Examinations for Degrees ,
has made our system , what appears to me , on the grounds just stated ,
a better intellectual education than it was before .
WHEWELL-1837-1,17.143

I shall not here dwell upon the intellectual effect of the practical
teaching of Greek and Latin , but proceed to consider the effect of the
two systems of instruction in another point of view .
WHEWELL-1837-1,17.144

<heading>

Sect. 3 . WHEWELL-1837-1,17.146

- Of the Effect of Practical and Speculative Teaching on the Progress of
Civilisation . WHEWELL-1837-1,17.147

<$$heading>

If I were to begin by asserting that the progress of civilisation is
essentially connected with the prevalent education , the assertion would
probably be assented to ; WHEWELL-1837-1,17.149

but at the same time , it would probably also be understood in so
general and indistinct a manner , that no real use could be made of it
in our argument . WHEWELL-1837-1,17.150

<P_18>

The connexion is , indeed , generally acknowledged ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,18.152

for instance , Dr. Diesterweg's pamphlet , in which he so deeply
deplores the present diseased condition of the German Universities ,
<paren> a subject which has recently excited much remark in that country
, <$$paren> is entitled , " The Vital Question of Civilisation . "
WHEWELL-1837-1,18.153

But some definite statement of the nature of this connexion is requisite
, in order to enable us to draw any inferences from it .
WHEWELL-1837-1,18.154

The subject is far too large to be treated generally here ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,18.155

but there is one view of it to which I hope I shall obtain the reader's
assent . WHEWELL-1837-1,18.156

Among the elements and indications of civilisation , I think it will be
allowed that a faculty of <font> speculative <$$font> thought forms a
leading point . WHEWELL-1837-1,18.157

Such a faculty , and its habitual exercise , forms a main distinction
between the most refined and the rudest nations ; as , in a broader
sense , it does between man and lower animals . WHEWELL-1837-1,18.158

For even the brutes have <font> practical <$$font> powers of thought ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,18.159

they have a practical notion of space and force ; a practical sense of
things good and bad , of things which they may and which they may not do
; WHEWELL-1837-1,18.160

but man alone has a geometry and a mechanics , an idea of happiness and
of a moral law . WHEWELL-1837-1,18.161

And the clearness of the ideas which speculation requires and uses , is
one of the most essential features of the progress of intellectual
refinement . WHEWELL-1837-1,18.162

This appears in matters , which at first seem trivial , as , for
instance , in the importance attached to correct speaking and writing .
WHEWELL-1837-1,18.163

Why is it that a false spelling or wrong accent in our <P_19> own
language , is considered a mark of a vulgar , or , at least , unpolished
, mind ? WHEWELL-1837-1,19.164

Why is it that a false quantity , or a false concord , is looked upon
with horror by the thorough scholar , as something offensive and
ridiculous ? WHEWELL-1837-1,19.165

Why is it that men are more angry at being accused of bad reasoning than
of erroneous opinions ? WHEWELL-1837-1,19.166

Clearly because all these faults imply an incomplete and ill-conducted
cultivation of the speculative faculty , in reference to language or to
reasoning . WHEWELL-1837-1,19.167

The errors may be trifling , WHEWELL-1837-1,19.168

but they seem to disclose faults of intellectual training :
WHEWELL-1837-1,19.169

they are , in the world of literature and thought , what violations of
good breeding are in manners . WHEWELL-1837-1,19.170

A single fault of grammar may betray a want of perception of the analogy
of language ; WHEWELL-1837-1,19.171

a single fault of logic may show that the speaker has no distinct
apprehension of the force of demonstration ; WHEWELL-1837-1,19.172

and when this judgment is formed of him , he immediately sinks below
that point of cultivation and connexion of thought , which those who so
judge of him have reached . WHEWELL-1837-1,19.173

He is less cultured than they . WHEWELL-1837-1,19.174

He is less refined in his intellectual character , because he is less
distinct and connected in his intellectual habits .
WHEWELL-1837-1,19.175

And thus we have , in the common judgments of mankind , an evidence that
they consider distinctness and clearness of the speculative faculty as
one of the elements of civilisation . WHEWELL-1837-1,19.176

But we may take a larger view . WHEWELL-1837-1,19.177

Probably all persons will acknowledge , that those nations by whom great
advances in knowledge are made , and among whom such advances are widely
diffused and well understood , have the pre-eminence in civilisation .
WHEWELL-1837-1,19.178

<P_20>

Great scientific discoveries , along with a general national interest
and intelligence respecting such matters , are circumstances peculiar to
the most highly cultured times . WHEWELL-1837-1,20.180

Now this consideration will lead us by a different road to the same
element of civilisation which we have already pointed out .
WHEWELL-1837-1,20.181

For by a history of each of the sciences in succession , I have proved ,
I hope satisfactorily , that their progress depends upon the
distinctness of certain fundamental ideas ; and that these ideas , being
first clearly brought into view by the genius of great discoverers ,
become afterwards the inheritance of all who thoroughly acquire the
knowledge which is thus made accessible . WHEWELL-1837-1,20.182

In highly cultured nations , a large portion of society will thus attend
to the progress of knowledge ; so as to obtain a just view , at least of
the general nature of the treasures which are thus placed within their
reach , and of the triumphs which their intellectual leaders have
achieved . WHEWELL-1837-1,20.183

And thus we are again brought to the principle , that distinct
speculative ideas generally diffused , are an essential part of our
conception of civilisation . WHEWELL-1837-1,20.184

Having reached this point , we have to inquire whether practical or
speculative teaching , distinguished as in the preceding section , be
the best instrument for that kind of culture on which civilisation thus
depends . WHEWELL-1837-1,20.185

I do not think it would be difficult to show , from general
considerations , that it is only by the practical teaching of
mathematics , that <P_21> the fundamental ideas of science can become
distinct among men in general . WHEWELL-1837-1,21.186

But a more interesting mode of deciding this point will be , to look
back at the history of the world ; WHEWELL-1837-1,21.187

for the whole history of the world has been one grand experiment on this
subject . WHEWELL-1837-1,21.188

Let us take a general view of the result . WHEWELL-1837-1,21.189

Our question is , whether practical or speculative teaching most
promotes civilisation ; which question , as we have seen , may be
decided , by inquiring whether an education in <font> mathematics
<$$font> , or in general <font> philosophy <$$font> , is most favourable
to the progress of science , and to the general diffusion of the
knowledge which this progress brings . WHEWELL-1837-1,21.190

A rapid survey of the history of education , with this view , will repay
us . WHEWELL-1837-1,21.191

Of the Greek education , up to the time of Plato , we know enough to be
able to assert , that it was in the main practical teaching .
WHEWELL-1837-1,21.192

The " music " <paren> {COM:greek_omitted} <$$paren> which constituted
the principal part of this , was taught unquestionably in a practical
manner ; WHEWELL-1837-1,21.193

and if the occasion admitted , it might be shown , both from the
elements which it included , and from the way in which it was conducted
, that it had nearly the same effect that the practical teaching of
mathematics has , in giving distinctness to the ideas , - independently
of its other and collateral influences . WHEWELL-1837-1,21.194

But in the time of Aristophanes , a change took place in the instruction
of the Greek youth . WHEWELL-1837-1,21.195

The sophists and philosophers were extraordinarily admired and followed
; WHEWELL-1837-1,21.196

and to acquire an acquaintance with their doctrines and systems came
<P_22> to be considered as the most essential part of a liberal
education . WHEWELL-1837-1,22.197

This was still more the case among the Romans , when they attempted to
take a place among cultivated nations . WHEWELL-1837-1,22.198

Their youth listened to what " Chrysippus and Crantor taught , "
WHEWELL-1837-1,22.199

and were thus supposed to be filled with all learning .
WHEWELL-1837-1,22.200

The study of <font> philosophy <$$font> , in the general sense , that is
, of the moral , metaphysical , and physical doctrines of the framers of
universal systems , was , as we know , the highest conception of the
Greeks and Romans in their aims at intellectual culture , till
civilisation itself sickened and declined . WHEWELL-1837-1,22.201

It was so , too , among the Neoplatonists , the schoolmen , the
theologians of the middle ages ; till in the monasteries there again
grew up a method of practical teaching from which the system of the
English universities had its origin . WHEWELL-1837-1,22.202

Such is the course of education ; WHEWELL-1837-1,22.203

now what is the corresponding course of knowledge ?
WHEWELL-1837-1,22.204

The answer is well worth notice . WHEWELL-1837-1,22.205

<font> The progress of science corresponds to the time of practical
teaching ; WHEWELL-1837-1,22.206

the stationary , or retrograde , period of science , is the period when
philosophy was the instrument of education . <$$font>
WHEWELL-1837-1,22.207

At the time of Plato , the Greek education had been for a long period
virtually mathematical ; a fact , of which the very term <font>
mathematics <$$font> is the record . WHEWELL-1837-1,22.208

At that time the greatest scientific discovery of the ancient world , -
the resolution of celestial phenomena into circular motions , - was
caught sight of by Plato , and soon after fully brought out by
Hipparchus . WHEWELL-1837-1,22.209

At a similar stage of Greek culture , although at a later time and
<P_23> in a different country , the science of mechanics was established
by Archimedes , on foundations fitted to endure to eternity .
WHEWELL-1837-1,23.210

What might have been the history of civilisation if the Greek education
had continued to be practically mathematical , we can@ @not tell .
WHEWELL-1837-1,23.211

Speaking according to human views of probability , perhaps the Greeks
might , in that case , have anticipated the discoveries of modern times
by a_thousand years ; WHEWELL-1837-1,23.212

and the places of Galileo , and Kepler , and Newton , might have been
preoccupied by citizens of Athens and Alexandria .
WHEWELL-1837-1,23.213

But the speculative study of philosophy prevailed .
WHEWELL-1837-1,23.214

From that time no material advance was made in science .
WHEWELL-1837-1,23.215

What great men had already taught mankind , was perverted or forgotten
by their degenerate followers . WHEWELL-1837-1,23.216

The schools of the philosophers resounded with systems old and new ,
with wranglings and boastings ; WHEWELL-1837-1,23.217

but this availed not to urge on the intellectual progress of man , or
even to prevent his sliding backwards . WHEWELL-1837-1,23.218

The simple geometrical conceptions of the school of Plato were debased
and weighed down by a cumbrous apparatus of crystalline spheres .
WHEWELL-1837-1,23.219

The mechanical truths brought to light by Archimedes , were , like his
tomb , overgrown with the rank and unprofitable vegetation of later days
, till they were lost sight of ; and were not resumed and pursued till
a_thousand years , and half a second thousand , had elapsed .
WHEWELL-1837-1,23.220

It is a manifest mistake to ascribe the decay of science to the
incursions of the northern nations . WHEWELL-1837-1,23.221

Science was dead , and literature mortally smitten , before the external
pressure was felt . WHEWELL-1837-1,23.222

But the study of speculative philosophy , as the business <P_24> of
cultured men , survived . WHEWELL-1837-1,24.223

Still the intellectual world grew darker and darker .
WHEWELL-1837-1,24.224

" Light after light goes out , WHEWELL-1837-1,24.225

and all is night . " WHEWELL-1837-1,24.226

In vain do the schoolmen of the middle ages build system upon system ,
as the schoolmen of Athens and Alexandria had done before .
WHEWELL-1837-1,24.227

The centuries roll on , WHEWELL-1837-1,24.228

and bring no day . WHEWELL-1837-1,24.229

But in the mean time the religious orders have established among
themselves a system of practical teaching . WHEWELL-1837-1,24.230

They introduce mathematics into their course with especial attention .
WHEWELL-1837-1,24.231

The principle of progress is soon felt to be again at work .
WHEWELL-1837-1,24.232

A Franciscan friar lifts up his voice against the sway of Aristotle ,
WHEWELL-1837-1,24.233

and points to the far-off temple of science , declaring that <font>
mathematics <$$font> is its gate and its key . WHEWELL-1837-1,24.234

His announcement is found to be true . WHEWELL-1837-1,24.235

From the like mathematical schools proceed the luminaries of a new dawn
, - WHEWELL-1837-1,24.236

Copernicus , Galileo , Kepler , Newton , are the founders of a fresh era
of knowledge , because they are well-trained mathematicians .
WHEWELL-1837-1,24.237

The universities of Europe assume a form in which such a training goes
on ; WHEWELL-1837-1,24.238

thus the cultured classes become capable of receiving and appreciating
the great discoveries by which man's intellectual position is advanced ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,24.239

and we reach the present condition of the civilised world .
WHEWELL-1837-1,24.240

But we have not yet done with the survey of this great experiment .
WHEWELL-1837-1,24.241

In one country of Europe the universities give up their habits of
practical teaching , WHEWELL-1837-1,24.242

and return to the speculative method . WHEWELL-1837-1,24.243

They make <P_25> <font> philosophy <$$font> their main subject .
WHEWELL-1837-1,25.244

Their professors deliver from their chairs system after system to
admiring audiences . WHEWELL-1837-1,25.245

The listener may assent or criticise ; WHEWELL-1837-1,25.246

but he is not disturbed by any demands on his mind , such as the
teaching of mathematics gives rise to . WHEWELL-1837-1,25.247

And what is the class of men thus produced , in their bearing upon the
progress of sure and indestructible knowledge ? WHEWELL-1837-1,25.248

They are such men as to be utterly incapable even of comprehending and
appreciating the most conspicuous examples of the advance of science .
WHEWELL-1837-1,25.249

Those who are universally allowed to be the greatest philosophers of our
own day in the German universities , Hegel and Schelling , can@ @not
understand that Newton went further than Kepler had gone in physical
astronomy , WHEWELL-1837-1,25.250

and despise Newton's optical doctrines in comparison with the vague
Aristotelian dogmas of Göthe {COM:sic} respecting colours .
WHEWELL-1837-1,25.251

Thus , the experiment on education , which has been going on from the
beginning of Greek civilisation to the present day , appears to be quite
distinct and consistent in its result . WHEWELL-1837-1,25.252

And the lesson we learn from it is this ; - that so far as civilisation
is connected with the advance and diffusion of human knowledge ,
civilisation flourishes when the prevalent education is mathematical ,
and fades when <font> philosophy <$$font> is the subject most preferred
. WHEWELL-1837-1,25.253

We find abundant confirmation of the belief , that education has a
strong influence upon the progress of civilisation ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,25.254

and we find that the influence follows a settled rule :
WHEWELL-1837-1,25.255

when the education is practical teaching , it is a genuine culture ,
tending to <P_26> increased fertility and vigour ; WHEWELL-1837-1,26.256

when it is speculative teaching , it appears that , however the effect
is produced , men's minds do , in some way or other , lose that force
and clearness on which intellectual progression depends .
WHEWELL-1837-1,26.257

I can@ @not go on to the next point of my argument without an
observation founded on the view which has been presented .
WHEWELL-1837-1,26.258

It is impossible , after the survey we have just made , not to reflect
of what immense importance the question of the two kinds of education is
. WHEWELL-1837-1,26.259

The reform of the European universities , a subject which is now
exciting so much interest in England , France , and Germany , is , in
truth , what it has been termed , the Vital Question of Civilisation .
WHEWELL-1837-1,26.260

Upon the decision of that question may depend , whether Europe , and
America , which must follow the intellectual fortunes of Europe , shall
, for the next thousand years , be in the condition of the later Greeks
and Romans , having for their mental aristocracy , a class of
philosophical system-builders , commentators , and mere metaphysicians ;
or shall go on to exhibit that healthy vigour and constant effort at
real progress and improvement , which has characterized this quarter of
the globe for the last three_hundred years . WHEWELL-1837-1,26.261

This is no slight matter . WHEWELL-1837-1,26.262

And let no one attempt to make it less momentous , by persuading himself
that civilisation must advance ; - that we can@ @not run back into an
inferior condition of culture and thought . WHEWELL-1837-1,26.263

The history of the world shows that we have no such security .
WHEWELL-1837-1,26.264

Civilisation , in its best sense , may too surely decline .
WHEWELL-1837-1,26.265

Greece and Rome had wasted by their own <P_27> folly almost all that was
most valuable in their intellectual inheritance , before the foreign
spoiler came . WHEWELL-1837-1,27.266

The civilisation of the eastern and southern shores of the Mediterranean
, once the fairest spots in the world of literature and art , - where is
it , WHEWELL-1837-1,27.267

and how is it vanished ? WHEWELL-1837-1,27.268

It is not enough to say that the barbarising storm of Mahommedan
conquest has swept over and destroyed it . WHEWELL-1837-1,27.269

The Mahommedans did not barbarise Spain or Persia .
WHEWELL-1837-1,27.270

And to whatever violent external causes we may ascribe this deplorable
change , it shows , at least , that in some countries civilisation takes
deeper root than in others ; WHEWELL-1837-1,27.271

and warns us to use our best endeavour , that , so far as we are
concerned , our country and the world may lose nothing of that real
civilisation which , combined with morality and religion , constitutes
the brightest glory and most precious treasure of the human race .
WHEWELL-1837-1,27.272

It is difficult to mark out , even in conjecture , the path of the
future progress of mental civilisation . WHEWELL-1837-1,27.273

Yet some light we may gather from the history of the past .
WHEWELL-1837-1,27.274

One idea after another , of those which constitute the basis of science
, becomes distinct , first in the minds of discoverers , then in the
minds of all cultured men , till a general clearness of thought
illuminates the land ; WHEWELL-1837-1,27.275

and thus the torch of knowledge is handed forwards , thousands upon
thousands lighting their lamps at it as it passes on ; while still from
time to time some new Prometheus catches a fresh light from heaven , to
spread abroad among men in like manner . WHEWELL-1837-1,27.276

Thus the opening of Greek civilisation was marked by the production of
Geometry : WHEWELL-1837-1,27.277

the <P_28> <font> idea of space <$$font> was brought to a scientific
precision . WHEWELL-1837-1,28.278

Of that step we still inherit the benefits ; WHEWELL-1837-1,28.279

for example , all educated Europeans conceive the relation of the
various parts and lines on the terrestrial globe with a distinctness in
which the rude savage or uncultured boor has no share .
WHEWELL-1837-1,28.280

The opening of the civilisation of modern Europe was distinguished , in
the same way , by the production of a new science - Mechanics , which
soon led to the Mechanics of the Heavens . WHEWELL-1837-1,28.281

And this step , like the former , depended on men arriving at a
properly-@ @distinct fundamental idea . WHEWELL-1837-1,28.282

The <font> revival of the scientific idea of force <$$font> <paren> an
idea which had been brought to light by Archimedes , and extinguished
again amid the mists of Greek philosophy , <$$paren> was , as I have
elsewhere shown , the essential condition to which this step was due .
WHEWELL-1837-1,28.283

This idea , too , has now been communicated to persons of education in
general , as the general reception of the Newtonian theory of the
universe proves ; while , at the same time , the very indistinct views
which men of considerable cultivation often entertain of the mechanism
of the universe , proves that the fundamental ideas on which a clear
apprehension of the doctrine of universal attraction depends , have
hitherto been very imperfectly diffused through the atmosphere of the
literary world . WHEWELL-1837-1,28.284

And the cause of this remaining imperfection probably is , that
elementary mechanics has not hitherto been made an essential portion of
a liberal education , as for centuries elementary geometry has .
WHEWELL-1837-1,28.285

Nothing forbids us to look forward to the time , when not only this
<P_29> deficiency shall be supplied , but when men's minds shall have
been carried much further in the same track . WHEWELL-1837-1,29.286

We may imagine a future period of mental culture , when the ideas on
which our knowledge of the composition of bodies , or our estimate of
the natural classes of organized beings , depends , shall be as clear in
cultivated minds , as the conception of universal attraction is now , in
the mind of a thoroughly educated man ; or as the conception of the
circles of latitude and longitude , in the thoughts of a well-taught
child . WHEWELL-1837-1,29.287

And if we add to this , the possibility that the ideas which are the
bases of sound criticism , morals , and politics , may become equally
distinct and equally diffused , by means of an appropriate education ,
we catch a glimpse of the grand and boundless vista of possible and
probable intellectual refinement and civilisation which the future
offers . WHEWELL-1837-1,29.288

Whether or not the reader may assent to the view thus presented of the
nature of the future progress of civilisation , he will , I trust ,
sympathize with another reflection which offers itself to us at this
point of our survey . WHEWELL-1837-1,29.289

If the destinies of the highest civilisation of man , be thus closely
connected with the progress of truly liberal education ; and if it
depend upon the constitution and conduct of educational institutions ,
whether such civilisation shall continue to advance , or shall become
retrograde : it is impossible not to <P_30> reflect , how grave and
weighty is the office of those , on whom it falls to found and to put in
action new institutions of liberal education , intended to meet the
requirements of present and future ages . WHEWELL-1837-1,30.290

To do this , is a great , and we may say , a solemn task .
WHEWELL-1837-1,30.291

Those who are engaged in it , must act as men building for eternity .
WHEWELL-1837-1,30.292

We see no reason to believe otherwise , than that this great nation ,
hitherto so highly favoured with outward and inward gifts , <paren> and
with it , its vigorous progeny , which , while peopling and civilising
the other side of the globe , is involved in the intellectual fortunes
of its parent , <$$paren> is destined by Providence for an advance yet
to be long continued , in civilisation and refinement of the best and
highest kind . WHEWELL-1837-1,30.293

To what consummation the world is reserved by its Governor we know not ,
nor whether he has decreed , that , before the final close of all things
, the brightness of civilised England must wane and become dim , as that
of Greece and Rome has done before . WHEWELL-1837-1,30.294

But this we know , that it would be the most fantastical presumption of
system-making , for any one to predict and reckon in centuries the
calculated time and rate of the declension of Britain .
WHEWELL-1837-1,30.295

We know , too , that if such a declension menaced us , the wisest , as
well as the noblest course , would be to seek and apply our remedies in
the spirit of considerate and hopeful regard for the future .
WHEWELL-1837-1,30.296

And surely , even if our final declension were certain , and if we could
yet , by our exertions , so retard its progress , that , during the
ensuing three_hundred years , our condition should be no worse than for
the last three_hundred years it has <P_31> been , this were a blessing ,
and a distinction among the nations of the earth , well worth the best
resolves and exertions the nation can bring to the task .
WHEWELL-1837-1,31.297

When , therefore , we attempt to construct institutions of education for
the countless youth of centuries still to come , we enter upon a task
full of solicitude and responsibility , but full also of hope and
promise . WHEWELL-1837-1,31.298

And in this spirit should the office be discharged ; all narrow views ,
and little jealousies , and limited regards , being laid aside , and the
great object itself , the transmission of the best portion of the
culture of this age to the Britons of ages now far removed , being
steadily kept in view . WHEWELL-1837-1,31.299

With this view we should guard especially against bringing down the
standard of our system to the level which transient and partial
circumstances , or popular prejudices , may suggest .
WHEWELL-1837-1,31.300

That education which will transmit to the future the civilisation of the
past and present , is that which the country really requires ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,31.301

and modes of education which may attract for a moment , but can produce
no effect of this kind , are of no value for the real purposes of
education , WHEWELL-1837-1,31.302

and can satisfy none of the real wants of the age .
WHEWELL-1837-1,31.303

But a part of this subject requires a separate section .
WHEWELL-1837-1,31.304

<heading>

Sect. 4 . WHEWELL-1837-1,31.306

- Of the Learned Languages as Subjects of University Teaching
WHEWELL-1837-1,31.307

<$$heading>

It has appeared in a preceding Section , that the decision of the
question , whether our teaching shall <P_32> be practical or speculative
, in the sense already explained , in a great measure decides the
subjects taught ; since certain subjects only can be made the basis of
practical education , and certain other subjects are peculiarly fitted
for speculative discussion . WHEWELL-1837-1,32.309

But there are some other questions concerning the matter taught , which
may be considered here ; for instance , the proposal to include in it
modern languages and their literature , instead of , or along with , the
ancient authors of Greece and Rome ; and to introduce the modern
sciences , as general physics , chemistry , natural history , and
geology , along with pure and mixed mathematics . WHEWELL-1837-1,32.310

I will say a word on each of these questions . WHEWELL-1837-1,32.311

It is one of the characters of the present time , alarming to many
persons , but , if we use the occasion well , a blessing rather than an
evil , that doctrines which have hitherto passed unquestioned , and on
which the frame of the institutions of European states is founded , are
unscrupulously and rudely assailed . WHEWELL-1837-1,32.312

The propriety of the use of what are called the learned languages
<paren> Greek and Latin <$$paren> , as one of the main instruments of
education , is a doctrine of this kind . WHEWELL-1837-1,32.313

And the question whether , in modern education , these languages are to
retain their ancient supremacy ; or whether , on the contrary , the
languages and literature of modern Europe are to be placed by their side
, or before them ; has been recently discussed with reference to
educational institutions , both in this and other countries .
WHEWELL-1837-1,32.314

In France , for example , this has been the subject of animated debates
in the Chamber <P_33> of Deputies ; WHEWELL-1837-1,33.315

and that distinguished man of science , M. Arago , is reported , on
such an occasion , to have expressed himself to the following effect : -
WHEWELL-1837-1,33.316

" I ask for <font> classical <$$font> studies : WHEWELL-1837-1,33.317

I require them : WHEWELL-1837-1,33.318

I consider them as indispensable ; WHEWELL-1837-1,33.319

but I do not think that they must necessarily be Greek and Latin .
WHEWELL-1837-1,33.320

I wish that , in certain schools , these studies should be replaced , at
the pleasure of the municipal councils , by a thorough study of our own
tongue . WHEWELL-1837-1,33.321

I wish that in each college , it should be permitted to put , in the
place of Greek and of Latin , the study of a living language .
WHEWELL-1837-1,33.322

I require even , that this language may be different according to the
situation of the place ; that at Perpignan and at Bayonne , for example
, it may be the Spanish ; at le Havre , the English ; at Besançon , the
German . " WHEWELL-1837-1,33.323

He then proceeds to answer certain objections , of which I shall only
notice the one which more peculiarly concerns our subject .
WHEWELL-1837-1,33.324

" It is urged , " he says , " that Greek and Latin must be the principal
classical studies , WHEWELL-1837-1,33.325

for they are <font> the true culture of the mind . <$$font> "
WHEWELL-1837-1,33.326

To this he makes the following reply : - WHEWELL-1837-1,33.327

" What does this mean ? WHEWELL-1837-1,33.328

Are Pascal , Fenelon , Bossuet , Montesquieu , Rousseau , Voltaire ,
Corneille , Racine , Molière - the incomparable Molière , - are these
writers deprived of the privilege which is so liberally granted to the
ancient authors , of enlightening , of unfolding the mind , of touching
the heart , of putting in vibration the springs of the soul !
WHEWELL-1837-1,33.329

God <P_34> preserve me from insulting you , by refuting in detail a
heresy such as this ! " WHEWELL-1837-1,34.330

In opposition to the opinion thus expressed , I maintain that Greek and
Latin are peculiar and indispensable elements of a liberal education ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,34.331

and it is my business to show , that the study of the modern authors
just enumerated , and of others , however admirable their works may be ,
does not produce that kind of culture of the mind , which is the true
object of a liberal education . WHEWELL-1837-1,34.332

This culture of the mind consists in sharing in the best influences of
the progressive intellectual refinement of man . WHEWELL-1837-1,34.333

The present age is not independent of those which have preceded it .
WHEWELL-1837-1,34.334

On the contrary , it is the heir of all the past .
WHEWELL-1837-1,34.335

Its wealth , intellectual and material , may have been improved in the
hands of the present holders , WHEWELL-1837-1,34.336

but the value of what we have added is small , compared with the amount
of what we found already accumulated . WHEWELL-1837-1,34.337

In thought and language , as well as in arts and the products of art ,
we inherit an inestimable fortune from a long line of ancestors .
WHEWELL-1837-1,34.338

In literature , we are the children of the early Greeks ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,34.339

{COM:greek_omitted} But thoughts can be inherited , and words , in all
their force , transmitted , only by those who are connected with their
ancestors in the line of thought and understanding , as well as in the
mere succession of time . WHEWELL-1837-1,34.340

And how is this connexion of generations , thus requisite to the
transmission and augmentation of mental wealth , to be kept up ?
WHEWELL-1837-1,34.341

<P_35>

The cultivated world , up to the present day , has been bound together ,
and each generation bound to the preceding , by living upon a common
intellectual estate . WHEWELL-1837-1,35.343

They have shared in a common developement of thought , because they have
understood each other . WHEWELL-1837-1,35.344

Their standard examples of poetry , eloquence , history , criticism ,
grammar , etymology , have been a universal bond of sympathy , however
diverse might be the opinions which prevailed respecting any of these
examples . WHEWELL-1837-1,35.345

All the civilised world has been one intellectual nation ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,35.346

and it is this which has made it so great and prosperous a nation .
WHEWELL-1837-1,35.347

All the countries of lettered Europe have been one body , because the
same nutriment , the literature of the ancient world , was conveyed to
all , by the organization of their institutions of education .
WHEWELL-1837-1,35.348

The authors of Greece and Rome , familiar to the child , admired and
dwelt on by the aged , were the common language , by the possession of
which each man felt himself a denizen of the civilised world ; - free of
all the privileges with which it had been gifted from the dawn of Greek
civilisation up to the present time . WHEWELL-1837-1,35.349

What can the best authors of modern days do in the way of filling such
an office ? WHEWELL-1837-1,35.350

Even if their language were universally familiar in cultured Europe ,
how do they connect us with the past ? WHEWELL-1837-1,35.351

How do they enable us to read the impress which was stamped upon thought
and language in the days of Plato and Aristotle , in virtue of which it
is still current ? WHEWELL-1837-1,35.352

How do they enable us to understand the process by which the language of
Rome conveyed the culture , the philosophy , <P_36> the legislation of
the ancient civilised world into the modern ? WHEWELL-1837-1,36.353

How do they enable us to understand the thoughts and feelings to which
they themselves appeal ? WHEWELL-1837-1,36.354

If the Greek and Latin languages were to lose their familiar place among
us , Montesquieu and Bossuet , Corneille and Racine , would lose their
force and their charm . WHEWELL-1837-1,36.355

Their audiences , immediately , or through a few steps of derivation ,
made a reference in their minds to ancient authors .
WHEWELL-1837-1,36.356

If this were taken away , many of the strings would be broken , in the
instrument on which these artists played . WHEWELL-1837-1,36.357

And though , so long as a liberal education continues what it has been ,
the well-educated diffuse to others a general admiration of the "
classical authors " of their own language , if Greek and Latin were to
cease to be parts of general culture , this admiration would become
faint and unintelligent , WHEWELL-1837-1,36.358

and , in a few generations , would vanish . WHEWELL-1837-1,36.359

The same may be said of language . WHEWELL-1837-1,36.360

The languages of ancient Greece and Rome have , through the whole
history of civilisation , been the means of giving distinctness to men's
ideas of the analogy of language , which distinctness , as we have seen
, is a main element of intellectual cultivation . WHEWELL-1837-1,36.361

The forms and processes of general grammar have been conveyed to all
men's minds by the use of common models and common examples .
WHEWELL-1837-1,36.362

To all the nations of modern Europe , whether speaking a Romance
language or not , the Latin grammar is a standard of comparison , by
reference to which speculative views of grammar become plain and
familiar . WHEWELL-1837-1,36.363

<P_37>

And then , as to the derivation of the modern European languages : -
Those who are familiar with Greek and Latin can@ @not but feel , in
every sentence they read and write , that the whole history of the
civilised world is stamped upon the expressions they use .
WHEWELL-1837-1,37.365

The progress of thought and of institutions , the most successful
labours of the poet , the philosopher , the legislator , have , in
thousands of cases , operated to give a meaning to one little word .
WHEWELL-1837-1,37.366

Those who feel this , have a view of the language which they speak , far
more intelligent , far more refined , than those who gather the force of
words from blind usage , without seeing any connexion or any reason .
WHEWELL-1837-1,37.367

What does intellectual culture mean , if it does not mean something more
than this ? WHEWELL-1837-1,37.368

What does it mean , but that insight , that distinctness of thought with
regard to the terms we employ , which saves us from solecisms , not by
habit but by principle , which shows us analogy where others see only
accident , and which makes language itself a chain connecting us with
the intellectual progress of all ages . WHEWELL-1837-1,37.369

In what a condition should we be , if our connexion with the past were
snapped ; - if Greek and Latin were forgotten ? WHEWELL-1837-1,37.370

What should we then think of our own languages ? WHEWELL-1837-1,37.371

They would appear a mere mass of incoherent caprice and wanton
lawlessness . WHEWELL-1837-1,37.372

The several nations of Europe would be , in this respect at least , like
those tribes of savages who occupy a vast continent , speaking a set of
jargons , in which scarcely any resemblance can be traced between any
two , or any consistency in any one . WHEWELL-1837-1,37.373

The various European <P_38> languages appear to us obviously connected ,
mainly because we hold the Latin thread which runs through them ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,38.374

if that were broken , the pearls would soon roll asunder .
WHEWELL-1837-1,38.375

And the mental connexion of the present nations with each other , as
well as with the past , would thus be destroyed . WHEWELL-1837-1,38.376

What would this be but a retrograde movement in civilisation ?
WHEWELL-1837-1,38.377

In nations as in men , in intellect as in social condition , true
nobility consists in inheriting what is best in the possessions and
character of a line of ancestry . WHEWELL-1837-1,38.378

Those who can trace the descent of their own ideas , and their own
language , through the race of cultivated nations ; who can show that
those whom they represent , or reverence as their parents , have
everywhere been foremost in the fields of thought and intellectual
progress , - those are the true nobility of the world of mind ; the
persons who have received true culture ; WHEWELL-1837-1,38.379

and such it should be the business of a liberal education to make men .
WHEWELL-1837-1,38.380

With these views , I can@ @not conceive it possible that any
well-constituted system of University teaching , in any European nation
, can do otherwise than make the study of the best classical authors of
Greece and Rome , one of its indispensable and cardinal elements .
WHEWELL-1837-1,38.381

But before I proceed , I can@ @not refrain from pointing out the evil of
making such an element , or any one element alone , too exclusive or too
large a part of our system of instruction . WHEWELL-1837-1,38.382

<P_39>

<heading>

Sect. 5 . WHEWELL-1837-1,39.385

- Of the Necessity of combining Classical and Mathematical Studies as
Subjects of University Teaching . WHEWELL-1837-1,39.386

<$$heading>

The arguments which we have urged in support of the necessity of the
ancient languages as prominent parts of the teaching of our Universities
, proceed upon the ground of their usefulness as instruments of mental
culture . WHEWELL-1837-1,39.388

And this effect has been contemplated , as resulting , not only from the
familiarity which the student of classical literature may acquire with
the works and style of the brightest periods of ancient civilisation ;
but also , from the clear views to which he may be led , by such studies
, of the principles and history of grammar , language , and literary
thought . WHEWELL-1837-1,39.389

Now it must not be forgotten , that in classical as in any other
literature , the reader who merely flutters through a series of authors
such as catch his fancy , who studies them only as a literary amusement
, without severe thought , or steady perception of the principles of
language and composition , can@ @not receive from them such a culture as
we have supposed ; any more than from any other line of reading ,
suggested and directed by mere caprice and personal taste .
WHEWELL-1837-1,39.390

Indeed , since principles are disclosed and illustrated by the reading
of poets and orators , far more obscurely and vaguely than by most other
studies , classical literature so pursued is entirely inefficient for
any purpose of genuine mental cultivation . WHEWELL-1837-1,39.391

It will only produce a taste , fastidious , indeed , but superficial and
<P_40> arbitrary , without any distinct and developed apprehension of
analogies and reasons . WHEWELL-1837-1,40.392

And even if the classical authors be studied profoundly and thoroughly ,
as examples of language , composition , and thought , still they only
supply one occasion among many , for the cultivation of the more exact
operations of the mind ; WHEWELL-1837-1,40.393

and in this , or in any other way , the adoption of one instrument alone
, for such a purpose , will make the resulting culture extremely partial
and deficient . WHEWELL-1837-1,40.394

The mode in which this defect may most effectually be remedied , is by
combining , with the study of classics , the study of the elementary
portions of mathematics . WHEWELL-1837-1,40.395

For these severer studies will bring into play that class of
intellectual faculties , which the pursuit of elegant literature alone
leaves unexercised . WHEWELL-1837-1,40.396

We may add , too , that the mental powers so developed will react upon
the study of classical authors ; and the perception of general relations
, of grounds and reasons , even in matters of grammar and taste , will
be far more likely to arise in a student thus disciplined , than in the
mere elegant scholar . WHEWELL-1837-1,40.397

Every person of mathematical cultivation is necessarily an analyst of
conditions and connexions ; WHEWELL-1837-1,40.398

and the analytical power thus awakened will commonly exercise itself
upon language , as well as upon mathematical quantity ;
WHEWELL-1837-1,40.399

and thus a familiarity with the best models of composition will become
such a discipline of distinct ideas , with regard to the principles of
language and thought , as , for our purposes , we require it to be .
WHEWELL-1837-1,40.400

The study of elementary mathematics , therefore , along with the study
of classical authors , ought to be <P_41> imperatively required by all
Universities {TEXT:Univerities} . WHEWELL-1837-1,41.401

To separate these studies , and to allow students to neglect one of them
, because some persons have a taste for one , and some persons for
another , of these lines of reading , is to abdicate the functions of
education altogether . WHEWELL-1837-1,41.402

Universities and Colleges do not exist merely for the purpose of
enabling men to do what they best like to do ; or for the purpose of
offering and awarding prizes for trials of strength , in modes selected
by the combatants . WHEWELL-1837-1,41.403

Their business is the general cultivation of all the best faculties of
those who are committed to their charge , and the preservation and
promotion of the general culture of mankind . WHEWELL-1837-1,41.404

And it is certain , that of all the persons who derive advantage from
them , none are more benefited than those who , with a great general
aptitude for learning , are prevented , by the requisition of such
institutions , from confining their exertions to one favourite channel .
WHEWELL-1837-1,41.405

