<BEGIN_white-1784-2>

<P_231>

<heading>

Sermon VI . WHITE-1784-2,231.4

I. Kings XIII. 18 . WHITE-1784-2,231.5

<$$heading>

<font> He said - I am a Prophet also - WHITE-1784-2,231.7

and an Angel spake to me by the Word of the Lord . WHITE-1784-2,231.8

But he lied - <$$font> WHITE-1784-2,231.9

In the days of man's innocence , while he was yet but little lower than
the angels , he conversed with God , without shame or terror , face to
face . WHITE-1784-2,231.10

But when , by his fatal transgression , he had fallen from that
happiness in which he was created , he was excluded from this exalted
intercourse ; WHITE-1784-2,231.11

and the Deity appointed beings of an intermediate rank between himself
and mankind , to dispense his favours and to reveal his will to his
degraded <P_232> creature . WHITE-1784-2,232.12

After the transgression of Adam , he no longer conversed familiarly with
the sons of men . WHITE-1784-2,232.13

Moses only was permitted to approach his presence , to converse
immediately with the most High , and to behold from the cleft of the
rock a small portion of the divine glory passing by .
WHITE-1784-2,232.14

Various were the methods by which the Almighty condescended to make
known his will to his people . WHITE-1784-2,232.15

Usually indeed he spake in dreams and visions : WHITE-1784-2,232.16

but the more solemn manner in which he chose to instruct mankind , was
by employing the ministration of angels ; who were occasionally sent to
deliver the divine commands , and to disclose the hidden events of
futurity to the patriarchs and prophets . WHITE-1784-2,232.17

Of these divine messengers Gabriel alone is expressly named in the
canonical scriptures . WHITE-1784-2,232.18

He was the favoured minister , who was commissioned to shew to Daniel
the restoration of Jerusalem , the fate of monarchies , and those mighty
events that were destined <font> to make reconciliation for iniquity ,
to bring in everlasting righteousness , and to seal up the vision
<P_233> and prophecy . <$$font> WHITE-1784-2,233.19

By him the birth of the Baptist was foretold to Zecharias ;
WHITE-1784-2,233.20

and by him the incarnation of the Messiah was announced to the Holy
Virgin . WHITE-1784-2,233.21

A name so distinguished , the impostor Mahomet justly conceived , would
be propitious to his designs : WHITE-1784-2,233.22

accordingly he pretended that his own revelations were transmitted to
him from heaven by the ministration of the same angel .
WHITE-1784-2,233.23

To enter into a philosophical enquiry concerning the interposition of
spirits in the affairs of men , is on the present occasion totally
unnecessary . WHITE-1784-2,233.24

The fact involves no impossibility ; WHITE-1784-2,233.25

and till the relation in which this world may stand to the great system
of the universe be fully and distinctly known , who shall dare to affirm
that the actions of men are unknown or indifferent to moral and rational
agents , who are endowed with nobler capacities , and employed in a more
extensive sphere ? WHITE-1784-2,233.26

To metaphysical subtleties , which rest on gratuitous and arbitrary
assumption , it <P_234> is sufficient then to oppose the general and
uniform belief of all ages , whether dark or enlightened , and of all
countries , whether barbarous or civilized : WHITE-1784-2,234.27

but in the present enquiry we shall consider the interposition of angels
only in an historical point of view , WHITE-1784-2,234.28

and shall dispute the pretensions of Mahomet on a principle which is
equally admitted by the believers both of the Koran and of the Gospel .
WHITE-1784-2,234.29

As the pretended intercourse of Mahomet with the angel Gabriel rests
solely on the suspicious authority of his own assertion , his
pretensions will not admit of any serious attack or any plausible
defence . WHITE-1784-2,234.30

But when he affirms that this divine messenger communicated to him
revelations so inimitably sublime and beautiful , that they could not
have proceeded from any created being ; when he defies both men and
genii to produce any composition that should bear the least resemblance
to his boasted Koran , when he boldly proposes it to the test of the
severest examination , and holds it out to the admiration of the whole
world as a tablet inscribed in legible <P_235> characters by the finger
of the Deity , then we have some opportunity for enquiry and some
foundation for argument . WHITE-1784-2,235.31

Admitting , what can never be proved , this new hypothesis , that any
composition may be so perfect as to transcend the powers of man , and
rise to our ideas of a miracle ; yet we peremptorily deny the conclusion
, thus applied from it to the Koran . WHITE-1784-2,235.32

His infatuated followers regarded it as something too wonderful to be
the work of one who professed himself to be both unlearned and ignorant
: WHITE-1784-2,235.33

and the impostor himself declared it superior to the utmost reach of the
most enlightened and cultivated mind . WHITE-1784-2,235.34

If to confident assertions implicit belief were due , we might assent to
each of these opinions : WHITE-1784-2,235.35

but if we turn our eyes , first upon the life of Mahomet <paren> which
we have already reviewed <$$paren> and then on his Koran , which remains
to be considered , we shall see no reason either to glow with the
raptures of the Mussulman , or to re-echo the boasts of the prophet .
WHITE-1784-2,235.36

<P_236>

By the advocates of Mahometism , the Koran has always been held forth as
the greatest of miracles , and equally stupendous with the act of
raising the dead . WHITE-1784-2,236.38

The miracles of Moses and Jesus , they say , were transient and
temporary ; WHITE-1784-2,236.39

but that of the Koran is permanent and perpetual ; WHITE-1784-2,236.40

and therefore far surpasses all the miraculous events of preceding ages
. WHITE-1784-2,236.41

We will not detract from the real merit of the Koran :
WHITE-1784-2,236.42

we allow it to be generally elegant , and often sublime ;
WHITE-1784-2,236.43

but at the same time we reject with disdain its arrogant pretence to any
thing supernatural . WHITE-1784-2,236.44

As we before discovered the supposed ignorance of the author to be no
other than an artful disguise which he assumed , to carry on more
effectually his fraudulent designs ; we shall now as readily be
convinced , that all the real excellence of the work is to be referred
to natural and visible causes . WHITE-1784-2,236.45

When the Arabs adopted the religion of Mahomet , all suspicions of his
sincerity were lost in exultation at his success , and admiration of his
character . WHITE-1784-2,236.46

<P_237>

They did not pause to examine any abstract question on the consistence
of his pretended revelations . WHITE-1784-2,237.48

A bright and prominent example stood before them , which overwhelmed
them with tumultuous amazement and fascinated them into the most
implicit confidence . WHITE-1784-2,237.49

His triumphs over enemies were considered as the most brilliant
acquisitions to their national glory : WHITE-1784-2,237.50

and in the dexterity of his contrivance and the vigour of his execution
they saw the sublime features of the hero of their country .
WHITE-1784-2,237.51

His claims to a divine commission , attended with an exterior sanctity
of demeanour , and supported by a long and splendid series of victories
, confirmed them in their veneration for an instructor so eminently
favoured , it should seem , by the interposition of heaven itself .
WHITE-1784-2,237.52

A confidence thus seemingly deserved , and thus liberally bestowed would
naturally lead the followers of Mahomet , to overlook every imperfection
, to enhance every excellence , to confound the seeming with the real ,
and to yield to the pretensions <P_238> of the prophet the implicit
submission they had already paid to the superiority of the warrior .
WHITE-1784-2,238.53

Under such impressions of admiration and astonishment , what could the
uninformed Arabian oppose to the claim of divine inspiration ?
WHITE-1784-2,238.54

Or while sharing in the glory of his arms , how pause to investigate the
truth of those pretensions , which while they exalted his leader to
communion with God , seemed to shed a portion of the same sanctity on
his followers and friends ? WHITE-1784-2,238.55

In the language of Arabia also , a language extremely loved , and
diligently cultivated by the people to whom it was vernacular , Mahomet
found advantages which were never enjoyed by any former or succeeding
impostor . WHITE-1784-2,238.56

It requires not the eye of a philosopher to discover in every soil and
country a principle of national pride : WHITE-1784-2,238.57

and if we look back for many ages on the history of the Arabians , we
shall easily perceive that pride among them , invariably to have
consisted in the knowledge and improvement <P_239> of their native
language . WHITE-1784-2,239.58

The Arabic which has been justly esteemed the most copious of the
Eastern tongues ; which had existed from the remotest antiquity ; which
had been embellished by numberless poets , and refined by the constant
exercise of the natives ; was the most successful instrument which
Mahomet employed in planting his new religion among them .
WHITE-1784-2,239.59

Admirably adapted by its unrivalled harmony , and by its endless variety
, to add painting to expression , and to pursue the imagination in its
unbounded flight ; it became in the hands of Mahomet an irresistible
charm to blind the judgment , and to captivate the fancy of his
followers . WHITE-1784-2,239.60

Of that description of men , who first composed the adherents of Mahomet
, and to whom the Koran was addressed , few , probably , were able to
pass a very accurate judgment on the propriety of the sentiments , or on
the beauties of the diction : WHITE-1784-2,239.61

but all could judge of the military abilities of their leader ;
WHITE-1784-2,239.62

and in the midst of their admiration it is not difficult to conceive ,
that they would ascribe to his <P_240> compositions every imaginary
beauty of inspired language . WHITE-1784-2,240.63

The shepherd and the soldier , though awake to the charms of those wild
but beautiful compositions , in which were celebrated their favourite
occupations of love or war , were yet little able to criticise any other
works , than those which were addressed to the imagination , or the
heart . WHITE-1784-2,240.64

To abstract reasonings on the attributes and the dispensations of the
Deity , to the comparative excellencies of rival religions , to the
consistency of any one religious system in all its parts , and to the
force of its various proofs , they were quite inattentive .
WHITE-1784-2,240.65

In such a situation the appearance of a work , which possessed something
like wisdom and consistence ; which prescribed the rules , and
illustrated the duties of life ; and which contained the principles of a
new , and comparatively sublime theology ; independently of its real and
permanent merit , was likely to excite their astonishment , and to
become the standard of future composition . WHITE-1784-2,240.66

<P_241>

In the first periods of the literature of every country , something of
this kind has happened . WHITE-1784-2,241.68

The father of Grecian poetry very obviously influenced the taste and
imitation of his countrymen . WHITE-1784-2,241.69

The modern nations of Europe all possess some original author , who
rising from the darkness of former ages , has begun the career of
composition , and tinctured with the character of his own imagination
the stream which has flowed through his posterity . WHITE-1784-2,241.70

But the prophet of Arabia had in this respect advantages peculiar to
himself . WHITE-1784-2,241.71

His compositions were not to his followers the works of man , but the
genuine language of Heaven which had sent him . WHITE-1784-2,241.72

They were not confined therefore to that admiration , which is so
liberally bestowed on the earliest productions of genius ; or to that
fond attachment with which men everywhere regard the original
compositions of their country : WHITE-1784-2,241.73

but with their admiration they blended their piety .
WHITE-1784-2,241.74

To know and to feel the beauties of the Koran , was in some respect to
share in the temper of <P_242> heaven ; WHITE-1784-2,242.75

and he who was most affected with admiration in the perusal of its
beauties , seemed most fitly the object of that mercy , which had given
it to ignorant man . WHITE-1784-2,242.76

The Koran , therefore , became naturally and necessarily the standard of
taste . WHITE-1784-2,242.77

With a language thus hallowed in their imaginations , they were too well
satisfied , either to dispute its elegance , or improve its structure .
WHITE-1784-2,242.78

In succeeding ages the additional sanction of antiquity , or
prescription , was given to those compositions which their fathers had
admired : WHITE-1784-2,242.79

and while the belief of its divine original continues , that admiration
which has thus become the test and the duty of the faithful , can
neither be altered nor diminished . WHITE-1784-2,242.80

When therefore we consider these peculiar advantages of the Koran , we
have no reason to be surprised at the admiration in which it is held .
WHITE-1784-2,242.81

But , if descending to a more minute investigation of it , we consider
its perpetual inconsistence and absurdity , we shall indeed have cause
for astonishment at that weakness of humanity , which could ever have
received such compositions as the work of the Deity .
WHITE-1784-2,242.82

<P_243>

The first praise of all the productions of genius , is invention ; that
quality of the mind , which by the extent and quickness of its views ,
is capable of the largest conceptions , and of forming new combinations
of objects the most distant and unusual . WHITE-1784-2,243.84

But the Koran bears little impression of this transcendent character .
WHITE-1784-2,243.85

Its materials are wholly borrowed from the Jewish and Christian
scriptures , from the Talmudical legends and apocryphal gospels then
current in the East , and from the traditions and fables which abounded
in Arabia . WHITE-1784-2,243.86

The materials collected from these several sources , are here heaped
together , with perpetual and needless repetitions , without any settled
principle or visible connection . WHITE-1784-2,243.87

When a great part of the life of Mahomet had been spent in preparatory
meditation on the system he was about to establish , its chapters were
dealt out slowly and separately during the long period of
three_and_twenty years . WHITE-1784-2,243.88

Yet thus defective in its structure , and not less exceptionable <P_244>
in its doctrines , was the work which Mahomet delivered to his followers
as the oracles of God . WHITE-1784-2,244.89

The most prominent feature of the Koran , that point of excellence in
which the partiality of its admirers has ever delighted to view it , is
the sublime notion it generally impresses of the nature and attributes
of God . WHITE-1784-2,244.90

If its author had really derived these just conceptions from the
inspiration of that Being whom they attempt to describe , they would not
have been surrounded , as they now are on every side , with error and
absurdity . WHITE-1784-2,244.91

But it might easily be proved , that whatever it justly defines of the
divine attributes , was borrowed from our holy scripture ; which even
from its first promulgation , but especially from the completion of the
New Testament , has extended the views , and enlightened the
understandings of mankind ; and thus furnished them with arms , which
have too often been ineffectually turned against itself by its
ungenerous enemies . WHITE-1784-2,244.92

In this instance particularly , the copy is far below the great original
, both in <P_245> the propriety of its images , and the force of its
descriptions . WHITE-1784-2,245.93

Our holy scriptures are the only compositions that can enable the dim
sight of mortality to penetrate into the invisible world , and to behold
a glimpse of the divine perfections . WHITE-1784-2,245.94

Accordingly , when they would represent to us the happiness of heaven ,
they describe it , not by any thing minute and particular , but by
something general and great ; something , that without descending to any
determinate object , may at once by its beauty and immensity , excite
our wishes and elevate our affections . WHITE-1784-2,245.95

Though in the prophetical and evangelical writings the joys that shall
attend us in a future state are often mentioned with ardent admiration ,
they are expressed rather by allusion than similitude , rather by
indefinite and figurative terms , than by any thing fixed and
determinate . WHITE-1784-2,245.96

<font> Eye hath not seen , nor ear heard , neither have entered into the
heart of man , the things which God hath prepared for them that love him
. <$$font> WHITE-1784-2,245.97

What a reverence and astonishment does this passage excite <P_246> in
every hearer of taste and piety ? {COM:sic} WHITE-1784-2,246.98

What energy , and at the same time what simplicity in the expression ?
{COM:sic} WHITE-1784-2,246.99

How sublime , and at the same time , how obscure is the imagery ?
{COM:sic} WHITE-1784-2,246.100

Different was the conduct of Mahomet in his descriptions of heaven and
of paradise . WHITE-1784-2,246.101

Unassisted by the necessary influence of virtuous intentions and divine
inspiration , he was neither desirous , nor indeed able to exalt the
minds of men to sublime conceptions , or to rational expectations .
WHITE-1784-2,246.102

By attempting to explain what is inconceivable , to describe what is
ineffable , and to materialize what in itself is spiritual ; he absurdly
and impiously aimed to sensualize the purity of the divine essence .
WHITE-1784-2,246.103

Thus he fabricated a system of incoherence , a religion of depravity ,
totally repugnant indeed to the nature of that Being , who , as he
pretended , was its object ; but therefore more likely to accord with
the appetites and conceptions of a corrupt and sensual age .
WHITE-1784-2,246.104

That I may not appear to exalt our Scriptures thus far above the Koran
by an <P_247> unreasonable preference , I shall produce a part of the
second chapter of the latter , which is deservedly admired by the
Mahometans , who wear it engraved on their ornaments , and recite it in
their prayers . WHITE-1784-2,247.105

" God ! WHITE-1784-2,247.106

there is no God but he ; the living , the self-subsisting :
WHITE-1784-2,247.107

neither slumber nor sleep seizeth him : WHITE-1784-2,247.108

to him belongeth whatsoever is in heaven , and on earth .
WHITE-1784-2,247.109

Who is he that can intercede with him but through his good pleasure ?
WHITE-1784-2,247.110

He knoweth that which is past , and that which is to come .
WHITE-1784-2,247.111

His throne is extended over heaven and earth , WHITE-1784-2,247.112

and the preservation of both is to him no burden . WHITE-1784-2,247.113

He is the high , the mighty . " WHITE-1784-2,247.114

To this description who can refuse the praise of magnificence ?
WHITE-1784-2,247.115

Part of that magnificence however is to be referred to that verse of the
Psalmist , whence it was borrowed , WHITE-1784-2,247.116

<font> He that keepeth Israel , shall neither slumber , nor sleep .
<$$font> WHITE-1784-2,247.117

<P_248>

But if we compare it with that other passage of the same inspired
Psalmist , all its boasted grandeur is at once obscured , and lost in
the blaze of a greater light . WHITE-1784-2,248.119

<font> O my God , take me not away in the midst of my days ;
WHITE-1784-2,248.120

thy years are throughout all generations . WHITE-1784-2,248.121

Of old hast thou laid the foundations of the earth ;
WHITE-1784-2,248.122

and the heavens are the work of thy hands . WHITE-1784-2,248.123

They shall perish , WHITE-1784-2,248.124

but thou shalt endure : WHITE-1784-2,248.125

yea , all of them shall wax old , as doth a garment ;
WHITE-1784-2,248.126

as a vesture shalt thou change them , WHITE-1784-2,248.127

and they shall be changed ; WHITE-1784-2,248.128

but thou art the same , WHITE-1784-2,248.129

and thy years shall not fail . <$$font> WHITE-1784-2,248.130

The Koran , therefore , upon a retrospective view of these several
circumstances , far from supporting its arrogant claim to a supernatural
work , sinks below the level of many compositions confessedly of human
original ; WHITE-1784-2,248.131

and still lower does it fall in our estimation , when compared with that
pure and perfect pattern which we justly admire in the scriptures of
truth . WHITE-1784-2,248.132

<P_249>

It being then abundantly apparent , that no miracle either was
externally performed for the support , or is internally involved in the
composition , of the Mahometan revelation , we proceed to enquire ,
whether it be better attested by prophecy , that other grand evidence of
a mission from heaven . WHITE-1784-2,249.134

The knowledge of futurity is one of the most unequivocal and
incommunicable characters of the most High . WHITE-1784-2,249.135

By this he stamps a seal on the genuine illapses of his spirit ,
WHITE-1784-2,249.136

and distinguishes them from the visions of enthusiasm and the fables of
imposture . WHITE-1784-2,249.137

Of this Mahomet was conscious , WHITE-1784-2,249.138

and endeavoured to avail himself . WHITE-1784-2,249.139

Sensible of the credibility that arises from the evidence of prophecy ,
he appealed to prophecy for the authenticity of his mission .
WHITE-1784-2,249.140

There were no popular prophetic traditions among the Arabians , that
might be wrested to favour his pretensions . WHITE-1784-2,249.141

The Jewish and Christian scriptures , therefore , which he acknowledged
as divine , were <P_250> the only sources whence he could attempt to
derive any predictions of his coming . WHITE-1784-2,250.142

Though the later advocates of the Mahometan cause have laboured to
discover such predictions in our bible in its present form , we know
that it contains nothing to countenance their attempt .
WHITE-1784-2,250.143

So weak a claim the great pretender himself forbore to alledge ;
WHITE-1784-2,250.144

and more artfully rested his pretensions on a falsehood , which , though
still more absurd and improbable , is , by its very absurdity , more
difficult to be disproved . WHITE-1784-2,250.145

He frequently and boldly affirmed , that his mission had been foretold
by the prophets in the Hebrew testament , and more particularly by
Christ in the Gospel : and that both Jews and Christians , expecting his
coming , and dreading his success , had concurred in the atrocious crime
of mutilating their scriptures ; and , to deprive him of the testimony
those prophecies afforded , had expunged them from the sacred pages .
WHITE-1784-2,250.146

But the idea of this pretended corruption of the sacred writings , draws
after <P_251> it a train of the most improbable conclusions .
WHITE-1784-2,251.147

That the most discordant sects had united in destroying an article of
their own faith , for the unaccountable purpose of discrediting a person
to be born in a future age ; and that their attempt succeeded in thus
mutilating a book dispersed through every country in every language , is
among the consequences of this extraordinary hypothesis .
WHITE-1784-2,251.148

But we have the strongest reasons to believe , that our holy scriptures
, by the care of a good providence , have descended to us pure and
perfect , from their original times . WHITE-1784-2,251.149

There is indeed no evidence of the authenticity of any compositions ,
but what equally attends the books of the old and new testament .
WHITE-1784-2,251.150

Nay , there are no ancient writings , which bear such peculiar and
discriminating characteristics of authenticity . WHITE-1784-2,251.151

Their importance made them subjects of deep attention and consideration
; WHITE-1784-2,251.152

and their authority occasioned them to be appealed to by christians of
every persuasion . WHITE-1784-2,251.153

Different sects watched over them with a jealous eye , lest they should
be <P_252> corrupted ; WHITE-1784-2,252.154

and as each made them a standard , each contributed to preserve their
identity . WHITE-1784-2,252.155

To confirm us still further in this opinion , we have the concurring
testimony of many ancient writers , of the primitive fathers of the
church , and of heretics who maintained the most clashing and opposite
tenets ; whose scriptural quotations , though made with different views
from different copies , all uniformly refer to one and the same bible .
WHITE-1784-2,252.156

The very exceptions to this general position are few ,
WHITE-1784-2,252.157

and contribute additional proofs in favour of the sacred text :
WHITE-1784-2,252.158

for every mutilation , however inconsiderable , every depravation ,
however artful , to which the rage of controversy had given birth , were
instantly detected by the activity , and exposed by the indignation of
the opposite party . WHITE-1784-2,252.159

There are extant at this day various manuscripts of both testaments ,
much older than the Hejra . WHITE-1784-2,252.160

Such are the Vatican and Alexandrian manuscripts ; the dates of which
are generally ascribed by the critics to the fourth , or fifth , century
. WHITE-1784-2,252.161

<P_253>

In these we no where find any mention of Mahomet , or any other allusion
to his coming , than the general prediction <font> that false Christs
and false prophets should arise . <$$font> WHITE-1784-2,253.163

But to enter at large into this subject is neither consistent with my
plan , nor indeed necessary to my argument ; since a slight
consideration of these obvious proofs will afford the clearest
conviction , that those imaginary prophecies which Mahomet alledged , if
they had ever existed in the sacred volume , would have existed still ;
and in truth , that no such corruption as he pretended , has ever
happened to our scriptures . WHITE-1784-2,253.164

Thus was a man of no common talents , reduced by the very nature of his
enterprise to bear record of himself , to support his own cause by his
own unsupported testimony , and to maintain a weak and defenceless claim
by a futile and absurd appeal to prophecies which had no existence .
WHITE-1784-2,253.165

It appears then , that the pretensions of Mahomet are not accompanied by
any of <P_254> those marks of external evidence , which may always be
expected to confirm and to distinguish a divine revelation .
WHITE-1784-2,254.166

The proofs which he adduced in support of his claims are , in every
point of view , weak and unsatisfactory . WHITE-1784-2,254.167

To miraculous power , that most infallible and decisive test of divine
interposition , he openly disclaimed every pretence ;
WHITE-1784-2,254.168

and even boldly denied its necessity to confirm the mission of a prophet
. WHITE-1784-2,254.169

He deemed it sufficient to appeal to a secret and unattested intercourse
with an angel ; and above all , to the inimitable excellence and
sublimity of the Koran . WHITE-1784-2,254.170

To the former of these pretences no serious attention is due ;
WHITE-1784-2,254.171

for instead of affording any evidence in support of the claims of
Mahomet , it notoriously wants proofs to establish its own authenticity
. WHITE-1784-2,254.172

With regard to the boasted excellence of the Koran , which , as the
impostor alledged , bore strong and visible characters of an almighty
hand , and was designed by God to compensate the want of miraculous
power , and to supply every defect of external evidence , we have
already seen how ill-founded are its haughty and arrogant pretensions to
a divine original . WHITE-1784-2,254.173

<P_255>

From a view of the real merits of that celebrated work , and from a
consideration of the peculiar circumstances under which it was written
and delivered to the world ; from its want of invention , of order , of
consistency ; from the real character and abilities of its author ; and
from the signal advantages which he enjoyed in a language copious and
expressive , harmonious and refined ; in the years which were spent in
previous meditation , and the still longer space which was afterwards
employed in its composition ; and above all , in the opinions , the
habits , and the prejudices of his countrymen ; I say , from a due
consideration of these important particulars , we are fully justified in
resolving all its merit and all its success , into the agency of
ordinary and human causes . WHITE-1784-2,255.175

But the evidence which Mahomet alledged in support of the character he
had assumed , was not only in itself fallacious and equivocal ;
WHITE-1784-2,255.176

we may also trace plain marks of imposture in the manner in <P_256>
which that evidence was proposed and enforced . WHITE-1784-2,256.177

Sensible of the weakness of his credentials , and of the suspicion to
which the proofs he had adduced were justly liable , he anxiously
laboured to mislead the unwary , and to confound the ignorant by the
arrogance of his claims , and the confidence of his assertions .
WHITE-1784-2,256.178

Thus instead of delivering his pretended revelation to his followers ,
and leaving it to stand or fall by the determination of their own cool
and dispassionate judgment , he endeavoured to anticipate their opinions
, WHITE-1784-2,256.179

employed every artifice to enhance its merit , WHITE-1784-2,256.180

and embraced every opportunity to exaggerate its excellence by the most
pompous and elaborate encomiums on its perfection .
WHITE-1784-2,256.181

Hence arose his bold and haughty defiance of the united powers of every
order of created beings , to produce a work of equal beauty and
sublimity with the miraculous Koran ; WHITE-1784-2,256.182

hence too proceeded his groundless , yet ostentatious appeal to the
testimony of the ancient prophets ; from <P_257> whose writings he was
confessedly unable to produce a single prediction , which could , with
any probability of construction , be wrested to favour his pretensions .
WHITE-1784-2,257.183

Compelled by the nature of his situation and design , to support one
impious falsehood by another still more atrocious , the artifice and the
audacity of the impostor carried him yet farther ; WHITE-1784-2,257.184

and in order to afford some countenance to his extravagant appeal to the
evidence of prophecy , induced him to charge both Jews and Christians
with the odious , but impossible crime of corrupting their scriptures .
WHITE-1784-2,257.185

Such were the vain pretences , and such the unsubstantial proofs by
which the prophet of Arabia laboured to confirm and to authenticate his
mission . WHITE-1784-2,257.186

But far different was the conduct , and different the evidence , which
was adduced by Jesus Christ , in support of his claim to the character
and office of the Messiah . WHITE-1784-2,257.187

Into this contrast , however , the time will not at present permit me to
enter . WHITE-1784-2,257.188

<P_258>

The consideration of that long and astonishing train of Miracles , and
of that equally stupendous chain of Prophecies , on whose collective
evidence , as on a firm and immoveable basis , our holy religion
ultimately rests , would unavoidably lead me into too wide a field of
investigation . WHITE-1784-2,258.190

The infinite importance of the subjects naturally demands our most
serious and earnest attention , WHITE-1784-2,258.191

and is , I trust , sufficient fully to justify me in reserving them as
objects of future and more particular discussion . WHITE-1784-2,258.192

<P_259>

<heading>

Sermon VII . WHITE-1784-2,259.195

John X. 25 . WHITE-1784-2,259.196

<font> Jesus answered - The works that I do in my Father's name , they
bear witness of me . <$$font> WHITE-1784-2,259.197

<$$heading>

Having in my last discourse endeavoured to expose that empty shew of
external evidence , by which the Arabian impostor laboured to support
his impious pretensions , I now proceed , in pursuance of my general
plan , to examine and state the proofs on which Jesus Christ rested his
claim to the character of a divine teacher . WHITE-1784-2,259.199

In the words which I have now read to you , our Lord replies to the
captious questions of the Jews concerning his dignity and office ;
WHITE-1784-2,259.200

and refers <P_260> them to the Miracles which he wrought as affording
plain and undeniable evidence of his mission . WHITE-1784-2,260.201

Every one knows , what is meant by a Miracle ; though divines have
differed about the precise terms of definition . WHITE-1784-2,260.202

Some have defined it in language too loose and equivocal ;
WHITE-1784-2,260.203

and have thus confounded that which is unaccountable with that which is
miraculous : WHITE-1784-2,260.204

others , to avoid this extreme , have so narrowed the definition as to
make it inapplicable even to events which are truly entitled to that
denomination . WHITE-1784-2,260.205

I will not attempt to give such a definition as shall be exact without
being defective ; and comprehensive , without being redundant .
WHITE-1784-2,260.206

It is sufficient to say , that by a Miracle I mean " An event out of the
ordinary and settled course of nature , and such as could not have been
produced either by the operation of its general laws , or the
combination of contingent circumstances : " Or - " An operation
performed by any particular agent , which transcends his skill and power
, and which required the assistance of a supernatural being . "
WHITE-1784-2,260.207

<P_261>

A celebrated champion of infidelity , has insidiously or erroneously
maintained a Miracle to be contrary to experience ; whereas it is in
reality only different from it . WHITE-1784-2,261.209

Experience informs us , that <font> one <$$font> event has happened
often - WHITE-1784-2,261.210

testimony informs us that <font> another <$$font> event has happened
once , or more . WHITE-1784-2,261.211

That diseases should be <font> generally <$$font> cured by the
application of external causes , and <font> sometimes <$$font> at the
mere word of a prophet , and without the visible application of causes ,
are facts not inconsistent with each other in the nature of things
themselves , or irreconcilable {TEXT:irreconcileable} according to our
ideas . WHITE-1784-2,261.212

Each fact may arise from its own proper cause ; WHITE-1784-2,261.213

each may exist independently of the other ; WHITE-1784-2,261.214

and each is known by its own proper proof , be it of sense or testimony
. WHITE-1784-2,261.215

As secret causes often produce events contrary to those we <font> do
<$$font> expect from experience , it is equally conceivable that events
should sometimes be produced which we do <font> not <$$font> expect .
WHITE-1784-2,261.216

<P_262>

To pronounce therefore a Miracle to be false , because it is different
from experience , is only to conclude against its general existence from
the very circumstance which constitutes its particular nature :
WHITE-1784-2,262.218

for if it were not different from experience , where would be its
singularity ? WHITE-1784-2,262.219

Or what particular proof , could be drawn from it , if it happened
according to the ordinary train of human events , or was included in the
operation of the general laws of nature ? WHITE-1784-2,262.220

We grant that it does differ from experience : WHITE-1784-2,262.221

but we do not presume to make our experience the standard of the divine
conduct . WHITE-1784-2,262.222

He that acknowledges a God , must at least admit the possibility of a
Miracle . WHITE-1784-2,262.223

The Atheist that makes him inseparable from what is called nature , and
binds him to its laws by an insurmountable necessity ; that deprives him
of will , and wisdom , and power , as a distinct and independent Being ,
may deny even the very possibility of a miraculous interposition , which
can in any instance suspend or counteract those general laws by which
the world is governed . WHITE-1784-2,262.224

But he who allows of a first cause <P_263> in itself perfect and
intelligent , abstractedly from those effects which his wisdom and power
have produced , must at the same time allow , that this cause can be
under no such restraints as to be debarred the liberty of controlling
{TEXT:controuling} its laws as often as it sees fit .
WHITE-1784-2,263.225

Surely the Being that made the world , can govern it , or any part of it
, in such a manner as he pleases : WHITE-1784-2,263.226

and he that constituted the very laws by which it is in general
conducted , may suspend the operation of those laws in any given
instance ; or impress new powers on matter , in order to produce new and
extraordinary effects . WHITE-1784-2,263.227

Here indeed it is proper for me to observe , that the force exerted in
every Miracle is finite , and may , in many cases , be in itself far
less than what we see employed in the ordinary course of the world .
WHITE-1784-2,263.228

The sudden suspension of the force , which preserves any one planet in
its orbit , is less than the constant exercise of that force , which
preserves all the planets in their respective orbits ;
WHITE-1784-2,263.229

and yet it may be properly miraculous . WHITE-1784-2,263.230

It is not therefore necessary <P_264> to say , that the Miracles can@
@not be performed by a power less than infinite . WHITE-1784-2,264.231

That no beings can change , or counteract , or supersede the order of
things , as established by the Deity , without his appointment , is
indeed the clear and necessary consequence of his omnipotence ;
WHITE-1784-2,264.232

but that he may appoint them to change it , involves no contradiction :
WHITE-1784-2,264.233

that purposes of the highest moment may be answered by such appointment
, implies no absurdity ; WHITE-1784-2,264.234

and , therefore , in the case of Miracles , whether the Deity performs
them immediately by himself , or mediately by other agents , the great
ends of religion are equally secured WHITE-1784-2,264.235

and the proofs of his interposition may be equally luminous .
WHITE-1784-2,264.236

Miracles may be classed under two heads : those which consist in a
<font> train <$$font> or <font> combination of events <$$font> , which
could not have resulted from the ordinary arrangements of providence ;
and those <font> particular operations <$$font> which are performed by
instruments and agents incompetent to effect them without a
preternatural power . WHITE-1784-2,264.237

<P_265>

In the conduct of Providence respecting the Jewish people , from the
earliest periods of their existence , as a distinct class of society ,
to the present time , we behold a singularity of circumstance and
procedure , which we can@ @not account for on common principles .
WHITE-1784-2,265.239

Comparing their condition and situation with that of other nations , we
can meet with nothing similar to it in the history of mankind .
WHITE-1784-2,265.240

So remarkable a difference , conspicuous in every revolution of their
history , could not have subsisted through mere accident .
WHITE-1784-2,265.241

There must have been a cause adequate to so extraordinary an effect .
WHITE-1784-2,265.242

Now , what should this cause be , but an interposition of providence in
a manner different from the course of its general government ?
WHITE-1784-2,265.243

- for the phenomenon can@ @not be explained by an application of those
general causes and effects that operate in other cases .
WHITE-1784-2,265.244

The original propagation of Christianity was likewise an event , which
clearly discovered a miraculous interposition . WHITE-1784-2,265.245

The circumstances which attended it were such , as <P_266> can@ @not
rationally be accounted for on any other postulatum .
WHITE-1784-2,266.246

I have already considered this subject at large . WHITE-1784-2,266.247

I would now observe , that the institutions of the Law and the Gospel
may not only appeal for their confirmation to a <font> train of events
<$$font> , which taken in a general and combined view , point out an
extraordinary designation , and vindicate their claim to a divine
authority ; but also to a number of <font> particular operations
<$$font> , which considered distinctly , or in a separate and detached
light , evidently display a supernatural power , immediately exerted on
the occasion . WHITE-1784-2,266.248

Since Christ himself constantly appealed to these works as the evidences
of this divine mission and character , we will briefly examine , how far
they justified and confirmed his pretensions . WHITE-1784-2,266.249

That our Lord laid the greatest stress on the evidence they afforded ;
nay , that he considered that evidence as sufficient to authenticate his
claims to the office of the Messiah with all reasonable and
well-disposed enquirers , is manifest not only from <P_267> the words of
my text , but also from a great variety of other passages in the
Evangelists . WHITE-1784-2,267.250

Thus , when the disciples of John were sent to Christ , to receive from
his own lips the most satisfactory proofs of his divine mission , he
referred them to his Miracles . WHITE-1784-2,267.251

<font> Go <$$font> , said he , WHITE-1784-2,267.252

<font> and shew to John again those things which ye hear and see :
WHITE-1784-2,267.253

the blind receive their sight , WHITE-1784-2,267.254

the lame walk , WHITE-1784-2,267.255

the lepers are cleansed , WHITE-1784-2,267.256

the deaf hear , WHITE-1784-2,267.257

and the dead are raised up <$$font> . WHITE-1784-2,267.258

Again , <font> If I do not the works of my Father , believe me not :
WHITE-1784-2,267.259

but if I do , though ye believe not me , believe the works . <$$font>
WHITE-1784-2,267.260

This appeal to Miracles was founded on the following just and obvious
grounds . First , that they are visible proofs of divine approbation as
well as divine power : WHITE-1784-2,267.261

for it could have been inclusive to have rested an appeal on the
testimony of the latter , if it had not at the same time included an
evidence of the former : WHITE-1784-2,267.262

and it was indeed a natural inference , <P_268> that working of Miracles
in defence of a particular cause , was the seal of Heaven to the truth
of that cause . WHITE-1784-2,268.263

To suppose the contrary , would be to suppose , that God not only
permitted his creatures to be deceived ; but that he deviated from the
ordinary course of his providence , purposely with a view to deceive
them . WHITE-1784-2,268.264

The conclusion which the man , whom our Saviour restored to sight , drew
from this Miracle , was exceedingly just , and founded on the common
sentiments and impression of the human heart . WHITE-1784-2,268.265

<font> We know <$$font> , says he , <font> that God heareth not sinners
: WHITE-1784-2,268.266

but if any man be a worshipper of God , and doeth his will , him he
heareth . WHITE-1784-2,268.267

Since the world began was it not heard , that any man opened the eyes of
one that was born blind . WHITE-1784-2,268.268

If this man were not of God , he could do nothing . <$$font>
WHITE-1784-2,268.269

If the cause which our Lord was engaged in , had not been approved of by
God , it would not have been honoured with the seal of Miracles :
WHITE-1784-2,268.270

for the divine power can never be supposed to counteract the divine will
. WHITE-1784-2,268.271

This would be to set his nature at variance with itself ;
WHITE-1784-2,268.272

and by destroying his simplicity , would destroy his happiness , and
terminate in confusion and misery . WHITE-1784-2,268.273

<P_269>

Hence we may justly reject as incredible those Miracles , which have
been ascribed to the interposition of wicked spirits .
WHITE-1784-2,269.275

The possibility of their interference is a mere hypothesis , depending
upon gratuitous assumption , and leading to very dangerous consequences
: WHITE-1784-2,269.276

and the particular instances in which credulous superstition , or
perverted philosophy , has supposed them to interfere , are , as Facts ,
destitute of any clear and solid evidence , or as Effects , often
resolvable into natural causes . WHITE-1784-2,269.277

Secondly , when our Lord appealed to his Miracles as proofs of his
divine mission , it presupposed that those Miracles were of such a
nature as would bear the strictest examination that they had all those
criteria , which could possibly distinguish them from the delusions of
enthusiasm , and the artifices of imposture ; WHITE-1784-2,269.278

else the appeal would have been fallacious and equivocal .
WHITE-1784-2,269.279

He appealed to them with all the confidence of an upright mind , totally
possessed <P_270> with a consciousness of their truth and reality .
WHITE-1784-2,270.280

This appeal was not drawn out into any laboured argument ; nor adorned
by any of the embellishments of language . WHITE-1784-2,270.281

It was short , simple , and decisive . WHITE-1784-2,270.282

He neither reasoned , WHITE-1784-2,270.283

nor declaimed on their nature , or their design . WHITE-1784-2,270.284

He barely pointed to them as plain and indubitable facts , such as spoke
their own meaning , and carried with them their own authority .
WHITE-1784-2,270.285

The Miracles which our Lord performed , were too public to be suspected
of imposture ; WHITE-1784-2,270.286

and being objects of sense , they were secured against the charge of
enthusiasm . WHITE-1784-2,270.287

An impostor would not have acted so absurdly , as to have risqued his
credit on the performance of what he must have known it was not in his
power to effect . WHITE-1784-2,270.288

And though an enthusiast , from the warmth of imagination , might have
flattered himself with a full persuasion of his being able to perform
some miraculous work ; WHITE-1784-2,270.289

yet when the trial was referred to an object of sense , the event must
soon have exposed the delusion . WHITE-1784-2,270.290

The impostor would not have dared to say to the blind , <font> Receive
thy <P_271> sight <$$font> , to the deaf , <font> Hear <$$font> , to the
dumb , <font> Speak <$$font> , to the dead <font> Arise <$$font> , to
the raging of the sea , <font> Be still <$$font> ; lest he should injure
the credit of his cause , by undertaking more than he could perform .
WHITE-1784-2,271.291

And though the enthusiast , under the delusion of his passions might
have confidently commanded disease to fly , and the power of nature to
be subject to his control {TEXT:controul} ; yet their obedience would
not have followed his command . WHITE-1784-2,271.292

The Miracles of Christ then were such as an impostor would not have
attempted ; and such as an enthusiast could not have effected .
WHITE-1784-2,271.293

They had no disguise ; WHITE-1784-2,271.294

and were in a variety of instances of such a nature , as to preclude the
very possibility of collusion . WHITE-1784-2,271.295

They were performed in the midst of his bitterest enemies ;
WHITE-1784-2,271.296

and were so palpable and certain as to extort the following
acknowledgement even from persons who were most eager to oppose his
doctrines , and to discredit his pretensions : WHITE-1784-2,271.297

<font> This man doeth many Miracles . WHITE-1784-2,271.298

If we let him thus alone , all men will believe on him . <$$font>
WHITE-1784-2,271.299

<P_272>

The Miracles Christ performed , were indeed sufficient to alarm the
fears of those whose downfall was involved in his success .
WHITE-1784-2,272.301

And it was impossible for them to deny the facts , which so many
thousands were ready to attest on evidence too certain to admit even the
possibility of mistake , delusion , or imposture . WHITE-1784-2,272.302

But his enemies , who admitted their reality and yet resisted their
design , by not acknowledging the person who wrought them to be the
Messiah , had recourse to the most impious and most absurd suppositions
, in order to evade their evidence . WHITE-1784-2,272.303

The heathen imputed them to some occult power of magic ;
WHITE-1784-2,272.304

and thus applied what has no existence in nature , in order to account
for a phenomenon that existed out of its common course .
WHITE-1784-2,272.305

The stories of the Jews , who confessed the Miracles , but denied what
they were intended to establish , are too ridiculous to be mentioned .
WHITE-1784-2,272.306

I must not however omit to take notice of the wicked and blasphemous
cavil of the Pharisees , and the noble reply which our Lord made <P_273>
to it . WHITE-1784-2,273.307

They could not deny the fact , WHITE-1784-2,273.308

but they imputed it to the agency of an infernal spirit .
WHITE-1784-2,273.309

<font> This fellow , said they , doth not cast out devils , but by
Beelzebub the prince of the devils . WHITE-1784-2,273.310

And Jesus knew their thoughts WHITE-1784-2,273.311

and said unto them , Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to
desolation ; WHITE-1784-2,273.312

and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand :
WHITE-1784-2,273.313

: and if Satan cast out Satan , he is divided against himself ;
WHITE-1784-2,273.314

how shall then his kingdom stand ? <$$font> WHITE-1784-2,273.315

The purity of the doctrine which was taught by our blessed Lord , was
totally adverse to the kingdom of darkness . WHITE-1784-2,273.316

It tended to overthrow it , by the introduction of principles far
different from those which Satan would inspire ; and by prosecuting
objects totally opposite to those which that wicked and malignant spirit
would tempt us to pursue : so that in proportion to the prevalence of
the kingdom of Christ , the kingdom of Satan would of course be
diminished . WHITE-1784-2,273.317

Now , supposing Miracles to be in the power of an infernal spirit , can
it be imagined that he would <P_274> communicate an ability of
performing them to persons , who were counteracting his designs ?
WHITE-1784-2,274.318

Would he by them give credit to a cause , that tended to bring his own
into disgrace ? WHITE-1784-2,274.319

Thus , as our Saviour appealed to Miracles as proofs of his power ; so
he appealed to the inherent worth and purity of the doctrines they were
intended to bear witness to , as a proof that the power was of God .
WHITE-1784-2,274.320

In this manner do the external and internal evidences give and receive
mutual confirmation , and mutual lustre . WHITE-1784-2,274.321

The truth of the Christian religion does not , however , wholly depend
on the Miracles wrought by its divine founder , though sufficient in
themselves to establish his claims : WHITE-1784-2,274.322

but in order to give the evidence of Miracles the strongest force they
could possibly acquire , that evidence was extended still farther ;
WHITE-1784-2,274.323

and the same power that our Lord possessed , was communicated to his
disciples , and their more immediate successors . WHITE-1784-2,274.324

Whilst yet on earth , he imparted to them this extraordinary <P_275>
gift , as the seal of their commission , when he sent them to preach the
gospel : WHITE-1784-2,275.325

and after his glorious resurrection and ascension into heaven they were
endowed with powers yet more stupendous . WHITE-1784-2,275.326

Sensible of the validity of this kind of evidence , the apostles of our
Lord , with the same artless simplicity , and the same boldness of
conscious integrity , which distinguished their great master ,
constantly insisted upon the Miracles they wrought , as strong and
undeniable proofs of the truth of their doctrines .
WHITE-1784-2,275.327

Thus the Miracles of our blessed Lord may be justly considered as the
evidence of his divine mission and character . WHITE-1784-2,275.328

If we consider their nature , their greatness , and their number ; and
if to this consideration we add that which respects their end and design
, we must acknowledge that no one could have performed them , unless God
was with him . WHITE-1784-2,275.329

They were too public to be the artifices of imposture ; too substantial
and too numerous , to afford the slightest suspicion of undesigned
<P_276> and fortuitous coincidence . WHITE-1784-2,276.330

In a word , supposing that the divine Being should in any instance so
far counteract the common laws of nature , as to produce a Miracle ; and
should design that Miracle as a monument to future times of the truth of
any particular doctrine , we can@ @not conceive any mode of
communicating it more effectual than that which he has chosen .
WHITE-1784-2,276.331

Stronger proofs could not be afforded , consistently with the design of
the gospel , which is not to overpower our understandings by an
irresistible and compulsory light , but to afford us such rational
evidence as is sufficient to satisfy moral enquirers , who are endowed
with faculties to perceive the truth ; but at the same time who also
have power totally to resist it , and finally to forfeit all its
blessings . WHITE-1784-2,276.332

It would lead me too far to pursue the subject of Miracles in detail .
WHITE-1784-2,276.333

What I have to urge , may be , however , comprized under the following
heads . WHITE-1784-2,276.334

<P_277>

These Miracles were of a nature too palpable to be mistaken .
WHITE-1784-2,277.336

They were the objects of sense ; and not the precarious speculations of
reason concerning what God might do ; or the chimerical suggestions of
fancy concerning what he did . WHITE-1784-2,277.337

The facts were recorded by those who must know whether they were true or
false . WHITE-1784-2,277.338

The persons who recorded them , were under no possible temptations to
deceive the world . WHITE-1784-2,277.339

We can only account for their conduct on the supposition of their most
perfect conviction , and disinterested zeal . WHITE-1784-2,277.340

That they should assert what they knew to be false ; that they should
publish it with so much ardour ; that they should risque every thing
dear to humanity , in order to maintain it ; and at last submit to death
, in order to attest their persuasion of its truth in those moments when
imposture usually drops its mask , and enthusiasm loses its confidence ;
that they should act thus in opposition to every dictate of common sense
, and every principle of common honesty , every restraint of shame , and
every impulse of selfishness ; <P_278> is a phenomenon not less
irreconcileable to the moral state of things than Miracles are to the
natural constitution of the world . WHITE-1784-2,278.341

Falsehood naturally entangles men in contradiction ,
WHITE-1784-2,278.342

and confounds them with dismay : WHITE-1784-2,278.343

but the love of truth invigorates the mind ; WHITE-1784-2,278.344

the consciousness of integrity anticipates the approbation of God ;
WHITE-1784-2,278.345

and conscience creates a fortitude , to which mere unsupported nature is
often a stranger . WHITE-1784-2,278.346

The divine mission of our blessed Lord was not only supported by a
variety of Miracles which carried with them every mark of a supernatural
power , and were immediate and visible evidences of the concurrence of
the great ruler of nature in that cause which they were brought to to
{COM:sic} defend ; WHITE-1784-2,278.347

but it was illustrated and confirmed by a train of Prophecies , which
beginning with the fall , opened with greater lustre and with a wider
prospect , as the fulness of time drew near , in which they were to
receive their accomplishment . WHITE-1784-2,278.348

To Prophecies then as well as Miracles , both Christ and his Apostles
frequently appealed , <P_279> as proofs of his mission .
WHITE-1784-2,279.349

But he did not , like Mahomet , build his pretensions on some
predictions that had no existence ; or on others of which the conveyance
was traditionary , and the meaning was equivocal . WHITE-1784-2,279.350

On the contrary he appealed to those that were actually contained in
public and solemn records , and which had been preserved for ages , with
the care and reverence which was due to their high authority and
momentous import . WHITE-1784-2,279.351

These records were preserved in the hands of his enemies , who admitted
their divinity , and were well informed of their contents , so that he
could not be accused of supporting his claims by doubtful and
disgraceful evidence ; by writings which long neglect had obscured , or
insidious artifice had mutilated ; by inferences from preceding records
, which could not be contradicted , or by assumptions , which lay out of
the reach of serious and direct confutation . WHITE-1784-2,279.352

Nor less in nature and quality , than in origin and credit , were the
Prophecies which our Lord appealed to ; unlike those which Mahomet
pretended to adduce in his favour : or those which his infatuated
followers in later ages affected to discover in <P_280> the scriptures ,
and which they have wrested with more absurdity than plausibility in
support of their prophet . WHITE-1784-2,280.353

The Prophecies which respect the Messiah , are neither few in number ,
nor vague and equivocal in their reference ; but numerous , pointed and
particular . WHITE-1784-2,280.354

They bear on them those discriminating marks by which divine inspiration
may be distinguished from the conjectures of human sagacity ; and a
necessary or probable event , from a casual and uncertain contingency .
WHITE-1784-2,280.355

They are such as can@ @not be referred to the dictates of mere natural
penetration , because they are not confined to general occurrences ; but
point out with singular exactness a variety of minute circumstances
relating to times , places , and persons , which were neither objects of
fore-sight nor conjecture , because they were not necessarily connected
with the principal event , or even probable either in themselves or in
their relation . WHITE-1784-2,280.356

They were such as could only have occurred to a mind that was under the
immediate influence of the divinity , by which distant periods were
revealed and the secrets of unborn ages disclosed .
WHITE-1784-2,280.357

<P_281>

The scheme of Prophecy considered in its first opening , its gradual
advance , and its final and full completion in the advent , the ministry
, the death , and resurrection of the Messiah , and the extensive
progress of his gospel among the Gentiles , together with its blessed
influence on individuals , societies , countries , and the whole race of
mankind ; is an object the greatest and most sublime that imagination
can conceive ; and the most pleasing and important that the human mind
can contemplate . WHITE-1784-2,281.359

We behold the promise of a Redeemer given to our first parents
immediately after the fall , in obscure and general terms .
WHITE-1784-2,281.360

It foretold a victory that would be gained over the enemy that had
deceived and conquered them ; a victory the most illustrious in its
effects and consequences ; and which should amply revenge on the <font>
serpent's head <$$font> the evils and miseries which he had introduced
into the world . WHITE-1784-2,281.361

We behold the promise renewed in somewhat clearer language to the
Patriarchs ; <P_282> particularly to Abraham , the great father of the
faithful . WHITE-1784-2,282.362

Here the great purposes of providence begin to disclose themselves with
a fuller and brighter lustre at every step . WHITE-1784-2,282.363

With this venerable patriarch the Almighty condescended to enter into a
peculiar covenant ; WHITE-1784-2,282.364

and to excite his obedience , he promised to raise up from him a great
nation ; to take him and his family under his immediate patronage ; and
to make all the nations of the earth blessed through him .
WHITE-1784-2,282.365

The latter part of this promise is peculiarly memorable , as containing
in it the proper end for which God had chosen and separated him and his
posterity . WHITE-1784-2,282.366

It is very fitly made by the sacred writers the foundation of God's
dispensations to him ; WHITE-1784-2,282.367

and may be regarded as a mark to direct that reader to the great object
, to which they ultimately referred . WHITE-1784-2,282.368

The scene opens with one man ; WHITE-1784-2,282.369

and extends itself wider and wider , till we see the light of divine
truth diffusing its influence <P_283> over the earth by Jesus Christ ,
who according to the flesh sprang from his loins ; and fulfilled the
promise made unto the Father , that <font> in Isaac should his seed be
called . <$$font> WHITE-1784-2,283.370

We first see the promise of God to this ancient Patriarch fulfilled by
giving him a son , contrary to all human expectations .
WHITE-1784-2,283.371

The next grand step of its accomplishment was in the twelve Patriarchs .
WHITE-1784-2,283.372

We see them through the amazing , and to human view , incomprehensible
direction of divine Providence , settled in Egypt : and through the
influence of Joseph , who miraculously became a person of distinguished
credit and consequence in the court of Pharaoh , treated with peculiar
respect ; and indulged with allotments which made their situation not
merely commodious , but even splendid . WHITE-1784-2,283.373

At length the scene changes , WHITE-1784-2,283.374

but the great drama is still carried on . WHITE-1784-2,283.375

Its intricacies are unravelling , WHITE-1784-2,283.376

and its design unfolds itself more and more . WHITE-1784-2,283.377

For what can baffle eternal wisdom ? WHITE-1784-2,283.378

Or what can counteract <P_284> the might of omnipotence ?
WHITE-1784-2,284.379

The posterity of Israel are subjected to the tyranny of a king , <font>
that knew not Joseph . <$$font> WHITE-1784-2,284.380

They are oppressed , and harrassed , and reduced to the most abject
state of penury and servitude . WHITE-1784-2,284.381

Their cries , however , enter into the ears of the Lord God of Sabaoth ;
WHITE-1784-2,284.382

and a deliverer is sent . WHITE-1784-2,284.383

He first attempts to deliver them by the voluntary consent of Pharaoh .
WHITE-1784-2,284.384

He endeavours to convince their oppressor by the most awful and
stupendous Miracles , that God was with his people of a truth ; that he
would avenge their wrongs ; and that he who opposed them fought against
heaven . WHITE-1784-2,284.385

But the haughty spirit of Pharaoh disdained submission : though
conscience sometimes was appalled , and made him anticipate what he had
neither the courage to defy , nor the virtue to prevent .
WHITE-1784-2,284.386

When arguments which he was unable to confute , aided by miracles he was
unable to deny , could not shake him from his purpose ; when every
concession was retracted , as soon as it was made ; when stubbornness
and irresolution actuated him <P_285> alternately , and craft was called
in to the aid of violence ; Moses by the command of the most High
endeavoured to rescue this oppressed people by force .
WHITE-1784-2,285.387

In spite of opposition and contrary to all human prospect of success in
the arduous and hazardous enterprize , he left Egypt ; resolved to
resist if pursued , and to die rather than to return to the house of
bondage . WHITE-1784-2,285.388

Under the greatest disadvantages , and amidst appearances the most
unpromising , this great man , supported by the arm of omnipotence ,
conducted his followers out of the land of Egypt : WHITE-1784-2,285.389

and that God might shew his power , and give them the most undeniable
proof of his divine patronage , he led them designedly out of the direct
and common path , WHITE-1784-2,285.390

and brought them to the red sea . WHITE-1784-2,285.391

There the Lord made bare his arm , WHITE-1784-2,285.392

opened a passage in the deep , WHITE-1784-2,285.393

and guided them through , as on dry land . WHITE-1784-2,285.394

Miracles were displayed to animate their hopes , as well as to dispel
their fears . WHITE-1784-2,285.395

Their escape had the air of a triumph : WHITE-1784-2,285.396

where they had passed through safely the Egyptian hosts were overwhelmed
with destruction . WHITE-1784-2,285.397

