<BEGIN_whitefield-1737-2>

<P_4,M>

<heading>

<font> The Nature and Necessity of <$$font> Self-Denial .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,4,M.4

A Sermon Preached at the Parish Church Of <font> St. <$$font> Nicholas
Cole-Abbey . <$$heading> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,4,M.5

<P_5,M>

<heading>

Matth. v. 34 . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,M.8

<font> But I say unto you , Swear not at all . <$$font> <$$heading>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,M.9

Among the many heinous Sins for which this Nation is grown infamous ,
perhaps there is no one more crying , but withal more common , than the
abominable Custom of Profane <font> Swearing <$$font> and <font> Cursing
. <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,M.10

Our Streets abound with Persons of all Degrees and Qualities , who are
continually provoking the Holy One of <font> Israel <$$font> to Anger by
their detestable Oaths and Blasphemies : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,M.11

and our very Children , <font> out of whose Mouths <$$font> , the
Psalmist observes in his Days , <font> was perfected Praise <$$font> ,
are now grown remarkable for the quite opposite ill Quality of <font>
Cursing <$$font> and <font> Swearing . <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,M.12

This can@ @not but be a melancholy Prospect for every sincere and honest
Minister of <font> Jesus Christ <$$font> , to view his Fellow <font>
Christians <$$font> in ; and such as will put him on contriving some
Means to prevent the spreading at least of so growing an Evil ; knowing
that the Lord <paren> without Repentance <$$paren> will assuredly visit
for these Things . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,M.13

But , alas ! what can he do ? WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,M.14

Publick Animadversions are so neglected amongst us , that where shall we
find a common Swearer punished as the Laws direct ?
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,M.15

And as for private Admonition , Men are now so <font> hardened through
the Deceitfulness of Sin <$$font> , that to give them sober and pious
Advice , <P_6,M> and to shew them the Evil of their Doings , is but like
<font> casting Pearls before Swine , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,M.16

they only turn again WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,M.17

and rent you . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,M.18

Since Matters then are come to this pass , all that we can do is this ,
that as we are appointed Watchmen and Ambassadors of the Lord , it is
our Duty from time to time <font> to shew the People their Transgression
, and warn Them of their Sin <$$font> ; so that <font> whether they will
hear , or whether they will forbear , We <$$font> however <font> may
deliver our own Souls . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,M.19

That I therefore may discharge my Duty in this Particular , give me
leave , in the Name of God , humbly to offer to your most serious
Consideration some few Observations on the Words of the Text , in order
to shew the Heinousness of <font> profane Cursing <$$font> and <font>
Swearing . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,M.20

But before I proceed directly to the Prosecution of this Point , it will
be proper to clear this Precept of our Lord from a Misinterpretation
that has been put on it by a Set of Men , who heedlessly infer from
hence , that our Saviour prohibits Swearing before a Magistrate when
required on a solemn and proper Occasion . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,M.21

But that all Swearing is not absolutely unlawful for a <font> Christian
<$$font> , - is evident from the Writings of St. <font> Paul <$$font> ,
whom we often find upon some solemn Occasions using several Forms of
Imprecation and Swearing , as , <font> I call God to Witness , - God is
my Judge , - By your Rejoicing in Christ Jesus <$$font> , and such like
. WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,M.22

And that our Saviour does by no means forbid Swearing before a
Magistrate , in the Words now before us , is plain , if we consider the
Scope and Design he had in view , when he gave his Disciples this
Command . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,M.23

Permit me <P_7,M> to observe to you then , that our Blessed Master had
set himself , from the 27th Verse of this Chapter , out of which the
Text is taken , to vindicate and clear the Moral Law from the corrupt
Glosses and Misconstruction of the <font> Pharisees <$$font> , who then
sat {TEXT:sate} in <font> Moses <$$font> 's Chair , but without were
notoriously faulty in adhering too closely to the literal Expression of
the Law , without ever considering the due Extent and spiritual Meaning
of it . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,7,M.24

Accordingly they imagined , that because God had said , <font> Thou
Shalt not commit Adultery <$$font> that therefore , supposing a Person
was not guilty of the very Act of Adultery , he was not chargeable with
the Breach of the Seventh Commandment . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,7,M.25

And likewise in the Matter of Swearing , because God had forbidden his
People in the Books of <font> Exodus <$$font> and <font> Deuteronomy
<$$font> to take his Name in vain , or to swear falsly by his Name ;
they therefore judged it lawful to swear by any Creature in common
Discourse , supposing they did not directly mention the Name of God .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,7,M.26

Our Blessed Saviour therefore , in the Words now before us , rectifies
this their Mistake about <font> Swearing <$$font> , as He had done in
the Verses immediately foregoing that concerning <font> Adultery
<$$font> , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,7,M.27

and tells the People , that whatever Allowances the <font> Pharisees
<$$font> might give to <font> swear <$$font> by any Creature , yet He
pronounced it absolutely unlawful for any of his Followers to do so .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,7,M.28

<font> You have heard <$$font> , says he , <font> that it has been said
by them of old Time <$$font> , <paren> namely , by the <font> Pharisees
<$$font> and Teachers of the <font> Jewish <$$font> Law <$$paren> <font>
Thou Shalt not forswear thyself , but perform unto the Lord thine Oaths
: WHITEFIELD-1737-2,7,M.29

But I say unto you <$$font> , <paren> I who am <P_8,M> appointed by the
Father to be the Great Prophet and True Lawgiver of his Church <font>
Swear not at all <$$font> , in your common Conversation , <font> neither
by Heaven , for it is God's Throne <$$font> ; and therefore to Swear by
That , is to swear by Him that sits thereon : <font> neither by the
Earth , for it is his Footstool ; nor by Jerusalem , for it is the City
of the Great King : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,8,M.30

neither shalt thou Swear by thy Head , because thou canst not make one
Hair white or black : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,8,M.31

But let your Communications <$$font> <paren> which plainly shews that
Christ is here speaking of <font> Swearing <$$font> , not before a
Magistrate , but in common Conversation <$$paren> let your
Communications , says he , <font> be Yea yea , Nay nay <$$font> , a
strong Affirmation or Negation at the most ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,8,M.32

<font> for whatever is more than this cometh of Evil <$$font> , that is
, cometh from an Evil Principle , from the Evil One , the Devil , the
Author of all Evil . Which by the way , me@ @thinks , should be a
Caution to all such Persons , who though not guilty of <font> Swearing
<$$font> in the gross Sense of the Word , yet attest the Truth of what
they are speaking of , though ever so trifling , by saying <font> Upon
my Life , As I live , By my Faith , By the Heavens <$$font> , and such
like : which Expressions , however harmless and innocent they may be
esteemed by some sorts of People , yet are the very Oaths which our
Blessed Lord condemns in the Words immediately following the Text ;
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,8,M.33

and Persons who use such unwarrantable Forms of speaking , must expect
to be convicted and condemned as <font> Swearers <$$font> at our
Saviour's second Coming to judge the World . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,8,M.34

But to return : It appears then from the whole Tenour of our Saviour's
Discourse , that <P_9,M> in the Words of the Text he does by no means
disannul or forbid <font> Swearing <$$font> before a Magistrate ,
<paren> which , as might be easily shewn , is both lawful and necessary
<$$paren> but only <font> profane Swearing <$$font> in common
Conversation ; the Heinousness and Sinfulness of which I come now , as
was above proposed , more immediately to lay before you .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,9,M.35

And here , not to mention that it is a direct Breach of our Blessed
Master's and great Lawgiver's Command in the Words of the Text , as
likewise of the Third Commandment , wherein God positively declares , He
<font> will not hold him guiltless <$$font> <paren> that is , will
assuredly punish him <$$paren> <font> that taketh his Name in vain :
<$$font> Not to mention that it is the greatest Abuse of that noble
Faculty of Speech , whereby we are distinguished from the Brute Creation
; and the great hazard the <font> common Swearer <$$font> runs of being
perjured some time or other : Not to mention these Reasons against it ,
I say , which of themselves would abundantly prove the Folly and
Sinfulness of <font> Swearing : <$$font> - I shall at this time content
myself with instancing in Four Particulars , which highly aggravate the
Crime of <font> profane Swearing <$$font> ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,9,M.36

and those are such as follow . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,9,M.37

<font> First <$$font> , Because there is no Temptation in Nature to this
Sin , nor does the Commission of it afford the Offender the least
Pleasure or Satisfaction . <font> Secondly <$$font> Because it is a Sin
which may be so often repeated . <font> Thirdly <$$font> , Because it
hardens Infidels against the Christian Religion , and must give great
Offence , and occasion much Sorrow and Concern to every true Disciple of
<font> Jesus Christ . <$$font> <P_10,M> <font> Fourthly <$$font> ,
Because it is an Extremity of Sin , which can only be matched in Hell .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,10,M.38

The <font> First <$$font> Reason then why <font> Swearing <$$font> in
common Conversation is so heinous in God's Sight , and why we should not
swear at all , is because it has no Temptation in Nature ; nor does the
Commission of it , unless a Man be a Devil incarnate , afford the
Offender the least Pleasure or Satisfaction . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,10,M.39

Now here , I presume , we may lay it down as a Maxim universally agreed
on , that the Guilt of any Crime is increased or lessened in proportion
to the Weakness or Strength of the Temptation by which a Person is
carried out to the Commission of it . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,10,M.40

It was this Consideration that extenuated and diminished the Guilt of
<font> Saul <$$font> 's taking upon him to offer Sacrifice before the
Prophet <font> Samuel <$$font> came , and of <font> Uzza <$$font> 's
touching the Ark , because it was in danger of falling : As on the
contrary , what so highly aggravated the Disobedience of our First
Parents and <font> Lot <$$font> 's Wife , was , because the former had
so little Reason to eat the forbidden Fruit , and the latter so small a
Temptation to look back on <font> Sodom . <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,10,M.41

And now if this be granted , surely the common <font> Swearer <$$font>
must of all Sinners be the most without Excuse , since there is no
manner of Temptation in Nature to the Commission of his Crime .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,10,M.42

In most of the other Commands , Persons perhaps may plead the Force of
natural Inclination in excuse for their Breach of them :
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,10,M.43

One , for Instance , may alledge his strong Propensity to Anger , to
excuse his breaking of the Sixth : Another , his Proneness <P_11,M> to
Lust , for his Violation of the Seventh . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,M.44

But now surely , the <font> common Swearer <$$font> has nothing of this
kind to urge in his Behalf : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,M.45

For tho' he may have a natural Inclination to this or that Crime , yet
no Man , it is to be presumed , can say , he is born of a <font>
Swearing <$$font> Constitution . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,M.46

But farther , as there is no Temptation to it , so there is no Pleasure
or Profit to be reaped from the Commission of it .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,M.47

Ask the Drunkard why he rises up early to follow strong Drink , and he
will tell you , because it affords his sensual Appetite some kind of
Pleasure and Gratification , though it be no higher an {COM:sic} one
than that of a Brute . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,M.48

Enquire of the covetous Worldling , why he defrauds and over-reaches his
Neighbour , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,M.49

and he has an Answer ready , - To enrich himself , and to lay up Goods
for many Years . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,M.50

But it must certainly puzzle the <font> profane Swearer <$$font> himself
, to inform you what Pleasure he reaps from <font> Swearing <$$font> ;
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,M.51

for , alas ! it is a fruitless , tasteless Thing , that he sells his
Soul for . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,M.52

But indeed he does not sell it at all : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,M.53

In this Case he prodigally gives it away <paren> without Repentance
<$$paren> to the Devil ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,M.54

and parts with a blessed Eternity , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,M.55

and runs into everlasting Torment , merely for Nothing !
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,M.56

But , <font> Secondly <$$font> , what increases the Heinousness of
<font> profane Swearing <$$font> , is , that it is a Sin which may so
often be repeated . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,M.57

This is another Consideration which always serves to lessen or increase
the Guilt and Malignity of any Sin . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,M.58

It was some Excuse for the Drunkenness of <font> Noah <$$font> , and the
Adultery of <font> David <$$font> , that they committed these Crimes but
once ; As on the contrary , of the Patriarch <P_12,M> <font> Abraham
<$$font> 's Distrust of God , that he repeated the dissembling of <font>
Sarah <$$font> to be his Wife , two several times .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,M.59

And if this be admitted as an Aggravation of other Persons Crimes ,
surely much more so of the Guilt of <font> common Swearing <$$font> ,
because it is a Sin which may be and is for the generality often
repeated . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,M.60

In many other gross Sins it can@ @not be so : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,M.61

If a Man be overcome in Drink , there must be a considerable Time e'er
he can recover his Debauch , and return to his Cups again ;
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,M.62

or if he be accustomed to profane the Sabbath , he can@ @not do it every
Day , but only one in seven . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,M.63

But , alas ! the <font> profane Swearer <$$font> is ready for another
Oath almost before the Sound of the first is out of our Ears :
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,M.64

Yea , some double and treble them in one Sentence , even so as to
confound the Sense of what they say , by an horrible Din of Blasphemy !
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,M.65

Now if the great and terrible <font> Jehovah <$$font> has expressly
{TEXTexpresly} declared that He <font> will not hold him guiltless
<$$font> , that is , will assuredly punish him , <font> that taketh his
Name <$$font> but once <font> in vain : <$$font> What a vast Heap of
these heinous Sins lies at every <font> common Swearer <$$font> 's Door
? WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,M.66

It would be apt to sink him into an intolerable Despair , did he but see
the whole Sum of them . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,M.67

And , oh ! what a seared Conscience must that Wretch have , that does
not feel this prodigious Weight ! WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,M.68

But , <font> Thirdly <$$font> , What makes the Sin of <font> profane
Swearing <$$font> appear yet more exceedful {COM:sic} sinful is , that
it hardens Infidels against the <font> Christian Religion . <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,M.69

It is the Apostle St. <font> Peter <$$font> 's Advice to the married
Persons of his Time , that they should walk as became the Gospel of
Christ , that <P_13,M> those that were without might be won to embrace
the <font> Christian Religion <$$font> , by seeing and observing their
pious Conversation coupled together with fear .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,M.70

And what the Apostle presses on married Persons we find elsewhere
enjoined {COM:no_preposition} each particular Member of the Church .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,M.71

Accordingly , we are commanded by our Blessed Lord to <font> let our
Light so shine before Men , that they may see our good Works , and
glorify our Father which is in Heaven . <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,M.72

And the Apostle St. <font> Paul <$$font> bids us walk <font>
circumspectly towards them that are without , redeeming the Time
<$$font> , that is , embracing all Opportunities to do them good ,
<font> because the Days are evil . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,M.73

But , alas ! in what a direct Contradiction does the <font> profane
Swearer <$$font> live to this and such Precepts , - who , instead of
gaining Proselytes to Christ from the unbelieving Part of the World ,
does all he can to oppose it ! WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,M.74

For how can it be expected , that Infidels should Honour our God , when
<font> Christians <$$font> themselves despise him ; or that any should
embrace our Religion , when Professors of it themselves make so light of
one of its strictest Commands ? WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,M.75

No , to our Grief and Shame be it spoken , it is by Reason of such
Impieties as these that our Holy Religion <paren> the best and purest in
itself <$$paren> is become a By-word among the Heathen ; that the sacred
Authority of the Holy Jesus and his Doctrine is despised ; and <font>
God's Name <$$font> , as it is written , <font> blasphemed among the
Gentiles . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,M.76

These can@ @not but be sad Blocks and Offences in the way of our
Brethren's Conversion : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,M.77

<font> But we be to those Men by whom such Offences come : <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,M.78

<P_14,M>

We may say of them , as our Blessed Lord did of <font> Judas , It had
been better for such Men that they had never been born <$$font> ; or ,
as he threatens in another Place , <font> It shall be more tolerable for
Sodom and Gomorrah {TEXTGommorah} in the Day of Judgment , than for such
Sinners . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,M.80

But this is not all : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,M.81

As <font> profane Swearing <$$font> must undoubtedly harden those in
their Infidelity that are without , so must it no less grieve and give
great Offence to those honest and sincere Persons that are within the
Church . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,M.82

We hear of <font> David <$$font> 's complaining and crying out , <font>
Wo is me that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech , and to have my
Habitation amongst the Tents of Kedar : <$$font> that is , That he was
obliged to live and converse with a People exceedingly wicked and
prophane . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,M.83

And Saint <font> Peter <$$font> tells us , that <font> Lot's righteous
Soul was grieved Day by Day , whilst he saw and observed the ungodly
Conversation of the Wicked . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,M.84

And no doubt it was one great Part of our blessed Master's Sufferings
whilst on Earth , that he was compelled to converse with a wicked and
perverse Generation , and to hear his heavenly Father's sacred Name
profaned and scoffed at by unrighteous and wicked Men .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,M.85

And surely it can@ @not but pierce the Heart of every true and sincere
<font> Christian <$$font> , of every one that does in any Measure
partake of the Spirit of his Master , to hear the Multitude of Oaths and
Curses which proceed daily and hourly out of the Mouths of many People ,
and those too whose liberal Education and seeming Regard for the Welfare
of Religion , one would think , should teach them a more becoming
Behaviour . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,M.86

To hear the Great and <P_15,M> terrible Name of God polluted by Men ,
which is adored by Angels , and to consider how often that sacred Name
is prophaned in common Discourse , which we are not worthy to mention in
our Prayers : This , I say , can@ @not but make each of them cry out
with Holy <font> David , Wo is me that I am constrained to dwell with
Mesech , and to have my Habitation amongst the Tents of Kedar .
<$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,M.87

And though the Blasphemies and prophane Discourses of others will not be
imputed to sincere Persons for Sin , so long as they <font> have no
Fellowship with such hellish Fruits of Darkness , but rather reprove
them <$$font> ; nay , rather will be imputed to them for Righteousness ,
for thus lamenting the Wickedness of <font> Sin : <$$font> yet it will
greatly enhance the present Guilt , and sadly increase the future
Punishment of every <font> prophane Swearer <$$font> , by whom such
Offences come . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,M.88

For if , as our Saviour tells us , <font> it had been better for a Man
to have a Mill-stone tied about his Neck , than that he should offend
one of his little ones <$$font> , that is , the weakest of his Disciples
, <font> How much sorer Punishment will they be thought worthy of
<$$font> , who not only cause God's Name to be blasphemed among the
<font> Gentiles <$$font> , and the Religion of our dear Redeemer to be
abhorred ; but who make his Saints to weep and mourn , and <font> vex
their righteous Souls from Day to Day <$$font> , by their ungodly ,
profane , and blasphemous Conversation ? WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,M.89

Surely as God will put the Tears of <font> one <$$font> into his Bottle
, and recompense {TEXTrecompence} them with eternal Glory at the Great
Day of Retribution , so it will be just in him to punish the <font>
other <$$font> with eternal Sorrow for all their ungodly and hard
<P_16,M> Speeches , and cast them into a Lake of Fire and Brimstone ,
where they shall be glad of a Drop of Water to cool those Tongues with
which they have so often blasphemed the Lord of Hosts , and grieved the
People of our God . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,16,M.90

But it is Time for me to proceed to give my <font> Fourth <$$font> and
last Reason , why <font> common Swearing <$$font> is so exceeding sinful
. WHITEFIELD-1737-2,16,M.91

And that is , because it is such an Extremity of Sin , that can only be
matched in Hell , where all are desperate and without Hope of Mercy .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,16,M.92

The damned Devils and damned Souls of Men in Hell , may be supposed to
rave and blaspheme in their Torments , because they know that the Chains
wherein they are held can never be knocked off :
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,16,M.93

But for Men that swim in the River of God's Goodness , <font> whose
Mercies are renewed to them every Morning <$$font> , and who are visited
with fresh Tokens of his infinite unmerited Loving-kindness every Moment
: for these favourite Creatures to <font> set their Mouths against
Heaven <$$font> , and to blaspheme a gracious , patient , all-bountiful
God ; is a Height of Sin which exceeds the Blackness and Impiety of
Devils and Hell itself . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,16,M.94

And now , after what has been here offered , to shew the Heinousness of
<font> profane Cursing <$$font> and <font> Swearing <$$font> in common
Conversation , may I not very justly address myself to you in the Words
of the Text , <font> Therefore I say unto you , Swear not at all
<$$font> ; since it is a Sin that has no Temptation in Nature , nor
brings any Pleasure or Profit to the Committer of it ; since it hardens
Infidels in their Infidelity , and affords sad Causes of Grief and
Lamentation to every honest <font> Christian <$$font> ; since it is a
Sin that generally grows into <P_17,M> a Habit ; and lastly , such a Sin
that can only be matched in Hell . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,M.95

1. And first then , if these Things be so , and the Sin of <font>
profane Swearing <$$font> , as hath been in some Measure shewn , is so
exceeding sinful , What shall we say to such unhappy Men , who think it
not only allowable , but fashionable and polite to <font> take the Name
of God in vain <$$font> ; who imagine that <font> Swearing <$$font>
makes them look big amongst their Companions , and really think it a
Piece of Honour to abound in it ? WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,M.96

But alas ! little do they think that such a Behaviour argues the
greatest Degeneracy of Mind and Fool-hardiness that can possibly be
thought of : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,M.97

For what can be more base than one Hour to pretend to adore God in
publick Worship , and the very next Moment to blaspheme his Name ?
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,M.98

Indeed such a Behaviour from Persons who deny the Being of a God <paren>
if any such Fools there be <$$paren> is not altogether so much to be
wondered at : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,M.99

But for Men , who not only subscribe to the Belief of a Deity , but
likewise acknowledge him to be a God of infinite Majesty and Power ; for
such Men , I say , to blaspheme his holy Name by <font> prophane Cursing
<$$font> and <font> Swearing <$$font> , and at the same Time confess
that this very God has expresly declared He <font> will not hold him
guiltless <$$font> , that is , will certainly and eternally punish
<paren> without Repentance <$$paren> him <font> that taketh his Name in
vain <$$font> ; is such an Instance of Fool-hardiness as well as
Baseness , that can scarcely be paralleled {TEXT:paralled} .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,M.100

This is what they presume not to do in other Cases of less Danger :
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,M.101

They dare not revile a General at the Head of his Army , nor rouse a
sleeping Lion , when <P_18,M> within Reach of his Paw .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.102

And is the Almighty God , the Great <font> Jehovah <$$font> , the
Everlasting King , who can consume them by the Breath of his Nostrils ,
and frown them to Hell in an Instant ; is He , I say , the only
contemptible Being in their Account that may be provoked without Fear ,
and offended without Punishment ? WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.103

No , though God bear long , he will not bear always :
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.104

Time will come , and that too perhaps much sooner than such Persons may
expect , when God will vindicate his injured Honour , when he will lay
bare his Almighty Arm , and make those Wretches feel the eternal Smart
of his Justice , whose Power and Name they have so often vilified and
blasphemed . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.105

Alas ! What will become of all their Bravery then ?
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.106

Will they then wantonly sport with the Name of their Maker , and call
upon the King of all the Earth to damn them any more in Jest ?
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.107

No , their Note will then be changed : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.108

indeed they shall call , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.109

but alas ! it will be for <font> the Rocks to fall on them , and the
Hills to cover them from the Wrath of him that sitteth upon the Throne ,
and from the Lamb for ever . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.110

It is true , Time was when they prayed , though without Thought perhaps
, for Damnation both for themselves and others :
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.111

And now they will find their Prayers answered ,
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.112

- <font> They delighted in Cursing , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.113

therefore shall it happen unto them ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.114

they loved not Blessing , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.115

therefore shall it be far from them WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.116

they cloathed themselves with Cursing like as with a Garment ,
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.117

and it shall come into their Bowels like Water , and like Oil into their
Bones . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,18,M.118

2. But farther , if the Sin of <font> Swearing <$$font> is so exceeding
heinous , and withal so common , <P_19,M> then it is every particular
Person's Duty , especially those that are in Authority , to do their
utmost towards discountenancing and suppressing so malignant a Crime .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,M.119

The Duty we owe both to God and our Neighbour requires this at our Hands
: WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,M.120

By the one we are obliged to assert our Maker's Honour ; by the other to
prevent our Neighbour's Ruin : Not to mention that it is the greatest
Proof we can give of our undissembled Love to our Master , and is but
<font> doing as we would be done by <$$font> , and as we ourselves act
in Cases of lesser Consequence . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,M.121

Were we to hear either our own or our Friend's good Name vilified and
traduced , we should think it our bounden Duty to vindicate the wronged
Reputation of each : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,M.122

And shall the great , terrible and holy Name of our best and only Friend
, our King , our Father , nay our God ; Shall this , I say , be daily ,
nay every Moment defied and blasphemed ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,M.123

and will no one dare to stand up in Defence of his Honour and Holiness ?
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,M.124

<font> Be astonished O Heavens <$$font> , at this !
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,M.125

No , let us scorn all such base and treacherous Treatment :
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,M.126

Let us , for once at least , resolve to support the Cause of Religion ,
and with a becoming prudent Courage manifest our Zeal for the Honour of
the Lord of Hosts . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,M.127

Men in Authority have double the Advantages of ordinary <font>
Christians : <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,M.128

Their very Office shews they are intended for the Punishment of
evil_Doers : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,M.129

And such is the Degeneracy of Mankind , that the Generality of them will
be more influenced by the Power of Persons in Authority , than by the
most laboured Exhortations from the Pulpit . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,M.130

To such therefore , if there are any here present , <P_20,M> I humbly
address myself , beseeching them in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ ,
to do their utmost to put a Stop to , and restrain <font> profane
Cursing <$$font> and <font> Swearing . <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,M.131

And though it must be confessed that this is a Work which requires a
great deal of Courage and Pains , yet they would do well to consider it
is for God they undertake it , who certainly will support and bear them
out in a due Execution of their Office here , and reward them with an
exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory hereafter .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,M.132

But it is Time to draw towards a Conclusion .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,M.133

4. Let me therefore once more address myself to every Person here
present , in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ ;
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,M.134

and if any amongst them have been any way guilty of this notorious Sin
of <font> Swearing <$$font> , let me intreat them by all that is near
and dear to them , that they would neither give the Magistrate the
Trouble to punish , nor their Friends any Reason for the future to warn
them against committing the Crime ; but keep a constant and careful
<font> Watch over the Door of their Lips <$$font> , and withal implore
the Divine Assistance <paren> without which all is nothing <$$paren>
that <font> they offend no more <$$font> so scandalously <font> with
their Tongues . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,M.135

Let them seriously lay to Heart what with great Plainness and Simplicity
has here been delivered : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,M.136

And if they have any Regard for themselves as Men , or their Reputation
as <font> Christians <$$font> ; If they would not be a publick Scandal
to their Profession , or a Grief to all that know or converse with them
; In short , if they would not be Devils incarnate here , and provoke
God to punish them eternally hereafter , - I say unto them in the Name
of our Lord Jesus Christ , <font> Swear not at all . <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,M.137

<P_2,E>

<heading>

<font> The <$$font> Benefits <font> of an <$$font> Early Piety .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,2,E.140

A Sermon Preached at <font> Bow-Church London , {TEXT:,.} <$$font>
Before the Religious Societies , At One of their Quarterly Meetings , On
Wednesday , <font> September <$$font> 28 . 1737 .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,2,E.141

<$$heading>

<P_3,E>

<heading>

Eccl. xii. i. WHITEFIELD-1737-2,3,E.145

<font> Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth . <$$font>
<$$heading> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,3,E.146

The Amiableness of Religion in itself , the innumerable Advantages that
flow from it to Society in general , as well as each sincere Professor
of it in particular , can@ @not but recommend it to the Choice of every
considerate Person , and make even wicked Men , as they wish to die the
Death , so in their more sober Intervals , envy the Life of the
Righteous . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,3,E.147

And indeed we must do the World so much Justice as to confess , that the
Question about Religion does not <font> usually <$$font> arise from a
Dispute whether it be necessary or not <paren> for most Men see the
Necessity of doing something for the Salvation of their Souls <$$paren>
; but when is the best Time to set about it . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,3,E.148

Persons are convinced by universal Experience , that the first Essays or
Endeavours towards the Attainment of Religion , are attended with some
Difficulty and Trouble , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,3,E.149

and therefore they would willingly defer the beginning such a seemingly
ungrateful Work as long as they can . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,3,E.150

The wanton Prodigal , that is spending his Substance in riotous Living ,
cries , A little more Pleasure , a <P_4,E> little more Sensuality , and
then I@ @'ll be sober in Earnest . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,4,E.151

The covetous Worldling , that employs all his Care and Pains in <font>
heaping up Riches , tho' he can@ @not tell who shall gather them
<$$font> , does not flatter himself that this will do always ;
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,4,E.152

but hopes with the rich Fool in the Gospel , to lay up Goods for a few
more Years on Earth , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,4,E.153

and then he@ @'ll begin to lay up Treasures in Heaven .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,4,E.154

And , in short , thus it is that most People are convinced of the
Necessity of being religious some Time or another ; but then , like
<font> Felix <$$font> , they put off the acting suitably to their
Convictions , till <paren> what they imagine <$$paren> a more convenient
Season : Whereas , would we be so humble as to be guided by the
Experience and Counsel of the wisest of Men , we should learn that Youth
is the fittest Season for Religion ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,4,E.155

<font> Remember now thy Creator <$$font> , says Solomon , <font> in the
Days of thy Youth . <$$font> By which Word Remember , we are not to
understand a bare speculative Remembrance , or calling to Mind , <paren>
for that , like a dead Faith , will profit us nothing <$$paren> but such
a Remembrance as will constrain us to Obedience , and oblige us out of
Gratitude to perform all that the Lord our God shall require of us .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,4,E.156

For as forgetting God , in Scripture Language , implies a total Neglect
of our Duty , in like Manner remembering him signifies a perfect
Performance of it : So that , when <font> Solomon <$$font> says , <font>
Remember thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth <$$font> , it is the same
as if he had said , Keep God's Commandments ; or in other Words , Be
religious in the Days of thy Youth , thereby implying that Youth is the
most proper Season for it . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,4,E.157

<P_5,E>

I shall in the following Discourse , <font> first <$$font> , endeavour
to make good the Wise Man's Proposition implied in the Words of the Text
, and to shew that Youth is the fittest Season for Religion .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,E.159

<font> Secondly <$$font> , By way of Motive , I shall consider the many
unspeakable Advantages that will arise from remembering our Creator in
the Days of our Youth . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,E.160

<font> Thirdly <$$font> and <font> Lastly <$$font> , I shall conclude
with a Word or two of Exhortation to the younger Part of this Audience .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,E.161

And <font> First <$$font> then , I am to make good the Wise Man's
Proposition implied in the Words of the Text , and to shew that Youth is
the fittest Season for Religion : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,E.162

<font> Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth . <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,E.163

But in order to proceed more clearly in this Argument , it may not be
improper , first , to explain what I mean by the Word <font> Religion .
<$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,E.164

By this Term , then , I would not be understood to mean a bare outward
Profession or Naming the Name of Christ ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,E.165

for we are told , that many that have even prophesied in his Name , and
in his Name cast out Devils , shall notwithstanding be rejected by him
at the last Day : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,E.166

Nor would I understand by it barely being admitted into Christ's Church
by Baptism , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,E.167

for then <font> Simon Magus , Arius <$$font> , and the Heresiarchs of
old might pass for religious Persons , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,5,E.168

for these <P_6,E> were baptized ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,E.169

nor yet the receiving the other Seal of the Covenant ,
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,E.170

for then <font> Judas <$$font> himself might be canonized for a Saint ;
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,E.171

nor indeed do I mean any or all of these together , considered by
themselves ; but a thorough , real , inward Change of Nature , wrought
in us by the powerful Operations of the Holy Ghost , conveyed to and
nourished in our Hearts , by a constant Use of all the Means of Grace ,
evidenced by a good Life , and bringing forth the Fruits of the Spirit .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,E.172

The attaining this real , inward Religion , is a Work of so great
Difficulty , that <font> Nicodemus <$$font> , a learned Doctor and
Teacher in <font> Israel <$$font> , thought it altogether impossible ,
and therefore ignorantly asked our Blessed Lord , How this Thing could
be ? WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,E.173

And <font> truly <$$font> to rectify a disordered Nature , to mortify
our corrupt Passions , to turn Darkness to Light , to put off the old
Man , and put on the new , and thereby to have the Image of God
reinstamped upon the Soul , or in one Word , to be born again , how ever
light some may make of it , must after all our Endeavours be owned by
Man impossible . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,E.174

'T@ @is true indeed , Christ's Yoke is said to be an easy or a gracious
Yoke , and his Burthen light ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,E.175

but then it is to those only who have been accustomed to bear and draw
in it . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,E.176

For , as the wise Son of <font> Sirach <$$font> observes , <font> At
first Wisdom walketh with her Children in crooked Ways ,
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,E.177

and brings them into Fear ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,E.178

and torments them with her Discipline , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,E.179

and does not turn to comfort and rejoice them , till she has tried them
and proved their Judgment . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,6,E.180

- <$$font> No ; we must not flatter <P_7,E> our selves , that our
depraved Natures can be renewed , unless we submit to a great many
Difficulties . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,7,E.181

The spiritual Birth is attended with its Pangs , as well as the natural
: WHITEFIELD-1737-2,7,E.182

For they that have experienced it , <paren> and they only are the proper
Judges <$$paren> can acquaint you , that frequent Acts of Self-denial
must be exercised , a constant regular Discipline kept up , lest , after
all , when we come to the Birth , we should want Strength to bring forth
. WHITEFIELD-1737-2,7,E.183

But if <font> these Things are so <$$font> ; if there are Difficulties
and Pangs attending our being born again , and Discipline must be called
in , what Season more proper than that of Youth ; when , if ever , our
Bodies are robust and vigorous , and our Minds active and courageous ;
and consequently we are then best qualified to endure Hardness as good
Soldiers of Jesus Christ ? WHITEFIELD-1737-2,7,E.184

We find in secular Matters People commonly observe this Method , and
send their Children abroad among the Toils and Fatigues of Business in
their younger Years , as well knowing they are then fittest to undergo
them . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,7,E.185

And why do they not act with the same Consistency in the grand Affair of
Religion ? WHITEFIELD-1737-2,7,E.186

<font> Because <$$font> , as our Saviour has told us , <font> the
Children of this World are wiser in their Generation , than the Children
of Light . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,7,E.187

But , <font> Secondly <$$font> , if pure Religion and undefiled ,
consists in the total Renewal of our corrupted Natures , then 't@ @is
not only a Work of Difficulty , but of Time : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,7,E.188

For , as the old was not , so neither is the new Creation compleated
<P_8,E> in a Day . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,8,E.189

No , good Men know by certain Experience , that it is a long while ere
old Things can pass away , and all Things become new in them .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,8,E.190

The strong Man armed has gotten too great Possession of their Hearts to
be quickly driven out , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,8,E.191

and they are obliged to combat many a weary Hour , ere their Corruptions
, which is the Armour in which the strong Man trusted , be wholly taken
from him . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,8,E.192

Nay , they find their whole Lives short enough to perfect the Work of
Regeneration , which they were sent into the World to do ,
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,8,E.193

and never expect to say 't@ @is finished , till with their Blessed
Master they bow down their Heads , and give up the Ghost .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,8,E.194

And if this be the Case , if the Renovation of our Nature be not only
difficult , but requires so long a Space to complete it in ; then it
highly concerns every one to set about it betimes , and to <font> work
their Work while it is Day , before the Night cometh , when no Man can
work . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,8,E.195

Could we , indeed , live to the Age of <font> Methuselah <$$font> , and
had but little Business to employ ourselves in , we might then be more
excusable , if we made no other Use of this World , than , what too many
do , <font> take our Pastime therein <$$font> ;
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,8,E.196

but since our Lives are so very short , and the working out our
Salvation requires so much Time , we have no Room left for Trifling ,
lest we should be snatched away while our Lamps are untrimmed , and we
are entirely unprepared to meet the Bridegroom .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,8,E.197

<P_9,E>

Did we know a Friend or Neighbour , who had a long Journey of the utmost
Importance to make , and yet should stand <font> all the Day idle
<$$font> ; neglecting to set out till the Sun was about to go down , we
could not but pity and condemn his egregious Folly ;
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,9,E.199

and yet it is to be feared most Men are just such Fools ;
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,9,E.200

they have a long Journey to take , nay , a Journey to Eternity , a
Journey of infinite Importance , and which they are obliged to dispatch
before the Sun of their natural Life be gone down ;
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,9,E.201

and yet they loiter away their Time allotted them to perform their
Journey in , till Sickness or Death surprizes them ;
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,9,E.202

and then they cry out , <font> What shall we do to inherit eternal Life
? <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,9,E.203

But , alas ! is this a proper Season to ask such a Question ?
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,9,E.204

Is this a Time to <font> begin <$$font> their Journey , when they should
be at the <font> End <$$font> of it ; or to inquire what they must do ,
when perhaps they have hardly any Strength or Ability left to do any
thing to Purpose , and when they should be waiting with humble Patience
, in Hopes of speedily receiving their Wages for Work already done ?
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,9,E.205

<font> O foolish People and unwise ! WHITEFIELD-1737-2,9,E.206

If ye offer the Blind for Sacrifice , is it not evil ?
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,9,E.207

and if ye offer the Lame and Sick , is it not evil ?
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,9,E.208

Offer it now unto thy Governor , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,9,E.209

will he be pleased with thee , or accept thy Person ? saith the Lord of
Hosts . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,9,E.210

But leaving such to the Mercies of God , I pass on to {TEXT:to.} The
Second general Thing proposed , <font> viz. <$$font> To shew the
Advantages that will arise from <font> remembering our Creator in the
Days of our Youth <$$font> ; which may serve as so many Motives to
<P_10,E> excite and quicken all Persons immediately to set about it .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,10,E.211

And the <font> first <$$font> Benefit resulting from thence is , that it
will bring most Honour and Glory to God . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,10,E.212

This , I suppose , every serious Person will grant , ought to be the
Point in which all our Actions should centre ;
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,10,E.213

for to this End were we born ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,10,E.214

to this End were we redeemed by the precious Blood of Jesus Christ ,
that we should promote God's eternal Glory , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,10,E.215

And as the Glory of God is most advanced by paying Obedience to his
Precepts , they that begin soonest to walk in his Ways , act most to his
Glory : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,10,E.216

For the common Objection against the Divine Laws in general , and the
Doctrines of the Gospel in particular , is , that they are not
practicable , that they are contrary to Flesh and Blood , and that all
those Precepts concerning Self-Denial , Renunciation of and Deafness to
the World , are but so many arbitrary Restraints imposed upon human
Nature . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,10,E.217

But when we see mere Striplings not only practising , but delighting in
such religious Duties , and in the Days of their Youth , when , if ever
, they have a Relish for sensual Pleasure , subduing and despising the
<font> Lust of the Flesh , the Lust of the Eye , and the Pride of Life -
<$$font> This , this is acceptable with God ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,10,E.218

this vindicates his injured Honour ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,10,E.219

this shews that his Service is perfect Freedom , <font> that his Yoke is
easy , and his Burden light . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,10,E.220

<P_11,E>

But , Secondly , as an early Piety redounds most to the Honour of God ,
so it will bring most Honour to ourselves : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,E.222

For those that honour God , God will honour .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,E.223

We find it therefore remarked to the Praise of Obadiah , that he served
the Lord from his Youth : Of Samuel , that he stood , when young ,
before God in a linnen Ephod : Of Timothy , that from a Child he had
known the Holy Scriptures : Of St. John , that he was the youngest and
most beloved Disciple ; and of our Blessed Lord himself , that at Twelve
Years old he went up to the Temple , and sat among the Doctors , both
hearing and asking them Questions . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,E.224

Nor , <font> Thirdly <$$font> , will an early Piety afford us less
Comfort than Honour , not only because it renders Religion habitual to
us , but also because it gives us a well-grounded Assurance of the
Sincerity of our Professions . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,E.225

Was there no other Argument against a Death-bed Repentance but the
Unsatisfactoriness and Anxiety of such a State , that would be
sufficient to deter all thinking Persons from deferring the most
important Business of their Life to such a dreadful Period of it .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,E.226

For supposing a Man be sincere in his professions of Repentance on a
Death-bed , <paren> which is very much to be doubted <$$paren> yet he
can take no great Comfort in them , because he is uncertain whether his
Convictions and Remorse proceed from a true Sorrow for Sin , or a
servile Fear of Punishment . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,E.227

- But a young Saint need fear no such Perplexity ,
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,11,E.228

he knows that he <P_12,E> loves God for his own Sake , and is not driven
to him by a Dread of impending Evil : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,E.229

He does not decline the Gratifications of Sense , because he can no
longer <font> hear the Voice of Singing-Men and Singing-Women <$$font> ;
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,E.230

but willingly takes up his Cross , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,E.231

and follows his Blessed Master in his Youth ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,E.232

and therefore must have great Confidence of his Sincerity towards God .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,E.233

But farther , as an early Piety assures the Heart of its Sincerity , so
likewise it brings its present Reward with it , as it renders Religion ,
and all its Duties , habitual and easy . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,E.234

A young Saint , was {COM:sic} you to ask him , would joyfully tell you
the unspeakable Comfort of beginning to be good betimes :
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,E.235

As for his Part , he knows not what Men mean by talking of Mortification
, Self-Denial , and Retirement , as hard and rigorous Duties ;
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,E.236

for he has so accustomed himself to them , that they are now become even
natural , and he takes infinitely more Pleasure in practising the
severest Precepts of the Gospel , than a luxurious <font> Dives <$$font>
in a Bed of State , or an ambitious <font> Haman <$$font> at a Royal
Banquet . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,E.237

And , oh ! how happy must that Youth be , whose Duty is become a second
Nature , and to whom those Things , which seem terrible to Others , are
grown both easy and delightful . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,12,E.238

But the greatest Advantage of an early Piety is still behind , <font>
viz. <$$font> That it lays in the best Provision of Comfort and Support
against such Times as we shall stand most in need thereof , <font> viz.
<$$font> all Times of our Tribulation , and in particular against the
Time of old Age , <P_13,E> the Hour of Death , and the Day of Judgment .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,E.239

This is the Argument the Wise Man makes Use of in the Words immediately
following the Text : <font> Remember now <$$font> , says he , <font> thy
Creator in the Days of thy Youth , while the Evil Days come not , nor
the Years draw nigh , wherein thou shalt say , I have no Pleasure in
them . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,E.240

Observe , the Time of old Age is an evil Time , Years wherein there is
no Pleasure ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,E.241

and ask those that are grown old , and they will inform you so .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,E.242

Cordials surely then must be exceeding proper to support our drooping
Spirits : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,E.243

And , oh ! What Cordial is {TEXT:missing_"is"} comparable to the
grateful Review of a well-spent Life ? WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,E.244

When the Eyes , like <font> Isaac <$$font> 's , are grown dim with Age ;
When <font> the Keepers of the House <$$font> , i.e. the Hands , shall
tremble ; as the Wise Man goes on to describe the Infirmities of old Age
; when <font> the strong Men bow themselves <$$font> , i.e. when the
Legs grow feeble , and <font> the Grinders <$$font> , i.e. the Teeth ,
shall cease to do their proper Office , because they are few ; for a
Person then to hear the Precepts of the Gospel read over to him , and to
be able to lay his Hand on his Heart , and to say sincerely , <font> All
these have I kept from my Youth : <$$font> This must fill him with such
unspeakable Comfort , that I want Words to express , and Thoughts to
conceive it . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,E.245

But , supposing it was possible for us to escape the Inconveniences of
old Age , yet still Death is a Debt we all must pay ;
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,13,E.246

and , what is worse , it generally comes attended with such dreadful
Circumstances , that it will make even a <P_14,E> <font> Felix <$$font>
tremble . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,E.247

But as for the Godly , that have served the Lord from their Youth , it
is not so with them ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,E.248

no , they look upon Death not as a <font> King of Terrors <$$font> , but
as a welcome Messenger , that is come to conduct them to their
wished-for Home . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,E.249

All the <font> Days <$$font> of their <font> appointed <$$font> Time
have they waited , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,E.250

and it has been the Business of their whole Lives to prepare themselves
for the coming of their great Change ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,E.251

and therefore they rejoyce to hear , that they are called to meet the
heavenly Bridegroom . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,E.252

Thus dies the early <paren> I mean the early , if persevering <$$paren>
pious ; whose <font> Path has been as the shining Light , that shineth
more and more unto the perfect Day . <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,E.253

But follow him beyond the Grave , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,E.254

and see with what an holy Triumph he enters into his Master's Joy , with
what an humble Boldness he stands at the dreadful Tribunal of Jesus
Christ ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,E.255

and can you then forbear to cry out , <font> Let me die the Death of the
Righteous , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,E.256

and let my latter End , and future State , be like his ? <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,E.257

Need I then , after having shewn so many Advantages to arise from an
early Piety , use any more Arguments to persuade the younger Part of
this Audience , to whom in the Third and last Place I address my self ,
to <font> remember their Creator in the Days of their Youth ? <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,E.258

What ! WHITEFIELD-1737-2,14,E.259

will not a Desire of bringing Glory to God , Honour and Comfort to
themselves ; will not the Pleasure of an habitual Piety , and the
comfortable Assurance of being sincere ; above all , will not the Hopes
of an honourable old Age , a peaceful Death , and a glorious <P_15,E>
Appearance at the tremendous Day of Judgment ; will not these , I say ,
prevail with them to leave their Husks , and return home to eat of the
fatted Calf ? WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,E.260

What , will they thus requite their Saviour's Love ?
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,E.261

That be far from them ! WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,E.262

Did he come down and shed his precious Blood to deliver them from the
Power of Sin ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,E.263

and will they spend their youthful Strength and Vigour in the Service of
it , and <font> then <$$font> think to serve Christ , when they can
follow their Lusts no longer ? WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,E.264

Is it fit , that many who are endowed with excellent Gifts , and are
thereby qualified to be Supports and Ornaments of our sinking Church ,
should notwithstanding forget the God that gave them , and employ them
in Things that will not profit ? WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,E.265

O why will they not arise , and , like so many <font> Phineas's <$$font>
{COM:font_change_around_"Phineas"} , be zealous for the Lord of Hosts ?
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,E.266

Doubtless , when Death overtakes them , they will wish they had :
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,E.267

and what hinders them , but that they may live as well now , as they
will wish they had when they leave the World ?
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,E.268

Think you , that any one yet ever repented that he began to be good too
soon ? WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,E.269

But how many , on the contrary , have repented that they began to be
good too late ? WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,E.270

May we not well imagine , that young <font> Samuel <$$font> now rejoices
that he waited so soon at the Tabernacle of the Lord ? Or young <font>
Timothy <$$font> , that from a Child he knew the Holy Scriptures ?
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,E.271

And if you wish to be Partakers of their Joy , let me persuade you to be
Partakers of their Piety . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,E.272

I could still go on to fill my Mouth with Arguments ;
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,15,E.273

but the Circumstances and Piety <P_16,E> of those amongst whom <font> I
am now preaching the Kingdom of God <$$font> , remind me to change my
Style ; and instead of urging any more Dissuasives from Sin , to fill up
what is behind of this Discourse , with Encouragements to persevere in
Holiness . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,16,E.274

<font> Blessed <$$font> , for ever blessed <font> be God and the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ ! <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,16,E.275

I am not speaking to Persons inflamed with youthful Lusts , but to a
Multitude of young Processors , who by frequently assembling together ,
and forming themselves into religious Societies , are in a ready Way to
be of the Number of those <font> young Men <$$font> who have <font>
overcome the wicked One . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,16,E.276

Believe me , it gladdens my very Soul , to see so many of your Faces set
heavenwards ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,16,E.277

and the visible happy Effects of your uniting together , can@ @not but
rejoice the Hearts of all sincere Christians , and oblige them to <font>
wish you good Luck in the Name of the Lord . <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,16,E.278

The many Souls that are nourished weekly by the spiritual Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ by your Means , the weekly and monthly Lectures that are
preached by your Contributions ; the daily Incense of Thanksgiving and
Prayer which is publickly sent up to the Throne of Grace by your
Subscriptions ; the many Children which are trained up <font> in the
Nurture and Admonition of the Lord <$$font> by your Charities ; and
lastly , the commendable and pious Zeal you exert in promoting and
encouraging divine Psalmody , are such plain and apparent Proofs of the
Benefit of your religious Societies , <P_17,E> that they call for a
publick Acknowledgment of Praise and Thanksgiving to our Blessed Master
, who has not only put into your Hearts such good Designs , but enabled
you also to bring the same to good Effect . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,E.279

It is true , it has been objected , <font> That young Mens forming
themselves into Religious Societies , has a tendency to make them
spiritually proud , and think more <$$font> highly of themselves than
they ought to think . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,E.280

And perhaps the imprudent imperious Behaviour of some Novices in
Religion , who , <font> though they went out from you , were not of you
<$$font> , may have given too much Occasion for such an Aspersion .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,E.281

<font> But you , Brethren , have not so learned Christ . <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,E.282

Far , far be it from you , to look upon your selves as righteous , and
despise others , because you often assemble your selves together .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,E.283

No , this , instead of creating Pride , ought to beget an holy Fear in
your Hearts , lest your Practice should not correspond with your
Profession , and that , after you have benefited and edified others ,
you yourselves should become Castaways . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,E.284

Worldly-mindedness , my Brethren , is another Rock against which we are
in danger of splitting . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,E.285

For , if other Sins have slain their Thousands of professing Christians
, this has slain its Ten_thousands . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,E.286

I need not appeal to past Ages ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,E.287

your own Experience , no doubt , has furnished you with many unhappy
Instances of young Men , who , after as one would have imagined they had
escaped the Pollutions which are in the World thro' Lust , and had
tasted the good Word of Life , and endured for a Season , whilst under
the Tuition and Inspection of others ; yet when they have come to be
their own Masters , through a want of Faith , and through too great an
Earnestness in labouring for the Meat which perisheth , have cast off
their first Love , been again entangled with the World , and returned
like the Dog to his Vomit , and like the Sow that was washed , to her
wallowing in the Mire . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,E.288

You would therefore do well , my Brethren , frequently to remind each
other of this dangerous Snare , and to exhort one another to begin ,
pursue and end your Christian Warfare , in a thorough Renunciation of
the World , and worldly Tempers ; so that , when you are oblig'd by
Providence to provide for your selves , and those of your respective
Housholds , you may continue to walk by Faith , and <font> still seek
first the Kingdom of God , and his Righteousness <$$font> ; not doubting
but <font> all <$$font> other <font> Things <$$font> , upon your honest
Industry and Endeavours , <font> shall be added unto you . <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,E.289

And now <font> what shall I say more ? <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,E.290

To speak unto you , Fathers , who have been in Christ ; so many Years
before me , and know the Malignity of Worldly-mindedness , and Pride in
the Spiritual Life , would be altogether needless .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,E.291

To you therefore , O young Men , <paren> for whom I am distressed , for
whom I fear as well as for my self <$$paren> do I once more address
myself , in the Words of the beloved Disciple , Look to yourselves ;
that <font> we lose not those Things which we have wrought , but receive
a full Reward . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,17,E.292

Be ever mindful , then , of the Words that have been <P_19,E> spoken to
us by the Apostles of the Lord and Saviour , Give Diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,E.293

Beware , lest ye also being led away by the Error of the Wicked , fall
from your own Stedfastness . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,E.294

Let him that thinketh he standeth , take heed lest he fall .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,E.295

Be not high-minded , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,E.296

but fear . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,E.297

But we are persuaded better Things of you , and Things that accompany
Salvation , though we thus speak . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,E.298

For God is not unrighteous , to forget your Works and Labours of Love .
<$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,E.299

And <font> we desire that every one of you do shew the same Diligence to
the full Assurance of Hope unto the End : <$$font> That ye be not
slothful , but Followers of them <font> who through Faith and Patience
inherit the Promises . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,E.300

'T@ @is true , we have many Difficulties to encounter , many powerful
Enemies to overcome , ere we can get Possession of the promis'd Land .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,E.301

We have an artful Devil , an ensnaring World , and , above all , the
Treachery of our own Hearts , to withstand and strive against .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,E.302

<font> For strait is the Gate , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,E.303

and narrow is the Way , that leadeth unto <$$font> eternal <font> Life .
<$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,E.304

But wherefore should we fear ? since he that is with us is far more
powerful , than all who are against us . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,E.305

Have we not already experienced his almighty Power , in enabling us to
conquer some Difficulties which seemed as insurmountable then , as those
we struggle with now ? WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,E.306

And can@ @not he who delivered us out of the Paws of those Bears and
Lions , preserve us also from being hurt by the strongest <font>
Goliah's <$$font> {COM:font_change_around_"Goliah"} ?
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,19,E.307

<P_20,E>

<font> Be stedfast therefore , my Brethren , WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,E.309

be immoveable . <$$font> WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,E.310

Consider the infinite future Rewards as well as present Comforts that
attend an Early Piety . WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,E.311

Be not <font> ashamed of the Gospel of Christ :
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,E.312

For it is the Power of God unto Salvation . <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,E.313

Fear not Man ; WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,E.314

fear not the Contempt and Revilings which you must meet with in the Way
of Duty : WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,E.315

For <font> one of you shall chase a_thousand ; and two of you put
Ten_thousand <$$font> of your Enemies <font> to Flight . <$$font>
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,E.316

And if you will be content to be abas'd for a short Time here , <font> I
speak the Truth in Christ , I lye not <$$font> ; then shall ye be
exalted to sit down with the Son of Man , when he shall come in the
Glory of his Father with his holy Angels to Judgment hereafter .
WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,E.317

May Almighty God give every one of us such a Measure of his Grace , that
we may not be of the Number of those that draw back unto Perdition , but
of them that believe and endure unto the End , to the Saving of our
Souls . <font> Which God <$$font> , &c. WHITEFIELD-1737-2,20,E.318

