<BEGIN_wilde-1895-1>

<P_39>

<heading>

Second Act WILDE-1895-1,39.4

Scene <font> Morning-room at Sir Robert Chiltern's house . <$$font>
WILDE-1895-1,39.5

<$$heading>

<font> Lord Goring , dressed in the height of fashion , is lounging in
an armchair . WILDE-1895-1,39.7

Sir Robert Chiltern is standing in front of the fireplace .
WILDE-1895-1,39.8

He is evidently in a state of great mental excitement and distress .
WILDE-1895-1,39.9

As the scene progresses he paces nervously up and down the room .
<$$font> WILDE-1895-1,39.10

Lord Goring : My dear Robert , it@ @'s a very awkward business , very
awkward indeed . WILDE-1895-1,39.11

You should have told your wife the whole thing . WILDE-1895-1,39.12

Secrets from other people's wives are a necessary luxury in modern life
. WILDE-1895-1,39.13

So , at least , I am always told at the club by people who are bald
enough to know better . WILDE-1895-1,39.14

But no man should have a secret from his own wife . WILDE-1895-1,39.15

She invariably finds it out . WILDE-1895-1,39.16

Women have a wonderful instinct about things . WILDE-1895-1,39.17

They can discover everything except the obvious . WILDE-1895-1,39.18

Sir Robert Chiltern : Arthur , I could@ @n't tell my wife .
WILDE-1895-1,39.19

When could I have told her ? WILDE-1895-1,39.20

Not last night . WILDE-1895-1,39.21

It would have made a life-long separation between us ,
WILDE-1895-1,39.22

and I would have lost the love of the one woman in the world I worship ,
of the only woman who has ever stirred love within me .
WILDE-1895-1,39.23

Last night it would have been quite impossible . WILDE-1895-1,39.24

<P_40>

She would have turned from me in horror ... in horror and in contempt .
WILDE-1895-1,40.26

Lord Goring : Is Lady Chiltern as perfect as all that ?
WILDE-1895-1,40.27

Sir Robert Chiltern : Yes , my wife is as perfect as all that .
WILDE-1895-1,40.28

Lord Goring <font> taking off his left-hand glove <$$font> : What a pity
! WILDE-1895-1,40.29

I beg your pardon , my dear fellow , WILDE-1895-1,40.30

I did@ @n't quite mean that . WILDE-1895-1,40.31

But if what you tell me is true , I should like to have a serious talk
about life with Lady Chiltern . WILDE-1895-1,40.32

Sir Robert Chiltern : It would be quite useless . WILDE-1895-1,40.33

Lord Goring : May I try ? WILDE-1895-1,40.34

Sir Robert Chiltern : Yes ; WILDE-1895-1,40.35

but nothing could make her alter her views . WILDE-1895-1,40.36

Lord Goring : Well , at the worst it would simply be a psychological
experiment . WILDE-1895-1,40.37

Sir Robert Chiltern : All such experiments are terribly dangerous .
WILDE-1895-1,40.38

Lord Goring : Everything is dangerous , my dear fellow .
WILDE-1895-1,40.39

If it was@ @n't so , life would@ @n't be worth living ... .
WILDE-1895-1,40.40

Well , I am bound to say that I think you should have told her years ago
. WILDE-1895-1,40.41

Sir Robert Chiltern : When ? WILDE-1895-1,40.42

When we were engaged ? WILDE-1895-1,40.43

Do you think she would have married me if she had known that the origin
of my fortune is such as it is , the basis of my career such as it is ,
and that I had done a thing that I suppose most men would call shameful
and dishonourable ? WILDE-1895-1,40.44

Lord Goring <font> slowly <$$font> : Yes ; most men would call it ugly
names . WILDE-1895-1,40.45

There is no doubt of that . WILDE-1895-1,40.46

<P_41>

Sir Robert Chiltern <font> bitterly <$$font> : Men who every day do
something of the same kind themselves . Men who , each one of them ,
have worse secrets in their own lives . WILDE-1895-1,41.48

Lord Goring : That is the reason they are so pleased to find out other
people's secrets . WILDE-1895-1,41.49

It distracts public attention from their own . WILDE-1895-1,41.50

Sir Robert Chiltern : And , after all , whom did I wrong by what I did ?
WILDE-1895-1,41.51

No one . WILDE-1895-1,41.52

Lord Goring <font> looking at him steadily <$$font> : Except yourself ,
Robert . WILDE-1895-1,41.53

Sir Robert Chiltern <font> after a pause <$$font> : Of course I had
private information about a certain transaction contemplated by the
Government of the day , WILDE-1895-1,41.54

and I acted on it . WILDE-1895-1,41.55

Private information is practically the source of every large modern
fortune . Lord Goring <font> tapping his boot with his cane {TEXT:came}
<$$font> : And public scandal invariably the result .
WILDE-1895-1,41.56

Sir Robert Chiltern <font> pacing up and down the room <$$font> : Arthur
, do you think that what I did nearly eighteen years ago should be
brought up against me now ? WILDE-1895-1,41.57

Do you think it fair that a man's whole career should be ruined for a
fault done in one's boyhood almost ? WILDE-1895-1,41.58

I was twenty-two at the time , WILDE-1895-1,41.59

and I had the double misfortune of being well-born and poor , two
unforgivable things nowadays . WILDE-1895-1,41.60

Is it fair that the folly , the sin of one's youth , if men choose to
call it a sin , should wreck a life like mine , should place me in the
pillory , should shatter all that I have worked for , all that I have
built up ? WILDE-1895-1,41.61

Is it fair , Arthur ? WILDE-1895-1,41.62

Lord Goring : Life is never fair , Robert . WILDE-1895-1,41.63

And perhaps it is a good thing for most of us that it is not .
WILDE-1895-1,41.64

Sir Robert Chiltern : Every man of ambition has to fight his century
with its own weapons . WILDE-1895-1,41.65

What this century worships is wealth . WILDE-1895-1,41.66

<P_42>

The god of this century is wealth . WILDE-1895-1,42.68

To succeed one must have wealth . WILDE-1895-1,42.69

At all costs one must have wealth . WILDE-1895-1,42.70

Lord Goring : You underrate yourself , Robert . WILDE-1895-1,42.71

Believe me , without wealth you could have succeeded just as well .
WILDE-1895-1,42.72

Sir Robert Chiltern : When I was old , perhaps . WILDE-1895-1,42.73

When I had lost my passion for power , or could not use it .
WILDE-1895-1,42.74

When I was tired , worn out , disappointed . WILDE-1895-1,42.75

I wanted my success when I was young . WILDE-1895-1,42.76

Youth is the time for success . WILDE-1895-1,42.77

I could@ @n't wait . WILDE-1895-1,42.78

Lord Goring : Well , you certainly have had your success while you are
still young . WILDE-1895-1,42.79

No one in our day has had such a brilliant success . WILDE-1895-1,42.80

Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs at the age of forty - that@ @'s good
enough for anyone , I should think . WILDE-1895-1,42.81

Sir Robert Chiltern : And if it is all taken away from me now ?
WILDE-1895-1,42.82

If I lose everything over a horrible scandal ? WILDE-1895-1,42.83

If I am hounded from public life ? WILDE-1895-1,42.84

Lord Goring : Robert , how could you have sold yourself for money ?
WILDE-1895-1,42.85

Sir Robert Chiltern <font> excitedly <$$font> : I did not sell myself
for money . WILDE-1895-1,42.86

I bought success at a great price . WILDE-1895-1,42.87

That is all . WILDE-1895-1,42.88

Lord Goring <font> gravely <$$font> : Yes ; you certainly paid a great
price for it . WILDE-1895-1,42.89

But what first made you think of doing such a thing ?
WILDE-1895-1,42.90

Sir Robert Chiltern : Baron Arnheim . WILDE-1895-1,42.91

Lord Goring : Damned scoundrel ! WILDE-1895-1,42.92

Sir Robert Chiltern : No ; he was a man of a most subtle and refined
intellect . A man of culture , charm , and distinction . One of the
most intellectual men I ever met . WILDE-1895-1,42.93

<P_43>

Lord Goring : Ah ! I prefer a gentlemanly fool any day .
WILDE-1895-1,43.95

There is more to be said for stupidity than people imagine .
WILDE-1895-1,43.96

Personally , I have a great admiration for stupidity .
WILDE-1895-1,43.97

It is a sort of fellow-feeling , I suppose . WILDE-1895-1,43.98

But how did he do it ? WILDE-1895-1,43.99

Tell me the whole thing . WILDE-1895-1,43.100

Sir Robert Chiltern <font> throws himself into an armchair by the
writing-table <$$font> : WILDE-1895-1,43.101

One night after dinner at Lord Radley's the Baron began talking about
success in modern life as something that one could reduce to an
absolutely definite science . WILDE-1895-1,43.102

With that wonderfully fascinating quiet voice of his he expounded to us
the most terrible of all philosophies , the philosophy of power ,
WILDE-1895-1,43.103

preached to us the most marvellous of all gospels , the gospel of gold .
WILDE-1895-1,43.104

I think he saw the effect he had produced on me , WILDE-1895-1,43.105

for some days afterwards he wrote and asked me to come and see him .
WILDE-1895-1,43.106

He was living then in Park Lane , in the house Lord Woolcomb has now .
WILDE-1895-1,43.107

I remember so well how , with a strange smile on his pale , curved lips
, he led me through his wonderful picture gallery , showed me his
tapestries , his enamels , his jewels , his carved ivories , made me
wonder at the strange loveliness of the luxury in which he lived ; and
then told me that luxury was nothing but a background , a painted scene
in a play , and that power , power over other men , power over the world
, was the one thing worth having , the one supreme pleasure worth
knowing , the one joy one never tired of , and that in our century only
the rich possessed it . WILDE-1895-1,43.108

Lord Goring <font> with great deliberation <$$font> : A thoroughly
shallow creed . WILDE-1895-1,43.109

Sir Robert Chiltern <font> rising <$$font> : I did@ @n't think so then .
WILDE-1895-1,43.110

I do@ @n't think so now . WILDE-1895-1,43.111

Wealth has given me enormous power . WILDE-1895-1,43.112

It gave me at the very outset of my life freedom , WILDE-1895-1,43.113

and freedom is everything . WILDE-1895-1,43.114

You have never been poor , and never known what ambition is .
WILDE-1895-1,43.115

You can@ @not understand what a wonderful chance the Baron gave me .
Such a chance as few men get . WILDE-1895-1,43.116

Lord Goring : Fortunately for them , if one is to judge by results .
WILDE-1895-1,43.117

But tell me definitely , how did the Baron finally persuade you to -
well , to do what you did ? WILDE-1895-1,43.118

<P_44>

Sir Robert Chiltern : When I was going away he said to me that if I ever
could give him any private information of real value he would make me a
very rich man . WILDE-1895-1,44.120

I was dazed at the prospect he held out to me , WILDE-1895-1,44.121

and my ambition and my desire for power were at that time boundless .
WILDE-1895-1,44.122

Six weeks later certain private documents passed through my hands .
WILDE-1895-1,44.123

Lord Goring <font> keeping his eyes steadily fixed on the carpet
<$$font> : State documents ? WILDE-1895-1,44.124

Sir Robert Chiltern : Yes . WILDE-1895-1,44.125

<font> Lord Goring sighs , WILDE-1895-1,44.126

then passes his hand across his forehead WILDE-1895-1,44.127

and looks up . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,44.128

Lord Goring : I had no idea that you , of all men in the world , could
have been so weak , Robert , as to yield to such a temptation as Baron
Arnheim held out to you . WILDE-1895-1,44.129

Sir Robert Chiltern : Weak ? WILDE-1895-1,44.130

Oh , I am sick of hearing that phrase . Sick of using it about others .
WILDE-1895-1,44.131

Weak ? WILDE-1895-1,44.132

Do you really think , Arthur , that it is weakness that yields to
temptation ? WILDE-1895-1,44.133

I tell you that there are terrible temptations that it requires strength
, strength and courage , to yield to . WILDE-1895-1,44.134

To stake all one's life on a single moment , to risk everything on one
throw , whether the stake be power or pleasure , I care not - there is
no weakness in that . WILDE-1895-1,44.135

There is a horrible , a terrible courage . WILDE-1895-1,44.136

I had that courage . WILDE-1895-1,44.137

I sat down the same afternoon WILDE-1895-1,44.138

and wrote Baron Arnheim the letter this woman now holds .
WILDE-1895-1,44.139

He made three-quarters of a_million over the transaction .
WILDE-1895-1,44.140

Lord Goring : And you ? WILDE-1895-1,44.141

Sir Robert Chiltern : I received from the Baron 110,000 +L
{TEXT:+L110,000} . WILDE-1895-1,44.142

Lord Goring : You were worth more , Robert . WILDE-1895-1,44.143

<P_45>

Sir Robert Chiltern : No ; WILDE-1895-1,45.145

that money gave me exactly what I wanted , power over others .
WILDE-1895-1,45.146

I went into the House immediately . WILDE-1895-1,45.147

The Baron advised me in finance from time to time . WILDE-1895-1,45.148

Before five years I had almost trebled my fortune . WILDE-1895-1,45.149

Since then everything that I have touched has turned out a success .
WILDE-1895-1,45.150

In all things connected with money I have had a luck so extraordinary
that sometimes it has made me almost afraid . WILDE-1895-1,45.151

I remember having read somewhere , in some strange book , that when the
gods wish to punish us they answer our prayers . WILDE-1895-1,45.152

Lord Goring : But tell me , Robert , did you ever suffer any regret for
what you had done ? WILDE-1895-1,45.153

Sir Robert Chiltern : No . WILDE-1895-1,45.154

I felt that I had fought the century with its own weapons , and won .
WILDE-1895-1,45.155

Lord Goring <font> sadly <$$font> : You thought you had won .
WILDE-1895-1,45.156

Sir Robert Chiltern : I thought so . WILDE-1895-1,45.157

<font> After a long pause . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,45.158

Arthur , do you despise me for what I have told you ?
WILDE-1895-1,45.159

Lord Goring <font> with deep feeling in his voice <$$font> : I am very
sorry for you , Robert , very sorry indeed . WILDE-1895-1,45.160

Sir Robert Chiltern : I do@ @n't say that I suffered any remorse .
WILDE-1895-1,45.161

I did@ @n't . WILDE-1895-1,45.162

Not remorse in the ordinary , rather silly sense of the word .
WILDE-1895-1,45.163

But I have paid conscience money many times . WILDE-1895-1,45.164

I had a wild hope that I might disarm destiny . WILDE-1895-1,45.165

The sum Baron Arnheim gave me I have distributed twice over in public
charities since then . WILDE-1895-1,45.166

Lord Goring <font> looking up <$$font> : In public charities ?
WILDE-1895-1,45.167

Dear me ! WILDE-1895-1,45.168

what a lot of harm you must have done , Robert ! WILDE-1895-1,45.169

Sir Robert Chiltern : Oh , do@ @n't say that , Arthur ;
WILDE-1895-1,45.170

do@ @n't talk like that ! WILDE-1895-1,45.171

<P_46>

Lord Goring : Never mind what I say , Robert ! WILDE-1895-1,46.173

I am always saying what I should@ @n't say . WILDE-1895-1,46.174

In fact , I usually say what I really think . A great mistake nowadays
. WILDE-1895-1,46.175

It makes one so liable to be misunderstood . WILDE-1895-1,46.176

As regards this dreadful business , I will help you in whatever way I
can . WILDE-1895-1,46.177

Of course , you know that . WILDE-1895-1,46.178

Sir Robert Chiltern : Thank you , Arthur , WILDE-1895-1,46.179

thank you . WILDE-1895-1,46.180

But what is to be done ? WILDE-1895-1,46.181

What can be done ? WILDE-1895-1,46.182

Lord Goring <font> leaning back with his hands in his pockets <$$font> :
Well , the English ca@ @n't stand a man who is always saying he is in
the right , WILDE-1895-1,46.183

but they are very fond of a man who admits that he has been in the wrong
. WILDE-1895-1,46.184

It is one of the best things in them . WILDE-1895-1,46.185

However , in your case , Robert , a confession would not do .
WILDE-1895-1,46.186

The money , if you will allow me to say so , is ... awkward .
WILDE-1895-1,46.187

Besides , if you did make a clean breast of the whole affair , you would
never be able to talk morality again . WILDE-1895-1,46.188

And in England a man who ca@ @n't talk morality twice a week to a large
, popular , immoral audience is quite over as a serious politician .
WILDE-1895-1,46.189

There would be nothing left for him as a profession except Botany or the
Church . WILDE-1895-1,46.190

A confession would be of no use . WILDE-1895-1,46.191

It would ruin you . WILDE-1895-1,46.192

Sir Robert Chiltern : It would ruin me . WILDE-1895-1,46.193

Arthur , the only thing for me to do now is to fight the thing out .
WILDE-1895-1,46.194

Lord Goring <font> rising from his chair <$$font> : I was waiting for
you to say that , Robert . WILDE-1895-1,46.195

It is the only thing to do now . WILDE-1895-1,46.196

And you must begin by telling your wife the whole story .
WILDE-1895-1,46.197

Sir Robert Chiltern : That I will not do . WILDE-1895-1,46.198

Lord Goring : Robert , believe me , you are wrong . WILDE-1895-1,46.199

Sir Robert Chiltern : I could@ @n't do it . WILDE-1895-1,46.200

It would kill her love for me . WILDE-1895-1,46.201

And now about this woman , this Mrs Cheveley . How can I defend myself
against her ? WILDE-1895-1,46.202

You knew her before , Arthur , apparently . WILDE-1895-1,46.203

<P_47>

Lord Goring : Yes . WILDE-1895-1,47.205

Sir Robert Chiltern : Did you know her well ? WILDE-1895-1,47.206

Lord Goring <font> arranging his necktie <$$font> : So little that I got
engaged to be married to her once , when I was staying at the Tenbys' .
WILDE-1895-1,47.207

The affair lasted for three days ... nearly . WILDE-1895-1,47.208

Sir Robert Chiltern : Why was it broken off ? WILDE-1895-1,47.209

Lord Goring <font> airily <$$font> : Oh , I forget .
WILDE-1895-1,47.210

At least , it makes no matter . WILDE-1895-1,47.211

By the way , have you tried her with money ? WILDE-1895-1,47.212

She used to be confoundedly fond of money . WILDE-1895-1,47.213

Sir Robert Chiltern : I offered her any sum she wanted .
WILDE-1895-1,47.214

She refused . WILDE-1895-1,47.215

Lord Goring : Then the marvellous gospel of gold breaks down sometimes .
WILDE-1895-1,47.216

The rich ca@ @n't do everything , after all . WILDE-1895-1,47.217

Sir Robert Chiltern : Not everything . WILDE-1895-1,47.218

I suppose you are right . WILDE-1895-1,47.219

Arthur , I feel that public disgrace is in store for me .
WILDE-1895-1,47.220

I feel certain of it . WILDE-1895-1,47.221

I never knew what terror was before . WILDE-1895-1,47.222

I know it now . WILDE-1895-1,47.223

It is as if a hand of ice were laid upon one's heart .
WILDE-1895-1,47.224

It is as if one's heart were beating itself to death in some empty
hollow . WILDE-1895-1,47.225

Lord Goring <font> striking the table <$$font> : Robert , you must fight
her . WILDE-1895-1,47.226

You must fight her . WILDE-1895-1,47.227

Sir Robert Chiltern : But how ? WILDE-1895-1,47.228

Lord Goring : I ca@ @n't tell you how at present . WILDE-1895-1,47.229

I have not the smallest idea . WILDE-1895-1,47.230

But everyone has some weak point . WILDE-1895-1,47.231

There is some flaw in each one of us . WILDE-1895-1,47.232

<font> Strolls over to the fireplace WILDE-1895-1,47.233

and looks at himself in the glass . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,47.234

My father tells me that even I have faults . WILDE-1895-1,47.235

Perhaps I have . WILDE-1895-1,47.236

I do@ @n't know . WILDE-1895-1,47.237

<P_48>

Sir Robert Chiltern : In defending myself against Mrs Cheveley , I have
a right to use any weapon I can find , have I not ? WILDE-1895-1,48.239

Lord Goring <font> still looking in the glass <$$font> : In your place I
do@ @n't think I should have the smallest scruple in doing so .
WILDE-1895-1,48.240

She is thoroughly well able to take care of herself .
WILDE-1895-1,48.241

Sir Robert Chiltern <font> sits down at the table WILDE-1895-1,48.242

and takes a pen in his hand <$$font> : WILDE-1895-1,48.243

Well , I shall send a cipher telegram to the Embassy at Vienna to
inquire if there is anything known against her . WILDE-1895-1,48.244

There may be some secret scandal she might be afraid of .
WILDE-1895-1,48.245

Lord Goring <font> settling his buttonhole <$$font> : Oh , I should
fancy Mrs Cheveley is one of those very modern women of our time who
find a new scandal as becoming as a new bonnet , and air them both in
the Park every afternoon at five-thirty . WILDE-1895-1,48.246

I am sure she adores scandals , and that the sorrow of her life at
present is that she ca@ @n't manage to have enough of them .
WILDE-1895-1,48.247

Sir Robert Chiltern <font> writing <$$font> : Why do you say that ?
WILDE-1895-1,48.248

Lord Goring <font> turning round <$$font> : Well , she wore far too much
rouge last night , and not quite enough clothes . WILDE-1895-1,48.249

That is always a sign of despair in a woman . WILDE-1895-1,48.250

Sir Robert Chiltern <font> striking a bell <$$font> : But it is worth
while my wiring to Vienna , is it not ? WILDE-1895-1,48.251

Lord Goring : It is always worth while asking a question , though it is
not always worth while answering one . WILDE-1895-1,48.252

<font> Enter Mason . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,48.253

Sir Robert Chiltern : Is Mr. Trafford in his room ?
WILDE-1895-1,48.254

Mason : Yes , Sir Robert . WILDE-1895-1,48.255

<P_49>

Sir Robert Chiltern <font> puts what he has written into an envelope ,
which he then carefully closes <$$font> : WILDE-1895-1,49.257

Tell him to have this sent off in cipher at once . WILDE-1895-1,49.258

There must not be a moment's delay . WILDE-1895-1,49.259

Mason : Yes , Sir Robert . WILDE-1895-1,49.260

Sir Robert Chiltern : Oh ! just give that back to me again .
WILDE-1895-1,49.261

<font> Writes something on the envelope . WILDE-1895-1,49.262

Mason then goes out with the letter . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,49.263

Sir Robert Chiltern : She must have had some curious hold over Baron
Arnheim . WILDE-1895-1,49.264

I wonder what it was . WILDE-1895-1,49.265

Lord Goring <font> smiling <$$font> : I wonder . WILDE-1895-1,49.266

Sir Robert Chiltern : I will fight her to the death , as long as my wife
knows nothing . WILDE-1895-1,49.267

Lord Goring <font> strongly <$$font> : Oh , fight in any case - in any
case . WILDE-1895-1,49.268

Sir Robert Chiltern <font> with a gesture of despair <$$font> : If my
wife found out , there would be little left to fight for .
WILDE-1895-1,49.269

Well , as soon as I hear from Vienna , I shall let you know the result .
WILDE-1895-1,49.270

It is a chance , just a chance , WILDE-1895-1,49.271

but I believe in it . WILDE-1895-1,49.272

And as I fought the age with its own weapons , I will fight her with her
weapons . WILDE-1895-1,49.273

It is only fair , WILDE-1895-1,49.274

and she looks like a woman with a past , does@ @n't she ?
WILDE-1895-1,49.275

Lord Goring : Most pretty women do . WILDE-1895-1,49.276

But there is a fashion in pasts just as there is a fashion in frocks .
WILDE-1895-1,49.277

Perhaps Mrs Cheveley's past is merely a slight <font> décolleté <$$font>
one , WILDE-1895-1,49.278

and they are excessively popular nowadays . WILDE-1895-1,49.279

Besides , my dear Robert , I should not build too high hopes on
frightening Mrs Cheveley . WILDE-1895-1,49.280

I should not fancy Mrs Cheveley is a woman who would be easily
frightened . WILDE-1895-1,49.281

She has survived all her creditors , WILDE-1895-1,49.282

and she shows wonderful presence of mind . WILDE-1895-1,49.283

<P_50>

Sir Robert Chiltern : Oh ! I live on hopes now . WILDE-1895-1,50.285

I clutch at every chance . WILDE-1895-1,50.286

I feel like a man on a ship that is sinking . WILDE-1895-1,50.287

The water is round my feet , WILDE-1895-1,50.288

and the very air is bitter with storm . WILDE-1895-1,50.289

Hush ! I hear my wife's voice . WILDE-1895-1,50.290

<font> Enter Lady Chiltern in walking dress . <$$font>
WILDE-1895-1,50.291

Lady Chiltern : Good afternoon , Lord Goring ! WILDE-1895-1,50.292

Lord Goring : Good afternoon , Lady Chiltern ! WILDE-1895-1,50.293

Have you been in the Park ? WILDE-1895-1,50.294

Lady Chiltern : No ; I have just come from the Woman's Liberal
Association , where , by the way , Robert , your name was received with
loud applause , WILDE-1895-1,50.295

and now I have come in to have my tea . WILDE-1895-1,50.296

<font> To Lord Goring . <$$font> You will wait and have some tea , wo@
@n't you ? WILDE-1895-1,50.297

Lord Goring : I@ @'ll wait for a short time , thanks .
WILDE-1895-1,50.298

Lady Chiltern : I will be back in a moment . WILDE-1895-1,50.299

I am only going to take my hat off . WILDE-1895-1,50.300

Lord Goring <font> in his most earnest manner <$$font> : Oh ! please
do@ @n't . WILDE-1895-1,50.301

It is so pretty . WILDE-1895-1,50.302

One of the prettiest hats I ever saw . WILDE-1895-1,50.303

I hope the Woman's Liberal Association received it with loud applause .
WILDE-1895-1,50.304

Lady Chiltern <font> with a smile <$$font> : We have much more important
work to do than look at each other's bonnets , Lord Goring .
WILDE-1895-1,50.305

Lord Goring : Really ? WILDE-1895-1,50.306

What sort of work ? WILDE-1895-1,50.307

Lady Chiltern : Oh ! dull , useful , delightful things , Factory Acts ,
Female Inspectors , the Eight Hours' Bill , the Parliamentary Franchise
... Everything , in fact , that you would find thoroughly uninteresting
. WILDE-1895-1,50.308

<P_51>

Lord Goring : And never bonnets ? WILDE-1895-1,51.310

Lady Chiltern <font> with mock indignation <$$font> : Never bonnets ,
never ! WILDE-1895-1,51.311

<font> Lady Chiltern goes through the door leading to her boudoir .
<$$font> WILDE-1895-1,51.312

Sir Robert Chiltern <font> takes Lord Goring's hand <$$font> :
WILDE-1895-1,51.313

You have been a good friend to me , Arthur , a thoroughly good friend .
WILDE-1895-1,51.314

Lord Goring : I do@ @n't know that I have been able to do much for you ,
Robert , as yet . WILDE-1895-1,51.315

In fact , I have not been able to do anything for you , as far as I can
see . WILDE-1895-1,51.316

I am thoroughly disappointed with myself . WILDE-1895-1,51.317

Sir Robert Chiltern : You have enabled me to tell you the truth .
WILDE-1895-1,51.318

That is something . WILDE-1895-1,51.319

The truth has always stifled me . WILDE-1895-1,51.320

Lord Goring : Ah ! the truth is a thing I get rid of as soon as
possible ! WILDE-1895-1,51.321

Bad habit , by the way . WILDE-1895-1,51.322

Makes one very unpopular at the club ... with the older members .
WILDE-1895-1,51.323

They call it being conceited . WILDE-1895-1,51.324

Perhaps it is . WILDE-1895-1,51.325

Sir Robert Chiltern : I would to God that I had been able to tell the
truth ... to live the truth . WILDE-1895-1,51.326

Ah ! that is the great thing in life , to live the truth .
WILDE-1895-1,51.327

<font> Sighs , WILDE-1895-1,51.328

and goes towards the door . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,51.329

I@ @'ll see you soon again , Arthur , sha@ @n't I ? WILDE-1895-1,51.330

Lord Goring : Certainly . Whenever you like . WILDE-1895-1,51.331

I@ @'m going to look in at the Bachelors' Ball tonight , unless I find
something better to do . WILDE-1895-1,51.332

But I@ @'ll come round tomorrow morning . WILDE-1895-1,51.333

If you should want me tonight by any chance , send round a note to
Curzon Street . WILDE-1895-1,51.334

Sir Robert Chiltern : Thank you . WILDE-1895-1,51.335

<font> As he reaches the door , Lady Chiltern enters from her boudoir .
<$$font> WILDE-1895-1,51.336

<P_52>

Lady Chiltern : You are not going , Robert ? WILDE-1895-1,52.338

Sir Robert Chiltern : I have some letters to write , dear .
WILDE-1895-1,52.339

Lady Chiltern <font> going to him <$$font> : You work too hard , Robert
. WILDE-1895-1,52.340

You seem never to think of yourself , WILDE-1895-1,52.341

and you are looking so tired . WILDE-1895-1,52.342

Sir Robert Chiltern : It is nothing , dear , nothing .
WILDE-1895-1,52.343

<font> He kisses her WILDE-1895-1,52.344

and goes out . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,52.345

Lady Chiltern <font> to Lord Goring <$$font> : Do sit down .
WILDE-1895-1,52.346

I am so glad you have called . WILDE-1895-1,52.347

I want to talk to you about ... well , not about bonnets , or the
Woman's Liberal Association . WILDE-1895-1,52.348

You take far too much interest in the first subject , and not nearly
enough in the second . WILDE-1895-1,52.349

Lord Goring : You want to talk to me about Mrs Cheveley ?
WILDE-1895-1,52.350

Lady Chiltern : Yes . You have guessed it . WILDE-1895-1,52.351

After you left last night I found out that what she had said was really
true . WILDE-1895-1,52.352

Of course I made Robert write her a letter at once , withdrawing his
promise . WILDE-1895-1,52.353

Lord Goring : So he gave me to understand . WILDE-1895-1,52.354

Lady Chiltern : To have kept it would have been the first stain on a
career that has been stainless always . WILDE-1895-1,52.355

Robert must be above reproach . WILDE-1895-1,52.356

He is not like other men . WILDE-1895-1,52.357

He can@ @not afford to do what other men do . WILDE-1895-1,52.358

<font> She looks at Lord Goring , who remains silent . <$$font>
WILDE-1895-1,52.359

Do@ @n't you agree with me ? WILDE-1895-1,52.360

You are Robert's greatest friend . WILDE-1895-1,52.361

You are our greatest friend , Lord Goring . WILDE-1895-1,52.362

No one , except myself , knows Robert better than you do .
WILDE-1895-1,52.363

He has no secrets from me , WILDE-1895-1,52.364

and I do@ @n't think he has any from you . WILDE-1895-1,52.365

Lord Goring : He certainly has no secrets from me . WILDE-1895-1,52.366

At least I do@ @n't think so . WILDE-1895-1,52.367

<P_53>

Lady Chiltern : Then am I not right in my estimate of him ?
WILDE-1895-1,53.369

I know I am right . WILDE-1895-1,53.370

But speak to me frankly . WILDE-1895-1,53.371

Lord Goring <font> looking straight at her <$$font> : Quite frankly ?
WILDE-1895-1,53.372

Lady Chiltern : Surely . You have nothing to conceal have you ?
WILDE-1895-1,53.373

Lord Goring : Nothing . WILDE-1895-1,53.374

But , my dear Lady Chiltern , I think , if you will allow me to say so ,
that in practical life - Lady Chiltern <font> smiling <$$font> : Of
which you know so little , Lord Goring - Lord Goring : Of which I know
nothing by experience , though I know something by observation . I
think that in practical life there is something about success , actual
success , that is a little unscrupulous , something about ambition that
is unscrupulous always . WILDE-1895-1,53.375

Once a man has set his heart and soul on getting to a certain point , if
he has to climb the crag , he climbs the crag ; WILDE-1895-1,53.376

if he has to walk in the mire - Lady Chiltern : Well ? Lord Goring : He
walks in the mire . WILDE-1895-1,53.377

Of course I am only talking generally about life . WILDE-1895-1,53.378

Lady Chiltern <font> gravely <$$font> : I hope so . WILDE-1895-1,53.379

Why do you look at me so strangely , Lord Goring ? WILDE-1895-1,53.380

Lord Goring : Lady Chiltern , I have sometimes thought that ... perhaps
you are a little hard in some of your views on life .
WILDE-1895-1,53.381

I think that ... often you do@ @n't make sufficient allowances .
WILDE-1895-1,53.382

In every nature there are elements of weakness , or worse than weakness
. WILDE-1895-1,53.383

Supposing , for instance , that - that any public man , my father , or
Lord Merton , or Robert , say , had , years ago , written some foolish
letter to someone ... . WILDE-1895-1,53.384

<P_54>

Lady Chiltern : What do you mean by a foolish letter ?
WILDE-1895-1,54.386

Lord Goring : A letter gravely compromising one's position .
WILDE-1895-1,54.387

I am only putting an imaginary case . WILDE-1895-1,54.388

Lady Chiltern : Robert is as incapable of doing a foolish thing as he is
of doing a wrong thing . WILDE-1895-1,54.389

Lord Goring <font> after a long pause <$$font> : Nobody is incapable of
doing a foolish thing . WILDE-1895-1,54.390

Nobody is incapable of doing a wrong thing . WILDE-1895-1,54.391

Lady Chiltern : Are you a Pessimist ? WILDE-1895-1,54.392

What will the other dandies say ? WILDE-1895-1,54.393

They will all have to go into mourning . WILDE-1895-1,54.394

Lord Goring <font> rising <$$font> : No , Lady Chiltern , I am not a
Pessimist . WILDE-1895-1,54.395

Indeed I am not sure that I quite know what Pessimism really means .
WILDE-1895-1,54.396

All I do know is that life can@ @not be understood without much charity
, can@ @not be lived without much charity . WILDE-1895-1,54.397

It is love , and not German philosophy , that is the true explanation of
this world , whatever may be the explanation of the next .
WILDE-1895-1,54.398

And if you are ever in trouble , Lady Chiltern , trust me absolutely ,
and I will help you in every way I can . WILDE-1895-1,54.399

If you ever want me , come to me for my assistance , and you shall have
it . WILDE-1895-1,54.400

Come at once to me . WILDE-1895-1,54.401

Lady Chiltern <font> looking at him in surprise <$$font> : Lord Goring ,
you are talking quite seriously . WILDE-1895-1,54.402

I do@ @n't think I ever heard you talk seriously before .
WILDE-1895-1,54.403

Lord Goring <font> laughing <$$font> : You must excuse me , Lady
Chiltern . WILDE-1895-1,54.404

It wo@ @n't occur again , if I can help it . WILDE-1895-1,54.405

Lady Chiltern : But I like you to be serious . WILDE-1895-1,54.406

<font> Enter Mabel Chiltern , in the most ravishing frock . <$$font>
WILDE-1895-1,54.407

<P_55>

Mabel Chiltern : Dear Gertrude , do@ @n't say such a dreadful thing to
Lord Goring . WILDE-1895-1,55.409

Seriousness would be very unbecoming to him . WILDE-1895-1,55.410

Good afternoon , Lord Goring ! WILDE-1895-1,55.411

Pray be as trivial as you can . WILDE-1895-1,55.412

Lord Goring : I should like to , Miss Mabel , WILDE-1895-1,55.413

but I am afraid I am ... a little out of practice this morning ;
WILDE-1895-1,55.414

and besides , I have to be going now . WILDE-1895-1,55.415

Mabel Chiltern : Just when I have come in ! WILDE-1895-1,55.416

What dreadful manners you have ! WILDE-1895-1,55.417

I am sure you were very badly brought up . WILDE-1895-1,55.418

Lord Goring : I was . WILDE-1895-1,55.419

Mabel Chiltern : I wish I had brought you up ! WILDE-1895-1,55.420

Lord Goring : I am so sorry you did@ @n't . WILDE-1895-1,55.421

Mabel Chiltern : It is too late now , I suppose ? WILDE-1895-1,55.422

Lord Goring <font> smiling <$$font> : I am not so sure .
WILDE-1895-1,55.423

Mabel Chiltern : Will you ride tomorrow morning ? WILDE-1895-1,55.424

Lord Goring : Yes , at ten . WILDE-1895-1,55.425

Mabel Chiltern : Do@ @n't forget . WILDE-1895-1,55.426

Lord Goring : Of course I sha@ @n't . WILDE-1895-1,55.427

By the way , Lady Chiltern , there is no list of your guests in <font>
The Morning Post <$$font> of today . WILDE-1895-1,55.428

It has apparently been crowded out by the County Council , or the
Lambeth Conference , or something equally boring . WILDE-1895-1,55.429

Could you let me have a list ? WILDE-1895-1,55.430

I have a particular reason for asking you . WILDE-1895-1,55.431

Lady Chiltern : I am sure Mr Trafford will be able to give you one .
WILDE-1895-1,55.432

<P_56>

Lord Goring : Thanks , so much . WILDE-1895-1,56.434

Mabel Chiltern : Tommy is the most useful person in London .
WILDE-1895-1,56.435

Lord Goring <font> turning to her <$$font> : And who is the most
ornamental ? WILDE-1895-1,56.436

Mabel Chiltern <font> triumphantly <$$font> : I am .
WILDE-1895-1,56.437

Lord Goring : How clever of you to guess it ! WILDE-1895-1,56.438

<font> Takes up his hat and cane . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,56.439

Good-bye , Lady Chiltern ! WILDE-1895-1,56.440

You will remember what I said to you , wo@ @n't you ?
WILDE-1895-1,56.441

Lady Chiltern : Yes ; but I do@ @n't know why you said it to me .
WILDE-1895-1,56.442

Lord Goring : I hardly know myself . WILDE-1895-1,56.443

Good-bye , Miss Mabel ! WILDE-1895-1,56.444

Mabel Chiltern <font> with a little moue of disappointment <$$font> : I
wish you were not going . WILDE-1895-1,56.445

I have had four wonderful adventures this morning ; four and a half , in
fact . WILDE-1895-1,56.446

You might stop and listen to some of them . WILDE-1895-1,56.447

Lord Goring : How very selfish of you to have four and a half !
WILDE-1895-1,56.448

There wo@ @n't be any left for me . WILDE-1895-1,56.449

Mabel Chiltern : I do@ @n't want you to have any . WILDE-1895-1,56.450

They would not be good for you . WILDE-1895-1,56.451

Lord Goring : That is the first unkind thing you have ever said to me .
WILDE-1895-1,56.452

How charmingly you said it ! WILDE-1895-1,56.453

Ten tomorrow . WILDE-1895-1,56.454

Mabel Chiltern : Sharp . WILDE-1895-1,56.455

Lord Goring : Quite sharp . WILDE-1895-1,56.456

But do@ @n't bring Mr Trafford . WILDE-1895-1,56.457

Mabel Chiltern <font> with a little toss of the head <$$font> : Of
course I sha@ @n't bring Tommy Trafford . WILDE-1895-1,56.458

Tommy Trafford is in great disgrace . WILDE-1895-1,56.459

<P_57>

Lord Goring : I am delighted to hear it . WILDE-1895-1,57.461

<font> Bows WILDE-1895-1,57.462

and goes out . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,57.463

Mabel Chiltern : Gertrude , I wish you would speak to Tommy Trafford .
WILDE-1895-1,57.464

Lady Chiltern : What has poor Mr Trafford done this time ?
WILDE-1895-1,57.465

Robert says he is the best secretary he has ever had .
WILDE-1895-1,57.466

Mabel Chiltern : Well , Tommy has proposed to me again .
WILDE-1895-1,57.467

Tommy really does nothing but propose to me . WILDE-1895-1,57.468

He proposed to me last night in the music-room , when I was quite
unprotected , as there was an elaborate trio going on .
WILDE-1895-1,57.469

I did@ @n't dare to make the smallest repartee , WILDE-1895-1,57.470

I need hardly tell you . WILDE-1895-1,57.471

If I had , it would have stopped the music at once .
WILDE-1895-1,57.472

Musical people are so absurdly unreasonable . WILDE-1895-1,57.473

They always want one to be perfectly dumb at the very moment when one is
longing to be absolutely deaf . WILDE-1895-1,57.474

Then he proposed to me in broad daylight this morning , in front of that
dreadful statue of Achilles . WILDE-1895-1,57.475

Really , the things that go on in front of that work of art are quite
appalling . WILDE-1895-1,57.476

The police should interfere . WILDE-1895-1,57.477

At luncheon I saw by the glare in his eye that he was going to propose
again , WILDE-1895-1,57.478

and I just managed to check him in time by assuring him that I was a
bimetallist . WILDE-1895-1,57.479

Fortunately I do@ @n't know what bimetallism means .
WILDE-1895-1,57.480

And I do@ @n't believe anybody else does either . WILDE-1895-1,57.481

But the observation crushed Tommy for ten minutes . WILDE-1895-1,57.482

He looked quite shocked . WILDE-1895-1,57.483

And then Tommy is so annoying in the way he proposes .
WILDE-1895-1,57.484

If he proposed at the top of his voice , I should not mind so much .
WILDE-1895-1,57.485

That might produce some effect on the public . WILDE-1895-1,57.486

But he does it in a horrid confidential way . WILDE-1895-1,57.487

When Tommy wants to be romantic he talks to one just like a doctor .
WILDE-1895-1,57.488

I am very fond of Tommy , WILDE-1895-1,57.489

but his methods of proposing are quite out of date .
WILDE-1895-1,57.490

I wish , Gertrude , you would speak to him , and tell him that once a
week is quite often enough to propose to any one , and that it should
always be done in a manner that attracts some attention .
WILDE-1895-1,57.491

<P_58>

Lady Chiltern : Dear Mabel , do@ @n't talk like that .
WILDE-1895-1,58.493

Besides , Robert thinks very highly of Mr Trafford .
WILDE-1895-1,58.494

He believes he has a brilliant future before him . WILDE-1895-1,58.495

Mabel Chiltern : Oh ! I would@ @n't marry a man with a future before
him for anything under the sun . WILDE-1895-1,58.496

Lady Chiltern : Mabel ! WILDE-1895-1,58.497

Mabel Chiltern : I know , dear . WILDE-1895-1,58.498

You married a man with a future , did@ @n't you ? WILDE-1895-1,58.499

But then Robert was a genius , WILDE-1895-1,58.500

and you have a noble , self-sacrificing character . WILDE-1895-1,58.501

You can stand geniuses . WILDE-1895-1,58.502

I have no character at all , WILDE-1895-1,58.503

and Robert is the only genius I could ever bear . WILDE-1895-1,58.504

As a rule , I think they are quite impossible . WILDE-1895-1,58.505

Geniuses talk so much , do@ @n't they ? WILDE-1895-1,58.506

Such a bad habit ! WILDE-1895-1,58.507

And they are always thinking about themselves , when I want them to be
thinking about me . WILDE-1895-1,58.508

I must go round now and rehearse at Lady Basildon's .
WILDE-1895-1,58.509

You remember , we are having tableaux , do@ @n't you ? The Triumph of
something , I do@ @n't know what ! WILDE-1895-1,58.510

I hope it will be triumph of me . Only triumph I am really interested
in at present . WILDE-1895-1,58.511

<font> Kisses Lady Chiltern WILDE-1895-1,58.512

and goes out ; WILDE-1895-1,58.513

then comes running back . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,58.514

Oh , Gertrude , do you know who is coming to see you ?
WILDE-1895-1,58.515

That dreadful Mrs Cheveley , in a most lovely gown .
WILDE-1895-1,58.516

Did you ask her ? WILDE-1895-1,58.517

Lady Chiltern <font> rising <$$font> : Mrs Cheveley ! Coming to see me
? WILDE-1895-1,58.518

Impossible ! WILDE-1895-1,58.519

Mabel Chiltern : I assure you she is coming upstairs , as large as life
and not nearly so natural . WILDE-1895-1,58.520

Lady Chiltern : You need not wait , Mabel . WILDE-1895-1,58.521

Remember , Lady Basildon is expecting you . WILDE-1895-1,58.522

Mabel Chiltern : Oh ! I must shake hands with Lady Markby .
WILDE-1895-1,58.523

She is delightful . WILDE-1895-1,58.524

I love being scolded by her . WILDE-1895-1,58.525

<font> Enter Mason . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,58.526

<P_59>

Mason : Lady Markby and Mrs Cheveley . WILDE-1895-1,59.528

<font> Enter Lady Markby and Mrs Cheveley . <$$font>
WILDE-1895-1,59.529

Lady Chiltern <font> advancing to meet them <$$font> : Dear Lady Markby
, how nice of you to come and see me ! WILDE-1895-1,59.530

<font> Shakes hands with her , WILDE-1895-1,59.531

and bows somewhat distantly to Mrs Cheveley . <$$font>
WILDE-1895-1,59.532

Wo@ @n't you sit down , Mrs Cheveley ? WILDE-1895-1,59.533

Mrs Cheveley : Thanks . WILDE-1895-1,59.534

Is@ @n't that Miss Chiltern ? WILDE-1895-1,59.535

I should like so much to know her . WILDE-1895-1,59.536

Lady Chiltern : Mabel , Mrs Cheveley wishes to know you .
WILDE-1895-1,59.537

<font> Mabel Chiltern gives a little nod . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,59.538

Mrs Cheveley <font> sitting down <$$font> : I thought your frock so
charming last night , Miss Chiltern . WILDE-1895-1,59.539

So simple and ... suitable . WILDE-1895-1,59.540

Mabel Chiltern : Really ? WILDE-1895-1,59.541

I must tell my dressmaker . WILDE-1895-1,59.542

It will be such a surprise to her . WILDE-1895-1,59.543

Good-bye , Lady Markby ! WILDE-1895-1,59.544

Lady Markby : Going already ? WILDE-1895-1,59.545

Mabel Chiltern : I am so sorry WILDE-1895-1,59.546

but I am obliged to . I am just off to rehearsal . WILDE-1895-1,59.547

I have got to stand on my head in some tableaux . WILDE-1895-1,59.548

Lady Markby : On your head , child ? WILDE-1895-1,59.549

Oh ! I hope not . WILDE-1895-1,59.550

I believe it is most unhealthy . WILDE-1895-1,59.551

<font> Takes a seat on the sofa next Lady Chiltern . <$$font>
WILDE-1895-1,59.552

Mabel Chiltern : But it is for an excellent charity : in aid of the
Undeserving , the only people I am really interested in .
WILDE-1895-1,59.553

I am the secretary , WILDE-1895-1,59.554

and Tommy Trafford is treasurer . WILDE-1895-1,59.555

Mrs Cheveley : And what is Lord Goring ? WILDE-1895-1,59.556

<P_60>

Mabel Chiltern : Oh ! Lord Goring is president . WILDE-1895-1,60.558

Mrs Cheveley : The post should suit him admirably , unless he has
deteriorated since I knew him first . WILDE-1895-1,60.559

Lady Markby <font> reflecting <$$font> : You are remarkably modern ,
Mabel . WILDE-1895-1,60.560

A little too modern , perhaps . WILDE-1895-1,60.561

Nothing is so dangerous as being too modern . WILDE-1895-1,60.562

One is apt to grow old-fashioned quite suddenly . WILDE-1895-1,60.563

I have known many instances of it . WILDE-1895-1,60.564

Mabel Chiltern : What a dreadful prospect ! WILDE-1895-1,60.565

Lady Markby : Ah ! my dear , you need not be nervous .
WILDE-1895-1,60.566

You will always be as pretty as possible . WILDE-1895-1,60.567

That is the best fashion there is , and the only fashion that England
succeeds in setting . WILDE-1895-1,60.568

Mabel Chiltern <font> with a curtsey <$$font> : Thank you so much , Lady
Markby , for England ... and myself . WILDE-1895-1,60.569

<font> Goes out . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,60.570

Lady Markby <font> turning to Lady Chiltern <$$font> : Dear Gertrude ,
we just called to know if Mrs Cheveley's diamond brooch has been found .
WILDE-1895-1,60.571

Lady Chiltern : Here ? WILDE-1895-1,60.572

Mrs Cheveley : Yes . I missed it when I got back to Claridge's ,
WILDE-1895-1,60.573

and I thought I might possibly have dropped it here .
WILDE-1895-1,60.574

Lady Chiltern : I have heard nothing about it . WILDE-1895-1,60.575

But I will send for the butler and ask . WILDE-1895-1,60.576

<font> Touches the bell . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,60.577

Mrs Cheveley : Oh , pray do@ @n't trouble , Lady Chiltern .
WILDE-1895-1,60.578

I dare say I lost it at the Opera , before we came on here .
WILDE-1895-1,60.579

<P_61>

Lady Markby : Ah yes , I suppose it must have been at the Opera .
WILDE-1895-1,61.581

The fact is , we all scramble and jostle so much nowadays that I wonder
we have anything at all left on us at the end of an evening .
WILDE-1895-1,61.582

I know myself that , when I am coming back from the Drawing_Room , I
always feel as if I had@ @n't a shred on me , except a small shred of
decent reputation , just enough to prevent the lower classes making
painful observations through the windows of the carriage .
WILDE-1895-1,61.583

The fact is that our Society is terribly over-populated .
WILDE-1895-1,61.584

Really , someone should arrange a proper scheme of assisted emigration .
WILDE-1895-1,61.585

It would do a great deal of good . WILDE-1895-1,61.586

Mrs Cheveley : I quite agree with you , Lady Markby .
WILDE-1895-1,61.587

It is nearly six years since I have been in London for the Season ,
WILDE-1895-1,61.588

and I must say Society has become dreadfully mixed .
WILDE-1895-1,61.589

One sees the oddest people everywhere . WILDE-1895-1,61.590

Lady Markby : That is quite true , dear . WILDE-1895-1,61.591

But one need@ @n't know them . WILDE-1895-1,61.592

I@ @'m sure I do@ @n't know half the people who come to my house .
WILDE-1895-1,61.593

Indeed , from all I hear , I should@ @n't like to . WILDE-1895-1,61.594

<font> Enter Mason . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,61.595

Lady Chiltern : What sort of a brooch was it that you lost , Mrs
Cheveley ? WILDE-1895-1,61.596

Mrs Cheveley : A diamond snake-brooch with a ruby , a rather large ruby
. WILDE-1895-1,61.597

Lady Markby : I thought you said there was a sapphire on the head , dear
? WILDE-1895-1,61.598

Mrs Cheveley <font> smiling . <$$font> No , Lady Markby - a ruby .
WILDE-1895-1,61.599

Lady Markby <font> nodding her head <$$font> : And very becoming , I am
quite sure . WILDE-1895-1,61.600

Lady Chiltern : Has a ruby and diamond brooch been found in any of the
rooms this morning , Mason ? WILDE-1895-1,61.601

<P_62>

Mason : No , my lady . WILDE-1895-1,62.603

Mrs Cheveley : It really is of no consequence , Lady Chiltern .
WILDE-1895-1,62.604

I am so sorry to have put you to any inconvenience .
WILDE-1895-1,62.605

Lady Chiltern <font> coldly <$$font> : Oh , it has been no inconvenience
. WILDE-1895-1,62.606

That will do , Mason . WILDE-1895-1,62.607

You can bring tea . WILDE-1895-1,62.608

<font> Exit Mason . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,62.609

Lady Markby : Well , I must say it is most annoying to lose anything .
WILDE-1895-1,62.610

I remember once at Bath , years ago , losing in the Pump Room an
exceedingly handsome cameo bracelet that Sir John had given me .
WILDE-1895-1,62.611

I do@ @n't think he has ever given me anything since , I am sorry to say
. WILDE-1895-1,62.612

He has sadly degenerated . WILDE-1895-1,62.613

Really , this horrid House of Commons quite ruins our husbands for us .
WILDE-1895-1,62.614

I think the Lower House by far the greatest blow to a happy married life
that there has been since that terrible thing called the Higher
Education of Women was invented . WILDE-1895-1,62.615

Lady Chiltern : Ah ! it is heresy to say that in this house , Lady
Markby . WILDE-1895-1,62.616

Robert is a great champion of the Higher Education of Women ,
WILDE-1895-1,62.617

and so , I am afraid , am I . WILDE-1895-1,62.618

Mrs Cheveley : The higher education of men is what I should like to see
. WILDE-1895-1,62.619

Men need it so sadly . WILDE-1895-1,62.620

Lady Markby : They do , dear . WILDE-1895-1,62.621

But I am afraid such a scheme would be quite unpractical .
WILDE-1895-1,62.622

I do@ @n't think man has much capacity for development .
WILDE-1895-1,62.623

He has got as far as he can , WILDE-1895-1,62.624

and that is not far , is it ? WILDE-1895-1,62.625

With regard to women , well , dear Gertrude , you belong to the younger
generation , WILDE-1895-1,62.626

and I am sure it is all right if you approve of it .
WILDE-1895-1,62.627

In my time , of course , we were taught not to understand anything .
WILDE-1895-1,62.628

That was the old system , WILDE-1895-1,62.629

and wonderfully interesting it was . WILDE-1895-1,62.630

I assure you that the amount of things I and my poor dear sister were
taught not to understand was quite extraordinary . WILDE-1895-1,62.631

But modern women understand everything , I am told .
WILDE-1895-1,62.632

<P_63>

Mrs Cheveley : Except their husbands . WILDE-1895-1,63.634

That is the one thing the modern woman never understands .
WILDE-1895-1,63.635

Lady Markby : And a very good thing too , dear , I dare say .
WILDE-1895-1,63.636

It might break up many a happy home if they did . WILDE-1895-1,63.637

Not yours , I need hardly say , Gertrude . WILDE-1895-1,63.638

You have married a pattern husband . WILDE-1895-1,63.639

I wish I could say as much for myself . WILDE-1895-1,63.640

But since Sir John has taken to attending the debates regularly , which
he never used to do in the good old days , his language has become quite
impossible . WILDE-1895-1,63.641

He always seems to think that he is addressing the House ,
WILDE-1895-1,63.642

and consequently whenever he discusses the state of the agricultural
labourer , or the Welsh Church , or something quite improper of that
kind , I am obliged to send all the servants out of the room .
WILDE-1895-1,63.643

It is not pleasant to see one's own butler , who has been with one for
twenty-three years , actually blushing at the side-board , and the
footmen making contortions in corners like persons in circuses .
WILDE-1895-1,63.644

I assure you my life will be quite ruined unless they send John at once
to the Upper House . WILDE-1895-1,63.645

He wo@ @n't take any interest in politics then , will he ?
WILDE-1895-1,63.646

The House of Lords is so sensible . An assembly of gentlemen .
WILDE-1895-1,63.647

But in his present state , Sir John is really a great trial .
WILDE-1895-1,63.648

Why , this morning before breakfast was half-over , he stood up on the
hearthrug , WILDE-1895-1,63.649

put his hands in his pockets , WILDE-1895-1,63.650

and appealed to the country at the top of his voice .
WILDE-1895-1,63.651

I left the table as soon as I had my second cup of tea , I need hardly
say . WILDE-1895-1,63.652

But his violent language could be heard all over the house !
WILDE-1895-1,63.653

I trust , Gertrude , that Sir Robert is not like that ?
WILDE-1895-1,63.654

Lady Chiltern : But I am very much interested in politics , Lady Markby
. WILDE-1895-1,63.655

I love to hear Robert talk about them . WILDE-1895-1,63.656

Lady Markby : Well , I hope he is not as devoted to Blue Books as Sir
John is . WILDE-1895-1,63.657

I do@ @n't think they can be quite improving reading for anyone .
WILDE-1895-1,63.658

Mrs Cheveley <font> languidly <$$font> : I have never read a Blue Book .
WILDE-1895-1,63.659

I prefer books ... in yellow covers . WILDE-1895-1,63.660

<P_64>

Lady Markby <font> genially unconscious <$$font> : Yellow is a gayer
colour , is it not ? WILDE-1895-1,64.662

I used to wear yellow a good deal in my early days , WILDE-1895-1,64.663

and would do so now if Sir John was not so painfully personal in his
observations , WILDE-1895-1,64.664

and a man on the question of dress is always ridiculous , is he not ?
WILDE-1895-1,64.665

Mrs Cheveley : Oh , no ! WILDE-1895-1,64.666

I think men are the only authorities on dress . WILDE-1895-1,64.667

Lady Markby : Really ? WILDE-1895-1,64.668

One would@ @n't say so from the sort of hats they wear , would one ?
WILDE-1895-1,64.669

<font> The butler enters , followed by the footman .
WILDE-1895-1,64.670

Tea is set on a small table close to Lady Chiltern . <$$font>
WILDE-1895-1,64.671

Lady Chiltern : May I give you some tea , Mrs Cheveley ?
WILDE-1895-1,64.672

Mrs Cheveley : Thanks . WILDE-1895-1,64.673

<font> The butler hands Mrs Cheveley a cup of tea on a salver .
<$$font> WILDE-1895-1,64.674

Lady Chiltern : Some tea , Lady Markby ? WILDE-1895-1,64.675

Lady Markby : No thanks , dear . WILDE-1895-1,64.676

<font> The servants go out . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,64.677

The fact is , I have promised to go round for ten minutes to see poor
Lady Brancaster , who is in very great trouble . WILDE-1895-1,64.678

Her daughter , quite a well-brought-up girl , too , has actually become
engaged to be married to a curate in Shropshire . WILDE-1895-1,64.679

It is very sad , very sad indeed . WILDE-1895-1,64.680

I ca@ @n't understand this modern mania for curates .
WILDE-1895-1,64.681

In my time we girls saw them , of course , running about the place like
rabbits . WILDE-1895-1,64.682

But we never took any notice of them , I need hardly say .
WILDE-1895-1,64.683

But I am told that nowadays country society is quite honeycombed with
them . WILDE-1895-1,64.684

I think it most irreligious . WILDE-1895-1,64.685

And then the eldest son has quarrelled with his father ,
WILDE-1895-1,64.686

and it is said that when they meet at the club Lord Brancaster always
hides himself behind the money article in <font> The Times . <$$font>
WILDE-1895-1,64.687

However , I believe that is quite a common occurrence nowadays and that
they have to take in extra copies of <font> The Times <$$font> at all
the clubs in St James's <P_65> Street ; there are so many sons who wo@
@n't have anything to do with their fathers , and so many fathers who
wo@ @n't speak to their sons . WILDE-1895-1,65.688

I think myself , it is very much to be regretted . WILDE-1895-1,65.689

Mrs Cheveley : So do I . WILDE-1895-1,65.690

Fathers have so much to learn from their sons nowadays .
WILDE-1895-1,65.691

Lady Markby : Really , dear ? WILDE-1895-1,65.692

What ? WILDE-1895-1,65.693

Mrs Cheveley : The art of living . WILDE-1895-1,65.694

The only really Fine Art we have produced in modern times .
WILDE-1895-1,65.695

Lady Markby <font> shaking her head <$$font> : Ah ! I am afraid Lord
Brancaster knew a good deal about that . More than his poor wife ever
did . WILDE-1895-1,65.696

<font> Turning to Lady Chiltern . <$$font> You know Lady Brancaster ,
do@ @n't you , dear ? WILDE-1895-1,65.697

Lady Chiltern : Just slightly . WILDE-1895-1,65.698

She was staying at Langton last autumn , when we were there .
WILDE-1895-1,65.699

Lady Markby : Well , like all stout women , she looks the very picture
of happiness , as no doubt you noticed . WILDE-1895-1,65.700

But there are many tragedies in her family , besides this affair of the
curate . WILDE-1895-1,65.701

Her own sister , Mrs Jekyll , had a most unhappy life ; through no fault
of her own , I am sorry to say . WILDE-1895-1,65.702

She ultimately was so broken-hearted that she went into a convent , or
on to the operatic stage , I forget which . WILDE-1895-1,65.703

No ; I think it was decorative art-needlework she took up .
WILDE-1895-1,65.704

I know she had lost all sense of pleasure in life . WILDE-1895-1,65.705

<font> Rising . <$$font> And now , Gertrude , if you will allow me , I
shall leave Mrs Cheveley in your charge and call back for her in a
quarter of an hour . WILDE-1895-1,65.706

Or perhaps , dear Mrs Cheveley , you would@ @n't mind waiting in the
carriage while I am with Lady Brancaster . WILDE-1895-1,65.707

As I intend it to be a visit of condolence , I sha@ @n't stay long .
WILDE-1895-1,65.708

Mrs Cheveley <font> rising <$$font> : I do@ @n't mind waiting in the
carriage at all , provided there is somebody to look at one .
WILDE-1895-1,65.709

<P_66>

Lady Markby : Well , I hear the curate is always prowling about the
house . WILDE-1895-1,66.711

Mrs Cheveley : I am afraid I am not fond of girl friends .
WILDE-1895-1,66.712

Lady Chiltern <font> rising <$$font> : Oh , I hope Mrs Cheveley will
stay here a little . WILDE-1895-1,66.713

I should like to have a few minutes' {TEXT:minute's} conversation with
her . WILDE-1895-1,66.714

Mrs Cheveley : How very kind of you , Lady Chiltern !
WILDE-1895-1,66.715

Believe me , nothing would give me greater pleasure .
WILDE-1895-1,66.716

Lady Markby : Ah ! no doubt you both have many pleasant reminiscences
of your schooldays to talk over together . WILDE-1895-1,66.717

Good-bye , dear Gertrude ! WILDE-1895-1,66.718

Shall I see you at Lady Bonar's tonight ? WILDE-1895-1,66.719

She has discovered a wonderful new genius . WILDE-1895-1,66.720

He does ... nothing at all , I believe . WILDE-1895-1,66.721

That is a great comfort , is it not ? WILDE-1895-1,66.722

Lady Chiltern : Robert and I are dining at home by ourselves tonight ,
WILDE-1895-1,66.723

and I do@ @n't think I shall go anywhere afterwards .
WILDE-1895-1,66.724

Robert , of course , will have to be in the House . WILDE-1895-1,66.725

But there is nothing interesting on . WILDE-1895-1,66.726

Lady Markby : Dining at home by yourselves ? WILDE-1895-1,66.727

Is that quite prudent ? WILDE-1895-1,66.728

Ah , I forgot , your husband is an exception . WILDE-1895-1,66.729

Mine is the general rule , WILDE-1895-1,66.730

and nothing ages a woman so rapidly as having married the general
WILDE-1895-1,66.731

<font> Exit Lady Markby . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,66.732

Mrs Cheveley : Wonderful woman , Lady Markby , is@ @n't she ?
WILDE-1895-1,66.733

Talks more and says less than anybody I ever met . WILDE-1895-1,66.734

She is made to be a public speaker . Much more so than her husband ,
though he is a typical Englishman , always dull and usually violent .
WILDE-1895-1,66.735

Lady Chiltern <font> makes no answer , WILDE-1895-1,66.736

but remains standing . WILDE-1895-1,66.737

There is a pause . WILDE-1895-1,66.738

Then the eyes of the two women meet . WILDE-1895-1,66.739

Lady Chiltern looks stern and pale . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,66.740

<P_67>

<font> Mrs Cheveley seems rather amused <$$font> : WILDE-1895-1,67.742

Mrs Cheveley : {TEXT:,} I think it is right to tell you quite frankly
that , had I known who you really were , I should not have invited you
to my house last night . WILDE-1895-1,67.743

Mrs Cheveley <font> with an impertinent smile <$$font> : Really ?
WILDE-1895-1,67.744

Lady Chiltern : I could not have done so . WILDE-1895-1,67.745

Mrs Cheveley : I see that after all these years you have not changed a
bit , Gertrude . WILDE-1895-1,67.746

Lady Chiltern : I never change . WILDE-1895-1,67.747

Mrs Cheveley <font> elevating her eyebrows <$$font> : Then life has
taught you nothing ? WILDE-1895-1,67.748

Lady Chiltern : It has taught me that a person who has once been guilty
of a dishonest and dishonourable action may be guilty of it a second
time , and should be shunned . WILDE-1895-1,67.749

Mrs Cheveley : Would you apply that rule to everyone ?
WILDE-1895-1,67.750

Lady Chiltern : Yes , to everyone , without exception .
WILDE-1895-1,67.751

Mrs Cheveley : Then I am sorry for you , Gertrude , very sorry for you .
WILDE-1895-1,67.752

Lady Chiltern : You see now , I am sure , that for many reasons any
further acquaintance between us during your stay in London is quite
impossible ? WILDE-1895-1,67.753

Mrs Cheveley <font> leaning back in her chair <$$font> : Do you know ,
Gertrude , I do@ @n't mind your talking morality a bit .
WILDE-1895-1,67.754

Morality is simply the attitude we adopt towards people whom we
personally dislike . WILDE-1895-1,67.755

You dislike me . WILDE-1895-1,67.756

I am quite aware of that . WILDE-1895-1,67.757

And I have always detested you . WILDE-1895-1,67.758

And yet I have come here to do you a service . WILDE-1895-1,67.759

<P_68>

Lady Chiltern <font> contemptuously <$$font> : Like the service you
wished to render my husband last night , I suppose .
WILDE-1895-1,68.761

Thank heaven , I saved him from that . WILDE-1895-1,68.762

Mrs Cheveley <font> starting to her feet <$$font> : It was you who made
him write that insolent letter to me ? WILDE-1895-1,68.763

It was you who made him break his promise ? WILDE-1895-1,68.764

Lady Chiltern : Yes . WILDE-1895-1,68.765

Mrs Cheveley : Then you must make him keep it . WILDE-1895-1,68.766

I give you till tomorrow morning - no more . WILDE-1895-1,68.767

If by that time your husband does not solemnly bind himself to help me
in this great scheme in which I am interested - Lady Chiltern : This
fraudulent speculation - Mrs Cheveley : Call it what you choose . I
hold your husband in the hollow of my hand , WILDE-1895-1,68.768

and if you are wise you will make him do what I tell him .
WILDE-1895-1,68.769

Lady Chiltern <font> rising and going towards her <$$font> : You are
impertinent . WILDE-1895-1,68.770

What has my husband to do with you ? With a woman like you ?
WILDE-1895-1,68.771

Mrs Cheveley <font> with a bitter laugh <$$font> : In this world like
meets like . WILDE-1895-1,68.772

It is because your husband is himself fraudulent and dishonest that we
pair so well together . WILDE-1895-1,68.773

Between you and him there are chasms . WILDE-1895-1,68.774

He and I are closer than friends . WILDE-1895-1,68.775

We are enemies linked together . WILDE-1895-1,68.776

The same sin binds us . WILDE-1895-1,68.777

Lady Chiltern : How dare you class my husband with yourself ?
WILDE-1895-1,68.778

How dare you threaten him or me ? WILDE-1895-1,68.779

Leave my house . WILDE-1895-1,68.780

You are unfit to enter it . WILDE-1895-1,68.781

<font> Sir Robert Chiltern enters from behind . WILDE-1895-1,68.782

He hears his wife's last words , WILDE-1895-1,68.783

and sees to whom they are addressed . WILDE-1895-1,68.784

He grows deadly pale . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,68.785

<P_69>

Mrs Cheveley : Your house ! A house bought with the price of dishonour
. A house , everything in which has been paid for by fraud .
WILDE-1895-1,69.787

<font> Turns round WILDE-1895-1,69.788

and sees Sir Robert Chiltern . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,69.789

Ask him what the origin of his fortune is ! WILDE-1895-1,69.790

Get him to tell you how he sold to a stockbroker a Cabinet secret .
WILDE-1895-1,69.791

Learn from him to what you owe your position . WILDE-1895-1,69.792

Lady Chiltern : It is not true ! WILDE-1895-1,69.793

Robert ! It is not true ! WILDE-1895-1,69.794

Mrs Cheveley <font> pointing at him with outstretched finger <$$font> :
Look at him ! WILDE-1895-1,69.795

Can he deny it ? WILDE-1895-1,69.796

Does he dare to ? WILDE-1895-1,69.797

Sir Robert Chiltern : Go ! WILDE-1895-1,69.798

Go at once . WILDE-1895-1,69.799

You have done your worst now . WILDE-1895-1,69.800

Mrs Cheveley : My worst ? WILDE-1895-1,69.801

I have not yet finished with you , with either of you .
WILDE-1895-1,69.802

I give you both till tomorrow at noon . WILDE-1895-1,69.803

If by then you do@ @n't do what I bid you to do , the whole world shall
know the origin of Robert Chiltern . WILDE-1895-1,69.804

<font> Sir Robert Chiltern strikes the bell . WILDE-1895-1,69.805

Enter Mason . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,69.806

Sir Robert Chiltern : Show Mrs Cheveley out . WILDE-1895-1,69.807

<font> Mrs Cheveley starts ; WILDE-1895-1,69.808

then bows with somewhat exaggerated politeness to Lady Chiltern , who
makes no sign of response . WILDE-1895-1,69.809

As she passes by Sir Robert Chiltern , who is standing close to the door
, she pauses for a moment WILDE-1895-1,69.810

and looks him straight in the face . WILDE-1895-1,69.811

She then goes out , followed by the servant , who closes the door after
him . WILDE-1895-1,69.812

The husband and wife are left alone . WILDE-1895-1,69.813

Lady Chiltern stands like someone in a dreadful dream .
WILDE-1895-1,69.814

Then she turns round WILDE-1895-1,69.815

and looks at her husband . WILDE-1895-1,69.816

She looks at him with strange eyes , as though she was seeing him for
the first time . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,69.817

Lady Chiltern : You sold a Cabinet secret for money !
WILDE-1895-1,69.818

You began your life with fraud ! WILDE-1895-1,69.819

You built up your career on dishonour ! WILDE-1895-1,69.820

Oh , tell me it is not true ! WILDE-1895-1,69.821

Lie to me ! WILDE-1895-1,69.822

Lie to me ! WILDE-1895-1,69.823

Tell me it is not true ! WILDE-1895-1,69.824

<P_70>

Sir Robert Chiltern : What this woman said is quite true .
WILDE-1895-1,70.826

But , Gertrude , listen to me . WILDE-1895-1,70.827

You do@ @n't realize how I was tempted . WILDE-1895-1,70.828

Let me tell you the whole thing . WILDE-1895-1,70.829

<font> Goes towards her . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,70.830

Lady Chiltern : Do@ @n't come near me . WILDE-1895-1,70.831

Do@ @n't touch me . WILDE-1895-1,70.832

I feel as if you had soiled me for ever . WILDE-1895-1,70.833

Oh ! what a mask you have been wearing all these years !
WILDE-1895-1,70.834

A horrible painted mask ! WILDE-1895-1,70.835

You sold yourself for money . WILDE-1895-1,70.836

Oh ! a common thief were better . WILDE-1895-1,70.837

You put yourself up to sale to the highest bidder ! WILDE-1895-1,70.838

You were bought in the market . WILDE-1895-1,70.839

You lie to the whole world . WILDE-1895-1,70.840

And yet you will not lie to me . WILDE-1895-1,70.841

Sir Robert Chiltern <font> rushing towards her <$$font> : Gertrude !
Gertrude ! WILDE-1895-1,70.842

Lady Chiltern <font> thrusting him back with outstretched hands <$$font>
: No , do@ @n't speak ! WILDE-1895-1,70.843

Say nothing ! WILDE-1895-1,70.844

Your voice wakes terrible memories - memories of things that made me
love you - memories of words that made me love you - memories that now
are horrible to me . WILDE-1895-1,70.845

And how I worshipped you ! WILDE-1895-1,70.846

You were to me something apart from common life , a thing pure , noble ,
honest , without stain . WILDE-1895-1,70.847

The world seemed to me finer because you were in it , and goodness more
real because you lived . WILDE-1895-1,70.848

And now - oh , when I think that I made of a man like you my ideal !
the ideal of my life ! WILDE-1895-1,70.849

Sir Robert Chiltern : There was your mistake . WILDE-1895-1,70.850

There was your error . The error all women commit .
WILDE-1895-1,70.851

Why ca@ @n't you women love us , faults and all ? WILDE-1895-1,70.852

Why do you place us on monstrous pedestals ? WILDE-1895-1,70.853

We have all feet of clay , women as well as men : WILDE-1895-1,70.854

but when we men love women , we love them knowing their weaknesses ,
their follies , their imperfections , WILDE-1895-1,70.855

love them all the more , it may be , for that reason .
WILDE-1895-1,70.856

It is not the perfect , but the imperfect , who have need of love .
WILDE-1895-1,70.857

It is when we are wounded by our own hands , or by the hands of others ,
that love should come to cure us - WILDE-1895-1,70.858

else what use is love at all ? WILDE-1895-1,70.859

All sins , except a sin against itself , Love should forgive .
WILDE-1895-1,70.860

All lives , save loveless lives , true Love should pardon .
WILDE-1895-1,70.861

A man's love is like that . WILDE-1895-1,70.862

It is wider , <P_71> larger , more human than a woman's .
WILDE-1895-1,71.863

Women think that they are making ideals of men . WILDE-1895-1,71.864

What they are making of us are false idols merely . WILDE-1895-1,71.865

You made your false idol of me , WILDE-1895-1,71.866

and I had not the courage to come down , show you my wounds , tell you
my weaknesses . WILDE-1895-1,71.867

I was afraid that I might lose your love , as I have lost it now .
WILDE-1895-1,71.868

And so , last night you ruined my life for me - yes , ruined it !
WILDE-1895-1,71.869

What this woman asked of me was nothing compared to what she offered to
me . WILDE-1895-1,71.870

She offered security , peace , stability . WILDE-1895-1,71.871

The sin of my youth , that I had thought was buried , rose up in front
of me , hideous , horrible , with its hands at my throat .
WILDE-1895-1,71.872

I could have killed it for ever , sent it back into its tomb , destroyed
its record , burned the one witness against me . WILDE-1895-1,71.873

You prevented me . No one but you , WILDE-1895-1,71.874

you know it . WILDE-1895-1,71.875

And now what is there before me but public disgrace , ruin , terrible
shame , the mockery of the world , a lonely dishonoured life , a lonely
dishonoured death , it may@ @be , some day ? WILDE-1895-1,71.876

Let women make no more ideals of men ! WILDE-1895-1,71.877

let them not put them on altars and bow before them , or they may ruin
other lives as completely as you - you whom I have so wildly loved -
have ruined mine ! WILDE-1895-1,71.878

<font> He passes from the room . WILDE-1895-1,71.879

Lady Chiltern rushes towards him , WILDE-1895-1,71.880

but the door is closed when she reaches it . WILDE-1895-1,71.881

Pale with anguish , bewildered , helpless , she sways like a plant in
the water . WILDE-1895-1,71.882

Her hands , outstretched , seem to tremble in the air like blossoms in
the wind . WILDE-1895-1,71.883

Then she flings herself down beside a sofa WILDE-1895-1,71.884

and buries her face . WILDE-1895-1,71.885

Her sobs are like the sobs of a child . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,71.886

Act Drop WILDE-1895-1,71.887

<P_72>

<heading>

Third Act . WILDE-1895-1,72.890

Scene WILDE-1895-1,72.891

<font> The Library in Lord Goring's house . WILDE-1895-1,72.892

An Adam room . WILDE-1895-1,72.893

On the right is the door leading into the hall . On the left , the door
of the smoking-room . WILDE-1895-1,72.894

A pair of folding_doors at the back open into the drawing-room .
WILDE-1895-1,72.895

The fire is lit . WILDE-1895-1,72.896

Phipps , the Butler , is arranging some newspapers on the writing-table
. WILDE-1895-1,72.897

The distinction of Phipps is his impassivity . WILDE-1895-1,72.898

He has been termed by enthusiasts the Ideal Butler .
WILDE-1895-1,72.899

The Sphinx is not so incommunicable . WILDE-1895-1,72.900

He is a mask with a manner . WILDE-1895-1,72.901

Of his intellectual or emotional life , history knows nothing .
WILDE-1895-1,72.902

He represents the dominance of form . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,72.903

<$$heading>

<font> Enter Lord Goring in evening dress with a buttonhole .
WILDE-1895-1,72.905

He is wearing a silk hat and Inverness cape . WILDE-1895-1,72.906

White-gloved , he carries a Louis Seize cane . WILDE-1895-1,72.907

His are all the delicate fopperies of Fashion . WILDE-1895-1,72.908

One sees that he stands in immediate relation to modern life , makes it
indeed , and so masters it . WILDE-1895-1,72.909

He is the first well-dressed philosopher in the history of thought .
<$$font> WILDE-1895-1,72.910

Lord Goring : Got my second buttonhole for me , Phipps ?
WILDE-1895-1,72.911

Phipps : Yes , my lord . WILDE-1895-1,72.912

<font> Takes his hat , cane , and cape , WILDE-1895-1,72.913

and presents new buttonhole on salver . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,72.914

Lord Goring : Rather distinguished thing , Phipps . WILDE-1895-1,72.915

I am the only person of the smallest importance in London at present who
wears a buttonhole . WILDE-1895-1,72.916

<P_73>

Phipps : Yes , my lord . WILDE-1895-1,73.918

I have observed that . WILDE-1895-1,73.919

Lord Goring <font> taking out old buttonhole <$$font> : You see , Phipps
. Fashion is what one wears oneself . WILDE-1895-1,73.920

What is unfashionable is what other people wear . WILDE-1895-1,73.921

Phipps : Yes , my lord . WILDE-1895-1,73.922

Lord Goring : Just as vulgarity is simply the conduct of other people .
Phipps : Yes , my lord . Lord Goring <font> putting in new buttonhole
<$$font> : And falsehoods the truths of other people .
WILDE-1895-1,73.923

Phipps : Yes , my lord . WILDE-1895-1,73.924

Lord Goring : Other people are quite dreadful . WILDE-1895-1,73.925

The only possible society is oneself . WILDE-1895-1,73.926

Phipps : Yes , my lord . WILDE-1895-1,73.927

Lord Goring : To love oneself is the beginning of a lifelong romance ,
Phipps . WILDE-1895-1,73.928

Phipps : Yes , my lord . WILDE-1895-1,73.929

Lord Goring <font> looking at himself in the glass <$$font> : do@ @n't
think I quite like this buttonhole , Phipps . WILDE-1895-1,73.930

Makes me look a little too old . WILDE-1895-1,73.931

Makes me almost in the prime of life , eh , Phipps ?
WILDE-1895-1,73.932

Phipps : I do@ @n't observe an alternation in your lordship's appearance
. WILDE-1895-1,73.933

Lord Goring : You do@ @n't , Phipps ? WILDE-1895-1,73.934

<P_74>

Phipps : No , my lord . WILDE-1895-1,74.936

Lord Goring : I am not quite sure . WILDE-1895-1,74.937

For the future a more trivial buttonhole , Phipps , on Thursday evenings
. WILDE-1895-1,74.938

Phipps : I will speak to the florist , my lord . WILDE-1895-1,74.939

She has had a loss in her family lately , which perhaps accounts for the
lack of triviality your lordship complains of in the buttonhole .
WILDE-1895-1,74.940

Lord Goring : Extraordinary thing about the lower class in England -
they are always losing their relations . WILDE-1895-1,74.941

Phipps : Yes , my lord ! WILDE-1895-1,74.942

They are extremely fortunate in that respect . WILDE-1895-1,74.943

Lord Goring <font> turns round WILDE-1895-1,74.944

and looks at him . WILDE-1895-1,74.945

Phipps remains impassive <$$font> : WILDE-1895-1,74.946

Hum ! Any letters , Phipps ? WILDE-1895-1,74.947

Phipps : Three , my lord . WILDE-1895-1,74.948

<font> Hands letters on a salver . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,74.949

Lord Goring <font> takes letters <$$font> : WILDE-1895-1,74.950

Want my cab round in twenty minutes . WILDE-1895-1,74.951

Phipps : Yes , my lord . WILDE-1895-1,74.952

<font> Goes towards door . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,74.953

Lord Goring <font> holds up letter in pink envelope <$$font> :
WILDE-1895-1,74.954

Ahem ! Phipps , when did this letter arrive ? WILDE-1895-1,74.955

Phipps : It was brought by hand just after your lordship went to the
club . WILDE-1895-1,74.956

Lord Goring : That will do . WILDE-1895-1,74.957

<font> Exit Phipps . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,74.958

Lady Chiltern's handwriting on Lady Chiltern's pink notepaper .
WILDE-1895-1,74.959

That is rather curious . WILDE-1895-1,74.960

I thought Robert was to write . WILDE-1895-1,74.961

Wonder what Lady Chiltern has got <P_75> to say to me ?
WILDE-1895-1,75.962

<font> Sits at bureau , WILDE-1895-1,75.963

opens letter , WILDE-1895-1,75.964

and reads it . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,75.965

' I want you . WILDE-1895-1,75.966

I trust you . WILDE-1895-1,75.967

I am coming to you . WILDE-1895-1,75.968

Gertrude . ' <font> WILDE-1895-1,75.969

Puts down the letter with a puzzled look . WILDE-1895-1,75.970

Then takes it up , WILDE-1895-1,75.971

and reads it again slowly . WILDE-1895-1,75.972

' I want you . WILDE-1895-1,75.973

I trust you . WILDE-1895-1,75.974

I am coming to you . ' WILDE-1895-1,75.975

So she has found out everything ! Poor woman ! Poor woman !
WILDE-1895-1,75.976

<font> Pulls out watch WILDE-1895-1,75.977

and looks at it . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,75.978

But what an hour to call ! Ten o'clock ! WILDE-1895-1,75.979

I shall have to give up going to the Berkshires . WILDE-1895-1,75.980

However , it is always nice to be expected , and not to arrive .
WILDE-1895-1,75.981

I am not expected at the Bachelors' , WILDE-1895-1,75.982

so I shall certainly go there . WILDE-1895-1,75.983

Well , I will make her stand by her husband . WILDE-1895-1,75.984

That is the only thing for her to do . WILDE-1895-1,75.985

That is the only thing for any woman to do . WILDE-1895-1,75.986

It is the growth of the moral sense in women that makes marriage such a
hopeless , one-sided institution . WILDE-1895-1,75.987

Ten o'clock . WILDE-1895-1,75.988

She should be here soon . WILDE-1895-1,75.989

I must tell Phipps I am not in to anyone else . WILDE-1895-1,75.990

<font> Goes towards bell . <$$font> WILDE-1895-1,75.991

