<BEGIN_william-1832-2>

<P_2,73>

{ED:301_The_King_to_Earl_Grey}

Brighton , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,73.4

Jan. 5 , 1832 . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,73.5

The King has read with attention the Minute which Earl Grey has made of
what passed in his interview with His Majesty yesterday ,
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,73.6

and he acknowledges its perfect accuracy in all points .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,73.7

His Majesty will proceed to make some remarks upon the questions
submitted by Earl Grey for his consideration , with the understanding ,
however , that he shall not be thereby considered as pledging himself to
the adoption of any proposal or suggestion , and that he <P_2,74>
reserves his decision , until his pleasure shall have been taken in the
more formal shape of a Minute of Cabinet . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,74.8

Earl Grey has most correctly admitted his sense of the strong objections
entertained by His Majesty to any addition to the Peerage for the
purpose of carrying the Reform Bill , or any other measure ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,74.9

and he has , with similar justice , taken credit to himself for having
originally , and indeed at all times when the subject has been touched
upon , expressed his own objections to a creation of Peers upon such an
occasion . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,74.10

Earl Grey has added that he still sees these objections in their full
force . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,74.11

The King is , therefore , satisfied that nothing but the apprehension of
a second rejection of the Reform Bill in the House of Lords , and a
conviction of the danger of incurring a greater evil , and all the
lamentable consequences which have been so forcibly stated by him ,
could have induced Earl Grey to yield to the advice of those who have
urged a resort to this alternative , and to have proposed it to His
Majesty . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,74.12

The King is naturally confirmed in this opinion by Earl Grey's verbal
communication of the sentiments of some of his colleagues <paren>
recorded also in his Minute <$$paren> as being still strongly opposed to
this measure , whilst there remained any hope of averting the danger by
other means . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,74.13

Strong as is and as ought to be the King's feeling on this subject , he
is , on the other hand , sensible that circumstances must occur , as
indeed they have occurred , in which it becomes a duty to sacrifice
feeling to necessity . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,74.14

It has always been his desire to remove difficulties rather than to
raise them ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,74.15

and he therefore will not add to those which have now arisen by <P_2,75>
hesitation , or by keeping those who are entrusted with the
administration of the affairs of this country at this critical period in
suspense , as to the view which he may be disposed to take of
circumstances which call for his decision . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,75.16

As matters now stand , His Majesty is assured , and he believes , that
the peace and the tranquillity of the country depend upon an early
settlement of the question which so intensely agitates it .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,75.17

He has reason to know that Earl Grey and the other members of his
Government consider the success of the measure as identified with their
continuance in office . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,75.18

He has no wish for any change of his Ministers , as he is satisfied with
the manner in which they discharge the duties of their arduous and
laborious offices ; and as he is equally satisfied of the serious injury
which the country must sustain from frequent changes of men and measures
, more especially from such change at the present period , when the
state of its domestic and foreign concerns and relations so imperiously
calls for stability of authority and consistency of purpose so essential
to the establishment of confidence . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,75.19

But even if such were not His Majesty's sentiments , and it should be
his desire to escape from the measure which is so repugnant to his
feelings , by risking the alternative of the loss of the Reform Bill ,
or the dissolution of the present Administration , a doubt would occur ,
whether there be in the country any individuals of respectability and
capacity willing to undertake the task he would impose upon them , by
calling them to his councils ; or whether , if these could be found ,
they <P_2,76> would be able to maintain themselves in office and to
carry on the government of the country ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,76.20

and His Majesty believes that this doubt would be solved in the negative
. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,76.21

If , however , all these considerations should appear to the King
sufficient to justify his consenting to an addition to the House of
Lords , for the purpose of giving to his Government such a preponderance
of influence and votes as shall enable it to carry the Reform Bill , he
can@ @not lose sight of the objections which he entertains to this
measure , so far as not to feel it to be his duty to cause his assent to
rest upon a principle which shall , as far as possible , maintain the
respectability of the House of Lords as it is now constituted , as shall
preserve to the Peerage of this country the <font> hereditary <$$font>
distinction which it has not yet ceased to enjoy , and shall secure the
character and the independence of this high and important branch of the
State from any permanent consequences of an act resorted to with a view
to a present emergency . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,76.22

His Majesty therefore must establish , as a condition <font> inseparable
<$$font> from the possibility of his assenting to the proposal which may
be submitted to him by his Cabinet , that , with the exception solely of
Lord Francis Osborne and Mr. Dundas , to whose elevation to the Peerage
he had already consented , and which had indeed , as observed by Earl
Grey , been merely suspended , and possibly of Sir John Leach , which
would stand on distinct ground , although taking place upon this
occasion , the addition to be made to the House of Lords , whatever may
be the numbers , may be effected <P_2,77> <font> exclusively <$$font> by
calling up eldest sons , or collateral heirs to Peerages , where no
direct heirs are likely to succeed . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,77.23

His Majesty is satisfied , from the inspection of the lists which Earl
Grey put into his hands , that enough could be obtained from this source
, without resorting to Scotch and Irish Peers , to whose transfer to the
English Peerage he , however , would not have objected , if it had been
shown to him to be indispensable towards making up the number required .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,77.24

But His Majesty does not think it would , in any view of the question ,
be wise to limit the selection to those not in Parliament , even in the
first instance , it appearing to him that the objections to the
exclusion of those holding seats in the House of Commons are greater and
more deserving of consideration than any that may attach to opening the
representation of counties , or other seats for which contests would
arise . Besides which the course and results of these contests may
serve the purpose of the Government , by affording a good criterion of
the feeling of the country in favour of the measure of Reform , a
contradiction to the assertion that a strong reaction in it has taken
place , and therefore an additional ground of justification for so
strong an exercise of the prerogative as that which is now recommended .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,77.25

His Majesty is further of opinion that , upon these occasions , when
once the decision is made , the measure should be effectual and
conclusive , and taken without the <font> appearance <$$font> of doubt
or hesitation , not subject to contingencies which might defeat its
object , to the risk of erroneous estimates of comparative strength , or
to <P_2,78> the possible necessity of a <font> second edition <$$font> ,
in consequence of the insufficiency of the first .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,78.26

If Earl Grey considers that twenty-one may be required <font> eventually
, <$$font> and is satisfied that his data are correct , that number
should be added at once in the manner proposed , instead of feeling the
pulse , and beating about the bush , by adding eight or ten , at the
risk of a failure , which would betray the absence of due calculation
and discrimination , and of a fixed determination , and might possibly
increase the difficulty and the objection , so as to render the
propriety or policy of a renewal of the attempt very questionable .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,78.27

The King , having declared that his acquiescence in the proposed measure
must be subject to the exclusion of all <font> creations , <$$font> ,
excepting the three specially named , it becomes unnecessary that he
should repeat his caution as to raising to the Peerage any individuals
who have been forward in agitating the country . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,78.28

But His Majesty can@ @not close this communication without again stating
to Earl Grey and to his other confidential servants , the extreme
importance , which , in times of great peril , when the overthrow of all
legitimate authority , the destruction of ancient institutions , of
social order , and of every gradation and link of society are threatened
, when a revolutionary and demoralising spirit is making frightful
strides , when a poisonous press , almost unchecked , guides , excites ,
and at the same time controls public opinion , His Majesty must attach
to their assurance , that , after the settlement of this all-engrossing
question of Parliamentary Reform shall have been happily settled , they
will strenuously exert themselves to resist and repress <P_2,79> further
encroachments tending to a dangerous diminution of the necessary power
of the Government , and to a systematic reduction of the authority ,
influence , and dignity of the Crown . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,79.29

It is impossible His Majesty should view otherwise than with serious
apprehension the preponderance of the House of Commons in the direction
of the affairs of this country , if it be applied , as it has been
occasionally applied , and more frequently attempted to be applied , to
the prejudice of the Monarchy and the degradation of its attributes .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,79.30

He is not conscious of having betrayed any disposition to an extravagant
display of dignity and splendour , or to the exercise of despotic and
arbitrary power . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,79.31

He is therefore warranted in ascribing the propensity for encroachment ,
which has been shown by the House of Commons , to that growing fancy for
<font> liberalism <$$font> which , however fair its appearance , is by
many assumed to cover democratic and levelling purposes , and may
mislead others to the encouragement and support of schemes fatal to the
existence of the Constitution and the form of Government under which
this country has so long prospered . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,79.32

It is His Majesty's duty , it must be his anxious wish , to endeavour to
preserve to his dominions the blessings which a bountiful Providence has
bestowed upon them , and to transmit them to his posterity as little
impaired as the spirit of these times will allow ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,79.33

and he appeals earnestly to his Ministers for their utmost aid towards
this object , and for their strenuous support of his endeavour to stem
the torrent . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,79.34

William R. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,79.35

<P_2,85>

{ED:305_The_King_to_Earl_Grey}

Brighton , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,85.38

Jan. 9 , 1832 . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,85.39

The King acknowledges the receipt of the Minute of Cabinet held on the
7th inst. , transmitted by Earl Grey ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,85.40

and His Majesty derives great satisfaction from the assurance it conveys
, that his confidential servants entirely adopt his opinion of the
necessity of resisting any proceedings which may tend to the
establishment of a dangerous and unconstitutional control over the
Government , and to undue interference with its executive functions ,
and the independence of the Legislature . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,85.41

His Majesty approves of their deferring to submit their final opinion
upon the particular object of their deliberation , till they can have
the assistance of the Lord Chancellor WILLIAM-1832-2,2,85.42

William R. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,85.43

<P_2,108>

{ED:313_The_King_to_Earl_Grey}

Brighton , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,108.46

Jan. 15 , 1832 . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,108.47

The King received yesterday evening the Minute of a meeting of his
confidential servants held on the 13th instant , transmitted to him by
Earl Grey . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,108.48

Important as is the subject , and serious as are the points submitted
for his consideration and decision in this communication , they have too
long engaged His Majesty's anxious attention , and presented themselves
to his mind in every form in which they could be <P_2,109> offered , to
impose upon him the necessity of hesitating in the view which he is
called upon to take of it , or of keeping Earl Grey and his colleagues
in suspense as to the result of that view . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,109.49

The Minute represents most ably and clearly the state and condition of
public affairs , the situation of the country , and the general
circumstances which , in the opinion of His Majesty's confidential
servants , have reduced them to the painful necessity of submitting the
advice which it conveys ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,109.50

and the King is not disposed to dispute the correctness of the reasoning
, or the soundness of the argument , by which this advice is supported ,
always however with the reserve that it is applicable to the <font>
existing <$$font> contingencies , and that the decision must be made
upon due consideration of present circumstances , and of the necessity
of incurring a serious evil in order to avert one which may prove yet
more serious . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,109.51

This , therefore , is the ground to be taken ; this the rule of conduct
; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,109.52

and it is unnecessary that His Majesty should seek for any other in the
discussion of what is advanced in the first part of the Minute .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,109.53

He will limit himself to two observations . First , that when the
present measure of Reform was proposed to him in February last , he
stated his apprehensions of the collision which has taken place between
the two Houses of Parliament , and deprecated it in strong terms .
Secondly , that however desirable it is , in his opinion , to put an end
to such collision , His Majesty can@ @not , under any circumstances ,
consent to undervalue the importance of the House of Lords as a separate
and independent branch of the Legislature , nor lose sight of the high
<P_2,110> functions which , it has to perform , and of the power with
which it is invested for the preservation of the Constitution ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,110.54

and he declares that he looks to that House principally , and to its
high , honourable , and loyal elements , for the support of the Monarchy
, and for the exertion of due vigour in resisting popular clamour and in
opposing a barrier to popular encroachments . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,110.55

Hence it appears to His Majesty a duty which he owes to the country as
well as to himself , its Sovereign , to preserve the character and
dignity and the hereditary constitution of the House of Lords and of the
Peerage ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,110.56

and this is the principle on which he is determined to act in his
endeavour to meet the exigency of the moment by the adoption of such
measures as may tend not only to the preservation of the peace of the
country , but also to secure its interests , at this critical period ,
from the prejudice to which they would be exposed from any change in the
Administration . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,110.57

To secure the Reform Bill against a second rejection in the House of
Lords , and the country against the consequences apprehended from such
result , the King is called upon to sanction an augmentation of the
Peerage , to consent to an exercise of the prerogative for purposes and
to an extent for which no precedent can be found of more recent date
than the reign of Queen Anne . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,110.58

The question now formally submitted to him was recently brought under
his consideration by Earl Grey , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,110.59

and all its bearings and every contingency were stated by him with the
correctness and the candour which have invariably distinguished his
proceedings and his <P_2,111> communications . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,111.60

His Majesty resolved to meet him in the same spirit .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,111.61

He did not seek to blink the question . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,111.62

He stated fairly his view of it , and also the extent to which he might
be induced to concede ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,111.63

and he now declares his readiness to give to Earl Grey , and to his
other confidential servants , the full and positive benefit of such
implied assent . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,111.64

This embraced , as does the Minute of Cabinet , the time , the extent ,
and the mode of the application of the proposed exercise of the
Prerogative . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,111.65

His Majesty understood and required that it should not be resorted to
while there existed a hope of averting its necessity .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,111.66

He objected to its being made in so limited a degree as to incur the
risk of its proving ultimately ineffectual ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,111.67

and therefore stated that , if it be considered that twenty-one Peers
might be eventually required , that number should be added at once .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,111.68

And he stated that the addition should be effected , <font> exclusively
, <$$font> by calling up the eldest sons or collateral heirs to Peerages
, where no direct heirs are likely to succeed ; with the exception of
two creations previously agreed to by him , and one considered , on
other grounds , free from objection . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,111.69

But when the King entered into this question , and showed the extent to
which he might be considered prepared to concede , he did so upon the
presumption <paren> which , however , he admits not to have rested upon
any assurance given to him <$$paren> , that the utmost number required
would not exceed twenty-one , or at least not much exceed twenty-one ;
and that he was thus required to exercise his prerogative with a
limitation , and not to an undefined extent ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,111.70

and it is impossible that he should not feel that there is a wide
difference between that <P_2,112> previous understanding and the case
now submitted for his decision . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,112.71

It is now stated , ' that the expediency of making an addition to the
Peerage must depend upon His Majesty's <font> being prepared to allow to
his servants the power of carrying it to the full extent which may be
necessary to secure the success of the Bill , with which view it can@
@not be limited to any precise number at present ' . <$$font>
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,112.72

In other words , the King is required to surrender into the hands of his
Ministers this important prerogative , to be exercised and applied
without any other reserve or limit than that which their calculation or
anticipation of the difficulties or opposition they may have to
encounter shall produce : WILLIAM-1832-2,2,112.73

nor does the unrestricted surrender of this prerogative derive security
from the character of those to whose honour and discretion His Majesty
would not hesitate to confide it , inasmuch as the limits of its
exercise must be dependent on circumstances , on contingencies of which
the estimate may be precarious and uncertain , and which may therefore
lead to an extension of the evil , far greater than His Majesty or his
responsible advisers could ever have contemplated .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,112.74

The King has stated freely his view of the question as now submitted to
him , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,112.75

and has done so because he conceives that he owes it to himself and to
his confidential servants not to shrink from the avowal of his
sentiments ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,112.76

but , having done so , he will not , after having allowed that the
resource should be effectual , and having , indeed , insisted upon the
absurdity of incurring any risk by an insufficient addition to the House
of Lords , if resorted to at all , deny to his <P_2,113> Ministers the
power ' of acting at once up to the full exigency of the case ; ' it
being understood that the contemplated addition shall be deferred till
it may appear certain that , without such addition , the strength of the
Government would be insufficient to bring the measure of Parliamentary
Reform to a successful issue . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,113.77

But His Majesty can@ @not give this pledge , nor consent to this
surrender of the exercise of his prerogative , without attaching to it
the positive and irrevocable condition , that the <font> creations of
new Peers <$$font> shall , under no circumstances , exceed the three to
which he has already agreed , namely , of Lord Francis Osborne , Mr.
Dundas , and Sir John Leach ; that the other additions shall be made by
calling up eldest sons , or collateral heirs of Peerages where no direct
heirs are likely to succeed , without reference to the objection which
has been made , of throwing open the representation of counties or
boroughs , which , if suffered to prevail , would have the effect of
excluding many of those whom His Majesty considers the most eligible ;
that if these sources should prove insufficient <paren> which , however
, His Majesty can hardly conceive possible <$$paren> , recourse may be
had to the Scotch and Irish Peerage for promotion to the English Peerage
on this occasion , but that the selection shall be made from the oldest
and most distinguished houses , so as not to detract from the value of
the translation . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,113.78

In attaching these conditions to his assent , it is His Majesty's object
to preserve the character and respectability of the Peerage of this
country , and to relieve it from the pressure of a <font> permanent
<$$font> evil . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,113.79

His Majesty is satisfied , from an inspection of the <P_2,114> lists ,
that , in subjecting his assent to the observance of a principle which
he considers correct , and which he is therefore in duty bound to
maintain , he does not require that which is unreasonable or
impracticable , and therefore that he does not place his Government
under embarrassment . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,114.80

Even the throwing open the representations of counties and boroughs
ought not to be objected to , when so much stress is laid upon the
feeling throughout the country in favour of the present Reform Bill ,
and upon the general and intense anxiety which is felt for the success
of the measure , as a fair opportunity will be thus afforded to the
people of proving that His Majesty's Government have not been deceived
in their estimate of that feeling . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,114.81

The King can@ @not close this communication without making a remark
which has frequently occurred to him , although he may not have
heretofore expressed it , but which may account in some degree for the
extreme reluctance with which he has yielded to the proposal , that an
addition to the House of Lords should be made for the purpose of
carrying a Reform of the House of Commons . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,114.82

It has always appeared to His Majesty that the creation of Peers , under
the direct influence of the Crown and the Government , for the avowed
purpose of obtaining a majority in the House of Lords , is altogether
inconsistent with the principle on which the measure of Reform is
professed to be introduced , and with its main feature , the abolition
of nomination , or , as vulgarly called , rotten boroughs , inasmuch as
nomination votes are created and introduced into the House of <P_2,115>
Lords for the purpose of overpowering the independent voice of the House
; and the character and integrity of the higher branch of the
Legislature are thus sacrificed to the reform of the lower .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,115.83

William R. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,115.84

<P_2,128>

{ED:319_The_King_to_Earl_Grey}

Brighton , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,128.87

Jan. 17 , 1832 . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,128.88

The King will not wait for any further communication from Earl Grey ,
which may result from the meeting of his other confidential servants ,
which he has stated to His Majesty that he would summon for this day to
reply to the letter he received from him this morning .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,128.89

He is indeed too sensible of the value of Earl Grey's individual
opinions and observations , and of the attention which is due to them ,
not to feel the propriety and the necessity of noticing them distinctly
. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,128.90

Nor are the considerations which have produced them such as His Majesty
could pass over , without losing sight of the obligations which his
station and the peculiar circumstances of this eventful period impose
upon him . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,128.91

Earl Grey and the King appear to agree that the subject of their late
communications must be considered with a view to existing contingencies
, and according to a careful estimate of the difficulties to which it is
on <P_2,129> each side exposed . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,129.92

His Majesty has , indeed , never varied in this opinion ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,129.93

he has always stated it ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,129.94

and he has admitted that he has been guided by this view , and by the
principle arising out of it , in subscribing to much which would
otherwise have ill-@ @accorded with sentiments early imbibed , and with
feelings and prejudices which he has considered it his duty to sacrifice
to necessity . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,129.95

The King's general sentiments upon this question of Reform , and upon
the contingencies attached to it , as well as the progress of its
discussion , were so clearly and candidly stated in His Majesty's letter
of the 24th of April last , written immediately after he had sanctioned
the dissolution of Parliament , thereby evincing his determination to
support his Government to the utmost of his power , that he can@ @not do
better than refer Earl Grey to that letter , and desire that , upon this
occasion , the attention of his confidential servants may be
particularly called to it . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,129.96

His Majesty readily admits his conviction of the reluctance with which
Earl Grey has approached the question of an augmentation of the Peerage
, WILLIAM-1832-2,2,129.97

and he has never ceased to give him credit for an anxious desire to
abstain from proposing it , unless driven to it by the necessity of
providing against a second failure , which His Majesty agrees with him
in considering to be , under existing circumstances , pregnant with a
great and imminent danger . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,129.98

Of the sentiments of others of his confidential servants upon this
question His Majesty could not be apprised , until he received the
Minute of Cabinet of the 13th ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,129.99

and this conveyed the assurance of their unanimous <P_2,130> concurrence
in the advice therein offered to His Majesty , for the augmentation of
the Peerage for the purpose of influencing the House of Lords on the
Reform Bill , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,130.100

The King has never denied , nor is he disposed to deny , that , when he
called Lord Grey to his Councils , he considered him and admitted him to
be pledged to the introduction of a Reform of Parliament .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,130.101

His Majesty had felt desirous , and had stated his wish , that the
consideration of this ' perilous ' question should be delayed ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,130.102

but he expressed himself satisfied with the reasons assigned by Earl
Grey for not postponing its introduction , and for not allowing more
time for consideration and deliberation . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,130.103

But His Majesty's early apprehension of a possible collision between the
two Houses was not lessened during the progress of the Bill ,
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,130.104

and Earl Grey can@ @not have forgotten that His Majesty's estimate of
the probable majority against the measure in the Lords was greater than
that which had been formed by his Government . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,130.105

His Majesty can@ @not have given a stronger proof of his acknowledgment
of the sense entertained by Earl Grey and his other confidential
servants of the high attributes of the House of Lords , than by the
adoption of the very words of their minute which described them ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,130.106

and he attaches too much importance to it to feel that they are not
applicable to circumstances of a general , as well as to circumstances
of a temporary , nature . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,130.107

He is ready , indeed , to allow , that even the most arbitrary
Government can@ @not safely bid defiance to the prevailing sentiment of
a whole nation ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,130.108

but His Majesty can@ @not allow that the opposition which has been made
by the House of Lords , or by a portion of the House of Commons , or by
other <P_2,131> portions and classes of the people to the proposed
measure of Reform , is illegitimate or unconstitutional , or that it
partakes of an arbitrary principle . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,131.109

His Majesty can@ @not forget that the question has long , very long ,
been the subject of discussion , and of great difference of opinion ;
that the sentiments of the ablest statesmen have been divided upon it
during the annual recurrence of the discussion ; and that the
extraordinary excitement which has attended its recent agitation may be
traced , in no slight degree , to co-existing and co-operating causes .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,131.110

His Majesty can@ @not admit that the opinions of a large portion of the
most respectable class of his subjects are not opposed to the present
measure of Reform , at least to its proposed extent ; while there is a
majority against it in the House of Lords , a respectable portion of the
House of Commons opposed to it , and while this feeling is by no means
confined to the individuals so assembled . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,131.111

His Majesty can@ @not , therefore , admit that those who oppose the Bill
are bidding defiance to the sentiment of <font> a whole nation ,
<$$font> or that the House of Lords can incur the imputation of using
their privileges more for the purposes of their separate advantage than
for the general good , upon a question which has so long been the
subject of great difference of opinion in the country and in its
legislative assemblies , and which is still contemplated in such various
lights , by Lords and Commons , and by other classes of the people .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,131.112

But His Majesty has allowed that the anxiety for the success of the
measure which seems to pervade the great mass of the population , and
the feeling which has been manifested throughout the country , whether
its <P_2,132> existence shall be permanent or temporary , have produced
a state of things which renders the passing of the Reform Bill an object
of extreme importance to the peace and tranquillity of the country ,
while he is sensible that it is equally essential towards another object
, to which His Majesty attaches the highest value , namely , the
continuance of his present Ministers in the exercise of duties which
they have discharged so much to his satisfaction and to their own credit
. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,132.113

It is not necessary that His Majesty should enter further into the
grounds on which he has subscribed to the advice of his confidential
servants with respect to an augmentation of the Peerage , all that has
recently passed having shown that the number to be added must depend
upon the strength of the opposition in the House of Lords ; and as he is
satisfied , from what Earl Grey has submitted , that it is impossible
for his Ministers to state what the necessary number may be .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,132.114

His Majesty , however , rejoices to learn , that the idea of confining
the selection to eldest sons not in Parliament is admitted to have
fallen to the ground with that of the partial promotion itself , as His
Majesty is , upon principle , a decided advocate for the selection of
those whose claims are the highest . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,132.115

He considers that the unwillingness to spend money to secure a seat
which , if the Bill succeed , can only be held for a very short period ,
must be felt by both parties , and will therefore produce its own remedy
; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,132.116

and , at any rate , the loss of seats can no longer affect the issue of
the Bill in the House of Commons . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,132.117

His Majesty will readily waive his idea of extending the selection to
Scotch or Irish Peers , if the eldest <P_2,133> sons or collateral heirs
of English Peers shall afford a sufficient number ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,133.118

but he retains his decided objection to the <font> creation <$$font> of
any others than Lord Francis Osborne and Mr. Dundas ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,133.119

and this is a point to which , in consenting to such exercise of his
prerogative , His Majesty has attached so much importance , that he
trusts it will not be considered necessary to urge him to abandon it .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,133.120

Earl Grey will observe that His Majesty has not , in any part of this
letter , shown the smallest inclination to recede from or retract aught
that he had previously agreed to ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,133.121

and although he has stated his sentiments upon the general subject
without reserve , he trusts that the different view he may take of
certain contingencies which are connected with the course pursued , and
the decision to be made , can@ @not be construed into the most distant
desire to withhold the sanction which he had given to that course , or
into the slightest diminution of the confidence which he reposes in his
Government . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,133.122

The King has only to say further , that he admits ' the fundamental
difference between a representative and a hereditary assembly , ' but
that the House of Lords must be considered as losing , for the time ,
the benefit of its hereditary constitution and independence , whenever
any addition is made , under the direct influence of the Government ,
for the purpose of carrying any particular object .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,133.123

The individuals brought in upon that principle can@ @not be viewed as
<font> independent , <$$font> although they may eventually become so ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,133.124

and so often as this expedient is resorted to <paren> and the example
may become catching <$$paren> , <P_2,134> the objection must apply ,
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,134.125

and must , in His Majesty's opinion , detract from the general respect
due to the House of Lords , and from the value of those high attributes
of which His Majesty's confidential servants acknowledge their sense .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,134.126

The influence exercised , or the reward given for the vote , becomes
naturally greater in proportion to the value of the benefit conferred ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,134.127

and therefore the objection to the creation of Peers is more striking
than that to calling up eldest sons , which is merely an anticipation of
that which they would receive in due course , and does not add <font>
permanently <$$font> to the Peerage , nor affect its <font> hereditary
<$$font> character . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,134.128

William R. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,134.129

Jan. 18 . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,134.130

P.S . - The King has this morning received , with much satisfaction ,
the Minute of the meeting of his confidential servants held yesterday ,
transmitted by Earl Grey . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,134.131

William R. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,134.132

<P_2,157>

{ED:333_The_King_to_Earl_Grey}

Brighton , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,157.135

Jan. 27 , 1832 . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,157.136

The King has received Earl Grey's letter , dated at half-@ @past one
this morning , and the enclosure relating to the debate upon Lord
Aberdeen's motion ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,157.137

and His Majesty congratulates him upon its satisfactory result , and
upon so decided a proof that the feelings of the majority of the House
of Lords , however opposed they may be to the Reform Bill , do not
influence them to the extent of supporting , from a spirit of party , or
of hostility to the existing Government , the objectionable motion which
has called for this expression of their sentiments .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,157.138

His Majesty , indeed , can@ @not but lament that the Earl of Aberdeen ,
whose late official duties must have made him peculiarly sensible of the
mischievous tendency of such a motion , as it may affect the general
interests of the country , should allow himself to be so misled by party
feeling as to introduce it , and that the Duke of <P_2,158> Wellington
should have concurred in and supported so unjustifiable and so
unstatesmanlike a proceeding . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,158.139

William R. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,158.140

<P_2,160>

{ED:335_The_King_to_Earl_Grey}

Brighton , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,160.143

Jan. 28 , 1832 . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,160.144

Sir Herbert Taylor having submitted to the King the letter addressed to
him yesterday by Earl Grey , His Majesty can@ @not help noticing with
great concern , his remark on the division in the House of Commons upon
the Russian-Dutch Loan question , and the circumstances connected with
it , which have been very fully stated in Viscount Althorp's report to
His Majesty . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,160.145

This event offers a confirmation of the opinion which the King has long
entertained , and , he believes , occasionally expressed to Earl Grey
and to Viscount Althorp , that no reliance can be placed upon the House
of Commons as it is now constituted , and with the spirit which has been
shown to animate it on any questions , however vitally they may affect
the Government , which the great body of it may profess to support , if
the object shall seem to be at variance with any prevailing popular
feeling , or if their support of it shall appear likely to excite
popular clamour , and to render the advocates for it obnoxious to the
people , however unexceptionable it may otherwise be .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,160.146

Upon this occasion the question is taken up as one of pounds , shillings
, and pence , in opposition to the principle of honour and equity , on
which the Government had proceeded ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,160.147

and <font> that <$$font> opposition is very naturally encouraged by
Messrs. Eume and O'Connell , whose example is followed by many others
who had usually <P_2,161> supported the Government .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,161.148

If to this deference to popular clamour and feeling be added the spirit
of encroachment , and the disposition to usurp the functions of the
Executive Government which have distinguished the House of Commons for
some time past , and have been too successfully brought into operation ;
- if a reference be made to their conduct on the Civil Lists questions ,
and others affecting the dignity and the prerogative of the Crown , His
Majesty thinks that he will be borne out in his apprehension , that the
general interests of the country , those of the Monarchy and the
stability of any Government which may be formed , are exposed to greater
danger and prejudice from the growing influence and power of the House
of Commons , and from its spirit of encroachment , than from any
exertion of the House of Lords to maintain and assert its independence
in the discussion of a great constitutional question .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,161.149

William R. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,161.150

<P_2,168>

{ED:338_The_King_to_Earl_Grey}

Brighton , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,168.153

Jan. 30 , 1832 . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,168.154

The King acknowledges the receipt of Earl Grey's letter of yesterday ,
from which he is sorry to learn the <P_2,169> importance which he
attaches to the effect of the motion made on Thursday by the Earl of
Aberdeen , and of the support given to it as it regards His Majesty's
Government , as he had flattered himself that the mischief would be
confined to the interests concerned in the late discussions of the
Conference , a view of this subject which had struck him as sufficiently
serious . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,169.155

His Majesty has never attempted to conceal from Earl Grey the increased
uneasiness and apprehension with which he has contemplated the effects
of the Reform Bill . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,169.156

The feeling with which the King approached this question is amply and
candidly stated in his letter to Earl Grey of the 4th February last ,
which confirmed the sanction he had given verbally to the proposed Bill
; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,169.157

and the expression of it has been repeated in various communications ,
but more particularly in his letter of the 24th April last , to which
the King has more than once called Lord Grey's attention .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,169.158

It would be idle , and it would be trifling with Earl Grey's good sense
to say , that this feeling , and the apprehensions which were always
entertained and expressed by His Majesty of the serious difficulties
which might arise , and the embarrassments under which the country and
the Government might be placed , by a collision between the two Houses
of Parliament upon a great popular question , had been weakened by what
has occurred in the progress of the Bill , as that collision which His
Majesty apprehended , and those embarrassments which he anticipated from
it , have arisen , and have produced the difficulties which have led of
late to so many communications of anxious import , and above all have
created the necessity of <P_2,170> admitting for consideration and
decision a measure to which the King believes Earl Grey to have felt as
much repugnance as His Majesty does . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,170.159

Earl Grey notices the persevering and irreconcilable opposition which is
given to the Bill in the House of Lords , as being such as he could not
have foreseen or contemplated ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,170.160

but he will do the King the justice to say , that he had frequently
expressed his apprehension of it ; and that , at various periods , more
particularly at the period of the dissolution of Parliament , and in
October after the rejection of the Bill in the House of Lords , His
Majesty adverted to the possibility of renewed disappointment , and
urged the importance of resorting to all practicable and justifiable
means of reconciling the opponents to the measure .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,170.161

While , however , the King has felt disposed to give credit to a portion
<paren> and he hopes a large portion <$$paren> of the opponents in the
House of Lords for conscientious motives in the course they have pursued
, he is by no means inclined to deny that a great number of those who
are taking the most violent part may be guided by a desire to overthrow
His Majesty's present Ministers , and to bring themselves into office .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,170.162

This , however , does not mend the matter ; while their efforts ,
although not springing from the same source , are directed to the same
result . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,170.163

While His Majesty makes these remarks , he does not cease to bear in
mind the circumstances under which Earl Grey proposed the introduction
of the measure , and that His Majesty sanctioned the nature and the
extent of the principle on which it was proposed to be introduced .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,170.164

His Majesty has invariably <P_2,171> assured Earl Grey of his
determination to support him in his endeavour to carry into effect the
arduous task which he has undertaken ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,171.165

and he believes no part of his conduct to be open to the imputation or
the suspicion that he has not firmly and honourably redeemed a pledge ,
without receiving which Earl Grey could not have committed himself as he
has done . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,171.166

His Majesty is also of Earl Grey's opinion , that there appears to be no
safe course but that of using every exertion to carry the measure safely
through Parliament ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,171.167

and having admitted the existence of the difficulty , he is not disposed
to shrink from it , but quite prepared to aid Earl Grey in meeting it .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,171.168

But this does not prevent His Majesty from entertaining serious
apprehensions of those which may remain to be encountered after the
Reform Bill shall have passed ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,171.169

and although they have been increased or rather confirmed by the recent
division in the House of Commons , he may with confidence refer to
successive communications of his sentiments for a proof that he has been
consistent in the opinion conveyed to Earl Grey and to Viscount Althorp
in his letters of the 28th inst. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,171.170

His Majesty admits that Earl Grey has never concealed the difficulties
which the present state of the House of Commons presents to the conduct
of public affairs , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,171.171

but he has never felt disposed to admit his opinion that these
difficulties would be removed or even diminished by the results of the
Reform Bill . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,171.172

His Majesty has , on the contrary , apprehended from them an
accumulation of embarrassment to the Government in the administration of
its executive functions , from a <P_2,172> more popular representation ,
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,172.173

and he does not deny that he looks forward with dread to the probability
of the Government being abandoned by many of those who may be considered
its supporters , upon every occasion when the object to be carried may
not be in unison with the popular feeling upon it .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,172.174

The King is persuaded , indeed , that there is not an individual in the
country to whose high_principled and honourable mind he could appeal
with greater confidence than to Earl Grey , for the corresponding
opinion that the Government of this country may , under circumstances
which justly entitle it to the support of those who know how to
distinguish between objects of general interest , importance , and
security , and minutiae of subordinate character , and in the hour of
trial , rely with greater confidence upon gentlemen whose views are
liberal and enlarged , and who enter Parliament with independent
feelings , than upon those who are seeking popular favour , and who have
pledged themselves to measures which may be inconsistent with the
principle and indispensable practice of any well-constituted Government
. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,172.175

His Majesty conceives that abundant proof of this opinion may be found
in the result of Mr. Herries's late motion ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,172.176

and it must not be forgotten that those who abandoned the Government on
this occasion must have been sensible that , by such course , they
risked , with the overthrow of the Government , the loss of the Reform
Bill , although they had professed on former occasions to overlook many
points to which they objected while that question should be at issue .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,172.177

The King is unwilling to take up more of Earl Grey's time by the
discussion of a subject which has been so <P_2,173> frequently that of
his communications , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,173.178

and he will proceed to reply to other parts of his letter .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,173.179

To Earl Grey's proposal that Sir John Cam Hobhouse should succeed Sir
Henry Parnell in the important office of Secretary-at-War the King can@
@not possibly object . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,173.180

His recent course in manfully expressing his disapprobation of and
resisting the objectionable and revolutionary measures of some
candidates for popular favour had not escaped His Majesty's notice ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,173.181

and while he gives him credit for the line he has thus drawn , His
Majesty is by no means disposed to consider him less respectable or
trustworthy , because he has been consistent in the political opinions
he has maintained . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,173.182

He has further the advantage of being of an old and respectable family ,
well connected , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,173.183

his pursuits have been literary and liberal , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,173.184

and His Majesty is assured that his disposition and manner qualify him
for the intercourse which official situations impose , while his
abilities are unquestionable . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,173.185

His Majesty , therefore , hopes that Sir J. C. Hobhouse will not
decline this situation . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,173.186

William R. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,173.187

<P_2,177>

{ED:342_The_King_to_Earl_Grey}

Brighton , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,177.190

Feb. 1 , 1832 . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,177.191

The King rejoices to learn from Earl Grey's letter of yesterday , that
His Majesty's communication of the preceding day had proved so
satisfactory to him , as His Majesty is quite sensible of the serious
difficulties which Earl Gary has to encounter , and has always felt
anxious , not only to aid and support him , but also to encourage
<P_2,178> him , whenever they have become most trying ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,178.192

and although it behoves him not to underrate them , or to blink them ,
Earl Grey may feel assured that a full sense of the difficulty will not
induce him to shrink from it . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,178.193

His Majesty trusts that the anticipation of an opposition in Westminster
from Mr. Place will not induce Sir John Cam Hobhouse to decline office
at this period ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,178.194

and he hopes that the dispersion of the meeting called by the Political
Union at Manchester , and the exposure of some of the designs and
projects of these revolutionary Unionists , may tend greatly to weaken
the operations of their coadjutors and confederates in London , whether
directed against respectability of representation , or against the
authority of the Government and the public peace and security .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,178.195

William R. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,178.196

<P_2,187>

{ED:348_The_King_to_Earl_Grey}

Brighton , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,187.199

Feb. 4 , 1832 . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,187.200

The King has received Earl Grey's letter of yesterday , respecting the
very satisfactory course and result of the debate in the House of Lords
on Thursday upon Lord Wynford's motion , in which the Lord Chancellor
appears to have distinguished himself in an extraordinary degree .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,187.201

This occurrence seems to the King to offer another instance <paren> if
indeed any doubt could exist on this point <$$paren> of the
disappointment which must ever attend the introduction of motions and
propositions by one or more individuals upon which no previous
understanding or concert has taken place among those who are generally
opposed to the Government ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,187.202

and His Majesty can@ @not but consider that Earl Grey would be justified
in discovering , in the event of Thursday evening , symptoms of want of
union and consistency of action among the different parties composing
the Opposition , which might possibly be turned to good purpose before
the Reform Bill is introduced into the House of Lords .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,187.203

William R. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,187.204

<P_2,243>

{ED:369_The_King_to_Earl_Grey}

Windsor Castle , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,243.207

March 4 , 1832 . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,243.208

The King is persuaded that , while the attention of his Government and
of the Legislative bodies is engaged in the consideration of the Reform
Bill and of the Irish Tithe questions , the extreme importance of the
Colonial interests of the country , and the danger which appears to his
Majesty to threaten them , can@ @not have escaped the consideration of
Earl Grey and his other confidential servants .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,243.209

Aware , as they must be , of the early and continued interest which His
Majesty had taken in the property of the West_Indian colonies , and of
his declared sentiments , that the maritime and commercial advantage of
the mother country is inseparable from the maintenance and the welfare
of her colonies , they can@ @not be surprised that his Majesty should
express earnest solicitude with respect to the possible effects of
recent occurrences , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,243.210

and should endeavour to impress upon Earl Grey and his colleagues his
anxiety , lest they should prove destructive of our tenure of the
valuable Windward and Leeward Islands and of Jamaica , unless measures
shall be taken which may restore confidence to the proprietors and
others concerned in the possession and property of these colonies , by
convincing them that the Government is determined to support them , and
is not disposed to encourage the projects of those who , under the plea
of humanity , are exciting the slaves , and introducing a spirit of
discontent , insubordination , and revolt , which must prove <P_2,244>
fatal to these poor creatures , not less than it is ruinous to the
proprietors . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,244.211

It is not His Majesty's intention to enter into the broad question of
the emancipation of slaves in our colonies , or to discuss its policy or
its humanity , aware as he is that the abolition of slavery has been
decided upon , and that the endeavours of the Government of this country
have long been directed to this object ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,244.212

but he is certain that Earl Grey and his other confidential servants
will feel the necessity of proceeding with caution in a matter which
involves so many interests , and excites so much feeling of contending
character ; and the importance of discouraging the attempts of those who
, callous to these considerations , and to the consequences of the
agitation they produce , are constantly advocating and urging a resort
to hasty measures . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,244.213

The recent events in Jamaica have offered proof of the mischief which
results from the suggestions and the influence of these persons ,
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,244.214

and have shown how little the objects of their mistaken zeal , or of
their intemperate indiscretion , are likely to be benefited by the
course they are pursuing ; whilst , on the other hand , the eventual
effect of those manoeuvres , if they should be persisted in , may be to
induce the proprietors to seek protection from America or France , as
circumstances may suggest ; the alternatives being , the ruin of the
colonies from insurrections , or the loss of them from the determination
of the proprietors to look for support to those states in which the
influence of ' Saints ' does not prevail to the same degree .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,244.215

The King requests Earl Grey will be assured that these remarks are
intended in the spirit of caution , <P_2,245> rather than with the
intention of expressing any doubt of the desire of his Government to
check the progress of the evil . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,245.216

He acknowledges indeed , with great satisfaction , the effectual and
liberal measures which have been adopted to relieve the valuable colony
of Barbadoes and others from the immediate pressure of a serious
calamity ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,245.217

and he is sensible of the activity and energy which have been displayed
by the local authorities in Jamaica , in the suppression of the
insurrection there . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,245.218

William R. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,245.219

<P_2,253>

{ED:375_The_King_to_Earl_Grey}

Windsor Castle , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,253.222

March 9 , 1832 . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,253.223

The King has received , with great satisfaction , Earl Grey's report of
the debate in the House of Lords last night ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,253.224

and His Majesty trusts that the course which it took and the result ,
may be considered not <P_2,254> only conclusive as to the immediate
question , but <font> generally <$$font> favourable to the Government .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,254.225

The King was not sorry to hear that the Archbishop of Canterbury had
been roused by Lord Eldon's attack upon the Bench of Bishops .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,254.226

William R. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,254.227

{ED:376_The_King_to_Earl_Grey}

Windsor Castle , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,254.229

March 11 , 1832 . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,254.230

The King received yesterday afternoon Earl Grey's letter of the 9th ,
enclosing a list of the Peers present on that evening in the House of
Lords , of the speakers in the debate , and the numbers of the division
. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,254.231

His Majesty is concerned to find that there was not a better attendance
of Peers who support the Government , and that so many Bishops voted
against it . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,254.232

It is his intention , when he goes to London , to see the Archbishop of
York , and to speak to him seriously respecting the course which the
Bishops are pursuing . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,254.233

William R. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,254.234

<P_2,287>

{ED:386_The_King_to_Earl_Grey}

Windsor Castle , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,287.237

March 26 , 1832 . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,287.238

11 p.m. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,287.239

The King is very sensible of Earl Grey's attention in making so
immediate a communication to him of what passed this evening in the
House of Lords , upon the introduction of the Reform Bill , aware as he
must be of the interest with which His Majesty would look forward to it
. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,287.240

His Majesty owns that he had not felt free from apprehension , that an
attempt would be made to oppose the Bill on the first reading , and that
, in this respect , the course of the debate has agreeably disappointed
him ; while , on the other hand , the qualification with which Lords
Harrowby and Wharncliffe expressed their determination to support the
second reading , as stated by Earl Grey , is not stronger than His
Majesty had been led to expect . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,287.241

At any rate , he rejoices that Earl Grey considers what has passed as
decisive of the success of the second reading ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,287.242

and he rejoices also that the Bishop of London has so early expressed
his sentiments in a spirit which can@ @not fail to produce considerable
effect upon many of those who are hesitating as to the line they shall
take . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,287.243

It appears very evident , as indeed His Majesty had always suspected ,
that considerable doubt and uncertainty , not to say divisions of
opinion , prevail among those who have been , or may as yet continue ,
hostile to the Bill ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,287.244

and His Majesty can@ @not but build his hope upon this circumstance as
calculated greatly to favour Earl <P_2,288> Grey's success in the
Committee . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,288.245

His Majesty is persuaded that nothing can tend more effectually to
insure that success , than a perseverance in the course which Earl Grey
has adopted in this first stage of the proceeding , which appears to His
Majesty to have been distinguished by that good judgment and temper
which are so essential towards carrying him through the arduous task he
has undertaken ; and which will , His Majesty trusts , enable him to
defeat the attempts of a jarring and disjointed Opposition .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,288.246

William R. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,288.247

<P_2,292>

{ED:389_The_King_to_Earl_Grey}

Windsor Castle , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,292.250

March 30 , 1832 . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,292.251

The King has given to the Minute of Cabinet , dated on the 27th inst. ,
which Earl Grey put into his hands on the following day at St. James's
Palace , the serious consideration which the importance of the questions
therein submitted to his attention called for ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,292.252

and it is his anxious desire to convey his sentiment thereon to Earl
Grey , and to his other confidential servants , in such terms as shall
satisfy them that His Majesty has not mistaken the nature of their
appeal to him , nor lost sight of the obligations under which he is
placed at this critical period , of stating without reserve the view he
takes of the various contingencies under which he is <P_2,293> called
upon to decide upon the advice they may tender to him .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,293.253

The King does not disguise from himself the difficulties in which his
Government may be placed by the state of the question now before the
House of Lords : WILLIAM-1832-2,2,293.254

he gives them full credit for the fair and manly manner in which they
have represented them in the Minute of Cabinet ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,293.255

and although his Majesty entertains a hope that the result to be
contemplated on the second reading of the Reform Bill may assume the
more favourable shape , he is quite alive to the necessity of being
prepared for the less satisfactory contingency .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,293.256

His Majesty readily admits that , in the first of the suppositions
stated in the Minute of Cabinet , that ' of the Bill being carried by a
satisfactory majority <paren> which satisfactory majority , as he
understood from Earl Grey , was calculated at from twelve to eighteen
<$$paren> , his Ministers would be bound to go to the Committee without
proposing to him an addition to the House of Lords . '
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,293.257

His Majesty admits also that the second supposition , that ' of the Bill
being carried by only a small majority , which would afford little hope
of its successful progress through the ulterior stages ' - ' raises a
question of greater difficulty , which can@ @not , perhaps , be
satisfactorily decided before the event ; and that much must depend on
the nature of the debate , and the character of the division . '
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,293.258

But His Majesty , at the same time that he admits this , can@ @not
conceal from his confidential servants his apprehension that , in such
case , the difficulty may become more serious , and its results prove
more uncertain than they may be disposed to anticipate .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,293.259

<P_2,294>

If the second reading should be carried ' by a very small majority which
would be likely to fail in the Committee , whereby a creation of Peers
would be rendered necessary to insure the progress of the Bill through
the remaining stages , ' it must be obvious that the Opposition would
have proved such as could not be defeated by any moderate addition of
Peers , inasmuch as the support given by Lords Harrowby and Wharncliffe
, and their friends , would have been unavailing toward averting that
measure which would , as they have declared , throw them again into the
ranks of the Opposition , with the greater part of the Bishops who may
take the same contingent line , and as to these again would be to be
added some Peers <paren> and His Majesty fears they would not prove few
<$$paren> who have hitherto supported the Bill , but who are averse to
the violent measure of creating Peers for the purpose of carrying it ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,294.261

all this may either render necessary an addition to the House of Lords
so extensive as His Majesty's confidential servants may not venture to
recommend , nor His Majesty think fit to sanction ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,294.262

or may render eventually insufficient and useless the addition , which ,
upon any reasonable ground , and defensible principle , His Majesty may
be advised and consent to make . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,294.263

His Majesty has stated his reasons for considering the second case as
offering difficulties of a most serious character , such as would render
it the most embarrassing of any , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,294.264

and he therefore sincerely hopes that it may not occur .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,294.265

The last consideration , namely , the possible <font> rejection <$$font>
of the Bill on the second reading , is certainly the most important ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,294.266

and as it is stated to require immediate decision , <P_2,295> and as he
admits the necessity of being prepared for it , His Majesty will deal
with it as a case that has already occurred , although he does not
hesitate to express his firm conviction , that the Bill will go to
Committee . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,295.267

The King is sensible that , in the event of the rejection of the Bill on
the second reading , only two courses are possible namely , ' that his
actual Ministers should resign their office , or that immediate steps
should be taken for the re-introduction of the Reform Bill , accompanied
by such measures as might appear best calculated to insure its success ;
' WILLIAM-1832-2,2,295.268

and His Majesty rejoices to learn from their Minute that they are not
disposed to entertain the first , ' unless it could be proved to them
that His Majesty's personal ease and the good of his service required
them to pursue that course . ' WILLIAM-1832-2,2,295.269

The King assures them that , in his feeling and opinion , neither his
personal ease , nor the good of the service , would be promoted by their
resignation , or by a change of Administration .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,295.270

His sentiments upon this subject have been fully stated upon former
occasions ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,295.271

and he trusts that the honesty of their expression has been amply proved
to them and to the country . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,295.272

Earl Grey and his colleagues <font> accepted <$$font> office at a very
critical period , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,295.273

and their conduct , under the continuance of almost unparalleled
difficulty of various nature , has experienced , as it has merited , His
Majesty's confidence and support . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,295.274

It is not in his disposition lightly to withdraw either ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,295.275

and he has not ceased to hold the opinion , more than once expressed ,
that the interests of this country , and the peace of Europe , which
mainly depends upon the consistent policy of this country , <P_2,296>
would be seriously compromised by frequent changes of men and measures .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,296.276

This , therefore , is a risk which it is His Majesty's bounden duty not
to incur , so long as he can possibly avoid it .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,296.277

But he must rely upon the moderation and upon the discretion of those
who constitute the Administration , not to place him in a position in
which the alternative shall cease to be a matter of option .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,296.278

Earl Grey and his colleagues must be sensible that this question of
Reform is that which has been the chief source of embarrassment since
their acceptance of office ; the only one , in fact , which has ever
raised any difficulty which might not be overcome by an able and
energetic discharge of duty such as His Majesty has experienced from
them ; the only one which has placed their existence as an
Administration at stake ; that which has , in great measure , absorbed
the attention of the country , paralysed its faculties and energies ,
and which still exercises a most prejudicial influence upon its power of
action and the application of its resources . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,296.279

It is not His Majesty's intention , by this observation , to effect upon
the introduction of the measure , or upon the course which has been
pursued during its progress . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,296.280

He believes the first to have been , under all circumstances ,
unavoidable ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,296.281

he will admit the second to have become so . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,296.282

But it must be allowed that a very erroneous estimate had been formed of
the opposition it might experience ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,296.283

and if , after two failures , after a discussion so often renewed and so
extended , after so long a continuance of agitation and irritation , the
Bill should be again rejected in the House of Lords , it must become the
<P_2,297> duty of His Majesty's Ministers to consider , as it is the
King's duty to require of them to consider , not only what measures
shall appear best calculated to insure the success of the Bill , but
also what measures shall be best calculated to reconcile the feelings
and opinions of those who are opposed to the measure , and to prevent
the continued agitation , the discomfort , and the serious injury to the
country in every respect , which must arise from the renewal of a
protracted discussion ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,297.284

and , although His Majesty has pledged himself to sanction an addition
to the House of Lords , although that pledge shall be sacred , although
his Ministers shall have that resource in reserve , to be applied ,
however , as had been stipulated , subject to His Majesty's
consideration of the nature and extent of the addition , His Majesty
can@ @not view that as being the resource best calculated to insure the
success of the measure ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,297.285

and he is sensible that Earl Grey and others of his confidential
servants will agree in opinion with him , that it is by no means a
desirable expedient , nor one which should be resorted to without
extreme hesitation : WILLIAM-1832-2,2,297.286

nay , the King fears , for the reasons assigned with reference to the
second supposed case , that this expedient might , after all , prove
insufficient , and disappoint their expectations .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,297.287

But , at any rate , the addition to the strength of the House of Lords
can@ @not prevent the recurrence of one of the most serious evils .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,297.288

The whole question will be re-opened , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,297.289

and the Bill must be re-introduced in the House of Commons , where its
discussion may be protracted as on the two former occasions , and may
again absorb the whole season . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,297.290

If there be any foundation for these remarks , if <P_2,298> they be
deserving of attention , His Majesty conceives that they should point
out the necessity of considering well , before another new Bill is
introduced , whether it may not become the duty of those who frame it to
communicate freely with the more moderate of those who have opposed the
present Bill , and to endeavour to secure their assent to such a degree
as may facilitate its progress , and greatly abridge the discussion .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,298.291

The King has always considered the main principle of the Bill to rest on
Schedule A . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,298.292

He believes it to embrace more than many of the most ardent advocates of
Reform had contemplated before the construction of this Bill ;
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,298.293

and he conceives that if this and the additions to the Scotch and Irish
representation were the basis assumed by the Government to have been
established , other parts of the Bill might become the subject of
communication and arrangement between the parties before the Bill should
be re-introduced . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,298.294

This is a suggestion which his Majesty has felt it to be his duty to
throw out , upon the same principle on which he urged every possible
modification , and every endeavour to conciliate and reconcile the
opponents to the measure when it was re-introduced , after its first
failure , and after the dissolution of Parliament .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,298.295

His Majesty is sensible that the suggestion may not accord with the
views and sentiments of those whose opinions are wedded to the Bill in
its present shape ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,298.296

but he can@ @not help considering the general interests of the country
as being of superior importance to the maintenance of certain provisions
of the Reform Bill , upon which opinions are greatly divided ; and that
the restoration of peace and tranquillity , of confidence and <P_2,299>
security , of comfort and good will , and a cessation of irritation and
disunion in society , are objects of which the attainment would well
reward the endeavours of those concerned in framing a new Bill , to
divest it of all that may appear to them , from past experience ,
calculated to produce a fresh and possibly another useless struggle .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,299.297

William R. WILLIAM-1832-2,2,299.298

<P_2,311>

{ED:393_The_King_to_Earl_Grey}

Windsor Castle , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,311.301

April 5 , 1832 . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,311.302

The King feels so deeply the importance of the matter submitted for his
consideration and decision in the Minute of Cabinet , dated on the 3rd
inst. , which he received from Earl Grey yesterday , that His Majesty
can@ @not but sincerely regret that the pressure of circumstances and
the urgency of the questions at issue should have allowed him so little
time for deliberation . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,311.303

He , is , however , anxious to relieve his confidential servants from
any uncertainty and suspense as to the view he takes of these questions
, WILLIAM-1832-2,2,311.304

and he admits them to have been so much the subject of previous
discussion and reflection , as not to have found him unprepared for this
communication of their sentiments and wishes . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,311.305

<P_2,312>

Before the King enters into any point contained in this Minute of
Cabinet , he considers it desirable to refer to the correspondence and
communications which have passed on the subjects of which it treats ,
but more especially to such as have reference to the proposal of
creating Peers , for the purpose of carrying the Reform Bill .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,312.307

He does so at the risk of extending this letter to great length and of
much repetition ; WILLIAM-1832-2,2,312.308

but he does so in order to establish , by such reference , that his
sentiments and language have been consistent , and that the hesitation
which <font> he feels and shows , to commit himself to the extent which
is now required from him <$$font> , is not produced by any new view of
the question , but by a strict adherence to the principle which he has
not ceased to profess and to maintain . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,312.309

The King had invariably expressed his apprehension of a collision
between the two Houses of Parliament , in consequence of the
introduction of an extensive measure of Reform .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,312.310

He stated in his letter of February 4 , 1831 , to Earl Grey , ' that it
was natural he should dread , independently of other sources of
objection , the introduction into the House of Commons of such measures
of Reform as would be likely to be rejected in the House of Lords ,
whence must arise a quarrel between the two branches of the Legislature
, not upon a mere matter of form , not upon the enactment of a common
law , but upon a matter affecting a main feature of the constitution of
the country , upon a great popular question , and therefore to be viewed
as a great national and political calamity . ' WILLIAM-1832-2,2,312.311

This apprehension was again strongly expressed at various periods during
the progress of the measure , WILLIAM-1832-2,2,312.312

<P_2,313>

and His Majesty had frequently stated his anticipation of opposition in
the House of Lords , more powerful , more violent , more persevering ,
than appeared to be contemplated by his Government , as well as his
apprehensions of the difficulties which have arisen .
WILLIAM-1832-2,2,313.314

His Majesty had not , when he first urged these considerations ,
contemplated the <font> possibility <$$ont> of his being eventually
called upon to relieve his Government from them by a large creation of
Peers . WILLIAM-1832-2,2,313.315

