<BEGIN_wollaston-1793-1>

<P_1>

<heading>

Sermon I . WOLLASTON-1793-1,1.4

2 Peter iii. 17 . WOLLASTON-1793-1,1.5

<$$heading>

" Beloved , seeing you know these things already , beware , lest ye also
, being led away with the error of the wicked , fall from your own
stedfastness . " WOLLASTON-1793-1,1.7

The things of which the Apostle here speaks , are , the <font> certain
assurance of Christ's coming to judgement <$$font> , together with the
<font> dissolution of this world we now inhabit . <$$font> An awful
subject ! and highly deserving of serious meditation !
WOLLASTON-1793-1,1.8

The Apostle , when he wrote this , was advanced in years ;
WOLLASTON-1793-1,1.9

and knew , from the mouth of our Lord himself , that he was shortly to
suffer martyrdom for the testimony which he bore to Christ .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,1.10

This Epistle therefore may be considered as a farewell to those who had
embraced Christianity ; <P_2> to exhort them to continue stedfast in the
<font> practice <$$font> as well as the <font> profession <$$font> of it
: warning them of false teachers who would arise in the bosom of the
Church of Christ , and introduce erroneous doctrines into it ; as also ,
that " in the last days " there would be " scoffers , walking after
their own lusts ; " who would blaspheme and deride Christianity , and
set it at nought . WOLLASTON-1793-1,2.11

But he assures them , that the word of God is true , and will be
verified in its time ; and the threats and the promises of the Gospel
will punctually be fulfilled . Whereupon he concludes with exhorting
them , in the words of my text , " Ye therefore beloved , seeing ye know
these things already , beware , lest ye also , being led away with the
error of the wicked , fall from your own stedfastness . "
WOLLASTON-1793-1,2.12

The same which the Apostle here says to them , it should seem may
without any forced construction be said by your Pastor , on the solemn
occasion of this Day , to you . WOLLASTON-1793-1,2.13

Though far inferior to the Apostle in gifts , or knowledge of what may
be the designs of the Almighty ; yet , as a veteran in your service ,
who feels daily the weakness of declining years , and that he must not
expect to be able often to address you more from hence ; he thinks he
can@ @not in any way better employ the <P_3> present opportunity , than
by taking the frame of this Epistle for his model , and speaking freely
to you : recalling to your minds the principal points of that , which ,
during above twenty years close attention to you and watching over you ,
he has endeavoured to inculcate ; warning you of what is to come upon
the world in due time ; and cautioning you , " lest , being led astray "
by the error of the wicked , you should fall from your stedfastness in
the belief of the Gospel promises ; and fail of that blessed hope , to
which while strength has lasted he has endeavored to conduct you .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,3.14

What is now coming upon the world , no man can tell .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,3.15

That the times are perillous , beyond what imagination could have
conceived possible , we all know . WOLLASTON-1793-1,3.16

Let us try , whether we may not be awakened thereby to a proper
consideration of our true interests . WOLLASTON-1793-1,3.17

The General Instruction you have received , during the time I have had
the happiness of being set over you , has been , the grounding you well
in the Fundamental <font> Truths <$$font> of Christianity , and the
<font> Practice <$$font> resulting from them . WOLLASTON-1793-1,3.18

I mean , the being of a God ; his creation of the whole world ; and his
providential care of it , and of every individual in it : the
Revelations he has made of himself and of his will to mankind ; to Adam
, to the Patriarchs , to the Israelites or Jews by Moses , <P_4> and
last of all by Jesus Christ his Son ; whom he sent in the nature and
form of mortal man , to redeem mankind from sin and from death ; to
proclaim pardon to us all , on repentance and amendment of life ; to
assure us , through faith in him , of a resurrection to eternal life ;
and to eternal happiness in that life , provided we exert our endeavors
to live in obedience to his commands during our continuance here ; and
with a promise , that we shall receive the assistance of God's holy
Spirit , if we seek and ask it , to help our infirmities , and enable us
to do what He expects us to strive to perform . WOLLASTON-1793-1,4.19

These things , you all know , have been again and again inculcated ; as
the great guide to our behaviour , the foundation of all our hope .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,4.20

And though practical Duties have been often the subject of our
Discourses in this place , as the end to which all knowledge ought to
lead ; however consonant they be with pure morality , you know they have
always been enforced upon you on Gospel principles , as declared by the
revealed will of God . WOLLASTON-1793-1,4.21

Morality alone , however agreeable to man's reason , and the feelings of
right and wrong impressed on the human heart , can@ @not inspire such
assured confidence as what we have received from the Declarations of the
Almighty . WOLLASTON-1793-1,4.22

It is from Him , and him alone , we can know with <P_5> any certainty
that there will be another life after this . WOLLASTON-1793-1,5.23

However the reasoning of man might have led him to such a hope ; that
hope was faint indeed before the coming of Jesus Christ .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,5.24

However true it be , that the Jews might have deduced it from some
passages of those holy writings which were in their hands ; even their
knowledge of it was mixed with uncertainty , till it was declared to man
, as it was purchased for man , by Jesus Christ . WOLLASTON-1793-1,5.25

From him and his Apostles we have learnt , whence sin came into the
world , and wherefore death ; how pardon was obtained for us ; and that
another life is intended for us , wherein each person will be
recompensed according to his deserving here . An object this , to which
to look forward with earnestness ; a Goal to which to contend with all
our might . WOLLASTON-1793-1,5.26

This therefore it has been the drift of all the instruction you have had
from me , to lay fairly and fully before you ; and to impress well these
eternal truths , not only on your minds , but your hearts too :
WOLLASTON-1793-1,5.27

and you well know that no exertions have been spared to enforce them :
that , " having escaped the corruption that is in the world , you might
secure to yourselves an entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ . " WOLLASTON-1793-1,5.28

This I will assure you has been <P_6> my endeavor for you :
WOLLASTON-1793-1,6.29

and therefore you now " are put in remembrance of them . "
WOLLASTON-1793-1,6.30

In the general turn of the Discourses you have had here , it may have
been observed , that very seldom any thing has been advanced upon
speculative points in divinity ; or the controversies which have divided
the Church of Christ under the name of Heresy . WOLLASTON-1793-1,6.31

This , I will confess , has always studiously been avoided before you .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,6.32

Our office is to teach Christianity ; pure Christianity , such as we
find it in the Holy Scriptures , and not in the interpretations of
fallible men . WOLLASTON-1793-1,6.33

And your time as well as ours is far better employed , in searching
after clear and certain and practical truths , and laying them up in
memory ; than in any abstruse doctrines whatsoever .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,6.34

Indeed , before a mixed congregation , the more carefully erroneous
doctrines are kept out of sight , the better it is for the generality of
hearers . WOLLASTON-1793-1,6.35

The errors of other Churches have incidentally been mentioned , so far
as they affect practice ; but no farther . WOLLASTON-1793-1,6.36

And you know , you have always been cautioned at the same time , against
any asperity or sharpness towards those of any communion differing from
our own . WOLLASTON-1793-1,6.37

<P_7>

Against the Enthusiasm of the Methodists you have been cautioned from
time to time , lest you be misled thereby in respect of your conduct ,
or rendered unhappy in your minds . WOLLASTON-1793-1,7.39

So far as the Methodists are sincere , and zealous to inculcate what
they esteem right , we do not blame them : WOLLASTON-1793-1,7.40

In that respect they deserve commendation . WOLLASTON-1793-1,7.41

But we ought to blame those of them , and we do blame all those , who
are guilty of uncharitableness towards such as differ from them .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,7.42

Their inculcating the necessity of Faith or Belief and Trust in God ,
and in His having redeemed mankind by Jesus Christ , is certainly true
Gospel doctrine . WOLLASTON-1793-1,7.43

But their supposing that Faith alone is to save men , without a suitable
Practice in the conduct of their lives , is as certainly an Error :
which will lead , and we see does lead some into the habitual practice
of vice ; from a supposition that on account of their profession of
Faith , they are secure of happiness eternal , however they may behave ;
and which does lead others of better disposition , into melancholy and
despair , and thence too frequently into absolute madness ; from their
not having presumption enough to pretend to feel what they do not feel ;
or enthusiasm enough to fancy they feel an assurance of their salvation
, which frail man can@ @not have . WOLLASTON-1793-1,7.44

<P_8>

Against the leading Errors of the Church of Rome you have been cautioned
; seldom by name , because I could wish you not to be uncharitable
towards them ; though once I gave you a series of discourses professedly
on that subject , at a time when it appeared necessary to lay their
Errors open before you . WOLLASTON-1793-1,8.46

Indeed against them , it is proper from time to time to caution mankind
: because that is a corruption of Christianity expressly pointed out by
Prophecy , as what was to arise in the Church of Christ , and what is to
continue for a certain specific term and no longer : a corrupt Church ,
from whose Communion God's " people " are exhorted to " come out "
before its destruction ; for that it should come to an end and be
destroyed with a signal destruction before the coming of Christ to
judgement . WOLLASTON-1793-1,8.47

Against your being misled by them , it has therefore appeared to be our
Duty to caution you . WOLLASTON-1793-1,8.48

But there is another Error against which our discourses have more
frequently been pointed ; because that appeared most urgent in these
days ; WOLLASTON-1793-1,8.49

I mean the fashionable Error of Unbelief . WOLLASTON-1793-1,8.50

Against that you know many and many a Discourse has been levelled : more
perhaps than some persons may have thought necessary in this place .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,8.51

But , <P_9> seeing the mischievous strides Infidelity had been making in
other countries , and the progress it seems to have had in this , made
me the more in earnest to counteract its baneful influence whereever my
weak endeavors could reach . WOLLASTON-1793-1,9.52

Though distressing it was to think , that the human mind should so far
debase itself , and depart from all sense of right , as in these
enlightened days to question the existence of a Deity , whose wonderful
works are better known than ever they were in former times ; little was
it to be expected that we should live to see the day , when Atheism is
publicly professed in an assembly of one of the most enlightened nations
, and received there with applause . WOLLASTON-1793-1,9.53

Though our endeavors have been to obviate the mischievous spreading of
the works of a voluminous French writer ; who manifestly not from
principle or conviction , but merely for the sake of applause , had been
sapping the foundation of Revelation ; little could it be imagined that
the day would come , when the ashes of that man should be brought in
triumph from a distant country , to be deposited in his native soil ,
whence he had been banished for unbelief ; and that a statue should be
erected to his memory in a temple , and venerated there with next to
divine honours . WOLLASTON-1793-1,9.54

Though I have been zealous to guard you against the contagion , which by
destroying <P_10> all the principles of religion , all hope of another
life , must tend to confound the distinction between right and wrong ,
and undermine the foundation of Government and good order among men ;
little was it to be expected we should see the day , when one of the
most polished , and seemingly most obsequious and best regulated of
nations , should become a pattern of Anarchy ; a horrid example to
mankind of cruelty and more than savage barbarity ; a Mark certainly of
the displeasure of the Almighty upon them , for their having cast off
all acknowledgement of Him . WOLLASTON-1793-1,10.55

It has been said repeatedly of late , that such great things are objects
of prophecy ; WOLLASTON-1793-1,10.56

and people have been disposed to search the scriptures , in order to
discover what is to be the issue of this unheard_of scene .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,10.57

That they are objects of prophecy , your Pastor will freely declare he
has little doubt . WOLLASTON-1793-1,10.58

Such things are not permitted without good reason :
WOLLASTON-1793-1,10.59

and as they are always known before to the Almighty , so they are often
declared before . WOLLASTON-1793-1,10.60

But the reason may not be to be discerned by us .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,10.61

The consequence to which any Prophecy points , is never to be discovered
till after the event . WOLLASTON-1793-1,10.62

The Captivity of the Jews in Babylon was declared by the Prophets before
it happened ; and <P_11> that it should last just seventy years :
WOLLASTON-1793-1,11.63

and Cyrus , by whom they were to be restored , was mentioned by name by
the prophet Isaiah near two_hundred years before his birth .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,11.64

Yet was the whole so involved in prophetic language , that Cyrus's entry
into Babylon , was as unexpected as the most unlikely thing that could
occur . WOLLASTON-1793-1,11.65

The Birth of Christ was repeatedly the subject of the prophetic writings
; WOLLASTON-1793-1,11.66

and various particulars were specified long before , which should attend
it : all which are clear to us now , but were not so to those who lived
before the time of their accomplishment . WOLLASTON-1793-1,11.67

The Destruction of Jerusalem was foretold by our Saviour himself :
WOLLASTON-1793-1,11.68

and certain signs were given to the faithful Christians , when to quit
the city : WOLLASTON-1793-1,11.69

but the infatuated Jews understood them not , WOLLASTON-1793-1,11.70

or would not pay attention to them ; WOLLASTON-1793-1,11.71

and many perished for their unbelief : WOLLASTON-1793-1,11.72

and at this day we behold their descendants , the remnant of them ,
wandering as vagabonds upon the earth now above
one_thousand_seven_hundred years : WOLLASTON-1793-1,11.73

and we know from the mouth of our Lord himself , that they will wander
in their dispersion , till towards the time of his second coming .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,11.74

<P_12>

The falling off from pure Christianity to Popery was declared in the
earliest days by St. Paul , and St. Peter , and more expressly by St.
John in the book of Revelation . WOLLASTON-1793-1,12.76

And another falling off to Mahometanism was intimated by him too .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,12.77

And it should seem as if each was to have its end after
one_thousand_two_hundred_and_sixty years <paren> a term specified by the
Prophet Daniel many ages before John . <$$paren> WOLLASTON-1793-1,12.78

Popery we see has arisen just as it was foretold it would ; and has
infected the Western world with its errors . WOLLASTON-1793-1,12.79

Mahomet has arisen , and misled the East with his false doctrines .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,12.80

And can we doubt that , when the time appointed arrives , both shall
cease ? WOLLASTON-1793-1,12.81

The Jews we see dispersed over every country ; a by-word and a proverb
every where : WOLLASTON-1793-1,12.82

Our Saviour declared they should . WOLLASTON-1793-1,12.83

And can we doubt but that they will be recalled , and restored , and
embrace Christianity , when the designs of the Almighty are fulfilled ?
when the times are ripe for it ? WOLLASTON-1793-1,12.84

" Scoffers , " St. Peter tells us , in the Chapter whence my text is
taken , " there will be in the last days , " who shall ridicule the
belief of Christ's coming . WOLLASTON-1793-1,12.85

Yet will he most certainly not <P_13> come the less assuredly for their
scoffing . WOLLASTON-1793-1,13.86

He will come , when it is seen fitting he should come .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,13.87

And Popery , whose seat St. John points out to be at Rome ; " that
great City which " at that time " reigned over the kings of the earth ;
" the " city seated on seven hills , " a name by which Rome was often
described by her own poets ; Popery will fall with a signal destruction
: WOLLASTON-1793-1,13.88

and God's people are called upon , to " come out of her , " " that they
be not partakers of her sins , and that they receive not of her plagues
. " WOLLASTON-1793-1,13.89

And Mahomet that false Prophet , will probably fall about the same time
, and be suffered no longer to deceive the world with his imposture .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,13.90

And the children of Israel , now dispersed over the face of the earth ,
will acknowledge Christ , and be restored to the holy city .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,13.91

And Christ himself will reign on the earth in righteousness .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,13.92

Then will there be as it were a " new heaven and a new earth wherein
dwelleth righteousness ; " and a new Jerusalem for God's elect ; for
such as have rendered themselves worthy , during their continuance here
, to be elect of God , and be made partakers of the first resurrection
in Christ's kingdom . After which , at the final consummation , <P_14>
all shall be raised ; and all shall be judged by Christ himself ; and
all shall be sentenced to happiness or to misery , according to what
they have done in the body , whether it be good or evil ; when Christ ,
having accomplished all things , shall " give up the Kingdom to God the
Father , " that " God may be all in all . " WOLLASTON-1793-1,14.93

Of the certainty of these things there can be no doubt .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,14.94

We read of them again and again in the holy Scriptures .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,14.95

" Heaven and earth may pass away ; " WOLLASTON-1793-1,14.96

but the word of God will not fail . WOLLASTON-1793-1,14.97

Yet , <font> When <$$font> these things are to come to pass , it is not
for us to know . WOLLASTON-1793-1,14.98

Though specified punctually as to the time ; and what by_and_by will be
known to have been so ; it is not given to us to understand it yet .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,14.99

That remains in the bosom of the Father . WOLLASTON-1793-1,14.100

While Popery continues , Christ will not come : WOLLASTON-1793-1,14.101

but the destruction of Popery may be sudden , WOLLASTON-1793-1,14.102

and may be followed immediately by his coming : WOLLASTON-1793-1,14.103

and we who are warned to " come out of that church , " ought not to
remain in her , nor to go over to her , nor to join in any of her errors
, lest we be partakers of her plagues . WOLLASTON-1793-1,14.104

While there are followers of Mahomet's delusion , it should seem Christ
will not come : WOLLASTON-1793-1,14.105

but their <P_15> destruction may and most probably will be sudden :
WOLLASTON-1793-1,15.106

and we , who have been made acquainted with the rise of that false
prophet , ought to beware of being seduced by his disciples , or
thinking too lightly of their errors . WOLLASTON-1793-1,15.107

We are told that the coming of Christ will be sudden ; when least
expected : WOLLASTON-1793-1,15.108

and we are bidden to watch . WOLLASTON-1793-1,15.109

We are commanded in all ages to live in expectation of it , to study the
prophecies , and to watch the signs : WOLLASTON-1793-1,15.110

but we are not to pretend to turn prophets ourselves ; nor to point
their meaning to this or that or another nation , this or that or
another year or even century of years . WOLLASTON-1793-1,15.111

When it shall please the Almighty Ruler to unfold the signs to us ; then
shall he that is of a willing mind to receive the doctrine , be shewn
its meaning , WOLLASTON-1793-1,15.112

and will profit from it himself , WOLLASTON-1793-1,15.113

and will be a blessed helper in explaining the true interpretation of it
to others : while , on the contrary , those who are reprobate and
alienated in their hearts from God , will be alienated in their
understandings too ; and will suffer justly for their unbelief ; because
they have wilfully despised the admonitions which God has given to the
world . WOLLASTON-1793-1,15.114

Thus far seems clear . WOLLASTON-1793-1,15.115

But , to what the present scene of things may tend , it is impossible to
guess . WOLLASTON-1793-1,15.116

It may be one of the preludes to the great catastrophe ; a fore-runner
not far distant . WOLLASTON-1793-1,15.117

<P_16>

But on the other hand , it may be one far off indeed .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,16.119

What is immediately to be ascribed to it , and it should seem with
little room for doubt , is , that the horrid scene displayed before all
our eyes in a neighbouring nation , is intended as a Warning to Mankind
: a Mark to shew to what a state of misery they reduce themselves when
they cast off all acknowledgement and dependance upon God .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,16.120

" When men choose not to retain God in their knowledge , " says St.
Paul , " he gives them over to a reprobate mind . "
WOLLASTON-1793-1,16.121

This we see now exemplified before our eyes . WOLLASTON-1793-1,16.122

And the Lesson we ought to learn from it , is , to <font> beware of
their errors . <$$font> WOLLASTON-1793-1,16.123

But there is another Topic calls for a few more words from us on this
day , by way of caution or admonition to you . WOLLASTON-1793-1,16.124

These people seem to answer in many particulars , to a description the
Apostle gives in the chapter before my text , of some , who , he says ,
" despise government ; WOLLASTON-1793-1,16.125

presumptuous , self-willed , they are not afraid to speak evil of
dignities : WOLLASTON-1793-1,16.126

but as natural brute beasts made to be taken and destroyed , they speak
evil of the things they understand not ; WOLLASTON-1793-1,16.127

and shall utterly perish in their own corruption ,
WOLLASTON-1793-1,16.128

and shall receive the reward of unrighteousness . "
WOLLASTON-1793-1,16.129

<P_17>

Whether this has any relation to them we can@ @not say .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,17.131

But this we may affirm : WOLLASTON-1793-1,17.132

these Atheistic philosophers , pretending to understand the nature of
Government beyond whatever has been known in the world , has certainly
led to the present scene of mischief . WOLLASTON-1793-1,17.133

Yet surely , far different in every branch of science is the Theory of
what an ingenious mind can frame , from what Experience will justify .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,17.134

The naturalist , the philosopher , the chemist , the farmer , may form
to themselves Theories very plausible and ingenious in their several
departments , WOLLASTON-1793-1,17.135

and what it might appear from speculation alone must be true :
WOLLASTON-1793-1,17.136

yet no sooner have they recourse to Practice , but experiment baffles
all their visionary schemes ; WOLLASTON-1793-1,17.137

and some unknown , or unseen , or unthought-of property , confounds the
whole . WOLLASTON-1793-1,17.138

The same it is in the art of Government . WOLLASTON-1793-1,17.139

So complex a System is not the production of a moment ; of one man , or
of one set of men ; but a work of <font> time . <$$font>
WOLLASTON-1793-1,17.140

The manners of a people must be consulted and taken into the accompt ,
before it can be said with any propriety what Form of Government is best
for them : WOLLASTON-1793-1,17.141

and their minds and their habits must be formed to receive it , and to
profit by it , before it can be beneficial to them .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,17.142

Government there must be in every Society , to form a Society ; and in
every nation , to form it into a nation ; WOLLASTON-1793-1,17.143

else <P_18> men are but a herd of brute beasts .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,18.144

Yet that Government which may suit one , will not suit another , till
the minds of the people become properly habituated to it .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,18.145

Indeed , it does not in general become us , the Ministers of Christ , to
discourse upon these matters in this place : WOLLASTON-1793-1,18.146

but on this occasion , it would misbecome us to be silent .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,18.147

In these times it behooves {TEXT:behoves} us to remind you , that
submission to Government is an ordinance of God .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,18.148

It is not for us to say , but that a nation may change its Form of
government if it be seen proper : WOLLASTON-1793-1,18.149

yet it is for us to say , that the people , if they consult their own
happiness , will not be hasty to desire a change ; that temperate and
gradual amendments are all that can be desirable ; that on any great
change , the interval of Anarchy is always far worse for the people ,
than the very worst of governments ; and that the common people , who
generally mean well , always find themselves at last the dupes of
aspiring leaders of faction . WOLLASTON-1793-1,18.150

These are truths , of which the page of History affords many an example
. WOLLASTON-1793-1,18.151

But at this day , when we ourselves behold the shocking effects of
Anarchy in our next adjoining nation : a nation florishing in arts and
opulence , sunk at once to wretchedness ; deluged in blood , through
their having listened to the plausible tale of the Philosopher , <P_19>
the speculative Theorist on Government ; can we of this nation , who
already sit happy under our own Vine and our own fig-tree as the prophet
expresses it ; we , who do feel our Persons secure from the oppression
of arbitrary power ; our Property our own ; not liable nor {TEXT:not}
possible to be wrested from us by violence , but the arm of Government
is always ready to defend it for the lowest individual among us against
the highest ? WOLLASTON-1793-1,19.152

shall we , who know our house to be our castle , as it has often been
called ; whose entrance we may shut if we please against every intruder
; shall we expose it to the demands of the licentious , who are
endeavoring to raise themselves on our ruin ? WOLLASTON-1793-1,19.153

shall we , who know that no assessments can be imposed upon the lowest
orders among us , but what must be laid in due proportion upon those who
appoint the assessment , and must be paid by them in like proportion too
; and that therefore , if there were not other reasons , it is best for
the lowest , that property should be the measure of the ruling powers ?
shall we , who already have a Government , long since the envy of other
nations ; formed gradually from the experience of centuries ; and
adapted to the turn of the people , and the turn of the people and
<P_20> their minds and their habits long adapted to it ; a Government ,
under which this nation has thriven so exceedingly , and become in
wealth and importance one of the first of nations ; - Shall we barter
all these solid advantages , all this fair inheritance , for a vision ?
an ideal scheme of perfection ? WOLLASTON-1793-1,20.154

We who are free-born , shall we cast away our birth-rights ; deluded by
the plausible tale of Atheistic Philosophers , who have these four years
been trying to form a Government they call perfect , and have in each
succeeding year made it worse than the preceding ?
WOLLASTON-1793-1,20.155

Shall we listen to these Infidels , who have brought their own country
to desolation , and have been striving with all their arts to reduce all
others to the same degraded level ? WOLLASTON-1793-1,20.156

shall we join hands with them ? WOLLASTON-1793-1,20.157

or shall we concur with a few licentious men among ourselves ? men of
unbounded ambition and desperate fortunes , who are practising every
artifice to checque the ardor of this nation , and the endeavors of its
Governors , towards stemming the torrent of Anarchy and licentiousness
gone forth on the continent ? WOLLASTON-1793-1,20.158

- Far be such a madness from an English mind . WOLLASTON-1793-1,20.159

As far be this from your thoughts , as the savage barbarity exercised
among them of late , is from the honest feelings of a true English
breast . WOLLASTON-1793-1,20.160

Cool and undaunted <P_21> courage to resist oppression , is the
character of this nation ; WOLLASTON-1793-1,21.161

but wanton cruelty is not . WOLLASTON-1793-1,21.162

Of the peculiar happiness under which we live at present ; having a King
on our throne , who is an exemplary pattern of religious and moral
conduct in himself ; a Father to his people ; whose study it is so to
govern them , as to make them happy ; I have said nothing :
WOLLASTON-1793-1,21.163

and scarcely know what to say in these days . WOLLASTON-1793-1,21.164

It is a blessing , for which we ought most certainly to be thankful to
the Almighty . WOLLASTON-1793-1,21.165

A reason it is , we all must sensibly feel , as at all times so
particularly in these distracted days , for grateful acknowledgement ;
and for rallying round the standard of a sovereign , so justly beloved ,
I might almost say adored by his people ; and for defending him to the
last drop of our blood against his secret as well as his open enemies .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,21.166

But - our neighbours ! They too had a King ! the most humane that ever
swayed their sceptre . WOLLASTON-1793-1,21.167

Born to tyranny if he so had willed , he studied to alleviate the
oppressions to which his subjects had long been inured , and to curtail
his own power for their advantage . WOLLASTON-1793-1,21.168

He summoned his people around him , to notify to him their wishes .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,21.169

They went beyond his : WOLLASTON-1793-1,21.170

yet he acquiesced ; and accepted WOLLASTON-1793-1,21.171

and swore to maintain a form of Constitution they themselves had framed
. WOLLASTON-1793-1,21.172

And now they have deliberately murdered him , for <P_22> what ?
WOLLASTON-1793-1,22.173

for having been true to the oath which they had themselves imposed upon
him ! WOLLASTON-1793-1,22.174

Be this a warning to us , to what lengths men can go when they cast off
all sense of shame . WOLLASTON-1793-1,22.175

Pretending to rights of their own , these Reformers forget the rights of
others . WOLLASTON-1793-1,22.176

May we beware of such reforms . WOLLASTON-1793-1,22.177

Yet , not content with the destruction of their own Country , the French
Reformers have erected the standard of Rebellion , and invited the
disaffected of all nations to flock to it . WOLLASTON-1793-1,22.178

Nay , we have seen them sallying forth in lawless bands , to different
countries ; professedly to overthrow all good order , and destroy all
good faith among mankind : driving the Magistrate from the seat of
Justice , the Priests from the altars of God ; declaring war , and
waging open war , against all laws , divine as well as human .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,22.179

Till this consummation of iniquity was <font> professed <$$font> , we of
this happy nation kept aloof ; not seeking to profit from the troubles
of others ; not wishing to add to their distress .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,22.180

But when they burst their own bounds , and began like a torrent to
overspread other nations ; when with insidious arts they were detected
in stirring up sedition among ourselves ; then it became necessary to
rouse the spirit of this nation , to defend her religion and her laws ;
and to arm herself against these invaders of <P_23> her peace .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,23.181

If ever war can be justified , surely the present is the case .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,23.182

We have armed , to defend ourselves against the aggressor .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,23.183

We have sallied forth , solely to rescue the oppressed from the
oppressor . WOLLASTON-1793-1,23.184

And , whatever the desperate Leader of a now unprincipled opposition may
assert ; or whatever obstacles the small remnant of his followers may
assist him in throwing in the way of Government ; we will say , we must
be bold to say on this occasion , that their conduct had shewn , and
does still shew , how necessary it was for Government to arm .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,23.185

Their own behaviour proves , how necessary it is to keep a watchful eye
over them , and over their traitorous {TEXT:traiterous} correspondence
with a faithless enemy . WOLLASTON-1793-1,23.186

In this confidence it is , the Justice of our cause , we are here
assembled this day , to implore the Divine assistance to our arms .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,23.187

And with humble confidence we surely may expect it .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,23.188

We have opened an asylum to the Ministers of their Altars whom
conscience has driven hither ; WOLLASTON-1793-1,23.189

and our purses have been opened to feed them ; though they are of a
persuasion contrary to our own , and though perhaps they may not always
have deserved it at our hands . WOLLASTON-1793-1,23.190

But , while we guard against their errors , Christianity , Protestant
Christianity , teaches us to do this . WOLLASTON-1793-1,23.191

We have received those of the Laity from among them who were heretofore
our enemies , so far as we dared ; - because they are <P_24> in distress
: WOLLASTON-1793-1,24.192

and we think we are obeying the commands of Christ our Saviour therein ;
WOLLASTON-1793-1,24.193

and we trust that it will have its reward . WOLLASTON-1793-1,24.194

We go not forth to battle to invade the rights of others ;
WOLLASTON-1793-1,24.195

but we are constrained to defend our own . WOLLASTON-1793-1,24.196

Our deluded neighbours have cast off all regard to the Deity :
WOLLASTON-1793-1,24.197

and thereupon we trust , that " the Lord our God , " in whom we believe
, " will save us from their hands ; that all the Kingdoms of the earth
may know , " and may acknowledge henceforth , " that He is the Lord ,
even He only . " WOLLASTON-1793-1,24.198

But , to conclude at last <paren> for I have been much longer than I
could have wished <$$paren> leaving , the Atheists , and the Licentious
, and the Insincere , to repent of their conduct , or to receive the due
reward of their deeds ; let me , as a Minister of God to you " beseech
you Brethren , by your hope in God ; by the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ , " which I know you all expect ; " and by our gathering together
unto him , " which is to be in its due time ; " that ye be not shaken in
mind , " as though there could be any doubt of Christ's having come to
redeem the world ; or of his being to come again to judge mankind ;
WOLLASTON-1793-1,24.199

" neither be ye troubled " at the thought " that the day of Christ may
peradventure be at <P_25> hand ; " WOLLASTON-1793-1,25.200

but " withdrawing yourselves from every " brother that walketh
disorderly , " may you so remember what you have been taught , and so
profit by it , as that the day of the Lord may not overtake you " like a
thief in the night ; " or surprize you unguarded , whenever it shall be
. WOLLASTON-1793-1,25.201

May you our dear children in the Lord hold yourselves always ready .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,25.202

" Seeing you know these things , may you beware , lest being led away
with the error of the wicked , you should fall from your own
stedfastness . " WOLLASTON-1793-1,25.203

Be true to yourselves : Be faithful to your King , to your Country , to
your God ; the God of the whole earth , the God of all peace and
consolation ; and may you " grow in grace , and in the knowledge and
love of God , and of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ . "
WOLLASTON-1793-1,25.204

<P_26_missing_in_electronic_edition>

<P_27>

<heading>

Sermon II . WOLLASTON-1793-1,27.208

Hebrews x. 23 . WOLLASTON-1793-1,27.209

Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering ,
WOLLASTON-1793-1,27.210

<paren> for he is faithful that promised <$$paren>
WOLLASTON-1793-1,27.211

and let us consider one another , to provoke unto love and to good works
. WOLLASTON-1793-1,27.212

<$$heading>

The letter which we have been commanded to read before you this day , in
behalf of a collection for the present maintenance of some of the French
Clergy , who through a principle of conscience have been driven from
their homes , is a call upon me to {TEXT:missing_"to"} speak to you on
that matter . WOLLASTON-1793-1,27.214

Though sensible of their distress , and pitying their situation , I have
been shy of bringing their case forward to your notice , till it was
judged proper to do it in this public manner throughout the <P_28>
kingdom . WOLLASTON-1793-1,28.215

Indiscreet zeal is often seen to be the cause of much mischief .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,28.216

And therefore , whatever it be that any person may choose to do in a
private way , for which he is accountable only to God and his own
conscience ; when he acts in a public capacity , he ought to consider
how far the public may be affected by any thing he undertakes , and to
conduct himself accordingly . WOLLASTON-1793-1,28.217

Of the troubles in which a neighbouring nation has for some years
unhappily been involved , I need say nothing at present : having entered
largely upon that subject , and full as much as could be proper for this
place , on a late occasion . WOLLASTON-1793-1,28.218

On the peculiar situation of their Clergy I then scarcely touched ;
since it seemed foreign to the purpose of that day .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,28.219

At that time they were only just so far mentioned , as affording one
ground of confidence we might entertain in the protection of the
Almighty , in that we had opened an asylum for them in their distress ,
though they are of a communion differing much from our own .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,28.220

But on that head , it seems now proper to discourse a little more at
large . WOLLASTON-1793-1,28.221

Their laboring under difficulties , is a call upon the true Christian to
relieve them , whoever or whatever they be , so far as in prudence he
may . WOLLASTON-1793-1,28.222

Yet the true Christian , who sees or thinks he discerns errors in their
Doctrine , will at the same time beware , how he suffers himself <P_29>
to be misled by them . WOLLASTON-1793-1,29.223

He will be cautious , lest the approbation he gives to their
conscientious conduct in respect of what they esteem right , should make
him inclined to adopt some of their errors , or to think of them with
indifference . WOLLASTON-1793-1,29.224

At least , it should seem but a necessary part of the Duty of a sincere
Pastor , at a time when he endeavors to move his Flock to the exercise
of charitable benevolence towards these clergy of the Romish Communion ,
to add a seasonable caution against the being led astray by them .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,29.225

It is one thing to shew Christian kindess towards those who differ from
us ; and quite another thing , to depart from the Truth ; or even to
waver from that steadfastness {TEXT:stedfastness} , with which every man
ought to maintain what he sees to be true . WOLLASTON-1793-1,29.226

In my late Discourse , I endeavored to recall to your memories the
principal heads of what , during several years ministration among you ,
had been inculcated : exhorting you to " beware , lest being led away
with the error of the wicked , you should fall from your own
stedfastness " in the belief and practice of true Christianity .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,29.227

The error against which that caution was more particularly levelled ,
was , the mischievous error of Atheism , which even the Romanists
themselves will join with me in calling , the error of " the wicked . "
WOLLASTON-1793-1,29.228

Against that , you know , I have repeatedly <P_30> been zealous , and
while breath lasts shall always esteem it my Duty , to caution you .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,30.229

And one principal drift of the discourse on that day , was , to point
out to your observation the horrid effects of Atheism riding triumphant
in an assembly of a neighbouring nation . Effects , which mark
certainly , if any thing can with confidence be declared a mark of , the
displeasure of the Almighty towards them for their having rejected all
acknowledgement of him . WOLLASTON-1793-1,30.230

" They did not choose to retain God in their knowledge ,
WOLLASTON-1793-1,30.231

and he has given them over , " as the Apostle says , " to a reprobate
mind . " WOLLASTON-1793-1,30.232

They are already feeling some of the consequences of it :
WOLLASTON-1793-1,30.233

and will thence by_and_by learn wisdom . WOLLASTON-1793-1,30.234

We may do it now . WOLLASTON-1793-1,30.235

And my endeavor on that day was , to point it out , and render it
visible to you . WOLLASTON-1793-1,30.236

But of a different kind is the caution I have now to give you .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,30.237

Though fully convinced , as I trust we of this place all are , of the
errors of Popery , and the truth of our Protestant profession ; and
though I must say that it would be wickedness in us , thinking as we do
, to go over to them ; far be it from me to say , or to think , or to
suffer you from any words of mine to think , that they , either their
Clergy or Laity , ought to be stiled <P_31> wicked in any degree ,
because they continue in it . WOLLASTON-1793-1,31.238

We may wonder at the delusion under which they lie ;
WOLLASTON-1793-1,31.239

and may pity them for not discerning their error : more epecially , if
we consider Popery , as in truth we must , to be a corruption of
Christianity ; pointed out by Prophecy as a corrupt Church , from which
the people of God are warned to " come out , " before its destruction .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,31.240

But , while its members continue under the delusion , and do not see it
in the light we do , there certainly is nothing of wickedness to be laid
to their charge for their continuing in it . WOLLASTON-1793-1,31.241

While they think it right , they most assuredly would be as much to
blame for quitting it ; as we , thinking as we do , should be if we were
to go over to it . WOLLASTON-1793-1,31.242

Among other things of which I reminded you on the late occasion , was ,
a series of Discourses delivered before you some years since , when an
alarm had gone forth in this nation as if Popery were gaining ground
among us . WOLLASTON-1793-1,31.243

After the ferment subsided , which indeed had gone far too great lengths
while it lasted , it appeared to me to be the Duty of a Rector towards
his Parishioners , to explain to them fairly the state of that matter .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,31.244

You know in general , during the whole of my <P_32> ministration among
you , I have cautiously abstained from the mention of any errors of any
people whatsoever , when that could be avoided .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,32.245

The inculcating of Gospel truths , as deduced immediately from the Holy
Scriptures , and guarding you against the deceitfulness of sin , I have
always supposed must be more generally beneficial to you .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,32.246

But at that time it appeared necessary , so far to depart from my
customary method of preaching , as professedly to enter upon that
subject ; and to let you know , what once was Popery , what is Popery in
these days , and what we mean by Protestantism .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,32.247

To that end , I gave you an historical account of the origin and rise of
the Papal power . How , from being merely Bishops of Rome , a principal
City , they had gained an ascendency over other Bishops , and become
temporal Princes : That from an ambition , not peculiar to these Bishops
of Rome but natural to man , they had taken advantage of the ages of
ignorance which followed the decline of the Roman Empire , to advance
their power ; and gradually had established many Practices in the church
, of which neither the Scriptures themselves , nor the example of early
ages give us any intimation , nor for which any authority can be traced
. WOLLASTON-1793-1,32.248

To recount even the principal {TEXT:pricipal} of them now , and argue at
all upon them , would <P_33> detain you too long ; though at that time I
endeavored to explain them to you . WOLLASTON-1793-1,33.249

Suffice it , for the present , to say , that Books being scarce , and
few persons able to read , what little learning there was in those days
, centered almost wholly among the Clergy ; and that they , living in a
profligate age , were not such patterns of righteousness , as Christian
Bishops and Christian Preachers should endeavor to be : That the Holy
Scriptures having been translated early into the Latin tongue , the
language then spoken at Rome , the Service of the church was in that
language too : and , as the Papal power extended itself over other
countries , the service of all the Western Church became {TEXT:become}
conducted in that language in every nation , though totally
unintelligible to the people . WOLLASTON-1793-1,33.250

This , among other things , as it took its rise from the authority of
the See of Rome , so it helped to increase that authority ;
WOLLASTON-1793-1,33.251

and enabled the Popes and their counsellors , to establish what
doctrines or what ordinances they saw convenient .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,33.252

The leading clue to this authority , and the predominant feature of it ,
was , the Infallibility of the Pope ; or at least of a council under his
direction : That he was the sole interpreter of Scripture ; and that his
decisions were never to be questioned . WOLLASTON-1793-1,33.253

By them , the Worship of the Virgin Mary , and of Angels , and of Saints
departed , <P_34> was introduced into the Church of Christ .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,34.254

By them the practice of erecting Images and Crucifixes was authorized ;
whence Image-worship or Idolatry became prevalent .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,34.255

Through them and their authority , the Eucharist or Lord's Supper , from
a reasonable service in Commemoration or Remembrance of Christ's death ,
became looked upon in a very different light ; the Bread or Water being
by them supposed converted absolutely into the real body of Christ , and
the wine as absolutely into his blood <paren> which they call
transubstantiation <$$paren> WOLLASTON-1793-1,34.256

and thereupon become objects of adoration . After which , as in the
Jewish and heathen temples , the beast sacrificed by their Priests , was
sacrificed for the People ; so Christ was considered in the Popish Mass
, as sacrificed anew for the living and the dead . Whence came repeated
Masses to be celebrated by their priests , though alone , for the people
absent ; and for the dead themselves , whose souls were supposed to be
relieved thereby from the pains of Purgatory . WOLLASTON-1793-1,34.257

And much profit arose to the Romish Clergy , from the donations of the
rich , for masses to be celebrated over their graves : Purgatory being
supposed by the Romish Church , to be an intermediate state of
punishment between death and the resurrection , from which the souls of
the faithful might be relieved by the prayers and <P_35> masses of the
living clergy . WOLLASTON-1793-1,35.258

From the idea of the mass being a Sacrifice , has arisen the custom , so
scrupulously observed in these days , of attending mass celebrated by a
Priest , as a sacrifice offered for the People present ; without their
ever participating of it themselves , or ever hearing or understanding
one of the words pronounced . WOLLASTON-1793-1,35.259

Hence arose also the custom , when the faithful Catholics do partake of
it , that they partake only of the bread and not of the wine ; the bread
alone being pretended sufficient for the Laity , while the wine is
reserved for the clergy . WOLLASTON-1793-1,35.260

From the assumed power of their infallible Popes , arose also the
practice of granting Indulgences for sins , to those who could afford to
pay for them ; the shameful traffic in which in those days , transferred
from one of the religious orders in the Romish Church to another , first
gave rise to the Reformation . WOLLASTON-1793-1,35.261

This transfer was seemingly a trivial circumstance in itself ;
WOLLASTON-1793-1,35.262

but , through the good pleasure of God , this it was which brought about
a great revolution in the Church of Christ . WOLLASTON-1793-1,35.263

An obscure yet learned Friar , of that order which though itself injured
, was led thereby to an inquiry into the authority by which it had been
appointed . WOLLASTON-1793-1,35.264

A young Pope then in the chair , who had set on foot that traffic on a
larger scale , to refill his coffers emptied by the encouragement <P_36>
he had given to the polite arts ; insensed at such inquiry by one so far
his inferior in rank , instead of soothing a dangerous opponent , as his
predecessors had done in similar cases , issued the thunder of
excommunication against Luther ; who being emancipated thereby from the
authority of the Church , prosecuted his inquiries with redoubled ardor
. WOLLASTON-1793-1,36.265

From one article , he proceeded {TEXT:proceded} to another ;
WOLLASTON-1793-1,36.266

and finding the then practice of the Church , very different indeed from
what Christ had taught , or the Scriptures authorized ; translated the
Holy Scriptures into his native tongue , WOLLASTON-1793-1,36.267

and invited all persons to compare the one with the other .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,36.268

The art of Printing then recently invented <paren> pointed out possibly
at that time to mankind by the Deity for that purpose <$$paren>
forwarded his hopes . WOLLASTON-1793-1,36.269

The Laity , from being unlettered , were then become learned , and
capable of examining for themselves . WOLLASTON-1793-1,36.270

Copies of the Holy Scriptures were now easily multiplied and dispersed ,
both in the original and the translation . WOLLASTON-1793-1,36.271

The Clergy could no longer keep mankind ignorant of what Christ really
had taught : WOLLASTON-1793-1,36.272

and from that time , the whole fabric of Popery began to totter .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,36.273

The Reformation spread on every side ; more particularly through Germany
where it first sprang up . WOLLASTON-1793-1,36.274

Many Princes of the Empire adopted it . WOLLASTON-1793-1,36.275

<P_37>

The Pope issued his censures against them . WOLLASTON-1793-1,37.277

They appealed from the Pope , to a Council . WOLLASTON-1793-1,37.278

A Council he refused to call . WOLLASTON-1793-1,37.279

Provincial Synods met to consider of the affair .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,37.280

At one of them , <paren> at Spire , 1529 <$$paren> where some Decrees
were made with which the Reformed could not comply , they protested
against the decrees , WOLLASTON-1793-1,37.281

and delivered their Protestation in Form ; WOLLASTON-1793-1,37.282

and from thence obtained the name of <font> Protestants . <$$font> A
name , by which the reformed have been called ever since : and in which
they glory . WOLLASTON-1793-1,37.283

To specify those decrees would detain us too long now .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,37.284

But , as I told you in one of those discourses , so it may be proper to
repeat that now , The great distinction between the Church of Rome and
those who protested , was at that time , and continues to this day , and
ought for ever to be kept in remembrance by those who call themselves
Protestants ; that the Papist or Roman_Catholic , derives the rule of
Faith and Practice from the Decrees of his Church ; the Protestant ,
from the word of God alone . WOLLASTON-1793-1,37.285

They keep the Scriptures in a learned language , WOLLASTON-1793-1,37.286

and as much as in them lies , restrain the Laity from the use of them ;
WOLLASTON-1793-1,37.287

and they celebrate divine service in an unknown tongue :
WOLLASTON-1793-1,37.288

we put the Holy Scriptures into the hands of the people in their own
tongue , WOLLASTON-1793-1,37.289

and celebrate divine service in their own tongue too .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,37.290

They esteem their Church and <P_38> its Rulers , infallible :
WOLLASTON-1793-1,38.291

We consider all men , and all Churches composed of Men , as fallible ;
WOLLASTON-1793-1,38.292

and apply to the Holy Scriptures , WOLLASTON-1793-1,38.293

and study the will of God in those Holy Scriptures which " were written
for our learning , " WOLLASTON-1793-1,38.294

and submit our understandings solely to what is clearly declared therein
. WOLLASTON-1793-1,38.295

This distinction I could wish you always to bear in remembrance , as the
reason for our departure from Popery , the ground of the hope that is in
us . WOLLASTON-1793-1,38.296

To say that Popery in these days is the same as it was in the days
before the Reformation , would not be doing justice to those who now are
of that profession . WOLLASTON-1793-1,38.297

Though their Doctrines have continued the same , and some of those we
esteem objectionable doctrines , have been authorized anew by a Council
held at Trent a few years after the Reformation ; yet certainly many
corrupt practices in the Church of Rome , were reformed then :
WOLLASTON-1793-1,38.298

and many , very many pious and learned men there have been , and still
are , members of that communion , and officiating ministers and
dignitaries in it . WOLLASTON-1793-1,38.299

True indeed it is , alas {TEXT:alass} too true , that the corruptions
retained in the Church , have given an advantage to the Infidel , to
argue from them against Christianity itself . WOLLASTON-1793-1,38.300

For , seeing so much of what we must allow to be absurdity in <P_39>
certain doctrines , and superstition in certain practices in that
communion , they have been too ready to accuse Christianity itself of
absurdity and superstition : to look upon it , or to represent it , as a
cunningly devised fable , for the benefit of the religious orders .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,39.301

And , from a pretended horror of the persecuting spirit , sometimes too
much encouraged by the Church of Rome , they have pleaded the cause of
heathenism as more tolerant . WOLLASTON-1793-1,39.302

This has been the favorite topic of many a celebrated writer of late
years . WOLLASTON-1793-1,39.303

And these have given birth to the spirit of Deism , and thence of
Atheism , which has gone forth and spread its baneful influence on the
continent , the sad effects of which we now deplore .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,39.304

Yet is Christianity itself , surely , not to be charged with the corrupt
doctrines or practices of any Sect of Christians whatsoever .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,39.305

Such as we find it in the Holy Scriptures , it is pure and peaceable ,
rational and consistent . WOLLASTON-1793-1,39.306

It is not involved in mysterious doctrines , nor burthened with
ceremonious observances . WOLLASTON-1793-1,39.307

It authorizes no persecution ; WOLLASTON-1793-1,39.308

but recommends universal charity or benevolence towards all .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,39.309

Of ceremonies , <paren> if they may be called ceremonies <$$paren> it
appoints but two : the form of admission into the profession of it , by
Baptism ; <P_40> and the Form of reminding us of that profession , and
declaring our continuance in it , by partaking conscientiously of the
bread and wine in the Lord's Supper : partaking of them both , ourselves
, in remembrance of Christ , who suffered once and but once for all
mankind , and rose again for all , and is ascended into heaven , whence
he will come again to judge all men . WOLLASTON-1793-1,40.310

If the Church of Rome pretends to sacrifice him afresh in their mass ;
the Church of Christ does not . WOLLASTON-1793-1,40.311

If the Church of Rome authorizes the worship of the Virgin Mary , or of
Angels , or of the Spirits of men departed ; the Church of Christ does
not : WOLLASTON-1793-1,40.312

nay one of his Apostles calls that a " departing from the faith . "
WOLLASTON-1793-1,40.313

If the Church of Rome allows of images , and worships them with incense
and adoration ; the Church of Christ does not : WOLLASTON-1793-1,40.314

the Apostle of Christ warns Christ's disciples to " flee from idolatry .
" WOLLASTON-1793-1,40.315

If the Church of Rome approves of and countenances monastic vows , or
enjoins celibacy on certain orders in her communion ; the Church of God
does not : WOLLASTON-1793-1,40.316

the Apostle of Christ considers the " forbidding to marry " as a "
giving heed to seducing spirits . " WOLLASTON-1793-1,40.317

If the head of the Church of Rome claims to be lord of the faith of
Christians , the Apostles themselves disclaim any such authority .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,40.318

Early practice <P_41> seems to countenance the setting apart of an order
of men , for teaching Christianity , and for exhorting men to the
profession and practice of it ; WOLLASTON-1793-1,41.319

but authority over the faithful they had none : WOLLASTON-1793-1,41.320

much less had they , or did they claim , any authority to persecute
those who differed from them . WOLLASTON-1793-1,41.321

Yet in this last respect , those who separated from the Church of Rome ,
have alas {TEXT:alass} shewn themselves too much disposed to follow them
. WOLLASTON-1793-1,41.322

Eager in the defense of what they esteemed right , Protestants of every
denomination , have specified their tenets more particularly , and
thereby rendered the terms of communion with them more narrow , than
perhaps was necessary ; WOLLASTON-1793-1,41.323

and each has certainly been more than enough eager to maintain their
respective opinions by persecuting others . An Error , natural perhaps
to man : certainly not peculiar to one sect or another sect of
Christians : practised under Popery , and retained by Protestants ,
without considering sufficiently , that it is really a departure from
the plea on which they can justify their separation from the Church of
Rome . WOLLASTON-1793-1,41.324

In this nation , from various causes which need not be recounted now ,
the fear of a return to Popery was predominant : to which , the support
a Popish Pretender to the crown of these kingdoms received from the
court of Rome , added a farther cause , for laying very severe
restraints upon every <P_42> member of that communion .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,42.325

The troubles of the last century , gave occasion for rigorous laws
against the Protestant Dissenters too . WOLLASTON-1793-1,42.326

In respect of each , it must be allowed , that some of the severities
towards either of them , were scarcely to be justified .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,42.327

However ; be that as it may : WOLLASTON-1793-1,42.328

the most severe of our laws have of late years been moderated , and
lately been taken off from each : WOLLASTON-1793-1,42.329

and some others may be in contemplation , if an over_eager blending of
religion with politics on their parts , does not make it be thought
necessary to retain , what would gladly be forgotten ; and , if it might
with safety , would gladly be obliterated . WOLLASTON-1793-1,42.330

It is but of late , very late years indeed , that the nature of
Christian Toleration has been rightly understood :
WOLLASTON-1793-1,42.331

and some may have to learn it yet . WOLLASTON-1793-1,42.332

But , seeing it is impossible to bring men to be entirely of one mind on
any subject whatsoever , it is surely in vain to look for it , or to
attempt it , in respect of religion . WOLLASTON-1793-1,42.333

Nay , since religion , if a man be sincere , must be next to his heart ;
and every man must believe according to the conviction of his own , not
another's , understanding ; and must be zealous to worship God
accordingly ; the Ruling Powers of a state , can have no right to
abridge any man of the liberty of so doing ; nor to lay any restraints
upon him on that account ; <P_43> excepting when , under the pretense of
religion , the principles he avows interfere with the concerns of the
state . WOLLASTON-1793-1,43.334

This seems to be pretty generally acknowledged among us now .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,43.335

And though some there may still be on one side , who are for keeping up
harsh laws ; and some on the other , for laying unlimited claim to a
civil allowance , which perhaps may be doubtful as to its consequences ;
yet every man of every persuasion is certainly now at free liberty to
worship God in his own way ; WOLLASTON-1793-1,43.336

and , if he does not interfere in the concerns of others , no one does
interfere with his . WOLLASTON-1793-1,43.337

On this presumption it is , that these French Clergy , whose cause we
plead before you this day , have trusted themselves among us .
WOLLASTON-1793-1,43.338

Though we , as Protestants , are far from wishing to receive any
emissaries from the Church of Rome ; <paren> and indeed against such
emissaries as should attempt to pervert our faith , it is apprehended
our laws continue still in full force <$$paren> ; yet we , as members of
the Church of Christ , protesting against the corruptions of the Church
of Rome ; and taking the Holy Scriptures for our guide for
{TEXT:missing_"for"} the rule of our conduct ; are ready to exercise
Christian benevolence to all men , even to an enemy , in distress :
WOLLASTON-1793-1,43.339

For so has Christ commanded . WOLLASTON-1793-1,43.340

