<BEGIN_wollstonecraft-1787-2>

<P_1>

<heading>

Thoughts on the Education of Daughters . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,1.4

The nursery . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,1.5

<$$heading>

As I conceive it to be the duty of every rational creature to attend to
its offspring , I am sorry to observe , that reason and duty together
have not so powerful an influence over <P_2> human conduct , as instinct
has in the brute creation . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,2.7

Indolence , and a thoughtless disregard of every thing , except the
present indulgence , make many mothers , who may have momentary starts
of tenderness , neglect their children . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,2.8

They follow a pleasing impulse , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,2.9

and never reflect that reason should cultivate and govern those
instincts which are implanted in us to render the path of duty pleasant
- WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,2.10

for if they are not governed they will run wild ; and strengthen the
passions which are ever endeavouring to obtain dominion -
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,2.11

I mean vanity and self-love . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,2.12

<P_3>

The first thing to be attended to , is laying the foundation of a good
constitution . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,3.14

The mother <paren> if there are not very weighty reasons to prevent her
<$$paren> ought to suckle her children . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,3.15

Her milk is their proper nutriment , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,3.16

and for some time is quite sufficient . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,3.17

Were a regular mode of suckling adopted , it would be far from being a
laborious task . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,3.18

Children , who are left to the care of ignorant nurses , have their
stomachs overloaded with improper food , which turns acid , and renders
them very uncomfortable . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,3.19

We should be particularly careful to guard them in their infant state
from bodily pain ; as their minds can then afford them no <P_4>
amusement to alleviate it . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,4.20

The first years of a child's life are frequently made miserable through
negligence or ignorance . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,4.21

Their complaints are mostly in their stomach or bowels ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,4.22

and these complaints generally arise from the quality and quantity of
their food . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,4.23

The suckling of a child also excites the warmest glow of tenderness -
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,4.24

Its dependent {TEXT:dependant} , helpless state produces an affection ,
which may properly be termed maternal . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,4.25

I have even felt it , when I have seen a mother perform that office ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,4.26

and am of opinion , that maternal tenderness arises quite as much from
habit as instinct . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,4.27

It is possible , I <P_5> am convinced , to acquire the affection of a
parent for an adopted child ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,5.28

it is necessary , therefore , for a mother to perform the office of one
, in order to produce in herself a rational affection for her offspring
. WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,5.29

Children very early contract the manners of those about them .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,5.30

It is easy to distinguish the child of a well-bred person , if it is not
left entirely to the nurse's care . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,5.31

These women are of course ignorant , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,5.32

and to keep a child quiet for the moment , they humour all its little
caprices . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,5.33

Very soon does it begin to be perverse , and eager to be gratified in
every thing . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,5.34

The usual <P_6> mode of acting is complying with the humours sometimes ,
and contradicting them at others - just according to the dictates of an
uncorrected temper . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,6.35

This the infant finds out earlier than can be imagined ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,6.36

and it gives rise to an affection devoid of respect .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,6.37

Uniformity of conduct is the only feasible method of creating both .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,6.38

An inflexible adherence to any rule that has been laid down makes
children comfortable , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,6.39

and saves the mother and nurse much trouble , as they will not often
contest , if they have not once conquered . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,6.40

They will , I am sure , love and respect a person who treats them
properly , if some one else does <P_7> not indiscreetly indulge them .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,7.41

I once heard a judicious father say , " He would treat his child as he
would his horse : first convince it he was its master , and then its
friend . " WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,7.42

But yet a rigid style of behaviour is by no means to be adopted ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,7.43

on the contrary , I wish to remark , that it is only in the years of
childhood that the happiness of a human being depends entirely on others
- and to embitter those years by needless restraint is cruel .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,7.44

To conciliate affection , affection must be shown ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,7.45

and little proofs of it ought always to be given -
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,7.46

let them not appear weaknesses , and they will sink deep into the young
mind , and call <P_8> forth its most amiable propensities .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,8.47

The turbulent passions may be kept down till reason begins to dawn .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,8.48

In the nursery too , they are taught to speak ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,8.49

and there they not only hear nonsense , but that nonsense retailed out
in such silly , affected tones as must disgust ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,8.50

- yet these are the tones which the child first imitates ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,8.51

and its innocent playful manner renders them tolerable , if not pleasing
; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,8.52

but afterwards they are not easily got the better of -
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,8.53

nay , many women always retain the pretty prattle of the nursery ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,8.54

and do not forget to lisp , when they have learnt to languish .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,8.55

<P_9>

Children are taught revenge and lies in their very cradles .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,9.57

If they fall down , or strike their heads against any thing , to quiet
them they are bid return the injury , and their little hands held out to
do it . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,9.58

When they cry , or are troublesome , the cat or dog is chastised , or
some bugbear called to take them away ; which only terrifies them at
first , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,9.59

for they soon find out that the nurse means nothing by these dreadful
threatenings . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,9.60

Indeed , so well do they discover the fallacy , that I have seen little
creatures , who could scarcely speak , play over the same tricks with
their doll or the cat . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,9.61

<P_10>

How , then , when the mind comes under discipline , can precepts of
truth be enforced {TEXT:inforced} , when the first examples they have
had would lead them to practise the contrary ?
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,10.63

<P_11>

<heading>

Moral Discipline . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,11.66

<$$heading>

It has been asserted , " That no being , merely human , could properly
educate a child . " WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,11.68

I entirely coincide with this author ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,11.69

but though perfection can@ @not be attained , and unforeseen events will
ever govern human conduct , yet still it is our duty to lay down some
rule to regulate our actions by , and to adhere to it , as consistently
as our infirmities will permit . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,11.70

To be able to follow Mr. Locke's system <paren> and this may be said of
almost all treatises on education <$$paren> the parents must have
subdued their own passions , <P_12> which is not often the case in any
considerable degree . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,12.71

The marriage state is too often a state of discord ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,12.72

it does not always happen that both parents are rational ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,12.73

and the weakest have it in their power to do most mischief .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,12.74

How then are the tender minds of children to be cultivated ?
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,12.75

- Mamma is only anxious that they should love her best ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,12.76

and perhaps takes pains to sow those seeds , which have produced such
luxuriant weeds in her own mind . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,12.77

Or , what still more frequently occurs , the children are at first made
play-things of , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,12.78

and <P_13> when their tempers have been spoiled by indiscreet indulgence
, they become troublesome , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,13.79

and are mostly left with servants ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,13.80

the first notions they imbibe , therefore , are mean and vulgar .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,13.81

They are taught cunning , the wisdom of that class of people ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,13.82

and a love of truth , the foundation of virtue , is soon obliterated
from their minds . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,13.83

It is , in my opinion , a well-proved fact , that principles of truth
are innate . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,13.84

Without reasoning we assent to many truths ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,13.85

we feel their force , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,13.86

and artful sophistry can only blunt those feelings which nature has
implanted in us as instinctive guards to virtue .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,13.87

Dissimulation and cunning will soon drive all other <P_14> good
qualities before them , and deprive the mind of that beautiful
simplicity , which can never be too much cherished .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,14.88

Indeed it is of the utmost consequence to make a child artless , or to
speak with more propriety , not to teach them to be otherwise ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,14.89

and in order to do so we must keep them out of the way of bad examples .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,14.90

Art is almost always practised by servants , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,14.91

and the same methods which children observe them to use , to shield
themselves from blame , they will adopt - WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,14.92

and cunning is so nearly allied to falsehood , that it will infallibly
lead to it - <P_15> or some foolish prevaricating subterfuge will occur
, to silence any reproaches of the mind which may arise , if an
attention to truth has been inculcated . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,15.93

Another cause or source of art is injudicious correction .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,15.94

Accidents or giddy tricks are too frequently punished ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,15.95

and if children can conceal these , they will , to avoid chastisement .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,15.96

Restrain them , therefore , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,15.97

but never correct them without a very sufficient cause ; such as a
violation of truth , cruelty to animals , inferiors , or those kind of
follies which lead to vice . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,15.98

<P_16>

Children should be permitted to enter into conversation ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,16.100

but it requires great discernment to find out such subjects as will
gradually improve them . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,16.101

Animals are the first objects which catch their attention ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,16.102

and I think little stories about them would not only amuse but instruct
at the same time , and have the best effect in forming the temper and
cultivating the good dispositions of the heart .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,16.103

There are many little books which have this tendency .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,16.104

One in particular I recollect : The Perambulations of a Mouse .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,16.105

I can@ @not here help mentioning a book of hymns , in measured prose ,
written by the ingenious author <P_17> of many other proper lessons for
children . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,17.106

These hymns , I imagine , would contribute to fill the heart with
religious sentiments and affections ; and , if I may be allowed the
expression , make the Deity obvious to the senses .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,17.107

The understanding , however , should not be overloaded any more than the
stomach . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,17.108

Intellectual improvements , like the growth and formation of the body ,
must be gradual - WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,17.109

yet there is no reason why the mind should lie fallow , while its "
frail tenement " is imperceptibly fitting itself for a more reasonable
inhabitant . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,17.110

It will not lie fallow ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,17.111

promiscuous seeds will be sown by accident ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,17.112

and they will shoot up <P_18> with the wheat , and perhaps never be
eradicated . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,18.113

Whenever a child asks a question , it should always have a reasonable
answer given it . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,18.114

Its little passions should be engaged . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,18.115

They are mostly fond of stories , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,18.116

and proper ones would improve them even while they are amused .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,18.117

Instead of these , their heads are filled with improbable tales , and
superstitious accounts of invisible beings , which breed strange
prejudices and vain fears in their minds . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,18.118

The lisp of the nursery is confirmed , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,18.119

and vulgar phrases are acquired ; which children , if possible , should
never hear . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,18.120

<P_19>

To be able to express the thoughts with facility and propriety , is of
great consequence in life , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,19.122

and if children were never led astray in this particular , it would
prevent much trouble . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,19.123

The riot too of the kitchen , or any other place where children are left
only with servants , makes the decent restraint of the parlour irksome .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,19.124

A girl , who has vivacity , soon grows a romp ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,19.125

and if there are male servants , they go out a walking with them ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,19.126

and will frequently take little freedoms with Miss , the bearing with
which gives a forwardness to her air , and makes her pert .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,19.127

The becoming modesty , <P_20> which being accustomed to converse with
superiors , will give a girl , is entirely done away .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,20.128

I must own , I am quite charmed when I see a sweet young creature ,
shrinking as it were from observation , and listening rather than
talking . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,20.129

It is possible a girl may have this manner without having a very good
understanding . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,20.130

If it should be so , this diffidence prevents her from being troublesome
. WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,20.131

It is the duty of a parent to preserve a child from receiving wrong
impressions . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,20.132

- As to prejudices , the first notions we have deserve that name ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,20.133

for it is not till we begin to waver in our <P_21> opinions , that we
exert our reason to examine them - WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,21.134

and then , if they are received , they may be called our own .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,21.135

The first things , then , that children ought to be encouraged to
observe , are a strict adherence to truth ; a proper submission to
superiors ; and condescension to inferiors .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,21.136

These are the main articles ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,21.137

but there are many others , which compared to them are trivial , and yet
are of importance . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,21.138

It is not pleasing to see a child full of bows and grimaces ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,21.139

yet they need not be suffered to be rude . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,21.140

They should be employed , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,21.141

and such fables and tales may be culled out for them as would <P_22>
excite their curiosity . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,22.142

A taste for the beauties of nature should be very early cultivated :
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,22.143

many things , with respect to the vegetable and animal world , may be
explained in an amusing way ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,22.144

and this is an innocent source of pleasure within every one's reach .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,22.145

Above all , try to teach them to combine their ideas .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,22.146

It is of more use than can be conceived , for a child to learn to
compare things that are similar in some respects , and different in
others . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,22.147

I wish them to be taught to think - WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,22.148

thinking , indeed , is a severe exercise , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,22.149

and exercise of either mind or body will not at first be entered on ,
but <P_23> with a view to pleasure . Not that I would have them make
long reflections ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,23.150

for when they do not arise from experience , they are mostly absurd .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,23.151

<P_24>

<heading>

Exterior Accomplishments . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,24.154

<$$heading>

Under this head may be ranked all those accomplishments which merely
render the person attractive ; and those half-learnt ones which do not
improve the mind . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,24.156

" A little learning of any kind is a dangerous thing ; "
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,24.157

and so far from making a person pleasing , it has the contrary effect .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,24.158

Parents have mostly some weighty weighty {COM:sic} business in hand ,
which they make a pretext to themselves for neglecting the arduous task
of educating their children ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,24.159

they are therefore sent <P_25> to school , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,25.160

and the allowance for them is so low , that the person who undertakes
the charge must have more than she can possibly attend to ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,25.161

of course , the mechanical parts of education can only be observed .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,25.162

I have known children who could repeat things in the order they learnt
them , that were quite at a loss when put out of the beaten track .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,25.163

If the understanding is not exercised , the memory will be employed to
little purpose . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,25.164

Girls learn something of music , drawing , and geography ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,25.165

but they do not know enough to engage their attention , and render it an
employment of the mind . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,25.166

If they can play over a few <P_26> tunes to their acquaintance ; and
have a drawing or two <paren> half done by the master <$$paren> to hang
up in their rooms , they imagine themselves artists for the rest of
their lives . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,26.167

It is not the being able to execute a trifling landscape , or any thing
of the kind , that is of consequence - WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,26.168

These are at best but trifles , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,26.169

and the foolish , indiscriminate praises which are bestowed on them only
produce vanity . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,26.170

But what is really of no importance , when considered in this light ,
becomes of the utmost , when a girl has a fondness for the art , and a
desire of excellence . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,26.171

Whatever tends to make a person in some measure independent <P_27> of
the senses , is a prop to virtue . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,27.172

Amusing employments must first occupy the mind ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,27.173

and as an attention to moral duties leads to piety , so whoever weighs
one subject will turn to others , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,27.174

and new ideas will rush into the mind . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,27.175

The faculties will be exercised , and not suffered to sleep , which will
give a variety to the character . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,27.176

Dancing and elegance of manners are very pleasing , if too great a
stress is not laid on them . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,27.177

These acquirements catch the senses , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,27.178

and open the way to the heart ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,27.179

but unsupported by solid good qualities , their reign is short .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,27.180

The lively thoughtlessness of youth makes every young creature agreeable
<P_28> for the time ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,28.181

but when those years are flown , and sense is not substituted in the
stead of vivacity , the follies of youth are acted over ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,28.182

and they never consider , that the things which please in their proper
season , disgust out of it . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,28.183

It is very absurd to see a woman , whose brow time has marked with
wrinkles , aping the manners of a girl in her teens .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,28.184

I do not think it foreign to the present subject to mention the trifling
conversations women are mostly fond of . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,28.185

In general , they are prone to ridicule . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,28.186

As they lay the greatest stress on manners , the most respectable
characters <P_29> will not escape its lash , if deficient in this
article . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,29.187

Ridicule has been , with some people , the boasted test of truth -
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,29.188

if so , our sex ought to make wonderful improvements ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,29.189

but I am apt to think , they often exert this talent till they lose all
perception of it themselves . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,29.190

Affectation , and not ignorance , is the fair game for ridicule ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,29.191

and even affectation some good-natured persons will spare .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,29.192

We should never give pain without a design to amend .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,29.193

Exterior accomplishments are not to be despised , if the acquiring of
them does not satisfy the possessors , and prevent their cultivating the
more important ones . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,29.194

<P_30>

<heading>

Artificial Manners . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,30.197

<$$heading>

It may be thought , that artificial manners and exterior accomplishments
are much the same ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,30.199

but I think the former take a far wider range , and are materially
different . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,30.200

The one arises from affectation , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,30.201

and the other seems only an error in judgment .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,30.202

The emotions of the mind often appear conspicuous in the countenance and
manner . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,30.203

These emotions , when they arise from sensibility and virtue , are
inexpressibly pleasing . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,30.204

But it is easier to copy the cast of countenance , than to cultivate the
virtues which animate and improve it . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,30.205

<P_31>

How many people are like whitened sepulchres , and careful only about
appearances ! WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,31.207

yet if we are too anxious to gain the approbation of the world , we must
often forfeit our own . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,31.208

How bewitching is that humble softness of manners which humility gives
birth to , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,31.209

and how faint are the imitations of affectation !
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,31.210

That gentleness of behaviour , which makes us courteous to all , and
that benevolence , which makes us loth to offend any , and studious to
please every creature , is sometimes copied by the polite ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,31.211

but how aukward is the copy ! WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,31.212

The warmest professions of regard are prostituted <P_32> on all
occasions . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,32.213

No distinctions are made , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,32.214

and the esteem which is only due to merit , appears to be lavished on
all - WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,32.215

Nay , affection is affected ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,32.216

at least , the language is borrowed , when there is no glow of it in the
heart . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,32.217

Civility is due to all , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,32.218

but regard or admiration should never be expressed when it is not felt .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,32.219

As humility gives the most pleasing cast to the countenance , so from
sincerity arises that artlessness of manners which is so engaging .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,32.220

She who suffers herself to be seen as she really is , can never be
thought affected . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,32.221

She is not solicitous to act a part ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,32.222

her endeavour <P_33> is not to hide ; but correct her failings ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,33.223

and her face has of course that beauty , which an attention to the mind
only gives . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,33.224

I never knew a person really ugly , who was not foolish or vicious ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,33.225

and I have seen the most beautiful features deformed by passion and vice
. WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,33.226

It is true , regular features strike at first ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,33.227

but it is a well ordered mind which occasions those turns of expression
in the countenance , which make a lasting impression .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,33.228

Feeling is ridiculous when affected ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,33.229

and even when felt , ought not to be displayed .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,33.230

It will appear if genuine ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,33.231

but when pushed forward to notice , it is obvious vanity has rivalled
sorrow , <P_34> and that the prettiness of the thing is thought of .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,34.232

Let the manners arise from the mind , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,34.233

and let there be no disguise for the genuine emotions of the heart .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,34.234

Things merely ornamental are soon disregarded ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,34.235

and disregard can scarcely be borne when there is no internal support .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,34.236

To have in this uncertain world some stay , which can@ @not be
undermined , is of the utmost consequence ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,34.237

and this stay it is , which gives that dignity to the manners , which
shews that a person does not depend on mere human applause for comfort
and satisfaction . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,34.238

<P_35>

<heading>

Dress WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,35.241

<$$heading>

Many able pens have dwelt on the peculiar foibles of our sex .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,35.243

We have been equally desired to avoid the two extremes in dress ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,35.244

and the necessity of cleanliness has been insisted on , " As from the
body's purity the mind receives a sympathetic aid . "
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,35.245

By far too much of a girl's time is taken up in dress .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,35.246

This is an exterior accomplishment ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,35.247

but I chose to consider it by itself . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,35.248

The body hides the mind , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,35.249

and it is , in its turn , obscured by the drapery .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,35.250

I hate to see the frame of a picture so glaring , as to <P_36> catch the
eye and divide the attention . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,36.251

Dress ought to adorn the person , and not rival it .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,36.252

It may be simple , elegant , and becoming , without being expensive ;
and ridiculous fashions disregarded , while singularity is avoided .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,36.253

The beauty of dress <paren> I shall raise astonishment by saying so
<$$paren> is its not being conspicuous one way or the other ; when it
neither distorts , or hides the human form by unnatural protuberances .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,36.254

If ornaments are much studied , a consciousness of being well dressed
will appear in the face - WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,36.255

and surely this mean pride does not give much sublimity to it .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,36.256

<P_37>

" Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh . "
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,37.258

And how much conversation does dress furnish , which surely can@ @not be
very improving or entertaining . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,37.259

It gives rise to envy , and contests for trifling superiority , which do
not render a woman very respectable to the other sex .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,37.260

Arts are used to obtain money ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,37.261

and much is squandered away , which if saved for charitable purposes ,
might alleviate the distress of many poor families , and soften the
heart of the girl who entered in to such scenes of woe .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,37.262

<P_38>

In the article of dress may be included the whole tribe of beauty-washes
, cosmetics , Olympian dew , oriental herbs , liquid bloom , and the
paint which enlivened Ninon's face , and bid defiance to time .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,38.264

These numerous and essential articles are advertised in so ridiculous a
style , that the rapid sale of them is a very severe reflection on the
understanding of those females who encourage it .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,38.265

The dew and herbs , I imagine , are very harmless ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,38.266

but I do not know whether the same may be said of the paint .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,38.267

White is certainly very prejudicial to the health ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,38.268

and never can be made to resemble nature . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,38.269

The red , too , takes <P_39> off from the expression of the countenance
, WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,39.270

and the beautiful glow which modesty , affection , or any other emotion
of the mind , gives , can never be seen . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,39.271

It is not " a mind-illumined face . " WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,39.272

" The body does not charm , because the mind is seen , " but just the
contrary ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,39.273

and if caught by it a man marries a woman thus disguised , he may chance
not to be satisfied with her real person . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,39.274

A made-up face may strike visitors , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,39.275

but will certainly disgust domestic friends .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,39.276

And one obvious inference is drawn , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,39.277

truth is not expected to govern the inhabitant of so artificial a form .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,39.278

The false life with which rouge animates the eyes , is not of the <P_40>
most delicate kind ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,40.279

nor does a woman's dressing herself in a way to attract languishing
glances , give us the most advantageous opinion of the purity of her
mind . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,40.280

I forgot to mention powder among the deceptions .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,40.281

It is a pity that it should be so generally worn .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,40.282

The most beautiful ornament of the features is disguised , and the shade
it would give to the countenance entirely lost .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,40.283

The color of every person's hair generally suits the complexion ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,40.284

and is calculated to set it off . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,40.285

What absurdity then do they run into , who use red , blue , and yellow
powder ! WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,40.286

- And what a false taste does it exhibit ! WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,40.287

<P_41>

The quantity of pomatum is often disgusting .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,41.289

We laugh at the Hottentots , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,41.290

and in some things adopt their customs . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,41.291

Simplicity of Dress , and unaffected manners , should go together .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,41.292

They demand respect , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,41.293

and will be admired by people of taste , even when love is out of the
question . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,41.294

<P_42>

The Fine Arts . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,42.296

Music and painting , and many other ingenious arts , are now brought to
great perfection , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,42.297

and afford the most rational and delicate pleasure .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,42.298

It is easy to find out if a young person has a taste for them .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,42.299

If they have , do not suffer it to lie dormant .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,42.300

Heaven kindly bestowed it , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,42.301

and a great blessing it is ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,42.302

but , like all other blessings , may be perverted :
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,42.303

yet the intrinsic value is not lessened by the perversion .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,42.304

Should nature have been a niggard to them in this respect , persuade
<P_43> them to be silent , and not feign raptures they do not feel ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,43.305

for nothing can be more ridiculous . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,43.306

In music I prefer expression to execution .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,43.307

The simple melody of some artless airs has often soothed my mind , when
it has been harrassed by care ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,43.308

and I have been raised from the very depths of sorrow , by the sublime
harmony of some of Handel's compositions . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,43.309

I have been lifted above this little scene of grief and care , and mused
on Him , from whom all bounty flows . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,43.310

A person must have sense , taste , and sensibility , to render their
music interesting . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,43.311

<P_44>

The nimble dance of the fingers may raise wonder , but not delight .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,44.313

As to drawing , those can@ @not be really charmed by it , who do not
observe the beauties of nature , and even admire them .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,44.314

If a person is fond of tracing the effects of the passions , and marking
the appearances they give to the countenance , they will be glad to see
characters displayed on canvass , and enter into the spirit of them ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,44.315

but if by them the book of nature has not been read , their admiration
is childish . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,44.316

<P_45>

Works of fancy are very amusing , if a girl has a lively fancy ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,45.318

but if she makes others do the greatest part of them , and only wishes
for the credit of doing them , do not encourage her .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,45.319

Writing may be termed a fine art ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,45.320

and , I am sure , it is a very useful one .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,45.321

The style in particular deserves attention .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,45.322

Young people are very apt to substitute words for sentiments , and
clothe mean thoughts in pompous diction . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,45.323

Industry and time are necessary to cure this ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,45.324

and will often do it . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,45.325

Children should be led into correspondences , and methods adopted to
make them write down their sentiments , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,45.326

and <P_46> they should be prevailed on to relate the stories they have
read in their own words . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,46.327

Writing well is of great consequence in life as to our temporal interest
, and of still more to the mind ; as it teaches a person to arrange
their thoughts , and digest them . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,46.328

Besides , it forms the only true basis of rational and elegant
conversation . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,46.329

Reading , and such arts as have been already mentioned , would fill up
the time , and prevent a young person's being lost in dissipation ,
which enervates the mind , and often leads to improper connections .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,46.330

When habits are fixed , and a character in some measure formed , the
entering into the <P_47> busy world , so far from being dangerous , is
useful . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,47.331

Knowledge will imperceptibly be acquired , and the taste improved , if
admiration is not more sought for than improvement .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,47.332

For those seldom make observation who are full of themselves .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,47.333

<P_48>

<heading>

Reading . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,48.336

<$$heading>

It is an old , but a very true observation , that the human mind must
ever be employed . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,48.338

A relish for reading , or any of the fine arts , should be cultivated
very early in life ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,48.339

and those who reflect can tell , of what importance it is for the mind
to have some resource in itself , and not to be entirely dependant on
the sense for employment and amusement . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,48.340

If it unfortunately is so , it must submit to meanness , and often to
vice , in order to gratify them . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,48.341

The wisest and best are too much under their influence ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,48.342

and the endeavouring to conquer them , <P_49> when reason and virtue
will not give their sanction , constitutes great part of the warfare of
life . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,49.343

What support , then , have they who are all sense , and who are full of
schemes , which terminate in temporal objects ?
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,49.344

Reading is the most rational employment , if people seek food for the
understanding , and do not read merely to remember words ; or with a
view to quote celebrated authors , and retail sentiments they do not
understand or feel . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,49.345

Judicious books enlarge the mind WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,49.346

and improve the heart , though some , by them , " are made coxcombs whom
nature meant for fools . " WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,49.347

<P_50>

Those productions which give a wrong account of the human passions , and
the various accidents of life , ought not to be read before the judgment
is formed , or at least exercised . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,50.349

Such accounts are one great cause of the affectation of young women .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,50.350

Sensibility is described and praised , and the effects of it represented
in a way so different from nature , that those who imitate it must make
themselves very ridiculous . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,50.351

A false taste is acquired , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,50.352

and sensible books appear dull and insipid after those superficial
performances , which obtain their full end if they can keep the mind in
a continual ferment . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,50.353

Gallantry is made the only interesting <P_51> subject with the novelist
; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,51.354

reading , therefore , will often co-operate to make his fair admirers
insignificant . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,51.355

I do not mean to recommend books of an abstracted or grave cast .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,51.356

There are in our language many , in which instruction and amusement are
blended ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,51.357

the Adventurer is of this kind . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,51.358

I mention this book on account of its beautiful allegories and affecting
tales , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,51.359

and similar ones may easily be selected . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,51.360

Reason strikes most forcibly when illustrated by the brilliancy of fancy
. WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,51.361

The sentiments which are scattered may be observed ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,51.362

and when they are relished , and the <P_52> mind set to work , it may be
allowed to chuse books for itself , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,52.363

for every thing will then instruct . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,52.364

I would have every one try to form an opinion of an author themselves ,
though modesty may restrain them from mentioning it .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,52.365

Many are so anxious to have the reputation of taste , that they only
praise the authors whose merit is indisputable .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,52.366

I am sick of hearing of the sublimity of Milton , the elegance and
harmony of Pope , and the original , untaught genius of Shakespear .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,52.367

These cursory remarks are made by some who know nothing of nature , and
could not enter into the <P_53> spirit of those authors , or understand
them . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,53.368

A florid style mostly passes with the ignorant for fine writing ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,53.369

many sentences are admired that have no meaning in them , though they
contain " words of thundering sound , " and others that have nothing to
recommend them but sweet and musical terminations .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,53.370

Books of theology are not calculated for young persons ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,53.371

religion is best taught by example . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,53.372

The Bible should be read with particular respect ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,53.373

and they should not be taught reading by <P_54> so sacred a book ; lest
they might consider that as a task , which ought to be a source of the
most exalted satisfaction . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,54.374

It may be observed , that I recommend the mind's being put into a proper
train , and then left to itself . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,54.375

Fixed rules can@ @not be given , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,54.376

it must depend on the nature and strength of the understanding ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,54.377

and those who observe it can best tell what kind of cultivation will
improve it . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,54.378

The mind is not , can@ @not be created by the teacher , though it may be
cultivated , and its real powers found out .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,54.379

The active spirits of youth may make time glide away without
intellectual <P_55> enjoyments ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,55.380

but when the novelty of the scene is worn off , the want of them will be
felt , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,55.381

and nothing else can fill up the void . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,55.382

The mind is confined to the body , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,55.383

and must sink into sensuality ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,55.384

for it has nothing to do but to provide for it , " how it shall eat and
drink , and wherewithal it shall be clothed . "
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,55.385

All kinds of refinement have been found fault with for increasing our
cares and sorrows ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,55.386

yet surely the contrary effect also arises from them .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,55.387

Taste and thought open many sources of pleasure , which do not depend on
fortune . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,55.388

<P_56>

No employment of the mind is a sufficient excuse for neglecting domestic
duties , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,56.390

and I can@ @not conceive that they are incompatible .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,56.391

A woman may fit herself to be the companion and friend of a man of sense
, WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,56.392

and yet know how to take care of his family .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,56.393

<P_57>

<heading>

Boarding-schools . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,57.396

<$$heading>

If a mother has leisure and good sense , and more than one daughter , I
think she could best educate them herself ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,57.398

but as many family reasons render it necessary sometimes to send them
from home , boarding-schools are fixed on .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,57.399

I must own it is my opinion , that the manners are too much attended to
in all schools ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,57.400

and in the nature of things it can@ @not be otherwise , as the
reputation of the house depends upon it , and most people can judge of
them . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,57.401

The temper is neglected , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,57.402

the same lessons are taught to all , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,57.403

and some get a smattering <P_58> of things they have not capacity ever
to understand ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,58.404

few things are learnt thoroughly , but many follies contracted , and an
immoderate fondness for dress among the rest .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,58.405

To prepare a woman to fulfil the important duties of a wife and mother ,
are certainly the objects that should be in view during the early period
of life ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,58.406

yet accomplishments are most thought of , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,58.407

and they , and all-powerful beauty , generally gain the heart ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,58.408

and as the keeping of it is not considered of until it is lost , they
are deemed of the most consequence . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,58.409

A sensible governess can@ @not attend to the <P_59> minds of the number
she is obliged to have . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,59.410

She may have been many years struggling to get established ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,59.411

and when fortune smiles , does not chuse to lose the opportunity of
providing for old age ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,59.412

therefore continues to enlarge her school , with a view to accumulate a
competency for that purpose . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,59.413

Domestic concerns can@ @not possibly be made a part of their employment
, or proper conversation often entered on .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,59.414

Improper books will by stealth be introduced , and the bad example of
one or two vicious children , in the play-hours , infect a number .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,59.415

Their gratitude and tenderness are not called forth in the way they
might be by <P_60> maternal affection . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,60.416

Many miseries does a girl of mild disposition suffer , which a tender
parent could guard her from . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,60.417

I shall not contest about the graces , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,60.418

but the virtues are best learnt at home , if a mother will give up her
time and thoughts to the task ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,60.419

but if she can@ @not , they should be sent to school ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,60.420

for people who do not manage their children well , and have not large
fortunes , must leave them often with servants , where they are in
danger of still greater corruptions . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,60.421

<P_61>

<heading>

The Temper . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,61.424

<$$heading>

The forming of the temper ought to be the continual thought , and the
first task of a parent or teacher . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,61.426

For to speak moderately , half the miseries of life arise from
peevishness , or a tyrannical domineering temper .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,61.427

The tender , who are so by nature , or those whom religion has moulded
with so heavenly a disposition , give way for the sake of peace -
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,61.428

yet still this giving way undermines their domestic comfort ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,61.429

and stops the current of affection ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,61.430

they labor for patience , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,61.431

and labor is ever painful . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,61.432

<P_62>

The governing of our temper is truly the business of our whole lives ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,62.434

but surely it would very much assist us if we were early put into the
right road . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,62.435

As it is , when reason gains some strength , she has mountains of
rubbish to remove , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,62.436

or perhaps exerts all her powers to justify the errors of folly and
passion , rather than root them out . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,62.437

A constant attention to the management of the temper produces gentleness
and humility , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,62.438

and is practised on all occasions , as it is not done " to be seen of
men . " WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,62.439

This meek spirit arises from good sense and resolution ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,62.440

and should not be confounded with indolence <P_63> and timidity ;
weakness of mind , which often pass for good nature .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,63.441

She who submits , without conviction , to a parent or husband , will as
unreasonably tyrannise over her servants ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,63.442

for slavish fear and tyranny go together . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,63.443

Resentment , indeed , may and will be felt occasionally by the best of
human beings ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,63.444

yet humility will soon conquer it , and convert scorn and contempt into
pity , and drive out that hasty pride which is always guarding Self from
insult ; which takes fire on the most trivial occasions , and which will
not admit of a superior , or even an equal .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,63.445

With such a temper is often joined that bashful aukwardness which arises
<P_64> from ignorance , and is frequently termed diffidence ; but which
does not , in my opinion , deserve such a distinction .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,64.446

True humility is not innate , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,64.447

but like every other good quality must be cultivated .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,64.448

Reflection on miscarriages of conduct , and mistakes in opinion , sink
it deep into the mind ; especially if those miscarriages and mistakes
have been a cause of pain - WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,64.449

when we smart for our folly we remember it .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,64.450

Few people look into their own hearts , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,64.451

or think of their tempers , though they severely censure others , on
whose side they say the fault always lies .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,64.452

Now I am apt to believe , that <P_65> there is not a temper in the world
which does not need correction , and of course attention .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,65.453

Those who are termed good-humored {COM:sic} , are frequently giddy ,
indolent , and insensible ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,65.454

yet because the society they mix with appear seldom displeased with a
person who does not contest , and will laugh off an affront , they
imagine themselves pleasing , when they are only not disagreeable .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,65.455

Warm tempers are too easily irritated . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,65.456

The one requires a spur , the other a rein .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,65.457

Health of mind , as well as body , must in general be obtained by
patient submission to self-denial , and disagreeable operations .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,65.458

<P_66>

If the presence of the Deity be inculcated and dwelt on till an habitual
reverence is established in the mind , it will check the sallies of
anger and sneers of peevishness , which corrode our peace , and render
us wretched , without any claim to piety . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,66.460

The wisdom of the Almighty has so ordered things , that one cause
produces many effects . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,66.461

While we are looking into another's mind , and forming their temper , we
are insensibly correcting our own ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,66.462

and every act of benevolence which we exert to our fellow-creatures ,
does ourselves the most essential services .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,66.463

Active virtue <P_67> fits us for the society of more exalted beings .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,67.464

Our philanthropy {TEXT:philanthrophy} is a proof , we are told , that we
are capable of loving our Creator . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,67.465

Indeed this divine love , or charity , appears to me the principal trait
that remains of the illustrious image of the Deity , which was
originally stampt on the soul , and which is to be renewed .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,67.466

Exalted views will raise the mind above trifling cares , and the many
little weaknesses , which make us such a torment to ourselves and others
. WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,67.467

Our temper will gradually improve , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,67.468

and vanity , which " the creature is made subject to , " has not an
entire dominion . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,67.469

<P_68>

But I have digressed . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,68.471

A judicious parent can only manage a child in this important article ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,68.472

and example will best enforce precept . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,68.473

Be careful , however , not to make hypocrites ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,68.474

smothered flames will blaze out with more violence for having been kept
down . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,68.475

Expect not to do all yourself ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,68.476

experience must enable the child to assist you ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,68.477

you can only lay the foundation , or prevent bad propensities from
settling into habits . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,68.478

<P_69>

<heading>

Unfortunate Situation of Females , fashionably educated , and left
without a Fortune . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,69.481

<$$heading>

I have hitherto only spoken of those females , who will have a provision
made for them by the parents . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,69.483

But many who have been well , or at least fashionably educated , are
left without a fortune , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,69.484

and if they are not entirely devoid of delicacy , they must frequently
remain single . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,69.485

Few are the modes of earning a subsistence , and these very humiliating
. Perhaps to be an humble companion to some rich old cousin , or what
is still <P_70> worse , to live with strangers , who are so intolerably
tyrannical , that none of their own relations can bear to live with them
, though they should even expect a fortune in reversion .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,70.486

It is impossible to enumerate the many hours of anguish such a person
must spend . Above the servants , yet considered by them as a spy , and
ever reminded of her inferiority when in conversation with the superiors
. WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,70.487

If she can@ @not condescend to mean flattery , she has not a chance of
being a favorite ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,70.488

and should any of the visitors take notice of her , and she for a moment
forget her subordinate state , she is sure to be reminded of it .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,70.489

<P_71>

Painfully sensible to unkindness , she is alive to every thing ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,71.491

and many sarcasms reach her , which were perhaps directed another way .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,71.492

She is alone , shut out from equality and confidence ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,71.493

and the concealed anxiety impairs her constitution ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,71.494

for she must wear a cheerful face , or be dismissed .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,71.495

The being dependant on the caprice of a fellow-creature , though
certainly very necessary in this state of discipline , is yet a very
bitter corrective , which we would fain shrink from .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,71.496

A teacher at a school is only a kind of upper servant , who has more
work than the menial ones . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,71.497

<P_72>

A governess to young ladies is equally disagreeable .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,72.499

It is ten to one if they meet with a reasonable mother ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,72.500

and if she is not so , she will be continually finding fault to prove
she is not ignorant , and be displeased if her pupils do not improve ,
but angry if the proper methods are taken to make them do so .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,72.501

The children treat them with disrespect , and often with insolence .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,72.502

In the mean time life glides away , and the spirits with it ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,72.503

" and when youth and genial years are flown , " they have nothing to
subsist on ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,72.504

or , perhaps , on some extraordinary occasion , some small allowance may
be made for them , which is thought a great charity .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,72.505

<P_73>

The few trades which are left , are now gradually falling into the hands
of the men , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,73.507

and certainly they are not very respectable .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,73.508

It is hard for a person who has a relish for polished society , to herd
with the vulgar , or to condescend to mix with her former equals when
she is considered in a different light . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,73.509

What unwelcome heart-breaking knowledge is then poured in on her !
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,73.510

I mean a view of the selfishness and depravity of the world ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,73.511

for every other acquirement is a source of pleasure , though they may
occasion temporary inconveniences . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,73.512

How cutting is the contempt <P_74> she meets with !
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,74.513

- A young mind looks round for love and friendship ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,74.514

but love and friendship fly from poverty : WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,74.515

expect them not if you are poor ! WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,74.516

The mind must then sink into meanness , and accommodate itself to its
new state , or dare to be unhappy . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,74.517

Yet I think no reflecting person would give up the experience and
improvement they have gained , to have avoided the misfortunes ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,74.518

on the contrary , they are thankfully ranked amongst the choicest
blessings of life , when we are not under their immediate pressure .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,74.519

How earnest does a mind full of sensibility look for disinterested
friendship , <P_75> and long to meet with good unalloyed .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,75.520

When fortune smiles they hug the dear delusion ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,75.521

but dream not that it is one . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,75.522

The painted cloud disappears suddenly , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,75.523

the scene is changed , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,75.524

and what an aching void is left in the heart ! a void which only
religion can fill up - WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,75.525

and how few seek this internal comfort ! WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,75.526

A woman , who has beauty without sentiment , is in great danger of being
seduced ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,75.527

and if she has any , can@ @not guard herself from painful mortifications
. WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,75.528

It is very disagreeable to keep up a continual reserve with men she has
been formerly familiar with ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,75.529

yet <P_76> if she places confidence , it is ten to one but she is
deceived . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,76.530

Few men seriously think of marrying an inferior ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,76.531

and if they have honor enough not to take advantage of the artless
tenderness of a woman who loves , and thinks not of the difference of
rank , they do not undeceive her until she has anticipated happiness ,
which , contrasted with her dependant function , appears delightful .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,76.532

The disappointment is severe ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,76.533

and the heart receives a wound which does not easily admit of a compleat
cure , as the good that is missed is not valued according to its real
worth : WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,76.534

for fancy drew the picture , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,76.535

and grief delights to create food to feed on .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,76.536

<P_77>

If what I have written should be read by parents , who are now going on
in thoughtless extravagance , and anxious only that their daughters may
be <font> genteelly educated <$$font> , let them consider to what
sorrows they expose them ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,77.538

for I have not over-coloured the picture . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,77.539

Though I warn parents to guard against leaving their daughters to
encounter so much misery ; yet if a young woman falls into it , she
ought not to be discontented . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,77.540

Good must ultimately arise from every thing , to those who look beyond
this infancy of their being ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,77.541

and here the comfort of a good conscience is our only stable support .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,77.542

The main business of our lives is to <P_78> learn to be virtuous ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,78.543

and He who is training us up for immortal bliss , knows best what trials
will contribute to make us so ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,78.544

and our resignation and improvement will render us respectable to
ourselves , and to that Being , whose approbation is of more value than
life itself . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,78.545

It is true , tribulation produces anguish , and we would fain avoid the
bitter cup , though convinced its effects would be the most salutary .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,78.546

The Almighty is then the kind parent , who chastens and educates , and
indulges us not when it would tend to our hurt .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,78.547

He is compassion itself , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,78.548

and never wounds but to heal , when the ends of correction are answered
. WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,78.549

<P_79>

<heading>

Love . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,79.552

<$$heading>

I think there is not a subject that admits so little of reasoning on as
love ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,79.554

nor can rules be laid down that will not appear to lean too much one way
or the other . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,79.555

Circumstances must , in a great measure , govern the conduct in this
particular ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,79.556

yet who can be a judge in their own case ? WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,79.557

Perhaps , before they begin to consider the matter , they see through
the medium of passion , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,79.558

and its suggestions are often mistaken for those of reason .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,79.559

We can no other way account for the absurd matches we every day have an
opportunity of observing ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,79.560

for in this <P_80> respect , even the most sensible men and women err .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,80.561

A variety of causes will occasion such an attachment ; an endeavour to
supplant another , or being by some accident confined to the society of
one person . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,80.562

Many have found themselves entangled in an affair of honor {COM:sic} ,
who only meant to fill up the heavy hours in an amusing way , or raise
jealousy in some other bosom . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,80.563

It is a difficult task to write on a subject when our own passions are
likely to blind us . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,80.564

Hurried away by our feelings , we are apt to set those things down as
general maxims , which only our partial experience gives rise <P_81> to
. WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,81.565

Though it is not easy to say how a person should act under the immediate
influence of passion , yet they certainly have no excuse who are
actuated only by vanity , and deceive by an equivocal behaviour in order
to gratify it . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,81.566

There are quite as many male coquets as female ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,81.567

and they are far more pernicious pests to society , as their sphere of
action is larger , and they are less exposed to the censure of the world
. WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,81.568

A smothered sigh , downcast look and the many other little arts which
are played off , may give extreme pain to a sincere , artless woman ,
though she can@ @not resent , or complain <P_82> of , the injury .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,82.569

This kind of trifling , I think , much more inexcusable than inconstancy
; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,82.570

and why it is so , appears so obvious , I need not point it out .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,82.571

People of sense and reflection are most apt to have violent and constant
passions , and to be preyed on by them . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,82.572

Neither can they , for the sake of present pleasure , bear to act in
such a manner , as that the retrospect should fill them with confusion
and regret . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,82.573

Perhaps a delicate mind is not susceptible of a greater degree of misery
, putting guilt out of the questions , than what must arise from the
consciousness <P_83> of loving a person whom their reason does not
approve . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,83.574

This , I am persuaded , has often been the case ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,83.575

and the passion must either be rooted out , or the continual allowances
and excuses that are made will hurt the mind , and lessen the respect
for virtue . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,83.576

Love , unsupported by esteem , must soon expire , or lead to depravity ;
as , on the contrary , when a worthy person is the object , it is the
greatest incentive to improvement , and has the best effect on the
manners and temper . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,83.577

We should always try to fix in our minds the rational grounds we have
for loving a person , that we may be able to recollect them when we feel
disgust or resentment ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,83.578

<P_84>

we should then habitually practise forbearance ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,84.580

and the many petty disputes which interrupt domestic peace would be
avoided . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,84.581

A woman can@ @not reasonably be unhappy , if she is attached to a man of
sense and goodness , though he may not be all she could wish .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,84.582

I am very far from thinking love irresistible , and not to be conquered
. WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,84.583

" If weak women go astray , " it is they , and not the stars , that are
to be blamed . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,84.584

A resolute endeavour will almost always overcome difficulties .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,84.585

I knew a woman very early in life warmly attached to an agreeable man ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,84.586

<P_85>

yet she saw his faults ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,85.588

his principles were unfixed , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,85.589

and his prodigal turn would have obliged her to have restrained every
benevolent emotion of her heart . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,85.590

She exerted her influence to improve him , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,85.591

but in vain did she for years try to do it .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,85.592

Convinced of the impossibility , she determined not to marry him ,
though she was forced to encounter poverty and its attendants .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,85.593

It is too universal a maxim with novelists , that love is felt but once
; though it appears to me , that the heart which is capable of receiving
an impression at all , and can distinguish , will turn to a new object
when the first is <P_86> found unworthy . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,86.594

I am convinced it is practicable , when a respect for goodness has the
first place in the mind , and notions of perfection are not affixed to
constancy . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,86.595

Many ladies are delicately miserable , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,86.596

and imagine that they are lamenting the loss of a lover , when they are
full of self-applause , and reflection on their own superior refinement
. WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,86.597

Painful feelings are prolonged beyond their natural course , to gratify
our desire of appearing heroines , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,86.598

and we deceive ourselves as well as others .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,86.599

When any sudden stroke of fate deprives us of those we love , we may not
readily get the better of the blow ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,86.600

but when we find we have <P_87> been led astray by our passions , and
that it was our own imaginations which gave the high colouring to the
picture , we may be certain time will drive it out of our minds .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,87.601

For we can@ @not often think of our folly without being displeased with
ourselves , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,87.602

and such reflections are quickly banished .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,87.603

Habit and duty will co-operate , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,87.604

and religion may overcome what reason has in vain combated with ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,87.605

but refinement and romance are often confounded ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,87.606

and sensibility , which occasions this kind of inconstancy , is supposed
to have the contrary effect . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,87.607

<P_88>

Nothing can more tend to destroy peace of mind , than platonic
attachments . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,88.609

They are begun in false refinement , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,88.610

and frequently end in sorrow , if not in guilt .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,88.611

The two extremes often meet , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,88.612

and virtue carried to excess will sometimes lead to the opposite vice .
Not that I mean to insinuate that there is no such thing as friendship
between person of different sexes ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,88.613

I am convinced of the contrary . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,88.614

I only mean to observe , that if a woman's heart is disengaged , she
should not give way to a pleasing delusion , and imagine she will be
satisfied with the friendship of a man she admires , and prefers to the
rest of the world . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,88.615

<P_89>

The heart is very treacherous , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,89.617

and if we do not guard its first emotions , we shall not afterwards be
able to prevent its sighing for impossibilities .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,89.618

If there are any insuperable bars to an union in the common way , try to
dismiss the dangerous tenderness , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,89.619

or it will undermine your comfort , and betray you into many errors .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,89.620

To attempt to raise ourselves above human beings is ridiculous ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,89.621

we can@ @not extirpate our passions , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,89.622

nor is it necessary that we should , though it may be wise sometimes not
to stray too near a precipice , lest we fall over before we are aware .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,89.623

We can@ @not avoid much vexation and sorrow , if we are ever so prudent
; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,89.624

it is then <P_90> the part of wisdom to enjoy those gleams of sunshine
which do not endanger our innocence , or lead to repentance .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,90.625

Love gilds all the prospects of life , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,90.626

and though it can@ @not always exclude apathy it makes many cares appear
trifling . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,90.627

Dean Swift hated the world , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,90.628

and only loved particular persons ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,90.629

yet pride rivalled them . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,90.630

A foolish wish of rising superior to the common wants and desires of the
human species made him singular , but not respectable .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,90.631

He sacrificed an amiable woman to his caprice ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,90.632

and made those shun his company who would have been entertained and
improved by his conversation , had he loved any <P_91> one as well as
himself . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,91.633

Universal benevolence is the first duty , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,91.634

and we should be careful not to let any passion so engross our thoughts
, as to prevent our practising it . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,91.635

After all the dreams of rapture , earthly pleasures will not fill the
mind , or support it when they have not the sanction of reason , or are
too much depended on . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,91.636

The tumult of passion will subside , and even the pangs of
disappointment cease to be felt . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,91.637

But for the wicked there is a worm that never dies - a guilty conscience
. While that calm satisfaction which resignation produces , which can@
@not be described , <P_92> but may be attained , in some degree , by
those who try to keep in the strait , though thorny path which leads to
bliss , shall sanctify the sorrows , and dignify the character of virtue
. WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,92.638

<P_93>

<heading>

Matrimony . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,93.641

<$$heading>

Early marriages are , in my opinion , a stop to improvement .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,93.643

If we were born only " to draw nutrition , propagate and rot , " the
sooner the end of creation was answered the better ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,93.644

but as women are here allowed to have souls , the soul ought to be
attended to . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,93.645

In youth a woman endeavours to please the other sex , in order ,
generally speaking , to get married , WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,93.646

and this endeavour calls forth all her powers .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,93.647

If she has had a tolerable education , the foundation only is laid ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,93.648

for the mind does not soon arrive at maturity ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,93.649

and should not be engrossed <P_94> by domestic cares before any habits
are fixed . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,94.650

The passions also have too much influence over the judgment to suffer it
to direct her in this most important affair ;
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,94.651

and many women , I am persuaded , marry a man before they are twenty ,
whom they would have rejected some years after .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,94.652

Very frequently , when the education has been neglected , the mind
improves itself , if it has leisure for reflection , and experience to
reflect on ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,94.653

but how can this happen when they are forced to act before they have had
time to think , or find that they are unhappily married ?
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,94.654

Nay , should they be so fortunate as to get a good husband , they <P_95>
will not set a proper value on him ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,95.655

he will be found much inferior to the lovers described in novels ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,95.656

and their want of knowledge makes them frequently disgusted with the man
, when the fault is in human nature . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,95.657

When a woman's mind has gained some strength , she will in all
probability pay more attention to her actions than a girl can be
expected to do ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,95.658

and if she thinks seriously , she will chuse for a companion a man of
principle ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,95.659

and this perhaps young people do not sufficiently attend to , or see the
necessity of doing . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,95.660

A woman of feeling must be very much hurt if she <P_96> is obliged to
keep her children out of their father's company , that their morals may
not be injured by his conversation ; WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,96.661

and besides , the whole arduous task of education devolves on her ,
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,96.662

and in such a case it is not very practicable .
WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,96.663

Attention to the education of children must be irksome , when life
appears to have so many charms , and its pleasures are not found
fallacious . WOLLSTONECRAFT-1787-2,96.664

