<BEGIN_wood-1864-2>

<P_26>

<heading>

Chapter III . WOOD-1864-2,26.4

Birds . WOOD-1864-2,26.5

<$$heading>

Birds - WOOD-1864-2,26.7

The Hawk Tribe - WOOD-1864-2,26.8

The Kestrel - WOOD-1864-2,26.9

Its Flight - WOOD-1864-2,26.10

Its Rapacity - Fondness of Human Society - WOOD-1864-2,26.11

Its peculiar Flight - WOOD-1864-2,26.12

Its Nest - WOOD-1864-2,26.13

The Owl Tribe - WOOD-1864-2,26.14

The Brown Owl - WOOD-1864-2,26.15

Its Habits and Mode of Nesting - WOOD-1864-2,26.16

The White or Barn Owl - WOOD-1864-2,26.17

How to encourage it - WOOD-1864-2,26.18

Its Food and Effect upon the Garden - WOOD-1864-2,26.19

The Goatsucker and the Benefit which it confers on Man -
WOOD-1864-2,26.20

Its various Names and their comparative Value - WOOD-1864-2,26.21

The Swallow Tribe - WOOD-1864-2,26.22

The House Martin - WOOD-1864-2,26.23

Its Habits and Mode of Feeding - WOOD-1864-2,26.24

Capriciousness of its Disposition - WOOD-1864-2,26.25

Its Nest and Young - WOOD-1864-2,26.26

The Wren - WOOD-1864-2,26.27

Its Habits and Value to the Garden - WOOD-1864-2,26.28

The Thrush and Blackbird - WOOD-1864-2,26.29

Their Depredations compared with their Services - WOOD-1864-2,26.30

The Stone of Sacrifice - WOOD-1864-2,26.31

The Rook - WOOD-1864-2,26.32

The great Controversy - WOOD-1864-2,26.33

The Scales of Justice - WOOD-1864-2,26.34

The Benefit of the Doubt - WOOD-1864-2,26.35

The Crow - WOOD-1864-2,26.36

Its Character and its Uses - WOOD-1864-2,26.37

The Starling - WOOD-1864-2,26.38

Its Services and their Wages - WOOD-1864-2,26.39

The Starling Tower - WOOD-1864-2,26.40

How to encourage the Bird - WOOD-1864-2,26.41

The Sparrow - WOOD-1864-2,26.42

The " Little Bird " Controversy , <font> pro <$$font> and <font> con
<$$font> - WOOD-1864-2,26.43

The Goldfinch and Chaffinch - WOOD-1864-2,26.44

Their Friends and their Enemies - WOOD-1864-2,26.45

The Bullfinch and its Habits - WOOD-1864-2,26.46

The Woodpecker - WOOD-1864-2,26.47

Its Food and Habits - WOOD-1864-2,26.48

The Wood-Pigeon . WOOD-1864-2,26.49

I can@ @not bring myself to believe that any bird ought to be ranked as
a foe to our gardens , WOOD-1864-2,26.50

and think that , at the worst , such birds as the bullfinch or the
wood-pigeon may be placed among the neutrals . WOOD-1864-2,26.51

In treating of the birds , therefore , I shall only mention a few
species , taking them as types of larger groups , and proceeding in as
systematic an arrangement as is possible . WOOD-1864-2,26.52

As a type of the hawk tribe , I have selected the Kestrel , because it
is at the same time one of the most familiar of the British hawks , and
one of our greatest though least obtrusive benefactors .
WOOD-1864-2,26.53

Just as the bat and the hedgehog rival each other in clearing the air
and earth of noxious insects , so do the weasel and the Kestrel vie with
each other in their pursuit of mice , the one hunting <P_27> them upon
the ground and the other sweeping down upon them from the air .
WOOD-1864-2,27.54

The Kestrel , or Windhover as it is often called , may be readily
distinguished from its relatives , such as the sparrow-hawk and the
merlin , by the peculiar character of its flight . WOOD-1864-2,27.55

It does {COM:picture_omitted} not flash along like the former bird , nor
skim along like the latter , WOOD-1864-2,27.56

but flies quietly for a little distance , WOOD-1864-2,27.57

and then hovers in the same spot , just as a kite remains fixed by the
opposing influences of <P_28> the string and the wind .
WOOD-1864-2,28.58

By the shivering movement of the wings and the force of gravitation ,
the place of the string is supplied , while the breeze against which the
bird is fluttering discharges its own office . WOOD-1864-2,28.59

The food of the Kestrel consists partly of the larger insects ,
especially the fat-bodied moths and the beetles , and partly - I may say
principally - of field-mice . WOOD-1864-2,28.60

It is to look out for these that the bird poises itself in so strange a
manner . WOOD-1864-2,28.61

Gifted , as are all the predaceous birds , with an eye that can be
changed at will from a microscope to a telescope , it is equally ready
to drop down upon some unhappy field mouse that is creeping along and
flatters itself that it is unseen , or to make a sudden dash at a
passing insect , seize it with a foot , and transfer the prey to its
mouth without taking the trouble to alight . WOOD-1864-2,28.62

Sometimes it will settle on the ground and devour grubs and caterpillars
, or even catch the earthworms and pull them out of their holes .
WOOD-1864-2,28.63

It is a remarkable fact , that the Kestrel , like the owl , prefers the
habitations of man to the open country ; WOOD-1864-2,28.64

and there is scarcely a village , or even a farm , that is not attended
by its Kestrels . WOOD-1864-2,28.65

Pretty birds they are , with their spirited little heads and glancing
eyes , the elegant form , the ruddy fawn , dotted with black , of the
back , and the pale streaked chest and under surface .
WOOD-1864-2,28.66

It builds its nests - I should rather say , it lays its eggs - on the
top of some tall tree , taking possession of the deserted tenement of
the common crow . WOOD-1864-2,28.67

It never seems to construct a nest for itself , WOOD-1864-2,28.68

but only squats , as it were , upon alien property . WOOD-1864-2,28.69

Mr. Waterton tried the experiment of turning a pair of crows out of
their nest in hopes that a Kestrel would take possession ,
WOOD-1864-2,28.70

and found that the vacant premises were occupied in less than a week by
a pair of these birds . WOOD-1864-2,28.71

In one year there were twenty-four nests of the Kestrels in the park
belonging to Walton Hall , so that if four young be allowed to each nest
<paren> which is the usual average , the fifth egg being often addled
<$$paren> , one_hundred_and_forty-four of these pretty hawks were at one
time flying about the demesne . WOOD-1864-2,28.72

<P_29>

{COM:picture_omitted}

By day the kestrel gives its aid towards thinning off the overflowing
numbers of the field-mice , WOOD-1864-2,29.75

and the Owls perform a similar service by night . WOOD-1864-2,29.76

The time has nearly passed away when the few species of Owl which still
linger in our island were the objects of universal dread and hatred .
WOOD-1864-2,29.77

I suppose that the only reasons for this widely-@ @spread feeling were ,
that the Owls have large eyes , that they fly by night , and frighten
silly people by their hootings , snappings , and hissings .
WOOD-1864-2,29.78

Even the little day-flying birds partake of the same feeling ;
WOOD-1864-2,29.79

and if you wish to have a complete Dutch concert of feathered songsters
, you need only take an Owl - any species will do - put it in a cage ,
hang the cage in the branches of a tree , and await the result .
WOOD-1864-2,29.80

In a very few minutes some inquisitive sparrow happens to perceive the
cage WOOD-1864-2,29.81

and goes to see what the strange object may <P_30> be .
WOOD-1864-2,30.82

On catching sight of the big round head and blinking eyes of the Owl ,
he sets up a screech loud enough to make him hoarse for a week .
WOOD-1864-2,30.83

Every bird within hearing dashes off to see what can be the matter ,
WOOD-1864-2,30.84

for the rough , grating cry of alarm is understood by all the feathered
nations , however different their language may be . WOOD-1864-2,30.85

In five or ten minutes there is an astounding uproar .
WOOD-1864-2,30.86

The birds are all horribly afraid of the Owl as it sits winking in a
puzzled manner on its perch . WOOD-1864-2,30.87

But they are also sensible of a kind of incongruity attending an Owl in
daylight , WOOD-1864-2,30.88

and can@ @not resist the temptation of pressing round the cage and
scolding the poor bewildered bird at the tops of their voices .
WOOD-1864-2,30.89

If , however , the Owl should happen to snap his beak , or to make a
quick movement , there is a sudden dispersion of his persecutors , who
dart off in every direction with cries of terror . WOOD-1864-2,30.90

Thus have I seen a crowd of impertinent street boys beleaguering an
arcade or church beadle , the big cocked hat and gold-handed gown being
to the boys , what the round head and staring eyes of the Owl are to the
little birds . WOOD-1864-2,30.91

Thus , when the beadle makes a rush at his tormentors , do they all
scatter themselves in fear of the uplifted cane , WOOD-1864-2,30.92

and in the like manner , alas ! do they reassemble and hover about him
, taking care to keep themselves just outside the boundaries which limit
his dominions and of which they are aware as well as himself .
WOOD-1864-2,30.93

There is hardly any little bird that makes more noise than the starling
on seeing the Owl , certainly no bird that runs away so fast or returns
so readily . WOOD-1864-2,30.94

All the British Owls feed chiefly on mice , although they occasionally
vary their diet with a sparrow or some such bird ; and at times seems to
prefer the larger insects , especially the beetles , to any other kind
of food . WOOD-1864-2,30.95

The different species of Owl take up different residences .
WOOD-1864-2,30.96

The Brown Owl , for example , or Tawny Owl as it is sometimes called ,
prefers to roost in hollow trees , WOOD-1864-2,30.97

and is so much attached to this particular residence , that unless it
can find a suitable residence it refuses to breed . WOOD-1864-2,30.98

Any one , however , who possesses a hollow tree in a tolerably quiet
locality , can mostly attract a pair of Brown Owls by scooping out
<P_31> the dead wood , fixing a convenient perch , and otherwise
attending to the wants of the anticipated guests . WOOD-1864-2,31.99

Mr. Waterton's plan of encouraging this species of Owl is excellent .
WOOD-1864-2,31.100

He begins by remarking that the Brown Owl can@ @not be expected to visit
any place where there is no wood , WOOD-1864-2,31.101

and then proceeds to say , that on examining the larger ash-trees a
particular fungus is sometimes seen growing on the trunk , yellow when
young and black when ripe . WOOD-1864-2,31.102

In process of time the fungus falls off , leaving a very faint mark to
show where it has been . WOOD-1864-2,31.103

But the fungus has absorbed into its own parasitical being the very life
of the tree , WOOD-1864-2,31.104

and the fresh , living wood has become dead , soft , and cork-like .
WOOD-1864-2,31.105

This dead wood may easily be removed with , a mallet and chisel , and
the hollow adapted for the use of the Owl . WOOD-1864-2,31.106

The tree will receive no harm , but rather benefit from the operation ,
as the whole of the diseased portion will be cut away , and the sound
wood removed from the influence of the decaying and therefore dangerous
part . WOOD-1864-2,31.107

The White , or Barn Owl , on the other hand , likes to settle itself
near man , WOOD-1864-2,31.108

and mostly fixes its domicile in some building . WOOD-1864-2,31.109

Old ruins and towers are very favourite localities for this Owl ;
WOOD-1864-2,31.110

and I have seen their simple nests placed in close proximity to a peal
of large bells , some of which were chimed daily , and others rung at
least once a week . WOOD-1864-2,31.111

Pigeons and jackdaws occupied the same tower , WOOD-1864-2,31.112

and all three species of birds lived together in perfect amity .
WOOD-1864-2,31.113

It is also fond of old barns , WOOD-1864-2,31.114

and is sure to select some spot just under the roof , where it may
remain in darkness even throughout the daytime and avoid the brilliant
light of day , which has so painful an effect on its enormous eyes .
WOOD-1864-2,31.115

The Owl makes no real nest , WOOD-1864-2,31.116

but merely deposits the eggs upon a thick layer composed of the rejected
bones , skins , and other indigestible portions of the prey which it has
eaten . WOOD-1864-2,31.117

When first rejected , these pellets , as they are called , look
something like small and very short sausages , WOOD-1864-2,31.118

and are wet and soft . WOOD-1864-2,31.119

Owing , however , to their structure , they rapidly become dry ,
WOOD-1864-2,31.120

and then break to pieces at a slight touch . WOOD-1864-2,31.121

I have now before me a box full of these pellets , which contain the
bones , skulls , and bits of <P_32> fur that once formed portions of
living mice , together with the elytra or shards of several beetles ,
and the bones , skulls , and feathers of sparrows and other little birds
. WOOD-1864-2,32.122

The eggs of the Owls should never be destroyed , as every Owl is worth
its weight in gold to all those who have an interest in forcing the
earth to yield her increase . WOOD-1864-2,32.123

If , in course of hunting about a barn , the nest of an Owl should be
discovered , by all means let it remain undisturbed .
WOOD-1864-2,32.124

There is no doubt concerning the proprietorship of the nest ,
WOOD-1864-2,32.125

for the eggs are very round , pure chalky white , and rough to the touch
, as if they had been powdered over with pounded egg-shells .
WOOD-1864-2,32.126

They are rather brittle of texture , WOOD-1864-2,32.127

and care should be taken that in handling them they are not broken .
WOOD-1864-2,32.128

Encourage the Barn Owl in every possible manner . WOOD-1864-2,32.129

If you have a barn or tolerably large outhouse , or , better still , a
piece of old ruin , it is easy to make a comfortable domicile for the
Owl , by reserving a hollow place about a yard square , shutting it well
out from light and the close proximity of man , and leaving a
moderate-sized aperture through it that the bird may gain admission .
WOOD-1864-2,32.130

You may be sure that before very long a pair of tenants will have taken
possession , and they will pay you such a rent as will reimburse you
a_hundred times for the pains you have taken to make their house
comfortable . WOOD-1864-2,32.131

The birds soon learn that they will not be molested , WOOD-1864-2,32.132

and will allow themselves to be inspected while in the nest , without
displaying any signs of discontent . WOOD-1864-2,32.133

Here they will bring up their little brood , WOOD-1864-2,32.134

and it is very amusing to watch the comical puffs of white down , with
disproportionate bills projecting from their heads , which call
themselves young Owls . WOOD-1864-2,32.135

The Barn Owl does not restrict itself to mice and small birds ,
WOOD-1864-2,32.136

but has been observed to aim at larger prey , and to carry away a
full-grown rat just after it fell dead from receiving the contents of an
air gun . WOOD-1864-2,32.137

It has also been detected in the act of catching fish , dropping
perpendicularly into the water and snatching up the scaly prey in its
claws . WOOD-1864-2,32.138

This species may be distinguished from all other British Owls by the
whiteness of its plumage . WOOD-1864-2,32.139

<P_33>

{COM:picture_omitted}

In the bird here figured we have another of our best garden friends ,
though , like the owl and many other benefactors , it has ever received
blame in lieu of praise , inspired fear instead of admiration ,
attracted hate rather than love , and been persecuted by the very
persons on whom it confers the greatest benefits . WOOD-1864-2,33.142

It is a most determined insect-hunter , its nocturnal habits enabling it
to chase and devour the insects which fly by night and remain hidden
during the day , and its huge mouth enabling it to seize those larger
insects which are most injurious to our gardens . WOOD-1864-2,33.143

Ocular demonstration of the services rendered by the Goatsucker is easy
enough . WOOD-1864-2,33.144

Walk out after dusk on a warm summer evening , WOOD-1864-2,33.145

take up your station against the trunk of a tree , or in some place
where your outline is masked by some natural object , WOOD-1864-2,33.146

and then wait quietly . WOOD-1864-2,33.147

The loud burr of the Goatsucker announces its coming ,
WOOD-1864-2,33.148

and perhaps it may fly along on its rapid wings , perch on a branch of
the very tree under which you are standing , and resume its
extraordinary cry . WOOD-1864-2,33.149

I know of nothing that can imitate this cry , nor of any sound to which
it can be rightly compared . WOOD-1864-2,33.150

In former days it was said to be like the humming of a spinning-wheel ,
WOOD-1864-2,33.151

but as I never <P_34> heard a spinning-wheel hum - and I think that
there are very few who have done so - the comparison carries no great
force with it . WOOD-1864-2,34.152

It certainly does appear to be the result of machinery rather than of
vocal organs forming part of a living being , WOOD-1864-2,34.153

for the sound is continued uninterruptedly for so long a period , that
no ordinary lungs seem to be capable of sustaining it without breaking
down . WOOD-1864-2,34.154

The Goatsucker is not very conspicuous while on the branches ,
WOOD-1864-2,34.155

for it does not sit crosswise , as is the habit of most birds , clasping
the bough in its claws , WOOD-1864-2,34.156

but places itself longitudinally , WOOD-1864-2,34.157

and there utters its strange cry . WOOD-1864-2,34.158

The feet of the bird are rather curiously formed , WOOD-1864-2,34.159

and are adapted for running along the branches , probably to enable it
to chase the beetles and other insects on which it feeds .
WOOD-1864-2,34.160

There is a curious lengthening of the middle toe , which has a comb-like
appendage attached to it , the use of which is not yet ascertained .
WOOD-1864-2,34.161

After sitting and buzzing for some time , the Goatsucker will start from
the branch and begin a circling flight around the tree , chasing the
cockchaffers , moths , and other nocturnal insects that love such
situations . WOOD-1864-2,34.162

As the body of the bird can be plainly seen against the sky , its
gestures are visible , WOOD-1864-2,34.163

and it is very beautiful to see the active bird dart through the air ,
with a flight that seems to combine the swiftness of the swallow with
the versatility of the bat , wheeling in graceful curves , sweeping
suddenly upwards and snapping up a passing insect , or reversing its
course and setting off in chase of some creature which has passed by .
WOOD-1864-2,34.164

The number of cockchaffers which it eats is almost incredible .
WOOD-1864-2,34.165

As the cockchaffer is one of our very worst foes to the garden , it will
be described in its proper place . WOOD-1864-2,34.166

Most farmers , however , are aware of the terrible damage which it does
during its three years of larval existence , and how it loses nothing of
its appetite in its perfect condition , but eats as voraciously as
before , stripping trees of their leaves as it had before robbed plants
of their roots . WOOD-1864-2,34.167

And , as the bird catches them just after their emergence from the soil
in which they have been hidden , it effectually prevents them from
depositing their numerous eggs , so that one cockchaffer <P_35> slain at
that time is equivalent to hundreds killed after the eggs have been laid
. WOOD-1864-2,35.168

This service alone , not to mention the quantities of the night-flying
moths devoured by the same bird , ought to give it its due rank among
the best of our garden friends , WOOD-1864-2,35.169

and should endear it to every one who cultivates even the tiniest patch
of ground . WOOD-1864-2,35.170

As it is known by different names in various parts of the country , I
will give a few of the titles which it bears . WOOD-1864-2,35.171

It is mostly called Goatsucker , from the ridiculous notion that it
sucks goats and cows , an idea which is equivalent to the pigeon's milk
so largely in demand on the 1st of April . WOOD-1864-2,35.172

Curiously enough , the Latin and Greek names of this bird are in
allusion to this fabled propensity . WOOD-1864-2,35.173

As it flies by night after the manner of the owl , and has , like them ,
soft plumage and enjoys nocturnal vision , it is called in some places
the Fern Owl , the Jar_Owl , or the Churn Owl , the two last titles
having also a reference to its cry . WOOD-1864-2,35.174

The resemblance of its note to the humming sound of a spinning-wheel is
expressed by the local name Spinner , which is given to it in some
places , WOOD-1864-2,35.175

and another common and very appropriate title is that of Nightjar .
WOOD-1864-2,35.176

The whole of the Swallow tribe , including the Swifts , Swallows , and
Martins , are of the greatest value to the gardener , performing by day
the task which the Goatsucker so successfully achieves by night , and
devouring insects from the early dawn until the shades of night have
closed upon the earth . WOOD-1864-2,35.177

Owing to their comparatively small size , they are not able to devour
insects of such dimensions as the goatsucker , WOOD-1864-2,35.178

but they quite equalize the benefit conferred upon us by the far greater
number of their victims . WOOD-1864-2,35.179

They are continually feeding , or carrying their prey to their young .
WOOD-1864-2,35.180

It is astonishing how large a number of insects can be captured and
carried off by a Swallow in a single journey . WOOD-1864-2,35.181

It catches the flies in its mouth , WOOD-1864-2,35.182

and packs them away in a kind of pouch formed under the chin , where it
presses them so closely that when the pouch is emptied the dead insects
roll out in a tolerably solid lump , just like currants from a barrel or
figs in a drum . WOOD-1864-2,35.183

<P_36>

In order to enable the bird to capture the swift-winged insects , the
mouth is made with an enormously wide gape , extending so far into the
head that when the bill is open , the bird looks as if the mouth had
been slit open with a knife . WOOD-1864-2,36.185

{COM:picture_omitted}

The species which has been selected for illustrating this group of birds
is a very familiar one , being the well-known Martin , that builds under
the eaves of our houses , and by some strange instinct has learned to
avoid the open country , and place itself under the protection of man .
WOOD-1864-2,36.187

Happily for itself , the popular superstitions have run in its favour
instead of against it , partly because its labours are more conspicuous
than those of the owl and goatsucker . WOOD-1864-2,36.188

It is thought a lucky omen for a house when the Martins build their
nests upon it , WOOD-1864-2,36.189

and as that little superstition has the effect of saving the life of a
pretty and most useful bird , I wish that it were extended to many more
members of the feathered tribes . WOOD-1864-2,36.190

<P_37>

To attract the Martin is not a very easy task . WOOD-1864-2,37.192

The bird is very capricious in its tastes , WOOD-1864-2,37.193

and will forsake one part of a building , and take to another , without
any apparent reason . WOOD-1864-2,37.194

That there must be some object in this apparent capriciousness is
evident from the fact that the whole colony is unanimous in the
accepting or rejecting of a particular wall . WOOD-1864-2,37.195

Generally the southern wall is rejected , probably because the hot beams
of the meridian sun might crack the mud-built nests , WOOD-1864-2,37.196

and the favourite point of the compass seems to be the northeast .
WOOD-1864-2,37.197

Yet the Martins have chosen the southern side of my own house for their
nests , WOOD-1864-2,37.198

and although there is a whole row of them on the south wall , not a nest
can be found on the other three sides . WOOD-1864-2,37.199

Perhaps this choice may be owing to the fact that the eaves are rather
long and projecting , and serve to shelter the nests from the mid-day
sun . WOOD-1864-2,37.200

Yet , when one of my friends thought to gratify the Martins by adding a
little wooden coverlet to act as a shelter for them , they one and all
took offence , WOOD-1864-2,37.201

and not only declined to build fresh nests , WOOD-1864-2,37.202

but even vacated those which had already been begun .
WOOD-1864-2,37.203

They do not like smooth walls , WOOD-1864-2,37.204

and if any one wishes to eject them from his premises , he can easily do
so by painting the wall with any oily substance so that the mud will not
adhere to it . WOOD-1864-2,37.205

Still , although they may cause a little inconvenience , and bring the
mop and pail into requisition rather too frequently , they are such
pretty and such useful birds , WOOD-1864-2,37.206

and their young are such engaging little creatures , as they poke their
black heads and white chins out of their nests , and look out eagerly
for their parents , who are careering in the distance , that very few
persons would like to deprive themselves of the sight , even at the risk
of a little inconvenience . WOOD-1864-2,37.207

The little creatures look so earnestly after their parents ,
WOOD-1864-2,37.208

they cry so pitifully for food whenever they are hungry <paren> an event
which mostly happens about ten minutes after they have been fed
<$$paren> , WOOD-1864-2,37.209

and twitter such rapturous thanks when the expected meal is brought to
them , that I , for one , could not find the heart to drive them away .
WOOD-1864-2,37.210

The contrast , too , between the half-fledged young , with their <P_38>
fat , helpless bodies , their purposeless movements , their ever open
and ever screaming mouths , and the light , swift-winged birds of which
they were born , and like which they will become in a few short weeks ,
is so remarkable , that it can@ @not but arrest the attention of even a
careless observer . WOOD-1864-2,38.211

On the first start in active life they often fail in their efforts , as
might be expected from a bird which had spent all its few days of
existence in the narrow mud-built cell which constitutes the Martin's
nest , and must launch at once into wide air . WOOD-1864-2,38.212

It is no uncommon circumstance to catch the young birds on the ground
where they are reposing after their first essay at flight , and for the
time are not able to launch again into the air . WOOD-1864-2,38.213

If the reader should happen to meet with such a bird , let him pick it
up carefully , take it to an upper window of the house , place it on the
sill , and allow it to remain there until it feels sufficient confidence
to make another effort . WOOD-1864-2,38.214

I once caught a young Martin that had fallen from its nest upon the open
window , and had contrived to flutter about in such a strange manner ,
that it had forced itself between the two sashes , and gave an immensity
of trouble before it could be extricated without suffering any injury .
WOOD-1864-2,38.215

It was all in a tremble , WOOD-1864-2,38.216

and did not attempt another flight for a long time ; WOOD-1864-2,38.217

but at last it spread its wings , WOOD-1864-2,38.218

shuffled to the extremity of the projection on which it had been placed
, WOOD-1864-2,38.219

and then launched itself off with perfect success . WOOD-1864-2,38.220

I watched it for a few moments , WOOD-1864-2,38.221

and , finding that it was gaining confidence and strength , left it to
follow its own devices . WOOD-1864-2,38.222

The low-flying Swallows , such as the Martin , are , perhaps , more
beneficial to our gardens than the Swallows and Swifts , especially the
last-mentioned birds , who sometimes soar at so great a height that they
look like little black midges playing about against the blue sky .
WOOD-1864-2,38.223

All are equally beneficial to mankind , WOOD-1864-2,38.224

but those that are of the greatest service to the garden are the species
that do not soar to those enormous heights , where the herb-destroying
insects are not likely to ascend . WOOD-1864-2,38.225

<P_39>

{COM:picture_omitted}

What <font> has <$$font> our dear little Kitty Wren done to be
encumbered with such a long and ugly-sounding name ? WOOD-1864-2,39.228

The Chimpansee has already absorbed the name of Troglodytes ,
WOOD-1864-2,39.229

so e'en let him keep it , WOOD-1864-2,39.230

and let us have a prettier name for our pretty little bird .
WOOD-1864-2,39.231

" Vulgaris , " again ! WOOD-1864-2,39.232

Why should such an offensive name be chosen for the Wren , which has
anything but a vulgar appearance , an idea which certainly is conveyed
to the ordinary mind by the Latin term " vulgaris ? "
WOOD-1864-2,39.233

The specific name of parvulus , or tiny , has been applied to it by some
writers , with more sense of the beautiful , WOOD-1864-2,39.234

and the name sylvestris has also been given to the little bird .
WOOD-1864-2,39.235

It is the only British species of the genus , WOOD-1864-2,39.236

and surely a prettier name might have been found for it .
WOOD-1864-2,39.237

The " Robin and the Wren " have long been united in a rude rhyme , for
which they may well be thankful , inasmuch as they are protected , as by
the magic runes of the Reim-kennar , from <P_40> suffering injury at
rustic hands . WOOD-1864-2,40.238

Uneducated man must be ruled by prejudice before he can be guided by
reason , as is seen by the ease with which factious demagogues can hold
vast assemblies as if they were children in leading-strings ;
WOOD-1864-2,40.239

and a word or phrase which appeals to the impulsive part of man's nature
will be a_thousand times more effectual than one which is based upon
sound reason . WOOD-1864-2,40.240

You may prove , in the most incontrovertible manner , that the Robin and
the Wren are real benefactors to the human race , that they destroy
thousands of living insects , and prevent the coming of as many more ;
WOOD-1864-2,40.241

yet by all these reasonings you will not induce the rustic to extend to
the birds that measure of protection which he gives under the incitement
of a couple of doggerel lines , without the least meaning in them ,
which might not equally well be applied to any other two members of the
feathered tribe . WOOD-1864-2,40.242

The pretty little Wren is but seldom seen in the open country ,
preferring to flit along the hedgerows , or to dive among the brushwood
in forests , woods , or copses . WOOD-1864-2,40.243

Small though it may be , it is a very hardy bird , WOOD-1864-2,40.244

and succeeds in finding a supply of food even through the severe winters
. WOOD-1864-2,40.245

When the ground is hard as if made of flint , when the good housewives
are all astir about frozen water-pipes , when the thick ice rings
merrily under the skater's steel , the Wren may be seen , still hopping
about the hedges pecking here and there at some object too diminutive to
be seen . WOOD-1864-2,40.246

Now the minute objects on which the bird has been feeding are the eggs
of various insects , that have been laid on the branches so that when
the young burst their way through the eggshell , they might find
themselves close to the leaves on which they were intended to feed .
WOOD-1864-2,40.247

These little eggs the Wren discovers , as it goes peering into every
cranny , WOOD-1864-2,40.248

and , by its continual researches , saves many a plant and tree from
destruction . WOOD-1864-2,40.249

It does not , however , restrict itself to insect eggs ,
WOOD-1864-2,40.250

but is very sharp-sighted in discovering their chrysalides , which are
hidden away in all kinds of corners , awaiting the coming of spring .
WOOD-1864-2,40.251

<P_41>

Thus its great value consists , not so much in the destruction of
insects that are actively noxious , as in the check which it lays upon
their increase . WOOD-1864-2,41.253

Putting the eggs out of the question , as being mostly objects which
escape the attention , we can ascertain from practical observation that
, together with other small birds , it makes terrible havoc among the
chrysalides . WOOD-1864-2,41.254

I have in my garden a little preserve of chrysalides of the cabbage
butterfly , most of them hidden away very cunningly between the
interstices of some unseasoned boards , that have warped , as is the
custom with such boards . WOOD-1864-2,41.255

I purposely left them undisturbed , wishing to see how many would escape
the birds . WOOD-1864-2,41.256

One by one they have vanished , WOOD-1864-2,41.257

and now there is only a single survivor , whose safety I attribute to
the fact that it is placed in a cranny on the interior of a sloping roof
, where no foothold can be found for the bird in the very awkward
position which it would be forced to assume before it could pick the
chrysalis out of its place of refuge . WOOD-1864-2,41.258

The beautiful little Golden-Crested Wren , or Kinglet - which is ,
however , not a true Wren - is , in its own little way , nearly as
useful as the Kitty Wren herself , though it is not so common , and not
so hardy . WOOD-1864-2,41.259

The bright little being is untiringly active , WOOD-1864-2,41.260

and it is a pretty sight to watch the tiny pinch of feathers running
about the branches of trees , peering into the little crevices in the
bark , and then scudding away , as if startled , until it checks itself
afresh in its course , and proves by the deliberation with which it
examines the tree , that its rapid movements were merely caused by the
exuberance of its spirits . WOOD-1864-2,41.261

It will , of course , be impossible , in a work of such small dimensions
, to mention every bird , or even every group of birds , that has an
influence , beneficial or the contrary , upon our gardens .
WOOD-1864-2,41.262

The plan adopted in this book is to select certain examples as types ,
and to omit mention of those species which have no particular
individuality in their habits . WOOD-1864-2,41.263

Thus , the whole of the British hawks are represented by the Kestrel ,
the owls by the Brown Owl , and the swallows by the Martin .
WOOD-1864-2,41.264

We therefore pass over the whole of the warblers , who , in relation to
our gardens , <P_42> may be classed with the finches , and will be
briefly noticed when we treat of those birds . WOOD-1864-2,42.265

The common Song Thrush has been chosen for separate mention , because it
performs a task which , though similar in its results to that which
falls to the lot of the wren , is exercised upon different materials .
WOOD-1864-2,42.266

In common with many other birds , the Thrush feeds largely upon insects
, WOOD-1864-2,42.267

and is in consequence entitled to our encomiums , and to be ranked among
the friends of our garden . WOOD-1864-2,42.268

But the special reason for which it is now thought worthy of separate
mention , is the incessant war which it wages upon the destructive
molluscs which do much harm to our gardens . WOOD-1864-2,42.269

Snails , in particular , fall victims by thousands to the hungry and
persevering Thrush , WOOD-1864-2,42.270

and all their instinctive skill of concealment avails them nothing when
a hungry Thrush is scouring about in search of food .
WOOD-1864-2,42.271

Neither does the hard shell of a large and venerable snail afford it the
least protection ; WOOD-1864-2,42.272

for the bird makes very light of the retreat which is beaten by the
snail on finding itself in danger , WOOD-1864-2,42.273

picks up the doomed mollusc in its bill , WOOD-1864-2,42.274

and carries it off to its place of sacrifice , where the ground is
strewed with many evidences of the daily murders committed there .
WOOD-1864-2,42.275

Robinson Crusoe discovered the sacrificing ground of the savages by the
bones and other relics of the slain ; WOOD-1864-2,42.276

and , in like manner , the sacrificial stone of the Thrush may be
detected by means of the fragments of broken shells that lie scattered
about , the only portions of the snail that the bird declines to eat .
WOOD-1864-2,42.277

Having carried off its prey to the accustomed spot , the Thrush puts it
down for a moment , WOOD-1864-2,42.278

and contemplates it . WOOD-1864-2,42.279

Should the shell be thin , the bird breaks it up quickly with its beak ;
WOOD-1864-2,42.280

but if it should be thick and hard , as is the case with the older and
larger snails , the Thrush picks up the mollusc in its beak ,
WOOD-1864-2,42.281

and bangs it against the stone with such hearty goodwill , that the
shell is dashed to pieces , and the exposed body of the snail left open
to the assaults of the sharp beak . WOOD-1864-2,42.282

The Thrush is rather conservative in its tastes - WOOD-1864-2,42.283

has , as the phrenologists say , the organ of adhesiveness strongly
developed - WOOD-1864-2,42.284

and when it has once fixed upon a stone of sacrifice , it will <P_43>
bring the snails from a considerable distance in order to immolate them
at the accustomed shrine . WOOD-1864-2,43.285

In process of time , great heaps of broken shells are accumulated about
the stone , which is sometimes situated in a most exposed locality ,
such as the side of a public road , or in the very track of a frequented
footpath . WOOD-1864-2,43.286

The instinct which leads the Thrush to beat the snails against a stone
is , however , only an instinct , though it does certainly appear to be
as much the result of reason as the nut-cracking propensities of the
little monkey in the Zoological Gardens , whose teeth are too weak to
crack the nuts that are given to him , and who smashes them neatly with
a large pebble . WOOD-1864-2,43.287

A tame Thrush has been seen to take from the dressing-table of its
mistress one of those shell pincushions which are so largely sold at
sea-side towns , and to batter it against the hearthstone , hoping to
find a snail of some sort inside . WOOD-1864-2,43.288

Just as the wren searches after and destroys the eggs and chrysalides of
insects , so does the Thrush seek for and kill the snails that have
retired from the world and active exercise , and immured themselves ,
monk-like , in cells of stone or wood . WOOD-1864-2,43.289

He is mostly obliged to content himself with the smaller kinds of snail
such as <font> Helix hortensis <$$font> and <font> Helix nemoralis
<$$font> , because the great garden snail <paren> <font> Helix aspersa
<$$font> <$$paren> has a habit of retiring to its hibernating place in
company with others of its own kind , and forming a compact mass , which
the Thrush is not able to separate . WOOD-1864-2,43.290

So , leaving these until the spring , when he purposes to recompense
himself for his enforced abstinence , he turns his attention to the
smaller species , WOOD-1864-2,43.291

and drags them easily out of hedge bottoms into which they had betaken
themselves . WOOD-1864-2,43.292

Concerning the Thrush and the snail , Mr. Knapp , in his well-known "
Journal of a Naturalist , " relates a very pleasing anecdote .
WOOD-1864-2,43.293

" We observed , this summer , two common Thrushes frequenting the shrubs
on the green in our garden . WOOD-1864-2,43.294

From the slenderness of their forms and the freshness of their plumage ,
we pronounced them to be birds of the preceding summer .
WOOD-1864-2,43.295

There was an association and friendship between them that called our
attention to their actions . WOOD-1864-2,43.296

One of them seemed ailing , or feeble from some bodily accident ;
WOOD-1864-2,43.297

for though it hopped about , yet it appeared <P_44> unable to obtain a
sufficiency of food . WOOD-1864-2,44.298

Its companion , an active , sprightly bird , would frequently bring it
worms or bruised snails , when they mutually partook of the banquet ;
WOOD-1864-2,44.299

and the ailing bird would wait patiently , understand the actions ,
expect the assistance of the other , and advance from his asylum upon
its approach . WOOD-1864-2,44.300

This procedure was continued for some days ; WOOD-1864-2,44.301

but after a time we missed the fostered bird - WOOD-1864-2,44.302

it probably died , WOOD-1864-2,44.303

or , by reason of its weakness , met with some fatal accident . "
WOOD-1864-2,44.304

Having now spoken in favour of the Thrush , I must , for truth's sake ,
admit that there is some basis for the hatred with which many gardeners
regard the Thrush , and its dark congener the Blackbird .
WOOD-1864-2,44.305

Read the correspondents' column in the journals which treat of such
subjects , and you will find a whole string of accusations brought
against these two birds . WOOD-1864-2,44.306

They eat the cherries , always selecting the best and ripest <paren> as
why should they not , being birds of good taste ? <$$paren> ,
WOOD-1864-2,44.307

they strip the currant-trees of their fruit , WOOD-1864-2,44.308

and , in fact , rob the garden as effectually as would be done by a set
of schoolboys intent on forbidden fruit . WOOD-1864-2,44.309

There is no gainsaying these assertions . WOOD-1864-2,44.310

The birds are very fond of fruit ; WOOD-1864-2,44.311

know good fruit from bad , WOOD-1864-2,44.312

and will not touch it unless it be quite ripe . WOOD-1864-2,44.313

But it must be remarked that , especially in the case of wall-fruit ,
the Thrush has eaten the snails , which would have not only eaten the
fruit , but covered it with slime , and gnawed the leaves and young buds
; so that the bird is surely justified in taking some little percentage
of the fruit which he has helped to save , and which we ought readily to
give . WOOD-1864-2,44.314

Still , even if we do grudge him a modicum of fruit , we can easily
prevent him from taking it , WOOD-1864-2,44.315

for his depredations are only carried on for a short time , while the
fruit is ripe . WOOD-1864-2,44.316

We do not speak of those persons who rear the trees for the purpose of
selling the fruit and gaining their livelihood thereby , but of those
who work in their gardens as an amusement , and yet who have a very
great objection to lose all the fruit which they have so carefully
watched since the blossoms gave promise of a heavy crop .
WOOD-1864-2,44.317

A net will be an effectual barrier to his progress , WOOD-1864-2,44.318

and netting <P_45> is now-a-days made at such very moderate cost , that
we may benefit by the Thrush's snail-killing propensities , have the
pleasure of hearing him sing , and yet keep all our fruit to ourselves .
WOOD-1864-2,45.319

Market gardeners are not likely to spare any bird which damages their
crops merely on account of its song , WOOD-1864-2,45.320

but there are many who do not grudge the Thrush a share of their fruit ,
for the sake of the rich full melody which bubbles from the throat of
this accomplished musician . WOOD-1864-2,45.321

If , therefore , the good and evil deeds of the Thrush be balanced
together , we shall find a great preponderance in his favour .
WOOD-1864-2,45.322

The fruit robbery in the autumn is more than compensated by the
snail-killing throughout the year , WOOD-1864-2,45.323

and when the pretty ways and glorious melody are thrown into the scale ,
the balance is all in favour of the Thrush . WOOD-1864-2,45.324

Of the Blackbird we can scarcely speak so favourably ,
WOOD-1864-2,45.325

but at all events commend him to notice for his undoubted services in
the spring , when he is indefatigable in his search after grubs ,
caterpillars , and insects of various kinds , WOOD-1864-2,45.326

and grant to the " Ouzel-cock , so black of hue , with orange tawny bill
, " his due meed of approbation ; WOOD-1864-2,45.327

and although he may not be so useful a friend to the garden as is the
Thrush , let him not be ranked among its foes . WOOD-1864-2,45.328

It is with a feeling of some trepidation that we venture upon dangerous
ground , WOOD-1864-2,45.329

and bring afresh the Great Controversy before the public .
WOOD-1864-2,45.330

Every few years , and with the regularity of an intermittent fever , up
starts the great Rook question . WOOD-1864-2,45.331

Is the Rook injurious or beneficial to the agriculturist ?
WOOD-1864-2,45.332

Some practical men take one side of the question , WOOD-1864-2,45.333

and other practical men take the other side . WOOD-1864-2,45.334

Both bring forward arguments that seem irrefragable until you hear the
arguments of their opponents . WOOD-1864-2,45.335

They mutually accuse each other of imperfect observation ,
WOOD-1864-2,45.336

and both appeal to their eyes as the testimony to their words .
WOOD-1864-2,45.337

As corn is not generally sown in gardens , we are able to omit that part
of the question , WOOD-1864-2,45.338

and we may confine ourselves to the turf , the turnips , and the potato
{TEXT:potatoe} , all of which are undoubtedly cut up by the powerful
beak of the Rook . WOOD-1864-2,45.339

<P_46>

As to the turf , a colony of Rooks will sometimes frequent it day after
day , pecking it up in all directions , and making it look as if it had
been treated with a scarifier . WOOD-1864-2,46.341

There is no mistake about it . WOOD-1864-2,46.342

The Rooks are caught <font> flagrante delicto <$$font> ,
WOOD-1864-2,46.343

and their beaks and feet bear evidence against them .
WOOD-1864-2,46.344

{COM:picture_omitted}

But , now that the act has been proved , let us examine its motive .
WOOD-1864-2,46.346

Take a spade , WOOD-1864-2,46.347

turn over some of the grass at which they have been so industriously
pecking , WOOD-1864-2,46.348

and try to discover what their object can be . WOOD-1864-2,46.349

You will not long be kept in suspense , WOOD-1864-2,46.350

for you find the object of their search in certain grubs , some large ,
very fat , half coiled , and lying on their sides , and some straight ,
moderately fat , and about the dimensions of a goose-quill .
WOOD-1864-2,46.351

Here we have two of the deadliest enemies of our gardens , the larvae of
the cockchaffer , and of the crane fly , or daddy-long-legs as it is
familiarly called . WOOD-1864-2,46.352

<P_47>

Pursuing their destructive labours unseen , and never appearing above
the surface of the ground until they take their adult form , these two
larvae are far more formidable enemies than even the slug , the snail ,
and the caterpillar , creatures which can be detected and destroyed by
man . WOOD-1864-2,47.354

Neither human eye nor touch can discover the subterranean larvae as they
silently consume the very life of the plants on which they feed ,
cutting away the tender rootlets , and causing a " blight , " as it is
called , to fall on the herbage . WOOD-1864-2,47.355

Many an acre of grass , many a fine crop of vegetables has been "
blighted " from no apparent cause ; WOOD-1864-2,47.356

the plant ceases to grow , WOOD-1864-2,47.357

the leaves lose their fresh , healthy contour , WOOD-1864-2,47.358

they become limp , WOOD-1864-2,47.359

and droop , WOOD-1864-2,47.360

the vivid green fades out of them WOOD-1864-2,47.361

and changes to yellow , WOOD-1864-2,47.362

the edges crumple up , WOOD-1864-2,47.363

and the plant dies . WOOD-1864-2,47.364

There is no external sign of injury , WOOD-1864-2,47.365

and until the plant be uprooted , and search made below , no destroyer
is visible . WOOD-1864-2,47.366

But , in the earth , or entangled in the roots of the dying plant , will
be found an inconspicuous , brownish , smooth-skinned , sharp-@ @jawed
grub , whose sleek condition shows the extent of its feeding , and whose
trenchant teeth have eaten away the sources of life .
WOOD-1864-2,47.367

Hidden , however , as they are from human ken , they can@ @not conceal
themselves from the keen senses of the Rook . WOOD-1864-2,47.368

Take a telescope WOOD-1864-2,47.369

and watch a Rook while pecking up the grass , and apparently destroying
it in wanton mischief . WOOD-1864-2,47.370

You will see the cunning bird go lightly over the ground with that
peculiar gait employed by the Corvine race when searching for food ,
stoop , put its head on one side , and seem to listen , shift its place
, listen again , and suddenly begin to peck away as in a desperate hurry
. WOOD-1864-2,47.371

Up comes the grass in little bunches , WOOD-1864-2,47.372

blades and rootlets are tossed here and there in reckless haste ,
WOOD-1864-2,47.373

and at last the bird makes a quick dive at some object ,
WOOD-1864-2,47.374

gives it a smart shake , WOOD-1864-2,47.375

swallows it , WOOD-1864-2,47.376

and then goes off to repeat the same process in another place .
WOOD-1864-2,47.377

If a Rook be shot while thus employed , the stomach will be found to
contain a quantity of grass root , together with a mass of substance
which an inexperienced observer would not readily recognise , but which
an entomologist sees at once to be composed <P_48> of the remains of
large larvae , the hard horny head and jaws remaining as proofs of its
true nature . WOOD-1864-2,48.378

The grass roots are mostly swallowed together with the grub , which has
entangled itself in their delicate fibres , WOOD-1864-2,48.379

and the object of the Rook is not to eat the roots , but to devour the
grub that destroys them . WOOD-1864-2,48.380

Cunning and bold as is the Rook , so that it can avoid almost any trap
laid for it , and will always keep itself well out of shot range <paren>
except when it finds that blank cartridge only is used , when it walks
about before the gunner with calm assurance <$$paren> , it may be easily
driven away from the fields by a very simple process .
WOOD-1864-2,48.381

Alternate rows of sticks should be firmly driven into the earth , and a
stout string passed zigzag-wise from one stick to the other .
WOOD-1864-2,48.382

No feathers or streamers are required , as the Rook is horribly afraid
of being entrapped , and will seldom venture within the angle enclosed
by the strings . WOOD-1864-2,48.383

These strings should be about seven or eight inches above the ground and
drawn tight . WOOD-1864-2,48.384

It can@ @not be denied that the Rook does pull up a large quantity of
grass WOOD-1864-2,48.385

but it is also true that if the bird did not do so , the grass would
have been destroyed by the grub , which , if allowed to come to maturity
, would have been the progenitor of a numerous offspring .
WOOD-1864-2,48.386

Also , it can@ @not be denied that the Rook causes great anger in the
mind of the gardener , by pecking up the potatoes which he has set with
so much care , and throwing them carelessly about the ground as if in
mere wantonness . WOOD-1864-2,48.387

But , here again , the destruction of the potato has been the secondary
and not the primary object of the bird , its real aim being to get at
the grub which was feeding on the potato . WOOD-1864-2,48.388

Turnips again , as every farmer knows , are attacked by a multiplicity
of enemies , WOOD-1864-2,48.389

and in its endeavours to dislodge the grubs , the Rook certainly
disfigures the turnip sadly , WOOD-1864-2,48.390

and makes it quite unfit for sale . WOOD-1864-2,48.391

The quantity of insects which a Rook will carry home to its young , is
really surprising . WOOD-1864-2,48.392

In order to achieve this task and to avoid the inconvenience of repeated
journeys to and from the fields , the Rook has recourse to a plan
similar to that which is followed by the swallow tribe when hunting for
a like purpose . WOOD-1864-2,48.393

<P_49>

The gathered insects are not swallowed , WOOD-1864-2,49.395

but are collected in the mouth , where they form a solid lump under the
lower jaw , the skin of which is distensible like the cheeks of a man .
WOOD-1864-2,49.396

When the bird has collected its full complement and is flying home ,
this lump is discernible at some little distance , WOOD-1864-2,49.397

and has caused the popular but erroneous belief that the Rook is
furnished with a pouch at the root of the tongue . WOOD-1864-2,49.398

Neither can it be denied that the Rook does often work great damage to
the crops , and that it repays itself in kind for the services which it
has rendered . WOOD-1864-2,49.399

And , as in other beings , we can@ @not expect unmixed good , any more
than such a quality can be expected from ourselves , we ought to balance
the good against the evil , and in our own little court of justice to
follow the British maxims ; that the accused is to be treated as
innocent until he is proved to be guilty , and that in any doubtful case
he is to have the benefit of the doubt . WOOD-1864-2,49.400

With the rook may be ranked the Crow as a friend to the gardener ,
though I should be sorry to plead for him as a friend to the game
preserver or to the poultry-keeper . WOOD-1864-2,49.401

Of course , the popular name of Carrion Crow is a misnomer , inasmuch as
the bird would have but small likelihood of surviving if it were
restricted to carrion in its " struggle for existence . "
WOOD-1864-2,49.402

Still , it is essentially a feeder on animal substances ,
WOOD-1864-2,49.403

and makes great havoc among the insects which depopulate our gardens .
WOOD-1864-2,49.404

It has a very accommodating appetite , eating mice , frogs , lizards ,
insects , and molluscs , robbing the nests of other birds and carrying
off both eggs and young , visiting the water's edge and picking up the
various aquatic creatures that venture near the banks , or even taking
expeditions to the seaside , and feeding luxuriously on the crabs ,
shrimps , and marine worms and molluscs . WOOD-1864-2,49.405

To the game preserver it is a deadly foe , WOOD-1864-2,49.406

and in his book is always classed among the numerous beings that he
considers as " vermin , " WOOD-1864-2,49.407

for it pounces upon the young pheasants and partridges ,
WOOD-1864-2,49.408

and occasionally seizes a favourable opportunity of delivering the
death-blow to a stray leveret WOOD-1864-2,49.409

<P_50>

{COM:picture_omitted}

To the poultry-keeper it is scarcely less obnoxious , inasmuch as it has
a great liking for very young chickens or ducklings , WOOD-1864-2,50.412

and has been observed to carry off nine successive ducklings to a single
nest . WOOD-1864-2,50.413

But as this little work is written for the use of gardeners , without
reference to any other pursuit which they may follow , it is but right
to include the Carrion Crow among the list of our friends .
WOOD-1864-2,50.414

We ought not to pass over the Starling in our list of garden friends .
WOOD-1864-2,50.415

The farmers have now begun to acknowledge that , to their fields and
flocks , the Starling is an invaluable benefactor , WOOD-1864-2,50.416

and have ceased , for the most part , from the deadly persecution with
which they assailed this handsome and most useful bird .
WOOD-1864-2,50.417

You may see the vast flocks of Starlings winging their way through
<P_51> the air , in compact and orderly masses , evidently under the
command of some leader , each body dashing forward as regularly as a
regiment of cavalry , wheeling , spreading themselves , reassembling ,
rising , and descending in perfect union . WOOD-1864-2,51.418

Suddenly they make a circuitous flight over a field , mostly where
cattle or sheep are grazing , WOOD-1864-2,51.419

stoop downwards , WOOD-1864-2,51.420

and , with a rushing sound of many wings , settle upon the grass .
WOOD-1864-2,51.421

{COM:picture_omitted}

Take the telescope , and watch them , and you will see that they are all
busily at work , some picking up the flies , beetles , and other insects
that are creeping among the grass or tormenting the cattle , and others
freeing the sheep from the so-called " ticks " which run riot among
their fleeces . WOOD-1864-2,51.423

The only cause of enmity to the Starling which the farmer can now bring
forward is , that he believes his pigeon-cotes to be <P_52> assailed ,
and the eggs sucked by this bird . WOOD-1864-2,52.424

Now , in truth , the Starling has no idea of sucking the eggs of pigeons
or of any other bird ; WOOD-1864-2,52.425

and though it is fond of establishing itself in the pigeon-cote , it
only does so because it finds a congenial shelter for its rudely
manufactured nest . WOOD-1864-2,52.426

The pigeons bear no enmity towards the bird , WOOD-1864-2,52.427

but associate with it in perfect amity . WOOD-1864-2,52.428

Putting aside , however , the influence which it exerts upon the
farmyard and the meadows , let us see what may be the effect of its
presence upon the garden . WOOD-1864-2,52.429

Apparently , the Starling seldom makes its appearance in the garden ,
WOOD-1864-2,52.430

for , though it is so far a lover of man as to congregate in cities ,
and build nests under the shelter of houses , it mostly goes far a-field
to seek its food , WOOD-1864-2,52.431

and spends the greater part of its day in the open country .
WOOD-1864-2,52.432

But , in the very early morning , before the generality of mankind have
opened their eyes to its brightness , the Starling pays its visit to our
gardens , especially favouring those which can boast a lawn ,
WOOD-1864-2,52.433

and there may be seen upon the grass , busily feeding away among the
blades . WOOD-1864-2,52.434

Like the rook , it comes to seek for subterranean grubs ,
WOOD-1864-2,52.435

and is wonderfully keen at discovering and unearthing the larvae of the
daddy-long-legs , as they creep their stealthy way through the soil ,
gnawing and destroying the roots of the grasses , and leaving barrenness
and destruction in their path . WOOD-1864-2,52.436

Only in the early dawn will the Starling remain within the garden - at
all events , in those cases where the lawn is in close proximity to the
house ; WOOD-1864-2,52.437

and when the sun begins to cast a shorter shadow , the Starling takes
wing for the fields , WOOD-1864-2,52.438

and there remains throughout the day , except when it brings back
provisions for its young and very noisy brood . WOOD-1864-2,52.439

Every householder in the country ought to encourage the Starling to
build its nest in his neighbourhood , and to enlist its services in
clearing his grounds of noxious insects . WOOD-1864-2,52.440

Nothing is easier than to attract the Starlings . WOOD-1864-2,52.441

If you can do so , build them a tower for their special accommodation ,
and you will have every aperture peopled by the ensuing spring .
WOOD-1864-2,52.442

The accompanying sketch shows the method that has been so successfully
employed by Mr. Waterton for this purpose . WOOD-1864-2,52.443

There are two of <P_53> these towers at Walton Hall , WOOD-1864-2,53.444

and both are crowded with inhabitants . WOOD-1864-2,53.445

In order to prevent cats from climbing up and thrusting their lithe paws
into the nests , and to form an effectual barrier to such stealthy foes
as rats , weasels , and stoats , the inhabited part
{COM:picture_omitted} of the edifice rests upon a stone pillar , crowned
with a large flat slab that projects boldly on every side , like the
staddles on which a rick is built . WOOD-1864-2,53.446

Of course , the pillar must be of sufficient height to prevent a cat
from leaping upon it . WOOD-1864-2,53.447

<P_54>

Upon this base is reared a cylindrical stone tower , pierced with a
multitude of apertures , made by the simple process of omitting stones .
WOOD-1864-2,54.449

These holes should be of some depth , to suit the idiosyncrasy of the
Starling , which likes its nest to be dark and well sheltered .
WOOD-1864-2,54.450

As , however , the crows , magpies , and other winged foes might make
sad havoc among the eggs and young , were the holes left entirely open ,
Mr. Waterton has invented an equally ingenious and simple method of
prohibiting the entrance of any but the rightful owners .
WOOD-1864-2,54.451

The entrance to each hole is closed by a square stone , which fits
loosely into the aperture , so as to leave plenty of room behind it .
WOOD-1864-2,54.452

One corner of the stone is chiselled away , as shown in the smaller
figure , so that the Starling is able to gain access to the nest , while
neither crow nor jay nor magpie can reach it . WOOD-1864-2,54.453

As the stone is quite loosely fitted , it can be hooked out at any time
by means of a bent iron rod , thrust through the opening ;
WOOD-1864-2,54.454

and thus the condition of the nest can be at any time examined .
WOOD-1864-2,54.455

The birds soon learn to comprehend that they will not be injured ,
WOOD-1864-2,54.456

and permit themselves to be inspected without showing the least sign of
fear . WOOD-1864-2,54.457

Brick will , of course , answer the purpose , if the garden should be in
a non-stone-producing locality , WOOD-1864-2,54.458

and , if entrusted to an architect of good taste , a very pretty and
picturesque design might be produced , uniting beauty with usefulness .
WOOD-1864-2,54.459

Should , however , both brick and stone be impracticable , the Starling
may be attracted by a wooden edifice , made like a pigeon-house , but
with much smaller entrances to nests . WOOD-1864-2,54.460

Even isolated boxes , such as are sold by the bird-dealers for the use
of canaries in the building season , will prove attractive ;
WOOD-1864-2,54.461

and any one who will exercise some little ingenuity , and take some
little trouble , will be able to have a colony of these beautiful birds
close to his house . WOOD-1864-2,54.462

No devices are needful to attract them . WOOD-1864-2,54.463

Make some houses for them , and they will find occupants .
WOOD-1864-2,54.464

