<BEGIN_yonge-1865-1>

<P_159>

<heading>

Chapter VII YONGE-1865-1,159.4

Waiting for Rose YONGE-1865-1,159.5

<$$heading>

{COM:epigraph_omitted}

So , instead of {COM:should_be_N_by_default} going to Belfast , here was
Colonel Keith actually taking a lodging and settling himself into it ;
nay , even going over to Avoncester on a horse-buying expedition , not
merely for the Temples , but for himself . YONGE-1865-1,159.8

This time Rachel did think herself sure of Miss Williams's ear in peace
, YONGE-1865-1,159.9

and came down on her with two fat manuscripts upon Human Reeds and
Military Society , preluding , however , by bitter complaints of the
<font> Traveller <$$font> for never having vouchsafed her an answer ,
nor having even restored " Curatocult , " though she had written three
times , and sent a directed envelope and stamps for the purpose .
YONGE-1865-1,159.10

The paper must be ruined by so discourteous an editor ,
YONGE-1865-1,159.11

indeed , she had not been nearly so much interested as usual by the last
few numbers . YONGE-1865-1,159.12

If only she could get her paper back , she should try the <font>
Englishwoman's Hobby-horse , <$$font> or some other paper of more
progress than that <font> Traveller . <$$font> YONGE-1865-1,159.13

" Is it not very hard to feel one's self shut out from the main stream
of the work of the world when one's heart is burning ? "
YONGE-1865-1,159.14

" I think you overrate the satisfaction . " YONGE-1865-1,159.15

" You ca@ @n't tell ! YONGE-1865-1,159.16

You are contented with that sort of home <P_160> peaceful sunshine that
I know suffices many . YONGE-1865-1,160.17

Even intellectual as you are , you ca@ @n't tell what it is to feel
power within , to strain at the leash , and see others in the race . "
YONGE-1865-1,160.18

" I was thinking whether you could not make an acceptable paper on the
lace system , which you really know so thoroughly . "
YONGE-1865-1,160.19

" The fact is , " said Rachel , " it is much more difficult to describe
from one's own observation than from other sources . "
YONGE-1865-1,160.20

" But rather more original , " said Ermine , quite overcome by the
<font> naïveté <$$font> of the confession . YONGE-1865-1,160.21

" I do@ @n't see that , " said Rachel . YONGE-1865-1,160.22

" It is abstract reasoning from given facts that I aim at , as you will
understand when you have heard my ' Human Reeds ' and my other -
YONGE-1865-1,160.23

Dear me , there@ @'s your door-bell . YONGE-1865-1,160.24

I thought that Colonel was gone for the day . " YONGE-1865-1,160.25

" There are other people in the world besides the Colonel , " Ermine
began to say , though she hardly felt as if there were ,
YONGE-1865-1,160.26

and at any rate a sense of rescue crossed her . YONGE-1865-1,160.27

The persons admitted took them equally by surprise , being Conrade
Temple and Mr. Keith . YONGE-1865-1,160.28

" I thought , " said Rachel , as she gave her unwilling hand to the
latter , " that you would have been at Avoncester to-day . "
YONGE-1865-1,160.29

" I always get out of the way of horse-dealing . YONGE-1865-1,160.30

I know no greater bore , " he answered . YONGE-1865-1,160.31

" Mamma sent me down , " Conrade was explaining ; YONGE-1865-1,160.32

" Mr. Keith's uncle found out that he knew Miss Williams -
YONGE-1865-1,160.33

no , that@ @'s not it ; YONGE-1865-1,160.34

Miss Williams's uncle found out that Mr. Keith preached a sermon , or
something of that sort , YONGE-1865-1,160.35

so mamma sent me down to show him the way to call upon her ;
YONGE-1865-1,160.36

but I need not stay now , need I ? " YONGE-1865-1,160.37

" After that elegant introduction and lucid explanation , I think you
may be excused , " returned Alick Keith . YONGE-1865-1,160.38

The boy shook Ermine's hand with his soldierly grace ,
YONGE-1865-1,160.39

but rather spoilt the effect thereof by his aside , YONGE-1865-1,160.40

" I wanted to see the toad and the pictures our Miss Williams told me
about , YONGE-1865-1,160.41

but I@ @'ll come another time ; " YONGE-1865-1,160.42

and the wink of his black eyes , and significant shrug of his shoulders
at Rachel , were irresistible . YONGE-1865-1,160.43

They all laughed , even Rachel herself , as Ermine , seeing it would be
worse to ignore the demonstration , said , " The elements of aunt and
boy do not always work together . " YONGE-1865-1,160.44

<P_161>

" No , " said Rachel ; YONGE-1865-1,161.46

" I have never been forgiven for being the first person who tried to
keep those boys in order . " YONGE-1865-1,161.47

" And now , " said Ermine , turning to her other visitor , " perhaps I
may discover which of us , or of our uncles , preached a sermon . "
YONGE-1865-1,161.48

" Mine , I suspect , " returned Mr. Keith . YONGE-1865-1,161.49

" Your sister and I made out at luncheon that you had known my uncle ,
Mr. Clare , of Bishopsworthy . " YONGE-1865-1,161.50

" Mr. Clare ! Oh yes , " cried Ermine , eagerly ; YONGE-1865-1,161.51

" he took the duty for one of our curates once for a long vacation .
YONGE-1865-1,161.52

Did you ever hear him speak of Beauchamp ? " YONGE-1865-1,161.53

" Yes , often ; YONGE-1865-1,161.54

and of Dr. Williams . YONGE-1865-1,161.55

He will be very much interested to hear of you . " YONGE-1865-1,161.56

" It was a time I well remember , " said Ermine . YONGE-1865-1,161.57

" He was an Oxford tutor then , YONGE-1865-1,161.58

and I was about fourteen , just old enough to be delighted to hear such
clever talk . YONGE-1865-1,161.59

And his sermons were memorable ; YONGE-1865-1,161.60

they were the first I ever listened to . " YONGE-1865-1,161.61

" There are few sermons that it is not an infliction to listen to , "
began Rachel , YONGE-1865-1,161.62

but she was not heard or noticed . YONGE-1865-1,161.63

" I assure you they are even more striking now in his blindness . "
YONGE-1865-1,161.64

" Blindness ! YONGE-1865-1,161.65

Indeed , I had not heard of that . " YONGE-1865-1,161.66

Even Rachel listened with interest as the young officer explained that
his uncle , whom both he and Miss Williams talked of as a man of note ,
of whom every one must have heard , had for the last four years been
totally blind , but continued to be an active parish priest , visiting
regularly , preaching , and taking a share in the service , which he
knew by heart . YONGE-1865-1,161.67

He had , of course , a curate , who lived with him , and took very good
care of him . YONGE-1865-1,161.68

" No one else ? " said Rachel . YONGE-1865-1,161.69

" I thought your sister lived at Bishopsworthy . " YONGE-1865-1,161.70

" No , my sister lives , or has lived , at Littleworthy , the next
parish , and as unlike it as possible . YONGE-1865-1,161.71

It has a railroad in it , YONGE-1865-1,161.72

and the cockneys have come down on it and ' villafied ' it .
YONGE-1865-1,161.73

My aunt , Mrs. Lacy Clare , has lived there ever since my sister has
been <P_162> with her ; YONGE-1865-1,162.74

but now her last daughter is to be married , she wishes to give up
housekeeping . " YONGE-1865-1,162.75

" And your sister is coming to Lady Temple , " said Rachel , in her
peculiar affirmative way of asking questions . YONGE-1865-1,162.76

" She will find it very dull here . " YONGE-1865-1,162.77

" With all the advantages of Avoncester at hand ? " inquired Alick ,
with a certain gleam under his flaxen eyelashes that convinced Ermine
that he said it in mischief . YONGE-1865-1,162.78

But Rachel drew herself up gravely , YONGE-1865-1,162.79

and answered - " In Lady Temple's situation any such thing would be most
inconsistent with good feeling . " YONGE-1865-1,162.80

" Such as the cathedral ? " calmly , not to say sleepily , inquired
Alick , to the excessive diversion of Ermine , who saw that Rachel had
never been laughed at in her life , and was utterly at a loss what to
make of it . YONGE-1865-1,162.81

" If you meant the cathedral , " she said , a little uncertainly ,
recollecting the tone in which Mr. Clare had just been spoken of , and
thinking that perhaps Miss Keith might be a curatolatress , " I am
afraid it is not of much benefit to people living at this distance ,
YONGE-1865-1,162.82

and there is not much to be said for the imitation here . "
YONGE-1865-1,162.83

" You will see what my sister says to it . YONGE-1865-1,162.84

She only wants training to be the main strength of the Bishopsworthy
choir , YONGE-1865-1,162.85

and perhaps she may find it here . " YONGE-1865-1,162.86

Rachel was evidently undecided whether chants or marches were Miss
Keith's passion , and , perhaps , which propensity would render the
young lady the most distasteful to herself . YONGE-1865-1,162.87

Ermine thought it merciful to divert the attack by mentioning Mr.
Clare's love of music , and hoping his curate could gratify it .
YONGE-1865-1,162.88

" No , " said Mr. Keith , " it was very unlucky that Mr. Lifford did
not know one note from another ; so that his vicar could not delude
himself into hoping that his playing on his violin was anything but a
nuisance to his companion , YONGE-1865-1,162.89

and in spite of all the curate's persuasions , he only indulged himself
therewith on rare occasions . " YONGE-1865-1,162.90

But as Ermine showed surprise at the retention of a companion devoid of
the sixth sense , so valuable to the blind , he added - " No one would
suit him so well . YONGE-1865-1,162.91

Mr. Lifford has been with him ever since his sight began to fail ,
YONGE-1865-1,162.92

and understands all his ways . " YONGE-1865-1,162.93

<P_163>

" Yes , that makes a great difference . " YONGE-1865-1,163.95

" And , " pursued the young man , coming to something like life as he
talked of his uncle , " though he is not quite all that a companion
might be , my uncle says there would be no keeping the living without
him , YONGE-1865-1,163.96

and I do not believe there would , unless my uncle would have me instead
. " YONGE-1865-1,163.97

Ermine laughed YONGE-1865-1,163.98

and looked interested , not quite knowing what other answer to make .
YONGE-1865-1,163.99

Rachel lifted up her eyebrow in amazement . YONGE-1865-1,163.100

" Another advantage , " added Alick , who somehow seemed to accept
Ermine as one of the family , " is , that he is no impediment to
Bessie's living there , YONGE-1865-1,163.101

for , poor man , he has a wife , but insane . " YONGE-1865-1,163.102

" Then your sister will live there ? " said Rachel .
YONGE-1865-1,163.103

" What an enviable position , to have control of the means of doing good
that always falls to the women of a clerical family . "
YONGE-1865-1,163.104

" Tell her so , " said the brother , with his odd , suppressed smile .
YONGE-1865-1,163.105

" What , she does not think so ? " YONGE-1865-1,163.106

" Now , " said Mr. Keith , leaning back , " on my answer depends
whether Bessie enters this place with a character for chanting , croquet
, or crochet . YONGE-1865-1,163.107

Which should you like worst , Miss Curtis ? " YONGE-1865-1,163.108

" I like evasions worst of all , " said Rachel , with a flash of
something like playful spirit , though there was too much asperity in it
. YONGE-1865-1,163.109

" But you see , unfortunately , I do@ @n't know , " said Alick Keith ,
slowly . YONGE-1865-1,163.110

" I have never been able to find out , nor she either .
YONGE-1865-1,163.111

I do@ @n't know what may be the effect of example , " he added .
YONGE-1865-1,163.112

Ermine wondered whether he were in mischief or earnest ,
YONGE-1865-1,163.113

and suspected a little of both . YONGE-1865-1,163.114

" I shall be very happy to show Miss Keith any of my ways , " said
Rachel , with no doubts at all ; YONGE-1865-1,163.115

" but she will find me terribly impeded here . YONGE-1865-1,163.116

When does she come ? " YONGE-1865-1,163.117

" Not for a month or six weeks , when the wedding will be over .
YONGE-1865-1,163.118

It is high time she saw something of her respected guardian . "
YONGE-1865-1,163.119

" The Colonel ? " YONGE-1865-1,163.120

" Yes ; " YONGE-1865-1,163.121

then to Ermine , " Every one turns to him with reliance and confidence .
YONGE-1865-1,163.122

I believe no one in the army received <P_164> so many last charges as he
has done , or executes them more fully . " YONGE-1865-1,164.123

" And , " said Ermine , feeling a pleasure colour her cheek more deeply
than was convenient , " you are relations . " YONGE-1865-1,164.124

" So far away that only a Scotsman would acknowledge the cousinship . "
YONGE-1865-1,164.125

" But do not you call yourself Scotch ? " said Ermine , who had for
years thought it glorious to do so . YONGE-1865-1,164.126

" My great-grandfather came from Gowanbrae , " said Alick ;
YONGE-1865-1,164.127

" but our branch of the family has lived and died in the -th Highlanders
for so many generations that we do@ @n't know what a home is out of it .
YONGE-1865-1,164.128

Our birthplaces - yes , and our graves - are in all parts of the world .
" YONGE-1865-1,164.129

" Were you ever in Scotland ? " YONGE-1865-1,164.130

" Never ; YONGE-1865-1,164.131

and I dread nothing so much as being quartered there .
YONGE-1865-1,164.132

Just imagine the trouble it would be to go over the pedigree of every
Keith I met , and to dine with them all upon haggis and sheeps' head !
" YONGE-1865-1,164.133

" There@ @'s no place I want to see as much as Scotland , " said Rachel
. YONGE-1865-1,164.134

" Oh , yes ! young ladies always do . " YONGE-1865-1,164.135

" It is not for a young lady reason , " said Rachel , bluntly .
YONGE-1865-1,164.136

" I want to understand the principle of diffused education , as there
practised . YONGE-1865-1,164.137

The only other places I should really care to see are the Grand
Reformatory for the Destitute in Holland , and the Hospital for Cretins
in Switzerland . " YONGE-1865-1,164.138

" Scotch pedants , Dutch thieves , Swiss <font> goîtres <$$font> - I
will bear your tastes in mind , " said Mr. Keith , rising to take leave
. YONGE-1865-1,164.139

" Really , " said Rachel , when he was gone , " if he had not that silly
military tone of joking , there might be something tolerable about him
if he got into good hands . YONGE-1865-1,164.140

He seems to have some good notions about his sister .
YONGE-1865-1,164.141

She must be just out of the schoolroom , at the very turn of life ,
YONGE-1865-1,164.142

and I will try to get her into my training and show her a little of the
real beauty and usefulness of the career she has before her .
YONGE-1865-1,164.143

How late he has stayed ! YONGE-1865-1,164.144

I am afraid there is no time for the manuscripts . "
YONGE-1865-1,164.145

<P_165>

And though Ermine was too honest to say she was sorry , Rachel did not
miss her regret . YONGE-1865-1,165.147

Colonel Keith came the next day , YONGE-1865-1,165.148

and under his arm was a parcel , which was laid in little Rose's arms ,
and , when unrolled , proved to contain a magnificent wax doll , no
doubt long the object of unrequited attachment to many a little
Avoncestrian , a creature of beauteous and unmeaning face , limpid eyes
, hair that could be brushed , and all her members waxen , as far as
could be seen below the provisional habiliment of pink paper that
enveloped her . YONGE-1865-1,165.149

Little Rose's complexion became crimson , YONGE-1865-1,165.150

and she did not utter a word , while her aunt , colouring almost as much
, laughed and asked where were her thanks . YONGE-1865-1,165.151

" Oh ! " with a long gasp , " it ca@ @n't be for me ! "
YONGE-1865-1,165.152

" Do you think it is for your aunt ? " said the Colonel .
YONGE-1865-1,165.153

" Oh , thank you ! YONGE-1865-1,165.154

But such a beautiful creature for me ! " said Rose , with another gasp
, quite oppressed . YONGE-1865-1,165.155

" Aunt Ermine , how shall I ever make her clothes nice enough ? "
YONGE-1865-1,165.156

" We will see about that , my dear . YONGE-1865-1,165.157

Now take her into the verandah YONGE-1865-1,165.158

and introduce her to Violetta . " YONGE-1865-1,165.159

" Yes ; " then pausing and looking into the fixed eyes , " Aunt Ermine ,
I never saw such a beauty , except that one the little girl left behind
on the bench on the esplanade , when Aunt Ailie said I should be
coveting if I went on wishing Violetta was like her . "
YONGE-1865-1,165.160

" I remember , " said Ermine ; YONGE-1865-1,165.161

" I have heard enough of that <font> ne_plus_ultra <$$font> of doll !
YONGE-1865-1,165.162

Indeed , Colin , you have given a great deal of pleasure , where the
materials of pleasure are few . YONGE-1865-1,165.163

No one can guess the delight a doll is to a solitary imaginative child .
" YONGE-1865-1,165.164

" Thank you , " he said , smiling . YONGE-1865-1,165.165

" I believe I shall enjoy it as much as Rose , " added Ermine , " both
for play and as a study . YONGE-1865-1,165.166

Please turn my chair a little this way , YONGE-1865-1,165.167

I want to see the introduction to Violetta . YONGE-1865-1,165.168

Here comes the beauty , in Rose's own cloak . " YONGE-1865-1,165.169

Colonel Keith leant over the back of her chair YONGE-1865-1,165.170

and silently watched , YONGE-1865-1,165.171

but the scene was not quite what they expected . YONGE-1865-1,165.172

Violetta was sitting in her " slantingdicular " position on her chair
placed on a bench , YONGE-1865-1,165.173

and her little mistress knelt down before her , YONGE-1865-1,165.174

took her in her arms , YONGE-1865-1,165.175

and began to hug her . YONGE-1865-1,165.176

<P_166>

" Violetta , darling , you need not be afraid ! YONGE-1865-1,166.178

There is a new beautiful creature come , YONGE-1865-1,166.179

and I shall call her Colinette , YONGE-1865-1,166.180

and we must be very kind to her , because Colonel Keith is so good , and
knows your grandpapa ; YONGE-1865-1,166.181

and to tell you a great secret , Violetta , that you must not tell
Colinette or anybody , I think he is Aunt Ermine's own true knight . "
YONGE-1865-1,166.182

" Hush ! " whispered the Colonel , over Ermine's head , as he perceived
her about to speak . YONGE-1865-1,166.183

" So you must be very good to her , Violetta , YONGE-1865-1,166.184

and you shall help me make her clothes ; YONGE-1865-1,166.185

but you need not be afraid I ever could love any one half or one quarter
as much as you , my own dear child , not if she were ten times as
beautiful , YONGE-1865-1,166.186

and so come YONGE-1865-1,166.187

and show her to Augustus . YONGE-1865-1,166.188

She@ @'ll never be like you , dear old darling . " YONGE-1865-1,166.189

" It is a study , " said the Colonel , as Rose moved off with a doll in
either hand ; " a moral that you should take home . "
YONGE-1865-1,166.190

Ermine shook her head , YONGE-1865-1,166.191

but smiled , saying , " Tell me , does your young cousin know - "
YONGE-1865-1,166.192

" Alick Keith ? YONGE-1865-1,166.193

Not from me , YONGE-1865-1,166.194

and Lady Temple is perfectly to be trusted ; YONGE-1865-1,166.195

but I believe his father knew it was for no worse reason that I was made
to exchange . YONGE-1865-1,166.196

But never mind , Ermine , YONGE-1865-1,166.197

he is a very good fellow , YONGE-1865-1,166.198

and what is the use of making a secret of what even Violetta knows ? "
YONGE-1865-1,166.199

There was no debating the point , YONGE-1865-1,166.200

for her desire of secrecy was prompted by the resolution to leave him
unbound , whereas his wish for publicity was with the purpose of binding
himself , YONGE-1865-1,166.201

and Ermine was determined that discussion was above all to be avoided ,
and that she would , after the first explanation , keep the conversation
upon other subjects . YONGE-1865-1,166.202

So she only answered with another reproving look and smile ,
YONGE-1865-1,166.203

and said , " And now I am going to make you useful .
YONGE-1865-1,166.204

The editor of the <font> Traveller <$$font> is travelling ,
YONGE-1865-1,166.205

and has left his work to me . YONGE-1865-1,166.206

I have been keeping some letters for him to answer in his own hand ,
because mine betrays womanhood ; YONGE-1865-1,166.207

but I have just heard that he is to stay about six weeks more ,
YONGE-1865-1,166.208

and people must be put out of their misery before that .
YONGE-1865-1,166.209

Will you copy a few for me ? YONGE-1865-1,166.210

Here is some paper with the office stamp . " YONGE-1865-1,166.211

" What an important woman you are , Ermine . " YONGE-1865-1,166.212

<P_167>

" If you had been in England all this time , you would see how easy the
step is into literary work ; YONGE-1865-1,167.214

but you must not betray this for the <font> Traveller's <$$font> sake or
Ailie's . " YONGE-1865-1,167.215

" Your writing is not very womanish , " said the Colonel , as she gave
him his task . YONGE-1865-1,167.216

" Or is this yours ? YONGE-1865-1,167.217

It is not like that of those verses on Malvern hills that you copied out
for me , the only thing you ever gave me . " YONGE-1865-1,167.218

" I hope it is more to the purpose than it was then ,
YONGE-1865-1,167.219

and it has had to learn to write in all sorts of attitudes . "
YONGE-1865-1,167.220

" What@ @'s this ? " as he went on with the paper ;
YONGE-1865-1,167.221

" your manuscript entitled ' Curatolcult . ' YONGE-1865-1,167.222

Is that the word ? YONGE-1865-1,167.223

I had taken it for the produce of Miss Curtis's unassisted genius . "
YONGE-1865-1,167.224

" Have you heard her use it ? " said Ermine , disconcerted , having by
no means intended to betray Rachel . YONGE-1865-1,167.225

" Oh yes ! I heard her declaiming on Sunday about what she knows no
more than Conrade ! YONGE-1865-1,167.226

A detestable , pragmatical , domineering girl ! YONGE-1865-1,167.227

I am thankful that I advised Lady Temple only to take the house for a
year . YONGE-1865-1,167.228

It was right she should see her relations , YONGE-1865-1,167.229

but she must not be tyrannized over . " YONGE-1865-1,167.230

" I do@ @n't believe she dislikes it . " YONGE-1865-1,167.231

" She dislikes no one ! YONGE-1865-1,167.232

She used to profess a liking for a huge Irishwoman , whose husband had
risen from the ranks ; the most tremendous woman I ever saw , except
Miss Curtis . " YONGE-1865-1,167.233

" You know they were brought up together like sisters . "
YONGE-1865-1,167.234

" All the worse , YONGE-1865-1,167.235

for she has the habit of passive submission . YONGE-1865-1,167.236

If it were the mother it would be all right , YONGE-1865-1,167.237

and I should be thankful to see her in good keeping ,
YONGE-1865-1,167.238

but the mother and sister go for nothing , YONGE-1865-1,167.239

and down comes this girl to battle every suggestion with principles
picked up from every catch-penny periodical , things she does not half
understand , and enunciates as if no one had even heard of them before .
" YONGE-1865-1,167.240

" I believe she seldom meets any one who has . I mean to whom they are
matters of thought . YONGE-1865-1,167.241

I really do like her vigour and earnestness . " YONGE-1865-1,167.242

" Do@ @n't say so , Ermine ! YONGE-1865-1,167.243

One reason why she is so intolerable to me is that she is a grotesque
caricature of what you used to be . " YONGE-1865-1,167.244

" You have hit it ! YONGE-1865-1,167.245

I see why I always liked her , besides that it <P_168> is pleasant to
have any sort of visit , and a good scrimmage is refreshing ;
YONGE-1865-1,168.246

she is just what I should have been without papa and Edward to keep me
down , and without the civilizing atmosphere at the park . "
YONGE-1865-1,168.247

" Never . " YONGE-1865-1,168.248

" No , I was not her equal in energy and beneficence ;
YONGE-1865-1,168.249

and I was younger when you came . YONGE-1865-1,168.250

But I feel for her longing to be up and doing , and her puzzled chafing
against constraint and conventionality , though it breaks out in very
odd effervescences . " YONGE-1865-1,168.251

" Extremely generous of you when you must be bored to death with her
interminable talk . " YONGE-1865-1,168.252

" You do@ @n't appreciate the pleasure of variety !
YONGE-1865-1,168.253

besides , she really interests me , YONGE-1865-1,168.254

she is so full of vigorous crudities . YONGE-1865-1,168.255

I believe all that is unpleasing in her arises from her being considered
the clever woman of the family ; having no man nearly connected enough
to keep her in check , and living in society that does not fairly meet
her . YONGE-1865-1,168.256

I want you to talk to her , and take her in hand . "
YONGE-1865-1,168.257

" Me ! YONGE-1865-1,168.258

Thank you , Ermine ! YONGE-1865-1,168.259

Why , I could not even stand her talking about you , though she has the
one grace of valuing you . " YONGE-1865-1,168.260

" Then you ought , in common gratitude , YONGE-1865-1,168.261

for there is no little greatness of soul in patiently coming down to
Mackarel Lane to be snubbed by one's cousin's governess's sister . "
YONGE-1865-1,168.262

" If you will come up to Myrtlewood , you do@ @n't know what you may do
. " YONGE-1865-1,168.263

" No , you are to set no more people upon me , though Lady Temple's eyes
are very wistful . " YONGE-1865-1,168.264

" I did not think you would have held out against her . "
YONGE-1865-1,168.265

" Not when I had against you ? YONGE-1865-1,168.266

No , indeed , though I never did see anybody more winning than she is in
that meek , submissive gentleness ! YONGE-1865-1,168.267

Alison says she has cheered up and grown like another creature since
your arrival . " " And Alexander Keith's . YONGE-1865-1,168.268

Yes , poor thing , we have brought something of her old world , where
she was a sort of little queen in her way . YONGE-1865-1,168.269

It is too much to ask me to have patience with these relations , Ermine
. YONGE-1865-1,168.270

If you could see the change from the petted creature she was with her
mother and husband , almost <P_169> always the first lady in the place ,
and latterly with a colonial court of her own , and now , ordered about
, advised , domineered over , made nobody of , and taking it as meekly
and sweetly as if she were grateful for it ! YONGE-1865-1,169.271

I verily believe she is ! YONGE-1865-1,169.272

But she certainly ought to come away . " YONGE-1865-1,169.273

" I am not so sure of that . YONGE-1865-1,169.274

It seems to me rather a dangerous responsibility to take her away from
her own relations , unless there were any with equal claims . "
YONGE-1865-1,169.275

" They are her only relations , YONGE-1865-1,169.276

and her husband had none . YONGE-1865-1,169.277

Still , to be under the constant yoke of an overpowering woman with
unfixed opinions seems to be an unmitigated evil for her and her boys ;
YONGE-1865-1,169.278

and no one's feelings need be hurt by her fixing herself near some
public school for her sons' education . YONGE-1865-1,169.279

However , she is settled for this year , YONGE-1865-1,169.280

and at the end we may decide . " YONGE-1865-1,169.281

With which words he again applied himself to Ermine's correspondence ,
and presently completed the letter , offering to direct the envelope ,
which she refused , as having one already directed by the author .
YONGE-1865-1,169.282

He rather mischievously begged to see it that he might judge the
character of the writing , YONGE-1865-1,169.283

but this she resisted . YONGE-1865-1,169.284

However , in four days' time there was a very comical twinkle in his eye
, as he informed her that the new number of the <font> Traveller
<$$font> was in no favour at the Homestead , YONGE-1865-1,169.285

" there was such a want of original thought in it . "
YONGE-1865-1,169.286

Ermine felt her imprudence in having risked the betrayal ,
YONGE-1865-1,169.287

but all she did was to look at him with her full , steady eyes , and a
little twist in each corner of her mouth , as she said , " Indeed !
YONGE-1865-1,169.288

Then we had better enliven it with the recollections of a military
secretary , " YONGE-1865-1,169.289

and he was both convinced of what he guessed , and also that she did not
think it right to tell him . YONGE-1865-1,169.290

" But , " he said , " there is something in that girl , I perceive ,
Ermine ; YONGE-1865-1,169.291

she does think for herself , YONGE-1865-1,169.292

and if she were not so dreadfully earnest that she ca@ @n't smile , she
would be the best company of any of the party . " YONGE-1865-1,169.293

" I am so glad you think so ! YONGE-1865-1,169.294

I shall be delighted if you will really talk to her , and help her to
argue out some of her crudities . YONGE-1865-1,169.295

Indeed she is worth it . YONGE-1865-1,169.296

But I suppose you will hardly stay here long enough to do her any good .
" YONGE-1865-1,169.297

" What , are you going to order me away ? " YONGE-1865-1,169.298

<P_170>

" I thought your brother wanted you at home . " YONGE-1865-1,170.300

" It is all very well to talk of an ancestral home ,
YONGE-1865-1,170.301

but when it consists of a tall , slim house , with blank walls and
pepper-box turrets , set on a bleak hill-side , and every one gone that
made it once a happy place , it is not attractive .
YONGE-1865-1,170.302

Moreover , my only use there would be to be kept as a tame heir , the
person whose interference would be most resented , YONGE-1865-1,170.303

and I do@ @n't recognize that duty . " YONGE-1865-1,170.304

" You are a gentleman at large , with no obvious duty , " said Ermine ,
meditatively . YONGE-1865-1,170.305

" What , none ? " YONGE-1865-1,170.306

bending his head , and looking earnestly at her . YONGE-1865-1,170.307

" Oh , if you come here out of duty - " she said archly , and with her
merry laugh . YONGE-1865-1,170.308

" There , is not that a nice occasion for picking a quarrel ?
YONGE-1865-1,170.309

And seriously , " she continued , " perhaps it might be good for you if
we did . YONGE-1865-1,170.310

I am beginning to fear that I ought not to keep you lingering here
without purpose or occupation . " YONGE-1865-1,170.311

" Fulfil my purpose , and I will find occupation . "
YONGE-1865-1,170.312

" Do@ @n't say that . " YONGE-1865-1,170.313

" This once , Ermine . YONGE-1865-1,170.314

For one year I shall wait in the hope of convincing you .
YONGE-1865-1,170.315

If you do not change your mind in that time , I shall look for another
staff appointment , to last until Rose is ready for me . "
YONGE-1865-1,170.316

The gravity of this conclusion made Ermine laugh . YONGE-1865-1,170.317

" That@ @'s what you learnt of your chief , " she said .
YONGE-1865-1,170.318

" There would be less difference in age , " he said . " Though I own I
should like my widow to be less helpless than poor little Lady Temple .
YONGE-1865-1,170.319

So , " he added , with the same face of ridiculous earnest , " if you
continue to reject me yourself , you will at least rear her with an
especial view to her efficiency in that capacity . "
YONGE-1865-1,170.320

And as Rose at that critical moment looked in at the window , eager to
be encouraged to come and show Colinette's successful toilette , he drew
her to him with the smile that had won her whole heart ,
YONGE-1865-1,170.321

and listening to every bit of honesty about " my work " and " Aunt
Ermine's work , " he told her that <P_171> he knew she was a very
managing domestic character , perfectly equal to the charge of both
young ladies . YONGE-1865-1,171.322

" Aunt Ermine says I must learn to manage , because some day I shall
have to take care of papa . " YONGE-1865-1,171.323

" Yes , " with his eyes on Ermine all the while , " learn to be a useful
woman ; YONGE-1865-1,171.324

who knows if we sha@ @n't all depend on you by_and_by ? "
YONGE-1865-1,171.325

" Oh , do let me be useful to you , " cried Rose ; YONGE-1865-1,171.326

" I could hem all your handkerchiefs , and make you a kettle-holder . "
YONGE-1865-1,171.327

Ermine had never esteemed him more highly than when he refrained from
all but a droll look , and uttered not one word of the sportive
courtship that is so peculiarly unwholesome , and undesirable with
children . YONGE-1865-1,171.328

Perhaps she thought her colonel more a gentleman than she had done
before , if that were possible ; YONGE-1865-1,171.329

and she took an odd , quaint pleasure in the idea of this match , often
when talking to Alison of her views of life and education , putting them
in the form of what would become of Rose as Lady Keith ;
YONGE-1865-1,171.330

and Colin kept his promise of making no more references to the future .
YONGE-1865-1,171.331

On moving into his lodgings , the hour for his visits was changed ,
YONGE-1865-1,171.332

and unless he went out to dinner , he usually came in the evening , thus
attracting less notice , and moreover rendering it less easy to lapse
into the tender subject , as Alison was then at home , and the
conversation was necessarily more general . YONGE-1865-1,171.333

The afternoons were spent in Lady Temple's service .
YONGE-1865-1,171.334

Instead of the orthodox dowager britzka and pair , ruled over by a
tyrannical coachman , he had provided her with a herd of little animals
for harness or saddle , and a young groom , for whom Coombe was
answerable . YONGE-1865-1,171.335

Mrs. Curtis groaned YONGE-1865-1,171.336

and feared the establishment would look flighty ; YONGE-1865-1,171.337

but for the first time Rachel became the Colonel's ally .
YONGE-1865-1,171.338

" The worst despotism practised in England , " she said , " is that of
coachmen , YONGE-1865-1,171.339

and it is well that Fanny should be spared ! YONGE-1865-1,171.340

The coachman who lived here when mamma was married , answered her
request to go a little faster , ' I shall drive my horses as I plazes ,
' YONGE-1865-1,171.341

and I really think the present one is rather worse in deed , though not
in word . " YONGE-1865-1,171.342

<P_172>

Moreover , Rachel smoothed down a little of Mrs. Curtis's uneasiness at
Fanny's change of costume at the end of her first year of widowhood , on
the ground that Colonel Keith advised her to ride with her sons , and
that this was incompatible with weeds . YONGE-1865-1,172.344

" And dear Sir Stephen did so dislike the sight of them , " she added ,
in her simple , innocent ways , as if she were still dressing to please
him . YONGE-1865-1,172.345

" On the whole , mother , " said Rachel , " unless there is more
heart-break than Fanny professes , there@ @'s more coquetry in a pretty
young thing wearing a cap that says , ' come pity me , ' than in going
about like other people . " YONGE-1865-1,172.346

" I only wish she could help looking like a girl of seventeen , " sighed
Mrs. Curtis . YONGE-1865-1,172.347

" If that Colonel were but married ; or the other young man !
YONGE-1865-1,172.348

I@ @'m sure she will fall into some scrape ; YONGE-1865-1,172.349

she does not know how , out of sheer innocence . " YONGE-1865-1,172.350

" Well , mother , you know I always mean to ride with her ,
YONGE-1865-1,172.351

and that will be a protection . " YONGE-1865-1,172.352

" But , my dear , I am not sure about your riding with these gay
officers ; YONGE-1865-1,172.353

you never used to do such things . " YONGE-1865-1,172.354

" At my age , mother , and to take care of Fanny . "
YONGE-1865-1,172.355

And Mrs. Curtis , in her uncertainty whether to sanction the
proceedings and qualify them , or to make a protest - dreadful to
herself , and more dreadful to Fanny - yielded the point when she found
herself not backed up by her energetic daughter , YONGE-1865-1,172.356

and the cavalcade almost daily set forth from Myrtlewood ,
YONGE-1865-1,172.357

and was watched with eyes of the greatest vexation , if not by kind Mrs.
Curtis , by poor Mr. Touchett , to whom Lady Temple's change of dress
had been a grievous shock . YONGE-1865-1,172.358

He thought her so lovely , so interesting , at first ;
YONGE-1865-1,172.359

and now , though it was sacrilege to believe it of so gentle and pensive
a face , was not this a return to the world ? YONGE-1865-1,172.360

What had she to do with these officers ? YONGE-1865-1,172.361

How could her aunt permit it ? YONGE-1865-1,172.362

No doubt it was all the work of his great foe , Miss Rachel .
YONGE-1865-1,172.363

It was true that Rachel enjoyed these rides . YONGE-1865-1,172.364

Hitherto she had been only allowed to go out under the escort of her
tyrant the coachman , who kept her in very strict discipline .
YONGE-1865-1,172.365

She had not <P_173> anticipated anything much more lively with Fanny ,
her boys , and ponies ; YONGE-1865-1,173.366

but Colonel Keith had impressed on Conrade and Francis that they were
their mother's prime protectors , YONGE-1865-1,173.367

and they regarded her bridle-rein as their post , keeping watch over her
as if her safety depended on them , and ready to quarrel with each other
if the roads were too narrow for all three to go abreast .
YONGE-1865-1,173.368

And as soon as the Colonel had ascertained that she and they were quite
sufficient to themselves , and well guarded by Coombe in the rear , he
ceased to regard himself as bound to their company ,
YONGE-1865-1,173.369

but he and Rachel extended their rides in search of objects of interest
. YONGE-1865-1,173.370

She liked doing the honours of the county , YONGE-1865-1,173.371

and achieved expeditions which her coachman had hitherto never permitted
to her , in search of ruins , camps , churches , and towers .
YONGE-1865-1,173.372

The Colonel had a turn for geology , though a wandering life even with
an Indian baggage-train had saved him from incurring her contempt for
collectors ; YONGE-1865-1,173.373

but he knew by sight the character of the conformations of rocks ,
YONGE-1865-1,173.374

and when they had mounted one of the hills that surrounded Avonmouth ,
discerned by the outline whether granite , gneiss , limestone , or slate
formed the grander height beyond , thus leading to schemes of more
distant rides to verify the conjectures , which Rachel accepted with the
less argument , because sententious dogmatism was not always possible on
the back of a skittish black mare . YONGE-1865-1,173.375

There was no concealing from herself that she was more interested by
this frivolous military society than by any she had ever previously met
. YONGE-1865-1,173.376

The want of comprehension of her pursuits in her mother's limited range
of acquaintance had greatly conduced both to her overweening manner and
to her general dissatisfaction with the world , YONGE-1865-1,173.377

and for the first time she was neither succumbed to , giggled at ,
avoided , nor put down with a grave , prosy reproof .
YONGE-1865-1,173.378

Certainly Alick Keith , as every one called him , nettled her extremely
by his murmured irony , YONGE-1865-1,173.379

but the acuteness of it was diverting in such a mere lad ,
YONGE-1865-1,173.380

and showed that if he could only once be roused , he might be capable of
better things . YONGE-1865-1,173.381

There was an excitement in his unexpected manner of seeing things that
was engaging as well as provoking ; YONGE-1865-1,173.382

and Rachel never felt content if he were at Myrtlewood without <P_174>
her seeing him , if only because she began to consider him as more
dangerous than his elder namesake , and so assured of his position that
he did not take any pains to assert it , or to cultivate Lady Temple's
good graces ; YONGE-1865-1,174.383

he was simply at home and perfectly at ease with her .
YONGE-1865-1,174.384

Colonel Keith's tone was different . YONGE-1865-1,174.385

He was argumentative where his young cousin was sarcastic .
YONGE-1865-1,174.386

He was reading some of the books over which Rachel had strained her
capacities without finding any one with whom to discuss them , since all
her friends regarded them as poisonous ; YONGE-1865-1,174.387

and even Ermine Williams , without being shaken in her steadfast trust ,
was so haunted and distressed in her lonely and unvaried life by the
echo of these shocks to the faith of others , that absolutely as a
medical precaution she abstained from dwelling on them .
YONGE-1865-1,174.388

On the other hand , Colonel Keith liked to talk and argue out his
impressions , YONGE-1865-1,174.389

and found in Rachel the only person with whom the subject could be
safely broached , YONGE-1865-1,174.390

and thus she for the first time heard the subjects fairly handled .
YONGE-1865-1,174.391

Hitherto she had never thought that justice was done to the argument
except by a portion of the press , that drew conclusions that terrified
while they allured her , whereas she appreciated the candour that
weighed each argument , distinguishing principle from prejudice , and
religious faith from conventional construction , YONGE-1865-1,174.392

and in this measurement of minds she felt the strength and acuteness of
powers superior to her own . YONGE-1865-1,174.393

He was not one of the men who prefer unintellectual women .
YONGE-1865-1,174.394

Perhaps clever men , of a profession not necessarily requiring constant
brain work , are not so much inclined to rest the mind with feminine
empty chatter , as are those whose intellect is more on the strain .
YONGE-1865-1,174.395

At any rate , although Colonel Keith was attentive and courteous to
every one , and always treated Lady Temple as a prime minister might
treat a queen , his tendency to conversation with Rachel was becoming
marked , YONGE-1865-1,174.396

and she grew increasingly prone to consult him . YONGE-1865-1,174.397

The interest of this new intercourse quite took out the sting of
disappointment when again " Curatocult " came back , " declined with
thanks . " YONGE-1865-1,174.398

Nay , before making a third attempt she hazarded a question on his
opinion of female authorship , YONGE-1865-1,174.399

and much to her <P_175> gratification , and somewhat to her surprise ,
heard that he thought it often highly useful and valuable .
YONGE-1865-1,175.400

" That is great candour . YONGE-1865-1,175.401

Men generally grudge whatever they think their own privilege . "
YONGE-1865-1,175.402

" Many things can often be felt and expressed by an able woman better
than by a man , YONGE-1865-1,175.403

and there is no reason that the utterance of anything worthy to be said
should be denied , provided it <font> is <$$font> worthy to be said . "
YONGE-1865-1,175.404

" Ah ! there comes the hit . YONGE-1865-1,175.405

I wondered if you would get through without it . " YONGE-1865-1,175.406

" It was not meant as a hit . YONGE-1865-1,175.407

Men are as apt to publish what is not worth saying as women can be ,
YONGE-1865-1,175.408

and some women are so conscientious as only to put forth what is of
weight and value . " YONGE-1865-1,175.409

" And you are above wanting to silence them by palaver about unfeminine
publicity ? " YONGE-1865-1,175.410

" There is no need of publicity . YONGE-1865-1,175.411

Much of the best and most wide-spread writing emanates from the most
quiet , unsuspected quarters . " YONGE-1865-1,175.412

" That is the benefit of an anonymous press . " YONGE-1865-1,175.413

" Yes . The withholding of the name prevents well-mannered people from
treating a woman as an authoress , if she do not proclaim herself one ;
YONGE-1865-1,175.414

and the difference is great between being known to write , and setting
up for an authoress . " YONGE-1865-1,175.415

" Between fact and pretension . YONGE-1865-1,175.416

But write or not write , there is an instinctive avoidance of an
intellectual woman . " YONGE-1865-1,175.417

" Not always , YONGE-1865-1,175.418

for the simple manner that goes with real superiority is generally very
attractive . YONGE-1865-1,175.419

The larger and deeper the mind , the more there would be of the genuine
humbleness and gentleness that a shallow nature is incapable of .
YONGE-1865-1,175.420

The very word humility presupposes depth . " YONGE-1865-1,175.421

" I see what you mean , " said Rachel . YONGE-1865-1,175.422

" Gentleness is not feebleness , nor lowness lowliness .
YONGE-1865-1,175.423

There must be something held back . " YONGE-1865-1,175.424

" I see it daily , " said Colonel Keith ; YONGE-1865-1,175.425

and for a moment he seemed about to add something , YONGE-1865-1,175.426

but checked himself , YONGE-1865-1,175.427

and took advantage of an interruption to change the conversation .
YONGE-1865-1,175.428

" Superior natures lowly and gentle ! " said Rachel to herself .
YONGE-1865-1,175.429

<P_176>

" Am I so to him , then , YONGE-1865-1,176.431

or is he deceiving himself ? YONGE-1865-1,176.432

What is to be done ? YONGE-1865-1,176.433

At my age ! YONGE-1865-1,176.434

Such a contravention of my principles ! YONGE-1865-1,176.435

A soldier , an Honourable , a title in prospect , Fanny's major !
YONGE-1865-1,176.436

Intolerable ! YONGE-1865-1,176.437

No , no ! YONGE-1865-1,176.438

My property absorbed by a Scotch peerage , when I want it for so many
things ! YONGE-1865-1,176.439

Never . YONGE-1865-1,176.440

I am sorry for him , though . YONGE-1865-1,176.441

It is hard that a man who can forgive a woman for intellect , should be
thrown back on poor little Fanny ; YONGE-1865-1,176.442

and it is gratifying - . YONGE-1865-1,176.443

But I am untouched yet , YONGE-1865-1,176.444

and I will take care of myself . YONGE-1865-1,176.445

At my age a woman who loves at all , loves with all the gathered force
of her nature , YONGE-1865-1,176.446

and I certainly feel no such passion . YONGE-1865-1,176.447

No , certainly not ; YONGE-1865-1,176.448

and I am resolved not to be swept along till I have made up my mind to
yield to the force of the torrent . YONGE-1865-1,176.449

Let us see . " YONGE-1865-1,176.450

" Grace , my dear , " said Mrs. Curtis , in one of her most
confidential moments , " is not dear Rachel looking very well ?
YONGE-1865-1,176.451

I never saw her dress so well put on . " YONGE-1865-1,176.452

" Yes , she is looking very handsome , " said Grace .
YONGE-1865-1,176.453

" I am glad she has consented to have her hair in that new way ,
YONGE-1865-1,176.454

it is very becoming to her . " YONGE-1865-1,176.455

" I - I do@ @n't know that it is all the hair , " said the mother ,
faltering , as if half ashamed of herself ; YONGE-1865-1,176.456

" but it seemed to me that we need not have been so uneasy about dear
Fanny . YONGE-1865-1,176.457

I think , do@ @n't you ? that there may be another attraction .
YONGE-1865-1,176.458

To be sure , it would be at a terrible distance from us ;
YONGE-1865-1,176.459

but so good and kind as he is , it would be such a thing for you and
Fanny as well - " YONGE-1865-1,176.460

Grace gave a great start . YONGE-1865-1,176.461

" Yes , my dear , " Mrs. Curtis gently prosed on with her speculation ,
" she would be a dreadful loss to us ; YONGE-1865-1,176.462

but you see , so clever and odd as she is , and with such peculiar ideas
, I should be so thankful to see her in the hands of some good ,
sensible man that would guide her . " YONGE-1865-1,176.463

" But do you really think it is so , mother ? " YONGE-1865-1,176.464

" Mind , my dear , it is nothing to build on , YONGE-1865-1,176.465

but I can@ @not help being struck , and just thinking to myself .
YONGE-1865-1,176.466

I know you@ @'ll not say anything . " YONGE-1865-1,176.467

<P_177>

Grace felt much distressed after this communication had opened her eyes
to certain little touches of softening and consciousness that sat oddly
enough on her sister . YONGE-1865-1,177.469

From the first avowal of Colonel Keith's acquaintance with the
Williamses , she had concluded him to be the nameless lover ,
YONGE-1865-1,177.470

and had been disappointed that Alison , so far from completing the
confidence , had become more reserved than ever , leaving her to wonder
whether he were indeed the same , or whether his constancy had survived
the change of circumstances . YONGE-1865-1,177.471

There were no grounds on which to found a caution , YONGE-1865-1,177.472

yet Grace felt full of discomfort and distrust ; a feeling shared by
Alison , who had never forgiven herself for her half confidence , and
felt that it would be wiser to tell the rest , but was withheld by
knowing that her motive would actuate her sister to a contrary course .
YONGE-1865-1,177.473

That Colin should detach himself from her , love again , and marry , was
what Ermine schooled herself to think fitting ; YONGE-1865-1,177.474

but Alison alternated between indignant jealousy for her sister , and
the desire to warn Rachel that she might at best win only the reversion
of his heart . YONGE-1865-1,177.475

Ermine was happy and content with his evening visits ,
YONGE-1865-1,177.476

and would not take umbrage at the daily rides , nor the reports of
drawing-room warfare , YONGE-1865-1,177.477

and Alison often wavered between the desire of preparing her , and the
doubt whether it were not cruel to inflict the present pain of want of
confidence . YONGE-1865-1,177.478

If that were a happy summer to some at Avonmouth , it was a very trying
one to those two anxious , yet apparently uninterested sisters , who
were but lookers-on at the game that affected their other selves .
YONGE-1865-1,177.479

At length , however , came a new feature into the quiet summer life at
Avonmouth . YONGE-1865-1,177.480

Colin looked in on Ermine one morning to announce , with shrugged
shoulders , and a face almost making game of himself , that his brother
was coming ! YONGE-1865-1,177.481

Lord Keith had been called to London on business , YONGE-1865-1,177.482

and would extend his journey to come and see what his brother was doing
. YONGE-1865-1,177.483

" This comes of being the youngest of the family , " observed Colin
meditatively . YONGE-1865-1,177.484

" One is never supposed capable of taking care of one's self .
YONGE-1865-1,177.485

With Keith I shall be the gay extravagant young officer to the end of my
days . " YONGE-1865-1,177.486

<P_178>

" You are not forgiving to your brother , " said Ermine .
YONGE-1865-1,178.488

" You have it in your power to make me so , " he said eagerly .
YONGE-1865-1,178.489

" Then you would have nothing to forgive , " she replied , smiling .
YONGE-1865-1,178.490

Lady Temple's first thought was a renewal of her ardent wish that Ermine
should be at Myrtlewood ; and that Mackarel Lane and the governess-ship
{TEXT:governesship} should be as much as possible kept out of sight .
YONGE-1865-1,178.491

Even Alison was on her side ; YONGE-1865-1,178.492

not that she was ashamed of either , YONGE-1865-1,178.493

but she wished that Ermine should see and judge with her own eyes of
Colin's conduct , YONGE-1865-1,178.494

and also eagerly hailed all that showed him still committed to her
sister . YONGE-1865-1,178.495

She was proportionably vexed that he did not think it expedient to
harass Ermine with further invitations . YONGE-1865-1,178.496

" My brother knows the whole , " he said , YONGE-1865-1,178.497

" and I do not wish to attempt to conceal anything . "
YONGE-1865-1,178.498

" I do not mean to conceal , " faltered Fanny , YONGE-1865-1,178.499

" only I thought it might save a shock - YONGE-1865-1,178.500

appearances - YONGE-1865-1,178.501

he might think better of it , if - " YONGE-1865-1,178.502

" You thought only what was kind , " answered the Colonel ,
YONGE-1865-1,178.503

" and I thank you for it most warmly ; YONGE-1865-1,178.504

but this matter does not depend on my brother's consent ,
YONGE-1865-1,178.505

and even if it did , Ermine's own true position is that which is most
honourable to her . " YONGE-1865-1,178.506

Having said this , he was forced to console Fanny in her shame at her
own kind attempt at this gentle little feminine subterfuge .
YONGE-1865-1,178.507

He gratified her , however , by not interfering with her hospitable
instincts of doing honour to and entertaining his brother , for whose
sake her first approach to a dinner-party was given ; a very small one ,
but treated by her and her household as a far more natural occurrence
than was ever any sort of entertainment at the Homestead .
YONGE-1865-1,178.508

She even looked surprised , in her quiet way , at Mrs. Curtis's
proffers of assistance in the <font> et_ceteras , <$$font>
YONGE-1865-1,178.509

and gratefully answered for Coombe's doing the right thing , without
troubling herself further . YONGE-1865-1,178.510

Mrs. Curtis was less easy in her mind , YONGE-1865-1,178.511

her housewifely soul questioned the efficiency of her niece's
establishment , YONGE-1865-1,178.512

and she was moreover persuaded that Lord Keith must be bent on
inspecting his brother's choice , even while Rachel felt as if the coils
of fate were being drawn round her , and let Grace embellish her for the
dinner-party , in <P_179> an odd sort of mood , sometimes rejecting her
attempts at decoration , sometimes vouchsafing a glance at the glass ,
chiefly to judge whether her looks were really as repellently practical
and intellectual as she had been in the habit of supposing .
YONGE-1865-1,179.513

The wreath of white roses , which she wore for the first time ,
certainly had a pleasing and softening effect , YONGE-1865-1,179.514

and she was conscious that she had never looked so well ;
YONGE-1865-1,179.515

then was vexed at the solicitude with which her mother looked her over ,
YONGE-1865-1,179.516

and fairly blushed with annoyance at the good lady's evident
satisfaction . YONGE-1865-1,179.517

But , after all , Rachel , at her best , could not have competed with
the grace of the quiet little figure that received them , the rich black
silk giving dignity to the slender form , and a sort of compromise
between veil and cap sheltering the delicate fair face ;
YONGE-1865-1,179.518

and with a son on each side , Fanny looked so touchingly proud and well
supported , YONGE-1865-1,179.519

and the boys were so exultant and admiring at seeing her thus dressed ,
that it was a very pretty sight , and struck the first arrived of her
guests , Mr. Touchett , quite dumb with admiration .
YONGE-1865-1,179.520

Colonel Hammond , the two Keiths , and their young kinsman , completed
the party . YONGE-1865-1,179.521

Lord Keith of Gowanbrae was best described by the said young kinsman's
words - " a long-backed Scotchman . " YONGE-1865-1,179.522

He was so intensely Scottish that he made his brother look and sound the
same , whereas ordinarily neither air nor accent would have shown the
Colonel's nation , YONGE-1865-1,179.523

and there was no definable likeness between them , except , perhaps ,
the baldness of the forehead ; YONGE-1865-1,179.524

but the remains of Lord Keith's hair were silvered red , whereas Colin's
thick beard and scanty locks were dark brown , and with a far greater
admixture of hoar-frost , though he was the younger by twenty years ,
and his brother's appearance gave the impression of a far greater age
than fifty-eight ; YONGE-1865-1,179.525

there was the stoop of rheumatism , and a worn , thin look on the face ,
with its high cheek-bones , narrow lips , and cold eyes , by no means
winning . YONGE-1865-1,179.526

On the other hand , he was the most finished gentleman that Grace and
Rachel had ever encountered ; YONGE-1865-1,179.527

he had all the gallant polish of manner that the old Scottish nobility
have inherited from the French of the old <font> régime <$$font> - a
manner that , though Colin possessed all its essentials , had been in
some degree rubbed off in the frankness of his military life , but
<P_180> which the old nobleman retained in its full perfection .
YONGE-1865-1,180.528

Mrs. Curtis admired it extremely as a specimen of the " old school , "
for which she had never ceased to mourn ; YONGE-1865-1,180.529

and Rachel felt as if it took her breath away by the likeness to Louis
XIV ; YONGE-1865-1,180.530

but , strange to say , Lady Temple acted as if she were quite in her
element . YONGE-1865-1,180.531

It might be that the old man's courtesy brought back to her something of
the tender chivalry of her soldier husband , and that a sort of filial
friendliness had become natural to her towards an elderly man ,
YONGE-1865-1,180.532

for she responded at once , YONGE-1865-1,180.533

and devoted herself to pleasing and entertaining him .
YONGE-1865-1,180.534

Their civilities were something quite amusing to watch ,
YONGE-1865-1,180.535

and in the evening , with a complete perception of his tastes , she got
up a rubber for him . YONGE-1865-1,180.536

" Can you bear it ? YONGE-1865-1,180.537

You will not like to play ? " murmured the Colonel to her , as he rang
for the cards , recollecting the many evenings of whist with her mother
and Sir Stephen . YONGE-1865-1,180.538

" Oh ! I do@ @n't mind . YONGE-1865-1,180.539

I like anything like old times , YONGE-1865-1,180.540

and my aunt does not like playing - " YONGE-1865-1,180.541

No , for Mrs. Curtis had grown up in a family where cards were
disapproved , YONGE-1865-1,180.542

and she felt it a sad fall in Fanny to be playing with all the skill of
her long training , and receiving grand compliments from Lord Keith on
joint victories over the two colonels . YONGE-1865-1,180.543

It was a distasteful game to all but the players , YONGE-1865-1,180.544

for Rachel felt slightly hurt at the Colonel's defection ,
YONGE-1865-1,180.545

and Mr. Touchett , with somewhat of Mrs. Curtis's feeling that it was
a backsliding in Lady Temple , suddenly grew absent in a conversation
that he was holding with young Mr. Keith upon - of all subjects in the
world - lending library books , YONGE-1865-1,180.546

and finally repaired to the piano , where Grace was playing her mother's
favourite music , in hopes of distracting her mind from Fanny's enormity
; YONGE-1865-1,180.547

and there he stood , mechanically thanking Miss Curtis , but all the
time turning a melancholy eye upon the game . YONGE-1865-1,180.548

Alick Keith , meanwhile , sat himself down near Rachel and her mother ,
close to an open window , YONGE-1865-1,180.549

for it was so warm that even Mrs. Curtis enjoyed the air ;
YONGE-1865-1,180.550

and perhaps because that watching the Colonel had made Rachel's
discourses somewhat less ready than usual , he actually obtained an
interval in which to speak ! YONGE-1865-1,180.551

<P_181>

He was going the next day to Bishopsworthy , there to attend his
cousin's wedding , and at the end of a fortnight to bring his sister for
her visit to Lady Temple . YONGE-1865-1,181.553

This sister was evidently his great care , YONGE-1865-1,181.554

and it needed but little leading to make him tell a good deal about her
. YONGE-1865-1,181.555

She had , it seemed , been sent home from the Cape at about ten years
old , when the regiment went to India , YONGE-1865-1,181.556

and her brother , who had been at school , then was with her for a short
time before going out to join the regiment . YONGE-1865-1,181.557

" Why , " said Rachel , recovering her usual manner , " you have not
been ten years in the army ! " YONGE-1865-1,181.558

" I had my commission at sixteen , " he answered . YONGE-1865-1,181.559

" You are not six-and-twenty ! " she exclaimed . YONGE-1865-1,181.560

" You are as right as usual , " was the reply , with his odd little
smile ; " at least till the 1st of August . " YONGE-1865-1,181.561

" My dear ! " said her mother , more alive than Rachel to his amusement
at her daughter's knowing his age better than he did himself , but
adding politely , " You are hardly come to the time of life for liking
to hear that your looks deceived us . " YONGE-1865-1,181.562

" Boys are tolerated , " he said , with a quick glance at Rachel ;
YONGE-1865-1,181.563

but at that moment something many-legged and tickling flitted into the
light , YONGE-1865-1,181.564

and dashed over her face . YONGE-1865-1,181.565

Mrs. Curtis was by no means a strong-minded woman in the matter of
moths and crane-flies , disliking almost equally their sudden personal
attentions and their suicidal propensities , YONGE-1865-1,181.566

and Rachel dutifully started up at once to give chase to the
father-long-legs , YONGE-1865-1,181.567

and put it out of the window before it had succeeded in deranging her
mother's equanimity either by bouncing into her face , or suspending
itself by two or three legs in the wax of the candle .
YONGE-1865-1,181.568

Mr. Keith seconded her efforts , YONGE-1865-1,181.569

but the insect was both lively and cunning , eluding them with a
dexterity wonderful in such an apparently over-limbed creature , until
at last it kindly rested for a moment with its wooden peg of a body
sloping , and most of its thread-like members prone upon a newspaper ,
where Rachel descended on it with her pocket-handkerchief , and Mr.
Keith tried to inclose it with his hands at the same moment .
YONGE-1865-1,181.570

To have crushed the fly would have been melancholy ; to have <P_182>
come down on the young soldier's fingers , awkward ;
YONGE-1865-1,182.571

but Rachel did what was even more shocking - YONGE-1865-1,182.572

her hands did descend on , what should have been fingers ,
YONGE-1865-1,182.573

but they gave way under her - YONGE-1865-1,182.574

she felt only the leather of the glove between her and the newspaper .
YONGE-1865-1,182.575

She jumped YONGE-1865-1,182.576

and very nearly cried out , looking up with an astonishment and horror
only half reassured by his extremely amused smile .
YONGE-1865-1,182.577

" I beg your pardon ; YONGE-1865-1,182.578

I@ @'m so sorry - " she gasped confused . YONGE-1865-1,182.579

" Inferior animals can dispense with a member more or less , " he
replied , giving her the other corner of the paper , on which they bore
their capture to the window , and shook it till it took wing , with
various legs streaming behind it . YONGE-1865-1,182.580

" That venerable animal is apparently indifferent to having left a third
of two legs behind him , " YONGE-1865-1,182.581

and as he spoke he removed the already half drawn-off left-hand glove ,
YONGE-1865-1,182.582

and let Rachel see for a moment that it had only covered the thumb ,
forefinger , two joints of the middle , and one of the third ;
YONGE-1865-1,182.583

the little finger was gone , and the whole hand much scarred .
YONGE-1865-1,182.584

She was still so much dismayed that she gasped out the first question
she had ever asked him - " Where - ? " YONGE-1865-1,182.585

" Not under the handkerchief , " he answered , picking it up as if he
thought she wanted convincing . YONGE-1865-1,182.586

" At Delhi , I imagine . " YONGE-1865-1,182.587

At that moment , Grace , as an act of general beneficence certainly
pleasing to her mother , began to sing . YONGE-1865-1,182.588

It was a stop to all conversation , YONGE-1865-1,182.589

for Mrs. Curtis particularly disliked talking during singing ,
YONGE-1865-1,182.590

and Rachel had to digest her discoveries at her leisure , as soon as she
could collect herself after the unnatural and strangely lasting
sensation of the solid giving way . YONGE-1865-1,182.591

So Grace was right , YONGE-1865-1,182.592

he was no boy , but really older than Fanny , the companion of her
childhood , and who would probably have married her had not the General
come in the way ! YONGE-1865-1,182.593

Here was , no doubt , the real enemy , while they had all been thinking
of Colonel Keith . A man only now expecting his company !
YONGE-1865-1,182.594

It would sound more absurd . YONGE-1865-1,182.595

Yet Rachel was not wont to think how things would sound !
YONGE-1865-1,182.596

And this fresh intense dislike provoked her . YONGE-1865-1,182.597

Was it the unsuitability of the young widow remarrying ?
YONGE-1865-1,182.598

" Surely , surely , it must not be that womanhood in its contemptible
side is still so strong that I want to keep all for <P_183> myself !
YONGE-1865-1,183.599

Shame ! YONGE-1865-1,183.600

And this may be the true life love , suppressed , now able to revive !
YONGE-1865-1,183.601

I have no right to be disgusted . YONGE-1865-1,183.602

I will watch minutely , and judge if he will be a good guide and father
to the boys , though it may save the Colonel trouble .
YONGE-1865-1,183.603

Pish ! what have I to do with either ? YONGE-1865-1,183.604

Why should I think about them ? YONGE-1865-1,183.605

Yet I must care for Fanny , YONGE-1865-1,183.606

I must dislike to see her lower herself even in the eyes of the world .
YONGE-1865-1,183.607

Would it really be lowering herself ? YONGE-1865-1,183.608

I can@ @not tell , YONGE-1865-1,183.609

I must think it out . YONGE-1865-1,183.610

I wish that game was over , or that Grace would let one speak . "
YONGE-1865-1,183.611

But songs and whist both lasted till the evening was ended by Lady
Temple coming up to the curate with her winnings and her pretty smile ,
YONGE-1865-1,183.612

" Please , Mr. Touchett , let this go towards some treat for the
school-children . YONGE-1865-1,183.613

I should not like to give it in any serious way , you know , but just
for some little pleasure for them . " YONGE-1865-1,183.614

If she had done it on purpose , she could not have better freshly
riveted his chains . YONGE-1865-1,183.615

That pensive simplicity , with the smile of heartfelt satisfaction at
giving pleasure to anybody , were more and more engaging as her spirits
recovered their tone , YONGE-1865-1,183.616

and the most unsatisfactory consideration which Rachel carried away that
evening was that Alexander Keith being really somewhat the senior , if
the improvement in Fanny's spirits were really owing to his presence ,
the objection on the score of age would not hold . YONGE-1865-1,183.617

But , thought Rachel , Colonel Keith being her own , what united power
they should have over Fanny . YONGE-1865-1,183.618

Pooh ! she had by no means resigned herself to have him , though for
Fanny's sake it might be well , YONGE-1865-1,183.619

and was there not a foolish prejudice in favour of married women , that
impeded the usefulness of single ones ? YONGE-1865-1,183.620

However , if the stiff , dry old man approved of her for her fortune's
sake , that would be quite reason enough for repugnance .
YONGE-1865-1,183.621

The stiff old man was the pink of courtesy , YONGE-1865-1,183.622

and paid his respects in due order to his brother's friends the next day
, Colin attending in his old <font> aide-de-camp <$$font> fashion .
YONGE-1865-1,183.623

It was curious to see them together . YONGE-1865-1,183.624

The old peer was not at all ungracious to his brother ;
YONGE-1865-1,183.625

indeed , Colin had been agreeably {TEXT:agreeable} surprised by an
amount of warmth and brotherliness that he had never experienced from
him before , as if old age had brought a disposition <P_184> to cling to
the remnant of the once inconveniently large family , and make much of
the last survivor , formerly an undesirable youngest favourite , looked
on with jealous eyes and thwarted and retaliated on for former petting ,
as soon as the reins of government fell from the hands of the aged
father . YONGE-1865-1,184.626

Now , the elder brother was kind almost to patronizing , though
evidently persuaded that Colin was a gay careless youth , with no harm
in him , but needing to be looked after ; YONGE-1865-1,184.627

and as to the Cape , India , and Australia being a larger portion of the
world than Gowanbrae , Edinburgh , and London , his lordship would be
incredulous to the day of his death . YONGE-1865-1,184.628

