<BEGIN_ambass-1525-e1-p2>

<P_3.2,20>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXXXIV_TUNSTALL_BISHOP_OF_LONDON_AND_DR._SAMPSON_TO_KING_HENRY_THE_EIGHTH._THEY_REPORT_THE_DEATH_OF_SIR_RICHARD_WINGFIELD;_WITH_THE_OFFERS_MADE_FOR_THE_RELEASE_OF_THE_FRENCH_KING>

Pleasith it your Highnes to vnderstond that the xv=th=. day of this
monith our companyon Maister <P_3.2,21> Wyngfeld , Chancelor of your
Duchie fell syk in to a flyx , and the next day we were convided to a
greate feste to the bishop of Avila , whider we went and Maister
Wyngfeld with vs , thinking hymself strong ynough thervnto , where he
dud ete Millons and drank wyn without water vnto them , and afterwardes
dranke bere , whiche is made here by force bytter of the hoppe for to be
preservyd the better agaynst the intollerable hetis of this contrye .
AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,21.4

And albeit he did ete but verey moderatly ; yet after our retorne home
not oonly his flux began to encreace vpon hym ,
AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,21.5

but also the feuer toke hym farvently . Wherupon Phisicions were callyd
for help , who after they perceyved the fever to bee contynuall without
intermission and the flux to encrease to a voyding of blud , mynestred
vnto hym suche medicynes as they thought moost convenyent ;
AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,21.6

and after th'@ @Emperor , hering of his disease , sent all his
Phisicions vnto hym to vysyte hym , AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,21.7

but for no thing that all they cold doo , the fever could be remedyed ,
nor yet mean found to make hym slepe , or sleke his perpetuall and
ardent thurst ; wher vpon he made hym mete to God , and receyvyd all the
sacramentis of holy churche , and the xx=th= day of this monyth whiche
was Mary Magdalens day dipartyd owte of this transitory lyf : of whom
your Highnes hath a marveilous great losse , seing the great wisdom and
experience that he had in all your affayres , and how at this tyme he
myght <P_3.2,22> here so evil haue been lakkyd , seing the greate weight
of your affayres that we now haue in hande . AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,22.8

And next your losse of suche a person of that maturitie and sadness that
he was of , We repute vs at this tyme to have the next losse , seing we
shall lak the substantiall advise and counsaile that we myght haue had
of hym from tyme to tyme to our noo litle comforth and the great
advauncement of our charge comytted vnto vs ; whiche , we pray almyghtie
God that nowe , syns he is goon , we may soo addresse that it may be to
the contentacien of your Highnes , wherin our good will and diligence
shall not lak , God willing . AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,22.9

Surely we never sawe nor herde in our lif any man of any degree or
condition make a better or more devoute ende of his lyf towardis God
then he dyd . AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,22.10

He made suche a Declaration of the goodnes and mercy of God , and so
humble a summyssion of hymself vnto the same , whiche he dyd both in
Frenche and Italyon , that the curate and those of other nations ther
being present to a good nombre were movyd all to teris .
AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,22.11

We pray Almyghty God to haue mercy of his soule and to graunt vs grace
when he shall call vs to his mercy to folow th'@ @example that we have
sene in hym . AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,22.12

A lytell before his dethe he wrote a Letter vnto your Highnes to pray
the same to bee good and graciouse to my Lady his wif and his childer ,
whiche your Grace shall receyue herwith . AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,22.13

We have buried <P_3.2,23> hym as honorably as we could devyse of things
to be had here , bicause he was bothe of your Ordre and your Ambassador
. AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,23.14

His will was to bee buryed at the ffreres Obseruaunts , bilded in this
Citie by the late King of Aragon and quene Elizabeth pro sepulture Regum
, wher no man is buryed without lycence of th'@ @Emperor , for th'@
@opteynyng wherof after we sent to know his pleasure , he not oonly
gladly gaue lycence but also comaundyd he shuld be buryed within the
cyrcuit of the quere , which place is foundyd and reseruyd for buryall
oonly of Kings . Whiche thinge he dyd in the honor of your Highnes ,
and never bifore was grauntyd to no pryvate person .
AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,23.15

Thre daies bifore the said Maister Wyngfeld fell syke , my Lorde
Chancelor sent for vs in an Evenyng to com to speke with hym , where he
shewyd vs howe th'@ @Emperor had gyven hym in commaundement to
communicate vnto vs suche things as had ben purposyd the same day by the
Presydent of Parys , whiche was arryvyd two daies byfore : declaring
vnto vs how that daie in the mornyng , in the chambre of the Vice_Roy of
Naples , within the Curte , the said President had purposyd that sense
Almyghtie God had by his prouidence ordeynyd that his Maister the
Ffrenche King was commyn in to the captiuitie of th'@ @Emperor , who of
his clemence and benignitie was content to herkyn to the deliuery of hym
vpon reasonable offres to be made , there were ij. waies for <P_3.2,24>
his deliuery , AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,24.16

oon was the way of clemence and liberalitie ,
AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,24.17

if th'@ @Emperour wold restore hym of his gooddnes , without raunsom ,
to his libertie , and make of hym an assured and boundyn frynde , for
evyr joynyng with hym in aliaunce , it shuld be to the perpetuall renome
and glorious fame of th'@ @Emperor for euyr .
AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,24.18

The odyr way was the way of justice , that sens he was content to herkyn
to his delivery , eydyr to set his raunsom at a somme of money
reasonable for his redempc~on , whiche , though it were right great ,
the Realme would bere , though they shuld sell for it all their juellis
, or ellis levyng that way , to make hym restore suche things as he
uniustly deteynith , and to satisfie suche wrongs as may be laide to his
chargis whiche he wold be redy to doo , desyringe to know whiche of thes
waies th'@ @emperour wold take . Wherunto the Chaunceler affirmyd to
haue made answer that as vnto the first way of clemence and liberalitie
that he had spokyn of , he thought that th'@ @Emperor wold not take that
way , nor that he wold bye soo dere fame and renome .
AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,24.19

And as vnto the secund way , he thought also that for money oonly he
shuld not be delivered , but that he must restore to th'@ @Emperor suche
as he deteynith of his : and also content and satisfie his confederatis
. Wherupon he saide that they fell to treat of restitution to bee made
to th'@ @Emperour first : and that albeit th'@ @Emperor <P_3.2,25> might
demaunde Languedoc and Prouynce , with many other pecis , yet he said
th'@ @Emperor wold only goe to matier freshe in memory , and werin he
sufferyd manifest wrong , as vnto the Duchie of Burgoyn and restitution
of the morgage of Picardie , or the money lent on the same , with
extincting of reasort of pecis to be restoryd . Opon all whiche matiers
, and specialli of the right of the Duchie of Burgon the Chanceler
shewid vs at length what he had purposed and what was answerid by the
President . Whiche reasons and argumentis perticulerly here we shal@
@not nede to reherse seing they conteyn matiers in Lawe , and be the
self same that were purposyd at Caleis by the Chauncelors of bothe
Princis before my Lorde Legate your Lieutenaunt at that time , and
wherof my said Lord Legate hath a boke alredy drawn by th'@ @Emperor's
chauncelor conteinyug all those arguments with many moo yet not purposyd
. AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,25.20

The Chancelor saide that after long debating they departyd for that tyme
, nedyr falling to any poynt nor lyke to com to any .
AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,25.21

And as vnto the Duc of Burbon , he saide the President answeryd that he
was subiect to Fraunce and that the Realme wold not treat with hym , but
wold put it to th'@ @Emperor , he to geve him as reason shuld require .
AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,25.22

We askyd hym if he had spokyn any thing of your Highnes and what
Commyssion he had brought or had . AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,25.23

To that he said that he had noo commission to treate <P_3.2,26> with us
, nor yet with them , for peax , but oonly to treat upon such pointis as
myght sounde to the deliuery of the Frenche King's person , and to
prepare all things to bee more ripe at the commyng of Madam de Alancon ,
whiche shall bring full pouer from all the astats of Fraunce to conclude
all things and to offre reason to all partis .
AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,26.24

{COM:material_omitted}

<P_3.2,29>

Th'@ @Emperour hath gevyn in reward to the seruaunts of Maister Wyngfeld
, suche as doo retorne in to England agayn , thre_hundreth Ducats to
help them homewardis . AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,29.27

And thus almighty Jh~u preserue your Highnes to his pleasure and yours
with encrease of much honour . AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,29.28

From Tolledo AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,29.29

the xxviij=th= daie of July . AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,29.30

By your Grace's moost humble seruaunts and subgectis Cuthbert London .
Richard Sampson . AMBASS-1525-E1-P2,3.2,29.31

