<BEGIN_armin-1608-e2-p2>

<P_29>

This leane , greedy foole having a stomacke , and seeing the butler out
of the way , his appetite was such , as loath to tarry , breakes open
the dairy house , eats and spoils new cheesecurds , cheesecakes ,
ouerthrowes creame bowles , and having filled his belly , and knew he
had done euill , gets him gone to Mansfield in Sherwood , as one
fearefull to be at home . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.3

The maydes came home that morning from milking , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.4

and finding such a masaker of their dairie , almost mad , thought a
yeere's wages could not make amends . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.5

But , O the foole ! leane Leonard , they cried , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.6

he did this mischief : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.7

they complayned to their master , but to no purpose ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.8

Leonard was farre enough off , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.9

search was made for the foole , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.10

but hee was gone , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.11

none knew wither ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.12

and it was his propertie , hauing done mischiefe , neuer to come home of
himselfe , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.13

but if any one intreated him , he would easily be won .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.14

All this while the foole was at Mansfield in Sherwood ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.15

and stood gaping at a shoomaker's stall ; who , not knowing him , asked
him what he was ? ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.16

Goe looke , sayes hee : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.17

I know not myselfe . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.18

They asked him where hee was borne ? ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.19

At my mother's backe , sayes hee . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.20

In what country ? quoth they . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.21

In the country , quoth hee , where God is a good man .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.22

At last one of these journeymen imagined he was not very wise ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.23

and flouted him very merrily , asking him if he would haue a stitch
where there was a hole ? <paren> meaning his mouth <$$paren> .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.24

I , quoth the foole , if your nose may be the needle .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.25

The shoomaker could have found in his heart to have tooke measure on his
pate with a last , instead of his foote , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,29.26

but let him goe as <P_30> he was . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.27

A country plow-jogger being by , noting all this , secretly stole a
peice of shoomaker's waxe off the stall , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.28

and coming behinde him , clapt him on the head , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.29

and asked him how he did ? ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.30

The foole , seeing the pitch ball , pulled to haue it off ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.31

but could not but with much paine , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.32

in an enuious spleene , smarting ripe runes after him ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.33

fals at fistie_cuffes with him ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.34

but the fellow belaboured the foole cunningly , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.35

and got the foole's head under his arme , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.36

and bob'd his nose . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.37

The foole , remembring how his head was , strikes it up ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.38

and hits the fellowe's mouth with the pitcht place , so that the haire
of his head and the haire of the clowne's beard were glued together .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.39

The fellow cryed , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.40

the foole exclaimed , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.41

and could not sodainely part : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.42

in the end , the people <paren> after much laughing at the jest
<$$paren> let them part faire ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.43

the one went to picke his beard , the other his head .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.44

The constable came , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.45

askt the cause of their falling out , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.46

and knowing one to be Leonard , the leane foole , whom he had a warrant
from the gentleman to search for , demands of the fellow how it hapned .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.47

The fellow hee could answere nothing , but um ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.48

um , quoth hee againe , meaning hee would tell him all when his mouth
was cleane ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.49

but the constable thinking hee was mockt , clapt him in the stocks ,
where the fellow sat a long houre farming his mouth ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.50

and when hee had done , and might tell his griefe , the constable was
gone to carry home Leonard to his maister , who , not at home , hee was
enforced to stay supper-time , where hee told the gentleman the jest ,
who was very merrie to heare the story , contented the officer , and bad
him set the fellow at liberty , who , betimes in the morning , was found
fast asleepe in the stocks . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.51

The fellow knowing himselfe faulty , put up his wrongs ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.52

quickly departed , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.53

and went to work betimes that morning with a flea in his eare .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.54

The gentleman with whom this Leonard dwelt , having bought a goodly
fayre hawke , brought her home , being not a little proud of his
penny-worth , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,30.55

and at supper to other gentlemen fell a praysing of her , who , soothing
up his humour , likewise fayled not to adde a toarch of fire to encrease
more <P_31> flame ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.56

for indeede the bird was worthy of commendations ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.57

and therefore did merit prayses . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.58

Leonard standing by with his finger in his mouth , as it was his custome
, after hearing them praise the goodnesse of the hawke , thought indeede
they had meant for goodnesse , being farre better meate then a turkey or
a swan , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.59

was very desirous to eate of the same ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.60

and unknowne goes downe , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.61

and sodainely from the pearch snatcht the hawke , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.62

and hauing wrung off her neck , begins to besiedge that good morsell ,
but with so good a courage , that the feathers had almost choakt him ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.63

but there lay my friend Leonard in a lamentable taking .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.64

Well , the hawke was mist , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.65

and the deede was found : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.66

the maister was fetcht , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.67

and all men might see the hawke , feathers and all , not very well
digested . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.68

There was no boote to bid runne for drams to driue down this undigested
moddicombe ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.69

the gentleman of the one side cryed , hang the foole !
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.70

the foole on the other side cryed not , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.71

but made signes that his hawke was not so good as hee did praise her for
; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.72

and , though the gentleman loued his hawke , yet he loued the foole
aboue , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.73

being enforced rather to laugh at his simplicitie , then to vere at his
losses sodainely - being glad to make himselfe merry , jested on it ever
after . Upon whose hawke a gentleman of his very wisely writ these
lynes , and gaue unto his maister . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.74

{COM:verse_omitted}

The gentleman laughed at this rime , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.76

yet knew not whether more foole he for writing , the other for eating ,
or he for loosing . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.77

Well , putting the hare to the goose-giblets , seeing there was no
remedy , made himselfe pastime , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.78

pleased himselfe , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.79

and did rest contented . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,31.80

He that mischiefes many , sometime wrongs himselfe , as <P_32> hearken
to this jest . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.81

Leonard of all things loued his wheele-barrow , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.82

and would worke all day , and carry dung in it , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.83

yet would sleepe in it at night - ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.84

he would set up meate for his belly in it - ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.85

I , what did hee without it . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.86

Once at a Christmas time , when the fire in the hall was full , Leonard
was sore a cold : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.87

hee got coles out of the scullery , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.88

and put them into his barrow , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.89

and set them on fire , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.90

and so sate him downe to warme him , quite forgetting it was made of
wood , and wood would burne : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.91

so , in the end , being warme , goes for a jacke of beere ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.92

brings it , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.93

and sets it on the fire to warme , so that the inside melted ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.94

and hee dranckt the drinck notwithstanding ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.95

but , on the sodaine , he seeing the wheele-barrow flame that he so
loued , aloud hee cryes , Dmee ! dmee ! dmee ! ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.96

and takes it up flaming , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.97

and trundles it into the hall , among the people , to shew .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.98

The young men and maydes tumbled over one another for feare :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.99

some had their faces burned , others their leges ; the maydes their
smocks - ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.100

yea , one set fire on another , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.101

for their aprons burned , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.102

and being many people , the flame increased rather then decreased .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.103

Leonard , seeing none would helpe him , runs <paren> for feare lest the
gentleman should know it <$$paren> ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.104

and thrusts it into the barne to hide it , which some seeing , runs
after , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.105

and , had they not come at that time , the hay and straw had beene all
burnt , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.106

for it was already of a light fire , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.107

but being quencht out all was well . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.108

Such is the enuie of fooles , who , seeing none would helpe him ,
thought to doe them mischiefe , which he did , but not much .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.109

The World laughed a good at these jests , though , to say sooth , shee
could hardly afford it , for feare of writhing her sweet fauour ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.110

yet strayning courtesy in this kinde , did , as our wantons doe at a
feast , spare for manners in company , but alone cram most greedily .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.111

So shee , forgetting modesty , gapte out a laughter ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.112

and , like women hardly wonne , cryd More ! more !
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.113

The currish crittick said shee should , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.114

and gaue her the third pennerth of the morral , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.115

and said : You laugh at leane enuie in a long foole ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,32.116

but you have cause to weepe at long <P_33> enuie in a leane age , as you
liue in . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.117

This foole cries out not all mine , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.118

but distributes like a kinde companion , being a superficiall glasse to
gaze in . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.119

There be leane fooles as well as fat : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.120

such are they whose noses dropes necessitie , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.121

and they smell out for church lands , many tenements , onthrifts ,
surfets , looking leanely on all this , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.122

but feede fatly on hope . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.123

This fatnesse goes to the heart , not seene in the visage .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.124

These seeme simple , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.125

but , like Leonard , hit home at advantage : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.126

they can stop men's mouths , and seale them up in advantage , and giue
the stocks to the simple deseruer , when themselves are not blamlesse .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.127

O ! beware when you see a long , meagre looke ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.128

search him - ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.129

he hath also long , reaching fingers , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.130

and can slide a groat by himselfe , as Leonard did , fall out , curse ,
sweare , and batter heauen itselfe with humour of folly .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.131

Such was the leane-neckt crane , who had the fat foxe to dinner , making
him lick the outside of the glasse , while his leannesse fed within .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.132

You understand me , maddame : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.133

such are your landlords to the poore , youre leane lords to the fat
tennant , or by a figure one for the other . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.134

Thus they batten heere ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.135

but the diuell will gnaw their bones for it . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.136

By the third jest we observe a greedinesse in leane folly , that , so
good a report come in their way , these eat up hawke , feathers , and
all , to put it by , though they choake in the deede .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.137

Hereupon comes in leane enuy , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.138

swallowes fat bits - I mean honest manners - ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.139

and makes them sterril of all good manners , as the lawyer the poore
clyant's plow pence , the cittie the country commodities ; that , under
the spew of leannesse , they fat themselves to the ribs - good hold for
flesh hookes at the general waste . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.140

By the fourth and last <paren> I would it were least <$$paren> it
bewrayes a curious and common leannesse in lewd liuers , who , to
revenge on others , will fire their own wheelebarrow .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,33.141

Like the leane tennant , who , falling out with his landlord , and
seeing his neighbour's house on fire , desired his neighbours to pull
downe his first , for feare of more danger ; not that he louede his
neighbour's safety and his owne , but that <P_34> hee hated his landlord
: ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.142

or the contrary , couetous of their owne commoditie , fire themselues ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.143

and , because they will not burn alone , endanger their friends ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.144

and say 't@ @is kind to have company . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.145

These are fooles , indeed , leane ones ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.146

these are fat and foule , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.147

and make thicke doings for the diuel's dyet . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.148

World , I name them not ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.149

thou knowest them well enough . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.150

At this shee bit her lip , knowing some that were leane Leonards in this
; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.151

but kay me I@ @le kay thee : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.152

giue me an inch to_day , I@ @le giue thee an ell to-morrow ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.153

and wee@ @le to hell together . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.154

The World , dimpling her chin with meere modestie , as it were throwing
off variety of squemish nicetie , began to say , Sooth , thou saist true
, ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.155

there are such nicks in mee , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.156

but I know not how to mende : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.157

I am willing , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.158

but flesh is weake ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.159

pre@ @thee be more sparing , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.160

carpe not , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.161

confound not , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.162

hope the best amendment may come . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.163

Pre@ @thee goe in , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.164

furnish thy sallet : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.165

these hearbs already are sauory , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.166

and I picke out to my appetite ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.167

and though I bee not altogether pleased , yet am I not quite past
patience : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.168

I will endure , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.169

for that disease that festers so much receives cure gladly , though it
come with exceeding paine , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.170

yet so much the profit by how much the perplexities , cries cure to the
danger . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.171

Mistris , sayes Sotto , I am glad to sit so neare you ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.172

and to bee thought a kinde neighbour , too , is more then the world
affords . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.173

But looke , who is heere we have ? ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.174

we haue fellowde one with our flat , and fat foole disturbd by the leane
. ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.175

Now , as in a history we mingle mirth with matter , to make a
please_plaister for melancholy , so in our glasse we present to the
leane a cleane . One that was more beloued among ladyes than thought
can hatch , or opinion produce . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.176

His name is Jack Miller : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.177

he liues yet ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.178

and hath beene in this citie within few dayes , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.179

and giue me leaue to describe him thus - ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,34.180

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_35>

Alas ! quoth the World , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,35.183

I am sorry , trust me , that one so outwardly well should bee so
inwardly ill , and haue that appearance in nastie defect , which of
itselfe is neate ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,35.184

but go on with the repetition , since wee are mended in the condition .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,35.185

Wee will winck at small faults , tho wee yeelde it greate in nature .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,35.186

Nemo sine crimine , and so forth . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,35.187

I , quoth Sotto , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,35.188

say yee me so ? ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,35.189

haue at him then , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,35.190

out it goes , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,35.191

but mark it well . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,35.192

In a gentleman's house where Jack Miller resorted , as he was welcome to
all , it chanced so there was a play , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,35.193

the players dressed them in the gentleman's kitchen ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,35.194

and so entered through the entry into the hall .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,35.195

It was after dinner , when pyes stood in the oven to coole for supper :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,35.196

Jack had not dyned , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,35.197

and seeing the oven stand open , and so many pyes there untold , <paren>
hee thought because they seemed numberlesse <$$paren> O ! sayes <P_36>
Jack , for one of them p- p- pyes , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.198

for so hee stammered in speaking . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.199

The players boy being by , and in his ladyes gowne , could haue found in
his heart to creepe in , cloathes and all ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.200

but he perswaded Jack to do so , to which hee was willing ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.201

and very nimbly thrusts his head into the hot oven , which being newly
opened , on the sodaine hee was singed both of head and face , and
almost not a hayre left on his eye-brows or beard .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.202

Jack cryes , O ! I burne , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.203

and had not the wit to come back , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.204

but lay still : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.205

the gentlewoman-boy tooke him by the heeles , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.206

and pulled him out , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.207

but how he lookt I pray you judge that can discerne fauours .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.208

Jack was in a bad taking with his face , poore soule ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.209

and lookt so ugly and so strangely , that the lady of the play , being
ready to enter before the gentiles to play her part , no sooner began ,
but , remembring Jack , laught out , and could goe no further .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.210

The gentleman mused at what hee laught , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.211

but such a jest being easily seene , was told the gentleman , who sent
in for Jack Miller , who came like bald Time , to tell them time was
past of his hayre : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.212

but hee so strangely lookt , as his countenance was better then the play
. ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.213

But against night the players dress themselves in another place ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.214

and at supper Jack Miller sang his song of Dirryes Faire , with a barmy
face to take out the fire , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.215

and lookt like the poter of the ale-fat . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.216

It was no boote to bid him stut and stammer , poore foole :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.217

as cleane as he was , hee was now but beastly_faced ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.218

for hee looked like a man that , being ashamed to shew his face , had
hid it in a dry lome wall , and pulling it out againe left all the hayre
behinde him . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.219

Jack , on Newyeeres day in the morning , was to carry a Newyeeres gift
to a gentleman a myle off , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.220

and as he staid to have it delivered him to beare , asked which was the
cleanest way thither . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.221

A fellow , knowing his cleanlinesse , sends him over a durty marsh ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.222

and so hee folded up his band <paren> then cleane <$$paren> for fouling
, that at the gentleman's doore he might put it on .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.223

The present came , which Jack seeing , made legs to the gentlewoman ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,36.224

forgetting his band was in his hose , carried <P_37> a stif neck to and
fro to the gentlewoman , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.225

and what ere she spake , or where shee stood , Jack would look but one
way , as though his neck had been starcht . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.226

And , remember , saies the gentlewoman , you abuse not my message , nor
my gift : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.227

No , fo , fo , forsooth , sayes Jack ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.228

and away he goes , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.229

and thought hee would see what it was , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.230

and , as hee went he lift up the basket lid ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.231

and lookt . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.232

Ah , ha ! quoth Jack , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.233

I see it is almond bu- , bu- , butter . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.234

Along he goes , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.235

and seeing the marsh wet and durty , thought to leape a little ditch ,
and so to goe a cleane hie_way , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.236

but <paren> O ! poor Jack <$$paren> hee , basket and all , lay in the
midst of the ditch up to his arme-pits in mud ; which , Jack seeing ,
got out , and goes to a riuer by , and washes himselfe first , his band
next ; where , if it had been about his neck as it should , it had
labour well saued : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.237

but he washt his almond butter so long , that the butter was washt away
, which hee perceiving , in that woefull taking comes back , and called
for more bu- , bu- , butter . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.238

The gentlewoman seeing how things went , rather laught then vext ,
because shee was so simple to trust a foole with matters of trust ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.239

and bad him get him to the fire and dry him ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.240

and said next time she would stay her seruants leisure , <paren> who
then were abroad <$$paren> rather then trust to a rotten staffe .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.241

Thus cleane fooles light still on beastly bargaines .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.242

In the towne of Esam , in Worstersh. , Jack Miller being there borne ,
was made much of in every place . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.243

It hapned that the Lord Shandoye@ @'s players came to towne and played
there ; which Jack not a little loved , especially the clowne , whom he
would embrace with a joyful spirit , and call him Grumball ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.244

for so he called himselfe in gentleman's houses , where hee would
imitate playes , being all himselfe king , gentleman , clowne , and all
: ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.245

hauing spoke for one , he would sodainely goe in , and againe return for
the other ; and , stammering as he did , make much mirth :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.246

to conclude , he was a right innocent , without any villany at all .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.247

When these players I speake of had done in the towne , they went to
Partiar , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,37.248

and Jack said he would goe all the world over <P_38> with Grumbal .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.249

It was then a great frost new begun , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.250

and the hauen was frozen over thinely ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.251

but heere is the wonder , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.252

the gentleman that kept the Hart , <paren> an inne in the towne
<$$paren> whose backside looked to the way that led to the riuer-side to
Partiar , lockt up Jack in a chamber next the hauen , where he might see
the players passe by ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.253

and they of the towne , loth to lose his company , desirued to have it
so ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.254

but hee , I say , seeing them goe by , creepes through the window ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.255

and said , I come to thee , Grumball . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.256

The players stood all still to see further . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.257

He got down very dangerously , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.258

and makes no more adoe , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.259

but venters over the hauen , which is by the long bridge , and , as I
guess , some forty yards ouer ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.260

yet he made nothing of it , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.261

but my hart aked when my eares heard the ise crack all the way .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.262

When hee was come unto me I was amazed , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.263

and tooke up a brick-bat <paren> which lay there by <$$paren>
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.264

and threw it , which no sooner fell on the ise , but it burst .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.265

Was not this strange , that a foole of thirty yeares was borne of that
ise which would not endure the fall of a brick-bat ?
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.266

but euery one rated him for the deede , telling him of the daunger .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.267

He considered his fault , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.268

and , knowing faults should be punished , he intreated Grumball the
clowne , who hee so deerely loued , to whip him but with rosemary ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.269

for that he thought would not smart . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.270

But the players in jest breecht him till the bloud came , which he tooke
laughing , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.271

for it was his manner euer to weepe in kindnesse , and laugh in
extreames . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.272

That this is true mine eies were witnesses , being then by .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.273

Jack Miller , welcomed to all places , and bard of none , came to a
gentleman , who being at dinner requested him for mirth to make him a
play , which he did , and to sing Derries Faire , which was in this
manner . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.274

First it is to be notted , hee strutted hugely , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.275

and could neyther pronounce b nor p. , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.276

and thus he began . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,38.277

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_39>

And so forward ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,39.280

but the jest was to heare him pronounce braue beggars ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,39.281

and his qualitie was , after hee began his song , no laughing could put
him out of it . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,39.282

One standing by , noting his humour that b and p plagued him , bad him
say this after him , which Jack said he would doe : Buy any flawre ,
pasties , pudding pyes , plum pottage , or pes-cods .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,39.283

O ! it was death to Jack to doe it ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,39.284

but like a willing foole he fell to it . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,39.285

Buy any , buy any fla- , flaw- , p- , p- , p- , pasties , and p- , p- ,
p- , pudding , p- , p- , p- , pyes , p- , p- , p- , &c.
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,39.286

And euer as hee hit the on word , hee would pat with his finger on the
other hand , that more and more it would make a man burst with laughing
almost to see his action : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,39.287

sometime he would be pronouncing one word , while one might goe to the
doore and come againe . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,39.288

But euer after gentiles would request him to speake that , where before
, Derryes fayre was all his song . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,39.289

He came not long after <paren> to this I am witness , because my eares
heard it <$$paren> to a gentleman's not far from Upton upon Seuerne , in
Gloxester-shire , where at the table among many gallants and gentlewomen
, <paren> almost the state of the country <$$paren> hee was to jest and
sing : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,39.290

especially they intreated him for his new speech of the pees , which he
began in such manner to speake with driuelling and stuttering , that
they began mightely to laugh ; insomuch , that one proper gentlewomen
{TEXT:gentlewomen} among the rest , because shee would not seeme too
immodest with laughing , for such is the humour of many , that thinke to
make all , when God knows they marre all : so she , straining herself ,
though inwardly she laughed heartily , gave out such an earnest of her
modesty , that all the table rung of it . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,39.291

Who is that ? says one : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,39.292

not I , says another ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,39.293

but by her cheeks you might find guilty Gilbert , where he had hid the
brush . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,39.294

This jest made them laugh more , and the rayther that shee stood upon
her marriage , and disdained all the gallants there , who so heartily
laught ; that an old gentlewoman at the table took such a conceit at it
with laughing , that , had not the foole bin <P_40> which stood <paren>
by fortune <$$paren> at her back , and was her supporter , being in a
great swound , she had fallen to the ground backward .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.295

But downe they burst the windows for ayre , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.296

and there was no little boot to bid ront : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.297

shee was nine or ten dayes ere she recovered that fit on my knowledge .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.298

Thus simple Jack made mirth to all , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.299

made the wisest laugh , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.300

but to this gathered little wit to himselfe . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.301

This , quoth the World , is mere mirth without mischiefe ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.302

and I allow of it : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.303

folly without faults , is as reddish without salt ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.304

may passe in digestion one without the other , and doe better , where
both together engenders but rheume , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.305

and mirth does well in any . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.306

I , sayes Sotto , so way you not the true waight :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.307

as it is sufferable to be whole , so it is saluable to be hurt ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.308

and one to the other giues ayme ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.309

but to {COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended} bee neither is monstrous .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.310

I would faine morrall of it , if you please . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.311

Leave was granted , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.312

for the World knew it would else be commanded , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.313

and Sotto thus poynts at the parable . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.314

By the first merry emblem I reach at stars , how they fire themselves in
the firmament : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.315

whether it bee sitting to neere the sunne in the day , or couching to
neere the moone in the night , I know not ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.316

but the hayre of their happynesse often fals off ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.317

and shoots from a blazing commet to a falne star ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.318

and carries no more light then is to be seene in the bottome of Platoe's
inck-horne ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.319

and , where they should study in private with Diogenes in his cell ,
they are with Cornelius in his tub . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.320

By the second , the cleane fooles of this world are pattern'd , who so
neately stand upon their ruffes , and shoeties , that the braine is now
lodged in the foote ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.321

and thereupon comes it that many make their head their foote , and
employment is the drudge to prodigalitee , made sawcie through the mud
of their owne minds , where they so often stick fast , that Bankes , his
horse , with all his strength and cunning , can@ @not draw them out .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.322

By the third is figured saucie adventure in folly ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.323

for wisdome puts no forwarder {COM:preceding_word_"forwarder"_emended}
then warrant , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.324

and for pleasure the wisest make themselves fooles .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,40.325

<P_41>

To conclude this foolish description of the fourth , many sing out their
tunes , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,41.327

and like ideots true borne , confound with folly what was created more
holy , shutting out trifles that out_method matter of more waight ,
where nisetie herselfe will let goe in laughter , though she spoyle her
marriage . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,41.328

The World likte not this well , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,41.329

but bit the lip againe , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,41.330

but as rich men suffer wrongs for advantage , took her pennerth's
together , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,41.331

casts her eye aside , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,41.332

and sees a comely foole indeed passing more stately ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,41.333

and , who was this ? ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,41.334

forsooth , Wil. Sommers , one not meanly esteemed by the king for his
merriment : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,41.335

his mellody was of a higher straine , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,41.336

and he lookt as the noone broade waking . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,41.337

His description was writ in his fore-head , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,41.338

and yee might read it thus : - ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,41.339

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_42>

The World was in loue with this merry foole , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,42.342

and said he was fit to the time indeede , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,42.343

and therefore deserued to be well regarded . Insomuch as shee longed to
heare his friscoes morralized , and his gambals set downe .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,42.344

And Sotto as willingly goes forward thus . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,42.345

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_2_here}

<P_48>

Now , Lady World , saies Sotto ; you wonder at this first jest :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.348

do not ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.349

't@ @is common , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.350

for who so simple that , being gorged with broth themselues , will not
giue their friends one spoonful , especially our kinne .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.351

O weell to make them great , make ourselues , and pollitikly rise againe
by their greatness . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.352

But hee was simple in that ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.353

for though hee raised many , hee himselfe stood at one stay .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.354

But the deed is not common , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.355

therefore may fitly be termed a fooles deed , since the wise meddle not
with it , unlesse to plunge further in , and winde from povertie .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.356

But leaue it the greatest power of all to remedie and reuenge , while
earthly majestie grows great by adding libertie to their afflictions ,
as in our commons of late , God preserue him for it .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.357

By the second morally signification giues this ; that fooles questions
reach to mirth , leading wisdome by the hand , as age leads children by
one finger , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.358

and though it holds not fast in wisdome , yet it points at it .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.359

Better so then the wise to put questions to fooles ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.360

for that@ @'s to put money out of the bag , and leaue the money behinde
to bad use , while themselues beg with the bag .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.361

Such , like Will Sommers , sleepe amongst dogs .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.362

The third bids us charitably learne of simplicitie to pay our debts when
the poore creditor cals for it ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.363

but 't@ @is a generall fault , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,48.364

and such who haue doores shut , whereat the poore stand , shal find
gates fast whereat <P_49> themselues may not enter ; but especially we
of the laity , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.365

for while the pastor cherishes the soule , we seeke to starve the body ;
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.366

but let@ @'s be mindfull least decaying one we lose both .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.367

O ! the World could not indure this , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.368

but offered to fling away . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.369

Nay , nay , saies the cinnick ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.370

soft and faire - a word or too more : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.371

and , halfe angry , looking into his glasse , sees one all in blew ,
carrying his neck on the one side , looking sharply , drawing the leg
after him in a strange manner , described in meeter thus :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.372

{COM:verse_omitted}

This is singular , indeede , sayes the World : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.374

I long to heere of this dry , poore John . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.375

His name is John , indeede , saies the cinnick ; but neither John a nods
, nor John a dreames , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.376

yet either as you take it , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.377

for he is simply simple without tricks , not sophisticated like your
tobacco to tast strong , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.378

but as nature aloud him he had his talent . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.379

Whereat the World so tickled her spleene that she was agog , clapped
{COM:preceding_word_"clapped"_emended} her hands for joy , and saies she
was deepely satisfied , and cryed more . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.380

The crooked stick of liqurish that gaue this sweet relish , being to set
his teeth to it , wipes his rheumy beard , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.381

and smites his philosophical nose , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,49.382

<P_50>

snapping his fingers , barber-like after a dry shauing , jogs on thus :
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.384

This innocent ideot , that neuer harmed any , before I enter any further
{SIC:tany_furher} , I will let you understand in too words , how he came
to be of the hospital of Christschurch . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.385

Some certaine yeers since <paren> but not a few yeers <$$paren> there
dwelt a poore blinde woman in Bow-lane , in London , called by the name
of blinde Alice , who had this foole of a child to lead her ; in whose
house he would sit eyther on the stayres , or in a corner , and sing
psalms , or preach to himselfe of Peter and Paul , because he delighted
to goe to sermons with blinde Alice , and heard the preacher talk of
them . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.386

It chanced the Worshipfull of the Citty <paren> good benefactours to the
poore <$$paren> to take her into Christ's hospital , with whom John went
as a guide to lead her : who being old , after shee dyed , hee was to
bee turned out of doore ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.387

but the Citty , more desirous to pitty then to be cruell , placed him as
a fostred fatherless child , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.388

and they did wel in it too , seeing hee was one of God's creatures ,
though some difference in persons . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.389

Well , to goe forward in what I promised you : John went to St. Paul's
church , in London , to meet with B. Nowell , the deane , whose bounty
to him was great ; and the foole knew it well enough , whom he would
duly attend after his preaching , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.390

for euer at their meeting he gaue them a groat , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.391

and hee would bring it to his nurse . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.392

Well , B. Deane preached not that day ; whereupon John stands in a
corner , with boyes flocking about him , and begins to preach himselfe ,
holding up his muckender for his booke , and reads his text .
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.393

It is written , saies he , in the 3 chapter of Paule to the Corinthians
. Brethren , you must not sweare <paren> for that was lightly all his
text <$$paren> : ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.394

then thus he begins , Wheras or wherunto it is written ; for because you
must belieue it ; ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.395

for surely else we are no Christians . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.396

Write the sermon <paren> boy <$$paren> saies hee <paren> as the hospital
boyes doe <$$paren> ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.397

and then one must write on his hand with his finger ,
ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.398

and then he would goe forward thus . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.399

The world is proud , ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.400

and God is angry if wee do not repent . ARMIN-1608-E2-P2,50.401

