<BEGIN_asch-1566-e1-p2>

<P_11R>

{COM:p._46_in_reprint}

Therfore , if to the goodnes of nature , be ioyned the wisedome of the
teacher , in leading yong wittes into a right and plaine waie of
learnyng , surelie , children , kept vp in Gods feare , and gouerned by
his grace , maie most easelie be brought well to serue God , and contrey
both by vertue and wisedome . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11R.4

But if will , and witte , by farder age , be once allured from
innocencie , delited in vaine fightes , filled {TEXT:filed} with foull
taulke , crooked with wilfulnesse , hardned with stubburnesse , and let
louse to disobedience , surelie it is hard with ientlenesse , but
vnpossible with seuere crueltie , to call them backe to good frame
againe . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11R.5

For , where the one , perchance maie bend it , the other shall surelie
breake it : and so in stead of some hope , <P_11V> leaue an assured
desperation , and shamelesse contempt of all goodnesse , the fardest
pointe in all mischief , as <font> Xenophon <$$font> doth most trewlie
and most wittelie marke . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11V.6

Therfore , to loue or to hate , to like or contemne , to plie this waie
or that waie to good or to bad , ye shall haue as ye vse a child in his
youth . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11V.7

And one example , whether loue or feare doth worke more in a child , for
vertue and learning , I will gladlie report : which maie be heard
{SIC:hard} with some pleasure , and folowed with more profit .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11V.8

Before I went into <font> Germanie <$$font> , I came to Brodegate in
Leicestershire {SIC:Lecestershire} , to take my leaue of that noble
Ladie <font> Iane Grey <$$font> , to whom I was exceding moch beholdinge
. ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11V.9

Hir parentes , the Duke and Duches , with all the {COM:p._47_in_reprint}
houshold , Gentlemen and Gentlewomen , were huntinge in the Parke :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11V.10

I founde her , in her Chamber , readinge <font> Phaedon Platonis
<$$font> in Greeke , and that with as moch delite , as four ientlemen
wold read a merie tale in <font> Bocase <$$font> .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11V.11

After salutation , and dewtie done , with som other taulke , I asked hir
, whie she wold leese soch pastime in the Parke ?
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11V.12

smiling she answered me : I wisse , all their sporte in the Parke is but
a shadoe to that pleasure , that I find in <font> Plato <$$font> :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11V.13

Alas good folke , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11V.14

they neuer felt , what trewe pleasure ment . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11V.15

And howe came you Madame , quoth I , to this deepe knowledge of pleasure
, ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11V.16

and what did chieflie allure you vnto it : seinge , not many women , but
verie fewe men haue atteined thereunto . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11V.17

I will tell you , quoth she , and tell you a troth , which perchance ye
will meruell at . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11V.18

One of the greatest benefites , that euer God gaue me , is , that he
sent me so sharpe and seuere Parentes , and so ientle a scholemaster .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11V.19

For when I am in presence either of father or mother , whether I speake
, kepe silence , sit , stand , or go , eate , drinke , be merie , or sad
, be sowyng , plaiyng , dauncing , or doing anie thing els , I must do
it , as it were , in soch weight , mesure , and number , euen so
perfitelie , as God made the world , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,11V.20

or else I am so sharplie taunted , so cruellie threatened , yea
presentlie some tymes , with pinches , nippes , and bobbes , and other
waies , <P_12R> which I will not name , for the honor I beare them , so
without measure misordered , that I thinke my selfe in hell , till tyme
cum , that I must go to <font> M. Elmer <$$font> , who teacheth me so
ientlie , so pleasantlie , with soch faire allurementes to learning ,
that I thinke all the tyme nothing , whiles I am with him .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12R.21

And when I am called from him , I fall on weeping , because , what
soeuer I do els , but learning , is ful of grief , trouble , feare , and
whole misliking vnto me : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12R.22

And thus my booke , hath bene so moch my pleasure , and bringeth dayly
to me more pleasure and more , that in respect of it , all other
pleasures , in very deede , be but trifles and troubles vnto me .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12R.23

I remember this talke gladly , both bicause it is so worthy
{COM:p._48_in_reprint} of memorie , and bicause also , it was the last
talke that euer I had , and the last tyme , that euer I saw that noble
and worthie Ladie . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12R.24

I could be ouer long , both in shewinge iust causes , and in recitinge
trewe examples , why learning shold be taught , rather by loue than
feare . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12R.25

He that wold see a perfite discourse of it , let him read that learned
treatese , which my frende <font> Ioan. Sturmius <$$font> wrote <font>
de institutione Principis <$$font> , to the Duke of <font> Cleues
<$$font> . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12R.26

The godlie counsels of <font> Salomon <$$font> and <font> Iesus <$$font>
the sonne of <font> Sirach <$$font> , for sharpe kepinge in , and
bridleinge of youth , are ment rather , for fatherlie correction , then
masterlie beating , rather for maners , than for learninge : for other
places , than for scholes . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12R.27

For God forbid , but all euill touches , wantonnes , lyinge , pickinge ,
slouthe , will , stubburnnesse , and disobedience , shold be with sharpe
chastisement , daily cut away . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12R.28

This discipline was well knowen , and diligentlie vsed , among the
<font> Graecians <$$font> , and old <font> Romanes <$$font> , as doth
appeare in <font> Aristophanes , Isocrates <$$font> , and <font> Plato
<$$font> , and also in the Comedies of <font> Plautus <$$font> : where
we see that children were vnder the rule of three persones : <font>
Praeceptore , Paedagogo , Parente <$$font> : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12R.29

the scholemaster taught him learnyng with@ @all ientlenes :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12R.30

the Gouernour corrected his maners , with moch sharpenesse :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12R.31

The father , held the sterne of his whole obedience :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12R.32

And so , he that vsed to teache , did not commonlie vse to beate ,
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12R.33

<P_12V>

but remitted that ouer to an other mans charge . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12V.35

But what shall we saie , when now in our dayes , the scholemaster is
vsed , both for <font> Praeceptor <$$font> in learnyng , and <font>
Paedagogus <$$font> in maners . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12V.36

Surelie , I wold he shold not confound their offices , but discretelie
vse the dewtie of both so , that neither ill touches shold be left
vnpunished , nor ientlenesse {SIC:ientlesse} in teaching anie wise
omitted . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12V.37

And he shall well do both , if wiselie he do appointe diuersitie of tyme
, and separate place , for either purpose : vsing {COM:p._49_in_reprint}
alwaise soch discrete moderation , as the scholehouse should be counted
a sanctuarie against feare : and verie well learning , a common perdon
for ill doing , if the fault , of it selfe be not ouer heinous .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12V.38

And thus the children , kept vp in Gods feare , and preserued by his
grace , finding paine in ill doing , and pleasure in well studiyng ,
shold easelie be brought to honestie of life , and perfitenes of
learning , the onelie marke , that good and wise fathers do wishe and
labour , that their children , shold most buselie , and carefullie shot
at . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12V.39

There is an other discommoditie , besides crueltie in scholemasters in
beating away the loue of learning from children , which hindreth
learning and vertue , and good bringing vp of youth , and namelie yong
ientlemen , verie moch in England . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12V.40

This fault is cleane contrary to the first . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12V.41

I wished before , to haue loue of learning bred vp in children :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12V.42

I wishe as moch now , to haue yong men brought vp in good order of
liuing , and in some more seuere discipline , then commonlie they be .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12V.43

We haue lacke in England of soch good order , as the old noble <font>
Persians <$$font> so carefullie vsed whose children , to the age of xxi.
yeare , were brought vp in learnyng , and exercises of labor , and that
in soch place , where they should , neither see that was vncumlie , nor
heare that was vnhonest . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12V.44

Yea , a yong ientlemen was neuer free , to go where he would , and do
what he liste him self , but under the kepe , and by the counsell , of
sume graue gouernour , vntill he was , either maryed , or called
{SIC:cald} to beare some office in the common wealth .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,12V.45

<P_13R>

And see the great obedience , that was vsed in old tyme to fathers and
gouernours . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.47

No sonne , were he neuer so old of yeares , neuer so great of birth ,
though he were a kynges sonne , might not mary {COM:might_marry} , but
by his father and mother@ @s also consent . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.48

<font> Cyrus <$$font> the great , after he had conquered <font> Babylon
<$$font> , and subdewed {COM:p._50_in_reprint} Riche king <font> Croesus
<$$font> with whole <font> Asia minor <$$font> , cummyng tryumphantlie
home , his vncle <font> Cyaxeris <$$font> offered him his daughter to
wife . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.49

<font> Cyrus <$$font> thanked his vncle , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.50

and praised the maide , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.51

but for mariage he answered him with thies wise and sweete wordes , as
they be vttered by <font> Xenophon <$$font> , {COM:greek_omitted} &c. ,
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.52

that is to say : Vncle <font> Cyaxeris <$$font> , I commend the stocke ,
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.53

I like the maide , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.54

and I allow well the dowrie , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.55

but <paren> sayth he <$$paren> by the counsell and consent of my father
and mother , I will determine farther of thies matters .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.56

Strong <font> Samson <$$font> also in Scripture saw a maide that liked
him , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.57

but he spake not to hir , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.58

but went home to his father , and his mother , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.59

and desired both father and mother to make the mariage for him .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.60

Doth this modestie , doth this obedience , that was in great kyng <font>
Cyrus <$$font> , and stoute <font> Samson <$$font> , remaine in our
yongmen at this daie ? ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.61

no surelie : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.62

For we liue not longer after them by tyme , than we liue farre different
from them by good order . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.63

Our tyme is so farre from that old discipline and obedience , as now ,
not onelie yong ientlemen , but euen verie girles dare without all feare
, though not without open shame , where they list , and how they list ,
marie them selues in spite of father , mother , God , good order , and
all . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.64

The cause of this euill is , that youth is least looked unto , when they
stand in {TEXT:missing_"in"} most neede of good kepe and regard .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.65

It auaileth not , to see them well taught in yong yeares , and after
whan they cum to lust and youthfull dayes , to giue them licence to liue
as they lust them selues . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13R.66

For , if ye suffer the eye of a yong Ientleman , once to be entangled
with vaine fightes , and the eare to be corrupted with fond or filthie
taulke , the mynde shall quicklie fall seick , and sone <P_13V> vomet
and cast vp , all the holesome doctrine , that he receiued in childhoode
, though he were neuer so well brought vp before .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13V.67

And being once {TEXT:ons} inglutted with vanitie , he will streight
{COM:p._51_in_reprint} way loth all learning , and all good counsell to
the same . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13V.68

And the parentes for all their great cost and charge , reape onelie in
the end , the fruite {SIC:frute} of grief and care .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13V.69

This euill , is not common to poore men , as God will haue it , but
proper to riche and great mens children , as they deserue it .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13V.70

In deede from seuen , to seuentene , yong ientlemen commonlie be
carefullie enough brought vp : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13V.71

But from seuentene to seuen_and_twentie <paren> the most dangerous tyme
of all a mans life , and most slipperie to stay well in <$$paren> they
haue commonlie the reigne of all licens in their owne hand , and
speciallie soch as do liue in the Court . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13V.72

And that which is most to be merueled at , commonlie , the wisest and
also best men , be found the fondest fathers in this behalfe .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13V.73

And if som good father wold seick some remedie herein , yet the mother
<paren> if {SIC} the house hold of our Lady <$$paren> had rather , yea ,
and will to , haue her sonne cunnyng and bold , in making him to lyue
trimlie when he is yong , than by learning and trauell , to be able to
serue his Prince and his contrie , both wiselie in peace , and stoutelie
in warre , whan he is old . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13V.74

The fault is in your selues , ye noble mens {SIC:men} sonnes ,
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13V.75

and therefore ye deserue the greater blame , that commonlie , the meaner
mens children , cum to be , the wisest councellours , and greatest doers
, in the weightie affaires of this Realme . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13V.76

And why ? ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13V.77

for God will haue it so , of his prouidence : bicause ye will haue it no
otherwise , by your negligence . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13V.78

And God is a good God , and wisest in all his doinges , that will place
vertue , and displace vice , in those kingdomes , where he doth gouerne
. ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13V.79

For he knoweth , that Nobilitie , without vertue and wisedome , is bloud
in deede , but bloud trewelie , without bones and sinewes : and so of it
selfe , without the other , verie weeke to beare the burden of weightie
affaires . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,13V.80

{COM:p._52_in_reprint} The greatest shippe in deede commonlie carieth
the greatest burden , but yet alwayes with the greatest ieoperdie
<P_14R> , not onelie for the persons and goodes committed vnto it , but
euen for the shyppe it selfe , except it be gouerned , with the greater
wisdome . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14R.81

But Nobilitie , gouerned by learning and wisedome , is in deede , most
like a faire shippe , hauyng tide and winde at will , vnder the reule of
a skilfull master : whan contrarie wise , a shippe , carried , yea with
the hiest tide and greatest winde , lacking a skilfull master , most
commonlie , doth either , sinck it selfe vpon sandes , or breake it
selfe vpon rockes . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14R.82

And even so , how manie haue bene , either drowned in vaine pleasure ,
or ouerwhelmed by stout wilfulnesse , the histories of England be able
to affourde ouer many examples vnto vs . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14R.83

Therfore , ye great and noble mens children , if ye will haue
rightfullie that praise , and enioie surelie that place , which your
fathers haue , and elders had , and left vnto you , ye must kepe it , as
they gat it , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14R.84

and that is , by the onelie waie , of vertue , wisedome and worthinesse
. ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14R.85

For wisedom , and vertue , there be manie faire examples in this Court ,
for yong Ientlemen to follow {SIC:folow} . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14R.86

But they be , like faire markes in the feild , out of a mans reach , to
far of , to shote at well . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14R.87

The best and worthiest men , in deede , be somtimes seen , but seldom
taulked withall : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14R.88

A yong Ientleman , may somtime knele to their person ; smallie vse their
companie , for their better instruction . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14R.89

But yong Ientlemen are faine commonlie to do in the Court , as yong
Archers do in the feild : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14R.90

that is to take soch markes , as be nie them , although they be neuer so
foule to shote at . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14R.91

I meene , they be driuen to kepe companie with the worste :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14R.92

and what force ill companie hath , to corrupt good wittes , the wisest
men know best . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14R.93

{COM:p._53_in_reprint} And not ill companie onelie , but the ill opinion
also of the most part , doth moch harme , and namelie of those , which
shold be wise in the trewe decyphring , of the good disposition of
nature , of cumlinesse in Courtlie maners , and all right <P_14V>
doinges of men . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14V.94

But error and phantasie , do commonlie occupie , the place of troth and
iudgement . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14V.95

For , if a yong ientleman , be demeure and still of nature , they say ,
he is simple and lacketh witte : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14V.96

if he be bashefull , and will soone blushe , they call him a babishe and
ill brought vp thyng , when <font> Xenophon <$$font> doth preciselie
note in <font> Cyrus <$$font> , that his bashfulnes in youth , was ye
verie trewe signe of his vertue and stoutnes after :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14V.97

If he be innocent and ignorant of ill , they say , he is rude , and hath
no grace , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14V.98

so vngraciouslie do som gracelesse men , misuse the faire and godlie
word grace . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14V.99

But if ye would know , what grace they meene , go ,
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14V.100

and looke , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14V.101

and learne emonges them , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14V.102

and ye shall see that it is : First , to blush at nothing .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14V.103

And blushyng in youth , sayth <font> Aristotle <$$font> is nothyng els ,
but feare to do ill : which feare beyng once lustely fraid away from
youth , then foloweth , to dare do any mischief , to contemne stoutly
any goodnesse , to be busie in euery matter , to be skilfull in euery
thyng , to acknowledge no ignorance at all . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14V.104

To do thus in Court , is counted of some , the chief and greatest grace
of all : and termed by the name of a vertue , called Corage and
boldnesse , whan <font> Crassus <$$font> in <font> Cicero <$$font>
teacheth the cleane contrarie , and that most wittelie , saying thus :
<font> Audere , cum bonis etiam rebus coniunctum , per seipsum est
magnopere fugiendum . <$$font> Which is to say , to be bold , yea in a
good matter , is for it self , greatlie to be exchewed {COM:sic} .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14V.105

Moreouer , where the swing goeth , there to follow , fawne , flatter ,
laugh and lie lustelie at other mens liking . To face , stand formest ,
shoue backe : and to the meaner man , or vnknowne in the
{COM:p._54_in_reprint} Court , to seeme somwhat solume , coye , big ,
and dangerous of looke , taulk , and answere : To thinke well of him
selfe , to be lustie in contemning of others , to haue some trim grace
in a priuie mock . And in greater presens , to beare a braue looke : to
be warlike , though he neuer looked enimie in the face in warre :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,14V.106

yet som warlike signe must , be vsed , either a slouinglie busking , or
an ouerstaring frounced hed , as though out of euerie heeres toppe ,
should suddenlie <P_15R> start out a good big othe , when nede requireth
. ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15R.107

Yet praised be God , England hath at this time , manie worthie
Capitaines and good souldiours , which be in deede , so honest of
behaviour , so cumlie of conditions , so milde of maners , as they may
be examples of good order , to a good sort of others , which neuer came
in warre . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15R.108

But to retorne , where I left : In place also , to be able to raise
taulke , and make discourse of euerie rishe {COM:sic} : to haue a verie
good will , to heare him selfe speake : To be seene in Palmestrie ,
wherby to conueie to chast eares , som fond or filthie taulke :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15R.109

And , if som Smithfeild Ruffian take vp , som strange going : som new
mowing with the mouth : som wrinchyng with the shoulder , som braue
prouerbe : som fresh new othe , that is not stale , but will rin
{GLOSS:run} round in the mouth : som new disguised garment , or
desperate hat , fond in facion , or gaurish in colour , what soeuer it
cost , how small soeuer his living be , by what shift soeuer it be
gotten , gotten must it be , and vsed with the first ,
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15R.110

or els the grace of it , is stale and gone : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15R.111

som part of this gracelesse grace , was discribed by me , in a little
rude verse long ago . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15R.112

{COM:verse_omitted}

Would to God , this taulke were not trewe , and that
{COM:p._55_in_reprint} som mens doinges were not thus ;
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15R.114

I write not to hurte any , but to proffit som : to accuse none , but to
monish soch who , allured by ill counsell , and folowing ill example ,
contrarie to their good bringyng vp , and against their owne good nature
, yeld ouermoch to thies folies and faultes : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15R.115

I know many seruing_men , of good order , and well staide :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15R.116

And againe , I heare saie , there be som seruing_men <P_15V> do but ill
seruice to their yong masters . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.117

Yea , rede <font> Terence <$$font> and <font> Plautus <$$font>
aduisedlie ouer , and ye shall finde in those two wise writers , almost
in euerie commedie , no vnthriftie yong man , that is not brought there
unto , by the sotle inticement of som lewd seruant .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.118

And euen now in our dayes <font> Getae <$$font> and <font> Daui , Gnatos
<$$font> and manie bold bawdie <font> Phormios <$$font> to , be preasing
in , to pratle on euerie stage , to medle in euerie matter , whan honest
<font> Parmenos <$$font> shall not be hard , but beare small swing with
their masters . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.119

Their companie , their taulke , their ouer great experience in mischief
, doth easelie corrupt the best natures , and best brought vp wittes .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.120

But I meruell the lesse , that thies misorders be emonges som in the
Court , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.121

for commonlie in the contrie also euerie where , innocencie is gone :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.122

Bashfulnesse is banished : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.123

moch presumption in yougthe : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.124

small authoritie in aige : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.125

Reuerence is neglected : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.126

dewties be confounded : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.127

and to be shorte , disobedience doth ouerflowe the bankes of good order
, almoste in euerie place , almoste in euerie degree of man .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.128

Meane men haue eies to see , and cause to lament , and occasion to
complaine of thies miseries : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.129

but other haue authoritie to remedie them , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.130

and will do so to , whan God shall think time fitte .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.131

For , all thies misorders , be Goddes iuste plages , by his sufferance ,
brought iustelie vpon vs , for our sinnes , which be infinite in nomber
, and horrible in deede , but namelie , for the {COM:p._56_in_reprint}
greate abhominable sin of vnkindnesse : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.132

but what vnkindnesse ? ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.133

euen such vnkindnesse as was in the Iewes , in contemninge Goddes voice
, in shrinking from his woorde , in wishing backe againe for <font>
AEgypt <$$font> , in committing aduoultrie and hordom , not with the
women , but , with the doctrine of Babylon , did bring all the plages ,
destructions , and Captiuities , that fell so ofte and horriblie , vpon
Israell . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,15V.134

We haue cause also in England to beware of vnkindnesse , who haue had ,
in so fewe yeares , the Candel of Goddes worde , so oft lightned , so
oft put out , and yet will <P_16R> venture by our vnthankfulnesse in
doctrine and sinfull life , to leese againe , lighte , Candle ,
Candlesticke and all . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16R.135

God kepe vs in his feare , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16R.136

God grafte in vs the trewe knowledge of his woorde , with a forward will
to folowe it , and so to bring forth the sweete fruites of it ,
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16R.137

and then shall he preserue vs by his Grace , from all maner of terrible
dayes . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16R.138

The remedie of this , doth not stand onelie , in making good common
lawes for the hole Realme , but also , <paren> and perchance cheiflie
<$$paren> in obseruing priuate discipline euerie man carefullie in his
own house : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16R.139

and namelie , if speciall regard be had to yougth :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16R.140

and that , not so much , in teaching them what is good , as in keping
them from that , that is ill . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16R.141

Therefore , if wise fathers , be not as well ware in weeding from their
Children ill thinges , and ill companie , as they were before , in
graftinge in them learninge , and prouiding for them good scholemasters
, what frute , they shall reape of all their coste and care , common
experience doth tell . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16R.142

Here is the place , in yougthe is the time whan som ignorance is as
necessarie , as moch knowledge : and not in matters of our dewtie
towardes God , as som wilful wittes willinglie against their owne
knowledge , perniciouslie againste {COM:p._57_in_reprint} their owne
conscience , haue of late openlie taught . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16R.143

In deede <font> S. Chrysostome , <$$font> that noble and eloquent
Doctor , in a sermon <font> contra fatum <$$font> , and the curious
serchinge of natiuities , doth wiselie saie , that ignorance therein ,
is better than knowledge : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16R.144

But to wring this sentence , to wreste thereby out of mens handes , the
knowledge of Goddes doctrine , is without all reason , against common
sence , contrarie to the iudgement also of them , which be the
discretest men , and best learned , on their own side .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16R.145

I know , <font> Iulianus Apostata <$$font> did so ,
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16R.146

but I neuer hard or red , that any auncyent father of the primitiue
chirch , either thought or wrote so . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16R.147

But this ignorance in yougthe , which I spake on , or rather this
simplicitie , or most trewlie , this innocencie , is that , which the
noble <font> Persians <$$font> , as wise <font> Xenophon <$$font> doth
testifie , <P_16V> were so carefull , to breede vp their yougth in .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16V.148

But Christian fathers commonlie do not so . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16V.149

And I will tell you a tale , as moch to be misliked , as the <font>
Persians <$$font> example is to be folowed . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16V.150

This last somer , I was in a Ientlemans house : where a yong childe ,
somewhat past fower yeare olde , cold in no wise frame his tonge , to
saie , a litle shorte grace : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16V.151

and yet he could roundlie rap out , so manie vgle othes , and those of
the newest facion , as som good man of fourescore yeare olde hath neuer
hard named before : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16V.152

and that which was most detestable of all , his father and mother wold
laughe at it . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16V.153

I moche doubte , what comforte , an other daie , this childe shall bring
vnto them . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16V.154

This Childe vsing moche the companie of seruinge_men , and geuing good
eare to their taulke , did easelie learne , which he shall hardlie
forget , all the {TEXT:missing_"the"} daies of his life hereafter :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16V.155

So likewise , in the Courte , if a yong Ientleman will venture him self
into the companie of Ruffians , it is ouer greate a ieopardie , lest ,
their facions , maners , thoughtes , taulke , and deedes , will verie
sone , be euer like . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16V.156

The confounding of companies , breedeth confusion {COM:p._58_in_reprint}
of good maners both in the Courte , and euerie where else .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16V.157

And it maie be a great wonder , but a greater shame , to vs Christian
men , to vnderstand , what a heithen writer , <font> Isocrates <$$font>
, doth leaue in memorie of writing , concerning the care , that the
noble Citie of <font> Athens <$$font> had , to bring vp their yougthe ,
in honest companie , and vertuous discipline , whose taulke in Greke ,
is , to this effect , in Englishe . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16V.158

" The Citie , was not more carefull , to see their Children well taughte
, than to see their yong men well gouerned : which they brought to passe
, not so much by common lawe , as by priuate discipline .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16V.159

For , they had more regard , that their yougthe , by good order shold
not offend , than how , by lawe , they might be punished :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16V.160

And if offense were committed , there was , neither waie to hide it ,
neither hope of pardon for it . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,16V.161

Good natures , were not so moche openlie praised as they were secretlie
marked , and watchfullie regarded , <P_17R> lest they should leaue the
goodnes they had . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17R.162

Therefore in scholes of singing and dauncing , and other honest
exercises , gouernours were appointed , more diligent to ouersee their
good maners , than their masters were , to teach them anie learning .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17R.163

It was som shame to a yong man , to be seene in the open market :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17R.164

and if for businesse , he passed throughe it , he did it , with a
meruelous modestie , and bashefull facion . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17R.165

To eate , or drinke in a Tauerne , was not onelie a shame , but also
punishable , in a yong man . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17R.166

To contrarie , or to stand in termes with an old man , was more heinous
, than in som place , to rebuke and scolde with his owne father : "
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17R.167

with manie other mo good orders , and faire disciplines , which I
referre to their reading , that haue lust to looke vpon the description
of such a worthie common welthe . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17R.168

And to know , what worthie frute , did spring of soch worthie seade , I
will tell yow the mostt meruell of all , and yet soch a trothe , as no
{COM:p._59_in_reprint} man shall denie it , except such as be ignorant
in knowledge of the best stories . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17R.169

<font> Athens <$$font> , by this discipline and good ordering of yougthe
, did breede vp , within the circuite {SIC:circute} of that one Citie ,
within the compas of one_hondred yeare , within the memorie of one mans
life , so manie notable Capitaines in warre , for worthinesse , wisdome
and learning , as be scarse matchable no not in the state of Rome , in
the compas of those seauen_hondred yeares , whan it florished moste .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17R.170

And bicause , I will not onelie saie it , but also proue it , the names
of them be those . <font> Miltiades , Themistocles , Xantippus ,
Pericles , Cymon , Alcybiades , Thrasybulus , Conon , Iphicrates ,
Xenophon , Timotheus , Theopompus , Demetrius , <$$font> and diuers
other mo : of which euerie one , maie iustelie be spoken that worthie
praise , which was geuen to <font> Scipio Africanus <$$font> , who ,
<font> Cicero <$$font> douteth , whether he were , more noble Capitaine
in warre , or more eloquent and wise councelor in peace .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17R.171

And if ye beleue not me , read diligentlie , <font> Aemilius Probus
<$$font> in Latin , and <font> Plutarche <$$font> in Greke , which two ,
had no cause either to flatter or lie vpon <P_17V> anie of those which I
haue recited . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17V.172

And beside nobilitie in warre , for excellent and matchles masters in
all maner of learninge , in that one Citie , in memorie of one aige ,
were mo learned men , and that in a maner altogether , than all tyme
doth remember , than all place doth affourde , than all other tonges do
conteine . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17V.173

And I do not meene of those Authors , which , by iniurie of tyme , by
negligence of men , by crueltie of fier and sworde , be lost , but euen
of those , which by Goddes grace , are left yet unto us : of which I
thank God , euen my poor studie lacketh not one .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17V.174

As , in Philosophie , <font> Plato , Aristotle , Xenophon , Euclide
<$$font> , and <font> Theophrast <$$font> : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17V.175

In eloquens and Ciuill lawe , <font> Demosthenes , Aeschines , Lycurgus
, Dinarchus , Demades , Isocrates , Isoeus , Lysias , Antisthenes ,
Andocides <$$font> : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17V.176

In histories , <font> Herodotus <$$font> {COM:p._60_in_reprint} <font>
Thucydides , Xenophon <$$font> : and which we lacke , to our great losse
, <font> Theopompus <$$font> and <font> Ephorus {SIC:Eph} <$$font> :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17V.177

In Poetrie , <font> Aeschylus , Sophocles , Euripides , Aristophanes ,
<$$font> and somewhat of <font> Menander , Demosthenes <$$font> sisters
{SIC:sister} sonne . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17V.178

Now , let Italian , and Latin it self , Spanishe , French , Douch , and
Englishe bring forth their lerning , and recite their Authors ,
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17V.179

<font> Cicero <$$font> onelie excepted , and in one or two moe in Latin
, they be all patched cloutes and ragges , in comparison of faire wouen
broade_cloathes . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17V.180

And trewelie , if there be any good in them , it is either lerned ,
borowed , or stolne , from some one of those worthie wittes of <font>
Athens <$$font> . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17V.181

The remembrance of soch a common welthe , vsing soch discipline and
order for yougthe , and thereby bringing forth to their praise , and
leauing to vs for our example , such Capitaines for warre , soch
Councelors for peace , and matcheles masters , for all kinde of
learninge , is pleasant for me to recite , and not irksum , I trust ,
for other to heare , except it be soch , as make neither counte of
vertue nor learninge . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17V.182

And whether , there be anie soch or no , I can not well tell :
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17V.183

yet I heare saie , some yong Ientlemen of oures , count it their shame
to be counted learned : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,17V.184

and perchance , they <P_18R> count it their shame , to be counted honest
also , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,18R.185

for I heare saie , they medle as litle with the one , as with the other
. ASCH-1566-E1-P2,18R.186

A meruelous case , that Ientlemen shold so be ashamed of good learning ,
and neuer a whit ashamed of ill maners : ASCH-1566-E1-P2,18R.187

soch do laie for them , that the Ientlemen of France do so : which is a
lie , as God will haue it . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,18R.188

<font> Langoeus <$$font> , and <font> Belloeus <$$font> that be dead ,
and the noble <font> Vidam <$$font> of Chartes , that is aliue , and
infinite mo in France , which I heare tell of , proue this to be most
false . ASCH-1566-E1-P2,18R.189

And though som , in France , which will nedes be Ientlemen , whether men
will or no , and haue more ientleshipe in their hat , than in their hed
, be at deedlie feude , with both learning and honestie , yet I beleue ,
if that noble Prince , king <font> Francis <$$font> the first were
{COM:p._61_in_reprint} aliue , they shold haue , neither place in his
Courte , nor pension in his warres , if he had knowledg of them .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,18R.190

This opinion is not French , but plaine Turckishe : from whens , som
French fetche moe faultes , than this : which , I praie God , kepe out
of England , and send also those of oures better mindes , which bend
them selues againste vertue and learninge , to the contempte of God ,
dishonor of their contrie , to the hurt of manie others , and at length
, to the greatest harme , and vtter destruction of themselues .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,18R.191

Some other , hauing better nature , but lesse witte , <paren> for ill
commonlie , haue ouer moch witte <$$paren> do not vtterlie dispraise
learning , ASCH-1566-E1-P2,18R.192

but they saie , that without learning , common experience , knowledge of
all facions , and haunting all companies , shall worke in yougthe , both
wisdome , and habilitie , to execute anie weightie affaire .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,18R.193

Surelie long experience doth proffet moch , but moste , and almost
onelie to him <paren> if we meene honest affaires <$$paren> that is
diligentlie before instructed with preceptes of well_doinge .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,18R.194

For good precepts of learning , be the eyes of the minde , to looke
wiselie before a man , which , waie to go right , and which not .
ASCH-1566-E1-P2,18R.195

