<BEGIN_aungier-1674-e3-p2>

<P_167,A>

<heading:edcomment:CIX_LORD_AUNGIER_TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

Lond. , AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,167,A.4

Jan. 27th , 1673 . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,167,A.5

May it please y=r= Ex=cye= , There seemes to be now a greate propensity
towards y=e= repealing of the Act ag=t= Irish Cattle , complaints
comeing from all partes of Engl=d= of y=e= greate mortallity of Sheepe &
Cattle , in_so_much that as soone as the more publique affaires will
give leave , some attempts will be made to repeale y=e= Act of
Prohibition . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,167,A.6

The Duke of Buck~s is become a greate converte ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,167,A.7

& to give a publique testimonye of it he went w=th= , his owne lady to
St. Martin's to Church in y=e= afternoone on Sunday last .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,167,A.8

In the mean time his Grace & my Lord Shaftsburye are reconciled ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,167,A.9

& both labour hard to gett him fairely quitt of my Lady Shrewsburye@ @'s
businesse , w=ch= is still depending in y=e= Lords Howse .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,167,A.10

<P_169,A>

<heading:edcomment:CXII_LORD_AUNGIER_TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

Lond. , AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,169,A.13

Jan. 31 , 1673 . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,169,A.14

May it please yo=r= Ex=cye= , Since my last there has not been anything
of greate moment transacted in y=e= Howse of Com=ns= ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,169,A.15

only this day they have voted that the addresse for removeing y=e= Duke
of Lawderdale from all his Employm=ts= & from His Ma=ties= Councills &
presence for ever as a person obnoxious & dangerous to y=e= Govem=t= ,
should be fortw=th= made to his Ma=tie= in order to w=ch= y=e= members
of y=e= Privy Councill are directed to acquaint His Ma=tie= , & to knowe
what time His Ma=tie= will appoint for y=e= Speaker w=th= y=e= whole
Howse to attend him w=th= y=e= sayd addresse .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,169,A.16

Im~ediately after this the addresse concerning His Grace of Buck~s
<P_170,A> was proposed , w=ch= begott a debate whether we should not in
his case desire the concurrence of y=e= Lords in reguard he is a Peere ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,170,A.17

& y=e= day being farre spent , y=e= further debate of it was putt of
till Thursday next . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,170,A.18

This morning the Lords alsoe spent upon His Grace's affaire wth my Lady
Shrewsburye , in w=ch= His Grace at first made an ingenuous confession ,
& beg'd pardon of y=e= Howse , And out of his great generositye &
kindnesse to y=t= noble family desired that all mention of y=t= affaire
should be taken of y=e= file and razed out of y=e= Records , w=ch=
request of his Grace's being not complyed w=th= , He then retracted his
confession , because he has owned more then y=e= Petitions ag=t= him
could prove , w=ch= begott a debate whether the Howse should accept of
his submission or reteine y=e= cause any longer , w=ch= spunn out their
time till two of y=e= clocke , at w=ch= time they adjourned the further
debate of it till Tuesday next . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,170,A.19

This day , upon a discourse accidentally started concerning a com~on
Fame that severall Members had receaved Money and Pensions , and y=t= it
was reported a Member should say he hoped to make this Sessions worth
him 5000@ @=ld= , The Howse have appoynted a com~ittee to examine this
matter , and to prepare some test for y=e= members to take & vindicate
themselves from this scandalous imputation .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,170,A.20

In the Lords House the preservation of y=e= French allyance was a
considerable parte of y=e= debate concerning y=e= addresse to be made to
His Ma=tie= about a peace w=th= y=e= States Gen=ll= .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,170,A.21

But it was overruled there as well as in y=e= Howse of Com~ons ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,170,A.22

And I suppose on Tuesday both Howses will agree on y=e= manner of their
Addresse , there haveing beene allready interchangeable messages sent to
one another . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,170,A.23

The newes from Holland is that y=e= Prince of Orange & his posterity are
declared State Holders for ever . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,170,A.24

<P_173,A>

<heading:edcomment:CXV_LORD_AUNGIER_TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

Lond. AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,173,A.27

Feb. 7=th= , 1673 . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,173,A.28

May it please Y=or= Ex=cye= , Yesterday the Duke of Buck~s made a very
submissive recantation to y=e= Howse of Peeres , acknowledging y=e=
miserable & lewd life he had led ; AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,173,A.29

And though it was a very heavy burthen to lye under the displeasure of
y=e= Howse & the sence of his transgressions , Yett he had reason to
give God thankes for it since it had opened his Eyes & discovered to him
the foulenesse of his past life , w=ch= he was resolved for y=e= future
to amend ; AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,173,A.30

& haveing added severall other patheticke expressions to testifye y=e=
sincerity of his Repentance , The Howse at last absolved him upon
promise never more to converse w=th= my Lady Shrewesbury ;
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,173,A.31

forw=th= both His <P_174,A> Lord=p= & my Lady are to enter into bonds
each of 10000@ @=ld= , & a Com~ittee of Bpp=s= appointed to draw up y=e=
condition w=th= all y=e= caution & stricktnesse imaginable .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,174,A.32

I had all_most forgott to tell yo=r= Ex=cy= That y=e= Howse will once
more Addresse to His Ma=tie= for y=e= sending back y=e= Irish Forces
into Irl~d . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,174,A.33

My Ld. Arlington@ @'s Com~ittee have often mett ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,174,A.34

but have not made one stepp towards an Impeachm=t= , for w=ch= in y=e=
end they will not find y=e= least matter y=t= can be proved .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,174,A.35

On Wenesday next the Com~=tee= of Greevances sitt againe , by w=ch=
severall are all_ready allarumed . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,174,A.36

<P_8,P>

<heading:edcomment:VI_FRANCIS_LORD_AUNGIER_TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

London : AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,8,P.39

May ye 11=th= 1675 AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,8,P.40

May it please yr Ex=cy= ... AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,8,P.41

Yesterday the Howse being resolved into a Committee of the whole Howse
to debate upon his Ma=ties= answere to Adresse for the recalling of his
Ma=ties= subjects in ye service of the French King , and the question
being putt for the adjournment of the Debate to this morning , it so
fell out that upon the division of the Com=tee= the numbers were equall
, AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,8,P.42

And some professing with greate zeale and <P_9,P> earnestnesse that we
should be told over againe upon an observation made that one of ye
members had beene told twice , the Contrary_teller being obstinate and
refusing to joyne with his Colleague in the telling us over againe ,
severall of ye members moved out of their seats
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,9,P.43

and gathered about ye table , where in some passion they shoved one
another , wch the Speaker observing he with greate dexterity and
nimbleness gott into the Chaire , AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,9,P.44

and by this provident care of his , prevented further progress of our
disorder , though there had very unkind words , looks , and actions been
exchang'd by some of ye members ; who by order of the Howse were
commanded to lay aside all kind of repitition of their disorder , every
one in his place rising up with his hat of to show his submission to ye
sayd order wch to avoid a future Reproach to posteritye was not entered
in ye Journall . AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,9,P.45

This day we have been much calmer though we resumed the same debate ;
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,9,P.46

For after some howers debate the question was stated whether an Addresse
should be made to his Ma=tie= for recalling all his subjects now in ye
service of the French King , AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,9,P.47

some exception was taken to ye word All because yt would engage His
Ma=tie= in too greate a difficultye , there being no colour for
recalling any other than those who have gone over as recruits since ye
late treatye of Peace with the Dutch and since his Ma=ties= Proclamation
, AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,9,P.48

and ye rather since the Ministers of ye King of Spain and ye Dutch who
managed ye Treaty did not insist to have those recalled wch were there
in ye actuale service of ye King of France , but desired only yt there
should be a restraint for any forces going over for ye future ;
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,9,P.49

The Question therefore being putt whether the word all should be part of
ye Question , upon ye division the numbers were again equall ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,9,P.50

so ye Speaker turned ye scale , AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,9,P.51

And our Addresse now will be more gratefull to his Ma=tie= because there
is a latitude left for keeping his first word with ye King of France ,
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,9,P.52

And by Mr Secretary Coventry it was intimated to us that his Ma=tie=
would grant us ye reply {TEXT:missing_"reply"} tomorrow .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,9,P.53

<P_10,P>

My Lord Lauderdale is like to be upon ye stage again , Tho t@ @is
believed he will find no greater favour than formerlye in ye Howse of
Commons , by wch he has not yett seemed much dismayed having in no sort
changed his manner of living and deportment at Courte .
AUNGIER-1674-E3-P2,10,P.55

