<BEGIN_bacon-1605-e2-p2>

<P_1,12V>

Surely <font> Salomon <$$font> hath pronounced it both in censure ,
<font> Qui festinat ad diuitias non erit insons <$$font> ; and in
precept : <font> Buy the truth , and sell it not :
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,12V.3

and so of wisdome and knowledge <$$font> ; iudging that meanes were to
be spent vpon learning , and not learning to be applyed to meanes :
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,12V.4

And as for the priuatenesse or obscurenesse <paren> as it may be in
vulgar estimation accounted <$$paren> of life of contemplatiue men ; it
is a Theame so common , to extoll a priuate life , not taxed with
sensualitie and sloth in comparison , and to the disadvantage of a
ciuile life , for safety , libertie , pleasure and dignitie , or at
least freedome from indignitie , <P_1,13R> as no man handleth it , but
handleth it well : such a consonancie it hath to mens conceits in the
expressing , and to mens contents in the allowing :
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,13R.5

this onely I will adde ; that learned men forgotten in States , and not
liuing in the eyes of men , are like the Images of <font> Cassius
<$$font> and <font> Brutus <$$font> in the funerall of <font> Iunia
<$$font> ; of which not being represented , as many others were <font>
Tacitus <$$font> sayth , <font> Eo ipso prefulgebant , quod non
visebantur <$$font> . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,13R.6

And for meanesse of employment , that which is most traduced to contempt
, is that the government of youth is commonly allotted to them , which
age , because it is the age of least authoritie , it is transferred to
the diseesteeming of those employments wherin youth is conuersant , and
which are conuersant about youth . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,13R.7

But how vniust this traducement is , <paren> if you will reduce thinges
from popularitie of opinion to measure of reason <$$paren> may appeare
in that we see men are more curious what they put into a new Vessell ,
than {COM:they_are_curious_about_what_they_put} into a Vessell seasoned
; and {COM:curious} what mould they lay about a young plant , than
{COM:they_are_curious_about_what_they_lay} about a Plant corroborate ;
so as the weakest Termes and Times of all things vse to have the best
applications and helpes . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,13R.8

And will you hearken to the Hebrew <font> Rabynes ?
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,13R.9

Your young men shall see Visions , and your old men shal dreame dreames
<$$font> , say they BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,13R.10

youth is the worthier age , for that Visions are neerer apparitions of
God , than dreames ? BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,13R.11

And let it bee noted , that how soeuer the Conditions of life of <font>
Pedantes <$$font> hath been scorned upon Theaters , as the Ape of
Tyrannies <P_1,13V> and that the modern loosenes or negligence hath
taken no due regard to the choice of Schoolemasters , & tutors ; yet the
ancient wisdome of the best times did alwaies make a iust complaint ,
that States were too busie with their Lawes , and too negligent in point
of education : which excellent part of ancient discipline hath been in
some sort reuiued of late times , by the Colledges of the Iesuites : of
whom , although in regard of their superstition I maye say , <font> Quo
meliores , eo deteriores <$$font> , yet in regard of this , and some
other points concerning humane learning , and Morall matters , I may say
as <font> Agesilaus <$$font> sayd to his enemie <font> Parnabasius ,
Talis quum sis , vtinam noster esses <$$font> .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,13V.12

And thus much touching the discredits drawn from the fortunes of learned
men . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,13V.13

As touching the Manners of learned men , it is a thing personall and
indiuiduall , BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,13V.14

and no doubt there be amongst them , as in other professions , of all
temperatures ; BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,13V.15

but yet so as it is not without truth , which is sayd , that <font>
Abeunt studia in mores <$$font> , BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,13V.16

Studies haue an influence and operation , vpon the manners of those that
are conuersant in them . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,13V.17

But vpon an attentive , and indifferent reuiew ; I for my part , can@
@not find any disgrace to learning , can proceed fro~ the manners of
learned men ; not inherent to them as they are learned ; except it be a
fault , <paren> which was the supposed fault of <font> Demosthenes ,
Cicero , Cato <$$font> the second , <font> Seneca <$$font> , and many
moe <$$paren> that because the times they read of , are commonly better
than the times they live in and the duties taught , <P_1,14R> better
than the duties practised : They contend somtimes too farre , to bring
thinges to perfection ; and to reduce the corruption of manners , to
honestie of precepts , or examples of too great height ;
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14R.18

And yet hereof they have Caveats ynough in their owne walkes :
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14R.19

For <font> Solon <$$font> , when he was asked whether he had given his
Citizens the best laws , answered wisely , <font> Yea of such , as they
would receive <$$font> : BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14R.20

and <font> Plato <$$font> finding that his owne heart , could not agree
with the corrupt manners of his Country , refused to beare place or
office , saying : <font> That a mans Countrey was to be vsed as his
Parents were , BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14R.21

that is , with humble perswasions , and not with contestations <$$font>
. BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14R.22

And <font> Caesars <$$font> Counsellor put in the same Caveat , <font>
Non ad vetera instituta reuoucans quae iampridem corruptis moribus
ludibrio sunt <$$font> ; BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14R.23

and <font> Cicero <$$font> noteth this error directly in <font> Cato
<$$font> the second , when he writes to his friend <font> Atticus ; Cato
optime sentit , sed nocet interdum reipublicae ; loquitur enim tanquam
in repub: Platonis , non tanquam in faece Romuli <$$font> ;
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14R.24

and the <font> same Cicero <$$font> doth excuse and expound the
Philosophers for going too far , and being too exact in their prescripts
, when he saith ; <font> Isti ipsi praeceptores virtutis & Magisitr ,
videntur fines officiorum paulo longius quam natura vellet protulisse ,
vt cu~ ad vltimu~ animo contendissemus , ibi tamen , vbi oportet ,
consisteremus <$$font> : BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14R.25

and yet himself might have said : <font> Monitis su~ minor ipse meis
<$$font> , BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14R.26

for it was his own fault , thogh not in so extream a degre .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14R.27

Another fault likewise much of this kind , hath beene incident to
learned men ; which is that they haue esteemed the preseruation , good ,
and honor of <P_1,14V> their Countreys or Maisters before their owne
fortunes or safeties . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14V.28

For so sayth Demosthenes vnto the Athenians ; <font> If it please you to
note it , my counsels unto you , are not such , whereby I should grow
great amongst you , and you become little among the Grecians :
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14V.29

But they be of that nature as they are sometimes not good for me to giue
, BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14V.30

but are alwaies good for you to follow <$$font> .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14V.31

And so <font> Seneca <$$font> after he had consecrated that <font>
Quinquennium Neronis <$$font> to the eternall glorie of learned
Governors , held on his honest and loyall course of good and free
Counsell , after his Maister grew extreamely corrupt in his government ;
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14V.32

neither can this point otherwise be : BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14V.33

for learning endueth mens mindes with a true sence of the frailtie of
their persons , the casualtie of their fortunes , and the dignitie of
their soule and vocation ; so that it is impossible for them to esteeme
that any greatnesse of their owne fortune can bee , a true or worthy end
of their being and ordainment ; BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,14V.34

and therefore are desirous to giue their account to God , and so
likewise to their Maisters vnder God <paren> as Kinges and the States
that they serue <$$paren> in these words ; <font> Ecce tibi lucrifeci
<$$font> , and not <font> Ecce mihi lucrifeci <$$font> : whereas the
corrupter sort of meere Politiques , that haue not their thoughts
established by learning in the loue and apprehension of dutie , nor
neuer looke abroad into vniuersalitie ; doe referre all thinges to
themselues , and thrust themselues into the Center of the world , as if
all lynes would meet in them and their fortunes ; neuer caring in all
tempers what becoms of the shippe of <P_1,15R> Estates , so they may
saue themselues in the Cockeboat of their owne fortune , whereas men
that feele the weight of dutie , and know the limits of selfeloue , vse
to make good their places & duties , though with perils .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,15R.35

And if they stand in seditious and violent alterations ; it is rather
the reuerence which many times both aduerse parts doe give to honestie ,
than any versatile advantage of their owne carriage .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,15R.36

But for this point of tender sence , and fast obligation of dutie ,
which learning doth endue the minde withall , howsoeuer fortune may taxe
it , and many in the depth of their corrupt principles may despise it ,
yet it will receive an open allowance , BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,15R.37

and therefore needes the lesse disproofe or excusation .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,15R.38

Another fault incident commonly to learned men , which may be more
probably defended , than truely denyed , is that they fayle sometimes in
applying themselus {COM:sic} to particular persons , which want of exact
application ariseth from two causes : BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,15R.39

The one , because the largenesse of their minde can hardly confine it
selfe to dwell in the exquisite obseruation or examination of the nature
and customes of one person : BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,15R.40

for it is a speech for a Louer , & not for a wise man : <font> Satis
magnum alter alteri Theatrum sumus <$$font> : BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,15R.41

Neuerthelesse I shall yeeld , that he that can@ @not contract the light
of his minde , as@ @well as disperse and dilate it , wanteth a great
facultie . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,15R.42

But there is a second cause , which is no inabilitie , but a reiection
upon choise and iudgement , BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,15R.43

For the honest and iust bounds of obseruation , by one person vpon
another , <P_1,15V> extend no further , but to vnderstand him
suficiently , whereby not to giue him offence , or wherby to be able to
giue him faithfull Counsel , or wherby to stand vpon reasonable guard
and caution in respect of a mans selfe : BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,15V.44

But to be speculatiue into another man , to the end to know how to worke
him , or winde him , or gouerne him , proceedeth from a heart that is
double and clouen , and not entire and ingenuous ; which as in
friendship it is want of integritie , so towards Princes or Superiors ,
is want of dutie . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,15V.45

For the custome of the Leuant , which is , that subiects doe forbeare to
gaze or fixe their eyes vpon Princes , is in the outward Ceremonie
barbarous ; BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,15V.46

but the morall is good : BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,15V.47

For men ought not by cunning and bent obseruations to pierce and
penetrate into the hearts of Kings , which the scripture hath declared
to be inscrutable . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,15V.48

There is yet another fault <paren> with which I will conclude this part
<$$paren> which is often noted in learned men , that they doe many times
fayle to obserue decencie , and discretion in their behauiour and
carriage ; and commit errors in small and ordinarie points of action ;
so as the vulgar sort of Capacities , doe make a Judgement of them in
greater matters , by that which they finde wanting in them , in smaller
. BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,15V.49

But this consequence doth oft deceive men , for which , I doe referre
them ouer to that which was sayd by <font> Themistocles <$$font>
arrogantly and vnciuily , being applyed to himselfe out of his owne
mouth , but being applyed to the generall state of this question
pertinently <P_1,16R> and iustly ; when being invited to touch a Lute ,
he sayd : <font> He could not fiddle , but he could make a small Towne ,
a great state <$$font> . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,16R.50

So no doubt , many may be well seene in the passages of gouernement and
policies which are to seeke in little , and punctuall occasions ;
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,16R.51

I referre them also to that , which <font> Plato <$$font> sayd of his
Maister <font> Socrates <$$font> , whom he compared to the Gallypots of
Apothecaries , which on the out_side had Apes and Owles , and Antiques ,
but contained with_in soueraigne and precious liquors , and confections
; acknowledging that to an externall report , he was not without
superficiall leuities , and deformitie ; but was inwardly replenished
with excellent vertues and powers . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,16R.52

And so much touching the point of menners of learned men .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,16R.53

But in the meane time , I have no purpose to giue allowance to some
conditions and courses base , and unworthy , wherein divers Professors
of learning , have wronged themselues , and gone too farre ; such as
were those Trencher Philosophers , which in the later age of the Romane
State , were vsually in the houses of great persons , being little
better than solemne Parasites ; of which kinde , <font> Lucian <$$font>
maketh a merrie description of the Philosopher that the great Ladie
tooke to ride with her in her Coach , and would needs have him carie her
little Dogge which he doing officiously , and yet vncomely , the Page
scoffed , and sayd : <font> That he doubted , the Philosopher of a
Stoike , would turne to be a Cynike <$$font> .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,16R.54

But above all the rest , the grosse and palpable flatterie , whereunto
<P_1,16V> many <paren> not vnlearned <$$paren> haue abbased & abused
their wits and pens , turning <paren> as <font> Du Bartas <$$font> saith
, <$$paren> <font> Hecuba <$$font> into <font> Helena <$$font> , and
<font> Faustina <$$font> into <font> Lucretia <$$font> , hath most
diminished the price and estimation of Learning
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,16V.55

Neither is the morall dedications of Bookes and Writings , as to Patrons
to bee commended : for that Bookes <paren> such as are worthy the name
of Bookes <$$paren> ought to have no Patrons , but Truth and Reason :
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,16V.56

and the ancient custome was , to dedicate them only to priuate and
equall friendes , or to intitle the Bookes with their Names ,
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,16V.57

or if to Kings and great persons , it was to some such as the argument
of the Booke was fit and proper for ; BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,16V.58

but these and the like Courses may deserue rather reprehension , than
defence . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,16V.59

Not that I can taxe or condemne the morigeration or application of
learned men to men in fortune . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,16V.60

For the answere was good that <font> Diogenes <$$font> made to one that
asked him in mockerie , <font> How it came to be that Philosophers were
the followers of rich men , and not rich men of Philosophers ? <$$font>
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,16V.61

He answered soberly , and yet sharpely ; <font> Because the one sort
knew what they had need of , & the other did not <$$font> ;
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,16V.62

And of the like nature was the answere which <font> Aristippus <$$font>
made , when hauing a petition to <font> Dionisius <$$font> , and no eare
giuen to him , he fell downe at his feete , whereupon {TEXT:wheupon}
<font> Dionisius <$$font> stayed , and gaue him the hearing , and
graunted it , BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,16V.63

and afterward some person tender on the behalfe of {TEXT:missing_"of"}
Philosophie , reprooued <font> Aristippus <$$font> , that he would offer
the Profession of Philosophie such an indignitie ; <P_1,17R> as for a
priuat Suit to fall at a Tyrants feet : BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,17R.64

But he answered ; <font> It was not his fault ,
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,17R.65

but it was the fault of Dionisius , that had his eares in his feete
<$$font> . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,17R.66

Neither was it accounted weakenesse , but discretion in him that would
not dispute his best with <font> Adrianus Caesar <$$font> ; excusing
himselfe , <font> That it was reason to yeeld to him , that commaunded
thirtie Legions <$$font> . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,17R.67

These and the like applications and stooping to points of necessitie and
conuenience can@ @not bee disallowed : BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,17R.68

for though they may haue some outward basenesse ; yet in a Iudgement
truely made , they are to bee accounted submissions to the occasion ,
and not to the person . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,17R.69

{COM:insert_helsinki_1}

<P_1,23V>

The first of these is the extreame affecting of two extreamities ; The
one Antiquity , The other Nouelty ; wherein it seemeth the children of
time doe take after the nature and mallice of the father .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,23V.72

For as he deuowreth his children ; so one of them seeketh to deuoure and
suppresse the other ; BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,23V.73

while Antiquity enuieth there should be new additions ,
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,23V.74

and Nouelty ; can@ @not be content to add , BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,23V.75

but it must deface ; BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,23V.76

Surely the aduise of the Prophet is the true direction in this matter ,
<font> State super vias antiquas , & videte quaenam sit via recta & bona
, & ambulate in ea . <$$font> BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,23V.77

Antiquity deserueth that reuere~ce , that men should make a stand
thereupon , and discouer what is the best way ,
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,23V.78

but when the discouery is well taken then to make progression .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,23V.79

And to speake truly , <font> Antiquita seculi Iuuentus Mundi . <$$font>
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,23V.80

These times are the ancient times when the world is ancient , & not
those which we count ancient <font> Ordine retrogrado , <$$font> by a
computacion backward from our selues . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,23V.81

Another Error induced by the former is a distrust that any thing should
bee now to bee found out <P_1,24R_misnumbered_as_34R> which the world
should haue missed and passed ouer so long time , if the same obiection
were to be made to time , that <font> Lucian <$$font> maketh to <font>
Iupiter <$$font> , and other the heathen Gods , of which he woondreth ,
that they begot so many Children in old time , and begot none in his
time , and asketh whether they were become septuagenarie , or whether
the lawe <font> Pappia <$$font> made against old mens mariages had
restrayned them . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,24R_misnumbered_as_34R.82

So it seemeth men doubt , least time is become past children and
generation ; wherein contrary wise , we see commonly the leuitie and
vnconstancie of mens iudgements , which till a matter bee done , woonder
againe that it was no sooner done , as we see in the expedition of
<font> Alexander <$$font> into <font> Asia <$$font> , which at first was
preiudged as a vast and impossible enterprize ; and yet afterwards it
pleseth <font> Liuye <$$font> to make no more of it , than this , <font>
Nil aliud quam bene ausus vana contemnere . <$$font>
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,24R_misnumbered_as_34R.83

And the same happened to <font> Columbus <$$font> in the westerne
Nauigation . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,24R_misnumbered_as_34R.84

But in intellectual matters , it is much more common ; as may be seen in
most of the propositions of <font> Euclyde <$$font> , which till they
bee demonstrate , they seeme strange to our assent ; but being
demonstrate , our mind accepteth of them by a kind of relation <paren>
as the Lawyers speak <$$paren> as if we had knowne them before .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,24R_misnumbered_as_34R.85

Another Errour that hath also some affinitie with the former is a
conceit that of former opinions or sects after varietie and examination
, the best hath still preuailed ; and suppressed the rest ; So as if a
<P_1,24V_misnumbered_as_34V> man should beginne the labour of a newe
search , hee were but like to light vppon somewhat formerly reiected ;
and by reiection , brought into obliuion ; as if the multitude , or the
wisest for the multitudes sake , were not readie to giue passage ,
rather to that which is popular and superficial , than to that which is
substantiall and profound ; BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,24V_misnumbered_as_34V.86

for the truth is , that time seemeth to be of the nature of a Riuer , or
streame , which carryeth downe to vs that which is light and blowne vp ;
and sinketh and drowneth that which is weightie and solide .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,24V_misnumbered_as_34V.87

Another Errour of a diuerse nature from all the former , is the
ouer-early and peremptorie reduction of knowledge into Arts and Methodes
: from which time , commonly Sciences receiue small or no augmentation .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,24V_misnumbered_as_34V.88

But as young men , when they knit and shape perfectly , doe seldome grow
to a further stature : so knowledge , while it is Aphorismes and
obseruations , it is in groweth ;
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,24V_misnumbered_as_34V.89

but when it once is comprehended in exact Methodes ; it may perchance be
further pollished and illustrate , and accommodated for vse and practise
; BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,24V_misnumbered_as_34V.90

but it encreaseth no more in bulke and substance .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,24V_misnumbered_as_34V.91

Another Errour which doth succeed that which we last mentioned , is ,
that after the distribution of particular Arts and Sciences , men haue
abandoned vniuersalitie , or <font> Philosophia prima <$$font> ; which
can@ @not but cease , and stoppe all progression .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,24V_misnumbered_as_34V.92

For no perfect discouerie can bee made vppon a flatte , or a leuell .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,24V_misnumbered_as_34V.93

<P_1,25R>

Neither is it possible to discouer the more remote , and deeper parts of
any Science , if you stand but vpon the leuell of the same Science , and
ascend not to a higher Science . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25R.95

Another Error hath proceeded from too great a reuerence , and a kinde of
adoration of the minde and vnderstanding of man : by meanes whereof ,
men haue withdrawne themselues too much from the contemplation of Nature
, and the obseruations of experience : and haue tumbled vp and downe in
their owne reason and conceits : BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25R.96

vpon these Intellectuallists , which are notwithstanding commonly taken
for the most sublime and diuine Philosophers ; <font> Heraclitus
<$$font> gaue a iust censure , saying : <font> Men sought truth in their
owne little worlds , and not in the great and common world : <$$font>
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25R.97

for they disdaine to spell , and so by degrees to read in the volume of
Gods works , BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25R.98

and contrarywise by continuall meditation and agitation of wit , doe
vrge , and as it were inuocate their owne spirits , to diuine , and giue
Oracles vnto them , whereby they are deseruedly deluded .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25R.99

Another Error that hath some connexion with this later , is , that men
haue vsed to infect their meditations , opinions , and doctrines with
some conceits which they haue most admired , or some Sciences which they
haue most applyed ; and giuen all things else a tincture according to
them , vtterly vntrue and vnproper . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25R.100

So hath <font> Plato <$$font> intermingled his Philosophie with
Theologie , and <font> Aristotle <$$font> with Logicke , and the second
Schoole of <font> Plato <$$font> , <P_1,25V> <font> Proclus <$$font> ,
and the rest , with the Mathematiques . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25V.101

For these were the Arts which had a kinde of <font> Primo_geniture
<$$font> with them seuerally . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25V.102

So haue the Alchymists made a Philosophie out of a few experiments of
the Furnace ; BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25V.103

and <font> Gilbertus <$$font> our Countrey_man hath made a Philosophie
out of the obseruations of a Loadstone . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25V.104

So <font> Cicero <$$font> , when reciting the seuerall opinions of the
nature of the soule , he found a Musician , that held that the soule was
but a harmonie , BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25V.105

sayth pleasantly : <font> Hic ab arte sua non recessit , &c. <$$font>
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25V.106

But of these conceits <font> Aristotle <$$font> speaketh seriously and
wisely , when he sayth : <font> Qui respiciunt ad pauca de facili
pronuntiant . <$$font> BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25V.107

Another Errour is an impatience of doubt , and hast to assertion without
due and mature suspention of iudgement . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25V.108

For the two wayes of contemplation are not vnlike the two wayes of
action , commonly spoken of by the Ancients . The one plain and smooth
in the beginning , and in the end impassable ; the other rough and
troublesome at the entrance , but after a while fair and euen ,
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25V.109

so it is in cotemplation , BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25V.110

if a man will begin with certainties , hee shall end in doubts ;
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25V.111

but if he will be content to beginne with doubts , he shall end in
certainties . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25V.112

Another Error is in the manner of the tradition and deliuerie of
knowledge , which is for the most part Magistrall and peremptorie ; and
not ingenuous and faithfull , in a sort , as may be soonest beleeued ;
and not easilest examined . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,25V.113

It is true , that in compendious Treatises for practise , that fourme is
<P_1,26R> not to bee disallowed . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,26R.114

But in the true handling of knowledge , men ought not to fall either on
the one side into the veyne of <font> Velieius <$$font> the Epicurean :
<font> Nil tam metuens , quam ne dubitare aliqua de re videretur
<$$font> ; Nor on the other side into <font> Socrates <$$font> his
irronicall doubting of all things , but to propound things sincerely ,
with more or lesse asseueration : as they stand in a mans owne iudgement
, prooued more or lesse . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,26R.115

Other Errors there are in the scope that men propound to themselues ,
whereunto they bend their endeauours : BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,26R.116

for whereas the more constant and deuote kind of Professors of any
science ought to propound to themselues , to make some additions to
their Science ; they conuert their labours to aspire to certaine second
Prizes ; as to be a profound Interpreter or Com~enter ; to be a sharpe
Champion or Defender ; to be a methodicall Compounder or abridger ;
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,26R.117

and so the Patrimonie of knowledge commeth to be sometimes improoued but
seldome augmented . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,26R.118

But the greatest Error of all the rest , is the mistaking or misplacing
of the last or furthest end of knowledge : BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,26R.119

for men haue entred into a desire of Learning and knowledge , sometimes
vpon a naturall curiositie , and inquisitiue appetite : sometimes to
entertaine their mindes with varietie and delight ; sometimes for
ornament and reputation ; and sometimes to inable them to victorie of
wit and contradiction , and most times for lukar and profession , and
seldome sincerely to giue a true account of their <P_1,26V> guift of
reason , to the benefite and vse of men : As if there were sought in
knowledge a Cowch , wherevpon to rest a searching and restlesse spirite
; or a tarrasse for a wandring and variable minde , to walke vp and
downe with a faire prospect ; or a Tower of State for a proude minde to
raise it selfe vpon ; or a Fort or commaunding ground for strife and
contention , or a Shoppe for profite or sale ; and not a rich
Store-house for the glorie of the Creator , and the reliefe of Mans
estate . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,26V.120

But this is that , which will indeed dignifie and exalt knowledge ; if
contemplation and action may be more neerely and straightly conioyned
and vnited together , than they haue beene ; a Coniunction like vnto
that of the two highest Planets , <font> Saturne <$$font> the Planet of
rest and contemplation ; and <font> Iupiter <$$font> the Planet of
ciuile societie and action . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,26V.121

Howbeit , I doe not meane when I speake of vse and action , that end
before mentioned of the applying of knowledge to luker and profession ;
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,26V.122

For I am not ignorant howe much that diuerteth and interrupteth the
prosecution and aduauncement of knowledge ; like vnto the goulden ball
throwne before <font> Atalanta <$$font> , which while shee gooth aside ,
and stoopeth to take vp , the race is hindred ,
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,26V.123

<font> Declinat cursus , aurumque volubile tollit : <$$font>
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,26V.124

Neither is my meaning as was spoken of <font> Socrates <$$font> , to
call Philosophy down from heaue~ to conuerse vpon the earth ,
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,26V.125

that is , to leaue natural Philosophy aside , & to applye knowledge
onely to manners , and policie . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,26V.126

<P_1,27R>

But as both heauen and earth doe conspire and contribute to the vse and
benefite of man : So the end ought to bee from both Philosophies , to
separate and reiect vaine speculations , and whatsoeuer is emptie and
voide , and preserue and augment whatsoeuer is solide and fruitfull :
that knowledge may not bee as a Curtezan for pleasure , & vanitie only ,
or as a bond-woman to acquire and gaine to her Masters vse , but as a
Spouse , for generation , fruit , and comfort .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,27R.128

Thus haue I described and opened as by a kinde of dissection , those
peccant humors <paren> the principall of them <$$paren> which hath not
onely giuen impediment to the proficience of Learning , but haue giuen
also occasion , to the traducement thereof : wherein if I haue beene too
plaine , it must bee remembred ; <font> Fidelia vulnera amantis , sed
dolosa oscula malignantis . <$$font> BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,27R.129

This I thinke I haue gained , that I ought to bee the better beleeued ,
in that which I shall say pertayning to commendation : because I haue
proceeded so freely , in that which concerneth censure .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,27R.130

And yet I haue no purpose to enter into a laudatiue of Learning , or to
make a Hymne to the Muses <paren> though I am of opinion , that it is
long since their Rites were duely celebrated <$$paren>
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,27R.131

but my intent is without varnish or amplification , iustly to weigh the
dignitie of knowledge in the balance with other things , and to take the
true value thereof by testimonies and arguments diuine , and humane .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,27R.132

First therefore , let vs seeke the dignitie of knowledge <P_1,27V> in
the Arch-tipe or first plat forme , which is {SIC:is_is} in the
attributes and acts of God , as farre as they are reuealed to man , and
may be obserued with sobrietie , wherein we may not seeke it by the name
of Learning , BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,27V.133

for all learning is knowledge acquired , BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,27V.134

and all knowledge in God is originall . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,27V.135

And therefore we must looke for it by another name , that of wisedome or
sapience , as the scriptures call it . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,27V.136

It is so then , that in the worke of the Creation , we see a double
emanation of vertue fro~ God : the one referring more properly to power
, the other to wisedome , the one expressed in making the subsistence of
the mater , & the other in disposing the beauty of the fourme .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,27V.137

This being supposed , it is to bee obserued , that for any thing which
appeareth in the historie of the Creation , the confused Masse , and
matter of heauen and earth was made in a moment , and the order and
disposition of that <font> Chaos <$$font> or Masse , was the work of
sixe dayes , such a note of difference it pleased God to put vppon the
workes of power , and the workes of wisedome : wherewith concurreth that
in the former , it is not sette downe , that God sayd , <font> Let there
be Heauen and Earth <$$font> , as it is set downe of the workes
following , but actually , that God made Heauen and earth : the one
carrying the stile of a Manufacture , and the other of a lawe , decree ,
or Councell . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,27V.138

To proceede to that which is next in order from God to spirits : we
finde as farre as credite is to bee giuen to the celestiall Hierarchye ,
of that supposed <P_1,28R> <font> Dionysius <$$font> the Senator of
Athens the first place or degree is giuen to the Angels of loue , which
are termed <font> Seraphim <$$font> , the second to the Angels of light
, which are termed <font> Cherubim <$$font> , and the third ; and so
following places to thrones , principalities , and the rest , which are
all Angels of power and ministry ; so as the Angels of knowledge and
illumination , are placed before the Angels of Office and domination .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,28R.139

To descend from spirits and intellectuall formes to sensible and
materiall fourmes , wee read the first fourme that was created , was
light , which hath a relation and correspondence in nature and corporall
thinges , to knowledge in spirits and incorporall thinges .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,28R.140

So in the distribution of dayes , we see the day wherin God did rest , &
conte~plate his owne works , was blessed aboue all the dayes , wherein
he did effect and accomplish them . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,28R.141

After the Creation was finished , it is sette downe vnto vs , that man
was placed in the Garden to worke therein , which worke so appointed to
him , could be no other than the worke of contemplation ,
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,28R.142

that is , when the end of worke is but for exercise and experiment , not
for necessitie , BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,28R.143

for there being then no reluctation of the creature , nor sweat of the
browe , mans employment must of consequence haue ben matter of delight
in the experiment and not matter of labor for the vse .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,28R.144

Againe the first Acts which man perfourmed in Paradise , <P_1,28V>
consisted of the two summarie parts of knowledge , the view of Creatures
, and the imposition of names . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,28V.145

As for the knowledge which induced the fall , it was , as was touched
before , not the naturall knowledge of Creatures , but the morall
knowledge of good and euill , wherein the supposition was , that Gods
commaundements or prohibitions were not the originals of good and euill
, but that they had other beginnings which man aspired to know , to the
end , to make a totall defection from God , and to depend wholy vpon
himselfe . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,28V.146

To passe on , in the first euent or occurrence after the fall of Man ;
we see <paren> as the Scriptures haue infinite Mysteries , not violating
at all the truth of the Storie or letter <$$paren> an Image of the two
Estates , the Contemplatiue state , and the actiue state , figured in
the two persons of <font> Abell <$$font> and <font> Cain <$$font> , and
in the two simplest and most primitiue Trades of life : that of the
Shepheard <paren> who by reason of his leasure , rest in a place , and
liuing in view of heauen , is a liuely Image of a contemplative life
<$$paren> and that of the husbandman ; where we see againe , the fauour
and election of God went to the Shepheard , and not to the tiller of the
ground . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,28V.147

So in the age before the floud , the holy Records within those few
memorials , which are there entred and registred , haue vouchsafed to
mention , and honour the name of the Inuentors and Authors of Musique ,
and works in mettall . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,28V.148

In the age after the Floud , the first great iudgement of God vppon the
<P_1,29R> ambition of man , was the confusion of tongues ; whereby the
open Trade and intercourse of Learning and knowledge , was chiefely
imbarred . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,29R.149

To descend to <font> Moyses <$$font> the Law_giuer , and Gods first
penne ; hee is adorned by the Scriptures with this addition , and
commendation : <font> That he was seene in all the Learning of the
AEgyptians <$$font> ; which Nation we know was one of the most ancient
Schooles of the world : BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,29R.150

for , so <font> Plato <$$font> brings in the Egyptian Priest , saying
vnto <font> Solon : You Grecians are euer Children ,
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,29R.151

you haue no knowledge of antiquitie , nor antiquitie of knowledge .
<$$font> BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,29R.152

Take a view of the ceremoniall law of <font> Moyses <$$font> ; you shall
find besides the prefiguration of Christ , the badge or difference of
the people of God , the excercise and impression of obedience , and
other diuine vses and fruits thereof , that some of the most learned
<font> Rabynes <$$font> haue trauailed profitably , and profoundly to
obserue , some of them a naturall , some of them a morall sence , or
reduction of many of the ceremonies and ordinances : As in the lawe of
the Leprousie , where it is sayd : <font> If the whitenesse haue
ouerspread the flesh , the Patient may passe abroad for clean ;
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,29R.153

But if there be any whole flesh remayning , he is to be shut vp for
vncleane : <$$font> BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,29R.154

One of them noteth a principle of nature , that putrefaction is more
contagious before maturitie than after : BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,29R.155

And another noteth a position of moral Philosophie , that men abandoned
to vice , doe not so much corrupt manners , as those that are halfe good
, and halfe euill , BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,29R.156

so , in this and verie many other places in that lawe , there is to bee
found besides <P_1,29V> the Theologicall sence , much aspersion of
Philosophie . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,29V.157

So likewise in that excellent Booke of <font> Iob <$$font> , if it be
reuolued with diligence , it will be found pregnant , and swelling with
naturall Philosophie ; as for example , Cosmographie , and the
roundnesse of the world : <font> Qui extendit aquilonem super vacuum , &
appendit terram super nihilum <$$font> : wherein the pensilenesse of the
earth , the pole of the North , and the finitenesse , or conuexitie of
Heauen are manifestly touched . BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,29V.158

So again matter of Astronomie ; <font> Spiritus eius ornauit caelos &
obstetricante manu eius eductus est coluber tortuosus <$$font> :
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,29V.159

And in another place , <font> Nunquid coniungere valebis micantes
stellas pleyadas , aut gyrum arcturi poteris dissipare ? <$$font> where
the fixing of the starres , euer standing at equall distance , is with
great elegancie noted : BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,29V.160

And in another place , <font> Qui facit arcturum , & oriona , & hyadas ,
& interiora austri <$$font> , where againe hee takes knowledge of the
depression of the Southerne pole , calling it the secrets of the South ,
because the southerne starres were in that climate vnseene .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,1,29V.161

<P_2,1R>

The Second Book of Francis Bacon ; of the proficience of aduancement of
Learning , Diuine and Humane . BACON-1605-E2-P2,2,1R.163

To the King . BACON-1605-E2-P2,2,1R.164

It might seeme to haue more conuenience , though it come often otherwise
to passe , <paren> Excellent King <$$paren> that those which are
fruitfull in their generations , & haue in themselues the foresight of
Immortalitie , in their descendents , should likewise be more carefull
of the good estate of future times ; vnto which they know they must
transmitte and commend ouer their dearest pledges .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,2,1R.165

Queene <font> Elizabeth <$$font> was a soiourner in the world in respect
of her vnmaried life : BACON-1605-E2-P2,2,1R.166

and was a blessing to her owne times ; & yet so as the impression of her
good gouernement , besides her happie <P_2,1V> memorie , is not without
some efect , which doth suruiue her . BACON-1605-E2-P2,2,1V.167

But to your Maiestie , whom God hath alreadie blessed with so much
Royall issue , worthie to continue and represent you for euer : and
whose youthfull and fruitfull bedde doth yet promise manie the like
renouations : It is proper and agreeable to be conuersant , not only in
the transitory parts of good gouernment : but in those acts also , which
are in their nature permanent & perpetuall . Amongst the which <paren>
if affection do not transport mee , <$$paren> there is not any more
worthie , then the further endowement of the world with sound and
fruitfull knowledge : BACON-1605-E2-P2,2,1V.168

For why should a fewe receiued Authors stand vp like <font> Hercules
Columnes <$$font> , beyond which , there should be no sayling , or
discouering , since wee haue so bright and benigne a starre , as your
Ma: to conduct and prosper vs ? BACON-1605-E2-P2,2,1V.169

To returne therefore where wee left , it remaineth to consider of what
kind those Acts are which haue bene vndertaken , & performed by Kings
and others , for the increase and aduancement of learning , wherein I
purpose to speake actiuely without digressing or dylating .
BACON-1605-E2-P2,2,1V.170

Let this ground therfore be layd , that all workes are ouerco~men by
amplitude of reward , by soundnesse of direction , and by the
coniunction of labors . BACON-1605-E2-P2,2,1V.171

The first multiplyeth endeuour , BACON-1605-E2-P2,2,1V.172

the second preuenteth error , BACON-1605-E2-P2,2,1V.173

and the third supplieth the frailty of man . BACON-1605-E2-P2,2,1V.174

But the principal of these is direction : BACON-1605-E2-P2,2,1V.175

for <font> Claudus in via , antevertit cursorem extra viam <$$font> :
BACON-1605-E2-P2,2,1V.176

And <font> Salomon <$$font> excellently setteth it downe ; <font> If the
Iron be not sharpe , <P_2,2R> it requireth more strength : But wisedome
is that which preuaileth : <$$font> signifying that the Inuention or
election of the Meane , is more effectuall then anie inforcement of
accumulation of endeuours . BACON-1605-E2-P2,2,2R.177

This I am induced to speake ; for that <paren> not derogating from the
noble intention of any that haue beene deseruers towards the State of
learning <$$paren> I do obserue neuerthelesse , that their workes and
Acts are rather matters of Magnificence and Memorie , then of
progression and proficience , and tende rather to augment the masse of
Learning in the multitude of learned men , then to rectifie or raise the
Sciences themselues . BACON-1605-E2-P2,2,2R.178

