<BEGIN_behn-1668-e3-p2>

<P_169>

'T@ @is not to be imagined the satisfaction of these two young lovers ;
nor the vows she made him , that she <P_170> remained a spotless maid
till that night , and that what she did with his grandfather had robb'd
him of no part of her virgin-honour ; the gods , in mercy and justice ,
having reserved that for her plighted lord , to whom of right it
belonged . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,170.3

And 't@ @is impossible to express the transports he suffer'd , while he
listen'd to a discourse so charming from her loved lips ; and clasped
that body in his arms , for whom he had so long languished :
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,170.4

and nothing now afflicted him , but his sudden departure from her ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,170.5

for he told her the necessity , and his commands , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,170.6

but should depart satisfy'd in this , That since the old king had
hitherto not been able to deprive him of those enjoyments which only
belonged to him , he believed for the future he would be less able to
injure him : so that , abating the scandal of the veil , which was no
otherwise so , than that she was wife to another , he believed her safe
, even in the arms of the king , and innocent ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,170.7

yet would he have ventur'd at the conquest of the world , and have given
it all to have had her have {TEXT:missing_"have"} avoided that honour of
receiving the royal veil . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,170.8

'T@ @was thus , between a_thousand caresses , that both bemoan'd the
hard fate of youth and beauty , so liable to that cruel promotion :
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,170.9

't@ @was a glory that could well have been spared here , tho desired and
aim'd at by all the young females of that kingdom .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,170.10

But while they were thus fondly employ'd , forgetting how time ran on ,
and that the dawn must conduct him far away from his only happiness ,
they heard a great noise in the Otan , and unusual voices of men ; at
which the prince , starting from the arms of the frighted <font> Imoinda
<$$font> , ran to a little battle-ax he used to wear by his side ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,170.11

and having not so much leisure as to put on his habit , he opposed
himself against some who were already opening the door : which they did
with so much violence , that <font> Oroonoko <$$font> was not able to
defend it ; but was forced to cry out with a commanding voice , <font>
Whoever ye are that have the boldness to attempt to approach this
apartment thus rudely ; know , that I , the Prince <$$font> Oroonoko ,
<font> will revenge it with the certain death of him <$$font> <P_171>
<font> that first enters : BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.12

Therefore , stand back , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.13

and know , this place is sacred to love and me this night ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.14

to-morrow 't@ @is the king's . <$$font> BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.15

This he spoke with a voice so resolv'd and assur'd , that they soon
retired from the door ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.16

but cry'd , <font> ' T@ @is by the king's command we are come ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.17

and being satisfy'd by thy voice , O prince , as much as
{we_would_have_been_satisfied} if we had enter'd , we can report to the
king the truth of all his fears , and leave thee to provide for thy own
safety , as thou art advis'd by thy friends . <$$font>
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.18

At these words they departed , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.19

and left the prince to take a short and sad leave of his <font> Imoinda
<$$font> ; who , trusting in the strength of her charms , believed she
should appease the fury of a jealous king , by saying , she was
surprized , and that it was by force of arms he got into her apartment .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.20

All her concern now was for his life , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.21

and therefore she hasten'd him to the camp , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.22

and with much ado prevail'd on him to go . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.23

Nor was it she alone that prevailed ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.24

<font> Aboan <$$font> and <font> Onahal <$$font> both pleaded ,
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.25

and both assured him of a lye that should be well enough contrived to
secure <font> Imoinda <$$font> . So that at last , with a heart sad as
death , dying eyes , and sighing soul , <font> Oroonoko <$$font>
departed , and took his way to the camp . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.26

It was not long after , the king in person came to the otan ; where
beholding <font> Imoinda <$$font> , with rage in his eyes , he upbraided
her wickedness , and perfidy ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.27

and threatning her royal lover , she fell on her face at his feet ,
bedewing the floor with her tears , and imploring his pardon for a fault
which she had not with her will committed ; as <font> Onahal <$$font> ,
who was also prostrate with her , could testify : That , unknown to her
, he had broke into her apartment , and ravished her .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.28

She spoke this much against her conscience ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.29

but to save her own life , 't@ @was absolutely necessary she should
feign this falsity . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.30

She knew it could not injure the prince , he being fled to an army that
would stand by him , against any injuries that should assault him .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,171.31

However this last thought of <font> Imoinda's <$$font> being ravished ,
changed the <P_172> measures of his revenge ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,172.32

and whereas before he designed to be himself her executioner , he now
resolved she should not die . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,172.33

But as it is the greatest crime in nature amongst 'em , to touch a woman
after having been possess'd by a son , a father , or a brother . so now
he looked on <font> Imoinda <$$font> as a polluted thing , wholly unfit
for his embrace ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,172.34

nor would he resign her to his grandson , because she had received the
royal veil : BEHN-1668-E3-P2,172.35

He therefore removes her from the otan , with <font> Onahal <$$font> ;
whom he put into safe hands , with order they should be both sold off as
slaves to another country , either Christian or heathen , 't@ @was no
matter where . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,172.36

This cruel sentence , worse than death , they implor'd might be reversed
; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,172.37

but their prayers were vain , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,172.38

and it was put in execution accordingly , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,172.39

and that with so much secrecy , that none , either without or within the
otan , knew any thing of their absence , or their destiny .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,172.40

The old king nevertheless executed this with a great deal of reluctancy
; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,172.41

but he believed he had made a very great conquest over himself , when he
had once resolved , and had perform'd what he resolv'd .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,172.42

He believed now , that his love had been unjust ; and that he cou'd not
expect the gods , or Captain of the Clouds <paren> as they call the
unknown power <$$paren> wou'd suffer a better consequence from so ill a
cause . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,172.43

He now begins to hold <font> Oroonoko <$$font> excused ; and to say , he
had reason for what he did : BEHN-1668-E3-P2,172.44

And now every body cou'd assure the king how passionately <font> Imoinda
<$$font> was beloved by the prince ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,172.45

even those confess'd it now , who said the contrary before his flame was
not abated . So that the king being old , and not able to defend
himself in war , and having no sons of all his race remaining alive ,
but only this , to maintain him on his throne ; and looking on this as a
man disobliged , first by the rape of his mistress , or rather wife ,
and now by depriving him wholly of her , he fear'd , might make him
desperate , and do some cruel thing , either to himself or his old
grandfather the offender , he began to repent him extremely of the
contempt he had , in his rage , put on <font> Imoinda . <$$font>
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,172.46

Besides <P_173> he consider'd he ought in honour to have killed her for
this offence , if it had been one . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,173.47

He ought to have had so much value and consideration for a maid of her
quality , as to have nobly put her to death , and not to have sold her
like a common slave ; the greatest revenge , and the most disgraceful of
any , and to which they a_thousand times prefer death , and implore it ;
as <font> Imoinda <$$font> did , but cou'd not obtain that honour .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,173.48

Seeing therefore it was certain that <font> Oroonoko <$$font> would
highly resent this affront , he thought good to make some excuse for his
rashness to him ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,173.49

and to that end , he sent a messenger to the camp , with orders to treat
with him about the matter , to gain his pardon , and to endeavour to
mitigate his grief ; but that by no means he shou'd tell him she was
sold , but secretly put to death : BEHN-1668-E3-P2,173.50

for he knew he should never obtain his pardon for the other .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,173.51

When the messenger came , he found the prince upon the point of engaging
with the enemy ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,173.52

but as soon as he heard of the arrival of the messenger , he commanded
him to his tent , where he embraced him , and received him with joy :
which was soon abated by the down-cast looks of the messenger , who was
instantly demanded the cause by <font> Oroonoko <$$font> ; who ,
impatient of delay , ask'd a_thousand questions in a breath , and all
concerning <font> Imoinda <$$font> . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,173.53

But there needed little return ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,173.54

for he cou'd almost answer himself of all he demanded from his sighs and
eyes . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,173.55

At last the messenger casting himself at the prince's feet , and kissing
them with all the submission of a man that had something to implore
which he dreaded to utter , he besought him to hear with calmness what
he had to deliver to him , and to call up all his noble and heroick
courage , to encounter with his words , and defend himself against the
ungrateful things he must relate . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,173.56

<font> Oroonoko <$$font> reply'd , with a deep sigh , and a languishing
voice , - <font> I am armed against their worst efforts -
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,173.57

For I know they will tell me , <$$font> Imoinda <font> is no more -
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,173.58

and after that , you may spare the rest . <$$font>
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,173.59

Then , commanding him to rise , he laid himself on a carpet , under a
rich pavilion , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,173.60

and remained a good <P_174> while silent , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,174.61

and was hardly heard to sigh . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,174.62

When he was come a little to himself , the messenger asked him leave to
deliver that part of his embassy which the prince had not yet divin'd :
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,174.63

And the prince cry'd , <font> I permit thee <$$font> -
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,174.64

Then he told him the affliction the old king was in , for the rashness
he had committed in his cruelty to <font> Imoinda <$$font> ; and how he
deign'd to ask pardon for his offence , and to implore the prince would
not suffer that loss to touch his heart too sensibly , which now all the
gods could not restore him , but might recompense him in glory , which
he begged he would pursue ; and that death , that common revenger of all
injuries , would soon even the account between him and a feeble old man
. BEHN-1668-E3-P2,174.65

<font> Oroonoko <$$font> bad him return his duty to his lord and master
; and to assure him , there was no account of revenge to be adjusted
between them : BEHN-1668-E3-P2,174.66

if there were , 't@ @was he was the aggressor , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,174.67

and that death would be just , and , maugre his age , wou'd see him
righted ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,174.68

and he was contented to leave his share of glory to youths more
fortunate and worthy of that favour from the gods :
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,174.69

That henceforth he would never lift a weapon , or draw a bow , but
abandon the small remains of his life to sighs and tears , and the
continual thoughts of what his lord and grandfather had thought good to
send out of the world , with all that youth , that innocence and beauty
. BEHN-1668-E3-P2,174.70

After having spoken this , whatever his greatest officers and men of the
best rank cou'd do , they could not raise him from the carpet , or
persuade him to action , and resolutions of life ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,174.71

but commanding all to retire , he shut himself into his pavilion all
that day , while the enemy was ready to engage : BEHN-1668-E3-P2,174.72

and wondring at the delay , the whole body of the chief of the army then
address'd themselves to him , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,174.73

and to whom they had much ado to get admittance .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,174.74

They fell on their faces at the foot of his carpet , where they lay ,
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,174.75

and besought him with earnest prayers and tears , to lead them forth to
battle , and not let the enemy take <P_175> advantages of them ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,175.76

and implored him to have regard to his glory , and to the world , that
depended on his courage and conduct . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,175.77

But he made no other reply to all their supplications , but this , That
he had now no more business for glory ; and for the world ,
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,175.78

it was a trifle not worth his care : BEHN-1668-E3-P2,175.79

<font> Go <$$font> <paren> continued he , sighing <$$paren>
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,175.80

<font> and divide it amongst you , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,175.81

and reap with joy what you so vainly prize , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,175.82

and leave me to my more welcome destiny . <$$font>
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,175.83

They then demanded what they should do , and whom he would constitute in
his room , that the confusion of ambitious youth and power might not
ruin their order , and make them a prey to the enemy .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,175.84

He reply'd , he would not give himself the trouble - but wished 'em to
chuse the bravest man amongst 'em , let his quality or birth be what it
wou'd : BEHN-1668-E3-P2,175.85

<font> For , oh my friends ! <$$font> <paren> said he <$$paren> <font>
it is not titles make men brave or good ; or birth that bestows courage
and generosity , or makes the owner happy . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,175.86

Believe this , when you behold <$$font> Oroonoko <font> the most
wretched , and abandoned by fortune , of all the creation of the gods .
<$$font> BEHN-1668-E3-P2,175.87

So turning himself about , he wou'd make no more reply to all they could
urge or implore . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,175.88

The army beholding their officers return unsuccessful , with sad faces
and ominous looks , that presaged no good luck , suffer'd a_thousand
fears to take possession of their hearts , and the enemy to come even
upon them , before they would provide for their safety , by any defence
: BEHN-1668-E3-P2,175.89

and though they were assured by some , who had a mind to animate them ,
that they should be immediately headed by the prince , and that in the
mean time <font> Aboan <$$font> had orders to command as general ; yet
they were so dismay'd for want of that great example of bravery , that
they could make but a very feeble resistance ; and at last , downright
fled before the enemy , who pursued 'em to the very tents , killing 'em
. BEHN-1668-E3-P2,175.90

Nor could all <font> Aboan's <$$font> courage , which that day gained
him immortal glory , shame 'em into a manly defence of themselves .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,175.91

The guards that were left behind about the prince's tent , seeing the
soldiers flee before the enemy , and scatter themselves all over the
plain , in <P_176> great disorder , made such outcries as rouz'd the
prince from his amorous slumber , in which he had remain'd bury'd for
two days , without permitting any sustenance to approach him .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,176.92

But , in spight of all his resolutions , he had not the constancy of
grief to that degree , as to make him insensible of the danger of his
army ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,176.93

and in that instant he leaped from his couch , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,176.94

and cry'd - <font> Come , if we must die , let us meet death the noblest
way ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,176.95

and 't@ @will be more like <$$font> Oroonoko <font> to encounter him at
an army's head , opposing the torrent of a conquering foe , than lazily
on a couch , to wait his lingring pleasure , and die every moment by
a_thousand racking thoughts ; or be tamely taken by an enemy , and led a
whining love-sick slave to adorn the triumphs of <$$font> Jamoan ,
<font> that young victor , who already is enter'd beyond the limits I
have prescrib'd him . <$$font> BEHN-1668-E3-P2,176.96

While he was speaking , he suffer'd his people to dress him for the
field ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,176.97

and sallying out of his pavilion , with more life and vigour in his
countenance than ever he shew'd , he appear'd like some divine power
descended to save his country from destruction : BEHN-1668-E3-P2,176.98

and his people had purposely put him on all things that might make him
shine with most splendor , to strike a reverend awe into the beholders .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,176.99

He flew into the thickest of those that were pursuing his men ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,176.100

and being animated with despair , he fought as if he came on purpose to
die , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,176.101

and did such things as will not be believed that human strength could
perform ; and such as soon inspir'd all the rest with new courage , and
new order . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,176.102

And now it was that they began to fight indeed ; and so , as if they
would not be outdone even by their ador'd hero ; who turning the tide of
the victory , changing absolutely the fate of the day , gain'd an entire
conquest : BEHN-1668-E3-P2,176.103

and <font> Oroonoko <$$font> having the good fortune to single out
<font> Jamoan <$$font> , he took him prisoner with his own hand , having
wounded him almost to death . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,176.104

This <font> Jamoan <$$font> afterwards became very dear to him , being a
man very gallant , and of excellent graces , and fine parts ; so that he
never put him amongst the rank <P_177> of captives , as they used to do
, without distinction , for the common sale , or market , but kept him
in his own court , where he retain'd nothing of the prisoner but the
name , and returned no more into his own country ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,177.105

so great an affection he took for <font> Oroonoko <$$font> ,
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,177.106

and by a_thousand tales and adventures of love and gallantry , flatter'd
his disease of melancholy and languishment : which I have often heard
him say , had certainly kill'd him , but for the conversation of this
prince and <font> Aboan <$$font> , and the <font> French <$$font>
governour he had from his childhood , of whom I have spoken before , and
who was a man of admirable wit , great ingenuity and learning ; all
which he had infused into his young pupil . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,177.107

This <font> Frenchman <$$font> was banished out of his own country , for
some heretical notions he held : BEHN-1668-E3-P2,177.108

and tho he was a man of very little religion , he had admirable morals ,
and a brave soul . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,177.109

After the total defeat of <font> Jamoan's <$$font> army , which all fled
, or were left dead upon the place , they spent some time in the camp ;
<font> Oroonoko <$$font> chusing rather to remain awhile there in his
tents , than to enter into a palace , or live in a court where he had so
lately suffer'd so great a loss . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,177.110

The officers therefore , who saw and knew his cause of discontent ,
invented all sorts of diversions and sports to entertain their prince :
so that what with those amusements abroad , and others at home , that is
, within their tents , with the persuasions , arguments , and care of
his friends and servants that he more peculiarly priz'd , he wore off in
time a great part of that <font> chagreen <$$font> , and torture of
despair , which the first effects of <font> Imoinda's <$$font> death had
given him ; insomuch as having received a_thousand kind embassies from
the king , and invitation to return to court , he obey'd , tho with no
little reluctancy : BEHN-1668-E3-P2,177.111

and when he did so , there was a visible change in him ,
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,177.112

and for a long time he was much more melancholy than before .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,177.113

But time lessens all extremes , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,177.114

and reduces 'em to <font> mediums <$$font> , and unconcern :
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,177.115

but no motives of beauties , tho all endeavour'd it , cou'd engage him
in any sort of amour , though he <P_178> had all the invitations to it ,
both from his own youth , and others ambitions and designs .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,178.116

<font> Oroonoko <$$font> was no sooner return'd from this last conquest
, and receiv'd at court with all the joy and magnificence that could be
expressed to a young victor , who was not only returned triumphant , but
belov'd like a deity , than there arriv'd in the port an <font> English
ship . <$$font> BEHN-1668-E3-P2,178.117

The master of it had often before been in these countries ,
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,178.118

and was very well known to <font> Oroonoko <$$font> , with whom he had
traffick'd for slaves , and had us'd to do the same with his
predecessors . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,178.119

This commander was a man of a finer sort of address and conversation ,
better bred , and more engaging , than most of that sort of men are ; so
that he seem'd rather never to have been bred out of a court , than
{COM:to_have_been} almost all his life at sea . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,178.120

This captain therefore was always better receiv'd at court , than most
of the traders to those countries were ; and especially by <font>
Oroonoko <$$font> , who was more civiliz'd , according to the <font>
European <$$font> mode , than any other had been , and took more delight
in the white nations ; and , above all , men of parts and wit .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,178.121

To this captain he sold abundance of his slaves ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,178.122

and for the favour and esteem he had for him , made him many presents ,
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,178.123

and oblig'd him to stay at court as long as possibly he cou'd . Which
the captain seem'd to take as a very great honour done him ,
entertaining the prince every day with globes and maps , and
mathematical discourses and instruments ; eating , drinking , hunting ,
and living with him with so much familiarity , that it was not to be
doubted but he had gain'd very greatly upon the heart of this gallant
young man . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,178.124

And the captain , in return of all these mighty favours , besought the
prince to honour his vessel with his presence , some day or other at
dinner , before he shou'd set sail : which he condescended to accept ,
and appointed his day . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,178.125

The captain , on his part , fail'd not to have all things in a readiness
, in the most magnificent order he could possibly :
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,178.126

And the day being come , the captain , in his boat , richly adorn'd with
carpets and velvet <P_179> cushions , row'd to the shore , to receive
the prince ; with another long-boat , where was plac'd all his musick
and trumpets , with which <font> Oroonoko <$$font> was extremely
delighted ; who met him on the shore , attended by his <font> French
<$$font> governor , <font> Jamoan , Aboan , <$$font> and about
an_hundred of the noblest of the youths of the court :
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.127

And after they had first carry'd the prince on board , the boats fetch'd
the rest off ; where they found a very splendid treat , with all sorts
of fine wines ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.128

and were as well entertain'd , as 't@ @was possible in such a place to
be . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.129

The prince having drunk hard of punch , and several sorts of wine , as
did all the rest , <paren> for great care was taken , they shou'd want
nothing of that part of the entertainment <$$paren> was very merry , and
in great admiration of the ship , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.130

for he had never been in one before ; so that he was curious of
beholding every place where he decently might descend .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.131

The rest , no less curious , who were not quite overcome with drinking ,
rambled at their pleasure fore and aft , as their fancies guided 'em :
So that the captain , who had well laid his design before , gave the
word , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.132

and seiz'd on all his guests ; they clapping great irons suddenly on the
prince , when he was leap'd down into the hold , to view that part of
the vessel ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.133

and locking him fast down , secur'd him . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.134

The same treachery was us'd to all the rest ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.135

and all in one instant , in several places of the ship , were lash'd
fast in irons , and betray'd to slavery . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.136

That great design over , they set all hands to work to hoist sail ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.137

and with as treacherous as fair a wind they made from the shore with
this innocent and glorious prize , who thought of nothing less than such
an entertainment . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.138

Some have commended this act , as brave in the captain ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.139

but I will spare my sense of it , and leave it to my reader to judge as
he pleases . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.140

It may be easily guess'd , in what manner the prince resented this
indignity , who may be best resembled to a lion taken in a toil ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.141

so he rag'd , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.142

so he struggled for liberty , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.143

but all in vain : BEHN-1668-E3-P2,179.144

and they had so wisely manag'd his fetters , that he could not use a
hand in his defence to quit <P_180> himself of a life that wou'd by no
means endure slavery ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,180.145

nor cou'd he move from the place where he was ty'd , to any solid part
of the ship against which he might have beat his head , and have
finish'd his disgrace that way . So that being deprived of all other
means , he resolv'd to perish for want of food ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,180.146

and pleas'd at last with that thought , and toil'd and tir'd by rage and
indignation , he laid himself down , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,180.147

and sullenly resolv'd upon dying , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,180.148

and refused all things that were brought him . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,180.149

This did not a little vex the captain , and the more so , because he
found almost all of 'em of the same humour ; so that the loss of so many
brave slaves , so tall and goodly to behold , would have been very
considerable : BEHN-1668-E3-P2,180.150

He therefore order'd one to go from him <paren> for he would not be seen
himself <$$paren> to <font> Oroonoko <$$font> , and to assure him , he
was afflicted for having rashly done so unhospitable a deed , and which
could not be now remedy'd , since they were far from shore ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,180.151

but since he resented it in so high a nature , he assur'd him he would
revoke his resolution , and set both him and his friends a-shore on the
next land they should touch at ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,180.152

and of this the messenger gave him his oath , provided he would resolve
to live . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,180.153

And <font> Oroonoko <$$font> , whose honour was such as he never had
violated a word in his life himself , much less a solemn asseveration ,
believ'd in an instant what this man said ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,180.154

but reply'd , He expected , for a confirmation of this , to have his
shameful fetters dismiss'd . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,180.155

This demand was carried to the captain ; who return'd him answer , That
the offence had been so great which he had put upon the prince , that he
durst not trust him with liberty while he remain'd in the ship , for
fear lest by a valour natural to him , and a revenge that would animate
that valour , he might commit some outrage fatal to himself , and the
king his master , to whom this vessel did belong .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,180.156

To this Oroonoko reply'd , He would engage his honour to behave himself
in all friendly order and manner , and obey the command of the captain ,
as he was lord of the king's vessel , and general of those men under his
command . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,180.157

<P_181>

This was deliver'd to the still doubting captain , who could not resolve
to trust a heathen , he said , upon his parole , a man that had no sense
or notion of the God that he worshipp'd . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,181.159

<font> Oroonoko <$$font> then reply'd , He was very sorry to hear that
the captain pretended to the knowledge and worship of any Gods , who had
taught him no better principles , than not to credit as he would be
credited . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,181.160

But they told him , the difference of their faith occasion'd that
distrust : BEHN-1668-E3-P2,181.161

For the captain had protested to him upon the word of a Christian , and
sworn in the name of a great God ; which if he should violate , he would
expect eternal torment in the world to come . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,181.162

<font> Is that all the obligation he has to be just to his oath ?
<$$font> <paren> reply'd <font> Oroonoko <$$font> <$$paren>
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,181.163

<font> Let him know , I swear by my honour ; which to violate , would
not only render me contemptible and despised by all brave and honest men
, and so give my self perpetual pain , but it would be eternally
offending and displeasing all mankind ; harming , betraying ,
circumventing and outraging all men . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,181.164

But punishments hereafter are sufer'd by one's self ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,181.165

and the world takes no cognizance whether this GOD have reveng'd 'em ,
or not , 't@ @is done so secretly , and deferr'd so long : while the man
of no honour suffers every moment the scorn and contempt of the honester
world , and dies every day ignominiously in his fame , which is more
valuable than life . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,181.166

I speak not this to move belief , but to shew you how you mistake , when
you imagine , That he who will violate his honour , will keep his word
with his Gods . <$$font> BEHN-1668-E3-P2,181.167

So , turning from him with a disdainful smile , he refused to answer him
, when he urged him to know what answer he should carry back to his
captain ; so that he departed without saying any more .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,181.168

The captain pondering and consulting what to do , it was concluded that
nothing but <font> Oroonoko <$$font> 's liberty would encourage any of
the rest to eat , except the <font> Frenchman <$$font> , whom the
captain could not pretend to keep prisoner , but only told him , he was
secured , because he might act something in favour of the prince , but
that he should be freed as soon as they came to <P_182> land . So that
they concluded it wholly necessary to free the prince from his irons ,
that he might shew himself to the rest ; that they might have an eye
upon him , and that they could not fear a single man .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,182.169

This being resolv'd , to make the obligation the greater , the captain
himself went to <font> Oroonoko <$$font> ; where , after many
compliments , and assurances of what he had already promis'd , he
receiving from the prince his parole , and his hand , for his good
behaviour , dismiss'd his irons , and brought him to his own cabin ;
where , after having treated and repos'd him a while , <paren> for he
had neither eat nor slept in four days before <$$paren> he besought him
to visit those obstinate people in chains , who refus'd all manner of
sustenance ; and intreated him to oblige 'em to eat , and assure 'em of
their liberty on the first opportunity . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,182.170

<font> Oroonoko <$$font> , who was too generous , not to give credit to
his words , shew'd himself to his people , who were transported with
excess of joy at the sight of their darling prince ; falling at his feet
, and kissing and embracing him ; believing , as some divine oracle ,
all he assur'd 'em . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,182.171

But he besought 'em to bear their chains with that bravery that became
those whom he had seen act so nobly in arms ; and that they could not
give him greater proofs of their love and friendship , since 't@ @was
all the security the captain <paren> his friend <$$paren> could have ,
against the revenge , he said , they might possibly justly take , for
the injuries sustain'd by him . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,182.172

And they all , with one accord , assur'd him , they cou'd not suffer
enough , when it was for his repose and safety .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,182.173

After this , they no longer refus'd to eat , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,182.174

but took what was brought 'em , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,182.175

and were pleas'd with their captivity , since by it they hoped to redeem
the prince , who , all the rest of the voyage , was treated with all the
respect due to his birth , tho nothing could divert his melancholy ; and
he would often sigh for <font> Imoinda <$$font> , and think this a
punishment due to his misfortune , in having left that noble maid behind
him , that fatal night , in the otan , when he fled to the camp .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,182.176

<P_183>

Possess'd with a_thousand thoughts of past joys with this fair young
person , and a_thousand griefs for her eternal loss , he endur'd a
tedious voyage , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,183.178

and at last arriv'd at the mouth of the river of <font> Surinam <$$font>
, a colony belonging to the king of <font> England <$$font> , and where
they were to deliver some part of their slaves .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,183.179

There the merchants and gentlemen of the country going on board , to
demand those lots of slaves they had already agreed on ; and , amongst
those , the overseers of those plantations where I then chanc'd to be :
the captain , who had given the word , order'd his men to bring up those
noble slaves in fetters , whom I have spoken of ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,183.180

and having put 'em , some in one , and some in other lots , with women
and children <paren> which they call pickaninies <$$paren> they sold 'em
off , as slaves , to several merchants and gentlemen ; not putting any
two in one lot , because they would separate 'em far from each other ;
nor daring to trust 'em together , lest rage and courage should put 'em
upon contriving some great action , to the ruin of the colony .
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,183.181

<font> Oroonoko <$$font> was first seiz'd on , and sold to our overseer
, who had the first lot , with seventeen more of all sorts and sizes ,
but not one of quality with him . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,183.182

When he saw this , he found what they meant ; BEHN-1668-E3-P2,183.183

for , as I said , he understood <font> English <$$font> pretty well ;
BEHN-1668-E3-P2,183.184

and being wholly unarm'd and defenceless , so as it was in vain to make
any resistance , he only beheld the captain with a look all fierce and
disdainful , upbraiding him with eyes that forc'd blushes on his guilty
cheeks , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,183.185

he only cry'd in passing over the side of the ship ; <font> Farewell ,
sir , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,183.186

't@ @is worth my sufferings , to gain so true a knowledge both of you ,
and of your gods by whom you swear . <$$font> BEHN-1668-E3-P2,183.187

And desiring those that held him to forbear their pains , and telling
'em he would make no resistance , he cry'd , <font> Come , my
fellow-slaves , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,183.188

let us descend , and see if we can meet with more honour and honesty in
the next world we shall touch upon . <$$font> BEHN-1668-E3-P2,183.189

So he nimbly leapt into the boat , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,183.190

and shewing no more concern , suffer'd himself to be row'd up the river
, with his seventeen companions . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,183.191

<P_184>

The gentleman that bought him , was a young <font> Cornish <$$font>
gentleman , whose name was <font> Trefry <$$font> ; a man of great wit ,
and fine learning , BEHN-1668-E3-P2,184.193

and was carry'd into those parts by the Lord-Governour , to manage all
his affairs . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,184.194

He reflecting on the last words of <font> Oroonoko <$$font> to the
captain , and beholding the richness of his vest , no sooner came into
the boat , but he fix'd his eyes on him ; and finding something so
extraordinary in his face , his shape and mein , a greatness of look ,
and haughtiness in his air , and finding he spoke <font> English
<$$font> , had a great mind to be enquiring into his quality and fortune
: which , though <font> Oroonoko <$$font> endeavour'd to hide , by only
confessing he was above the rank of common slaves ; <font> Trefry
<$$font> soon found he was yet something greater than he confess'd ; and
from that moment began to conceive so vast an esteem for him , that he
ever after lov'd him as his dearest brother , and shew'd him all the
civilities due to so great a man . BEHN-1668-E3-P2,184.195

