<BEGIN_boethpr-1695-e3-p2>

<P_92>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> I . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,92.4

<$$heading>

By this time she had ended her Song , when I desirous to hear more , was
so charmed by the pleasantness of it , that I stood long expecting that
she would proceed ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,92.6

but at last said I , O thou chief Support and Stay of languishing Minds
, how much hast thou refreshed me either with the weight of thy
Sentences or the sweetness of thy Numbers ! so that now I almost think
my self an equal Match for Fortune , and able to resist her Blows .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,92.7

Therefore I do not only not fear the Application of those Remedies ,
which thou didst say a little before were sharp ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,92.8

but I earnestly desire to hear what they are . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,92.9

I well perceived that , returned she , when with silence and attention
thou didst receive my Words ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,92.10

and I did then expect such a State of Mind in thee ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,92.11

or what is more true , I did then create in thee such an one .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,92.12

And indeed what yet remains to be said is of such a Nature , that when
it is first tasted , it seems to bite , and is unpleasant ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,92.13

but when it is once swallowed it turns sweet , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,92.14

and is most grateful to the Stomach . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,92.15

But because thou sayst thou wouldst now gladly hear , with what Desire
wouldst thou burn , if thou couldst imagine whither I am now about to
lead thee ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,92.16

Whither is that I <P_93> Pray thee ? <paren> said I <$$paren> .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,93.17

To that true genuine Felicity , answered she , which thy Mind doth
apprehend as if it were in a Dream , and of which thou seemest to have
some Foretaste . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,93.18

<paren> But thy sight is so clouded with false Forms , and light
Appearances that it can@ @not bear the Lusture of that Object .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,93.19

Then I intreat thee without delay , shew me that true Happiness .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,93.20

I will most willingly , at thy Desire , do it , replied she :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,93.21

but I will endeavour to describe that false and adulterate Cause which
is better known to thee ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,93.22

and that being full laid open , thou wilt be better able to comprehend
that exact Model of true Felicity which I shall draw by casting thine
Eye upon its contrary . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,93.23

<P_94>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> II . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,94.26

<$$heading>

Then fixing her Eye a little , and as it were withdrawing her self into
the most inward Cabinet of her Mind , she thus began ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,94.28

All the Care and manifold Studies of Men do indeed proceed in differing
Paths BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,94.29

but they tend to one only End , which is Happiness :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,94.30

And Happiness is that compleat Good , of which when a Man is once
possessed , he hath nothing more to desire . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,94.31

This indeed is the Sovereign <P_95> Good of all ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,95.32

and contains all others in it : To which , if any thing were wanting it
could not be the chief , because there would be something without it
self , some foreign Advantage which were to be desired .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,95.33

It is therefore apparent that Blessedness or Happiness is that perfect
State in which all other Goods meet and centre ; which , I have said ,
all Men endeavour to arrive at by differing Ways and Means :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,95.34

For in the Minds of Men there is naturally inserted a Desire of the true
Good BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,95.35

but wandring Error leads them to the false and fictitious one ; so that
some , believing it to be the chief of Goods to want nothing , labour
for an abundance of Riches : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,95.36

Others again believing Happiness to consist in being reverenced and
esteemed by their Country-men , endeavour all they can after Honours .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,95.37

There are also those who place it in Power , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,95.38

and these endeavour either to rule themselves , or to be Favourites to
those who actually govern . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,95.39

There are those also who fancy an high Renown to be the height of
Happiness ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,95.40

and these , by all the Arts of War and Peace , hasten to propagate their
Names , and to arrive at Glory . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,95.41

Many measure the Fruits of this Good by Joy and Chearfulness ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,95.42

and they think it the happiest thing in the World to abound in Luxury ,
and to be dissolved in Pleasures . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,95.43

Some there are who use these Causes and Ends interchangeably ; as they
<P_96> who desire Riches as a Means to obtain Power and Pleasures ; or
as they who desire Power , either that by it they may get Money or
purchase a Name . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,96.44

About these and such like things the Intention of all humane Actions and
Desires is versed and employed , as Nobility and popular Applause are
sought after by some , which Men think do make them famous ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,96.45

and Wives and Children by others are desired for the sake of Pleasure .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,96.46

Only Friendship , which is a sacred kind of Tie , is not to be reckoned
amongst the Goods of Fortune , but amongst those of Vertue :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,96.47

but all other things are desired either for the Power or the Pleasure
which they afford . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,96.48

Now for the Goods of the Body , they are to be referred to the things
mentioned before ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,96.49

For Strength , and the large Proportion of Parts , seem to give Power
and Worthiness , Beauty and Swiftness , to afford Glory and Fame ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,96.50

and Health and Indolence of Body yield Joy and Pleasure .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,96.51

In all these things it appears that Happiness is only wanting ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,96.52

for whatever any one desireth above other things , he iudgeth that to be
the chief Good : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,96.53

But we have already defined Happiness to be the Soveraign of Goods ;
wherefore every one judgeth that to be the happiest State , which he
desires above all others . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,96.54

Thou hast now therefore before thine Eyes an exact Scheme and Form of
humane Felicity , that is , Riches , Honours , <P_97> Powers , Glory and
Pleasure , which last was only considered by Epicure ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,97.55

and consequently he did declare that Happiness consisted in that alone ,
because he imagined that other things did withdraw Joy and Cheerfulness
from the Heart and Spirits . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,97.56

But I return to the Studies and Inclinations of Men , whose Minds are
always bent upon the chief Good , and are ever seeking after it , though
it seemeth to be as with a darkned Understanding , and like a drunken
Man reeling about , and not knowing which Path to take which may head
him home . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,97.57

Do they , let me ask thee , seem to wander who endeavour to put
themselves into a Condition of wanting nothing ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,97.58

Certainly there is no State doth so much afford Happiness as that of
having Plenty and Affluence of all good things , of being out of need of
being beholden to another , but having sufficient for one's self .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,97.59

Or are they guilty of folly who think that what is the best doth deserve
Esteem and Reverence ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,97.60

Certainly <P_98> no ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,98.61

for that thing is surely not vile and contemptible , which all Men with
so much Intention labour after . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,98.62

Is not Power to be numbred amongst Goods ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,98.63

Why not ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,98.64

for is that to be esteemed feeble and without Strength , which is
apparently better than all other things ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,98.65

Is Renown not to be regarded ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,98.66

but it can@ @not be denied , but that whatever is most excellent seemeth
also to be most renowned . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,98.67

For to what purpose shall we say that Happiness is not an anxious and
melancholy thing , nor subject to Grief and Trouble , since even in the
least things Men seek for what may delight and please them ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,98.68

These are the things which Men desire to obtain and possess ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,98.69

and for this Cause do they labour after Riches , Dignities , Commands ,
Glory , and Pleasure , that they may have Sufficiences and Abundance
within themselves , that so they may arrive at Esteem , Power and Fame .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,98.70

It must therefore be a Goal , of which all are in quest by so divers
Ways and different Studies : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,98.71

And from hence it may easily appear how great the Power and Force of
Nature is , since notwithstanding that all Men differ very much in their
opinions of Good , yet , they All agree in the choice of the End of it .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,98.72

<P_102>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> III . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,102.75

<$$heading>

And you , O Men , whose Thoughts are so employed upon things below ;
that I may fitly call you earthly Animals , do think ever of your
Beginning , though it be but with a dreaming and darkned Imagination ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,102.77

and you have always the true end of Happiness in view , although you
have no clear and perfect Notion of it : So that though your natural
Intention leads you to the true Good , yet indirect and manifold Error
draws you from it . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,102.78

Consider now if Men can by those Means by which they endeavour to attain
Happiness , arrive at their desired End . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,102.79

For if Riches , if Honours , and other the like Accessions can plant one
in such a State , that he shall seem to want no other thing to make him
happy , then will I confess that Felicity may be derived from such
Acquisitions . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,102.80

But if so it be that these can@ @not make good what they seem so fairly
to promise , and that those who possess them in the greatest measure ,
do yet want many other Advantages and good things , will not the
counterfeit and mistaken Face of Happiness be clearly discovered in them
? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,102.81

First of all therefore I ask thee , who not long since didst abound in
Riches , whether sometimes in that great abundance thy Mind <P_103> was
not anxious and discomposed upon the receiving of any notable Injury ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,103.82

<font> Boet. <$$font> Truly I never remember that in my most numerous
Prosperity my Spirits were so free as not to be oppressed with some
Trouble or other . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,103.83

<font> Phil. <$$font> And was not that because something was absent
which thou didst desire , or something present which thou wouldst have
had away ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,103.84

<font> Boet. <$$font> So it was truly . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,103.85

<font> Phil. <$$font> Why then thou desiredst the Presence of that ,
and the Absence of this . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,103.86

<font> Boet. <$$font> I confess it . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,103.87

<font> Phil. <$$font> Every Man wanteth , that which he desireth .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,103.88

<font> Boet. <$$font> Doubtless he doth . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,103.89

<font> Phil. <$$font> Can that Man then who wanteth any thing be said
to have all things within himself sufficient for his Necessities ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,103.90

<font> Boet. <$$font> No . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,103.91

<font> Phil. <$$font> And didst not thou in all thy Plenty labour under
this want ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,103.92

<font> Boet. <$$font> What then ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,103.93

<font> Phil. <$$font> Then hence it follows that Riches can@ @not put a
Man beyond all want , nor make him self-sufficient , although this was
it which they seem'd to promise . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,103.94

And this also I think of great Moment to be considered , that Money hath
nothing in its own Nature which can hinder its being taken from the
Possessor , though against his Will . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,103.95

<font> Boet. <$$font> I confess that . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,103.96

<font> Phil. <$$font> It ought to be confess'd , when we see every Day
that the stronger takes it from the weaker . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,103.97

From whence spring all Debates at Law , and all Complaints in Courts of
Judicature , but from this , that Men desire to recover their <P_104>
Estates and Goods , of which they have been bereft either by Force or
Fraud ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.98

<font> Boet. <$$font> It is plain . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.99

<font> Phil. <$$font> Then every Man needeth foreign Helps to maintain
the Possession of his Money . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.100

<font> Boet. <$$font> Who denies it ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.101

<font> Phil. <$$font> But he would not want such Help unless he were
the Owner of Money , which he is in a possibility of losing .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.102

<font> Boet. <$$font> That is unquestionable .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.103

<font> Phil. <$$font> Then is the thing turned into its contrary ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.104

for Riches , which were thought to have made a Man self-sufficient , do
rather make him have need of Aid from others .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.105

By what way do Riches drive away Necessity ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.106

Can rich Men be neither hungry nor thirsty ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.107

Are not the Bodies of the Rich sensible of Winter's Cold ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.108

But perhaps thou mayst say , such Men have wherewith to satisfy this ,
and to quench that , and to keep out the other .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.109

By these Means it@ @'s true that Riches may comfort and support those
who suffer these things , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.110

but they can@ @not wholly free them from such Inconveniences .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.111

But if these Necessities , which are ever gaping and asking for more ,
can@ @not be supplied with Wealth , then there still remains something
which should be satisfied . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.112

I shall not now urge that the smallest things are sufficient for Nature
, and that nothing is enough for Avarice . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.113

But if Riches can@ @not remove Want , but rather create it , why should
Men vainly imagine that they can meet and supply all humane Necessities
? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,104.114

<P_105>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> IV . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,105.117

<$$heading>

But it may be said that Dignities render those Men honoured and esteem'd
who possess them . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,105.119

I shall only then ask , if they have the Power to place Vertue in the
Minds of those who enjoy them , and clear them from Vice ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,105.120

Surely no , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,105.121

for it hath been found by experience , that they are so far from
expelling vitious Habits , <P_106> that they rather make them more
conspicuous . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,106.122

Hence it is that we often so much disdain their being conferr'd upon
undeserving Men . For which Reason , <font> Catullus <$$font> called
<font> Nonius <$$font> the Consul , even when he was <P_107> sitting in
his Ivory Chair , the Botch or Impostume of the State .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,107.123

Dost thou not see what great Inconveniences Dignities have wrought to
wicked Men ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,107.124

Their Deformities would less appear if they were more obscure , and
could be content to be without honourable Titles .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,107.125

And let me now ask thee , if thou thy self <paren> notwithstanding the
Danger's which hang over thee <$$paren> couldst condescend to be
Colleague with <font> Decoratus <$$font> in the Magistracy , who hath
discovered himself to be a saucy Buffoon and an officious Informer ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,107.126

For it is not reasonable to reverence those Men who have arrived at
Honours without deserving them : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,107.127

but if thou seest a Man endowed with Wisdom , thou couldst not but think
him worthy of Reverence and Esteem , and of the Wisdom with which he is
endowed . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,107.128

<font> Boet. <$$font> No surely , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,107.129

for Vertue hath her proper Worth , which she <P_108> transfers to those
who are her Votaries . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,108.130

And forasmuch as Honours conferr'd by the People can@ @not make a Man
worthy of them , it is clear that they do not contain the genuine Beauty
of true Worth and Dignity : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,108.131

In this Men also ought to be wary ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,108.132

for if a Man be so much the more abject , by how much the more he is
despised of everyone ; then Dignities which can@ @not procure Reverence
or Esteem to ill Men , whom they expose to the World , do necessarily
make them more the Subjects of Contempt and Scorn .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,108.133

Nor do Dignities themselves come off clear ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,108.134

for impious Persons are reveng'd on them , since they sully and stain
the Brightness of them by their contagious Villanies .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,108.135

And that thou mayst know that Esteem and Reverence can@ @not be
purchased by these transitory and empty Dignities , consider , that if a
Man who hath often been Consul , and run through many other honourable
Degrees of Magistracy , should perchance arrive in a barbarous Nation ,
would his Honours , dost thou think , make him be reverenced by those
Barbarians ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,108.136

Further , if it were of the Nature of Dignities to make Men venerable
and reverenc'd , it would perform that Office in all Places , amongst
all Nations , and at all times ; as Fire , where-ever it is , never
parts with its innate Quality of being hot . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,108.137

But because Honours do not proceed from any Power in themselves , but
arise from the false <P_109> Opinion of Men , they immediately vanish ,
when they chance to be amongst those who do not esteem them to be
Dignities . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,109.138

But this is amongst foreign Nations . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,109.139

Let me then ask thee , if they always endure even with those from whom
they have their Beginnings ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,109.140

The Pretorship heretofore was a great and honourable Employ , and much
sought after , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,109.141

but now it is only an empty Name , and an heavy Addition to the
Senator's Expence , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,109.142

whoever heretofore had the Superintendency of the Markets , and was to
provide Corn for the People , and had the Care the of the publick
Victuals , and was esteemed great and honourable ; but now what is there
more vile and abject than that Employ ? So that what I said a little
before is very clear , that the thing which hath no proper innate Beauty
, must necessarily sometimes be <P_110> splendid and admired , and
sometimes undervalued and slighted , as the Opinion of the People flows
or ebbs . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,110.143

If Dignities therefore can@ @not give Men Reverence and Esteem , if they
become vile by the Contagion of ill Men , if they lost their Lustre by
the Change of times , if they are esteemed worthy , or otherwise
according to the Estimation of Men , what Beauty then is there in them
which should make them desirable , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,110.144

or what Dignity can they confer on others ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,110.145

<P_111>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> V . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,111.148

<$$heading>

<font> Phil. <$$font> Can Kingdoms or the Familiarity of Princes make a
man mighty ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,111.150

<font> Boet. <$$font> How can it be otherwise , since their Felicity
doth always endure ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,111.151

<font> Ph. <$$font> But mistake not , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,111.152

for both Antiquity and the present Times abound with Examples of Kings
and Potentates who have been forced to change an happy for a calamitous
Estate . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,111.153

And then we may justly cry out , how great and glorious a thing is Power
, which is not of Ability to preserve even it self ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,111.154

But if Dominion and the Rule over many People be the efficient Cause of
Happiness , doth not it follow , that if it be defective in any Part ,
it must necessarily diminish that Happiness and introduce Misery ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,111.155

But although humane Empires extend themselves far and wide , there must
of necessity be many People over which every King can have no Command ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,111.156

and on whatsoever Hand this Power which constitutes Happiness shall fail
, there must Impotence enter , which causes Misery .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,111.157

Hence therefore it is natural to aver , that Princes must have a larger
<P_112> Portion of Misery than of its contrary .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,112.158

A certain Tyrant who well understood the danger of his Condition , did
well express the Fears and Cares which attend Government by the Terror
of a naked Sword hanging over a Man's Head . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,112.159

What then is this thing call'd Power , which can@ @not expel Care , nor
banish Fear ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,112.160

Men desire to live secure , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,112.161

but can@ @not ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,112.162

and yet they glory in and boast of their Power .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,112.163

Canst thou believe him to be powerful , whom thou seest not able to do
what he would ? or him mighty , who goes surrounded with a Guard , to
terrify those of whom he himself is <P_113> more afraid , and whose
Power is seated in the Number of his Attendance ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,113.164

And now why should I trouble my self to discourse of the Favourites of
Princes , when I have shew'd even Kingdoms themselves to be subject to
so much Imbecility ? especially since these gaudy things are often
disgraced and ruined , as well when the Prince is fortunate as when he
is unhappy . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,113.165

<font> Nero <$$font> would allow <font> Seneca <$$font> his Friend and
Tutor this only Favour , to chuse the manner of his Death after he had
condemned him . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,113.166

The Emperor <font> Antoninus <$$font> <P_114> exposed <font> Papinian
<$$font> , who had long been great at Court , to fall by the Swords of
his Souldiers . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,114.167

Both of them would willingly have renounced their Authority ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,114.168

and <font> Seneca <$$font> was willing to have given his whole Estate ,
and all his Riches into the Hands of <font> Nero <$$font> , and to have
retired : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,114.169

but whilst the Force of Fate pushed them on towards their Fall , neither
of them could accomplish what they desired to have done .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,114.170

What then is this Power , of which Men even when they enjoy it , are
afraid ? of which , when they are desirous , they are not sure nor safe
? and which , when they would lay it down , they can@ @not be acquitted
of it ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,114.171

Are those Friends to be trusted to in time of need , whose Friendship is
not founded upon Vertue , but upon thy Fortune ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,114.172

Believe it , they whom thy happy Estate have made so , will change when
that is altered ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,114.173

and when thou art miserable , they will be thy Enemies .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,114.174

And what Plague in the World can be greater , or hurt thee more than
such an Enemy who hath gained an Intimacy with thee ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,114.175

<P_116>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> VI . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,116.178

<$$heading>

But O how deceitful oft , and how deformed is the thing called Glory !
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,116.180

Hence not without Reason did the Tragedian exclaim ; {COM:greek_omitted}
<font> O Glory , Glory , there are thousands of men who have deserved
nothing , whose Lives nevertheless thou hast rendred famous ! <$$font>
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,116.181

for many have surrepitiously gotten to themselves great Names by the
false and mistaken Opinions of the Vulgar , than which nothing can be
more mean and base : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,116.182

For they who are praised and applauded undeservingly , must needs , if
they have any Modesty , be ashamed and blush at the Recital of their own
Praises . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,116.183

But if Esteem and Praise be purchased by Defect , what Satisfaction yet
can they add to the Mind of a wise Man , who measures not his Good by
popular Rumour , but by the just Rules of Truth and Conscience ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,116.184

And if it seem a fair and noble thing for a Man to have made himself
famous , and to have propagated his Name , then by Consequence it must
be adjudged the contrary , not to have done so .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,116.185

But since , as I have before demonstrated , there must be many People in
the Earth whom the Renown of one Man could never reach , then of <P_117>
necessity must follow , that he whom thou accountest glorious must to
the greatest part of the World be inglorious and obscure .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,117.186

Amongst these things I do not think popular Favour to be worthy to be
taken notice of , which is neither the Product of Judgment , nor ever
was or can be of Duration . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,117.187

And now who doth not see how vain , how empty , and how uncertain Titles
of Nobility are ? which if referred to Renown , they are wholly foreign
to it : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,117.188

For Nobility seems to be that fame and Praise which proceedeth from the
Merits of Ancestors . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,117.189

Now if Praise can give Nobility , they necessarily are noble who are
praised . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,117.190

Then it follows thou canst derive no Splendor from the Nobility of
another , if thou hast none of thine own . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,117.191

But if there be any Good and Advantage in Nobility , I think it is only
this , that it serves to impose a kind of Necessity upon those who
possess it , of not degenerating the Vertue of their Progenitors .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,117.192

<P_118>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> VII . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,118.195

<$$heading>

Why should I here discourse of the Pleasures of the Body , the Desire of
which is full of Anxiety , and the satisfying of them , of Repentance ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,118.197

What dangerous Diseases , what intolerable Pains , being like Fruits of
Iniquity , do they bring to the Bodies of those who enjoy them ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,118.198

and what Joys are to be found in the Motions of them , I confess I know
not . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,118.199

But this I know , that whoever will call to mind his Luxury and Lusts ,
shall find much bitterness in the Issue of them .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,118.200

If these things can make Men happy , I see no Cause why Beasts also may
<P_119> not be said to be in a possibility of obtaining Happiness ,
since by their Instinct they are urged to intend and pursue bodily
Delight . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,119.201

The Satisfaction of having a Wife and Children were great ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,119.202

but it hath been said , though against Nature , that some in their
Children have found Tormentors : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,119.203

How biting and uneasy the Condition of such is , it is not necessary to
tell thee , who hath before this tried it , and who are not under so
great a Discomposure . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,119.204

In this I approve the Opinion of <font> Euripides <$$font> , who said ,
that he who hath no Children is happy in his Misfortune .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,119.205

<P_120>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> VIII . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,120.208

<$$heading>

From what I have said then it may without doubt appear , that all these
mentioned Ways are wrong and deceitful , and can@ @not lead Men to that
Happiness which they promise : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,120.210

And with how many Evils and Inconveniences they are perplexed , I shall
soon shew thee . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,120.211

Consider then thus : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,120.212

Hast thou a mind to amass Wealth ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,120.213

then thou must bereave the Possessor of it . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,120.214

Wouldst thou shine in Dignities and Titles ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,120.215

thou must supplicate him who is the Fountain of them , and who only can
confer them ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,120.216

and so thou who desirest to outgo others in Honour , shall by meanly
asking it become contemptible . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,120.217

Dost thou affect Power ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,120.218

thou wilt expose thy self to Danger , by subjecting thy self to the
Traps and Snares of those who are under thee .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,120.219

Art thou desirous of Glory ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,120.220

being distracted by sharp and severe Dispensations , thou shalt forgo
thy Security and Quiet . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,120.221

Wouldst thou lead a voluptuous life ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,120.222

think then that all Men will scorn and contemn him who is a Slave to
that vile and frail thing , his Body . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,120.223

And now upon how weak a Foundation do they build , upon how uncertain a
Possession do they rely , who value and affect corporal Delights ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,120.224

Canst thou surpass the Elephant <P_121> in Bulk , or the Oxe in Strength
? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,121.225

Canst thou excel the Tigers in Swiftness ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,121.226

Behold the vast Space and Extention of the Heavens , their Firmness ,
and the Swiftness of their Motions , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,121.227

and then at length cease to admire vile or less things .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,121.228

Nor is the Heaven more to be admired for these Qualities mentioned ,
than for those exact orders and Methods by which it is governed .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,121.229

How fleeting , and of how short Duration is Beauty and Exactness of
Feature , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,121.230

how swiftly it passeth , fading sooner than a vernal Flower !
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,121.231

For as <font> Aristotle <$$font> saith , if a Man had the Eyes of a
<font> Lynx <$$font> , that so he might pierce through every Medium
which should oppose him , would not he , if he looked into the inward
Recesses of the Body of <font> Alcibiades <$$font> , whose outward Form
was so fair and charming , find it noisom and foul ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,121.232

And therefore thy Nature doth not make thee appear beautiful , <P_122>
but the Infirmity of the Eyes of thy Beholders .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,122.233

Esteem bodily Goods as much as thou wilt , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,122.234

but consider , that what thou so much admirest may in three Days be
shaken and dissolved by the raging Fires of a Fever . From all which we
may gather this , that those things which can@ @not confer those Goods
which they promise , nor are perfect and consummate by a general Meeting
of all Goods in themselves , can neither always conduct to Happiness ,
nor by themselves make any one happy . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,122.235

{COM:insert_helsinki_1_here}

<P_148>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> XII . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,148.239

<$$heading>

<font> Boet. <$$font> I now very much assent to <font> Plato <$$font> ,
since this second time thou hast brought these things to my remembrance
. BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,148.241

At first when my Memory was drowned by the Conjunction of my Body with
my Soul , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,148.242

and then when I afterwards lost it in those Pressures of Sorrow under
which I laboured . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,148.243

<font> Ph. <$$font> If thou wilt a little recollect what thou hast
granted above , thou wilt not be far from remembring that thing of which
a little before thou didst confess thy Ignorance .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,148.244

<font> Bo. <$$font> What thing was that ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,148.245

<font> Ph. <$$font> It was , by what Power the Universe is governed .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,148.246

<font> Bo. <$$font> I confess I did in that <P_149> own my want of
Knowledg ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,149.247

but although I have a Prospect of what thou wilt infer , yet I desire to
hear it made more plain from thy Mouth . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,149.248

<font> Ph. <$$font> A little time before thou didst think that there
was no Reason to doubt but that this World was governed by God .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,149.249

<font> Bo. <$$font> Nor do I think otherwise now ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,149.250

nor shall I ever think that it ought to be doubted ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,149.251

and I will briefly recount to you the Reasons which lead me to this
Opinion . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,149.252

The differing and contrariant Parts of which this World is compos'd ,
had never been brought together into one beautiful Form , without the
Assistanoe of a powerful Hand to join them : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,149.253

And even after such a Conjunction the disagreeing Qualities of their
Natures had dissociated the Parts , and ruined the Fabrick , if the same
conjoining Hand had not kept them together : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,149.254

For the Order and Methods of Nature could not so certainly proceed , nor
produce so regular Motions , disposed and limited according to Times ,
Places , Actings , Spaces , and Qualities , unless there were one
remaining , fix'd and immovable Being to mesnage so great Varieties of
Change . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,149.255

I give this excellent Being , whatever it is , by which all things
created endure , and are actuated and informed , the known Denomination
of God . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,149.256

<font> Ph. <$$font> Seeing that thou hast so right a Sentiment of these
things , there is but little more to be done now that thou mayst once
more be happy <P_150> and safe , and that thou mayst revisit thy own
Countrey : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.257

But let us reflect a little upon what we have before proposed .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.258

Have not we agreed that Sufficiency is of the Nature of true Happiness ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.259

And have we not granted that God is that true Happiness ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.260

<font> Bo. <$$font> We have . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.261

<font> Ph. <$$font> And that towards the Government of this World he
shall need no Helps or foreign Instruments ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.262

for if he should , he should not then be self-sufficient .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.263

<font> Bo. <$$font> That necessarily follows .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.264

<font> Ph. <$$font> Therefore by himself alone he disposeth of all
things . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.265

<font> Bo. <$$font> It can@ @not be denied .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.266

<font> Ph. <$$font> And I have shewed that God is the real Good .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.267

<font> Bo. <$$font> I remember it well . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.268

<font> Ph. <$$font> By that Good then doth he order every thing ,
because he governs all things by himself , whom we have granted to be
the Sovereign Good ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.269

and he is that great and certain Rule and Method of Government which
keeps the Machine of the World together , giving it Stability , and
preserving it from Corruption . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.270

<font> Bo. <$$font> I entirely agree to this ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.271

and I did foresee before that this was it which thou wert about to say .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.272

<font> Ph. <$$font> I believe it ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.273

and now I believe thy Eyes are more intent upon these great Truths .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.274

But what I shall say is not less open to thy View .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.275

<font> Bo. <$$font> What is that . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.276

<font> Ph. <$$font> God is rightly believed to govern all things by his
Goodness , and all those things , as I have before taught , to hasten by
a natural Bent and Intention towards Good , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,150.277

can it be doubted but <P_151> that they voluntarily submit to his
Government , and that of their own Accord they willingly comply with ,
and yield up themselves to him their Ruler ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,151.278

<font> Bo. <$$font> That must necessarily be ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,151.279

otherwise the Government could not subsist : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,151.280

if People were suffered to draw different ways , there would be no
Safety for those who obey . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,151.281

<font> Ph. <$$font> Is there any Being then , which follows the
Dictates of Nature , that endeavours to go contrary to the laws of God ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,151.282

<font> Bo. <$$font> No surely . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,151.283

<font> Ph. <$$font> But if there should be so prepostrous an one ,
shall it ever be able to prevail against him , whom by the Right of true
Happiness we have granted to be most powerful ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,151.284

<font> Bo. <$$font> If there were such an one , certainly it could
never prevail . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,151.285

<font> Ph. <$$font> Then there is nothing that either will or can
resist this Sovereign Good which ruleth all things powerfully , and
disposeth them softly and harmoniously . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,151.286

<font> Bo. <$$font> How am I delighted not only with this Sum and
Conclusion of thy Reasons and Arguments , but much more also with thy
very Words ! so that at length those wicked People who impiously have
reprehended the Government of God , may blush and be ashamed of their
Folly . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,151.287

<font> Ph. <$$font> Thou hast read , amongst the Mythologists , the
Story of the Giants who stormed Heaven ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,151.288

but the Divine Arms , according to their Demerits , repell'd and
punished <P_152> them : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.289

But wilt thou now that we commit and compare our Reasons together ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.290

Perhaps by so doing some clear Spark of Truth may break out .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.291

<font> Bo. <$$font> Do as it pleaseth thee .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.292

<font> Ph. <$$font> No Body then will doubt but that God is Omnipotent
. BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.293

<font> Bo. <$$font> No Man in his Senses doubteth of that .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.294

<font> Ph. <$$font> And that there is nothing which he who is Almighty
can@ @not do . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.295

<font> Bo. <$$font> Nothing surely . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.296

<font> Ph. <$$font> Can God then do Evil ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.297

<font> Bo. <$$font> No . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.298

<font> Ph. <$$font> Is Evil nothing ? since he can@ @not do it who can
do all things . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.299

<font> Bo. <$$font> Dost thou play with me , leading me by thy Reasons
into an inextricable Labyrinth , which sometimes thou entrest where thou
goest out , and sometimes thou goest out where thou entrest ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.300

Dost thou endeavour then to amuse me by thy intricate Reasonings ,
enclosing me in a wonderful Circle of Divine Simplicity ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.301

For a little before , beginning at Happiness , thou didst declare it to
be the Sovereign Good , and that it did reside in God ; then that God
himself was that Good , and the Fulness of Happiness :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.302

And hence thou didst infer , and give to me as a Mark of thy Bounty ,
that no Body could be happy , unless he were God .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.303

Again thou saidst that the very Form of Good was the Substance of Good
and Happiness ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.304

and didst teach , that that was the only genuine Good which was desired
by all things in Nature . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,152.305

Thus further didst argue and demonstrate , that God by his <P_153>
Goodness did govern the World , and that all things willingly obeyed him
, and that Evil had not any Nature and Existence which might be properly
so called : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,153.306

and these things thou didst explain by no strained or far-fetch'd
Reasons , but by strong and natural Truths , one thing still confirming
and verifying another . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,153.307

<font> Ph. <$$font> I have not deluded thee ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,153.308

for by the Assistance of God , for which we lately prayed , we have run
through our chief Work : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,153.309

For such is the Nature and Form of the Divine Substance , that it
neither communicates it self to foreign things , nor receives such into
its own Nature ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,153.310

but , as <font> Parmenides <$$font> saith of it , {COM:greek_omitted}
God is like to a sphere which is every way round .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,153.311

He rolleth the moving Globe of the world , whilst he himself remains
immobile : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,153.312

And if I have not drawn my Reasons from things without , but those
within the Comopass of my Subject , wonder not at it ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,153.313

for as <font> Plato <$$font> before hath taught us , there ought to be a
Consonancy and Alliance betwixt the Word and the Matter which we handle
. BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,153.314

<P_159>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> I . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,159.317

<$$heading>

When Philosophy , preserving the Dignity and the Gravity of her
Countenance , had in soft and sweet Strains sung these things , I not
having wholly forgot my Grief , and the distemper of my Mind remaining ,
did thus interrupt her , being now ready to have continued her Discourse
. BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,159.319

Those things , O thou Fore-runner and giver of the true Light ! which
thou hast hitherto delivered , are evidently clear and unanswerable , as
well from that divine Testimony which they bear about them , as from thy
irrefragable Reasons : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,159.320

and although I had forgotten them , through the Prevalency of Grief for
the many Injuries which I have endured , yet , as thou hast said , I was
not wholly ignorant of them : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,159.321

But this one thing , I must own , is the greatest Cause of my Sorrow ,
to wit , that whilst there is one good Ruler of all things , there
should be any Evil at all , or at the least , that it should pass
unpunished . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,159.322

And how worthy this is of Admiration thou mayst consider .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,159.323

To this also another greater Mischief is adjoined :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,159.324

For while Impiety doth bear Command and flourish , Vertue doth not only
want its Reward , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,159.325

but is also trampled upon by wicked <P_160> Men ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,160.326

and bears the Punishment due to its Enemy . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,160.327

No Man therefore can enough wonder and complain that Affairs should move
so under the Governance of a God all-knowing , almighty , and willing
nothing but what is the best . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,160.328

And it would indeed , returned she , be a thing not only of infinite
Wonder , but also horribly monstrous , if in the well-regulated Family
of so great a Master , the worthless Vessels , as thou imaginest ,
should be honoured , and the more pretious ones be despised :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,160.329

But thou art mistaken , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,160.330

it is not truly so : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,160.331

For if these Conclusions which I have drawn be a little reserved entire
, thou shalt well know by the Authority of God , of whose Reign and
Government I now speak , that the Good are always powerful and mighty ,
the evil Men ever Cast-aways and weak ; that Vice never passeth without
its Punishment , nor Vertue without its Rewards ; that Happiness always
attends good Men , and Misfortunes the wicked .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,160.332

These and many other things of this kind shall be proved to thee , which
may put an end to thy complaints , and strengthen thee with all Firmness
and Solidity . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,160.333

and because I have lately shewn to thee , with a full Pace , the Figure
of true Happiness , and also in what it is placed , and all things being
run through which I think necessary to be premised , I shall now chalk
out to thee that direct way which will <P_161> lead thee again to thy
own Habitation . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,161.334

I will also affix Wings to thy Mind , by which it may raise it self on
high , that so all Trouble being done away , and all Obstacles remov'd ,
thou mayst by my Direction , by my Way , by my Conveniences of
travelling , return safe into thy own Country .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,161.335

<P_163>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> II . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,163.338

<$$heading>

<font> Boet. <$$font> O Wonderful ! BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,163.340

thou promisest great things indeed ! BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,163.341

nor do I doubt but thou canst perform them : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,163.342

therefore I intreat thee , without delay , to satisfy my Expectation .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,163.343

<font> Ph. <$$font> First then thou shalt know that vertuous Men are
always armed with Power , and that the wicked are always destitute of
Strength ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,163.344

and these Assertions do mutually demonstrate each other :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,163.345

For since Good and Evil are contrary , if Good be powerful , Evil must
be weak and frail ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,163.346

and if thou knowest the Frailness of Evil , the Firmness of Good must
also be known to thee . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,163.347

But that the Credit and Truth of my Opinion may appear more abundantly ,
I will proceed in both ways , confirming what is proposed now on this ,
now on that part . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,163.348

There are two Poles upon which all humane Actions do turn , that is to
say , the Will and Power ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,163.349

if either of these be absent , nothing can be done :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,163.350

For the Will being wanting , <P_164> no Man attempts to do that which he
will not do ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.351

and if Power faileth , the Will is of no Effect .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.352

Hence it is , that if thou seest any Man desirous to obtain that which
he doth not compass , thou needst not doubt but he wanted the Power of
obtaining that which he would have . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.353

<font> Bo. <$$font> That@ @'s clear , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.354

nor can it be denied . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.355

<font> Ph. <$$font> Whom then thou seest do that which he had a mind to
do , canst thou doubt that he had a Power to do it ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.356

<font> Bo. <$$font> No surely . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.357

<font> Ph. <$$font> And in that a Man is able to do a thing , Men
esteem him mighty ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.358

and in that he is not able , he is looked upon as weak .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.359

<font> Bo. <$$font> I confess it . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.360

<font> Ph. <$$font> Dost thou remember then that it was collected from
former Reasons ; that every Intention of Man's Will , however actuated
by different Studies , doth hasten towards Happiness ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.361

<font> Bo. <$$font> I remember well that that was demonstrated .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.362

<font> Ph. <$$font> Canst thou call to mind that it hath been shewed ,
that Happiness is the Sovereign Good , and that when Happiness is sought
for , Good is desired of all ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.363

<font> Bo. <$$font> I need not call it to mind , because it is always
fixed in my Memory . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.364

<font> Ph. <$$font> All Men then , the good as well as the bad , with
one and the same Intention , endeavour to arrive at Good .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.365

<font> Bo. <$$font> It naturally follows . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.366

<font> Ph. <$$font> And it is certain when Men have obtained Good ,
they are made good . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.367

<font> Bo. <$$font> It is most certain . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.368

<font> Ph. <$$font> Do good Men obtain then what they desire ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.369

<font> Bo. <$$font> It seems so . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,164.370

<font> Ph. <$$font> But if evil Men obtain <P_165> the Good which they
desire , they may not still be evil ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,165.371

<font> Bo. <$$font> So it is . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,165.372

<font> Ph. <$$font> Since therefore then both Parties are in quest of
Good , but these only obtain it and the other lose it , it is not at all
to be doubted but that good Men are powerful , and the wicked weak and
feeble . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,165.373

<font> Bo. <$$font> Whoever doubts of this , does neither rightly
consider the Nature of things , nor understand the Consequences of
Reasoning . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,165.374

<font> Ph. <$$font> Again , if there be two , who , according to Nature
, propose to themselves the same thing , and one of them acts naturally
, and performs his Intention , but the other can@ @not administer the
natural Office , but imitates him by another Method than what is
agreeable to Nature , who did accomplish his Purpose , yet this Man doth
not attain his End ; which of these dost thou judg to be most powerful ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,165.375

<font> Bo. <$$font> Although I guess at what thou sayst , yet I desire
thou wouldst further explain thy self . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,165.376

<font> Ph. <$$font> Thou wilt not deny but the Motion of Walking is
natural to Men ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,165.377

<font> Bo. <$$font> No , I can@ @not . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,165.378

<font> Ph. <$$font> And thou doubtest not , but to perform this Motion
is the natural Office of the Feet ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,165.379

<font> Bo. <$$font> Nor will I deny it . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,165.380

<font> Ph. <$$font> If then he who is able to use his Feet walks , and
if another to whom this natural Office of the Feet is wanting , creeping
upon his Hands , doth endeavour to walk , which of these , by right ,
ought to be esteemed more able ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,165.381

<font> Bo. <$$font> Proceed with what remains ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,165.382

for no <P_166> one doubteth but he who is able to move naturally upon
his Feet , is more powerful than he who can@ @not .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,166.383

<font> Ph. <$$font> But the Sovereign Good , which even the Vertuous
and Impious propose to themselves as their End , by the one Party is
sought by the natural means of Vertue , whilst the other endeavours
after it by various and differing Desires of earthly things , which is
not the natural way of obtaining it ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,166.384

dost thou think otherwise ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,166.385

<font> Bo. <$$font> No ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,166.386

for the Consequence is plain , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,166.387

and it appears out of that which before I granted , which was , that the
Good were endowed with Power and Might , and that the evil Men were
destitute of it . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,166.388

<font> Ph. <$$font> Thou dost rightly run before me ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,166.389

and it is a good Sign , as Physicians observe , when Nature exerts her
self , and resists the Malady . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,166.390

But because I perceive thou art quick of Apprehension , and ready to
understand , I shall continue to thee my Reasons :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,166.391

Behold then how plainly the Infirmity and Weakness of vitious Men lies
open , who can@ @not even attain to that to which their natural
Intention leads them , and which it almost compels them to seek .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,166.392

And what does thou think would become of these Men , if they were
deserted by this almost unconquerable Bent and Help of Nature , which
always goes before them ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,166.393

Consider with thy self how great the Impotence of wicked Men is :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,166.394

Nor are they slight and empty things to which they <P_167> aspire , and
which they have not Power to obtain . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,167.395

But they attempt the chief and highest of all things ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,167.396

and there they fail ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,167.397

nor can bring that to effect after which they by Day and Night endeavour
; and in the obtaining of which the Might of the Vertuous is eminent .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,167.398

For as thou mayst deem him a good Walker , who hath been able to go so
far on his Feet , that no way doth lie beyond the Place at which he is
arrived ; so must thou necessarily judg him to be most mighty , who hath
attained that thing beyond which nothing is to be desired .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,167.399

True then it is , that wicked Men are wholly destitute of those Powers
which the Good amply possess : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,167.400

For why do they leave Vertue and pursue Vice ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,167.401

Is it because they know not Good ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,167.402

But what is more weak and base than the Blindness of Ignorance ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,167.403

or are they perhaps acquainted with the way which they ought to follow ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,167.404

But Lust , or some inordinate Desires do lead them aside ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,167.405

so doth also Intemperance to weak Natures , which can@ @not resist Vice
. BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,167.406

But do they knowingly and willingly desert Good , and turn to Evil ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,167.407

But this way they do not only cease to be mighty , but also even to be .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,167.408

For those who neglect the common End of all Beings , do also leave off
to be . Which thing perhaps to some may seem wonderful , that the
Vitious , who make up the most numerous Part of Mankind , should not
<P_168> be Men , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.409

but it is most truly so . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.410

And thus it is . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.411

I do not deny but that the Wicked are wicked ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.412

but that they have any Being , purely and simply , I deny :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.413

For as thou mayst call a Carcase a dead Man , but simply thou canst not
call it a Man ; so will I grant that the Vitious are vitious Men ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.414

but absolutely that they exist I can@ @not confess .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.415

That thing is or hath a Being which observeth its Order , and retains
its Nature ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.416

but that which faileth in this , deserteth its natural Being .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.417

But thou mayst say , that even the Wicked have a Power to act :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.418

Nor will I deny it ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.419

but this their Power is not derived from Strength but Weakness .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.420

They can do Evil , 't@ @is true , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.421

but they could not do that if they persevered in doing Good ; which
Possibility doth clearly demonstrate that they can do nothing :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.422

For if , as we have before gathered , Evil be nothing , it is clear that
whilst flagitious Men can only do ill , they can do nothing .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.423

And that thou mayst understand what is the Bent and Force of this Power
, we have before determined that nothing is more powerful than the
Sovereign Good . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.424

<font> Bo. <$$font> That@ @'s true . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.425

<font> Ph. <$$font> And that Sovereign Good can do no ill .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.426

<font> Bo. <$$font> It can do none . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.427

<font> Ph. <$$font> Is there then any one who thinks that Men can do
all things ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.428

<font> Bo. <$$font> No Man surely who is not mad .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.429

<font> Ph. <$$font> But they may do Evil . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.430

<font> Bo. <$$font> I wish they could not . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,168.431

<font> Ph. <$$font> Then since he who can only do Good , can <P_169> do
all things , and those who are powerful to do Evil can@ @not do all
things , it is most evident that those who do Evil are less powerful .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,169.432

And yet it further assists me towards the proving of what I have shewed
, that all Power is to be reckoned amongst things to be desired ; and
that all things are to be referr'd to the chief Good , as the Height and
Eminency of their Nature : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,169.433

But the Power of committing Wickedness can@ @not be referred to that
Good ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,169.434

therefore it is not desirable : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,169.435

but all Power is desirable . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,169.436

It is therefore clear that the Power of doing Evil is not Power .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,169.437

Upon the whole Matter , from hence the Power of good Men , and the
undoubted Weakness of evil Men may well appear .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,169.438

Hence also is the Opinion of <font> Plato <$$font> verified , That only
wise Men can attain to that which they desire , whilst the Wicked , let
them endeavour what they will , can never accomplish what they desire to
themselves , that is , to aim at Happiness ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,169.439

for they do what they list , whilst by those Actions in which they
delight , they think they shall obtain the Good which they desire ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,169.440

but they can never be Possessors of it , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,169.441

for Impiety can never be crown'd with Happiness .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,169.442

<P_170>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> III . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,170.445

<$$heading>

<font> Phil. <$$font> Dost thou see then in what a Puddle of Filth
Impiety doth wallow , and with what Rays of Light Goodness doth shine
out ? By which it is clear , that good Men <P_171> never go without a
Reward , and evil Men without Punishment ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,171.447

for that which causes any thing to be undertaken and done , may justly
be said to be the Reward of that thing which is done ; as the Crown
which is won is the Reward of him who runs in the Race for it .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,171.448

But we have already shewn that Happiness is that Good for which all
Matters are undertaken . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,171.449

Therefore Happiness is the Reward propos'd to all humane Actions ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,171.450

and of this the Vertuous can by no means be deprived ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,171.451

nor can any Man by right be called good who wanteth Goodness ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,171.452

therefore Vertue can never want its Reward . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,171.453

But however evil Men may be unquiet or rage , yet the Crown shall never
fall from the head of the wise Man , nor wither upon it .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,171.454

Nor can the impiety of another Man bereave a worthy Soul of its Honour :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,171.455

But if a Man be carried away by the Enjoyment of any foreign Good , he
may be deprived even of this , either by him who gave it to him , or by
any other . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,171.456

But because every Man's proper Good procureth to him his Reward ,
whosoever ceaseth to be good loseth that Reward .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,171.457

Lastly , since a reward is desired , because it is supposed to be a Good
, who will judg him who is capable of Good to be uncapable of a Reward ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,171.458

But thou wilt say , of what Reward is he worthy ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,171.459

Of the fairest , certainly , and most considerable .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,171.460

Call to mind that remarkable <P_172> Corollary , which a little before
gathered , I gave to thee , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,172.461

and consider thus : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,172.462

Since the Sovereign Good is Happiness , it appears that all good Men ,
in that they are good , become happy ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,172.463

and those who are good , are as it were Gods .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,172.464

Therefore is the Reward of vertuous Men such , that no time shall impair
it , no Power diminish it , nor any Impiety darken it .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,172.465

Since these things then are thus , a wise Man can@ @not at all doubt of
the Punishment which inseparably attends wicked Men .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,172.466

For since Good and Evil are Contraries , so are Rewards , and
Punishments : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,172.467

therefore as we see that Rewards follow good Actions , there must
necessarily also , on the other hand , be the Punishment for Evil .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,172.468

Then as Vertue it self is a Reward to vertuous Men , so Vice is a
Punishment to the Wicked : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,172.469

whoever then is punished with Pain and Uneasiness , it is not to be
doubted is affected with Evil . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,172.470

If therefore they will rightly weigh themselves , can they seem to be
free from Punishments , whom Wickedness , the most extreme Evil , doth
not only affect , but even vehemently infect ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,172.471

But now behold , on the other hand , what Punishment attends evil_Doers
; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,172.472

for thou hast learnt a little before , that every Being is one , and
that that one is Good . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,172.473

Hence it follows , that every thing which is , or hath a Being , seems
to be good : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,172.474

Whatsoever then fails to be good , fails to be : So that <P_173> it
appears that evil Men cease to be what they were ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.475

but the remaining Form of the Body shews that these evil Men were before
however Men ; wherefore when they lose their Vertue , they also lose
their humane Nature . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.476

But since only Vertue can carry Men above the common Pitch of Humanity ,
it is sure that those whom Vice hath deposed from the common Condition
of Mankind , it must also throw below the Merit of Men .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.477

Then it happens that you can@ @not esteem him to be a Man , whom you see
thus transform'd by his Vices . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.478

Doth the violent Oppressor , and the Ravisher of other Mans Goods , burn
with Avarice ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.479

Thou mayst say that he resembles the Wolf . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.480

Is he fierce ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.481

and doth he give himself over to Controversie and Chiding ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.482

Thou mayst compare him to the Dog . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.483

Is he treacherous , and one who delights to deceive ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.484

He is then like the young Foxes . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.485

Is he intemperate in his Anger ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.486

He seems to carry about with him the Fury of the Lion .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.487

Is he timorous and fearful of what ought not to be fear'd ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.488

He is like the Hart . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.489

Is he light , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.490

and doth he inconstantly change his Purposes ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.491

He differs nothing from the Birds of the Air .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.492

Doth he wallow in filthy and unclean Lusts ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.493

He rolls himself in the Mire like the nasty Sow .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.494

So that whosoever leaves off to be vertuous , ceases to be a Man ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.495

and since he can@ @not attain to a Divine Nature , he is turn'd into a
Beast . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,173.496

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_2}

<P_186>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> V . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,186.500

<$$heading>

<font> Boet. <$$font> Here I plainly see what Happiness or Misery is
placed in the Deserts of good and of evil Men .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,186.502

But in this same common Estate of Fortune I perceive something both of
Good and Evil : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,186.503

For no wise Man had rather be expos'd to Banishment , Poverty , and
Ignominy , than excel in Riches , Honours , Power , and continue in a
flourishing Estate in his own Country . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,186.504

For in this the more clearly and openly the Duty of Wisdom doth appear ,
when the Happiness of the Governours is in some measure diffused , and
communicated to Subjects ; whilst Imprisonment , and all legal
Punishments are only due to those pernicious <P_187> and profligate
Citizens , for whom they were at first instituted and appointed .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,187.505

Why then should things suffer so unnatural a Change ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,187.506

Why should Punishments due to Crimes , oppress the Good , and the
Rewards of Vertue be born only by wicked and flagitious Men ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,187.507

These things I much wonder at , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,187.508

and I desire to learn from thee what may be the Reason of so unjust a
Distribution . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,187.509

For my Wonder would be less , did I believe all things to be governed by
Chance . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,187.510

But now even God , the Governour of all things , doth heighten my
Astonishment , who whilst he doth often distribute good things to the
good , and evil things to the Wicked , yet doth sometimes give to the
Vertuous an hard Portion , and to the impious Man he grants his Heart's
Desire . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,187.511

What Difference then is there to be found , unless Men may be acquainted
with the Cause betwixt his Proceedings and the Actings of Chance ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,187.512

<font> Ph. <$$font> Nor is it at all to be admired if Men fancy
something fresh and confus'd in these Methods of Acting , if they are
ignorant of the Reason of that order by which God proceeds .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,187.513

But although thou art ignorant of the Cause of this great Disposal of
things , yet because the good Governour of all things doth temper and
inform the world , never doubt but that all things are done rightly and
as they ought to be . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,187.514

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_3}

<P_203>

<heading>

<font> PROSA <$$font> VII . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,203.518

<$$heading>

<font> Phil. <$$font> Dost thou not see now what follows from all the
things which I have spoken . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,203.520

<font> Bo. <$$font> What is the Consequence ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,203.521

<font> Ph. <$$font> That all Fortune is good .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,203.522

<font> Bo. <$$font> And how , I pri@ @thee , can that be ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,203.523

<font> Ph. <$$font> Observe then that since all Fortune is either
prosperous or adverse , it is given either to reward or exercise the
Good , or to punish or correct the Bad ; BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,203.524

and all Fortune is good which appears to be either just or profitable .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,203.525

<font> Bo. <$$font> The Reason is most true ,
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,203.526

and if I consider the Doctrine either of Providence or Fate , which a
little before thou taughtest me , thy Opinion is founded upon a firm
Ground . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,203.527

But let us range it , if thou pleasest , amongst those Positions which ,
a little before , thou saidst were not commonly believed by the People .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,203.528

<font> Ph. <$$font> Why so ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,203.529

<font> Bo. <$$font> Because it is the common and frequent Phrase of Men
, that the Fortune <P_204> of such an one is bad .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.530

<font> Ph. <$$font> Wilt thou then that I shall for a while draw nearer
to the Peoples way of Discourse , lest we should seem too much to have
receded from the Usages of Mankind ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.531

<font> Bo. <$$font> As thou pleasest . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.532

<font> Ph. <$$font> Thinkest thou not then that every thing which is
profitable is good ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.533

<font> Bo. <$$font> Yes surely . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.534

<font> Ph. <$$font> But whatsoever doth either exercise or correct is
profitable . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.535

<font> Bo. <$$font> I confess it . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.536

<font> Ph. <$$font> Therefore 't@ @is good .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.537

<font> Bo. <$$font> Why should it not ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.538

<font> Ph. <$$font> But this is the Fortune of them who are either
fixed in Vertue , and wage a constant War against Adversity , or of
those who , abandoning Vice , take the way of Vertue .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.539

<font> Bo. <$$font> I can@ @not deny it . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.540

<font> Ph. <$$font> But what sayst thou of that pleasant Fortune which
is given as a Reward to good Men , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.541

do the <font> Many <$$font> conceive it to be ill ?
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.542

<font> Bo. <$$font> Certainly no , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.543

but rather they believe it to be very good , as it is indeed .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.544

<font> Ph. <$$font> But what sayst thou of that other , which although
it be sharp , and inflicts just Punishment upon the Wicked , do Men take
it to be good ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.545

<font> Bo. <$$font> No sure , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.546

but rather the most wretched and tormenting thing that can be thought
upon . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.547

<font> Ph. <$$font> Behold then , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.548

and mark well , if we , following the Opinion of The People , have not
concluded something which is very contrary to the common Opinion .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.549

<font> Bo. <$$font> What is that ? BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,204.550

<font> Ph. <$$font> It followeth clearly to the things before granted ,
that whatsoever the Fortune of all those who are either in possession of
, or <P_205> growing in Vertue , or otherwise in search after her , may
be , it is good ; but that the Fortune of those who live in impiety and
sin must be the worst of any thing . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,205.551

<font> Bo. <$$font> That is true , although no one dare confess it .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,205.552

<font> Ph. <$$font> Why so , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,205.553

for the wise Man ought not to be cast down when he is brought into the
Field to wage War with Fortune , no more than the valiant Man ought to
be dismayed when he hears the Trumpet sound to Battel :
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,205.554

For Difficulty and Hardship giveth the Occasion to one that he may
encrease and propagate his Glory ; and to the other , that he may
confirm and improve his Wisdom . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,205.555

From hence is Vertue denominated , because leaning upon its own Strength
, and confiding in its proper Force , it is not to be overcome by
Adversity : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,205.556

Nor thou who art so far advanced in the Course of Vertue , art not to be
carried away by Delights , and to wallow in Lust ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,205.557

thou must engage valiantly and fiercely against every Fortune .
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,205.558

And lest Adversity should oppress thee , or Prosperity corrupt thee ,
possess thy self of the Golden Mean , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,205.559

and retain it with all thy Strength : BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,205.560

For whatsoever is below , or goeth beyond that , implies a contempt of
true Happiness , BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,205.561

and loseth the Reward of its Labour . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,205.562

It lieth in thy own Hand to choose what Fortune thou likest ;
BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,205.563

for al Fortune which seemeth sharp and grievous , unless it exercise the
Vertues of the Good , or chastise the Impiety of the Wicked , is a
Punishment . BOETHPR-1695-E3-P2,205.564

