<BEGIN_boethel-1593-e2-p2>

<P_43>

<heading>

THE THIRD BOOKE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,43.4

I . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,43.5

<$$heading>

Thus ended she her song , when greedy me & astond with lyfted eares ,
the doulcenes of her verse , perced . Wherfore a little after : " O
cheefest comfort , " quoth I , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,43.7

" of wearyd myndes , how much hast thou reviued me , with waight of
sentence , or pleasantnes of song . so as heerafter I shall think me
not inferiour to fortunes strokes . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,43.8

and so the remedyes that a little before thou saidst to sharp , not only
doo I not feare , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,43.9

but ernest to heare of I greedely beseech . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,43.10

Then she : " I perceauid , " quoth she , " when silently our wordes with
attentyue care thou cacht , that this state of thy mynde eyther I lookt
for , or that is truer , my self haue made : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,43.11

The rest that doth remayne , be such that tasted , smartes , but
inwardly received , sweetens . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,43.12

But for that thou namest thy self ernest to heare , with what desyres
shouldest thou be inflamed , yf thou couldst know whither we meane to
bring the` ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,43.13

" Whither ? " quoth I ; BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,43.14

" to true felicitie , which thy mynde dreames of , whose eyes being vsed
to pictures , it self can not beholde . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,43.15

Than I : " doo , I besech the` , and without delay , shew what is the
true one . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,43.16

" Willingly shall I doo it , " quoth she , " for thy sake ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,43.17

but cause that thou doost better know the same in woordes , I shall
describe and seeke to inform the` that she knowen , when eyes thou
turnst to contrary parte , the show of truest good , thou mayst knowe .
" {COM:verse_omitted} BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,43.18

<P_44>

<heading>

II . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,44.21

<$$heading>

Than fixing her looke awhile , and as taken with straight conceite of
mynde , thus begyns : " All mortall care which labour of many studyes
vsith , goes on in diuers pathes , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,44.23

and yet stryves to com to one end of bliss : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,44.24

But that is right good which a man obtayning , no furder may desyre ,
which is of all the greatest good , & in it self contaynes them all , of
which if any want , it can not be the moste , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,44.25

for outwardly were left somthing to be wisht . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,44.26

Playne then it is , that state of all good thinges perfect in his
gathering , is onely blisse . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,44.27

This , as we sayde , by diuers path all mortall mens {SIC:men} indeuors
gett . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,44.28

For nature hath ingraft in mens mynd desyre of truest good ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,44.29

but strayeng errour to falshode doth seduce vs . Among whom som ,
beleeuing hit greatest good nothing to want , stryve <P_45> to be rych :
som , supposing honour best , when gotten they haue , seeke of their
Citizens honour . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.30

Others ther be that settels greatest good in hyest powre .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.31

such will or raigne themselves , or stryve to cleave to such as doo .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.32

But they that suppose honour greatest good , they eyther with warre or
peace@ @s worth hast to inlarge a glorious name .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.33

But many good men measure the frute of good with joy & mirth ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.34

and they think it happyest to wallow in delytes .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.35

Then be to , that enterchange ech end & care with other ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.36

as they that riches & delyte for powres sake desyre , the other powre
for monnyes sake or glory doo desyre . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.37

In these & such lyke humayne actes or desyres , intent abydes , as
Nobilitie & popular fame they seeme to get som show .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.38

wyfe & children for plesure sake desyre , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.39

but partaking of {SIC:of_of} frendes <paren> that holyest is <$$paren>
not reckon by fortune nor force , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.40

The rest eyther for powres sake or delyte be taken .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.41

It is playne that bodyes good to hyer thinges be referd , whose strength
& bygnes it is that makes their woork commended .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.42

Beauty & agilitie their fame , hath their delyte , to whom only bliss
they ad , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.43

for that that ech man thinkes above the rest exceede , that greatest
good he thinkes . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.44

And greatest we suppose blisse to be , which makes men think blessedst
thing , that ech man above the rest couetes . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.45

Before thyn eyes thou hast the forme sett out of mans felicitie , Riches
, honour , powre , glory , and delyte , which last only the Epicure
considering , hit followes that the greatest good he thought , for that
delyte bringes all delytefull thing to mynde . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.46

But let me retourn to mans study , whose mynde albeit with blynded
memory , yet seekes the greatest good , but as dronken man knowes not
the path to bring him home . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.47

Doo they seeme to err that nothing to neede desyres ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.48

for that nought can so well obtayne happynes as flowing state of all
good thinges , not needing others , contented with it self .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.49

Be they deceaud that hit supposith best , that worthyest is of Reuerente
respecte ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,45.50

<P_46>

No sure , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,46.52

nether is that vyle to be despisde that the care of ech mans labour
couettes to gett . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,46.53

Is not force to be nombred among good thinges ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,46.54

What then , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,46.55

is that weake and to be estemid feeble , that of all other thinges
exceedes ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,46.56

Is not honour to be regarded ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,46.57

It can not be denyed , but that that is most worth , ought be most
honord . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,46.58

For carefull sorowfull , blisse we can not call ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,46.59

nor subiecte to care & woe we may not saye , when in lest thinges that
is desyrd , that most delytes haue & enioye . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,46.60

And these be those which men wold obtayne , & for their cause desyre
ryches , dignitie , Raygnes , glory , & delytes . for that by these
they beleeue they may gett ynough , honour , powre , glory , and Joye .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,46.61

Good it is therfore that men by so many ways doo seeke ; In which , what
force of nature ther is , is showed , that tho dyuers & sondry opinyons
, yet in looving goodnes end , they all consent . " {COM:verse_omitted}
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,46.62

<P_48>

<heading>

III . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.65

<$$heading>

" You allso o erthly wightes , though by single figure doo dreame of
your own begynning . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.67

& that true end of blissednes perceaue , tho with no playne yet with
sour thought , vnderstand . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.68

And thither bringes you a naturall instinct to true goodnes ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.69

and increasing errour leades yo=u= from the same .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.70

Consider therfore , whither men can obtayne their end desyrd , by those
meanes that men suppose gettes happynes . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.71

For if eyther monny , honors , or such lyke can bring such thinges to
whom nothing is lacking of , best , let vs then confesse that som men
may be happy by their obteyning . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.72

For if neyther they can doo that they promise & wantes greatest good ,
is it not euident that they haue but a false show of blessidnes ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.73

First therfore let me ask the` that a little afore aboundedst in ryches
, BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.74

Among thy flowing heaps , did not conceyte of conceauid iniury amase thy
mynde ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.75

" I can not remember , " quoth I , " that euer my mynde was so free but
somwhat greeuid it . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.76

" Was it not because that was a_waye that thou woldest not forgo , or
was with the` that thou caredst not for ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.77

I answerd , " so it is . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.78

" Then thou desyredst the ones presence , and the others want ? "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.79

I confesse . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.80

" Does any man neede than , " quoth she , " that euery man wantes &
needes ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.81

He that lackes is not wholly content . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.82

No , sure . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.83

When thou hadst welth ynough , hadst thou not this want ? "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.84

" What els ? " said I . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.85

" Then Riches can not make a man lack nothing , nor yet content himself
. BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.86

And this is that promise they seemed . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.87

This I suppose ought most be considered , that monny of his own nature
hath nothing that he can not be spoyled of that possesses it . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.88

I confesse it . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.89

" Why shouldst thou not confesse yt . Whan a mightyer takes it away
from the vnwilling . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.90

Whence come these Courtes complayntes ? but that coyne is taken away
from the losers by force or guyle ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.91

He shall haue neede therfore of outward help by which his monny he may
keepe . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.92

Who can this deny ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.93

He should not cede such help that possest of monny lose he wold not .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.94

This is doutles . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.95

The matter is fallen otherwise now , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,48.96

for such <P_49> riches as were thought sufficient of them selves , are
needy of others ayde . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,49.97

But what is the way to dryve away lack from ryches ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,49.98

for rych men can they not honger , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,49.99

Can they not thirst , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,49.100

nor can not somtyme the cold wynter hurt the lymmes of the rich man ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,49.101

But you will say , they haue ynough , thurst & colde to dryue away .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,49.102

But by this meanes yo=u= may saye the lack of rich men may be comforted
, neuer taken {SIC:take} away . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,49.103

For if she euer gape & serch for som thing els , tho fild with ryches
ynough , it must be that ther somthing remaynes that it should be filld
withall . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,49.104

I neede not tell you that Nature with lest , & Auarice with nothing is
contented . Wherfore if nether Riches can take away their lack , & they
make their own neede , why should we think them sufficient ?
{COM:verse_omitted} BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,49.105

<heading>

IV . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,49.107

<$$heading>

" But thou wilt say dignities makes honorable , reuerenced to whom they
hap . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,49.109

Haue then {COM:preceding_word_"then"_emended} dignities this force ?
that they can ingraff in vsers myndes vertue , & expulse vice .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,49.110

Nay , they are wont , not to chace iniquitie but to adorn it ; so as we
disdayne somtyme that they should hap to wickedst men : wherfore
Catullus , tho Nonius sate as Curule , calld him Lump of flesh .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,49.111

Dost thou see how great a shame somtyme dignity receuith ? Which
indignitie should not be so euident , if honour should not show it .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,49.112

You allso , could you <P_50> haue bene brought by so many perils to
accompany Decoratus in office , when in him you sawe a mynde of a wicked
Ruffin {COM:sic} , and slanderer tongue ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,50.113

For we can not for honors sake iudge them worthy Reuerence whom we
suppose vnworthy of their dignities . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,50.114

But if thou sawest a wyse man , couldst thou not think him wourthy of
reuerence euin for that wisdom he enioyes ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,50.115

Yes surely , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,50.116

for ther is a peculiar dignitie for vertue , which alltogither is
bestowde on them to whom she haps . Which because they can@ @not euer
haue popular honors , they may not enioy the beauty of their worth :
wherin this is to be noted , that if it be the lesse worth , that it is
dispised of many , when they can not make them reuerenced , thorow the
contempt that many makes it , Then honour makes many wicked ; but yet
not without punishment ; BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,50.117

for wicked men giues this good turn to dignitie , that they spot them
with their own infection . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,50.118

And that thou mayst know that true honour can not hap by these shaded
dignities , gather it thus {SIC:this} : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,50.119

Yf a man haue oft tymes bene Consul , & fortune to com to barbarous
Nations , shall there honour make him be esteemd ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,50.120

Yf this be a naturall gyft to all dignities , whither euer they go ,
they should vse the self office , As the fyre in ech Country neuer
leaues to burne . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,50.121

But because not their own force but false humayne opinion hath bred it ,
straight they vanish , when to them they com that esteemes not such
dignities . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,50.122

but thus much for foren Nations . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,50.123

Among them that made them , doo they euer last ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,50.124

The Prefectures office was once a greate powre , now a vayne name , and
a combersom waight of Senators Censure . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,50.125

He was wont be greate that cared for the peeples prouisions .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,50.126

Now {COM:preceding_word_"Now"_emended} , what baser than that office ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,50.127

For as a little afore I said , That it had nothing in it self of his own
proper valure , that takes or loses luster <P_51> by the vsers opinion .
Yf then honors can not make men reuerenced , which are despisd by wicked
mens infection , if by change of tyme they leave to be famous , yf by
vulgar opinion despysd , what beauty haue they in them selves , or can
giue others ? {COM:verse_omitted} BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,51.128

<heading>

V . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,51.130

<$$heading>

" But kingdomes & kinges familieerities , can they not make a man happy
? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,51.132

What els ? yf their felicitie euer last . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,51.133

But full be old examples & of present age , that kinges haue changed
with misery their lott . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,51.134

O noble powres , which is not able to keepe them selves . Yf this
Raigne of kinges be autour of felicytie , shall it not bring misery in
part that lackes , and so diminish Luck ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,51.135

For tho mens dominions stretch furr , yet more peeple ther must needes
be , vnacquaynted with kinges Raigne . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,51.136

For wher the making felicitie endith , there skanted is the force , &
wretched makes . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,51.137

Thus must it needes follow that greatest portion of myserye kinges haue
. BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,51.138

The tyrant that proued the danger of his Lot , dissembled his Raignes
feare by sword hanging on his head . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,51.139

What then is powre ? that can not chace bittes of Care , nor shun the
stinges of feare ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,51.140

Will they haue to lyue secure , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,51.141

but may not , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,51.142

and <P_52> yet boast of their force ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,52.143

Dost thou suppose him mighty , whom thou seest can not what he wold ,
performe ; BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,52.144

dost thou think him strong that fills his sydes with gardes
{COM:preceding_word_"gardes"_emended} , that whom he affrightes ,
himself doth feare ? who , that he may seeme mighty , throwes himself
to the handes of slaues ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,52.145

What shall I speake of kinges fauorites , when the kingdoms themsellves
I haue shewde full of such weaknes ? whom ofttymes kinges force hath
preseruid , som tymes opprest ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,52.146

Nero compeld Seneck his familiar & tutour to chose his own death .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,52.147

Antony threw to soldiours glaiues Papinian , long in Courte , of Credit
. BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,52.148

And both wold willingly giue vp their autoritie .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,52.149

Seneck offerd Nero all his goodes , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,52.150

& straue to return to his own ease . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,52.151

But while the waight it self thrust them downe , nether that he wold
obtayned . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,52.152

What is this autoritie then ? which the hauers feare , such as when
thou woldst haue , art not safe , & seekest putt of , canst not shun ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,52.153

Shall thy frendes be helpers , whom not vertue but fortune gat the` ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,52.154

But whom felicitie made a frend , misery makes an ennemy .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,52.155

What plague is there more of strength to harme than a familiar ennemy ?
{COM:verse_omitted} BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,52.156

<P_53>

<heading>

VI . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,53.159

<$$heading>

" But glory how begyling , how fowle is she ? Wherfore the Tragik poet
wrongfully exclaymes not : O Glory , glory , on thousandes of men nought
worth , a greate name thou haste bestowed . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,53.161

For many haue lost greate renoune through vulgar false opinion , than
which {COM:update_after_lemmatization} what can be worsse ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,53.162

for they that falsely be praised , needes must they blush at their own
laude . Which if hit may be got by desart , what may they allow the
conscience of a wise man , who mesurith not his good by popular fame ,
but Conscience trouth ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,53.163

And if to stretch for {SIC:fur} mens fame , seeme best , it followes
then , to skant the same is worst . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,53.164

But since , as I haue afore tolde , it must nedes be that many Nations
ther ar to whom the fame of one man could neuer com , It followes then ,
that whom you {COM:preceding_word_"you"_emended} thought most glorious ,
in the next climate of the earth seemes vnspoken of .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,53.165

Among all this I suppose not popular fauour woorthy of memoriall , whom
neyther Judgement bred , nor steddy lastes . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,53.166

But now how vayne , how slippery is noble name . Who sees it not ?
which if to honour yo=u= refer , an other man makes it .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,53.167

For nobilitie seemes to be a prayse proceeding of parentes desart .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,53.168

And if the speche therof make it knowen , they must be noble that be
spoken of . Wherfore if thyne own thou have not , an other mans lawde
shall neuer make the` famous . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,53.169

And if ther be any good thing in nobilitie , this I think it only , that
it breedes the hauers a constraynte , that they may not degenerate from
their auncestors vertue . {COM:verse_omitted} BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,53.170

<P_54>

<heading>

VII . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,54.173

<$$heading>

" But what should I speake of the bodye's pleasure , whose greedie
desyres be full of wo , and sacietie of repentance ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,54.175

What diseases , how intollerable paynes is wont as frute of wickednes ,
hap to the enioyers body . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,54.176

What pleasure soeuer their motions haue , I know not .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,54.177

But who will remember his own delites , shall vnderstand what wofull end
those pleasures haue ; which if they could yeld men happy , ther is no
cause why beastes should not be lyke , whose wholle delite <P_55> hyes
to satisfy their lust . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.178

Most laudable shuld be delite of wyfe & childe ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.179

but I know not how somtyme against nature it haps that children haue
tormented them , whose state how wearing it is , I neede not now tell
the` , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.180

but knowst it well ynough , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.181

and nedest not now wayle it . Which makes me allow Euripides opinion ,
who said , he was happy in mishap that lackt ofspring .
{COM:verse_omitted} BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.182

<heading>

VIII . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.184

<$$heading>

" Doubte then ther is none , but that these to blesse , be crooked steps
, nor thither can any man bring , whither they promise leade him .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.186

How wrapt they be in euills , shortly I can shew you .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.187

For what , wilt thou snatch moony ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.188

Thou must take it from the hauer . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.189

Woldst thou shyne with dignities ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.190

Thou wilt pray the giuer ; BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.191

& thou that desyrst to aduaunce others in honour , with lowlynes of
request , art dasht . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.192

Dost thou desyre powre ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.193

to subjectes ambusshes thou shalt lye in danger .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.194

Dost thou seeke glory ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.195

Thou leauest to be sure , that art drawen by so sharp wayes .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.196

Pleasurable lyfe dost thou desyre ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.197

But who wold not despise & throwe away the bodyes bondage so frayle &
vile ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.198

But now , such as cares for bodyes strength , on how frayle & meane a
possession doo they trust ! BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,55.199

Can you in force exceede the Elephantes <P_56> waight , or bulls
strength ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,56.200

Shall yo=u= forego the Tigres swiftnes ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,56.201

Looke thou on heauens compasse , stabilitie and speede ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,56.202

& leave to wonder at that is base . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,56.203

A marveil in reason it were that Skye it selfe were better than he by
whom it is guided . Whose forme is so much the fayrer as it is caryed
with soudain & speedy change of Springes floures ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,56.204

Yf , as Aristotle sayes , men could vse Linxes eyes , to peirce throw
that they sawe , wold they not whan bowells all were seene , suppose
that that fayre body whose covering Alcibiades spake of , should fowlest
seeme ? Wherfore not thy nature but weaknes of vewars sight makes the`
seeme fayre . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,56.205

Esteeme how much you will of bodyes goodes , when this yo=u= knowe ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,56.206

whatso yo=u= wonder , a fyre of a Tercian may dissolue . Of which all ,
this in somme yo=u= may gather , that these which neyther can performe
that they promise be good , nor when they are alltogither can be
perfecte , These nether can add strength to bliss , nor make them blest
that haue them . {COM:verse_omitted} BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,56.207

<P_69>

<heading>

XII . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,69.210

<$$heading>

Than I : " I agree well to Plato , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,69.212

for twise thou hast remembred me of it . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,69.213

First , when memory I lost thorow bodyes syn , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,69.214

next , prest with sorowes burden . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,69.215

Then she : " yf the abouesaid <P_70> thou hast regarded , thou wilt not
be long ere thou remember that lately thou hast confest thou knewest not
. " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.216

" What@ @'s that ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.217

" thou meanest by what Raynes the world is guided , " sayd she .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.218

" I remember it , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.219

& that my ignorance confessed shewes , Albeit I see what thou has
brought me , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.220

yit playnlier of the` to heare it I desyre . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.221

" A little before , " quoth she , " Thou thoughtst ther was no doute but
that the wourld by God was ruled . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.222

" Nether now nor euer will I doute it , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.223

and what therfore be my reasons , in short I will tell yo=u= .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.224

This world had neuer com togither into one forme of so diuers &
contrarious partes , without one it were that so diuers thinges doth
Joyne . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.225

And being so knytt , the diuersitie of their own natures among
themselves disagreeing , should vncouple & breake them , without one it
were that held that so he knytt . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.226

For so certain an order of nature should not contynue , nor should show
so many diuers motions in their place , tyme , woork , space , & quality
, without one it were alone that euer byding himself , disposeth their
mutable varietye . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.227

What euer this is , wherby the made remayns , & be wrought , by vsuall
name of all men , God is calld . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.228

Then she : " Since this thou thinkst , I shall haue but little labour
that thou , that comprehendst felicities , as an inhabiter should renew
thy Countrey . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.229

But let vs looke on our own propositions . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.230

Have we not set sufficiency in nomber of blisse , and so graunte that
God it is ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.231

And to rule the world he needith no other help .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.232

For els , yf ought he needed , full sufficiency he had not . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.233

" That must needes be . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.234

" Then by him self all he disposes alone . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.235

And God is he that only we haue showed to be the good .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.236

By goodnes therfore all he doth dispose , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.237

for by himself he rulith all , whom we haue graunted the only good .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.238

And he is the key & helm wherby this worldes molde stable & vncorrupt is
kepte . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.239

" I agree to this , " quoth I , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.240

" and with a slender suspicion I sawe afore what yo=u= wold saye . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.241

" I beleeue it well . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.242

For euin now , as I think more heedely to looke , to truth thou hast
turnd thyne eye , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,70.243

And that I say is playne now that thou <P_71> with me may see . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.244

" What@ @s that ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.245

" When rightly we beleeue that God all Rules by goodnes order , & that
all thinges as I have taught you , by naturall instinct hyes to the
hiest good , Can any man doute , but that willingly they are so rulde ,
& turnes themselfes to the beck of the disposer , as Ruler of meetest &
best agreeing ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.246

" It must needes be , " quoth I , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.247

" for els it could not be a blessed raigne , yf it should be the yoke of
drawers back , not the favour of the obeyeng .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.248

And so nothing can conserve nature that stryves to gaynesay his God .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.249

but what if he went about it , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.250

Can any thing euer prevail against him whom all men graunte by lawe of
bliss , the mightyest ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.251

" It should nought prevayle , " said I , " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.252

for ther is nothing that eyther can or may resist the greatest good . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.253

" Then that is the top of felicitie , that stowtly rules & gently all
disposith . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.254

" How much , " quoth I , " these thinges not only that are concluded by
great Reason , but thy wordes themselves much more delytes me , So as a
man may be ashamd of him self , that foolishly hath babled so much . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.255

" You haue hard er now , " sayd she , " in fables how Gyantes haue
clamard to the hevens , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.256

but them to as hit was meete , the gentle force hath deposd .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.257

But will yo=u= haue me make a comparison ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.258

Perchance thorow such debate , som cleere sparkell of trouth shall leape
out . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.259

Thy Judgement hath made the` suppose that no man doutes but God is of
all thing the mightyest . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.260

No man will doubte therof , without he be mad .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.261

and he that Rulith all , nothing ther is that doo he can not . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.262

" Nothing , " quoth I . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.263

" can God do yll then ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.264

" No , " quoth I . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.265

" For yll is nothing , when he can not make it , that can do all . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.266

" Do you dally with me , " quoth I , " & wrap me in vndooing laberinth
of Reason , in which thou entrest in , whence thou wentst out , & now
goest out where thou camst in ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.267

So hast thou not thus wrapt a Rondell of dyuine sinceritie ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,71.268

For a little afore begynning from bliss , thou saydst she was <P_72>
greatest good , which only abode in the greatest God .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,72.269

Then thou saydst that God himself was the greatest good & blisse , of
whom no man was made blessed , but he that was lyke to him , And that
thou gauest for a reward . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,72.270

Then thou saydst that the shape of good was the substance of God & bliss
, BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,72.271

and {SIC:&_and} so didst saye , that he alone was greatest good , which
Naturally ech man desyrd ; BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,72.272

and didst dispute that God was he that ruld the vniuersalitie by the
raynes of goodnes , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,72.273

& all thinges willingly did obey , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,72.274

And so ther was no euill in Nature . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,72.275

And didst show how all thinges , not by outward , but one from an other
lynking beleefe , had ingraft prooues and their own . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,72.276

Then she , " We doo not sporte , as godes gyftes the greatest doo
require , that thing that of late we so much desyrd .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,72.277

For such is the shape of divine substance that neyther it slyppith to
outward cause , nor inwardly doth take for him self any thing without
him . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,72.278

But as Parmenides sayth : A lyke compasse in Roundnes ech Circle caryes
. BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,72.279

Then if we have so well compast , that we have not gatherd our reasons
out of the matter , but agreing with that that we have treated , ther is
no cause then why thou shouldst doute , when thou hast lernt by Plato ,
that all talke should agree as neere of kyn to matter that we speake of
. " {COM:verse_omitted} BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,72.280

<P_75>

<heading>

THE FOURTH BOOKE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,75.283

I . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,75.284

<$$heading>

Thus when Philosophy her stately looke & graue countenance keeping , In
mylde & sweete sorte had song , Then I , not forgetting my late ingraven
woe , burst out to tell som part of my intent .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,75.286

" O , " quoth I , " Thou , the guide of true light , such thinges as thy
talke hitherto hath vtterd , by diuine speculation & Reason thyne , are
showed inuincible . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,75.287

And though the same of late my iniuryes sorowe forgate , yet altogither
of them I was not ignorant . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,75.288

But this was the self & greatest cause of all my woe , that when the
Righter of all thing is good , eyther at all euills can be , or
vnpunished pas . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,75.289

That , how worthy wonder it is , consider I pray yo=u= .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,75.290

But to this a greater mater is added . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,75.291

For wickednes ruling & florishing , not only vertue wantes rewarde ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,75.292

but subiect to the feete of wicked men , is troden downe
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,75.293

& suffers payne that wicked folkes deserue . Which happening in a
Raigne of him that all knowes , all may {SIC:ma} , and such a god that
wills but only that is good , No man can but mervell and complayne . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,75.294

" It should be worthy mervell , " quoth she , " And horrible more than
any monster , if , as thou supposest , in a house guyded by such a
master , base vessells should be esteemd , & precious are despisd .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,75.295

But so it is not . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,75.296

For if such thinges be kepte which we of late concluded , & be kepte
togither , he being the maker of whose kingdom we spake , thou shalt
knowe that euer good men be mighty , yll men slaues & weake . And how
vice is neuer without punishment , nor vertue without rewarde . And how
prosperitie to the good , yll luck to euill betydes . And such lyke ,
which may leaving quarrels , strengthen the` with steddy soundnes .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,75.297

And for that thou haste seene the picture of true blisse , which I
shewed the` , and haste knowen where hit is placed , passing all those
thinges that necessary I think not , I will show the` the way that home
to thy house may bring the` and stick fethers in thy mynde , <P_76>
wherby thou mayst sore up on hye , so as woe trode down , homedweller in
thy country by my guyding path & Charyot mayst return . "
{COM:verse_omitted} BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,76.298

<P_77>

<heading>

II . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,77.301

<$$heading>

Than I : " O Lord , how great thinges dost thou promis , nether doubt I
but that performe thou canst hit , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,77.303

but stik not now at that thou hast begon . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,77.304

" First therfor , thou must knowe , " quoth she , " that good men haue
euer power , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,77.305

Iuel men lack euer strengh for good and yl , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,77.306

being so contrary , yf powreful be the first , the last doth shewe his
Lack . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,77.307

But that your Opinion may haue more Credit , by ether pathe I wyl treade
, and therby my propositions confirme . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,77.308

Two thinges ther be by wiche the effecte of eache mans doings apere ,
wyl and power , of wiche if ether lacke , nothing may be perfourmed .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,77.309

For wyl wanting , No man wyl go about that he wold not .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,77.310

and power fayle , vain is wyl . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,77.311

So hit folowes , that whan he wants that he wylz , no dout but power
failes to get the desired . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,77.312

" That is plain , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,77.313

and can@ @not be denied . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,77.314

" And whom thou seest optaine {SIC:optone} that he wold , dost thou dout
that he may not haue the power ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,77.315

In that he prevailes , In that man is able , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,77.316

but weke must nides be , in that he may not . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,77.317

Dost thou remember that in our last arguments this was gathered that the
intent of eache man's wyl , thogh diuersly distracted , is <P_78> only
to hie to blis ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.318

" I remember hit was so shewed . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.319

" Dost thou cal to mynd that blis is the greatest good , and so whan
that is soght al best is got ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.320

" I remember that well Inough , " quoth I , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.321

" for that hold I fixd in mynde . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.322

" Therfore all good men & yll stryve to com to the best by diuers
intentes ! " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.323

" So it is . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.324

But most sure it is they are made good men by obtayning good . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.325

" But is it sure that good men doo allwayes obtayne that they desyre ?
" BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.326

" So it seems . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.327

" But if yll men might obtayne good , they could not be yll . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.328

" So it is . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.329

" When they both desyre good , but the one gettes it , the other not ,
It is certain that good men be mighty & yll weake . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.330

" Who euer , " quoth I , " doutes therof neyther can consider Natures
property , nor sequele of Reason . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.331

" Then if twoo ther be that by nature requires one thing , one of them
naturally does that & performs , & the other no way can do it , nor can
agree to what Nature will , & so to fullfill his intent doo but follow
the fulfiller : which of them ij thinkest thou more of powre ? "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.332

" Though I coniecture what you wold , yet plainlyer I desyre to heare .
" BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.333

" The motion of walking , you can not deny but all men haue ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.334

nor does not doute that is not the feetes office ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.335

Yf any man , then that can go , & an other to whom the naturall
propertie of the feete is wanting , stryving with his handes , stryves
so to walke , which of these ij suppose yo=u= more worth ? "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.336

" Perform the rest if that you will , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.337

for no man doutes but he is more of force that hath the vse of nature ,
than he that wantes it . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.338

" But the greatest good , " said she , " that is set before yll & good ,
the good desyre by naturall duty of vertue , the other by a scatterd
desyre , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.339

& stryue to get that which is no proper gift , to such as will obtayne
the greatest good . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.340

Doest thou think the contrary ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.341

" No , " quoth I , " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.342

for that is playne that followes . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.343

For heerby may we gather that I graunted afore , good men to be mighty ,
& yll men weake . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.344

" Rightly hast thou discourst , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.345

And so , as phisicians ought to hope , that it is a signe of a helthy &
Resisting Nature . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,78.346

But for that I see the` redyest to understand , I will <P_79> heape vp
many reasons . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.347

Beholde , how greate a weakenes is there appeers in vicious men that can
not obtayne that to which their naturall intent leades & well nye
compells . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.348

And what if they be left of the greate & almost invincible help of his
precedent nature ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.349

Consider how great a feblenes holdes wicked men .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.350

For nether can they gett light & vayne rewardes , which they can not
obtayne , but fayles in the Top of height , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.351

neither does good effect hap to the wretched , euen the same that night
& day they seeke . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.352

And yet in self_same thing we see the good mens strenghth excell .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.353

For as a man that walkes to that place whence chefely he wold com ,
being such as has no way beyond , woldst thou not think him best
footeman ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.354

so shouldst {SIC:shoulst} thou think him mightyest that can comprehend
the end , beyond which no furder is . Wherby it haps that who contrary
is , the same be wicked & weake of all strength .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.355

For why doo they follow vice , leaving vertue behind them ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.356

For ignorance of good ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.357

But what is more feeble than ignorance blyndnes ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.358

But they know what follow they ought ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.359

But their lust doth ouerthrow them : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.360

so doth intemperance the frayle men that in vice be delited .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.361

But wittingly & knowing do they leave that is good , and so bend them to
vice ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.362

This waye , not only without powre , but they leave to be .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.363

For they that forsake the common end of all thinges that be , they leave
themselves to be . Which may seeme strange to men , that euill men
<paren> that many be <$$paren> we shall not say to be ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.364

but so the case standth . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.365

For they that euill be , I deny them not to be yll ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.366

but I deny that they be purely or simply . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.367

For as we call a Carcas , a dead man , symply we can not call him man :
so vicious men we graunte them to be yll , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.368

but absolutely to be , that can we not confesse .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.369

For ther is that , that keps & retaynes Natures order :
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.370

Ther is that fayles from that , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.371

& leaves that in their Nature is grafted . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.372

But thou wilt say , yll men may doo , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.373

nether can I denye . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.374

But this powre to doo coms not of force , but of weaknes .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,79.375

For they can doo yll , which they should not doo , if they wold remayn
in their creation of good . <P_80> Which possibilitie to doo , In not
dooing shewes they can doo nothing . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.376

For yf , as we haue gatherd afore , euill be nothing , when but only the
yll they can doo , wicked men can doo nothing . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.377

" That@ @s playne . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.378

" And that you may understand what is the force of this powre , we haue
defynd afore , that nothing is fuller of force than the greatest good .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.379

But that can@ @not the wicked doo . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.380

But what man is that thinkes man can doo all ? "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.381

" None but a mad man will so think . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.382

" And that the same can doo yll to ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.383

" Wold God they could not , " quoth I . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.384

" When then he is mightest that can do all good , & mightyest men in yll
, can not such thinges obtayne , then is it playne , that they can lest
doo that be wicked . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.385

And so it haps , that rightly we haue showed , all powre to consist in
thinges to be obtaynd ; And all such referd to greatest good , as to the
top of Natures best . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.386

But possibilitie of wicked acte can not be refered to good ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.387

desyrd therfore it ought not be , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.388

& all powre is to be desyrd : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.389

It followes therfore , possibilitie of euill men is no powre . By all
which , the powre of good men plainly appeers , & makes vndouted the
weaknes of wicked men , veryfyeing Platoes sentence , to be true , that
only wise men can performe , that they desyre to doo .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.390

But wicked men vse only that they will , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.391

but what they most desyre can not obtayne . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.392

For they doo certain thinges , in which delyting they suppose they haue
obtaynd the good that they desyre : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.393

but obtayne it they can not , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.394

for reproche neuer coms to blisse . " {COM:verse_omitted}
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,80.395

<P_81>

<heading>

III . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,81.398

<$$heading>

" See you not in what a great slowe , wicked thinges be wrapt in , &
with how great a light , godlynes shynith ? by which t@ @is playne ,
that neuer reward wantes to good , nor punishment to wicked folke .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,81.400

For it is no wrong that of thinges don , that be ech reward for which
ech thing is don : as a Runner in a race has a guarland for which he ran
, in rewarde . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,81.401

But we haue shewed how blisse is that self good , for which all thinges
be don . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,81.402

Then it followes that the only good is sett as the vniuersall reward to
men . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,81.403

And this from good men can not be deuided , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,81.404

for nether can he be iustly cald a good man by right , that wantith true
good . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,81.405

Therfore good conditions can neuer want rewarde .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,81.406

For though euill men afflicte them , a wise mans Garland shall not fall
nor wither . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,81.407

For other <P_82> mens wickednes can not pluck away the true honour from
honest myndes . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.408

For yf he reioyce at ought received from outward meane , som other man
or he that gaue it might take it awaye . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.409

But because Godlynes it self suffisith , then shall he want reward ,
when he leaves so to be . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.410

Lastly , since all rewarde is therfore desyrd , because it is beleeuid
good , who can think an honest man , without rewarde ?
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.411

But of what ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.412

Of that that is fayrest & greatest . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.413

Remember this breefe that a little afore I gaue you to be the cheefest ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.414

& so conclude : When the greatest good is blisfulnes , they must needes
be happy that are good , because they are so . And they that be happy ,
must needes be lyke to God . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.415

Therfore good mens reward is such as neyther any day drawes away , nor
powre minish , nor Ire darken , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.416

but lyke to him they be . Which being true , no wise man may doute of
the wicked mans inseparable payne . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.417

For where both good & yll , payne & reward be crosse one to an other ,
it followes that such reward as haps to goodnes , the same must needes
be of contrary sorte , for payne of wicked . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.418

For as sinceritie to the honest is rewarde , so to the wicked their
vnhappynes is their plage . So as who euer is punisht must needes be
wicked . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.419

Yf therfore they wold way well themselves , can they suppose them voyde
of payne , whose wickdnes in all ylls not only touchith them , but
greevously infectes ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.420

See on th@ @other syde , such parte as is to the good contrary ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.421

what payne doth follow them . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.422

I haue taught yo=u= afore that all that is , must be one , and that the
only good is one . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.423

Then it followes , to what so that is , that seemes to be good .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.424

Then whosoeuer faylith from that good he leaves to be : so that , when
euill they be , they leave to that they were ; BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.425

but to prove that men they were , the forme their humayne body shewith ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.426

but turned into malice , they haue left their humayne nature .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.427

And since that true pietie alone may lift vp a man , it followes , that
whom wickednes hath throwen downe from state of man , hath cast him
downe beneth the merit of man . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.428

So it haps , that whom transformed thou seest with vice , thou mayst not
suppose him a man . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,82.429

<P_83>

The violent robber of others goodes is farvent in his robberyes ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.431

swellith in coueting , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.432

& mayst call him woolflyke , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.433

feerce & contentious , exercises his tongue in bralles , euin lyke a dog
. BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.434

The secret lurker joyes with fraude to catche .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.435

And so is foxlyke , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.436

untemperate in ire he chafith , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.437

& men beleeue him a lyar ; BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.438

but fearfull & flyeing , fearith & dredith that needes not ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.439

And he to deere is compared . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.440

The sluggy & dullard languishith BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.441

& lyke an ass doth lyve . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.442

The light & vnconstant man changes his intentes ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.443

& differs so nought from the byrdes , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.444

And is plunged in filthy & vncleane lustes , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.445

And is kept in the delyte of his owne lewdnes .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.446

And so it haps , that he that forsakyth honesty leaues to be a man ;
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.447

for not to be able to attayne a dyuine state , is tournid to the bestly
. {COM:verse_omitted} BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,83.448

<P_89>

<heading>

V . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,89.451

<$$heading>

Than I began : BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,89.453

" I se , " quoth I , " what felicitie or misery it is , that is sett in
the desertes of honest & wicked men . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,89.454

But in common fortune I see , but little good or yll to be .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,89.455

For no wise man wold rather choose to be exul , poore , dispisde , than
riche , reuerenced , mighty , & florishing abide in his own Citie .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,89.456

For then more plainly & with better witnes , is the propertie of wisdom
seene , when the happines of Rulers be as it were skatterd among such
peeple as be straungers , When cheefely geayle , lawe & other tormentes
for due punishment rather pertayne to wicked Citizens ; for whom they
were first ordeynd . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,89.457

But when these be turnd in wry sorte , & wickedest payne doo presse good
men , & yll doo snatch reward from vertue , I wonder much what may seeme
the reason of so vniust a confusion , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,89.458

& doo desyre of the` to know . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,89.459

For lest wold I maruell therat , if I beleeued all thinges were mixt by
chanceing luck . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,89.460

Now , God the guide , my doute increasith ; which when oft tymes he
giues to good , delytes , to euill hard haps , somtyme agayne he giues
yll chance to good , & grauntes the yll their wish , without ther <P_90>
could a cause be founde , what hit should be that makes a difference
from chaunceing haps . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,90.461

" It is no wonder , " quoth she , " if any thing rash & confounded be
beleuid when orders reason is vnknowen . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,90.462

But thou , allthough thou knowest not the cause of so greate an order ,
yet because a good guyder the world tempers , doubte thou not all
thinges rightly orderd be . " {COM:verse_omitted}
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,90.463

<P_98>

<heading>

VII . PROSE . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,98.466

<$$heading>

" Doo yo=u= see now what all these thinges we haue told may get ? "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,98.468

" What is that ? " said I . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,98.469

" That all fortune may be good . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,98.470

" And how may that be ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,98.471

" Attend , " said she : " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,98.472

When euery fortune eyther plesing or hard be made eyther to exercise &
reward the good , or to punish & correcte the yll , it is euident that
all is a good cause that eyther is manifest to be iust or proffitable .
" BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,98.473

" I perceaue this reason to be most true , BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,98.474

and if I consider eyther prouidence or fate , that you haue afore tolde
, your opinion leanith I perceaue to steddyest ground .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,98.475

But let vs set her yf please yo=u= , among such as we haue supposed to
be out of men's opinions . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,98.476

" What is that ? " said she . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,98.477

" For the common speche of men deceaues itself ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,98.478

& oft supposith mens fortunes hard . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,98.479

Will ye haue me a little draw neere to the vulgarest opinions ? "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,98.480

" As it please yo=u= , " said I . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,98.481

" Doo yo=u= not suppose that to be good that avayles , <P_99> and such
thing as exercises or correctes , good therfore ? "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.482

" What els ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.483

" But these belong to those which eyther vertuous jarre against
aduersitie , or strayeng from vice takes vertues waye . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.484

" I can not deny it . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.485

" May the common peeple deny that the rewarde is not good that good men
haue ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.486

" No . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.487

For it must needes be the best . " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.488

" And what of all the rest ? BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.489

Will the common sorte think that that is not best that , tho it be sharp
, yet lymites wicked men by iust Payne ? " BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.490

" Yea , " quoth I . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.491

" I think that to be the most misery of all . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.492

Let vs beware lest following the common opinion we doo somthing vnawares
. BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.493

By this that we haue graunted we conclude that worsse is the state of
them that be eyther in the possibilitie , or in the aduaunce or
obtayning of vertue , and yet byde in their iniquitie . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.494

" This is true , " said I , " tho no man dare confesse it . "
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.495

" Wherfore , " said she , " so ought not a wise man beare with greefe ,
fortunes wrestell , as it becoms not a strong man to be mooued , when a
battell begyns . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.496

For the hardnes is argument for bothe , eyther to inlarge his glory , or
to confirme his witt . Wherby we call it force that stycking to his
owne strenght is not won by wo . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.497

For you cam not to vs in the aduancement of vertue , to make vs ouerflow
with delites , or drownd in pleasure , but that we should make a sharp
battell against all fortune , and that neyther the sowre oppresse yo=w=
, nor pleasant corrupt yo=u= ; BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.498

the middle waye with steddy force maynteyne yo=u= .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.499

For who so beneth this or beyond goes has but felicities contempte , no
trauells rewarde . BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.500

For in your hand it is what fortune yo=u= will frame you ,
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.501

for what so seemith sharpest eyther invres , correctes , or punishith .
BOETHEL-1593-E2-P2,99.502

