<BEGIN_boethco-1556-e1-p2>

<P_53>

<heading>

THE THIRDE BOKE . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,53.4

<$$heading>

BOECIUS . Nowe when Phylosophy had ended her songe , and that the
swetenes of her metyr had confyrmyd me beynge desyrous to heare wyth
open eares , and meruaylynge at her wordes I <paren> a lytle after
<$$paren> sayde . O phylosophye , whych art the very comforte of werye
myndes , howe much haste thou cheryshed me with the grauitie of thy
sentences , and with the pleasauntenes of thy syngynge . In_so_much
that I do thinke that fro~ henceforth , I am able to wythstand the
assaultes of fortune . Soo that the medycines that thou a lytell before
saydest were very sharpe , I do not onelye nothyng feare , but I beyng
very desyrous to here them , do vehemently or ernestlye often requyre
them . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,53.6

PHIL: I well perceyued the same , when thou being styll makynge no noyse
and herkenyng , receyuydest my wordes . And that I had expected or
reuocate the habite of thy mynde , that thou hast now , <paren> or that
is more true <$$paren> that I had perfyted the habite or maner of thy
mynde . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,53.7

And certes the residue of the thinges that do remayne be suche , that
when they be tasted , truely they do byte or be vnplesaunte .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,53.8

But when they be receyued inwardly : they taste swetely .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,53.9

But for by cause thou sayest thou art so desyrous to here them , Oh howe
muche wouldyste thou brene with desyre , yf thou knewest whether I wold
lede the . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,53.10

BOE: I saye , whyther wouldyste thou leade me .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,53.11

PHIL: To the trewe felycitie , that thy mynde dreameth of .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,53.12

But thy syghte beyng occupyed with fantasies and immagynations , that is
to saye : with temporall or worldely thynges : thou mayst not beholde
and loke vpon the same true and perfyt felycitie .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,53.13

<P_54>

BOE: Then come of BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,54.15

and shewe me I beseche the , without anye taryinge , whyche is the same
trewe felicitie . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,54.16

PHIL: I wyll doo it gladelye at thy request , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,54.17

but fyrst I wil go about to mark and appoynte out by my wordes , that
false felycytie , that is better knowen to the , that after thou haste
sene her , when thou hast turnyd thy eyes on the contrarye parte , that
is to saye : from false felicitie vnto trewe felicitie , thou mayst the
better knowe the similytude and beawtie of the same trew felicitie .
{COM:material_omitted} BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,54.18

<P_54>

BOECIUS . Then Phylosophy lokynge donnewarde a litle , and remembrynge
her selfe as one that had her wits to seke , or put vp into the narow
seate of her mynd , beganne to speake after thys maner .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,54.20

P. All y=e= cure of mortal folk howe manye maners of wayes soeuer they
do labour and trauell , yet they all do laboure <paren> althoughe it be
by dyuers and sondry meanes <$$paren> to come vnto one ende of felycitie
, or blessednes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,54.21

Truely that thynge is good <paren> whyche when a man hath obteyned it
<$$paren> that nothynge can be desyred ferther besydes it , which thinge
certes is the soueraygne good of all thynges , and contayneth in it
selfe all good thynges . <P_55> To the whych good thynge yf any thinge
shoulde be awaye or wantynge : it can@ @not be sufferaigne and perfyt
good , for by cause som thing is left behynd or forgotte~ that maye be
desyred . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.22

Therefore it appereth y=t= {COM:preceding_word_"y=t="_emended} felicitie
is a perfyt state by gatheryng together of all good thynges .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.23

The same perfytte state , or felicitie <paren> as I haue sayde <$$paren>
al me~ lyuynge do labor to optayne and gette dyuers wayes .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.24

For the desyre of felycitye or blessednes , is naturally plantyd in mens
myndes and hartes , but that wandryng error ledyth them out of the way
to false gods , that is to say : worldlye thynges , of the whyche men ,
some <paren> certes thynkyng that the perfytte felycitie and goodnes is
to haue nede of nothynge <$$paren> doo laboure to habounde in ryches .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.25

Other men <paren> iudging good that thyng , that is most worthy honour
<$$paren> do stryue to be honorable emongest their citizens and
neyghbours after they haue gotten honors . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.26

There be other that do determyne {SIC:dertermyne} that soueraygne
felycitye is in high power , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.27

and they them self will raygne or rule , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.28

or do laboure to be nere vnto suche as doo rule or raygne .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.29

But other to whome fame semeth perfytte felycitie and goodnes , do make
haste to optayne a gloryous name by feates of warre or armes , or by the
meanes of peace makyng . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.30

But many do measure the fruyte of perfytte felicitie , wythe myrth and
gladnes , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.31

that is to saye : doo thynke that perfytte felicitie standythe in ioye
and gladnes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.32

They do thynke it the most perfytte felicitie , to haue abou~dau~ce of
corporal pleasure . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.33

Also ther be some men that do chaunge or ioine the endes and causes of
thynges one wyth another , as they that do desyre to haue ryches , for
to haue power and pleasure BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.34

or they desyre power bycause they wold haue monye or fame and renoune .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.35

Soo in these thinges and suche lyke , the intente and purpose of all
mens actes , and desyres be occupied : as noblenes and fauoure of the
common people whych semeth to geue vnto all men a certayne glory and
prayse . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.36

And lykewyse wife and chyldren , that men desyre for the cause of
pleasure and myrth . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.37

But frendes which is the most holy thyng , may not be acountyd emonges
the goods of fortune , <paren> whych consysteth in wordly and tra~sytory
thynges <$$paren> but in vertu . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.38

But al the other thinges that cometh of fortune , be taken eyther for
the loue of offyce or power , or of pleasure , and delyghte .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,55.39

And truely it is mete to referre al goodes temporall , and transytorye ,
vnto y=e= other goodes of fortune , <P_56> abouenamed .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.40

For strength and gretnes of bodye semeth to geue powre : fayrenes and
swyftnes , to geue glory and prayse : and helthe of bodye , to geue
pleasure , and delyght . In all whych thynges it apperyth that
blessednes and felicytye is desyred . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.41

For that thynge that anye man requyreth or desyreth aboue all other
thynges , the same he iudgeth to be soueraygne good or felicitie .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.42

But I haue dyffyned that soueraygne good is perfyt felycitie .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.43

For euerye man demeth that state to be blessed , that he desireth aboue
other thynges . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.44

Therefore thou hast before thine eyes shewed and declared the proposed
fortune and maner of mannes felicitie , that is ryches , power , honour
, glorye and plesures , which thynges truelye the Epicurus onelye
considering and beholding , estemid co~sequentlye with hymselfe , that
plesure was soueraygne good or perfyt felycitie , forsomuch as all the
other thinges semyd to reioyse the harte and mynde , but none so much as
plesure , after hys iudgment . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.45

But now I returne againe to mens studyes and ententes , whose mynde and
harte sekethe soueraygne good or perfite felycitie , although it be with
an imperfette and dull memorye drownyd of worldely goodes , wandryng as
a dronken man that knoeth not whych way to go home to hys house .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.46

Seme they to erre and goo oute of the waye that labouryth to haue
ynoughe and to haue nede of nothynge ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.47

noo truelye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.48

Certes there is nothynge that more performeth and geueth blessednes then
a plenteous estate of al goods hauyng ynough hymselfe of his owne and
nede of none other mans , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.49

Do they erre from felycitie , that do thynke that thynge moste worthy
reuerence and honor y=t= is best ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.50

No truely : BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.51

For that thing is not vyle and to be dyspysed that the entente of all
men lyuyng <paren> almoste <$$paren> laboureth to optayne .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.52

Is not power , to be nombred in ryches ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.53

What ells ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.54

Is the thynge to be estemyd weke and feble without strength , that
semethe to be more worthye and stronger then all other thyngs ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.55

no truely . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.56

Is glory fame and renoune nothyng estemyd ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.57

no not so . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.58

For it can@ @not be denyed but that all thyng , that is most excellent ,
semythe to be moste gloryous , and clere . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.59

For it is manyfest that blessednes is not carefull and sadde , nor
subiect to doloures , and greifes , but full of pleasures and gladnes ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.60

what should a man say more when in the leste thynges that can be , some
thynge is desyred that delytethe a man to haue , and to enioye as hys
owne . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.61

And these be the thynges that menne woulde wisshe to haue ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,56.62

and for thys <P_57> cause they doo seke for and desyre ryches dignities
, rule , glory and pleasures , that by them they do thynke that they
shal haue suffisans , reuere~ce , power , renoune , fame , myrth , and
gladnes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,57.63

Therefore that thinge muste nedes be good , that men do aske and seke
for soo manye dyuers and sundrye wayes . In the which sekyng it is
lyghtly shewed , and euydentlye it apperyth , how great the power and
strengthe of nature is , that thoughe the sentences and iudgementes of
men be dyuerse one contrary to another : yet for@ @all that in louynge
and desyryng the ende of good and blessednes , they do agre and be of
one mynde and iudgemente . {COM:material_omitted}
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,57.64

<P_58>

Certes , O you erthly men , you do know vnperfetly or as it were in a
dreme , your owne begynnyng and the verye ende of true felicitie ,
although you do se it by a thynne or slender imagination or fantasye .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,58.66

And therfore your naturall intent and purpose ledeth you to the true
good or blessednes , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,58.67

and much error withdraweth you from the same . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,58.68

Consyder nowe than Boecius whether that men may com to that perfyt ende
and blessednes by such thyngs as me~ thought they shuld come by nature ,
that is to say , yf that ryches or honors and suche temporall thynges
can brynge a man anye suche thinge that hath suffisaunce and wantyth
nothynge at all . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,58.69

For then I wold thynke that some men were blessed and happye by
opteynyng of these foresaid thinges , that is to saye : that hath the
sayde goodes of fortune all_redye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,58.70

But and yf those thynges , that is to saye : worldely goodes can@ @not
do the things that they do promysse , and do wante muche goodes , Is not
then the kynde of false felicitie apprehended and known {SIC:knoen}
openly by them ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,58.71

Therefore I aske the Boecius fyrste of all <paren> whyche not longe agoo
diddest habound in riches <$$paren> whether that care dyd not trouble
thy mynde for euery wronge done emongest all those aboundaunt ryches .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,58.72

BOE: Certes I doo saye that I can@ @not remember that I was euer of so
quiet mynde , but that somethynge dydde alwayes greue me .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,58.73

PHIL: Dyddyst not thou {SIC:thon} want some thynge that thou woldest
haue had , or thou haddest so~thing that thou wouldest not haue hadde ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,58.74

BOE: I saye it is euen soo . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,58.75

PHIL: Then thou desyreddeste to haue the thynge that thou dyddest lack ,
and to lacke that thou haddest . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,58.76

<P_59>

BOE: I saye I do confesse no lesse . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.78

PHIL: Then there nedeth some thynge that euery man desyrethe , that is
to saye : Then euery man hath nede . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.79

BOE: I graunt that euery man laketh . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.80

PHIL: Then he that hath nede of anye thinge , is not thoroughly suffised
and contented . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.81

BOE: I saye the same . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.82

P. So then thou lackeddest suffisau~ce , when thou haddyst aboundaunce
of ryches . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.83

BOE: I saye what ells . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.84

PHIL: Then ryches can@ @not make a man haue Inough or to be contented ,
with {TEXT:whyche} that hee hathe , whyche was the thing that they semed
to promise . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.85

And certes this thing I do thynke cheifelye to be considered , that mony
by his owne nature and kynde hath nothynge that it can@ @not be taken
fromme theym that haue it , agaynste theyr wyll ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.86

that is to saye : that it hath nothyng in it , but may be taken away
whether they wyll or not that haue it . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.87

BOE: I do knowledge , that it is so . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.88

PHIL . Why shouldest thou not confesse it , when the stronger folke
takethe it awaye dayly , from the weaker against theyr wyll ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.89

For els whence commethe all these complayntes in courtes , but@ t_hat
mony is taken awaye , from folke agaynst theyr wyll , eyther by force or
by crafte and deceyte . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.90

BOE: I say it is soo . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.91

PHIL: Than euerye man shal haue nede of some outwarde helpe , whereby he
maye kepe hys monye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.92

BOE: Who wyl deny that . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.93

P. Certes he shuld haue no nede thereof , but for that he hath mony ,
that he maye lese . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.94

BOE: I say there is no doute thereof . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.95

PHIL: Therefore the matter of monye is otherwyse , the~ men do thinke it
is . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.96

For y=e= ryches that were thought to make men to haue suffisaunce and to
be contented , makethe theym rather to haue nede of other mennes helpe .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.97

What waye is there whereby indigence and nede maye be put away and
satysfied with riches ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.98

Canne not ryche men be hungerye ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.99

Canne not ryche men be thrystye ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.100

Doo the members and lymes of ryche men , fele no wynter colde ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.101

But thou wylte saye that ryche men haue Inoughe , to slacke theyr hu~ger
to quench ther thirst and to kepe them from cold .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.102

Certes by this waye nede and pouertie maye be eased by ryches .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.103

But it can@ @not be clene taken awaye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,59.104

For yf thys indigence and nede , alwayes gapyng and desyrynge riches ,
might be satisfied with riches , then it behoueth that there remayne and
be such a nede and indigence , that may be fulfylled and <P_60>
satysfyed . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,60.105

But I holde my peace BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,60.106

and wyll not tell that a lytell thynge suffyseth nature , but nothynge
is Inoughe or suffyseth couetuousnes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,60.107

Wherefore if ryches can@ @not put away indigence and nede , but doo
cause and make indigence and nede ? how may it be , that ye can beleue
that ryches geueth and bryngeth to any man ynough or suffysaunce .
{COM:material_omitted} BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,60.108

PHILOSOPHY . But , do dignities make him honorable and reuerend , that
hath them ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,60.109

Is there such vertue in dignyties , that they maye put vertues in the
mindes of them that haue dignities and expell vyce ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,60.110

Truelye they be not wonte to expell vyce and wyckednes , but rather to
augment the same . Wherefore I haue dysdayne that dignyties should so
often happen vnto wycked and vitious men . For whyche thinge Catulus
that was a vertuous wise ma~ in Rome <paren> Seinge Nonius a vicyous man
, syttinge in the place of dignitie and iudgmente <$$paren> called hym a
swellynge full of corruption <paren> that is to saye <$$paren> a man
hauynge an hepe of vyces , in hys breste . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,60.111

As the swellynge in the necke called Struma , is ful of
{TEXT:missing_"of"} corruption impostumed so was he full of vyce and
wyckednes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,60.112

Seyst thou not howe grete shame and vylanye dignities bryngeth to wicked
folke ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,60.113

Truelye the vnworthines or malyce of them shuld lesse appere , yf they
were not honored . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,60.114

O Boecius myghtist thou be brought to so greate perylles , that thou
wouldeste thynke or be contented to bere offyce or be felowe in offyce
with the man named Decorate , when thou sawest in hym the hart and mynde
of a wycked knaue and accuser of men ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,60.115

Certes I can@ @not iudge them , worthy reuere~ce for their honors , who~
I deem vnworthy to haue such honors . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,60.116

But yf thou sawest a man ful of wysdome , myghtest thou thynke him ,
vnworthy of reuerence , or of the wysdom that he hath ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,60.117

<P_61>

BOE: No truely . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.119

PHYLO: Certes dygnyties be properly incident to vertue .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.120

And vertue gyueth dygnyties anone to them , to whom dignities shal be
ioyned . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.121

And for bycause that honours , that the people do gyue to men , can not
make men worthye such honours : it appereth that honours haue no proper
beautie , or similitude of dignytie of it selfe . In whiche thynge the
same thynge aboue sayde , is to be consydered .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.122

For yf a man be so moche the lesse estemed , bycause he is dyspysed of
many ? When that dygnytie can not make euyll men reuerende : then
dygnitie maketh y=e= euil folke , be rather dyspraysed , then praysed ,
which disprayse dignytie sheweth to many . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.123

And truely not without a cause . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.124

For the wycked do reuenge them selfe vpon dygnytie , when they defowle
it , with theyr vilanye and wyckednes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.125

And that thou mayst knowe that the same trewe reuerence can not happen
to any man by these shadowy or transytorie dygnyties , vnderstande thus
. BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.126

If a man had vsed to haue moch dygnytie in the Co~sul_ship , and by
chau~ce come emongest straunge nacions , shulde his honoure of the
consull_shyp , make him to be honoured amongest the straungers ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.127

But and yf this honoure , were a naturall geste to dygnyties , they
myght neuer cease any where , amongest people fro~ doynge theyr offyce
and dutie , as the fyre in euery countrye neuer ceaseth to heate and
warme . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.128

But for bycause , to be reuerenced and honourable co~meth not to anye of
the proper nature and strength in it selfe , but mans false and vayne
opinion causeth it : anone when they come there vnto them that esteme
not the same dygnyties , theyr honours immedyatlye vanysshe awaye
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.129

and cease . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.130

But thou maist say , y=t= it is so amongest strau~ge nacions .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.131

Do not the dignyties endure alwaies amongest the~ , where they first
began ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.132

Understand no . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.133

Trulye the dygnyte of the prefectory , was somtyme a great power ,
amonge the Romaynes , which nowe is nothyng els , but a vayne name ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.134

and the dygnytie of the senatours , that somtime was estemed a hyghe
honoure is nowe a great burden or charge . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.135

And yf a man had the offyce to take hede of corne and other vytayle of
the people , he was taken for a greate man . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.136

Nowe what is lesse estemed then the said prouostship ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.137

Certes as I sayde a lytell before , the thynge that hath no proper
beawtye , or worshype of it selfe , receyueth some tyme renoune and some
tyme loseth renoune by meanes of the vsage of the thinge .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,61.138

If therefore dignities can@ @not <P_62> make men reuerende ? If by
their own meanes , they were foule , and by the vice of wicked folke ?
If they lose their bewtye and vertue by mutacion of tymes ? And if they
become detestable and foule , in mens estimacion ? what goodnes is in
them to be desyred , and can@ @not geue the same vnto other ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,62.139

vnderstand none at all . {COM:material_omitted}
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,62.140

PHILOSOPHY . Can kingdomes and the acquaintaunce or fauoure of kinges ,
make a man myghtye ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,62.141

He aunswerith himself in mockynge <paren> called Ironice <$$paren> what
elles , when that their power enduryth euer ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,62.142

But surely olde tyme past , and thys our present age , and tyme , is
full of examples y=t= kyngs haue chaungyd their felicitie , into sorowe
and calamyte . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,62.143

And phylosophye sayth agayne Ironice , O full noble and hyghe excellent
is that power , whyche is not founde sufficient ynoughe to preserue and
defend it selfe . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,62.144

And if the power of kynges be the cause of blessednes or felicitie , if
the same power faileth in any part , do it not diminisshe felicitye ,
and bryngeth in wretchednes and miserye ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,62.145

But yet although the empire , and rule of mankynde be spred very wyde ,
and brode , It behouethe that there be many people lefte , and
remaynynge , ouer whome euerye Kynge hath not dominion . So that , on
whatsoeuer syde , power wanteth , that shuld make men blysfull and
happye , on the same syde entreth weakenes or lacke of power that maketh
men wretches . So that by this meanes it must nedes be , that there is
in kynges more wretchednes and infelicite : then blessednes and
felycitie . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,62.146

A certayne Tyraunte that hadde experience of the peryll of his <P_63>
estate and fortune , dyd declare and shewe the feare and dreade of his
kyngedome by the terrours of a sworde hangynge ouer the heade of one of
hys famylyer frendes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.147

What is therefore this power that can@ @not put awaye the bytinge of
carefulnes , nor auoid the prickings of feare .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.148

Certes these kynges would fayne lyue safely and sure ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.149

but they ca~ not . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.150

Maye they therefore from henceforthe reioyse of theyr power ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.151

Doest thou iudge hym myghtye whom thou seyst would do that thynge that
he ca~ not do ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.152

Doest thou esteme him myghtye that hath many men of armes , aboute hym ?
That more fearythe them that feareth him ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.153

how semeth he mightye that is put in the handes of hys seruauntes ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.154

For what shal I say of them that be in the fauour of kynges , when that
I my selfe haue shewed the , that the same kyngedomes of themselfe be
vnsure and mutable . And that often tymes the power of kynges , when it
decayethe and fayleth , ouer_throweth such as it auaunsed whe~ it
flourished and was in prosperitie . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.155

Kynge Nero constrayned Seneke his familiar maister that taughte hym , to
chose what death he woulde dye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.156

Antonius , commaunded Papinion , that hadde bene longe a valiaunt man in
y=e= court , to be slayne with the swordes of knyghtes .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.157

And both of them , that is to saye : Senecke , and Papinion , would haue
forsaken and haue yelded vp their power and aucthoritie yf they myght .
Of the whyche two notable menne , Senecke labored to geue vnto Nero his
riches , to haue his fauour and to go himselfe into exile alone .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.158

But whyles that the same aucthoritie and power of kynges ruleth men
redye to fall , and in suche indignation , nether of them , that is to
saye : of Seneke and Papinion , myght do that he woulde .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.159

Therefore what is this power , whych when men haue it , that they be
aferde of ? whych whe~ thou wouldst haue it , thou art not suer of it ,
And when thou wouldest leue it , thou cannest not eschewe it .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.160

Be they more thy frendes at nede , that fortune , and not vertue getteth
? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.161

But surelye whome good fortune maketh thy frende , euyll fortune maketh
thine enemye and foe . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.162

And certes what pestylence is stronger to hurt , then a famylyer enemye
or so ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.163

Understand surely none at al . {COM:material_omitted}
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,63.164

<P_64>

PHILOSOPHY . But how deceyueable is glory ofte~tymes , whervpon <paren>
not withoute cause <$$paren> a certayne poete <paren> that vsed to make
dities <$$paren> cried oute and sayde . O glory glorye , emongeste
thousands of men , thou art nothyng ells but a great swellynge or
fillynge of mens eares . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,64.166

For certes manye men , haue receyued and had often grete fame , by the
false opinion of the people . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,64.167

And what thing may be thought more feble , then suche fame of the people
: BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,64.168

For they y=t= be praysed vnworthelye , ought to be ashamed of their
prayse , whyche prayses if they be iustly deserued , what thinge hath it
augmentyd to the conscience of a wise ma~ , that mesureth not his good
by the rumour of the people , but by the truth of hys conscience .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,64.169

And yf this thing be goodly to haue a fame spredde abrode , then is it a
consequence that it is a foul thinge to be kept close .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,64.170

And as I sayde a lytell before , that it muste neades be that there be
manye people , to whome the fame of one man can@ @not come , it foloweth
then that he whome thou estemest to be famous and renomed semeth not
gloryous nor famous , in the moste parte of the worlde .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,64.171

And truelye emongest these thynges , I do not thynke the fauour or
prayse of the people worthye to be remembred , that commeth not by wyse
and iuste iudgment , nor firmely endureth or continueth euer .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,64.172

Nowe truely , what man seith not how vaine and slipperie the name of
nobilitie and gentlesse is ? Whych if it be referred to glorye and
renoune of lynage , it is none of theirs that soo do glorye therin .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,64.173

For nobilitie or gentlesse semeth to be a certayne prayse , commynge by
the <P_65> deserts of their auncestoures {SIC:auncetoures} .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,65.174

And if laude and praysynge maketh nobilitie or gentelesse , then muste
they be nedes noble and gentyll , that be praysed .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,65.175

Therfore another mans glory , nobilitie , or gentelles , maketh not the
noble or gentle , yf thou haue no nobilitie or gentlesse of thy selfe ,
commynge by thine owne desertes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,65.176

But Certes yf ther be any good in noblesse or gentles , I thynke it
semeth to be as a thynge of necessitie ioyned to noblesse and gentles ,
that they do not degenerate or vary from the vertue of their noble , or
gentle progenitours and auncestours . {COM:material_omitted}
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,65.177

PHILOSOPHY . But what shall I saye of corporall plesures , the desire
whereof is full of carefulnes , and the satisfyenge thereof is ful of
payne and sorow , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,65.178

how great sycknes and intollerable dolours be these pleasures wonte to
brynge to the bodyes of suche as do vse them , as a certayne fruyte of
such wyckednes , of the whyche pleasures , what delectacion their
motions and effectes haue , I know not . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,65.179

For whosoeuer wil reme~ber hymselfe of his pleasurs , he shall well
knowe that the endes thereof be sorow_full and greuous . Whyche
pleasures temporall if they coulde make men blessed and happye , then is
there no cause but that brute beastes may also be called blessed , whose
hole intent and purpose , hasteth to fulfyll their bodelye plesure .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,65.180

The reioysynge also of wyfe and chyldren should be honest ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,65.181

but it is <P_66> said much agaynst nature and kynde , that some haue had
chyldren y=t= haue ben tormentors to their parentes ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,66.182

but I doo not knowe howe many of the whiche chyldren ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,66.183

howe bytynge and carefull euery conditio~ is , it is no nede to shewe
the , that hast proued it al_redy . Nor yet to moue the beinge carefull
nowe for the same . In whych thing I do allowe the sentens of my
dyscyple Euripydis that sayde , he is happye by mischaunce that hath no
chyldren . {COM:material_omitted} BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,66.184

PHILOSOPHY . Therefore there is no doughte but that these wayes , be
certayne bywayes vnto felicitie or blessednes and can@ @not brynge anye
man thyther as they do promisse to brynge the~ .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,66.185

But wyth howe great perylles and euyls , they be wrapped , I will shew
you shortlye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,66.186

Certes what thynge of these folowing is without peryll .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,66.187

Thou shalte not goo aboute to gather monye , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,66.188

but thou shalte take it awaye from some man that hathe it .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,66.189

If thou wouldeste shyne wyth dignities , thou must make peticion to hym
that geueth them ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,66.190

If thou desirest to excell others in honoure , thou makest thy selfe
subiecte , by humble askynge of them . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,66.191

If thou desire power : thou shalt be in daunger of beseging or layinge
in awayte of them that be inferiors to the ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,66.192

If thou aske glory , thou being troubled wyth euery aduersitie , ca~nest
not be quyet . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,66.193

And if thou woldest lede a voluptuouse lyfe , euery ma~ wold dispise the
and cast in thy teth , the thraldome and bondage of thy bodily actes ,
and dedes , most vyle and bryttell , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,66.194

that is to saye : that thou art a bondeman to the vile pleasures of thy
bodye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,66.195

Nowe than , they that desyre corporall goodes aboue them selfe , that is
to saye : aboue reason , <P_67> howe lytell and frayle possessyon do
they labour for ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,67.196

Cannyst thou excell the elephantes in greatenes , or the bulles in
strenghte ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,67.197

mayste thou surmou~t the tyger in swiftnes ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,67.198

loke vpon the space and compasse of the firmame~t the stedfastnes and
swyftenes thereof , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,67.199

and than cesse to wonder at these vile inferior worldly thinges . Whych
fyrmament certes is not rather to be wondred at for these thynges , but
for the self_same reson wherby it is gouerned .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,67.200

But how swyftly passynge away and transitorye and howe fletynge and more
swyfter fadynge awaye , is the beawty of the body , the~ y=e=
mutabilitie or chau~ge of the sommer flowers .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,67.201

And <paren> as Aristotle sayth <$$paren> if that men had eyes as quick
as a beast named Lynx , soo that their sighte myghte se thorowe or
penetrate the bodies that they doo see , shoulde not that bodye of
Alcibiades that was mooste fayre without fourthe , seme most foule
within to them that sawe y=e= in_trayles , or inner partes thereof ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,67.202

And so therefore thy owne nature causethe not the to seme fayre ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,67.203

but the wekenes of the eyes , that loketh vpon the , cawseth it .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,67.204

But esteme thou the goodes or fayrenes of the bodye as much as thou wylt
, so that thou doest knowe that the same goodes or fayrenes , whatsoeuer
it be that thou meruailest at , or so estemest , maye be dessolued and
clene take~ awaye , with the heate of a feuer , that lasteth but three
dayes . Of all whyche thyngs before sayd , a man may gather breyfely
that these worldely thynges , that can@ @not perfourme the goodnes that
they promes or seme to haue in the~ nor be yet perfytte by hepynge vppe
of goodes they <paren> I say <$$paren> be not as ways and pathes to
brynge men to felycitye and blissidnes , nor can make men happy or
blessed . {COM:material_omitted} BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,67.205

{COM:insert_helsinki_1}

<P_82>

BOECIUS . The~ said I , I graunt wel vnto Plato .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,82.208

For thou remembrest me the seco~d tyme of these thyngs .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,82.209

Fyrst y=u= remembrest me that I lost my memory , by the contagious
coniunction of the body and soule . And afterwarde when I was oppressed
wyth the bourden of my dolour and sorowe . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,82.210

PHIL: If thou beholde the thynges before graunted , it shall not be
farre of but thou shalt remembre the thyng that thou of late diddest
confesse , that thou knewest not . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,82.211

BOETIUS . What thinge was that ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,82.212

PHYLOSOPHY . By what gouernemente the worlde is gouerned .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,82.213

BOECIUS . I remember well that I confessed that I knewe it not ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,82.214

but althoughe I se now what thou purposeste , yet I desyre to here it
more plainely of the . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,82.215

<P_83>

PHIL: Thou thoughtest it no doughte , a lytle before that this worlde is
gouerned by God . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.217

BOE: Certes I thynke it no dought BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.218

nor neuer wyll , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.219

and I wil shew the shortly by what resones I am brought to it .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.220

Thys worlde colde neuer be brought into one forme of soo dyuers
contrarye partes , excepte that there were one that ioyned together such
dyuers thynges . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.221

And the same dyuersitie of nature so varieng one from another woulde
seperate and deuyde a sunder , the thynges that be ioyned together ,
except ther were one that held together the thing that he hath knyt
together . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.222

And the order of nature , shoulde not go fourth , so certainely , nor
shewe so ordinary mouinges , in places , times , effects {SIC:effect}
spaces , and qualities , except ther were one that remayned alwayes
stedefast , and dysposed and ordryd the same varieties and chaunges of
thyngs . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.223

And the same one whatsoeuer it be whereby al thynges that be made , do
remayne and be moued , I call God by a name that is commenly vsed of al
folke . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.224

PHIL: Then whyles thou art of that opinio~ , I think I haue lytle els to
do , but that thou beinge sure of felycytye and blessednes , mayst go se
thy countraye safe and sound . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.225

But let vs beholde the thynges that we purposed before .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.226

Haue I not nombred suffysaunce in felycitie and blessednes ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.227

And haue we not agreed that the same felicitie and blessednes is God ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.228

BOE: It is euen soo . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.229

PHIL: And that he shall nede no outward help to gouerne the worlde ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.230

For yf he shoulde nede , he shoulde not haue full suffysaunce .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.231

BOE: It must nedes be so . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.232

PHIL: Then he alone orderethe al thynges . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.233

BOE: It may not be denyed . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.234

PHIL: And that God is declared to be the same soueraygne good .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.235

BOE: I do wel remember it . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.236

PHIL: Then he dysposeth all thyngs by the same good .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.237

And if he who~ we haue agreed to be good , do rule al thynges , alone by
hymselfe then is he as a certaine key and sterne wherby the whole worlde
is kept stedefast and withoute corruption . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.238

BOE: I say I agre fyrmely thereto , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.239

and I sawe a lytle before <paren> that thou were aboute to saye so
<$$paren> althoughe it were by a sclender suspycion or imagynacion .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.240

PHI. I do beleue , and certes I do thynke thou ledest nowe thy eyes
more stedfastlye to beholde the truthe then before .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.241

But yet the thynge that I shall say , appereth no lesse to be bolde .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.242

BOE: I say what is that ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,83.243

PHIL: When it is beleued fully and truly that God gouerneth all thynges
wyth the keye of <P_84> his goodnes , and that all the same thinges that
I haue taught , do make haste by naturall intencion to come to good ,
maye it be doughted but they be gouerned wyllyngly ? And do turne them
self of ther fre wyl at the commaundement of there gouernor as thynges
conuenyent and obeying there gouernoure ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.244

BOE: I saye it muste nedes be soo , and that rule of God shoulde not
seme blessed , yf there shoulde be a yoke of vnruly thinges that draweth
peruersly backwarde , or stubbournelye , and no comforte of obedyent
thinges , submytting them selfe to good order .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.245

PHYLO: Then there is nothynge <paren> that kepeth his own nature
<$$paren> labourethe to resyste or go agaynste GOD .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.246

BOE: It is trewe . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.247

PHY: What and yf any thynge dyd laboure agaynste God ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.248

myght it any thynge auayle , at laste agaynst hym , whom we haue
graunted to be almyghtie by ryght of blyssednes ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.249

BOE: I say it could nothyng auayle him at all .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.250

PHY: Then is there nothyng that eyther wyll , or maye resyste this
soueraygne good ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.251

BOE: I saye , I thynke not that any thynge maye resyst God .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.252

PHY: Then it is the same soueraygne good , that ruleth all thynges
stronglye and dysposeth them gently . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.253

BOE: I say , the same wordes that thou vsyste , do moche more delyght me
, then the effect and ende of the reasons , that thou hast concluded ,
so that we fooles <paren> that do reprehende and rebuke some tyme great
thynges that toucheth goddes myghtie work <$$paren> may be at the last
ashamed of our folysshenes , as I that sayde a lytell before , that God
refuseth the workes of men , and nothyng medleth therwith .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.254

PHY: Thou haste harde in fables , that gyauntes haue ben aboute to
assaute heauen , but the gentle strength of God , hath deposed and
dystroyed them , as it was mete and worthy , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.255

but wylte thou that we knit togither the same resons ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.256

Perchaunce of suche conference , or dysputacion , some goodly sparke of
trueth may procede and appere . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.257

BOE: Do at your pleasure . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.258

PHY: No ma~ doughteth that God is omnipotent ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.259

BOE: No man doughteth it , that is in his ryght mynd .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.260

PHY: Then he that is almyghtie , can do al@ @thynges .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.261

BOE: It is trewe . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.262

PHY: May God do any euyll ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.263

BOE: No , truelye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.264

PHIL . Then euyll is nothinge when that he can@ @not doo it that canne
do all thynges . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,84.265

BOE: I saye doest thou mocke me weyuynge or knyttynge together a
meruaylous subtyle laborinth by thy reasons , that haue no ende lyke a
rounde compas , by the <P_85> whych subtill resons , thou goeste oute
where thou dyddeste enter , and where thou diddest enter or goo in ,
thou goeste oute ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,85.266

And thou foldyst together maruaylous compassyng rounde resons of the
symple or pure dyuinitie . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,85.267

For a lytel before thou begynnyng at blessednes saydeste that the same
was soueraygne good , which blessednes thou saydest was in God .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,85.268

And also thou saydest that God was soueraygne good and full of felycitie
, or blessednes , wherby thou dyddest proue as a corrolarye , or
conclusion that no man was blessed but God . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,85.269

And thou saydest also that the forme of good , is the substaunce of God
, and of blessednes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,85.270

And thou saidest that the same one thynge was the same good thyng , that
was desyred by nature of all thynges . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,85.271

And thou dyddeste proue that God ruleth all thynges by the gouernaunces
of hys bountiousnes , and that al thynges obeyeth hym , howe vyolent
soeuer they be , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,85.272

and thou saydeste that there is no nature of euyll .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,85.273

And thou dyddeste proue these thynges by no outewarde reasons , but by
proues takynge aucthoritie one thynge of another , and by inwarde and
proper or famylyer probation . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,85.274

PHI. Then I do not mocke saieth philosophy , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,85.275

but I haue shewed the , the greatest thing of all by the gyft of God ,
whome of late we prayed vnto . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,85.276

For certes suche is the forme of the diuine substaunce , that it falleth
and slydethe not into outward or straunge thynges nor receyueth any
outward or straung thynge into it selfe , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,85.277

but as the philosopher Permenides saith of the substau~ce of God . Thou
ledest all the multitude of thynges in a cyrcle ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,85.278

that is to saye : the deuyne substaunce turnyth the mouynge worlde of
thynges round lyke a compas whiles that the same substau~ce kepeth it
selfe stedfast and immouable . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,85.279

And if I haue stirred resons , not taken from without , but set within
the compas of the thynge that we treate of , there is nothynge that thou
shouldeste meruaile at since thou hast lerned with Plato <paren> saying
<$$paren> that the words ought to be conuenient and agreing to the
thinges , whereof they be spoken , or whereof men do speke .
{COM:material_omitted} BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,85.280

<P_88>

<heading>

THE FOURTH BOOKE . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,88.283

<$$heading>

BOECIUS . When Phylosophye <paren> after that she hade kept the
reuerence , of her countenaunce and grauitie of her spekyng <$$paren>
had songe these thynges softly and swetely . Then I <paren> that had
not vtterly forgotten my inwarde gryfe and sorowe <$$paren> dyd
interrupte her intent and purpose beyng yet redy to speke some other
thyng . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,88.285

And I sayd : O thou gyde and leder of the very true lyght or knoledge ,
euen the same thinges that thy owne wordes haue spoken hetherto , haue
appered vnto me inuincible , as@ @well for there deuine speculacion as
for thy resons . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,88.286

And the same very thinges that thou shewedst me , althoughe I had
forgotten them for sorow of the wronge that was done to me , yet for all
that they were not vnto me vtterly unknowen . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,88.287

But thys is the cheifeste cause of my greyfe and sorowe , that where as
the ruler of all thynges is good , why be there any euiles ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,88.288

or why do euiles passe vnponyshed ? Whyche thynge alone well consydered
, howe much is it worthy to be meruayled at ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,88.289

But yet ther is another greater thyng to be ioyned to thys , moreouer to
be meruayled at . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,88.290

For whiles that wickednes ruleth and flourysheth , vertue is not only
vnrewarded , but also subiect and troden vnder the fete of the wicked
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,88.291

and is ponyshed in stede of wicked offenders , whych thynges to be
suffered in the kyngdom of God that knoweth all thynges , able to do al
thinges , and willyng to do onely good thynges , no man maye thereat
nether meruayle ynoughe , nor complayne ynoughe .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,88.292

PHI. It shoulde be a greate infynite wonder and more horrible then all
the monsters of the world , if it were so as thou takest it , that euyl
men should be worshypped and that good men shuld be vyle or nothyng
estemed in the well_ordred <P_89> house of suche a father of the
howshold , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,89.293

but it is not so . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,89.294

For if those thynges that be concluded a lytell before , be kepte hole
or vnbroken , thou shalt knowe <paren> the same God of whose kyngedome
now I speake , beynge the aucthor <$$paren> that good me~ be alwais
mightye , and euyll men always abiect and vnmyghty or weke , and that
vyces be neuer vnponyshed , nor vertue vnrewarded , and that felicitie
and blessednes happeth to good folke , and myschaunces to wycked folke .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,89.295

And thou shalte knowe manye thynges of thys kynd which may strengthen
the with stedfaste sadnes , when thou haste put awaye thy complayntes ,
agaynst euill fortune . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,89.296

And for by cause thou haste sene the fourme of true blessednes or
felycitie , as I of late haue shewed the , and that thou haste knowen
wherein it is set , all thynges omytted and ouerpassed that I thynke
mete to omit and passe ouer , I wyll shewe vnto the , the waye that maye
brynge the home , to the knowledge of true blessednes and felicitie .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,89.297

And I wyll fasten fethers or resones in thy mynde , wherby it may ryse
vp in helth , so that after thou hast cast awaye all trouble of worldly
and temporall thynges , thou mayst reuert and turne into thy countrye
safe and sounde , by my leding , by my path way and by my steppes .
{COM:material_omitted} BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,89.298

<P_90>

BOECIUS . Then when Phylosophy had ended her tale , I sayde . O
Phylosophy thou promisest gret thinges BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,90.300

and I dought not but thou mayst perfourme them .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,90.301

And I praye the tarye not BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,90.302

but tell me now , seing thou haste styrryd me to here .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,90.303

PHI. Fyrst it behoueth the to knowe that good men be myghty , and
wycked men be alwaies vnmyghtye and weke of all strength , of the whych
the one is shewed by the other . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,90.304

For when that good and euyll be thynges contrary , yf good appereth to
be myghty and stronge , then the wekenes of the euill is manifest .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,90.305

And when the frayltie of euyll shewethe it selfe , then the stedefastnes
of good is perceyued . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,90.306

But to th@ @intent that more credite shoulde be geuen to my saying , I
will procede by both wayes <paren> confyrmynge the thynges that be
proposed <$$paren> BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,90.307

now on the one parte , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,90.308

and nowe the th@ @other parte . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,90.309

There be two thynges or pryncyples , wherin standeth th@ @effect of all
menes actes and dedes , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,90.310

that is to saye : wyl , and power . Of the whych if eyther of them
fayle , there is nothynge that can be done . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,90.311

For if that wyl fayleth none effect is <P_91> done .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.312

For no manne taketh in hand to doo the thynge that he will not do .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.313

And if power be away wyll is in vayne or voyde , whereby it commeth to
passe that yf thou see anye man that would obtayne , that he can@ @not
get , thou mayst not dought , but he wanteth power , to haue that he
wold haue . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.314

BOE: It is verye clere BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.315

and maye not be doughted in any maner . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.316

PHIL: Truelye yf thou se anye man to haue done that he woulde doo ,
doubtest {SIC:doughest} thou that he lacked power to do it .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.317

BOE: No . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.318

PHIL: Than that thing that a man maye doo , in that thynge , he is
myghtye , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.319

and in that thynge that he can@ @not do , he is to be iudged vnmyghtye
and weke . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.320

BOE: I saye I confesse the same . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.321

PHIL: Remembrest thou by the former resones , that it is gathered or
concluded , that al th@ @entent of mans wyll maketh hast or tendeth vnto
felicitie or blessednes , whyche is ledde by dyuers studies or wayes .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.322

BOE: I saye I do remember that the same was so shewed and declared
before . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.323

PHY: And doest thou remember that the same felycitie or blessednes is
the same good , and after the same maner desyred , of all men when
felicitie is requyred ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.324

BOE: I saye I doo not recorde it , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.325

for I holde it fired in my mynd or memory . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.326

PHIL: Then all men both good and also euyll doo laboure to come to good
without any difference of intent . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.327

BOE: I say the same , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.328

it is a very consequence . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.329

PHI. Then it is certayne that men be made good by adoption or
optaynynge of good . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.330

BOE: It is true . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.331

PHIL: Then good men do optayne the thynge that they do desyre .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.332

BOE: So it semeth . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.333

PHIL: Then truely if euel men should get and obtayne the good that they
do desyre they myght not be euil . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.334

BOE: It is euen so . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.335

PHIL: Then when that both the good and the euyll folke desyreth good ,
yf the good folke obtayneth the good and the euil folke do not , Is it
nowe anye doughte but that the good folke be myghty , and the euill
folke weke and vnmyghtye ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.336

BOE: I saye whosoeuer doughteth of thys , can@ @not consyder the nature
of thyngs , nor the consequence of reson . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.337

PH: And farther if there be two that haue one naturall purpose or intent
, and the one of them worketh and perfourmethe the same thynge by offyce
of nature or naturallye , and the other may not do the same by naturall
offyce , or naturallye , but foloweth hym that perfourmeth the offyce
naturallye , but yet by a nother wayes , or meane , then is conueniente
for nature , and dooeth not fulfyll or perfourme the purpose , whych of
these two iudgest thou to be mooste myghtye ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,91.338

BOECIUS . Althoughe I do coniecture <P_92> what thou wouldeste saye ,
yet I desyre to heare it moore fullye of the .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.339

PHIL: Then , wilt thou denye that the mouing to walke or go is in men by
nature , or that it is not naturall ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.340

BOE: I do saye I do not denye it . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.341

PHILO: Then , doughtest thou that the acte of going is the naturall
offyce of the fete ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.342

BOE: I saye I dought it not . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.343

PHIL: Then if a man beynge myghtye to go vpon his fete walketh , another
that lacketh the naturall offyce of hys fete laboureth to go vpon his
handes , which of these may iustelye be iudged more strong or myghtye .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.344

BOE: I saye procede in thy other sayinges , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.345

for noo man doughteth but that he that maye go by naturall offyce of hys
fete , is stronger , then he that maye not do the same .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.346

PHIL: Even soo the soueraygne good before spoken of is shewed
indifferently , as wel vnto the euyll folke as to the good folke ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.347

but the good doo optayne it by the naturall offyce of vertue ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.348

and the wycked folke do enforce themselfe to get it by sundry couytous
desyres of temporall and worldly thinges , whyche is not the naturall
offyce or meane to obteyne good . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.349

Doist thou thynke it otherwyse ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.350

BOE: No truely BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.351

for the thyng , that is the consequence is manyfest ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.352

And of these thinges that I haue graunted , it is necessarye , that good
folke be myghtye and euyll folke vnmyghtye and weake .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.353

PHIL: Thou sayest right , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.354

and it is a sygne or iudgement that nature is recouered in the and
resisteth the dyssease , as the phisicions be wonte to hope of the
paciente and sycke folke . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.355

But for by cause I see the redy to vnderstand , I shall shewe the diuers
and many sundry reasons . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.356

For see howe gretely the wekenes of wycked and euyll folke appereth that
can@ @not attayne vnto the thynge that ther natural intencyon ledeth ,
and in a maner almost compelleth the~ . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.357

And what yf that the same wycked folke shoulde lacke this so grete and
al_most inuyncible helpe of nature . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.358

Consider also how lytle power the wycked folke hath ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.359

for they seke not lyght and vayne rewardes , whych they can not folowe
and obtayne . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.360

But they fayle BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.361

and can@ @not attayne the cheyfest and hyest thynges that is to saye
soueraygne good , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.362

nor these wycked wretches , can gette the effecte of soueraygne good ,
whyche they go aboute onely to obtayne night and daye , wherin the
myghte of good folke doth appere . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,92.363

For certis , as thou woldest iudge hym moste myghtie and stronge in
goynge , that may come to the place in going on his feet , beyonde the
which place there lyeth no way farther to go : <P_93> euen so it
behoueth that thou do iudge hym , moste stronge and myghtie , that
optayneth the end of al thynges that be to be desired , beyonde whiche
ende , there is nothyng : whych ende , good folke doe optayne , whereby
it foloweth that ther is a thyng contrary to this , that is to saye :
that these wycked seme to be desolate , naked , or voyd of all strength
. BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.364

But why do the wicked folke folowe wyckednes and forsake vertue ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.365

is it for that they be ignoraunt of good thinges ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.366

But what is more feble then the blyndnes of ignoraunce ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.367

Do the wycked know that good is to be folowed ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.368

ye truely , but that couitousnes , ouerthroweth them being clene turnyd
fro~ good . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.369

And they be also frayle by intemperaunce of vice , that can@ @not resist
vyce , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.370

and whether they <paren> knowynge and wyllyng <$$paren> do forsake the
good and be turned vnto vyces ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.371

Ye truely , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.372

And by thys meanes they cesse not onelye to be myghtye and stronge ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.373

but also they cesse vtterly to be . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.374

For they that forsake the ende of al thynges that be , do cesse also to
be , or haue no beinge , whych thyng perchaunce should seme to some man
a meruayle , that I shuld say that wycked folke <paren> whyche be the
most part of men <$$paren> be not , or haue no beynge .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.375

But it is euen soo . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.376

For they that be wycked <paren> I doo not denye <$$paren> but that they
be wycked , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.377

but I denye that they be pure and symple . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.378

For as thou hast called a dede man a Corpus or carkes , and maye not
call hym simply and purely a man , euen soo haue I graunted that vicious
and wicked folke be wycked , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.379

but I can@ @not confesse that they be absolutely with_out any dyuersitie
as they were before they were vicious . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.380

For the thinge that kepeth order , kepeth nature ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.381

and is styll as it was , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.382

but the thing that varyeth from order and nature , forsaketh the thyng
that is set in his nature {SIC:natur} . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.383

But thou wilt say that wycked folke may do things :
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.384

Certes I wyll not deny , but that they may do .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.385

But I say that their power , commeth not by strength , but by wekenes .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.386

For they may doo euyll thynges which they might not do if they might
remayne in the workes of good folke , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.387

And the same possybylitie or power of euyll folke , shewethe euidentlye
that they maye do ryght nought . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.388

For as I haue gathered and proued a lytle before that euyll is nought or
nothyng , whe~ that the euyll folke may onely do euil , It appereth a
playne conclusion , that euyll folke may do ryght nought , and haue no
power or myghte . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.389

BOETI: It is playne soo . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,93.390

PHILO: Then , that thou mayst vnderstand what is the strengthe of this
power , <P_94> that y=e= wycked may do nought , I haue defyned and
determyned a lytel before that nothynge is more myghty then soueraygne
good . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.391

BOE: I saye it is so . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.392

PHIL: But y=e= same soueraygne good can do no euyll .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.393

BOE: No forsoth . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.394

PHIL: Then is there any man that thynketh that men can do all thynges .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.395

BOE: No man so thinketh , except he be mad . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.396

PHIL: But yet wycked folke may do euyll . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.397

BO. I say would to God they coulde not . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.398

PHIL: Now then when that he that is myghtye in good thynges may doo all
thynges , but they that be myghtye in euyll thynges , maye not do al
things , It is manyfest that they that may do euyl , may do lesse or be
of lesse power . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.399

And soo it commethe to passe to proue thys conclusion , that I haue
shewed before , that is , that all power is to be numbred emongest
thynges that are to be desyred . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.400

And all thynges y=t= ought to be desired , are referred vnto good , that
is to say , vnto God , as vnto a certayne perfection of theyr nature .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.401

But the power or possibilytye to doo euyll , may not be referred vnto
good , that is to say , to God . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.402

Therfore euyll is not to be desyred . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.403

But all power is to be desyred . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.404

So therfore it appereth that the power of the wiked folk , is no power .
By all whyche thynges before sayde , it appereth truely , that good
folke be myghty , and wycked folke withoute any dought , be vnmyghtye
and weake . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.405

And it appereth that the same sentence or sayinge of Plato , is true ,
that sayd , that wyse men onely might do the thing that they desyred to
doo . And that wycked folke myght doo the thyng , that accordeth to
ther wycked pleasures , but they can@ @not fulfyll and do the thyng ,
that they desyre , that is to say , they can@ @not obtayne soueraign
good , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.406

yet they do all thynges , whyles they do thynke to attayne vnto the
soueraygne good that they desyre , by those thynges wherein they delite
, BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.407

but they can@ @not attayne therevnto . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.408

For wyckednes can@ @not optayne and come vnto felicitie and blessednes .
{COM:material_omitted} BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,94.409

<P_95>

PHILOSOPHY . Seist thou not than in howe greate fylth the wycked folke
be wrapped , and with what clerenes the good folke do shyne . In whych
thynge it is euydent and manyfest that good folke neuer want reward ,
nor wicked folke neuer lacketh there ponyshmentes .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,95.411

For of all thynges that be done , the thynge for the whych euery thynge
is done , the selfe_same thynge , semethe wel to be the reward of the
same thing . As yf a man do run {SIC:ren} in a furlonge space for a
crowne , the crowne is y=e= reward for the whych the rennynge is .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,95.412

And in like maner I haue shewed before , that felicitie or blessednes is
the selfe_same thynge ; for the whyche all thynges be done .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,95.413

Then is the same good , appoynted as a common rewarde for mannes actes
and dedes , whyche good , maye not be separated from good folke .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,95.414

And he shall not be called ryghtfully good , that lacketh goodnes ,
wherefore men well-manered <P_96> and vertuous , neuer loseth their
rewardes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.415

Therefore howe muche soeuer wycked folke waxe mad agaynste good folke ,
yet for al that the wyse man shall neuer lose his crowne or reward ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.416

nor shal drye vp or dymynyshe . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.417

Nor another mans wyckednes taketh not awaye the proper honoure frome
good folke . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.418

And yf good folke should reioyse of any outewarde good that they haue
receyued of anye other then of themselfes , truly he that gaue them such
goodnes , or some other person myght take it from them .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.419

But for_asmuch as to euery man his owne proper goodnes is his rewarde
then euery man shall lacke his reward , when he cesseth , and is not
good . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.420

Furthermore when that all reward , therefore is desyred , bycause it is
thought to be good who would iudge that he had noo rewarde , that is
good ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.421

But what is the rewarde of good folke ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.422

Truely the fairest and gretest rewarde . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.423

But remember the same corrolarye or conclusyon that I gaue the as cheife
a litle before , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.424

and vnderstand it thus . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.425

When y=e= sayd good is felicitie or blessednes , it appereth that all
good folke <paren> in_as_muche as they be good <$$paren> be made blessed
or happye . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.426

And it behoueth that they that be blessed , be goddes .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.427

Therefore the reward of good folke : is to be made goddes , whiche
rewarde , no daye consumeth , no power diminissheth {SIC:dimnissheth} ,
and no wickednes defaceth . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.428

And synce it is thus that good folke neuer fayle of reward , then a wyse
man may not doughte of the contynuall and inseperable payne of wycked
folke . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.429

For when that good and euyll , payne and rewarde , be contrarye one to
another , then the things that we se to happen as a rewarde of good ,
the same thynges beyng contrarye must nedes be the ponyshmente of the
euyll folke . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.430

For as goodnes is the rewarde of good folke , soo wyckednes is the
ponyshmente of wicked folke . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.431

Nowe certes whosoeuer is tormentid with ponyshment , there is no dought
but that he is tormented wyth euyll . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.432

Therefore if the same euyll folke will esteme and praise themselfe , may
they seme to be without ponishme~t : which euyl folke not onely extreme
wyckednes of all euyll trobleth , but also corrupteth vehemently .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.433

And se also of the contrarye part of the good folke , what payne
folowethe the wycked folke . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.434

For thou hast lerned a litle before that euery thyng that is , is one .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.435

And the same one , is good , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.436

so the consequence to the same is , that euery thing that is certes the
same semethe to be good . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,96.437

Therefore by this means , what soeuer thynge fayleth and is <P_97> not
good , it cessyth to be , or it is not . Whereby it comethe to passe
that euyll folke cesseth to be the same that they were .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,97.438

But the same other fourme of manes body sheweth yet that wycked folke ,
haue bene men , and certes beyng turnyd into malyce or wyckednes , they
haue lost the nature of man . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,97.439

But whe~ that goodnes onely may exalte euerye man aboue the nature of
men : It must nedes be , that wycked folke <paren> whose wyckednes hath
cast them oute from the condicion of man <$$paren> do put them vnder the
merite of man or cause them to be lesse estemed then men .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,97.440

Therefore it happeth that if thou seist anye man turned into vices or
wickednes , thou mayst not thinke that he is a man .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,97.441

If any man brenneth in couitous and is a violent extorcioner or rauener
of other mennes goodes , thou mayst saye that he is lyke a woulfe .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,97.442

And if a man be cruel , and troubelous , and exercyseth hys tounge with
chydyng he may be lykened to a dogge . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,97.443

Also he that is a pryuye lyer in a waye , and reioyseth to stele by
craft and soteltie , he may be compared to yong foxes , or yong coubbes
. BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,97.444

And a man that is distempryd , and wexeth wode for anger , it semeth
that he do beare the stomake of a lyon . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,97.445

If a man be fearefull and fleynge , and feareth thynges that he ought
not to fere he is counted lyke vnto hertes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,97.446

And if a man be slow , astonyed and waxethe dull , he lyueth as an asse
. BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,97.447

If a man be lyght inconstant and often chaungeth his mynd and thought ,
he differith no thynge from byrdes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,97.448

And he that is drowned in foule and fylthy plesures , of lechery , is
wrapped in the delight of the fylthy sow or hogge .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,97.449

So then it foloweth , that he that forsaketh his goodnes , is no man .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,97.450

And when he can@ @not passe and turne into the condytyon of God , he is
turnyd by his wycked condicions into a beste . {COM:material_omitted}
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,97.451

{COM:insert_helsinki}

<P_103>

BOECIUS . By this I do perceyue what felycytie , or blyssednes is in
the desertes of good folke , and of wycked folk .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,103.454

But in this commen fortune of the people , I doo conceyue that therein
is some good or euyll . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,103.455

For no wise man hadde leuer be a banisshed manne , nedye , poore , and
shamefull : then to be full of riches , reuerende <P_104> in honoure ,
stronge in power , and to dwell styll in his Cytie , and florysshe in
welth . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,104.456

So certes after this maner , that is to say : by riches honour and power
, the offyce of a wyse man , is estemed more clere , and more assured of
wysdom , then when felycytie or blyssednes of gouernours or rulers , is
scatered or deuyded , as it were emonges the comme~ people next
adioynynge as subiectes . Sythe that namely pryson , lawe , and other
tormentes of lawefull paynes , do rather appertayne vnto myschiuous
cytisens for whome they were ordeyned , then for good folke .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,104.457

Therfore I do greatly maruayle , why these thynges folowyng be turnyd
clene contrarye , that is to saye : that ponyshmentes of wycked folke ,
do oppresse good folke . And that the wycked folke , do beare awaye the
rewardes of vertue , that is to say , why they be exalted to honor and
high {SIC:his} estate . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,104.458

And I desyre to lerne of the what thou thynkeste to be the reason of
suche a wrongfull confusion . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,104.459

For I woulde lesse meruail yf that I thought that al thynges were myngyd
together with chaunce of fortune . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,104.460

But now God the gouernoure of all thynges incresethe my meruaylynge ,
syth that he geueth often tymes plesaunt thynges to good folke , and
sharpe thynges to euil folk : and contraryewyse he geuethe harde thynges
to good folke , and to wycked folke theyr desyres , except the cause be
knowen what difference is betwene goddes doynges , and fortunes chaunces
. BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,104.461

PHILOSO. It is no meruayle at all thoughe people thinketh that there is
somethinge folishe and confuse {COM:sic} , when the reason of Gods
ordynaunce is not knowen . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,104.462

But althoughe thou knowest not the cause of so grete a disposition , yet
doute thou not but all thynges be well gouerned , for_asmuche as god the
good gouernor , attempereth and gouerneth the world vnyuersall .
{COM:material_omitted} BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,104.463

{COM:insert_helsinki}

<P_113>

PHILOSOPHYE . Seist thou not nowe what foloweth all these thynges that
I haue sayd ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,113.466

BOE. I say what thinge foloweth ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,113.467

PHI. All fortune is good without dout . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,113.468

BOE. And how can it be soo . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,113.469

PHI. Vnderstande thus , that all fortune whether it be good or <P_114>
euyll is geuen either to rewarde or exercyse good folke , or for th@
@intente to ponyshe and correcte euyll folke .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.470

And so all fortune is good that appereth eyther to be iuste or
profytable . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.471

BOE. I saye it is a verye true reason . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.472

And yf I do consider the prouidence of god , or destinye whych thou
taughtest a lytle before , thy sentence is knyt together with stronge
resons . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.473

But let vs <paren> if it please the <$$paren> nomber this opinion or
sentence , emongest those thynges that thou diddest allege a lytle
before , were not to be thought of any man . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.474

PHI. And wherefore . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.475

BOE. For that the commen speche of men dothe muche mystake the talke of
fortune , saying often that some mens fortune is very euyll .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.476

PHI. Wylt thou therefore that I returne a lytle to the speche of the
commen people , so that I seme not to digresse ouermuch from the vse of
the people . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.477

BOE. I saye do as it shall please the . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.478

PHI. Dost thou not iudge all thyng good that profyteth .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.479

BOE. Yes . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.480

P. The fortune that dothe exercyse or correct , doth good .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.481

BOE. I saye I graunt the same . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.482

PHI. Then is al fortune good . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.483

BOE. What ells ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.484

PHILOSO. But this fortune that exerciseth , is the fortune of such that
be sette in vertue and do stryue agaynst vyce :
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.485

but fortune that correcteth , is of suche that declyning from vyce , do
chose and take the way of vertue . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.486

BOE. I can@ @not denye it . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.487

PHILOSOPHI . But what sayest thou , of plesaunte fortune , that is
geuen to good folke for rewarde , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.488

doo the comme~ people iudge the same wicked fortune ?
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.489

BOE. No truelye , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.490

but iudgeth it good , as it is in dede . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.491

P. What sayest thou of the other fortune that is euyll and sharpe , and
restrayneth wicked folke by iuste ponyshment ,
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.492

do the commen people esteme it good . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.493

BOE. I saye that they do iudge the same most wretched of all thynges
that maye be thoughte . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.494

PHI. Take hede therefore lest that we folowynge the opinion of the
commen people , haue not concluded a thyng gretely , not to be thought
of them . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.495

BOE. What is that . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.496

P. Certes of these thinges that are graunted it fortuneth that of them
that be other in professing of vertue , or in th@ @encrease of vertue ,
or in optayning of vertue , al maner of fortune <paren> what souer it be
<$$paren> is good . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.497

But all maner of fortune is euell to them that remayne in wickednes ,
whych thing the commen people do not so iudge and take it .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.498

BOE. That is true , although no man dare confesse the truth there of .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.499

PHI. Why so ? BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,114.500

A wyse man ought not to be greued , whe~ misfortune happeth no more then
a strong man {COM:ought} to disdaine or to be moued <P_115> with angre ,
when alarum or tumult of warre ryseth . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,115.501

For to bothe , the same difficultie to stryue agaynst fortune , is the
matter , that is to saye : to the one whych is the strong man it is a
cause to optayne renown {SIC:renome} , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,115.502

to the other , which is the wyse man , it is a cause to confyrme hys
wisedom or vertue . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,115.503

For therefore it is called vertue , by cause it , stryuing agaynst vice
, with all force , is not ouercome wyth vyce or aduersitie .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,115.504

Nor certes you that be set in the increase or waye of vertue haue not
come to abounde in pleasurs and to continue in lustes of the fleshe .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,115.505

For then you do sowe and plant a verye sharpe conflyct or battell , with
all fortune . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,115.506

Therfore lest that eyther wicked fortune opppresse you , or good fortune
corrupte and hurte you , hold you the meane betwene both with fyrme ,
and stedefast power and strength . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,115.507

For certes al that is vnder the mene vertu or passeth the meane vertue ,
dispiseth vertue , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,115.508

or is vicious , BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,115.509

and hath no rewarde of his trauell or laboure .
BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,115.510

For it lyeth in your owne power , what fortune you had leuer haue , that
is to sai : to take what fortune ye wyll . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,115.511

For all fortune that semeth sharpe or euyll <paren> yf it do not
exercyse the good folke , or correct and chastyce the wicked folke
<$$paren> it greueth or ponysheth . BOETHCO-1556-E1-P2,115.512

