<BEGIN_boylecol-1664-e3-p2>

<P_139>

<heading>

EXPERIMENT IV . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,139.4

<$$heading>

But yet I much Question whether that Rule delivered by divers , as well
Philosophers as Chymists , <font> adusta nigra , sed perusta alba
<$$font> , will hold as Universally as is presum'd , since I have
several Examples to allege against <P_140> it :
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,140.6

For I have found that by burning Alablaster , so as both to make it
appear to boyl almost like Milk , and to reduce it to a very fine Powder
, it would not at all grow Black , but retain its Pure and Native
Whiteness , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,140.7

and though by keeping it longer than is usual in the fire , I produc'd
but a faint Yellow , even in that part of the Powder that lay nearest
the top of the Crucible , yet having purposely enquired of an
Experienc'd Stone-cutter , who is Curious enough in trying Conclusions
in his own trade , he told me he had found that if Alablaster or Plaster
of Paris be very long kept in a Strong fire , the whole heap of burnt
Powder would exchange its Whiteness for a much deeper Colour than the
Yellow I observ'd . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,140.8

Lead being Calcin'd with a Strong fire turns <paren> after having
perhaps run thorough divers other Colours
{COM:preceding_word_"Colours"_emended} <$$paren> into <font> Minium
<$$font> , whose Colour we know is a deep Red ;
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,140.9

and if you urge this <font> Minium <$$font> , as I have purposely done
with a Strong fire , you may much easier find a Glassie and Brittle Body
darker than <font> Minium <$$font> , than any white <font> Calx <$$font>
or Glass . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,140.10

'T@ @is known among Chymists , that the white <font> Calx <$$font> of
Antimony , by the further and more vehement operation of the fire may be
melted into Glass , which we have obtained of a Red Colour , which is
<P_141> far deeper than that of the <font> Calx <$$font> of Burnt
Antimony , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,141.11

and though common Glass of Antimony being usually adulterated with Borax
, have its Colour thereby diluted , oftentimes to a very pale Yellow ;
yet not onely ours made more sincerily , was , as we said , of a Colour
less remote from Black , than was the <font> Calx <$$font> ;
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,141.12

but we observ'd , that by Melting it once or twice more , and so
exposing it to the further operation of the Fire , we had , as we
expected , the Colour heightned . To which we shall add but this one
Instance , <paren> which is worth the taking notice of in Reference to
Colours : <$$paren> That , if you take Blew , but Unsophisticated ,
Vitriol , and burn it very Slowly , and with a Gentle degree of Heat ,
you may observe , that when 't@ @is Burnt but a Little , and yet so far
as that you may rub it to Powder betwixt your fingers , it will be of a
White or Whitish Colour ; BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,141.13

But if you Prosecute the Calcination , this Body which by a light
Adustion was made White , will pass through other Colours , as Gray ,
Yellowish , and Red ; BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,141.14

and if you further burn it with a Long and Vehement fire , by that time
it comes to be <font> Ferustum <$$font> , it will be of a dark Purple ,
nearer to Black , not only than the first <font> Calx <$$font> , but
than the Vitriol before it at all felt the fire .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,141.15

I might add that <font> Crocus <P_142> Martis <$$font> <paren> <font>
per se <$$font> as they call it <$$paren> made by the Lasting violence
of the Reverberated flames is not so near a_Kin to White ; as the Iron
or Steel that afforded it was before its Calcinations ;
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,142.16

but I suppose , that {SIC:that_I_suppose} these Instances may suffice to
satisfie you , that Minerals are to be excepted out of the forementioned
Rule , which perhaps , though it seldome fail in substances belonging to
the Vegetable or Animal Kingdome , may yet be Question'd even in some of
these , if that be true , which the judicious Traveller <font> Bellonius
<$$font> affirms , that Charcoales made out of the Wood of <font>
Oxycaeder <$$font> are White ; BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,142.17

And I could not find , that though in Retorts Hartshorn and other White
Bodies will be Denigrated by Heat , yet Camphire would not at all lose
its Whiteness , though I have purposely kept it in such a heat , as made
it melt and boyl . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,142.18

And to manifest , <font> Pyrophilus <$$font> , that Galls are not so
requisite as many suppose to the making Attamentous Liquors , we have
sometimes made the following Experiment , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,142.19

We took dryed Rose leaves BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,142.20

and Decocted them for a while in Fair Water , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,142.21

into two or three spoonfulls of this Decoction we shook a few drops of a
strong and well_filtrated Solution of Vitriol <paren> which perhaps had
it been Green would have done as well <$$paren>
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,142.22

and immediately the <P_143> mixture did turn Black ,
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,143.23

and when into this mixture presently after it was made , we shook a just
Proportion of <font> Aqua Fortis <$$font> , we turn'd it from a Black
Ink to a deep Red one , which by the affusion of a little Spirit of
Urine may be reduc'd immediately to an Opacous and Blackish Colour .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,143.24

And in regard , <font> Pyrophilus <$$font> , that in the former
Experiments , both the Infusion of Galls , and the Decoction of Roses ,
and the Solution of Copperis employ'd about them , are endow'd each of
them with its own Colour , there may be a more noble Experiment of the
sudden production of Blackness made by the way mention'd in the Second
Section of the Second Part of our Essays , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,143.25

for though upon the Confusion of the two Liquors there mention'd , there
do immediately emerge a very Black mixture , yet both the Infusion of
<font> Orpiment <$$font> and the Solution of <font> Minium <$$font> were
before their being joyn'd together , Limpid and Colourless .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,143.26

<heading>

EXPERIMENT V . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,143.28

<$$heading>

And now I speak of Camphire , it puts me in mind of adding this
Experiment , That , though as I said in Clos'd Glasses , I could not
Denigrate it by Heat , but {COM:sic} it would Sublime to the sides and
top of the Glass , <P_144> as it was before , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,144.30

yet not only it will , being set on fire in the Free Air , send forth a
Copious smoak , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,144.31

but having purposely upon some of it that was Flaming , clapt a Large
Glass , almost in the form of a Hive , <paren> but more Slender only
<$$paren> with a Hole at the top , <paren> which I caus'd to be made to
trye Experiments of Fire and Flame in <$$paren> it continued so long
burning that It Lin'd all the Inside of the Glass with a Soot as Black
as Ink , and so Copious , that the Closeness of the Vessel consider'd ,
almost all that part of the White Camphire that did take Fire , seem'd
to have been chang'd into that deep Black Substance
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,144.32

<heading>

EXPERIMENT VI . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,144.34

<$$heading>

And this also brings into my mind another Experiment that I made about
the production of Blackness , whereof , for Reasons too long to be here
deduced , I expected and found a good Success ,
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,144.36

and {SIC:an} it was this : BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,144.37

I took Rectifi'd Oyl of Vitriol <paren> that I might have the Liquor
Clean as well as Strong <$$paren> BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,144.38

and by degrees mixt with it a convenient proportion of the Essential Oyl
, as Chymists call it , of Wormwood , drawn over with store of Water in
a Limbec , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,144.39

and warily Distilling the mixture in a Retort , there remain'd <P_145> a
scarce credible quantity of dry Matters , Black as a Coal .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,145.40

And because the Oyl of Wormwood , though a Chymical Oyl drawn by a
<font> Virtuoso <$$font> , seem'd to have somewhat in it of the Colour
of the Plant , I Substituted in its Room , the Pure and Subtile
Essential Oyl of Winter-Savory , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,145.41

and mixing little by little this Liquor , with <paren> if I mis-remember
not <$$paren> an Equal weight of the formerly mention'd Rectifi'd Oyl of
Vitriol , and Distilling them as before in a Retort , besides what there
pass'd over into the Receiver , even these two clear Liquors left me a
Considerable Proportion , <paren> though not so great as the two former
<$$paren> of a Substance black as Pitch , which I yet Keep by me as a
Rarity . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,145.42

<heading>

EXPERIMENT VII . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,145.44

<$$heading>

A way of Whiting Wax Cheaply and in Great Quantity may be a thing of
good Oeconomical Life , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,145.46

and we have elsewhere set down the Practice of Trades-men that Blanch it
; BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,145.47

But here Treating of Whiteness only in Order to the Philosophy of
Colours , I shall not Examine which of the Slow vvayes may be best
Employ'd , to free Wax from the Yellow Melleous parts ,
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,145.48

but shall rather set down a Quick <P_146> way of making it White ,
though but in very Small Quantities . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,146.49

Take then a little Yellow Wax , scraped or thinly sliced , and putting
it into a Colts-head or some other Convenient Glass , pour to it a
pretty deal of Spirit of Wine , and placing the Vessel in Warm Sand ,
Encrease the Heat by degrees , till the Spirit of Wine begin to Simper
or to Boyl a little ; and continuing that degree of Fire , if you have
put Liquor enough , you will quickly have the Wax dissolv'd ,
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,146.50

then taking it off the fire , you may either suffer it to Cool as
hastily as with Safety to the Glass you can , or Pour it whilst 't@ @is
yet Hot into a Filter of Paper , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,146.51

and either in the Glass where it Cools , or in the Filtre , you will
soon find the Wax and <font> Menstruum <$$font> together reduc'd into a
White Substance , almost like Butter , which by letting the Spirit
Exhale will shrink into a much Lesser Bulk , but still retaining its
Whiteness . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,146.52

And that which is pretty in the working of this Magistery of Wax , is ,
that the Yellowness vanishes , neither appearing in the Spirit of VVine
that passes Limpid through the Filtre , nor in the Butter of VVax , if I
may so call it , that , as I said , is VVhite .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,146.53

<P_147>

<heading>

EXPERIMENT VIII . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,147.56

<$$heading>

There is an Experiment , <font> Pyrophilus <$$font> , which though I do
not so exactly remember , and though it be somewhat Nice to make , yet I
am willing to Acquaint You with , because the thing Produc'd , though it
be but a Curiosity , is wont not a little to please the Beholders ,
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,147.58

and it is a way of turning by the help of a Dry Substance , an almost
Golden-Colour'd Concrete , into a White one , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,147.59

the several Tryals are not at present so fresh in my Memory to enable me
to tell you Certainly , whether an Equal onely or a Double weight of
Common Sublimate must be taken in reference to the Tinglass ,
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,147.60

but if I mistake not , there was in the Experiment that succeeded best ,
Two parts of the Former taken to One of the Latter .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,147.61

These Ingredients being finely Powdred and Exactly mix'd , we Sublim'd
together by degrees of fire <paren> the due Gradation of which is in
this Experiment a thing of main Importance <$$paren>
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,147.62

there ascended a matter of a very peculiar Texture ,
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,147.63

for it was for the most part made up of very Thin , Smooth , Soft and
Slippery Plates , almost like the finest sort of the Scales of Fishes ,
but of so Lovely a VVhite Inclining to <P_148> Pearl-Colour , and of so
Curious and Shining a Gloss , that they appear'd in some respect little
Inferiour to Orient Pearls , and in other Regards , they seem'd to
Surpass them , and were Applauded for a sort of the Prettiest Trifles
that we had ever prepar'd to Amuse the Eye . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,148.64

I will not undertake that though you@ @'l hardly miss changing the
Colour of our shining Tinglass , yet you will the first or perhaps the
second time hit Right upon the way of making the Glistring Sublimate I
have been mentioning . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,148.65

<heading>

EXPERIMENT IX . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,148.67

<$$heading>

VVhen we Dissolve in <font> Aqua Fortis <$$font> a mixture of Gold and
Silver melted into one Lump , it usually happens that the Powder of Gold
that falls to the bottom , as not being Dissoluble by that <font>
Menstruum <$$font> , will not have its own Yellow , but appear of a
Black Colour , though neither the Gold , nor the Silver , nor the <font>
Aqua Fortis <$$font> did before manifest any Blackness .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,148.69

And divers Alchymists , when they make Solutions of Minerals they would
Examine , are very Glad , if they see a Black Powder Praecipitated to
the Bottom , taking it for a Hopefull Sign , that those Particles are of
a Golden Nature , <P_149> which appear in a Colour so ordinary to Gold
parted from other Metalls by <font> Aqua Fortis <$$font> , that it is a
trouble to the Refiner to Reduce the Praecipitated <font> Calx <$$font>
to its Native Colour . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,149.70

For though , <paren> as we have try'd , <$$paren> that may be Quickly
enough done by Fire , which will make this Gold look very Gloriously
<paren> as indeed 't@ @is at least one of the Best wayes that is
Practis'd for the Refining of Gold , <$$paren> yet it requires both
Watchfulness and Skill , to give it such a Degree of Fire as will serve
to Restore it to its Lustre , without giving it such a One , as may
bring it to Fusion , to which the Minuteness of the corpuscles it
consists of makes the Powder very apt . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,149.71

And this brings into my Mind , that having taken a Flat and Bright piece
of Gold , that was Refin'd by a Curious and Skilfull Person on purpose
to Trye to what height of Purity Gold could be brought by Art , I found
that this very piece , as Glorious as it look'd , being rubb'd a little
upon a piece of fine clean Linnen , did sully it with a kind of Black ;
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,149.72

and this like I have observ'd in Refin'd Silver , which I therefore
mention , because I formerly suspected that the Impurity of the Metall
might have been the only Cause of what I have divers times observ'd in
wearing Silver-hilted Swords , Namely , that <P_150> where they rubb'd
upon my Clothes , if they were of a Light-Colour'd Cloath , the
Affriction would quickly Black them ; BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,150.73

and Congruously hereunto I have found Pens Blackt almost all over , when
I had a while carri'd them about me in a Silver Ink-case . To which I
shall only add , that whereas in these several Instances of Denigration
, the Metalls are worn off , or otherwise Reduc'd into very Minute Parts
, that Circumstance may prove not Unworthy your Notice .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,150.74

<heading>

EXPERIMENT X . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,150.76

<$$heading>

That a Solution of Silver does Dye Hair of a Black Colour , is a Known
Experiment , which some persons more Curious than Dextrous , have so
Unluckily made upon themselves as to make their Friends very Merry .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,150.78

And I remember that the other day , I made myself some Sport by an
Improvement of this Observation , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,150.79

for having dissolv'd some Pure Silver in <font> Aqua Fortis <$$font> ,
and Evaporated the <font> Menstruum ad siccitatem <$$font> , as they
speak , I caus'd a Quantity of fair Water to be pour'd upon the <font>
Calx <$$font> two or three several times , and to be at each Evaporated
, till the <font> Calx <$$font> was very Drye , and all the Greenish
Blewness that is wont to appear in Common Crystals of Silver , <P_151>
was quite carry'd away . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,151.80

Then I made those I meant to Deceive , Moisten some part of their Skin
with their own Spittle , and slightly Rub the moistned parts with a
little of this Prepar'd Silver , Whereupon they Admir'd to see , that a
Snow-white Body laid upon the White Skin should presently produce a deep
Blackness , as if the stains had been made with Ink , especially
considering that this Blackness could not , like that produc'd by
ordinary Ink , be readily Wash'd off , but requir'd many Hours , and
part of it some dayes , to its Obliteration .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,151.81

And with the same White <font> Calx <$$font> and a little Fair Water we
likewise Stain'd the White Hafts of Knives , with a lasting Black in
those parts where the <font> Calx <$$font> was Plentifully enough laid
on , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,151.82

for where it was laid on but very Thinly , the Stain was not quite of so
Deep a Colour . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,151.83

<heading>

EXPERIMENT XI . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,151.85

<$$heading>

The Cause of the Blackness of those many Nations , which by one common
Name we are wont to call <font> Negroes <$$font> , has been long sence
Disputed of by Learned Men , who possibly had not done amiss , if they
had also taken into Consideration , why some whole races of other
Animals besides Men , as <P_152> Foxes and Hares , are Disinguish'd by a
Blackness not familiar to the Generality of Animals of the same Species
; BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,152.87

The General Opinion <paren> to be mention'd a little lower has been
rejected even by some of the Antient Geographers ,
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,152.88

and among the Moderns <font> Ortelius <$$font> and divers other Men have
Question'd it . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,152.89

But this is no place to mention what thoughts I have had to and fro
about these Matters : Only as I shall freely Acknowledge , that to me
the Enquiry seems more Abstruse than it does to many others ,
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,152.90

and that because consulting with Authors , and with Books of Voyages ,
and with Travellers , to satisfie my self in matters of Fact , I have
met with some things among them , which seem not to agree very well with
the Notions of the most Classick Authors concerning these things ;
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,152.91

for it being my Present Work to deliver rather matters Historical than
Theorys , I shall Annex some few of my Collections , instead of a Solemn
Disputation . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,152.92

It is commonly presum'd that the Heat of the Climates wherein they live
, is the reason , why so many Inhabitants of the Scorching Regions of
<font> Africa <$$font> are Black ; BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,152.93

and there is this familiar Observation to Countenance this Conjecture ,
That we plainly see that Mowers , Reapers , and other Country-people ,
<P_153> who spend the most part of the Hot Summer dayes expos'd to the
Sun , have the skin of their Hands and Faces , which are the parts
immediately Expos'd to the Sun and Air , made of a Darker Colour than
before , and consequently tending to Blackness ;
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,153.94

And Contrarywise we observe that the <font> Danes <$$font> and some
other people that Inhabit Cold Climates , and even the English who feel
not so Rigorous a Cold , have usually Whiter faces than the <font>
Spaniards <$$font> , <font> Portugalls <$$font> and other European
Inhabitants of Hotter Climates . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,153.95

But this Argument I take to be far more Specious than Convincing ;
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,153.96

for though the Heat of the Sun may darken the Colour of the Skin , by
that Operation , which we in <font> English <$$font> call Sun-burning ;
yet Experience doth not Evince , that I remember , That that Heat alone
can produce a Discolouring that shall amount to a true Blackness , like
that of <font> Negroes <$$font> , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,153.97

and we shall see by and by that even the Children of some <font> Negroes
<$$font> not yet 10. dayes Old <paren> perhaps not so much by three
quarters of that time <$$paren> will notwithstanding their Infancy be of
the same Hue with their Parents . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,153.98

Besides , there is this strong Argument to be alleg'd against the Vulgar
Opinion , that in divers places in Asia under the same Parallel , or
even of the same <P_154> Degree of Latitude with the African Regions
Inhabited by Blacks , the People are at most but Tawny ;
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,154.99

And in Africa it self divers Nations in the Empire of <font> Ethiopia
<$$font> are not <font> Negroes <$$font> , though Situated in the Torrid
Zone , and as neer the Aequinoctial , as other Nations that are so
<paren> as the Black Inhabitants of <font> Zeylan <$$font> and <font>
Malabar <$$font> are not in our Globes plac'd so near the Line as <font>
Amara <$$font> the Famousest place in <font> Ethiopia <$$font> .
<$$paren> BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,154.100

Moreover , <paren> that which is of no small Moment in our present
Disquisition <$$paren> I find not by the best Navigators and Travellers
to the <font> West-Indies <$$font> , whose Books or themselves I have
consulted on this Subject , that excepting perhaps one place or two of
small extent , there are any Blacks Originally Natives of any part of
<font> America <$$font> <paren> for the Blacks now there have been by
the <font> Europeans <$$font> long Transplanted thither <$$paren> though
the New World contain in it so great a Variety of Climates , and
particularly reach quite Cross the Torri'd Zone from one Tropick to
another . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,154.101

And though it be true that the <font> Danes <$$font> be a Whiter People
than the <font> Spaniards <$$font> , yet that may proceed rather from
other causes <paren> not here to be enquired into <$$paren> than from
the Coldness of the Climate , since not onely the <P_155> <font> Swedes
<$$font> and other Inhabitants of those Cold Countreys , are not usually
so White as the <font> Danes <$$font> , nor Whiter than other Nations in
proportion to their Vicinity to the Pole . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,155.102

<bracket> And since the Writing of the former part of this Essay ,
having an opportunity on a Solemn occasion to take Notice of the
Numerous Train of some Extraordinary Embassadours sent from the <font>
Russian <$$font> Emperour to a great Monarch , observ'd , that <paren>
though it were then Winter <$$paren> the Colour of their Hair and Skin
was far less Whitish than the <font> Danes <$$font> who Inhabit a milder
Region is wont to be , but rather for the most part of a Darkish Brown ;
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,155.103

And the Physician to the Embassadour with whom those <font> Russes
<$$font> came , being ask'd by me whether in <font> Muscovy <$$font> it
self the Generality of the people were more inclin'd to have
Dark-colour'd Hair than {they_were_inclined_to_have} Flaxen , he
answer'd Affirmatively ; BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,155.104

but seem'd to suspect that the True and Antient <font> Russians <$$font>
, a Sept of whom he told me he had met with in one of the Provinces of
that vast Empire , were rather VVhite like the <font> Danes <$$font> ,
than any thing near so Brown as the present <font> Muscovites <$$font>
whom he guesses to be descended of the <font> Tartars <$$font> , and to
have inherited their Colour from them . <$$bracket>
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,155.105

But to Prosecute our former Discourse , I shall add for further Proof of
the Conjecture I was <P_156> countenancing that good Authors inform us
that there are <font> Negroes <$$font> in <font> Africa <$$font> not far
from the <font> Cape of good Hope <$$font> , and consequently beyond the
Southern Tropick , and without the Torrid Zone , much about the same
Northern Latitude <paren> or very little more <$$paren> wherein there
are divers <font> American <$$font> Nations that are not <font> Negroes
<$$font> , and wherein the Inhabitants of <font> Candia <$$font> , some
parts of <font> Sicily <$$font> , and even of Spain are not so much as
Tawny-Mores . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,156.106

But <paren> which is a fresh and strong Argument against the common
Opinion , <$$paren> I find by our recent Relations of <font> Greenland
<$$font> , <paren> our Accounts whereof we owe to the Curiosity of that
Royal <font> Virtuoso <$$font> the present King of <font> Denmark
<$$font> , <$$paren> that the Inhabitants are Olive-colour'd , or rather
of a Darker Hiew . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,156.107

But if the Case were the same with Men , and those other kinds of
Animals I formerly nam'd , I should offer something as a considerable
proof , That , Cold may do much towards the making , Men White or Black
, BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,156.108

and however I shall set down the Observation as I have met with it , as
worthy to come into the History of Whiteness and Blackness ,
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,156.109

and it is , that in some parts of <font> Russia <$$font> and of <font>
Livonia <$$font> it is affirm'd by <font> Olaus Magnus <$$font> and
others , that Hares and Foxes <paren> some add Partridges <$$paren>
which before were Black , or Red , or <P_157> Gray , do in the depth of
Winter become White by reason of the great Cold ; <paren> for that it
should be , as some conceive , by Looking upon the Snow , seems
improbable upon divers accounts <$$paren> BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,157.110

And I remember that having purposely enquir'd of a <font> Virtuoso
<$$font> who lately Travell'd through <font> Livonia <$$font> to <font>
Mosco <$$font> , concerning the Truth of this Tradition , he both told
me , he believ'd it , and added , that he saw divers of those lately
nam'd Animals either in <font> Russia <$$font> or <font> Livonia
<$$font> <paren> for I do not very well remember whether of the two
<$$paren> which , though White when he saw them in Winter , they assur'd
him had been Black , or of other Colours before the Winter began , and
would be so again when it was over . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,157.111

But for further satisfaction , I also consulted one that had for some
years been an Eminent Physician in <font> Russia <$$font> , who though
he rejected some other Traditions that are generally enough believ'd
concerning that Countrey , told me nevertheless , that he saw no cause
to doubt of this Tradition of <font> Olaus Magnus <$$font> as to Foxes
and Hares , not onely because 't@ @is the common and uncontroul'd
Affection of the Natives , but also because he himself in the Winter
could never that he remember'd see Foxes and Hares of any other Colour
than White ; BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,157.112

And I my self having seen a small White <P_158> Fox , brought out of
<font> Russia <$$font> Into <font> England <$$font> towards the latter
end of Winter , foretold those that shew'd him me , that he would change
Colour in Summer , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,158.113

and accordingly coming to look upon him again in July , I found that the
Back and Sides , together with the upper part of the Head and Tayl were
already grown of a Dark Colour , the lower part of the Head and Belly
containing as yet a Whiteness . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,158.114

Let me add , that were it not for some scruple I have , I should think
more than what <font> Olaus <$$font> relates , confirm'd by the
Judicious <font> Olearius <$$font> , who was twice employ'd into those
parts as a Publick Minister , who in his Account of <font> Moscovy
<$$font> has this Passage : BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,158.115

<font> The Hares there are Gray ; BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,158.116

but in some Provinces they grow white in the Winter . <$$font>
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,158.117

And within some few Lines after : <font> It is not very Difficult to
find the Cause of this Change , which certainly proceeds only from the
Outward Cold , since I know that even in Summer , Hares will change
colour , if they be kept a competent time in a Cellar <$$font> ;
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,158.118

I say , were it not for some Scruple , because I take notice , that in
the same Page the Author Affirms , that the like change of Colour that
happens to Hares in some Provinces of <font> Muscovy <$$font> , happens
to them also in Livonia , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,158.119

and yet immediately subjoyns , that in <font> Curland <$$font> the Hares
vary not their Colour in Winter , <P_159> though these two last named
Countries be contiguous , <paren> that is <$$paren> sever'd only by the
River of Dugna ; BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,159.120

For it is scarce conceivable how Cold alone should have , in Countries
so near , so strangely differing an operation , though no less strange a
thing is confess'd by many , that ascribe the Complexion of <font>
Negroes <$$font> to the Heat of the Sun , when they would have the River
of <font> Cenega <$$font> so to bound the Moors , that though on the
North-side they are but Tawny , on the other side they are Black .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,159.121

There is another Opinion concerning the Complexion of <font> Negroes
<$$font> ; that is not only embrac'd by many of the more Vulgar VVriters
, but likewise by that ingenious Traveller Mr. <font> Sandys <$$font> ,
and by a late most learned Critick , besides other men of Note ,
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,159.122

and these would have the Blackness of <font> Negroes <$$font> an effect
of <font> Noah's <$$font> Curse ratify'd by God's , upon <font> Cham
<$$font> ; BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,159.123

But though I think that even a Naturalist may with-out disparagement
believe all the Miracles attested by the Holy Scriptures , yet in this
case to flye to a Supernatural Cause , will , I fear , look like
Shifting off the Difficulty , instead of Resolving it ;
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,159.124

for we enquire not the First and Universal , but the Proper , Immediate
, and Physical Cause of the Jetty Colour of <font> Negroes <$$font> ;
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,159.125

And not only we do not find expressed in the <P_160> Scripture , that
the Curse meant by <font> Noah <$$font> to <font> Cham <$$font> , was
the Blackness of his Posterity , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,160.126

but we do find plainly enough there that the Curse was quite another
thing , namely , that he should be a Servant of servants , that is by an
Ebraism , a very Abject Servant to his Brethren , which accordingly did
in part come to pass , when the Israelites of the posterity of <font>
Sem <$$font> , subdued the <font> Canaanites <$$font> , that descended
from <font> Cham <$$font> , and kept them in great Subjection .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,160.127

Nor is it evident that Blackness is a Curse ,
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,160.128

for Navigators tell us of Black Nations , who think so much otherwise of
their own condition , that they paint the Devil White .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,160.129

Nor is Blackness inconsistent with Beauty , which even to our European
Eyes consists not so much in Colour , as an Advantageous Stature , a
Comely Symmetry of the parts of the Body , and Good Features in the Face
. So that I see not why Blackness should be thought such a Curse to the
<font> Negroes <$$font> , unless perhaps it be , that being wont to go
Naked in those Hot Climates , the Colour of their Skin does probably ,
according to the Doctrine above deliver'd , make the Sun-beams more
Scorching to them , than they would prove to a people of a VVhite
Complexion . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,160.130

Greater probability there is , That the Principal Cause <paren> for I
would not exclude <P_161> all concurrent ones <$$paren> of the Blackness
of Negroes is some Peculiar and Seminal Impression ,
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,161.131

for not onely we see that <font> Black-more <$$font> boyes brought over
into these Colder Climates lose not their Colour ;
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,161.132

But good authors inform us , That the Off-spring of <font> Negroes
<$$font> Transplanted out of <font> Africa <$$font> , above a_hundred
years ago , retain still the Complexion of their Progenitors , though
possibly in Tract of time it will decay ; BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,161.133

As on the other side , the White people removing into very Hot Climates
, have their Skins by the Heat of the Sun scorch'd into Dark Colours ;
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,161.134

yet neither they , nor their Children have been observ'd , even in the
Countreys of Negroes ; to descend to a Colour amounting to that of the
Natives ; whereas I remember I have Read in <font> Pisos <$$font>
excellent account of <font> Brasile <$$font> , that betwixt the <font>
Americans <$$font> and <font> Negroes <$$font> are generated a distinct
sort of Men , which they call <font> Cabocles <$$font> ,
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,161.135

and betwixt <font> Portugalls <$$font> and <font> Aethiopian <$$font>
women , He tells us , he has sometimes seen Twins , whereof one had a
White skin , the other a Black ; not to mention here some other
instances , he gives , that the productions of the mixtures of differing
people , that is <paren> indeed , <$$paren> the effects of Seminal
Impressions which they consequently <P_162> argue to have been their
Causes ; BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,162.136

and we shall not much scruple at this , if we consider , that even
Organical parts may receive great Differences from such peculiar
Impressions , upon what account soever they came to be setled in the
first Individual persons , from whom they are Propagated to Posterity ,
as we see in the Blobber-Lips and Flat-Noses of most Nations of <font>
Negroes <$$font> . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,162.137

And if we may Credit what Learned men deliver concerning the Little Feet
of the <font> Chinesses <$$font> , the <font> Macrocephali <$$font>
taken notice of by <font> Hippocrates <$$font> , will not be the only
Instance we might apply to our present purpose .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,162.138

And on this occasion it will not perchance be Impertinent to add
something of what I have observ'd in other Animals , as that there is a
sort of Hens that want Rumps ; And that <paren> not to mention that in
several places there is a sort of Crows or Daws that are not Cole-black
as ours , but Partly of a Whitish Colour <$$paren> in spight of <font>
Porphyries <$$font> examples of Inseparable Accidents , I have seen a
perfectly White Raven , as to Bill as well as Feathers , which I
attentively consider'd , for fear of being impos'd upon .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,162.139

And this recalls into my Memory , what a very Ingenious Physician has
divers times related to me of a young Lady , to whom being call'd , he
found that though <P_163> she much complain'd of want of Health , yet
there appear'd so little cause either in her Body , or her Condition to
Guess that She did any more than fancy her self Sick , that scrupling to
give her Physick , he perswaded her friends rather to divert her Mind by
little journeys of Pleasure , in one of which going to Visit St. <font>
Winifrids <$$font> Well , this Lady , who was a <font> Catholick
<$$font> , and devout in her Religion , and a pretty while in the VVater
to perform some Devotions , had {SIC:and_had} occasion to fix her Eyes
very attentively upon the Red pipple-stones , which in a scatter'd order
made up a good part of those that appear'd through the water ,
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,163.140

and awhile after growing Bigg , she was deliver'd of a Child , whose
VVhite Skin was Copiously speckl'd with spots of the Colour and Bigness
of those Stones ; BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,163.141

and though now this Child have already liv'd several years , yet she
still retains them . BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,163.142

I have but two things to add concerning the Blackness of <font> Negroes
<$$font> , BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,163.143

the one is , that the Seat of that Colour seems to be but the thin
<font> Epidermes <$$font> , or outward Skin ,
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,163.144

for I knew a young <font> Negroe <$$font> , who having been lightly Sick
of the Small_pox or Measles , <paren> for it was doubted which of the
two was his Disease <$$paren> I found by enquiry of a person that vvas
concern'd for him , that in those places the little Tumors <P_164> had
{SIC:that_had} broke their passage through the Skin , when they were
gone , they left VVhitish specks behind them ;
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,164.145

And the lately commended <font> Piso <$$font> assures us , that having
the opportunity in <font> Brasil <$$font> to Dissect many <font> Negroes
<$$font> , he cleerly found that their Blackness went no deeper then the
very outward Skin , which <font> Cuticula <$$font> or <font> Epiderms
<$$font> being remov'd , the undermost Skin or <font> Cutis <$$font>
appear'd just as VVhite as that of <font> European <$$font> Bodyes .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,164.146

And the like has been affirmed to me by a Physician of our own , whom
hearing he had Dissected a <font> Negroe <$$font> here in <font> England
<$$font> , I consulted about this particular .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,164.147

The other thing to be here taken notice of concerning <font> Negroes
<$$font> is , That having enquir'd of an Intelligent acquaintance of
mine <paren> who keeps in the <font> Indies <$$font> about 200. of them
as well VVomen as Men to work in his Plantations , <$$paren> whether
their Children come Black into the world ; he answer'd , That they did
not , but were brought forth of almost the like Reddish Colour with our
<font> European <$$font> Children ; BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,164.148

and having further enquir'd , how long it was before these Infants
appear'd Black , he reply'd , that 't@ @was not wont to be many daies .
BOYLECOL-1664-E3-P2,164.149

