<BEGIN_brinsley-1627-e2-p2>

<P_24>

<font> Spoud. <$$font> You have directed me very rightly how to answer
such Parents : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,24.3

now I shall be able to shew them where the fault is , & be calling upon
them to redresse this at home . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,24.4

<P_25>

I shall also indevour to put all this in use , and more as you make the
particulars more fully knowne unto me ; and as I shall finde by triall
the fruit hereof . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,25.6

But now , that you have thus satisfied me in al these my doubts ; I can@
@not but demand yet one other point , wherein I finde another great want
, though not comparable to the former ; because there is not so much use
of it : which is about the ordinarie numbers or numbring .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,25.7

For I am much troubled about this , that my readers and others above
them , are much to seeke in all matters of numbers , whether in figures
or in letters . Insomuch , as when they heare the Chapters named in the
Church , many of them can@ @not turne to them , much lesse to the verse
. BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,25.8

<font> Phil. <$$font> This likewise is a verie ordinarie defect ,
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,25.9

& yet might easily be helped by common meanes , in an houre or two .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,25.10

I call it ordinarie , because you shal have schollers , almost readie to
go to the Universitie , who yet can hardly tell you the number of Pages
, Sections , Chapters , or other divisions in their bookes , to finde
what they should . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,25.11

And it is , as you say , a great & a foule want ; because , without the
perfect knowledge of these numbers , schollers can@ @not helpe
themselves by the Indices , or Tables of such books , as they should use
, for turning to anything of a sodaine : although it be a matter whereof
they should have use all their life long . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,25.12

And to conclude , it is a great neglect , because it is a thing so easie
, as that it may be learned in so short a time , only by most usuall
meanes , as by these following . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,25.13

For numbers by letters , use but only to appose them , according to the
direction in the Latine Grammar at <font> Orthographia <$$font> , and
they wil do them presently . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,25.14

As if you aske what I. stands for , what V. what X. what L. &c.
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,25.15

And back againe , what letter stands for one , so what for five , or for
ten . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,25.16

But especially if you desire to have them very ready herein , cause them
to have these written , & then to practise to read them over often ,
until that they can answer any of them perfectly .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,25.17

Warn them also to remember alwaies , that any number set after a greater
or after the same number , doth adde so many mo , as the value of that
later number is . As , I. set after X. thus ,
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,25.18

XI. doth make eleven , XV. fifteene . <P_26> XX. twentie .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,26.19

But being set before , they doe take away so many as they are :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,26.20

as I. before X. thus , IX. nine . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,26.21

If you wish an example more at large , this may serve ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,26.22

let each of them that should learne have a briefe of these , after this
manner , to shew them all the chiefe numbers . {COM:numbers_omitted}
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,26.23

And thus much shortly for numbring by letters .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,26.24

For the numbers by Figures , this rule must also bee observed ; That the
Figures doe signifie in the first place so much onely , as if they were
alone , or one time so many . In the second place tennes , or ten times
so many . In the third place , hundreths , or a_hundreth times so many
. In the fourth place thousands , or a_thousand times so many . In the
fift place ten_thousands . In the sixt place hundreth_thousands ; the
places being reckoned from the right hand to the left .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,26.25

As for example , {COM:numbers_omitted} BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,26.26

These being learned backwards and forwards , so that your scholler be
able to know each of them , to call them , or name them right , and to
finde them out , as the child should finde any letter which he is to
learne : in a word , to tell what any of these numbers stand for , or
how to set downe any of them ; will performe fully so much as is
needfull for your ordinarie Grammar scholler .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,26.27

If you do require more for any , you must seeke <font> Records <$$font>
Arithmetique , or other like Authors , and set them to the Cyphering
schoole . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,26.28

<P_27>

<font> Spoud. <$$font> This is a defect that I see is most easily
supplied by a very little paine and care in examining .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,27.30

I have troubled you overlong in this , being in it selfe so very a
trifle , though the want generally be to be blamed .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,27.31

Now therefore let us hasten unto our profession for the Grammar
Schoolemaster . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,27.32

For I desire earnestly to be in our own element , as more befitting and
beseeming our place . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,27.33

<font> Phil. <$$font> I am very willing to make all the haste that we
can : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,27.34

for this I see , that though we neither use digressions , nor needlesse
words ; yet this our conference will prove very long , before that I can
make my mind plain unto you : Unlesse I should be so short , as either
to be obscure , or to omit many things which I take to be very
necessarie : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,27.35

But yet before we come to make entrance into the Latine , if we do keepe
order , we are to goe thorow the way of writing , as being more generall
, and which chiefly appertaineth also to our English tongue ; in respect
of our more frequent use of it ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,27.36

I meane chiefely for the writing of our ordinarie hand called the
Secretarie hand , which is almost wholly in use amongst us .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,27.37

<heading>

CHAP. IIII . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,27.39

<font> How the Master may direct his Schollers to write very faire ,
though himselfe be no good Pen-man . <$$font> BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,27.40

<$$heading>

<font> Spoud. <$$font> To come therefore unto writing , and the manner
of teaching it ; That which you affirme may be done herein , can@ @not
but be a very great benefit , and a notable grace to schooles , and also
to all learning , if it can be so effected : That all Schollers in
generall may be directed to write commendably , and a great part of them
which are more apt to write very faire ; and that in the severall <P_28>
hands of the learned tongues , as they doe proceede in every one of them
. BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.42

For many of the best Schollers have beene wont to write very ill ;
insomuch , as it hath beene a received opinion , as you know , amongst
very many , That a good Scholler can hardly be a good pen-man .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.43

Moreover you shall find very few good writers in Grammar schooles ;
unlesse either they have been taught by Scriveners , or are
{TEXT:missing_"are"} by themselves marvellous apt hereunto , and very
rare , or where the Master doth apply himselfe chiefly to teach to write
. BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.44

The want of this , hath bin another part of my griefe :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.45

for besides the complaint and grudging of the parents ; I have also seen
, after they have bin a great while with me , that they have not bin
able to write so , as to be fit for any trade ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.46

but they must after be set to learne of the Scrivener :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.47

much lesse have they bin able to write a letter to their friends , or to
perform any such businesse with their pen , in any commendable maner .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.48

You shall therfore do me no lesse a pleasure , then in the former , if
you can direct me , how to help all these evils , and to attaine to that
dexteritie , whereof you speake . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.49

<font> Phil. <$$font> I hope to satisfie you herein also .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.50

But first relate unto mee , what courses your selfe have taken , to
teach your Schollers to write ; whereof you have found so little profit
: and after I shall adde , as in the former , what I have learned , to
the better effecting hereof . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.51

<font> Spoud. <$$font> Surely I have done this :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.52

I have daily set them copies , so well as I could , which hath bin no
small toile unto me : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.53

or else I have caused some of my Schollers , or some others to doe it .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.54

Also I have made them now and then to write some copies ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.55

and it may be , I have corrected them for writing so badly , or guided
some of their hands , or shewed them how to amend their letters .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.56

This I take to be the most that is done in Schooles ordinarily ; unlesse
any do procure Scriveners to teach in their townes : whereof we finde no
small inconveniences . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.57

<font> Phil. <$$font> I take it to be as you say , that this is all
which is done in most Schooles : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.58

and hence so many of us have experience of the like murmurings against
us . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,28.59

Now I will let you see <P_29> plainly , and as familiarly as I can , how
to help this evill , and to attaine this so great a benefit .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.60

1

The Scholler should be set to write , when he enters into his Accidence
; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.62

so every day to spend an houre in writing , or very neere .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.63

2

There must be speciall care , that every one who is to write , have all
necessaries belonging thereunto ; as pen , inke , paper , rular ,
plummet , ruling-pen , pen-knife , &c. BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.65

3

The like care must be , that their inke be thin , blacke , cleere ;
which will not runne abroad , nor blot : their paper good ; that is ,
such as is white , smooth , and which will beare inke , and also that it
be made in a book . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.67

Their writing books would be kept faire , strait ruled ,
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.68

and each to have a blotting paper to keepe their bookes from soyling ,
or marring under their hands . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.69

4

Cause every one of them to make his own pen ; otherwise the making , and
mending of pens , will be a very great hinderance , both to the Masters
and to the Schollers . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.71

Besides that , when they are away from their Masters <paren> if they
have not a good pen made before <$$paren> they will write naught ;
because they know not how to make their pens themselves .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.72

The best manner of making the pen , is thus : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.73

1

Choose the quill of the best and strongest of the wing , which is
somewhat harder , and will cleave . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.75

2

Make it cleane with the backe of the pen-knife .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.77

3

Cleane it strait up the backe ; first with a cleft , made with your
pen-knife : after with another quill put into it ,
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.79

rive it further by little and little , till you see the cleft to be very
cleane : so you may make your pen of the best of the quil , and where
you see the cleft to be the cleanest , and without teeth .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.80

If it doe not cleave without teeth , cleave it with your pen-knife in
another place , still neerer the backe : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.81

for if it be not strait up the backe , it will very seldome run right .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.82

After , make the nebbe and cleft both about one length , somewhat above
a barley corne breadth , and small ; so as it may let downe the inke ,
and write cleane . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,29.83

Cut the nebbe first slant downewards to make it thinne , and after
strait <P_30> over_thwart . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,30.84

Make both sides of equall bignesse , unlesse you be cunning to cut that
side , which lieth upon the long finger , thinner and shorter ; yet so
little , as the difference can hardly be discerned .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,30.85

But both of equall length is accounted the surest .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,30.86

The speediest and surest way to learne to make the pen , is this .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,30.87

When your Scholler shall have a good pen fit for his hand , and well
fashioned ; then to view and marke that well and to trie to make one in
all things like unto it . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,30.88

It were good for the learner to procure such a pen made , and to keepe
it for a patterne to make others by , untill he be very perfect in it .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,30.89

A childe may soone learne to make his pen ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,30.90

yet , few of age do know how to make their owne pens well ; although
they have written long and very much : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,30.91

neither can any attaine to write faire without that skill .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,30.92

Next unto this , cause your scholler to hold his pen right , as neere
unto the nebbe as he can , his thumbe and two fore-fingers , almost
closed together , round about the neb , like unto a Cat's foote , as
some of the Scriveners doe terme it . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,30.93

Then let him learne to carry his pen as lightly as he can , to glide or
swimme upon the paper . So hee shall write the cleanest , fairest , and
fastest , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,30.94

and also his pen shall last the longer . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,30.95

In stead of setting of copies , and to save that endlesse toile , let
every one have a little copie booke fastened to the top of his writing
booke , with a strong thread of a span long , or thereabout ; that
alwaies when he writeth , he may lay his copy booke close before him ,
and that the side of the copy may almost touch the line where he writeth
, that his eye may be upon the copie , and upon his letter both together
. And also , to the end that ever when he hath done writing , he may
put his copie booke into his writing booke againe ; so that the copie
may never be out of the way , nor the Scholler write without it .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,30.96

The fittest volume for their writing booke is , to have them in <font>
quarto <$$font> . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,30.97

<P_31>

Moreover , the copie bookes would be made thus :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.99

Not above two inches in breadth ; foure or six copies in a booke , halfe
Secretary , halfe Roman . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.100

The copie books might be made thus most fitly , as I take it .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.101

1

One line of small letters , of each letter one , except in those which
have letters of divers kinds , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.103

and therein both kinds to be set downe : as {COM:letters_omitted}
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.104

Under the line of small letters would be set a line of great letters ,
after the same manner ; and under them both a line or two of joyning
hand , containing all the letters in them . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.105

Examples of both sorts for the present , untill better can be found ,
may be these . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.106

I meane copies both of Secretarie and Romane , containing all the
letters in them . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.107

For Secretarie thus : Exercise thyselfe much in God's book , with
zealous and fervent prayers and requests . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.108

For Romane thus : AEquore cur gelido zephyrus fert xenia kymbis ?
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.109

Respect not the verse , but the use . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.110

Under all these , may be fitly set in very little roome those characters
or letters , out of which all the rest of the letters may be framed : as
in the small letters in Secretarie , {COM:letters_omitted} In the great
letters , {COM:calligraphy_omitted} . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.111

So under the Roman copies after the same maner .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.112

In the end of the copie bookes , in a page or two , might be set downe
all the hard syllables mentioned before . That by oft writing them over
, they might be helped to spell , and to write true Orthographie .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.113

And after those , the numbers mentioned , to be able to write or to tell
any of them upon the book without it . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.114

Then what scholler soever were not able to tell any of them , after a
little poasing , were well worthy to be corrected .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.115

If such copie books were finely printed , being graven by some cunning
workman , and those of the most perfect and plaine formes of letters ,
that could possibly be procured , in a strong and very white paper , one
Booke or two of them would serve a scholler neere all his time that he
should never need to change his hand . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,31.116

<P_32>

The often change and following of divers hands , doth as much hinder
writing , as often change of Schoolemasters doth hinder learning .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,32.118

Therefore the best is to be chosen at the first , and ever to be stucke
unto without alteration , if it may be . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,32.119

In the meane time , untill such copies can be had , some would be
procured of the master , to be written by the best Scrivener who can be
gotten , after the manner aforesaid , for each scholler to have one to
fasten to his booke , and to use as before . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,32.120

Otherwise when for lacke hereof , the Master , or Usher , or some other
Scholler is compelled every day , to write each scholler a new copie ;
it is both an endlesse toyle , and also an extreme losse of time :
beside the inconvenience mentioned , of change of hands , and that few
Masters or Ushers are fit pen-men , to write such copies as were
necessarie . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,32.121

Lastly , because through want of such copies , schollers do write
ordinarily without direction or pattern , in all their exercises ,
whereby they either grow to very bad hands , or doe profit in writing ,
little or not at all . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,32.122

This exercise of writing faire , would be practised by all the Schollers
thorow the Schoole , at least once every day , for an houre's space or
neere ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,32.123

and that about one of the clocke : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,32.124

for then commonly their hands are warmest and nimblest .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,32.125

Now those that write exercises , may take the opportunitie of that time
, to write them so faire as they can . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,32.126

In all writing this generall rule would be observed streightly , to
cause them to strive to make every letter , as like to the copie letter
in all proportion , as the one hand is to the other . And that they
never thinke a letter good , untill no difference can be found between
it and the copie letter , that it can@ @not be discerned whether is the
better . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,32.127

Great care would be had withall , to make every writer to keepe even
compasse in the height , greatnesse , and breadth of his letters ; that
no one letter stand either <P_33> too high or too low , be overlong , or
overshort , nor any way too bigge , or too little , too wide , or too
narrow . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,33.128

To the end , that they may write of even height ; cause them to rule
their bookes with a ruling_pen , and then that they make the body of
each letter , to touch their rules on both sides , I meane both at the
tops and bottomes of the letters ; but not to goe one haire breadth
higher or lower . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,33.129

Thus by practice the scholler will in time attaine to write very faire
of himselfe without any ruling_pen . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,33.130

That every one may rule their bookes thus , cause them to have each his
ruling_pen , made of a quill , somewhat like unto a pen ; but onely that
it is to be made with a nocke in the neb or point of it , like the nocke
of an arrow , the nebs of the nocke standing just of the breadth of
their copie letters asunder , that they may rule their rules meet of the
same compasse with their copies . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,33.131

The points of the nebs of the ruling_pens , must not be made over-sharpe
, nor pressed downe over-hard in ruling ; because they wil then race the
paper , and make it that it will not beare inke .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,33.132

They are moreover to rule but a few lines at once because the lines
being drawne but lightly , will soon goe out , and not be seene before
that the learners come to write in them . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,33.133

Also this care must be had in ruling , to carry the ruling_pen so even
and straight forward , that both the lines which are drawne by it , may
be seene together ; or else to draw the lines so oft over with the same
, untill that both the lines may be well seene .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,33.134

This would be observed carefully , untill that time that they can begin
to write even and streight of themselves : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,33.135

for the even compasse doth especially grace a hand ,
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,33.136

and the faire shew of it will cause children to take a delight in
writing faire . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,33.137

Every scholler who writeth Latine , should have two of these ruling_pens
: one for Secretarie , and another for Romane ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,33.138

or else to have one made of iron or brasse , the one end for the one ,
the other end for the other . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,33.139

Moreover , the books of all the new beginners or enterers , <P_34>
whilst they write letters , would be ruled well with crosse lines , with
the ruling_pens on this manner : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,34.140

It is found to direct them very much . {COM:diagram_omitted}
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,34.141

Thus their books shall be kept faire . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,34.142

The compasse or the space within the crosse lines , serves to keepe and
guide the body of each letter to make it of a just proportion .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,34.143

The straight lines direct and guide the childe to make every stroke
straight forward , or up and downe , and also how to frame the head and
taile of each letter . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,34.144

Thus much for the compasse of the letters ; chiefly in the tops and
bottomes of the letters . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,34.145

Now that the letters may not be over bigge or over little , set too
neere one another or far off , this may be one good direction ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,34.146

Cause your scholler to draw his lines , on which he will write his
copies , of the very same length with the length of the line of his copy
: BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,34.147

and then if he writes just so much in his line as is in the copie , it
is very like that he makes his letters of a good proportion , not too
bigge nor too little , and the compasse even , not one over neere , or
far off from another . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,34.148

But if he write more in a shorter space , then is in like space in the
copy , he either makes his letters too little ,
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,34.149

or sets them too neere one another ; letters , or words , or both .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,34.150

And so on the other side , if he write lesse in a line , then is in his
copy in the same space , and length , then he makes his letters too
bigge , or too wide asunder . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,34.151

The letters would be joyned . in every word : yet so , as no one be set
over neere another , but just as the copie , observing <P_35> blacks and
whites , as the Scrivener tearmeth them . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,35.152

And each word in a sentence , would be set about the breadth of an
<font> a <$$font> , or an <font> o <$$font> , from one another .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,35.153

For writing straight without lines <paren> after that they have
practised this a good while , to write with double lines , ruled with
the ruling_pen , and after with single lines <$$paren> this may helpe to
guide them well ; to cause them to hold their elbow so close to their
side and so steadily , as they can conveniently ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,35.154

for the elbow so stayd , will guide the hand as a rule , especially in
writing fast . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,35.155

Afterwards , looking at the end of the line , as we use to try the
straightnesse of an arrow , they shall see easily where it is crooked .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,35.156

Practice will bring facility . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,35.157

These also may be speciall furtherances for the first enterers :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,35.158

When the yong scholler can@ @not frame his hand to fashion any letter ;
besides the guiding of his hand , and also the shewing where to begin
each letter , & how to draw it , some doe use to draw before them the
proportion of their letters , with a piece of chalke upon a boord , or
table , or with a piece of black lead upon a paper ; and then let the
child try how he himselfe can draw the like upon it ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,35.159

and after this to let him to doe it with his pen , following the letter
of his booke . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,35.160

Or thus ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,35.161

Let him take a dry pen , that can@ @not blot his book ,
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,35.162

and therewith cause him to follow that letter in his copie , which he
can@ @not make , drawing upon the copy letter very lightly , & a little
turning the side of the pen , where the letter is small ; but leaning
harder upon it where it is full , & there also turning the broad part of
the pen . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,35.163

Onely warne him to be careful , that he do not hurt the letter in the
copy , by his hard leaning upon his pen , or by the overmuch sharpnesse
of it . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,35.164

Thus let him follow his copie letter , drawing his pen so oft upon it ,
untill he thinke his hand will goe like unto it .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,35.165

Then direct him , to try with another pen with inke , whether he can
make one like to that of his copie . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,35.166

If he can@ @not , let him goe to it with his dry pen againe , untill
that he can fashion one like unto it . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,35.167

This also is a speciall observation : That the more leasurely the childe
draweth at the beginning , as the Painter <P_36> doth , and the more
lightly , the sooner a great deale he shall learne to frame his hand to
write faire . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,36.168

This likewise some good Scriveners observe ; to suffer the child to
learne to make but one kinde of letter at once , untill they can make
that in some good sort , then another BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,36.169

as first <font> a <$$font> , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,36.170

then <font> b <$$font> . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,36.171

But especially to begin with those letters , out of which all the rest
may be framed , to make them perfectly , as {COM:letters_omitted} .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,36.172

For so all the rest will be the easier . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,36.173

To helpe to write cleane , fast and faire together , call oft on your
schollers to exercise their hands in making of <font> f <$$font> strokes
, that is , dashes of <font> f <$$font> , and <font> s <$$font> thus
<font> f s <$$font> ; and the stroake of the great C , and B , thus ,
{COM:calligraphy_omitted} BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,36.174

Also some use to cause the learners , to practise their hands to run
upon the paper , either with inke or without , until they be very nimble
and cunning to glide upon the paper ; and namely , to make certain rude
flourishes . {COM:flourishes_omitted} BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,36.175

Call on them in all exercises , to be carefull to observe the graces of
letters : as the keeping of great letters , accents , points , as comma
, colon , period , parenthesis , and whatsoever may serve for the
adorning of writing ; and ever more to take a delight in writing faire :
which delight is in each art the one halfe of the skill ; but to fly all
long tailes of letters , and to make all their letters so plaine as they
can : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,36.176

the plainer the better . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,36.177

Beware that you suffer no one to learne a bad hand , or to make any bad
letter , so neere as you are able to prevent it .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,36.178

For it will be found much harder to teach such to forget their bad
letters and hands , then to teach other which never learned , to write
the good . So that if you teach such , a better hand , after that they
have learned and been long inured to the worse ; although they <P_37>
seeme to have learned to write well , yet unlesse they be holden
continually to practise their good hand each day a little , they will
fall unto their bad hand againe : so great force hath any evill custome
. BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,37.179

This therefore must be our wisedome , to procure from the beginning the
most excellent copies , for our schollers , whatsoever they cost ; and
to keep them constantly to them : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,37.180

they will soone quite the cost both to Master and Scholler .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,37.181

To the end that any Master may be the better able to teach thus ; let
him either try to attaine this faculty of writing faire <paren> which
much commends a Master <$$paren> BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,37.182

or at least , let him labour to be well acquainted with these directions
, or the like : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,37.183

and also let him cause his Schollers to observe them constantly ; or so
many of them as need shall require . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,37.184

And to this end , let him use to walke amongst his Schollers as they
write all together ; & see that they do practise these things duely :
but chiefly that every one have his copy book layed close before him ;
and to marke well wherein any one of them misseth in any letter or
stroke , that it is not like to the copie , there to point him to the
copie , and to shew him where they differ , or to cause him to compare
them himselfe : so to appoint them to be mending their faults , untill
their letters be in all things like the copie letters .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,37.185

And what letters they make the worst , to make them so oft over , in
some voide place of their booke , or some waste paper , untill those be
as good as any of the rest , and like the copy , as was said .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,37.186

Amongst others , to looke specially to these three letters together ,
<font> f. g. b. <$$font> and to <font> m. <$$font> which being well
made , do grace all the rest , and yet are commonly made the worst of
all . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,37.187

Thus anyone of these Schollers , chiefly one of them who write the best
, may helpe the Master to direct the rest . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,37.188

By these meanes the Schoole-master may bring many of his Schollers to be
very good pen-men , and all generally to some competent sufficiencie ,
to the credit of the Schoole , the good contentment of the parents , and
the great benefit of the Schollers , though he can@ @not write well
himselfe , if hee can but onely thus farre forth direct , <P_38> as to
cause his Schollers to follow these observations .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,38.189

Hereby the Schooles also may be freed from having any need of the
Scriveners , which go about the country , at least , which go under the
names of Scriveners , & take upon them to teach to write ; and doe
ofttimes very much hurt in the places where they come .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,38.190

For they draw away the mindes of many of the Schollers from their bookes
; even of all such as can@ @not endure to take paines , nor have any
great love of learning , BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,38.191

and cause many of good hope to leave the schoole utterly .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,38.192

Besides that , very often , so soone as ever these Scriveners are gone ,
the schollers whom they have taught , do forget what they seemed to have
gotten by them , unlesse they be kept to practise their writing daily .
So that all that cost and time is commonly lost ; besides the former
inconveniences , that sundry by them lose all the learning which they
had gotten . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,38.193

Also most of the yonger sort , who seem to write faire , and so leave
the Schoole in a conceit of that which they have gotten by the Scrivener
; yet doe write so false Orthography , as is loathsome to see , and
ridiculous to reade . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,38.194

For these properties should be joyned together in every pen-man , who
would have any approbation ; to bee able as well to write a good stile
<paren> I meane to indite , and to expresse his mind in some good forme
of words , and true Orthography <$$paren> as to write faire .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,38.195

As for the use of Scriveners in the common schooles , it would be this
<paren> if any <$$paren> ; either to make every scholler his book of
copies , to use after the manner prescribed , untill such printed ones
can be had : or else to set all the schollers in a good way of writing ,
for right framing their letters , and the like . To do it only at such
times as the Master shall appoint ; that it may be without any great
hinderance to the schollers for their learning , and warily preventing
all the former inconveniences . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,38.196

For schooles and good learning being such a singular benefit , and so
great a gift of God to Church and Commonwealth , all hinderances would
be wisely foreseene , and heedily prevented .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,38.197

<P_39>

These are the special helps which hitherto I have learned , for the
direction of schollers in writing : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,39.199

and by these I am assured upon triall , that what is promised in this
behalfe , may be effected through God's blessing .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,39.200

<font> Spoud. <$$font> Sir , these must needs be very profitable :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,39.201

yet my memory being weake , and they many , I shall hardly thinke of
them , to put them in practice . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,39.202

I pray you therefore repeat unto me againe in a word or two , which of
them you take to be the principall , and of most continuall use .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,39.203

<font> Phil. <$$font> These I take to be the principall , & almost the
summe of all ; and which would ever be had in memory : that the
schollers have good pens , thin ink , faire & good copy books , and
those made fast to their bookes , to have them ever laid close before
them whe~ they are to write faire ; which would be once every day ; and
then all of them together . That they have their bookes ruled strait
and lightly , and that with ruling_pens amongst all the yonger sort :
and that therein a care be had , that they ever touch both the lines of
the ruling_pen with the bodies of their letters . Also that they have
their faults shewed them , by pointing them to the copy letters ; and
where their letters are unlike to the copy , there to cause them to be
amending them continually , until they attaine to write as faire as it .
To call on them ever to have an eye to the copy , & to have the fashions
of the letters in their minds . To take a delight in writing ; striving
who shall doe the best : to this end , to let their hands glide lightly
on the paper ; to strive to write very cleane ; to make minimes , and
such like letters sharpe at tops and bottomes , or just to the
proportion of their copies : to hold their pens very low : their elbow
something neere their side : to keepe their copies and bookes faire ,
unblotted and unscrauled : to have void places , or waste papers for
assaies , &c. BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,39.204

Most shortly , these three are almost all in all ; good copies ,
continuall eying them well , a delight in writing :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,39.205

although I thinke it very necessary , that you be acquainted with all
the former directions as they are set downe at large , to use them as
need shall require . You may soone attain the knowledge <P_40> of them
, when you have them written down : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.206

the labour of learning them will be nothing to you in regard of the
benefit ; and much lesse in regard of the long search and observation ,
which I have used to finde them out . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.207

<font> Spoud. <$$font> It is true indeed ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.208

and I am the more beholden unto you : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.209

but give me leave this one word ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.210

that which you said even now , may seeme to make very much against the
Scriveners . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.211

<font> Phil. <$$font> Not at all ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.212

it only helpeth to redresse the great abuse by some shifters , who goe
under the name of Scriveners ; BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.213

for all good Scriveners have their callings and imployments , wherein to
serve to the profit and good of the Commonwealth , and not unto the hurt
thereof . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.214

This onely may teach us to prevent and avoid those intolerable abuses ,
and hurts to schooles mentioned ; whereof there hath been , and is daily
, so much experience . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.215

<font> Spoud. <$$font> Sir , I can@ @not but like of your answer ;
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.216

I my selfe have had some experience of the truth of the complaint :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.217

it is very necessarie that such evils should be prevented .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.218

Now therefore that you have thus shewed me how to make my schollers good
pen-men , and that they may grow therein , as in their schoole learning
; and thus prepared the way to our Grammar schoole : let us at length
come to that which hath been the speciall end of my journey , and
wherein our chiefe travel & imployment lyeth .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.219

And first let us begin with the rudiments of the Grammar , I meane the
Accedence ; wherein our first entrance is . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.220

<font> Phil. <$$font> Very willingly : BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.221

but first let me acquaint you with certaine generall observations ,
which concerne our whole course of teaching , and whereof we shall have
almost continuall use ; lest we be troubled with repeating them often
after . BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.222

<font> Spoud. <$$font> It is well advised , that we may doe all things
the most shortly , and in the best and easiest order that we can :
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.223

I pray you therefore shew unto me what those generall observations be .
BRINSLEY-1627-E2-P2,40.224

