<BEGIN_burnetroc-1680-e3-p2>

<P_80>

Yet such a believing as this , is only a general perswasion in the Mind
, which has not that effect , till a man applying himself to the
Directions set down in the Scriptures <paren> which upon such Evidence
can@ @not be denied , to be as reasonable , as for a man to follow the
Prescriptions of a <P_81> learned Physitian , and when the Rules are
both good and easie , to submit to them for the recovering of his health
<$$paren> and by following these , finds a power entring within him ,
that frees him from the slavery of his Appetites and Passions , that
exalts his Mind above the accidents of life and spreads an inward purity
in his Heart , from which a serene and calm joy arises within him :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,81.3

And good men by the efficacy these Methods have upon them , and from the
returns of their prayers , and other endeavours , grow assured that
these things are true , and answerable to the Promises they find
registred in Scripture . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,81.4

All this , he said , might be fancy : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,81.5

But to this I answered , That as it were unreasonable <P_82> to tell a
man that is abroad , and knows he is awake , that perhaps he is in a
dream , and in his Bed , and only thinks he is abroad , or that as some
go about in their sleep , so he may be asleep still : So good and
religious men know , though others may be abused , by their fancies ,
that they are under no such deception : and find they are neither hot
nor <font> Enthusiastical <$$font> , but under the power of calm and
clear Principles . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,82.6

All this he said he did not understand , and that it was to assert or
beg the thing in Question , which he could not comprehend .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,82.7

As for the possibility of Revelation , it was a vain thing to deny it :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,82.8

For as God gives us the sense of seeing material <P_83> Objects by our
Eyes , and opened in some a capacity of apprehending high and sublime
things , of which other men seemed utterly incapable : So it was a weak
assertion that God can@ @not awaken a power in some mens Minds , to
apprehend and know some things , in such a manner that others are not
capable of it . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,83.9

This is not half so incredible to us as sight is to a blind man , who
yet may be convinced there is a strange power of seeing that governs men
, of which he finds himself deprived . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,83.10

As for the capacity put into such mens hands to deceive the World , we
are at the same time to consider , that besides the probity of their
tempers , it can@ @not be thought but God can so forcibly <P_84> bind up
a man in some things that it should not be in his power to deliver them
otherwise then as he gives him in Commission :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,84.11

besides the Confirmation of Miracles are a Divine Credential to warrant
such persons in what they deliver to the World : which can@ @not be
imagined can be joyned to a Lye , since this were to put the Omnipotence
of God , to attest that which no honest man will do .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,84.12

For the business of the Fall of Man , and other things of which we can@
@not perhaps give our selves a perfect account : We who can@ @not
fathome the Secrets of the Councel of God , do very unreasonably to take
on us to reject an excellent Systeme of good and holy Rules , because we
can@ @not <P_85> satisfie our selves about some difficulties in them .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,85.13

Common Experience tells us , There is a great disorder in our Natures ,
which is not easily rectified : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,85.14

All <font> Philosophers <$$font> were sensible of it ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,85.15

and every man that designs to govern himself by Reason , feels the
struggle between it and nature : So that it is plain , there is a Lapse
of the high powers of the Soul . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,85.16

But why , said he , could not this be rectified , by some plain Rules
given ; BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,85.17

but men must come and shew a trick to perswade the World they speak to
them in the Name of God ? BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,85.18

I Answered , That Religion being a design to recover and save Mankind ,
was to be so opened as to awaken and work upon all sorts of people :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,85.19

and generally <P_86> men of a simplicity of Mind , were those that were
the fittest Objects for God to shew his favour to ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,86.20

Therefore it was necessary that Messengers sent from Heaven should
appear with such allarming Evidences , as might awaken the World , and
prepare them by some astonishing Signs , to listen to the Doctrine they
were to deliver . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,86.21

<font> Philosophy <$$font> , that was only a matter of fine Speculation
, had few Votaries : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,86.22

And as there was no Authority in it to bind the World to believe its
Dictates , so they were only received by some of nobler and refined
Natures , who could apply themselves to , and delight in such Notions .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,86.23

But true Religion was to be built on a Foundation , that should carry
more <P_87> weight on it , and to have such Convictions , as might not
only reach those who were already disposed to receive them , but rouse
up such as without great and sensible excitation would have otherwise
slept on in their ill Courses . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,87.24

Upon this and some such Occasions , I told him , I saw the ill use he
made of his Wit , by which he slurred the gravest things with a slight
dash of his Fancy : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,87.25

and the pleasure he found in such wanton Expressions , as calling the
doing of Miracles , <font> The shewing of a trick <$$font> , did really
keep him from examining them , with that care which such things required
. BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,87.26

For the <font> Old Testament <$$font> , We are so remote from that time
, We have so little knowledge <P_88> of the Language in which it was
writ , have so imperfect an account of the History of those Ages , know
nothing of their Customs , Forms of Speech , and the several Periods
they might have , by which they reckoned their time , that it is rather
a wonder We should understand so much of it , than {it_is_a_wonder} that
many passages in it should be so dark to us .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,88.27

The chief use it has to us <font> Christians <$$font> , is , that from
Writings which the <font> Jews <$$font> acknowledge to be divinely
inspired , it is manifest the <font> Messias <$$font> was promised
before the Destruction of their Temple : which being done long ago ; and
these Prophesies agreeing to our Saviour , and to no other , Here is a
great Confirmation given to the Gospel . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,88.28

But <P_89> though many things in these Books could not be understood by
us , who live above 3000 years after the chief of them were written , it
is no such extraordinary matter . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,89.29

For that of the Destruction of the <font> Canaanites <$$font> by the
<font> Israelites <$$font> , It is to be considered , that if God had
sent a Plague among them all , that could not have been found fault with
. BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,89.30

If then God had a Right to take away their Lives , without Injustice or
Cruelty , he had a Right to appoint others to do it , as well to execute
it by a more immediate way : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,89.31

And the taking away people by the Sword , is a much gentler way of dying
, than to be smitten with a Plague or a Famine .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,89.32

And for the Children that were Innocent <P_90> of their Fathers faults ,
God could in another State make that up to them .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,90.33

So all the difficulty is , Why were the <font> Israelites <$$font>
commanded to execute a thing of such Barbarity ?
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,90.34

But this will not seem so hard , if we consider that this was to be no
Precedent , for future times : since they did not do it but upon special
Warrant and Commission from Heaven , evidenc'd to all the World by such
mighty Miracles as did plainly shew , That they were particularly
design'd by God to be the Executioners of his Justice .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,90.35

And God by imploying them in so severe a Service , intended to possess
them with great horrour of idolatry , which was punished in so extream a
manner . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,90.36

<P_91>

For the Rites of their Religion , We can ill judge of them , Except We
perfectly understood the Idolatries round about them : To which we find
they were much inclined : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,91.38

So they were to be bent by other Rites to an extream aversion from them
: BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,91.39

And yet by the pomp of many of their Ceremonies and Sacrifices , great
Indulgences were given to a people naturally fond of a visible splendor
in Religious Worship . In all which , if we can@ @not descend to such
satisfactory Answers in every particular , as a curious man would desire
, it is no wonder . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,91.40

The long interval of time , and other accidents , have worn out those
things which were necessary to give us a clearer light into the meaning
<P_92> of them . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,92.41

And for the story of the Creation , how far some things in it may be
Parabolical , and how far Historical , has been much disputed :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,92.42

there is nothing in it that may not be historically true .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,92.43

For if it be acknowledged that Spirits can form Voices in the Air , for
which we have as good Authority as for any thing in History ; Then it is
no wonder that <font> Eve <$$font> being so lately created , might be
deceived , and think a <font> Serpent <$$font> spake to her , when the
Evil Spirit framed the Voice . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,92.44

But in all these things I told him he was in the wrong way , when he
examined the business of Religion , by some dark parts of Scripture :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,92.45

Therefore I desired him to consider the whole Contexture of the <P_93>
<font> Christian Religion <$$font> , the Rules it gives , and the
Methods it prescribes . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,93.46

Nothing can conduce more to the peace , order and happiness of the World
, than to be governed by its Rules . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,93.47

Nothing is more for the Interests of every man in particular :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,93.48

The Rules of Sobriety , Temperance and Moderation , were the best
Preservers of life , and which was perhaps more , of Health .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,93.49

Humility , Contempt of the Vanities of the World , and the being well
employed , raises a mans Mind to a freedom from the Follies and
Temptations that haunted the greatest part . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,93.50

Nothing was so Generous and Great as to supply the Necessities of the
Poor , and to forgive Injuries : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,93.51

Nothing raised and maintained <P_94> a mans Reputation so much , as to
be exactly just , and merciful ; Kind , Charitable and Compassionate
{raised_it} : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,94.52

Nothing opened the powers of a mans Soul so much as a calm Temper , a
serene Mind , free of Passion and Disorder {opened_it} :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,94.53

Nothing made Societies , Families , and Neighbourhoods so happy , as
when these Rules which the Gospel prescribes , took place , <font> Of
doing as we would have others do to us , and loving our Neighbours as
our selves . <$$font> BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,94.54

The <font> Christian Worship <$$font> was also plain and simple ;
suitable to so pure a Doctrine . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,94.55

The Ceremonies of it were few and significant , as the admission to it
by a washing with Water , and the Memorial of our Saviour's Death in
<font> Bread <$$font> and <font> Wine <$$font> ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,94.56

The Motives in it to perswade to <P_95> this Purity , were strong : That
God sees us , and will judge us for all our Actions : That we shall be
for ever happy or miserable , as we pass our Lives here :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,95.57

The Example of our Saviour's Life , and the great expressions of his
Love in Dying for us , are mighty Engagements to Obey and Imitate him .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,95.58

The plain way of Expression used by our Saviour and his Apostles , shews
there was no Artifice , where there was so much Simplicity used :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,95.59

There were no Secrets kept only among the Priests ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,95.60

but every thing was open to all <font> Christians <$$font> :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,95.61

The Rewards of Holiness are not entirely put over to another State ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,95.62

but good men are specially blest with peace in their Consciences , great
Joy in <P_96> the Confidence they have of the Love of God , and of
seeing Him for ever : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,96.63

And often a signal Course of Blessings follows them in their whole Lives
: BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,96.64

But if at other times Calamities fell on them , these were so much
mitigated by the Patience they were taught , and the inward Assistances
, with which they were furnished , that even those Crosses were
converted to Blessings . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,96.65

I desired he would lay all these things together , and see what he could
except to them , to make him think this was a Contrivance .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,96.66

Interest , appears in all Humane Contrivances :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,96.67

Our Saviour plainly had none ; BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,96.68

He avoided Applause , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,96.69

withdrew Himself from the Offers of a Crown ; BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,96.70

He submitted to <P_97> Poverty and Reproach , and much Contradiction in
his Life , and to a most ignominious and painful Death .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,97.71

His Apostles had none neither , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,97.72

They did not pretend either to Power or Wealth ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,97.73

But delivered a Doctrine that must needs condemn them , if they ever
made such use of it : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,97.74

They declared their Commission fully without reserves till other times :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,97.75

They Recorded their own Weakness : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,97.76

Some of them wrought with their own hands BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,97.77

and when they received the Charities of their Converts , it was not so
much to supply their own Necessities , as to distribute to others :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,97.78

They knew they were to suffer much for giving their Testimonies , to
what they had seen and heard : In which so many in a thing so <P_98>
visible , as Christ's Resurrection and Ascension , and the Effusion of
the Holy Ghost which He had promised , could not be deceived :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,98.79

And they gave such publick Confirmations , of it by the Wonders they
themselves wrought , that great multitudes were converted to a Doctrine
, which , besides the opposition it gave to Lust and Passion , was born
down and Persecuted for 300 years : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,98.80

and yet its force was such , that it not only weathered out all those
Storms , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,98.81

but even grew and spread vastly under them . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,98.82

<font> Pliny <$$font> about threescore years after , found their Numbers
great and their Lives Innocent : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,98.83

and even <font> Lucian <$$font> amidst all his Raillery , gives a high
Testimony to their Charity and Contempt of Life , and the <P_99> other
vertues of the <font> Christians <$$font> ; which is likewise more than
once done by Malice it self , <font> Julian <$$font> the Apostate .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,99.84

If a man will lay all this in one Ballance , and compare with it the few
Exceptions brought to it , he will soon find how strong the one , and
how slight the other are . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,99.85

Therefore it was an improper way , to begin at some Cavils about some
Passages in the <font> New Testament <$$font> , or the <font> Old
<$$font> , and from thence to prepossess one's Mind against the whole .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,99.86

The right method had been first to consider the whole matter , and from
so general a view to descend to more particular Enquiries : whereas they
suffered their Minds to be forestalled with Prejudices ; so that they
never examined the matter impartially . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,99.87

<P_100>

To the greatest part of this he seemed to assent ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,100.89

only he excepted to the belief of Mysteries in the <font> Christian
Religion <$$font> ; which he thought no man could do , since it is not
in a mans power to believe that which he can@ @not comprehend : and of
which He can have no Notion . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,100.90

The believing Mysteries , he said , made way for all the Juglings of
Priests , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,100.91

for they getting the people under them in that Point , set out to them
what they pleased ; BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,100.92

and giving it a hard Name , and calling it a <font> Mystery <$$font> ,
The people were tamed , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,100.93

and easily believed it . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,100.94

The restraining a Man from the use of Women , Except one in the way of
Marriage , and denying the remedy of Divorce , he thought unreasonable
Impositions <P_101> on the Freedom of Mankind :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,101.95

And the business of the Clergy , and their Maintenance , with the belief
of some Authority and Power conveyed in their Orders , lookt , as he
thought , like a piece of Contrivance : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,101.96

And why , said he , must a man tell me , I can@ @not be saved , unless I
believe things against my Reason , and then that I must pay him for
telling me of them ? BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,101.97

These , were all the Exceptions which at any time I heard from him to
<font> Christianity <$$font> . To which I made these Answers .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,101.98

For Mysteries it is plain there is in every thing somewhat that is
unaccountable . How Animals or Men are formed in their Mothers bellies
, how Seeds grow in the Earth , how the <P_102> Soul dwells in the Body
, and acts and moves it ; How we retain the Figures of so many words or
things in our Memories , and how We draw them out so easily and orderly
in our Thoughts or Discourses ? How Sight and Hearing were so quick and
distinct , how We wove , and how Bodies were compounded and united ?
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,102.99

These things if we follow them into all the Difficulties , that we may
raise about them , will appear every whit as unaccountable as any
Mystery of Religion : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,102.100

And a blind or deaf man would judge Sight or Hearing as incredible , as
any Mystery may be judged by us : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,102.101

For our Reason is not equal to them . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,102.102

In the same rank , different degrees of Age or Capacity raise some far
<P_103> above others : So that Children can@ @not fathome the Learning ,
nor weak persons the Counsels of more illuminated Minds :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,103.103

Therefore it was no wonder if we could not understand the Divine Essence
: BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,103.104

we can@ @not imagine how two such different Natures as a Soul and a Body
should so unite together , and be mutually affected with one anothers
Concerns , and how the Soul has one Principle of Reason , by which it
acts Intellectually , and another of life by which it joyns to the Body
and acts Vitally ; two Principles so widely differing both in their
Nature and Operation , and yet united in one and the same Person .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,103.105

There might be as many hard Arguments brought against the possibility
<P_104> of these things , which yet every one knows to be true , from
Speculative Notions , as against the Mysteries mentioned in the
Scriptures . As that of the <font> Trinity <$$font> , That in one
Essence there are three different Principles of Operation , which , for
want of terms fit to express them by , We call <font> Persons <$$font> ,
and are called in Scripture <font> The Father , Son , and Holy Ghost
<$$font> , and that the Second of these did unite Himself in a most
intimate manner with the Humane Nature of Jesus Christ : And that the
Sufferings he underwent , were accepted of God as a Sacrifice for our
Sins ; Who thereupon conferred on Him a Power of granting Eternal Life
to all that submit to the Terms on which He offers it ; And that the
<P_105> matter of which our Bodies once consisted , which may be as
justly called the Bodies we laid down at our Deaths , as these can be
said to be the Bodies which We formerly lived in , being refined and
made more spiritual , shall be reunited to our Souls , and become a fit
Instrument for them in a more perfect Estate : And that God inwardly
bends and moves our Wills , by such Impressions , as he can make on our
Bodies and Minds . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,104.106

These , which are the chief Mysteries of our Religion , are neither so
unreasonable , that any other Objection lies against them , but this ,
that they agree not with our Common Notions , nor so unaccountable that
somewhat like them , can@ @not <P_106> be assigned in other things ,
which are believed really to be , though the manner of them can@ @not be
apprehended : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,106.107

So this ought not to be any just Objection to the submission of our
Reason to what we can@ @not so well conceive , provided our belief of it
be well grounded . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,106.108

There have been too many Niceties brought indeed , rather to darken then
explain these : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,106.109

They have been defended by weak Arguments , and illustrated by Similies
not always so very apt and pertinent . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,106.110

And new subtilties have been added , which have rather perplexed than
cleared them . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,106.111

All this can@ @not be denied ; BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,106.112

the Opposition of <font> Hereticks <$$font> anciently , occasioned too
much Curiosity among the <font> Fathers <$$font> : <P_107> Which the
<font> School-men <$$font> have wonderfully advanced of late times .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,107.113

But if Mysteries were received , rather in the simplicity in which they
are delivered in the Scriptures , than according to the descantings of
fanciful men upon them , they would not appear much more incredible ,
than some of the common Objects of sense and perception .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,107.114

And it is a needless fear that if some Mysteries are acknowledged ,
which are plainly mentioned in the <font> New Testament <$$font> , it
will then be in the Power of the Priests to add more at their pleasure .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,107.115

For it is an absurd Inference from our being bound to assent to some
Truths about the Divine Essence , of which the manner is not understood
to argue that therefore <P_108> in an Object presented duly to our
Senses such as <font> Bread <$$font> and <font> Wine <$$font> , We
should be bound to believe against their Testimony , that it is not what
our Senses perceived it to be , but the whole <font> Flesh <$$font> and
<font> Blood <$$font> of <font> Christ <$$font> ; an entire Body being
in every Crumb and Drop of it . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,108.116

It is not indeed in a mans power to believe thus against his Sense and
Reason , where the Object is proportioned to them , and fitly applied ,
and the Organs are under no indisposition or disorder .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,108.117

It is certain that no Mystery is to be admitted , but upon very clear
and express Authorities from Scripture , which could not reasonably be
understood in any other sense . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,108.118

And though a man can@ @not form an explicite <P_109> Notion of a Mystery
, for then it would be no longer a Mystery , Yet in general he may
believe a thing to be , though he can@ @not give himself a particular
account of the way of it : or rather though he can@ @not Answer some
Objections which lie against it . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,109.119

We know We believe many such in Humane matters , which are more within
our reach : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,109.120

and it is very unreasonable to say , We may not do it in Divine things ,
which are much more above our Apprehensions .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,109.121

For the severe Restraint of the use of Women , it is hard to deny that
Priviledge to Jesus Christ as a Law-Giver , to lay such Restraints , as
all inferiour Legislators do ; who when they find the Liberties their
Subjects <P_110> take , prove hurtful to them , set such Limits , and
make such Regulations , as they judge necessary and expedient .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,110.122

It can@ @not be said but the Restraint of Appetite is necessary in some
Instances : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,110.123

and if it is necessary in these , perhaps other Restraints are no less
necessary , to fortifie and secure them . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,110.124

For if it be acknowledged that Men have a property in their Wives and
Daughters , so that to defile the one , or corrupt the other , is an
injust and injurious thing ; It is certain , that except a man carefully
governs his Appetites , he will break through these Restraints :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,110.125

and therefore our Saviour knowing that nothing could so effectually
deliver the World from the mischief of unrestrained Appetite , as such
<P_111> a Confinement , might very reasonably enjoyn it .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,111.126

And in all such Cases We are to ballance the Inconveniences on both
hands , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,111.127

and where we find they are heaviest , We are to acknowledge the Equity
of the Law . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,111.128

On the one hand there is no prejudice , but the restraint of Appetite ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,111.129

On the other , are the mischiefs of being given up to pleasure , of
running inordinately into it , of breaking the quiet of our own Family
at home , and of others abroad : the ingaging into much Passion , the
doing many false and impious things to compass what is desired , the
Wast of mens Estates , time , and health . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,111.130

Now let any man judge , Whether the prejudices on this side , are not
greater , <P_112> than that single one of the other side , of being
denied some pleasure ? BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,112.131

For <font> Polygamy <$$font> , it is but reasonable since Women are
equally concern'd in the Laws of Marriage , that they should be
considered as well as Men : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,112.132

But in a State of <font> Polygamy <$$font> they are under great misery
and jealousie , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,112.133

and are indeed barbarously used . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,112.134

Man being also of a sociable Nature , Friendship and Converse were among
the Primitive Intendments of Marriage , in which as far as the Man may
excel the Wife in greatness of Mind , and height of Knowledge , the Wife
someway makes that up with her Affection and tender Care : So that from
both happily mixed , there arises a Harmony , which is to vertuous Minds
<P_113> one of the greatest joys of life : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,113.135

But all this is gone in a state of <font> Polygamy <$$font> , which
occasions perpetual Jarrings and Jealousies .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,113.136

And the Variety does but engage men to a freer Range of pleasure , which
is not to be put in the Ballance with the far greater Mischiefs that
must follow the other course . So that it is plain , Our Saviour
considered the Nature of Man , what it could bear , and what was fit for
it , when he so restrained us in these our Liberties .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,113.137

And for Divorce , a power to break that Bond would too much encourage
married persons in the little quarrellings that may rise between them ;
If it were in their power to depart one from another .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,113.138

For when they know that can@ @not be , and <P_114> that they must live
and die together , it does naturally incline them to lay down their
Resentments , and to endeavour to live as well together as they can .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,114.139

So the Law of the Gospel being a Law of Love , designed to engage <font>
Christians <$$font> to mutual love ; It was fit that all such Provisions
should be made , as might advance and maintain it : and all such
Liberties be taken away , as are apt to enkindle or foment strife .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,114.140

This might fall in some instances to be uneasie and hard enough ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,114.141

but Laws consider what falls out most commonly ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,114.142

and can@ @not provide for all particular Cases .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,114.143

The best Laws are in some Instances very great grievances .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,114.144

But the Advantages being ballanced with the Inconveniences , <P_115>
Measures are to be taken accordingly . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,115.145

Upon this whole matter I said , That pleasure stood in opposition to
other Considerations of great weight , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,115.146

and so the decision was easie . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,115.147

And since our Saviour offers us so great Rewards . It is but reasonable
He have a Priviledge of loading these Promises with such Conditions , as
are not in themselves grateful to our natural Inclinations :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,115.148

For all that propose high Rewards , have thereby a right to exalt
difficult performances . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,115.149

To this he said , we are sure the terms are difficult , but are not so
sure of the Rewards . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,115.150

Upon this I told him , That we have the same assurance of the Rewards ,
that we have of the <P_116> other parts of <font> Christian Religion
<$$font> . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,116.151

We have the Promises of God made to us by Christ , confirmed by many
Miracles : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,116.152

we have the Earnests of these , in the quiet and peace which follows a
good Conscience : and in the Resurrection of Him from the dead , who
hath promised to raise us up . So that the Reward is sufficiently
assured to us : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,116.153

And there is no reason it should be given to us , before the Conditions
are performed , on which the Promises are made .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,116.154

It is but reasonable that we should trust God , and do our Duty , <font>
In hopes of that eternal Life , which God who can@ @not lie , hath
promised <$$font> . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,116.155

The Difficulties are not so great , as those which sometimes the
commonest concerns <P_117> of Life bring upon us :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,117.156

The learning some Trades or Sciences , the governing our Health and
Affairs , bring us often under as great straights . So that it ought to
be no just prejudice , that there are some things in Religion that are
uneasie , since this is rather the effect of our corrupt Natures , which
are farther deprav'd by vitious habits , and can hardly turn to any new
course of life , without some pain , than of the Dictates of <font>
Christianity <$$font> , which are in themselves just and reasonable ,
and will be easie to us when renew'd , and a good measure restor'd to
our Primitive Integrity . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,117.157

As for the Exceptions he had to the Maintenance of the Clergy , and the
Authority to <P_118> which they pretended ; if they stretched their
Designs too far , The Gospel did plainly reprove them for it : So that
it was very suitable to that Church , which was so grosly faulty this
way to take the Scriptures out of the hands of the people , since they
do so manifestly disclaim all such practices .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,118.158

The Priests of the true <font> Christian Religion <$$font> have no
secrets among them , which the World must not know ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,118.159

but are only an Order of Men dedicated to God , to attend on Sacred
things , who ought to be holy in a more peculiar manner , since they are
to handle the things of God . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,118.160

It was necessary that such persons should have a due Esteem paid them ,
and a fit Maintenance appointed for them : That so they <P_119> might be
preserved from the Contempt that follows Poverty , and the Distractions
which the providing against it might otherways involve them in :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,119.161

And as in the Order of the World , it was necessary for the support of
Magistracy and Government , and for preserving its esteem , that some
state be used <paren> though it is a happiness when Great Men have
Philosophical Minds , to despise the Pageantry of it . <$$paren>
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,119.162

So the plentiful supply of the Clergy , if well used and applied by them
, will certainly turn to the Advantage of Religion .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,119.163

And if some men either through Ambition or Covetousness used indirect
means , or servile Compliances to aspire to such Dignities , and being
possessed of <P_120> them , applied their Wealth either to Luxury or
Vain Pomp , or made great Fortunes out of it for their Families ; these
were personal failings in which the Doctrine of Christ was not concerned
. BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,120.164

He upon that told me plainly , There was nothing that gave him , and
many others , a more secret encouragement in their ill ways , than
{did_the_fact} that those who pretended to believe , lived so that they
could not be thought to be in earnest , when they said it :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,120.165

For he was sure <font> Religion <$$font> was either a meer Contrivance ,
or the most important thing that could be : So that if he once believed
, he would set himself in great earnest to live suitably to it .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,120.166

The aspirings that he had observed at Court , of some <P_121> of the
Clergy , with the servile ways they took to attain to Preferment , and
the Animosities among those of several Parties , about trifles , made
him often think they suspected the things were not true , which in their
Sermons and Discourses they so earnestly recommended .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,121.167

Of this he had gathered many Instances ; BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,121.168

I knew some of them were Mistakes and Calumnies ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,121.169

Yet I could not deny but something of them might be too true :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,121.170

And I publish this the more freely , to put all that pretend to Religion
, chiefly those that are dedicated to holy Functions , in mind of the
great Obligation that lies on them to live sutably to their Profession :
Since otherwise a great deal of the Irreligion <P_122> and Atheism that
is among us , may too justly be charged on them :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,122.171

for wicked men are delighted out of measure when they discover ill
things in them , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,122.172

and conclude from thence not only that they are Hypocrites , but that
Religion it self is a cheat . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,122.173

But I said to him upon this Head , that though no good man could
continue in the practice of any known sin , yet such might , by the
violence or surpise of a Temptation , to which they are liable as much
as others , be of a sudden overcome to do an ill thing , to their great
grief all their life after . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,122.174

And then it was a very injust Inference , Upon some few failings , to
conclude that such men do not believe themselves .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,122.175

<P_123>

But how bad soever many are , it can@ @not be denied but there are also
many both of the Clergy and Laity , who give great and real
Demonstrations of the power Religion has over them ; in their Contempt
of the World , the strictness of their Lives , their readiness to
forgive Injuries , to relieve the Poor , and to do good on all Occasions
: BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,123.177

and yet even these may have their failings , either in such things
wherein their Constitutions are weak , or their Temptations strong and
suddain : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,123.178

And in all such cases We are to judge of men , rather by the course of
their Lives , than by the Errors , that they through infirmity or
surprize may have slipt into . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,123.179

<P_124>

These were the chief Heads we discoursed on ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,124.181

and as far as I can remember , I have faithfully repeated the substance
of our Arguments : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,124.182

I have not concealed the strongest things he said to me ,
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,124.183

but though I have not enlarged on all the Excursions of his Wit in
setting them off , Yet I have given them their full strength , as he
expressed them ; BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,124.184

and as far as I could recollect , have used his own words : So that I am
afraid some may censure me for setting down these things so largely ,
which Impious Men may make an ill use of , and gather together to
encourage and defend themselves in their Vices :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,124.185

But if they will compare them with the Answers made to them , and the
sense <P_125> that so great and refined a Wit had of them afterwards , I
hope they may through the blessing of God be not altogether ineffectual
. BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,125.186

The issue of all our Discourses was this , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,125.187

He told me , He saw Vice and Impiety were as contrary to Humane Society
, as wild Beasts let loose would be ; and therefore he firmly resolved
to change the whole method of his Life : to become strictly just and
true , to be Chast and Temperate , to forbear Swearing and Irreligious
Discourse , to Worship and Pray to his Maker : And that though he was
not arrived at a full perswasion of <font> Christianity <$$font> , he
would never employ his Wit more to run it down , or to corrupt others .
<P_126> Of which I have since a further assurance , from a Person of
Quality , who conversed much with him , the last year of his life ; to
whom he would often say , That he was happy , if he did believe , and
that he would never endeavour to draw him from it .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,126.188

To all this I Answered , That a Vertuous Life would be very uneasie to
him , unless Vicious Inclinations were removed ;
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,126.189

It would otherwise be a perpetual constraint .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,126.190

Nor could it be effected without an inward Principle to change him :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,126.191

and that was only to be had by applying himself to God for it in
frequent and earnest Prayers : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,126.192

And I was sure if his Mind were once cleared of these Disorders , and
cured of those <P_127> Distempers , which Vice brought on it , so great
an Understanding would soon see through all those flights of Wit , that
do feed Atheism and Irreligion : which have a false glittering in them ,
that dazles some weak-sighted Minds , who have not capacity enough to
penetrate further than the Surfaces of things and so they stick in these
Toyls , which the strength of his Mind would soon break thorough , if it
were once freed from those things that depressed and darkened it .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,127.193

At this pass he was when he went from <font> London <$$font> , about the
beginning of <font> April <$$font> : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,127.194

He had not been long in the Country when he thought he was so well ,
that being to go to his Estate in <font> Somersetshire <$$font> he rode
<P_128> thither Post . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,128.195

This heat and violent motion did so inflame an Ulcer , that was in his
Bladder , that it raised a very great pain in those parts :
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,128.196

Yet he with much difficulty came back by Coach to the Lodge at <font>
Woodstock-Park <$$font> . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,128.197

He was then wounded both in Body and Mind : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,128.198

He understood Physick and his own Constitution and Distemper so well ,
that he concluded he could hardly recover : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,128.199

For the ulcer broke BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,128.200

and vast quantities of purulent matter past with his Urine .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,128.201

But now the Hand of God touched him , BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,128.202

and as he told me , It was not only a general dark Melancholy over his
Mind , such as he had formerly felt ; but a most penetrating cutting
Sorrow . So that though in his <P_129> Body he suffered extream pain ,
for some Weeks , Yet the Agonies of his Mind sometimes swallowed up the
sense of what he felt in his Body . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,129.203

He told me , and gave it me in charge , to tell it to one for whom he
was much concern'd , that though there were nothing to come after this
life , Yet all the Pleasures he had ever known in Sin , were not worth
that torture he had felt in his Mind : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,129.204

He considered he had not only neglected and dishonoured , but had openly
defied his Maker , and had drawn many others into the like Impieties :
So that he looked on himself as one that was in great danger of being
damn'd . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,129.205

He then set himself wholly , to turn to God unfeignedly and to do all
that was <P_130> possible in that little remainder of his life which was
before him , to redeem those great portions of it , that he had formerly
so ill employed . BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,130.206

The Minister that attended constantly on him , was that good and worthy
Man Mr. <font> Parsons <$$font> , his Mothers Chaplain , who hath since
his Death Preached , according to the Directions he received from him ,
his Funeral Sermon : in which there are so many remarkable Passages ,
that I shall refer my <font> Reader <$$font> to them , and will repeat
none of them here , that I may not thereby lessen his desire to edifie
himself by that excellent Discourse , which has given so great and so
general a satisfaction to all good and judicious Readers .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,130.207

I shall speak cursorily of every <P_131> thing , but that which I had
immediately from himself : BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,131.208

He was visited every Week of his Sickness by his <font> Diocesan
<$$font> , that truly Primitive Prelate , the Lord Bishop of <font>
Oxford <$$font> ; who though he lived six miles from him , yet looked on
this as so important a piece of his Pastoral Care , that he went often
to him ; and treated him with that decent plainness and freedom which is
so natural to him ; and took care also that he might not on terms more
easie than safe , be at peace with himself .
BURNETROC-1680-E3-P2,131.209

