<BEGIN_burnetcha-1698-e3-p2>

<P_2,174>

And when he was bid describe the room , it proved to be one of the
public rooms of that court , which are so great , that the queen , who
was a woman of a low voice , could not be heard over it , unless she had
strained for it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,174.3

Oates , to excuse his saying that he could not lay any thing to the
charge of any beside those he had already named , pretended he thought
then it was not lawful to accuse the queen :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,174.4

but this did not satisfy people . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,174.5

Bedloe , to support this , swore that being once in the chapel at
Somerset house , he saw the queen , the duke , and some others , very
earnest in discourse in the closet above , and that one came down with
much joy , and said the queen had yielded at last ; and that one
explained this to him beyond sea , and said it was to kill the king .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,174.6

And , besides Bedloe's oath that he saw Godfrey's body in Somerset house
, it was remembered that at that time the queen was for some days in so
close a retirement that no person was admitted .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,174.7

Prince Robert came then to wait on her , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,174.8

but was denied access . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,174.9

This raised a strange suspicion of her : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,174.10

but the king would not suffer that matter to go any further .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,174.11

<P_2,175>

While the examinations were going on , and preparation was making for
the trial of the prisoners , a bill was brought into the house of
commons , requiring all members of either house , and all such as might
come into the king's court or presence , to take a test against popery ;
in which not only transubstantiation was renounced , but the worship of
the Virgin Mary and the saints , as it was practised in the church of
Rome , was declared to be idolatrous . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,175.13

This passed in the house of commons without any difficulty .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,175.14

But in the house of lords , Gunning , bishop of Ely , maintained that
the church of Rome was not idolatrous : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,175.15

and he was answered by Barlow , bishop of Lincoln .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,175.16

The lords did not much mind Gunning's arguments ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,175.17

but passed the bill : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,175.18

and though Gunning had said that he could not take that test with a good
conscience , yet as soon as the bill was passed he took it in the crowd
with the rest . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,175.19

The duke <P_2,176> got a proviso to be put in it for excepting himself .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,176.20

He spoke upon that occasion with great earnestness , and with tears in
his eyes . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,176.21

He said he was now to cast himself upon their favour in the greatest
concern he could have in this world . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,176.22

He spoke much of his duty to the king , and of his zeal for the nation :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,176.23

and solemnly protested that whatever his religion might be , that should
only be a private thing between God and his own soul , and that no
effect of it should ever appear in the government .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,176.24

The proviso was carried for him by a few voices :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,176.25

and , contrary to all men's expectations , it passed in the house of
commons . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,176.26

There was also a proviso put in excepting nine ladies about the queen :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,176.27

and she said she would have all the ladies of that religion cast lots
who should be comprehended , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,176.28

only she named Portsmouth , as one whom she would not expose to the
uncertainty of a lot ; which was not thought very decent in her , if her
circumstances at that time had not required an extraordinary submission
to the king in every thing . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,176.29

Coleman was brought to his trial . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,176.30

Oates and Bedloe swore flatly against him as was mentioned before .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,176.31

He denied that he had ever seen either the one or the other of <P_2,177>
them in his whole life : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.32

and defended himself by Oates's not knowing him when they were first
confronted , nor objecting those matters to him for a great while after
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.33

He also pressed Oates to name the day in August in which he had sent the
fourscore guineas to the four ruffians . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.34

But Oates would fix on no day , though he was very punctual in matters
of less moment . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.35

Coleman had been out of town almost that whole month ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.36

but no day being named , that served him in no stead .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.37

He urged the improbability of his talking to two such men , whom he had
by their own confession never seen before .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.38

But they said he was told that they were trusted with the whole secret .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.39

His letters to P. la Chaise was the heaviest part of the evidence .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.40

He did not deny that there were many impertinent things in his letters :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.41

but said he intended nothing in them but the king's service and the
duke's . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.42

He never intended to bring in the catholic religion by rebellion or by
blood , but only by a toleration : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.43

that by the aid that was prayed from France , was only meant the
assistance of money , and the interposition of that court .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.44

After a long trial he was convict : and sentence passed upon him to die
as a traitor . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.45

He continued to his last breath denying every tittle of that which the
witnesses had sworn against him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.46

Many were sent from both houses , offering to interpose for his pardon
if he would confess . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.47

He still protested his innocence , and that he knew nothing but in the
way of negotiation . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.48

A committee of the house of commons was sent to examine him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.49

He behaved himself very modestly before them .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.50

He asserted his own innocence , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.51

and took great care to vindicate the duke .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.52

He said his own heat might make him too forward ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.53

for , being persuaded of the truth of his religion , he could not but
wish that all others were not only almost but altogether such as he was
, except in that chain ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.54

for he was then in irons . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,177.55

He confessed he had mixed too much of interest for raising himself in
all he did : and that he had received 2500 guineas from the French
ambassador to gain <P_2,178> some friends to his master , but that he
had kept them to himself . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.56

He had acted by order in all that he had done ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.57

and he believed the king knew of his employment , particularly that at
Brussels : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.58

but though he seemed willing to be questioned concerning the king , the
commons did not think fit to do it , nor to report what he said
concerning it : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.59

only in general they reported that he spoke of another thing , about
which they did not think fit to interrogate him , nor to mention it .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.60

Littleton was one of the committee , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.61

and gave me an account of all that passed that very night :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.62

and I found his behaviour made great impression on them all .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.63

He suffered with much composedness and devotion ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.64

and died much better than he had lived . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.65

It was given out at that time , to make the duke more odious , that
Coleman was kept up from making confessions , by the hopes the duke sent
him of a pardon at Tyburn : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.66

but he could not be so ignorant , as not to know that at that time it
was not in the king's power to pardon him , while the tide went so high
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.67

The nation was now so much alarmed , that all people were furnishing
themselves with arms , which heightened the jealousy of the court .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.68

A bill passed in both houses for raising all the militia , and for their
keeping together for six weeks , a third part , if I remember right ,
being to serve a fortnight , and so round .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.69

I found some of them hoped , when that bill passed into a law , they
would be more masters , and that the militia would not separate till all
the demands of the two houses should be granted .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.70

I gave the king notice of the consequence of that bill , and of the
effects it might have . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.71

He rejected the bill when offered to him for his assent ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.72

and thanked me for the advice I sent him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.73

I waited often on him all the month of December .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,178.74

<P_2,179>

He came to me to Chiffinch's , a page of the back stairs ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.76

and kept the time he assigned me to a minute .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.77

He was alone , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.78

and talked much and very freely with me . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.79

We agreed in one thing , that the greatest part of the evidence was a
contrivance . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.80

But he suspected some had set on Oates , and instructed him , and named
the earl of Shaftesbury . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.81

I was of another mind . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.82

I thought the many gross things in his narrative shewed there was no
abler head than Oates or Tonge in the framing it ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.83

and Oates in his first story had covered the duke and the ministers so
much , that from thence it seemed clear that lord Shaftesbury had no
hand in it , who hated them much more than he did popery .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.84

He fancied there was a design of a rebellion on foot .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.85

I assured him I saw no appearances of it .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.86

I told him there was a report breaking out , that he intended to
legitimate the duke of Monmouth . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.87

He answered quick , that , as well as he loved him , he had rather see
him hanged : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.88

yet he apprehended a rebellion so much , that he seemed not ill pleased
that the party should flatter themselves with that imagination , hoping
that would keep them quiet and in a dependance upon himself :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.89

and he suffered the duke of Monmouth to use all methods to make himself
popular , reckoning that he should keep him in his own management .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.90

He was surprised when I told him that Coleman had insinuated that he
knew of all their foreign negotiations , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.91

or at least he seemed so to me . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.92

I pressed him much to oblige the duke to enter into conferences with
some of our divines , and to be present at them himself .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.93

This would very much clear him of jealousy ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.94

and might have a good effect on his brother :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,179.95

at least it would give <P_2,180> the world some hopes , as Henry IV of
France , his grandfather , did , which kept a party firm to him for some
years before he changed . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.96

He answered that his brother had neither Henry IV@ @'s understanding nor
his conscience : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.97

for he believed that king was always indifferent as to those matters .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.98

He would not hearken to this , which made me inclined to believe a
report I had heard , that the duke had got a solemn promise of the king
that he would never speak to him of religion .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.99

The king spoke much to me concerning Oates's accusing the queen , with
the whole progress of it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.100

He said she was a weak woman , and had some disagreeable humours ; but
was not capable of a wicked thing : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.101

and considering his faultiness towards her in other things , he thought
it a horrid thing to abandon her . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.102

He said he looked on falsehood and cruelty as the greatest of crimes in
the sight of God . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.103

He knew he had led a bad life , of which he spoke with some sense ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.104

but he was breaking himself of all his faults ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.105

and he would never do a base and a wicked thing .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.106

I spoke on all these subjects what I thought became me , which he took
well : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.107

and I encouraged him much in his resolution of not exposing the queen to
perish by false swearing . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.108

I told him there was no possibility of laying the heat that was now
raised , but by changing his ministry : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.109

and told him how odious the earl of Danby was , and that there was a
design against him , but I knew not particulars .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.110

He said he knew that lay at bottom . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.111

The army was not yet disbanded , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.112

and the king was in great straits for money .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.113

The house of commons gave a money bill for this :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.114

yet they would not trust the court with the disbanding the army :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.115

but ordered the money to be brought into the chamber of London ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,180.116

<P_2,181>

and named a committee for paying off and breaking the army .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.118

I perceived the king thought I was reserved to him , because I would
tell him no particular stories , nor name persons . Upon which I told
him , since he had that opinion of me , I saw I could do him no service
, and would trouble him no more ; but he should certainly hear from me ,
if I came to know any thing that might be of any consequence to his
person or government . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.119

This favour of mine lasted all the month of December 78 .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.120

I acquainted him with Carstares's practice against duke Lauderdale , and
all that I knew of that matter , which was the ground on which I had
gone with relation to Staley . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.121

The king told duke Lauderdale of it , without naming me ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.122

and he sent for Carstares , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.123

and charged him with it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.124

Carstares denied all , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.125

but said that duke Hamilton and lord Kincardine had pressed him to it :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.126

and he went to the king , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.127

and affirmed it confidently to him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.128

He did not name lord Athol , hoping that he would be gentle to him for
that reason . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.129

The king spoke of this to duke Hamilton , who told him the whole story
as I had done . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.130

Lord Athol upon that sent for Carstares , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.131

and charged him with all this foul dealing ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.132

and drew him near a closet , where he had put two witnesses .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.133

Carstares said somebody had discovered the matter to duke Lauderdale :
that he was now upon the point of making his fortune , and that if duke
Lauderdale grew to be his enemy , he was undone .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.134

He confessed he had charged duke Hamilton and lord Kincardine falsely ,
but he had no other way to save himself .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.135

After the marquis of Athol had thus drawn every thing from him , he went
to the king with his two witnesses , and the paper that Carstares had
formerly put in his hand . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.136

Carstares was then with the king , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.137

and was , with many imprecations , justifying his charge against the two
lords : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.138

but he was confounded when he saw lord Athol ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.139

and upon that his villainy appeared so evidently , that the part I had
acted in that matter was now well understood and approved of .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.140

Carstares died not long after under great horror ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,181.141

and <P_2,182> ordered himself to be cast into some ditch as a dog ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.142

for he said he was no better . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.143

But I could never hear what he said of Staley's business .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.144

While all matters were in this confusion , a new incident happened that
embroiled them yet more . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.145

The earl of Danby had broke with Montagu ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.146

but he knew what letters he had writ to him , and with what secrets he
had trusted him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.147

He apprehended Montagu might accuse him : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.148

so he resolved to prevent him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.149

Jenkins , who was then at Nimeguen , writ over , according to a
direction sent him , as was believed , that he understood Montagu had
been in a secret correspondence and in dangerous practices with the
pope's nuncio at Paris . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.150

This was meant of one Con , whom I knew well , who had been long in Rome
: BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.151

and most of the letters between England and Rome passed through his
hands . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.152

He was a crafty man , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.153

but knew news well , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.154

and loved money . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.155

So Montagu made use of him , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.156

and gave him money for such secrets as he could draw from him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.157

Upon Jenkins's letter , the king sent a message to the house of commons
, letting them know that he was resolved to bring Montagu to a trial ,
for being a confederate with Rome , and in the plot to bring in popery .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.158

And at the same time he sent to secure his cabinets and papers : a
device of lord Danby's to find his own letters and destroy them , and
then to let the prosecution fall : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.159

for they knew they had nothing against Montagu .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.160

But he understood the arts of a court too well to be easily catched ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,182.161

and had <P_2,183> put a box in which those letters were in sure hands
out of the way . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,183.162

A great debate rose upon this matter in the house of commons .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,183.163

It was thought a high breach of privilege to seize on the papers of a
member of their house when there was nothing of treason swore against
him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,183.164

After some hours spent in the debate , during which Montagu sat silent
very long , at last , when the box was brought to him from the person to
whom he had trusted it , he opened it , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,183.165

and took out two of lord Danby's letters , that contained instructions
for him to treat with the king of France for 300,000 <font> l. <$$font>
a year for three years , if a peace succeeded , since it would not be
convenient for the king to meet a parliament in all that time ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,183.166

and he was charged to mention no part of this to the secretary .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,183.167

Winnington , who from small beginnings , and with as small a proportion
of learning in his profession , in which he was rather bold and ready
than able , was now come to be solicitor general , fell severely upon
those letters . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,183.168

He said , here was a minister who , <P_2,184> going out of the affairs
of his own province , was directing the king's ambassadors and excluding
the secretary of state , whose office that was , from the knowledge of
it : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,184.169

here was the faith of England to our allies , and our own interest
likewise , set to sale for French money , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,184.170

and that to keep off a session of parliament .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,184.171

This was a design to sell the nation , and to subvert the government :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,184.172

and he concluded that was high treason : upon which he moved that lord
Danby should be impeached of high treason .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,184.173

The earl of Danby@ @'s party was much confounded :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,184.174

they could neither deny nor justify his letters ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,184.175

but they argued that they could not be high treason , since no such fact
was comprehended in any of the statutes of treason .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,184.176

The letters seemed to be writ by the king's order , who certainly might
appoint any person he pleased to send his orders to his ministers abroad
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,184.177

They reflected on the business of the earl of Strafford , and on
constructive treason , which was a device to condemn a man for a fact
against which no law did lie . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,184.178

Maynard , an ancient and eminent lawyer , explained the words of the
statute of 25 Edward III that the courts of law could only proceed upon
one of the crimes there enumerated . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,184.179

But the parliament had still a power by the clause in that act to
declare what they thought was treason : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,184.180

so an act passed declaring poisoning treason , in king Henry VIII@ @'s
time : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,184.181

and as by the statute it was only treason to conspire against the prince
of Wales , yet if one should conspire against the whole royal family ,
when there was no prince of Wales , they would without doubt declare
that to be high treason . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,184.182

After a long debate it was voted by a majority of above seventy voices ,
that lord Danby should be impeached <P_2,185> of high treason ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,185.183

and the impeachment was next day carried up to the lords .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,185.184

The earl of Danby justified himself , that he had served the king
faithfully , and according to his own orders .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,185.185

And he produced some of Montagu's letters , to shew that at the court of
France he was looked on as an enemy to their interest .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,185.186

He said they knew him well that judged so of him ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,185.187

for he was indeed an enemy to it , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,185.188

and among other reasons he gave this for one , that he knew the French
king held both the king's person and government under the last degree of
contempt . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,185.189

These words were thought very strange with relation to both kings .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,185.190

A great debate arose in the house of lords concerning the impeachment ;
whether it ought to be received as an impeachment of high treason , only
because the commons added the word high treason in it .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,185.191

It was said , the utmost could be made of it was to suppose it true :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,185.192

but even in that case they must needs say plainly , that was not within
the statute . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,185.193

To this it was answered , that the house of commons that brought up the
impeachment were to be heard to two points :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,185.194

the one was , to the nature of the crime :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,185.195

the other was , to the trial of it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,185.196

But the lords could not take upon them to judge of either of these ,
till they heard what the commons could offer to support the charge .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,185.197

They were bound therefore to receive the charge , and to proceed
according to the rules of parliament , which <P_2,186> was to commit the
person so impeached , and then give a short day for his trial :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,186.198

so it would be soon over if the commons could not prove the matter
charged to be high treason . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,186.199

The debate went on with great heat on both sides :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,186.200

but the majority was against the commitment .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,186.201

Upon this it was visible the commons would have complained that the
lords denied them justice : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,186.202

so there was no hope of making up the matter ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,186.203

and upon that the parliament was prorogued .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,186.204

This was variously censured . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,186.205

The court condemned Montagu for revealing the king's secrets .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,186.206

Others said , that since lord Danby began to fall on him it was
reasonable and natural for him to defend himself .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,186.207

The letters did cast a very great blemish not only on lord Danby but on
the king , who , after he had entered into alliances , and had received
great supplies from his people to carry on a war , was thus treating
with France for money , which could not be asked or obtained from France
on any other account , but that of making the confederates accept of
lower terms than otherwise they would have stood on ; which was indeed
the selling of the allies and of the public faith .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,186.208

All that the court said in excuse for this was , that since the king saw
a peace was resolved on , after he had put himself to so great a charge
to prepare for war , it was reasonable for him to seek to be reimbursed
as much as could be from France . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,186.209

This was ordinary in all treaties , where the prince that desired a
peace was made to buy it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,186.210

This indeed would have justified the king , if it had been demanded
above board : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,186.211

but such underhand dealing was mean and <P_2,187> dishonourable :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.212

and it was said , that the States went in to the peace with such
unreasonable earnestness upon the knowledge , or at least the suspicion
, that they had of such practices . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.213

This gave a new wound to the king's credit abroad ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.214

or rather it opened the old one : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.215

for indeed after our breaking both the treaty of Breda and the triple
alliance , we had not much credit to lose abroad .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.216

None gained so much by this discovery as secretary Coventry ; since it
now appeared that he was not trusted with those ill practices .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.217

He had been severely fallen on for the famed saying of the murder of
forty men . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.218

Birch aggravated the matter heavily , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.219

and said it seemed he thought the murder of forty men a very small
matter , since he would rather be guilty of it than oppose an alliance
made upon such treacherous views . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.220

Coventry answered , that he always spoke to them sincerely , and as he
thought ; and that if an angel from heaven should come and say otherwise
, <paren> at this they were very attentive , to see how he could close a
period so strangely begun , <$$paren> he was sure he should never get
back to heaven again , but should be a fallen and a lying angel .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.221

Now the matter was well understood , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.222

and his credit was set on a sure foot . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.223

After the prorogation , the earl of Danby saw the king's affairs and the
state of the nation required a speedy session .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.224

He saw little hope of recovering himself with that parliament , whence
so great a majority was already so deeply engaged :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.225

so he entered into a treaty with some of the country party for a new
parliament . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.226

He also undertook to get the duke to be sent out of the way against the
time of its meeting . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.227

Lord Holles , Littleton , Boscawen , and Hampden were spoke to .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,187.228

They were all so apprehensive of the continuance of that parliament ,
and that another set of ministers would be able to manage them as the
court pleased , that they did undertake to save him , if he could
<P_2,188> bring these things about ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.229

but it was understood that he must quit his post , and withdraw from
affairs . Upon which they promised their assistance to carry off his
impeachment with a mild censure . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.230

The duke went into the advice of a dissolution upon other grounds .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.231

He thought the house of commons had engaged with so much heat in the
matter of the plot , that they could never be brought off , or be made
more gentle in the matter of religion . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.232

He thought a new parliament would act in a milder strain , and not fly
so high ; or that they would give no money , and so the king and they
would break : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.233

for he dreaded nothing so much as the bargains that were made with the
present parliament , in which popery was always to be the sacrifice .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.234

Thus both the duke and lord Danby joined in advising a dissolution ,
which was not resolved on_till the January following .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.235

In December , Ireland , Whitebread , and Fenwick , three Jesuits , and
Grove and Pickering , two of the servants in the queen's chapel , were
brought to their trial . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.236

Oates and Bedloe swore home against Ireland , that in August last he had
given particular orders about killing the king .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.237

Oates swore the same against the other Jesuits ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.238

but Bedloe swore only upon hearsay against them .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.239

So , though they had pleaded to their indictment , and the jury was
sworn , and the witnesses examined , yet , when the evidence was not
found full , their trial was put off to another time ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.240

and the jury was not charged with them . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.241

This looked as if it was resolved that they must not be acquitted .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.242

I complained of this to Jones , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.243

but he said they had precedents for it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.244

I always thought that a precedent against reason signified no more but
that the like injustice had been done once before .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.245

And the truth is , the crown has , or at least had , such advantages in
trials of treason , that it seems strange how any person was ever
acquitted . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,188.246

Ireland , in his own defence , proved by many witnesses that he went
from <P_2,189> London on the second of August to Staffordshire , and did
not come back till the twelfth of September ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,189.247

yet , in opposition to that , a woman swore that she saw him in London
about the middle of August . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,189.248

So , since he might have come up post in one day , and gone down in
another , this did not satisfy . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,189.249

Oates and Bedloe swore against Grove and Pickering that they had
undertaken to shoot the king at Windsor ; that Grove was to have 1500
<font> l <$$font> for it , and that Pickering chose thirty_thousand
masses , which at a shilling a mass amounted to the same sum .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,189.250

They attempted it three several times with a pistol :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,189.251

once the flint was loose , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,189.252

at another time there was no powder in the pan ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,189.253

and the third time the pistol was charged only with bullets .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,189.254

This was strange stuff ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,189.255

but all was imputed to a special providence of God ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,189.256

and the whole evidence was believed . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,189.257

So they were convicted , condemned , and executed ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,189.258

but denied to the last every particular that was sworn against them .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,189.259

This began to shake the credit of the evidence , when a more composed
and credible person came in to support it .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,189.260

One Dugdale , that had been the lord Aston@ @'s bailie , and lived in a
fair reputation in the country , was put in prison for refusing the
oaths of allegiance and supremacy . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,189.261

<P_2,190>

He did then , with many imprecations on himself , deny that he knew of
any plot ; BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.263

but afterwards he made a great discovery of a correspondence that Evers
, the lord Aston@ @'s Jesuit , held with the Jesuits in London ; who had
writ much to Evers of the design of killing the king , and desired him
to find out men proper for executing it , whether they were gentlemen or
not . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.264

This , he swore , was writ plain in a letter from Whitebread , the
provincial , directed to himself , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.265

but he knew it was meant for Evers . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.266

He and Govan , another Jesuit , pressed this Dugdale to undertake it :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.267

they promised he should be canonized for it ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.268

and the lord Stafford offered him 500 <font> l. <$$font> if he would
set about it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.269

He was a man of sense and temper , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.270

and behaved himself decently , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.271

and had somewhat in his air and deportment that disposed people to
believe him : so that the king himself began to think there was somewhat
in the plot , though he had very little regard either to Oates or Bedloe
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.272

Dugdale's evidence was much confirmed by one circumstance .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.273

He had talked of a justice of peace in Westminster that was killed , on
the Tuesday after Godfrey was missed : so that the news of this must
have been writ from London on the Saturday night's post .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.274

He did not think it was a secret : BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.275

and so he had talked it as news in an alehouse .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.276

The two persons to whom he said he spoke it remembered nothing of it ,
the one being the minister of the parish :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.277

but several others swore they had heard it .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.278

He saw this , as he swore , in a letter writ by Harcourt the Jesuit to
Evers , in which Godfrey was named . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,190.279

But he added a strange story to this , which he said Evers told him
afterwards ; that the duke had sent to Coleman when he was in Newgate to
persuade him to discover nothing , and that he desired to know of him
whether he had ever discovered it to any other person ; and that Coleman
sent back answer , that he had spoke of it to Godfrey , but to no
<P_2,191> other man : upon which the duke gave order to kill him .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,191.280

This was never made public till the lord Stafford@ @'s trial :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,191.281

and I was amazed to see such a thing break out after so long a silence ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,191.282

and it looked like an addition to Dugdale's first evidence , though he
had been noted for that , as having brought out all his discoveries at
once . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,191.283

But the earl of Essex told me he swore it on his first examination , but
since it was only upon hearsay from Evers , and so was nothing in law ,
and yet would heighten the fury against the duke , the king charged
Dugdale to say nothing of it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,191.284

At the same time a particular discovery was made of Godfrey's murder .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,191.285

Prance , a goldsmith that wrought for the queen's chapel , had gone from
his house for two or three days the week before the murder ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,191.286

and one that lodged in his house , calling that to mind upon Bedloe's
swearing he saw the body in Somerset house , fancied that this was the
time in which he was from home , and that he might be concerned in that
matter ; though it appeared afterwards that his absence was the week
before , and he said he went from his own house fearing to be put in
prison , as many were upon suspicion , or on the account of his religion
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,191.287

Yet upon this information he was seized on , and carried to Westminster
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,191.288

Bedloe accidentally passed by , not knowing any thing concerning him :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,191.289

and at first sight he charged some to seize on him ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,191.290

for he was one of those whom he saw about Godfrey's body :
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,191.291

yet he denied every thing for some days .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,191.292

Afterwards he confessed he was in it , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,191.293

<P_2,192>

and he gave this account of it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.295

Girald and Kelly , two priests , engaged him and three others into it ;
who were Green , that belonged to the queen's chapel , Hill , that had
served Godden the most celebrated writer among them , and Berry , the
porter of Somerset house . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.296

He said , these all , except Berry , had several meetings , in which the
priests persuaded them it was no sin , but a meritorious action , to
despatch Godfrey , who had been a busy man in taking depositions against
them , and that the taking him off would terrify others .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.297

Prance named an alehouse where they used to meet ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.298

and the people of that house did confirm this of their meeting there .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.299

After they had resolved on it , they followed him for several days .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.300

The morning before they killed him , Hill went to his house , to see if
he was yet at home , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.301

they stayed his coming out . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.302

This was confirmed by the maid , who upon Hill's being taken went to
Newgate , and in a crowd of prisoners distinguished him , and said he
was the person that had asked for her master the morning before he was
lost . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.303

And then he said they dogged him into a place near St. Clement's church
, where he was kept till night . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.304

This laid the suspicion still heavier on the duke of Norfolk .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.305

Prance was appointed to be at Somerset house at night ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.306

and , as Godfrey went by the water gate , two of them pretended to be
hot in a quarrel , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.307

and one run out to call a justice of peace ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.308

and so he pressed Godfrey to go in and part them .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.309

He was not easily prevailed on to do it , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.310

yet did at last . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.311

Green then got behind him , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.312

and pulled a cravat about his neck , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.313

and drew him down to the ground , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.314

and strangled him . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.315

Upon that Girald would have run him through ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.316

but the rest diverted him from that , by representing the danger of a
discovery by the blood's being seen there .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.317

Upon that they carried up his body to Godden's room , of which Hill had
the key , he being then in France . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,192.318

Two days after , they removed it to a room <P_2,193> cross the upper
court , which he could never describe particularly ;
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,193.319

and that not being found a convenient place , they carried it back to
Godden's lodgings . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,193.320

At last it was resolved to carry it out in the night , in a sedan , to
the remote parts of the town , and from thence to cast it in some ditch
. BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,193.321

On Wednesday a sedan was provided , BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,193.322

and one of the centinels swore he saw a sedan carried in ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,193.323

but none saw it brought out . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,193.324

Prance said they carried him out , and that Green had provided a horse ,
on whose back he laid him when they had got clear of the town ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,193.325

and then he carried him as he believed to the place where his body was
found . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,193.326

This was a consisting story , which was supported in some circumstances
by collateral proofs . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,193.327

He added another particular , that some days after the fact those who
had been concerned in it , and two others who were in on the secret ,
appoointed to meet at Bow , where they talked much of that matter .
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,193.328

This was confirmed by a servant of that house , who was coming in and
out to them , and heard them often mention Godfrey's name ; upon which
he stood at the door out of curiosity to hearken ,
BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,193.329

but one of them came out BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,193.330

and threatened him for it . BURNETCHA-1698-E3-P2,2,193.331

