<BEGIN_capel-1676-e3-p2>

<P_88>

<heading:edcomment:LXXIII_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX_TO_THE_DUKE_OF_YORK>

May it please yr Higness Sir Cyrill Wyche goeing over to attend at this
next sessions in Parliament , I have commanded him to waite on yr
Highness and <P_89> acquaint you with ye affairs of this Kingdome wch
God bee thanked are in a very quiett posture . CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,89.4

The Country doth sensibly improve dayly CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,89.5

and ye Farme is likely to go on very well , tho ye delays in ye dispatch
of ye patent wch hinderd their principalls from coming over had put
their businesse so much back , as I fear they will be loosers this first
year , CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,89.6

yet it seems to mee very clear yt ye next will certeinly repay them with
advantage ; CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,89.7

for there are severall particulars both in ye customs , Excise and
Hearth Money , wch ye Comm=isnrs= for ye late Farme did not discerne to
bee done by Lawe , wch these men have discovered , and putt in execution
, CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,89.8

and it is certain yt if ye Revenue bee made good his Mat=y= will bee at
great ease for all concernments here . CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,89.9

Dublin Castle CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,89.10

Jan 13 76@ @<slash>@ @7 CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,89.11

To Ye Duke . CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,89.12

<P_108>

<heading:edcomment:LXXXIX_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX_TO_THE_DUKE_OF_ORMOND>

Dublin Castle CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,108.15

March 6 1676/7 CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,108.16

My Lord , By some Letters from my brother I doe understand how much I am
obliged to yr grace for ye good character you have bin pleasd to give
mee upon occasion of some debates relating to ye affairs of Ireland ;
CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,108.17

I must confesse ye worke I have to doe here is made soe laborious , as I
thinke would almost tire out any man CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,108.18

and that which is most strange to mee is , yt whilst I only endeavor to
bring these persons who are accountants to his Mat=y= to a just and true
acc=t= , discouragement should bee putt upon mee therein :
CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,108.19

If I passe everything that comes before mee I shall bee blamed
here-after , CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,108.20

<P_109>

and if I doe not doe it I am found fault with now ;
CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,109.22

therefore let it fall out as it will I will bee just to ye Master I
serve : CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,109.23

I have appointed Sir Cyrill Wyche , yt when yr Grace is at Leisure , hee
will communicate matters to you CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,109.24

and therefore I shall not trouble yr Grace with any long Letters
CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,109.25

but desire you will believe mee to bee with perfect truth , etc.
CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,109.26

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_2,_letter_107,_here}

<P_145>

<heading:edcomment:CXXIII_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX_TO_THE_DUKE_OF_ORMOND>

Dublin Castle CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,145.30

Augst 15. : 77 CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,145.31

My Lord On Sunday last I received yr Grace's Letter of ye 4=th= instant
wch gave mee notice yt you had begun yr journey ;
CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,145.32

I have ordered <P_146> ye ships w=ch= you desired to attend yr Grace at
Holyhead . CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,146.33

Sir John Champion hath desired leave to goe for England w=ch= truly I
would not venture to give him without ye advice of ye Privy Councill ,
CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,146.34

and it being proposed there , hee was called in and asked if ye Lord
Ranela had deputed any one in his absence to supply his place ,
CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,146.35

and hee telling us there was none , but yt hee would leave the business
in such order as there would not need any , The Councill were so little
satisfied w=th= this answer as they were all unanimously of opinion yt
hee ought not to have permission to goe . CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,146.36

The reasons are too long for a letter CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,146.37

but they are such as I beleive can@ @not bee answered .
CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,146.38

I have nothing further to acquaint yr Grace till I see you
CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,146.39

but wish you a prosperous voyage CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,146.40

and remaine , etc. CAPEL-1676-E3-P2,146.41

