<BEGIN_chaplain-1506-e1-p2>

<P_3>

<heading>

The Pylgrymage of S=r= R. Guylf~ , Kny. CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,3.4

<$$heading>

Firste , the Wednysday at nyght in Passyon weke that was y=e= .viij.
day of Apryll in the .xxi. yere of the reygne of our soueraygne lord
kynge Henry the .vij. the yere of our Lorde God .M.D.vj. , aboute .x.
of y=e= cloke the same nyght , we shypped at Rye in Sussex ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,3.6

and the nexte daye , that was Shyre Thursdaye , aboute noone , we landed
at Kyryell in Normandy , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,3.7

and rode to Depe the same nyght . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,3.8

Good Frydaye , the .ix. daye of Apryll , we rode to Totys , where we
herde the deuyne seruyce , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,3.9

and soo to Roane the same nyght , where we abode Ester euyn and Ester
daye all daye , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,3.10

and on Ester Monday that was the .xij. daye of Apryll we departed frome
Roane to Cuys to dyner , and to Myny y=e= same nyght .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,3.11

Tewysdaye to Pountese to dyner , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,3.12

and rode by seynt Denys , where we offerde and saw the relyquys , and to
Parys the same nyght , where we abode Wednysdaye all daye .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,3.13

Thursdaye , the .xvj. daye of Apryll , to Essone and to Myly .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,3.14

Frydaye to seynt Mathelyn~ and to Montorg~ . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,3.15

Saterdaye to Bryere , and to Cona . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,3.16

<P_4>

Sundaye , the .xix. daye , after masse to Cyryte .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.18

Mondaye to Nauers and to seynt Pyers La Mottyer .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.19

Tewsdaye to Molyns , and to Valyons . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.20

Wednysdaye to seynt Martyn , and to seynt Gy . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.21

Thursdaye , seynt Georg~ daye , to Roana , and to Tarrare , where we
passed an yll mountayne . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.22

Frydaye to Labrylle , and to Lyon , where we taryed bothe Saterdaye and
Sonday , and vysyted the relyques at the Yle where saint Anne lyeth and
Longyous ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.23

there is also a cuppe of an emerawde stone wherof oure Sauyoure Criste
dranke at his maundy . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.24

Mondaye , the .xxvij. daye of Apryll , to Vyenna .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.25

Tewysdaye to Bewrepayre , and to seynt Antony .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.26

Wednysday to Leerbe and to Tulynes . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.27

Thursdaye , the laste daye of Apryll , to Lasheles , where lyethe quene
Elyanour of Englonde , and in an abbey of her awne fou~dacyon ;
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.28

and from thense after dyner the same nyght we passed the daungerous
Mou~te to the great Charterhouse , where we well were receyuyd ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.29

and lay there all that nyght . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.30

Frydaye , the firste daye of Maij , ayen to Lasheles ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.31

and ouer the Mounte to Shambery . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.32

Saterdaye to Mou~te Mylyon and to Chambre . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.33

So~day , Holy rode day , after masse to Agabelle .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,4.34

<P_5>

Mondaye to seynt Mychell and to seynt Andrea . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.36

Tewysdaye to Ocesse and to Lyuyngborghe . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.37

Wednysday to Susa , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.38

and there restyd vs all nyght , bycause of the greuous Mounte Senys that
we passed the same daye . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.39

Thursdaye to seynt Ambrose and to Moncalere . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.40

Fryday , the .viij. daye of Maij , to Nouauylla in Haust to Hauste ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.41

and to Curtysello the same nyght , where we were at ease , &c.
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.42

Saterdaye to Alexandrya , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.43

and there Sonday all daye , where maister Jerom and Augustyn Panyson ,
with the grete nou~bre of their worshypfull parentis and cosyns , whiche
two gentylmen be nyghe cosyns vnto mayster Vaux and to my lady Guylforde
, made grete honour , feestis , and cheere vnto my M. Gulford y=t=
myght not be ame~dyd , and also stuffed vs w=t= vitall~ , brede , and
wyne in our barg~ : CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.44

there we lefte our horses CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.45

and toke the water of Tannar . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.46

Mondaye the .xi. daye of Maij we toke shyppynge there ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.47

and aboute .x. myle thens the sayde Tannar brought vs into the Poo , by
syde Bassynyana , whiche stondeth vppon the Poo .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.48

The same daye we passyd Pauya , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.49

and lay y=t= nyght at Seint Jacobo , a vyllage .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.50

Tewysdaye the .xij. daye we passed by Plesaunce and Cremona ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.51

and laye at Pulleso . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.52

Wednysdaye we passed by Trusell p~ uia Cassamora , Vedona , Mantua ,
Bressello , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.53

and Gwastale all nyght . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,5.54

Thursdaye by Bulforde and Belforde , the one ayenst the other <P_6> on
the ryuer , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,6.55

and so to Hystya , where we souped and toke oure bote
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,6.56

and passed all that nyght . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,6.57

The same nyght we passed by Ferare , whiche stondeth .iij. myle frome
the Poo , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,6.58

and a lytell aboue Ferare the Poo departeth into two part~ , that oon
parte gothe to Ferare and so into the see at {COM:blank_in_text} , and
the other parte to Padow . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,6.59

Frydaye somwhat byfore noone we lefte all the Poo
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,6.60

and toke our course by a lytell ryuer y=t= commeth to the same , called
the Fosse , made and cutte out by hande , whiche brought vs ouerthawart
into another ryuer , called Latyze , that co~meth from Verone and Trent
; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,6.61

and yet within a whyle we trauersed out of that ryuer into an other
lytell ryver , whiche brought vs thawarte ayen into Latyze , whiche
Latyze broughte vs into Chose vpon the see , called in Latyne Claudium ,
where we lay all nyght , .xxv. myle from Venys .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,6.62

The nexte daye , Saterdaye byfore the feste of Assencion of oure Lorde ,
that was the .xvj. daye of Maij , we come to Venyse , aboute .ij. of
the cloke at after_noone . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,6.63

The .xij. daye of June , that was Fryday , we wente by water to Padua
by the ryver of Brente , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,6.64

and there we taryed Saterdaye and Sondaye . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,6.65

Saterdaye was the feeste of seynt Antony , whiche was a Grey Frere , and
lyeth ryght fayre at the Grey Freres there . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,6.66

There was the same daye a solempne processyon , where at were borne many
relyques , and the noumbre of doctoures of Cyuyle and physyk was grete
excedyngly . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,6.67

In the sayde processyon we vysyted there many seyntes and relyques , as
seynt Luke and seynt Mathye , whiche bothe lye in the abbey of seynt
Justyne vyrgyn , a place of Blake Monkes , ryght delectable , and also
solytarye : CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,6.68

there be two tables of our blessyd Lady , which seynt Luke paynted with
his awne handes at Padowa . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,6.69

Also we sawe the toumbes of Antenore of Troye and of Tytus Lyuyus .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,6.70

<P_7>

The Mondaye folowynge , that was the daye of Viti and Modesti , and the
.xvj. day of June , we retournyd ayen to Venys , whiche day was a grete
tryumphe and Feste there in remembrance of a Victorye that the Venycyans
had y=e= same day in gettynge of Padowa . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,7.72

They went ouer y=e= water to the churche of the sayde Seyntis , whiche
is an arme of the see , vpon a brygge layde {TEXT:ladye} and made of
Galyes ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,7.73

and so they do ever whan the Duke and the Senyourye shall passe the same
water . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,7.74

The relyques at Uenyce can not be noumbred . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,7.75

There lyeth saynt Elyn , saynt Barbara , seynt Roke , seynt Zachary ,
seynt Jeruas , and Prothase , and many other seynt~ and grete relyques ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,7.76

and at the monastery of seynt Nycholas there lyeth the holy body of
seynt Nycholas , as they saye . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,7.77

There be also in the churche of seynt Marke many grete relyques and
jewell~ . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,7.78

There is a grete chales of fyne gold of curious werke , set with many
precious stones , whiche is in heyght .iij. quarters of a yerde ;
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,7.79

it is to large to vse at masse , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,7.80

but they use it in adhornynge the aulter at pryncypall tymes , and in
theyr processyon on Corpus X~pi day . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,7.81

There be also two grete candylstykes amonge other of a wonderfull
gretenesse , y=t= be ryght curyously wrought , and are fyne golde ,
garnysshed ouer all with stones of grete pryce .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,7.82

There be also .xij. crownes of fyne golde , and .xij. pectorals , and
a ryche cappe whiche euery Duke is corowned with at his first
intrononyzacion ; the pryce of all whiche crownes , pectorales , and
cappe is inestymable , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,7.83

for they be full set with precyous stones of the gretest valoure that
may be . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,7.84

At the Archynale there be closed within , alwaye in a redynesse to set
forth whan they woll , an_.c. galyes , grete bastardes and sotell ,
besydes all tho that be in voyage and in the hauen .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,7.85

There be workynge dayly at the same Archynale , in a place y=t= is in
lengthe .M.lxxx. fote , moo than an_.c. men and women that do no
thynge but dayly make ropes and cables . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,7.86

Item , amonge all wondre and strau~ge ordynau~ce that we sawe there ,
bothe for see and lande , with all maner Artyllary and Ingynes that may
be deuysyd , pryncypally we noted .ij. peces of artyllary , <P_8>
wherof one was a pece of ordynaunce of brasse for a Galy bastarde , to
be deuyded in two peces of .xij._M.cccc._and_.xix. pounde weyght , with
a stopel made by a vyce , and the sayde stopell joyned by vyce , whiche
shoteth of yrron .c._l. pounde weyght , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.87

and the sayde shot of yrron is .xxviij. ynches aboute .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.88

This pece is .xxviij. fote of lengthe , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.89

and is called a Basylyske , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.90

and is for the see . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.91

An other pece there is for the londe , for a sege , deuyded in .iij.
pec~ , to be joyned by vyces , weyinge .xxxviij. weyghte .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.92

and beryth of lengthe .xxiiij. fote , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.93

and shoteth a stone of irron of .ij. fote depe .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.94

The rychesse , the su~ptuous buyldynge , the relygyous houses , and the
stablysshynge of their justyces and councylles , with all other thyng~
y=t= maketh a cytie glorious , surmou~teth in Venyse aboue all places
y=t= euer I sawe . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.95

{TEXT:paragraph_symbol}

And specyally at .ij. festis wherat we were present .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.97

The one was upon the Ascencion daye , whiche daye the Duke , with a
greate truymphe and solempnyte , with all the Seygnyoury , went in their
Archa trimphali , which is in maner of a Galye of a strau~ge facyon and
wonder stately , &c. ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.98

and so rowed out into y=e= see with assystence of their patriarche ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.99

and there spoused y=e= see with a rynge . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.100

The spousall wordes be , " In signu~ veri p~petui q~ Domini . "
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.101

And therwith the Duke lete fall the rynge in to the see . The processe
and cerimonyes wherof were to longe to wryte , &c.
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.102

The other feeste was on Corporis X~pi day , where was the most solempne
procession that euer I sawe . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.103

There went Pagentis of y=e= olde lawe and the newe , joynynge togyther
the fygures of the blessyd sacrament in suche noumbre and soo apte and
conuenyent for that feeste y=t= it wold make any man joyous to se it .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.104

And ouer that it was a grete marueyle to se the grete noumbre of
relygyous folkes , and of scoles that we call bretherhed~ or felysshyps
, with theyr deuyses , whiche all bare lyght~ of wondre goodly facyon ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,8.105

and bytwene euery of the pagentis went lytell children of bothe kyndes ,
gloryously and rychely dressyd , berynge in their hand~ in riche cuppes
or other vessaylles some plesau~t floures or other <P_9> well_smellynge
or riche stuffe , dressed as aungelles to adorne the sayde processyon .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.106

The forme and maner therof excedyd all other that euer I sawe so moche
that I can not wryte it . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.107

{TEXT:paragraph_symbol}

The Duke sat in seynt Markes churche in ryght hyghe estate , with all
the Seygnyourye , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.109

and all the pylgrymes were present . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.110

The Duke thus syttynge , the sayde p~cessyon come by hym ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.111

and byganne to passe by aboute .vij. of the cloke ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.112

and it was passed .xij. or the sayde processyon myght come oones aboute
, passynge by as faste as they myght goo but one tyme .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.113

There was greate honoure done to the Pylgrymes ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.114

for we all moste and leste wente all there nexte the Duke in the sayd
processyon , byfore all the lordes and other estat~ , with lyght~ also
in our handes of wexe , of the fresshest formynge , yeuen vnto vs by the
mynysters of the sayde processyon . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.115

Whyles we were at Venyse we went also to Mestres , where y=e= Iewes
dwell ; to Moryan , where they make glasse ; and to many abbeys and
houses of relygyon that stonde in the see ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.116

and grete marveyle it is to se theym stande in suche places , and the
beauty , costely buyldynge , and y=e= relygyous lyfe that they kepe in
the same , &c. CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.117

Frydaye , the thirde daye of July , the Galye dep~ted with all the
pylgrymes oute at the hauen at Venyce CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.118

and fell to an ancre in the rode .iiij. or .v. myle without the
Castelles that stande at the mouthe of the sayd haven ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.119

and there we lay all nyght ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.120

and Saterdaye , the .iiij. day of July , in the mornynge , we made
sayle , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.121

and with scarce wynde come to Parence in Hystrya the Sondaye , aboute
.ij. of the cloke at after_noone , whiche is an_.c. myle frome Venys ;
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.122

there lyeth sa~ctus Mauricius . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.123

And there we lay vnto Mondaye at nyght , at whiche tyme we lodged our
self in the Galye . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.124

And erly on the Tewysday , whiche was seynt Thomas daye , we made sayle
, CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.125

and passed by the costes of Slauony and Hystria with easy wynde :
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.126

the same day we passed by Pole , which is aboute .xxx. myle from
Parence , and a good hauen , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,9.127

for many shyppes and <P_10> galyes touche there rather then at Parence .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.128

We passed also by the gulffe of Sena , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.129

that is the entre into Hungary . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.130

Wednysdaye at nyght we came to the hauen of Jarre ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.131

and lay in our Galye all that nyght , by cause it was late or we come
into the rode . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.132

Thursdaye erly we went on londe , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.133

and herde masse CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.134

and visyted the sayntes and relyques there , as seynt Symeon Justus ,
that receyved our Sauyoure the .viij. daye after his byrthe into y=e=
Temple , that sayd " Nunc dimittis , " &c. CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.135

In the same Churche , in the hyghe aulter , lyeth also seynt Joell y=e=
prophete . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.136

This Jarre siue {SIC:sine} +gara is .c. myle from Parence .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.137

This Jarre is a stronge walled towne , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.138

and is inuyrounde with the see . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.139

The same Thursday , aboute .iij. of the cloke at after_noone , we made
sayle ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.140

and on Saterdaye we came to the yle of Lyssa , where we taryed that
nyght . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.141

Some of vs went to the lande to the vyllage , whiche is right lytel
worthe ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.142

hit is vnder the Venysians . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.143

Sonday in the mornynge , that was the .xij. day of July , we made sayle
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.144

and lefte the castell and towne of Lesana on the lefte hande vpon the
ferme londe , where we wolde haue ben CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.145

but the wynde wolde not serue . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.146

Hit is also vnder the domynyon of the Venysyans .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.147

This cyte is an_.c. myle from Jarre , and in the countrey of Dalmacia .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.148

Upon Wednysday , the .xv. daye of July , we come to the moste stronge
and myghty towne called Arragonse , in the cou~tre of Slauanye or
Dalmacie , and in the prouynce of the royalme of Croacie .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.149

They holde of noo man but of theym selfe , saffe they pay tribute to the
Turke , whiche marcheth within halfe a myle of the same towne .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.150

It is the strongest towne of walles , towres , bulwerk~ , watches , and
wardes that euer I sawe in all my lyfe . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,10.151

It is also ryche and fayre in su~ptuous buyldynge , with marueylous
strengthe <P_11> and beautye , together with many fayre Churches and
glorious houses of relygyon . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.152

There be also many relyques , as the hed and the arme of seynt Blase ,
whiche is there patron ; an ha~de with parte of the arme of seynt John
Baptyste , some what scorchede {TEXT:scorcherde} with the fyre as it was
brente ; the clothe that seynt Symyon receyued our Sauyoure upon in his
armes whan he was p~sented into the Temple ; with many other grete
relyques . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.153

Upon Thursdaye at nyght we slept in the Galye ;
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.154

and on Frydaye erly we made sayle . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.155

This cytie is .v._.c. myle from Venyce . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.156

Aboute .xxx. myle by_yonde Aragonse endeth Sclauonya and begynneth
Albanye , at the towne of Budna . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.157

Saterday , the .xviij. daye , we aproched nyghe to the yle of Cerfona ;
how be it y=e= wynde was so scarce and calme that we coude not come to
the towne of Corfona tyll Monday ayenst nyght , at whiche tyme we landyd
there , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.158

and it was the .xx. daye of July . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.159

There be ij. stronge castelles stondynge upon two rokkes .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.160

They holde of the Venycyans , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.161

and I trowe they haue noo where so stronge a place .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.162

It is in Grece , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.163

and the Turkes mayne lande lyeth within .ij. or .iij. myle of theym ;
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.164

and as by force to any mannys syghte the sayde Castelles be imprygnable
, CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.165

and they be furnysshed with ordynaunce accordyngly .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.166

And vndoubted the sayde Corfona is the key , entre , and holde for the
suertye of the sayde Venycyans galyes and shyppes , and countre , aboue
and before any other that they haue in those partyes .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.167

And at the sayd Corfona they speke all Greke ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.168

and be Grekes in dede . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.169

We founde there rype smalle raysons that we calle reysons of Corans ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.170

and they growe chefly in Corynthy , called nowe Corona , in Morea , to
whome seynt Poule wrote sondry epystolles . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.171

And this Curfo is the firste yle of Grece , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.172

and it is from Aragons .iij._c. myle . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.173

At this Corfona we were aduertysed of certayne Turkes Fustis that lay
for vs in oure waye , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.174

and therfore the Patron of the Galye and euery man purueyed to be redy
as defensyble as myght be . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,11.175

<P_12>

Wednysday , the .xxij. of July , that was seynt Mary Mawdelyns daye ,
we departed fro Corfona aboute .ij. or .iij. of the cloke at
after_noone , with an easy wynde , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.177

and salyd styll in alto pelago , leuynge Grece on y=e= lefte hande and
Barbary on the ryght hande . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.178

We lefte Modona for fere of the Turkes ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.179

it was but late Uenycyans , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.180

but nowe the Turke hathe it ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.181

there groweth moche Romney and Maluesey . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.182

This Modena is .ccc. myle from Corfona , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.183

and from Modona to Candya is other .ccc. myle .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.184

We passed open before Modona vpon Mondaye that was the .xxvij. daye of
Julye . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.185

This Modona is in Morrea , whiche Morrea stondeth within the prouynce of
Achaya , that nowe is called Albania in some parte ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.186

and it is juste in cornu Achaye . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.187

This Morrea is a plentyous countre , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.188

and thyse be the cyties in Morrea : Modona , Archadia , Corona ,
Neapolis , Cameliona , Malmasia , and Saxenulo .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.189

There is a lytell yle also before Modona , called Sapiencia .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.190

These be parte of the countrees that we passed by : s~ , Hystria ,
Croacia , Slouonya , Dalmacia , Hiliricu~ , Corsiru~ Insula Dardama ,
insula p~ Achaya .j. Albania p~ mare , Molon~ , that taketh the name of
Mons Malee , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.191

it is called Cornu siue Caput Mo~tis Malee ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.192

vpon that hyll is a cyte called Malsasia , where firste grewe Malmasye
and yet dothe ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.193

howbeit hit groweth nowe more plentuously in Ca~dia and Modona , and no
where ellys . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.194

By_yonde that is Helyspont and Cicladas Insulas , whiche countrees
belonge all to Grece beyonde Corfewe , as@ @well the mayne lande as the
yles , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.195

and so doth bothe Candy and Cypres , with moo ;
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.196

and than comyth in Nigropontus , Achenas , Myrria , Galathas , Macedonia
, Pathmos Insula , Troya , Constantynapolis , Tracia .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,12.197

Upon Tewsdaye ayenst nyght we passed by the yle called Cyrigo , whiche
yle was somtyme called Citheria , where Helena the <P_13> Grekysshe
Quene was borne , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.198

but she was rauysshed by Par~ in y=e= next yle by , called Cicerigo ,
doynge sacryfyce in the Temple , for the whiche rape folowed the
distruccion of Troye , as y=e= famouse storye therof sheweth , knowen in
euery tonge ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.199

and yet is the ymage of the same quene remaynynge in the Cytie of Asdrys
, vpon the see of Archepelagus , in memory of the same rape , wroughte
moost sotely and craftly in fygne {COM:preceding_word_"fygne"_emended}
whyte marble ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.200

and the sayde yle Cirigo is directely ayenst the poynt of Capo Maleo in
Morrea , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.201

and in the same yle was Venus borne , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.202

and in the same yle is Delphos , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.203

and it is all in Europa , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.204

and so is all the remenau~t of Grece ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.205

and beyonde Grece , ouer a bra~che of the sea , is Asya , wherin ,
almoste at th@ @entre standynge Troia , with the chyef porte the yle of
Tenedos , that stondeth in the see . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.206

And all the countre of Troya is the Turkes owne countre by inherytance ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.207

and that countre is properly called nowe Turkey , and none other .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.208

Neuerthelasse he hath lately vsurped Grece , with many other countreys ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.209

and calleth theym all Turkey . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.210

Ouer ayenst the forsayd yle of Cirigo to y=e= see wardes is y=e= Stopull
or Cragge called in Greke Ouago , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.211

for it is lyke an egge , &c. CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.212

Thursday , the .xxx. daye of July , aboute .ix. or .x. of the clocke
in the mornynge , we come to Candy . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.213

Candy is called otherwyse Crete . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.214

There be ryght euyll people . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.215

It is vnder y=e= Venysshyans . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.216

There was a grete Ambasset of the soldans towardes Venyce , that hadde
in his companye many Mamolukes . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.217

No~ multa memo=e= digna de ipo~ , &c. CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.218

In Candia siue Creta was musyke firste founde , and also tourneys and
exercyse of armes on horsbacke . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.219

There was lawe firste put in wrytynge ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.220

armour was first ther deuysed and fou~de , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.221

and so was y=e= makyng of remys and rowynge in boot~ .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.222

In Ca~dy be y=e= caues called Labor Jutus ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.223

there growe grete wynes , and specially Maluesy and Muskadell .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,13.224

They speke all Greke , excepte the <P_14> Venycyans , that be lordes and
gouernours there . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.225

In y=e= same yle was Saturnus borne : CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.226

" Prymus Creteis Saturnus venit ab oris , " &c. .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.227

In Candy also is the olde churche wherof Tytus was bysshop , to whome
Poule wrote epystelles , &c , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.228

I sawe the graue of the sayd Tytus . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.229

And thyse be the pryncypall cyties of Candya : s~ , Canea Candia ,
Aretimo , and Sotiglia ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.230

and the sayd yle is .vij._c. myle aboute , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.231

and this cytie of Candy was somtyme the habytacle and lordshyp of y=e=
kynge Mynos . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.232

The thirde daye of Auguste , that was Mondaye , at after_noone we
departed from Candy ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.233

and on y=e= Tewsday at nyght we passed by the yle of Pathemos , where
seynt John~ wrote the Apocalyps , whiche yle we lefte on our lefte hande
towardes Grece . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.234

The next daye , Wednysdaye , we passed by the yle of seynt Nycholas of
Cartha , where as be tooles made of yrron that neuer lose their egge ,
by myracle of seynt Nycholas . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.235

Saterdaye , the .viij. daye of August , aboute .iij. of the cloke at
after_noone , we departed frome the Rodes ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.236

and the Monday next after we passed by the Gulfe of Satalye , other wyse
called saynt Elyns Gulfe , where she kest one of y=e= holy nayles into
the see to sease the tempest . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.237

Upon Tewysdaye we sayled by Baffe in Cyprys , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.238

and the same Tewysdaye at nyght , that was the .xi. daye of August , we
come to Lymosyn , an hauen in the sayde yle of Cyprys ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.239

and bycause it was late we laye in oure Galye all nyght ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.240

and in the mornynge erly we went on lande to masse ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.241

and refresshed vs with fresshe vytaylles CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.242

and come ayen into our galye the same nyght , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,14.243

and there we taryed <P_15> in our galye Thursdaye , Frydaye , and
Saterdaye that was our Ladyes daye , Assumcion , not alwaye abydynge in
one place , but dryuyng easely by the coste of the sayd Cyprys ; in the
whiche tyme the patrone , galyottis , and pylgrymes , with all other
that nedyd , toke in wodde , water , beef , and moton , with all other
thynges necessarye . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,15.244

{TEXT:paragraph_symbol}

The chyef cytyes and townes of this yle of Cyprys were distroyed by a
kyng of Englonde , in reuengynge the rauysshinge of his suster ,
vyolently done by y=e= prynce of the same yle , whiche dede , and also
the sayde reuengynge , with all the circumstaunce of the same , is yet
in memorye and in rype remembraunce comenly with euery man and woman of
the same yle . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,15.246

Also in Cyprys is Paphon~ , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,15.247

that was a temple consecrate to Venus , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,15.248

and this yle is called in the Byble Sythym , &c. Nicosia metropolis .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,15.249

I woll wryte more of this yle at my comynge homwarde , as ye shall
parceyue by the processe of the same . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,15.250

And vpon Saterdaye , our Ladye daye at nyght aforesayde , we made sayle
; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,15.251

and on Mondaye we met with the shyppe with pylgrymes that went out of
Venyce .iij. wekes before vs , which pylgrymes had done theyr
pylgrymage and retourned homewardes , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,15.252

and we met thus with theym vpon .xl. myle on this side Jaffe .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,15.253

And as soone as we hadde syght of the Holy Lande , we sange Te Deum ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,15.254

and thanked joyously Almyghty God , y=t= had yeuen vs suche grace to
haue ones y=e= syght of y=t= moost holy lande .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,15.255

And y=e= nexte day we {SIC:was} come to Jaffe , as foloweth hereafter ,
&c. CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,15.256

<heading>

Firste of Our Landynge at Jaffe . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,15.258

<$$heading>

Memorandum , that vpon Tewysday , at nyght , aboute .vj. of the cloke ,
that was the .xviij. daye of August , we come to Jaffe , and fell to
ancre in the rode there ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,15.260

and incontynently we sent to Jherusale~ for y=e= father warden of mou~te
Syon to come and se vs co~ducted to Jherusalem , as y=e= custome is ,
&c. CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,15.261

{TEXT:paragraph_symbol}

Howbeit , notwithsto~dyng all our haste , we lay there in our Galye
.vij. dayes or <P_16> y=t= he come to vs ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.263

the cause was for he coude no sooner haue the lordes of Jherusalem and
Rama at layser to come to vs , without whose presence and co~ducte there
can no Pylgryme passe ; whiche lordes be all Mamolukes and vnder the
soldan . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.264

And after theyr commynge , whan the patron and warden aforesayde hadde
comenyd with theym by the space of .ij. dayes and intreated of our
tribute , and concluded what su~me our patron shulde paye for vs , than
we were suffred to come to londe . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.265

The daye of our londynge there was Thursday , that was the .xxvij. daye
of Auguste ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.266

and as we come out of the bote we were receyved by y=e= Mamolukes and
Sarrasyns , and put into an olde caue , by name and tale , there scryuan
euer wrytyng our names man by man as we entred in the presens of the
sayd Lordes ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.267

and there we lay in the same grotte or caue Frydaye all day , vpon the
bare , stynkynge , stable grounde , as well nyght as daye , right euyll
intreated by the Maures , &c. CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.268

At this Jaffe begynneth the Holy Lande ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.269

and to euery pylgryme at the firste fote that he setteth on londe there
is graunted plenary remyssion , de pena , and a culpa ;
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.270

and at this hauen Jonas y=e= prophete toke the see whan he fledde from
the syght of our Lorde in Tharsis . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.271

And in the same Jaffe seynt Petre reysed frome dethe Thabytam , the
seruaunte of the appostles . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.272

And faste by is the place where seynt Peter vsed to fysshe ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.273

and there oure Sauyour Criste called hym CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.274

and sayde , " Sequere me , " &c. CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.275

This Jaffe was so~tyme a grete Cytie , as apperyth by the ruyne of the
same , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.276

but nowe there stondeth neuer a house , but oonly two Towres and
certayne caues vnder the grounde ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.277

and it was one of the firste Cyties of the worlde founded by Japheth ,
Noes sone , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.278

and beryth yet his name . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.279

Saterdaye , the .xxix. daye of Auguste , we departed from Jaffe erly in
the mornynge , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.280

and come to Rama vpon asses by noon , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.281

and there we were receyued into duke Phylyps hospytall ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,16.282

and it is <P_17> called so bycause duke Phylip of Borgone buylded it of
his greate charyte to receyue pylgrymes therin .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,17.283

We founde no thinge therin , but bare walles and bare floures , excepte
onely a welle of good fresshe water , whiche was moche to our comforth ;
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,17.284

neuertheles there come i~to vs Jacobyns and other feynyd cristen men of
sondry sectis , that brought vnto vs mattes for oure money , to lye vpon
, and also brede , soddyn egges , and somtyme other vytaylles ;
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,17.285

and there we taryed all that nyght and Sondaye all daye .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,17.286

Aboute .ij. myle from Rama is the towne of Lydya , where seynt George
suffred marterdome and was hedyd , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,17.287

and in y=e= same towne seynt Peter helyd Enea~ of the palsy .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,17.288

Rama is frome Japha .x. myle , and frome Jherusalem .xxx. myle ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,17.289

and vpon the ryght hande goynge from Rama to Jherusalem , about .xx.
myle from Rama , is the castell of Emaus , where y=e= .ij. disciples
knewe our Sauyour Criste in brekynge of brede after his resurreccion ,
as is well knowen by the gospell , &c. CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,17.290

A lytell from thense , vpon an hylle called Mounte Joye , lyeth Samuell
y=e= prophete , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,17.291

and a lytell therby is the towne of Ramatha , where Samuell was borne ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,17.292

and of this towne Joseph ab Aramathia ought the newe tombe or monyment
that our Sauyoure Criste was buryed in , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,17.293

and a lytell ouer y=e= mydwaye on y=e= lefte hande is the vale of
Terebynthy , where Dauyd ouercome Golea~ , &c.
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,17.294

Sondaye at nyght we toke our journeye towardes Jherusalem ;
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,17.295

and , bycause bothe my mayster and mayster Pryor of Gysborne were sore
seke , therefore with grete dyffyculte and outragyous coste we purueyed
camellys for them and certayne Mamolukes to conducte theym in safty to
Jherusalem , whiche intreated vs very euyll , and toke moche more for
theyr payne thenne theyr couenaunt was , &c. CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,17.296

Upon Mondaye , that was the laste daye of Auguste , aboute .ij. or
.iij. of the cloke at afternoone , we come to Jherusalem ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,17.297

and were receyued into the Latyn Hospytall , called with some men y=e=
<P_18> Hospytall of seynt John , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,18.298

and there we restyd vs that nyght , whiche hospytall is right nyghe vnto
y=e= Temple of the holy Sepulcre , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,18.299

and there the Gray Freres of Mou~te Syon mynystred wyne vnto vs euery
day twyse , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,18.300

and lent vs also carpettis to lye vpon , for y=e= whiche euery pylgryme
recompensyd the sayd freres at theyr deuoucyon and power .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,18.301

As for brede and other vytaylles was brought vnto vs for oure money by
p~sones of dyuers sect~ ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,18.302

and alwaye the warden of y=e= sayde freres or some of his bretherne by
his assygnement dayly accompanyed vs , informynge and shewynge vnto vs
the holy places within the Holy Londe , &c. CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,18.303

<heading>

Pylgrymages of Mounte Sion . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,18.305

<$$heading>

Tewysdaye , y=e= first day of Septembre , that was the next morowe after
that we come to Jherusalem , we wente erly to Mounte Syon ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,18.307

and by the waye we vysyted some holy places .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,18.308

Firste the place where the Jewes wolde haue arestyd and taken awaye the
holy body of our blessyd Lady whan the appostellys bare her to the vale
of Josaphat to be buryed . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,18.309

And therby we come into a place where seynt peter , after y=t= he had
denyed our Lord thryes , went out of the house of Cayphas into a caue
and wept bytterly . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,18.310

And a lytell from thens we come into the churche of the Aungelles ,
where somtyme was the house of Annas the bysshop , into the whiche our
Sauyoure Criste was first ledde from the Mounte of Olyuete , where he
suffred many injuryes , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,18.311

and specyally there he toke a buffet of one of y=e= bysshops seruauntes
, seyinge , " Sic respondes Pontifici , " &c.
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,18.312

From thens we went to a churche of seynt Sauyour , where somtyme stode
y=e= grete house of Cayphas , where as our blessyd Sauyour was scorned ,
his face couerde and bobbyd , and moste greuously betyn , and there
suffred many affliccions all y=e= nyght . CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,18.313

There is also a lytell Caue , where they shytte hym in to tyme the Jewes
had taken theyr counseyll and determynyd what they wolde <P_19> do with
hym , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,19.314

and it is yet called " Carcer Dn~i . " CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,19.315

There is also in y=e= same place the moste parte of the grete stone that
the Aungell , as we rede , remeuyd frome the dore of the Sepulcre ,
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,19.316

and it is nowe the stone of the hyghe aulter in the same churche ;
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,19.317

an other parte of the same stone lyeth yet before the sepulcre dore .
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,19.318

And there , withoute the dore , in y=e= courte on the left hand , is a
tree with many stones aboute it , where the mynysters of the Jewes , and
seytn Peter with theym , warmed theym by the fyre , &c.
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,19.319

And goynge out of the same courte in y=e= hyghe waye on the ryght hande
, in a corner , is a stone where our blessed Lady stode whan Petre went
out sore wepynge , CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,19.320

and his wepyng was so moche that he coude yeue her none answer whan she
inqueryd of her swete sone ; CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,19.321

and there she , desyrous to knowe of her sone , moste sorowfully abode
tyll in the mornynge that she sawe theym ledde hym bounden to the house
of Pylate the presydent , whyther she moste sorowfully folowed hym , &c.
CHAPLAIN-1506-E1-P2,19.322

