<BEGIN_charles-1676-e3-p2>

<P_23,A>

<heading:edcomment:XII_CHARLES_R._TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

CHARLES R. CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,23,A.4

As to ye matter of regulating Corporations , wee have considered of y=e=
principall points represented by you to have beene drawne up & reported
to y=e= Councell by y=e= Comittee appointed in that businesse ,
CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,23,A.5

& are of opinion & accordingly Our Pleasure is , That as to that
concerning y=e= Oath of Supremacy to be taken in all Corporations it bee
fixed as a Generall rule , that noe person whatsoever bee admitted into
any Place of Magistrature or Government in any Corporation within that
Our Kingdome till hee shall have first taken y=e= Oath of Supremacy ,
except such as Our Lieutenant for y=e= time being , or other Chiefe
Governor for y=e= time being shall think fitt for some particular
reasons to dispense w=th= in that behalfe , CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,23,A.6

& suitable to this Our Pleasure is , that you doe even forthwi=th= & at
y=e= same time that you shall execute this rule in y=e= generall towards
Corporac~ons make use of y=e= Power of dispensing in this particular of
y=e= Oaths with such persons in any Corporations as you shall find
qualified for that grace by their Loyalty , Sobriety , prudence , estate
in trading , or other particular considerations .
CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,23,A.7

And as to y=e= encouragement to bee given to Forreigners to come &
settle themselves in that Our Kingdome , wee think it of great advantage
to Our said Kingdome , CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,23,A.8

& accordingly Our Pleasure is , That you doe <P_24,A> take care that all
Forreigners , as well Protestants as others , be admitted into
Corporac~ons , CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,24,A.9

& this is what wee think most necessary to be signified to you at y=e=
present in those matters . CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,24,A.10

Given at Our Court at Whitehall y=e= 31=st= day of August , 1672 , in
y=e= 24=th= year of Our Reigne . CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,24,A.11

<P_36,P>

<heading:edcomment:XXXII>

RULES AND INSTRUCTIONS FOR OUR RIGHT TRUSTY AND RIGHT WELLBELOVED COUSIN
AND COUNSELLOR ARTHUR EARL OF ESSEX OUR LIEUTENANT GOVERNOUR OF OUR
KINGDOM OF IRELAND CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,36,P.14

1 . <$$paren> Our pleasure is , and wee doe Declare that we will Signe
no Letters for the granting of any Money or Lands or Releasing or
abating any Rents or other summs of money due to us in that our Kingdome
of Ireland , but upon a petition presented to us which petition is to be
first either recommended by you our Lieutenant or the same is to be
transmitted unto you by one of our Principall Secretaries of State and
your sense and opinion to be had before any order or Letter be signed
thereupon . CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,36,P.15

2 <$$paren> That afterwards such Peticion shall be referred to our High
Treasurer of England ; who is to be made acquainted with what you Our
Lieutenant shall write , either in recommending such Peticion , or upon
transmission of any such unto you , CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,36,P.16

And our said High Treasurer's Report is to be had thereupon .
CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,36,P.17

3 <$$paren> You shall give no orders upon any Letters for granting money
Lands , Releasing or Abating Rents in Ireland , which shall come
<P_37,P> from us in any other forme or method or wherein these Rules
shall not be observed . CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,37,P.18

6 . <$$paren> Whensoever there shall be any Letters from Us for
disposing of any money to any publick uses , and there shall be other
Letters from Us at the same time for the payment of any money to any
particular persons , in all such cases the publique Letters shall be
obeyed and preferred before the private . CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,37,P.19

7 . <$$paren> In case our Revenue shall at any time not hold out to pay
the whole Establishment the same shall not be applied to the payment of
any Pensions untill the rest of the Civill and Military Lists be first
payd : CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,37,P.20

And if afterwards the same will not hold out to the payment of all
Pensions , a proportionable abatement shall be made out of each of them
. CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,37,P.21

8 . <$$paren> No Letters or Directions from us for the payment of any
money shall be directed immediately to the Vice Treasurer of Ireland but
to the Chief Governor or Governors for the time being ;
CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,37,P.22

And no payments made by the Vice Treasurer upon any such Letters or
Directions from Us without the Chief Governor's Warrant thereupon shall
be allowed upon the Vice Treasurer's accompts .
CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,37,P.23

10 <$$paren> All Letters must have been first entered at the Signet
Office here in England before being issued for payment . Whereby the
great disorder in procuring Our grant for the same thing to severall
persons may and will be prevented . CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,37,P.24

Given at Our court at Whitehall the 22=nd= Day of September 1675 in the
seven_and_twentieth year of our Reigne . CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,37,P.25

<P_234,A>

<heading:edcomment:CLV_CHARLES_R._TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

CHARLES R. , CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,234,A.28

Right Trusty and Right Welbeloved Cousin and Counceller , Wee greet you
well . CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,234,A.29

Whereas , by Our Letters Patents under <P_235,A> Our Great Seale of
England , bearing date the first day of December in the 23=rd= yeare of
Our Reigne , Wee have given and granted unto Our Deare and Entirely
Beloved Cousin Prince Rupert , his Executors , Administrators , and
Assignes , the Sole Power and Priviledge to use exercise and enjoy the
new Arts or Inventions of converting into Steele all manner of edged
Tooles , Files , and other Instruments forged and formed in soft Iron ,
or any part of the said Tooles , Files , or other Instruments after they
are soe forged or framed ; As also for the like converting of all manner
of Iron Wier {COM:sic} after it is drawne , and alsoe of preparing and
softning all Cast and Melted Iron , soe that it may be filed & wrought
as forged Iron is ; and of tincturing of Copper upon Iron as to him or
them shall seem meet ; To have and enjoy the same for and during the
terme of fourteen yeares according to the Act of Parliament in that case
made and provided . CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,235,A.30

Our will and pleasure is , And Wee doe hereby require and Authorise you
to give Order for y=e= passing of Letters Patents under the Great Seale
of that Our Kingdome , containing Our Grant unto Our said most Deare
Cousin Prince Rupert , his Executors , Administrators , and Assignes of
the said Exercise and use of the said Arts and Inventions in that Our
Kingdome for the terme of fourteen yeares in the same manner , and as
fully and beneficially as is contained in Our said Letters Patents under
Our Great Seale of England . CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,235,A.31

And for soe doing this shall be unto you and to all other Our Officers
and Ministers whom it may concerne a sufficient Warrant .
CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,235,A.32

And soe Wee bid you heartily Farewell . CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,235,A.33

Given at Our Court at Windsor the 11=th= day of June , 1679 , in the
Six_and_Twentieth yeare of Our Reigne . CHARLES-1676-E3-P2,235,A.34

