<BEGIN_clowesobs-1596-e2-p2>

<P_40>

<heading>

<font> The cure of two Seafaring men which fell sicke at the sea of the
Scorby . CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,40.4

Cap. 12 . <$$font> CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,40.5

<$$heading>

I can not heere well passe ouer this briefe note or obseruation of the
curing two seafaring men , which trauelled a long time vpon the seas ,
and there fell sicke of the Scorby , which infection as I gathered by
inquiry , was reputed principally vnto their rotten and vnholsome
victuals , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,40.7

for they said their bread was musty and mouldie Bisket , their beere
sharpe and sower like viniger , their water corrupt and stinking ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,40.8

the best drinke they had , they called Beueridge , halfe wine and halfe
putrified water mingled togither , and yet a very small and short
allowance , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,40.9

their beefe and porke was likewise , by reason of the corruption therof
, of a most lothsome and filthy taste and sauor , insomuch that they
were constrained to stop their noses , when they did eate and drinke
thereof : CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,40.10

moreouer their bacon was restie , their fish , butter and cheese
wonderfull bad , and so consequently all the rest of their victuals :
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,40.11

by means hereof , and likewise lacke of conuenient exercise , cleane
keeping and shift of apparell , and againe , being in an ill_disposed
climate , and want of good aire : these causes and such like were the
onely meanes they fell into the Scorby , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,40.12

for their gums were rotten euen to the very roots of their teeth , and
their cheekes hard and swolen , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,40.13

their teeth were loose neere readie to fall out , their iawes very
painfull , their breath of a filthy sauor , that at what time I drest
their gums , and washed their mouthes , the sauor was so odious , that I
was scarse able to staie and abide it : CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,40.14

in like maner their legs were feeble , and so weake , that they were
scarse able to carrie their bodies : CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,40.15

moreouer , they were full of aches and paines , with many blewish &
reddish staines or spots , some broad and some small like flea bitings ,
or the graines of a Pomegranate , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,40.16

like wise their legs were colde , hard , and swolen , which caused me to
fear a <font> Gangraena <$$font> , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,40.17

for coldnes in such extremities being in corrupt bodies full of euill
iuice , doth challenge putrification , which disease or sicknes ,
although it be in some safely cured , yet experience daily proueth that
a number also die . CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,40.18

Now the first thing that required helpe by Chirurgery was their gums ,
and their legs , being the conioined cause , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,40.19

but for that I will proceede as orderly as I can in my writing , I will
begin with the antecedent cause inwardly , which was done and performed
by the aduise and counsell of learned Physitions , who very confidently
set me down their opinions for their maner & order of purging , <P_41>
with other remedies , as hereafter followeth :
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.20

First as I said , euacuation going before , to diminish the humors sore
abounding , it was therfore thought most meete to begin with
blood_letting in the middle vain on the left arme ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.21

& I did then take from ech of them vii. or viij. ounces of blood .
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.22

The next day following they were also well purged with this purgation ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.23

<font> Rx. Diasenae {TEXT:dram_symbol} j. ss. Sirr. fumariae ,
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} j. Aquae scabiosae , {TEXT:ounce_symbol} iij.
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.24

Misce . <$$font> CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.25

and herewith they were purged . CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.26

Also euerie seuenth or eight day they were likewise purged with the pils
of Fumitorie {TEXT:dram_symbol} j. made into fiue pils , so as I say ,
after they were well purged , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.27

then in the meane space , there was prepared for them in a readines this
drinke following , which continually they did drinke at their meales ,
and also as often as they were desirous to drinke .
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.28

The order and making thereof is thus : CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.29

first there must be prepared a cleane vessell of eight gallons , which
was filled full of new ale , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.30

and then was added to it of <font> Coclearia <$$font> or Scorby grasse a
pecke , being purely picked , and cleane washed , and also brused in a
stone morter , and after put into the vessell with the ale ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.31

then was added thereto of long Pepper {TEXT:ounce_symbol} j. Cinnamon
and Ginger of each halfe an ounce , of Saffron {TEXT:dram_symbol} ij.
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.32

all these spices were put into a fine linnen cloth or bag , and so
hanged in the ale , with the herbes aforesaid ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.33

and thus it rested two daies before they did drinke of it .
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.34

And further it is to be remembred , that euery morning they did eate a
messe of this Almond milke being newly made , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.35

and it did them very much good . CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.36

Rx. two spoonefuls of French barly , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.37

and seeth it in a reasonable quantitie of running water till it be soft
, CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.38

then adde to it of Almonds blaunched ij. ounces ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.39

then take of this liquor a pound , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.40

and put to it of <font> Coclearia <$$font> or Scorby grasse , Fumitorie
, and water Cresses , of each halfe a handfull ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.41

but first mixe with the Almonds in the beating , of this liquor , for
feare the Almonds will turne to an oile , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.42

then boile all togither to the consumption of the third part ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.43

then adde to the straining , of fine Sugar {TEXT:ounce_symbol} j. ss.
of Rose water {TEXT:ounce_symbol} ij. CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.44

let all these seeth a little , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.45

and then reserue it to your vse : CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.46

In like sort euerie euening towards fower of the clocke they did drinke
a good draught of posset ale , whereunto was added of the iuice of
Scorby grasse a spoonfull , with a little of the powder of Cinnamon and
some Sugar , and now and then in stead thereof a good draught of
Woormwood wine . CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.47

Their meates that they did eate was Mutton boiled , and somtimes Veale
and chickens , &c. seasoned with veriuice made of grapes , and
thickened with ote meals , or the crums of white bread , with a few
Currans , and Raisons of the sunne . CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.48

Moreouer , there was added of Scorby grasse , Fumitorie , water Cresses
, and Soldanella . CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.49

Their bread was made of the finest wheate , and of a day old .
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,41.50

Now heere note you well , that euerie day or second day , one hower
after they had receiued a certaine sume , the description heereafter
<P_42> followeth , then they did presently drinke of the aboue named
Almond milke . CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.51

And after their sweating was ended , I did immediately bathe their legs
: which done , I annointed them , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.52

and lastly I applied a plaister , which heereafter shall be also
nominated . CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.53

Now for that their gums were so exceeding stinking and rotten , I did at
the very beginning scarifie their gums with a fleame ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.54

then presently I did as it were touch , or wipe their gums gently ouer
with a certaine blewish water , which the goldfiners haue vsed for
refining their golde , and haue themselues no vse for it , the force and
strength being by them greatly consumed and wasted : for the which cause
it is called the weake water . CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.55

After the vse heereof , I did cause them certaine times in the day and
in the night , to gargarise or wash their gums and mouthes with my
lotion published in my booke for the curing of <font> Lues Venerea ,
Cap. 6. <$$font> whereunto many times I mixed the sirr. of Mulberies
, q. s. CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.56

Also I did at sundrie times vse of the afore named blewish water ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.57

and did take thereof {TEXT:dram_symbol} ss. . whereunto I did put of
Plantaine water {TEXT:ounce_symbol} viij. . CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.58

and heere with I did mundifie and clense their gums .
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.59

Also it is knowen most certainly what great good is done in curing of
such rotten gums and sore mouthes , onely with this gargarisme , which
is published by <font> Iulius Palmerius <$$font> ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.60

& it is also set foorth of late by master <font> Banister <$$font> in a
booke , which he calleth his Antidotarie Chirurgicall ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.61

Rx. Hordei integri p. ij. Eupatorij , Nicotianae , Plantaginis ,
Morscis gallinae , Ros. rub. ana m. j. CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.62

boile these together in Aqua lib. iiij. till the one part be consumed
, CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.63

then adde thereto Mellis rosar. Sirr. rosarum siccarum ana.
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} iij. Aluminis vsti , Calcanti vsti , ana.
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} ss. CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.64

boile all these with a walme or two , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.65

& so let it coole , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.66

and then keepe it to your vse . CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.67

Also I haue found great good by the vse of this powder , which is
published by that reuerend learned man <font> Wyerus <$$font> , who hath
written most profoundly for the cure of the Scorby ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.68

take of salt CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.69

and burne it in a crucible , whereunto ye shall adde of the powder of
Pomegranate flowers , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.70

and so mixe them togither , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.71

& heerwith I did many times rub well their gums .
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.72

Moreouer , I haue in times past vsed Vnguentum Aegyptiacum , and also a
powder called of some Puluis Alchimisticus , or Caput mortuum ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.73

it is the dead head , of Aqua fortis , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.74

I also after washed their mouthes with vinegar and salt water , q. s.
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.75

and by these meanes I haue cured manie sore mouthes specially in
children , when I was Chirurgion vnto the children in Christs Hospitall
, where I haue had twenty or thirty infected with the Scorby at a time .
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.76

After I had well mundified and cleansed the mouthes and gums of these
two men , then I did administer a certaine fume , by the aduice and
counsell of <font> D.D. <$$font> which fume was receiued in at their
mouthes by a funnell after this manner , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,42.77

I did take of Mirrhae , Olibani , Assae faetidae ana.
{TEXT:dram_symbol} ij. Aceti vinaci lib. j. which gums <P_43> were
grosly beaten , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.78

then they were tied loosely in a fine linnen cloth , and so put into the
viniger , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.79

then there was prepared an earthen pot fit for the purpose , well
glassed or nealed , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.80

and at those times when it was to be vsed , there was prepared a funnell
made fit in widenes and compasse vnto the mouth of the said pot ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.81

& so it was well passed or luted togither , with this lute called of
<font> Schilauder <$$font> , and many other good distillers and
Alcumists <font> Lutum sapientie <$$font> , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.82

and it is prooued very necessary to ioine and conglutinate two vessels
togither seruing for distillations , or otherwise as afore said .
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.83

Rx. Clay and Fullers haire , with whites of egs and sand ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.84

thus I ioined the pot & the funnel togither , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.85

and then I set it vpon a chafingdish of coles ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.86

and I let it boile gently , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.87

& then caused the patients to sit by in their beds one after another ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.88

& so they receiued into their mouthes the fume or smoke , that passed
foorth of the top of the said funnell , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.89

& this was vsed diuers mornings before they did take their Almond milke
, and also certaine times in the euening , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.90

and did sweate halfe an hower after it in their beds : which fume was
administred most chiefly to open their obstructions inwardly ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.91

and so being well cooled and dried with warme clothes , they did rise
out of their beds , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.92

and went to the bathing of their legs , and annointings as followeth ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.93

Rx. the flowers of Chammell , Pelilote and Woormewood , the leaues of
Coclearia , Water Cresses , and Brookelime , of each a handfull , of the
berries of Juniper two handfuls , of Malmsey a quart , running water q.
s. sweete butter a pound , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.94

these were boiled togither , to the consumption of the third part ,
which bath did bring out in a short time a number of spots , which
before lay hid in the flesh , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.95

and heerewith very warme , they were a long time togither bathed , with
double woollen clothes of white cotton or baies ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.96

& then dried them very well , with hot linnen clothes :
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.97

and as I haue before mentioned , they were presently annointed somtimes
with Vnguentum Agrippae , and somtimes with Vnguentum Brioniae , or
Dialthaeae cum gum . CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.98

and also their legs were all wrapped round with this plaister ,
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.99

Rx. Emplastrum Deminio lib. ij. Gummi Armoniaci lib. ss. being
dissolued in Malmsey , CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.100

then put them togither , adding thereto Axungiae humani
{TEXT:ounce_symbol} ii. ss. CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.101

I boiled these togither to the forme of a plaister .
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.102

I found also very much profit by the Cuminum plaister published in this
booke . CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.103

And thus by the helpe of God and carefull diligence , they were both
perfectly cured , and diuers other persons of good account since that
time , onely by this maner and order of curing aforesaid , &c.
CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,43.104

<P_44>

<heading>

<font> The cure of a Lieutenant which was shot into the right buttock
with a poisoned bullet . CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,44.107

Cap. 13 . <$$font> CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,44.108

<$$heading>

Friendly Reader , amongst sundry other special cures which I haue noted
, not onely in mine owne works and proceedings , but also in other mens
of greater yeeres , antiquitie , and experience in the art of Chirurgery
, this one cure following in my simple opinion and iudgement , is not to
be passed slightly ouer and buried in forgetfulnes , if it were but in
respect of the strangenesse and rareness of such a cure , and of the
good and happy successe that followed . CLOWESOBS-1596-E2-P2,44.110

