<BEGIN_clowes-1602-e2-p2>

<P_53>

How_be_it , the worst I liked in him , was for that he boasted , and
said he was a Chirurgian naturalized , and so borne a Chirurgian :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,53.3

truely I tolde him it was a reason as naked as my naile :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,53.4

For be it graunted that his Father might bee a good Chirurgian <paren>
as him selfe reported to vs <$$paren> what is that to the purpose , if
his Sonne be found a counterfeit ? CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,53.5

It is a true saying , the best Apple will growe to be a Crab , vnlesse
some good fruite be grafted on the stocke : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,53.6

but indeede I doe know there bee some whose Fathers were good
Chirurgians , and so be their Sonnes likwise , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,53.7

but how commeth it to passe they bee so ? CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,53.8

Truely the reason is , they were like vnto their Fathers , men carefull
and painfull in study , and of long experience . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,53.9

But otherwise , for any one to suppose or dreame , y=e= Arte commeth to
a man by succession , because happily his Father was a good Chirurgian ,
it is a Paradoxicall opinion , very foolish , absurde and fantasticall :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,53.10

Other the like speeches hee had to this ende and purpose ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,53.11

and thus we ended , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,53.12

and so I took my leaue , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,53.13

and left them altogether . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,53.14

After I was gone , they fell out with great and vnseemly wordes :
whereupon the Gentleman caused his men to set his Phisitian downe in a
Chaire , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,53.15

and then with a payre of Taylors sheeres , <P_54> one of his men played
<font> Barba tonsoris <$$font> , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.16

and so did Cutte off his faire beared , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.17

and shore of the hayre of his head very vnseemly , being a man of his
peeres , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.18

and so put him out of doores , without any consideration for his paines
and Medicines hee had bestowed vpon him : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.19

but what became of him afterward I haue not heard .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.20

Then he sent to <font> D. Simonds <$$font> againe ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.21

& tolde him how his new come Phisitia~ & Chirur: had abused him &
desired him of all friendship to help him presently to some cunning
Chirurgian , to cure him foorthwith if it were possible , & that with
speed : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.22

After some talke , the Doctor remembred him selfe ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.23

and tolde him he would send him a neighbour of his , one Ma. <font>
Story <$$font> , a Chyrurgian of S. Bartholmewes Hospitall , & a man
<paren> said he <$$paren> wel experienced in his Arte .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.24

After he was come home to his house , he did conuerse with his neyghbour
M. <font> Story <$$font> , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.25

& tolde him what maner of hasty man the Gent. was :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.26

therfore he willed him , saying , before you meddle with him make your
bargaine wisely now he is in paine , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.27

for hee is but a bad pay-master , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.28

and therefore follow this rule . <font> Accipe dum dolet , cum sanus
soluere nolet . <$$font> CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.29

As cunning as Master <font> Storye <$$font> thought to haue been , hee
could not get one penny out of his purse , not in sixe daies after hee
vndertooke to cure him , vntill Master <font> Story <$$font> was going
away , and said , sir I can@ @not goe to the market with wordes ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.30

but the Gentleman would not heare on that side .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.31

Then the Doctor went with Master <font> Story <$$font> ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.32

and tolde the Gentleman : <font> Sir if you ride your horse all day ,
and giue him no meate at night , and so againe all the next day , you
may bee sure you are like to goe a foote the third day . <$$font>
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.33

Indeede I remember a pretty saying of one , whose wordes in effect were
these : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,54.34

<font> When a Phisitian or a Chyrurgian commeth to a man that lyeth
sicke , and is in daunger of death , yet by his iudgement and skill ,
promiseth with <P_55> Gods helpe , to cure him of his griefes and
Maladyes : then the sicke Patient greatly reioyceth ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,55.35

& presently commpareth him to a God : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,55.36

But after , being somewhat recouered and perceiueth good amendment ,
then he doth say , hee is but an Angell , & not a God :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,55.37

Againe , after hee doth walke abroad and falleth to his meate , truely
he is then accompted no better than a man : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,55.38

in the end when he happily commeth for his money for the curing of his
grieuous sicknes , he now reporteth him to be a deuill ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,55.39

& so shut the doore ; CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,55.40

Non est inuentus ; CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,55.41

come when I send for you . <$$font> CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,55.42

To conclude , & now I come againe to speake of Ma. <font> Story
<$$font> , after hee had been comming and going , twice a day for eyght
daies space , hee gaue him certaine money , w=t= a world of faire
promises , so far foorth as he would perfect his cure at his house in
the countrie : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,55.43

But according to the old saying in Latin , <font> Mel in ore verba
lactis fel in corda fraus in factis <$$font> , as by the sequell shall
appeare . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,55.44

At much intreatie hee consented , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,55.45

and went downe to his house in the Countrey : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,55.46

when hee came vnto the Gentlemans house with him , hee tolde Master
<font> Storie <$$font> saying : I haue a Store-house of diseases and
impedimentes in my body , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,55.47

and so I haue not ledde a Saintes life : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,55.48

as hee confessed very strange and far from all good , to this ende
<paren> he sayd hee spake it <$$paren> whereby hee might bee the better
instructed to make his cure the more certayne : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,55.49

When hee tolde the Gentleman hee would be loath to begin a thing when
the ende is doubtfull and daungerous , and vnto him before altogether
vnknowne : And therefore desired him to send for some skilfull Phisitian
or Chirurgian , for further counsaile to his good . Then he did sweare
& stare , that he did not bring him downe to expostulate and make
Lectures vnto him , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,55.50

but he said he did vnderstand by M. D. <font> Simondes <$$font> , that
he was able to performe greater cures then his was , without the counsel
of any <P_56> other , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.51

and tolde Master <font> Story <$$font> he would not depart aliue out of
his house , if hee did not perfectly cure him . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.52

I trust <paren> sayd Master <font> Story <$$font> <$$paren> that you
will not <paren> what soeuer you say <$$paren> commit so foule a fault
in your owne house , whereby may follow vnto you such dishonour :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.53

Howbeit , Master <font> Story <$$font> was greatly troubled in minde ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.54

and seeing no remedy , he endeuoured himselfe with great care and
industry , to attempt the said Cure , according to the Gentlemans owne
request , which was with the Unction : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.55

but first he prepared and afterwards purged his body ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.56

and opened a vaine , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.57

and after very discreetly hee did administer the Unction at seuerall
times , vntill hee did see and perceiue it had wrought sufficiently ,
and to Master <font> Stories <$$font> owne good liking ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.58

and so meant to haue ceased . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.59

But this monster in humanity <paren> contrary to all Arte and reason
<$$paren> compelled Master <font> Storie <$$font> to administer the
Unction once againe , saying his body was strong enough to endure it .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.60

Howbeit , within three dayes after , he did begin to sing a new song ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.61

for strange and vnexpected accidents immediately did follow :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.62

A great and an inordinate Fluxe of vicious and corrupt humours passed
out of his mouth , with much acrimony , burning heate and sharpnes , by
reason of the putrifaction of his gummes , with an horrible stinking
sauour and a Feuer accompanying the same : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.63

Then he and all his people about him , were in great doubt of his
recouery , saying to Master <font> Story <$$font> , my griefe <paren> I
fear me <$$paren> will prooue insauable and deadly .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.64

Master <font> Story <$$font> said he hoped not so ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.65

for you may thanke your self of this extremitie :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.66

Then secretly <paren> doubting he should dye <$$paren> he sent an olde
trustie seruant of his to <font> London <$$font> in all poste_haste for
me , with a Letter subscribed by a wrong name , and by his man 20.
Angels . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.67

After I had perused his letter , and vnderstood what a bad case he was ,
I prepared all things necessary , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,56.68

and so with all expedition ridde <P_57> poast away with his guide .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.69

But when I came into his house where he lay , I did not knowe him , his
disease had so altered the naturall shape of his face :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.70

at last he reuealed him selfe vnto me , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.71

and said , Master <font> Clowes <$$font> , I haue sent for you , hoping
you wil saue my life , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.72

I haue beene abused by counterfeit bungling botchers ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.73

for one told me I had the K. Euill , and an other , I haue the Fr. P.
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.74

but what soeuer it is , I pray you bend your endeauour and diligence ,
that with al conuenient speed I may be brought to my former health ,
which I know <paren> sayd he <$$paren> resteth in the skill of a good
Chirurgian . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.75

After I vnderstood what hee was , I repented mee of my comming ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.76

& wisht my selfe at <font> London <$$font> againe , & his 20. Angels in
his belly . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.77

To proceede , I tolde him hee was not without danger , & therfore I
could not make any warrant of his cure , but the best I could do he
shoulde be sure of : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.78

then this cankred chuffe looked on me like one that had lately come out
of the deuils slaughter-house , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.79

& said : if he dyed vnder my care , there were in his house , that
should take accompt of me before I went . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.80

Then I tolde him , if he or any of his durst touch or abuse one haire of
my head , it would bee deerely answered . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.81

But before I proceed any farther , you shal vnderstand , I was informed
by one of the Gentlemans men that M. <font> Story <$$font> was kept in
obscurity <paren> & as it were in a close prison . <$$paren>
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.82

So vpo~ a sodaine , about 10. a clock at night , this Gentle. sent a
swash_buckler of his own training vp , who was vnto him <paren> as it
were <$$paren> the very light of his eyes , & one that serued him in a
nu~ber of bad matters : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.83

He came to M. <font> Story <$$font> CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.84

& caused him to rise out of his bed , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.85

and bad him prepare to ride towardes <font> London <$$font> ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.86

for hee said he had ordained horses for him selfe , & you M. <font>
Story <$$font> , &c. CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.87

I will soone bee ready to attend vpon you , said hee ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.88

but first <paren> he said <$$paren> hee would faine haue taken his leaue
of the Gent: CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.89

but this Royster tolde him it was in vaine , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,57.90

his Master had no <P_58> pleasure in the sight of his person :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,58.91

So they took horse , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,58.92

& towards <font> London <$$font> they did ride , vntill they came into a
very great wood farre from any house or towne , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,58.93

and in the midst of the wood hee forced Master <font> Storie <$$font> to
alight , with many scoffes and scornes , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,58.94

and being very darke , left him to shift for himselfe , where hee
wandred vp and downe all the night , with great feare , sorrow and care
, till it was day , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,58.95

& then in the end he came into <font> London <$$font> hye_way ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,58.96

and so being ouer-wearyed , rested himselfe for a space ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,58.97

and in the end went to his house in <font> London <$$font> .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,58.98

After , when this grislie ghost <paren> his man <$$paren> came home , in
the morning hee informed his good Master , how he had dealt with Master
<font> Story <$$font> , whereat <paren> though he being sore and sicklie
<$$paren> yet hee smiled , and greatly reioyced at this bad action :
which I did heare , & full wel vnderstood though I said litle ,
whatsoeuer I thought , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,58.99

but marke hereafter the end of the Master and the man :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,58.100

and now I come againe to my owne proceedings , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,58.101

that is . The morning after Ma. <font> Story <$$font> was gone , I
administred vnto this Gentleman a Glister , made of new Milke , Suger
and Oyle of Almonds , which could in no wise haue been lawfully
prohibited , by reason of the great restriction and torments of his
belly , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,58.102

for hee had not a stoole in fiue dayes before .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,58.103

Now I suppose some vpon a spleane , will obiect against me , and say ,
that I goe <paren> here and in other places of this booke <$$paren>
beyond my latchet , in the publishing & administring of phisical
remedies , vnto my Patients : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,58.104

but I must craue pardon to answere with fauour to this obiectio~ ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,58.105

for be it without offence spoke~ : I say , where the learned Phisitian
is not to be had , be it either by sea or land , far or neer , I wil
the~ vse al honest & lawful meanes , both in Phisicke & Chirurgery , to
the vttermost of my knowledge and skill , before I wil any way permit
and suffer my Patient to perish for want of all helpe .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,58.106

Notwithstanding , what <P_59> soeuer is said and spoken to the contrarie
by any malicious aduersary , I assure my selfe , the graue , wise and
learned will not take offence at these my sayings ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.107

but passe it ouer with modesty & silence . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.108

Secondly , though he were weake , by reason of his extreame sweates ,
paines , and burning heate of his mouth , throate and whole body , for
which cause I did let him bloud on the <font> Caephalica <$$font> vaine
, on the right arme that was , 4. Ounc. of bloud in the morning , and
3. Ounces of bloud more at foure of the clocke in the after_noone the
same day . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.109

And thus by intermission of time , I took away 7 Oun. of very corrupt
and impure bloud : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.110

this done , I vsed frications , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.111

and I set strong cupping glasses vpon his shoulders and hippes ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.112

and at sundry times I did administer vnto him certaine comfortable
cordials : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.113

And then with excellent Gargarismes and Lotions , I brought away many
foule and filthye Askers from his mouth and throate :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.114

thus within the space of sixe dayes , hee did confesse some little ease
and amendment , by these inward and outward medicaments .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.115

And at the full end of 18 daies after following , I made him perfectly
whole , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.116

in the meane time hee did cogitate <paren> as it were <$$paren>
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.117

and bethought with himselfe , how cunningly he had dealt with his two
former Chyrurgians , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.118

and did greatly reioyce in this sending them away vnsatisfied .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.119

Then I tolde him , it was to Master <font> Storyes <$$font> great
detriment , & hurt vnto his body , and hindrance to his liuing being a
poore man : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.120

but hee would not heare on that side . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.121

Notwithstanding , it is a true saying : <font> It is an ill winde that
bloweth no man good <$$font> ; CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.122

I meane , happy is hee that commeth in the declination and ending of a
Cure : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.123

and so I let him alone with his humours , sith my reasons was not of
force to perswade him : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.124

howbeit , in conclusion he vsed me very kindly ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,59.125

& willed me to goe abroad with him , to see his Riuers , wherein were
<P_60> many goodly Trowtes and other fine fishes ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.126

and after shewed me his mighty high woods , and a number of
Heronshew-nestes : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.127

But truely , I tooke as much pleasure at the sight thereof , as Jacke an
Apes doth when he hath a whip at his tayle . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.128

After all these sightes , he returned to his house ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.129

and by the way he said , Master <font> Clowes <$$font> , I will holde
you no longer with me , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.130

but I will send you with my men to <font> London <$$font> ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.131

for I must confesse I haue stayed you longer time then I meant to haue
done : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.132

and in conclusion , he gaue me 20. pound , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.133

and promised mee to rest my assured good friend during his life .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.134

But to conclude , I note his vnfortunate end , whereby it presaged he
was borne vnder some vnluckie Planet or Crosse day .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.135

For within fewe yeeres after , he took occasion to ride abroad , as at
many other times he vsed to doe , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.136

but in returning home to his owne house , it was said , he entring into
a Lane , and attempting to open a great gate , sodainly his horse
started aside , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.137

and fled away , whereby the Gentleman fell from his horse vnto the
ground , and there sodainly brake his owne necke :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.138

So his horse ran home , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.139

and he being left behinde , the seruants went CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.140

and sought for him , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.141

and found him stark dead , and his necke broke :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.142

Thus far of the end of the Master , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.143

now to the end of his man , which he appointed to be Master <font>
Storeys <$$font> guide , the onely <font> Phoenix <$$font> , whom he
deerely loued , but not for his good conditions .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.144

Within a yeere after his Ma. came to his vntimely death , <paren> whose
end was onely to God foreknown & prefixed <$$paren> this swaggering
fellow did sodainly grow into great misery , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.145

& so vpon a time hee came to <font> London <$$font> ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.146

and there I saw him : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.147

presently he craued of mee some releife , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.148

for he said , for want of seruice hee was brought into great pouerty .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.149

Indeede I must confesse I had small deuotion vnto him ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.150

but yet I gaue him some what to be rid of his company :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,60.151

thus he went his waies , saying he did hope <P_61> it would be better or
worse with him shortly . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,61.152

Indeed it was reported that not long after , he did consort with a crew
of his old companions , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,61.153

& they together immediately robbed certain Cloathiers of the west
country , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,61.154

& being al take~ , were at y=e= Assises hanged on y=e= gallows at <font>
Ailesbury <$$font> or there abouts , for the said fact .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,61.155

Thus <paren> friendly Readers <$$paren> you haue heard <paren> as it
were <$$paren> the tragical history of the foresaid Gentleman and his
man . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,61.156

The cause which hath mooued mee to publish the same is , to forewarne al
young practicers of this faculty of Chirurgery , being indeed truely
called <font> filius Artis <$$font> , to beware and take heede how they
goe , and where and with whom they goe , especially into strange and
vnknowne places , and vnto me~ of such extraordinary & strange qualities
, which make but a iest & pastime at the abusing of any man , be he of
neuer so much worth , honesty & skil in his profession .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,61.157

<heading>

An obseruation for the Cure of Struma , performed by me vpon a woman
dwelling in the County of Essex . 1602 . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,61.159

<$$heading>

Amongst others that I haue cured this present yeere <font> Anno 1602
<$$font> . there repayred vnto me , a woman being about the age of
thirtye yeeres , dwelling in the County of Essex , three miles from my
parish of <font> Westham <$$font> , within the said Country : which
woman was a long time molested and troubled with certaine Carnosityes
and hard <font> Strumous <$$font> swellynges vnder her Chinne , some
mooueable and some vnmooueable : the which woman I did take in cure ,
for the said infirmity , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,61.161

and after speeches had , I perswaded her <P_62> that shee would permit
mee to take her <font> Strumous <$$font> swellings away by Incision ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,62.162

but it fell out that shee shewed her selfe faint-hearted , and so
vnwilling to suffer that action by Incision . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,62.163

Notwithstanding , she hauing an ardent desire and affection to bee cured
by mee , was very willing to indure and abide the force and painfull
working of the Causticke , which was performed as followeth .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,62.164

The incredible operation of this simple Causticke now following is aboue
beliefe , being indeed made but onely of the powder of new quick burnt
Lime-stones , as they come out of the Kyll , and of Sope well mixed
together , <font> An. q. s. <$$font> CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,62.165

Heere some peraduenture wil say , it is a great vanity in mee , to
commend a remedie which is well knowne already ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,62.166

<paren> it will doe that it is prescribed for <$$paren>
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,62.167

but I will leaue to answere such obiections , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,62.168

and will proceede with matter of more importance , that is to wit :
After I had well defended the partes about , then I applyed vpon these
swellinges , the aforesaid Causticke , which she reasonable well endured
, for the space of three houres : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,62.169

and then I remooued it , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,62.170

and in place thereof I applyd other medicaments , onely to mollifye and
loose the Askers , which was made by the said Causticke ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,62.171

and also I gaue with her <paren> of the same remedy <$$paren> home to
her house , to dresse her selfe with_all : where shee remained for the
space of fiue daies , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,62.172

in the end yee shall note , she returned to me , being very faint , pale
and ill-coloured , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,62.173

thereat I much maruailed , to see so sodaine an alteration :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,62.174

then I demaunded the reason of her , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,62.175

shee answered CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,62.176

and said it was by reason of the bad sent and ill fauours of the Askers
, and of the filty corrupt matter , which did run from the foresaid
Cauterized <font> Strumous <$$font> swellings , that greatly offended
her stomacke , and by reason of the sensibilitie of the grieued partes ,
which were sharpe , mordant and <P_63> byting , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,63.177

and that was after the Askers were remooued : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,63.178

and farther , she confessed in the end , that she was quick with childe
, which troubled her greatly , all which causes being considered , I
very much feared an vntimely birth , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,63.179

but I tolde her she was much too blame , that she did not acquaint me
therewith , before I tooke her in cure . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,63.180

Howbeit , God did so open my knowledge and vnderstanding , that all
thinges fell happily out , better then we looked for .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,63.181

So after , I appointed her to bee drest twise a day with conuenient
remedies , and then by the vse of some metalline instruments , onely to
apprehend and to pull out part of the foresaid <font> Strumous <$$font>
swellings . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,63.182

So , according as I haue said before , those which are Masters and
Professors , chosen to performe the like operation , ought indeede to
haue a Lyons heart , Ladies hand , and a Haukes eye , for that it is a
worke of no smal importance . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,63.183

Then by the applycation of these two noble compositions , being
irreprooueable and most iudiciallly penned , and of great truth and
probability in this cure , that is <font> Vnguentu~ Apostoloru~ mesuae
<$$font> , & <font> Vnguentum Aegiptiacum <$$font> , with other worthy
Agglutinatinues and drying medicaments , oftentimes before named ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,63.184

and thus she was perfectly cured within the space of 10. weeks .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,63.185

Friendly Reader , y=e= cause chiefly which hath mooued mee to publish
this obseruation amongst the rest , is partly <paren> as I haue before
said <$$paren> to render some fruites of my labours , studies and time
spent , which as it may heere appeare , is no afternoone mans worke , as
some rake-shames & belly Gods haue falsly and slaunderously so reported
: CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,63.186

but the troth is I haue carefully laboured heere , also to admonish
euery young practiser of Chirurgery , which is rightly called <font>
filius Artis <$$font> , that hee in no wise attempt the like cure , vpon
any woman with childe , without some sage aduise :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,63.187

for great was the troubles and daungers <P_64> that was like to haue
followed , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,64.188

but happily were they preuented through the helpe of Almighty God , &c.
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,64.189

Now heere I will forbeare any further to discourse herein ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,64.190

but I will set downe certaine Prescriptions worthy of obseruing , which
I haue gathered out of <font> Plinie <$$font> , <paren> a most worthy
writer <$$paren> for the cure of the fore named Euill , the which I wil
heere set downe word for word , as followeth . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,64.191

<heading>

<font> The cure of the King or Queenes Euill , after Plinius Secundus
description . <$$font> CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,64.193

<$$heading>

The bloud of a Weizell is good for the Wennes called the king or Queenes
Euill , when they be exulcerate and doe run : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,64.195

so is the Weysell it selfe sod in Wine , and applyed , Prouided alwaies
, that they run not by the occasion of any launcing or Incision , made
by the Chirurgians hands CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,64.196

and it is commonly said , that to eate the flesh of a Weizell is as
effectuall for the cure : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,64.197

so are the Ashes of a Weizell calcined vpon the fire made of Vine twigs
, if they be incorporated with Hogs grease . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,64.198

<font> Item <$$font> , take a greene Lyzard and binde it to the sore ,
but <paren> after thirtie daies <$$paren> you must doe so with another ,
and this will heale them . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,64.199

Some make no more a_doe , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,64.200

but in a little bore of siluer , keepe the heart of a Weizell ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,64.201

and weare it about them . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,64.202

If a Woman or a Maide bee troubled with the Kings or Queenes Euill , it
were good to make a Plaster or Linament of old shell Snailes ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,64.203

and <P_65> let them be stamped shelles and all <paren> especially such
as be sticking to the rootes of shrubbes of bushes .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,65.204

The Ashes of a Serpent <font> Aspis <$$font> calcyned are likewise very
good for this disease , if they be incorporated with Buls Tallow , and
so applyed . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,65.205

Some vse Snakes grease and Oyle together : also a Linament made of the
ashes of Snakes burnt , tempered with Oyle and Waxe .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,65.206

Moreouer , it is thought that the middle part of a Snake <paren> after
the head and tayle bee both cut away <$$paren> is very wholesome meate
for those that haue the Kinges Euill : or to drinke the Ashes , being in
the same manner prepared , burnt in a new Earthen pot neuer occupyed .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,65.207

Marry , if the said Snakes chaunce to be killed betweene two Cart
trackes where the wheele went , the Medicine will worke much more
effectuall . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,65.208

Some giue counsell to apply vnto the affected place Crickets digged out
of the earth , with the moulde and all that commeth up : also to apply
Pigeons dung , onely without any thing else , or at the most tempered
with Barly meale , or Ote-meale in vinegar : likewise , to make a
Linament of Mouldwarpes ashes , incorporate with Hony .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,65.209

Some there be that take the Liuer of a Moule crushed and bruised
betweene their hands , working it to a Linament , and lay the same to
the sore , and there let it dry vpon the place , and wash it not in
three dayes . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,65.210

And they affirme that the foot of a Moulde is a singular good remedy for
this disease : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,65.211

others catch some of them , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,65.212

and cut off their heads , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,65.213

stampe them with the moulde that they haue wrought and cast vp aboue
ground , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,65.214

and reduce them into certayne trochesces , which they
{COM:preceding_word_"they"_emended} keepe in a boxe or potte of Tinne ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,65.215

and vse them by way of applycation , to all <font> Tumours <$$font> and
Impostumes , which the Greekes call <font> Aposthemata <$$font> , and
especiallie those that ryse in the Necke : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,65.216

but then they forbid the patient to eate Porke , or any Swine , <P_66>
during the Cure . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.217

Moreouer , there is a kinde of earth-Beetles , called <font> Tauri
<$$font> or bulles , which name they took of the little Hornets they
carry , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.218

for otherwise in colour they resemble Tickes , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.219

some term them <font> Pediculos terrarum <$$font> or earth Lice :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.220

these worke also vnder the ground like Wantes , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.221

and cast vp moulde which serueth in a Linament for the Kings Euill , and
such like swellings : also for the Goute in the feete ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.222

but it must not be washed off in three dayes space .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.223

Howbeit , this is to be noted , that the medicine must be renewed euery
yeere , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.224

for the same moulde will continue no longer in vertue then one yeere :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.225

In some , there be attributed vnto Beetles , all those medicinall
properties which I haue assigned vnto Crickets called <font> Grillj
<$$font> . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.226

Moreouer , some there be , who vse <paren> in maner and cases afore said
<$$paren> the moulde which Antes do cast vp . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.227

Others <paren> for the Kinges Euill <$$paren> take vp as many Maddes or
Earthwormes in number , as there be Wennes gathered and knotted together
, CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.228

and binde the same fast vnto them , letting them dry vpon the place ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.229

and they are perswaded that the same Wennes will dry and consume away
together with them . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.230

There be againe , who doe get a Viper , about the rising of the
Dog-starre , cutting off the head and tayle , <paren> as I said before
of the Snakes <$$paren> CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.231

and the middle part betweene they burne : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.232

the Ashes that come thereof , they giue afterwards to drinke for three
weekes together , euery day as much as may be comprehended and taken vp
at three fingers endes , CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.233

and thus they cure the Kings Euill . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.234

Moreouer , there bee some which hang a Viper by a Linnen threed , fast
tyed somewhat vnder the head , so long till shee be strangled and dead ,
and with that threed binde the Wennes or Kings Euill aforesaid ,
promising vnto the Patient assured remedye thereby .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.235

They vse also the Solues called <font> Multipedae <$$font> ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,66.236

& incorporate the same with a fourth <P_67> part in proportion of them ,
of true Turpentine : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,67.237

and they be of that opinion , that this Oyntment or Salue is sufficient
to cure any Impostumes whatsoeuer . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,67.238

<font> Aetius <$$font> also sayth , if a man should eate a Viper , it is
a most notable thing : whose authority others also haue followed in
administring vnto <font> Strumous <$$font> persons <font> Trochiscos
Viperinos <$$font> , or the Pilles of Vipers , with good & happy
successe . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,67.239

Also it was said , it was the experience in times past of countrymen ,
that if any had eaten a Snake , hee should bee deliuered from <font>
Struma <$$font> . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,67.240

Thus much touching <font> Pliny <$$font> his manner and order which hee
hath published , for the Curing the Kings or Queenes Euill .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,67.241

<heading>

<font> The conclusion . <$$font> CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,67.243

<$$heading>

And thus <paren> friendly Reader <$$paren> it were a great argument of
folly & shameless impudency in me , worthy to be laughed at , once to
think that I could heer any way instruct the learned Phisitia~ or
Chirurgian , in the Cure of the Kinges or Queenes Euill , before named ,
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,67.245

I am not so full of childish toyes : CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,67.246

but if I were , I doe full well know they might by their prouident
wisedomes and learning easily circumuent mee , though I doe confesse , I
am not altogether insufficient to performe this enterprise I haue heere
set downe and taken in hand . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,67.247

The onely cause why I haue done it , is <paren> as I haue before said
<$$paren> for the benefit of all young Students of Chirurgery , who haue
a long time expected the comming foorth and publishing of this Booke :
whose honest zeale and affection towards me , hath induced mee the
rather to set foorth the same . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,67.248

But before I would attempt it without good aduise , I did first intreate
divers <P_68> Phisitians and Chirurgians <paren> men of a singular
perceiuerance , in perusing and examining the same <$$paren> of whom I
haue had a fauourable acceptation . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,68.249

And this I did of purpose , least some might <paren> otherwise <$$paren>
lay stumbling blocks in my way , onely to impeach these my painfull
labors & trauels . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,68.250

And so I do make a final end , acknowledging as I did in y=e= beginning
, <font> That the gift of healing , is the gift of God : <$$font>
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,68.251

howbeit , I doe not heere presume , or once take vpon me to enter into
the high cure of the said Euill vsually called <font> Scrophula <$$font>
, in such wise as God hath giuen diuine & peculiar giftes vnto Princes :
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,68.252

but my full intent hath alwaies been onely to direct the true path-way
of Artificial gifts <paren> w=c= God of his great goodnes giueth to men
of Arte <$$paren> knowlege & skil in Phisick & Chirurgery w=c= is
performed & done by the applicatio~ of interiall & exteriall
medicamentes , appropriate & approued profitable therefore .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,68.253

For it is a true saying : <font> God hath created medicines of the earth
, <$$font> for the reliefe & comfort of man ; CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,68.254

and it is said : <font> He that is wise wil not refuse it . <$$font>
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,68.255

And thus last of all , I thought it not impertinent , heere to diuert &
digresse fro~ the matter , & wholy attribute all diuine honor &
reuerence , for the great cure of the forenamed Euill <paren> by Gods
gratious good gifts <$$paren> vnto our most prouide~t , wise & vertuous
Princesse , the Queenes most Royall Maiesty : For whom let vs all pray ,
that the Lord God Almighty eternal Sauiour wil send her Highnes still
long and long to raigne ouer vs , to our great ioy , happiness , &
comfort , so that she may liue long , and many happy yeares & daies , to
hold vp the Scepter of this Kingdome , in Christ Iesus .
CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,68.256

Amen . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,68.257

{COM:verse_omitted}

Finis . CLOWES-1602-E2-P2,68.259

