<BEGIN_conway2-1675-e3-p2>

<P_1>

<heading:edcomment:I_LORD_CONWAY_TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

London CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,1.4

27 Aprill 1675 . CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,1.5

May it please Yr. Excel=cie= . I came to this towne on Satterday last
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,1.6

and the next morning was two howers <font> with Treasurer <$$font> by
whom I found that <font> all their measures <$$font> were alter'd since
I last saw him , that King and Duke were resolved to keep up Parliament
to raise the old <font> Cavaleers and the Church Party <$$font> and to
sacrifice <font> Papists and Presbyterians <$$font> .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,1.7

I asked him what then was the reason of the <font> Divisions <$$font>
among <font> that Party <$$font> , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,1.8

he said it was because of faction yet in ye Court ,
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,1.9

why then , said I , you begin at the wrong end , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,1.10

for you should show <font> King <$$font> the necessity of throwing
<font> Arlington <$$font> and <font> Ormond <$$font> to the Divell ,
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,1.11

and then <font> Parliament would be united <$$font> .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,1.12

I believe he sat musing a quarter of an hower before he gave me any
answer , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,1.13

then he said - <font> King <$$font> hath shewed one example of severity
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,1.14

for he hath taken away <font> ye Lord Clarendon@ @'s place for joyning
with those that are against him <$$font> though another misdeamenor be
pretended . CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,1.15

This is the ground of the hot contest now in the house of Lords about
the Test desired to be settled by Act of Parliament for all members of
both Houses to take before they are admitted to sit , wch is the very
same that all Lord Lieutenants of Countyes and Deputy Lieutenants have
taken , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,1.16

only we add a Penalty to it that they shall not sit in Parliament till
they take it , that the Government in Church and State may be preserved
. CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,1.17

Yesterday an Impeachment was brought into the Howse of <P_2> Commons
against my Lord Tresurer by <font> Arlington's wishes <$$font> .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.18

Mr Russell ushered it in , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.19

Sir Sam Barnardiston presented it , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.20

Mr Powell seconded it , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.21

Sir Tho: Meeres thirded it CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.22

and Sir Tho: Littleton fourthed it . CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.23

But such pitifull stuff it is that it will redound infinitly to his
advantage , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.24

Colonell Strangwaise was so violent in my Lord Treasurer's behalf that
he spoke some very injurious words against them , upon wch some called
to the Bar , others to have him explaine himself ,
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.25

but he answered he would doe neither till he knew whether the Howse took
offense at it , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.26

and so went to his Pipe of Tobacco , without any further concernment .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.27

I saw him and his sonne this morning with my Lord Tresurer and many
others but not Sir H. Capell . CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.28

It was all their work this morning to proceed upon those Articles ,
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.29

and so far as they have gonne , they have voted that there is no ground
of Impeachment , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.30

and his enemyes would be very glad it might all rest without further
examination thinking this would be sufficient to bespatter him ,
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.31

But his friends drive it on to a thorough Examination .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.32

And by their means it is to be reassumed again to-morrow morning .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.33

I am running on so fast to give your Excel=cie= account of things here
that I had almost forgot your particular Commands .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.34

When I delivered yr letter to <font> Treasurer <$$font> he told me that
he perceived much was left to my Relation , upon wch I explained to him
the grounds wch moved yr Excel=cie= to Recomend to him a particular
managem=t= of the Revenue in Ireland , wch he fully approved of when I
opened to him the advantages the King would have by a Parliament there ,
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.35

and he said the King was resolved we should have one .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,2.36

Afterwards he carried me to the King , where I delivered yr Excel=cies=
Letter and <P_3> he ordered me to wait upon him whensoever any thing was
seasonable to be done about the affairs of that Country .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,3.37

Last night I supt or rather dined though it was 10 a clock at night
<paren> for so long the Howse of Lords sat <$$paren> with <font>
Lodderdale <$$font> who is no more concerned , nor thinks himself in no
more danger than I am . CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,3.38

One thing I must not omit CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,3.39

<font> Coll Talbott <$$font> is trying all ways in the world how to
propose a friendship with <font> Essex <$$font> CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,3.40

and the reason is because <font> Duke <$$font> hath told him that he
finds it impossible to shake <font> Essex <$$font> .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,3.41

So you will hear more of this from others . CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,3.42

D: of Portsmouth is very great CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,3.43

and hath given out words as if <font> she were marryed <$$font>
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,3.44

and doth not think unlawfull for a King to have as many wives as he
please . CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,3.45

She hath forsaken <font> Arlington <$$font> , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,3.46

and is wholy concerned for <font> Treasurer <$$font>
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,3.47

but <font> Monmouth <$$font> is all for <font> Arlington <$$font> ...
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,3.48

When I waited upon the Duke of York I told him that your Excell=cie=
commanded me to present yr humble duty to him , and that you wd be
extreme glad of any opportunity to serve him , wch he seemed to take
very kindly ... CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,3.49

<font> Treasurer <$$font> told me he wondred Essex would not write to
him his apprehensions of <font> Ormond <$$font> , the danger of his
interest in <font> Ireland <$$font> and the insecurity to all by reason
of <font> Arran's Regiement <$$font> , that if he would write to him but
one word of it , it should be all removed . CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,3.50

<P_8>

<heading:edcomment:V_LORD_CONWAY_TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

May 4 1675 CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,8.53

In my last to yr Excel=cie= of the 27=th= past I gave your Excel=ce=
some account of the measures we walke by : CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,8.54

without that , it would be hard for you to imagine what should be the
cause of these great heats in the House of Lords about passing the Test
in wch nothing is gained but by inches , and every line contested till
10 aclock at night , the weaker party every day entering their protests
, <font> Duke <$$font> and <font> Papists <$$font> divided and <font>
Papists <$$font> and <font> Presbyterians <$$font> united .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,8.55

For <font> Duke <$$font> sees a necessity of using other hands
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,8.56

and will be the first that shall take the Test .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,8.57

That <font> King <$$font> and <font> Parliament <$$font> agree well yr
Excel=ce= need not doubt CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,8.58

<font> for ye recesse <$$font> was only to get <font> money <$$font>
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,8.59

and that is so well distributed that we hear no more complaints <font>
of ill management <$$font> or fears of <font> papists <$$font>
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,8.60

but all is now for union and healing . CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,8.61

Treasurer will be too hard for his <font> enemies <$$font> ,
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,8.62

therefore I hope Essex will preserve his friendship with him .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,8.63

In the beginning of his <font> Impeachment <$$font> he had a Letter sent
to him without any name to subscribe it , that if he would let Hallifax
in the place of Essex it should be all quasht , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,8.64

but he made no such composition . CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,8.65

<P_10>

<heading:edcomment:VII_LORD_CONWAY_TO_THE_EARL_OF_ESSEX>

London CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,10.68

11 May 1675 CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,10.69

May it please Yr Excel=ce= I write this to enclose my Lord Treasurer's
Letter to yr Excel=ce= wch he hath promised to send to me , to give yr
Excell=ce= full assurance of the false report wch was writ to you ,
about his laying the Instructions to have been procured at yr desire .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,10.70

I went to him today CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,10.71

and asked him whether he had not already writ , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,10.72

and he said no , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,10.73

then I begd him to write though it were but six lines ,
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,10.74

and told him I heard <font> Ormond <$$font> had writ the same thing to
<font> Arran <$$font> and I was confident they had contrived it so , to
send it by severall hands to make a difference betwene you .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,10.75

Truly , says he , 't@ @is very pretty <font> Arlington <$$font> and
<font> Ormond <$$font> endeavor there to make him jealous of me , who
have served him with the greatest fidelity in the world , and heere they
are endeavoring to possess <font> Parliament <$$font> that he is the
only man hath <font> sent Forces into France <$$font> .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,10.76

I told him we were very much governed by news and reports in that
country , and they had spread it that <font> Treasurer <$$font> was run
downe , and <font> Arlington <$$font> and <font> Ormond governed all
<$$font> , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,10.77

why says he <font> Conway <$$font> is able to informe him how those
things stand ; CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,10.78

I told him <font> Conway <$$font> had not been wanting in that , but if
a multitude , and probably some neare relations sayd otherwise how could
<font> Conway <$$font> expect to be believed . CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,10.79

Why , says he , <font> Conway <$$font> will sone be justified by the
Confession of his adversaries , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,10.80

and if I may judge either by what he tells me or by what I see he is
certainly <font> ye greatest subject <$$font> that is in <font> England
<$$font> . CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,10.81

This morning my Lady Northumberland sent me my Lady <P_11> Essex@ @'s
Letter to her of the 4=th= instant . CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.82

I shewed it to <font> Treasurer <$$font> though there was one harsh word
in it of being made a Pack horse to beare the falts of others ,
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.83

It made him laugh , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.84

and I told him I shewed it him purposely that he might see how his
Adversarys and yo=rs= did worke <paren> for I always tell him you are
both upon one bottome <$$paren> to make division between you ...
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.85

I doubt not but yr Excel=ce= will heare from others of the Debate that
was yesterday and to day in the House of Commons about the King's Answer
to the Recalling of his subjects in the French Service .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.86

If Mr Speaker had not shewed an unparalleld adresse in reassuming the
House wch was then in a Grand Com~itee , they had certainly fought it
out with their swords , and never parted till the guards from Whitehall
had parted them . CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.87

The difference arose about telling the Howse upon the Question , wch was
certainly 135 on each side , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.88

and both partyes thinking themselves wronged in the reckning cald
one-another all the opprobrious names imaginable ,
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.89

spit in one-anothers faces , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.90

puld of one-anothers Perriwiggs , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.91

and were drawing their swords , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.92

but the Speaker , who was at the lower end of the Howse foresaw what it
would come to , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.93

and made up to the Chaire wch in a minutes time had been impossible for
him to doe . CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.94

The same Debate being this day in a full House was carried according to
the King's desire by one Voice 172 on one side and 173 on the other side
the Speakers voyce not included . So that the King is now only to
recall out of the French service such of his subjects as he thinks fit .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.95

I asked <font> Treasurer <$$font> how long <font> Parliament <$$font>
would <font> sitt <$$font> , CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.96

he told me till they had a <font> bill of religion past <$$font> .
CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.97

I shall only beg yr Excel=ce= to present my humble duty to my Lady Essex
and be pleased to tell Sir Arthur Forbesse that if my life lay on it I
can@ @not write to him yet . CONWAY2-1675-E3-P2,11.98

