<BEGIN_coverte-1612-e2-p2>

<P_28>

This countrey beareth towards the Northwest , in the height of 28.
Degrees , or thereabouts : COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,28.3

And heere Muskets , Snaphances , Pistols , Petronels , and Swords , be
good commodities , but no Firelocks in any wise .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,28.4

Also cloth is an excellent commodity to my knowledge ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,28.5

for I was offered three pound for an old cloake , which heere , is not
worth 20. shillings the vttermost . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,28.6

And in Bramport we staied from the seuenth of October vntill the 11 of
Nouember following : COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,28.7

Then I and <font> Iohn Frencham <$$font> of our Company went to craue
the Generals passe , to goe to the great <font> Mogol <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,28.8

but he asked vs if we would serue him in his warres ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,28.9

and he would giue vs what meanes we would desire :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,28.10

but we told him , we were poore distressed Merchants , that had beene
shipwracked : COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,28.11

and hee again replied , that there was no Englishman , Merchant , nor
other but he was a Souldier . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,28.12

But we told him that we had wiues and children in our Countrey , to whom
wee must of necessity goe , to which hee said , it was very well spoken
, and that it was against their Lawes to <P_29> keepe any man against
his will : COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.13

Then hee asked vs if wee had any Jewels for his Ladies ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.14

I answered I had one stone and one Jewell , which I sold him for forty
pound sterling , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.15

and then hee commanded his Secretary to make vs a Passe , and seale it
with his great Seale , for our safe_conduct to <font> Agra <$$font> .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.16

Also for the nature & strength of the Elephant , I can say thus much of
mine owne knowledge because I saw it . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.17

An Elephant royall being brought to remoue a piece of Ordinance of
one_and_twenty foot long , which caried a shot of seuen inches high ,
and lay vpon the cariage on the side of a hill , and to carry the same
some halfe furlong off ; which he did as it seemed to the great dislike
of his Keeper , who told him he was a lazy villaine , and deserued not
his meat . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.18

Now the nature of the Elephant is , not to be disparaged in any thing ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.19

and standeth much vpon his reputation and valour : so that vpon these
speeches of his Keeper , he came to it againe , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.20

and with maine strength tore the carriage in pieces ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.21

and left the piece lying on the ground . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.22

Then were Carpenters set on worke to make a new carriage , which being
done , the same Elephant was broght , who clapt his Trunke about the
wheeles , and brought the Ordinance where his Keeper commanded him .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.23

This Citie is farre bigger then <font> London <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.24

and great trade of all sorts of merchandise therin :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.25

it is one of the most famous heathen Cities that euer I came in ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.26

and the Citizens are very good and kind people ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.27

and very many Gallants in the Citie . Also fine riuers , ponds ,
orchards , gardens , pleasant walkes , and excellent faire prospect as
euer I saw . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.28

Heere any Gentleman may haue pastime to hunt or hawke :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.29

and if hee will not go farre , he may buy a Deere in the <font> Busar
<$$font> or market for a Doller , being but foure shillings sterling ,
and hunt him where and when he will . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,29.30

Now in my iudgment , our English cloth of gold <P_30> and siluer ,
veluets , broad_cloth , bayes , and cottons , would be very vendable ,
in regard there are so many Gallants . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,30.31

And thus much for the great City of <font> Bramport <$$font> .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,30.32

The eleuenth of Nouember we took our iourny towards <font> Agroe
<$$font> , I and <font> Ioseph Salebanck <$$font> our Purser , and one
<font> Io. Frencham <$$font> , with one of the Country people for our
guide , taking leaue of our Generall , who was extreame sicke of an Ague
, and no hope of any speedy recouery . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,30.33

Also we had thought to haue gone along with a Carrauand of
foure_hundred_and_fifty strong , which were bound for <font> Agro
<$$font> : COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,30.34

but the Captaine told vs , that they were to stay seuen daies longer ;
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,30.35

but said , if wee would trauel some two daies iourny <paren> which we
might safely doe without any danger of theeues <$$paren> we should meet
with a greater Carauand then they were . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,30.36

So on the twelfth day , wee trauelled to a Towne called <font> Caddor
<$$font> , some fifteene course from thence , where we lay that night .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,30.37

Heere the Gouernor hearing that wee were strangers , or Christians ,
demanded what we would haue , and whether we trauelled :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,30.38

We answered , to <font> Agro <$$font> , to the King , and that we came
from <font> Surrot <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,30.39

Then he asked vs what we would doe with the King :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,30.40

And when I heard him so inquisitiue , I peremptorily answered , that my
businesse was too great for him to know : COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,30.41

but he said , he would know it ere we went out of the Towne :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,30.42

and I againe replied , that my businesse was such , that I would goe out
of the Towne and aske him no leaue : COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,30.43

and so making vs ready to depart , we said , we would see who would stay
vs , without a very lawfull occasion : COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,30.44

Then the Gouernor sent his Cotwall or the Maior of the Towne , who asked
vs why we vsed such peremptory speeches to the Gouernor :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,30.45

We told him , we answered him in no worse manner then his place and
calling deserued , and that it was not for him to force vs to acquaint
him with our businesse to the <P_31> King , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.46

and then we shewed him the Can Canawes passe to the King . Whereupon
the Gouernor came to vs again with twenty Gentlemen of the Towne , and
by all meanes intreated vs to stay all night , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.47

and whatsoeuer wee wanted that the country could afford , should be at
our seruice ; COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.48

and withall told vs , the way was dangerous , and very bad to trauell .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.49

The next day we gaue him halfe a pound of Tobacco for a present , which
wee brought out of England , which he accepted very thankfully .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.50

The thirteenth day wee came to a Towne called <font> Sawbon <$$font> ,
some 14 course from <font> Caddor <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.51

but before wee were halfe a course out of the Towne , the Gouernour sent
12. Horsemen with Launces , Bowes and Arrowes , to conduct vs some part
of the way that was most dangerous , which was some 10. or 12. English
miles . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.52

And when we came to <font> Sawbon <$$font> , we found the <font>
Carauand <$$font> being 500. Camels bound for <font> Agro <$$font> .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.53

And were laden with Taffateis , wrought Silkes , Cloth , Sugar , and
other Commodities , some from <font> Bramport <$$font> , some from
<font> Bengalla <$$font> , and some from <font> Cambaia <$$font> .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.54

The 14. day we set forwards with the <font> Carrauand <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.55

and trauelled some 12. course to a Monastery called <font> Tindey
<$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.56

The 15. day , we trauelled some 10. course COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.57

and lay in the woods . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.58

The next day , we came to a great City called <font> Cannowe <$$font> ,
where is much trading for Cloth , Swords , Shashes , Peeces , and Armour
tied on with strings , being but onely Arrow_proofe .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.59

There is great store of fruit , and colours for Diars , of all sorts :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.60

and I thinke our English cloth would be an excellent commodity there :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.61

for it is very cold , especially in January February and March ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.62

for it beareth to the Northwards . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,31.63

The 15. day we trauelled some 14 course to a great <P_32> Riuer ,
called the Riuer of <font> Andee <$$font> , which is as broad as the
<font> Thames <$$font> at <font> Woolwich <$$font> , and runneth into
the Bay of <font> Bengalla <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.64

and this is the vtmost part or border of the <font> Gentiles <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.65

and one the 17. day we passed ouer the Riuer COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.66

and went out of the <font> Gentiles <$$font> Countrey .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.67

The <font> Gentiles <$$font> will eat nothing that bleedeth ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.68

and the Sun is their great god . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.69

For , should they eat any thing that bleedeth , they beleeue that they
may eat the soules of their Father , Mother , Sister , Brother , or
friends , that are deceased : COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.70

For , they say , that when any one dieth , their breath presently goeth
into one beast or other , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.71

& so , in eating that beast , a man may eat the soule of some friend
together with the flesh of that beast , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.72

such is their great blindenesse and ignorance .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.73

Nay more , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.74

they doe make euery liuing thing their Idols : as , the first liuing
they meete in the morning is their god or saint for that day , to
worship that , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.75

and so leauing the <font> Gentiles <$$font> , we come to the <font>
Bulloits <$$font> , or <font> Pithagoreans <$$font> .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.76

The 17. day we came to the City of <font> Gorra <$$font> , where are
many <font> Surroyes <$$font> , or Innes , where Trauellers may set
their Camels , Horses or Catell , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.77

and cost nothing . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.78

Also there are four great Schooles for learning like to an Uniuersity :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.79

In this Countrey were two Brothers being Kings sonnes , who warred for
this city , being eight miles in compasse , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.80

and in the middle a great wall , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.81

and there they laid their Seedge , a long time .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.82

And at the last the King of the East part got the victory ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.83

and held the same for seuen yeeres , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.84

and then the great <font> Mogol Tamberlaine <$$font> the sixth ouercame
the whole Countrey COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.85

and tooke it into his hands . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.86

The 18. day , we went ten course to a great Tanck or poole of water ,
like vnto the Bath , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.87

the water boiling out of the earth COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.88

and is very warme . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.89

The 19. day , wee trauelled some 15. course to a Towne called <font>
Sanday <$$font> where is a great store of Wooll , like <font> Spanish
<$$font> Wool , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,32.90

heere are made great store of caps to couer Turbants , felt gownes to
ride in , both fine <P_33> and course , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,33.91

there are great store of sheepe , and so much Sugar , that they feed
horses therewith as we do with prouender , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,33.92

also there are goodly Surroies or Innes for horsemen and footmen .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,33.93

The 20. day , wee trauelled some fifteene course to a great <font>
Surroy <$$font> , neere vnto a Monastery , where wee had great store of
fruit called <font> Mangoes <$$font> being like an apple , and haue a
stone as big as an Apricocke , and in sent or taste ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,33.94

and is excellent good for the Flixe , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,33.95

and are there much esteemed of . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,33.96

The 21. day we trauelled twelue course to a small village , called
<font> Lee <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,33.97

The 22. day we trauelled some 16. course to a City called <font> Esman
<$$font> , where is a great Bussart or Market for the countrey people ,
for Wooll , Cotten , Cotten {TEXT:Colten} yearne , Swords , Jauelins ,
and other weapons for the warres . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,33.98

The 23. day , wee came to a little Towne called <font> Zingreene
<$$font> , some 14. course , where is great store of Oad , and
aboundance of Drugs for Diars . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,33.99

The 24. day , we trauelled 16. course to a Citie called <font>
Barrandonn <$$font> where are great store of Merchants of the <font>
Bannians <$$font> and <font> Mesulipatanians <$$font> .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,33.100

It is a City were the great <font> Carrauans <$$font> meet ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,33.101

and there is great trade of Merchandise , for Cloth , Shashes , Armour ,
for men and Horses , Coats of Male , Armour of Arrow_proofe , bombast
Headpeeces , and Elephants teeth , also many wilde Elephants in the
Countrey : COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,33.102

here we staied two daies COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,33.103

and left our Carrauant in the City . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,33.104

The 27. day we tooke our iourney forwards , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,33.105

and by the way we met with a Con or Knight of the Countrey , with fourty
Horse being bound for <font> Agro <$$font> , and fifty shot , with whom
we also kept company , being about 140. strong ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,33.106

and trauelled in the Desart some sixe daies , where are great store of
wilde Elephants , Lions , Tygars , Cat of Mountaines , Porpentines ,
<P_34> and other wilde beasts innumerable , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.107

but those wee saw . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.108

These Desarts are 100. course long , where euery night we made great
fires round about our tents , to shunne the dangers of the wilde beasts
: COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.109

This Con or Knight told vs the nature or wit of the Elephant , who
knowing he is hunted to death for his teeth , will goe to a tree and
there by maine force will wring or wrest his teeth out of his head ,
knowing that so he shall liue secure and free from that danger ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.110

and this he protested to be true . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.111

The third of December , we past those Desarts COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.112

and came to a Towne called <font> Tranado <$$font> .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.113

The fourth day , we trauelled some 16. course to a Towne called <font>
Zaioberdee <$$font> , where is hay , corne , and graine , great plenty .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.114

The fifth day we trauelled some 18. course to a City called <font>
Handee <$$font> , where the King hath a Castle and house , cut out of
the maine Rocke , and wrought with carued worke round about .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.115

This Castle is inuincible , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.116

and hath fifty peeces of Ordinance in it . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.117

There lay in this Castle , when wee were there 200. Knights , Captaines
, and other Gallants , that had transgressed the Law , or the Kings
commandement , as in Treson , Rebellion , and such like matters .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.118

Also , in this City are two houses much like Saint <font> Iones <$$font>
, where Captaines and Cauiliers , that haue beene maimed , and hurt in
the warres , do liue , and haue each one a Mammothee a day being nine
pence English , and meat and drinke at the Kings allowance .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.119

The 6. day we came to the Riuer of <font> Tamluo <$$font> , which
runneth into the Riuer <font> Indus <$$font> , which parteth the
Countries of the <font> Pythagoreans <$$font> , and the <font>
Indestands <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.120

The <font> Pithagoreans <$$font> in former times haue beene a vile and
treacherous kinde of people , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.121

and had a Law that when the husband died , the wife should be also burnt
, which is holden till this day , though not in so strict a maner ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.122

for now shee may refuse it , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,34.123

but then <P_35> her head is shauen and she clad in a blacke vesture or
garment , which among them is reputed most vile and hatefull , that the
basest slaue in the Countrey will not succor nor releeue her though she
should starue . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,35.124

Now , the cause why this Law was first made , was , for that the women
there were so fickle and inconstant , that , vpon any slight occasion of
dislike or spleene , they would poison their husbands . Whereas now the
establishing and executing of this Law , is the cause that moueth the
wife to loue and cheerish her husband , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,35.125

and wisheth not to suruiue him . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,35.126

As for example , I saw a young woman the wife of a Doctor , whose
husband being dead , shee made choise to bee carried in a Pageant , by
foure men , shee being cloathed in Lawne , and her head deacked with
Jewels and rich Ornaments , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,35.127

and before her went Musike of all sorts that the Countrey afforded , as
Hoeboies , Drums , fifes , and Trumpets , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,35.128

and next vnto her all her kindred , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,35.129

and so shee was brought to the place of Execution , where was a stake
and a hold to set her feet in , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,35.130

and so being tied to the stake , all her kindred kneeling round about
her , & praying to the sun and their other Idols , the fire was set to
her , she hauing vnder each arme a bagge of gunpowder , and a bagge
betwixt her legges , and so burnt to death , the fire being made of
Beniamin , Storaxe , Lignomalloes , and other sweet woods .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,35.131

Thus much for the <font> Bulloits <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,35.132

and so to the <font> Indestands <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,35.133

and the next day we trauelled some ten course to a Towne called <font>
Addar <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,35.134

The eight day , wee trauelled some 26. course ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,35.135

and came to the great City of <font> Agro <$$font> where the great
<font> Mogoll <$$font> keepeth his Court and residence .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,35.136

The ninth day Captaine <font> Hawkins <$$font> came to vs ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,35.137

and brought vs before the King , as it is the custome and manner of the
Countrey . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,35.138

For no stranger must stay aboue twenty_foure houres before he be brought
before the King to know what hee is , and wherefore hee commeth .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,35.139

<P_36>

Also euery stranger must present the King with some present , bee it
neuer so small , which hee will not refuse . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.141

And I gaue him for a present , a small whistle of gold , waighing almost
an ounce , set with sparks of Rubies , which hee tooke and whisteled
therewith almost an houre . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.142

Also I gaue him the picture of Saint <font> Iohns <$$font> head cut in
Amber and Gold , which hee also receiued very gratiously .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.143

The whistle hee gaue to one of his great women , and the picture to
<font> Sultane Caroone <$$font> his yongest sonne .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.144

His eldest son rebelled , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.145

and is in prison with his eies sealed vp , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.146

and it is noised amongst the common people that his eies are put out :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.147

But it was told mee by a great man , that they are but sealed vp .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.148

His name is <font> Patteshaw Shelham <$$font> , which in our language is
heire apparant to the Crowne : COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.149

His second sonne liueth with him COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.150

and is called <font> Sultane Nawbree <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.151

and him hee thinketh to make his heire apparant :
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.152

His third sonne is called <font> Sultane Lawlle <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.153

and is Viceroy of <font> Lihorne <$$font> : COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.154

His fourth sonne is called <font> Sultane Lill <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.155

and is Viceroy of the Gentiles , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.156

and these are his fiue sonnes . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.157

Also hee hath ten Viceroys more vnder him , that gouern ten seuerall
Prouinces or Countries , <font> viz. Can Canow <$$font> Viceroy of the
<font> Guzarats <$$font> : <font> Can Iohn <$$font> Viceroy of the
<font> Bulloites <$$font> : <font> Michall Car <$$font> Viceroy of the
<font> Bannians <$$font> : <font> Howsouer Can <$$font> , Viceroy of
<font> Cambaia <$$font> : <font> Hodge Iohn <$$font> , Viceroy of <font>
Bengolla <$$font> : <font> Michaell Can <$$font> , Viceroy of the <font>
Hendownes <$$font> : <font> Sawder Can <$$font> Viceroy of the <font>
Puttans <$$font> , and hee lieth in the City of Candahar : <font> Alloe
Can <$$font> Viceroy of the <font> Bullochies <$$font> , and lieth in
the City of <font> Buckera <$$font> : <font> Sawber Can <$$font> ,
Viceroy of the <font> Multans <$$font> , and <font> Can Bullard <$$font>
Viceroy of the <font> Indestands <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,36.158

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_2}

<P_46>

The 23. day we went some 15. course COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.161

and lay in the fields . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.162

The 24. day , we went some fiue course COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.163

and came to three Townes , <font> viz. Roree , Buckar <$$font> , and
<font> Sucker <$$font> , where is a gallant fresh Riuer , and small
ships that may goe to <font> Armoose <$$font> , as the Townsmen report .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.164

Now the shipping belongeth to <font> Roree <$$font> , being some fifty
or sixtey saile , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.165

and are of the burden of fourty , fifty , and sixty tun , whereby there
is trade of Merchandize as far as the coast of <font> Molindee <$$font>
, and as far as <font> Mosembique <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.166

and this Riuer falleth into the gulph of <font> Persia <$$font> .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.167

<font> Buckar <$$font> standeth in the middle of the Riuer , which
maketh it in forme of an Iland , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.168

and is besides very strongly built . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.169

The <font> Indians <$$font> cal this Riuer , the Riuer of <font>
Damiadee <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.170

And in this towne of <font> Bucker <$$font> , lieth <font> Allee Can
<$$font> the <font> Mogols <$$font> Viceroy of the <font> Bullochies
<$$font> , who are such a stubborne & rebellious people that he keepeth
that strong_hold of purpose to retire vnto , and to gather a head and
renew his forces , at all assaies , to subdue and keepe them in awe and
obedience , which notwithstanding he can hardly doe .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.171

Also this <font> Allee Can <$$font> is a very worthy and bountifull
Prince , who gaue vs very gallant and kinde entertainment , and
commended vs to come dayly to his Court , where we had both costly and
plentifull diet at all times , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.172

and heere wee left <font> Io. Frencham <$$font> <paren> one of our
company <$$paren> sicke . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.173

<font> Sucker <$$font> is a Towne consisting most of Weauers and Diars ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.174

and liue by cloathing , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.175

and serue the Countrey round about , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.176

and this is the first Towne of the <font> Bullochies <$$font> .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.177

And <font> Roree <$$font> is {TEXT:missing_"is"} the last confine towne
of the <font> Multans <$$font> who are good husbandmen and painefull
people , and deale much in Merchandize , as Cloth , Indico , and other
commodities , and are very good people to deal withall ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.178

yet their Religion is Mahometicall . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.179

At <font> Sucker <$$font> we staied 24. daies and more for a Coffilo or
Conuoy , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,46.180

For the Captaine of the Castle would not <P_47> suffer vs to goe without
one , because the way was dangerous and full of Theeues , which
afterwards we found true , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.181

for had we not <paren> by the great prouidence of God <$$paren> escaped
their hands , it had cost vs our liues , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.182

and yet it cost vs some money besides . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.183

The 25. day of March , 1610. wee came from <font> Sucker <$$font>
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.184

and trauelled ouer the plaines some three course or thereabouts .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.185

The 26. day wee trauelled through the woods or Desarts some three
course more . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.186

The 27. day , wee went three course more through the Desarts ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.187

and there wee tooke in water for two daies , which was but bad water
neither , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.188

but there was no better to be had , nor any towne to com to , vntill we
came to <font> Gorra <$$font> , some eight course distant from thence ,
which was on the 28. day at night , where we rested two daies and were
very well vsed , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.189

yet being a Towne of the <font> Bullochies <$$font> and Rebels , wee
were in great feare , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.190

but we found no such cause , God be praised . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.191

The <font> Bullochies <$$font> are Man-eaters , being men of huge limmes
and proportion euen giantlike , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.192

nor are they of any religion at all , saue only that they worship the
Sunne . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.193

The 21. day , we came to <font> Norry <$$font> , being about 10.
course , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.194

and this is the last Towne , of the <font> Bullochies <$$font> ;
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.195

and so to the <font> Puttans . <$$font> COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.196

The first day of Aprill , we tooke our iourney ouer the plaines earely
in the morning , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.197

and about breake of day wee met with tenne or twelue men playing on
fiddles , as if they had come in friendly maner to welcome vs ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.198

but indeed they were no better then Theeues that intended to rob and
pillege vs , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.199

for by the Sun_rising wee were beset round with them and their
companions , whose certaine number wee could not discerne nor know .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,47.200

And though wee had a Caffeloe or Conuoy of two_hundred <P_48> strong ,
yet wee were glad to intreate the Captaine of that vnruly Crew to stand
our friend , and both to bribe him priuatly , and to pay openly besides
in the name of a custom , twenty Checkeenoes in gold ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.201

nor would all this haue serued the turne , but for the <font> Mogols
<$$font> Passe vnder his hand and great seale , which they much feared ,
but that all our throats had beene cut , as other in greater number had
formerly beene ; COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.202

yet at last vpon this friendly composition , they garded and conducted
vs through their Countrey , vntill wee were past all danger ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.203

and so departed , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.204

and that day wee trauelled some nine course ouer the plaines ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.205

and tooke vp our lodging in the plaine Fields .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.206

The second day wee trauelled some eight course to a Towne called <font>
Daddor <$$font> , where wee rested two daies .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.207

The fifth day , we trauelled eight course ouer the mountaines .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.208

The sixth day , we went ten course ouer the mountaines .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.209

The seuenth day , we went eight course ouer the Mountaines .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.210

The eight day , we went eight course to <font> Vachesto <$$font> , a
Towne of ciuill and quiet Gouernment , where wee rested that night .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.211

The ninth day we went three or foure course ouer the mountaines
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.212

and lay in the fields . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.213

The tenth day we went some eight course in the mountaines .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.214

The eleuenth day , we went nine or ten course in the Mountaines .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.215

The twelfth day we went some nine or ten course in the mountaines .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.216

The thirteenth day we went nine or ten course in the mountaines .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.217

The fourteenth day we went some fourteene course ouer
{COM:rest_of_sentence_missing} COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,48.218

<P_49>

The 15. day we came to <font> Candahar <$$font> being but two course
from thence , where we staied 20. or 21. daies .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.220

This is a great and gallant Citie of the <font> Puttans <$$font> , where
<font> Sawdder Conuiceroy <$$font> of the <font> Puttans <$$font>
keepeth his Court and residence . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.221

There is great and continuall traffique by land , from <font> Persia ,
Indestand , Mesopotamia <$$font> , and from all partes betweene that and
<font> China <$$font> , with all sortes of merchandize and commodities
which those Countries yeelde ; COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.222

For there are continually 7. or 8._thousand Camels about the Citie
which trade to and fro with merchandize . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.223

Also the viceroy hath continually 40000. horses for the warres in
readinessse for feare of Rebellion , because the <font> Puttans <$$font>
are a strong and warlike people , and inclined to rebellion , by reason
they came vnder the <font> Mogols <$$font> gouernment and subiection by
force and conquest , and therefore loue him not in their hearts , but
obey him for feare . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.224

The 6. day of May we tooke our iourney for <font> Ispahawne <$$font> in
<font> Persia <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.225

and trauelled some 8 course that day , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.226

and came to a gallant Riuer where were two Townes on each side of the
Riuer one , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.227

and at one of these Townes called <font> Langor <$$font> we rested that
night . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.228

The 7. day we went some 6. or 7. course ouer the plaines .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.229

The 8. day we went in like manner some 7. course more
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.230

and lay in the fields . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.231

The 9. day we went ouer the plaines some 12. course ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.232

and came to a great Riuer which diuideth the land of the <font> Puttans
<$$font> from <font> Persia <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.233

and there we paid custome for our Owts or Camels
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.234

and rested 2. daies by the Riuer side . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.235

The 12. day we were ferried ouer the Riuer , which is called <font>
Sabbaa <$$font> to a castle a course from thence , and neer to a Towne
called <font> Grees . <$$font> COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.236

This Riuer diuideth the confines of the great <font> Mogoll <$$font> and
the King . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.237

The <font> Puttans <$$font> are a warlike and goodly people ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,49.238

and were <P_50> their beards long , which the <font> Mogols <$$font> doe
hate , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.239

also they worship the great God of heauen COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.240

and despise <font> Mahomet <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.241

Their Priests goe in Sackcloth with great Chaines about their middles ;
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.242

And doe fall downe and pray continuallie in Sackcloth and Ashes .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.243

And so passing out of the great <font> Mogols <$$font> kingdomes and
dominions we came to the Towne of <font> Grees <$$font> being the first
Towne of <font> Persia <$$font> , where we rested a day and a night .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.244

The Towne of <font> Grees <$$font> is a frontier Towne ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.245

and therefore the King or <paren> as they call him <$$paren> the <font>
Shawbash <$$font> of <font> Persia <$$font> keepeth heere a garrison of
ten_thousand men , and a gouernour to command them .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.246

The 14. day we went ouer the plaines 6. forsongs euery forsong being a
league , and euery league 2. course , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.247

and rested in the fields . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.248

The 15. day we trauelled ouer the plaines some 6. forsongs more ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.249

and came to a Castle , where we refreshed our selues and our cattle ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.250

and there we rested our selues two daies to stay for a Coffeloe or
conuoy which came to vs the 14. day at night .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.251

The 18. day we went 5. forsongs ouer the fields or plaines
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.252

and lay in the fields . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.253

The 19. day at night we trauelled some 4 forsongs to a Towne called
<font> Doctorcham <$$font> , where wee staied all the next day and night
. COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.254

The 21. day we trauelled some 5 or 6 forsongs in the night to a Towne
called <font> Sehawe <$$font> , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.255

and thus for certaine daies we trauelled al by night by reason of the
extreame heat in the day time . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.256

The 22. day at night we trauelled some 6 forsongs ouer the plaines .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.257

The 23. day at night we went 5 forsongs to a Town called <font> Vea
<$$font> , where are great store of Feltmakers which also make felt
Carpets & weauers of <font> Turkie <$$font> Carpetes ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.258

there are also great store of Dates , and all sorts of fruits .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,50.259

The 24. day wee trauelled some 6. forsongs to a faire <P_51> Citie
called <font> Parra <$$font> , where we staied 22. daies for a Coffeloe
or Conuoy , my selfe being also sicke there , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.260

there is great trade of merchandize , and great store of raw silke which
in the <font> Persian <$$font> tongue is called <font> Auerisham
<$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.261

The 6. day we went some 2. forsongs ouer the mountaines .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.262

The 7. day we went 4. or 5. forsongs ouer the mountaines .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.263

The 8. day we went 7. forsongs . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.264

The 9. day we went some 5. forsongs . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.265

The 10. day we went 10. forsongs all in the mountaines .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.266

The 11. day we trauelled some 3. forsongs to a towne called <font>
Banda <$$font> being but a harbor or lodging place .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.267

The 12. day wee went some 3. forsongs ouer the plaines .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.268

The 13. day we trauelled some 5. forsongs ouer the plaines
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.269

and rested till the 14. day at night , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.270

and then trauelled some 7. forsongs and a halfe .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.271

The 15. day wee came to a Towne called <font> Sunday <$$font> where we
rested that night and all the next day and night .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.272

The 17. day we trauelled some 7. forsongs and a halfe ouer the plaines
. COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.273

The 18. daie wee went in like manner some 9. for_songs .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.274

The 19. day we went 5. forsongs to a Towne called <font> Beasta
<$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.275

The 20. day we went some 4. forsongs . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.276

The 21. day we trauelled some 6. forsongs to a towne called <font>
Gusta <$$font> , where we rested a day and a night .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.277

The 23. day we trauelled 4. forsongs to a watering place .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.278

The 24. day we trauelled 10. forsongs COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.279

and rested in the fields . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.280

The 25. day we trauelled 7. forsongs to a Towne called <font> Dattee
<$$font> , where was great store of Muskmillions
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,51.281

and <P_52> there wee had good releefe . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.282

The 26. day we trauelled some 4. forsongs to a place where was a
gallant vawlt with water . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.283

The 27. day we went some 7. forsongs to a Towne called <font> Yesday .
<$$font> COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.284

The 28. day we went some 5. forsongs to a Towne called <font>
Pahanauens <$$font> where we rested 2. daies and two nights .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.285

There is great store of raw silke , or Auerisham as they call it .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.286

The 2. day of <font> Iuly <$$font> we went 5. forsongs ouer the
plaines . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.287

The third day we went 8. forsongs ouer the barren and wilde plaines
where we had no water but salt water and the ground all couered ouer
with salt . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.288

The 4. day we trauelled 7. forsongs in salt ground
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.289

and none but salt water . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.290

The 5. day we went 15. forsongs for want of water in a most barren and
dry Country COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.291

and came to a town called <font> Bibe <$$font> , where we rested two
daies and two nights . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.292

The 8. day we truealled some 14. forsongs to a Towne called <font>
Godanna <$$font> : where we rested that night and the next day and night
, COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.293

and here is also great store of raw silke . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.294

The 10. day we trauelled some 20. forsongs to a Town called <font>
Henda <$$font> , where are great store of Grapes and Muskmillions .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.295

The 12. day we trauelled some 15. forsongs to a Towne called <font>
Corneta <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.296

The 13. day we went 6. or 7. forsongs to a Towne called <font>
Orrinkea <$$font> , a lodging Towne . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.297

The 14. day we went but 4. forsongs to a little village .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,52.298

The 15. day we went 5. forsongs to a Towne called <font> Gowra
<$$font> being a faire great Towne , where is great store of raw silkes
, bed couerings , silke carpets , cotton <P_53> Carpets , and such like
commodities ; COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.299

and there wee staied that night , and the next day and night .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.300

The seuenteenth day , we went nine forsongs before we could finde any
water . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.301

The eighteenth day , we trauelled fiue forsongs to a little Village .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.302

The nineteenth day , we went seuen forsongs ouer the plaines .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.303

The twentieth day , wee went some fiue forsongs ouer the plaines .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.304

The twenty_one day , wee trauelled some sixe forsongs ouer the plaines .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.305

The twenty_two day , we went two forsongs and a halfe .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.306

The twenty_three day , we came to <font> Ispahawne <$$font> .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.307

The twenty fourth day , we entred into the City where wee staied eleuen
or twelve daies . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.308

This City of <font> Ispahawne <$$font> , is a gallant City , and one of
the principall Cities of <font> Persia <$$font> ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.309

and aboundeth in traffique of all sorts of Merchandize .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.310

There are many great Surroies , where are houses made of purpose for the
laying in and keeping of Merchants goods , and to harbour and lodge
themselues and their Camels Horses or other Cattle , and prouision ; the
profits of which Surroies redound to the King only .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.311

The whole Countrey aboue a_hundred miles round about , doe wholly and
generally trade to this City with their chiefest and best commodities .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.312

There is also a place in forme like the Exchange , of an inestimable
wealth , where is nothing to be sold but things of great value and worth
. As Cloth of gold , siluer and tissue , sattans , veluets , Jewels and
pearles . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.313

In one end are nothing but raw silkes , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.314

in another are twisted and wrought silkes . In another none but
Merchanttailors , who sell , all sorts of apparell ready made , as it is
in Birching lane , but farre more rich , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,53.315

and all of the <font> Persian <$$font> fashion , as , sutes of cloth of
gold <P_54> and siluer , veluet , satten , taffety , Callico and none
almost of any worser sorts . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,54.316

Also there is great store of Indico and Anneele , and of all maner of
Drugs , which are sold by Jewes and other strangers , that send them
thither , and haue continuall trading there . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,54.317

Also there are Camels , the best and strongest that are to bee found ,
with gallant Horses and Mules abundance . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,54.318

For whereas an ordinary Camels load is fiue_hundred waight , the <font>
Persian <$$font> Camels load is vsually 800. waight .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,54.319

The <font> Shawbash <$$font> <paren> or , as we call him , the King
<$$paren> hath there diuers gallant and stately houses , and banqueting
houses , with Orchards , Gardens , Springs , ponds of water , walks and
Galleries , as pleasantly seated and artificially contriued , as can be
thought or deuised . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,54.320

But the king himselfe before my comming thither , was remoued to a place
called <font> Tobrin <$$font> , as it was told me by the Christian
Friars . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,54.321

And at his chiefest house standing ouer against the great Basar or
Market place , there are good store of brasse Ordinance orderly planted
before the gate thereof , for defence if neede be , as namely , two Demy
Cannons , two whole Culuerings , two Cannon Pedrars , and thirty other
field Pieces . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,54.322

Also heere I made enquiry of Master <font> Robert Sherley <$$font> ,
thinking to haue had some assistance , and better directions from him ,
or by his procurement , in my Journey , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,54.323

but it was told me directly that hee was departed some seuen months
before for <font> England <$$font> , and had his way by the <font>
Caspian <$$font> Seas , being two months Journey from <font> Ispahawn
<$$font> : COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,54.324

That is to say , himselfe , and his wife , being a woman of great worth
and esteeme in that Countrey , with Camels and Horses to carry his
treasure , stuffe , and prouision , and many attendants both men and
women . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,54.325

And in his Company , one Captaine and fiue or seuen Englishmen more .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,54.326

<P_55>

Also there are great store of Grapes and Wines , and of all sorts of
fruits ; their stronger Wines like vnto Canary Sacke , their red Wines
like high Countrey Claret , and their smaller Wines like to Iland Wines
. COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.328

Also victuals good store and good cheape . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.329

And there lieth continually a <font> Portugall <$$font> Embassador , and
fiue <font> Portugall <$$font> Friars , who haue a Church , and a house
to entertaine Roman Catholiks , and other Christians at their pleasures
, and haue meanes sufficient to maintaine the same .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.330

Also there are great store of <font> Armenian <$$font> Christians , and
some Greekes , who liue all at free liberty without restraint or
controll for their Religion . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.331

And so much for the great and rich City of <font> Ispahawne . <$$font>
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.332

The sixth day of August , wee departed from thence
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.333

and trauelled some sixe forsongs , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.334

and lay in the fields close by a riuer side . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.335

The seuenth day , we trauelled ten forsongs in the Desarts , and on the
eight day sixe forsongs more to the Towne of <font> Corronday <$$font> .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.336

The ninth day to <font> Miskerion , <$$font> COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.337

and so directly to <font> Bugdad <$$font> , or <font> Babilon <$$font> ,
being a months Journey : that is to say , sixe forsongs to <font>
Miskereon . <$$font> COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.338

The tenth day , wee went ten forsongs in the Desarts .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.339

The eleuenth day , eleuen {SIC:eleuenth} forsongs in the Desarts .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.340

The twelfe day , nine forsongs more in the Desarts .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.341

The thirteenth day , we went fourteene forsongs to a little Village
called <font> Corryn <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.342

The fourteenth day , ten forsongs in the Desarts .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.343

The fifteenth day , nine forsongs in the Desarts .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.344

The sixteenth day , we trauelled nine or ten forsongs to a little Towne
called <font> Lackeree <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.345

The seuenteenth day we trauelled eight forsongs in the Desarts .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,55.346

The eighteenth day , we trauelled twelue forsongs <P_56> in the Desarts
to a water Mill , where we lay all night . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,56.347

The ninteenth day , wee went fourteene forsongs through the Desarts to a
little Towne called <font> Corbet <$$font> . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,56.348

The twentieth day , we trauelled twelue forsongs , to a Cloth towne :
that is to say , where all the houses were made of hairy cloth like
tents , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,56.349

and there we rested two daies . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,56.350

The three_and_twentieth day , we trauelled some eight forsongs in the
Desarts . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,56.351

The foure_and_twentieth day , wee trauelled some nine or tenne forsongs
ouer the Desarts , to another Cloth towne . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,56.352

The twentie_fiue day , wee went through a mighty great Wood being
fifteene forsongs in length , where we went down such an extreame steepe
hill , that wee broke two of our Camels necks , and had much to doe to
goe downe the same our selues without harme , COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,56.353

and there we {SIC:were} sted all night . COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,56.354

The sixe_and_twentieth day , wee went some two forsongs to an other
Cloth towne , where wee rested three daies and three nights ,
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,56.355

and there we paid Custome for our Camels to a great City being but a
forsong from thence and is called <font> Nezzeret <$$font> , where , on
the top of a mighty great mountaine , was a monument of a great Sultan ,
or Gentleman : COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,56.356

and when wee asked , why hee was buried there , it was directly answered
, because he was so much the neerer to heauen .
COVERTE-1612-E2-P2,56.357

