<BEGIN_cromwell-1534-e1-p2>

{COM:continuation_of_cromwell.e1.p1}

<P_3.2,185>

Sir , I assure your Grace that ye be moch bounde to our Lorde God , that
in suche wise hath suffered you so to behave and order your self in thos
partyes to atteyne the good myndes and herts of the people there , the
reporte whereof in the Courte and ells where in these parties is and
hathe ben to the acquyryng and augmentyng the good oppynyons of many
persons towards your Grace ; beseching therfore your Grace to contynue
in the same after suche a sort and fasshyon as ye may daylye increase ,
not onlye in the ffavours of the pepull ther , but also here and ells
where , to the pleasure of God and the Prynce .
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,185.4

And notwithstanding your good , vertuous , and charitable demeaning and
using yourself in thos parties , ys not by your enemies interpretyd
after the best fashyon , yet always follow and persever ye attemperatlye
in suche things as your worldly affeccons sett apart , shall seme to
stand best with the pleasure of God and the Kyng .
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,185.5

Sir , sum ther@ @be that doth alledge ye doth kepe to grete a house and
famylie , and that ye are contynually buylding .
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,185.6

For the love of God , therefore , I eftsones as I often tymys have done
, most hertelye beseche your Grace to have respecte to every thing , and
, consyderyng the tyme , to refraygne your self for a season from all
manner byldinggs more then mere <P_3.2,186> necessite requireth ; which
I assure your Grace shall sease and put@ @to sylence sum persons that
moche spelyth of the same . CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,186.7

For the geldings which your Grace dyd send me , I do most humblie and
hertelie thanke you ; beseching your Grace to gyve ferther credens to
this berer , who shall declare unto your Grace other things not wryttyn
. CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,186.8

I do rekyn your Grace right happye that ye be now at libertye to serve
God , and lern to experyment how ye shall banyshe and exyle the vayn
desyrys of this unstabyll world ; which undowtydlye doth nothing ells
but allure every person therin , and specyallye such as our Lorde hath
most indewyd with his gyfts , to desyre the affecsyons of theyr mynd to
be satysfyed ; in studying and sekyng wherof , most persons , besyd the
grete tramaylls {COM:sic} and afliyccsyons that men suffer daylye ,
wherof most persons bene dryvyn to extreme repentance {COM:anacoluth} ;
and serching for plesure and ffelycyte fynd nothing but trowbyll , sorow
, anxyete , and adversyte . Wherfor , in myn oppynyon , your Grace
being as ye ar , I supposse ye woolde not be as ye werre , to wyn
a_hundereth tymys as moche as ye were possessyd off .
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,186.9

The Busshop of Bayon ys daylye lokyd ffor ,
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,186.10

and <P_3.2,187> my Lord of Wyltshyre ys cumyn home .
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,187.11

The sayng here is that the Emperowr hathe good obbedyence of his
subjects in all thing , saving that they wyll not discent from the
Lutheran sekt . CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,187.12

It ys also sayd that the Emperowr doth make musters for a gret army to
be preparyd ayenst the Turke , to passe to Hungary for the recovery of
that regyon , and that the second son of the Emperowr ys departyd this
present lyffe . CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,187.13

The news here ys that the Germayns wyll medlye have a generall
Counsaylle for the reformacyon of many things .
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,187.14

The Florentynys dothe styll contenew and defende the power of the Pope ,
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,187.15

and it ys supposyd that they shall vynce by meane that ther ys a gret
pestylence fallen amongyst them , being in the ffelde of the Popis
partye . CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,187.16

Ther ys also a gret carystye in Italye of all maner of grayne ,
in_somoche a quarter of whet ys worth generallye fforty shelinggs .
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,187.17

They loke daylye for an Ambassadour from the Pope , who at the ferthest
wil@ @be here w=t= xiiij days . CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,187.18

The Kyngs Highnes is this nyght at Amptell ,
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,187.19

and ther wyll contenew thes xiiij dayes .
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,187.20

It may please your Grace to pardon me that I do not repayre unto yow at
this tyme , CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,187.21

for undowtydlye it ys not possyble , as this berer shall fferthr declare
unto your Grace . CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,187.22

Our Lord knowith my wyll and mynde . CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,187.23

And I trust verelye that your Grace doth perffytlye thinke that I woolde
bee glade to see yow , CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,187.24

<P_3.2,188>

and unfaynydlye I woolde have sene your Grace long a this , yf I hadde
not bene lettyd by impertune busynes ; wherfor I eftsones most humblye
besech your Grace of pardon , CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,188.26

and though I am not with you in person , yet be ye assuryd I am , and
duryng my lyff shal@ @be , with yowr Grace , in hert , spyryt , prayer ,
and servyce , to the utterest of my poore and symple power , as knowyth
our Lorde , whom I most hertelye beseche to preserve your Grace in long
lyff , goode helthe , with th'@ @encreace of your hertys desyre .
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,188.27

At London , CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,188.28

the xviii=th= daye of August . CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,188.29

I beseche your Grace to depeche this berer whom I mygh evyll have
forborne at this tyme , but onlye that I persayvyd by your lettres that
ye moche desyryd to be put in quyetacyon , and that , besyde my selfe ,
I coulde not send any that coulde certefye your Grace of the effects of
such things as ye desire to be inforemyd in , but onlye he : eftsones
beseching your Grace spedelye to send hym home ,
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,188.30

for my busynes ys such that I can@ @not lake hym .
CROMWELL-1534-E1-P2,3.2,188.31

