<BEGIN_dacre-1513-e1-p2>

<P_1.1,92>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_XXXIV_THOMAS_LORD_DACRE_TO_KING_HENRY_THE_EIGHTH_A._D._1513>

<P_1.1,93>

Pleas it your Highnes to knowe I have received your most honourable
Lettres of your gracious thanks for my pure service done to your Grace
according to my dieuty , which is to me the most singler comforth and
rejoysing I can have ; DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,93.5

for by the same I well perceyve yo=r= Highnes regardeth not the sinistre
reaport or rumor surmised ayenst me , ne your Grace regardeth or geveth
ony credence thereunto , wherby I am bounde the rather to do unto
{SIC:doun_to} your Highnes the most laudable and acceptable service I
can or may do , and so shall undoutedly at all my power :
DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,93.6

and where as by the same your most honorable letters I understond your
pleasor and commaundment is that I shold effectually procede to the
spedy execution of ij Roods opon the West and Medyll Marches to the most
annoyaunce of the Scotts that I possibly may , like it your Grace to
knowe Opon Thuresday last past I assembled your subgietts in
Northumbreland to the nombre of a_thousand <P_1.1,94> horsmen , and rode
in at Gallespeth and so to the watre of Kale two myle within Scotland ,
and there set furth two foreyes ; my broder Philipp Dacre with ccc. men
which burnt and destroyed the Town of Rowcastell with all the cornes in
the same and thereabouts , and wan two towres in it , and burnt both
roffe and flores : DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,94.7

and Sir Roger Fenwike with ccc. men burnt the Town of Langton
DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,94.8

and destroyed all the cornes therein : which Townes er in the hert of
the countre two myle beyond Jedworth opon the watere of Chevyot .
DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,94.9

And I come with a stale to a place called the Dungyon , a myle from
Jedworth , DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,94.10

and so went to the Sclater furd on the water of Bowset ,
DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,94.11

and there the Scotts persewed us right sore , DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,94.12

ther bekered with us , DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,94.13

and gave us hand stroks ; DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,94.14

there come thre standards to bak theym , that is to say David Karr of
Fernehirst and the lard of Boudgedworth opon the oon side , and the
sheriff of Tevidale on the othre side , with the nombre of dcc. men or
mo . DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,94.15

The lard of Walghope was hurt there with oon arrowe and his hors slane ;
DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,94.16

Mark Trumbill was strikken with a spere and the hede left in hym ,
DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,94.17

his hors was won , DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,94.18

and diverse Scotesmen were hurt there . DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,94.19

And so we come forwards , where we saw my brother Syr Cristofer Dacre
with his oste arreyed at a place called the Bellyng , which was to us no
litill comforth , and to hym gret gladnes seyng the small power we were
of at that tyme . DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,94.20

My said broder come in at Cressopbrige DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,94.21

and there <P_1.1,95> entred the Medyll marches ,
DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.22

and so come thorow Ledesdale to the rughes wyre {COM:sic} , xiiij myle
within the ground of Scotland , DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.23

and there he put furth two forreyes : Syr John Ratclif with
fyve_hundreth men in oon , which burnt the town of Dyker sex myle from
the said swyre with a towre in the same , DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.24

thei layed corne and straw to the dore DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.25

and burnt it both rofe and flore , DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.26

and so smoked theym owt . DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.27

Also the said Syr John and his company burnt the Townnes of Sowdon and
Lurchestrother with a towre in it , DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.28

and destroyed all the cornes about theym DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.29

and toke diverse prisoners with much insight and goods .
DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.30

Nicholes Haryngton , Nicholes Rydley , Thomas Medilton , and George
Skelton with othre to the nombre of fyve_hundreth in the othre forrey
burnt the towne of Hyndhalghehede and a towre in the same flore and rofe
; and in likewise the townnes of Westsaw_syde and Estsaw_syde , with a
Pele of lyme and stane in it : DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.31

and my said brother Syr Cristofer , with two_thousand horsmen and cccc.
fute_men with bowes for savegard of th@ @ost in strayts come in a stale
to Dykerawe ; DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.32

and there the said forreyes releved to hym , DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.33

and so come forward DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.34

and met me . DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.35

We had not rydden above the space of a myle when we sawe the Lord
Chambrelane appere in our sight with ij_M. men , and four standerds ;
DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.36

the othre thre standerds resorted to hym DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.37

and so the countre drew fast to theym . DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.38

We put us in arreye DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.39

and come homeworde DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,95.40

and rode no faster then nowr <P_1.1,96> sheep and swyne that we had won
wold dryve , which was of no gret substance , DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,96.41

for the countre was warned of our comyng DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,96.42

and the bekyns burnt fro mydnyght forward . DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,96.43

And when the Scotts had geven us overe we retourned home
DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,96.44

and come in at the Redeswyre . DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,96.45

I come to Harbotill at mydnyght : DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,96.46

my broder Syr Cristofer lay that night at the towre of Otterburne , and
opon the morne to Hexham , and his folks in other townnes opon the water
of Tyne , and , on the thrid day at home , as many as might git .
DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,96.47

Sir I se not the gentilmen of the countre in a redynes for defence of
your bordoures , DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,96.48

for certen of theym to whome I had geven warnyng , as my Lord Ogle which
promised to com to me , the constable of Alnewike , and othre , trustyng
thei wold have bene glad to do your Grace service accordingly as thei
have done to your Wardens in tyme of werre , come not to me at the place
appoynted , wherby I was not accompayned as I thoght to have bene .
DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,96.49

I was counselled and avised by my guyds to have rejorned my purpose ,
DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,96.50

and so wold have done , but oonly that I had appoynted with my broder
Syr Cristofer to mete hym in Scotland , DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,96.51

for he departed fro me to the West Merches to bryng my folks from thens
whome I might not disappoynt DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,96.52

for I had no space to gif him warnyng , DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,96.53

it was xxx=ti= myle fro me and more , DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,96.54

and els I had not keped my purpose which now is performed thanked be
Jhesu , and all your subgietts in savety bot a servaunt of myn , which
was <P_1.1,97> killed there , DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,97.55

and two Scotts were slain and many othre hurt the same tyme .
DACRE-1513-E1-P2,1.1,97.56

