<BEGIN_deloney-1597-e2-p2>

<P_26>

<heading>

CHAPTER II . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,26.4

Of <font> Iacke <$$font> of <font> Newbery <$$font> his great wealth ,
and number of seruants : and also how hee brought the Queen <font>
Katherin <$$font> one_hundred_and_fifty men prepared for the warre at
his owne cost against the King of Scots at <font> Flodden <$$font> field
. DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,26.5

<$$heading>

Now <font> Iacke <$$font> of <font> Newberie <$$font> beeing a widower ,
had the choise of many Wiues , mens daughters of good credit and widowes
of great wealth . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,26.7

Notwithstanding he bent his onely like to one of his owne seruants ,
whom hee had tried in the guiding of his house a yeere or two :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,26.8

and knowing her carefull in her businesse , faithfull in her dealing ,
and an excellent good huswife , thought it better to haue her with
nothing , than some other with much treasure . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,26.9

And besides , as her qualities were good , so was she of very comely
personage , of a sweete fauour , and faire complexion .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,26.10

In the end hee opened his mind vnto her , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,26.11

and craued her good will . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,26.12

The maid <paren> though shee tooke this motion kindly <$$paren> said
shee would do nothing without consent of her Parents . Whereupon a
Letter was writ to her Father , being a poore man dwelling at <font>
Alesburie <$$font> in <font> Buckinghamshire <$$font> : who being
ioyfull of his daughters good fortune speedily came to <font> Newbery
<$$font> , where of her master he was frendly entertained : who after
hee had made him good chear , shewed him all his seruants at worke , and
euery office in his house . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,26.13

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_28>

When the olde man had seene this great houshold and familie , then hee
was brought into the Ware-houses , some being fild with wooll , some
with flockes , some with woad and madder , and some with broad cloathes
and kersies readie dyed and drest , beside a great number of others ,
some stretcht on the Tenters , some hanging on poles , and a great many
more lying wet in other places . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,28.16

Sir <paren> quoth the olde man <$$paren> Iwis che zee you bee bominable
rich , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,28.17

and ch@ @am content you shall haue my daughter ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,28.18

and Gods blessing and mine light on you both . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,28.19

But Father <paren> quoth <font> Iack <$$font> of <font> Newbery <$$font>
<$$paren> what will you bestow with her ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,28.20

Mary hear you <paren> quoth the old man <$$paren> I vaith ch@ @am but a
poore man , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,28.21

but I thong God , ch@ @am of good exclamation among my neighbours ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,28.22

and they will as zoone take my vice for any thing as a richer mans :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,28.23

th@ @icke I will bestowe , you shall haue with a good will :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,28.24

because che heare very good condemnation of you in euery place ,
therefore ch@ @ill giue you twenty Nobles and a weaning Calfe ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,28.25

and when I dye and my Wife , you shall haue the reuelation of all my
goods . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,28.26

When <font> Iack <$$font> heard his offer hee was straight content ,
making more reckning of the womans modestie , than her Fathers money .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,28.27

So the marriage day beeing appointed , all things were prepared meet for
the wedding , and royal cheere ordained ; DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,28.28

most of the Lordes , Knights , and Gentlemen therabout , were inuited
thereunto : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,28.29

the Bride being attired in a Gowne of sheepes russet , and a kertle of
fine wosted , her head attired with a billiment of gold , <P_29> and her
haire as yellow as golde hanging downe behind her , which was curiously
combd and pleated ; according to the manner in those dayes , shee was
led to Church betweene two sweet boyes , with Bride laces and Rosemary
tied about their silken sleeues , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.30

the one of them was sonne to Sir <font> Thomas Parrie <$$font> , the
other to Sir <font> Francis Hungerford <$$font> .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.31

Then was there a faire Bride-cup of siluer and gilt caried before her ,
wherein was a goodly branch of Rosemary gilded very faire , hung about
with silken Ribonds of all colours : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.32

next was there a noyse of Musicians that played all the way before her :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.33

after her came all the chiefest maydens of the Countrie , some bearing
great Bride Cakes , and some Garlands of wheate finely gilded ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.34

and so shee past vnto the Church . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.35

It is needelesse for mee to make any mention heere of the Bridegroome :
who being a man so well beloued , wanted no companie , and those of the
best sort , beside diuers Marchant Strangers of the Stilyard , that came
from London to the Wedding . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.36

The marriage being solemnized , home they came in order as before ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.37

and to dinner they went , where was no want of good cheere , no lacke of
melodie : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.38

Rhennish Wine at this wedding was as plentifull as Beere or Ale ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.39

for the Marchants had sent thither ten Tunnes of the best in the
Stilyard . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.40

This wedding endured ten dayes , to the great reliefe of the poore ,
that dwelt all about : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.41

and in the ende the Brides Father and Mother came to pay their Daughters
portion : which when the Bridegroome had receiued , hee gaue them great
thankes : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.42

Notwithstanding hee would not suffer them yet to depart :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.43

and against they should goe home , their sonne in law came vnto them ,
saying : Father , and Mother , all the thankes that my poore heart can
yeeld , I giue you for your good will , cost , and curtesie ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.44

and while I liue make bolde to vse me in any thing that I am able ;
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.45

and in requitall of the gift you gaue mee with your daughter , I giue
you heere twenty pound to bestowe as you find occasion ;
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.46

and for your losse of time , and charges riding vp and downe , I giue
you here as much broade cloath as shall make you a cloake and my mother
a holiday gowne , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.47

and when this is worne out , come to mee DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.48

and fetch more . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.49

O my good zonne <paren> quoth the old woman <$$paren> Christs benizon
bee with thee euermore : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.50

for to tell thee true , we had zold al our kine to make money for my
Daughters marriage , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,29.51

and this zeauen yeare <P_30> we should not haue been able to buy more :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,30.52

Notwithstanding wee should haue zold all that euer wee had , before my
poore wench should haue lost her marriage . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,30.53

I <paren> quoth the olde man <$$paren> ch@ @ud haue zold my coate from
my back , and my bed from vnder me , before my Girle should haue gone
without you . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,30.54

I thank you good father and mother , said the Bride ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,30.55

and I pray God long to keep you in health : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,30.56

then the Bride kneeled down DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,30.57

and did her dutie to her Parents ; who weeping for very ioy , departed .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,30.58

Not long after this , it chaunced while our Noble King was making warre
in <font> France <$$font> , that <font> Iames <$$font> , king of
Scotland , falsly breaking his oath inuaded <font> England <$$font> with
a great army and did much hurt vpon the Borders : whereupon on the
sodaine euerie man was appointed according to his abilitie to be readie
with his men and furniture at an houres warning , on paine of death .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,30.59

<font> Iacke <$$font> of <font> Newberie <$$font> was commanded by the
Iustices to set out sixe men , foure armed with Pikes and two Calieuers
, and to meete the Queene in <font> Buckinghamshire <$$font> , who was
there raising a great power to goe against the faithlesse king of Scots
. DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,30.60

When <font> Iacke <$$font> had receiued this charge , hee came home in
all haste , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,30.61

and cut out a whole broadcloth for horsemens coats , and so much more as
would make vp coates for the number of a_hundred men :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,30.62

in short time hee had made readie fiftie tall men well mounted in white
coates , and red caps with yellowe Feathers , Demilances in their hands
, and fiftie armed men on foot with Pikes , and fiftie shot in white
coats also , euery man so expert in the handling of his weapon , as fewe
better were found in the field . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,30.63

Himselfe likewise in compleat armour on a goodly Barbed Horse , rode
formost of the companie , with a launce in his hand , and a faire plume
of yellow feathers in his crest , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,30.64

and in this sort hee came before the Iustices : who at the first
approach did not a little wonder what hee should be .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,30.65

At length when he had discouered what he was , the Iustices and most of
the Gentlemen gaue him great commendations for this his good and forward
mind shewed in this action : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,30.66

but some other enuying heereat gaue out words that hee shewed himselfe
more prodigall then prudent , and more vaine_glorious then well aduised
, <P_31> seeing that the best Nobleman in the Countrie would scarce haue
done so much : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.67

and no maruell <paren> quoth they <$$paren> DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.68

for such a one would call to his remembrance , that the King had often
occasions to vrge his subiects to such charges ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.69

and therefore woulde do at one time as they might bee able to doe at
another : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.70

but <font> Iacke <$$font> of <font> Newbery <$$font> , like the Stork in
the Spring time , thinks the highest Cedar too lowe for him to build his
neast in , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.71

and eare the yeare bee halfe done , may bee glad to haue his bed in a
bush . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.72

These disdainefull speeches being at last brought to <font> Iacke
<$$font> of <font> Newberie@ @s <$$font> eare , though it grieued him
much , yet patiently put them vp till time conuenient .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.73

Within a while after , all the Souldiers in <font> Barkshire , Hampshire
<$$font> , and <font> Wilshire <$$font> , were commanded to shew
themselues before the Queene at <font> Stonny Stratford <$$font> , where
her Grace with many Lords , Knights , and Gentlemen were assembled ,
with tenne_thousand men . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.74

Against <font> Iacke <$$font> should goe to the Queen , hee caused his
face to bee smeared with bloud , and his white coate in like manner .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.75

When they were come before her Highnesse , she demanded <paren> aboue
all the rest <$$paren> what those white coates were ? Whervpon Sir
<font> Henery Englefield <$$font> <paren> who had the leading of the
<font> Barkshire <$$font> men <$$paren> made answere : Maie it please
your Maiestie to vnderstand , that hee which rideth formost there , is
called <font> Iacke <$$font> of <font> Newbery <$$font> , and all those
gallant men in white , are his owne seruants , who are maintained all
the yeare by him , whom he at his owne cost hath set out in this time of
extremitie , to serue the King against his vaunting Foe :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.76

and I assure your Maiesty there is not , for the number , better
Souldiers in the field . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.77

Good sir <font> Henry <$$font> <paren> quoth the Queene <$$paren> bring
the man to me that I may see him : which was done accordingly .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.78

Then <font> Iacke <$$font> with all his men alighted ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.79

and humbly on their knees fell before the Queene :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.80

Her Grace said , Gentleman arise , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.81

and putting forth her lillie_white hand , gaue it him to kisse .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.82

Most gratious Queene quoth hee , Gentleman I am none , nor the sonne of
a Gentleman , but a poore Clothier , whose lands are his Loomes , hauing
no other Rents but what I get from the backes of little sheepe ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.83

nor can I claime any cognisance but a wodden shuttle .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.84

Neuerthelesse , most gratious Queene , these my poore servants and my
selfe , with life and goods are readie at your Maiesties commaund , not
onely to spend our blouds , but also to lose our liues in defence of our
King and Countrey . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,31.85

<P_32>

Welcome to mee <font> Iacke <$$font> of <font> Newberie <$$font> , saide
the Queene , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,32.87

though a Clothier by trade , yet a Gentleman by condition , and a
faithfull subiect in heart : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,32.88

and if thou chance to haue any sute in Court , make account the queene
will bee thy friend , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,32.89

and would to God the King had many such Clothiers .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,32.90

But tell mee , how came thy white coate besmeared with bloud , and thy
face so bescratcht ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,32.91

May it please your Grace <paren> quoth hee <$$paren> to vnderstand ,
that it was my chaunce to meete with a Monster , who like the people
<font> Cynomolgy <$$font> , had the proportion of a man , but headed
like a dogge , the biting of whose teeth was like the poysoned teeth of
a Crocodile , his breath like the Basilisks , killing afarre off .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,32.92

I vnderstand , his name was Enuie , who assailed mee inuisibly , like
the wicked spirit of <font> Mogunce <$$font> , who flung stones at men
and could not bee seene : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,32.93

and so I come by my scratcht face , not knowing when it was done .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,32.94

What was the cause this monster should afflict thee aboue the rest of
thy companie , or other men in the field ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,32.95

Although most Souereigne Queenb , quoth hee , this poysoned curre
snarleth at many , and that few can escape the hurt of his wounding
breath , yet at this time hee bent his force against mee , not for any
hurt I did him , but because I surpast him in heartie affection to my
Souereigne Lord , and with the poore Widowe offered all I had to serue
my Prince and Countrey . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,32.96

It were happy for <font> England <$$font> , sayd the Queene , if in
euery market Towne there were a Iybbet to hang vp curres of that kind :
who like <font> Aesops <$$font> dogge lying in the maunger , will doe no
good himselfe , nor suffer such as would to doe any .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,32.97

This speech beeing ended , the Queene caused her Army to bee set in
order , and in warlike manner to march toward <font> Flodden <$$font> ,
where King <font> Iames <$$font> had pitcht his field .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,32.98

But as they passed along with Drum and Trumpet , there came a Post from
the valiant Earle of <font> Surrey <$$font> , with tydings to her Grace
, that now shee might dismisse her Army , for that it had pleased <font>
God <$$font> to grant the noble Earle victorie ouer the Scots : whome
hee had by his wisedome and valiancie vanquisht in fight , and slayne
their King in battel . Upon which newes her Maiestie discharged her
Forces , and ioyfully tooke her iourney to <font> London <$$font> , with
a pleasant countenance , praysing <font> God <$$font> for her famous
victorie , and yeelding thankes to all the Noble Gentlemen and Souldiers
for their readinesse in the action , giuing many giftes to the Nobilitie
, and great rewards to the Souldiers : among whom shee <P_33> nothing
forgot <font> Iacke <$$font> of <font> Newberie <$$font> , about whose
necke shee put a rich chaine of gold : at what time he with all the rest
gaue a great shout , saying <font> God <$$font> saue <font> Katherin
<$$font> the noble Queene of <font> England <$$font> .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,33.99

Many Noble men of <font> Scotland <$$font> were taken prisoners at this
battell , and manie more slaine : so that there neuer came a greater
foyle to <font> Scotland <$$font> than {SIC:this} this :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,33.100

for you shall vnderstand that the Scottish King made full account to bee
Lord of this land , watching opportunitie to bring to passe his
faithlesse and trayterous practise : which was when our King was in
<font> France <$$font> , at <font> Turney <$$font> , and <font> Turwin
<$$font> : in regard of which warres , the Scots vaunted there was none
left in <font> England <$$font> , but shepheards and ploughmen , who
were not able to lead an army , hauing no skill in martiall affaires .
In consideration of which aduantage , hee inuaded the Countrey ,
boasting of victorie befor hee had wonne : which was no small griefe to
Queene <font> Margaret <$$font> his wife , who was eldest Sister to our
noble King . Wherefore in disgrace of the Scots , and in remembrance of
the famous atchieued victorie , the Commons of <font> England <$$font>
made this Song : which to this day is not forgotten of many .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,33.101

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_35>

<heading>

CHAPTER III . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,35.105

How <font> Iack <$$font> of <font> Newberie <$$font> went to receiue the
King , as hee went a progresse into Barkeshire : and how hee made him a
banquet in his owne house . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,35.106

<$$heading>

About the tenth year of the kings reign , his Grace made his progresse
into <font> Barkshire <$$font> , against which time <font> Iacke
<$$font> of <font> Newberie <$$font> cloathed 30. tall fellowes , being
his houshold seruants , in blewe coates , faced with Sarcenet , euerie
one hauing a good sword and buckler on his shoulder , himselfe in a
plaine russet coate , a paire of white kersie breeches , without welt or
gard , and stockings of the same peece sowed to his slops , which had a
great codpeece , wheron hee stucke his pinnes : who knowing the King
would come ouer a certaine meadow neer adioyning to the Towne , got
himselfe thither with all his men ; and repairing to a certaine Ant-hill
, which was in the field , tooke vp his seate there , causing his men to
stand round about the same with their swords drawne .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,35.108

The King comming neere the place with the rest of his Nobilitie , and
seeing them stand with their drawne weapons , sent to know the cause .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,35.109

<font> Garter <$$font> King_at_armes was the Messenger , who spake in
this sort . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,35.110

Good fellowes , the Kings maiestie would know to what end you stand
heere with your swords and bucklers prepared to fight .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,35.111

With that , <font> Iacke <$$font> of <font> Newberie <$$font> started vp
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,35.112

and made this answere . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,35.113

Harrold <paren> quoth he <$$paren> returne to his Highnesse , it is
poore <font> Iacke <$$font> of <font> Newberie <$$font> , who beeing
scant Marquesse of a mole hill , is chosen Prince of Ants ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,35.114

and heere I stand with my weapons and Guard about mee , to defend and
keep these my poore and painefull subiects from the force of the idle
Butterflyes , their sworne enemies , least they should disturbe this
quiet Common wealth , who this Sommer season are making their winters
prouision . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,35.115

The Messenger returning , told his Grace that it was one <font> Iacke
<$$font> of <P_36> <font> Newbery <$$font> that stoode there with his
men about him to guard <paren> as they say <$$paren> a company of Ants ,
from the furious wrath of the Prince of Butterflies .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.116

With this newes the King heartily laught , saying : Indeede it is no
maruel hee stand so well prepared , considering what a terrible tyrant
he hath to deale withall . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.117

Certainly my Lords <paren> quoth hee <$$paren> this seemes to bee a
pleasant fellow , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.118

and therefore we will send to talke with him .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.119

The Messenger being sent , told <font> Iack <$$font> he must come speake
with the King . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.120

Quoth hee , his Grace hath a horse , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.121

and I am on foote , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.122

therefore will him to come to mee : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.123

beside that , while I am away , our enemies might come and put my people
in hazard as the Scots did <font> England <$$font> , while our King was
in <font> France <$$font> . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.124

How dares the Lambe bee so bolde with the Lyon , quoth the Herald ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.125

Why quoth hee , if there bee a Lyon in the field , here is neuer a cocke
to feare him : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.126

and tell his Maiestie , hee might thinke me a very bad Gouernour that
would walke aside vpon pleasure , and leaue my people in perill .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.127

Herald <paren> quoth hee <$$paren> it is written , Hee that hath a
charge must looke to it , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.128

and so tell thy Lord my King . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.129

The Message being done , the King sayd : My Lords , seeing it will bee
no other , wee will ride vp to the Emperour of Ants , that is so careful
in his gouernment . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.130

At the Kings approach , <font> Iack <$$font> of <font> Newbery <$$font>
and his seruants put vp all their weapons , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.131

and with a ioyfull crie flung vp their caps in token of victorie .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.132

Why how now my masters <paren> quoth the King <$$paren> is your wars
ended ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.133

Let mee see where is the Lord Generall of this great Campe ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.134

With that , <font> Iack <$$font> of <font> Newberie <$$font> with all
his seruants fell on their knees , saying : God saue the King of <font>
England <$$font> , whose sight hath put our foes to flight , and brought
great peace to the poore labouring people . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.135

Trust me <paren> quoth our King <$$paren> here bee pretie fellowes to
fight against Butterflies : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.136

I must commend your courage , that dares withstand such mightie gyants .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,36.137

Most dread Soueraigne <paren> quoth <font> Iacke <$$font> <$$paren> not
long agoe , in my conceit , I saw the most prouident Nation of the Ants
, summoned their cheefe Peeres to a Parliament , which was helde in the
famous citie <font> Dry Dusty <$$font> , the one_and_thirtith day of
September : where@ @as , <P_37> by their wisdomes , I was chosen their
King ; at what time also manie billes of complaint were brought in
against diuers ill members in the common-wealth : among whome the Moule
was attainted of high treason to their state , and therefore was
banished for euer from their quiet Kingdome : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.138

so was the Grashopper and the Caterpiller , because they were not onely
idle , but also liued vpon the labours of other men :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.139

amongst the rest , the Butterflie was very much misliked ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.140

but fewe durst say anie thing to him because of his golden apparell :
who through sufferance grewe so ambitious and malapert , that the poore
Ant could no sooner get an egge into her nest , but hee would haue it
away , and especially against Easter , which at length was misliked .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.141

This painted Asse tooke snuffe in the nose , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.142

and assembled a great many other of his owne coate , by windie warres to
roote these painefull people out of the land , that hee himselfe might
bee seated aboue them all . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.143

<paren> These were proud Butterflies , quoth the King . <$$paren>
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.144

Whereupon I with my men <paren> quoth <font> Iacke <$$font> <$$paren>
prepared our selues to withstand them till such time as your Maiesties
royall presence put them to flight . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.145

Tush <paren> said the King <$$paren> thou must think that the force of
flies is not great . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.146

Notwithstanding <paren> quoth <font> Iacke <$$font> <$$paren> their gaie
gownes make poore men afraid . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.147

I perceiue <paren> quoth Cardinall <font> Wolsey <$$font> <$$paren> that
you being King of Ants , doe carry a great grudge to the Butterflies .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.148

I , quoth <font> Iack <$$font> , wee bee as great foes , as the Foxe and
the Snake are friends : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.149

for the one of them being subtile , loues the other for his craft :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.150

but now I intend to be no longer a prince , because the maiestie of a
king hath eclipst my glorie : so that looking like the Peacocke on my
blacke feet , makes mee abase my vain_glorious feathers ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.151

and humbly I yeeld vnto his Maiestie all my souereigne rule and dignitie
, both of life and goods , casting up my weapons at his feete , to doe
any seruice wherein his Grace shall command me .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.152

God a mercy good <font> Iack <$$font> <paren> quoth the king <$$paren> I
haue often heard of thee , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.153

and this morning I mean to visite thy house . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,37.154

Thus the King with great delight rode along vntill hee came to the
townes end , where a great multitude of people attended , <P_38> to see
his Maiestie : where also Queene <font> Katherine <$$font> with all her
traine met him . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,38.155

Thus with great reioycing of the Commons , the King and Queene passed
along to this iolly Clothiers house , where the good wife of the house
with threescore maidens attending on her , presented the king with a Bee
hiue , most richly gilt with gold , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,38.156

and all the Bees therein were also of gold curiously made by Art ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,38.157

and out of the top of the same Hiue sprung a flourishing green tree ,
which bore golden Apples , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,38.158

and at the roote thereof lay diuers Serpents , seeking to destroy it ,
whom Prudence and Fortitude trode vnder their feet , holding this
inscription in their hands ; DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,38.159

{COM:verse_omitted}

The King fauourably accepted this Embleme , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,38.161

and receiving it at the womans hands , willed Cardinall <font> Wolsey
<$$font> to look thereon , commanding it should bee sent to <font>
Windsor <$$font> Castle . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,38.162

This Cardinall was at that time Lord Chauncellor of <font> England
<$$font> , and a wonderfull proude Prelate , by whose meanes great
variance was set betwixt the King of <font> England <$$font> and the
French King , the Emperour of <font> Almaine <$$font> , and diuers other
Princes of Christendome , whereby the trafficke of those Merchants was
vtterly forbidden , which bred a generall woe through <font> England
<$$font> , especially among Clothiers : insomuch that hauing no sale for
their cloath , they were faine to put away many of their people which
wrought for them , as hereafter more at large shall be declared .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,38.163

Then was his Maiestie brought into a great Hall , where foure long
Tables stoode readie couered : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,38.164

and passing through that place , the King and Queene came into a faire
and large Parlour hung <P_39> about with goodly Tapistrie , where was a
Table prepared for his Highnesse and the Queenes Grace .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,39.165

All the floore where the king sate , was couered with broadcloathes in
stead of greene rushes : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,39.166

these were choice peeces of the finest wool , of an Azure colour ,
valued at an_hundred pound a cloath , which afterward was giuen to his
Maiestie . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,39.167

The king beeing set with the chiefest of his Councell about him , after
a delicate dinner , a sumptuous Banquet was brought in , serued all in
glasse : the description whereof were too long for mee to write , and
you to read . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,39.168

The great Hall was also filled with Lords , Knights , and Gentlemen ,
who were attended by no other but the seruants of the house .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,39.169

The Ladies of Honour and Gentlewomen of the Court were all seated in an
other Parlour by themselues : at whose table the maidens of the house
did waite in decent sort . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,39.170

The seruingmen by themselues , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,39.171

and the pages and foot men by themselues , vpon whom the Prentizes did
attend most diligently . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,39.172

During the kings abiding in this place , there was no want of delicates
: DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,39.173

Renish wine , Claret wine , and Sacke , was as plentifull as small Ale .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,39.174

Then from the highest to the lowest , they were serued in such sort , as
no discontent was found anie waie , so that great commendations
redounded vnto the Good-man of the house . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,39.175

The L. Cardinall that of late found himselfe gall'd by the Allegorie of
the Ants , spoke in this wise to the King . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,39.176

If it would please your Highnesse <paren> quoth he <$$paren> but to note
the vaine_glory of these Artificers , you should find no small cause of
dislike in many of their actions . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,39.177

For an instance , the fellow of this house , hee hath not stucke this
day to vndoo himselfe onely to become famous by receiuing of your
Maiestie : like <font> Herostratus <$$font> the Shoomaker , that burned
the Temple of <font> Diana <$$font> , onely to get himselfe a name ,
more than {he_would_have_undone_himself} for any affection hee beares to
your Grace , as may well bee prooued by this : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,39.178

Let there be but a simple Subsidie leuied vpon them for the assistance
of your Highnesse Wars , or anie other weightie affaires of the Common
wealth and state of the Realme , though it bee not the twentith part of
their substance , they will so grudge and repine , that it is wonderfull
; and like people desperate crie out , They be quite vndone .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,39.179

My Lord Cardinall quoth the Queene , <paren> vnder correction of my
<P_40> Lord the King <$$paren> I durst lay an_hundred pound <font> Iacke
<$$font> of <font> Newberie <$$font> was neuer of that mind , nor is not
at this instant : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,40.180

if ye ask him , I warrant hee will say so . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,40.181

My self also had a proofe thereof at the Scottish inuasion , at what
time this man , being seassed but at sixe men , brought <paren> at his
owne cost <$$paren> an_hundred_and_fiftie into the field .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,40.182

I woulde I had moe such subiects saide the King , and many of so good a
minde . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,40.183

Ho , ho <font> Harry <$$font> <paren> quoth <font> Will Sommers <$$font>
<$$paren> then had not <font> Empson <$$font> and <font> Dudley <$$font>
beene chronicled for knaues , or sent to the Tower for treason .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,40.184

But then they had not knowne the paine of imprisonment quoth our King ,
who with their subtiltie grieued many others .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,40.185

But their subtiltie was such that it broke their necks quoth <font> Will
Sommers <$$font> . Whereat the King and Queen laughing heartily , rose
from the Table . By which time , <font> Iacke <$$font> of <font>
Newberie <$$font> had caused all his folkes to goe to their worke , that
his Grace and all the Nobilitie might see it , so indeed the Queene had
requested . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,40.186

Then came his Highnesse where hee saw an_hundred Loomes standing in one
roome , and two men working in euery one , who pleasantly sung in this
sort . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,40.187

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_42>

Well sung good fellowes , said our King : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.190

Light hearts and merrie mindes liue long without gray haires .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.191

But <paren> quoth <font> Will Sommers <$$font> <$$paren> seldome without
red noses . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.192

Well , said the King , there is a_hundred angels to make good chear
withal : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.193

and looke that euery yeare once you make a feast among your selues ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.194

and frankly <paren> euery yeare <$$paren> I giue you leaue to fetch
foure Buckes out of <font> Dunnington <$$font> parke , without any mans
let or controulement . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.195

O I beseech your Grace <paren> quoth <font> Will Sommers <$$font>
<$$paren> let it be with a condition . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.196

What is that , said our King ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.197

My Liege , quoth hee , that although the Keeper will haue the skins ,
that they may giue their wiues the hornes . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.198

Goe to , said the Queene , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.199

thy head is fuller of knauerie , then thy purse is of crownes .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.200

The poore workemen humbly thanked his Maiestie for his bountifull
liberalitie : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.201

and euer since it hath beene a custome among the Weauers , euery yeare
presently after <font> Bartholomewtide <$$font> , in remembrance of the
Kings fauor to meete together , and make a merrie feast .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.202

His Maiestie came next among the spinners , and carders , who were
merrily a working : whereat <font> Will Sommers <$$font> fell into a
great laughter . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.203

What ayles the foole to laugh , sayd the King ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.204

Marrie <paren> quoth <font> Will Sommers <$$font> <$$paren> to see these
maidens get their liuing , as buls doe eate their meate .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.205

How is that , said the Queen ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.206

By going still backward quoth <font> Will Sommers <$$font> :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.207

and I will laie a wager , that they that practise so well being maides
to goe backward , will quickly learne ere long to fall backward .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.208

But sirra said the Cardinall , thou didst fall forward when thou brokest
thy face in maister <font> Kingsmiles <$$font> cellar .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,42.209

<P_43>

But you my Lord sate forward <paren> quoth <font> Will Sommers <$$font>
<$$paren> when you sate in the stockes at Sir <font> Amias Paulets
<$$font> . Whereat there was greater laughing than before .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,43.211

The King and Queene and all the Nobilitie heedfully beheld these Women ,
who for the most part were very faire and comly creatures , and were all
attired alike from top to toe . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,43.212

Then <paren> after due reuerence <$$paren> the maidens in dulcet manner
chaunted out this song , two of them singing the Dittie , and all the
rest bearing the burden . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,43.213

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_47>

After the Kings Maiestie and the Queene had heard this song sweetely
sung by them , hee cast them a great rewarde : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,47.216

and so departing thence , went to the Fulling mills , and Dyehouse ,
where a great many also were hard at worke : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,47.217

and his Maiesty perceiuing what a great number of people were by this
one man set on worke , both admired , and commended him , saying further
, that no Trade in all the Land was so much to bee cherished and
maintained as this , which quoth he may well be called The life of the
poor . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,47.218

And <P_48> as the King returned from this place with intent to take
horse and depart , there met him a great many of children in garments of
white silke fringed with gold , their heads crowned with golden Baies ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.219

and about their armes each one had a scarfe of green sarcenet fast tyed
, DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.220

in their hands they bore siluer Boawes , and vnder their girdles golden
arrowes . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.221

The formost of them represented <font> Diana <$$font> , goddesse of
Chastitie , who was attended vpon by a trayne of beautifull Nymphes ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.222

and they presented to the King foure prisoners :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.223

The first was a sterne and grisly Woman , carrying a frowning
countenance : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.224

and her forehead full of wrinkles , her hair as blacke as pitch ; and
her garments all bloudie , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.225

a greate sworde shee had in her hand all stayned with purple gore :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.226

they called her name <font> Bellona <$$font> , Goddesse of warres , who
had three daughters : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.227

the first of them was a tall Woman , so leane and ill_fauoured , that
her cheek bones were ready to start out of the skinne , of a pale and
deadly colour , her eyes sunke into her head : her legges so feeble ,
that they could scantly carrie the body , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.228

all along her armes and hands through the skin you might tel the sinowes
, ioyntes , and bones : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.229

her teeth were very strong and sharpe withall :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.230

shee was so greedy that shee was readie with her teeth to teare the skin
from her owne armes : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.231

her attyre was black , and all torne and ragged ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.232

shee went bare_footed DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.233

and her name was <font> Famine <$$font> . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.234

The second was a strong and lustie Woman , with a looke pittilesse , and
vnmercifull countenance : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.235

her garments were all made of Iron and Steele ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.236

and she carried in her hand a naked weapon DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.237

and shee was called the <font> Sword <$$font> .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.238

The third was also a cruell creature , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.239

her eyes did sparkle like burning coales : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.240

her hayre was like a flame : and her garments like burning brasse :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.241

shee was so hot that none could stand neere her ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.242

and they called her name <font> Fyre <$$font> .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.243

After this they retyred againe , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.244

and brought vnto his Highnesse two other Personages ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.245

their countenaunce was Princely and amiable , their attyre most rich and
sumptuous : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.246

The one carried in his hand a golden trumpet , and the other a Palmetree
, DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.247

and these were called <font> Fame <$$font> and <font> Victory <$$font> ,
whom the goddesse of Chastitie charged to waite vpon this famous Prince
for euer . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.248

This done , each child after other with due reuerence gaue vnto his
Maiestie a sweete_smelling Gilliflower , after the manner of the
Persians , offering something in token of loyalty and obedience .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,48.249

The King and Queene behoulding <P_49> the sweet fauour and countenance
of these children , demaunded of <font> Iack <$$font> of <font> Newbery
<$$font> whose children they were ? Who answered : It shall please your
Highnesse to vnderstand , that these are the children of poore people :
that do get their liuing by picking of woll , hauing scant a good meale
once in a weeke . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.250

With that the King began to tell his Gilliflowers , whereby hee found
that there was 96. children . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.251

Certainely said the Queene I perceiue God gives as faire children to the
poore as to the rich , and fairer manie times :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.252

and though their dyet and keeping bee but simple , the blessing of God
doth cherish them . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.253

Therefore sayd the Queene I will request to haue two of them to waite in
my Chamber . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.254

Faire <font> Katherine <$$font> said the King , thou and I haue iumpt in
one opinion , thinking these children fitter for the Court than the
Countrey : whereupon he made choyse of a_dozen more :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.255

foure he ordained to be Pages to his royall person ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.256

and the rest hee sent to Uniuersities , allotting to euery one a
Gentlemans liuing . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.257

Diuers of the Noble men did in like sort entertaine some of those
children into their seruices , so that <paren> in the end <$$paren> not
one was left to picke wool , but were all so prouided for , that their
Parents neuer needed to care for them : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.258

and God so blessed them , that each of them came to be men of great
account and authority in the land , whose posterities remaine to this
day worshipfull and famous . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.259

The King , Queene , and Nobles being ready to depart , after great
thankes and gifts giuen to <font> Iack <$$font> of <font> Newbery
<$$font> , his Maiestie would haue made him Knight ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.260

but hee meekely refused it , saying : I beseech your Grace let me liue a
poore Clothier among my people , in whose maintenance I take more
felicity , then in all the vaine titles of Gentilitie :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.261

for these are the labouring Ants whom I seeke to defend ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.262

and these bee the Bees which I keepe : who labour in this life , not for
our selues , but for the glory of God , and to do seruice to our dread
Soueraigne . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.263

Thy knighthood need be no hinderance of thy faculty , quoth the King .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.264

O my drad Soueraigne said <font> Iacke <$$font> , honour and worship may
be compared to the Lake of <font> Laethe <$$font> , which makes men
forget themselues that taste thereof : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.265

and to the end I may still keepe in minde from whence I came , and what
I am , I beseech your Grace let mee rest in my russet coat a poore
Clothier to my dying day . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,49.266

<P_50>

Seeing then <paren> said the King <$$paren> that a mans minde is a
Kingdome to himselfe , I will leaue thee to the riches of thy owne
content , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.268

and so farewell . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.269

The Queenes Maiesty taking her leaue of the good wife with a Princely
kisse , gaue her in token of remembrance a most precious and rich
Dyamond set in gold , about the which was also curiously set sixe Rubies
, and sixe Emeralds in one peece , valued at nine_hundred Marks :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.270

and so her Grace departed . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.271

But in this meane space <font> Will Sommers <$$font> kept company among
the maids , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.272

and betooke himselfe to spinning as they did , which among them was held
as a forfeit of a gallon of wine : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.273

but <font> William <$$font> by no meanes would pay it except they would
take it out in kisses , rating euery kisse at a farthing .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.274

This paiment we refuse for two causes quoth the Maidens :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.275

the one , for that we esteem not kisses at so base a rate :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.276

and the other , because in so doing we should giue as much as you .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.277

<heading>

CHAPTER IV . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.279

How the maidens serued <font> Wil Sommers <$$font> for his sawsinesse .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.280

<$$heading>

The maidens consented together , seeing <font> Will Sommers <$$font> was
so busie both with their worke , and in his wordes , and would not pay
his forfeiture , to serue him as he serued : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.282

first therefore they bound him hand and foote ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.283

and set him vpright against a poste , tying him thereto , which he tooke
in ill part , notwithstanding he could not resist them :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.284

and because hee let his tongue runne at randome , they set a faire gagge
in his mouth , such a one as he could not for his life put away : so
that he stood as one gaping for winde . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.285

Then one of them got a couple of dogs droppings ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.286

and putting them in a bagge , laide them in soke in a bason of water ,
while the rest turned downe the coller of his Ierkin , and put an hoste
cloath about his necke in stead of a fine towell :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,50.287

then came the <P_51> other maide with a bason and water in the same ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.288

and with the perfume in the pudding-bagge , flapt him about the face and
lips , till he looked like a tawnie Moore , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.289

and with her hand washt him very orderly : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.290

the smell being somwhat strong , <font> Will <$$font> could by no meanes
abide it , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.291

and for want of other language , cryed <font> Ah ha ha ha <$$font> .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.292

Faine hee would haue spet , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.293

and could not , so that he was faine to swallow down such liquor as hee
neuer tasted the like . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.294

When hee had a pretty while been washed in this sort , at the length he
croucht downe vpon his knees , yeelding himselfe to their fauor : which
the maidens perceiuing , pulled the gag out of his mouth .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.295

He had no sooner the liberty of his tongue , but that he curst and swore
like a diuel : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.296

the maides that could scant stand for laughing , at last askt how hee
liked his washing ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.297

Washing , quoth hee ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.298

I was neuer thus washt , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.299

nor euer met with such Barbers since I was borne :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.300

let mee goe quoth hee , and I will giue you whatsoeuer you will demand :
wherewith hee cast them an English Crowne . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.301

My quoth one of the maides , you are yet but washt ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.302

but wee will shaue you ere yee goe . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.303

Sweete Maides quoth hee pardon my shauing , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.304

let it suffice that you haue washt mee : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.305

if I haue done a trespasse to your trade , forgiue it mee ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.306

and I will neuer hereafter offend you . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.307

Tush said the Maides you haue made our wheeles cast their bands and
bruzed the teeth of our cards in such sort , as the offence may not bee
remitted without great penance . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.308

As for your gold wee regarde it not : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.309

therefore as you are perfumed fit for the dogges , so we enioine you
this night to serue all our hogs , which penance if you will sweare with
all speede to performe , we will let you loose .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.310

O quoth <font> Will <$$font> , the huge Elephant was neuer more
fearefull of the silly sheepe , than I am of your displeasures :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.311

therefore let mee loose and I will doo it with all diligence .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.312

Then they vnbound him , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.313

and brought him among a great companie of Swyne , which when <font> Will
<$$font> had well viewed ouer , hee draue out of the yard all the sowes
. DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.314

Why how now quoth the maides , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.315

what meane you by this ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.316

Mary quoth <font> Will <$$font> , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.317

these be all sowes , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.318

and my pennance is but to serue the hogs . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.319

It is true quoth they : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.320

haue you ouertaken vs in this sort ? DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.321

Well looke there bee not one hog vnserued wee would aduise you .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.322

<font> Will Sommers <$$font> stript vp his sleeues very orderly ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,51.323

and clapt an apron <P_52> about his motley hosen ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,52.324

and taking a paile serued the hogs handsomely .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,52.325

When he had giuen them all meate , he sayd thus :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,52.326

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_52>

Nay soft friend quoth they , the veriest hog of all hath yet had nothing
. DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,52.329

Where the diuell is he said <font> Will <$$font> that I see him not ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,52.330

Wrapt in a motley Ierkin quoth they , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,52.331

take thy selfe by the nose , and thou shalt catch him by the snout .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,52.332

I was neuer so verie a hog quoth hee , but I would always spare from my
own bellie to giue to a Woman . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,52.333

If thou do not <paren> say they <$$paren> eate <paren> like the
prodigall Childe <$$paren> with thy fellow hogs , wee will so shaue thee
, as thou shalt dearely repent thy disobedience .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,52.334

He seeing no remedie , committed himselfe to their mercie :
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,52.335

and so they let him goe . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,52.336

When hee came to the Court , hee shewed to the King al his aduenture
among the Weauers maidens , wherat the King and Queene laughed heartily
. DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,52.337

<heading>

CHAPTER V . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,52.339

Of the pictures which <font> Iacke <$$font> of <font> Newbery <$$font>
had in his house , whereby hee encouraged his seruants to seeke for fame
and dignitie . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,52.340

<$$heading>

In a faire large Parlour which was wainscotted about , <font> Iacke
<$$font> of <font> Newbery <$$font> had 15. faire Pictures hanging ,
which were couered with curtaines of green silke , fringed with gold ,
which hee would often shew to his friends and seruants .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,52.342

In the first was the picture <P_53> of a sheepheard before whom kneeled
a great King named <font> Viriat <$$font> , who sometime gouerned the
people of <font> Portugal <$$font> . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.343

See heere quoth <font> Iacke <$$font> , the father a Shepheard , the
sonne a Soueraigne . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.344

This man ruled in <font> Portugall <$$font> , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.345

and made great warres against the Romanes , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.346

and after that inuaded <font> Spaine <$$font> ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.347

yet in the end was traiterously slaine . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.348

The next was the Portraiture of <font> Agathocles <$$font> , which for
his surpassing wisedome and manhood , was created King of <font> Sicilia
<$$font> , and maintained battaile against the people of <font> Carthage
<$$font> . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.349

His Father was a poore Potter , before whom he also kneeled .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.350

And it was the vse of this King , that whensoeuer he made a banquet , he
would haue as well vessels of earth as of golde set vpon the Table , to
the intent hee might alwaies beare in mind the place of his beginning ,
his Fathers house and family . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.351

The third was the picture of <font> Iphicrates <$$font> an Athenian
borne , who vanquished the Lacedemonians in plaine and open battaile .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.352

This man was Captaine generall to <font> Artaxerxes <$$font> , King of
<font> Persia <$$font> , whose father was notwithstanding a Cobler , and
there likewise pictured . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.353

<font> Eumenes <$$font> was also a famous Captaine to <font> Alexander
<$$font> the great , whose father was no other then a Carter .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.354

The fourth was the similitude of <font> Aelius Pertinax <$$font> ,
sometime Emperor of Rome , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.355

yet was his father but a Weauer : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.356

and afterward to giue example to others of lowe condition , to beare
minds of worthy men , he caused the shop to be beautified with marble
curiously cut , wherein his father before him was wont to get his liuing
. DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.357

The fift was the picture of <font> Dioclesian <$$font> , that so much
adorned Rome with his magnificall and triumphant victories .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.358

This was a most famous Emperour , although no other than the sonne of a
Book-binder . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.359

<font> Valentinian <$$font> stood the next , painted most artificially :
who also was crowned Emperor , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.360

and was but the sonne of a poore Ropemaker , as in the same picture was
expressed , where his father was painted by him vsing his trade .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.361

The seuenth was the Emperor <font> Probus <$$font> , whose father being
a Gardener , was pictured by him houlding a spade .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,53.362

<P_54>

The eighth picture was of <font> Marcus Aurelius <$$font> , whom euery
age honoureth , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,54.364

he was so wise and prudent an Emperour : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,54.365

yet was he but a cloth-weauers sonne . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,54.366

The ninth was the portraiture of the valiant Emperour <font> Maximinus
<$$font> , the son of a Black-smith , who was there painted as he was
wont to worke at the Anuill . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,54.367

In the tenth table was painted the Emperour <font> Galerus <$$font> ,
who at the first was but a poore shepheard . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,54.368

Next to this picture was placed the pictures of two Popes of Rome ,
whose wisedome and learning aduanced them to that dignitie .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,54.369

The first was the liuely counterfeit of Pope <font> Iohn <$$font> the
twenty_two , whose father was a Shoomaker : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,54.370

he beeing elected Pope , increased their rents and patrimonie greatly .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,54.371

The other was the picture of Pope <font> Sextus <$$font> the fourth of
that name , being a poore Mariners sonne . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,54.372

The thirteenth picture was of <font> Lamusius <$$font> , King of <font>
Lombardie <$$font> , who was no better then the son of a common strumpet
, being painted like a naked childe walking in water , and taking hold
of the point of a Launce , by the which hee hung fast , and saued
himselfe . The reason whereof is this . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,54.373

After his lewde mother was deliuered of him , shee vnnaturally threw him
into a deepe stinking ditch , wherein was some water .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,54.374

By hap , King <font> Agilmond <$$font> passed that way ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,54.375

and found this childe almost drowned , who mouing him somewhat with the
point of his Launce , the better to perceiue what he was , the child
<paren> though newly borne <$$paren> took hold thereof with one of his
pretty hands , not suffering it to slide or slip away againe : which
thing the king considering , beeing amazed at the strange force of this
young little infant , caused it to bee taken vp , and carefully to be
fostered , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,54.376

and because the place where hee found it , was called <font> Lama
<$$font> , he named the child <font> Lamusius <$$font> : who after grew
to be so braue a man , and so much honoured of Fortune , that in the end
hee was crowned King of the <font> Lombards <$$font> , who liued there
in honour , and in his succession after him , euen vnto the time of the
vnfortunate King <font> Albouina <$$font> , when all came to ruine ,
subuersion and destruction . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,54.377

In the fourteenth picture , <font> Primislas <$$font> King of <font>
Bohemia <$$font> , was most artificially drawne , before whom there
stood an horse without bridle or saddle , in a field where husbandmen
were at plough . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,54.378

<P_55>

The cause why this King was thus painted <paren> quoth <font> Iack
<$$font> <$$paren> was this . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,55.380

At that time the King of the <font> Bohemians <$$font> died without
issue , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,55.381

and great strife being among the Nobility for a new King , at length
they all consented that a horse should be let into the field , without
bridle or saddle , hauing all determined with a most assured purpose to
make him their King , before whom this horse rested : At what time it
came to passe , that the horse first stayed himselfe before this <font>
Primislas <$$font> , being a simple creature , who was then busie
driuing the plough : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,55.382

they presently made him their Soueraigne , who ordered himselfe and his
Kingdome very wisely . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,55.383

Hee ordained many good Lawes , DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,55.384

he compassed the Citty of Prague with strong walles , besides many other
things , meriting perpetuall laud and commendations .
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,55.385

The fifteenth was the picture of <font> Theophrastus <$$font> , a
Philosopher , a counsellor of Kings , and companion of Nobles , who was
but sonne of a Taylor . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,55.386

Seeing then my good seruants , that these men haue been aduanced to high
estate and Princely dignities by wisedome , learning , and diligence , I
would wish you to imitate the like vertues , that you might attaine the
like honors : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,55.387

for which of you doth know what good fortune God hath in store for you ?
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,55.388

there is none of you so poorly born , but that men of baser birth haue
come to great honors : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,55.389

the idle hand shall euer goe in a ragged garment ,
DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,55.390

and the slothfull liue in reproach : DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,55.391

but such as do leade a vertuous life , and gouerne themselues
discreetely , shall of the best bee esteemed , and spend their dayes in
credit . DELONEY-1597-E2-P2,55.392

