<BEGIN_dering-1647-e3-p2>

<P_116>

<heading:edcomment:LXXII_UNTON,_LADY_DERING_TO_HENRY_OXINDEN>

Worthy Sir , Wee are still in the same distracted Expectassion you left
us ; DERING-1647-E3-P2,116.4

only our fears a little increase , as the Armye draws nearer ;
DERING-1647-E3-P2,116.5

it lyes now at St. Albons ; DERING-1647-E3-P2,116.6

tomorrow the King comes to Tibbalds ; and on Saterday to Richmond .
DERING-1647-E3-P2,116.7

This day we here of a Declaration from the Army ,
DERING-1647-E3-P2,116.8

but 't@ @is not to be seene till tomorrow , DERING-1647-E3-P2,116.9

therfore I cann give you no account of it . DERING-1647-E3-P2,116.10

I spake to Mr. Haberfield about that stone DERING-1647-E3-P2,116.11

but he sayes he hath allowd for Sir Anthony's funerall and he hath no
more in that kind to doe , so that I must take care of it ; and if you
please to speake to Rob: Venetian , who is at Denton ,
DERING-1647-E3-P2,116.12

he knowes where the stone is at Dover DERING-1647-E3-P2,116.13

and will , I presume , gett <P_117> it brought safe to Denton .
DERING-1647-E3-P2,117.14

I will sattisfie the charg of it , DERING-1647-E3-P2,117.15

and you will be a noble worthy frend if you please to see it layd ,
after theyr Armes are Ingraven upon it and some Inscription worthy of
them . DERING-1647-E3-P2,117.16

I understand by Mr. Haberfield that Mr. Barling told him that I was
buisey to undervalue the goods and beate downe the price sett in the
Inventory of severall things . DERING-1647-E3-P2,117.17

I can@ @not beleve him so unworthy . DERING-1647-E3-P2,117.18

Somthing that I knew the value of better then he , who would have
over_rated it , DERING-1647-E3-P2,117.19

I told him he was mistaken . DERING-1647-E3-P2,117.20

One {COM:preceding_word_"One"_emended} was a little bableing silver
watch she had , which he would prize at 12@ @=ll= .
DERING-1647-E3-P2,117.21

I told him , as was true , it never cost 4@ @=ll= ,
DERING-1647-E3-P2,117.22

and so of other things . DERING-1647-E3-P2,117.23

Pray when you see him tell him of it . DERING-1647-E3-P2,117.24

Is there none but falce Hearts under those black coates -
DERING-1647-E3-P2,117.25

He parted with me in the greatest civillity and complement that could be
; DERING-1647-E3-P2,117.26

but I have done . DERING-1647-E3-P2,117.27

Pray present my true and affectionat respects to your Dearest , sweete
Mrs. Oxinden . DERING-1647-E3-P2,117.28

Sir your faithfull frend to serve you Unton Dering {COM:June_1647}
DERING-1647-E3-P2,117.29

<P_118>

<heading:edcomment:LXXIV_UNTON,_LADY_DERING_TO_HENRY_OXINDEN>

Sir , I thank you for your acceptance of my endeavors which were very
hearty to serve you ; and your promise to preserve me iust in my word ,
which is a reall kindnes , DERING-1647-E3-P2,118.32

for it is pretious to mee : DERING-1647-E3-P2,118.33

I shall not be forgettfull of your desiers . DERING-1647-E3-P2,118.34

Sir , you know how unhappiely frendless those dear pledges of my
pretious frends and yours <paren> so you are pleased to value them
<$$paren> are left ; and my selfe and sister as women being altogether
unable and unfitt to undergoe the care of that little estate left unto
them ; and my eldest brother at so great a distance as he can@ @not
nether performe that office of love and <P_119> regard toward them that
otherwise he would and desiers . DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.35

Wee have interested in the troblesome part of it , as setting and
letting and payeing , Mr. Haberfield chiefly ; DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.36

and Mr. Kitchell is willing to be his assistant in his absence or
anything difficult ; DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.37

and Mr. Haberfield to be every yeare accountable to Sir Phillip
Percivall of the disposall of the estate belonging to them - who upon
our intreaty and his affection to those gone is very willing to be
interested for them in anything for theyr good -
DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.38

Only he desiers some gentleman , and frend to them may be , be ioynd
with him in the Contrye wher the estat is ; by whom the faire carage of
Haberfield will be better desernd , and no accedent of absence or
otherwise be preiudiciall to the children , for theyr education or
otherwise . DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.39

This frendly charitable office we doe intreat you <paren> of whose
loving regard and true well-wishes to those poore unhappie orphans wee
are very confiedent <$$paren> to joyne with Sir Phillip Percivall in ,
DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.40

and we shall acknowledg it , as it will justly deserve , a curtesye of a
Noble and true frend . DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.41

Pray lett me know by the next returne whether you will be pleased to
wellcome this troble - DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.42

For I shall as soone as this Terme is done , returne home -
DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.43

We are yett here undisturb'd by the Armye . DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.44

The demanded members have withdrawne themselves from the House ,
DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.45

but that will not serve ; DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.46

the Army requiers to have them suspended the House ;
DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.47

t'@ @is thought they will doe the King's buissnes and then he will doe
theyrs . DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.48

God send us a good peace by any means he please .
DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.49

My best respects to yourselfe and Dearest DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.50

I am unfainedly Your affectionat true frend Un. Dering .
DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.51

I hope your little Naighbours at Denton are well .
DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.52

St. Martin's lane DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.53

July 1 1647 . DERING-1647-E3-P2,119.54

<P_128>

<heading:edcomment:LXXIX_UNTON,_LADY_DERING,_TO_HENRY_OXINDEN>

Sir , According to your desier , I have spoken with Mr. Beven of
Ashford concerning your daughters being with him ;
DERING-1647-E3-P2,128.57

he is very willing to doe you and them any servis in his power ,
DERING-1647-E3-P2,128.58

and I am confiedent you will receave very good sattisfaction in your
charge , DERING-1647-E3-P2,128.59

for he is a conscienable , discreete man , and one that stands uppon his
creditt ; and so industerous for the benifitting of his schollers as if
they be willing to receave , he will spare no paines to bring them to
perfection ; as I cann wittnes by experiance , when he taught my
daughter . DERING-1647-E3-P2,128.60

And besides the quallietyes of musicke both for the virgenalls and
singing <paren> if they have voices <$$paren> and writing <paren> and to
cast account which will be usefull to them hereafter <$$paren> he will
be carefull also that theyr behaviour be modest and such as becomes
theyr qualliety ; and that they grow in knowledg and understanding of
God and theyr duty to him , which is above all .
DERING-1647-E3-P2,128.61

For truely he is able to performe all this exceeding well :
DERING-1647-E3-P2,128.62

and t'@ @is his delight as well as his duty . DERING-1647-E3-P2,128.63

They shall want no attendance or ought els nessessary for them ,
DERING-1647-E3-P2,128.64

for his wife is an excellent good woman , and his daughter a civill
well_quallified mayde , DERING-1647-E3-P2,128.65

and both work very well . DERING-1647-E3-P2,128.66

I presume you will think 30@ @=ll= a yeare for both reasonable , when
you consider the hardnes of the times and that there is more troble with
Girles then boys ; DERING-1647-E3-P2,128.67

and receave assuerance from me that these quallietys shall not be taught
superviciously but really , if your daughters will bee industerous .
DERING-1647-E3-P2,128.68

Pray lett me here your resolution speediely ; and I shall be glad
therwith to be sattisfied of your and your beloved safe <P_129> returne
home . DERING-1647-E3-P2,129.69

With my affectionat thanks for the favor of your companys here ; though
but a short time , <paren> so short as I cann scarse think it other then
a dreame <$$paren> . I shall hope for some other Opertunytie to express
better how much I vallue it ; DERING-1647-E3-P2,129.70

in the mean time ever pray esteeme me as Unfainedly I am to you both A
truely affectionat frend Un. Dering . DERING-1647-E3-P2,129.71

Surenden Dering DERING-1647-E3-P2,129.72

the 2=d= of Aug. 1647 . DERING-1647-E3-P2,129.73

I pray Intreat your wife to inquire how that sweete little babe of my
dear sister Per: is used by her Nurse . DERING-1647-E3-P2,129.74

I can@ @not beleve this report that she uses it ill and beates itt .
DERING-1647-E3-P2,129.75

<heading:edcomment:LXXX_SAME_TO_SAME>

Sir , The chainge of the weather makes me hasten the dispatch of my
buissness at Denton , and by that opertunytie to returne you a more full
answer to your letter . DERING-1647-E3-P2,129.77

First for your daughters ; Mr. Beven is this Michellmas removed from
Ashford ; but noe farther then to Mersham , where Sir Norton Knatchbull
lives . DERING-1647-E3-P2,129.78

He will be settled there this weeke , and all accommodation as good
there , if not better , then at Ashford ; DERING-1647-E3-P2,129.79

and t'@ @is somewhat neerer you . DERING-1647-E3-P2,129.80

As soone as you shall please to send them he will respectively wellcome
them ; DERING-1647-E3-P2,129.81

and promises me faithfully nothing shall be wanting to them <paren> in
his power <$$paren> for their good everywaie ; DERING-1647-E3-P2,129.82

and he hopes you shall receave good sattisfaction in theyr time spent
with him . DERING-1647-E3-P2,129.83

He hath a daughter , a civill well-disposed and discreete young mayde :
who works very well and playes excellent well of the virgenols ; who
shall attend them and accompany them in theyr imployments all day .
DERING-1647-E3-P2,129.84

For the stone at Dovor , I will have it brought to Denton <P_130> by all
means ; and new polished ; DERING-1647-E3-P2,130.85

and because it is to lye on the ground , an ingraven Epitaph will be
difficultly reade and be a good Charge ; though I must ever think the
preservation of the memory of theyr worths <paren> in any kind <$$paren>
above all such consideration . DERING-1647-E3-P2,130.86

Yet not knowing how anything but of nessessity will be approved that I
doe , I desier the favor of you to Appoynt it to be brought from Dovor
and to be new polished ; and both theyr Armes with Crests in severall
scuchions to be ingraven upon it , with theyr Names , Ages , and day of
Death . DERING-1647-E3-P2,130.87

And for those affectionat and frendly expressions you have made of them
<paren> for which you doe more and more indeere my best respective
acknowledgments to you <$$paren> , I would have them written upon a
Table , the ground black and the letters gold , and put in a black frame
and hung up by the table of Armes , which I think will be more proper
then ingraving it upon the stone . DERING-1647-E3-P2,130.88

The Arms and Crest etc. , Gibbs of Cantb. can give , of both .
DERING-1647-E3-P2,130.89

My brother's age I know not , DERING-1647-E3-P2,130.90

she was about 33 <paren> if it be materiall to sett downe theyr ages
<$$paren> ; DERING-1647-E3-P2,130.91

and I shall be much oblieged to you if you will please to take order for
the doeing of it : and to direct the layeing of the stone ;
DERING-1647-E3-P2,130.92

and what the charge is I will be thankfully answereable to you for .
DERING-1647-E3-P2,130.93

The money I shall be very well sattisfied should be in your Hands , and
upon the securiety alone of your bond and Mr. Denn's , if it were my
owne ; as I have given you testimony of ; DERING-1647-E3-P2,130.94

but being intrusted for orphans , and of so deere parents ; and more ,
<paren> for this would well suit with my confiedence in you <$$paren>
many eyes being upon mee <paren> as Mr. Haberfield writs me word
<$$paren> , it will concerne mee to bee circumspect to prevent in the
beginning their censures ; though time will shew them in the end how
vaine theyr aptnes to jelloesies of me are . DERING-1647-E3-P2,130.95

Therfore since I know your intensions are as just as I cann wish them ,
yett bee pleas'd , for full sattisfaction , to give your bond and Mr.
Denn's , and to acknowledge a recognizance , and after my returne from
London , the money shall be redy ; wich will be about a month after
<P_131> Michellmas . DERING-1647-E3-P2,131.96

A_100@ @=ll= you might have presently : DERING-1647-E3-P2,131.97

the rest is not yett gathered together . DERING-1647-E3-P2,131.98

I must begg your pardon for my tedyous expressions , which have , I
feare , to long detained you from your better spent time .
DERING-1647-E3-P2,131.99

I have only to present my affectionate respects to sweete Mrs. Oxenden
and your selfe , with assurance that I am Your professed faithfull frend
Unton Dering . DERING-1647-E3-P2,131.100

