<BEGIN_edmondes-1599-e2-p2>

<P_404>

<heading:edcomment:CLIV>

It maie please yor honor . The Master of Gray hath tould me that he
hath latelie receiued aduertisement out of the lowe Countries that the
Spanyardes doe Contynue their practises for the employing of the lord
Bothwell , and therefore that he would acquainte me wth as much as he
knew of the said intended enterprises , wch is that he is first to
attempt in his passage the burning of her maties shippes , if the tyme
geiue him apt comoditie thereunto , wthout staying his voyage . That
afterwardes he designeth to land in Scotland , and to fortifie Taymouth
wch is a stronge seate there , and for that pourpose they hath sent one
ffoster to the lord of leisterac , both to sell unto him ffastcastle wch
is thereunto adioyning and is likewise of good strengthe , and also to
sollicitt him to practise such intelligences as he maie haue in Barwicke
, to facyllitate the entreprise against the said Towne wth offers of
great recompence to be made to the said lord of leisterac , and to all
others that shal@ @be gayned to be of their p~tie . That the said Earl
hath moreouer suggested to the Spanyardes , that there wil@ @be noe
great difficultie to take also Newecastle , and Hartlepoole , if they
should fayle of Barwicke , and for these enterprises hath demanded to be
onlie furnished wth 500 muskettiers 200 pyoners and som~e armes and
munition , and 50,000 Crownes to enterteine such nombrs as he should be
able to assemble uppon his landing . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,404.4

He sayth that the Spanyardes are Content to hazard this expense thoughe
it wourke noe other effect then to breake the borders to serue them for
a kind of diuersion , to hould her mat=ie= manie waies occupyed , and
that they care not though it be to the offence also of the K. of
Scottes for that they belieue that the Insynuations wch he maketh to
them , are onlie to serue his turne the better wth her matie , but if
the lord Bothwell@ @s enterprizes doe take place , that there uppon such
aduantage they will enter into treatie wth the said Kinge .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,404.5

He affirmeth also that the Spanyardes doe certeinlie determyn to send
4000 men into Ireland . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,404.6

I pressed him to tell me as yor honor dyrected me , wth what p~sons the
lord of leisterac hath <P_405> intelligence in Barwicke .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,405.7

He p~tested unto me that he could not as yett Certeinly tell , but that
hee would seeke to enfourme himself thereof , and that the said lord
doth ordynarelie frequent & bancquett wth the most of the Captens of the
towne , hauing free recourse thither , EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,405.8

And afterwardes he remembred that one Capten Waker , who is tall of
stature , highe_coulored & lefthanded , was by the lord of leisterack
dealth wth , foure or fyue yeares since in the like practise , but that
he doth not thincke that the said Capten is to be detected to haue
consented to anie disloyaltie , EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,405.9

and he prayed me to recom~end wth great instance his request unto yor
honor that the extremitie of rigor might not be used towardes anie , by
the occasion of his enfourmations , or otherwise that he could not
contynue to serue her matie . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,405.10

I asked him also whether he were not able to dyuert the lord Bothwell
from these badd courses , wch he hath least reason to enterprize against
her matie specially hauing neuer geiuen him iust cause of
discontentement . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,405.11

He sayd that the said Earles desperatt necessitie to seeke the meanes to
lyue , doth make him wthout other regard to embarque himself into anie
action who notwhstanding his miserie doth leade so riotous a lief as he
doth not make himself wourthie others regard , and that the least
preuention will hinder anything wch he shall intend , not being able to
carrie anie enterprize wither wth secrecie or good conduct , and besides
hauing lost all creditt by reason of his disorderlie lief .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,405.12

He wished rather that the matter might be suffered to rypen to manifest
to the King of Scottes what affection the Spanyardes doe beare unto him
, wch other enfourmation {TEXT:enjourmation} can@ @nott make him to
belieue . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,405.13

Lastlie I dealt wth him in the manner as yor honor comanded me , for the
seacrett carrying of the intelligence betweene yor honor & him .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,405.14

He would not accuse himself to haue wrytten thereof to Hudson ,
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,405.15

neither ded I instant the same , EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,405.16

but receiued his assurances that he would use all secrecie wch wil@ @be
noe small myracle in that nation . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,405.17

He tould me that he had ben earnestlie sollicited by the lord Bothwell
in the Spanyardes name to be a p~tye in the enterprize to th@ @end to
assist them wth Shipping from Dundee wch app~teyneth to him , and wth
the fauor of his frendes in those p~tes , and also to haue employed his
Creditt to haue drawne awaie such of the Scottishe nation as doe serue
the States but because he will not take such monie as was offred him by
the Spanyardes , that therefore they haue him in jallousie .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,405.18

Moreouer he declared unto me that one Phillipp Dayalla a Secretarie of
<P_406> Spayne longe since of his acquayntance , hath latelie wrytten to
him , praying him to resolue him in respect that he knewe that
heretofore he had good correspondencies in England , whether he
understand that her matie haue an inclynation to a peace and whether she
determine not to make it , wthout comp~hending the States .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,406.19

He sayeth that he made answeare that it is long since he enterteyned
anie Correspondencie in England , but that for a good occasion he would
seeke to renewe it and therefore that he desired that he would first
expresse unto him of whatt affection the K: of Spayne is , touching the
said p~positions . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,406.20

I tould him that they are onlie practises of the Spanyard to putt her
matie in Jallousie , both wth those of the lowe Countries , and also wth
this Kinge , who hath hitherto onlie handled her maties treatie .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,406.21

He sayd that his answeare importeth noe engaging , but onlie to make
them to speake and if the said Dayalla doe replye unto him , that he
will send yor honor his letter to make a iudgement thereof .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,406.22

I fynd notwthstanding he doth affect to be used as an {SIC:in}
instrument in that negociation EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,406.23

And so I most humbly take my leaue EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,406.24

ffrom Paris EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,406.25

the 26th of Januarie 1598 . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,406.26

yor honors most humble Thos Edmondes EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,406.27

Endorsed 1598. 26. Jan. M=r=. Edmondes to my M=r=. the M=r=. of
Grais EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,406.28

Declaracon~ of Bothwells Enterprizes . EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,406.29

To the right honorable S=r= Robert Cecyll knight Principall Secretarie
to the Queenes matie and chancelor of the Duchie of Lancaster .
EDMONDES-1599-E2-P2,406.30

