<BEGIN_eliz-1600-e2-p2>

<P_43,G>

<heading:edcomment:THE_QUEENE'S_LETTER_SENT_TO_MY_LADYE_NORRICE_TO_COMFORTE_HER_FOR_THE_DEATHE_OF_HER_SONNE_IN_IRELANDE>

Althoughe we have deferred longe to p'sent to yo=w= o=r= grieved
thoughtes , because we liked full ill to make yo=w= the firste refleccon
of o=r= misfortunes , whome we haue allwaies soughte rather to cherishe
and comforte , yet knowinge that necessitie must bringe to yo=r= eares &
nature consequentlye move passions in yo=r= harte , wee resolved noe
long=er= to smother either o=r= care for yo=r= sorrowe or the sympathy
of o=r= greife for his death wherein y=e= societie in sorrowe may worke
diminution . ELIZ-1600-E2-P2,43,G.4

We doe assure yo=w= {COM:preceding_word_"yo=w="_emended} by this true
messenger of o=r= mynde y=t= nature can have stirred noe more dolours of
affection in yo=w= as a mother for a deare sonne , then the gratefullnes
and memorye of his service past hath wroughte in us his sou'aigne ,
app=r=hension of o=r= mysse of so worthye a servant .
ELIZ-1600-E2-P2,43,G.5

But now y=t= in {COM:preceding_word_"in"_emended} nature his com~on
worke is done and he that was borne to dye hath payd his tribute , let
that Christian discretion staye the flux of yo=r= imoderate {COM:sic}
greivinge w=ch= hathe instructed yo=w= both by example & knowledge ,
that nothinge of this kinde hath happened but by gode's p'vidence ,
ELIZ-1600-E2-P2,43,G.6

and let these lynes from yo=r= lovinge & gracous {COM:sic} sou'aigne
serve to assure yo=w= y=t= there shall ever appeare the livelye
characters {COM:all_uppercase_in_edition} of yo=w= and yo=rs= that are
beste in o=r= valewinge rightelye all theire faithfull and honest
indevo=res= : ELIZ-1600-E2-P2,43,G.7

Nowe at this tyme we will not wryte of this unsilent subjecte
ELIZ-1600-E2-P2,43,G.8

but haue <P_44,G> dispatched this gent. to visitt both yo=r= Lorde and
yo=w= to condole w=th= yo=w= in the true sence of yo=r= Love and to pray
yo=w= that the worlde may see that {SIC:what} tyme curethe in weak
myndes that discretion & moderacon he hopeth in yo=w= in this accident ,
wheare there is the fitt occasion to demonstrate true patience and
moderation . ELIZ-1600-E2-P2,44,G.9

