<BEGIN_eliz-1566-e1-p2>

<P_1.2,223>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CLXXXVII_QUEEN_ELIZABETH,_TO_SIR_JOHN_FOSTER_RESPECTING_THE_EARL_OF_MORTON,_THE_LORD_RUTHVEN,_AND_THEIR_ACCOMPLICES>

Trusty ande right welbeloved Wee grete you well .
ELIZ-1566-E1-P2,1.2,223.4

Whereas the Quene of Scotts our good sister charginge the Erle Moreton ,
Lord Ruthwen , and otheres their Complices , remayninge nowe at our
Towne of Newcastle , not only with the slawghter of hir servant David
the Italian not far frome hir persone , but with certein other treasons
towards hir owne personne , hathe thereupon maide diverse ernest meanes
to us , bothe by messages ande Lettres , to deliver them unto hir ; and
on hir behalfe the Frenche Kinge haithe ernestlie required us to deny
them any succor : ande seinge that wee maye not indede maintein the
keppinge of them withein our Realme , and yet consederinge the
displesour that the Quene their soveraigne presentlie bearethe towardes
them , wee wolde be lothe to committ them into hir handes duringe the
tyme of hir indignation . ELIZ-1566-E1-P2,1.2,223.5

Wee therefore wolde that thaie shulde devise <P_1.2,224> of some place
out of our realme , where they maie provide for ther lives and safety
vntil suche tyme as ether theye may procure their Soveraignes wrath and
displeasoure to be assuaged towardes them , or ells that suche
indyfferency of Lawe <paren> as they cane reasonably desier <$$paren>
may , accordinge to their doings , be ministered unto them . Wherefore
we requier you forthwith to repaire to them , ande thus muche to signify
unto them , that therafter thay maie take spedy order for some place for
their saiftie out of our Realme , where thaie shall think metest .
ELIZ-1566-E1-P2,1.2,224.6

This matter you shall as of yourself firste declare unto them , as a
thinge conveniente ande necessary for them to do :
ELIZ-1566-E1-P2,1.2,224.7

ande if they shall not thereupon make their resolution to departe , then
you shall singnyfie {COM:sic} unto them this our pleasor in our name
expressely . ELIZ-1566-E1-P2,1.2,224.8

And thereof faile you not to see it executed .
ELIZ-1566-E1-P2,1.2,224.9

Yeven under our Signet at our mannor of Grenewich the vij=th= of May
1566. the eight yere of our Reigne . ELIZ-1566-E1-P2,1.2,224.10

