<BEGIN_elyot-1531-e1-p2>

<P_18>

<heading>

IV . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,18.4

<font> The education or fourme of bringing up of the childe of a
gentilman , which is to haue authoritie in a publike weale . <$$font>
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,18.5

<$$heading>

For as moche as all noble authors do conclude , and also commune
experience proueth , that where the gouernours of realmes and cities be
founden adourned with vertues , and do employ theyr study and mynde to
the publike weale , as well to the augmentation therof as to the
establysshynge and longe continuaunce of the same : there a publike
weale must nedes be both honorable and welthy . To the entent that I
wyll declare howe suche personages may be prepared , I will use the
policie of a wyse and counnynge gardener : who purposynge to haue in his
gardeine a fyne and preciouse herbe , that shulde be to hym and all
other repairynge therto , excellently comodiouse or pleasant , he will
first serche throughout his gardeyne where he can finde the most melowe
and fertile erth : ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,18.7

and therin wil he put in the sede of the herbe to growe and be norisshed
: and in most diligent wise attende that no weede be suffred to growe or
aproche nyghe unto it : ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,18.8

and to the entent it may thrive the faster , as soone as the fourme of
an herbe ones appereth , he will set a vessell of water by hit , in
suche wyse that it may continually distille on the rote swete droppes ;
and as it spryngeth in stalke , under_sette it with some thyng that it
breake nat , and alway kepe <P_19> it cleane from weedes .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,19.9

Semblable ordre will I ensue in the fourmynge the gentill wittes of
noble mennes children , who , from the wombes of their mother , shal be
made propise or apte to the gouernaunce of a publike weale .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,19.10

Fyrste , they , unto whom the bringing up of suche children apperteineth
, oughte , againe the time that their mother shall be of them deliuered
, to be sure of a nourise whiche shulde be of no seruile condition or
vice notable . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,19.11

For , as some auncient writers do suppose , often times the childe
soukethe the vice of his nouryse with the milke of her pappe .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,19.12

And also obserue that she be of mature or ripe age , nat under xx yeres
, or aboue xxx , her body also being clene from all sikenes or deformite
, and hauing her complection most of the right and pure sanguine . For
as moche as the milke therof comminge excelleth all other bothe in
swetenes and substance . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,19.13

More_ouer to the nourise shulde be appointed an other woman of approued
vertue , discretion , and grauitie , who shall nat suffre , in the
childes presence , to be shewed any acte or tache dishonest , or any
wonton or unclene worde to be spoken : ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,19.14

and for that cause al men , except physitions only , shulde be excluded
and kepte out of the norisery . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,19.15

Perchance some wyll scorne me for that I am so serious , sainge that
ther is no suche damage to be fered in an infant , who for tendernes of
yeres hath nat the understanding to decerne good from iuell .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,19.16

And yet no man wyll denie , but in that innocency he wyll decerne milke
from butter , and breadde from pappe , ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,19.17

and er he can speake he wyll with his hande or countenaunce signifie
whiche he desireth . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,19.18

And I verily do suppose that in the braynes and hertes of children ,
whiche be membres spirituall , whiles they be tender , and the litle
slippes of reason begynne in them to burgine , ther may happe by iuel
custome some pestiferous dewe of vice to perse the sayde membres , and
infecte and corrupt the softe and tender buddes , wherby the frute may
growe wylde , and some tyme conteine in it feruent and mortal poyson ,
to the utter destruction of a realme . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,19.19

<P_20>

And we haue in daily experience that litle infantes assayeth to folowe ,
nat onely the wordes , but also the faictes and gesture , of them that
be prouecte in yeres . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,20.21

For we daylye here , to our great heuines , children swere great othes
and speake lasciuious and unclene wordes , by the example of other whom
they heare , whereat the leude parentes do reioyce , sone after , or in
this worlde , or els where , to theyr great payne and tourment .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,20.22

Contrary wise we beholde some chyldren , knelynge in theyr game before
images , and holdyng up theyr lytell whyte handes , do moue theyr praty
mouthes , as they were praying : other goynge and syngynge as hit were
in procession : wherby they do expresse theyr disposition to the
imitation of those thynges , be they good or iuell , whiche they usually
do se or here . Wherfore nat only princis , but also all other children
, from their norises pappes , are to be kepte diligently from the
herynge or seynge of any vice or euyl tache . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,20.23

And incontinent as sone as they can speake , it behoueth , with most
pleasaunt allurynges , to instill in them swete maners and vertuouse
custome . Also to prouide for them suche companions and playfelowes ,
whiche shal nat do in his presence any reprocheable acte , or speake any
uncleane worde or othe , ne to aduaunt hym with flatery , remembrynge
his nobilitie , or any other like thyng wherin he mought glory : onlas
it be to persuade hym to vertue , or to withdrawe him from vice , in the
remembryng to hym the daunger of his euill example .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,20.24

For noble men more greuously offende by theyr example than by theyr dede
. ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,20.25

Yet often remembrance to them of their astate may happen to radycate in
theyr hartes intollerable pride , the moost dangerous poyson to noblenes
: wherfore there is required to be therein moche cautele and sobrenesse
. ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,20.26

<P_37>

Nat_withstandinge , for as moche as the saide warkes be very longe , and
do require therfore a great time to be all lerned and kanned , some
latine autour wolde be therwith myxte , and specially Virgile ; whiche ,
in his warke called <font> Eneidos <$$font> , is most lyke to Homere ,
and all_moste the same Homere in latine . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,37.28

Also , by the ioynynge to_gether of those autours , the one shall be the
better understande by the other . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,37.29

And verily <paren> as I before saide <$$paren> none one autour serueth
to so diuers witts as doth Virgile . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,37.30

For there is nat that affect or <P_38> desire , wherto any childes
fantasie is disposed , but in some of Virgils warkes may be founden
matter therto apte and propise . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,38.31

For what thinge can be more familiar than his bucolikes ?
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,38.32

nor no warke so nighe approcheth to the commune daliaunce and maners of
children , ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,38.33

and the praty controuersies of the simple shepeherdes , therin contained
, wonderfully reioyceth the childe that hereth hit well declared , as I
knowe by myne owne experience . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,38.34

In his Georgikes lorde what pleasaunt varietie there is : the diuers
graynes , herbes , and flowres that be there described , that , reding
therin , hit semeth to a man to be in a delectable gardeine or paradise
. ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,38.35

What ploughe man knoweth so moche of husbandry as there is expressed ?
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,38.36

who , delitynge in good horsis , shall nat be therto more enflamed ,
reding there of the bredyng , chesinge , and kepyng , of them ? In the
declaration whereof Virgile leaueth farre behynde hym all breders ,
hakneymen , and skosers . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,38.37

Is there any astronomer that more exactly setteth out the ordre and
course of the celestiall bodies : or that more truely dothe deuine in
his pronostications of the tymes of the yere , in their qualities , with
the future astate of all thinges prouided by husbandry , than Virgile
doth recite in that warke ? ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,38.38

If the childe haue a delite in huntyng , what pleasure shall he take of
the fable of Aristeus : semblably in the huntynge of Dido and Eneas ,
whiche is discriued moste elegantly in his boke of Eneidos .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,38.39

If he haue pleasure in wrastling , rennyng , or other lyke exercise ,
where shall he se any more plesant esbatementes , than that whiche was
done by Eurealus and other troyans , whiche accompanyed Eneas ?
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,38.40

If he take solace in hearynge minstrelles , what minstrell may be
compared to Jopas , whiche sange before Dido and Eneas ? or to blinde
Demodocus , that played and sange moste swetely at the dyner , that the
kynge Alcinous made to Misses : whose dities and melodie excelled as
farre the songes of our minstrelles , as Homere and Virgile excelle all
other poetes . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,38.41

If he be more desirous , <paren> as the most parte of children <P_39> be
, <$$paren> to here thinges marueilous and exquisite , whiche hath in it
a visage of some thinges incredible , wherat shall he more wonder , than
whan he shall beholde Eneas folowe Sibille in to helle ?
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,39.42

What shal he more drede , than the terrible visages of Cerberous ,
Gorgon , Megera , and other furies and monsters ?
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,39.43

Howe shall he abhorre tyranny , fraude , and auarice , whan he doth se
the paynes of duke Theseus , Prometheus , Sisiphus , and suche other
tourmented for their dissolute and vicious lyuyng ?
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,39.44

Howe glad soone after shall he be , whan he shall beholde , in the
pleasant feldes of Elisius , the soules of noble princes and capitaines
which , for their vertue , and labours in aduancing the publike weales
of their countrayes , do lyue eternally in pleasure inexplicable .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,39.45

And in the laste bokes of Eneidos shall he finde matter to ministre to
hym audacite , valiaunt courage , and policie , to take and susteyne
noble enterprises , if any shall be nedefull for the assailynge of his
enemies . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,39.46

Finally <paren> as I haue saide <$$paren> this noble Virgile , like to a
good norise , giueth to a childe , if he wyll take it , euery thinge
apte for his witte and capacitie : wherfore he is in the ordre of
lernyng to be preferred before any other autor latine .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,39.47

I wolde set nexte unto hym two bokes of Ouid , the one called <font>
Metamorphosios <$$font> , whiche is as moche to saye as , chaungynge of
men in to other figure or fourme : ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,39.48

the other is intitled <font> De fastis : <$$font> where the ceremonies
of the gentiles , and specially the Romanes , be expressed : bothe right
necessary for the understandynge of other poetes .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,39.49

But by cause there is litell other lernyng in them , concernyng either
vertuous maners or policie , I suppose it were better that as fables and
ceremonies happen to come in a lesson , it were declared abundantly by
the maister than {it_were_good} that in the saide two bokes , a longe
tyme shulde be spente and almost lost : which mought be better employed
on suche autors that do minister both eloquence , ciuile policie , and
exhortation to vertue . Wherfore in his place let us bringe in Horace ,
in whom is contayned moche varietie of lernynge and quickenesse of
sentence . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,39.50

<P_40>

This poet may be enterlaced with the lesson of <font> Odissea <$$font>
of Homere , wherin is declared the wonderfull prudence and fortitude of
Ulisses in his passage from Troy . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,40.52

And if the childe were induced to make versis by the imitation of
Virgile and Homere , it shulde ministre to hym moche dilectation and
courage to studie : ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,40.53

ne the making of versis is nat discommended in a noble man : sens the
noble Augustus and almost all the olde emperours made bokes in versis .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,40.54

The two noble poetis Silius , and Lucane , be very expedient to be
lerned : ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,40.55

for the one setteth out the emulation in qualities and prowesse of two
noble and valiant capitaynes , one , enemy to the other , that is to say
, Silius writeth of Scipio the Romane , and Haniball duke of
Cartaginensis : ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,40.56

Lucane declareth a semblable mater , but moche more lamentable : for as
moche as the warres were ciuile , and , as it were , in the bowelles of
the Romanes , that is to say , under the standerdes of Julius Cesar and
Pompei . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,40.57

Hesiodus , in greke , is more briefe than Virgile , where he writeth of
husbandry , ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,40.58

and doth nat rise so high in philosophie , ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,40.59

but is fuller of fables : ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,40.60

and therfore is more illecebrous . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,40.61

And here I conclude to speke any more of poetis , necessary for the
childehode of a gentill man : for as moche as these , I doubt nat , will
suffice untill he passe the age of xiii yeres . In which time childhode
declineth , and reason waxeth rype , and deprehendeth thinges with a
more constant iugement . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,40.62

Here I wolde shulde be remembred , that I require nat that all these
warkes shud be throughly radde of a childe in this tyme , whiche were
almost impossible . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,40.63

But I only desire that they haue , in euery of the saide bokes , so
moche instruction that they may take therby some profite .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,40.64

Than the childes courage , inflamed by the frequent redynge of noble
poetes , dayly more and more desireth to haue experience in those
thinges , that they so vehemently do commende in them , that they write
of . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,40.65

Leonidas , the noble kynge of Spartanes , beinge ones <P_41> demaunded ,
of what estimation in poetry Tirtaeus , <paren> as he supposed ,
<$$paren> was , it is writen that he answeryng saide , that , for
sterynge the myndes of yonge men he was excellent , for as moche as they
, being meued with his versis , do renne in to the bataile , regardyng
no perile , as men all inflamed in martiall courage .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,41.66

And whan a man is comen to mature yeres , and that reason in him is
confirmed with serious lerning and longe experience , than shall he , in
redyng tragoedies , execrate and abhorre the intollerable life of
tyrantes : ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,41.67

and shall contemne the foly and dotage expressed by poetes lasciuious .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,41.68

Here wyll I leaue to speake of the fyrste parte of a noble mannes studie
: ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,41.69

and nowe wyll I write of the seconde parte , which is more serious , and
containeth in it sondry maners of lernynge . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,41.70

<heading>

XI . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,41.72

<font> The moste commodious and necessary studies suceedyng ordinatly
the lesson of poetes . <$$font> ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,41.73

<$$heading>

After that xiv. yeres be passed of a childes age , his maister if he
can , or some other , studiouslye exercised in the arte of an oratour ,
shall firste rede to hym some what of that parte of logike that is
called <font> Topica <$$font> , eyther of Cicero , or els of that noble
clerke of Almaine , which late floured , called Agricola : whose warke
prepareth inuention , tellynge the places from whens an argument for the
profe of any mater may be taken with litle studie :
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,41.75

and that lesson , with moche and diligent learnyng , hauyng mixte there
with none other exercise , will in the space of halfe a yere be
perfectly kanned . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,41.76

Immediately after that , the arte of Rhetorike wolde be semblably taught
, either in greke , out of Hermogines , or of Quintilian in latine ,
begynnyng at the thirde boke , and instructyng diligently the childe in
that parte of rhethorike , principally , whiche concerneth persuation :
for as moche as it is moste apte for consultations .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,41.77

There can be <P_42> no shorter instruction of Rhetorike than the
treatise that Tulli wrate unto his sonne , which boke is named the
partition of rhetorike . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,42.78

And in good faythe , to speake boldly that I thinke : for him that
nedeth nat , or doth nat desire , to be an exquisite oratour , the litle
boke made by the famous Erasmus , <paren> whom all gentill wittis are
bounden to thanke and supporte <$$paren> , whiche he calleth <font>
Copiam Verborum et Rerum <$$font> , that is to say , plentie of wordes
and maters , shall be sufficient . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,42.79

Isocrates , concerning the lesson of oratours , is euery where
wonderfull profitable , hauynge almost as many wyse sentences as he hath
wordes : ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,42.80

and with that is so swete and delectable to rede , that , after him ,
almost all other seme unsauery and tedious : ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,42.81

and in persuadynge , as well a prince , as a priuate persone , to vertue
, in two very litle and compendious warkes , wherof he made the one to
kynge Nicocles , the other to his frende Demonicus wolde be perfectly
kanned , and had in continual memorie . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,42.82

Demosthenes and Tulli , by the consent of all lerned men , haue
preeminence and soueraintie ouer all oratours : the one reignyng in
wonderfull eloquence in the publike weale of the Romanes , who had the
empire and dominion of all the worlde : the other , of no lasse
estimation , in the citie of Athenes , whiche of longe tyme was
accounted the mother of Sapience , and the palaice of musis and all
liberall sciences . Of whiche two oratours may be attayned , nat onely
eloquence , excellent and perfecte , but also preceptes of wisdome , and
gentyll maners : with most commodious examples of all noble vertues and
pollicie . Wherfore the maister , in redynge them , muste well obserue
and expresse the partis and colours of rhetorike in them contayned ,
accordynge to the preceptes of that arte before lerned .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,42.83

The utilitie that a noble man shall haue by redyng these oratours , is ,
that , whan he shall happe to reason in counsaile , or shall speke in a
great audience , or to strange ambassadours of great princes , he shall
nat be constrayned to speake wordes sodayne and disordred ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,42.84

but shal bestowe them aptly and in their places . Wherfore <P_43> the
moste noble emperour Octauius is highly commended , for that he neuer
spake in the Senate , or to the people of Rome , but in an oration
prepared and purposely made . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,43.85

Also to prepare the childe to understandynge of histories , whiche ,
beinge replenished with the names of countrayes and townes unknowen to
the reder , do make the historie tedious or els the lasse pleasant , so
if they be in any wyse knowen , it encreaseth an inexplicable
delectation . It shall be therfore , and also for refreshing the witte
, a conuenient lesson to beholde the olde tables of Ptholomee , where in
all the worlde is paynted , hauynge firste some introduction in to the
sphere , wherof nowe of late be made very good treatises , and more
playne and easie to lerne than was wonte to be . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,43.86

All_be_it there is none so good lernynge as the demonstration of
cosmographie by materiall figures and instrumentes , hauynge a good
instructour . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,43.87

And surely this lesson is bothe pleasant and necessary .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,43.88

For what pleasure is it , in one houre , to beholde those realmes ,
cities , sees , ryuers , and mountaynes , that uneth in an olde marines
life can nat be iournaide and pursued : ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,43.89

what incredible delite is taken in beholding the diuersities of people ,
beastis , foules , fisshes , trees , frutes , and herbes : to knowe the
sondry maners and conditions of people , and the varietie of their
natures , and that in a warme studie or perler , without perill of the
see , or daunger of longe and paynfull iournayes :
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,43.90

I can nat tell what more pleasure shulde happen to a gentil witte , than
to beholde in his owne house euery thynge that with_in all the worlde is
contained . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,43.91

The commoditie therof knewe the great kynge Alexander , as some writars
do remembre . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,43.92

For he caused the countrayes wherunto he purposed any enterprise ,
diligently and counningly to be discribed and paynted , that ,
beholdynge the picture , he mought perceyue whiche places were most
daungerous : and where he and his host mought haue most easy and
couenable passage . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,43.93

Semblably dyd the Romanes in the rebellion of France , <P_44> and the
insurrection of theyr confederates , settynge up a table openly , wherin
Italy was painted , to the intent that the people lokying in it , shuld
reason and consulte in whiche places hit were best to resiste or inuade
their ennemies . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,44.94

I omitte , for length of the matter , to write of Cirus , the great
kinge of Perse , Crassus the Romane , and dyuers other valiant and
experte capitaines : whiche haue lost them selfes and all their army by
ignorance of this doctryne . Wherfore it maye nat be of any wyse man
denied , but that Cosmographie is to all noble men , nat only pleasant ,
but profitable also , and wonderfull necessary . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,44.95

In the parte of cosmographie wherwith historie is mingled Strabo
reigneth : whiche toke his argument of the diuine poete Homere .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,44.96

Also Strabo hym selfe , <paren> as he saith , <$$paren> laboured a great
part of Africa and Egypte , where undoubtedly be many thinges to be
maruailed at . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,44.97

Solinus writeth almost in like forme , ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,44.98

and is more brefe , ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,44.99

and hath moche more varietie of thinges and maters .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,44.100

and is therfore maruailous delectable : ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,44.101

yet Mela is moche shorter , ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,44.102

and his stile , <paren> by reason that it is of a more antiquitie ,
<$$paren> is also more clene and facile . Wherfore he , or Dionisius ,
shall be sufficient . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,44.103

Cosmographie beinge substantially perceiued , it is than tyme to induce
a childe to the redinge of histories : but fyrst to set hym in a feruent
courage , the mayster in the mooste pleasant and elegant wise
expressinge what incomparable delectation , utilitie , and commodite ,
shal happen to emperours , kinges , princes , and all other gentil men
by reding of histories : shewinge to hym that Demetrius Phalareus , a
man of excellent wisdome and lerninge , and whiche in Athenes had ben
longe exercised in the publick weale , exhorted Ptholomee , kyng of
Egipt , chiefly aboue all other studyes , to haunte and embrace
histories , and suche other bokes , wherin were contayned preceptes made
to kynges and princes : sayng that in them he shulde rede those thinges
whiche no man durst reporte unto his persone . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,44.104

Also Cicero , father of the <P_45> latin eloquence , calleth an historie
the witnesse of tymes , maistres of life , the lyfe of remembrance , of
trouthe the lyght , and messager of antiquite . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,45.105

Moreouer , the swete Isocrates exhorteth the kynge Nicocles , whom he
instructeth , to leaue behynde him statues and images , that shall
represent rather the figure and similitude of his mynde , than the
features of his body , signifienge therbye the remembraunce of his actes
writen in histories . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,45.106

By semblable aduertisementes shall a noble harte be trayned to delite in
histories . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,45.107

And than , accordynge to the counsayle of Quintilian , it is best that
he begynne with Titus Liuius , nat onely for his elegancie of writinge ,
whiche floweth in him like a fountaine of swete milke but also for as
moche as by redynge that autor he maye knowe howe the mooste noble citie
of Rome , of a small and poure begynnynge , by prowes and vertue ,
litell and litell came to the empire and dominion of all the worlde .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,45.108

Also in that citye he maye beholde the fourme of a publike weale :
whiche , if the insolencie and pryde of Tarquine had nat excluded kynges
out of the citie , it had ben the most noble and perfect of all other .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,45.109

Xenophon , beynge bothe a philosopher and an excellent capitayne , so
inuented and ordred his warke named <font> Paedia Cyri <$$font> , whiche
may be interpreted the Childehode or discipline of Cyrus , that he
leaueth to the reders therof an incomparable swetenes and example of
lyuynge , specially for the conductynge and well ordring of hostes or
armyes . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,45.110

And therfore the noble Scipio , who was called Affricanus , as well in
peace as in warre was neuer seene without this boke of Xenophon .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,45.111

With hym maye be ioyned Quintus Curtius , who writeth the life of kyng
Alexander elegantly and swetely . In whom may be founden the figure of
an excellent prince , as he that incomparably excelled al other kinges
and empereurs in wysedome , hardynes , strength , policie , agilite ,
valiaunt courage , nobilitie , liberalitie and curtaisie : where in he
was a spectakle or marke for all princes to <P_46> loke on .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,46.112

Contrarye wise whan he was ones vainquisshed with voluptie and pride his
tiranny and beastly crueltie abhorreth all reders .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,46.113

The comparison of the vertues of these two noble princes , equally
described by two excellent writars , well expressed , shall prouoke a
gentil courage to contende to folowe their vertues .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,46.114

Julius Cesar and Salust for their compendious writynge to the
understandynge wherof is required an exact and perfect iugement , and
also for the exquisite ordre of bataile and continuange of the historie
without any varietie , wherby the payne of studie shulde be alleuiate ,
they two wolde be reserued untyll he that shall rede them shall se some
experience in semblable matters . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,46.115

And than shal he finde in them suche pleasure and commodite as therwith
a noble and gentyl harte ought to be satisfied .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,46.116

For in them both it shall seme to a man that he is present and hereth
the counsayles and exhortations of capitaines , whiche be called <font>
Conciones <$$font> , and that he seeth the ordre of hostes whan they be
embatayled , the fiers assaultes and encountringes of bothe armies , the
furiouse rage of that monstre called warre . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,46.117

And he shall wene that he hereth the terrible dintes of sondry weapons
and ordinaunce of bataile , the conducte and policies of wise and expert
capitaines , specially in the commentaries of Julius Cesar , whiche he
made of his exploiture in Fraunce and Brytayne , and other countraies
nowe rekned amonge the provinces of Germany : whiche boke is studiously
to be radde of the princes of this realme of Englande and their
counsailors ; considering that therof maye be taken necessary
instructions concernynge the warres agayne Irisshe men or Scottes , who
be of the same rudenes and wilde disposition that the Suises and Britons
were in the time of Cesar . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,46.118

Semblable utilitie shal be founden in the historie of Titus Liuius , in
his thirde Decades , where he writeth of the batayles that the Romanes
had with Annibal and the Charthaginensis . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,46.119

Also there be dyuers orations , as well in all the bokes of the saide
autors as in the historie of Cornelius Tacitus , whiche be very
delectable , and for counsayles <P_47> very expedient to be had in
memorie . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,47.120

And in good faythe I haue often thought that the consultations and
orations wryten by Tacitus do importe a maiestie with a compendious
eloquence therin contained . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,47.121

In the lerning of these autors a yonge gentilman shal be taught to note
and marke , nat only the ordre and elegancie in declaration of the
historie , but also the occasion of the warres , the counsailes and
preparations on either part , the estimation of the capitaines , the
maner and fourme of theyr gouernance , the continuance of the bataile ,
the fortune and successe of the holle affaires .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,47.122

Semblably out of the warres in other dayly affaires , the astate of the
publike weale , if hit be prosperous or in decaye , what is the very
occasion of the one or of the other , the forme and maner of the
governance therof , the good and euyll qualities of them that be rulers
, the commodites and good sequele of vertue , the discommodies and euyll
conclusion of vicious licence . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,47.123

Surely if a noble man do thus seriously and diligently rede histories ,
I dare affirme there is no studie or science for him of equal commoditie
and pleasure , hauynge regarde to euery tyme and age .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,47.124

By the time that the childe do com to xvii yeres of age , to the intent
his courage be bridled with reason , hit were nedefull to rede unto hym
some warkes of philosophie ; specially that parte that may enforme him
unto vertuous maners , whiche parte of philosophie is called morall .
Wherfore there wolde be radde to hym , for an introduction , the two
fyrste {SIC:two_the_fyrste} bokes of the warke of Aristotell called
<font> Ethicae <$$font> , wherin is contained the definitions and propre
significations of euery vertue ; ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,47.125

and that to be lerned in greke ; ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,47.126

for the translations that we yet haue be but a rude and grosse shadowe
of the eloquence and wisedome of Aristotell . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,47.127

Forthe_with wolde folowe the warke of Cicero , called in Latin <font> De
officiis <$$font> , wherunto yet is no propre englisshe worde to be
gyuen ; ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,47.128

but to prouide for it some maner of exposition , it may be sayde in this
fourme : ' Of the dueties and maners appertaynynge to men . '
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,47.129

But aboue all other , the warkes of <P_48> Plato wolde be most
studiously radde whan the iugement of a man is come to perfection , and
by the other studies is instructed in the fourme of speakynge that
philosophers used . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,48.130

Lorde god , what incomparable swetnesse of wordes and mater shall he
finde in the saide warkes of Plato and Cicero ; wherin is ioyned
grauitie with delectation , excellent wysedome with diuine eloquence ,
absolute vertue with pleasure incredible , ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,48.131

and euery place is so infarced with profitable counsaile , ioyned with
honestie , that those thre bokes be almoste sufficient to make a
perfecte and excellent gouernour . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,48.132

The prouerbes of Salomon with the bokes of Ecclesiastes and
Ecclesiasticus be very good lessons . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,48.133

All the historiall partes of the bible be righte necessarye for to be
radde of a noble man , after that he is mature in yeres .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,48.134

And the residue <paren> with the newe testament <$$paren> is to be
reuerently touched , as a celestiall iewell or relike , hauynge the
chiefe interpretour of those bokes trewe and constant faithe , and
dredefully to sette handes theron , remembrynge that Oza , for puttyng
his hande to the holy shryne that was called <font> Archa federis
<$$font> , whan it was broughte by kyng Dauid from the citie of Gaba ,
though it were wauerynge and in daunger to fall , yet was he stryken of
god , and fell deed immediately . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,48.135

It wolde nat be forgoten that the lytell boke of the most excellent
doctour Erasmus Roterodamus , <paren> whiche he wrate to Charles , nowe
beynge emperour and than prince of Castile <$$paren> whiche booke is
intituled the Institution of a christen prince , wolde be as familyare
alwaye with gentilmen , at all tymes , and in euery age , as was Homere
with the great king Alexander , or Xenophon with Scipio ;
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,48.136

for as all men may iuge that haue radde that warke of Erasmus , that
there was neuer boke written in latine that , in so lytle a portion ,
contayned of sentence , eloquence , and vertuous exhortation , a more
compendious abundaunce . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,48.137

And here I make an ende of the lernynge and studie wherby noble men may
attayne to be worthy to haue autorite in a publike weale .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,48.138

Alway I shall exhorte tutours and gouernours of noble children , that
they suffre them nat to use ingourgitations of meate <P_49> or drinke ,
ne to slepe moche , that is to saye , aboue viii houres at the moste .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,49.139

For undoubtedly bothe repletion and superfluous slepe be capitall
enemies to studie , as they be semblably to helth of body and soule .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,49.140

Aulus Gellius sayth that children , if they use of meate and slepe ouer
moche , be made therwith dull to lerne , ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,49.141

and we se that therof slownesse is taken , and the children's personages
do waxe uncomely , and lasse growe in stature . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,49.142

Galen wyll nat permitte that pure wyne , without alay of water , shulde
in any wyse be gyuen to children , ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,49.143

for as moche as it humecteth the body , or maketh it moyster and hotter
than is conuenient , also it fylleth the heed with fume , in them
specially , whiche be lyke as children of hote and moiste temperature .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,49.144

These be well nighe the wordes of the noble Galen .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,49.145

<P_163>

Ye and if they be bothe in an equall dignitie , if they be desirous to
klyme , as they do ascende , so frendship for the more parte decayeth .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,163.147

For as Tulli saieth in his firste boke of offices , what thing so euer
it be , in the whiche many can nat excell or haue therein superioritie ,
therein often tymes is suche a contencion , that it is a thinge of all
other moste difficile to kepe amonge them good or vertuous company ;
that is as moche to say as to retayne amonge them frendship and amitie .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,163.148

And it is often tymes sene that diuers , which before they came in
autoritie , were of good and vertuous conditions , beinge in their
prosperitie were utterly chaunged , and dispisinge their olde frendes
set all their studie and pleasure on their newe acquaintaunce . Wherein
men shall parceiue to be a wonderfull blindnes , or <paren> as I mought
say <$$paren> a madnesse , if they note diligently all that I shall here
after write of frendshippe . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,163.149

But nowe to resorte to speke of them in whom frendship is most frequent
, ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,163.150

and they also therto be moste aptly disposed . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,163.151

Undoughtedly it be specially they whiche be <P_164> wyse and of nature
inclined to beneficence , liberalitie and constance .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,164.152

For by wysedome is marked and substancially decerned the wordes , actes
, and demeanure of all men betwene whom hapneth to be any entrecourse or
familiaritie , whereby is ingendred a fauour or disposition of loue .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,164.153

Beneficence , that is to say , mutually puttinge to their studie and
helpe in necessary affaires , induceth loue . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,164.154

They that be liberall do with_holde or hyde nothinge from them whom they
loue , wherby loue encreaseth . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,164.155

And in them that be constante is neuer mistrust or suspition ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,164.156

nor any surmise or iuell reporte can withdrawe them from their affection
, ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,164.157

and hereby frendship is made perpetuall and stable .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,164.158

But if similitude of studie or lerninge be ioyned unto the said vertues
, frendship moche rather hapneth , ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,164.159

and the mutuall enteruewe and conuersation is moche more pleasaunt ,
specially if the studies haue in them any delectable affection or motion
. ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,164.160

For where they be to serious or full of contention , frendship is
oftentimes assaulted , whereby it is often in parile .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,164.161

Where the studie is elegant and the mater illecebrous , that is to say ,
swete to the redar , the course wherof is rather gentill persuasion and
quicke reasoninges than ouer_subtill argumentes or litigious
controuersies , there also it hapneth that the studentes do delite one
in a nother and be without enuie or malicious contention .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,164.162

Nowe let us trie out what is that frendshippe that we suppose to be in
good men . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,164.163

Verely it is a blessed and stable connexion of sondrie willes , makinge
of two parsones one in hauinge and suffringe . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,164.164

And therfore a frende is proprely named of Philosophers the other I .
For that in them is but one mynde and one possession ; and that , which
more is , a man more reioiseth at his frendes good fortune than at his
owne . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,164.165

Horestes and Pilades , beinge wonderfull like in all features , were
taken to_gider and presented unto a tyrant who deedly hated Horestes ,
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,164.166

but whan he behelde them bothe , and wolde haue slayne Horestes onely ,
he coulde nat decerne the one from the other . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,164.167

And also Pilades , <P_165> to deliuer his frende , affirmed that he was
Orestes ; ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,165.168

on the other parte Orestes , to saue Pilades , denied
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,165.169

and said that he was Orestes <paren> as the trouthe was <$$paren> .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,165.170

Thus a longe tyme they to_gither contendinge , the one to die for the
other , at the laste so relented the fierse and cruell harte of the
tyrant , that wondringe at their meruailous frendship he suffred them
frely to departe , without doinge to them any damage .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,165.171

Pitheas and Damon , two Pythagoriens , that is to say , studentes of
Pythagoras lerninge , beinge ioyned to_gither in a parfeite frendship ,
for that one of them was accused to haue conspired agayne Dionyse , king
of Sicile , they were bothe taken and brought to the kinge , who
immediately gaue sentence , that he that was accused shulde be put to
dethe . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,165.172

But he desired the kinge that , er he died , he mought retourne home to
set his householde in ordre and to distribute his goodes ; whereat the
kinge laughinge demaunded of him skornefully what pledge he wolde leaue
hym to come agayne . At the whiche wordes his companyon stepte furthe
and saide , that he wolde remayne there as a pledge for his frende ,
that in case he came nat agayne at the daye to hym appointed , that he
wyllingly wolde lose his hede ; whiche condicion the tyraunt receyued .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,165.173

The yonge man that shuld haue died , was suffred to departe home to his
house , where he set all thinge in ordre and disposed his goodes wisely
. ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,165.174

The day appointed for his retourne was commen , the tyme moche passed ;
wherfore the kynge called for him that was pledge , who came furthe
merely without semblaunte of drede , offringe to abide the sentence of
the tyraunt , and without grudginge to die for the sauinge the life of
his frende . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,165.175

But as the officer of iustyce had closed his eien with a kerchiefe , and
had drawen his swerde to haue striken of his hedde , his felowe came
runninge and cryenge that the daye of his appointment was nat yet past ;
wherfore he desired the minister of iustice to lose his felowe , and to
prepare to do execution on hym that had giuen the occasion . Whereat
the tyraunt being all abasshed , commaunded bothe to be brought in his
<P_166> presence , ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,166.176

and whan he had ynough wondred at their noble hartes and their constance
in very frendship , he offring to them great rewardes desired them to
receyue hym into their company ; ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,166.177

and so , doinge them moche honour , dyd set them at liberte .
ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,166.178

Undoughtedly that frendship whiche dothe depende either on profite or
els in pleasure , if the habilitie of the parsone , whiche mought be
profitable , do fayle or diminisshe , or the disposition of the parsone
, whiche shulde be pleasaunt , do chaunge or appayre , the feruentnesse
of loue cesseth , ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,166.179

and than is there no frendship . ELYOT-1531-E1-P2,166.180

