<BEGIN_epoole-1503-e1-p2>

<P_162>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXXVIII>

<font> To the right worshipfull , my full singuler good master , Sir
Robart Plumpton , knight , this letter be delivered in hast . <$$font>
EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,162.4

Right reverent and worshipfull and my singler gud master , in the most
humble and lowly maner that I can , I recomend me unto you , and unto my
gud lady your wyfe , desiryng to have knowledg of your prosperous helth
, worship , and welfayre , which I besech almyghty Jesus long to
contynue to his pleasure , and your most comforth . Hartely beseching
the gud Lord that redemed me and all mankind upon the holy crosse , that
he will of his benigne mercy vouchsafe to be your helper , and give you
power to resist and withstand the utter and malicious enmity , and false
craft of Mr. Empson , and such others your adversaries ; which , as all
the great parte of England knoweth , hath done to you and yours the most
iniury and wrong , that ever was done , or wrought , to any man of
worship in this land of peace . EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,162.5

And non more sory therfore , then I myselfe is .
EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,162.6

If it were , or myght be in my poore power to remedy the matter , or any
parcell of the matter , in any maner , condition , or dede , and whereas
I may doe no more , my dayly prayers shal@ @be , and have bene , ever
redy , with the grace of <font> Jesu <$$font> . EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,162.7

And wher it is so that I am bounden to pay to your mastership , or to
your assignes , certayne money by yere , to the sume of x@ @=li= , at ij
tymes , for such lands as be assigned in ioynter to my nephew , Germayne
Pole , <P_163> and my cousin , his wyfe and your daughter , I have
delivered and payd to his hands for this last past Martynmas rent v@
@=li= , trustyng that your mastership is contented therwith .
EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,163.8

What parte , or how much thereof , my sayd neveu , Germayne , hath sent
to your mastership , I am ignorant , saving that he shewed me that he
sendeth you but x@ @=li= towards the exibicions of my nese , his wyfe .
EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,163.9

I required you as my singler trust is in you , to send me acquitaunce
for my discharg , for the payment of this sayd v@ @=li= ;
EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,163.10

and moreover I besech you to send me word in writting by the bringer
hereof , how I shall pay my rent from hence forward , and to whom I
shall pay it ; EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,163.11

and as it pleaseth you by yore owne writting to comand me , I shal@ @be
redy to performe it , by the grace of <font> Jesu <$$font> , who ever
preserve your gud mastership . EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,163.12

Wrytten at Rodburne in hast , the morow next after St. Kathren day .
EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,163.13

Your true and faythfull beadwoman to hir power , Elizabeth de Pole
EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,163.14

<paren> 26 <font> Nov. <$$font> 1501 . <$$paren>
EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,163.15

<P_190>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CLV>

{COM:no_address}

Right worshipfull and my singuler good master , in the most humble and
lowly maner that I can or may , I humbly recomend me unto your good
mastership , and unto my good lady your wyfe , desiryng hartely to here
of your welfaire , and also of your good speed in your weighty and great
matters , which I have prayed for , and shall doe dayly .
EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,190.19

Sir , I receyved a letter from you , which bare dayt the viii day of
June , EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,190.20

and in that letter ye wrote to me , that it was my sone Germyne mynd ,
and yours , with other his frynds , that I should occupie still att
Rudburne , as I have done in tymes , as long as we can agre ; upon
condition that I wold be as kynd to my sayd son Germyne , as he
intendeth to be to me . EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,190.21

I pray Jesus that I may find him kynd to me , EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,190.22

for it is my full entent and purpose to be kynd and lovyng unto him and
his , whersoever I come . EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,190.23

But thus the matter is now , that I have taken another house within the
Freres at Derby , which is but of a smale charge ,
EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,190.24

and ther I entend to dispose myselfe to serve God dilygently , and kepe
a narrow house and but few of meany ; EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,190.25

for I have such discomforth of my son Thomas unfortunate matters , that
it is tyme for me to get me into a litle cornner ,
EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,190.26

and so wyll I doe . EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,190.27

I will besech you and him to take no displeasure with me for my
departing , EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,190.28

for it wil@ @be no otherwyse ; EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,190.29

my hart is so sett . EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,190.30

Moreover , as touching the custodie of all such evidence , as I have now
in my keeping , concernyng th@ @enherytance of my sayd son Germyne , a
gentleman of your acquantance , Mr. Herry Arden , hath bene in hand
with me for them , EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,190.31

and I have shewed him , <P_191> whensoever and to whom it shal@ @be
thought by you most convenyent tyme of the delyverance of them , I wyl@
@be redy to delyver them , EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,191.32

for I will be glad to be discharged of them ; EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,191.33

for I will flitt at this next Mighelmas , as I am full mynded , or
sonner , with Gods grace . EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,191.34

I pray you contynew my gud master , EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,191.35

and owe me never the worse will therfor ; EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,191.36

for it ryseth on my owne mynd to give over grett tuggs of husbandry
which I had , and take me to lesse charge . EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,191.37

And with Gods grace I shal@ @be as kynd to him , and to my daughter ,
his wyfe , as ever I was in my life , as well from them , as with them .
EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,191.38

With the grace of <font> Jesu <$$font> , who ever preserve you .
EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,191.39

Wrytten at Rodburne in hast , the x=th= day of July . By your poore
sister and trew beadwoman , Elizabeth Pole EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,191.40

<paren> 10 <font> July <$$font> 1504 <$$paren> .
EPOOLE-1503-E1-P2,191.41

