<BEGIN_fabyan-1516-e1-p2>

<P_570>

<heading>

Anno Domini. M.CCCC.ii. Anno Domini. M.CCCC.iii.
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,570.4

Richarde Merlewe . Iohn~ Walcot , draper . Robert Chichele .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,570.5

Anno. iiii. FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,570.6

<$$heading>

In this yere , and .xiiii. daye of the moneth of Septembre , was the
foresayde duchesse of Brytayne , and wyfe of y=e= kynge , receyued with
great honour into the cytie of London , and so by the mayre and the
cytezyens co~ueyed vnto Westmynster ; where , vpon the morowe folowynge
, she was crowned quene of Englande with great honoure and solempnyte ,
the circumstau~ce wherof I passe ouer . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,570.8

In this yere also Rupertus , whiche after the deposynge of Wessenselans
, was by y=e= electours of the empyre , and by auctorytie of Bonyface
the .ix. thenne pope , admytted for emperour of Rome ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,570.9

& came into Engla~de with a goodly companye oonly to se the countre and
co~modyties of the same ; the whiche of the kyng was honourably receyued
<P_571> and festyd , and lastly conueyed by the kynge towarde the see
syde , where eyther departed from other , with exchaunge of ryche and
precyous gyftes ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.10

for this Rupartus was named of wryters a man of excellent bounte and
largesse . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.11

And he gaue more lyberally , for_somoche as all the tyme of his beynge
in Englande , he laye here at the kynges costes ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.12

and whyle he was at London , he was lodged at the house of seynt Iohi~s
in Smythfelde . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.13

This yere also vpon seynt Laurence euyn , or the .ix. daye of August ,
a lorde of Brytayne named the lorde of Castyle in Frenshe , landed
within a myle of Plymmouth , w=t= a great company of Normans and Brytons
, FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.14

& came vnto the sayd towne FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.15

and lodgyd there all nyght , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.16

and spoyled & robbyd the sayde towne ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.17

and vpon the daye folowynge , whan they hadde done what they wolde ,
they retourned agayne to theyr shyppes , with plente of pyllage and
prysoners suche as they fande . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.18

<heading>

Anno Domini. x.iiii.C.iii. Anno Domini. x.iiii.C.iiii.
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.20

Thomas Fawconer . William Askam . Thomas Pooll .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.21

Anno. v. . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.22

<$$heading>

In this yere , soone after Candelmasse , the foresayd lorde of Castyle ,
trustyng to wyn~e a lyke enterpryse as in the yere passed he had done ,
he beynge acco~panyed with a stronge nauy of Frenshemen and Brytons ,
was encountred with the Englysshe floot , within .ii. myles of
Dertmouth , at a place called Blakpooll , where , after longe and cruell
fyght , the sayd lorde was slayne , with the more partye of y=e= people
, and dyuers of his shyppes taken , as wytnesseth the Englysshe Cronycle
, with dyuers other Englysshe auctours . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.24

But the Frenshe boke excuseth this scomfyture of Frenshemen ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.25

and sayth , that by treason of a Gascoyne named Peryn or Perot de
Languyle , whiche shewed vnto the sayde lorde Castyle that he had espyed
certayne Englysshe shyppes in a creke lyghtly without resystence to be
taken , {COM:no_subject} caused the sayde lorde to make sayle towarde
the sayd towne of Dartmouthe , where , after he had contynued a certayne
tyme his course , he espyed the hole flote of Englysshemen , whiche made
towarde hym , and so at the sayd Blakpool encountred and faught , and
lastly escaped the daunger of his enemyes , as testyfyeth the sayd
Frenshe Cronycle , but nat vnhurt , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.26

for he was so wounded in that fyght y=t= he dyed shortly after .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.27

And in the moneth of Apryll folowynge , the duke of Clarence with y=e=
erle of Kent , and many other lordes , toke shyppynge at Meregate ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.28

& so sayled vnto Sluce in Flaundres , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.29

and after the sayd duke had there refresshed hym & his company , he toke
shyppyng agayne , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.30

& holding his course toward Swyn~e , he was encou~tred with .iii. great
carykes of Ieane , the whiche he assayled , & after longe bekerynge ,
theym toke , beynge ladyn with marchau~dyse ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.31

and so with y=t= praye retourned to Cambre before Wynchelsee , in y=e=
which haven y=e= sayd goodes were cantyd & sharid .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.32

But how it was , by varyaunce amonge themself or otherwyse , one of the
sayd carykes was sodeynly feryd and so consumyd . For restytucyon of
whiche goodes & shyppes , the marchau~tes Ianuence made after great and
longe sute to the kyng & his counsayll ; in which passe_tyme they
borowed cloth , wolle & other marchaundyses , amountynge vnto great &
noble {COM:notable} su~mes , of dyuerse marchau~tes of Englande ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.33

& whan they sawe that they myght haue none hope of recouery of theyr
losse , they sodeynly auoyded the lande , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.34

& lafte the foresayd notable su~mes vnpayd , to the great hynderaunce &
vtter vndoynge of many Englysshe marchauntes . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.35

In this yere also , a yoman named Wylliam Serle , somtyme yoman of kynge
Richardes robis , was taken in the marches of Scotla~de and brought vnto
London , and there in the Guyldehall areygned for the murder of the duke
of Glouceter at Caleys , vpon whiche murder he was atteynt & conuict ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,571.36

and vpon the .xx. day of Octobre he was drawen from <P_572> the Tower
vnto Tyborn~ , and there hanged & quartred , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,572.37

& his hede was after set vpon London brydge , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,572.38

and his .iiii. quarters were sente to .iiii. sondry good townes .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,572.39

<heading>

Anno Domini. M.CCCC.iiii. Anno Domini. M.CCCC.v.
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,572.41

Wylliam Lowfthe . Iohn~ Hyende , draper . Stephen Spilman .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,572.42

Anno. vi. FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,572.43

<$$heading>

In this yere , and moneth of Ianuary , were certayn~ courses of warre
ron in Smythfelde atwene sir Edmu~de erle of Kent , and the lorde Moryf
a baron of Scotlande , vpon the chalenge of the sayd Scottisshe lorde ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,572.45

but y=e= erle of Kent bare hym so valyauntly , that to hym was gyuen
y=e= pryce of y=e= iourney to his great honour .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,572.46

And in the same year {COM:edit._1533} sir Richarde Scrope , than
archebisshop of Yorke , and the lorde Monbraye , than marshall of
Englande , with other to theym allyed , for grudge that they bare
{COM:edit._1533} agayne the kynge , gaderyd vnto theym great strength ,
entendinge to haue put downe the kyng , as the fame than went . Wherof
the kyng beyng enfourmyd , in all hast sped towarde them , and met with
theym on this syde Yorke , where , after a skyrmysshe by the sayde
lordes made , they were than taken , & after presented vnto the kynge at
Yorke , where they were bothe demyd to suffre deth for theyr rebellyon .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,572.47

Then whan y=e= bysshop came vnto his place of execucion , he prayed the
bowcher to gyue to hy~ .v. strokes in the worshyp of Cristes fyue
woundes ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,572.48

and for more penaunce , at eueryche of whiche .v. strokes , kynge Henry
beyng in his lodgyng , had a stroke in his necke ; in so moche , that he
demyd that some persone there beynge with hym present , had stryken hym
. FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,572.49

And forthwith he was stryken with y=e= plage of lepyr , so that then he
knewe it was the hande of God , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,572.50

& repented hym of that hasty iugement , without auctoryte of the Churche
. FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,572.51

And soon after God shewyd many myracles for the sayde bysshop , whiche
called the kynge vnto the more repentaunce . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,572.52

{COM:insert_helsinki_2}

<P_574>

<heading>

Anno Domini. M.iiii.C.ix. Anno Domini. M.iiii.C.x.
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,574.56

Iohn~ Lawe . Richarde Marlowe , irenmonger Wyllyam Chycheley .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,574.57

Anno. xi. FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,574.58

<$$heading>

In this yere , and moneth of Marche , a taylour of London , named Iohn~
Badby , was brent in Smythfelde for heresy ; albe_it that by meanes of
the prynce , and one maister Courtnay , than chaunceller of Oxenforde ,
he was for a whyle reconcyled , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,574.60

and promysed to leue that errour ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,574.61

but when the sacrame~t of the aulter was brought to fore hym , he
dispysed it , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,574.62

and wolde in no wyse therin byleue ; wherfore he had as he deserued .
Of whome a vercifier , in reproche of his errour , made thyse .ii.
versys folowyng . {COM:latin_verse_omitted} The whiche versys are thus
moche to meane in Englysshe . {COM:english_verse_omitted}
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,574.63

<P_575>

In this yere also , & moneth of April , within the lystes of Smytfelde ,
was foughten a sore fight atwene an esquyre named Glouceter , appellau~t
, & an other esquyer called Arthur , defendau~t , the whiche acquyted
them eyther partie so ma~fully , that the kynge , of his especiall grace
, seynge they were both so well fyghtynge me~ , toke the quarell into
his ha~des , & pardoned y=e= offence to eyther partie .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,575.65

And this yere the market hous called the Stokkys , standynge by the
churche of Seynt Mary Wolchirche of Lo~don was begon to be edyfyed .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,575.66

In this yere also , the kynge helde his parlyame~t at Westmester ,
duryng the whiche the co~mons of this lande put vp a bylle to the kyng ,
to take the temporall landes out from spu~ell me~nes handes or
possession . The effect of whiche bylle was , y=t= the temporaltes ,
disordynatly wastyd by men of y=e= churche , myghte suffyce to fynde to
y=e= kyng .xv. erles , xv._C. knyghtes , vi.M._and_CC. esquyers , &
an._C. houses of almes , to the releef of poore people , moo then at
y=t= dayes were within Englande . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,575.67

And ouer all thyse foresayd charges , the kynge myght put yerely i~ his
cofers .xx.M. <font> li <$$font> . Prouyded that euery erle shuld haue
of yerely rent .iii.M. marke , euery knyght an._C. marke , & iiii.
ploughe lande , euery esquyer .xl. marke by yere , w=t= .ii. plughe
lande , and euery house of almesse an._C. marke , w=t= ouersyghte of
.ii. trewe seculers vnto euery house . And also with prouycion y=t=
euery towneshyp shuld kepe all poore people of theyr owne dwellers ,
whiche myght nat labour for theyr lyuynge , with condycyon that if moo
fell in a towne than the towne myght maynteyn , than y=e= said almesse
houses to releue suche towneshyppes . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,575.68

And for to bere thyse charges , they allegyd by their sayd bylle , that
{SIC:y=t=_that} the temporalties , beyng in the possession of spirituell
men , amounted to .CCC._and_xxii.M. mark by yere , wherof they affermyd
to be in the see of Caunterbury , with the abbeys of Cristes Churche ,
of Seynt Augustyns , Shrowsbury , Coggeshale , and Seynt Osiys .xx.M.
marke by yere . In the see of Durham and other abbeys there .xx.M.
marke : in the see of Yorke & abbays there .xx.M. marke : in the see of
Wynchester & abbays there .xx.M. marke : in the see of London , w=t=
abbays & other houses there .xx.M. marke : in the see of Lyncoln~ ,
with the abbays of Peterbourth , Ramsay , & other .xx.M. marke : in the
see of Norwych , with y=e= abbays of Bury & other .xx.M. marke : in the
see of Hely , with the abbays of Hely , Spaldyng , & other .xx.M. marke
: in y=e= see of Bathe , w=t= the abbay of Okynborne & other .xx.M.
marke : in the see of Worceter , with the abbays of Euisham , Abyngdon~
, & other .xx.M. marke : in y=e= see of Chester , w=t= precinct of y=e=
same , w=t= the sees of Sey~t Dauyd , of Salisbury & Exceter , with
theyr precinctes .xx.M. marke : FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,575.69

the abbays of Rauens or Reuans , of Founteyns , of Geruons , & dyuers
other , to y=e= nombre .v. mo .xx.M. marke : FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,575.70

the abbays of Leyceter , Waltham , Gisbourne , Merton~ , Circetir ,
Osney , & other , to the no~bre of vi. mo .xx.M. marke :
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,575.71

the abbays of Douers , Batell , Lewis , Cowentre , Daue~tre , & Tourney
.xx.M. marke : FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,575.72

the abbays of Northampton~ , Thornton~ , Brystow , Kely~gworth ,
Wynchecomb , Hayles , Parchissor , Frediswyde , Notley , & Gry~mysby
.xx.M. marke . The which foresayd su~mes amou~te to y=e= full of
.CCC.M. marke ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,575.73

and for y=e= odde xxii.M. marke , they appointed Herdford , Rochester ,
Hu~tyngdon~ , Swyneshede , Crowla~de , Malmesbury , Burton~ , Tewkisbury
, Du~stable , Shirborn~ , Taunton~ , & Bylande .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,575.74

And ouer this , they alledgyd by y=e= sayd byll , that ouer & aboue y=e=
sayd su~me of .CCC._&_xxii.M. marke , dyuers houses of relygion in
Engla~de possessyd as many temporalties as might suffyce to fynde yerely
.xv.M. preestes & clerkes , euery preest to be allowed for his stipende
.vii. marke by yere . To the which byll none answere was made , but
that the kyng of this matyer wolde take <P_576> delyberacion &
aduycement , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,576.75

and with that answere it endyd ; so that no ferther laboure was made .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,576.76

<heading>

Anno Domini. M.iiii.C.ix. Anno Domini. M.CCCC.x.
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,576.78

Iohn~ Penne . Thomas Knollys , grocer . Thomas Pyke .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,576.79

Anno. xii. FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,576.80

<$$heading>

In this yere , a squyer of Walys named Rize ap Dee , y=e= whiche had
longe tyme rebellyd agayne the kynge , and fortifyed the partie of Howan
of Glendore , was taken and brought to London , and there , vpon the
.ix. daye of Decembre , drawen , hanged , and quarteryd , and his hede
set vpon the brydge , amonge the other . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,576.82

In this yere also was y=e= Guylde halle of Lo~don begon to be newe
edyfied , and of an olde and lytell cotage , made into a fayre and
goodly house as it nowe apperyth . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,576.83

{COM:insert_helsinki_3}

<P_577>

<heading>

Henrici Quinti . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.87

<$$heading>

Henry the .v. of that name , & sone of Henry the .iiii. began his
reygne ouer this realme of Englande y=e= .xxi. day of the moneth of
Marche , in the yere of our Lorde and ende of the same
.xiiii.C._and_.xii. and in the xxxii. yere of Charlys y=e= .vii. yet
kynge of Frau~ce . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.89

And the .ix. daye of Apryll folowynge , whiche was that yere Passion
Sondaye , beynge a day of excedyng rayne , he was crowned at Westmynster
. FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.90

This ma~ , before y=e= deth of his fader , applyed hym vnto all vyce and
insolency , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.91

and drewe vnto hym all ryottours & wylde dysposed persones ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.92

but after he was admytted to the rule of the lande , anone & sodaynly he
became a newe man , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.93

and tourned al that rage and wyldnes i~to sobernesse & wyse sadnesse ,
and the vyce into co~stant vertue . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.94

And for he wolde contynewe y=t= vertue , and nat to be reduced therunto
by the famyliarytie of his olde nyse company , he therfore , after
rewardes to them gyuen , charged theym vpon payne of theyr lyues , that
none of theym were so hardy to come w=t=in .x. myle of suche place as
he were lodgyd , after a daye by hym assigned .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.95

In this begynnynge of this kynge Henry , y=e= olde mayre and shryues
contynued theyr ofyces to the termys accustomed ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.96

<heading>

Anno Domini. M.iiii.C.xii. Anno Domini. M.iiii.C.xiii.
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.98

Rauffe Leuyngham . Wyllyam Waldern , mercer . Wyllyam Seuenok .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.99

Anno primo . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.100

<$$heading>

Anone as kyng Henry was crowned , and y=e= solemnitye of the feest of
Eester was passyd , he sent vnto y=e= fryers of Langley , where the
corps of kynge Richarde was buryed , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.102

and caused it to be taken out of y=e= erth , and so with reuerence and
solempnytie to be co~ueyed vnto Westmynster , and vpon the south syde of
seynt Edwardes shryne there honourably to be buryed by quene Anne his
wyfe , which there before tyme was entered . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.103

And after a solempn~ terment there holden , he prouydyd that .iiii.
tapers shulde brenne daye and nyght about his graue , whyle the world
endureth ; and one day in the weke a solempne dirige , and vpon the
morowe a masse of Requiem by note ; after which masse endyd , to be
gyuen wekely unto pore people .xi. <font> s. <$$font> viii. <font> d.
<$$font> in pens : & vpon y=e= day of his anniuersary , after y=e= sayd
masse of Requiem is songe , to be yerely destrybuted for his soule .xx.
<font> li. <$$font> in <font> d. <$$font> FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.104

And about heruest tyme was sir Iohn~ Oldcastell knyght appechyd for an
heretyke and co~mnytted to pryson ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.105

but howe it was he escaped for that tyme oute of the Tawer of London ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.106

and so rode into Walys , where he lyued ouer .iiii. yeres after .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,577.107

<P_578>

<heading>

Anno Domini. M.iiii.C.xiii. Anno Domini. M.iiii.C.xiiii.
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.110

Iohn~ Sutton~ . Willyam Crowmer , draper . Iohn~ Mycoll .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.111

Anno. ii. FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.112

<$$heading>

In this yere and moneth of Ianuary , certayne adherentes of y=e=
forenamed sir Iohn Oldcastell , entendynge y=e= distruccion of this
lande and subuercion of the same , assembeld them in a felde nere vnto
Seynt Gyles in great nombre , wherof the kynge beynge enfourmed , toke
the felde before them , and so toke a certayne of theym ; amonge the
whiche was sir Roger Acton~ knight , sir Iohn~ Beuerley preest , and a
squier called sir Iohn~ Browne , the whiche , with .xxxvi. mo in nombre
, were after conuict of heresy & treason , & for the same hangyd & brent
within the sayd felde of Seynt Gyles . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.114

And in y=e= same yere , Iohn~ Claydon skynner , and Richard Turmyn baker
, were for heresy brent in Smythefelde . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.115

And this yere the kyng helde his parlyame~t at Leyceter , where , amo~ge
other thynges , the foresayd bylle put vp by the co~mons of the lande ,
for the temporalties beynge in the churche , as it is before towchid in
the xi yere of the iiiith Henry , was agayne mynded . In fere wherof ,
lest the kynge wolde therunto gyue any comfortable audyence , as
testyfye some wryters , certayne bysshoppes and other hede men of the
churche , put y=e= kyng in mynde to clayme his ryght in Fraunce ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.116

& for the exployte therof , they offrede unto hym great & notable su~mes
. By reason whereof y=e= sayd byll was agayne put by ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.117

and the kynge sette his mynde for the recouery of the same ; so y=t=
soon after he sent his letters vnto the Frensh kynge concernyng that
matyer , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.118

and receyued from him answere of dirision , as affermyth the Englysshe
booke . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.119

And Gaguynus sayth in his Frenshe Cronycle , that kynge Henry sent his
oratours unto Charlys the .vii. than kyng of Frau~ce , for to haue dame
Katheryne his doughter in maryage , with other requestes towchynge his
ryght and enherytau~ce . Wherevnto it was answered by y=e= cou~sayll of
Frau~ce , that y=e= kyng had no leyser to entende such idelnes .
Wherupon ky~g Henry made quycke prouico~n for to warre vpon y=e= Frenshe
kynge , as after apperyth . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.120

In this yere also , by procurement of Sigismunde than emperoure , a
great counsayl or synod of bysshops were assembled at a cytie in hygh
Almayn called Constaunce , for the vnyon of y=e= Churche , & for to
auoyde the scisme whiche began in the .xiiii. yere of Charlys the .vi.
as before in the said .xiiii. yere is touched .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.121

In the sayd synode or genrall cou~sayll , was the .xxiii. Iohn~ than
pope put downe , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.122

or resygned by his volunte . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.123

And by auctoryte of the same counsayll , the opynyons and heresy of
Wyklyf were vtterly anulled & dampned , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.124

and .ii. of his disciples there present named Iohn~ Hus or Husse &
Ierom the herytyke , were there brent . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.125

And many notable actes for the wele of the churche there were enacted .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.126

And fynally , whan the sayd counsayll had endured nere vpon the terme of
.iiii. yeres , they there by an hoole assent chase a newe pope ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.127

and named hym the .v. Martyne , whiche occupyed Peters chayre .xiiii.
yeres and odde monethes , as indubitat pope , and so other after hym .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.128

<heading>

Anno Domini. M.iiii.C.xiiii. Anno Domini. M.iiii.C.xv.
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.130

Iohn Mychell . Thomas Fawconer , mercer . Thomas Aleyn .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.131

Anno. iii. FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,578.132

<$$heading>

This yere after the kynge hadde made sufficyent prouycion for all
thynges co~cernynge his warre to be made vpon the Frenshe kynge , he ,
with his lordes honourably accompanyed , rode through Lo~don , vpon the
.xviii. daye of Iuny , towarde the port of Southampton~ , <P_579> where
he had appoynted his hoost to mete with hym . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.134

And whyle the kynge there was shyppynge of his people , dyuers of his
lordes , that is to say , sir Richarde erle of Cambrydge & brother vnto
the duke of Yorke , whiche sir Richarde berynge the name of Langley ,
had wedded dame Anne , the doughter of syr Roger Mortymer erle of Marche
& Wolster , by whom he had yssue Isabell , which after was maryed vnto
the lorde Boucher erle of Essex , & Richard whiche after was duke of
Yorke & fader to kynge Edward the .iiii. To whom also was assentyng ,
sir Richard Strop than tresourer of England , & sir Thomas Gray knyght ,
were there arrestyd for treason , & aregnyd , and {COM:edit._1542,_1559}
so examyned vpon y=e= same , that the .xxix. day of Iuly folowyng they
were there all thre behedyd . After which execucion so done , the kyng
upon y=e= morowe or shortly after , with his lordes toke shyppynge there
, FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.135

& landed at a place called Kydcaus in Norma~dy .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.136

And the .xvi. daye of August , he layde siege vnto the towne of Harflew
, FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.137

and assayled theim by lande and by water , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.138

and co~tynued so his siege vnto y=e= .xxii. day of Septembre ; at
whiche day , as sayth the Frenshe Gaguynus , it was delyuered by Albert
tha~ there capitayne , vpon condition y=t= kyng Henry myght sauely wynne
or passe to Calays , & so he beyng there , the towne to be yolden vnto
him . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.139

But the Frenshe wryter Gaguynus vpholdeth y=e= honour of the Frenshmen
in all he may , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.140

& boroweth of his conscyence for sparynge the trouth in report of many
thynges . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.141

For after most wryters , y=e= sayd towne , after sondry appoyntementes
of rescouse , was delyuered vnto the kyng w=t=out any condycion the daye
abouesayd , where , after the kyng had ordeyned sir Thomas Beauforde his
vncle & erle of Dorset , capytayne of y=t= towne , he sped hym towarde
Calays . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.142

Than the dolphyn with other lordes of Fraunce , whiche at y=t= tyme had
the realme of Fraunce in gouernau~ce , for_somoche as the Frenshe kynge
was vysited with suche malady as before I haue shewed , brake the brydge
to lette y=e= kyng of his passage ouer y=e= water of Sum . Wherfore he
was constrayned to drawe towarde Pycardy , & so passe by the ryuer of
Peron , wherof the Frenshmen beynge ware , assembled and lodgyd them at
certayne townes named Agyncourt , Rolandcourt and Blangy , with all the
power of Fraunce . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.143

And whan kynge Henry sawe that he was so besette with his enemyes , he
in the name of God and seynt George pyght his felde in a playn , atwene
the sayd townes of Agyncourt and Blangy , hauynge in his companye of
hoole men y=t= myght fyght , nat passyng the nombre of .vii.M .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.144

But at those dayes the yomen had their lymmes at lybertie ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.145

for theyr hosyn were than fastened w=t= one poynt ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.146

and theyr iackes were longe and easy to shote in , so that they myght
drawe bowes of great strentgth , & shote arowes of a yerde longe ,
besyde the hede . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.147

Then the kyng consyderyng y=e= great nombre of his enemyes , and that
the acte of Frenshmen standynge moche in ouer_rydynge of theyr
aduersaryes by force of speremen , he therfore charged euery boweman to
ordeyne hym a sharpe stake , & to pytche it a_slope before hym , and
whan the sperys came , somdeale to drawe bak , and so to shote at the
horse men . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.148

And at {COM:preceding_word_"at"_emended} the proper request of the duke
of Yorke he ordeynyd hym to haue the vawewarde of that felde .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.149

And whan kynge Henry had thus prouidently orderyd for his batayll ouer
nyght , vpon the morowe beynge the .xxv. daye of Octobre , & the daye
of the holy marters Crispyne and Crispinian , the kynge caused dyuers
masses to be songyn . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.150

And wher y=e= nyght before the Englysshe hoost was occupyed in prayer
and confession , he than caused the bysshoppes and other spirituell me~
to gyue vnto theym generall obsolucion . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.151

And that done , with a comfortable chere orderyd his people as they
shuld fyght , hauynge vnto them good & comfortable wordes ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.152

and so abode y=e= comyng of theyr enemyes , which of dyuers wryters were
and are remembred to be aboue xl.M. fyghtynge men . The whiche aboute
ix. of the clok in y=e= mornynge , with great pryde set vpon the
Englysshe hoost , thynkynge to haue ouer_rydyn them shortly ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,579.153

but the archers lyke as befor <P_580> they were taught , pyght theyr
sharpe stakes before them , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.154

and whan they sawe the Frenshe galantes approche , they a lytell yode
back FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.155

and receyued them , as hereafter ensueth . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.156

<heading>

The batayll of Agyncourt . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.158

<$$heading>

That is to meane they shotte at them so feruently , y=t= what with the
shotte & gorynge of their horses with the sharpe stakes , they stumbelyd
one vpon another , so that he or they whiche ranne formest , were the
confucion of hym or them that folowed , so y=t= in a short whyle a great
multytude of horse & men were layde vpon the grounde .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.160

And after theyr shot spent , they layde aboute them with theyr glayues
and axes , that by y=e= great grace of God and comfortable ayde of y=e=
kynge , the victory fyll that daye to the Englyshmen , & with lytell
losse of theyr company ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.161

for , after the oppinyon of sondry wryters , were slayne that day of
Englysshmen , the dukes of York & of Suffolke , and nat ouer .xxvi.
parsones more . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.162

But of Frenshmen were slayne y=t= day , after Englysshe wryters , ouer
y=e= nombre of .x.M. albeit the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended}
{COM:edit._1542,_1559} Frenshe Gaguynus sayth , y=t= of the Englysshe
hoost were slayne the duke of Yorke & with hym iiii.C. Men , and of the
{COM:edit._1542,_1559} Frenshe hoost iiii.M. of me~ of name , besyde
other , whiche he no~breth nat . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.163

Also he affermyth to be horsmen at that felde , vpon the Frenshe partie
x.M. , ouer & besyde the fotemen , & that the Englysshmen were nombred
at .xv.C. spere men , & .xiii.M. of yomen and archers .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.164

At this sayd batayll was taken prysoners , the duke of Orleau~ce , the
duke of Burbon~ , y=e= erles of Vendosme , of Ewe , of Rychemou~t , &
Bursigau~t than marshall of Fraunce , with many other knyghtes and
esquyres , which were tedyous to name , to the nombre of .xxiiii.C. and
aboue , as wytnessyth y=e= boke of mayres . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.165

And in this batayl were slayne of the nobles of Fraunce , the dukes of
Barre , of Alanson and of Braban .viii. erlis , and barons aboue .lxxx.
with other gentlemen in cote_armours , to the nombre of .iii.M. and
aboue ; by reason of whiche pyllage the Englisshmen were greatly
auaunced , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.166

for the Frenshmen were soo assuryd of victory by reaso~ of their great
nombre , that they brought the more plentye of rychesse with theym , to
the ende to bye prysoners eyther of other . And also after the victory
by them opteyned , to shewe vnto Englisshmen their pryde and pompous
araye ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.167

but God , whiche knewe the presumpcion & pompe , tournyd all thynge
co~trary to their myndes & ententes . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.168

Whan y=e= kynge by grace and power of God , more than
{he_had_gotten_the_victory} by force of man , had thus goten this
triumphaunt victorye , & retourned his people from the chase of theyr
enemyes , tydynges were brought vnto hym that a newe hoost of Frenshmen
were co~mynge toward hy~ . Wherfore he anon co~mau~ded his people to be
enbatayled , and that done made proclamacions thorugh the host , that
euery man shuld slee his prysoner ; by reason of which proclamacion ,
y=e= duke of Orleau~ce and other lordes of Frau~ce were in such fere ,
that they anon by the lycence of the kynge , sent such worde vnto y=e=
sayd host y=t= they w=t=drewe them , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.169

and the kynge with his prysoners vpon the morowe folowynge toke his way
towarde his towne of Calays , where he restyd hym durynge this mayres
tyme . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.170

<heading>

Anno Domini. M.iiii.C.xv. Anno Domini. M.iiii.C.xvi.
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.172

Wylliam Cambridge . Nicholas Wotton~ , draper . Aleyn Euerarde .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.173

Anno. iiii. FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.174

<$$heading>

This yere , and .xxix. daye of Nouembre , as the mayre rode towarde
Westmynster for to take his charge , a pursyuaunt of the kynges came
with letters vnto the mayre , gyuynge to hym knowledge of y=e= kynges
good spede ; wher=e=fore the bysshop of Wynchester , than chauncellor of
Englande , hauynge lyke wyttyng , came that daye to Paulys ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,580.176

& there caused <P_581> Te Deum to be songyn with great solempnyte ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.177

and in lyke wyse was lyke obseruaunce don in y=e= parysshe churches &
other relygyous houses thorough the cytie of London .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.178

And at Poulys , by the sayd chaunceller , standyng vpon the steppes at
the quyer dore , were the sayd tydynges denou~ced vnto the people :
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.179

and vpon the morowe folowynge , y=e= sayd chau~celler , with other
bysshoppes and temporall lordes , with a general procession of y=e=
mayre and comynalte of the cytie , yode from Paulls to Westmynster on
fote , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.180

and offeryd at seynt Edwardes shryne , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.181

& so retourned to theyr own houses {COM:preceding_word_"houses"_emended}
. FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.182

Then kyng Henry w=t= his prisoners shypped at Calays ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.183

and so landed at Douer , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.184

& after he had been at Cau~terbury and there made his offeryng vnto
seynt Thomas , he than spedde hym on his iourney tyll he came vnto
Eltham , where he rested hym a season . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.185

Vpon the .xxiii. daye of Nouembre , he was mette with the mayre & his
bretherne vpon the Blak Heth , & so conueyed with all honour thorugh the
cytie vnto Westmy~ster , wher , in dyuers places of the sayd cytie , as
the bridge & crosse in Chepe , were ordeyned certayne page~tes to the
kynges great comforte , the maner wherof , with also pro~cessions &
other seremonyes , I passe ouer for lengthynge of the tyme .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.186

In this yere also , Sigismunde emperour of Almayne came into England ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.187

and in the month of May by the kynges co~maundement , and .vii. daye of
the sayd moneth , the mayre and bretherne mette hym vpon Blak Heth ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.188

and at Seynt Georges met hym the kynge & his lordes in great nombre ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.189

and so conueyed hym vnto Westmy~ster with great honoure ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.190

& lodgyd hym in his owne palays . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.191

And shortly after was y=e= feest of seynt George holden at Wyndesore ,
whiche before was deferryd for his co~mynge ; in tyme of whiche
solempnyte , durynge the dyuyne seruyce , the kyng kept y=e= astate ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.192

but in syttyng at the feest , the emperour kept the astate ; the seruyce
and sotlytees of whiche feest , with syttynge of the lordes after theyr
degrees , I passe ouer . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.193

And shortly after came the duke of Holande into this lande , for
certayne causes concernynge the emperour , whom the kyng honourably
receyued , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.194

& lodgyd hym in the bysshoppes palays of Ely in Holbourne ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.195

and so the kynge entreated & cheryd thyse strau~gers , that for the
season that they taryed in Englande , they laye here at the kynges coste
and charge : FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.196

and the emperour and he were made knyghtes of the Garter , and also a
great duke of the emperours named duke of Briga .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.197

And whan the emperoure had taryed vpon .vii. wekys and odde days in
Englande , whiche after some wryters , was to th@ @entent to set an
vnyte & rest atwene the Frenshe kynge & kynge Henry , he after tooke
mynde to retourne into Almayne , whom the kynge for his comfort and
nedes that he had to do at Calays , acco~panyed hym thyder , where
eyther with gyftes and thankes departyd from other ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.198

and the duke of Holande went with the emperoure into Holande and other
countres . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.199

Whyle y=e= kynge was thus at Calays , to hym came thyder vnder
sauffe_conduyt , y=e= duke of Burgoyn , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.200

& had w=t= them dyuers co~municacions , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.201

& after retourned to his owne . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.202

And soon after the kynge retourned into Englande ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.203

& came to Westmynster vpon seynt Lukes euyn , or the .xvii. day of
Octobre . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.204

This yere and season , whyle the kyng was at Calays , that is to meane
vpon y=e= daye of the Assumpcyon of our blessyd Lady , the duke of
Bedforde , accompanyed with the earle of Marche & other lordes , had a
great floyt {COM:conflict} and batayll with duyers carykkes of Ieane &
other shyppes , where after a longe and sore fyght , y=e= honour fyll to
hym & his Englysshemen , to the great losse of the straungers , bothe of
theyr men and also of theyr shyppes , as some drowned , and .iii. of
the grettest of theyr carykkes taken . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.205

<heading>

Anno Domini. M.iiii.C.xvi. Anno Domini. M.iiii.C.xvii.
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.207

Robert Wodtyngton . Henry Barton , skynner Iohn~ Couentre .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.208

Anno. v. FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,581.209

<$$heading>

This yere the kynge holdynge his parlyament at Westmynster , to hym was
grau~ted by <P_582> auctorytie of the same a_fyftene ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.211

and by a conuocacion of y=e= clergy , was graunted to hym a dyme , for
the mayntenaunce of his warrys : wherupon newe prouyco~n was made for
his second vyage into Fraunce . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.212

By auctoryte of this parlyame~t also , Richarde , whiche was sone &
heyre of y=e= erle of Ca~brydge , which erle was put to deth at
Southampton , was {COM:edit._1542,_1559} created duke of Yorke , which
after was maryed vnto Cecile y=e= doughter of Daraby erle of
Westmerla~de , by reason y=t= he boughte his wardshyp of y=e= kyng . By
the whiche lady Cecile he had Henry y=t= dyed yonge , Edward y=t= after
was kyng , Edmu~de erle of Rutla~de , Anne duchesse of Exceter ,
Elizabeth duchesse of Suffolk , George duke of Clarence , Richard duke
of Glouceter & after kyng , & Margaret duchesse of Burgoyn .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.213

And whan all thyng was redy for y=e= k~nges viage , he ordeyned Iohn~
duke of Bedforde his brother protecto=r= of this lande in y=e= tyme of
his absence ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.214

& that done he with his lordes aboute Wytsontyde , toke his shyppyng at
Southhampton , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.215

and so sayled into Normandy , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.216

and landyd vpon Lammas day at a place called Tooke or Towke .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.217

And after he was with his host there landed , for_somoche as he was
warnyd of certayne shyppes of warre y=t= entendyd to do some harme in
Englande , beyng than vpon the see , he therfore to withstande theyr
malycyous purpose , sent y=e= erle of Marche , the erle of Huntyngdon ,
with other , to store {COM:scour} the see ; the whiche encountred the
sayd enemyes , and after a lo~ge and cruell fyght , them venquysshed and
ouercome ; which fyght was vpon y=e= day of seynt Romayn , or the .ix.
day of August , as hath the Frenshe Cronycle .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.218

And of the Frenshe nauy was chief capitayn the vycou~t of Narbon ,
whiche in that fight was taken with great plente of treaso=r= ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.219

for , as sayth Gaguynus , he with one Mou~tney an other captayne , to
whome the sowdyours wages was co~mytted , of one assent , for theyr
synguler lucre , withhelde the sayd wages , by reason wherof whan they
shuld ioyne in batayll , many of them w=t= theyr shippes withdrewe , and
laft theyr capytayns in the dau~ger of their enemyes .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.220

But this is lyke to be a fayned excuse of the said Gagwyne , to saue
y=e= honour of y=e= Frenshme~ , as he many tymes semblably doth in many
places of his boke . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.221

Then to retourne vnto kynge Henry : whan he was thus landyd , he sent
vnto the rulers of the towne of Towke , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.222

and had it vnto hym delyuered ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.223

but the castell was defendyd agayne hym tyll seynt Laurence daye
folowynge : the whiche he gaue after vnto his brother the duke of
Clarence , with all the signory therunto belongynge .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.224

And this done , the kynge sped hym towarde Cane ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.225

and layd his siege therunto vpon the .xvii. day of y=e= foresayd moneth
of August , the which contynued tyll the feest of the Natyuite of our
Lady , & than won vpon the partie that the duke of Clarence assawted ;
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.226

but the castell helde by apoyntme~t , if no rescouse were had tyll y=e=
.xiiii. day folowyng , at whiche day the said castell was delyuered
with other .xiiii. stronge holdes , which had before taken the same
appoyntment . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.227

Than the kynge made the foresayd duke of Clarence capitayne of the sayd
towne and castell . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.228

And in this passe_tyme were diuers other townes & stronge holdes gotyn
by diuers of the kynges retynew , as the erle marshall , the erle of
Warwyke & other , the whiche wan Louers , Faloys , Neuelyn , Cherburgth
, Argentyne , and Bayons the cytie , with many other stro~ge abbeys and
pyles {COM:edit._1533,_1542,_1559} . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.229

Than the kyng helde there seint Georges feest ,
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.230

and dubbyd there .xvi. knyghtes of the Bath , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.231

and after co~tynued his warres duryng this mayres yere , in wynnynge
vpon y=e= Frenshmen by appoyntme~tes & otherwyse , wherof the
circumstaunce were very longe to declare in ordre .
FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.232

In this yere also , and vpon the feestfull day of Ester , fyll a chau~ce
in Lo~don , whiche , to y=e= fere of all good christen men , is
necessary to be noted ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,582.233

for vpon the hygh & solempne day , by excytynge of the deuell , & yll
disposicion of .ii. women , that is to meane the wyfe of the lorde
Straunge , & the wife of sir Iohn~ Trussel knyght , such vnkyndnesse
fyll atwene theyr .ii. husbandes , y=t= eyther wolde haue slayne other
within the parysshe churche of Seynt Dunstanes in the East : in partyng
of which persones dyuers men were <P_583> hurt & sore wounded , & one
named Thomas Petwarden slayne out of ha~de , whiche was a freeman and
fysshemonger of y=e= cytie . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,583.234

Than lastly both frayers were taken & brought vnto the countour in the
Pultry , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,583.235

& for the sayd lorde Strau~ge was demyd culpable of the begynnynge of
this fraye , he therfore vpon the Sonday folowynge , & for suspendynge
of the Church , was denou~ced accursyd at Poulis crosse , & in all
parysshe churches of London ; FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,583.236

and fynally he was demyd to open penaunce FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,583.237

& dyd it , FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,583.238

and made great amendes vnto the wyfe of the said Thomas for the deth of
her husbande : FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,583.239

and in the ende of this yere whete at London was solde for .ii. <font>
s. <$$font> a busshell . FABYAN-1516-E1-P2,583.240

