<BEGIN_fiennes-1698-e3-p2>

<P_169>

<heading:edcomment:4_INTO_DERBYSHIRE_AND_BACK>

Another journey to Darby town from Woolsly by Colton and Blithbery
{COM:Blithbury} 3 mile , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,169.4

thence to Yoxwell {COM:Yoxall} 3 mile over Nedwood {COM:Needwood} Forest
of the kings which is 40 mile in extent , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,169.5

all the way you have a fine prospect of the Country , enclosed good
lands admirable corne of all sorts , good grass ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,169.6

I went in sight of Tedbery {COM:Tutbury} Castle which is the kings , a
great fortification but all decay'd , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,169.7

here 4 mile more FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,169.8

and there it was that I pass the river Dove on a stone bridge called
Dovebridge which enters me into Darbyshire FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,169.9

and thence it@ @s 8 mile more to Darby town . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,169.10

Darby town lies down in a bottom built all of brick or for the most part
, FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,169.11

in it are 5 Churches built of stone the biggest of which I was in
{COM:All_Saints} the tower was finely carv'd full of niches and
pedistals whereon statues had been set , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,169.12

but nothing worth notice in the inside except a monument which was over
the vault of the Duke {COM:Earl} of Devonshire , on which stands 2
Effigys at length all of white marble the Earle and his Countess of
Devonshire with an arch of cannopy of stone over their heads ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,169.13

this is rail'd in with iron grates , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,169.14

there is also another statue of marble painted and gilded lying at
length which is also railed in ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,169.15

the River Derwent runes by the town FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,169.16

and turns many mills and the water <P_170> engine which turns the water
into the pipes that serves the town , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.17

the same wheele grinds also , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.18

but they do it for a half penny a strike which is the same measure as
our bushell , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.19

at this Engine they can grind if it@ @s never so high a flood which
hinders all the other from working , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.20

at the flood they are quite choaked up , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.21

but this they can set higher or lower just as the water is ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.22

there are bay's which they make with stones to keep the water to run to
the mill FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.23

and thence it falls againe into the Derwent ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.24

there is also a fine stone Cunduite in the Market place which is very
spacious well pitch'd , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.25

a good Market Cross ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.26

this is a dear place for strangers notwithstanding the plentyfullness of
all provision FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.27

my dinner cost me 5@ @s. and 8@ @d. , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.28

only 2 servant men with me FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.29

and I had but a shoulder of mutton and bread and beer ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.30

here they make great quantetys of gloves , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.31

I did not observe or learn any other trade or manufacture ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.32

they had only shops of all sorts of things ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.33

they carry much of their carriages on sledges to secure their pitching
in the streetes . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.34

Thence I went to Chartly {COM:Chartley} 6 mile Lord Ferrers and thence
Bradly {COM:Bretby} Lord Chesterfields FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.35

and passed by a fine parke of some Gentlemans , in which was a summer
house on the side of the hill amongst fine tall trees which look'd very
well , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.36

and on the right hand I turned up to the Earle of Chesterfield@ @s Parke
full of fine rows of trees running up the avenues to the house ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.37

one enters an outward court FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.38

and drives round a little pond , like a ditch all pav'd with stone or
great bason of stone , in which were two swans swimming about in that
little compass ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.39

the gates are all iron barrs and the whole front of the house open iron
pallasadoe spikes in a compass round like a half moone answerable to
that beyond , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.40

the stable yard is another such a demy_circle of open pallasadoe that
lets you out to the prospect of the grounds beyond , full of regular
rows of trees ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.41

the house has a visto quite thro' by a glass bellcony ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.42

doors into the gardens , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.43

and so to the parke beyond ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.44

on that side the front has something surpriseing in it
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.45

it@ @s all of free stone which is dipt in oyle that adds a varnish to
its lustre as well as security to its foundation ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.46

the roofe is not flatt as our modern buildings FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,170.47

so <P_171> the garret windows come out on the tileing which is all of
slatt ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.48

none of the windows are sashes which in my opinion is the only thing it
wants to render it a compleate building ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.49

it@ @s halfe a roman H , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.50

there is an ascent of 5 or 6 steps all stone to the gates
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.51

and so you proceed on a broad paved walke , which is divided by a cross
walke of the same , towards the upper end , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.52

thence the ascent by as many more stone steps into a noble hall that has
a row of white marble pillars at the upper end ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.53

the middle the little roome with a marble table in the middle , which is
the balcony into the garden but that@ @s without steps down into the
garden ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.54

from these rows of pillars on the right hand runs a passage to the
servants roome and all the offices , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.55

and at the end is a Chappell which was very neate ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.56

over the alter is a large ovall of glass of the sort of Private glass
used in windows to obscure the sight from without , but hinders not the
light within side - FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.57

this look'd pretty as being particular and uncom~on .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.58

There was a little organ , and closets for the Lord and Ladies to sitt
in ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.59

from the hall on the left hand one {TEXT:missing_"one"} enters into a
large roome with a billiard table ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.60

from thence into a large parlour and 2 drawing-roomes ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.61

there was a good dineing roome above ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.62

the drawing roome had company in it - the Earle having just marry'd his
eldest Daughter Lady Mary to one Mr. Cooke , a Gentleman of a good
Estate hard by , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.63

so there was company to wishe her joy - FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.64

but I was in severall bedchambers , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.65

one had a crimson damaske bed , the other crimson velvet set upon halfe
paces , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.66

this best was the bride chamber which used to be call'd the Silver roome
where the stands table and fire utensills were all massy silver ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.67

but when plaite was in nomination to pay a tax , the Earle of
Chesterfield sold it all and the plaite of the house , so that when the
table was spread I saw only spoones salts and forks and the side board
plaite , noe plaites or dishes and but few salvers ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.68

the pictures was all burnt by a fire FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.69

and so there are only bare walls , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.70

one roome was painted over head , the others frettwork .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,171.71

But that which is most admired - and justly so to be - by all persons
and excite their curiosity to come and see is the <P_172> Gardens and
Waterworks ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.72

out of the billiard roome the first was with gravell walks and a large
fountaine in the middle with flower potts and greens set round the brimm
of the fountaines that are paved with stone ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.73

you see but one garden at a tyme ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.74

the pipes in the fountaines play very finely , some of a great height ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.75

some flushes the water about , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.76

then you come to a descent of severall steps which discovers another
fine garden with fountaines playing through pipes , besett on the bancks
with all sort of greens and flower trees dwarfes honeysuckles in a round
tuft growing uppright and all sorts of flower trees and greens finely
cutt and exactly kept ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.77

in one garden there are 3 fountaines wherein stands great statues ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.78

each side on their pedistalls is a Dial , one for the sun , the other a
Clock which by the water worke is moved and strikes the hours and chimes
the quarters , and when they please play Lilibolaro on the Chymes -
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.79

all this I heard when I was there - FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.80

on one side of this garden is a half compass with a breast wall on which
are high iron pallisadoes divided with severall pillars , stone with
images on their tops ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.81

about 2 yards distance this opens to view the parke and a sort of
cannall or pond which is in it of a good bigness ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.82

beyond this garden is a row of orange and lemon trees set in the ground
, of a man's height and pretty big , full of flowers and some large
fruit almost ripe ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.83

this has a penthouse over it which is cover'd up very close in the
winter ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.84

this leads on to a great wilderness FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.85

and just by it is another square with a fountaine whose brim is deck'd
with flower potts full of flowers and all sorts of greens ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.86

on either side is 2 or 3 rows of orange and lemon trees in boxes one
below another in growth . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.87

Just against this is a wall cover'd over with lawrell finely cutt
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.88

and also in the middle is an arch , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.89

and on either side stone staires ascends it which terminate in a sort of
half pace all cover'd over with lawrell , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.90

and this enters a doore into another garden through a little garden
house ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.91

this also has a fine fountaine like the others FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,172.92

only as most off the others <P_173> was green walks this was gravell ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.93

so was the garden on the right side of the house ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.94

the front garden which has the largest fountaine has also a fine green
house and very fine flowers , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.95

and the beds and borders are cut in severall formes ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.96

the greens are very fine and the hedges cut in severall formes ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.97

there was one tree not much unlike the cyprus green
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.98

but the branches were more spread and of a little yellower green , the
barke of the limbs yellow , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.99

it was the Cedar of Lebonus ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.100

there was also fine strip'd stocks double like a rose ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.101

there was a large Ewe tree in the middle of one garden cut in forms ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.102

fine firrs and cyprus and filleroy of which some was striped like silver
white others yellow like gold which gave them their different names ,
and fine gilded and striped hollys . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.103

There was one green in a pott call'd St. John the Baptist@ @s herb ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.104

it was full of many leaves and the coullour not much unlike the green
they call Solomons Seale FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.105

but longer and bigger leaves , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.106

it@ @s an annual plant ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.107

here just by the wilderness is the Tulip tree which runns up of a great
height FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.108

and the flower is on the top FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.109

it flowers in August ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.110

there is a great avery of birds which stands like a sum~er house open ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.111

there is also many close averys of birds and severall green shady walks
and close arbours , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.112

there are very fine wood_bines grows like tufts all in flower red and
white ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.113

there is some of the fountaines that have figures in them that throws up
water a greate height , a cascade of water . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.114

Then I returned into the hall and so into a coole roome in which was a
fountaine , where I dranke a glass of wine , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.115

and so proceeded ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.116

this was 3 miles from Chartry , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.117

thence through a fine visto or glide of trees which runs along the parke
, FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.118

and so to Burton on the Trent 2 long miles ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.119

this is a pretty large town , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.120

here is a very long stone bridge over the Trent ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.121

the streetes are very well pitch'd and some very broad ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.122

thence over Nedwood {COM:Needwood} Forest 6 mile
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.123

and thence to Yoksell {COM:Yoxall} which is 6 mile more to Woolsley
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.124

and they are all long miles . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.125

Then I went againe to Stafford town 5 miles and from thence to Instree
{COM:Ingestre} Mr. Shetwins {COM:Chetwynd} ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,173.126

it@ @s <P_174> bad way , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.127

you go by St. Thomas's which was some old abbey
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.128

it@ @s still a good house ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.129

going along the side of the hill gives a great view of the country that
is mostly on inclosures FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.130

we passed between two parkes , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.131

the one is Lord Astons , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.132

and goe in sight of Tixall Hall which is his , a good house
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.133

and looks handsomely of stone building ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.134

the other was Mr. Shetwins {COM:Chetwynd} parke which has fine rows of
trees firrs Scots and Noroway , and the picanther ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.135

the front lookes nobly ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.136

noe flatt_roofed houses in this country but much in windows ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.137

two large bow_windows on each side runns up the whole building , the
middle the same , besides much flatt window between so that the whole is
little besides window ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.138

it@ @s built brick and stone ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.139

the part to the garden ward is new building of the new fashion and sash
windows ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.140

the court is 2 or 3 stepps up with open iron pallasadoes the breadth of
the house , and a broad paved walk which leads up to the doore in the
middle ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.141

the visto is quite through the house FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.142

and so to the gardens FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.143

and through a long walke of trees of a mile through the parke to a lodge
or summer house at the end , which lookes very finely , it being a
riseing ground up to the parke ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.144

there is a crosse_paved walke in the Court which leads to a little house
on each end like summer houses with towers and balls on the top ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.145

the one leads through to the Church yard which is planted with rows of
Ewe trees very uniforme and cut neately . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.146

The Church is new FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.147

and very handsome good fretworke on the top FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.148

the wood worke well carv'd FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.149

its seates good wanscoate and with locks , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.150

in the Chancell are two monuments of marble , one all white , the other
white with a border black and with white pillars ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.151

the middle at the bottom is alabaster ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.152

the pillars of the Church is made of the red stone which is plenty in
this country FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.153

and they are all polished over , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.154

the font is all white marble , stem the same veined blew ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.155

the foote is black , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.156

the cover is wood carv'd very well ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.157

the porch is very high on which is a dyal , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.158

it almost breaks ones neck to looke up at it FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.159

for that@ @s the tower in which are 5 bells .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,174.160

There is just against this a garden , on the other side the <P_175>
dwelling house which is severall steps up it ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.161

gravell walkes full of flowers and greens and a box hedge cut finely
with little trees , some cut round , and another hedge of strip'd holly
cut even and some of lawrell cut even likewise ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.162

out of this one {TEXT:missing_"one"} goes into a flower garden divided
into knotts in which were 14 Cyprus trees which were grown up very tall
some of them and kept cutt close in four squares down to the bottom ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.163

towards the top they enclined to a point or spire ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.164

thence into another garden with gravel walks FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.165

and so into a summer house through which you enter a good bowling-green
, which also goes out of another garden which takes in the whole breadth
of the house and is full of flowers and greens and dwarfe trees and
little borders of severall sorts of greens cut even and close , of tyme
severall sorts and of savin which is another coullour and of lavender
cotten another coullour and rosemary and severall others .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.166

From this bowling-green in the middle you descend 18 steps in a
demi-circle inwards halfe way , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.167

then the stones are set round FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.168

and so the half pace is , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.169

and the other stepps are round turned outward and the lowest much the
largest , as was the uppermost of the first ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.170

this leads to a place designed for ponds to keep fish in ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.171

but this place will not admitt of any water works altho' it@ @s a deep
dirty country , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.172

they neither have good gravell or marle to make a pond secure to hold
water FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.173

nor are they near enough the springs , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.174

but are forced to be supply'd with water by pipes from the River Trent
that is a mile off - FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.175

and yet the whole place seems a quage when one is descended the hill -
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.176

this seemes to be the only thing wanting FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.177

for just by the bowling-green is a very fine wilderness with many large
walks of a great length , full of all sorts of trees scycamores willows
hazel chesnutts walnuts set very thicke and so shorn smooth to the top
which is left as a tuff or crown , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.178

they are very lofty in growth which makes the length of a walke look
nobly ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,175.179

there is also a row on the outside of firrs round every grove 2 yards or
3 distant some silver firrs some Norraway <P_176> some Scotts and pine
trees ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.180

these hold their beauty round the groves in the winter when the others
cast their leaves . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.181

This was from Stafford 3 mile FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.182

and to Woolsley was 3 mile more through narrow stony lanes through Great
Heywood {COM:Haywood} . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.183

Att Instree {COM:Ingestre} Mr. Shetwins {COM:Chetwynd} I saw a fine
pomgranate tree as tall as my self , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.184

the leafe is a long slender leafe of a yellowish green edged with red
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.185

and feeles pretty thicke , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.186

the blossom is white and very double ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.187

there was a terrass walke in one of the gardens that gave the full
prospect of the country a great way about , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.188

it@ @s a deep country , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.189

you are going these 3 miles to Woolsly a great while ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.190

there was at Sir Charles Woolsly's some of the best good land and some
of the worst as is the Kankwood {COM:Cannock_Wood}
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.191

but here the roads are pretty good and hard which makes it pleasant ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.192

there is much fine fruite here , Sir Charles takeing great delight in
his gardens - FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.193

I must say I never saw trees so well dress'd and pruned , the walls so
equally cover'd as there ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.194

there is severall sorts of strawbery's FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.195

but the vermillion is the finest very large as any garden strawbery and
of a fine scarlet coullour , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.196

but it@ @s a later sort ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.197

there was a pretty almond tree in bloome the flower not unlike a
rosemary flower . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.198

<heading:edcomment:5_FROM_WOLSELEY_THROUGH_CHESHIRE_INTO_WALES_AND_OUT_AGAIN>

From thence I tooke my progress northward FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.200

and went from hence to Newcastle under Line {COM:Newcastle_under_Lyme}
through Stone which was 9 mile , and then to Trentum {COM:Trentham}
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.201

and passed by a great house {COM:Trentham_Hall} of Mr. Leveston Gore
{COM:Leveson_Gower} , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.202

and went on the side of a high hill below which the River Trent rann and
turn'd its silver streame forward and backward into Ss which looked very
pleasant circleing about the fine meadows in their flourishing tyme ,
bedecked with hay almost ripe and flowers ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.203

6 mile more to Newcastle under Line where is the fine shineing Channell
{COM:Cannel} Coale , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,176.204

so the proverb to both <P_177> the Newcastles of bringing Coales to them
is a needless labour , one being famous for this coale that@ @s cloven
and makes white ashes , as is this , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.205

and the Newcastle on the Tyne is for the sea-coale that cakes and is
what is common and famillier to every smith in all villages ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.206

I went to this Newcastle in Staffordshire to see the makeing the fine
tea-potts cups and saucers of the fine red earth , in imitation
{COM:sc._"of"} and as curious as that which comes from China ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.207

but was defeated in my design , they comeing to an end of their clay
they made use off for that sort of ware FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.208

and therefore was remov'd to some other place where they were not
settled at their work , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.209

so could not see it ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.210

therefore I went on to Betely {COM:Betley} 6 miles farther
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.211

and went by a ruinated Castle the walls still remaineing called Healy
{COM:or_Heighley} Castle - FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.212

this was deep clay way ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.213

this town is halfe in Staffordshire and half in Cheshire one side of the
streete in the one and the other in the latter , so that they often jest
on it in travelling one wheele goes in Staffordshire the other wheele in
Cheshire ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.214

here is a great mer or standing water FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.215

2 miles compass FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.216

great store of good fish , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.217

it belongs to one Mr. Egerton . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.218

Thence I went to Nantwitch {COM:Nantwich} 5 long miles ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.219

Nantwitch is a pretty large town and well built ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.220

here are the salt springs of which they make salt and many salterns
which were a boyling the salt ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.221

this is a pretty rich land ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.222

you must travell on a Caussey , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.223

I went 3 miles on a Caussey through much wood ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.224

it@ @s from Nantwitch to Chester town 14 long miles the wayes being deep
; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.225

it@ @s much on enclosures FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.226

and I passed by severall large pooles of waters but what I wonder'd at
was that tho' this shire is remarkable for a greate deale of greate
Cheeses and Dairys I did not see more than 20 or 30 cowes in a troope
feeding , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.227

but on enquiry find the custome of the country to joyn their milking
together of a whole village and so make their great Cheeses
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.228

and so it goes round . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,177.229

<P_178>

West Chester town lies in a bottom FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.231

and runs a greate length FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.232

and is pretty big FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.233

there are 10 Churches ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.234

the Cathedrall is large and lofty , the quire well carv'd
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.235

fine tapistry hangings at the alter , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.236

a good organ ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.237

the Bishops Pallace is on the right hand of it and the Doctors houses
all built of stone , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.238

there is a new Hall building which is for the assize
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.239

and it stands on great stone pillars which is to be the Exchange , which
will be very convenient and handsome , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.240

the Hall is round , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.241

it@ @s built of bricke and stone coynes , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.242

there are leads all round with battlements FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.243

and in the middle is a tower ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.244

there are ballconies on the side and windows quite round the Cupillow
that shews the whole town round ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.245

there is another Town Hall a long lofty place and another by the side
which is called the Councill Roome both for the Major {COM:Mayor} and
Aldermen to meete for the buissinesse of the Corporation ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.246

the town is walled all aboute with battlements
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.247

and a wallke all round pav'd with stone ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.248

I allmost encompass'd the walls ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.249

the streetes are of a greate breadth from the houses ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.250

but there is one thing takes much from their appeareing so and from
their beauty , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.251

for on each side in most places they have made penthouses so broad set
on pillars which persons walks under covert , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.252

and is made up and down steps under which are ware houses ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.253

tho' a penthouse or pallasadoe be convenient and a security from the sun
or weather and were it no broader than for two to passe one by the other
it would be well and no dissight to the grace of the streetes , but this
does darken the streetes and hinder the light of the houses in many
places to the streete ward below ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.254

indeed in some places were it only before the chiefly persons houses it
would be convenient where it@ @s flatt and even with the streetes ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.255

the town is mostly timber buildings , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.256

the trade and concourse of people to it is chiefly from the intercourse
it has with Ireland , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,178.257

most take this passage , and also the intercourse with Wales which is
parted from it and England by the River Dee , which washes the Castle
walls <P_179> in which they keep their stores -
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.258

but nothing fine in it - FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.259

the walls and towers seemes in good repaire ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.260

at the end of the town just by the Castle you crosse over a very large
and long Bridge over the River Dee which has the tyde comes up much
beyond the town , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.261

it@ @s 7 mile off that it falls into the sea FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.262

but it@ @s very broad below the town , when at high tyde is like a very
broad sea ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.263

there they have a little dock FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.264

and build shipps of 200 tunn FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.265

I saw some on the stocks . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.266

Cross this river by this bridge enters Flintshire
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.267

and so crossed over the marshes , which is hazardous to strangers ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.268

therefore Mr. William Allen <paren> which was the Major {COM:Mayor} of
Chester that tyme and gave me a very civil treate being an acquaintance
of my Brother Sir Edmund Harrison <$$paren> so order'd his son and
another gentleman to ride with me to direct to Harding {COM:Hawarden}
which was 5 mile ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.269

just by that was a very fine new_built house of brick and in the exact
forme of the London architecture which was this Mr. Majors house and
good gardens . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.270

Att Harding , where was my Relation , Dr. Percivalls wife , who was
Minister of that place ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.271

his parish was 8 miles in extent FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.272

and 2 lordships in it FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.273

and the ruines of two great Castles in it remaines ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.274

it@ @s good rich land here much on enclosures and woods ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.275

in a tarresse walke in my Relations garden I could very plainly see
Chester and the River Dee with all its washes over the marsh ground
which look'd very finely ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.276

here are sands which makes it very difficult for strangers to passe
without a guide ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.277

from thence my Relation carry'd me to Holly well {COM:Holywell}
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.278

and pass'd thro' Flint town which is the shire town , 5 mile from
Harding ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.279

it@ @s a very ragged place FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.280

many villages in England are better , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.281

the houses all thatched and stone walls but so decay'd that in many
places ready to tumble down ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.282

there was a Town Hall such a one as it was ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.283

it was at a Session tyme when I was there which shew'd it at its prime ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,179.284

there is a Castle which <P_180> still remaines with its towers built of
stone , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.285

it@ @s down to the water side ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.286

from thence to Holy well is 3 mile mostly by the water side which is
reckon'd the sea - FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.287

here I went just in sight of High Lake {COM:Hoylake} where were many
shipps rideing along that harbour . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.288

St. Winfreds Well is built over with stone on pillars like a tryumphall
arch or tower on the gates of a Church ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.289

there is a pavement of stone within ground 3 sides of the Well which is
joyn'd on the fourth side by a great arch of stone which lies over the
water that runs off from the Well , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.290

it@ @s many springs which bubbles up very fast and lookes cleane in a
compass which is 8 square walled in with stone ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.291

in the bottom which you see as clear as Chrystall are 9 stones layd in
an oval on which are dropps of red coullour some almost quite covering
the top of the stone , which is pretended to be the blood of this holy
saint whose head was struck off here , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.292

and so where her body laid this spring burst forth and remaines till now
, a very rapid current , which runs off from this Well under a barre by
which there are stone stepps for the persons to descend which will bathe
themselves in the Well ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.293

and so they walke along the streame to the other end
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.294

and then come out , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.295

but there is nothing to shelter them FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.296

but are exposed to all the Company that are walking about the Well and
to the little houses and part of the streete which runs along by it ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.297

but the Religeuse are not to mind that ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.298

it seemes the Saint they do honour to in this place must beare them out
in all things , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.299

they tell of many lameness's and aches and distempers which are cured by
it ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.300

it@ @s a cold water and cleare FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.301

and runs off very quick so that it would be a pleasant refreshment in
the sum~er to washe ones self in it , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,180.302

but it@ @s <P_181> shallow not up to the waste so it@ @s not easye to
dive and washe in ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.303

but I thinke I could not have been persuaded to have gone in unless
might have had curtains to have drawn about some part of it to have
shelter'd from the streete , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.304

for the wett garments are no covering to the body ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.305

but there I saw abundance of the devout papists on their knees all round
the Well ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.306

poor people are deluded into an ignorant blind zeale and to be pity'd by
us that have the advantage of knowing better and ought to be better ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.307

there is some small stones of a reddish coullour in the Well said to be
some of St. Winifreds blood also , which the poore people take out and
bring to the strangers for curiosity and relicts , and also moss about
the bancks full of great virtue for every thing -
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.308

but it@ @s a certaine gaine to the poore people ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.309

every one gives them something for bringing them moss and the stones ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.310

but least they should in length of tyme be quite gather'd up they take
care to replenish it dayly from some mossy hill
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.311

and so stick it along the sides of the Well - FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.312

there is good streames runs from it and by meanes of steepe descent runs
down and turns mills ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.313

they come also to drinke of the water which they take up in the first
square which is walled round and where the springs rise ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.314

and they say it@ @s of wonder_full operation ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.315

the taste to me was but like good spring water which with wine and sugar
and leamons might make a pleasant draught after walking amongst those
shady trees of which there is a great many FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.316

and some straight and tall like a grove but not very uniforme , but a
sort of iregular rows . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.317

From thence I went back to Harding {COM:Hawarden} which is 8 very long
miles ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.318

at Holly Well {COM:Holywell} they speake Welsh ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.319

the inhabitants go barefoote and bare_leg'd a nasty sort of people ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.320

their meate is very small here , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.321

mutton is noe bigger than little lamb , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.322

what of it there is was sweete ; their wine good being neare the sea
side FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.323

and are well provided with fish , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.324

very good salmon and eeles and other fish I had at Harding .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.325

This shire is improperly called Flintshire there being noe flints in all
the country ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.326

there are great Coale pitts of the Channell {COM:Cannel} Coale that@ @s
cloven huge great pieces , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,181.327

they <P_182> have great wheeles that are turned with horses that draw up
the water and so draine the Mines which would else be overflowed so as
they could not dig the coale ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.328

they have also engines that draw up their coale in sort of baskets like
hand barrows which they wind up like a bucket in a well ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.329

for their mines are dug down through a sort of well
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.330

and sometymes it@ @s pretty low before they come to the coales ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.331

it makes the road unsafe because of the coale pitts and also from the
slough and quick sands all here about being mostly near the bancks of
the water . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.332

In this country are quarrys of stone , copper and iron mines and salt
hills , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.333

it@ @s a hilly place very steep descents great many very high hills ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.334

but I went not so farre as Pen_ma_mower {COM:Penmaenmawr}
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.335

but cross'd the River Dee haveing first went two mile by these coale
mines at least 10 in a place ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.336

it@ @s a thing which holds neer 2 bushell that is their basket they draw
up which is bought for 6 pence . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.337

I forded over the Dee when the tide was out all upon the sands at least
a mile which was as smooth as a die being a few hours left of the flood
; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.338

the sands are here soe loose that the tydes does move them from one
place to another at every flood , that the same place one used to foard
a month or two before is not to be pass'd now ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.339

for as it brings the sands in heaps to one place so it leaves others in
deep holes , which are cover'd with water , and loose sand that would
swallow up a horse or carriages , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.340

so I had two Guides to conduct me over ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.341

the carriages which are used to it and pass continually at the ebbs of
water observes the drift of sands FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.342

and so escape the danger ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.343

it was at least a mile I went on the sands before I came to the middle
of the channell which was pretty deep , and with such a current or tyde
which was falling out to sea together with the wind the horses feete
could scarce stand against it , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.344

but it was but narrow just the deep part of the channell and so soone
over ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.345

when the tyde is fully out they frequently ford in many places which
they marke as the sands fall , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.346

and can go near 9 or 10 mile over the sands from Chester to Burton or to
Flint town almost ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,182.347

but many persons that have known the foards well , that have <P_183>
come a year or half a year after , if they venture on their former
knowledge have been overwhelm'd in the ditches made by the sands , which
is deep enough to swallow up a coach or waggon ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,183.348

but they convey their coales from Wales and any other things by waggon
when the tyde is out to Chester and other parts .
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,183.349

From Burton which was on the side of England the shore I went to the
ferry 9 miles to the River Meresy {COM:Mersey} , another great river
indeed much broader and a perfect sea for 20 mile or more ;
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,183.350

it comes out of Lancashire from Warrington FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,183.351

and both this and the Dee empts themselves into the sea almost together
a few leagues from Leverpoole {COM:Liverpool} which poole is form'd by a
poynt of land that runs almost round the entrance from the sea , being
narrow and hazardous to strangers to saile in in the winter ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,183.352

the mouth of the river by reason of the sands and rocks is a gate to the
river ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,183.353

this I ferry'd over FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,183.354

and was an hour and halfe in the passage , FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,183.355

it@ @s of great bredth FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,183.356

and at low water is so deep and salt as the sea almost , tho' it does
not cast so green a hew on the water as the sea ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,183.357

but else the waves toss and the rocks great all round it
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,183.358

and is as dangerous as the sea ; FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,183.359

it@ @s in a sort of Hoy that I ferried over and my horses ,
FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,183.360

the boate would have held 100 people . FIENNES-1698-E3-P2,183.361

