<BEGIN_fitzh-1534-e1-p2>

<P_25>

<heading>

l6 . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,25.4

To falowe . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,25.5

<$$heading>

Nowe these housbandes haue sowen theyr pees , beanes , barley , and otes
, and harowed them , it is the beste tyme , to falowe , in the later
ende of Marche and Apryll , for whete , rye , and barley .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,25.7

And lette the husbande do the <P_26> beste he can , to plowe a brode
forowe and a depe , soo that he turne it cleane , and lay it flat , that
it rere not on the edge : the whiche shall destroy all the thistils and
wedes . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.8

For the deper and the broder that he gothe , the more newe molde , and
the greatter clottes shall he haue , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.9

and the greatter clottes , the better wheate . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.10

For the clottes kepe the wheate warme all wynter ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.11

and at Marche they wyll melte and breake , and fal in manye small peces
, the whiche is a newe dongynge , and refresshynge of the corne .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.12

And also there shall but lyttell wedes growe vpon the falowes , that are
so falowed . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.13

For the plough goth vndernethe the rootes of all maner of wedes ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.14

and tourneth the roote vpwarde , that it maye not growe .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.15

And yf the lande be falowed in wynter tyme , it is farre the worse , for
three principall causes . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.16

One is , all the rayne that commeth , shal washe the lande , and dryue
awaye the dounge and the good moulde , that the lande shall be moche the
worse . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.17

An other cause is , the rayne shall beate the lande so flat , and bake
it so hard to-gyther , that if a drye Maye come , it wyll be to harde to
stere in the moneth of June . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.18

And the thyrde cause is , the wiedes shall take suche roote , er
sterynge-tyme comme , that they wylle not be cleane tourned vndernethe ,
the whiche shal be great hurte to the corne , whan it shall be sowen ,
and specially in the weding-tyme of the same ; FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.19

and for any other thynne , make a depe holowe forowe in the rydge of the
lande , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.20

and loke wel , thou rest-balke it nat ; FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.21

for if thou do , there wyll be many thystels : FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.22

and than thou shalte not make a cleane rydge at the fyrste sterynge ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.23

and therfore it muste nedes be depe plowed , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.24

or elles thou shalt nat tourne the wiedes cleane .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,26.25

<P_27>

<heading>

17 . To cary out donge or mucke and to sprede it .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.28

<$$heading>

And in the later ende of Apryll , and the begynnynge of Maye , is tyme
to cary out his dounge or mucke , and to lay it vppon his barley-grounde
. FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.30

And where he hath barley this yere , sowe it with whete or rye the next
tyme it is falowed , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.31

and so shal he mucke all his landes ouer at euerye seconde falowe .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.32

But that husbande that can fynd the meanes to cary oute his donge , and
to laye it vpon his lande after it be ones sturred : it is moche better
than to laye it vppon his falowe , for dyuer causes .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.33

One is , if it be layde vpon his fallowe , all that fallethe in the
holowe rygge shall do lyttell good ; FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.34

for whan it is rygged agayne , it lyeth soo depe in the erthe , that it
wyll not be plowed vp agayne , excepte that whan he hath sprede it , he
wyll with a shouell , or a spade , caste out all that is fallen in the
rygge . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.35

And if it be layde vpon the sturrynge , at euery plowynge it shall medle
the donge and the erthe togyder , the whiche shall cause the corne moche
better to growe and encreace . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.36

And in somme places , they lode not theyr donge , tyll harvest be done ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.37

& that is vsed in the farther syde of Darbyshyre , called Scaresdale ,
Halomshyre , and so northewarde towarde Yorke and Ryppon :
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.38

and that I calle better thanne vppon the falowe , and specyally for
barley : FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.39

but vppon the fyrste sturrynge , is beste for wheate and rye ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.40

and that his dunge be layde vpon smal hepes nygh together ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.41

and to sprede it euenly , and to leue no dounge there-as the mucke-hepe
stode , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.42

for the moystnes of the dounge shall cause the grounde to be ranke
ynoughe . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.43

And if it be medled with erthe , as sholynges and suche other , it wyll
laste the longer , and better for barley than for whete or rye , bycause
of wedes . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.44

Horse-donge is the worste donge that is . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.45

The donge of all maner catell , that chewe theyr cudde , is verye good .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.46

And the dounge of douues is best , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.47

but it must be layde vppon the grounde verye thynne .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,27.48

<P_28>

<heading>

18. FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.51

To set out the shepe-folde . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.52

<$$heading>

Also it is tyme to set out the shepefolde in May , and to sette it vppon
the rye-grounde , if he haue any , and to flyte it euery mornynge or
nyght : and in the mornynge , whan he cometh to his folde , let not his
shepe out anone , but reyse theym vp , and let them stande stylle good
season , that they may donge and pysse . And go amonge them to se
whether any of them haue any mathes , or be scabbed : and se them thre
or foure tymes on the oone syde , and as ofte on the other syde .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.54

And whan the kelles begonne besyde the grounde , than lette theym out of
the folde , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.55

and dryue theym to the soundest place of the felde .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.56

But he that hath a falowe felde , seueral to hym-selfe , let hym occupie
no folde . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.57

For foldynge of shepe maketh them scabbed , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.58

and bredeth mathes ; FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.59

and whanne a storme of yll wether commeth in the night , they can nat
flee nor go awaye , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.60

and that appeyreth them sore of their flesshe . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.61

But lette that man that hath such a seueral falowe-felde , driue twentie
, thyrty , or forty stakes , accordynge to the nombre of his shepe ,
upon his falowe , where he wolde sette his folde , and specially in the
farthest parte of the fyelde frome thense as they comme in ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.62

for the goynge vppon dothe moche good . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.63

And lette the sheparde brynge his shepe to the stakes , and the sheepe
wylle rubbe them on the stakes . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.64

And lette the sheparde goo aboute them , tyll they be sette , and thus
serue theym two or three nyghtes , and they wyll folowe those stakes ,
as he flytteth them , and syt by them . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.65

And if any ill wether come , they will ryse vp , and go to the hedge .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.66

And this maner of foldynge shall brede noo mathes nor scabbe , nor
appeyre theym of theyr flesshe , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.67

and shall be a greate sauegarde to the shepe for rottynge :
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,28.68

and in the mornynge put them out of theyr pasture , and thou shalte not
nede to bye any <P_29> hurdels nor shepe-flekes ; FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.69

but howe ye shall salue them or dresse them , ye shall vnderstande in
the chaypter of shepe after . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.70

<heading>

19 . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.72

To cary wodde and other necessaryes . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.73

<$$heading>

And in May , whan thou hast falowed thy grounde , and set oute thy
shepefolde , and carved oute thy dounge or mucke , if thou haue any
wodde , cole , or tymbre to cary , or suche other busynes , that moste
nedes be doone , with thy charte or wayne , than is it tyme to do it .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.75

For than the waye is lyke to be fayre and drye , and the days longe ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.76

and that tyme the husbande hath leeste to doo in husbandry .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.77

Perauenture I set one thynge to be done at one tyme of the yere ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.78

and if the husbande shulde do it , it shulde be a greatter losse to hym
in an other thynge . Wherefore it is moste conuenient to do that thynge
fyrst , that is moste profytable to hym , and as soone as he can , do
the other labour . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.79

<heading>

20 . To knowe dyuers maner of wedes . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.81

<$$heading>

In the later ende of Maye , and the begynnynge of June , is tyme to wede
thy corne . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.83

There be diuers maner of wedes , as thistyls , kedlokes , dockes ,
cocledrake , darnolde , gouldes , haudoddes , dogfenell , mathes , ter ,
and dyuers other small wedes . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.84

But these be they that greue mooste : FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.85

The thistyll is an yll wede , roughe and sharpe to handell ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.86

and freteth away the cornes nygh it , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.87

and causeth the sherers or reapers not to shere cleane .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.88

Kedlokes hath a leafe lyke rapes , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.89

and beareth a yelowe floure , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.90

and is an yll wede , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.91

and groweth in al maner corne , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.92

and hath small coddes , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.93

and groweth lyke mustard sede . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.94

Dockes have a brode lefe , and diuers high spyres , and very small sede
in the toppe . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.95

Cockole hath a longe small lefe , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,29.96

and wyl beare fyue or vi. floures of purple colour , as <P_30> brode as
a grote , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.97

and the sede is rounde and blacke , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.98

and maye well be suffred in a breade-corne , but not in sede ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.99

for therin is moche floure . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.100

Drake is lyke vnto rye , till it begynne to sede ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.101

and it hath many sedes lyke fenell-sedes , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.102

and hangeth downewarde , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.103

and it maye wel be suffred in breade , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.104

for there is moche floure in the sede : FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.105

and it is an opinion that it commeth of rye , &c.
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.106

Dernolde groweth vp streyght lyke an hye grasse ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.107

and hath longe sedes on eyther syde the sterte , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.108

and there is moche floure in that sede , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.109

and growethe moche amonge barley : FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.110

and it is sayde , that it cometh of small barley .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.111

Golds hath a shorte iagged lefe , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.112

and groweth halfe a yarde hygh , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.113

and hath a yelowe floure , as brode as a grote , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.114

and is an yll wede , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.115

and groweth commonlye in barleye and pees . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.116

Hawdod hath a blewe floure , and a fewe lyttell leues ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.117

and hath v. or syxe braunches , floured in the toppe :
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.118

and groweth comonly in rye vpon leane grounde , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.119

and dothe lyttel hurte . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.120

Doggefenell and mathes is bothe one , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.121

and in the commynge vp is lyke fenell FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.122

and beareth many white floures , with a yelowe sede :
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.123

and is the worste wede that is , excepte terre , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.124

and it commeth moste commonly , whan great wete commeth shortly after
the corne is sowen . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.125

Terre is the worste wede , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.126

and it neuer dothe appere tyll the moneth of June , and specyallye
whanne there is great wete in that mone , or a lyttell before ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.127

and groweth mooste in rye , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.128

and it groweth lyke fytches , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.129

but it is moche smaller , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.130

and it wyll growe as hyghe as the corne , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.131

and with the weyght therof it pulleth the corne flatte to the erth ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.132

and freteth the eares away ; wherfore I haue seene housbandes mowe downe
the corne and it together : And also with sharp hokes to repe it , as
they doo pees , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.133

and made drye , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.134

and than it wyll be good fodder . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.135

There be other weeds not spoken of , as dee-nettylles , dodder , and
suche other , that doo moche harme . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,30.136

<P_31>

<heading>

21 . Howe to wede corne . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.139

<$$heading>

Nowe it wolde be knowen , howe these cornes shulde be weded .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.141

The chyefe instrument to wede with is a paire of tonges made of wode ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.142

and in the farther ende it is nycked , to holde the wed faster ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.143

and after a shoure of raine it is beste wedynge ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.144

for than they maye be pulled vp by the rotes , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.145

and than it cometh neuer agayne . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.146

And if it be drye wether , than muste ye haue a wedynge-hoke with a
socket set vpon a lyttel staffe of a yarde longe ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.147

and this hoke wolde be well steeled , and grounde sharpe bothe behynde
and before . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.148

And in his other hande he hath a forked stycke a yarde longe ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.149

and with his forked stycke he putteth the wede from hym ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.150

and he putteth the hoke beyond the rote of the wede ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.151

and pulleth it to hym , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.152

and cutteth the wede fast by the erthe , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.153

and with his hoke he taketh up the wede , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.154

and casteth it in the reane , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.155

and if the reane be full of corne , it is better it stande styll , whan
it is cut , and wyddre : FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.156

but let hym beware , that he trede not to moche vppon the corne , and
specyallye after it is shotte , and whan he cutteth the wede , that he
cut not the corne : FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.157

and therefore the hoke wolde not passe an inche wyde .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.158

And whanne the wede is soo shorte , that he can not with his forked
stycke put it from hym , and with the hoke pull it to hym , thanne muste
he set his hoke vppon the wede , fast by the erthe , and put it from hym
, FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.159

and so shall he cutte it cleane . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.160

And with these two instruments , he shall neuer stoupe to his warke .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.161

Dogfenell , goldes , mathes , and kedlokes are yll to wede after this
maner , they growe vppon so many braunches , harde by the erthe :
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.162

and therfore they vse most to pul them vppe with theyr handes ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.163

but loke well , that they pull not vppe the corne with all ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.164

but as for terre , there wyll noo wedynge serue .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,31.165

<P_32>

<heading>

22 . The fyrst sturrynge . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.168

<$$heading>

Also in June is tyme to rygge vppe the falowe , the whiche is called the
fyrst sturrynge , and to plowe it as depe as thou canste , for to tourne
the rotes of the wedgs vpwarde , that the sonne and the drye wether maye
kyll them . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.170

And an housbande can not conuenyentelye plowe his lande , and lode out
his dounge bothe vppon a daye , with one draughte of beastes :
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.171

but he maye well lode oute his dounge before none , and lode heye or
corne at-@ @after_none : FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.172

or he maye plowe before none , and lode hey or corne at-@ @after_none ,
with the same draughte , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.173

and noo hurte to the cattell : bycause in lodynge of hey or corne , the
cattel is alwaye eatynge or beytynge , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.174

and soo they can not doo in lodynge of dounge and plowynge .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.175

<heading>

23 . To mowe grasse . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.177

<$$heading>

Also in the later ende of June is tyme to begyn to mowe , if thy medowe
be well growen : FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.179

but howe-so-ever they be growen , in July they muste nedes mowe , for
diuers causes . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.180

One is , it is not convenient to haue hey and corne bothe in occupation
at one tyme . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.181

An other is , the yonger and the grener that the grasse is , the softer
and the sweter it wyll be , whan it is hey , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.182

but it wyll haue the more wyddrynge ; FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.183

and the elder the grasse is , the harder and dryer it is , and the worse
for al maner of cattell : FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.184

for the sedes be fallen , the whiche is in maner of prouander ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.185

and it is the harder to eate and chowe . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.186

And an other cause is , if drye wether come , it wyll drye and burne
vpon the grounde , and waste away . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.187

Take hede that thy mower mow clene and holde downe the hynder hand of
his sith , that he do not endent the grasse , and to mowe his swathe
cleane thorowe to that that was laste mowen before , that he leaue not a
mane bytwene , and specyallye in the common medowe :
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,32.188

for in <P_33> the seuerall medowe it maketh the lesse charge ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.189

and that the moldywarpe-hilles be spredde , and the styckes cleane
pycked out of the medowe in Apryll , or in the beginnynge of Maye .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.190

<heading>

24 . Howe forkes and rakes shulde be made . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.192

<$$heading>

A Good husbande hath his forkes and rakes made redye in the wynter
before , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.194

and they wolde be gotte bytwene Mighelmasse and Martylmasse , and beyked
, and sette euen , to lye vpryght in thy hande : FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.195

and than they wyll be harde styffe and drye . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.196

And whan the housbande sytteth by the fyre , and hath nothynge to do ,
than maye he make theym redye , and tothe the rakes with drye wethywode
, and bore the holes with his wymble , bothe above and vnder , and driue
the tethe vpwarde faste and harde , and than wedge them aboue with drye
woode of oke , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.197

for that is hard , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.198

and wil driue and neuer come out . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.199

And if he get them in sappe-tyme , all the beykyng and drienge that can
be had shal not make them harde and styffe , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.200

but they woll alwaye be plyenge : FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.201

for they be moste comonly made of hasell and withee ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.202

and these be the trees that blome , and specially hasell :
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.203

for it begynneth to blome as sone as the lefe is fallen .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.204

And if the rake be made of grene woode , the heed wyll not abyde vppon
the stele , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.205

and the tethe wyll fall out , whan he hath mooste nede to them , and let
his warke , and lose moche heye . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.206

And se that thy rake and forke lye vpryghte in thy hand ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.207

for and the one ende of thy rake , or the syde of thy forke , hang
downe-warde , than they be not handsome nor easy to worke with .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.208

<heading>

25 . To tedde and make hay . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.210

<$$heading>

Whan thy medowes be mowed , they wolde be well tedded and layde euen
vppon the grounde : FITZH-1534-E1-P2,33.212

and if the grasse be very thycke , it woode be shaken with handes ,
<P_34> or with a shorte pykforke . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.213

For good teddynge is the chiefe poynte to make good hey ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.214

and than shall it be wyddred all in lyke , or elles not :
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.215

and whan it is wel wyddred on the ouer_syde , and dry , than turne it
cleane before noone , as soone as the dewe is gone :
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.216

And yf thou dare truste the wether , lette it lye so all nyghte :
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.217

and on the nexte daye , tourne it agayne before none ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.218

and towarde nyght make it in wyndrowes , and than in smal hey-cockes ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.219

and so to stande one nyghte at the leaste , and sweate :
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.220

and on the nexte fayre day caste it abrode agayne ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.221

and tourne it ones or twyse , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.222

and than make it in greatter hey-cockes , and to stande so one nyght or
more , that it maye vngiue and sweate . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.223

For and it sweate not in the hey-cockes , it wyll sweate in the mowe ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.224

and than it wyll be dustye , and not holsome for hors , beastes , nor
shepe . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.225

And whan it standeth in the cockes , it is better to lode ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.226

and the more hey maye be loded at a lode , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.227

and the faster it wyll lye . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.228

Quyche-hey commeth of a grasse called crofote , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.229

and groweth flatte , after the erthe , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.230

and bearethe a yelowe floure halfe a yarde hygh and more ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.231

and hath many knottes towarde the roote , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.232

and it is the beste hey for horses and beastes , and the sweteste , if
it be well got ; FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.233

but it wyll haue moch more wyddrynge than other hey ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.234

for els he wyll be-pysse hym-selfe and waxe hote , and after dustye .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.235

And for to knowe whanne it is wyddred ynoughe , make a lyttell rope of
the same , that ye thinke shulde be moste greneste ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.236

and twyne it as harde to-gether bytwen your handes as ye canne ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.237

and soo beynge harde twon , let one take a knyfe , and cut it faste by
your hande ; and the knottes wyll be moyste , yf it be not drye ynough .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.238

Shorte hey , and leye-hey , is good for shepe , and all maner of catell
, if it be well got . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.239

A man maye speke of makynge of hey , and gettynge of corne ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.240

but god disposeth and ordreth all thynge . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,34.241

<P_101>

<heading>

150 . How men of hye degree do kepe measure . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,101.244

<$$heading>

To me it is doubtefull , but yet me semeth , they be rather to lyberall
in expences , than to scarce , and specyally in three thynges .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,101.246

The fyrste is prodigalytie in outragious and costely aray , fer aboue
measure ; FITZH-1534-E1-P2,101.247

the seconde thynge is costely charge of delycyous meates and drynkes ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,101.248

the thyrde is outragious playe and game , ferre aboue measure .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,101.249

And nowe to the fyrste pointe . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,101.250

<P_102>

<heading>

151 . Prodigalite in outragious and costely aray .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,102.253

<$$heading>

I haue seen bokes of accompte of the yomen of the wardropes of noble men
, and also inuentorys made after theyr decease of their apparell ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,102.255

and I doubte not but at this daye , it is .xx. tymes more in value ,
than it was to suche a man of degre as he was an_.C. yere a-go :
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,102.256

and many tymes it is gyuen away , er it be halfe worne , to a symple man
, the whiche causeth hym to weare the same ; and an other symple man ,
or a lyttell better , seynge him to weare suche rayment as he ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,102.257

and so causeth hym to bye suche other , to his great coste and charge ,
aboue measure , and an yll ensample to all other :
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,102.258

and also to see mens_seruantes so abused in theyr aray , theyr cotes be
so syde , that they be fayne to tucke them vp whan they ryde , as women
do theyr kyrtels whan they go to the market or other places , the whiche
is an vnconuenient syght . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,102.259

And ferthermore , they haue suche pleytes vpon theyr brestes , and
ruffes vppon theyr sleues , aboue theyr elbowes , that yf theyr mayster
, or theym-selfe hadde neuer so greatte nede , they coude not shoote one
shote , to hurte theyr ennemyes , tyll they hadde caste of theyr cotes ,
or cut of theyr sleues . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,102.260

This is fer aboue measure , or common weale of the realme .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,102.261

This began fyrste with honour , worship , and honesty ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,102.262

and it endeth in pryde , presumption , and pouertye . Wherof speketh
saint Austin , <font> Quemcunque superbum esse videris , diaboli filium
esse ne dubites : <$$font> That is to say , who-so-euer thou seest that
is proude , dout the not , but he is the diuels chylde . Wherfore
agaynst pryde he byddeth the remembre : <font> Quid fuisti , quid es ,
et qualis post mortem eris : <$$font> That is to say , what thou were ,
what thou art , and what thou shalte be after thy death .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,102.263

And S. Bernarde saythe , <font> Homo nihil aliud est , quam sperma
fetidum , saccus stercorum , et esca vermium : <$$font> That is to saye
, <P_103> A man is nothynge but stynkynge fylthe , a sacke of dounge ,
and wormes meate . The whiche sayinges wolde be remembred ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,103.264

and than me semeth this is sufficient at this time for the first point
of the thre . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,103.265

<heading>

152 . Of delycyouse meates and drynkes . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,103.267

<$$heading>

Howe costely are the charges of delycyous meates & drynkes , that be
nowe most commonly vsed , ouer that it hath ben in tymes paste , and
howe fer aboue measure ? FITZH-1534-E1-P2,103.269

For I haue seen bokes of accompte of householde , and brumentes vpon the
same , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,103.270

& I doubte not , but in delycyous meates , drinkes , and spyces , there
is at this daye foure tymes so moche spent , as was at these dayes , to
a lyke man in degree ; FITZH-1534-E1-P2,103.271

and yet at that tyme there was as moche befe and mutton spent as is nowe
, and as many good housholdes kept , and as many yomenne wayters therin
as be nowe . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,103.272

This began with loue and charytye whan a lorde , gentylman , or yoman
desyred or prayed an other to come to dyner or soupper ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,103.273

and bycause of his commynge he wolde haue a dysshe or two mo than he
wolde haue had , if he had ben away . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,103.274

Than of very loue he , remembrynge howe louyngely he was bydden to
dynner , and howe well he fared , he thynketh of very kyndnes he muste
nedes byd hym to dyner agayne , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,103.275

and soo ordeyneth for hym as manye maner of suche dysshes and meates ,
as the other man dyd , and two or .iii. mo , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,103.276

& thus by lyttel and litell it is common fer aboue measure .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,103.277

And begon of loue and charyte , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,103.278

and endeth in pryde and glotony , wherof saynte Ierome saythe : <font>
Qui post carnem ambulant , in ventrem et libidinem proni sunt , quasi
irrationabilia iumenta reputantur . <$$font> That is to say , They that
walke , and be redy to fulfill the lust of the fleshe and the bely , are
taken as vnreasonable beastes ; FITZH-1534-E1-P2,103.279

and sayncte Gregory sayth , <font> Dominante vicio gulae , omnes <P_104>
virtutes per luxuriam et vanam gloriam obruuntur : <$$font> That is to
saye , where the vice of glotony hath domination , all vertues by luxury
and vayne glory are cast vnder : the whiche sayinges wold in lykewise be
remembred ; FITZH-1534-E1-P2,104.280

and this me semeth sufficient for the .ii. poynte of the thre .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,104.281

<heading>

153 . Of outragious playe and game . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,104.283

<$$heading>

It is conueniente for euery man , of what degree that he be of , to haue
playe & game accordynge to his degree . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,104.285

For Cato sayth , <font> Interpone tuis interdum gaudia curis : <$$font>
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,104.286

Amonge thy charges and busynes thou muste haue sometyme ioye and myrthe
; FITZH-1534-E1-P2,104.287

but nowe_a-dayes it is doone ferre aboue measure .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,104.288

For nowe a poore man in regarde wyll playe as great game , at all maner
games , as gentylman were wont to do , or greater , and gentilmen as
lordes , and lordes as prynces , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,104.289

& ofte tymes the great estates wyll call gentylmen or yomen to play with
them at as great game as they do , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,104.290

and they call it a disport , the whiche me semeth a very trewe name to
it , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,104.291

for it displeaseth some of them er they departe , and specyall god , for
myspendynge of his goodes and tyme . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,104.292

But if they played smalle games , that the poore man that playeth myght
beare it thoughe he loste , and bate not his countenaunce , than myght
it be called a good game , a good playe , a good sporte , and a pastyme
. FITZH-1534-E1-P2,104.293

but whan one shall lose vpon a day , or vpon a nyght , as moche money as
wold fynde hym and all his house meate and drynke a moneth or a quarter
of a yere or more , that maye be well called a disporte , or a
displeasure , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,104.294

and ofte tymes , by the meanes therof , it causeth theym to sell theyr
landes , dysheryte the heyres , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,104.295

and may fortune to fall to thefte , robbery , or suche other , to the
great hurte of themselfe , & of theyr chyldren , and to the displeasure
of god : FITZH-1534-E1-P2,104.296

and they so doinge , lyttel do they pondre or regarde the <P_105> saying
of saynt Paule ; <font> Iuxta facultates faciendi sunt sumptus , ne
longi temporis victum breuis hora consumat : <$$font>
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,105.297

This play begun with loue and charity , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,105.298

and oft times it endeth with couetous wrath and enuy .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,105.299

And this me thynketh shoulde be a sufficient instruction for kepynge of
measure . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,105.300

<heading>

154 . A prologue of the thyrde sayinge of the philosopher .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,105.302

<$$heading>

Nowe thou housbande and housewife , that haue done your diligence and
cure about your husbandrye and huswyfry , accordynge to the fyrste
sayenge of the philosopher , <font> Adhibe curam : <$$font> And also
haue well remembred and fulfylled the seconde sayinge of the sayde
philosopher , <font> Tene mensuram : <$$font> I doubte not but ye be
ryche accordyng to the thyrde sayinge of the sayde philosopher , <font>
Et eris diues . <$$font> FITZH-1534-E1-P2,105.304

Nowe I haue shewed you the sayinge of the philosopher , wherby you haue
goten moche worldely possession , me semeth it were necessary , to shewe
you howe ye maye gette heuenly possessions , accordynge to the sayenge
of our lorde in his gospel , <font> Quid prodest homini , si vniuersum
mundum lucretur , animae vero suae detrimentum paciatur : <$$font>
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,105.305

What profyteth it to a man , thoughe he wyn all the worlde , to the
hyndraunce and losyng of his soule ? FITZH-1534-E1-P2,105.306

Howe_be_it , it shoulde seme vnconuenient for a temporall man to take
vpon hym to shewe or teache any suche spirytuall matters ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,105.307

and yet there is a great diuersytie betwene predication and doctrine .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,105.308

<heading>

A diuersitie betwene predication and doctrine .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,105.310

<$$heading>

As sayncte Iherome saythe , there is greate difference or diuersitie
betwene preachinge and doctrine . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,105.312

A preachyng or a sermon is , where is {COM:preceding_word_"is"_emended}
a conuocation or a gatherynge of people on holye dayes , or other dayes
in churches or <P_106> other places , and times sette and ordeyned for
the same . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,106.313

And it belongeth to theym that be ordeyned there-vnto , and haue
iurisdiction and auctorytie , and to none other .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,106.314

But euery man may lawefully enforme and teache his brother , or any
other , at euery tyme and place behouable , if it seme expedient to hym
, FITZH-1534-E1-P2,106.315

for that is an almes-dede , to the whiche euery man is holden & bounde
to do , accordyng to the sayenge of saynt Peter , <font> Vnusquisque ,
sicut accepit gratiam , in alterutrum illam administrare debet .
<$$font> That is to saye , as euery man hath taken or recyued grace , he
oughte to mynyster and shewe it forthe to other .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,106.316

For as Chrisostome saythe , great merite is to hym ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,106.317

and a great reward he shall haue in tyme to come , the which writeth or
causeth to be writen , holy doctrine , for that entent , that he may se
in it , howe he may lyue holylye , and that other may haue it , that
they maye be edyfyed or sanctyfyed by the same ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,106.318

for he saythe surely , knowe thou , that howe many soules be saued by
the , soo many rewardes thou shalte haue for eyther .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,106.319

For saynt Gregory saythe , <font> Nullum sacrificium ita placet deo ,
sicut zelus animarum : <$$font> FITZH-1534-E1-P2,106.320

There is no sacrifyce that pleaseth god so moche , as the loue of soules
. FITZH-1534-E1-P2,106.321

And also he saythe , <font> Ille apud deum maior est in amore , qui ad
eius amorem plurimos trahit : <$$font> FITZH-1534-E1-P2,106.322

He is greateste in fauour with god , that draweth moste men to the loue
of god . Wherfore me semeth , it is conuenient to enforme and shewe
them , how they maye gette heuenly possessions .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,106.323

Than to my purpose , and to the poynt where I lefte , ' nowe thou art
ryche . ' FITZH-1534-E1-P2,106.324

<heading>

What is rychesse . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,106.326

<$$heading>

It is to be vnderstande what is rychesse ; FITZH-1534-E1-P2,106.328

and as me semeth , rychesse is that thynge , that is of goodnes , and
can-@ @not be taken awaye from the owner , neyther in his <P_107>
temporall lyfe , nor in the lyfe euerlastynge .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.329

Than these worldly possessions , that I haue spoken of , is no richesse
, for why they be but floures of the worlde . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.330

And that may be wel consydered by Iob , the whiche was the rychest man
of worldely possessions , that was lyuynge in those daies ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.331

and sodeynely he was the poorest man agayne that coulde be lyuynge ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.332

and all the whyle he toke pacyence , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.333

and was content , as appereth by his sayenge , <font> Dominus dedit ,
dominus abstulit : sicut domino placuit , ita factum est , sit nomen
domini benedictum : <$$font> FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.334

Our lorde hath gyuen it , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.335

our lorde hath taken it awaye , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.336

and as it pleaseth our lorde , so be it , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.337

blessed be the name of our lorde . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.338

The whiche Iob may be an ensample to euery true chrysten man , of his
pacyence and good liuing in tribulation , as appereth in his storye ,
who that lyste to rede therin . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.339

And saynte Austyne saythe : <font> Qui terrenis inhiat , et aeterna non
cogitat , vtrisque in futuro carebit : <$$font> FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.340

he that gathereth in worldly thynges , and thynketh not vppon
euerlastynge thynges , shall wante bothe in tyme to come .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.341

For sayncte Ambrose saythe , <font> Non sunt bona hominis , quae secum
ferre non potest : <$$font> FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.342

They are not the goodes of man , the whiche he can-@ @not beare with him
. FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.343

And saynte Bernarde saythe : <font> Si vestra sint , tollite vobiscum :
<$$font> FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.344

Yf they be yours , take them with you . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.345

Than it is to be vnderstande , what goodes a man shall take with hym .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.346

And these be the good dedes wherof speketh Crysostome : <font> Fac bene
, et operare iustitiam , vt spem habeas apud deum , et non desperabis in
terra : <$$font> FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.347

Doo well , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.348

and worke ryghtwysly , that thou mayste haue truste in god , and that
thou be not in despayre in this worlde . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.349

Accordynge to that saythe the prophete Dauyd , <font> Iunior fui ,
etenim senui , et non vidi iustum derelictum , nec semen eius querens
panem : <$$font> FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.350

I haue been yonge , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.351

and I haue waxen olde , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.352

and I haue not seen a ryghtwyse man forsaken , nor his chyldren sekynge
theyr breade . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,107.353

<P_108>

<heading>

157 . What is the propertie of a riche man . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.356

<$$heading>

In myne opynyon the propertye of a ryche manne is , to be a purchaser ;
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.358

and if he wyll purchase , I councell hym to purchase heuen .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.359

For sayncte Austyne saythe , <font> Regnum caelorum nulli clauditur ,
nisi illi , qui se excluserit : <$$font> FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.360

The kyngedome of heuen is to no man closed , but to hym that wyll putte
oute hym-selfe . Wherfore this texte maye gyue the a courage to prefixe
thy mynde , to make there thy purchase . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.361

And Salomon saythe : <font> Quod mali carius emunt infernum , quam boni
caelum : <$$font> FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.362

Ill men bye hell derer , thanne the good men bie heuen .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.363

And that me semeth maye well be proued by a common ensample : As if I
had a_.M. shepe to sell , and dyuers men come to me , and bye euery
manne a_.C. of the shepe , all of one price , to paye me at dyuers
dayes . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.364

I am agreed , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.365

and graunt them these dayes ; FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.366

some of the menne be good , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.367

and kepe theyr promesse , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.368

and paye me at theyr dayes , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.369

and some of theym doo not paye me . Wherfore I sue theym at the lawe ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.370

and by course of the common lawe , I doo recouer my duetie of them ,
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.371

and haue theyr bodyes in prisone for execution , tylle they haue made me
payment . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.372

Nowe these men , that haue broken me promesse , and payed not theyr
dewetye , bye theyr shepe derer thanne the good menne bought theyrs .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.373

For they haue imprysonment of theyr bodyes , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.374

and yet must they pay theyr duetyes neuer_the_lesse , or elles lye and
dye there in pryson : the whiche sheepe be derer to them , then to the
good men that kepte theyr promes . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.375

Righte so euery man chepeth heuen , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.376

and god hath sette on it a pryce , and graunted it to euery man , and
giuen to them dayes of payment : FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.377

the pryce is all one , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.378

and that is to kepe his commaundementes , and fulfyll theyr promesse ,
and haue heuen at theyr decease . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.379

The yll men breake promesse , FITZH-1534-E1-P2,108.380

& kepe not his commaundementes , wherfore at theyr <P_109> decease they
be put in pryson , that is to say in hell , there to abyde his
ryghtuousenes . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,109.381

And soo the yll men bye hell derer , than the good menne bye heuen .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,109.382

And therfore it is better , to forgoo a lyttel pleasure , or suffer a
lyttell payne in this worlde , than to suffer a moche greatter and a
lenger payne in an other worlde . FITZH-1534-E1-P2,109.383

Nowe sythe helle is derer than heuen , I aduyse the specyally to bye
heuen , wherin is euerlastynge ioye without ende .
FITZH-1534-E1-P2,109.384

