<BEGIN_fox-1674-e3-p2>

<P_103>

And ye next day after I came out of Scarborough Castle from prison ye
fire broake out in London y=t= consumed most parte of ye Citty in 3 days
time . {COM:paragraph_from_"And"_to_"time"_interlineated}
FOX-1674-E3-P2,103.3

<P_104>

And I woulde have given ye governor somethinge for his Civility
FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.5

but hee woulde not receive any thinge . FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.6

And then ye officers & souldyers were mightily changhed & respective :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.7

& said hee is as stiffe as a tree & as pure as a bell
FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.8

for wee coulde never stirr him . FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.9

And ye governor said : whatever good hee coulde doe to my freinds hee
woulde doe it & never doe y=m= any hurte : FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.10

& soe hee remained to doe till hee dyed . FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.11

And when ye maior of ye tounde sent to him for souldyers to breake uppe
freinds meetinges if hee sent any doune hee woulde charge y=m= not to
medle : FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.12

but remaned loveinge till hee dyed . FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.13

But this Will Wilkison aforesaid y=t= chalenghed mee hee gott out of
prison by baile whoe was tender att his first comeinge in but after when
hee gott out Into drinkeinge hee repented him of his perniceousnesse
FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.14

& after hee was out of prison ye Lord soone cutt him off in his
wickednesse . FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.15

And Joblin ye goaler of Durham whoe was prisoner with mee in Scarborough
Castle {COM:3_words_from_"in"_to_"Castle"_interlineated} & had often
Incensed ye govrnor & officers against mee which woulde bee to large to
speake of hee gott out of prison FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.16

butt ye Lord cutt him off in his wickednesse soone after
{COM:2_words_"soone_after"_interlineated} . FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.17

And ye wicked serjant y=t= was a papist : ye Lord cutt him off alsoe :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.18

& sevrall other envious people against mee ye Judgements of God pursued
y=m= . FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.19

And there was a papist y=t= came to discourse with mee when I was in ye
Castle FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.20

& hee said all ye patriarks was in hell : from ye Creation till Christ
came : & when Christ suffred hee went Into hell & ye Devill said what
comes thou hither for to break open our stronge holdes & Christ said to
fetch y=m= all out . FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.21

And soe hee said : Christ was 3 days & 3 nights in hell to bringe y=m=
out . FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.22

But I tolde him y=t= was false : FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.23

for Christ said to ye theife this day shalt thou bee with mee in
paradice : FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.24

& Enoch & Elijah was translated Into Heaven : FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.25

& Abraham was in heaven FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.26

for ye scripture saith Lazarus was in his bosome : FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.27

& Moses & Elijah was with Christ upon ye mount before hee suffred :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.28

& soe stopt ye papists mouth . FOX-1674-E3-P2,104.29

And heere you may see many sad Judgements y=t= came <P_105> upon all my
olde persecutors in Lancasheere as may bee seene in this followinge list
. FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.30

And {COM:"and"_interlineated} richard dodgson hy constable & 2 other
constables gorg mountes john ashbonnars wiffe
{COM:"wiffe"_interlineated} & another constable dyed shortly after
{COM:3_words_from_"dyed"_to_"after"_interlineated} FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.31

& wilan kerbe his wife died soone after
{COM:2_words_"soone_after"_interlineated} FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.32

& flimin his wife died : FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.33

& left him 14 motherlesse children whoe made many fatherlesse :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.34

& soe his became : FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.35

& hee y=t= fetcht mee to Holkar was one Tho: fflemminge : y=t= was a
servant to Coll: Kirby . FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.36

And olde Preston was then high sheriffe Rawlinson & Sir G.
{COM:"sir_G."_interlineated} Midleton Justices
{COM:"justices"_INTERLINEATED} both since deade : FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.37

& Prestons wiffe & son & daughter since deade . FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.38

Will: Knipe of Broughton one of my accusers : att Holkar since deade .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.39

And Midleton & Rawlinson bounde mee over to ye sessions :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.40

& att ye sessions ye {COM:"ye"_INTERLINEATED} Justices upon ye bench :
{COM:sic} were : Justice fflemminge & Justice Rawlinson : & Justice
Spencer & Coll. West : & Nath: West of Borwicke both Justices & Justice
Portar : FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.41

& Portar & Rawlinson & both ye Wests since deade .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.42

And this Justice fflemminge Imprisoned two frends to death <paren> viz
<$$paren> Sam: Sands & one Parkamoore whoe left severall fatherlesse
children after which ffleminge {COM:"ffleminge"_interlineated} his wiffe
dyed & left him 13 or {COM:"13_or"_interlineated} 14 motherlesse
children . FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.43

And a consumption came upon Spencers estate : FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.44

& Coll Kirby wasted away all his estate FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.45

& buryed 3 wiffes . FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.46

Will Kirby buryed his wiffe . FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.47

S=r= Rob: Binleys whoe persecuted
{COM:the_words_"sir"_to_"persecuted"_have_a_line_through_them}
FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.48

And the cheife constable Rich Dogeson aforesaid
{COM:3_words_"rich"_to_"aforesaid"_interlineated} dyed : soone after :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.49

& Mounte ye petty constable & Jo: Ashburneham buryed his wiffe : soone
after : whose wiffe scolded much {COM:"much"_interlineated} at mee in
her house . FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.50

Alsoe Will Knipe ye wittnesse against mee soone after dyed
FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.51

ffor when I came Into ye Country againe all these aforesaid were deade &
ruined in there estates & severall others of our persecutors whome ye
Lord blasted . FOX-1674-E3-P2,105.52

<P_106>

And ye Goaler one Hunter y=t= abused mee In Lancaster prison hee was
cutt off in his younge days .
{COM:paragraph_from_"And"_to_"days"_interlineated} FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.54

<bracket> 1665 <$$bracket> FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.55

And ye Undersheriffe y=t= carryed mee from Lancaster prison towards
Scarborough till hee mett ye souldyers aforesaid att Bentam in
Yorkesheere when I came Into ye Country againe I hearde hee was deade
alsoe : FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.56

& ye Lorde had cutt off most of my olde persecutors
FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.57

& ruined y=m= FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.58

& though I did not seeke to {COM:"seeke_to"_interlineated} execute ye
law upon y=m= for there actinge contrary to there owne laws against mee
yet ye Lord had executed his vengans upon y=m= . FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.59

And after I came foorth of ye Castle I went about three miles unto a
large generall meetinge : FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.60

& all was quiett which meetinge was att a ffrends house y=t= had beene a
Cheife Constable . FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.61

And on ye 4=th= day after I came Into Scarborough tounde
FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.62

& had a large meetinge att Peter Hodgesons house : FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.63

& there came a Lady unto it & severall great persons
FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.64

& there was a younge man convinced in Scarborough tounde whilst I was in
prison ye bayliffes son FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.65

& hee came to dispute FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.66

& spoake Hebrew to mee FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.67

& I spoake in Welch to him FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.68

& bid him feare God : whoe after became a pretty ffreinde .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.69

And from thence I past to Whitbey FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.70

& ye Lady aforesaid came to mee FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.71

& said I spoake against ye preists : FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.72

& I tolde her such as ye prophetts & Christ declared against I did
declare against now . FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.73

And after I had visited frends att Whitbey I past to Burlingeton where I
had another meetinge & from thence to Oram : where I had another
meetinge : & from thence to Marmaduke Storrs where wee had a large
meetinge att a Constables house on whome ye Lord had wrought a great
miracle as in ye booke of miracles may bee seene
{COM:9_words_from_"as"_to_"seene"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.74

And there was a great mariage of two ffreindes
{COM:3_words_from_"of"_to_"ffreindes"_interlineated} ye next day
FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.75

& there came some hundreds of beggars : FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.76

& ffreinds refresht y=m= Insteade of ye rich : FOX-1674-E3-P2,106.77

& in ye meetinge before ye mariage I was moved to open to ye people ye
state of our mariages : howe ye People of God tooke one <P_107> another
in ye assemblyes of ye elders : & howe God did Joine man & woman
togeather before ye ffall : FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.78

& man had Joined in ye fall FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.79

but it was Gods Joineinge againe in ye restoration FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.80

& never from Gen: to ye revelation did ever any preists marry any as may
bee reade in ye Scriptures . FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.81

And then I shewed y=m= ye duty of man & wiffe howe they ahoulde serve
God beinge heires of life & grace togeather . FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.82

And from thence I past to Grace Barwickes where I had a generall
meetinge which was very large : FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.83

& soe came through ye wooles to one Shiptons where I had a large
meetinge alsoe . FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.84

And from thence I went to a preists house : whose wiffe was convinced &
mighty loveinge & glad to see mee : which preist had saide formerly :
hee woulde have my life or I shoulde have his & hee woulde give his
heade if I was not knockt doune in a months time : whoe was now very
loveinge & convinct of Gods eternall truth . FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.85

And from thence I past towards ye sea where severall freinds came to
visitt mee FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.86

& a preist one Phillippe Scafe
{COM:3_words_from_"one"_to_"Scafe"_interlineated} y=t= had beene
formerly convinced was nowe become a preacher of Christ freely
FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.87

& soe continnues . FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.88

And from thence I past to see an olde man y=t= was convinct whoe was
above 100 yeeres olde : FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.89

& from thence I past to a freinds house where I had a great meetinge &
all was quiett . FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.90

Soe I passed through ye Country till I came neere Malton where I had a
large meetinge FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.91

& neere Hull alsoe I had a large meetinge : FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.92

& from thence I came to a place caled Holden dike FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.93

& as I came Into ye tounde ye watchmen questioned mee & y=m= with mee
{COM:5_words_from_"mee"_to_"mee"_interlineated} : FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.94

& woulde have had us before ye magistrates FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.95

but they haveinge noe warrant they went away in a rage
FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.96

& said they woulde search for us : FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.97

but I went to ye Lady Mountague@ @s house where I lodged all night
FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.98

& frends came to see mee there FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.99

& in ye morninge I walkt out FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.100

& when I was gonne there came in a man with a naked sworde under his
coate FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.101

& hee frightned ye maide servant : FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.102

& when I came in shee tolde mee of it FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.103

so ye Lords power prevented him of his wickednesse .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,107.104

And from thence I past through ye Country visitinge <P_108> ffreinds to
Yorke where wee had a large meetinge FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.105

& I went to visitt Justice Robinson an auncient Justice of peace y=t=
had beene very loveinge to mee & {COM:"mee_&"_interlineated} freinds at
ye beginninge {COM:3_words_from_"at"_to_"beginninge"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.106

And there was a preist with him : FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.107

& hee saide It was said wee loved none but our selves
FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.108

but I tolde him wee loved all mankinde as they was Gods creation & as
they was children of Adam & Eve by generation : & wee loved ye
brotherhood in ye holy ghoast . FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.109

And soe after many more words with him whoe was very loveinge wee past
away . FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.110

And I had given foorth a book about this time
{COM:3_words_from_"about"_to_"time"_interlineated} Intituled feare God &
honor ye kinge & y=t= none coulde feare God & honor ye kinge but whoe
departed from sin & evill
{COM:17_words_from_"first"_to_"evill"_interlineated} : which booke
{COM:"booke"_interlineated} did mightily affect ye souldyers & people .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.111

And after I had visited freinds att Yorke I past towards a markett
tounde FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.112

& there was a Justice rideinge before us FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.113

& ye watchmen questioned him FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.114

& perceveinge hee was a Justice they lett him passe
FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.115

& soe wee escaped alsoe {COM:"alsoe"_interlineated} : att which tounde
wee had a great meetinge at one George Watkinsons house whoe formerly
had beene a Justice : FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.116

& a glorious blessed meetinge it was & very large FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.117

& ye seede of life was set {COM:"set"_interlineated} over all .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.118

And from thence wee past to Tho: Taylors : whoe formerly had beene a
Captaine where wee had a pretious meetinge FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.119

& there was a knight lived harde by y=t= threatned mee & said if ye
kinge sett mee at liberty hee would sende mee to prison againe
{COM:"againe"_interlineated} ye next day : FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.120

but ye Lords power stoppt him FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.121

And our meetinge was quiett . FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.122

And from thence I past through ye Country visitinge freinds till I came
to Senderlande greene : where I had a large genrall meetinge & ye preist
hearde of it & hee sent the constables to ye Justices & they brought a
warrant : FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.123

& ridd there horses soe harde y=t= they had almost spoiled y=m=
FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.124

but ye meetinge was ended before I hearde of y=m= FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.125

& as I was goeinge out of ye house a frende came to mee
FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.126

& tolde mee they were searchinge another house for mee :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.127

& as I was goeinge alonge through ye closes I mett ye constables &
warders & ye Justices clarke : FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.128

& I went through y=m= FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.129

& they looked att mee : FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.130

& soe I went to ye house y=t= they had beene searchinge :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,108.131

& thus ye Devill & ye preists lost there <P_109> designe
FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.132

& ye Lords power gave mee dominion over y=m= FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.133

& bounde y=m= praised bee his name for ever : FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.134

& frends all parted FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.135

& escaped y=m= FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.136

& soe they went away as they came : FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.137

for ye Lord God had frustrated there designe . FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.138

And from thence I went Into Darbysheere : where I had a large meetinge &
some freinds was afraide of ye Constables comeinge in
FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.139

for they had had great persecution in those parts .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.140

And there was a Justice of peace had taken away much of frends goods :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.141

& one Elen: ffretwell had made her appeale to ye Sessions :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.142

& ye rest of ye Justices graunted her her {COM:"her"_interlineated}
goods againe FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.143

And spoake to ye persecutinge Justice y=t= hee shoulde not doe soe any
more FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.144

& then shee was moved to speake to y=t= Justice & to warne him
FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.145

& hee bid her come & sett doune on ye bench : FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.146

I saide shee if I may doe Justice to ye Country
{COM:3_words_from_"to"_to_"Country"_interlineated} I will sett doune
with you FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.147

noe said hee then you shall not : FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.148

but bid her gett out of ye Courte FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.149

then shee was moved of ye Lord to turn again & say
{COM:"&_say"_interlineated} y=t= shee shoulde bee there when hee shoulde
not . FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.150

And after ye sessions was donne hee got amongst some of his persecutinge
companions : FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.151

& said : y=t= they woulde gett some more goods of frends if ye Devill
did not raise uppe y=t= woman to hinder y=m= . FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.152

Soe hee went home FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.153

& drove away her brothers oxen for goeinge to meetinges
FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.154

& soe another woman frends {COM:sic} of Chesterfeilde Susan ffreth
{COM:"Susan"_interlineated} was moved of ye Lord to tell him y=t= if hee
continnued one in his persecution ye Lord woulde execute his plagues
upon him . FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.155

And soe this Justice whose name was
{COM:3_words_from_"whose"_to_"was"_interlineated} Clarke went home
FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.156

& fell distracted : FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.157

& they tyed him in ropes FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.158

but hee gnawed y=m= to peices : FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.159

& hee had like to have worryed his mayde : FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.160

& they were feigne to putt an Iron Instrument Into his mouth to wrest
his teeth out of her flesh . FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.161

And soe hee dyed distracted in chaines {COM:"in_chaines"_interlineated}
which relation {COM:"relation"_interlineated} I had from Ellen
ffretwells one mouth . FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.162

And from thence I past Into Nottinghamsheere where I had a large
meetinge att Sekgby . FOX-1674-E3-P2,109.163

And from thence I went to Mansfeilde & from thence <P_110> to a fayre
where I saw & mett with many freinds : FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.164

& had likewise a meetinge att Mansfeilde . FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.165

And from thence I past through ye forrest in a mighty thunderinge &
rainy day : to Nottingham : where severall trees were blown uppe by ye
rootes & some people y=t= came from ye markett
{COM:7_words_from_"some"_to"_"markett"_interlineated} killed
FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.166

but ye Lords power preserved us . FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.167

And on ye first day : I had a large meetinge in Nottingham
FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.168

& all was brought under there teacher ye grace of God which brought
there salvation FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.169

& I established y=m= {COM:"y=m="_interlineated} upon ye rocke &
foundation Christ Jesus : FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.170

& after ye meetinge was donne I came to visitt ye Sheriffe whoe had
beene convinct formerly whoe remaines a freinde
{COM:4_words_from_"whoe"_to"_"freinde"_interlineated} :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.171

& I had beene his prisoner : about 49 : FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.172

& all was quiett . FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.173

And from thence I past Into Leistersheere to Seilby where wee had a
large blessed meetinge : FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.174

& I went to Leister to visitt ye prisoners there .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.175

And from thence I came to Jo: Penfords : where wee had a generall
meetinge large & pretious : FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.176

& from thence I past through ye Country : visitinge freinds & my
relations till I came Into Warwickesheere : & to Warwicke where I
visited ye prisoners . FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.177

And from thence I past to Bageley where I had a pretious meetinge
FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.178

& soe I past through Northamptonsheere visitinge frends & Bedfordshee
{COM:sic} & Buckkinghamsheere & Oxfordesheere
{COM:"&_Oxfordesheere"_interlineated} visitinge frends :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.179

& in Oxfordsheere ye Lord broake ye Devills snare :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.180

& his power came over all : FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.181

& his blessed truth enccreased . FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.182

And soe after {COM:"after"_interlineated} I had
{COM:"had"_interlineated} past through many Countryes & had large
meetinges visitinge ffreindes {COM:"visitinge_ffreindes"_interlineated}
I came at last {COM:"at_last"_interlineated} to London .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.183

But I was soe weake with lyinge about 3 yeeres in cruell & harde
Imprisonements my Jointes & my body was soe benumned y=t= I coulde
hardely gett on my horse : FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.184

neither could I well bend my knees nor hardely Indure fire nor warme
meate I had beene soe longe kept from it . FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.185

And soe after I had visited frends meetinges
{COM:5_words_from_"I"_to_"meetinges"_interlineated} in London which was
large & pretious {COM:5_words_from_"which"_to_"pretious"_interlineated}
I walkt Into ye ruines of ye Citty y=t= was burnt : which I saw it
lyeinge accordeinge as ye worde of ye Lord come to mee concerneinge it
severall yeeres before . FOX-1674-E3-P2,110.186

And after I had visited freinds a time in London & <P_111> there
meetinges I went Into ye Countrys {COM:sic} againe
FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.187

& had large meetinges through ye Countryes till I came to Bristoll : as
att Readinge & Kingston & in Wiltsheere : FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.188

& had many a large meetinge att Bristoll it beinge there fayre time
FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.189

& Tho: Lower came uppe thither out of Cornewall to see mee : & freinds
from severall parts of ye nation
{COM:20_words_from_first_"&"_to_"nation"_interlineated} :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.190

& after I was cleere of Bristoll I past uppe to Justice Nath:
{COM:"Nath"_interlineated} Crispps : & soe through ye Countryes till I
came to London again : FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.191

& had large meetinges FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.192

& all was quiett blessed bee ye Lorde . FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.193

And though I was very weake yett I travailed uppe & doune in ye service
of ye Lord . FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.194

And about this time Joh: Swinton & some other Scotch freinds & some
others had runn out : FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.195

& ye Lords power came over y=m= soe as they was made to condemne & teare
all there papers of controversyes to peices : FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.196

& severall meetinges wee had FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.197

& ye Lords everlastinge power was over all FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.198

& Judgement was sett : FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.199

& whole days wee sate : wherein many condemned there former lifes &
runninges out as may bee seene in ye booke of Condemnations att y=t=
time : wherein ye Lords power was wonderfully manifested .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.200

And then I was moved of ye Lord God to sett uppe & establish five
monthly meetinges of men : & women : In ye Citty of London
{COM:"of_London"_interlineated} to admonish & exhort & to take care of
Gods glory : besydes ye womens meetinge & ye Quarterly meetinge .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.201

And ye Lord opned to me & lett mee see what I must doe : & howe I must
order & establish ye men & womens monthly & quarterly meetinges
{COM:10_words_from_"&"_to_"meetinges"_interlineated} in all ye nation &
other nations to doe ye same : or write to y=m= where I came not
{COM:4_words_from_"where"_to_"not"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.202

And whereas they had had onely {COM:"had_onely"_interlineated} quarterly
meetinges now truth was spread & frends were growne popular y=t= now : I
must sett uppe ye monthly meetinges in ye nations
{COM:3_words_from_"in"_to_"nations"_interlineated} :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.203

& after they was established in London FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.204

& severall y=t= had runn out with Jo: Parrott & others came in :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.205

& condemned y=t= spiritt y=t= Ledde y=m= to keepe on ther hats when
frendes prayed & said it was of ye Devill : FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.206

& said yt frends were more righteous then they : & y=t= if freinds had
not stoode they had beene gonne & fallen Into perdition
{COM:4_words_from_"&"_to_"perdition"_interlineated} :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.207

& thus ye Lords power came over all . FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.208

<bracket> 1667 <$$bracket> FOX-1674-E3-P2,111.209

And soe after thinges were all setled : & ye <P_112> Lords truth : &
power & seede & life reigned & shined over all in ye Citty then I past
foorth Into ye Countryes : FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.210

And setled ye monthly meetinges in Essex : FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.211

& from thence Into Norfolke & Suffolke {COM:"&_Suffolke"_interlineated}
: FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.212

& Tho: Dry went alongst with mee : FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.213

& from thence after I had visited ye {COM:"ye"_interlineated} meetinges
in y=t= Country {COM:3_words_from_"in"_to_"Country"_interlineated} &
sett uppe ye monthly meetinges there I had a mens monthly
{COM:"monthly"_interlineated} meetinge alsoe {COM:"also"_interlineated}
at a preists house y=t= had beene convinced : FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.214

& from thence wee past Into Huntingeton sheere : where wee had very
large blessed meetings though there was some opposition
FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.215

butt ye Lords power came over all FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.216

& ye monthly mens meetinges was established there alsoe
{COM:9_words_from_"&"_to_"alsoe"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.217

And from thence wee past Into Bedfordesheere : where wee had some
opposition FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.218

but ye Lords power come over it all . FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.219

And from thence wee past into Nottinghamsheere : FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.220

& after ye monthly meetinges was setled wee had many pretious meetinges
in those Countryes {COM:3_words_from_"in"_to_"Countryes"_interlineated}
. FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.221

And from thence wee past Into Lincolnesheere : FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.222

& on ye day caled Christmas day att his
{COM:preceding_word_"his"_emended} house whoe had beene formerly ye
Sheriffe of Lincolne {COM:4_words_from_"ye"_to_"Lincolne"_interlineated}
wee had some men frendes {COM:"Men_frendes"_interlineated} of all ye
meetinges in ye County FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.223

& all was quiett FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.224

& after ye meetinge was donne wee past away . FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.225

And from thence wee past to a freinds house FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.226

& I was very weake FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.227

& ye constables & bayliffes had seised upon all Will Smyths goods to ye
very bed hee lay upon for truths sake : whoe was very sicke & weake att
y=t= time . FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.228

And they threatned to come & breake uppe our meetinge
FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.229

but ye Lords power chained y=m= blessed be his name
FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.230

& our meetinge was quiett . FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.231

And after ye meetinge was donne I went to visitt Will: Smyth :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.232

& ye bayliffes & constables watcht his corne & his beasts y=t= none
might carry his goods & corne away . FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.233

And ye Lords power chained y=m= y=t= they had not power to medle with us
. FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.234

And hee y=t= was ye Sheriffe of Lincolne was with mee
FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.235

& from thence wee past over Trent Into Nottinghamsheere where wee had
some of all ye meetinges in y=t= County togeather :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.236

& our meetinge was very glorious & peaceable FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.237

& many pretious meetinges wee had in y=t= County .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,112.238

And from thence wee past Into Leistersheere & soe Into <P_113>
Warwickesheere where many blessed meetinges wee had & ye order of ye
gospell was {COM:"was"_interlineated} sett uppe & ye mens monthly
meetinges were established in all those Countryes
{COM:11_words_from_"&"_to_"Countryes"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.239

And from thence wee past Into Darbysheere where wee had sevrall large
blessed meetinges : FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.240

& in many places wee were {COM:"we_were"_interlineated} threatned
FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.241

but escaped by ye power of ye Lord . FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.242

And from thence wee past Into Staffordsheere over ye Peake hills : which
were very colde Itt beinge snow & frost FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.243

& I was soe exceedinge weake I was haredly able to gett off or one my
horse backe : FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.244

& att Tho: Hammerslyes wee had a generall mens meetinge where all
thinges was setled in ye {COM:"ye"_interlineated} gospell order & ye
monthly meetinges were established alsoe
{COM:7_words_from_"&"_to_"alsoe"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.245

And from thence wee past Into Chesheere where wee had severall blessed
meetinges a generall mens meetinge where all ye monthly meetinges were
setled accordinge to ye gospell order in ye power of God .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.246

And after ye meetinge was donne I past away . FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.247

And ye Justices hearde of it : after it was donne FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.248

& were very much troubld y=t= they had not come & brooken it uppe &
taken mee FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.249

but ye Lord prevented y=m= FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.250

& so after I had cleered my selfe there in ye Lords service
{COM:4_words_from_"in"_to_"service"_interlineated} I past Into
Lancasheere : to Will: Barnes neere Warrington : where there mett mee
some of most of ye {COM:"of_ye"_interlineated} meetinges in y=t= County
: FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.251

& {COM:"&"_interlineated} there all ye monthly meetinges were
established in ye gospell order alsoe {COM:"alsoe"_interlineated} :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.252

& soe I sent papers Into Westmorelande : by Leo: ffell & Rob: Withers &
Into Bishopricke Cleveland & Northumberland & Into Cumberland & Scotland
: for y=m= to setle ye monthly meetinges in ye Lords power : which they
did . FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.253

And soe ye Lords power came over all : FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.254

& all ye heires of it came to Inheritt it FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.255

for ye authority of our meetinges is ye power of God ye gospell which
bringes life & Immortality to light : y=t= they may see over ye Devill
y=t= has darkned y=m= . FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.256

And soe ye order of ye glorious heavenly gospell is not of man nor by
man . Soe y=t= all ye heires of ye gospell might walke accordinge to ye
gospell : & glorify God with there bodys soules & spiritts which are ye
Lords . FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.257

And soe from Lancasheere : I past Into Chesheere :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,113.258

& <P_114> Margaret ffell beinge a prisoner att Lancaster gott leave to
{COM:3_words_from_"gott"_to_"to"_interlineated} come uppe to ye meetinge
FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.259

& went with mee to Jane Milners in Chesheere : FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.260

& soe past backe again . FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.261

And soe out of Chesheere I past Into Shropsheere : & from thence Into
Wales & Into Tenby sheere & Mountgomery sheere FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.262

& had a large generall mens {COM:"mens"_interlineated} meetinge att
Charles ffloydes : where some opposers came in FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.263

butt ye Lords power was over all . FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.264

And from thence wee past to Marioneth sheere where wee had severall
blessed meetinges : FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.265

& from thence wee past to ye sea syde where wee had a blessed meetinge :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.266

& soe past through severall countyes FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.267

& had many large meetinges FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.268

& ffreinds were established upon Christ there foundation .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.269

And from thence wee returned Into Shropsheere : againe haveinge setled
ye mens monthly meetinges in ye power of God
{COM:5_words_from_"in"_to_"God"_interlineated} both in Wales : &
Shropsheere & those other countyes wee came Into : Worcestersheere
{COM:"Worcestershire"_interlineated} FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.270

And after wee had had many meetinges uppe & doune in y=t= country amongt
{COM:sic} ffreinds : wee had a generall mens meetinge : att Pashur : att
Henry Gybbs : his house : where wee setled all ye monthly meetinges in
ye gospell order : FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.271

& ye sessions beinge in tounde y=t= day : ffreinds were very much
Concerned least they shoulde sende some officers to breake uppe our
meetinge FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.272

but ye Lords power chaind y=m= all soe y=t= our meetinge was quiett :
through which power wee had dominion FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.273

& after ye meetinge was donne I past away : FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.274

& had sevrall meetinges in y=t= country amongst frends
FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.275

& after came to Worcester FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.276

& it beinge there fayre time : wee had a pretious meetinge
FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.277

& after I was gonne out of tounde : there was one Major Wilde a wicked
persecutinge man & some of his souldyers enquired after mee
FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.278

butt I past away to Witch FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.279

& left ffrends setled in good order . FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.280

And at Witch there came Jo: Cartwright to a freinds house
FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.281

& was moved to speake a few words before supper in praise to God :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.282

& there came an Informer FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.283

& hearkned under ye wall FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.284

& hee went to Lichfeilde for an order to distrein under pretence of a
meetinge & y=t= hee shoulde gett some reward : where there was none but
: {COM:erased_in_the_ms.} FOX-1674-E3-P2,114.285

<P_115>

And from thence wee came to Shrewsberry : where wee had a pretious
meetinge FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.287

& ye maior & his officers hearinge of my beinge in tounde : they mett
togeather to consult what to doe against mee FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.288

for they said ye great Quaker of England was come to towonde
FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.289

& therfore they tooke councell togeather to Imprison mee
FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.290

but some of y=m= opposed it FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.291

butt ye Lord confounded y=t= . FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.292

And from thence wee past Into Radnoll sheere : where wee had many
pretious meetinges FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.293

& wee setled ye monthly meetinges . FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.294

And as wee came foorth of ye country att a markett tounde wee stayde a
while : FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.295

& a Justices Clarke & some others combined togeather : to doe us some
mischeife in ye roade : FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.296

& they overtooke us : FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.297

but Meetinge many markett people they were somewhat hindred of there
designe : FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.298

but they light one two of our Company y=t= ridd behinde us :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.299

& one of y=m= drew out his sworde FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.300

& cutt him Itt beinge Rich: Moore of Shrewsberry a D=tr= of physicke
{COM:"of_physicke"_interlineated} : FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.301

& ye other came gallopinge after mee & another ffreinde y=t= was with
mee : FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.302

& hee ridd Into a brook ye bridge beinge narrow to gett before us : soe
y=t= his horse fell Into a deepe hole in ye water :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.303

& soe I saw there designe : FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.304

& I desired freinds to bee patient & give y=m= noe occasion :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.305

& soe Rich: Moore came uppe to us & another ffreinde y=t= knew there
names : FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.306

& soe wee ridd alonge ye roade FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.307

& there wee mett another man drunke : whoe was a foote with a naked
rapier in his hande & in a bottome : FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.308

wee mett two men & two women : one of which men had his thumbe cutt of
by this man y=t= wee mett with a naked rapier in his hande
{COM:10_words_from_"y=t="_to_"hande"_interlineated}
FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.309

for hee would have ravished ye younge woman : FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.310

& hee went to rescue her : FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.311

& soe hee cutt his thumbe of FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.312

& ye other man was ye father of ye daughter . FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.313

And this foote man y=t= had ye naked rapier in his hande y=t= would have
ravished ye maide his horse was a pretty way behinde followeinge off him
: FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.314

& I ridde after ye horse FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.315

& ketcht him : FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.316

& brought him to ye man y=t= had beene wounded by him
FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.317

& bid him carry ye horse to ye next Justice of ye peace :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.318

& by y=t= meanes they might finde out & pursue
{COM:"&_pursue"_interlineated} ye man . FOX-1674-E3-P2,115.319

Soe upon this I writt a letter to ye Justices & to ye <P_116> Judge of
ye Assises FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.320

& I imployed som freinds to carry it to ye Justices of peace first .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.321

And ye Justice rebuked his Clarke & ye others for abuseinge &
disturbeinge us upon ye high way FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.322

& they made entreaty to ffreinds not to appeare against y=m= att ye
assises : which thinge did a great deale of good in ye country & stoppt
many rude people in ye country y=t= had used to abuse freindes formerly
. FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.323

And soe wee past Into Heriforde sheere where wee had severall blessed
meetinges FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.324

& wee had a generall mens meetinge alsoe where all ye monthly meetinges
were established . FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.325

And from thence wee past into Monmouthsheere where I had severall
blessed meetinges : FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.326

& att Walter Jenkins whoe had beene a Justice of peace we had a large
meetinge FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.327

& there was 4 preists convinced . FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.328

And at another meetinge before this {COM:"before_this"_interlineated}
there came ye bayliffe of ye hundred almost drunk unto his house to ye
meetinge {COM:6_words_from_"unto"_to_"meetinge"_interlineated} :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.329

& hee was to take uppe ye speakers hee said
{COM:"he_said"_interlineated} FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.330

but ye Lords power chained him : FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.331

& a mighty power of God there was in ye meetinge though hee raged :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.332

& soe after meetinge was donne I stayde a while FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.333

& hee stayde there FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.334

& I spoake to him FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.335

& soe past away . FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.336

And att night some rude people came FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.337

& shott a muskett against ye house FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.338

but did noe hurte . FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.339

And thus ye Lords power came over all FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.340

& chained y=m= FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.341

& wee escaped y=m= FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.342

& went to Rosse y=t= night FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.343

& had a meetinge there att James Merrickes . FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.344

And soe wee came Into Glocestersheere : where wee had a generall mens
meetinge att Justice Crispes house : FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.345

& setled all ye monthly meetinges in ye Lords everlastinge power
FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.346

& exhorted all ye heires of ye power of God to take there possessions of
ye gospell FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.347

for that was ye authority of there meetinges . FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.348

And soe after wee had many blessed meetinges upp & doune in y=t= Country
wee came to Bristoll FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.349

& after wee had had {COM:"had"_interlineated} severall powerfull
meetinges wee setled ye mens monthly meetinge there & ye womens meetinge
. FOX-1674-E3-P2,116.350

And as I was lyeinge in my bed : ye worde of ye Lord <P_117> came to mee
y=t= I must goe backe to London : FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.351

& Alex: Parker & sevrall others came to mee ye next morninge
{COM:3_words_from_"ye"_to"_"morninge"_interlineated}
FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.352

& I askt y=m= what they felt : FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.353

& they askt mee what was upon mee FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.354

& I tolde y=m= I felt I must returne to London FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.355

& they said it was upon y=m= ye same . FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.356

And soe wee gave uppe to returne to London : FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.357

for which way ye Lord moved us & ledd us wee went In his power .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.358

And after ye meetinge aforesaid : in Glocestersheere at Nat: Crisps was
ended there was a Justice of peace hearde of it & was in a great rage
y=t= hee had not come & broake uppe ye meetinge FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.359

but ye Lord disapointed him . FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.360

And about this time there was a proclamation against meetinges
FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.361

& as wee came through Herifordsheere there was a great meetinge of ye
Presbyterians FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.362

& they had engaged y=m=selves to stande & give upp all :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.363

butt when they heared of this Proclamation ye people came
FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.364

but ye preist was gonne FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.365

& then they mett in Lemster privately FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.366

& ye bayliffe came In FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.367

& tooke y=m= : FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.368

butt they had provided breade & cheese & drinke y=t= if ye officers came
there they would putt uppe there bibles & fall upon there colde meate .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.369

And ye bayliffe said hee woulde have ye speakers :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.370

& then they cryed what woulde become then of there wiffes & children .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.371

And ye Bayliffe tolde y=m= ye breade & cheese should not cover y=m= :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.372

but hee took away there speakers : FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.373

& kept y=m= awhile FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.374

& this ye bayliffe tolde our frende Peter Younge y=t= they were ye
veryest hypocrites y=t= ever made a profession . FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.375

And before this there was one Pococke : y=t= marryed ye Lady Dorsett
which Lady Dorsett was convinced FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.376

& this Pococke {COM:8_words_from_"which"_to"_"Pococke"_interlineated}
was a tryer of ye {COM:"ye"_interlineated} preists
FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.377

& hee used to call our ffrends house creepers : FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.378

& I comeinge Into his house his Lady saide unto mee : I have somethinge
to speak to thee against my husbande FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.379

nea said I : FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.380

thou must not speake against thy husbande FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.381

yes said shee FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.382

but I must . FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.383

Ye last first day said shee hee & his preists ye presbyterians mett
FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.384

& they had candles & tobacco pipes & breade & cheese & colde meat att
table : FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.385

& if ye officers had come in then they had agreed to leave there
preachinge & praynge & fall to there colde meate :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,117.386

& I said unto him is not this a shame to you : y=t= persecuted &
Imprisoned us : & <P_118> spoiled our goods because wee wulde not follow
you & bee of your religion & caled us housecreepers & now
{COM:"now"_interlineated} you dare not stande to your owne religion your
selves : FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.387

did you ever finde our meetinges stufft with breade & Cheese & tobacco
pipes FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.388

or did you ever reade in ye Scriptures of any such Practises amongst ye
saintes . FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.389

Why says ye old Pococke ye tryer of ye preists wee must bee as wise as
serpents says hee : FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.390

then said I : this is indeed ye serpents wisedome :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.391

& whoe would have ever thought y=t= you presbyterians & Independants
y=t= persecuted & Imprisoned & spoiled ye goods of others & whippt such
as wulde not follow your religion : & now dare not stande to your owne :
but cover it with tobacco pipes flagons of drinke colde meate & breade &
cheese . FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.392

And this was a common practise amongst y=m= in many places in this time
of persecution to use such deceitefull covers for there worshippe
{COM:8_words_from_"to"_to_"worshippe"_interlineated} .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.393

And soe as I said before : wee past from Bristoll into Wiltsheere
FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.394

& established ye mens monthly meetinges in ye Lords power there :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.395

& soe past through ye Countryes visitinge frends till wee came to London
: FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.396

& after wee had visited frends in y=t= Citty & had
{COM:"had"_interlineated} stayde there a while : I was moved to exhort
y=m= to {COM:3_words_from_"exhort"_to_"to"_interlineated} bringe all
there mariages Into ye men & womens meetinges y=t= they might lay y=m=
before ye faithfull there : FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.397

for many had gonne togeather contrary to there relations :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.398

& some times younge rawe people had mixed with ye worlde :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.399

& widdows had marryed FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.400

& had not made provision for there children before mariage .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.401

For I had given foorth a paper about 53 : concerneinge of mariages when
truth was litle spreade over ye nation y=t= they might lay it before ye
faithfull & then publish it In ye markett or before ye Justices
FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.402

& In ye ende of ye meetinge & when all thinges was founde cleere : &
they free from all other & there relations satisfyed then they might
appoint a meetinge of purpose for ye takeinge of one another :
FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.403

& not under 12 faithfull wittnesses . FOX-1674-E3-P2,118.404

And these thinges not beinge observed it was therfore ordered by ye same
power & spiritt of God : y=t= mariages might bee layde before ye mens
monthly & Quarterly meetinges or as the meetinges then
{COM:"s"_of_"meetinges"_and_"then"_interlineated} was established
{COM:"established"_interlineated} soe y=t= they might see y=t= ther
relations were satisfyed : & that <P_119> they were cleere from all
others : & y=t= widdowes had made provision for there first husbands
{COM:"first_husbands"_interlineated} children before they marryed again
. FOX-1674-E3-P2,119.405

And after ordered {COM:"after_ordered"_interlineated} if they came out
of another County or nation they must bringe a certificate from ye men &
womens meetinges they belonged unto : to ye men & women meetinges where
they tooke there wiffe or husbande . Soe y=t= all thinges might bee
kept cleane : & pure & donne in righteousnes to ye glory of God .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,119.406

And soe after these thinges with many other services for God were sett
in order & setled in ye Churches in ye Citty
{COM:3_words_from_"in"_to_"Citty"_interlineated} I past out of London
into ye Countryes againe . FOX-1674-E3-P2,119.407

<bracket> 1668 <$$bracket> And went Into Harfordesheer
FOX-1674-E3-P2,119.408

& setled there ye mens monthly meetinges FOX-1674-E3-P2,119.409

& after I had visited freinds there I went to Baldocke where I had a
great meetinge of many 100=ds= of people FOX-1674-E3-P2,119.410

& came by Waltom FOX-1674-E3-P2,119.411

& established a schoole for teachinge of children there .
FOX-1674-E3-P2,119.412

And ordered ye womens schoole to bee sett uppe to Instruct younge lasses
: & maydens in whatsever {COM:sic} thinges was civill & usefull
{COM:"&_usefull"_interlineated} in ye creation . FOX-1674-E3-P2,119.413

