<BEGIN_fryer-1677-e3-p2>

<P_1,205>

About this time the <font> Rajah <$$font> , according to the <font>
Hindu <$$font> Custom , was weighed in Gold , and poised about 16000
Pagods , which Money , together with an_100000 more is to be distributed
among the <font> Brachmines <$$font> after the day <P_1,206> he is
enthroned , who in great numbers flock hither from all parts of his
Territories . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,206.3

Being earnest to press on his Errand he came for , the Ambassador sent
to <font> Narun Gi Pundit <$$font> to know what was transacted in the
Articles ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,206.4

but was returned for Answer . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,206.5

The <font> Rajah <$$font> stopt his Ears to all Affairs , declaring he
had granted all the Demands , except those two Articles , expressing ,
Our Money shall go current in his Dominions , and his on <font> Bombaim
<$$font> ; and that he shall restore whatever Wrecks may happen on his
Coasts belonging to the <font> English <$$font> , and Inhabitants of
<font> Bombaim <$$font> : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,206.6

The first he accounted unnecessary to be inserted , because he forbids
not the passing of any manner of Coins ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,206.7

nor on the other side , can he force his Subjects to take those Monies
whereby they shall be Losers ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,206.8

but if our Coin be as fine an Allay , and as weighty as the <font>
Mogul's <$$font> , and other Princes , he will not prohibit it .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,206.9

To the other he says , that it is against the Laws of <font> Conchon
<$$font> to restore any Ships , Vessels , or Goods , that are driven
ashore by <P_1,207> Tempest , or otherwise ; and that should he grant us
that Privilege , the <font> French <$$font> , <font> Dutch <$$font> ,
and other Merchants , would claim the same Right ; which he could not
grant without breaking a Custom has lasted many Ages :
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,207.10

The rest of our Desires he willingly conceded , embracing with much
satisfaction our Friendship , promising to himself and Country much
Happiness by our Settlement and Trade : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,207.11

Notwithstanding <font> Narun Gi Pundit <$$font> did not altogether
despair of obtaining our Wrecks , because we enjoyed the same Privilege
in the <font> Mogul <$$font> , and <font> Duccan <$$font> Country .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,207.12

Near a Month after they had been here , <font> Narun Gi Pundit <$$font>
sent word , That to_Morrow about Seven or Eight in the Morning , the
<font> Rajah Seva Gi <$$font> intended to ascend his Throne ; and he
would take it kindly if they came to congratulate him thereon ; that it
was necessary to present him with some small thing , it not being the
Custom of the <font> Eastern <$$font> Parts to appear before a Prince
empty-handed . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,207.13

The Ambassador sent him word , according to his Advice he would wait on
the <font> Rajah <$$font> at the prescribed time .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,207.14

Accordingly next Morning he and his Retinue went to Court ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,207.15

and found the <font> Rajah <$$font> seated on a Magnificent Throne , and
all his Nobles waiting on him in Rich Attire ; his Son <font> Samba Gi
Rajah <$$font> , <font> Peshuah Mora Pundit <$$font> , and a <font>
Brachmin <$$font> of Great Eminence , seated on an Ascent under the
Throne ; the rest , as well Officers of the Army as others , standing
with great Respect . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,207.16

The <font> English <$$font> made their Obeisance at a distance ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,207.17

and <font> Narun Sinai <$$font> held up the Diamond Ring that was to be
presented him : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,207.18

He presently took notice of it , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,207.19

and ordered their coming nearer , even to the Foot of the Throne , where
being Vested , they were desired to retire ; which they did not so soon
, FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,207.20

but they took notice on each side of the Throne there hung <paren>
according to the <font> Moors <$$font> manner <$$paren> on heads
<P_1,208> of Gilded Launces many Emblems of Dominion and Government ; as
on the Right-hand were two great Fishes Heads of Gold , with very large
Teeth ; on the Left , several Horses Tails , a Pair of Gold Scales on a
very high Launce's head , equally poized , an Emblem of Justice ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,208.21

and as they returned , at the Palace Gate stood two small Elephants on
each side , and two fair Horses with Gold Trappings , Bridles , and Rich
Furniture ; which made them admire how they brought them up the Hill ,
the Passage being both difficult and hazardous .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,208.22

Two days after this , the <font> Rajah <$$font> was married to a Fourth
Wife , without State ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,208.23

and doth every day bestow Alms on the <font> Brachmins <$$font> .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,208.24

Some days after , <font> Narun Gi Pundit <$$font> sent word the <font>
Rajah <$$font> had signed their Articles , all but that about Money .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,208.25

Then the rest of the Ministers of State signed them ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,208.26

and they went to receive them of <font> Narun Gi Pundit <$$font> ,
<P_1,209> who delivered them to the Ambassador with Expressions of great
Kindness for our Nation , and offered on all occasions to be serviceable
to the <font> English <$$font> at the Court of the <font> Rajah <$$font>
. FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,209.27

I will only add one Passage during the Stay of our Ambassador at <font>
Rairee <$$font> : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,209.28

The Diet of this sort of People admits not of great Variety or Cost ,
their delightfullest Food being only <font> Cutchery <$$font> , a sort
of Pulse and Rice mixed together , and boiled in Butter , with which
they grow Fat : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,209.29

but such Victuals could not be long pleasing to our Merchants , who had
been used to Feed on good Flesh : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,209.30

It was therefore signified to the <font> Rajah <$$font> , That Meat
should be provided for them ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,209.31

and to that end a Butcher that served those few <font> Moors <$$font>
that were there , that were able to go to the Charge of Meat , was
ordered to supply them with what Goat they should expend <paren> nothing
else here being to be gotten for them <$$paren> , which he did
accordingly , to the consumption of half a Goat a Day , which he found
very profitable for him , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,209.32

and thereupon was taken with a Curiosity to visit his new Customers ; to
whom , when he came , it was told them , The honest Butcher had made an
Adventure up the Hill , though very old , to have the sight of his good
Masters , who had taken off of his hands more Flesh in that time they
had been there than he had sold in some Years before ; so rare a thing
is it to eat Flesh among them ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,209.33

for the <font> Gentiles <$$font> eat none , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,209.34

and the <font> Moors <$$font> and <font> Portugals <$$font> eat it well
stew'd , bak'd , or made into Pottage ; no Nation eating it roasted so
commonly as we do : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,209.35

And in this point I doubt we <P_1,210> err in these Hot Countries ,
where our Spirits being always upon the Flight , are not so intent on
the business of Concoction ; so that those things that are easiest
digested , and that create the least trouble to the Stomach , we find by
Experience to agree best here . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,210.36

<heading>

CHAP. V . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,210.38

<font> Our Passage to <$$font> Swally , <font> and Relation of the
<$$font> English <font> Presidency at <$$font> Surat .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,210.39

<$$heading>

After the Rains were over , and the <font> North-East <$$font> Wind had
brought in the Cool Season , by Command from the President I was sent to
<font> Surat <$$font> . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,210.41

In a Week's time we turned it up , sailing by <font> Bac~ein <$$font> ,
<font> Tarapore <$$font> , <font> Valentine's-Peak <$$font> , St.
<font> John's <$$font> , and <font> Daman <$$font> , the last City
Northward on the Continent , belonging to the <font> Portugueze <$$font>
. As also passing by <font> Balsore <$$font> <paren> the first Town of
the <font> Moors <$$font> Southward of <font> Surat <$$font> <$$paren>
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,210.42

and eight Ships riding at <font> Surat <$$font> River's Mouth ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,210.43

we then came to <font> Swally Marine <$$font> , where were flying the
several Colours of the Three Nations , <font> English <$$font> , <font>
French <$$font> , and <font> Dutch <$$font> , on Flag-Staffs <P_1,211>
erected for that purpose , who here land and ship off all Goods ,
without molestation . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,211.44

Here we were welcomed by the Deputy-President , Mr. <font> Matthew Grey
<$$font> , an Eminent Merchant , and by the rest of the Council , who
took care for my Entertainment , which here was but rude , the place
admitting of little better Tenements than Booths , stiled by the name of
<font> Choultries <$$font> : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,211.45

Before President <font> Andrew's <$$font> time they always lodged in
Tents ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,211.46

but since , Wooden Houses tiled with Pan-Tiles have been raised in an
Inclosure allotted by the Governor . In which Compound are included
Warehouses , Stables , and other Out-houses , with as good a Garden as
this Sandy Soil will allow ; in which ours exceeds the other two , being
far pleasanter seated . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,211.47

To this place belong two sorts of Vermin , the Fleas and <font> Banyans
<$$font> ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,211.48

the one harbouring in the Sand , fasten upon you as you pass ; where 't@
@is some Pastime to see what Shift the <font> Banyan <$$font> makes ,
being bit by them , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,211.49

he dare not kill them , for fear of unhousing a Soul , according to
their Notion of Transmigration ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,211.50

but giving them a severe Pinch will put them to shift for themselves in
a Nest of Cotton-Wool . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,211.51

The other Vermin are the <font> Banyans <$$font> <P_1,212> themselves ,
that hang like Horse-leeches , till they have suck'd both <font>
Sanguinem & Succum <$$font> <paren> I mean Mony <$$paren> from you :
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,212.52

As soon as you have set your Foot on Shore , they crowd in their Service
, interposing between you and all Civil Respect , as if you had no other
Business but to be gull'd ; so that unless you have some to make your
way through them , they will interrupt your going , and never leave till
they have drawn out something for their Advantage .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,212.53

At this time of Shipping they Present the Governor of <font> Surat
<$$font> , to license them to keep a Mart here , which they make the
<font> Europeans <$$font> pay dearly for : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,212.54

Yet such is their Policy , that without these , neither you nor the
Natives themselves shall do any Business , though they are worse Brokers
than <font> Jews <$$font> ; if they be not the Spawn of them , the
<font> Rechabites <$$font> , that would drink no Wine .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,212.55

These generally are the Poorer sort , and set on by the Richer to Trade
with the Seamen for the meanest things they bring ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,212.56

and notwithstanding they take them at their own rates , get well enough
in exchange of Goods with them . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,212.57

They are the absolute Map of Sordidness , fareing hardly , and
professing fairly , to entrap the unwary ; enduring servily foul Words ,
Affronts and Injuries , for a future hope of Gain ; expert in all the
studied arts of Thriving and Insinuation ; so that , Lying , Dissembling
, Cheating , are their Masterpiece : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,212.58

Their whole desire is to have Money pass through their Fingers , to
which a great part is sure to stick : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,212.59

For they well understand the constant turning of Cash amounts both to
the Credit and Profit of him that is so occupied ; which these <font>
Banyans <$$font> are sensible of , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,212.60

otherwise they would not be so industrious to enslave themselves .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,212.61

Having viewed the Tombs by the Sea-side , and some more conspicuous at
the end of the Plain belonging to the <font> English <$$font> ; others
seated behind the <font> Dutch Choultry <$$font> , <P_1,213> partly
<font> English <$$font> , partly <font> Dutch <$$font> : Marks set to
avoid , as well the <font> Sylla <$$font> and <font> Charibdis <$$font>
of <font> Damkin <$$font> and <font> Mora <$$font> , two Nurseries for
Stews , as to warn them of the Sands coming into the Hole where the
Ships ride at Anchor very securely : We in the Company's Coaches
Travelled to <font> Surat <$$font> , Ten Mile , brave Champion ground ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,213.62

but the Coach wherein I was , breaking , we were forced to mount the
<font> Indian Hackery <$$font> , a Two-wheeled Chariot , drawn by swift
little Oxen . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,213.63

By Sun-set we entred the Company's Barge , waiting to carry us over the
River ; where saluted us the dreadful Noise of the <font> Moors <$$font>
Drums and Trumpets , it being customary for them to sound at the Castle
every Three hours ; but chiefly at Sun-rise and Sun-set :
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,213.64

I could think of nothing but the last Trump ; so that I could persuade
my self there was little Musick in it ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,213.65

but they say Time will bring it to be agreeable to the Ears .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,213.66

On the other side the River , other Four_wheeled Coaches expected us ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,213.67

and the <font> Moors <$$font> let us pass the Custom-house without
Examination , having Women among us ; which was no ordinary point of
Civility , they otherwise being strict Examiners , unless the President
cross the River , when they forbear also . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,213.68

The Coach where the Women were , was covered with <P_1,214> <font>
Cheeks <$$font> , a sort of hanging Curtain , made with Bents variously
Coloured with Lacker , and Chequered with Packthred so artificially ,
that you may see all without , and your self within unperceived :
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,214.69

Ours was open , and guarded by such a Troop as went to apprehend our
Saviour , dressed after the same manner we find them on old Landskips ,
and led by the same Phanatick Lights we see there Painted .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,214.70

Our Reception at the <font> English <$$font> House was Courteous and
Welcome , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,214.71

for the Heat of the Day had tired us . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,214.72

The House the <font> English <$$font> live in at <font> Surat <$$font> ,
is partly the King's Gift , partly hired ; Built of Stone and excellent
Timber , with good Carving , without Representations ; very strong , for
that each Floor is Half a Yard thick at least , of the best plastered
Cement , which is very weighty . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,214.73

It is contrived after the <font> Moor's <$$font> Buildings , with upper
and lower Galleries , or Terras-walks ; a neat Oratory , a convenient
open Place for Meals . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,214.74

The President has spacious Lodgings , noble Rooms for Counsel and
Entertainment , pleasant Tanks , Yards , and an Hummum to Wash in ; but
no Gardens in the City , or very few , though without they have many ,
like Wildernesses , overspread with Trees . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,214.75

The <font> English <$$font> had a neat one , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,214.76

but <font> Seva Gi's <$$font> coming , <P_1,215> destroyed it :
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,215.77

It is known , as the other Factories are , by their several Flags flying
. FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,215.78

Here they live <paren> in Shipping-time <$$paren> in a continual
hurlyburly , the <font> Banyans <$$font> presenting themselves from the
hour of Ten till Noon ; and then Afternoon at Four till Night , as if it
were an Exchange in every Row ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,215.79

below stairs , the Packers and Warehouse-keepers , together with
Merchants bringing and receiving Musters , make a meer <font>
Billinsgate <$$font> ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,215.80

for if you make not a Noise , they hardly think you intent on what you
are doing . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,215.81

Among the <font> English <$$font> , the Business is distributed into
four Offices ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,215.82

the Accomptant , who is next in Dignity to the President , the general
Accompts of all <font> India <$$font> , as well as this place , passing
through his hands ; he is <font> Quasi <$$font> Treasurer , signing all
things , though the Broker keep the Cash . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,215.83

Next him is the Warehouse-keeper , who registers all <font> Europe
<$$font> Goods Vended , and receives all <font> Eastern <$$font>
Commodities Bought ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,215.84

under him is the Purser Marine , who gives Account of all Goods Exported
and Imported , pays Seamen their Wages , provides Waggons and Porters ,
looks <P_1,216> after Tackling for Ships , and Ships Stores .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,216.85

Last of all is the Secretary , who models all Consultations , writes all
Letters , carries them to the President and Council to be perused and
signed ; keeps the Company's Seal , which is affixed to all Passes and
Commissions ; records all Transactions , and sends Copies of them to the
Company ; though none of these , without the President's Approbation ,
can act or do any thing . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,216.86

The Affairs of <font> India <$$font> are solely under his Regulation ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,216.87

from him issue out all Orders , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,216.88

by him all Preferment is disposed ; by which means the Council are
biassed by his Arbitrament . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,216.89

The whole Mass of the Company's Servants may be comprehended in these
Classes , <font> viz. <$$font> Merchants , Factors , and Writers ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,216.90

some Blewcoat Boys also have been entertained under Notion of
Apprentices for Seven Years , which being expired , if they can get
Security , they are capable of Employments . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,216.91

The Writers are obliged to serve Five Years for 10 <font> l. per_Ann.
<$$font> giving in Bond of 500 <font> l. <$$font> for good Behaviour ,
all which time they serve under some of the forementioned Offices :
After which they commence Factors , and rise to Preferment and Trust ,
according to Seniority or Favour , and therefore have a_1000 <font> l.
<$$font> Bond exacted from them , and have their Salary augmented to 20
<font> l. per Ann. <$$font> for Three Years ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,216.92

then entring into new Indentures , are made Senior Factors ; and lastly
, Merchants after Three Years more ; out of whom are chose Chiefs of
Factories , as Places fall , and are allowed 40 <font> l. per_Ann.
<$$font> during their stay in the Company's service , besides Lodgings
and Victuals at the Company's Charges . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,216.93

These in their several Seigniories behave themselves after the
Fundamentals of <font> Surat <$$font> , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,216.94

and in their respective Factories live in the like Grandeur ; from
whence they rise successively to be of the Council in <font> Surat
<$$font> , which is the great Council ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,216.95

and if the President do not contradict , <P_1,217> are Sworn ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,217.96

and take their place accordingly , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,217.97

which consists of about Five in Number , besides the President , to be
constantly Resident . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,217.98

As for the Presidency , though the Company seldom interpose a deserving
Man , yet they keep that Power to themselves , none assuming that
Dignity till confirmed by them : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,217.99

His Salary from the Company is 500 <font> l. <$$font> a Year ; half
paid here , the other half reserved to be received at home , in case of
misdemeanour , to make satisfaction ; beside a Bond of 5000 <font> l.
Sterling <$$font> of good Securities . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,217.100

The Accountant has 72 <font> l. per_Annum <$$font> , Fifty Pound paid
here , the other at home : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,217.101

All the rest are half paid here , half paid at home , except the Writers
, who have all paid here . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,217.102

Out of the Council are elected the Deputy-Governor of <font> Bombaim
<$$font> , and Agent of <font> Persia <$$font> ; the first a Place of
great Trust , the other of Profit ; though , by the appointment from the
Company , the second of <font> India <$$font> claims <font> Bombaim
<$$font> , and the Secretary of <font> Surat <$$font> the Agency of
<font> Persia <$$font> , which is connived at , and made subject to the
Will of the President , by the Interest of those whose Lot they are ;
chusing rather to reside here , where Consignments compensate those
Emoluments ; so that none of the Council , if noted in <font> England
<$$font> , but makes considerably by his Place , after the rate of Five
in the Hundred , Commission ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,217.103

and this is the <font> Jacob's <$$font> Ladder , by which they ascend .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,1,217.104

<P_2,200>

From <font> Bonaru <$$font> to <font> Mousar <$$font> , another
Eight-square <font> Caravan <$$font> , are Fifteen Miles , fine , plain
, and easy way ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,200.106

near the <font> Caravan_Ser_Raw <$$font> was a pleasant Garden , the
utmost extent of the <font> Caun <$$font> of <font> Lhor@ @'s <$$font>
Dominions on this Road . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,200.107

And as a Boundary thereto , is opposed the steepest Hill we have yet met
with , insomuch that we found it a notable Task to gain the Top by the
Morning of the following Day , contenting our selves to sit down at
<font> Chawtalk <$$font> , but Nine Miles from <font> Bonaru <$$font> ,
being advised of a more troublesome Day's Journy the <font> Munsel
<$$font> after this ; not so difficult for Access as this , but a more
continued Labour by the multitude of Mountains we were to Master ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,200.108

<P_2,201>

and on that account it was highly necessary to Feed our <font> Caphala's
<$$font> well before we undertake so great a Work .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,201.110

<font> Chawtalk <$$font> , <paren> by the most valuable Munificence of
the Benefactor , yet living to Oversee this good Deed compleated
<$$paren> is a noble new <font> Caravan <$$font> , an Ample and Princely
Building : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,201.111

Near to it was , not long since , only a Well of Bitter Water , which
gives Name to the Place ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,201.112

but by Cost and Inquest of this Pious Benefactor , Sweeter Waters are at
this time produced , something more remote , for Men to Drink , though
the Cattel refuse not generally the other . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,201.113

On these Mountains the <font> Mastich <$$font> Tree brings forth plenty
of that Gum , of which the Country People make good Profit :
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,201.114

Nor does less Benefit accrue by the Mellifluous Dew a-Nights turn'd into
Manna , from the Leafs and Shrubs , as well as Plants , upon the sides
of these Mountains , which are not altogether so Barren as those we have
hitherto passed ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,201.115

this Manna is White and Granulated , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,201.116

and , what I have found my self , I think not inferior to the <font>
Calabrian <$$font> . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,201.117

As for the Mastick Trees , they bore Red Berries ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,201.118

and if wounded would spew out the liquid Resin from the Branches ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,201.119

they are not very tall , of the bigness of our Bully Trees :
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,201.120

Whether they bring forth a Cod or not , this <P_2,202> Season would not
inform me , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,202.121

nor can I say it agrees in all respects with the Lentisk Tree of <font>
Clusius <$$font> . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,202.122

Here also grows the Wild or Bitter Almond , the Wands or Sticks of which
are in Esteem , for that Tradition of their being of the same Tree with
those of <font> Aaron's <$$font> Rod which budding brought forth Almonds
, and for that reason are worn by those of the highest Rank among them :
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,202.123

More of this anon . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,202.124

And now the time approaches we must pass over in one Day as many
Mountains as we have hitherto been conquering , some of whose Clifts
could never be gained , had they not been joined together by vast Arches
from Rock to Rock , their dismal Pits otherwise being rendred impassable
: FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,202.125

Thus by inexpressible Endeavours we strive to clear this formidable
Chain of Hills , all in the Heat of the Sun <paren> not daring to trust
our selves in the Night <$$paren> , whereby we had our Skins flead off
of those Parts exposed to the Solar Rays ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,202.126

and those that fared best had Bladders raised , as if scalded or burnt
by the Fire ; for which , when we had travell'd One_and_twenty Miles ,
we found at <font> Gerom <$$font> a ready Medicine of the Butter of the
Seed of Gourds made into an Ointment , which appeased the Inflammation
by its cooling Virtue , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,202.127

and immediately asswaged the Pain by Basting our selves herewith , being
half Roasted . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,202.128

We refreshed our selves one entire Day at <font> Gerom <$$font> , where
a small White Grape , without any Stone , was an excellent Cordial ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,202.129

the Wine pressed from it is white also , and the strongest by Natural
Fermentation only , that I ever drank ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,202.130

they are called <font> Kismas <$$font> Grapes ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,202.131

and the <P_2,203> Wine is known by the same Name farther than where they
grow , it being of so stout a Body that it is not subject to decay
presently ; though their best Wines when they begin to turn , are fit
for nothing but Vinegar , they being inexpert either in their Cure , or
to preserve them ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,203.132

that which we drink is pure , without any Sophistication .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,203.133

There grow no where better Dates than at this Town ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,203.134

and packed up dry are preferred before others all the World over .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,203.135

The People that dwell here are for the most part blind ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,203.136

for of Three you meet , Two shall not see , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,203.137

and it may be a Third shall have but half an Eye . The Occasion whereof
, as they report , is , because little pretty_@ @coloured Mice and
Weasels by their poysonous Stale infect the Trees so , that they produce
Worms , the Parent of this Distemper ; more truly fancying than proving
this Secret , for want of that Microscope whereby <font> Kepler <$$font>
assisted this enquiring Age to discover , That no kind of Plant
whatsoever but procreates of its superfluous juice some putrid Humour ,
which by active Nature is enliven'd into Vital Motion , forming to every
one their proper Insects . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,203.138

Whether any Virulency may be ascribed to these , or the immoderate
eating of Dates ought to be accused of their excessive Heat , as we do
Wormwood , which for that reason we account offensive to the Eyes , I
know not ; following herein the Prince of Physicians , <font> Calidis
enim qui saepe multumque utuntur , nervorum infirmitatem adferunt ,
<P_2,204> in Aph. <$$font> 16. <font> Hyp. lib. <$$font> 5. who
says , They who accustom themselves to eat Hot things , bring on
themselves the Weakness of the Nerves , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,204.139

and consequently decay their Eyesight , the Optick Nerves being signally
affected , through which Organs , Spirits ought to be conveyed
principally for the service of the Eyes . To which Evil no doubt
Sympathy makes a great Addition , whether in the Individual , or in
respect of others : Wherein the Poet Philosophized , when he sang ,
<font> Cum spectant oculi laesos laeduntur & ipsi . <$$font>
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,204.140

But above all , the Sands , which have here the same effect as elsewhere
. FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,204.141

This is a Free Town , enfranchis'd with Liberties peculiar to its self ,
being independent on any other Governor but its own ; though he be but a
<font> Calenture <$$font> or Bayliff , giving Laws , and ruling by his
own Power , being accountable to none but the Emperor :
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,204.142

His Jurisdiction spreads a great way , for that he is not inferior in
Wealth to many <font> Cauns <$$font> , only somewhat less in Dignity .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,204.143

Mr. <font> Herbert <$$font> in his <font> Itinerary <$$font> relates
<font> Gerom <$$font> to have its denomination from certain <font> Jews
<$$font> who took up their Abode here , and gave it this Name in honour
of their <font> Kirjoth-Jerom <$$font> : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,204.144

But whether more of that Nation dwell here than in other great Towns , I
am not thoroughly advertised , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,204.145

and therefore forbear determining . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,204.146

A Mile from the Town had been a Coloss , now half ruined by Age ,
bearing still some Marks of its pristine Majesty , it being more than
Sixty Foot high , and Thirty in Circumference , raised in Memory of some
departed Saint ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,204.147

it overlooks a great many more humble Tombs , not liable therefore to
such Dilapidation . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,204.148

<P_2,205>

Leaving these , we pass through plough'd Fields , sowed with Wheat and
almost mowed , it being Harvest time . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,205.150

In this Plain abundance of Liquorice grows wild ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,205.151

and by the Brooks sides are planted Country Mansions , with store of
Sallows and Willows . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,205.152

At Midnight we came to <font> Mocock Sugta <$$font> <paren> <font> i.e.
<$$font> a dry Clove <$$paren> Twenty_two Miles , having forded several
Plashes where flourished lascivious Shrubs , more like <font>
Southernwood <$$font> than <font> Osiers <$$font> , till we were
inclosed in in the Mountains . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,205.153

The <font> Rhadars <$$font> here had apprehended a sturdy Thief , who
had set upon a poor Merchant , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,205.154

and drove away his Ass loaded with <font> Indian <$$font> Cloth :
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,205.155

These sort of Vermin are rare , either for the exemplary Punishment
inflicted , which is Immuring , when detected , or for the former
mentioned Satisfaction to be made by the <font> Shawbunder <$$font> ,
who employs these <font> Rhadarees <$$font> , restoring to every one
their proper Goods , or else giving them the full Value .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,205.156

I shall not deviate much to give a credible Instance from our Agent ,
who upon the Road by the Remissness of the <font> Shotters <$$font> had
his Gold Bridle and other Furniture stole out of a <font>
Caravan_Ser_Raw <$$font> , after they had come tired in .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,205.157

As soon as they were missing , upon notice given to the Captain of the
<font> Rhadars <$$font> , a strict Search being made presently , it was
not long e're the Criminal was detected , and taken with his Prize , the
latter restored , and the other left to the Mercy of the Agent , who
might have cut him to pieces without any other Formality of Process ,
had he not <P_2,206> delivered him over to be chastised by his Accusers
, who were not wanting to inflict what Punishment his Fact deserved ,
the next <font> Caun <$$font> adjudging him the Severity of the Law .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,206.158

Here again over the Portal of the Inn , were advanced the Crests to the
<font> Persian <$$font> Arms , I mean huge Rams-heads , Horns and all ,
which declare what would seem monstrous to relate , they surpassing in
Bulk as well as Courage all those of other Nations ; not for their Heads
alone , but their Tails , which sometimes prove such Incumbrances , that
unless small Carts were ordained for their Carriage <paren> especially
the tame ones <$$paren> , they would trail upon the Ground , and wound
themselves against every sharp Stone and rough Piece of Ground :
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,206.159

But these exalted are the Offspring of the Mountains , sheltring
themselves among the Rocks and untrodden Paths of the Hills . Where ,
and in our Passage , grew the Mountain- <font> Poly <$$font> , which
struck our Scent , till we descended a Fruitful Valley , abounding with
Springs of Water , which gave Increase to many Furlongs loaded with Rice
or <font> Paddy <$$font> , being courser than the <font> Indian <$$font>
; from whence not only <font> Persia <$$font> , but all the World
besides , must fetch the best and finest Rice .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,206.160

This Valley led us to <font> Caifer <$$font> , some Five <font>
Pharsangs <$$font> , a Village blest with all Fruits <font> Persia
<$$font> glories in , but above all , the choicest Oranges ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,206.161

but this unseasonable Year , with the <P_2,207> help of the Locusts ,
had blasted them all . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,207.162

This Town , as it terminates the Bounds of <font> Gerom <$$font> , so it
puts an end to the genuine Growth of the Palm-Tree , it being barren
beyond this Place , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,207.163

and therefore only set in Great Mens Gardens for Shew , it delighting
rather in Hot and Dry Ground , such as Sands , and such as come nighest
in Nature to them : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,207.164

Moreover , the Climate beyond this Place admits of too cold a Winter for
their Nourishment , which I impute to be the chiefest Cause .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,207.165

This Town is planted in the Bosom of two Rows of Hills , reaching <font>
Siras <$$font> , which delivers us to a delightful Plain , adorned with
Cypress-Trees on each hand , and plenteously stored with Villages and
Running Water on every side . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,207.166

And now it was pleasant to behold the Harvest-men labouring with their
Sythes , the Wheat blading low ; the Ruther Beasts with distended Bags
grazing in the Meadows , the Sheep with their broad Tails gathered into
Folds , and the wary Shepherd on his Guard to defend them , as well as
to dress them when infected with any Maladies ;
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,207.167

the Groves look'd Green , as in the midst of Summer's Pride , whose
Bowers the Winged Choristers made chearful with their unconfined Notes ,
their Mirth as free as their Melody untaught , being actuated by no
other Rule than Instinct . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,207.168

These gave us hopes of future Moderation ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,207.169

nor were they flattering ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,207.170

for we had not traced Ten Miles of this pleasant Way , when we came to
<font> Firaw <$$font> , <paren> <font> The Foot of the Way <$$font> ,
<$$paren> where <font> Aga Tocke <$$font> had placed a <font>
Caravan_Ser_Raw <$$font> ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,207.171

but here we were forced to gather those Garments close <P_2,208> about
us , the wearing of which we hitherto rather thought an useless Decency
, than a real Requisite . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,208.172

From hence to <font> Mussaferry <$$font> we toiled through rugged and
uneasy Ways to a very splendid <font> Caravan_Ser_Raw <$$font> , some
Fourteen Miles more , where we took our Rest :
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,208.173

And thence along a sweet Campaign , watred by a delicate Rivulet on the
Left , at the Bottom of the declining Hills , bestowing its Blessing on
the adjacent Villages and Country Towns . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,208.174

We continued journying all this Night ; wherefore the Sun had gilded the
Firmament with his Vermilion Red , before we took up at <font> Bobba
Hodge <$$font> , Thirty Miles compleat from our last Stage . Where
intending to have been quiet , we were interrupted more than ever
{we_were_interrupted} by impertinent Gnats and Flies , by reason of the
Concourse of Waters nourishing abundance of Rushes and Fenny Plants ,
which harboured these and gave them Refuge in the Day ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,208.175

but at Night they broke out of their Lurking-Places ,
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,208.176

and beset us with that Rage and Force , that no Resistance or Fence can
be made against them ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,208.177

for , say they hyperbolically , They will bite through Armour ; the best
<font> Persian <$$font> Boots <paren> which are low-heel'd and good
Cordavan Leather <$$paren> being not Proof against their Assaults .
Wherefore the Eve to the same Day , to avoid these invincible Assailants
, the disturbers of our Repose , we held on our Pace through
Pasture-Grounds , such as our Commons , where they are down-fed , that
little more than <P_2,209> Green-Sod appears , in which were wanton
Foles and unback'd Colts , with Mares for Breed , and unbridled
Stallions , sporting on the spacious Downs , which brought us onwards to
<font> Siras <$$font> Twelve Miles more , <font> viz. <$$font> to the
<font> Beggars-Garden <$$font> <paren> but one <font> Pharsang <$$font>
short of the City <$$paren> called <font> Udgewally <$$font> .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,209.178

Here we had scarcely alighted , but the <font> French <$$font> Agent
having notice of our coming , beat up our Quarters , and broke us of our
Sleep . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,209.179

By Break of Day the <font> Armenian <$$font> Christians , which are
numerous , came to congratulate our Arrival , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,209.180

and brought Banquets of Wine , Fruit , and a Cold Treat , with Led
Horses of State , and loud Musick , to make our Entry the more Pompous .
In order whereunto , about Eleven in the Morning , conducted with much
Ceremony , we approached <font> Siras <$$font> , where we found
Spectators answerable to the Novelty of our Appearance , and the
Greatness of our Train , with which we were passing through this City
nigh Two Hours , before we were enclos'd within the Walls of the <font>
English <$$font> House , which is a Noble one , in the middle of a
stately Garden . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,209.181

Hither came the Fathers of all Orders to bid us Welcome , that were
resident in the several Convents allowed them in this City ; all which ,
and other Christian Attendants , were not dismiss'd till after a
Splendid Dinner provided by our Interpreter , who makes some Thousands a
Year by the License of our Winepress , the Profit whereof is wholly his
. FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,209.182

The Wines of the Growth of this Country are esteemed the most
Stomachical and Generous in all <font> Persia <$$font> , and fittest for
common drinking , when allayed a little with Water , otherwise too heady
for the Brain , and heavy for <P_2,210> the Stomach , their Passage
being retarded for want of that proper Vehicle :
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,210.183

It is incredible to see what Quantities they drink at a Merry-meeting ,
and how unconcerned the next day they appear , and brisk about their
Business , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,210.184

and will quaff you thus a whole Week together . In which Exercise when
they engage , they observe this Maxim , Always to lay in Ballast , they
eating heartily ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,210.185

and all the time that Healths are passing about , they have Cucumbers ,
Melons , and other Fruits before them , which must be acknowledged to
receive the most perfect Ripeness , and therefore are more innocent here
than any where else . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,210.186

Tobacco is a general Companion ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,210.187

and to give them their due , they are Conversable Good-Fellows , sparing
no one his Bowl in their turn ; FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,210.188

and to be sure none shall escape a Nosegay , Orange , or some such Mark
as passes with every Health ; so that sometimes when they mind Discourse
more than the Business in hand , a whole Nest of Posies wait on one Man
, who must clear himself , or disgust those whose Healths remain
unpledg'd . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,210.189

Having discharg'd the Fatigue of this Day , it remained incumbent on our
parts to return these Civilities , which was to renew the Trouble again
, each striving to outvye others in their Entertainments :
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,210.190

In these Courteous Visits we spent a Week , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,210.191

nor was that sufficient , FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,210.192

but we being late in the Year for this Journey to <font> Spahaun
<$$font> , our Interpreter excused our Neglect .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,210.193

<P_2,211>

<heading>

CHAP. IV . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,211.196

<font> Of <$$font> Siras , <font> and the Ancient City <$$font>
Persepolis , <font> and our Journying quite through <$$font> Persia .
FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,211.197

<$$heading>

In our Stay here we had Opportunity to observe <font> Siras <$$font> ,
not only by Fame , but indeed to be , second to none , except the Royal
City , in the whole Empire : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,211.199

And in this Country , the Country which is properly <font> Persia
<$$font> <paren> extended from the Gulph to <font> Esduchos <$$font> ,
which parts <font> Parthia <$$font> from it by a great Ditch made for a
Boundary on that Side to this Ancient Kingdom <$$paren> it is the
principal Metropolis . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,211.200

It is delivered as a Tradition , That it arose from the Ruins of <font>
Persepolis <$$font> : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,211.201

Others will have it as old as <font> Cyrus , <$$font> who contend for
him to be the Founder , for that the nearness of the Name intimates as
much : FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,211.202

But that he should raise it as a Monument , seems not so probable , who
would not permit it at his Death , as {it_seems_probable} that these
People , devoted to his Memory , might on the Miscarriage of <font>
Persepolis <$$font> , raise this in Honour of him , whose Remembrance
might at once revive the Glory of the then fallen Monarchy , and bury
the hated Name of the new Conqueror in Oblivion , who had sullied all
his Lawrels by hearkning to the unlimited Revenge of a Prostitute , to
lay the most flourishing <font> Persepolis <$$font> in Ashes , from
whence , <font> Phoenix_like {COM:font_change_only_around_"Phoenix"}
<$$font> , this is supposed to spring . FRYER-1677-E3-P2,2,211.203

