<BEGIN_gawdy-1588-e2-p2>

<P_45>

<heading:edcomment:TO_HIS_FATHER>

Sir , I am vncerteyne of your being at Harling GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,45.4

neverthelesse I have adventured to directe my lettres to yow , In whose
absence I wishe my good Brother might have the pervsing of them .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,45.5

And as neare as I can I will acquaint yow with such newes as hathe
happened and such business as hath passed my hands .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,45.6

And first for the discharge which my mother desired to have from the
Coferer and the rest of the officers . I was with them all my self
severally , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,45.7

bothe by intreaty and persuasion I used the best meanes I colde .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,45.8

I was with them all together at the counting howse .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,45.9

They seemed to be wondrous willing to pleasure me so farr as they might
, GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,45.10

But this is certeyne that they neither do , nor will graunt to any of
what sort soever the lyke manner of discharge . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,45.11

And hearinge my mothers name nominated , they sayde it was the only
<P_46> thing that was directed against all the officers .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.12

Yet with as much frendshipp as I mought well request at ther hands ,
they have taken specyall order by name that none shall meddle with any
of your men that dwell at Tolson . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.13

And indeade I thincke you shall not neade muche to feare the purveyors ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.14

for ther is a specyall bill past against them in the parlament house .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.15

And that hathe muche nettled all the officers of the grene clothe .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.16

For your bill of impost I have it ready , more than {COM:?} that he was
not in towne , whose hand is very requisite shold be added to the bill .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.17

The last Sonday being at the court I will describe a salutation that
passed betwixt M=r= Lovell and my self touching yow , and in very truthe
, and as neare as I may in the very same wordes .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.18

I was talking with my L. Wharton , and M=r= Dacres of the Northe .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.19

M=r= Lovell standing a good pretty way from vs , cam
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.20

and whispered in M=r= Dacres eare , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.21

and sodenly and very softly he speake in my eare to this effecte without
any other salutation , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.22

and my self and he hath had no speaches since our last meeting at Walton
. GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.23

But now to the purpose GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.24

this was his speches very abruptly , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.25

Yo=r= father will nowe leave his slaunderous speeches of me ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.26

and presently runn his way without suffering me to reply .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.27

I followed him as fast as I might , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.28

and told him that my father had neither sayde or done any thing , but
that he wold iustefy to be honest , and in his absence I wold iustefy it
to be true to his face wher he wold disprove me .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.29

Well sayth he , he hathe vsed very spiteful and slaunderous speeches
touching my creditt . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.30

Then I desired to know what the effecte of the woordes shold be ;
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.31

he answered that he wold keepe them to him self , and yow shold
heareafter heare of them ; GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.32

then I replyed that I toke it for a lye and him for a lyar in the
reporting of it , and not mayntayning it . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.33

Well cosin saythe he I have nothing to say to yow ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.34

this matter concerneth your father my great enemy .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.35

And he shall answer it els wher , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.36

and yf I be not muche abused by my friends I know it to be very true .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.37

I vrged him farr to have had some knowledge therof ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.38

but he passed it over GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.39

and called me cosin , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.40

and by no meanes I cold make him angry with me . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,46.41

He told me <P_47> that I did the parte of a sonne in the behalf of a
father GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.42

and in conclusion told me that within fewe dayes I shold vnderstand the
whole circumstance therof , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.43

but as yet I have no vnderstanding therof : GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.44

and so I must leave it till I heare further therof ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.45

and then yow shall have notice therof accordingly .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.46

But assure yow S=r= I gather this of his vilde condition , that Malice
was his mother , and envy nursed him , and shame brought him into the
world and never will forsake him till he leave world and all .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.47

I speake not altogether of the spleane , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.48

for the truthe leadeth me to say muche more . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.49

He that hewethe at the Body of the tree intendeth the destructione of
the braunches , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.50

and the lyfe of the one preservethe the creditt of the other .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.51

If I have spent to many wordes about him that is not worthe one good
word , I am to crave pardon for the same , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.52

somtymes a faulte escapes the printer , vsuall with moste writers .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.53

S=r= Frances Drake and his company went as yesterday being Wedensday to
their shippes . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.54

My L. of Worster departed out of this life the laste weeke .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.55

My l. of Worster is deade , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.56

and yet my l. of Worster liveth . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.57

S=r= William Winter hathe taken his leave of all his frendes in this
present world , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.58

and amongst all theise great men an old acquaintance of my brothers and
myne hathe taken the same course , and I hope sayled to heaven ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.59

Tom Carrew , he was an honest man w=ch= makes me remember him amongst
his betters . ... GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.60

Let my affectionate duty be rememberd to yowr good self in all dutyfull
manner , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.61

my humble duty to my good mother {COM:preceding_word_"mother"_emended}
for whom I will not forget to do any service . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.62

Let me be in loving manner remembred to my good Brother and his good
wife . To my oncle Anthony Gavdy , to my loving Sisters , wishing yow
all and my self abundance of the favor of the most mighty .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.63

From London GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.64

this xxvij of ffebruary {COM:1589} . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.65

My returne shall be before the end of the Parlament
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.66

for it is thought it will hold long . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,47.67

<P_48>

<heading:edcomment:TO_HIS_FATHER>

Sir , ... The parlament is lyke to continew very long ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.70

and the end therof is not lyke shortly to fall out .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.71

It is thought it shall be but proroged . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.72

The minister of Kenninghall was with me aboute some truble he is brought
into , by reason of woordes , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.73

he brought me a letter from yow that by my means he might fynde some
favor . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.74

I spake to M=r= Vycechamberlyne for him GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.75

and he had referred him to M=r= Wade . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.76

I talked with M=r= Wade about him , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.77

And he had posted him over to My L. of Canterbury ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.78

and further I have not yet heard of him , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.79

but assure yow , Sir , I will not fayle to do him any pleasure in
respecte of the place he cam last from . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.80

I sent last week a frayle of fygges , reysons and allmons .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.81

I heare my oncle Anthony is at Graves End GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.82

and further I heard not from him , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.83

he attendethe vppon his Mistress a thing vsual amongst all good servants
. GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.84

Myne owne experience hathe taught me , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.85

I have bene a servant and had a Mistress . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.86

And I ever found that the greater {TEXT:"was"_elided} the service , the
greater was the reward . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.87

His desert is great , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.88

his favor shall be answerable therto . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.89

I wish I might have sene him , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.90

and whensoever , I desire to be especially commended to him .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.91

Ther is very freshe newes and very trewe that there was a warrant made
to acuse my L. of Arundell , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.92

and I thinke he is indyted and is lyke to communicate further by degrees
. GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.93

I am sorry his deserts shold now clayme for justice .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.94

I wish he had had better regard of himself . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.95

His oncle and my L. William are restrained of ther liberty .
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,48.96

I mean to come so spedely to yow that I will referr the certeynty of all
other newes to myne own <P_49> reporting . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,49.97

Let my humble dutye be remembred to your good self and my good Mother ,
GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,49.98

my very kind and harty commendacions to my good Brother , and his wife ,
whose love is dearer to me then Thowsands . GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,49.99

Let me be commended to my good systers , etc. GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,49.100

London , GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,49.101

this xiij=th= of March {COM:1589} GAWDY-1588-E2-P2,49.102

