<BEGIN_gifford-1593-e2-p2>

<P_F1V>

<font> M.B. <$$font> I doe not see how any man can indeed iustifie , or
maintaine , that the spirites which appeare vnto them in the Christall ,
or in the glasse , or water , or that any way do speake , and shewe
matters vnto them , be holy Angels , or the soules of excellent men , as
of Moses , Samuel , Dauid , and others , though I haue heard that the
cunning men , take them to be such , and thinke they deale by them
against deuils . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F1V.3

<font> Dan. <$$font> It is no matter what Satans vassals are made to
beleeue by his subtil sleights : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F1V.4

it is most abhominable for any Christian man , euer to let it enter into
his thought , that they doe any thing by the power or wisdome of the
holie Ghost , by any Angel or good spirit , or that they doe any thing
against the deuill , which worke by the intelligence which they haue
from euill spirits : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F1V.5

therfore hold this , that they seeke vnto deuils , which run vnto those
southsayers . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F1V.6

<font> M.B. <$$font> I am perswaded indeed that they seek vnto deuils ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F1V.7

but I would see some reason for it out of Gods word .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F1V.8

<font> Dan. <$$font> Touching all spirituall matters , as to be armed
with power against deuils , and to know how to auoid the daungers which
they bring , we are no where to seeke , and to learne but of our most
blessed Lorde God . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F1V.9

And of <P_F2R> him we can@ @not learn , but by his holy word ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2R.10

for in it he hath opened vnto vs all his whole will .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2R.11

And therefore , where the Lorde commaundeth the people of Israel by
Moses , <font> Deut. 18 <$$font> that they should not when they came
into the land , learn to do according to the abhominations of those
heathen , reckoning vp sundry kinds of such as were Satans instruments
which he vsed to seduce the multitude , by deuinations , by obseruing of
times , by augurie , by iuglings with the helpe of the deuill , by vsing
familiar Spirits , spirits of deuination , and seeking to the dead :
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2R.12

he setteth downe also the remedie , shewing first , that he woulde cast
out those nations because they harkened vnto the southsayers , and
deuiners , pronouncing that euerie one which doth those things , is an
abhomination to the Lorde , willing his people that they should not
harken to such , but that they should hearken vnto him :
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2R.13

And then Moses saith , <font> A Prophet shall the Lord thy God raise vp
vnto thee from among you of thy brethren like vnto me ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2R.14

him shal ye heare . <$$font> GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2R.15

<font> M.B. <$$font> Then you prooue by that place , that we muste
seeke only to God , and not to such as work by meanes besides his words
. GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2R.16

<font> Dan. <$$font> If you read that place , <font> Deut. 18 <$$font>
and mark euery thinge well , you shall see it doeth not onely prooue
that they seeke vnto Deuilles , which runne to these cunning men and
women : because the Prophetes which God hath raysed vp to declare the
Lords will , commaund vs not to doe such things : but also declareth
that they bee an abhomination to the Lorde that vse them , or that seeke
vnto them . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2R.17

<font> M.B. <$$font> I see then it is not onelie a sinne , but a moste
horrible sinne , to seeke vnto them . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2R.18

Alas , many do not think that they seeke vnto deuilles , when they goe
for helpe vnto them for thinges stollen , or for helpe and remedie
against witches . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2R.19

<P_F2V>

<font> Dan. <$$font> No doubt many refuse to hear the voyce of God , to
be instructed by him : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.21

they despise his word , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.22

and therfore they be giuen vp to hearken vnto Deuilles .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.23

Such as haue sought vnto any of these that worke by the deuill , and now
come to see their offence , ought to shew repentaunce for the same , not
as for a light sinne . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.24

It is no small abhomination to goe for helpe vnto the deuill :
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.25

It is to set him in Gods place , and to honour him as God .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.26

It riseth of infidelity and distrust of help from God , as we may see in
the example of king Saule , who finding no answere nor comforte from God
, whom he had so wickedly disobeyed , went to a witch .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.27

The heathen man saide , <font> Flectere si nequeo Superos , Acheronta
mouebo . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.28

If I can@ @not intreat the goddes , I will downe among the deuils .
<$$font> GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.29

<font> M.B. <$$font> Nay , doubtles there can be no defence made for
such seeking help at their hands , which deale with familiar spirits ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.30

but I muse at diuers thinges , as this for one , how the cunning men ,
if they deale by the power of the deuill , should vse such good wordes ,
and will them that come vnto them to doe all in the name of Christ ,
teaching them to vse words and sentences of the scriptures .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.31

<font> Dan. <$$font> O sir , here lieth the deep subtiltie of Satan ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.32

how should the people be seduced to follow him , if he should not vse
great cunning to couer matters , as if deuils were driuen out , and
harmes cured that are done by them , euen through the name and mightie
power of God . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.33

Herein also lyeth a more foule abhomination , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.34

and that is the abusing and horrible prophaning of the most blessed name
of God , and the holie Scriptures vnto witcheries , charmes , and
coniurations , and vnto all deuillish artes . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.35

Such an one is haunted with a fayrie , or a spirit :
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.36

he must learne a charme compounded of some straunge speaches , and the
names of God intermingled , or weare some part of S. Johns Gospeall or
such like . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.37

So against the thiefe , against the deuill sent by the witch , the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} like
{COM:preceding_word_"like"_emended} {COM:sic} is practized .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F2V.38

What can Satan <P_F3R> desire more , than {he_desires} that holie
thinges should be thus abused ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.39

There is adoe to get him into the glasse , to get him into the Chrystall
, to get him into the basen of water : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.40

there is a_doe to binde hym , as it were by the name & power of Christ
to tell this thing or that thing . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.41

The coniurer hee bindeth him with the name of God , and by the vertue of
Christes passion and resurrection , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.42

& so maketh him serue his turne : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.43

And all is his owne worke , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.44

for he is not constrayned , nor bound , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.45

but seeketh thus to haue God blasphemed . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.46

O <paren> sayth the simple man <$$paren> this is a good woman ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.47

shee speaketh of God , and of Christ , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.48

and doth all in his name : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.49

they be good words which she hath taught me to vse :
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.50

and what hurt can there be in vsing good wordes ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.51

Alas poore man , what case are they in which must learne good words of
the deuill ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.52

It is not the speaking of good wordes , or the wearing some part of the
scriptures , that defendeth from deuils , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.53

therein lieth the craft of satan , to haue those holy thinges so foullie
abused , and that men may put trust in wordes and sentences pronounced ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.54

but the deuilles are withstood onlie by the power of faith , where the
holie scriptures are written in the heart , & the soule armed with the
power of them . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.55

From this Satan draweth men by his soothsayers , teaching them other
helpes : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.56

For the naming of God , or the sentences of scripture bindeth not satan
, when we reade he can vtter them . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.57

<font> M.B. <$$font> Then howe can the deuill beare such a pitifull
minde , as to help those that bee in misery ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.58

For many haue helpe by these cunning men . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.59

The deuill is cruell and bent wholly to hurt , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.60

and that is it which perswadeth manie that things are done euen by the
power of God . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.61

<font> Dan. <$$font> The deuils be as pitifull as a greedy hungrie lion
that roareth after his pray , and as a fierce Dragon , all burning with
wrath and bloody malice : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3R.62

they make shew of doing good vnto men , only of a most cruel and
murtherous purpose , euen to draw men deeper into the pit of hell with
<P_F3V> them . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.63

For if they can help the bodie a litle , it is to win both bodie and
soule vnto eternall damnation . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.64

Where satan offereth his help , it is more to be feared , than where he
manifestly impugneth , and seeketh apparantly to hurt .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.65

<font> M.B. <$$font> But this then is more strange , if they doe not
deale by the power of God , but by the power of the deuill , when they
driue out deuils from hurting , howe one deuill should driue out another
. GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.66

Our sauiour saith , that satan doth not driue out satan ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.67

for then his kingdom should bee deuided GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.68

and could not stand . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.69

<font> Dan. <$$font> It is most certaine that satan doth not driue out
satan : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.70

for our sauiour shewed the reason of the contrarie .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.71

One deuill is readie to further the worke of another : but in no wise to
expel or to hinder one another . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.72

<font> M.B. <$$font> There is it which maketh me to muse :
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.73

we see the deuill driuen out , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.74

and doeth not returne againe , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.75

and if it not be wrought by the power of deuilles , as you say , it can@
@not , then must it needs be by the power of God ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.76

<font> Dan. <$$font> The Deuill is driuen out , neither by the power of
the deuill , nor yet by the power of God , in these that are healed by
cunning men . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.77

<font> M.B. <$$font> I like this worst of al the speach which I heard
you vtter yet : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.78

for if satan be not driuen out neither by the power of satan , nor by
the power of God , what other power is there to driue him out ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.79

If you can shewe a third power to expell him , it is more than euer I
heard of . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.80

<font> Dan. <$$font> There needeth not a thirde power to expell him ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.81

for he is not driuen out at all . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.82

<font> M.B. <$$font> I told you before , if you deni that to be , which
all experience doth shewe , then is it no reasoning .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.83

There be examples in many places , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.84

and daylie it is seene , that the deuill is driuen out of some possessed
, that wher he did vexe and torment men in their bodies , and in their
cattle , they haue remedie against him . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F3V.85

<font> Dan. <$$font> I doe not denie but that some which are possessed
<P_F4R> and tormented by Satan , haue release :
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.86

but yet the deuill is not cast foorth by those means ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.87

but ceaseth willingly euen to establish men in errour , and in most
wicked prophaning of the name of God , and worshipping of himselfe ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.88

and so entreth deeper into them . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.89

<font> M.B. <$$font> I beseech you let me heare how that is , that you
say he ceaseth of his own accord . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.90

Will he let goe his hold willingly and of his owne accord , where he
hath it vpon any man ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.91

Doth he not desire to do hurt ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.92

<font> Dan. <$$font> He doeth not let goe his hold which he hath vpon
any man , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.93

but indeed taketh faster holde when hee seemeth to be cast foorth and
doth greater hurt : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.94

for tel me whose deuise is the coniuration ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.95

<font> M.B. <$$font> I am out of doubt that coniuration is the deuice
of the deuill . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.96

<font> Dan. <$$font> Then tell me , hath the deuill deuised and taught
a way to bind himselfe , or to cast forth himselfe ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.97

<font> M.B. <$$font> That I suppose he would neuer doe .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.98

<font> Dan. <$$font> Indeed if we wil imagine that the deuil is becom
an old foole ; GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.99

we may think he wold teach that which should bind and cast foorth
himselfe : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.100

but the scripture calleth him the old serpent :
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.101

he deuised and taught coniuration , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.102

therefore coniuration doth not cast him foorth .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.103

Yet he seemeth to be bound by the co~iurer , yea euen by the name of God
, and by the power of the passion of Christ .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.104

The coniurer seemeth by the same power to driue him out of a man
possessed , whose body he doth vex & torment .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.105

And he ceaseth willingly to torment the bodie , to establish coniuration
, & so to draw men quite from God , euen to worship and to follow
himselfe , and seeke all helpes at his hands .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.106

Euen so when men are tormented in their bodies , or plagued in their
cattell by the deuill , and seeke vnto the cunning men and women ,
following the way that they prescribe vnto them , and haue ease in their
bodies , and no more harme among their cattell , Satan doth not giue
place as forced , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4R.107

but ceaseth to do <P_F4V> those bodilie harmes , that he may fullie win
vnto himselfe both bodie and soule . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4V.108

If they should not seeme to bee expelled , how should men be drawn to
seek help at their handes which deale by him ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4V.109

how should witches and coniurers be drawne on most horriblie to pollute
and blaspheme the glorious name of God ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4V.110

<font> M.B. <$$font> Then I see they buy their help deer which haue it
at the handes of these cunning men . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4V.111

<font> Dan. <$$font> Yea , what can be bought more deare , than that
which is with the losse of soule and bodie for euer , by running from
God after deuils ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4V.112

<font> M.B. <$$font> What shoulde a man thinke then touching all other
which deale not with the deuill , and yet haue certaine waies to finde
out witches , and to vnwitch that which they haue done ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4V.113

<font> Dan. <$$font> Although they deale not directly by the deuill , I
meane they haue no familiar spirites that speake vnto them yet they
deale by deuillish deuises , which are also an abhomination to the Lord
. GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4V.114

For all those seuerall sortes of witches which the Lord rehearseth ,
<font> Deut. 18. <$$font> did not deale directlie with deuils .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4V.115

For some were obseruers of times , which had their luckie dayes and
their vnluckie dayes , and so their howers . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4V.116

If they goe to buy or to sell , they choose their hower to set foorth in
. GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4V.117

Some dealt by the intralles of beasts , and by the flying of birds , by
meeting with an hare , or a foxe , and on which hand , & a_thousand such
like . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4V.118

Some deal with the Siue and paire of sheeres , vsing certaine words :
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4V.119

Some vse a charme for the tooth ach , another for the ague , and for
stopping the bleeding at the nose , also their spell for the theefe ,
and a_thousande such like , when butter will not come , when cheese will
not runne , nor Ale worke in the fatte : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4V.120

These would seeme of all others to haue witches in the greatest
detestation , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4V.121

and in the meane time worke by the deuill themselues ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4V.122

and may bee termed witches . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,F4V.123

<P_G1R>

<font> M.B. <$$font> We doe count them witches which haue their spirits
, GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.125

we doe not take them to be witches which doe but vse those things which
the cunning men haue taught . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.126

For they doe not mean to doe any thing by the deuill .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.127

Me thinketh therefore it is hard to call them witches .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.128

<font> Dan. <$$font> Take the name of witchcraft for all that dealeth
by the power and deuices of the deuill . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.129

No doubt some are more horrible than other of the seuerall sortes of
witches , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.130

yet the lightest of them be abhominations before the Lord , as we are
taught , <font> Deut. 18. <$$font> GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.131

and the ignorance doeth not excuse . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.132

For what though the witch suppose it is the soule of Moses , which
appeareth in his Chrystal , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.133

is he not therfore a witch ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.134

Your neighbour , whose butter wold not come , which heat a spit red_hoat
and thrust into the creame , vsing certaine wordes , doth thinke she did
by the power of God fray away the deuil , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.135

is she therefore a witch , dealing with that which the deuil , and not
God hath taught ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.136

Is she not a witch also in seeking help at deuils ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.137

They which did burne the cloaths which their child lay in , to know by
the burning blacke whether it were bewitched , and to bring the witch
thither , dealt altogether by the power and direction of the deuill ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.138

& so in scratching , for God hath taught no such things , then are they
not witches ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.139

By whose instruction , and by whose power was the witch fetched home at
the burning of the hair of the butchers sonne you spake of ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.140

Was not all done by the power of Satan , and by his instruction ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.141

Are not they then which practize the thinges the Disciples of witches ,
& so indeed very witches ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.142

Those which haue their charmes , and their night spels , what can they
be but witches ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.143

I might reckon vp her that dealeth with the siue and the sheares , and a
number of such trumperies , in all which the most holie name of God is
polluted , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.144

and if any thing be done , it is done wholly by the effectuall working
of Satan . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.145

God hath giuen naturall helps , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1R.146

and those we may vse , as from his hand against naturall <P_G1V>
diseases , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.147

but things besides nature he hath not appointed ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.148

especiallie , they be ridiculous to driue away deuilles and diseases .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.149

<font> M.B. <$$font> Now you speak of naturall things ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.150

we see there be great secretes in nature : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.151

the Adamant draweth Iron vnto it . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.152

And why may {SIC:m_ay} there not be some force in these naturall things
then ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.153

<font> Dan. <$$font> No doubt there be great secrets in nature , which
the skilfull physicians , and naturall Philosophers do find out . As
the hanging of some thinge about the necke , may haue force to driue
away the ague , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.154

the wearing of some thing may haue such vertue to deliuer from the cramp
, and such like . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.155

And from these Satan doeth take occasion to bring in his trumperies ,
and curious deuiles . As because there be secretes in nature , a ring
is curiouslie framed according to the signes in the firmament ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.156

this is tied to a thread , and let down into a basen or cup of water ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.157

and wil shew great things . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.158

Because there be secretes in nature , a horshoo must be heat red_hot ,
and then put into a kettle seething vpon the fire to driue away the
witches spirite . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.159

Also he that hath his cattle bewitched , burneth some liue thing , as
hogge or henne , to driue out the deuill . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.160

Can these naturall thinges expell deuils ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.161

Nay , they play the rancke witches , which burne any thing for to expell
deuils : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.162

for , hath God taught to do anie such thing ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.163

Doe they burne the thing to God , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.164

or is it as a verie burnt sacrifice to the Deuill ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.165

In the time of the law burnt sacrifices were offred to God :
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.166

the deuill among the heathen drewe the like to himself :
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.167

And now by his sleight he doth after some sort procure the same at their
hands , which professe to be Christians , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.168

and thus worshipping him , he ceaseth from hurting their bodies , or
their cattell , as gaining a greater matter .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.169

<font> M.B. <$$font> If it be so <paren> as I am not able to gainsay it
<$$paren> then be there multitudes in all places which are guiltie of
sorcerie and witchcraft . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G1V.170

For I see many deale in matters by <P_G2R> the help and power of the
deuill , which are perswaded otherwise . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.171

But I meruaile much at diuers things touching the help which men haue by
deuils . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.172

Let vs conferre a little about them . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.173

The deuill doeth know things past , & things present ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.174

but God onelie doth know what shall bee done in the time to come .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.175

If these cunning men doe deale with no further power , than the power of
the deuill , howe can they tell so right what shall come to passe ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.176

<font> Dan. <$$font> It is peculiar to God alone , to know what shall
come to passe hereafter . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.177

But the Lord God hath reuealed by his Prophetes , and Apostles many
thinges that after should be fulfilled . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.178

Satan can giue a nere coniecture when these come to be fulfilled .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.179

Hee is a most subtill obseruer of thinges , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.180

and will gesse at many : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.181

but especially , where hee hath power giuen him to worke and to bring
any matter about , he can and will tell it aforehand .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.182

Finally , God in his iust iudgement giueth him power to seduce the
wicked . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.183

<font> M.B. <$$font> I pray you open your meaning more fully .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.184

<font> Dan. <$$font> Very well : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.185

In which haue you any doubt ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.186

<font> M.B. <$$font> I take it the Deuill gesseth at things which are
prophecied , and is a sharpe obseruer of causes .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.187

But you said he telleth what shall be where he worketh that which he
foretelleth : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.188

giue some example for this . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.189

<font> Dan. <$$font> There needeth no better example , than that which
you tolde of the Churchwardens that went to the cunning man , to knowe
the theefe which had stollen their communion cuppe .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.190

It may be sayd , where the cunning man bad them go to such a place ,
such a night , and at such an hower , and thither shall come he that
stole the cup , how could the deuill tell it , if it were a night or two
after , that he should come to that place , and at that hower ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.191

You muste note what power the deuill hath in the mind of a theefe .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.192

He stirred him vp to steale the cup . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.193

He stirred vp the Churchwardens to seeke to the cunning witch .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2R.194

Hee nameth the place and the time , whether , and when he would moue the
<P_G2V> heart of the theefe to come : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.195

And at the time appointed hee bringeth him thither ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.196

for he that could moue him to steale , could also by secrete suggestion
mooue him to goe thither . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.197

The deuill told that the witch shuld come home with speed that had
bewitched the butchers son : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.198

He that had power in her heart to make her become a witch , did know he
should haue power to make her with haste to come home .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.199

One carieth somewhat which a sick person hath lien in to the cunning man
. GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.200

He can tell , it seemeth , by the smell of the cloth , whether the deuil
hath bene in it <paren> if it smell like his deuill <$$paren>
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.201

and so telleth , the partie is bewitched . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.202

Take the clothes which the sicke partie hath lien in , and burne them ,
if they burne blacke , then may you see it is so ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.203

and the witch shall come in while they be a burning .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.204

Nowe , if the Lord gaue him power , and he hath striken and tormented
the bodie of the sicke person : and if hee haue collourably stirred vp a
witch to send him : is it not an easie matter for him to make the fire
burne blacke , and to mooue the witch to come at that present ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.205

Or if he haue power for to torment , and hath no witch to sende him ,
his great desire being to haue men guiltie of innocent blood , is it not
as easie by the permission of God , which in his iust iudgment , giueth
him power to seduce such people as will hearken vnto deuils , for him to
make the fire burne blacke , or at least to seeme so to them , and to
mooue some frowarde suspected woman or other to come in , though she be
no witch ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.206

A_thousande such things hee worketh in , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.207

and as a cunning iuggler can compasse and bring them about .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.208

<font> M.B. <$$font> Indeed an innocent person may come in at such a
time : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.209

but I haue heard , I can@ @not tell howe true it is , that therefore
there is a further thing which they obserue .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.210

And that is this , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.211

the cunning man biddeth , set on a posnet or some pan with nayles , and
seeth them , and the witch shal come in while they be in seething ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.212

and within a fewe dayes after , her face will be all bescratched with
the nailes . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G2V.213

And <P_G3R> I haue heard that some olde woman comming in , her face hath
indeed bene as it were scratched within a few dayes after ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.214

for the shingles or such like brake forth . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.215

<font> Dan. <$$font> O the depth of Satans illusions to make blinde
people becom witches , and to deale by him . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.216

He doth know the corrupted humours in the bodie , which will breake out
into the smal_pockes , or such like , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.217

and if he can procure one to come in which is euen ready to haue them ,
what a shew doth he make , as if the nails did it ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.218

<font> M.B. <$$font> This were great subtiltie of Satan .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.219

<font> Dan. <$$font> Nay , we are not able to imagine the depth of his
sleights , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.220

neither can we see the secrete force , wherwith he moueth the minds of
ignorant people , and so bringeth about his enterprises .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.221

There doth lie the greatest cunning of Satan .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.222

<font> M.B. <$$font> Indeed it seemeth strange and vncredible that the
deuil should so moue the minds of men , and lead them vnto this thing
and that thing , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.223

and in the meane time they doe not know it , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.224

but thinke they goe against the deuil . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.225

But now I haue a further doubt . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.226

I confesse it is an easie thing for the deuill to tell where a thing is
that is lost or stollen , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.227

but what power hath he to heale that which is sick or sore ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.228

Out of question they be innumerable which receiue helpe by going to the
cunning men . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.229

You say he helpeth the bodie that he may destroy the soule .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.230

Hee helpeth that men may seeke vnto him , and so set him , as it were ,
in the place of God . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.231

Me thinketh it should not be in the power of deuilles for to helpe .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.232

<font> Dan. <$$font> Indeed that is well mooued ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.233

there lieth a great sleight of the deuill in it .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.234

You say that innumerable do receiue help by going vnto cunning men .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.235

I warrant you not so many as you are perswaded {receive_help} .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.236

<font> M.B. <$$font> O verie manie . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.237

There be a number which doe neuer make it knowne , because it is
misliked by some . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3R.238

<font> Dan. <$$font> Yea , and there be many which come home again
<P_G3V> with a flea in their eare , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.239

they receiue an answere , as good as a flim_flam .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.240

<font> M.B. <$$font> It may be they come too late ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.241

the matter is ouer farre spent , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.242

and if they had come sooner , they could haue holpen them .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.243

<font> Dan. <$$font> Yea , a number of such cosoning answers the deuill
maketh which satisfie ignorant people , which are ready {SIC:rea-} to
beleeue all that he telleth , and to daunce after his pipe .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.244

One commeth to him for his childe , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.245

if he know the disease be deadly , he will say it is bewitched , but so
farre spent , that there is no help , the childe will hardlie liue two
daies : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.246

the father commeth home GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.247

and findeth his child deade , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.248

or it dieth within two or three dayes after , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.249

here the deuill getteth credit . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.250

Another is sicke and grieously tormented , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.251

hee sendeth : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.252

Satan doth see <paren> for he sendeth them <$$paren> that the disease is
euen spent , and that the cause of it begin to fail , and so that the
partie in a few dayes will recouer , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.253

here he prescribeth one paltrie or other , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.254

they vse it , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.255

the man is recouered , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.256

and so should haue bene without the deuils medicine ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.257

but now Satan hath gotten further credite . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.258

Another is sicke GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.259

and languisheth , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.260

his neighbours tell him , he may be bewitched ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.261

it is good to send , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.262

and then he shal know . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.263

He sendeth , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.264

the deuill doth not know whether the sicke man can escape and recouer ,
or not . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.265

He saith , it is like he is bewitched : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.266

and teacheth what to doe , if there bee any help at all ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.267

but doubteth , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.268

and so whether the man liue or die , Satan saueth his credite whole and
sound . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.269

And many of these answeres he giueth . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.270

Againe , we must note that mans imagination is of great force , either
to continue a disease , or to diminish and take away some diseases .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.271

And in this also Satan deludeth some , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.272

for his medicine seemeth to do somwhat , when it is but the Parties
conceit . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.273

<font> M.B. <$$font> These be sleights indeede :
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.274

but mee thinketh you goe farre in the last . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.275

I doe not see how a mans conceit can help him .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G3V.276

<P_G4R>

<font> Dan. <$$font> Imagination is a strong thing to hurt , all men
doe finde , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.278

and why should it not then be strong also to help , when the parties
mind is cleared , by beleeuing fully that he receiueth ease ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.279

<font> M.B. <$$font> But yet it is hard to shewe that euer anie such
cure hath bene wrought . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.280

<font> Dan. <$$font> It is not hard to shew ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.281

for that which men doe , it is presumed the deuill can doe the like .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.282

And I haue heard of a mery companion that wrought such a cure .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.283

Ther was one in London <paren> as report goeth <$$paren> which was
acquainted with Feats . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.284

Now , this Feats had a blacke dogge , whome he called <font> Bomelius
<$$font> . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.285

This partie afterward had a conceit that <font> Bomelius <$$font> was a
deuill , and that hee felt him within him . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.286

He was in heauinesse , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.287

and made his moane to one of his acquaintance , who had a merie head ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.288

he tolde him , hee had a friend who could remooue <font> Bomelius
<$$font> . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.289

Hee had him prepare a breakfast , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.290

and he would bring him . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.291

Then this was the cure , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.292

he made him be stripped naked and stand by a good fire ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.293

and though he were fatte ynough of himselfe , basted him all ouer with
butter against the fire , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.294

and made him weare a sleeke stone next his skin vnder his bellie ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.295

and the man had present remedie , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.296

and gaue him afterward greate thankes . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.297

<font> M.B. <$$font> I know men haue many foolish imaginations :
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.298

but though one imagination may driue out another , which is not the
curing of any disease in deed , but of an imagination : yet it doth not
followe , that where there is an appareant griefe , that a mans conceit
can helpe to cure it . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.299

<font> Dan. <$$font> Yes , the conceit doth much , euen where there is
an apparant disease . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.300

A man feareth hee is bewitched , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.301

it troubleth al the powers of his mind , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.302

and that distempereth his bodie , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.303

maketh great alterations in it , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.304

and bringeth sundrie griefes . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.305

Now , when his minde is freed from such imaginations , his bodily griefe
which grew {SIC:g_rew} from the same is eased .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.306

And a multitude of Satans cures are but such .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4R.307

<P_G4V>

<font> M.B. <$$font> Nay , there be also euils which be apparant in the
bodie , and bee cured , which come not of anie feare or imagination :
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.309

how can these be cured by any conceit ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.310

There is great reason that such griefes may be cured indeede by quieting
the minde , and did growe from the disturbance of the same .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.311

<font> Dan. <$$font> Yea , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.312

and that falleth out sometimes in griefes of the body , which doeth not
growe from imagination , but from some other passions . As I can giue
you an example , which is written and reported on by a very reuerend
learned Physitian . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.313

The cure was done by a lewde cosening knaue in Germanie .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.314

A woman had bleare eies that were watery . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.315

The knaue lodging there , promised for certainty that hee would heale
them : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.316

hee did hang a litle writing about her necke , charging strictlie , that
it should not be taken from thence nor read , nor opened ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.317

for if any of these were done , she could haue no help at all by it .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.318

The woman had such a confidence in the thinge , and was so merry and
glad , that she left weeping GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.319

<paren> for her often weeping and tears had spoiled her eies <$$paren>
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.320

and so by little and litle , the moysture stayed ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.321

and her eies were whole . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.322

It fell out that she lost the writing , where at she was in such griefe
and sorrowe , and weeping , that her eies were sore againe .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.323

Another founde the writing , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.324

opened it , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.325

and read it . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.326

It was written in the Germane tongue , to this effect translated into
English : <font> The deuill pluck out thine eies ,
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.327

and fill their holes with dung . <$$font> GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.328

Was not this , thinke you , a proper salue for to cure her eies ?
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.329

If this medicine had taken effect , her eies shuld not haue ben healed ,
but plucked quite out . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.330

We may not think that Satan hath mo cousening tricks than al men in the
world , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.331

for men are but his schollers . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.332

Againe , where men faile , he can worke somewhat in the affections of
the parties mindes . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.333

And you shall heare them say , when any charme is vsed , you must
beleeue it will helpe , or els it will doe you no good at all .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,G4V.334

Thus if it were well seene into , <P_H1R> the greatest part of your
innumerable cures , come to bee mere cosonages .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.335

<font> M.B. <$$font> Well , let all this be true as you haue saide :
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.336

yet there be many thinges wherein the deuilles doe helpe .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.337

What say you to the boy which healed within few daies after {SIC:af} he
had scratched the witch , whereas his sores were most grieuous before ,
and could not be cured ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.338

What say you to that which they doe , when butter will not come , or
when drinke will not worke in the fat ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.339

What say you to the burning of some liue thing , as hogge or henne , and
the harme ceassing ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.340

And finallie , what say you to the helping of them where the deuill is ,
and doth torment their bodies ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.341

<font> Dan. <$$font> All these are answered in few wordes , that where
he hath power to hurt either man or beast , drinke or butter he helpeth
only by giuing place , and ceasing to hurt , which as I shewed you
before , he doth most willinglie , to bring to passe , that men may seek
to him , & become euen verie witches . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.342

If a man be vexed & tormented by a deuil , & men seek by fasting &
prayer to cast him foorth , euen instantly intreating the Lord , the~ he
goeth out with much a_do , and vnwillingly , as ouercome & expelled by
the power of God . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.343

But when he hurteth , as you say he did the butchers sonne , and they
seeke to him , and will followe his prescriptions , as to draw blood of
the witch , he goeth out willingly , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.344

I meane he ceaseth from hurting the bodie : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.345

for he goeth not out indeede , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.346

but rather goeth further in , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.347

and seateth himselfe deeper in the soule . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.348

And so is it in all the rest . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.349

How gladlie wil he cease to hurte the hennes , so that to please him , a
henne may be burnt aliue ? GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.350

his helping is no more but a ceasing from doing harme , if he had power
giuen him to hurt . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.351

<font> Sam. <$$font> This is a strange thing if it be so .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.352

There be thousands in the land deceiued . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.353

The woman at <font> R.H. <$$font> by report hath some weeke fourtie
come vnto her , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.354

and many of them not of the meaner sort . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.355

But I doe but hinder , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.356

I pray you go forward . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1R.357

<P_H1V>

<font> Dan. <$$font> The deuill can deceiue thousand thousands , and
euen the wisest for this world , GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1V.359

when they will not be taught of God , but dispise his doctrine , then
are they iustly giuen ouer to be disciples of the deuill .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1V.360

<font> M.B. <$$font> If there be such deceit in all these things , and
that the witches do not kill nor hurt , but the deuill craftilie seemeth
to kill and to hurt when the diseases be naturall and maketh the witch
beleeue that hee hath done all at her request . Or where God hath giuen
him power , he stirreth her vp to send him , as if either hee could not
, or would not meddle , vnles he had bene sent . Seeing all lieth vpon
Satan , it should seeme , there is no reason that witches should be put
to death : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1V.361

but the scripture doth command they shuld be put to death .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1V.362

<font> Dan. <$$font> The holy scriptures doe command that witches
should be put to death : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1V.363

therein you say right : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1V.364

but if you did take it , that the word of God commaundeth they shall not
be suffered to liue , because they kill men and beastes , or because
they send their spirits which possesse men , and torment their bodies ,
you are much deceiued : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1V.365

For you shal neuer finde , of all that haue bene tormented and plagued
by euill spirites , that the holie Ghoste layeth it vpon witches .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1V.366

The causes why they should be put to death are , that they haue
familiaritie with deuils , which are the blasphemous enemies of God :
and that they seduce the people into errour , to runne after deuils ,
and deuilish practises , and that they haue such wicked minds .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1V.367

Although they neuer minde to kill or to hurt any , but to doe them good
, as they imagine , yet if they deale with deuilles they ought to die
for it . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1V.368

<font> M.B. <$$font> Then you take it , that these cunning men and
women , vnto whome so many runne for helpe , which are thought to do
very much good , and no hurt at all , ought to be rooted out , and
destroyed . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1V.369

Let vs knowe what scripture there is to it . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H1V.370

<P_H2R>

<font> Dan. <$$font> yea , of all other they ought to die , because
they doe the greatest harme . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H2R.372

Other witches that haue spirites are thought to doe harm , because the
deuil at the appointment of God doth harme , and he beareth in hand hee
doeth it at the request of the witch : GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H2R.373

but these that seeme to doe good , do harme indeed , and that many wayes
, as euerie one that light in him , may easily see .
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H2R.374

And for the scriptures which shewe that they ought to die , reade first
in the 22. chapter of <font> Exodus . ver. 18. <$$font>
GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H2R.375

and there it is said , <font> Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live
<$$font> . GIFFORD-1593-E2-P2,H2R.376

