<BEGIN_gpoole-1515-e1-p2>

<P_211>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CLXXIII>

<font> To my right worshipfull father-in-law , Sir Robart Plompton , kt.
be these delivered . <$$font> GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,211.4

Right worshipfull father , in the most loving maner that I can , I
hartely recomennd me unto you , and to my lady my mother-in-law , your
wyfe ; GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,211.5

and likwise my poore wyfe , your daughter , recomends hir unto you and
my sayd lady , GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,211.6

and prayeth you of your daly blessing . GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,211.7

And we desire hartely the knowledge of your prosperous health , worship
, and welfare , the which I besech Almyghty Jesus long to contynue to
encrease to his pleasure , and your comforth . GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,211.8

And , father , if you be remembred , I wrote a letter unto you laytly ,
GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,211.9

and sent it unto you by my servant ; in the which letter I instaunced
and desired you to shew your fatherly kindnes unto my poore wife and me
, and to be so gud father unto us , as to make a sure meane that we
myght peaseably enjoy and occupie the land that I bought of you in
Combryg in Staforthshire , <paren> for I thought , that unles the sayd
land in Combryge were specified in this award , now made betwixt you and
Roclife and the heires of Suttele , or els of a liklyhod they wold enter
upon me and disposses me , <$$paren> GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,211.10

and you send me word , that you thought they wold not have it , nor
medle with it . GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,211.11

But thus it is , that now within this fortnyth ther were servants of Sir
William Parpoints and Sir John Roclifes determined to take away the
goods that they <P_212> could find upon the ground ;
GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,212.12

and so had they donne , but that the tenaunt fortuned to here tell of
ther coming , and in all possible hast came to give me warning .
GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,212.13

And so , by the helpe of gud masters and frinds , at the last , by fayre
means , with very great payne , entreated them to spare distreyning ,
till such tyme as I had sent unto you to know what remedy you wold
provide herin . Wherfore , at the reverence of God , and for the love
that you owe unto my poore wyfe and me and our children , remember how
we stand unto you , and be so gud and kind father unto us to find the
meane , that we may peasiably occupie that litle land , which I bought
of you and truly payd for ; GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,212.14

and it shal@ @be to a discharge of your conscience and , with Gods grace
, comforth in lykewyse , GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,212.15

for it shall ever succeed in your bloud . GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,212.16

Father , I besech you thus to doe , to take the payne upon you to make
such labor unto Sir John Roclife , that he will , at your instauncie and
by the mediacion of such of your frinds as it shall please you to cause
to labor unto him , make a release of that land in Combrig .
GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,212.17

Father , if it please you to doe your best herin , I doubt not , with
Gods grace , but you shall well bring this matter to passe , considring
the familiaritie betwixt you and him now , and that is like to be .
GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,212.18

Thus doing , you bynd me and all myne ever to do you that pleasure ,
that may be in our smale power ; GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,212.19

and not doyng thus , all that know you and me myght well speake upon it
, that I should , considryng how I stand unto you , pay such a sume of
money to you , and not to be made sure of my bargen .
GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,212.20

And beside , yt wold be to me as great discomforth as lightly cold
happen me , which wold greve much more then the losse of my money , or
of my land . GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,212.21

And , as you know right well , I have Slyngsby bonden as your surty in
an obligation of x@ @=li= for the perfirmance of your bargan , which I
have redy in my keping . GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,212.22

And the Lord preserve you . GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,212.23

From Redburne in hast , upon Trenetie Monday . GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,212.24

By your faythfull loving son , Germayn Pole . GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,212.25

<paren> 4 <font> June <$$font> 1515 . <$$paren>
GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,212.26

<P_213>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CLXXIV>

<font> To the right worshipfull and singuler gud father , Sir Robart
Plompton , Kt. be these delivered in hast . <$$font>
GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,213.29

Right worshipfull and my full singuler gud father , in the most humble
and lowly maner that I can , I hartely recomend me unto you , and to my
lady your wyfe , GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,213.30

and in lykewise doth your daughter , my poore wyfe ,
GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,213.31

and hartely prayeth you of your dayly blessing , desiring the knowledg
of your prosperous health and welfaire . GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,213.32

Father , so it is that upon a truth , of thursday last , oon Richard
Bardall of Hessope came in the names of Roclife , Parpoynte , and
Counstable to my tennant in Combryg , and also to Crakemarsh
{COM:preceding_word_"Crakemarsh"_emended}

and in ther names commaunded my tennant that he should from henceforth
pay me no rent , but to make his rent redy for them , shewing eich one
of them wold send a servant thither for the rent betwixt this and
Martynmas ; GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,213.34

and told him playnly that they must have the sayd land , because it was
nether in ther wryting , nor in yours . GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,213.35

Father , you sent me word laytly by my servant , that you had made it
sure to me without any daunger . GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,213.36

Yt pleaseth you to let him se your wrytings , GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,213.37

and , as I understond , both by you and by him , it is nether expressed
in the wrytings that towch them , nor you . GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,213.38

Yet , notwithstanding , upon mine honestie , they make this sturryng
therin , GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,213.39

and so yt is to thinke , that if they may find any hole or color therin
, they will troble with me for the same ; GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,213.40

and yt were great pytie that I shold have ony troble for that thing ,
that I have bought and truly payd for . Wherfore , at the reverence of
God , and for the love that you owe to me and my wyfe , and our children
, to make a sure way for me now at this terme at London .
GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,213.41

And I pray you send me word what tyme you will goe or send to London ,
and I will send one of my servants to meet you or your deputie ther .
GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,213.42

And <P_214> at his comming whom {GLOSS:home} , bringing me word that you
have made it sure to me without daunger or jopartie , forthwith you shal
have payd you that , that myne uncle Sir Alban promysed you , and at all
tymes the best that in me may be to you and all yours , duryng my
natural life , by the sufferance of <font> Jesu <$$font> , who have you
in his eternall keeping . GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,214.43

From Rodburne in hast , the iij day of October .
GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,214.44

Father , I besech you at such tyme as recoveres or assurances shal@ @be
made , that it will please you to let it be expressed by name , that
they may be avoyded or expulsed from ther clame therin .
GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,214.45

Your loving son , Germayn Pole GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,214.46

<paren> 3 <font> Oct. <$$font> 1515 . <$$paren>
GPOOLE-1515-E1-P2,214.47

