<BEGIN_gpoole-1504-e1-p2>

<P_166>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXXXII>

<font> To his right worshipfull father , Sir Robart Plompton , kt.
deliver thes . <$$font> GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,166.4

Right worshipfull father , in the most humble and lowly wyse that I can
, or may , desiryng to here of your prosperous health , worship , and
welfaire , which I hartely besech Almighty Jesus encrease and contyuew
to his pleasure , and your most comforth . <P_167> Father , I am very
desirous to here from you , and to know how you do in your matters .
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,167.5

I can noe more doe therein , but hartely pray to God to helpe you in
your right , and send you gud speede . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,167.6

And I pray you let my wyfe have some word from you by this next carryer
, how you doe in your sayd matters ; GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,167.7

and she and my sister Ellynor humbly recomend them unto you ,
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,167.8

and pray you for your dayly blessing . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,167.9

And both they , and I , pray you that we may be recommended unto my
brother William Plompton and all your folkes . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,167.10

<paren> And we rehersed them by name . <$$paren>
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,167.11

And thus the holy Ghost guid you and all the matters that you labor
about . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,167.12

Scribbled in hast the viii day of November . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,167.13

Father , I can not yet tell whether I come to London my selfe on this
side Christenmas or not ; GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,167.14

my servant , the bringer hereof , shall shew , as sone as he hath the
certenty , whether I shall come or be at home .
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,167.15

Your loving sone to his smale poore , Germayn Pole
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,167.16

<paren> 8 <font> Nov. <$$font> 1502 . <$$paren>
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,167.17

<P_178>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXLIV>

<font> To his right worshipfull and most especiall gud father in law ,
Sir Robart Plompton , kt. be thes delivered . <$$font>
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,178.20

Right worshipfull and my most especiall gud father in law , in my most
umbele maner I recomend me most hartely unto you , and unto my lady my
mother in law , gladly desiringe to have knowledg of your prousperyte ,
wellfayre , and harts ease , the which I besech almyghty <font> Jesu
<$$font> long to contynew and increase unto his pleasure , and unto your
most joyfull comforth and gladness . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,178.21

Sir , if it please you to understand , that since my last coming into
Darbyshire , it was infirmed me , that ther was in Staforthshire a
parcell of land , the which should be ther at Combryge and Cramarsh ,
that was not receined {COM:typo_for_"received"?} the recovery of the
size at Nottingham and Derbye . Wherfore , Sir , I toke upon me in your
name to send unto the tenants for as much rent as thay were behind ,
since the last payment that was made unto Sir John or Preston ;
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,178.22

and they desired my servants to com agane , as that day sennyt ,
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,178.23

and they should either have the rent , or be suffered to streyne on such
guds as they fond on the ground . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,178.24

And so they did com <P_179> againe as they had apoynted them ,
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.25

and in the meane season , thorow the meanes of one Berdall of Assope ,
ther had bene iiij of Suttell and Roclife servants , the which wold have
had the rent ; GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.26

and your tenaunts answered , that they knew not wherfore that they
should pay them , GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.27

and so they went ther way . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.28

Howbeit , they sayd they wold be ther shortly againe ,
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.29

and for that cause they wold not pay my servant , as for at that tyme .
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.30

Howbeit , they promysed them upon ther fayth that they shall not pay one
penny unto the tyme that they have some word from you .
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.31

Furthermore , Sir , if it please you to understand of the great
unkindnes that my grandam hath showed unto me now latly , as the bringer
herof can more planly shew you by muth , to whom I besech you to take
credence on . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.32

For be ye sure , Sir , that I was never so unkindly delt with ;
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.33

all is because that she well know it that ye are asunder ,
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.34

therfore she thinketh that she may give and sell all at her owne
pleasure . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.35

I will besech you for the reverence of <font> Jesu <$$font> to be so gud
father unto me and my wyfe as to mayntayne it that is my ryght , and to
se a remedy for it , as my speciall trust is in you above all other
creatures livinge . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.36

Furthermore , I wold desire you that I may have knowledge how that you
do in your matters , GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.37

for I here tell that you dyd well . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.38

That wold be the most joyfull tydings unto me that ever was , or ever
shal@ @be , as knoweth the blessed Rode of Rodeborne , who save you in
his blessed keepinge . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.39

Amen . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.40

I will besech you , Sir , that this simple letter may recomend me unto
my brother William , and my brother Maliverey , with both my sisters ,
and my sister Eyre , with all your houshold . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.41

By your humble son and beadman , G. de la Pole GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.42

<paren> <font> Anno <$$font> 1503 . <$$paren> GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,179.43

<P_180>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXLV>

<font> To his right morshipfull father , Sir Robart Plompton , kngght ,
thes letter be delivered . <$$font> GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,180.46

Right worshipfull and my most singuler good father in law , in my most
humblest maner I recommend me right hartely unto you , and unto my lady
my mother in law , inwardly desiring to have knowledg of your wellfare
and harts ease , the which I besech almyghty <font> Jesu <$$font> of his
infinyt mercy and grace shortly to send you , unto your most joyful
comforth , and to the pleasure of your harte . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,180.47

So it is , Sir , that I understand by the letter that I received from
you , that ye have the Kings protection ryall , the which is the most
joyfullest tydings that ever I hard , since the tyme that I was borne of
my mother . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,180.48

For now , I doubt not but with dew labor mad unto the Kings grace , and
with the gud counsell of your lovers and frinds , all the vexation and
troble that ye have had now laytly for your matters , by the grace of
the blessed Trenity , shall turne unto your joyfull comforth and harts
ease , considering how falsly , and how unrighteously , the size is past
against you , contrary to the law either of God , or man .
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,180.49

Furthermore , Sir , I have bene at Combrige for your rent at your
tenaunte , William Smith , GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,180.50

and I received of him for one yeares rent xl@ @=s= . the which I send
you by the brynger hereof . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,180.51

Howbeit , I lay at outside ij dayes or I cold have it , he was so
fearfull to pay it because of Sir Robart Shefell and Emson ;
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,180.52

and he desireth you to be his gud master and beare him out , that a
{COM:he} be not vexed nor trobled therfore , GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,180.53

for be ye sure he is stedfast unto you . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,180.54

And I wold have had rent in Crakmarsh , GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,180.55

but the tenaunts wold pay me none ; GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,180.56

and I wold have streaned , GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,180.57

but ther could no man shew me which was <P_181> your ground . Wherfore
, I supposed that it should have hurt your matters to have streyned ,
not knowing your ground from his . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,181.58

Also , Sir , I desired you in my last letter to be so gud father unto me
, as to com speake with my grandam for diverse matters , the which
longeth unto my profit . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,181.59

Howbeit , I have no gud answere of you . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,181.60

But now I will desire you , for the reverence of <font> Jesu <$$font> ,
to doe for me as I will do for you , if my power were unto my will , and
make it in your way to com speake with hir for the welfare and profit of
your daughter , my wyfe , and me . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,181.61

Many a gentleman in Darbyshire marvelleth , I being so nere my age ,
that ye will not com and speake with hir for my right ;
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,181.62

and if ye come , it will save me greatly , more then ye know , in dyvers
matters that I shall shew you of , by the grace of <font> Jesu <$$font>
, who have you in his gloryous keeping . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,181.63

Your owne son and beadman , German de la Pole <paren>
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,181.64

<paren> <font> Anno <$$font> 1505 . <$$paren> GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,181.65

<P_191>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CLVI>

<font> To my right worshipfull father-in-law , Sir Robart Plompton , kt.
be this delivered . <$$font> GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,191.68

Right worshipfull and my most singuler good father-in-law , in my best
maner I hartely recomend me unto you , right glad to here of your
welfare , the which our Lord contynew long unto his pleasure and your
most comforth . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,191.69

Father , the cause of this my wryting unto you of myn own hand , is for
a matter that no man knoweth <P_192> of but onely my wyfe , and I , and
the partyes . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.70

Father , this is the matter ; GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.71

ther is a gentleman , the which had maryed one of my naunts , whose name
is Randolpe Manwring , GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.72

and he beareth great love and favor unto my sister Ellynor ,
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.73

and she doth likewise unto him the same . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.74

And the gentleman hath desired me to wryte unto you , to know if ye can
be contented that he have hir in marage to his wyfe ; the which if that
ye so be , he wil@ @be glad to meat you in any plase , that it please
you to apoynt , and to have a communication in the matter .
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.75

And I thinke in my mynd that he wil@ @be contented to take lesse with
hir than any man in Inglond wold doe , being of his avyowre , because of
the great love and favour that is betwyxt them .
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.76

And , father , this I will say by myn uncle Manwryng ;
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.77

his land is a_c marke , GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.78

and also he is as godly and as wyse a gentleman , as any is within a_m.
myle , of his hed . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.79

And , Sir , all the whole matter lyeth in you and in noe man els ;
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.80

but if that she were myne owne borne sister , I had lever that she had
him , knowing him as I doe , than a man of vi tymes his land .
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.81

Father , how that ye are disposed in this matter , I besech you that I
may have answere , as shortly as ye can ; GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.82

for my sister Ellynor putteth herselfe utterly unto that thing , that is
your mynd . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.83

And my wyfe and I will doe the same , by the grace of <font> Jesu
<$$font> , who send you shortly a good end in your matters .
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.84

Amen . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.85

Your son , Germayn Pole . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.86

<paren> <font> Anno <$$font> 1504 . <$$paren> GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.87

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CLVII>

<font> To my right worshipfull father-in-law , Sir Robart Plompton , kt
, this letter be delivered in hast . <$$font> GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,192.89

Right worshipfull and my most singuler good father-in-law , in the best
manner that I possibly can . I hartely recomend me unto <P_193> you
with effectuall desire to here of your welfare and gud speed in your
great matters . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,193.90

And likewise , Sir , doth your poore daughter my wyfe , and my sister
Ellynor , desiring to have your dayly blessing .
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,193.91

Father , I have word brought me , by one Duckmanton of Moginton , from
you , that you had a joyfull end in all your matters , the which were
unto me the joyfullest tydings that cold be thought .
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,193.92

Howbeit , Sir , I have had great marvell , that I have not , since that
tyme , hard some word from you . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,193.93

Father , pleaseth yt you to understand , that I have comuned with my
uncle Maywheryng , according to the effect of your letter ;
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,193.94

and veryly , Sir , I can no other wyse perceive by my sayd uncle , but
that he is reasonable in all causes . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,193.95

For first , he wil@ @be contented to make hir xx marke joynter ;
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,193.96

and as for such essew as God sendeth them , it is noe doubt but he wyll
so provyd for them , that they shall live like gentlemen or gentlewomen
, whichsoever God suffereth . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,193.97

And veryly , father , I am right sure that my sister Ellynor had rather
have hym , you beyng so content , then a man of far greater lands .
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,193.98

And also , father , I know wher that my sayd uncle myght have great
marraiges , both with great lands , and guds . Wherfore , Sir , yfe yt
is your mynd that the matter goe forward , and the preferment of my
syster , your daughter , in this behalfe , I pray you that I may have
shortly knowledg in writting , what your mind is in this matter , and
what you be worthy to give for his large proffers .
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,193.99

And , you being any thing resanable , I am right sure that ye shall like
my sayd uncle , as well as ever you liked any man , by the grace of
<font> Jesu <$$font> , who preserve you . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,193.100

Written at Rodburne in hast upon Martingmas even . By your son-in-law ,
Germayn Pole . GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,193.101

<paren> 1O <font> Nov. <$$font> 1504 . <$$paren>
GPOOLE-1504-E1-P2,193.102

