<BEGIN_harman-1568-e1-p2>

<P_34>

I lately had standinge in my well house , which standeth on the
backeside of my house , a great cawdron of copper , beinge then full of
water , hauinge in the same halfe a doson <P_35> of pewter dyshes , well
marked , and stamped with the connizance of my armes , whiche being well
noted when they were taken out , were set a side , the water powred out
, and my caudron taken awaye , being of such bygnes that one man ,
vnlesse he were of great strength , was not able far to cary the same .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.3

Not_withstandinge , the same was one night within this two yeares
conuayed more then half a myle from my house , into a commen or heth ,
And ther bestowed in a great fir-bushe . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.4

I then immediatly the next day sent one of my men to London ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.5

and there gaue warning in Sothwarke , kent strete , and Barmesey streete
, to all the Tynckars there dwelling , - That if any such Caudron came
thether to be sold , the bringar therof should be stayed ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.6

and promised twenty shyllings for a reward . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.7

I gaue also intelligence to the water men that kept the ferres , that no
such vessel should be ether conuayd to London or into essex , promysing
the lyke reward , to haue vnderstanding therof . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.8

This my doing was well vnderstand in many places about ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.9

and that the feare of espyinge so troubled the conscience of the stealer
, that my caudoren laye vntouched in the thicke firbushe more then halfe
a yeare after , which , by a great chaunce , was found by hunteres for
conneys ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.10

for one chaunced to runne into the same bushe where my caudren was ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.11

and being perceaued , one thrust his staffe into the same bushe ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.12

and hyt my caudren a great blowe , the sound whereof dyd cause the man
to thinke and hope that there was some great treasure hidden , wherby he
thought to be the better whyle he lyued . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.13

And in farther searching he found my caudren ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.14

so had I the same agayne vnloked_for . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.15

<heading>

A HOKER , OR ANGGLEAR . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.17

CAP. 3 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.18

<$$heading>

These hokers , or Angglers , be peryllous and most wicked knaues ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.20

and be deryued or procede forth from the vpright men ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.21

they commenly go in frese ierkynes and gally slopes , poynted benethe
the kne ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.22

these when they practise there pylfringe , it is all by night ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.23

for , as they walke a day times from house to house , to demaund
charitie , they vigelantly marke where or in what place they maye
attayne to there praye , casting there eyes vp to euery wyndow , well
noting what they se their , whether apparell or linnen , hanginge nere
vnto the sayde wyndowes , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,35.24

and that wyll they <P_36> be sure to haue the next night folowing ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,36.25

for they customably carry with them a staffe of v. or vi. foote long ,
in which , within one ynch of the tope therof , ys a lytle hole bored
through , in which hole they putte an yron hoke ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,36.26

and with the same they wyll pluck vnto them quickly any thing that they
may reche ther with , which hoke in the day tyme they couertly cary
about them , and is neuer sene or taken out till they come to the place
where they worke there fete : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,36.27

such haue I sene at my house , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,36.28

and haue oft talked with them HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,36.29

and haue handled ther staues , not then vnderstanding to what vse or
intent they serued , although I hadde and perceiued , by there talke and
behauiour , great lykelyhode of euyll suspition in them :
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,36.30

they wyl ether leane vppon there staffe , to hyde the hole thereof ,
when they talke with you , or holde their hande vpon the hole ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,36.31

and what stuffe , either wollen or lynnen , they thus hoke out , they
neuer carye the same forth_with to their staulyng kens ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,36.32

but hides the same a_iij. daies in some secret corner ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,36.33

<font> and <$$font> after conuayes the same to their houses abouesaid ,
where their host or hostys geueth them money for the same , but halfe
the value that it is worth , or els their doxes shall a_farre of sell
the same at the like houses . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,36.34

I was credebly informed that a hoker came to a farmers house in the ded
of the night , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,36.35

and putting back a drawe window of a low chamber , the bed standing hard
by the sayd wyndow , in which laye three parsones <paren> a man and two
bygge boyes <$$paren> , this hoker with his staffe plucked of their
garments which lay vpon them to kepe them warme , with the couerlet and
shete , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,36.36

and lefte them lying a slepe naked sauing their shertes ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,36.37

and had a_way all clene , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,36.38

and neuer could vnderstande where it became , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,36.39

I verely suppose that when they wer wel waked with cold , they suerly
thought that Robin goodfelow <paren> accordinge to the old saying
<$$paren> had bene with them that night . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,36.40

<P_42>

<heading>

A PRYGGER OF PRAUNCERS . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,42.43

CAP. 6 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,42.44

<$$heading>

A Prigger of Prauncers be horse stealers ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,42.46

for to prigge signifieth in their language to steale ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,42.47

<font> and <$$font> a Prauncer is a horse : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,42.48

so beinge put together , the matter is playne . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,42.49

These go commonly in Ierkins of leatherr , or of white frese ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,42.50

<font> and <$$font> carry litle wands in their hands ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,42.51

and will walke through grounds and pastures , to search and se horses
meete for their purpose . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,42.52

And if thei chaunce to be met and asked by the owners of the grounde
what they make there , they fayne strayghte that they haue loste their
waye , and desyre <P_43> to be enstructed the beste waye to such a place
. HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.53

These will also repayre to gentlemens houses and aske their charitye ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.54

and wyll offer their service . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.55

And if you aske them what they can do , they wyll saye that they can
kepe two or thre Geldinges , and waite vppon a Gentleman .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.56

These haue also their women , that walkinge from them in other places ,
marke where and what they see abroade , and sheweth these Priggars
therof when they meete , which is with_in a weeke or two .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.57

And loke , where they steale any thinge , they conuay <font> the
<$$font> same at the least thre_score miles of or more .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.58

There was a Gentleman , a verye friende of myne , rydyng from London
homewarde into Kente , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.59

hauinge with_in three myles of his house busynesse , alyghted of his
horse , and his man also , in a pretye vyllage , where diueres houses
were , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.60

and looked aboute hym where he myghte haue a conuenient person to walke
his horse , beecause hee would speake with a Farmer that dwelt on the
backe side of the sayde village , lytle aboue a quarter of a myle from
the place where he lighted , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.61

and had his man to waight vpon him , as it was mete for his callinge :
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.62

espying a Pryggar there standing , thinking the same to dwell there ,
charging this prity prigginge person to walke his horse well , and that
they might not stande styll for takyng of colde ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.63

and at his returne <paren> which he saide should not be longe <$$paren>
he would geue hym a peny to drinke , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.64

and so wente aboute his busines . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.65

This peltynge Priggar , proude of his praye , walkethe his horse vp and
downe tyll he sawe the Gentleman out of sighte , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.66

and leapes him into the saddell , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.67

and awaye he goeth a_mayne . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.68

This Gentleman returninge , and findinge not his horses , sent his man
to the one end of the vyllage , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.69

and he went himselfe vnto the other ende , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.70

and enquired as he went for his horses that were walked ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.71

and began some what to suspecte , because neither he nor his man could
se nor find him . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.72

Then this Gentleman deligentlye enquired of thre or foure towne dwellers
there whether any such person , declaring his stature , age , apparell ,
with so many linamants of his body as he could call to remembraunce .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.73

And , " vna voce , " all sayde that no such man dwelt in their streate ,
neither in the parish , that they knewe of ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,43.74

but some did wel remember that such a one they saw there lyrkinge and
huggeringe <P_44> two houses before the Gentleman came thether , and a
straunger to them . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.75

" I had thoughte , " quoth this Gentleman , " he had here dwelled , " -
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.76

and marched home manerly in his botes : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.77

farre from the place he dwelt not . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.78

I suppose at his comming home he sente suche wayes as he suspected or
thought meete to searche for this Prigger , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.79

but hetherto he neuer harde any tydinges agayne of his palfreys .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.80

- I had the best geldinge stolen oute of my pasture that I had amongst
others whyle this boke was first a printinge . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.81

<heading>

A PALLYARD . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.83

CAP. 7 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.84

<$$heading>

These Palliardes be called also Clapperdogens : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.86

these go with patched clokes , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.87

<font> and <$$font> haue their Morts with them , which they cal wiues ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.88

and if he goe to one house , to aske his almes , his wife shall goe to a
nother : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.89

for what they get <paren> as bread , cheese , malte , and woll <$$paren>
they sell the same for redy money ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.90

for so they get more and if they went together .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.91

Although they be thus deuided in the daie , yet they mete iompe at night
. HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.92

Yf they chaunce to come to some gentylmans house standinge a_lone , and
be demaunded whether they be man and wyfe , <font> and <$$font> if he
perceaue that any doubteth thereof , he sheweth them a Testimonial with
the ministers name , and others of the same parishe <paren> naminge a
parishe in some shere fare distant from the place where he sheweth the
same <$$paren> . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.93

This writing he carieth to salue that sore . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.94

Ther be many Irishe men that goe about with counterfeate licenses ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.95

and if they perceive you wil straytly examen them , they will immediatly
saye they can speake no Englishe . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.96

Farther , vnderstand for trouth that the worst and wickedst of all this
beastly generation are scarse comparable to these prating Pallyardes .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.97

All for the most parte of these wil either lay to their legs an herb
called Sperewort , eyther Arsnicke , which is called Ratesbane .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.98

The nature of this Spereworte wyll rayse a great blister in a night vpon
the soundest part of his body ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.99

and if the same be taken away , it wyl dry vp againe
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.100

and no harme . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.101

But this Arsnicke will so poyson the same legge or sore , that it will
euer after be incurable : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.102

this do they for gaine and to be pitied . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.103

The most of these that walke about be Walchmen .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,44.104

<P_45>

<heading>

A FRATER . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.107

CAP. 8 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.108

<$$heading>

Some of these Fraters will cary blacke boxes at their gyrdel , wher in
they haue a briefe of the Queenes maiesties letters patentes , geuen to
suche poore spitlehouse for the reliefe of the poore there , whiche
briefe is a coppie of the letters patentes , <font> and <$$font> vtterly
fained , if it be in paper or in parchment without the great seale .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.110

Also , if the same brief be in printe , it is also of auctoritie .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.111

For the Printers wil see <font> and <$$font> wel vnderstand , before it
come in presse , that the same is lawfull . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.112

Also , I am credibly informed that the chiefe Proctors of manye of these
houses , that seldome trauel abroad them selues , but haue their factors
to gather for them , which looke very slenderly to the impotent and
miserable creatures committed to their charge , <font> and <$$font> die
for want of cherishing ; wheras they <font> and <$$font> their wiues are
wel crammed <font> and <$$font> clothed , <font> and <$$font> will have
of the best . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.113

And the founders of euery such house , or the chiefe of the parishe wher
they be , woulde better see vnto these Proctors , that they might do
their duty , they should be wel spoken of here , and in the world to
come aboundantly therefore rewarded . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.114

I had of late an honest man , and of good wealthe , repayred to my house
to common wyth me aboute certeyne affaires . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.115

I inuited the same to dinner , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.116

and dinner beinge done , I demaunded of hym some newes of these parties
were hee dwelte . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.117

" Thankes be to God , syr , " <paren> saith he <$$paren> ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.118

" all is well <font> and <$$font> good now . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.119

" Now ! " <paren> quoth I <$$paren> " this same ' nowe ' declareth that
some things of late hath not bene wel . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.120

" Yes , syr , " <paren> <font> quoth <$$font> he <$$paren>
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.121

" the matter is not great . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.122

I had thought I should haue bene wel beaten within this seuenth night .
" HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.123

" How so ? " <paren> quoth I <$$paren> . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.124

" Mary , syr , " sayd he , " I am Counstable for fault of a better ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.125

and was commaunded by the Iusticer to watch . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.126

The watch being set , I toke an honest man , one of my neighbors , with
me , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.127

and went vp to the ende of the towne as far as the spittle_house , at
which house I heard a great noyse , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.128

and , drawing nere , stode close vnder the wall ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,45.129

and this was at one of the clocke after midnight . <P_46> Where he
harde swearinge , pratinge , and wagers laying , and the pot apase
walkinge , and xl. pence gaged vpon a matche of wrastling , pitching of
the barre , and casting of the sledge . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.130

And out they goe , in a fustian fume , into the backe syde , where was a
great Axiltrye , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.131

and there fell to pitching of the barre , being thre to thre .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.132

The Moone dyd shine bright , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.133

the Counstable with his neighboure myght see and beholde all that was
done . And howe the wyfe of the house was rostinge of a Pyg , whyle her
gestes were in their matche . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.134

At the laste they coulde not agree vpon a caste ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.135

and fell at wordes , and from wordes to blowes .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.136

The Counstable with his fellowe runnes vnto them , to parte them ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.137

and in the partinge lyckes a drye blowe or two .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.138

Then the noyse increased ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.139

the Counstable woulde haue had them to the stockes .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.140

The wyfe of the house runnes out with her goodman to intreat the
Counstable for her gestes , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.141

and leaues the Pyg at the fyre alone . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.142

In commeth two or three of the next neighboures , beinge waked wyth this
noise , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.143

and into the house they come , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.144

and fynde none therein , but the Pygge well rosted ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.145

and carieth the same awaye wyth them , spyte and all , with suche breade
and drinke also as stoode vpon the table . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.146

When the goodman and the goodwyfe of the house hadde intreated and
pacified the Counstable , shewinge vnto him that they were Proctors and
Factores all of Spyttell_houses , and that they taryed there but to
breake theyr fast , and woulde ryde awaye immediatelye after , for they
had farre to goe , and therefore mente to ryde so earlye . And comminge
into their house agayne , fyndinge the Pygge wyth bread and drincke all
gonne , made a greate exclamation , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.147

for they knewe not who had the same . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.148

The Counstable returning and hearinge the lamentable wordes of the good
wyfe , howe she had lost both meate and drinke , and sawe it was so in
deede , hee laughed in his sleue , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.149

and commaunded her to dresse no more at vnlawfull houres for any gestes
. HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,46.150

For hee thought it better bestowed vppon those small feastes his poore
neighboures <P_47> then vppon suche sturdye Lubbares .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.151

The nexte mornynge betymes the spitte and pottes were sette at the
Spittle_house doore for the owner . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.152

Thus were these Factours begyled of theyr breakefast ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.153

and one of them hadde well beaten an other ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.154

" And , by my trouth , " <paren> quoth thys Counstable <$$paren> " I was
gladde when I was well ryd of them . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.155

" Why , " quoth I , " coulde they {COM:preceding_word_"they"_emended}
caste the barre and sledge well ? " HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.156

" I wyll tell you , syr , " <paren> quoth hee <$$paren>
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.157

" you knowe there hath bene manye games this Sommer .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.158

I thinke verely , that if some of these Lubbars had bene there , and
practysed amongest others , I beleue they woulde haue carryed awaye the
beste games . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.159

For they were so stronge and sturdye , that I was not able to stande in
their handes . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.160

" Well " <paren> quoth I <$$paren> " at these games you speake of , both
legges and armes bee tryed . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.161

" Yea , " quoth this offycer , " they bee wycked men .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.162

I haue seene some of them sithens wyth cloutes bounde aboute theyr
legges , and haltynge wyth their staffe in their handes . Wherefore
some of theym , by God , bee nought all . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.163

<heading>

A ABRAHAM MAN . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.165

CAP. 9 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.166

<$$heading>

These Abrahom men be those that fayne themselves to haue beene mad , and
have bene kept eyther in Bethelem or in some other pryson a good tyme ,
<font> and <$$font> not one amongst twenty that euer came in pryson for
any such cause : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.168

yet wyll they saye howe pitiously and most extreamely they haue bene
beaten , and dealt with_all . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.169

Some of these be merye and verye pleasant , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.170

they wyll daunce and sing ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.171

some others be as colde and reasonable to talke wyth_all .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.172

These begge money ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.173

eyther when they come at Farmours howses they wyll demaunde Baken ,
eyther cheese , or wooll , or any thinge that is worthe money .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.174

And if they espye small company within , they wyll with fierce
countenaunce demaund some what . Where for feare the maydes wyll geue
theym largely to be ryd of theym . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.175

If they maye conuenyently come by any cheate , they wyl picke and steale
, as the vpright {COM:preceding_word_"vpright"_emended} man or Roge ,
poultrey or lynnen . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.176

And all wemen that wander bee at their commaundemente .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.177

Of all that euer I saw of this kynde , one naminge him selfe Stradlynge
is the craftiest and moste dyssemblyngest Knaue .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,47.178

<P_48>

Hee is able wyth hys tounge and vsage to deceaue and abuse the wysest
man that is . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.180

And surely for the proportion of his body , with euery member there vnto
appertayninge , it can@ @not be a_mended . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.181

But as the prouerbe is " God hath done his part . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.182

Thys Stradlyng sayth he was the Lord Sturton@ @s man ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.183

and when he was executed , for very pensiuenes of mynde , he fell out of
his wytte , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.184

and so continued a yeare after and more ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.185

and that with the very greefe and feare , he was taken wyth a marueilous
palsey , that both head and handes wyll shake when he talketh , with
anye and that a_pase or fast , where by he is much pytied , and getteth
greately . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.186

And if I had not demaunded of others , bothe men and women , that
commonly walketh as he doth , and knowen by them his deepe dissimylation
, I neuer hadde vnderstand the same . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.187

And thus I end wyth these kynde of vacabondes .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.188

<heading>

A FRESHE WATER MARINER OR WHIPIACKE . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.190

CAP. 10 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.191

<$$heading>

These Freshwater Mariners , their shipes were drowned in the playne of
Salisbery . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.193

These kynde of Caterpillers counterfet great losses on the sea ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.194

these bee some Western men , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.195

and most bee Irishe men . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.196

These wyll runne about the countrey wyth a counterfet lycence , fayninge
either shypwracke , or spoyled by Pyrates , neare the coaste of Cornwall
or Deuonshyre , and set a lande at some hauen towne there , hauynge a
large and formall wrytinge , as is aboue sayd , with the names and
seales of suche men of worshyppe , at the leaste foure or fiue , as
dwelleth neare or next to the place where they fayne their landinge .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.197

And neare to those shieres wyll they not begge , vntyll they come into
Wylshyre , Hamshyre , Barkeshyre , Oxfordshyre , Harfordshyre ,
Middelsex , and so to London , and downe by the ryuer to seeke for their
shyppe and goods that they neuer hade : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.198

then passe they through Surrey , Sossex , by the sea coasts , and so
into Kent , demaunding almes to bring them home to their country .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.199

Some tyme they counterfet the seale of the Admiraltie .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.200

I haue diuers tymes taken a_waye from them their lycences , of both
sortes , wyth suche money as they haue gathered ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.201

and haue confiscated the same to the pouerty nigh adioyninge to me .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,48.202

And they wyll not <P_49> beelonge with_out another .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,49.203

For at anye good towne they wyll renewe the same .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,49.204

Once wyth muche threatninge and faire promises , I required to knowe of
one the {TEXT:missing_"the"} companye who made their lycence .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,49.205

And they sweare that they bought the same at Portsmouth , of a Mariner
there , and it cost them two shillinges ; with such warrantes to be so
good and efectuall , that if any of the best men of lawe , or learned ,
aboute London , should peruse the same , they weare able to fynde no
faute there with , but would assuredly allow the same .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,49.206

<P_50>

{COM:image_and_verse_omitted}

<P_51>

<heading>

A COUNTERFET CRANKE . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.211

CAP. 11 . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.212

<$$heading>

These that do counterfet the Cranke be yong knaves and yonge harlots ,
that depely dissemble the falling sicknes . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.214

For the Cranke in their language is the falling euyll .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.215

I haue seene some of these with fayre writinges testimoniall , with the
names and seales of some men of worshyp in Shropshyre , and in other
Shieres farre of , that I haue well knowne , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.216

and haue taken the same from them . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.217

Many of these do go without writinges , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.218

and wyll go halfe naked , and looke most pitiously .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.219

And if any clothes be geuen them , they
{COM:preceding_word_"they"_emended} imnmediatly sell the same ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.220

for weare it they wyll not , because they would bee the more pitied ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.221

and weare fylthy clothes on their heades , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.222

and neuer go without a peece of whyte sope about them , which , if they
see cause or present gaine , they wyll priuely conuey the same into
their mouth , and so worke the same there , that they wyll fome as it
were a Boore , <font> and <$$font> maruelously for a tyme torment them
selves ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.223

and thus deceiue they the common people , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.224

and gayne much . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.225

These haue commonly their harlots as the other .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.226

Apon Alhollenday in the morning last Anno domini . 1566 , or my booke
was halfe printed , I meane the first impression , there came earely in
the morninge a Counterfet Cranke vnder my lodgynge at the whyte Fryares
, wythin the cloyster , in a lyttle yard or coorte , where aboutes laye
two or thre great Ladyes , being without the lyberties of London , where
by he hoped for the greatter gayne ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.227

this Cranke there lamentably lamentinge and pitefully crying to be
releued , declared to dyuers their hys paynfull and miserable dysease .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.228

I being rysen and not halfe ready , harde his dolfull wordes and rufull
mornings , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.229

hering him name the falling sicknes , thought assuredlye to my selfe
that hee was a depe desemblar ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.230

so , comminge out at a sodayne , and beholdinge his vgly and yrksonle
attyre , hys lothsome and horyble countinance , it made me in a
meruelous parplexite what to thinke of hym , whether it were fayned or
trouth , - HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.231

for after this manner went he : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.232

he was naked from the wast vpward , sauyng he had a old Ierken of
leather patched , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.233

and that was lose about hym , that all his bodye laye out bare ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,51.234

a filthy foule cloth he ware on his head , <P_52> being cut for the
purpose , hauing a narowe place to put out his face , with a bauer made
to trusse vp his beard , and a stryng that tyed the same downe close
aboute his necke ; with an olde felt hat which he styll caried in his
hande to reccaue the charytye and deuotion of the people ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.235

for that woulde he hold out from hym ; hauyng hys face , from the eyes
downe ward , all smerd with freshe bloud , as thoughe he had new falen ,
and byn tormented wyth his paynefull panges , - his Ierken beinge all
be_rayde with durte and myre , and hys hatte and hosen also , as thoughe
hee hadde wallowed in the myre : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.236

sewerly the sighte was monstrous and terreble .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.237

I called hym vnto me , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.238

and demaunded of hym what he ayled . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.239

" A , good maister , " quoth he , " I haue the greuous and paynefull
dyseas called the falynge_syckenes . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.240

" Why , " quoth I , " howe commeth thy Ierken , hose , and hat so
be_rayd with durte and myre , and thy skyn also ? "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.241

" A , good master , I fell downe on the backesyde here in the fowle lane
harde by the watersyde ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.242

and there I laye all_most all night , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.243

and haue bled all_most all the bloude owte in my bodye . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.244

It raynde that morninge very fast ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.245

and whyle I was thus talkinge with hym , an honest poore woman that
dwelt thereby brought hym a fayre lynnen cloth ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.246

and byd hym wype his face therewyth ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.247

and there beinge a tobbe standing full of rayne water , offered to geue
hym some in a dishe that he might make hym selfe cleane :
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.248

hee refuseth the same . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.249

" Why dost thou so ? " quoth I . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.250

" A , syr , " sayth he , " yf I shoulde washe my selfe , I shoulde fall
to bleedinge a freshe againe , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.251

and then I should not stop my selfe : " HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.252

these wordes made me the more to suspecte hym .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.253

Then I asked of hym where he was borne , what is {COM:sic} name was ,
how longe he had this dysease , and what tyme he had ben here about
London , and in what place . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.254

" Syr , " saythe he , " I was borne at Leycestar ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.255

my name is Nycholas Genings , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.256

and I haue had this falling sycknes viij. yeares ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.257

and I can get no remedy for the same ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.258

for I haue it by kinde , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.259

my father had it and my friendes before me ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.260

and I haue byne these two yeares here about London , and a yeare and a
halfe in bethelem . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.261

" Why , wast thou out of thy wyttes ? " quoth I .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.262

" Ye , syr , that I was . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,52.263

<P_53>

" What is the Kepars name of the house ? " HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.265

" Hys name is , " quoth hee , " Iohn Smith . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.266

" Then , " quoth I , " hee must vnderstande of thy dysease ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.267

yf thou hadest the same for the tyme thou wast there , he knoweth it
well . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.268

" Ye , not onely he , but all the house bee_syde , " quoth this Cranke ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.269

" for I came thens but within this fortnight . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.270

I had stande so longe reasoning the matter wyth him that I was a cold ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.271

and went into my chamber HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.272

and made me ready , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.273

and commaunded my seruant to repayre to bethelem , and bringe me true
worde from the keper there whether anye suche man hath byn with him as a
prisoner hauinge the dysease aforesayd , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.274

and gaue hym a note of his name and the kepars also :
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.275

my seruant , retorninge to my lodginge , dyd assure me that neither was
there euer anye such man there , nether yet anye keper of any suche name
; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.276

but hee that was there keper , he sent me hys name in writing ,
afferming that hee letteth no man depart from hym vnlesse he be fet
a_waye by hys freendes , and that none that came from hym beggeth aboute
the Citye . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.277

Then I sent for the Printar of this booke , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.278

and shewed hym of this dyssembling Cranke , and how I had sent to
Bethelem to vnderstand the trouth , and what aunswere I receaued againe
, requiringe hym that I might haue some seruant of his to watche him
faithfully that daye , that I might vnderstand trustely to what place he
woulde repaire at night vnto , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.279

and thether I promised to goe my selfe to see their order , and that I
woulde haue hym to associate me thether : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.280

hee gladly graunted to my request , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.281

and sent two boyes , that both diligently and vygelantly accomplisht the
charge geuen them , and found the same Cranke aboute the Temple , where
about xii. of the clocke he wente on the backesyde of Clementes Ine
without Temple barre : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.282

there is a lane that goeth into the Feldes ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.283

there hee renewed his face againe wyth freshe bloud , which he caried
about hym in a bladder , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.284

and dawbed on freshe dyrte vpon his Ierken , hat , and hoson .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.285

And so came backe agayne vnto the Temple , and sometyme to the Watersyde
, HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.286

and begged of all that passed bye : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.287

the boyes behelde howe some gaue grotes , some syxe pens , some gaue
more ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,53.288

<P_54>

for hee looked so ougleie and yrksomlye , that euerye one pytied his
miserable case that beehelde hym . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.290

To bee shorte , there he passed all the daye tyll night approched ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.291

and when it began to bee some what dark , he went to the water syde
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.292

and toke a Skoller , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.293

and was sette ouer the Water into Saincte Georges feldes , contrarye to
my expectatian ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.294

for I had thought he woulde haue gonne into Holborne or to Saynt Gylles
in the felde ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.295

but these boyes , with Argues and Lynces eyes , set sewre watche vppon
him , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.296

and the one tooke a bote HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.297

and followed him , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.298

and the other went backe to tell his maister . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.299

The boye that so folowed hym by Water , had no money to pay for his Bote
hyre , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.300

but layde his Penner and his Ynkhorne to gage for a penny ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.301

and by that tyme the boye was sette ouer , his Maister , wyth all
celeryte , hadde taken a Bote HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.302

and followed hym apase : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.303

now hadde they styll a syght of the Cranke , wych crossed ouer the
felddes towardes Newyngton , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.304

and thether he went , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.305

and by that tyme they came thether it was very darke :
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.306

the Prynter hadde there no acquaintance , nether any kynde of weapon
about hym , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.307

nether knewe he how farre the Cranke woulde goe , becawse hee then
suspected that they dogged hym of purposse ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.308

he there stayed hym , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.309

and called for the Counstable , whyche came forthe dylygentelye to
inquyre what the matter was : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.310

thys zelous Pryntar charged thys offycer wyth hym as a malefactor and a
dessemblinge vagabonde - HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.311

the Counstable woulde haue layde him all night in the Cage that stode in
the streate . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.312

" Naye , " saythe this pitifull Prynter , " I praye you haue him into
your house ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.313

for this is lyke to be a cold nyght , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.314

and he is naked : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.315

you kepe a vytellinge house ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.316

let him be well cherished this night , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.317

for he is well hable to paye for the same . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.318

I knowe well his gaynes hath byn great to_day , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.319

and your house is a sufficient pryson for the tyme ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.320

and we wil there serche hym . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.321

The Counstable agreed there vnto : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.322

they had him in , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.323

and caused him to washe him selfe : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.324

that donne , they demaunded what money he had about hym .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.325

Sayth this Cranke , " So God helpe me , I haue but xii. pence , "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.326

and plucked oute the same of a lytle pursse . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.327

" Why , haue you no more ? " quoth they . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.328

" No , " sayth this Cranke , " as God shall saue my soule at the day of
iudgement . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.329

" We must se more , " quoth they , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,54.330

<P_55>

and began to stryp hym . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.332

Then he plucked out a nother purse , wherin was xl. pens .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.333

" Toushe , " sayth thys Prynter , " I must see more . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.334

Saythe this Cranke , " I pray God I bee dampned both body and soule yf I
haue anye more . " HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.335

" No , " sayth thys Prynter , " thou false knaue , here is my boye that
dyd watche thee all this daye , and sawe when such men gaue the peeses
of sixe pens , grotes , and other money ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.336

and yet thou hast shewed vs none but small money . "
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.337

When thys Cranke hard this , and the boye vowinge it to his face , he
relented , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.338

and plucked out another pursse , where in was eyght shyllings and od
money ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.339

so had they in the hole that he had begged that day xiij. shillings
iii. pens halfepeny . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.340

Then they strypt him starke naked , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.341

and as many as sawe him sayd they neuer sawe hansommer man , wyth a
yellowe flexen beard , and fayre_skynned , withoute anye spot or greffe
. HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.342

Then the good wyfe of the house fet her goodmans olde clocke ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.343

and caused the same to be cast about him , because the sight shoulde not
abash her shamefast maydens , nether loth her squaymysh sight .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.344

Thus he set downe at the Chemnes end , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.345

and called for a potte of Beere , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.346

and dranke of a quarte at a draft , HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.347

and called for another , and so the thyrde , that one had bene
sufficient for any resonable man , the Drynke was so stronge .
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.348

I my selfe , the next morninge , tasted thereof ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.349

but let the reader iudge what and howe much he would haue dronke and he
had bene out of feare . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.350

Then when they had thus wrong water out of a flint in spoyling him of
his euyl gotten goods , his passing pens , <font> and <$$font> fleting
trashe , The printer with this offecer were in gealy gealowsit ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.351

and deuised to search a barne for some roges and vpright men , a quarter
of a myle from the house , that stode a_lone in the fieldes ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.352

and wente out about their busines , leauing this cranke alone with his
wyfe and maydens : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.353

this crafty Cranke , espying al gon , requested <font> the <$$font> good
wife that hee might goe out on the backesyde to make water , and to
exonerate his paunche : HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,55.354

she bad hym drawe the lache of the dore and goe out , neither thinkinge
or mistrusting he <P_56> would haue gon awaye naked ;
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,56.355

but , to conclude , when hee was out , he cast awaye the cloke ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,56.356

and , as naked as euer he was borne , he ran away , that he could neuer
be hard of againe . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,56.357

Now the next morning betimes , I went vnto Newington , to vnderstand
what was done , because I had word or it was day that there my printer
was ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,56.358

and at my comming thether , I hard the hole circumstaunce , as I above
haue wrytten ; HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,56.359

and I , seing the matter so fall out , tooke order with the chiefe of
the parish that this xiij. shyllings <font> and <$$font> iij. pens
halfpeny might the next daye be equally distributed , by their good
discrecions , to the pouertie of the same parishe ,
HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,56.360

and so it was done . HARMAN-1568-E1-P2,56.361

