<BEGIN_hayward-1612-e2-p2>

<P_29>

Whilst this mutatione was in working the Queene was not negligent to
winne the love of London , by supporting the liberties of the City ; to
gayne the good will of the Countrie , by erecting a military discipline
in every shire , and by giving pensiones and preferments to men of
actione ; which wrought exceeding both contentement and assurance , to
all the realme ; alsoe to hold men of worth in expectatione and hope ,
by taking a list of the most worthy men in every kind , with such alsoe
who had served her father , brother , or sister ; whoe were fitted
eyther with advancement or suites , agreeable both to their quality and
meritt ; lastly , to procure favour from the common people , by
relieving them against the exactiones of inferior officeres , not onely
by setting downe strict orderes against their abuses , but by severe
executiones of them . In_so_much as , by speciall appoyntement from
herselfe , a purveiour <paren> which sort of officers since the
destruction of wolves have been reputed the most noisome and vile vermin
in the realme , <$$paren> who had taken smelts for her provisione , and
sold them agayne at a higher price was sett three dayes upon the <P_30>
pillory in Cheapside , a bawdricke of smelts about his necke , and uppon
his foorehead a paper containing an inscriptione of his offence .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,30.3

Upon the last day one of his eares should have been slitt ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,30.4

but , by intreaty of the Lord Mayor , that part of his punishment was
exchanged for a long imprisonment . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,30.5

And , because money is the very spiritt and life of actiones , whether
peaceable or of armes , as without which neyther witts nor swords have
any edge , to come into purse , which Queen Mary had left quite drained
and exhaust , many unnecessary officers and attendants wer discharged ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,30.6

enquirie was made what grants had passed from Queen Mary , by
restitutione , gift , sale , or exchange , and to what valew they did
extend ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,30.7

Commissioners were appoynted to call in debts ; to take upp moneyes , at
home and abroade ; to make sales of lands ; to ferme out the customes of
London , and the Cinque Portes , for a yearely rent , and to take money
beforehand ; to demand of the Queenes tenants a yeares rent before hand
, and soe all of the Coppy-holderes westward . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,30.8

And , the better to inable men to contribute towardes the necessary
charges of state , excesse of apparrell in all degrees was much
restrained . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,30.9

And , during the continuance of this parliament , the Knightes and
Burgesses of the Lower house <paren> doubtful whither of themselves or
sett unto it by some lofty spiritt <$$paren> made suite to the Queene
that they might have accesse to her presence , to move a matter unto her
which they esteemed of great importance for the general <P_31> state of
all the realme . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,31.10

This was granted , and a certayne time of audience appoynted ; uppon
which daye she came foorth into the greate gallery at White-Hall ,
richly furnished in attire , and honorably attended .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,31.11

And , when she was placed in her royall seate , the Commones of the
Parliament wer brought before her . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,31.12

Here the Speaker delivered a sett oratione , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,31.13

but it plainely appeared that her eminent excellencyes , together with
the greatnesse of her state , made him feare the unworthinesse of every
word which he was about to present to her eares .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,31.14

The summe and substance of that which he sayde contayned a suite that
she would be pleased to dispose herselfe to marriage , as well for her
owne comfort and contentment , as for assurance to the realme by her
royall issue : that , if successione to the Crowne wer by this means
certaynely knowne , not onely those dangeres should be prevented which ,
after her death , might fall uppon the state , but those alsoe which ,
in the meane tyme , did threaten herselfe : and that , thereby , as well
the feares of her faythfull subjects and frendes , as the ambitious
hopes of her enimyes , should cleane be cutt offe .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,31.15

The Queene , after a sweete graced silence , with a princely
countenaunce and voyce , and with a gesture somewhat quicke but not
violent , returned answeare , that shee gave them greate thankes <paren>
as shee saw greate cause <$$paren> for the love and care which they did
expresse as well towardes her persone as the whole state of the realme ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,31.16

" and first " <paren> sayd shee <$$paren> " for the manner of your
petitione , I like it well , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,31.17

and take it in good part , because it is simple , without any
limitatione , eyther of persone or place . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,31.18

If it had beene otherwise ; if you had taken uppon you to confine , or
rather to bind , my choyse ; to draw my love to your likeinge ; to frame
my affectione according unto your fantasyes ; I must have disliked it
very much ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,31.19

for as , generally , the will desireth not a larger liberty in any case
then in this , soe had it beene a greate <P_32> presumptione for you to
direct , to limitt , to command me herein , to whome you are bound in
duty to obey . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,32.20

" Concerning the substance of your suite , since my yeeres of
understanding , since I was first able to take consideratione of my
selfe , I have hitherto made choyce of a single life , which hath best ,
I assure you , contented mee , and , I trust , hath beene most
acceptable to God ; from which , if , eyther ambitione of high estate ,
offered unto me by the pleasure and appoyntment of my prince , whereof I
have some testimony in this place <paren> as you our Treasurer well doe
know <$$paren> ; or , if avoyding the malice of my enemyes , or the very
danger of death itselfe , whose messenger , or rather continuall
watchman , the prince's indignatione , was dayly before my eyes ; if any
of these , I saye , could have dissuaded mee , I had not now remayned as
I doe . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,32.21

But soe constant have I always continued in this determinatione - albeit
my wordes and my youthe maye happily seeme hardly to agree - that it is
most trew I stand now free from any other meaning .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,32.22

Neverthelesse , if any of you suspect that , in case it shall please God
hereafter to change my purpose , I will determine something to the
prejudice of the realme , putt the jealousy out of your heades ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,32.23

for I assure you - what credit my assurance have with you I can not tell
, HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,32.24

but what it doth determine to have the sequell shall declare -
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,32.25

I will never conclude any thing in that matter which shall be hurtfull
to the realme , for the preservatione and prosperity whereof as a loving
mother I will never spare to spend my life . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,32.26

And uppon whomsoever my choyse shall fall he shall be as careful for
your preservatione , - I will not saye as myselfe , for I can not
undertake for another as for myselfe , - HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,32.27

but my will and best indeavour shall not fayle that he shal@ @be as
carefull for you as myselfe . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,32.28

And , albeit it shall please God that I still persevere in a virgines
state , yet you must not feare but he will soe worke , both in my hart
and in your wisdomes , that provisione shall be made , in convenient
tyme , whereby the realme shall not remayne destitute of an heyre who
maye <P_33> be a fitt governour , and , peradventure , more beneficiall
then such offspring as I should bring foorth , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,33.29

for , although I be carefull of your well-doings , and ever purpose soe
to be , yet may my issue degenerate , and grow out of kind .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,33.30

The dangeres which you feare are neyther soe certayne , nor of such
nature , but you may repose yourselves upon the providence of God , and
the good provisions of the state . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,33.31

Witts curious in casting things to come are often hurtfull , for that
the affayres of this world are subject to soe many accidents that seldom
doth that happen which the wisedome of men doth seeme to foresee .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,33.32

As for mee , it shall be sufficient that a marble stone shall declare
that a Queene , having lived and reigned soe many yeeres , died a
Virgine . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,33.33

And here I end , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,33.34

and take your comeing in very good parte , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,33.35

and agayne give harty thankes to you all ; yet more for your zeale , and
good meaning , then for the matter of your suite . "
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,33.36

These wer her wordes ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,33.37

there wanteth nothing but the grace wherewith shee delivered them ,
which gave such life to that which shee spake that {COM:sic} not onely
satisfied , but almost amazed , those that wer present .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,33.38

And , having once wonne opinione , every poynt of her behaviour was
afterwards observed , extolled , admired as excellent .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,33.39

And to this purpose have I declared this passage at large , that ,
thereby , we may perceive by what actions and abilityes shee advanced
herselfe to the highest pitch both of love and feare with all her
subjects , the true temper whereof is the heart of honour .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,33.40

Now , the yeare next before , the French King and the King of Spayne ,
with two mighty armies , affronted each other neere to the river of Some
, eyther of them beeing obstinately bent to drive the other out of the
feild . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,33.41

For this cause they intrenched their armies soe neere together , that it
was thought he must have been <P_34> a good man-at-armes whoe should
have parted them without battaile . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,34.42

Notwithstanding Christiann , Dutchesse of Lorraine , did soe incessantly
travaile betweene them , that , by her mediatione , commissioneres wer
appoynted , by both the Kings , to treate of peace .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,34.43

By thes , diverse conferences wer held that yeare , first at Lisle , and
after at the Abby of Eercampe , not farr from Dorlens ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,34.44

but nothing was concluded . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,34.45

This year , both the Kings sent their deputies to Chateau-Cambresi ,
about 6 leagues from Cambray , to which place the Queene of England sent
her Commissioneres , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,34.46

and soe did the Duke of Savoy . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,34.47

The Dutchesse of Lorayne came thither in persone , accompanied with the
young Duke , her sonne , whose honest endeavours to compound a peace
betweene thes parties , by persuasiones , by intreatyes , by all other
moderate meanes , hath gayned to her a perpetuall honor in the annalles
and histories of all thes nationes . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,34.48

At the last all differences wer accorded except the restitutione of
Calais to the English , which was both stifly demaunded by King Phillipp
and denyed by the French . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,34.49

King Phillipp held himselfe obliged in honor to procure a restitutione
of that towne , which , under his government , and principally in his
cause and quarrell , was lost . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,34.50

The French were unwilling to receive that people to any footing in
France whoe had soe roughly overtrampled all ther country before .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,34.51

But when they saw that , without performance of this conditione ,
nothing could be done , they studied onely how they might for the
present deferr it ; knowing right well that tyme worketh many advantages
, which neyther are contrived , nor can be conceived at <P_35> the first
. HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,35.52

To this purpose they imployed Guido Cavalcanti , a gentleman of Florence
, by whose meanes a speciall treaty was interteyned betweene the Queene
of England and the French King . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,35.53

And so effectually did Cavalcanti deale , that , in short tyme , it was
concluded , that Callais should remayne in possessione of the French
King for the terme of eyght yeares ; that , this terme beeing expired he
should render the same to the Queene of England , or else to forfeite to
her the summe of five_hundreth_thousand crownes ; that , for suerty of
the performance hereof , he should deliver fowre such hostages to the
Queene , as shee should thinke fitt , that , in case the money should be
payd , and the towne not rendered at the end of the sayd terme , yett
the right and title of the sayde towne , with the country adjoyning ,
should pertayne to the Crowne and Realme of England .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,35.54

And , further , by the same treaty , a peace was concluded betweene the
Realmes of England and Scotland ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,35.55

such fortresses in Scotland wer to be beaten downe , as had beene built
by the French and Scotts uppon the borderes towardes England .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,35.56

It is very like , that the Queene was lede to this speciall treaty and
agreement , partly by consideratione of her new and unsettled estate ,
the lesse assured by reasone of the greate mutatione which shee had made
, and partly for that shee had some cause of jealousy , least the French
King and the King of Spayne <paren> especially for the cause of
relligeone <$$paren> might be drawn to make a peace prejudiciall unto
her . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,35.57

But certayne it is , that in diverse of the greatest treaties betweene
England and France , many principall poyntes have not punctually beene
performed . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,35.58

<P_36>

Noe sooner was this agreement made , but Sir John Mason , Knight , and
Secretary for the French toungue , was foorthwith dispatched to signify
the same to the Queenes Commissioneres lying at Cambresi .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,36.60

Soe , the knot beeing loosed whereat onely the Commissioneres did sticke
, a generall peace was presently concluded betweene all the partyes
mentioned before , ther Realmes , Dominiones , and subjectes , which ,
uppon the seaventh daye of Aprill , was publickly proclaimed at London .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,36.61

Upon the xxij=th= of Aprill the Lord Wentworth , late deputy of Callais
, was araigned , at Westminster , uppon an inditement of treasone ,
which had beene fownd agaynst him in Queene Maryes tyme , for the losse
of Callais . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,36.62

But , all circumstances beeing well examined , he was acquitted by his
Peeres . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,36.63

This actione I have esteemed worthy the memory , first for the rarenesse
thereof , because very few before , and not any since , have , uppon the
like triall , beene acquitted ; Secondly , to manifest the justice of
that tyme , for , assuredly , in cases of this nature , the Attorney
Generall hath never had cause , but under a good and moderate prince .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,36.64

Afterward , Hurleston , who had beene captayne of Risebancke , and
Chamberleyne , who had beene captayne of the castle of Callais , wer
arraigned , and alsoe condemned of treasone , for that at the first
approach of the enemy , without assault , without battery , without
necessity , they abandoned ther charges ; whereby Risebanck was taken
without any resistance , and the Towne was entred at the Castle , which
is commonly the last peece that holdeth out . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,36.65

Uppon the viij=th= of Maye the parliament dissolved ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,36.66

and , albeit princes , in the beginning of ther reigne , doe commonly
rather give then receive , yet in regard that the treasure of the Realme
was consumed , the revenewes of the Crowne diminished , and the <P_37>
Crowne much indebted , in regard alsoe of the greate charges which the
Queene was both presently occasioned , and did in short tyme after not
onely suspect , but expect certeynly , to susteyne , a subsidie was
granted of ij@ @=s=. viij@ @=d=. the pownd for moveable goodes , and
of iiij@ @=s=. the pownd for land , from all persones , as well
spirituall as temporall , within the Realme . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,37.67

This yeare John , Duke of Finland , second sonne to Gustavus King of
Sueden , was sent into England by the King his father , to deale for a
marriage betweene the Queene and Ericus the eldest sonne to the said
Gustavus . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,37.68

He arrived at Harwich in Essex about the end of September ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,37.69

and was ther honorably received by the Earle of Oxford and the Lord
Robert Dudley , and by them conducted from thence to London .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,37.70

He had in his owne trayne about fifty persones well mounted ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,37.71

the Earle of Oxford alsoe , and the Lord Robert Dudley , wer followed
with a fayre attendance both of gentlemen and yeomen .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,37.72

At London he was received by diverse Knights and gentlemen of the court
, and lodged at the Bishopp of Winchestere@ @s place in Southwarke .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,37.73

Here he remayned untill two dayes before Easter next following ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,37.74

and then departed towardes his country , having fully requited his
honorable usage with very civill and modest behaviour .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,37.75

At his returne Gustavus was deade , and Ericus possessed of his state ,
who , suspecting that his brother John had demeaned himselfe <P_38>
eyther faintly or falsely in his businesse , committed him to prisone .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,38.76

Afterwardes he attempted the same suite agayne ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,38.77

and was againe in like sort refused . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,38.78

In October , a solemne obsequie was kept in Paules church for Henry the
Second , King of France . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,38.79

He died of a wound received in the eye , as he ran at tilt against Count
Mountgomery , in honor of the marriage betweene the Lady Margaret , his
sister , and Philebert Duke of Savoy . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,38.80

Some wright , that the splitteres of the broken staffe peirced through
the sight of his beaver , beeing somewhat open :
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,38.81

others affirme , that his beaver slipped downe at the instant when the
staffes did breake . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,38.82

After his death Francis , his eldest sonne , being about sixteene or
seventeene yeares of age , succeeded in his state , whoe the same yeare
had taken to wife Mary the Queene of Scotland , daughter to James the
fift by Mary of Lorraine , daughter to Claude the first Duke of Guise .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,38.83

Of this Queene I must now speeke , soe farr onely as may suffice to open
the occasiones of such enterprises as I am to declare betweene the
English and the French in Scotland . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,38.84

The residue shall more fully and fitly be supplyed afterward .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,38.85

<heading>

THE SECOND YEARE . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,38.87

<$$heading>

Marie Stuart , the onlie daughter to Jeames the fift Kinge of Scotland
begane her reigne over the Realme of Scotland upon the 18=th= daie of
December in the yeare 1542 , beinge then not above seaven daies old , so
that almost the world did no soner <P_39> behold her an infant , then a
Quene ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,39.89

no soner was she borne , but forthwith she was a Quene ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,39.90

and no soner was she a Quene , but forthwith she was desired by Henry ,
then Kinge of England , to be assured in marriage to prince Edward , his
onlie sonne , beinge then not past six yeares of age .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,39.91

To this purpose he called before him the Earles of Cassill and Glencarne
, the Lords Maxwell and Fleminge , and diverse others who had bene taken
in the warres , and were deteyned prisoners in England ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,39.92

upon these he bestowed their libertie , and manie liberall promises
besides , in case they would faithfullie endeavour to effect this
marriage . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,39.93

This they liked well , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,39.94

this they undertooke with great declaracion both of diligence and hoope
, HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,39.95

and so returned into Scotland ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,39.96

here they acquaynted the Governor with the King's request , perswadinge
him that this marriage would be exceedinge advantageable to the Realme
of Scotland , as well for extinguishinge warres with a people more
mightie , and for participatinge benefitts from a people more
{COM:preceding_word_"more"_emended} wealthy
{COM:preceding_word_"wealthy"_emended} then were themselves ; that it
was more convenient to knit Scotland with England then with anie other
Realme whatsoever , in regard as well of the scituacion of the Countries
, not onlie joyned togither , but divided from all the world beside , as
of the nature of the people not much differinge in the language , or in
fashion and behaviour of life . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,39.97

Hereupon the Governor assembled the nobilitie of the Realme at Edenburgh
, where they concluded that a parliament should be held in March next
ensuinge , to give perfection and forme to this busines .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,39.98

In the mean tyme Sir Ralph Sadler , Knight , was sent Embassador from
King Henry the Eight of England to the Deputie and other Lords of
Scotland , who dealt so earnestlie , and advisedlie too , that
authoritie was given by parliament to the Earle of Glencarne , Sir
George Douglas , Sir William Humellton , Sir Jeames Leirmouth , and one
of the Secretaries of State , to conclude <P_40> this busines with the
Kinge . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,40.99

These Commissioners passed into England , with whom , before the end of
Julie , all covenants were agreed , and enterchaungeably were sealed ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,40.100

the marriage was contracted , and a peace established for ten yeares .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,40.101

The French all this while were so enterteyned with warres against the
Emperour , that they litle attended theise procedings ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,40.102

but when they understood of this conclusion , both of marriage and of
peace , they applied all their endeavours to dissolve it ; ffirst , with
intent to empeache the greatenes and strength of the Kinge of England ;
afterwards , to win Marie Queene of Scotts to be knit in marriage with
Francis , who afterward was Kinge of France . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,40.103

To this purpose the Frenche Kinge sent for Matthew Earle of Leneox , who
then served under his pay in the warres of Italie ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,40.104

and furnished him with monie , forces and freindes , to recover the
regencie of the realme of Scotland from the Earle of Arraine , who then
did possesse it , and to reverse such pactions as he had made .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,40.105

The pope sent also the patriarche of Apulia , as his legate a latere
into Scotland , who in the name of the pope did assure both forces and
monie to be sent into Scotland against the Englishe ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,40.106

he drewe all the Clergie of the Realme to the side , of whom manie were
, as in peace factious , so of no great use for the warres .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,40.107

One the other side , the Kinge of England did not faile to support his
partie with supplies ; whereby a long , and very great warre , both for
importaunce and varietie of accidents , was raysed in Scotland , betwene
the two Realmes of England and France . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,40.108

In the yeare 1548 the yonge Quene was conveied over by seas out of
Scotland into France , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,40.109

and afterwards the regencie of the Realme was comitted to the Queene
Dowager her mother , who much favoured and affected the French , as
beinge of the same <P_41> nation by birth . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,41.110

In the yeare 1558 she was married to Frances , then Dolphin , but before
he expired Kinge of France . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,41.111

And nowe it might have been conjectured , that , by reason as well of
her marriage , as of the death of Kinge Edward the Sixt , the warres
should have been {COM:preceding_word_"been"_emended} extinguished :
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,41.112

but it often falleth out that , the causes of thinges ceasinge , the
effects , once set on foote , continue their courses .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,41.113

In the yeare followinge a provinciall counsell of all the prelates and
Clergie of Scotland was assembled at Edenburgh ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,41.114

and herein the temporall state required that praiers might be read and
sacramentes administred in the Scottishe language ; that election of
Bishops and beneficed men should passe by voices of the people , with
diverse other like articles of alteration ; all which were no lesse
stoutlie denied by the Clergie , than the laie people did stiffelie
demaund them . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,41.115

The Queene Regent caused fower ministeres , Knox , Wullock , Douglasse ,
and Meffane , to be sumoned to Strevellinge , as principall firebrandes
of these demands , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,41.116

and , for want of appearance , they were denounced rebells , and put to
the horne . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,41.117

But it is a great poynt of wisdome to make true conference betwene the
nature of injuries and abilitie to revenge ; to fore-cast <paren> I saie
<$$paren> <P_42> whether the hurt of revenginge will not exceed the
harmes alredie receyved ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,42.118

for Knox was followed by manie men of principall qualitie and degree ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,42.119

and , to these , the multitude adioyned themselves , who made the
example of the nobilitie a sufficient warrant for all their actions .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,42.120

And nowe , supposinge he could not escape , either by lurkinge or
submission , he set his saftie upon bold advise .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,42.121

Hereupon he assembled manie of his followers , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,42.122

and , haveinge first inflamed them to furie by a sermon , they began in
Perth , otherwise called St. John's towne , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,42.123

and from thence proceeded in other places , to pull downe images and
altars , to abolishe reliques , and to overthrowe howses of religious
persons , seizinge upon their lyvinges and goodes ; not the weakest
argument for their overthrowe . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,42.124

And thus it happened to the Quene Regent , as is reported of a beare ,
which , beinge stunge by a bee , tore the hive , and , thereby , brought
the whole swarme about her eares . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,42.125

Agayne , the remedie which she used was farre more dangerous then the
disease , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,42.126

for she did all togither followe the advise of the French .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,42.127

She used their aide cheiflie against those enterprises , whereas , in
verie truth , whatsoever was pretended , her immoderat both favouringe
and trustinge of the French was the principall occasion of all those
stirres , and especially for that she reposed almost absolute credit and
faith in the counsell of Mounseir Doysell and Rubee , who were adioyned
to her by the States of Scotland . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,42.128

For no people will easilie endure that more should be attributed within
their state , either in trust or authoritie , to others than themselves
. HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,42.129

So William , Kinge of Cicelie , by makinge a Frenchman his chanchellor ,
gave occasion to Cicelian evensong . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,42.130

So the Duke of Britaine , by callinge the Englishe into Britaine , was
enforced himself to flie into England ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,42.131

and this was the cheif cause whereby the Englishe lost Aquitane ; and ,
afterward , the French Naples . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,42.132

<P_43>

But the Quene Regent , persistinge in her errour , tooke two_thousand
Frenche men undir the command of Mounsair Doysell ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,43.134

and , ioyninge to them certeyne bands of Scotts , entered Perth by
appoyntement HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,43.135

and placed a good garison therein ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,43.136

afterwards she fortified Leth , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,43.137

defeated the lords of Scotland , nere to the Abbey of Holieroode-howse ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,43.138

entered and possessed Edenburgh , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,43.139

and either raised or repaired manie other peices of good conditions for
defence ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,43.140

and , further , she receyved newe forces out of France , under the
conduct of Mounseir de la Brosse , leivetenant generall , and of
Mounseur Martignes , Colonell of the foote . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,43.141

The Bishop of Amiens , and thre Doctors of Sorbone , passed with these
companies into Scotland , to assist the Quene Regent for affaires of
religion . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,43.142

These knewe right well , that , besids the countenaunce of the Regent ,
amongest the Scotts their partie was good , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,43.143

and as for anie other nation their reckoninge was , that , if they came
with a greate armie , the place would soone reduce them to some
necessitie ; if with a slender strength , they should limit their
fortunes well inoughe . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,43.144

The Scottishe Lords were unable of them selves to beare head against
this storme , and the rather for that all the great artillary of the
realme was in the power of the Quene Regent , and of the Captaine of
Edenburgh Castle ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,43.145

they begane also to frame feares , that , as the French were possessed
of the person of their Quene , so they would seise upon her state , even
under colour of her authoritie . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,43.146

They sawe that by the meanes of Mounsair Rubee , who had bene an
advocate in the Courte of Paris , and was then one of the principall in
counsell with the Quene Regent , the ancient orders of the realme were
altered , newe customes and impositions brought in , agreable to the
lawes and customes of France . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,43.147

By the counsell of Count Martignes all the country about Lieth was laid
wast , bycause it should afford no releif to anie that should beseige
the towne . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,43.148

Labrosse signified his opinion into France <P_44> <paren> whose lettres
were intercepted in the cariage <$$paren> that all the nobilitie of
Scotland should be destroyed , and a_thousand men at armes out of France
placed in their castles , to kepe the comen multitude in subjection .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,44.149

The Bishop of Amiens gave incoragement to put to death not onlie those
that imbraced not the Catholeke Religion , but those also , that did not
favour the faction of France , in_so_much that he had openlie reproched
the French soldiers , for enduringe their master's enimies to lyve .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,44.150

Hereupon the Lords of Scotland did more than probably <paren> as they
thought <$$paren> conjecture , that , whatsoever was pretended in shewe
, yet the French Kinge , either by his own ambition , naturall almost to
all great princes , or through insolence of those who guided his
affayres , had a secret purpose to enlarge his dominions ; that
supposinge all his purposses were faire , suposinge that he intended
that he pretended , yet no man could assure howe he would moderate
himself when all thinges should stand at his discretion :
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,44.151

no man could then assure that he would onlie impeach attempts for change
of religion , that he would no further bridle the people , that he would
not oppresse them , that he would not subvert the lawes and governement
of the Realme , and annexe it to the Crowne of France ; that , howsoeuer
publicke affayres might be carried , yet , in regard of their particuler
safties , there was left no midlinge either place or advice ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,44.152

they had gonne so farre they could not goe backe ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,44.153

they must of necessitie perishe or prevaile ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,44.154

they might playe the fooles to half . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,44.155

Hereupon diverse of the nobilitie to the number of 28 persons addressed
themselves to the Quene of England , intreatinge her , under manie
arguments both of amitie and compassion , under manie workinge reasons
of state , to be aidinge unto them , in dislodginge the French out of
their countryes , not meaneinge <paren> as they said <$$paren> to
perswade her to partialitie , not to enterpose betwene her affection and
anie person whatsoeuer , but to desire her with <P_45> an indifferent
hand , she would help to uphold in their proper states , first her
neighbours , then herself . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,45.156

The Quene , to cover herself with manie excuses , alledginge that her
owne state was not well established , as neither herself beinge setled
in authoritie nor her subjects in obedience , that she was not so
ambicious either of the hate or hassarde of warre , as without urgent
necessitie to drawe them upon her , that she desired to communicate so
litle as she could in a warre betwene two nations so nere unto her ,
that she had lately concluded a peace with the French Kinge , that a
prince is not bownd to aide one confederate against another , and
therefore she would answer them as they of Massilia answered Caesar in
the warres against Pompey , - if they came peaceably and as freinds ,
they were both welcome ; if as enimies , neither .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,45.157

The Lords of Scotland beinge so inflamed with this answere , that it did
inflame them the more , " your unsettled and uncerteyne state " <paren>
said they <$$paren> " is no sufficient grownd to withdrawe you from this
action , because the undertakinge of great enterprises abroad , is the
most assured meanes to divert away disquiet at home .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,45.158

In your peace with the French Kinge it was expressly comprised that such
fortresses should be beaten downe , as had bene built in Scotland by the
French . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,45.159

But have they done so ? HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,45.160

is this condition well performed ? HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,45.161

Nothinge lesse , they have fortified more stronglie since than before ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,45.162

they send over such companies dailie , that it draweth nowe to a plaine
invasion . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,45.163

Howe should you accompt them persons in a league ?
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,45.164

or , if you do , yet manie tymes a prince not onlie maie , but , both in
honor and justice , is bownde to aide one confederate against another :
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,45.165

assuredlie in this cause , manie respects may justlie move you to
undertake the aideinge of us against the French .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,45.166

" For , first , we are your more ancient allies :
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,45.167

we are ioyned more to you in nearer termes of confederacion ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,45.168

we are almost <P_46> naturally knit in our bodie with you ; in which
case the Romanes did help and aid the Campanians against the Samnites
their ancient confederates , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,46.169

and so the Switzers did aid usually their fellowe Switzers against all
other confederates whatsoeuer . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,46.170

Agayne , a confederate that hath a good cause should be mayntayned
against another , who by unjust armes oppugneth another ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,46.171

for this is sometyme expressed in leagues , that if anie of the
associates make warr upon the other , the residue shall assist the cause
that is just . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,46.172

But the French do nowe attempt upon us onlie <paren> as they pretend
<$$paren> for matter of religion . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,46.173

We desire to reforme our church , and to conforme it to tymes of
antiquitie , wherin we follow your owne example ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,46.174

your self for doeinge the like before us have thereby not onlie approved
our action , but bownd your self in honor to support it , partlie for
that we have taken imitacion from you , and partly for that your actions
shal@ @be iustified by beinge imbraced and followed by others ;
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,46.175

for naturally we are bownd to defend , even strangers , even against our
very freinds ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,46.176

no freindship maie debarre us from drivinge dangers from the necks of
others , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,46.177

yea in all civill respects you must preserve your neighbours both from
ruine and change , if you will suerly provide for the stabilitie of your
self . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,46.178

" Lastlie , omit these respects to us , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,46.179

and consider <paren> which commonlie is the end of aidinge others
<$$paren> howe nerelie the cause concernes your self :
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,46.180

our young Quene is married into France , where she nowe lyveth as a
stranger both to them and us , unable to use the liberty of her crowne ,
partely by reason of her tender yeares , and partlie for that the French
King , her husband , beinge no lesse yonge both in age and judgement
then her self , is wholly governed by his mother , and by the Duke of
Guise , unckle to the <P_47> Quene . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,47.181

These , as if France susteyned not calamitie inoughe by chalenginge the
dominion of Milane , Naples , and Flanders , have also , under colour of
her name , pretended title to your crowne ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,47.182

they have proclaymed her Quene of your dominion .
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,47.183

She assumed the armes and stile of England and Ireland ,
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,47.184

and annexed them to the stile and armes of Scotland and France :
HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,47.185

thus are publicke instruments made . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,47.186

" And nowe , to what end is this invasion of Scotland , but to open an
entraunce thereby into England ? HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,47.187

what assurance either of peace or of saftie can you expect , when you
shal@ @be so nerely approched , and almost invironed with , then , by
those who do pretend a title to your Crowne and have alredy imbraced the
same in their ambicious hopes ? HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,47.188

can anie respect debarr you from deffendinge your self , from providinge
for your self , from shakinge your enimies from of your skirts , from
takinge the alarme against you in good tyme ? HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,47.189

Let others sit downe and lament their losses ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,47.190

it is the part of wise men to sit downe , and foresee , and to prevent
them . " HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,47.191

The Quene , whose deliberacions depended much upon herself , was neither
ignorant nor irresolute what to doe , and also not unskillfull to carry
affayres in fayrest forme , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,47.192

and therefore , albeit she both graciouslie enterteyned and heard the
Lords of Scotland , yet received they nothinge for the present , but
onlie hopes doubtfull and weake ; HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,47.193

afterwards she dispatched manie messengers of assurance and credit , as
well to the French Kinge as also to those that managed his state
cheifely , requestinge them to forbeare their fortifications , and
withdrawe their forces out of Scotland , accordinge to the capitulations
of their late league : HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,47.194

but receiveinge an answere nothinge answerable to her demand , she
undertooke the action , HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,47.195

and appointed thereto forces and order . HAYWARD-1612-E2-P2,47.196

