<BEGIN_henry-1531-e1-p2>

<P_1.2,16,E>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CVI_KING_HENRY_THE_EIGHTH_TO_WILLIAM_LORD_DACRE_A._D._1530>

<P_1.2,17,E>

HENRY R. By the King . HENRY-1531-E1-P2,1.2,17,E.5

Right trusty and welbeloved we grete you well
HENRY-1531-E1-P2,1.2,17,E.6

and forasmoche as the most reverend fader in God our right trustly
{COM:sic} and right entierly welbeloved the Lord Cardinall Archebisshop
of York dothe now repayre into those partyes , mynding to reside in that
his Province for the bettre administration of the cure to hym committed
, which now of long season hathe ben orbate and destitute of an
archebisshop there resident ; HENRY-1531-E1-P2,1.2,17,E.7

and consequently it shal@ @be the more nedeful unto hym to have the
favorable and lovyng assistance of the noble men and other in those
partyes : HENRY-1531-E1-P2,1.2,17,E.8

We therfor wol and desyre youe not oonely to shewe yourself unto hym
from tyme to tyme of toward and benevolent mynde , using , entreatyng ,
and accepting hym as to his dignitie dothe apperteyn , but also in suche
things as shall concerne either the administration of hys sayd cure or
the fortheraunce of hys owne reasonnable causes , with the good ordre of
hys church , and things apperteynyng to the same , ye woll be to hym
conforting , ayding , helping , and assisting , as we specyally
<P_1.2,18,E> trust youe . HENRY-1531-E1-P2,1.2,18,E.9

Yeven under our Signet at our Castell of Wyndesore the xxviij=ti=
{TEXT:sic} daye of Marche . HENRY-1531-E1-P2,1.2,18,E.10

To the richt trusty and welbiloved the Lord Dacre our Counsaillor .
HENRY-1531-E1-P2,1.2,18,E.11

<P_38,H>

<heading:edcomment:6_HENRY_VIII_TO_THE_FIRST_EARL_OF_CUMBERLAND,_13_JUNE_1530>

To our right trustie and right welbeloved cousin th@ @erle of
Cumberlande . HENRY-1531-E1-P2,38,H.14

Henricus Rex By the Kinge HENRY-1531-E1-P2,38,H.15

Right trustie and right welbeloved cousin wee greete you well .
HENRY-1531-E1-P2,38,H.16

And albeit for certaine matters of great importance touchinge us and the
wealth of this our realme , wee were minded to send for you to repaire
hither unto us . Yet tendringe your labors and eschewinge your charges
in the same , wee have thought good to send unto you our trustie
servantes William Brererton {COM:sic} , one of the Gentlemen of our
Privie Chamber and Robert Leighton our Chaplin and Thomas Writhesley one
of the clerkes of our Signet , to open and declare our mind and pleasure
unto you , desireinge you to give firme credence unto the same .
HENRY-1531-E1-P2,38,H.17

And straightly charge you to keepe secret such matter as they shall shew
unto you without disclosinge or communicatinge it to any personne or
then those whome ye understand by your said servantes to be made privie
thereunto without failing as wee singulerly trust you .
HENRY-1531-E1-P2,38,H.18

Yeven under our signett at our castell of Windesor the xiijth day of
June . HENRY-1531-E1-P2,38,H.19

<heading:edcomment:7_HENRY_VIII_TO_THE_SIXTH_EARL_OF_NORTHUMBERLAND,_24_AUGUST_1532>

<heading:edcomment:A_COPPIE_OF_A_LETTRE_FROM_HIS_MAJESTIE_TO_MY_LORD_OF_CUMBERLANDE>

Right trustie and right welbeloved cousin wee greete you well .
HENRY-1531-E1-P2,38,H.22

And forasmuch as wee bee enformed the borderers of Scotland have of late
<P_39,H> made divers roades into our East and Middle Marches to the
greate damage and hurt of our subjectes there , due redresse whereof our
officers , as they write unto us , can@ @not attaine of the kinge of
Scottes . So as wee accompt our self bound for the safegard and defence
of our said subjectes to provide and furnish a convenient garrison to
lie uppon the wide borders untill such time as wee may otherwise take
order therein , wee therfore will and desire you , and likewise
comaundinge you by these presentes authorishe the same , to putt in a
readines and retaine of your tenantes and servantes the number of
two_hundreth able men , well horsed , with bowes and arrowes , in
sufficient array so as they faile not to be at our towne of Newcastle
the xviijth day of September next comeinge , to serve us in the said
garrison under the leadeinge of a captaine to be by you appointed ,
whome wee require you to make Roger Lassells , a man thought unto us
verie meete for the same . Signifieinge unto you that forasmuch as the
fewer of th@ @inhabitantes of Northumberland be retained in the said
garrison the stronger shall the country bee as yee cann by your wisedome
consider , our pleasure is therfore that there bee in no wise above two
personages inhabitantes of Northumberland in every hundreth of your said
number ne yet of the inhabitantes of your mannor of Cokermouth for
disfurnishinge of those partes . HENRY-1531-E1-P2,39,H.23

And as for conducte money , and money for coates for your said men , wee
have appointed payment to be made at our citty of Yorke the xijth day of
September next ensueuing {COM:sic} by th@ @andes of our trustie and
welbeloved servant Sir George Lawson knight where fore sendinge thither
therfore ye shall not faile to have the same paid accordingly .
HENRY-1531-E1-P2,39,H.24

And as for instructions how and after what sorte and fashion wee will
have the said garrison ordered , wee shall with all diligence send the
same unto you . HENRY-1531-E1-P2,39,H.25

Yeuen under our signett att our monastarie of Abbington the xxiiijth day
of August . HENRY-1531-E1-P2,39,H.26

