<BEGIN_hooker-b-1614-e2-p2>

<P_49>

28 HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,49.3

To make a wicked and a sinful man most holy through his beleeuing , is
more then {it_is} to create a world of nothing .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,49.4

Our faith most holy ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,49.5

Surely <font> Solomon <$$font> <P_50> could not shew the Queene of
<font> Saba <$$font> so much treasure in all his kingdo~e , as is lapt
vp in these words . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,50.6

O that our hearts were stretched out like tents , & that the eies of our
vnderstanding were as bright as the sunne , that we might throughly
knowe the riches of the glorious inheritance of Saints , and what is the
exceeding greatnesse of his power towards vs , whome he accepteth for
pure , and most holy , through our beleeuing . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,50.7

O that the spirit of the Lord would giue this doctrine entrance into the
stonie and brasen hart of the Iew , which followeth the law of
righteousnes but can@ @not attaine vnto the righteousnesse of the law .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,50.8

Wherefore ? saith the Apostle . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,50.9

They seeke righteousnesse , and not by faith . Wherefore they stumble
at Christ , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,50.10

they are bruised , shivered to peeces as a ship that hath runne her
selfe vpon a rocke . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,50.11

O that God would cast downe the eies of the prowd , and humble the
soules of the high_minded , that they might at length abhorre the
garments of their owne flesh which can@ @not hide their nakednesse , and
put on the faith of Christ Iesus , as hee did put it on , which hath
said ; <font> Doubtlesse I thinke all things but losse for the excellent
knowledge sake of Christ Iesus my Lord , for whom I haue counted all
things losse , and doe iudge them to be dung , that I might winne Christ
, and might be found in him , not hauing mine owne righteousnes , which
is of the law , but that which is through the faith of Christ , even the
righteousnesse which is of God through faith . <$$font>
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,50.12

O that God would open the Arke of mercy , wherein this doctrine lyeth ,
and set it wide before the eies of poore afflicted consciences , which
fly vp and downe <P_51> vpon the water of their afflictions , & can see
nothing but only the gulfe and deluge of their sinnes , wherein there is
no place for them to rest their feet . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,51.13

The God of pittie and compassion giue you al strength & courage , every
day , and every houre , & every moment , to build , and edifie your
selues in this most pure & holy faith . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,51.14

And thus much both of the thing prescribed in this exhortatio~ , & also
of the properties of the thing . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,51.15

Build your selues in your most holy faith . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,51.16

I would co~e to the next branch , which is of <font> Prayer <$$font> ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,51.17

but I ca~@ @not lay this matter out of my ha~ds , til I haue added
somwhat for the applying of it both to others , & to our selues .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,51.18

29 HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,51.19

For your better vnderstanding of matters contained in this exhortation ,
<font> Build your selues <$$font> , you must note , that every Church
and congregatio~ doth consist of a multitude of beleeuers , as every
house is built of many stones . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,51.20

And although the nature of the mystical body of the Church be such ,
that it suffereth no distinction in the invisible members , but whether
it be <font> Paul <$$font> or <font> Apollos <$$font> , Prince or
Prophet , hee that is taught , or he that teacheth , all are equally
Christs , & Christ is equally theirs : yet in the externall
administration of the Church of God , because God is not the author of
confusion but of peace , it is necessary that in every Congregation
there be a distinction , if not of inward dignitie , yet of outward
degree : so that all are Saints , or seeme to be Saints , and should bee
as they seeme . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,51.21

But are all Apostles ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,51.22

If the whole bodie were an eie , where were then the hearing ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,51.23

God therfore hath giuen some to be Apostles , and some to be Pastours ,
&c. for the edification~ of the body of Christ . <P_52> In which worke
we are Gods labourers , saith the Apostle , & yee are Gods husbandry , &
Gods building . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,52.24

30 . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,52.25

The Church respected with reference vnto administration ecclesiastical ,
doth generally consist but of 2 sorts of men , the <font> Labourers
<$$font> , & the <font> Building <$$font> ; they which are ministred
vnto , and they to whom the worke of the ministery is committed ; <font>
Pastours <$$font> & the <font> flocke <$$font> , over whom the holy
Ghost hath made them overseers . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,52.26

If the <font> Guid <$$font> of a Congregation <paren> be his name or his
degree whatsoever <$$paren> be diligent in his vocation , feed the
flocke of God which dependeth vpon him , caring for it not by constraint
but willingly , not for filthie lucre , but of a ready mind , not as
though hee would tyrannize over Gods heritage , but as a patterne vnto
the flocke , wisely guiding them : if the people in their degree doe
yeeld themselues frameable to the truth , not like rough stone or flint
refusing to bee smoothed and squared for the building : if the
Magistrate doe carefully and diligently survey the whole order of the
worke , providing by statutes and lawes , & bodily punishments , if need
require , that all things may be done according to the rule which can@
@not deceaue , even as <font> Moses <$$font> provided that all things
might be done according to the patterne which hee saw in the Mount ;
there the words of this exhortation are truely and effectually heard .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,52.27

Of such a Congregation every man will say , <font> Behold a people that
are wise , a people that walke in the statutes and ordinances of their
God , a people full of knowledge and vnderstanding , a people that haue
skill in building themselues . <$$font> HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,52.28

Where it is otherwise there , <font> as by slothfulnesse the roofe doth
decay <$$font> , & as <font> by idlenesse <P_53> of hands the house
droppeth thorough <$$font> , as it is in the 10. of Ecclesiastes , v.
18 , so first one peece and then another of their building shal fall
away , till there be not a stone left vpon a stone .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.29

31 HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.30

We see how fruitlesse this exhortation hath bene to such as bend all
their trauaile onely to build and {TEXT:missing_"and"} manage a <font>
Papacie <$$font> vpon earth , without any care in the world of building
the~selues in their most holy faith . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.31

Gods people haue enquired at their mouthes , <font> What shall we doe to
haue eternall life ? <$$font> HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.32

where-in shall we build & edifie our selues ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.33

And they haue departed ho~e fro~ their Prophets , & from their priests ,
laden with doctrines , which are precepts of men ;
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.34

they haue bene taught to tire out themselues with bodily excercise ;
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.35

those thinges are inioyned them which God did never require at their
hands , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.36

and the things he doth require are kept fro~ the~ ;
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.37

their eies are fed with pictures , and their eares filled with melodie ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.38

but their soules do wither , and starue , and pine away ;
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.39

they crie for bread , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.40

and behold stones are offered them ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.41

they aske for fishe , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.42

and see they haue scorpions in their hands ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.43

Thou seest , O Lord , that they builde themselues , but not in faith ;
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.44

they feede their children but not with food ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.45

Their rules say with shame , Bring , & not build .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.46

But god is righteous ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.47

their dru~kennesse stinketh , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.48

their abominations are knowne , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.49

their madnesse is manifest , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.50

the winde hath bound them vp in hir wings , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.51

and they shall be ashamed of their doings . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.52

<font> Ephraim <$$font> , saith the <font> Prophet <$$font> , is ioyned
to Idoles , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.53

let him alone , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,53.54

I will turne me therfore from the Preists which do minister vnto Idoles
, & applie this exhortation to the~ whom <P_54> god hath appointed to
feede his chosen in Israell . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.55

32 HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.56

If their be any feeling of Christ , and drop of heavenly dewe , any
spark of Gods good spirit within you , stirre it vp ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.57

be careful to build and edifie first your selues , & then your flockes
in this most holy faith . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.58

33 HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.59

I say , <font> first your selues <$$font> ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.60

For he which wil set the hearts of other men on fire with the loue of
Christ , must himselfe burne with loue . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.61

It is want of faith in our selues , My Brethren , which maketh vs
retchlesse {GLOSS:carelesse} in building others .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.62

We forsake the Lords inheritance HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.63

and feed it not . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.64

What is the reason of this ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.65

Our own desires are setled where they should not be .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.66

Wee our selues are like those women which haue a longing to eate coales
, and lime , and filth ; HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.67

we are fed , some with honour , some with ease , some with wealth ;
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.68

the Gospell waxeth loathsome & vnpleasant in our tast ;
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.69

how should we then haue a care to feed others with that which we can@
@not fancie our selues ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.70

If <font> faith <$$font> wax cold , and slender in the <font> heart
<$$font> of the <font> Prophet <$$font> , it will soone perish from the
eares of the people . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.71

The Prophet <font> Amos <$$font> speaketh of a famine , saying , <font>
I will send a famine in the land , not a famine of bread , nor a thirst
of water , but of hearing the word of the Lord .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.72

Men shall wander from sea to sea , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.73

and from the north vnto the east shall they runne to and fro to seeke
the word of the Lord , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.74

and shall not find it . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.75

Iudgement must beginne at the house of God <$$font> , saith <font> Peter
<$$font> . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.76

Yea , I say , at the sanctuarie of God this iudgeme~t must begin .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.77

This famine must begin at the hart of the Prophet .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.78

He must haue darknes for a vision , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.79

hee must stumble at noone daies , as at the twi-light ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.80

and then truth shall fall in middest of the streets ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,54.81

then shall the <P_55> people wander from sea to sea ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,55.82

and from the North vnto the east shall they runne to and fro to seeke
the word of the Lord . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,55.83

34 HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,55.84

In the second of Haggaie , <font> speake now <$$font> , saith God to his
prophet , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,55.85

<font> Speake now to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel Prince of Iudah , &
to Iehoshua the son of Iebozadak the high priest , & to the residue of
the people , saying , who is left among you that saw this house in hir
first glory , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,55.86

and how doe you see it now ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,55.87

is not this house in your eies , in comparison of it , as nothing ?
<$$font> HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,55.88

the prophet would haue all mens eies turned to the veiw of the~selues ,
every sort brought to the consideration of their present state .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,55.89

This is no place to shew what dutie <font> Zerubbabel <$$font> or <font>
Iehoshua <$$font> doth owe vnto God in this respect .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,55.90

They haue I doubt not such as put them hereof in remembra~ce .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,55.91

I aske of you which are a part of the residue of Gods elect & chosen
people . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,55.92

Who is their amongst you that hath take~ a survey of the house of God ,
as it was in the daies of the blessed Apostles of Iesus Christ ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,55.93

who is there amongst you that hath seen & con~sidred this holy temple in
her first glory ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,55.94

& how do you see it now ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,55.95

Is it not in comparison of the other almost as nothing whe~ ye look vpo~
the~ that haue vndertake~ the charge of your soules , & know how far
these are for the most part growne out of kind , how few there be that
tread the steps of their ancient predecessors ,
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,55.96

yee are easily filled with indignation , easily drawne vnto these
co~plaints , wherein the difference of present fro~ former times is
bewailed , easily persuaded to think of the~ that lived to enioy the
daies which now are gon . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,55.97

Surely they were happy in co~parison of vs that haue <P_56> succeeded
them : HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.98

were not their Bishops me~ vnreprovable , wise , righteous , holy ,
te~perat , wel reported of even of those which were without ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.99

were not their Pastours , guids , & teachers , able & willing to exhort
with wholso~e doctrine & to improue which gainesaid the truth ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.100

had they priests made of the refuse of the people ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.101

were men , like to the children which were in <font> Niniveh <$$font> ,
unable to discerne betweene the right hand & the left , presented to the
charge of their congregation ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.102

did their teachers leaue their flocks over which the holy Ghost had made
them overseers ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.103

Did their Prophets enter vpon holy things as spoils , without a reverend
calling ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.104

were their leaders so vnkindly affected towards the~ that they could
find in their hearts to sel them as sheepe or oxen , not caring how they
made them away ? HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.105

But beloued , deceaue not your selues . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.106

Doe the faults of your guids and pastours offend you ?
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.107

it is your fault if they bee thus faulty . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.108

<font> Nullus qui malu~ rectore~ patitur , eu~ accuset , quia sui fuit
meriti perversi pastoris subiacere ditioni <$$font> , saith S. <font>
Gregory <$$font> , HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.109

whosoever thou art whom the inco~venience of an evil governor doth
presse , accuse thy selfe , & not him . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.110

His being such , is thy deseruing HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.111

<font> O yee disobedient children , turn again <$$font> , saith the Lord
, <font> & the~ wil I giue you pastours according to mine own hart ,
which shall feed you with knowledge & vndersta~ding <$$font> .
HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.112

So that the only way to repaire all ruines , breaches , & offensiue
decaies in others , is to begin reformation at your selues . Which that
we may all sincerely , seriously , and speedily doe , God the Father
grant for his sonne our Saviour Iesus sake , vnto whom with the holy
Ghost , three persons , one Eternall and everlasting God , be Honour ,
and Glory , and Praise forever . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.113

<font> Amen <$$font> . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.114

Finis . HOOKER-B-1614-E2-P2,56.115

