<BEGIN_hooker-a-1614-e2-p2>

<P_19>

Will you iudge of wheat by chaffe which the winde hath scattered from
amongst it ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,19.3

Haue the children no bread because the dogs haue not tasted it ?
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,19.4

Are Christians deceived of that salvatio~ they looked for , because they
denied the ioies of the life to come which were no Christia~s ?
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,19.5

What if they seemed to bee pillers and principall vpholders of our faith
? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,19.6

What is that to vs , which know that Angels haue fallen from heaven ?
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,19.7

Although if these men had beene of vs indeed , <paren> O the blessednes
of a Christian mans estate ! <$$paren> they had stood surer then the
Angels , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,19.8

they had never departed from their place . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,19.9

Whereas now we mervaile not at their departure at all , neither are we
prejudiced by their falling away ; because they were not of vs , sith
they are fleshly and haue not the <P_20> spirit .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.10

Children abide in the house for ever ; HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.11

they are bondmen and bondwomen which are cast out .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.12

13 HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.13

It behoveth you therefore greatly every ma~ to examine his owne estate ;
and to try whether you be bond or free , children or no children .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.14

I haue tolde you already that we must beware we presume not to sit as
Gods in iudgement vpon others , and rashlie , as our conceipt and fancie
doth lead vs , so to determine of this man , he is sincere , or of that
man , he is an hypocrit , except by their falling away they make it
manifest and knowne what they are . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.15

For who art thou that takest vpon thee to iudge another before the time
? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.16

Iudge thy selfe . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.17

God hath left vs infallible evidence , whereby we may at any time giue
true & righteous sentence vpon our selues . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.18

We can@ @not examine the harts of other men , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.19

we may our owne . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.20

That we haue passed from death to life , we knowe it , saith S=t= <font>
Iohn <$$font> , because we loue our brethren : HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.21

& knowe yee not your owne selues , how that Iesus Christ is in you ,
except yee bee reprobates ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.22

I trust , beloued , wee knowe that wee are not reprobates , because our
spirit doth bear vs record , that the faith of our Lord Iesus Christ is
in vs . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.23

14 HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.24

It is as easie a matter for the spirit within you to tell whose yee are
, as {it_is} for the eies of your body to iudge where you sit , or in
what place you stand . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.25

For what saith the Scripture ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,20.26

Yee , which were in times past strangers and enimies , because your
minds were set on evill workes , Christ hath now reconciled in the body
of his flesh through death , to make you holy , <P_21> and vnblameable ,
and without fault in his sight : if you continue grounded and
established in the faith , and bee not moved away from the hope of the
Gospell , <font> Colos. I <$$font> . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.27

And in the third to the <font> Coloss. <$$font> yee knowe that of the
Lord yee shall receiue the reward of that inheritance ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.28

for yee serue the Lord Christ . If wee can make this account with our
selues ; HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.29

I was in times past dead in trespasses and sinnes ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.30

I walked after the prince that ruleth in the aire , & after the spirit
that worketh in the children of disobedience ; HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.31

but God , who is rich in mercy , through his great loue , wherewith he
loued me , eve~ when I was dead , hath quickned me in Christ .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.32

I was fierce , heady proud , high_minded ; HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.33

but God hath made me like the child that is newly wained :
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.34

I loved pleasures more then God ; HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.35

I followed greedily the ioies of this present world ;
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.36

I esteemed him , that erected a stage or theatre , more then <font>
Solomon <$$font> which built a Temple to the Lord ;
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.37

the Harpe , Viole , Timbrell , & Pipe , men singers & wome~ singers were
at my feasts , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.38

it was my felicity to see my children dance before me ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.39

I said of every kind of vanitie , O how sweet art thou vnto my soule !
All which things now are crucified to me , and I to them :
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.40

now I take as great delight in the way of thy testimonies , O Lord , as
in all riches , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.41

now I finde more ioy of heart in my Lord and Saviour , then the
worldly_minded man , when his wheate and oyle do much abound :
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.42

now I tast nothing sweet , but the bread that came downe from heaven ,
to giue life vnto the world : HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,21.43

now mine eyes see nothing , but <P_22> Iesus rising from the dead :
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,22.44

now my eare refuseth all kind of melodie to heare the song of them that
haue gotten victory of the beast , and of his image , and of his marke ,
and of the number of his name , that stand on the sea of glasse , hauing
the harpes of God , and singing the song of <font> Moses <$$font> the
servant of God , and the song of the Lambe , saying , Great and
marvailous are thy workes , Lord God Almightie ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,22.45

iust & true are thy waies , O king of Saints .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,22.46

Surely if the spirit haue been thus effectuall in the secret worke of
our regeneration vnto newnesse of life ; if wee endeavour thus to frame
our selues anew , then we may say boldly with the blessed Apostle in the
10. to the <font> Hebrews , We are not of them which withdraw our
selues to perdition , but which follow faith to the conservation of the
soule . <$$font> HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,22.47

For they that fall away from the grace of God , and separate themselues
vnto perdition , they are fleshly and carnall ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,22.48

they haue not Gods holy spirit . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,22.49

But vnto you , because yee are sonnes , God hath sent forth the spirit
of his sonne into your hearts , to the end yee might knowe , that Christ
hath built you vpon a rocke vnmoueable , that he hath registred your
names in the booke of life ; that hee hath bound himselfe in a sure and
everlasting covenant to be your God , & the God of your children after
you , that hee hath suffered as much , groned as oft , prayed as
heartily for you as for <font> Peter , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,22.50

O father keepe them in thy name ! HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,22.51

o righteous father the world hath not knowne thee ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,22.52

but I haue knowne thee , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,22.53

and these haue knowne that thou hast sent me , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,22.54

I haue declared thy name vnto them , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,22.55

and will declare it , that the <P_23> loue wherewith thou hast loued me
, may be in them , and I in them . <$$font> HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,23.56

The Lord of his infinite mercy giue vs hearts plentifully fraught with
the treasure of this blessed assurance of faith vnto the end .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,23.57

14 HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,23.58

Here I must advertise all men , that haue the testimonie of Gods holy
feare within their breasts , to consider how vnkindly , and iniuriously
our owne countrimen and brethren haue dealt with vs by the space of
foure_and_twentie yeares , from time to time , as if we were the men of
whom <font> S. Iude <$$font> here speaketh ; never ceasing to charge vs
, some with schisme , some with heresie , some with plaine and manifest
apostasie , as if we had cleane separated our selues from Christ ,
vtterly forsaken God , quite abiured heaven , & trampled all truth and
all religion vnder our feet . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,23.59

Against this third sort , God himselfe shall pleade our cause , in that
day , when they shall answer vs for these words , not we them .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,23.60

To others by whom we are accused for schisme and heresie , wee haue
often made our reasonable , and in the sight of God , I trust ,
allowable answers . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,23.61

For in the way which they call <font> heresie <$$font> , wee worship the
God of our fathers , beleeuing all things which are written in the law &
the Prophets . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,23.62

That which they call <font> schisme <$$font> , wee knowe to bee our
reasonable service vnto God , and obedience to his voice , which cryeth
shrill in our eares , <font> Go out of Bablyon my people , that you be
not partakers of her sinnes , and that yee receaue not of her plagues .
<$$font> HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,23.63

And therefore when they rise vp against vs , hauing no quarrel but this
, we need not to seeke any farther for our Apologie , then <P_24> the
words of <font> Abiah <$$font> to <font> Ieroboam <$$font> & his armie ,
<font> 2. Chr. 13. O Ieroboam and Israel , heare you me ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,24.64

ought you not to knowe , that the Lord God of Israel hath giuen the
kingdome over Israel to David , for ever , even to him & to his sonnes
by a covenant of salt ? <$$font> that is to say , an everlasting
covenant . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,24.65

Iesuits & Papists , heare yee me , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,24.66

ought you not to knowe , that the Father hath giuen al power vnto the
sonne , and hath made him the only head over his Church , wherein he
dwelleth as an husba~dman in the midst of his vineyard , manuring it
with the sweat of his owne browes , not letting it forth to others ?
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,24.67

For as it is in the Canticle , <font> Solomon <$$font> had a vineyard in
<font> Baalhamon <$$font> , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,24.68

he gaue the vineyard vnto keepers every one bringing for the fruit
thereof a_thousand peeces of silver ; HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,24.69

but my vineyard which is mine is before me , saith Christ .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,24.70

It is true this is meant of the mysticall head set over the body which
is not seene , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,24.71

but as he hath reserved the mysticall administratio~ of the church
invisible vnto himselfe , so hee hath committed the mysticall government
of co~gregations visible to the sonnes of David by the same couenant ;
whose sonnes they are in the governing of the flock of Christ ,
who~soever the holy ghost hath set over the~ to goe before them & to
leade them in their seuerall pastures , one in this co~gregation ,
another in that : as it is written , <font> Take heede vnto your selues
, and to all the flocke , whereof the holy ghost hath made you overseers
, to feed the church of God , which hee hath purchased with his owne
blood . <$$font> HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,24.72

Neither wil ever any Pope or Papist vnder the cope of heaven bee able to
proue the Romish Bishops <P_25> vsurped supremacy over all Churches , by
any one word of the covenant of salt , which is the Scripture .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,25.73

For the children in our streets doe now laugh them to scorne , when they
force , <font> thou art Peter <$$font> , to this purpose .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,25.74

The Pope hath no more reason to draw the charter of his vniversall
authoritie from hence , then the brethren had to gather by the wordes of
Christ , in the last of <font> S. Iohn <$$font> , that the Disciple ,
whome Iesus loued , should never die . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,25.75

<font> If I will that he tarry till I come , what is that to thee ?
<$$font> saith Christ ; HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,25.76

Straight waies a report was raysed amongst the brethren , that this
disciple should not die , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,25.77

yet Iesus said not to him , <font> Hee shall not die , but if I will
that he tarry till I come , what is that to thee ? <$$font>
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,25.78

Christ hath said in the 16 of <font> S. Matthewes <$$font> Gospell to
Simon the sonne of <font> Ionas , I say to thee , thou art Peter .
<$$font> HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,25.79

Hence an opinion is held in the world that the Pope is vniversall head
of all Churches , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,25.80

yet Iesus said not the pope is vniversall head of all Churches , but
<font> Tu es Petrus <$$font> , Thou art <font> Peter <$$font> .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,25.81

Howbeit , as <font> Ieroboam <$$font> the sonne of <font> Nebat <$$font>
the servant of <font> Solomon <$$font> , rose vp and rebelled against
his Lord , and there were gathered vnto him vaine men and wicked , which
made themselues strong against <font> Ieroboam <$$font> the sonne of
<font> Solomon <$$font> , because <font> Roboam <$$font> was but a child
, and tender_hearted , and could not resist them : so the sonne of
perdition and man of sinne , being not able to brooke the words of our
Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ , which forbad disciples to be like
princes of nations , <font> They beare rule and are called gracious , it
shall not bee so with you <$$font> , hath risen vp and rebelled against
his Lord , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,25.82

& to <P_26> strengthen his arme , he hath crept into the houses almost
of all the noblest families round about him , and taken their children
from the cradle to be his Cardinals , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,26.83

he hath fawned vpon the kings and princes of the earth ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,26.84

& by spirituall cousenage hath made them sell their lawfull authoritie
and iurisdiction for titles of <font> Catholicus , Christianissimus ,
Defensor fidei <$$font> , and such like , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,26.85

he hath proclaimed sale of pardons to inveigle the ignorant , built
seminaries to allure young men desirous of learning , erected <font>
Stewes <$$font> , to gather the dissolute vnto him .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,26.86

This is the rocke wherevpon his Church is built .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,26.87

Hereby the man is growne huge and strong , like the Cedars , which are
not shaken with the wind , because Princes haue beene as children ,
over_tender_hearted , and could not resist . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,26.88

Hereby it is come to passe , as you see this day , that the man of sinne
doth warre against vs , not by men of a language which we can@ @not
vnderstande , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,26.89

but he commeth as <font> Ieroboam <$$font> against <font> Iuda <$$font>
, HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,26.90

& bringeth the fruit of our owne bodies to eat vs vp , that the bowels
of the childe may be made the mothers graue , that he hath caused no
small number of our brethren to forsake their natiue country , & with
all disloialty to cast off the yoke of their allegeance to our dread
Soveraigne , whom God in mercy hath set over them , for whose sauegard ,
if they caried not the hearts of Tygers in the bosomes of men , they
woulde thinke the dearest blood in their bodies wel spent .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,26.91

But now , saith <font> Abiah <$$font> to <font> Ieroboam <$$font> , yee
thinke yee be able to resist , the kingdome of the Lorde , which is in
the hands of <P_27> the sonnes of David . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,27.92

Yee be a great multitude , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,27.93

the golden calues are with you , which <font> Ieroboam <$$font> made you
for Gods , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,27.94

haue yee not driven away the priests of the Lord the sonnes of <font>
Aaron <$$font> , and the Levites , & haue made you priests like the
people of natio~s ? HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,27.95

whosoever commeth with a young bullocke and seaven rammes , the same may
bee a priest of them that are no Gods . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,27.96

If I should follow the comparison , & here vncover the cup of those
deadly and ougly abominations , where with this <font> Ieroboam <$$font>
of whom we speake hath made the earth so drunke that it hath reeled
vnder vs , I know your godly hearts would loath to see them .
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,27.97

For my own part I delight not to rake in such filth ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,27.98

I had rather take a garment vpon my shoulders , and go with my face from
them to cover them . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,27.99

The Lord open their eies , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,27.100

and cause them , if it be possible , at the length to see , how they are
wretched , and miserable , and poore , and blinde , and naked !
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,27.101

Put it O Lord in their hearts to seeke white raiment , and to cover
themselues , that their filthy nakednes may no longer appeare !
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,27.102

For , beloved in Christ , we bow our knees , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,27.103

& lift vp our hands to heaven in our chambers secretly ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,27.104

& openly in our churches we pray hartily , & howrely even for them also
; though the Pope haue given out as a Iudge in a solemne declaratory
sentence of <font> excommunication <$$font> against this land , that our
gracious Lady hath quite abolished <font> praiers <$$font> within her
realme , HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,27.105

and his schollers , whom he hath taken from the midst of vs , haue in
their published writings charged vs not only not to haue any holy
assemblies vnto the Lorde <P_28> for praier , but to hold a common
schoole of sinne & flattery , to hold sacrilege to be Gods service ,
vnfaithfulnesse and breach of promise to God to giue it to a strumpet to
be a vertue ; to abandon fasting , to abhor confession , to mislike with
penance , to like well of vsury , to charge none with restitution , to
finde no goode before God in single life , nor in no well_working ; that
all men , as they fal to vs are much woorsed , and more , then
{was_the_case} afore , corrupted . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,28.106

I do not adde one word or sillable vnto that , which <font> M=r= Bristow
<$$font> , a man both borne and sworne amongst vs , hath taught his hand
to deliver to the view of all . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,28.107

I appeale to the co~science of every soule , that hath beene truely
converted by vs ; whether his heart were never raised vp to God by our
preaching ; whether the words of our exhortation never wrong any teare
of a penitent heart from his eies ; whether his soule never reaped any
ioy , any comfort , any consolation in Christ Iesus , by our sacraments
, and praiers , and Psalmes , & thanksgivings ; whether he were never
bettered , but alwaies worsed by vs . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,28.108

O merciful God ! if heaven and earth in this case do not witnesse with
vs , and against them , let vs bee razed out from the land of the living
! HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,28.109

let the earth , on which we stand , swallow vs quicke , as it hath done
<font> Corah , Dathan , <$$font> and <font> Abiram <$$font> !
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,28.110

But if we belong vnto the Lord our God , and haue not forsaken him , if
our priests the sonnes of <font> Aaron <$$font> minister vnto the lord ,
and the Levites in their office , if wee offer vnto the Lord every
morning and evening the burnt offrings , & sweet incense of praiers ,
and thanksgivings , <P_29> if the bread be set in order vpon the pure
table , & the candlesticke of gold with the lamps thereof to burne every
morning , that is to say , if amongst vs Gods blessed sacraments be duly
administred , his holy word sincerely and daily preached , if we keep
the watch of the Lord our God , and if yee haue forsaken him ; then
doubt yee not this God is with vs as a captaine , his priests with
sounding trumpets must cry alarme against you , <font> O yee children of
Israel fight not against the Lord God of your fathers ,
HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,29.111

for yee shall not prosper . HOOKER-A-1614-E2-P2,29.112

