<BEGIN_hooke-1665-e3-p2>

<P_156>

<heading>

Observ. XXXII . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,156.4

<font> Of the Figure of several sorts of <$$font> Hair , <font> and of
the texture of the <$$font> skin . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,156.5

<$$heading>

Viewing some of the Hairs of my Head with a very good <font> Microscope
<$$font> , I took notice of these particulars : HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,156.7

1 . That they were , for the most part , <font> Cylindrical <$$font> ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,156.8

some of them were somewhat <font> Prismatical <$$font> ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,156.9

but generally they were very neer round , such as are represented in the
second Figure of the 5. <font> scheme <$$font> , by the <font>
Cylinders <$$font> EEE . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,156.10

nor could I find any that had sharp angules . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,156.11

<P_157>

2 . That that part which was next the top , was bigger then that which
was neerer the root . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.13

3 . That they were all along from end to end transparent , though not
very cleer , the end next the root appearing like a black transparent
piece of Horn , the end next the top more brown , somewhat like
transparent Horn . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.14

4 . That the root of the Hairs were pretty smooth , tapering inwards ,
almost like a Parsneb ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.15

nor could I find that it had any filaments , or any other vessels , such
as the <font> fibres <$$font> of Plants . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.16

5 . That the top when split <paren> which is common in long Hair
<$$paren> appear'd like the end of a stick , beaten till it be all
flitter'd , there being not onely two splinters , but sometimes
half_a_score and more . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.17

6 . That they were all , as farr as I was able to find , solid <font>
Cylindrical <$$font> bodies , not pervious , like a Cane or Bulrush ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.18

nor could I find that they had any Pith , or distinction of Rind , or
the like , such as I had observ'd in Horse-hairs , the Bristles of a Cat
, the <font> Indian <$$font> Deer's Hair , &c. HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.19

<heading>

<font> Observations on several other sorts of <$$font> Hair .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.21

<$$heading>

For the Brisles of a Hogg , I found them to be first a hard transparent
horny substance , without the least appearance of pores or holes in it ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.23

and this I try'd with the greatest care I was able , cutting many of
them with a very sharp Razor , so that they appear'd , even in the Glass
, to have a pretty smooth surface , but somewhat waved by the sawing to
and fro of the Razor , as is visible in the end of the <font>
Prismatical <$$font> body A of the same Figure ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.24

and then making trials with causing the light to be cast on them all the
various ways I could think of , that was likely to make the pores appear
, if there had been any , I was not able to discover any .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.25

Next , the Figure of the Brisles was very various , neither perfectly
round , nor sharp_edg'd , but <font> Prismatical <$$font> , with divers
sides , and round angles , as appears in the Figure A .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.26

The bending of them in any part where they before appear'd cleer , would
all flaw them , and make them look white . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.27

The Mustacheos of a Cat <paren> part of one of which is represented by
the short <font> Cylinder <$$font> B of the same Figure <$$paren> seem'd
to have , all of them that I observ'd , a large pith in the middle ,
like the pith of an Elder , whose texture was so close , that I was not
able to discover the least sign of pores ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.28

and those parts which seem to be pores , as they appear'd in one
position to the light , in another I could find a manifest reflectiom to
be cast from them . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.29

This I instance in , to hint that it is not safe to conclude any thing
to be positively this or that , though it appear never so plain and
likely when look'd on with a <font> Microscope <$$font> to one posture ,
before the same be examin'd by placing it in several other positions .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.30

And this I take to be the reason why many have believed and asserted the
Hairs of a man's head to be hollow , and like so many small pipes
perforated from end to end . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,157.31

Now , though I grant that by an <font> Analogie <$$font> one may suppose
them so , <P_158> and from the <font> Polonian <$$font> disease one may
believe them such , yet I think we have not the least encouragement to
either from the <font> Microscope <$$font> , much less positively to
assert them such . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.32

And perhaps the very essence of the <font> Plica Polonica <$$font> may
be the hairs growing hollow , and of an unnatural constitution .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.33

And as for the <font> Analogie <$$font> , though I am apt enough to
think that the hairs of several Animals may be perforated somewhat like
a Cane , or at least have a kind of pith in them , first , because they
seem as 't@ @were a kind of Vegetable growing on an Animal , which
growing , they say , remains a long while after the Animal is dead , and
therefore should like other Vegetables have a pith ; and secondly ,
because Horns and Feathers , and Porcupine's Quils , and Cats Brisles ,
and the long hairs of Horses , which come very neer the nature of a mans
hair , seem all of them to have a kind of pith , and some of them to be
porous , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.34

yet I think it not <paren> in these cases , where we have such helps for
the sense as the <font> Microscope <$$font> affords <$$paren> safe
concluding or building on more then we sensibly know , since we may ,
with examining , find that Nature does in the make of the same kind of
substance , often vary her method in framing of it :
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.35

Instances enough to confirm this we may find in the Horns of several
creatures : as what a vast difference is there between the Horns of an
Oxe , and those of some sorts of Staggs as to their shape ?
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.36

and even in the hairs of several creatures , we find a vast difference ;
as the hair of a man's head seems , as I said before , long , <font>
Cylindrical <$$font> and sometime a little <font> Prismatical <$$font> ,
solid or impervious , and very small ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.37

the hair of an <font> Indian <$$font> Deer <paren> a part of the middle
of which is described in the third Figure of the fifth <font> Scheme
<$$font> , marked with F <$$paren> is bigger in compass through all the
middle of it , then the Brisle of an Hogg , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.38

but the end of it is smaller then the hair of any kind of Animal <paren>
as may be seen by the Figure G <$$paren> HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.39

the whole belly of it , which is about two or three Inches long , looks
to the eye like a thread of course Canvass , that has been newly
unwreath'd , it being all wav'd or bended to and fro , much after that
manner , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.40

but through the <font> Microscope <$$font> , it appears all perforated
from side to side , and Spongie , like a small kind of spongy Coral ,
which is often found upon the <font> English <$$font> shores ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.41

but though I cut it transversly , I could not perceive that it had any
pores that ran the long-way of the hair : HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.42

the long hairs of Horses CC and D , seem <font> Cylindrical <$$font> and
somewhat pithy ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.43

the Brisles of a Cat B , are conical and pithy : HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.44

the Quils of Porcupines and Hedghoggs , being cut transversly , have a
whitish pith , in the manner of a Starr , or Spur-rowel :
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.45

Piggs-hair <paren> A <$$paren> is somewhat <font> triagonal <$$font> ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.46

and seems to have neither pith nor pore : HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.47

And other kinds of hair have quite a differing structure and form .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.48

And therefore I think it no way agreeable to a true natural Historian ,
to pretend to be so sharp-sighted , as to see what a pre-conceiv'd
<font> Hypothesis <$$font> tells them should be there , where another
man , though perhaps as seeing , but not forestall'd , can discover no
such matter . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.49

But to proceed ; I observ'd several kind of hairs that had been Dyed ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.50

and found them to be a kind of horny <font> Cylinder <$$font> , being of
much about the transparency of a pretty cleer piece of Oxe horn ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,158.51

these appear'd quite <P_159> throughout ting'd with the colours they
exhibited . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.52

And 't@ @is likely , that those hairs being boyl'd or steep'd in those
very hot ting'd liquors in the Dye-fat , And the substance of the hair
being much like that of an Oxes Horn , the penetrant liquor does so far
mollifie and soften the substance , that it sinks into the very center
of it , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.53

and so the ting'd parts come to be mix'd and united with the very body
of the hair , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.54

and do not <paren> as some have thought <$$paren> only stick on upon the
outward surface . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.55

And this , the boiling of Horn will make more probable ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.56

for we shall find by that action , that the water will insinuate it self
to a pretty depth within the surface of it , especially if this
penetrancy of the water be much helped by the Salts that are usually
mix'd with the Dying liquors . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.57

Now , whereas Silk may be dyed or ting'd into all kind of colours
without boiling or dipping into hot liquors , I ghess the reason to be
two-fold : HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.58

First , because the filaments , or small cylinders of Silk , are
abundantly smaller and finer , and so have a much less depth to be
penetrated then most kind of hairs ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.59

and next , because the substance or matter of Silk , is much more like a
Glew then the substance of Hair is . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.60

And that I have reason to suppose : First , because when it is spun or
drawn out of the Worm , it is a perfect glutinous substance , and very
easily sticks and cleaves to any adjacent body , as I have several times
observed , both in Silk-worms and Spiders . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.61

Next , because that I find that water does easily dissolve and mollifie
the substance again , which is evident from their manner of ordering
those bottoms or pods of the Silk-worm before they are able to unwind
them . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.62

It is no great wonder therefore , if those Dyes or ting'd liquors do
very quickly mollifie and tinge the surfaces of so small and so
glutinous a body . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.63

And we need not wonder that the colours appear so lovely in the one ,
and so dull in the other , if we view but the ting'd cylinders of both
kinds with a good <font> Microscope <$$font> ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.64

for whereas the substance of Hair , at best , is but a dirty duskish
white somewhat transparent , the filaments of Silk have a most lovely
transparency and cleerness , the difference between those two being not
much less then that between a piece of Horn , and a piece of Crystal ;
the one yielding a bright and vivid reflection from the concave side of
the cylinder , that is , from the concave surface of the Air that
incompasses the back-part of the cylinder ; the other yielding a dull
and perturb'd reflection from the several <font> Heterogeneous <$$font>
parts that compose it . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.65

And this difference will be manifest enough to the eye , if you get a
couple of small Cylinders , the smaller of Crystal Glass , the other of
Horn , and then varnish {SIC:varnishing} them over very thinly with some
transparent colour , which will represent to the naked eye much the same
kind of object which is represented to it from the filaments of Silk and
Hair by the help of the <font> Microscope <$$font> .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.66

Now , since the threads of Silk and Serge are made up of a great number
of these filaments , we may henceforth cease to wonder at the difference
. HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.67

From much the same reason proceeds the vivid and lovely colours of
Feathers , wherein they very farr exceed the natural as well as
Artificial colours of hair , of which I shall say more in its proper
place . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,159.68

The Teguments indeed of creatures are all of them adapted to the
peculiar use and convenience of that Animal which they inwrap ; and very
<P_160> much also for the ornament and beauty of it , as will be most
evident to any one that shall attentively consider the various kinds of
cloathings wherewith most creatures are by Nature invested and cover'd .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,160.69

Thus I have observed , that the hair or furr of those Northern white
Bears that inhabite the colder Regions , is exceeding thick and warm :
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,160.70

the like have I observ'd of the hair of a <font> Greenland <$$font> Deer
, which being brought alive to <font> London <$$font> , I had the
opportunity of viewing ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,160.71

its hair was so exceeding thick , long and soft , that I could hardly
with my hand , grasp or take hold of his skin , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,160.72

and it seem'd so exceeding warm , as I had never met with any before .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,160.73

And as for the ornamentative use of them , it is most evident in a
multitude of creatures , not onely for colour , as the Leopards , Cats ,
Rhein_deer ; &c. but for the shape , as in Horses manes , Cats beards ,
and several other of the greater sort of terrestrial Animals ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,160.74

but is much more conspicuous , in the Vestments of Fishes , Birds ,
Insects , of which I shall by and by give some Instances .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,160.75

As for the skin , the <font> Microscope <$$font> discovers as great a
difference between the texture of those several kinds of Animals , as it
does between their hairs ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,160.76

but all that I have yet taken notice of , when tann'd or dress'd , are
of a Spongie nature , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,160.77

and seem to be constituted of an infinite company of small long <font>
fibres <$$font> or hairs , which look not unlike a heap of Tow or Okum ;
every of which <font> fibres <$$font> seem to have been some part of a
Muscle , and probably , whil'st the Animal was alive , might have its
distinct function , and serve for the contraction and relaxation of the
skin , and for the stretching and shrinking of it this or that way .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,160.78

And indeed , without such a kind of texture as this , which is very like
that of <font> Spunk <$$font> , it would seem very strange , how any
body so strong as the skin of an Animal usually is , and so close as it
seems , whil'st the Animal is living , should be able to suffer so great
an extension any ways , without at all hurting or dilacerating any part
of it . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,160.79

But , since we are inform'd by the <font> Microscope <$$font> , that it
consists of a great many small filaments , which are implicated , or
intangled one within another , almost no otherwise then the hairs in a
lock of Wool , or the flakes in a heap of Tow , though not altogether so
loose ; but the filaments are here and there twisted , as t@ @were , or
interwoven , and here and there they join and unite with one another ,
so as indeed the whole skin seems to be but one piece , we need not much
wonder : HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,160.80

And though these <font> fibres <$$font> appear not through a <font>
Microscope <$$font> , exactly jointed and contex'd , as in Sponge ; yet
, as I formerly hinted , I am apt to think , that could we find some way
of discovering the texture of it , whil'st it invests the living Animal
, or had some very easie way of separating the pulp or intercurrent
juices , such as in all probability fill those <font> Interstitia
<$$font> , without dilacerating , brusing , or otherwise spoiling the
texture of it <paren> as it seems to be very much by the ways of tanning
and dressing now us'd <$$paren> we might discover a much more curious
texture then I have hitherto been able to find ; perhaps , somewhat like
that of Sponges . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,160.81

That of <font> Chamoise <$$font> Leather is indeed very much like that
of <font> Spunk <$$font> , save onely that the <font> filaments <$$font>
seem nothing neer so even and round , nor altogether so small ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,160.82

nor has it so curious joints as <font> Spunk <$$font> has , some of
which I <P_161> have lately discover'd like those of a Sponge ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.83

and perhaps all these three bodies may be of the same kind of substance
, though two of them indeed are commonly accounted Vegetable <paren>
which , whether they be so or no , I shall not now dispute <$$paren>
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.84

But this seems common to all three , that they undergo a tanning or
dressing , whereby the interspers'd juices are wasted and wash'd away
before the texture of them can be discover'd . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.85

What their way is of dressing , or curing Sponges , I confess , I can@
@not learn ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.86

but the way of dressing <font> Spunk <$$font> , is , by boiling it a
good while in a strong <font> Lixivium <$$font> , and then beating it
very well ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.87

and the manner of dressing Leather is sufficiently known .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.88

It were indeed extremely desirable , if such a way could be found
whereby the <font> Parenchyma <$$font> or flesh of the Museles , and
several other pits of the body , might {SIC:bod,_ymight} be wash'd , or
wasted clean away , without vitiating the form of the <font> fibrous
<$$font> parts or vessells of it , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.89

for hereby the texture of those parts , by the help of a good <font>
Microscope <$$font> , might be most accurately found .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.90

But to digress no further , we may , from this discovery of the <font>
Microscope <$$font> , plainly enough understand how the skin , though it
looks so close as it does , comes to give a passage to so vast a
quantity of <font> excrementitious <$$font> substances , as the diligent
<font> Sanctorius <$$font> has excellently observed it to do , in his
<font> medicina statica <$$font> ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.91

for it seems very probable , from the texture after dressing , that
there are an infinit of pores that every way pierce it , and that those
pores are onely fill'd with some kind of juice , or some very pulpy soft
substance , and thereby the steams may almost as easily find a passage
through such a fluid <font> vehicle <$$font> as the vaporous bubbles
which are generated at the bottom of a Kettle of hot water do find a
passage through that fluid <font> medium <$$font> into the ambient Air .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.92

Nor is the skin of animals only thus pervious , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.93

but even those of vegetables also seem to be the same ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.94

for otherwise I can@ @not conceive why , if two sprigs of Rosemary
<paren> for Instance <$$paren> be taken as exactly alike in all
particulars as can be , and the one be set with the bottom in a Glass of
water , and the other be set just without the Glass , but in the Air
onely , though you stop the lower end of that in the Air very carefully
with Wax , yet shall it presently almost wither , whereas the other that
seems to have a supply from the subjacent water by its small pipes , or
<font> microscopical <$$font> pores , preserves its greenness for many
days , and sometimes weeks . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.95

Now , this to me , seems not likely to proceed from any other cause then
the <font> avolation <$$font> of the juice through the skin ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.96

for by the Wax , all those other pores of the stem are very firmly and
closely stop'd up . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.97

And from the more or less porousness of the skins or rinds of Vegetables
may , perhaps , be somewhat of the reason given , why they keep longer
green , or sooner wither ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.98

for we may observe by the bladdering and craking of the leaves of Bays ,
Holly , Laurel , &c. that their skins are very close , and do not
suffer so free a passage through them of the included juices .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,161.99

But of this , and of the Experiment of the Rosemary , I shall elsewhere
more fully consider , it seeming to me an extreme luciferous Experiment
, such as seems indeed very plainly to prove the <font> Schematism or
structure <P_162> of Vegetables altogether <font> mechanical <$$font> ,
and as necessary , that <paren> water and warmth being apply'd to the
bottom of the sprig of a Plant <$$paren> some of it should be carried
upwards into the stem , and thence distributed into the leaves , as that
the water of the <font> Thames <$$font> covering the bottom of the Mills
at the Bridge foot of <font> London <$$font> , and by the ebbing and
flowing of it , passing {SIC:passsing} strongly by them , should have
some part of it convey'd to the Cesterns above , and thence into several
houses and Cesterns up and down the City . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,162.100

<heading>

Observ. XXXIII . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,162.102

<font> Of the <$$font> Scales <font> of a <$$font> Soal , <font> and
other Fishes . <$$font> HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,162.103

<$$heading>

Having hinted somewhat of the skin and covering of terrestrial Animals ,
I shall next add an Observation I made on the skin and Scales of a
<font> Soal <$$font> , a small Fish , commonly enough known ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,162.105

and here in Fishes , as well as other Animals , Nature follows its usual
method , framing all parts so , as that they are both usefull and
ornamental in all its composures , mingling <font> utile <$$font> and
<font> dulce <$$font> together ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,162.106

and both these designs it seems to follow , though our unassisted senses
are not able to perceive {TEXT:peceive} them : HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,162.107

This is not onely manifest in the covering of this Fish only , but in
multitudes of others , which it would be too long to enumerate ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,162.108

witness particularly that small Sand Shell , which I mention'd in the
XI. Observation , and infinite other small Shells and Scales , divers
of which I have view'd . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,162.109

This skin I view'd , was flead from a pretty large <font> Soal <$$font>
, and then expanded and dry'd , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,162.110

the inside of it , when dry , to the naked eye , look'd very like a
piece of Canvass , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,162.111

but the <font> Microscope <$$font> discover'd that texture to be nothing
else , but the inner ends of those curious Scolop'd Scales I , I , I ,
in the second <font> Figure <$$font> of the XXI. <font> Scheme <$$font>
, namely , the part of GGGG <paren> of the larger representation of a
single Scale , in the first <font> Figure <$$font> of the same <font>
Scheme <$$font> <$$paren> which on the back side , through an ordinary
single Magnifying Glass , look'd not unlike the Tyles on an house .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,162.112

The outside of it , to the naked eye , exhibited nothing more of
ornament , save the usual order of ranging the Scales into a <font>
triagonal <$$font> form , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,162.113

onely the edges seem'd a little to shine , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,162.114

the finger being rubb'd from the tail-wards towards the head , the
Scales seem'd to stay and raze it ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,162.115

But through an ordinary Magnifying glass , it exhibited a most curiously
carved and adorned surface , such as is visible in the second <font>
Figure <$$font> , each of those <paren> formerly almost imperceptible
<$$paren> Scales appearing much of the shape I , I , I ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,162.116

that is , they were round , and protuberant , and somewhat shap'd like a
Scolop , the whole Scale being creasd with curiously wav'd and indented
ridges , with proportionable furrows between ; each of which was
terminated with a very sharp transparent bony substance , which , like
so many small Turnpikes , seem'd to arm the edges .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,162.117

The back part KKK was the skin into which each of those Scales were very
deeply fix'd , in the curious regular order , visible in the second
<P_163> <font> Figure <$$font> . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.118

The length and shape of the part of the Scale which was buried by the
skin , is evidenced by the first <font> Figure <$$font> ; which is the
representation of one of them pluck'd out and view'd through a good
<font> Microscope <$$font> , namely , the part LFGGFL , wherein is also
more plainly to be seen , the manner of carving of the scolopt part of
every particular Scale , how each ridge or barr EEE is alternately
hollowed or engraven , and how every gutter between them is terminated
with very transparent and hard_pointed spikes , and how every other of
these , as AAAA , are much longer then the interjacent ones , DDD .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.119

The texture or form also of the hidden part appears ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.120

namely , the middle part , GGG , seems to consist of a great number of
small quills or pipes , by which , perhaps , the whole may be nourished
; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.121

and the side parts FF consist of a more fibrous texture , though indeed
the whole Scale seem'd to be of a very tough grisly substance , like the
larger Scales of other Fishes . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.122

The Scales of the skin of a Dog-fish <paren> which is us'd by such as
work in Wood , for the smoothing of their work , and consists plainly
enough to the naked eye , of a great number of small horny points
<$$paren> through the <font> Microscope <$$font> appear'd each of them
curiously ridg'd , and very neatly carved ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.123

and indeed , you can hardly look on the scales of any Fish , but you may
discover abundance of curiosity and beautifying ; and not only in these
Fishes , but in the shells and crusts or armour of most sorts of <font>
Marine <$$font> Animals so invested . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.124

<heading>

Observ. XXXIV . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.126

<font> Of the Sting of a <$$font> Bee . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.127

<$$heading>

The Sting of a <font> Bee <$$font> , delineated in the second Figure of
the XVI. <font> Scheme <$$font> , seems to be a weapon of offence ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.129

and is as great an Instance , that Nature did realy intend revenge as
any , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.130

and that first , because there seems to be no other use of it .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.131

Secondly , by reason of its admirable shape , seeming to be purposely
shap'd for that very end . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.132

Thirdly , from the virulency of the liquor it ejects , and the sad
effects and symptoms that follow it . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.133

But whatever be the use of it , certain it is , that the structure of it
is very admirable ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.134

what it appears to the naked eye , I need not describe , the thing being
known almost to every one , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.135

but it appears through the <font> Microscope <$$font> , to consist of
two parts , the one a sheath , without a chape or top , shap'd almost
like the Holster of a Pistol , beginning at <font> d <$$font> , and
ending at <font> b <$$font> , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.136

this sheath I could most plainly perceive to be hollow , and to contain
in it , both a Sword or Dart , and the poisonous liquor
{COM:preceding_word_"liquor"_emended} that causes the pain .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.137

The sheath or case seem'd to have several joints or settings together ,
marked by <font> f g h i k l m n o <$$font> , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.138

it was arm'd moreover neer the top , with several crooks or forks
<paren> <font> p q r s t <$$font> <$$paren> on one side , and <paren>
<font> p q r f t u <$$font> <$$paren> on the other , each of which
seem'd like so many Thorns growing on a briar , or rather like so many
Cat's Claws ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,163.139

for the crooks themselves seem'd to be little sharp transparent points
or claws , growing out of little <font> protuberancies <$$font> on
<P_164> the side of the sheath , which , by observing the Figure
diligently , is easie enough to be perceiv'd ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,164.140

and from several particulars , I suppose the Animal has a power of
displaying them , and shutting them in again as it pleases , as a Cat
does its claws , or as an Adder or Viper can its teeth or fangs .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,164.141

The other part of the Sting was the Sword , as I may so call it , which
is sheath'd , as it were , in it , the top of which <font> a b <$$font>
appears quite through at the smaller end , just as if the chape of the
sheath of a Sword were lost , and the end of it appear'd beyond the
Scabbard ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,164.142

the end of this Dart <paren> <font> a <$$font> <$$paren> was very sharp
, HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,164.143

and it was arm'd likewise with the like Tenterhooks or claws with those
of the sheath , such as <paren> <font> v x y , x y z z <$$font>
<$$paren> HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,164.144

these crooks , I am very apt to think , can be clos'd up also , or laid
flat to the sides of the Sword when it is drawn into the Scabbard , as I
have several times observ'd it to be , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,164.145

and can be spred again or extended when ever the Animal pleases . The
consideration of which very pretty structure , has hinted to me , that
certainly the use of these claws seems to be very considerable , as to
the main end of this Instrument ; for the drawing in , and holding the
sting in the flesh ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,164.146

for the point being very sharp , the top of the Sting or Dagger <paren>
<font> a b <$$font> <$$paren> is very easily thrust into an Animal's
body , which being once entred , the Bee , by endeavouring to pull it
into the sheath , draws <paren> by reason of the crooks <paren> <font> v
x y <$$font> <$$paren> and <paren> <font> x y z z <$$font> <$$paren>
which lay hold of the skin on either side <$$paren> the top of the
sheath <paren> <font> t s r v <$$font> <$$paren> into the skin after it
, HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,164.147

and the crooks <font> t , s , <$$font> and <font> r , v <$$font> , being
entred , when the Bee endeavours to thrust out the top of the sting out
of the sheath again , they lay hold of the skin on either side ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,164.148

and so not onely keep the sheath from sliding back ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,164.149

but helps the top inwards , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,164.150

and thus , by an alternate and successive retracting and emitting of the
Sting in and out of the sheath , the little enraged creature by degrees
makes his revengfull weapon pierce the toughest and thickest Hides of
his enemies , in_so_much that some few of these stout and resolute
soldiers with these little engines , do often put to flight a huge masty
Bear , one of their deadly enemies , and thereby shew the world how much
more considerable in Warr a few skilfull Engineers and resolute soldiers
politickly order'd , that know how to manage such engines , are , then a
vast unweildy rude force , that confides in , and acts onely by , its
strength . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,164.151

But <paren> to proceed <$$paren> that he thus gets in his Sting into the
skin , I conjecture , because , when I have observ'd this creature
living , I have found it to move the Sting thus , to and fro ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,164.152

and thereby also , perhaps , does , as 't@ @were , pump or force out the
poisonous liquor , and make it hang at the end of the sheath abouth in a
drop . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,164.153

The crooks , I suppose also to be the cause why these angry creatures ,
hastily removing themselves from their revenge , do often leave these
weapons behind them , sheath'd , as 't@ @were , in the flesh , and , by
that means , cause the painfull symptoms to be greater , and more
lasting , which are very probably caus'd , partly by the piercing and
tearing of the skin by the Sting , but chiefly by the corrosive and
poisonous liquor that is by this Syringe-pipe convey'd among the
sensitive parts thereof and thereby more easily gnaws <P_165> and
corrodes those tender <font> fibres : <$$font> As I have shewed in the
description of a Nettle and of Cowhage . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,165.154

<heading>

Observ. XXXV . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,165.156

<font> Of the contexture and shape of the particles of <$$font> Feathers
. HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,165.157

<$$heading>

Examining several sorts of <font> Feathers <$$font> , I took notice of
these particulars in all sorts of wing-Feathers , especially in those
which serv'd for the beating of the air in the action of flying . That
the outward surface of the Quill and Stem was of a very hard , stiff ,
and horny substance , which is obvious enough , and that the part above
the Quill was filld with a very white and light pith ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,165.159

and , with the <font> Microscope <$$font> , I found this pith to be
nothing else , but a kind of natural <font> congeries <$$font> of small
bubbles , the films of which seem to be of the same substance with that
of the Quill , that is , of a stiff transparent horny substance . Which
particular seems to me , very worthy a more serious consideration ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,165.160

For here we may observe Nature , as 't@ @were , put to its shifts , to
make a substance , which shall be both light enough , and very stiff and
strong , without varying from its own establish'd principles , which we
may observe to be such , that very strong bodies are for the most part
very heavie also , a strength of the parts usually requiring a density ,
and a density a gravity ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,165.161

and therefore should Nature have made a body so broad and so strong as a
Feather , almost , any other way then what it has taken , the gravity of
it must necessarily have many times exceeded this ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,165.162

for this pith seems to be like so many stops or cross_pieces in a long
optical tube , which do very much contribute to the strength of the
whole , the pores of which were such , as that they seem'd not to have
any communication with one another , as I have elsewhere hinted .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,165.163

But the Mechanism of Nature is usually so excellent , that one and the
same substance is adapted to serve for many ends .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,165.164

For the chief use of this , indeed , seems to be for the supply of
nourishment to the downy or feathery part of the stem ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,165.165

for 't@ @is obvious enough in all sorts of Feathers , that 't@ @is
plac'd just under the roots of the branches that grow out of either side
of the quill or stalk , and is exactly shap'd according to the ranking
of those branches , coming no lower into the quill , then just the
beginning of the downy branches , and growing onely on the under_side of
{SIC:of_of} the quill where those branches do so .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,165.166

Now , in a ripe Feather <paren> as one may call it
{COM:missing_right_paren} it seems difficult to conceive how the <font>
Succus nutrituius <$$font> should be convey'd to this pith ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,165.167

for it can@ @not , I think , be well imagin'd to pass through the
substance of the quill , since , having examin'd it with the greatest
diligence I was able , I could not find the least appearance of pores ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,165.168

but he that shall well examine an unripe or pinn'd Feather , will
plainly enough perceive the Vessel for the conveyance of it to be the
thin filmy pith <paren> as t@ @is call'd <$$paren> which passes through
the middle of the quill . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,165.169

As for the make and contexture of the Down it self , it is indeed very
<P_166> rare and admirable , and such as I can hardly believe , that the
like is to be discover'd in any other body in the world ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,166.170

for there is hardly a large Feather in the wing of a Bird , but contains
neer a million of distinct parts , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,166.171

and every one of them shap'd in a most regular & admirable form ,
adapted to a particular Design : HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,166.172

For examining a middle_ciz'd Goose-quill , I easily enough found with my
naked eye , that the main stem of it contain'd about 300. longer and
more Downy branchings upon one side , and as many on the other of more
stiff but somewhat shorter branchings . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,166.173

Many of these long and downy branchings , examining with an ordinary
<font> Microscope <$$font> , I found divers of them to contain neer
1200. small leaves <paren> as I may call them , such as EF of the first
Figure of the 23. <font> Scheme <$$font> <$$paren> and as many stalks ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,166.174

on the other side , such as IK of the same Figure , each of the leaves
or branchings , EF , seem'd to be divided into about sixteen or eighteen
small joints , as may be seen plainly enough in the Figure , out of most
of which there seem to grow small long <font> fibres <$$font> , such as
are express'd in the Figure , each of them very proportionably shap'd
according to its position , or plac'd on the stalk EF ; those on the
under_side of it , namely , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 6 , 8 , 9 , <font>
&c. <$$font> being much longer then those directly opposite to them on
the upper ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,166.175

and divers of them , such as 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , <font> &c.
<$$font> were terminated with small crooks , much resembling those small
crooks , which are visible enough to the naked eye , in the seed-buttons
of Bur-docks . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,166.176

The stalks likewise , IK on the other side , seem'd divided into neer as
many small knotted joints , but without any appearance of strings or
crooks , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,166.177

each of them about the middle K , seem'd divided into two parts by a
kind of fork , one side of which , namely , KL , was extended neer the
length of KI , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,166.178

the other , M , was very short . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,166.179

The transverse Sections of the stems of these branchings , manifested
the shape or figure of it to be much like INOE , which consisted of a
horny skin or covering , and a white seemingly frothy pith , much like
the make of the main stem of a Feather . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,166.180

The use of this strange kind of form , is indeed more admirable then all
the rest , and such as deserves to be much more seriously examin'd and
consider'd , then I have hitherto found time or ability to do ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,166.181

for certainly , it may very much instruct us in the nature of the Air ,
especially as to some properties of it . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,166.182

The stems of the Downy branches INOE , being rang'd in the order visible
enough to the naked eye , at the distance of IF , or somewhat more , the
<font> collateral <$$font> stalks and leaves <paren> if I may so call
those bodies I newly described <$$paren> are so rang'd , that the leaves
or hairy stalks of the one side lie at top , or are incumbent on the
stalks of the other , and cross each other , much after the manner
express'd in the second Figure of the 23. <font> Scheme <$$font> , by
which means every of those little hooked <font> fibres <$$font> of the
leaved stalk get between the naked stalks , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,166.183

and the stalks being full of knots , and a prety way dis-join'd , so as
that the <font> fibres <$$font> can easily get between them , the two
parts are so closely and admirably woven together , that it is able to
impede , for the greatest part , the transcursion of the Air ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,166.184

and though they are so exceeding small , as that the thickness of one of
<P_167> these stalks amounts not to a 500. part of an Inch , yet do
they compose so strong a texture , as , notwithstanding the exceeding
quick and violent beating of them against the Air , by the strength of
the Birds wing , they firmly hold together . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,167.185

And it argues an admirable providence of Nature in the contrivance and
fabrick of them ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,167.186

for their texture is such , that though by any external injury the parts
of them are violently dis-joyn'd , so as that the leaves and stalks
touch not one another , and consequently several of these rents would
impede the Bird's flying ; yet , for the most part , of themselves they
readily re-join and re-contex themselves , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,167.187

and are easily by the Birds stroking the Feather , or drawing it through
its Bill , all of them settled and woven into their former and natural
posture ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,167.188

for there are such an infinite company of those small <font> fibres
<$$font> in the under_side of the leaves , and most of them have such
little crooks at their ends , that they readily catch and hold the
stalks they touch . From which strange contexture , it seems rational
to suppose that there is a certain kind of mesh or hole so small , that
the Air will not very easily pass through it , as I hinted also in the
sixth Observation about small Glass Canes , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,167.189

for otherwise it seems probable , that Nature would have drawn over some
kind of thin film which should have covered all those almost square
meshes or holes , there seeming through the <font> Microscope <$$font>
to be more then half of the surface of the Feather which is open and
visibly pervious ; which conjecture will yet seem more probable from the
texture of the brushie wings of the <font> Tinea argentea <$$font> , or
white Feather_wing'd moth , which I shall anone describe .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,167.190

But Nature , that knows best its own laws , and the several properties
of bodies , knows also best how to adapt and fit them to her designed
ends , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,167.191

and whoso would know those properties , must endeavour to trace Nature
in its working , and to see what course she observes .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,167.192

And this I suppose will be no inconsiderable advantage which the <font>
Schematisms <$$font> and Structures of Animate bodies will afford the
diligent enquirer , namely , most sure and excellent instructions , both
as to the practical part of <font> Mechanicks <$$font> and to the <font>
Theory <$$font> and knowledge of the nature of the bodies and motions .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,167.193

<heading>

Observ. XXXVI . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,167.195

<font> Of <$$font> Peacoks , Ducks , <font> and other <$$font> Feathers
<font> of changeable colours . <$$font> HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,167.196

<$$heading>

The parts of the Feathers of this glorious Bird appear , through the
<font> Microscope <$$font> , no less gaudy then do the whole Feathers ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,167.198

for , as to the naked eye 't@ @is evident that the stem or quill of each
Feather in the tail sends out multitudes of <font> Lateral <$$font>
branches , such as AB in the third Figure of the 23. <font> Scheme
<$$font> represents a small part of about 1$$32 part of an Inch long ,
and each of the <font> lateral <$$font> branches emit multitudes of
little sprigs , threads or hairs on either side of them , such as CD ,
CD , CD , so each of those threads in the <font> Microscope <$$font>
appears a large long body , consisting of a multitude <P_168> of bright
reflecting parts , whose Figure 't@ @is no easie matter to determine ,
as he that examines it shall find ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,168.199

for every new position of it to the light makes it perfectly seem of
another form and shape , and nothing what it appear'd a little before ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,168.200

nay , it appear'd very differing ofttimes from so seemingly
inconsiderable a circumstance , that the interposing of ones hand
between the light and it , makes a very great change , and the opening
or shutting of a Casement and the like , very much diversifies the
appearance . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,168.201

And though , by examining the form of it very many ways , which would be
tedious here to enumerate , I suppose I have discover'd the true Figure
of it , yet oftentimes , upon looking on it in another posture , I have
almost thought my former observations deficient , though indeed , upon
further examination , I have found even those also to confirm them .
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,168.202

These threads therefore I find to be a <font> congeries <$$font> of
small <font> Laminae <$$font> or plates , as <font> e e e e e , <$$font>
&c. each of them shap'd much like this of <font> a b c d <$$font> , in
the fourth <font> Figure <$$font> , the part <font> ac <$$font> being a
ridge , prominency , or stem , and <font> b <$$font> and <font> d
<$$font> the corners of two small thin Plates that grow unto the small
stalk in the middle , so that they make a kind of little feather ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,168.203

each of these Plates lie close to another , almost like a company of
sloping ridge or gutter Tyles ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,168.204

they grow on each side of the stalk opposite to one another , by two and
two , from top to bottom , in the manner express'd in the fifth Figure ,
the tops of the lower covering the roots of the next above them ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,168.205

the under_side of each of these laminated bodies , is of a very dark and
opacous substance , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,168.206

and suffers very few Rays to be trajected , HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,168.207

but reflects them all toward that side from whence they come , much like
the foil of a Looking-glass ; HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,168.208

but their upper sides seem to me to consist of a multitude of thin
plated bodies , which are exceeding thin , and lie very close together ,
and thereby , like mother_of_Pearl shells , do not onely reflect a very
brisk light , but tinge that light in a most curious manner ;
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,168.209

and by means of various positions , in respect of the light , they
reflect back now one colour , and then another ,
HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,168.210

and those most vividly . HOOKE-1665-E3-P2,168.211

