<BEGIN_hoole-1660-e3-p2>

<P_233>

<heading>

CHAP. II . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,233.4

<font> How the Master should maintain his Authority amongst his Scholars
. <$$font> HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,233.5

<$$heading>

<font> Authority is the true mother of all due order , <$$font> which
the Master must be careful in every thing to maintain ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,233.7

otherwise he may command what he pleaseth , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,233.8

but withall , he must give the Scholars liberty to do what they list .
Which what an horrible confusion in their places , what insufferable
<P_234> neglect of their tasks , what unrulinesse in point of behaviour
, what perpetual torment to the painful Master , and his Ushers , and
what unavoydable disgrace it bringeth upon a Schoole , let them that are
Actors , or Spectators thereof , give testimony .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,234.9

1 . That therefore the Master may have all his lawful commands put in
execution with due alacrity , and his decent <font> orders <$$font>
diligently observed , I conceive it requisite , that , 1. He be sure in
all thinges to <font> behave as a Master over himself <$$font> , not
only by refraining those enormities and grosser faults , which may
render him scandalous to every one , but <font> checking his own
Passions , especially <$$font> that of <font> Anger <$$font> ;
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,234.10

and if at any time he seem to have cause to be provoked to it , and feel
it to come too violently upon him , let him rather walk aside awhile out
of the Schoole to divert it , then expresse it openly amongst his
Scholars by unseemly words or gesturs . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,234.11

He should indeed endeavour to behave himself unblameably in all
Christian-like conversation before all men , but so amongst his Scholars
, that they may have much wherein to imitate him , but nothing whereby
to disgrace him . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,234.12

And towards his neighbours , his affability should be such , as to win
their love and respects , <P_235> so that they may be ready at all times
to countenance the Masters well-doing , and to vindicate the credit of
him and his Schoole , when they hear it unjustly traduced .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,235.13

2 . When he commands , or forbids any thing to be done , he should
acquaint his Scholars with the end intended , and the benefits or
inconveniences which attend such , or such a course .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,235.14

For <font> children <$$font> have so much use of reason as to <font>
delight to heare perswasive arguments of reason , though the declivity
of corrupt nature makes , that they do not much minde them , <$$font>
where there is no feare of a rod for doing amisse .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,235.15

Yet sometimes it may be best to say onely , <font> Do this <$$font> , or
<font> do it not <$$font> , where you think it of no concernment to them
to know the reason , and would make trial of their readinesse to obey ,
without asking <font> why or wherefore . <$$font>
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,235.16

3 . One main way to bring Scholars to a loving and awfull respect of
their Master , is for him to shew himselfe at all times pleasing and
chearful towards them , and unwilling to punish them for every error ;
but withall to carry so close an eye upon all their behaviour , that he
can tell them privately , betwixt himself and them alone , of many
faults they commit , when <P_236> they think he knowes nothing ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,236.17

and let them see how he dare correct them for the like offences when
they presume to commit them again , and especially if they behave
themselves stubbornely before their fellowes . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,236.18

Yet to win a boy of a more stubborne spirit , it is better sometimes to
forbeare blowes , when you have him submit to the rod , then to punish
him so for a fault , as to make him to hate you , and out of a despight
to you to do the like , or a worse mischiefe . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,236.19

And when any general misdemeanour is committed , the Master should shew
himselfe impartial towards all , so as either to pardon or punish all .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,236.20

But in afflicting punishments , as he should let none escape , so he
should let the most untoward feele the most smart ;
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,236.21

but beware he deal not rigorously , much lesse cruelly with any ;
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,236.22

for that will cause an utter dislike in all the Scholars towards the
Master , fearing he will deale so with them , in case they so offend ,
and thinking it to be no argument of love , where severity of correction
is used . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,236.23

4 . But nothing works more upon good_natured children , then frequent
encouragments and commendations for well-doing ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,236.24

and therefore , when any taske <P_237> is performed , or order observed
according to his minde , the Master should commend all his Scholars ,
but especially the most observant , and encourage the weak , and
timerous , and admonish the perversest amongst them to go on in
imitating their example , in hopes of finding as much favour at his
hands , as they see them to have . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,237.25

5 . In some places a Master is apt to be molested with the reproachfull
clamours of the meaner sort of people , that can@ @not <paren> for the
most part <$$paren> endure to have their children corrected , be the
fault never so heinous , but presently they must come to the Schoole to
brave it out with him ; which if they do , the Master should there in a
calme manner admonish them before all his Scholars , to cease their
clamour , and to consider how rash they are to interrupt his businesse ,
and to blame him for doing that duty to which he is entrusted by
themselves , and others , their betters : HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,237.26

But if they go about to raise scandalous reports upon him , he may do
well to get two or three judicious neighbours to examine the matter ,
and to rebuke the parties for making so much adoe upon little or no
occasion . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,237.27

Thus we <P_238> shall see Scholars abundantly more to respect the Master
, when they know how grossely he is apt to be wronged by inconsiderate
persons , and that wise men are ready to vindicate his cause . Whereas
if they once see their Master liable to every bodies censure , and no
man take his part whatever is said of him , they themselves will not
care what tales they make to his utter disgrace , or ruine ; especially
, if he have been any whit harsh towards them , and they be desirous to
out-slip the reines of his Teaching and Government .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,238.28

<heading>

CHAP. III . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,238.30

<font> Of Schoole-times . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,238.31

Of Scholars going forth of the Schoole , and of Play dayes . <$$font>
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,238.32

<$$heading>

Though in many Schooles I observe six a clock in the morning to be the
hour for children to be fast at their Book , yet in most , seven is the
constant time , both in Winter and Summer , against which houre , it is
fit every Scholar should be ready at the Schoole .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,238.34

And all they that come before seven , should be permitted to play
<P_239> about the Schoole , till the clock strike , on condition they
can say their parts at the Masters coming in ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,239.35

else , they are not to play at all , but to settle to their books , as
soon as they come . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,239.36

But here the Master is to take heed , that he be neither too rigorous
with those of weaker age or constitution for coming somewat tardy ; nor
indulgent towards those , who through manifest sloth , and frequent
loytering , neglect the houre . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,239.37

For in the one it will breed a daily timerousnesse ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,239.38

and in the other it will make way to licentiousnesse ;
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,239.39

and on the one side Parents will clamour , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,239.40

on the other side the Schoole will receive disgrace .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,239.41

However the best is to be as strict as possibly may be , in seeing that
every Scholar come at the just houre , and to note it as a punishable
fault in him that cometh late ; except he bring a note of excuse from
his Parents , or Host's hand , and a promise withall , that he shall not
offend often in that kind . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,239.42

It is not amisse for every Scholar in every Form to put down his name in
a book <paren> kept common for that purpose <$$paren> so soon as he
comes to Schoole every day , that it may be upon record , whether
<P_240> he used to come with the foremost or the hindmost , and how
often he was absent from the Schoole ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,240.43

likewise every Scholars name should be called over according to the Bill
every Schole hour , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,240.44

and they that are present should answer for themselves , by saying
<font> Adsum <$$font> , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,240.45

and his next fellow should give notice of him that is absent , by saying
<font> Abest <$$font> . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,240.46

The common time of dismissing Scholars from Schoole in the fore-noons ,
is eleven a clock every day , and in the after-noons , on Mondaies ,
Wednesdaies , and Fridaies , five a clock , but on Tuesday after-noons ,
foure ; and on Thursdayes , three . Touching which , a care would be
taken that the taskes of every Form may be fully dispatched rather a
little before those houres then after ; that then the Scholars which
intend writing or cyphering , or the like , may go to the
Writing-schoole , as they yet use to doe about <font> London <$$font> .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,240.47

Neither would I have the Scholars to be so precisely observant of the
clock , as just upon the first stroke of it to rush out of the Schoole :
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,240.48

but notice being given to the Master that it is stricken , and he having
given the word for dismissing the Schoole , all the Scholars should come
<P_241> one by one orderly out of their seats according to their Forms
<paren> the lowest beginning first , because they are commonly next the
doore <$$paren> and salute him with their hats in their hands , and so
quietly depart out of the Schoole without thrusting , or striving one to
get out before another . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,241.49

It were good if there were hour-glasses in the School , to give notice
how the time goes on . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,241.50

And for their ready going home , or to the writing Schoole , there
should be private Monitors appointed to inform the Master , so soon as
they return to the Schoole again , who they are that neglected their
duty therein . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,241.51

That space of intermission about nine and three a clock , which is used
at <font> Westminster Schoole <$$font> , and some others , and is so
much commended by <font> Mr. Brinsley <$$font> <paren> <font> Chap. 33
of his Grammar Schoole <$$font> <$$paren> can@ @not so well be observed
, nor is it so requisite in those Schooles , in which Scholars meet not
till seven in the morning ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,241.52

for the variety of their several tasks , will take away that
tediousnesse that seems to accurre by the length of time ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,241.53

and those <font> Subsidiary Books <$$font> provided for the lower Formes
, will prevent the over-toyling of themselves by their <P_242> present
work . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,242.54

And that those disorders which usually befall in Scholars running forth
in Schoole-time , may be somewhat remedied , this or the like course may
be taken . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,242.55

1 . Let it be not lawful for above one boy in twenty to go forth at
once ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,242.56

and at his going forth , let every one come to the Master , or that
Usher to whose charge he belongs , and in his hearing repeat four or six
Vocabula's or phrases , which he hath not said before , and then lay
down his book , with his name writ in it in a place appointed within the
Masters view , that so it may be knowne at once , both how many , and
who are out of doores , and how long they tarry abroad .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,242.57

At their coming in , they should again repeat the like number of
Vocabula's and Phrases , as they did at their going forth .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,242.58

The Master should do well now and then to send a privie spie , who may
truly observe and certifie him , how every scholar spendeth his time
abroad , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,242.59

and if any be found to go forth upon no occasion , or to truant it
without doors , let him be censured or reproved , according to his
demerits . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,242.60

3 {COM:sic} . The granting of a Play-day , is to
<P_243_misnumbered_as_242> be referred wholly to the discretion of the
Master , who must in this be as fearfull to work his Scholars hinderance
, and the Schooles discredit , as {he_must_be} willing by such a
courtesie to gratify his deserving friends ; who if they be any whit
reasonable , will be easily satisfied with a just excuse of denial ;
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,243_misnumbered_as_242.61

but if they be unreasonably importunate , they ought to be served with
as unreasonable a nay-say ; so that Play-dayes should be rarely granted
, except to such as may seem to claime more then ordinary interest in
the Schoole , and to whom the Master is bound to shew his due respects ,
especially before his Scholars .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,243_misnumbered_as_242.62

In places of great resort , and where often sollicitation is used to be
made for play <paren> especially by mothers that come to visit their
children which are tabled at Schoole <$$paren> it were good that a piece
of an afternoon were designed constantly afore-hand , on which <paren>
in case any suit should be made <$$paren> the Scholars might have leave
to play ; but if not , that they be held to their Books .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,243_misnumbered_as_242.63

Yet if there have not a Play-day been granted , nor a Holy day
intervened for some weeks together , the Master may of himself propound
to his Scholars , that in <P_244> case they performe all their Tasks
very well and orderly , so as to dispatch them by such an hour on such a
day , they shall play the remainder thereof , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,244.64

& then <paren> as at other times also when a Play-day is intended
<$$paren> one of the upper Form <paren> at least <$$paren> should make a
Petitory Oration to the Master , for {SIC:or} them that come to crave
play ; and another , a Gratulatory speech , after leave is obtained .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,244.65

Where both Thursdayes and Saturdayes in the afternoons are halfe
Holy-dayes , I think Tuesdayes the fittest , on which to grant play ;
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,244.66

in other places , Thursdayes may seem the best .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,244.67

But this I leave to the discretion of the Master , who knoweth what is
most convenient for his own Schoole . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,244.68

Now in granting a Play-day , these directions may be useful . 1. That
there be never more then one Play-day granted in one week , and that
onely when there is no Holy-day in that week , and when the weather also
is clear and open , and the ground some what dry . 2. That no Play be
granted till one a clock <paren> at the soonest <$$paren> when all the
Scholars are met , and Orations have been said . 3. That all the
Scholars be dismissed <P_245> orderly in some close <paren> or other
place appointed for such a purpose <$$paren> near the Schoole , where
they may play together , and use such honest and harmlesse recreations ,
as may moderately exercise their bodies , and not at all endanger their
health . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,245.69

And because some boyes are apt to sneak home , or straggle from the rest
of their fellowes out of their bounds , prescribed them to play in ; you
may do well to give order to him that hath the Bill of all the names ,
to call it over at any time amid their sport , and to take notice of all
such as have absented themselves , & to give you an account of them ,
when they return into the Schoole ; which should be upon Play-daies
before five of the clock , that they may blesse God for his provident
hand over them that day , and so go home . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,245.70

And that the Master may sometimes see into the various disposition of
children , which doth freely discover it selfe by their company , and
behaviour at play ; he may now and then take occasion to walk at a
distance from them , or <paren> if he come nearer <$$paren> to stand out
of their sight , so as he may behold them in the throng of their
recreations , and observe their <P_246> gesture and words , which if in
any thing they be not as becometh them , he may afterwards admonish them
in private to behave , or speak otherwise . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,246.71

But an especial care must be taken , and a charge accordingly often
given , that your Scholars do at no time play with any but their own
Schoole-fellowes , or other ingenuous children about home ; which their
Parents or Friends know , and whom they are willing should be admitted
into their company ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,246.72

for besides the evil which may be contracted by learning corrupt
discourse , and imitating them in many shrewd turns : boyes that are
under little or no command , will be very subject to brabble and fight
with Scholars , and the rather because they know the Master will not
allow his Scholars at all to quarel , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,246.73

and if they can do them any maime , they will attempt it , that the
Master may have occasion to call them to account for it . So perverse
is our corrupt nature <paren> especially <$$paren> where education hath
no sway . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,246.74

<P_247>

<heading>

CHAP. IV . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,247.77

<font> Of Admission of Scholars ; of Election of Forms ; and of Scholars
orderly sitting , and demeanour in their seats , when they are at
Schoole . <$$font> HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,247.78

<$$heading>

1 . <font> No children should <$$font> <paren> as I have formerly said
<$$paren> <font> be admitted into a Grammar Schoole , but such as can
readily read English , and write a legible hand or at least be willing
to learn to write , and to proceed in learning Latine . <$$font>
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,247.80

And it is therefore best to try , in the presence of their Parents or
friends that bring them , what they can do , by causing them to read or
write if they can before them , that themselves may be Judges of their
present strength or weaknesse , and expect proficiencie from them
according as they see their capacity , not hastening them on too fast ,
and rating at them daily , because perhaps in their judgements they do
not learn so well as their neigbours children . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,247.81

The best is to admit of young beginners <P_248> onely once every year ,
and then to take in all that can be gotten from the Petty-Schooles ;
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,248.82

for company will encourage children to adventure upon an uncouth course
of learning , seeing the more the merrier ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,248.83

and any discreet Parent will be easily perswaded to forbear his son a
while when he considereth it will be more for his profiting to have
company along with him , as he learneth , and he may be daily bettered
in reading English , and forwarded by learning to write , before he come
from the Petty-Schoole . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,248.84

The fittest season of the year for such a general admission of little
ones into the Grammar-Schoole , doth seem to be about Easter ; partly
because the higher boyes are usually then disposed of to Trades , or the
Universities , and partly , because most children are then removed from
one Schoole to another , as having the Summer coming on for their
encouragement . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,248.85

When you have thus admitted a company of boyes together , you may let
those that can read best , obtain the higher places , till they come to
get the Rudiments of Latine without book , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,248.86

and then you may rank them into a <P_249> Form .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,249.87

Because , 2. It is a main help to the Master , and a furtherance to all
the Scholars , that the whole Schoole be reduced into Formes ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,249.88

and those also as few as may be , respecting the different years , and
capacity of each Scholar . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,249.89

And if there were six_hundred Scholars or more in a Schoole , they might
all fitly be ranked into six Forms , by putting those of equal age and
abilities together , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,249.90

and the toyle in hearing Parts , or Lessons , and perusing Exercises ,
<paren> as I will shew anon <$$paren> would not be much more with
an_hundred orderly placed , and well_behaved in a room to themselves
apart , then with three or foure single boyes in several employments .
Not onely because the Master or Ushers do thus at once impart themselves
to all alike , and may bestow more time amongst them in examining any
Task ; but also because by this means Aemulation <paren> as a main
quickner of diligence <$$paren> will be wrought amongst them , insomuch
as the weakest Scholar amongst them will be loth to lagge alway behinde
the rest ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,249.91

and there is none so stupidly blockish , but by help of company will
learn that which he would not <P_250> obtain being alone ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,250.92

and I have seen the very hindmost oftentimes to help all his fellowes at
a dead lift . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,250.93

The Teachers constant care should be in every Form , as to direct and
examine every particular boy , so to help forward the weakest , that in
every thing he doth , he may understand himself ,
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,250.94

and it is not to be said , with what alacrity they will all strive to
out-doe one another , so that sometimes he that cometh behinde all the
rest , will be as fit to make a leader of the Forme , as those that are
the foremost in it . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,250.95

To provoke them all therefore to emulation , and that none may complain
, or think himself injured by being left behinde ; use constantly once
at the end of a moneth , and when all your Scholars are together to make
a free new choyce in every Forme , after this manner .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,250.96

1 . Let every Scholar in the Forme give his own voyce , concerning
which boy he thinketh to be the best proficient , and ablest for the
present to lead the company ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,250.97

and having set him aside , let them all passe their voyces again ,
concerning whom they judge fittest to stand next to him .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,250.98

2 . Then set these two opposite <P_251> one to another , so as the
better Scholar may take the leading of the upper side , on your right
hand , and the other , the leading of the lower side , on your left hand
. HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,251.99

3 . And that there may not be much inequality in the sides , let the
lower leader have the first call , and liberty to take what boy he
thinketh the strongest , out of all the rest , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,251.100

and then let the higher leader have the next call , and liberty to take
whom he liketh ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,251.101

and so let them proceed to call by course , till they have <paren> like
ball players <$$paren> ranked all their fellowes to their sides , and so
strongly and evenly set themselves in a posture one side against another
, that it may be hard for any one to judge , whether is the stronger .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,251.102

By thus choosing amongst themselves , they will be all so well pleased ,
that the Master shall never be blamed for endeavouring to preferre one
boy before another , or keeping of any back , that would seem to go
faster then his fellowes at his Book . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,251.103

And indeed I have sometimes admired to observe the impartiality and
judgement of children in placing one another according to their
abilities and parts , waving all other by-respects by <P_252> which men
would be inclined to set one higher , and another lower .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,252.104

Yet if sometimes they seem to mistake in their judgement concerning a
boy , that is but newly come amongst them ; or to be too partial against
any other upon some general splene , which is but very rare ; The
discreet Master may after the election , correct the error by giving
such a one a place to his own liking , which he may keep till the next
choyce , except some of his inferiours have a list to dispute with him
for his place , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,252.105

and then he must put it to the hazard , having a lawful time given him
to provide before-hand for the contest . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,252.106

3 {COM:sic} . Let all the Scholars take their places in the Schoole ,
according to their several Formes , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,252.107

and let every one sit in his Form in that order in which he was elected
. HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,252.108

It were good that the seates were so equally set on both sides the
Schoole , as that the higer side of each Form , might keep the higher
side of the School , I mean , that on the Masters right hand ; and the
lower side of the Form , the lower side of the Schoole , which is that
on the Masters left hand . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,252.109

However , let the upper side take alwayes the upper , and the lower ,
the lower seats . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,252.110

<P_253>

This placing of Scholars in an opposite manner , side against side , is
good in many respects , as , 1. To know on a suddain who is unruly in ,
or absent out of his place . 2. To have them ready paired at all times
for Examinations , Disputations , or Orations , or the like . 3. To
keep order in going in and out of their seats to say , or in going home
from Schoole , or the like . 4. To increase courage in the Scholars ,
who are delighted to let their friends see , what place they keep
amongst the rest , when they come to visit them .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,253.112

As they sit in their seats , be sure to keep them continually imployed ,
by proportioning every taske to the time and their strength , with
respect to the capacity of the weakest ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,253.113

for by this means , the strongest boyes will have more leisure to help ,
and see the weakest can do their work , for which purpose they should be
appointed sometimes to sit in the middle amongst the rest , that they
may more readily be consulted with , & heard of all .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,253.114

These should sometimes construe , and sometimes examine over their
Lessons , having their Grammars , <P_254> and Dictionaries , and other
Subsidiary books to help them , out of which they should appoint others
to find what they enquire after ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,254.115

and this will be so far from hindering their own progresse , that it
will encourage them to go faster onward , when they see how readily they
can lead the way , and incite their fellowes to follow after them .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,254.116

When in getting Lessons , the whole Form shall be at a <font> Non-plus
<$$font> , let one of the leaders have recourse to the Master or Ushers
, or to whom they shall appoint him to go for resolution .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,254.117

But I have found it a continual provoking of Scholars , to strive who
should learn the fastest , to let both the sides of one Form , as they
sit apart , so to look to provide their Lessons apart ; and when they
come to say Parts or Lessons , or to perform Exercises , to bicker one
with another , and propound those things to be resolved in by their
opposites , which they observe the Master to have omitted , and they
think they can@ @not tell . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,254.118

And let it be constantly noted which side hath the better all the week ,
that when afterwards they come to a general dispute at the weeks end ,
for places or sides , it may be considered . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,254.119

<P_255>

<heading>

CHAP. V . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,255.122

<font> Of saying Parts , and Lessons ; and of perusing Translations ,
and all other kind of Exercises . <$$font> HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,255.123

<$$heading>

1 . The best time for saying <font> Grammar Parts <$$font> , or the
like , is the morning , partly because the memory is then the freshest ;
and partly , because children may take the opportunity over night to get
them perfectly at home . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,255.125

But forasmuch as <font> Vocabula's <$$font> are more easie to be
impressed in the mind , and require lesse paines in getting , I conceive
it not amisse , that children be continually exercised in saying them
for afternoons parts at one a clock , before which hour they may prepare
themselves afore-hand <paren> even <$$paren> amid their play .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,255.126

After parts said , the Master or his Ushers should immediately give
Lessons to every Form , or appoint a boy out of an upper Form to give
Lessons to that which is next below him , in his hearing ; which he
should distinctly construe <P_256> once or twice over , and note out all
the Words , wherein the most difficulty of parsing seems to lye , and
name the Tropes and Figures , the Phrases , and other elegancies that
are to be found especially in higher Authours .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,256.127

The Lessons should be got ready to be said against ten a clock in the
forenoon , and four in the after_noon ; at which time the Scholars
should come all orderly and quietly out of their Form , and taking their
places where they ought to stand , <paren> so as one side may be
opposite to another <$$paren> they should all make their salutes , and
then say one after another , except they be appointed otherwise .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,256.128

For sometimes when you have occasion to make more hastie dispatch with a
Form , you may cause any one or more to say the whole Lesson , or by
pieces ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,256.129

but be sure that they all come very well provided , and that every one
be intent upon what another is saying , for which purpose you may note
him that hath been most negligent in his seat , and ask him ever and
anon , what it was that his fellow said last . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,256.130

To save your own lungs in asking many questions , and telling Rules , or
<P_257> the like , you may let every two boyes examine one another , and
your self onely help them , when they are both at a mistake .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,257.131

You may easily amend that common and troublesome fault of indistinct and
muttering speaking , by calling out a bold_spirited little boy , that
can speak with a grace ; and encouraging him to give the other an higher
note for the elevation of his voyce : HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,257.132

for this will at last enforce the boy you are troubled with , to speak
louder , and with a better grace ; and to strive to pronounce his words
more distinctly , then the other did before him .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,257.133

After Lessons are ended , you may let every one propound what questions
he pleaseth , for his opposite to answer , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,257.134

and this will be a means to whet them on to more diligence in getting
them , before they come to say . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,257.135

In the three lowest Forms , or in others , where all have the same
Translations , or Dictates , you may cause onely him whose performance
you most doubt of , to read what he hath written both in English and
Latine , and help him , as you finde his errour , to correct it , and
see that all the rest amend their own <P_258> faults accordingly .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,258.136

Afterwards , you may let one parse it both in English and Latine , and
order them all to write it over again fair in a Paper-book for
themselves , and to give you also a copy of it neatly written in a loose
paper , every Saturday . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,258.137

And thus you shall have every one begin to leane to his own strength , a
thing very necessary in all kinde of Exercises , though they doe the
lesse . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,258.138

If you once take notice of any boyes strength , you may easily judge of
what he bringeth , whether it be his own , or anothers doing .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,258.139

But in the upper Formes , and where they have all several Exercises , it
is necessary that you peruse what every Scholar hath done .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,258.140

And for this work , you may set apart Saturday fore-noons , after
Grammatical Examinations are ended , and before they say their
Catechismes . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,258.141

And that they may write them fair , you should sometimes compare them
with their Copy-Books , or such pieces as they writ last , at the
Writing-Schoole . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,258.142

Before they bring them to you to read , let them peruse one anothers
Exercise amongst themselves , and try what faults they can finde in it ;
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,258.143

and as you read them over , where you see a <P_259> grosse mistake ,
explode it ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,259.144

where you espie any over-sight , note it with a dash , that they may
amend it ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,259.145

but where you see any fault , which is beyond their power to avoyd , or
remedy , do you mildely correct it for them , and advise them to observe
it for the future . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,259.146

However , forget not to commend him most that hath done the best , and
for his encouragement to make him read over his exercise aloud , that
others may heare it , and then to hang it up in an eminent place , that
they may imitate it ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,259.147

and if any one can afterwards out-doe it , let his exercise be hanged up
in its stead . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,259.148

But if any one hath lazily performed his exercise , so that it be worse
then all the rest , let it be cut in fashion of a leg , and be hanged up
by the heel , till he make a better , and deserve that that may be taken
down . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,259.149

It is not amisse also , to stirre them up to more diligence , to have a
<font> Common-paper-Book <$$font> , wherein the names of all in every
Form that have <font> optime <$$font> and <font> pessime <$$font>
performed their weekly exercises may be written , and that the one may
have the priviledge to beg a Play-day once a moneth , or to obtain
pardon for some of his fellows ; and the other may be confined to some
task , when a Play-day is granted . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,259.150

<P_260>

<heading>

CHAP. VI . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,260.153

<font> Of weekly Repetitions : Of Grammaticall Examinations , and
Disputations . Of collecting phrases , and gathering into
Common-place-Bookes . Of pronouncing Orations , and Declamations .
<$$font> HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,260.154

<$$heading>

I have not in either of the foregoing Treatises made mention of any
thing to be done on Fridaies , because that day is commonly spent in
most Schooles , in repeating what hath been learned in the fore-going
part of the week ; which custome , because it is a mean to confirm
{SIC:confim} childrens memories in what they learn , I willingly conform
thereunto . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,260.156

After Chapter's therefore read in a morning , let them repeat their
wonted Parts , and afterwards their Lessons , all which they will be
able to say together , out of their several Authours , so that some be
made to repeat out of one book , and some out of another .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,260.157

For if due care be but had aforehand , that Scholars be very ready and
<P_261> perfect in their daily taskes , it will take away all toyle and
timerousnesse , which usually attends these Repetitions , and make that
this day will become the veryest play-day in all the week ; when boyes
shall se that they have nothing to do , but what they can do already ,
<paren> at least <$$paren> with a little looking of it over on
Thursdaies towards evening at home , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,261.158

what they have translated out of any Authour in Prose , should be read
out of English into Latine , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,261.159

and what they learn in Poets , should be said <paren> as well as can be
<$$paren> by heart , both for the verse and the matters sake , which
will furnish them with Authorities , and sharpen their invention for
versifying . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,261.160

After Repetitions ended , the Master should note all the Phrases and
Sentences , and other things observable in their Lessons , which they
should transcribe into <font> Phrase-bookes , and Common-place-Bookes
<$$font> , for their constant use in writing or speaking , or making
Exercises , as we have mentioned already before .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,261.161

And because the most leisure is gained on Friday afternoones , it will
not be amisse about three a clock to let every Form to dispute side with
side , one <P_262> after another , after this manner .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,262.162

1 . Let every one propound to his opposite two or three questions ,
which he thinks most difficult out of his weeks work , which if the
other can@ @not answer readily before he count six , or ten in Latine ,
let him be <font> Captus <$$font> , and the questions be propounded to
his next fellow . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,262.163

The lowest in the Form may begin the dispute , and so go on to the
highest on either side , who should keep reckoning of those that are
capt , and how often . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,262.164

2 . Besides their weeks works they may try , who can most perfectly
repeat <font> memoriter <$$font> , a part of their Grammar , or any
Authour which they read , or who can recite the most Vocabula's under
one head , or who can vary a phrase the best , or imitate any piece of
an Oratour or Poet . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,262.165

3 . Some time would also be spent in <font> Capping Latine verses
<$$font> amongst the lower Forms , and <font> Greek verses <$$font>
amongst the highest ; for which they may provide themselves out of a
<font> Capping-book <$$font> , which seems to be made on purpose by
<font> Bartholomaeus Schonborn <$$font> or <font> Gnomologicon Poeticum
<$$font> , made lately by <font> Mr. Rosse <$$font> , besides which ,
they may contrive a little Book of their own , wherein to write verses
Alphabetically <P_263> out of the best Poets . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,263.166

Let that side which appeareth to be the Victor have the upper seat in
the Schoole , till a new choice be made , except the other can win it
from them before , and bring them back with a hissing disgrace .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,263.167

Amid these disputes , the Master must have a great care to suppresse
noise and tumultuous clamour , and see that no boy stirre out of his
appointed place . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,263.168

For they are apt to heighten their spirits beyond moderation , if the
Masters discretion doe not settle them . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,263.169

Let it be now lawful for any lower boy in a Form , to dispute with one
above him for his place . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,263.170

Mr. <font> Stockwoods <$$font> Disputations will be helpfull to the
upper Scholars . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,263.171

Now , that all your Scholars may be thorowly grounded in their Grammar ,
so as not to be apt to forget what they have learnt in it ; let them all
be exercised in the examination of a part of it every Saturday morning
thus ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,263.172

1 . Let the first and lowest Form examine the two next above them out
of the examination of the Accidents , asking them the Questions as they
are in the Book , and causing them to answer without book , and
according to the Accidents . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,263.173

<P_264>

2 . Then let all those three Forms run over the Examples of the
Declensions and Conjugations , as I formerly shewed , & try , who can
pusle one another in declining any hard Noun , or Conjugating and
Forming any Verb , and give the Rule of the Genders of the one , or
Preterperfect tense , or Supin of the other ; HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,264.175

when these have done , 3. Let the fourth Form examine the two highest
Forms in <font> Examinatio Latinae Grammaticae <$$font> , and sometimes
in <font> Elementa Rhetorica <$$font> , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,264.176

and then 4. Let all these three Forms run over the Paradigmes of the
Greek Declensions and Conjugations . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,264.177

5 . Afterwards the two upper Forms may bicker with one another touching
Grammar niceties , either Latine or Greek , which they have taken notice
of , and collected into a <font> Common-place-book <$$font> , as I
mentioned before . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,264.178

But a principal care must be had to bring all your Scholars to an habit
of speaking Latine , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,264.179

and therefore a strict Law should be made and observed , that every
Scholar <paren> especially after he hath been one quarter of a year at
Schoole <$$paren> should either learn to speak in Latine , or be
enforced to hold his tongue . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,264.180

And to help the little ones in so doing , besides those <font>
Phrasiuncula <$$font> at the end of <font> the <P_265> Grounds of
Grammar <$$font> , they should have <font> Formulae loquendi quotidianae
<$$font> , such expressions as are every day used <paren> especially
about the Schoole <$$paren> writ down in a little book , that they may
get them by heart at by-times . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,265.181

As for the other boyes , they will be better guided how to speak by the
Rules of Grammar , and the constant use and imitation of approved
Authours . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,265.182

I conceive , the penury of proper words and good phrase , with many
Teachers , is a main reason why children are not as well trained up to
speak Latine in <font> England <$$font> , as they are in many places
beyond Seas , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,265.183

and the ready & frequent use of their Mother-tongue causeth , that they
are hardly reclaimed from it to make use of another Language . Whereas
, if whilest they are at the Schoole , they might hear little or no
English spoken , nor be suffered to speak it , they would quickly
conforme themselves to discourse in Latine . As I have known French
boyes that understood not a word in English , to be able in two or three
moneths to talk it as readily , as they that were English_borne .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,265.184

Onely at the first , one must wink at their improprieties , and
harshnesse in pronunciation of some words and phrases , and take their
meaning by what they speak , HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,265.185

<P_266>

and after a while by custome and imitation of others , they will speak
in Latine , as properly as the best ; especially after they have gained
the knowledge of Grammar , accustomed themselves to observe the style of
Latine Authours . HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,266.187

No day in the week should passe on which some Declamation , Oration , or
Theme should not be pronounced , about a quarter of an hour before the
Schoole be broken up , and after Lessons are all ended in the forenoon .
That by assiduity in these exercises , the Scholars may be emboldened to
perform them with a grace before whomsoever , and upon occasion of any
solemnity , or coming of Friends into the Schoole .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,266.188

There should be two standing desks set opposite in the midst of the
Schoole , for boyes to stand at , when they pronounce .
HOOLE-1660-E3-P2,266.189

