<BEGIN_hoxinden-1652-e3-p2>

<P_166>

<heading:edcomment:CIV_HENRY_OXINDEN_TO_KATHERINE_OXINDEN>

Endeared , I have not yet seene your letter of Tuesday mentioned in
yoars of No: 4=th= . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,166.4

I sent you one by last Thursday <P_167> post wherein I certifyed you of
another foile Mr. Denne received in the open court , insomuch as I and
my Cozin Roberts conceave the most troublesome of all our businesses is
over . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,167.5

His Refuge since hath beene to stop my seeing him uppon my Recognizance
of 5000@ @=ll= and bond of 3000@ @=ll= , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,167.6

and to that end , the 5=th= of this instant , hee endeavored to gaine an
injunction and to hinder the examination of what I have been damnified ;
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,167.7

and in that very thing before the Lords Commissioners att Westminster
Hall , I foyled him once more , the businesse going att my side , my
Cozin Robart Hales being present and assisting .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,167.8

I doubt not <paren> as you say <$$paren> hee will and hath done his
worst ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,167.9

but hee will certainly <paren> and you know itt is not my way to bee
confident without good cause <$$paren> in the end come off with
dishonour , and bee forced to pay those monies hee leaves uppon mee to
pay . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,167.10

Concerning our daughter Hobart I hope for no other then what you say
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,167.11

but going downe yesterday after my Tryall at Westminster Hall to the La:
Zouch , to see how thinges stood there , and coming in just as the La:
was att dinner <paren> with whom Sir Peter Kelligrey who lately arrived
out of France was then sate downe to dinner <$$paren> I was importuned
to sett downe HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,167.12

and did accordingly . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,167.13

There dined our daughter Hobart , and my Cozin Harry , Allen and
Dorothie ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,167.14

after dinner the Ladie desired to speake to mee in private ;
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,167.15

the effect of her discourse was of some dislikes shee toke against her
daughter , one of going out without her consent , which shee sayes shee
will not allow of , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,167.16

and sayes when she lived with her Mother in law shee never did so .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,167.17

Another thing was that shee was with her daughter Marie , wheruppon shee
told her if she came againe into her company shee would turne her out of
doores . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,167.18

Another was shee met one whom shee called brother ; which I learned to
bee one of Mr. Hogbin's sonnes ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,167.19

shee sayes she hath so ratled her up for the premises that shee left her
to her crying refuge and that more then once or twice either .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,167.20

I see our daughter growes wearie at beeing there allreadie , but knowes
not , neither do <P_168> I , whether she will goe , or doe , nor what
will bee the issue of businesses beetwixt us .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.21

Only I am resolved shee shall never come againe to live with mee in
regard of her neglective demeanour toward us when shee thought herselfe
uppon the top of fortune's wheele . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.22

Sir Allan is not yet returned , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.23

but hath sent his Lady a letter filled with strange expressions , some
of love , some of Rebuke , some of I know not what ;
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.24

he tells her hee prayes God to amend them both .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.25

Hee quotes textes of scripture to her of wifes' dutie to bee obedient to
their Husbands , and more Text to that and other effects .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.26

Tells her that both of them have their Dalilahs , which shee disclaimes
absolutely , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.27

and vowes shee will never keepe company with anie man hee shall tell her
hee dislikes . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.28

The summe of what I can say is , they lived like cats and dogs when they
were together and clash at one another being absent .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.29

Concerning Mr. Kt I have onlie to say I have not seene him since I came
to London , and I wrote my mind to you in my last .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.30

Concerning Jo: Hobart his threats , I value them not ,
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.31

onlie I wish I had nothing to doe with him . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.32

And the Ladie's saying I made him pay for his wife's wedding apparell is
false . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.33

I am at least , one way or other , 400@ @=ll= out of purse for him .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.34

I would I could say otherwise . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.35

I have sent Mr. Barling's booke apart because if I had enclosed itt
among my letters they might otherwise , have hapned not to have come
till Saturday by the wagon ; his booke beeing of some bulke .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.36

The water I brought downe of which I tooke 3 spoonefulls a morning , now
itt comes to bee paid for is 30 or 40@ @=s= the halfe pint ,
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.37

for I thinke I had not above , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.38

but I will not bee brought to that price . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.39

Pray preserve what is left att home of itt . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.40

I have not yett seene Mr. Andrewes , Mr. Nedham nor Mr. Thompson ,
nor dranke the value of a quart of wine since I came last to towne .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.41

You may beeleive the Ile of man is taken , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,168.42

for since my <P_169> writing the 3 other sides I saw Mr. Nedham who
assures mee so much , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,169.43

and Limbrick is taken ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,169.44

my Lord President hath letters of itt which I saw .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,169.45

This is not for certaine in the bookes HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,169.46

but I assure it you . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,169.47

I heare also Jo: Hobbart is in Towne HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,169.48

and his wife and hee come together ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,169.49

they are both well met . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,169.50

I can say no more than what you shall find me whilst I live ;
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,169.51

I am Yours and none but yours Hen: Oxinden HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,169.52

<font> No <$$font> 6 1651 HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,169.53

I came a mile in hast to end my letter . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,169.54

<heading:edcomment:CV_HENRY_OXINDEN_TO_KATHERINE_OXINDEN>

{COM:beginning_lost} ... Towne . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,169.56

There is no newes in the Moonday Diurnall beeyond the King's being for
the most part in trees , after the fight at Worchester , one day and
night , and that the Lady <P_170> that went with him was so kind as not
to forsake him so long as hee stayd uppon the land .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.57

But this I shall tell thee is newes not yet in print ,
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.58

and itt is to bee wondered if itt should : viz that uppon Sunday last ,
about 4 of the clock in the afternoone , Hind was taken after all his
Rambles at a Barber's house as hee was reading the bookes concerning him
; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.59

being brought beefore the Lord President hee told him hee was a
notorious theife ; to whom he answered hee was no Theife but only
borrowed and had an intention to pay every man his owne againe .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.60

This you may beleive ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.61

I meane the history ; not that hee intends to pay every man :
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.62

but I beelieve hee will bee paid his due , viz a Halter .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.63

I have sent the Testament thou dist send to mee for and withall a peeice
of Taffety for a petticoat for thy selfe , for which I paid for out of
the 3@ @=l= 6@ @=s= 8@ @=d= I receaved from old Denne , because I would
bee sure thou shouldst have somewhat out of it , come what there can .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.64

I have also bought my selfe a Bible in folio ; wherein there is never a
word misprinted , which shall bee to the longest liver of us two ;
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.65

it cost : one pound : two shillings : sixpence .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.66

Kate pray if you can gett money lett my sonne have 12@ @=l= to pay Mr.
Fanting because his day is past . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.67

I can ad no more now because the post is uppon going , then that I am
thine in all fortunes whether adverse or prosperous .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.68

Hen: Oxinden . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.69

No: 10 : 1651 . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.70

Tell Mr. Barling I will remember the letter booke hee certifyed mee of
: HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.71

the first I have sent . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.72

My respects to him and to those thou thinkest fitt .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.73

My blessing to my Children . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,170.74

<P_171>

<heading:edcomment:CVI_HENRY_OXINDEN_TO_HIS_WIFE>

Deare Heart , No longer agoe then Sunday last there was such a falling
out beetweene my daughter Hobart and the Lady Zouch that our daughter
had packed up her thinges to bee gon , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,171.77

and had not I accidentally come downe to dinner thether <paren> not so
much for the dinner as to see how the squares went , yet I found there a
great rib of roast beife , boyled meate , a rabbot and one of her great
puddinges <$$paren> , I thinke my daughter had ruined her selfe ;
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,171.78

for had shee gon without the Lady and her husband@ @'s consent <paren> I
meane Jack Hobart , for Sir Allan is not yet come <$$paren> shee would
not have bene allowed any maintenance by the Lawe ,
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,171.79

and I beeleive both the Lady and Jack Hobart would have been glad of the
occasion . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,171.80

The Lady and her sonne are both exceeding great one with the other ;
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,171.81

shee beeleives him a Saint ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,171.82

shee thinkes hee hath beene exceedingly wronged in reports ,
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,171.83

and <P_172> hee affirmes , and confirmed itt confidently beefore mee ,
that hee brewed but one bushell of malt , which hee made out into drinke
, and that was all that caused so much report of the drinking in his
house . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.84

The truth is shee keepes him exceedingly in awe , and very temperate .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.85

Shee talkes about going beeyond seas HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.86

and hee sayes hee will go with her and what not .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.87

The occasion of the falling out betweene the Lady and her daughter was
because shee went into her daughter Marie@ @'s company , contrary to her
commands and indeed contrary to mine allso ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.88

surely shee growes too too headstrong HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.89

and hath neede enough of such a one as the Lady to breake her if
possible of her willfull courses . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.90

My cozin Master is come to Towne , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.91

but Mr. Andrews and hee have not yet mett . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.92

I was this day at Westminster where I met Mr. Kt .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.93

He told mee hee intended to go home in {COM:preceding_word_"in"_emended}
regard of this night . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.94

I desired him if hee saw you to remember my love to you
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.95

and that was all I said to him . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.96

If he will have Betty without standing upon a portion and rely uppon us
{COM:ms._torn} the businesse I would be glad to have only thee and I and
ours to live together . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.97

I am in haste Thine alone Hen: Oxinden HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.98

No: 24 , 1651 HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.99

Let Tom come up if hee can all the way to London on horseback .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.100

This day they chuse members for the counsell of state
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.101

but itt is not yet knowne . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.102

Liuetenant Generall Fleetwood's Lady is now going to bee buried .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,172.103

<heading:edcomment:CVII_HENRY_OXINDEN_TO_KATHERINE_OXINDEN>

<P_173>

Deare Hearte , My sonne came up Saturday , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.106

from him I receaved thy letter ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.107

I am glad to heare thou art in health but sorrie thou art put to so hard
shiftes , as indeed I am the like . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.108

My sonne Thomas was yesterday at the Ladie Zouche@ @'s where hee
understood that uppon Saturday night last , that after Sir Allan and my
Ladie were in their bed , Harrie Hobart came up into their chamber , and
the Ladie beginning to finde fault with him for coming home so late hee
thereuppon drew out his sword and threatened to kill his Mother and tore
downe the Curtaines , insomuch that the Ladie fell into fitts of the
Mother and itt was thought she would have dyed ;
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.109

Sir Allan in the interim lay by HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.110

and sayd nothing ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.111

John Hobart coming up after Harry Hobart and thinking to pacifie him ,
was in danger to be killed by his brother . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.112

Much was sayd and done more then I can now relate ,
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.113

but this is {TEXT:missing_"is"} enough to shew in what a lamentable
condition they live , no place that I know resembling Hell so much as
that ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.114

and indeed miserable are all they that have anie thing to doe with them
. HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.115

My Cozin Master desires to bee acquitted of Denton , not because hee is
out of love with itt , but because hee is afrayd of some incumbrance
uppon itt ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.116

this is all of these two thinges but too much to bee spoken of .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.117

I would to God I were once in a condition that I might not bee forced in
this manner to live from thee so long . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.118

I had rather enjoy a little then have much and bee deprived of thy
company . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.119

Pray aske my daughter Bettie from mee what shee can expect from mee ,
being so refractory to my will . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.120

Tell her I intend shee shall not live long at home with mee and
therefore I would have her beethinke her selfe of a service .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.121

I told her my minde enough of this beefore ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.122

I thought I should not have needed to have beene put to the trouble to
say more of itt . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.123

There is little newes but that of the Act of Oblivion , which is about
coming out ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,173.124

but no Act shall ever make mee forgett <P_174> the respects I ow to thee
for the love I beeleeve thou beerest to Thyne ever more in the highest
degree of affection Hen: Oxinden HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,174.125

<font> Dec <$$font> : 1. 1651 HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,174.126

<heading:edcomment:CVIII_HENRY_OXINDEN_TO_KATHERINE_OXINDEN>

Deare Heart , I have sent my sonne home to keep thee companie because I
can@ @not yett come myselfe , for greife wherof I kept my bed all day
yesterday . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,174.128

As concerning old Denne's businesse , my sonne can spare mee the paines
in relating itt to thee ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,174.129

sure I am as yett hee may wish hee had not meddled with opposition of
mee , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,174.130

for I have carried everie thing against him since I came to towne .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,174.131

Concerning my sonne , you have him now with you I assure you a single
though not a singular man : HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,174.132

how soone hee may be marred or married I knowe not .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,174.133

For my part , if I could have my price for land , I have a desire rather
to convert itt into mony then mar or marry him ;
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,174.134

if hee marry hee will hardly bee of a profession , which I value equall
to an estate att least of 100@ @=ll= the yeare :
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,174.135

if he do not marrie well , I know not how I shall according to the
saying keepe buckle and thong together . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,174.136

Pray sift out to your utmost abilitie how they of Broome stand affected
to the buying of what I have formerly <P_175> acquainted you with ;
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.137

I do not value what was my forefathers if inconvenient to mee , as they
would have altered their estates if for their conveniency ;
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.138

they have left mee the same liberty HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.139

and I may lawfully take it ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.140

and Posterity will take the same libertie should I do my utmost to
prevent itt HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.141

and it is not wisdome as thinges may happen to have it otherwise .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.142

This is my opinion ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.143

however I shall be ruled , or rather overruled by thee , by whose
desires I shall stare my Course , so long as I find thee no otherwise
then I have done hetherto , that is Faithfull and Carefull .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.144

Trust no bodie's wordes nor present affections ;
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.145

they will fade according to interest and profitt .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.146

It is only that true love and true lover's knot beetwene man and wife
continues indissoluble ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.147

what is beesides it is a chance , if att the last itt end not in hatred
and discontent . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.148

Warily observe all negotiations beetweene Denton Court , Deane and
Broome ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.149

surely they have some thing or other in designe amongst them in relation
to Matches one amongst the other , or in regard of having Denton Court ,
which I tell thee once for all I beeleive at St. Mich. Mr. Andrewes
will have in his owne possession . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.150

If Mr. Andrews would have assured the 1500@ @=ll= I formerly acquainted
thee with , I beleive hee and I might have concluded on somewhat ,
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.151

but , in regard of mistakes beetweene us , the issue of that , as of
most of my affaires , is uncertaine . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.152

I beeleive my Cozin Ja: Master hath no present Mistris at London and
therfore is to seeke one to come ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.153

his friends say hee hath no mind to marrie , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.154

but that saying of theirs is like to that of maydes , who say they care
not to marrie , which is to bee understood till they can gett them wifes
. HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.155

I beeleve his friends have bene these 3 or 4. yeares about the designe
of getting him a rich Match , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.156

and when they can@ @not , perhaps they will have that in designe nere
home ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.157

if so , you may if you have oportunity see how cunningly they all play
their games ; which you may the better do if you seeme to take no notice
of anything concerning them . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,175.158

<P_176>

Deare Heart ,
{COM:15_lines,_substance_elsewhere_repeated,_omitted_in_edition} When
you see the partie that sifts whether I intend to put off land suddenly
or no ? order your discourse to this effect with her : viz : you know
itt is my intention so to doe , and that I seldome go about anything
that is feaceable but that I do one way or other effect it , and that my
way is <paren> as much as the nature of the businesse requires <$$paren>
to doe a thing first , and then , and not before , to speake of itt ,
though in other cases I may bee free enough of my speech ; that you know
I had rather they would have dealt with mee then another , and when itt
is too late , they will as long as they live repent of their not dealing
with mee . That it is to bee wondred that they beeing so understanding
as they are should bee so overseene as to lett slip any oportunity of
having land nere them when they may ; itt being of so much concernement
to their quiett . That to suffer another neighbour to encroach nere
upon them is against all the pollicy in the world . That whereas
perhaps they have omitted other things nere home in expectation of
Denton Court , and may do so still , tell them , that Denton Court is
not so convenient for them as other thinges ; that itt is not likely to
bee had ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,176.160

if itt were likely , divers casualities in itt ,
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,176.161

and when all comes to all , any friend of the heires may redeeme itt att
his coming to age that will deposite as much as hee that is to buy itt ;
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,176.162

that nothing can bee had of itt but only a mortgage and itt hath ever
bene an infortunate place etc HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,176.163

and this do att your first oportunity that I may order my affaires
accordingly : HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,176.164

extort what answeares you can HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,176.165

and let mee heare accordingly . {COM:no_signature_or_date}
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,176.166

<P_177>

<heading:edcomment:CIX_HENRY_OXINDEN_TO_KATHERINE_OXINDEN>

Deare Heart , {COM:27_lines_omitted} Concerning the gentleman you
understand well of , I have seene him sometimes since ,
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,177.169

but wee are att {SIC:att_at} greater distance then formerly ;
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,177.170

the reason I conceave to bee because uppon that last discourse uppon
which wee estranged ourselves I told him I understood hee promised 1500@
@=ll= but hee proffered then not above 1000@ @=ll= ,
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,177.171

and I beeleive hee understood by mee my estate was not so much cleere ,
debts payd , as hee expected . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,177.172

However wee apprehended one the other <P_178> then I know not certainlie
; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.173

nor know not what hee intends now ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.174

but if hee will lett mee enioy a cleere estate to the value of as I have
told thee formerly in discourse beetweene thee and I , and with the
monie I shall receave of him and the sale of land pay what I owe , I
shall thinke it as thinges stand with mee <paren> accounting the nature
of the man , his neerenes in neighbourhood , and relation to us ,
<$$paren> the best I can make HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.175

for I know not of anie other match , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.176

and if I did , I much scruple the issue of itt .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.177

If I can bee left free , if thou wilt , I will venture ;
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.178

and if thou likest I should , I shall desire thee to animate my sonne in
relation to itt ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.179

tell him if I chance to happen in trouble beefore hee marrie , he can
not then expect any match att all . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.180

I expected to have gotten monie HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.181

and then I intended to have bought a golden watch for him to have
presented his once perhaps intended M=s= with ,
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.182

but having itt not , I should not lett thee suffer for the curtesie if
thou wouldst send mee the ring of diamonds with which his mother was
married with , and which shee delivered mee a little before her death ,
with desire hee might have itt , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.183

but I will promise thee hee shall not have itt otherwise then uppon the
occasion of gaining what wee expect thereby ;
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.184

otherwise I will see itt in thy possession againe .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.185

Doe as thou pleasest ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.186

I know thou hast itt in pawne of mee for somewhat or other I have
forgotten , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.187

but what ever it bee I will , if God inable mee , bee as good as my word
to thee who art liveing ; as well as to the dead , who know nothing
<paren> as I suppose <$$paren> of my actions .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.188

If thou send it by my sonne to mee , lett not him know what I intend
with itt ; HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.189

the safest way to carrie itt will bee <paren> as I thinke <$$paren> to
sow itt up in the bellie peece of his dublett , or otherwise as thou
mayst thinke more safely . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.190

Let mee entreate thee not to take this desire of mine amisse , meere
necessitie occasioning mee to request this att thy hands ; but not so
earnestly as that I shall faile in my love to thee in case of denyall .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,178.191

I have sent thee somewhat which I bee chance hapned uppon to make a
window cushion , or the like , which I desire thee to accept of and to
give itt after our decease to which of our children thou thinkest
<P_179> best of : HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.192

itt will serve to healp sett out our house when thee and I are alone of
our selves . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.193

For my part I can@ @not beeleive there is anie hurt in pictures : so
long as wee do not worship the shadow and forgett the substance .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.194

I am sorrie my sonne loves his booke no better , it is hee will repent
itt hereafter ; but more sorrie thou hadst beene ill if I had not heard
of thy recoverie , for which I praise God . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.195

Mr. Andrews doth intend to come and live att Denton att St. Mich ,
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.196

and if the businesse goe forward beetweene him and mee , hee may buy
that I must putt off , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.197

and then the businesse will in my opinion bee the lesse .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.198

I can say nothing for certaine , HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.199

and as therefore as thou sayest I must refer all thinges to Him whose
will <paren> whatever mine bee <$$paren> will bee done , I shall for my
part respect thy Councell as far as I can . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.200

I have beene but once at Sir Thomas Peyton's since hee came to
Westminster which was uppon Saturday last , at which time his sonne was
in some danger of life , but perhaps amended since ,
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.201

for I heard Sir Tho: was att the Globe in Fleet street uppon Mooneday
last . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.202

I heard at Sir Tho: Peyton's that one Smith , one of the principall
Hectors in the towne , is latelie dead , and his brother Hectors
complaine that hee hath made no provision for them etc.
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.203

Ned Swan cheeres himselfe up in expectation of future happinesse ,
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.204

and wonders to see mee so melancholy as hee often tells mee .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.205

I must confess there is a great deale of happinesse in expectation of
good : HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.206

but I expect but little . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.207

The best I hope for is to live lovingly and quietly with thee and to bee
content with whatsoever itt shall please God to lay out for mee :
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.208

and shall ever remaine Thine and solely thine Hen: Oxinden
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.209

<font> Jan: <$$font> 16 : 1651 . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.210

Saturday next my birthday . HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.211

My love to all my children and in particular to Kate and Mal .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.212

My respects to all such neighbors as you shall thinke fitt .
HOXINDEN-1652-E3-P2,179.213

