<BEGIN_interview-1520-e1-p2>

<P_1.1,174>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_LXII_THE_LORDS_OF_THE_COUNCIL_TO_KING_HENRY_THE_EIGHTH_AFTER_THE_INTERVIEW>

Sir Please it your Grace , over and besides the joyous personnall
Commyng to your Highnesse of the Emperor {SIC:the_th'Emperor} within
this your Reame , and of the comfortable mutuell communicacion and
entreteignment that was betwene you , whoys commyng into your said Reame
is greatly estemed and noted to th'@ @inestimable honor of your Highnes
and your said Reame , we have had knowledge to our most singular
comforte and rejoysing , not oonly of your gode , prosperous , and
fortunate late passage and arrivall at your towne of <P_1.1,175> Calays
, but also of the most honorable personnal late meting of your Grace and
the Frenshe King , with the goodliest and moost commendable ordre
devised and observed therin at that tyme , the like whereof heretofore
hath nat been seen . For the which , and for that every thing hitherto
in this your royall Journey so fortunately and prosperously succedeth
oon thing after another , we and all other your subgietts have greate
cause to geve laudes and praise to almighty God ,
INTERVIEW-1520-E1-P2,1.1,175.4

and so full humbly do ; firmely trusting all your causes and matiers
shall take such effectuell and fortunate conclusion as shal@ @be to the
perpetuall and immortall memorie of your said Grace , and to the
universall weale , rest , and tranquilitie of all Christendome .
INTERVIEW-1520-E1-P2,1.1,175.5

Ascertaignyng your Highnes we were on Saturday last passed at your
manoir of Richemounte with your dearest daughter the Princesse , who ,
lauded bee Almighty God , is right mery and in prosperous helth and
state , dailly exercising her self in vertuous pastymes and occupacions
, whereof we sawe sum experience afore we departed from her .
INTERVIEW-1520-E1-P2,1.1,175.6

Fynally as for th@ @astate of your Reame , loved be God , it is in good
peax , rest , and tranquilitie , and your subgietts conserved in good
ordre and peasible rule : INTERVIEW-1520-E1-P2,1.1,175.7

and we ensuyng your commandement according to our duties , dailly
assemble and contynue in your Counsaill , INTERVIEW-1520-E1-P2,1.1,175.8

and have had afore us sum causes and matiers to bee punysshed and
refourmed after yo=r= Lawes as well from farr places as <P_1.1,176> from
other nigh in these parties , to th'@ @ordering wherof we trust we do
endevor us as shal@ @be to the contentacion of yo=r= said Highnesse .
INTERVIEW-1520-E1-P2,1.1,176.9

At your Paloys of Westm. INTERVIEW-1520-E1-P2,1.1,176.10

the xiij=th=. day of June . INTERVIEW-1520-E1-P2,1.1,176.11

Your most humble subjects T. Norfolke Ri. Wynton . W. Lincoln . J.
Abbot of Westm. John Berners . Jo. Fyneux . Thomas Louell . Robt.
Brudenell . John Cutte . C. Wyndham . T. Magnus . John Fitz James
. INTERVIEW-1520-E1-P2,1.1,176.12

