<BEGIN_jbarring-1629-e2-p2>

<P_121>

<heading:edcomment:101_JOHN_BARRINGTON,_18_JANUARY_1630>

Deare mother May it please yow , I having notice of so fitt an
opportunitie as by this bearer would not let it passe without the
presenting of my most humble dutie unto yow in a few lines , having no
other subject at this present to wright of , JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,121.4

onlie I do desire againe to let yow know <paren> as often I have made
knowen by my letters unto yow <$$paren> that as your desire and will is
I should undertake some setled course so yow will please to beleave mee
that I do most earnestlie wish I could <P_122> finde out a way to free
my selfe from idlenes , and to live in such a course wherby I might give
yow satisfaction and content to my sealfe . JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,122.5

My labour and care herin shall not be wanting in the seaking out this
way , JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,122.6

but as yet I heare of none worth the undertaking , unles it fall out our
bussines for Swethland goe forward which is revived againe since I
wroght yow of the last newes thence . JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,122.7

If yow shall please to desire my undertaking any other course I shall
most willinglie submit my sealfe to your command whatever course it be .
JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,122.8

I do hope wee shall have imployment this springe for Swede , if not else
where , JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,122.9

but as yet I heare of none , only New England which I do utterly dislike
, JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,122.10

yet I will conforme my sealf to your will if yow will please to command
it JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,122.11

Your obedient sonn John Barrington JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,122.12

Oates , JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,122.13

18th January JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,122.14

{COM:endorsed} To my honorable mother the ladie Johan Barrington at
Harrow Hill JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,122.15

<P_131>

<heading:edcomment:112_JOHN_BARRINGTON,_10_FEBRUARY_1630>

Deare mother May it please yow , since my comming to London I have
understood by a letter receaved from my brother Robert Barrington how
exceadinglie I am bounde unto yow , that yow are pleased to be intreated
in my behalfe by my friends and to be so willing <paren> notwithstanding
so many former favours yow have pleased to heape upon mee <$$paren> to
continew your favours towards mee , for which I do present yow my humble
thanckfulnes in thease poore lines ; JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,131.18

and yow shall <paren> God willing <$$paren> finde mee ever carefull to
strive to expresse this thanckfulnes in my submitting my selfe to
whatever yow shall command mee . JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,131.19

Wee can@ @not as yet have our pay , JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,131.20

neither are certaine when wee shall . JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,131.21

Wee heare no other newes but that of certaine the French fleete and army
in them are at sea and have beene thease six daies and are bound for
Mantua ; JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,131.22

they are 120 sayle of great and small shipps , but 25 or 30 great shipps
, the rest but small boates . JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,131.23

I beseach yow excuse my tediousnes . JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,131.24

And so with my humble dutie remembred unto yow and my prayers for the
continuance of your good health , I remayne Your obedient sonne John
Barrington JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,131.25

London , JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,131.26

10th February , 1629 JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,131.27

{COM:endorsed} To my honorable ladie and mother the ladie Barrington at
Sir Gilbert Gerrard's house in Harrow Hill JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,131.28

<P_134>

<heading:edcomment:116_JOHN_BARRINGTON,_19_FEBRUARY_1630>

Deare mother In regarde my occasions have detayned mee thus longe in
this towne I have made boulde to let yow know the cheife cause hearof ,
which is to know the lords' order concerning our payment and the
certayne tyme , that so I may accordingly repaire hither ,
JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,134.31

and God willing at the beginning of the next weeke I will make bould to
see yow . JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,134.32

For wee are heare in feare of greate deductions out of our money , which
I would gladlie know before I go heance , that I may frame an answere
against the tyme to avoyde any deduction . JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,134.33

I heare of no newes in this towne worthy of your knowledge .
JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,134.34

I do desire yow will please to accept of my humble acknowledgment as of
divers former so of your late readines to extend your bountie unto
<P_135> mee . JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,135.35

So with my most humble dutie remembred I betake yow to the lord his
protection who I beseach to guide yow in all waies ,
JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,135.36

and so I rest Your obedient sonne John Barrington
JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,135.37

London , JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,135.38

19th February , 1629 JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,135.39

{COM:endorsed}

To my honorable ladie and mother the ladie Barrington at Sir Gilbert
Gerrard's in Harrow Hill JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,135.41

<P_142>

<heading:edcomment:126_JOHN_BARRINGTON,_24_MARCH_1630>

Deare mother I understand by Mr Brewster he sente Sir Phillip Pagnam's
letter unto my brother Gerrard , which doth mencion a meeting of the
states at the Hague about a treatie of peace ,
JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,142.44

but I understand by some that came latelie from theance that it is not
likelie a peace wil@ @be concluded , JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,142.45

but is quite rejected by the greater parte of them .
JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,142.46

I do assure my sealfe if Sir Phillip and my Lord Veare come not over
this weeke or the next they can@ @not come this sommer , it being
generallie beleaved the army wil@ @be on foote at the beginning of May .
JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,142.47

Thearfore I shall <paren> God willing <$$paren> resolve the beginning of
the weeke after Easter to wayte upon yow at Harrow , with my brother and
sister Masham , and from theance as yow shall please to appoint mee soe
to dispose of my sealfe , JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,142.48

for it is my earnest desire to be abroade in action and not to live in
this maner at home , which desire of mine I doe assure my selfe doth
correspond with your will . JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,142.49

With my humble dutie remembred and praiers for your health I commyt yow
to the lord his mercifull tuition , remayning Your obedient sonn John
Barrington JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,142.50

Hatfild , JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,142.51

24th March , 1629 JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,142.52

{COM:endorsed} To my honourable ladie and mother the lady Barrington at
Harrow Hill JBARRING-1629-E2-P2,142.53

