<BEGIN_jetaylormeas-1662-e3-p2>

<P_14>

<font> Nature <$$font> and <font> Religion <$$font> are the <font> bands
<$$font> of Friendships ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,14.3

<font> Excellencie <$$font> and <font> Usefulnesse <$$font> are its
great <font> Indearments : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,14.4

Society <$$font> and <font> Neighbourhood <$$font> , that is , the
possibilities and the circumstances of converse <P_15> are the <font>
Determinations <$$font> and <font> actualities <$$font> of it .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,15.5

Now when men either are unnatural , or Irreligious , they <font> will
not <$$font> be friends ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,15.6

when they are neither Excellent nor Usefull , <font> they are not worthy
<$$font> to be friends ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,15.7

when they are strangers or unknown , they <font> can@ @not be friends
<$$font> actually and practically ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,15.8

but yet , as any man hath any thing of the good , contrary to those
evils , so he can have and must have his share of Friendship .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,15.9

For thus the Sun is the eye of the world ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,15.10

and he is indifferent to the Negro , or the cold Russian , to them that
stand near the Tropicks , the scalded Indian , or the poor boy that
shakes at the foot of the Peiphean hills ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,15.11

but the fluxures of the heaven & the earth , the conveniency of abode ,
and the approches to <P_16> the North or South respectively change the
emannations of his beams ; not that they do not pass alwaies fro~ him ,
but that they are not equally received below ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,16.12

but by periods and changes , by little inlets and reflections , they
receive what they can ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,16.13

and some have onely a dark day and a long night from him , snowes and
white cattle , a miserable life & a perpetual harvest of Catarrhes and
consumptions ; apoplexies and dead palsies ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,16.14

but some have splendid fires , and aromaticke spices , rich wines , and
well_digested fruits , great wit and great courage ; because they dwell
in his eye , and look in his face , and are the courtiers of the Sun ,
and wait upon him in his Chambers of {TEXT:of_of} the East ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,16.15

just so is it in friendships : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,16.16

some are worthy , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,16.17

and some are necessary ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,16.18

some dwell hard by JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,16.19

<P_17>

and are fitted for converse ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,17.21

Nature joyns some to us , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,17.22

and Religion combines us with others ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,17.23

society and accidents , parity of fortune , and equal dispositions do
actuate our friendships : which of themselves and in their prime
dispositions are prepared for all Mankind according as any one can
receive them . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,17.24

We see this best exemplified by instances and expressions of freindships
and charity : <font> viz. Almes <$$font> and <font> Prayers <$$font> ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,17.25

Every one that needs relief is equally the object of our charity ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,17.26

yet we signifie this severally and by limits , and distinct measures :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,17.27

the poor man that is neer me , he whom I meet , he whom I love , he whom
I fancy , he who did me benefit , he who relates to my family ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,17.28

he rather then another , <P_18> because my expressions being finite and
narrow , and can@ @not extend to all in equal significations , must be
appropriate to those whose circumstances best fit me :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,18.29

and yet even to all I give my alms : to all the world that needs them ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,18.30

I pray for all mankind , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,18.31

I am greived at every sad story I hear ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,18.32

I am troubled when I hear of a pretty Bride murdered in her bridechamber
by an ambitious and enrag'd Rival ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,18.33

I shed a tear when I am told that a brave King was mis-understood , then
slandered , then imprisoned , and then put to death by evil men :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,18.34

and I can never read the story of the Parisian Massacre or the Sicilian
Vespers , but my blood curdles , and I am disordered by two or three
affections . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,18.35

A good man is a friend to all the world ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,18.36

& he is not truly charitable that <P_19> doth not wish well , and doe
good to all mankind in what they can ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,19.37

but though wee must pray for all men , yet we say special Letanies for
brave Kings and holy Prelates , and the wise Guides of Souls ; for our
Brethren and Relations , our Wives and Children .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,19.38

The effect of this consideration is , that the Universal Friendship of
which I speak , must be <font> limited <$$font> , because <font> we are
so : <$$font> JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,19.39

In those things where we stand next to Immensity and Infinity , as in
good wishes and prayers , and a <font> readinesse <$$font> to benefit
all Mankind , in these our Friendships must not be limitted ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,19.40

but in other things which passe under our hand and eye , our voices and
our material exchanges ; our hands can reach no further but to our arms
end , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,19.41

and our voices can but sound till the next <P_20> ayre be quiet ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,20.42

and therefore they can have entercourse but within the sphere of their
own activity ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,20.43

our needs and our conversations are served by a few ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,20.44

and they can@ @not reach to all ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,20.45

where they can , they must ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,20.46

but <font> where it is impossible it can@ @not be necessary <$$font> .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,20.47

It must therefore follow , that our Friendships to Mankind may admit
variety as doth our coversation ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,20.48

and as by nature we are made <font> sociable <$$font> to all , so we are
<font> friendly <$$font> ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,20.49

but as all can@ @not actually be of our society , so neither can all be
admitted to a special , actual Friendship ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,20.50

Of <font> some entercourses <$$font> all men are capable , but <font>
not of all <$$font> ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,20.51

Men can pray for one another , and abstain from doing injuries to all
the world , and be desirous to do all Mankind good , and love all Men ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,20.52

Now this Friendship we must pay to all <P_21> because we can ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,21.53

but if we can do no more to all , we must shew our readinesse to do more
good to all by actually doing more good to all them to whom we can
{COM:no_period_in_text} JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,21.54

To some we can , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,21.55

and therefore there are nearer Friendships to some then to others ,
according as there are natural or civil nearnesses , relations and
societies ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,21.56

and as I can@ @not expresse my Friendships to all in equall measures and
significations , that is , as I can@ @not do benefits to all alike : so
neither am I tyed to love all alike : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,21.57

for although there is much reason to love every man ; yet there are more
reasons to love some then others , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,21.58

and if I must love because there is reason I should ; then I must <font>
love more <$$font> , where there is <font> more reason <$$font> ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,21.59

and where there is a special affection and a great readiness <P_22> to
do good , and to delight in certain persons towards each other , there
is that special Charity and Indearment which Philosophy calls <font>
Friendships <$$font> ; but our Religion calls <font> Love <$$font> or
<font> Charity <$$font> . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,22.60

Now if the inquiry be concerning this speciall Friendship . 1. <font>
How it can be appropriate <$$font> , that is , who to be chosen to it ;
2. <font> How far it may extend <$$font> ; that is , with what
expressions signified ; 3. <font> How conducted ? <$$font> The answers
will depend upon such considerations which will be neither useless nor
unpleasant . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,22.61

1 . There may be a speciall Friendship contracted for any speciall
excellency whatsoever ; because <font> Friendships are nothing but Love
and Society mixt together <$$font> ; that is , <font> a conversing with
them whom we love <$$font> ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,22.62

now for whatsoever we can love any one , for that we can be <P_23> his
friend ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,23.63

and since every excellency is a degree of amability , every such
worthiness is a just and proper motive of friendship , or loving
conversation . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,23.64

But yet in these things there is an order and proportion .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,23.65

Therefore 2. A Good man is the best friend , and therefore soonest to
be chosen , longer to be retain'd ; and indeed never to be parted with ;
unless he cease to be that for which he was chosen .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,23.66

{COM:greek_and_verse_omitted}

But although vertue alone is the <P_24> worthiest cause of amability ,
and can weigh down any one consideration ; and therefore to a man that
is vertuous every man ought to be a friend ; yet I do not mean the
severe , and philosophical excellences of some morose persons who are
indeed wise unto themselves and exemplar to others ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,24.68

by <font> vertue <$$font> here I do not mean <font> justice <$$font> and
<font> temperance , charity <$$font> and <font> devotion <$$font> ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,24.69

for these I am to love the man , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,24.70

but friendship is something more then that :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,24.71

<font> friendship is the nearest love and the nearest society <$$font>
of which the persons are capable : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,24.72

Now justice is a good entercourse for Merchants , as all men are that
buy , and sell ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,24.73

and temperance makes a man good company , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,24.74

and helps to make a wise man ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,24.75

but a perfect friendship requires something else ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,24.76

these must be in him that is chosen to be <P_25> my friend ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,25.77

but for these I do not make him my <font> privado <$$font> ; that is ,
my special and peculiar friend : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,25.78

but if he be a <font> good man <$$font> , then he is properly fitted to
be my correlative in the noblest combination .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,25.79

And for this we have the best warrant in the world :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,25.80

<font> For a just man scarcely will a man die <$$font> ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,25.81

the Syriac interpreter reads it {COM:greek_omitted} <font> for an unjust
man scarcely will a man dy <$$font> ; that is , a wicked man is at no
hand fit to receive the expression of the greatest friendship ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,25.82

but all the Greek Copies that ever I saw , or read of , read it as we do
; <font> for a righteous man or a just man <$$font> :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,25.83

that is , justice and righteousnesse is not the nearest indearment of
friendship ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,25.84

but for a good man some will even dare to dy : that is , for a man that
is sweetly disposed , ready to do acts of goodnesse , and to oblige
<P_26> others , to do things usefull and profitable , for a loving man ,
a beneficent , bountiful man , one who delights in doing good for his
friend , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,26.85

such a man may have the highest friendship ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,26.86

he may have a friend that will dy for him .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,26.87

And this is the meaning of <font> Laelius <$$font> :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,26.88

Vertue may be despised , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,26.89

so may learning and Nobility ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,26.90

<font> et una est amicitia in rebus humanis de cujus utilitate omnes
consentiunt <$$font> : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,26.91

onely friendship is that thing which because all know to be useful and
profitable , no man can despise ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,26.92

that is , {COM:greek_omitted} , or {COM:greek_omitted} , goodness or
beneficence makes friendships . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,26.93

For if he be a good man he will love where he is beloved ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,26.94

and that@ @'s the first tye of friendship .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,26.95

<P_27>

{COM:greek_omitted}

That was the Commendation of the bravest friendship ; in <font>
Theocritus <$$font> . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,27.98

{COM:verse_and_greek_omitted}

For it is impossible this neerness of friendship can be where there is
not mutual love ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,27.100

but this is secured <P_28> if I choose a good man ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,28.101

for he that is apt enough to begin alone will never be behinde in
relation & correspondency ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,28.102

and therefore I like the Gentiles Letany well .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,28.103

{COM:greek_and_verse_omitted}

But there is more in it then this felicity mounts to
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,28.105

For {COM:greek_omitted} <font> the good man <$$font> is a profitable ,
useful person , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,28.106

and that@ @s an effective friendship . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,28.107

For I doe not <P_29> think that friendships are Metaphysical nothings ,
created for contemplation ; or that men or women should stare upon each
others faces , and make dialogues of news & prettinesses , and look
babies in one anothers eyes . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,29.108

Friendship is the allay of our sorrows , the ease of our passions , the
discharge of our oppressions , the sanctuary to our calamities , the
counsellor of our doubts , the clarity of our minds , the emission of
our thoughts , the exercise and improvement of what we meditate ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,29.109

And although I love my friend because he is worthy , yet he is not
worthy if he can do no good . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,29.110

I do not speak of accidental hinderances and misfortune by which the
bravest man may become unable to help his child ; but of the natural ,
and artificial capacities of the man . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,29.111

<P_30>

He onely is fit to be chosen for a friend , who can do those offices for
which friendship is excellent . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,30.113

For <paren> mistake not <$$paren> no man can be loved for himselfe ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,30.114

our perfections in this world ca~@ @not reach so high ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,30.115

it is wel if we would love God at that rate ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,30.116

and I very much feare , that if God did us no good , we might admire his
Beauties , but we should have but a small proportion of love towards him
; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,30.117

and therefore it is that God to indeare <font> the obedience <$$font> ,
that is , <font> the love <$$font> of his servants , signifies what
benefits he gives us , what great things he does for us .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,30.118

<font> I am the Lord God that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt :
<$$font> JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,30.119

and , <font> does <$$font> Job <font> serve God for nought ? <$$font>
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,30.120

And , <font> he that comes to God , must believe that he is , and that
he is a rewarder : <$$font> JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,30.121

all his other greatnesses are objects of feare and wonder ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,30.122

it is his goodnesse that <P_31> makes him lovely :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,31.123

and so it is in friendships . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,31.124

He only is fit to be chosen for a friend who can give me counsel , or
defend my cause , or guide me right , or relieve me , or can and will ,
when I need it , do me good : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,31.125

onely this I adde : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,31.126

into the heaps of doing good , I will reckon <font> <bracket> loving me
<$$font> <$$bracket> JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,31.127

for it is a pleasure to be beloved ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,31.128

but when his love signifies nothing but kissing my Cheek or talking
kindly , and can goe no further , it is a prostitution of the Bravery of
friendship to spend it upon impertinent people who are <paren> it may be
<$$paren> loads to their families , but can never ease my loads :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,31.129

but my friend is a worthy person , when he can become to me instead of
God , a guide or a support , an eye , or a hand ; a staffe , or a rule :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,31.130

There must be in friendship something to distinguish it from a <P_32>
Companion , and a Countryman , from a School-fellow , or a Gossip , from
a Sweetheart , or a Fellow traveller : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,32.131

Friendship may look in at any one of these doors ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,32.132

but it stayes not any where till it come to be the best thing in the
world : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,32.133

and when we consider that one man is not better then another , neither
towards God nor Man , but by doing better and braver things , we shall
also see , that that which is most beneficent is also most excellent ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,32.134

and therefore those friendships must needs be most perfect , where the
friends can be most useful . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,32.135

For men can@ @not be useful but by worthinesses in the several instances
: JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,32.136

a fool can@ @not be relied upon for counsel ; nor a vitious person for
the advantages of vertue , nor a beggar for relief , nor a stranger for
conduct , nor a tatler to <P_33> keep a secret , nor a pittiless person
trusted with my complaint , nor a covetous man with my childes fortune ,
nor a false person without a witnesse , nor a suspicious person with a
private design ; nor him that I feare with the treasures of my love ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,33.137

But he that is wise and vertuous , rich and at hand , close and merciful
, free of his money and tenacious of a secret , open and ingenuous ,
true and honest , is of himself an excellent man ; and therefore fit to
be lov'd ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,33.138

and he can do good to me in all capacities where I can need him ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,33.139

and therefore is fit to be a friend . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,33.140

I confesse , we are forced in our friendships to abate some of these
ingredients ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,33.141

but full measures of friendship would have full measures of worthinesses
; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,33.142

and according as any defect is in the foundation ; <P_34> in the
relation also there may be imperfection : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,34.143

and indeed I shall not blame the friendship so it be worthy , though it
be not perfect ; not only because friendship is charity , which can@
@not be perfect here , but because there is not in the world a perfect
cause of perfect friendship . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,34.144

If you can suspect that this discourse can suppose friendship to be
mercenary , and to be defective in the greatest worthinesse of it ,
which is to love our friend for our friends sake <paren> for <font>
Scipio <$$font> said , that it was against friendship to say , <font>
ita amare oportere ut aliquando esset usurus <$$font> , that we ought to
love , that we may also sometimes make use of a friend
{COM:no_close_paren} : I shall easily be able to defend my self :
because I speak of the election and reasons of choosing friends :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,34.145

after he is chosen , do <P_35> as nobly as you talk ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,35.146

and love as purely as you dream ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,35.147

and let your conversation be as metaphysical as your discourse ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,35.148

and proceed in this method , till you be confuted by experience ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,35.149

yet till then , the case is otherwise when we speak of choosing one to
be my friend : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,35.150

He is not my friend till I have chosen him , or loved him ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,35.151

and if any man inquires whom he shall choose , or whom he should love ,
I suppose it ought not to be answered , that we should love him who hath
least amability ; that we should choose him who hath least reason to be
chosen : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,35.152

But if it be answered , he is to be chosen to be my friend who is most
worthy in himself , not he that can do most good to me ; I say , here is
a distinction , but no difference ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,35.153

for he is most worthy in himself who can <P_36> do most good ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,36.154

and if he can love me too , that is , if he will do me all the good he
can , or that I need , then he is my friend ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,36.155

and he deserves it . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,36.156

And it is impossible from a friend to separate a will to do me good :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,36.157

and therefore I do not choose well , if I choose one that hath not power
; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,36.158

for if it may consist with the noblenesse of friendship to desire that
my friend be ready to do me benefit or support , it is not sense to say
, it is ignoble to desire he should really do it when I need ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,36.159

and if it were not for pleasure or profit , we might as well be without
a friend as have him . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,36.160

Among all the pleasures and profits , the <font> sensual pleasure
<$$font> and the <font> matter of money <$$font> are the lowest and the
least ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,36.161

and therefore although they may sometimes be used in <P_37> friendship ,
and so not wholly excluded from the consideration of him that is to
choose , yet of all things they are to be the least regarded ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,37.162

{COM:greek_and_verse_omitted}

For there are , besides these , many profits and many pleasures ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,37.164

and because these only are sordid , all the other are noble and fair ,
and the expectations of them no disparageme~ts to the best friendships .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,37.165

For can any wise or good man be angry , if I say , I chose this man to
be my friend , because he is able to give me counsel , to restrain my
wandrings , to comfort me in my sorrows ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,37.166

he is pleasant to me in <P_38> private , and useful in publick ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,38.167

he will make my joyes double , and divide my grief between himself and
me . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,38.168

For what else should I choose ? JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,38.169

For being a fool , and useless ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,38.170

for a pretty face , or a smooth chin ? JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,38.171

I confesse , it is possible to be a friend to one that is ignorant , and
pitiable , handsome and good for nothing , that eats well , and drinks
deep : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,38.172

but he can@ @not be a friend to me ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,38.173

and I love him with a fondness or a pity ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,38.174

but it can@ @not be a noble friendship . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,38.175

{COM:greek_and_verse_omitted}

<P_39>

<font> Plutarch <$$font> calls such friendships , the Idols and Images
of friendship . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,39.178

True and brave friendships are between worthy persons ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,39.179

and there is in mankind no degree of worthiness , but is also a degree
of usefulnesse ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,39.180

and by every thing by which a man is excellent , I may be profited :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,39.181

and because those are the bravest friends which can best serve the ends
of friendships , either we must suppose that friendships are not the
greatest comforts in the world , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,39.182

or else we must say , he chooseth his friend best , that chooseth such a
one by whom he can receive the <P_40> greatest comforts and assistances
. JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,40.183

3 . This being the measure of all friendships ; they all partake of
excellency , according as they are fitted to this measure :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,40.184

a friend may be counselled well enough , though his friend be not the
wisest man in the world ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,40.185

and he may be pleased in his society though he be not the best_natured
man in the world ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,40.186

but still it must be , that something excellent is , or is apprehended ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,40.187

or else it can be no worthy friendship ; because the choice is imprudent
and foolish . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,40.188

Choose for your friend him that is wise and good , and secret and just ,
ingenuous and honest ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,40.189

and in those things which have a latitude , use your own liberty ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,40.190

but in such things which consist in an indivisible point , make no
abatements : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,40.191

That is , you must choose him to be your <P_41> friend that is not
honest and secret , just and true , to a tittle ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,41.192

but if he be wise at all , and usefull in any degree , and as good as
you can have him , you need not be ashamed to own your friendships ;
though sometimes you may be ashamed of some imperfections of your friend
. JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,41.193

4 . But if you yet inquire further , whether fancy may be an ingredient
in your choice ? I answer , that fancy may minister to this as to all
other actions in which there is a liberty and variety ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,41.194

and we shall find that there may be peculiarities , and little
partialities , a <font> friendship , improperly so called <$$font> ,
entring upon accounts of an innocent passion and a pleas'd fancy ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,41.195

even our Blessed Saviour himself loved St. <font> John <$$font> and
<font> Lazarus <$$font> by a special love , which was signified by
special <P_42> treatments ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,42.196

and of the young man that spake well and wisely to Christ , it is
affirmed , <font> Jesus loved him <$$font> :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,42.197

that is , he fancied the man ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,42.198

and his soul had a certain cognation and similitude of temper and
inclination . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,42.199

For in all things where there is latitude , every faculty will endeavour
to be pleased ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,42.200

and sometimes the meanest persons in a house have a festival ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,42.201

even sympathies and natural inclinations to some persons , and a
conformity of humors , and proportionable loves , and the beauty of the
face , and a witty answer may first strike the flint and kindle a spark
, which if it fall upon tender and compliant natures may grow into a
flame ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,42.202

but this will never be maintained at the rate of friendship , unlesse it
be fed by pure materials , by <font> worthinesses <$$font> , which
<font> are the food of <$$font> <P_43> <font> friendship <$$font> .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,43.203

Where these are not , men and women may be pleased with one anothers
company , and ly under the same roof , and make themselves companions of
equal prosperities , and humour their friend ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,43.204

but if you call this friendship , you give a sacred name to humour or
fancy ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,43.205

for there is a Platonic friendship , as well as a Platonic love ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,43.206

but they being but the Images of more noble bodies are but like tinsel
dressings , which will shew bravely by candle light , and doe
excellently in a mask , but are not fit for conversation , and the
material entercourses of our life . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,43.207

These are the prettinesses of prosperity , and good-natured wit ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,43.208

but when we speak of friendship , which is the best thing in the world
<paren> for it is love and beneficence ; it is charity which is fitted
<P_44> for society <$$paren> we can@ @not suppose a brave pile should be
built up with nothing ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,44.209

and they that build castles in the aire , and look upon friendship , as
upon a fine Romance , a thing that pleases the fancy , but is good for
nothing else , will do well when they are asleep , or when they are come
to Elysium ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,44.210

& for ought I know , in the mean time may be as much in love with <font>
Mandana <$$font> in the <font> Grand Cyrus <$$font> , as with the <font>
Countess of Exeter <$$font> ; and by dreaming of perfect and abstracted
friendships , make them so immaterial that they perish in the handling ,
and become good for nothing . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,44.211

But I know not whither I was going ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,44.212

I did only mean to say that because friendship is that by which the
world is most blessed and receives most good , it ought to <P_45> be
chosen amongst the worthiest persons , that is , amongst those that can
do greatest benefit to each other ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,45.213

and though in equal worthinesse I may choose by my eye , or ear , that
is , into the consideration of the essential I may take in also the
accidental intrinsic worthinesses ; yet I ought to give every one their
just value ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,45.214

when the internal beauties are equal , these shall help to weigh down
the scale , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,45.215

and I will love a worthy friend that can delight me as well as profit me
, rather then him who can@ @not delight me at all , and profit me <font>
no more <$$font> ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,45.216

but yet I will not weigh the gayest flowers , or the wings of
butterflies against wheat ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,45.217

but when I am to choose wheat , I may take that which looks the
brightest : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,45.218

I had rather see Time and Roses , Majoram and Julyflowers <P_46> that
are fair and sweet and medicinal , then the prettiest Tulips , that are
good for nothing : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,46.219

And my Sheep and Kine are better servants then race-Horses and
Grayhounds : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,46.220

And I shall rather furnish my study with <font> Plutarch <$$font> and
<font> Cicero <$$font> , with <font> Livy <$$font> & <font> Polybius
<$$font> , then with <font> Cassandra <$$font> and <font> Ibrahim Bassa
<$$font> ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,46.221

and if I do give an hour to these for divertisement or pleasure , yet I
will dwell with them that can instruct me and make me wise , and
eloquent , severe and useful to my self , and others .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,46.222

I end this with the saying of <font> Laelius <$$font> in <font> Cicero :
Amicitia non debet consequi utilitatem , sed amicitiam utilitas <$$font>
. JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,46.223

When I choose my friend , I will not stay till I have receiv'd a
kindnesse ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,46.224

but I will choose such a one that can do me many if I need them :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,46.225

But I mean such kindnesses which make me <P_47> wiser , and which make
me better ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,47.226

that is , I will when I choose my friend , choose him that is the
bravest , the worthiest and the most excellent person :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,47.227

And then your first question is soon answered ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,47.228

to love such a Person , and to contract such friendships , is just so
authorized by the principles of Christianity , as it is warranted to
love wisdome and vertue , goodnesse and beneficence , and all the
impresses of God upon the spirits of brave men .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,47.229

2 . The next inquiry is , <font> how far it may extend ? <$$font>
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,47.230

That is , by what expressions it may be signified ?
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,47.231

I finde that <font> David <$$font> and <font> Jonathan <$$font> loved at
a strange rate ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,47.232

they were both good men ; though it happenned that <font> Jonathan
<$$font> was on the obliging side ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,47.233

but here the expressions were ; <font> Jonathan <$$font> watched for
<P_48> <font> Davids <$$font> good ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,48.234

told him of his danger , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,48.235

and helped him to escape ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,48.236

took part with <font> Davids <$$font> innocence against his Fathers
malice and injustice ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,48.237

and beyond all this , did it to his own prejudice ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,48.238

and they two stood like two feet supporting one body ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,48.239

though <font> Jonathan <$$font> knew that <font> David <$$font> would
prove like the foot of a wrastler , and would supplant him , not by any
unworthy or unfriendly action , but it was from God ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,48.240

and he gave him his hand to set him upon his owne throne .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,48.241

We find his paralels in the Gentile stories :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,48.242

young <font> Athenodorus <$$font> having divided the estate with his
Brother <font> Xenon <$$font> divided it again when <font> Xenon
<$$font> had spent his own share ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,48.243

and <font> Lucullus <$$font> would not take the Consularship till his
younger brother had first injoyed it for a <P_49> year ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,49.244

but <font> Pollux <$$font> divided with <font> Castor <$$font> his
immortality ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,49.245

and you know who offer'd himself to death being pledge for his friend ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,49.246

and his friend by performing his word rescued him as bravely :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,49.247

and when we find in Scripture that <font> for a good man some will even
dare to die <$$font> ; and that <font> Aquila <$$font> and <font>
Priscilla <$$font> laid their necks down for S. <font> Paul <$$font> ;
and the <font> Galatians <$$font> would have given him their very eyes ,
that is , every thing that was most dear to them ; and some others were
neer unto death for his sake ; and that it is a precept of Christian
charity , to lay down our lives for our Brethren , that is , those who
were combined in a cause of Religion , who were united with the same
hopes , and imparted to each other ready assistances , and grew dear by
common sufferings , we need inquire <P_50> no further for the
expressions of friendships : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,50.248

<font> Greater love then this hath no man , then that he lay down his
life for his friends <$$font> ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,50.249

and this we are oblig'd to do in some Cases for all Christians ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,50.250

and therefore we may do it for those who are to us in this present and
imperfect state of things , that which all the good men and women in the
world shall be in Heaven , that is , in the state of perfect friendships
. JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,50.251

This is the biggest ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,50.252

but then it includes and can suppose all the rest ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,50.253

and if this may be done for all , and in some Cases must for any one of
the multitude , we need not scruple whether we may do it for those who
are better then a multitude . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,50.254

But as for the thing it self , it is not easily and lightly to be done ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,50.255

and a man must not die for humor , nor expend so great a Jewel for a
<P_51> trifle : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,51.256

{COM:greek_omitted} said <font> Philo <$$font> ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,51.257

we will hardly die when it is for nothing , when no good , no worthy end
is served , and become a sacrifice to redeem a foot-boy .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,51.258

But we may not give our life to redeem another : unless , 1. The party
for whom we die be a worthy and a useful person ; better for the publick
, or better for Religion , and more usefull to others then my self .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,51.259

Thus <font> Ribischius <$$font> the German died bravely when he became a
sacrifice for his Master , <font> Maurice <$$font> Duke of <font> Saxony
<$$font> ; Covering his Masters body with his own , that he might escape
the fury of the Turkish Souldiers . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,51.260

<font> Succurram perituro , sed ut ipse non peream , nisi si futurus ero
magni hominis , aut magnae rei merces <$$font> ; said <font> Seneca
<$$font> . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,51.261

I will help a dying person if I can ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,51.262

but I will not die <P_52> my self for him , unless by my death I save a
brave man , or become the price of a great thing ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,52.263

that is , I will die for a Prince , for the republick , or to save an
Army , as <font> David <$$font> expos'd himself to combat with the
Philistin for the redemption of the Host of Israel :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,52.264

And in this sence , that is true ; <font> Praestat ut pareat unus , quam
Unitas <$$font> , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,52.265

better that one perish than a multitude .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,52.266

2 . A man dies bravely when he gives his temporal life to save the soul
of any single person in the Christian world .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,52.267

It is a worthy exchange , and the glorification of that love by which
Christ gave his life for every soul . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,52.268

Thus he that reproves an erring Prince wisely and necessarily , he that
affirms a fundamentall truth , or stands up for the glory of the Divine
Attributes , though he die for <P_53> it , becomes a worthy sacrifice .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,53.269

3 These are duty , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,53.270

but it may be heroic and full of Christian bravery , to give my life to
rescue a noble and a brave friend ; though I my self be as worthy a man
as he ; because the preference of him is an act of humility in me ; and
of friendship towards him ; <font> Humility <$$font> and <font> Charity
<$$font> making a pious difference , where <font> art <$$font> and
<font> nature <$$font> have made all equall .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,53.271

Some have fancied other measures of treating our friends .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,53.272

One sort of men say that we are to expect that our friends should value
us as we value our selves : which if it were to be admitted , will
require that we make no friendships with a proud man ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,53.273

and so far indeed were well ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,53.274

but then this proportion does exclude also humble men who are most to be
<P_54> valued , and the rather because they undervalue themselves .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,54.275

Others say , that a friend is to value his friend as much as his friend
values him ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,54.276

but neither is this well or safe , wise or sufficient ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,54.277

for it makes friendship a mere bargain , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,54.278

and is something like the Country weddings in some places where I have
been ; where the Bridegroom and the Bride must meet in the half way ;
and if they fail a step , they retire and break the match :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,54.279

It is not good to make a reckoning in friendship ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,54.280

that@ @'s merchandise , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,54.281

or it may be gratitude , but not noble friendship ; in which each part
strives to out-do the other in significations of an excellent love :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,54.282

And <font> amongst true friends there is no fear of losing anything .
<$$font> JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,54.283

But that which amongst the old <P_55> Philosophers comes nearest to the
right , is , that we love our selves . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,55.284

If they had meant it as our Blessed Saviour did , of that general
friendship by which we are to love all mankind , it had been perfect and
well ; or if they had meant it of the inward affection , or of outward
justice ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,55.285

but because they meant it of the most excellent friendships , and of the
outward significations of it , it can@ @not be sufficient :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,55.286

for a friend may and must sometimes do more for his friend then he would
do for himself . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,55.287

Some men will perish before they will beg or petition for themselves to
some certain persons ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,55.288

but they account it noble to do it for their friend ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,55.289

and they will want rather then their friend shall want ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,55.290

and they will be more earnest in praise or dispraise respectively <P_56>
for their friend , then for themselves . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,56.291

And indeed , I account <font> that <$$font> one of the greatest
demonstrations of real friendship is , that a friend can really
endeavour to have his friend advanced in honour , in reputation , in the
opinion of wit or learning , before himself .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,56.292

{COM:verses_omitted}

<P_57>

But then be pleas'd to think that therefore I so highly value this
signification of friendship , because I so highly value humility .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,57.295

Humility & Charity are the two greatest graces in the world ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,57.296

and these are the greatest ingredients which constitute friendship and
expresse it . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,57.297

But there needs no other measures of friendship , but that it may be as
great as you can express it ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,57.298

beyond death it can@ @not go , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,57.299

to death it may , when the cause is reasonable and just , charitable and
religious : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,57.300

and yet if there be any thing greater then to suffer death <paren> and
pain and shame to some are more insufferable <$$paren> a true and noble
friendship shrinks not at the greatest trials , {COM:sic}
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,57.301

<P_58>

And yet there is a limit even to friendship .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,58.303

It must be as great as our friend fairely needs in all things where we
are not tied up by a former duty , to God , to our selves , or some
pre-obliging relative . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,58.304

When <font> Pollux <$$font> heard some body whisper a reproach against
his Brother <font> Castor <$$font> , he kill'd the slanderer with his
fist : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,58.305

That was a zeal which his friendship could not warrant .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,58.306

<font> Nulla est excusatio , si amici causa peccaveris <$$font> , said
<font> Cicero <$$font> . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,58.307

No friendship can excuse a sin : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,58.308

And this the braver Romans instanced in the matter of duty to their
Country . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,58.309

It is not lawful to fight on our friends part against our Prince or
Country ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,58.310

and therefore when <font> Caius Blosius <$$font> of <font> Cuma <$$font>
, in the sedition of <font> Gracchus <$$font> , appeared against his
Country , when he was taken he answered , that he loved <P_59> <font>
Tiberius Gracchus <$$font> so dearly , that he thought fit to follow him
whithersoever he lead ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,59.311

and begg'd pardon upon that account . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,59.312

They who were his Judges were so noble , that though they knew it no
fair excuse ; yet for the honour of friendship they did not directly
reject his motion : but put him to death , because he did not follow ,
but led on <font> Gracchus <$$font> and brought his friend into the
snare : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,59.313

For so they preserved the honours of friendship on either hand , by
neither suffering it to be sullied by a foul excuse , nor yet rejected
in any fair pretence . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,59.314

A man may not be perjured for his friend .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,59.315

I remember to have read in the History of the Low-countreyes , that
<font> Grimston <$$font> and <font> Redhead <$$font> , when <font>
Bergenapzoom <$$font> was besieged by the Duke of <font> Parma <$$font>
, acted for the interest of <P_60> the Queen of <font> England@ @s
<$$font> forces a notable design ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,60.316

but being suspected , and put for their acquittance to take the
Sacrament of the Altar , they dissembled their persons , and their
interest , their design and their Religion ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,60.317

and did for the Queens service <paren> as one wittily wrote to her
<$$paren> give not only their bodies , but their souls ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,60.318

and so deserved a reward greater then she could pay them :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,60.319

I can@ @not say this is a thing greater then a friendship can require ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,60.320

for it is not great at all , but a great villany , which hath no name ,
and no order in worthy entercourses ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,60.321

and no obligation to a friend can reach as high as our Duty to God :
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,60.322

And he that does a base thing in zeal for his friend , burns the golden
thred that tyes their hearts together ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,60.323

it is a <font> conspiracy <$$font> , but no longer <font> friendship
<$$font> . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,60.324

<P_61>

And when <font> Cato <$$font> lent his Wife to <font> Hortensius
<$$font> , and <font> Socrates <$$font> lent his to a merry Greek , they
could not amongst wise persons obtain so much as the fame of being
worthy friends ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,61.326

neither could those great Names legitimate an unworthy action under the
most plausible title . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,61.327

It is certain that amongst friends their estates are common ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,61.328

that is , by whatsoever I can rescue my friend from calamity , I am to
serve him , or not to call him my friend ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,61.329

and there is a great latitude in this ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,61.330

and it is to be restrained by no prudence ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,61.331

but when there is on the other side a great necessity neither vitious
nor avoidable , A man may choose , whether he will or no ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,61.332

and he does not sin in not doing it , unlesse he have bound himself to
it : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,61.333

<font> But certainly friendship <P_62> is the greatest band in the world
; <$$font> JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,62.334

and if he have professed a great friendship , he hath a very great
obligation to do that and more ; JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,62.335

and he can no way be disobliged but by the care of his Natural relations
. JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,62.336

I said <bracket> <font> Friendship is the greatest bond in the world
<$$font> <$$bracket> , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,62.337

and I had reason for it , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,62.338

for it is all the bands that this world hath ;
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,62.339

and there is no society , and there is no relation that is worthy , but
it is made so by the communications of friendship and by partaking some
of its excellencies . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,62.340

For friendship is a transcendent , JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,62.341

and signifies as much as <font> Unity <$$font> can mean ,
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,62.342

and every consent , and every pleasure , and every benefit , and every
society is the Mother or the Daughter of friendship .
JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,62.343

Some friendships are made by <font> nature <$$font> , some by <font>
contract <$$font> , some by <P_63> <font> interest <$$font> , and some
by <font> souls <$$font> . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,63.344

And in proportion to these wayes of Uniting , so the friendships are
greater or less , vertuous or natural , profitable or holy , or all this
together . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,63.345

Nature makes excellent friendships , of which we observe something in
social plants ; growing better in each others neighbourhood then where
they stand singly : JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,63.346

And in animals it is more notorious , whose friendships extend so far as
to herd and dwell together , to play , and feed , to defend and fight
for one another , and to cry in absence , and to rejoyce in one anothers
presence . JETAYLORMEAS-1662-E3-P2,63.347

