<BEGIN_jotaylor-1630-e2-p2>

<P_1,142.C1>

<heading>

THE GREAT EATER , OR PART OF THE ADMIRABLE TEETH AND STOMACKS EXPLOITS
OF <font> NICHOLAS WOOD <$$font> , OF <font> HARRISOM <$$font> IN THE
COVNTY OF KENT . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,142.C1.4

HIS EXCESSIVE <font> MANNER <$$font> OF EATING WITHOVT MANNERS , IN
STRANGE AND TRVE MANNER DESCRIBED , BY <font> JOHN TAILOR <$$font> .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,142.C1.5

<$$heading>

Records and Histories doe make memorable mention of the diuersitie of
qualities of sundry famous persons , men and women , in all the
Countries and Regions of the world , how some are remembred for their
Piety and Pitty ; some for Iustice ; some for Seuerity , for Learning ,
Wisedome , Temperance , Constancie , Patience , with all the vertues
Diuine , and morall : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,142.C1.7

Some againe , haue purchased a memory for Greatnesse and Talnesse of
body ; some for Dwarfish smalnesse ; some for beautifull outsides ,
faire feature and composition of Limbs and stature ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,142.C1.8

many haue gotten an earthly perpetuity for cruelty and murther , as
<font> Nero , Commodus , <$$font> and others : for Leachery , as <font>
Heliogabalus : <$$font> for Drunkennesse , <font> Tiberius <$$font> ,
<paren> <font> alias Biberius : <$$font> <$$paren> for Effeminacy , as
<font> Sardanapalus : <$$font> for Gluttony , <font> Aulus Vitellius
<$$font> , who at one supper was serued with two_thousand sorts of
fishes , and seuen_thousand fowles , as <font> Suetonius <$$font> writes
in his ninth Booke , and <font> Iosephus <$$font> in his fifth Booke of
the Iewes warres . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,142.C1.9

<font> Caligula <$$font> was famous for Ambition ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,142.C1.10

for hee would bee ador'd as a God , <P_1,142.C2> though he liu'd like a
Deuill , poysoning his Vnkle , and deflowring all his Sisters :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,142.C2.11

And in all ages and Countries , time hath still produc'd particular
persons , men & women , either for their vertues or their vices , to be
remembred , that by meditating on the good , we may bee imitating their
goodnesse , and by viewing the bad , we might be eschewing thier vices .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,142.C2.12

To descend lower to more familiar examples , I haue knowne a great man
very expert on the Iewe-harpe ; a rich heire excellent at Noddy , a
Iustice of the Peace skilfull at Quoytes ; a Marchants wife a quicke
Gamester at Irish <paren> especially when she came to bearing of men
<$$paren> that she would seldome misse entring .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,142.C2.13

Monsieur <font> La Ferr <$$font> a French-man , was the first inuentor
of the admirable Game of Double-hand , Hot-cockles ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,142.C2.14

& <font> Gregorie Dawson <$$font> an English man , deuised the
vnmatchable mystery of Blind-man-buffe .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,142.C2.15

Some haue the a_gility to ride Poast , some the facility to runne Poast
; some the dexterity to write Post , and some the ability to speake ,
poast : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,142.C2.16

For I haue heard a fellow make a Hackney of his tongue ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,142.C2.17

& in a moment he hath gallop'd a <P_1,143.C1> Lye from <font> China
<$$font> to <font> London <$$font> , without Bridle or Saddle .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C1.18

Others doe speake poast , in a thicke shuffling kind of Ambling-trot ,
and that in such speede , that one of them shall talke more in one
quarter of an houre , then shall be vnderstood in seuen yeeres .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C1.19

And , as euery one hath particular qualities to themselues , and
dissonant from others , so are the manners of liues <paren> or liuings
<$$paren> of all men and women various one from another ; as some get
their liuing by their tounges , as Interpreters , Lawyers , Oratours ,
and Flatterers ; some by tayles , as Maquerellaes , Concubines ,
Curtezanes , or in plaine English , Whores ; Some by their {SIC:theit}
feete , as Dancers , Lackeyes , Footmen , and Weauers , and Knights of
the publicke or common order of the Forke ; Some by their braines , as
Politicians , Monopolists , Proiectmongers , Suit-ioggers , and
Stargazers ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C1.20

Some <paren> like the <font> Salamander <$$font> <$$paren> liue by fire
, as the whole Race of <font> Tubalcaine <$$font> , the <font> Vulcanean
<$$font> Broode of Blacksmiths , fire-men , Colliers , Gunners ,
Gun-founders , and all sorts of mettle-men ; Some like the <font>
Cameleon <$$font> , by the Ayre , and such are Poets , Trumpeters ,
Cornets , Recorders , Pipers , Bag-pipers ; and some by smoake , as
Tabaconists , Knights of the Vapour , Gentlemen of the Whiffe , Esquires
of the Pipe , Gallants in <font> Fumo <$$font> ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C1.21

Some liue by the Water as Herrings doe , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C1.22

such are Brewers , Vintners , Dyers , Mariners , Fisher-men , and
Scullers ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C1.23

And many like Moles liue by the Earth , as griping Vsurers , racking
Landlords , toyling Plowmen , moyling Labourers , painefull Gardners ,
and others . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C1.24

Amongst all these before mentioned , and many more which I could recite
, this subiect of my Pen is not <paren> for his qualitie <$$paren>
inferiour to any : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C1.25

and as neere as I can , I will stretch my wit vpon the Tenters , to
describe his name and Character , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C1.26

his worthy Actes shall be related after <font> in due time duely
<$$font> . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C1.27

And , Be it knowne vnto all men , to whom these presents shall come ,
that I <font> Iohn Taylor <$$font> , Waterman of Saint <font> Sauiours
<$$font> in Southwarke , in the County of Surrey , the Writer hereof ,
&c. will write plaine truth , bare and threed-bare , and almost starke
naked truth {SIC:naked-truth} , <P_1,143.C2> of the descriptions , and
remarkable , memorable Actions of <font> Nicholas Wood <$$font> , of the
Parish of <font> Harrisom <$$font> in the County of Kent , Yeoman , for
these considerations following . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.28

First , I were to blame to write more then truth , because that which is
knowne to be true , is enough . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.29

Secondly , that which is onely true , is too much .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.30

Thirdly , the truth will hardly be beleeued , being so much beyond mans
reason to conceiue . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.31

Fourthly , I shall runne the hazzard to bee accounted a great lyer , in
writing the truth . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.32

Lastly , I will not lye , on purpose to make all those lyers that
esteeme me so . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.33

Yet by your leaue , Master Critick , you must giue me licence to
flourish my Phrases , to embellish my lines , to adorne my Oratory , to
embroder my speeches , to enterlace my words , to draw out my sayings ,
and to bumbaste the whole suite of the businesse for the time of your
wearing . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.34

For though truth appeareth best bare in matters of Iustice , yet in this
I hold it decent to attire her with such poore raggs as I haue , in
stead of Robes . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.35

First then ; the place of his birth , and names of his parents are to me
a meere <font> Terra incognita <$$font> , as farre from my knowledge ,
as content from a Vsurer , or honesty from a Bawde ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.36

but if hee be no Christian , the matter is not much ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.37

hee will serue well enough for a man of Kent ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.38

and if his education had beene as his Feeding , it is euident he had
been of most mighty breeding ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.39

he hath gotten a soule name , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.40

but I know not if it came to him by Baptisme ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.41

for it is partly a <font> Nick-name {COM:font_change_only_around_"Nick"}
<$$font> , which in the totall is <font> Nicholas <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.42

I would abate him but a Saint , and call him <font> Nicholas Shambles
<$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.43

and were the goodnesse of his purse answerable to the greatnesse of his
appetite , out of all question , no man below the Moone would be a
better customer to a shambles then he , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.44

for though he be chaste of his body , yet his minde is onely vpon flesh
, JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.45

he is the onely Tugmutton , or Muttonmonger betwixt <font> Douer
<$$font> and <font> Dunbarr <$$font> : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.46

for hee hath eaten a whole Sheepe of sixteene shillings price , raw at
one meale JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,143.C2.47

<paren> pardon me <$$paren> I thinke hee left the skin , <P_1,144.C1>
the wooll , the hornes , and the bones : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.48

but what talke I of a Sheepe , when it is apparantly knowne , that he
hath at one repast , and with one dish , feasted his Carkas with all
manner of meates ? JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.49

All men will confesse that a Hogge will eate any thing , either fish ,
flesh , fowle , root , herbe , or excrement ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.50

and this same noble <font> Nick Nicholas <$$font> , or <font> Nicholas
Nick <$$font> , hath made an end of a Hogge all at once , as if it had
bin but a Rabbet sucker , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.51

and presently after , for fruit to recreate his palate , he hath
swallowed three peckes of Damsons , thus <paren> Philosophically
<$$paren> by way of a Chimicall Infusion ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.52

as a Hogge will eate all things that are to be eaten , so he in eating
the Hogge , did in a manner of extraction distill all manner of meates
thorow the Limbeck of his paunch . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.53

But hold a little , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.54

I would be loath to cloy my Reader with too much meate and fruit at once
, so that after your Sheepe , Hogge and Damsons , I thinke it best to
suffer you to pawse and picke your teeth <paren> if you haue any
<$$paren> whilst I spend a few words more in Paraphrasing vpon his
surname . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.55

<font> Wood <$$font> is his Appellation , Denomination , or how you
please to tearme it . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.56

Some of the ancient Philosophers haue compared man to a Tree with the
bottome vpwards , whose roote is the braine ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.57

the Armes Hands , Fingers , Leges , Feete and Toes , are the Limbs , and
Branches , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.58

the comparison is very significant , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.59

many Trees doe bring forth good fruit , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.60

so doe some fewe men ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.61

Some stately Trees growe high and faire ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.62

yet stand for nothing but shades , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.63

and some men grow high and lofty , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.64

yet are nothing but shaddows ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.65

Some Trees are so malignant , that nothing can prosper vnder the
compasse of their branches ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.66

and some men are so vnlucky , that very few can thriue in their seruice
. JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.67

And as of one part of a Tree a Chaire of State may be made , and of
another part a carued Image , and of a third part a stoole of office ;
So men , being compounded and composed all of one mould and mettle , are
different and disconsonant in estates , conditions , and qualities .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C1.68

Too many <paren> like the barren Fig-tree <$$paren> beare leaues of
hypocrisie , but no fruites of Integrity , who serue <P_1,144.C2> onely
for a flourish in this life , and a flame in that hereafter .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.69

So much for that : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.70

now to returne to my Theame of <font> Wood <$$font> , <paren> indeed
this last disgression may make my Reader thinke that I could not see
wood for trees <$$paren> what Wood he is , I know not ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.71

but by his face he should be Maple , or Crab-tree ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.72

and by his stomacke , sure he is heart of <font> Oake <$$font> ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.73

some say he is a <font> Medaler <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.74

but by his stature , he seemes like a low short <font> Pine <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.75

and certaine I am , that hee is a <font> Popular <$$font> , a
well-tymberd piece , or a store house for belly tymber .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.76

Now Gentlemen , as I haue walked you amongst the Trees , and thorow the
Wood , I pray set downe , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.77

and take a taste or two more of this Banquet .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.78

What say you to the Leafe or Flecke of a Brawne new kild , to be of
weight eight pound , and to be eaten hot out of the Bores belly raw ?
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.79

much good doe you Gallants , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.80

was it not a glorious dish ? JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.81

and presently after <paren> in stead of suckets , {COM:no_close_paren}
twelue raw puddings . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.82

I speake not one word of drinke all this while ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.83

for indeed he is no drunkard , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.84

hee abhorres that swinish vice : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.85

Alehouses , nor Tapsters can@ @not nick this <font> Nick <$$font> with
froth , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.86

curtoll Cannes , tragicall blacke-pots , and double-dealing bumbasted
Iugges , could neuer cheate him , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.87

for one Pinte of Beere or Ale is enough to wash downe a Hog , or water a
Sheepe with him . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.88

Two Loynes of Mutton , and one Loyne of Veale were but as three Sprats
to him : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.89

Once at Sir <font> Warrham Saint Leigers <$$font> house , and at Sir
<font> William Sydleyes <$$font> he shewed himselfe so valiant of Teeth
, and Stomacke , that hee ate as much as would well haue seru'd and
suffic'd thirty men , so that his belly was like to turne bankerupt and
breake , but that the Seruing-men turn'd him to the fire , and anoynted
his paunch with Greace and Butter , to make it stretch and hold ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.90

and afterwards being layd in bed , hee slept eight houres ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.91

and fasted all the while : which when the Knight vnderstood , he
commanded him to be laid in the stocks , and there to endure as long
time as he had laine bedrid with eating .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,144.C2.92

<font> Pompey <$$font> the Great , <font> Alexander <$$font> the Great ,
<font> Tamberlane <$$font> the Great , <font> Charlemagne <$$font> or
<font> Charles <$$font> the <P_1,145.C1> Great , <font> Arthur <$$font>
the Great : all these gat the Title of Great , for conquering Kingdomes
, and killing of men ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.93

and surely <font> eating <$$font> is not a greater sinne then rapine ,
theft , manslaughter and murther . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.94

Therefore this noble <font> Eatalian <$$font> doth well deserue the
Tytle of <font> Great : <$$font> wherefore I instile him <font> Nicholas
<$$font> the Great <paren> Eater : <$$paren>
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.95

And as these forenamed Greats haue ouerthrowne and wasted Countreyes ,
and Hosts of men , with the helpe of their Soldiers and followers ; so
hath our <font> Nick <$$font> the Great , <paren> in his owne person
<$$paren> without the helpe or ayde of any man , ouercome , conquered ,
and deuoured in one weeke , as much as would haue sufficed a reasonable
and sufficient Army in a day , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.96

for hee hath at one meale made an assault vpon seuen dozen of good
Rabbets at the Lord <font> Woeton@ @s <$$font> in <font> Kent <$$font> ,
which in the totall is foure-score , which number would well haue
suffic'd a_hundred_,_three-score_and_eight hungry Soldiers , allowing to
each of them halfe a Rabbet . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.97

<font> Bell <$$font> , the famous Idoll of the <font> Babylonians
<$$font> , was a meere imposture , a Iuggling toye , and a
cheating-bable , in comparison of this <font> Nicholaitan , Kentish
Tenterbelly <$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.98

the high and mighty Duke <font> All paunch <$$font> , was but a fiction
to him . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.99

<font> Milo <$$font> the <font> Crotonian <$$font> could hardly be his
equall : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.100

and <font> Woolner <$$font> of <font> Windsor <$$font> was not worthy to
bee his foot-man . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.101

A quarter of fat Lambe , and threescore Eggs haue beene but an easie
colation , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.102

and three well larded Pudding-pyes he hath at one time
{COM:preceding_word_"time"_emended} {SIC:time_time} put to foyle ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.103

eighteene yards of black Puddings <paren> <font> London <$$font> measure
<$$paren> haue suddenly beene imprisoned in his sowse-tub .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.104

A Ducke raw with guts , feathers , and all <paren> except the bill & the
long feathers of the wings <$$paren> hath swomme in the whirlepole or
pond of his mawe , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.105

and he told me , that three-score pound of Cherries was but a kind of
washing meate , and that there was no tacke in them ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.106

for hee had tride it at one time . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.107

But one <font> Iohn Dale <$$font> was too hard for him at a place called
<font> Lennam <$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.108

for the said <font> Dale <$$font> had laid a wager that he would fill
<font> Woods <$$font> belly , with good wholesome victuals for 2.
shillings , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C1.109

& a Gentleman that laid the contrary , did wager , that as soone as
noble <font> Nick <$$font> had eaten out <font> Dales <$$font> 2.
shillings , that he should <P_1,145.C2> presently enter combate with a
worthy Knight , called Sir <font> Lorne of Beefe <$$font> , & ouerthrow
him ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.110

in conclusion , <font> Dale <$$font> bought 6. pots of potent , high ,
and mighty Ale , and twelue new penny white loaues , which hee sop'd in
the said Ale , the powerfull fume whereof , conquer'd the conquerour ,
rob'd him of his reason , bereft him of his wit , violently tooke away
his stomacke , intoxicated his <font> Piamater <$$font> , & entred the
Sconce of his <font> Pericranion <$$font> , blinde-folded him with sleep
; setting a <font> nap <$$font> of nine houres for manacles vpon his
<font> threed-bare eyelids <$$font> , to the preseruation of {SIC:or}
the rost Beefe , and the vnexpected winning of the wager .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.111

This inuincible <font> Ale <$$font> , victoriously vanquish'd the
vanquisher , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.112

and ouer our Great Triumpher , was Triumphant :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.113

But there are presidents enow of as potent men as our <font> Nicholas
<$$font> , that haue subdude Kings and Kingdomes , and yet they
themselues haue been captiu'd and conquer'd by drinke ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.114

wee need recite no more examples but the Great <font> Alexander <$$font>
, and <font> Holophernes <$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.115

their ambition was boundlesse , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.116

and so is the stomacke of my Pens subiect ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.117

for all the foure Elements can@ @not cloy him , fish from the deepest
ocean , or purest Riuer , fairest Pond , foulest Ditch , or dirtiest
puddle , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.118

he hath a receite for Fowle of all sorts , from the <font> Wren <$$font>
to the <font> Eagle <$$font> , from the <font> Titmouse <$$font> to the
<font> Estrich <$$font> , or <font> Cassawaraway <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.119

his paunch is either a Coope or a Roost for them :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.120

He hath <paren> within himselfe <$$paren> a stall for the Oxe , a roome
for the Cow , a stye for the Hogge , a Parke for the Deere , a warren
for Coneies , a storehouse for fruit , a dayery for Milke , Creame ,
Curds , Whay , Butter-milke , and Cheese :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.121

his mouth is a Mill of perpetual motion ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.122

for let the wind or the water rise or fall , yet his teeth will euer bee
grinding ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.123

his guts are the Rendez-vous or meeting place or Burse for the Beasts of
the fields , the Fowles of the Ayre , and Fishes of the Sea ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.124

and though they be neuer so wild or disagreeing in Nature , one to
another , yet hee binds or grindes them to the peace , in such manner ,
that they neuer fall at odds againe . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.125

His eating of a Sheepe , a Hog , and a Duck raw , doth shew that he is
free from the sinne of nicenesse or curiosity in his Dyet .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,145.C2.126

<P_1,146.C1>

<paren> It had beene happy for the poore , if their stomacks had beene
of that constitution , when seacoales were so deare here . <$$paren>
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.128

Besides , he neuer troubles a Larder , or Cupboord to lay cold meate in
, JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.129

nor doth he keepe any Cats or Traps in his house to destroy vermin ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.130

he takes so good a course , that he layes or shuts vp all safe within
himselfe ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.131

in briefe , giue him meate , and he ne'r stands vpon the cookery ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.132

he cares not for the Peacocke of <font> Sames <$$font> , the Woodcock of
<font> Phrygia <$$font> , the Cranes of <font> Malta <$$font> , the
Pheasants of <font> England <$$font> , the <font> Caperkelly <$$font> ,
the <font> Heathcocke <$$font> , and <font> Termagant <$$font> of <font>
Scotland <$$font> , the Goate of <font> Wales <$$font> , the Salmon ,
and Vsquabah of <font> Ireland <$$font> , the Sawsedge of <font>
Bolognia <$$font> , the Skink of <font> Westphalia <$$font> , the
Spanish <font> Potato <$$font> , he holds as a bable ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.133

and the <font> Italian Figge <$$font> he esteemes as poyson .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.134

He is an English man , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.135

and English dyet will serue his turne .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.136

If the <font> Norfolk Dumplin <$$font> , and the <font> Devonshire
White-pot <$$font> , be at variance , he will atone them ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.137

the <font> Bag-puddings <$$font> of <font> Gloucester <$$font> shire ,
the <font> Black-puddings <$$font> of <font> Shropshire <$$font> , the
<font> White puddings <$$font> of <font> Somersetshire <$$font> , the
<font> Hasty-puddings <$$font> of <font> Hamshire <$$font> , and the
<font> Pudding-pyes <$$font> of any shire , all is one to him ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.138

nothing comes amisse , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.139

a contented mind is worth all , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.140

and let any thing come in the shape of fodder , or eating stuffe , it is
welcome , whether it bee <font> Sawsedge <$$font> , or <font> Custard
<$$font> , or <font> Eg-pye <$$font> , or <font> Cheese-cake <$$font> ,
or <font> Flawne <$$font> , or <font> Foole <$$font> , or <font> Froyze
<$$font> , or <font> Tanzy <$$font> , or <font> Pancake <$$font> , or
<font> Fritter <$$font> , or <font> Flapiacke <$$font> , or <font>
Posset , Galley-mawfrey , Mackeroone , Kickshaw <$$font> , or <font>
Tantablin <$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.141

he is no puling Meacocke , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.142

nor in all his life time the queasinesse of his stomacke needed any
fawcy spurre or switch of sowre <font> Veriuce <$$font> , or acute
<font> Vinegar <$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.143

his appetite is no straggler , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.144

nor is it euer to seeke , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.145

for he keepes it close prisoner , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.146

and like a courteous kind Iaylour , he is very tender ouer it , not
suffering it to want any thing if he can by any meanes procure it :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.147

indeede it was neuer knowne to be so farre out of reparations , that it
needed the assistance of <font> Cawdle , Alebery , Iulep , Culisse ,
Grewell <$$font> , or <font> stewd-@ @broth <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C1.148

onely a messe of plaine frugall Countrey <font> Pottage <$$font> was
alwayes sufficient for him , though it were but a <font> washing-bowle
full <$$font> , of the quantity of two pecks , which porrenger of his ,
I my selfe saw at the signe of the white <P_1,146.C2> <font> Lyon
<$$font> at a Village called <font> Harrisom <$$font> in <font> Kent
<$$font> , the Hostesse of which house did affirme , that hee did at
once wash downe that Bowle full of pottage , with nine penny loaues of
bread , and three Iugges of Beere . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.149

Indeed , in my presence <paren> after he had broken his fast <$$paren>
hauing <paren> as he said <$$paren> eaten one pottle of milke , one
pottle of potage , with bread , butter , and cheese : I then sent for
him , to the aforesaid Inne , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.150

and after some accomodated salutations , I asked him if hee could eate
any thing ? JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.151

He gaue me thankes , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.152

and said , that if he had knowne , that any Gentleman would haue inuited
him , that he would haue spared his breakefast at home ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.153

<paren> and with that he told me as aforesaid , what he had eaten
<$$paren> JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.154

yet neuerthelesse <paren> to doe me a courtesie <$$paren> he would shew
me some small cast of his office , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.155

for he had one hole or corner in the profundity of his storehouse , into
which he would stow and bestow any thing that the house would afford ,
at his perill and my cost . Whereupon I summoned my Hostesse with three
knocks vpon the Table , two stamps on the floore , with my fist and foot
, at which shee made her personall appearance with a low Curtsie , and
an inquisitiue What lacke ye ? JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.156

I presently laid the authority of a bold Guest vpon her , commanding
that all the victuals in the house should be laid on the Table .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.157

She said , she was but slenderly prouided , by reason goodman <font>
Wood <$$font> was there , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.158

but what she had , or could doe , wee should presently haue :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.159

so the cloth was displaid , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.160

the salt was aduanc'd , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.161

sixe penny wheaten loaues were mounted two stories high like a Rampier ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.162

three sixe-penny Veale pyes , wall'd stiffly about , and well victual'd
within , were presented to the hazzard of the <font> Scalado <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.163

one pound of sweet butter <paren> being all fat and no bones <$$paren>
was in a cold sweat at this mighty preparation ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.164

one good dish of Thorneback , white as Alabaster or the Snow vpon the
<font> Scithian <$$font> mountaines , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.165

and in the Reare came vp an inch_thick shyuer of a Peck house-hold loafe
; all which prouision were presently , in the space of an houre vtterly
confounded , and brought to nothing , by the meere and onely valourous
dexterity of our vnmatchable grand Gurmound .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,146.C2.166

<P_1,147.C1>

He couragiously past the Pikes , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C1.168

and I cleared the shot , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C1.169

but the house yeelded no more , so that my Guest arose vnsatisfied , and
my selfe discontented in being thrifty and sauing my money against my
will . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C1.170

I did there offer him twenty shillings to bring him vp to me to my house
on the Bank-side , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C1.171

and there I would haue giuen him as much good meate , as he would eate
in tenne dayes , one after another , & fiue shillings a day every day ,
and at the tenne dayes end , twenty shillings more , to bring him downe
againe . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C1.172

I did also offer tenne shillings to one <font> Ieremy Robinson <$$font>
a Glouer <paren> a man very inward with him <$$paren> to attend and
keepe him company , and two shillings six pence the day , with good dyet
and lodging : all which were at {TEXT:missing_"at"} once accepted ,
vntill <font> Wood <$$font> began to ruminate and examine what seruice
he was to doe , for these large allowances {COM:no_period}
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C1.173

Now my plot was to haue him to the Beare-garden ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C1.174

and there before a house full of people , he should haue eaten a wheele
barrow full of Tripes , and the next day , as many puddings as should
reach ouer the Thames <paren> at a place which I would measure betwixt
<font> London <$$font> and <font> Richmond <$$font> <$$paren>
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C1.175

the third day , I would haue allowed him a fat Calfe , or Sheepe of
twenty shillings price , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C1.176

and the fourth day he should haue had thirty Sheepes Gathers ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C1.177

thus from day to day , he should haue had wages & dyet with variety ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C1.178

but he fearing that which his merits would amount vnto , brake off the
match , saying , that perhaps when his Grace , <paren> I guesse who he
meant <$$paren> should heare of one that ate so much , and could worke
so little , he doubted there would come a command to hang him :
whereupon our hopefull Beare-garden busines was shiuerd , and shatterd
in pieces . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C1.179

Indeed he made a doubt of his expected performance in his quality , by
reason of his being growne in yeeres , so that if his stomack should
faile him publikely , and lay his reputation in the mire , it might haue
beene a disparagement to him for euer , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C1.180

and especially in Kent , where he hath long beene famous , hee would be
loth to be defamed ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C1.181

But as weake as he was , he said , that he could make a shift to destroy
a fat Weather of a pound in two <P_1,147.C2> houres , prouided that it
were tenderly boild , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.182

for he hath lost all his teeth <paren> except one <$$paren> in eating a
quarter of Mutton , <paren> bones and all <$$paren> at <font> Ashford
<$$font> in the County aforesaid , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.183

yet is he very quicke and nimble in his feeding ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.184

and will ridde more Eating worke away in two houres , then tenne of the
hungriest Carters in the Parish where he dwells .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.185

He is surely noble <paren> for his great Stomacke <$$paren> and vertuous
, chiefely for his patience in putting <font> vp much <$$font> ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.186

moreoeuer he is <font> thrifty <$$font> or <font> frugall <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.187

for when he can get no better meate , he will eate Oxe Liuers , or a
messe of warme Ale-graines from a Brewhouse .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.188

He is prouident and studious where to get more prouision as soone as all
is spent , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.189

and yet hee is bountifull or prodigall in spending all hee hath at once
: JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.190

hee is profitable in keeping bread and meate from mould and Maggots ,
and sauing the charge of salt , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.191

for his appetite will not waite and attend the poudring ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.192

his courtesie is manifest , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.193

for he had rather haue one <font> Farewel <$$font> then twenty Godbwyes
: JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.194

Of all things , hee holds fasting to be a most superstitious branch of
Popery , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.195

he is a maine enemy to Emberweekes , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.196

he hates Lent worse then a Butcher or a Puritan ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.197

and the name of Good-friday affrights him like a Bulbegger ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.198

a long Grace before meate , strikes him into a Quotidian Ague ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.199

in a word , hee could wish that Christmas would dwell with vs all the
yeere , or that euery day were metamorphoz'd into Shrouetuesdayes ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.200

in briefe , he is a Magazine , a store-house , a Receptacle , a Burse ,
or Exchange , a Babel or confusion for all Creatures .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.201

Hee is no Gamester , neither at Dice , or Cards ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.202

yet there is not any man within forty miles of his head , that can play
with him at <font> Maw <$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.203

and though his pasture be neuer so good , he is alwayes like one of
<font> Pharoahs <$$font> leane Kine ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.204

he is swarty , blackish haire , Hawk-nosed <paren> like a Parrot , or a
Roman <$$paren> JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.205

hee is wattle-Iawde , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,147.C2.206

and his eyes are sunke inward ; as if hee looked into the inside of his
intrayles , to note what custom'd or vncustom'd goods he tooke in ,
whilst his belly <paren> like a Maine-sayle in a calme <$$paren> hangs
ruffled and wrinkled <paren> in folds and wrathes <$$paren> flat
<P_1,148.C1> to the mast of his empty carkasse , till the storme of
aboundance fills it , and violently driues it into the full sea of
satisfaction . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,148.C1.207

{COM:verse_omitted}

Finis . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,1,148.C1.209

<P_3,93.C1>

Sunday the <font> 26. <$$font> of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended}
<font> August {COM:preceding_word_"August"_emended} <$$font>
{SIC:"August_of"_in_italics} wee set sayle from <font> Graus end
<$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C1.211

and with various windes some large and some scarce , we happely past the
Seas , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C1.212

and sayled vp the Riuer or <font> Maze <$$font> , by the <font> Brill
<$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C1.213

and on the Wednesday following I arriued at <font> Roterdam <$$font> in
<font> Holland <$$font> , at which time the worthy Regiment of the right
honourable Colonell Sir <font> Horace Veere <$$font> , and the two noble
Earles of <font> Essex <$$font> , and <font> Oxford <$$font> departed
from thence in Martiall Equipage toward the Pallatinate Country , whose
Heroick and Magnanimous endeauours , I beseech the <P_3,93.C2> Lord of
Hosts , and God of battels to direct and blesse .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C2.214

The same day I went to the <font> Hage <$$font> , and from thence to
<font> Leiden <$$font> , where I lodged all night ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C2.215

and the morrow being Thursday the 30. of <font> August <$$font> , I
sayled from <font> Leyden <$$font> to <font> Amsterdam <$$font> , where
I saw many things worthy the noting , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C2.216

but because they are so neere and frequent to many of our Nation , I
omit to relate them , to auoid tediousnes :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C2.217

but on the Friday at night I got passage from thence toward <font>
Hambrogh <$$font> , in a small hoy , in the which we were weather-beaten
at Sea three dayes and nights before we arriued there .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C2.218

Saturday the eighth of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} <font>
September <$$font> I left <font> Hambrogh <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C2.219

and being carried day and night in Waggons , on the Monday night
following I came to an ancient towne called <font> Heldeshim <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C2.220

it standeth in <font> Brunswicke <$$font> Land ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C2.221

and yet it belongeth to the Byshop of <font> Collin <$$font> , where I
did obserue in their <font> Doome Kirke <$$font> , or Cathedral Church ,
a Crowne of siluer 80. foote in Compasse , hanged vp in the body of the
Church , in the circuit of which crowne were placed 160. waxe Candles ,
the which at Festiuall dayes , or at the celebration of some high
Ceremonies are lighted to lighten their darknesse or their ignorance ,
chuse yee whether . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C2.222

Moreouer , there I saw a siluer Bell in their Steeple , of thirty pound
weight , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C2.223

and the Leades of their steeple shining and sparkeling with the Sunne
beames , they did affirme to mee to bee gold , the truth of which I am
doubtfull of . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C2.224

In this towne I stayed foure dayes JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C2.225

and on Friday the 14. of <font> September <$$font> , I went sixe Dutch
miles to the strong towne of <font> Brunswicke <$$font> , where by
reason of my short stay which was but two houres , I obserued nothing
worthy of memory , but their triple Wals , and double Ditches , there
artillery and fortifications , which they thinke to be impregnable ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C2.226

besides , there I saw an old house of the Duke of <font> Brunswicke
<$$font> , with the statue of a golden Lyon , of a great bignesse ,
standing aloft vpon a Piller , with the broken Wals , and houses , which
the Dukes Canon hath left there sixe yeares since , as tokens and badges
of his fury , and their rebellion . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,93.C2.227

From thence on the morrow , I went one Dutch mile further , to an
ancient towne called <P_3,94.C1> <font> Wolfunbottle <$$font> , where
the Duke of <font> Brunswicke <$$font> keepes his Court , in the which I
and my fellow could get no further admittance , then ouer a bridge into
his outtermost , or base Court ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C1.228

for his Souldiers seeing vs with Swords and Pistols , were fearefull ,
belike , that wee would haue taken the fortresse from them ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C1.229

and therefore though we were but two Englishmen , yet they durst not let
vs enter ; which made me call to remembrance the frequent , and dayly
Egresse and Regresse , that all people haue to his Maiesties Court of
Great <font> Britaine <$$font> , where none that are of any good fashion
and aspect , are debar'd entrance : when those inferiour Princes@
@houses are guarded with hungry Halberdiers , and reuurend rusty bil-men
, with a brace or two of hot-shots ; so that their Pallaces are more
like Prisons , then the free and Noble Courts of Commanding Potentates .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C1.230

After two dayes entertainment at <font> Wolfunbotle <$$font> , with an
English Marchant residing there , of good fame and credit , named
Maister <font> Thomas Sackuile <$$font> , I with my brother , and my
fellow <font> Tilbery <$$font> , and another man in my company ,
departed thither on foot onward on our iourney towards <font> Bohemia
<$$font> , in which trauaile , what occurrences happened , and what
things of note I saw , were as followeth .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C1.231

Passing with many weary steps through the townes of <font> Rosondink ,
Remling , Soulem , Hassen , Darsam <$$font> , and <font> Haluerstadt
<$$font> , <paren> which is all in <font> Brunswicke <$$font> land ,
<$$paren> but this towne of <font> Haluerstadt <$$font> belongs to a
Byshop so stiled , who is Duke <font> Christian <$$font> brother to the
now Duke of <font> Brunswicke <$$font> , a long Dutch mile <paren> or
almost sixe English <$$paren> is a small towne or a Blecke called <font>
Groning <$$font> belonging to the Duke , in the which place I obserued
two things worthy of remembrance . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C1.232

First a most stately Pallace built with a beautifull Chappell , so
adorned with the Images and Formes of Angels and Cherubins , with such
exquisitenesse of arts best industry of caruing , grauing , guilding ,
painting , glazing , and pauing , with such superexcellent workemanship
of Organs , Pulpit , and Font , that for curiositie and admirable
rarenesse , all the Buildings and Fabricks that euer I beheld , must
giue it preheminence . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C1.233

I confesse that <font> Henry <$$font> the seuenth@ @s Chappell at <font>
Westminster <$$font> , Kings Colledge Chappell in <P_3,94.C2> <font>
Cambridge <$$font> , and Christ Church in <font> Canterbury <$$font> ,
are beyond it in height and workemanship of stone :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.234

for indeed this Chappell is most of wood gipps , and plaster of <font>
Paris <$$font> ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.235

but it is so guilded as if it had beene made in the golden age , when
gold was esteemed as Drosse , so that a man had need to weare a vaile
ouer his dazzling eyes , or else he can hardly looke vpon it .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.236

The caruing and painting seeme to out_goe the arts of <font> Pigmalion ,
Apelles <$$font> , or <font> Praxiteles <$$font> , the pauing of the
chequered blacke and white marble , and the windowes glassed with
Chrystall : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.237

but all this great cost and shew is very little to the honour of God ,
or the propagation of the Gospell , the edification of the ignorant .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.238

For in this Church of ease , there is no Seruice .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.239

If the painted Pulpit could preach , the dumbe Images might <paren>
perhaps <$$paren> haue a Sermon now and then ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.240

for scarce at any time there comes any body into the Chappell , but a
fellow that shewes the beauty of it for two pence or three pence a peece
. JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.241

In the same house , in a place or Celler built of purpose , is a great
tonne or Vessell of wood , that was 7 yeares in making & was vsed to be
filled with Rhenish wine : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.242

it is said to be twice as big as the vessell at <font> Heidelberg
<$$font> , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.243

and the hoops of it are twelue inches thicke ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.244

and the staues or bordes of it being as much ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.245

I went vp to the top of it with a Ladder of 18. steps ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.246

he that keepes it saith it will hold 160. tonnes .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.247

My fellow <font> Tilbery <$$font> did creepe in at the tap hole ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.248

it is in length thirty_two foot , and in breadth a_crosse 19 .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.249

and verily I thinke that bable cost more money the making , then would
haue built a good ship , or founded an Almes house for 6. poore people
. JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,94.C2.250

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_3,95.C1>

From <font> Groning <$$font> wee trauailed to a Towne called <font>
Ashers Leauen <$$font> , to <font> Ashleauen <$$font> , to <font>
Kinderne <$$font> , to <font> Hall <$$font> , and so to <font> Leipzig
<$$font> , which is one of the chiefest townes in <font> Saxony <$$font>
, being famous for a yearely Mart that is yearely held there , where to
Merchants and other people from the most part of Christendome haue
annuall concourse : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C1.253

in this towne we stayd two dayes , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C1.254

and taking our leaue then of some English Merchants , who vsed vs kindly
, we there would haue hired a coach or waggon to <font> Prague <$$font>
; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C1.255

but all the <font> Saxon <$$font> coach men and carters were afraid to
looke vpon any part of <font> Bohemia <$$font> , because their Duke is a
profest enemy in armes against the King of <font> Beame <$$font> , so
that we were forced to hire a fellow with a wheele barrow 2. dayes to
carry our cloaks , swords , guns , pistols , & other apparell & luggage
which were our necessaries , to a towne called <font> Boorne <$$font> ,
to <font> Froburge <$$font> , and so to another towne called <font>
Penigh <$$font> , where we cashierd our one_wheel'd coach , & hired a
cart with two , which carried both vs and our baggage to <font> Chemnizt
<$$font> another towne in <font> Saxony <$$font> , from whence to a
place called <font> Shop <$$font> wee were faine to be our owne sumpter
horses walking on foot to the last towne in <font> Saxony <$$font> ,
called <font> Marlenberg <$$font> . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C1.256

From thence passing vp and downe inaccessable mountaines , we came to a
wood , which parts <font> Bohemia <$$font> from <font> Saxony <$$font>
on the west , which wood is called by the people of those parts the
<font> Beamer Wolts <$$font> or <font> Wolt <$$font> , and is in breadth
ten English miles , and length further then I know how to discribe
truely : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C1.257

but this much of it I dare affirme , that it is a naturall impregnable
wall to the kingdome of <font> Bohem <$$font> , which kingdome is all
incompast round with woods and mountaines , so that there is no passage
on that side of it , for any army to enter into it with munition and
artillery , all the wayes being vneuen , and the mountaine tops all
boggs , mosses , and quagmires , that great Ordnance or <P_3,95.C2> any
heauy cariage either of horse , car or waggon , will sinke and be lost .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C2.258

Besides , there are numbers past numbring of Firre trees , many standing
, and such store fallen of themselues , that any passage might easily be
stopped by laying the~ crosse the way . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C2.259

And of all my iourny , the trauell through that dismall wood was the
most heauy vnto me , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C2.260

for the trees grew so thicke , and so high , that the Sun was obscured ,
and the day seemed night ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C2.261

in some places , the way was paued with swimming trees 2. miles
together on the tops of Hils , which now and then I slipping beside ,
sunke to the middle in a Quagmire . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C2.262

When we had thus footed it , and trauailed past the hils & the woods ,
<paren> being at the least 4. houres toyle <$$paren> and that we might
looke downe the mountaines , into the fruitfull Land of <font> Bohem
<$$font> , neuer did sight more reioyce vs , the lower Hils being all
full of Vineyards and the Vallyes corne and pasture ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C2.263

not an English mile distance , but a village euery way ; and 20. 30.
or 40. reekes or stacks of corne which their barnes can@ @not hold , in
the space of euery houres iourney : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C2.264

in a word , euery thing that belonged to the vse and commodity of man
was and is there , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C2.265

and all the delightfull obiects to satisfie euery sence , is there
abundantly so that nature seemed to make that Country her store house or
granary , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C2.266

for there is nothing wanting , except mens gratitude to God for such
blessings . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C2.267

The first night we lodged there at a pretty towne called <font> Comoda
<$$font> , which towne , by negligence and occasion of fire , had fifty
houses burnt , two dayes before our comming thither , it beeing eleuen
Dutch miles from <font> Prague <$$font> .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C2.268

There we hired a waggon 7 dutch miles to a towne called <font> Slowne
<$$font> from whence we walked on foot a long 16. English miles to
<font> Prague <$$font> , which long looked_for Citty wee could not see
vntill we came within an houres trauell of it :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C2.269

within halfe a dutch mile is a fearefull place , being frequented with
inhumaine and barbarous murderrers , that assault trauellers , first
shooting and murdring them , & after searching their pockets , where if
they haue money or not , all is one , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C2.270

it is but so many slaine : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C2.271

for these villains haue a wood and a deepe valley to shelter themselues
in , that they are hardly taken afterwards ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,95.C2.272

but if they chance at any time to be but apprehended , they <P_3,96.C1>
are racked & tortured to make them confesse ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.273

& afterwards their executions are very terrible .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.274

But <paren> I thanke God <$$paren> we past that place , & many other as
dangerous as that , where some were robbed & murdered <paren> as report
told vs <$$paren> both before vs , behind vs , and on each side :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.275

and we saw in our journy aboue 7._score Gallowses and wheeles , where
theeues were hanged some fresh , and some halfe rotten , & the carkases
of murtherers , broken limb after limb on the wheeles ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.276

and yet it was our happines only to see the dead villaines , & escape
the liuing . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.277

I came into <font> Prague <$$font> on Thursday the 7. of <font>
September <$$font> , whither if I had come but the Friday before , I had
seene a most fearfull execution of 2. notorious offenders , the manner
how , with their faults , as it was truely related to me by English
Gent. that saw it : I think it not much impertinent to relate .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.278

The one of them being taken , apprehended and racked , for ripping vp a
liue woman with child , & for taking the infant out of her body , did
sow a liuing puppy into her belly ; all w=ch= he confessed he did , to
make properties for witch craft : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.279

and being further tortured , he confessed when and where he had
committed 35. murthers more : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.280

the other in respect of him was but a petty offender ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.281

for he in all his lifetime had murthered but 14. For the which
execrable facts , their deserued executions were as followeth :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.282

First , they were brought out of the Iayle naked from the girdle vpward
; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.283

and so being bound fast on high in a Cart , that the spectators might
see them ; then the Hangman hauing a pan of coales neere him , with
red_hot pincers nip'd off the nipple of one breast ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.284

then he tooke a knife JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.285

and giues him a slash or cut downe the backe on one side from the
shoulder to the wast ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.286

and presently gaue him such another slash , three inches from the first
; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.287

then on the top he cut the slashes into one ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.288

and presently taking pincers , tooke hold of the crosse cut ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.289

& tore him downe like a Girse below the middle , letting it hang downe
behind him like a belt : after which he tooke his burning pincers , &
pluck'd off the tops of his fingers of one hand :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C1.290

then passing to another place of the Towne , his other nipple was
plucked off , the other side of his backe so cut and mangled , <paren>
which they call by the name of rimming , <paren> if it had beene riming
, I would never haue written but in prose <$$paren> his other fingers
<P_3,96.C2> nip'd of , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C2.291

then passing further all his toes were nip'd off with the burning
pincers after which he was enforced to come out of the Cart , and goe on
foote vp a steepe hill to the Gallowes , where he was broken with a
wheele , aliue , one bone after another , beginning at his legs and
ending with his necke , and last of all quartered and layd on the wheele
, on a high post , till Crowes , Rauens , or consuming time consume him
. JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C2.292

This was the manner of both their executions ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C2.293

but I speake of the greatest murtherer particularly , because it is
reported that all these torments neuer made him once to change
countenance , or to make any signe or action of griefe , to call to God
for mercy , or to intreat the people to pray for him ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C2.294

but as if he had beene a sencelesse stocke or stone , hee did most
scornefully , and as it were in disdaine , abide it ; whilst the other
villaine did cry , rore , and make lamentation , calling vpon God often
; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C2.295

the difference was not much in their liues , and manner of their deaths
, JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C2.296

but I am perswaded the odds was great in their dying .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C2.297

The Citty of <font> Prague <$$font> is almost circular or round , being
diuided in the middle by the Riuer of <font> Moldoue <$$font> , ouer
which is a faire stone Bridge , of 600. paces ouer , and at each end a
strong gate of stone : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C2.298

there is said to be in it of Churches & Chappels , 150.
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C2.299

for there are great numbers of Catholiques , who have many Chappels
dedicated to sundry S=t=s . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C2.300

and I was there at 4. seuerall sorts of diuine exercises , <font> viz.
<$$font> at good Sermons with the Protestants , at Masse with the
Papists , at a Lutherans preaching , & at the Iewes Synagog ; 3. of
which I saw & heard for curiosity , & the other for edification .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C2.301

The Iewes in <font> Prague <$$font> , are in such great numbers , that
they are thought to be of men , women , and children , betwixt 50. or
60000. who doe all liue by brocage and vsury vpon the Christians , and
are very rich in mony and Iewels , so that a man may see 10. or 12.
together of them , that are accounted worth 20. 30 or 40000. l. a
piece ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C2.302

and yet the slaues goe so miserably attired , that 15. of them are not
worth the hanging for their whole ward-ropes .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,96.C2.303

The Castle where the King and Queene doe keepe their Court , is
magnificent and sumptuous in building , strongly scituated and fortified
<P_3,97.C1> by nature and art , being founded on a high hill , so that
at pleasure it keepes the towne in command ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C1.304

and it is much more spacious in roomes for receipt in Gardens & Orchards
, then the Towre of <font> London <$$font> .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C1.305

I was in it dayly the space of 20. dayes ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C1.306

and saw it royally graced with the presence of a gracious King & Queene
, who were honorably attended by a gallant Courtly traine of Lords and
Ladies , and Gentles of the High <font> Dutch <$$font> and <font>
Bohemians <$$font> , & where was free & bountifull entertainment to
strangers in aboundance : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C1.307

I must euer humbly and thankfully acknowledge the Queenes Maiesties
goodnesse towards me , whose vndeserued fauours were helpfull vnto me
both there , and in my tedious iourny homeward .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C1.308

Moreouer there I saw <paren> & had in mine armes <$$paren> the King and
Queenes youngest Son Prince <font> Robert <$$font> , who was borne there
on the 16. of December last : a goodly child as euer I saw of that age
, whom with the rest I pray God to blesse ; to his glory and his Parents
joy and comfort . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C1.309

{COM:verse_omitted}

The Citty of <font> Prague <$$font> hath in it <paren> by reason of the
wars <$$paren> thrice the number of its owne Inhabitants ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C1.311

and yet for all that , victuals is in such great plenty , that sixe men
can@ @not eate three halfe penny worth of bread ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C1.312

and I did buy in the Market a fat Goose well roast for the valew of 9.
pence English , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C1.313

and I and my brother haue dined there at a Cookes with good roasted meat
, bread & beere , so that we haue beene satisfied and left , for the
valew of fiue pence : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C1.314

a good Turky there may bee <P_3,97.C2> bought for two shillings ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C2.315

and for fresh fish I neuer saw such store ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C2.316

for in one market day I haue knowne in <font> Prague <$$font> 2000.
Carps , besides other fishes , which Carps in <font> London <$$font> are
fiue shillings a piece , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C2.317

& there they were for 8. pence or 10. pence at the most , so that one
of their fresh fish markets here , were worth at the least 5. or 600.
pounds , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C2.318

and as for all other manner of wilde fowle , they are there in satiety ,
besides their fruites are in such aboundance , that I bought a basket of
Grapes of the quantity of halfe a pecke for a penny and farthing , and a
hatfull of faire Peaches for as much , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C2.319

picked cowcombers , I haue bought a pecke for three pence ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C2.320

and muskmellions , there hath been cast fiue or sixe carts
{COM:preceding_word_"carts"_emended} load of them in one day to their
hogs . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C2.321

As concerning the dyet that is in the Kings Armies , I could neuer yet
heare any man complaine of want , but that it is more plentifull then in
the Citty , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C2.322

the greatest scarcitie hath beene to some sick souldiers , who being not
able to march with the Leaguers <paren> by reason of their weaknesse
<$$paren> they haue been left amongst the Boores , or Husbandmen in the
next villages , where their Languages not vnderstood , their succor hath
euer bin small , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C2.323

but for all this in the Campe hath euer bin a continuall cheapnes of all
things , the King most duely paying his Souldiers at the end of euery
month , hauing in his great Leaguer , vnder the conduct of the Princes
of <font> Hollock <$$font> and <font> Anhalt <$$font> of foot and horse
43000. and at the least of carts and waggons to carry prouision , and
baggage for the Army , to the number of 18000 .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C2.324

In his little Leaguer , vnder the leading of Count <font> Mansfelt
<$$font> , there are of Foot and Horse 7000. besides Carts and Waggons
for carriage , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C2.325

and yet for these great numbers of men and beasts , there is food in all
aboundance . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C2.326

In the Campe with <font> Graue Mansfelt <$$font> is the <font> Brittaine
<$$font> Regiment under the Col. Sir <font> Andrew Gray <$$font> Knight
, JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C2.327

and in <font> Prague <$$font> I met with many worthy Gentlemen and
Souldiers which were there sicke , as the worthy Captaine <font> Bushell
<$$font> , Lieutenant <font> Grimes <$$font> , Lieutenant <font>
Langworth <$$font> , Ancient <font> Galbreath <$$font> , Ancient <font>
Vandenbrooke <$$font> , Master <font> Whitney <$$font> Master <font>
Blundell <$$font> , and others , all which did most courteously
entertaine me , vnto whom I must euer rest thankfull ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,97.C2.328

and they do affirme that now it <P_3,98.C1> hath pleased God to grant
their Souldiers recouerie , that they doe hope euery <font> Britaine
<$$font> Souldier doth retaine more good spirit , then three enemies of
what nation soeuer . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,98.C1.329

Thus hauing shewed part of the best things in <font> Bohemia <$$font> ,
the Court and City of <font> Prague <$$font> , it shall not bee amisse
if I relate a little merrily , of some things there tolerable , some
intolerable , some naught , and some worse than naught ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,98.C1.330

for as euery Rose hath a prickle , and euery Bee a sting , so no earthly
Kingdome hath such perfection of goodnesse but it may bee iustly taxed
with imperfections . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,98.C1.331

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_3,98.C2.15>

Thus hauing staid in <font> Prague <$$font> almost 3. weekes , I
returned from thence homeward , on Tuesday , the 26. of September ,
hauing in my company a widow <paren> and foure small children <$$paren>
whose Husband beeing an Englishman and the Kings Brewer for Beere ,
deceased , and was buried there in <font> Prague <$$font> whilst I was
there : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,98.C2.15.334

the good desolate woman hauing receiued reward after seuen yeares
Seruice there and at <font> Heidelbergh <$$font> , beeing desirous to
returne to her Country <paren> <font> England <$$font> <$$paren> came
with vs , with my brother , and my fellow <font> Tilbery <$$font> .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,98.C2.15.335

We tooke two Coaches at the Castle of <font> Prague <$$font> ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,98.C2.15.336

and in a day and a halfe , we were carried 7. Dutch miles , to a Towne
in <font> Bohemia <$$font> <paren> standing on the riuer of <font> Elue
<$$font> <$$paren> called <font> Leutmeritz <$$font> , at w=ch= towne we
all layd our moneyes together , and bought a boat of 48. foot in length
, and not 3. foote in bredth , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,98.C2.15.337

and because we did not know the riuer , we hired a <font> Bohemian
<$$font> waterman to guide vs 15. dutch miles , to the Towne of <font>
Dreason <$$font> in <font> Saxony <$$font> .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,98.C2.15.338

But 4. miles short of that Towne , which was the first Towne in the
<font> Saxon <$$font> Country , called <font> Pirne <$$font> , where we
were stayed 5 houres without the Gates , till such time as the
Burgamaster would be pleased to examine vs : in the meane space our
waterman <paren> not daring to abide the terrible tryall of examination
, because the Duke of <font> Saxon <$$font> was in Armes against the
King of <font> Beame <$$font> , {COM:no_close_paren} he ran away ,
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,98.C2.15.339

and left vs to bring the boat downe the riuer 600. English miles our
selues to <font> Hamburgh <$$font> . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,98.C2.15.340

But now to close vp all , I will relate what rare dyet , excellent
cookery , and sweet Lodging we had in our journey in <font> Germany
<$$font> : JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,98.C2.15.341

first , for our <P_3,99.C1> comfort , after very hard gatting of
houseroome our lodginge was euery night in straw , where lying together
well littered , we honestly alwayes left our sheets behinde vs :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C1.342

then our suppers at a table square , and so broad , that two men can
hardly shake hands ouer it , we being some twelue about it .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C1.343

Our first dish being a raw Cabbadge , of the quantity of halfe a pecke ,
cut and chopped small , with the fat of resty bacon powred vpon it in
stead of oyle , which dish must be emptied before we could get any more
: JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C1.344

Our second dish perhaps a pecke of boyld apples & hony , the Apples
being boyled skins , cores , stalkes & all :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C1.345

Thirdly 100. Gudgeons newly taken perhaps , yet as salt as if they had
beene three yeares pickled , or twice at the East Indies , boyld with
scayles , guts and all , and buried in Ginger like sawdust :
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C1.346

a fresh pike as salt as brine , boyld in flat milke , with a pound of
Garlicke . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C1.347

This was the manner of the most part of our dyet ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C1.348

and if we did aske them why they did salt their meate so vnreasonable ,
there answer was , that their beere could not be consumed , except their
meate were salted extraordinarily . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C1.349

If a man finde fault or seeme distasted with there beastly dyet , he is
in danger to be thrust out of doores , and take vp his lodging in the
streets , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C1.350

and in the conclusion when dinner or supper is ended , then comes mine
Host , or his leather_lip'd Froe , with a fawcy reckoning of what they
please , which sounds in our eares like a harsh Epilogue , after a bad
play ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C1.351

for what they say we must pay , their words are irreuocable <paren> like
the ancient Kings of <font> Persia <$$font> <$$paren>
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C1.352

and we must not question or aske how and how it can be so much , but pay
them their demand without grumbling , to halfe a farthing . Which made
mee call to mind sixe seuerall principals , that doe belong to a
traueller , as patience , silence , warinesse , watchfulnesse and a good
stomacke , and a purse well moneyed ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C1.353

for if he want any one of these , <paren> perhaps <$$paren> the other
fiue will neuer bring him to his iournies end .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C1.354

A mans patience must be such , that <paren> though he be a Barron
<$$paren> he must beare all abuses , either in words , lodging , diet ,
or almost any thing , though offered from or by a sowter , tinker , or a
Merchant of tripes and turneps ; JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C1.355

his silence must be , that <P_3,99.C2> though he beare and vnderstand
himselfe wronged , yet he must be as dumbe as a Gudgeon or a Whiting mop
: JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C2.356

and though his mouth be shut , his warinesse must be such , that his
eares must be euer open , to listen and ouer-heare all danger that may
be complotted against him , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C2.357

his watchfulnesse must be so , that he must seldom sleepe with both his
eyes at once , least his throat be cut before he wake againe .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C2.358

But for his stomacke , hee must eat grasse with a horse , and drasse
with the hogs , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C2.359

for hee that can@ @not eate pickel'd herring broth , and dirty puddings
, shall many times fast by authority , and goe to bed without his supper
: JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C2.360

and last of all he must haue <font> Fortunatus <$$font> or a Prince his
purse , that must be <paren> like a Drunkards dagger <$$paren> euer
drawne , to pay bountifully for such wash and graines , as his valiant
stomacke hath ouercome , conquered and deuoured ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C2.361

but of this a little in verse . JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C2.362

{COM:verse_omitted}

With this kinde of lodging and dyet , and with tedious labour sometimes
night and day ; wee came in 14. dayes 607. miles from <font> Prague
<$$font> in <font> Bohemia <$$font> , to <font> Hambrogh <$$font> on the
hither skirts of <font> Germany <$$font> , the Riuer hauing aboue 1000.
shelues and sands , and 800. Ilands , so that a man can@ @not see on
which side of them to goe , there being 240. mils chained in boats on
the first streame , and a number numberlesse of Oakes & other trees
sunke with the violence of the Riuer , and sometimes fogs & mists that
we could not see a boats length from vs : besides great Rockes , and
stones that were falne into the water , that any or many of these
impediments do often ouerthrow boates , & drown passengers ;
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C2.364

yet I , & my fellow <font> Tilbery <$$font> <paren> we being both his
Maiesties watermen <$$paren> did by Gods assistance safely escape them
all , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,99.C2.365

and brought our selues , as is afore said , to <font> Hamborogh <$$font>
, where <P_3,100.C1> being windebound 10. dayes , I thanke the English
Merchants , I was well welcommed , vntill at last it pleased God , the
winde came faire , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,100.C1.366

I tooke ship , JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,100.C1.367

and after nine dayes and nights of various weather <paren> I giue praise
to the Almighty <$$paren> I came home to my house in <font> London
<$$font> on Saturday the 28. of September , 1620 .
JOTAYLOR-1630-E2-P2,3,100.C1.368

