<BEGIN_joxinden-1633-e2-p2>

<P_71>

<heading:edcomment:LX_JAMES_OXINDEN_TO_HENRY_OXINDEN>

Oxford JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,71.4

July the 10 1631 JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,71.5

Deere Brother , I know the vehement desire and the exceeding greate care
which you have of my welfare listeneth to heare some news of the
schollar's place , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,71.6

but I can@ @not write any certainty to you concerning it , by reason
that there is soe many that stand for it , to wit 9 , that I allmost
feare of the obtaining it , but still am in hope
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,71.7

and in the meane time noe way shall be left untried by me .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,71.8

Mr. Holt did greatly desire to have seene <P_72> you at the
commencement , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,72.9

and did tell me that if you your selfe were present it would goe better
with me concerning the schollar's place . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,72.10

But I suppose your great busines in other affaires would not suffer you
to come . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,72.11

I can@ @not write to you when the Election will be as yet ,
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,72.12

for it is at the Presedent's appointing JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,72.13

and about a weeke hence he goes a progress into his Contry ,
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,72.14

and then I beleive , if it be not before his going , that it will not be
this 8 weekes , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,72.15

and then I think I must retire agane to Cambridg .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,72.16

I hope you arre all in good health . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,72.17

I desire you to remember my Duty to my Mother , my love to my Sisters .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,72.18

I will not at this time troble you with many lines nor hinder my more
carefull study in writing many lines ; JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,72.19

leaving noe way untried , and as the proverb omnem movebo lapidem to the
obtaining of it , I rest Your Loving Brother James Oxinden From C.C.C.
in Oxford JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,72.20

I pray you , if you can conveniently , that you would not let the church
book be seene , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,72.21

but keepe it in the house , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,72.22

or else order the Figures according to the writing that was sent up by
Good. Coper . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,72.23

<P_73>

<heading:edcomment:LXXII_JAMES_OXINDEN_TO_HENRY_OXINDEN>

Dearest Brother , That misfortune of losing the Scholler's place makes
me allmost affraid to write unto you , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,73.26

but I hope that you having heard <paren> i doubt not <$$paren> that it
was not any defect of me , you will have me pardoned soe that my letters
may have free access and accepted as they were before ;
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,73.27

having the opertunyty of this carrier and being now allmost as they say
ita pauperior for want of money by reason that I can@ @not heare from
you , I therefor now intreate you to send me my quarteridge .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,73.28

But me thinks I heare you wonder how it should come to pass that I
should want money soe sone , having received some from you soe lately :
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,73.29

but I hope the letter which I sent you by my Cosine Pettet will expel
that doubt out of your mind : wherefor I intreate you to be soe loving
as you have always beene , and in this necessity to set to your helping
hand , and this time not to deny . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,73.30

And you shal not heare from me againe till next quarter .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,73.31

Thus in hope of your favour I goe forward , desiring you all_soe that
you would desire my Mother to send me some bands and Cufts and
Hanchechers and 2 or 3 towells , which were promised me the last returne
of the Carrier JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,73.32

and now I hope I shall not miss of them , in which hope , being in
greate haste , remembring my love to you , my duty unto my Mother I rest
Your ever loving Brother James Oxinden JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,73.33

From St. Johns Colleidg JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,73.34

August the 14 1631 JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,73.35

<P_92>

<heading:edcomment:LXXVII_JAMES_OXINDEN_TO_HENRY_OXINDEN>

Most Loving Brother , I receiving my Mother's letter , though indeede
that needed not for my accusation in writing so peromtorily unto you ,
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,92.38

for myself after serious consultation is a sufficient iudg to condemn
mee of my folly , of which I am now <paren> O si praeteritos recovet
mihi Jupiter annos <$$paren> hartilie <paren> i feare too late <$$paren>
sorie for it : JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,92.39

my necessitie I confess was very urgent , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,92.40

and it was it seemes the carriar's fault to detain it from mee soe long
, which hath <paren> i feare <$$paren> incurred your more sevearer
displeasure . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,92.41

<P_93>

But I hope your better iudgment weighing how prowne youth is uppon the
smallest occasion to interpret the worst , you will pardon this crime ,
which if teares can expiat , Perlegis et lachrymas finge videre meas .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,93.43

T'@ @is true I have scarse that mask of Impudence <paren> having so
grosslie offended you <$$paren> as to seeme to excuse my fault , being
soe great , untill I considder the tendernes of your nature , which is
soe apt to forgive ; JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,93.44

I with confidence here unlock myselfe unto you , desiring once more to
bee ingrafted into your favour , which if I shall obtain I shall pose
Arethmatick in giving thanks unto you and shall think you the sole
Brother of humanity . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,93.45

My request unto you is that you would send mee my Quarteridge :
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,93.46

for I must needes make mee a sute of Clothes before the commencement .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,93.47

I think it doth not want above a weeke of a Quarter since I had my last
Quarteridg . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,93.48

I received it the 12th of March JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,93.49

and now it is the 27th of may . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,93.50

I am sure by that time I shall receive it the time will bee full expird
. JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,93.51

In the meane time I doubt not of your Brotherly care and your indulgent
affection toward mee , which as it hath allways beene soe , it will now
bee reddy to healp mee in my necessity . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,93.52

I know that my Brothers' urgent occasions hath allmost suckt you dry of
money JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,93.53

and therefore I would not , were I not forct , trouble you ,
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,93.54

but I hope you will pardon mee at this time , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,93.55

desiring to bee remembred both to you and your loving Bedfellow I reste
Your loving Brother James Oxinden JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,93.56

<font> From Cam: JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,93.57

May the 27th <$$font> 1634 JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,93.58

<P_95>

<heading:edcomment:LXXX_JAMES_OXINDEN_TO_HENRY_OXINDEN>

Loving Brother , I may , and that justly , think humanity to have been
exil'd or have beene devorct from all hearts were shee not lodged in
yours , whom excluding all others I may call the sole borne sonne of
humanity , whose curtisie swift_winged time , having lost soe many
feathers , is to poore to furnish me with dayes enough to express my
service unto you and Arethmatick is to poore to multiplie thanks enough
for your former curtesies . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,95.61

But to omit the idle heaping up of words which arre to frivilous to
trouble your more serious occasions , as in all things I desire to
satissfie your desires , soe I am desirous to acquaint you with my
acourrants in Cambridg ; JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,95.62

my Scholler's place <paren> though with great difficulty <$$paren> I doe
retain , by reason some envious people , more for envy then any hopes to
obtaine it , would needes attempt it , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,95.63

but the master of our Colleidg and some other of my freinds , accepting
my excuses , would not deprive mee of it . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,95.64

My Chamber I have lost JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,95.65

and can not heare of Mr. Bletchinden , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,95.66

and therefore I desire you if possible you can to send mee my Quarteridg
to bee heere the 10th of December because wanting of it I can not
furnish myself , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,95.67

but time will not suffer mee to be to long JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,95.68

and therefore remembring my self unto you , hoping that you are in good
health I rest your ever loving Brother James Oxinden
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,95.69

<font> From Cam. JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,95.70

November the 11th <$$font> 1634 JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,95.71

<P_113>

<heading:edcomment:XCV_JAMES_OXINDEN_TO_HENRY_OXINDEN>

Dearest Brother , I am verry sorry that I can@ @not soe much recover my
strength as to give you thanks for your most loving letter .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,113.74

I am though feebly , thanks bee to God , somewhat recovered
{COM:preceding_word_"recovered"_emended} from the poison of sickness ,
which though I am I can@ @not say freed from , yet so much as to write
unto you , which I never thought {COM:preceding_word_"thought"_emended}
to have had that happines . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,113.75

You write unto mee to certifie you whether I bee Master of Arts or noe ,
which I was not at the receit of your letter , being then not the Time
of our commensement , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,113.76

but now , Thanks bee to God , I have obtained it .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,113.77

Good Brother , send mee word if the least preferment may bee had ,
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,113.78

for I am not able nor willing , considring my greate Sicknes , to
remaine heere . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,113.79

I would <paren> as the Proverb sayth <$$paren> play at small game
wrather then give out , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,113.80

and my sicknes hath soe disinabled mee that I feare to live in this
infectious ayre . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,113.81

You write to mee to send you a note of the receite of monyes ,
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,113.82

but the extraordinary resistance of my occasions and the greeviousness
of my sicknes detaines mee from it . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,113.83

I must <paren> Brother <$$paren> desire you uppon all love to send mee
by the bearer the sum of 10@ @=ll= , which I have impulsive necessity to
use . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,113.84

I must buy mee a Master of Arts Gowne and a sute ,
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,113.85

beesides I am indebted for my commensement and my sicknes .
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,113.86

Let not <paren> I pray you <$$paren> my not forceable writing unto you
make you weake in sending to me , JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,113.87

for I <P_114> protest I have had soe much bloud taken from mee that I am
scarse able to write at all . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,114.88

In the meane time <paren> Good Brother <$$paren> if you either respect
mee or my credit help mee at this time . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,114.89

Thus desiring you to remember mee to your loving bedfellow , hoping you
are all in health I rest Yours if his owne James Oxinden
JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,114.90

<font> From Camb. JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,114.91

3d of Aprill <$$font> 1636 . JOXINDEN-1633-E2-P2,114.92

