<BEGIN_jubarring-1630-e2-p2>

<P_95>

<heading:edcomment:69_LADY_JUDITH_BARRINGTON,_EARLY?_OCTOBER_1629>

Madam The want of your presence amongst us now is so much the worss to
be borne because we had soe certainly now propounded to our selves the
comfort of you , JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,95.4

but you have soe lawfull a cause to detaine you that we ware
unreasonable not to be sattissfied , especially sence you are pleased to
assure us your company constantly at the springe , which all_though we
can@ @not but think longe , yett they are good hopes to make us pass
over the dull winter quarter the cheerfuller .
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,95.5

And in the mean time I shall not omitt any fitt opertunity to visett
<P_96> you , which I intend when I come to London if I make any stay
thear and that the weather is any thinge seasonable .
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,96.6

I begin to finde an inclination to the same infermitie of my lungs that
I began withall last winter that will hinder my corage from being to
bould with all weathers , JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,96.7

but in truth I longe to waite upon you . JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,96.8

In the mean while and ever my best wishes and service attend you
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,96.9

and so rest Your most respectively loving daughter Judith Barrinton
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,96.10

Friday , October {COM:blank} JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,96.11

{COM:endorsed} To my most honored mother the Lady Barrington at Harrow
Hill this JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,96.12

<P_127>

<heading:edcomment:108_LADY_JUDITH_BARRINGTON_TO_MRS_NECTON,_28_JANUARY_1630>

Sweet Mrs Necton I hope you have receaved my former letter of my
intention now to be at Mr Martin's if all things may fall out
conveniently JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,127.15

and I have now directed thease unto you to begg I may now receave an
answear , because we intend to be in London on Tuseday or Wensday next ,
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,127.16

and I beseech you lett Mr Pahanesin know my husband will bringe up with
him a fine gelding for his frend , such as a frend may put into
another's hands ; JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,127.17

and withall lett him know , as the best entertainment I can give him ,
his mistres is well and joynes with me in all harty good wishes to him .
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,127.18

And so beging pardon for thease abrupt lines , which I am constrained to
hasten , with my affectionate love to {TEXT:missing_"to"} you and your
husband and my pretty godaughter I rest Yours faithfully to serve you
Judith Barrington JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,127.19

Hatfield , JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,127.20

28 January , 1629 {COM:old_style} JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,127.21

{COM:endorsed_f._268b}

To my much esteemed frend Mrs Necton in Aldersgate Street neer the Halfe
Moone tavern JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,127.23

<P_152>

<heading:edcomment:141_LADY_JUDITH_BARRINGTON,_N._D.,_MAY?_1630>

Madam I have noe hart to lett a frend soe neer us pass to you without
some few lines of my respects to you . JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,152.26

Whear I owe soe much , this is the least I can doe ,
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,152.27

and your lovinge care of my safety in our returne from London , with
your kinde letter , challenged my thankfulnes before now , as well as
the account to lett you kno I think we fared the better for your good
wishes , JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,152.28

for I see you wear mindfull of us . JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,152.29

And soe shall I be now to gett your gardin and all things to your
contentment against you please to do us the favour you have promised ,
which now draws on soe fast that our hopes grow stronge .
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,152.30

My daily prayers attend you that we may enjoye with health , which I am
confident this ayre will be no enemye to , JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,152.31

and I am sure you have many harts that doe attend for that good daye .
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,152.32

Mine must be in the first ranke JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,152.33

and shall ever dispose of me and my actions to render me Your most
respectively lovinge daughter to command Judith Barrington
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,152.34

Thursday JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,152.35

My sisters remember thear best services to you .
JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,152.36

{COM:endorsed_f._195b} To my most honored mother the Lady Barrington at
Harrow this JUBARRING-1630-E2-P2,152.37

