<BEGIN_judall-1590-e2-p2>

<P_1,171>

<heading>

<font> At the Assizes at <$$font> Croydon , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.4

<font> the 24th <$$font> July , 1590 . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.5

<$$heading>

Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> was called , and commanded to hold up his
Hand at the Bar ; who held up his Hand accordingly .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.7

Then was his Indictment read , being thus : <font> John Udall <$$font> ,
late of <font> London <$$font> Clerk , thou art indicted , <font> &c.
<$$font> The form of which Indictment was as against Murderers : namely
, That he not having the Fear of God before his Eyes , but being stirred
up by the instigation and motion of the Devil , did maliciously publish
a slanderous and infamous Libel against the Queen's Majesty , her Crown
and Dignity . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.8

And being asked whether he were Guilty , or not Guilty , he answered
thus : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.9

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , may it please you to hear me a word
or two ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.10

<font> Judge Clarke . <$$font> Answer first to the Indictment ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.11

and then you shall be heard . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.12

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , I beseech you hear me first a word
or twain . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.13

<font> Judge . <$$font> Say on . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.14

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Case is rare , and such as hath not been
heard of heretofore , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.15

and consisteth upon divers points of Law ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.16

I humbly crave of your Lordships to grant me to answer by Counsel , if
it may be . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.17

<font> Judge Clarke . <$$font> You can@ @not have it ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.18

and therefore answer to your Indictment . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.19

<font> Udall . <$$font> Then I answer <paren> my Lords <$$paren> , that
I am not Guilty . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.20

<font> Judge Clarke . <$$font> How wilt thou be tried ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.21

<font> Udall . <$$font> I do desire to be tried by an Inquest of
learned Men ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.22

but seeing I shall not , I am contented to be tried by the ordinary
Course , as these Men before me are , that is <paren> as you use to say
<$$paren> by God and the Country . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.23

Then the Clerk of the Assizes said to the Parties arraigned , <paren>
after he had read the Names of the Jury before them <$$paren> These Men
whose Names you have heard , are to go upon your Lives and your Deaths ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.24

look upon them when they are called to be sworn ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.25

and if you know any Cause , take exception against them .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.26

Then the rest of the Felons having nothing to say , Mr. <font> Udall
<$$font> said , My Lords , I am ignorant of the Law in this Point ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.27

I pray you therefore shew me the manner of Challenging the Jury ; how
many I may challenge , and whether I may render a Reason of the same .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.28

<font> Judge . <$$font> I think you will know a Cause in your
Conscience , before you challenge any of them .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.29

<font> Udall . <$$font> Then I pray you , my Lord , how many am I by
Law permitted to challenge ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.30

<font> Judge . <$$font> Nay , I am not to tell you that ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.31

I sit to judge , and not to give you counsel .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.32

Then Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> keeping silence , Proclamation was made
according to the manner : That if any Man could give in Evidence against
<font> John Udall <$$font> , Prisoner at the Bar , that they should come
into the Court and be heard . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.33

Then Mr. <font> Daulton <$$font> stood up : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.34

And in the mean while Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> said to the Judges thus
; My Lords , I beseech you answer me to one question before Mr. <font>
Daulton <$$font> begins to speak . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.35

<font> Judge . <$$font> Say on . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.36

<font> Udall . <$$font> Is it permitted me by Law to answer to those
things in particular , which are brought to prove this Indictment ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.37

<font> Judge . <$$font> It is permitted . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.38

<font> Udall . <$$font> Then I humbly crave of your Lordships to grant
me two Petitions , which I think will greatly further both him in
speaking , me in answering , and also be a more ready help to the memory
of the Jury , that they may be able to bear the matter away .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.39

<font> Judge . <$$font> What are your Petitions ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.40

<font> Udall . <$$font> The first is , that when Mr. <font> Daulton
<$$font> hath spoken to one Point what he can , I may answer to that
before he proceed any further , lest my Memory being overwhelmed with
multitude of matter , I should forget to answer to some Points of
Importance , and the Jury made less able to discern of the Particulars .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.41

The second is , that it might please you to grant me to answer without
Interruption . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.42

<font> Judge . <$$font> You shall have them both granted .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.43

<font> Dault. <$$font> Then Mr. <font> Daulton <$$font> said , Mr.
<font> Udall <$$font> , you have these petitions granted you ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.44

I desire the same of you . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.45

And then he desiring leave of the Judges , before he should prove the
Indictment , to say something touching this , that this Man , and such
as he is , do maintain , <font> &c. <$$font> JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.46

After leave given him , he used a very long Speech , to the great
disgrace and slander of the Cause , and those Men that professed the
same , especially of Mr. <font> Udall : <$$font>
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,171.47

and making mention in the same his Speech , of five several Books of
Common-Prayer , made by such as desire Reformation ; he affirmed , that
in one of the said Books there was a horrible Blasphemy , in these words
of the Consecration <P_1,172> of the Lord's Supper , <font> Take ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.48

eat , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.49

this is my Body ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.50

drink , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.51

this is my Blood . <$$font> JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.52

Then he cried out , saying , <font> Oh horrible Blasphemy ! <$$font>
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.53

And taking occasion upon the variety of these Books , he affirmed that
there was no constancy in these Men : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.54

And whereas one of the Books doth allow , that over every Congregation
there should be a faithful Pastor ; that is , quoth he , a Shepherd ,
whereby they may take the Government out of her Majesty's hand , and so
bring her Majesty to be one of their Sheep ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.55

no , quoth he , her Majesty is no Sheep under any Shepherd in the World
, except Christ : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.56

and for the Government that these Men do seek for , I am assured there
is none such to be found in the Word of God .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.57

<font> Udall . <$$font> Mr. <font> Daulton <$$font> hath used a very
large Speech , which doth nothing concern to prove the Indictment , or
me in particular ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.58

and therefore seeing I am not called hither to dispute <paren> as if I
would , I should not be permitted <$$paren> I will not answer it ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.59

only thus much will I say <paren> if it please your Lordships <$$paren>
that seeing Mr. <font> Daulton <$$font> is by Profession a Lawyer , and
the Cause is yet in question amongst the learned Divines , me@ @thinks
it had been more modesty for Mr. <font> Daulton <$$font> to have
suspended his Judgment until the Controversy had been determined amongst
them , to whose Profession it belongeth : especially seeing Mr. <font>
Daulton <$$font> knoweth in his Conscience , that he hath heretofore
carried some shew of liking to the Cause , which now he speaketh against
. JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.60

<font> Judge . <$$font> Sirrah , Sirrah , answer to the matter that Mr.
<font> Daulton <$$font> hath against you ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.61

Mr. <font> Daulton <$$font> , proceed to the proof of the points of the
Indictment . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.62

<font> Dault. <$$font> My Masters , you of the Jury , <font> &c.
<$$font> I will prove , First , That he had a malicious Intent in making
of this Book : Secondly , that he is the Author of it : And Thirdly ,
That these matters contained in the Indictment are Felony , by the
Statute <font> Eliz. <$$font> 23 . <font> cap. <$$font> 2 .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.63

Then was Mr. <font> Beadle <$$font> the Register called , who was sworn
, that these Examinations following were as the Parties themselves
confessed the same : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.64

And to prove the first , the Clerk of the Assizes caused <font> Stephen
Chatfield <$$font> to be called into the Court , to give in Evidence
against <font> John Udall <$$font> ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.65

but he appeared not at all , for which the Judges were offended ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.66

and Serjeant <font> Puckering <$$font> said , there was a Warrant sent
for him : whereupon some standing by affirmed , that the Warrant came
after his departure from home . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.67

Then Mr. <font> Daulton <$$font> said , that he went out of the way of
purpose ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.68

and Judge <font> Clarke <$$font> said , Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> , you
are glad of that . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.69

Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> answered ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.70

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , I wish heartily he had been here ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.71

for as I am sure he never could say any thing against me to prove this
point , so I have heard and am able to prove it to be true , that he is
very sorry that ever he made any complaint against me , confessing he
did it in his Anger , when <font> Martin <$$font> came first out ; and
by their Suggestions , whom he hath proved since by Experience to be
very bad Men . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.72

<font> Daulton <$$font> It is no great matter whether he be here or no ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.73

for we have his Articles against you , and your own Confession , to
prove this point sufficiently . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.74

Then were Mr. <font> Chatfield <$$font> 's Articles <paren> that he
brought to the Archbishop against Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> <$$paren>
read by the Clerk , containing a Report of certain written Papers ;
tending , as he supposed , to the making of such a Book as this is :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.75

and thereupon asked Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> whose writing they were ;
who answered , they are a Friend's of mine : whereunto <font> Chatfield
<$$font> replied , wishing him to take heed of them , and to rid his
hands of them , and to return them to his Friend from whom he had them ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.76

for he doubted they concerned the State . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.77

These Papers he saw in Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> 's Study at <font>
Kingston <$$font> . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.78

Also he further saith , that at another time , he having conferred with
Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> in a certain Field by <font> Kingston
<$$font> , called <font> Little-field <$$font> , about this putting to
silence ; he saith , that the said Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> uttered
these words , That if they put him to silence , he would give the
Bishops such a Blow , as they never had . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.79

<font> Udall . <$$font> May it please your Lordships that I may answer
to these things in particular ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.80

<font> Judge . <$$font> Say on , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.81

let us hear your answer . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.82

<font> Udall . <$$font> I was accused this time two Years upon the
words of <font> Chatfield <$$font> , that these Papers that he did see
in my Study , should be the matter of <font> Martin-Mar-Prelate <$$font>
; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.83

and because I cleared my self of that , it is now brought to prove
another matter : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.84

but it proveth nothing , unless it were set down in particular what they
were . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.85

<font> Dault. <$$font> It proveth this , that you had a purpose to
write this Book ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.86

and those things were Collections from your Friends , and Preparations
thereunto . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.87

<font> Udall . <$$font> Let the Jury consider how that Point is prov'd
by it . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.88

Besides , it may be prov'd , that this Book was extant in Men's hands
before the Conference between <font> Chatfield <$$font> and me ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.89

therefore how can it be prov'd that this is the Book that should give
them such a Blow ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.90

<font> Dault. <$$font> But you can@ @not deny the second Point , that
you had a pretended Malice , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.91

for it is extant in your own Confession : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.92

Read his Answer to those Articles of Mr. <font> Chatfield <$$font> .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.93

Then the Clerk read his Answer to this effect , That if the Bishops put
him to silence , they would give him Occasion and Leisure to be imployed
in writing against them . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.94

Then said Mr. <font> Daulton <$$font> , Is not this most evident ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.95

what can be plainer than it is ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.96

<font> Udall . <$$font> I pray your Lordships give me leave to explain
these things . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.97

<font> Judge . <$$font> Say on , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.98

and be brief . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.99

<font> Udall . <$$font> Mr. <font> Chatfield <$$font> told me , that
he was commanded to come to <font> Kingston <$$font> and be resident
there , of purpose that I might be put to silence , and that there might
not appear any want of a Preacher , I being put down ; whereupon I said
, in effect , as is above rehearsed : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.100

But I pray you hear in what sense these words were uttered .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.101

<font> Judge . <$$font> The Matter is clear ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.102

and we see what you can say to it well enough ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.103

proceed , Mr. <font> Daulton <$$font> , to the Proof of the second
Point . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.104

<font> Dault. <$$font> And that you be the Author of this slanderous
and infamous Libel , it shall be proved clearly to the Jury before your
face . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.105

Then said he to the Clerk , Read the Answer of <font> Nicholas Thompkins
<$$font> , which was made upon his Oath before her Majesty's
High-Commissioners . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.106

Then was read to this effect , that <font> Thompkins <$$font> knew that
Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> was the Author of that Book call'd <font> The
Demonstration <$$font> , for he said that Mr. <font> Udall <$$font>
himself told him so . Also that he saw either in Mr. <font> Udall
<$$font> 's House , or in some other Place in <font> Kingston <$$font> ,
a Catalogue of all the Books that Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> had made ,
amongst which <font> The Demonstration <$$font> was one .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.107

<font> Judge . <$$font> You see here that this is clear , and a
sufficient Testimony . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.108

<font> Udall . <$$font> It carried some shew ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.109

but it is nothing . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.110

<font> Judge . <$$font> Do you call the Testimony of one being an
honest Man , and upon his Oath , before the High-Commissioners , to be
nothing ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.111

Can you answer it ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,172.112

<P_1,173>

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , I answer it thus , denying it to be
his Testimony ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.114

for if it be , why is he not present to verify it face to face ,
according to the Law ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.115

<font> Judge Puck. <$$font> It is verified to be his true answer ,
under the hands of Dr. <font> Auberie <$$font> and Dr. <font> Lewen
<$$font> , the latter whereof confirmed it before me upon his corporal
Oath . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.116

<font> Dault. <$$font> You can take no Exceptions against that ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.117

and will you say he is not an honest Man ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.118

<font> Udall . <$$font> I am persuaded he was amazed , and answered he
knew not what : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.119

for he hath reported it so diversly , that it seemeth he remembreth not
what he said . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.120

<font> Judge . <$$font> But the Oath of <font> Thompkins <$$font> is to
be preferred before his Report . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.121

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , I answer ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.122

I protest unto you , <paren> and will verify it upon my Oath , if it
please you <$$paren> that he told me the day before I was committed , at
his Master's House , that he could not say , neither would he for
a_thousand Pounds affirm any more than this , that he heard me say I
would not doubt but set my Name to that Book if I might have indifferent
Judges . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.123

And further <paren> if it please you , my Lords <$$paren> here are some
Witnesses that upon their Oaths will testify , how diversly he hath
reported of his Confession to this thing , if it please your Lordships
to accept them . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.124

And the Witnesses offering themselves to be heard , were answered , that
because their Witness was against the Queen's Majesty , they could not
be heard . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.125

And after other Speeches passing , Mr. <font> Udall . <$$font> said
{COM:sic} ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.126

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , the Speech of the Catalogue is most
vain , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.127

and hath no Sense in it ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.128

for can I have made so many Books , as that I need make a Catalogue of
them ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.129

It may be , my Lords , he saw a Catalogue of the Books in my Study ,
wherein if that were one , it is rather an Argument that I made it not ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.130

for Men use not to put their own Works in the Catalogue of those that
they have in their Study . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.131

<font> Dault. <$$font> You of the Jury consider this , that <font>
Thompkins <$$font> was Mrs. <font> Crane <$$font> 's Man , and one that
was privy to all the Printing that was at her House ; and Mr. <font>
Udall <$$font> used to go often thither . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.132

<font> Udall . <$$font> All that is nothing to me :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.133

what if I used to go thither , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.134

she is of my Acquaintance , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.135

I know her to be an honest Gentlewoman ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.136

what can you gather by any of these things ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.137

Why is not <font> Thompkins <$$font> here to declare his Testimony , and
to say what he can ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.138

<font> Dault. <$$font> He is beyond the Seas about Merchandizes , sent
away by Mr. <font> Gore <$$font> , who married Mrs. <font> Crane
<$$font> 's Daughter . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.139

<font> Udall . <$$font> How doth that appear ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.140

He is no Merchant , but a Serving-Man ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.141

and if he were , what is that to me ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.142

But it can@ @not be proved that Mr. <font> Gore <$$font> did send him ,
so that here is nothing but bare Papers to shew for Evidence against me
. JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.143

Then there was much said , to prove that the Testimony of a Man absent
was sufficient , if it were proved to be his upon the Oaths of others .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.144

And then the Judge said , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.145

<font> Judge . <$$font> What say you ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.146

Did you make the Book , <font> Udall <$$font> , yea or no ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.147

What say you to it , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.148

will you be sworn ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.149

Will you take your Oath that you made it not ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.150

We will offer you that Favour which never any indicted of Felony had
before ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.151

take your Oath , and swear you did it not , and it will suffice .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.152

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , I pray you hear me to this :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.153

If I would have done so before the Lords of her Majesty's Privy-Council
that committed me , I had not come hither ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.154

but I neither then might , nor may do so now , whereof I pray you let me
shew a Reason to the Jury . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.155

I and many more do think the Book to be good , for any thing we can find
in it , and to be written in defence of a Cause which we take to be most
true . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.156

Now the Author is sought for , that he may be punished for some Speeches
that may be wrested in the Book ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.157

therefore lest he should be found <paren> if one after another that are
suspected do deny it <$$paren> it is thought best every one neither to
confess nor to deny , yea altho' we suffer some Punishment , rather than
the Author , being found out , should suffer Extremity .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.158

<font> Judge . <$$font> Nay , this is but a shift ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.159

I will go further with you ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.160

Will you but say upon your Honesty that you made it not ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.161

and you shall see what shall be said unto you ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.162

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , it is all one ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.163

I make a Conscience of my Word as of my Oath ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.164

for I must give account for both . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.165

This is no direct Course in this Place . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.166

<font> Judge . <$$font> You of the Jury consider this .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.167

This argueth , that if he were not guilty , he would clear himself ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.168

and consider well of it . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.169

And then speaking to Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> , he said , Do not stand
in it , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.170

but confess it , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.171

and submit your self to the Queen's Mercy , before the Jury find you
guilty . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.172

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lord , I answer , that according to my
Indictment I am not guilty , every Point whereof must be proved ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.173

or else the whole is false . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.174

And I beseech your Lordships give me leave , and I will be very brief :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.175

My Conscience doth not accuse me that I have so much as offended her
Majesty , her Council , or the meanest of her People in any thing I have
done concerning this Cause ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.176

for if I should , of all other I deserved the least Favour , being one
that professed to teach others Loyalty to her Majesty , and Love to one
another : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.177

and would you have me to confess a Fault where there is none ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.178

No , I can@ @not do it , neither will I : wherefore proceed in your
Course begun . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.179

<font> Dault. <$$font> We have more Proof than this , tho' yet this
were sufficient of itself ; wherefore read the other Examinations .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.180

Then was read the Confession of <font> Henry Sharpe <$$font> of <font>
Northampton <$$font> , who upon his Oath , before my Lord Chancellor ,
had said , that he heard Mr. <font> Penry <$$font> say , that Mr.
<font> Udall <$$font> was the Author of <font> The Demonstration
<$$font> . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.181

<font> Udall . Sharpe <$$font> and I were never above once in Company
together <paren> to my remembrance <$$paren> ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.182

neither knew he ever any of my Dealings . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.183

This is nothing to prove me the Author of the Book :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.184

Reports be uncertain ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.185

and if Reports be true , the Archbishop himself told me , that Mr.
<font> Penry <$$font> made it ; which is more forcible for me than any
of <font> Sharpe <$$font> 's Reports can be against me .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.186

<font> Dault. <$$font> You mistake the Matter ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.187

the force of the Point resteth in Mr. <font> Penry <$$font> 's Report ,
who was one of your great Acquaintances and Familiars ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.188

and you , and <font> Waldgrave <$$font> , and he , were at Mrs. <font>
Crane <$$font> 's House . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.189

<font> Udall . <$$font> Here is one Man's saying that another said so ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.190

let the Jury consider of what force this Proof is ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.191

if you have any more , let it appear . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.192

<font> Judge Clarke . <$$font> You of the Jury have not to enquire
whether he be guilty of the Felony , but whether he be the Author of the
Book ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.193

for it is already set down by the Judgment of all the Judges in the Land
, that whosoever was Author of the Book , was guilty by the Statute of
Felony , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.194

and this is declared above half a year agone .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,173.195

<P_1,174>

<font> Udall . <$$font> Tho' it be so determined already , yet I pray
your Lordships give me leave to shew that which I have to say , and I
will be very brief ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.197

and it is to prove , that tho' I were found to be the Author , yet it
can@ @not be within the Compass of the Statute , <font> Anno <$$font> 23
<font> Eliz. cap. <$$font> 2 . whereupon the Indictment is framed .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.198

<font> Judge . <$$font> You shall be heard to say for yourself what you
can , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.199

therefore say on . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.200

<font> Udall . <$$font> Tho' I be not by Profession a Lawyer , yet I
think I can shew it clearly by these Reasons following :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.201

<paren> 1 . <$$paren> The intent of the Law-makers <paren> which always
is to be regarded in these Cases <$$paren> is to be considered , which
appeareth in the Preface of the Statute in these words , <font> To
frustrate the Malice of those that be evil-affected to her Highness
<$$font> . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.202

Now I pray you consider this JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.203

how can it be ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.204

or how is it possible that a Preacher , of the same Religion which her
Majesty professeth and maintaineth , who is known continually to pray
unto God for her Highness's Prosperity and Happiness , both of Soul and
Body ; how is it possible , I say , that such a one should be
maliciously affected towards her ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.205

Therefore it is evident that the Statute was made against the Papists ,
who use to slander her Highness with the Terms of Heretick , <font> &c.
<$$font> and no way against us ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.206

for I dare boldly say of my self , and in the name of all my Brethren ,
Cursed is he of God , and he deserveth doubtless to be hated of Men ,
that doth imagine the least hurt against her Highness .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.207

<paren> 2 . <$$paren> The Matter that maketh a Man a Felon by that
Statute , must proceed from a malicious Intent against her Highness ,
which I or any such as I am can no way justly be charged with ; partly
for that which is said before , and partly for that my Course of
teaching and living in this Country these nine years <paren> saving this
last Year , wherein I have been absent <$$paren> is known to have tended
to no other end , than the provoking and persuading of the People to
like and yield Obedience unto her Majesty , and the Religion received in
her Dominions : for the Proof whereof , I refer my self to the
Consciences of all Men in the Country that have known me .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.208

And further , is it likely , that I who have been trained up in the
Universities under her Majesty's Protection , and have always bended my
Studies to the Advancement of the Sincerity of the Gospel ; so that
those small Crumbs of Learning which I have gathered , I do acknowledge
to have received by her Majesty's means : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.209

These things considered , how can it be that I should be evil-affected
towards her Highness , whom I protest I unfeignedly reverence ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.210

And therefore the worst that the Author can be charged withal , is his
Over-heat and too much Vehemency , by reason of his Zeal against the
Abuses , and not any Malice against her Majesty , or the meanest of her
Subjects . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.211

Again , the Matter , to bring it within the Compass of the Statute ,
must be false : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.212

But this Book is written in the behalf of a most true Cause .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.213

Lastly , The End of it must be either to the Defamation of the Queen's
Majesty , or stirring up of Insurrection , Sedition , or Rebellion :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.214

For the former , I trust that the whole Course of our Behaviour , both
in our Ministry and Conversation , declareth it self to be so far from
seeking to defame her Highness , as it tendeth , to the uttermost of our
Powers , to the Advancement of her Honour . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.215

For I am persuaded that there is none of us that would refuse to undergo
any Pain , whereby her Majesty might any way be the better honoured ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.216

yea , we would not refuse , if need so required , to lay down our Lives
for redeeming of the least aking of her Majesty's little Finger ,
wherewith she might be grieved . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.217

Now for the second End , which is the moving or stirring up of Rebellion
, <font> &c. <$$font> I pray your Lordships , and you of the Jury to
consider this : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.218

There have been , since the first day of her Majesty's Reign , learned
Men , that have desired the Advancement of this Cause , and many of the
People that affected it , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.219

and yet hath it never appeared , that by Occasion hereof , there hath in
all this time been any in any Place that have raised any Insurrection or
Sedition : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.220

yea this Book , which is now in question , hath been extant these two
years ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.221

yet I trust neither your Lordships , nor any here present can shew that
any People in any Corner of the Land , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.222

nay it can@ @not be justly proved that any one Person hath taken any
occasion hereby to enterprize any such matter :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.223

and therefore the making of this Book can@ @not be Felony .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.224

Besides all this , if there had been any such thing meant by the Author
, or received by the People , as the Indictment chargeth me withal ,
<paren> which is the Defamation of her Highness's Government <$$paren>
yet , as I take it , it should not be Felony by that Statute ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.225

for the whole Course of it declareth , that it is only meant of them
that defame her Highness's Person , and not her Government , as it is
manifest by the last Proviso ; wherein it is shewed , that the whole
Statute doth determine and end with her Majesty's Life .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.226

And we may not think their Wisdoms that made the Law to be so unadvised
, as to make a Law for the Preservation of the Prince's Government ,
which is continual , to last no longer than the Life of one Prince ,
which is temporary : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.227

therefore it seemeth that the Statute hath no further regard than this ,
that her Highness's Person might be preserved in that Honour and Dignity
, which becometh her Royal Dignity and Estate .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.228

And I do beseech your Lordships to answer me ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.229

for I appeal to your Consciences , as you will answer to God for my Life
; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.230

and I pray you tell the Jury , whether you do think the Intent of the
Statute were in any sort meant against us , and not rather against the
Papists . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.231

<font> Judge Puck. <$$font> Judge <font> Puckering <$$font> said , You
do not well to charge us so with our Consciences , which God only is to
know . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.232

I answer you , the Intent of the Statute is against all ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.233

for so the words are . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.234

<font> Udall . <$$font> The words , my Lord , I confess are so ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.235

but is the principal Intent so ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.236

<font> Judge . <$$font> Yes , it is so . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.237

<font> Judge Clarke . <$$font> We have heard you speak for your self to
this Point at large , which is nothing to excuse you ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.238

for you can@ @not excuse your self to have done it with a malicious
Intent against the Bishops , and that exercising their Government which
the Queen hath appointed them , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.239

and so it is by consequence against the Queen .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.240

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , I am persuaded the Author did it not
of any Malice against them ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.241

and for my self , I protest I wish them as much good as I do to my own
Soul , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.242

and will pray to God to give them Repentance .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.243

But the Cause why the Author did so earnestly inveigh against them was
this , as it seemeth , because he perceived them not only to execute an
Authority which he taketh to be unlawful by the Word of God , but also
for that they do not the tenth part of that good <paren> even in those
corrupt Callings <$$paren> which by Law they might do ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.244

and I am persuaded that your Lordships know in your own Consciences ,
that they do not the tenth part of that they are bound to do .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,174.245

<P_1,175>

<font> Judge Clarke . <$$font> That is true ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.247

they do not the good that they might do ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.248

but yet that doth not excuse you : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.249

for it is plain in your Book , that you writ not against them only , but
you writ against the State ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.250

for is it not against the State , when you say , that it is easier to
live in <font> England <$$font> a Papist , an Anabaptist , of the Family
of Love , and what not ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.251

Yea , you say , I could live so in a Bishop's House , it may be these
twenty years , and never be much molested for it .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.252

What is this but a plain slandering of the State ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.253

And mark the words , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.254

for you say , you could live so in <font> England : <$$font>
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.255

And doth her Majesty's Laws allow of Papists ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.256

This maketh evidently against you , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.257

and it is so plain that you can@ @not deny it .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.258

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , if it might please you to hear me a
word or two , I will shew the meaning of the Author of the Book ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.259

I beseech you to hear me , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.260

and I will be very brief : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.261

I know the Laws of <font> England <$$font> do not allow of any such are
mentioned in the Book , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.262

for there are godly Laws made for the punishing of them , if they were
put in execution . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.263

But this I take to be the Author's Meaning : That it is not spoken in
respect of her Majesty's Government and Laws , but in respect of the
Bishops , whom your Lordships know to be wholly imployed in finding us
out , and punishing of us , not regarding <paren> in a manner <$$paren>
the punishing any Sin else . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.264

<font> Judge . <$$font> What , Sirrah , will you not confess any Fault
to be in the Book ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.265

You seek to excuse all . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.266

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , I do acknowledge that there was
never any Work of Man so perfect , but there have been imperfections in
the same ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.267

and therefore there may be some fault in the Manner , but surely none in
the Matter : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.268

for the Bishops themselves will confess that they may fail in their
Actions , and be partial <paren> as they are Men <$$paren> in the manner
of handling any thing . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.269

So also the Author of this Book being assured that the Matter is without
reproof , may err in the Manner , being over-zealous in the handling of
it ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.270

and this fault I will easily confess to be in the Book , my Lord :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.271

but I am sure the Author never had any malicious Intent against her
Highness , or any of her Subjects . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.272

<font> Judge Clarke . <$$font> This Book hath made you to come within
the Compass of the Statute , tho' your Intent were not so :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.273

for I am sure there was Mr. <font> Stubbs <$$font> , well known to
divers here , to be a good Subject and an honest Man ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.274

yet taking upon him to write a Book against her Majesty touching <font>
Mounseir <$$font> , he thereby came within the Compass of Law , which he
intended not in making of the Book ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.275

and I am persuaded , that he did it of a good affection towards her
Majesty ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.276

and yet if this Law had been made then , which was made since , he had
died for it : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.277

So you , tho' you intended not to come within the compass of the Statute
, yet the Law reacheth to your Fact , as that did to us .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.278

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , his Case and mine is not alike ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.279

for his Book concerned her Highness's Person ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.280

but the Author of this Book toucheth only the Corruptions of the Bishops
, and therefore not the Person of her Majesty .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.281

<font> Judge . <$$font> But I will prove this book to be against her
Majesty's Person ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.282

for her Majesty being the supreme Governor of all Persons and Causes in
these her Dominions , hath established this kind of Government in the
hands of the Bishops , which thou and thy Fellows so strive against ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.283

and they being set in Authority for the exercising of this Government by
her Majesty , thou dost not strive against them , but her Majesty's
Person , seeing they can@ @not alter the Government which the Queen hath
laid upon them . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.284

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , we are not ignorant of this , that
her Majesty hath a care that all things might be well ; and in that
respect hath given them often in charge , <paren> upon the
Considerations of these Controversies <$$paren> to see to it that
nothing be amiss ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.285

and because she had a good Opinion of them for their Gravity and
Learning , she believeth them when they say all is well and in good case
: whereas , if they had the Grace to look into these things , and to
make them known as they be , indeed her Majesty and the State , I doubt
not , would quickly redress them ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.286

and therefore was it that the Author did so charge them .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.287

Then the Judge proceeding farther in the Book to prove him to have
offended ; he took occasion by the same to speak against railing against
Magistrates ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.288

and speaking to Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> , he said in effect thus :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.289

<font> Judge Clarke . <$$font> Sirrah , you that should have been a
Teacher of her Majesty's People , you should have taught your self not
to have railed upon the Rulers of the People :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.290

for do you not know what is written in the 23d of <font> Exodus ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.291

Thou shalt not rail upon the Rules of the People ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.292

for whosoever doth so shall die the death <$$font> .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.293

And do you not know what is written in the 23d of <font> Acts <$$font> ,
where the Apostle <font> Paul <$$font> being before the High-Priest ,
called him a <font> painted Wall <$$font> ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.294

and being smitten by one of the High-Priest Servants , it was said unto
him , <font> Revilest thou the Lord's High-Priest ? <$$font> To which
<font> Paul <$$font> answered , <font> I knew not , Brethren , that he
was the High-Priest <$$font> . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.295

Lo ! thus did he acknowledge his Fault : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.296

Do you know these things , Sirrah ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.297

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lord , you know that we hold it not lawful
for a Minister to be a Civil Magistrate , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.298

and there are at least 500 in this Land , amongst whom I am the most
unworthy , that are of the same Judgment in this Point .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.299

<font> Judge . <$$font> But how if the Queen doth give it to them ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.300

<font> Udall . <$$font> They ought not to take it .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.301

And , my Lord <paren> if it please you <$$paren> , I will answer to your
Proofs , altho' I came not hither to dispute .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.302

But in my answering , my purpose is not to give any liberty to any Man
to rail upon any that are in Authority . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.303

Now to your Proofs : I say , my Lords , that the place out of <font>
Exod. <$$font> 23 , doth rather concern your Lordships , and such as
are under her Majesty for Judges , than any way to concern the Bishops :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.304

And touching the second place out of <font> Acts <$$font> 23 , where the
Apostle saith , <font> Brethren , I wist not that it was the High-Priest
: <$$font> the meaning of that Place is , as if he should say , I
thought there had not been any High-Priest now , seeing Christ being
come , the High Priesthood was to cease : so that the Apostle doth not
acknowledge any Fault in that his Speech , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.305

for there was no lawful High-Priest of that time ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.306

neither did he acknowledge any , seeing they did end in Christ .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.307

And thus do the best Divines expound the Place .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.308

Then , after some farther Speeches of this Exposition , the Judge
returned to the matter of the Book again , saying , That the Book did
concern the State , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.309

and said : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.310

<font> Judge . <$$font> But , Sirrah , thou canst not so excuse thy
self , as though it touched not the Queen and the State ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,175.311

for is it not written in thy Book , that this Saying will not serve
their turns , The Queen and Council will have it <P_1,176> so ? whereby
it is plain , that thou didst speak against the Queen and the State .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.312

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lord , the Author only meaneth this , That
when we are called before the Bishops , they were often driven to use
this Argument <paren> when they had nothing else to say for themselves
<$$paren> , that they could be content many things were amended ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.313

but it must be so , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.314

for the Queen and Council will have it so : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.315

And surely herein me@ @thinks they slander her Highness ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.316

and we tell them , that however they bear it out here before Men , yet
before God that Excuse will not serve their turn .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.317

<font> Judge . <$$font> Thou canst not carry it away so :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.318

Dost not thou plainly say , That they are not safe , tho' they have
human Authority on their side ; but he that is on our side is mightier
than they ? Whereby thou both abasest her Majesty , and also dost
threaten them with some Force and Violence .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.319

<font> Udall . <$$font> It is true , that whosoever doth unjustly is
not safe in it , tho' all the Princes in the world should defend him in
it ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.320

and that is the Meaning of the Author : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.321

But to say , that Force and Violence is threatned them , is farthest
doubtless from this Meaning ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.322

for it is known to all the World , that we desire , by all good means ,
to commend this holy Cause of Reformation to her Majesty and the State ,
and do not look for neither , that ever it should by any force prevail ,
but that it would please God to honour her Highness with the advancement
of the same . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.323

<font> Judge . <$$font> No , no , these are but Excuses ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.324

these malicious Speeches proceeded from thee ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.325

and were the Ground-work of all these Libels that have been dispersed
since , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.326

and thou art known to be the Ring-leader of this Faction .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.327

<font> Udall . <$$font> There is no reason to charge me with other
Men's doings , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.328

every Man must answer for himself ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.329

but as for me <paren> alas ! <$$paren> , I am no body :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.330

there are five_hundred Ministers in this Land of my judgement in these
things , the meanest of which I acknowledge to be far better learned
than I am . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.331

But by the way , my Lords , I pray your Lordships give me leave to say
one thing , which I being about to speak of before , was interrupted ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.332

and therefore seeing now it cometh into my Memory , I pray you to hear
me , tho' it be out of time , concerning the Felony whereof I am accused
; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.333

it maketh greatly for me . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.334

<font> Judge . <$$font> What is it ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.335

Let us hear what you can say . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.336

<font> Udall . <$$font> When I was before the Lords of her Majesty's
Council at the time of my Commitment , amongst other things that I
alledged against the taking of an Oath to accuse my self , I said , that
the thing was accounted criminal , and therefore by Law I was not to
answer : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.337

My Lord <font> Anderson <$$font> said , that I said true , if the case
had concerned either the loss of Life or Limb ; whereby it is manifest ,
that then my Case was not esteemed Felony . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.338

<font> Judge . <$$font> Tho' the Judges had not then concluded it , yet
it was Law before , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.339

or else it could not so be determined after ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.340

the violent course of others since , hath caused your Case to be more
narrowly sifted . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.341

Then the Judge <paren> having spoken to the like effect also <$$paren>
said to the Jury , That they should not need to trouble themselves to
find him Guilty of the Felony , but only it was sufficient if they found
him Guilty to be the Author of the Book : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.342

for , quoth he , it is already determined by all the Judges of the Land
, that the Author of that Book was in the compass of the Statute of
Felony ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.343

and this , quoth he , was concluded before we came hither :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.344

Therefore you being ignorant of the Law , and we being sworn , as well
as you are , you are to hear us , and to take our exposition of the Law
. JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.345

And after many other Speeches , the Judges said , Go thy way ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.346

we will hear thee no longer , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.347

get thee hence ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.348

and shaking his Hand , he called for the other Felons to hear their
Causes . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.349

Then the Jury said , What can we find ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.350

<font> Judge . <$$font> Find him Author of the Book ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.351

and leave the Felony to us . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.352

And after some other Speeches , Mr. <font> Fuller <$$font> said to the
Jury , You are to find him Author of the Book , and also guilty of a
malicious Intent in making it . Whereat Mr. <font> Daulton <$$font>
said , What have you to do with the matter , Mr. <font> Fuller <$$font>
, to speak to the Jury ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.353

Then there being some Noise at the Bar , Mr. <font> Udall <$$font>
could not any more be heard : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.354

Yet as he was ready to depart , he said to the Jury , You of the Jury ,
consider this , that you have not to consult about the Life of a
Seminary and Popish Priest , but of a Minister of the Gospel .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.355

Then Judge <font> Clarke <$$font> shewed the Reasons to the Jury , why
they must find him Guilty ; saying , The Evidences are manifest for the
first Point , that he is the Author of the Book ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.356

and the second is a Point in Law agreed upon by all the Judges , as I
have said . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.357

So the Jury , after they had heard the Evidences of the other Felons at
the Bar , departed to consult about them ; in which time of their
Consultation , there came two several Messages , exhorting him to submit
himself , and to yield unto the Judges before the Jury had given up
their Verdict . Unto whom Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> replied , willing
them not to trouble him with any such matter ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.358

for he was clear in his Conscience , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.359

and therefore he was not to accuse himself . In which time also the
Jury divers times sent and received Messages from the Judges ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.360

and at last , the Foreman of the Jury went himself unto them .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.361

Thus having debated of the Evidences of the rest of the Felons with Mr.
<font> Udall <$$font> , after the Judges had dined , the Jury brought in
their Verdict that he was guilty of Felony .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.362

After that Baron <font> Clarke <$$font> had finished all other matters
of Law , and that the Juries had given their Verdicts on the Felons ,
finding some Guilty , and some Not Guilty , the Judge commanded all the
Prisoners to stand forth and to answer to their Names : who did so .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.363

And first , Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> was called , who stood at the Bar
; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.364

but the Judge commanded him for that time to stand aside , saying , That
he would deal with him anon . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.365

Then some of the Prisoners which were saved by their Books , were burnt
in their Hands ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.366

and for that Night there was nothing more done .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.367

Then the Judge commanding the Jailor to bring the Prisoners betimes in
the morning , commanded them to depart : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.368

And so for that time every Man departed to his place .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.369

The next morning , being the 25th of <font> July <$$font> , about four
of the Clock , the Prisoners were brought to the Bar , who stayed till
the coming of the Judges : who came thither by six of the Clock , or
thereabouts , and called the Prisoners by their Names to receive
Sentence of Death : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,176.370

And first , they began with Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> ; who , after he
was called , was commanded to stand aside till <P_1,177> anon .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.371

And then were seven Felons that received Sentence of Death ; who being
taken aside , Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> was called the second time ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.372

and the Clerk of the Assizes said , <font> John Udall <$$font> , hold up
thy Hand , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.373

what canst thou alledge for thy self , why thou should'st not receive
Judgment to die ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.374

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , notwithstanding my earnest pleading
and protesting of mine Innocency yesterday , which I could and would
have done more clearly , but that I was so much interrupted ; yet it
hath pleased the Jury , upon their Consciences , to find me Guilty of
that , which , I thank God , never entered into my heart :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.375

Now therefore must I plead another Plea , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.376

and therefore I crave of your Lordships to grant me the Benefit of the
Pardon granted the last Parliament . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.377

<font> Judge . <$$font> I think you can have no Benefit of it ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.378

for I am deceived if it be not excepted . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.379

Then said he to the Clerk , or some other , Reach me the Statute-Book :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.380

And whilst he looked into the same , Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> said , I
pray your Lordships consider the Ground of my Plea , albeit indeed it
seems to be excepted : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.381

Your Lordships confessed yesterday , and I shewed it by my Lord <font>
Anderson <$$font> 's Speeches to me , that it was not thought Felony
until late ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.382

and therefore the things that be excepted , be such as be inquirable and
punishable in the Ecclesiastical Courts . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.383

<font> Judge . <$$font> That is nothing ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.384

for if the lesser be excepted , much rather is the greater .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.385

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , I refer it to your Consciences and
favourable Considerations : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.386

The Words are these in the Pardon , which he repeated :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.387

And they finding it to be as he had said , the Judge said , Here is no
help for you . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.388

And after other Speeches between them of the Meaning of the Words of the
Pardon , the Judge said , Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> , your Counsel hath
deceived you . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.389

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , I have not received any Counsel
herein , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.390

for I have been close Prisoner this half year ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.391

and therefore could not attain to have any Counsel ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.392

but thus much have I gathered , which is my Judgment , out of the Book .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.393

<font> Judge . <$$font> What can you alledge more for your self ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.394

for this helpeth you not . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.395

<font> Udall . <$$font> Nothing but mine own Innocency ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.396

but that your Lordships may roceed {COM:sic} .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.397

<font> Judge . <$$font> What say you ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.398

Are you contented to submit your self to the Queen ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.399

<font> Udall . <$$font> Yea , or else I were not worthy to live in her
Highness's Dominions . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.400

<font> Judge . <$$font> But will you acknowledge your self to have
offended her Majesty in making this Book ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.401

She is gracious and full of Mercy ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.402

it may be , that we , reporting your Submission unto her Majesty , may
procure her Pardon for you . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.403

<font> Udall . <$$font> May it please your Lordship to hear me ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.404

The Cause for which I am called in question , I can@ @not forsake in any
sort , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.405

for I hold it to be the undoubted Truth of God ; but , <font> &c.
<$$font> JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.406

And then he was interrupted by Judge <font> Puckering <$$font> , who
said : <font> Judge . <$$font> Nay , stay there ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.407

you can@ @not go away with that Speech unanswered , to buz into the
People's ears such a Conceit , that it is an undoubted Truth that you
hold ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.408

for I hold it to be an undoubted Falshood . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.409

And then he proceeded further in a large set Speech , the effect whereof
was , That this Land having been governed by sundry Nations , hath yet
kept her antient Laws , which <paren> he affirmed <$$paren> would be
overthrown , if this Government that these Men seek for , should be
established : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.410

And then he further shewed , What Inconveniencies <paren> as he thought
<$$paren> would come by the same , <font> viz. <$$font> That we having
Laws and Judges appointed to decide all Controversies , this Presbytery
which these Men seek for , would overthrow all , and bring to their
Censure and Government all Men's Causes , or else they would
excommunicate them from their Churches : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.411

yea , and they are so hot for this Government , that they will not stay
for the Magistrate ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.412

and if the Magistrate will not , they will reform themselves :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.413

and one of them writing in a Letter to a Friend of his , saith , Let us
number our hot Brethren , that we may know who will stand to it ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.414

for it is high time . So that it is plain , that if they can@ @not have
it with her Majesty's Consent , they will have it , tho' it make our
Hearts to ake , as you say in your Book . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.415

And whereas her Majesty hath Revenue belonging to her Crown out of the
Church-Livings and Cathedral Churches , these Men would have her Majesty
give unto those Revenues , for the Maintenance of their Presbytery ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.416

and they would allow her a Stipend at their Discretions ; so that they
would bring the Queen and Crown under their Girdles .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.417

And some of these men have gone so far , that they say plainly we have
no Church , no Sacrament , no Ministers , nor any Worship of God amongst
us . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.418

If these things be not look'd unto in time , what Confusion shall we
have in this Land shortly ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.419

Many other things he spake against the Cause of Reformation , which I
can@ @not particularly lay down ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.420

but this is in effect the Substance of it : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.421

concluding , he said , Thus much , Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> , have
your Speeches enforced me to speak , lest the People here present
<paren> being deceived <$$paren> should be carried away by it . To
which Mr. <font> Udall <$$font> answered briefly :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.422

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , it is bootless for me to enter
Disputation with you in this place touching this matter ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.423

only this I could wish you , to leave it to be first decided by the
learned Divines , to whose Calling it belongeth .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.424

And altho' some weak Men wanting judgment have been headily carried in
seeking the Furtherance of this Cause , and so for want of this
Government have run into some Errors : yet it is no reason to charge us
with them ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.425

for your Lordships know , that we have been the men that have taken the
greatest pains to reclaim them to the joining of themselves with the
Church , from which they have separated themselves .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.426

<font> Judge Clarke . <$$font> You are deceived ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.427

it is not a matter of Divinity only , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.428

but it is a matter of State , and within the compass of our Profession ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.429

and it is no so greatly in controversy , as you would have us to believe
it is . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.430

<font> Udall . <$$font> It is diversly debated <paren> my Lords
<$$paren> , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.431

and the greatest number of learned Men in Christendom do maintain the
same . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.432

<font> Judge . <$$font> How do you know that ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.433

Have you been beyond the Seas to know the greatest number of learned Men
to be of this Judgment ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.434

<font> Udall . <$$font> Your Lordships know , that all the Churches of
<font> France <$$font> , the <font> Low-Countries <$$font> , and of
<font> Scotland <$$font> , do maintain the same , besides many hundred
of learned Men in this Land . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.435

<font> Judge . <$$font> Have you been in all these Churches , that you
can tell so much ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.436

<font> Udall . <$$font> I know it to be true <paren> my Lords <$$paren>
, JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.437

for their Practice doth shew them to be of this Judgment .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.438

<font> Judge . <$$font> Well , if you can alledge no more , neither
will submit your self to the Queen's Mercy , then hear your Judgment .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,177.439

<P_1,178>

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , I was beginning to speak ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.441

but you interrupted me ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.442

I pray you hear me what I will say , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.443

and then do as God shall move you . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.444

<font> Judge . <$$font> Let us hear what you will say .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.445

<font> Udall . <$$font> As I said before , so I say now ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.446

I believe the Cause to be the undoubted Truth of God ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.447

and therefore in the Matter , I can@ @not by any means yield :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.448

yet seeing , by your order of Law , I am found to be guilty , neither
can I <paren> for the Reverence I bear to her Majesty's Laws <$$paren>
take any Exceptions against you nor the Jury ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.449

but that which you have done , I acknowledge to be done in all Equity
and Right . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.450

Seeing , I say , you have found me to be guilty , whereby I can@ @not
live without her Majesty's gracious and special Favour , I acknowledge ,
that whatsoever I have done to the advancement of the Cause , I may
offend in the Manner ; in which respect <paren> if I have offended
<$$paren> seeing it hath pleased your Lordships and the Jury to find me
guilty , I do willingly submit my self , and heartily crave her
Majesty's Pardon . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.451

<font> Judge . <$$font> But you are sorry that you have offended the
Queen's Majesty ? JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.452

<font> Udall . <$$font> I am sorry that the Course of the Law hath
found me to have offended . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.453

<font> Judge . <$$font> So is every Thief that is condemned sorry ,
that his Offence is found out , but not for the Fact .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.454

This is a plain Fallacy . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.455

<font> Udall {SIC:Judge} . <$$font> My Lord , indeed if it were so as
your Lordship doth understand it , it were a plain Fallacy ;
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.456

but I say farther , if in the Manner of handling so good a Cause , there
be found in me any Offence against her Majesty's Laws , I acknowledge ,
that in the Manner of handling it , her Majesty may be justly offended ,
for which I am sorry . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.457

And I protest that I have never gone about to advance it by any other
means , than by manifesting it to all Men , and tendering it to them in
Authority ; and that by such means as might not be contrary to the Laws
of this Land , that so it might be received by her Majesty and the State
: JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.458

and this is the Care of us all , howsoever we be charged with Factions .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.459

<font> Judge . <$$font> You say , if there be found any Offence ;
whereby you call in question the Equity of dealing in this Court against
you . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.460

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , I do not ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.461

neither will I ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.462

let it be looked into by you and the rest whom it concerneth ,
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.463

I hope you would not deal otherwise than lawfully against me .
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.464

<font> Judge Puck. <$$font> You say , you seek no unlawful Means :
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.465

What can it be meant but unlawful Means in the words of your Book ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.466

<font> If it come in by that Means that will make all your Hearts to ake
, blame your selves . <$$font> JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.467

What good Means can be meant by these Words ?
JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.468

<font> Udall . <$$font> My Lords , yesterday I shewed you what I took
to be the meaning of the Author in some places of the Book alledged
against me in the Indictment ; JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.469

and then I would have spoken unto all , JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.470

but you cut me off : JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.471

I pray you now therefore let me shew the Meaning of the Author in those
Words now . JUDALL-1590-E2-P2,1,178.472

