<BEGIN_kpaston-1625-e2-p2>

<P_73>

<heading:edcomment:43_LADY_KATHERINE_PASTON_TO_WILLIAM_PASTON_June_1624?>

To my beloued sonne William Paston these at Cambridge spede
KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.4

My good Will : the Lords blessinge be evermor upon the .
KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.5

I have receiued two letters from the this weeke with a booke , all which
are most wellcom to me : KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.6

I am glad to heer by good Mr. Roberts that thow hetherto haste demeaned
thyself well and as it is meet thow shouldest haue giuen good respect to
all ; KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.7

all good news of the , and from the , cheers me more then any thinge in
this world ; KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.8

and I know thow dost loue to haue me cheerly . KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.9

goe on still my good chilld in all well_doinge KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.10

and be then as mery as mery maye be : KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.11

Mr Parker I hope by this time haue delivered my letter and token to the
, KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.12

he was to be at Cambridge on munday or tusday last :
KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.13

I doe like that thow doest inditt thy owne letters thy selfe .
KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.14

for thow weart wont to know how to speake to me .
KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.15

and euen so wold I haue the wright . KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.16

and hetherto I doe like exedingly of them and of the well wrightinge of
them : KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.17

the use of wrightinge will perfict your hand very much :
KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.18

I am so strayted of time as I can not tary longer to talk with the now :
KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.19

but bid the farwell . besechinge god to keepe the in all thy ways now
and euermore KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.20

thy most louinge Mother Katherine Paston KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.21

at the Commencement I will send a beaver hat to the
KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.22

but I feare it will be to bigge ore to littell or too broad_verged or
sumthinge amis : | KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.23

but if it shold not doe Comly send it me then agayn - and I will send
for an other for the . KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.24

far@ @well and euermore well : KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.25

good will tell tom Hartstonge that I doe like well of his wrightinge .
KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.26

I wold haue written to him to put him in minde of sum things
KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.27

but I haue now no time : | KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.28

<heading:edcomment:44_LADY_KATHERINE_PASTON_TO_WILLIAM_PASTON_July_1624>

To my deerly beloued sonne William Paston these at Corpus Christy
Colledge at his chamber ther Cambridge KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.30

My good will : I pray our mercyfull god to blese and guide the , in all
thy ways words and works , to the glory of his own nam , thy sowlls
euerlastinge comfort and my Ioy : | KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,73.31

it is true that I haue receiued 6. of thy letters and bothe thow and I
haue wronge if thow hast not receiued 4. of mine . <P_74> besids this
, on by my Cosine Cook on by mr Parker . on by Iohnsons the Carier , on
by Cowell the Carier . this last munday or tusday :
KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.32

I hope thou hast had them all befor this : | KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.33

I doe send the a new sute of sattine to weare this comencment as allso a
payer of silke stokins poynts garters and shoe strings and a siluer
girdell , - sutable to weare with those things that are siluered
KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.34

good boy haue a great care to wear thy Clothes neat and Clean
KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.35

it is a great Comendation to se a yonge man spincs and neat . without
spots and durtines upon his clothes : KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.36

I must confes I haue not heard to the contrary , but that thow hast bine
a good and well gouerned chilld . KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.37

and therfore thow shallt finde me requitfull of thy loue and care to
please ; | KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.38

and I will soon procure thy content and send for the hom a littell whill
for a recreation fitt ; hopinge thow willt haue as longinge a desire to
se Cambridge again as thou hadst before , KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.39

for that is the plase that I trust shall doe the good more ways then on
. if thow continew still to be a good chilld as by the blesinge of my
god I trust thow willt : KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.40

I doe not send my beuer Hate as I thought to haue don . which I wold ,
but that I looke to se the heer <paren> if god lett not <$$paren>
with_in this 3. weekes wherfor make use of your best beauer ,
KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.41

and when thow comest home I will see if any of myn will fitt of which I
make sum doupt . | KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.42

farwell my sweet will to thy owne selfe KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.43

Christ Iesus bless the ewer more : | KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.44

Commend my best respect to the most worthy master of your Colledge
KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.45

I am very glad of his kindnes to the with all my harte |
KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.46

god bless the euer KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.47

amen KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.48

thy most louinge mother Katherine Paston KPASTON-1625-E2-P2,74.49

