<BEGIN_latimer-1549-e1-p2>

<P_23L>

Micheas the prophet also dyd not spare to blame King Achab for hys
wyckednes , accordinge <P_24L> to goddes wil and to prophesye of his
destruction contrary vnto manye false prophetes .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,24L.3

These forsayde kynges beinge admonished by the ministers of gods worde ,
because they woulde not folow their godly doctryne and correcte their
lyues , came vnto utter destruction . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,24L.4

Pharao geuynge no credit vnto Moyses the prophet of God , but applyant
vnto the lustes of his owne herte , what tyme he hard of the passage of
Goddes people , hauyng no feare or remembraunce of gods worke , he did
prosecute after entendyng to destroye them LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,24L.5

and was drowned in ye red sea . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,24L.6

Kynge Acab also because he wold not herken vnto Micheas was kilde with
an arrowe . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,24L.7

Likewise also the house of Iereboam with other many , came vnto
destruction , because he woulde not heare the ministers of Goddes worde
, and correcte hys lyfe accordyng vnto hys wyl , and pleasure .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,24L.8

Let the preacher therefore neuer feare to declare the message of God
vnto all men . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,24L.9

And if the king wyll not heare them then the preachers may admonyshe and
charge them wyth their dewties , and so leaue them vnto God and praye
for them . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,24L.10

But if the preachers digresse out of Christes chaire , and shal speake
their owne phantasyes , then in stede of , <font> Quaecunque iusserint
vos facere , facite , et seruate <$$font> . What so euer they
{COM:preceding_word_"they"_emended} byd you obserue that obserue and do
. Change it into these wordes folowynge : <font> Cauete vero vobis a
pseudo Prophetis qui veniunt ad vos etc. <$$font> Be_ware of false
Prophetes which come vnto you in shepes clothing , but inwardly , they
are rauenyng woulffes , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,24L.11

ye shall knowe them by their frutes : LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,24L.12

Yea , change <font> Quaecunque iusserint <$$font> , <paren> yf their
doctryne be euel <$$paren> into <font> Cauete a fermento phariseorum ,
etc. <$$font> That is : Take <P_25L> hede and beware of the , leauen of
the Phariseis , and of the Saduces . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,25L.13

In teaching euel doctryne , all preachers are to be eschewed , and in no
wyse to be harkened vnto . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,25L.14

In speakyng trueth : thei are to be hard . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,25L.15

All thynges wrytten in goddes boke , are moost certayne true , and
profitable for all men . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,25L.16

For in it , is contayned mete matter for Kynges , Prynces , Rulers ,
Byshops , and for alle states . Wherfore , it behoueth euerye preacher
, sum what to appoynt and accommodate hym selfe , and hys matter
a_greeable vnto the comforte , and amendemente of the audience , vnto
the which he declareth the message of God . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,25L.17

If he preache before a kyng , let hys matter be concernynge the offyce
of a kinge , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,25L.18

if before a byshoppe , then lette hym treate of byshoplye dutyes and
orders , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,25L.19

and so forthe in other matters , as time and audience shal require .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,25L.20

I haue thoughte it good , to intreate vpon these wordes folowynge whyche
are wrytten in the .xvii. Chapter of Deuteronomye . <font> Cum ueneris
in terram quam Dominus Deus dat tibi possederisque eam . <$$font> That
is . When thou arte come vnto the Lande whiche the Lorde thy God geueth
the , and enioyeste it , and dwelleste therin : If thou shalt say , I
wil set a kynge ouer me : lyke vnto al the nacions that are aboute me :
Then thou shalt make him kynge ouer the , whome the Lorde thy God shall
chose . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,25L.21

One of thy brethren muste thou make Kynge ouer the ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,25L.22

and mayste not set a stranger ouer the , whiche is not of thy brethren .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,25L.23

But in any wyse , let him not holde to manye horsses , that he bringe
not the people <P_26L> agayne to Egypt , thorowe the multitude of
horsses , for_as_muche as the Lorde hath sayd vnto you : ye shall hence
forth go no more agayne that waye . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.24

Also he shal not haue to many wyues , lest hys herte turne awaye ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.25

neyther shall he gether hym syluer and gould to much .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.26

As in dyuerse other places of scripture is mete matter for al estates .
So in thys forsayede place is describyd cheyfly the doctryne fyt for a
kynge . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.27

But who is worthye to vtter thys doctryne before oure moste noble kynge
? LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.28

Not I God knoweth , whyche am thoroughe age , boethe weake in body and
obliuious , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.29

vnapte I am , not only because of paynful study , but also for the short
warning . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.30

Well vnto God I wyll make my mone , who neuer fayled me .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.31

<font> Auxiliator in necessitatibus . <$$font>
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.32

God is my helper in all my necessities . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.33

To hym alone wyl I make my peticion . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.34

To praye vnto sayntes departed I am not taught ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.35

to desyre like grace of god as they had <paren> right godly it is
<$$paren> LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.36

or to beleue God to be no lesse mercyfull vnto vs <paren> beinge
faythful <$$paren> then he was vnto them , greately comfortable it is .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.37

Therfore only vnto God let vs lyfte vp our hertes and say the Lordes
prayer . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.38

<font> Cum veneris , etc. <$$font> LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.39

When thou art come vnto ye land which the lord , etc. Thou shalt
appoint him king , etc. LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.40

One of thi brethren must thou make king ouer the ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.41

and must not set a straunger ouer ye which is not of thy brethren .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.42

But in any wyse let not suche one {COM:sic} prepare vnto him selfe many
horses that he bryng not . etc. LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.43

Furthermore let hym not prepare vnto hym selfe manye wyues , least his
herte recede frome God . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.44

Nor he shal not multiply vnto hym selfe , to much golde , and syluer .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,26L.45

As the text doeth ryse , I wyl touche and go a lyttle in euery place ,
vntyl I come <P_27L> vnto to much . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.46

I wyl touche al the forsayd thynges , but not to muche .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.47

The texte is , when thou shalt come into the land , etc. To haue a kyng
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.48

the Israelites dyd wyth much importunitye call vnto God ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.49

and God longe before promised theim a kynge LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.50

and were full certified thereof , that God hadde promised that thynge .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.51

For vnto Abraham he sayed : <font> Ego crescere te faciam vehementer
ponamque te in gentes , sed et reges ex te prodibunt . <$$font> That is
, I wil multipli the excedingly , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.52

and wil mak nations of the , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.53

yea and kings shal spring out of the . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.54

These wordes were spoken long before the chyldren of Israel had any king
. LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.55

Notwithstandyng , yet God prescrybid vnto them an order , howe they
{COM:preceding_word_"they"_emended} shulde chose their kyng , and what
manner a man he shoulde be , where he saith : when thou shalt come in to
the lande , etc. As who should say . O ye children of Israel I knowe
your nature ryght well , whiche is euyl , and inclined vnto al euyls .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.56

I know that thou wilt chose a kyng to raygne over the and to apere
glorious in the face of the world , after the manner of gentyles ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.57

But because thou art stiffe_necked , wilde , and art geuen to walke
without a brydell , and lyne . Therfore now I wyll preuente thy euyl
and bestly manners LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.58

I will hedge strongly thy waye , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.59

I wyll make a durable lawe , whyche shal compell the to walke ordinatlye
, and in a plain way , that is thou shalt not chose the a kynge after
thy wyll and fantasye but after me thy Lord and God .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.60

Thus , god condycioned wyth the Iewes , that theyr king should be suche
a one as he hym self wold chose them . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.61

And was not much vnlyke the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} bargayne
that I herd of late shulde be betwixte two fryndes for a horsse ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.62

the owner promysed the other shuld haue the horsse yf he wold ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.63

the other axed ye price , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.64

he sayed : xx. nobles LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.65

The other wold geue hym but iiii. pound : LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.66

ye owner said he shuld not haue hym then , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,27L.67

The other claymed the horsse bycause he sayd , he <P_28L> shoulde haue
hym if he wold , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,28L.68

Thus thys bargayne became a westminster matter ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,28L.69

the lawyers gote twyse the valure {COM:sic} of the horse ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,28L.70

and when all came to all , two fooles made an ende of the matter .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,28L.71

Howbeit , the Israelites coulde not go to lawe wyth God , for chosynge
theyr kynge , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,28L.72

for would they , n@ @yl they , theyr kinge shold be of his chosynge ,
lest they should walke inordinatly , in a deceyuable way , vnto theyr
vtter losse and destruction . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,28L.73

For as they say commonely <font> Qui vadit plane , vadit sane .
<$$font> that is . He that walketh playnly , walketh safely .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,28L.74

As the Iewes were styfnecked , and were euer ready to walke
inordinatelye , no lesse are we Englyshe men geuen to vntowardnes , and
inordinate walkynge after oure owne fantasies and braynes .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,28L.75

We wyll walke wythoute the limites of Goddes worde ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,28L.76

we wyll chose a kynge at our owne pleasure . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,28L.77

But let vs learne to frame our lyues after the noble king Dauid whych
when he had manye occasions , geuen of kyng Saul to worke euyl , for
euyl , yea , and hauynge manye tymes oportunity to perfourme mischief
and to slay king Saule . Neuerthelesse yet fearyng , would not folowe
hys fleshly affections and walke inordinatelye , wythoute the wyll of
Gods worde , whych he confessed alwayes to be hys direction , sayinge .
<font> Lucerna pedibus meis verbum tuum et lumen femitis meis .
<$$font> Thy worde , O Lorde is a Lanterne vnto my feete , and a lyght
vnto my steppes . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,28L.78

Thus hauynge in mynde , to walke ordinatly he did alwaies auoyde to do
euyll . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,28L.79

For whan kyng Saul was in a caue without anye man . Dauid and hys men
sytting by the sydes of the caue , yea and Dauids men mouyng hym to kyl
Saul , Dauid made answer LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,28L.80

and sayd vnto them : <font> Seruet me dominus , ne rem istam . etc.
contra dominum meum Messiam etc. <$$font> That is The Lord kepe <P_29L>
me from doyng this thing vnto my maister yat is the lordes anointed .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.81

At another tyme also , moued by Abisay to kyl Saul sleping , Dauid said
: <font> Ne interficias eum , quis enim impune manum suum inferret vncto
domino etc. <$$font> That is : Destroye hym not ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.82

for who can laye hys handes on the Lordes anoynted and be gyltlesse .
etc. LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.83

I wold God we wolde folowe King Dauid , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.84

and then we shuld walke ordinatly , and yet do but yat we are bounde of
dutye to do , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.85

for God sayth : <font> Quod ego praecipio , hoc tantum facito .
<$$font> That thing which I commande that only do .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.86

There is a greate errour risen now_a_daies among many of vs , which are
vayne and new_fangled men clymbyng beyond the limites of our capacitye
and wytte , in wrenching thys text of scrypture , hereafter folowyng ,
after their owne phantasie and brayne , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.87

their erroure is vpon this text : <font> Audi vocem populi in omnibus
quae dicunt tibi , non enim te reprobant sed me reprobarunt ne regnem
super eos . <$$font> That is , Heare the voyce of the people in all
that they say vnto the , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.88

for they haue not caste the a_way but me . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.89

Thei wrench these wordes a_wryte after their owne fantasies ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.90

and make much doubte as touchynge a kynge , and hys Godlye name .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.91

They that so do walketh inordinatly , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.92

they walk not directely and playnly , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.93

but delite in balkes , and stubble way . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.94

It maketh no matter by what name the rulers be named , if so be they
shall walke ordinately with god , and derect {COM:sic} their steps with
god . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.95

For both patriarkes Iudges , and kynges , had , and haue their
authorytie of God , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.96

and therfore Godli {COM:sic} . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.97

But this ought to be considered which God saieth . <font> Non
praeficere tibi potest hominem alienum . <$$font> that is . Thou must
not set a straunger over the . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,29L.98

<P_30L>

It hath pleased God to graunt vs a naturall liege kynge and Lorde , of
oure owne nation an Englysh man , one of our owne religion .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,30L.100

God hath geuen hym vnto vs , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,30L.101

and is a mooste precious treasure , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,30L.102

and yet mani of vs do desyre a straunger to be kynge ouer vs .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,30L.103

Let vs no more desyre to be bankers , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,30L.104

but lett vs endeauoure to walke ordinatelye and plainely , after the
word of God . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,30L.105

Let vs folow Daniel , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,30L.106

let vs not seke the death of oure moste noble and ryghtfull Kynge , oure
owne brother , boeth by natyuyty , and Godly relygion .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,30L.107

Let vs pray for hys good state , that he may lyue long among vs .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,30L.108

Oh what a plage were it , that a straunge kinge of a straunge land , and
of a straung religion should raygne ouer vs .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,30L.109

Where nowe we be gouerned in the true relygion , he should extirpe and
plucke away all to_gether , and then plante agayn all abomynacyon , and
popery , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,30L.110

God kepe suche a kynge from vs . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,30L.111

Well the kynges grace hath systers , my Ladye Mary , and my Lady
Elizabeth , whych by succession and course are inheritours to the crowne
. Who yf they shulde mary with straungers , what should ensue God
knoweth . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,30L.112

But god graunt they neuer come vnto coursyng nor succedynge .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,30L.113

Therfore to auoyd thys plage , let vs amende oure lyues and put awaye
all pryde , whyche doth drowne men in thys realme at these dayes , all
couetousnes where in the magistrates and ryche men of thys realme are
ouerwhelmed , all lechery and other excessyue vyces , prouokynge gods
wrath , were he not mercyful , euen to take from vs oure naturall kynge
and leyge Lorde , yea , and to plage vs wyth a straunge kynge for oure
vnrepentaunte herte . Wherfore <paren> yf as ye saye <$$paren> ye loue
the kynge , amende your lyues , and then ye shal@ @be a meane that God
shall lende hym vs longe to raygne ouer vs , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,30L.114

for vndowtedlye synnes prouoke much goddes wrath
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,30L.115

scripture sayth : <font> Dabo tibi regem in furore meo , <$$font>
<P_31L> That is : I wyll geue a kynge in my wrathe .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.116

Now we haue a lawfull kyng , a godly kynge , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.117

neuertheles yet many euyls do raygne . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.118

Longe tyme the mynisters appoynted , hath studied to amende , and redres
al euyles , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.119

long time before thys greate laboure hathe bene about this matter ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.120

great crakes hath bene made that al shoulde be well .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.121

But when all came to all for theyr bostes , lyttle or nothynge was done
, in whome these words of Horace mai wel be verified sayinge . <font>
Parturiunt montes , nascitur ridiculus mus . <$$font> The mountains
swelleth vp , the pore mouse is brought out , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.122

long before thys tyme , many hath taken in hande to brynge manye thynges
vnto paste , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.123

but finally theyr worckes came vnto small effect and profyte .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.124

Now I here say all thinges are ended after a Godly maner , or els
shortelye shall be . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.125

Make hast , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.126

make hast , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.127

and let vs learne to conuerte , to repente , and mende our lyues .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.128

If we do not , I feare , I feare , lest for our synnes and
vnthankefulnes , an Hipocrit shal raigne ouer vs .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.129

Long we haue bene seruantes and in bondage , seruyng the pope in Egypte
. LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.130

God hath geuen vs a deliuerer , a natural kynge .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.131

Let vs seke no stranger of another nacion , no hypocrite , whiche shall
brynge in agayne al papistrie , hipocricie , and Idolatrye . No
diabolicall minister whyche shall mayntayne all deuelishe worckes and
euyll exercises . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.132

But let vs pray that God mayntayne and continue oure most excellente
kynge here presente , true inheritoure of thys our realme , both by
natyuytye , and also by the special gift and ordinaunce of God .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.133

He doth vs rectify in the libertie of the gospel ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.134

in that therefore let vs stand . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.135

<font> State ergo in libertate , qua Christus nos liberauit . <$$font>
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.136

Stande ye in the libertye , wherwyth Chryste hath made vs free .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,31L.137

In Chrystes lybertye , <P_32L> If we cast away all euyl , fraude , and
deceyte , with such other vices , contrary to Gods word .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,32L.138

And in so doing we shal not onely prolonge and mayntayne our most noble
kynges dayes in prosperitie : LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,32L.139

but also we shal prosper our owne lyues , to lyue not onelye
prosperously , but also godly . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,32L.140

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_2}

<P_38L>

But fewe ther@ @be that vseth these spectacles ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,38L.143

the more is theyr dampnacion , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,38L.144

Not wythoute cause Christostome wyth admiracion sayeth . <font> Miror
si aliquis rectorum potest saluari . <$$font> I maruell if anye ruler
can be saued . Whyche wordes he speaketh not of an impossibilitie , but
of a great difficultie For that their charge is maruelous great , and
that none aboute them dare shew them the truth of the thing how it goth
. LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,38L.145

Wel : then , if God wyl not alowe a king to much . Whither wyl he alowe
a subiect to much ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,38L.146

no , yat he wil not LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,38L.147

Whether haue any man here in England to much ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,38L.148

I doubte most riche men haue to muche , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,38L.149

for wythout to muche , we can get nothynge . As for example . The
Phisicion . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,38L.150

If the pore man be dyseased , he can haue no helpe without to much ?
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,38L.151

and of ye lawier , the pore man can get no counsell , expedicion , nor
helpe in his matter , except he geue him to much .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,38L.152

At marchandes handes , no kynd of wares can be had , except we geue for
it to muche . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,38L.153

You landelordes , you rentreisers , <P_39L> may I saye you steplordes ,
you vnnaturall lordes , you haue for your possessions yerely to much .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,39L.154

For that herebefore went for .xx. or .xl. pound by yere , <paren>
which is an honest porcion to be had <font> gratis <$$font> in one
Lordeshyp , of a nother mannes sweat and laboure <$$paren> now is it let
for .l. or a_.C. pound by yeare . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,39L.155

Of thys to muche commeth thys monsterous and portentious dearthis made
by man , not_with_standynge God doeth sende vs plentifullye the fruites
of the earth , mercyfullye , contrarye vnto oure desertes ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,39L.156

Not_wythstandynge to muche , whyche these riche menne haue , causeth
suche dearth , that poore menne <paren> whyche liue of theyr laboure
<$$paren> can not wyth the sweate of their face haue a liuinge ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,39L.157

all kinde of victales is so deare , pigges , gese , capons , chickens ,
eggs . {COM:sic} etc. LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,39L.158

These thinges with other are so vnresonably enhansed .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,39L.159

And I thinke verely , that if it thus {SIC:this} continewe , we shal at
length : be constrayned to paye for a pygge a pounde .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,39L.160

I wyl tel you my lordes and maysters , thys is not for the kynges
honoure , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,39L.161

Yet some wyl saye , knowest thou what belongeth vnto the kinges honoure
better then we ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,39L.162

I answere , that the true honoure of a Kinge , is moost perfectly
mencioned and painted furth in the scriptures , of which , if ye be
ignoraunt , for lacke of tyme yat ye can@ @not reade it , albeit , that
your counsaile be neuer so politike , yet is it not for the kynges
honoure . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,39L.163

What his honoure meaneth ye ca@ @not tel . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,39L.164

It is the kynges honoure yat his subiectes bee led in the true religion
. That all hys prelates and Cleargie be set about their worcke in
preching and studieng , and not to be interrupted from their charge .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,39L.165

Also it is ye Kinges honour that the commen_wealth be auaunsed , that
the dearth of these forsaied thynges be prouided for , and the
commodities of thys Realme so emploied , as it may be to the setting his
<P_40L> subiectes on worke , and kepyng them from idlenes .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.166

And herin resteth the kinges honour and hys office ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.167

So doynge , his accompte before God shal@ @be alowed , and rewarded .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.168

Furder_more , if the kinges honour <paren> as sum men say <$$paren>
standeth in the great multitude of people . Then these grasiers ,
inclosers , and rente-rearers , are hinderers of the kinges honour .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.169

For wher as haue bene a great meany of householders and inhabitauntes ,
ther is nowe but a shepherd and his dogge , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.170

so thei hynder the kinges honour most of al .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.171

My lordes and maisters , I say also , that all suche procedynges which
are agaynste the Kynges honoure <paren> as I haue a_part declared before
<$$paren> and as far as I can perceiue , do intend plainly , to make the
yeomanry slauery and the Cleargye shauery . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.172

For suche worckes are al syngular , priuate welth and commoditye .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.173

We of the cleargye had to much , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.174

but that is taken away . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.175

and nowe we haue to little . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.176

But for myne owne part , I haue no cause to complaine ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.177

for I thanke God and the kyng . I haue sufficient ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.178

and God is my iudge I came not to craue of anye man , any thyng ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.179

but I knowe theim that haue to litle . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.180

There lyeth . a greate matter by these appropriacions ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.181

greate reformacions is to be had in them . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.182

I knowe wher is a great market Towne with diuers hamelets and
inhabitauntes , wher do rise yereli of their labours to the value of .l.
pounde , and the vicar that serueth <paren> being so great a cure
<$$paren> hath but .xii. or .xiiii. markes by yere , so that of thys
pension he is not able to by him bokes , nor geue hys neyghboure dryncke
, LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.183

al the great gaine goeth another way . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.184

My father was a Yoman , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.185

and had no landes of his owne , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.186

onelye he had a farme of .iii. or iiii. pound by yere at the vttermost
, LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.187

and here vpon he tilled so much as kepte halfe_a_dosen men .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.188

He had walke for a_hundred shepe , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.189

and my mother mylked .xxx. Kyne , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.190

He was able LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,40L.191

and did find the king a harnesse , wyth hym selfe , and hys <P_41L>
horsse , whyle he came to ye place that he should receyue the kynges
wages . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.192

I can remembre , yat I buckled hys harnes , when he went vnto Blacke
heeath felde . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.193

He kept me to schole , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.194

or elles I had not bene able to haue preached before the kinges maiestie
nowe . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.195

He maryed my systers with .v. pounde or .xx. nobles a pece , so that
he broughte them vp in godlines , and feare of God .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.196

He kept hospitalitie for his pore neighbours .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.197

And sum almess he gaue to the poore , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.198

and all thys did he of the sayd farme . Wher he that now hath it ,
paieth .xvi. pounde by yere or more , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.199

and is not able to do any thing for his Prynce , for himselfe , nor for
his children , or geue a cup of drincke to the pore .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.200

Thus al the enhansinge and rearing goth to your priuate commoditie and
wealth . So that where ye had a single to much , you haue that :
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.201

and syns the same , ye haue enhanced the rente ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.202

and so haue encreased an other to much . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.203

So now ye haue doble to muche , whyche is to to much .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.204

But let the preacher preach til his tong be worne to the stompes ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.205

nothing is amended . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.206

We haue good statutes made for the commen welth as touching comeners ,
enclosers , many metinges and Sessions , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.207

but in the end of the matter their commeth nothing forth .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.208

Wel , well , thys is one thynge I wyll saye vnto you ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.209

from whens it commeth I knowe , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.210

euen from the deuill . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.211

I knowe his intent in it . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.212

For if ye bryng it to passe , that the yomanry be not able to put their
sonnes to schole <paren> as in dede vniuersities do wonderously decaye
al_redy <$$paren> and that they be not able to mary their daughters to
the auoidyng of whoredome , I say ye plucke saluation from the people
and vtterly distroy the realme . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.213

For by yomans sonnes , the fayth of Christ is , and hath bene maintained
chefely . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.214

Is this realme taught by rich mens sonnes . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,41L.215

No no , reade <P_42L> the Cronicles ye shall fynde sumtime noble mennes
sonnes , which haue bene vnpreaching byshoppes and prelates ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.216

but ye , shall finde none of them learned men .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.217

But verilye , they that shoulde loke to the redresse of these thinges ,
be the greatest against them . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.218

In thys realme are a great meany of folkes , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.219

and amongest many , I knowe but one of tender zeale . at the mocion of
his poore tennauntes , hath let downe his landes to the old rentes for
their reliefe . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.220

For goddes loue , let not him {COM:sic} be a Phenix ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.221

let him not be alone , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.222

Let hym not be an Hermite closed in a wall , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.223

sum good man follow him LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.224

and do as he geueth example . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.225

Surueiers {COM:sic} there be , yat gredyly gorge vp their couetouse ,
guttes hande makers , I meane <paren> honest men I touch not <$$paren>
but al suche as suruei LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.226

thei make vp their mouthes LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.227

but the commens be vtterlye vndone by them . Whose bitter cry ascendyng
vp to the eares of the god of Sabaoth , the gredy pyt of hel burning
fire <paren> without great repentaunce <$$paren> do tary and loke for
them . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.228

A redresse God graunt . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.229

For suerly , suerly , but yat ii. thinges do comfort me I wold despaire
of the redresse in these maters . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.230

One is , that the kinges maiestie when he commeth to age : wyll se a
redresse of these thinges so out of frame . Geuing example by letting
doune his owne landes first and then enioyne hys subiectes to folowe him
. LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.231

The second hope I haue is , I beleue that the general accomptyng daye is
at hande , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.232

the dreadfull day of iudgement I meane , whiche shall make an end of al
these calamities and miseries . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.233

For as the scryptures be <font> Cum dixerint pax pax <$$font> , When
they shal say peace , peace : <font> Omnia tuta <$$font> , all thynges
are sure : LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.234

Then is the day at hand , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,42L.235

a mery day I saye , for al such as do in this worlde studye to serue and
please god and continue in his fayth , feare and loue : and a dreadful ,
horrible day for them that decline from God walking in ther owne wayes ,
to whom as it is wrytten in the .xxv of <P_43L> Mathew is sayd : <font>
Ite maledicti in ignem eternum . <$$font> Go ye curssed into
euerlastynge punyshment . Wher shal@ @be waylinge and gnashing of teeth
. LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,43L.236

But vnto ye other he shal saye : <font> Venite benedicti . <$$font>
come ye blessed chyldren of my father , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,43L.237

possesse ye the kyngdome prepared for you from the beginninge of the
worlde , of the which god make vs al partakers .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,43L.238

Amen . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,43L.239

<P_55L>

<heading>

<font> The seconde sermon <$$font> LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,55L.242

<$$heading>

<font> Quaecunque scripta sunt , ad nostram doctrinam . etce. <$$font>
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,55L.244

All thinges yat are written in Gods boke , in the holye Bible , they
were wrytten before oure tyme , but yet to continue from age to age as
long as the worlde doeth stand . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,55L.245

In thys Boke is contayned doctrine of al estates , euen for kynges .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,55L.246

A kynge herein maye learne how to gyde hymselfe ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,55L.247

I tolde you in my laste sermon muche of the duty of a kyng .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,55L.248

And ther is one place behynd yet , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,55L.249

and it folowith in ye texte . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,55L.250

<font> Postquam autem sederit in folio regni sui , et cete . <$$font>
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,55L.251

And when the kyng is sette in the seate of hys kyngdome , he shall wryte
hym out a boke and take a copy of ye priestes or Leuites .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,55L.252

He shall haue the boke wyth hym , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,55L.253

and why ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,55L.254

to reade in it all the dayes of hys lyfe , to learne to feare God , and
learne hys Lawes and other thynges , as it foloweth in the texte wyth
the appurtenaunces and hangynges on , that he turne not frome God ,
neyther to the ryght hande , nor to the lefte .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,55L.255

And wherfore shal he do thys ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,55L.256

that he may lyue longe , he and hys children .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,55L.257

Hytherto goeth the texte . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,55L.258

That I maye declare thys the better to the edifiynge of youre soules and
the glory of God , I shall desyre you to praye etc. <font> Et postquam
{COM:preceding_word_"postquam"_emended} sederit . etc. <$$font> Before
I enter into thys <P_56L> place <paren> right honourable audience
<$$paren> to furnysh it accordyngly , whych by the grace of god I shal
do at leysure , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,56L.259

I woulde repete the place I was in last , and furnyshe it wyth a story
or two whyche I lefte oute in my last sermon .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,56L.260

I was in a matter concerninge the sturdines of the Iewes , a frowarde
and styfnecked kynde of people , much lyke our Englyshe men nowe_a_dayes
, that in the minoritye of a Kynge , take vpon them to breke lawes and
to go by_wayes . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,56L.261

For when god had promised them a kynge , when it came to point they
refused hym . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,56L.262

These men walked by_walkes , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,56L.263

and the sayynge is many biwalkes , many balkes ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,56L.264

many balkes much stumblynge , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,56L.265

and where muche stumblynge is , there is sometyme a fal ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,56L.266

howbeit ther were some good walkers among them , that walked in ye
kynges highe waye ordinarilye , vprightlye , playne Dunstable waye ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,56L.267

and for thys purpose , I woulde shewe you an hystorye whiche is written
in the thyrde of the kynges . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,56L.268

Kynge Dauid beynge in his chyldhode , an old man , in hys second
chyldhode , for al old men are twise chyldren , as the Prouerb is .
<font> Senex bis puer . <$$font> An olde manne , twyse a child , it
happened wyth him , as it doth oftentymes , when wicked men , of a
Kinges chyldhode take occasion of euyl . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,56L.269

Thys Kynge Dauid beyng weake of nature and impotente , in_so_muche that
when he was couered with clothes , he coulde take no heate , was
counsayled of hys seruauntes to take a fayre yonge mayde to nouryshe hym
, and to keepe hym warme in hys bodye . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,56L.270

I suppose she was hys wyfe . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,56L.271

Howe_be_it he hadde no bodilye companie with hyr ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,56L.272

and wel she myghte be hys wyfe . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,56L.273

For thoughe the scripture doeth saye . <font> Non cognouit eam .
<$$font> He knewe hyr not , he had no carnal copulation with hyr yet it
sayeth not . <font> Non duxit eam Vxorem . <$$font> He maried hyr not
. LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,56L.274

And I canne not thynke that king Dauid would haue hyr too warme hys
bosome in Bedde , except shee hadde <P_57L> bene hys wyfe , hauynge a
dispensation of God to haue as manye wyues as he woulde .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.275

For God had dispensed wyth theym to haue manye wyues .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.276

Wel , what happened to kyng Dauid in hys childhode , by ye chylde of the
deuyll ? LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.277

Ye shall heare . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.278

Kynge Dauid hadde a proud sonne , whose name was Adonyas , a man ful of
ambition , desyerouse of honoure , alwayes clymbyng , clymbynge .
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.279

Nowe , whylse the tyme was of his fathers childhode , he wold depose hys
father , not knoweyng of hys fathers mynd , saying . <font> Ego regnabo
. <$$font> I wil raigne , I wyll be kyng , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.280

he was a stoute_stomaked chyld , a biwalker , of an ambitious mynde ,
LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.281

he wold not consente to hys fathers frendes , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.282

but gate him a charet , and men to runne before it , and dyuerse other
adherentes to helpe hym forwarde , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.283

wordelye wise men , such as had bene before of hys fathers counsayle ,
great men in the world , and some no doute of it , came of good wil
thynkynge no harme , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.284

for they woulde not thynke that he did it wythoute hys fathers wyll ,
hauynge such greate men to set hym forth , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.285

for euery man can@ @not haue accesse at al tymes to the kynge to knowe
hys pleasure , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.286

well : algates he would be Kynge , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.287

and makes a great feast , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.288

and thither he called Ioab the ryngleader of hys fathers armye , a
worldly wyse man , a bywalker , that would not walke the Kynges hye way
, and one Abiather the hyghe prieste . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.289

For it is maruayle if any mischeyefe be in hand , if a priest be not at
some ende of it , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.290

they toke hym as Kynge , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.291

and cried , <font> Viuat rex Adonias . <$$font> God saue kynge Adonias
. LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.292

Dauid suffered all thys , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.293

and lette hym alone , LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.294

for he was in hys chyldhode a bedred man . LATIMER-1549-E1-P2,57L.295

