<BEGIN_leland-1539-e1-p2>

<P_102>

From Willington to Antehille-Castelle a_xij. miles , almost al by
chaumpayn grounde , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,102.3

part by corne , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,102.4

and parte by pasture , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,102.5

and sum baren hethy and sandy ground . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,102.6

About the castelle self and the toune of Antehille is faire wood .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,102.7

The castelle and town of Antehille with diverse fair lordshippes
thereabout {COM:preceding_word_"thereabout"_emended} longgid to the L.
Fannope , a man of great renowne in the raigns of Henry the v. and
Henry the syxte . {COM:20_words_from_'to'_to_'syxte'_interpolated}
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,102.8

This Lorde Fannope buildid this castelle as it is now stonding stately
on an hille , with a_4. or 5. faire towers of stone in the inner warde
, beside the basse-courte , of such spoiles as it is saide that he wanne
in Fraunce . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,102.9

<P_103>

It apperith by the este wyndow in the chapelle withyn the castelle of
Anthille that he maried yn a noble blood : LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.11

as I remembre she was the Duches of Excestre ; LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.12

it may chaunce that the mariage of her was a great cause of the sumptuus
building there . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.13

This Lorde Fannope lyith at the blake freres in London , as I have
lernid , and his wife on the right hand of hym and a childe .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.14

How the Lorde Gray of Ruthin cam to this castelle and landes aboute it ,
I have hard these thinges folowing told for a verite .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.15

In the tyme of the civile war betwixt King Henry the vi.
{COM:preceding_word_"vi."_emended} and King Edwarde the iv.
{COM:preceding_word_"iv."_emended} there
{COM:preceding_word_"there"_emended} was a battaile
{COM:preceding_word_"battaile"_emended} faught hard without the south
suburbes of Northampton .
{COM:7_words_from_'hard'_to_'Northampton'_interpolated}
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.16

The Lorde Fannope tooke totally King Henry's parte .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.17

The Lorde Gray of Ruthine did the same in countenance .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.18

But a litle afore the feeld he practised with King Edward , other saying
that he had a title to the Lorde Fannope@ @s landes at Antehil and there
aboute , or depraving {COM:sic} hym with false accusations so wrought
with King Edwarde , that he with al his strong band of Walschemen felle
to King Edwardes part , apon promise that if Edward wan the feelde he
shaul have Antehil and such landes as Fannope had there .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.19

Edwarde wan the feelde , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.20

and Gray opteinid Antehille <font> cum pertinentiis <$$font> :
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.21

and stil encreasing in favor with King Edwarde was at the laste made by
hym Erle of Kente . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.22

But wither the Lord Fannope were slayn at this
{COM:preceding_word_"this"_emended} feelde or
{COM:preceding_word_"or"_emended} no I am not sure .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.23

The market town of Antehill {COM:preceding_word_"Antehill"_emended} is
praty and welle favoridly {COM:preceding_word_"favoridly"_emended}
buildyd , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.24

and is a quarter of a mile
{COM:8_words_from_'buildyd'_to_'mile'_interpolated} distant from the
castelle : LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.25

part of it standith on a {COM:preceding_word_"a"_emended} hille , but
the most and the best parte in a valley . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.26

There rennith a broket , as I remember , by the est part of the toune .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.27

From Antehill to Dunestaple a_x. miles , or more .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.28

First I passid partely by wooddy ground and enclosures , but after moste
parte by champaine grounde , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,103.29

and aboute a_2. miles from Dunestaple by est I toke thorough a fair
uplandisch <P_104> toune caullid {COM:lacuna} and thens to Mergate al by
chaumpaine , but for the moste parte fertile of corne , a_vj. miles .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.30

Mergate was a nunnery of late tyme , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.31

it standith on an hil in a faire woode hard by Watheling-Streate on the
est side of it . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.32

Humfrey Boucher , base sunne to the late Lorde Berners , did much coste
in translating of the priorie into a maner place :
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.33

but he left it nothing endid . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.34

Ther is a litle south of the priorie a long thorough_fare on
Watheling-Streate meately welle buildid for low housing .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.35

About the midle of this town I passid half a mile by hilly ground as in
the beginning of Chilterne , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.36

and ther I saw in a praty wood side S. Leonardes on the lifte hand ,
scant half a mile of toward north weste . Wher of late tyme was a
priorie of nunnes . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.37

Master Page the knight hath it now in exchaunge for landes of his in
Sutherey about the quarters of Hampton-Courte .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.38

Master Page hath translatid the house , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.39

and now much lyith there . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.40

So forthe by Chiltern-hilles and woddes a_4. miles and a half to
Gaddesden {COM:preceding_word_"Gaddesden"_emended} wher the Lorde of
Darby hath a praty maner place of tymbre . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.41

And or I cam to this village I rode over a litle brooke that cummith not
very far of out of Chilterne-hilles
{COM:preceding_word_"Chilterne-hilles"_emended} and resortyth
{COM:preceding_word_"resortyth"_emended} to Langeley where
{COM:preceding_word_"where"_emended} the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} friars
{COM:preceding_word_"friars"_emended} were dwelling .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.42

Thens by Chiltern-hilles and baren , wooddy , and ferne ground for the
moste parte , the soile waxing chalky and flinty , as al Chiltern ys ,
a_3. miles {COM:preceding_word_"miles"_emended} to Barkhamstede . Wher
is an old large castelle in a roote of an hille stonding sum what low ,
and environid with a mote , to the which , as I coulde perceyve , part
of the water of the ryver there hard by doth resorte .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.43

I markid dyverse towers in the midle warde of the castelle , and the
dungeon hille . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.44

But to my sighte it is much in ruine . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.45

The house of Bonehomes , caullid Asscheruge , of the fundation of
Edmunde , Erle of Cornewale , and owner of Berckhamstede-Castel , is
about a mile of , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,104.46

and there the king <P_105> lodgid . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.47

After that I had veuyd the castel , I passid over the ryver wher as is a
bridge of wood . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.48

This ryver cummith by northe-west from Penley , a place yn Chiltern a_3.
miles of , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.49

and so renning by the est ende of Barkhamstede toune goith doun a_xij.
miles southwarde to the more water about the quarters of
Richemannesworthe . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.50

Berkhamstede is one of the best markette townes in Hertfordeshire ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.51

and hath a longe streate metely welle buildid from the north to the
south : and another , but sumwhat lesser , from the west to the est ,
where the ryver rennith . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.52

The chirch is in the midle of the town . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.53

In the botom of the ryver of eche side be very faire medowes .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.54

Thens I passid by hilly , woddy , and much baren ground to Cheynes a_v.
miles of . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.55

And or I cam very nere Cheneys I passid over a little brooke , and even
in the valley by Cheineys over another , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.56

and they {COM:preceding_word_"they"_emended} resorte
{COM:preceding_word_"resorte"_emended} aboute Richemansworth
{COM:preceding_word_"Richemansworth"_emended} {COM:Rickmansworth} to the
moore water {COM:preceding_word_"water"_emended} .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.57

The olde house of the Cheyneis is so translatid by my Lorde Russel ,
that hath that house on the right of his wife , that litle or nothing of
it yn a maner remaynith ontranslatid : LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.58

and a great deale of the house is even newly set up made of brike and
timber : LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.59

and fair logginges be new erectid in the gardein .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.60

The house is within diverse places richely paintid with antique workes
of white and blak . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.61

And there be about the house 2. parkes , as I remembre .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.62

The maner place stondeth at the west ende of the paroche chirche .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.63

In the paroche on the northe side of it , as in a chapelle , be 2.
tumbes of the Chaynes lordes {COM:preceding_word_"lordes"_emended} of
the manor ther , and the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} smaul
village {COM:preceding_word_"village"_emended} bering their name .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.64

From {COM:preceding_word_"From"_emended} Cheyneis I passed much good
{COM:preceding_word_"good"_emended} pasture and corne ground
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.65

{COM:blank_in_leland}

a pratie uplandisch town in a botom v. miles of .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,105.67

And thens a_v. miles stil for the most parte on a mory <P_106> ground
like Hundeslaue hethe , to the which level by likelihood it streachith ;
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,106.68

and thens by sum enclosid and woddy grounde a_3. miles to Windelesore .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,106.69

From Windelesore by a_3. mile most be wood and enclosid pastures ,
leving Cheortesey a mile of on lifte hand . Where is a goodly bridg of
timbre over the Tamise newly repaired . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,106.70

And thens a_2. miles and more in faire open and levelle medow ground
wher I saw over the Tamise , Ankerwike , of late tyme a priorie of
nunnes , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,106.71

and aboute an half mile lower I passid over the Tamise by Stanes-bridge
. LELAND-1539-E1-P2,106.72

And thens most by champaine {COM:preceding_word_"champaine"_emended} and
corne ground {COM:lacuna} pasture to Hampton
{COM:preceding_word_"Hampton"_emended} Courte 6. miles .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,106.73

And about halfe a myle a this syd it is Hampton village on the Thamise
syde . {COM:19_words_from_'Courte'_to_'syde'_interpolated}
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,106.74

<P_107>

<heading:edcomment:PART_II>

<heading>

<font> Quinto {SIC:Quinta} die Maii Anno D. <$$font> 1542 .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,107.78

<$$heading>

From London to New Brentford 8. miles . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,107.80

There is a bridge apon Brent ryveret of 3. arches , and an hospital
buildid with brike on the farther ende of it . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,107.81

From Brentford to Hundeslawe 2. miles . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,107.82

There was in the west ende of the toune an house of freres of the ordre
of the Title {COM:preceding_word_"Title"_emended} of the Trinite .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,107.83

There rennith a lande water thorough the hethe of Hundeslaw as a drene
to the hole hethe , that is of a great cumpace ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,107.84

and I passid by a bridge of tymbre over it . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,107.85

From Hundeslaw to Longeforde a_v. miles . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,107.86

A litle beyond this village is a bridge of tymbre at the which the mille
water of Langford breking out above yn the medowes doth mete with one of
the 2. greate principale armes that brekith out of Colne brooke .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,107.87

This arme , as one told me , brekith out of Colne or ever it cum by the
ende of Uxbridge , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,107.88

and metith not very far beneth Langford bridge with the principal streme
of Colne . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,107.89

A litle beyond Langford bridge is a bridge of wood , under the which the
principal streame of Colne ryver rennith , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,107.90

and thens more then a mile goith into Tamise by Stanes chirch a litle
above Stanes bridg apon the Tamise . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,107.91

Coleham the Erle of Darby@ @'s house stondith on the hither side of this
streame about a mile above the bridge . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,107.92

From this bridge to Colebrok bridge of tymbre about a mile .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,107.93

Al the ground from a mile or more a this side Langford to <P_108>
Colebrok bridge is al low pasture ground , and at rages of rayne by
rising of the ryver muche overflowen . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.94

Under Colebrooke bridge of tymbre rennith the secund of the 2.
principale armes of Cole ryver , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.95

and this to my estimation is the lesser of the 2 .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.96

It breketh owt of the principale streame a_2. miles above Colebroke
toun yn a mooreisch grounde about a mile lower then Uxbridge toun .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.97

Uxbridge 3. miles from Colebrook toune . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.98

This arme rennith by it self about a mile and a half beneth Colebrook
toun into the Tamise a litle above Ancrewike , wher was a priory of
nunnes . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.99

Colebrook toun is a_2. miles from Stanes . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.100

The toune of Colebrok is set on eche side of the ryver of Cole ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.101

but the far greatter part of it is on the west side of the ryver :
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.102

and there is a chapelle of brike made of late dayes .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.103

The paroche chirch is a mile of . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.104

From Colne brooke to a place wher I passid over Burne ryveret a_4. or
5. miles . This water risith out of morisch spring on the lifte hond
as I roode from Stok wher the Erle of Huntendun lyith :
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.105

and , as I gesse , goith by Burneham and about Eiton College toward the
Tamise . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.106

A_2. or 3. miles beyond the passage over Burne I cam to Maidenhed
bridge of tymbre apon the Tamise . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.107

A litle above the bridge <font> ripa citeriori Tamesis <$$font> I saw a
cliffy ground as hanging over the Tamise and sum busschis groinge on it
. LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.108

I conjectid that ther had beene sum site of an auncient building .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.109

There is great warfeage of timbre and fier wood on the west ende of the
bridge , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.110

and this wood cummith out of Barkshir , and the great woddis of the
forest of Windelesore , and the great Frithe .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.111

Heere mark that as much grounde as lyith bytwixt the arme of Colne ,
that goith thoroug Colebroke toun , and the bridge of Maidenhed is yn
Bukkinghamshir ; LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.112

beyond is Barkeshire . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.113

The toun of Maidenhed stondith a praty distance from the Tamise side ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.114

and is meately welle buildid . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,108.115

<P_109>

The south side of the toune is yn the paroche of Bray .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.117

The north side is in the paroch of Cookham
{COM:preceding_word_"Cookham"_emended} . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.118

From Maidenhedde toun a_2. miles by narow wooddy way to the Frithe .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.119

And so thorough the Frithe 3. miles and more .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.120

Then to Twiford {COM:preceding_word_"Twiford"_emended} a praty tounelet
a_2. miles . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.121

At the west ende of this tounlet rennith Loden a praty ryver ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.122

and so brekith out in armes that therby I passid over 4. bridgis .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.123

Thens a mile and an half to Sunning , an uplandisch toune , but sette on
a fair and commodius grounde . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.124

The Tamise rennith under it in a plesant vale .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.125

I markid no very great antiquite in the chirch ;
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.126

it is impropriate onto the decanerie of Saresbyri .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.127

In the presbyteri is one Fitton an esquier buried .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.128

In the south isle be 2. or 3. Vouesses buried , kinswomen to Bisshop
of Saresbyri . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.129

In the north isle be 2. of the {COM:blank_in_text}
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.130

There is an old chapelle at the est end of the chirch of S. Sarik ,
whither of late tyme resortid in pilgrimage many folkes for the desease
of madnes . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.131

The Bisshop of Saresbyri hath had at Sunning afore the Conquest an
auncient maner place , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.132

and hath be {COM:sic} lordes there . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.133

And yet remainith a fair olde house there of stone , even by the Tamise
ripe , longging to the Bisshop of Saresbyri : LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.134

and therby is a fair parke . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.135

This place is in Barkeshir 3. miles above Henley .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.136

From Sunning to Reading 2. miles . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.137

There is a park cumming into Reading toun longging to the late
monasterie there . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.138

There is no maner of token that ever the toun of Reading was waullid ;
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.139

yet it is a very auncient toun , and at this tyme the best toun of al
Barkshire . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.140

There was a castelle in the Saxons tyme in this towne :
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.141

and the name of Castelle-Streat yet remaynithe , lying from est to west
to passe to Newbyri : LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.142

but I could not perceive or clerely lerne wher it stoode .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,109.143

But <P_110> by al lykelihod at the west-ende of the Castelle-Streat :
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.144

and , as sum think , about the place of execution .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.145

It is very likely that a peace of the abbay was buildid of the ruines of
it . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.146

Peraventure it stoode wher th@ @abbay was . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.147

S. Edwarde the Martyr@ @'s mother-yn-law for penaunce buildid , as I
have redde , a monasterie of nunnes yn Reading .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.148

There is a constant fame that this nunnery was wher S. Maryes , a
paroche chirch is now yn Reading . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.149

King Henry the first making an abbay at Reading of blak monkes
suppressid this house , as I hard , giving the landes thereof to his
abbay . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.150

But for more certente know whither the old nunnery stoode not yn the
place wher the abbay of Reading stondith ? And whither S. Maries were
not of a newer foundation ? LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.151

On the north side of the Castelle-Streat was a late a fair house of Gray
Freres . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.152

In the toune be 3. paroche chirchis . S. Giles a this side Kenet
ryver : Sainct Maries , and S. Laurence beyond Kenet .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.153

S. Maries is as the principal paroche of the toun for auncientnes :
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.154

and standith in the hart of it . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.155

S. Laurence stondith by west hard by cumming yn at the principal gate
of th@ @abbay . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.156

West north west of S. Laurence chirch was an almose house of poore
sisters by al lykelihod of the foundation of sum abbate of Reading :
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.157

and remaynid ontyl such tyme one Thorne Abbate of Reading suppressid it
in King Henry the vij. dayes , and gave the landes of it onto the use
of the almoner of his abbay . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.158

But Henry the vij. cumming to Reading , and asking what old house that
was , th@ @abbate told hym , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.159

and then the king wyllid hym to convert the house self and the landes
<font> in pios usus . <$$font> Wherapon th@ @abbate desirid that it
might be made a grammar-schole , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.160

and so it was . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.161

One Wylliam Dene , a riche man and servant in th@ @abbay of Reading ,
gave 200. markes in mony toward the avauncement of this schole : as it
apperith by the epitaphie on his grave in the abbay chirch of Reading .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.162

The ryver of Kenet cummith thorough the midle of Reading toun ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.163

but devidid principally into 2. partes , wherof the principal streame
cummith thorough a great wood bridge in the south side of the toune .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,110.164

<P_111>

The arme that breketh out of Kenet is caullid communely about the
quarters of the toune the Halowid brooke , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.166

and brekith out of the principal streame of Kenet up above the toune by
west south west aboute the Bere , wher th@ @abbat of Reading had a fair
manor place of bryke , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.167

and so cumming doune by medowes ynto Reading toune passith thorough a
peace of th@ @abbay clensing the filth of it , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.168

and a litle lower joinith againe with the great streame :
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.169

and a litle lower Kenet hole streame goith into Tamise ryver . So that
Tamise river cummith within half a mile by est north est of Reading .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.170

In the vale of the toune of Reading , wher the 2. armes of Kenet renne
nere togither , I markid diverse armelettes breking out of the 2.
streames and making mediamnes , over the which be dyverse bridges of
wood . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.171

And these waters be very commodius for diers , welle occupied there ;
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.172

for the toune chiefly stondith by clothyng . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.173

From Reading to Causeiham , shortly caullid Causham , aboute half a mile
, wher is a great mayne bridge of tymbre over the Tamise , wher I markid
that it restid most apon fundation of tymbre , and yn sum places of
stone . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.174

Toward the north end of this bridge stondith a fair old chapelle of
stone on the right hond , pilid in the fundation for the rage of the
streame of the Tamise . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.175

Ther is no bridge on the Tamise upward betwixt this and Walingford ,
distant about a_10. miles of . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.176

And byneth this Causham bridge to Henley five miles , and a half lower
is first Sunning bridge of tymbre , and Grat-Marlaw-bridge .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.177

Bisham Priorie in Barkshir on the Tamise a_3. miles above Maidenhed .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.178

Hurley apon the Tamise , a celle to Westminstre , a mile above Bisham .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.179

Litle-Marlaw , wher the priorie of nunnes was , a_2. miles above
Maidenhed , stonding in Bukinghamshir . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.180

Great-Marlaw , wher the <font> bridge <$$font>
{COM:'bridge'_interpolated_by_Burton} of timbre is over the Tamise ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.181

a mile above it . Medmenham , a celle to Woburn in Bedfordshir , a mile
above Bissham as the Tamise goith in Bukinghamshir .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,111.182

<P_112>

Beyond Causham bridge is Causham villag in Oxfordshir .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,112.184

Thens I rode a_v. miles or more al by great wooddes . And thens by
chaumpaine hilly ground a_4. miles to Ewelm , an uplandisch village .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,112.185

Ewelme was the inheritance of the Chaucers . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,112.186

Thomas Chaucer the last heire male owner of it is buried yn an high
marble tumbe in a fair chapelle in the paroch chirch of Ewelm , on the
south@ @side of the quier with this epitaphie : <font> Hic jacet Thomas
Chaucer armiger , quondam dominus istius villae , & - Patronus istius
ecclesiae : qui obiit <$$font> 18. <font> die mensis Novembr: anno D.
<$$font> 1434. <font> Et Matildis uxor ejus , quae obiit <$$font> 28.
<font> die mensis Aprilis Anno D. <$$font> 1436 .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,112.187

Sum say , that this Chaucer was a marchant man , and bout a_1000 li.
landes by the yere , and that wollesakkes be yn Ewelm in token of
marchaundise . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,112.188

And menne say likewise , that he mindid the fundation of the hospitale
of Ewelme , and also the hospitale by Duningtoun-castelle .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,112.189

But William Duke of Southfolk {COM:preceding_word_"Southfolk"_emended}
did build them booth , eche pore man ther having xiiij. d. by the
weeke . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,112.190

Alice , doughter and heire to Thomas Chaucer and Matilde , tooke to
husband William de la Pole Duke of Southfolk : the which for love of her
and the commodite of her landes fell much to dwelle yn Oxfordshir and
Barkshir wher his wifes landes lay . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,112.191

This William translatid and encreasid the manor place of Ewelme .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,112.192

I think that Ewelme tooke name of a great poole afore the maner place
and elmes grouing about it . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,112.193

Ewelme paroche chirch a cumly and new peace of work stonding on an hille
was lately made by William Duke of Southfolk and Alice his wife .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,112.194

William was slayn , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,112.195

and Alice supervivid , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,112.196

and after was byried yn the paroche chirch of Ewelme on the south side
of the high altare in a riche tumbe of alabastre , with an image in the
habite of a woves crounid lying over it , and having this epitaphie on
it : <font> Orate pro anima Serenissimae Principissae Aliciae Ducissae
Suffolchiae , hujus ecclesiae patronae , & primae fundatricis hujus
<P_113> elemosynariae . quae obiit <$$font> 20. <font> die mensis Maij
, anno Di. <$$font> 1475. <font> litera Dominicali A. <$$font>
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.197

The pratie hospitale of xiij {COM:preceding_word_"xiij"_emended} poore
men is hard joynid to the west ende of Ewelm paroche chirch :
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.198

and much after the building of the vicars houses at Windesore yn a
circle . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.199

In the midle of the area of the hospitale is a very fair welle .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.200

The master or provost of the almose house hath ther a praty lodging .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.201

every poore man hath 14@ @d. a weke . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.202

I redde these thinges folowing in a table in Ewelm chirch :
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.203

Pray for the soules of John Duk of Southfolk , and Elizabeth his wife .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.204

This John was sun and heire to William and Alice .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.205

John de la Pole Duk of Southfolk had by Elizabeth <font> John <$$font>
Erle of Lincoln , Edmund after Duk of Southefolk , Richard , William :
and {COM:blank_in_leland} that was at {COM:sic} scholar yn Gunvile-Haul
in Cambridge , and lyith buried at Baberham . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.206

The maner place of Ewelme is in the valley of the village :
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.207

the base court of it is fair , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.208

and is buildid of brike and tymbre . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.209

The inner part of the house is sette with in a fair mote ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.210

and is buildid richely of brike and stone . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.211

The haul of it is fair LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.212

and hath great barres of iren overthuart it instede of crosse beames .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.213

The parler by is exceding fair and lightsum : LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.214

and so be al the lodginges there . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.215

The commune saying is that Duk John made about the beginning of King
Henry the vij. tymes most of the goodly buildinges withyn the mote .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.216

There is a right fair parke by the manor place .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.217

From Ewelm to Hasely a_v. miles by chaumpaine ground sumwhat plentiful
of corne , but most layid to pasturage . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.218

Haseley is thus dividid into Grete-Haseley , Litle Haseley , Lecheford
and Ricote . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,113.219

Great Haseley was of aunciente tyme a lordship longging by many
descentes to the Pyperdes , whos maner place was <P_114> there wher now
is the ferme place by the chirch longging to Windesor college .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,114.220

These Piperdes were men of fair possessions , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,114.221

and the name of them as in the principal maner florishid onto Edward the
thirde dayes , about the which tyme Piperdes maner place and the
patronage of the benifice of Haseley was gyven to the college of
Windesore . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,114.222

The armes of Piperd apere yn the est window of the fair chauncelle of
Haseley chirch . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,114.223

Litle Haseley , wher Master Baretine hath a right fair mansion place ,
and marvelus fair walkes <font> topiarii operis <$$font> , and orchardes
, and pooles , holdith , as I lernid , of the maner of Piperdes by
knight service . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,114.224

Lacheforde about the beginning of Edward the thirde@ @s tyme was parte
of the Piperdes landes . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,114.225

Then it chauncid for a younger sun of Piperdes of Haseley to do so
valiauntly in batelle agayn the Scottes that he was made knight :
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,114.226

and having no lande , bycause that his elder brother was heire , desirid
to have sum smaul portion of land ; wherapon his father gave hym
Lacheford to hold by knight service of the maner of Piperdes in Great
Haseley . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,114.227

The stook of this yong Piperd knight remaynid in Lacheford onto 80.
yeres ago : when the last of these Piperdes lefte a doughter and heire ,
that was maried to one Lenthaul , a gentilman of Herefordshir , whos
sunne now dwellith in Lacheforde . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,114.228

Ricote longid to one Fulco de Ricote . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,114.229

After it cam to one Quatermains . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,114.230

The house of the Quatermains in Oxfordshir hath beene famose and of
right fair possessions . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,114.231

Their chief house was at Weston by Ricote , wher Mr. Clerk now dwellith
. LELAND-1539-E1-P2,114.232

<P_115>

And Shirburne withyn a mile of Wathelington market , wher is a strong
pile or castelet , longid to Quatremains : sins Fowler : and by
exchaunge now to Chaumbrelein of Oxfordshir . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.234

About King Henry the vj. dayes dyvers brethren dyed of the Quatremains
one after another , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.235

and by a great onlykelihod al the landes descendid to one Richard , the
yonggest of the brethern , that was a marchant of London , and after
custumer there . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.236

This Richard had a servant caullid Thomas Fowler , his clerk , a toward
felaw that after was chauncelar of the duchy of Lancastre .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.237

Richard Quatremains bare great favor to this Thomas .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.238

Richard was god-father to Thomas sunne , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.239

and namid hym Richard Quatermains Fowler . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.240

Richard Quatermains lay at Ricote : LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.241

and caussid Thomas Fowler to ly at Westun . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.242

Richard Quatermains made Richard , Thomas Fowler sunne , heir of most
part of his landes , bycause he had no children .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.243

Richard Quatermains godfather to Richard Fowler made a right goodly
large chapelle of ease hard without the manor place of Ricote ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.244

and foundid ther 2. chauntre prestes to sing perpetually for his soule
, enduing the cantuaries with good landes : LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.245

and made a fair house for the prestes therby .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.246

This fundation was begon in Henry the 6. dayes :
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.247

and endid yn Edward the 4. tyme . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.248

This Richard foundid also a cantuarie in Tame paroche chirche a_2.
miles from Ricote , wher he in a chapelle is buried undre a marble stone
. LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.249

This Richard foundid ther also an hospitale by Tame chirche endowing it
by landes . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.250

Richard Fowler heir to Quatremains was a very onthrift ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.251

and sold al his landes leving his children ful smaul lyvinges .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,115.252

Syr John Heron , treasorer of the chaumbre to Henry the <P_116> vij.
and the viij. boute the reversion of the lordship of Ricote ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.253

and Giles his sunne possessid it a while . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.254

Giles Heron wise in wordes , but folisch yn deades , as Syr Richard
Fowler was , sold Ricote to John Willyams now knighte .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.255

From Haseley to Miltoun village half a mile . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.256

At this place , as I hard say , was many yeres syns a priorie of monkes
: a selle , as one told me , to Abbingdon . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.257

The house of the priorie was by likelihod wher the farmer's house is now
hard by the chirch yard . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.258

For ther appere fundations of great buildinges .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.259

Sum say that Mounseir de Louches house was wher the farmer's house is .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.260

In the chirch of Miltun is an highe tumbe of fre stone with the image of
a knight and a lady , with an epitaphie in Frenche , declaring that
Richard de Louches chivalier and Helene his wife ly buried there .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.261

The voice ther goith that Louche had the priorie land gyven hym .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.262

Louches landes cam to heires generales . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.263

Of later tymes Davers had this lordship of one {COM:lacuna} .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.264

Syr Regnald Bray boute it of Davers . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.265

The late Lord Bray sold it to Dormer Mair of London .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.266

Ther is a prebend land in Miltun longging to Lincoln .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.267

The Bisshop of Lincoln is patrone of the chirch .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.268

There joynith onto Great-Miltun , Litle-Miltoun ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.269

and there is a chapelle of ease dedicate to S. James .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.270

From Haseley to Chisilhampton <paren> vulgo Chisiltun <$$paren> by
plaine ground fruteful of corne and grasse , but baren of wood as al
that angle of Oxfordshir is , 3. miles . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.271

Here is passid over 3. litle bridges of wood , wher under wer plaschsy
pittes of water of the overflowing of Tame ryver ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.272

and then straite I rode over a great bridge under the which the hole
streame of Tame rennith . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.273

Ther were a_5. great pillers of stone , apon the which was layid a
timbre bridge . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.274

Thens to Drayton village , longging a late to Dorchestre Abbay .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.275

Thens a mile to Dorchester . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,116.276

<P_117>

In the toun of Dorchestre I markid these notable thinges .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.278

The abbay of chanons , wher afore the Conquest was a bisshopes sete .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.279

Remigius translatid it to Lincoln . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.280

Alexander Bisshop of Lincoln erected there an abbay of blak chanons .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.281

Yet the chirch berith the name of the prebend chirch .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.282

There was buried , as it is said , the bodie of S. Birine bisshop there
. LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.283

And there yet remainith the image of free stone that lay on the tumbe of
Bisshop Aeschwine , as apperith by the inscription .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.284

There be buried in the quier beside divers abbates a knight on the south
side with an image crosse_leggid , whos name is there oute of
remembrance . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.285

There lyith at the feete of hym one Stoner sumtyme a juge <paren> as it
apperith by his habite <$$paren> <font> in the raigne of K. E.
<$$font> 3. {COM:7_words_from_'in'_to_'3'_interpolated}
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.286

There lyith a knight on the north side of the quier , a knight whom the
late abbate tooke to be one of the Segraves , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.287

the image was of alabastre . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.288

But after the abbate told me that he hard of late one say that there was
one Holcum a knight buried . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.289

In the body of the chauncelle afore the quier doore lay a gentilman
caullid Ways . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.290

Ther ly in south isle of the quier 3. of the Draitons , gentilmen , one
hard by another , under plaine marble stones .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.291

Mr. Barentine hath part of these Draitons landes .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.292

Ther {COM:preceding_word_"Ther"_emended} lyith at the hed of thes
Draitons one Gilbert Segrave a gentilman , under a flat marble .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.293

The body of the abbay chirch servid a late for the paroche chirch .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.294

Syns the suppression one {COM:lacuna} a great riche man , dwelling in
the toun of Dorchestre , bought the est part of the chirch for 140.
poundes , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.295

and gave it to augment the paroch chirch . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.296

The toun of Dorchestre was sore defacid by the Danes .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.297

Of old tyme it was much larger in building then it is now toward the
south and the Tamise side . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.298

There was a paroche chirch a litle by south from the abbay chirch . And
another paroch chirch more south above it . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.299

There was the 3. paroch chirch by south weste .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,117.300

<P_118>

In the closis and feeldes that lye southly on the toun that now standith
be founde <font> numismata Romanorum <$$font> of gold , silver , and
brasse . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.302

The bisshop's palace , as is saide ther , was at the toune's end by
north west , wher yet {COM:preceding_word_"yet"_emended}
{COM:leland_has_'it',_stow_has_'yet'} appere fundations of old
buildinges : LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.303

and there as yet be kept the courtes . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.304

The ryver of Tame cummith first by the est ende of the toune : and then
by the south side passing thoroug a very faire bridge of stone a litle
witoute the toune . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.305

Cumming from Wallingford to Dorchester the toun standith <font> ulter.
ripa Tamae . <$$font> LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.306

The bridg is of a good lenghth : LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.307

and a great stone causey is made to cum welle onto it .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.308

There be 5. principale arches in the bridge , and in the causey joining
to the south ende of it . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.309

Tame and Ise metith aboute half a mile beneth Dorchestre bridg in the
medowis . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.310

From Dorchester to the fery over the Tamise about a mile .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.311

Here the hither ripe by north is low and medow ground .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.312

The south ripe ys high al alonge like the long bak of an hille .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.313

From the fery to Walingford a mile by marvelus fair champain and
fruteful ground of corne . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.314

The toun of Walingeforde hath beene a very notable thing and welle
waullid . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.315

The diche of the toun and the crest wheron the waulles stoode be yet
manifestely perceyvid , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.316

and begin from the castelle going in cumpace a good mile and more ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.317

and so cummith to Walingford bridg a large thing of stone over the
Tamise . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.318

There remayne yet the names of these streates emong other :
Tamise-streat , Fische-streate , Bred-streat , Woodstreat ,
Goldsmithes-row . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.319

And by the patentes and donations of Edmunde Erle of Cornewaul and Lord
of the Honor of Wallingeford <font> it appereth <$$font>
{COM:'it_appereth'_interpolated} that ther wer 14. paroch chirchis in
Walingford . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,118.320

And ther be men yet alyve that can shew the places and cemiteries
<P_119> wher yn the {COM:sic} al stoode . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,119.321

At this tyme there be but 3. poore paroch chirches in the town .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,119.322

Ther was a priory of blake monkes , a celle to S. Alban , suppressid by
Thomas Woulsey cardinale , standing hard withyn the west gate of
Wallingford . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,119.323

The toun and the castelle was sore defacid by the Danes warres .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,119.324

Yet they meatly reflorichid in the tyme of Richard King of Romaines and
Erle of Cornewaulle , brother to King Henry the 3 .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,119.325

This Richard did much cost on the castelle . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,119.326

The castelle yoinith to the north gate of the toune ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,119.327

and hath 3. dikis , large and deap , and welle waterid .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,119.328

About ech of the 2. first dikis , as apon the crestes of the ground
cast out of them {COM:preceding_word_"them"_emended} , rennith an
embatelid waulle now sore yn ruine , and for the most part defaced .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,119.329

Al the goodly building with the tourres and dungeon be withyn the 3.
dike . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,119.330

There is also a collegiate chapel emong the buildinges withyn the 3.
dike . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,119.331

Edmund Erle of Cornewale , sunne to Richard King of the Romains , was
the first founder and endower of this college .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,119.332

Prince Edwarde , as one told me , the Blak , augmentid this college .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,119.333

There is a decane , 4. prestes , 6. clerkes and 4. choristers .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,119.334

{COM:lacuna} the late decane afore Dr. London that now is buildid a
fair steple of stone at the weste ende of the collegiate chapelle , to
making wherof he defacid , as it is said , withoute licens a peace of
the kinges lodging , joyning on the est ende of the chapelle .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,119.335

<P_120>

The decane hath a fair lodging of tymbre withyn the castelle :
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.337

and to it is yoinid a place for the ministers of the chapelle .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.338

From Walingford to Makeney in Barkshir a good mile .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.339

Mr. Molynes hath a pratie manor place of brike ther .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.340

One Courte buildid this house of late dayes . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.341

This Court was uncle to Molines , that now dwellith at Makeney .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.342

Molines hath not this lordship only , but a nother in Oxfordshir not far
from Dorchester , caullid Moungewelle , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.343

and is 50. li. in value by yere , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.344

and hath fair woodes . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.345

The house of Molines habitation byfore the death of Court was yn
Hamptonshir about an_8. miles from Saresbyri at a place caullid Sandhil
, wher is a fair manor place . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.346

From Walingford to Sinodune about a mile and a half .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.347

This place is wonderful dikid about LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.348

and stondith on a hille in Barkshir , hanging over the Tamise .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.349

It is yn by estimation half a mile . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.350

And withyn it hath beene sum toune , or , as the commune voice sayith ,
a castelle in the Britannes tyme , defacid by lykelihod by the Danes .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.351

At this tyme it berith very plentifullye booth barley and whete ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.352

and <font> numismata Romanorum <$$font> be ther found yn ploughyng .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.353

About this Sinodune beginnith the fruteful vale of White-Horse ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.354

and so strecchith by south west toward Farington quarters .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.355

This vale is not plentiful of woodde .
{COM:leland_left_a_long_blank_after_this_sentence}
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.356

From Sinodune to Abbingdon 6. miles . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.357

A little a this side the bridge over the Ise at Abbingdon is a
confluence of 2. armes that brekith aboute the est ende of
Abbingdon-Abbay out of the hole streame of the Ise , and make 2. litle
isles or mediamnes . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.358

And at this confluence self in the very mouth is a very fair bridge of
7. arches : LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.359

and a very litle beneth this bridge booth the armes yoinid
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.360

and renning in one botom goith ynto Ise . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,120.361

<P_121>

The greath {COM:sic} bridge at Abbingdon over Ise hath a_14. arches .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,121.363

The toun of Abbingdon afore the abbay was buildid there was caullid
Seukesham . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,121.364

The abbay was first begon at Bagley Wood in Barkshir a_2. miles more
upper on the Ise then Abbingdon now is : LELAND-1539-E1-P2,121.365

but the foundations and the workes there prosperid not ; wherapon it was
translatid to Seukesham , and ther finished most by the costes of King
Cissa , that there after was buried ; LELAND-1539-E1-P2,121.366

but the very place and tumbe of his burial was never knowen syns the
Danes defacid Abbingdon . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,121.367

I hard that ther was an holy heremite , kynne to King Cissa , that lyvid
in the woodes and marisches about Seukesham , and that the abbay for his
sake and by his meanes was buildid there . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,121.368

Ethelwolde , Abbate of Abbingdon , and after Bisshop of Winchestre , yn
King Edgares days {COM:preceding_word_"days"_emended} did clerely
renovate and augmentid this abbay , digging and caussing a gut to cum
out of Isis by force to serve and purge th@ @offices of th@ @abbay .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,121.369

The chirche and buildinges that he made ther were after taken doune and
new made by Norman abbates in the first Norman kinges tymes . The est
partes wherof yet be seene . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,121.370

The tower in the midle of the chirch , al the body of the chirch , and
the towers at the west ende of it wher made by 4. abbates immediatelie
praeceding the last 4. abbates of Abbingdon .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,121.371

The latter 2. of the 4. abbates that buildid the west part of the
chirch were thus namid : Aschendune and Sante .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,121.372

Sante was a doctor of divinite , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,121.373

and was imbassador at Rome bothe for King Edward the fourth and Henrie
the vij. LELAND-1539-E1-P2,121.374

At the west end of the area wheryn the abbay chirch of Abbingdon
stondith is a charnel chapelle , to the which was gyven the profite of a
chapelle at Bayworth by Bagley-Wood . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,121.375

On the south side of the area is al the abbate and convente@ @s lodging
. LELAND-1539-E1-P2,121.376

<P_122>

In old tymes many of the villages about Abbingdon had but chapelles of
ease , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.378

and Abbingdon Abbay was their mother chirch , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.379

and there they buried . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.380

There is at the west ende of th@ @abbay withowt the gate a chirch
dedicate to S. Nicolas , and buildid by one abbate Nicolas for the ease
of the toun encreasing with people . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.381

Again this on the other side without th@ @abbay gate is a chirch
dedicate to S. John , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.382

and there is an hospital having 6. almose menne .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.383

The kinges be countid for founders of this hospitale .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.384

There is a paroch chirch of S. Helene at the south ende of the toun
apon Isis as the ryver cummith from the abbay downeward .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.385

At this place was sumtyme a nunnery : LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.386

and yn S. Ethelwoldes tyme that renewid th@ @abbay of Abbingdon wer
straunge thinges and tumbes found yn digging .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.387

There is now an hospital of 6. men and 6. women at S. Helenes
maintained by a fraternite ther , as I hard . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.388

A very litle beneth S. Helenes cummith Och ryver thorough the vale of
Whit-Horse into Isis . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.389

There is a mille almost at the mouth of this confluence caullid
Ocke-mille , and nother above it . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.390

There is a right goodly crosse of stone with fair degres and imagerie in
the market steede of Abbingdon . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.391

There is also a fair house with open pillars coverid with a rofe of
leade for market folkes . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.392

The toun of Abbingdon stondith by clothing . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.393

The market is quik there . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.394

Remembre to speke with Mr. Bachelar in Abbingdon , and the prior of
Abbingdon dwelling a mile from Abbingdon , for the book <font> de Gestis
abbatum de Abbingdune <$$font> . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.395

From Abbingdon to a fair waren of conies longging to th@ @abbay about a
mile . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.396

Thens a_4. miles to Chisilhampton bridge . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,122.397

<P_123>

Thens to Haseley 3. miles . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.399

From Haseley to Oxford about a_7 miles . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.400

Robertus de Oilleio that cam into England with Wylliam Conqueror had
given to hym the baronyes of Oxford and Sainct Waleries .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.401

This Robert made the castelle of Oxford , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.402

and , as I conject , other made the waulles of Oxford
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.403

or repairid them . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.404

This Robert made the chapelle of S. George in the castelle of Oxforde ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.405

and foundid a college of prebendaries there . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.406

This Robert dyid withowt issue , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.407

and wher he was buried it is not very certeinly knowen .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.408

This Robert had one John de Einerio that was exceding familiar with hym
, and had beene in the warres as sworen brother onto hym , and had
promised to be part taker of Robertes fortunes . Wherapon he enrichid
hym with possessions , and , as sum think , gave hym S. Waleries .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.409

Robert Oilley had a brother caullid Nigellus , of whom be no verye
famose thinges written . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.410

Nigellus had a sunne caullid Robert that provid a very noble man .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.411

This Robert the 2. had a wife caullid Edith Forne , a woman of fame and
highly estemid with King Henry the first
{COM:preceding_word_"first"_emended} by whose procuration Robert weddid
her . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.412

This Robert began the priorie of blake chanons at Oseney by Oxford emong
the isles that Isis ryver ther makith . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.413

Sum write that this was the occasion of making of it .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.414

Edith usid to walk out of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} Oxford
Castelle with her gentilwomen to solace and that often tymes , wher yn a
certen place in a tre as often as she came a certen pies usid to gether
to it , and ther to chatte , and as it wer to speke onto her .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.415

Edithe much marveling at this matier , LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.416

and was sumtyme sore ferid as by wonder . Wherapon she sent for one
Radulph , a chanon of S. Frediswides , a man of a vertuus life and her
confessor , asking hym counsel : to whom he answerid , after that he had
seene the fascion of the pies chattering only at her cumming , that she
should builde sum chirch or monasterie in that place .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,123.417

<P_124>

Then she entreatid her husband to build a priorie ,
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,124.419

and so he did , making Radulp the first prior of it .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,124.420

The cumming of Edith to Oseney and Radulph waiting on her , and the tre
with the chattering pies be paintid in the waulle of th@ @arch over
Edith tumbe in Oseney priorie . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,124.421

There lyith an image of Edithe of stone in th@ @abbite of a wowes ,
holding an hart in her right hond , on the north side of the high altare
. LELAND-1539-E1-P2,124.422

Robert Oilley the 2. founder of Oseney priorie , was buried in th@
@abbay of Eignesham a_3. miles from Oxford . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,124.423

Robert Oilley the 2. had faire issue by Edith his wife , emong the
which Henry was his heire . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,124.424

This Henry lyith buried yn Oseney chirch , in the veri midle of the
presbyteri , under a flatte marble stone , wherapon is a flourid cross
porturid . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,124.425

This Henry had Henry the 2 . LELAND-1539-E1-P2,124.426

And from Henry the 2. were other discentes ; LELAND-1539-E1-P2,124.427

but in processe the landes of the Oilleys were disparkelid .
LELAND-1539-E1-P2,124.428

Ther is at this tyme one of the Oilleis a man of a_140. li. land
dwelling ... LELAND-1539-E1-P2,124.429

