<BEGIN_locke-1685-e3-p2>

<P_64>

58 . I would therefore have nothing but vice absolutely forbidden ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,64.3

and since there are very few vices that a child of your sons age is
capeable of , I thinke there will not need many precepts to be given him
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,64.4

Lying and stubbornesse and some ill_naturd tricks are all the vices I
thinke children of that age can be guilty of , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,64.5

but these are <P_65> not {COM:sic} neither to be forbid till he appeares
guilty of them , for feare least by forbiding you teach them ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,65.6

for when he is first found in a lie or an ill_naturd trick , the first
remedy should be to talke to him of it as of a strange monstrous thing
that it could not be supposd he would have donne , a thing to be wonderd
at , and soe shame him out of it . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,65.7

59 . Manners , as they call it , about which children are soe often
perplexd and have soe many wise exortations made them by their wise
maids and governesses , I thinke are rather to be learned by example
then rule . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,65.8

And children if keept {COM:sic} out of ill company will take a pride to
behave themselves prettily after the fashon of others , perceiving
themselves esteemd and commended for it . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,65.9

But if by a litle negligence in this part my young master should not put
off his hat or make legs a la mode , a danceing master would cure that
defect and wipe of all that plainesse of nature which the a la mode
people call rusticity . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,65.10

And since nothing appeares to me to give children soe much becomeing
confidence and a behaviour that soe much fits them for the conversation
of those above their age as danceing , I thinke they should be taught to
dance as soon as they are capeable of learning it ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,65.11

for though this consist only in outward decency of motion , yet I know
not how it gives children manly thoughts and cariage more then anything
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,65.12

But otherwise I would not have children much tormented about the
punctilios or nicetys of breeding . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,65.13

Any carelessnesse is to be borne with_in them that carys not with it the
marks of ill nature , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,65.14

but that when it appeares in any action is to be corrected by the ways
above mentioned , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,65.15

and what else remains like clownishnesse or want of perfect good manners
time and observation as they grow up will of its self cure if they are
bread in <P_66> good company , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.16

but if in ill all the rules in the world , all the correction imaginable
will not be able to polish them . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.17

For you must take this for a certain truth that let them have what
instructions you will , what teachers soever you please , that which
will most influence their actions will be the company they converse with
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.18

Children <paren> nay and men too <$$paren> doe most by example ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.19

we are all a sort of camelions that still take a tincture from things
about us , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.20

nor is it to be wonderd at in children who better understand what they
see then what they heare . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.21

60 . I mentioned above one great mischeife that came by servants to
children , when by their flattery they take of the edg and force of the
parents rebukes , and soe lessen their authority .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.22

And here is another as great or greater inconvenience which children
receive from the ill examples they meet with amongst the meaner servants
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.23

They are wholy if possible to be kept from such conversation .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.24

For the contagion of these ill examples both in civility and vertue
horribly infects children as often as they come in reach of it .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.25

They often learne from ill_bread or debauchd servants such language ,
ill tricks , and vices as otherwise they would possibly be ignorant of
all their lives . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.26

T@ @is a hard matter wholy to prevent this mischeife ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.27

you will have very good luck if you never have an ill_bread or vitious
servant , and if from them your children never get any infection .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.28

But yet as much must be donne towards it as can be , and the children
kept as much as may be in the company of their parents and those to
whose care they are committed . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.29

To this purpose their being there should be made easy to them ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.30

they should be allowd the libertys and freedomes suitable to their ages
and not be held under unnecessary restraints when in their parents
sights or in their governors . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.31

If it be a prison to them , t@ @is noe wonder they should not like it .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.32

They must not be hindred from being children and from playing and doeing
as children , but from doeing ill . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.33

All other liberty is to be allowd them . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,66.34

<P_67>

Next , to make them in love with the company of their parents , they
should receive all their good things there and from their hands .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,67.36

The servants should be hindred from makeing court to them by giveing
them strong drinke , wine , fruit , playthings , and other such matters
, which may make them in love with their Company .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,67.37

61 . Haveing named Company I am almost ready to throw away my pen and
trouble you noe farther on this subject . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,67.38

For since that does more then all precepts , rules , instructions , me@
@thinkes t@ @is almost wholy in vain to make a long discourse of other
things and to talke of that almost to noe purpose ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,67.39

for you will be ready to say , what shall I doe with my son ?
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,67.40

If I keepe him always at home , he will be in danger to be my young
Master , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,67.41

and if I send him abroad , how is it possible to keepe him from the
contagion of rudnesse and vice which is soe every where in fashon .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,67.42

In my house he will perhaps be more innocent , but more ignorant too of
the world , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,67.43

and being used constantly to the same faces and litle company will when
he comes abroad be a sleepish or conceited creature .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,67.44

I confesse both sides has its inconvenience , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,67.45

but whilst he is at home use him as much to your company and the company
of men , gentlemen {COM:preceding_word_"gentlemen"_emended} and
well_bread people that come to your house , as you can , and keep him
from the corruption of your servants and meaner people , and about his
goeing abroad or staying at home we have yet time enough to consider .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,67.46

62 . Haveing here under consideration how great the influence of
company is , and how prone we are all , espetially children , to <P_68>
imitation , I must take the liberty to set down one thing <paren> though
I doubt not but you need not be advised of it , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,68.47

but if that were a reason for me to {COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended}
passe it in silence I might very well be excused from writeing at all
<$$paren> . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,68.48

That which I was goeing to say is this that if you will have your son
have a respect for you and your orders you must have a great reverence
for him . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,68.49

<font> Maxima debetur pueris reverentia . <$$font>
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,68.50

You must doe noething before him which you would not have him imitate .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,68.51

If any thing scape you which you would have passe for a fault in him ,
he will be sure to shelter himself under your example ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,68.52

and how then you will be able to come at him to correct it in the right
way I doe not easily see , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,68.53

and if you will punish him for it he can@ @not look on it as a thing
which reason condemns since you practise it , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,68.54

but he will be apt to interpret it the peevishnesse and arbitrary
imperiousnesse of a father which without any ground for it would deny
his son the liberty and pleasures he takes himself ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,68.55

or if you would have it thought it is a liberty you take belonging to a
man and not a child , you add but a new temptation , since you must
always remember that children affect to be men earlier then is thought ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,68.56

and they love breetches not for their cut or ease but because it is a
marke of a step towards manhood . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,68.57

I know he will run litle risque from you your self ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,68.58

and therefore I adde that what I say of your cariage before your
children must extend itself to all those who have any authority over
them , or for whom you would have them have any respect .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,68.59

And this leads me to another consideration , which is the haveing
somebody about them whose only businesse should be to forme their tender
years and manners . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,68.60

<P_69>

63 . In all the whole businesse of Education there is nothing to be
lesse hearkened to nor harder to be well observed then what I am now
goeing to say , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,69.62

and that is that I would from their first begining to talke have some
describd sober wise person whose care it should be to fashon them right
and keep them from ill , espetially the ill of bad company .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,69.63

I thinke this province requires great sobriety , temper , tendernesse ,
diligence and discretion , qualitys hardly to be found united in persons
that are to be had for ordinary wages , or easily to be found any where
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,69.64

As to the charge of it , I thinke it will be the money best laid out
that can be about our children , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,69.65

and therefor though it may be expensive more then is ordinary , yet it
can@ @not be thought deare . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,69.66

He that purchases his child a good minde , well principled , temperd to
virtue and usefullnesse and adorned with civility and good breeding
makes a better purchase for him then if he laid out the money for an
addition of more earth to his former acres . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,69.67

Spare it in toyes and playgames , in silke and ribbons , laces and other
uselesse expences as much as you please , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,69.68

but be not sparing in soe necessary a part as this .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,69.69

T@ @is not good husbandry to make his fortune rich and his minde poore .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,69.70

I have often with great admiration seen people lavish it profusely in
trikeing up their children in fine clothes , lodging and feeding them
sumptuously , allowing them more then enough of uselesse servants , and
yet at the same time starve their mindes and take noe care to cover that
which is the most shamefull nakednesse , viz. their natural wrong
inclinations and ignorance . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,69.71

This I can looke on as noe other then a sacrificing to their own vanity
, it shewing more their pride then true care of the good of their
children . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,69.72

Whatsoever you imploy to the advantage of your sons minde will shew your
true kindenesse , though it be to the lessening of his estate .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,69.73

A wise and good man can hardly want either the opinion or reality of
being great or happy , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,69.74

but he that is <P_70> foolish or vitious can be neither great nor happy
, what estate soever you leave him , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,70.75

and I aske you whether there be not men in the world whom you had rather
have your son be with 500@ @=li= then some other you know with 5000@
@=li= ? LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,70.76

64 . I conclude then that the consideration of charge will not deterre
you from thoughts like mine . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,70.77

The great difficulty will be where to finde a person fit ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,70.78

for people of small age , parts or vertue are unfit for this imployment
, LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,70.79

and those that have greater will hardly be got to undertake such a
charge . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,70.80

You must therefore looke out early and enquire every where ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,70.81

for the world has people of all sorts , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,70.82

and I remember Montagne says in one of his Essays that the learned
Castalio was fain to make trenchers at Geneva to keepe himself from
starving when his father would have given any money for such a tutor for
his son , and Castalio have willingly imbraced such an imployment upon
very reasonable termes , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,70.83

but this was for want of intelligence . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,70.84

65 . This is what I have thought concerning the generall method of
Educating your son , which though I am apt to thinke may have some
influence on the whole course of his Education , yet I am far from
imagining it conteins all those particulars which his growing years or
peculiar temper may require . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,70.85

Nay , haveing writ these general parts
{COM:preceding_word_"parts"_emended} in the warmth of my running
thoughts , there may I suppose be many things I have overseen which if
hereafter they shall offer them selves to my thoughts in any of the
returns of my minde to its usuall and most acceptable imployment of
thinking on you and yours , I shall take the liberty to mention them to
you . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,70.86

66 . In the meane time , haveing premised this in generall , we will
now descend to a more particular consideration of your sons Education .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,70.87

That which every gentleman {COM:preceding_word_"gentleman"_emended}
desires <paren> that takes any care of his <P_71> Education <$$paren>
for his son besides the estate he leaves him are I suppose these 4
things , Virtue , Wisdome , Breeding , and Learning .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,71.88

I will not trouble myself whether these words doe not some of them stand
for the same thing or really include one another .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,71.89

I leave to men skild in words the glory of criticiseing .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,71.90

It suffices me if I make myself understood , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,71.91

and I hope you will finde noe difficulty to comprehend my meaning .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,71.92

67 . I place virtue as the first and most necessary of those endowments
that belong to a man or a gentleman
{COM:preceding_word_"gentleman"_emended} as absolutely necessary to make
him valued and beloved by others , acceptable and tolerable to himself .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,71.93

Without that I thinke he will neither be happy in this or the other
world . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,71.94

As the foundation of this there ought very early to be imprinted on his
minde a true notion of God as of the supreame being , from whom we
receive all our good , that loves us and gives us all things ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,71.95

and soe worke him into a love and reverence of him .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,71.96

This is enough to begin with , without goeing to explain this matter any
farther , for feare least by talkeing too early to him of spirits and
being unseasonably forward to make him understand the incomprehensible
nature of that infinite being , his head be either fild with false or
perplexd with unintelligible notions of him . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,71.97

Let him only be told upon occasion of a God that governs all things ,
hears and sees every thing , and does all manner of good to those that
love and obey him . You will finde being told of such a God other
thoughts will be apt to rise up fast enough in his minde about him ,
which as you observe them to have any mistakes you must set right ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,71.98

and I thinke it would be better if men generally rested in such an Idea
of God without being too curious in their notions about a being which we
all acknowledge incomprehensible , whereby many who have not strength
and cleareness of thought to destinguish between what they can and what
they can@ @not know run them selves into <P_72> superstition or Atheisme
, makeing God like themselves , or because they can@ @not comprehend any
thing else , none at all . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,72.99

68 . Haveing by gentle degrees , as you finde them capeable of it ,
setled such an Idea of God in his minde and taught him to pray to him ,
trouble not his younger years with any discourse of spirits ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,72.100

and be sure hinder as much as you can any others from doeing so ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,72.101

for it commonly tends to fill their mindes with fearfull and distracting
apprehensions , it being the usuall method of servants to make children
obedient to their commands to tell them of spirits and Goblins , whereby
though sometimes they keepe them from commiteing some litle faults , yet
the remedy is much worse then the disease , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,72.102

and they leave upon their mindes Ideas that follow them with terror and
affrightment , make them dastards and affraid of their shadows and
darkenesse all their lives after , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,72.103

for it is to be taken notice that the first impressions sinke deepest
into the mindes of children , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,72.104

and the notions they are possessd with when young are scarce by any
industry or art ever quite whiped out after . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,72.105

And I have had those complaine to me when men who had been thus used
when young , that though their reason corrected the wrong Idea they had
then taken in of God as an old man sitting in heaven , and though they
were satisfied that there was noe cause to feare invisible beings more
in the darke then in the light , yet that these notions were apt still
upon any occasion to start up first in their prepossesd phansys and not
to be removed without some pains . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,72.106

And to let you see how lasting frightfull images are that take place in
the minde earely , I shall here tell you a pretty remarkeable but true
story . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,72.107

There was in Glocester a man of a disturbd brain whom the boys used to
tease when he came in their way in the streets .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,72.108

This fellow one day seeing in the street one of the lads that used to
vex him stepd <P_73> into a Cutlers shop he was neare ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,73.109

and there seising on a naked sword made after the boy , who seeing him
comeing soe armd betooke him selfe to his feet and ran for his life ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,73.110

and by good luck had law and heels enough to reach his fathers house
before the other could get up to him . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,73.111

The doore was only latchd , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,73.112

and when he had the latch in his hand he turnd about his head to see how
neare his pursuer was , who was at the entrance of the porch with his
sword up ready to strike , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,73.113

and he had just time to get in and clap up the dore to {SIC:to_to} avoid
the blow , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,73.114

but though his body scaped his minde did not . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,73.115

This frightning Idea made soe deepe an impression there that it lasted
many years , if not all his life after . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,73.116

For telling this story when he was a man he said that after that time
till then he never went in at that dore that he could remember at any
time without lookeing back , whatever businesse he had in his head , or
how litle soever before he came thither he thought of this madman .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,73.117

69 . If children were let alone they would be noe more afraid in the
darke then in broad sunshine . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,73.118

They would in their turns as much welcome the one for sleep as the other
to play in , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,73.119

and there should be noe destinction made to them by any discourse of
more danger or terrible things in the one then the other .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,73.120

But if the folly of any one about them should doe them this harme to
make them thinke there is any difference between being in the darke and
winkeing , you must get it out of their mindes as soon as you can , and
let them know that God who made all things good for them made the night
that they might sleepe the better and the quieter , and that besides him
who is good and kinde there is nothing in the darke , nothing that can
hurt them . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,73.121

What is to be known more of him and spirits , espetially the evil ones ,
they will , doe what you can , come to have notice of and phansys about
early enough and sooner then would be desird . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,73.122

<P_74>

Having laid the foundations of virtue in a true notion of a God such as
the creed wisely teaches as far as his age is capeable , and by
accustoming him to pray to him , the next thing to be taken care of is
to keep him exactly to speaking of truth and by all the ways imaginable
inclining him to be good_naturd . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,74.124

Let him know that twenty faults are sooner to be forgiven then the
straining of truth to cover any one by an excuse .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,74.125

And to teach them betimes to love and be good_naturd to others is to lay
early the true foundation for justice . All injustice generally
springing from a too great love of our selves and too litle of others .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,74.126

70 . This is all I shall say of this matter at present ;
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,74.127

as your son grows up he will discover his natural inclination , which as
it inclines him more then is convenient on one or t@ @other side from
the right path of virtue ought to have proper remedys applyd ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,74.128

for few of Adams children are so happy as not to be borne with some byas
in their natural temper , which it is the businesse of Education either
to take off or counterbalance , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,74.129

but t@ @is in vain to thinke of remedys before we know the disease .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,74.130

71 . Wisdome I take in the vulgar acceptation for a mans managing his
businesse ably and with foresight in this world .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,74.131

This is the product of a good natural temper , application of minde ,
and experience togeather , and soe not to be taught children .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,74.132

The greatest thing that in them can be donne towards it is to hinder
them as much as may be from being cunning , which being the ape of
wisdome is the most distant from it that can be ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,74.133

and as an ape for the likenesse it has to a man , wanting what really
should make him soe , is by soe much the uglier , Cunning is only the
want of understanding , which because it can@ @not compasse its
businesse by direct ways would doe it by a trick and circumvention ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,74.134

and the mischeif of it is , a cunning trick helps but once ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,74.135

but hinders ever after . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,74.136

Noe cover was ever made <P_75> either soe big or soe fine as to hide its
self . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,75.137

Noe body was ever so cunning as to conceale their being soe ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,75.138

and when they are once discovered every body is shie , every body
distrustfull of them , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,75.139

and all the world forwardly joyn to oppose and defeat them , whilst the
open direct wise man has every body makes way for him ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,75.140

and goes directly to his businesse . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,75.141

I doe not suspect that your son is like to be of a coverd wily temper ,
when I consider his make and from what stock he comes .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,75.142

I am apt to thinke he will be quite of another strain ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,75.143

and therefore I will not trouble you or myself any farther concerning
this matter . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,75.144

72 . The next good quality belonging to a gentleman
{COM:preceding_word_"gentleman"_emended} is good breeding and civility ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,75.145

and though this has the name of good breeding as if peculiarly the
effect of Education , yet I would not have young children much perplexd
about it , I meane about puting off their hats and makeing legs modishly
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,75.146

Teach them to be good_naturd if you can , and this sort of good manners
will not be wanting , civility being in truth noething but a care not to
show any slighting or contempt of anyone in conversation .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,75.147

What are the most allowd and esteemd ways of expressing this is as
peculiar and different in severall countrys of the world as their
languages , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,75.148

and therfor if it be rightly considerd rules and discourses made to
children about it are as uselesse and impertinent as it would be now and
then to give a rule or two of the Japan tongue to one that converses
only with Englishmen . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,75.149

Read what lectures you please to your son , such as is his company ,
such will be his manners . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,75.150

A ploughman of your neighbourhood that has never been out of his parish
will be as soon in his language as his cariage a Courtier , that is
neither will be more polite then of those he uses to converse with .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,75.151

And therefor of this noe other care can be taken ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,75.152

and in good earnest , if I were to speake my minde freely , Soe children
doe nothing out of obstinancy , pride and ill nature , t@ @is noe <P_76>
great matter how they put of their hats or make legs , or doe it at all
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,76.153

If you can teach them to love and respect other people , they will as
their age requires it finde ways to expresse it acceptably to every one
according to the fashons they have been used to ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,76.154

and as to what is becoming in their motions and cariage of their bodys ,
a danceing master , as has been said , when it is fit will teach them
what is most becomeing . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,76.155

In the meane time , whilst they are young people , expect not that
children should be over_mindefull of these ceremonys .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,76.156

Carelessenesse is allowd to that age LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,76.157

and becomes them as well as complements doe growne people ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,76.158

or if at least some very nice and not very wise will thinke it a fault ,
I am sure t@ @is a fault that should be overlookd and left to time and
conversation only to cure , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,76.159

and therefore I would not have your son <paren> as I often see children
are <$$paren> molested or chid about it , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,76.160

but where there is pride or ill nature appearing in his cariage , there
he must be perswaded or shamd out of it . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,76.161

73 . This that I have said here , if it were well reflected on , would
perhaps lead us a litle farther , and let us see of what influence
company is . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,76.162

T@ @is not the modes of civility alone that are imprinted by
conversation . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,76.163

The influence of company sinkes deeper then the outside ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,76.164

and possibly if a true estimate were made of the morality and religions
of the world we should finde that the far greater part of mankinde
received even those opinions and ceremonys they would die for rather
from the fashons of their Country and the constant practise of those
about them then from any conviction of their reasons .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,76.165

I mention this only to let you see of what moment I thinke company is to
your son in all the parts of his life , and therefore how much that one
part is to be weighd and provided for , it being of greater force to
worke upon him then all you can doe besides . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,76.166

74 . You will wonder perhaps that I put Learning last , espetially if
<P_77> I tell you I thinke it the least part . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,77.167

This will seeme strange in the mouth <paren> though not of a learned yet
<$$paren> of a bookish man , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,77.168

and this being usually the cheif if not only bustle and stir about
children , that almost alone which is thought on when people talke of
Education , makes it the greater paradox . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,77.169

When I consider what a deale adoe is made about a litle Latin and Greeke
and how many years are foolishly spent in it , and what a noise and
businesse it makes to noe purpose , I can hardly forbeare thinking that
the parents of children live in feare of the schoolemasters rod and
therefor sacrifice their children to this Moloch to appease his anger .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,77.170

How else is it possible that a childe should be chaind to the oar 7 or 8
or 10 of the best yeares of his life to get fee fa fum , bonus bona
bonum , to get a language or two which I thinke might be had at a great
deale cheaper rate of pains and time , and be learnt almost in playing .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,77.171

75 . But it will be time enough hereafter to discourse more of that
matter , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,77.172

only in the meane time give me leave to say I can@ @not with patience
thinke that you should put your son into the heard and have him driven
with whip and scourge as if he were to run the gantlet through the
severall classes , Ad capiendum ingenii cultum .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,77.173

What then , say you , would you not have him read and write ?
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,77.174

Shall he be more ignorant then the Clerk of our parish , who takes
Hopkins and Sternall for the best poets in the world , whom yet he makes
worse then they are by his ill reading ? LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,77.175

Not soe . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,77.176

Not soe fast , I beseech you . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,77.177

Reading and writeing and Learning I allow to be necessary , but yet not
the cheif businesse . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,77.178

I assure you you would thinke him a very foolish fellow that should not
value a virtuous or a wise man infinetly before a great Schollar .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,77.179

Not but that I thinke learning a great help to both in well disposd
mindes , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,77.180

but it must be confessd also that in others not soe disposd it helps
them only to be more foolish or more wicked . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,77.181

I say this that when you consider of the <P_78> breeding of your son and
are looking out for a Schoolmaster and a Tutor , that you would not have
, as is usuall , Latin and Logique only in your thoughts .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,78.182

Let them come in , but in the second place , as subservient only to
greater and more necessary Qualitys . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,78.183

Seeke out some body that may know how discreetly to frame his manners ,
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,78.184

place him in hands where you may as much as is {TEXT:missing_"is"}
possible secure his innocence , cherish and nurse up the good , and
gently correct and weed out any bad inclinations .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,78.185

This is the main point , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,78.186

and this being provided for , learning may be had into the bargain , and
that as I thinke at a very easy rate , by methods that may be thought on
. LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,78.187

76 . Now that he can talke , t@ @is time , you thinke , he should begin
to learne , learne to read I meane , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,78.188

but I thinke as to this great care is to be taken that it be never made
as a businesse to him , that he never looks on it as a taske .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,78.189

We naturally from our cradles love liberty , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,78.190

and have therefore an aversion for many things for noe other reason but
because they are injoynd us . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,78.191

I have always had a phansy that learning might be made play and
recreation to children and that they might be brought to desire to be
taught , if it were proposd to them as a thing of honour , credit ,
delight , and recreation , if they were never chid nor corrected for the
neglect of it . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,78.192

That which confirms me in this opinion is that amongst the Portugeses t@
@is soe much a fashon and emulation amongst their children to learne to
read and write that they can@ @not hinder them from it .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,78.193

They will learne it one from another , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,78.194

and are as intent on it as if it were forbidden them .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,78.195

And I remember that being at a freinds house whose younger son , a child
in coats , was not easily brought to his book <paren> being taught to
read at home by his mother <$$paren> I advised to trie another way then
requiring it of him as a duty . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,78.196

We then by talke with him and discourse on purpose one with another made
him apprehend that it was the priviledg and advantage of Heirs and Elder
brothers to be Schollars , that this made a <P_79> fine gentleman
{COM:preceding_word_"gentleman"_emended} and beloved by every body , and
that for younger brothers t@ @was a favour to admit them to that
breeding , to be taught to read and write was more then came to their
share , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,79.197

they might be ignorant bumkins and clowns if they pleased .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,79.198

This soe wrought upon the child that afterwards he desird to be taught ,
would come himself to his mother to Learne , and would not let his maid
be quiet till she heard him his lesson . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,79.199

I doe not doubt but some way like this might be taken with other
children , and when their tempers are found , some thoughts be instilld
into them that might set them upon desireing of learning themselves ,
and they themselves seeke it as another sort of play or recreation .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,79.200

But then as I said before it must never be imposd as a taske , nor made
a trouble to them . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,79.201

There are dice and playthings with the letters on them to teach children
the alpabet {COM:sic} by playing , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,79.202

and twenty other ways may be found out , suitable to their particular
tempers , to make this kinde of learning a sport to them .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,79.203

I would not , I say , have learning made by any means his businesse .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,79.204

He should never be driven to it , nor it be imposd on him as a taske .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,79.205

I thinke the beginning , which in all things is the hardest , he may be
brought to play himself into , and may be taught to read without ever
perceiving that it is anything but a sport . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,79.206

Children should not have any thing like worke or serious imposed upon
them . LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,79.207

Their mindes nor bodys will not beare it , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,79.208

it injures their healths , LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,79.209

and their being forced and tied down to their books in an age at enmity
with all such restraint has , I doubt not , been the reason why a great
many have hated books and learning all their lives after .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,79.210

T@ @is like a surfet that leaves an aversion behind not to be removed .
LOCKE-1685-E3-P2,79.211

