<BEGIN_machyn-1556-e1-p2>

<P_63>

The xviij day of May was drane a-pone a sled a proper man namyd Wylliam
Thomas from the Towre unto Tyborne ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,63.3

the {COM:lacuna} MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,63.4

he was clarke to the consell ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,63.5

and he was hangyd , and after ys hed stryken of , and then quartered ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,63.6

and the morow after ys hed was sett on London bryge , and iij quarters
set over Crepullgate . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,63.7

The xx day of May my lade Elsabeth the quen's
{COM:preceding_word_"quen's"_emended} syster cam owt of the Towre ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,63.8

and toke her barge at Towre warfe , and so to Rychemond , and from thens
unto Wyndsor , and so to Wodstoke . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,63.9

The xvj day of May , and the furst yere of quen Mare , was Henry Machun
lvj yere old , Anno Domini M._v=c=_liiij . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,63.10

<bracket> The xxiij day of May a certain woman was set on the pillory in
Cheapside for speaking lies and seditious words against the queen's
majesty . <$$bracket> MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,63.11

The xxiiij day of May was Corpus Christi day , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,63.12

and {COM:lacuna} ther wher mony goodly prossessyons
{COM:preceding_word_"prossessyons"_emended} in mony parryches
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,63.13

{COM:lacuna} was yll , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,63.14

for mony had long torchys garnyshyd in {COM:preceding_word_"in"_emended}
the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} old fassyouns , and stayffe
torchys bornyng , and mony canopies
{COM:preceding_word_"canopies"_emended} borne <P_64> a-bowt the strett ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.15

and sant Pulcurs parryche went a-bowt ther owne parryche , and in
Smythfeld ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.16

as they wher goohyng , ther cam a man unto the prest that
{COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} bare
{COM:preceding_word_"bare"_emended} the sacrament ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.17

and began to pluke ytt owt of ys hand , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.18

and contenent he druw ys dager {COM:blank} , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.19

and contenent he was taken and cared to Nuwgate .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.20

The xxv day of May was ij men set on the pelere in Chepe ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.21

one ys ere was naylyd for horabull lyes and sedyssyous wordes aganst the
quen's {COM:preceding_word_"quen's"_emended} mageste and her consell ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.22

and th'@ @odur was sedyssyous slanderous wordes gaynst the quens
{COM:preceding_word_"quens"_emended} mageste and her consell and the
mages {COM:lacuna} MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.23

The xxv day of May , wyche was the sam day , whent owt of the Towre
northwarde the yerle of Devonshyre , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.24

and cared into Northhamtunshyre to a castyll called Fotheringay
{COM:preceding_word_"Fotheringay"_emended} with serten of the gard , and
dyvers knyghtes , by iij and iiij of the cloke in the mornyng .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.25

The xxvj day of May was the sam man that had ys her {GLOSS:ear} naylyd
a-for , was ys thuder her {COM:the_other_ear} naylyd ; and a woman sett
on the pelere for spykyng of serten words thuchyng {GLOSS:touching} the
quens prosedynges and the consell . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.26

The xxvij day of May whent owt of the Towre unto Westmynster hall by
land , and cam my lord John Gray , the duke of Suffoke@ @'s
{COM:preceding_word_"Suffoke's"_emended} brodur latt beheddyd .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.27

<bracket> The xxix day of May the Queen removed from St. James's ,
passing through the park , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.28

and took her barge at Whitehall , and so to <$$bracket> Rychmond , on
her progress . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.29

The xxx day of May was ij sett on the pelere , a man
{COM:preceding_word_"man"_emended} and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} a {COM:preceding_word_"a"_emended}
woman {COM:preceding_word_"woman"_emended} ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.30

but the woman had here ere {GLOSS:her_ear} nayled to the pelere for
spykyng of falles lyes and rumors ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.31

the man was for sedyssyous wordes and slanderous wordes .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.32

The xxxj day of May was a marchand-man of {COM:lacuna} slayne by a
servyng-man with-in Sant Marten {COM:lacuna} . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,64.33

<P_65>

The furst day of Junii was the sam woman set on the pillory
{COM:preceding_word_"pillory"_emended} , that
{COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} her ere was nayled a-ffor ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.35

was her thuder {COM:her_other_ear} nayled thys sam day for the sam
offense . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.36

The iiij day of Junii wasse all the galus in London plokyd done in all
places . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.37

The sam day the mayre of London and the althermen commanded that a
skaffold shuld be mad abowt the crosse , for to be gyldyd agaynst the
prynse of Spayne commyng in . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.38

The sam tyme wher granted by the lord mayre and the aldermen and the
common consell a_xv and a d. for the commonse , payd forth-with-all
toward the commyng of the prynsse of Spayne . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.39

The sam tym wher commondyd that ij althermen to wache evere nyght , and
j or ij constabulls to wache evere nyght , tyll iij or iiij of the cloke
in the mornyng . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.40

The ix day of Juin was the crosse in Chepe covered with canves from the
fott to the tope , and endyd , for the prynce's
{COM:preceding_word_"prynce's"_emended} coming
{COM:preceding_word_"coming"_emended} , and gyldyd .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.41

The x day of Juin dyd pryche at Powlles crosse master doctor Pendleton ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.42

and be-twyn x and a_xj of the cloke ther was a gunne shott over the
prycher , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.43

and yt {GLOSS:hit} the wall , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.44

and yt was a pellett of tyne . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.45

The xij day of Juin was a gret fray be-twyn the lord Warden's
{COM:preceding_word_"Warden's"_emended} servands of Kent and the Ines
{COM:lacuna} of Gray's {COM:preceding_word_"Gray's"_emended} inn ,
Lynkolne's {COM:preceding_word_"Lynkolne's"_emended} inn ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.46

and sum slayn and hurt . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.47

The xxiiij day of Juin was a goodly masse kept at sant Edmond in
Lumbard-strett for the strangers , and the chyrche hangyd with ryche
cloth . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.48

The xxv day of Juin anodur masse kept at the Gray-frers for the sextons
of London , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.49

and after pressessyons with the whetes plahyng , and clarkes syngyng ,
thrug Chepe-syd unto Soper lane , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.50

and agayn thrug Powlles chyrche yerd by master denes place
{COM:preceding_word_"place"_emended} , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,65.51

<P_66>

and thrug Warwyke lane unto the Gray-frers , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.53

and so to dener unto the Kukes-hall {COM:Cook's} .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.54

The sam day cam to Londun by water the prynche of Pymon with a grett
compeny of Spaneards ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.55

sum had crosses , sum red , and sum gren , and sum whyt ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.56

and so to {COM:unfinished} MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.57

The xxix day of Juin , the wyche was sant Peter and Powlles day , was a
fayre at Westmynster abbay ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.58

and ther was a goodly pressessyon , and after masse ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.59

and ther the prynse of Pymon and dyvers Spaneards ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.60

and hard messe in kyng Henry the vij chapelle . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.61

The vj day of Julij was a goodly sermon by
{COM:preceding_word_"by"_emended} on of the prebendares of Powlles ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.62

and ther was a nuw skaffold mayd ther for the mayd that spake in the
wall and wystelyd in Althergat stret ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.63

and she sayd openly that yt was on John Drakes ser Antony Knevett
servand ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.64

and she whept petefully , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.65

and she knelyd MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.66

and askyd God mercy , and the quen ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.67

and bad all pepull be ware of false thechyng , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.68

for she sayd that she shuld have many goodly thynges gyffyn her
{COM:lacuna} MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.69

The xxj day of July by x of the cloke was
{COM:preceding_word_"was"_emended} proclaimed
{COM:preceding_word_"proclaimed"_emended} thrug London that the prynche
of Spayne was arrived {COM:preceding_word_"arrived"_emended} at
{COM:preceding_word_"at"_emended} Southampton
{COM:preceding_word_"Southampton"_emended} and that evere pere and lord
and lade shuld resort {COM:preceding_word_"resort"_emended} unto her
graces {COM:preceding_word_"graces"_emended} cete of Wynchester with all
spede to her graceus weddyng . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.70

The sam after_non commondyd by my lord mayre that hevere man shuld make
bone-fyres in evere strett , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.71

so ther was mony plases had tabuls and {COM:lacuna} tyll x at nyght ,
and ryngyng and plahyng . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.72

The xxiij day of July wher commondyd that evere {COM:lacuna} shuld goo a
prossessyon and to syng <font> Te Deum laudamus <$$font> in evere
parryche in London , and ryngyng of the belles .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,66.73

The xxix day of July dyd pryche at Powlles crosse master <P_67> Harpfeld
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,67.74

and he dyd pray in ys bedes for the kyng and the quen Phelipe and Mare
by the grace of God kyng and quene of England , Franse , Napuls ,
Jerusalem , Ierland , deffendors of the fayth , prynces of Spayne and
Sycylye , archedukes of Austryche , dukes of Mylayne , Burgundye , and
Brabant ; contes of Haspurge , Flandurs , and Tyrole ; whyt thes stylle
as ys a-ffor . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,67.75

The xxx day of July was bered at Grenwyche ser Robart Whentworth knyght
, with armes and dyvers mornares . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,67.76

The vj day of September wher creatyd ser Antony Browne creatyd vyconte
lord Montyguw . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,67.77

<bracket> The j day of August the King and Queen were proclaimed in
London , by the titles as above , <$$bracket> dukes of Melayne ,
Burgundye and Brabant , contes of Haspurge , Flandurs and Tyrole .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,67.78

The {COM:lacuna} day of August was bered master Lambard , altheman and
draper , with mony mornars , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,67.79

and they bare stayff torchys , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,67.80

had mantyll fryresse {COM:sic} gownes , and the armes of ys craft and
the armes of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} the marchant adventorers
. MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,67.81

The vij day of August was bered the wyff of master Lambard alderman and
draper , with-in the monyth of the sam , with torchys and tapurs .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,67.82

The viij day of August was bered the jentle
{COM:preceding_word_"jentle"_emended} master Austyne Hynd altherman ,
the wych hyt had {COM:preceding_word_"had"_emended} plesyd Almyghty God
that he had levyd tyll myghelmas
{COM:preceding_word_"myghelmas"_emended} , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,67.83

he shuld had byne the nuw mayre of thys noble
{COM:preceding_word_"noble"_emended} cete of London ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,67.84

with a standard and a cote of armur and iiij penons of armes and
a_C._iiij=xx=. of mantyll frysse gownes for men and women , and the
women havyng raylles , with xxiiij torchys , and ij fayre whyt branchys
, and mony mornares , and the compenye of the Clarkes , and with vj
dosen of schochyons of ys armes , and a_C. of blake gownes , and
a-boyffe the nombur , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,67.85

and after a gret dener . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,67.86

The vij day of September was bered in sant Bothulff with-owt
Bysshope-gate chyrche , good master James Suttun sqwyre , and <P_68>
clarke of the gren cloth unto kyng Henry the viij=th= . and unto kyng
Edward the vj=th= . and unto quen Mare , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.87

and so buried with a cot_armur , and a penon of armes , and ij dosen of
schochyons , and ij whyt branchys and xij stayff torchys , and mony
mornars , and the compene of the Clarkes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.88

and vj of ys servantes bare hym in blake cotes , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.89

and ther dyd pryche master doctur Smyth at ys masse .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.90

<bracket> The same day was the funeral of sir Harry Huncotes knight ,
alderman , and fishmonger . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.91

<bracket> {COM:lacuna} pore men and women of {COM:lacuna} mantyll frysse
{COM:lacuna} MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.92

Fyssmongers halle hangyd with blake and with armes ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.93

then {COM:preceding_word_"then"_emended} came the standard and then
mornares ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.94

and then came {COM:preceding_word_"came"_emended} ys armes , and then a
harold bayryng ys cot_armur MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.95

{COM:lacuna} master Clarenshws the kyng at armes in ys ryche cote ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.96

then cam the corsse , and a-bowtt the corsse iiij mo penons , and a-bott
xxiiij torchys bornyng , and ij goodly whytt branchys ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.97

{COM:lacuna} and cam mornars the sward-berrer , my lord mayre , and the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} aldermen
{COM:preceding_word_"aldermen"_emended} mornars , and the resedue of
them in vyolett , and then {COM:lacuna} boyth men and women ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.98

and so to the chyrche , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.99

and then on ha {COM:lacuna} prahynge for ys solle ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.100

and then began the durge MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.101

and {COM:lacuna} pepull whent to the halle to drynke boyth spysse and
wyn ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.102

and the morow mass of <font> requiem ; <$$font> MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.103

and after they offered furst ys cot_armur , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.104

and after cam the harold MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.105

and {COM:lacuna} offered ys target ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.106

and after ij offered ys sword ; and after ij morners
{COM:preceding_word_"morners"_emended} ys elmet with the crest ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.107

and then the mayre offered , and the altherman , and the mornars , and
the craft ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.108

and , all done , master doctor Smyth dyd pryche ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.109

and when masse was don then offered the standard and the v penonsse of
armes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.110

and after to the Fyssmongars hall to dener ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.111

and my lord mayre and the althermen and all the mornars ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.112

and {COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} ther was a grett dener as youe
have sene now_a_days . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.113

The xiiij day of September was iij sett in the pelere for playhyng with
falsse dysse and deseyffeng honest men in playng ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,68.114

and <P_69> the same day was ij wypyd a-bowt London , after
{COM:preceding_word_"after"_emended} a care-hars , for lotheryng ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.115

and as wacabondes wher they taken . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.116

The xvij day of September was a proclamasyon that all vacabonds and
lotherus , boyth Englys men and all maner of strangers , that have no
master , shuld avoyd the cete and the subarbes a-pon gret payn .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.117

The xx day of September was ij men dran of ij hyrdles unto Tyburne and
un-to hangyng , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.118

the ij for qwynnyng of noythy money , and deseyvyng of the quen's
{COM:preceding_word_"quen's"_emended} subjects ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.119

the one dwelt in London sum tym . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.120

Item the {COM:blank} day of October was a woman sett on the pelere for
sedyssyous wordes . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.121

{COM:lacuna} and alle to evere body that wold cum
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.122

{COM:lacuna} money a-way for lake of pepull . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.123

The xxiij day of September dyd pryche doctor Rud at Powlles crosse ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.124

and he recantyd and repentyd that he ever was mared ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.125

and sayd openly that he cold not mare by God's law .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.126

The xxvj day of September wher ij yonge men sett on the pelere , and
ther ere nayled for spykyng sedyssyous wordes and malessyous wordes
aganst the commonwelth . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.127

The xxvij day of September wher iiij hangyd , on was a Spaneard , at
Tyburne : MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.128

ij wher goodly felows . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.129

The xxviij day of September the Kyng and the Quen removyd from Hamtun
court unto Westmynster tho her grace's
{COM:preceding_word_"grace's"_emended} plasse .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.130

The xxx day of September dyd pryche at Powlles crosse my lord Chansseler
the bysshope of Wynchester , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.131

and he mad a goodly sermon ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.132

and ther wher as grett a audyensse as ever I saw in my lyff .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.133

The ij day October whent from Westmynster xx carres with veges
{GLOSS:wedges} of gold and sylver to the Towre to be quennyd
{GLOSS:coined} . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,69.134

The iiij day of October was the monyth myn {GLOSS:month's_mind} at
Waltham <P_70> Abbay of master James Suttun sqwyre , and clarke of the
grencloth ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.135

and ther was a sarmon , and a dolle of money unto evere howsse that ned
the charete , and after a grett dener . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.136

The ij day of October was bered the nobull duke of Norffok at a plasse
callyd Fremyngham chyrche ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.137

and ther was a goodly hersse of wax as I have sene in thes days , with a
dosen of banerrolles of ys progene , and xij_dosen penselles , xij dosen
of kochyons , and with standard , and iij cotes of armes , and a baner
of damaske , and iiij banars of emages , and mony mornars , and a gret
dolle , and after gret dener . <bracket> For the furnishing of which
dinner were killed forty great oxen and a_hundred sheep , and sixty
calves , besides venison , swans , and cranes , capons , rabbits ,
pigeons , pikes , and other provisions both flesh and fish .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.138

There was also great plenty of wine ; and of bread and beer as great
plenty as ever had been known , both for <$$bracket> ryche and pore :
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.139

all the country {COM:preceding_word_"country"_emended} came
{COM:preceding_word_"came"_emended} thither
{COM:preceding_word_"thither"_emended} ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.140

and {COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} a grett dolle of money ther wher
bestowed {COM:preceding_word_"bestowed"_emended} upon
{COM:preceding_word_"upon"_emended} the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} poorer
{COM:preceding_word_"poorer"_emended} sort
{COM:preceding_word_"sort"_emended} ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.141

for he was cared from {COM:unfinished} . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.142

The v day of October was the obsequy of the duke of Northfoke at sant
Mare Overes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.143

a hers mad with tymber , and hangyd with blake , and with ys armes , and
iiij goodly candlestyks gyldyd , and iiij grett tapurs , and with ys
armes , and alle the gwyre hangyd with blake and armes ; and durge and
masse on the morowe . And my lord chanseler cheffe morner ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.144

and next master controller {COM:preceding_word_"controller"_emended} ,
and master Gorge Haward ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.145

at the durge my lord Montyguw , my lord admerell , and my lord Brugys ,
and divers others ; and a_xl in gownes and cotes in blake ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.146

and after to my lord's {COM:preceding_word_"lord's"_emended} place
{COM:preceding_word_"place"_emended} , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.147

and gret ryngyng ij days . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.148

The vij day of October was the monyth mynd
{COM:preceding_word_"mynd"_emended} of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended}
ser Hare Huncotes knyght , late mayre and altherman , and Fyssmonger of
London , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.149

and ther ys hersse bornyd MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.150

{COM:lacuna}

durge , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.152

and the morow-mas the furst masse of the trinity
{COM:preceding_word_"trinity"_emended} , and with a harold ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.153

and after the masse of requiem ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,70.154

and doctur Smyth dyd <P_71> pryche , the reder of Oxford ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.155

and after a {COM:preceding_word_"a"_emended} great
{COM:preceding_word_"great"_emended} dener ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.156

and he gayff muche money to evere ward
{COM:preceding_word_"ward"_emended} in London MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.157

and he has fondyd ij prestes to syng , on in London and th'@ @odur in
Lynckolneshyre , wher he was borne : MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.158

thys shall be for ever . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.159

The vi day of October was bered at Westmynster a grett man a Spaneard ,
with syngyng , boyth Englys and Spaneards , with a hand-belle , a-for
ryngyng , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.160

and every {COM:preceding_word_"every"_emended} Spaneard havyng gren
torchys , and gren tapurs to the nombur of a_C. bornyng ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.161

and ther bered in the Abbay . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.162

The ix of October was bered master Gorge Medley merser , and lat
Chamburlayn of this cete of London , with ij whyt branchys and xij pore
men with xij stayffes torchys , and xij gownes {TEXT:gomes} , and dyvers
men and women in blake gownes ; and ys armes a-pone ys body , and the
compene of the Clarkes , and of the Marsars ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.163

and when alle was don , they whent hom to drynke ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.164

and the morow after the masse of <font> requiem <$$font> ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.165

and ther dyd pryche doctur Smyth ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.166

and after hom to dener . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.167

The x day of October was bered the good lord De la Warr in Sussex , with
standard , banar of armes , banar-roll , coat_armur , targat , sword ,
elmet , with harolds of armes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.168

then cam the corsse with iiij baners borne abowt hym .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.169

He {COM:preceding_word_"He"_emended} was the best howssekeper in Sussex
in thes days , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.170

and the mone was {COM:preceding_word_"was"_emended} greater
{COM:preceding_word_"greater"_emended} for ym , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.171

for he ded withowt essue ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.172

and ther wher mony morners in blake ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.173

and ther wher a goodly hersse of wax and pensels , and viij_dosen
skochyons ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.174

and ther was a grett dolle of money , and met and drynke as was ever
known in that contrey . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.175

The xij day of October ther was on of the pelere for spykyng of
sedyssyous wordes , a colyar , iij tymes . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.176

The xiiij day of October dyd pryche in the shruds the good bysshope of
Durram , Donstall , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.177

that was Sonday . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,71.178

The xj day of October was the obsequy of {COM:blank} a Spaneard at
<P_72> Westmynster ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,72.179

ther wase a praty herse after the fassyon of Spayn , with blake , and a
goodly masse of <font> requiem ; <$$font> MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,72.180

and the chapell that he was bered in was hong with blake ; and ys harmes
mony , with a baner of armes and cote of armes , alle in gold , and
target and elmett and mony skochyon , and a fere hers-clothe of blake ,
and a crosse of cremesun velvet , done to the ground - the ij yer of
quen Mare . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,72.181

The xv day of October was kyllyd with-owt Tempall bare almost at stren
{COM:Strand} a servand of ser Gorge Gyfford , shamfully slayne by a
Spaneard , a-bowt iiij of the clock {COM:preceding_word_"clock"_emended}
at after-non . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,72.182

The xvj day of October cam rydyng owt of Northfoke on John Day prynter
and ys servand , and a prest , and an-odur prynter , for pryntyng of
noythy bokes , to the Towre . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,72.183

<bracket> The xviij day of October king Philip came down on horseback
from Westminster unto Paul's , with many lords , being received under a
canopy , at the west end : MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,72.184

and the lord Montagu bare the sword afore the king .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,72.185

There he heard mass , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,72.186

and <$$bracket> Spaneards song mase ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,72.187

and after masse he {COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended} went
{COM:preceding_word_"went"_emended} back
{COM:preceding_word_"back"_emended} to {COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended}
Westmynster to dener . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,72.188

The xxj day of October ded the yerle of Warwyke , the eldest sune of the
duke of Northumberland that was heddyd , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,72.189

at ser Henry {COM:preceding_word_"Henry"_emended} Sydnay plasse at
Penthurst at mydnyght he ded . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,72.190

The xxiiij day of October was bered {COM:lacuna} Rechard Townlay in sant
Austyn parryche syd Powlles with xvj torchys and iiij grett tapers
{COM:preceding_word_"tapers"_emended} , and ij whyt branchys , with a
harold of armes , with a standard , a penons of armes , cote , helmet ,
target , sword , the crest a hauke w {COM:lacuna} , and vj dosen of
skochyons , and prestes and clarkes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,72.191

a_C. of the inns {COM:preceding_word_"inns"_emended} of the cort cam to
the berehyng , and the morow masse , and a sermon .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,72.192

The xxvj day of October was hangyd at Charynge-crosse a Spaneard that
kyld a servant of ser Gorge Gefford , the wyche was slayne with-owt
Tempull-bare . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,72.193

The xxix day of October the nuw lord mayre of London , master <P_73>
Lyons groser , toke ys hoathe at Westmynster ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.194

and alle the craftes of London in ther barges , and with stremars ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.195

and ther was a grett penoys decked with ij topes and stremars and
{COM:lacuna} gones and drumes and trumpetes , rohyng to Westmynster up
and don ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.196

and when thay cam hom thay landyd at Powlles warff ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.197

and ther mett the mayr lx in rosett gownes and with targetts and
gyffelyns and blue hattes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.198

and then a goodly pagant , a gryffen with a chyld lyung in harnes , and
sant John Baptyst with a lyon , and ij vodys
{GLOSS:woods,_i.e._wild_men} and a dulle {GLOSS:devil} with squybes
bornyng , and trumpetes blohyng , and drums
{COM:preceding_word_"drums"_emended} and flutes
{COM:preceding_word_"flutes"_emended} , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.199

and then the bachelers with cremesun damaske hedes {COM:hoods} ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.200

and then trumpeters , and the wettes
{GLOSS:waits_not_waists_as_in_footnote_in_edition} of the cete ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.201

and so to yeld-hall to dener , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.202

for ther dynyd my lord chanseler and all the nobuls , and the Spaneardes
, and the juges and lernyd men . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.203

<bracket> The same day sir Thomas Audley , a famous captain , was buried
in saint Mary Overy's . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.204

There attended his funeral the lord Gray , lord Fitzwalter , and divers
other <$$bracket> captaynes and knyghtes and gentyllmen <bracket> to the
number of <$$bracket> lx. be-syd odur . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.205

The furst day of Novembar was carried
{COM:preceding_word_"carried"_emended} by the gard into Nuwgatt serten
men . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.206

The ij day of November was bered at sant Peters in chepe on master
Pekeryng with ij fayre whyt branchys and viij torchys , iiij grett
tapurs , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.207

and he gayffe unto xij pore {COM:preceding_word_"pore"_emended} men
{COM:preceding_word_"men"_emended} xij gownes that dyd bere them ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.208

and eldyd th {COM:lacuna} dyvers mornars , and the felowshype of the
{COM:lacuna} MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.209

and the morow the masse of <font> requiem <$$font> .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.210

The iiij day of November dyd pryche at Powlles crosse master Harpfeld ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.211

and ther wher v dyd penance with shetts a-bowt them , and tapurs and
rods in ther handes , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.212

and the prycher dyd stryke them with a rod , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.213

and ther dyd they stand tyll the sermon was all done ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.214

and then the sumner toke the shets and the rods ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.215

and they whent into Powlles a-gayn , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.216

and so up the syd of the quer ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,73.217

<P_74>

on prest , ys nam ys ser Thomas Lawes , odur wysse callyd ser Thomas
Gryffyn , sum tyme a chanon at Eyssyng spyttyll ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.219

iiij of them wher relegyous men , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.220

and the feyth was a temporall man that had ij wyeffes .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.221

The iiij day of November be-gane a grett fray at Charyng crosse at viij
of the cloke at nyght be-twyn the Spaneardes and Englysmen , the wyche
thrugh wysdom ther wher but a fuwe hort , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.222

and after the next day thay wher serten taken that be-gane yt ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.223

on was a blake-mor , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.224

and was brought a-for the hed offesers by the knyght-marshall's
{COM:preceding_word_"knyght-marshall's"_emended} servandes .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.225

<bracket> The vj day of November the earl of Shrewsbury came riding to
London with vj=xx= horse , and of gentlemen in velvet caps thirty , to
his place in Coleherber in Thames-street . <$$bracket>
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.226

The vij day of November was ij men sett in the pelere in ther fordgownes
; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.227

on had the wryting {COM:preceding_word_"wryting"_emended} over
{COM:preceding_word_"over"_emended} ys hed for falshood and wylfull
perjury ; and th'@ @odur for subtyll falshod and crafty desseytt .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.228

The ix day of November cam rydyng to London the yerle of Penbroke with
ij_C. horsse , and in velvet cottes and cheynes , the cotes with iij
lasses of gold , and lx reseduw in bluw cotes gardyd with velvet , and
badge a gren dragon , to the parlement . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.229

The xj day of November dyd pryche master Pendylltun at Powlles crosse
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.230

and mad a good sermon . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.231

The xij day of November the Kyng and the Quen rod unto West-mynster
chyrche to the masse of the Holy-gost , and after masse to the
parlement-howsse ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.232

and all the bysshopes and the lordes in ther parlement robes , with
trompeters blohyng , and all the harolds in ther cote_armurs , and the
juges in ther robes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.233

the yerle of Penbroke bare the kyng's
{COM:preceding_word_"kyng's"_emended} sword , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.234

and the yerle of Comberland bare the quen's
{COM:preceding_word_"quen's"_emended} sword , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.235

and the yerle of Shrewsbury bare the kyng's
{COM:preceding_word_"kyng's"_emended} cape of mantenance ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.236

and the yerle of Arundell bare the quen's
{COM:preceding_word_"quen's"_emended} cape of mantenance ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.237

and a-for them rod to-gether my lord chansheler and my lord tressorer in
ther parlement robes . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,74.238

<P_75>

The xiij day of November was commondyd by the bysshope of London to all
clarkes in the dyoses of London for to have sant Necolas and to go
a-brod , as mony as wold have ytt . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,75.240

<bracket> The xiiij day of November , saint Erconwald's day , it was
commanded that every priest in the diocess {COM:lacuna}
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,75.241

The {COM:blank} day of November cam to the Fleet Barlow
{COM:preceding_word_"Barlow"_emended} sumtyme bysshope of Bath and Wells
, MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,75.242

and master Kardmaker parsun of sant Brydes in Fletstret was the
{COM:lacuna} MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,75.243

thay wher gohyng over see lyke marchands . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,75.244

The xviij day of November dyd pryche at Powlles crosse the nuw bysshope
of Lynckolne , doctur White , late the warden of Wynchaster .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,75.245

The sam day was consecratyd nuw bishops
{COM:preceding_word_"bishops"_emended} , on bysshope of Brystow , and
a-nodur byshope of Lycheffeld and Coventre . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,75.246

The xix day of November was bered at sant Martens at Charyng-crosse with
ij crosses a gentyllman a Spaneard , and a_iiij=xx= torchys and tapurs
in ther handes , and with syngyng to the cherche , and the morowe-masse
boythe Spaneards and Englysmen syngyng . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,75.247

The sam day whent to met my lord cardenall Polle in Kent my lord of Elly
, with odur - doctur Thurlbe bysshope of Elly .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,75.248

The xviij day of November was a man and a woman stode on the pelere for
tellyng of falsse lyes thatt kyng Edward the vj=th= was a-lyffe .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,75.249

The xxiiij day the sam man and {COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} woman
was sett on the pelere a-gayne that dyd say that kyng Edward was a-lyffe
, and for odur thynges . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,75.250

<bracket> The same day cardinal Pole came from Gravesend by water , with
the earl of Shrewsbury , the lord Montagu , the bishops of Durham and
Ely , the lord Paget , sir Edward Hastings , the lord Cobham , and
diverse <$$bracket> knyghts and gentyllmen , in barges ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,75.251

and thay all did {COM:preceding_word_"did"_emended} shoot
{COM:preceding_word_"shoot"_emended} the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} bryge be-twyn xij and on of the cloke
, MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,75.252

and a-gainst {COM:preceding_word_"a-gainst"_emended} the steleard
{GLOSS:steel-yard} of Temes my lord chanseler mett them
{COM:preceding_word_"them"_emended} <P_76> in
{COM:preceding_word_"in"_emended} his {COM:preceding_word_"his"_emended}
barge , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.253

and my lord of Shrousbury had {COM:preceding_word_"had"_emended} his
{COM:preceding_word_"his"_emended} barge with the talbot
{COM:preceding_word_"talbot"_emended} , all
{COM:preceding_word_"all"_emended} ys men in bluw cotes , red-@ @hosse ,
skarlett capes , and {COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} white
{COM:preceding_word_"white"_emended} fethers ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.254

and so to the cort gatt , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.255

and ther the Kyng's {COM:preceding_word_"Kyng's"_emended} grace met
{COM:preceding_word_"met"_emended} him
{COM:preceding_word_"him"_emended}

and inbrasyd hym , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.257

and so lad ym thrughe the kyng's {COM:preceding_word_"kyng's"_emended}
hall ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.258

and he had borne a-for hym a sylver crosse , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.259

and <bracket> he was arrayed in <$$bracket> a skarlet gowne and a sqware
skarlett cape ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.260

and my lord North {COM:preceding_word_"North"_emended} bare the swarde
a-for the Kyng ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.261

and so they whent up unto the Quens chambur , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.262

and ther her grace salutyd hym ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.263

and after he toke ys leyffe , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.264

and toke ys barge to ys plase at Lambeth , that was the bysshope of
Cantorbery@ @s , Crenmer , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.265

and so to dener . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.266

The xxv day of November dyd pryche at Powlles crosse master Fecknam ,
den of Powlles , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.267

and a godly sermon . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.268

The sam day , the wyche was Sonday , at after-non , the Kyngs grace and
my lord Fuwater and dyvers Spaneards dyd ryd in dyvers colars , the Kyng
in red , and som in {COM:preceding_word_"in"_emended} yellow , sum in
gren , sum in whyt , sum in bluw , and with targets and canes in ther
hand , herlyng of rods on at a-nodur , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.269

and thrumpets in the sam colars , and drumes mad of ketylles , and
banars in the sam colars . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.270

The xxvij day of November was the obsequy of sir Hugh Ryche knyght , the
sune and here to the lord Ryche , and knyght of the Bathe mad by quen
Mare the Furst , in Essex , with a standard , a penon of armes , and a
cot_armur , elmet , targat , sword , skochyons , and torchys .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.271

The xxvij of November the Kynge and the lordes of the parlement satt
with-in the court , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.272

and ther my lord cardenall dyd make a orayson to the Kyng and the lords
of the parlement what {COM:lacuna} thankes unto God of the Quen's
{COM:preceding_word_"Quen's"_emended} grace qwyckenyng .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,76.273

The xxix day of November was commondyd by the byshope of London ,
thrughe ys dyosesse , that thay shuld say the masse of the Holy-gost
with {COM:preceding_word_"with"_emended} prossessyon , and to syng
<font> Te Deum <$$font> , and ryngyng , <P_77> and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} to {COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended}
pray to God to gyffe hym thankes of owr gracious
{COM:preceding_word_"gracious"_emended} quen of her gwyckenyng with
chyld , and to pray . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.274

The xxx day of November the Kyng's {COM:preceding_word_"Kyng's"_emended}
grace and ys lords {COM:preceding_word_"lords"_emended} rod to
Westmynster abbay to masse , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.275

for the Spaneards sung {COM:preceding_word_"sung"_emended} ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.276

and ther mett ym at the cort gate a_C. He-Alman {GLOSS:High_Almaines}
in hosse and dobeletes of whyt and red , and yelow welvet cotes trimmed
{COM:preceding_word_"trimmed"_emended} , with yelow sarsenet , and yelow
velvet capes and fethers {COM:lacuna} coler , and drumes and flutes in
the sam coler , and with gylt halbards
{COM:preceding_word_"halbards"_emended} , and C. in yolow hosse ,
dobelets of welvett , and jerkens of leather
{COM:preceding_word_"leather"_emended} gardyd with cremesun velvett and
whyt , fether yelow and red ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.277

and thos be Spaneards ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.278

and a_C. in yelow gownes of velvett with {COM:blank}
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.279

And the sam nyght my lord cardenall cam to the courte ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.280

and whent to the chapell with the Kyng , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.281

and ther <font> Te Deum <$$font> songe . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.282

The furst day of Desember was bered in Powlles chyrche-yerd Recherd
Wethers penter , the wyche he ded with-in Ludgat as a presoner ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.283

and he was a proper man and a conyng man as any ys now .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.284

The ij day of Desember dyd com to Powlles all prestes and clarkes with
ther copes and crosses , and all the craftes in ther leverey , and my
lorde mayre and the althermen , agaynst my lord cardenall@ @'s
{COM:preceding_word_"cardenall's"_emended} commyng ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.285

and at the bysshopes of London plase my lord chansseler and alle the
bysshopes tarehyng for my lord cardenall commyng ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.286

that was at ix of the cloke , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.287

for he landyd at Beynard Castell ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.288

and ther my lord mayre reseyvyd hym , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.289

and browgth ym to the Powllse , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.290

and so my lord chanseler and my lord cardenall and all the byshopes
whent up in-to the quer with ther meyturs ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.291

and at x of the cloke the Kyng's {COM:preceding_word_"Kyng's"_emended}
grace cam to Powlles to her mase with iiij_C. of gaard , on_C. Englys
, on_C. He-Almen , on_C. Spaneards , on_C. of Swechenars
{GLOSS:Switzers} , and mony lords and knyghtes ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.292

and hard masse . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.293

Boyth the quen's {COM:preceding_word_"quen's"_emended} chapell and the
kynges and Powlles qwer song . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,77.294

<bracket> The v day of December , the which was saint Nicholas' eve , at
<P_78> evensong time , came a commandment that saint Nicholas should not
go abroad , nor about . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.295

But , notwithstanding , there went about these saint Nicholases in
divers parishes , as st. Andrew's , Holborn , and st. <$$bracket>
Nicolas Olyffe in Bredstret . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.296

The viij day of Desember , the wyche was the Conceptyon of owre blessed
lady the Vyrgyn , was a goodly prossessyon at the Save {GLOSS:Savoy} be
the Spaneards , the prest carehyng the sacrement ryally be-twyne ys
hands , and on deacon carehyng a senser sensyng , and anodur the
ale-water_stoke , and a nombur of frers and prestes syngyng , and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} every
{COM:preceding_word_"every"_emended} man and woman , and knyghts and
gentylmen , bayryng a gren tapur bornyng , and viij trumpeters blohyng ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.297

and when they had don plahyng , and then begane the sagbottes plahyng ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.298

and when they had don theyr was on that cared ij drumes on ys bake ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.299

and on cam after playng ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.300

and , so don , they whent a-bowt the Sawve {GLOSS:Savoy} with-in ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.301

and a wyll after playing a-gayn , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.302

and so cam in syngyng , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.303

and so after they whent to masse , wher the bedes w {COM:unfinished} .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.304

The ix day of Desember dyd pryche at Powlles crosse doctur Borne ,
bysshope of Bathe , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.305

and prayd for the pope of Rome Julius the thurde , and for alle the
solles of purgatory . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.306

The sam day at after-non was a bere-beytyn on the Banke syde ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.307

and ther the grett blynd bere broke losse , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.308

and in ronnyng away he chakt a servyng_man by the calff of the lege ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.309

and bytt a gret pesse away , and after by the hokyll-bone , that with-in
iij days after he ded . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.310

The xij day of Desember dyd ryd in a car a-bowt London for baldre one
Kay wyffe dwellyng be-syd sant Mare Spytyll at the corner .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.311

The xiiij day of Desember was sant Donstones in the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} est chyrche and chyrche-yerde halowyd
by a sofferacan , the wyche was sospendyd one owr Lade day , the
Consepsyon , by a man of the parryche . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,78.312

<P_79>

The xvj day of Desember dyd pryche at Powlles crosse doctur Cottes the
bysshope of West Chastur , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.314

and his {COM:preceding_word_"his"_emended} sermon of the blessyd
sacrement of the auter {COM:lacuna} owt dyvers actours of the sacrement
of dyvers {COM:lacuna} MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.315

The xviij day of Desember was a grett tryhumph at the court gatte , by
the Kyng and dyvers lordes boyth English-men and Spaneards , the wyche
the Kyng and his compene were {COM:preceding_word_"were"_emended} in
goodly harnes , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.316

and a-pon ther armes goodly jerkyns of bluw velvett ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.317

and hosse in-brodered with sylver and bluw sarsenett ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.318

and so thay rane on fott with spayrers and swerds at the tornay , and
with dromes and flutes in whyt velvet drawn
{COM:preceding_word_"drawn"_emended} owt with blu sarsenett ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.319

and ther wher x aganst the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} King
{COM:preceding_word_"King"_emended} and ys compene ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.320

the wher xviij in odur colers . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.321

The xxvj day of Desember cam by water from {COM:lacuna} the prynche of
Pymon {GLOSS:Piedmont} with my lord of preve-sale and my lord Montycute
, MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.322

and shut {GLOSS:shoot} the bryge , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.323

and cam unto {COM:unfinished} . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.324

The last day of Desember was bered at Margatt at Westmynster a Spaneard
, a lord , and bered with baner , cott , targett , and skochyons , and
with grett lyght , and elmet , and the mantyll , and mony torche lyght .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.325

The furst day of January where asymbulle {GLOSS:assembly} of men and
vomen in Bowe chyrche-yerde at nyght of a_xxx and a-boyffh ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.326

and ther thay had the Englys serves and prayers and a lectorne ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.327

and thay wher taken by the shreyffes , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.328

and Thomas Rosse the menyster , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.329

and thay wher cared to the contors and odur plases , and ser Thomas
Rosse to the Towre . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.330

The viij day of January the prynsse of Pyemon whent by water to the
Towre with my lord Admerall and my lord Clynton , and dyvers odur ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.331

and he was shud evere plasse ther , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.332

and ther wher grett shutyng of gones . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.333

<bracket> The ix day of January certain Spaniards killed an Englishman
basely : MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.334

two held him while one thrust him through , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.335

and so he died . <$$bracket> MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,79.336

<P_80>

The xiiij day of Januarij ther preched at
{COM:preceding_word_"at"_emended} Paul's
{COM:preceding_word_"Paul's"_emended} cross
{COM:preceding_word_"cross"_emended} doctur Chadsay persun of Allalowes
in Bred-strett . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,80.338

The xvj day of January was bered the lade Fuwater , the wyff of the lord
Fuwater , in Essex {COM:preceding_word_"Essex"_emended} at Odam Water ,
with iiij baners of armes , a {COM:preceding_word_"a"_emended} standard
{COM:preceding_word_"standard"_emended} {COM:?} of armes , and ij emages
, with a hers , and vij_dosen penselles , and viij dosen of skochyons ,
and a mantyll , and whyt branchys , and iiij dosen stayff-torchys .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,80.339

The xviij day of January wher hangyd at Tyborne ij men and iiij women .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,80.340

The sam day whent to the Towre my lord chansseler , and dyvers odur
lordes and of the conselle , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,80.341

and delyvered a nomber presonars , as ther names folowes - ser James a
Croft , ser Gorge Harper , ser Gawynn Carow , ser Necolas Frogmortun ,
master Vaghan , ser Edward Varner , Gybbs , the bysshope of Yorke ,
master Rogers , and dyverrs odur presonars , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,80.342

and after ther was a gret shottyng of gones . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,80.343

The xxij day of Januarij was raynyd at my lord chansseler plasse by-syd
sant Mare Overes ser John Hoper latt bysshope of Glosetur , doctor Crome
{COM:preceding_word_"Crome"_emended} , as the parsun of Wyttyngtun
colege , harold Tomson , Rogars parsun or veker of sant Pulkers , and
dyvers odur . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,80.344

The xxiiij day of January ther wher grett ronnyng at the tylt at
Westmynster with spayrers , boyth Englys men and Spaneards .
<$$bracket> MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,80.345

The xxv day of January , being saint Paul's day , was a general
procession of saint Paul by every parish , both priests and clarkes , in
copes to the number of a_hundred_and_sixty , singing <font> Salve festa
dies <$$font> , with ninety crosses borne . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,80.346

The procession was through Cheap into Leadenhall .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,80.347

And before went the <$$bracket> chyldryn of the Gray-frers and Powlles
skolle . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,80.348

<bracket> There were eight bishops , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,80.349

and the <$$bracket> bysshope of London myteryd , bayryng the sacrement
{COM:preceding_word_"sacrement"_emended} , with
{COM:preceding_word_"with"_emended} {COM:lacuna} eym
{COM:preceding_word_"eym"_emended} of torchys bornyng , and a canepe
borne over {COM:preceding_word_"over"_emended} ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,80.350

so a-bowtt the chyrch-yerde , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,80.351

and in at the west dore , with {COM:preceding_word_"with"_emended} the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} lord mayre <P_81> and the althermen ,
and all the craftes in ther best leverays . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.352

And with-in a wylle after the Kyng cam , and my lord cardenall , and the
prynsse of Pyamon , and dyvers lordes and knyghtes ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.353

thay hard masse , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.354

and after to the court to dener , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.355

and at nyght bone-fyres and grett ryngyng in evere church
{COM:preceding_word_"church"_emended} . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.356

The xxvij day of January ther was a goodly prossessyon cam from
Westmynster unto Tempull bar with crosses and a_C. chylderyn in surples
and a_C. clarkes and prestes in copes syngyng , the wyche the copes
wher very ryche of tyssuw and cloth of gold ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.357

and {COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} after
{COM:preceding_word_"after"_emended} that master dene Weston carehyng
the blessyd sacrement , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.358

and a canepe borne over yt , and a-bowt yt MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.359

a_xx torchys bornyng , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.360

and after yt a_ij_C. men and women . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.361

The xxviij day of January was examynyd at sant Mare Overes bysshope
Hoper , doctor Crom , and Cardmaker , and odur ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.362

and Cardmaker recantyd . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.363

The xxix day of January wher raynyd at sant Mare Overes for herese Hoper
and Rogers , and cast to be brentt , and from thens cared to Nugatt .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.364

The xxx day of January was raynyd in the sam plasse Bradford , Tayller ,
and Sandur , and cast to be brentt in dyvers places .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.365

<bracket> The j day of February was buried the duchess of Northumberland
at Chelsea where she lived , with a goodly herse of wax and pensils ,
and escocheons , two baners <$$bracket> of armes , and iiij <bracket>
banners of images , and <$$bracket> mony mornars , and with ij haroldes
of armes . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.366

Ther was a mageste and the valans , and vj dosen of torchys and ij whyt
branchys , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.367

and alle the chyrche hangyd with blake and armes ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.368

and a canepe borne over her to the chyrche . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.369

The iiij day of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} Feybruary the bysshope
of London went into Nugatt , and odur docturs , to dysgratt Hoper , and
Rogers sumtyme vycker of sant Polkers . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.370

The sam day was Rogers cared be-twyn x and xj of the cloke in-to
Smyth-feld , and bornyd , for aronyus apinions , with a grett compene of
the gard . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,81.371

<P_82> The v day of Feybruarij be-twyn v and vj in the mornyng ,
departed master Hoper to Gloceter , and Sandurs to Coventre , boyth to
{COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended} be {COM:preceding_word_"be"_emended}
bornd . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.372

The vj day of Feybruary doctur Tayller was sent in-to Suffoke , and to
be brentt . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.373

The xij day of Feybruary was my lord Strange mared to the lade of
Cumberland the yerle of Cumberland doyctur ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.374

and after a grett dener , and justes , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.375

and after tornay on horsbake with swordes , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.376

and after soper <font> Jube the cane <$$font> {COM:for_"juego_de_canas"}
, a play , with torch-lyght and cressett-lyghtes , lx cressets and C.
of torchys , and a maske , and a bankett . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.377

The ix day of Feybruary was raynyd at Powlles , a-for my lord mayre and
the shreyffes and the bysshope of London and dyvers docturs and of the
conselle , vj heretykes of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} Essex and
Suffoke , to be brent in dyvers places . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.378

The xvij day of Feybruary at bowt mydnyght ther wher serten lude feylous
cam unto sant Thomas of Acurs , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.379

and over the dore ther was set the ymage of sant Thomas ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.380

and ther thay brake ys neke and the tope of ys crosier , the wyche was
mad of fre-ston ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.381

with grett sham yt was done . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.382

The v day of Marche was playd a-for {COM:preceding_word_"a-for"_emended}
the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} king
{COM:preceding_word_"king"_emended} and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} the conselle Whyt the master of
fensse and ys fellows {COM:preceding_word_"fellows"_emended} , and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} all odur that wold come at the court
at Vestmynster {COM:preceding_word_"Vestmynster"_emended} .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.383

The viij day of Marche ther was a general prossessyon from Powlles and
thrugh Chepe and Bucklersbery
{COM:preceding_word_"Bucklersbery"_emended} and thrug Walbroke and up
Boge-row and Watling stret , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.384

and so to Powlles ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.385

and all the chylderyn of Powlles and of the hospetall , and the bysshope
and my lord mare and aldermen , and all the crafts ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.386

and all clarkes and prestes syngyng . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.387

The sam day was a man sett on the pelere for
{COM:preceding_word_"for"_emended} hurting
{COM:preceding_word_"hurting"_emended} of one of the vj men that was
sworne , and lyke to {COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended} have
{COM:preceding_word_"have"_emended} bene slayne ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.388

and dyd suspend the chyrche of saint
{COM:preceding_word_"saint"_emended} Donestones in the est .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,82.389

The xiiij day of Marche in the nyght ther serten velyns dyd <P_83> breke
the neke of the ymage of sant Thomas of Canturbere ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.390

and on of ys arms broke . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.391

The xv day of Marche ther was a proclamassyon the morowe after that wo
so ever dyd know or cold bryng word to the mayre who dyd breke ys neke ,
shuld have a_C. crones of gold for ys labur . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.392

The xvj day of Marche was a veyver bornyd in Smyth-feld , dwellyng in
Sordyche , for herese , by viij of the cloke in the mornyng ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.393

ys nam was Tomkins . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.394

The xviij day of Marche was browth to the Towre owt of Cambryge-shyre
master Bowes , master Cutt , and master Hynd , and dyvers odur , for a
nuw conspyrase , the wyche shuld have byne don in Suffoke and odur
plases . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.395

The xix day of Marche in the mornyng the Kyng's
{COM:preceding_word_"Kyng's"_emended} grace rune at the tylt a-gaynst
odur Spaneards , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.396

and brake iiij stayffes by viij of the cloke in the mornyng .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.397

<bracket> The xx day of March the earl of Bedford , lord privy-seal ,
who died at his house beside the Savoy , was carried to his
burying-place in the country , called Chenies , with three_hundred horse
all in black . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.398

He was carried with three crosses , <$$bracket> with mony clerkes and
prestes , <bracket> till they came to the hill <$$bracket> a-boyffe sant
James , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.399

and ther returnyd certain {COM:preceding_word_"certain"_emended} of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} them
{COM:preceding_word_"them"_emended} home ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.400

and thay had torchys and almes and money gyven them .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.401

And after evere man sett in aray on horssebake .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.402

First on red {GLOSS:rode} in blake bayryng a crosse of sylver , and
serten prestes on horsebake wayryng ther surples ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.403

then cam the standard , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.404

and then all the gentyllmen and hed officers ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.405

and then cam haroldes , on beyryng ys elmet , and the mantylls , and the
crest , and anodur ys baner of armes , and anodur ys target with the
garter , and anodur ys cott_armur ; and anodur ys sword :
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.406

and then master Garter in ys ryche cott_armur MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.407

and then cam the charett with vj banars rolles of armes ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.408

and a-bowt the charett iiij banars of ymages , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.409

and after the charet a gret horsse trapyd in cloth of gold with the
sadyll of the sam ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,83.410

and then cam mornars , the <P_84> cheyffe of whom my lord Russell ys
sune , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.411

and after my lord trayssorer , and the master of the horse , and dyver
odur nobull men all in blake ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.412

and evere towne that he whent thrughe the clarkes and prestes mett ym
with crosses ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.413

and thay had in evere parryche iiij nobuls to gyffe to the pore , and
the prest and clarke of evere parryche x@ @=s=. , tyll he cam to ys
plasse at Cheynes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.414

and the morowe after was he bered , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.415

and a grett doll of money ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.416

and ther the deyn of Powlles mad a godly sermon ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.417

and after a grett dener , and gret plenty to all the contrey a-bowt that
wold com thether . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.418

The xxv day of Marche , the wyche was owre lade day
{COM:preceding_word_"day"_emended} , ther was as gret justes as youe
have sene at the tylt at Vestmynster ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.419

the chalyngers was a Spaneard and ser Gorge Haward ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.420

and all ther men , and ther horsses trymmyd in whyt ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.421

and then cam the Kyng and a gret mene all in bluw , and trymmyd with
yelow , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.422

and ther elmets with gret tuyffes of blue and yelow fether ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.423

and all ther veffelers {GLOSS:whifflers,_or_forerunners} and ther
fotemen , and ther armorers , and a compene lyke Turkes red {GLOSS:rode}
. in cremesun saten gownes and capes , and with fachyons , and gret
targets ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.424

and sum in gren , and mony of dyvers colers ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.425

and ther was broken ii_hondred stayffes and a-boyff .
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.426

The iiij day of Aprell the Kyng's {COM:preceding_word_"Kyng's"_emended}
grace and the Quen removyd unto Hamtun cowrte to kepe Ester ther ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.427

and so her grace to her chambur ther . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.428

The xiiij day of Aprell , the wyche was Ester
{COM:preceding_word_"Ester"_emended} day
{COM:preceding_word_"day"_emended} , at sant Margatt parryche at
Westmynster , after {COM:preceding_word_"after"_emended} masse
{COM:preceding_word_"masse"_emended} was done , one of the menysters a
prest of the abbay {COM:preceding_word_"abbay"_emended} dyd helpe hym
that was the menyster to {COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended} the pepull
who wher reseyvyng of the blessyd sacrement of the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} lord Jhesus
{COM:preceding_word_"Jhesus"_emended} Cryst , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,84.429

ther cam in-to the chyrche a man <P_85> that was a monke of Elly , the
wyche was marryed to a wyff ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.430

the sam day ther was that sam man sayd to the menyster , What doyst thow
gyff them ? MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.431

and as sone as he had spokyn he druw his wod-knyffe ,
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.432

and hyt the prest on the hed MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.433

and struck hym a grett blowe , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.434

and after ran after hym MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.435

and struck hym on the hand , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.436

and cloyffe ys hand a grett way , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.437

and after on the harme a grett wond ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.438

and ther was syche a cry and showtt as has not byne ;
MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.439

and after he was taken and cared to presun , and after examynyd wher-for
he dyd ytt . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.440

The xx day of Aprell was raynyd at Powlles a-for the bysshope of London
and many odur and my lord cheyffe justys and my lord mayre and the
shreyffes ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.441

ys name was Master Fowler , alias Branch ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.442

he was a monke of Ely ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.443

and ther was a goodly sermon , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.444

and after he was cast and condemnyd to have ys hand that hurt the prest
cut off or he shuld suffer , and after dysgracyd , and after cared to
Nuwgatt . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.445

The xxj day of Aprell ther was wypyd at a cart-hors iij , j man and ij
women , and anodur man a-lone , ij old men with whyt berdes , and on was
for carehyng {COM:lacuna} . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.446

<bracket> The xxiijd day of April , being saint George's day , at
Hampton Court , the King , with other lords and knights of the garter ,
went in their robes on procession , with three <$$bracket> crosses , and
clarkes and prestes , and my lord chancellor , the cheyff menyster ,
metered , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.447

and all thay in copes of cloth of tyssue and gold , syngyng <font> Salva
fasta dyes <$$font> as thay whent a-bowt ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.448

the Quen's {COM:preceding_word_"Quen's"_emended} grace lokyd owt of a
cassement , that hundereds dyd se her grace after she had taken her
chambur ; MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.449

and arolds gohyng a-bowt the Kyng's
{COM:preceding_word_"Kyng's"_emended} grace . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.450

The xxiiij day of Aprell was the sam man cared to Westmynster that dyd
hurt the prest , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.451

and had ys hand stryken of at the post , MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.452

and after he was bornyd aganst sant Margett chyrche with-owt the
cherche-yarde . MACHYN-1556-E1-P2,85.453

