<BEGIN_manners-1535-e1-p2>

<P_2.2,41>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CVI_ELEANOR_COUNTESS_OF_RUTLAND_TO_THE_LADY_LISLE;_A_LETTER_OF_THANKS_AND_KINDNESS>

{COM:introductory_material_omitted}

My verie good Lady , in my right hertie maner I recommende me unto your
good Ladishipe , signifying the same that I have received frome youe ,
by maister Hussey , a Pipe of Gascoigne Wyne and two barrells of heringe
, for the whiche and others your manyfold kindnes heretofore shewed I
rendre unto youe my hertie thankes , assuring the same that if there be
any pleasure that my Lorde or I can doo for youre ladishipe , here or
elswhere , ye shall have the same accomplished to the best we can
accordingly . MANNERS-1535-E1-P2,2.2,41.5

And where ye be verey desirous to have youre daughter maistres Basset to
be oon of the Quene's Graces maids , and that ye wold I shuld move hir
Grace in that behalf , thies shal@ @be to doo your Ladishipe to wite
that I perceive right well the Kingis Highnes pleasure to be suche that
no more Maids shal@ @be taken in , untill suche tyme as some of them
that now be with the Quenes Grace <P_2.2,42> be preferred . Albeit if
ye will make some meanes unto mother Lowe , who can doo as@ @moche good
in this matier as any oon woman here , that she maye make some meanes to
gete your said doughter with the Quenes said Grace :
MANNERS-1535-E1-P2,2.2,42.6

and in soo doing I think ye shall obtene your purpos in every behalf .
MANNERS-1535-E1-P2,2.2,42.7

And I for my partie shall doo the best I can to preserve here ,
MANNERS-1535-E1-P2,2.2,42.8

for I wold be right glad thereof bothe {COM:sic} for the greate honestie
that is in hir . MANNERS-1535-E1-P2,2.2,42.9

And thus our Lorde kepe your Ladishipe in helthe .
MANNERS-1535-E1-P2,2.2,42.10

At the Corte MANNERS-1535-E1-P2,2.2,42.11

the xvij. daye of February . MANNERS-1535-E1-P2,2.2,42.12

your Ladiships assured Elynor Rutland . MANNERS-1535-E1-P2,2.2,42.13

To my very good Lady my Lady Lislie {COM:sic} her good Ladyshipp , these
be yeven . MANNERS-1535-E1-P2,2.2,42.14

