<BEGIN_markham-1615-e2-p2>

<P_1,79.14>

<heading>

CHAP. VI . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,79.14.4

<font> Of the ordering and dyettng of the running Horse . <$$font>
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,79.14.5

<$$heading>

If one Husband-man haue his minde taken vp onely with the delight of
running <font> horses <$$font> which is a noble sport , and though not
of so long indurance , yet equall with anie before spoke of , he shall
for the bettring of his knowledge giue to his memorie these fewe rules
following , by which he shall rightly order and diet him .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,79.14.7

First for his taking vp from grasse <paren> for there for order sake we
must first beginne <$$paren> it shall bee at the same time of the yeere
and after the same manner that you tooke vp your hunting <font> horse
<$$font> , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,79.14.8

and till you haue enseamed him , hardned his flesh , taken awaie his
inward grease , and brought him to a good perfectnesse of winde , you
shall cloath him , dresse him , water him , feede him , exercise
<P_1,80> him , purge him and order him after labour in all points , and
all things as you did your hunting <font> horse <$$font> .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,80.9

When he is thus cleane of body and winde , you shall then lay on him
some moe clothes then you did on your hunting <font> horse <$$font> , to
purge his body a little the more , and to make him the more apt to sweat
, and euacuate humors as they shall grow , the ordinary quantity whereof
would bee a warme narrow woollen cloth about his body , on either side
his heart : then a faire white sheet , a woollen cloath aboue it , and a
canuasse cloth or two aboue it , and before his brest a woollen cloth at
least two double : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,80.10

He would continually stand vpon cleane litter , and haue his stable very
darke and perfum'd with giniper , when as the strength of his dunge
shall annoy it . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,80.11

For his dressing it shall bee in all points done as you did to your
hunting <font> Horse <$$font> , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,80.12

onely to dresse him once a day is sufficient ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,80.13

and that euer in the afternoone : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,80.14

but for rubbing his limbes or body with drie cloathes or wispes ; you
shall doe that as oft as you come into the stable , prouided that you
turne but his clothes vp , not take them from his body .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,80.15

You shall water your running <font> Horse <$$font> , as you watered your
hunting <font> horse <$$font> , and giue him the same exercise after it
, MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,80.16

onely you shall not bring him into the stable of at least an houre or
more after he is watred . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,80.17

The best foodes for your running <font> Horse <$$font> , is either good
sweet oates wel dried , sunned and beaten , or bread made of two parts
wheat , and but on part beanes , and boulted and sifted , and knodden ,
as was before shewed : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,80.18

onely if you adde to your better sort of bread the whites of twentie or
thirty egges , and with the barme a little ale also , it will be much
the better , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,80.19

for you shall not respect how little water you vse at all ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,80.20

the houres you feed in , and the quantity of your food shall be the same
, and <P_1,81> in the same manner as was mentioned before for the
hunting <font> Horse <$$font> , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,81.21

yet with these obseruations that if your <font> Horse <$$font> be very
leane , sickely , and a weake stomacke , that then you may as before
shewed , giue him with his oates a few spilted beanes , or els wash his
oates in a little strong ale or beare , or in the whites of a couple of
egges . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,81.22

Touching his exercise it consisteth in two kinds , the one airings , the
other coursing : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,81.23

Airing is a moderate and gentle exercise , which you shall vse morning
and euening , by riding or leading your <font> Horse <$$font> foot pace
<paren> but riding is better and lesse in danger of cold <$$paren> in
the morning after his water vp to the hils , and in the euening after
his water by the riuers side , by the space of an houre or two together
, MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,81.24

and before you lead him forth to aire , you shall be sure to giue him a
rere egge broken into his mouth , as soone as his bridle is put on ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,81.25

for it will increase wind : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,81.26

and this airing you shall by no meanes forbeare , but vpon his daies of
purging or sweating , or when it much raineth ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,81.27

for then to aire is vnwholsome . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,81.28

Againe if your <font> Horse <$$font> be very fat you shall aire before
Sunne_rise ; and after Sun_set : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,81.29

but if he be leane , then you shall let him haue all the strength and
comfort of the Sunne you can deuise , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,81.30

and during this ayring you shall be sure that your <font> horse <$$font>
be cloathed very warme , especially before the breast , and on each side
the hart , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,81.31

for cold to a running <font> Horse <$$font> is mortall .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,81.32

You shall course your <font> Horse <$$font> according to his strength ,
and ability of body ; that is to say twice a weeke , thrice , or as oft
as you see cause , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,81.33

and you shall course him sometimes in his cloathes to make him sweat ,
and consume grease , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,81.34

and that must be done moderately and gently , and sometimes without his
cloath to increase wind ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,81.35

and that shall be done sharpely and swiftly : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,81.36

you shall by keeping <P_1,82> your <font> horse <$$font> fasting the
night before , be sure that his bodie be empty before he doe course ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.37

to wash his tongue and nostrels with vineger , or to pisse in his mouth
ere you take his backe is very wholsome ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.38

you shall lead him in your hand well and warme cloathed to the course ,
and there vncloath him and rub his limbs well :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.39

then hauing courst him , after a little breath-taking cloath him againe
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.40

and so ride him home , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.41

there rub him thorowly , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.42

and let him stand till he be fully cold , which perceiued , let his
first meat you giue him , be a handfull or two of the eares of pollard
wheat : then after his ordinary food as aforesaid .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.43

There is also another exercise for your running <font> horse <$$font> ,
which is sweats in his cloathes either abroad or in the house ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.44

for sweats in his cloathes abroad , they are those which are taken vpon
the course , and are formerly spoke of that they must be giuen by a
moderate galloping , no maine running , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.45

and as soone as your <font> horse <$$font> hath past ouer his course ,
and is in a hie sweat , you shall instantly haue him home , and there
lay more cloaths vpon him , and keepe him stirring till hee haue sweat
so in the stable an houre or more : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.46

Then abate his cloathes by little and little , till he be perfect cooled
and dried , which you must further by rubbing him continually with drie
cloathes , and by laying drie cloaths on and taking the wet away ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.47

but for sweats in his cloaths without any exercise abroad , you shall
giue them either when the weather is so much vnseasonable , that you
can@ @not go forth , or when your <font> horse <$$font> is so much in
danger of lamenes , that you dare not straine him ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.48

and you shall doe it thus : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.49

First take a blanket folded and warmed very hot ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.50

and wrap it about his body MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.51

then ouer it lay two or three more , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.52

and wispe them round , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.53

then ouer them as many couerlids , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,82.54

and pinne <P_1,83> them fast and close , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.55

then make the <font> horse <$$font> stirre vp and downe in the stable
till hee begin to sweat , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.56

then lay on more cloathes , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.57

and as the sweat trickleth downe his face , so rubbe it awaie with drie
cloathes till hee haue sweat sufficiently , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.58

then as before shewed abate the cloathes by little and little ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.59

and rubbe him in euery part till he be as drie as at first .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.60

After euery course or sweat you shall scowre or purge your <font> horse
<$$font> in the same manner , and with the same medicine that you did
your hunting <font> horse <$$font> , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.61

for it is the best that can by art be inuented , being both a purge and
a restoratiue , cleansing and comforting all the parts of a <font>
horses <$$font> body ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.62

but if you thinke it purgeth not enough , then you shal take twenty
reasins of the sunne the stones pickt out , and ten figges slit in the
midst , boile them in a pottle of faire running water , till it come to
be thicke , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.63

then mixe it with powder of Licoras , Anyseeds and Suger-candie till it
come to a stiffe paste , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.64

then make pretty round balls thereof , and roule them vp in butter
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.65

and giue your <font> horse <$$font> three or fowre of them the next
morning after his sweat or course , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.66

and ride him an hower after , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.67

and then set him vp warme . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.68

After your <font> horse <$$font> hath been courst or sweat , and is as
before said , colde and drie , you shall then vnbridle him , giue him
some fewe wheate eares , and then at an howre or two after a little of a
very sweete mash , then some bread ; after which at his due hower dresse
him , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.69

and giue him when you find him thirstie some cold water with a ball of
your leauen dissolued into it , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.70

and so let him stand till you feed him for all night .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.71

Course not your <font> horse <$$font> sore for at least fowre or fiue
daies before you runne your match , least the sorenesse of his limbes
abate him of his speede . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,83.72

<P_1,84>

Except your <font> horse <$$font> be a very fowle feeder muzzel him not
aboue two or three nights before his match , and the night before his
bloody courses . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,84.74

Giue your <font> horse <$$font> as well his gentle courses as his sharp
courses vpon the race he must run , that hee may as well finde comfort
as displeasure thereon . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,84.75

In training of your <font> horse <$$font> obserue not the number the
miles , but the labour fit for your <font> horse <$$font> .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,84.76

Be sure vpon the match day that your <font> horse <$$font> be emptie ,
and that he take his rest vntroubled till you prepare to leade him forth
. MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,84.77

Shooe your <font> horse <$$font> euer a daie before you runne him , that
the paine of the hammers knocks may bee out of his feete .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,84.78

Saddle your <font> horse <$$font> on the race day in the stable before
you leade him forth , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,84.79

and fixe both the pannell and the girthes to his backe and sides with
Shooe-makers waxe to preuent all daungers . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,84.80

Leade your <font> Horse <$$font> to his course with all gentlenesse ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,84.81

and giue him leaue to smell to other <font> horses <$$font> dungs that
thereby he may be inticed to stale and emptie his bodie as he goes .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,84.82

When you come to the place where you must start , first rubbe his limmes
well , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,84.83

then vncloath him , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,84.84

then rake his backe MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,84.85

and the word giuen start him with all gentlenesse and quietnesse that
may bee , least dooing any thing rashly , you happen to choake him in
his owne winde . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,84.86

And thus much for the ordering and dietting of the running <font> horse
<$$font> , and the particularities belonging to the same .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,84.87

Now for our Husbandmans trauelling <font> horse <$$font> , which is to
carrie him in his iournies and about his necessarie businesse <P_1,85>
in the countrie ; he shall first feede him with the best sweet hey ,
drie oates , or drie beanes and oates mixt together ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.88

in his trauell he shall feede him according to his stomacke more or
lesse , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.89

and in his rest at a certaine proportion , as halfe a pecke at each
warring is vtterly sufficient . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.90

In your trauell feede your <font> horse <$$font> early that hee may take
his rest soone . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.91

In trauell by no meanes wash nor walke your <font> horse <$$font> ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.92

but be sure to rubbe him cleane . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.93

Water him a mile before you come to your Inne , or more as shall lie in
your iourney , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.94

or if you faile thereof forbeare it till next morning ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.95

for water hath often done hurt , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.96

want of water neuer did anie . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.97

Let your <font> horse <$$font> neither eate nor drinke when he is
extreame hot , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.98

for both are vnholsome . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.99

When the daies are extreame hot labour your <font> horse <$$font>
morning and euening MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.100

and forbeare hie noone . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.101

Take not your saddle off sodainly but at leasure ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.102

and laying on the cloath set on the saddle againe till hee bee colde .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.103

Litter your <font> horse <$$font> deepe , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.104

and in the daies of his rest let it lie also vnder him .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.105

Dresse your <font> horse <$$font> twice a daie when he rests , and once
when he trauels . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.106

If the <font> horse <$$font> be stoned let him goe to soile and be
purged with grasse in <font> May <$$font> , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.107

a month is time long enough , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.108

and that grasse which growes in Orchards vnder trees is best .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.109

Let blood Spring and Fall , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.110

for they are the best times to preuent sicknesses .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.111

In your iourneying light at euerie steepe hill ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.112

for it is a great refreshing and comfort to your <font> Horse <$$font> .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,85.113

Before your sleepe euerie night in your iourney , see <P_1,86> all your
<font> Horses <$$font> feet stopt with Oxe dung ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,86.114

for it taketh awaie the heate of trauell and surbating .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,86.115

Many other necessarie rules there are but so depending vpon these
already shewed , that whoso keepeth them shall not be ignorant of any of
the rest , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,86.116

for they differ more in name then nature . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,86.117

<heading>

<font> The end of Hors-manshippe . <$$font> MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,86.119

<$$heading>

<P_1,97>

Now if the mind of our <font> Husbandman <$$font> be not so generally
taken with the delight and pleasure of this recreation of Hawking , but
that he preferreth before it the delight of coursing of Greyhounds ,
which is a very noble and worthy pastime , hee shall in it obserue these
foure things , the breede of <font> Greyhounds <$$font> , their shape ,
their diet , and the lawes belonging to the same .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,97.122

Touching the breed of <font> Greyhounds <$$font> you are principallie to
respect the Countreyes in which they are bred and nourished , as that it
be a champayne plaine and without couert , where a <font> Hare <$$font>
may stand forth and indure a course of two miles or more , as it shal
happen <paren> for the coursing of the <font> Hare <$$font> , is that
which I purpose most to entreat of <$$paren> because in a close country
full of couert , where a <font> Hare <$$font> can@ @not run aboue a
quarter of a mile or lesse : both the pleasure of the recreation is
taken away , and the <font> Greyhound <$$font> by an insufficient
exercise is made vnapt , and vnfit for that for which he was created .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,97.123

Now of champaine countries MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,97.124

they are of three kinds MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,97.125

as the low vales , as are the vale of Beluoire , the vale of white horse
, the vale of Eusham and such like , the high downes and heaths as about
<font> Salisbury , Cysseter , Lincolne <$$font> , and many such like
places , and the middle betweene both as the County of <font>
Northampton <$$font> , and <font> Leicester <$$font> , and others like
them : All which are very excellent places for the breeding
<P_1,98_misnumbered_as_8> and training vp of the best <font> Greyhounds
<$$font> , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,98_misnumbered_as_8.126

yet of the three your valles or middle soiles , which for the most part
are errable grounds , are much better to breed and traine on , then your
downes and heathes , because they are much more laborsome , rough ,
heauy , and in the winter season full of much trouble and false
foot_hould , in_so_much {COM:previous_word_"mucst"_emended} that a
<font> Dogge <$$font> which is able to runne , strongly , swiftlie , and
surely there , must necessarily doe it ten times better when he comes to
the smooth , plaine and carpet_like downe , where on {SIC:whereon} the
contrary the <font> Dogge <$$font> which is trained vpon those euen
downes , though he be right famous and excellent , when he comes to run
in the deepe well plowed field , is to seeke where to bestow his feet ,
and can neither shew {TEXT:shee} speed , round , nor indurance .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,98_misnumbered_as_8.127

Now the Gentlemen which dwell on the downes and plain grounds to
maintaine the reputation of their <font> Dogs <$$font> affirme them to
be much more nimble and cunning in turning , then the vale <font> Dogs
<$$font> be , because the fairenes of the earth giuing them so much
aduantage ouer the <font> Hare <$$font> , that hauing her euen <paren>
as it were <$$paren> in a manner vnder their feet , shee is put more to
her shifts , and striues with great art of sleights to deceiue , and get
aduantage of the <font> Greyhound <$$font> :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,98_misnumbered_as_8.128

And it is true , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,98_misnumbered_as_8.129

for by reason of the aduantage of their hils , which are great and
steepe , though smooth and plaine , I haue seene a vale <font> Dogge
<$$font> so much deceiued , that vpon a turne hee hath lost more ground
then hath beene recouerable , in the whole course after ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,98_misnumbered_as_8.130

but this is no want of goodnes but a little skil which a mo~ths coursing
will bring a <font> Dogge <$$font> so sufficiently vnto , that he will
not need any other reformation then the knowledge of his error , by his
losse of labor . So that I conclude the good <font> Dogge <$$font> vpon
the deepes will euer beate the good <font> Dogs <$$font> on the plaine .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,98_misnumbered_as_8.131

It is an old receiued opinion amongst many men of the <P_1,99> leashe
that the <font> Greyhound <$$font> bitch , will euer beat the <font>
Greyhound <$$font> dog , by reason of her more nimblenes , quicknes ,
and agillitie : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,99.132

And it is sometimes seene that a perfect good <font> bitch <$$font>
indeed , hath much aduantage of an ordinary <font> dogge <$$font> :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,99.133

but if the good <font> dogge <$$font> meet with the good <font> bitch
<$$font> , there is then no comparison , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,99.134

but the <font> Dogge <$$font> will be her master , in_as_much as he
exceedeth her both in length , and strength , the two maine helps in
coursing ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,99.135

for her nimblenes is then no helpe , sith a good <font> Dogge <$$font>
in the turne will loose as little ground , as any <font> Bitch <$$font>
whatsoeuer . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,99.136

Yet thus much I would perswade all Gentlemen of the leashe to be very
carefull in their breeding , to breed vpon the best <font> Bitches
<$$font> they can prouide , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,99.137

for it is found in experience that the best <font> Dogge <$$font> vpon
any indifferent <font> bitch <$$font> will not get so good a whelpe , as
an indifferent <font> Dogge <$$font> vpon the best <font> Bitch <$$font>
; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,99.138

And amongst these obseruations in breeding <font> Grey-hounds <$$font> ;
you shall obserue to haue your <font> Dogges <$$font> and <font> Bitches
<$$font> of equall and indifferent ages , as about three or foure yeeres
old at the most ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,99.139

but in case of need , your <font> Bitch <$$font> will indure a great
deale longer then your <font> Dogge <$$font> ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,99.140

and to breed with a young <font> Dogge <$$font> on an olde <font> Bitch
<$$font> , may bring forth an excellent <font> whelpe <$$font> .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,99.141

Touching the shapes of <font> Grey-hounds <$$font> <paren> from whence
you shall take the best collections for their goodnesses <$$paren> they
are certaine and most infallable : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,99.142

Therefore touching <font> Grey-hounds <$$font> , when they are puppies
or young whelpes , those which are most raw-bon'd leane , loose made ,
sickly or crooke hought , and generally vnknit in euery member , are
euer likely to make the best <font> Dogges <$$font> , and most shapely :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,99.143

but such as in the first three or foure monthes , are round and close
trussed , fat , straight , and as it were full sum'd and knit in euery
member , neuer prooue good , swift or comely .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,99.144

<P_1,100>

Now after your Dogge comes to full growth , as at a yeere and a halfe or
two yeeres old , he would then haue a fine long leane head , with a
sharpe nose rush-growne , from the eies downeward : A full cleere eie
with long eie lids ; a sharpe eare short and close falling , a long
necke a little bending , with a loose hanging wezand : a broad breast
straight forelegs , side hollow ribs , a straight square and flat backe
, short and strong fillets , a broad space betweene the hips ; a long
stearne or taile and a round foot : and good large cleis .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,100.146

Now for the better helpe of your memory I will giue you an old rime ,
left by our Forefathers , from which you shall vnderstand the true
shapes of a perfect <font> Grey-hound ; <$$font>
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,100.147

and this it is . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,100.148

{COM:verse_omitted}

These being the principall members of a good <font> grey-hound <$$font>
, if they resemble the proportions of the things a_boue named , the
dogge can@ @not chuse but bee most perfect .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,100.150

When you haue thus a perfect and well-shap't <font> grey-hound <$$font>
, your next rule is to apply your selfe to the dyetting and ordering of
him , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,100.151

for the pleasure to which you keepe him , that bringing him to the
vttermost height of strength of winde , you may know the vttermost
goodnesse that is within him , which disorderly and fowle keeping
<P_1,101> will conceale , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,101.152

and you loose a Iewell for want of knowledge of the value .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,101.153

Dietting then of <font> grey-hounds <$$font> consisteth in fowre
especiall things , to wit , foode , exercise , ayring , and kennelling ,
the first nourishing the bodie , the second the limbes , the third the
winde and the last the spirits . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,101.154

To speake then first of foode , it is two-fold , either generall , or
particular ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,101.155

generall as for a continuall vpholding and maintaining of a dogge in
good state of bodie , being in good plight and liking , or particular
when a dogge is either poore , sicke , or prepared for wadger standeth
in neede of particular foods of aduantage .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,101.156

The best generall foods for the ordinarie vpholding of a dogge in a good
state of body is chippings , crusts of bread , soft tender bones or
grissels of Veale , Lambe , or such like ; first scalded in beefe-broth
not very salt ; or other broath in which hath beene boiled , mutton ,
veale , venison , or anie kinde of Pullen , or for want thereof , other
cleane scalding water ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,101.157

after your chippings or bread is scaulded you shall let it stand and
coole , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,101.158

then when your feeding hower commeth , you shall take as much good milke
, floten milke , or butter milke <paren> but the best is best wholsom
<$$paren> as will fully or more then whiten the same
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,101.159

for it is to be intended that your water must be all drunk vp into your
bread , and your milke must onely make it swimme ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,101.160

and with this feede your dogge morning and euening after you come from
walking him , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,101.161

and giue him a good and sufficient meale thereof ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,101.162

for this will onely maintaine and vphold him in good state of body ,
being strong and lustie in flesh before . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,101.163

For particular food which is when a dogge is poore , sicke or to be
prepared for wadger they be these : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,101.164

First , if he be poore in flesh , sickly or weake , the best food you
can raise him vp withall is to {SIC:to_to} take sheeps heads wool
<P_1,102> and all cleane washt , and breake them all to peeces ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,102.165

then put them into a Cauldron or Kettle , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,102.166

and after the water hath risen and is cleane skumm'd , put vnto it good
store of oat-meale and sweet pot-hearbes smal chopt together
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,102.167

and so boile it till the flesh be tender ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,102.168

then with this meat and the pottage feede your <font> grey-hound
<$$font> morning and euening , and it will soone put him into great lust
& strength : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,102.169

but if you will prepare him for match and wadger , then you shall make
him this diet-bread , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,102.170

take a pecke of the finest and driest oat-meale , and two pecks of good
wheat , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,102.171

and hauing ground them together , boult the meale thorough a fine
boulting cloath , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,102.172

and then scattring amongst it a prittie quantitie of Any-seeds and
Licoras wel beaten together , kneade it vp with the whites of egges ,
newe ale and barme mixt together , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,102.173

and so bake it in prettie round loaues reasonable hard ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,102.174

with this bread either scalded , as was before shewed in your chippings
, or put into the pottage with the Sheepes-heads warm , feed your dogge
morning and euening , to wit halfe an hower after sunne_rise , and halfe
an hower before sunne_set , when you come from walking or ayring him ,
and it will bring him to exceeding great strength of bodie and purenesse
of winde . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,102.175

For the exercise of your <font> grey hound <$$font> , it consisteth
likewise in two things , coursing and ayring ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,102.176

and they be euery way as necessary as is foode , because it only
bringeth abilitie to his limbes and perfitnesse to his winde :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,102.177

to speake then of coursing , you shall not faile to course him at least
twice a weeke if your courses be strong and long , thrice a weeke , if
they be but reasonable as a mile or a mile and a halfe at most , and
some times if your courses be short and vnder a mile .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,102.178

In coursing you shall obserue two things blood and labour ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,102.179

blood which is a hartning and animating of your dogge to delight in the
<P_1,103> pleasure , when he finds the rewards of his paines_taking ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,103.180

for if a dogge course continually and neuer kill , the sport will growe
yrksome vnto him , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,103.181

and therefore now and then , giue him such aduantage that he may kill
the Hare , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,103.182

then labour , which is contrarie to killing ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,103.183

for in it you must giue the Hare all indifferent aduantages , both by
lawe and otherwise , whereby she may stand long before the dogge , and
make him shewe his vttermost strength before he be able to reach her .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,1,103.184

<P_2,114>

The best vse of buttermilke for the able Hus-wife is charitablie to
bestow it on the poore Neighbors , whose wants doe dailie crie out for
sustenance : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,114.186

and no doubt but she shall finde the profit thereof in a diuine place ,
as well as in her earthly businesse : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,114.187

But if her owne wants command her to vse it for her owne good ; then
shee shall of her buttermilke make curds in this manner :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,114.188

shee shall take her buttermilke and put it into a cleane earthen vessell
, which is much larger then to receiue the Butter-milke onely :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,114.189

and looking vnto the quantitie thereof shee shall take as it were a
third part so much new Milke and set it on the fire , and when it is
ready to rise , take it off and let it coole a little ; then powre it
into the buttermilke in the same manner as you would make a posset , and
hauing stirred it about let it stand : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,114.190

then with a fine skummer when you will vse the curds <paren> for the
longer it stands the better the curds will eate <$$paren> take them vp
into a cullander MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,114.191

and let the whey drop well from it : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,114.192

and then eate them either with Creame , Ale , Wine , or Beere ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,114.193

as for the Whey you may keepe it also in a sweet stone vessell :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,114.194

for it is that which is called Whigge , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,114.195

and is an excellent coole drinke <P_2,115> and a wholsome ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.196

and may very well be drunke a summer through in stead of any other
drinke : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.197

and without doubt will slake the thirst of any labouring man as well ,
if not better . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.198

The next maine profit which ariseth from the Dairie is Cheese , of which
there be diuers kinds , as new Milke , or morrow milke Cheese , nettle
cheese , flotten milke Cheese , and eddish , or after_much Cheese , all
which haue their seueral orderings and compositions as you shall
perceiue by the discourse following : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.199

yet before I doe beginne to speake of the making of the Cheese , I will
shew you how to order your Cheeselep-bag or runnet , which is the most
principall thing wherewith your Cheese is compounded , and giueth the
perfect taste vnto the same . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.200

The Cheeselep-bagge or runnet which is the stomacke bagge of a young
suckling calfe , which neuer tasted other foode then milke , where the
curd lieth vndisgested . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.201

Of these bags you shall in the beginning of the yeere prouide your selfe
good store , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.202

and first open the bagge MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.203

and poure out into a cleane vessell the curde and thicke substance
thereof ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.204

but the rest which is not curdled you shall put away :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.205

then open the curd MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.206

and picke out of it all manner of motes , chiers of grasse , or other
filth gotten into the same : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.207

Then wash the curd in so manie cold waters till it be as white and
cleane from all sorts of motes as is possible ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.208

then lay it on a cleane cloth that the water may draine from it , which
done lay it in another drie vessell , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.209

then take a handfull or two of salt MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.210

and rub the curd therewith exceedinglie : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.211

then take your bag MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.212

and wash it also in diuers cold waters till it be verie cleane ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.213

and then put the curd and the salt vp into the bag , the bag being also
well rub'd within with salt : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.214

and so put it vp , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.215

and salt the outside also all ouer : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.216

and then close vp the pot close MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.217

and so keepe them a full yeere before you vse them .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,115.218

For touching <P_2,116> the hanging of them vp in chimney corners <paren>
as course Huswiues doe <$$paren> is sluttish , naught , and vnwholsome ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.219

and the spending of your runnet whilst it is new , makes your Cheese
heaue and proue hollow . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.220

When your runnet or earning is fit to be vsed , you shall season it
after this manner ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.221

you shall take the bagge you intend to vse , and opening it put the
curde into a stone morter or a bowle , and with a woodden pestell or a
roling pinne beat it exceedingly ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.222

then put to it the yelkes of two or three egges , and halfe a pint of
the thickest and sweetest creame you can fleete from your milke , with a
peny-worth of saffron finely dried and beaten to powder together with a
little Cloues and Mace , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.223

and stirre them all passing well together till they appeare but as one
substance , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.224

and then put it vp in the bagge againe : MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.225

then you shall make a very strong brine of water and salt ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.226

and in the same you shall boile a handfull or two of Saxifrage ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.227

and then when it is colde claire it into a cleane earthen vessell ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.228

then take out of the bagge halfe_a_dozen spoonfull of the former curde
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.229

and mixe it with the brine ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.230

then closing the bagge vp againe close hang it within the brine ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.231

and in any case also steepe in your brine a few Wall-nut tree leaues
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.232

and so keepe your runnet a fortnight after before you vse it
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.233

and in this manner dresse all your bagges so as you may euer haue one
ready after another , and the youngest a fortnight old euer at least ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.234

for that will make the earning {SIC:earing} quicke and sharp , so that
fowre spoonfuls therof will suffice for the gathering and seasoning of
at least twelue gallons of milke , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.235

and this is the choisest and best earning which can possible be made by
any Hus-wife . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.236

To make a new milke or morning milk cheese , which is the best cheese
made ordinarily in our kingdome ; you shal take your milk early in the
morning as it comes from the Cowe , and sile it into a cleane tubbe ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,116.237

then take all the <P_2,117> creame also from the milke you milk the
euening before , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.238

and straine it into your new milke , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.239

then take a pretty quantity of cleane water MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.240

and hauing made it scalding_hot powre it into the milke also to scauld
the creame and it together , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.241

then let it stand MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.242

and coole it with a dish til it be no more then luke_warme ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.243

then go to the pot where your earning bagges hangs ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.244

and draw from thence so much of the earning without stirring of the
bagge as will serue for your proportion of milke ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.245

and straine it therein very carefully ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.246

for if the least mote of the curd of the earning fall into the cheese it
will make the Cheese rot and mould MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.247

when your earning is put in you shall couer the milke
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.248

and so let it stand halfe an howre or thereabouts ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.249

for if the earning be good it will come in that space ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.250

but if you see it doth not then you shall put in more ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.251

being come you shall with a dish in your hand breake and mash the curd
together , possing and turning it about diuersly , vvhich {COM:sic} done
with the flat palmes of your hands very gently press the curde downe
into the bottome of the tub , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.252

then with a thinne dish take the whey from it as cleane as you can ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.253

and so hauing prepared your Cheese-fat answerable to the proportion of
your curd with both your hands ioined together , put your curd therein
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.254

and breake it MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.255

and presse it downe hard into the fat til you haue fild it ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.256

then lay vpon the top of the curd your flat cheese-boord and a little
small weight therevpon , that the whey may drop from it into the
vnder_vessell , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.257

when it hath done dropping take a large cheese cloth ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.258

and hauing wet it in colde water lay it on the cheese-boord
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.259

and then turne the cheese vpon it ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.260

then lay the cloth into the cheese-fat MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.261

and so put the cheese therin againe , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.262

and with a thin slice thrust the same downe close on euery side , then
laying the cloth also ouer the top to lay on the cheese-boord
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.263

and so carrie it to your great presse , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.264

and there presse it vnder a suficient waight ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,117.265

after <P_2,118> it hath been there prest halfe an howre you shall take
it and turne it into a drie cloth and put it into the presse againe ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,118.266

and thus you shal turne it into drie cloathes at least fiue or sixe
times in the first day , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,118.267

and euer put it vnder the presse againe , not taking it there-from till
the next day in the evening at soonest , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,118.268

and the last time it is turned you shall turne it into the drie fat
without any cloth at all . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,118.269

When it is prest sufficiently and taken from the fat , you shall then
lay it in a kimnell and rub it first on the one side and then on the
other with salt , and so let it lie all that night ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,118.270

then the next morning you shall do the like againe and so turne it vpon
the brine which comes from the salt two or three daies or more ,
according to the bignesse of the cheese , and then lay it vpon a faire
table or shelfe to drie , forgetting not euery day once to rubbe it all
ouer with a cleane cloth , and then to turne it til such time that it be
throughly drie and fit to goe into the presse ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,118.271

and in this manner of drying you must obserue to lay it , first where it
may drie hastily , and after where it may drie at more leasure :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,118.272

thus may you make the best and most principall cheese .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,118.273

Now if you will make Cheese of two meales , as your mornings new milke ,
and the euenings Creame milke , and all you shall doe but the same
formerly rehearsed . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,118.274

And if you will make a simple morrow milke Cheese which is all of new
milke and nothing els : you shall then doe as is before declared ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,118.275

onely you shall put in your earning so soone as the milke is sil'd
<paren> if it haue any warmth in it <$$paren> and not scald it :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,118.276

but if the warmth be lost , you shall put it into a kettell and giue it
the aire of the fire . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,118.277

If you will haue a very dainty nettle Cheese , which is the finest
summer Cheese which can be eaten ; you shall doe in all things as was
formerly taught in the new milke Cheese compound :
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,118.278

Onely you shall put the curd into a <P_2,119> verie thin cheese-fat ,
not aboue halfe an inch or a little better deepe at the most ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.279

and then when you come to dry them as soone as it is drain'd from the
brine , you shall lay it upon fresh nettles and couer it all ouer with
the same ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.280

and so lying where they may feele the aire let them ripen therein ,
obseruing to renew your nettles once in two daies , and euerie time you
renew them to turne the Cheese or Cheeses , and to gather your nettles
as much without stalkes as may be , and to make the bed both vnder and a
loft as smooth as may be , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.281

for the more euen and fewer wrinckles that your Cheese hath , the more
daintie is your Hus-wife euer accounted . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.282

If you will make floaten milke cheese , which is the coursest of all
cheeses , you shall take some of the milk and heate it upon the fire to
warme all the rest ; MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.283

but if it be so sower that you dare not aduenter the warming of it for
feare of breaking ; then you shall heate water and with it warme it ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.284

then put in your earning as before shewed , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.285

and garner it , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.286

presse it , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.287

salt it MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.288

and drie it as you did all other Cheeses . MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.289

Touching your eddish cheese or winter cheese , there is not any
difference betwixt it and your summer cheese touching the making thereof
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.290

only , because the season of the yeere denyeth a kindly drying or
hardning thereof , it differeth much in taste
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.291

and will be soft alwaies , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.292

and of these eddish cheeses you may make as many kindes as of summer
cheeses , as of one meale , two meales , or of milke that is floten .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.293

When you haue made your Cheese you shall then haue care of the whey ,
whose generall vse differeth not from that of butter-milke ,
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.294

for either you shall preserue it to bestow on the poore , because it is
a good drinke for the labouring man , or keep it to make curds out of it
or lastly to nourish and bring up your swine .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,119.295

<P_2,120>

If you will make curds of your best whey , you shall set it vpon the
fire MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,120.297

and being ready to boile , you shall put into it a pretty quantity of
buttermilke , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,120.298

and then as you see the curds arising vp to the top of the whey , with a
skummer skimme them off MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,120.299

and put them into a Cullender , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,120.300

and then put in more butter-milke , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,120.301

and thus do whilest you can see any curds arise ;
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,120.302

then the whey being drained cleane from them , put them into a cleane
vessell , MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,120.303

and so serue them foorth as occasion shall serue .
MARKHAM-1615-E2-P2,2,120.304

