<BEGIN_masham-1630-e2-p2>

<P_104>

<heading:edcomment:80_LADY_ELIZBETH_MASHAM,_N.D.,_NOVEMBER_1629>

<$$heading>

Deare mother I have better considered of my brother Knightli@ @'s letter
, which is very hard to reade , he writing so bad a hand ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,104.5

but I perseve ther is not soe great a differanc between Sir Robert and
us as I thought ther had bin . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,104.6

Jug is desirus to keep hir owne land , tho she have the less joynter ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,104.7

and I think hir owne inheritanc will@ @be better for hir preferment in a
second match , if God should take away hir husband withowt iswe , than
her joynter . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,104.8

Sir Robert ofers 300 maintinans and so much joynter aded to hir owne if
she oute_live hir husband and have isswe by him , other wayes not ,
which I se no reson for , because he shall injoye hir land for his life
. MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,104.9

I dout not but my brother Knightly will prevaile with Sir Robert to
yeald to our resonable demaunds . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,104.10

I have writ to him MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,104.11

and when I here his answer you shall know more .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,104.12

I hope God will dispose all for the best . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,104.13

Thus with my humble duty praying for the continuanc of your health ,
especialy for the thriving of your sole , hoping ere long to se you , I
remaine Your obedient daughter Elizabeth Masham MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,104.14

I desir to have my kind love remembred to my brother and sisters and the
rest of my frinds . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,104.15

<P_105>

{COM:endorsed_in_Sir_William_Masham's_hand}

To my much honoured mother the Lady Barrington these be given
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,105.18

<P_118>

<heading:edcomment:97_LADY_ELIZABETH_MASHAM,_N.D.,_30_DECEMBER_1629>

<$$heading>

Deare mother I rejoyce to think the time drawes neer that we shall
injoye you at Hatfelde , where you are much desired .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,118.22

I shall@ @be very glad to here that my sister is safly delivered
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,118.23

and then I hope you <P_119> will come cherfully .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.24

I thoute good to lett you know of a proposition of a match for Jug
propownded by Sir Nathanell Rich . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.25

The gentleman's name is Mr Sant Johns that was lately in prison in the
tower . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.26

I here very worthyly of the man , MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.27

but it semes his estate is very small , not above 200@ @=li= a yere ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.28

and besids his father was a base sonne <paren> as I have hard <$$paren>
of the Lord Sant Johns . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.29

Sir Nathanell and he are both at Hatfeld MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.30

and meane to take our howse in the way to Pergoe ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.31

and when he informes me more fully then you shall here ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.32

for I will doe nothing withowt your advise . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.33

He is a lawyer , but young , MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.34

and therfor I think his practis is little , MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.35

yet I beseech you to consider well of it and keep it very secrett .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.36

And let me crave your prayers to God that he will be pleased to direct
all as may@ @be most for his glory and all our comforts .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.37

Thus with my humble dutye praying for your increse of comfort in sole
and body , I remaine Your dutyfull daughter Elizabeth Masham
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.38

I have sent you a small remembranc of my duty , sum plaine gloves .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.39

{COM:endorsed}

To my much honoured mother the Lady Barrington these be given
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,119.41

<P_120>

<heading:edcomment:99_LADY_ELIZABETH_MASHAM,_N.D.,_18?_January_1630>

<$$heading>

Deare mother I acknowledg my self very much bownd to you for your care
of Jug Altham in this watye busines , wherin I would be loth to doe
anything withowt your advice and aprobation : MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,120.45

I conffes the man moveth me much to aprove of it ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,120.46

but I know God comandes me to have a care in the second place of the
outward conveniencis ; MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,120.47

tho I desier to acsept of much less with such a man , yet I shall@ @be
much taxed of hir friends if I look not for a compedency of owtward
estate . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,120.48

I think thar may be prity well , MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,120.49

for thare 2 lives , his and hirs , will make between 4 and 5_100@ @=li=
yearly besides what he may get in law , MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,120.50

but some say hi can@ @not get much yet . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,120.51

But Sir Nathanell Rich tolde me he thought Mr Saint Jhons colde not
spend less then 500@ @=li= yearly him self now he is a single man ,
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,120.52

if that be soe then hir estate will@ @be but little to pay howsrent and
maintaine howskeeping if thay keep any , or elc to sogiorn in another
bodie's howse . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,120.53

Thay can@ @not gather much to purchas for posteryty .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,120.54

I beseech you to way all things well and give me your considerat advice
. MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,120.55

She hath good frinds to advise for hir with you , my brother Garard and
my brother Mewix , who I know desire to seek God's honor in the chefe
place , MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,120.56

and then God gives leav to seek other things as may be fitt to make our
pasadg the more comfortable to that place whare we shall have no need of
these vanitis . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,120.57

The lord fitt us for soe gloryus a place . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,120.58

I am very glad to here you have your <P_121> health soe well .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,121.59

I much longe to se you , MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,121.60

I hope the time will not be longe . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,121.61

The lord send my sister a safe deliveranc that you may come with more
joy . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,121.62

Thus in hast with my humble duty and harty prayers for your increse of
happynes here and especially in the life to come , I rest Your ever
obedient daughter Elizabeth Masham MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,121.63

I desire to be remembred to all my brothers and sisters .
MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,121.64

I beseech you if you think it not fitt to proceed in the busines that
you will write your minde to Jug , MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,121.65

for she desirs to be directed by you . MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,121.66

{COM:endorsed}

For my much honoured and most deare mother the Lady Barrington at Harrow
these MASHAM-1630-E2-P2,121.68

