<BEGIN_memo-1675-e3-p2>

<P_277>

To y=e= 4=th= . MEMO-1675-E3-P2,277.3

That upon y=e= giving dispatch to every Vessel that shall Lade Wooll
from Ireland , The Officers of y=e= Customs doe forthw=th= transmitt a
Duplicate of each Entry of Wooll to y=e= Trea~ry Office , & another
Duplicate of each entry of Wooll to y=e= Comm=rs= of y=e= Customs in
England , at y=e= Custome House in London , to be by them registerd in
their Office , & transmitted to y=e= severall Ports to w=ch= y=e= s=d=
Wooll shall be said to be consigned . Whereunto may be <P_278> Added ,
that some Trusty person be employd in each Port in England where Wooll
is usually Landed , to give an Acc=t= from Time to Time of y=e= Wooll
that is really exported from Ireland . MEMO-1675-E3-P2,278.4

It is also proposed , that y=e= Comm=rs= of y=e= Customs in England doe
send over to y=e= L=d= Lieu=t= , at every six or Twelve months End ,
Copies of y=e= Returns they have received from y=e= Ports in Ireland ;
w=ch= may be compared w=th= y=e= booke of Licences kept in y=e=
Secretarys Office , MEMO-1675-E3-P2,278.5

& by that will be seen whether all y=e= Wooll w=ch= went hath bin truly
Licenced . MEMO-1675-E3-P2,278.6

To y=e= 5=th= . MEMO-1675-E3-P2,278.7

Woollen Yarne being within y=e= prohibition of y=e= aforsd~ Acts , the
Lord Lieu=t= hath already given Ord=r= that no Woollen Yarne whatever
shall be Exported without Licence in y=e= same Forme as in y=e= case of
Wooll , for w=ch= neverthelesse no duty , tho' by y=e= Statute it might
, is exacted by y=e= Chiefe Govern=r= , MEMO-1675-E3-P2,278.8

but for y=e= present y=e= Licences are allowd gratis .
MEMO-1675-E3-P2,278.9

That some one person be employd in each of y=e= Ports abroad where
English or Irish Wooll is usually Landed to observe what Wooll comes
over , & to returne an Acc=t= , either by y=e= Lord Trea~r or one of
y=e= Secretarys , of y=e= proportions of Wooll that are there unladen ,
what Ships they are that bring it , who y=e= Master of y=e= s=d= Ship is
, & from what part of his Ma~ties Dominions it comes .
MEMO-1675-E3-P2,278.10

It is supposed that six persons may doe this worke , there being not
above that number of Ports to w=ch= our Wooll usually goes , and 100
<font> l. <$$font> a year to a man may suffice .
MEMO-1675-E3-P2,278.11

This as is conceived may be so effectuall for y=e= discouery of y=e=
fraudulent Exportacon of Wooll , as if it be put in practice , & fitt
men employd therein only for 4 or 4 years , it will utterly breake those
that follow this illegall Trade , w=ch= being once done every one will
probably be soe cautions {COM:sic} as they will not readily venture upon
y=e= like practices , MEMO-1675-E3-P2,278.12

& so this sort of Traffique will be at an end , MEMO-1675-E3-P2,278.13

& consequently y=e= Expence to these Inform=rs= will also determine .
MEMO-1675-E3-P2,278.14

