<BEGIN_merrytal-1526-e1-p2>

<P_59>

<heading>

XXXIV . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,59.4

<font> Of the frankelyne that wold haue had the frere gon . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,59.5

<$$heading>

A ryche fraynklyng dwellyng in the countrey had a freer vsyng to his
howse of whom he coud neuer be ryd MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,59.7

& had taryed with him the space of a senyght & neuer depart wherfore the
fraynklyng beyng wery of hym | on a tyme | as he & his wyfe & this frere
sat to_geder at supper faynyd hym selfe very angry with hys wyfe
In_somoche he sayd he wolde bete her . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,59.8

This frere p~seyuyng wel what they me~t sayd thus .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,59.9

master frankli~g I haue bene here this seuenyght when ye were fre~dys
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,59.10

& I wyll tary here this fortenyght lenger MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,59.11

but I wyll se you frendys agayne or I go . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,59.12

thys man perseyuyng <P_60> that he coude no good nor wolde not depart by
none honest meanys answeryd hi~ shortly MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,60.13

& sayd by god freere but thou shalte abyde here no lenger
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,60.14

& toke hym by the shulders MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,60.15

& thrust hym out of the dorys by vyolence . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,60.16

By this ye may se that he that wyll lerne no good by example | nor good
maner to hym shewyd is worthy to be taught with open rebukes .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,60.17

<heading>

XXXV . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,60.19

<font> Of the good man that sayd to his wyfe he had yll fare . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,60.20

<$$heading>

A frer Lymytour come into a pore mannys howse in the countrey
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,60.22

and because this pore man thought this frere myght do hym some good he
therfore thought to make hym good chere | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,60.23

But becawse hys wyfe wolde dresse hym no good mete for coste | he
therfor at dyner tyme sayde thus | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,60.24

By god wyfe <P_61> bycawse thou dyddest dresse me no good mete to my
dyner | were it nat for master frere | thou sholdest haue half a dosyn
strypes . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,61.25

Nay sir quod the frere I pray you spare nat for me | wherwith the wyf
was angry MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,61.26

& therfore at supper she caused them to fare wors .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,61.27

By thys ye may se it is good polycy for gestys yf they wyll haue any
good chere to pleas alway the wyfe of the howse .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,61.28

<heading>

XXXVI . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,61.30

<font> Of the frere that bad hys chylde make a latyn . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,61.31

<$$heading>

There was a frere whiche though he were well lernyd yet he was callyd
wycked of condycyons whiche had a Gentylmannys sonne to wayte vpon hym
and to teche hym to speke latyn . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,61.33

<P_62>

Thys frere came to thys chyldes fader dwellyng in the contrey |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,62.35

and becawse this frere wold haue this Gentylman to knowe that this
chylde had metly well spent his tyme for the whyle he had bene with hym
| he bad this chyld to make in latyn shortly Freres walke in the
cloyster . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,62.36

This chylde halfe astonyed bycawse his master bad hym make this latyn so
shortly answered at all aduentures MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,62.37

and sayd In circuitu impii ambulant . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,62.38

<heading>

XXXVII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,62.40

<font> Of the gentylman that askyd the frere for his beuer . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,62.41

<$$heading>

In the terme tyme a good old gentylman beyng a lawyer cam to london to
the terme MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,62.43

& as he came he hapened to ouertake a frere which was som vnthryft &
we~t alone without his beuer wherfor this ge~tylman asked this frere
where was his beuer that shold kepe hym co~pany
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,62.44

and sayd it was contrary to his relygyon to go alone |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,62.45

and it wolde cawse people to suppose hym to be som apostata or some
vnthryft . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,62.46

By god syr quod the frere my felow co~mendeth hym vnto your mastershyp |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,62.47

why <P_63> quod the gentylman I knowe hym nat |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,63.48

than quod the frere to the gentylman ye are the more to blame to aske
for hym . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,63.49

By this tale ye may se that he that geueth cou~sel to an vnthryft and
techeth hym his dutye shall haue oftentymes but a mocke for his labour .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,63.50

<heading>

XXXVIII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,63.52

<font> Of the .iii. men that chase the woma~ . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,63.53

<$$heading>

<P_64>

Thre gentylme~ cam into an Inne where a fayre woman was tapster wherfor
as these thre sat ther makyng mery echone of the~ kyssed her & made good
pastyme & plesure . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,64.56

howbeit one spake meryly MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,64.57

& sayd I can not se how this gentylwoman is able to make pastyme &
pleasure to vs all thre excepte that she were departed in thre partes .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,64.58

By my trouthe quod one of theym | yf that she myght be so departed than
I wolde chose for my parte her hed and her fayre face that I myght alway
kysse her . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,64.59

Then quod the seco~d I wold haue the brest and hart
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,64.60

for ther lyeth her loue . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,64.61

Then quod the thyrd then ther is nothyng lefet {COM:sic} for me but the
loynys buttokkys & leggys MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,64.62

& I am content to haue yt for my part . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,64.63

And when these ge~tylmen had passyd the tyme ther by the space of one
hour or ij they toke ther leue MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,64.64

& were goynge away MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,64.65

but or they went the thyrd man that had chosen the bely & the buttokkys
dyd kys the <P_65> tapyster MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,65.66

& bad her farewel . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,65.67

what quod the furst ma~ that had chosen the face & the mouth why dost
thou so | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,65.68

thou dost me wronge to kys my parte that I haue chosen of her .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,65.69

O quod the other I pray the be not angry MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,65.70

for I wol@ @be co~tent that thou shalt kys my part for it .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,65.71

<heading>

XXXIX . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,65.73

<font> Of the ge~tylma~ that taught his cooks the medesyne for the
tothake . <$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,65.74

<$$heading>

In Essex there dwellyd a mery gentylman which had a cooke callyd Thomas
that was gretly dyseasyd with the tothake & complainyd to his mayster
there of whiche sayd he had a boke of medyci~s & sayd he wold loke vp
his boke to se whether he cowd fynde any medecyn ther for it
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,65.76

& so sende one of hys doughters to his study for his boke
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,65.77

and incontynent lokyd vppon yt a longe season MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,65.78

& than sayde thus to hys coke . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,65.79

Thomas quod he here is a medesyne for thy tothake
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,65.80

& yt ys a charme MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,65.81

but it wyll do you no good except ye knele on your knees and aske yt for
seynt charyte . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,65.82

Thys <P_66> man glad to be releasyd of hys payne knelyd
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.83

& sayd mayster for sei~t charyte let me haue that medecyne .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.84

Then quod thys gentylman knele on your knees MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.85

& say after me MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.86

which knelyd dou~e and sayd after hym as he bad hym .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.87

Thys ge~tylman began MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.88

& sayd thus . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.89

The sone on the sonday . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.90

The sone on the sonday quod thomas . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.91

The mone on the monday . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.92

The mone on the monday . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.93

the trynyte on the tewsday . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.94

the trinyte on the tewsday . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.95

The wite o~ the wednysday MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.96

the wit on the wednysday . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.97

The holy holy thursday . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.98

The holy holy thursday . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.99

And all that fast on fryday . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.100

and al that fast on fryday . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.101

Shite in thy mouthe on saterday . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.102

This Thomas coke herynge his mayster thus mokkynge hym in an anger start
vp MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.103

& sayd | by goddys body mokkyng churle I wyll neuer do the seruyce more
. MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.104

And wente forth to hys cha~ber to get hys gere to_geder to th@ @entent
to gon thens by & by . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,66.105

But what for the anger that he toke with hys master for the moke that he
gaue hym & what for labour that he toke to geder hys gere so shortly
to_geder the payne of the tothake wente from hym incontynent that his
master com to hym & made hym tary styll & tolde hym that hys charme
<P_67> was the cause of the ease of the payn of his tothake .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,67.106

By this tale ye may se that anger oftymys puttyth away bodely payne .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,67.107

<heading>

XL . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,67.109

<font> Of the ge~tylma~ that promysyd the scoler of Oxford a sarcenet
typet . <$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,67.110

<$$heading>

A scholer of Oxford lately made master of arte come to the cyte of
lo~don MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,67.112

& in polys met with the sayd mery ge~tylma~ of essex which was euer
dysposyd to playe many <P_68> mery paieantys with whome before he had
bene of famylier accoyntance MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,68.113

and prayd hym to geue hym a sercenet typet . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,68.114

This gentylman more lyberall of promys than of gyft grantyd hym he
sholde haue one yf he wolde come to his lodgynge to the signe of the
bulle without byshops gate in the next mornynge at vi of the cloke .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,68.115

Thys scoler thanked hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,68.116

& for that nyght departed to hys lodgynge in flete strete |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,68.117

& in the mornynge erely as he poynted cam to hym to the sygne of the
bull | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,68.118

Anon as this gentylman saw hym he bad hym go with hym in to the Cite
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,68.119

& he sholde be sped anone | which incontynent went togeder tyll they cam
in to seynt laurence churche in the Jury wher the gentylman espyed a
prest raueshyd to masse & tolde the scoler that yonder is the preste
that hathe the typet for you MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,68.120

& bade hym knele down in the pewe MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,68.121

& he wolde speke to hym for it | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,68.122

And incontynent this gentilman went to the prest
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,68.123

and sayd Syr here is a scoler and kynsman of myne greatly dyseased with
the chyncowgh . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,68.124

I pray yow when masse ys done gyue hym iij draughtys of your chales .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,68.125

The prest <P_69> grau~ted hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.126

& turned hym to the scoler MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.127

and sayd Syr I shall serue you as son as I haue sayd masse .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.128

the scoler the~ taryed styl MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.129

& hard the masse trusti~g then whan the masse was done that the preste
wolde geue hym his typet of sarcenet . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.130

Thys gentylman in the meane whyle departed out of the churche .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.131

This prest whan masse was don put wyne in the chalice
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.132

& cam to the scoler knelyng in the pew profferyng hym to drink of the
chales . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.133

this scoler lokyd vpon hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.134

& mused MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.135

& sayd | master person wherfore profer ye me the chalyce
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.136

mary quod the preste for the gentylman tolde me ye were dysesyd with the
chi~cough MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.137

& prayd me therfore that for a medcyn ye myght drynk of the chalis .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.138

Nay by seynt mary quod the skolar MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.139

he promysyd me ye sholdd delyuer me a typet of sercenet .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.140

Nay sayde the preste he spake to me of no typet |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.141

but he desyryd me to gyue you drynk of the chales for the chyncough .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.142

By goddys body quod the scoler he is as he was euer wont to be but a
mockyng wrech | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.143

& euer I lyue I shall quyte it hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.144

& so departed out of the churche i~ gret a~ger .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,69.145

By thys tale ye may perceyue it were no wysdom for a man to trust to a
man to do a <P_70> thynge that ys contrary to hys olde accustumyd
condycyons . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,70.146

<heading>

XLI . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,70.148

<font> Of master skelton that brought the byshop of Norwich .ii.
fesantys . <$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,70.149

<$$heading>

It fortuned ther was a gret varyau~ce betwen the bysshop of Norwhich &
one mayster Skelton a poyet lauriat . In so moch that the bysshope
co~maunded hym that he sholde nat come in at hys gatys .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,70.151

This master skelton dyd absent hym selfe for a longe season
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,70.152

but at the last he thought to do his duty to hym
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,70.153

and studyed wayes how he myght obtayn the byshopys fauour
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,70.154

and determynyd him selfe that he wold com to hi~ with some present &
humble hym selfe to the byshop MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,70.155

& gat a couple of fesants MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,70.156

and cam to the byshoppys place MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,70.157

& requyryd the porter he myght come in to speke wyth my lorde .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,70.158

<P_71>

this porter knowyng hys lordys pleasure wolde not suffer hym to come in
at the gatys | wherfore this master skelton went on the bak syde to seke
some other way to com in to the place . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,71.160

But the place was motid that he cowd se no waye to come ouer except in
one place where there lay a longe tre ouer the motte in maner of a brydg
that was fallyn downe with wynd wherfore this master skelton went a_long
vppon the tre to com ouer MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,71.161

& when he was almost ouer hys fote slyppid for lake of sure fotyng
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,71.162

& fell in to the motte vp to the myddl but at the last he recoueryd hym
selfe MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,71.163

& as@ @wel as he coud dryed hym selfe agayn | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,71.164

& sodenly cam to the byshop beyng in his hall then lately rysen from
dyner which when he saw skelton co~mi~g sode~ly sayd to hym why thow
chatyfe I warnyd the thow sholdys neuer come yn at my gatys
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,71.165

& chargyd my porter to kepe the owt . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,71.166

Forsoth my lorde quod skelton though ye gaue suche charge & though your
gatys be neuer so suerly kept | yet it is no more possyble to kepe me
owt of your dorys than to kepe out crowes or pyes
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,71.167

for I ca~e not in at your gatys . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,71.168

but I came ouer the motte that I haue bene almost drownyd for my labour
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,71.169

& shewd hys clothys how euyll he was arayed which causyd many that stode
thereby to laugh a_pace . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,71.170

Then quod skelton yf it lyke your lordeshyp I haue brought <P_72> yow a
dysshe to your supper a cople of Fesantys . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.171

Nay quod the byshop I defy the and thy Fesantys also
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.172

And wreche as thou art pyke the out of my howse
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.173

for I wyll none of thy gyft . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.174

How_be_it with as humble wordys as he coud this skelton desyryd the
byshop to be hys good lorde & to take his lytyll gyft of hym |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.175

But the byshop callyd hym dawe & fole often tymys
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.176

& in no wyse wolde receyue that gyft . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.177

This Skelton than consyderyng that the byshop callyd hym fole so oft
sayd to one of his famyliers therby that though it were euyl to be
cristynyd a fole yet it was moche worse to be confyrmyd a fole of suche
a byshop MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.178

for the name of confyrmacyo~ must nedes abyde |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.179

therfore he ymagynyd how he might auoyd that co~fyrmacio~
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.180

& musyd a whyl MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.181

& at the last sayd to the byshop thus . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.182

if your lordshyp knew the namys of these fesa~tys ye wold be co~te~t to
take them | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.183

why caytyf quod the byshop hastely & angerly what be theyre namys .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.184

I wys my lorde quod skelton this Fesant is callyd alpha .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.185

ys . primus the furst . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.186

& this is callyd O that ys nouissimus the last .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,72.187

& for the more playn vnderstandyng of my mi~de . If it plese your
lordshyp to take them I p~myse you This Alpha is the fyrst that euer I
gaue you & this O is the last that euer I wyl <P_73> gyue you wyl I leue
. at the which a~swer al that wer by made gret laghter .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,73.188

& al they desyryd the byshop to be good lord to hi~ for hys mery
conceytys at whose request or they went the byshop was co~tent to take
hym vnto his fauour agayn . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,73.189

By thys ye my {COM:sic} se that mery conceytes dothe a man moche more
good than to frete hym selfe with anger and melancoly .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,73.190

<heading>

XLII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,73.192

<font> Of the yeman of gard that sayd he wold bete the carter .
<$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,73.193

<$$heading>

A yoman of the kynges gard dwellyng in a vyllage besyde london had a
very fayre yonge wyfe . To whom a cart of the towne a tal felowe
resorted & lay with her dyuers tymes whan her husband was from home |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,73.195

& so openly knowe~ that all the town spake therof | wherfor ther was a
yong man of the towne well accoynted with this yema~ of gard that tolde
hym <P_74> that suche a Carter had layne by his wyfe . To whome thys
yeman of garde sayd & sware by godys body that yf he met hym it shold
cost hym his lyfe . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,74.196

Mary quod the yong man yf ye go streyght euyn now the hye way ye shall
ouertak hym dryui~g of a cart ladyn with hay toward london wherfore this
yeman of garde incontynent rode after this Carter | & within short space
ouertoke hym & knew hym well ynough | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,74.197

& inco~tynent called the cart to hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,74.198

& sayd thus . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,74.199

Sirra , I vnderstand that thou dost ly euery night with my wyfe when I
am from home . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,74.200

This carter beyng no thyng afrayd of the other | answered ye mary what
than | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,74.201

what than quod the yeman of garde | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,74.202

by goddes hart haddest thou na tolde me the trouth I wolde haue broken
thy hede . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,74.203

And so the yeman of garde retourned MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,74.204

and no hurte done MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,74.205

nor stroke stryken nor profered . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,74.206

By thys ye may se that the greatest crakers somtyme whan it cometh to
the profe be moste cowardys . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,74.207

<P_75>

<heading>

XLIII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,75.210

<font> Of the pryst that sayd our lady was not so curyous a woman .
<$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,75.211

<$$heading>

In the towne of Bottelley dwelled a mylner whiche had a good homely
wench to his doughter whom a curat of the next towne louyd | and as the
fame went had her at his plesure . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,75.213

But on a tyme this curat preched of these curyous wyues now_a_dayes |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,75.214

& whether it were for the nones or whether it come out at all aduenturys
he hapned to say thus in his sermo~ . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,75.215

Ye wyues ye be so curious in all your warkes that ye wote nat what ye
mene | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,75.216

but ye shold folowe our lady . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,75.217

For our lady was nothynge so curyous as ye be |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,75.218

but she was a good homely wenche lyke the mylners doughter of bottellay
. At which sayng all the paryshons made gret laughynge | & specyally
they that knewe that he had loued the same wenche .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,75.219

By thys ye may se it is great foly for a man that is suspected with any
parson to prayse or <P_76> to name the same parson openly lest it bryng
hym forther in sclaunder . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,76.220

<P_116>

<heading>

LXVII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,116.223

<font> Of the penytent that sayd the shepe of god haue mercy vpon me .
<$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,116.224

<$$heading>

A certayne confessour in the holy tyme of lente inioyned his penitent to
say dayly for his penaunce this prayer . Agnus dei miserere mei |
whiche was as moche to saye in englysshe as y=e= Lambe of god haue mercy
vpon me . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,116.226

This penitens acceptynge his penau~ce departyd
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,116.227

& that tyme twelfe moneth after came agayne to be confessyd of the same
co~fessoure whiche demaundyd of hym whether he had fulfyllyd his
penau~ce that he hym inioynyd y=e= last yere .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,116.228

And he sayd thus | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,116.229

ye syr I thank god I haue fulfylled it | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,116.230

for I haue sayde thus to_daye mornynge and so dayly . The shepe of
<P_117> god haue mercy vpon me . To whom the confessour sayd . Nay I
bad y=e= say Agnus dei miserere mei | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,117.231

that is y=e= lambe of god haue mercy vpon me .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,117.232

Ye syr quod y=e= penytent ye say trouth MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,117.233

that was y=e= laste yere | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,117.234

but now it is at twelfe month syth | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,117.235

& it is a shepe by this tyme . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,117.236

Therfore I must nedys say now y=e= shepe of god haue mercy vpon me .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,117.237

By this tale ye may perceyue that yf holy scrypture be expownyd to rude
Lay people onely in the lytterall scence . Peraduenture it shal do but
lytell good . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,117.238

<heading>

LXVIII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,117.240

<font> Of the husband that sayd he was John~ daw . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,117.241

<$$heading>

It fourtuned dyuers to be in co~munycacyon amonge whom there was a curat
or a parysh preest & one Johan daw a paryshon of his whiche .ii. had
co~munycacyon more busy than other in this maner .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,117.243

This preest thought y=t= one myght not by felynge knowe one from another
in the darke | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,117.244

John <P_118> daw his paryshon of contrary opynyon layde with his curate
for a wager .xl. pence . Wherupon the parysh preest wyllynge to proue
his wager wente to this John dawes house in the euenynge and sodenly
gate hym to bed with his wyfe where whe~ he began to be somwhat besy .
She felynge his crowne sayde shortly with a loud voyce . By god thou
art not John daw . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,118.245

That herynge her husbond answerde . Thou sayst trouth wyfe
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,118.246

I am here John daw . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,118.247

Therfore mayster person gyue me the money MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,118.248

for you haue lost your .xl. pence . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,118.249

By this tale ye may lerne to perceyue y=t= it is no wysdome for a man
for y=e= couetouse of wynnyng of any wager to put in Jeoperdy a thyng
that may torne hym to gretter dysplasure . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,118.250

<P_120>

<heading>

LXX . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,120.253

<font> Of the frere that stale the podyng . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,120.254

<$$heading>

A frere of london there was that on a sondaye mornynge yarly in y=e=
somer seaso~ came from Londo~ to Barnet to <P_121> make a colacyon |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,121.256

& was there an houre before hye masse began |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,121.257

& bycause he wolde come to y=e= chyrch honestly | he went fyrst to an
alehouse there to wype his shoys & to make hymself clenely . In the
which house there were podyngis to selle | & dyuers folkys there
brekynge theyr faste & etyng podyngys . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,121.258

But y=e= frere brake his fast in a secrete place in the same house .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,121.259

This frere soone after came to the chyrch MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,121.260

and by lycence of y=e= curat enteryd into the pulpet to make a colacyon
or sermon . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,121.261

And in his sermon there he rebukyd sore y=e= maner of them that vsyd to
breke theyr fast on the sonday before hye masse
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,121.262

& sayd it was called y=e= dyuyls blak brekfast .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,121.263

And with that worde spekyng as he dyd cast his armys out to make his
con~tenau~ce there fell a podynge out of his sleue | which he hymself
had stole~ a lytel before in y=e= same alehous
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,121.264

& when y=e= people sawe that & specyally they y=t= brake theyr fast
there y=e= same mornyng & knew wel that y=e= wyfe had compleyned how she
had one of her podynges stolyn | they laughyd so moche at the frere y=t=
he inco~tynent went downe of the pulpet for shame .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,121.265

By this tale a man may se that whe~ a precher <P_122> doth rebuke any
synne or vyce wherin he is knowe~ openly to be gylty hymself | suche
prechyng shall lytell edyfy to the people . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,122.266

<heading>

LXXI . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,122.268

<font> Of the frankelyns son that cam to take orders . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,122.269

<$$heading>

<P_123>

A certayne skoller ther was intendynge to be made prest whiche had
nother grete wytte nor lernyng came to the bysshop to take orders | whos
folyshnese y=e= byshop perceyuyng because he was a ryche ma~nes son
wolde not very strongly oppose hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.272

but askyd hym this small questyon . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.273

Noe had .iij. sonnes | Sem | Cham & Japhet |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.274

now tell me quod the bysshop wo was Japhetis father & thou shalt haue
orders . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.275

Then sayd ye scoler By my trouth my lorde I pray you pardo~ me .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.276

For I neuer lernyd but lyttel of the byble .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.277

Then quod the bysshop | go home MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.278

& come agayn MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.279

& soyle me this questyon & thou shalt haue orders .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.280

This scoler so departed MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.281

& came home to his fader MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.282

& shewde hym y=e= cause of the hynderaunce of his orders .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.283

His fader beynge angry at his folysshnes thought to teche hym y=e=
solucyon of this questyon by a famylyer example
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.284

& called his spanyels before hym MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.285

& sayd thus | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.286

thou knowyst well Coll my dogge hath these iii. whelpys Ryg | Tryg | &
Tryboll . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.287

Must not Coll my dog nedys be Syre to tryboll .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,123.288

Then quod the scoler by god fader <P_124> ye saye trouth
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,124.289

let me alone now | ye shall se me do well ynough y=e= nexte tyme .
wherfore on y=e= morowe he wente to y=e= bysshop agayne & sayd he coud
soyle his questyon . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,124.290

Then sayd the bysshop Noe had .iii. sonnes Sem Cham & Japhet |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,124.291

now tell me who was Japhetys fader . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,124.292

Mary syr quod y=e= scholer yf it please your lordshyp Col my faders dog
. MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,124.293

By this tale a man may lerne that it is but lost tyme to teche a fole
any thynge whych hath no wyt to perceyue it .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,124.294

<heading>

LXXII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,124.296

<font> Of the husbandman that lodgyd the frere in his own bed .
<$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,124.297

<$$heading>

It fortuned so that a frere late in the euenynge desyred lodgynge of a
poore man of the countrey | the whiche for lake of other lodgynge glad
to herborowe the frere lodgyd hym in his owne bed .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,124.299

And after he and his wyfe . The frere beynge a sleepe came
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,124.300

and lay in the same bedde . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,124.301

And in the mornynge after the poore man rose MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,124.302

and wente to the marketh leuynge the Frere in y=e= bedde with his wyfe .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,124.303

And as he went he smylyd & laughyd to hymself | wherfor his neybours
demaunded of hym why he so smyled | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,124.304

he <P_125> answerd MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,125.305

& sayd I laugh to thynk how shamefast the frere shall be when he waketh
| whom I left in bedde with my wyfe . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,125.306

By this tale a man may lerne that he that ouershotyth hymself doth
folyshly MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,125.307

yet he is more fole to shewe it openly . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,125.308

<heading>

LXXIII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,125.310

<font> Of the prest that wold say .ii. gospels for a grote . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,125.311

<$$heading>

Somtyme there dwellyd a prest in Stretforth vpon auyne of small lernynge
whiche vndeuoutly sange masse | & often tymes twyse on one day .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,125.313

So it happened on a tyme after his seco~de mas was done in shoterey not
a myle from Strethforth there mete with hym dyuers merchaunt men whiche
wolde haue harde masse | & desyryd hym to synge masse
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,125.314

and he sholde haue a grote | whiche answerd them <P_126> & sayd Syrs I
wyll say masse no more this day | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,126.315

but I wyl say you .ii. gospels for one grote |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,126.316

& that is dog chepe a masse in ony place in englonde .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,126.317

By this tale a man may se that they that be rude & vnlernyd regard by
lytell the meryt & goodnes of holy prayer . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,126.318

<P_127>

<heading>

LXXV . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,127.321

<font> Of the frere that prechyd what mennys sowlys were . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,127.322

<$$heading>

A precher in the pulpet whiche prechyd the worde of god | & amo~g other
matters spake of mennys soullys & sayd they were so meruelous & so
subtyll y=t= a_thousand soullys myght dau~ce in the space of a nayle of
a mannys fynger | amonge whiche audyence there was a mery conceyted
felowe of small deuocyon that answerde and sayd thus | mayster doctor yf
that a_thousande soullys may daunce on a mannys nayle I pray you tell
then where shall the pyper stande . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,127.324

By this tale a man may se that it is but foly to shewe or to teche
vertew to them that haue no pleasure nor mynde therto .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,127.325

<P_128>

<heading>

LXXVI . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,128.328

<font> Of the husband that cryed ble under the bed . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,128.329

<$$heading>

In londo~ there was a certayn artyfycer hauyng a wyf to who~ a lusty
gala~t made pursute to accomplyshe his pleasur .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,128.331

This woma~ denyenge shewde the matter vnto her husbande | whiche mouyd
therwith bad hys wyfe to appoynte hym a tyme to come secretly to lye
with her all night . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,128.332

And w=t= gret krakys & othes sware y=t= agaynst his coming he wolde be
redy harnesyd & wolde put hym in ieopardy of his lyf except he wolde
make hym a grete amendys . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,128.333

This nyght was then appoynted at whiche tyme this courtyer came at
<P_129> his howre & entred into the chaumber set his two-hand sworde
downe & sayde these wordes . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,129.334

Stand thou there thou sworde the deth of .iii. men .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,129.335

This husbande lyenge vnder y=e= bed in harnes heryng these wordes lay
styl for fere . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,129.336

The courtyer anone gat him to bed with the wyfe aboute his prepensyd
besynes | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,129.337

and within an houre or .ii. the husbande beynge wery of lyenge began to
remoue hym | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,129.338

the courtyar that herynge askyd the wyfe what thynge that was y=t=
remouyd vnder y=e= bed | whiche excusynge y=e= matter sayde it was a
lytell shepe that was wonte dayly to go about the hous
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,129.339

& the husbande y=t= herynge anone cryed ble as it had ben a shepe .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,129.340

And so in co~clusyon when y=e= courtyer saw his tyme he rose
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,129.341

& kyssed the wyfe MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,129.342

& toke his leue MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,129.343

& departyd . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,129.344

And as soone as he was gone the husbande arose |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,129.345

& when the wyfe lokyd on hym somwhat abasshyd she began to make a sad
cou~tenaunce MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,129.346

& sayde Alas syr why dyd ye not ryse & play the man as ye sayde ye wolde
| MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,129.347

whiche answerde and sayde why dame dydest thou not here hym say that his
sworde had ben the dethe <P_130> of .iii. men |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,130.348

& I had ben a fole than yf y=t= I had put my selfe in ieopardy to haue
ben the fourth . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,130.349

Then sayd the wyfe thus | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,130.350

but syr spake not I wysely then when I sayd ye were a shepe |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,130.351

yes quod y=e= husbande . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,130.352

But than dyd not I more wysely dame when that I cryed ble .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,130.353

By this ye may se that he is not wyse that wyll put his confydens to
moche vpon these grete crakers whiche oftymes wyll do but lytell when it
comyth to the poynt . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,130.354

<heading>

LXXVII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,130.356

<font> Of the shomaker that askyd the colyer what tydyngys in hell .
<$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,130.357

<$$heading>

There was a shomaker syttynge in his shop y=t= sawe a colyer come by
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,130.359

thought to deryde hym bycause he was so blake |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,130.360

askyd hym , what thydynges were in hell and how the deuyll fayred .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,130.361

To whome the colyer sayde | the deuyll fared well when <P_131> I sawe
hym last MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,131.362

for he was rydynge forthe MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,131.363

and taryed but for a sowter to pluk on his botis .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,131.364

By this ye may se that he that vsyth to deryde other folkys is somtyme
hymselfe more derydyd and mokkyd . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,131.365

<heading>

LXXVIII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,131.367

<font> Of saynt Peter that cryed cause bobe . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,131.368

<$$heading>

I fynde wryte~ amonge olde gestys how god made saynte peter porter of
heuen | and that god of his goodnes soone after his passyon suffred many
men to come to the kyngdome of heuen with small deseruyng | at whiche
tyme there was in heuen a grete company of Welchemen | whiche with
theyre krakynge & babelynge trobelyd all the other . Wherfore god sayd
to saynt peter y=t= he was wery of them | & that he wolde fayne haue
them out of heuen . To whome saynt Peter sayde good lorde I warrant you
y=t= shal@ @be shortly done | wherfore saynt peter went out of heue~
gatys & cryed w=t= a loude voyce Cause bobe |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,131.370

y=t= is as moche to say as rostyd chese | whiche thynge ye welchmen
heryng ran out of heuyn a great pace . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,131.371

And when saynt Peter sawe them al out he sodenly went in to <P_132>
heuen MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,132.372

and lokkyd the dore MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,132.373

and so sparryd all the welchmen out . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,132.374

By this ye may se that it is no wysdome for a man to loue or to set his
mynde to moche vpon ony delycate or wordly {COM:sic} pleasure wherby he
shall lose the celestyall & eternall Joye . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,132.375

<P_133>

<heading>

LXXX . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,133.378

<font> Of the parson that stall the mylners elys . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,133.379

<$$heading>

A certayn mylner ther was which had dyuers po~dys of elis wheri~ was
good store of elys | wherfore y=e= p~son of y=e= town which lokyd like
a~ holy ma~ dyuers & many timis stale many of the~ in so moch y=t= he
had left few or none behind him | wherfore this milner seyng his elis
stolyn & wist not by who~ cam to y=e= sayd p~son & desyrid hym to curse
for the~ MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,133.381

y=e= p~son sayd he wolde . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,133.382

& y=e= next so~day ca~ in to y=e= pulpet w=t= book bell & ca~dell
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,133.383

& p~ceiyng there were none in y=e= chirche y=t= vnderstode latyn sayd
thus | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,133.384

he y=t= stale y=e= milners elis laudate dominum de celis
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,133.385

but he y=t= stale y=e= grer elis gaudeat ipse in celis
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,133.386

therw=t= put out y=e= candell , MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,133.387

why syr quod ye mylner no more MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,133.388

for this sauce is sharp ynough for hym . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,133.389

<P_134>

By this ye may se that some curatys that loke full holyly be but
desemblers & ypocrytis . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,134.391

<heading>

LXXXI . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,134.393

<font> Of the welchman that saw one xl. shyl. better than god .
<$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,134.394

<$$heading>

A welchman on a tyme went to chirche to here mas whiche hapenyd to come
in euyn at y=e= sacryng time MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,134.396

when he had hard y=t= mas to y=e= ende he we~t home wher one of his
felowes askyd hym whether he had sene god almighty to_day which a~swerd
& sayd nay but I saw one lx. s. better tha~ he .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,134.397

By this ye maye se that they that {TEXT:missing_"that"} be euyll brought
vp haue but lytyll devocyon to pray and vertew .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,134.398

<P_136>

<heading>

LXXXIII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,136.401

<font> Of the parson that sayd masse of requie~ for Crystys sowle .
<$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,136.402

<$$heading>

A certayne prest there was that dwellyd in y=e= cou~trey which was not
very lernyd . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,136.404

Therfore on Eester euyn he se~t his boy to y=e= prest of the next town
<P_137> y=t= was .ii. myle from thens to know what masse he sholde
synge on ye morowe . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.405

This boy came to the sayd prest MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.406

and did his maysters erra~de to hym . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.407

Then quod the prest tel thy mayster that he must synge to morow of the
resurrexyon | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.408

and furthermore quod he yf thou hap to forget it tel thy mayster that it
begynneth w=t= a gret R. MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.409

and shewed hym the masse booke where it was wryten Resurrexi . &c.
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.410

This boy than wente home agayne MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.411

and all the way as he went he clateryd styll . Resurrexi Resurrexi |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.412

but at y=e= last he hapenyd to forget it clene
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.413

and whe~ he came home his mayster askyd hym what masse he sholde synge
on y=e= morowe . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.414

By my troth mayster quod the boy I haue forgoten it |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.415

but he bad me tell you it bega~ w=t= a gret .R.
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.416

By god quod the prest I trowe thou sayest trowth
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.417

for now I remember well it muste be requiem eternam |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.418

for god almyghty dyed as on yester_day MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.419

& now we must say masse for his soule . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.420

By this ye may se that when one fole sendyth another fole on his errand
oftentymes the besynes is folyshly spede . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,137.421

<P_138>

<heading>

LXXXIV . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,138.424

<font> Of the herdman that sayd ryde apace MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,138.425

ye shall haue rayn . <$$font> MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,138.426

<$$heading>

A skoler of Oxenford whiche had studyed y=e= iudycyals of astronomy o~ a
tyme was rydyng by y=e= way which ca~ by a herdma~ & inquyrid of hym how
far it was to y=e= next town | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,138.428

syr quod y=e= herdma~ y=e= haue not thyder {SIC:notthyder} past a myle &
a half , MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,138.429

but syr quod he ye nede to ryde apace MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,138.430

for ye shal haue a shour of rayn er ye co~e thyder |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,138.431

what quod y=e= skoler y=t= is not so MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,138.432

for here is no token of rayn MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,138.433

for all y=e= cloudys be both fayr & clere | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,138.434

by god syr quod y=e= herd ma~ but ye shall fynd it so .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,138.435

The skoler then rode forth his way MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,138.436

& or he had ryden half a myle forther there fel a good showre of rayn
that the skoler was well wasshyd and wete to y=e= skyn |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,138.437

y=e= skoler then tournyd his horse MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,138.438

and rode agayne to the herdman MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,138.439

& desyred hym to teche hym that connyng . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,138.440

nay quod y=e= herdman I wyll <P_139> not teche you my connynge for
nought | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,139.441

tha~ the skoler profferyd hym .xl. shyllyngys to teche hym that
connynge | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,139.442

the herde man after he had receyued his money sayde thus . Syr se you
not yo~der a dun {TEXT:dun_a} kow with the whyte face |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,139.443

yes quod the skoler . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,139.444

Suerly quod y=e= herdma~ whe~ she dau~syth and holdyth vp her tayle it
shal haue a showre of rayne within halfe an howre after .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,139.445

By this ye may see y=t= the conyng of herdmen & shepardes as touchyng
alteracyo~s of weders is more sure than y=e= iudycyallys of Astronomy .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,139.446

<heading>

LXXXV . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,139.448

<font> Of hym that sayd I shall haue nere a peny . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,139.449

<$$heading>

In a certayn town ther was a rych man that lay on his deth bed at poynte
of deth whiche chargyd his executours to dele for his soule a certayn
so~me of money in pence MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,139.451

& on this condicyon chargyd them as y=e= wolde answere afore God that
euery pore man that came to them & tolde a trewe tale sholde haue a peny
& they that sayd a fals <P_140> thynge sholde haue none |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.452

& in the dole tyme there came one which sayde y=t= god was a good man |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.453

quod y=e= executours thou shalt haue a peny MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.454

for thou sayste trouth . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.455

Anone came another MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.456

& said ye deuyll was a good man | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.457

quod the executours there thou lyest MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.458

therfore thou shalt haue nere a peny . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.459

At last came one to y=e= executours MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.460

& sayd thus | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.461

ye shall gyue me nere a peny | which wordys made the executours amasyd
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.462

and toke aduysement whether they shold gyue hym the peny or no .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.463

By this ye may se it is wysdome for Juggys in deutefull matters of law
to beware of hasty iugement . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.464

<heading>

LXXXVI . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.466

<font> Of the husband that sayd his wyfe and he agreed well . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.467

<$$heading>

A man askyd his neybour which was but late maryed to a wydow how he
agreyd with his wyfe MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.469

for he said y=t= her fyrst husba~d and she coud neuer agre |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.470

by god quod y=e= other we agre meruelous wel .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.471

I pray the how so | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.472

mary quod y=e= other I shall tell y=e= | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,140.473

<P_141>

when I am mery she is mery | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,141.475

& when I am sad she is sad | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,141.476

for whe~ I go out of my doris I am mery to go from her
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,141.477

& so is she | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,141.478

& when I come in agayne I am sad MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,141.479

& so is she . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,141.480

<heading>

LXXXVII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,141.482

<font> Of the preest that sayd comede episcope . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,141.483

<$$heading>

In y=e= tyme of vysytacyo~ a bysshop whiche was somwhat lecherous & had
got many chylderne preparyd to come to a prestes house to se what rule
he kept which prest had a lema~ in his house called Ede & by her had
.ii. or .iii. smale chyldre~ in short space |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,141.485

but agayn y=e= bysshop commyng ye prest preparyd a rome to hyde his
lema~ & his childre~ ouer in y=e= rofe of his hall |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,141.486

& whe~ ye bysshop was come & set at dyner in y=e= same hal hauyng .x.
of his owne childre~ about hym this preste which coud speke lytell latyn
or none bad the bysshop in <P_142> latyn to ete saynge Comede episcope .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,142.487

This woma~ in the rofe of the house herynge the prest say so had wente
he had callyd her byddynge her com Edee MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,142.488

& a~swerd shortly MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,142.489

& sayd shall I brynge my chylderen w=t= me also .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,142.490

This bysshop herynge this uxor tua sicut vitis abundans in lateribus
domus tue . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,142.491

The preest the~ half amasyd answeryd shortly MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,142.492

and sayd Filii tui sicut nouelle olyvarum in circuitu mense tue .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,142.493

By this ye may se that they that haue but small lernynge somtyme speke
truely vnaduysyd . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,142.494

<heading>

LXXXVIII . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,142.496

<font> Of the woman that stale the pot . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,142.497

<$$heading>

On ashe wednysday in y=e= mornynge was a curat of a church whiche had
made good chere the nyght afore | & syttyn vp late & came to y=e=
churche to here co~fessyon to whom there came a woman |
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,142.499

and amo~ge other thyngys she co~fessyd her that she had stolyn a pot .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,142.500

But than because of grete watche that this preest had | he there sodenly
felle a slepe | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,142.501

and whe~ this woman sawe hym not wyllyng to here her she rose vp
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,142.502

& we~t her way | MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,142.503

& anone an <P_143> other woman kneled downe to the same prest
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,143.504

& began to say benedicite wherwith this preest sodenly wakyd wenynge she
had ben the other woman & sayd al angerly | what art thou now at
benedicite agayne MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,143.505

tell me what dydest thou when thou hadyst stolyn the pot .
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,143.506

<P_144>

<heading>

XC . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,144.509

<font> Of the prest that kyllyd hys horse callyd modicum . <$$font>
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,144.510

<$$heading>

A certayne bysshop appoynted to go on vysytacyon to a prestys house
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,144.512

and bycause he wolde haue the preest do but lytell cost upon hym he bad
hym dresse but lytyl mete saying thus in latyn . Preparas mihi modicu~
. MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,144.513

<P_145>

This preest which vnderstode hym not halfe wel had a horse called
modicu~ wherfore he thought to obtayne the bysshops fauour
MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,145.515

& agaynst y=e= bysshops comyng kylled his horse that was called modicum
wherof the byssop & his serua~tes ete p~t which whe~ y=e= bisshop knew
afterward was gretly displesid . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,145.516

By this ye may se that many a fole doth moche cost which hath but lytyll
thank for his laboure . MERRYTAL-1526-E1-P2,145.517

