<BEGIN_milton-1670-e3-p2>

<P_X,172>

But the two young Sons of <font> Arwald <$$font> , King of that Iland ,
met with much more hostility ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,172.3

for they at the Enemies approach flying out of the Ile , and betray'd
where they were hid not far from thence , were led to <font> Kedwalla
<$$font> , who lay then under Cure of some wounds receav'd , and by his
appointment , after instruction and Baptism first giv'n them , harshly
put to death , which the youths are said above thir Age to have
Christianly sufferd . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,172.4

In <font> Kent <$$font> , <font> Lothair <$$font> dy'd this year of his
wounds receav'd in fight against the <font> South-Saxons <$$font> , led
on by <font> Edric <$$font> , who descending from <font> Ermenred
<$$font> , it seems challeng'd <P_X,173> the Crown ; and wore it ,
though not commendably , one year and a half : but coming to a violent
Death , left the land expos'd a prey either to home-bred usurpers , or
neighbouring invaders . Among whom <font> Kedwalla <$$font> , taking
advantage from thir civil distempers , and marching easily through the
<font> South-Saxons <$$font> , whom he had subdu'd , sorely harrass'd
the Country , untouch'd of a long time by any hostile incursion .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,173.5

But the <font> Kentish <$$font> men , all parties uniteing against a
common Enemy , with joint powr so oppos'd him , that he was constrain'd
to retire back ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,173.6

his Brother <font> Mollo <$$font> in the flight with 12 men of his
Company , seeking shelter in a House , was beset and therin burnt by the
persuers : MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,173.7

<font> Kedwalla <$$font> much troubl'd at so great a loss , recalling
and soon rallying his disorderd Forces , return'd fiercely upon the
chaseing Enemy ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,173.8

nor could be got out of the Province , till both by fire and Sword , he
had aveng'd the Death of his Brother . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,173.9

At length <font> Victred <$$font> the Son of <font> Ecbert <$$font> ,
attaining the Kingdome , both settl'd at home all things in peace ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,173.10

and secur'd his Borders from all outward Hostility .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,173.11

While thus <font> Kedwalla <$$font> disquieted both <font> West <$$font>
and <font> East <$$font> , after his winning the Crown , <font> Ecfrid
<$$font> the <font> Northumbrian <$$font> , and <font> Ethelred <$$font>
the <font> Mercian <$$font> , fought a sore Battel by the River <font>
Trent <$$font> ; wherin <font> Elfwin <$$font> Brother to <font> Ecfrid
<$$font> , a youth of 18 years , much belov'd , was slain ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,173.12

and the accident likely to occasion much more sheding of blood , peace
was happily made by the grave exhortation of Archbishop <font> Theodore
<$$font> , a pecuniary fine only paid to <font> Ecfrid <$$font> , as
some satisfaction for the loss of his Brothers life .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,173.13

Another adversity befell <font> Ecfrid <$$font> in his Family , by means
of <font> Ethildrith <$$font> his Wife , King <font> Anna's <$$font>
Daughter , who having <P_X,174> tak'n him for hir Husband , and
professing to love him above all other men , persisted twelve years in
the obstinat refusal of his bed , therby thinking to live the purer life
. MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,174.14

So perversly then was chastity instructed against the Apostles rule .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,174.15

At length obtaining of him with much importunity her departure , she
veild her self a Nun , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,174.16

then made Abbess of <font> Ely <$$font> , dy'd 7 years after the
pestilence ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,174.17

and might with better warrant have kept faithfully her undertak'n
Wedlock , though now canoniz'd St. <font> Audrey <$$font> of <font> Ely
<$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,174.18

In the mean while <font> Ecfrid <$$font> had sent <font> Bertus <$$font>
with a power to subdue <font> Ireland <$$font> , a harmless Nation ,
saith <font> Beda <$$font> , and ever friendly to the English ; in both
which they seem to have left a posterity much unlike them at this day :
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,174.19

miserably wasted , without regard had to places hallow'd or profane ,
they betook them partly to thir Weapons , partly to implore divine aid ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,174.20

and , as was thought , obtain'd it in thir full avengement upon <font>
Ecfrid <$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,174.21

For he the next year , against the mind and persuasion of his sagest
friends , and especially of <font> Cudbert <$$font> a famous Bishop of
that Age , marching unadvisedly against the <font> Picts <$$font> , who
long before had bin subject to <font> Northumberland <$$font> , was by
them feigning flight , drawn unawares into narrow streights overtopt
with Hills , and cut off with most of his Army . From which time ,
saith <font> Bede <$$font> , military valour began among the <font>
Saxons <$$font> to decay , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,174.22

nor only the <font> Picts <$$font> till then peaceable , but some part
of the <font> Britans <$$font> also recover'd by Armes thir liberty for
many years after . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,174.23

Yet <font> Aldfrid <$$font> elder , but base Brother to <font> Ecfrid
<$$font> , a man said to be learned in the Scriptures , recall'd from
<font> Ireland <$$font> , to which place in his Brothers Reign he had
retir'd , and now succeeding , upheld <P_X,175> with much honour ,
though in narrower bounds , the residue of his Kingdome .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,175.24

<font> Kedwalla <$$font> having now with great disturbance of his
Neighbours reign'd over the <font> West-Saxons <$$font> two years ,
besides what time he spent in gaining it , wearied perhaps with his own
turbulence , went to <font> Rome <$$font> , desirous there to receave
Baptism , which till then his worldly affairs had deferr'd ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,175.25

and accordingly , on <font> Easter <$$font> Day , 689. he was baptiz'd
by <font> Sergius <$$font> the Pope , and his name chang'd to <font>
Peter <$$font> . All which notwithstanding , surpris'd with a Disease ,
he outliv'd not the Ceremony so far sought , much above the space of 5
weeks , in the Thirtieth year of his Age , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,175.26

and in the Church of St. <font> Peter <$$font> was there buried , with
a large Epitaph upon his Tomb . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,175.27

Him succeeded <font> Ina <$$font> of the Royal Family ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,175.28

and from the time of his coming in , for many years oppress'd the Land
with like greevances , as <font> Kedwalla <$$font> had done before him ,
insomuch that in those times there was no Bishop among them .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,175.29

His first expedition was into <font> Kent <$$font> , to demand
satisfaction for the burning of <font> Mollo <$$font> :
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,175.30

<font> Victred <$$font> loth to hazard all for the rash act of a few ,
deliver'd up 30 of those that could be found accessory ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,175.31

or as others say , pacifi'd <font> Ina <$$font> with a great sum of
money . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,175.32

Mean while , at the incitement of <font> Ecbert <$$font> , a devout Monk
, <font> Wilbrod <$$font> a Priest eminent for learning , past over Sea
, having 12 others in Company , with intent to preach the Gospel in
<font> Germany <$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,175.33

And coming to Pepin Cheif Regent of the <font> Franks <$$font> , who a
little before had conquer'd the hither <font> Frisia <$$font> , by his
countnance and protection , promise also of many benefits to them who
should beleeve , they found the work of conversion much the easier , and
<font> Wilbrod <$$font> the first Bishoprick in that Nation .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,175.34

But two <P_X,176> Priests , each of them <font> Hewald <$$font> by name
, and for distinction surnam'd from the colour of thir Hair , the black
and the white , by his example , piously affected to the Souls of thir
Country-men the old <font> Saxons <$$font> , at thir coming thether to
convert them met with much worse entertainment .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,176.35

For in the House of a Farmer who had promis'd to convey them , as they
desir'd , to the Governour of that Country , discoverd by thir daily
Ceremonies to be Christian Priests , and the cause of thir coming
suspected , they were by him and his Heathen Neighbours cruelly butcherd
; yet not unaveng'd , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,176.36

for the Governour enrag'd at such violence offerd to his Strangers ,
sending Armed Men , slew all those Inhabitants ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,176.37

and burnt thir Village . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,176.38

After three years in <font> Mercia <$$font> , <font> Ostrid <$$font> the
Queen , Wife to <font> Ethelred <$$font> , was kill'd by her own Nobles
, as <font> Beda <$$font> 's Epitome records ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,176.39

<font> Florence <$$font> calls them <font> Southimbrians <$$font> ,
negligently omitting the cause of so strange a fact .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,176.40

And the year following , <font> Bertred <$$font> a <font> Northumbrian
<$$font> General was slain by the <font> Picts <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,176.41

<font> Ethelred <$$font> 7 years after the violent Death of his Queen ,
put on the Monk , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,176.42

and resign'd his Kingdome to <font> Kenred <$$font> the Son of <font>
Wulfer <$$font> his Brother . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,176.43

The next year , <font> Aldfrid <$$font> in <font> Northumberland
<$$font> dy'd , leaving <font> Osred <$$font> a Child of 8 years to
succeed him . Fowr years after which , <font> Kenred <$$font> having a
while with praise govern'd the <font> Mercian <$$font> Kingdome , went
to <font> Rome <$$font> in the time of Pope <font> Constantine <$$font>
, and shorn a Monk spent there the residue of his daies .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,176.44

<font> Kelred <$$font> succeeded him , the Son of <font> Ethelred
<$$font> , who had reign'd the next before . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,176.45

With <font> Kenred <$$font> went <font> Offa <$$font> the Son of <font>
Siger <$$font> , King of <font> East-Saxons <$$font> ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,176.46

and betook him to the same habit , leaving his Wife and Native Country ;
a comely Person <P_X,177> in the prime of his youth , much desir'd of
the people ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,177.47

and such his vertue by report , as might have otherwise bin worthy to
have reign'd . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,177.48

<font> Ina <$$font> the <font> West-Saxon <$$font> one year after fought
a Battell , at first doubtfull , at last successfull , against <font>
Gerent <$$font> King of <font> Wales <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,177.49

The next year <font> Bertfrid <$$font> , another <font> Northumbrian
<$$font> Captain , fought with the <font> Picts <$$font> ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,177.50

and slaughterd them , saith <font> Huntingdon <$$font> , to the full
avengment of <font> Ecfrids <$$font> Death . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,177.51

The fowrth year after , <font> Ina <$$font> had another doubtfull and
cruell Battel at <font> Wodnesburg <$$font> in <font> Wiltshire <$$font>
, with <font> Kelred <$$font> the <font> Mercian <$$font> , who dy'd the
year following a lamentable Death : MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,177.52

for as he sat one day feasting with his Nobles , suddenly possess'd with
an evill Spirit , he expir'd in despair , as <font> Boniface <$$font>
Archbishop of <font> Ments <$$font> , an English man , who taxes him for
a defiler of Nuns , writes by way of caution to <font> Ethelbald
<$$font> , his next of Kin , who succeeded him .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,177.53

<font> Osred <$$font> also the young <font> Northumbrian <$$font> King ,
slain by his Kindred in the 11. of his Reign , for his vitious life and
incest committed with Nuns ; was by <font> Kenred <$$font> succeeded and
aveng'd , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,177.54

he reigning two years left <font> Osric <$$font> in his room . In whose
<font> 7th <$$font> year , if <font> Beda <$$font> calculate right ,
<font> Victred <$$font> King of <font> Kent <$$font> deceas'd , having
reign'd 34 years , and some part of them with <font> Suebhard <$$font> ,
as <font> Beda <$$font> testifies . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,177.55

He left behind him three Sons , <font> Ethelbert <$$font> , <font>
Eadbert <$$font> , and <font> Alric <$$font> his Heirs . Three years
after which , appear'd two Comets about the Sun , terrible to behold ,
the one before him in the Morning , the other after him in the Evening ,
for the space of two weeks in <font> January <$$font> , bending thir
blaze toward the North , at which time the Saracens furiously invaded
<font> France <$$font> , but were expell'd soon after with great
overthrow . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,177.56

The same year in <font> Northumberland <$$font> , <font> Osric <$$font>
dying or <P_X,178> slain , adopted <font> Kelwulf <$$font> the Brother
of <font> Kenred <$$font> his Successor , to whom <font> Beda <$$font>
dedicates his story ; but writes this only of him , that the beginning ,
and the process of his Reign met with many adverse commotions , wherof
the event was then doubtfully expected . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,178.57

Mean while <font> Ina <$$font> 7 years before , having slain <font>
Kenwulf <$$font> , to whom <font> Florent <$$font> gives the addition of
<font> Clito <$$font> , giv'n usually to none but of the blood Royal ,
and the <font> 4th. {COM:font_change_only_around_"th"} <$$font> year
after overthrown and slain , <font> Albright <$$font> another <font>
Clito <$$font> , driv'n from <font> Taunton <$$font> to the <font>
South-Saxons <$$font> for aid , vanquish't also the <font> East-Angles
<$$font> in more then one Battel , as <font> Malmsbury <$$font> writes ,
but not the year , whether to expiate so much blood , or infected with
the contagious humour of those times , <font> Malmsbury <$$font> saith ,
at the persuasion of <font> Ethelburga <$$font> his Wife , went to
<font> Rome <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,178.58

and there ended his dayes ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,178.59

yet this praise left behind him , to have made good Laws , the first of
<font> Saxon <$$font> that remain extant to this day ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,178.60

and to his Kinsman <font> Edelard <$$font> , bequeath'd the Crown ; No
less then the whole Monarchy of <font> England <$$font> and <font> Wales
<$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,178.61

For <font> Ina <$$font> , if we beleeve a digression in the Laws of
<font> Edward <$$font> Confessor , was the first King Crown'd of English
and British , since the <font> Saxons <$$font> entrance ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,178.62

of the British by means of his second Wife , some way related to <font>
Cadwallader <$$font> last King of <font> Wales <$$font> , which I had
not noted being unlikely , but for the place where I found it .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,178.63

After <font> Ina <$$font> , by a surer Author , <font> Ethelbald
<$$font> King of <font> Mercia <$$font> commanded all the Provinces on
this side <font> Humber <$$font> , with thir Kings :
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,178.64

the <font> Picts <$$font> were in league with the English , the <font>
Scots <$$font> peaceable within thir bounds , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,178.65

and the <font> Britans <$$font> part were in thir own Goverment , part
subject to the English . In which peacefull state of the land , many in
<font> Northumberland <$$font> , both <P_X,179> Nobles and Commons ,
laying aside the exercise of Armes , betook them to the Cloister :
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,179.66

and not content so to do at home , many in the days of <font> Ina
<$$font> , Clerks and Laics , Men and Woemen , hasting to <font> Rome
<$$font> in Herds , thought themselves no where sure of Eternal Life ,
till they were Cloisterd there . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,179.67

Thus representing the state of things in this Iland , <font> Beda
<$$font> surceas'd to write . Out of whom cheifly hath bin gatherd ,
since the <font> Saxons <$$font> arrival , such as hath bin deliverd , a
scatterd story pickt out heer and there , with some trouble and tedious
work from among his many Legends of Visions and Miracles ; towards the
latter end so bare of civill matters , as what can be thence collected
may seem a Calendar rather than a History , tak'n up for the most part
with succession of Kings , and computation of years , yet those hard to
be reconcil'd with the <font> Saxon Annals <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,179.68

Thir actions we read of , were most commonly Wars ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,179.69

but for what cause wag'd , or by what Councells carried on , no care was
had to let us know : wherby thir strength and violence we understand ,
of thir wisedom , reason , or justice , little or nothing , the rest
superstition and monastical affectation ; Kings one after another
leaving thir Kingly Charge , to run thir heads fondly into a Monks Cowle
: which leaves us uncertain , whether <font> Beda <$$font> was wanting
to his matter , or his matter to him . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,179.70

Yet from hence to the <font> Danish <$$font> Invasion it will be worse
with us , destitute of <font> Beda <$$font> . Left only to obscure and
blockish Chronicles ; whom <font> Malmsbury <$$font> , and <font>
Huntingdon <$$font> , <paren> for neither they then we had better
Authors of those times <$$paren> ambitious to adorn the History , make
no scruple oft-times , I doubt to interline with conjectures and
surmises of thir own : MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,179.71

them rather <P_X,180> then imitate , I shall choose to represent the
truth naked , though as lean as a plain Journal .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,180.72

Yet <font> William <$$font> of <font> Malmsbury <$$font> must be
acknowledg'd , both for stile and judgment , to be by far the best
Writer of them all : MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,180.73

but what labour is to be endur'd , turning over Volumes of Rubbish in
the rest , <font> Florence <$$font> of <font> Worster <$$font> , <font>
Huntingdon <$$font> , <font> Simeon <$$font> of <font> Durham <$$font> ,
<font> Hoveden <$$font> , <font> Mathew <$$font> of <font> Westminster
<$$font> , and many others of obscurer note , with all thir monachisms ,
is a penance to think . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,180.74

Yet these are our only Registers , transcribers one after another for
the most part , and somtimes worthy enough for the things , they
register . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,180.75

This travail rather then not know at once what may be known of our
antient story , sifted from Fables and impertinences , I voluntarily
undergo ; and to save others , if they please the like unpleasing labour
; except those who take pleasure to be all thir life time , rakeing in
the Foundations of old Abbies and Cathedrals ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,180.76

but to my task now as it befalls . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,180.77

In the year 733. on the <font> 18th.
{COM:font_change_only_around_"th"} <$$font> Kalends of <font> September
<$$font> , was an Eclipse of the Sun about the third howr of day ,
obscureing almost his whole Orb as with a black sheild .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,180.78

<font> Ethelbald <$$font> of <font> Mercia <$$font> , beseig'd and took
the Castle or Town of <font> Somerton <$$font> :
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,180.79

and two years after , <font> Beda <$$font> our Historian dy'd ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,180.80

some say the year before . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,180.81

<font> Kelwulf <$$font> in <font> Northumberland <$$font> three years
after became Monk in <font> Lindisfarne <$$font> , yet none of the
severest , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,180.82

for he brought those Monks from milk and water , to Wine and Ale ; in
which doctrin no doubt but they were soon docil , and well might ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,180.83

for <font> Kelwulf <$$font> brought with him good provision , great
treasure and revenues of land , recited by <font> Simeon <$$font> ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,180.84

yet all under pretense of following <paren> I use the Authors words
<$$paren> poor <font> Christ <$$font> , <P_X,181> by voluntary poverty :
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,181.85

no marvel then if such applause were giv'n by Monkish Writers to Kings
turning Monks , and much cunning perhaps us'd to allure them .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,181.86

To <font> Eadbert <$$font> his Unkle's Son , he left the Kingdom , whose
brother <font> Ecbert <$$font> , Archbishop of <font> York <$$font>
built a Library there . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,181.87

But two years after , while <font> Eadbert <$$font> was busied in War
against the <font> Picts <$$font> , <font> Ethelbald <$$font> the <font>
Mercian <$$font> , by foul fraud , assaulted part of <font>
Northumberland <$$font> in his absence , as the supplement of <font>
Beda's <$$font> Epitomy records . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,181.88

In the <font> West-Saxons <$$font> , <font> Edelard <$$font> who
succeeded <font> Ina <$$font> , having bin much molested in the
beginning of his Reign , with the Rebellion of <font> Oswald <$$font>
his Kinsman , who contended with him for the right of succession ,
overcoming at last those troubles , dy'd in Peace 741 , leaving <font>
Cuthred <$$font> one of the same linage to succeed him : who at first
had much War with <font> Ethelbald <$$font> the <font> Mercian <$$font>
, and various success , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,181.89

but joyning with him in League two years after , made War on the Welch :
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,181.90

<font> Huntingdon <$$font> doubts not to give them a great Victory .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,181.91

And <font> Simeon <$$font> reports another Battel fought between <font>
Britans <$$font> and <font> Picts <$$font> the year ensueing .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,181.92

Now was the Kingdome of <font> East-Saxons <$$font> drawing to a Period
, MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,181.93

for <font> Sigeard <$$font> and <font> Senfred <$$font> the Sons of
<font> Sebbi <$$font> having reign'd a while , and after them young
<font> Offa <$$font> , who soon quitted his Kingdome to go to <font>
Rome <$$font> with <font> Kenred <$$font> , as hath been said , the
Goverment was conferr'd on <font> Selred <$$font> Son of <font> Sigebert
<$$font> the good , who having rul'd 38 years , came to a violent death
; how or wherefore , is not set down . After whom <font> Swithred
<$$font> was the last King , driv'n out by <font> Ecbert <$$font> the
<font> West-Saxon <$$font> : MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,181.94

but <font> London <$$font> , with the Countries adjacent , obey'd the
<font> Mercians <$$font> till they also were dissolv'd .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,181.95

<font> Cuthred <$$font> had now reign'd about nine years , when
<P_X,182> <font> Kinric <$$font> his Son a valiant young Prince , was in
a military tumult slain by his own Souldiers .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,182.96

The same year <font> Eadbert <$$font> dying in <font> Kent <$$font> ,
his Brother <font> Edilbert <$$font> reign'd in his stead .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,182.97

But after two years , the other <font> Eadbert <$$font> in <font>
Northumberland <$$font> , whose War with the <font> Picts <$$font> hath
bin above-mention'd , made now such Progress there , as to subdue <font>
Kyle <$$font> , so saith the Auctarie of <font> Bede <$$font> , and
other Countries thereabout , to his dominion ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,182.98

While <font> Cuthred <$$font> the <font> West-Saxon <$$font> had a fight
with <font> Ethelhun <$$font> , one of his Nobles , a stout Warrier ,
envi'd by him in some matter of the Common-wealth , as far as by the
Latin of <font> Ethelwerd <$$font> can be understood <paren> others
interpret it Sedition <$$paren> and with much ado overcoming , took
<font> Ethelhun <$$font> for his valour into favour , by whom faithfully
serv'd in the twelf or thirteenth of his Reign , he encounter'd in a set
Battell with <font> Ethelbald <$$font> the Mercian at <font> Beorford
<$$font> , now <font> Burford <$$font> in <font> Oxfordshire <$$font> ;
one year after against the Welch , which was the last but one of his
life . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,182.99

<font> Huntingdon <$$font> , as his manner is to comment upon the annal
Text , makes a terrible description of that fight between <font> Cuthred
<$$font> and <font> Ethelbald <$$font> , and the Prowess of <font>
Ethelhun <$$font> , at <font> Beorford <$$font> , but so affectedly ,
and therfore suspiciously , that I hold it not worth rehersal ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,182.100

and both in that and the latter conflict , gives Victory to <font>
Cuthred <$$font> ; after whom <font> Sigebert <$$font> , uncertain by
what right , his Kinsman , saith <font> Florent <$$font> , step'd into
the Throne , whom hated for his cruelty and other evil doings , <font>
Kimwulf <$$font> joining with most of the Nobility , dispossess'd of all
but <font> Hamshir <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,182.101

that Province he lost also within a year , together with the love of all
those who till then remain'd his adherents , by slaying <font> Cumbran
<$$font> , one of his Cheif Captains , who for a long <P_X,183> time had
faithfully serv'd , and now disuaded him from incensing the people by
such Tyrannical practices . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,183.102

Thence flying for safety into <font> Andreds <$$font> Wood , forsak'n of
all , he was at length slain by the Swineheard of <font> Cumbran
<$$font> in revenge of his Maister , and <font> Kinwulf <$$font> who had
undoubted right to the Crown , joyfully saluted King .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,183.103

The next year <font> Eadbert <$$font> the <font> Northumbrian <$$font>
joining forces with <font> Unust <$$font> King of the <font> Picts
<$$font> , as <font> Simeon <$$font> writes , beseig'd and took by
surrender the City <font> Alcluith <$$font> , now <font> Dunbritton
<$$font> in <font> Lennox <$$font> , from the <font> Britans <$$font> of
<font> Cumberland <$$font> ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,183.104

and ten days after , the whole Army perishd about <font> Niwanbirig
<$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,183.105

but to tell us how , he forgetts . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,183.106

In <font> Mercia <$$font> , <font> Ethelbald <$$font> was slain , at a
place call'd <font> Secandune <$$font> , now <font> Seckinton <$$font>
in <font> Warwickshire <$$font> , the year following , in a bloody fight
against <font> Cuthred <$$font> , as <font> Huntingdon <$$font> surmises
, MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,183.107

but <font> Cuthred <$$font> was dead two or three years before ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,183.108

others write him murder'd in the night by his own Guard ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,183.109

and the Treason , as some say , of <font> Beornred <$$font> , who
succeeded him ; but ere many Months , was defeated and slain by <font>
Offa <$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,183.110

Yet <font> Ethelbald <$$font> seems not without cause , after a long and
prosperous Reign , to have fall'n by a violent Death ; not shameing on
the vain confidence of his many Alms , to commit uncleanness with
consecrated Nuns , besides Laic Adulteries , as the Arch-Bishop of
<font> Ments <$$font> in a letter taxes him and his Predecessor , and
that by his example most of his Peers did the like ; which adulterous
doings he foretold him were likely to produce a slothfull off-spring ,
good for nothing but to be the ruin of that Kingdome , as it fell out
not long after . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,183.111

The next year <font> Osmund <$$font> , according to <font> Florence
<$$font> , ruleing the <font> South-Saxons <$$font> , and <font>
Swithred <$$font> the <font> East <$$font> , <font> Eadbert <$$font> in
<font> Northumberland <$$font> , <P_X,184> following the steps of his
Predecessor , got him into a Monks Hood ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,184.112

the more to be wonder'd , that having reign'd worthily 21 years , with
the love and high estimation of all , both at home and abroad , able
still to govern , and much entreated by the Kings his Neighbours , not
to lay down his charge ; with offer on that condition to yeild up to him
part of thir own Dominion , he could not be mov'd from his resolution ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,184.113

but relinquish'd his Regal Office to <font> Oswulf <$$font> his Son ;
who at the years end , though without just cause , was slain by his own
Servants . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,184.114

And the year after dy'd <font> Ethelbert <$$font> , Son of <font>
Victred <$$font> , the second of that name in <font> Kent <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,184.115

After <font> Oswulf <$$font> , <font> Ethelwald <$$font> , otherwise
call'd <font> Mollo <$$font> , was set up <font> King <$$font> ; who in
his third year had a great Battel at <font> Eldune <$$font> , by <font>
Melros <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,184.116

slew <font> Oswin <$$font> a great Lord , rebelling ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,184.117

and gain'd the Victory . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,184.118

But the third year after , fell by the treachery of <font> Alcred
<$$font> , who assum'd his place . The fowrth year after which , <font>
Cataracta <$$font> an antient and fair City in <font> Yorkeshire
<$$font> , was burnt by <font> Arnred <$$font> a certain Tyrant , who
the same year came to like end . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,184.119

And after five years more , <font> Alcred <$$font> the King depos'd and
forsak'n of all his people , fled with a few , first to <font> Bebba
<$$font> , a strong City of those parts , thence to <font> Kinot
<$$font> King of the <font> Picts <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,184.120

<font> Ethelred <$$font> the Son of <font> Mollo <$$font> , was crown'd
in his stead . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,184.121

Mean while <font> Offa <$$font> the <font> Mercian <$$font> , growing
powerfull , had subdu'd a Neighbouring people by <font> Simeon <$$font>
, call'd <font> Hestings <$$font> ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,184.122

and fought successfully this year with <font> Alric <$$font> King of
<font> Kent <$$font> , at a place call'd <font> Ottanford <$$font> :
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,184.123

the Annals also speak of wondrous Serpents then seen in <font> Sussex
<$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,184.124

Nor had <font> Kinwulf <$$font> the <font> West-Saxon <$$font> giv'n
small proof of his valour in several Battels against the Welch
heretofore ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,184.125

but this year <P_X,185> 775. meeting with <font> Offa <$$font> at a
place call'd <font> Besington <$$font> , was put to the worse ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,185.126

and <font> Offa <$$font> won the Town for which they contended .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,185.127

In <font> Northumberland <$$font> , <font> Ethelred <$$font> having
caus'd three of his Nobles , <font> Aldwulf <$$font> , <font> Kinwulf
<$$font> , and <font> Ecca <$$font> , treacherously to be slain by two
other Peers , was himself the next year driv'n into banishment , <font>
Elfwald <$$font> the Son of <font> Oswulf <$$font> succeeding in his
place , yet not without civil broils ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,185.128

for in his second year <font> Osbald <$$font> and <font> Ethelheard
<$$font> , two Noblemen , raising Forces against him , routed <font>
Bearne <$$font> his General , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,185.129

and persueing , burnt him at a place call'd <font> Seletune <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,185.130

I am sensible how wearisom it may likely be to read of so many bare and
reasonless Actions , so many names of Kings one after another , acting
little more then mute persons in a Scene : MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,185.131

what would it be to have inserted the long Bead-roll of Archbishops ,
Bishops , Abbots , Abbesses , and thir doeings , neither to Religion
profitable , nor to morality , swelling my Authors each to a voluminous
body , by me studiously omitted ; and left as their propriety , who have
a mind to write the Ecclesiastical matters of those Ages ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,185.132

neither do I care to wrincle the smoothness of History with rugged names
of places unknown , better harp'd at in <font> Camden <$$font> , and
other Chorographers . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,185.133

Six years therfore pass'd over in silence as wholely of such Argument ,
bring us to relate next the unfortunate end of <font> Kinwulf <$$font>
the <font> West-Saxon <$$font> ; who having laudably reign'd about 31
years , yet suspecting that <font> Kineard <$$font> Brother of <font>
Sigebert <$$font> the former King , intended to usurp the Crown after
his Decease , or revenge his Brothers expulsion , had commanded him into
banishment ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,185.134

but he lurking heer and there on the borders with a small Company ,
<P_X,186> having had intelligence that <font> Kenwulf <$$font> was in
the Country thereabout , at <font> Merantun <$$font> , or <font> Merton
<$$font> in <font> Surrey <$$font> , at the House of a Woeman whom he
lov'd , went by night MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,186.135

and beset the place . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,186.136

<font> Kenwulf <$$font> over-confident either of his Royal presence , or
personal valour , issuing forth with the few about him , runs feirsly at
<font> Kineard <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,186.137

and wounds him sore , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,186.138

but by his followers hem'd in , is kill'd among them .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,186.139

The report of so great an accident soon running to a place not far off ,
where many more attendants awaited the Kings return , <font> Osric
<$$font> and <font> Wivert <$$font> , two Earles hasted with a great
number to the House , where <font> Kineard <$$font> and his fellows yet
remain'd . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,186.140

He seeing himself surrounded , with fair words and promise of great
guifts , attempted to appease them ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,186.141

but those rejected with disdain , fights it out to the last ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,186.142

and is slain with all but one or two of his retinue , which were nigh
a_hunderd . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,186.143

<font> Kinwulf <$$font> was succeeded by <font> Birthric <$$font> ,
being both descended of <font> Kerdic <$$font> the Founder of that
Kingdome . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,186.144

Not better was the end of <font> Elfwald <$$font> in <font>
Northumberland <$$font> , two years after slain miserably by the
conspiracy of <font> Siggan <$$font> , one of his Nobles , others say of
the whole people at <font> Scilcester <$$font> by the Roman Wall ; yet
undeservedly , as his Sepulchre at <font> Hagustald <$$font> , now
<font> Hexham <$$font> upon <font> Tine <$$font> , and some miracles
there said to be done , are alleg'd to witness ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,186.145

and <font> Siggan <$$font> 5 years after laid violent hands on himself .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,186.146

<font> Osred <$$font> Son of <font> Alcred <$$font> advanc't into the
room of <font> Elfwald <$$font> , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,186.147

and within one year driv'n out , left his seat vacant to <font> Ethelred
<$$font> Son of <font> Mollo <$$font> , who after ten years of
banishment <paren> impris'nment , saith <font> Alcuin <$$font> <$$paren>
had the Scepter put again into his hand . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,186.148

The third year of <font> Birthric <$$font> King of <font> West-Saxons
<$$font> , gave beginning <P_X,187> from abroad to a new and fatal
revolution of calamity on this Land . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,187.149

For three Danish Ships , the first that had bin seen heer of that Nation
arriving in the West , to visit these , as was suppos'd , Foren
Merchants , the Kings gatherer of Customes taking Horse from <font>
Dorchester <$$font> , found them Spies and Enemies .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,187.150

For being commanded to come and give account of thir ladeing at the
Kings Custome House , they slew him and all who came with him ; as an
earnest of the many slaughters , rapines , and hostilities , which they
return'd not long after to commit over all the Iland .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,187.151

Of this Danish first arrival , and on a sudden worse then hostile
Aggression , the Danish History far otherwise relates , as if thir
landing had bin at the mouth of <font> Humber <$$font> , and thir
spoilfull march far into the Country ; though soon repelld by the
Inhabitants , they hasted back as fast to thir Ships :
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,187.152

But from what cause , what reason of state , what Authority or publick
counsell the invasion proceeded , makes not mention ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,187.153

and our wonder yet the more , by telling us that <font> Sigefrid
<$$font> then King in <font> Denmarke <$$font> , and long after , was a
man studious more of peace and quiet then of warlike matters .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,187.154

These therefore seem rather to have bin some wanderers at Sea , who with
publick Commission , or without , through love of spoil , or hatred of
Christianity , seeking booties on any land of Christians , came by
chance or weather on this shore . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,187.155

The next year <font> Osred <$$font> in <font> Northumberland <$$font> ,
who driv'n out by his Nobles had giv'n place to <font> Ethelred <$$font>
, was tak'n and forcibly shav'n a Monk at <font> Yorke <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,187.156

And the year after , <font> Oelf <$$font> , the <font> Oelfwin <$$font>
, Sons of <font> Elfwald <$$font> , formerly King , were drawn by fair
promises from the principal Church of <font> Yorke <$$font> , and after
by <P_X,188> command of <font> Ethelred <$$font> , cruelly put to Death
at <font> Wonwaldremere <$$font> , a Village by the great Pool in <font>
Lancashire <$$font> , now call'd <font> Winandermere <$$font> .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,188.157

Nor was the third year less bloody ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,188.158

for <font> Osred <$$font> , who not likeing a shav'n Crown had desir'd
banishment and obtain'd it , returning from the Ile of <font> Man
<$$font> with small Forces , at the secret but deceitfull call of
certain Nobles , who by Oath had promis'd to assist him , was also tak'n
, and by <font> Ethelred <$$font> dealt with in the same manner ; who
the better to avouch his Cruelties , therupon married <font> Elfled
<$$font> the Daughter of <font> Offa <$$font>
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,188.159

for in <font> Offa <$$font> was found as little Faith or mercy .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,188.160

He the same year having drawn to his Palace <font> Ethelbrite <$$font>
King of <font> East-Angles <$$font> , with fair invitations to marry his
Daughter , caus'd him to be there inhospitably beheaded , and his
Kingdome wrongfully seis'd , by the wicked counsel of his Wife , saith
<font> Mat. West. <$$font> annexing thereto a long unlikely Tale .
For which violence and bloodshed to make attonement , with Fryers at
lest , he bestows the reliques of St. Alban , in a shrine of Pearl and
Gold . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,188.161

Far worse it far'd the next year with the reliques in <font> Lindisfarne
<$$font> ; where the <font> Danes <$$font> landing , pillag'd that
Monastery , and of Fryers kill'd some , carried away others Captive ,
sparing neither Preist nor Lay : which many strange thunders and fiery
Dragons , with other impressions in the air seen frequently before ,
were judg'd to foresignifie . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,188.162

This year <font> Alric <$$font> third Son of <font> Victred <$$font>
ended in <font> Kent <$$font> his long Reign of 34 years :
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,188.163

with him ended the race of <font> Hengist <$$font> :
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,188.164

thenceforth whomsoever wealth or faction advanc'd , took on him the name
and state of a King . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,188.165

The <font> Saxon Annals <$$font> of 784. name <font> Ealmund <$$font>
then reigning in <font> Kent <$$font> ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,188.166

but that consists not <P_X,189> with the time of <font> Alric <$$font> ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,189.167

and I find him no where else mentiond . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,189.168

The year following was remarkable for the Death of <font> Offa <$$font>
the <font> Mercian <$$font> , a strenuous and suttle King ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,189.169

he had much intercourse with <font> Charles <$$font> the Great ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,189.170

at first enmity , to the interdicting of commerce on either side ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,189.171

at length much amity and firm League , as appears by the Letter of
<font> Charles <$$font> himself yet extant , procur'd by <font> Alcuin
<$$font> a learned and prudent man , though a Monk , whom the Kings of
<font> England <$$font> in those days had sent Orator into <font> France
<$$font> , to maintain good correspondence between them and <font>
Charles <$$font> the Great . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,189.172

He granted , saith <font> Huntingdon <$$font> , a perpetual tribute to
the Pope out of every House in his Kingdome ; for yeilding perhaps to
translate the Primacy of <font> Canterbury <$$font> to <font> Lichfeild
<$$font> in his own Dominion . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,189.173

He drew a trench of wondrous length between <font> Mercia <$$font> and
the <font> British <$$font> Confines , from Sea to Sea .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,189.174

<font> Ecferth <$$font> the Son of <font> Offa <$$font> , a Prince of
great hope , who also had bin Crown'd 9 years before his Fathers Decease
, restoring to the Church what his Father had seis'd on : yet within
fowr Months by a sickness ended his Reign . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,189.175

And to <font> Kenulf <$$font> next in right of the same Progeny
bequeath'd his Kingdome . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,189.176

Mean while the <font> Danish <$$font> Pirats who still wasted <font>
Northumberland <$$font> , ventring on shoar to spoil another Monastery
at the mouth of the River <font> Don <$$font> , were assail'd by the
English , thir Cheif Captain slain on the place ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,189.177

then returning to Sea , were most of them Ship-wrack'd ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,189.178

others driv'n again on shoar , were put all to the Sword .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,189.179

<font> Simeon <$$font> attributes this thir punishment to the power of
St. <font> Cudbert <$$font> , offended with them for the rifling of his
Covent . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,189.180

Two years after this , dy'd <font> Ethelred <$$font> twice King , but
not exempted <P_X,190> at last from the fate of many his predecessors ,
miserably slain by his people , some say deservedly , as not inconscious
with them who train'd <font> Osred <$$font> to his ruin .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,190.181

<font> Osbald <$$font> a Nobleman exalted to the Throne , and in less
then a month , deserted and expell'd , was forc'd to fly at last from
<font> Lindisfarne <$$font> by Sea to the <font> Pictish <$$font> King ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,190.182

and dy'd an Abbot . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,190.183

<font> Eardulf <$$font> whom <font> Ethelred <$$font> six years before
had commanded to be put to Death at <font> Ripun <$$font> , before the
Abbey-Gate , dead as was suppos'd , and with solemn Dirge carried into
the Church , after midnight found there alive , I read not how , then
banish'd , now recall'd , was in <font> Yorke <$$font> created King .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,190.184

In <font> Kent <$$font> , <font> Ethelbert <$$font> or <font> Pren
<$$font> , whom the Annals call <font> Eadbright <$$font> <paren> so
different they often are one from another , both in timeing and in
nameing <$$paren> by some means having usurp'd regal power , after two
years Reign contending with <font> Kenulf <$$font> the <font> Mercian
<$$font> , was by him tak'n Pris'ner , and soon after , out of pious
commiseration let go : but not receav'd of his own ,
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,190.185

what became of him , <font> Malmsbury <$$font> leaves in doubt .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,190.186

<font> Simeon <$$font> writes , that <font> Kenulf <$$font> commanded to
put out his Eyes , and lop off his hands ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,190.187

but whether the sentence were executed or not , is left as much in doubt
by his want of expression . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,190.188

The second year after this , they in <font> Northumberland <$$font> who
had conspir'd against <font> Ethelred <$$font> , now also raising War
against <font> Eardulf <$$font> , under <font> Wada <$$font> thir Cheif
Captain , after much havock on either side at <font> Langho <$$font> ,
by <font> Whaley <$$font> in <font> Lancashire <$$font> , the
Conspirators at last flying , <font> Eardulf <$$font> return'd with
Victory . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,190.189

The same year <font> London <$$font> , with a great multitude of her
Inhabitants , by a sudden fire was consum'd .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,190.190

The year 800. made way for great alteration in <font> England <$$font>
, uniting her seaven Kingdoms into <P_X,191> one , by <font> Ecbert
<$$font> the famous <font> West-Saxon <$$font> ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,191.191

him <font> Birthric <$$font> dying Childless left next to reign , the
only surviver of that linage , descended from <font> Inegild <$$font>
the Brother of King <font> Ina <$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,191.192

And according to his Birth liberally bred , he began early from his
youth to give signal hopes of more then ordinary worth growing up in him
; which <font> Birthric <$$font> fearing , and with all his juster title
to the Crown , secretly sought his life , and <font> Ecbert <$$font>
perceaving , fled to <font> Offa <$$font> the <font> Mercian <$$font> ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,191.193

but he having married <font> Eadburg <$$font> his Daughter to <font>
Birthric <$$font> , easily gave ear to his Embassadors coming to require
<font> Ecbert <$$font> ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,191.194

he again put to his shifts , escap'd thence into <font> France <$$font>
; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,191.195

but after three years banishment there , which perhaps contributed much
to his education , <font> Charles <$$font> the Great then reigning , he
was call'd over by the publick voice <paren> for <font> Birthric
<$$font> was newly dead <$$paren> and with general applause created King
of <font> West-Saxons <$$font> . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,191.196

The same day <font> Ethelmund <$$font> at <font> Kinneresford <$$font> ,
passing over with the <font> Worcestershire <$$font> men , was met by
<font> Weolstan <$$font> another Nobleman with those of <font> Wiltshire
<$$font> , between whom happ'nd a great fray , wherin the <font>
Wiltshire <$$font> men overcame , MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,191.197

but both Dukes were slain , no reason of thir quarrel writ'n ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,191.198

such bickerings to recount , met oft'n in these our Writers , what more
worth is it then to Chronicle the Wars of Kites , or Crows , flocking
and fighting in the Air ? MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,191.199

The year following , <font> Eardulf <$$font> the <font> Northumbrian
<$$font> , leading forth an Army against <font> Kenulf <$$font> the
<font> Mercian <$$font> , for harboring certain of his Enemies , by the
diligent mediation of other Princes and Prelats , Armes were laid aside
, and amity soon sworn between them . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,191.200

But <font> Eadburga <$$font> the Wife of <font> Birthric <$$font> , a
woeman every way wicked , in malice especially cruel , could not or
car'd not to <P_X,192> appease the general hatred justly conceiv'd
against her ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,192.201

accustom'd in her Husbands days to accuse any whom she spighted ; and
not prevailing to his ruin , her practice was by poison secretly to
contrive his Death . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,192.202

It fortun'd that the King her Husband , lighting on a Cup which she had
temperd , not for him , but for one of his great Favourites , whom she
could not harm by accuseing , sip'd therof only , and in a while after
still pineing away , ended his days ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,192.203

the favourite drinking deeper found speedier the operation .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,192.204

She fearing to be questiond for these facts , with what treasure she had
, pass'd over-sea to <font> Charles <$$font> the Great , whom with rich
guifts coming to his presence , the Emperour courtly receav'd with this
pleasant proposal : Choose <font> Eadburga <$$font> , which of us two
thou wilt , me or my Son <paren> for his Son stood by him <$$paren> to
be thy Husband . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,192.205

She no dissembler of what she lik'd best , made easie answer .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,192.206

Were it in my choise , I should choose of the two your Son rather , as
the younger man . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,192.207

To whom the Emperour between jest and earnest , hadst thou chosen me , I
had bestow'd on thee my Son ; MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,192.208

but since thou hast chos'n him , thou shalt have neither him nor me .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,192.209

Nevertheless he assign'd her a rich Monastery to dwell in as Abbess ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,192.210

for that life it may seem , she chose next to profess ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,192.211

but being a while after detected of unchastity , with one of her
followers , she was commanded to depart thence ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,192.212

from that time wandring poorly up and down with one Servant , in <font>
Pavia <$$font> a City of <font> Italy <$$font> , she finish'd at last in
beggery her shamefull life . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,192.213

In the year 805. <font> Cuthred <$$font> , whom <font> Kenulf <$$font>
the <font> Mercian <$$font> had , instead of <font> Pren <$$font> , made
King in <font> Kent <$$font> , having obscurely reign'd 8 years ,
deceas'd . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,192.214

In <font> Northumberland <$$font> , <P_X,193> <font> Eardulf <$$font>
the year following was driv'n out of his Realm by <font> Alfwold
<$$font> , who Reign'd two years in his room ; after whom <font> Eandred
<$$font> Son of <font> Eardulf <$$font> 33 years ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,193.215

but I see not how this can stand with the sequel of story out of better
Authors : Much less that which <font> Buchanan <$$font> relates , the
year following , of <font> Acaius <$$font> King of <font> Scots <$$font>
, who having reign'd 32 years , and dying in 809 , had formerly aided
<paren> but in what year of his Reign tells not <$$paren> <font> Hungus
<$$font> King of <font> Picts <$$font> with 10000 <font> Scots <$$font>
, against <font> Athelstan <$$font> a Saxon or English-man , then
wasting the <font> Pictish <$$font> Borders ; that <font> Hungus
<$$font> by the aid of those <font> Scots <$$font> and the help of St.
<font> Andrew <$$font> thir Patron , in a Vision by night , and the
appearance of his cross by day , routed the astonisht English , and slew
<font> Athelstan <$$font> in fight . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,193.216

Who this <font> Athelstan <$$font> was , I believe no man knows ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,193.217

<font> Buchanan <$$font> supposes him to have been some <font> Danish
<$$font> Commander , on whom King <font> Alured <$$font> , or <font>
Alfred <$$font> , had bestow'd <font> Northumberland <$$font> ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,193.218

but of this I find no footstep in our antient Writers ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,193.219

and if any such thing were done in the time of <font> Alfred <$$font> ,
it must be little less then 100 years after ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,193.220

this <font> Athelstan <$$font> therefore , and this great overthrow ,
seems rather to have bin the fancy of some Legend then any warrantable
Record . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,193.221

Mean while <font> Ecbert <$$font> , having with much Prudence , Justice
, and Clemency , a work of more then one year , establisht his Kingdome
and himself in the affections of his people , turns his first enterprise
against the <font> Britans <$$font> , both them of <font> Cornwal
<$$font> and those beyond <font> Seavern <$$font> , subdueing both .
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,193.222

In <font> Mercia <$$font> , <font> Kenulf <$$font> the <$$font> 6th.
{COM:font_change_only_around_"th"} <$$font> year after , having reign'd
with great praise of his religious mind and vertues both in Peace and
War , deceas'd . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,193.223

His Son <font> Kenelm <$$font> , a Child of seaven years , was committed
to the care of <P_X,194> his Elder Sister <font> Quendrid <$$font> ; who
with a female ambition aspiring to the Crown , hir'd one who had the
charge of his nurture , to murder him , led into a woody place upon
pretence of hunting . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,194.224

The murder , as is reported , was miraculously reveal'd ;
MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,194.225

but to tell how , by a Dove droping a writt'n note on the Altar at
<font> Rome <$$font> , is a long story , told , though out of order , by
<font> Malmsbury <$$font> ; and under the year 821. by <font> Mat.
West. <$$font> where I leave it to be sought by such as are more
credulous then I wish my Readers . MILTON-1670-E3-P2,X,194.226

