<BEGIN_moreric-1513-e1-p2>

<P_38>

Troweth the protector <paren> I pray god he may proue a protectour
<$$paren> troweth he that I parceiue not whereunto his painted processe
draweth ? MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.3

It is not honorable that the duke bide here : MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.4

it were comfortable for them both that he wer with his brother , because
y=e= king lacketh a play felowye be ye sure . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.5

I pray god send them both better play felowes then hym , that maketh so
high a matter vpon such a trifling pretext : as though there coulde none
be founden to playe with the kyng , but if his brother y=t= hath no lust
to play for sicknes , come oute of sanctuary out of hys sauegarde , to
play with him . As though princes as yonge as thei be , could not play
but with their Peres , or children could not play but w=t= their kyndred
, with whom for the more part they agree much worse then wyth straungers
. MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.6

But the childe can@ @not require the priuelege , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.7

who tolde hym so ? MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.8

he shal here him aske it MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.9

and he will . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.10

Howbeit this is a gay matter : MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.11

Suppose he could not aske it , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.12

suppose he woulde not aske it , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.13

suppose hee woulde aske to goe owte , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.14

if I saye hee shall not , if I aske the priuilege but for my selfe , I
say he that agaynst my wyll taketh out him , breaketh the sanctuary .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.15

Serueth this liberty for my person onlye , or for my goodes to ?
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.16

ye maye not hence take my horsse fro me : MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.17

and maye you take my childe fro me ? MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.18

he is also my warde , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.19

for as my lerned counsell sheweth mee , syth he hath nothing by discent
holden by knightes seruice , the law maketh , his mother his gardaine .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,38.20

Then may no man , I suppose take my warde fro me oute of <P_39>
sanctuarye , wythout the breche of the sanctuary .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,39.21

And if my pryuelege could not serue hym , nor he aske it for hymselfe ,
yet sythe the lawe committeth to me the custody of him , I may require
it for hym , excepte the lawe giue a childe a gardayne onely for his
goodes & hys landes , discharging hym of the cure and saufe kepyng of
hys body , for whych only both landes & goodes serue .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,39.22

{COM:beginning_of_passage_translated_from_more's_latin_text_but_not_by_him}

And if examples be sufficient to obtayne priueledge for my chylde , I
nede not farre to seeke . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,39.24

For in thys place in which we now be <paren> and whych is now in
questyon whyther my chylde may take benefyte of it <$$paren> myne other
sonne now kyng was born , and kept in hys cradle , and preserued to a
more prosperous fortune , which I pray god long to continu .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,39.25

And as all you know , this is not y=e= first tyme that I haue taken
sanctuarye , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,39.26

for when my lord my husbande was banished & thrust out of his kingdom ,
I fled hither being great with child , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,39.27

and here I bare the prynce . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,39.28

And when my lorde my husbande retourned safe again and had the victorye
, than went I hence to welcome him home , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,39.29

and from hence I brought my babe the prynce vnto hys father , when he
fyrste toke hym in hys armes . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,39.30

And I praye God y=t= my sonnes palace may be as great sauegard to him
now rayning , as thys place was sometime to the kinges enemye . In
whych place I entend to kepe his brother sith &c.
{COM:end_of_passage_translated_from_more's_latin_text_but_not_by_him}
Wherfore here intend I to kepe him sins mans law serueth y=e= gardain to
kepe the infant . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,39.31

The law of nature wyll the mother kepe her childe .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,39.32

Gods law pryuelegeth the sanctuary , & the sanctuary my sonne , sith I
fere to put hym in the protectours handes that hath hys brother already
, and were if bothe fayled , inheritour to the crowne .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,39.33

The cause of my fere hath no man to doe to examine .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,39.34

And yet fere I no ferther then y=e= law fereth which as lerned men tell
me forbiddeth euery man the custody of them , by whose death he may
inherite lesse lande then a kingdome . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,39.35

<P_40>

I can no more , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,40.37

but whosoeuer he be that breketh this holy sanctuary : I pray god
shorttly sende him nede of sanctuary , when he may not come to it .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,40.38

For taken out of sanctuary would I not my mortall enemy were .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,40.39

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample}

<P_42>

{COM:beginning_of_passage_translated_from_more's_latin_text_but_not_by_him}

When y=e= protector had both y=e= children in his handes , he opened
himself more boldly , both to certaine other men , and also chiefely to
the duke of Buckingham . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,42.43

Although I know that many thought , that this duke was priuy to al the
protectours counsel , euen from the beginning . And some of the
protectours frendes said , that the duke was the first mouer of the
protectoure to this matter , sending a priuie messenger <P_43> vnto him
, streight after king Edwards death . But other again which knewe
better the suttle wit of the protectour , deny that he euer opened his
enterprise to the duke , vntill he had brought to passe the thinges
before rehersed . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,43.44

But when he had imprisoned the quenes kinsefolkes , & gotten bothe her
sonnes into his owne handes , than hee opened the rest of his purpose
with lesse fere to them whom he thought mete for the matter , and
specially to y=e= duke : who being wonne to his purpose , he thought his
strength more then halfe encreased . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,43.45

The matter was broken vnto the duke , by suttell folkes , and such as
were their crafte maisters in the handling of such wicked deuises : who
declared vnto him , y=t= the yong king was offended with him for his
kinsfolkes sakes , and that if he were euer able , he would reuenge them
. MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,43.46

Who wold prick him forward therunto , if they escaped <paren> for they
would remembre their imprisonment <$$paren> . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,43.47

Or els if thei wer put to death , without doubte the yonge king wold be
careful for their deathes , whose imprisonment was greuous vnto him .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,43.48

And that with repenting the duke should nothing auaile :
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,43.49

for there was no way left to redeme his offence by benefites :
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,43.50

but he should soner distroy himself than saue the king , who with his
brother & his kinsefolkes he saw in such places imprisoned , as the
protectour might w=t= a beck distroy them al : MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,43.51

and that it were no doubte but he woulde do it in dede , if there wer
any new enterprise attempted . And that it was likely that as y=e=
protectour had prouided priuy garde for himself , so had he spialles for
the duke , and traines to catche hym , if he should be againste him , &
that paraduenture from them , whom he least suspected .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,43.52

For the state of thinges & the disposicions of men wer than such , that
a man could not wel tell whom he might truste , or whom he might feare .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,43.53

These thinges and such like , being beaten into the dukes minde ,
brought him to that pointe , y=t= where he had repented the way that he
had entred , yet wold he go forth in the same : MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,43.54

& since he had ones begon , he would stoutly go through .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,43.55

And therefore to thys wicked enterprise , which he beleued coulde not
bee voided , hee bent himselfe MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,43.56

and went through : MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,43.57

and determined , that since the comon mischief could not be amended , he
wold tourne it as much as he might to hys owne commodite .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,43.58

<P_44>

Than it was agreed , that the protectour should haue the dukes aide to
make him king , & that the protectours onely lawful sonne , should mary
y=e= dukes daughter , and that the protectour shold graunt him the quiet
possession of the Erledome of Hertford , which he claimed as his
enheritance , and could neuer obtain it in king Edwardes time .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,44.60

Besides these requestes of y=e= duke , the protectour of hys owne minde
promised him a great quantite of the kinges tresure & of his howsehold
stuffe . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,44.61

And when they wer thus at a point betwene themselfes , they went about
to prepare for the coronacyon of y=e= yong king as they would haue it
seme . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,44.62

And that they might turne both the eies & mindes of men , from
perceiuing of their driftes other where the lordes being sent for from
al parties of the realme , came thick to that solemnite .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,44.63

But the protectour & the duke , after y=t= , that they had set the lord
Cardinall , the Archebishoppe of Yorke than lorde Chauncellour , the
Bishoppe of Ely , the lord Stanley & the lord Hastinges than lord
chamberleine , w=t= many other noble men
{COM:end_of_passage_translated_from_more's_latin_text_but_not_by_him} to
commune & deuise about the coronacion in one place : as fast were they
in an other place contryuyng the contrary , & to make the protectour
kyng . To which counsel , albeit there were adhibit very few , & they
very secret : yet began there here & there about , some maner of
muttering amonge the people , as though al should not long be wel ,
though they neither wist what thei feared nor wherfore : were it that
before such great thinges , mens hartes of a secret instinct of nature
misgiueth them . As y=e= sea w=t=out wind swelleth of himself somtime
before a tempest : or were it that some one man happely somwhat
perceiuing , filled mani men w=t= suspicion , though he shewed few men
what he knew . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,44.64

Howbeit somwhat the dealing self made men to muse on the mater , though
the counsell were close . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,44.65

For litle and little all folke withdrew from the Tower ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,44.66

and drew to Crosbies place in Bishops gates strete wher the protectour
kept his household . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,44.67

The protectour had the resort , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,44.68

the king in maner <P_45> dessolate . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,45.69

While some for their busines made sute to them that had the doing , some
were by their frendes secretly warned , that it might happelye tourne
them to no good , to be to much attendaunt about the king w=t=out the
protectours appointment : which remoued also diuers of the princes olde
seruantes from him , & set newe aboute him . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,45.70

Thus many thinges comming togither partly by chaunce , partly of purpose
, caused at length , not comen people only that waue with the winde ,
but wise men also & some lordes , yeke to marke the mater and muse
theron : so fer@ @forth that the lord Stanly , y=t= was after Erle of
Darbie , wisely mistrusted it , & saied vnto y=e= lord Hasting , y=t= he
much misliked these two seuerall counsels . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,45.71

For while we <paren> quod he <$$paren> talke of one matter in the tone
place , litle wote we wherof they talk in y=e= t@ @other place .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,45.72

My lord <paren> quod the lord Hastinges <$$paren> on my life neuer doute
you . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,45.73

For while one man is there which is neuer thence , neuer can there be
thinge ones minded that should sownde amisse toward me , but it should
be in mine eares ere it were well oute of their mouthes .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,45.74

This ment he by Catesby , which was of his nere secret counsail , and
whome he veri familiarly vsed , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,45.75

and in his most weighty matters put no man in so special trust ,
rekening hymself to no man so liefe , sith he well wist there was no man
to him so much beholden as was thys Catesby , which was a man wel lerned
in the lawes of this lande , & by the special fauour of the lorde
chamberlen , in good aucthoritie & much rule bare in al the county of
Leceter where the Lorde Chamberlens power chiefly laye .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,45.76

But surely great pity was it , that he had not had either more trouthe
or lesse wytte . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,45.77

For his dissimulacion onelye , kepte all that mischyefe vppe . In whome
if the lord Hastinges had not put so special trust , the lord Stanley
and he <P_46> had departed with diuerse other lordes , and broken all
the daunce , for many il signes that hee sawe , which he nowe construed
all to the beste . So suerly thoughte he that there could be none harme
toward him in that counsaile entended where Catesby was .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,46.78

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample}

<P_47>

Then the lord chamberlen , as he y=t= for the loue betwene them thoughte
he might be boldest w=t= him , aunswered MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,47.81

and sayd , y=t= thei wer worthye to bee punished as heighnous traitors
whatsoeuer they were . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,47.82

And al the other affirmed the same . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,47.83

That is <paren> quod he <$$paren> yonder sorceres my brothers wife &
other w=t= her meaning y=e= quene . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,47.84

At these wordes many of the other Lordes were gretly abashed y=t=
fauoured her . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,47.85

But the lord Hastinges was in his minde better content , that it was
moued by her , then by any other whom he loued better : Albeit hys harte
somewhat <P_48> grudged , that he was not afore made of counsell in this
mater as he was of y=e= taking of her kynred , and of their putting to
death , which were by his assent before , deuised to bee byhedded at
Pountfreit , this selfe same day , in which he was not ware y=t= it was
by other deuised , that himself should the same day be behedded at
London . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,48.86

Then said the protectour : ye shal al se in what wise that sorceres and
that other witch of her counsel shoris wife w=t= their affynite , haue
by their sorcery & witchcraft wasted my body . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,48.87

And therw=t= he plucked vp hys doublet sleue to his elbow vpon his left
arme , where he shewed a werish withered arme and small , as it was
neuer other . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,48.88

And thereupon euery mannes mind sore misgaue them , well perceiuing that
this matter was but a quarel . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,48.89

For wel thei wist , that y=e= quene was to wise to go aboute any such
folye . And also if she would , yet wold she of all folke leste make
Shoris wife of counsaile , whom of al women she most hated , as that
concubine whom the king her husband had most loued .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,48.90

And also no man was there present , but wel knew that his harme was euer
such since his birth . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,48.91

Natheles the lorde Chamberlen <paren> which fro y=e= death of king
Edward kept Shoris wife , on whome he somwhat doted in the kinges life ,
sauing as it is sayd he that while forbare her of reuerence towarde hys
king , or els of a certaine kinde of fidelite to hys frende <$$paren>
aunswered MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,48.92

& sayd : certainly my lorde if they haue so heinously done , thei be
worthy heinouse punishement . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,48.93

What quod the protectour thou seruest me I wene w=t= iffes & with andes
, MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,48.94

I tel the thei haue so done , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,48.95

& that I will make good on thy body traitour . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,48.96

And therw=t= as in a great anger , he clapped his fist vpon y=e= borde a
great rappe . At which token giuen , one cried treason without the
cambre . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,48.97

Therwith a dore clapped , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,48.98

and in come there rushing men in harneys as many as y=e= chambre might
hold . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,48.99

And anon the protectour sayd to the lorde Hastinges : I arest the
traitour . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,48.100

What me my Lorde quod he . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,48.101

Yea the <P_49> traitour , quod the protectour .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,49.102

And a nother let flee at the Lorde Standley which shronke at the stroke
& fel under the table , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,49.103

or els his hed had ben clefte to the tethe : MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,49.104

for as shortely as he shranke , yet ranne the blood aboute hys eares .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,49.105

Then were they al quickly bestowed in diuerse chambres , except y=e=
lorde Chamberlen , whom the protectour bade spede & shryue hym a_pace ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,49.106

for by saynt Poule <paren> quod he <$$paren> I wil not to dinner til I
se thy hed of . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,49.107

It boted him not to aske why MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,49.108

but heuely he toke a priest at aduenture , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,49.109

& made a short shrift , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,49.110

for a longer would not be suffered , the protectour made so much hast to
dyner : which he might not go to til this wer done for sauing of his
othe . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,49.111

So was he brought forth into the grene beside the chappel w=t=in the
tower , & his head laid down vpon a long log of timbre , and there
striken of , and afterward his body with the hed entred at Windsore
beside the body of kinge Edward , whose both soules our lord pardon .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,49.112

A merueilouse case is it to here , either the warninges of that he
shoulde haue voided , or the tokens of that he could not voide .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,49.113

For the self night next before his death , y=e= lord Standley sent a
trustie secret messenger vnto him at midnight in al the hast , requiring
hym to rise & ryde away with hym , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,49.114

for he was disposed vtterly no lenger to bide :
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,49.115

<P_50>

he had so fereful a dreme , in which him thoughte that a bore with his
tuskes so raced them both bi the heddes , that the blood ranne aboute
both their shoulders . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,50.117

And forasmuch as the protectour gaue the bore for his cognisaunce , this
dreme made so fereful an impression in his hart , y=t= he was throughly
determined no lenger to tary , but had his horse redy , if y=e= lord
Hastinges wold go w=t= him to ride so far yet y=e= same night , that
thei shold be out of danger ere dai . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,50.118

Ey good lord quod y=e= lord Hastinges to this messenger , leneth my lord
thi master so much to such trifles , & hath such faith in dremes , which
either his own fere fantasieth or do rise in y=e= nightes rest by reson
of his daye thoughtes ? MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,50.119

Tel him it is plaine witchcraft to beleue in suche dremes : which if
they wer tokens of thinges to come , why thinketh he not that we might
be as likely to make them true by our going if we were caught & brought
back <paren> as frendes fayle fleers <$$paren> for then had the bore a
cause likely to race vs w=t= his tuskes , as folke that fled for some
falshed , wherfore either is there no peryl , nor none there is in dede
: or if any be , it is rather in going then biding .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,50.120

And if we should nedes cost fall in perill one way or other : yet had I
leuer y=t= men should se it wer by other mens falshed , then
{COM:I_would_want_that_they_should} thinke it were either our owne
faulte or faint hart . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,50.121

And therfore go to thy master man , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,50.122

& commende me to him , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,50.123

& pray him be mery & haue no fere : MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,50.124

for I ensure hym I am as sure of the man y=t= he woteth of , as I am of
my own hand . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,50.125

God sende grace sir quod the messenger , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,50.126

and went his way . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,50.127

Certain is it also , y=t= in y=e= riding toward y=e= tower , y=e= same
morning in which he was behedded , his hors twise or thrise stumbled
w=t= him almost to y=e= falling , which thing albeit eche man wote wel
daily happeneth to them to whom no such mischaunce is toward : yet hath
it ben of an olde rite & custome , obserued as a token often times
notably foregoing some great misfortune . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,50.128

Now this y=t= foloweth was no warning , but an enemiouse scorne .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,50.129

<P_51>

The same morning ere he were vp , came a knight vnto him , as it were of
curtesy to accompany hym to the counsaile , but of trouth sent by the
protector to hast him thitherward , wyth whom he was of secret
confederacy in that purpose , a meane man at that time , and now of gret
auctorite . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,51.131

This knight when it happed the lord Chamberlen by y=e= way to stay his
horse , and comen a while w=t= a priest whome he met in the tower strete
, brake his tale MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,51.132

& said merely to him : what my lord I pray you come on ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,51.133

whereto talke you so long w=t= that priest , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,51.134

you haue no nede of a prist yet : MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,51.135

& therw=t= he laughed vpon him , as though he would say , ye shal haue
sone . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,51.136

But so litle wist y=e= tother what he ment , & so little mistrusted ,
that he was neuer merier nor neuer so full of good hope in his life :
which self thing is often sene a signe of chaunge .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,51.137

But I shall rather let anye thinge passe me , then the vain sureti of
mans mind so nere his deth . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,51.138

Vpon the very tower wharfe so nere the place where his hed was of so
sone after , there met he w=t= one Hastinges a purseuant of his own name
. MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,51.139

And of their meting in y=t= place , he was put in remembraunce of an
other time , in which it had happened them before , to mete in like
maner togither in the same place . At which other tyme the lord
Chamberlein had ben accused vnto king Edward , by y=e= lord Riuers y=e=
quenes brother , in such wise y=t= he was for y=e= while <paren> but it
lasted not long <$$paren> farre fallen into y=e= kinges indignation , &
stode in gret fere of himselfe . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,51.140

And for_asmuch as he nowe met this purseuant in the same place that
iubardy so wel passed : it gaue him great pleasure to talke w=t= him
therof w=t= whom he had before talked thereof , <P_52> in the same place
while he was therin . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,52.141

And therfore he said : Ah hastinges , art y=u= remembred when I met thee
here ones with an heuy hart ? MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,52.142

Yea my lord <paren> quod he <$$paren> that remembre I wel :
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,52.143

& thanked be God they gate no good , nor ye none harme thereby .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,52.144

Thou wouldest say so quod he , if thou knewest as@ @much as I know ,
which few know els as yet & moe shall shortly .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,52.145

That ment he by the lordes of the quenes kindred that were taken before
, and should that day be behedded at Poumfreit : which he wel wyst ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,52.146

but nothing ware that y=e= axe hang ouer his own hed .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,52.147

In faith man quod he , I was neuer so sory , nor neuer stode in so great
dread in my life , as I did when thou and I met here .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,52.148

And lo how y=e= world is turned , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,52.149

now stand mine enemies in y=e= daunger <paren> as thou maist hap to here
more hereafter <$$paren> & I neuer in my life so mery , nor neuer in so
great suerty . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,52.150

O good god , the blindnes of our mortall nature ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,52.151

when he most feared , he was in good suerty : MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,52.152

when he rekened him self surest , he lost his life ,
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,52.153

& that w=t=in two howres after . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,52.154

Thus ended this honorable man , a good knight and a gentle , of gret
aucthorite w=t= his prince , of liuing somewhat dessolate , plaine &
open to his enemy , & secret to his frend : eth to begile , as he that
of good hart & corage forestudied no perilles . A louing man & passing
wel beloued . Very faithful , & trusty ynough , trusting to much .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,52.155

<P_56>

I doubt not some shal think this woman to sleight a thing , to be
written of & set amonge the remembraunces of great matters : which thei
shal specially think , y=t= happely shal esteme her only by y=t= thei
now see her . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,56.157

But me semeth the chaunce so much the more worthy to be remembred , in
how much she is now in the more beggerly condicion , vnfrended & worne
out of acquaintance , after good substance , after as gret fauour w=t=
the prince , <P_57> after as gret sute & seking to w=t= al those y=t=
those days had busynes to spede , as many other men were in their times
, which be now famouse , only by y=e= infamy of their il dedes .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,57.158

Her doinges were not much lesse , albeit thei be muche lesse remembred ,
because thei were not so euil . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,57.159

For men vse if they haue an euil turne , to write it in marble :
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,57.160

& whoso doth vs a good tourne , we write it in duste which is not worst
proued by her : MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,57.161

for at this daye shee beggeth of many at this daye liuing , y=t= at this
day had begged if she had not bene . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,57.162

Now was it so deuised by y=e= protectour & his counsel , y=t= the self
day in which the lord Chamberlen was behedded in the tower of London , &
about the selfsame hower , was there not without his assent behedded at
Poontfraite , the fore remembred lordes & knightes y=t= were taken from
the king at Northampton & Stony Stratford . Which thinge was done in
the presence & by the order of syr Richard Ratclif knight , whose
seruice y=e= protector specially vsed in y=e= counsel and in th@
@execucion of such lawles enterprises , as a man y=t= had ben long
secret w=t= him , hauing experience of y=e= world & a shrewde wit ,
short & rude in speche , rough & boustiouse of behauiour , bold in
mischief , as far from pitie as from al fere of god .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,57.163

This knight bringing them out of y=e= prison to y=e= scafold , & shewing
to the people about y=t= thei were Traitors , not suffring them to speke
& declare their innocence lest their wordes might haue inclined men to
pity them , & to hate the protectour & his part : caused them hastly
without iugement , <P_58> processe , or maner of order to be behedded ,
& w=t=out other earthly gilt , but only y=t= thei were good men , to
true to y=e= king & to nigh to the quene . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,58.164

Now when the lord Chamberlen & these other lordes & knightes were thus
behedded & ridde out of the way : then thought the protectour , y=t=
while men mused what y=e= mater ment , while y=e= lordes of the realme
wer about him out of their owne strenghtis , while no man wist what to
thinke nor whome to trust , ere euer they should haue space to dispute &
disgest the mater & make parties : it wer best hastly to pursue his
purpose , & put himself in possession of y=e= crowne , ere men could
haue time to deuise ani wais to resist . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,58.165

But now was al the study , by what meane thys matter being of it self so
heinouse , might be first broken to the people , in such wise that it
might be wel taken . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,58.166

To this counsel they toke diuerse , such as they thought metely to be
trusted , likely to be indused to y=e= parte , & able to stand them in
stede , either by power or policy . Among whom , they made of Counsail
Edmond Shaa knight then Maier of London , which vpon trust of his own
aduauncement , whereof he was of a proud hart highly desirouse , shold
frame the cite to their appetite . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,58.167

Of spiritual men thei toke such as had wit , & were in aucthoritie among
the peple for oppinion of ther lerning , & had no scrupilouse consience
. MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,58.168

Among these had thei Iohn Shaa clerke brother to y=e= Maier , & freer
Penker prouincial of the Augustine freers both doctors of diuinite ,
both gret prechars , both of more learning then vertue , of more fame
then lerning . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,58.169

For thei were before gretly estemed among the peple : but after that
neuer . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,58.170

Of these two y=e= tone had a sermon in praise of the protectour before
the <P_59> coronacion , the t@ @other after , both so ful of tediouse
flatery , that no mans eares could abide them .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,59.171

Penker in his sermon so lost his voice that he was faine to leaue of &
come downe in the middes . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,59.172

Doctor Shaa by his sermon lost his honestie , & sone after his life ,
for very shame of the worlde , into which he durst neuer after come
abrode . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,59.173

But the frere forced for no shame , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,59.174

& so it harmed him y=e= lesse . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,59.175

Howbeit some dout & many thinken , that Penker was not of counsel of the
mater before the coronacion , but after the comen maner fell to flattery
after : namely sith his sermon was not incontinent vpon it , but at S.
Mary hospytall at the Ester after . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,59.176

But certaine is it , that Doctour Shaa was of counsel in the beginning ,
so farre forth that they determined that he should first breke the mater
in a sermon at Poules Crosse , in whiche he shold by y=e= aucthorite of
his preaching , encline the peple to the protectours ghostly purpose .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,59.177

But now was al the labour & study , in the deuis of some conuenient
pretext , for which the peple should be content , to depose the prince &
accept the protector for kinge . In which diuerse thinges they deuised
. MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,59.178

But the chief thing & the weighty of al that inuencion , rested in this
y=t= they should allege bastardy , either in king Edward himself , or in
his children , or both . So that he should seme dishabled to inherite
the crowne by the duke of Yorke , and the prince by him .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,59.179

To lay bastardy in kynge Edward , sowned openly to the rebuke of the
protectours owne mother , which was mother to them both :
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,59.180

for in y=t= point could be none other colour , but to pretend that his
own mother was one aduouteresse which not_w=t=standing to farther this
purpose he letted not : MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,59.181

but Natheles he would y=e= point should be lesse & more fauorably
handled , not euen fully plain & directly , but that y=e= matter should
be touched a slope craftely , as though men spared in y=t= point to
speke al the trouth for fere of his displeasure .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,59.182

But y=e= other point concerning the bastardy that they deuised to
surmise in king Edwards children , y=t= wold he should be openly
declared & inforsed to the vttermost . The coloure & pretext wherof
can@ @not be wel <P_60> perceiued , but if we first repete you some
thinges longe before done about king Edwardes mariage .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,60.183

After y=t= king Edward y=e= fourthe had deposed kinge Henry the sixt , &
was in peasyble possession of the realme , determining himself to mary ,
as it was requisite bothe for himself & for the realme , he sent ouer in
embassiate , the Erle of warwike with other noble men in his company
vnto Spaine , to intreate & conclude a mariage betwene king Edward & the
kinges doughter of Spain . In which thing y=e= Erle of Warwik founde
the parties so toward & willing , y=t= he spedely according to his
instruccions , w=t=out any difficulty brought y=e= matter to verye good
conclusion . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,60.184

Now happed it that in the meane season , there came to make a sute by
peticion to the king , dame Elizabeth Gray which was after his quene ,
at that tyme a widow borne of noble blood , specyally by her mother ,
which was Duches of Bedford ere she maried the lord Wodefeld her father
. MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,60.185

Howbeit this dame Elizabeth her self being in seruice w=t= quene
Margaret , wife vnto king Henry the .vi. was maried vnto one Iohn Gray
a squier whom king Henry made knight vpon the field y=t= he had on
Shroue Tuesday at Saint Albans against king Edward .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,60.186

And litle while enioyed he y=t= knighthod , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,60.187

for he was at y=e= same field slaine . After which done , & the Erle of
Warwik being in his embassiate about th@ @afore remembred mariage , this
pore Lady made humble sute vnto y=e= king , y=t= she might be restored
vnto such smal landes as her late husband had giuen her in iointure .
<P_61> Whom when y=e= king beheld , & hard her speke , as she was both
faire , of a good fauor , moderate of stature , wel made & very wise :
he not only pitied her , but also waxed ennamored on her .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,61.188

And taking her afterward secretly aside , began to entre in talking more
familiarly . Whose appetite when she perceiued , she verteousely denyed
him . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,61.189

But y=t= did she so wiseli , & with so good maner , & wordes so wel set
, that she rather kindled his desire then quenched it .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,61.190

And fynally after many a meting , much woing & many great promises , she
wel espied the kinges affeccion toward her so greatly encresed , y=t=
she durst somwhat y=e= more boldly say her minde , as to hym whose harte
she perceiued more firmely set , then to fall of for a worde .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,61.191

And in conclusion she shewed him plaine , y=t= as she wist herself to
simple to be his wife , so thought she her self to good to be his
concubine . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,61.192

The king much merueling of her constaunce , as he y=t= had not ben wont
els where to be so stiffely sayd naye , so muche estemed her contynence
and chastitie , y=t= he set her vertue in the stede of possession &
riches . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,61.193

And thus taking counsaile of his desyre , determined in al possible hast
to mary her . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,61.194

And after he was thus appointed , & hadde betwene them twain ensured her
: then asked he counsel of his other frendes , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,61.195

and y=t= in suche maner , as thei might ethe perceiue it boted not
greatly to say nay . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,61.196

Notwithstanding y=e= Duches of york his <P_62> mother was so sore moued
therewith , y=t= she diswaded y=e= mariage as@ @much as she possible
might alleging y=t= it was his honor , profite , and surety also , to
mary in a noble progeny out of his realm , whereupon depended gret
strength to his estate by y=e= affinytie & great possibilitie of
encrease of his possessions . And y=t= he could not well otherwise do ,
standing that y=e= Earle of warwik had so far moued already . Whiche
wer not likely to take it well , if al his viage were in suche wise
frustrate , and his appointmentes deluded . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,62.197

And she said also y=t= it was not princely to mary hys owne subiect , no
gret occasion leading thervnto , no possessions , or other commodityes ,
depending therupon , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,62.198

but onely as it were a rich man that would mary his mayde , onely for a
litle wanton dotage vppon her parson . In which mariage manye moe
commend y=e= maidens fortune , then y=e= maisters wisdom .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,62.199

And yet therin she said was more honesty , then honor in this mariage .
Forasmuch as there is betwene no merchant & his own maid so gret
difference , as betwene y=e= king and this widowe . In whose parson
albeit ther was nothing to be misliked , yet was there she saide :
nothing so excellent , but y=t= it might be founden in diuers other ,
y=t= wer more metely <paren> quod she <$$paren> for your estate , &
maydens also , wheras y=e= only widowhed of Elizabeth Gray though she
wer in al other thinges conuenient for you , shold yet suffice as me
semeth to refrain you from her mariage , sith it is an vnfitting thing ,
& a veri blemish , & highe disparagement , to the sacre magesty of a
prince , y=t= ought as nigh to approche priesthode in clenes as he doth
in dignitie , to be defouled w=t= bigamy in his first mariage .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,62.200

<P_63>

The king when his mother had said , made her answer part in ernest part
in play merely , as he that wiste himself out of her rule .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,63.202

And albeit he would gladly y=t= she shold take it wel , yet was at a
pointe in his owne mynde , toke she it wel or otherwise .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,63.203

Howbeit somwhat to satisfy her he saide , y=t= albeit mariage being a
spiritual thing , ought rather to be made for y=e= respecte of God where
his grace enclineth y=e= parties to loue together as he trusted it was
in his then for y=e= regard of any temporal aduauntage : yet natheles
him semed y=t= this mariage euen worldly considred , was not
vnprofitable . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,63.204

For he reckened y=e= amitye of no earthly nacion so necessari for him ,
as y=e= frendship of his own . Which he thought likely to beare him so
muche y=e= more herty fauor in y=t= he disdayned not to marye w=t= one
of his own land . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,63.205

And yet yf outeward aliance wer thought so requisite , he wold find y=e=
meanes to enter therinto , much better bi other of his kin , wher al
y=e= parties could be contented , than to mary himself , whom hee
shoulde happelye neuer loue , and for y=e= possibility of more
possessions , lese y=e= fruit & pleasure of this y=t= he had alredy .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,63.206

For smal pleasure taketh a man of al y=t= euer he hath beside , yf he
bee wiued against his appetite . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,63.207

And I dout not quod he but there be as ye saye other , y=t= be in euery
point comparable w=t= her . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,63.208

And therfore I let not them y=t= like them to wedde them .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,63.209

No more is it reason y=t= it mislike any man , y=t= I mary where it
liketh me . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,63.210

And I am sure y=t= my cosein of warwik neither loueth me so litle , to
grudge at y=t= I loue , nor is so vnresonable to loke y=t= I shold in
choise of a wife , rather be ruled by hys eye , then by mine own : as
though I wer a ward y=t= wer bound to <P_64> mary by th@ @apointment of
a gardain . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,64.211

I wold not be a kyng w=t= that condicion , to forbere mine own lyberty
in choise of my own mariage . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,64.212

As for possibilitie of more inheritaunce by new affinity in estraunge
landes , is ofte y=e= occasion of more trouble then profite .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,64.213

And we haue alredy title by y=t= meanes , to so much as suffiseth to get
& kepe wel in one mans daies . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,64.214

That she is a widow & hath alredy children , by gods blessed Ladye I am
a batcheler MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,64.215

& haue some to : MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,64.216

& so eche of vs hath a profe y=t= neither of vs is lyke to be barain .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,64.217

And therefore madam I pray you be content , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,64.218

I trust in god she shal bring furth a young prince , y=t= shal please
you . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,64.219

And as for y=e= bigamy , let y=e= bishop hardely lay it in my wai , when
I come to take orders . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,64.220

For I vnderstand it is forbidden a prieste , MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,64.221

but I neuer wiste it yet y=t= it was forbidden a prince .
MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,64.222

The Duchesse w=t= these wordes nothyng appeased , and seing y=e= king so
set thereon that she coulde not pull him backe , so hyghelye she
dysdained it , y=t= under pretext of her duetye to Godwarde , shee
deuised to disturbe this mariage , and rather to help that he shold mary
one Elizabeth Lucy , whom y=e= king had also not long before gotten w=t=
child . Wherefore y=e= kinges mother obiected openly against his
mariage , as it were in discharge of her conscience , that the kinge was
sure to dame Elizabeth Lucy and her husband before god . By reson of
which wordes , such obstacle was made in the matter , that either y=e=
Bishoppes durst not , or the king would not , procede to the
solempnisacion of this weding , til these same wer clerely purged , &
the trouth wel & openly testified . Wherupon dame Elysabeth Lucy was
sent for . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,64.223

And albeit y=t= she was by y=e= kinges mother & many other put in good
<P_65> comfort , to affirme that she was ensured vnto y=e= king : yet
when she was solempnely sworne to say the trouth , she confessed that
they were neuer ensured . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,65.224

Howbeit she sayed his grace spake so louing wordes vnto her , y=t= she
verely hopid he wold haue maried her . And y=t= if it had not ben for
such kind wordes , she would neuer haue shewed such kindenes to him , to
let him so kindly get her w=t= childe . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,65.225

This examinacion solempnly taken , when it was clerely perceiued that
there was none impediment : the king w=t= gret feast & honorable
solempnite , maried dame Elisabeth Grai MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,65.226

and her crowned quene y=t= was hys enemies wife , & many time had praied
full hartly for his losse . In which god loued her better , then to
graunt her her bone . MORERIC-1513-E1-P2,65.227

