<BEGIN_morewol-1524-e1-p2>

<P_1.1,210>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_LXXV_SIR_THOMAS_MORE_TO_CARDINAL_WOLSEY>

Hit may lyke your good Grace to be advertised that I have this nyght
received and presented un to <P_1.1,211> the Kings Grace as well your
Graces Lettre wrytten to my selfe dated this present Day , as also the
copies of my Lord of Surrei@ @s Lettres wrytten to the Quene of Scotts ,
with the copie of your Graces formar Lettre wrytten and sent un to my
said Lord , and your Lettre of new devised at this tyme to be sent ; by
all which his Highnes well perceiveth not onely your Graces high polycie
in the devising and ordering of his affeires and busynes comprised in
the same but also your mervelouse diligence and celerite in th'@
@epedition and spede of the same ; MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,211.4

for his Highnes seeth all such things as he commanded me to put your
Grace in rememberaunce of on his byhalfe , by your high diligence
anticipated , and all_redy done ere his Grace thought theron . Wherfore
his Highnes with moost harty thanks un to your Grace for your great
labour , payne , and diligence used therein , hath signed the lettres in
his name by your Grace devised un to his sistre the Quene of Scotts ,
commanding me forthwith to depech the Post agayn un to your Grace with
the same . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,211.5

And thus our Lord long preserve your good Grace in honor and helth .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,211.6

At Wodestok MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,211.7

the xxiiij=th=. day of Septembr MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,211.8

Your humble Orator and moost bounden beedman THOMAS MORE .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,211.9

To my Lord Legates good Grace . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,211.10

<P_1.1,212>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_LXXVI_SIR_THOMAS_MORE_TO_CARDINAL_WOLSEY>

Hit may like your good Grace to be advertised that I have this nyght ,
after the Kings Grace had souped , presented and redde un to his Highnes
as well your Graces Lettre wrytten un to me dated Yesterday , as the
Lettres of the Quene of Scotts wrytten to my lord of Surrey , with the
Lettres of his Lordishippe , as well answeryng her Grace as advertising
yours . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,212.13

The Kings Highnes is glad that my Lord of Surrey now bygynneth savourely
to perceve that the lords of Scotland entend but onely to dreve over the
tyme of theyre annoyaunce ; MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,212.14

and mych would his Grace have bene gladder that my Lord had savored hit
before , MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,212.15

for than his Grace thinketh that as well the feat that shall now be done
, or is by this done , myght have bene long synnys done , and
peradventur mych more . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,212.16

His Highnes also lyketh not all the beste that my Lord of Surrey in his
lettre wrytten to the Quene which he wold she shold shew to the lords of
Scottland appointeth theym the tyme and place where they shall send to
hym to Gedworth , MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,212.17

for his Grace thinketh the tyme and place so certaynly knowen it shal@
@be a good occasion to the Scotts the more surely to withstand his
entreprise . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,212.18

How_be_it his Grace trusteth in God hit shal@ @be or is by this tyme
well inough . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,212.19

<P_1.1,213>

His Highnes is very sory of the plage , and the ferfent agues fallen in
his army to the great minishing of the same ; for the remedy and
reinforcing wherof his Highnes thinketh no thinge more profitable than
for the causes in your Grace's Lettres moost prudently remembred , that
the places of them that are departed to God , or sent bakke to Calais to
be cured , shold be , and so is he content they shal@ @be supplied with
as many horsemen of those parties . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,213.21

And thereof his Grace requyreth Yours that my lord of Suffolke may be
advertised . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,213.22

Finally that hit lyketh your good Grace so benygnely to accepte and take
in worth my pore service , and so far above my merits to commend the
same in that Lettre which of myn accustumed maner your Grace foreknew
the Kings Grace shold se ; wherby his Highnes shold have occasion to
accepte hit in lyke wise , and so lyked your Grace in one Lettre both
geve me your thanks and gete me his . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,213.23

I were my good Lord very blynde if I perceived not , very unkinde if
ever I forgate , of what graciouse favor it procedeth , which I can
never otherwise reanswere than with my pore prayor , which duryng my
life shall never faile to pray to God for the preservation of your good
Grace in honor and helth . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,213.24

At Wodestoke MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,213.25

the xxvj=th=. day of Septembre . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,213.26

Your humble Orator and moost bounden beedman THOMAS MORE .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,213.27

To my Lord Legats good Grace . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,213.28

<P_1.1,252>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_LXXXVIII_SIR_THOMAS_MORE_TO_CARDINAL_WOLSEY_A.D._1524>

<P_1.1,253>

Hit may lyke your good Grace to be advertised that yisternyght at my
cummyng un to the Kings Graces presence , after that I had made your
Graces recommendations and his Highnes shewed hym selfe very greatly
glad and joyfull of your Graces helthe , as I was abowte to declare
ferther to his Grace what lettres I had brought , his Highnes ,
perceiving Lettres in my hand , prevented me ere I could bygyn , and
saied " Ah ye have lettres nowe by John Joachym ,
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,253.32

and I trow sum resolution what they will do . "
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,253.33

" Nay veryly Sir " quoth I " My lord hath yit no word by John Joachim
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,253.34

nor John Joachim as far as my Lord knew had yit no worde hym selfe this
day in the mornyng whan I departed from his Grace . "
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,253.35

" No had " quoth he , I mych mervaile therof ,
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,253.36

for John Joachim had a servaunt come to hym two dayes agoo . "
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,253.37

" Sir , " quoth I , " if hit lyke your Grace , this mornyng my Lords
Grace had no thing herd therof ; MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,253.38

for yisterday his Grace at after_none dispeched me to your Grace with a
Lettre sent from Mr Doctor Knyght , MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,253.39

and the same nyght late , his Grace sent a servaunt of his to myn howse
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,253.40

and commaunded me to be with his Grace this mornyng by eight of the
clokke , where at my cummyng <P_1.1,254> he delivered me these other
lettres and advertisements sent un to hym fro Mr Pace commanding me that
after that your Highnes had seene theym I shold remitte theym to hym
with diligence , as well for that he wold shew theym to other of your
Graces counsaile , as also to John Joachym ,
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,254.41

for the contents be such as will do hym litle pleasure . "
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,254.42

" Mary " quoth his Grace " I am well a_paied therof , "
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,254.43

and so he fell in meryly to the redyng of the Lettres of Maister Pace ,
and all the other abstracts and wrytyngs wherof the contents as highly
contented hym as eny tidings that I have sene cum to hym ;
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,254.44

and thanked your Grace moost hartely for your good and spedy
advertisement ; MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,254.45

and furthwithe he declared the newes and every materiall point which
vppon the reding his Grace well noted un to the Quenys Grace and all
other abowt hym , who were mervelouse glad to here it .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,254.46

And the Quenys Grace saied that she was glad that the Spanyerds had yit
done somwhat in Italy in recompence of their departure owt of Province .
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,254.47

I shewed his Highnes that your Grace thought that the French King passed
the mountaignys in hope to wynne all with a visage in Italy , and to
fynd there no resistence : MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,254.48

and his sodayn cummyng uppon mych abashed the cuntrees , putting eche
quarter in dowt of other and owt of suertie who myght be well trusted ;
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,254.49

but now sith he fyndeth it otherwise , myssyng the helpe of money which
he hoped to have had in Mylleyn ; fyndyng his <P_1.1,255> enemyes strong
, and the fortressis well manned and furnyshed ;
MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,255.50

and at Pavia , by th'@ @expugnation wherof he thought to put all the
remanant in fere and drede , being now twyes rejected w=t= losse and
reproche , his estimation shall so decay , and his friends fail , his
enemyes confermed and encoraged , namely such aide of th'@ @Almaignes of
new joynyng with theym that lyke as the French King byfore wrote and
bosted un to his mother that he had of his awne mynd passed in to Italy
, so is it lykly that she shall have shortly cause to wryte agayn to hym
that it had be mych bettre and more wisedome for hym to abide at home
than to put hym selfe there , where as he standeth in great parell
whither ever he shall gete thense . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,255.51

The King's Grace lawghed MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,255.52

and said that he thinketh it wil@ @be very hard for hym to gete thense .
And that he thinketh the maters going thus , the Popis Holynes will not
be hasty neither in Peace nor Treuix . MOREWOL-1524-E1-P2,1.1,255.53

