<BEGIN_moxinden-1640-e2-p2>

<P_303>

<heading:edcomment:CCXXXIV_MARGARET_LADY_OXINDEN_TO_MRS._KATHERINE_OXINDEN>

Good Sister , Heer was with me this morning my Cosin Adam whos plas that
we all thought so fit for him is com to nothing , by reson my Lord of
Lester is not like to go to eyrlland , to whos soldrigary my Cosin shold
have bin on of the secrettarys , MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,303.4

so he is wholy to seeke of an Imployment now .
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,303.5

M=tr= broks that he is with_all is wery of his being ther , which I
persave much discontents my Cosin Adam , MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,303.6

and as he saith , meat and drink is not all that he must have ,
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,303.7

for that sut his master made him is bad now MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,303.8

and more Clothes he is Shure he ca@ @not have of him ;
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,303.9

my Lord of Lester@ @'s Secretary sayth if he can procure his frends to
set him out with these , which he sayth 20 or thirty pound will do , he
will plase him with a Captayne of his aquayntance , to be his Aynshant .
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,303.10

Now his desire is that you wold give your Consent to this imployment and
get his brother to send him 20@ @=li= , which he sayth he will make
serve his turne , and that it might be with speed ,
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,303.11

for the plas ca@ @not <P_304> be stayed a_bove 14 days for him .
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,304.12

I sent for my cosin barrow , who estemeth that and this plase may be had
, and that if my Cosin Hary be not fited with present monies , he will
lay it downe for him , a_pon a condision that my cosin hary will prefix
a time of paying it him a_gayne , and that if my cosin have to returne ,
he will bethought that my cosin Adam shall pay it him a_gayne ,
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,304.13

if my cosin dy than thay say my Cosin Hary may pay himself .
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,304.14

For my advise , trewly Sister I see not any cors he can take but he must
run hasards , MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,304.15

and the plase he now is in he ca@ @not continew in ,
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,304.16

nether is it any advancment for him if he cold .
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,304.17

My brother partherich was now heer MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,304.18

and teleth us my Cosin Richard@ @'s Cornell is now Sir William Ogell ,
who loveth my brother Partherich excedingly and hath promised to befrend
my cosin much , so as I doubt not if god send him life he will rays his
fortunes very much . MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,304.19

What with this pay , and monyes put into his hands for to rays his men ,
and pay that was dew to him in the north , which he neer had payd him ,
and that mony for pay he had for his jorny with the king to winsor , it
{COM:preceding_word_"it"_emended} hath set him out in a very comendable
way , as I beleve most kaptaynes wer , MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,304.20

and monyes in his pers to ; MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,304.21

he toke his jorny from this towne this day senight .
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,304.22

I pray sister send me your speedy answer . MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,304.23

So with my harty love to you and the like from my daughter Dallison , I
comit you to God allmighti MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,304.24

and rest Your most afectionat sister Margaret Oxinden
MOXINDEN-1640-E2-P2,304.25

