<BEGIN_mroper-1534-e1-p2>

<P_523>

And when my father had tolde me this tale , than sayd he ferther thus :
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,523.3

' I pray the now , good Marget , tell me this , MROPER-1534-E1-P2,523.4

Wouldest you wishe thy poore father beinge at the lestwise somewhat
learned , lesse to regarde the peryll of his soule , than did there the
honest unlearned man ? MROPER-1534-E1-P2,523.5

I medle not <paren> you wote well <$$paren> with the conscience of any
man , that hath sworne , MROPER-1534-E1-P2,523.6

nor I take not vpon me to be their iudge . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,523.7

But now if they do well , and that their conscience grudge them not , if
I with my conscience to the contrary , shoulde for good cumpany passe on
with them and swere as they doe , when all our soules hereafter shall
passe out of this worlde , and stand in iudgement at the barre before
the hie Iudge , if he iudge them to heauen and me to the deuil , because
I did as they did , not thinking as they thought , if I should than say
<paren> as the good man Cumpany sayd <$$paren> mine olde good lordes and
frendes , naming such a lorde and such , yea and some bishoppes
peraduenture of such as I loue best , I sware because you sware , and
went that way that you went , doe lykewise for me now , let me not goe
alone , yf there be any good felowship with you , some of you come
<P_524> with me : by my trouth Marget I may say to the , in secret
counsayle , here betwene vs twayne <paren> but let it go no ferther , I
besech the hartely <$$paren> . I finde the frendship of this wretched
worlde so ficle , that for any thinge that I coulde trete or pray , that
wolde for good felowship goe to the deuyll with me , amonge them all I
wene I shoulde not finde one . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,524.8

And than by God , Margett , if you thinke so too , best it is I suppose
that for any respecte of them all were they twyse as many moe as they be
, I haue my selfe a respecte to mine owne soule . '
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,524.9

' Surely , Father , ' quod I , ' without any scruple at all , you may be
bolde I dare say for to sware that . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,524.10

But Father , they that thinke you shoulde not refuse to swere the thinge
, that you see so many so good men and so well learned swere before you
, meane not that you shoulde sweare to beare them felowship , nor to
passe with them , for good cumpany : But that the credence that you may
with reason geue to their persons for their aforsayd qualities , shoulde
well moue you to thinke the oth such of it selfe , as euery man may well
swere without peryll of their soule , if their owne priuate conscience
to the contrary be not the lett : and that ye well ought and haue good
cause to chaunge your owne conscience , in confirming your owne
conscience to the conscience of so many other , namely beinge such as
you knowe they be . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,524.11

And sith it is also by a lawe made by the parlement commaunded , they
thinke that you be vpon the peryll of your soule , bounden to chaunge
and reform your conscience , and confirme your owne as I said to other
mens . ' MROPER-1534-E1-P2,524.12

' Mary , Marget ' <paren> quod my father again <$$paren> , ' for the
parte that you playe , you playe it not much a_misse .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,524.13

But Margaret fyrst , as for the law of the land , though euery man being
borne and inhabiting therin , is bounden to the keping in euery case
vpon some temporall paine , and in manye cases vpon paine of Goddes
displeasure too , yet is there no man bounden to swere that euery law is
well made , nor bounden vpon the payne of Goddes displeasure , to
perfourme any such poynt of the law , as were in dede vnleafull . Of
which maner kind , that ther may such happe to be made in anye part of
Christendome , I suppose no man doubteth , the generall counsell of the
whole body of Christendome euermore in that poynt excepte : which
<paren> though it may make some thinges better than other , and some
thinges may growe to that poynt , that by a nother law they may nede to
be refourmed , yet to institute any thinge in such wise , to Goddes
displeasure , as at the makinge might not lawfully be perfourmed , the
spirit of God that gouerneth his churche , <P_525> neuer hath it
suffered , nor neuer here after shall , his whole catholike church
lawfully gathered together in a generall counsell , <paren> as Christ
hath made playne promises in Scripture <$$paren> . '
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,525.14

Now if it so hap , that in any particular parte of Christendome , there
be a law made , that be such as for some parte therof some men thinke
that the law of God can not beare it , and some other thinke yes , the
thing being in such maner in question , that throwe diuerse quarters of
Christendome , some that are good men and cunninge , both of our owne
dayes and before our daies , thinke some one way , and some other of
lyke learninge and goodnesse thinke the contrary , in this case he that
thinketh against the lawe , neither may swere that law lawfully was made
, standing his owne conscience to the contrarie ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,525.15

nor is bounden vpon paine of Goddes displeasure to chaunge his owne
conscience therin , MROPER-1534-E1-P2,525.16

for any particular law made any where , other than by the generall
counsaile or by a generall faith growen by the workynge of God
vniuersally thorow all Christian nacions : nor other authorite than one
of these twayne <paren> except speciall reuelacion and expresse
commaundement of God <$$paren> sith the contrary opinions of good men
and well learned , as I put you the case , made the vnderstanding of the
Scriptures doubtefull , I can see none that lawfully may commaunde and
compell any man to chaunge his owne opinion , and to translate his owne
conscience from the tone side to the t@ @other . '
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,525.17

For an example of some such maner thinges , I haue I trow before this
time tolde you , that whether our Blessed Lady were conceyued in
orygynall syn or not , was sometime in great questyon among the great
learned men of Christendome . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,525.18

And whether it be yet decided and determined by any generall counsaile ,
I remember not . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,525.19

But this I remembre well , that notwithstanding that the feast of her
conception was than celebrate in the Church <paren> at the least wyse in
dwerse prouinces <$$paren> yet was holy S. Bernard , which as his
many_folde bokes made in the lawde and praise of our Ladie doe declare ,
was of as deuoute affection towarde all thinges sowninge toward her
commendacion , that he thought might well be veryfied or suffered , as
any man was liuing , yet <paren> I say <$$paren> was that holy deuoute
man against that part of her prayse , as appeareth well by a pistle of
his , wherin he right sore and with great reason <P_526> argueth ther
against , and approueth not the institucion of that feaste neyther .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,526.20

Nor he was not of this mynde alone , MROPER-1534-E1-P2,526.21

but many other well learned men with hym , and right holy men too .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,526.22

Now was ther on the t@ @other side , the blessed holy byshop , S.
Anselme , MROPER-1534-E1-P2,526.23

and he not alone neyther , MROPER-1534-E1-P2,526.24

but many well learned and very verteous also with hym .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,526.25

And they be both twayne holy saintes in heauen ; and many mo that wer on
eyther syde . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,526.26

Nor neither parte was ther bounden to chaunge ther opinion for th@
@other , nor for any prouinciall counsell either . '
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,526.27

But lyke as after the determinacion of a well assembled generall
counsaile , euery man had been bounden to geue credans that way , and
confirme their owne conscience to the determinacion of the counsayle
generall , and than all they that helde the contrary before , were for
that holding oute of blame , so if before such decision a man had
against his owne conscience , sworne to maintain and defend the other
side , he had not fayled to offende God very sore .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,526.28

But marye if on the t@ @other side a man wolde in a matter take away by
hym self vpon his owne minde alone , or with some fewe , or with neuer
so many , against an euident trouthe appearing by the comon faith of
Christendome , this conscience is very damnable , yea ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,526.29

or if it be not euen fully so plaine and euident , yet if he see but hym
self with farre the fewer parte , thinke the tone way , against farre
the more parte of as well learned and as good , as those are that
affirme the thinge that he thinketh , thinkinge and affirming the
contrary , and that of such folke as he hath no reasonable cause
wherfore he shoulde not in that matter suppose , that those which say
they thinke against his minde , affirme the thinge that they saye , for
none other cause but for that they so thinke in dede , this is of very
trouth a verie good occasion to moue hym , and yet not to compelle hym ,
to confirme his minde and conscience vnto theirs . '
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,526.30

But Margaret , for what causes I refuse the othe , the thinge , <paren>
as I haue often tolde you <$$paren> I will neuer shewe you , neither you
nor no body elles , excepte the Kynges Highnes shoulde lyke to commaunde
me . Which if his Grace did , I haue ere this tolde you <P_527> therin
how obediently I haue sayde . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.31

But surelye , Daughter , I haue refused it MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.32

and doo , for mo causes than one . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.33

And for what causes so euer I refuse it , this am I sure , that it is
well knowen , that of them that haue sworne it , some of the best lerned
before the oth geuen them , saide and plaine affirmed the contrarye , of
some such thinges as they haue now sworne in the othe ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.34

and that vpon their trouth , and their learning than ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.35

and that not in hast nor sodainly , but often and after great diligens
done to seke and finde out the trouth . ' MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.36

' That might be , Father ' <paren> quod I <$$paren> ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.37

' and yet since they might see more , I will not ' <paren> quod he
<$$paren> , ' dispute , daughter Margaret , against that , nor
misse_iudge any other mans conscience , which lyeth in their owne hart
farre out of my sight . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.38

But this will I say , that I neuer heard my self the cause of their
chaunge , by anye new further thinge founden of authoritie , than as
farre as I perceyue they had loked on , and as I suppose , verie well
wayed before . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.39

Now if {SIC:of} the self same thinges that they sawe before , seme some
otherwise vnto them now , than they did before , I am for their sakes
the gladder a great dele . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.40

But any thinge that euer I saw before , yet at this day to me they seme
but as they dyd . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.41

And therfore , though they may doe other wise than they might , yet ,
Doughter , I may not . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.42

As for such thinges as some men woulde happely saye , that I might with
reason the lesse regard their chaunge , for any sample of them to be
taken to the chaunge of my conscience , because that the kepinge of the
princes pleasure , and the auoyding of his indignacion , the feare of
the losing of their worldly substaunce , with regarde vnto the
discomfort of their kynrede and their frendes , might
{COM:preceding_word_"might"_emended} happe make some men either swere
otherwise than they thinke , or frame their conscience afreshe to thinke
other wise than they thought , any such opinion as this is , wil I not
conceiue of them , MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.43

I haue better hope of their goodnes than to thinke of them so .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.44

For if such thinges shoulde haue tourned them , the same thinges had
been lykely to make me do the same , MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.45

for in good faith I knew fewe so faint_hearted as my selfe .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.46

Therfore will I , Margaret , by my wyll , thinke no worse of other folke
in the thing that I know not , than I finde in my selfe .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.47

But as I know well mine onely conscience causeth me to refuse the othe ,
so will I trust in God , that according to their conscience , they haue
receyued it and sworne . ' MROPER-1534-E1-P2,527.48

But where as you thinke , Margett , that they be so many moe than there
are on the t@ @other side that thinke in this thinge as I <P_528> thinke
, surelie for your owne coumfort that you shall not take thought ,
thinking that your father casteth himself away so lyke a foole , that he
wolde ieobarde the losse of his substaunce , and peraduenture his bodie
, without any cause why he so shoulde for peryll of his soule , but
rather his soule in peryll therby too , to this shall I say to the ,
Marget , that in some of my causes I nothing doubte at all , but that
though not in this realme , yet in Christendome aboute , of those well
learned men and verteouse that are yet alyue , they be not the fewer
parte that are of my minde . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,528.49

Besides that , that it were ye wot well possible , that some menne in
this realme too , thinke not so clere the contrary , as by the othe
receyued they haue sworne to saye . ' MROPER-1534-E1-P2,528.50

Now this farre forth I saie for them that are yet alyue .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,528.51

But go we now to them that are dead before , and that are I trust in
heauen , MROPER-1534-E1-P2,528.52

I am sure that it is not the fewer parte of them that all the time while
they liued , thought in some of the thinges , the way that I thinke nowe
. MROPER-1534-E1-P2,528.53

I am also , Margaret , of this thinge sure ynough , that of those holy
doctours and saintes , which to be with God in heauen long ago no
Christen man douteth , whose bookes yet at this day remayne here in mens
handes , there thought in some such thinges , as I thinke now .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,528.54

I say not that they thought all so , but surely such and so manye as
will well appeare by their wryting , that I pray God geue me the grace
that my soule may folow theirs . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,528.55

And yet I show you not all , Margarett , that I haue for my self in the
sure discharge of my conscience . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,528.56

But for the conclusion , doughter Margeret , of all this matter , as I
haue often tolde you , I take not vpon me neither to diffine nor dispute
in these matters , MROPER-1534-E1-P2,528.57

nor I rebuke not nor impugne any other mans dede ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,528.58

nor I neuer wrote , nor so much as spake in any cumpany , any worde of
reproch in any thing that the Parlement had passed ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,528.59

nor I medled not with the conscience of any other man , that either
thinketh or saith he thinketh contrarie vnto mine .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,528.60

But as concerninge mine owne self , for thy coumfort shall I say ,
Daughter , to the , that mine owne conscience in this matter <paren> I
damne none other mans <$$paren> is such , as may well stand with mine
owne saluacion , MROPER-1534-E1-P2,528.61

therof am I , Megge , so sure , as that is , God is in heauen .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,528.62

And therfore as for all the remenaunt , goodes , landes , and lyfe both
<paren> if the chaunce sholde so fortune <$$paren> sith this conscience
is sure for me , I verelie trust in God , MROPER-1534-E1-P2,528.63

he shall rather strenght me to bere the losse , than against this
conscience to swere and put my soule in peryll , sith all <P_529> the
causes that I perceyue moue other men to the contrary , seme not such
vnto me , as in my conscience make any chaunge . '
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.64

When he saw me sit with this very sadde , as I promisse youe , Sister ,
my heart was full heauye for the peryll of his person , for in faith I
feare not his soule , he smyled vpon me MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.65

and said : ' how now doughter Marget ? MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.66

What how mother Eue ? MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.67

Where is your mind now ? MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.68

sit not musing with some serpent in your brest , vpon some newe
perswasion , to offer father Adam the apple yet once againe ? '
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.69

' In good faith , Father , ' quod I , ' I can no ferther goe ,
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.70

but am <paren> as I trow Cresede saith in Chauser <$$paren> comen to
Dulcarnon , euen at my wittes ende . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.71

For sith th@ @ensaumple of so many wise men can not in this matter moue
you , I see not what to say more , but if I shoulde loke to perswade you
with the reason that Master Harry Patenson made .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.72

For he met one day one of our men , MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.73

and when he had asked where you were , and heard that you wer in the
Towre still , he waxed euen angry with you MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.74

and said , " Why ? MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.75

What aileth hym that he wil@ @not swere ? MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.76

Wherfore sholde he sticke to swere ? MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.77

I haue sworne the oth my self . " MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.78

And so I can in good faith go now no ferther neither , after so many
wise men whom ye take for no saumple , but if I should say lyke M.
Harry , Why should you refuse to swere , Father ?
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.79

for I haue sworne my self . ' MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.80

At this he laughed MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.81

and said , ' That word was lyke Eue to , MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.82

for she offered Adam no worsse fruit than she had eten her self . '
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.83

' But yet Father , ' quod I , ' by my trouth , I feare me very sore ,
that this matter will bringe you in merueilous heauy trouble .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.84

You know well that as I shewed you , M. Secretary sent you word as your
very frende , to remember , that the Parlement lasteth yet . '
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.85

' Margaret , ' quod my father , ' I thanke hym right hartely .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.86

But as I shewed you than again , I left not this geare vnthought on .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,529.87

And albeit I knowe well that if they wolde make a law to doe me any
harme , that lawe coulde neuer be lawfull , but that God shall I trust
<P_530> kepe me in that grace , that concerning my duetie to my prince ,
no man shall doe me hurte but if he doe me wronge <paren> and than as I
told you , this is lyke a riddle , a case in which a man may lese his
head and haue no harme <$$paren> , and notwithstanding also that I haue
good hope , that God shall neuer suffer so good and wyse a prince , in
such wyse to requyte the longe seruice of his true faithfull seruaunt ,
yet sith there is nothing vnpossible to falle , I forgat not in this
matter , the counsell of Christ in the gospell , that ere I shoulde
beginne to builde this castell for the sauegarde of mine owne soule , I
sholde sit and rekon what the charge wold be . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,530.88

I coumpted , Marget , full surely many a restles night , while my wife
sleapt , and went that I had slept to , what peryll was possible for to
fall to me , so farre forth that I am sure there can come none aboue .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,530.89

And in deuising , Daughter , therupon , I had a full heauy harte .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,530.90

But yet <paren> I thanke our Lorde <$$paren> for all that , I neuer
thought to chaunge , though the very vttermost shoulde happe me that my
feare ranne vpon . ' MROPER-1534-E1-P2,530.91

' No , Father <paren> quod I <$$paren> , it is not lyke to thinke vpon a
thinge that may be , and to see a thinge that shall be , as ye shoulde
<paren> our Lord saue you <$$paren> if the chaunce should so fortune .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,530.92

And than should you peraduenture thinke , that you thinke not now
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,530.93

and yet than peraduenture it wolde be to late . '
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,530.94

' To late , Daughter , ' <paren> quod my father <$$paren> , ' Margaret ?
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,530.95

' I besech our Lord , that if euer I make such a chaunge , it may be to
late in dede . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,530.96

For well I wot the chaunge can@ @not be good for my soule that chaunge I
say that shoulde growe but by feare . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,530.97

And therfore I pray God that in this worlde I neuer haue good of such
chaunge . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,530.98

For so much as I take harme here , I shal haue at the lest wise the
lesse therfore when I am hence . MROPER-1534-E1-P2,530.99

And if so were that I wist well now , that I should faint and fall , and
for feare swere here after , yet wolde I wish to take harme by the
refusing first , MROPER-1534-E1-P2,530.100

for so should I haue the better hope for grace to rise againe .
MROPER-1534-E1-P2,530.101

