<BEGIN_mtudor-1515-e1-p2>

<P_1.1,121>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_XLII_MARY_THE_FRENCH_QUEEN_TO_KING_HENRY_THE_EIGHTH,_REQUESTING_HIM_TO_SEND_FOR_HER_FROM_FRANCE>

My most kynde and lovyng brother , I humbly recomand me vnto yowr Grace
, thankyng yow interly of yowr comfortable Letters ; besechyng yowr
grace <P_1.1,122> most humbly now so to contenwe toward me and my
frendes , as owr spessyale trowst ys yn yowr Grace ; and that yt may
layke you w=t= all convennynte delygence to sende for me that I may
shortely se yowr grace wyche ys the thyng that I most dissyr yn thys
world MTUDOR-1515-E1-P2,1.1,122.4

and I and all myn ys at yowr gracs commandmente and playsayr .
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P2,1.1,122.5

At Parys MTUDOR-1515-E1-P2,1.1,122.6

the vj. day of Marche . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P2,1.1,122.7

by yowr lowyng suster Mary . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P2,1.1,122.8

To the Kings Grace thes be delivered . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P2,1.1,122.9

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_XLIII_MARY_QUEEN_OF_FRANCE_TO_KING_HENRY_VIII=th=>

{COM:introductory_material_omitted}

<P_1.1,123>

My most derest and ryt entierly belowyde Lord and brothare , yn my most
humble wys I recommande <P_1.1,124> me unto yowr Grace , shawynge unto
yowr Grace that I do a pa ... by my Lord my howsbande that you
{COM:preceding_word_"you"_emended} ar playsayde and contentyde that he
shale resorde on to yowr presence at swche tyme as yowr Grace shale be
at hys maner of Donyngton , wherby I se wele he hys merwosly rejoysyd
and moche comfortyd that yt hathe lyked yowr Grace so to be playsayd ;
for the wyche yowr specyale goodnys to hym showyd yn that be_halfe , and
for sondry and many oder yowr kyndnes , as wele to me as to hym showed
and gewyn yn dyvers cawsys , I most humbly thanke yowr Grace ; assewryng
yow that for the same I accompt my self as moche bonden un_to yowr Grace
as ewer swster was to brother : MTUDOR-1515-E1-P2,1.1,124.13

and accordyng ther un to I shale to the beste of my powr dowryng my lyef
, endver myselfe as ferre as in me shale be possyble to do the thyng
that shale stond with yowr playsowr , MTUDOR-1515-E1-P2,1.1,124.14

and yf it had be tyme convenyente to yowr Grace hade be ther wythe
pleassyd I wolde most gladly have accompanyd my sayd Lord yn thys
yowrnay . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P2,1.1,124.15

Bwt I trowst that bowthe I and my sayd Lord shal se yow acordyng as yowr
Grace wrote {SIC:worte} yn yowr laste Letters unto my sayde Lord , wych
ys the thyng that I dessyr more to opteyn than all the honor off the
Worlde . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P2,1.1,124.16

And thws I beseche owre Lorde to send unto yow , my most dereste and
enterly be_lowyd brother and Lord , long and prosperows <P_1.1,125> lyfe
with the fole accomplyshment of al yowr honorable dessyrs , most humbly
prayeng yowr Grace that I may be humbly recomanded unto my most derest
and beste be_lowyd suster the Quene Grace , and to the Quene off Scottys
my welbelowyd suster , trowstyng that she be asserteyned frome yowr
Grace of the prosperows estate and helthe of my everly beloved nyphews
{COM:preceding_word_"nyphews"_emended} the prences , to home I pray God
send long lyfe . MTUDOR-1515-E1-P2,1.1,125.17

Frome Letheryng in Swf {COM:Suffolk} MTUDOR-1515-E1-P2,1.1,125.18

the ix. day off Septembur , MTUDOR-1515-E1-P2,1.1,125.19

by the hand of yowr lowyng suster Mary Quene off France .
MTUDOR-1515-E1-P2,1.1,125.20

