<BEGIN_nferrar-1629-e2-p2>

<P_261>

<heading:edcomment:XIX_N.F._TO_HIS_MOTHER_IUL_10.=TH=_1631>

My most Deare mother By Nathaniell on Wednessdy night I wrott you
touching I. Gabbetts immediate comming vpp soe that now wee almost
howerly expect him - NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,261.4

Yesterday by Huntington carrier Bearde I wrott you farther wherin was a
letter enclosed from Margetting - And a Bundle in cloth -
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,261.5

{COM:list_omitted}

<P_262>

I payed him twelue pence NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.8

and directed the things to Good man Richards - NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.9

I hope you haue received all - NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.10

I haue many things to write NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.11

but tyme hath ouertaken mee - NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.12

Nathaniell must sende upp word to whom the cloake was putt to dy - And
likewyse m=r= Stroothers patterns of kersy w=ch= the noate of prouisions
mentions - NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.13

I haue next weeke promised Page a horseloade NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.14

by him I purpose to send the fruite and spice so that for the Cake you
must otherwyse prouide in the Country - NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.15

This Cake you sente Last is heauy NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.16

whither wante of baking or otherwyse consider NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.17

And I thinke best to add a couple of Capons w=th= it for the Churching
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.18

this day 14 days Thom Collett is this morning gon to Margetting
purposing to returne to_morrow NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.19

god send them Comfort in Sues safe deliuery NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.20

M=rs= Keighly was on Monday brought a bed of a Son~ -
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.21

In the greate shower which was heere a gladsom~ hower and since god bee
thanked wee haue had some more rayne but in Essex soe much as they say
it is almost wynter agayne in the way , NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.22

Wee hope god hath refreshed you likewyse w=th= this blessing -
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.23

There@ @s greate news abroade and true but of soe serious consideration
as I am scarse in this Confusion of thoughts willing to sett doune -
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.24

Magdeburge was taken the x May by Tilly whilest the people were at
Churche giuing god thankes for his removall uppon the king of sweden@ @s
approach NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.25

but the king not comming forward Tilly returned
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.26

and by supprizall tooke the Citty hauing slayne 20000 persons of the
Inhabitants and utterly consumed the Towne saue some few houses about
the Cathedrall Church w=ch= stands - NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.27

The kyng of Sweden@ @s Gouernour there and his soldiers though they were
offered quarter refused to ouerliue soe much misery as they saw before
there eyes . NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,262.28

And the <P_263> Bishopp flying wounded desyred his seruant to kill him -
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,263.29

But is taken prisoner - NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,263.30

The destruction is horrible and soe fearefull that none like it since
that of Iherusalem as the Corrant saith NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,263.31

God make it a warning . NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,263.32

and in there misery lett us know our owne happiness and w=th= Compassion
of there Afflictions ioyfully prayse god for his inestimable mercys to
us whoe surely deserue to mans appearance much more his wrath then those
people did - NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,263.33

And soe beseeching y=r= blessing and prayers I committ y=u= to gods most
mercifull protection NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,263.34

Your most bounden and obedient son - N.F. NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,263.35

x Iuly NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,263.36

If you have any cloth whited send it upp next week
NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,263.37

And lett mee know whither Grey com~ any more - NFERRAR-1629-E2-P2,263.38

