<BEGIN_penny-1686-e3-p2>

<P_141>

<heading>

<font> The Blind Beggar . <$$font> PENNY-1686-E3-P2,141.4

1686 . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,141.5

CHAP. II . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,141.6

How Monford arrived in England , and of the cold Entertainment he found
amongst his Relations ; how he came to Bednal-Green , and settling
himself there , he continud to Begg for his Living , etc.
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,141.7

<$$heading>

Monford escaping a Storm at Sea , in his Return Landed with his Vertuous
Wife on the Coast of Essex , where he had some considerable Relations ,
to whom in this necessity they applyed themselves for succour ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,141.9

but they either not desirous of his Company , who after the death of his
Parents had wasted much of his Patrimony , or fearing in that condition
he might be chargeable to them , would not know him ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,141.10

and those that were convinced he was the same Monford that went over
into France , gave him but cold Entertainment , insomuch that scorning
to rely upon their Charity , he told the kind Partner of his joy and
sorrow , that he intended early in the morning to hast towards London ,
and that he would rather trust to Providence then to the ingratitude of
those who in his prosperous days had Carressed him in a high manner ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,141.11

and so without taking Leave of any , Early in the morning they departed
; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,141.12

and in two days travelling <paren> having spent the little Money they
had reserved <$$paren> necessity that has no Law , so far humbled his
high Spirit , that he did not think it amiss <paren> especially in
places where he was not known <$$paren> to crave the Charity of the
People as he passed through several good Towns , who understanding that
he came by his misfortune in fighting for the Honour of his Country ,
gave very Liberally , insomuch that he resolved to be of good chear ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,141.13

and thereupon considering with himself that he was never brought up to
Labour , or if he had , <P_142> the Loss of his Sight had rendred him
incapable of business , he resolved to embrace what Providence had cast
in his way : Which was , to live upon Charity , which he found to flow
in upon him faster then he expected : Whereupon arriving at Bednal-Green
, a place near London , he with the little Money he had got , hired a
small Cottage for his Wife and himself , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,142.14

and daily appearing publick to crave Alms , was from thence called the
Beggar of Bednal-Green , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,142.15

and in a short time found it a thriveing Trade , insomuch that his Bed
of Straw was changed into Down , and his Earthen Platters and other
Utensils into a better Sort . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,142.16

His Wife whilst he begged abroad not being idle at home , but Laboured
at the Wheel and such other matters as in her younger years she had
learned . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,142.17

<heading>

CHAP. III PENNY-1686-E3-P2,142.19

How Monford happened to meet with Snap an Old Experienced Beggar , who
gave him an insight into the mistery of the canting Tribe , and how he
invited him to their general Randesvouze , etc. PENNY-1686-E3-P2,142.20

<$$heading>

Monford resolving in this kind of way to spend the remainder of his Days
, that he might humble himself for his former offences , having plyed it
with good success in the place where he lived , by the Road side he was
incountred one day by an Old Proficient at that Trade , who seeing him
Diligent , became greatly desirous of his acquaintance , and to know
what Gang he belonged to , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,142.22

and began to Cant <paren> as is usual amongst such seasoned Sticks of
that Profession <$$paren> of which kind of Speech being known to none
but themselves , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,142.23

Monford being ignorant , could make him no direct answer ; which the
other , whose Name was Snap , perceiving , and thereby knowing him to be
a young beginner , invited him to their Feasts or rendesvouze in
White-Chappel , whither he having promised to come , and they between
them tip'd off four Black Pots of Hum they at that time parted .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,142.24

<P_143>

<heading>

CHAP. IV . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,143.27

How Monford went to the Beggars Feast , and of his Entertainment as also
of the Present they made him , etc. PENNY-1686-E3-P2,143.28

<$$heading>

Monford upon his coming home , declared to his Wife what a merry
Companion he had met with , and what discourse they had , as likewise
what he had promised , entreating her to get things in a readiness ,
that she might be at leasure to conduct him thither , where appeared ,
instead of a ragged Regiment of Lame , Blind , and Dumb , there was a
rout of jovial Dancers , as gay as the Spring , and as merry as the
Maids ; which made them imagine they were either mistaken in the place ,
or had been imposed upon PENNY-1686-E3-P2,143.30

and therefore were about to retire , had not Snap who knew Monford at
first Blush , started from his Chair where he sat Supervizor in all his
Gallantry , and taking him by the hand , let him know who he was , and
afterward presented him to the whole Assembly , who received him as a
Brother or Member of their Society , each <paren> by the order of Snap
<$$paren> paying him a Complement : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,143.31

and that for the future he might not want a Guide on all occasion , Snap
in the name of the rest presented him with a Dog and a Bell trained to
the Business , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,143.32

and had before been the Companion of an Eyeless Beggar deceased ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,143.33

and so having Feasted him and his Spouse in a Splendid manner , they
dismissed him , upon his promise that he would not be wanting at that
yearly meeting ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,143.34

and being dismissed , he trudged home with his tractable Guide , which
ever after proved serviceable to him ... PENNY-1686-E3-P2,143.35

<P_162>

<heading>

<font> The Sack-ful of News . <$$font> PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.38

1685 . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.39

... Another . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.40

<$$heading>

There was an old man that could not well see , who had a fair young Wife
, PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.42

and with them dwelt a young man , which had long wooed his Mistris to
have his pleasure of her , who at last consented to him ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.43

but they knew not how to bring it to pass , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.44

for she did never go abroad , but in her husbands company ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.45

and lead him alwaies . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.46

At last she deviled a very fine shift , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.47

and bid her servant that he should that night about midnight come into
her chamber where her Husband and she lay , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.48

& she would find some device for him . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.49

Night came , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.50

and the old man and wife went to bed , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.51

but she slept not a wink , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.52

but thought still upon her pretended purpose , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.53

but a little before the time prefixed , she awakened her Husband ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.54

& said thus unto him : Sir , I will tell you a thing in secret , which
your servant was purposed to do ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.55

when I am alone I can never be quiet for him , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.56

but he is always inticing me to have me at his will ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.57

and so at the last to be quiet with him , I consented to meet him in the
Garden , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.58

but for mine Honesties sake I will not . Wherefore I pray you put on my
clothes and go meet him : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.59

so when he comes to you , beat him well , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.60

and chide him , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.61

for I know well he will not strike you , because you are his Master ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.62

and then he may amend himself & prove a good servant :
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.63

& the man was well pleased therewith . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.64

So the good man put on his wives Cloaths , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.65

and took a good Cudgel in his hand , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.66

& went into the garden . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.67

At length there came the servant to his mistris , where she lay in bed ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.68

and did what he would with her , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.69

and she was content , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.70

& then she told him how she had sent her Husband into the garden in her
apparel , & wherefore , and to what purpose . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.71

So her servant arose , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.72

and as she bade him , took a good staff with him ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.73

and went into the garden , as though he knew not it was his master ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,162.74

& said unto him : Nay you whore , I did this but only to <P_163> prove
thee whether thou wouldest be false to my good master , and not that I
would do such a vile thing with thee : whereupon he fell upon his Master
, giving him many sore stripes , & beating him most cruelly , still
calling him nothing but , out you Whore , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.75

will you offer this abuse to my good Master : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.76

Alas , <paren> qd. his Master <$$paren> good John , I am thy Master ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.77

strike me nomore I pray thee . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.78

Nay whore <paren> qd. he <$$paren> I know who thou are well enough ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.79

& so he strook him again , beating him most grievously .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.80

Good John <paren> said his Master <$$paren> feel ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.81

I have a Beard , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.82

Then the servant felt <paren> knowing well who it was <$$paren> who
presently kneeled down and cryed his Master mercy .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.83

Now thanks be to God <paren> qd. his Master <$$paren>
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.84

I have as good a servant of thee as a man can have ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.85

and I have as good a Wife as the World affords .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.86

Afterwards the Master went to bed , & his servant also .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.87

When the old man came to bed to his wife ; she demanded of him how he
sped : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.88

He answered PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.89

and said , By my troth Wife , I have the trustiest servant in the world
, & as faithful a Wife ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.90

for my Servant came thither with a great staff PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.91

& did beat me right sore , thinking it had been you , wherefore I was
well pleased therewith . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.92

But ever after the Servant was well beloved of his Master , but better
of his Mistris : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.93

for his Master had no mistrust of him , though he had made him a Cuckold
. PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.94

so the poor man was cruelly beaten , and made Summers Bird nevertheless
... PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.95

<heading>

... Another . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.97

<$$heading>

There was a Priest in the Country which had christened a Child ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.99

and when he had christened it , he & the Clerk were biden to the
drinking that should be there , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.100

and thither they went with other people , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.101

and being there , the Priest drank PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.102

and made so merry , that he was quite foxed , and thought to go home
before he laid him down to sleep ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,163.103

but having gone a little way , he grew so <P_164> drowsie , that he
could go no further , but laid him down by a ditch-side so that his feet
did hang in the water , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.104

& lying on his back , the Moon shined in his face :
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.105

thus he lay till the rest of the company came from drinking , who as
they came home found the Priest lying as aforesaid ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.106

and they thought to get him away , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.107

but do what they could he would no rise , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.108

but said , Do no meddle with me , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.109

for I lye very well , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.110

and will not stir hence before the morning , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.111

but I pray lay some more clothes on my feet , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.112

and blow out the Candle , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.113

and let me lye and take my rest . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.114

<heading>

Another . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.116

<$$heading>

There was once a Country-man , which came to London , where he had never
been before , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.118

and as he went over London bridge , he saw certain Ships sailing , being
the first time he had seen any PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.119

& perceiving the Sails made of cloath , he thought to assay if his
Plough would go so , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.120

and when he came home , he caused his Wife to give him a large new Sheet
, PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.121

and went PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.122

and set it on the Plough like a Sail , thinking the Plough would go with
the Wind , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.123

but it removed not . Which when he saw , he said what the Devil , have
I spoiled my sheet about nothing ? PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.124

so set his Horses to the Plough again ... PENNY-1686-E3-P2,164.125

<P_165>

<heading>

<font> Humphry Frollicksome . <$$font> PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.128

... Sir Humphrys Journey up to London ; And his putting a Trick upon
his Brother ; And how he got himself reconciled again to his Father .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.129

<$$heading>

Sir Humphry having now raised his Fortune to so high a pitch in so short
a time , was inclined to let himself loose to his accustomed Pleasures ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.131

and having heard much of the Fame of London , he had a longing desire to
see that place , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.132

and to satisfie his Curiosity , he takes his Journey that way ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.133

and having eased himself of the burthen of Necessity , he resolved to
travel like a Gentleman , and lay aside all his Politick Contrivances ,
till Poverty should oblige him to make use of them again :
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.134

so up to the City of London he came , well mounted , and his Pockets
lined with the best of Coyn ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.135

his Journey was very prosperous and pleasant , not meeting with any
interruption in all his passage , in which he found a great deal of
satisfaction : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.136

When he had reach'd London , that Famous City , in which his desire was
lodged , he was mightily pleased with the Noble Fabricks and the many
Grandeurs he had not before seen ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.137

and when he had taken up his Lodging and provided himself all things
necessary to his Settlement , he walks about , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.138

and makes what enquiry he could after some that been formerly his
Acquaintance at Oxford , that they might introduce him into a farther
knowledge of the Town , to which he was a perfect stranger :
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.139

He had not made this his business long , but Fortune so favoured him ,
that he met one by meer accident , who had been his intimate Friend and
Acquaintance , who were both mightily surprized , and extremely glad to
see each other ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.140

and after a kind salutation on both sides , they consented to carrouse
one hearty Bottle to their happy meeting , and to laugh at old passages
, in which they had been both concerned ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.141

and in their discourse Sir Humphrys Friend happened <P_165> to inform ,
that his Father and his Brother was in Town , and that he had seen them
not above two days ago ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.142

Sir Humphry replyed , he was very glad to hear it ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.143

and being both intimate together , and sufficiently assured of one
anothers friendship , said , that he would lay hold of the first
opportunity he could , to make himself amends for the Injury his Brother
had done him , in being an Instrument in putting his Father and him at
variance ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.144

and enquired of his Friend where it was he lodg'd , who gave him an
account of every matter requisite for Sir Humphrys purpose ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.145

and when they had laughed and chatted three or four hours , it began to
grow late , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.146

and the Wine had almost turned their Noddles top-side_turvey ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.147

they thought it time to part , and to retire home to their respective
Habitations ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.148

so they pay'd their Reckoning , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.149

and Sir Humphry desired his friend not to take notice to his Father of
his being in Town , who assured he would not ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.150

and when they had appointed where to meet the next time , they took a
kind leave of one another , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.151

and so parted . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.152

And as Sir Humphry <paren> in his Cups being a little more Frollicksome
than ordinary <$$paren> happened to ramble some way by a House that was
new building , where he heard something rustle in the dark Cellar ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.153

and resolved to see what it was , steps in , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.154

and asks , Who@ @'s there ? PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.155

It happened to be a poor Beggar-wench , about Eighteen years of Age ,
who replyed , Nothing <paren> Sir <$$paren> but a poor Girl , who is
forc'd to lye here , for want of a better habitation .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.156

Sir Humphry steps in PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.157

and swore he would bear her company a little , before he went any
further , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.158

and catched hold of the wench , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.159

and fell a tumbling and touzing her , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.160

and askt her how she could make shift to lye in so cold a dwelling ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.161

she told him , she had made her a Bed of Shavings in the next Cellar ,
which was warmer ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.162

and Sir Humphry being desirous to see it , entreated the Wench to
conduct him into her Bed-Chamber , which according to his request she
did , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.163

and down she and Sir Humphry lay together , who began to be very brisk
with her , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,165.164

and she being loth to deny him the Civility of a Female Bed-fellow , but
receiv'd his close embraces as a courteous obligation . When the heat
of Pastime began to be over , and Sir Humphry considering what he had
<P_167> done , resolved to contrive a way to lay this Action as a
Scandal upon his Brother . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.165

By this time the Wench began to lay open her unfortunate Condition , and
to desire some Charity from Sir Humphry , for her Relief , which Request
put him in mind of the Outlandish piece of money he had privately taken
from his Brother , who never knew which way he had lost it , thinking
That would be a good Instrument to make his Father really believe his
Brother to be guilty of the thing which he designed to put upon him ,
which was the chief hopes of Sir Humphry , who told her , he had spent
that day what money he had brought out with him , and had {SIC:had_and}
nothing left but an Outlandish piece of money , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.166

and that he gave her , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.167

and bid her come tomorrow to his Lodging , directing her to the place
where his Father and Brother lay , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.168

and goes himself by his Brothers Name , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.169

and bids her ask for him , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.170

and bid her send up that piece of money , as a Token , by any of the
Servants , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.171

and then he should know her business , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.172

and would send her down half a Piece ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.173

the Wench was mighty thankful , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.174

and said , she would be sure to come : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.175

so Sir Humphry took his leave , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.176

and left her where he found her , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.177

and went home to Bed , hoping this design would work .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.178

The next day the Wench , according to his order , went to the place he
had directed her , expecting it to be Sir Humphrys Lodging , where she
knocks , and asks for Sir Humphry's Brother , expecting him to be the
same man she had before seen ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.179

the Father being in the Entry , wondring what such a draggle-tail'd
wench would have with his Son , goes to her , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.180

and enquires her business ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.181

the wench gives him the Token , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.182

and desires him to give the Gentleman that , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.183

and he would presently know her business : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.184

The Father knowing the piece of Coyn to be his Sons , that was given him
as a Token by his Grandmother , wondered the more how such a Wench came
by it ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.185

so he calls the Girl within the Doors , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.186

and there began to be mighty inquisitive , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.187

and examined her strictly how she came by that piece of money and what
was the business she came to his Son about , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,167.188

and threatned the Girl with hard words into so many fears , that at last
she told him the whole <P_168> circumstance of the matter ; which put
the Old Man into such a lamentable fury , that he coughed himself half
dead with meer passion ; his Son being not within all this time to
vindicate himself before the wenches Face , who got away as soon as she
could , and was glad to escape the old Gentlemans Rage .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,168.189

In this Agony of vexation the Old Man continued , exclaiming against his
Son for a Reprobate-Rascal , who poor Gentleman , knew nothing of the
matter ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,168.190

at last home he came , where he no sooner entred , but the old man met
him with a lusty Cudgel , and fell to belabouring {COM:picture_omitted}
<P_169> him with all the Vigour that fumbling old Age could lay upon him
, crying out , Thou Villain , I@ @'le teach you to have your
draggle-tail'd Sluts come after you for Money , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,169.191

and you must give them Tokens , with a Pox to you ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,169.192

and i@ @'le give you a Token to remember me too before I part with you .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,169.193

The Son cryed out for mercy , denying all his Father accused him with ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,169.194

but nothing could curb the Old mans passion ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,169.195

and when he thought he had bang'd him sufficiently , he turns him out of
doors , not giving him the liberty to speak one word for himself ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,169.196

and vowed he would never see him no more . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,169.197

The poor Gentleman thought the Devil was in his Father , to accuse him
with what he knew nothing of , and to beat him so unmercifully ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,169.198

neither could he imagine what was the meaning of it .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,169.199

Sir Humphry hearing his design had took so effectually , resolved to
take this opportunity of submitting himself to his Father , which he
accordingly did , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,169.200

and by the endeavour of some Friends , got him throughly reconciled to
him , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,169.201

and was placed again in the same splendid Station he had formerly lived
in , leaving his Brother in the same condition that he himself was freed
from . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,169.202

<P_200>

<heading>

<font> The Life and Death of Sheffery ap Morgan . <$$font>
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.205

CHAP. I. PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.206

Of Sheffery's Birth and Education . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.207

<$$heading>

The Person we intend to insist upon in this following Discourse , is one
Sheffery Morgan , who was born near Denby , a place eminently known in
Wales , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.209

His Father being a Man of no small account , kept two or three Hoggs ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.210

and Brewed week for week the Year round , half a peck of Malt ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.211

Her {COM:meaning_'his',_a_common_parody_of_welsh_speech} being a man so
well to pass in the world , resolved to bring up her son Sheffery
Scolar-like ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.212

and in order thereunto put him to the greatest school in those parts ,
where he improved his time so well , that in six or seven Years he was
able to Spell his own Name with a small matter of help .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.213

But not long after , her fond Father supposed her fit for the University
, PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.214

and disposed of her accordingly ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.215

but Jeffry grew negligent , unknown to her Father ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.216

and minded more her Waggish Pastimes than her serious Studdy ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.217

and her Father supposing her to be capable to manage a Parsons place ,
took a Fatherly care of her , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.218

and went to the Bishop of that Diocess , making sute for a Benefice for
her , which was granted , provided that her should preach a Sermon of
Approbation . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.219

Did Shon ap Morgan being joyful of this answer from the Bishop , writ
Post to her Son Sheffry , wishing her with all speed to come ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.220

for her was likely to become a Welsh Parson , and have a Benifice of 40
l. per_annum . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.221

These good Tydings so tickled the Ear of our young Parson , that her
omitted no opportunity , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.222

but took Horse PENNY-1686-E3-P2,200.223

and rid full speed to her Fathers House in Wales , who told her all the
matter <P_201> in hand ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.224

but when her heard that her was to preach before her could have her
money , her knew not what to think on@ @'t . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.225

The day appointed drawing nigh when Sheffery was to Preach , being
sensible of her inability , her knew not what course to take , or how
her should perform her Task imposed upon her ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.226

sometimes her thought to fly from the presence of the Bishop and her
Father both , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.227

and then contradicted that thought with this Resolution , That if he
could not do as well as he should , that he would do as well as he could
. PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.228

So the day being come , Sheffery lay somewhat long a Bed ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.229

and seemed to have small stomach to his new Concern ; which her Father
perceiving , stept up to give her a call , telling her the Saints Bell
had rung in : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.230

O Father , said her , I am in a brown Study , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.231

look Father upon the top of Mr. Quibus his House ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.232

and behold a Cow-Curd that lyes there ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.233

and I have been studying how it might be ; whether the top of the House
came down to the Cow , or whether the Cow went up to the top of the
House ! PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.234

O fie Son , this is idle discourse , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.235

come make hast , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.236

for it draws near ten a Clock , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.237

the Bishop and the people begin to think you long .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.238

Well Father I have but a short Sermon to make , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.239

but it is such a Tickler as has not been Preached at your Church , since
you came to the Parish , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.240

well Son , I shall leave that to your Judgment .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.241

Sheffery no sooner enters the Church , but he steps into the Pulpit ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.242

and begins as followeth . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.243

Good people all , her knows there is something expected from her by way
of Discourse , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.244

and seeing we are all met together , take this following matter as an
undeniable Truth . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.245

There are some Things that I know and you know not ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.246

and there are some Things that you know , and I know not ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.247

and there are some Things that neither I nor you know .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.248

For thus , As I went over a stile I tore my Breeches ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.249

that I know and you know not ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.250

but what you will give me towards the mending of them , that you know ,
and I know not , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.251

but what the Knave the Taylor will have for mending them , that neither
you nor I know . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,201.252

The Bishop hearing such a strange Welsh discourse <P_202> delivered as a
Sermon , fell into such a laughter , that he laughed himself into a
Looseness , that he was forced to carry his Arse under his Arm ever
after ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.253

and Old Shon ap Morgan fell into such a passion , that her solemnly
protested , her would Dis-inherit her Son Sheffery ...
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.254

<heading>

CHAP. III . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.256

How Sheffery being weary of London , and short of Money , took a Journey
toward the North ; and how he got the good Will of a Sow , which prov'd
the first rise of Sheffery's Fortune . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.257

<$$heading>

Sheffery being forsaken of her Countrymen , & allmost mony-less ,
wandred to and fro feasting her Eyes , but starving her Belly , resolved
to travel farther towards the North : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.259

her had not gone above 20 miles , but her was surprized by the dismal
night , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.260

and being unacquainted with the way , lost her self ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.261

and wandred up and down , till at last her hapned upon a small Cottage ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.262

and knocking at the door , her asked how far it might be to the next
Town ? PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.263

the old Man answered : he was far from any Town or House except his :
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.264

them {COM:sic} Sheffery craved for Entertainment for that night ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.265

but the old Man reply'd , he had no convenience ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.266

but her pressed hard for Lodging ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.267

so the old Man said , I have no place for you , except you will lie with
our old Sow , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.268

with all her heart , quoth Sheffery . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.269

This being agreed , on they went to their Bed , and Sheffery to the
Hogg-Stye , which joyned to the House , near the old Man and Womans
Beds-head : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.270

Sheffery having but a sorry Lodging and a turbulent Bed-fellow , took no
rest at all : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.271

the old Man and Woman waking about midnight , fell in discourse ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.272

quoth the old Woman , Husband , what if the young man should fall in
love with our Sow , and forthwith get her good will to be Married ?
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.273

Who , quoth the old Man , should be against her Preferment , if they
like each other ? PENNY-1686-E3-P2,202.274

Ah ! but Husband , <P_203> she hath been a good Old Servant to us ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.275

and if ever she goes , I hope you will bestow something with her :
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.276

Well , well , Wife , I sha@ @n't be backward , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.277

but ten or twenty pound I will bestow if the Man be deserving .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.278

Sheffery minding their Discourse , arose PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.279

and went into a Carrot field near by , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.280

and pull'd some up , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.281

and brought them to the Sow , giving her plentifully to eat ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.282

then tyed the rest about his middle , underneath his Coat :
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.283

& going into the house to return thanks for his nights Lodging , the Sow
having tasted the sweetness of the Carrots , rav'd as though she would
have torn down the stye , longing for more Carrots ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.284

the old Woman hearing the Sow to rave , cry'd out to her Husband , What
is the matter with our Sow ? PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.285

Quoth Sheffery , her can tell best what is the matter ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.286

for her and I have made a match to be Marry'd PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.287

and now she finding me to be gone without her , causeth her to rave in
this sort ? PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.288

The old Woman runs with speed to her Husband , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.289

and said , Cuts hobby Husband , I told you our Sow is in love with the
Young Man . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.290

Ah ! but quoth her , that must be farther try'd ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.291

i@ @'le see first whether she will follow him sooner than another ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.292

and letting her out , she ran directly at him , and taking hold on him ,
as if she loved him above others ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.293

the Old Man seeing this , was much satisfied , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.294

and call'd Sheffery in , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.295

and laid him down 20 pound , wishing them much joy together :
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.296

This being done , Sheffery took her leave of the old people
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.297

and went her way , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.298

by the smell of the Carrots the Sow followed him , which the Old Woman
spying , she cry'd out , Come hither Mistris Bride ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.299

pray stay PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.300

and take my best hat with you , which she did , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.301

and look'd like Mother Shipton with her long nose ...
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,203.302

<P_209>

<heading>

<font> Black Tom . <$$font> PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.305

1686 PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.306

... CHAP. II . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.307

How this Young Tom came to be known , and how he went by the Name of
Black Tom ; and what befell . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.308

<$$heading>

When Tom was grown to be a Man , as lusty and as strong a Thief as his
Father , he told his Father he would now set up for himself ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.310

and when they were both agreed , Tom took his leave in the Evening ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.311

and went for Wapping , where he goes to a House standing nigh to the
Thames : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.312

There he enter'd , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.313

and call'd for a Pot of Ale ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.314

and as he sat drinking his Ale , in the next room were sitting very
merrily over a Bowl of Punch , a Company of jovial Drunken Sea-men ,
which Tom observed to make a noise , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.315

he also falls to singing as well as they . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.316

The Sea-men observing him to be so merry a Fellow , call'd him in
amongst them ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.317

and after he had saluted the Company , and drank a dish of Punch or two
, they ask'd him to sing them a merry Song to pass the time away :
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.318

But he cryed no , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.319

let@ @'s rather drink while we are by land , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.320

for you are always hard employ'd upon the Sea ; which Proposal pleas'd
the Sea-men so well , that they oblieg'd themselves to follow Tom's
example ; who thereupon began so many Healths one after another , that
the Sea-men not being so fresh as he , by degrees fell fast asleep .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.321

Now Tom minding his opportunity , insensibly creeps to their Pockets ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.322

and takes away all the Money they had , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.323

and when he had discharg'd the Reckoning , took his leave of his Hostess
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.324

and went off : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.325

but the Sea-men waking , and missing their Money , began to curse and
swear at the Black Dog most bitterly ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.326

and one of them remembering that his name was Tom , resolved to put him
in the Gazette by the name of Black Tom , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,209.327

but they being almost Drunk , when he came first amongst them , that
they could not remember what sort of <P_210> Cloaths he wore , or
whether his Visage was round or long , or his Body by stature tall or
short . So that one of them coming one day by Charing-Cross , saw a
Black behind a Gentlemans Coach , cryed out very eagerly to the
Coach-man to stop his Horses : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.328

and then eagerly running to the Foot-man behind the Coach , lay'd hold
on him , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.329

and causing a Constable to be call'd , had the poor Man before a Justice
, PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.330

and swore against him , That he was the very Man that Rob'd him at such
a time , and such a place ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.331

But the Youth making it appear that he was not there , but was employed
on some business for his Lady , was clear'd , and the Man look'd upon as
Mad . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.332

<heading>

CHAP. III . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.334

How Black Tom committed a Robbery at St. Katherines , and how he came
off . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.335

<$$heading>

After Tom and the Sea-men had parted , Tom takes a Boat ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.337

and Rows to St. Katherines , where he lay three days before he heard of
any thing fit for his purpose : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.338

At last entring into Discourse with his Landlady , Lord , Landlady ,
<paren> says he <$$paren> I admire some People that are Rich , and but
few in Family , are not afraid to stay out of their Houses , especially
by Night , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.339

so many loitering idle Fellows as lie here about !
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.340

Indeed Sir , says she <$$paren> {COM:no_matching_open_paren} I wonder as
much as you do ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.341

but above all People in St. Katherines , I admire at my next Neighbour
, that hath always good store of Plate , and Coin of Gold and Silver
always by her , that she dares lye alone , or with none but a poor
simple Girl , that is her Servant ; especially having such a weak Old
House , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.342

and by my truly , sometimes they both go out ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.343

and one perhaps has got the Key of the Door , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.344

and the other coming home , wanting the Key , will lift the Door off the
Hinges : Which hath been done so often , that it comes off now without
any noise . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.345

Indeed Landlady , <paren> says Tom <$$paren> 't@ @is a great Miracle to
me , that they escape so well . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,210.346

<P_211>

Now Tom being very glad of this News , after a small meditation what to
do , tells his Landlady , That he was invited out , and should be pretty
late before he could come in that Night , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.348

and therefore desires her not to sit up late for him ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.349

and so departed till toward Night , which time he imployed in viewing
the House , to see how or where he might break in most easily .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.350

At last considering that his Landladys way was the best , he would stay
till Night , and venture at the Door , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.351

therefore he goes to an Ale-house hard by , to spend his time .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.352

But not long after the Watch had passed by , crying the time of the
Night , out goes Tom ; who coming to the Door , and gently renches it
off the Hinges , goes up the Stairs , and finding every body fast
{COM:asleep} , opens a Coffer , in which was a Till or Drawer , from
whence Tom takes an_Hundred pounds , besides Jewels and Rings ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.353

so being very well contented with his prize , was preparing to go off ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.354

but the Watch was passing by , whose custome is to knock at the Doors ,
and if they be open , to call upon the People to shut them ;
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.355

but Tom was got withoutside the Door endeavouring to fasten it again .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.356

Now the Watch-men finding the Door off the Hinges , began to think that
Mr. Thomas had committed a fault , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.357

and therefore took him into examination . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.358

Now Tom told them that it was his own House , and he had some occasion
to go out , and could not find his Key until he had lifted the Door off
the Hinges ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.359

and if they would not believe it was his House , they might come in ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.360

and he would make them drink for their pains . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.361

Now as 't@ @is not the custome of Watch-men to deny drink at any time ,
they entered into the House : PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.362

Now Tom taking down a Mug from the Shelf , and going to the Door ,
praying them not to make any noise , under pretension of going to fetch
drink , ran quite away . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.363

Now the Constable having a Drunken Man that was scarce able to go with
him , commanded one of the Watch-men to stay there with him , until Mr.
Black Thomas should come in , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.364

and because the poor Man look'd like a Gentleman , should beg Mr. Black
Thomas to lend him a Bed , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.365

so the Constable and part of the Watch departed .
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.366

Now Mr. Black Thomas not returning , the Gentleman that was o'recome
with drink fell fast asleep , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,211.367

and <P_212> likewise the Watch-man being in the dark , and no body left
to talk to , fell fast asleep also ; PENNY-1686-E3-P2,212.368

and slept soundly until the Morning , that the woman of the House
finding her Coffer open , and her Money gone , came happily down , and
caused them to be seized , as Men guilty of Burglary and Robbery ,
PENNY-1686-E3-P2,212.369

and had them before the Justice , PENNY-1686-E3-P2,212.370

and he had committed them , had not the Constable and Watch come and
cleared them . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,212.371

Thus Black Tom came off . PENNY-1686-E3-P2,212.372

