<BEGIN_pepys-1667-e3-p2>

<P_8,320>

And it is pretty that G Holmes did tell his fellows , and these boys
swore it , that he did set fire to a box of linen in the Sheriffs , Sir
{COM:preceding_word_"Sir"_emended} Joseph
{COM:preceding_word_"Joseph"_emended} Shelden's , house while he was
attending the fire in Aldersgate-street , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.3

and the Sheriffe himself said {COM:preceding_word_"said"_emended} that
there was a fire in his house , in a box of linen , at the same time ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.4

but can@ @not conceive how this fellow should do it .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.5

The boys did swear against one of them , that he had made it his part to
pull out the plug out of the engine while it was a-playing ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.6

and it really was so . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.7

And goods they did carry away , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.8

and the manner of the setting the house on fire was that Holmes did get
to a Cockepitt <paren> where it seems there was a public cockpit
<$$paren> and set fire to the straw in it , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.9

and hath a fire-ball at the end of the straw which did take fire ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.10

and so it prevailed PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.11

and burned the house ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.12

and among other things they carried away , he took six of the cocks that
were at the cockpit , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.13

and afterward the boys told us how they had one dressed ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.14

by the same token , it was so hard they could not eat it .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.15

But that which was most remarkable was the impudence of this Holmes ,
who hath been arraigned often and got still away ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.16

and on this business was taken , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.17

and broke loose just at Newgate gate PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.18

and was last night luckily taken about Bow ; who got loose and run into
the River and hid himself in the Rushes , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.19

and they pursued him with a dog , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.20

and the dog got him PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.21

and held him till he was taken ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,320.22

but the impudence of this fellow was such , that he denied he ever saw
the boys before , or ever knew the Russia-house , or <P_8,321> that the
people knew him ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,321.23

and by and by the mistress of the Russia-house was called in , being
indicted at the same time about another thing ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,321.24

and she denied that the fellow was of her acquaintance ; when it was
pretty to see how the little boys did presently fall upon her , and ask
her how she durst say so , when she was always with them when they met
at her house , and perticularly when she came in in her smock before a
dozen of them - at which the court laughed and put the woman away .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,321.25

Well , this fellow Holmes was found guilty of the act of burning the
house , and other things that he stood indicted for ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,321.26

and then there were other good cases , as of a woman that came to serve
a gentlewoman , and in three days run away , betimes in the morning ,
with a great deal of plate and rings and other good things .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,321.27

It was time very well spent to be here . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,321.28

Here I saw how favourable the judge was
{COM:preceding_word_"was"_emended} to a young gentleman that struck one
of the officers for not making him room ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,321.29

told him he had endangered the loss of his hand , but that he hoped he
had not struck him , and would suppose that he had not struck him .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,321.30

About noon {COM:preceding_word_"noon"_emended} the court rose ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,321.31

and I to dinner with my Lord Mayor and Sheriffs - where a good dinner
and good discourse , the Judge being there . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,321.32

There was also tried this morning Fielding <paren> which I thought had
been Bazill , but it proved the other , and Bazill was killed <$$paren>
that killed his brother ; who was found guilty of murther ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,321.33

and nobody pitied him . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,321.34

The Judge seems to be a worthy man and able , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,321.35

and doth entend of these rogues that burned this house , to be hung in
some conspicuous place in the town , for an example .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,321.36

After dinner to the court again , where I hear some more causes , but
with so much trouble because of the hot weather , that I had no pleasure
in it . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,321.37

Anon the court rose PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,321.38

and I walked to Fleetstreete for my <P_8,322> belt at the Beltmakers ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.39

and so home and to the office , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.40

wrote some letters , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.41

and then home to supper and to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.42

5 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.43

Up PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.44

and to the office , where Sir W. Batten , W. Penn , T. Harvy and I
met upon Mr. Gawden's accounts , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.45

and was at it all the morning . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.46

This morning Sir G. Carteret did come to us PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.47

and walked in the garden ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.48

it was to talk with me about something of my Lord Sandwiche@ @s ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.49

but here he told us that the great Seale is passed to my Lord Anglesy
for Treasurer of the Navy , so that now he doth no more belong to us -
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.50

and I confess , for his sake I am glad of it - PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.51

and do believe the other will have little content in it .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.52

At noon I home to dinner with my wife ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.53

and after dinner to sing , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.54

and then to the office a little and Sir W. Batten's , where I am vexed
to hear that Nan Wright , now Mrs. Marckham , Sir W. Penn's maid and
whore , is come to sit in our pew at church , and did so while my Lady
Batten was there - PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.55

I confess I am very much vexed at it and ashamed .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.56

By and by out with W. Penn to White-hall , where I stayed not ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.57

but to the New Exchange to buy gloves and other little errands ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.58

and so home and to my office , busy till night ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.59

and then walked in the garden with my wife , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.60

and then to supper and to sing , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.61

and so to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.62

No news , but that the Dutch are gone clear from Harwich Northward and
have given out they are going to Yarmouth . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.63

6 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.64

Up PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.65

and to the office , where some of us sat busy all the morning .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.66

At noon home to dinner , whither Creed came to dine with us and brings
the first word I hear of the news of a peace , the King having letters
come to him this noon , signifying that it is concluded on and that Mr.
Coventry is upon his way , coming over for the King's ratification .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,322.67

The news was so good and sudden , that I went with great joy to W.
Batten and then to <P_8,323> W. Penn to tell it them ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.68

and so home to dinner , mighty merry and light at my heart only on this
ground , that a continuing of the war must undo us , and so , though
peace may do the like , if we do not make good use of it to reform
ourselfs and get up money , yet there is an opportunity for us to save
ourselfs - PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.69

at least , for my own perticular , we shall continue well till I can get
my money into my hands , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.70

and then I will shift for myself . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.71

After dinner away , leaving Creed there , by coach to Westminster ,
where to the Swan and drank ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.72

and then to the Hall PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.73

and there talked a little , with great joy of the peace ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.74

and then to Mrs. Martins , where I met with the good news que esta no
es con child she {COM:preceding_word_"she"_emended} having
{COM:preceding_word_"having"_emended} de
{COM:preceding_word_"de"_emended} estos
{COM:preceding_word_"estos"_emended} upon
{COM:preceding_word_"upon"_emended} her
{COM:preceding_word_"her"_emended} - the fear of which , which she did
give me the other day , had troubled me much .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.75

My joy in this made me send for wine , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.76

and thither came her sister PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.77

and Mrs. Cragg and I stayed a good while there .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.78

But here happened the best instance of a woman's falseness in the world
; that her sister Doll , who went for a bottle of wine , did come home
all blubbering and swearing against one Captain Vandena , a Dutchman of
the Rhenish wine-house , that pulled her into a stable by the Dog tavern
and there did tumble her and toss her ; calling him all the rogues and
toads in the world , when she knows that ella hath suffered me to
{COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended} do {COM:preceding_word_"do"_emended}
anything {COM:preceding_word_"anything"_emended} with
{COM:preceding_word_"with"_emended} her
{COM:preceding_word_"her"_emended} a_hundred times .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.79

Thence with joyful heart to White-hall to ask Mr. Williamson the news ;
who told me that Mr. Coventry is coming over with a project of a peace
; which , if the States agree to and our King , when their ministers on
both sides have showed it them , we shall agree ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.80

and that is all ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.81

but the King I hear doth give it out plain that the peace is concluded .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.82

Thence by coach home PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.83

and there wrote a few letters ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.84

and then to consult with my wife about going to Epsum tomorrow ,
sometimes designing to go and then again not ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.85

and at last it grew late PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.86

and I bethought myself of business to imploy me at home tomorrow ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.87

and so I did not go . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.88

This afternoon I met with Mr. Rolt , who tells me that he is going
Cornett under Collonell Ingoldsby , being his old acquaintance ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.89

and Ingoldsby hath a troop now from under the King ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,323.90

and I <P_8,324> think it is a handsome way for him .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.91

But it was an ominous thing me@ @thought , just as he was bidding me his
last Adieu , his nose fell a-bleeding , which run in my mind a pretty
while after . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.92

This afternoon Sir Alex. Frazier , who was of counsel for Sir Jo.
Minnes and had given him over for a dead man , said to me at White-hall
: " What , " says he , " Sir Jo. Minnes is dead . "
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.93

I told him no , but that there is hopes of his life .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.94

Me@ @thought he looked very sillily after it , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.95

and went his way . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.96

Late home to supper , a little troubled at my not going to Epsum
tomorrow as I had resolved , especially having the Duke of York and W.
Coventry out of town ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.97

but it was my own fault , and at last my judgment to stay ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.98

and so after supper , to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.99

<paren> This day , with great satisfaction I hear that my Lady Jemimah
is brought to bed at Hinchingbrooke of a boy . <$$paren>
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.100

7 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.101

<font> Lords day . <$$font> PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.102

Up ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.103

and to my chamber , there to settle some papers ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.104

and thither comes Mr. Moore to me PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.105

and talked till church-time of the news of the times about the peace ,
and the bad consequences of it if it be not improved to good purpose of
fitting ourselfs for another war . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.106

He tells me he hears that the discontented Parliament-men are fearful
that the next sitting the King will put for a general Excize , by which
to raise him money , and then to fling off the Parliament , and raise a
land-army and keep them all down like slaves ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.107

and it is gotten among them that Bab. May , the Privy-purse , hath been
heard to say that 300 <font> l <$$font> a year is enough for any country
gentleman ; which makes them mad , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.108

and they do talk of 6 or 800000 gone into the privy-purse this war ,
when in King James's time it arose but to 5000 <font> l <$$font> and in
King Charles's but 10000 <font> l <$$font> in a year .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,324.109

He tells me that a goldsmith in town told him , that being with some
plate with my Lady Castlemaine lately , she directed her woman <paren>
the great <P_8,325> beauty <$$paren> , " Willson , " says she , " make a
note for this and for that to the Privy-purse for money . "
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.110

He tells me a little more of the basenesse of the courses taken at Court
in the case of Mr. Moyer , who is at liberty and is to give 500 <font>
l <$$font> for his liberty ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.111

but now the great ones are divided
{COM:preceding_word_"divided"_emended} who shall have the money , the
Duke of Albemarle on one hand , and another Lord on the other ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.112

and that it is fain to be decided by having the person's name put into
the King's warrant for his liberty , at whose intercession the King
shall own that he is set at liberty ; which is a most lamentable thing ,
that we do professedly own that we do these things , not for right and
justice sake , but only to gratify this or that person about the King
{COM:preceding_word_"King"_emended} . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.113

God forgive us all . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.114

Busy till noon PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.115

and then home to dinner PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.116

and Mr. Moore come PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.117

and dined with us , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.118

and much more discourse at and after dinner of the same kind ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.119

and then he gone , I to my office , busy till the evening ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.120

and then with my wife and Jane over to Half-way house ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.121

a very good walk , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.122

and there drank ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.123

and in the cool of the evening back again , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.124

and sang with pleasure upon the water PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.125

and were mightily pleased in hearing a boat full of spaniards sing ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.126

and so home to supper and to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.127

Jane of late mighty fine , by reason of a laced whiske her mistress hath
given her , which makes her a very gracefull servant .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.128

But above all , my wife and I were the most surprized in the beauty of a
plain girle which we met in the little lane going from Redriffe-stairs
into the fields , one of the prettiest faces that we think we ever saw
in our lives . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.129

8 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.130

Up PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.131

and to my chamber ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.132

and by and by comes Greeting , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.133

and to my flagelette with him with a pretty deal of pleasure ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.134

and then to the office , where W. Batten , W. Penn and I met about
putting men to work for the weighing of the ships in the River sunk .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.135

Then home again PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.136

and there heard Mr. Caesar play some very good things on the lute ,
together with myself on the viall and Greeting on the viallin .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,325.137

Then with my wife abroad by <P_8,326> coach , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.138

she to her tailor's , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.139

I to Westminster to Burges about my Tanger business ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.140

and thence to White-hall , where I spoke with Sir John Nicholas , who
tells me that Mr. Coventry is come from Bredah as was expected ; but
contrary to expectation , brings with him two or three Articles which do
not please the King - as , to retrench the Act of Navigation , and then
to ascertaine what are contraband goods . And then , that those exiled
persons who are or shall take refuge in their country may be secure from
any further prosecution . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.141

Whether these will be enough to break the peace upon or no , he can@
@not tell ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.142

but I perceive the certainty of peace is blown over .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.143

So called on my wife PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.144

and met Creed by the way , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.145

and they two and I to Charing-cross , there to see the great Boy and
Girle that are lately come out of Ireland ; the latter , eight
{COM:years_old} , the former but four years old ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.146

of most prodigious bigness for their age . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.147

I tried to weigh them in my arms , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.148

and find them twice as heavy as people almost twice their age ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.149

and yet I am apt to believe they are very young - their father a little
sorry fellow , and their mother an old Irish woman .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.150

They have had four children of this bigness and four of ordinary growth
, whereof two of each are dead . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.151

If <paren> as my Lord Ormond certifies <$$paren> it be true that they
are no older , it is very monstrous . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.152

So home and to dinner with my wife , and to pipe .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.153

And then I to the office , where busy all the afternoon till the evening
; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.154

and then with my wife by coach abroad to Bow and Stratford , it being so
dusty weather , that there was little pleasure in it ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.155

and so home and to walk in the garden , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.156

and thither comes Pelling to us to talk ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.157

and so in PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.158

and to supper , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.159

and then to bed - all the world being , as I hear , very much damped
that their hopes of peace is become uncertain again .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,326.160

<P_8,327>

9 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.162

Up pretty betimes PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.163

and to the office , where busy till office time ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.164

and then we sat , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.165

but nothing to do but receive clamours about money .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.166

This day my Lord Anglesy , our new Treasurer , came the first time to
the Board , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.167

and there sat with us till noon ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.168

and I do perceive he is a very notable man and understanding , and will
do things regular and understand them himself , not trust Fenn as Sir G.
Carteret did , and will solicit soundly for money ; which I do fear was
Sir G. Carteret's fault , that he did not do that enough , considering
the age we live in , that nothing will do but by solicitation - though
never so good for the King or Kingdom ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.169

and a bad business well solicited shall for peace sake speed , when a
good one shall not . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.170

But I do confess I do think it a very bold act of him to take upon him
the place of Treasurer of the Navy at this time ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.171

but when I consider that a regular accountant never ought to fear
anything , nor have reason , I then do cease to wonder .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.172

At noon home to dinner and to play on the flagelette with my wife ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.173

and then to the office , where very busy , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.174

close at my office till late at night ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.175

at night walked and sang with my wife in the garden ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.176

and so home to supper and to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.177

This evening news comes for certain that the Dutch are with their fleet
before Dover , and that it is expected they will attempt something there
. PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.178

The business of the peace is quite dashed again , so as now it is
doubtful whether the King will condescend to what the Dutch demand , it
being so near the Parliament , it being a thing that will , it may be ,
recommend him to them when they shall find that the not having of a
peace lies on his side , by denying some of their demands .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.179

This morning Captain Clerke <paren> Robin Clerke <$$paren> was at the
table , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.180

now commands the <font> Monmouth <$$font> PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,327.181

and did when the enemy passed the Chain at Chatham the other day , who
said publicly at the table that he did admire at the order when it was
brought him , for sinking of the <font> Monmouth <$$font> <paren> to the
endangering of the ship and spoiling of all her provisions <$$paren>
when her number of men were upon her , that he could have carried her up
the River whither he <P_8,328> pleased and have been a guard to the rest
, and could have sunk her at any time . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.182

He did carry some 100 barrels of powder out of the ship , to save it ,
after the order came for the sinking her . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.183

He knew no reason at all , he declares , that could lead them to order
the sinking her , nor the rest of the great ships that were sunk ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.184

but above all , admires they would burn them on shore and sink them
there , when it had been better to have sunk them long way in the middle
of the River , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.185

for then they could not have burned them so low as now they did .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.186

10 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.187

Up , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.188

and to the office betimes ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.189

and there all the morning very busy , causing papers to be entered and
sorted , to put the office in order against the Parliament .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.190

At noon home to dinner PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.191

and then to the office again , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.192

close all the afternoon , upon {COM:preceding_word_"upon"_emended} the
same occasion , with great pleasure till late ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.193

and then with my wife and Mercer in the garden
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.194

and sung ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.195

and then home PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.196

and sung , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.197

and to supper with great content , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.198

and so to bed . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.199

The Duke of York is come back last night from Harwich ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.200

but what {COM:preceding_word_"what"_emended} news he brings I know not -
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.201

nor hear anything today from Dover whether the enemy have made any
attempt there , as was expected . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.202

This day our girle Mary , whom Payne helped us to , to be under his
daughter when that she came to be our cookmaid , did go away , declaring
that she must be where she might earn something one day , and spend it
and play away the next - PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.203

but a good civil wench , and one neither wife {COM:sic} nor I did ever
give angry word to ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.204

but she hath this silly vanity that she must play .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.205

11 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.206

Up betimes PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.207

and to my office , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.208

and there busy till the office <paren> which was only Sir T. Harvy and
myself <$$paren> met ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.209

and did little business PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.210

and then broke up . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.211

He tells me that the Council last night did sit close , to determine of
the King's answer about the peace ; and that though he doth not
certainly know , yet by all discourse yesterday , he doth believe it is
peace ; and that the King had said it should be peace and had bidden
Alderman Backewell to declare upon the Change .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.212

It is high time for us to have peace , that the King and Council may get
up their credits and have time to do it , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,328.213

for that endeed {COM:sic} is the bottom of all our <P_8,329> misery ,
that nobody hath any so good opinion of the King and his Council and
their advice , as to lend money , or venture their persons or estates or
pains upon people that they know can@ @not thrive with all that we can
do , but either by their corruption or negligence must be undone .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.214

This endeed {COM:sic} is the very bottom of every man's thought , and
the certain ground that we must be ruined , unless the King change his
course , or the Parliament come and alter it .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.215

At noon dined alone with my wife . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.216

All the afternoon close at the office , very hard at gathering papers
and putting things in order against the Parliament ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.217

and at night home with my wife to supper , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.218

and then to bed , in hopes to have all things in my office in good
condition in a little time for anybody to examine , which I am sure none
else will . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.219

12 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.220

Up betimes PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.221

and to my chamber , there doing business ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.222

and by and by comes Greeting , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.223

and begun a new month with him , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.224

and now to learn to set anything from the notes upon the flagelette ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.225

but Lord , to see how like a fool he goes about to give me direction
would make a man mad . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.226

I out , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.227

and by coach to White-hall and to the Treasury-chamber , where did a
little business ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.228

and thence to the Exchequer to Burges about Tanger business ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.229

and so back again , stepping into the Hall a little ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.230

and then homeward by coach PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.231

and met at White-hall with Sir H. Cholmly ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.232

and so into his coach , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.233

and he with me to the Excise Office , there to do a little business also
- in the way , he telling me that undoubtedly the peace is concluded ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.234

for he did stand yesterday where he did hear part of the discourse at
the Council-table , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.235

and there did hear the King argue for it ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.236

among other things , that the spirits of the seamen were down , and the
forces of our enemies are grown too great and many for us , and he would
not have his subjects overpressed , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,329.237

for he knew an Englishman would do as much as any man upon hopeful terms
, <P_8,330> but where he sees he is overpressed , he despairs as soon as
any other ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.238

and besides that , they have already such a load of dejection already
upon them , that they will not be in temper a good while again .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.239

He heard my Lord Chancellor say to the King , " Sir , " says he , " the
whole world doth complain publicly of treachery , that things have been
managed falsely by some of his {COM:sic} great ministers ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.240

Sir , " says he , " I am for your Majesty's falling into a speedy
enquiry into the truth of it , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.241

and where you meet with it , punish it - PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.242

but at the same time , consider what you have to do ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.243

and make use of your time for having a peace ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.244

for more money will not be given without much trouble ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.245

nor is it I fear to be had of the people , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.246

nor will a little do it , to put us into condition of doing our business
. " PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.247

But the other day Sir H. Cholmly tells me , he did say the other day at
his table - " Treachery ? " says he , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.248

" I could wish we could prove there was anything of that in it ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.249

for that would imply some wit and thoughtfulness ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.250

but we are ruined merely by folly and neglect . "
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.251

And so Sir H. Cholmly tells me they did all argue for peace ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.252

and so he doth believe that the King hath agreed to the three points Mr.
Coventry brought over , which I have mentioned before , and is gone with
them back . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.253

He tells me further , that the Duke of Buckingham was before the Council
the other day , and there did carry it very submissively and pleasingly
to the King ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.254

but to my Lord Arlington , who doth prosecute the business , he was most
bitter and sharp , and very slighting . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.255

As to the letter about his imploying a man to cast the King's nativity ,
says he to the King , " Sir , " says he , this is none of my hand ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.256

and I refer it to your Majesty whether you do not know this hand . "
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.257

The King answered that it was endeed none of his , and that he knew
whose it was , but could not recall it presently -
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,330.258

" Why , " says he , " it is my sister of Richmonds , some frolic or
other of hers of some <P_8,331> certain person ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,331.259

and there is nothing of the King's name in it ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,331.260

but it is only said to be his by supposition , as is said . "
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,331.261

The King , it seems , seemed not very displeased with what the Duke had
said ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,331.262

but however , he is still in the Tower , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,331.263

and no discourse of his being out in haste - though my Lady Castlemayne
hath so far solicited for him , that the King and she are quite fallen
out ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,331.264

he comes not to her PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,331.265

nor hath for some three or four days , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,331.266

and parted with very foul words , the King calling her a whore , and a
jade that meddled with things she had nothing to do withal . And she
calling him fool ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,331.267

and told him , if he was not a fool , he would not suffer his businesses
to be carried by fellows that did not understand them , and cause his
best subjects , and those best able to serve him , to be imprisoned ,
meaning the Duke of Buckingham ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,331.268

and it seems she was not only for his liberty , but to be restored to
all his places ; which it is thought he will never be .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,331.269

While we were at the Excise office talking with Mr. Ball , it was
computed that the Parliament had given the King , for this war only ,
besides all prizes and besides the 200000 <font> l <$$font> which he was
to spend of his own revenue to guard the sea , above five millions and
odd 100000 l's {COM:l_in_italics} ; which is a most prodigious sum .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,331.270

Sir H. Cholmly , as a true English gentleman , doth decry the King's
expenses of his privy-purse ; which in King James's time did not rise to
above 5000 <font> l <$$font> a year and in King Charles's to 10000
<font> l <$$font> , do now cost us above 100000 <font> l <$$font> -
besides the great charge of the Monarchy ; as , the Duke of York 100000
<font> l <$$font> of it , and other limbs of the Royall <P_8,332> family
, and the guards , which for his part , says he , " I would have all
disbanded ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,332.271

for the King is not the better by them PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,332.272

and would be as safe without them , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,332.273

for we have had no rebellions to make him fear anything . "
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,332.274

But contrarily , he is now raising of a land-army , which this
Parliament and Kingdom will never bear ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,332.275

besides , the commanders they put over them are such as will never be
able to raise or command them . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,332.276

But the design is , and the Duke of York he says is hot for it , to have
a land army , and so to make the government like that of France ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,332.277

but our princes have not brains , or at least care and forecast enough ,
to do that . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,332.278

It is strange how he and everybody doth nowadays reflect upon Oliver and
commend him , so brave things he did and made all the neighbour princes
fear him ; while here a prince , come in with all the love and prayers
and good liking of his people , and have given greater signs of loyallty
and willingness to serve him with their estates then ever was done by
any people , hath lost all so soon , that it is a miracle what way a man
could devise to lose so much in so little time .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,332.279

Thence he set me down at my Lord <P_8,333> Crew@ @'s
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.280

and away , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.281

and I up to my Lord , where Sir Tho. Crew was ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.282

and by and by comes Mr. Caesar , who teaches my Lady's page upon the
Lute , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.283

and here Mr. Caesar did play some very fine things endeed , to my great
liking . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.284

Here was my Lord Hinchingbrooke also , newly come from Hinchingbrooke ,
where all well ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.285

but me@ @thinks , I knowing in what case he stands for money , by his
demands to me and the report Mr. Moore gives of the management of the
family , makes me , God forgive me , to contemn him , though I do really
honour and pity them ; though they deserve it not , that have so good an
estate and will live beyond it . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.286

To dinner , and very good discourse with my Lord ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.287

and after dinner , Sir Tho. Crew and I alone ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.288

and he tells me how I am mightily in esteem with the Parliament , there
being harangues made in the House to the Speaker of Mr. Pepys's
readiness and civility to show them everything ; which I am at this time
very glad of . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.289

He tells me the news of the King and my Lady Castlemaine which I have
wrote already this day - and the design of the Parliament to look into
things very well before they give any more money ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.290

and I pray God they may . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.291

Thence after dinner to St. James's , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.292

but missed Sir W. Coventry ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.293

and so home PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.294

and there find my wife in a dogged humour for my not dining at home ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.295

and I did give her a pull by the nose and some ill words , which she
provoked me to by something she spoke , that we fell extraordinarily out
; insomuch , that I going to the office to avoid further anger , she
fallowed me in a devilish manner thither , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.296

and with much ado I got her into the garden out of hearing , to prevent
shame ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.297

and so home , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.298

and by degrees I found it necessary to calme her ,
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.299

and did ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.300

and then to the office , where pretty late , and then to walk with her
in the garden , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.301

and so to supper PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.302

and pretty good friends ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.303

and so to bed - with my mind very quiet . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.304

13 . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.305

Up pretty betimes , it being mighty hot weather and I lying this night
<paren> which I have not done I believe since a boy ; I am sure not
since before I had the stone before <$$paren> with only a rugg and a
sheet upon me . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.306

To my chamber , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.307

and my wife up to do something PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.308

and by chance we fell out again ; PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,333.309

but I to the <P_8,334> office , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,334.310

and there we did at the board much business , though the most was the
dividing of 5000 <font> l <$$font> <paren> which the Lords-Comissioners
have with great difficulty found upon our letter to them this week that
would have required 50000 <font> l <$$font> <$$paren> among a great many
occasions . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,334.311

After rising , my Lord Anglesy , this being the second time of his being
with us , did take me aside PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,334.312

and asked me where I lived , because he would be glad to have some
discourse with me . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,334.313

This I liked well enough , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,334.314

and told him I would wait upon him , which I will do ;
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,334.315

and so all broke up , PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,334.316

and I home to dinner , where Mr. Pierce dined with us ; who tells us
what troubles me , that my Lord Buckhurst hath got Nell away from the
King's House , lies with her , and gives her 100 <font> l <$$font> a
year , so as she hath sent her parts to the House and will act no more .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,334.317

And yesterday Sir Tho. Crew told me that Lacy lies a-dying of the pox ,
and yet hath his whore by him ; whom he will have to look on , he says ,
though he can do no more ; nor would receive any ghostly advice from a
Bishop , an old acquaintance of his that went to see him .
PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,334.318

He says there is a strangeness between the King and my Lady Castlemayne
, as I was told yesterday . PEPYS-1667-E3-P2,8,334.319

