<BEGIN_perrott-1598-e2-p2>

<P_74>

My very good Lord , <font> I were much to be condemned , if <paren>
whatsoever Busines I had <$$paren> I would leave your honorable Letters
unanswered , thincking my self much beholding to you for the writing of
such as I have receved , assuring you , that I have sent unto you two
severall Letters before this Time , which if they were not trewly
delivered , beshrew the Hertes of the Carriers .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,74.3

Your Lordshipp shall never have Occasion to thincke Unkindnes in me ,
but that I will be as redie to honor you , as any who wisheth you best ,
after Troble , Toyling , some Hazard , running up and down after
<$$font> Kernes <font> <paren> with as ill Legges as your Lordshipp hath
. <$$paren> PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,74.4

And being let with most of the fine Heades of this Land <paren> as well
<$$font> English <font> as <$$font> Irish <font> <$$paren> to bring that
to pass which I was sent hither for , PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,74.5

I have now , I thancke God , in the Eand , compassed that , in bringing
her Majesties Subjectes here to Obedience , as I trust her Highnes may
stand satisfied therewith ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,74.6

for I know not any <$$font> Kerne <font> abroad at this present Hower ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,74.7

neither neede any man feare to Travell thorow any Part of this Province
<P_75> without Weapon or Assurance . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,75.8

The idell Sort fall as fast unto the Plow , as they were wont to runne
unto Mischief . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,75.9

I can say noe more , PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,75.10

but whatsoever it shall please the Queene's Majestie to command here ,
it shall be done . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,75.11

I understand that the Erle of <font> Essex <$$font> , with a great Rout
, intendeth the Conquest of the North , PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,75.12

for her Majesties Service , I wish hym good Successe ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,75.13

but for hymself , I care not what cometh thereof ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,75.14

for he and his Frendes have sought as much to discredit me in my Absence
, as in them lay . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,75.15

But I thank the Queene's Majestie they were not beleved ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,75.16

neither was there any Cause . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,75.17

If they lie on me , chide for your poor Brother , &c.
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,75.18

From <$$font> Corke , <font> PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,75.19

this xiiiith of <$$font> July , 1573 . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,75.20

<font> Subscribed , <$$font> Your Lordship's poore Brother , and assured
to command , John Perrott . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,75.21

<P_76>

This Letter sheweth unto what Subjection and Tranquilitie the Lord
President had reduced that Province , and how he was hindred by his
Enemies <paren> altho' they were the Queene's Subjectes <$$paren> to do
her Majestie Service . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,76.23

Also it is manifest hereby , what Complaynts were made in <font> England
<$$font> against hym in his Absence , PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,76.24

for there did never want those which would be ready to sett forwards ,
and to further his Adversarys in artickling and petitioning against hym
to the Queene and Counsell , whereof he complayn'd to this honourable
Erle that loved hym so deerely that he did always call hym <font>
Brother <$$font> , and would be redie styll to answer for hym in his
Absence . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,76.25

At that very Time , the Lord President wrote the lyke Letter unto the
Erle of <font> Sussex <$$font> , somewhat of the same Subject , first
acknowledging , That he had receved a Letter from the Erle of <font>
Sussex <$$font> , who thereby seemed glad that the Lord President had
purged hymself , touching that he was charged with , about a <font>
Marsigllian <$$font> Shipp that came into <font> Mounster <$$font> .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,76.26

<P_77>

And so lykewise the Erle wished that he might unburden hymself of the
rest , for which the Lord President did thanck his Lordship , as one
whom he knew did wish hym well for old Acquaintance ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,77.28

and told hym in these Termes : Truly , my Lord , there is noe Man that
hath been more wronged than your Lordship , touchinge your <font> Irish
<$$font> Service , whereby I think you may the better <paren> untill
Proffe be had <$$paren> excuse any one that serveth here , who is ill
reported of . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,77.29

He said also , That for his own Part , sithence almost xlv Years had
passed hym , he were worse than madd , if either Pelfe should cause , or
light Toy move hym to do that which should passe the Boundes of Reason
or Honestie . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,77.30

And further , he telleth the Erle of <font> Sussex <$$font> , That your
Lordship hath knowen me , I am sure , these xxvi Yeres at the least ,
during which Time you never knew me do any dishonest Deede ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,77.31

perhapps some willfullnes you may remember that I have committed ,
whereof your Lordship hath seen part your selfe .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,77.32

I ask of my Frends no more but one Thinge , <P_78> <font> Never to love
me , if any ill Thinge can be layd to my Charge before or synce my
coming into <$$font> Ierland , <font> can be proved true . <$$font>
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,78.33

Whatsoever I have done , I am able to answer the doeing thereof , either
by Commission or Reason . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,78.34

And touching the Lord President's Service , and the State of that
Contrie , he informs the Erle of <font> Sussex <$$font> by that Letter ,
That he had staied in <font> Mounster <$$font> but only one_Hundred
<font> English <$$font> Footemen , whom he ceased and placed in several
Townes of that Province , in such Sort as theyr Aboad there was neither
chargeable greatly unto hir Majesty nor hir Subjects , upon whom they
were placed . Which whensoever there should be any neede of them , he
could spare them , and would be able lend a_Thowsand Men when Occasion
should requier <paren> so as they might be victualed <$$paren> and yet
would reserve besyds , at the least , five or six_Thowsand able Men to
serve the Queene's Majestie there . Wherein his Service was
sufficiently shewed , into what Peace and good State he had brought that
Province . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,78.35

And also it is no less manifest by this Declaration , and by the former
Letter , how <P_79> much the Lord President was molested with the
Complayntes and Calumniations of his Adversaries ; that it should seem
he was as much trobled , and had in a Manner as much to do with
answering the Articles and Objections of his private Adversaries , as to
withstand the Assaults and Alarumes of the publick Enimies of State .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,79.36

For it is surer , that by his Service there he had procured more Enimies
than by any other Meanes , PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,79.37

such was his Severitie and playne Dealing with all Men , and especially
with Offenders , without respect of Persons . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,79.38

And that may be seene by another Example , of an Accident which fell out
in the Time of his Government there , which was thus :
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,79.39

There was some Question made of certayne Liberties which the Erle of
<font> Ormond <$$font> claimed to belong unto his Signiories ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,79.40

and one of the Priveleges so chalenged , was , That no Man should be
brought to take his Triall out of those Liberties or Lordships , for any
Offence committed within the Precinctes thereof , but that they should
be only tried before the Erles Officers . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,79.41

Then it came soe to passe , that certayne Offences <P_80> were done
within those Liberties , and the Offendors could not be found or brought
forth : PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,80.42

Therefore the Lord President sent unto the Erle's Officers , either to
bring the Parties punishable before him , or else to send the Sheriffe
of that Countie unto hym : Which they in some Sorte refused to doe ,
excusing theyr Refusal , by pleading the Erle's Patentt or Graunt of
their alleadged Liberties and Privileges . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,80.43

But the President tooke it in ill Part , PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,80.44

and wrote a sharpe Letter unto the Erle's Officers <paren> as the Lord
of <font> Donborne <$$font> , Sir <font> Edmond Butler <$$font> , Knight
, <font> John Talbot , Richard Sheeth <$$font> , and <font> James Tobyes
<$$font> , Sheriffe of the Countie of <font> Typperary <$$font> <paren>
the Erle hymself beinge then in <font> England <$$font> <$$paren>
wherein he did sharpely reprend them , much marvelling at the
Inconstancie of some of them , which not longe synce complained of the
Partialitie , that the Ministers of that Liberty exercised ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,80.45

and of the rest he marvelled much moer , that being learned and wise ,
would bringe the Liberties into dispute , by making of undue Excuses .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,80.46

He further argued , That if they of the Libertie were answerable <P_81>
upon the Command of the Lord Deputie <paren> as he trusted they would
not stand to Defence of the contrary <$$paren> then were they by the
same Authoritie answerable before the State of Presidencie , which had
the lyke Jurisdiction over them . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,81.47

Also he signified that there were exempted fower Causes out of the Erle
of <font> Ormond@ @s <$$font> Patentt , which was reserved to the Crowne
<paren> and which the State of Presidencie had Power to determyn
<$$paren> because it were not convenient to expresse the Causes , or to
name the Places unto them where the Offences were committed :
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,81.48

He did assure them that he had not byn yet of Mynd to make any Question
of the Erle of <font> Ormond@ @s <$$font> Liberties ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,81.49

neither would he hereafter , unlesse by standing in unreasonable Thinges
they forced hym thereto . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,81.50

For the Erle of <font> Ormond <$$font> was his very Frend , and one whom
he entirely loved , which yet in case of Justice he was not to respect .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,81.51

And howsoever they seem'd to let the Apparance of them in that Liberty ,
yet the Erle <paren> as the President affirmed <$$paren> commaunded at
his Departure , That any should be sent whom the President <P_82> would
call for . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,82.52

Lykewise the President told them , That in the End he should be found a
better Frend to the Erle of <font> Ormond <$$font> , then any that by
standing in unreasonable Matters would call his Liberties into Question
; and he had as yet borne but too much with the Abuses committed within
that Libertie , in punishing of which he had not seene Earnestness in
them ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,82.53

neither did he promise but that now and then , as Occasion should serve
, he would use Martial Law within that Libertie ; and if he were hindred
by theyr dilatory Excuses , from the Administration of Justice <paren>
as by their Means occasioned so to do <$$paren> he must call the other
Partes of the Liberties to Triall . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,82.54

And so he required them , and in hir Majestie's Name eftsones commanded
them to send the Sheriffe of that Countie <paren> and the Persons for
whom he sent unto them before <$$paren> by the xiiiith Day of that
Moneth . Which Letter bears Date at <font> Limbrick <$$font> , the 2d
of <font> March <$$font> 1572 . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,82.55

<P_83>

This , and the like plain Dealing , purchased the Lord President much
Evill-Will , whereby there were heaped on him divers causeles
Complayntes <paren> as he thought <$$paren> prosecuted with such
Vehemencie , and sometimes shadowed with such Probabilitie and
countenanced by greate Men in such Sorte , that in Parte they were
beleved ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,83.57

and he being not at hand to answer his Adversaries Objections , had now
and then some sharpe Letters sent unto hym out of <font> England
<$$font> , wherefore the President did determyne to come into <font>
England <$$font> , with Intente to cleare hymselfe of such Complaynts as
were preferr'd against hym ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,83.58

and tho' he had not Licence so to doe , yet knowing that he left the
Contrie in good Quietnes , and the People peaceable , he did presume and
hope , that his sodayn Departure from that Service would be the better
excused , because he left the Contrie in quiett , and no Enemie of the
State to take Advantage of his Absence . Which Adventure in hym <paren>
although it succeeded well with hym <$$paren> is noe suer or safe
Presisident {TEXT:Presisident} for other Presidents or Governors <P_84>
to follow , because we see , that sithence that Time some others have
felte the Smart for cominge from theyr Charge without Commaund or
Licence . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,84.59

And it is a certayne Rule , that those Rulers which being placed by
theyr Prince in any great Commaund of People , or of Trust , doe leave
theyr Charge without Commission or Authoritie from their Soveraigne , or
such as may give Libertie so to doe , thereby do subject themselves to
theyr Prince's Displeasure , the Danger of the Lawes , and the Envie of
their Evil-Willers about the Prince , whose Persuasions of Contempt of
Danger , and of exemplary Punishment , may in this Case much prevayle
with the Prince , and bringe the Partie so offending into much Perill .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,84.60

Yet the Lord President , with this Resolution , setting Things in Order
for the present Government of <font> Mounster <$$font> , and making up
his Accompts , departeth thence about the begynning of <font> March
<$$font> 1573 , PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,84.61

and so shortly arived in <font> England <$$font> ; where we must now
salute hym by his first and proper Name of Sir <font> John Perrott
<$$font> , having hitherto given hym that Title which did belong to his
<P_85> Office . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,85.62

When Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> came first to the Court of <font>
England <$$font> , it was thought that the Queene would have byn highly
offended at his coming over without Licence , and that she would have
shewed some Signes of hir Indignation towards hym , which some of his
back Frends went about to procure to incense the Queene , and to
aggravate Matters agaynst hym . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,85.63

Yet as soon as Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> came to speach with the
Queene , and had related unto hir the State of the Contrie , the
Particulers of his Service , and the Cause of his cominge over , with
Answer unto such Objections as had byn made agaynst hym in his Absence :
Her Majestie <paren> contrary to the Expectations of many <$$paren> did
allow of his Doings , PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,85.64

and commended his Indevours . Insoemuch , that hir Highness would have
him to returne speedily , doubtinge that in his Absence , some
Disquietnes or civill Disention might arise . To the which Sir <font>
John Perrott <$$font> answered , That for the generall State of the
Province , it was soe well settled , as noe new Alteration on the
sodayne neede to be doubted . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,85.65

But yet there were divers Particulers <P_86> sumwhat amisse , which
might be amended without any great Difficulty .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,86.66

And for the present , he thought there some Defects , both in
establishinge the State of Presidencie , and the Allowance fitt for his
Place ; as for other Services incident to the same , which being allow'd
by hir Highness , he was readye to serve hir there whensoever it should
please hir to appoynte hym . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,86.67

And that the same might be the better understood , he presented a Plott
unto the Queen to be consider'd by hir Majestie , and hir Privy Counsell
, which was in these Words . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,86.68

{COM:material_omitted,_p._86_to_p._98}

<P_98>

Besydes this Project propounded by Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> for
the Government of <font> Monster <$$font> ; he layd downe therewith the
Valew of the severall Coynes , both of Silver and base Moneys , at that
present current in <font> Ireland <$$font> , to be reduced into a baser
Coyne : All which Moneys , both of Silver and of baser Mettall <paren>
wherein also some Silver was conteyned <$$paren> at that present soe
confusedly running in that Realme ; He would have by hir Majesties
Commandment called in , and brought unto the Dealers of the Mynt to be
erected at <font> Lymbrick <$$font> ; and in liew of the same , a base
Money of a_i d. ii d. iii d. to be coyned , either of half the
Goodnes of the sayd Silver Moneys or lesse , as best <P_99> should lyke
hir Highnes : Thereby assuring hymselfe , that great Advantage would
accrew towards the Accomplishment of the foresayd Service .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,99.71

And for all other Sorts of Coyne either of Silver or Gold , both <font>
English , French <$$font> , or <font> Spanish <$$font> , the same to
passe as it did before . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,99.72

The Names of the sayd Coynes , which he would have soe called in and
coverted , were these . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,99.73

{COM:material_omitted,_p._99_to_p._101}

<P_101>

The Alteration of these Coynes , the Callinge of them in , and the
causing other Coyne of lesse Valew to be current , Sir <font> John
Perrott <$$font> helde as a good Helpe for the Accomplishing of all the
other forenamed Services and Purposes ; which conteyned divers Poyntes
in one Plott . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,101.76

As for the planting of Religion in that Province , being the surest
Knott to the Heartes of the Subjects in the Bands of Fayth and Loyaltie
unto theyr Prince : <P_102> For the due administring of Justice unto all
Men , according to the Lawes of <font> England <$$font> : For the
keeping of the People in Peace , and the answering of hir Majesties
Rents and Revenues more assuredly : For the setting hir Lands at more
Certaynty : For the dividing of that Province into Shiers and Signiories
: The buylding of certayne Fortes and Castells , some to bridle the
Rebells , and some for the State of Presidency : For the cuttinge downe
of Woods , which were then Harbors of , and Fortresses unto Theeves ,
Rebells , and Outlawes : And the buyldinge of Shippes out of the sayd
Woods for the Queenes Service . All which Services as we see Sir <font>
John Perrott <$$font> set down a Course to accomplish without any great
Charge to hir Majestie , Burden or Troble to hir Subjects . Which Plott
he first presented to the Queene , PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,102.77

and the same to be considered of by the Lords of hir Privy Counsell .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,102.78

The Queene lyked well of the Plott , PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,102.79

and soe did some of hir Counsell ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,102.80

but some others myslyked it , more because it was his Doeing , and his
Desier , then for any Defect that they founde <P_103> therin :
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,103.81

Yet they seemed to shew some Reasons of the Inconveniences of some of
those Poyntes ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,103.82

and soe the same was hindred . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,103.83

The Queene , notwithstanding , would have had Sir <font> John Perrott
<$$font> to goe over as President agayn ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,103.84

but he perceiving his Course to be crossed , and fearing least in his
Absence the Complayntes of his Adversaries might prevayle <paren> wherof
he had former Experience <$$paren> did then excuse the Undertaking of
that Service , by his Disabilitie of Body , <paren> being touched with
that Country Disease , and one of his Legges much payned with Colde
which he had taken in his Winter Services <$$paren> :
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,103.85

And therfor prayed that he might be licenced to repayer into the Country
for the Recovery of his Health ; which being graunted , after Leave
taken of the Queene , he departed home to his Howse .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,103.86

At Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> his coming into the Country he
continewed there for a Time , as well in settling Courses for his
private State , as in caringe and travelling <P_104> for the publick
State of the Contrie ; wherin he bare Authority , being one of the
Counsell of the Marches <paren> besyds his other Offices in the Country
<$$paren> . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,104.87

And soe he tooke Truce for a Season with his Travells ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,104.88

yet soe as he was seldom free from Ill-willers , and such as did oppose
themselves agaynst hym , as much as they might , which were divers
Gentlemen of the better Sorte in that Contry wherin he dwelt ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,104.89

and they , to strengthen themselves the more agaynst hym , drew in
<font> Walter <$$font> Erle of <font> Essex <$$font> to be theyr Back ,
because some of them depended on hym , who had a Howse called <font>
Lamfey <$$font> in <font> Pembrockshiere <$$font> , where he sometimes
resyded , neere Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> 's Castell of <font>
Carew <$$font> . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,104.90

What past betwixt hym and them in privat Quarells and in publicke
Contentions I over-passe , PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,104.91

and will not troble the Reader therewith ; partly because Sir <font>
John Parrott <$$font> 's Carriage therin is well known to all that
Countrie , where it is fresh in the Memory of many yet livinge ; and
partely for that this Erle of <font> Essex <$$font> was a worthy
Nobleman , wise , bountiful and affable <paren> whose Daughter
afterwards was married <P_105> unto Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> 's
eldest Sonne Sir <font> Thomas Perrott <$$font> Knight <$$paren> ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,105.92

therefore to advance the Prayse of the one , or to diminish the Honor of
the other <paren> they being both dead <$$paren> might sounde and savor
either of Vanitie , Partiallitie or Malice : PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,105.93

Besyds that the Recital of privat Quarrells , Duellions , or Contentions
, is not so proffitable for the Reader , or Praise-worthy in the Writer
. PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,105.94

Only this much may be alledged <paren> as an Annotation not Impertinent
in this matter , and for other mens Instructions , <$$paren> That as
there were at that Time some , which <paren> by bringinge of false
Reports , and doeinge of evill Offices betwixt the Erle of <font> Essex
<$$font> and Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> <$$paren> sought to
incence and sette them farther asunder , then otherwise they would have
byn ; soe is it usual that , in most Places , Personages of best
Quallitie and Reputation are devided in Love , and sometimes seperated
from all mutuall Societie <paren> if not driven into Discord and
Disention , <$$paren> by such as , <paren> to serve theyr owne Turnes ,
<$$paren> are allway soe apte to nourishe Contention betwixt Men of best
Callinge and Condition ; wherof if the better <P_106> Sort be not wise
inoughe to take Heede , they can hardly eschew the Harme .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,106.95

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_2}

<P_120.4>

Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> departing into the Contrey lefte <font>
Wyriott <$$font> in Prison , by Order of the Privey Counsell , that he
should not be released from thence , but to remayne Prisoner untill that
he should finde sufficient Suerties to enter into 200 l. Bands , and
hymselfe to be bound in 500 l. to answer Sir <font> John Perrott
<$$font> in an Action of the Case . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,120.4.98

Yet Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> was noe sooner gon into the
Countrey , but within short Time <font> Wyriott <$$font> found such
Frends , <paren> not soe much for his owne Sake , as for the evill
Affection which they bare unto Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font>
<$$paren> that they did not only procure <font> Wyriott's <$$font>
Inlargment , <paren> without entring into Bonds as was ordered <$$paren>
but allso Letters were written from some of the Privey Counsell unto the
Justice of the Assisse , in that Cyrcuite wherin Sir <font> John
Perrott's <$$font> Leving lay ; to take the Examination and Triall of
such Proffes as should be produced , either by <P_121> Sir <font> John
Perrott <$$font> agaynst <font> Wyriott <$$font> , or by <font> Wyriott
<$$font> agaynst hym , touching such Artickles as should be tendered
unto them . Wheras , in truth , Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> had
not objected any thing agaynst hym at all , but only answered his
Objections befor the Privey Counsell . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,121.99

When the Judges of that Cyrcuite had receved this Letter from the Privey
Counsell , they wrote unto Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> , lyinge
sick then at his Castell of <font> Carew <$$font> of a sweating Sicknes
, <paren> which was then common in that Country <$$paren> signifying
unto hym the Effect of the Letter receved from theyr Lordships , and
requiring his Repayer unto <font> Haverfordwest <$$font> , where the
Sessions were then holden . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,121.100

As soone as Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> was certified therof , he
perposed to performe what they required , although it might be
perchaunce with the Perill of his Life ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,121.101

and soe he came to <font> Haverfordwest <$$font> : Where <font> Wyriott
<$$font> attended the Justices , and had procured from them Precepts to
bringe in all such Persons , as he supposed would prove the Poyntes
objected by him . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,121.102

<P_122>

The Artickles he exhibited were abouts {COM:sic} LXX ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,122.104

and the Witnesses , he had convented , were about that Number .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,122.105

When Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> perused the Artickles , he told
the Judges it was a strange Course , <paren> and as he thought never
used before <$$paren> that a Man's whole Life should be ripped up
without any Action or Forme of Law ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,122.106

but <paren> quoth he <$$paren> here are many Matters suggested agaynst
me , PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,122.107

and yet if one of theise Artickles can be proved , I will confesse all
the Rest to be trew . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,122.108

Then they fell to examyn the Particulers , PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,122.109

and in fine found that <font> Wyriott <$$font> was not able to make due
Prooffe , and to justifie any Part of his Accusations , or bitter
Exclamations : PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,122.110

Soe Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> was cleared ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,122.111

and his Adversarie departed with Shame . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,122.112

Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> , having thus purged and acquited
hymselfe , was yet much greved that his whole Life shou'd be called in
Question , without any Cause as he conceved .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,122.113

And therefor <P_123> presuming on his owne Innocencie , and the Queenes
Majesties Indifferency , he wrote Letters , as well to the Queene and to
the Privey Counsell , as to some speciall Noblemen of the Counsell ,
whom he honored , and of whom he was beloved , grevously complayning of
the hard Measure which he had receved ; that his Life should be from his
Cradell soe rypped up upon mere Suggestion and Slaunder .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,123.114

The Tenor of Sir <font> John Perrott's <$$font> Letter to the Queenes
Majestie was this , PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,123.115

<font> May it please your most Excellent Majestie to graunte me Pardon ,
in that I presume upon your Gracious Goodnes , sekinge noe other Meanes
, <paren> because I serve your Majestie only and follow noe other
<$$paren> to defend me from Injuries or to helpe me unto Good , but only
from your sacred Handes . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,123.116

Whilst I served your Highnes in <$$font> Ireland , <font> and sithence ,
there were fower or five severall Persons animated by some , my
Contraries , unjustly to exclayme , as well unto your Majestie as unto
my Lords of your Privey Counsell , <P_124> agaynst me with Intent to
bringe me to Discredite : Whose Lordshipes <paren> upon the hearing of
apparent Wronges they offered me <$$paren> committed them all unto the
Prison of the <$$font> Marshialsey ; <font> where I lefte one <$$font>
Wyriott , <font> being one of them , in Prison , when your Highnes
lisenced me last <paren> after I had served upon the Seaes {COM:sic}
<$$paren> to repaier into the Contrie : Who by some indirect and
unusuall Meanes , without Byll or Artickle offered agaynst me , or
Calling me to answer , gatt a Letter thence unto the Justices of Assise
of theise three Shiers , <paren> where I have some small Levinge
<$$paren> as well to receve the Complayntes which I should deliver
agaynst <$$font> Wyriott , <$$font> as that which he should exhibite
agaynst me ; where in troth I never complayned unto my Lords of the
Counsell , or to any other Person agaynst hym . Soe that it should
appere , <paren> wherof I ame sorie to writt <$$paren> the Intent was to
sifte me of whatsoever I had don since I was first borne : A Course
<paren> as I take it <$$paren> never used to any Gentleman , or other
Person hertofore , or convenient to be don henceforward .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,124.117

And although thereby I have receved greate Discredit , <paren> and soe
<P_125> unabled in my Contrey <$$paren> by the publick Examyninge and
Reexamyninge of the Justices in theyr severall Cyrcuites this Sommer ,
<paren> upon that Letter , and Artickles grounded therupon <$$paren> to
serve your Majestie as I desired : Yet I am assured , there neither is ,
hath , or can be proved one whitt , that can touch me with disorderly
Levinge here , or doinge Wrong to any particular Person :
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,125.118

Protesting unto your Majestie , that by my owne Experience I finde there
is not soe great Greif , <paren> that soe neerely toucheth the Mynd of
Man , <$$paren> as to be mistrusted , and therupon to be generally
sifted . And seeing I can@ @not be proved guyltie of any Crime , and
that I remayne here repayring my selfe to serve your Highnes , when and
howsoever it shall please you to commaund me ; I trust your Majestie
will cause it to be examyned , wherfore and by whom such unusuall
Letters were sent out , with Intent to doe me Harme .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,125.119

And soe with all Humblenes , referring the Consideration of the
Premisses to your most gratious Pleasure ; I agayne crave Pardon for the
Length of this Letter , praying unto God to send your <P_126> Majestie
all abondant Felicitie , longe and prosperous Raigne over us , and
continual Victory over your Enimies . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,126.120

This playne Letter Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> wrote , presenting
his Complaynt unto the Queenes Majestie , who accepted it in good Part ;
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,126.121

and gave Order unto the Erle of <font> Lecester <$$font> that he should
make Inquirie touching the Wronges offered unto Sir <font> John Perrott
<$$font> , and that he learning it out , should certifie hir Highnes
whoe were the Authors and Workers of the same . Soe that Sir <font>
John Perrott <$$font> thought hymselfe reasonable well righted , and his
Mynd sumwhat eased , when once the Queenes Majestie had receved his
Complaynts and promised hym Redresse . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,126.122

But withall he wrote unto the Lords of the Councell , and to other his
honorable Frendes , touching the hard Course used towards hym :
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,126.123

And in one of his Letters unto the Lord President of <font> Wales
<$$font> , <paren> who sent unto hym to know how he had been handled
<$$paren> he writeth thus : PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,126.124

<P_127>

My very good Lord , I <font> Have receved your Letter of the sixth of
this <$$font> November , <font> whereby I understand the greate Care
your Lordshipe hath to know how Thinges procedeth in Court with me ,
touching the hard Measure offered unto me this last Somer . For the
which I yeld your Lordshipe due Thankes . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,127.126

And although I were the Man that was first shott at by such an unwonted
and extraordinary Course , yet perhappes there was a Meaninge to reach
farther , PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,127.127

but God will not permitt the Envious to doe more then he is pleased to
suffer . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,127.128

And seeing that I ame knowen above , not to have don any Offence in the
Contrey <paren> and thereby tried to be trew Silver by the Touche
<$$paren> since I was first rocked in my Cradell ; I have not spared
<paren> as farre as became me <$$paren> to write both unto hir Majestie
, and to my Lords of the Counsell , of the Manner of this Misuse , and
dangerous new invented Course agaynst me , that allwayes ment hir
Highnes and my Contrey all faythfull Service . From the which , whilst
I leve , there shall noe Whip of Despite drive me .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,127.129

And touching such <P_128> Letters as I receved from my Lord of <font>
Leicester <$$font> , Mr. Secretary <$$font> Walsingham <font> , and my
Sonne , of that Matter ; I have sent your Lordshipes theyr Copies here
inclosed , by the which it may appere that hir Majestie is offended with
the sower Course used agaynst me , and allso meaneth to wad farther in
seeking to understand the Cause , &c. PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,128.130

I am Yours to command <$$font> J. Perrott . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,128.131

By which Letters we may behold Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> his
Innocencie , the Bitternes of his open Enimies , and the Support they
receved from his secret Adversaries ; who yet regarded them not , though
they sate in high Places of Authority . PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,128.132

And as for <font> Wyriott <$$font> , <paren> who still persisted in his
malicious Purposes <$$paren> Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> caused hym
to be arrested upon an Action of the Case , for the Artickles which he
had exhibited , PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,128.133

and recovered thereupon a_1000 <font> l. <$$font> Damages ; <P_129> for
which he was committed to Prison in <font> Haverfordwest <$$font> ,
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,129.134

and there did remayne in Durance , being so willfully bent , that he
would never confesse his Faulte , or crave Favour at Sir <font> John
Perrott <$$font> 's Handes , which if he would have don , he might have
byn released ; PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,129.135

but Sir <font> John Perrott <$$font> percevinge his Obstinacy , suffered
hym to be a Punisher of himself , and to pay for that in Body which
otherwise he could not satisfie ; having sought to take away the good
Name and to blemish the Reputation of a Man of his Worth .
PERROTT-1598-E2-P2,129.136

