<BEGIN_pettit2-1627-e2-p2>

<P_25>

<heading:edcomment:XIX_VALENTINE_PETTIT_THE_YOUNGER_TO_MRS._HANNA_PETTIT>

London PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,25.4

this vijth of March An=o= 1625 PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,25.5

Kynde Sister , My love salutes both yourselfe and likewes the reste of
our good frends , etc. PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,25.6

At Gabrell Richards beinge heere , I receaved a payer of gloves of him
as a token from you , for the which I kyndely thank yow .
PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,25.7

I likewis receaued a letter the last weeke from my cousin Oxenden ,
wherin hee wroate for as much of the beste black damaske as would make
you a Goune , kyrtle and wascote , the which I have sente doune by
Gybbson , the foote post of Canterbury , and withall wild him to leave
it with my Brother Paule for to be conueyed unto you ,
PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,25.8

and herewith halfe a pounde of black Naples silke , the which coste xv@
@s . PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,25.9

I have sent of the damaske seventeene yeards , the price whereof is
xiij@ @s viii@ @d per yeard . PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,25.10

As for the monye that they come unto , send it at your layseure .
PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,25.11

I have likewies sent with these thinges a smale token of my love , the
which I would entreate you to exsept of . PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,25.12

Thus with the Remembraunce of my Beste wishes I conclude , leavinge of
yow to the Tuission of Th@ @almighty , Your euer loveinge Brother to the
utmoste of his pouer Valen: Pettit PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,25.13

<P_39>

<heading:edcomment:XXX_VALENTINE_PETTIT_THE_YOUNGER_TO_RICHARD_OXINDEN>

London PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,39.16

this IX=th= of June 1628 PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,39.17

Couzin , I Receaved your letter in a letter of my brother Paule@ @s ,
wherein hee gave me order for the paymente of XX@ @=li= unto Mr. Newman
for you ; PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,39.18

presentely after the receipte of your letter I met with Mr. Newman in
Fish Streete , unto whome {COM:preceding_word_"whome"_emended} <P_40> I
remembred your love PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,40.19

and told him that I had order to pay him his money , the which I tolld
him I would bringe him in the afternoone or the next morninge .
PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,40.20

I wente in the afternoone to speake with my couzin Richard ,
PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,40.21

but his Master beeinge in the shopp I could not have soe much Conference
with him <paren> I meane with my couzin <$$paren> as I intended . Soe
that the nexte morninge I wente thither agayne .
PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,40.22

Mr. Newman beinge buisie above stayers with a Customer , I had som
speech with his prentesses and afterwards with my cousin Richard , after
which discourse , thoughe I helde oute parte of the money , yet I put it
up agayne , and spake unto my cousin to speake unto his fellowes not to
let ther Master know that I brought the money .
PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,40.23

I must needes say that , both by my Cousin Richard@ @'s words and also
by his fellowes , I perceve that the Master is much alterd since hee
hath beene marryed . PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,40.24

For they all say that , through her dyssuadinge him , hee is brought to
such a pass that hee will beate them for any smale occasion , the which
I can@ @not approve of , PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,40.25

and if I had knowne that hee would have provd soe It should have been
farre from mee from wishinge of your sonn unto him ;
PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,40.26

there is a greate many have beene deseaved in him besides myselfe ,
PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,40.27

I mean in Mr. Newman . PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,40.28

I have much wondred that your sonn spake noe thinge of this usadge when
you bounde him , nor unto mee , PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,40.29

for I have divers times since questioned with him ,
PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,40.30

but hee alwayes telld mee that hee liked his Master well but his Mistris
was somthinge a strange kynde of wooman . Where upon I thoughte with
myselfe , in regard if hee liketh well of his Master the matter is not
greate , PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,40.31

for moste of London mistrisses ar strange kynde of woomen .
PETTIT2-1627-E2-P2,40.32

