<BEGIN_proposals-1677-e3-p2>

<P_146>

<heading:edcomment:CXXIV>

<heading>

Proposals and Considerations Humbly Offered to Your Ma=tie= for Your
Service in Ireland . PROPOSALS-1677-E3-P2,146.5

<$$heading>

That yo=r= Mat=ie's= Revenue in that Kingdom may in the first place be
applyed to bring the payments upon the Establishment within the Compasse
of the certain Revenue , y=t= so all who are upon the Establishment may
constantly receive what shall be due to them at the time appointed for
their payment . PROPOSALS-1677-E3-P2,146.7

The facility of doing this seems at this time to be very apparent by the
Calculations of the Charge and Revenue made by the L=d= Lieu=t= , the
Lord Ranelagh , and others , which do bring the income and issues to
such a Ballance , that in a short time <paren> if the Revenue shall be
reserved to that use <$$paren> all y=e= arreares of the Military list
and pentions incurred since y=e= end of y=e= Lord Ranelagh@ @'s contract
will be pay'd . PROPOSALS-1677-E3-P2,146.8

Till this be done and whilst y=e= Army is in arreare , It will be hard
to keep y=e= officers to their duty or so in their Garrisons as will be
necessary for y=e= well disciplining and Exercising of their troops and
Companies PROPOSALS-1677-E3-P2,146.9

for they will still have y=e= pretence of soliciting for their pay to
excuse their absence PROPOSALS-1677-E3-P2,146.10

and y=e= com~on soldier will be forcd <paren> as heretofore they have
been <$$paren> to look for worke too far from their <P_147> garrisons
for their subsistance ; PROPOSALS-1677-E3-P2,147.11

But it will be more difficult till they are fully and constantly pay=d=
to remove troops and Companyes from one garrison to another w=ch= ought
frequently to be done to prevent all the corruptions they may contract
by their long continuance in one place which may extend further and to
more dangerous inconveniences <paren> especially in some places
<$$paren> then those of making false Musters and taking unfitt persons
to fill up their Rolls . PROPOSALS-1677-E3-P2,147.12

And if there shall be any occasion to draw any considera=ble= part of
the Army into a body , without first discharging their old quarters and
fitting themselves for y=e= Expedition , they will be followed with the
Clam=rs= of those who have trusted them for their support in their old
quarters PROPOSALS-1677-E3-P2,147.13

and that clam=r= reaching as farre as to the new , they will there find
no credit , or find it upon so hard terms that all their year's pay may
not answer what may be exacted from them in six months .
PROPOSALS-1677-E3-P2,147.14

So shall they always be in want , Discouragement and Disorder , and
neither y=e= souldiers nor y=e= country satisfyed with the Government
because it will be well known to both that y=e= Revenue is capable of
doing more then discharging y=e= Establishment
PROPOSALS-1677-E3-P2,147.15

and what advantage all men may make of such opportunities and so
generall an ill temper is humbly submitted to yor Mat=ties=
consideration . PROPOSALS-1677-E3-P2,147.16

