<BEGIN_rcecil-1596-e2-p2>

<P_270>

<heading:edcomment:CIX>

M=r= Edmondes . Yo=w= shall vnderstand that Mons=r= Lominy hath had his
audience , and for y=e= reasonnes contained in her ma=tes= Letters to
yo=w= is very lyke to haue the aunswere w=ch= is contained in y=e= same
; RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,270.4

But hereof her ma=tie= would haue y=e= king informed by yo=w= , and at
full length to y=e= end he maie know the iust reasonnes of the same :
RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,270.5

for as it is not a denyall but a suspence , so I assure yo=w= in pryvate
that this mans choler , and manaces , hath made it y=e= worse for ye=
present . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,270.6

But forasmuch as her Ma=tie= , {COM:sic} heareth , that y=e= king when
he knowes y=e= substance of letters not to satisfie him , will not haue
y=e= patience to heare the wholle Circumstance , and because it may be
that this man will Report y=e= worst , her ma=tie= commendeth it to
yo=r= dexteritie and discretion to vse y=e= matter so as to gett accesse
to y=e= king before he arryve , and to put into ffrench this letter ,
whereof yo=w= may iustly say you haue the English originall , and to
shewe it him and desire him to reade it , as well as shee did his last
whole letter at length to La Fontaine of y=e= xii {COM:date?} of Sept:
from Lyons , to w=ch= this is an aunswere , <P_271> w=ch= was delyvered
her even y=e= same day that L'omynie arrived . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.7

And because it is here reported , that his Secretaries only reade his
letters , and that he hath but y=e= substance giuen him of yea , or noe
; yo=w= shal doe y=e= Queene good service if yo=w= handle it so finelie
as that it may be all readd by himself and in tyme :
RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.8

for tomorrowe L'omynie hath his dispatche , RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.9

and wil@ @be gonne Post , RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.10

but I hope this man wil over_ryde him . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.11

Yo=w= must conceale y=e= effect of yo=r= letter till yo=w= may speake
w=th= y=e= king , and say that yo=w= haue heard L'omynie is sicke , or
some such thing to make him greedie to speake w=th= yo=w= first .
RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.12

I can@ @not send yo=w= y=e= letter w=ch= y=e= king wrytt to La ffontain
, RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.13

but theise are y=e= heddes in this Paper inclosed .
RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.14

I haue represented to y=e= Q. the extremities yo=w= are in ,
RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.15

and I hope yo=ur= returne will nowe approache , RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.16

for y=e= Q. will send an Ambassado=r= to y=e= kinge ,
RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.17

and so I commytt yo=w= to God . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.18

ffrom y=e= Cort at Nonesuch RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.19

y=e= viij=th= of October 1595. RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.20

Yo=r= Loving friend Ro: Cecyll . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.21

{COM:endorsed}

8=th= October 1595 RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.23

ffrom S=r= Robert Cecyll by John Symmons . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.24

To my Loving friend M=r= Edmondes . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,271.25

{COM:enclosed_memorandum_omitted}

<P_279>

<heading:edcomment:CXII>

M=r= Edmondes . Her ma=tie= having vnderstood very latelie that Mons=r=
Lominye , laie long at y=e= seaside , did cause enquirie to be made ,
what might be y=e= occasion : whervppon she hath vnderstoode that he was
staied , partlie by contrarie windes , and also for want of a shipp to
wafte him over : RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,279.29

And therfore her ma=tie= suspecting by y=e= mannor of his sower and
sullen carriag here , That he wil@ @be as apt , to make y=e= worste of
all thinges there , hath nowe Comanded me expresslie to assure yo=w= ,
That whatsoever impedyment he did find besides the aduerse wyndes , was
merely w=th=out her ma=ties= knowledge , or any sett purpose , of any of
her mynisters . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,279.30

Yo=w= shall therfore vnderstand . That vppon y=e= departure of S=r= Ha:
Palmer w=th= dyverse of her ma=ties= shippes to y=e= westwardes , that
small remaine left in y=e= narrowe seas of shippes and Pynnaces was
commanded to attend y=e= wafting of her ma=ties= merchantes shippes to
myddleburghe , and other places , more precisely then vusually they did
. W=ch= order was nowe y=e= rather taken for that my lo: Admirall hath
ben informed That his men that were Cap=ens= of y=e= shippes did make
their pryvate gaine of wafting over almost
{COM:preceding_word_"almost"_emended} every com~on Passenger ; so as it
may well be , that because {COM:preceding_word_"because"_emended}
Mons=r= Lomynie at his comming to Rye , had not some letter from my l.
Adm=rll= of dyreccon~ to any of y=e= Cap=ens= there : for w=ch= my L.
Adm=rll= assures her may=tie= that Mons=r= L'omynie never voutsafed so
much as to send to him to demaunde it , that he might be denyed to be
receaved : RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,279.31

for otherwise her ma=tie= would haue yo=w= make it knowen , That shee
holdes to great a Respect to y=e= ffr. king , and knowes to well what
belonges to her owne honor to haue denyed a publyke ministers {COM:sic}
such a favour . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,279.32

And therefore her ma=tie= Req=ts= yo=w= , even w=th= great dexteritie
and discreccon~ , both to anticipat and aunswere such reportes contryved
by him or any other , of any ill Treatem=t= vsed towardes him , wherin
yo=w= may add , That her ma=tie= hath bestowed to many offices of
kyndnes vppon y=e= king nowe to darken or shaddowe y=e= same , w=th= any
such trifling accident . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,279.33

This being all I haue for y=e= present fytt to wryte vnto yo=w= , I will
here make an end , having labored as much to my small power for the
Reliefe of yo=r= particuler , as any friend yo=w= haue , whereof I haue
good Testimony , RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,279.34

<P_280>

and I doe hope vppon y=e= comming over of some Embassado=rs= of her
ma=tie= that yo=w= shall find contentment . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,280.36

And thus I commytt yo=w= to God . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,280.37

ffrom y=e= Cort at Richemond RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,280.38

y=e= xiiij of No: 1595. RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,280.39

Yo=r= loving friend Ro: Cecyll . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,280.40

{COM:endorsed}

14=th= November 1595 RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,280.42

ffrom S=r= Robert Cecyll . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,280.43

To my very loving friend M=r= Thomas Edmondes her Ma=ties= Agent w=th=
the King of Fraunce . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,280.44

{COM:INSERT_HELSINKI_SAMPLES_1_2}

<heading:edcomment:CXXX>

<P_329>

I conceaue you have receaued my Letter , by my L. of Southamton wherby
you see y=e= Cawse of my Alteration w=ch= now I find , concurres w=th=
y=e= Necessity of y=e= Time . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,329.48

I came hyther yesternight , RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,329.49

and will this night come to Pontoise , and so not be at Paris before
Wednesday RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,329.50

Only this I do desire y=t= I may not come in to Paris late ,
RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,329.51

for y=t= were disagreable to me for many Respects which you can
coniecture . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,329.52

I haue not paied this Post , becawse I know not whyther you haue alredy
paied him , RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,329.53

I pray you satisfy him and I will then dischardg you of all when I see
you , RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,329.54

I haue receaued yo=r= letters concerning y=e= Prisoner w=th= whom I will
speake and proceed as I find Cawse . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,329.55

I doe see very great Care and Affection in yo=r= Proceeding w=th= me
w=ch= I will acknoledge and requite . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,329.56

I will so order my Journey from Pontoise as to be in Paris to_morrow
between 3. and 4 . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,329.57

The less shoting , or none at all , y=t= mought be I wold be very
<P_330> gladd of , for that my horses of my Coch and y=t= w=ch= I ryde
on , will in no sort endure it . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,330.58

But y=t= I leaue to yo=r= discretion soe to order it , w=ch= must be as
it may be . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,330.59

And so in haste I end Yo=r= louing and ass: frend Ro: Cecyll .
RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,330.60

From Magny this Twesday at 9 of clock being the 28=th= of Feb: 97
RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,330.61

I haue geuen him six Crownes because he importuned me for money .
RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,330.62

{COM:addressed}

To my very Loving frend M=r= Thos Edmunds , her Ma=tes= Agent w=th= the
french king . RCECIL-1596-E2-P2,330.64

