<BEGIN_roper-1555-e1-p2>

<P_21>

As soone as his grace was gone , I , reioycing thereat , told Sir Thomas
Moore howe happy he was , whom the king had so familiarly entertayned ,
as I neuer had seene him to doe to any other
{COM:preceding_word_"other"_emended} excepte Cardinall Wolsey , whom I
sawe his {COM:preceding_word_"his"_emended} grace
{COM:preceding_word_"grace"_emended} once walke with , arme in arme .
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,21.3

" I thancke our lord , sonne , " quoth he , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,21.4

" I find his grace my very good lord indeed , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,21.5

and I beleeave he dothe as singulerly favour me as any subiecte within
this {COM:preceding_word_"this"_emended} realme . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,21.6

Howbeit , sonne Roper , I may tell thee I haue no cawse to be prowd
thereof , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,21.7

for if my head could {COM:preceding_word_"could"_emended} winne him a
castle in Fraunce <paren> for than was there warre betweene vs <$$paren>
it should not faile to goe . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,21.8

This Sir Thomas Moore , amonge all other his vertues , was of suche
meeknes that if it had fortuned him with any learned men resortinge to
him from Oxford , Cambridge , or els where , as there did divers , some
for desire of his acquaintaunce , some for the famous reporte of his
wisdome and learning , and some for suites of the vniuersityes , to haue
entered into argvment , wherein fewe were comparable vnto him , and so
farre to have <P_22> discoursed with them therein that he might perceiue
they coulde not , without some inconveiens , hold out much further
disputacion against him : Then , least he should discomforte them , as
he that sought out not his owne glory , but rather wold seeme conquered
then to discourage studentes in their studies , euer shewinge himself
more desirous to learne then to teache , wold he by some witty devise
courteouslye breake of into some other matter , and geeve over . Of
whom , for his wisdome and learninge , had the kinge suche an opinion ,
that at suche tyme as he attended vppon his highnes , takinge his
progresse either to oxford or Cambridge , where he was receaved with
very eloquent orations , his grace wold alwaies assigne him , as one
that was prompte and ready therein , ex tempore to make awneswer
therevnto . Whose manner was , whensoeuer he had occasion , either here
or beyond the sea , to be in any vniuersity , not onely to be present at
the readinge and disputations
{COM:preceding_word_"disputations"_emended} there comonly vsed , but
also learnedly to dispute amonge them himself . <P_23> Who , beinge
Chauncelour of the duchie , was made Embassador twice , ioyned in
Comission with Cardinall Wolsey , once to the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} Emperour Charels into Flaunders , the
other tyme to the French kinge into Fraunce . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,22.9

Not longe after this , the water-baily of London , sometyme his servant
, hearing , where he had bine at dynner , certeine marchantes liberally
to raile against his old maister , waxed so discontented therewith that
he hastely came to him , and told him what he had herd .
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,22.10

" And were I , Sir , " quoth he , " in such favour and aucthoryty with
my prince as you are , such men surelye
{COM:preceding_word_"surelye"_emended} should not be Suffred so
villainously and falsly to misreporte and slaunder me . Wherefore I
wold wishe you to call them before you , and to their shame for their
lewd malice to punishe them . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,22.11

Who , smilinge vppon him , said : " Why , master Waterbayly , wold you
haue me pvnyshe those by whom I receiue more benefitt then by you all
that be {COM:preceding_word_"be"_emended} mye freindes ?
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,22.12

Let them a gods name speake as lewdly as they list of me , and shoote
neuer so many arrowes at me , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,22.13

as {COM:preceding_word_"as"_emended} long as they do not hitt me , what
am I the worse ? ROPER-1555-E1-P2,22.14

But if they should once hitt me , then wold it indeed not a litle
trowble me . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,22.15

Howbeit I trust , by gods helpe , <P_24> there shall none of them all
once be able to touche me . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,24.16

I haue more cause , I assure thee , master waterbaily , to pyty them
then to be angry with them . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,24.17

Such fruitefull communicacion had he oftetimes with his familiar
Freindes . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,24.18

So on a tyme , walking with me alonge the teames side at Chelsey , in
talking of other things he said vnto me : " Nowe wold to our Lord ,
sonne Rooper , vppon condicion that three things were well established
in Christendome , I were put in a Sack , and here presently caste into
the Thames . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,24.19

" What greate things be those , Sir , " quoth I , " that should moue you
so to wishe ? " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,24.20

" Wouldest thou knowe what they be , sonne Roper ? " quoth he . "
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,24.21

Yea , marry , with good will , sir , if it please you , " quoth I .
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,24.22

" In faith , sonne , they be these , " said he . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,24.23

" The first is , that where the moste
{COM:preceding_word_"moste"_emended} part of Christen princes be at
mortall warre , they were all {COM:preceding_word_"all"_emended} at an
vniuersall peace . The second , that wheare the Church of Christe is
<P_25> at {COM:preceding_word_"at"_emended} this
{COM:preceding_word_"this"_emended} presente
{COM:preceding_word_"presente"_emended} sore afflicted with many errors
and heresees , it were setled in a perfect vniformity of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} religion . The third , that where the
kings matter of his mariage is nowe come in question , it were to the
glory of god and quietnes of all partes brought to a good conclusion .
" Whereby , as I could gather , he iudged that otherwise it wold be a
disturbance to a greate parte of Christendome . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,25.24

Thus did it by his doings throughe out the whole course of his life
appere that all his travaile and paynes , without respecte of erthly
comodities , either to himself , or any of his , were onely vppon the
seruice of god , the prince , and the realme , wholy bestowed and
imploied ; whom I herd in his later tyme to say that he neuer asked the
kinge for himself the valewe of one penye . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,25.25

As Sir Thomas Moores cvstome was daily , if he were att home , besides
his private prayers , with his children to say the seuen Psalmes ,
letany and suffrages Folowinge ; So was his guise nightly , before he
went to bed , with his wife , children , and houshold to goe to his
chappel , and there vppon his knees ordinarily to say certeine psalmes
and collectes with them . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,25.26

And because he was desirous for godlye purposes sometyme to be solitary
, and sequester himself from worldly company . A good <P_26> distaunce
from his mansion house builded he a place called the newe buildinge ,
wherein there was a Chappell , a library , and a gallery ; In which , as
his vse was vppon other dayes to occupy himself in prayer and study
together , So on the Fridaie there vsually contynewed he from morning
till evening , spending his time only in devoute praiers and spirituall
exercises . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,26.27

And to provoke his wife and Children to the desire of hevenly things ,
he wold sometymes vse thes wordes vnto them : ROPER-1555-E1-P2,26.28

" It is nowe no maistry for you children to goe to heaven ,
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,26.29

for euery body geueth you good councell , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,26.30

euery body geeueth you good example ; ROPER-1555-E1-P2,26.31

you see vertue rewarded and vice pvnished . So that you are caried vppe
to heven euen by the chynnes . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,26.32

But if you live the tyme that no man will geeue you good councell , nor
no man will geeue you good example , when you shall see vertue punished
and vice rewarded , If you will then stand fast and firmely stick to god
, vppon paine of my life , thoughe
{COM:preceding_word_"thoughe"_emended} you be but half good , god will
allowe you for whole good . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,26.33

If his wife or any of his children had bine diseased or troubled , he
wold say vnto them : " We may not looke at our pleasure to goe to heaven
in fetherbeds : ROPER-1555-E1-P2,26.34

it is not the way , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,26.35

for our lord himself went thither <P_27> with greate payne and by many
tribulacions , which was the path wherein he walked thither ;
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,27.36

for {COM:preceding_word_"for"_emended} the servaunt may not looke to be
in better case then his master . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,27.37

And as he wold in this sort perswade them to take their trowbles
paciently , So wold he in like sorte teach them to withstand the divell
and his temptaciones valiantly , sayeng : " Whosoeuer will marke the
divell and his temptacions , shall find him therein much like to an Ape
. ROPER-1555-E1-P2,27.38

For , like as an Ape , not well loked vnto , wil@ @be busy and bold to
do shrewd turnes , and contrarywise , being spied , will sodeinely leape
back and adventure no farther ; So the divell , finding a man idle ,
slouthfull , and without resistaunce redy to receiue his temptacions ,
waxeth so hardy that he will not faile still to contynue with him ,
vntill to his purpose he haue {COM:preceding_word_"haue"_emended}
throughly brought him . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,27.39

But on th@ @other side , if he se a man with dilegens perseuer to
preuent and withstand his temptacions , he waxeth so wery that in
conclusion he vtterly forsaketh him . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,27.40

For as the divell of disposition is a spirite of so highe a pride that
he can@ @not abide to be mocked , so is he of nature so envious that he
feareth any more to assaulte him , least he should therby not only
catche a fowle fall himself , but also minister to the man more matter
of merite . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,27.41

Thus delighted {COM:preceding_word_"delighted"_emended} he euermore not
only in vertuous exercses to be occupied himself , but also to exhorte
his <P_28> wife , children , and houshold to embrace and followe the
same . To whom , for his notable vertue and godlines , god shewed , as
it seemed , a manifest miraculous token of his speciall favour towardes
him , at such tyme as my wife , as many other that yeare were , was sick
of the sweating sicknes ; who , lieing in so
{COM:preceding_word_"so"_emended} great extremity of that disease as by
no invention or devises that phisitions in such cases
{COM:preceding_word_"cases"_emended} comonly vse <paren> of whom she had
diuers both experte , wise and wel learned , then continually attendant
about her <$$paren> she could be kepte from sleape , So that both
phisitions and all other there dispaired of her recouerye , and gave her
ouer ; her father , as he that most intirely tendred her , being in no
small hevines for her , by praier at gods hand sought to get her remedy
. Whervppon goinge vppe , after his vsuall maner , into his foresaid
newe buildinge , there in his Chappell , vppon his knees , with teares
most devoutly besought allmighty god that it wold like his goodnes ,
vnto whom nothinge was impossible , if it were his blessed will , at
<P_29> his mediation to voutchsafe gratiously to heare his humble
{COM:preceding_word_"humble"_emended} petition . Where incontynent came
into his mynd that a glister shold be th@ @only way to helpe her .
Which , when he told the phisitions , they by and by confessed that , if
there were any hope of health , that was the very best helpe indead ,
much marvailinge of themselfes that they had not before remembred it .
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,28.42

Then was it ymmediately ministred vnto her sleapinge , which she could
by no meanes haue bine brought vnto wakinge . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,28.43

And albeit after that {COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} she was therby
throughly awaked , gods markes , an evident vndoubted token of death ,
plainely appeared vppon her , yeat she , contrary to all their
expectacions , was , as it was thought , by her fathers fervent prayer
myraculously recouerid , and at length again to perfect health restored
. Whom , if it had pleased god at that tyme to haue taken to his mercye
, her father said he wold neuer haue medled with worldly matters
{COM:preceding_word_"matters"_emended} after . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,28.44

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_here}

<P_71>

And on the morowe after , master Cromewell , meeting me in the
parliamente house , willed me to tell my father that he was put out of
the parliament bill . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,71.47

But because I had appointed to dine that day in London , I sente the
message by {COM:preceding_word_"by"_emended} my
{COM:preceding_word_"my"_emended} servaunte
{COM:preceding_word_"servaunte"_emended} to my wife to Chelsey .
Whereof when she informed her father , " In faith , Megge , " quoth he ,
" <font> quod differtur non aufertur . <$$font> ROPER-1555-E1-P2,71.48

After this , as the duke of Norfolke and Sir Thomas Moore chaunced to
falle in familiar talke together , the duke said vnto him : " By the
masse , master Moore , it is perillous stryvinge withe princes .
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,71.49

And therefore I wold wishe you somewhat to inclyne to the kings pleasure
; ROPER-1555-E1-P2,71.50

For by god body , master Moore , <font> Indignatio principis mors est .
" <$$font> ROPER-1555-E1-P2,71.51

<P_72>

" Is that all , my Lord ? " quothe he . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,72.53

" Then in good faith is there no more differens betweene your grace and
me , but that I shall dye today , and yow tomorowe . "
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,72.54

So fell it oute , within a moneth or thereaboutes after the makinge of
the statute for the oathe of the supremacye and matrimonye , that all
the preistes of London and Westminster , and no temporall men but he ,
were sente for to appeare att Lambethe before the Byshoppe of Canterbury
, the lord Chauncelour , and Secretory Cromwell , Comissioners appointed
there to tender the oathe vnto them . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,72.55

Then Sir Thomas Moore , as his accostomed manner was alwaies , ere he
entered into any matter of importaunce , as when he was firste chosen of
the kings privy Councell , when he was sent Embassadour , appointed
speaker of the parliamente , made Lord Chauncelour , or when he tooke
any like waighty matter vppon him , To goe to church and be confessed ,
to heare masse and be howsled , So did he likewise in the mornynge
earlye the self same day that he was summoned to appeare before the
Lordes at Lambeth . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,72.56

And whereas he evermore vsed before , at his departure from his wife and
children , whom he <P_73> tenderly loved , to haue them bring him to his
boate , and there to kisse them all , and bidd them farewell , Then wold
he Suffer none of them forthe of the gate to followe him ,
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,73.57

but pulled the wickatt after him , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,73.58

and shutt them all from him ; ROPER-1555-E1-P2,73.59

and with an heauy harte , as by his countenaunce it appeared , with me
and our foure servantes there tooke he his boate towards Lambithe .
Wherein sitting still sadly a while , at the last he sodainely
{COM:preceding_word_"sodainely"_emended} rounded me in the yeare , and
said : " Sonne Roper , I thancke our Lord the feild is wonne . "
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,73.60

What he ment thereby I then wist not , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,73.61

yeat loth to seeme ignorant , I awneswered : " Sir , I am thereof very
glad . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,73.62

But as I coniectured afterwardes , it was for that
{COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} the loue he had to god wrought in
him so effectually that it conquered all his carnall affections vtterlye
. ROPER-1555-E1-P2,73.63

Nowe {COM:preceding_word_"Nowe"_emended} At his cominge to Lambithe ,
howe wisely he behaved himself before the Comissioners , at the
ministration of the oathe vnto him , may be found in certaine letters of
his , sent to my wife , remayning in a greate booke of his workes .
Where , by the space of foure daies , he was betaken to the custody of
the Abbott of Westminster , <P_74> during which tyme the king consulted
with his councell what order were meete to be taken with him .
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,74.64

And albeit in the beginninge they were resolued that with an othe not to
be acknowen whether he had to the supremacye bine sworne , or what he
thoughte thereof , he should be dischardged , yeat did Queene Anne , by
her impourtunate clamour , so sore exasperate the kinge againste him ,
that contrary to his former resolucion , he caused the said othe of the
Supremacye to be ministred unto him . Who , albeit he made a discreete
qualified awnswer , neuertheles was forthwith comitted to the tower .
Whom {COM:preceding_word_"Whom"_emended} , as he was going thitherward ,
wearing , as he comonly did , a chayne of gould about his necke , Sir
Richard Cromewell , that had the charge of his conveyans thither ,
advised him to send home his chayne to his wife , or to some of his
children . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,74.65

" Nay , Sir , " quoth he , " that I will not ; ROPER-1555-E1-P2,74.66

for if I were taken in the feild by my enemies , I wold they shold
somewhat fare the better by me . " <P_75> At whose landing master
Leiuetenant at {COM:preceding_word_"at"_emended} the tower gate was
ready to receaue him , wheare the Porter demaunded of him his vpper
garment . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,75.67

" Master Porter , " quoth he , " here it is ; " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,75.68

and tooke of his cappe , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,75.69

and deliuerid it him {COM:preceding_word_"him"_emended} , saying , " I
am very sory it is no better for you . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,75.70

" No , Sir , " quoth the Porter , " I must haue your gowne . "
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,75.71

And so was he by master Leiuetenaunte convayed to his lodginge , where
he called vnto him one John A wood , his owne servaunte , there apointed
to attend vppon him who {COM:preceding_word_"who"_emended} coulde
{COM:preceding_word_"coulde"_emended} neither
{COM:preceding_word_"neither"_emended} write
{COM:preceding_word_"write"_emended} nor
{COM:preceding_word_"nor"_emended} rede
{COM:preceding_word_"rede"_emended} ; ROPER-1555-E1-P2,75.72

and sware him before the Leiuetenaunte that if he should heare or see
him , att any tyme , speake or write any manner of thinge against the
king , the Councell , or the State of the realme , he shoulde open it to
the Leiuetenaunte , that the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended}
Leiuetenaunte {COM:preceding_word_"Leiuetenaunte"_emended} mighte
incontinent reveale it to the Councell . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,75.73

Nowe when he {COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended} had remayned in the Tower
a litle more then a monethe , my wife , longinge to see her father , by
her ernest suite at length got leaue to goe to him . At whose cominge ,
after the seuen psalmes and <P_76> letany said <paren> which ,
whensoeuer she came to him , ere he fell in talke of any worldly matters
, he vsed accustomably to say with her <$$paren> Amonge other
communicacion he said vnto her : " I beleeve , Megge , that they that
have putt me heare , weene they haue done me a high displeasure .
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,76.74

But I assure thee {COM:preceding_word_"thee"_emended} , on my faithe ,
my owne good daughter , if it had not byne for my wife and you that be
my children , whom I accompte the cheife parte of my charge , I wold not
haue fayled longe ere this to haue closed my self in as straighte a
roome , and straighter too . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,76.75

But since I am come hither without myne owne deserte , I trust that god
of his goodnes will discharge me of my care , and with his graciouse
helpe supply my lack amonge you . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,76.76

I find no cause , I thanck god , Megge , to reckon my self in wors case
heare then in my owne house . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,76.77

For me thinckethe god makethe me a wanton , and settethe me on his lappe
and dandlethe me . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,76.78

Thus by his gratious demeanour in tribulacion appeared it that all the
trowbles {COM:preceding_word_"trowbles"_emended} that euer chaunced vnto
{COM:preceding_word_"vnto"_emended} him , by his patient sufferaunce
thereof , were to him no paynefull punishmentes , but of his paciens
profitable exercises . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,76.79

And att another tyme , when he had first questioned <P_77> with my wife
a while of the order of his wife , children , and state of his howse in
his absens , he asked her how queene Anne did . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,77.80

" In faith , father , " quoth she , " never better . "
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,77.81

" Never better ! Megge , " quothe he . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,77.82

" Alas ! Megge , alas ! it pitieth me to remember into
{COM:preceding_word_"into"_emended} what misery , poore soule , she
shall shortly come . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,77.83

After this , master Lieutenant , cominge into his chamber to visite him
, rehearced the benefittes and freindshipp that he had many waies
receaved at his handes , and howe much bounden he was therefore freindly
to intertayne him , and make him good cheare ; which , since the case
standing as it did , he could not do without the kinges indignation , he
trusted , he said , he wold accepte his good will , and suche poore
cheare as he had . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,77.84

" Maister Leivetenaunt , " quothe he againe , " I veryly beleeve , as
you may , so you are my good freind indeede , and wold , as you say ,
with your best cheare intertaine me , for the which I most hartely
thancke you ; ROPER-1555-E1-P2,77.85

and assure your self , master Leivetenant , I doe not myslike my cheare
; ROPER-1555-E1-P2,77.86

But whensoeuer I soe doe , then thruste me out of your doores . "
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,77.87

Whereas the oath confirminge the supremacye and <P_78> matrimonie was by
the first statute in fewe wordes comprised , The Lord Chauncelor and
Master Secretary did of their owne heads adde more words vnto it , to
make it appeare vnto the kinges eares more pleasaunt and plausible .
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,78.88

And that oath , so amplified , caused they to be ministred to Sir Thomas
Moore , and to all other throughout the Realme . Which Sir Thomas Moore
perceyuinge , said vnto my wife : " I may tell thee , Megg , they that
haue committed me hither , for refusinge of this
{COM:preceding_word_"this"_emended} oath not agreable with the statute ,
are not by theyr owne lawe able to iustifye my imprisonement .
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,78.89

And surely , daughter , it is greate pitye that any Christian prince
should by a flexible Councell ready to followe his affections , and by a
weake Cleargie lackinge grace constantly to stand to their learninge ,
with Flatterye be so shamefully abused . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,78.90

But at length the Lord Chauncelour and master Secretorye , espieng their
owne {COM:preceding_word_"owne"_emended} ouersight in that behalf , were
fayne afterwardes to find the meanes that another statute shold be made
for the confirmacion of the oath so amplified with their additions .
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,78.91

<P_79>

After Sir Thomas Moore had geeuen over his office and all other worldly
doings therewith , to th@ @entent he might from thenceforthe the more
quietly settle {COM:preceding_word_"settle"_emended} himself to the
Service of god , Then made he a conveyaunce for the disposition of all
his lands , reseruinge to himself an estate thereof only for tearme of
his owne life ; and after his decease assuringe some parte of the same
to his wife , some to his sonnes wife for a Joynture in consideracion
that she was an inheretrice in possession of more then an_houndred
poundes land by the yeare , and some to me and my wife in recompence of
our mariage money , with divers remaynders ouer ; All which conveyaunce
and assurance was parfitelye finished longe before that matter wheruppon
he was attainted was made an offence , and yeat after by statute
clearely avoided . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,79.93

And so were all his landes , that he had to his wife and children by the
said conveyaunce in such sorte assured , contrary to th@ @order of lawe
, taken away from them , and brought into the kings handes , saving that
portion which {COM:preceding_word_"which"_emended} he had apointed to my
wife and me ; which {COM:preceding_word_"which"_emended} , although
{COM:preceding_word_"although"_emended} he
{COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended} had {COM:preceding_word_"had"_emended}
in {COM:preceding_word_"in"_emended} the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} foresaid
{COM:preceding_word_"foresaid"_emended} conveyaunce
{COM:preceding_word_"conveyaunce"_emended} reserued
{COM:preceding_word_"reserued"_emended} , as
{COM:preceding_word_"as"_emended} he {COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended}
did {COM:preceding_word_"did"_emended} the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} reste
{COM:preceding_word_"reste"_emended} , for
{COM:preceding_word_"for"_emended} tearme
{COM:preceding_word_"tearme"_emended} of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} life
{COM:preceding_word_"life"_emended} to {COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended}
him {COM:preceding_word_"him"_emended} self
{COM:preceding_word_"self"_emended} , neuer_the_lesse , vpon
{COM:preceding_word_"vpon"_emended} further
{COM:preceding_word_"further"_emended} consideracion
{COM:preceding_word_"consideracion"_emended} , two
{COM:preceding_word_"two"_emended} dayes
{COM:preceding_word_"dayes"_emended} after
{COM:preceding_word_"after"_emended} , by
{COM:preceding_word_"by"_emended} another
{COM:preceding_word_"another"_emended} conveyaunce
{COM:preceding_word_"conveyaunce"_emended} , he
{COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended} gaue
{COM:preceding_word_"gaue"_emended} the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} same
{COM:preceding_word_"same"_emended} immediatlye
{COM:preceding_word_"immediatlye"_emended} to
{COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended} <P_80> my
{COM:preceding_word_"my"_emended} wife
{COM:preceding_word_"wife"_emended} and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} me {COM:preceding_word_"me"_emended}
in possession . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,80.94

And so because the statute had vndone onely the firste conveyaunce ,
geeving no more to the kinge but so much as passed by that , The seconde
conveyaunce , whereby it was geeven to my Wife and me , being dated two
dayes after , was without the compasse of the statute ,
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,80.95

And so was our porcion to vs by that meanes clearely reserved .
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,80.96

As Sir Thomas Moore in the Tower chaunced on a tyme , lookinge out of
his windowe , to behold one master Reynolds , a religious , learned ,
and vertuous father of Sion , and three Monkes of the Charterhouse , for
the Matters of the Matrimonye and Supremacye goinge out of the Tower to
execution , He , as one longinge in that iourneye to haue accompanied
them , said vnto my wife , then standinge there besides him : " Loe ,
doest thow not see , Megge , that thes blessed fathers be nowe as
chearefully goinge to their deathes as bridegromes {COM:go} to their
Mariage ? Wherefore thereby maiste thow see , myne owne good daughter ,
what a greate difference there is betweene such as haue in effecte spent
all their dayes <P_81> in a straight , hard , penetentiall , and
paynefull life religiously , and such as haue in the world , like
worldly wretches , as thy poore father hath
{COM:preceding_word_"hath"_emended} done , consumed all theyr tyme in
pleasure and ease licentiouslye . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,81.97

For god , consideringe their longe continued life in most sore and
greavous penaunce , will no longer suffer them to remayne heare in this
vale of Misery and iniquitye , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,81.98

but speadily hence taketh them to the fruition of his euerlasting deitye
; whereas thy syllye father , Megge , that like a most wicked Caytiffe
hath passed forth the whole course of his miserable life most sinfully ,
God , thinckinge him not worthy so soone to come to that eternall
felicitye , leaveth him heare yet still in the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} world , further to be plonged and
turmoyled withe miserye . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,81.99

Within a while after , master Secretorye , cominge to him into
{COM:preceding_word_"into"_emended} the tower from the kinge , pretended
much freindshipp towardes him , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,81.100

and for his comforte told him that the kings highnes was his good and
gratious Lorde , and minded {COM:preceding_word_"minded"_emended} not
with {COM:preceding_word_"with"_emended} any matter wherein he should
haue any cause of scruple , from henceforthe to trouble his consciens .
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,81.101

As soone as master Secretory was gone , to expresse what comforte he
conceaved of his wordes , he wrote with a cole , for Incke then had he
none , thease verses folowinge : {COM:verses_omitted}
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,81.102

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_here}

<P_95>

Wherevppon the Lord Chauncelour said to the rest of the Lordes : " Loe ,
my Lordes , loe , you heare what <P_96> my lord cheif Iustice saith , "
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,96.105

and so ymmediately gave he Iudgemente against him . After whiche ended
, the Comissioners yeat further curteouslye offred him , if he had any
thinge els to alleage for his defence , to graunt him favorable audience
. Who awneswered : " More haue I not to say , my Lordes , but that like
as the blessed Apostle St Pawle , as we read in th@ @actes of the
Apostles , was present , and consented to the death of St Stephen , and
kepte their clothes that stoned him to deathe , and yeat be they nowe
{COM:preceding_word_"nowe"_emended} both twayne holy Sainctes in heaven
, and shall continue there frendes for euer , So I verily truste
{COM:preceding_word_"truste"_emended} , and shall therefore right
hartelye pray , that thoughe your lordshippes haue nowe here
{COM:preceding_word_"here"_emended} in earthe bine Judges to my
condemnacion , we may yeat hereafter in heaven meerily all meete
together , to our euerlasting saluacion . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,96.106

Thus much towching Sir Thomas Moores arrainement , being not thereat
present my self , haue I by the credyble reporte , partely
{COM:preceding_word_"partely"_emended} of the right worshippfull Sir
Anthony Seintleger , knight , and partely of Richard Heywood and John
Webbe , gentlemen , withe others of good creditt , <P_97> at the hearing
thereof present themselves , as farre as my poore witt and memory wold
serue me , here truly rehersed vnto you . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,97.107

Nowe , after this arraignement , departed he from the barre to the Tower
againe , ledde by Sir William Kingston , a talle , stronge , and comely
knighte , Constable of the Tower , and his very deare freind . Who ,
when he had brought him from westminster to the old Swanne towards the
Tower , there with an heavy harte , the teares runinge downe by his
cheekes , bade him farewell . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,97.108

Sir Thomas Moore , seinge him so sorowefull , comforted him with as good
words as he could , sayenge : " Good master Kingston , trouble not your
self , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,97.109

but be of good cheare ; ROPER-1555-E1-P2,97.110

for I will pray for you , and my good Lady , your wife , that we may
meete in heuen together , where we shal@ @be meery for ever and ever .
" ROPER-1555-E1-P2,97.111

Soone after , Sir William Kingston , talking with me of Sir Thomas Moore
, saide : " In good faith , master Roper , I was ashamed of my self ,
that , at my departing from your father , I found my harte so feeble ,
and his so stronge , that he was fayne to comforte me , which should
rather have comforted him . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,97.112

When Sir Thomas Moore came from westminster to the Towerward againe ,
his daughter , my wife , desirous <P_98> to see her father , whom she
thought she should neuer see in this world after , and also to haue his
Finall blessinge , gaue attendaunce aboute the Tower wharf , where she
knewe he should passe by , before he could enter into the Tower , There
tarienge for his coming home . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,98.113

As@ @sone as she sawe him , after his blessing on her knees reuerently
receaued , Shee hastinge towards him , and , without consideracion or
care of her self , pressinge in {COM:preceding_word_"in"_emended} amonge
the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} middest
{COM:preceding_word_"middest"_emended} of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} the thronge and company of the garde
that with halberdes and bills wente round aboute him , hastely ranne to
him , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,98.114

and there openly , in the sight of them all , imbraced him ,
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,98.115

toke him about the neck , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,98.116

and kissed him . Who , well liking her moste naturall and deere
daughterlye affection towardes him , gaue her his fatherly blessinge and
many godly {COM:preceding_word_"godly"_emended} wordes of comforte
besides . From whom after she was departed , she , not satisfied with
the former sighte of him {COM:preceding_word_"him"_emended} , and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} like
{COM:preceding_word_"like"_emended} one
{COM:preceding_word_"one"_emended} that
{COM:preceding_word_"that"_emended} had
{COM:preceding_word_"had"_emended} forgotten
{COM:preceding_word_"forgotten"_emended} herselfe
{COM:preceding_word_"herselfe"_emended} , being
{COM:preceding_word_"being"_emended} all
{COM:preceding_word_"all"_emended} ravished
{COM:preceding_word_"ravished"_emended} with
{COM:preceding_word_"with"_emended} the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} entyre
{COM:preceding_word_"entyre"_emended} loue
{COM:preceding_word_"loue"_emended} of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended}
her deere father , having respecte neyther to her self , nor to the
presse of the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} people and multitude
<P_99> that were there {COM:preceding_word_"there"_emended} aboute him ,
sodainely torned back againe , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,99.117

ranne to him as before , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,99.118

tooke him about the neck , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,99.119

and divers tymes together most lovingly kissed him ;
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,99.120

and at last , with a full heavy harte , was fayne to departe from him :
The beholding whereof was to many of them that were present thereat so
lamentable that it made them for very sorowe therof
{COM:preceding_word_"therof"_emended} to mourne and weape .
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,99.121

So remayned Sir Thomas Moore in the tower more then a seuennight after
his iudgment ; From whence , the day before he suffred , he sent his
shirte of heare <paren> not willinge to haue it seene <$$paren> to my
wife , his deerely beloved daughter , and a letter written with a coale
, contayned in the foresaid booke of his workes , plainely expressing
the fervent desire he had to suffer on {COM:preceding_word_"on"_emended}
the morowe , in these words folowinge : ROPER-1555-E1-P2,99.122

" I comber you , good Margaret , much , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,99.123

but I wold be sory if it should be any longer then to morowe ;
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,99.124

For to morowe is St Thomas even , and the vtas of St Peeter ;
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,99.125

And therefore too morowe longe I to goe to god ; ROPER-1555-E1-P2,99.126

it were a daye very meete and convenient for me , etc.
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,99.127

I neuer liked your manner towardes
{COM:preceding_word_"towardes"_emended} me
{COM:preceding_word_"me"_emended} better then when you kissed me last .
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,99.128

For I like when daughterly <P_100> loue and deere charitye hath no
leysure to looke to worldly curtesye . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,100.129

And so vppon the next morowe , beinge Tuesdaye , St Thomas even , and
the vtas of Saincte Peeter , in the yeare of our lord ,
one_thowsand_five_hundreth_thirtye_and_five <paren> according as he in
his letter the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} daye
{COM:preceding_word_"daye"_emended} before had wished <$$paren> earlye
in the morninge came to him Sir Thomas Pope , his singuler freind , on
message from the kinge and his Councell , That he should before nyne of
the clock the same morning suffer death ; and that therefore furthwith
he should prepare him self therunto : " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,100.130

Master Pope , " quoth he , " for your good tydings I most hartelye
thancke you . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,100.131

I haue bine alwaies much bounden to the Kings highnes for the benefites
and honoures that he hath still from tyme to tyme most bountyfully
heaped vppon me ; ROPER-1555-E1-P2,100.132

and yeat more bound am I to his grace for puttinge me into this place ,
where I haue had convenient time and space to haue remembraunce of my
end . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,100.133

And so helpe me , god , most of all , master Pope , am I bound to his
highnes that it pleaseath him so shortly to ridde me out of the miseries
of this wretched woorld . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,100.134

And therefore will I not faile ernestly <P_101> to pray for his grace ,
bothe heare and also in another world . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,101.135

" The kings pleasure is further , " quoth master Pope , " that at your
execution you shall not vse many words . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,101.136

" Master Pope , " quothe he , " you do well to geeue me warninge of his
graces pleasure , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,101.137

for other wise I had purposed at that tyme somewhat to have spoken , but
of no matter wherewith his grace , or any other , should haue had cause
to be offended . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,101.138

Neuertheles , whatsoeuer I intended , I am ready obediently to conforme
my self to his graces commandementes . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,101.139

And I beseeke you , good master Pope , to be a meene vnto his highnes
that my daughter Margaret may be at my buriall . "
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,101.140

" The kinge is content already , " quoth master Pope , " that your wife
, children and other your {COM:preceding_word_"your"_emended} freinds
shall haue libertie to be present thereat . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,101.141

" O howe much beholden then , " said Sir Thomas Moore , " am I to his
grace , that vnto my poore buriall vouchsafeth to haue so graciouse
consideracion . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,101.142

Wherewithall master Pope , takinge his leaue of hym , could not refrayne
from wepinge . Which Sir Thomas Moore perceiuinge , comforted him in
this wise : ROPER-1555-E1-P2,101.143

" Quiet your self , good master Pope , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,101.144

and be not discomforted ; ROPER-1555-E1-P2,101.145

For I trust that we shall , once in heaven , <P_102> see eche other full
merily , where we shal@ @be sure to live and loue together , in ioyful
blisse eternally . " Vppon whose departure , Sir Thomas Moore , as one
that had bine invited to some {COM:preceding_word_"some"_emended}
solempne feaste , chaunged himself into his best apparell ; which master
Leiuetenaunt espienge , advised him to put it of , sayenge that he that
should haue it was but a Javill . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,102.146

" What , master Leiuetenaunt , " quoth he , " shall I accompte him a
Javill that shall doe me this day so singuler a benefitt ?
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,102.147

Nay , I assure you , were it clothe of gold , I wolde accompt it well
bestowed on him , as St Ciprian did , who gaue his executioner thirtie
peeces of gould . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,102.148

And albeit at length , throughe master Leiuetenauntes importunate
persuasion , he altered his apparell , yeat after th@ @example of that
holy martir St Ciprian , did he , of that litle money that was lefte him
, send one Angell of gold to his executioner . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,102.149

And so was he by master Leiuetenaunte brought out of the Tower , and
from thence led towardes {COM:preceding_word_"towardes"_emended} the
place of execution . Where , goinge vppe the scaffold , which <P_103>
was so weake that it was ready to fall , he saide merilye to master
Leiuetenaunte : " I pray you , master Leiuetenaunte , see me salf vppe ,
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,103.150

and for my cominge downe let me shifte for my self . "
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,103.151

Then desired he all the people thereaboute to pray for him , and to
beare witnes with him that he should nowe
{COM:preceding_word_"nowe"_emended} there
{COM:preceding_word_"there"_emended} suffer death in and for the faith
of the holy chatholik churche . Whiche done , he kneled downe , and
after his prayers said , turned to th@ @executioner , and with a
cheerefull countenaunce spake thus {COM:preceding_word_"thus"_emended}
to him : " Plucke vpp thy spirites , man , ROPER-1555-E1-P2,103.152

and be not afrayde to do thine office ; ROPER-1555-E1-P2,103.153

my necke is very shorte ; ROPER-1555-E1-P2,103.154

take heede therefore thow strike not awrye , for savinge of thine
honestye . " ROPER-1555-E1-P2,103.155

So passed Sir Thomas Moore out of this world to god , vppon the very
same daye in which himself had most desired . Soone after whose deathe
came intelligence thereof to the Emperour Chareles . Whervppon he sent
for Sir Thomas Elliott , our english Embassadour , and said vnto him : "
My Lord Embassador , we vnderstand that the Kinge , your master , hath
put his faithfull seruaunt and grave , wise Councelour , Sir Thomas
Moore , to deathe . " Wherunto Sir Thomas Elliott awneswered that he
<P_104> vnderstood nothing thereof . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,104.156

" Well , " said the Emperour , " it is too true .
ROPER-1555-E1-P2,104.157

And this will we say , that if we had bine maister of such a servante ,
of whose doings our selfe haue had these many yeares no small experience
, we wold rather haue lost the best city of our dominions then haue lost
such a worthy councellour . " Which matter was by the same Sir Thomas
Eliott to my self , to my wife , to maister Clement and his wife , to
master John Haywood and his wife , and vnto
{COM:preceding_word_"vnto"_emended} diuers other his Freinds accordingly
reported . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,104.158

Finis . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,104.159

Deo gratias . ROPER-1555-E1-P2,104.160

