<BEGIN_roxinden2-1630-e2-p2>

<P_79>

<heading:edcomment:LXVIII_RICHARD_OXINDEN_TO_VALENTINE_PETTIT_THE_YOUNGER>

Worthy Cozin , Callinge to remembrance your many curtisies which I soe
often times have received from you and I not knowinge how to requite the
lest of them {COM:ms._torn} it makes mee new to greave and lament for my
former follies , and nowe wish {COM:preceding_word_"wish"_emended} that
I were to begin the woorlde agayne , not that I dooe any wayes dislike
this coorse which I have now taken but that I myth give summe
sattisfacktion to my frendes for my former extravigant coorses ;
ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,79.4

but since it is to late and the time far wasted and I have allredy
thrust myself into the <P_80> handes of Fortune , hoping that it will
deele favorably with mee {COM:ms._torn} I desire that my frendes will
forget and forgive all the thingis that ar past and bee but now my
pilate , and once more steere my course to the banke of good fortune ;
ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.5

and if ever heere after I dooe fale away from that which I have promised
{COM:preceding_word_"promised"_emended} then let mee bee put soe far
oute of mynd that never after to dooe so much as mension mee ,
ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.6

but let mee bee as if I had never bin ; ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.7

but yow ar only {COM:ms._torn} I dooe invest my hole trust in .
ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.8

Consarning my maintenance heere , for I have all wayes founde you a man
of your woorde , I must confes that I doe live uppone the states menes
but very basly and poorly , ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.9

and it will not {COM:ms._torn} only a disparrigement to mee but to my
frendes hereby , ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.10

for my ant sayes that I shall disgrace her , ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.11

therfor good Cosen doe so much allsoe in my beehalfe ,
ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.12

for I am in want of shirtes and a gray hatt ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.13

{COM:ms._torn}

as yett I have nether ; ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.15

pray lett mee intrete you to doe mee that curtisy that if you can
possible to send mee my seles that I have many times spake to you aboute
when I was in London , and if yow plese but to take the paynes to write
to or three lines unto mee and inclose it in your Letter ,
ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.16

and you may give the Letter to my unkle proude ,
ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.17

for hee will bee in London aboute three weekes after Crismas ;
ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.18

thus intretinge you to remember my duty to my mother , my sarvis to my
unkle Oxinden and my Ant and to my Cozen Elizabeth Oxinden , and my duty
and sarvis to my {COM:ms._torn} Barrowe and my best respackted sarvis to
your selfe Your obliged servaunt Richard Oxinden
ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.19

From our garrison at Arnam in gildarland ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.20

this 14th of December 1631 ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.21

My Cozen Sanders dooth Remember his sarvis unto you
ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.22

and dooth intrete you to sende this Letter to his fathar .
ROXINDEN2-1630-E2-P2,80.23

