<BEGIN_russell-1538-e1-p2>

<P_1.2,98>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXXXVI_JOHN_RUSSELL,_TO_LORD_CROMWELL,_RESPECTING_THE_TRIAL_EXECUTION_OF_THE_ABBAT_TWO_MONKS_OF_GLASTONBURY>

Right honourable and my verry good Lorde , pleasyth youre lordeshipp to
be advertised , that I have receyved <P_1.2,99> youre Lettres dated the
xij=th= daye of this present ; and understood by the same youre
lordeshipps greate goodnes towardes my friende the Abbott off
Peterborough , for whome I have ben ofte bold to wryte unto youre good
lordeshipp ; moste hartely thankynge yor lordeshipp for that and all
other youre goodnes that I have founde at youre good lordeshipps handes
: even so , desiering you my lorde longe to contynew in the same .
RUSSELL-1538-E1-P2,1.2,99.4

My lorde thies shal@ @be to asserteyne , that on Thursdaye the xiiij=th=
daye of this present moneth the Abbott of Glastonburye was arrayned ,
and the next daye putt to execucyon with ij. other of his monkes , for
the robbyng of Glastonburye Churche , on the torre hyll next unto the
towne of Glaston ; the seyde Abbotts body beyng devyded in fower parts ,
and heed stryken off , whereof oone quarter stondythe at Welles , a
nother at bathe , and at Ylchester and Brigewater the rest . And his
hedd uppon the Abbey gate at Glaston . RUSSELL-1538-E1-P2,1.2,99.5

And as concernyng the rape and burglary commytted , those parties are
all condempned , and fower of theym putt to execucyon at the place of
the act don , whiche is called the were ; and there adjudged to hange
styll in chaynes to th'@ @ensample of others .
RUSSELL-1538-E1-P2,1.2,99.6

As for Capon , oone of the seyde offenders condempned , I have repried
according to yor Lordeshipp's letters ; of whome I shall further show
unto you at my next repayre unto the Courte .
RUSSELL-1538-E1-P2,1.2,99.7

And <P_1.2,100> here I do sende yor lordeshipp , enclosed , the names of
th'@ @enquest that passed on Whytyng the seid abbott : whiche I ensure
you my lorde is as worsshipfull a jurye as was charged here thies many
yeres . RUSSELL-1538-E1-P2,1.2,100.8

And there was never seene in thies parts so greate apparaunce as were
here at this present tyme , and never better wyllyng to serve the Kyng .
RUSSELL-1538-E1-P2,1.2,100.9

My Lorde I ensure you there were many bylles putt upp ageynst the abbott
by his tenaunts and others , for wronges and injuryes that he hadd donne
theym . RUSSELL-1538-E1-P2,1.2,100.10

And I commytt yor good lordeshipp to the keapyng of the blessed Trynyte
. RUSSELL-1538-E1-P2,1.2,100.11

From Welles RUSSELL-1538-E1-P2,1.2,100.12

the xvj=th= daye of Novembre . RUSSELL-1538-E1-P2,1.2,100.13

Your owen to commande J. Russell . RUSSELL-1538-E1-P2,1.2,100.14

