<BEGIN_smith-1591-e2-p2>

<P_B1R>

<heading>

THE EXAMINATION OF VSURIE ; IN TWO SERMONS . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,B1R.4

THE FIRST SERMON . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,B1R.5

<$$heading>

{COM:verse_omitted}

These two verses must bee considered together , because one is the
question , and the other is the answer : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,B1R.8

<font> Dauid <$$font> demands who shall come to heauen ?
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,B1R.9

and God tels him that Vsurers <P_B1V> shall not come thether : as if hee
should say , They shall go to hell . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,B1V.10

Therefore as <font> Paule <$$font> taught <font> Timothie <$$font> to
warne the~ which are rich , as though they had more neede to be warned
than other : so this sentence seemeth to bee penned for a warning to the
rich , because it strikes vpon the rich mans vice .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,B1V.11

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_1_here}

<P_C2V>

When God set <font> Adam <$$font> his work , he sayd , <font> In the
sweate of thy browes shalt thou liue : <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C2V.14

not in the sweate of his browes , but in the sweate of thy browes :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C2V.15

but the Vsurer liueth in the sweate of his browes , and her browes :
that is , by the paines and cares , and labours of an other ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C2V.16

for he taketh no paines himselfe , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C2V.17

but only expecteth the time when his interest will come in , like the
belly which doeth no worke , and yet eateth all the meate .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C2V.18

When God had finished his creation , he sayd vnto man , and vnto beastes
, and vnto foules , and vnto fishes , <font> increase and multiplie ,
<$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C2V.19

but he neuer saide vnto money , increase and multiplie , because it is a
dead thing which hath no seede , and therefore is not fit to ingender .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C2V.20

Therefore he which saith to his money , increase and multiplie , <P_C3R>
begetteth a monstrous birth , like <font> Anah <$$font> , which deuised
a creature which God had not created before . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3R.21

Christ saith to his Disciples , <font> If you loue but them which loue
you , what are you better then the Publicans , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3R.22

for they loue their brethren : <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3R.23

so I may say , if you will lend to none but to them which will pay you
Vusurie for it , what are you better tha~ the <font> Iewes <$$font> ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3R.24

for the <font> Iewes <$$font> would lend for Vsurie ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3R.25

and if you be no better than the <font> Iewes <$$font> , then you shall
speede no better than they : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3R.26

for as Christ sayde , <font> Except your righteousnes do exceede the
righteousnes of the Pharisies , your reward shall not exceed the rewarde
of the Pharisies <$$font> , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3R.27

so , except your charitie do exceede the charitie of the <font> Iewes
<$$font> , your reward shall not exceede the reward of the <font> Iewes
<$$font> . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3R.28

All this doth shewe , that the Vsurer is like <font> Esau <$$font> ,
<P_C3V> of whome God sayde , <font> Esau haue I hated . <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3V.29

Now in the 112. Psalme , you shall see who is like <font> Iacob
<$$font> , of whome God sayth , <font> Iacob haue I loued : <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3V.30

for there <font> Dauid <$$font> sayth , <font> a good man is mercifull ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3V.31

and lendeth <$$font> , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3V.32

and straight vppon it he setteth this crowne , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3V.33

<font> he shall neuer be moued , but be had in perpetuall remembraunce :
<$$font> as if he should say , this is the good mans Vusurie ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3V.34

this is his increase , euen a good name , and euerlasting ioy .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3V.35

Againe in the 23. of Exod. it is said , <font> Lend vnto him which
wanteth without Vsurie , that the Lorde may blesse thee : <$$font> as if
he should say , let the Lord pay the increase , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3V.36

feare not to be loosers by doing good , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3V.37

for God hath giuen his word to requite it himselfe .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C3V.38

As he sayth to them which were afrayd to pay tythes , and offer
sacrifice , <font> Try me if I will not powre down a blessing <P_C4R>
vpon you : <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C4R.39

so he seemeth to say vnto them which are afrayd to lend , try me if I
will not powre downe a blessing vppon you . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C4R.40

Whome will you trust , if you doe not trust your Creator , your Father ,
your Redeemer , your Preseruer , and your Sauiour .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C4R.41

Now you haue heard the vnlawfulnes of Vsurie , you shall heare how many
kindes there be of it . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C4R.42

As other Crafts are called Mysteries , so I may fitly call it , the
mysterie of Vsurie , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C4R.43

for they haue deuised moe sorts of Vsurie , than there be tricks at
Cardes , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C4R.44

I can@ @not recken halfe , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C4R.45

and I am afraide to shewe you all , least I should teach you to be
Vsurers , while I disswade you from Vsurie , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C4R.46

yet I will shew you some , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C4R.47

and the same reasons which are aledged against these , shall condemne
all the rest . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C4R.48

<P_C4V>

Some will not take Vsurie , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C4V.50

but they will haue the vse of your pasture , or your lande , or your
orchard , or your teame , or your kine , vntill you pay the money againe
, which in that time will grow to greater gaine to the Vsurer , and a
greater losse to the borower , than if he had paid more money than other
Vsurers are wont to take . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C4V.51

Some will not take Vsurie , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C4V.52

but they will take plate , and vessell , and tapistree , and bedding ,
and other houshold stuffe , to vse and weare , vntill their money come
home , which will lose more in the wearing , than the interest of the
money would come to . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C4V.53

This Vsurie is forbidden in the 2. of <font> Amos <$$font> , where God
co~plaineth saying , <font> They lye downe vpon the clothes which are
layd to pledge : <$$font> shewing , <P_C5R> that wee should not lye down
vppon such clothes , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5R.54

that is , wee should not vse or weare the thing which is layd to pledge
. SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5R.55

Some will take no Vusrie , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5R.56

but they will take a pawne which is better than the money which they
lende , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5R.57

and then they will couenant , that if he bring not the money againe by
such a day , he forfitteth his pawne : which day the Vsurer knoweth ,
that the poore man is not able to keepe , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5R.58

and so kepeth the pawne for his money , which is worth twise his money .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5R.59

This Vsurie is forbidden in <font> Leuit. <$$font> 25. , where it is
said , <font> Thou shalt not take Vsurie or vauntage <$$font> as if he
should say , thou shalt not take the forfeiture ;
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5R.60

for then thou takest vauntage , when thou takest more than thou lendest
. SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5R.61

Some will not take Vsurie , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5R.62

but <P_C5V> they will buy some thing at a smal price , and then couenant
with the borrower that he buy the same againe of the same price at such
a day , which day the Vsurer knoweth that the borrower is not able to
keepe , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5V.63

and so hee getteth for a little that which the other might haue solde
for much more . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5V.64

This Vsurie is conde~ned in the 1. <font> Thess. <$$font> 4 where it
is said , <font> Let no man defraude or circumuent his brother in any
thing . <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5V.65

Some will not take Vsurie , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5V.66

but they will lend out their money to occupiers , vpon condition to bee
partakers in their gaines , but not in their losses :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5V.67

so one takes all the paines SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5V.68

and abideth al the venture , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5V.69

& the other which takes no pains , reapeth halfe the profite .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C5V.70

This Vsurie is forbidden in 2. <font> Thessa. <$$font> 3.@ @10. where
it is saide , <font> He which will <P_C6R> not worke let him not eate .
<$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6R.71

Some will not take Vsurie , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6R.72

but if he bee a Labourer , or a Mason , or a Carpenter , which borroweth
of him , he will couenant with him for so many daies worke ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6R.73

he shall labour with him so manie daies , or so many weekes for no money
, but the lone of money . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6R.74

This Vsury is condemned in <font> Luk. <$$font> 10.@ @7. where it is
said , <font> The labourer is worthie of his hire . <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6R.75

Some will not take Vsurie , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6R.76

but if you haue not present money to pay for their wares , they will set
a high price of them , for the forbearing of the time ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6R.77

and so they doo not onely sell their wares , but they sell time too :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6R.78

that is , they doo not onely sell their owne , but they sell Gods owne .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6R.79

Therefore one saith of these , <font> When he selleth the day he selleth
the light , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6R.80

and when hee selleth <P_C6V> the night , he selleth rest :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6V.81

therefore when he would haue the light of heauen , and the rest of
Paradise , it shall be said vnto him that he hath solde both alreadie .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6V.82

For he solde light when he sold the day , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6V.83

and he solde rest when he sold the night : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6V.84

and therefore now he can haue neither light nor rest . <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6V.85

There be other Vsurers which will not lend themselues , but giue leaue
to their wiues , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6V.86

and they play like hucksters , that is , euerie moneth a penny for a
shilling , which is one hundred for another in the yeare .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6V.87

But that I was informed of the~ since this Sermon was preached , I had
left out our {SIC:out} capital Vsurers , which will not lend any money ,
because they dare not require so much gaine as they would haue :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C6V.88

but if you would borrow an_hundred pounde , they will giue you <P_C7R>
wares worth three_score pounde , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7R.89

and you shall answer them an_hundred pound for it .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7R.90

These are the Vsurers generall which lurke about the Citie like Rats ,
and Wesels , and Fulmers , of whom may bee said the same which is said
of the diuels , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7R.91

<font> they seeke whom they may deuoure . <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7R.92

There be other Cosins to Vsurers , which are not counted Vsurers , such
as aske money for that which they should giue freelie : such as take as
much for a counterfeit as for the best : such as take a fee of a Client
and doo him no pleasure : such as take money for Masses , and Dirges ,
and Trentalls , and Pardons , and such like drugs , which do no more
good than fire out of the chimney . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7R.93

This is a kind of Vsury and deceit beside , which one day they will cast
away as <font> Iudas <$$font> <P_C7V> did his thirtie pence .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7V.94

Now you haue heard the kinds of Vsurie , you shall heare the arguments
which are deuised for Vsurie . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7V.95

Sinne is neuer complet vntill it bee excused : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7V.96

this is the vauntage which the deuill getteth by euery sinne ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7V.97

whensoeuer he can fasten any temptation vppon vs , wee giue him a sinne
for it , and an excuse to boote , as <font> Adam <$$font> our father did
. SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7V.98

First he sinned , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7V.99

and then he excused : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7V.100

so first we sinne , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7V.101

and then we excuse : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7V.102

first an Vsurer , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7V.103

& then an excuser . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7V.104

Therefore euerie Vsurer will defend Vsurie with his tung , though he
condemne it with his conscience . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7V.105

If the Image makers of <font> Ephesus <$$font> had not liued by Images ,
they would haue spoken for Images no more than the rest :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C7V.106

for none stood for Images but the Image <P_C8R> makers :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C8R.107

so if the Vsurers did not liue by Vsurie , they woulde speak for Vsurie
no more than the rest : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C8R.108

for none stand for Vsurie but Vsurers . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C8R.109

It is an easie matter , if a man be disposed , to speake something for
euerie vice ; as some defende the Stewes : some defende Nonresidencie :
some defend swearing by my faith : some defende bowling vppon the
Saboath : and some defend Vsurie . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C8R.110

But , <font> will you pleade for Baal ? <$$font> <paren> saith <font>
Ioash <$$font> <$$paren> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C8R.111

that is , will you pleade for sinne which will pleade against you ?
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C8R.112

A sin is a sin when it is defended : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C8R.113

nay , a sinne is two sins when it is defended : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C8R.114

for <font> he which breaketh one of the least Commandements <$$font>
<paren> saith Christ <$$paren> and teacheth others to doo so , <font> is
the least in the kingdom of heauen . <$$paren> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C8R.115

A Squire of low degree is a Squire of no degree :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C8R.116

so <P_C8V> the least in the kingdome of heauen is none of the kingdome
of heauen . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C8V.117

Who then is the least in the kingdome of heauen ?
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C8V.118

not he which breaketh the least of the Commandements , but he which
teacheth others to doo so : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C8V.119

that is , he which by defending , and excusing , and minsing , and
extenuating his sinne , incourageth others to sinne too .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C8V.120

To defend Vsurie , they distinguish vppon it , as they distinguish of
lying : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C8V.121

as they say , there is a pernicious lye , and an officious lye , and a
merrie lye , and a godly lye : so they say , there is the Merchants
Vsurie , and the Strangers Vsurie , and the Widdowes Vsurie , and the
Orphanes Vsurie , and the poore mans Vsurie , and the biting Vsurie ,
and the charitable Vsurie , and the necessarie Vsurie .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,C8V.122

<P_D1R>

As God said <font> ye shall die , <$$font> & the woman sayd , <font>
peraduenture ye shall dye <$$font> , and the Serpent said , <font> ye
shall not dye <$$font> ; so there be three opinions of Vsurie :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1R.124

some say like God , <font> thou shalt dye <$$font> ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1R.125

they thinke that Vsurie is vtterly vnlawfull , because God hath vtterly
forbid it : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1R.126

some say like the woman , <font> peraduenture thou shalt dye <$$font> ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1R.127

they doubt whether Vsurie be vtterly vnlawfull or no , because it is so
much tollerated : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1R.128

some say like the Serpent , <font> thou shalt not dye <$$font> ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1R.129

they thinke that Vsurie is lawfull , because it is gainefull , as <font>
Saule <$$font> thought that the Idolaters beastes should not be killed
because they were fat . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1R.130

But as he was commaunded to kill the fat beastes , as well as the leane
, so we are commanded to kill fat sinnes as well as leane sinnes ;
gainefull sinnes as well as prodigall sinnes . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1R.131

<P_D1V>

They which pleade for Vsurie , obiect these arguments .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1V.133

First they say , God doeth alow some kinde of Vsurie ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1V.134

for in <font> Deut. <$$font> 2.@ @3 it is said <font> of a stranger
thou mayest take Vsurie . <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1V.135

I perceiue no scripture speaketh for Vsurers . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1V.136

<font> Of a stranger <$$font> <paren> sayth God <$$paren> <font> thou
mayest take Vsurie : <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1V.137

but thou takest Vsurie of thy brother , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1V.138

therefore this condemneth thee , because thou vsest thy brother like a
stranger . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1V.139

Here <font> stranger <$$font> doth signifie the <font> Iewes <$$font>
enemies , whome they were commaunded to destroy :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1V.140

therefore marke how much this maketh against Vsurie , which they obiect
for Vsurie . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1V.141

God doeth not license the <font> Iewes <$$font> to take Vsurie of any ,
but their enemies whome they might kill : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D1V.142

They might not be Vsurers vnto any , but to them of whom they might be
destroyers , whome they might <P_D2R> slay , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2R.143

of them only they might take Vsurie : shewing that Vsurie is a kind of
punishment , and such a kind of punishment , as if we are to kill a man
, it were a very fit punishment for him , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2R.144

and therefore the <font> Iewes <$$font> might take Vsurie of none , but
them whom they might kill . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2R.145

Secondly , they say that they lend for compassion ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2R.146

and so make Vsurie a worke of charitie . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2R.147

This were charitie not to be partakers in our gaines , but to be
partakers in our losses , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2R.148

but Vsurers will be partakers in our gaines , but not in our losses ;
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2R.149

nay , though we lose , yet they will gaine : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2R.150

is this charitie ? SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2R.151

it is colde charitie to partake in our gaines , and not in our losses .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2R.152

Thirdly , they say , if he gaine and I gaine too , is not this well ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2R.153

may he not consider my friendship <P_D2V> and be thankefull ?
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2V.154

yes , hee may be thankfull , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2V.155

but no man is bound to be thankfull , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2V.156

but when he hath receiued a good turne , then he is tried whether he wil
be thankfull or no : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2V.157

and if he requite thy curtesie , then he is thankefull ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2V.158

but if thou bind him to requite it , then thou are couetous .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2V.159

Fourthly they say , Vsurie is necessarie for Orphanes and Widdowes , and
Straungers , which haue no other way to get their liuing ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2V.160

and therefore some Vsurie must be tolerated . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2V.161

If Vsurie be necessarie for vs , how did the <font> Iewes <$$font>
without it ? SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2V.162

Did God thinke it good for the state of their common weale to be without
Vsurers : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2V.163

and is it good for the state of our common weale to haue Vsurers ?
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2V.164

this is wisdome against God . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D2V.165

Fiftly they say : If I may not <P_D3R> gaine by the money which I lend ,
I will lend no more , but keepe my money to my selfe :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3R.166

nay , that is as bad to keepe thy money from them which neede , as to
lend thy money for Vsurie . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3R.167

For Christ saith , <font> from him which borroweth , turne not away thy
face . <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3R.168

Therefore thou are bound to lende . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3R.169

As he hath a cursse in <font> Prou. <$$font> 11. which keepeth his
Corne when hee should sell it to them which hunger : so he hath a cursse
in <font> Eze. <$$font> 18. which keepeth his money when he should
lende it to them which want . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3R.170

Sixtly they say , because Vsurie comes of biting , the biting Vsurie is
onely forbidden , and none but the biting Vsurie :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3R.171

why then all Vsurie is forbidden , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3R.172

for all Vsurie commeth of biting , to shewe that all Vsurie is vnlawfull
. SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3R.173

<P_D3V>

Lastly , they aleadge the Law of the land for it ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3V.175

and say , the Queens Statute doeth allowe vs to take vppon Vsurie tenne
in the hundreth . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3V.176

These are like the <font> Iewes <$$font> which sayd , <font> We have a
lawe , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3V.177

and by our lawe he shall dye : <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3V.178

when they could not saye by Gods lawe he shall die , then they said
<font> by our lawe he shall dye : <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3V.179

so when they can@ @not say by Gods lawe we may take Vsurie , they say by
mans law we may take Vsurie , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3V.180

this is the poorest defence of all the rest : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3V.181

for if Gods lawe forbid thee , can any lawe of man excuse thee :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3V.182

As it would not serue <font> Adam <$$font> to say , <font> the woman bad
me <$$font> , so it will not serue the Vsurer to say , the Lawe doth
licence me . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3V.183

But he can@ @not say , the Law doth license me :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D3V.184

for though peraduenture our law do tollerate more than should be
tollerated , yet <P_D4R> I would haue you know , that our lawe doeth not
allow tenne in the hundreth , nor fiue in the hu~dreth , not one in the
hundreth , nor any Vsurie at all : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4R.185

but there is a restraint in our law , that no Vsurer take aboue tenne in
the hundreth , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4R.186

it doeth not allow tenne in the hundreth , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4R.187

but punisheth that tyrant which exacteth aboue tenne in the hundreth .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4R.188

It is much like that tolleration which we reade of diuources .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4R.189

For the hardnesse of mens hearts , Christ saith , that <font> Moses
<$$font> did suffer the man and wife to part asunder :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4R.190

So for the hardnesse of mens hearts , our <font> Moses <$$font> our
Prince is faine to suffer as it were a kinde of Vsurie , because
otherwise no men would lende . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4R.191

These are the best excuses which our Vsurers haue to pleade for
themselues , against they come <P_D4V> before the tribunall of God ;
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4V.192

and if their reasons will not stande before men nor their owne
conscience , how will they stande before the Lorde ?
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4V.193

Now , you long to heare what the Vsurer is like .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4V.194

to what shall I liken this generation ? SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4V.195

They are like a Butlers boxe : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4V.196

for as all the counters at last come to the Butler : so all the money at
last commeth to the Vsurer , ten after ten , and ten after ten , and ten
to ten , till at last he receiue not onely ten for an_hundreth , but
an_hundreth for ten . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4V.197

This is the onely differnce , that the Butler ca~ receiue no more than
he deliuered : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4V.198

but the Vsurer receiueth more than hee deliuereth .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4V.199

They are like a Moth ; SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4V.200

euen as a Moth eateth a hole in cloath , so Vsurie eateth a hole in
siluer : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D4V.201

If you haue a peece of siluer which <P_D5R> is as much as an_hundreth
pounds , in one yere Vsurie will eate a hole in it as big as ten pounds
: SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5R.202

in two yeares she will eate a hole as big as twentie pounds :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5R.203

in three yeares she will eate a hole as big as thirtie pounds .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5R.204

Nay , now they say , he is but a bad husband which can@ @not eate a hole
as big as fiftie pounds in a yeare : that is , which can@ @not gaine
halfe in halfe : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5R.205

how manie holes haue these Moths eaten in poore mens garments :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5R.206

They are like Nonresidents , that is , such bad members that no man
speaketh for them but themselues . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5R.207

As no man standeth for Nonresidencie but he which is a Nonresident , or
he which would be a Nonreside~t : so no man standeth for Vsurie but hee
which is an Vsurer , or hee which would be an Vsurer .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5R.208

They are like <font> Iezabel <$$font> , which said , <font> Let me
<P_D5V> alone , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5V.209

I haue a way <$$font> , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5V.210

If there bee no way to liue <paren> saieth the false Steward <$$paren> I
knowe what to doo , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5V.211

I wil deceiue ; SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5V.212

so if there bee no way to liue <paren> saieith the Vsurer <$$paren> I
knowe what to doo , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5V.213

I will oppresse : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5V.214

If I can@ @not liue by buying , nor by selling , nor by flattering , nor
by labouring , I will liue by oppression . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5V.215

But as one in his Comment speakes to the false Steward , <font> Thou
saiest I knowe what to doo , but doest thou knowe what thou shalt suffer
? <$$font> So I saye to Vsurers , you saye you knowe what to doo , but
doo you knowe what you shall suffer ? SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5V.216

In deed he knoweth not what to do , which knoweth not to doo well :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5V.217

and therefore Christ saide of his persecutors , <font> that they knewe
not what they did . <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5V.218

Now I may conclude with <font> Paul , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5V.219

I haue not spoken but the Lord . <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D5V.220

<P_D6R>

and therefore as the Lord said vnto <font> Saul <$$font> , that he
persecuted him : so they which resist this doctrine do contemne him ,
and not me . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D6R.222

<font> The end of the first Sermon . <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,D6R.223

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_2_here}

<P_F1R>

Now you would vnderstand the last question . If you haue bin Vsurers
alreadie , what you should doe with that money which you haue by Vsurie
, SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F1R.226

surely euen as <font> Zacheus <$$font> did , restore it againe .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F1R.227

If you can@ @not say as <font> Samuel <$$font> said , <font> whose goods
haue I taken ? <$$font> then you must saye as <font> Zacheus <$$font>
sayde , <font> whose goodes haue I kept ? <$$font>
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F1R.228

The best thinge is , to doe no man wrong , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F1R.229

but the next to that is , to make him amends . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F1R.230

This God signifieth when he saith , <font> put away the execrable thing
from you , <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F1R.231

that is , let no vnlawfull thing staye in youre hands , like the wedge
of <font> Achan <$$font> which he had got by sinne .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F1R.232

The <P_F1V> same lawe serueth for all which is got wrongfully , which
was instituted against theeues , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F1V.233

<font> Restore it againe : <$$font> SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F1V.234

the reason of this lawe is , because the sinne is not remitted , vntill
the debt be restored , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F1V.235

for as humilitie is the repentaunce of pride , and abstinence is the
repentaunce of surfet , and almes is the repentaunce of couetousnes ,
and forgiuenes is the repentaunce of malice , so restitution is the
repentaunce of Vsurie ; SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F1V.236

as he which is not humble doeth not repent his pride , he which doeth
not abstaine doth not repent his gluttonie , he which doeth not forgiue
, doeth not repent his malice , so he which doeth not restore , doeth
not repent his Vsurie . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F1V.237

for how can he be said to repent for his Vsurie , which liueth by Vsurie
still . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F1V.238

Therefore <font> Daniel <$$font> saith to <font> Nebuchadnezzar ,
<P_F2R> Breake off thy sinnes by righteousness <$$font> , shewing , that
nothing but righteousnes can breake vnrighteousnes .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F2R.239

As diseases are healed by the contrarie , so pride is healed by
humilitie , gluttonie by abstinence , malice by forgiuenes , couetousnes
by almes , and Vsurie by restoring . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F2R.240

This <font> Paule <$$font> calleth , <font> The reuenge of a Christian ,
<$$font> when he takes reuenge vpon his sinnes , and punisheth his
lustes , so that he maketh them do the contrarie to that which they
would do . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F2R.241

Therefore you must restore that which you haue got by Vsurie ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F2R.242

or else you do not repent of your Vsurie . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F2R.243

As a Camell whe~ he come home , casteth off his burthen at the dore ,
that he may enter into his Stable , so they which are laden with other
mens goodes , when they goe to heauen , <P_F2V> must leaue their burthen
where they had it , least they be too grose to get in at the narrow gate
. SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F2V.244

But as the Disciple of Christ said , <font> this is a hard speech
<$$font> , so to them which haue got most that they haue by vnlawfull
meanes , this is a hard speech , to bid them restore it againe :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F2V.245

there be two great rubs in the way . First , the losse which they shall
sustaine , if they restore againe all which they haue got vniustlie .
Then the difficultie to restore it vnto the right parties .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F2V.246

If you aske mee , as <font> Amaziah <$$font> asked the Prophet , <font>
How shall we doo for those hundreth tallents ? <$$font> How shall I
liue when al is gone which I haue got wrongfully ? I can say no more
than the Prophet said to him , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F2V.247

<font> The Lord is able to giue thee more than this .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F2V.248

Zacheus <$$font> did not feare how he <P_F3R> should liue ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3R.249

but <font> Zacheus <$$font> did feare to offende :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3R.250

so thou shouldest not feare to restore other mens goods ,
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3R.251

but thou shouldest feare to keepe other mens goods :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3R.252

and as <font> Zacheus <$$font> liued when hee had restored , so thou
shalt liue when thou has restored . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3R.253

He which saith , <font> Trie me if I will not powre down a blessing ,
<$$font> trie him whether he will not powre down a blessing ;
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3R.254

for he hath promised to blesse the lender as@ @well as the sacrificer .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3R.255

He which is the Lorde of all , can giue thee more than thou needest :
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3R.256

but if you can not restore to the owner , nor to his heires , the~ giue
it to the poore , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3R.257

for they are the next heires , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3R.258

& repent that thou hast kept it so long : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3R.259

but in no wise thou maiest keepe it to thy selfe , because it is none of
thine . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3R.260

When <font> Hezekiah <$$font> was like to <P_F3V> die , <font> Esaiah
<$$font> sayd vnto him , <font> Set thy things in order before thou die
<$$font> . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3V.261

That which hee aduised him hee aduiseth all ; SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3V.262

set your things in order before you die . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3V.263

What is this to set things in order , but to restore vnto euerie one his
owne ? SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3V.264

When thou bequeathest thy bodie to the earth , then thy bodie is set in
order : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3V.265

when thou bequeathest thy soule to God , then thy soule is set in order
: SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3V.266

when thou bequeathest thy goods to the owners , then thy goods are set
in order : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3V.267

therefore if thou die with other me~s goods in thy hand , then thou
diest before thou haue set things in order , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3V.268

and then thou diest in thy sinnes , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3V.269

and then no promise in all the Scripture appertaineth vnto thee ,
because nothing is promised vnto sinners but vnto penitent sinners .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F3V.270

Therefore that you may not die in <P_F4R> your sinnes , it is necessary
to make restitution before you die , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F4R.271

or els you die in your sinne , SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F4R.272

and are crossed out of all the ioyes of heauen .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F4R.273

Therefore as <font> Abner <$$font> saide to <font> Ioah , Knowest thou
not that it will be bitternes in the latter end ? <$$font> So remember
whether this course will bee sweete or bitter in the end .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F4R.274

Thus you haue heard the definition of Vsurie , and the deriuation of it
, and the vnlawfulness of it , and the kindes of it , and the punishment
of it , and the arguments which are alleaged for it , & what may bee
thought of them which doo not take Vusrie but giue Vsurie , and what
they should doo which haue got their liuing by Vsurie .
SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F4R.275

Now , seeing you may not bee Vsurers to men , let euerie man hereafter
bee an Vsurer to God , <P_F4V> which promiseth ; If thou leaue father ,
or mother , or wife , or children , or house , or land for him , not ten
in the hundreth , but an_hundreth for ten ; nay an_hundreth for one ,
and in the world to come life euerlasting : SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F4V.276

that is , a_thousand for one . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F4V.277

That we may receiue this Vsurie , let vs pray that the wordes which wee
haue heard out of this Psalme , may dwell with vs till we dwell in
heauen . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F4V.278

Finis . SMITH-1591-E2-P2,F4V.279

