<BEGIN_spencer-1708-e3-p2>

<P_2.4,249>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCCC_LORD_SUNDERLAND_TO_THE_DUKE_OF_NEWCASTLE._PROPOSES_TO_MAKE_A_STAND_IN_PARLIAMENT,_OR_THE_PRINCE_OF_WALES_WILL_BE_BROUGHT_IN>

Althorp , SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,249.4

Aug. 9=th= . 1708 . SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,249.5

My Lord , I believe Lord Sommers and Lord Halifax have acquainted your
Grace with the unlucky accidents that have prevented our waiting you at
Welbeck ; SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,249.6

however I should have done myself the honour to have gone alone , but
that , since my coming here , I have had the ill luck to sprain my foot
, which has put me to a great deal of pain and trouble , but is now
something easier . SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,249.7

I own I am extremely concerned at this disappointment ,
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,249.8

for besides the pleasure of waiting upon your Grace , it would have been
of use to have talked together of the present posture of our affairs ,
which , though they are very fortunately and unexpectedly mended abroad
, by our success in Flanders and in the West Indies , yet seem to grow
worse and worse every day at home ; SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,249.9

for without running over all the particulars , such as the villainous
management of Scotland , <P_2.4,250> the state of the Fleet , which is
worse than ever , the condition of Ireland in which the Protestant
interest is lower and the Popish higher than ever , their late
management in relation to the Invasion , and in particular the pardoning
Lord Griffin , is a declaration to the whole world , as far as in them
lies , for the Prince of Wales and against the Protestant succession .
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,250.10

These are such proceedings , that , if there is not a just spirit shewn
in Parliament , we had as good give up the game and submit to my Lord
Treasurer and Lord Marlboroughs bringing in the Prince of Wales .
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,250.11

My reason of troubling your Grace with all this is to conjure you not to
defer coming to town too long , till just the Parliament meets ;
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,250.12

for whatever is proper to be done must be concerted beforehand ,
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,250.13

and that can@ @not be done without your presence and influence .
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,250.14

I know you are very averse to coming to town before your time ,
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,250.15

but three weeks or a month sooner or later I hope will break no squares
, SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,250.16

and it is so absolutely necessary , that it is the joint request of your
friends and humble servants ; SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,250.17

and indeed our all is at stake ; SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,250.18

for if next Sessions of Parliament does not redress the mischiefs ,
there 's an end of the Revolution and the Protestant succession .
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,250.19

I have obeyed your commands in relation to Mr. Rayner ;
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,250.20

as for Mr. Attwood , several merchants of the other side have lodged a
Petition against him , so that he has desired to have the matter put off
till more of his <P_2.4,251> friends are in Town :
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,251.21

Your Grace may depend upon my doing him all the service I can .
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,251.22

I hope your Grace has your health well in the country ,
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,251.23

and beg you to believe that I am with the greatest truth and respect ,
My Lord , Your Grace's most obedient humble servant , Sunderland .
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,251.24

{COM:insert_letter_401_here}

<P_2.4,257>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCCCIII_THE_EARL_OF_SUNDERLAND_TO_THE_DUKE_OF_NEWCASTLE._THE_DEATH_OF_PRINCE_GEORGE_OF_DENMARK._OFFICIAL_CHANGES>

London , SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,257.28

Nov. 4=th= . 1708 . SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,257.29

My Lord , Since I wrote last to your Grace , and had the honour of your
answer , the death of the Prince has made so great an alteration in
every thing , and particularly in what was most at every body's heart ,
the affair of the Admiralty , that as soon as it happened , those of our
friends of the House of Commons that were in Town , and that were the
most zealous with us in setting up Sir Peter King , begun to press us to
accommodate the matter and not to make division , since by this accident
there was room to have every thing set right ;
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,257.30

since that , my Lord Treasurer has acquainted us that the Queen had
agreed to make Lord Pembroke Lord High Admiral , Lord Sommers President
, and Lord Wharton Lord Lieutenant of Ireland .
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,257.31

Lord Sommers is out of Town , so that whether he will be persuaded to
accept of it , or no , I can@ @not tell ; SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,257.32

but he would be <P_2.4,258> so much in the wrong if he should not , that
I wo@ @n't doubt but he will . SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,258.33

These Proposals are so great in themselves towards putting things upon a
thorough right foot , that those Lords in whose names I wrote last to
your Grace have desired me to acquaint you with it , and that their
thoughts upon it are , that since these main things are like to be done
, it would by no means be right to venture a division of our friends
upon the first point of the Speaker , and therefore they have already
spoke with Sir Peter King , in order to endeavour to make him easy in it
; so that if your Grace is of the same mind , and approves what they
have done , you will please to let your friends of the House of Commons
know it in the manner you shall judge properest .
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,258.34

We are in expectation of seeing you here every day .
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,258.35

However , these Lords directed me to acquaint you with it as soon as
possible . SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,258.36

I am ever , with the greatest truth and respect , My Lord , Your Grace's
most obedient humble servant , Sunderland .
SPENCER-1708-E3-P2,2.4,258.37

