<BEGIN_stat-1626-e2-p2>

<P_5,3>

<heading>

CHAPTER IV . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,3.4

An Acte for the further restraint of Tipling in Innes , Alehouses , and
other Victualling Houses . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,3.5

<$$heading>

Whereas in the last Parliament , it was enacted , that if any p~son or
p~sons wheresoever his or their habitacion , or abiding be , should
after be found , uppon view or his owne confession , or proofe of one
witnesse , to be tipling in any Inne Alehouse , or Victualling house ,
such p~son or p~sons should be thenceforth adjudged and construed to be
within the Statutes of the first and fourth yeares of the late King~
Majesties reigne , King James of famous memory : The one entituled , An
Act to restraine the inordinate haunting of tipling in Innes Alehouses ,
and other Victualling Houses : And the other intituled , An Acte to
represse the odious and loathsome sinne of drunkennesse , as if he or
they had inhabited and dwelled in the Citie , Towne corporate , Markett
towne , Village or Hamlett , where the Inne , Alehouse , or Victualling
house was or should be , where he or they should be so found tipling ,
should incurre the like penaltie , and the same to be in such sort
levied and disposed , as in the said Act is expressed , concerning such
as there inhabite , but no punishment by any , or either of the said
Actes , or by any other Statute , is inflicted uppon the Innekeeper ,
Alehousekeeper , or Victualler that p~mitt~ or
{COM:preceding_word_"or"_emended} suffers such p~son or p~sons not there
inhabiting to tipple in his Inne , Alehouse , or Victualling House : For
remedy whereof , be it enacted , That every Innekeep , Alehousekeep ,
and other Victualler , that at any tyme after the end of this Session of
Parliament shall p~mitt and suffer any p~son or p~sons , not inhabiting
in the Citie , Towne corporate , Markett Towne , Village , or Hamlett ,
where such Inne , Alehouse , or Victualling House is , or shal@ @be , to
tipple in the saide Inne , Alehouse , or Victualling House , contrary to
the true intent of any , or either of the said former Statutes , the
said Innekeeper , Alehousekeeper , and Victualler so offending , shall
incurre the same penaltie , and in such manner to be proved , levied ,
and disposed , as in the former Statute of the first yeare of his said
late Majesties Raigne , is appointed for p~mitting such to tipple as
dwell in the same Cittie , Towne corporate , Markett Towne , Village ,
or Hamlett . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,3.7

And be it further enacted , That the Keepers of Tavernes , and such as
doe sell Wine in their houses , and doe alsoe keepe Innes , or
Victualling in their houses , shal@ @be taken to be within the said two
former Statutes , and also within this Statute . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,3.8

<P_5,23>

<heading>

CHAPTER I . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,23.11

The Peticion Exhibited to His Majestie by the Lord~ Spirituall and
Temporall and Co~mons in this p~sent Parliament assembled conc~ning
divers Right~ and Liberties of the Subject~ : with the King~ Majesties
Royall Aunswere thereunto in full Parliament . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,23.12

<$$heading>

To the King~ most Excellent Majestie . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,23.14

Humbly shew unto our Soveraigne Lord the King the Lord~ Spirituall and
Temporall and Co~mons in Parliament assembled , That whereas it is
declared and enacted by a Statute made in the tyme of the Raigne of King
Edward the first co~monly called Statutum de Tallagio non concedendo ,
That no Tallage or Ayde should be layd or levyed by the King or his
Heires in this Realme without the good will and assent of the
Archbishopps Bishopps Earles Barons Knight~ Burgesses and other the
Freemen of the Co~monaltie of this Realme , And by Authoritie of
Parliament holden in the five_and_twentith yeare of the raigne of King
Edward the third , it is declared and enacted , That from thenceforth no
p~son should be compelled to make any Loanes to the King against his
will because such Loanes were against reason and the franchise of the
Land , And by other Lawes of this Realme it is p~vided , that none
should be charged by any charge or Imposicion called a Benevolence nor
by such like Charge by which the Statutes before mencioned and other the
good Lawes and Statutes of this Realme your Subject~ have inherited this
Freedome That they should not {COM:preceding_word_"not"_emended} be
compelled to contribute to any Taxe Tallage Ayde or other like Charge
not sett by co~mon consent in Parliament . Yet neverthelesse of late
divers Co~missions directed to sundry Co~missioners in severall Counties
with Instruccions have issued , by meanes whereof your people have been
in divers places assembled and required to lend certaine so~mes of mony
unto your Majestie , and many of them uppon their refusall soe to doe
have had an Oath administred unto them not warrantable by the Lawes or
Statutes of this Realme and have been constrayned to become bound to
make apparance and give attendance before your Privie Councell and in
other places ; and others of them have been therefore imprisoned
confined and sondry other waies molested and disquieted And divers other
charges have been laid and levyed upon your people in severall Counties
by Lord Lieuten=a=nt~ Deputie Lieuten=a=nt~ Co~missioners for Musters
Justices of Peace and others by Co~maund or Direccion from your Majestie
or your Privie Councell against the Lawes and free Customes of the
Realme . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,23.15

And where alsoe by the Statute called The great Charter of the Liberties
of England , It is declared and enacted , That no Freeman may be taken
or imprisoned or be disseised of his Freehold or Liberties or his free
Customes or be outlawed or exiled or in any manner destroyed , but by
the lawfull Judgment of his Peeres or by the Law of the Land . <P_5,24>
And in the eight_and_twentith yeere of the raigne of King Edward the
third it was declared and enacted by authoritie of Parliament , that no
man of what estate or condicion that he be , should be put out of his
Land or Tenement~ nor taken nor imprisoned nor disherited nor put to
death without being brought to aunswere by due p~cesse of Lawe .
Neverthelesse against the tenor of the said Statutes and other the good
Lawes and Statutes of your Realme to that end p~vided , divers of your
Subject~ have of late been imprisoned without any cause shewed :
STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,24.16

And when for their deliverance they were brought before your Justices by
your Majesties Writt~ of Habeas corpus there to undergoe and receive as
the Court should order , and their Keepers co~maunded to certifie the
causes of their detayner , no cause was certified , but that they were
deteined by your Majesties speciall co~maund signified by the Lord~ of
your Privie Councell , and yet were returned backe to severall prisons
without being charged with any thing to which they might make aunswere
according to the Lawe . And whereas of late great Companies of
Souldiers and Marriners have been dispersed into divers Counties of the
Realme , and the inhabitant~ against their will~ have been compelled to
receive them into their houses , and there to suffer them to sojourne
against the Lawes and Customes of this Realme and to the great greivance
and vexation of the people . And whereas alsoe by authoritie of
Parliament in the five_and_twentith yeare of the Raigne of King Edward
the third it is declared and enacted that no man should be forejudged of
life or limbe against the forme of the Great Charter and the Lawe of the
Land , And by the said Great Charter , and other the Lawes and Statutes
of this your Realme no man ought to be adjudged to death but by the
Lawes established in this your Realme , either by the customes of the
same Realme or by Act~ of Parliament . And whereas no offendor of what
kinde soever is exempted from the p~ceeding~ to be used and punishment~
to be inflicted by the Lawes and Statutes of this your Realme ,
Neverthelesse of late tyme {COM:preceding_word_"tyme"_emended} divers
Co~missions under your Majesties great Seale have issued forth , by
which certaine p~sons have been assigned and appointed Co~mmissioners
with power and authoritie to p~ceed within the land according to the
Justice of Martiall Lawe against such Souldiers or Marriners or other
dissolute p~sons joyning with them as should co~mitt any murther robbery
felony mutiny or other outrage or misdemeanor whatsoever , and by such
su~mary course and order as is agreeable to Martiall Lawe and as is used
in Armies in tyme of warr to p~ceed to the tryall and condemnacion of
such offendors , and them to cause to be executed and putt to death
according to the Lawe Martiall . By p~text whereof some of your
Majesties Subject~ have been by some of the said Co~missioners put to
death , when and where , if by the Lawes and Statut~ of the land they
had deserved death , by the same Lawes and Statut~ alsoe they might and
by no other ought to have byn judged and executed . And alsoe sundrie
greivous offendors by colour thereof clayming an exemption have escaped
the punishment~ due to them by the Lawes and Statutes of this your
Realme , by reason that divers of your Officers and ministers of Justic~
have unjustlie refused or forborne to p~ceed against such Offendors
according to the same Lawes and Statutes uppon p~tence that the said
offendors were punishable onelie by Martiall law and by authoritie of
such Co~missions as aforesaid . Which Co~missions and all other of like
nature are wholly and directlie contrary to the said Lawes and Statutes
of this your Realme . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,24.17

They doe therefore humblie pray your most Excellent Majestie , that no
man hereafter be compelled to make or yeild any Guift Loane Benevolence
Taxe or such like Charge without co~mon consent by Acte of Parliament ,
And that none be called to make aunswere or take such Oath or to give
attendance or be confined or otherwise molested or disquieted concerning
the same or for refusall thereof . And that no freeman in any such
manner as is before mencioned be imprisoned or deteined . And that your
Majestie would be pleased to remove the said Souldiers and Mariners and
that your people may not be soe burthened in tyme to come . And that
the aforesaid Co~missions for p~ceeding by Martiall Lawe may be revoked
and annulled . And that hereafter no Co~missions of like nature may
issue forth to any p~son or p~sons whatsoever to be executed as
aforesaid , lest by colour of them any of your Majesties Subject~ be
destroyed or put to death contrary to the Lawes and Franchise of the
Land . All which they most humblie pray of your most Excellent Majestie
as their Right~ and Liberties according to the Lawes and Statutes of
this Realme , And that your Majestie would alsoe vouchsafe to declare
that the Award~ doing~ and p~ceeding~ to the p~judice of your people in
any of the p~misses shall not be drawen hereafter into consequence or
example . And that your Majestie would be alsoe graciouslie pleased for
the further comfort and safetie of your people to declare your Royall
will and pleasure , That in the thing~ aforesaid all your Officers and
Ministers shall serve you according to the Lawes and Statutes of this
Realme as they tender the Honor of your Majestie and the prosperitie of
this Kingdome . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,24.18

<P_5,25>

<heading>

CHAPTER II . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,25.21

An Act for the further reformacion of sondry abuses co~mitted on the
Lord~ Day co~monlie called Sonday . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,25.22

<$$heading>

Forasmuch As the Lord~ Day co~monlie called Sunday is much broken and
p~faned by Carriers Waggoners Carters Waynemen Butchers and Drovers of
cattell to the great dishonor of God and reproach of Religion , Be it
therefore Enacted by the King~ most excellent Majestie and the Lord~
Spirituall and Temporall and by the Co~mons in this p~sent Parliament
assembled and by the Authoritie of the same , That no Carrier with any
Horse or Horses nor Waggonmen with any Waggon or Waggons nor Carremen
with any Cart or Cart~ nor Waynemen with anie Wayne or Waynes nor
Drovers with any Cattell shall after fortie daies next after the end of
this p~sent Session of Parliament by themselves or any other travell
uppon the said Day , uppon paine that every p~son and p~sons so
offending shall lose and forfeit twentie shilling~ for every such
offence , STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,25.24

Or if any Butcher by himselfe or any other for him by his privitie or
consent shall after the end of the said fortie daies kill or sell any
Victuall uppon the said Day , That then every such Butcher shall forfait
and lose for every such offence the so~me of six shilling~ and eight
pence The said offences and every of them being done in view of anie
Justice of Peace Mayor or other head Officer of any Cittie or Towne
Corporate within their lymitt~ respectivelie or being proved uppon oath
by two or more witnesses or by the Confession of the partie offending
before any such Justice Mayor or head Officer within their severall
limitt~ respectivelie wherein such offence shal@ @be co~mitted , To
which end every such Justice Mayor or Head officer shall have power by
this Act to minister an Oath to such witnesse or witnesses . All which
so~mes or penalties shall or may be levied by any Constable or
Churchwarden by warrant from any such Justice or Justices of the Peace
Mayor or other Head officer as aforesaid within their severall lymitt~
where such offence shal@ @be co~mitted or done by distresse and sale of
the offendors good~ rendring to the partie the overplus or shal@ @be
recovered by any p~son or p~sons that will sue for the same by Bill
Plaint or Informacion in any of His Majesties Court~ of Record in anie
Cittie or Towne Corporate before His Majesties Justices of the Peace in
their generall Sessions of the Peace . All which forfeitures shal@ @be
imployed to and for the use of the poore of the Parishes where the said
offences shal@ @be co~mitted or done Saving onelie that it shal@ @be
lawfull to and for any such Justice Mayor or Head officer out of the
said forfeitures to reward any such p~son or p~sons that shall informe
or otherwise p~secute any p~son or p~sons offending against this p~sent
Act according to their discrecions so that such reward exceed not the
third part of the forfeiture . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,25.25

Provided that such Bill Plaint or informacion shal@ @be co~menced sued
and p~secuted in the Countie City or Towne Corporate where such offence
shal@ @be co~mitted and done and not elsewhere , wherein no Essoyne
Proteccion or wager of Lawe shall be allowed to the Defendant ,
STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,25.26

Provided allwaies that it shal@ @be lawfull for any Constable or
Churchwarden that shall have any Suit or Accion brought against them for
any distresse by them or any of them to be taken by force of this p~sent
Act to pleade the generall issue , and to give the speciall matter in
evidence . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,25.27

Provided likewise that no p~son or p~sons whatsoever shal@ @be impeached
by this Act , unlesse he be thereof questioned within six Monethes after
the offence co~mitted . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,25.28

Provided further that this Act shall not in any sort abridge or take
away the Authoritie of the Court~ Eccl~iasticall ,
STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,25.29

This Act to continue to the end of the first Session of the next
Parliament . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,25.30

<heading>

CHAPTER III . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,25.32

An Act to restraine the Passing or Sending of any to be popishly bred
beyond the Seas . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,25.33

<$$heading>

Forasmuch as divers ill_affected p~sons to the true Religion established
within this Realme have sent their Children into forraine Part~ to be
bred upp in Popery notwithstanding the Restraint thereof by the Statute
made in the First Yere of the Raigne of our late Soveraigne Lord King
James of famous memory , Be it enacted That the said Statute shal@ @be
put in due Execucion . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,25.35

And be it further enacted by the King~ most excellent Majestie and the
Lord~ Spirituall and Temporall and Co~mons in this p~sent Parliament
assembled and by the Authoritie of the same , That in case any p~son or
p~sons under the Obedience of the King His Heires and Successors at any
Tyme after the End of this Session of Parliament shall passe or goe or
shall convey or send or cause to be sent or conveyed any Child or other
p~son out of any of the King~ Dominions into any the Part~ beyond the
Seas out of the King~ Obedience to the Intent and Purpose to enter into
or be resident or trayned upp in any Priory Abby Nunnery Popish
Univ~sitie Colledge or Schoole or House of Jesuit~ Preist~ or in any
private Popish Familie and shal@ @be there by any Jesuite Seminary
Priest Fryer Monke or other Popish p~son instructed p~swaded or
strengthened in the Popish Religion in any Sort to p~fesse the same or
shall convey or send or cause to be conveyed or sent by the Hand~ or
Meanes of any p~son whatsoever any so~me or so~mes of Mony or other
Thing for or toward~ the maynten=a=nce of any Child or other p~son
already gone or sent to goe or to be sent and trayned and instructed as
is aforesaid or under the Name or Colour of any Charitie Benevolence or
Almes toward~ the Releife of any Priorie Abby Nunnery Colledge Schoole
or any Religious House whatsoever . Every p~son so sending conveying or
causing to be sent and conveyed as well any such Child or other p~son as
any so~me or so~mes of Mony or other Thing and every p~son passing or
being sent beyond the Seas being thereof lawfullie convicted in or uppon
any Informacion p~sentment or Indictment as is aforesaid shal@ @be
disabled from thenceforth to sue or use any Accion Bill Plaint or
Informacion in Course of Lawe or to p~secute any Suite in any Court of
Equitie or to be <P_5,26> Co~mittee of any Ward or Executor or
Administrator to any p~son or capable of any Legacie or Deed of Gift or
to beare any Office within the Realme ; and shall loose and forfeite all
his Good~ and Chattell~ and shall forfeit all his Land~ Tenement~ and
Hereditament~ Rent~ An~uities Offices and Estates of Freehold for and
during his naturall Life . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,26.36

Provided allwaies That no p~son sent or conveyed as aforesaid that shall
within Six Monethes after his Retorne into this Realme conforme himselfe
unto the p~sent Religion established in this Church of England and
receive the Sacrament of the Lord~ Supper according to the Statutes made
concerning Conformitie in other Cases required from Popish Recusant~
shall incurre any the Penalties aforesaid . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,26.37

{COM:The_two_following_clauses_are_annexed_to_the_original_act_in_a_separate_schedule}

And it is enacted That all and every the Offences against this Statute
may be enquired heard and determined before the Justices of the King~
Bench or Justices of Assise or Gaole delivery or of Oyer and Terminer of
such Counties where the Offenders did last dwell or abide , or whence
they departed out of this Kingdome or where they were taken .
STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,26.39

Provided also That if any p~son or Childe so passing or sent or now
being beyond the Seas shall after his Retorne into this Realme conforme
himselfe unto {COM:preceding_word_"unto"_emended} this
{COM:preceding_word_"this"_emended} Religion established in this Church
of England and receive the Sacrament of the Lord his Supper according to
the Statut~ made for or concerning Conformity in other Cases required
from Popish Recusant~ for and during such tyme as he or she shall so
contynue in such Conformitie and Obedience according to the true Intent
and Meaning of the said Lawes and Statut~ he
{COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended} or {COM:preceding_word_"or"_emended}
she {COM:preceding_word_"she"_emended} shall have his or her Land~
restored to them againe . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,26.40

<heading>

CHAPTER IV . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,26.42

An Act for the better Suppressing of unlicenced Alehouse keepers .
STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,26.43

<$$heading>

Whereas by an Acte made in the Fift Yeare of the Raigne of King Edward
the Sixth of famous Memory entituled An Act for Keepers of Alehouses to
be bound by Recognizance amongest other Thing~ it is enacted That if any
p~son or p~sons other then such as should be from thenceforth admitted
and allowed by the Justices mencioned in the said Acte should after the
Day in the said Acte limited obstinatelie and uppon his owne Authoritie
take uppon him or them to keepe a co~mon Alehouse or Tipling house or
should contrary to the co~maundement of the said Justices or Two of them
use co~monlie selling of Ale or Beere , that then the said Justices of
Peace or Two of them <paren> whereof one to be of the Quo~ <$$paren>
should for every such Offence committ every such p~son or p~sons so
offending to the Co~mon Goale within the same Shire Cittie Borough Towne
Corporate Franchise or Libertie there to remaine without Baile or
Mainprise by the Space of Three Dayes . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,26.45

And before his or their Deliverance the said Justices should take
Recognizance of him or them so co~mitted , with Two Suerties that he or
they should not keepe any co~mon Alehouse or {TEXT:missing_"or"} Tipling
house or use co~monlie selling of Ale or Beere as by the Discrecion of
the said Justices should seeme convenient : STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,26.46

And the said Justices should make Certificate of every such
Recognizaunce and Offence at the next Quarter Sessions that should be
holden within the same Shire Cittie Borough Towne Corporate Franchise or
Libertie where the same should be co~mitted or done , which Certificate
should be a sufficient Conviccion in Law of the same offence ,
STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,26.47

And the said Justice of Peace uppon the said Certificate made , should
in open Sessions assesse the Fine for every such Offence at Twentie
Shilling~ , as by the said Acte may appeare : Which Law hath not wrought
such Reformacion as was intended , for that the said Fine of Twentie
Shilling~ is seldome levied , and for that many of the said Offendors by
Reason of their Povertie are neither able to pay the said Fine of
Twentie Shilling~ , nor yet to beare their owne Charges of conveying
them to the Gaole , and moreover doe leave a great Charge of Wife and
Children uppon the Parishes wherein they live : In regard whereof the
Constables and other Officers are much discouraged in p~senting them and
the Offendors become obstinate and incorrigible . For Remedie whereof ,
be it enacted by the Authoritie of this p~sent Parliament That if any
p~son or p~sons after Fortie Daies next ensuing the End of this p~sent
Session of Parliament shall uppon his owne Authoritie not being
thereunto lawfullie licensed take uppon him her or them to keepe a
co~mon Alehouse or Tipling house or use co~monlie selling of Ale Beere
Cyder or Perrie : that then every such p~son or p~sons shall for every
such Offence forfeite and lose the so~me of Twentie Shilling~ of Currant
Mony of England to the Use of the Poore of the Parish where such Offence
shal@ @be co~mitted : the same Offence being viewed and seene by any
Mayor Bayliffe or Justice of Peace or other Head Officer within their
severall Limitt~ or confessed by the Partie so offending or proved by
the Oath of Two Witnesses to be taken before any Maior Bayliffe or other
Head Officer or any one or more Justice or Justices of the Peace who by
vertue of this Act shal@ @be authorised to minister the said Oath to any
p~son or p~sons that can or will justifie the same being within the
Limitt~ of their said Co~mission . The said Penaltie to be levied by
the Constables or Churchwardens of the Parish or Parishes where the said
Offence shal@ @be co~mitted who shal@ @be accomptable therefore to the
Use of the Poore of the said Parish by way of Distresse to be taken and
detained by Warrant or p~cept from the said Mayor Bayliffe Justice or
Justices or other Head Officer by whome the said Offence shal@ @be
viewed or before whom the same shal@ @be confessed or proved as
aforesaid : And for Default of Satisfaccion within Three Daies next
ensuing the said Distresse to be by the said Constables or Churchwardens
apprised and sold , and the Overplus to be delivered to the Partie or
Parties offending , STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,26.48

and this to be onelie for the <P_5,27> First Offence .
STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,27.49

And if such Offendor or Offendors shall not have sufficient Good~ and
Chattell~ , whereby the said Twentie Shilling~ may be levied by way of
Distresse as aforesaid or shall not pay the said so~me of Twentie
Shilling~ within Six Daies after such Conviccion as aforesaid , that
then the said Mayor Bayliff Justice or Justices or other Head Officer
before whome the said Offender shal@ @be convicted as aforesaid shall
co~mitt all and every the said Offendors to some Constable or Constables
or other inferior Officer or Officers of the Citie Borough Towne Parish
or Hamlett where the Offence shal@ @be co~mitted or the Partie
app~hended to be openlie whipped for {SIC:for_for} the said Offence as
the said Justice or Justices shall lymitt or appoint .
STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,27.50

And be it enacted by the Authoritie aforesaid , That if any Constable or
inferiour Officer shall neglect to execute the said Precept or Warrant
or doe refuse or doe not execute by himselfe or some other to be by him
appointed uppon the Offendor the Punishment limitted by this Statute ,
that in that Case it shall and may be lawfull for the said Mayor
Bayliffe Justice and {COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} Justices of
Peace or other Head Officer to co~mitt the Constable or other inferior
Officer so refusing or not executing the said Punishment by himselfe or
some other to the Co~mon Gaole of the said Countie Cittie or Towne
Corporate there to remaine without Bayle or Mainprise untill the said
Offendor or Offendors shal@ @be by the said Constable or Constables or
other inferiour Officer so refusing or not executing the said Punishment
or some by his or {SIC:or_his} their p~curement punished or
{COM:preceding_word_"or"_emended} whipped as is above lymitted and
declared or untill he or they so neglecting or refusing shall have paid
the so~me of Fortie Shilling~ of lawfull Mony of England unto the Use of
the Poore of the Parish for their said Contempt .
STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,27.51

And be it further enacted That if the said Offendor or Offendors being
an unlicensed Alehousekeep shall offend in any of the p~misses the
second tyme and be thereof convicted in Manner and Forme aforesaid ,
that then the said Mayor Bayliffe Justice or Justices of Peace or other
Head Officer shall committ him her or them unto the House of Correccion
there to remaine for the Space of One Moneth and be dealt withall as
idle lewd and disorderly p~sons , And if such p~son or p~sons shall
againe offend and shal@ @be thereof convicted as aforesaid , that then
the said Offendor or Offendors for every such Offence shal@ @be
co~mitted unto the said House of Correccion as aforesaid there to
remaine untill by Order of the Justices in their Generall Sessions for
the Countie Citie Borough or Franchise he she or they shal@ @be
delivered from thence . STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,27.52

Provided alwaies That such Offendor or Offendors as shal@ @be punished
by vertue of this Acte shall not be punished againe for the same Offence
by the former Acte made in the Fifth Yeare of King Edward the Sixth
afore mencioned , and that such Offender or Offendors as shal@ @be
punished by vertue of the before mencioned Acte made in the Fifth Yeare
of King Edward the Sixth shall not be punished againe for the same
Offence by vertue of this p~sent Act nor any Thing therein conteyned .
STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,27.53

Provided alwaies That in such Townes and Places where any Faire or
Faires shal@ @be kept , that for the time onelie of the same Faire or
Faires it shal@ @be lawfull for every p~son or p~sons to use co~mon
selling of Ale or Beere in Boothes or other Places there for the Releife
of the King~ Subject~ that shall repaire unto the same in such like
Manner and Sorte as hath byn used and done in Tymes past , this Act or
any Thing therein conteyned to the contrary notwithstanding .
STAT-1626-E2-P2,5,27.54

