<BEGIN_stat-1585-e2-p2>

<P_4,657>

<heading>

CHAPTER I . STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,657.4

An Acte to reteine the Queenes Ma=ties= Subjectes in their due Obedience
. STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,657.5

<$$heading>

Where sithence the Statute made in the thirtenth yeare of the Raigne of
the Queene our Soveraigne Ladye , entituled An Acte againste the
bringing in and putting in execuco~n of Bulles Writinges and
Instrumentes and other sup~sticious Thinges from the Sea of Rome ,
divers evell_affected persons have practised contrarye to the meaninge
of the said Statute , by other meanes then by Bulles or Instrumentes
written or printed , to withdrawe divers the Queenes Ma=ties= Subjectes
from their naturall Obedience to her Majestie , to obey the said usurped
aucthoritie of Rome , and in respecte of the same to perswade great
nombers to withdrawe their due Obedience to her Ma=ties= Lawes
established for the due service of Almightie God : For Reformaco~n
whereof , and to declare the true meaninge of the said Lawe , Bee yt
declared and enacted by the aucthoritie of this p~sent Parliament , That
all p~sons whatsoe~ which have or shall have or shall p~tend to have
Power , or shall by any Wayes or Meanes put in practise , to absolve
perswade or withdrawe any of the Queenes Ma=ties= Subject~ , or any
within her Highenes Realmes and Dominions , from their naturall
Obedience to her Majestie , or to withdrawe them for that entent , from
the Relygeon nowe by her Highenes aucthoritie established within her
Highenes Domynions , to the Romyshe Religeon , or to move them or any of
them to promise any Obedience to any p~tended aucthoritie of the Sea of
Rome , or of any other Prince State or Potentate , to be had or used
within her Dominions , or shall doe any overte Acte to that Intent or
Purpose , and everye of them , shal@ @be to all Intentes adjudged to be
Traitors , and being thereof lawfullye convicted shall have Judgement
suffer and forfaite as in case of Highe Treason : And yf any person
shall , after th@ @end of this Session of Parliament , by any meanes be
willinglye absolved or withdrawne as aforesaid , or willinglye be
reconciled , or shall promise any Obedience to any such p~tended
Aucthoritie Prince State or Potentate as ys aforesaid , that then everye
suche p~son their Procurers and Counsellers thereunto , beinge thereof
lawfullye convicted , shal@ @be taken tryed and judged , and shall
suffer and forfaite as in cases of Highe Treason .
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,657.7

And be yt lykewise enacted and declared , That all and everye person and
p~sons , that shall willinglye be Ayders or Maineteyners of suche p~sons
so offendinge as ys above expressed , or of any of them knowinge the
same , or whiche shall conceale any Offence aforsaide , and shall not ,
within twentie dayes at the furthest after suche p~sons knowledge of
suche Offence , disclose the same to some Justice of Peace or other
higher Officer , shal@ @be taken tried and judged , and shall suffer and
forfeyte as Offendors in Misprision of Treason .
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,657.8

And be yt likewise enacted , That everye person which shall saye or
singe Masse , being thereof lawfullye convicted , shall forfaite the
so~me of Two_hundreth markes and bee co~mitted to prison in the next
Gaole , there to remaine by the space of one yeare , and from
thenceforthe tyll he have paid the said so~me of CC. markes : and that
everye p~son which shall willinglye heare Masse shall forfaite the so~me
of one_hundreth markes , and suffer ymprisoment for a yeare .
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,657.9

Be yt also further enacted by the aucthoritie aforesayd , That every
p~son above the Age of xvj yeares , which shall not repaire to some
Churche Chappell or usuall Place of Common Prayer , but forbeare the
same contrarye to the tenour of a Statute made in the firste yeare of
her Ma=ties= Raigne for Uniformitie of Co~mon Prayer , and being therof
lawfullye convicted , shall forfaite to the Queenes Ma=tie= , for everye
Moneth after th@ @end of this Session of Parliament whiche he or she
shall@ @so forbeare , twentie powndes of lawfull Englishe Money : and
that over and besides the said Forfeytures , everye p~son so forbearing
, by the space of xij Monethes as aforesaid , shall for his or her
obstinacie , after Certificat thereof in Writinge made into the Courte
comonlye called the Kinges Benche , by the Ordinarie of the Dioces , a
Justice of Assisse and Gaole Deliverye , or a Justice of Peace of the
Countie , where suche Offendor shall <P_4,658> dwell or be , be bounde
with two sufficient Suerties in the so~mme of two_hundreth pounde at the
leaste to the good Behaviour , and so to continue bounde untill suche
tyme as the p~sons so bounde do conforme themselves and come to the
Churche , accordinge to the true meaninge of the said Statute made in
the said firste yeare of the Queenes Ma=ties= Raigne .
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,658.10

And be yt further enacted , That yf any p~son or p~sons Bodye Pollitike
or Corporate , after the Feaste of Pentecost next cominge , shall kepe
or mainteyne any Scholemaster , which shall not repayre to Churche as ys
aforesaid , or be alowed by the Bisshopp or Ordinarye of the Diocesse
where suche Scholemaster shal@ @be so kept , they
{COM:preceding_word_"they"_emended} shall forfaite and lose for everye
Moneth so keping him ten poundes ; Provided that no suche Ordinarye or
their Ministers shall take any thinge for the said Allowaunce ; and
suche Scholemaster or Teacher p~suminge to teache contrarie to this Acte
, and beinge thereof lawfullye convicted
{COM:preceding_word_"convicted"_emended} , shal@ @be disabled to be a
Teacher of Youth , and shall suffer ymprisonment without Baile or
Maineprise for one yeare . STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,658.11

And be yt likwise enacted , That all and everye Offences againste this
Acte , or against the Actes of the firste fifte or xiij yeares of her
Ma=ties= Raigne towching acknowledging of her Ma=ties= supreme
Governement in Cawses Ecclesiasticall or other Matters towchinge the
Service of God , or coming to Churche or Establishement of true Religeon
in this Realme , shall and maye bee inquireable as@ @well before
Justices of Peace , as other Justices named in the same Statutes ,
within one yeare and a daye after everye suche Offence comitted ; Any
Thinge in this Acte or in any other Acte to the contrarie
notwithstandinge . STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,658.12

Be yt likewise enacted , That Justices of Oier and Terminer and Justices
of Assise and of Gaole Delyverye in their severall lymittes , shall have
power to enquier heare and determine of all Offences againste this
Statute , STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,658.13

and Justices of Peace in their open Quarter Sessions of Peace shall have
power by vertue of this Acte to enquier heare and determine of all
Offences against this Acte , <paren> excepte Treason and Misprision of
Treason <$$paren> : Provided alwaye , that everye p~son guiltie of any
Offence againste this Statute , other then Treason and Misprision of
Treason , which shall before he be thereof indicted , or at his
Arrainement or Tryall before Judgement , submit and conforme himselfe
before the Bisshop of the Diocesse where he shal@ @be resident , or
before the Justices where he shal@ @be indicted araigned or tried ,
<paren> havinge not before made like submission at any his Tryall being
indicted for his firste lyke Offence , <$$paren> shall uppon his
Recognition of such Submission in open Assises {TEXT:Assies} or Sessions
of the Countie where suche person shal@ @be resident , be dischardged of
all and everye the said Offences against this Acte , <paren> excepte
Treason and Misprision of Treason , <$$paren> and of all Paynes and
Forfeytures for the same . STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,658.14

And be yt likewise enacted , That all Forfeytures of any sommes of Money
lymited by this Acte , shal@ @be devided in three equall partes ,
whereof one thirde parte shal@ @be to the Queenes Mat=tie= to her owne
use , one other thirde parte to the Queens Ma=tie= for Releife of the
poore in the Parishe where the Offence shal@ @be comitted , to be
delivered by Warraunte of the principall Officers in the Receipte of the
Exchequer without further Warraunte from her Ma=tie= , and the other
thirde parte to suche person as will sue for the same in any Courte of
Recorde by Acc~on of Debte Byll Plainte or Informaco~n , in whiche Suite
no Essoigne Protecco~n or Wager of Lawe shal@ @be allowed ; And that
everrye p~son which shall forfaite any sommes of Money by vertue of this
Acte , and shall not be able or shall fayle to paye the same within
Three Monethes after Judgement thereof gyven , shal@ @be comitted to
pryson , there to remaine untill he have paied the said somes , or
conforme himselfe to goe to Churche and there to doe as ys aforesaid .
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,658.15

Provided also , That everye p~son whiche usuallye on the Sundaye shall
have in his or their Howse the Devine Service which ys establyshed by
the Lawe in this Realme , and be thereat himselfe or herselfe usuallye
or most co~monlye p~sent , and shall not obstinatelye refuse to come to
Churche and there to doe as ys aforesaid , and shall also fowre tymes in
the yeare at the leaste be p~sent at the Devyne Service in the Churche
of the P~ishe where he or she shal@ @be resident , or in some other open
Comon Churche or suche Chappell of Ease , shall not incurre any Payne or
Penaltie lymyted by this Acte for not repayringe to Churche .
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,658.16

And be yt likewise enacted and declared , That everye Graunte
Conveyaunce Bond Judgement and Execuco~n had or made since the
beginninge of this Session of Parliament , or hereafter to be had or
made , of covenous Purpose to defraude any Interest Right or Title ,
that maye growe to the Queene or to any other p~son by meane of any
Conviction or Judgement , by vertue of this Statute or of the said
Statute of the said xiij yeare , shal@ @be and be adjudged to be
utterlye voide , againste the Queene and against suche as shall sue for
any parte of the said Penalties in fourme aforesaid .
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,658.17

Provided allwaye , That yf any Peere of this Realme shall happen to be
indicted of any Offense made Treason or Misprision of Treason by this
Acte , he shall have his Triall by his Peeres as in other lyke cases is
accustomed . STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,658.18

Provided also , That neither this Acte nor any Thing therein conteyned
shall extend to take awaye or abbridge the Aucthorite or Jurisdicco~n of
the Eccle~iasticall Censures for any Cause or Matter , but that the
Archebisshoppes and Bisshoppes and other Eccl~iasticall Judges maye doe
and proceed as before the makinge of this Acte they lawfullye did or
mighte have done ; Any Thinge in this Acte to the contrarye
notwithstandinge . STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,658.19

<P_4,698>

<heading>

CHAPTER XVI . STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,698.22

An Act for the Queenes Ma=ties= most graciouse generall and free Pardon
. STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,698.23

<$$heading>

The Queenes most Excellent Majestie well perceiving and understanding
that her loving Subjects by manie and sundrie wayes and meanes have of
late diversly offended against the good Lawes and Statutes of this her
Highnesse Realme , and thereby are fallen into grievous Paynes
Forfeytures and Penalties , out of which they can@ @not bee delivered
but onely by her Majesties great Mercie ; and withall , considering that
Justice and Mercie doe chiefely appertayne to her Princely Estate and
Function to be delivered and distributed to her Subjects as occasion
shall serve ; and at this present , her Highnesse by Gods Providence ,
beeing rather inclined with Mercie and Clemencie to allure provoke and
stirre her Subjects to live and continue in their due Obedience towards
her Majestie then otherwise by severe Justice to correct them according
to their Deserts and the Severitie of her Lawes ; And having a speciall
Trust and Confidence in her said loving Subjects , that they will from
henceforth diligently applie and endevour themselves to serve her
Majestie in all Obedience and due Observaunce of her Majesties Lawes ,
hath thought it convenient at this time with her Highenesse Free and
Generall Pardon , to discharge her sayd Subjects of manie great Paines
Forfeitures and Penalties wherewith they stand now charged and
chargeable , by reason of their manifold Offences Disobedience and
Contempts ; STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,698.25

And Therefore her Highnesse , of her most gratious Disposition , is
contented and pleased that it bee enacted by the aucthoritie of this
presente Parliament , in manner and forme followinge , that is to say ;
That all and every her said Subjects , as well Spirituall as Temporall
of this her Highnesse Realm of England , Wales , the Isles of Jernesey
and Garnesey , and the Towne of Barwick , the Heires Successors
Executors and Administrators of them and every of them , and all and
singuler Bodies in any manner of wise corporated , Cities Boroughs
Shires Ridings Hundreds Laths Rapes Wapentakes Townes Villages Hamlets
and Tythings , and every of them , and the Successor and Successors of
every of them , shal@ @be by the authority of this present Parliament
acquitted pardoned released & discharged , agaynst the Queenes Majesty
her Heires & Successors and every of them , of all maner of Treasons
Felonies Offences Contempts Trespasses Entries Wrongs Deceits
Misdemeanors Forfeitures Penalties and Sums of Money , Paines of Death ,
Paines Corporal and pecuniary , and generally of all other Things Causes
Quarrels Sutes Judgements and Executions , in this present Act hereafter
not excepted nor foreprised , which may be or can be by her Highnesse in
any wise or by any meanes pardoned , before and unto the first day of
January last past in this present xxiij yeere of her most gracious
Reigne , to every or any of her said Subjects Bodies Corporated Cities
Boroughes Shires Ridings Hundreds Lathes Rapes Wapentakes Townes
Villages & Tithings or any of them . STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,698.26

And also the Queenes Highnes is contented that it be enacted by the
authority of this present Parliament , That her said free Pardon shal@
@be as good and effectuall in the Law to every of her said Subjects ,
Bodyes Corporate , and other before rehearsed , in for and against all
Things which be not hereafter in this present Acte excepted & <P_4,699>
foreprised , as the same Pardon should have ben , if all Offences
Contempts Forfeitures Causes Matters Suits Quarrels Judgements
Executions Penalties and al other Things , not hereafter in this Act
excepted and foreprised , had beene particularly singularly specially
and plainely named rehearsed and specified , and also pardoned by proper
and expresse Words and Names in their Kinds Natures and Qualities , by
Words and Termes thereunto requisite to have beene put in and expressed
in this present Act of free Pardon ; And that her said Subjects , nor
any of them , nor the Heires Executors or Administrators of any of them
, nor of the said Bodies Corporate and other before named , and
rehearsed , nor any of them , be nor shal@ @be sued vexed or inquieted
in their Bodies Goods Chattels Lands or Tenements , for any maner of
Matter Cause Contempt Misdemeanor Forfeiture Trespasse Offence or any
other Thing , suffred done or committed , before the said first day of
January , against her Highnes her Crowne Dignity Prerogative Lawes or
Statutes , but only for such Matters Causes & Offences as be rehearsed
mentioned or in some wise touched in the Exceptions of this present Act
hereafter mentioned to be foreprised & excepted , and for none other ;
Any Statute or Statutes Lawes Customes or Usages heretofore had made or
used to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding .
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,699.27

And the Queenes Highnes of her bounteous liberality , by the Authority
of this present Parliament , graunteth & freely giveth to every of her
said Subjects , & to every of the said Bodies Corporat and other before
rehearsed , and every of them , all Goods Chattels Debts Fines Issues
Profits Amerciaments Forfeitures and Sums of Money by any of them
forfeited , which to her Highnes do or should belong or appartaine , by
reason of any Offence Contempt Trespasse Entree Misdemeanor Matter Cause
or Quarrell suffered done or committed by them or any of them before the
said first day of January , which bee not hereafter in this present Act
foreprised and excepted ; And that all and every the Queenes said
Subjects , and all and singular Bodies Corporat and others before
rehearsed , may by him or themselves , or by his or their Deputy or
Deputies or by his or their Atturney or Atturneys , according to the
Lawes of this Realme , plead and minister this present Act of free
Pardon , for his or their Discharge of and for every Thing that is by
vertue of this present Act pardoned discharged given or granted ,
without any Fee or other Thing in any wise paying to any person or
persons for Writing or Entry of the Judgments or other Cause concerning
such Plea Writing or Entry , but only xvj d. to be paid to the Officer
or Clarke that shall enter such Plea Matter or Judgement for the Parties
discharged in that Behalfe ; Any Law Statute Usage or Custome to the
contrary notwithstanding . STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,699.28

And Furthermore the Queenes Highnesse is contented and pleased that it
be enacted by the authoritie of this present Parliament , That her saide
free Pardon by the generall Words Clauses and Sentences before rehearsed
, shall {SIC:shalll} be reputed deemed adjudged expounded allowed and
taken in all maner of Courts of her Highnes and else where most
beneficially and avayleably to all and singuler her said Subjects Bodies
Corporate and others before rehearsed and to every of them in al things
not in this present Act excepted or foreprised , without any Ambiguity
Question or other Delay whatsoever it shal@ @be to be made pleaded
objected or alleaged by the Queene our Sovereigne Lady her Heires &
Successors , or by any of their general Atturny or Atturnies , or by any
person or persons for her Highnes or any of her Heires or Successors .
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,699.29

And further it is enacted by the Queene our Sovereigne Lady by the
authority of this present Parliament , That if any Officer or Clarke of
any of her Highnes Courts commonly called the Kings Bench Chancery and
Common Place or of her Exchequer or any other Officer or Clarke of any
other of her Highnes Courts within this Realme , at any time after the
last day of this present Session of Parliament , make out or write out
any maner of Writs Processe Sommons or other Precepts whereby any of the
said Subjects or any of the said Bodies corporated or others before
rehearsed or any of them shall be in any wise arrested attached
distrained sommoned or otherwise vexed inquieted or grieved in his or
their Bodies Lands Tenements Goods or Chattels or in any of them , for
or because of any maner of thing pardoned or discharged by vertue of
this Act of free Pardon ; Or if any Shiriffe or Eschetor or any of their
Deputy or Deputies or any Bailiffe or other Officer whatsoever by colour
of his or their Office or otherwise , after the said last day of this
present Session of Parliament doe levy receive take or withhold of or
from any person or persons any thing pardoned or discharged by this Act
, that then every such person so offending and thereof lawfully
convicted or condemned by any sufficient Testimony Witnesse or Proofe
yeeld & pay for Recompence thereof to the Party so grieved or offended
therby his or their treble Damages besides all Costs of the Suite , &
shal also forfeit & lose to the Queenes Majesty for every such Default ,
x li. : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,699.30

And nevertheles all & singular such Writs Processe and Precepts so to be
made for or upon any maner of thing pardoned or discharged by this
present Act of free Pardon , shal@ @be utterly void of none Effect .
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,699.31

Except and alwayes foreprised out of this generall and free Pardon , all
& all maner of High Treasons and other offences committed or done by any
person or persons against the Queenes most Royall person , and all
Conspiracies and Confederacies trayterously had committed or done by any
person or persons against the Queenes Majesties Royall Person :
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,699.32

And also excepted all and every maner of Treasons committed or done by
any person or persons in the parts beyond the Seas or in any other place
out of the Queenes Dominions , and also all Suites Punishments
Executions Paines of Death Forfeitures and Penalties for or by reason or
occasion of any the Treasons and Offences before excepted :
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,699.33

And also excepted and foreprised out of this generall Pardon al and
every Offences of Piracie and Robbery done uppon the Seas , & al & every
comforting procuring or abetting of the same Offences to be had done or
committed : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,699.34

And also excepted out of this Pardon al maner of voluntary Murders Petie
Treasons & wilful Poysonings don or co~mitted by any person or persons ,
& al & every the Accessaries to the same Offences or any of the~ before
the said Offences co~mitted : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,699.35

And also excepted out of this Pardo~ al Offences of forging & false
counterfeiting of any the Monies currant within this Realme : And also
al Offences of unlawfull diminishing of any the said Moneys by any way
or meanes whatsoever contrary to the Lawes and Statutes of this Realme ;
<P_4,700> And also all abbetting ayding comforting or procuring of the
same Offences or any of them to be committed or done ;
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.36

And also excepted out of this Pardon all Burglaries committed or done in
any Dwelling House or Houses , any person or persons then being in the
said House and put in feare : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.37

And also excepted all Robberies done upon or to any Man or Womans person
in the High_way or elsewhere , and all and singular Accesaries of or to
any such Robberies before the said Robbery committed : And also all
willfull Burnings of any Dwelling House or Houses , or of any Barne or
Barnes wherein any Corne is : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.38

And also excepted all Rapes and carnall Ravishments of Women : And also
all Ravishments and wilfull taking away or marrying of any Maide Widow
or Damosell against her will , or without the Assent or Agreement of her
Parents or of such as have her in Custody : And also all Offences of
aiding comforting procuring or abbetting of any such Ravishment wilfull
taking or marrying to be had committed or done :
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.39

And also excepted all wilfull Escapes of any Traitors or Felons :
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.40

And also excepted out of this Pardon all persons now attainted or
outlawed of or for any Treason Petty Treason Murder Willfull Poysoning
or Robbery : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.41

And also excepted all Offences of Invocations Conjurations Witchcrafts
Sorceries Inchauntments and Charmes , and all Offences of procuring
abetting or comforting of the same , and all persons now attainted or
convicted of any of the said Offences : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.42

And also except all and every maner of taking from the Queenes Majestie
of any Goods or Chattels , or the Issues Rents Revenues or Profits of
any Manors Lands Tenements or Hereditaments which were of any Traitor
Murderer Felon Clarke or Clarks attainted or Fugitives , or of any of
them : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.43

And also except all Goods and Chattels in any wise forfeited to the
Queenes Majestie by reason of any Treason Petty Treason Murder or Felony
heretofore committed or done : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.44

And also except out of this generall Pardon all persons which the last
day of this present Session of Parliament stand indicted of any wilfull
Murder , and which yet be not acquitted or discharged thereof , and all
Forfeitures and Titles of Forfeitures of any Goods Chattels Lands or
Tenements that now is growen or accrued , or hereafter may grow accrue
or come by any Offence or Offences committed or done by any such person
or persons : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.45

And also excepted out of this Pardon all Intrusions had made or done by
any such person or persons in or upon any the Manors Lands Tenements or
other Hereditaments of our Sovereigne Lady the Queene , and all Wastes
done committed or suffered upon any such Lands Tenements or
Hereditaments , and the wrongfull taking of any the Rents Issues and
Profits of the same Manors Lands Tenements or other Hereditaments of our
said Sovereigne Lady the Queene , and also all Suites Accountes and
Impetitions of and for the same : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.46

And also excepted out of this Pardon al Alienations of any Lands
Tenements or Hereditaments without Licence , and all Fines Issues and
Profits that may or ought to grow or come to the Queenes Majesty by
reason of any such Alienation without Licence : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.47

And also excepted out of this Pardon all Wastes committed or done in any
of the Queenes Wards Lands or in the Wards Lands of any of the Queenes
Committees : And also all and every Fine and Fines for the single or
double Value of the Marriage or Marriages of all & every Ward or Wards
at any time heretofore growen in the Queenes Majestie or any her noble
Progenitors : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.48

And also excepted all concealed Wards and the Lands of such Wards
concealed , and all Liveries and Primer Sessions and Ouster le maines
that ought to be had done or sued for the same :
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.49

And also excepted out of this generall Pardon all Ravishments and
wrongfull taking or withholding of any of the Queenes Wards or Wards
Lands , or the Rents and Profits of the same at any time comen or growen
to the Queenes Hands , and every other Thing that by reason of any Ward
or Wards Lands ought to come or bee to the Queenes Majestie , and which
as yet is not discharged : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.50

And also excepted all Fines that should or ought to grow to the Queenes
Majestie of any of her Widowes that have married without License .
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.51

Provided alwayes and be it enacted by the Authority of this present
Parliament , That all and every person and persons which have tendered
or ought to sue Livery out of our said Sovereigne Lady the Queene@ @s
Hands of or for any Manors Lands Tenements or Hereditaments whatsoever
they be , shall sue his and their Livery and Liveries out of our said
Sovereigne Lady the Queene@ @s Hands of his or their Manors Lands
Tenements and Hereditaments in like manner and forme as they and every
of them should or ought to have done if this Acte had never beene had
nor made ; Any Article Thing or Things in this present Acte of generall
Pardon comprised and specified to the contrary notwithstanding .
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.52

And also excepted and foreprised out of the Pardon all such as the last
day of this present Session of Parliament be in Prison in the Towre of
London or in the Prison of the Marshalsey , or in the Prison of the
Fleete , by expresse Commandement from the Queenes Majestie , or by the
Commaundement of any of her Majesties Privy Councell :
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.53

And also excepted out of this Pardon all and every such person and
persons which at any time sithence the beginning of the Queenes
Majesties Reigne , have fled out of this Realme of England , or any
other the Queenes Dominions , for any Offence of High Treason Petty
Treason or Misprision of Treason : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.54

And also excepted all such persons as be fled or gone out of this Realme
for any Cause contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realme without
the Queenes Majesties License : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.55

And also excepted all such persons as have obtained and had Licence to
depart this Realme for a certaine time , and now doe abide out of the
Realme without any lawfull excuse after the time of their Licence
expired : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.56

And also excepted out of this Pardon all and every Concealements or
wrongfull Detainements of any Custome or Subsidy due to the Queenes
Majestie , and all Accounts Impetitions and Sutes to be had made or done
for the same : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.57

And also excepted all and singular Accounts of all and every Collector
and Collectors of any Subsidy Fifteene Custome or other Thing , & all
Accounts of every other person whatsoever that ought to be accomptant to
the Queenes Highnesse or to her most noble father King Henry the Eight ,
or to King Edward the Sixt or Queene Mary , or to any of {SIC:or} them ,
and the Heires Executors and Administrators of every such person that
ought to account for all things touching onely the same Accounts , and
all and singular Arrerages of Accounts , and all untrue Accounts , and
all Impetitions Suites Demaunds and Executions which can or may be had
of or for any Account or Accounts , or any Arrerages of the same :
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.58

And also excepted all Inclosures and Decayes of Houses of Husbandry and
the converting of any Land from Tillage to Pasture made done committed
or permitted contrary to the forme and effect of any Statute or Statutes
heretofore made : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,700.59

And also excepted and foreprised out of this Pardon all and all manner
of Deceits and <P_4,701> Offences of all and singular Moneyers and other
Officers Mynters and Workemen of or in any of the Queenes Majesties
Mynts within this Realm or any other her Dominions , and all Impetitions
and Punishments for the same : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.60

And also excepted all Titles and Actions of Quare impedit , and all
Homages Releefe and Releefes Rents Services Rent Charges Rents_Secks and
the Arrerages of the same not done or payed to the Queenes Highnesse :
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.61

And also excepted all Penalties Titles and Forfeitures of Condition or
Conditions Covenant or Covenants accrued or growen to the Queenes
Majestie by reason of the Breache and not performing of any Covenant or
Condition whatsoever : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.62

And also excepted all summes of Money granted to the Queenes Majestie or
to any her noble Progenitors , by way or meane of Subsidy Fifteene or
otherwise : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.63

And also excepted out of this Pardon all Debts which were or be due to
our Soveraigne Lady the Queene or to the most noble King of famous
Memory King Henry the Seventh , or to King Henry the Eight King Edward
the Sixt , or to the late Queene Mary , or to any person or persons to
any of their Uses , by any Condemnation Recognisance Obligation or
otherwise <paren> other then such Debts as are due upon any Obligation
or Recognisance forfeited before the said first day of January , for
non_appearance in any Court or other Place whatsoever , or for not
keeping of the Place or not being of good Behaviour <$$paren> which
Debts growen or accrued upon those Causes by this free Pardon be and
shall@ @bee cleerely pardoned and discharged : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.64

And also excepted and foreprised out of this Pardon all and singular
Penalties Forfeitures and summes of Money , being due or accrued to our
Sovereigne Lady the Queene , by reason of any Acte Statute or Statutes ,
which Forfeitures Penalties and summes of Money be converted into the
Nature of Debt by any Judgement Order or Decree , or by the Agreement of
the Offender or Offenders : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.65

And also except all First Fruits and Tenths at this present being due to
be payed to her Majestie by force of any Acte or Statute or otherwise :
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.66

And also except all Penalties and Forfeitures whereof there is any good
Verdict in any Sute given or past for the Queenes Majestie :
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.67

And also excepted all Forfeitures and other Penalties and Profites now
due accrued or growen , or which shall or may be due accrue or growe to
the Queenes Majestie by reason of any Offence Misdemeanour or Contempt ,
or other Act or Deed had suffered committed or done contrary to any Act
Statute or Statutes , or contrary to the common Lawes of this Realme ,
and whereof any Accion Bill Plaint or Information before the first day
of this Session of Parliament hath beene exhibited commenced or sued in
any of the Queenes Majesties Courts at Westminster , and is now there
depending : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.68

And also excepted out of this Pardon all Offences of Perjury and
Subornation of Witnesses , and all Offences of forging and
counterfeiting of any false Deeds Escripts or Writings , and all
procuring or counselling of any such counterfeiting or forging to be had
or made : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.69

And also excepted out of this Pardon all and every Offence and Offences
touching or concerning the carrying sending or conveying over the Seas
or out of this Realme of any Gold Silver Jewels , or any Coyne of Gold
or Silver contrary to the Lawes or Statutes of this Realme , unlesse it
were or be by the Queenes Licence : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.70

And also excepted out of this Pardon all Offences of Incest Adultery and
Fornication : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.71

And also excepted all Offences whereby any person may be charged with
the Penalty and Danger of Premunire {SIC:Preminire} , & of the which
Offence or Offences any person standeth already indicted or otherwise
lawfully condemned or convicted : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.72

And also except out of this generall Pardon all Offences Contempts
Disorders Covins Frauds Deceits and Misdemeanors whatsoever heretofore
committed or done by any person or persons , and whereof or for the
which any Sute by Bill Plaint or Information at any time within foure
yeeres next before the last day of this present Session of Parliament ,
hath beene or is commenced or exhibited in the Court of Starre Chamber
at Westminster , and there is yet depending : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.73

And also except and foreprised out of this Pardon all Issues Fines and
Amerciaments afferred taxed set estreated or entred severally or
particularly in any Court of Record at Westminster , at any time
sithence the first day of Michaelmas Terme last past :
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.74

And yet neverthelesse all other Fines , as well Fines pro licentia
concordandi , as other set taxed estreated or entred before the said
first day of Michaelmas Terme last past , And also all Issues Fines and
Amerciaments , as well reall as other , either within any Liberties or
without , being set taxed estreated or entred before the said first day
of Michaelmas Terme , and which severally or particularly extend to the
summe of Five Pound , and not above , whether they bee totted or not
totted , taken to the Charge of the Shiriffe or not taken to his Charge
, estreated or not estreated , or whether they be turned into Debt , or
not turned into debt , and not being levied nor received by any Shiriffe
Under_shiriffe Bailiffe Minister or other Officer or Officers to the
Queenes Majesties use before the last day of this present Session of
Parliament , shall be freely clearely and plainely pardoned and
discharged against the Queenes Majestie , her Heires and Successors for
ever , by force of this present Acte of Free Pardon :
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.75

And yet neverthelesse all Estreates of such Fines Issues and
Amerciaments as be now pardoned by this Acte , and which bee already
estreated forth of the Court of Exchequer , and be remaining in the
Hands of the Sheriffes Under_shiriffes or Bailiffes for collecting of
the same Fynes Issues and Amerciaments , shall upon the returne of the
same Estreates , bee orderly charged and delivered by scrowes into the
Office of the Pipe in the Court of Exchequer , as heretofore hath beene
accustomed , to the intent that thereupon order may bee taken that her
Majestie may bee the more truely answered of all such Fines Issues and
Amerciaments not by this Act pardoned , and which any Sheriffe
Under_sheriffe Bayliffe or other Officer or Minister hath received by
force or colour of any such Extreates Processe or Precept to him or them
made for the levying therof ; STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.76

And yet notwithstanding all and every Sheriffe and Sheriffes and other
Accomptant upon his or their petition or petitions to bee made for the
allowance of any such Fines Issues and Amerciaments as by this Act is
pardoned , shall have all and every such his and their Petition allowed
in his Account without paying any Fee or Reward to any Officer Clarke or
other Minister for the making entring or allowing of any such Petition
or Petitions ; Any Usage or Custome to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding . STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.77

And also except out of this Pardon all Goods Cattells Debts Actions and
Suites already forfeited , or whereof any {SIC:any_any} Right or Title
is accrued or grown to the Queenes Majestie , by reason of any Outlawry
, and whereof the Queenes Majestie by her Highnesse Letters Patents hath
before the last day of this present Session of Parliament made any Grant
Covenant or Promise to any person or persons : STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,701.78

And also except all false forging or counterfeiting of any <P_4,702>
Commission or Commissions to enquire of any Landes Tenements or
Hereditaments ; and also all false forging or counterfeiting of any
untrue Certificate or Returne of any Commission or Commissions obtained
or gotten foorth of any Court or Courts to enquire of any Landes
Tenements Hereditaments or other Things whatsoever :
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,702.79

And also excepted out of this Pardon , all such persons that bee and
remain still attainted or condemned , and not already pardoned of and
for any Rebellion or levying of Warre , or of or for any Conspiracie of
any Rebellion or levying of Warre within this Realme or in any the
Queenes Dominions . STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,702.80

Provided alwayes and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid , That it
shall and may bee lawfull to all and every Clerke and other Officer of
the Queenes Courts to award and make Writes of Capias utlegat~ at the
suite of the Partie Plaintife against such persons outlawed as be
pardoned by this Act , to the intent to compell the Defendant and
Defendants to make answere to the Plaintife or Plaintifes at whose sute
hee or they were outlawed , STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,702.81

{COM:missing_subject_in_text} shall sue a Write Scire fac~ against the
partie {SIC:parties} or parties at whose sute he or they were so
outlawed , before this Pardon in that behalfe shal@ @be allowed to him
that is so outlawed . STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,702.82

Provided also that this Act of Generall Pardon shall not in any wise
extend to any person or persons which the last day of this present
Session of Parliament be by force of any Commandement remayening in any
Prison , or in any other Place in speciall custody as persons restrained
from liberty for their obstinancie and disobedience in refusing to come
to the Church to heare Divine Service , or for any other Matter or Cause
touching their willfull obstinancie and disobedience in causes of
Religion or Doctrine now lawfully established within this Realme , but
that they {COM:preceding_word_"they"_emended} shall be excepted and they
and every of them for so long time as they shall so still continue in
such their wilfull obstinacie and disobedience foreprised out of this
generall Pardon ; STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,702.83

And yet nevertheless whensoever the said persons or any of them shall
willingly submit themselves in their obedience to her Majestie , and
will come to the Church to heare Divine Service , and willingly refuse
their said wilfull obstinacie , and conforme themselves in the said
causes of Religion and Doctrine , and continue in such their conformity
and due obedience to her Majestie , according as by the Lawes and
Statutes of this Realme they ought to doe , then and from thenceforth
all and every such person and persons so submitting and yeelding
themselves in their due obedience towards her Majestie , and so
continuing in the same shall forthwith be received and enabled by force
of this Act to have and enjoy the full benefite of this generall Pardon
as largely and fully in all respects as any other of her Majesties good
Subjects have or ought to enjoyne {COM:sic} by virtue of this Act :
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,702.84

And also except out of this Pardon , all such persons as the last day of
this present Session of Parliament be and remain as persons restrained
from liberty in the custody of any other person or persons in her
Highnesse expresse commandement for any Offence or Offences whatever :
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,702.85

And also except all other persons which before the said last day of this
Session of Parliament have bene are or hereafter shal be upon just cause
impeached or accused of or for any such like Offence or Offences ,
wherewith those persons now restrained as aforesaid , be or shall be
justly charged ; And also all other Offences wherewith any of those
persons so impeached or accused be or shall be justly charged :
STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,702.86

And also except all Offences committed or done by any person or persons
contrary to the form and effect of the Statute made in the first yere of
her Majesties Reign , touching the uniformity of Common Prayer and the
Administration of Sacraments in the Church , and whereof any person or
persons at any time since the twentieth day of June last past have bene
or is lawfully indicted or convicted . STAT-1585-E2-P2,4,702.87

