<BEGIN_stat-1572-e2-p2>

<P_4,526>

<heading>

CHAPTER I . STAT-1572-E2-P2,4,526.4

An Acte whereby certayne Offences bee made Treason .
STAT-1572-E2-P2,4,526.5

<$$heading>

Forasmuch as it is of some doubted , whether the Lawes and Statutes of
this Realme , remayning at this present in force , are vayleable and
suffycient anough for the suertie and p~servacion of the Quenes moste
Royall P~son , in whom consisteth all the Happines and Comforte of the
whole State and Subjectes of the Realme , w=ch= thing all faithfull
lovynge and duetyfull Subjectes ought and will w=th= all carefull studie
& zeale consider foresee and p~vyde for ; by the neglecting and passing
over whereof w=th= wynking eies , there might happen to growe the
subvertion and ruyne of the quyet and moste happy State and present
Government of this Realme , <paren> w=ch= God defend : <$$paren>
Therefore at the humble Suite and Peticion of the Lords and Comens in
thys present Parliament assembled , Be yt enacted declared and
established by aucthoritie of the same Parliament , That yf any person
or persons whatsoever , at any tyme after the laste daye of June next
commynge duryng the naturall Lyfe of o=r= moste gracious Sovereigne
Ladye Quene Elizabeth <paren> whome Almightey God preserve & blesse
w=th= longe and prosperous Raigne over this Realme <$$paren> shall
w=th=in the Realme or w=th=oute , compasse imagyn invent devyse or
intend the Deathe or Destrucco~n or any bodely harme tending to Death
Destrucco~n Mayme or Wounding of the Royall P~son of the same our
Sov~aigne Ladye Queene Elizabeth ; or to deprive or depose her of or
from the Stile Honor or Kyngly Name of the Ymperiall Crowne of this
Realme or of anny other Realme or Domynyon to her Ma=tie= belonging ; or
to levye Warre agaynst her Ma=tie= w=th=in this Realme or w=th=oute ; or
to move or to sturre any Forreyners or Straungers w=th= Force to invade
this Realme or the Realme of Irelande or anny other her Ma=t=~ Domynions
being under her Ma=t=~ Obeysaunce ; and suche Compasses Ymaginaco~ns
Invencions Devises or Intentions or any of them , shall malitiously
advysedly and expressly utter or declare by any Pryntinge Wrytinge
Cyphryng Speache Wordes or Sayinges ; or yf any person or p~sons
whatsoever after the saide laste daye of June shall malitiously
advisedly and directly publish declare holde opinion affyrme or saye by
any Speach expresse Wordes or Sayinges , that our said Sov~aine Ladye
Queene Elizabeth during her Lyfe is not or ought not to be Queene of
this Realme of England and alsoe of the Realmes of Fraunce and Ireland ;
or that any other p~son or p~sons ought of Ryght to be Kyng or Queene of
the sayd Realmes of England and Ireland or of any other her Ma=t=~
Domynions being under her Ma=t=~ Obeysaunce , during her Ma=t=~ Lyfe ;
or shall by Wryting Pryntinge Preachinge Speache expresse Wordes or
Sayinges , malitiously advysedly and directly publishe set forthe and
affyrme that the Queene our sayd Sov~ayne Ladye Queene Elizabeth is an
Heretyke Schesmatyke Tyraunt Infidell or an Usurper of the Crowne of the
sayd Realmes or any of them , That then all and every such sayde Offence
or Offences shal@ @be taken deemed & declared by the aucthoritie of this
Acte and Parliament to be High Treason ; and that as@ @well the
pryncipall Offendor or Offendors therein , as all and every the Abettors
Councellors and p~curers to the same Offence or Offenc~ , and all and
every Aydors and Comforters of the same Offendor or Offendors , knowing
the same Offence or Offences to be done and co~mitted in any Place
w=th=in this Realme or withoute , being thereof lawfully and duely
indyted convycted and attaynted according to
{COM:preceding_word_"to"_emended} the usuall Order and Course of the
Co~mon Lawes of this Realme , or according to the Acte made in the
xxxv=th= yere of the Raigne of the late Kynge of famos Memorye Kynge
Henry the Eyght , Father of our said Sov~aigne Ladye entytuled An Acte
concerninge <P_4,527> the Tryall of Treasons co~mitted oute of the
Kynges Ma=t=~ Domynyons , as the cases shall requyre , shal@ @be deemed
declared and adjudged Traytors to the Queene and the Realme , and shall
suffer paynes of Death , and also forfaite unto the Queenes Ma=tie= her
Heires and Successors , all and singuler Landes Tenement~ and
Hereditamentes Goodes and Catals , as in Cases of High Treason by the
Lawes and Statutes of this Realme at this daye of Ryght ought to be
forfaited and loste . STAT-1572-E2-P2,4,527.7

And be yt allso enacted by the aucthoritie aforesaid , That all and
every person and p~sons of what Degree Condycion Place Nation or Estate
soever they be , w=ch= shall after the end of Thyrtey daies next after
the laste daye of this present Session of this Parliament , at any tyme
in the Lyfe of o=r= Soveraigne Ladye Quene Elizabeth in any wyse clayme
pretende utter declare affyrme or publishe themselves or any of them ,
or any other then o=r= said Soveraigne Ladye Elizabeth the Queenes
Ma=tie= that nowe is , to have Righte or Title to have or enjoye the
Crowne of England during or in the Lyfe of our said Soveraigne Ladye ;
Or shall usurpe the same Crowne or the Royall Style Tytle or Dignitie of
the Crowne or Realme of Englande during or in the Lyef of o=r= said
Soveraigne Ladye , or shall holde and affyrme that o=r= said Sov~aigne
Ladye hathe not Ryghte to holde and enjoye the said Crowne and Realme
Style Tytle or Dygnitie , or shall not after any Demaunde on o=r= said
Soveraignee Ladys parte to be made effectually acknowledg our said
Sov~aigne Lady to be in Ryghte , true and lawfull Queene of this Realme
, thay and every of them so offending shal@ @be utterly dysabled during
their naturall Lyves onely , to have or enjoye the Crowne or Realme of
England , or the Stile , Title or Dignitie thereof at anye tyme in
Succession Inheritance or otherwyse after the Decease of our said
Soveraigne Ladye as yf suche p~son were naturally dead ; Any Lawe
Custome Pretence or Matter whatsoever to the contrary notw=th=standing .
STAT-1572-E2-P2,4,527.8

And be yt further enacted , That yf any person shall duryng the Queenes
Ma=t=~ Lyfe , in any wyse holde affyrme or maynteyne any Right Title
Interest or Possibilitie in Succession or Inheritance , in or to the
Crowne of England after our said Soveraigne Ladye the Queene to be
ryghtfully in or lawfully due or belonging unto any such Claymer
Pretender Usurper Utterer Declarer Affyrmer Publisher or
not_Acknowledger , so that o=r= said Sov~ayne Ladye the Queene shall by
P~clamation to be published throughe the Realme , or els in the more
parte of those Sheris of this Relme , as@ @well on the Southsyde as the
Northsyde of Trent , and also in the Domynyon of Wales , in w=ch= Shyres
no Warr or Rebellion then shal@ @be , set foorth notifie or declare such
clayming pretence uttering declaration affyrming publishing usurpation
or not_acknowledging , then every p~son w=ch= after such P~clamation
shall duryng the Queenes Ma=t=~ Lyfe mayntayne holde or affyrme any
Ryght in Succession Inheritance or Possibilitie in or to the Crowne or
Realme of England or the Rightes thereof to be in or to any such Claymer
Pretender Utterer Declarer Affyrmer Usurper Publisher or
not_Acknowledger , shal@ @be a High Traytor and suffer and forfayte as
in Cases of Highe Treason is accustomed . STAT-1572-E2-P2,4,527.9

And be yt further enacted , That yf any person shall in any wyse holde
and affyrme or mayntayne that the Co~mon Lawes of this Realme not altred
by P~lyament , ought not to dyrecte the Ryght of the Crowne of England ,
or that o=r= said Sov~ayne Ladye Elizabeth the Quenes Ma=t=~ that nowe
is , with and by the aucthoritye of the Parlyament of Englande is not
able to make Lawes and Statutes of suffycyent force and valyditie to
lymit and bynd the Crowne of this Realme , and the Descent Lymitac~on
Inheritaunce and Government thereof , or that this present Statute , or
any parte thereof , or any oth=r= Statute to be made by the aucthorytie
of the Parlyament of England w=th= the Royall Assent of o=r= said
Sov~ayne Ladye the Quene for lymiting of the Crowne , or anye Statute
for recognysing the Right of the said Crowne and Realme to be justly and
lawfully in the moste Royall P~son of our said Soveraigne Ladye the
Queene , is not are not or shall not or ought not to be for ever of good
and suffycient force and validitie to bynde lymit restrayne and governe
all p~sons their Rightes and Titles that in any wyse maye or might
clayme any Interest or Possibilitie in or to the Crowne of England in
Possession Remaynder Inheritaunce Succession or otherwyse howsoev=r= ,
and all oth=r= p~sons whatsoever , every suche p~son so holdynge
affyrming or mayntayninge during the Lyfe of the Queenes Ma=tie= shal@
@be judged a Highe Traytor and suffer and forfaite as in cases of Highe
Treason is accustomed ; STAT-1572-E2-P2,4,527.10

And every p~son so holdynge affrymynge or mayntayninge after the
Deceasse of o=r= said Sov~aine Ladye shall forfayte all his Good~ and
Cattayles . STAT-1572-E2-P2,4,527.11

And for the avoyding of contentious and seditious spreading abrode of
Tytles to the Succession of the Crowne of this Realme to the dysturbing
of the co~mon quiet of the Realme ; Bee yt enacted by the aucthoritie
aforesaid , That whosoever shall hereafter duryng the Lyef of o=r= said
Sov~aigne Ladye , by any Booke or Worke prynted or written , dyrectly &
expresly declare and affyrme at any tyme before the same be by Acte of
Parlyament of this Realme established and affyrmed , that any one
p~ticul=r= p~son whosoever it be , is or ought to be the ryght Heire &
Successor to the Queenes Ma=tie= that nowe is <paren> whome God longe
preserve <$$paren> except the same be the naturall yssue of her Ma=t=~
Bodye , or shall willfully set upp in open place publishe or spread any
Bookes or Scrowles to that effect , or shall print bynde or put to sale
, or utter or cause to be prynted bounde or put to sale or uttered any
such Booke or Wrytynge wittinglye , that he or they theire Abbetto=r=s
and Counselours , & ev~y of them , shall for the fyrste Offence suffer
ympryso~ment of one whole yere , and forfayte halfe his Goodes , whereof
the one Moitie to the Quenes Ma=tie= the other Moytie to hym or them
that will sue for the same by Byll Action of Debt Playnte Information or
otherwyse in any of the Quenes Ma=t=~ Court~ , wherein no Essoyne or
P~texion shal@ @be alowed ; STAT-1572-E2-P2,4,527.12

And yf any shall eftsoones offend therein then thaye and everye of them
theire Abbettors and Counselo=r=s shall incurr the paynes and forfaytur~
w=ch= in the Statute {COM:preceding_word_"Statute"_emended} of Provysion
or Premunyre are appoynted and lymited . STAT-1572-E2-P2,4,527.13

<P_4,528>

Provyded alwaye , That yf it shall happen hereafter any Pere of this
Realme to be indyted of anye Offence made Treason by this Acte , he
shall have his tryall by his Peeres , as in other cases of Treason ys
accustomed . STAT-1572-E2-P2,4,528.15

Savynge to all and every person and p~sons Bodyes Politique and
Corporate , theyre Heyres and Successors , other then the said
Offendo=r=s and theyr Heir~ claymyng onely as Heire or Heyres to anye
suche Offendo=r= , and suche p~son and p~sons as clayme to any theire
Uses all suche Ryght~ Titles Interest~ Possessions Leases Rentes
Revertions Offyces and other Proffitt~ w=ch= thay or any of them shall
have at the daye of the comittynge suche Offence or Offences , or at any
tyme before , in as large and ample maner as yf this Acte had never ben
hadd or made . STAT-1572-E2-P2,4,528.16

Provyded alsoe and be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforesaid ,
That no p~son or p~sons shall in any wyse bee arraygned for anye of the
Offence~ mentioned in this Acte to be co~mitted or don w=th=in any the
Queenes Ma=t=~ Realmes or Domynyons , unlesse the Offendo=r= or
Offendo=r=s be thereof indited w=th=in Syxe Monethes next after the same
Offence co~mitted ; Any Thing mentioned in this Acte to the contrary
notwithstandinge ; And that no p~son or p~sons shall in any wyse be
arraygned for anye the Offences mencyoned in this Acte to be co~mitted
or done out of anye the Quenes Ma=t=~ Realmes or Domynions , unlesse the
Offendo=r= or Offendo=rs= be thereof indited w=th=in one yere next
aft=r= y=e= same Offence comitted ; Any Thyng mentioned in this Acte to
the contrary notw=th=standing . STAT-1572-E2-P2,4,528.17

Provided also and be it enacted by th@ @aucthorytye aforesaid , That no
p~son or p~sons shal@ @be hereafter arraygned for anny of the Offence or
Offence~ mentioned in this Acte , unlesse the same Offence or Offences
be proved by the Testimonye Deposicion and Othe of two lawfull &
sufficient Wytnesses ; w=ch= said Wytnesses shall att the tyme of the
Arraignement of such p~son so offendynge , be brought forth in p~son
before the p~tie so arraygned Face to Face , and there shall avowe and
openly declare all they can saye againste the p~tie so arraygned ,
unlesse the said p~tie arraygned shall wyllingly w=th=out vyolence
confesse the same . STAT-1572-E2-P2,4,528.18

Provided allso and be it enacted by the aucthoritye aforesaid , That the
Aydo=r=s and Comforters of suche of the Offendo=r=s aforesaid as shall
malitiously advysedly and dyrectly publishe set forth and affyrme that
the Queenes Highnes that nowe is , is an Heritike Schismatyke Tyrant
Infidell or Usurp~ of the Crowne as in fourme aforesaid , shall for his
said fyrste Offence of ayding and comfortinge the sayde laste recited
Offendo=r= or Offendors , knowing the same Offence or Offences to be
co~mitted , incurr onely the Daunger and Penaltie of Premunyre mentioned
in the Statute of Premunire made in the syxteenth yere of Kynge Richard
the Seconde ; And that such Aydo=r=s and Comforters of the Offendor or
Offendors aforesaid laste recited , knowing the same Offences to be
co~mitted , w=ch= after theire fyrst Convyction & Attainder thereof
shall eftsones offend , shall for his or their seconde Offence be
adjudged Highe Traytors and suffer and forfayte as in cases of High
Treason as is aforesaid . STAT-1572-E2-P2,4,528.19

Provyded allwayes and be it enacted by the Aucthoritie aforesaid , That
the gevinge of Charytable Almes , in Monye Meate Drynke Apparrell or
Beddyng , for the Sustentation of the Bodye or Helth of any p~son or
p~sons that shall co~mit any the Offences made Treason or Premunyre by
this Acte during the Tyme that the same Offendor shal@ @be in p~son ,
shall not in any wyse be demed or taken to be any Offence ; Any Thynge
in this Acte contayned to the contrary thereof notwithstandynge .
STAT-1572-E2-P2,4,528.20

