<BEGIN_stat-1607-e2-p2>

<P_4,1159>

<heading>

Chapter IV . STAT-1607-E2-P2,4,1159.4

An Acte for the due execucion of divers Lawes and Statutes heretofore
made against Rogues Vagabond~ and Sturdye Beggars and other lewde and
idle p~sons STAT-1607-E2-P2,4,1159.5

<$$heading>

Whereas heretofore div~s good and necessarie Lawes and Statutes have
beene made and p~vided for the ereccion of Howses of Correccion for the
suppressing and punishing of Rogues Vacabond~ and other idle vagrant and
disorderly p~sons , w=ch= Lawes have not wrought soe good effect as was
expected , as@ @well for that the said Howses of Correccion have not
beene buylte according as was intended , as alsoe for that the said
Statutes have not beene duly and severely putt in execucion as by the
said Statut~ were appointed ; For Remedy whereof , Be it enacted and
established by our Soveraigne Lord the King~ Majestie and by the Lord~
Spirituall and Temporall and by the Co~mons in this p~sent Parliament
assembled and by the Authoritie of the same , That all Lawes and
Statutes nowe in force made for erecting and buylding of Howses of
Correccion , and for punishing of Rogues Vacabond~ and other wandring
and idle p~sons shall be put in due execucion .
STAT-1607-E2-P2,4,1159.7

<P_4,1160>

And be it further enacted and established by the authoritie aforesaid ,
That before the Feast of S=t= Michaell the Archangell w=ch= shal@ @be in
the yeere of our Lord God one_thousand_six_hundred_and_eleven , there
shall@ @bee erected built or otherwise p~vided w=th=in ev~y Countie of
this Realme of England and Wales where there is not one Howse of
Correccion alredy built purchased p~vided or contynued , one or more
fitt and convenient Howse or Howses of Correccion w=th= convenient
Backside thereunto adjoyninge togither w=th= Milles Turnes Card~ and
such like necessarie Ymplement~ to sett the said Rogues or such other
idle p~sons on worke ; the same Howses to be buylt erected or p~vided in
some convenient Place or Towne in ev~y Countie : W=ch= Howses shall@
@bee purchased conveyed or assured unto such p~son or p~sons as by the
Justices of Peace or the more part of them in their Quarter Sessions of
the Peace to be holden w=th=in ev~y Countie of this Realme of England
and Wales upon Trust , to the Intente the same shall@ @bee used and
ymployed for the keeping correcting and setting to worke of the said
Rogues Vagabond~ Sturdy Beggers and other idle and disorderly p~sons .
STAT-1607-E2-P2,4,1160.9

And be it further enacted by the authoritie aforesaid , That if the said
Howse soe to be erected purchased or p~vided , shall not be erected
buylt or otherwise p~vided before the Feast of S=t= Michaell the
Archangell , w=ch= shal@ @be in the yeere
one_thousand_six_hundred_and_eleven next ensuyng the last day of this
p~sent Session of Parliament , that then ev~y Justice of Peace w=th=in
ev~y Countie of this Realme of England and Wales , where such Howse and
Backside shall not be erected or p~vided , shall forfeite for his said
Neglect Fyve Pound~ of lawfull English Money , the One Moitie thereof to
be unto him or them that will sue for the same by Accion of Debt Bill
Plainte or Informacion , in w=ch= Suite noe P~teccion Essoine or Wager
of Lawe shall@ @bee admitted ; And the other Moitie thereof to be
ymployed and bestowed toward~ the erecting buylding p~curing or p~viding
the said Howse and Backside , and such necessarie Ymplement~ as
aforesaid . STAT-1607-E2-P2,4,1160.10

And be it further enacted and established by the authoritie aforesaid ,
That the Justices of Peace of ev~y Countie w=th=in the Realme of England
and Wales , at their Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be holden for
their sev~all Counties <paren> next after the erecting p~viding or
buylding of the said Howse or Howses , and soe from tyme to tyme
<$$paren> or the most parte of them , shall elect no~iate and appointe
at their Will and Pleasure , one or more honest fitt p~son or p~sons to
be Governor or Master of the saide Howse or Howses soe to be purchased
erected buylte or p~vided ; w=ch= p~son and p~sons soe chosen by v~tue
of this p~sent Act , shall have Power and Authoritie to sett such Rogues
Vagabond~ idle and disorderlie p~sons as shall@ @bee brought or sent
unto the said Howse to work and labor <paren> being able <$$paren> from
tyme to tyme for such tyme as they shall contynue and be remayning in
the said Howse of Correction , and to punishe the said Rogues Vagabond~
, idle and disorderly p~sons , by putting Fetters or Gyves upon them ,
and by moderate whipping of them : and that the said Rogues Vagabond~
and idle p~sons , during such tyme as they shall contynue and remaine in
the said Howse of Correccion , shall in noe sort be chargeable to the
Countrie for any Allowance either at their bringing in or going forth or
during the tyme of their Abode there , but shall have such and so much
Allowance as they shall deserve by their owne Labour and Worke .
STAT-1607-E2-P2,4,1160.11

And be it further enacted by the authoritie aforesaid , That the said
Justices of Peace of every Countie w=th=in every of their severall
Devisions twice in every yeare at the least and oftener if their be
occasion , shall assemble and meete togither for the better execucion of
this Statute , and that some fower or fyve daies before their Assembly
and Meeting , the said Justices or the more parte of them shall by their
Warrant co~maund the Constables and Tithing-men of every Hundred Towne
Parish Village and Hamlett w=th=in their said severall Divisions , w=ch=
shal@ @be assisted w=th= sufficient Men of the same Places , to make a
gen~all privy search in one Night w=th=in their said Hundred~ Townes
Villag~ and Hamlett~ , for the finding out and app~hending of the said
Rogues Vagabond~ wandring and idle p~sons , and that such Rogues
Vagabond~ wandring and idle p~sons as they shall then fynd and app~hend
in the said Search , shall by them be brought before the said Justices
at their said Assembly or Meeting , there to be examined of their idle
and wandring life , there to be punished , or otherwise by their Warrant
to be sent or conveyed unto the said House or Houses of Correccion
w=th=in the said County , appointed and p~fixed , there to be delyvered
unto the Master or Governour of the said Howse , or to his Deputie or
Assignee , to be sett to labor and work , at w=ch= daies and tymes of
Assembly or Meeting so to be held by the said Justices of Peace , the
Constables and Tything-men of every Hundred Parish Towne Village and
Hamlett , shall then appeare in every their severall Divisions before
the said Justices of Peace at the said Assemblies or Meeting~ , and
there shall give accompt and reckoning uppon Oath in writing , and under
the Hand of the Minister of every Parish , what Rogues Vagabond~ and
wandring and disorderly p~sons they have app~hended both in the same
Search , and also betweene every such Assemblies and Meeting~ , and howe
many have bene by them punished , or otherwise sent unto the Houses of
Coreccion ; which if the said Constables or Tithingmen shall neglect to
p~forme , as also to convey safely all such Rogues , w=th= all other
idle or disorderly p~sons at the charge of the Hundreth , as by the
Justices of Peace Warrant~ shal@ @be sent unto the Houses of Correccion
in the same Countie , that then they shall forfeit such further Fynes
Paines and Penalties as by the said Justices of Peace , or the most part
of them , shal@ @be thought fitt and convenient , not exceeding the some
of fortie shilling~ for every Offence . STAT-1607-E2-P2,4,1160.12

And for that it is convenient that the Masters or Governors of the said
Houses of Correccion should have some fit Allowauce {COM:sic} and
Maynten=a=nce for their Travell and Care to be had in the said s~vice ,
as also for the releiving of such as shall happen to be weake and sick
in their Custody , and y=t= the Subjett~ of this Realme should in noe
sort be overcharged to raise up Money for Stock~ to sett such on worke
as shal@ @be co~mitted to their Custody ; <P_4,1161> Be it therfore
enacted and established by the Authoritie of this p~sent Parliament ,
That the Masters or Governors of the said Howses of Correccion , shall
have such so~me of Money yearelie as shal@ @be thought meete by the most
part of Justices of the Peace w=th=in the said Countie at the Quarter
Sessions of the Peace , the same to be paid quarterlie before hand by
the Treasurers appointed by one Act made in the three and forteth
{COM:sic} yeare of the late Queene Elizabeth , intituled An Act for the
Releif of the Poore during the tyme they the said Masters or Governors
shal@ @be imployed in the said s~vice <paren> the said Master or
Governor giving sufficient Securitie for the contynuance and p~formaunce
of the said s~vice <$$paren> , w=ch= if the said Treasorer shall neglect
or refuse to p~forme , that then the said Master or Governor of the
Howse of Correccion , shall have authoritie by this p~sent Acte to levy
the same or soe much thereof as shal@ @be unpaid , uppon the said
Treasorers Accompt , in {SIC:iu} such Manner and Forme as by the said
Statute they the said Treasorers are appointed and authorized to levy
the weekly so~me or payment being to them unpaid .
STAT-1607-E2-P2,4,1161.13

And because great charge arriseth {COM:sic} uppon many places w=th=in
this Realme by reason of Bastardie , besides the greate Dishonor of
Almightie God ; Be it therefore enacted by the authoritie aforesaid ,
That every lewde Woman w=ch= after this p~sent Session of Parliament ,
shall have any Bastard w=ch= may be chargeable to the Parish , the
Justices of the Peace shall co~mitt such lewde Woman unto the House of
Correccion , there to be punished and sett on worke during the terme of
one whole yere ; and if shee shall eftsons offend againe , that then to
be co~mitted to the said House of Correccion as aforesaid , and there to
remaine untill shee can put in good suerties for her good behavior , not
to offend so againe . STAT-1607-E2-P2,4,1161.14

And for that many wilfull People fynding that they having Children ,
have some hope to have Reliefe from the Parish wherein they dwell , and
being able to labor , and therebie to releive themselves and their
Familyes , doe nev~theles ru~ne awaie out of their Parishes and leave
their Famylyes upon the Parish : For remedy whereof , be it further
enacted by this p~sent Parliament , and by the authoritie of the same ,
That all such p~sons so running away , shal@ @be taken and demed to be
incorrigible Rogues , and endure the Paines of incorrigible Rogues ; And
if either such Man or Woman being able to worke {SIC:worke_and} shall
threaten to runne away and leave their Families as aforesaid , the same
beinge p~ved by Two sufficient Witnesses upon Oath before Two Justices
of Peace in that Division , that then the said p~son so threatning shall
{COM:preceding_word_"shall"_emended} by the said Justices of Peace be
sent to the Houses of Correccion <paren> unlesse he or she can put in
sufficient Suerties for the Discharge of the Parish <$$paren> there to
be delt w=th= and deteyned as a sturdy and wandring Rogue , and to be
delyvered at the said Assembly or Meeting or at the Quarter Sessions and
not otherwise . STAT-1607-E2-P2,4,1161.15

And because there shal@ @be the more Care taken by all such Masters of
the Houses of Correccion , that when the Countrey hath beene at Trouble
and Charge to bringe all such disorderlie p~sons as aforesaid to their
safe keeping , that then they shall p~forme their Duties in that Behalf
: Be it therefore enacted by the authoritie aforesaid , That if they
shall not ev~y Quarter Sessions yeld a true and lawfull Accompt unto the
Justices of Peace , of all such p~sons as have beene co~mitted to their
Custody , or if the said p~sons co~mitted to their Custody , or any of
them , shal@ @be troublesome unto the Countrey , by going abroad , or
otherwise shall escape awaye from the said House of Correccion , before
they shal@ @be from thence lawfully delyvered , that then the said
Justices shall sett downe such Fynes and Penalties uppon the said
Masters and Governors as the most part of them in their Quarter Sessions
shall thincke fitt and convenient , STAT-1607-E2-P2,4,1161.16

and all Fynes and Penalties not herein before lymited shal@ @be paid
unto the Treasorer and accompted for by the Treasorer aforesaid .
STAT-1607-E2-P2,4,1161.17

This Act to have contynuance for the space of seaven yeares , and from
thence to the end of the next Session of Parliament after the said seven
yeeres . STAT-1607-E2-P2,4,1161.18

<P_4,1167>

<heading>

Chapter X . STAT-1607-E2-P2,4,1167.21

An Acte for Reformacion of Alehouse Keepers . STAT-1607-E2-P2,4,1167.22

<$$heading>

Wheras notw=th=standing all former Lawes and Provisions already made ,
the inordinate and extreme Vice of excessive Drinking and Drunkennes
doth more and more abound , to the greate Offence of Almightie God , and
the wastefull Destruccion of God~ good Creatures : Bee it enacted by the
Authoritie of this p~sent Parliament , That if any p~son being an
Alehouse Keeper <paren> after Six Weekes next ensuyng this p~sent
Session of Parliament <$$paren> shall be lawfully convicted for any
Offence or Offences , co~mitted against any of the Branches of Two
former Act~ of Parliament made sithens the begynninge of this p~sent
Parliament , the one intituled An Act to restraine the inordinate
haunting and tipling in Innes Alehowses and other Victualing Howses ,
the other intituled An Act against the odious and loathsome synne of
Drunkennes , that then every p~son or p~sons so convicted shall for the
Space of Three Yeeres next ensuyng the said Conviccion be utterly
disabled to keepe any such Alehowse . STAT-1607-E2-P2,4,1167.24

