<BEGIN_stat-1640-e2-p2>

<P_5,54.10>

<heading>

CHAPTER I . STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,54.10.4

An Act for the p~venting of inconveniencies happening by the long
intermission of Parliaments . STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,54.10.5

<$$heading>

Whereas by the Lawes and Statutes of this Realme the Parliament ought to
bee holden att least once every yeare for the redresse of greivances but
the appointment of the time and place for the holding thereof hath
alwaies belonged as it ought to his Majestie and his Royall Progenitors
. And whereas it is by experience found that the not holding of
Parliaments accordingly hath produced sundry and great mischeife and
inconveniences to the Kings Majestie the Church and Comon_Wealth For the
P~vention of the like mischeifs and inconveniences in time to come .
Bee it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majestie with the consent of
the Lords Spirituall and Temporall and the Co~mons in this p~sent
Parliament assembled that the said Lawes and Statutes bee from
henceforth duly kept and observed STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,54.10.7

and your Majesties loyall and obedient subjects in this p~sent
Parliament now assembled doe humbly pray that it bee enacted And be it
enacted accordingly by the authority of this p~sent Parliament That in
case there be not a Parliament summoned by Writ under the Great Seale of
England and assembled and held {COM:following_text_annexed_to_original}
before the tenth day of September which shall bee in the third yeare
next after the last day of the last meeting and sitting in this p~sent
Parliament the begining of the first yeare to be accompted from the said
last day of the last meeting and sitting in Parliament and soe from time
to time and in all times hereafter if there shall not bee a Parliament
assembled and held before the tenth day of September which shall be in
the third yeare next after the day of the last meeting and sitting in
Parliament before that time assembled and held the begining of the first
yeare to bee accounted from the said last day of the last meeting and
sitting in Parliament That then in every such case as aforesaid the
Parliament shall assemble and bee held in the usuall place att
Westminster in such manner and by such meanes onely as is hereafter in
this p~sent Act declared and enacted and not otherwise on the second
monday which shall bee in the moneth of November then next ensueing
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,54.10.8

And in case this p~sent Parliament now assembled and held or any other
Parliament which shall att any time hereafter bee assembled and held by
Writ under the Great Seale of England or in case any Parliament shall
bee assembled and held by authority of this p~sent Act and such
Parliam=ts= or any of them shall be prorogued or adjourned or continued
by prorogation or adjournment untill the tenth day of September which
shall be in the third yeare next after the last day of the last meeting
and sitting in Parliament to bee accompted as aforesaid that then in
every such case every such Parliament so prorogued or adjourned or soe
continued by prorogation or adjournment as aforesaid shall from the said
tenth day of September be thenceforth cleerely and absolutely dissolved
and the Lord Chancellor of England the Lord Keeper of the Great Seale of
England and every Commissioner and Commissioners for the keeping of the
Great Seale of England for the time being shall within six dayes after
the said tenth day of September in every such third yeare as aforesaid
in due forme of Law and without any further Warrant or direcco~n from
His Majestie his Heires or Successors Seale issue forth and send abroad
severall and respective Writs to the severall and respective Peeres of
this Realme commanding every such Peer that hee personally bee att the
Parliament to be held att Westminster on the second monday which shall
be in November next <P_5,55> following the said tenth day of September
then and there to treate concerning the high and urgent Affairs
concerning his Majestie the state and defence of the Kingdome and church
of England and shall alsoe seale issue forth and send abroad severall
and respective Writs to the severall and respective Sheriffs of the
severall and respective Counties Cities and Boroughs of England and
Wales and to the Constable of the Castle of Dover Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports or his Lieutennant for the time being and to the Maior and
Bailiffs of Barwick upon Tweed and to all and every other Officers and
Persons to whom Writs have used to be directed for the electing of the
Knights Citizens Barons and Burgesses of and for the said Counties
Cities Cinque Ports and Boroughs of England and Wales respectively in
the accustomed forme to appeare and serve in Parliament to be held at
Westminster on the said second Monday which shall be in November
aforesaid which said Peers after the said Writs received and which said
Knights Citizens Barons and Burgesses chosen by vertue of the said Writs
shall then and there appeare and serve in Parliament accordingly
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,55.9

And the said Lord Chancellour Lord Keeper Commissioner and Commissioners
aforesaid shall respectively take a solemn Oath upon the Holy Evangelist
for the due issuing of Writs according to the tenour of this Act viz.
in hec verba . STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,55.10

You shall sweare that you shall truly and faithfully issue forth and
send abroad all Writs of Summons to Parliament for both Houses att such
time and in such manner as is expressed and enjoyned by an Act of
Parliament intituled An Act for the p~venting of Inconveniencies
happening by the long intermission of Parliaments . Which Oath is
forthwith to be taken by the p~sent Lord Keeper and to be administred by
the Clerke of the Crowne to every Lord Chancellour Lord Keeper
Commissioner and Co~missioners aforesaid STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,55.11

and that none of the said Officers respectively shall henceforth execute
any the said Offices before they have taken the said Oath
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,55.12

And if the said Lord Chancellour Lord Keeper or any the said
Commissioners shall fail or forbeare soe to issue out the said Writs
according to the true meaning of this Act then he or they respectively
shall beside the incurring of the grievous Sin of perjury be disabled
and become by vertue of this Act incapable ipso facto to beare his and
theire said Offices respectively and bee further lyable to such
punishments as shall be inflicted on him or them by the next or any
other ensuing Parliament STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,55.13

And in case the said Lord Chancellour Lord Keeper Commissioner or
Commissioners aforesaid shall not issue forth the said Writs as
aforesaid or in case that the Parliament doe not assemble and bee held
att the time and place before appointed Then the Parliament shall
assemble and bee held in the usuall place att Westminster in such manner
and by such meanes onely as is hereafter in this p~sent Act declared and
enacted and not otherwise on the third monday which shall bee in the
moneth of January then next ensuing STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,55.14

And the Peers of this Realm shall by vertue of this Act bee enabled and
are enjoyned to meet in the Old Palace of Westminster in the usuall
place there on the third monday in the said moneth of November
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,55.15

and they or any twelve or more of them then and there assembled shall on
or before the last monday of November next following the tenth day of
September aforesaid by vertue of this Act without other Warrant issue
out Writts in the usuall forme in the name of the Kings Majestie his
Heires or Successors attested under the Hands and Seales of twelve or
more of the said Peers to the severall and respective Sheriffes of the
severall and respective Counties Cities and Boroughs of England and
Wales and to the Constable of the Castle of Dover Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports or his Lieutennant for the time being and to the Maior and
Bayliffs of Berwicke upon Tweed and to all and every other the said
Officers and Persons to whom Writs have beene used to bee directed for
the electing of the Knights Citizens Barons and Burgesses of and for the
said Counties Cities Cinque Ports and Boroughs to bee and appeare att
the Parliament att Westminster aforesaid to be held on the third monday
in January then next following All and every which Writts the Clerks of
the Pettibag and other Clerks to whom the writing of the Writs for
Summons to the Parliament doth and shall belong or whom the said Lords
or twelve or more of them shall appoint shall att the command of the
said Lords soe assembled or of any twelve or more of them make and
prepare ready for the signature of the said Lords or any twelve or more
of them under paine of the losse of theire places and offices and of
such other punishments as in the next or any other ensuing Parliament
shall be inflicted on him or them STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,55.16

And it is enacted that the said Writs soe issued shall be of the same
power and force to all intents and purposes as the Writs or Summons to
Parliament under the Great Seale of England have ever beene or ought to
bee STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,55.17

And all the Messengers of the Chamber or others whoe shall be appointed
by the said Lords or any twelve or more of them are hereby required
faithfully and speedyly to deliver the said Writs to every person and
persons Sheriffe Officers and others to whom the same shall be directed
which if the said Messengers or any of them shall faile to performe they
shall forfeit theire respective places and incurre such other pains and
punishments as by that or any other ensuing Parliament shall be imposed
on them . STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,55.18

And it is alsoe further enacted that all and every the Peers of this
Realme shall make theire appearance and shall assemble on the said third
monday in January in such manner and to such effect and with such power
as if they had received every of them Writs of Summons to Parliament
under the Great Seale of England in the usuall and accustomed manner
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,55.19

And in case the said Lords or twelve or more of them shall faile to
issue forth such Writs or that the said Writs doe not come to the said
severall Counties Cities Cinque Ports and Boroughs soe that an election
bee not thereupon made And in case there be not a Parliament assembled
and held {COM:end_of_inserted_text} before the three_and_twentieth day
of the said moneth of January and soe from time to time and in all times
hereafter if there shall not be a Parliament assembled and held before
the said three_and_twentieth day of January then in every such case as
aforesaid the Parliament shall assemble and be held in the usuall Place
att Westminster in such manner and by such meanes onely as is hereafter
in this p~sent Act declared and enacted and not otherwise on the second
Tuesday which shall bee in the moneth of March next after the said
three_and_twentieth day of January Att which Parliament the Peers of
this Realme shall make theire appearance and shall assemble att the time
and place aforesaid and shall each of them be liable unto such paines
and censures for his and theire not appearing and serving then and there
in Parliament as if hee or they had beene summoned by Writ under the
Great Seale of England and had not appeared and served and to such
further paines and censures as by the rest of the Peers in Parliament
assembled they shall be adjudged unto . STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,55.20

<P_5,56>

And for the better assembling of the Knights Citizens Barons and Burges
to the said Parliament as aforesaid It is further enacted that the
severall and respective Sheriffs of theire severall and respective
Counties Cities and Boroughs of England and Wales and the Chancellor
Masters and Schollers of both and every of the Universities and the
Maior and Bailiffs of the Borough of Barwick upon Tweed shall att the
severall Courts and Places to be held and appointed for theire
respective Counties Universities Cities and Boroughs next after the said
three_and_twentieth day of January cause such Knight and Knights Citizen
and Citizens Burgesse and Burgesses of theire said Counties Universities
Cities and Buroughs respectively to be chosen by such persons and in
such manner as if severall and respective Writs of Summons to Parliament
under the Great Seale of England had issued and been awarded
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,56.22

And in case any of the severall Sheriffs or the Chancellour Masters and
Schollers of either of the Universities or the Maior and Bailiffs of
Barwick respectively doe not before ten of the clocke in the forenoone
of the same day wherein the severall and respective Courts and Places
shall bee held or appointed for theire severall and respective Counties
Universities Cities and Boroughs as aforesaid begin and proceed on
according to the meaning of this Law in causing Elections to be made of
such Knight and Knights Citizen and Citizens Burgesse and Burgesses of
theire said Counties Universities Cities and Boroughs as aforesaid then
the Free holders of each County and the Masters and Schollers of every
of the Universities and the Citizens and others having voices in such
Election respectively in each University City and Borough that shall be
assembled att the said Courts or Places to be held or appointed as
aforesaid shall forthwith without further Warrant or direction proceed
to the Election of such Knight or Knights Citizen or Citizens Burgesse
or Burgesses aforesaid in such manner as it is usuall in case of Writs
of Summons issued and awarded . STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,56.23

And it is further enacted that the severall and respective Sheriffs of
theire several and respective Counties and the Constables of the Castle
of Dover and Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports or his Leiutenant {COM:sic}
for the time being respectively shall after the said three_and_twentieth
day of January and before the eighth day of February then immediately
next ensuing award and send forth theire Precepts to the severall and
respective Cities and Boroughs within theire severall Counties and
likewise unto the said Cinque Ports respectively comanding them
respectively to make choice of such Citizen and Citizens Barons Burge
{COM:preceding_word_"Burge"_emended} and Burgesses to serve in the said
Parliament att the time and place aforesaid Which said Cities Cinque
Ports and Boroughs respectively shall before the last day of the said
Moneth of February make election of such Citizen and Citizens Barons
Burgesse and Burgesses as if Writs for summoning of a Parliament under
the Great Seale of England had issued and beene awarded
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,56.24

And in case no such p~cept shall come unto the said Cities Cinque Ports
and Boroughs respectively by the time herein limited or in case any
precept shall come and no election be made thereupon before the said
last day of February That then the severall Citizens Burgesses and other
Persons that ought to elect and send Citizens Barons and Burgesses to
the Parliament shall on the first Tuesday in March then next ensueing
the said last day of February make choice of such Citizen and Citizens
Barons Burge {COM:preceding_word_"Burge"_emended} and Burgesses as if a
Writ of Summons under the Great Seale of England had issued and beene
awarded and precepts thereupon issued to such Cities Cinque Ports and
Boroughs which Knights Citizens Barons and Burgesses so chosen shall
appeare and serve in Parliament att the time and place aforesaid and
shall each of them be liable unto such paines and censures for his and
theire not appearing and serving then and theire in Parliament as if hee
or they had beene elected and chosen by vertue of a Writ under the Great
Seale of England and shall be likewise subject unto such further paines
and censures as by the rest of the Knights Citizens and Burgesses
assembled in the Common House of Parliament hee or they shall be
adjudged unto STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,56.25

And the Sheriffs and other Officers and persons to whom it appertaineth
shall make returnes and accept and receive the returnes of such
Elections in like manner as if Writs of Summons had issued and beene
executed as hath beene used and accustomed STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,56.26

and in default of the Sheriffs and other Officers respectively in not
accepting or makeing returne of such Elections it shall and may be
lawfull to and for the severall Freeholders and other persons that have
elected to make returns of the Knights Citizens Barons and Burgesses by
them elected which shall bee as good and effectuall to all intents and
Purposes as if the Sheriffe or other Officers had received a Writ of
Summons for a Parliament and had made such returnes
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,56.27

And that such Elections Precepts and returnes shall bee had and made att
such times by such persons and in such manner as before in this Act is
expressed and declared according to the true intent and meaning of this
Law Any Writ Proclamation Edict Act Restraint Inhibition Order or
Warrant to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,56.28

And in case any person or persons shall be soe hardy to advise frame
contrive serve or put in execution any such Writs Proclamation Edict Act
Restraint Inhibition Order or Warrant thereupon then hee or they soe
offending shall incur and sustain the paines penalties and forfeitures
limited ordained and provided in and by the Statute of Provision and
Premunire made in the sixteenth yeare of King Richard the Second
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,56.29

and shall from thenceforth bee disabled during his life to sue or
implead any person in any action reall or personall or to make any Gift
Grant Conveyance or other disposition of any his Lands Tenements
Hereditaments Goods or Chattels which hee hath to his owne use either by
Act executed in his life time or by his last Will or otherwise or to
take any Gift Conveyance or Legacie to his owne use or to take any
benefit of any Gift Conveyance or Legacie to his owne use
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,56.30

And if any Sheriffe Constable of the Castle of Dover or Lord Warden of
the Cinque Ports shall not performe his duty enjoyned by this Act then
hee shall lose and forfeit the sum of one_thousand pounds
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,56.31

and every County City Cinque Port and Borough that shall not make
Election of theire Knights Citizens Barons and Burgesses respectively
shall incur the Penalties following <paren> that is to say <$$paren>
every County the su~me of one_thousand Pounds and every City which is
noe County twoe_hundred pounds and every Cinque Port and Borough the
su~m of one_hundred pounds All and every of which severall forfeitures
and all other forfeitures in this Act mentioned shall and may bee
recovered in any of the Kings Courts of Record att Westminster by and in
the name of the Lord Maior of the City of London for the time being
without nameing the christian name or sirname of the said Lord Maior for
the time being by action of debt bill plaint or information wherein no
essoin protection wager of Law aid prayer priviledge injunction or order
of restraint shall bee in any wise prayed granted or allowed nor any
<P_5,57> more then one imparlance STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,57.32

And if any person after notice given that the Action depending is
grounded or prosecuted upon or by vertue of this Statute shall cause or
procure any such Action to bee stayed or delayed before Judgement by
colour or meanes of any Order Warrant Power or Authority save onely of
the Court wherein such Action as aforesaid shall be brought or depending
or after Judgment had upon such Action shall cause or procure the
execution of or upon any such Judgment to bee stayed or delayed by
colour or meanes of any order warrant power or authority save onely by
Writ of Errour or Attaint that then the said persons soe offending shall
incurre and sustain all and every paines penalties and forfeitures
limited ordained and provided in and by the said Statute of Provision
and Premunire made in the sixteenth yeare of King Richard the Second
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,57.33

And if any Lord Maior of London shall att any time hereafter commence or
preferre any such Suite Action or Information and shall happen to die or
be removed out of his office before recovery and execution had that yet
no such Action Suit or Information sued commenced or preferred shall by
such displacing or death be abated discontinued or ended but that it
shall and may be lawfull to and for the Lord Maior of the City of London
next succeeding in that office and place to prosecute pursue and follow
all and every such Action Bill Plaint or Information for the causes
aforesaid soe hanging and depending in such manner and forme and to all
intents and purposes as that Lord Maior might have done which first
commenced or preferred the same STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,57.34

the fifth part of all and every the forfeitures in this Act mentioned
shall goe and be to and for the use and behoofe of the City of London
and the other four parts and residue to be employed and disposed to and
for such onely uses intents and purposes as by the Knights Citizens and
Burgesses in Parliament assembled shall be declared directed and
appointed STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,57.35

Provided that in case the Freeholders of any County and Inhabitants or
other persons having or claiming power to make election of any Knights
Citizens Barons Burgesses shall proceed to making of election of theire
Knights Citizens Barons and Burgesses which election shall afterwards
fall out to bee afterwards adjudged or declared void in Law by the House
of Commons by reason of equality of voices or misdemeanour of any person
whatsoever then the said County City Cinque Port or Borough shall not
incurre the penalties in this Law soe as an election de facto be made .
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,57.36

And it is further enacted that noe Parliament henceforth to bee
assembled shall be dissolved or prorogued within fiftie dayes att the
least after the time appointed for the meeting thereof unlesse it be by
assent of his Majesty his heires or successours and of both Houses in
Parliament assembled And that neither the House of Peers nor the House
of Commons shall be adjourned within fifty dayes att least after the
meeting thereof unlesse it bee by the free consent of every the said
houses respectively . STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,57.37

And bee it further enacted and declared by authority of this present
Parliament that the Peers to be assembled att any Parliament by vertue
of this Act shall and may from time to time att any time during such
theire assembly in Parliament choose and declare such person to bee
Speaker for the said Peers as they shall thinke fitt And likewise that
the said Knights Citizens and Burgesses to bee assembled att any
Parliament by vertue of this Act shall and may from time to time at any
time during such theire assembly in Parliament choose and declare one of
themselves to bee Speaker for the said Knights Citizens and Burgesses of
the House of Co~mons assembled in the said Parliament as they shall
thinke fitt which said Speakers and every of them as@ @well for the said
Peers as for the said House of Commons respectively shall by vertue of
this Act be perfect and compleat Speakers for the said Houses
respectively and shall have as full and large power jurisdiction and
priviledges to all intents and purposes as any Speaker or Speakers of
either of the said houses respectively heretofore
{COM:preceding_word_"heretofore"_emended} have had or enjoyed .
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,57.38

And it is further enacted and declared that all Parliaments hereafter to
bee assembled by authority of this Act and every member thereof shall
have and enjoy all rights priviledges jurisdictions and immunities as
any Parliament summoned by Writ under the Greate Seale of England or any
member thereof might or ought to have STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,57.39

and all and every the Members that shall be elected and chosen to serve
in any Parliament hereafter to be assembled by authority of this Act as
aforesaid shall assemble and meet in the Co~mons House of Parliament
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,57.40

and shall enter into the same and have voices in such Parliament before
and without the takeing the severall Oathes of Supremacy and Allegiance
or either of them any Lawe or Statute to the contrary thereof in anywise
notwithstanding . STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,57.41

Provided alwaies that if the Kings Majesty his heires or successors
shall att any time during any Parliament hereafter to be assembled by
authority of this Act as aforesaid award or direct any Co~mission or
Co~missions unto any person or persons whatsoever thereby giving power
and authority to him or them to take and receive the Oath of Supremacy
and Allegiance of all or any the Members of the Co~mons house of
Parliament and any the Members of that House being duly required
thereunto shall refuse or neglect to take and pronounce the same that
from thenceforth such person soe refuseing or neglecting shall bee
deemed no member of that house nor shall have any voice therein and
shall suffer such paines and penalties as if he had presumed to sit in
the same house without election return or authority .
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,57.42

And it is likewise provided and enacted that this Statute shall be
publikely read yearely att every Generall Sessions of the Peace to be
held next after the Epiphany and every Assizes then next ensuing by the
Clerke of the Peace and Clerke of the Assises for the time being
respectively STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,57.43

and if they or either of them shall neglect or fail to doe the same
accordingly then such party soe neglecting or failing shall forfeit the
sum of One_hundred Pounds . STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,57.44

And it is lastly provided and enacted that His Majesties Royall Assent
to this Bill shall not thereby determine this present Session of
Parliament and that all Statutes and Acts of Parliament which are to
have continuance unto the end of this present Session shall bee of full
force after His Majesties Assent untill this p~sent Session be fully
ended and determined STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,57.45

And if this present Session shall determine by dissolution of this
present Parliament then all the Acts and Statutes aforesaid shall be
continued untill the end of the first Session of the next Parliament .
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,57.46

<P_5,116.30>

<heading>

CHAPTER XIV . STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,116.30.49

An Act for the declaring unlawfull and void the late proceedings
touching Ship money and for the vacating of all Records and Processe
concerning the same . STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,116.30.50

<$$heading>

Whereas diverse Writs of late time issued under the Great Seale of
England commonly called Shipwrits for the charging of the Ports Towns
Cities Boroughs and Counties of this Realme respectively to provide and
furnish certain Ships for his Majesties Service And whereas upon the
Execution of the same Writs and Returnes of Certioraries thereupon made
and the sending the same by Mittimus into the Court of the Exchequer
Processe hath beene thence made against sundry Persons pretended to be
charged by way of Contribution for the making up of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} certaine Sums assessed for the
providing of the said Shipps and in especiall in Easter Terme in the
thirteenth yeare of the Reign of our Soveraign Lord the King that now is
a Writ of Scire facias was awarded out of the Court of Exchequer to the
then Sheriffe of Buckingham_Shire against John Hampden Esquire to
appeare and shew cause why he should not be charged with a certaine su~m
so assessed upon him upon whose appearance and demurrer to the
proceedings therein the Barons of the Exchequer adjourned the same Case
into the Exchequer Chamber where it was solemnly argued divers dayes and
at length it was there agreed by the greater part of all the Justices of
the Courts of Kings Bench and Common Pleas and of the Barons of the
Exchequer there assembled that the said John Hampden should be charged
with the said Sum so as aforesaid assessed on him The main grounds and
reasons of the said Justices and Barons which so agreed being that when
the good and safety of the Kingdome in generall is concerned and the
whole Kingdome is in danger the King might by Writ under the Great Seale
of England command all the Subjects of this his Kingdome at theire
charge to provide and furnish such number of Ships with Men Victuals and
Munition and for such time as the King should thinke fit for the defence
and safegard of the Kingdome from such danger and perill and that by Law
the King might compell the doing thereof in case of refusall or
refractarinesse and that the King is the sole Judge both of the danger
and when and how the same is to be prevented and avoided according to
which grounds and reasons all the Justices of the said Courts of Kings
Bench and Common Pleas and the said Barons of the Exchequer having beene
formerly consulted with by His Majesties command had set theire hands to
an extrajudiciall opinion expressed to the same purpose which opinion
with theire names thereunto was also by his Majesties command inrolled
in the Courts of Chancery Kings Bench Common Pleas and Exchequer and
likewise entred among the Remembrances of the Court of Star chamber
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,116.30.52

and according to the said agreement of the said Justices and Barons
Judgement was given by the Barons of the Exchequer That the said John
Hampden should be charged with the said Sum so assessed on him
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,116.30.53

And whereas some other <P_5,117> Actions and Processe depend and have
depended in the said Court of Exchequer and in some other Courts against
other persons for the like kinde of charge grounded upon the said Writs
commonly called Shipwrits all which Writs and proceedings as aforesaid
were utterly against the Law of the Land Be it therefore declared and
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty and the Lords and Commons in
this present Parliament assembled and by the Authority of the same That
the said charge imposed upon the Subject for the providing and
furnishing of Ships commonly called Shipmoney and the said
extrajudiciall opinion of the said Justices and Barons and the said
Writs and every of them and the said agreement or opinion of the greater
part of the said Justices and Barons and the said Judgement given
against the said John Hampden were and are contrary to and against the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm the right of property the libertie of
the Subjects former resolutions in Parliament and the Petition of Right
made in the third yeare of the Reign of his Majestie that now is
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,117.54

And it is further declared and Enacted by the Authoritie aforesaid That
all and every the particulars prayed or desired in the said Petition of
Right shall from henceforth be put in execution accordingly and shall be
firmely and strictly holden and observed as in the same Petition they
are prayed and expressed and that all and every the Records and
remembrances of all and every the Judgement Inrolments Entry and
proceedings as aforesaid and all and every the proceedings whatsoever
upon or by pretext or colour of any of the said Writs co~monly called
Shipwrits and all and every the Dependents on any of them shall be
deemed and adjudged to all intents constructions and purposes to be
utterly void and disannulled and that all and every the said Judgement
Inrolments Entries Proceedings and Dependents of what kind soever shall
be vacated and cancelled in such manner and form as Records use to be
that are vacated . STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,117.55

<P_5,135.23>

<heading>

CHAPTER XXV . STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,135.23.58

A Subsidy granted to the King of Tonnage Poundage and other summes of
money payable upon Merchandize exported and imported .
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,135.23.59

<$$heading>

Whereas An Act was made this present Parliament intituled A Subsidy
granted to the King of Tonnage and Poundage and other su~mes of money
payable upon merchandize exported and imported Whereby it is declared &
enacted that it is and hath beene the ancient right of the Subjects of
this Realme that no Subsidy custome impost or other charges whatsoever
ought or may be laid or {COM:preceding_word_"or"_emended} imposed
{COM:preceding_word_"imposed"_emended} by Subjects Denizens or Aliens
without co~mon consent in Parliament And the said Co~mons then taking
into theire consideration the great perill that might have ensued by not
guarding of the Seas and other inconveniencies which might have followed
in case the said su~ms of money in the said Act mentioned should not
have beene granted to your Majestie as in and by the said Act is
expressed Did therefore by the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} advice
of the Lords in this present Parliament assembled and by the authority
of the same give and grant unto your Majestie our leige Lord and
Soveraigne One Subsidie of Tonnage and one other subsidie of Poundage in
such manner and according to such rates as in the said Act is expressed
To have take perceive and enjoy the Subsidies and other su~mes soe
granted by the said Act and every of them and every part and parcell of
them to your Highnes from the five_and_twentieth day of May
One_thousand_six_hundred_forty_one unto the fifteenth Day of July then
next ensuing And Whereas the said Act being determined one other Act of
the same title was likewise made this present Parliament with like
declaration of the right of the Subjects of this your Realme by which
second Act your said Co~mons did by the like advice of the Lords in this
present Parliament assembled and by the authority of the same give and
grant to your Majestie One subsidy of Tonnage and one other subsidy of
Poundage in such manner and according to such rates as in the said last
recited Act is specified and conteyned To have take perceive and enjoye
the Subsidies and other su~ms so granted by the said last recited Act
and every of them and every part and parcell of them to your Highnes
from the said fifteenth day of July One_thousand_six_hundred_forty_one
unto the tenth day of August then next ensuing And whereas the said Act
being determined one other Act of the same title was likewise made this
present Parliament by which third Act your said Co~mons did by the like
advice of the Lords in this present Parliament assembled and by the
authority of the same give and grant to your Majestie one subsidy of
Tonnage and one other subsidy of Poundage in such manner and according
to such Rates as in the said last recited Act is specified and conteyned
To have take enjoye and perceive the said subsidies and other su~mes soe
granted by the said last recited Act and every of them and every part
and parcell of them to your Highnes from the ninth day of August
One_thousand_six_hundred_forty_one to the first day of December then
next ensuing The said Co~mons now likewise againe takeing into theire
consideracon the great perill that might ensue to this Realme by the not
guarding of the Seas & the other inconveniencies that might follow in
case the said su~mes of money should upon the suddaine be forborne to be
paid By and with the consent of the Lords in this present Parliament
assembled and by the authority of the same Doe give and grant to you our
Supreame Lord & Soveraigne One subsidy called Tonnage that is to say Of
every Tun of Wine that is or shall come into this Realme or any your
Majesties Dominions by way of Merchandize the su~me of three shillings
and soe after that rate And of every <P_5,136> tonn of sweete Wines as
well malmesey as other that is or shall come into this Realme by any
Merchant Alien three shillings and soe after the rate over and above the
three shillings above mentioned And of every Awme of Rhenish Wine that
is or shall soe come in twelve pence And alsoe one other Subsidy called
Poundage that is to say of all manner of Goods and Merchandize of every
Merchant Denizen and Alien carried or to be carried out of this Realme
or any your Majesties Dominions or to be brought into the same by way of
Merchandize of the value of every twenty shillings of the same goods and
merchandize twelve pence and soe after the rate and of every twenty
shillings value of Tynn and Pewter Vessell carried out of this Realme by
every or any Merchant Alien twelve pence over and above the twelve pence
aforesaid Except and foreprized out of this Grant
{COM:preceding_word_"Grant"_emended} of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} subsidy of Poundage all manner of
Woollen Cloth made or wrought or which shall be made or wrought within
this Realme of England and by every or any Merchant Denizen and not born
Alien carried or to be carried out of this Realme And all manner of
Woolls Woolfels Hydes and Backs of Leather that is or shall be carried
out of this Realme and all Wines not before limited to pay subsidy or
tonnage And all manner of fresh fish and bestiall coming or that shall
come into this Realme STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,136.61

And further the said Commons by the advice assent & authority aforesaid
Doe give and grant unto our said leige Lord our Soveraigne for the
causes aforesaid One other Subsidy that is to say Of every Merchant
borne Denizen of and for every Sacke of Wooll thirty_three shillings
four pence and of and for every two_hundred_and_forty Woolfels
thirty_three shillings foure pence and of and for every Last of Hides
and Backs three pounds six shillings eight pence and so after the same
rate for every lesse or greater quantity for any the same merchandize
more or lesse And of every Merchant Stranger not borne Denizen of & for
every Sacke of Wooll three pounds six shillings eight pence and of and
for every two_hundred_forty Woolfels three pounds six shillings eight
pence and for every Last of Hides and Backs three pounds thirteene
shillings foure pence And so of all the said Wools Woolfels Hydes and
Backs and every of them after the rate STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,136.62

And such other su~ms of money as have beene imposed upon any Merchandize
either outward or inward by pretext of any Letters Patents Commission
under the Great Seale of England or Privie Seale since the first yeare
of the reigne of his late Majestie King James of Blessed memory and
which were continued and paid at the begining of this present Parliament
To have take enjoye and perceive the Subsidies aforesaid and other the
aforementioned su~mes and every of them and every part and parcell of
them to you our said leige Lord and Soveraigne from the last day of
November One_thousand_six_hundred_forty_one to the first day of February
next ensuing STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,136.63

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid that the said
Subsidy of Tonnage Poundage Woole and other su~mes of money shall be
taken and employed dureing the time aforesaid to and for the intents and
purposes and upon and under such provisions clauses and limitations as
are conteyned in one Act made in Parliament held in the first yeare of
the reigne of his said late Majestie King James of Blessed Memory
entituled An Act for the granting of a Subsidy to the King of Tonnage
Poundage Wools &c STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,136.64

And it is hereby declared that the su~mes of money hereby granted upon
merchandize are not the rates intended to be continued
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,136.65

but the same to be hereafter in this present Parliament altered in such
manner as shall be thought fit STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,136.66

Provided that no penalty or forfeiture conteyned in this present Act or
in the said Act made in the first yeare of King James doe or shall ensue
to any person or persons unlesse they refuse to compound to any
merchandize or goods imported or exported after notice given of this Act
penalty & forfeiture by proclamation where the said goods are or ought
to be entred STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,136.67

And it is further enacted that any Customer or Comptroller or any other
Officer or person that after the determinaco~n of this grant shall take
or receive or cause to be taken or received the said subsidy su~mes of
money or any imposition upon merchandize whatsoever exported or imported
except the same by Grant in Parliament be due or by such graunt shall
become due or have beene continually paid from the end of the reigne of
the late King Edward the Third untill the begining of the Reigne of the
late Queene Mary shall incur and sustain the paines penalties and
forfeitures ordeined and provided by the Statute of Provision and
premunire made in the sixteenth yeare of King Richard the Second and
shall alsoe from henceforth be disabled during his life to sue or
impleade any person in any Action reall mixt or personall in any Court
whatsoever . STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,136.68

Provided alwaies That this Act shall not extend to any imposition or
charge upon any sort of Tobacco of English Plantaco~ns But that the said
Tobacco shall be charged only with the payment of two pence in the pound
and no more STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,136.69

Provided alwaies And it is further enacted that this Act shall not
extend or be construed to charge any person or persons with an
imposition or charge of late yeares imposed upon Woollen Cloath and
Woolen Comodities knowne by the name of the pretermitted customes
STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,136.70

Provided alsoe And be it further {COM:preceding_word_"further"_emended}
enacted by the authority aforesaid that all Grants and Letters Patents
under the Great Seale Privy Seale or otherwise conteyning the Grants of
any Subsidies or Imposts heretofore made or granted unto any person or
person {COM:sic} for or in respect of the transportation exportation or
importaco~n of any goods or <P_5,137> merchandize pretended to be due or
payable to your Majestie or by any such Grants or Letters Patents
covenanted to be enjoyed or had out of such Subsidies Imposts or
Payments as hereafter should be setled by Parliament or otherwise And
all Letters Patents or other Grants of the Collection of any impositions
heretofore set without consent in Parliament made or granted to any
person whatsoever And also All Penco~ns Assignaco~ns of moneys and all
other payments whatsoever charged or hereafter to be charged on this
Subsidy by this Act other then for the uses before in this Act intended
shal@ @be from henceforth utterly voide . STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,137.71

Provided that if any Merchant shall export any Goods and merchandize
which have beene formerly imported and the customes and other duties for
the same truly paid that in such case the same allowance shal@ @be made
unto every such merchant as have been formerly by vertue of your Highnes
Privy Seale . STAT-1640-E2-P2,5,137.72

