<BEGIN_stat-1553-e1-p2>

<P_4,155>

<heading>

CHAPTER XX . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,155.4

A BYLL AGAINST USURIE . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,155.5

<$$heading>

Where in the xxxvij=th= yere of the Reigne of the late King of famous
memorye King Henry th@ @eight , father to o=r= Soveraigne Lorde the King
that now is , amongest other Act~ and Statut~ then made , it was enacted
by auctoritye of Parlament that no parsone or parsons , at anny tyme
after the last daye of January in the saide xxxvij=th= yere , sholde
have receive accept or in lucre or gaynes , for the Lone forbearing or
giving daye of payment of anny so~me of moneye for one hole yere above
the so~me of tenne pownde in the hundred , and so after that rate and
not above of and for a more or lesse so~me or for a longer or shorter
tyme , uppon the paynes and forfaitures in the saide Acte mentyoned and
conteyned ; The which Acte was not ment or intended for maynten=a=nce
and allowaunce of Usurie , as dyvers parsons blynded with inordinat love
of themself~ have and yet doo mistake the same , but rather was made and
intendid against all sort~ and kyndes of Usurie as a thing unlawfull ,
as by the tytle and preamble of the saide Acte it doth playnely appeare
, STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,155.7

And yet nevertheles the same was by the saide Acte p~mitted for the
avoyding of a more yll and inconvenyence that before that tyme was used
and exercysed : STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,155.8

But Forasmuche as Usurie is by the words of God utterly prohibited , as
a vyce moste odyous and detestable , as in dyvers places of the hollie
Scripture it is evydent to be seen , which thing by no godly teaching~
and perswations can syncke in to the harts of dyvers gredie uncharitable
and couvetous parsons of this Realme , nor yet by anny terrible
threatning~ of Godd~ wrathe and vengeaunce that justly hangeth over this
Realme for the great and open Usurie therein dailye used and practysed
they will forsake such filthie gayne and lucre , onles some temporall
punishment be provyded and ordeyned in that bihalfe : For Reformaco~n
wherof , Be it enacted by th@ @auctoritie of this p~nt Parlament , That
from the firste daye of Maye which shal@ @be in the yere of our Lorde
God a_thousande_fyve_hundred_fiftie_and_twoo , the saide Acte and
Statute concerning onely Usurie Lucre or Gaynes of or for the Lone
forbearing or geving dayes of anny so~me or so~mes of moneye , be
utterly abrogate voyde and repealed . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,155.9

And furthermore be it enacted by th@ @auctoritye aforesaide , that from
and after the saide first daye of Maye next co~minge , no parsone or
parsons , of what Estate degree qualitie or condico~n so ever he or they
be , by anny corrupt colourable or disceitfull conveyaunce sleight or
engyne , or by anny waye or meane , shall lende give sett owte delyver
or forbeare anny so~me or so~mes of moneye , to anny parsone or parsons
, or to anny Corporac~on or Bodie Politike , to or for anny manner of
Usurie encreace lucre gayne or interest to be had receyved or hoped for
, over and above the so~me or so~mes so lent given sett owt delyvered or
forborne , uppon payne of forfaiture the valewe as@ @well of the so~me
or so~mes so lent given sett owt delyvered or forborne , as allso of the
Usurie encreace lucre gayne or interest thereof , and allso uppon payne
of emprysonement of the bodye or bodyes of every such offendo=r= or
offendo=rs= , and allso to make fyne and rawnsome at the King~ will and
pleasure ; the moytie of which forfaiture of the saide vallewe shal@ @be
to the King , and th@ @other moitye to the p~tie that will sue for the
same in anny of the King~ Court~ of Recorde by actyon of Debte Bill
Playnte or Informac~on , wherin no wager of Lawe Essoyne or Protectyon
shal@ @be allowed or admitted . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,155.10

<heading>

CHAPTER XXI . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,155.12

AN ACTE FOR TYNCKERS AND PEDLERS . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,155.13

<$$heading>

Forasmuche as it is evident that Tynkers Pedlers and suche like vagrant
p~sones are more hurtfull then necessarie to the Co~men Wealth of this
Realme , Be it therfore ordeyned established and enacted by auctoritie
of this p~sent Parliament , That from and after the Feast of the
Nativitye of Saint John Baptist next co~mynge , no p~son or p~sons
co~menly called Pedler Tynker or Pety Chapman , shall wander or go from
one Towne to another or from Place to Place , out of the Towne parishe
or village where suche p~son shall dwell , and sell Pynnes poynt~ laces
gloves knyves glasses tapes or any suche kynde of wares whatsoever , or
gather Connye Skynnes or suche like thinge , or use or ex~cise the trade
or occupac~on of a Tynker , but onely suche p~son or p~sons as shal@ @be
thereunto licenced , and that in suche Circuyte or compasse as shal@ @be
to him or them assigned , by two Justic~ of Peace or mo of the Shire
where he or they shall dwell , by writinge under their handes and seales
; upon payne that everie p~son whiche shall offende cont=a=rie to the
meanynge of this Acte shall by anye Justice of the Shire where the same
Offence shal@ @be co~mytted , upon complaynt and due proffe had by
witnes or otherwise , be ymprisoned by the space of fourtene dayes at
the lest . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,155.15

<P_4,156>

<heading>

CHAPTER XXII . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,156.18

AN ACTE FOR THE PUTTINGE DOWNE OF GYGG MILLES .
STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,156.19

<$$heading>

Forasmuche as true Draperie of Wollen Clothes ys to be comended , as@
@well in Forren Realmes as in this Realme of Englande , and all wayes
and meanes used to the cont=a=rie are to be eschued and taken awaye ;
And Forasmuche as in manye part~ of this Realme ys newly and lately
devised erected buylded and used , certen Milles called Gigge Milles ,
for the perchinge and burlinge of Clothe , by reason whereof the true
Draperie of this Realme ys wonderfullye empayred , and the Clothe
thereof deceitfully made , by reason of the using of the saide Gigg
Mill~ ; For remedy whereof be it enacted by the Kinge our Sovereigne
Lorde the Lordes Sp~uall and Temporall and the Co~mons in this p~sent
Parliament assembled and by th@ @auctoritie of the same , That no manner
of p~son or p~sons , after the last daye of Maie next co~mynge , shall
use or occupie anye of the saide Gigge Mille for the workinge of any
Wollen Clothe or Clothes made or to be made within this Realme , upon
payne of forfeiture for ev~y Clothe so wrought in or by any of the saide
Milles called Gigge Milles , fyve Poundes : The moytie of all and everie
suche forfeyture and forfeytures penaltye and penalties to be to the use
of our Soveraigne Lorde the Kinge and his heires ; and th@ @other moytie
to the use of him that will sue for the same in any of the King~ Court~
be it by Writt bill playnte or informac~on wherein the Defendaunte shall
not be admytted to wage his lawe , nor any p~tecco~n essoyne or
injunction shal@ @be to him allowed . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,156.21

<P_4,240>

<heading>

CHAPTER III . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,240.24

AN ACTE AGAINST SEDITYOUS WOORDES AND RUMOURS .
STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,240.25

<$$heading>

Where it is conteyned as well in the Statute of Westm~ the First , as in
the Statute made at Glocester the seconde yere of the Raigne of King
Richarde the Seconde , That no Man shoulde bee so hardye to contryve
speake or tell any false Newes lyes or other suche lyke false thinges of
Prelates Dukes Earles Barons and other Nobles and Peares of the Realme ,
or of the Cha~ncelour Treasurer Clerck of the Pryvie Seale Stewarde of
the Kynges Householde Justices of th@ @one Bancke or of th@ @other , or
of any of the greate Officers of this Realme : And that every suche
Offendo=r= shoulde be taken and imprisoned untill suche tyme as he hadd
brought him or them forthe whiche did speake the same ; And where also
at a P~liam=t= holden at Cambridge in the twelvethe yere of the reigne
of the said King Richard , It was also enacted that where any suche
Offendo=r= as is aforesaid shoulde be taken and imprisoned , and coulde
not finde him of whom he hearde those Newes whiche he spake as is
aforesayd , that then the same speaker shoulde bee punished by the
Advice of the Cowncell ; As by the same Actes amongest other more
playnelye doo and maye appeare : Be it enacted by th@ @aucthoritee of
this p~nt P~liam=t= , That all and every the said former Actes and
Statutes shal@ @be and remaine in their full force strengthe and effect
to all intentes constructyons and purposes : STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,240.27

And further that Justices of Peace in every Shire Cytie and Towne
Corporate within the lymites of their severall Co~missions shall by
aucthoritie of this p~nte Acte , have full powre to examyne heare and
determyne the causes abovesaid in the said two firste Actes specyfied ,
and to put the said twoo first Statutes and every branche in them
conteyned in due execuc~on , that from hensforthe condigne punishement
be not deferred from suche Offendours . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,240.28

And Forasmuche as dyvers and sundry malicious and evill_disposed persons
maliciouslye sediciouslye rebellyouslye and unnaturally , contrary to
the Dutie of their Fidelytees and Allegiances , have now of late not
onely ymagined invented practised spoken and spredd abroade dyvers and
sundry false seditious and sclaunderous Newes Rumours Sayenges and Tales
, ageynst our most dreadd Sovereigne Lorde and King , and ageynst our
most naturall Sovereygne Ladye and Quene and against either of them , of
whom we ar forbidden to thinck evill and muche more to speake evell ,
Whiche Offence soundethe and ys as@ @well to the greate Dishonour
Reproche and Sclaunder of their most Excellent Majesties , as also to
the greate Sclaunder of this their Realme and other their Dominions ,
But also have devised made written printed publyshed and set forthe
dyvers heynous sedicious and sclanderous Writinges Rimes Ballades
Letters Papers and Bookes , intending and practising therby to move and
stir sedicious Discorde Disention and Rebellyon within this Realme , to
the greate perill and daunger of the same ; For avoyding wherof Be it
enacted by th@ @aucthoritee of this p~nt P~liam=t= , That if any p~son
or p~sons after the xx=th= day of Februarye next ensuing , and after
open Proclamac~on made of this Acte , shall maliciouslye of his or their
Imaginac~on , speake any false seditious and sclanderous Newes Rumors
Saienges or Tales of our said Sovereigne Lorde and King , or of our said
most naturall Sovereigne Ladye and Quene , that then all and every suche
person and persons so offending , being therof convicted or attainted in
fourme hereafter in this Acte expressed , shall for every first Offence
in some Market Place within the Shire Citie or Boroughe wher or nere
unto the Place where the sayd woordes were or shall@ @bee so spoken , be
set openly upon the Pylorye by the Sheryffe or his Ministers , yf yt
shall fortune to be without any Citie or Towns Corporate , And if it
happen to be within suche Citie or Towne Corporate then by the
principall Officer or Officers of suche Citie or Towne Corporate or his
or their Ministers and ther to have bothe his eares cutt of , onles he
paye One_hundrethe powndes to the King and Quenes Highnes use , within
one monethe next after jugement gyven of his sayd Offence ,
STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,240.29

and also shall suffer imprysonement by the space of three monethes after
suche his or their execuc~on . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,240.30

And it is lykewise enacted by th@ @aucthoritie aforesaid , That all and
every p~son and p~sons whiche after the said daye and after Proclamac~on
made of this Acte , shall maliciouslye speake any false seditious and
sclanderous Newes Rumours or Tales to the sclander and reproche of o=r=
said Sovereigne Lorde the King or of our said most naturall Sovereigne
Ladye the Quene , of the speaking or reporting of any other , that then
all and every suche p~son or p~sons so speaking and reporting being
therof convicte or attainted in fourme hereafter in this Acte expressed
, shall for every suche Offence in some Markett Place within the Shire
Citie Boroughe or Towne , wher or nere unto the place where the said
wordes were or shall@ @bee so spoken and reported , bee set openly upon
the Pylorye by the Sherif or his Ministers , yf it shall fortune to be
without any Citie or Towne Corporate , And if it shall happen to be
within any Citie or Towne Corporate then by the principall Officer or
Officers of suche Citie or Towne Corporate or his or their Ministers ,
and ther to have one of his eares cut of , onles he pays One_hundrethe
Markes to the Kinge and Quenes Highnes use , within one monethe next
after jugement gyven of his said Offence , STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,240.31

and also shall suffer Imprisonement by the space of one monethe after
his or their Execuc~on . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,240.32

And Be it further enacted by th@ @aucthoritee aforesaid , That if any
person or p~sons shall after the said days and after Proclamac~on made
as is aforesaid , maliciousye devise write printe or set forthe any
maner of Booke Rime Ballade Letter or Writing , conteining any false
Matter Clause or Sentence of Sclander Reproche and Dishono=r= of the
King and Quenes Majesties or of either of them , or to the encoraging
stirring or moving of any Insurrecc~on or Rebellyon within this Realme ,
or any Dominions belonging to the same , Or whosoever shall maliciouslie
procure any suche Booke Rime Ballade Letter or Writing to bee written
printed or set forthe , and the said Offence not being punishable by the
Statute made in the xxv=th= yere of the Reigne of King Edward the thirde
, concerning Treasons or Declaracyon of Treason , that then and in every
suche cace the Offender and Offenders therin after his or their
Convicc~on or Attaindo=r= , shall for his or their first <P_4,241>
Offence in some Market Place within the Shire Citie or Bourghe wher the
said Offence ys or shal@ @be co~mitted or done , by the Shirefe or his
Ministers yf it shall fortune to bee without any Citie or Towne
Corporate , And yf within suche Citie or Towne Corporate , then by the
princypall Officer or Officers of suche Citiye or Towne Corporate or by
his or theyr Ministers , have his and their right hande stricken of .
STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,241.33

And Be it further enacted by the th@ @aucthoritee aforesaid , That if
any p~son or p~sons being ons lawfully convicted of any of th@ @offences
aforesaid , now provided to be punished by th@ @execuc~on of losses of
eare eares or hande as is aforesaid , doo afterwardes eftesones offende
in any of the Offences aforesaid , that then he or they so offending
shall suffer imprisonm=t= during his or their lyves without Baile or
Mainprise , and forfeite and lose to the King and Quenes Majesties all
his and their Gooddes and Cattelles . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,241.34

And Be it also enacted by th@ @aucthorite aforesaid , That all Justices
of Oier and Determiner within the limites of their Co~mission , Justices
of Assise in their severall Circuites , Justices of Gaole Deliverie ,
and Justices of Peace , as@ @well within the Lyberties as without ,
within the limites of their severall Co~missions in their Generall
Sessions or other Sessions whiche they or twoo of them , wherof one of
them to bee of the Quorum , may and shall at their pleasure appointe ,
wher and when nede shall require , and shall by vertue hereof have full
power and aucthoritee to enquire here and determine of all and every th@
@offences aforesayd as in cases and tryall of Fellony :
STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,241.35

And that the partie indicted and arraigned shall have advauntage of all
maner of chalendges to the Jurye , peremptorie chalenge only except , as
in triall of Felonye : STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,241.36

And also that every Justice of Peace within the limites of his
Co~mission , shall have full power and aucthoritee to co~mit any p~son
being vehemently suspected of any of the said Offences to Warde , ther
to remayne without Baile or Mainprise untill he shal@ @be delyvered
according to this Acte . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,241.37

Provided Alwaies and be it enacted by th@ @aucthorite aforesayd , That
no maner of p~son or p~sons shal@ @be molested or impeached for any of
th@ @offences concerning speaking or reporting as is aforesaid , onles
he or they bee accused and convicted within three monethes next after
his or their said Offence so co~mitted or done :
STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,241.38

And in cace any p~son shal@ @be imprisoned for any of the said Offences
concerning speaking or reporting , and not therof convicted within thre
monethes next after his Offence supposed to be by him done and co~mitted
, that then the p~son so imprisoned shal@ @be set at libertie and no
lenger deteyned in prison . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,241.39

Provided Also and Be it enacted by aucthoritie aforesaid , That every
suche Maior Maio=rs= Bailiefes and other head Officer and Officers of
Cities Boroughes and Townes Corporate which have or hereafter shall have
jurisdicc~on and aucthoritie within the severall limittes of their
Office or Offices , to holde and kepe Sessions as Justice or Justices of
the Peace , shall and maye by aucthorite hereof as@ @well arrest and
co~mit to Warde all and every p~son and p~sons being vehemently
suspected of any of the Offences aforesaid ; as also to procede to th@
@execuco~n hearing and determining of every of the said Offences , and
to see and make due execuc~on therof according to the purporte meaning
and effect of this p~nt Acte ; Any thing in the same Acte heretofore
made to the contrary notwithestanding . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,241.40

Provided Alwaies , That the said Justice of Peace , as@ @well within
Liberties as without , the whiche shall for any th@ @offences aforesaid
, co~mit any p~son or p~sons to Warde as is aforesaid , shall within
tenne days next after suche co~mitting , withe one other Justice ,
wherof one of them to be of the Quoru~ , directe their Precept to the
Sherefe or Sherefes of the Cowntie wher th@ @offence shal@ @be co~mitted
, or to other ordinary Officer , yf it be within any Citie or Towne
Corporate wher the Sherife can@ @not intromitt , co~maunding him or them
by the same to Impanell and returne as they shall assigne xxiiij good
and lawful Men of his or their Bailiwyke or Bailiwikes t@ @enquire of
the said Offence or Offences , the whiche any suche p~sone or p~sons
shal@ @be so imprisoned for : STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,241.41

And therupon within one monethe after the date of the sayd Precepte , to
procede and determine as above is expressed ; every one of the same
Justices upon payne of Tenne powndes to be paide to the King and Quenes
Highnes as often as they shal@ @be founde in defaulte of any the same .
STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,241.42

Provided Also and Be it enacted , That this Acte shal@ @be proclaymed in
all the Shires within this Realme , before the xij=th= day of Februarye
nexte co~ming , to th@ @intent that all persones may have notyce therof
, and avoide the p~ill and daunger that might ensewe by offending
against the same : STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,241.43

And this Acte to be onlye in force untill th@ @ende of the next
P~liament and no longer . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,241.44

Provided Alwaies and Be it enacted by th@ @aucthoritee aforesaid , That
none of the Peares of this Realme shal@ @be Arrested or Imprisoned for
any of the said Offences but onelye by Order or Co~mandement geven from
the King and Quenes Privy Cou~cell , or of th@ @eires of the Quene ; and
that the said Peares and every of them that shall herafter fortune to be
indicted of any th@ @offences aforesaid , shal@ @be tryed by their
Peares , as before hathe bene accustomed in cases of Treason or Felonye
. STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,241.45

<P_4,242>

<heading>

CHAPTER IV . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,242.48

AN ACTE FOR THE PUNISHEMENT OF CERTAYNE PERSONS CALLING THEMSELVES
EGIPTIANS . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,242.49

<$$heading>

Where in a Parliament holden at Westminster in the xxij. yere of the
Reigne of our late Sovereigne Lorde King Henry th@ @eight , For th@
@avoyding and banishing out of this Realme of certaine outlandishe
People calling themselves Egiptians , using no crafte nor feate of
marchaundises for to lyve by , but going from place to place in greate
Companies , using greate suttle and craftye meanes to deceyve the Kinges
Subjectes , bearing them in hande that they by Palmestrye coulde tell
Mens and Womens Fortune ; and so many tymes by crafte and subtiltie
deceyve the People of their money , and co~mitted divers greate and
heinous Felonies and Roberies , to the great hurte and deceypte of the
People , It was amongest other thing~ then enacted , That from the tyme
of the making of the said Acte , no suche p~sons should be suffred to
come within this the Kinges Realme , upon paine of forfeyture to the
King all their Goodes and Cateles , and then to be co~maunded t@ @avoide
the Realme within fyftene days next after the co~maundement , upon payn
of Imprisonement ; and suche p~sons calling themselfes Egiptians as then
were within this Realme , shoulde depart within xvj dayes next after
Proclamac~on of the said Acte , upon paine of Imprisonement and
Forfeiture of all their Goodes and Catells ; withe divers other Clauses
and Articles conteyned in the sayd Acte , as by the said Acte more at
large it appearethe : STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,242.51

Forasmuche as dyvers of the sayd Companie and suche other lyke p~sons
not fearing the penaltie of the said Statute , have enterprised to come
over againe into this Realme using their olde accustomed develishe and
noughty practises and devises , withe suche abhominable lyving as is not
in any Christian Realme to be permitted named or knowen , and bee not
dulie punished for the same , to the perillous and evell example of our
Sovereigne Lorde and Ladye the King and the Quene@ @s Majesties most
loving Subjectes , and to th@ @utter and extreame undoing of divers and
many of them , as evidentlye dothe appeare : STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,242.52

For Reformation wherof , Be it ordeined and enacted by the King and
Quene our Sovereigne Lorde and Lady , the Lordes Sp~uall and Temporall
and the Co~mons in this p~nt P~liam=t= assembled and by the aucthoritee
of the same , That if any p~son or p~sons after the last day of Januarie
next co~ming , doo willinglye transporte bring and conveye into this
Realme of England or Wales any suche p~sons calling themselfes or
co~monly called Egiptians , That then he or they so transporting
bringing or conveyeng in any suche p~sons , contrary to the true meaning
of this Acte , shall forfeite and lose for every tyme so offending ,
fourtye powndes of lawfull moneye of Englande .
STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,242.53

And Be it further enacted by th@ @aucthoritee aforesaid , That if any of
the said p~sons called Egiptians whiche shal@ @be transported or
conveyed into this Realme of Englande or Wales as ys aforesayd , doo
continue and remaine within the same by the space of one monethe , that
then he or they so Offending , shall by vertue of this Acte bee demed
and judged a Fellon and fellons and shall therfore suffer paynes of
Deathe losse of Landes and Goodes as in cases of Fellony , by th@ @order
of the Co~men Lawe of this Realme , and shall upon the tryall of them or
any of them therin be tried in the Countie and by th@ @inhabitantes of
the Countie or Place where they or he shall be apprehended or taken and
not p~ medietatem lingue , and shall lose the benefite and privilege of
Sainctuary and Clergie . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,242.54

And Be it further enacted by th@ @aucthoritee aforesaid , That yf the
Egiptyans or other persones co~monly calling themselfes Egyptians and
every of them now being within this Realme of Englande or Wales , doo
not depart out of the same within xx=ti= days next after Proclamac~on of
this p~nt Acte shall@ @bee made , that then he or they whiche shall not
depart within the said time according to the true meaning of this Acte ,
shall forfeite and lose all his and their Goodes and Cattels ; and that
then it shal@ @be lawfull to all and every the King and the Quenes
Subjectes to sease the same , th@ @one moietie therof to be to th@ @use
of our Sovereygue Lorde and Ladye the King and the Quene , and the other
moietie therof to be to th@ @use of him or them that shall so sease the
same . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,242.55

And Be it also enacted by th@ @aucthoritee aforesaid , That if the
Egiptians and other p~sons co~monly called Egiptians and every of them
nowe being within this Realme of Englande or Wales , doo not departe out
and from the same within xl=ty= dais next after Proclamac~on shall be
made of this Acte , that then he or they whiche shall not depart and
avoide within the said time of xl. days according to the true meaning
of this Acte , shal@ @be judged and denied according to the Lawes of
this Realme of England a Fellon and Fellons , and shall suffer therfore
paynes of Deathe , losse of Landes and Goodes as in other cases of
Fellonye , and shall bee tryed as ys aforesaid , and without having any
benefite or privilege of Sainctuarie or Clergie .
STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,242.56

And Be it further enacted by th@ @aucthoritee aforesaid , That if any
p~son after the first day of Januarie next co~ming , shall sue for th@
@obteining of any Lycence Letter or Pasporte , for any of the said
p~sons called Egiptians t@ @abide within this Realme of Englande or
Wales contrary to the tenour of this Acte , that then every suche p~son
so suing shall forfeite and lose for the same xl li. of lawfull money
of Englande ; and that every suche Lycence Letter and Pasporte shal@ @be
by vertue of this Acte voyde to all intentes and purposes ; th@ @one
moietie of all whiche so~mes of money to be forfeited as is beforesaid ,
shal@ @be to the King and Quene our Sovereigne Lorde and Ladye , and th@
@other moitie therof to be to him or them that will sue for the same in
any Courte of Recorde , by acc~on of Dett Bill Plaint or Informac~on ,
wherin any Essoigne Wager of Lawe nor Protecc~on shal@ @be admitted and
allowed . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,242.57

Provided alwaies and Be it enacted by th@ @aucthoritee aforesaid , That
this p~nt Acte nor any thing therin conteined , shall not extende nor be
hurtfull to any of the said p~sons co~monly Called Egiptians , whiche
within the said time of xx=ty= daies next after the said Proclamac~on to
be made as is beforesaid , shall leave that noughtye idle and ungodly
<P_4,243> lyef and company , and be placed in the service of some honest
and able Inhabitante or Inhabitantes within this Realme , or that shall
honestlye exercise himself in some lawfull worck or occupac~on ; but
that he or they so continuing in service or other lawfull woorck or
occupac~on , shall during suche time as he or they shall so continue ,
be dischardged of all Paines and Forfeitures conteined in this Acte .
STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,243.58

Provided Also and be it Enacted by th@ @aucthorite aforesaid , That this
Acte shall not in any wise extende to any Childe or Children being not
above the age of xiij yeares , nor to any of the said p~sons being now
in prison , so that he or they so being in prison doo departe out of
this Realme within xiiij days next after his or their deliverie out of
prison , nor shall extende to chardge any maner of p~son or p~sons as
accessarye to any Offence or Offences conteined or specified in this
Estatute . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,243.59

<heading>

CHAPTER V . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,243.61

AN ACTE TO RESTRAYNE CARRIENG OF CORNE VICTUALS AND WOOD OVER THE SEA .
STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,243.62

<$$heading>

Wheras sundry good Estatutes and Lawes hathe bene made within this
Realme in the time of the Quenes Highnes most noble Progenitoures , that
none shoulde transporte carrye or conveye out of this Realme into any
place in the parties beyonde the Seas , any Corne Butter Chese or other
Victuall , <paren> Except onely for the vitailing of the Towne of Caleis
Hames and Guisnes and the Marches of the same , <$$paren> upon divers
greate paynes and forfeitures in the same conteyned ; That
notwithestanding , many and sundrye covetous and unsatiable p~sons
seking their onely lucers and gaynes , hathe and dayly dothe carye and
convey innumerable quantitie as@ @well of Corne Chese Butter and other
Victuall , as of Wood , out of this Realme into the p~ties beyonde the
Seas ; By reason wherof the sayd Corne Vyctuall and Wood arre growen
unto a wonderfull dearthe and extreame pryses , to the greate detryment
of the Common wealthe of this yo=r= Highnes Realme and yo=r= faithefull
subjectes of the same : For Remedie wherof , It may please yo=r= Highnes
that it may be enacted and be it enacted by yo=r= Highnes by th@ @assent
of the Lordes Sp~uall and Temporall and the Co~mons in this present
P~liam=t= assembled and by th@ @aucthoritee of the same , That no maner
of p~son or p~sons after the xx=th= daye of Januarye next co~ming ,
shall carye and transporte out of this Realme , by any Shippe Craier or
other Vessell whatsoever , into any place in the parties beyonde the
Seas or into the Realme of Scotlande , any Wheate Rie Barley or other
Corne or Grayne growing within this Realme , or any Maulte made within
the same , or any Bere Butter Chese Hearing or Wood , <paren> Except
onlye to and for the victualing and furniture of the Townes of Callys
Ha~mes and Guisnes and to the Towne of Barwick and the Marches of the
same , <$$paren> without sufficient and lawfull aucthoritie so to doo ,
upon the paine and penalties hereafter ensuing ;
STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,243.64

that ys to saye , th@ @owner and owners of the sayd Shippes and other
Vessells to forfaite the said Shippes Craiers and other Vessels , with
all their apparelles to them and every of them belonging , wherin the
said Corne Butter Cheese Hearing Victuall or Wood shall be so
transported and caried ; and the Owners and Owner of the said Corne
Butter Chese Hearing and Woodd to forfeite the doble value of the same
so caryed and conveied , and the M=r= and Mareners of the said Shippes
Craiers and Vessells for every suche Offence to forfeite all their
Gooddes , And to be imprisoned by the space of one whole yeare without
Baile or Maynprise . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,243.65

And Be it further enacted by th@ @aucthoritee aforesaid , That yf any
p~son or p~sons , after the said xx=th= day of Januarie , doo carye and
conveye away by Boate Crayer or other Vessell , or otherwise , any
Wheate Rie Barley Malte or other Corne or Grayne or any Beere Butter
Cheese Hearing or Wood to any Shippe or Vessell being on the Seas , or
within any Haven Creeke or other place of the Border of this Realme , to
be transported caried and conveyed into any place in the p~ties beyonde
the Seas , or into the Realme of Scotlande , without sufficient
aucthoritie so to doo ; That then every Owner of the sayde Victuales
Corne and other things abovesaid , so transported or caryed , and th@
@owner and owners of every such Boate or Vessell , and the Boatemen and
Mareners of the same , shall lose forfeit and suffer all suche
forfeitures paines and penalties as is above rehearsed ; Th@ @one
moietie of all and everye whiche forfeiture or forfeitures to be to the
King and Quenes Highnes their heires and successours , and th@ @other
moietie to him or them that will sue for the same by Bill Informac~on
Acc~on of Det or otherwise in any of the King and Quene@ @s Highnes
Courtes of Recorde , In whiche Accon Bill or Sute the Defendant shall
not wage his Lawe nor have any Essoigne or Protecc~on to him allowed .
STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,243.66

And Be it enacted by th@ @aucthoritee aforesaid , That yf any p~son or
p~sons shall obteine of the King and Quenes Majesties , their heires or
successoures , or any of them , any Lycence to cary and transporte any
Corne Victuall or Wood into any parties beyonde the Seas , that if he or
they to whom any suche Licence shal@ @be granted , or any other to whom
suche p~son or persons having suche licence shall give grante or sell
his or their said Licence unto , shall cary and conveye or cause to be
caried and conveyed any more Corne Victuall or Wood then shall be
conteined in his or their said Licence , he
{COM:preceding_word_"he"_emended} or {COM:preceding_word_"or"_emended}
they {COM:preceding_word_"they"_emended} shall forfeite the treble value
of the said Corne Victuall or Wood so caried and transported without
sufficient aucthoritee , and shall suffer Imprisonement for one whole
year , in the common Gaole wher he shall bee apprehended , ther to
remaine without Baile or Maineprise . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,243.67

And Be it further enacted by th@ @aucthoritee aforesaid , That no maner
of p~son or p~sons after the said xx=th= daye of Januarye that shall
obtaine or have any suche Licence , for transporting and carieng any
Corne Victuall or Wood into any partes beyonde the Seas , shall shippe
fraught and lade the same , or any p~te therof , at sundry places within
this Realme , but at one place certaine ; upon pains of forfeiture of
the said Corne Victuall and Wood , and all his Gooddes <P_4,244> and
Cattels ; th@ @one moietie therof to the King and Quenes Majesties their
heires and successours , and th@ @other moietie to him or them that will
sue for the same , by Acc~on of Det Byll Plainte Informac~on or
otherwise , wherin no Wager of Lawe Essoigne or Protecc~on shall bee to
him or them allowed . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,244.68

And For the better Execuc~on of this Acte , Be it further enacted by th@
@aucthorite aforesaid , that all and singler Justices of Peace , as@
@well within the liberties as without , within their severall
Aucthorities and Co~missiones , at any tyme within three yeres next
after suche Offences co~mitted , shall have full power and aucthoritee
t@ @enquire as well by th@ @othes of xij lawfull men , as allso to heare
and examyne the M=r= M=rs= and Mareners of the sayd Shippes Craiers and
other Vesselles , and all and every other p~son and p~sons , of all and
singler th@ @offendo=r=s ageinst this p~nt Acte , and to heare and
determine the same Offenc~ , as they maye and ought to heare and
determine any other Trespasses or Offences . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,244.69

Provided Alwaies and Be it enacted by th@ @aucthorite aforesaid , That
at all time and times hereafter when the co~mon price of Corne within
this Realme is , that Wheate shall not excede the price of vj s. viij
d. the Quarter , and Rye iiij s. the Quarter , and Barlye iij s. the
Quarter , it shal@ @be lawfull to every p~son and p~sons to carye and
transporte over the Sea to any Place beyonde the Seas at their pleasure
, any of the said kindes of Corne , so that it be not to the King and
Quenes Enemies . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,244.70

Provided Alwaies and Be it enacted by th@ @aucthorite aforesaid , That
this Acte nor any thinge therin conteyned shall extende to any person or
persons for the necessarie victeling of any Shippe Shipper or other
Vessells ; but that they and every of them may victaile the said Shippes
and Vessels as they might have done before the making of this present
Acte ; This Acte or any thing therin conteined to the contrarye
notwithestanding . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,244.71

Provided Alwaies and Be it enacted by th@ @aucthorite aforesaid , That
this Acte or any thinge therein conteined , shall not be prejudiciall or
hurtfull unto the Lorde Greate Admirall of England for the tyme being ,
or to the King and Quenes Ma=t=~ Jurisdicc~on of Th@ @admiraltie ; but
that the said Lorde Admirall or his Deputie or Deputies , may and shall
exersice use and execute all kinde of Jurisdicc~on belonging to the Sea
, according to his or their Co~missions , as they might lawfully have
done heretofore ; This Acte or any thing therin conteined to the
contrarye notwithstanding . STAT-1553-E1-P2,4,244.72

