<BEGIN_stat-1563-e1-p2>

<P_4,411>

<heading>

CHAPTER III . STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,411.4

AN ACTE FOR THE RELEIFE OF THE POORE . STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,411.5

<$$heading>

To th@ @intent that idell and loytering p~sons and valiant Beggers may
be avoyded , and th@ @impotent feble and lame , w=ch= are the Poore in
very dede , should bee hereafter relieved and well provided for : Bee it
enacted by the Quene our Sovereigne Ladye w=th= th@ @assent of the
Lordes Sp~uall and Temporall and the Co~mons in this p~nt P~liamen=t=
assembled , and by th@ @aucthoritee of the same , That the Statute made
in the xxij=th= yere of the late King of famouse memorye King Henrye Th@
@eight , and also the Statute made in the thirde and fourth yeres of the
Reigne of the famouse King Edwarde the Syxthe , concerning Beggers
Vagabundes and idle p~sons , and every Article Clause Branche Sentence
and other thinge conteyned in them and eyther of them , <paren> other
then suche thinges as shall@ @bee by this p~nte Acte otherwyse
{TEXT:otherwye} ordeyned and provided for , <$$paren> shall stande
remayn and bee in their full Force and Effecte , and shal@ @be also from
hensforthe justly and truely put in execuc~on according to the true
meaning of the sayd severall Statutes and every of them .
STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,411.7

And further be it enacted by th@ @aucthorite aforesayd , That yerely
upon the Sundaye next before the Feast Daye of the Nativitee of S=t=
John Baptist , co~monly called Midso~mer daye , in everye Citie Boroughe
and Towne Corporate , the Mayor Bailiefes or other Head Officers for the
tyme being , and in everye other P~she of the Countrey the Parson Vycare
or Curate and Churchewardens , shall have writton in a Register or Booke
to be provided by them , as@ @well the Names of Th@ @inhabitantes and
Householders w=th=in theyr Citie Boroughe Towne Corporate or Parish , as
also the Names of all suche impotent aged and nedy p~sons as bee w=th=in
their Citie Boroughe Towne Corporate or Parishe w=ch= are not hable to
lyve of themselves nor w=th= their owne labour ; and shall openly in the
Churche and quyetly after Dyvyne Service call the sayd Housholders and
Inhabitantes together , among whom the Mayo=r= or other Head Officers
and twoo of the Cheife Inhabitantes in every suche Cytie Boroughe and
Towne Corporate suche as the Mayo=r= or other Heade Officers shall
thincke meete , And the Parson Vicar or Curate and Churchwardens in
every other Parishe , shall elect nominate and appointe yerely twoo
hable persons or mo , to be Gatherers and Collectours of the Charitable
Almes of all the residue of the people inhabiting in the P~ishe wherof
they bee chosen Collecto=rs= for the Releif of the Poore : Whiche
Collectoures , the Sonday next after their Electyon , or the Sunday
following if nede require , when the people are at the Churche at Dyvine
Service , shall gentelly aske and demaunde of every Man and Woman what
they of their Charitee wil@ @be contented to gyve weekly towardes the
Relief of the Poore , and the same to be writon to the sayd Register or
Booke : STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,411.8

And the sayd Gatherers so being elected and chosen , shall justly gather
and truly distribute the same charitable Almes weekly , by themselfes or
theyr Assignes , to the sayd poore and impotent p~sons of the sayd
Cyties Boroughes Townes Corporate and Parishes , without Fraude or Covyn
Favour or Affeccion ; and after suche sorte that the more impotent may
have the more Helpe , STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,411.9

and suche as can get parte of their Lyving to have the lesse , and by
the discretion of the Collectoures to bee put in suche Laboure as they
bee fitt and hable to doo , but none to go or sitt openly a begging ,
upon paine limited in th@ @aforesaid Statutes ; STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,411.10

And yf the said Maio=rs= Bayliefes Head Officers Person Vicar Curat and
Churchewarden , or any of them , faile in the doing and executing of the
Premisses in forme above declared , he or they so making Default to
forfeit for every suche Defaulte Fourtye Shillinges , to bee imployed to
th@ @use of the Poore of that P~ishe where he or they doe inhabit , to
be levied by the Collectors of the same P~ishe , by way of Distresse or
otherwise as ys appointed in this Acte for levieng of like Forfeitures .
STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,411.11

And bee it enacted by th@ @aucthorite aforesayd , That no p~son or
p~sons so elected nominated and appointed to bee Gatherer or Gatherers
as ys aforesayd , shall refuse the said office , but shall justly and
truly execute the same , by the space of one whole yere next ensuing
suche elecc~on ; upon payne to forfeite Tenne Poundes , the one Moitie
therof to the Churchewardens of the P~ishe where he or they shall@ @bee
elected Collector , and th@ @other Moietie therof to th@ @use and relief
of the Poore of the said P~ishe to be levied by the Churchewardens where
they or he dwellethe of the Goodes of the said Gatherer or Gatherers so
refusing , by Distresse or@ @els by Action of Debt Byll Playnt or
informac~on to bee brought or pursued by the sayd Churchwardens of the
sayd P~ishe wher they shall dwell , in any Court of Recorde , or in the
Courte of any Lorde of anny Manour within the said Parishe where the
said Gatherer shall@ @bee chosen ; In whiche Sute no Protecc~on or Wager
of Lawe shal@ @be allowed or admitted for the Partie defendant .
STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,411.12

And bee yt further enacted by th@ @aucthorite aforesaid , That yf the
sayd Churchewardens , or either of them , shall refuse to sue for the
sayd Forfayture , or within Twoo Monthes next after the same cause of
Forfayture shall@ @bee gyven shall not sue or take the Remedye for the
Recoverye therof , in suche maner and fourme as before in this p~nte
Acte ys limited and appointed , that then the same Churchewardens so
making Defaulte of sute , shall forfayte and lose Twentye Powndes of
laufull Money of Englande ; th@ @one Moitie herof to him or them that
will sue for the same by Action of Debt Bill Playnte or Informac~on in
any Courte of Recorde , or in the Courte of any Lorde of any Mano=r=
w=th=in the p~ishe where the said Churchewardens shall dwell , and th@
@other Moietie to th@ @use of the Poore of the said P~ishe ; In whiche
Sute no Essoigne Protecc~on or Wager of Lawe shal@ @be admitted for the
Partye defendant . STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,411.13

And for the better Executyon of this Acte touchyng the Electyon of the
Collectoures for the Poore , Bee it enacted by th@ @aucthoritee
aforesayd , That every Parson Vicar Curate or Minister of every P~she
w=th=in this Realme , shall yerely for evermore upon the Sunday before
Midso~mer daye , in the Pulpit , or some other convenient Place in the
Churche , <P_4,412> gyve knowledg and warning at th@ @ende of some of
the Morning Service , to the P~shioners then and ther p~nt , to prepare
themselfes on the Sondaye next after Midso~mer Daye then next folloing ,
to co~me to the Churche , and there t@ @ellect and choose Collectoures
and Gatherers for the Poore , according to the Ten=or= of this Acte ;
And yf the P~son Vicar Curate or Minister shall make Defaulte in gyving
of the sayd Knowledge , that then he or they so making Defaulte , to
forfait and lose fourtye Shillinges , towardes the Reparac~ons of the
said Churche ; And the Churchewardens of the sayd P~she to sue and
distrene for the same , in suche fourme as before ys appointed for th@
@other Forfeitures . STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,412.14

And further bee yt enacted by th@ @aucthoritee aforesayd , That the said
Gatherers or Collectors for the Poore so to bee chosen as ys aforesaid
shall make their just Accompt quarterly to the Mayors or Chiefe Officers
of the said Cyties Boroughes and Townes Corporate , and in every Parishe
of the sayd Countreye , to the Parson Vicar or Curate and Churchewardens
of the Parishe ; at w=ch= Accompte suche of the Parishe as will may be
p~nte ; STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,412.15

And when they goe out of their Office {TEXT:Offiee} they shall delyver
or cause to be delyvered foorthwithe upon th@ @ende of their Accomptes ,
all suche Surplusage of Moneye as then shall remayne of their Collection
undistributed , to be put in their Co~mon Chest of the Churche , or in
some other safe Place , to th@ @use of the Poore , at the Oversight and
Discretyon of the Mayo=r= Officers and others before mentioned ;
STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,412.16

And yf the sayd Collectours or any of them doo refuse to make their sayd
Accompte w=th=in Eight Dayes next after request made to them for the
same , then the Bishoppe of the Dyocesse or the Ordynarye of the Place ,
Chancello=rs= or their Co~missaries , together w=th= a Justice of Peace
and the Churchewardens of the sayd P~ishe , or one of them , shall have
aucthorite by vertue of this Acte , upon complaynt to them made , to
co~mit the said p~son or p~sons refusing to Warde , there to remayn
w=th=out Baile or Maineprise untill he or they so refusing shall make
their sayd Accomptes before suche p~sons as the sayd Bushop Ordinarye
Chancello=rs= or Co~missaries & Justice of Peace shall appointe , and to
make imediate Paym=t= of the So~mes wherw=th= by Determinac~on of the
said Accompt they shal@ @be chardged . STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,412.17

And bee it further enacted by th@ @aucthoritee aforesaid , That yf any
p~son or p~sons being hable to further this charitable Worck , doo
obstinately and frowardly refuse reasonably to give towardes th@ @helpe
and relief of the Poore , or doo wilfully discorage other from so
charitable a Dede , the Parson Vicar or Curate and Churchewardens of the
P~ishe wherin he dwellethe shall then gentelly exhorte him or them
towardes the releef of the Poore ; STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,412.18

and yf he or they will not so bee p~swaded , then upon the Certificate
of the Parson Vicar or Curat of the P~ishe to the Bishoppe of the Dyoces
or Ordinarye of the Place , Chauncellors or their Co~missaries or
Gardyan of the S~pualties , the same Bishoppes Ordinarye Chancellor=rs=
or Co~missaries or Gardeyn of the Spiritualties shall sende for him or
them , t@ @induce or p~suade him or them by charitable meanes and waies
t@ @extende their Charitee to the Poore , as in this Acte ys well ment
and intended ; STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,412.19

And yf the p~son or p~sons so sent for , of his or their frowarde or
wilfull minde shall obstinatly refuse to gyve weekly to the releef of
the Poore according to his or their habilitees , that then the Bishoppe
or Ordinarie of the Dyoces , Chauncellours or their Co~missaries , shall
have full Power & Aucthoritee by virtue of this Acte , to bynde the
saide obstinate and wilfull p~sons so refusing unto the Quene by
Recognisance , in the some of Tenne Powndes , w=th= Condic~on therupon
to bee indorsed , that the sayd obstinate p~son so refusing shall
p~sonallye appere , before the Justices of Peace of the Countye where
the same p~son shall then inhabyte and dwell , yf yt bee out of any
Citie Borouge or Towne Corporate , and yf yt bee w=th=in any Cittie
Boroughe or Towne Corporate , then before the Mayours Bailiefes or other
Head Officers of every suche Cite Boroughe or Towne Corporate , at the
next Generall Sessions to bee holden before the sayd Justices within the
saide Countie , or at the next Courte to bee holden before the sayd
Maio=r= Baliefes or other Head Officers w=th=in every suche Citie
Boroughe or Towne Corporate , and that the same obstinate p~son shall
not from thence departe w=th=out Lysence , of the said Justices yf he
duell out of any Citye Boroughe or Towne Corporate , or of the said
Maio=r= Bayliefes or other Head Officers yf he dwell w=th=in any suche
Citie Bourghe or Towne Corporate ; STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,412.20

And yf any suche obstinate persone shall refuse to bee bounde as ys
aforesayd , that then the said Bishoppe Ordinarie Chauncello=r= or
Co~missarie , shall have aucthoritee by this Acte , to co~mitt the sayd
obstinatt p~son to Pryson , there to remayne witheout Bayle or
Maineprise untill the sayd obstynate parson shall become bounde as ys
aforesaid . STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,412.21

And further bee yt enacted by th@ @aucthoritye aforesayd , That the sayd
Justices or suche of them as shal@ @be at the said Sessions , or the
Maio=r= Bailiefes or other Head Officers of everye suche Citie Burghe or
Towne Corporate , yf the said obstinate p~son doo appeare before them ,
shall charitably and gentelly perswade and move the said obstinate
p~sons t@ @extende his or their Charitee towardes the Relief of the
Poore of the P~ishe where he or she inhabitethe and dwelleth ; and yf he
or she shall obstinatly and wilfully stande in the same , and will not
bee p~swaded therin by the sayd Justices Maio=r= Bailiefes or other
Heade Officers , that then yt shall and may bee laufull to and for the
sayd Justices yf yt bee out of any Citie Burghe or Towne Corporate , and
yf yt bee w=th=in any Cite Burghe or Towne Corporate , for the Maio=r=
Bailiefes or other Head Officers of the same Citie Burghe or Towne
Corporate , w=th= the Churchewardens wher the sayd obstinate p~son shall
inhabite , or one of them , to sesse taxe and lymit , upon every suche
obstinate p~son so refusing , according to their good discretions , what
So~me the said obstinate p~son shall pay weekly towardes the Relief of
the Poore w=th=in the sayd P~ishe where he or she shall inhabyte and
dwell ; STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,412.22

And yf the said p~son so sessed and taxed shall refuse to paye the So~me
that shall@ @bee so reasonablye lymited taxed and appointed , then the
said Justices of Peace or twoo of them , wherof th@ @one to be of the
Quoru~ , or the said Mayor Bailiefes or other Head Officers of every
suche Citie Burghe or Towne Corporate , shall have full Power and
Aucthorite by vertue of this Acte , upon Complaynte and Certificate to
them by the Collectoures and Churchwardens of the same P~ishe wher the
sayd obstinate p~son shall dwell , to co~mit the said obstinate p~son
and p~sons so refusing to pay , to Pryson to the next Gaole , there to
remaine w=th=out Bayle or Maineprise till he or they have payde the sayd
So~me so appointed taxed and limited , together w=th= th@ @arrerages
therof , yf any suche shall fortune to bee . STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,412.23

<P_4,413>

And for the better mayntenance of this charitable Acte and Worcke , It
ys ordeyned and established by th@ @aucthorite aforesaid , that whereas
the late Kings of famouse Memorie King Henry Th@ @eight , his Heires or
Successoures , or any other p~son or p~sons , by his or their severall
and laufull Erecc~ons and Foundac~ons , hathe or have ordeyned and
appointed any So~me or So~mes of Money to th@ @use of the Poore , or for
the repayring or amending of Higheways or Bridges , not being taken away
otherwise by Acte of P~liamen=t= , whether the same be in any Cathedrall
Churche Colledge or@ @elswhere , The Bishoppe of the Diocese or
Chancello=r= for the tyme being , shall from time to time examyne howe
and after what maner the sayd Money ys bestowed , and to call t@
@accompte the p~ties whiche retayne the said Money , and therupon to
take suche Order as the same from thensfoorthe be distributed to the
Pore , according to the good Intent and Purpose of the said noble King
that graunted the same ; STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,413.25

And yf they shall faile yerely to call t@ @accompt the p~sons aforesaid
, in fourme aforesaid {TEXT:afosesaid} , and after accompt t@ @order the
distribuc~on of the sayd Money in maner before declared , to forfeit for
every suche Default xx li. to be employed to th@ @use of the Poore , by
th@ @oversight of three Justices of the Peace w=th=in the said Countie
wher the p~son that so should account dwellethe , to bee levied by way
of Distres or otherwise , as other forfeitures in this Estatute ar
appointed to bee levied . STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,413.26

And bee it further enacted by th@ @aucthorite aforesayd , yf it shall
chance any P~ishe to have in yt mo poore and impote~t folkes , not hable
to labo=r= then the said P~ishe ys able to relief , that then in every
suche P~ishe not standing in any Citie or Towne Corporate , the P~son
Vicar or Curate of the said P~ishe , and two or three of the cheef
Inhabitantes of the same P~ishe , and in every Citie and Towne Corporate
, the Maio=r= or Cheef Officers of the same Citie or Towne Corporate ,
and the P~son Vicar or Curate of the said P~ishe , <paren> calling to
them two or three of the cheef P~ishoners of the same P~ishe suche as
the said Maio=r= or Head Officers shall thinck meet , <$$paren> shall
certefie unto the Justices of Peace of the Countie where the same P~ishe
ys , the nomber and names of the P~sons w=th= w=ch= they be surchardged
, and upon suche Certificate , the said Justices of the Peace in the
same Countie , or twoo of them whereof one to be of the Quorum , shall
consider and examine the said Certificat as@ @well by th@ @othe of those
that so certified Inspection of the said poore p~sons , to be taken and
vieued at suche Daye tyme and Place as to them shal@ @be thought meet ,
as by all other wayes and meanes ; and finding the same true after suche
Othe and Allowance by Inspection , shall then grante unto suche and as
many of the said poore folkes as by their discretion they shall thinck
good , a sufficient Lisence under the Seale appointed for the Limit , to
go abrode to begge get and receyve the charitable Almes of Th@
@inhabitantes of the Countrey out of the sayd Parishes Cities and Townes
so surchardged ; In w=ch= Licence Th@ @infirmitie of the P~son , the
Places Townes and P~ishes to w=ch= suche poore folkes are by that
Licence licensed to resorte , shall in the same Licence be named
lymitted and appointed , bee yt one_Hundred or moo in the same Countie
at the said Discretion of the same Justices ; STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,413.27

And yf any of the sayd poore folkes so licensed shall transgresse the
Lymittes to them appointed , and resorte to begge at other places then
ys in the said Lycence named , the p~tie so transgressing and offending
to be taken for a valiant Begger , and punished according to the Statute
made in the sayd xxij=th= yere of King Henrye Th@ @eight , and his or
their Licence to be taken from them : STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,413.28

And yf the said Justices of the Peace shall faile t@ @appoint a Daye and
Tyme for Inspection of the said Poore and Examinac~on of the said
Certificatours w=th=n One Monethe nexte ensuing the Daye of Receipte of
the said Certificat , or shall grant or give Licence to any p~son or
p~sons so certified to go abrode and begge , before suche tyme as they
shall have viewed and seen the said poore p~sons and have receyved Othe
of the p~sons that so certified , that the said poore p~sons for Age
Impotencye or Sicknes , in their Consciences and to their Knowledge ,
are not hable by any Woorck or Labour to earne them necessarye Meate
Drinke and Clothe , and the same Deposition put in Writing , subscribed
or marked by the p~sons deposed , to forfeite for every suche Defaulte
Tenne Poundes , to be emploied to th@ @use of the Poore of any P~ishe or
P~ishes w=th=in the said Countie where the said Justices dwell , at the
Oversight and Appointment of the Bishoppe or his Chauncellour of the
same Dioceses , to bee levied in sorte and fourme as other forfeitures
in this Statute are appoynted . STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,413.29

And be it further enacted , That where any of the said Cities Boroughes
Townes Corporate or P~ishe so chardged , ys scituate and standing in one
Countie or twoo Counties of this Realme , or scituate and standing in
one and immediatlye adjoyning to another County of this Realme , as the
Cytie of Bristoll and the Townes of Ludlow and Stamforde stande ; that
in those Cities the Parson Vicar and Curate of the said P~ishe , and the
said Maio=r= Heade Officers and Inhabitantes of every suche Citie
Bourghe Towne Corporate and P~yshe , shall make Certificat unto the
Justices of the said Counties adjoyning to the same Cities Bourghes
Townes Corporate and P~ishes , and the same Justices of the said
adjoining Countie or Counties to doe gyve lycence and folowe th@ @order
above remembred , according as other Justices of the Counties in w=ch=
the P~ishe surchardged standethe , ys lymitted aund aucthorised to do .
STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,413.30

And bee it also enacted , That in all Cities Bourghes and Townes
Corporate w=th=in w=ch= bee dyvers P~ishes , the Maio=r= and Head
Officers of every the same Cities Burghes and Townes Corporate , shall
consider the state and abilitie of every suche P~ishe ;
STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,413.31

And yf the same Maio=r= and Officers shall understande by their
discretion that the P~ishioners of any one of the sayd P~ishes ys of
suche wealthe and havor , that they have no povertie amongst them , or
be hable sufficiently to relief the povertie of the P~ishe where they
inhabite and dwell , and also to helpe and succo=r= povertie elswhere
further , that then the said Maio=r= and Officers , w=th= th@ @assent of
twoo of the most honest and substanciall inhabitantes of every such
welthye P~ishe , shall consider the nedines of th@ @inhabitantes of th@
@other P~ishe or P~ishes within the same Citie or Towne Corporate , and
move induce and p~suade the P~ishioners of the welthier P~ishe
charitably to contrybute su~mewhat according to theire habilitee towarde
the wekely relief succour and consolac~on of the poore and nedye within
th@ @other P~ishe or P~ishes aforesayd where nede ys .
STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,413.32

And bee it also enacted , That all and every suche pore folkes as by any
suche lycence are to bee licensed and aucthorised to resorte out of the
limittes liberties and franchesies of all and every suche Citie Bourghe
and Towne Corporate , into any the said Counties , to begg get and
gather the charitable almes of good people , shall at all tymes
<P_4,414> when the same gothe abrode to begg , weare openly upon him or
them bothe on the brest and the backe of his or their uppermoste garment
, some notable badge or token to bee assigned unto him by the Maio=r= or
Head Officers of the same Citye Burgh and Towne Corporate or P~ishe
w=th= th@ @assent of the Justices of the Peace that shall grante the
same lycence , upon payne to bee taken for a valiant Beggar , and to bee
punished as afore ys remembred , and shall also carry his lycence wythe
hym upon the lyke payne ; this Acte to endure to the latter ende of the
first Session of the next P~lyament . STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,414.33

Provided alwayes and bee yt enacted by th@ @aucthorite aforesayd , That
all and every so~me and so~mes of Moneye from hensforthe to be collected
or gathered w=th=in the Citie of London and the Lyberties of the same by
vertue of this Acte , shall@ @bee payd over to the Governours of the
Hospitall called the Hospitall of Christes Churche withein the sayd
Citie of London for the tyme beyng , and shal@ @be by them from tyme to
tyme distributed and bestowed for the relief of the Poore of the sayd
Cytie , accordyng to their wisdome and discressyons ; Anny thing in this
Acte mentioned to the contrary notwithestanding .
STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,414.34

Provided also and be yt enacted by th@ @aucthorite aforesaid , That all
and every so~me and so~mes of Money from hensforthe to be collected or
gathered w=th=in the Citie of Coventrye and the Liberties of the same by
vertue of this Acte , towardes the mayntenance and relief of the said
Hospitall of poore people , erected in the said Citie , shal@ @be payd
over to suche Governo=r= or Governo=rs= of the said Hospitall as nowe ys
or hereafter shall@ @bee admitted and appointed by the Maio=r= and
Aldermen of the said Citie of Coventrye or the more p~te of them for the
tyme being . STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,414.35

And suche Governo=r= or Governo=rs= so admitted and appointed as
aforesaid , shall from tyme to tyme distribute and bestowe for the
relief of th@ @aforesaid Poore w=th=in the said Citie , the said so~me
or so~mes of Money according to their wisedomes and discressions ; Anny
thing mentioned in this Acte to the contrarye notwithestanding .
STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,414.36

Provided always and bee it further enacted , That the Curate Minister or
Reader , together w=th= the Wardens of every Chappell of Ease , and
where no Wardens are the Warden or two of the cheifest of th@
@inhabitantes resorting and frequenting the said Chappell of Ease for
hering Dyvine Service , the same inhabitantes to be nominated and chosen
by the same Curate Minister or Reader , and also the Collectoures and
all and every other p~son and p~sons to whom in this behalf yt shall
appertayne by force of this Estatute , shall doo execute p~fourme and be
liable to all and every suche Ordinance Clause Article Sentence and
Penalties specified and conteyned in this p~nte Acte , for and towardes
the relief of the Poore , in like maner and fourme as the Vicar Curate
Churchwardens and Collecto=rs= of every Parishe Churche shall may or
ought to doo by force of this Acte , according to the purporte and true
meaning of the same , and not be compellable to come or resorte to their
P~ishe Churche for the same onely purpose or intent ; Anny thing in this
Acte before specyfied to the contrary notwithstanding .
STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,414.37

Provided also that this Acte or any thing therin conteyned shall not in
any wise extende or be prejudiciall to any gyfte legacie conveyance or
assignement of any maner of landes or other profit , heretofore gyven
assigned or bequeathed to the relyef of the Poore , Reparac~on of
Highe_waies or Bridges upon any maner of condic~on ; but that the same
shall be employed converted bestowed and accompted for in suche maner
and forme and upon suche condic~on as the same laufully was or ought to
bee before the making of this Acte . STAT-1563-E1-P2,4,414.38

