<BEGIN_stat-1671-e3-p2>

<P_5,687>

<heading>

CHAPTER XIV . STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,687.4

An Act for settling the drayneing of the Fennes in Lincolneshire called
Deepeing Fennes . STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,687.5

<$$heading>

Whereas by an Act of this present Parliament made at a Session held in
the Sixteenth and Seaventeenth yeare of His Majesties Raigne entituled
An Act for drayneing the Fenns called Deeping Fenns and other Fenns
therein menco~ed It is amongst other things enacted , That the Trustees
therein named their Heires and Assignes should drayne the said Fenns in
manner as is therein expressed within the Space of seaven yeares then
next ensueing But by reason of some inconveniencies in the said Act and
other discouragements the said Trustees have delayed to proceed in the
said worke ; till by a Law Order and Decree of Sewers made at a Generall
Sessions of Sewers holden at Spalding in the County of Lincolne the
Foureteenth Day of Aprill in the One_and_twentieth yeare of his said
Majesties raigne , it was adjudged ordered and decreed That in case the
tyme remaineing and then yet to come of the seaven yeares aforesaid by
reason of the unseasonablenesse of the weather or other unavoidable
accident should not be sufficient for the compleateing and finishing the
said worke , and should be soe adjudged and declared by six or more of
the Commissioners of Sewers of the County of Lincolne , whereof three to
be of the Hundred of Nesse at their Publique and open Sessions to be
holden at Spalding aforesaid And the said Trustees their Heires and
Assignes should within one halfe yeare after makeing the said Order and
Decree of Sewers sufficiently maintaine and repaire the Banck called
Hawthorn Banck and the Banck called the Douzens and soe from tyme to
tyme should maintaine and preserve the same then the space or time of
three yeares should be added and granted to the said Trustees their
Heires and Assignes for the better effecting and finishing the said
worke ; STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,687.7

And further it was then adjudged ordered and decreed by the said
Commissio~: of Sewers That from thenceforth it should and might be
lawfull for the said Trustees their Heires and Assignes to take Earth
and Manure for the makeing and repaireing any the Bancks made or to be
made for the drayneing and preservaco~n of the said Fenns on the River
or Washside in such proporco~n as need should require and where Earth
sufficient could not be had on that side that it should and might be
lawfull for the said Trustees their Heires and Assignes to take Earth
and Manure on the Land side or inside of any the said Banks not
exceeding sixscore foote distance from any the said Banks without
payeing any satisfaco~n: for the same except for cutting or covering
such Grounds as were then severall for which satisfaco~n should be made
and given by the Commissioners of Sewers appointed by the said Act in
such manner as by the said Act of Parliament is limitted and directed
STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,687.8

And it was then alsoe adjudged ordered and decreed by the said
Commissioners of Sewers that noe satisfaco~n should be made or given to
any person or persons for any losse or da~mage which by reason of any
breach or overflowing hath or shall hereafter happen to any the Fenns
co~monly {COM:preceding_word_"co~monly"_emended} called Deepeing Fenns
or other the Fenns by the said Act of Parliament intended to be drayned
, for_as_much as {COM:preceding_word_"as"_emended} the said Trustees
their Heires and Assignes would be the greatest sufferers thereby By
which said Law Order and Decree of Sewers the said Trustees their Heires
or Assignes haveing been encouraged to proceed in the drayneing of the
said Fenns untill an Act of Parliament might be obtained for their
better assureance and security , And in confidence thereof haveing
already expended great sumes of money in the said worke Bee it therefore
enacted by the Kings most excellent Majestie by and with the Consent of
the Lords Spirituall and Temporall and Co~mons in this present
Parliament assembled and by the Authority of the same That in case the
tyme remaineing and yet to come of the seaven yeares afore menco~ed by
reason of the unseasonablenesse of the weather or other unavoidable
accidents shall not be sufficient to compleate and finish the said worke
and shall be soe adjudged and declared by six or more of the
Comissioners of Sewers of the County of Lincolne whereof three to be of
the Parts of Kesteven not interested in the said undertakeing at their
publique and open Sessions to be holden at Spalding aforesaid And the
said Trustees their Heires and Assignes shall within one halfe yeare
after the passing of this Act sufficiently maintaine
{COM:preceding_word_"maintaine"_emended} and
{COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended} repaire the said Bank called the
Douzens and the said Bank called Hawthorne Bank and soe from tyme to
tyme shall maintaine and preserve the same then the space or tyme of
three yeares shall be added and granted unto the said Trustees their
Heires and Assignes for the better effecting and finishing the said
worke , STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,687.9

And further , bee it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That from
henceforth it shall and may be lawfull for the said Trustees their
Heires and Assignes to take Earth and Manure for the makeing and
repaireing any the Banks made or to be made for the dreyneing and
preservaco~n of the said Fenns on the River or Wash side of any the said
Banks in such proporco~n as need shall require , and where Earth
sufficient can@ @not be had on that side it shall and may be lawfull for
the said Trustees their Heires and Assignes to take Earth and Manure on
the Land side or inside of any the said Banks not exceeding sixscore
foote distance from any of the said Banks without paieing any
satisfaco~n for the same except for cutting and covering such Grounds as
now are severall for which satisfaco~n shall be made and given by the
Commissioners of Sewers appointed by the said Act in such manner as in
{COM:preceding_word_"in"_emended} and {COM:preceding_word_"and"_emended}
by the said Act of Parliament is limitted and directed
STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,687.10

And further be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That noe satisfacon
shall be made or given to any p~son or p~sons for any losse or da~mage
which by reason of any breach or overflowing hath or shall hereafter
happen to any the Fenns now co~monly called Deeping Fenns or other the
Fenns by the said Act intended to be drayned , forasmuch as the said
Trustees their Heires and Assignes will be the greatest sufferers
thereby Any thing in the said Act to the contrary notwithstanding
STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,687.11

<P_5,688>

And whereas by the said Act Three_thousand_five_hundred Acres , and
one_thousand Acres and Five_hundred Acres are added and allotted to the
said Trustees their Heires and Assignes Which said
Three_thousand_five_hundred Acres one_thousand Acres and Five_hundred
Acres were to be admeasured by Statute Measure by two Artists and sett
out by them at the charge of the said Trustees their Heires or Assignes
or the Survivor of them one to be chosen by the Commissioners of Sewers
for Kesteven and Holland and one other by the said Undertakers , Which
said Three_thousand_five_hundred Acres , and One_thousand Acres and
Five_hundred Acres have been since admeasured and sett out according to
the direco~ns in the said Act Bee it therefore enacted by the Authority
aforesaid That the said Trustees their Heires and Assignes shall hold
and enjoy the same as they are soe sett forth or now enclosed
STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,688.13

And for the better security and preservaco~n of the said works Bee it
enacted by the Authority aforesaid That if any person or persons except
such as shall be authorized by the said Trustees their Heires and
Assignes shall wilfully or maliciously stopp any River or Drayne cutt
breake or throw downe any Bank Sluce or other worke made or to be made
within or without the said Fenns except as in the said Act is limitted
and p~mitted such person or persons offending as aforesd~ shall make
full satisfaco~n to the person and persons as shall be injured thereby
to be recovered by an Acco~n in any of His Majesties Courts of Record at
Westminster wherein noe Essoigne Protecco~n or Wager of Law shall be
allowed STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,688.14

and in case he or they soe offending shall not be able to give or make
satisfaco~n as aforesaid then such person or persons shall and may be
prosecuted and punished for the same as in the case of cutting the Poe
Dik in Marsland is provided STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,688.15

And for the more convenient layeing and leavying of Taxes , and for the
better security of all such persons as shall become Participants and
Adventurers in the said work under the said Trustees their Heires and
Assignes Bee it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That the Undertakers
in the said Act menco~ed their Heires and Assignes or any three or more
of them each of them being Owner of Two_hundred_and_fifty Acres or more
part of the Tenn_thousand_thirty_six Acres by the said Act made
chargeable with Taxes for carrying on the dreyneing of the said Fenns
shall and may at a Publique Meeting of the said Undertakers to be holden
at the Towne of Spalding in the County of Lincolne on the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} Thursday next after the second Sunday
in Aprill yearely <paren> at which tyme and place the said Undertakers
are hereby enjoyned to hold their publique meeting once in every yeare
for ever hereafter <$$paren> assesse and rate an equall Acre Tax on all
and every the said Tenn_thousand_thirty_six Acres to be paid on the
Tenth Day of October then next following and alsoe impose a Penaltie not
exceeding the third part of the said Tax , STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,688.16

and if the said Tax be not paid by the respective Undertakers at or
before the Tenth Day of November then next following then such
Undertakers soe faileing shall forfeit the Penaltie imposed to be
leavyed together with the said Tax by sequestraco~n and sale of the Land
of such Undertakers in such manner as is herein after expressed <paren>
that is to say <$$paren> if the said Tax and Penaltie or any part
thereof be unpaid untill the Thursday after the second Sunday in Aprill
then next following that it shall and may be lawfull for the said
Undertakers or any three or more of them qualified as aforesd~ at their
publique meeting on the last menco~ed Thursday at the Towne of Spalding
aforesaid by a Writeing under their Hands and Seales to that purpose
made and directed to their Receivo=r= for the tyme being to cause to be
seized and sequestred the Lands for which such Tax and Penaltie shall be
soe in arreare , STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,688.17

And the said Recivo=r= is hereby enabled upon receipt of such Writeing
to enter upon the said Lands and to take receive and leavy the Rents
Issues and Profitts thereof till the said Tax and Penalty due as
aforesaid be fully satisfied the same to be imployed for the dreyneing
and preserving the said Fenns without any accompt to be given thereof to
the Owner or Owners of such Lands STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,688.18

And if the said Tax and Penaltie with such other Tax and Penaltie as
shall be due dureing the said Sequestraco~n shall not be fully satisfied
before the Thursday next after the second Sunday in Aprill then next
following that it shall and may be lawfull for any three or more of the
said Undertakers qualified as aforesd~ at their then publique meeting at
the Towne of Spalding aforesaid by Deed under their Hands and Seales
duely executed and enrolled or entred within three moneths then next
following with the Register of the said Undertakers in his Register
Booke for entering Conveyances to bargaine and sell to any p~son or
p~sons such or soe much of the said Lands for which such Tax and
Penaltie shall be in arreare as shall be sufficient to satisfye the said
Tax or Taxes and Penalties in arreare and returne the Overplus of the
money <paren> if any be <$$paren> to the Owners of the said Lands Which
Deed soe executed and enrolled or entered is hereby enacted to be a
sufficient Conveyance of the said Lands to such person or persons to
whom the same shall be bargained and sold as aforesaid
STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,688.19

And be it enacted that noe Tax for dreyneing or preserveing the said
Fenns shall at any tyme hereafter be taxed or leavyed at any other tyme
or in any other manner then is herein before expressed
STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,688.20

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That if any sume or
su~mes of money shall be raised or leaved by vertue of the Authority
given by the said Act to the Commissioners of Sewers upon the Lands
Goods or Chattells of the Adventurers or Owners of the said
Tenn_thousand_thirty_six Acres or any of them or upon the Lands Goods or
Chattells of any their respective Ten=a=nts Farmo=rs=: or Occupiers for
any the matters or things in the said Act menco~ed if the Trea~r for the
tyme being to the said Undertakers shall not within Twenty Dayes after
demand made pay and satisfye the same with such Da~mages as such person
or persons shall susteyne thereby to such person or persons on whose
Lands Goods or Chattells any sume or su~mes of money shall be <P_5,689>
raised or leavyed as aforesaid that then the person and persons soe
dampnified shall and may devide the said su~me or su~mes of money
leavyed on him or them as aforesaid together with his or their Da~mages
susteyned thereby into equall proporco~ns to be charged on every the
Owners of the said Ten_thousand_thirty_six Acres in a rateable way
according to their respective number of Acres , STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,689.21

and if any such Owner shall not within Twenty Dayes after demand pay to
the partyes soe dampnified his respective part or proporco~n thereof
such person or persons soe dampnified shall and may recover the same by
Acco~n of Debt against the person or persons soe neglecting or refuseing
to pay the same in any of His Majesties Courts of Record at Westminster
in which Aco~n noe Essoigne Proteco~n or Wager of Law shall bee admitted
. STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,689.22

Provided alwaies and bee it further enacted that it shall and may bee
lawfull for six or more of the Comission~s of Sewers for the County of
Lincolne to direct the cutting of any the Bankes in the said Parts of
Holland without the said Fenns for the laying downe any Tunnell or
Tunells in such place or manner as to them shall seeme meete for the
takeing in or letting out of Water to any the Lands of Spalding
Pinchbeck or Weston STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,689.23

but the said Trustees their Heires or Assignes shall not stand
chargeable therewith STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,689.24

nor shall be lyable to make or give any satisfacco~n for any da~mage
hapning thereby STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,689.25

And bee itt further enacted that it shall not be lawfull for any person
or persons whatsoever to lett or take any Waters out of the Rivers of
Glean or Welland into any other place or places then into the places
afore mentioned or into the Fenns co~monly called Deeping Fenns
STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,689.26

but the said Trustees their Heires or Assignes their Servants or Agents
or any other person shall have power imediatly to stop the same
STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,689.27

and alsoe shall or may recover Da~mages against such person or persons
soe offending by Acco~n in any of His Ma=ties= Courts at Westminster in
which Acco~n noe Essoigne Proteco~n or Wager of Law shall bee admitted .
Any Law Statute Costome or Usuage to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,689.28

<P_5,732>

<heading>

CHAPTER XVIII . STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,732.31

An Act for the better regulateing of Workehouses for setting the Poore
on Worke . STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,732.32

<$$heading>

For the more effectuall putting in Execution of an Act of Parlyament
made in the fowerteenth yeare of your Majestyes Raigne entituled , An
Act for the better Releife of the Poore of this Kingdome . And to the
end that the Poore of the severall Parishes within the City and
Liberties of Westminster and other Parishes within the County of
Midlesex mentioned within the weekely Bill of Mortality , may for the
future be duely provided for according to the intent and meaneing of the
said Act , May it please your most excellent Majesty that it may be
enacted , and bee it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majestie by and
with the advice and consent of the Lords Spirituall and Temporall and
Commons in this present Parlyament assembled and by the authoritie of
the same {COM:begin_interpolated_text} That all moneys assessed or
ordered to be assessed upon any person in pursuance of the said Act
since the first day of March in the yeare of our Lord
One_thousand_six_hundred_sixty_and_five shall be collected and paid in
to the Treasurers of the respective Corporations by or before the
nine_and_twentyeth day of September in the yeare of our Lord
One_thousand_six_hundred_seaventy_and_one . STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,732.34

And all moneys already collected by authority of the said Act shall be
paid into the said Treasurers by or before the first day of June in the
yeare of our Lord One_thousand_six_hundred_seaventy_&_one .
STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,732.35

And {COM:end_interpolated_text} that the Officers of the said
Corporations erected and constituted in pursuance of the said Act and
their Treasurers shall make and give Quarterly Accompts to the Justices
of Peace , who are hereby required to demand and call for the said
Accompts , and are not to raise any more moneys upon any new
Certificates whatsoever , untill there be a just Accompt given to , and
allowed by the Justices of the Peace aforesaid according to the true
intent and meaning of the said former and this present Act .
STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,732.36

And whereas some Accompts have been made by the former Governours of
part of the moneys raised by the Act aforesaid , and some of them stand
engaged for payment of certaine Summes of money , which were borrowed
and expended in pursuance of the said former Act , Bee it further
enacted That all such Accompts which shall appeare to the said Justice
<paren> not haveing beene Governours of the said Corporations <$$paren>
to have beene made according to the Act aforesaid shall be and are
hereby ratifyed and confirmed , and that such moneys as have not beene
accompted for as aforesaid shall be accompted for according as in the
said Act is provided . And that all moneys lent , and all such Debts ,
as any of them , or any of the Members of the said Corporations
aforesaid stand engaged for , and have beene contracted for the Uses
expressed in the said Act , shall upon order from the Justices aforesaid
<paren> ascertaining the same <$$paren> be discharged and satisfyed by
the respective Treasurer or Treasurers for the time being , and shall
from time to time be allowed in their respective accompts .
STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,732.37

And bee it further enacted by the authority aforesaid That noe Summe or
Summes of money to be leavyed upon the Inhabitants of any of the said
respective Parishes according to the said former or this present Act
shall in any one yeare exceede one fowerth part of the Assessment to the
Poore for that yeare , laid on any of the Parishes and Liberties
aforesaid , Which said Summe shall be paid by the respective Inhabitants
of the said Parishes at two severall payments to the Treasurer or
Treasurers for the said Corporations <paren> that is to say <$$paren> at
the Feast of Saint Michael the Arch-Angell , and the Annunciation of the
blessed Virgin Mary , or within fowerteene dayes after either of the
said Feasts as aforesaid . STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,732.38

And bee it alsoe enacted That noe Assesment shall be laid or made on any
the Parishes aforesaid after the nine_and_twentyeth day of September
which shall be in the yeare of our Lord
One_thousand_six_hundred_seaventy_and_five , Any thing in the said
former or this present Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding .
STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,732.39

Provided alwayes That noe thing herein contained shall in any sorte
extend to the superseding , altering or vacating any of the Powers given
by the said former Act to the Lord Maior and Governours for the
Corporation within the City of London or the Parish of Saint Margarets
Westminster but that the same and all the other Clauses and Articles in
the said former Act shall to all intents and purposes be fully executed
and observed within the City of London , and Parish of Saint Margarets
Westminster as if this Act had not beene made . Any thing herein
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding .
STAT-1671-E3-P2,5,732.40

