<BEGIN_stat-1663-e3-p2>

<P_5,236>

<heading>

CHAPTER XIII . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,236.4

An Act for restraining the takeing of Excessive Usury .
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,236.5

<$$heading>

Forasmuch as the Abatement of Interest from Ten in the Hundred in former
times hath beene found by notable experience beneficiall to the
Advancement of Trade and Improvement of Land~ by good Husbandry with
many other considerable advantages to this Nation , especially the
reduceing of it to a nearer proportion with Forraigne States with whom
wee traffique , And wheras in fresh memory the like fall from Eight to
Six in the Hundred by a late constant practise hath found the like
Successe to the generall contentment of this Nation as is visible by
severall Improvements . And whereas it is the endeavour of some at
present to reduce it backe againe in practice to the allowance of the
Statute still in force to Eight in the Hundred to the great
discouragement of Ingenuity and industry in the Husbandry Trade and
Commerce of this Nation . Bee it for the Reasons aforesaid Enacted by
the Kings most Excellent Majestye and the Lord~ and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled That noe person or persons whatsoever from
and after the twenty ninth day of September in the yeare of our Lord
One_thousand_six_hundred_and_sixty upon any Contract shall from and
after the said twenty ninth {COM:preceding_word_"ninth"_emended} of
September take directly or indirectly for Loane of any Money
{COM:preceding_word_"Money"_emended} Wares Merchandice or other
Commodityes whatsoever above the value of Six Pound~ for the Forbearance
of one_Hundred Pound~ for a Yeare , and soe after that Rate for a
greater or lesser Summe or for a longer or shorter time , And that all
Bond~ Contracts and Assurances whatsoever made after the time aforesaid
for payment of any principall or money to be lent or covenanted to be
performed upon or for any Usury , wherupon or whereby there shall be
reserved or taken above the Rate of Six pound~ in the Hundred as
aforesaid shall be utterly void , And that all and every person and
persons whatsoever which shall after the time aforesaid upon any
Contract to be made after the said twenty nineth day of September take
accept and receive by way or meanes of any corrupt Bargaine Loane
Exchange Cheivesaunce Shift or Interest of any Wares Merchandise or
other thing or things whatsoever , or by any deceitfull way or meanes or
by any covin , engine or deceitfull conveyance for the forbearing or
giveing day of payment for one whole yeare of and for their Money or
other thing above the Su~me of Six pound~ for the forbearing of
One_hundred pound~ for a yeare , and soe after that Rate for a greater
or lesser Summe or for a longer or shorter Terme shall forfeit and loose
for every such offence the treble value of the Moneyes Wares Merchandize
and other things soe Lent Bargained Sold Exchanged or Shifted ;
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,236.7

<P_5,237>

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid That all and every
Scrivenor and Scrivenors Broker and Brokers Sollicitor and Sollicitors
Driver and Drivers of Bargaines for Contracts who shall after the said
twenty nineth day of September take or receive directly or indirectly
any Summe or Summes of Money or other reward or thing for Brokage
Solliciting Driving or Procureing the Loane or forbearing of any Summe
or Summes of Money over and above the Rate or Value of five shillings
for the Loane , or of one_hundred pound~ for a yeare and soe rateably ,
or above twelve pence for the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} making
or renewing of the Bond or Bill for the Loane , or for forebearing
thereof , or for any Counterbond or Bill concerning the same shall
forfeite for every such Offence twenty pound~ and have Imprisonment for
halfe a yeare ; The one moyety of all which forfeitures to be to the
King our Soveraigne Lord His Heires and Successors , And the other
moyety to him or them that will sue for the same in the same County
where the severall Offences are committed and not elsewhere by action of
Debt Bill Plaint or Information , in which noe Essoigne Wager of Law ,
or protection to be allowed . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,237.9

<P_5,288>

<heading>

CHAPTER XXX . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,288.12

An Act for the Attainder of severall persons guilty of the horrid
Murther of his late Sacred Majestie King Charles the first .
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,288.13

<$$heading>

In all humble manner shew unto Your most Excellent Majestie Your
Majestyes most dutyfull and loyall Subjects the Lord~ and Commons in
Parliament assembled That the Horrid and Execrable Murder of Your
Majestyes Royall Father our late most Gratious Soveraigne Charles the
First of ever blessed and glorious memory hath beene committed by a
party of wretched men desperately wicked and hardened in their impietie
, who haveing first plotted and contrived the ruine and distruction of
this excellent Monarchy , and with it of the true Reformed Protestant
Religion which had beene soe long protected by it and flourished under
it , found it necessary in order to the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} carrying on of their pernitious and
traiterous designes to throw downe all the Bulwarks and Fences of Law ,
and to subvert the very being and constitution of Parliament that soe
they might at last make their way open for any further attempts upon the
Sacred person of his Majestie himselfe , And that for the more easy
effecting thereof they did first seduce some part of the then Army into
a compliance and then kepte the rest in subjection to them partly for
hopes of preferment and cheifely for feare of looseing their imployments
and arreares untill by these and other more odious arts and devices they
had fully strengthened themselves both in power and faction , which
being done they did declare against all manner of Treaties with the
person of the King even then while a Treaty by advice of both Houses of
Parliament was in being remonstrate against the Houses of Parliament for
such proceedings , seize upon His Royall person while the Commissioners
were returned to the House of Parliament with his Answere , and when his
concession had beene voted a ground for peace , seize upon the House of
Commons seclude and imprison some Members force out others and there
being left but a small remnant of their owne Creatures <paren> not a
tenth part of the whole <$$paren> did seeke to shelter themselves by
this weake pretence under the name and authoritie of a Parliament , and
in that name laboured to prosecute what was yet behinde and unfinished
of their long intended Treason and Conspiricie ,
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,288.15

To this purpose they prepared an Ordinance for erecting a prodigious and
unheard of Tribunall which they called An High Court of Justice for
tryall of his Majestie STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,288.16

and haveing easily procured it to passe in their House of Commons as it
then stood moulded ventured to send it up from thence to the Peeres then
sitting who totally rejected it , whereupon their rage and fury
increasing they presume to passe it alone as an Act of the Commons and
in the name of the Commons of England , STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,288.17

and haveing gained the pretence of Law made by a power of their owne
makeing pursue it with all possible force and cruelty untill at last
upon the thirtyeth day of January
One_thousand_six_hundred_forty_and_eight His Sacred Majestie was brought
unto a Scaffold and there publiquely murthered before the Gates of his
owne Royall Palace , STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,288.18

And because by this horred {COM:sic} action the Protestant Religion hath
received the greatest wound and reproach and the people of England the
most insupportable shame and infamy that it was possible for the enimies
of God and the King to bring upon us whilst the Fanatick Rage of a few
Miscreants <paren> who were as farr from being true Protestants as they
were from being true Subjects <$$paren> stand~ imputed by our
Adversaries to the whole nation , We therefore your Majestyes said
dutyfull and loyall Subjects the Lord~ and Commons in Parliament
assembled doe hereby renounce abominate and protest against that Impious
Fact , the execrable Murther and unparreled
{COM:preceding_word_"unparreled"_emended} Treason committed against the
Sacred person and life of our said late Soveraigne Your Majestyes most
Royall Father , and all proceedings tending thereunto ,
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,288.19

And doe beseech Your most Excellent Majestie that it may be declared ,
And be it hereby declared That by the undoubted and Fundamentall Lawes
of this Kingdome , neither the Peeres of this Realme nor the Commons nor
both together in Parliament or out of Parliament , nor the people
collectively or representatively
{COM:preceding_word_"representatively"_emended} nor any other persons
whatsoever ever had hath have {COM:sic} or ought to have any coercive
power over the persons of the Kings of this Realme ,
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,288.20

And for the better vindication of our selves to posteritie , and as a
lasting Monument of our otherwise inexpressible detestation and
abhorrency of this villanous and abominable Fact We doe further beseech
Your most Excellent Majestie that it may be Enacted , And bee it hereby
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majestie by and with the advice and
consent of the Lord~ and Commons in this present Parliament assembled
That every thirtyeth day of January unless it falls out to be upon the
Lord~ day and then the day next following shall be for ever hereafter
sett apart to be kepte and observed in all the Churches and Chappells of
these Your Majestyes Kingdomes of England and Ireland Dominion of Wales
and Towne of Berwicke upon Tweed and the Isles of Jersey and Guernsey
and all other Your Majestyes Dominions as an Anniversary day of Fasting
and Humiliation to implore the mercy of God that neither the guilt of
that Sacred and Innocent Blood , nor those other sinns by which God was
provoked to deliver up both us and our King into the hand~ of cruell and
unreasonable men may at any time hereafter be visited upon us or our
posterity , STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,288.21

And whereas Oliver Cromwell deceased Henry Ireton deceased John Bradshaw
deceased and Thomas Pride deceased John Lisle William Say Sir Hardresse
Waller Valentine Wauton Thomas Harrison Edward Whalley William
Heveningham Isaac Pennington Henry Martin John Barkstead Gilbert
Milington Edmond Ludlow Sir Michael Livesey Robert Tichborne Owen Rowe
Robert Lilborne Adrian Scroope John Oakey John Hewson William Goffe
Cornelius Hollond Thomas Challoner John Carew John Jones Miles Corbet
Henry Smith Gregory Clement Thomas Wogan Edmond Harvey Thomas Scot
William Cawley John Downes Nicholas Love Vincent Potter Augustine
Garland John Dixwell George Fleetwood Simon Meyne James Temple Peter
Temple Daniell Blagrave Thomas Waite John Cooke Andrew Broughton Edward
Dendy William Hewlet Hugh Peters Francis Hacker Daniell Axtell are
notoriously knowne to have beene wicked and active Instruments in the
prosecution and compassing that traiterous Murther of His late Majesty
for which the said <P_5,289> Sir Hardresse Waller Thomas Harrison
William Heveningham Isaac Pennington Henry Martin Gilbert Millington
Robert Tichborne Owen Rowe Robert Lilborne Adrian Scroope John Carew
John Jones Henry Smith Gregory Clement Edmond Harvey Thomas Scot John
Downes Vincent Potter Augustine Garland George Fleetwood Simon Meyne
James Temple Peter Temple Thomas Waite John Cooke William Hewlet Hugh
Peters Francies Hacker and Daniell Axtell have already received their
tryall at Law and by Verdict , or their owne Confession have been
convicted , and by Judgement of Law thereupon had doe now stand duely
and legally attainted , of whom , ten persons that is to say Thomas
Harrison Adrian Scroope John Carew John Jones Thomas Scot Gregory
Clement John Cooke Hugh Peters Francis Hacker and Daniell Axtell have
most deservedly suffered the paines of death and beene executed
according to Law and the said John Lisle William Say Valentine Wauton
Edward Whalley John Barkstead Edmond Ludlow Sir Michaell Livesey John
Oakey John Hewson William Goffe Cornelius Holland Thomas Challoner Miles
Corbert {COM:preceding_word_"Corbert"_emended} William Cawley Nicholas
Love John Dixwell Daniell Blagrave Andrew Broughton and Edward Dendy are
fled from Justice , not dareing to abide a Legall Tryall May it
therefore please Your Majestie that it may be Enacted And be it Enacted
by Authority of this present Parliament That the said Oliver Cromwell
deceased Henry Ireton deceased John Bradshaw deceased and Thomas Pride
deceased shall by vertue of this Act be adjudged to be convicted and
attainted of High Treason to all intents and purposes as if they and
every of them respectively had beene attainted in their lives , And
alsoe that John Lisle William Say Valentine Wauton Edward Whally John
Barkstead Edmond Ludlow Sir Michaell Livesey John Okey John Hewson
William Goffe Cornelius Holland Thomas Challoner William Cawley Miles
Corbert {COM:preceding_word_"Corbert"_emended} Nicholas Love John
Dixwell Daniell Blagrave Andrew Broughton Edward Dendy and every of them
stand and be adjudged and by Authority of this present Act convicted and
attainted of High Treason , And that all and every the Mannours
Messuages Land~ Tenements Rents Reversions Remainders Possessions Rights
Conditions Interests Offices Fees Annuities and all other the
Hereditaments Leases for yeares Chattells reall and other things of that
nature whatsoever they be of them the said Oliver Cromwell Henry Ireton
John Bradshaw Thomas Pride John Lisle William Say Valentine Wauton
Edward Whalley John Barkstead Edmond Ludlow Sir Michaell Livesey John
Oakey John Hewson William Goffe Cornelius Holland Thomas Challoner
William Cawley Miles Corbert {COM:preceding_word_"Corbert"_emended}
Nicholas Love John Dixwell Daniell Blagrave Andrew Broughton Edward
Dendy Thomas Harrison Adrian Scroope John Carew John Jones Thomas Scot
Gregory Clement Hugh Peters Francis Hacker John Cooke Daniell Axtell Sir
Hardresse Waller William Heveningham Isaac Pennington Henry Martin
Gilbert Millington Robert Tichborne Owen Rowe Robert Lilborne Henry
Smith Edmond Harvey John Downes Vincent Potter Augustine Garland George
Fleetwood Simon Meyne James Temple Peter Temple Thomas Waite which they
or any of them or any other person or persons to their or any of their
uses or in trust for them or any of them had the five_and_twentyeth day
of March in the yeare of our Lord One_thousand_six_hundred_forty_and_six
or at any time since shall stand and be forfeited unto Your Majestie
Your Heires and Successors and shall bee deemed vested and adjudged to
be in the actuall and reall possession of Your Majesty without any
Office or Inquisition thereof hereafter to be taken or found , And alsoe
that all and every the Good~ Debts and other the Chattells personall
whatsoever of them the said Oliver Cromwell Henry Ireton John Bradshaw
Thomas Pride whereof at the time of their respective deathes they or any
of them or any other in trust for them or any of them stood possessed in
Law or Equity , and all the Good~ Debts and other the Chattells
personall whatsoever of {TEXT:missing_"of"} any of them the said John
Lisle William Say Valentine Wauton Edward Whalley John Barkstead Edmond
Ludlow Sir Michael Livesey John Oakey John Hewson William Goffe
Cornelius Holland Thomas Challoner William Cawley Miles Corbet Nicholas
Love John Dixwell Andrew Broughton Edward Dendy Thomas Harrison Adrian
Scroope John Carew John Jones Thomas Scot Gregory Clement Hugh Peters
John {COM:preceding_word_"John"_emended} Cooke
{COM:preceding_word_"Cooke"_emended} Francis
{COM:preceding_word_"Francis"_emended} Hacker
{COM:preceding_word_"Hacker"_emended} Daniell Axtell Sir Hardresse
Waller William Heveningham Isaac Pennington Henry Martin Gilbert
Millington Robert Tichborne Owen Rowe Robert Lilborne Henry Smith Edmond
Harvey John Downes Vincent Potter Augustine Garland George Fleetwood
Simon Meyne James Temple Peter Temple Thomas Wayte whereof upon the
Eleaventh day of February One_thousand_six_hundred_fifty_nine they or
any of them or any other in trust for them or any of them stood
possessed either in Law or Equity shall bee deemed and adjudged to be
forfeited unto and are hereby vested and putt into the actuall and reall
possession of Your Majestie without any further Office or Inquisition
thereof hereafter to be taken or found . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,289.22

Provided allwayes and be it Enacted by the Authoritie aforesaid That noe
Conveyance Assurance Grant Bargaine Sale Charge Lease Assignment of
Lease Grants and Surrenders by Coppy of Court Roll Estate Interest Trust
or limitation of any Use or Uses of or out of any Mannors Land~
Tenements or Hereditaments not being the Land~ nor
{COM:preceding_word_"nor"_emended} Hereditaments
{COM:preceding_word_"Hereditaments"_emended} of the late King Queene or
Prince or of any Arch_Bishops Bishops Deanes {SIC:Deanes_Deanes} and
Chapters , nor being Land~ nor Hereditaments sold or given for the
delinquency or pretended delinquency of any person or persons whatsoever
by vertue or pretext of any Act Order Ordinance or reputed Act Order or
Ordinance since the First day of January
One_thousand_six_hundred_forty_and_one , nor any Statute Judgement or
Recognizance had made acknowledged
{COM:preceding_word_"acknowledged"_emended} or suffered to any person or
persons Bodyes Pollitique or Corporate before the twenty ninth day of
September One_thousand_six_hundred_fifty_nine by any of the Offenders
before in this Act mentioned or their Heires , or by any other person or
persons claiming by from or under them or any of them other then the
wife or wives childe or children heire or heires of such person or
persons or any of them for money bona fide to them or any of them paid
or lent , nor any conveyance assurance grant or estate made before the
twenty_fifth of Aprill One_thousand_six_hundred_and_sixtie by any person
or persons to any of the Offenders aforesaid in Trust and for the
benefit of any other person or persons not being any of the Offenders
aforesaid or in trust for any Bodyes Pollitique or Corporate shall be
impeached defeated made void or frustrated hereby or by any of <P_5,290>
the Convictions and Attainders aforesaid but that the same shall be held
and enjoyed by the Purchasers Grantees Lessees Assignes Cestuy que use
Cestuy que trust and every of them their Heires Executors Administrators
and Assigns respectively as if this Act had not beene made , and as if
the said Offenders had not beene by this Act , or by any other course or
proceedings of Law convicted or attainted soe as the said Conveyances
and all and every the Grants and Assurances which by vertue of this Act
are and ought to be held and enjoyed as aforesaid shall before the First
of January which shall be in the yeare of our Lord
One_thousand_six_hundred_sixty_and_two be entred and enrolled of Record
in His Majestyes Court of Exchequer and not otherwise Any thing in this
Act herein before contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding
. STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,290.23

Provided alwayes and be it Enacted by the Authoritie aforesaid That all
and singular the Mannours Land~ Tenements and Hereditaments which at any
time heretofore were the Land~ and Possessions of Henry late Marquesse
of Worcester and Edward now Marquesse of Worcester and Henry Lord
Herbert Sonne and Heire Apparent of the said Edward Marquesse of
Worcester or any of them whereof or wherein the said Oliver Cromwell or
any other person or persons in trust for him or to his use , or any
other the persons attainted by this Act or otherwise , or any person or
persons in trust for them or any of them had or claimed or pretended to
have any Estate Right Title Possession or Interest at any time before or
since the decease of the said Oliver Cromwell shall be and hereby are
vested and setled in , and shall be held and enjoyed by the said
Marquesse of Worcester and the said Henry Lord Herbert in such manner
and forme and for such Estate and Estates with such Powers and
priviledges as they formerly had in the same respectively , Any thing in
this present Act contained , or any Act Conveyance or Assurance
heretofore made or acknowledged by the said Edward Marquesse of
Worcester and Henry Lord Herbert or either of them unto the said Oliver
Cromwell , or any other person or persons in trust for or to the use of
the said Oliver Cromwell , or any Act or Conveyance made or done by the
said Oliver Cromwell or by any in trust for him to any person whatsoever
to the contrary notwithstanding . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,290.24

Saveing alwayes to all and every person and persons Bodyes Pollitique
and others their respective Heires Successors Executors and
Administrators all such Right Title Interest in Law and Equity which
they or any of them have or ought to have of , in , to or out of any the
Premisses not being in trust for any the said Offenders nor derived by
from or under the said Offenders since the twenty fifth day of March
which was in the yeare of our Lord One_thousand_six_hundred_forty_six ,
And that they the said person and persons Bodyes Pollitique and other
their respective Heires Successors Executors and Administrators and
every of them in all and every such case where his and their Entry was
lawfull upon such Offender or Offenders or the Heires or Assignes of
such Offender or Offenders in or upon the said twenty_fifth day of March
One_thousand_six_hundred_forty_&_six or at any time since may without
Petition Monstrans de droyt Ouster le maine or other Suite to His
Majestie enter on the Premises in His Majestyes Possession , or in the
possession of His Successors and Patentees their Heires or Assignes in
such manner to all intents as he or they might have done on the
possession of the said Offenders their Heires or Assignes in or upon the
said twenty fifth day of March or at any time since Any thing in this
Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding .
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,290.25

Provided alsoe That all and every person and persons which have received
any of the Rents or meane proffitts of in or out of any the Land~
Tenements and Hereditaments Chattells reall or Possessions of any the
Offender or Offenders in this Act mentioned before the Eleventh day of
February One_thousand_six_hundred_fifty_and_nine and have paid or
accompted for the same before the said Eleventh day of February 1659
{COM:sixteen_words_from_'and'_to_'1659'_interpolated} . unto the said
Offender or Offenders or their Assignes , or to any claiming from or
under them shall be clearely and for ever acquitted and discharged of
and from the same against the Kings Majestie His Heires and Successors
Any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding .
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,290.26

Provided alwayes That it shall and may be lawfull to and for Richard
Ingoldsby to retaine and keepe or otherwise to sell and dispose all and
singular the Good~ and Chattells formerly belonging to Sir Hardresse
Waller in the Kingdome of Ireland untill two_thousand pound~ for which
the said Richard Ingoldsby in the yeare
One_thousand_six_hundred_fifty_eight stood joyntly bound with the said
Sir Hardresse Waller unto James Brookes of the Citty of Yorke Alderman ,
and was then counter_secured by a Judgement upon his Land~ , and since
by a Deed of Bargaine and Sale of the said Good~ and Chattells in
Ireland be fully paid together with the Interest thereof , he the said
Richard Ingoldsby accounting for and paying the full overplus thereof if
any shall be unto our Soveraigne Lord the King , Any thing herein before
contained to the contrary notwithstanding . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,290.27

<P_5,308>

<heading>

CHAPTER V . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,308.30

An Act against Tumults and Disorders upon p~tence of p~paring or
p~senting publick Petico~ns or other Addresses to His Majesty or the
Parliament . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,308.31

<$$heading>

Whereas it hath beene found by sad experience that Tumultuous and other
Disorderly solliciting and procuring of Hands by private persons to
Petico~ns Complaints Remonstrances & Declarations and other Addresses to
the King or to both or either Houses of Parliament for alteraco~n of
matters established by Law or {TEXT:missing_"or"} redresse of p~tended
grievances in Church or State or other publique Concernments have beene
made use of to serve the ends of Factious & Seditious persons gotten
into power to the violation of the publique Peace and have beene a great
meanes of the late unhappy Wars Confusions and Calamities in this Nation
For p~venting the like mischeife for the future Be it Enacted by the
Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the consent of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament and by the Authority of the same That no
person or persons whatsoever shall from and after the first of August
One_thousand_six_hundred_sixty_and_one solicite labor or procure the
getting of Hands or other consent of any persons above the number of
twenty or more to any Petico~n Complaint Remonstrance Declaraco~n or
other Addresses {COM:preceding_word_"Addresses"_emended} to the King or
both or either Houses of Parliament for alteraco~n of matters
established by Law in Church or State unlesse the matter thereof have
been first consented unto and Ordered by three or more Justices of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} that County or by the Major part of
the Grand Jury of the County or division of the County where the same
matter shall arise at theire publique Assizes or Generall Quarter
Sessions or if arising in London by the Lord Maior Aldermen and Commons
in Common Councell assembled And that no person or persons whatsoever
shall repaire to His Majesty or both or either of the Houses of
Parliament upon p~tence of presenting or delivering any Petico~n
Complaint Remonstrance or Declaraco~n or other Addresses accompanied
with excessive number of people not att any one time with above the
number of ten persons upon pain of incurring a penalty not exceeding the
su~m of One_hundred pounds in money and three months Imprisonment
without Bail or Mainprize for every offence which offence to be
prosecuted at the Court of Kings Bench or att the Assizes or Generall
Quarter Sessions within six moneths after the offence committed and
proved by two or more credible witnesses . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,308.33

Provided alwaies That this Act or any thing therein contained shall not
be construed to extend to debar or hinder any person or persons not
exceeding the number of Ten aforesaid to present any publique or private
Greivance or Complaint to any Member or Members of Parliament after his
Election and during the continuance of the Parliament or to the Kings
Majesty for any remedy to bee thereupon had nor to extend to any Address
whatsoever to His Majesty by all or any the Members of both or either
Houses of Parliament during the sitting of Parliament but that they may
enjoye theire freedome of Accesse to His Majesty as heretofore hath
beene used . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,308.34

<P_5,410>

<heading>

CHAPTER XVIII . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,410.37

An Act against exporting of Sheepe Wooll Woolfells Mortlings Shorlings
Yarn made of Wool Woolflocks Fullers Earth Fulling Clay and Tobacco pipe
Clay . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,410.38

<$$heading>

Whereas against the Lawes of this Kingdome great number of Sheep and
great quantities of Wooll Woolfels Mortlings Shorlings Yarn made of Wool
Woolflocks Fullers Earth or Fulling Clay are secretly exported
transported carried and conveyed out of the Kingdome of England Dominion
of Wales the Towne of Berwicke upon Tweed and Kingdome of Ireland into
the Kingdom of Scotland and into Forreigne parts to the great decay of
the Woollen Manufactures the ruine of many Families and the destruction
of the Navigation and Commerce of the Kingdoms Town and Dominion
aforesaid which is like dayly to encrease if some further remedy be not
provided and further penalties imposed upon the Offenders therein . Be
it therefore enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spirituall and Temporall and Commons in
this present Parliament assembled and by the Authority of the same That
if any person or persons shall from and after the First day of August
One_thousand_six_hundred_sixty_and_two directly or indirectly export
transport carry or convey or shall cause to be exported transported
carried or conveyed out of or from the Kingdome of England Dominion of
Wales or Town of Berwick upon Tweed or after the First day of January
One_thousand_six_hundred_sixty_and_two out of the Kingdome of Ireland
into any parts or places out of the Kingdomes or Dominion aforesaid or
into the Kingdome of Scotland any Sheepe or Wool whatsoever of the breed
or growth of the Kingdomes or Dominion aforesaid or any Woolfells
Mortlings Shorlings Yarn made of Wool Wool flocks or any Fullers Earth
or Fulling Clay whatsoever or shall directly or indirectly pack or load
or cause to be packed or loaden upon any Horse Cart or other Carriage or
shall load or lay on board or cause to be loaden or laid on board in any
Ship or other Vessel in any place within the Kingdomes of England or
Ireland Dominion of Wales or Towne of Berwick upon Tweed aforesaid any
such Sheep Wooll Woolfels Mortlings Shorlings Yarn made of Wooll
Woolflocks Fullers Earth or Fulling Clay to the intent or purpose to
export transport carry or convey the same or to cause the same to bee
exported transported carryed or conveyed out of the Kingdomes of England
or Ireland the Dominion of Wales or Town of Berwicke upon Tweed
aforesaid into the Kingdome of Scotland or into any Forreign parts that
then every such Offence shall be adjuged Felony and the Offender or
Offenders being duly convicted shall suffer and forfeit as in case of
Felony STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,410.40

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That every owner of
any such Ship or other Vessell and every owner of every Horse Cart or
Carriage upon which any Sheepe Wool Woolfels Mortlings Shorlings Yarn
made of Wool Woolflocks Fullers Earth or Fulling Clay shall be so
exported transported carryed or conveyed as aforesaid or to any such
intent or purpose as aforesaid knowing thereof and being wittingly and
willingly ayding assisting or consenting thereunto and alsoe every
Master and Mariner of or in such Shipp or other Vessell wherein any such
Sheep Wool Woolfels Mortlings Shorlings Yarn made of Wool Woolflocks
Fullers Earth or Fulling Clay shall be so exported transported carryed
or conveyed or loaden or laid on board as aforesaid to any such intent
or purpose as aforesaid knowing thereof and being wittingly and
willingly aiding assisting or consenting thereunto and alsoe every
Factor or Servant or other person whatsoever and every Customer
Comptroller Waiter Searcher Survyor or other Officer or Person
whatsoever knowing thereof and being wittingly or willingly aiding
assisting or consenting thereunto shall be and shall be adjudged and
taken to be a Felon and every Offender or Offenders therein being duly
convicted shall suffer and forfeit as in case of Felony
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,410.41

<P_5,411>

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That every offence
which shall be done or committed contrary to this Act shall and may be
enquired of and heard examined tried and determined in the County where
such Sheepe Wooll Woolfels Mortlings Shorlings Yarn made of Wooll
Woolflocks Fullers Earth or Fulling Clay respectively shall be so packed
loaden or laid on board as aforesaid or else in the County where such
Offender shall happen to be {COM:preceding_word_"be"_emended}
apprehended or arrested for such offence in such manner and form and to
such effect to all intents and purposes as if the same offence had beene
wholly done and committed in the same County STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,411.43

Provided alsoe that every Baron and other Peer of this Realm which shall
be indicted or accused as principall or accessary {COM:sic} in or to any
offence made Felony by this Act shall have his her or theire Tryal by
his her or theire Peeres as in cases of Felony att Common Law
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,411.44

Provided alwaies and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That no
person or persons whatsoever shall att any time hereafter be impeached
for any offence made Felony by this Act unlesse such person or persons
shall be thereof indicted within the space of one yeare next ensuing
such offence committed STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,411.45

And for_as_much as great quantities of Wooll Woollen Yarn and Woolflocks
are close packed and pressed togeather with Scrues and other unlawfull
Engines into Butts Pipes Hogsheads Chests and other Cask and Vessells
and into Sacks Baggs and other Wrappers made of Wool or Linnen and under
colour of Bales Sacks Baggs Packs and Cask of other Goods and otherwise
great quantities of the same are daily loaden on board of Ships or other
Vessels and soe are carryed conveyed exported and transported out of the
Kingdomes Town of Berwick and Dominion aforesaid and alsoe great
quantities are daily carried and laid at or neere the Coasts of the Sea
or some navigable Rivers into Storehouses and Barnes and by night are
laid on board of Shallops and other Vessells belonging to Aliens and so
carried and exported out of the Kingdomes Town of Berwick and Dominion
aforesaid Be it therefore enacted by the Authority aforesaid That from
and after the said First day of August no person or persons shall presse
together with any Scrues Presses or other Engines into any Sacke Pack
Bagg or other Wrapper or shall put presse pack or stean any Wooll
whatsoever or any Yarn made of Wooll into any Butt Pipe Hogshead Chest
or any other Cask or Vessell upon any pretence whatsoever or shall carry
or lay or cause to be carried or laid at or neare the Shoar or Coasts of
the Sea or of any navigable River or into any House or Place near
adjoyning thereunto any such Wooll Woolflocks or Yarn made of Wooll with
intention to export transport carry or convey the same out of the
Kingdomes of England or Ireland Town of Berwick upon Twede or Dominion
of Wales into the Kingdom of Scotland or into any foreign parts under
the penalty of the losse and forfeiture of all such Wooll Woolflocks and
Yarn made of Wooll as shall be so packed or pressed or put or laid into
Cask or carried or laid near to the Sea shoar or to any navigable River
as aforesaid or the value thereof STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,411.46

And whereas great quantities of Fullers Earth or Fulling Clay is dayly
carried and exported under the colour of Tobacco pipe Clay Be it
therefore enacted by the Authority aforesaid That no Tobacco pipe Clay
shall from and after the First day of August
One_thousand_six_hundred_sixty_and_two be exported transported carried
or conveyed out of or from the Kingdome of England Town of Berwick upon
Twede or after the First Day of January
One_thousand_six_hundred_sixty_and_two out of or from the Kingdome of
{COM:twenty_words_from_'after'_to_'of'_interpolated} Ireland or the
Dominion of Wales into the Kingdom of Scotland or into any forreign
parts or into any port or place out of the Kingdomes or Dominion
aforesaid under the penalty of three shillings for every pound of
Tobacco pipe Clay which shall be exported or transported contrary to
this Act . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,411.47

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid That from and after
the First day of August One_thousand_six_hundred_sixty_and_two no Packs
Sacks Bags or Caske of any Wooll Woolfels Mortlings Shorlings Yarn made
of Wooll Woolflocks Fullers Earth Fulling Clay or Tobacco pipe Clay
shall be laid or loaden on any Horse Cart or other Carriage whatsoever
or shall be carried or conveyed by land to or from any place or places
within the Kingdom of England Town of Berwick or Dominion aforesaid nor
after the First day of January One_thousand_six_hundred_sixty_two in the
Kingdome of Ireland but in the day time and att seasonable houres
<paren> that is to say <$$paren> from and after the First day of March
to the Nine_&_twentieth day of September yearely between the houres of
Foure of the Clock in the Morning and Eight of the Clock in the Evening
and from the Nine_and_twentieth day of September to the first day of
March yearly between the houres of Seven of the Clocke in the Morning
and Five of the Clock in the Evening under the penalty of the losse and
forfeiture of all such Goods or the value thereof the one moiety of all
which forfeitures mentioned in this Act to be to the use of the King His
Heires and Successors and the other moyetie to him or them that will sue
for the same by Action of Debt Bill Plaint or Information in any Court
of Record in which no Essoign Protection or Wager of Law shall be
admitted or allowed STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,411.48

Provided neverthelesse That this Act or any thing therein contained
shall not extend or be construed to extend to repeal disanul and make
void any the Penalties Clauses or Provisoes mentioned in one Act of this
present Session of Parliament made against the Transportation of Wooll
Woolfels Fullers Earth or any kind of Scouring Earth or to the
prohibiting of the loading on board of any Ship or Vessel of any Weather
Sheep Wooll Woolflocks or other Goods menco~ned in this Act that by the
aforesaid Act is permitted to be loaden on board of any Ship or Vessel
for the necessary use or provision of such Ship or Vessel as aforesaid
Any thing in this Act contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,411.49

<P_5,412>

Provided alwaies That if any Owner of any Ship or Vessel or any Master
or Mariner knowing of such Transportation of such Sheep Wooll Woolfels
Mortlings Shorlings Yarn made of Wooll Woolflocks Fullers Earth Fulling
Clay or Tobacco pipe Clay shall within three monthes next after the
knowledge therof or after his returne into the Kingdom of England or
Ireland or into the said Town of Berwick or Dominion of Wales aforesaid
give the first information bona fide before any of the Barons of either
of the Courts of the Exchequer in England or Ireland for the time being
or before the Head Officer of any Port where he shall first arrive upon
his or theire Oath of the number and quantity of the Goods mentioned in
this Act so carried conveyed & transported and by whom where and in what
Shipp or Vessell and afterwards shall be ready upon reasonable warning
by Processe to justifie and prove the same that then such Owner or
Owners Master Mariner and Mariners shall not be punished for Felony by
vertue of this Act but shall nevertheless be subject to all other
penalties and forfeitures in this or any other Act contained for the
Offence aforesaid STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,412.51

and all such Exportation Transportation carrying or conveying of any the
Goods Wares or Comodities in this Act mentioned is hereby declared and
adjudged to be a common and publicke Nusance STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,412.52

And for the better execution of this Act be it further enacted That all
Justices of Assize Justices of Goal Delivery and Justices of Peace shall
enquire of all the premisses in theire General Quarter Sessions and
heare and determine the same and that all Maiors Bayliffs and other Head
Officers of Cities Burroughs and Towns not having Jurisdiction to try
Felony shall enquire of all and every Offence within this Act not made
Felony and heare and determine the same . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,412.53

<P_5,553>

<heading>

CHAPTER III . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,553.56

An Act for the returning of able and sufficient Jurors .
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,553.57

<$$heading>

For the returning of more able and sufficient Jurors for Trialls
hereafter to be had betweene party and partyes
{COM:preceding_word_"partyes"_emended} and for reformation of abuses in
Sheriffes and other Ministers , who for reward doe oftentimes spare the
ablest and sufficientest , and returne the poorer and simpler
Freeholders lesse able to descerne the Causes in question , and to beare
the charges of appearance and attendance thereon , Bee it enacted by the
Kings most Excellent Majestie by and with the advice and consent of the
Lords Spirituall and Temporall and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled and by the Authority of the same That all Jurors <paren> other
then Strangers upon Tryalls per medietatem lingue <$$paren> who are to
be returned for the Tryalls of Issues joyned in any of his
{COM:preceding_word_"his"_emended} Majestyes Courts of Kings Bench ,
Common Pleas or the Exchequer or before Justices of Assize or nisi Prius
Oyer and Terminer Goale Delivery or Generall or Quarter Sessions of the
Peace from and after the Twentyeth day of Aprill which shall be in the
yeare of our Lord One_thousand_six_hundred_sixty_five in any County of
this Realme of England shall every of them then have in their owne name
or in trust for them within the same County Twenty pounds by the yeare
at least above reprizes in their owne or their wives right of Freehold
Lands or of auntient Demeasne , or of Rents in Fee , Fee_tail , or for
Life , And that in every County within the Dominion of Wales , every
such Juror shall then have within the same eight pounds by the yeare at
the least above reprizes in manner aforesaid , All which persons haveing
such Estate as aforesaid are hereby enabled and made lyable to be
returned and to serve as Jurors for the Tryall of Issues before the
Justices aforesaid , Any Law or Statute to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding , STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,553.59

And if any of a lesse Estate and value shall be respectively returned
upon any such Jury or Tales in defaulte of such Jurors it shall be a
good cause of Challenge , STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,553.60

and the party returned shall be discharged upon the said Challenge , or
his owne Allegation and Oath thereof . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,553.61

And that noe Jury mans Issues makeing Defaulte shall be saved but by
speciall Order of the Judge or Judges before whom the Issue is to be
tryed for some just and reasonable Cause proved upon Oath before the
same Judge or Judges STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,553.62

And all such Issues shall be duely estreated and levyed ,
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,553.63

And that the Writt of Venire facias which from and after the aforesaid
time shall be awarded and directed for the impannelling of Juryes in
Cases aforesaid within any County of England shall be in this Forme Rex
&c. p~cipimus &c quod venire fac~ cora~ &c duodecim liberos et legales
homines de vicineto de A Quorum quilibet habeat viginti libras terre
tenementoru~ vel reddit~ per annu~ ad minus per quos &c et qui nec , &c
, STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,553.64

And the residue of the said Writt shall be after the auntient manner .
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,553.65

And that those Writs which shall be awarded and directed for returning
of Juryes within the Dominion of Wales shall be made in the same manner
altering onely the word Viginti into Octo , and that upon every such
Writt and Writts of Venire facias the Sheriffe Coroner or other
Ministers of each respective County in England and Wales unto whom the
makeing of the Pannell shall appertaine shall not returne in any such
Pannell any person unlesse he shall then have Twenty Pounds or Eight
pounds respectively by the yeare at least as aforesaid in the same
County where the Issue is to be tryed upon paine to forfeite for every
person being returned in any such Pannell that shall not then have
Twenty pounds or Eight pounds respectively as is aforesaid the summe of
Five pounds to His Majestie His Heires and Successors ,
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,553.66

And for the better enableing the Sheriffe of every County to know the
value of the Estates of such persons as are by the true intent and
meaning of this Act to be returned for Jury men , Bee it further enacted
That every Sheriffe shall on the First day of every Generall Quarter
Sessions yearely held next after the Feast of Easter deliver or cause to
be delivered unto the Justices of Peace sitting at the same Sessions the
Names of all persons of such Estates as are by the true meaning of this
Act to be returned for Jury men , to the end the Estates of such persons
may be enquired after , and such persons approved of by the said
Justices of Peace or the greater number of them then present to be
persons of such Estates to be returneable for Jury men for the yeare
then next ensuing , STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,553.67

And the said Justices shall have power to add such persons haveing
Estates of the respective values before mentioned as they shall finde to
be ommitted by the Sheriffe among the Names by him delivered ,
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,553.68

and such competent number and noe more of such persons as aforesaid
shall be returnable to serve of Juryes <P_5,554> for the yeare next
ensueing as the said Justices or the greater number of them as aforesaid
shall thinke fitt , STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,554.69

And that noe Sheriffe shall incurr the penaltie aforesaid for returning
any of the persons soe approved or added by the Justices in case his
Estate fall out to be of lesse value then aforesaid .
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,554.70

And it is further enacted That noe Sheriffe or Bayliffe of any Liberty
or Franchise or any of their or either of their Ministers shall returne
any such person or persons as aforesaid to have beene summoned by them
or any of them unlesse such person or persons shall have beene duely
summoned by the space of six dayes at the least before the day on which
they ought to make their appearance , And have left with or for such
persons in writeing the Names of all the Partyes in those Causes wherein
they are to serve as Jurors , nor shall directly or indirectly take any
money or other reward to excuse the appearance of any Juror by them or
any of them to be summoned or returned upon paine to forfeite for every
such Offence the summe of Ten pounds , saveing to all Cittyes and Townes
Corporate their auntient Usage of returning Jurors of such Estate and in
such manner as heretofore hath beene used or accustomed
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,554.71

And bee it further enacted by the Authoritie aforesaid That from
henceforth upon Writts of Venire facias issued out and returned within
the County Pallatine of Lancaster as of the same Assizes wherein the
Issues are said to be joyned Writts of Habeas Corpora or Distringas
shall be sued out like as is used in all other Countyes within this
Kingdome returnable at the then next Assizes , And the Sheriffe
thereupon to returne such Issues as is or ought to be done by the said
Sheriffes of the said other Countyes and those Issues to be duely
estreated as above is provided , STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,554.72

And the better to cause and bring Jurors to appeare upon Tryalls at
Assizes within the said County Pallatine of Lancaster Bee it further
enacted by the Authoritie aforesaid That the Sheriffe of the same County
Pallatine of Lancaster for the time being shall from henceforth cause
twelve good and lawfull men soe qualifyed as before in this Act is
appointed out of every of the six Hundreds within the said County
Palatine to be duely summoned or warned ten dayes at the least before
the begining of every Assizes to be and appeare the first day of the
then next Assizes and there to attend dureing the same Assizes to
performe their duty and service to the Court as Jurors or Jury-men in
such Causes betweene Party and Party wherein they shall be respectively
returned and impannelled upon paine that every of them that shall make
defaulte to appeare and attend at and dureing the said Assizes to
forfeite Ten pounds to the use and behoofe of the Poore of the Towne
where such person or persons soe makeing defaulte doth inhabit and live
, the same to be levyed recovered and had in such manner and wayes as
other Issues of Jurors use to be levyed . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,554.73

Provided That this Act shall continue and stand in force for the space
of Three yeares and from thence to the end of the next Session of
Parlyament and noe longer . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,554.74

<P_5,597>

<heading>

CHAPTER II . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,597.77

An Act against importing Cattell from Ireland and other parts beyond the
Seas and Fish taken by Forreigners . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,597.78

<$$heading>

Whereas by an Act of this present Parlyament entituled An Act for the
encouragement of Trade amongst other things some Provision was made for
the preventing of comeing in of vast Numbers of Cattell whereby the
Rents and Values of the Land of this Kingdome were much fallen and like
dayly to fall more to the great Prejudice Detriment and Impovrishment of
this Kingdome which neverthelesse hath by experience beene found to be
ineffectuall and the continuance of any Importation either of the Leane
or Fatt Cattell dead or alive herein after specified not onely
unnecessary but very destructive to the welfare of this Kingdome Bee it
therefore enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majestie by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spirituall and Temporall and Commons in
this present Parlyament assembled That such Importation from and after
the second day of February in this present yeare
One_thousand_six_hundred_sixty_and_six is a publique and common Nusance
and shall be soe adjudged deemed and taken to be to all intents and
purposes whatsoever , And that if any great Cattell Sheepe or Swine or
any Beefe Porke or Bacon <paren> excepte for the necessary Provision of
the respective Shipps or Vessells in which the same shall be brought not
exposeing the same or any part thereof to Sale <$$paren> shall from and
after the said second day of February by any wise whatsoever be imported
or brought from beyond Seas into this Kingdome of England Dominion of
Wales or Towne of Berwicke upon Tweed That then it shall and may be
lawfull for any Constable Tythingman Headborough Churchwardens or
Overseers of the Poore or any of them within their respective Liberties
Parishes or Places to take and seize the same and keepe the same dureing
the space of Eight_and_forty houres in some publique and convenient
place where such Seizure shall be made within which time if the Owner or
Owners or any for them or him shall make it appeare unto some Justice of
{COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} the {COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended}
Peace {COM:preceding_word_"Peace"_emended} of the same County where the
same shall be soe seized by the Oath of two credible Witnesses which
Oath the said Justice of Peace is hereby impowered and required to
administer That the same were not imported from Ireland or from any
other place beyond the Seas not herein after excepted after the said
Second day of February Then the same upon the Warrant of such Justice of
Peace shall be delivered without delay But in defaulte of such Proofe
and Warrant then the same to be forfeited , One halfe thereof
{COM:preceding_word_"thereof"_emended} to be disposed to the use of the
Poore of the Parish where the same shall be soe found or seized the
other halfe to be to his or their owne use that shall soe seize the same
. STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,597.80

And for the better encouragement of the Fishery of this Kingdome Bee it
further enacted by the Authoritie aforesaid That if any Ling , Herring ,
Codd or Pilchard fresh or salted , dryed or bloated or any Salmons Eeles
or Congers taken by any Foreigners Aliens to this Kingdome shall be
imported uttered sold or exposed to sale in this Kingdome That then it
shall and may be lawfull for any person or persons to take and seize the
same , The one halfe thereof to be disposed of to the use of the Poore
of the Parish where the same shall be soe found or seized , the other
halfe to his or their owne use which shall soe seize the same .
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,597.81

Provided alwayes That noe thing in this Act shall be construed to hinder
the Importation of Cattell from the Isle of Man in this Kingdome of
England soe as the number of the said Cattell doe not exceede
Six_hundred Head yearely And that they be not of any other Breed then of
the Breed of the Isle of Man And that they be landed at the Port of
Chester or some of the members thereof and not elsewhere
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,597.82

This Act to continue untill the end of seaven yeares and from thence to
the end of the first Session of the next Parlyament .
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,597.83

<P_5,613>

<heading>

CHAPTER IX . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,613.86

An Act for reliefe of Poore Prisoners and setting of them on worke .
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,613.87

<$$heading>

Whereas there is not yet any sufficient Provision made for the Releife
and setting of worke of poore and needy persons comitted to the Co~mon
Goale for Felony and other misdemeanors who many times perish before
their Tryall , and the Poore there living idlely and unimployed become
debauched and come forth instructed in the practice of Thievery and
lewdnes For remedy whereof Bee it enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majestie with advice and consent of the Lords Spirituall and Temporall
and Co~mons in this present Parlyament assembled and by Authoritie of
the same That the Justices of the Peace of the respective Countyes at
any their Generall Sessions or the major part of them then there
assembled if they shall finde it needfull soe to doe may provide Stocke
of such Materialls as they finde convenient for the setting poore
Prisoners on worke in such manner and by such wayes as other County
charges by the Lawes and Statuts {COM:preceding_word_"Statuts"_emended}
of the Realme are and may be leavyed and raised ; And to pay and provide
fitt persons to oversee and to sett such Prisoners on worke , and make
such Orders for Accompts of and concerning the premises as shall by them
be thought needfull , and for punishment of negclects and other abuses
and for bestowing of the Proffitt ariseing by the labour of the
Prisoners soe sett on worke for their Releife which shall be duely
observed and may alter revoke or amend such their Orders from time to
time . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,613.89

Provided that noe Parish be rated above Six pence by the weeke towards
the premisses haveing respect to the respective values of the severall
Parishes . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,613.90

And whereas sometimes by occasion of the Plague and otherwhiles by the
great number of Prisoners great and infectious Diseases have happened
among the Prisoners whereby it hath come to passe sometimes that the
Judges Justices and Jurors have upon occasion of their Attendance at the
Tryall of Prisoners beene infected and many of them dyed thereof and
sometime such Infection hath spread in the Country For some Remedy
therein Bee it by the same Authority enacted That any Sheriffe of the
respective Countryes haveing the Custodie of the Goale or such persons
who have the Custodie of the Goale with the advice and consent of three
or more Justices of the Peace whereof one to be of the Quorum may if
they shall on inquiry or information finde it needfull upon emergent
occasions in the respective Countryes provide other safe places for the
removall of sicke or other persons from and out of the ordinary and
usuall Goales the same places to be used and imployed for the reception
and custodie of Prisoners to be by or according to their Order or Orders
kepte ordered disposed and conveyed to the places appointed for the
Goale delivery in such and like manner as such Prisoners ought to be
kepte ordered disposed and conveyed in and from the Co~mon Goales by the
Lawes and Statutes of the Land , STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,613.91

Provided noe such place be made use of for the purposes aforesaid
against the good and free will of the Owners thereof .
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,613.92

Provided alsoe and bee it enacted by the Authority aforesaid That the
Maior Bayliffe and other Head Officer or any other person and persons
who have and hath the Custodie of the Co~mon Goale within any
Corporation of this Kingdome and Dominion of Wales shall by and with the
advice of three or more Justices of Peace within the said Corporation
whereof one of them be of the Quorum in time of Infection have the like
power and authoritie for removeing his and their Prisoners into some
other convenient place within their Jurisdiction as to them shall seeme
fitt dureing the time of Infection , And alsoe to raise a Stocke after
the same rates and proportions as is herein before allowed to and for
the severall Countyes of {COM:preceding_word_"of"_emended} this Kingdome
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,613.93

Provided alsoe and bee it further enacted by the Authoritie aforesaid as
followeth <paren> viz <$$paren> That whereas there is already provided a
strong and sufficient Messuage in the Parish of Saint Thomas the Apostle
neer the Citty of Exon for the purpose aforesaid and One_thousand pounds
more by certaine Trustees upon Proposalls and Agreements made by them
with certaine Gentlemen Justices of the Peace for the County of Devon
who have alsoe provided One_thousand pounds more in order to purchase
Lands of Inheritance for the good purposes hereafter mentioned Be it
enacted by the Authority aforesaid That the said two_thousand pounds be
laid out in purchase of Lands of Inheritance by Order of the Generall
Sessions of the Peace hereafter at any time to be held in the name of
such persons as by such Order shall be appointed Item That the said
House with the Grounds therewith enclosed be had and used as a Common
Goale and Workehouse for the said County in manner as is after expressed
Item That an Overseer be therein placed by like Order , and by like
Order be removeable from time to time which Overseer shall have the
charge custodie and government of the Prisoners to him committed
according to this Act , and shall have Fifty pounds per_annum dureing
the execution of his Office and ten pounds per_annum for his Deputie but
shall therefore take noe Fees for receiving delivering or doeing any
other service relateing to the Prisoners from or of any the said
Prisoners Item That the said Justices by like Order from time to time
shall and may by approbation of the Ordinary provide and appoint some
meete and discreete Minister to reade Divine Service according to the
Orders of the Church of England unto the Prisoners at least Fower dayes
in the weeke that is to say on the Lords day , each Wednesday and each
Friday and Saturday and oftner if the said Justices shall appoint and to
take paines in instructing them each Lords day at the least for which
they may allow him thirty pounds per_annum or after that rate , the rest
of the Proffitts to be for repairing the House and towards finding a
Stocke for to sett the Prisoners on worke , Item That any person charged
with such offence onely for which Goale is allowable if soe be he be
needy and indigent and not like {COM:preceding_word_"like"_emended} to
maintaine himselfe in Goale <P_5,614> may by Warrant of the Justice of
the Peace to whom Jurisdiction in that behalfe appertaineth be committed
to the said Worke house in order to his Tryall STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,614.94

and if any person shall be co~mitted to the ordinary Goale who shall be
or become soe indigent he may by Warrant of three Justices of the
{COM:preceding_word_"the"_emended} Peace whereof one to be of the Quorum
be removed from the ordinary common Goale to the said House , All which
Prisoners soe co~mitted or removed shall be in the custodie of the
Overseer and be ordered and demeaned in the said House and conveyed to
the Session or to the Goale delivery by like Warrant way and meanes as
the Prisoners in other Goales by the Lawes and Statutes of this Realme
are to be ordered and demeaned . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,614.95

And because the said Workehouse is distant from the ordinary Common
Goale , the Prisoners by order from the Sessions or Goale delivery may
in order to their Tryalls be removed to the Common Goale to be the more
ready for their Tryalls . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,614.96

Item That the said Overseer shall give Security for the Stocke and be
lyeable to such Regulations and Orders for Accompts and otherwise as the
Sessions shall from time to time make for setting the poore Prisoners on
worke there which shall be obeyed and observed that a convenient Stocke
be from time to time raised at the Charge of the County .
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,614.97

Item That the said Justices in the County of Devon may putt in ure all
the powers in this Act as other Justices may in any other County by
vertue thereof . Saveing to the Kings Majestie his Heires and
Successors and to every other person and persons and their Heires
Successors Executors and Administrators all Rights Titles Claimes and
Demands whatsoever into or out of the said Messages and Premises as if
this Act had never beene made . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,614.98

<heading>

CHAPTER X . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,614.100

An Act extending a former Act concerning Replevins and Avowries to the
Principality of Wales and the County Palatines .
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,614.101

<$$heading>

Whereas by an Act of Parliament entituled An Act for the more speedy and
effectuall proceeding upon Distresses and Avowryes for Rents Provision
is made where any Plaintiffe shall Nonsuite before Issue joyned in any
Suite or Replevin by Plaint or Writt lawfully returned removed or
depending in any of the Kings Courts at Westminster Be it enacted by the
Kings most Excellent Majestie by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Lords Spirituall and Temporall and Commons in this present Parlyament
assembled That the said Act and all the Powers and Provisions thereby
made for causes of Replevins depending in His Majestyes Courts of
Wesminster {COM:sic} shall be extended and be of the same force and
efficacy in all causes of Replevin which are or shall be depending in
His Majesties Court of Common Pleas for the County Palatine of Lancaster
, the Courts of the Great Sessions of His Majesties Principality of
Wales the Court of Great Sessions or Assizes for the County Palatine of
Chester and the Court of Co~mon Pleas for the County Palatine of Durham
as fully and as amply for and dureing the continuance of the said Act as
if the said Courts had beene mentioned therein .
STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,614.103

<heading>

CHAPTER XI . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,614.105

An Act for Redresse of Inconveniences by want of Proofe of the Deceases
of Persons beyond the Seas or absenting themselves , upon whose Lives
Estates doe depend . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,614.106

<$$heading>

Whereas diverse Lords of Mannours and others have used to grant Estates
by Copy of Court Roll for one two or more life or lives according to the
Custome of their severall Mannours and have alsoe granted Estates by
Lease for one or more life or lives , or else for yeares determinable
upon one or more life or lives And it hath often happened that such
person or persons for whose life or lives such Estates have beene
granted have gone beyond the Seas or soe absented themselves for many
yeares that the Lessors and Reversioners can@ @not finde out whether
such person or persons be alive or dead by reason whereof such Lessors
and Reversioners have been held out of possession of their Tenements for
many yeares after all the lives upon which such Estates depend are dead
in regard that the Lessors and Reversioners when they have brought
Actions for the recovery of their Tenements have beene putt upon it to
prove the death of their Tennants when it is almost impossible for them
to discover the same , For remedy of which mischeife soe frequently
happening to such Lessors or Reversioners Bee it enacted by the Kings
most Excellent Majestie by and with the advice and consent of the Lords
Spirituall and Temporall and the Co~mons in this present Parlyament
assembled and by the Authoritie of the same That if such person or
persons for whose life or lives such Estates have beene or shall be
granted as aforesaid shall remaine beyond the Seas or elsewhere absent
themselves in this Realme by the space of seaven yeares together and noe
sufficient and evident proofe be made of the lives of such person or
persons respectively in any Action commenced for recovery of such
Tenements by the Lessors or Reversioners in every such case the person
or persons upon whose life or lives such Estate depended shall be
accounted as naturally dead , STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,614.108

And in every Action brought for the recovery of the said Tenements by
the Lessors or Reversioners their Heires or Assignes , the Judges before
whom such Action shall be brought shall direct the Jury to give their
Verdict as if the person soe remaining beyond the Seas or otherwise
absenting himselfe were dead . STAT-1663-E3-P2,5,614.109

