<BEGIN_stow-1580-e2-p2>

<P_574>

<heading>

<font> Iohn Raynwel : William Cotton , STOW-1580-E2-P2,574.4

the .28. of September . STOW-1580-E2-P2,574.5

Sir Robert Chicheley Grocer , STOW-1580-E2-P2,574.6

the .28. of September . <$$font> STOW-1580-E2-P2,574.7

<$$heading>

After the feast of <font> All Saintes <$$font> a Parliamente was begun
at <font> London <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P2,574.9

The king caused a newe kinde of Nobles to be made which were of lesse
value than the olde by foure pence in the noble .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,574.10

King <font> Henrie <$$font> fou~ded the Colledge of <font> Fodringhey
<$$font> in <font> Northamptonshire : STOW-1580-E2-P2,574.11

Henrie <$$font> the fifth gaue it lande of Priories of Monkes aliantes
by him supressed . STOW-1580-E2-P2,574.12

<P_575>

A Goldsmith and his man of <font> Fleete <$$font> in <font> London
<$$font> were bothe murdered by night , in the Duke of <font> Yorke@ @s
<$$font> place without Temple barre , STOW-1580-E2-P2,575.14

and were cast into the riuer of <font> Thamis <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,575.15

About the fifteenth of August the king by determination of the Counsel
appoynting to send help to the Duke of <font> Orleaunce <$$font> , sent
his second son <font> Thomas <$$font> Duke of <font> Clarence , Edwarde
<$$font> Duke of <font> Yorke <$$font> , and <font> Thomas <$$font>
Earle of <font> Dorset <$$font> , and many valiant men , with a strong
power to helpe to the Duke of <font> Orleaunce <$$font> , against the
Duke of <font> Burgonie <$$font> , or euer al y=e= other were returned ,
whiche a while agoe went ouer with y=e= erle of <font> Arundale <$$font>
to ayde the Duke of <font> Burgonie <$$font> , so that many men
maruelled of the sodaine chaunge , that in so small a tyme the <font>
Englishmen <$$font> dyd ayde and assiste the two contrarie parts :
STOW-1580-E2-P2,575.16

notwythstandyng the foresayde Nobles went forewardes
STOW-1580-E2-P2,575.17

and arriued in <font> Normandie <$$font> , where when the Duke of <font>
Orleaunce <$$font> did not meete them at the tyme appointed , they brent
hys townes , and spoyled his Countrey , and tooke manye holdes .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,575.18

At length , thoughe late , the Dukes of <font> Clarence <$$font> and of
<font> Orleaunce <$$font> , mette and talked togither .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,575.19

And the matter was so entreated of betweene them , that our menne
shoulde desyste from raungyng throughe the Countrey , and refrayne from
robberie , which when our men hadde graunted , they departed into <font>
Aquitaine <$$font> to Wynter there , STOW-1580-E2-P2,575.20

and the Duke of <font> Orleaunce <$$font> wente home to hys Countrey .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,575.21

<heading>

<font> Ralph Leuenhynd : William Seuenocke , STOW-1580-E2-P2,575.23

the .28. of Sep. STOW-1580-E2-P2,575.24

Sir William Waldren Mercer , STOW-1580-E2-P2,575.25

the .28. of October . <$$font> STOW-1580-E2-P2,575.26

<$$heading>

About this tyme the Lorde <font> Herle <$$font> Marshall of <font>
Fraunce <$$font> , with manye other noble men and men of armes , to the
number of foure_thousande , besieged a certayne holde in <font>
Aquitaine <$$font> , whyche was in the keepyng of <font> Iohn Blunte
<$$font> <P_576> Knight , who with three_hundered that ayded hym , putte
to flight the whole army of the <font> Frenchmen <$$font> , and toke
twelue of their men of name , and other gentlemen to the number of
<font> 120 <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P2,576.28

Kyng <font> Henrie <$$font> kept his Christmasse at his <font> manour
<$$font> of <font> Eltham <$$font> , being so sore sick , that sometime
men thought that he had bin dead : STOW-1580-E2-P2,576.29

notwithstanding it pleased God that he recouered his strength againe a
little . STOW-1580-E2-P2,576.30

After Christmasse he called the Nobles of y=e= realm togither to a
Parliament at <font> London <$$font> ; STOW-1580-E2-P2,576.31

but he liued not to the end thereof , STOW-1580-E2-P2,576.32

for now after the great and fortunate chaunces hapned to him , and being
deliuered of all Ciuill diuision , hee was taken with sicknesse , of the
which he languished til his appointed houre , during which sickenesse ,
some euil disposed people laboured to make dissention betweene the King
and the Prince his sonne , by reason wherof , and by the acte of youth ,
which he exercised more than meanely , and for the great recourse of
people vnto him , of whom his Court was at all times more aboundant than
the King his father , the King suspected that he would presume to vsurpe
the crown , he being aliue : which suspitious iealousie was occasion
that he in part withdrewe his affection and singular loue from the
Prince . STOW-1580-E2-P2,576.33

But when this noble Prince was aduertised of his fathers iealousie , he
disguised himself in a gown of blew satten , made full of small Oylet
holes , STOW-1580-E2-P2,576.34

and at euery Oylet the needle wherwith it was made hanging stil by a
threede of silke . STOW-1580-E2-P2,576.35

And about his arme he ware a dogges coller set ful of <font> SS <$$font>
of golde , STOW-1580-E2-P2,576.36

and the Tirets of the same also of fine gold . STOW-1580-E2-P2,576.37

Thus apparelled , with a great companye of Lords and other noblemen of
his Court , he came to the king his father , who at that time laye at
<font> Westminster <$$font> , where at his co~ming <paren> by his owne
commaundement <$$paren> not one of his companye auaunced himselfe
further tha~ the fire in the Hall , notwithstanding that they were
greatly and ofte desired to the contrarie by the Lordes and great
estates of the Kings Court : STOW-1580-E2-P2,576.38

and that the Prince had commanded , to giue the lesse occasion <P_577>
of mistrust to the King his father , STOW-1580-E2-P2,577.39

but he himselfe only accompanyed of the kings house , passed forth to
the king his father , to whom after due salutation <$$paren> {COM:sic}
he desired to shewe the intent of his minde in secrete manner .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,577.40

Then the Kyng caused himselfe to be borne in his chayre into his secrete
chamber <paren> bycause he was deseased and might not goe <$$paren> wher
in the presence of three or foure persons , in whom the King had most
confidence , he commaunded the Prince to shewe the effect of his minde :
STOW-1580-E2-P2,577.41

Then the Prince kneeling down before his Father , saide to him these
wordes , STOW-1580-E2-P2,577.42

most redoubted Lord and Father , I am this time come to your presence ,
as your liegman , and as your sonne naturall , in all thyngs to obay
your grace as my soueraigne Lord and father . STOW-1580-E2-P2,577.43

And whereas I vnderstand yee haue me suspect of my behauiour against
your grace , and that yee feare I would vsurpe your Crowne againste the
pleasure of your highnesse , of my co~uersation youre grace knoweth that
if yee were in feare of any man , of what estate soeuer he were , my
duetie were to the endaungering of my life to punishe that person ,
therby to race that sore from your hearte . STOW-1580-E2-P2,577.44

And then howe muche rather oughte I to suffer death to bring your grace
from the feare that yee haue of me that am your naturall sonne , and
your liegeman . STOW-1580-E2-P2,577.45

And to that intente I haue thys daye by confession and receyuing the
Sacramente , prepared my selfe , STOW-1580-E2-P2,577.46

and therefore moste redoubted Lorde and Father , I beseeche you in the
honour of God , for the easing of youre harte , heretofore your knees to
slea me with this dagger , STOW-1580-E2-P2,577.47

and at that worde with all reuerence he deliuered to the king hys dagger
, saying my Lorde and Father my lyfe is not so desirous to mee , that I
woulde liue one daye that shoulde be to you {COM:sic} displeasure ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,577.48

nor I couet not so much my life as I doe your pleasure and welfare ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,577.49

and in your thus doing , here in the presence of these Lordes , and
tofore God at the daye of iudgemente I clearelye forgiue you my deathe .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,577.50

At these wordes of the Prince , the King taken with compassion of hearte
, cast from him the dagger , STOW-1580-E2-P2,577.51

and imbracing <P_578> the Prince kissed him , STOW-1580-E2-P2,578.52

and with effusion of teares saide vnto him , my right deare and hartily
beloued sonne , it is {COM:illegible} trueth that I had you partly
suspecte , and as I now perceyue , vndeserued on your partie :
STOW-1580-E2-P2,578.53

but seeing this your humilitie and faithfulnesse , I shall neyther slay
you , nor from henceforth haue you any more in mistrust , for no report
that shall be made vnto me , STOW-1580-E2-P2,578.54

and therof I assure you vpon mine honor . STOW-1580-E2-P2,578.55

Thus by his great wisedome was the wrongfull imagination of his Fathers
hate vtterly auoyded , and hymselfe restored to the Kings former grace
and fauour . STOW-1580-E2-P2,578.56

After thys , as was reported by the Earle of <font> Ormonde <$$font>
<paren> to the translatour of myne author <font> Titus Liuius <$$font>
<$$paren> the king gaue to his sonne the Prince , diuerse notable
doctrines , & insignments , among which eruditio~s , one is this :
STOW-1580-E2-P2,578.57

the King lying grieuously diseased , called before him the Prince his
sonne ; STOW-1580-E2-P2,578.58

& sayd vnto him : My sonne , I feare me soone after my departure from
this life , some discord shal grow & arise betwene thee and thy brother
<font> Thomas <$$font> Duke of <font> Clarence <$$font> , where by the
realme may be brought to destruction and miserie ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,578.59

for I knowe you both to be of greate stomacke and courage . Wherefore I
feare that he throughe his high mynde wyll make some enterprise against
thee , intending to vsurpe vpon thee , whiche I know thy stomacke maye
not abyde easily . STOW-1580-E2-P2,578.60

And for dreade hereof , as ofte as it is in my remembraunce , I soare
repente me , that euer I charged my selfe with the Crowne of this Realme
. STOW-1580-E2-P2,578.61

To these wordes of the King the Prince aunsweared thus :
STOW-1580-E2-P2,578.62

Righte redoubted Lorde and Father to the pleasure of God your grace
shall long continue with vs , and rule vs both : STOW-1580-E2-P2,578.63

but if God haue so prouided that euer I shall succeede you in thys
Realme , I shall honour and loue my brethren aboue all menne , as long
as they be to me true , faythfull and obediente , as to theyr soueraigne
Lord , STOW-1580-E2-P2,578.64

but if anye of them fortune to conspyre or rebell againste mee , I
assure you I shall as soone execute iustice vppon one of them , as I
shall <P_579_misnumbered_as_589> vpon the worst and most simplest person
within this your Realme . STOW-1580-E2-P2,579_misnumbered_as_589.65

The Kyng hearing thys aunsweare , was therewith maruellouslye reioyced
in hys mynde , STOW-1580-E2-P2,579_misnumbered_as_589.66

and sayde : My deare and wel beloued Sonne , wyth thys aunswere thou
haste deliuered me of a greate and ponderous agonye :
STOW-1580-E2-P2,579_misnumbered_as_589.67

and I beseeche thee , and vppon my blessing charge thee , that like as
thou haste sayde , so thou minister iustice equally , and in no wise
suffer , not them that be oppressed long to call vpon thee for Iustice ,
but redresse oppressions , and indifferently , and wythout delay ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,579_misnumbered_as_589.68

for no perswasion of flatterers , or of them that bee partiall , or
suche as vse to haue their handes replenished wyth gyftes , deferre not
Iustice vntill to_morrowe , if that thou mayste doe iustice thys daye ,
leaste <paren> peraduenture <$$paren> God doe Iustice on thee in the
meane tyme , and take from thee thyne authoritye :
STOW-1580-E2-P2,579_misnumbered_as_589.69

remember , that the wealth of thy body and thy soule , and of thy Realme
, resteth in the execution of Iustice ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,579_misnumbered_as_589.70

and doe not thy Iustice , so that thou be called a Tyraunte ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,579_misnumbered_as_589.71

but vse thy selfe meanely betwixte Iustice and mercie in those things
that belong to thee . STOW-1580-E2-P2,579_misnumbered_as_589.72

And between parties do iustice truely and extreamely to the co~solation
of thy poore subiects that suffer iniuries , and to the punition of them
that be extortioners and doers of oppresio~s , that other therby may
take example : & in thus doing , thou shalt obtayne the fauour of God ,
and the loue and fear of thy subiectes ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,579_misnumbered_as_589.73

and therefore also thou shalte haue thy Realme more in tranquilitye and
reste , whiche shal bee occasion of greate prosperitie wythin thy Realme
, whyche <font> Englishmen <$$font> naturally do desyre :
STOW-1580-E2-P2,579_misnumbered_as_589.74

for so long as they haue wealthe and Ryches , so long shalte thou haue
obeysaunce : STOW-1580-E2-P2,579_misnumbered_as_589.75

and when they bee poore , then they bee alwayes readye at euerye motion
to make insurrections , STOW-1580-E2-P2,579_misnumbered_as_589.76

and it causeth them to rebel agaynst theyr soueraygne Lorde :
STOW-1580-E2-P2,579_misnumbered_as_589.77

for the nature of them is suche , <P_580> rather to feare losing of
theyr goods and worldly substaunce , than the ieoparding of theyr liues
. STOW-1580-E2-P2,580.78

And if thou thus keepe them in subiection mixed with loue and feare ,
thou shalte haue the moste peaceable and fertyle Countrey , and the
moste louyng , faythfull , and manlye people of the Worlde : whyche
shall be cause of no small feare to thyne aduersaries .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,580.79

My sonne when it shall please God to call me to the waye decrede for
euerye Worldely creature , to thee <paren> as my sonne and heyre
<$$paren> I muste leaue my Crowne and my Realme , whyche I aduise thee
not to take vaynelye , and {COM:next_word_illegible} a maxine elate in
pryde , and reioyced in Worldlye honour , STOW-1580-E2-P2,580.80

but thinke that thou arte more oppressed wyth charge , to puruie for
euerie Person wythin the Realme , than exalted in vaine honoure of the
Worlde . STOW-1580-E2-P2,580.81

Thou shalt be exalted to the Crowne , for the wealthe and conseruation
of the Realme , and not for thy singular commoditie and auaile :
STOW-1580-E2-P2,580.82

my Sonne thou shalte be a minister to thy Realme to keepe it in
tranquilitie and defende it . STOW-1580-E2-P2,580.83

Like as the harte in the myddest of the bodye is principall and chiefe
thyng in the bodye , and serueth to couet and desire that thyng that is
moste necessarie to euerye of thy members , so <paren> my Sonne
<$$paren> thou shalte be amongst thy people as chiefe and principall of
them to minister , imagine and acquire those thyngs that maye be moste
beneficiall for them . STOW-1580-E2-P2,580.84

And then thy people shall be obediente to thee , to ayde and succoure
thee , and in al things to accomplishe thy commaundeme~ts , like as thy
members laboure , euerye one of them in theyr office to acquire and get
that thing that the hearte desireth , STOW-1580-E2-P2,580.85

and as thy hearte is of no force and impotent without the ayde of thy
members so without thy people , thy raygne is nothing .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,580.86

My sonne thou shalt feare and dread God aboue all things ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,580.87

and thou shalt loue honour and worship him w=t= all thy hearte ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,580.88

thou shalte attribute and ascribe to hym all things wherein thou seest
thy selfe to be well . Fortunate , STOW-1580-E2-P2,580.89

bee it victorye of thyne enymies , loue of thy friendes , <P_581>
obedience of thy subiectes , strength and actiuenesse of body , honor ,
riches , or fruitefull generations , or any other thing whatsoeuer it be
, that chanceth to thy pleasure . Thou shalt not imagine that any such
thing shoulde fortune to thee , by thyne acte , nor by thy desert ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,581.90

but thou shalte thinke that all co~meth only of the goodnesse of our
Lord . STOW-1580-E2-P2,581.91

Thus y=u= shalt with all thine heart , prayse , honour , and thanke God
of all hys benefits that he giueth vnto thee . STOW-1580-E2-P2,581.92

And in thy selfe eschew all vaineglorie and elation of heart , following
the holesome counsell of the Psalmist , <paren> which sayeth <$$paren>
<font> Non nobis Domine non nobis , sed nomini tuo da gloria~ <$$font>
<paren> which is to say <$$paren> <font> Not vnto vs Lord , not vnto vs
, but to thy holy name be giuen laude and praise <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,581.93

These & many other admonishments and doctrines this victorious king gaue
vnto this noble prince his sonne : who with effect followed the same ,
after the death of his father : whereby he obtained grace of our Lorde
to attaine to gret victories and many glorious and incredible conquests
, through the helpe and succour of our Lord , whereof he was neuer
destitute . STOW-1580-E2-P2,581.94

The king his father drawing to his end , after due thankes giuen , and
supplications made to God , gaue his benediction to the Prince his sonne
, STOW-1580-E2-P2,581.95

and so yeelded to God his spirit , the .xx. day of March <font> Anno
<$$font> .1412. when he had raigned .xiij. yeares , sixe months and
odde dayes . STOW-1580-E2-P2,581.96

He was conueyed by water to <font> Feuersham <$$font> , and from thence
by lande to <font> Canterburie <$$font> and there buryed .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,581.97

<P_582>

<heading>

<font> KING HENRY OF MONMOUTH . <$$font> STOW-1580-E2-P2,582.100

<$$heading>

Henrie the fifth began his raigne y=e= .xx. day of March in y=e= yere
.1412 . STOW-1580-E2-P2,582.102

This Prince exceeded the mean stature of men , STOW-1580-E2-P2,582.103

he was beautiful of visage , his necke long , bodye slender and leane ,
and hys bones smal : STOW-1580-E2-P2,582.104

neuerthelesse he was of mareullous greate strength , and passing swifte
in running , in_so_much that he with two other of his Lords without bow
or other engine , would take a wilde Buck or Doe in a large Park :
STOW-1580-E2-P2,582.105

he delighted in so~gs & musical instrume~ts , in_so_much y=t= in his
chappel amo~gst other his priuate prayers , he vsed certaine Psalmes of
<font> Dauid <$$font> translated into heroycall <font> English <$$font>
meeter , by <font> Iohn Lydgate <$$font> , Monke of <font> Bury <$$font>
. STOW-1580-E2-P2,582.106

Whilst his father liued , beyng acco~panyed w=t= some of his <P_583>
yong Lords & gentilemen , he wold waite in disguised araye for his owne
receyuers , and distresse them of theyr money : STOW-1580-E2-P2,583.107

and sometimes at suche enterprices both he and his company wer surely
beaten : STOW-1580-E2-P2,583.108

and when his receiuers made to him their complaints , how they were
robbed in their comming vnto him , he wold giue them discharge of so
much mony as they had lost , STOW-1580-E2-P2,583.109

and besides that , they should not depart from him without great rewards
for their trouble and vexation , STOW-1580-E2-P2,583.110

especially they should be rewarded that best hadde resisted hym and his
company , and of whom he hadde receyued the greatest & most strokes .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,583.111

But after the decease of his father , was neuer any youth , or wildnes ,
that might haue place in him , STOW-1580-E2-P2,583.112

but all his actes were sodainely chaunged into grauitie and discreation
. STOW-1580-E2-P2,583.113

To this noble Prince <paren> by assent of the Parliament <$$paren> all
the estates of the realme , after three dayes offered to do fealtie
before he was crowned , or had solemnized his othe , wel and iustly to
gouerne the common weale , which offer , beefore was neuer found to be
made to any Prince of <font> England <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P2,583.114

The king gaue them all generallye thankes , for theyr good mindes
towardes hym , STOW-1580-E2-P2,583.115

and therewyth exhorted them to the zeale of the publicke prosperitie and
honoure of the Realme . STOW-1580-E2-P2,583.116

If anye man hadde offended hym , he pardoned theyr trespasse ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,583.117

and desyred heartily of God , that if he shoulde rule and doe all things
well to the honoure of God and the prosperous commoditie of the Realme ,
that then God woulde suffer him to be Crowned . But if hys fortune
shoulde bee to doe otherwise , that then God shoulde take hym to hys
mercye , and suffer hym rather to be buried than to enterprize the
charge of the Realme . STOW-1580-E2-P2,583.118

The ninth day of April he was crowned at <font> Westminster <$$font> ,
by <font> Thomas Arundell <$$font> Archebyshoppe of <font> Canterburie
<$$font> , after whyche Coronation , he called vnto hym all those young
Lords and Gentlemen that were the folowers of his yong <P_584> actes ,
to euerye one of whome he gaue rich and bounteous giftes ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,584.119

and then commanded that as many as would cha~ge their maners as he
intended to doe , should abide with him in his Courte ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,584.120

and to all that woulde perseuer in theyr former light conuersation , he
gaue expresse commaundemente vpon paine of their heades , neuer after
that day to come in his presence . STOW-1580-E2-P2,584.121

About this time <font> Thomas <$$font> Duke of <font> Clarence <$$font>
, the Kings brother , came from the coastes of <font> Aquitaine <$$font>
, who <paren> as we said before <$$paren> was sent to ayde the Duke of
<font> Orleaunce <$$font> , againste the Duke of <font> Burgoine
<$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P2,584.122

A great part of the Citie of <font> Norwich <$$font> was brent , with
all the house of the Frier <font> Preachers <$$font> , and also two
Friers of that order , STOW-1580-E2-P2,584.123

<font> Sir Iohn Oldcastle <$$font> , at that time Lorde of <font> Cobham
<$$font> , for diuerse pointes touching the Sacrament , before the
Archebyshoppe of <font> Canterburie <$$font> , the Bishops of <font>
London , Winchester <$$font> & other , was conuict and committed to the
Tower of <font> London <$$font> , out of the which he brake ouer the
walles in the night and escaped , about the feast of <font> Simon
<$$font> and <font> Iude <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P2,584.124

<heading>

<font> Iohn Sutton : Iohn Michel , STOW-1580-E2-P2,584.126

the .28. of September . STOW-1580-E2-P2,584.127

Sir William Cromer Draper , STOW-1580-E2-P2,584.128

the .28. of October . <$$font> STOW-1580-E2-P2,584.129

<$$heading>

Richard <$$font> the second , somtime king of <font> England <$$font> ,
which was at the first enterred in the church of the preaching Friers of
<font> Langley <$$font> , was take~ vp and royally buried at <font>
Westminster <$$font> with no small charges to the King .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,584.131

The K. keeping his Christmasse at his manour of <font> Eltham <$$font>
<paren> vij. miles from <font> London <$$font> <$$paren> was warned
y=t= certain had conspired against him , eyther to haue taken , or
sodainly slain him & his brethren on Twelfth day at night , whervpon the
king sent word to the Maior of <font> Londo~ <$$font> , y=t= he should
arrest all suspitious persons : whereupon the Maior forthwith caused
euery Alderma~ in his ward to keep great watch , STOW-1580-E2-P2,584.132

and about tenne of the clocke at nighte wente hymselfe with a strong
power , to the signe of the Axe wythoute <font> Byshoppes Gate <$$font>
, where they apprehended the man of the house , called <font> Iohn
Burgate <$$font> Carpenter and vij. other , & sent them to <font>
Eltham <$$font> , where they confessed before the Kyng <P_585> that they
were confederate with Sir <font> Iohn Oldcastell <$$font> to fight
against him and his Lords in <font> Saint Giles <$$font> fielde aboue
<font> Holborn <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P2,585.133

{COM:remainder_of_page_and_three_pages_following_are_mostly_illegible_and_have_been_omitted}

<P_589>

The king gaue to diuers Gentlemen the order of knighthoode ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,589.136

and assigned the bearing of his Standarts and Banners to such me~ as he
knew to be of great strength and prowesse . STOW-1580-E2-P2,589.137

All thing being set in good order and array , the King with all his host
ascended to the toppe of an high hill there nigh ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,589.138

and there he rested the next day . STOW-1580-E2-P2,589.139

On the fifteenth day of August , the Duke of <font> Clarence <$$font> ,
leader of the foreward , in good ordinance , entred his iourney towarde
a Towne called <font> Herefleete <$$font> , distant from <font> Kedecamp
<$$font> scarcely three leagues , where he lodged his host in a field
before the towne . STOW-1580-E2-P2,589.140

The King at his comming , lodged himselfe nigh to the first warde , not
farre from the Towne . STOW-1580-E2-P2,589.141

The Earle of <font> Suffolke , Michaell at Poole <$$font> , Chiefetayne
of the rereward , lodged on the other side before the Towne .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,589.142

Other noble men that had the conduct of the two wings , lodged them ,
one on the right ha~d , the other on the left . STOW-1580-E2-P2,589.143

Forthwith were sent to the Towne , men of armes in great number , to see
the scituation thereof , who shortly returned with a great pray of
Cattell , and enformed the King of all his demaundes .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,589.144

<font> Hereflete <$$font> is the key of the see of all <font> Normandy
<$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-P2,589.145

and is scituate vpon the Sea side , by the Riuer of <font> Seene
<$$font> , betwixte two hilles , STOW-1580-E2-P2,589.146

and through the middle thereof runneth a Riuer , whiche not farre from
the same Towne entreth into the <font> Seane <$$font> ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,589.147

and from thence , both those Riuers in one descende into the Sea , where
as a great and goodly Hauen is , belonging to the same Towne , which
Hauen , is garnished with the defence of two faire and strong Towers :
STOW-1580-E2-P2,589.148

and in the same Hauen a right great Nauie of Shippes may ride in <P_590>
safetie : STOW-1580-E2-P2,590.149

and if the inhabitants of this Towne enclose and keepe within the Towne
the course of the foresayd Riuer by their sluces , as they may right
well do , then the Riuer riseth without the Towne so high , that it
forecloseth all entries to the walles , so that no man may approch the
towne on that part . STOW-1580-E2-P2,590.150

This Towne is also defended with high and thicke walles and towers ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,590.151

and is also enuironed with broade and deepe ditches .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,590.152

To this Towne also belongeth only two Gates for entries , the one called
<font> Calturances <$$font> , the other <font> Mostrouillier <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,590.153

In this Towne , besides the inhabitants thereof , for the defence of the
same , were foure_hundred men of armes deputed in <font> Garrison
<$$font> , amongst whome , were these Lords , Lord <font> Discouteuile
<$$font> , chiefe Captayne of the Towne , Lord <font> Blanuile <$$font>
, Lord <font> Haqueuile <$$font> , Lord <font> Harmanuile <$$font> ,
Lord <font> Eancourt <$$font> , Lord <font> Gaillard Ros <$$font> , and
diuers other Lords and men expert in warre . STOW-1580-E2-P2,590.154

The King commanding the Duke of <font> Clarence <$$font> to asseege the
Towne , he endeuoured to conuey his people ouer the Riuer , in the
passage whereof , he had a great skirmish with the inhabitants of the
Towne , STOW-1580-E2-P2,590.155

but at the last his aduersaries being put to flight , recoyled within
the walles . STOW-1580-E2-P2,590.156

The Duke conuayde ouer the Riuer all his ward and company ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,590.157

and bycause the Riuer deuided the Kings Camp from the Dukes , they
ordeyned a ready and sure passage ouer the same Riuer betwixt both the
Campes , to the keeping whereof , certayne Gentlemen were appoynted , so
that theyr enimies myghte not endomage them neyther by Water nor Lande .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,590.158

In this meane time befell a great misaduenture to the <font> Frenchmen
<$$font> that were beseeged , STOW-1580-E2-P2,590.159

for the Gonnepouder and shotte that was sent vnto them by the <font>
French <$$font> King , was encountred vpon the Sea by the <font>
Englishmen <$$font> , and taken , to their great displeasure and domage
. STOW-1580-E2-P2,590.160

The King gaue the charge of the fielde to his brother <font> Humfrey
<$$font> Duke of <font> Glocester <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P2,590.161

On the same side the Riuer that the King lay , was y=e= Duke of <font>
York <$$font> , high Connstable <P_591> of <font> England <$$font>
lodged with his band . STOW-1580-E2-P2,591.162

When euery man was placed , y=e= Towne was so streightly asseeged , that
all entries and issues of the Towne were stopped , so y=t= they of y=e=
towne were in dispaire to haue any succour from the Realme of <font>
France <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P2,591.163

Many engins were reysed by the English , which in short time should haue
bin the destruction of the walles , if they of the Towne had not the
sooner stopped the Riuer of the same towne within , wherby the water
gathered & reised without the towne betwixt the King and the D. of
<font> Clarence <$$font> , to the semblance of a little Sea , which
caused the <font> Englishmen <$$font> to withdraw their Gonnes , and
other engins , whereby at that time the walles were saued .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,591.164

Then the King caused to be made vnder the water three great Mines vnto
the walles of the towne , which in like maner had bin the cause of their
ruine , if the inhabitants had not countermined them , and lessed their
purpose . STOW-1580-E2-P2,591.165

The inhabitants of the Town perceyuing themselues thus streightly
asseeged , as well by Land as by Sea , conuayde all their Shippes within
their Haue~ , STOW-1580-E2-P2,591.166

and bound them togither with cheynes , STOW-1580-E2-P2,591.167

and in the two towers that were made for the defence of the Hauen , they
put certaine Garrisons , and armed men , who oftentimes attempted to
inuade the Kings Nauie , STOW-1580-E2-P2,591.168

but at all times they were by his Shippes beaten , and constreyned to
recule still within their Hauen : STOW-1580-E2-P2,591.169

at the last , the Captaynes and inhabitants considering that by such
skirmishes <paren> as well vpon the Land as vpon the Sea <$$paren> they
gained nothing , tooke this appointment with the King , that if they
were not rescued by the <font> Frenchmen <$$font> within certayne dayes
limited , they shoulde then delyuer into hys handes the Towne , with
thirtie persons of the greatest and most noble within the Towne , suche
as the King woulde desire , to bee ordered at the Kings pleasure , and
all the residue , as well menne of Warre , as the inhabitantes of the
same Towne , without armoure , and leauing behynde them theyr goodes ,
shoulde freely goe where they woulde , for the suretie of whyche
appoyntemente to bee kepte , they deliuered <P_592> vnto the king twelue
of their greatest personages for pleages . STOW-1580-E2-P2,592.170

The Captaynes and inhabitants of the Towne seeing their day of
appoyntment to approch , and themselues vtterly desperate of any
succours of their people , ordeyned to perfourme their couenant at their
day prefixed , whiche was the xxij. of September , on which day came
Sir <font> Lionell Braquemont <$$font> gouernour of the Towne , vnto the
King , STOW-1580-E2-P2,592.171

and kneeling before him , sayd : Most victorious Prince , beholde heere
the keyes of this Towne , which after our promis I yeeld vnto you , with
the Towne , my selfe , and my companie . STOW-1580-E2-P2,592.172

Then were brought to the King the Lord <font> Coteuile <$$font> , the
Lord <font> Gangepurt <$$font> , and other , to the number of thirtie ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,592.173

and all the residue , as well souldioures , as inhabitants , were
suffered vnarmed to depart . STOW-1580-E2-P2,592.174

The king constitute Captayne of the Towne , Sir <font> Thomas Brawford
<$$font> Earle of <font> Dorset <$$font> hys Vnkle , to whome he also
committed two_thousand souldiers , chosen men of his host .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,592.175

Then considering that winter drew on , as also the losse of their men ,
by reason of the Flu then reigning amongst them , by which infirmitie ,
died <font> Michaell at Poole <$$font> , Earle of <font> Suffolke
<$$font> , the Bishop of <font> Norwich <$$font> , the Lord <font>
Beawmont <$$font> , and others , and of the commons , to the number of
two_thousand and aboue . King <font> Henry <$$font> created the sonne
of <font> Michaell at Poole <$$font> , Earle of <font> Suffolk <$$font>
, who liued not long after . STOW-1580-E2-P2,592.176

After King <font> Henry <$$font> had remayned at <font> Harefleete
<$$font> fifteene dayes , after y=e= deliuerie of the Towne , and of the
Towers , he departed from thence towards <font> Caleis <$$font> ,
whereof , when his enimies were aduertised , and also by what way he
intended to passe ; all the people of the Countrey , Cities , and Townes
, were maruellousile oppressed with feare , wherefore they hasted them
to defensible places , and other that were apt to warre , tooke them to
their horsses , and assembled them togither in great number , with no
small companie of footemen , STOW-1580-E2-P2,592.177

and in all that they might they oppressed the <font> Englishmen <$$font>
. STOW-1580-E2-P2,592.178

The Kings host kept an easie pace , without making any <P_593> hast ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.179

and when they approched the Towne of <font> Ewe <$$font> , their enimies
assayled them in the fieldes with great force and noyse , where on both
parties it was foughten sore and vigorously : STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.180

but the <font> Frenchmen <$$font> reculed to the Towne , where they were
in good suretie . STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.181

From thence the King departed , STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.182

and came to a passage of the Riuer of <font> Some <$$font> , which the
<font> Frenchmen <$$font> call <font> Blankhestoke <$$font> , or <font>
Blanchtache <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.183

This passage , at the comming vnto it , was fixed with sharp stakes by
their enimies , so that they could not passe there , but were
constreyned to go farther seeking their passage , vntill they came
directly to haue the Citie of <font> Amiens <$$font> , and the Castell
of <font> Gorby <$$font> on their left side , where they of the sayde
Citie began with them a new fight : STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.184

but they were soone forced by the English to returne to their Citie
agayne . STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.185

The xix. of October the King passed the Riuer of <font> Some <$$font> ,
at the passage of <font> Vienna <$$font> , and <font> Bethew-court
<$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.186

and wente then to lodge him at <font> Mouche-legach <$$font> , fro~
whence , he aduanced him towardes the Riuer of <font> Miramont <$$font>
. STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.187

In the meane time , the <font> French <$$font> King , and the Duke of
<font> Guyen <$$font> his sonne , then Dolphin , purposing to resist the
<font> Englishmen <$$font> , came to <font> Roane <$$font> , from whence
, they sent three Heraults to the King of <font> England <$$font> , to
giue vnderstanding that he should not escape without battayle : vnto
whome the sayde King answered , All things be done at the pleasure of
God , STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.188

I will keepe the right way towardes <font> Calais : <$$font>
STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.189

if our aduersaries do attempt to disturbe vs in oure iourney , we thinke
they shall not do it without their owne great danger and perill .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.190

From thence , King <font> Henry <$$font> remoued to a Village called
<font> Forceuile <$$font> , aduancing his host towardes the Riuer of
<font> Miramont <$$font> , STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.191

and the next day they passed by the <font> Cheue <$$font> ,
STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.192

and the King lodged that night at <font> Bonyers lestaillon <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.193

The next day the King remoued vnto <font> Bangy <$$font> .
STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.194

The next day late in the night the King came to a Village named <font>
Agencourt , Euguerant <$$font> sayeth <font> Masencelles <$$font> ,
where they lodged not distant from the <font> French <$$font> host the
space of two_hundred_and_fiftie spaces . STOW-1580-E2-P2,593.195

The <font> Frenchmen <$$font> fixed their Banners and Standarts with the
Banner Royall , whereof the <P_594> Connestable had the conduct , in the
field by them deuised and chosen , which was in the Countie of <font> S.
Paule <$$font> , in y=e= grou~d of <font> Agencourt <$$font> , by whiche
the day following , the <font> Englishmen <$$font> should passe to go to
<font> Caleis <$$font> . STOW-1580-E2-P2,594.196

