<BEGIN_tbarring-1630-e2-p2>

<P_124>

<heading:edcomment:105_SIR_THOMAS_BARRINGTON,_N.D._24_JANUARY_1630>

Madame This short time of distance since I was with you hath produced
nothing either new or worthy of your eye , TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,124.4

only the greate affaire of the King's Bench is to_morrow to be tryed
between the king and our parliament men . TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,124.5

The time is fixt , TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,124.6

God send such an issue as may most gloryfye him and benefitt king and
subjects . TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,124.7

This day my cozen Dunch maryes his brave mistress , a gentle-woman of
portion , education and proportion paralel to his estate and credit
sufficient for his long delayed matrimonye . TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,124.8

My wife and my selfe are solemnely invited to_morrow to be thare when is
the festivall , this day not allowing it , and the joyneing of hands
being alltogether private . TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,124.9

Madame my intention and desyre is to see you againe before my jornye to
Hatfeild <paren> if I can find any time from my busynes <$$paren>
haveing had so little libertye by reson of my lord to discourse with you
of diverse particulars which I resolved to impart to you , som of mirth
, som for meear notice , som of <paren> though small <$$paren> busines .
TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,124.10

My wife tenders her dewtye and service to you , desyring your excuse for
her not waiteing on you haveing no horses of her owne and being so
lately perplext with those hyred , as Tobie knowes .
TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,124.11

Owr love to all our freinds , TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,124.12

and so I rest Your most obedient and loving sonn Thomas Barrington
TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,124.13

{COM:endorsed} To my most honored mother the Lady Barrington at Harrow
Hill TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,124.14

<P_133>

<heading:edcomment:115_SIR_THOMAS_BARRINGTON,_N.D._FEBRUARY_1630>

Madame This toune is so barren of newes , as if the frost had
{COM:preceding_word_"had"_emended} foreclosed the streame .
TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,133.17

The only intelligence I can derive to yow is the French king hath
advaunced his foote forces to Piamont and the cardinall demaunds high
conditions in his behalfe thare . TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,133.18

His naval power is in dayly preparation , he haveing dessigned 30,000
crounes by the yeear to fortyfye him selfe at sea ,
TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,133.19

and towards the effecting heearof hath procured 20 or 30 familyes of the
best shipp wrights that <P_134> he can obtaine into his countrye .
TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,134.20

Besydes this , he finding that the only way to improove his strength for
the seas is to take of that contempt which the nobless of Fraunce held
formerly all marchandizeing in <paren> that so the publique of the
better condition applying them selves to trafique might necessaryly add
increase to his kingdom in shipping <$$paren> , he hath him selfe
immediately professed that he will trade at sea as a marchant
TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,134.21

and hath innobled thareby that qualytye TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,134.22

and will no question in probabilytye be much more powerfull at sea , of
which the French embassador knowes TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,134.23

for he allready professes against owr king's sole regalytye on the
narrow seas , or his master his rayseinge sayle to our king's shipps .
TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,134.24

But his indevors have not yet raysed his ambition high enough <paren> as
all men thinke <$$paren> to attempt us with a bodye of a navye ,
TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,134.25

yet God open the eyes of state to foresee the perill of this groeing
evell . TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,134.26

And so with my humble dewtye and my wive's I rest Your most obedient and
loving sonn Thomas Barrington TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,134.27

{COM:f.109b} Madame , my wife is so unwilling and carefull not to
intermedle with or dispose of what is yours that she will not be
perswaded to make your old peuter new with_oute your consent , which
being graunted it shall be the same in nomber and waight ;
TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,134.28

the charge will be myne as well as the comodiousnes , now especially
when we expect som freinds of worth before Easter .
TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,134.29

I desyre your answar to this resonable request for my wive's
satisfaction . TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,134.30

Theise be delivered to the honourable my verye good mother the Lady
Johan Barrington at Harrow TBARRING-1630-E2-P2,134.31

