<BEGIN_tillots-c-1680-e3-p2>

<P_455>

<heading>

THE PROTESTANT RELIGION VINDICATED FROM THE CHARGE OF SINGULARITY AND
NOVELTY TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,455.4

<$$heading>

<heading:edcomment:PREACHED_BEFORE_THE_KING_AT_WHITE-HALL,_ON_2_APRIL,_1680>

<heading>

<font> Joshua <$$font> XXIV. 15. TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,455.8

<font> If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord , chuse you this day
whom you will serve . <$$font> TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,455.9

<$$heading>

These are the words of <font> Joshua <$$font> ; who , after he had
brought the People of <font> Israel <$$font> thorough many difficulties
and hazards into the quiet possession of the promised land , like a good
Prince and Father of his Country , was very solicitous , before his
death , to lay the firmest foundation he could devise of the future
happiness and prosperity of that People in whose present settlement he
had , by the blessing of God , been so successfull an instrument .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,455.11

And because he knew no means so effectual to this end , as to confirm
them in the Religion and Worship of the true God , who had by so
remarkable and miraculous a Providence planted them in that good Land ;
he summons the people together , TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,455.12

and represents to them all those considerations that might engage them
and their posterity for ever , to continue in the true Religion .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,455.13

He tells them what God had already done for them , and what he had
promised to do more , if they would be faithfull to him : And on the
other hand , what fearfull calamities he had threatned , and would
certainly bring upon them , in case they should transgress his Covenant
, and go and serve other Gods . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,455.14

And after many Arguments to this purpose , he concludes with this
earnest Exhortation at the <font> 14th. <$$font>
{COM:font_change_in_text_after_14} verse , TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,455.15

Now therefore fear the Lord , TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,455.16

and serve him in sincerity and in truth , TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,455.17

and put away the Gods which your fathers served on the other side of the
flood , and in Egypt ; TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,455.18

and serve ye the Lord . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,455.19

And to give the greater weight and force to this Exhortation , he does
by a very eloquent kind of insinuation as it were once more <P_456> set
them at liberty , and leave them to their own election : It being the
nature of man to stick more stedfastly to that which is not violently
imposed , but is our own free and deliberate choice :
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.20

<font> And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord , chuse you this
day whom you will serve . <$$font> TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.21

Which words offer to our consideration these following observations .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.22

1 . <font> It is here supposed that a Nation must be of some Religion
or other . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.23

Joshua <$$font> does not put this to their choice ,
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.24

but takes it for granted . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.25

2 . <font> That though Religion be a matter of choice , yet it is
neither a thing indifferent in it self , nor to a good Governour , what
Religion his people are of . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.26

Joshua <$$font> does not put it to them as if it were an indifferent
matter they served God or Idols ; TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.27

he had sufficiently declared before which of these was to be preferred .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.28

3 . <font> The true Religion may have several prejudices and objections
against it : TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.29

If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord , <$$font> intimating that
upon some accounts , and to some persons , it may appear so .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.30

4 . <font> That the true Religion hath those real advantages on its
side , that it may safely be referr'd to any considerate mans choice .
<$$font> TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.31

And this seems to be the true Reason why <font> Joshua <$$font> refers
it to them : Not that he thought the thing indifferent , but because he
was fully satisfied that the truth and goodness of the one above the
other was so evident , that there was no danger that any prudent man
should make a wrong choice , <font> If it seem evil unto you to serve
the Lord , chuse you this day whom you will serve <$$font> ; intimating
, that the plain difference of the things in competition would direct
them what to chuse . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.32

5 . <font> The Example of Princes and Governours hath a very great
influence upon the people in matters of Religion . <$$font>
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.33

This I collect from the Context : TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.34

And <font> Joshua <$$font> was sensible of it ;
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.35

and therefore though he firmly believed the true Religion to have those
advantages that would certainly recommend it to every impartial mans
judgment , yet knowing that the multitude are easily imposed upon and
led into error , he thought fit to encline and determine them by his own
example , and by declaring his own peremptory resolution in the case ,
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.36

<font> Chuse you this day whom you will serve ;
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,456.37

as for me , I and <P_457> my house will serve the Lord . <$$font>
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.38

Laws are a good security to Religion ; TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.39

but the Example of Governours is a living Law , which secretly
over-rules the minds of men , and bends them to a compliance with it .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.40

{COM:latin_verse_omitted}

The Lives and Actions of Princes have usually a greater sway upon the
minds of the People than their Laws . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.42

All these Observations are I think very natural , and very considerable
. TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.43

I shall not be able to speak to them all ; TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.44

but shall proceed so far as the time and your patience will give me
leave . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.45

First , <font> It is here supposed that a Nation must be of some
religion or other . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.46

Joshua <$$font> does not put it to their choice whether they would
worship any Deity at all . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.47

That had been too wild and extravagant a supposition , and which it is
likely in those days had never entered into any mans mind .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.48

But he takes it for granted that all people will be of some Religion ;
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.49

and then offers it to their consideration which they would pitch upon ,
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.50

<font> Chuse you this day whom you will serve , whether {you_will_serve}
the Gods which your fathers served , etc. <$$font>
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.51

Religion is a thing to which men are not only formed by education and
custom , but , as <font> Tully <$$font> says , <font> Quo omnes duce
natura vehimur <$$font> , It is that to which we are all carried by a
natural inclination ; which is the true Reason why some Religion or
other hath so universally prevailed in all Ages and places of the world
. TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.52

The temporal felicity of men , and the ends of Government can very
hardly , if at all , be attained without Religion .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.53

Take away this , and all Obligations of Conscience cease :
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.54

and where there is no obligation of Conscience , all security of Truth
and Justice and mutual confidence among men is at an end .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,457.55

For why should I repose confidence in that man , why should I take his
word , or believe his promise , or put any of my Interests and
concernments <P_458> into his power , who hath no other restraint upon
him but that of humane Laws , and is at liberty in his own mind and
principles to do whatever he judgeth to be expedient for his interest ,
provided he can but do it without danger to himself ? So that declared
Atheism and Infidelity doth justly bring men under a jealousie and
suspition with all mankind ; TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,458.56

and every wise man hath reason to be upon his guard against those , from
whom he hath no cause to expect more justice and truth and equity in
their dealings than he can compell them to by the mere dint and force of
Laws . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,458.57

For by declaring themselves free from all other obligations they give us
fair warning what we are to expect at their hands , and how far we may
trust them . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,458.58

Religion is the strongest band of humane Society ; and God so necessary
to the welfare and happiness of mankind , as it could not have been more
, if we could suppose the Being of God himself to have been purposely
designed and contrived for the benefit and advantage of men : So that
very well may it be taken for granted , that a Nation must be of some
Religion or other . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,458.59

Secondly , <font> Though Religion be a matter of our choice , yet it is
neither a thing indifferent in it self , nor to a good Governour , what
Religion his people are of . <$$font> TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,458.60

Notwithstanding the supposition of the Text , <font> Joshua <$$font>
doth not leave them at liberty whether they will serve God or Idols ;
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,458.61

but by a very Rhetorical Scheme of Speech endeavours to engage them more
firmly to the worship of the true God . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,458.62

To countenance and support the true Religion , and to take care that the
people be instructed in it , and that none be permitted to debauch and
seduce men from it , properly belongs to the Civil Magistrate .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,458.63

This power the Kings of <font> Israel <$$font> always exercised , not
only with allowance , but with great approbation and commendation from
God himself . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,458.64

And the case is not altered since Christianity :
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,458.65

The better the Religion is , the better it deserves the countenance and
support of the Civil Authority . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,458.66

And this Power of the Civil Magistrate in matters of Religion was never
called in question , but <P_459> by the <font> Enthusiasts <$$font> of
these latter times : TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,459.67

And yet among these , every Father and Master of a Family claims this
Power over his Children and servants , at the same time that they deny
it to the Magistrate over his Subjects . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,459.68

But I would fain know where the difference lyes .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,459.69

Hath a Master of a Family more power over those under his Government
than the Magistrate hath ? TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,459.70

No man ever pretended it : TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,459.71

Nay , so far is it from that , that the natural Authority of a Father
may be , and often is , limited and restrained by the Laws of the Civil
Magistrate . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,459.72

And why then may not a Magistrate exercise the same power over his
Subjects in matters of Religion , which every Master challengeth to
himself in his own Family , that is , to establish the true worship of
God in such manner and with such circumstances as he thinks best , and
to permit none to affront it , or to seduce from it those that are under
his care ? TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,459.73

And to prevent all misunderstandings in this matter , I do not hereby
ascribe any thing to the Magistrate that can possibly give him any
pretence of right to reject God's true Religion , or to declare what he
pleases to be so , and what Books he pleases to be <font> Canonical
<$$font> and the <font> Word of God <$$font> ; and consequently to make
a false Religion so currant by the stamp of his Authority , as to oblige
his Subjects to the profession of it : Because he who acknowledgeth
himself to derive all his Authority from God , can pretend to none
against Him . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,459.74

But if a false Religion be established by Law , the case here is the
same as in all other Laws that are sinfull in the matter of them , but
yet made by a lawfull Authority ; TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,459.75

in this case the Subject is not bound to profess a false Religion , but
patiently to suffer for the constant profession of the true .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,459.76

And to speak freely in this matter , I can@ @not think <paren> till I be
better inform'd , which I am always ready to be <$$paren> that any
pretence of Conscience warrants any man , that is not extraordinarily
commission'd , as the Apostles and first Publishers of the Gospel were ,
and can@ @not justifie that Commission by Miracles as they did , to
affront the establish'd Religion of a Nation <paren> though it be false
<$$paren> and openly to draw men off from the profession of it in
contempt <P_460> of the Magistrate and the Law :
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,460.77

All that persons of a different Religion can in such a case reasonably
pretend to , is to enjoy the private liberty and exercise of their own
Conscience and Religion ; for which they ought to be very thankfull ,
and to forbear the open making of Proselytes to their own Religion ,
<paren> though they be never so sure that they are in the right
<$$paren> till they have either an extraordinary Commission from God to
that purpose , or the Providence of God make way for it by the
permission or connivance of the Magistrate .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,460.78

Not but that every man hath a <font> Right <$$font> to publish and
propagate the true Religion , and to declare it against a false one ;
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,460.79

but there is no <font> Obligation <$$font> upon any man to attempt this
to no purpose , and when without a miracle it can have no other effect
but the loss of his own life : unless he have an immediate Command and
Commission from God to this purpose , and be endued with a power of
Miracles , as a publick Seal and Testimony of that Commission , which
was the case of the <font> Apostles <$$font> , who after they had
received an immediate Commission were not to enter upon the execution of
it , but to <font> stay at Jerusalem , till they were endued with power
from on high <$$font> . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,460.80

In this case a man is to abide all hazards , TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,460.81

and may reasonably expect both extraordinary assistance and success , as
the Apostles had ; and even a miraculous protection till his work be
done ; and after that , if he be call'd to suffer Martyrdom , a
supernatural support under those sufferings .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,460.82

And that they are guilty however of gross Hypocrisie who pretend a
further obligation of Conscience in this matter , I shall give this
plain Demonstration , which relies upon Concessions generally made on
all hands , and by all Parties . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,460.83

No Protestant <paren> that I know of <$$paren> holds himself obliged to
go and Preach up his Religion and make Converts in <font> Spain <$$font>
or <font> Italy <$$font> : TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,460.84

Nor do either the <font> Protestant <$$font> Ministers or <font> Popish
<$$font> Priests think themselves bound in Conscience to Preach the
Gospel in <font> Turky <$$font> , and to confute the <font> Alchoran
<$$font> , to convert the <font> Mahometans <$$font> .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,460.85

And what is the Reason ? TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,460.86

because of the severity of the Inquisition in <font> Popish <$$font>
Countreys , and of the Laws in <font> Turky <$$font> .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,460.87

But doth the danger then alter the obligation of <P_461> Conscience ?
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.88

No certainly ; TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.89

but it makes men throw off the false pretence and disguise of it :
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.90

But where there is a real obligation of Conscience , danger should not
deter men from their Duty , as it did not the Apostles : which shews
their case to be different from ours , and that probably this matter was
stated right at first . So that whatever is pretended this is certain ,
that the <font> Priests <$$font> and <font> Jesuites <$$font> of the
Church of <font> Rome <$$font> have in truth no more obligation of
Conscience to make Converts here in <font> England <$$font> than in
<font> Sueden <$$font> or <font> Turky <$$font> ; where it seems the
evident danger of the attempt hath for these many years given them a
perfect discharge from their duty in this particular .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.91

I shall joyn the <font> Third <$$font> and <font> Fourth <$$font>
Observations together . <font> That though the true Religion may have
several prejudices and objections against it , yet upon examination
there will be found those real advantages on its side , that it may
safely be referred to any considerate mans choice :
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.92

If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord , chuse you this day whom you
will serve . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.93

If it seem evil unto you ; <$$font> Intimating , that to some persons
and upon some accounts it may appear so . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.94

But when the matter is truly represented , the choice is not difficult ,
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.95

nor requires any long deliberation , TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.96

<font> Chuse you <$$font> this day <font> whom you will serve .
<$$font> TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.97

Let but the Cause be fully and impartially heard , and a wise man may
determine himself upon the spot , and give his Verdict without ever
going from the Bar . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.98

The true Religion hath always layen under some prejudices with partial
and inconsiderate men ; which commonly spring from one of these <font>
two <$$font> Causes , either the <font> Prepossessions of a contrary
Religion <$$font> , or the <font> contrariety of the true Religion to
the vicious inclinations and practices of men <$$font> , which usually
lyes at the bottom of all prejudice against Religion .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.99

Religion is an enemy to mens beloved lusts ,
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.100

and therefore they are enemies to Religion .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.101

I begin with the <font> first <$$font> , which is as much as I shall be
able to compass at this time . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.102

I . <font> The Prepossessions of a false Religion <$$font> ; which
commonly pretends <font> two <$$font> advantages on its side , <font>
Antiquity <$$font> and <font> Universality <$$font> ; and is wont to
object to the true Religion <font> Novelty <$$font> and <font>
Singularity <$$font> . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.103

And <font> both <$$font> these are intimated both before and after the
Text : TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.104

<font> Put away the gods which your Fathers served on the other side of
the flood , and in Egypt : TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,461.105

And chuse you this day whom you will serve , <$$font> <P_462> <font>
whether {you_will_serve} the gods which your Fathers served on the other
side of the flood , or the gods of the Amorites in whose land ye dwell .
<$$font> TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,462.106

Idolatry was the Religion of their Fathers ,
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,462.107

and had spread it self over the greatest and most ancient Nations of the
World and the most famous for Learning and Arts , the <font> Chaldeans
<$$font> and <font> Egyptians <$$font> ; TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,462.108

and was the Religion of the <font> Amorites <$$font> and the Nations
round about them . So that <font> Joshua <$$font> represents the <font>
Heathen Religion <$$font> with all its strength and advantage ,
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,462.109

and does not dissemble its confident pretence to <font> Antiquity
<$$font> and <font> Universality <$$font> , whereby they would also
insinuate the <font> Novelty <$$font> and <font> Singularity <$$font> of
the worship of the God of <font> Israel <$$font> .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,462.110

And it is very well worthy our observation , that one or both of these
have always been the Exceptions of false Religions <paren> especially of
<font> Idolatry <$$font> and <font> Superstition <$$font> <$$paren>
against the true Religion . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,462.111

The ancient Idolaters of the World pretended their Religion to be <font>
ancient <$$font> and <font> universal <$$font> , that their Fathers
served these gods , and that the worship of the God of <font> Israel
<$$font> was a plain Innovation upon the <font> Ancient <$$font> and
<font> Catholick Religion <$$font> of the world , and that the very
first rise and original of it was within the memory of their Fathers ;
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,462.112

and no doubt they were almost perpetually upon the <font> Jews <$$font>
with that pert question , <font> Where was your Religion before Abraham
<$$font> ? and telling them , that it was the Religion of a very small
part and corner of the world , confined within a little Territory :
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,462.113

But the great Nations of the world , the <font> Egyptians <$$font> and
<font> Chaldeans <$$font> , famous for all kind of knowledge and wisedom
, and indeed all the Nations round about them , worshipped other Gods :
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,462.114

And therefore it was an intolerable arrogance and singularity in them ,
to condemn their Fathers and all the world , to be of a Religion
different from all other Nations , and hereby to separate themselves and
make a <font> Schism <$$font> from the rest of mankind .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,462.115

And when the Gospel appeared in the world , which the Apostle to the
<font> Hebrews <$$font> <paren> to prevent the scandal of that word
<$$paren> calls <font> the time of Reformation <$$font> , the <font>
Jews <$$font> and <font> Heathen <$$font> still renewed the same
Objections against Christianity . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,462.116

The <font> Jews <$$font> urged against it , not the ancient <font>
Scriptures <$$font> and the true Word of God , but that which they
pretended to be of much greater Authority , the <font> unwritten
<$$font> Word , the ancient and constant <font> Traditions <$$font> of
their Church ; TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,462.117

and branded this new Religion with the name of Heresie ,
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,462.118

<font> After <P_463> the way <$$font> <paren> saith St. <font> Paul
<$$font> <$$paren> <font> that you call Heresie so worship I the God of
my Fathers ; believing all things that are written in the Law , and in
the Prophets <$$font> : By which we see , that they of the Church of
<font> Rome <$$font> were not the first who called it <font> Heresie
<$$font> to reject humane Traditions , and to make the Scriptures the
Rule of Faith : TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,463.119

This was done long before by their Reverend Predecessors , the <font>
Scribes <$$font> and <font> Pharisees <$$font> .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,463.120

And the <font> Gentiles <$$font> , they pretended against it both <font>
Antiquity <$$font> and <font> Universality <$$font> , the constant
belief and practice of all Ages , and almost all Places of the World ;
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,463.121

<font> Sequimur majores nostros qui feliciter secuti sunt suos <$$font>
, says <font> Symmachus , TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,463.122

We follow our Forefathers , who happily followed theirs <$$font> ;
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,463.123

But you bring in a new Religion , never known nor heard of in the World
before . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,463.124

And when the Christian Religion was most miserably depraved and
corrupted , in that dismal night of Ignorance which over-spread these
<font> Western <$$font> Parts of the World about the <font> Ninth
<$$font> and <font> Tenth Centuries <$$font> ; and many pernicious
Doctrines and Superstitious Practices were introduced , to the wofull
defacing of the Christian Religion , and making it quite another thing
from what our Saviour had left it ; and these Corruptions and Abuses had
continued for several Ages : No sooner was a <font> Reformation <$$font>
attempted but the Church of <font> Rome <$$font> make the same out-cry
of <font> Novelty <$$font> and <font> Singularity <$$font> :
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,463.125

And though we have substantially answered it a_thousand times , yet we
can@ @not obtain of them to forbear that thread-bare Question , <font>
Where was your Religion before Luther <$$font> ?
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,463.126

I shall therefore apply my self to answer these <font> two <$$font>
Exceptions with all the brevity and clearness I can :
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,463.127

And I doubt not to make it appear , that as to the point of <font>
Universality <$$font> <paren> though that be nowise necessary to
justifie the truth of any Religion <$$paren> ours is not inferior to
theirs ; if we take in the Christians of all Ages , and of all parts of
the World : And as to the point of <font> Antiquity <$$font> , that our
Faith and the Doctrines of our Religion have clearly the advantage of
theirs ; all <font> our <$$font> Faith being unquestionably ancient ,
<font> theirs <$$font> not so . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,463.128

1 . As to the Point of <font> Universality <$$font> . Which they of
the Church of <font> Rome <$$font> , I know not for what reason , will
needs make an inseparable <P_464> property and mark of the true Church .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,464.129

And they never flout at the Protestant Religion with so good a grace
among the ignorant people , as when they are bragging of their Numbers ,
and despising poor Protestancy because embraced by so few .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,464.130

This <font> pestilent Northern Heresie <$$font> <paren> as of late they
scornfully call it <$$paren> entertained it seems only in this cold and
cloudy Corner of the World , by a company of dull stupid People , that
can neither penetrate into the proofs nor the possibility of <font>
Transubstantiation <$$font> ; whereas to the more refined <font>
Southern <$$font> Wits all these difficult and obscure Points are as
clear as their Sun at Noon-day . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,464.131

But to speak to the thing it self . If Number be necessary to prove the
truth and goodness of any Religion , <font> ours <$$font> upon enquiry
will be found not so inconsiderable as our Adversaries would make it .
Those of the <font> Reformed <$$font> Religion , according to the most
exact calculations that have been made by learned men , being esteemed
not much unequal in number to those of the <font> Romish <$$font>
persuasion . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,464.132

But then if we take in the ancient Christian Church , whose Faith was
the same with ours ; and other Christian Churches at this day , which
altogether are vastly greater and more numerous than the <font> Roman
<$$font> Church , and which agree with us , several of them in very
considerable Doctrines and Practices in dispute between us and the
Church of <font> Rome <$$font> , and all of them in disclaiming that
fundamental point of the <font> Roman <$$font> Religion , and <font>
Summ of Christianity <$$font> <paren> as <font> Bellarmine <$$font>
calls it <$$paren> I mean the <font> Supremacy of the Bishop of <$$font>
Rome <font> over all Christians and Churches in the World <$$font> ,
then the Number on our side will be much greater than on theirs .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,464.133

But we will not stand upon this advantage with them .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,464.134

Suppose we were by much the fewer . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,464.135

So hath the true Church of God often been , without any the least
prejudice to the truth of their Religion . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,464.136

What think we of the Church in <font> Abraham's <$$font> time , which
for ought we know was confined to one Family ; and one small Kingdom ,
that of <font> Melchesidec <$$font> King of <font> Salem <$$font> ?
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,464.137

What think we of it in <font> Moses <$$font> his time , when it was
confined to one People wandering in a Wilderness ? What of it in <font>
Elijah's <$$font> time , when besides the <font> two <$$font> Tribes
that worshipped at <font> Jerusalem <$$font> , there were in the <P_465>
other <font> ten <$$font> but <font> seven_thousand that had not bowed
their knee to Baal ? <$$font> What in our Saviour's time , when the
whole Christian Church consisted of twelve Apostles , and seventy
Disciples , and some few Followers beside ?
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,465.138

How would <font> Bellarmine <$$font> have despised this little Flock ,
because it wanted one or two of his goodliest marks of the true Church ,
<font> Universality <$$font> and <font> Splendor <$$font> ?
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,465.139

And what think we of the Christian Church in the height of <font>
Arianism <$$font> and <font> Pelagianism <$$font> , when a great part of
<font> Christendom <$$font> was over-run with these Errors , and the
number of the <font> Orthodox <$$font> was inconsiderable in comparison
of the <font> Hereticks <$$font> ? TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,465.140

But what need I to urge these Instances ? As if the Truth of a Religion
were to be estimated and carried by the <font> major Vote <$$font> ;
which as it can be an Argument to none but Fools , so I dare say no
honest and wise man ever made use of it for a solid proof of the truth
and goodness of any Church or Religion . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,465.141

If multitude be an Argument that men are in the right , in vain then
hath the <font> Scripture <$$font> said , <font> Thou shalt not follow a
multitude to do evil <$$font> : TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,465.142

For if this Argument be of any force , the greater number never go wrong
. TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,465.143

2 . As to the Point of <font> Antiquity <$$font> . This is not always
a certain Mark of the true Religion . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,465.144

For surely there was a time when Christianity began and was a new
Profession , TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,465.145

and then both <font> Judaism <$$font> and <font> Paganism <$$font> had
certainly the advantage of it in Point of Antiquity .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,465.146

But the proper Question in this Case is , <font> Which is the true
Ancient Christian Faith , that of the Church of <$$font> Rome , <font>
or Ours <$$font> ? TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,465.147

And to make this matter plain , it is to be considered , that a great
part of the <font> Roman <$$font> Faith is the same with <font> Ours
<$$font> ; as , namely , the Articles of the Apostle's <font> Creed
<$$font> , as explained by the first four General Councils .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,465.148

And these make up our whole Faith , so far as concerns matters of meer
and simple Belief , that are of absolute necessity to Salvation .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,465.149

And in this Faith of Ours , there is nothing wanting that can be shewn
in any ancient <font> Creed <$$font> of the Christian Church .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,465.150

And thus far <font> Our <$$font> Faith , and <font> theirs <$$font> of
the <font> Roman <$$font> Church , are undoubtedly of equal Antiquity ,
that is , as ancient as Christianity it self .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,465.151

All the Question is , as to the matters in difference between us . The
principal whereof are the twelve new Articles of the Creed of Pope
<font> Pius <$$font> the IV , concerning the <font> Sacrifice of the
Mass , Transubstantiation , <$$font> <P_466> the <font> Communion in one
kind only , Purgatory , etc. <$$font> not one of which is to be found
in any ancient <font> Creed <$$font> or Confession of Faith generally
allowed in the Christian Church . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,466.152

The Antiquity of these we deny , TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,466.153

and affirm them to be Innovations ; TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,466.154

and have particularly proved them to be so , not only to the answering ,
but almost to the silencing of our Adversaries .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,466.155

And as for the <font> negative <$$font> Articles of the <font>
Protestant <$$font> Religion , in opposition to the Errors and
Corruptions of the <font> Romish <$$font> Faith , these are by accident
become a part of our Faith and Religion , occasioned by their Errors ;
as the renouncing of the Doctrines of <font> Arianism <$$font> became
part of the <font> Catholick <$$font> Religion , after the rise of that
Heresie . So that the Case is plainly this ;
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,466.156

We believe and teach all that is contained in the <font> Creeds <$$font>
of the ancient Christian Church , and was by them esteemed necessary to
Salvation : TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,466.157

and this is <font> Our <$$font> Religion . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,466.158

But now the Church of <font> Rome <$$font> hath innovated in the
Christian Religion , and made several Additions to it ; and greatly
corrupted it both in the Doctrines and Practices of it :
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,466.159

And these <font> Additions <$$font> and <font> Corruptions <$$font> are
their Religion , as it is distinct from ours ;
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,466.160

and both because they are <font> Corruptions <$$font> and <font>
Novelties <$$font> we have rejected them : TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,466.161

And our rejection of these is our Reformation :
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,466.162

And our Reformation we grant <paren> if this will do them any good
<$$paren> not to be so ancient as their Corruptions : All Reformation
necessarily supposing Corruptions and Errors to have been before it .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,466.163

And now we are at a little better leisure to answer that captious
Question of theirs , <font> Where was your Religion before Luther ?
<$$font> Where-ever Christianity was ; in some places more pure , in
others more corrupted : but especially in these <font> Western <$$font>
parts of Christendom over-grown for several Ages with manifold Errors
and Corruptions , which the Reformation hath happily cut off , and cast
away . So that though our <font> Reformation <$$font> was as late as
<font> Luther <$$font> , our <font> Religion <$$font> is as ancient as
Christianity it self . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,466.164

For when the <font> Additions <$$font> <P_467> which the Church of
<font> Rome <$$font> hath made to the <font> ancient <$$font> Christian
Faith , and their Innovations in practice are pared off , that which
remains of <font> their <$$font> Religion is <font> ours <$$font> ;
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,467.165

and this they can@ @not deny to be every tittle of it the ancient
Christianity . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,467.166

And what other Answer than this could the <font> Jews <$$font> have
given to the like Question , if it had been put to them by the <font>
ancient Idolaters <$$font> of the World , <font> Where was your Religion
before Abraham ? <$$font> but the very same in substance which we now
give to the Church of <font> Rome <$$font> ? That for many Ages the
Worship of the one true God had been corrupted , and the Worship of
Idols had prevailed in a great part of the World : that <font> Abraham
<$$font> was raised up by God to reform Religion , and to reduce the
Worship of God to its first Institution ; in the doing whereof he
necessarily separated Himself and his Family from the Communion of those
Idolaters . So that though the <font> Reformation <$$font> which <font>
Abraham <$$font> began was new , yet his <font> Religion <$$font> was
truly ancient ; as old as that of <font> Noah <$$font> , and <font>
Enoch <$$font> , and <font> Adam <$$font> . Which is the same in
substance that we say , and with the same and equal reason .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,467.167

And if they will still complain of the <font> Newness <$$font> of our
<font> Reformation <$$font> , so do we too ,
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,467.168

and are heartily sorry it began no sooner ; TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,467.169

but , however , better late than never . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,467.170

Besides , it ought to be considered , that this Objection of <font>
Novelty <$$font> lies against all Reformation whatsoever , though never
so necessary , and though things be never so much amiss :
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,467.171

And it is in effect to say , that if things be once bad , they must
never be better , but must always remain as they are ;
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,467.172

for they can@ @not be better , without being reformed ,
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,467.173

and a Reformation must begin sometime , TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,467.174

and whenever it begins it is certainly new . So that if a real
Reformation be made , the thing justifies it self ;
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,467.175

and no Objection of <font> Novelty <$$font> ought to take place against
that which upon all accounts was so fit and necessary to be done .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,467.176

And if they of the Church of <font> Rome <$$font> would but speak their
mind out in this matter , they are not so much displeased at the
Reformation which we have made because it is <font> new <$$font> , as
because it is a <font> Reformation <$$font> .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,467.177

It was the humour of <font> Babylon <$$font> of old <paren> as the
<font> Prophet <$$font> tells us <$$paren> that she <font> would not be
healed <$$font> ; TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,467.178

and this is still the temper of the Church of <font> Rome <$$font> ,
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,467.179

they <font> hate to be reformed <$$font> ; TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,467.180

and rather than acknowledge themselves to have been once in an <P_468>
Error , they will continue in it for ever .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,468.181

And this is that which at first made , and still continues the breach
and <font> Separation <$$font> between us ; of which we are no-wise
guilty who have only reformed what was amiss , but they who obstinately
persist in their Errors , and will needs impose them upon us and will
not let us be of their Communion unless we will say they are no Errors .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,468.182

II . The other <font> Prejudice <$$font> against the true Religion is ,
<font> the contrariety of it to the vicious inclinations and practices
of Men . <$$font> TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,468.183

It is too heavy a yoke , TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,468.184

and lays too great a restraint upon humane Nature .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,468.185

And this is that which in truth lies at the bottom of all Objections
against Religion , TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,468.186

<font> Men love darkness rather than light , because their deeds are
evil . <$$font> TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,468.187

But this Argument will require a Discourse by it self ,
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,468.188

and therefore I shall not now enter upon it ; only crave your patience a
little longer , whilst I make some Reflections upon what hath been
already delivered . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,468.189

You see what are the <font> Exceptions <$$font> which Idolatry and
Superstition have always made , and do at this day still make , against
the true Religion ; and how slight and insufficient they are .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,468.190

But do we then charge the Church of <font> Rome <$$font> with Idolatry ?
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,468.191

our Church most certainly does so , TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,468.192

and hath always done it from the beginning of the Reformation ; in her
<font> Homilies <$$font> , and <font> Liturgy <$$font> , and <font>
Canons <$$font> , and in the <font> Writings <$$font> of her best and
ablest <font> Champions <$$font> . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,468.193

And though I have , as impartially as I could , consider'd what hath
been said on both sides in this Controversie ; yet I must confess I
could never yet see any tolerable defence made by them against this
heavy charge . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,468.194

And they themselves , acknowledge themselves to be greatly under the
suspicion of it , by saying <paren> as Cardinal <font> Perron <$$font>
and others do <$$paren> that the Primitive Christians for some Ages did
neither worship Images , nor pray to Saints , for fear of being thought
to approach too near the Heathen Idolatry : TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,468.195

And which <P_469> is yet more ; divers of their most learned men do
confess , that if Transubstantiation be not true , they are gross
Idolaters as any in the World . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,469.196

And I hope they do not expect it from us , that in complement to them ,
and to acquit them from the charage of Idolatry , we should presently
deny our senses , and believe Transubstantiation ;
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,469.197

and if we do not believe this , they grant we have Reason to charge them
with Idolatry . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,469.198

But we own them to be a true Church : which they can@ @not be , if they
be guilty of Idolatry : TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,469.199

This they often urge us withall , TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,469.200

and there seems at first sight to be something in it :
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,469.201

And for that reason I shall endeavour to give so clear and satisfactory
an answer to it , as that we may never more be troubled with it .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,469.202

The truth is , we would fain hope , because they still retain the
Essentials of Christianity , and profess to believe all the Articles of
the Christian Faith , that notwithstanding their Corruptions they may
still retain the true Essence of a Church : as a man may be truly and
really a man , though he have the plague upon him ; and for that reason
be fit to be avoided by all that wish well to themselves :
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,469.203

But if this will not do , we can@ @not help it .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,469.204

Therefore to push the matter home : TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,469.205

Are they sure that this is a firm and good consequence , <font> That if
they be Idolaters , they can@ @not be a true Church ? <$$font>
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,469.206

Then let them look to it . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,469.207

It is they , I take it , that are concerned to prove themselves a true
Church , and not we to prove it for them . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,469.208

And if they will not understand it of themselves , it is fit they should
be told that there is a great difference between <P_470> Concessions of
Charity and of Necessity , and that a very different use ought to be
made of them . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,470.209

We are willing to think the best of them ; TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,470.210

but if they dislike our Charity in this point , nothing against the hair
: TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,470.211

If they will forgive us this Injury , we will not offend them any more :
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,470.212

But rather than have any farther difference with them about this matter
, we will for quietness sake compound it thus ; That till they can
clearly acquit themselves from being Idolaters , they shall never_more
against their wills be esteemed a true Church .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,470.213

And now to draw to a Conclusion . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,470.214

<font> If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord , <$$font> and to
worship him only ; to pray to him alone , and that only in the name and
mediation of Jesus Christ , as he hath given us Commandment ; <font>
because there is but one God , and one Mediator between God and Man ,
the Man Christ Jesus . If it seem evil unto you , <$$font> to have the
liberty to serve God in a Language you can understand ; and to have the
free use of the Holy <font> Scriptures , which are able to make men wise
unto Salvation ; <$$font> and to have the Sacraments of our Religion
entirely administred to us , as our Lord did institute and appoint .
And on the other hand , if it seem good to us , to put our necks once
more under that yoke , which our Fathers were not able to bear : If it
be really a Preferment to a Prince to hold the Pope's Stirrup , and a
Privilege to be deposed by him at his pleasure , and a courtesie to be
kill'd at his command : If to pray without Understanding , and to obey
without Reason , and to believe against Sense ; if Ignorance , and
implicit Faith , and an Inquisition , be in good earnest such charming
and desirable things : Then welcome Popery ; which , where-ever thou
comest , dost infallibly bring all these wonderfull Privileges and
Blessings along with thee . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,470.215

But the Question is not now about the <font> choice <$$font> , but the
<font> change <$$font> of our Religion , after we have been so long
settled in the quiet possession and enjoyment of it .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,470.216

Men are very loth to change even a false Religion .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,470.217

<font> Hath a Nation changed their Gods , which yet <P_471> are no Gods
? <$$font> TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,471.218

And surely there is much more reason why we should be tenacious of the
Truth , and hold fast that which is good . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,471.219

We have the best Religion in the World , the very same which the <font>
Son of God <$$font> revealed , which the <font> Apostles <$$font>
planted and confirmed by Miracles , and which the <font> noble Army of
Martyrs <$$font> sealed with their Blood : TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,471.220

And we have retrench'd from it all false Doctrines and superstitious
Practices which have been added since . TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,471.221

And I think we may without immodesty say , That upon the plain square of
Scripture and Reason , of the Tradition and Practice of the first and
best Ages of the Christian Church , we have fully justified <font> Our
<$$font> Religion ; and made it evident to the World , that our
Adversaries are put to very hard shifts , and upon a perpetual
disadvantage in the defence of <font> Theirs <$$font> .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,471.222

I wish it were as easie for us to justifie our Lives as our Religion .
TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,471.223

I do not mean in comparison of our Adversaries <paren> for that , as bad
as we are , I hope we are yet able to do <$$paren> but in comparison of
the Rules of our holy <font> Religion <$$font> , from which we are
infinitely swerv'd ; which I would to God we all did seriously consider
and lay to heart : TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,471.224

I say , in comparison of the Rules of our Holy Religion , which <font>
teach us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts , and to live soberly ,
and righteously , and godly in this present World , in expectation of
the blessed hope , and the glorious appearance of the great God , and
our Saviour Jesus Christ ; <$$font> To whom with the Father , and the
Holy Ghost , <font> etc. <$$font> TILLOTS-C-1680-E3-P2,471.225

