<BEGIN_torkingt-1517-e1-p2>

<P_45>

Thursday , that was the xxiij Day of Julii , a_bowth x or xj of the
cloke , the Gatys of the holy Temple of the Sepulcre war Sett opyn
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,45.3

And thanne we went all to the Mownte Syon to Dyner .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,45.4

And so it appereth that we war in the Temple of the holy <P_46> Sepulcre
ij Dayes and ij nyghts , And never com owte the for seyd tyme .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,46.5

The same Thursday at aftyr_noon we toke our assys at the Mownte Syon ,
accompanyed with the seyd ffreres and Turkes TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,46.6

and rode the same nyght to Bethlem whiche ys v myle for Jherusalem .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,46.7

And in the high way by_twyne , a_bowte ij myle from Jherusalem , we com
to a place wher the starre appered ageyn to the iij kynges , wherof they
lost ther light at ther entre into Jherusalem wherby they rode forthe to
Jherusalem . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,46.8

And a lytyll forther we com to a old Chirche , wher the prophete Elias
was born . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,46.9

And ther by ys a place wher the Aungell toke vp Abacok by the fronte And
bar hym to Babylon and sett hym in the lake of lyons wher Danyell the
pphete {COM:no_tilde} was , and refresshed hym with mete and Drynke .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,46.10

Nott far thens we myght se the place in which Jacobb the patriarke ,
Dwellyd TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,46.11

And ther also we passyd fast by the Sepulcre of Rachell the wyff of the
seyd Jacobe . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,46.12

Thanne next we cam to Bethelem , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,46.13

it was callyd in old tyme Effrata , wherof it ys wretyng Ecce Audivimus
eum in effrata . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,46.14

A lytyll withowt the same Citie , towardys the Est , ys the fayer
chirche of ower blyssyd lady , wher ower Savyr Criste was born , wherof
shal@ @be made more mencion aftyrward . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,46.15

And bytwyne Citie and the seyd Chirche ys the flod floridus <P_47> where
the fayer mayd shuld a ben brent . And was Savyd harmlesse by myracle ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,47.16

for the fyer chaunged in to Rosis . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,47.17

And in thys Citie of Bethelem was kyng David born .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,47.18

The same thursday as we cam to thys Bethelem , and a_lytyd at the
Chirche of our lady a_for_sayd , whych ys a mervelus fayer Chirche and a
rygth Sumptuos werke , the length therof ys ccxxviij fote ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,47.19

And the bred ys lxxxvij fote . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,47.20

Ther be iiij rowes or Ranges of pylers thorow the Chirche .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,47.21

The Sawdon was in porpuse to a removyd those pyllers , and to a caryed
them to have byldyd hys paleys with the same .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,47.22

And for that intent he cam {SIC:can} to Bethlem in hys owne persone to
se them take Downe . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,47.23

And he be_held the Masons begynnyng to breke .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,47.24

So Deuly ther came owt of the Chirche wall with_in forth ny ther the
Sowdon was , an howge gret Serpent that ranne endlong vpon the ryght
Syde of the Chirche wall , and scorged the seyd wall as it had be
{COM:sic} sengid with fyer all the wey that he wente , whyche schorchyng
ys sene in to thys Day . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,47.25

And with thys sygn the Sawdon a_voydyd with grett fere , And all tho
that war with hym , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,47.26

And nev sythyns he nor non other attempted to remove ony thyng ther .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,47.27

At Bethelem , comonly be v or vj friers of Mowte Syon , to kepe the holy
place ther , whiche with other fryers that cam with us to Mownte Syon ,
Dressed them to solempne procession at our fyrst <P_48> commyng , whome
we folowyd to all the holy placys with_in the same Monasteri , with
candels light in ower handys , as all_wey vsyd in other place wher ony
procession was Don . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,48.28

And fyrst the seyd procession browght vs to a place at an Aulter in the
south {TEXT:suth} yle wher our Savyr Crist was Circumsysed .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,48.29

And from thens we came to an other Auter on the Northe syd , wher the
iij kyngs made redy ther offeryngs to present on to ower Savor Criste .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,48.30

And from thys place , Descendyng certayne grees of stone , we com in to
a wonder fayer lityll Chapell , at the hyer auter wherof , ys the vary
place of the byrth of our lord , Assigned by a sterre made in a fayer
whith marble stone . Vnder the myddys of the seyd high Auter , whych
byrth was Don in the self most holy place to the gretest Joy and
gladnesse that ever cam to mankynde . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,48.31

And at thys holy place ys clene Remission . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,48.32

And ther by ys a lityll Auter sum what vnder the Rook , wher the iij
kyngs offered to ower blyssyd Savyor Criste Jhu , Gold , Myrre , and
Incence , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,48.33

and ther ys clene remission . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,48.34

And a lityll be_for the seyd Aulter ys the Cribbe of our lord , wher
ower blyssyd lady leyd hyr Dere sone be_for hyr , The oxe and the Asse .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,48.35

clene Remission . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,48.36

And vndowtyd thys lityll Chapell of the byrthe of ower lord ys the most
glorius and Devowte place that ys in the world , So@ @myche thot that
excedith in holynesse all other places that be in this worlde .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,48.37

<P_49>

It ys Also of tables of fyne whith marble stonne .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,49.39

And the vowtys be garnyshyd with gold and byse with Diverse Storys of a
substyll mosaic {TEXT:musyk} werke as may be .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,49.40

The walles also of all the body of the Chirche , from the pyllers to the
Rooff , be poyntyd with storys from the begynnyng of the world of the
same mosaic {TEXT:musyng} werkys , whyche ys the Richeest thyng that
canne be Don to any wallis . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,49.41

How_be_it the seyd werkes be gretly Defauncyd , bothe in the Chirche and
in the Chapell , for very pure Age , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,49.42

And the seyd Churche wyth all the places falleth in gret Dekay .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,49.43

And whanne we had vysyted thys holy Chapell , we ascendid ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,49.44

and come to the place wher the bodys of the holy Innocets {COM:sic} lay
many yers vnknowen . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,49.45

Item , fast by the same Chapell , ys a nother lityll Chapell , wher
Seynt Jherom was buryd , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,49.46

and ther ys yet hys tombe , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,49.47

but hys body was translat to Rome long Syns . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,49.48

Ther ys also another solytary Chapell under a Rooke , wher Seynt Jherom
translated the bybyll in to Greke and latyn . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,49.49

Thys procession ended , we refressyd vs with such vitallys as we had
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,49.50

and restyd vs a while , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,49.51

And that Day every man gaff hym to prayer and contemplacion , visityng
the holy place a_for_seyd . And aftyr myde_night , seying and hering
messis unto the tyme it was Dailyght , At which tyme the Chirche Dores
war sett <P_50> open by the Paynymys , by whom we war let owt , by tale
, as we entred in , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,50.52

And thanne we visited the holy place a_bowte Bethlem .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,50.53

ffyrst the place wher the Aungell of god apperyd to Joseph in hys Slepe
, Saying , Surge et accipe puerum et matrem eius et fuge in Egiptum .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,50.54

At the Est ende of the Chirche of Bethlem ys A cave in the grounde ,
wher sumtyme stod a Chirch of Seynt Nicholas .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,50.55

In the same Cave Entred ower blyssid lady with hyr Sone ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,50.56

And hyd hyr , for ffer of kyng Herrod , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,50.57

the gronde ys good for Norces that lake mylk for ther Childern .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,50.58

Ther ys a nother place wher Sumtyme stod a Chirche of our lady ,
Distante from ower lady of Bethlem , v arrow shots , wher at the byrth
of our lord The Aungell seyd on to the Shepperds , Anuncio vobis gaudium
magnum Quia natus est hodie salvator mundi . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,50.59

A lityll thense ys the place wher the herdmen kepte ther watche vpon
ther flock , in the houre of the nativite of ower lord , Sawe and hard
the Aungellis syng , Gloria in excelsis Dei . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,50.60

this place ys ij myle from Bethelem . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,50.61

And thens , the same ffryday , that was the vigill of Seynt Jamis , we
retornyd to Bethelem , to ower Dyner a_geyne , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,50.62

and ther refresshed vs to the tyme it was paste noon .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,50.63

<P_65>

And so it Dothe appere hev {COM:sic} that we war saylyng in the see
be_twyx the Rodes and Cicyll xxiij wekes , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,65.65

and it ys but m myle . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,65.66

<P_66>

Wedynsday aftyr mydlent Sonday , that was the xvij Day of Marche , at vj
of the clok at aftyr_non , we toke a barke at the seyd Missena ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,66.68

And Rowe {COM:sic} over a_geyne to Calabrys , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,66.69

and so passyd by the shore by the space of a_C myle .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,66.70

SatyrDay {COM:sic} , the xx Day of Marche , the aftyr_non , we cam on
londe not_with_stondyns {COM:sic} evy Day of the for seyd iiij Days at
non TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,66.71

and at nyght we cam on londe . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,66.72

Passion Sonnday , aftyr masse , we hyred horse and mules to the tyme we
came to Napylles , And also men to Ronne by vs on fote to bryng the
horse and mules a_geyne . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,66.73

Fryday , the xxvj Day of Marche , we cam to a fayer Citee , stondyng on
the see syde , whyche ys callyd Salarno . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,66.74

Satyrday a_for palme Sonnday , at iiij of cloke at aftyr_noon , we cam
to the noble Citee of Napyllys , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,66.75

and thanne the same Satyrday , at nyght , we hyred new fres {COM:sic}
horses to the tyme we came to Rome . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,66.76

At Napyllys , on palme sonnday , we hard Divine {TEXT:Divne} servyce ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,66.77

Also ther ys the fayerst castyll that ever I sawe ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,66.78

the gatys be goodly and made of whith marlle .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,66.79

Also with_owt the Citys ys an horse wey under_neth a mownteyn , by the
space of a myle , a mervelous cave in the grounde , which we rode thorow
the same palme Sonnday aftyr messe towards Rome .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,66.80

Wedynsday , the last Day of Marche , a_bowte v of the clok , at
aftyr_non , we com to Rome , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,66.81

And ther we a_bode Mawdleyn thursday , Good fryday , Ester evyn , Ester
Day , And also Ester <P_67> munday , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.82

and visityd the holy places with_in the Cite and with_owt .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.83

Ester munday we bowght in Rome Ryght good horse that browght vs well in
to Englande . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.84

Ester tewysday , abowght x of the cloke , we Departyd from Rome .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.85

The wey from Rome it ys knowen perfyghthly I know {TEXT:now} with many
Sondry persons to Englond , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.86

And ther for I Doo no wryght itt . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.87

Wedynsday , the Ascencion evyn , the xj Day of Apyll
{COM:preceding_word_"Apyll"_emended} {COM:sic} we cam to Seynt John of
Amyas , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.88

ther I offerd . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.89

ffryday aftyr we came to our lady of Boleyn , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.90

and ther I offerd . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.91

SatyrDay {COM:sic} aftyr the Ascension , we com to Caleys by noon ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.92

And ther we lay all nyght , and sonnday all Day and all nyght .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.93

The same Sonnday , at nyght , we shippyd our horses at Caleys .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.94

And munday , that was the xvij Day of Apryll , we com to Dover ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.95

and lay ther all nyght . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.96

Tewysday a_for whith Sonnday , we cam to Canterbury , to Seynt Thomes
Messe , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.97

And ther I offeryd TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.98

and made an ende of my pylgrymage . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.99

Deo gracias . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.100

Note that be thys forseyd processe wreten of thys seyd Jurney that we
Departyd owt of Inglonde the xx Day of Marche , the yer of o=r= lord God
, mlccccc_and_xvij , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,67.101

and we came to Venyce the xxix <P_68> Day of Apryll , whyche ys v wekys
an v Days , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,68.102

And ther we lay at Venece tyll the xiiij Day of Junii , whyche ys vj
wekes and iiij Dayes . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,68.103

The xij Day of Julii , we cam to Jaff , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,68.104

and so spendyd owtwardes be_twyne Venyce and Jaffe on moneth and ij
Dayes , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,68.105

And her we lay in the same Porte iij Days . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,68.106

Also we taryed in the holy londe vnto the xxix day of Julii , whiche Day
we retornyd to ower shippe . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,68.107

And so it appereth that we war in the holy londe xv Dayes .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,68.108

The xij Day of Marche , we com to Missena , In Cecyll ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,68.109

And the xv Day of Apryll we com to Calys . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,68.110

And the xvij Day of Apryll we come to Dover , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,68.111

And so we war owt of Enlong in ower seyd Pylgrymage the space of an holl
yer v wekys and iii Dayes . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,68.112

By the accompte a_forseyd that it shewyth it ys ffrom Venyce to Parence
, C myle . ffrom Parens to Jarra , C myle {SIC:mble} . ffrom Jarra to
Lesena , C myle li . ffrom Lesena to Araguse , CC myle . ffrom Araguse
to Corfew , CCC myle . ffrom Corfew to Modona , CCC myle . ffrom
Modona to Candia , CCC myle . ffrom Candia to Rodys , CCC myle . ffrom
the Rodes to Cipres , CCCC myle , ffrom Cipres to Jaff , CCCC myle .
<P_69> ffrom Jaff to Jherusalem , XL myle . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,69.113

Sm xxvj_C myles . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,69.114

ffrom Englond to Venice , vij_C myle . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,69.115

ffrom Englond to Jherusalem , iij_m=l= myle and iij_C.
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,69.116

<heading>

Of the Temple of Salomon . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,69.118

<$$heading>

Whyle we war thus occupyd in our pylyrymage at Jherusalem And ther
a_bowyt , we passyd Sundry tymes by the temple of Salomon ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,69.120

and often we Sawe it and behelde it with_owt forth ffrom Sundry hylls ,
and specially from the Mownte of Olivete , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,69.121

ffor ther ys the most clere sight and best beholdyng ther of to them
that may not entre in to it . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,69.122

And be_twyne the Temple of Salomon and the Mownte of Olivete ys the vale
of Josophat . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,69.123

The Sarrasyns woll sofer no Cristen men to com with_in the seyd Temple .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,69.124

And yf he Doo he shal@ @be compellyd incontynently to for_sake hys fayth
and Cristendom or ellys to be put to execucion of Dethe by and bye .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,69.125

Ther ys also with_in the circuyte of the walles of the same , an other
Temple that was callyd Porticus Salomonis , whiche ys also wonder grett
and large , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,69.126

And it ys sayd ther be continually brennyng , within Salomons Temple
vij_C lampes , And in porticu Salamonis viij_C lampys .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,69.127

Thys Temple hath Sundry gatts to entre in to it , the iij gatts with_in
the citye , whiche I said all iij , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,69.128

An other gate ys with_owt forth Estwarde toward the Mounte of Olivete ,
that ys callyd the <P_70> goldyn gate . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,70.129

In at the same gate Rode ower blyssyd Savyor upon palme Sonday , Sittyng
vpon the Asse . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,70.130

But as I sayd befor ther ys no Cristen man sufferyd to com ny it ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,70.131

but what so ev pylgryme loke Devowtly to wardys the same gate and
be_hold it with Devocion hath grauntyd to hym plenarye Remission .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,70.132

The Sarrasyns have thys Temple in gret reverence ,
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,70.133

and specially they worshippe ther a Rokk of Stone , whyche ys closyd
a_bowte with Irron , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,70.134

And they Rekyn it so holy that no Sarrasyn Dare towche it .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,70.135

How_be_it they com from p-ties to visit it . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,70.136

In the same Rook with_in the sayd Temple , the Jewes kepe the Arke of
god , with the reliques that Titus caryed from Rome , that ys to sey the
x commaundments , Arons rodde , Moyes Roode , A vessell of gold , full
of Mauna , Ornamentis for Sacryfyce , the Tabernacle of Aron , a sqware
table of gold with xij precious Stonys , a box with grene Jaspys with
iiij fyngerys , conteynyng the viij names of ower lorde , vij
candylstykkys of golde , and An Auter of fyne gold , upon the whyche
they have a cherybyn of gold xij spane longe , And a Tabernacle of golde
and xij Trumpetts of sylv , A Tabernacle of Sylver and vij barley lovys
, And all the other reliques that war be_for the Nativite of Criste .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,70.137

Up on the same Rokk sleppe Jacobbe whanne he sawe Aungellys goo vp and
Down , And sayd , Vere locus iste Sanctvs est et ego nesciebam .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,70.138

And ther the Aungell changyd Jacobs name TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,70.139

and callyd hym Israel . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,70.140

Item , our Savyor Criste was offeryd vpon the same stone whanne <P_71>
Symeon Justus toke hym in hys Armys and sayd , Nunc Dimittis svum tuum .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,71.141

Item , o=r= Savyor Criste sat vp on the same Rokke at xij yer of Age ,
in the myddys of the Doctors heryng them and opposyng them .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,71.142

And aftyr wardys at hys xxx yer of age , many tymes he satt vpon the
same prechyng to the peple , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,71.143

And ther ower Savyor Criste for_gaff the woman hyr synnys that was taken
in Avoutry . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,71.144

And ther offeryd fyrst Melchesedech bred and wyne to ower lord in token
of the sacrament that was for to com . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,71.145

And ther the Aungell Denowncyd to Zacharie the Nativite of Seynt John
the Baptyst . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,71.146

Item , ther fell David praeying to our lord for mercy for hym self and
hys peple . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,71.147

And with_in the same Temple ys the ffountayne wher of holy wrytt seyte ,
Vidi aquam egredientem de templo . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,71.148

The iiij gate of thys Temple ys with_owt the Citye , Suthest towards the
Mownte Syon , TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,71.149

And that ys callyd Porticus Salomonis , with_in the whyche gate ther ys
a fayer Chirche and a large of our blyssyd lady wher she was Noryshed
and browght vp to the tyme she was xiiij yer of Age .
TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,71.150

Holy scriptur spekyth moche of thys Temple whiche war to longe to wryte
for this purpose . TORKINGT-1517-E1-P2,71.151

