<BEGIN_turner-1568-e1-p2>

<P_E5R>

This Booke sheweth at large the powers , commodities , vertues , and
properties of the three most renouned and famous Preseruatives or
Triacles : to weete , of the great Triacle called in Latine <font>
Theriaca Andromachi : <$$font> of the Triacle <font> Salt <$$font> : and
of it that is called by the name of the first finder out and maker ,
Mithridatium : Gathered out of Galen and Aetius , by the labours and
paines of William Turner , Doctor of Phisick . <$$font>
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E5R.3

<P_E5V>

<heading>

William Turner to the gentle reader . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E5V.6

<$$heading>

Forasmvch as both Christian charity , and the common ciuil loue that
euerye man oweth to his countrye , woulde and do require that all
Christians and men liuing ciuilly togither in one common countrye ,
shoulde one helpe another with such giftes , as riches , strength and
all kinde of mans helpe , if they be more richly replenished therwith
than their neighbors be : Me thinke we that professe the science of
Phisick , and can shewe great helpe and comfort vnto our brethren and
countrymen , as wel as men of other countries , to wete , Italians ,
Germanes , and Spaniards haue done , might iustlye be accused of
vnkindnesse , if none of vs <paren> being so many <$$paren> would take
in hand to declare in the English tong , the manifolde and worthie
vertues of the great Triacle made by <font> Andromachus : <$$font> and
of the Triacle <font> Salt , <$$font> which is called in Latine <font>
Sal theriacalis . <$$font> Wherefore seeing that hitherto <P_E6R> I
haue not perceiued any man to haue taken that labour in hand , for the
loue that I owe vnto almightie God and his people , my countrymen of
England , I will aduenture as well as I can , to declare the nature ,
vertue , propertie and operations of the forenamed Triacle , and also of
the Triacle <font> Salt . <$$font> TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E6R.8

And because I am not minded to bring out any new thing of mine owne
inuention , I entend for to gather the summe of this whole matter out of
an olde Graecian , named <font> Galen , <$$font> the most famous writer
of Phisicke that wrote this .xiiij._hundred yeare in all Europa , Asia ,
or Africa , and out of another famous Graecian named <font> Aetius ,
<$$font> a man of great learning : who gathered into a booke that is now
abrode in Latin , all the most notable compositions that his predecessor
<paren> noble <font> Galen <$$font> left behind him , and a great number
of compositions of medicines , written before <font> Galens <$$font>
time by noble Phisitions , whereof <font> Galen <$$font> made no mention
: and also of no small number of excellent compositions of medicines
inuented by learned Phisitions after <font> Galens <$$font> time .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E6R.9

If this my paine taken in this matter shall be perceiued to be
thankefull vnto them , and to be well taken , if God sende me longer
life and health , I will set something more <P_E6V> forth to the profite
of all my country men , both my friendes and foes also .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E6V.10

The maner of making of the great Triacle , and Triacle <font> Salt ,
<$$font> and <font> Mithridatium , <$$font> maye be had both in Galen to
Piso , and also in Aetius . Wherefore if there be any Apothecaries of
Lo~don , that dare take in hande to make these noble compositions , they
may know now where to haue the~ : or if that for lacke of some simple
medicines , not easilye to be had in England , they dare not aduenture
vppon the making thereof : they maye haue them made already from Venice
, as faithfully compounded at this time , as euer any Triacles haue bene
made there these .xl. yeres . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E6V.11

But now let vs reherse the vertues and properties of these excellent
medicines . And first of the great Triacle . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E6V.12

<P_E7R>

<heading>

Galen writeth to <font> Piso this . <$$font> TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E7R.15

<$$heading>

The triacle deuised by <font> Andromachus <$$font> the elder , is verye
good against the biting of all wilde beastes and serpents , against
poysoned medicines , against disease of y=e= stomach , shortnesse of
winde , against the Colicke , against the iaundice , the dropsey , the
consumption of the lunges , all kinds of crampes or drawings togither ,
the pleurisie , sores of the bladder , stopping of water , paines of the
kidneys , pestilent diseases , and also the biting of a mad dog , if it
be taken in the weight of the Beans of Egypt , with three ciathes of
warme water : TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E7R.17

that is about the measure of foure ounces and a half .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E7R.18

It is also good against the long during paines of the head , distnesse
of the head , and hardnesse of hearing : TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E7R.19

it mendeth the dulnesse of the eyesight , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E7R.20

it helpeth the falling sicknesse , and them that cast out bloud , if a
man will <P_E7V> giue it with the broth of <font> Comfrey <$$font> .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E7V.21

It draweth out the wormes in the guts , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E7V.22

it helpeth those that haue diseases of the liuer and milt ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E7V.23

it helpeth thorowlye the bloudie flixe , and the common flixe that
commeth of the slipperinesse of the guts and stomacke , and the turning
torments of the guts , especially if the guttes haue no inflammation or
great burning heate in them . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E7V.24

Besides this , when as the body wasteth a_way with to much sweating ,
and his strength is brought to weakenesse , & the nature of the disease
will not suffer y=e= vse of wine , this triacle dru~ken , stayeth or
stoppeth the sweate , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E7V.25

and restoreth the strength that was weakened before .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E7V.26

It doth also prouoke downe to women their sickenesse that hath bene long
stopped , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E7V.27

and it doth now and then open the stopping of the issue of the mother
and of the Emrodes : TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E7V.28

for seeing that it is endued with sundrye and mengled qualities or
properties , therfore it spreading abrode something & making them thin ,
draweth them togither , that they may be sifted out .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E7V.29

It vseth for to staye <P_E8R> other things that flowe aboue measure , by
reason of the weaknesse of y=e= strength of the body , or the power
retentiue or holding power , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8R.30

and therefore restoreth the strength againe : TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8R.31

and also it helpeth all diseases of the ioyntes , when as the time of
increasing the disease is past , and it is come to the highest ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8R.32

for then thou shalte giue to drinke this triacle after thou hast made
fomentations vpo~ the aking place , the which in deede shall driue away
the flowing humors that are stuffed in , and shall driue backe those
that woulde fall in afterwarde . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8R.33

This Triacle is good also for them that are of perfite health , if they
take it oft . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8R.34

With the vse of this Triacle , I haue oft times helped those that haue
the disease called in Greeke <font> Elephantiasis <$$font> , and <paren>
now commonly called the lepre or leprosie , which is not in deede the
lepre of the olde Grecians , neither it that the scripture makes mention
of . <$$paren> TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8R.35

It is not onely good for the bodie , but also for the minde ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8R.36

for if it be oft drunken , it healeth melancholyke diseases ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8R.37

and wasteth away blacke choler , by reason whereof <P_E8V> it is also
good for the Feuer Quartaine which commeth of blacke choler , otherwise
called melancholy . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8V.38

I haue deliuered many verie easily that haue bene sicke of the Quartaine
, with this remedie . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8V.39

For I vse first to purge the sick person by vomiting , which is done
after meate , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8V.40

and the next daye I giue hym to drinke the iuice of wormwood ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8V.41

and then two houres before his fit , I giue him this Triacle ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8V.42

and oft times the patient is by and by deliuered from his fit .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8V.43

This medicine hath accustomably taken away y=e= feare of water , which
of all diseases is the worst , and vseth to come to a man after he is
bitten of a mad dog . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8V.44

They that haue this disease , are afrayde of water ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8V.45

and for the great drynesse that they haue within the~ , they are
desirous of moysture , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8V.46

but they forbeare or hold themselues from drink , bicause that they are
departed from their right minde and vnderstanding , and consider not
what woulde helpe them or doe them good . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,E8V.47

And therefore it commeth to passe that they flying & eschuing water ,
wither , and are drawen togither with a <P_F1R> deadly crampe , by the
reason of a hote ague that they are inwardly burnt with , and so at
length die the wretchedst kinde of death y=t= can be .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F1R.48

I haue vsed somtimes to put some portion of this triacle mengled with
rose oyle , into the wounde that the mad dog hath made , that it might
after the maner of a boring glasse , sucke and draw out from the bottome
the vennome , in_so_much that the Triacle is not onely good to be taken
in , but also to be layde outwardly vpon the wound , which as soone as
the dog hath made with his teeth , must be launced and cut rounde about
and kept open , for the space of foure dayes , that the venome may
therby breth out , that the wounde be not stopped or growen vp againe .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F1R.49

And for this purpose ye may make a cauterisation in y=e= wound to kepe
it long open , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F1R.50

but bicause the most part of men can better abide the akings than the
burnings . If the wounde can be kept open with only cutting , it shall
be better to let it abide so , in tender and weake persons ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F1R.51

but if it wil needes grow to , then must it be kept open with burning
<P_F1V> or cauterisation . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F1V.52

A man can@ @not finde a better remedie than this triacle against the
pestilence , which being also as it were a wild beast , bred of y=e=
corruption of the ayre , leaping vpon men by the inbreathing of that ill
breaths which destroyeth , wasteth , and maketh hauock not only of one
man , but of whole tounes and Cities . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F1V.53

And as <font> Hipocrates <$$font> draue away y=e= pestilence out of
Athens w=t= great fires made of spice woods , and swete floures ,
chaunging the temperature of the aire , that men by this meanes might
draw in with their breath the purified or clensed aire , for a remedye
against the common euill that reigned there then : Eue~ so this Triacle
like a scouring or purging fire , will not suffer them that take it in
before they be infected , to be infected at al :
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F1V.54

and deliuereth them that are infected already , if they take it in
afterward , chaunging the malicious poyson of the aire which they haue
receyued by breath . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F1V.55

And suffereth not the disease to spread any further . Wherfore I
counsel thee , euen whe~ as thou are in thy <P_F2R> best helth , to vse
oft this Triacle . But especially when thou makest thy iorney in the
winter . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F2R.56

And this Triacle strengtheneth also the wittes or senses .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F2R.57

It quickeneth the minde or vnderstanding , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F2R.58

and so defendeth the body , by reason of the mixture , that it suffereth
not the bodye to be ouercome by anye poyson or venemous drink or potion
. As it is reported of king <font> Mithridates <$$font> , who defended
himselfe so , not with the great triacle , which at that time was not ,
but with a preseruatiue of his owne making , which after his owne name
was called <font> Mithridatium <$$font> , that he could not be
ouercommed with any poyson , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F2R.59

a man must vse this Triacle after he hath perfitely digested . Somtime
in the quantity of a beane of Egypt with three ounces & a halfe of water
. TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F2R.60

And somtime when he hath more time to digest the medicine , he may take
the quantitie of a Hasel nut , with four ounces & a halfe of water .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F2R.61

But I would counsell no body to take this triacle in the heate of Sommer
. TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F2R.62

Neyther ought it to be taken oft and much , of them that are not of
flourishing <P_F2V> or lusty age , neither of the~ that are of hote
natures or complexions : TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F2V.63

I counsell also that they whose yeres turne towards age doe take it oft
and much , not with water but with wine . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F2V.64

Children in no case ought to receiue this medicine , bicause it will
dissolue or lose in pieces their bodies . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F2V.65

For I remember that I saw once a little boy , who by the vnseasonable
vsing of thys Triacle , fell into a palsey . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F2V.66

<heading>

<font> Of the Triacle Salt . <$$font> TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F2V.68

<$$heading>

The Triacle Salt is a medicinall Salt , made of diuers excellent herbes
, and of burnt Salt and burnt Vipers , or else of the trochiskes of
Vipers being burnt . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F2V.70

And the composition of this Salt , is found both in <font> Galen
<$$font> and also in <font> Aetius . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F2V.71

Galen <$$font> writeth thus of the triacle Salt : not word for word but
in sentence , as I am ready for to proue , if any may holde the
contrarye . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F2V.72

The triacle Salt <paren> saith <font> Galen <$$font> <$$paren> is good
for the same diseases , poisons , bitings and other things that the
great Triacle is good <P_F3R> for , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3R.73

but it worketh not so effectuously nor in so short a time .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3R.74

Some peraduenture will thinke that the vertue of Triacle Salt shall
soone vanishe awaye , bicause the Vipers which are the principall
grounde of the medicine are burned , and thereby leese their strength :
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3R.75

but that is not true , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3R.76

for manye things by reason of the fire are made better ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3R.77

or else declare their nature that lurketh . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3R.78

We melt or trie golde by the fire , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3R.79

and it that is counterfeit golde , is betrayed thereby ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3R.80

and it that is good golde , is declared to be good , by the triall of
the fire . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3R.81

And iron also is made soft by the fire and bowable ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3R.82

and so is made fit for many things necessary for mans life .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3R.83

Are not also manye things that we receyue inwardly for the nourishment
of our bodies made better by y=e= help of the the fire ?
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3R.84

<font> Galen <$$font> rehearseth examples of diuerse other things which
are made better by burning of them in the fire .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3R.85

And so hee sayth , that all Vipers burnt whole , do put away their
poyson that they had before , & are made holsome by the fire .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3R.86

Although <P_F3V> the triacle Salt be good for manye other things , yet
properly and especially it helpeth those diseases that rise in the
vttermost part of the skin : as the scuruye euill that goeth through the
skin into the flesh , and maketh it of a white colour , the common lepre
of the Grecians and scripture , and the Wild scabby or scuruy euil .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3V.87

And it driueth awaye lice that breede of corruption ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3V.88

and besides these , it scoureth the teeth verye well ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3V.89

and suffereth them not to be eaten thorow , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3V.90

and it strengthneth the gummes that are lose , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3V.91

and holdeth downe or stoppeth the flowing and the rotting of them .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3V.92

<heading>

<font> Of the Triacle Salt : out of Aetius . <$$font>
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3V.94

<$$heading>

The Triacle Salt is good for all things that the great Triacle is after
a moderate maner , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3V.96

and sheweth his profite by continuall vsing of it :
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F3V.97

howbeit there are some that denie vtterly that it hath any power to
helpe or doe any good , alledging that <P_F4R> the propertie of the
Vipers is destroyed by the burning , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4R.98

but I dare affirme that although the Triacle Salt hath not so great
vertues as the great Triacle hath : yet neuertheless that it looseth not
his strength by the comming into the fier . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4R.99

For there are manye things which are found and perceyued to be better
for that they haue bene in the fier , as golde , lime , and such like .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4R.100

For Vipers burnt whole in the fier , put away by the reason of the fier
, their more strong and hurtfull {SIC:hurfull} propertie ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4R.101

and take of the fire their holesome temperature and right propertie .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4R.102

The Triacle Salt is chieflye commended in helping the diseases of the
skin , as the white Morphew , y=e= Lepre of the Grecians , and Scripture
, the wilde scurfe , and the sickenesse now commonlye called the Lepre ,
which in deede is not the Lepre , but <font> Elephantiasis <$$font> ,
the black morphew , wilde scabbes , thinnesse and falling of the heare ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4R.103

for it doth awaye by and by such euilles or griefes of the skin
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4R.104

and driueth awaye verye well sharp excrements , being in plenty vnder
the skin . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4R.105

<P_F4V>

The vse of this Salt driueth out sweats of many ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4V.107

and so by the sweating , the rotten substance is emptied out :
in_so_much that certaine drawe out lice in the beginning , within .14.
dayes after the vse of this medicine at the most ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4V.108

& afterwards there appeared no more anye lice ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4V.109

but some in stede of lice , cast out flemmy spitting , beginning first
with the casting out of the Salt : TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4V.110

and then within a little while after , when the spittell is purged out ,
it is stopped . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4V.111

Ye may vse it as well at dinner , as at supper , with what soeuer kinde
of meate ye list to take it , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4V.112

neither shall ye neede to prouoke anye man further , to the receuing of
it . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4V.113

For there is such pleasauntnesse in it , that a man might saye , it were
rather made for pleasure , than for other intentes .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4V.114

A man may take the quantitie of three spoonfuls in one daye , especially
if the meate be well digested in the stomach before .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4V.115

They that eate it haue a better digestion , and a greater appetite to
their meate , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4V.116

and they haue a more florishing or lustie body , and all their wittes or
senses lustier and fresher . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F4V.117

<P_F5R>

It dissolues suffusions that are yet beginning , and not fully growen
togither . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5R.119

Neyther shall any man be in daunger of suffusio~ that vseth them dayly .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5R.120

The same prouoketh the monethlye disease of women , that are stopped by
reason of a clustering or stopping co~geling of the bloud ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5R.121

the same stayeth and stoppeth the outrageous and large flowing of the
same . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5R.122

Whosoeuer will take it afore hand , shall ouercome all the lying in
waite of beasts that cast out poyson , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5R.123

neither when a man is hurt with the venome alreadye , & take the Salt by
and by after , shall he {TEXT:missing_"he"} run into any daunger thereby
, especially if he haue prepared , or as it were seasoned the complexion
of his body a long time before , by the vsing of this Salt .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5R.124

It is good to {COM:illegible} for succour vnto this helping medicine ,
which driueth away the euill in the beginning of the Pestilence ,
especiallye if thou menge withall some part of <font> Tamariske <$$font>
. TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5R.125

Furthermore the triacle Salt is good phisicke for the most part of all
diseases , and especially for such as are in the kidneys ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5R.126

for it breaketh the stones that <P_F5V> are in them ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5V.127

and when they are sore weakened , restoreth and maketh them freshe
againe . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5V.128

There can no like medicine be giuen , to helpe the disinesse of the head
, & headaches , and to the falling sickenesse ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5V.129

vnto this if a man will take it plenteouslye , for the space of a yeare
, I haue knowen olde iaundices , and those that haue hadde yll nultes ,
and men diseased with the Colike , which fell oft into that disease , to
haue bene holpen by this Salt . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5V.130

And I haue dried vp the dropsy with it , especially it that goeth
betwene the fell and the fleshe . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5V.131

And I haue driuen away the disease of insatiable hunger , which is
called in greke <font> Bulinos <$$font> , w=t= this salt :
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5V.132

& also if it be eaten , it helpeth those that go in colde ayre , that
they take no harme therby . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5V.133

It stayeth continuall quiuerings or shaking , that come to one by
courses , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5V.134

and drieth vp moyst horce and coughes . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5V.135

This Salt sprinkled vppon the meate bringeth them that were consumed
with a consumption , to the right state again ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5V.136

and maketh them that are losed by weaknesse , to amende agayne .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F5V.137

For I knowe <P_F6R> manye that haue had all their members losed , that
is to saye stricken with a palsey , restored to their perfite helthe
againe . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F6R.138

This etable Salt a man woulde thinke that it were onely made for them
that beginne to haue the goute , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F6R.139

and for all them that haue anye disease of the ioyntes , it helpeth them
so spedilye . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F6R.140

A man can not well expresse howe much this Salt will staye and hinder
olde quarteyns , and dotings or madnesse , that ryse of melancholye , if
it be taken before the fittes , or in the space betweene the fittes ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F6R.141

it killeth also all kinde of wormes , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F6R.142

it is also verye good to rub the teeth , speciallye the great teeth ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F6R.143

for it doth make the teeth not onely the whiter ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F6R.144

but also strengthneth them , so that no tooth shal moue or be losed
after , nor eaten thorow , nor set on edge . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F6R.145

It draweth also out of the head y=e= great plenty of humors ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F6R.146

& purgeth it TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F6R.147

and maketh the eies lighter . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F6R.148

The phisition must occupie this triacle Salt after diuers maners and
wayes : TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F6R.149

as for an example . If he will giue this Salt to one that spitteth
bloud , let him put the first part of <font> Comfrey <$$font> <P_F6V>
brused and sifted , to one proportion or quantitie of this Salt : as to
fiue spoonefuls of the Salt , one of <font> Comfrey <$$font> .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F6V.150

In the curing of them that are sick in the consumption of the lungs ,
called the ptisick , and them that haue matter running out of the
breasts : y=e= phisition must put also to one part of the Salt , sixe
parts of Oris pouder , or Dittamy of Candy . To the~ that are diseased
in the liuer , Ground pine , to them that are diseased in the milt , the
roote of Swines head , called <font> Cyclamem <$$font> , or the barkes
of Capers , or put vnto the sixt part of pepper .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F6V.151

If thou wilt dresse it for them that haue the gout , take awaye the
halfe of the prescribed weight of Satirion , taking good heede that thou
stirrest not vp furious pleasures , & such as lose the ioynts in them .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F6V.152

But the Salt will breake the stone in the kidneys , most of all if it
haue mixed with it y=e= fruit of <font> Balsamum <$$font> or
Gru~mellsede . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F6V.153

If thou wilt make a stronger power against poisons , thou shalt double
y=e= quantitie of <font> Scordiu~ <$$font> , otherwise called Water
Germaunder , and Horehound , in the <P_F7R> making of the Salt :
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F7R.154

and beside that , thou shalt adde dried Duckes bloud .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F7R.155

It will be better for them that are bitten of a mad dog , if they put
vnto it the rootes of Piony or burnt Crabbes .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F7R.156

The Salt wil be good for them that haue their neckes growen backwarde ,
by reason of drawing togither of the sinewes , if they can abide to haue
a little <font> Castoreum <$$font> , and <font> Opopanax <$$font> ,
mixed with it . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F7R.157

It cleareth and maketh sharp the eye sight , if thou put in thy Salt
y=e= leaues of <font> Malabathrum <$$font> , in double quantitie .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F7R.158

It helpeth y=e= digestions of meate , if there be put in it a sufficient
quantitie of <font> Cassia <$$font> , and <font> Costus <$$font> , for
the swelling that commeth of winde . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F7R.159

Put Commin to it , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F7R.160

it will prouoke brine or water in greater plentie , if thou put of y=e=
seede of <font> Dancus <$$font> to it . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F7R.161

It will deliuer a man sooner from the quartein if right vp growing
Veruin and Agrimonie , and the iuice of <font> Cireneik <$$font> or
Laser it selfe be mixed with it . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F7R.162

But to tell the summe of the matter shortly . Whatsoeuer thou knowest
to be holesome and good for the diseased member , mixe that with the
<P_F7V> Salt : either in the making of it , or in the quantitie that
thou entendest to giue in . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F7V.163

But we must not giue it to them that are with childe , nor to sucking
children , neither to other little children , neyther to them that are
of a hoter complexion , and especially not in Summer , neyther to them
that haue a sharpe and a drie ague in any case .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F7V.164

Hitherto haue I written of the great Triacle and the Triacle Salt :
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F7V.165

but bicause there are many excellent vertues , helpes , and remedies
that may be had also of the noble preseruatiue medicine called <font>
Mithridatium <$$font> , bearing the name of <font> Mithridates <$$font>
the king , who inuented it , I thinke I shall doe well also to declare
to such as vnderstand no Latine , the vertues , properties , remedies ,
and helpes , that maye be had of that preseruatiue : which maye be taken
with much less ieopardie , then the great Triacle can be taken .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F7V.166

Yea maye take at the most , the quantitie of a hasell nut of this
medicine . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F7V.167

They that are come to full age may take the qua~titie of a beane of
<font> Grecia <$$font> , which is called <font> Lotos <$$font> .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F7V.168

This quantitie <P_F8R> may be encreased or diminished in y=e= middle
ages , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F8R.169

and they that haue no ague maye take it with wine , or with honied wine
, or sugared wine , or with spiced wine , if that they haue a stopped
liuer . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F8R.170

But they that are agewish , muste take it with water , or Mede .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F8R.171

It is verie good for old reumes that flow downe into the stomach and
brest , and for all impostumes , and deepe old exulcerations or wearing
of the skin that are far and depe in the bodye .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F8R.172

It is good for them that are in a consumption , and them that haue great
plentie of winde in their bellies , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F8R.173

and it helpeth the common flix , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F8R.174

it mendeth the dull appetite , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F8R.175

and bringeth a freshe appetite againe . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F8R.176

And maketh a mans body haue a good color , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F8R.177

it breaketh the stone , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F8R.178

it helpeth them that can@ @not but with great paine make water ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F8R.179

and suffereth not melancholy to be gathered togither .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F8R.180

It sharpeneth their sight that receiue it , TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F8R.181

if it be taken afore hande , it hath a great power to hinder or let that
a man not be hurt with any kinde of deathlye poyson , for the which
cause it was <P_F8V> first ordeyneth and inuented of King <font>
Mithridates <$$font> . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F8V.182

<heading>

An Admonition of William Turner to the Reader .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,F8V.184

<$$heading>

Although both <font> Galen <$$font> and <font> Aetius <$$font> hath
giuen sufficient warning vnto all me~ & women , at what times , in what
ages , complexions , and in what diseases these medicines may be
hurtfull or holesome to the receyuers of it : yet marking the great dull
grossenesse of many English men that can@ @not vnderstand it , that is
plainly spoken , and the foolish hardynesse of other some that care not
for sufficient warning , but will boldlye become murtherers of
themselves , by misusing of Gods creatures , not vsing them by the
aduise of almightie Gods seruauntes and officers the learned Phisitions
, but out of time , and out of measure take them in , without al
discretion , folowing <P_G1R> onelye their owne aduise or els the
counsell of some doting olde Gooddame , or some craking Cremer , or
prating runnagate Pedlar , I ca~@ @not think my self sufficie~tly
discharged , except I giue warning to all men and women that will vse
these medicines , that they take the~ not in rashly and unaduisedly ,
without the aduise and counsell of a learned phisition , who may tell
them , whether they be agreeing for their natures and complexions and
diseases or no . The which thing if they will not doe , neither will
learne in what quantitie they ought to be taken , neither what persons ,
of what ages , neither at what times they ought to be taken , doubtlesse
, I thinke that it will chaunce sometime , that the most precious
medicines shall turne in to their owne destructions .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,G1R.186

Let no man now say but he is sufficiently warned .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,G1R.187

The great Triacle & the <font> Mithridatium <$$font> may be had wel ,
euen of the best making , of the most part of y=e= Apothecaries of the
citie of London : and sometimes of other that trauaile to Venice ,
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,G1R.188

all these three sortes are nowe <P_G1V> lately made and dressed in the
famous Citie of Venice . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,G1V.189

<heading>

The names of diseases and griefes that maye be healed by the great
Triacle , called <font> Theriacas Andromachi <$$font> , as Galen writeth
in his booke vnto Piso . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,G1V.191

<$$heading>

The biting of all venemous beasts and serpents . All kinde of poysons
and poysened drinkes . The diseases of the stomach . Shortnesse of
winde . The Colicke . The Iaundise or Guelesought . The Dropsey .
The consumption of y=e= Lungs or ptisick . All kinde of Cramps , or
drawings togither , or shrinking of sinewes . The pleuresey or side
ague with a stitch , and spitting of bloud , and vlcerations . Sores of
the bladder . Stopping of water or brine . <P_G2R> Paines of the
kidneys . Pestilence , and pestilent diseases . The biting of a mad
dog . Olde headaches . Disinesse of the head . Hardnesse of hearing .
The dulnesse of the eye sight . The falling sicknesse . Vomiting of
bloud . Wormes in the guttes . The diseases of the Liuer . The
diseases of the Milt . The bloudie flix . The common flix . The
turning torments of the guttes . Wasting away with to much sweating .
The stopping of womens monthly sicknesse . The stopping of the mother .
The stopping of the Emrodes . All superfluous flowings of the body .
All diseases of the ioyntes . Poysoning , and falling to perilous
diseases . The common Lepre called <font> Elephantiasis . <$$font>
<P_G2V> The disease of the minde that came of melancholye . All
melancholicke diseases . Plentie of choler : called melancholy . The
quartaine ague . The feare of water after the biting of a mad dog .
The weakenesse of the wittes or senses . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,G2R.193

<heading>

The names of the diseases and griefes that maye be healed by the Triacle
Salt : according vnto the learning of Galen and Aetius .
TURNER-1568-E1-P2,G2R.195

<$$heading>

All the diseases of the skin , but chiefly those that follow . The
white Morphew . The Lepre of the Grecians and scripture . The wilde
scurfe . The common Lepre , called in Latin <font> Elephantiasis .
<$$font> The blacke morphew . Wilde crabbes . The falling of the heare
. <P_G3R> Thinnesse of the heares . Stopping of sweate . Ouermuch
plentie of flegmaticke excrements . Lacke of digestion . Lacke of
appetite . Dulnesse of senses or wittes . Suffusions that breede the
hawe , and pearle in the eye , called of some <font> Cataracta .
<$$font> Stopping of venemous diseases . The outrageous flowing of
venemous diseases . The biting of venemous beasts and serpentes . The
pestilence and contagious aire . The disease of the kidneys . The
debilitie and weakenesse of the kidneys . Olde headaches . The falling
sicknesse . The Iaundice . The diseases of the Milt . The Colicke .
The dropsey . The vnsatiable hunger called <font> Bulimos <$$font> .
<P_G3V> The cold y=t= a ma~ taketh in cold weather . Shakings and
tremblings , that come before agues . Consumptions , Ptisicks , and
wastings of the bodye . The Palsie and weaknesse of the ioints , and
other members . The Goute . All diseases of the ioyntes . Olde
quartaines . Dotings , and madnesse that come of melancholie . All
kinde of wormes that breede within a man . The rotting & other diseases
of the teeth . Rheumaticke humors in the head . Certaine diseases of
the eyes . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,G3R.197

<heading>

The Names of the diseases that may be healed by the noble preseruatiue
medicine called <font> Mithridatium <$$font> , as Galen and Aetius and
all other learned Phisitions , that wrote after them of such matter , do
beare witnesse in their writings . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,G3R.199

<$$heading>

<P_G4R>

The stopping of the Liuer . Olde reumes flowing downe into the stomacke
and brest . Impostumes . Deepe Ulcerations , and of scraping of the
skin that are farre in the body . Consumptions and Ptisicks .
Windynesse in the body . The common flixe . The dull appetite .
Euill_fauored color of the face and other places of the body . The
stone . Hardnesse and painefulnesse in making of water . Gathering
together of melancholy . Dulnesse of the eye sight . All deadly poyson
. TURNER-1568-E1-P2,G4R.202

<font> Finis <$$font> . TURNER-1568-E1-P2,G4R.203

