<BEGIN_tyndnew-1534-e1-p2>

<P_6,1A>

<heading>

The .vi. Chapter . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.4

<$$heading>

In those dayes as the nombre of the disciples grewe , ther arose a
grudge amonge the Grekes agaynste the Ebrues , because their wyddowes
were despysed in the dayly mynystracion . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.6

Then the twelve called the multitude of the disciples to_gether
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.7

and sayde : it is not mete that we shuld leave the worde of God and
serve at the tables . Wherfore brethren , loke ye out amonge you seven
men of honest reporte , and full of the holy goost and wysdome , which
we maye apoynte to this nedfull busynes . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.8

But we will geve oure selves continually to prayer , and to the
ministracion of the worde . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.9

And the sayinge pleased the whoale multitude .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.10

And they chose Steven a man full of fayth and of the holy goost , and
Philip , and Prochorus , and Nichanor , and Timon , and Permenas , and
Nicholas a converte of Antioche . Which they set before the Apostles ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.11

and they prayed TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.12

and layde their hondes on them . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.13

And the worde of God encreased , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.14

and the noumbre of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.15

and a great company of the prestes were obedient to the faythe .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.16

And Steven full of faythe and power , dyd great wondres and myracles
amonge the people . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.17

Then ther arose certayne of the synagoge , which are called Lybertines
and Syrenites , and of Alexandria , and of Cilicia , and Asia ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.18

and disputed with Steven . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.19

And they coulde not resist the wysdome , and the sprete , with which he
spake . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.20

Then sent they in men , which sayd : we have hearde him speake
blasphemous wordes agaynst Moses , and agaynst God .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.21

And they moved the people and the elders and the scribes :
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.22

and came apon him TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.23

and caught him , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.24

and brought him to the counsell , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.25

and brought forth falce witnesses which sayde . This man ceasith not to
speake blasphemous wordes agaynst this holy place and the lawe :
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.26

for we hearde him saye : this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroye this
place , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.27

and shall chaunge the ordinaunces which Moses gave vs .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.28

And all that sate in the counsell loked stedfastly on him ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.29

and sawe his face as it had bene the face of an angell .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,6,1A.30

<P_7,1A>

<heading>

The .vii. Chapter . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.33

<$$heading>

Then sayde the chefe prest : is it even so ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.35

And he sayde : ye men , brethren and fathers , harken to .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.36

The God of glory appered vnto oure father Abraham whyll he was yet in
Mesopotamia , before he dwelt in Charran , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.37

and sayd vnto him : come out of thy contre , and from thy kynred ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.38

and come into the londe , which I shall shewe the .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.39

Then came he out of the londe of Chaldey , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.40

and dwelt in Charran . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.41

And after that , as@ @sone as his father was deed , he brought him into
this lande , in which ye now dwell , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.42

and he gave him none inheritaunce in it , no not the bredeth of a fote :
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.43

but promised that he wolde geve it to him to possesse and to his seed
after him , when as yet he had no chylde . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.44

God verely spake on this wyse that his seade shulde be a dweller in a
straunge londe and that they shulde kepe them in bondage and entreate
them evyll .iiii.C. yeares . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.45

But the nation to whom they shal@ @be in bondage will I iudge , sayde
God . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.46

And after that shall they come forthe and serve me in this place .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.47

And he gave him the covenaunt of circumcision .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.48

And he begat Isaac , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.49

and circumcised him the viii. daye , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.50

and Isaac begat Jacob , and Jacob the twelve patriarkes .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.51

And the patriarkes havinge indignation solde Joseph into Egipte .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.52

And God was with him TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.53

and delivered him out of all his adversities .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.54

And gave him faveour and wisdome in the sight of Pharao kynge of Egipte
which made him governer over Egipte , and over all his housholde .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.55

Then came ther a derth over all the londe of Egipt and Canaan , and
great affliccion , that our fathers founde no sustenaunce .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.56

But when Jacob hearde that ther was corne in Egipte , he sent oure
fathers fyrst , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.57

and at the seconde tyme , Ioseph was knowen of his brethren ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.58

and Iosephs kynred was made knowne vnto Pharao .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.59

Then sent Ioseph TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.60

and caused his father to be brought and all his kynne ,
thre_score_and_xv. soules . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.61

And Iacob descended into Egipte TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.62

and dyed bothe he and oure fathers , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.63

and were translated into Sichem , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.64

ond were put in the sepulcre that Abraham bought for money of the sonnes
of Emor , at Sichem . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.65

When the tyme of the promes drue nye <paren> which God had sworne
{SIC:sworme} to Abraham <$$paren> the people grewe and multiplied in
Egipte , till another kynge arose which knewe not of Joseph .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.66

The same dealte suttelly with oure kynred , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.67

and evyll intreated oure fathers , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.68

and made them to cast oute their younge chyldren , that they shuld not
remayne alyve . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,1A.69

<P_7,20A>

The same tyme was Moses borne , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.71

and was a proper childe in the sight of God , which was norisshed vp in
his fathers housse thre monethes . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.72

When he was cast out , Pharoes doughter toke him vp ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.73

and norisshed him vp for her awne sonne . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.74

And Moses was learned in all maner wisdome of the Egipcians ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.75

and was mighty in dedes and in wordes . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.76

And when he was full forty yeare olde , it came into his hert to visit
his brethren , the chyldren of Israhel . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.77

And when he sawe one of them suffre wronge , he defended him ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.78

and avenged his quarell that had the harme done to him ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.79

and smote the Egypcian . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.80

For he supposed hys brethren wolde have vnderstonde how that God by his
hondes shuld save them TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.81

But they vnderstode not . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.82

And the next daye he shewed him selfe vnto them as they strove ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.83

and wolde have set them at one agayne sayinge : Syrs , ye are brethren ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.84

why hurte ye one another ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.85

But he that dyd his neghbour wronge , thrust him awaye sayinge : who
made the a rular and a iudge amonge vs ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.86

What , wilt thou kyll me , as thou dyddest the Egyptian yester_daye ?
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.87

Then fleed Moses at that sayenge , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.88

and was a stranger in the londe of Madian , where he begat two sonnes .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.89

And when .xl. yeares were expired , ther appered to him in the
wyldernes of mounte Syna an angell of the Lorde in a flamme of fyre in a
busshe . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.90

When Moses sawe it , he wondred at the syght .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.91

And as he drue neare to beholde , the voyce of the Lorde came vnto him :
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.92

I am the God of thy fathers , the God of Abraham , the God of Isaac ,
and the God of Jacob . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.93

Moses trembled TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.94

and durst not beholde . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.95

Then sayde the Lorde to him : Put of thy showes from thy fete ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.96

for the place where thou stondest , is holy grounde .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.97

I have perfectly sene the affliccion of my people which is in Egypte ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.98

and I have hearde their gronynge , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.99

and am come doune to delyver them . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.100

And now come and I will sende the into Egypte .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.101

This Moses whom they forsoke sayinge : who made the a ruelar and a judge
: the same God sent bothe a ruler and delyverer , by the hondes of the
angell which appered to him in the busshe .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.102

And the same brought them out shewynge wonders and signes in Egypte ,
and in the reed see and in the wyldernes .xl. yeares .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.103

This is that Moses which sayde vnto the chyldren of Israel : A Prophet
shall the Lorde youre God rayse vp vnto you of youre brethren lyke vnto
me , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.104

him shall ye heare . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.105

This is he that was in the congregacion , in the wyldernes with the
angell which spake to him in the mounte Syna , and with oure fathers .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.106

This man receaved the worde of lyfe to geve vnto vs , to whom oure
fathers wolde not obeye but cast it from them ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,20A.107

and in their hertes turned backe agayne into Egypte , <P_7,40A> sayinge
vnto Aaron : Make vs goddes to goo before vs .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.108

For this Moses that brought vs out of the londe of Egypte , we wote not
what is become of him . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.109

And they made a calfe in those dayes , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.110

and offered sacrifice vnto the ymage , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.111

and reioysed in the workes of their awne hondes .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.112

Then God turned him selfe ; TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.113

and gave them vp , that they shuld worship the starres of the skye , as
it is written in the boke of the prophetes .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.114

O ye of the housse of Israel , gave ye to me sacrefices and meate
offerynges , by the space of xl. yeares in the wildernes ?
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.115

And ye toke vnto you the tabernacle of Moloch , and the starre of youre
god Remphan , figures which ye made to worshippe them .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.116

And I will translate you beyonde Babylon . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.117

Oure fathers had the tabernacle of witnes in the wyldernes , as he had
apoynted them speakynge vnto Moses , that he shuld make it acordynge to
the fassion that he had sene . Which tabernacle oure fathers receaved ,
and brought it in with Josue into the possession of the gentyls which
God drave out before the face of oure fathers vnto the tyme of David ,
which founde favour before God , and desyred that he myght fynde a
tabernacle for the God of Iacob . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.118

But {SIC:Bnt} Salomon bylt him an housse . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.119

How_be_it he that is hyest of all , dwelleth not in temple made with
hondes , as saith the Prophete : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.120

Heven is my seate , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.121

and erth is my fote stole , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.122

what housse will ye bylde for me sayth the Lorde ?
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.123

or what place is it that I shuld rest in ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.124

hath not my honde made all these thinges ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.125

Ye stiffenecked and of vncircumcised hertes and eares : ye have all
wayes resisted the holy goost : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.126

as youre fathers dyd , so do ye . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.127

Which of the prophetes have not youre fathers persecuted ?
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.128

And they have slayne them , which shewed before of the commynge of that
iust , whom ye have now betrayed and mordred .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.129

And ye also have receaved a lawe by the ordinaunce of angels ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.130

and have not kept it . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.131

When they hearde these thinges , their hertes clave a sunder ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.132

and they gnasshed on him with their tethe .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.133

But he beynge full of the holy goost , loked vp stedfastlye with his
eyes into heven TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.134

and sawe the glorie of God , and Jesus stondynge on the ryght honde of
God , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.135

and sayde : beholde , I se the hevens open , and the sonne of man
stondynge on the ryght honde of god . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.136

Then they gave a shute {COM:sic} with a loude voyce ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.137

and stopped their eares TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.138

and ranne apon him all at once , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.139

and caste him out of the cite , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.140

and stoned him . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.141

And the witnesses layde doune their clothes at a yonge mannes fete named
Saul . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.142

And they stoned Steven callynge on and sayinge : Lorde Iesu receave my
sprete . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,40A.143

<P_7,60A>

And he kneled doune TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,60A.145

and cryed with a loude voyce : Lorde laye not this synne to their charge
. TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,60A.146

And when he had thus spoken , he fell a slepe .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,7,60A.147

<P_8,1A>

<heading>

The .viii. Chapter . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.150

<$$heading>

Saul had pleasure in his deeth . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.152

And at that tyme there was a great persecucion agaynst the congregacion
which was at Ierusalem , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.153

and they were all scattered abroade thorowout the regions of Iury and
Samaria , except the Apostles . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.154

Then devout men dressed Steven , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.155

and made great lamentacion over him . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.156

But Saul made havocke of the congregacion entrynge into every housse ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.157

and drewe out bothe man and woman , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.158

and thrust them into preson . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.159

They that were scattered abroade , went every where preachyng the worde
. TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.160

Then came Philip into a cite of Samaria TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.161

and preached Christ vnto them . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.162

And the people gave hede vnto those thinges which Philip spake , with
one acorde , in that they hearde and sawe the miracles which he dyd .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.163

For vnclene spretes cryinge with loude voyce , came out of many that
were possessed of them . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.164

And manye taken with palsies , and many that halted , were healed
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.165

And ther was great ioye in that cite . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.166

And ther was a certayne man called Simon , which before tyme in the same
cite , vsed witche crafte and bewitched the people of Samarie , sayinge
, that he was a man that coulde do greate thinges . Whom they regarded
, from the lest to the greatest , sayinge : this felow is the great
power of God . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.167

And him they set moche by , because of longe tyme with sorcery he had
mocked them . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.168

But as@ @sone as they beleved Philippes preachynge of the kyngdome of
God and of the name of Iesu Christ , they were baptised bothe men and
wemen . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.169

Then Simon him selfe beleved also , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.170

and was baptised , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.171

and continued with Phillip , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.172

and wondered beholdynge the miracles and signes , which were shewed .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.173

When the Apostles which were at Jerusalem hearde saye that Samaria had
receaved the worde of God : they sent vnto them , Peter and Iohn , which
when they were come , prayed for them , that they myght receave the holy
goost TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.174

For as yet he was come on none of them : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.175

But they were baptised only in the name of Christ Iesu .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.176

Then layde they their hondes on them , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.177

and they receaved the holy goost . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.178

When Simon sawe , that thorowe layinge on of the Apostles hondes on them
, the holy goost was geven : he offered them money sayinge : Geve me
also this power , that on whom soever I put the hondes , he maye receave
the holy goost . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,1A.179

<P_8,20A>

Then sayde Peter vnto him : thy monye perysh with the , because thou
wenest that the gifte of God maye be obteyned with money .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.181

Thou hast nether parte nor felloushippe in this busines .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.182

For thy hert is not ryght in the syght of God .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.183

Repent therfore of this thy wickednes , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.184

and praye God that the thought of thyne hert maye be forgeven the .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.185

For I perceave that thou arte full of bitter gall , and wrapped in
iniquite . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.186

Then answered Simon TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.187

and sayde : Praye ye to the lorde for me that none of these thinges
whiche ye have spoken , fall on me . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.188

And they , when they had testified and preached the worde of the lorde ,
returned toward Jerusalem , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.189

and preached the gospell in many cities of the Samaritans .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.190

Then the angell of the lorde spake vnto Phillip sayinge : aryse
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.191

and goo towardes mydde daye vnto the waye that goeth doune from
Ierusalem vnto Gaza which is in the desert .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.192

And he arose TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.193

and went on . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.194

And beholde a man of Ethiopia which was a chamberlayne , and of grete
auctorite with Candace quene of the Ethiopians , and had the rule of all
her treasure , came to Jerusalem for@ @to praye .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.195

And as he returned home agayne sittynge in his charet , he rede Esay the
prophet . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.196

Then the sprete sayde unto Phillip : Goo neare
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.197

and ioyne thy selfe to yonder charet . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.198

And Philip ranne to him , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.199

and hearde him rede the prophet Esayas TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.200

and sayde : Vnderstondest thou what thou redest ?
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.201

And he sayd : how can I , except I had a gyde ?
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.202

And he desyred Philip that he wold come vp and sit with him .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.203

The tenoure of the scripture which he redde , was this .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.204

He was ledde as a shepe to be slayne : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.205

and lyke a lambe domme before his sherer , so opened he not his mouth .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.206

Because of his humblenes , he was not estemed :
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.207

who shall declare his generacion ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.208

for his lyfe is taken from the erthe . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.209

The chamberlayne answered Philip TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.210

and sayde : I praye the , of whom speaketh the Prophet this ?
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.211

of him selfe , or of some other man ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.212

And Philip opened his mouth , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.213

and beganne at the same scripture , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.214

and preached vnto him Jesus TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.215

And as they went on their waye , they came vnto a certayne water ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.216

and the chamberlayne sayde : Se here is water ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.217

what shall let me to be baptised ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.218

Philip sayde vnto him : Yf thou beleve with all thyne hert , thou mayst
. TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.219

He answered TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.220

and sayde : I beleve that Jesus Christe is the sonne of God .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.221

And he commaunded the charet to stonde still .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.222

And they went doune bothe into the water : bothe Philip and also the
chamberlayne , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.223

and he baptised him . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.224

And as@ @sone as they were come out of the water , the sprete of the
lorde caught awaye Philip , that the chamberlayne sawe him no moore .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.225

And he went on his waye reioysinge : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,20A.226

<P_8,40A>

but Philip was founde at Azotus . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,40A.228

And he walked thorow out the countre preachynge in their cities , tyll
he came to Cesarea . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,8,40A.229

<P_9,1A>

<heading>

The .ix. Cha. TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.232

<$$heading>

And Saul yet brethynge oute threatnynges and slaughter agaynst the
disciples of the lorde , went vnto the hye preste ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.234

and desyred of him letters to Damasco , to the synagoges : that yf he
founde eny of this waye , whether they were men or wemen , he myght
bringe them bounde vnto Ierusalem . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.235

But as he went on his iorney , it fortuned that he drue nye to Damasco ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.236

and sodenly ther shyned rounde about him a lyght from heven .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.237

And he fell to the erth , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.238

and hearde a voyce sayinge to him : Saul , Saul , why persecutest thou
me ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.239

And he sayde , what arte thou lorde ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.240

And the lorde sayd , I am Jesus whom thou persecutest ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.241

it shal@ @be harde for the to kycke agaynst the pricke .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.242

And he bothe tremblynge and astonyed sayde : Lorde what wilt thou have
me to do ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.243

And the Lorde sayde vnto him : aryse and goo into the cite , and it
shal@ @be tolde the what thou shalt do . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.244

The men which iornayed with him , stode amased ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.245

for they herde a voyce , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.246

but sawe no man . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.247

And Saul arose from the erth , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.248

and opened his eyes , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.249

but sawe no man . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.250

Then ledde they him by the honde , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.251

and brought him into Damasco . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.252

And he was .iii. dayes with_out syght , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.253

and nether ate nor dranke . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.254

And ther was a certayne disciple at Damasco named Ananias ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.255

and to him sayde the lorde in a vision : Ananias .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.256

And he sayde : beholde I am here lorde . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.257

And the lorde sayde to him : aryse TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.258

and goo into the strete which is called strayght ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.259

and seke in the housse of Iudas , after one called Saul of Tharsus .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.260

For beholde he prayeth , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.261

and hath sene in a vision a man named Ananias comynge in to him , and
puttynge his hondes on him , that he myght receave his syght .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.262

Then Ananias answered : Lorde I have hearde by many of this man , how
moche evell he hath done to thy sainctes at Jerusalem ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.263

and here he hath auctorite of the hye prestes to bynde all that call on
thy name . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.264

The lorde sayde vnto him : Goo thy wayes : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.265

for he is a chosen vessell vnto me , to beare my name before the gentyls
and kynges , and the chyldren of Israel . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.266

For I will shewe him how great thinges he must suffre for my names sake
. TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.267

Ananias went his waye TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.268

and entryd into the housse TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.269

and put his hondes on him TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.270

and sayde : brother Saul , the lorde that apperyd vnto the in the waye
as thou camst , hath sent me , that thou myghtest receave thy syght and
be@ @filled with the holy goost . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.271

And immediatly ther fell from his eyes as it had bene scales ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.272

and he receaved syght , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.273

and arose TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.274

and was baptised , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.275

and receaved meate TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.276

and was comforted . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.277

Then was Saul a certayne daye with the disciples which were at Damasco .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,1A.278

<P_9,20A>

And streyght waye he preached Christ in the synagoges , how that he was
the sonne of God . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.280

All that hearde him , were amased TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.281

and sayde : is not this he that spoyled them which called on this name
in Jerusalem , and came hyther for the entent that he shuld bringe them
bounde unto the hye prestes ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.282

But Saul encreased in strength , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.283

and confounded the Iewes which dwelte at Damasco , affirminge that this
was very Christ . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.284

And after a good whyle , the Jewes toke counsell to_gether , to kyll him
. TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.285

But their layinge awayte was knowen of Saul .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.286

And they watched at the gates daye and nyght to kyll hym .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.287

Then the disciples toke him by night TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.288

and put him thorow the wall TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.289

and let him doune in a basket . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.290

And when Saul was come to Ierusalem , he assayde to cople him selfe
{TEXT:silfe} with the discyples TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.291

and they were all afrayde of hym TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.292

and beleued not that he was a disciple . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.293

But Bernabas toke hym TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.294

and brought hym to the apostles TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.295

and declared to them how he had sene the Lorde in the waye and had
spoken wyth hym : and how he had done boldely at damasco in the name of
Iesu . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.296

And he had his conuersacion with them at Ierusalem ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.297

and quit hym selfe {SIC:silfe} boldly in the name of the lorde Iesu .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.298

And he spake TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.299

and disputed wyth the grekes : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.300

and they went aboute to slee hym . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.301

But when the brethren knew of that , they brought hym to cesarea ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.302

and sent hym forth to Tharsus . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.303

Then had the congregacions rest thorowoute all Jewry and galile and
Samary , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.304

and were edified , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.305

and walked in the feare of the lorde , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.306

and multiplied by the comforte of the holy gost .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.307

And it chaunsed that as Peter walked throughoute all quarters , he cam
to the saynctes which dwelt at Lydda TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.308

and there he founde a certayne man namyd Eneas , whych had kepte hys bed
viii. yere sicke of the palsie . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.309

Then sayde Peter vnto hym : Eneas Jesus Christ make the whole .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.310

Aryse TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.311

and make thy beed . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.312

And he arose immedyatly . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.313

And all that dwelt at lydda and assaron , sawe hym ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.314

and tourned to the lorde . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.315

Ther was at Ioppe a certayne woman <paren> whiche was a disciple named
Tabitha , which by interpretacion is called dorcas <$$paren>
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.316

the@ @same was full of good workes and almes dedes , which she did .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.317

And it chaunsed in those dayes that she was sicke and dyed .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.318

When they had wesshed her and layd her in a chamber : Because Lydda was
nye to Ioppa , and the disciples had hearde that Peter was there , they
sent unto hym , desyrynge him that he wolde not be greved to come vnto
them . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.319

Peter arose TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.320

and came with them TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.321

and when he was come , they brought him in to the chamber .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.322

And all the wydowes stode rounde aboute hym wepynge and shewynge the
cotes and garmentes which Dorcas made whill she was with them .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,20A.323

<P_9,40A>

And Peter put them all forth TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,40A.325

and kneled doune TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,40A.326

and prayde TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,40A.327

and turned him to the body , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,40A.328

and sayde : Tabitha aryse . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,40A.329

And she opened her eyes , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,40A.330

and when she sawe Peter she sat vp . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,40A.331

And he gave her the honde TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,40A.332

and lyft her vp , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,40A.333

and called the sainctes and wydowes , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,40A.334

and shewed her alyve . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,40A.335

And it was knowne throwout all Ioppa , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,40A.336

and many beleved on the Lorde . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,40A.337

And it fortuned that he taryed many dayes in Ioppa with one Simon a
tanner . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,9,40A.338

<P_10,1A>

<heading>

The .x. Chapter . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.341

<$$heading>

Ther was a certayne man in Cesarea called Cornelius , a captayne of the
soudiers of Italy , a devoute man , and one that feared God with all his
housholde , which gave moche almes to the people , and prayde God alwaye
. TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.343

The same man sawe in a vision evydently aboute the nynthe houre of the
daye an angell of god comynge into him , and sayinge vnto him :
Cornelius . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.344

When he looked on him , he was afrayde , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.345

and sayde : what is it lorde ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.346

He sayde vnto him . Thy prayers and thy almeses ar come vp into
remembraunce before God . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.347

And now sende men to Ioppa , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.348

and call for one Simon named also Peter . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.349

He lodgeth with one Simon a tanner , whose housse is by the see syde .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.350

He shall tell the , what thou oughtest , to doo .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.351

When the angell which spake vnto Cornelius was departed , he called two
of his housholde servauntes , and a devoute soudier of them that wayted
on him , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.352

and tolde them all the mater , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.353

and sent them to Ioppa . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.354

On the morowe as they went on their iorney and drewe nye vnto the cite ,
Peter went vp into the toppe of the housse to praye , aboute the .vi.
houre . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.355

Then wexed he an_hongred , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.356

and wolde have eaten . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.357

But whyll they made redy . He fell into a traunce ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.358

and sawe heven opened and a certayne vessell come doune vnto him , as it
had bene a greate shete , knyt at the .iiii. corners , and was let
doune to the erth , where in wer all maner of .iiii._foted beastes of
the erth and vermen and wormes , and foules of the ayer .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.359

And ther came a voyce to him : ryse Peter , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.360

kyll and eate . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.361

But Peter sayde : God forbyd Lorde , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.362

for I have never eaten eny thinge that is comen or vnclene .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.363

And the voyce spake vnto him agayne the seconde tyme : what God hath
clensed , that make thou not comen . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.364

This was done thryse , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.365

and the vessell was receaved vp agayne into heven .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.366

Whyle Peter mused in him selfe what this vision which he had sene meant
, beholde , the men which were sent from Cornelius , had made inquirance
for Simons housse , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.367

and stode before the dore . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.368

And called out won TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.369

and axed whether Simon which was also called Peter were lodged there .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.370

Whyll Peter thought on this vision , the sprete sayde vnto him : Beholde
, men seke the : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,1A.371

<P_10,20A>

aryse therfore , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.373

get the doune , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.374

and goo with them , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.375

and doute not . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.376

For I have sent them . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.377

Peter went doune to the men which were sent vnto him from Cornelius ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.378

and sayde , Beholde , I am he whom ye seke ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.379

what is the cause wherfore ye are come ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.380

And they sayde vnto him : Cornelius the captayne a iust man , and won
that feareth God , and of good reporte amonge all the people of the
Jewes was warned by an holy angell , to sende for the into his housse ,
and to heare wordes of the . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.381

Then called he them in , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.382

and lodged them . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.383

And on the morowe Peter went awaye with them ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.384

and certayne brethren from Ioppa accompanyed hym .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.385

And the thyrd daye entred they into Cesaria .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.386

And Cornelius wayted for them , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.387

and had called to_gether his kynsmen , and speciall frendes .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.388

And as it chaunsed Peter to come in , Cornelius met hym ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.389

and fell doune at his fete , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.390

and worshipped hym . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.391

But Peter toke him vp sayinge : stonde vp :
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.392

for evyn I my selfe {SIC:silfe} am a man .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.393

And as he talked with him he cam in , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.394

and founde many that were come to_gether .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.395

And he@ @sayde vnto them : Ye do@ @knowe how that yt ys an vnlawfull
thynge for a man that is a Iewe , to company or come vnto an alient :
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.396

But god hath shewed me that I shuld not call eny man commen or vnclene :
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.397

therfore came I vnto you with_oute sayenge naye as@ @sone as I was sent
for . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.398

I axe therfore , for what intent have ye sent for me ?
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.399

And Cornelius sayde : This daye now .iiii. dayes I fasted ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.400

and at the nynthe houre I prayde in my housse :
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.401

and beholde , a man stode before me in bright clothynge ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.402

and sayde : Cornelius , thy prayer is hearde ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.403

and thyne almes dedes are had in remembraunce in the sight of God .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.404

Sende therfore to Ioppa , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.405

and call for Simon which is also called Peter .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.406

He is lodged in the housse of one Simon a tanner by the see syde , the
wich as@ @sone as he is come , shall speake vnto the .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.407

Then sent I for the immediatly TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.408

and thou hast well done for to come . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.409

Now are we all here present before god , to heare all thynges that are
commaunded unto the of God . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.410

Then Peter opened his mouth TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.411

and sayde : Of a trueth I perseave , that God is not parciall , but in
all people TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.412

he that feareth him and worketh rightewesnes , is accepted with him .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.413

Ye knowe the preachynge that God sent vnto the chyldren of Israel ,
preachinge peace by Jesus Christe , <paren> which is Lorde over all
thinges : <$$paren> Which preachinge was publisshed thorow_oute all
Iewrye , and beganne in Galile , after the baptyme which Iohn preached ,
how God had annoynted Jesus of Nazareth with the holy goost , and with
power , which Jesus went aboute doinge good , and healynge all that were
oppressed of the develles , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.414

for God was with him . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.415

And we are witnesses of all thinges which he dyd in the londe of the
Iewes and at Ierusalem , whom they slew , and honge on tree .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,20A.416

<P_10,40A>

Him God reysed vp the thyrde daye , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,40A.418

and shewed him openly , not to all the people , but vnto vs witnesses
chosyn before of God , which ate and dronke with him , after he arose
from deeth . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,40A.419

And he commaunded vs to preache vnto the people and testifie , that it
is he that is ordened of God a iudge of quycke and deed .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,40A.420

To him geve all the Prophetes witnes , that thorowe his name shall
receave remission of synnes all that beleve in him .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,40A.421

Whyle Peter yet spake these wordes , the holy gost fell on all them
which hearde the preachinge . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,40A.422

And they of the circumcision which beleved , were astonyed , as many as
came with Peter , because that on the Gentyls also was shed {TEXT:sheed}
oute the gyfte of the holy gost . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,40A.423

For they hearde them speake with tonges and magnify God .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,40A.424

Then answered Peter : can eny man forbyd water that these shuld not be
baptised , which have receaved the holy goost as well as we ?
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,40A.425

And he commaunded them to be baptysed in the name of the Lorde .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,40A.426

Then prayde they him , to tary a feawe dayes .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,10,40A.427

<P_11,1A>

<heading>

The .xi. Chapter . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.430

<$$heading>

And the Apostles , and the brethren that were thorowout Iewry , harde
saye that the hethen had also receaved the worde of God .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.432

And when Peter was come vp to Jerusalem , they of the circumcision
reasoned wyth him sayinge Thou wentest in to men vncircumcised ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.433

and atest with them . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.434

Then Peter began TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.435

and expounded the thinge in order to them sayinge : I was in the cyte of
Ioppa prayinge , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.436

and in a traunce I sawe a vision , a certen vessell descende , as it had
bene a large lynnyn clothe , let doune from hevin by the fower corners ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.437

and it cam to me . Into the which when I had fastened myn eyes , I
consydered and sawe fowerfoted beastes of the erth , and vermen and
wormes , and foules of the ayer . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.438

And I herde a voyce sayinge vnto me : aryse Peter ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.439

sley and eate . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.440

And I sayd : God forbyd lorde , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.441

for nothinge comen or vnclene , hath at eny tyme entred into my mouth .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.442

But the voyce answered me agayne from heven ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.443

count not thou those thinges comen , which god hath clensed .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.444

And this was done thre tymes . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.445

And all were takin vp agayne into heven . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.446

And beholde immediatly ther were thre men come vnto the housse where I
was , sent from Cesarea vnto me . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.447

And the sprete sayde vnto me , that I shuld go with them , with_out
doutinge . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.448

Morover the sixe brethren accompanyed me : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.449

and we entred into the mans housse . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.450

And he shewed vs , how he had sene an angell in his housse , which stod
and sayde to him : Send men to Ioppa , and call for Symon , named also
Peter : he shall tell the wordes , wher by both thou and all thyne
housse shal@ @be saved . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.451

And as I beganne to preach , the holy goost fell on them , as he dyd on
vs at the begynninge . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.452

Then came to my remembraunce the wordes of the Lorde , how he sayde :
Iohn baptised with water , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.453

but ye shal@ @be baptysed with the holy goost .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.454

For as moche then as God gave them lyke gyftes , as he dyd vnto vs ,
when we beleved on the Lorde Jesus Christ : what was I that I shuld have
withstonde {SIC:havewith_stonde} God ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.455

when they hearde this , they helde their peace
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.456

and gloryfied God , sayinge : then hath God also to the gentyls graunted
repentaunce vnto lyfe . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.457

They which were scattryd abroade thorow the affliccion that arose aboute
Steven , walked thorow_oute tyll they came vnto Phenices and Cypers and
Antioche , preachynge the worde to no man , but vnto the Iewes only .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,1A.458

<P_11,20A>

Some of them were men of Cypers and Syrene , which when they were come
into Antioche , spake vnto the Grekes , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.460

and preched the Lorde Jesus TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.461

And the honde of the Lorde was with them , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.462

and a greate nombre beleved TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.463

and turned vnto the Lorde . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.464

Tydinges of these thinges came vnto the eares of the congregacion ,
which was in Ierusalem . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.465

And they sente forth Barnabas that he shuld go vnto Antioche . Which
when he was come , and had sene the grace of God , was glad , and
exhorted them all , that with purpose of hert they wolde continually
cleave vnto the Lorde . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.466

For he was a good man , and full of the holy goost and of faythe :
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.467

and moche people was added vnto the Lorde .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.468

Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus , for to seke Saul .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.469

And when he had founde him , he brought him vnto Antioche .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.470

And it chaunsed that a whole yere they had their conversacion with the
congregacion there , and taught moche people : in_somoche that the
disciples of Antioche were the fyrst that were called Christen .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.471

In those dayes came Prophetes from Ierusalem vnto Antioche .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.472

And ther stode vp one of them , named Agabus ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.473

and signified by the sprete , that ther shuld be great derth throughoute
all the worlde , which came to passe in the Emproure Claudius dayes .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.474

Then the disciples every man accordinge to his abilite , purposed to
sende socoure vnto the brethren which dwelt in Jewry . Which thinge
they also dyd , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.475

and sent it to the elders , by the hondes of Barnabas and Saul .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,11,20A.476

<P_12,1A>

<heading>

The .xii. Chapter . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.479

<$$heading>

In that tyme Herode the kynge stretched forthe his handes to vexe
certayne of the congregacion . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.481

And he kylled Iames the brother of Iohn with the swerde :
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.482

and because he sawe that it pleased the Iewes , he proceded forther ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.483

and toke Peter also . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.484

Then were the dayes of swete breed . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.485

And when he had caught him , he put him in preson ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.486

and delyvered him to .iiii. quaternions of soudiers to be@ @kepte ,
entendynge after ester to brynge him forth to the people .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.487

Then was Peter kepte in preson . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.488

But prayer was made with_out ceasynge of the congregacion vnto God for
him . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.489

And when Herode wolde have brought him oute vnto the people , the same
nyght slepte Peter bitwene two soudiers , bounde with two chaynes ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.490

and the kepers before the dore kepte the preson .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.491

And beholde the angell of the Lorde was there present ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.492

and a lyght shyned in the lodge . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.493

And smote Peter on the syde , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.494

and steryd him vp sayinge : aryse vp quyckly .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.495

And his cheynes fell of from his hondes . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.496

And the angell sayd unto him : gyrde thy selfe
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.497

and bynde on thy sandales . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.498

And so he dyd . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.499

And he sayde vnto him : cast thy mantle aboute the ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.500

and folowe me . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.501

And he came oute TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.502

and folowed him , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.503

and wist not , that it was truthe which was done by the angell ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.504

but thought he had sene a vision . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.505

When they were past the fyrst and the seconde watche , they came vnto
the yron gate , that ledeth vnto the cyte , which opened to them by his
awne accorde . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.506

And they went out TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.507

and passed thorowe one strete , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.508

and by and by the angell departed from him .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.509

And when Peter was come to him selfe , he sayde : now I knowe of a
surety , that the Lorde hath sent his angell , and hath delyvered me out
of the honde of Herode , and from all the waytynge for of the people of
the Iewes . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.510

And as he consydred the thinge , he cam to the housse of Mary the mother
of one Iohn , which was called Marke also , where many were gaddered
to_gedder in prayer . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.511

As Peter knocked at the entry dore , a damsell cam forth to herken ,
named Rhoda . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.512

And when@ @she knew Peters voyce , she opened not the entrey for gladnes
, TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.513

but ran in TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.514

and told how Peter stode before the entrey .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.515

And they sayde vnto her : thou arte mad . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.516

And she bare them doune that it was even so .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.517

Then sayde they : it is his angell . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.518

Peter contynued knockinge . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.519

When they bad opened the dore , and sawe him , they were astonyed .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.520

And he beckened vnto them with the honde to holde their peace ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.521

and tolde them by what meanes the Lorde had brought him oute of the
preson . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.522

And sayde : goo TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.523

shew these thinges vnto Iames and to the brethren .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.524

And he departed TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.525

and went into a nother place : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.526

As@ @sone as it was daye ther was no lyttell a_do amonge the soudyers ,
what was becum of Peter . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.527

When Herode had called for him , and founde him not , he examined the
kepers , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.528

and comaunded to departe . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.529

And he descended from Jewry to Cesarea , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.530

and ther abode . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,1A.531

<P_12,20A>

Herode was displeased with them of Tyre and Sydon .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,20A.533

And they came all at once , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,20A.534

and made intercession unto Blastus the kynges chamberlen ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,20A.535

and desyred peace , because their countrey was norysshed by the kynges
londe . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,20A.536

And vpon a daye appoynted Herode arayed him in royall apparell ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,20A.537

and set him in his seate , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,20A.538

and made an oraycon vnto them . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,20A.539

And the people gave a shoute , sayinge : it is the voyce of a God and
not of a man . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,20A.540

And immediatly the angell of the Lorde smote him , because he gave not
God the honoure , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,20A.541

and he was eatyn of wormes , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,20A.542

and gave vp the goost . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,20A.543

And the worde of God grewe and multiplied .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,20A.544

And Barnabas and Paul returned to Jerusalem , when they had fulfilled
their office , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,20A.545

and toke with them Iohn , which was also called Marcus .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,12,20A.546

<P_13,1A>

<heading>

The .xiii. Chapter . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.549

<$$heading>

There were at Antioche , in the congregacion certayne Prophetes and
teachers : as Barnabas and Simon called Niger , and Lucius of Cerene ,
and Manahen Herode the Tetrarke@ @s norsfelowe , and Saul .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.551

As they mynistred to the Lorde and fasted , the holy goost sayde :
separate me Barnabas and Saul , for the worke where vnto I have called
them . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.552

Then fasted they TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.553

and prayed , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.554

and put their hondes on them , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.555

and let them goo . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.556

And they after they were sent of the holy goost , came vnto Seleutia ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.557

and from thence they sayled to Cyprus . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.558

And when they were come to Salamine , they shewed the worde of God in
the synagoges , of the Jewes . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.559

And they had Iohn to their minister . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.560

When they had gone thorowout the yle vnto the cite of Paphos , they
founde a certayne sorserer , a falce prophet which was a Iewe , named
Bariesu , which was with the ruler of the countre won Sergius Paulus a
prudent man . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.561

The same ruler called vnto him Barnabas and Saul ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.562

and desyred to heare the worde of God . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.563

But Elemas the sorcerar <paren> for so was his name by interpretacion
<$$paren> with_stode them : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.564

and sought to turne awaye the ruler from the fayth .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.565

Then Saul which also is called Paul beinge full of the holy goost , set
his eyes on him , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.566

and sayde : O full of all sutteltie and disseytfulnes , the chylde of
the devyll , and the enemye of all righteousnes thou ceasest not to
pervert the strayght wayes of the Lorde . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.567

And now beholde the honde of the Lorde is vpon the ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.568

and thou shalt be blinde and not se the sunne for a season .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.569

And immediatly ther fell on him a myste and a darcknes ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.570

and he went aboute sekinge them that shuld leade him by the honde .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.571

Then the rular when he sawe what had happened , beleved ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.572

and wondred at the doctryne of the Lorde . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.573

When they that were with Paule , were departed by shyppe from Paphos ,
they cam to Perga a cite of Pamphilia : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.574

and there Iohn departed from them , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.575

and returned to Ierusalem . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.576

But they wandred thorowe the countres , from Perga to Antioche a cite of
the countre of Pisidia , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.577

and went in to the synagoge on the saboth daye ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.578

and sate doune . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.579

And after the lawe and the Prophetes were redde , the rulers of the
synagoge sent vnto them sayinge : Ye men and brethren , yf ye have eny
sermon to exhorte the people , saye on . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.580

Then Paul stode vp TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.581

and beckened with the honde , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.582

and sayde : Men of Israel , and ye that feare God , geve audience .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.583

The God of this people chose oure fathers , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.584

and exalted the people when they dwelt as straungers in the londe of
Egypt , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.585

and with a mighty arme brought them oute of it ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.586

and aboute the tyme of .xl. yeares suffred he their maners in the
wyldernes . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.587

And he destroyed .vii. nacions in the londe of Canaan ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.588

and devided their londe to them by lot . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,1A.589

<P_13,20A>

And after_warde he gave vnto them iudges aboute the space of
.iiii.C._and_.l. yeres vnto the tyme of Samuel the Prophet .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.591

And after that they desyred a kinge , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.592

and God gave vnto them Saul the sonne of Cis , a man of the tribe of
Beniamin , by the space of .xl. yeres . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.593

And after he had put him doune , he set vp David to be their kynge , of
whome he reported sayinge : I have founde David the sonne of Iesse , a
man after myne awne hert , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.594

he shall fulfill all my will . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.595

Of this mannes seed hath God <paren> accordinge to his promes <$$paren>
brought forth to the people of Israel a saviour , one Iesus , when Iohn
had fyrst preached before his comminge the baptyme of repentaunce to
Israel . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.596

And when Iohn had fulfylled his course , he sayde : whome ye thinke that
I am , the same am I not . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.597

But beholde ther cometh one after me , whose shewes of his fete I am not
worthy to lowse . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.598

Ye men and brethren , chyldren of the generacion of Abraham , and
whosoever amonge you feareth God , to you is this worde of salvacion
sent . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.599

The inhabiters of Jerusalem and their rulers , because they knewe him
not , nor yet the voyces of the Prophetes which are redde every Saboth
daye , they have fulfilled them in condempninge him .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.600

And when they founde no cause of deeth in him , yet desyred they Pylate
to kyll him . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.601

And when they had fulfilled all that were written of him , they toke him
doune from the tree TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.602

and put him in a sepulcre . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.603

But God raysed him agayne from deeth , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.604

and he was sene many dayes of them which came with him from Galile to
Jerusalem . Which are his witnesses vnto the people .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.605

And we declare vnto you , how that the promes made vnto the fathers ,
God hath fulfilled vnto vs their chyldren , in that he reysed vp Jesus
agayne even as it is written in the fyrste psalme : Thou arte my sonne ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.606

this same daye begat I the . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.607

As concernynge that he reysed him vp from deeth , now no more to returne
to corrupcion , he sayde on this wyse : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.608

The holy promyses made to David I will geve them faithfully to you .
Wherfore he saith also in another place : Thou shalt not soffre thyne
holye to se corrupcion . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.609

Howbe_it David after he had in his tyme fulfilled the will of God , he
slepte , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.610

and was layde with his fathers , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.611

and sawe corrupcion . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.612

But he whom God reysed agayne , sawe no corrupcion .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.613

Be it knowne vnto you therfore ye men and brethren , that thorow this
man is preached vnto you the forgevenes of synnes , and that by him are
all that beleve justified from all thinges from the which ye coulde not
be iustified by the lawe of Moses . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,20A.614

<P_13,40A>

Beware therfore lest that fall on you , which is spoken of in the
Prophetes : Be_holde ye despisers TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.616

and wonder , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.617

and perishe ye : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.618

for I do a@ @worke in youre dayes , which ye shall not beleve , yf a man
wolde declare it you . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.619

When they were come out of the Synagoge of the Iewes , the gentyls
besought that they wolde preache the worde to them bitwene the Saboth
dayes . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.620

When the congregacion was broken vp , many of the Jewes and verteous
convertes folowed Paul and Barnabas , which spake to them and exhorted
them to continue in the grace of God . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.621

And the nexte Saboth daye , came almoste the whole cite to_gether , to
heare the worde of God . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.622

When the Iewes sawe the people , they were full of indignacion
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.623

and spake agaynst those thinges which were spoken of Paul , spekinge
agaynst it , and raylinge on it . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.624

Then Paul and Barnabus wexed bolde , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.625

and sayde : it was mete that the worde of God shulde fyrst have bene
preached to you . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.626

But seinge ye put it from you , and thinke youre selfes onworthy of
everlastinge lyfe : lo , we turne to the gentyls .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.627

For so hath the Lorde commaunded vs : I have made the a light to the
gentyls , that thou be salvacion vnto the ende of the worlde .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.628

The gentyls hearde TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.629

and were glad TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.630

and glorified the worde of the Lorde , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.631

and beleved : even as many as were ordeyned vnto eternall lyfe .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.632

And the worde of the Lorde was publisshed thorowe oute all the region .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.633

But the Jewes moved the worshypfull and honorable wemen , and the chefe
men of the cyte , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.634

and reysed persecucion agaynst Paul and Barnabas ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.635

and expelled them oute of their costes . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.636

And they shouke of the duste of their fete agaynste them ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.637

and came vnto Iconium . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.638

And the disciples were filled with ioye and with the holy goost .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,13,40A.639

<P_14,1A>

<heading>

The .xiiii. Chapter . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.642

<$$heading>

And it fortuned in Iconium that they went both to_gether into the
synagoge of the Jewes , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.644

and so spake , that a gret multitude both of the Iewes and also of the
Grekes beleved . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.645

But the vnbelevinge Jewes , steryd vp TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.646

and vnquyeted the myndes of the Gentyls agaynste the brethren .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.647

Longe tyme a_bode they there TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.648

and quyt them selves boldly with the helpe of the Lorde , the which gave
testimony vnto the worde of his grace , and caused signes and wondres to
be done by their hondes . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.649

The people of the cyte were devided : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.650

and parte helde with the Jewes , and parte with the Apostles .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.651

When ther was a saute made both of the gentyls and also of the Iewes
with their rulers , to put them to shame and to stone them , they were
ware of it , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.652

and fled vnto Listra and Derba , cities of Licaonia , and vnto the
region that lyeth round aboute , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.653

and there preached the gospell . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.654

And ther sate a certayne man at Listra weake in his fete , beinge creple
from his mothers wombe , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.655

and never walkyd . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.656

The same hearde Paul preache . Which behelde him and perceaved that he
had fayth to be whole , and sayd with a loude voyce : stond vp_right on
thy fete . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.657

And he stert vp , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.658

and walked . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.659

And when the people sawe what Paul had done , they lifte vp their voyces
, sayinge in the speache of Lycaonia : Goddes are come doune to vs in
the lyknes of men . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.660

And they called Barnabas Iupiter , and Paul Mercurius , because he was
the preacher . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.661

Then Iupiters Preste , which dwelt before their cite , brought oxen and
garlondes vnto the churche porche , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.662

and wolde have done sacrifise with the people .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.663

But when the Apostles , Barnabas and Paul herde that , they rent their
clothes , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.664

and ran in amonge the people , cryinge and sayinge : syrs , why do ye
this ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.665

We are mortall men lyke unto you , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.666

and preache unto you , that ye shuld turne from these vanyties vnto the
lyvinge God , which made heaven and erth and the see and all that in
them is : the which in tymes past suffred all nacions to walke in their
awne wayes . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.667

Neverthelesse he lefte not him selfe with_outen witnes , in that he
shewed his benefites , in gevinge vs rayne from heaven and frutefull
ceasons , fyllinge oure hertes with fode and gladnes .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.668

And with these sayinges , scarse {TEXT:scase} refrayned they the people
, that they had not done sacrifice vnto them .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.669

Thither came certayne Jewes , from Antioche and Iconium ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.670

and optayned the peoples consent TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.671

and stoned Paul , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.672

and drewe him oute of the cyte , supposynge he had bene deed .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,1A.673

<P_14,20A>

How_be_it as the disciples stode rounde about him , he arose vp
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,20A.675

and cam into the cyte . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,20A.676

And the nexte daye he departed with Barnabas to Derba .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,20A.677

After they had preached to that cite and had taught many , they returned
agayne to Listra , and to Iconium and Antioche ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,20A.678

and strengthed the disciples soules , exhortinge them to continue in the
faith , affyrminge that we must thorowe moche tribulacion entre into the
kyngdome of God . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,20A.679

And when they had ordened them elders by eleccion in every congregacion
, after they had prayde and fasted , they comended them to God on whom
they beleved . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,20A.680

And they went thorow_out Pisidia TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,20A.681

and came into Pamphilia , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,20A.682

and when they had preached the worde of God in Perga , they descended in
to Attalia , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,20A.683

and thence departed by shippe to Antioche , from whence they were
delivered vnto the grace of God , to the worke which they had fulfilled
. TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,20A.684

When they were come and had gaddered the congregacion to_gedder , they
rehersed all that God had done by them , and how he had opened the dore
of faith vnto the gentyls . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,20A.685

And ther they abode longe tyme with the disciples .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,14,20A.686

<P_15,1A>

<heading>

The .xv. Chapter . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.689

<$$heading>

Then cam certayne from Iewrie , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.691

and taught the brethren : excepte ye be circumcysed after the maner of
Moses , ye can@ @not be saved . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.692

And when ther was rysen dissencion and disputinge not a@ @litle vnto
Paul and Barnabas agaynst them . They determined that Paul and Barnabas
and certayne other of them shuld ascende to Jerusalem vnto the Apostles
and elders aboute this question . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.693

And after they were brought on their waye by the congregacion , they
passed over Phenices and Samaria , declarynge the conuersion of the
gentyls , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.694

and they brought great ioye vnto all the brethren .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.695

And when they were come to Jerusalem , they were receaved of the
congregacion and of the Apostles and elders .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.696

And they declared what thinges God had done by them .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.697

Then arose ther vp certayne that were of the secte of the Pharises and
dyd beleve sayinge , that it was nedfull to circumcise them and to
enioyne them to kepe the lawe of Moses . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.698

And the Apostles and elders came to_geder to reason of this matter .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.699

And when ther was moche disputinge , Peter rose vp
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.700

and sayde vnto them : Ye men and brethren , ye knowe how that a good
whyle agoo , God chose amonge vs that the gentyls by my mouth shuld
heare the worde of the gospell and beleve .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.701

And God which knoweth the herte , bare them witnes ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.702

and gave vnto them the holy goost , even as he dyd vnto vs ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.703

and he put no difference bitwene them and vs ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.704

but with fayth purified@ @their hertes . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.705

Now therfore why tempte ye God , that ye wolde put a yoke on the
disciples neckes , which nether oure fathers nor we were able to beare .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.706

But we beleve that thorowe the grace of the Lorde Iesu Christ we shal@
@be saved , as they doo . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.707

Then all the multitude was peased TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.708

and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul , which tolde what signes and
wondres God had shewed amonge the gentyls , by them .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.709

And when they helde their peace , Iames answered sayinge : Men and
brethren herken vnto me . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.710

Simeon tolde how God at the begynnynge dyd visit the gentyls , and
receaved of them , people vnto his name . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.711

And to this agreith the wordes of the Prophetes , as it is written .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.712

After this I will returne , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.713

and wyll bylde agayne the tabernacle of David which is fallen doune ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.714

and that which is fallen in dekey of it , will I bilde agayne ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.715

and I will set it vp , that the residue of men might seke after the
Lorde , and also the gentyls vpon whom my name is named saith the Lorde
, which doth all these thinges : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,1A.716

known vnto God are all his workes from the begynninge of the worlde .
Wherfore my sentence is , that we trouble not them which from amonge the
gentyls , are turned to God : <P_15,20A> but that we write vnto them
that they abstayne them selves from filthynes of ymages , from
fornicacion , from stranglyd and from bloude .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.717

For Moses of olde tyme hath in every cite that preache him ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.718

and he is rede in the synagoges every saboth daye .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.719

Then pleased it the Apostles and elders with the whole congregacion , to
sende chosyn men of their owne company to Antioche with Paul and
Barnabas . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.720

They sent Iudas called also Barsabas and Silas , which were chefe men
amonge the brethren , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.721

and gave them lettres in their hondes after this maner .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.722

The Apostles , elders and brethren send gretynges vnto the brethren
which are of the gentyls in Antioche , Siria and Celicia .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.723

For as moche as we have hearde that certayne which departed from vs ,
have troubled you with wordes , and combred youre myndes sayinge : Ye
must be circumcised and kepe the lawe , to whom we gave no soche
commaundement . It semed therfore to vs a good thinge , when we were
come to_gedder with one accorde , to sende chosyn men vnto you , with
oure beloved Barnabas and Paul , men that have ieoperded their lyves for
the name of oure Lorde Iesus Christ . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.724

We have sent therfore Iudas and Sylas , which shall also tell you the
same thinges by mouth . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.725

For it semed good to the holy gost and to vs , to put no grevous thinge
to you more then these necessary@ @thinges : that is to saye , that ye
abstayne from thinges offered to ymages , from bloud , from strangled
and fornicacion . From which yf ye kepe youre selves , ye shall do well
. TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.726

So fare ye well . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.727

When they were departed , they came to Antioche
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.728

and gaddred the multitude togeder TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.729

and delyvered the pistle . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.730

When they had redde it , they reioysed of that consolacion .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.731

And Iudas and Sylas beinge prophetes , exhorted the brethren with moche
preachynge , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.732

and strengthed them . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.733

And after they had taryed there a space , they were let goo in peace of
the brethren vnto the Apostles . Not with stondynge it pleasyd Sylas to
abyde there still . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.734

Paul and Barnabas continued in Antioche teachynge and preachynge the
worde of the Lorde with other many . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.735

But after a certayne space , Paul sayde vnto Barnabas : Let vs goo
agayne and visite oure brethren in every cite where we have shewed the
worde of the Lorde , and se how they do . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.736

And Barnabas gave counsell to take with them Iohn , called also Marke .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.737

But Paul thought it not mete to take him vnto their company whiche
departed from them at Pamphylia , and went not with them to the worke .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,20A.738

And the dissencion was so sharpe bitwene them , that they departed a
sunder one from the other : so that Barnabas toke Marke and sayled vnto
Cypers . <P_15,40A> And Paul chose Sylas and departed delyvered of the
brethren vnto the grace of god . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,40A.739

And he went thorowe all Cyria and Cilicia , stablisshynge the
congregacions . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,15,40A.740

<P_16,1A>

<heading>

The .xvi. Chapter . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.743

<$$heading>

Then came he to Derba and to Lystra . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.745

And beholde a certayne disciple was there named Timotheus , a womans
sonne which was a Iewas and beleved : but his father was a Greke . Of
whom reported well , the brethren of Lystra and of Iconium .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.746

The same Paul wolde that he shuld goo forth with him ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.747

and toke TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.748

and circumcised him because of the Jewes , which were in those quarters
: TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.749

for they knewe all that his father was a Greke .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.750

As they went thorow the cities , they delyvered them the decrees for to
kepe , ordeyned of the Apostles and elders which were at Ierusalem .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.751

And so were the congregacions stablisshed in the fayth ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.752

and encreased in noumbre dayly . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.753

When they had goone thorow_out Phrigia , and the region of Galacia , and
were forbydden of the holy gost to preach the worde in Asia , they came
to Misia , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.754

and sought to goo into Bethinia . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.755

But the sprete soffered them not . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.756

Then they went over Misia , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.757

and cam doune to Troada . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.758

And a vision appered to Paul in the nyght .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.759

There stode a man of Macedonia TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.760

and prayed him sayinge : come into Macedonia
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.761

and helpe vs . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.762

After he had sene the vision , immediatly we prepared to goo into
Macedonia , certified that the lorde had called vs for to preache the
gospell vnto them . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.763

Then lowsed we forth from Troada , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.764

and with a strayght course came to Samothracia , and the nexte daye to
Neapolim , and from thence to Philippos , which is the chefest citie in
the partes of Macedonia , and a fre citie .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.765

We were in that cite abydynge a certayne dayes .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.766

And on the saboth dayes we went out of the cite besydes a ryver where
men were wont to praye , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.767

and we sate doune TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.768

and spake vnto the wemen which resorted thyther :
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.769

And a certayne woman named Lydia , a seller of purple , of the cite of
Thiatira , which worshipped God , gave vs audience . Whose hert the
Lorde opened that she attended vnto the thinges which Paul spake .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.770

When she was baptised and her housholde , she besought vs sayinge : Yf
ye thinke that I beleve on the Lorde , come into my housse ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.771

and abyde there . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.772

And she constrayned vs . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.773

And it fortuned as we went to prayer , a certayn damsell possessed with
a sprete that prophesied , met vs , which brought her master and mastres
moche vauntage with prophesyinge . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.774

The same folowed Paul and vs TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.775

and cryed sayinge : these men are the servauntes of the most hye God ,
which shewe vnto vs the waye of salvacion .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.776

And this dyd she many dayes . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.777

But Paul not content , turned about TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.778

and sayd to the sprete : I commaunde the in the name of Iesu Christ ,
that thou come out of her . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.779

And he came out the same houre . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.780

And when her master and mastres sawe that the hope of their gaynes was
gone , they caught Paul and Sylas , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.781

and drue them into the market place vnto the rulars ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,1A.782

<P_16,20A>

and brought them to the officers sayinge : These men trouble oure cite ,
which are Iewes and preache ordinaunces , which are not laufull for vs
to receave , nether to observe , seinge we are Romayns .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.784

And the people ranne on them , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.785

and the officers rent their clothes , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.786

and commaunded them to be beaten with roddes .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.787

And when they had beaten them sore , they cast them into preson ,
commaundynge the iayler to kepe them surely . Which iayler when he had
receaved suche commaundment , thrust them into the ynner preson , and
made their fete fast in the stockes . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.788

At mydnyght Paul and Sylas prayed , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.789

and lauded God . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.790

And the presoners hearde them . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.791

And sodenly ther was a greate erth quake , so that the fonndacion of the
preson was shaken , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.792

and by and by all the dores opened , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.793

and every mannes bondes were lowsed . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.794

When the keper of the preson waked out of his slepe and sawe the preson
dores open , he drue out his swearde TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.795

and wolde have kylled him selfe , supposynge the presoners had bene
fledde . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.796

But Paul cryed with a lowde voyce sayinge : Do thy selfe no harme ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.797

for we are all heare . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.798

Then he called for a lyght TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.799

and sprange in , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.800

and came tremblynge , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.801

and fell doune before Paul and Sylas , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.802

and brought them out TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.803

and sayde : Syrs , what must I do to be saved ?
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.804

And they sayde : beleve on the Lorde Jesus and thou shalt be saved and
thy housholde . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.805

And they preached unto him the worde of the Lorde , and to all that were
in his housse . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.806

And he toke them the same houre of the nyght
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.807

and wasshed their woundes , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.808

and was baptised with all that belonged vnto him strayght waye .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.809

When he had brought them into his housse , he set meate before them ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.810

and ioyed that he with all his housholde , beleved {SIC:boleved} on God
. TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.811

And when it was daye , the officers sent the ministres sayinge : Let
those men goo . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.812

The keper of the preson tolde this sayinge to Paul , the officiers have
sent worde to lowse you . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.813

Now therfore get you hence TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.814

and goo in peace . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.815

Then sayde Paul vnto them : they have beaten vs openly vncomdempned ,
for all that we are Romayns , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.816

and have cast vs into preson : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.817

and now wolde they sende vs awaye prevely ?
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.818

Naye not so , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.819

but let them come them selves and fet vs out .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.820

When the ministres tolde these wordes vnto the officers , they feared
when they hearde that they were Romayns , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.821

and came TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.822

and besought them , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.823

and brought them out , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.824

and desyred them to departe out of the cite .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,20A.825

<P_16,40A>

And they went out of the preson TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,40A.827

and entred into the housse of Lidia , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,40A.828

and when they had sene the brethren , they comforted them
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,40A.829

and departed . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,16,40A.830

<P_17,1A>

<heading>

The .xvii. Chapter . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.833

<$$heading>

As they made their iorney thorow Amphipolis , and Appolonia , they came
to Thessalonica where was a synagoge of the Iewes .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.835

And Paul as his maner was , went in vnto them ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.836

and thre saboth dayes declared oute of the scripture vnto them ,
openynge and allegynge that Christ must nedes have suffred and rysen
agayne from deeth , and that this Iesus was Christ , whom <paren> sayde
he <$$paren> I preache to you . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.837

And some of them beleved and came and companyed with Paul and Sylas :
also of the honourable Grekes a greate multitude , and of the chefe
wemen , not a feawe . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.838

But the Iewes which beleved not , havynge indignacion , toke vnto them
evyll men which were vagabondes , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.839

and gadered a company , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.840

and set all the cite on a roore , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.841

and made asaute vnto the housse of Iason , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.842

and sought to bringe them out to the people .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.843

But when they founde them not , they drue Iason and certayne brethren
vnto the heedes of the cite cryinge : these that trouble the worlde ,
are come hydder also , which Iason hath receaved prevely .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.844

And these all do contrary to the elders of Cesar , affirmynge another
kynge , one Iesus . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.845

And they troubled the people and the officers of the cite when they
hearde these thinges . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.846

And when they were sufficiently answered of Iason , and of the other ,
they let them goo . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.847

And the brethren immediatly sent awaye Paul and Sylas by nyght vnto
Berrea . Which when they were come thyther , they entred into the
synagoge of the Iewes . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.848

These were the noblest of byrthe amonge them of Thessalonia which
receaved the worde with all diligence of mynde ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.849

and searched the scriptures dayly whether those thinges were even so .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.850

And many of them beleved : also of worshipfull wemen which were Grekes ,
and of men not a@ @feawe . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.851

When the Jewes , of Thessalonia had knowledge that the worde of God was
preached of Paul at Berrea , they came there
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.852

and moved the people . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.853

And then by and by the brethren sent awaye Paul to goo as it were to the
see : TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.854

but Sylas and Timotheus abode there still .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.855

And they that gyded Paul , brought him vnto Attens ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.856

and receaved a commaundment vnto Sylas and Timotheus for to come to him
atonce , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.857

and came their waye . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.858

Whyll Paul wayted for them at Attens , his sprete was moved in him , to
se the cite geven to worshippinge of ymages .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.859

Then he disputed in the synagoge with the Iewes , and with the devout
persones , and in the market dayly with them that came vnto him .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.860

Certayne philosophers of the Epicures and of the stoyckes , disputed
with him . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.861

And some ther were which sayde : what will this babler saye .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.862

Other sayd : he semeth to be a tydynges bringer of newe devyls , because
he preached vnto them Iesus and the resurreccion .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.863

And they toke him , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.864

and brought him into Marsestrete sayinge : maye we not knowe what this
newe doctrine wher of thou speakest , is ? TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,1A.865

<P_17,20A>

For thou bringest straunge tydynges to oure eares .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.867

We wolde knowe therfore what these thinges meane .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.868

For all the Attenians and straungers which were there , gave them selves
to nothinge els , but ether to tell or to heare newe tydynges .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.869

Paul stode in the myddes of Marse strete TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.870

and sayde : ye men of Attens , I perceave that in all thinges ye are to
supersticious . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.871

For as I passed by and behelde the maner how ye worship youre goddes , I
founde an aultre wher in was written : vnto the vnknowen god . Whom ye
then ignorantly worship , TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.872

him shewe I vnto you . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.873

God that made the worlde and all that are in it , seynge that he is
Lorde of heven and erth , he dwelleth not in temples made with hondes ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.874

nether is worshipped with mennes hondes , as though he neded of eny
thinge , seinge he him selfe geveth lyfe and breeth to all men every
where , and hath made of one bloud all nacions of men , for to dwell on
all the face of the erthe , and hath assigned , before how longe tyme ,
and also the endes of their inhabitacion , that they shuld seke God , yf
they myght fele and fynde him , though he be not farre from every one of
vs . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.875

For in him we lyve , move and have oure beynge , as certayne of youre
awne Poetes sayde . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.876

For we are also his generacion . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.877

For as moche then as we are the generacion of God , we ought not to
thynke that the godhed is lyke vnto golde , silver or stone , graven by
crafte and ymaginacion of man . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.878

And the tyme of this ignoraunce God regarded not :
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.879

but now he byddeth all men every where repent , because he hath apoynted
a daye , in the which he will iudge the worlde acordynge to ryghtewesses
, by that man whom he hath apoynted , and hath offered faith to all men
, after that he had raysed him from deeth .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.880

When they hearde of the resurreccion from deeth , some mocked ,
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.881

and other sayde : we will heare the agayne of this matter .
TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.882

So Paul departed from amonge them . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.883

Howbeit certayne men clave vnto Paul TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.884

and beleved , amonge the which was Dionysius a senatour , and a woman
named Damaris , and other with them . TYNDNEW-1534-E1-P2,17,20A.885

