<BEGIN_underhill-1565-e1-p2>

<P_134>

<heading>

<font> Receaved of M. Vnderyll , hys examinations . <$$font>
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,134.4

A note off the examynacyon and impresonmentt off Edwarde Underehylle ,
sone and heyre off Thomas Underhylle , off Honyngham , in the countie
off Warwycke , {COM:'gentleman'_altered_to_'esquire'} esquire , beynge
off the bande off the pencyoners , for a ballett that he made agaynst
the papistes , immediately after the proclamacyone of quene Mary att
London , she beynge in Norfoulke . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,134.5

<$$heading>

The next daye after the quene was come unto the Tower , the foresayde
ballett came unto the handes off secretary Borne , who strayte wayes
made inquiry for me the sayde Edwarde , who dwelled att the Lymehurst ;
wiche he having intellygence off , sentt the shreffe <P_135> of
Mydellsex , with a company off bylles and gleves , who came unto my
housse , I beynge in my bedde , and my wyffe newly leayde in
chylde-bedde . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.7

The hygh constable , whose name is Thomas Ive , dwelled att the next
house unto me the sayde Edwarde , whome the shreffe brought also with
hym ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.8

he beynge my very ffrende , desyred the shreffe and his company to staye
withowte ffor fryghtynge off my wyffe , beyng newly leyde ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.9

and he wolde goo feche me unto hym , who knokede att the doore saynge he
must speke with me . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.10

I lyinge so nere that I might here hym , called unto hym , wyllynge hym
to come unto me , for thatt he was alwayes my verye frende and earnest
in the Gospelle ; who declared unto me that the shreffe , with a greate
company with hym , weare sentt for me . Whereuppon I rose , made me
redy , and came unto hym demaundynge what he wolde with me .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.11

" Sir , <paren> sayde he , <$$paren> I have commanundementt fromme the
councelle to aprehende yow , and forthewith to brynge yow unto them . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.12

" Why , <paren> sayde I , <$$paren> it is now x off cloke in the nyght ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.13

ye can@ @nott now cary me unto them . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.14

" No , syr , <paren> sayde he , <$$paren> you shall go with me to my
house , to London , wheare yow shall have a bedde ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.15

and to-morrowe I wyll brynge yow unto them att the Tower . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.16

" In the name of God ! " <paren> sayde I , <$$paren>
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.17

and so wentt with hym , requyryng hym yff I myght understande the cause
. UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.18

He sayde , he knew none . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.19

" This nedede not then , <paren> sayde I ; <$$paren>
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.20

any one mesenger myght have feched me unto them ; "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.21

suspectynge the cause to be , as it was indede , the ballett .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.22

On the morrow , the shreffe , seynge me nothynge dismayde , thynkyng it
to be sume lyght matter , wentt nott wyth me hymselfe ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.23

butt sent me unto the Tower wyth too of his men , waytynge upon me with
two bylles , presoner-lyke , who brought me unto the councell chamber ,
beynge comaundyd to delyver me unto secretary Bourne .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,135.24

Thus standynge waytynge at the councelle chamber doore , too or <P_136>
thre off my fellowes the pencyoners , and my cosyn jarmene Gilbarte
Wynter , jentylman ussher unto the ladye Elizabethe , stoode talkynge
with me . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,136.25

In the meanetyme commithe sir Edwarde Hastynges , newly made master off
the horse to the quene , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,136.26

and seyng me standynge there presoner , frownynge earnestly uppon me ,
sayde , " Are yow cume ? UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,136.27

we wylle talke with yow or yow parte , I warrantt yow , "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,136.28

and so went into the councell . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,136.29

With that my fellowes and kynsemane shranke away from me as men greately
affrayde . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,136.30

I dide then parseave the sayde syr Edwarde bare in remembraunce the
contraversy thatt was bytwyxt hym and me in talke and questions off
relegyone att Callis , when the ryght honorable the yerle off
Hyntyngetune his brother wentt over generalle off vj._thowsande men ,
with whom I wentt the same tyme and was comtroler off the <P_137>
ordynaunce . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,137.31

The earle beynge veseted with syknes when he came thether , for thatt I
wentt over in his company , and could pley and synge to the lute ,
therwith to pass awaye the tyme on the nyghtes beynge lounge , for we
wentt over in the Cristmas , wolde have me with hym in his chamber ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,137.32

and hadde also a greate delyght to heare his brother reasone with me in
matters of relegione , who wolde be very hote when I dide overley hym
with the textes off the screpture concernynge the naturalle presens of
Crist in the sacramentt of the alter , and wolde sweare greate othes ,
specyally " by the Lord's foote , " thatt after the words spokyne by the
prist ther remayned no breade , but the naturalle body thatt Mary bare .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,137.33

" Naye , then it muste needes be so , <paren> wolde I saye , <$$paren>
and yow prove it with souche othes . " Whereatt the earle wolde lawghe
hartely , sayinge , " Brother , geve hym over ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,137.34

Underhylle is too {COM:preceding_word_"too"_emended} goode for yow . "
Wherwith he wolde be very angrye . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,137.35

The greatest holde thatt he toke was off the thyrde off John , and all
other places thatt he coulde aleage ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,137.36

but frome this he wolde nott be removed , butt thatt those wordes proved
his naturalle body to be in heaven and in the sacramentt also .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,137.37

I tolde hym he as grosely understode Cryst as Nicodemus dyde in the same
place , off beynge borne anew ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,137.38

in my oppinnione any mane that is nott gevyne upe of God maye be
satysfyde concernynge the naturalle presence in the supper of the Lorde
, by the gospell off saynt John , <P_138> redynge from the fyrst chapter
unto the ende off the xvij=th= , with the witnes of the first of the
Actes of the Apostles , off Crist's assencyone , and comynge agayne ,
yff ever he wil@ @be satisfyde , withowte the healpe of any doctors .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.39

Undoutedly the aprehendynge off me was for this matter ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.40

butt the greate mercy off God so provided for me thatt mr. Hastynges
was not att my examynacyone , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.41

for taryinge thus att the councelle chamber doore , doctor Coxks was
within , who came forthe , and was sent to the Marshalse ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.42

then came forthe the lorde Ferris , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.43

and was committed to the Tower ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.44

thene it was dynnar tyme , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.45

and all weare commaunded to departe untylle after dynnar .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.46

My too waytynge mene and I wente to ane alehowse to dynnar ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.47

and , longynge {TEXT:loungynge} to know my payne , I made hast to gett
to the councelle chamber doore , that I myght be the fyrst .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.48

Immediatly as they {COM:preceding_word_"they"_emended} hadde dyned ,
secretarye Bourne came to the doore , lookynge as the wolffe dothe for a
lambe , unto whome my too kepers delyvered me , standynge next unto the
doore , for ther was moo behynde me . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.49

He toke me in gredely , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.50

and shute {SIC:suhute} to the doore ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.51

levynge me at the nether ende of the chamber , he went unto the
councelle , showynge them off me , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.52

and then beckoned me to come neare . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.53

Then they begayne the table UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.54

and sett them downe ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,138.55

the earle of Bedforde sat as chefest uppermoste <P_139> uppon the benche
; next unto hym the earle of Sussex ; next him syr Rycharde Southwelle ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,139.56

on the syde nexte me sate the yearle of Arundell ; next hym the lorde
Pagett ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,139.57

by them stood syr John Gage , then constable of the Tower ; the earle of
Bathe ; and mr. Masone ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,139.58

att the bordes ende stoode sargant Morgane , that afterwardes died madde
, and secretary Borne ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,139.59

the lorde Wentworthe stood in the baye wyndoo , talkyng with one alle
the whyle of my examynacyone , whome I knew nott .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,139.60

<P_140>

Me lorde off Bedforde <paren> beynge my very frende , for thatt my
chaunce was to be att the recoverynge off his sone me lorde Russelle ,
when he was caste into Temes agaynst the Lymehurst ; whome I caryed to
my howse and gott hym to bedde , who was in greate parelle off hys lyff
, the wether beynge very colde ; <$$paren> wolde not seme to be
famelyare with me , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.62

nor called me nott by my name , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.63

butt sayde , " Come hither , surray , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.64

dydd nott yow sett forthe a ballett of late in printe ? "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.65

I kneled downe , sayinge , " Yesse , truly , my lorde ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.66

is thatt the cause I am called before your honors ? "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.67

" Eae , mary , <paren> sayde secretary Bourne , <$$paren>
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.68

yow have one off them abowte yow , I am sure . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.69

" Naye , truly have I nott , " sayde I . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.70

Then toke he one owt of his bosome , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.71

and reade it over distynkly , the councelle gevynge diligentt eare .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.72

When he hadde endide , " I trust , me lordes , <paren> sayd I ,
<$$paren> I have not offendid the queen's majestie in this ballett , nor
spokyne agaynst her title , but mayntayned it . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.73

" No have , syr , <paren> sayde Morgane , <$$paren>
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.74

yesse I cane devide your ballett , and make a distynkcyon in it , and so
prove att the leaste sedicyon in it . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.75

" Eae , syr , <paren> sayde I , <$$paren> yow mene off lawe wylle make
off a matter whatt ye list {COM:to_make} . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.76

" Loo ! <paren> sayde syr Rycharde Southwelle , <$$paren> howe he cane
gyve a taunte . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.77

Yow mayntayne the quene's title , with the healpe of ane arantt herytyke
, Tyndale . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.78

" Yow speake of papistes ther , syr , <paren> sayd mr. Masone ,
<$$paren> UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.79

I praye yow , how defyne yow a papist ? " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.80

I loked uppon hym , turnynge towardes hym , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.81

for he stoode on the syde of me , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.82

" Why , syr , <paren> sayde I , <$$paren> it is nott lounge syns you
could defyne a papist better than I . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.83

With that some off them secretly smyled , as the lorde of Bedforde ,
Arundelle , Sussex , and Pagett . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.84

In greate haste syr John Gage toke the matter in hande .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.85

" Thow callest mene papist ther <paren> sayd he <$$paren> .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.86

Who be they thatt thow jugest to be papistes ? "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.87

I sayde , " Syr , I do name no name {SIC:mane} ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.88

nor I come nott hether to accuse any , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.89

nor none I wylle accuse ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,140.90

butt your honors do knowe thatt in this <P_141> contraversy thatt hathe
byn sume be called papistes and sume {COM:be_called} protestaynes . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,141.91

" Butt we mustt knowe whome thow jugest to be papistes ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,141.92

and thatt we commaunde thee uppon thyne alegens to declare . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,141.93

" Syr , <paren> sayde I , <$$paren> I thynke yff yow loke amonge the
pristes in Poolles , ye shall fynde some old mumsymussis ther . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,141.94

" Mumsymussis , knave , <paren> sayde he , <$$paren> mumsymussis ?
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,141.95

thou arte an herytike knave , by God's bloude ! "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,141.96

" Ee , by mase ! <paren> sayes the earle of Baythe , <$$paren>
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,141.97

I warrantt hym ane heritike knave in dede . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,141.98

" I beseche your honores , <paren> sayde I , spekynge to the lordes
thatt satt att the table , for those other stode by and weare not then
of the councelle , <$$paren> be my goode lordes ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,141.99

I have offendid no lawes , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,141.100

and I have <P_142> sarved the quenes majesties father and her brother
lounge tyme , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,142.101

and in ther sarvis have spentt and consumed parte off my lyvynge , never
havynge as yett any prefermentt or recompence , and the rest off my
{COM:preceding_word_"my"_emended} felows lykewyse , to ower utter
undoynges , unless the quenes hyghnes be goode unto us ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,142.102

and ffor my parte , I wentt nott forthe agaynst her majestie ,
notwithstandynge thatt I was commaundid , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,142.103

nor lyked those doynges . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,142.104

" No , butt with your wrytynges you wolde sett us together by the eares
, " saythe the yearle of Arundelle . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,142.105

" He hathe spentt hys levynge wantonly , " saythe Bourne ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,142.106

" and now saythe he hathe spentt it in the kynges sarvis ; wiche I am
sory ffor . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,142.107

He is cume of a worshipefulle howse in Worsetershere . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,142.108

" It is untruly sayde off yow <paren> sayde I , <$$paren> thatt I have
spentt my levyng wantonly , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,142.109

for I never consumed no parte theroff untylle I came into the kynges
sarvis , whiche I do not repentt , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,142.110

nor douted off recompence , yff ether of my too masters hadde leved .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,142.111

I parseave yow Borne's sone of Worseter , who was beholdon unto my uncle
<P_143> Wynter , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.112

and therfore yow have no cause to be my enemy ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.113

nor yow never knew me , nor I yow before now , wiche is too soone . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.114

" I have harde inough off yow , " sayde he .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.115

" So have I off you , <paren> sayde I , <$$paren> how that mr. Sheldone
drave you oute off Worsetershire for your behavyoure . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.116

With thatt came syr Edward Hastynges from the quene in greate hast ,
saynge , " Me lordes , yow must sett all thynges aparte , and come
forthwith to the quene . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.117

Then sayde the earle of Sussex , " Have this gentleman unto the Flete
untyll we maye talke farther with him , " although I was " knave "
before off mr. Gage . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.118

" To the Flete ? <paren> sayde mr. Southewell , <$$paren>
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.119

have hym to the Marshalse . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.120

" Have the gentleman to Newgate , <paren> saythe mr. Gage agayne ;
<$$paren> UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.121

call a couple of the garde here . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.122

" Ee , <paren> saythe Borne , <$$paren> UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.123

and ther shal@ @be a letter sentt to the keper howe he shall use hym ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.124

for we have other maner off matters to hym then these . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.125

" So hadd ye nede , <paren> sayde I , <$$paren>
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.126

or else I care nott for yow . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.127

" Delyver hym to mr. Garett the shreffe , <paren> sayde he , <$$paren>
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.128

and bydde hym send hym to Newgate . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.129

" Me lorde , " sayde I unto me lorde of Arundelle , for thatt he was
nexte to me as they weare rysynge , " I trust yow wylle not se me thus
used to be sende to Newgate ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.130

I am nother theffe nor trayter . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,143.131

" Ye are a noughtie <P_144> fellow , <paren> sayde he ; <$$paren>
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.132

you weare alwayes tutynge in the duke of Northumberlande@ @s eare ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.133

that you weare . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.134

" I wolde he hadd gevyne better eare unto me , <paren> sayde I ;
<$$paren> UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.135

itt hadde nott byne with hym then as it is now . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.136

Mr. Hastynges passynge by me , I thought goode to prove hym , although
he thretnede before none {GLOSS:noon} . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.137

Syr , <paren> sayde I , <$$paren> I praye yow speake for me thatt I be
nott sende unto Newgate , butt rather unto the Flete , wiche was first
namede ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.138

I have nott offended ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.139

I am a jentylmane , as yow know , and one of your fellowes when you
weare off thatt bande off the pencyonars . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.140

Very quyetly he sayde unto me , " I was nott att the talke , mr.
Underehylle , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.141

and therfore I cane saye nothynge to it , " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.142

butt I thynke he was welle content with the place I was apointed to .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.143

So went I forthe with my too fellowes of the garde , who weare gladd
they hadde the leadynge off me , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.144

for they weare greate papistes . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.145

" Where is thatt knave the painter ? " sayde mr. Gage .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.146

" I know nott , " sayde I . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.147

When we came to the Tower gate , wheroff syr John Abryges hadd the
charge , and his brother mr. Thomas , with whome I was well aquaynted ,
butt nott with syr John ; who , seynge they two
{COM:preceding_word_"two"_emended} off the garde leadynge me withowte
ther halbartes , rebuked them , and stayde me whyle they wentt for ther
halbartes . His brother sayde unto me , " I am sory yow shulde be ane
offender , mr. Underhylle . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.148

" I am none , syr , <paren> sayde I , <$$paren>
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.149

nor I went nott agaynste the quene . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.150

" I am glade of thatt , " sayde he . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.151

And so forthe we wentt at the gate , where was greate throunge off
people to heare and se whatt presonars weare committed , and amoungst
whome stoode my frende mr. Ive , the hygh constable , my next
neyghboure . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,144.152

One off the garde wentt forthe att the weked before <P_145> me to take
me by the arme , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.153

the other helde me by the other arme , fearynge be lyke I wolde have
shifted frome them amongst the people . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.154

When my frende sawe me thus leade , who hadd wachede att the gate all
the forenoone , he followed afarre off , as Peter did Crist , to see
what shulde become off me . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.155

Many also followed , sum thatt knewe me , some to larne whatt I was ,
for thatt I was in a gowne of sattene . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.156

Thus passed we thorow the stretes welle accompanyed unto mr. Garett the
shereffe@ @'s howse in the stokes-markett .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.157

My frende mr. Ive tarryed at the gate . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.158

These two {COM:preceding_word_"two"_emended} off the garde declared unto
mr. shreffe thatt they weare commaunded by the councelle to delyver me
unto hym , and he to sende me unto Newgate , saynge , " Syr , if it
please yow we wyll carye hym thether . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.159

With thatt I stepped unto mr. shreffe , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.160

and takynge hym a litle asyde , requested hym thatt , forasmoche as ther
commissyon was butt to delyver me unto hym , and he to sende me unto
Newgate , thatt he wolde sende me by his offycers ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.161

for the request was off mere malyce . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.162

" With a goode wylle , " sayde mr. sherffe .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.163

" Masters , <paren> sayde he , <$$paren> you maye departe ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.164

I wyll sende my offycers with this jentyllmane anone , when they be come
in . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.165

" We wylle se hym caryed , syr , <paren> sayde they , <$$paren> for ower
discharge . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.166

" Then the shreffe sayde sharpely unto them , " Whatt ! do you thynke
that I wyll nott do the councelles commaundementt ?
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.167

Yow are discharged by delyveryng off hym unto me . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.168

With thatt they departede . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.169

My frend mr. Ive , seynge them departe , and leave me behynde , was
very gladde theroff , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.170

and taryed stylle att the gate to se farther .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,145.171

All this talke in the shreffes halle dide me lorde Russelle , sone and
heyre to the earle off Bedford , heare and se , who was att <P_146>
commaundement in the sherffe's {COM:sic} howse , and his chamber
joynynge unto the halle , wherinto he myght loke ; who was very sory for
me , for thatt I hadd byne familiare with hym in matters off relegyone ,
as well on the other syd the seies , as at hoome .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,146.172

He sentt me on the morowe xx s. , and every weke as moche wyle I was in
Newgate . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,146.173

When these too companyons off the garde weare goone , the shreffe sentt
too off his offycers with me , who toke no billes with them , nor leadde
me not , butt followed a prety waye behynde me ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,146.174

ffor as I sayde unto mr. shreffe , butt for order sake , and to save
hym blameles , I wolde have gone unto Newgate myselffe att the counceles
commaundementt , or his other . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,146.175

When I came into the strete , my frende mr. Ive , seyng me have suche
libertie , and souche distaunce betwyxt me and the offyceres , he
stepped before them , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,146.176

and so went talkynge with me thorow Chepesyde ; so thatt it was nott
welle perseaved thatt I was aprehendide , butt by the greate company
thatt followed . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,146.177

The offyceres delyvered me unto the keper off Newgate as they were
commaunded , who unloked a dore , and willed me to goo upe the steares
into the halle . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,146.178

My frende Ive wente upe with me , where we founde 3 or 4 presonars thatt
hadde the libertie off the howse . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,146.179

After a littelle talke with my frende , I requyred hym nott to lett my
wyffe know thatt I was sende to Newgate , butt to the Counter , untyll
suche tyme thatt she weare nere her churcheynge , and thatt she sulde
sende me my nyghte gowne , my bible , and my lute ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,146.180

and soe he departede . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,146.181

<P_147>

In a wyle after it was supper tyme . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,147.183

The borde was covered in the same halle . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,147.184

The keper , whose name was Alesaunder , and his wyffe came to supper ,
and halffe a dosyn presonars thatt weare ther for feloneys ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,147.185

for I was the fyrst for relegyon thatt was sentt unto thatt presone ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,147.186

butt the cause why the keper knue nott . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,147.187

One off those presonars toke acquayntaunce off me ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,147.188

and sayde he was a sodyare under syr Rycharde Crumewell in the jurney to
<P_148> Laundersey , where he dide knowe me , whose sarvant I was at the
same tyme ; who the next yere followyng , when the famous kynge Henry
viij=th= wentt unto Bollene , he putt me unto his majestie in the rome
of a mane att armes , off the wiche bande ther was ij=c= off us uppon
barded horsses , alle in one sute off readde and yalloo damaske , ower
bardes off ower horses and plumes off fethers of the same colars , to
attend uppon his majestie for the defense off his parsone .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,148.189

After supper this goode fellow , whose name was Brysto , procured me to
have a bedde in his chamber ; who coulde pley well uppon a rebyke .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,148.190

He was a talle mane , and afterwardes on off quene Maryes garde , and
yett a protestayne , wich he kepte secrete ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,148.191

for eles he sayde he shulde nott have founde souche favour as he dide
att the keper's {COM:preceding_word_"keper's"_emended} handes and his
wyff , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,148.192

for to souche as loved the gospelle they weare very cruell .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,148.193

" Welle , <paren> sayd I , <$$paren> I have sende <P_149> for my bible ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.194

and , by Godes grace , therin shal@ @be my dayly exersyse ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.195

I wylle nott hyde it frome them . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.196

" Syr , <paren> sayde he , <$$paren> I am poore ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.197

butt they will beare with you , for thatt they see your estate is to
paye welle ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.198

and I wyll show you the nature and maner off them ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.199

for I have byne heare a good wyle . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.200

They bothe do love musyke very welle ; wherfore yow with your lute , and
I to pley with yow on my rebyke , wylle please them greately ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.201

he lovethe to be mery , and to drynke wyne , and she also ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.202

yff yow wyll bestowe upon them every dynare and supper a quarte off wyne
, and some musyke , yow shal@ @be ther whyte sone , and have alle ther
favour thatt they cane show yow . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.203

And so it came to pass . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.204

And now I thynke it goode a litle to dygrese frome my matter concernynge
my impresonmentt and my delyveraunce ; and to note the greate mercy off
God showed unto his sarvantes in thatt greate parsecusyone in quene
Mary's tyme ; howe myghtelie and how {SIC:missing_"how"} many wayes he
presarved souche as dide feare hym , evyne as he presarved Danyelle ,
Jeremy , Paulle , and many in the olde tyme .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.205

Sume weare moved by his spirite to fle over the seyes ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.206

sume weare presarved stylle in Londone , thatt in all the tyme off
parsecusyone never bowed ther knes unto Balle ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.207

for ther was no souche place to shyft in in this realme as Londone ,
notwithstandynge ther greate spyalle and shearche ; nor no better place
to shifte the Easter tyme in then {SIC:ther} quene Maryes courte ,
sarvynge in the rome thatt I dide , as shal@ @be showed hereafter .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.208

A greate noumber God dide strengthen constantly to stande to his worde ,
to gloryfye his name , wiche be praysede for ever and ever , worlde
withoute ende ! UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.209

And sume he presarved for these dayes . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.210

And now agayne to prosecute the matter of my trouble and wonderfull
delyveraunce owt off thatt lothsume gayle off Newgate .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,149.211

When thatt I hadde byn ther abowte too wekes , thorow the evylle savers
and greate unquyettnes off the logeynges , as also by occasyon <P_150>
off drynkenge off a draught off strounge {COM:'malmesey'_erased} holloke
as I was goynge to bedde , wyche my chamber fellow wolde nedes have me
to plege hym in , I was cast into an extreame burnynge ague , thatt I
coulde take no reste , desirynge to chaunge my logenge ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,150.212

and so dide frome oon to another ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,150.213

butt noone I coulde abyde , ther was so mouche noyse off presonars , and
evyll savours . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,150.214

The keper and his wyffe offered me his owne parler where he laye
hymselffe , wyche was fforthist from noyse ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,150.215

butt it was nere the kechyn , the savour wheroff I coulde nott abyde .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,150.216

Then dide she lay me in a chamber where she sayde never no presoner laye
, wiche was her store-chamber , where she sayde all her plate and money
laye , wyche was mouche . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,150.217

So mouche frendshepe I founde att ther handes , notwithstandynge thatt
they weare spoken unto by dyvers papistes ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,150.218

and the Woodmoungeres of London , withe whome I hadde a greate conflycte
for presentynge them for false markynge off bylettes , they requyred the
keper to show me no favour , and to laye yrones uppon me , declarynge
thatt I was the greatist heretyke in London .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,150.219

My very frende mr. Recorde , doctor off phesyke , syngularly <P_151>
sene in alle the seven syencis , and a greate devyne , visited me in the
presone , and also after I was delyvered , to his greate parrelle yff it
hadde byne knowne , who lounge tyme was att charges and payne with me
gratis . By meanes whereoff and the provydence off God I reseaved my
healthe . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,151.220

My wyffe then was churched befoore her tyme to be a suter for my
delyveraunce , who put upe a supplycacyone unto the councelle ,
declarynge my extreame syknes , and smalle cause to be committed unto so
louthsome a gayle ; requyrynge thatt I myght be delyvered , puttynge in
sureties to be forthecumynge to aunswere farther when I shuld be called
; wiche she obteyned by the healpe off mr. John Througemarton , beynge
the master off the questes , and my cunetremane and kynesmane ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,151.221

he , understandynge <P_152> who weare my enemyes , toke a tyme in ther
absens , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,152.222

and obteyned a letter to the keper , subscrybed by the yearle of
Bedforde , the yearle of Sussex , Wynchester , Rochester , and Walgrave
, to be delyvered , puttynge in suretye , accordynge to the requeste off
my wyves supplycacyon ; with whome Wynchester talked concernynge the
crestenynge off her chylde att the churche att the Tower hylle , and the
gossipes , wiche weare , the duke of Suffolke , the yearle of Penbroke ,
and the lady Jane then beynge quene , with the whiche he was moche
offendide . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,152.223

My ladie Througemartone , wyfe unto syr Nycolas Througemartone , was the
<P_153> quenes debetie , who named my sone Gylfforde after her husebande
. UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.224

Immediately after the crestenynge was done , quene Marye was proclaimed
in Chepesyde , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.225

and when me ladie Througemartone came into the Tower , the clothe off
estate was takone downe and all thynges defaced :
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.226

a sodene chaunge ! UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.227

She wolde have goone forthe agayne , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.228

butt colde nott be suffered . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.229

Butt nowe agayne to the matter . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.230

When my wyff hadde obtained the letter , joyfull she was ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.231

and brought her brother with her , John Speryne of Londone marchantt , a
very frendly mane , and zelous in the Lorde , who was bounde with me
before mr. Chedely justice off peace , accordynge to the counceles
lettres , who came into the presone unto me ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.232

for I was so syke and weake thatt I was constrayned to tary a wyle
longer , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.233

and my wyffe with me daye and nyghte . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.234

Durynge alle the tyme off my sykness , I was constrayned to paye viij d.
every meale , and as moche for my wyffe , and for every frende thatt
came to se me , yf they weare alone with me att dyner or supper tyme ,
whether they came to the table or noo ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.235

and payde also xl s. for a ffyne for iernes , wyche they sayde they
showede me greate favoure in , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.236

I shulde eles have payd iiij or v li . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.237

Thus when they parseaved I dide nott amende , butt rather worse and
worse , they thought it best to venter the matter ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.238

and provydede a horse-litter to cary me home to the Lyme_hurst .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.239

I was so weake thatt I was not able to be ledde downe the steares ;
wherefore on thatt was sarvant to the jaler , who before tyme hade byne
my mane , who was also very diligentt and frendely unto me , toke me in
his armes and caryed me downe the steares to the horse-litter , wiche
stoode redy att the presone doore , and went with me to my howse .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,153.240

Many people weare gathered to se my comynge forthe , who praysed <P_154>
God for my delyverance , beynge very sory to se my state , and the
lamentacyone off my wyff and her frendes , who jugede I wolde nott leve
untyll I came hoome . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,154.241

I was nott able to endure the goynge off the horse-litter ; wherefore
they weare fayne to goo very softely , and oftentymes to staye , att
wiche tymes many of my aquayntaunces and ffrendes and others resortede
to se me , so thatt it was too howres or we coulde pass frome Newgate
unto Algate , and so within nyght before I coulde gett to my howse ,
wheare many off my neyghboures resorted to se me takone owte off the
horse-litter , whoo lamentedde and prayde for me , thynkynge it nott
possible for me to escape deathe , butt by the greate mercy of God .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,154.242

Thus I contyneued the space of viij or x dayes , withowte any
lykelyhoode or hoope off amendementt . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,154.243

I was sende to Newgate the v=th= daye off August ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,154.244

and was delyvered the v=th= daye off September .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,154.245

The fyrste daye off October was quene Mary crowned , by wiche tyme I was
able to walke upe and doune my chamber ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,154.246

and beynge very desyrous to se the quene pase thorow the cittie , gott
uppe on horsebake , beynge scantt able to sett , gyrdide in a longe
nyghtgowne with double kercheves aboute my heade , a greate hatt uppon
them , my bearde dubed harde too ; my face so leane and pale thatt I was
the very image off deathe ; wondred at off alle thatt dide beholde me ,
unknowne to any . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,154.247

My wyffe and neyghboures weare to-to sorry thatt I wolde nedes goo
forthe , thynkynge I wolde nott returne alyve .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,154.248

Thus wentt I forthe , havynge off ether syde off me a mane to staye me ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,154.249

and so wentt to the west ende off Polles , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,154.250

and ther placed myselfe amoungst others thatt satte on horsebake to se
the quene pase by . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,154.251

Before her cumeynge I behelde Poles steple bearynge toppe and
toppe-galantt lyke a ryalle sheppe with many flages and bannars , and a
mane tryoumfynge and daunsynge in the toppe .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,154.252

<P_155>

I sayde unto one thatt sate on horsebake by me , who hadde nott sene any
corownacyone , " Att the coronasyone off kynge Edwarde I sawe Poles
steple ly att ane anker , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,155.254

and now she wearithe toppe and toppe-gallantt ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,155.255

surely the nexte wyl@ @be shippewrake , or it be lounge ; " whiche
chauncethe sume tymes by tempestuous wyndes , sume tymes by lyghtnynges
and fyre from the hevens . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,155.256

Butt I thowghte thatt it shulde rather periche with sume horible wynde
then with lyghtnynge or thounderbolt ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,155.257

butt souche are the <P_156> wonderfulle workes off God , whose gonnares
wyl@ @nott mysse the marke thatt he dothe apoynte , be it never so
little . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.258

When the quene passed by , many behelde me ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.259

for they myght almost touche me , the rome was so narrow , marvelynge
belyke that one in souche state wolde venter forthe .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.260

Many off my fellowes the pencyonars , and others , and dyvers off the
councelle behelde me , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.261

and noone off theme all knewe me . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.262

I myght heare them saye one to another , " There is one lovithe the
quene welle belyke , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.263

for he venterith greately to see her ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.264

he is very lyke never to se her more . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.265

Thus my men thatt stoode by me hard many of them saye , whose hearynge
was quyker then myne . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.266

The quene herselfe when she past by behelde me .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.267

Thus mouche I thought goode to wryte , to show how God dothe presarve
thatt semithe to mane impossyble , as many thatt daye did juge off me .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.268

Thus returned I hoome , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.269

and abowte to monethes after I was able to walke to London ane easy pace
; butt stylle with my kercheves and pale lene face .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.270

I muffeled me with a sarcenett , wiche the rude people in the strettes
wolde murmure att , sayinge , " What is he ?
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.271

Dare he nott show his face ? " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.272

I dyde repayre to my olde familiare acquayntaunce , as drapers , mercers
, and others , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.273

and stoode talkynge with them UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.274

and cheponed ther wares ; UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.275

and nott one off them thatt knew me . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.276

Then wolde I saye unto them , " Do you nott know me ?
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.277

loke better uppone me . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.278

Do you nott know my voyce ? " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.279

For thatt was also altered . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.280

" Truly , <paren> wolde they saye , <$$paren> yow must pardone me ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.281

I can@ @nott calle you to rememberaunce . "
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.282

Then wolde I declare my name unto them ; whereatt they so marveled thatt
they colde scarcely credite me , butt for the famelyare acquayntaunce
thatt I putt them in rememberance off . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,156.283

Thus passed I forthe the tyme att the Lyme_hurst untyll crystmas <P_157>
was past , thatt I waxed somethynge strounge ,
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.284

and then I thought it best to shifte frome thence , for thatt I hadde
there ferce enemys , specyally the vycker of Stepney , abbot <font>
qondame <$$font> off Tower hylle , whome I aprehendide in kynge Edwardes
tyme , and caryed hym unto Croydone to Cranemer , bishope of Caunterbery
; for thatt he distourbed the prechers in his churche , causynge the
belles to be rounge when they weare att the sermone , and sume tymes
begyne to synge in the quere before the sarmone weare halffe done , and
sume tymes chalenge the precher in the pulpitt ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.285

for he was a strounge , stowte popyshe prelate , whome the godly mene
off the paryshe weare wearye off ; specyally my neyghboures of the
Lyme_hurst , as mr. Dryver , mr. Ive , mr. Poynter , mr. Marche ,
and others . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.286

Yet durst they {COM:preceding_word_"they"_emended} nott medelle with hym
untylle it was my happe to cume dwelle amoungst them ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.287

and for thatt I was the kynges sarvantt I toke uppone me ;
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.288

and they wentt with me to the bishope to wittnes those thynges agaynst
hym . Who was to fulle off lenite : UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.289

a litle he rebuked hym , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.290

and badde hym doo no more soo . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.291

" Me lorde , <paren> sayde I , <$$paren> me thynkes yow are to jentylle
unto so stowte a papiste . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.292

" Welle , <paren> sayde he , <$$paren> we have no lawe to ponyshe them
by . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.293

" We have , me lorde , <paren> sayde I ; <$$paren>
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.294

yff I hadde your auctoryte I wolde be so bolde to unvycker hym , or
mynnester sume sharpe ponyshementt unto hym and souch other .
UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.295

Yff ever it cume to ther turne , they wyll show yow no souch favoure .
" UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.296

" Well , <paren> sayde he , <$$paren> yff God so provyde , we must abyde
it . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.297

" Surely , <paren> sayde I , <$$paren> God wyll never cone yow thank for
this , butt rather take the sworde from souche as wylle nott use it
uppon his enemyes . " UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.298

And thus we departed . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.299

The lyke favoure is showed now , UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.300

and therfore the lyke plage wylle follow . UNDERHILL-1565-E1-P2,157.301

