<BEGIN_vicary-1548-e1-p2>

<P_42>

The partes of the mouth are fyue , that is to say , the Lippes , the
teeth , the toung , the Uuila , and the Pallet of the mouth .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,42.3

And first to speake of the lippes : they are members consimile or
official , full of Musculus fleshe , as is aforesayde ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,42.4

and they were ordeyned for two causes ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,42.5

one is , that they should be to the mouth as a doore to a house , and to
keepe the mouth close tyl the meate were kindly chewed :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,42.6

The other cause is , that they should be helpers to the pronouncing of
the speache . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,42.7

The teeth are members consimile or official , spermatike , and hardest
of any other members , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,42.8

and are fastened in the cheke bones , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,42.9

and were ordeyned for three causes : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,42.10

First , that they should chewe a mans meate , or it should passe downe ,
that it might be the sooner digested : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,42.11

The seconde , that they should be a helpe to the speache ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,42.12

for they that lacke their Teeth , doe not perfectly pronounce their
wordes : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,42.13

the thirde is , that they should serue to beasts as weapons .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,42.14

The number of them is vncertayne ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,42.15

for some men haue mo , and some lesse ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,42.16

they that haue the whole number haue .xxxij. , that is to say .xvj.
<P_43> aboue , and as many beneath , as thus , two <font> Duvallies
<$$font> , two <font> Quadripulles <$$font> , two <font> Cannines
<$$font> , eyght <font> Molares {SIC:Morales} <$$font> , and two <font>
Cansales <$$font> . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.17

The Toung is a carnous member , compounde and made of many Nerues ,
Lygamentes , Veines and Arteirs , ordeyned principally for three causes
: VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.18

The first is , that when a man eateth , the Toung mighte helpe to turne
the meate tyll it were wel chewed : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.19

The seconde cause is , that by him is receiued the taste of sweete and
sowre , and presented by him to the common wittes :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.20

The thirde is , that by him is pronounced euery speach .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.21

The fleshly parte of the toung is white , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.22

and hath in him nine muskles ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.23

and about the roote of him is Glandulus , in the whiche be two welles ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.24

and they be euer ful of spittle , to temper and keepe moyst the toung ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.25

or els it would waxe dry by reason of his labour , &c.
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.26

The Uuila is a member made of a spongeous fleshe , hanging downe from
the ende of the Pallet ouer the goulet of the throte ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.27

and is a member in complexion colde and dry ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.28

and oftentimes when there falleth rawnes or muche moystnes into it from
the head , then it hangeth downe in the throte , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.29

and letteth a man to swallowe ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.30

and it is broade at the vpper ende , and smal at the nether .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.31

It was ordeyned for diuers causes : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.32

One is , that by him is holpen the sounde of speache ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.33

for where the Uuila is lacking , there lacketh the perfect sound of
speache : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.34

Another is , that it might helpe the prolation of vomites :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.35

another is , that by him is tempered and abated the distemperaunce of
the ayre that passeth to the Lunges : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,43.36

another is , that by <P_44> him is guyded the superfluities of the
brayne that commeth from the coletures of the Nose ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,44.37

or els the superfluities should fal down sodenly into the mouth , the
which were a displeasure . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,44.38

The Pallet of the mouth conteyneth nothing els but a carnous Pannikle ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,44.39

and the bones that be vnderneath it haue two diuisions , One along the
Pallet from the diuision of the Nose , and from the opening of the other
Mandible vnto the nether ende of the Pallet , lacking halfe an inch ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,44.40

and there it diuideth ouerthwart ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,44.41

and the first diuision is of the Mandible , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,44.42

and the seconde is of the bone called Paxillarie or Bazillarie , that
sustayneth and byndeth al other bones of the head together .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,44.43

The skinne of the Pallet of the mouth is of the inner parte of the
stomack and of Myre , and of Ysofagus , that is , the way of the meate
into the stomacke . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,44.44

The way how to know that such a pannicle is of that part of the stomacke
, may be knowen when that a man is touched within the mouth , anone he
beginneth to tickle in the stomacke ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,44.45

and the neere that he shal touche vnto the throte , the more it
abhorreth the stomacke , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,44.46

and often times it causeth the stomacke to yeld from him that is within
him , as when a man doth vomite . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,44.47

Also in the mouth is ended the vppermoste extremitie of the Wesande ,
which is called Myre or Isofagus . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,44.48

And with hym is conteyned <font> Trachia arteria <$$font> , that is ,
the way of the ayre , whose holes be couered with a lap like a tong ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,44.49

and is gristly , that the meate and drinke mighte slyde ouer him into
Isofagus : The <P_45> whiche grystle , when a man speaketh , it is
reared vp , and couereth the way of the meate : and when a man
swalloweth the meate , then it couereth the way of the ayre , so that
when the one is couered , the other is discouered .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.50

For if a man open the way of the ayre when he swalloweth , if there fal
a crum into it , he shal neuer cease coughing vntil it be vp agayne .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.51

And this suffiseth for the necke . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.52

<heading:edcomment:CHAPTER_VI>

<heading>

<font> Heereafter foloweth the <$$font> Anatomie of the Necke .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.55

<$$heading>

The Necke foloweth next to be spoken of . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.57

Galen proueth that the Necke was made for no other cause but for the
Lunges ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.58

for al thinges that haue no Lungs , haue neither necke nor voyce ,
except fishe . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.59

And you shal vnderstande , that the necke is all that is conteyned
betweene the head and the shoulders , and betweene the chinne and the
brest . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.60

It is compounde and made of foure thinges , that is to say , of <font>
Spondillus <$$font> , or <font> Seruicibus <$$font> , or <font> Gula
<$$font> , and of <font> Gutture <$$font> , the which shal be declared
more playnely hereafter ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.61

and through these , passe the waye of the meate and of the ayre ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.62

but they be not of the substance of the necke . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.63

The Spondelles of the necke be seuen : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.64

The fyrst is ioyned vnto the lower parte of the head , called Paxillarie
or Bazillarie , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.65

and in the same wise are ioyned euery Spondel with other , and the laste
of the seuen with the fyrst of the Backe or Ridge :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.66

and the Lygamentes that keepe these Spondels together , are not so hard
and tough as those of the backe : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.67

for why ? VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.68

those of the necke be more feebler and subtiller :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,45.69

The cause <P_46> is this , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,46.70

for it is necessary otherwhile that the head moue without the necke ,
and the necke without the head , the whiche might not well haue beene
done if they had beene strong and boystrous . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,46.71

Of these aforesayd seuen Spondels of the necke , there springeth seuen
payre of Senewes , the whiche be diuided into the head and into the
Vysage , to the shoulders , and to the armes . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,46.72

From the hole of the first spondel springeth the fyrst payre of senewes
, betwene the fyrst spondel and the seconde ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,46.73

and so foorth of al the rest in like maner as of these .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,46.74

Also these senewes receyue subtil wylle of the senewes of the Brayne ;
of the which wylle , and senewes , and fleshe , with a pannikle , make
the composition of Muskels , Lazartes , and Brawnes , the which three
thinges be al one , and be the instrumentes of voluntarie mouing of
euery member . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,46.75

The Muskles of the neck , after Galen , are numbred to be .xx. mouing
the head and the necke . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,46.76

Likewise it is to be noted , that there be three maner of fleshes in the
necke : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,46.77

the first is called <font> Pixwex <$$font> or Seruisis ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,46.78

and it is called of Chylder ' Golde heire , or yellow heire , ' the
whiche are certayne longitudinales lying on the sides of the Spondels
from the head downe to the latter Spondel . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,46.79

And they are ordeyned for this cause , that when the Senewes be weery of
ouer muche labour with mouing and trauayle
{COM:preceding_word_"trauayle"_emended} , that they might rest vpon them
as vpon a bedde . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,46.80

The second fleshe is musculus , from whome springeth the Tendons and
cordes that moue the head and the necke , whiche be numbred twentie , as
is afore declared : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,46.81

The thirde fleshe replenisheth the voyde places , &c.
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,46.82

The thirde parte of the necke is <P_47> called <font> Gutture <$$font> ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,47.83

and it is the standing out of the throte_boll . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,47.84

The fourth part is called <font> Gula <$$font> , and the hinder parte
{COM:is_called} <font> Ceruix <$$font> , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,47.85

and hath that name of the Philosophers , because of the marowe comming
to the Ridge bones . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,47.86

It is so called , because it is <paren> as it were <$$paren> a seruaunt
to the brayne : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,47.87

For the necke receiueth and taketh of the brayne , influence of vertue
of mouing , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,47.88

and sendeth it by senewes to other parts of the body downwardes , and to
al members of the body . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,47.89

Heere you shal vnderstand , that the way of the meate , & Mire or
Isofagus , is al one thing ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,47.90

and it is to be noted , that it stretcheth from the mouth to the
stomache , by the hinder part of the necke inwardly , fastned to the
spondels of the necke , vntyl he come to the fyfthe spondel ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,47.91

and there he leaueth the spondel , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,47.92

and stretcheth tyl he come to the formost
{COM:preceding_word_"formost"_emended} part of the brest , & passeth
through Diafragina tyl it come to the mouth of the stomacke ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,47.93

and there he is ended . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,47.94

Furthermore it is to be noted , that this Wesande is compounde and made
of two Tunikles or Cotes , that is to say , of the inner and of the
vtter . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,47.95

The vtter tunikle is but simple , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,47.96

for he needeth no retention but onely for his owne nourishing :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,47.97

but the inner Tunikle is compounde and made of Musculus Longitudinal Wyl
, by which he may drawe the meate from the mouth into the stomack , as
it shal be more playnely declared in the Anatomie of the stomacke .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,47.98

Furthermore , <font> Caua pulmonis via , trachia arteria <$$font> , al
<P_48> these be one thing , that is to say , the throte_boll ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,48.99

and it is set within the necke besides y=e= Wesande towardes <font> Gula
<$$font> , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,48.100

and is compounde of the grystle knytte eache with other .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,48.101

And that pannikle that is meane betweene the Wesand and the throte_bol ,
is called <font> Isinon <$$font> . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,48.102

Also ye shal vnderstand , that the great Veines which ramefie by the
sydes of the necke to the vpper part of the head , is of some men called
<font> Gwidege <$$font> , & of others <font> Vena organices <$$font> ,
the incision of whom is perillous . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,48.103

And thus it is to be considered , that the Necke of man is compounde and
made of skinny fleshe , Ligamentes , and bones .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,48.104

And this suffiseth for the necke and the throte .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,48.105

<heading:edcomment:CHAPTER_VII>

<heading>

<font> The Anatomie of the <$$font> Shoulders and Armes .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,48.108

<$$heading>

And fyrst to speake of the bones : It is to be noted , that in the
shoulder there be two bones , that is to say , the Shoulder bone , and
the Cannel_bone ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,48.110

and also the adiutor bone of the arme are ioyned with y=e= shoulder
bones , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,48.111

but they are not numbred among them , but amongst the bones of the armes
. VICARY-1548-E1-P2,48.112

In the composition of the shoulder , the fyrst bone is <font> Os spatula
<$$font> , or shoulder blade , whose hinder part is declined towards
y=e= chinne , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,48.113

& in that ende it is broade , & thin , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,48.114

and in the vpper part it is round , in whose roundnes is a concauitie ,
which is called y=e= boxe or coope of the shoulder , into which entereth
the Adiutor bones ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,48.115

and they haue a bynding together {SIC:togethers} <P_49> with strong
flexible Senewes , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,49.116

and are conteyned faste with the bone called <font> Clauicula <$$font> ,
or the Cannel_bone : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,49.117

and this Cannel_bone stretcheth to bothe the shoulders , one ende to the
one shoulder , and another to the other ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,49.118

and there they make the composition of the shoulders .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,49.119

The bones of the great arme , that is to say , from the shoulder to the
fingers endes , be .xxx . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,49.120

The first is the Adiutor bone , whose vpper ende entreth into the
concauitie or boxe of the shoulder bone : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,49.121

It is but one bone , hauing no felowe , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,49.122

and it is hollowe , and ful of marowe ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,49.123

and it is also crooked , because it shoulde be the more habler to grype
thinges ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,49.124

and it is hollowe , because it should be lighter and more obedient to
the steering or mouing of the Brawnes . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,49.125

Furthermore , this bone hath two emynences , or two knobs in his nether
extremitie , or in the iuncture of the Elbowe , of the which the one is
more rising then the other , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,49.126

and are made lyke vnto a Polly to drawe water with ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,49.127

and the endes of these bones enter into a concauitie proportioned in the
vppermoste endes of the two Focel bones ; of whiche two bones , the
lesse goeth from the Elbowe to the Thombe , by the vppermoste part of
the arme , and the greater is the nether bone from the Elbowe to the
little finger . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,49.128

And these two bones be conteyned with the Adiutor bone ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,49.129

and bee bounde with strong Ligamentes , and in like maner with the bones
of the hande . The whiche bones be numbred .viij. ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,49.130

the .iiij. <P_50> vppermost be ioyned with the .iiij. nethermost
towardes the handes : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,50.131

and in the thirde warde of bones , be .v. VICARY-1548-E1-P2,50.132

and they are called <font> Ossa patinis <$$font> ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,50.133

and they are in the palme of the hande . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,50.134

And to them be ioyned the bones of the Fingers and the Thombes , as thus
; in euery fynger .iii. bones , and in the thombe two bones : that is
to say , in the fingers and thombe of euery hand .xiiij. called <font>
Ossa digitorum <$$font> ; in the palm of the hand .v. called <font>
Patinis ; <$$font> and betweene the hande and the wryste , .viij.
called <font> Racete ; <$$font> and from the wryst to the shoulder .iij.
bones : al which beeing accompted together , ye shal finde thirtie bones
in eche hand and arme . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,50.135

To speake of Senewes , Lygamentes , Cordes and Brawnes : Here fyrst ye
shal vnderstand that there commeth from Mynuca , thorowe the Spondels of
the necke , foure senewes , which most playnly do appeare in sight , as
thus : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,50.136

one commeth into the vpper parte of the arme , another into the nether
parte , and one into the inner side , and another into the vtter side of
y=e= arme ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,50.137

and they bring from the brayne and from Minuca , both feeling and mouing
into the armes , as thus : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,50.138

The senewes that come from the Brayne and from the marow of the backe
that is called Minuca , when they come to the iuncture of the shoulder ,
there they are mixed with the Lygamentes of the selfe shoulder ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,50.139

and there the Lygamentes receyue both feeling and mouing of them ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,50.140

and also in their medling together , they are made a Corde or a Tendon .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,50.141

Three <P_51> causes I find why the senewes were medled with the
Lygamentes : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,51.142

The first cause is , that the excellent feeling of the senewes , whiche
many waies be made weery by their continual mouing , should be repressed
by the insenciblenesse of the Lygaments : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,51.143

The seconde is , that the littlenesse of the Senewes shoulde be
fulfilled through the quantitie of the Lygaments .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,51.144

The third is , the feeblenesse of the senewe , that is insufficiente and
too feeble to vse his offices , but by the strength and hardnes of the
Lygamentes . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,51.145

Nowe to declare what a Corde is , what a Ligament , and what a Muskle or
a Brawne , it is ynough rehearsed in the Chapter of the Simple members .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,51.146

But if you wyl , thorough the commaundement of the Wyl or of the Soule ,
drawe the arme to the hinder part of the body , then the vtter Brawne is
drawen together , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,51.147

and the inner is inlarged : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,51.148

And likewise inwards , when the one brawne dothe drawe inwardes , the
other doth stretche ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,51.149

& when the arme is stretched in length , then the Cordes be lengthened :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,51.150

but when they passe the iuncture of the shoulder and of the Elbowe , by
three fingers breadth or thereabout , then it is deuided by subtill wyl
, and medled with the simple fleshe : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,51.151

and that whiche is made of it is called a Brawne .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,51.152

And three causes I find why that the simple fleshe is medled with the
Corde in the composition of the brawne : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,51.153

The fyrst is , that the aforesayde Wylle might drawe in quiet through
the temperaunce of the fleshe . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,51.154

The seconde is , that they temper and abate the drought of the cord with
his moystnes , the which drought he getteth through his manifold mouing
. VICARY-1548-E1-P2,51.155

The thirde is , that the forme of the brawny members shoulde be the more
fayre , and of better shape : wherefore God and nature haue clothed it
with a Panikle , that it might be the better kept .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,51.156

And it is called of <P_52> y=e= Philosophers ' Musculus , ' because it
hath a forme like vnto a Mouse . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,52.157

And when these Brawnes come neere a Ioynt , then the Cordes spring
foorth of them , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,52.158

and are medled with the Lygaments agayne , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,52.159

and so moueth that Ioynt . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,52.160

And so ye shall vnderstande , that alwayes betweene euery two Ioyntes ,
is ingendred a Brawne , proportioned to the same member and place , vnto
the last extremitie of the fingers , so that as@ @well the least
iuncture hath a proper feeling and mouing when it needeth , as hath the
greatest . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,52.161

And after Guydo , there be numbred .xiiij. in the arme and hande , as
thus : .iiij. in the Adiutor , mouing the vpper part of the arme : and
.iiij. in the Focels , mouing that part of the arme : and fiue in the
hande , mouing the fyngers . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,52.162

Now to speake somewhat of the Veynes and Arteirs of the arme : It is to
be vnderstoode , that from <font> Venakelis <$$font> there commeth two
braunches , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,52.163

the one commeth to the one arme pyt , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,52.164

and the other commeth to the other . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,52.165

And nowe marke the spreading ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,52.166

for as it is of the one , so it is of the other , as thus :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,52.167

when the braunch is in the arme pyt , there he is deuyded into two
braunches ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,52.168

the one braunche goeth along in the inner side of the arme vntil it come
to the bought of the arme , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,52.169

and there it is called <font> Bazilica <$$font> or <font> Epatica
<$$font> , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,52.170

<P_53>

and so goeth downe the arme til it come to the wryst ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.172

and there it is turned to the backe of the hand ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.173

and is found betwene the little fynger and the next ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.174

and there it is called <font> Saluatella <$$font> .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.175

Nowe to the other braunche that is in the arme hole , which spreadeth to
the vtter side of the shoulder , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.176

and there he deuideth in two : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.177

y=e= one goeth spreading vp into y=e= carnous parte of the head ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.178

and after discendeth through the bone into the Brayne , as is declared
in the Anatomie of the head : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.179

The other braunche goeth on the outward side of the arme ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.180

and there he is deuided in two also ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.181

the one parte is ended at the hande , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.182

and the other part is folded about the arme , tyl it appeare in the
bought of the arme , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.183

and there it is called <font> Sephalica : <$$font>
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.184

from thence it goeth to the backe of the hande ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.185

& appeareth betweene the thombe and the formost fynger ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.186

and there it is called <font> Sephalica occularis <$$font> .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.187

The two braunches that I spake of , whiche be diuided in the hinder part
of the shoulders ; from eche of these two <paren> I say <$$paren>
springeth one ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.188

and those two meete together , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,53.189

and make one veyne , <P_54> which appeareth in the bought of the arme ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,54.190

and there it is called <font> Mediana <$$font> , or <font> Cordialis
<$$font> , or <font> Commine <$$font> . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,54.191

And thus it is to be vnderstoode , that of <font> vena Sephalica
<$$font> springeth <font> vena occularis ; <$$font> and of <font> vena
Bazilica <$$font> springeth <font> vena Saluatella ; <$$font> and of the
two veynes that meete , springeth <font> vena Mediana ; <$$font>
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,54.192

and in ramefying from these fyue principal Veines springeth innumerable
, of the whiche a Chirurgion hath no great charge ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,54.193

for it suffiseth vs to knowe the principale . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,54.194

To speake of Arteirs , you shall vnderstande , that wheresoeuer there is
founde a Veine , there is an Arteire vnder him :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,54.195

and if there be founde a great Veine , there is found a great Arteir ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,54.196

and where as is a little Veine there is a little Arteir :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,54.197

For whersoeuer there goeth a veine to geue nutriment , there goeth an
Arteir to bring the spirite of lyfe . Wherfore it is to be noted , that
the Arteirs lye more deeper in the flesh then the Veines doo :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,54.198

for they cary and kepe in them more precious blood than doth the Veine ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,54.199

and therefore he hath neede to be further from daungers outwardly :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,54.200

and therefore God and Nature haue ordeyned for him to be closed in two
cotes , where the Veine hath but one , &c. VICARY-1548-E1-P2,54.201

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample}

<P_71>

Nowe to speake of the Gal , or the chest of the Gal :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,71.204

it is an official member , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,71.205

and it is spermatike and senowy , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,71.206

and hath in it a subtil wyl ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,71.207

and it is a purse or a pannicular vesike in the holownesse of the Lyuer
, about the middle particle or lobe , ordeyned to receyue the Cholerike
superfluities which are ingendred in the Lyuer . The which purse or
bagge hath three holes or neckes : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,71.208

by the fyrste , he draweth to him from the Lyuer the choler , that the
blood be not hurt by the choler : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,71.209

by the seconde necke , he sendeth to the bottome of the stomacke ,
Choler to further the digestion of the stomacke :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,71.210

And by the third neck , he sendeth the choler regularly from one gutte
to another , to chense them of their superfluities and drosse :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,71.211

and the quantitie of the purse may conteyne in it halfe a pinte , &c.
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,71.212

And next is the Splen or the Milte , the which is a spermatike member ,
as are other members , and official , and is the receptory of the
melancolious superfluities that are ingendred in the Liuer .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,71.213

And his place is on the lefte side transuerslye lincked to the stomacke
, VICARY-1548-E1-P2,71.214

and his substaunce is thinne . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,71.215

And two causes I finde why he was ordeyned there :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,71.216

The first is , that by the melancolious superfluities that are ingendred
of the Lyuer which he draweth to him , he is nourished with :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,71.217

The seconde cause is , that the nutritiue blood should by <P_72> him be
made the more purer and cleane , from the drosse and thicking of
melancolie , &c. VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.218

And next of the Reynes and Kidnes : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.219

It is to be vnderstoode , that within the region of the Nutrites
backwardes , are ordeyned the Kidnes , to clense the blood from the
waterie superfluities , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.220

And they haue ech of them two passages , or holes , or neckes :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.221

by the one is drawen the water from Venakelis by two veynes , whiche are
called <font> vena emulgentes <$$font> , the length of a fynger of a man
, VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.222

and issueth from the Liuer : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.223

and by the other is sente the same water to the Bladder ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.224

and is called <font> Poros vrithides <$$font> .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.225

The substaunce of the Kidnes is Lazartus fleshe , hauing Longitudinal
wyl . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.226

And their place is behinde on eache side of the Spondles ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.227

and they are two in number ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.228

and the righte Kidney lyeth somewhat hyer then the lefte ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.229

and is bounde fast to the backe with Lygamentes .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.230

The Philosopher sayth , that mans kidneys are like to the kidnes of a
Cowe , ful of harde knottes , hauing in him many harde concauities ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.231

and therefore the sores of them be harde to cure .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.232

Also they are more harder in substaunce then any other fleshy member ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.233

and that for two causes : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.234

one is , that he bee not muche hurt of the sharpnesse of the vrin :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,72.235

The other is , that the same vrin that passeth from him might the better
be altered and clensed throughe the <P_73> same .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.236

Also there commeth from the harte to eche of the kydnes an Arteir , that
bringeth with him blood , heate , spirite , and lyfe .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.237

And in the same maner there commeth a veyne from the Lyuer , that
bringeth blood to nourishe the kydnes , called ' blood nutrimental . '
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.238

The grease of these kydnes or fatnes is as of other inwarde members ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.239

but it is an official member , made of thinne blood , congeled & cruded
through colde : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.240

and there is ordeyned the greater quantitie in his place , because it
should receayue and temper the heate of the kydnes , which they haue of
the biting sharpnesse of the water . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.241

Nowe by the kydnes vpon the Spondels passeth <font> Venakelis <$$font> ,
or <font> venecaua <$$font> , which is a veyne of a great substaunce ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.242

for he receyueth al the nutrimental blood from the Lyuer :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.243

and from him passeth many smal pypes on euery side ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.244

and at the Spondel betweene the Shoulders , he deuideth him selfe whole
into two great braunches ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.245

the one goeth into the one arme , and the other into the other ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.246

and there they deuide them selues into many veynes and branches : as it
is declared in the armes <paren> p. 52 <$$paren> .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.247

<heading:edcomment:CHAPTER_IX>

<heading>

<font> The Anatomie of the <$$font> Hanches and their parts .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.250

<$$heading>

The Hanches are the lower parte of the wombe , ioyning to the Thies ,
and the secret members . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.252

And three thinges there are to be noted thereof :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.253

the first is of the partes conteining : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.254

the seconde is of the partes conteyned : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.255

and the thirde is of the partes proceeding outwardes .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.256

The partes conteyning outwardly be <font> Myrac <$$font> and <font>
Sifac <$$font> , the <font> Zirbus <$$font> , and the bones .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,73.257

The partes conteyned inwardly , are the <font> Vezike <$$font> , or
bladder , the spermatike vessels , the Matrix in women , <P_74> <font>
Longaon <$$font> , Nerues , Veynes , and Arteirs dissending downwards .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,74.258

The partes proceeding outwardes , are The Buttockes , and the Muscles
dissending to the Thies , of whiche it is to be spoken of in order .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,74.259

And first of the partes conteyning , as of Myrac , Sifac , and Zirbus ,
there is ynough spoken of in the Anatomie of the wombe .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,74.260

But as for the bones of the Hanches , There be of the partes of the
backe , three Spondels of <font> Ossa sacri <$$font> , or of the Hanches
, and three <font> cartilaginis <$$font> spondels of <font> Ossa caude
<$$font> , called The tayle bonne . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,74.261

And thus it is proued , that there is in euery man , woman and childe
.xxx. spondels ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,74.262

and thus they are to be numbered : In the Necke .vij. , in the Ridge
.xij. , in the Reynes .v. , and in the Hanches .vj.
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,74.263

And it is to be noted , that euery spondel is hollowe in the middest ,
through which holownesse passeth Nuca from the Brayne , or the marowe of
the backe . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,74.264

And some Authors say , that Mynuca is of the same substaunce that the
Brayne is of , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,74.265

for it is like in substaunce , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,74.266

and in it selfe geueth to the Nerues both the vertue of mouing and
feeling . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,74.267

And also euery Spondel is holed on euery side , through the which holes
both Arteirs and veynes doo bring from the hart and the Lyuer both lyfe
& nourishment , like as they doo to the brayne :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,74.268

and from the pannicle of Minuca or the marowe of the backe , through the
holes of the sides of the spondels , springeth forth Nerues motiues ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,74.269

and there they intermedle them selues with the strong Lygamentes <P_75>
that be insencible ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,75.270

and so the Lygamentes receayue that feeling of the Nerue which the Nerue
taketh of Mynuca . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,75.271

And by this reason may Autors proue , that Mynuca is of the same
substaunce that the Brayne is of , and the panicles of the Nuca is of
the substaunce of the pannikles of the Brayne , &c.
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,75.272

And eche of these spondels be bounde fast one with another , so that one
of them maye not wel be moued without another .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,75.273

And so al these spondles together , conteined one by another , are
called y=e= Ridgbone , which is the fundation of al the shape of the
body . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,75.274

They , with the laste spondel , be conteyned or ioyned to the bones of
the Hanches , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,75.275

and they be the vpholders of al the spondles . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,75.276

And these bones be smal towardes the tayle bone , and broade towardes
the Hanches , and before they ioyne and make <font> Os pectinis <$$font>
. VICARY-1548-E1-P2,75.277

And so they be brode in the partes of Iles , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,75.278

and therefore some Authors calleth it <font> Ilea <$$font> .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,75.279

And ech of these two bones toward the lyuer hath a great rounde hole ,
into the whiche is receyued the bone called <font> Vertebra <$$font> ,
or The whorle bone ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,75.280

Also besides that place there is a great hole or way , through the which
passeth from aboue Musculus , veynes and Arteirs , and go into the Thees
. VICARY-1548-E1-P2,75.281

And thus it is to be noted , that of this bone <font> Pecten <$$font> ,
and the bone <font> Vertebra <$$font> , is made the iuncture of the Thye
. VICARY-1548-E1-P2,75.282

<P_76>

Nowe to speake of the parts conteined : The first thing that commeth to
sight is the Bladder , the which is an official member , compounde of
two Neruous Pannicles , in complexion colde and dry , whose necke is
carnous , and hath Muscles to withholde , and to let go :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.284

And in men it is long , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.285

and is conteyned with the yard , passing through <font> Peritoneum ;
<$$font> VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.286

but in women it is shorter , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.287

and is conteyned within the <font> Vulua <$$font> .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.288

The place of the bladder is betweene the bone of the Share and the tayle
gutte called <font> Longaon ; <$$font> VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.289

and in women it is betweene the foresayde Bone and Matrix .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.290

And in it is implanted two long vessels comming from the kidnes , whose
names be <font> Torri vrichides <$$font> , bringing with them the Urin
or water from the kidnes to the bladder , whiche priuily entreth into
the holes of the pannicles of the bladder by a natural mouing betweene
tunicle and tunicle ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.291

and there the vrin fyndeth the hole of the nether tunikle ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.292

and there it entreth priuily into the concauitie of the bladder ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.293

and the more that the bladder is filled with vrin , the straighter be
the two tunicles comprised togeather ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.294

for the holes of the tunicles be not euen , one agaynst another ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.295

and therefore if the bladder be never so ful , there may none goe backe
agayne . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.296

The forme of it is rounde ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.297

the quantitie is a pitcher full ; in some , more ; & in some , lesse ,
&c. VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.298

Also there is founde two other vessels , called <font> vaza seminaria
<$$font> , or the spermatike vessels . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.299

And they come from Venakelis , bringing blood to the Testikles , as wel
in man as in woman , in the which , by his further digestion , it is
made sparme or nature in men . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.300

They be put outwarde , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.301

for the Testikles be without ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,76.302

but <P_77> in women it abydeth within , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.303

for their Testicles stande within , as it shal be declared hereafter .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.304

Next foloweth the Matrix in women : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.305

The Matrix in woman is an official member , compounde and Nerueous , and
in complexion colde and dry . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.306

And it is the felde of mans generation ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.307

and it is an instrument susceptiue , that is to say , a thing receying
or taking : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.308

and her proper place is betweene the bladder and the gutte <font>
Longaon : <$$font> VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.309

the likenes of it is as it were a yarde reuersed or turned inwarde ,
hauing testikles likewise , as aforesaid : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.310

also the Matrix hath two concauities or selles , and no more ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.311

but al beasts haue as many selles as they haue pappes heades .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.312

Also it hath a long necke lyke an vrinal ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.313

& in euery necke it hath a mouth , that is to saye , one within , and an
other without . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.314

The inner in the tyme of conception is shutte , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.315

and the vtter parte is open , as it was before :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.316

and it hath in the middest a Lazartus pannicle , whiche is called in
Laten <font> Tentigo <$$font> . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.317

And in the creation of this Pannicle is founde two vtilities :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.318

The first is , that by it goeth forth the vrin ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.319

or els it should be shed through_out al the Vulua :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.320

The seconde is , that when a woman doth set hir thies abrode , it
altereth the ayre that commeth to the Matrix for to temper the heat .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.321

Furthermore , the necke that is betweene these two foresayde mouthes ,
in her concauitie hath many inuolutions and pleates , ioyned together in
the maner of Rose leaues before they be fully spread or ripe ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.322

and so they be shut togeather as a Purse mouth , so that nothing may
passe foorth but vrin , vntil the time of chylding .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.323

Also about the middle of this necke be certain veynes in Maydens , the
which in tyme of deflouring be corrupt & broken .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,77.324

Furthermore , in the <P_78> sides of the vtter mouth of the mouth are
two testicles or stones , and also two vessels of sparme , shorter than
mans vessels ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,78.325

and in time of coyt the womans sperme is shed downe into the bottome of
the Matrix . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,78.326

Also from the Lyuer there commeth to the Matrix many veynes , bringing
to the childe nourishing at the time of a womans beeing with childe :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,78.327

and those veynes , at suche time as the Matrix is voyde , bring therto
superfluities from certayne members of the body , whereof are ingendred
womans flowres , &c. VICARY-1548-E1-P2,78.328

And forasmuche as it hath pleased almightie God to geue the knowledge of
these his mysteries and workes vnto his creatures in this present worlde
, Here I purpose to declare what thing Embreon is , and his creation .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,78.329

The noble Philosophers , as Galen , Auicen , Bartholomeus , and diuers
other writing vpon this matter , say , That Embreon is a thing ingendred
in the mothers wombe , the original whereof is y=e= sparme of the man
and the woman , of the which is made , by the might and power of God ,
in the mothers wombe a chylde , as hereafter more at large shal be
declared . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,78.330

First , the feelde of generation called the Matrix , or the mother , is
knowen in the anatomie , whose place is properly betwixt the Bladder and
Longaon in the woman , in which place is sowen , by the tillage of man ,
a couenable matter of kindly heate ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,78.331

for kindly heate is cause efficeens bothe of dooing and working , and
spirite that geueth vertue to the body , and gouerneth and ruleth that
vertue : the which seede of generation commeth from al the partes of the
body , both of the <P_79> man and the woman , with consent & wyl of al
members , and is shed into the place of conceyuing , where , through the
vertue of Nature , it is gathered together in the selles of the matrix
or the mother , in whom - by the way of the working of mans seede , and
by the way of suffering of the womans seede mixte together , so that
eche of them worketh in other , and suffereth in other - there is
ingendred Embreon . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,79.332

And further it is to be noted , that this sparme that commeth both of
man and woman , is made & gathered of the most best and purest drops of
blood in all the body ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,79.333

and by the labour and chafing of the testikles or stones , this blood is
turned into another kinde , VICARY-1548-E1-P2,79.334

and is made sparme . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,79.335

And in man it is hotte , white , & thicke , wherfore it may not spread
nor runne abroade of it selfe , but runneth and taketh temperaunce of
the womans sparme , which hath contrarie qualities ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,79.336

for the womans sparme is thinner , colder , and feebler .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,79.337

And as some Authors holde opinion , when this matter is gathered into
the right side of the matrix , then it happeneth a male kinde ; and
likewise on the left , the female ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,79.338

and where the vertue is most , there it sauoureth most .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,79.339

And further it is to be noted , that lyke as the Renet of the Cheese
hath by him selfe the way or vertue of working , so hath the mylke by
way of suffering : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,79.340

and as the Renet and mylke make the cheese , so doth the sparme of man
and woman make the generation of Embreon , of the which thing springeth
, by the vertue of kindly heate , a certayne skinne or caule , into the
which it lappeth it selfe in , wherewith afterwardes it is tyed to the
mothers wombe , the whiche couering commeth foorth with the byrth of the
childe ; VICARY-1548-E1-P2,79.341

and if it happen that any of the skinne remaine after the byrth of the
childe , then is the woman in peril of her lyfe .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,79.342

<P_80>

Furthermore it is sayde , that of this Embreon is ingendred the Hart ,
the Lyuer , the Brayne , Nerues , veynes , Arteirs , Cordes , Lygamentes
, Skinnes , Gristles , & Bones , receyuing to them by kindly vertue the
menstrual blood , of whiche is ingendred both fleshe and fatnes .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,80.344

And as wryters say , the fyrst thing that is shapen be the principals ,
as is the Harte , Lyuer , and Brayne . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,80.345

For of the Hart springeth the Arteirs , of the Lyuer the Veynes , and of
the Brayne the Nerues : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,80.346

and when these are made , Nature maketh & shapeth Bones and grystles to
keepe & saue them , as the bones of the head for the Brayne , the
Brest-bones and the Ribbes for the Harte and the Lyuer .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,80.347

And after these springeth al other member , one after another .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,80.348

And thus is the childe bred foorth in four degrees , as thus :
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,80.349

The first is , when sayde sparme or seede is at the fyrst as it were
mylke : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,80.350

The seconde is , when it is turned from that kinde into another kinde ,
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,80.351

it {COM:preceding_word_"it"_emended} is yet but as a lumpe of blood ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,80.352

and this is called of Ypocras , <font> Fettus : <$$font>
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,80.353

The thirde degree is , when the principals be shapen , as the Hart ,
lyuer , and Brayne : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,80.354

The fourth and laste , as when al the other members be perfectly shapen
, then it receyeth the soule with life and breath ;
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,80.355

and then it beginneth to moue it-selfe alone . VICARY-1548-E1-P2,80.356

Nowe in these foure degrees aforesayde , in the fyrst , as milke , it
containeth vij. dayes : in the seconde , as Feetus , ix. dayes : in
the thirde , as a lumpe of fleshe ingendring the principals , the space
of ix. dayes : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,80.357

and the fourth , vnto the tyme of ful perfection of al the whole members
, is the space of xviij. dayes : VICARY-1548-E1-P2,80.358

So is there xlvj. dayes from the day of conception vnto the day of ful
perfection and receyuing of the soule , as God best knoweth .
VICARY-1548-E1-P2,80.359

