<BEGIN_wcecil-1587-e2-p2>

<P_1.3,3>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CCXIX_LORD_BURGHLEY_TO_SIR_FRANCIS_WALSINGHAM,_UPON_THE_DIFFERENCE_OF_OPINION_AS_TO_WHERE_THE_QUEEN_OF_SCOTS_SHOULD_MD_BE_TRIED>

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

<P_1.3,4>

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

<P_1.3,5>

Sir We ar occupyed with many offers to and fro in words ,
WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,5.8

but I can not certefy you what shall be determyned .
WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,5.9

Yesterday the Towre was flatly refused , WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,5.10

and instead of Fothryngay , which we thought too far off , Hertford was
named , and next to the Tower thought metest ; and so for a tyme both
lyked and mislyked for nearnes to London . WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,5.11

Nevertheless I hope it will be so concluded this daye .
WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,5.12

And so I will wryte to S=r= Walter Mildmay for to stey brewyng and
provisions of coale , which by my last I required hym to provyde .
WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,5.13

The Queen hath agreed uppon nine Erles besid Counsellors , and uppon
eight or nine Barons to heare the cause . WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,5.14

Hertford shall be metar for such an assemble than Fothryngay can be .
WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,5.15

Grafton was also named , but unmete . WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,5.16

We styck uppon Parlement , which hir Ma=ty= mislyketh to have
WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,5.17

but we all persist , to make the Borden better born and the world abrod
better satisfyeed . WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,5.18

Naw offred on Tewsday to have oppened much , WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,5.19

and in stead therof , he hath only wrytten to have a pardon as yesterday
because it was the Queen's byrth_day . WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,5.20

I do send to Mr Mills to challeng hym , and to warn hym to be sent to
the Tower if he do not otherwise acquit hymself of his promis .
WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,5.21

I thynk Curle will be more oppen , WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,5.22

and yet Naw hath amply confessed by his hand wrytyng to have <P_1.3,6>
wrytten by the Queen's endityng and hir own minut y=t= long lettre to
Babyngton : WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,6.23

but he wold quallefy his mastris fault in that Babyngton provoked hir
therto , and Morgan prevaled hir to renew hir intelligence with
Babyngton . WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,6.24

Yours as. W. Burghley . WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,6.25

8 Sept. 1586 . WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,6.26

To the right honorable S=r= Francise Walsyngham Knight pr. Secretary to
hir Ma=ty= . WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,6.27

<P_1.3,12>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CXXI_LORD_BURGHLEY_TO_SECRETARY_DAVISON,_UPON_THE_QUEEN_OF_SCOT'S_DEFENCE,_UPON_THE_DELAY_OF_PASSING_SENTENCE_UPON_HER>

{COM:apostrophe_in_heading_sic}

M=r= Secretary , yesternight , vppon recept of your lettre dated on
Thursday , I wrote what was thought wold be this dayes work .
WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,12.31

This Queen of the Castell was content to appeare ageyn afor us in
publyck to be hard , but , in truth , not to be hard for hir defence ,
WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,12.32

for she cold say nothyng but negatyvely , that the poynts of the lettres
that concerned the practise against the Q. Ma=ts= person was never by
hir wrytten , nor of her knolledg , WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,12.33

the rest , for invasion , for scapyng by force , she sayd she wold
nether deny nor affirm . WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,12.34

But hir intention was , by long artificiall speches , to move pite , to
laye all blame uppon the Queen's Majesty or rather uppon the Counsell ,
that all the troobles past did insew , avowyng hir resonable offers and
our refusalls ; WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,12.35

and in this hir speches I did so encounter hir with reasons out
<P_1.3,13> of my knolledg and experience , as she had not that avantage
she looked for ; as I am assured the Auditory did fynd hir case not
piteable , hir allegations untrew ; by which means gret debate fell
yesternight very long , and this day renewed with gret stomakyng .
WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,13.36

But we had gret reason to prorog our session which is rone till the
25=th= WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,13.37

and so we of the Counsell will be at the Court the 22=th= .
WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,13.38

And we fynd all persons here in Commission fully satisfyed , as , by hir
Ma=ts= order judgment will be gyven at our next metyng ,
WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,13.39

but the record will not be provided in v or vj. dayes ,
WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,13.40

and that was on {GLOSS:one} cause , why if we shuld have proceded to
judgment we shuld have tarryed v or vj. dayes more ;
WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,13.41

and suerly the Country cold not beare it , by the wast of bread
specially , our Company being then and within vj myle , above ij._M
horssmen : WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,13.42

but by reson of hir Ma=ts= lettre we of hir Counsell , that is the L.
Chanc. M=r= Rich , M=r= Secr. and my self only , did procure this
prorogation for the other ij. causes . WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,13.43

And so knowyng that by my Lord of Cumberland hir Ma=ty= shall , soner
than this lettre can come , understand the course of the procedyng , I
will end . WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,13.44

xv Octob. 1586 WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,13.45

at Burghley WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,13.46

Your assured lov. frend W. Burghley . WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,13.47

To the right honorable my verie good frend Mr Secretarie Davison .
WCECIL-1587-E2-P2,1.3,13.48

