<BEGIN_wolsey-1529-e1-p2>

<P_1.2,10>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CV_CARDINAL_WOLSEY_TO_SECRETARY_GARDENER>

My owne goode mastyr Secretary goyng this day owt of my pue to sey masse
, your lettres datyd yesternygth at London wer delyveryd unto me , by
the contynue wherof I undyrstand that the Kyngs Hyhnes of hys excellent
goodnes and cheryte ys contentyd that I shal inyoy and have the
admynistracon of Yorke merly , with the gyftts of the promocyons
spiritual and temporall of the same ; reservyd onely onto hys nobyll
Grace the gyft of v or vj of the best promocons and that hys pleasure ys
I shal leve Wynchester and Saynt Albons . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,10.4

As hereonto Master Secretary I can nat expresse howe moche I am bowndyn
to the Kyngs Royal Maieste for thys hys gret and bowntawse liberalyte ,
reputyng the same to be moche more than I schal evyr be abyl to deserve
. WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,10.5

Howbeyt yf hys Maieste , consyderyng the short and lytyl tyme that I
shal lyve here in thys world , by the reason of suche hevynes as I have
conceyved in my hert , with the minyuose of the olde howsys , and the
decay of the seyd archbyshoprych at the lest to the summe of viij_C
marcke yeerly , by the reason of the Act passyd for fynys of testaments
; with also min long peynful servys and poore <P_1.2,11> degre ; and for
the declaration of hys Graces excellent cheryte , yf hys hyhnes be
myndyd I shal leve Wynchester and Saynt Albons wych I supposyd when I
made my Submyssyan , not offendyng in my treweth towards hys royal
parson , dygnyti , or majeste royal , I shuld not now have deservyd to
have left ; WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,11.6

and moche the more knowyng hys Graces excellent propensyon to pyte and
mercy , and rememberyng of the francke departyng with of all that I had
in thys world ; that I may have summe convenyent pencion reservyd unto
me , suche as the Kyngs hyhnes of hys nobyl charite shal thynke mete ;
so orderyng hys that shal succede and my lyvyng , that the same may be
of lyck value yeerly and exstent . Wherat my trust ys
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,11.7

and my herte so gevyth me , that hys Majeste wole make no dyfficultie yf
yt may lycke yow frendly to propone the same ; assuryng yow that I
desyre nat thys for any mynde , God ys my jugge , that I have to
accumulat good , or desyre that I have to the muke of the world ; sen
God be thankyd , at this ower , I set no more by the ryches and
promocyons of the world than by the roshe undyr my fote ; but onely for
the declaration of the Kyngs honor and hyhe charyte , and to have
wherewith , to do good dedys , and to helpe my poore servants and
kynnysfolks . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,11.8

And furthermore that yt wold please the Kyngs excellent goodnes by your
freindly medyacion , consyderyng how slendyrly I am furnyshyd in my
Howse , nowe specially that the apparell <P_1.2,12> of Wynchester and
Saynt Albons shal@ @be takyn from me , to geve and appoynt on to me a
convenyent fernyture for the same , <font> non ad pompam sed necessariam
honestatem <$$font> : WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,12.9

and yf I may have the free gyft and dyssposycion of the benefyces , yt
shal@ @be gretly to my comfort . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,12.10

And yet when any of the v or vj princypall shal fortune to be voyd , the
Kyngs Grace beyng myndyd to have any of them , hys hyhnes shal@ @be as
sure of the same as thougth they wer reservyd .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,12.11

And thus by hys nobyl and mercyful goodnes delyveryd owt of extreme
calamyte , and restoryd to a newe fredome , I shall , with Gods mercy
and help , so ordyr my lyff , that I trust hys Majeste shal take special
comfort theran , and be pleasyd with the same .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,12.12

<font> Spero quod haec quae peto non videbuntur magna . <$$font>
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,12.13

Howbeyt I moste humbly submyt and refferre all my petycions , <font>
immo ipsam vitam <$$font> , to hys gracyous ordynance and pleasure ,
prayng yow to declare and sygnyfye the same , supplying myn
indyssposcycon and lack of wyt conceyvyd by reason of my extreme sorowe
and hevynes , that the same may be to the Kyngs contentacion ; whom I
had lever be ded than to ofende in worde , thowgth , or dede .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,12.14

And as towchyng the grantyng of the fee of one_C@ @=li= for M=r= Nores
duryng hys lyff for hys good servys done unto the Kyng's hyhnes , for
the wych I have alweyes lovyd hym , and for the singler good hert and
mynde that I knowe he hath allweys borne unto me , I am content to make
owt my graunte <P_1.2,13> opon the same , ye and yt wol please the Kyng
to inlarge yt to one_C@ @=li= more : WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,13.15

and semblably , cause M. Thesauror hath the kepyng of the Kyngs game
nygth to Fernam , I wold gladly yf yt may stand with the Kyngs pleasure
grawnte onto hym the revercion of such thinges as the lorde Sands hath
ther , with the ampliacion of the fee , above that wych ys oldely
accustomyd , to the summe of xl@ @=li= by the yeer :
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,13.16

and also I wold gladly geve to M=r= Comptroller a lycke fee : and to
M=r= Russell anothyr of xx@ @=li= by the yeere : remyttyng thys and all
other my suts to the Kyng's Hyhnes pleasure , mercy , pity , and
compassyon moste holly . Besechyng hys Hyhnes so nowe gracyously to
ordyr me that I may from hens forth serve God quyetly and with reposse
of mynd , and pray as I am moste bowndyn for the conservacion and
increase of hys most nobyll and royal astat .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,13.17

And thus with my dayly prayer I byd yow farewell .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,13.18

From Asher hastely , with the rude hand and moste hevy hert of yowr
assuryd frend and bedysman T. Car=lis= Ebor .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,13.19

To the rygth honorable Mr Secretary , in hast .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,1.2,13.20

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample}

<P_2.2,26>

<heading:edcomment:LETTER_CI_CARDINAL_WOLSEY_TO_THOMAS_CROMWELL,_ENTREATING_HIM_TO_COME_TO_HIM,_TO_ENQUIRE_IF_THE_LADY_ANNE'S_DISPLEASURE_IS_ASSUAGED>

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

<P_2.2,27>

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

The ferteryng and puttyng ovyr of your commyng hyther hath so increasyd
my sorowe and put me in such anxyete of mynd , that thys nygth my brethe
and wynde by sythyng was so short that I was by the space of thre owers
as one that shuld have dyd . Wherfor , yf ye love my lyf , breke awey
thys e'nyng and come hyther , to the'@ @yntent I may open my mynde unto
yow and instruct yow of the same , wych I can@ @nat commyt to wryttyng ;
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,2.2,27.27

but yt ys necessary that the same be done by mutual conferens with yow
by mowth , and that I may have your Cownsell opon the same .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,2.2,27.28

Yf thys tyme be put ovyr yt shall not lye in your poore to provyde the
remedye . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,2.2,27.29

Yf I mygth I wold nat fayle . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,2.2,27.30

Rather then thys my spekyng with yow shul@ @be put ovyr and delayd I
wold com on my fote to yow . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,2.2,27.31

At the reverens of God take summe payne now for me , and forsake me nat
in thys myn extreme nede ; and <P_2.2,28> wher_as I can nat , God shall
rewarde yow . WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,2.2,28.32

Now ys the tyme to shewe whether ye love me or not .
WOLSEY-1529-E1-P2,2.2,28.33

{COM:remainder_of_letter_too_fragmentary_to_parse}

