<BEGIN_zouch-1649-e3-p2>

<P_158>

<heading:edcomment:XCIX_KATHERINE,_LADY_ZOUCH,_TO_HENRY_OXINDEN>

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Honored Cosen , I must returne you many thanks for the great payns and
care , you have bene pleased to take in my sonne's bisnes .
ZOUCH-1649-E3-P2,158.5

You will now continue with the seame sealle {GLOSS:zeal} or greter in
his behalfe , by reason of that neerre relacond which you mention in
youer letter , wherin hee hath ioyned himsellfe on to you :
ZOUCH-1649-E3-P2,158.6

the first intellegenc therof I did reseve from youeresellfe ; whereof I
confes somewhat strange and onexpected to mee ; ZOUCH-1649-E3-P2,158.7

butt now , though I ca@ @not bee unsensible that hee hath furgotten mee
his mother in not takeng my advise in a meatter of that weight , yet I
am glad {COM:preceding_word_"glad"_emended} that hee heath not furgutten
himsellfe in his Choyce , haveing matched with a daughter of youers
whose worth and abilityes I knowe so well , as that you are able with
ease to assiste him and goe thorwgh in the recovery of his esteate which
I confes <P_159> was a taske somewhat to heard and very inproper for a
weake woman ; wherin I shall still doo the outmost that shall ley in my
power . ZOUCH-1649-E3-P2,159.8

But good Cosin I am confident you are so ingenuous and of so much
iudgement as theat you will not conceive I can soppose my husband shulld
expend his esteat for a sonne in Leaw , having one of his owen , which I
doubt not you will take into so serious consideracon as to afforde all
faitherly care and affection towards him who is now made your
{COM:preceding_word_"your"_emended} sonne
{COM:preceding_word_"sonne"_emended} by a decre , as you write very
truely , not to be prevented : ZOUCH-1649-E3-P2,159.9

and for my sellfe I shall never be wanting as fare as I am able to
performe the part of a mother , ZOUCH-1649-E3-P2,159.10

and for the present shall conclude , by youer owen good exampele , with
my prayers that all blessings meay bee multyplyed opon thim both , which
shall allways bee the fervent desier of her that is , worthy Cosin ,
Youer afacnat kinwomen and sister Zowch ZOUCH-1649-E3-P2,159.11

{COM:postscript_omitted}

Setember this 28 1649 ZOUCH-1649-E3-P2,159.13

