<BEGIN_1490-caxton-benet-m4>

{COM:parsed_file_supplied_by_Joel_Wallenberg}

<P_119>

<Foreword> <VS_a> Here felowyth a compendious abstracte , translate into
englysshe , out of the holy rule of saynte Benet for men and wymmen of
the habyte therof , <VS_b> the whiche vnderstonde lytyll laten or none ,
<VS_c> to +te entent +tat they maye often rede , execute the hole rewll
, and the better kepe it than it is , accordyng to the abyte & their
streyte professyon , <VS_d> so that the welle of their sowlys and better
emsample of that holy relygyon maye be the sooner had and knowen .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,119.4

<Chapter_64_part_1> <VS_1> HE or she +tat
{ED:fn._10:_Through_"+tat"_there_arises_an_anocoluthon} is to be made
hede or souereyn in a monestary , in whom all the hole congregacion in
one acorde after god consentyth , or els that the more parte thereof and
sadder wyth god counseyll chesith . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,119.5

<Chapter_2> <VS_11> WHan soo euer ony takyth by true eleccyon the name
and dygnytee of an hede or souereyn in relygyon , they owne to shewe in
their dedys to their disciples two doctrynes , <VS_12> that is to sey ,
that all suche good dedys and holy that they teche , +tat they first
shewe hem by their owne dedys rather than by theyr wordys .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,119.6

<VS_13> And al thynges that they teche their children and disciples to
be contrari to god & their rule , lete her dedes shew openly suche
thinges not to be done , so +tat theimselfe be not founde gylty &
reprouable in their doctryne & ensample , <VS_15> & redy to see a lytill
mote in their disciples eyen , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,119.7

but a grete blocke or beme in their owne they can not espie ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,119.8

but lete it lye styll . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,119.9

<VS_26> The souereyns also shulde not dissymyle in punyshment and
chastysyng of theyr subgettes whan they offende , but as sone as the
<P_120> synnes begyn to sprynge , forthwyth cut hem vp by the rote by
correccyon , <VS_a> accordyng to the rule , wythoute acceptynge of ony
persone , <VS_28> Remembryng +tat foles wyll neuer be corrected with
wordis , but rather by chastisment . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,120.10

<Chapter_3> <VS_1> As ofte as ony grete maters arn to be doon in the
monestary , all +te congregacion is to be callyd & to be enformed of hem
by the souereyns , <VS_2> +te whiche owe to here the myndys of echone
syngulerly , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,120.11

<VS_3> for oft tymes oure lorde shewyth to the symplest of the relygyon
a thynge that is best therfore . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,120.12

<VS_4> how be it , what som euer shal@ @be seide of the subgettes , see
that it be doon wyth al mekenes and submyssyon of spirite & body .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,120.13

<VS_5> And therevpon the souereyn ouht to kepe well in mynde the resons
or seyenges of euery of theim , and to doo therafter as can be founde
best and proffitable , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,120.14

<VS_a> For it is a token of an vnwytty mynde and of a prowde hert of
theym that take their owne way oonly & counseyll .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,120.15

<VS_6> Also as it is accordynge to a disciple for to obey his mayster ,
soo it is requyred to the souereyn visely & warely and all thynges of
the place to dispose . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,120.16

<VS_12> To other thynges of lesse charge the souereyn owe to take
counseyle of the senyours of the relygion & sadder . <VS_13> Soo +tat
euery thyng is to be doone at ony tyme wyth counseyle , accordynge to
scripture +tat seyth , " Doo all thyngs wyth counseyle , & thou shall
not repente after . " 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,120.17

<VS_7> Also bere in thy mynde this synguler note , that the hede or the
souereyn wyth all the congregacion streytly be bounde to folowe the rule
in euery poynte , & that none of theim be soo bolde to declyne or
departe therefro ; <VS_8> So that none folowe the wyll of theyr owne
mynde oonly , <VS_b> but euer be redy to be reformyd .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,120.18

<VS_9> The subgettes also owe to be ryght ware +tat they make no strife
wythyn or wythout wyth theyr souereyns . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,120.19

<VS_10> yf that they doo , anone lete hem haue the streyt reguler
punysshment , <VS_11> wyth +te fere of god and in kepynge the rule ,
remembrynge that the hede withoute ony dowte shall yeue a full streyte
accompte oon day of all their Iugementes & byhauour to god at@ @te
ferefull daye of rekenynge . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,120.20

<Chapter_63_part_1> <VS_2> Also be they ware that they trowble not
<P_121> their flocke that ben commytted vnto theim , and that they
dyspose noo thynge of the place vnryghtwysly , as though they wolde vse
theim as their owne , <VS_a> the whyche is ayens god vterly , & +te
reule . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,121.21

<VS_b> Therfore it is good that they at all tymes so behaue theim in
vertue that all people may saye , " loo , suche one is worthy to occupye
thys place and to haue thys dignytee . " <Chapter_64_part_2> <VS_2>
Wherfore suche owe not to be chosen therto by their age , but for their
wertuous lyuyng and wysdom , <VS_9> chastyte and sobre dealyng , <VS_10>
and also for their pyte and mercy , the whyche thei muste vse in all
their dedys , that they the rather maye haue the same of god whan
someuer they trespasse . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,121.22

<VS_11> See thenne that they loue well their chyldren , and hate their
synnes , <VS_12> & in amending of their maners and correccyon of their
synnes wysely to behaue theim . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,121.23

For to moche in ony thyng is nought , lesst +tat thei breke the vesell
of the whiche wythoute discrecion and pyte they wolde haue taken of the
rust . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,121.24

<VS_8> Also they must see that they prouffyte in theyr werkys more than
for to loke for worship , <VS_15> and euer to studye to haue loue rather
of the subgettes than drede , <VS_19> dooynge all thynges wyth
discrecion , whiche is moder of all wertues , <VS_13> consideryng theyr
owne freylte , <VS_c> where thorough of theyr subgettes the better they
may haue compassion whan someuer they trespase .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,121.25

<VS_16> Also thei may not be yrefull , vnrestfull , or obstynate , or to
be Ielouse , or moche suspeccyouse ouer theyr subgettes ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,121.26

for thenne they shall neuer haue rest to_gyder in the relygyon , <VS_20>
and euer kepe the rule . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,121.27

<Chapter_4> <VS_a> Also the souereyn & the subgettes owe euer to flee
Idylnesse , +te norisshe of al synnes , & to be ocupyed euer in vertu ,
<VS_1> louyng god wyth all their herte , of all theyr soule , and of all
their strength , <VS_2> and theyr neyghbour as theyr selfe , <VS_9>
doyng euer vnto theym as they wolde be done vnto , <VS_10> dyspisyng
theyrselfe , and folow crist by the cross of penaunce .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,121.28

<VS_11> Also they must chastyse theyr body <VS_12> and flee the pleasur
thereof , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,121.29

<VS_13> and to vse fastynge , <VS_14> & refresshe the poore peple <VS_b>
wyth dedes of mercy goostly and bodely . <VS_20> & medle lytyll wyth
worldly actes , <VS_21> no thyng preferrying aboue the loue of god .
<VS_22-24> , wrath or deceyte neuer to kepe in herte , <VS_25> or to
promyse ony false peas , <VS_26> kepynge euer charytee .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,121.30

<VS_27> And <P_122> vse neuer to swere , leeste that by custome ye fall
in periurie , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.31

<VS_28> and sey euer the trouth in herte & mouth , <VS_29> neuer yeldyng
euyll for euyll , <VS_c> but rather good for euyll , <VS_30> doyng no
wronge to ony , but for to suffre paciently whan it is done to you .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.32

<VS_31> loue your enmyes , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.33

<VS_32> & curse hem not , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.34

<VS_33> & be redy to take persecucion for a rightwys mater .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.35

<VS_34> neuer be prowde , <VS_35> or dronklew , <VS_36> nor moche etyng
, <VS_38> or slouthfull , <VS_39> not grutchynge , <VS_40> or bakbytynge
, <VS_41> euer puttynge your trust in our lord god .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.36

<VS_42> Whan +tat ye see ony goodnes in your selfe , anone put it to
oure lorde & not to your selfe ; 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.37

<VS_43> all thinge that is euyll ascryue to your selfe .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.38

<VS_44> Fere euer the daye of Iugement , <VS_45> & the dungeon of hell ,
<VS_46> desyrynge wyth all your mynde & herte +te euerlastyng lyfe ;
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.39

<VS_47> & haue euere deth suspecte afore your eyen ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.40

<VS_48> & gyde euer your dedes wysely in euery hour .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.41

<VS_49> And be certeyn +tat god beholdith theim in eueri place ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.42

<VS_50> & euery euyl thought that commyth to your mynde , anone put it
a_waye by thynkyng of cristes passyon , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.43

& shewe theym by confessyon to your goostly fader .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.44

<VS_51> & kepe euer your tongue from euyll & shrewde langage ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.45

<VS_52> & speke lytyll & well , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.46

<VS_53> & euer auoyde vayn wordes , <VS_54> and dissolute laughter &
Iapes , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.47

<VS_55> and be glad to here gode lectures and lyues of sayntes ; <VS_56>
with preyer , <VS_57> dayly waylyng your synnes , <VS_d> & the synnes &
Ignoraunce of the peple , <VS_58> wyth amendes makying .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.48

<VS_61> The preceptes of your souereyn in all thynges obey , lefull as
to god 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.49

& fulfyll theym . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.50

<VS_64> Loue euer chastyte , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.51

<VS_67> & flee euer enuy , <VS_65> hatrede , <VS_68> & stryff ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.52

<VS_70> & worship your elders , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.53

<VS_71> & fauour the yong in all loue and drede of god .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.54

<VS_72> Euer pray for your enmyes , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.55

<VS_73> & or the sone goo downe , be in perfyte peas wyth theym dayly to
your power , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.56

<VS_74> & neuer dyspeyr of the grete mercy of god .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.57

<VS_75> Loo , thyes ben the Instrumentes of the spirituell crafte &
occupacion , <VS_76> +te which exercised and doon , oure lorde hath
promysed to you and vs <VS_77a> that eye neuer sawe , nor ere euer herde
, <VS_e> nor cowde euer in to mannys herte ascende , <VS_77b> +te which
to al his louyng seruantes he hath ordened .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.58

amen . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.59

<Chapter_5> <VS_1> OBedyence is a grete vertu done without grutchyng or
taryenge . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.60

It is the fyrst steppe vnto mekenes , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,122.61

<P_123>

<VS_2> & it is right specyous & nedefull to be had for all peple ,
<VS_3> & namely for relygyous persones . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,123.63

<VS_4> True obediencers , as sone as thei be called or commaundid of
theyr souereyn , anone after +te worde seyde , they be redy wyth all
gladnesse to doo the dede so commaundid , <VS_7> settyng asyde all other
thynges vndone & their owne wyll in euery poynt , <VS_9> and +tat wyth
all quyknesse of herte & body for drede of our lorde . <VS_11> Wherfore
he callyth suche a lyfe a streyt waye to heuen , <VS_12> and not a comyn
waye where synners take her owne wyll , & be not vndir the yocke of
obedyence to an other . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,123.64

<VS_13> Wythouten doubte trew obedyencers folow surely oure lorde & his
wordes where he seyth , " I come not in to thys world to doo myn owne
wyll , but the wyll of my fader the whiche sent me . "
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,123.65

<VS_14> Thenne this obedience is gretly acceptable to god and swete to
al cristen peple , whan it is done quikly and wythoute grutchynge or
frowarde countenaunce in worde or in herte .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,123.66

<VS_16> Our lorde loueth a thyng done vnto hym cherefully in soule ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,123.67

<VS_15> and such obedience done to the souereyn is done to god & for god
, as he seyth hymselfe . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,123.68

<VS_17> Yf one obey with grutchyng , either in worde or in their herte ,
<VS_18> fulfyllyng the commaundement of theyr so-uereyn , yet it is not
acceptable to god , the whiche beholdyth the herte euer & the wyll of
the doer therof , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,123.69

<VS_19> & he shal haue noo grace , but rather payne ordeined for
grutchers without he amende him . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,123.70

<Chapter_6> <VS_1a> AS for silence , doo aftir the cheyf prophete <VS_a>
of god , dauid , where he seyth in +te sauter : <VS_1b> " I haue seyd
that I shall not offende in my tongue . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,123.71

I haue put a kepyng to my mowth , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,123.72

& am dompe and therwith made meke & silent . "
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,123.73

<VS_4> In moche speche , as it is writen , synne cann not be auoyded ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,123.74

<VS_5> also in +te power of the tongue is deth & lyfe .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,123.75

<VS_6> As it accordith to a mayster to speke & teche , so it behoueth
the disciple to here & be silent . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,123.76

<VS_8> wordes of vnclennes , voyde , or meuynge to disolucyon or to
laughter , ben dampned by the rule in ony place to be had ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,123.77

& it is commaunded streytly by the same , none to be so bolde to open
their mowth in suche maner of <P_124> talkyng .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,124.78

<Chapter_42> <VS_8> Also silence is to be kept by the rule at all tymes
, & spyrituelly at nyght after complyn , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,124.79

and noo licence thenne is to be gyuen to ony for to speke , <VS_a> but
oonly to officers , <VS_b> or to theim that grete nede causith to speke
with sadnesse & honestee . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,124.80

<VS_c> & silence also is to be kept at all refeccions and meles & in
other places , & at other tymes specyfyed by the rule .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,124.81

<VS_9> Yf theyr be founde ony gylty in theis premyses , thei out to be
punysshid streytly and greuously . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,124.82

<Chapter_7> <VS_1> HOly scrypture cryeth and seyth , " he that wyll high
hymselfe shal be made lowe , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,124.83

and he that mekyth hym selfe shall be made high . "
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,124.84

<VS_2> In thys is shewid that exaltacyon is +te doughter and nygh of
kyne to pryde , whiche is mortall . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,124.85

<VS_5> Yf we wyll atteyne and come to the heyth of perfyte mekenes , the
whiche wyll bringe vs to the honour of heuen in body and soule , <VS_6>
lete vs lyft vp our herte & mynde vnto heuen by +te skale and lader of
Iacob , <VS_7> descendyng wyth the angels from ony exaltacyon , and
clymme vp to theym by mekenes & humyliacion .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,124.86

<VS_10> The fyrste steppe of thys ladder ascendyng by mekenes to heuen ,
is to be euer aferde of god and of your souereyn , and not to be
foryetful , <VS_11> beringe in your mynde surely all thynges that god
hath commaundyd you to be done , and your rule , and how they +tat
contempnyth god & hys preceptes or the rule shal goo to hell , and to
theim that loue & drede god & kepith his commaundementes is ordeyned
Ioye euerlastyng . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,124.87

<VS_13> Oure lorde in euery place beholdyth the dedes & thoughtes of
euery creature , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,124.88

and +te angels ben redy to shewe to the trynitee dayly the gode dedes of
eche good creature . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,124.89

<VS_31> The seconde steppe or degree of thys ladder of mekenesse is whan
one hath no delyte to fulfyll theyr owne wyll or desire , <VS_32> but
oonli to folow crist , +tat seith : " I come not in to the worlde to doo
myn owne wyll but the wyll of my fader that sent me . "
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,124.90

<VS_34> The iij . degree is whan one subdewyth & mekyth hym selfe for
god lowly to their souereyn , folowynge crist , of whom the apostyll
seyth : " Ihesus was made obedient vnto deth of the crosse . "
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,124.91

<VS_35> The iiij . degree is whan one can suffre wyth <P_125> all
obedience & pacyence all Iniuries , wronges , wordes of rebuke , & suche
other done or sayd vnto theim , <VS_36> & to take hem gladly for goddis
sake , their lyfe enduring . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,125.92

For +te gospel seith : " he +tat contynueth to the ende shall be sauff .
" 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,125.93

<VS_44> The v . steppe of this ladder of mekenes is +tat whan all euyll
thoughtes that come vnto their herte or to their mynde , & their synnes
a_fore hid & not confessyd , +tat they wyll thenne open mekely to theyr
sourereyn wyth repentaunce . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,125.94

<VS_45> For it is writen : " shew thy wayes of thy lyuyng to our lord
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,125.95

& trust in hym & in his mercy , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,125.96

<VS_46> for he is al goodnesse & piteful , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,125.97

<VS_a> & redy is to foryeue thy trespace & synne , <VS_47> yf thou wyll
knowleche it wyth repentaunce & amende . " 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,125.98

<VS_49> The vj . degre of mekenes is whan one is well content wyth
symple araye or habite , & is glad to be set lytill by , & to be take as
a drudge or outcast of the religion , & to be euer redy to doo al
thynges that is boden hym to doo , Iugyng him an Idyll seruaunt and
vnworthy to god and man . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,125.99

<VS_51> The vij . degree is yf he shew in dede hymself , not oonly with
tongue but also wyth all the inwardes of his herte & by outwarde
behauour , the lothliest & the vilest of all other , <VS_52> seyeng wyth
the prophete : " I am a worme & noo man , the repreef of peple &
abieccion . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,125.100

<VS_54> lord , I thanke the that +tou hast mekid me so that I may the
beter learne thy commaundementes . " 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,125.101

<VS_55> The viij . degree is yf that he doo no thynge but as the commyn
rule of the place and holy ensample of his senyours doo shewe vnto him
in our lorde . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,125.102

<VS_56> The ix . degree is yf one kepe his tongue in al silence to the
tyme he be commaundid to speke , or els that he be asked a questyon .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,125.103

<VS_59> The x . degree is yf one be not lyght and redy to laughter or
to dissolucyon : 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,125.104

It is writen , " a fole wylle exalte his voyce in laughter . "
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,125.105

<VS_60> The enleuenth is for to speke euer softely wyth sadnes , &
mekely , & with fewe wordes groundid vpon reason and godly .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,125.106

<VS_61> It is wryten : " The wyse man is knowen by hys wordes . "
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,125.107

<VS_62> The xij . degree is whan one not oonly in his mowthe , but as
well in his body , shewyth meknesse to all that beholde hym , <VS_63> as
in al his dedes , in chaptour , in chirche , in garden , in felde ,
sittynge , walkynge , or standynge , & his hede enclynynge , and his
sight to the grounde , <VS_64> shewynge hym <P_126> selfe euery houre
gylty of hys synne . hauynge euer suspect for to be brought to the
ferefull lugement of god , <VS_65> seyeng thus wyth the publycan : "
Good lorde , I a synner am not worthy to lyfte vp myn eyen to heuen . "
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,126.108

<VS_67> who som euer hath ascendyd al thise degrees of mekenesse shall
anone haue the charyte of god perfitely , <VS_68> +te whyche thenne
puttyth awaye all drede in suche thynges , <VS_b> the whyche he dyde
afore with drede , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,126.109

and also dooth thenne al his actes of accustome , as it were naturalle
to hym , cherefully , & wythoute labour , & that <VS_69> not for the
drede of hell he dooth it . but for feruent loue +tat he hath to god by
a custome & delyte of vertue , <VS_70> +te whyche grace is yeuen of +te
holy gooste . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,126.110

<Chapter_18> <VS_a> HOw the seruyse of god is to be doone at his howres
accordying to the tyme , is shewid in the holy rule distynctly by
chaptours , <VS_b> where it is noted in +te ende <VS_23> +tat euery weke
, beynnynge on the sonday , shal be songe the hole sawter of dauid wyth
anthemes & other appropyred therfore , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,126.111

<VS_25> & finally it is so of vs to doo in regarde of holy faders afore
tyme , +tat dide deuoutly rendre & say euery daye of the yer +te seyde
holy sawter as we rede . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,126.112

<Chapter_19> <VS_1> SIth it is so that our bileue , is that god is
presente in euery place , & beholdyth at eche howre both the gode & the
euyll , <VS_2> thenne it is to truste wythoute ony dowte , +tat moche
more whan we be occupied in his seruyce <VS_a> in +te chirche or ony
other holy place , <VS_3> wherfore he is to be serued in drede by the
counseyle of the prophete , <VS_5> & wysely remembring his presence with
innumerable angels , <VS_6> the whyche ben theyr surely at dyuyne
seruyce , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,126.113

<VS_7> and lete vs euer soo syng and saye , that our mynde accorde to
our voys and the sentence of the dytee . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,126.114

Amen . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,126.115

<Chapter_20> <VS_1> YF we shulde make ony suggestion to a state
temporall , we wolde not presume to doo it but with mekenes & reuerence
, 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,126.116

<VS_2> thenne how moche more owe we to oure lorde god wyth all mekenes
and clennesse <P_127> deuoutly to make our prayer and supplicacion ,
<VS_4> & that not in haste and moche seyenge , <VS_3> but in clennesse
of the herte & compunccion wyth wepyng , +tat we may the rather be herde
in our prayer & petycion . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,127.117

<Chapter_21> <VS_a> OF the eleccyon of the deanes & offycers of the
religyon and of theyr good lyfe & of their charges , <VS_b> by the
whyche the souereyn maye in partie be discharged ; <VS_3-4> And how they
owe to be chosen for theyr good lyfe , theyr lernyge and wysdom ; <VS_5>
And how they shal be correct and blamed ; and also depryued if thei
amende not after theyr defawte ; <VS_6> And how that other better
disposyd shal occupye their place , and soo other offices .
<Chapter_22> <VS_a> and also in what maner they shall slepe in their
clothes gyrde . <Chapter_25> <VS_a> And how offenses and sinnes , grete
& less dyuersly , owen to be corrected ; <Chapter_27> <VS_1-2> And how
+te souereyn owe to be dilygent aboute suche as a goode leche or
phisicien in all charite & prayer ; <Chapter_28> <VS_a> And also how
they that oft haue ben corrupt & correcte wyll not amende by noo
punysshement reguler , that prayer to god & good exhortacyon is thenne
euer to be had vnto theim ; <VS_6-7> Yf they wyll not dispose theim so
to be reconsiled & to take grace ; how that thenne they shall departe
from the congregacyon , <VS_8> leest that suche a moreyne shepe empoysen
and enfecte the residue of +te flocke ; <Chapter_29> <VS_a> And also how
those +tat ones by their owne foly goone out of the religyon ben
receyuen ayen ; <Chapter_30> <VS_a> And how childern nouyces arn to be
chastised . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,127.118

<VS_b> al thys afore wryten ben ordeyned afore by saynte benet in +te
complete rule in seuerall chapitours full heavenly .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,127.119

<Chapter_31> <VS_1> THe cellerer of the place is to be chosen of the
congregacyon , suche one that is wyse , quicke , well condycyoned , &
sobre , not prowde , impacient , not trowbelous , ferefull , nor large ,
<VS_2> but euer dredynge god , beyng as a fader or a louyng moder to al
+te congregacion . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,127.120

<VS_3> They must haue grete laboure & thought for all theim , <VS_4>
doyng noo thyng wythout +te commaundement of the souereyn , <VS_5> the
whiche agreyng to god and the rule is euer to be kept , <VS_6> soo that
they cause not ony of the couent to <P_128> grutche or be heuy .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,128.121

<VS_7> Yf cace be that ony aske a thynge vnresonable , yet they owe not
to dysdeyne suche one or dispyse , makyng theim heuy with theyr
countenaunce or answere , but reasonably , wyth all mekenes and
cheyrfull countenaunce , in softnes of spiritte denie their petycion .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,128.122

<VS_8> This sayd charge is dredefull and also meritorious ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,128.123

for the apostle seyth : " He or she that mynystrith wel shall haue grete
rewarde & crowned in heuen . " 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,128.124

<VS_9> Morouer theyr charge is to see diligently and well to the seke ,
and to Infauntes , to strangers , and to power peple , Remembring that
wythout doubte , +tat they shall yeue a streyt rekenyng and accompte for
all theys , and for the leest thyng in theyr office myskepte or
myspendid at@ @te ferefull daye of dome . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,128.125

<VS_10> All the vesels of +te place they own to kepe well , in that as
well as though thei were the sacrate vesels of the awter .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,128.126

<VS_11> Noo thynge they shulde doo nec-lygently , <VS_12> or to be
couetous or ouerlarge or prodigious , but all thynges to doo mesurably
wyth discreyon & after the commaundement of the souereyn .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,128.127

<VS_13> And specially in thys offyce thei must haue mekenesse , & whan
they haue not the thyng that is askyd of theym , thenne at leest to yeue
an esy & gentill answer , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,128.128

<VS_14> For it is writen , a soft & esy answere is a_boue ony yeft .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,128.129

<VS_16> The refresshynge and fode that is to be yeuen to the couent or
congregacyon is to be done euer without grutchyng or taryeng , so that
thei haue noo cause to compleyne for the minystracyon .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,128.130

<VS_18> All thynges is to be askyd in dew houres , <VS_19> soo that none
be trowbled or made pensy in the housholde of our lorde .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,128.131

<Chapter_32> <VS_1> FOr the other stuff of the monestary , and vesture
of the couent wyth other necessaryes , +te souereyn owe to prouide suche
officers of whos lyf & good maners he and other may be sure , <VS_2> for
the kepyng therof & gaderyng of the same , and for delyueryng of hem to
theym +tat haue nede . <VS_3> Of the whiche stuff the souereyn shall
haue wrytynge , wherby he maye delyuer the percels to the offycers as
they chaunge , so +tat it maye be well knowen what is yeuen and what is
receyued . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,128.132

<VS_4-5> Who so <P_129> euer neclygently or sluttisshly entretyth ony
thyng of the place , anone be they rebukyd & punysshid .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.133

<Chapter_33> <VS_1> THe grete vice & syn of properte in relygyon is
namely to be cutte awaye by +te rote . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.134

<VS_2> Presume none in relygyon to yeue ony thyng , or to take , wythout
the wyll & commaundement of the souereyn , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.135

<VS_3> nor is it leefull ony to haue a thyng to theyrself propre ,
<VS_4> not as moche as their owne body , or to haue their own wyll in
their power . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.136

<VS_5> All thynges to theim necessary is to be had of the souereyn
accordynge to theyr nede , <VS_a> not acceptynge ony persone more than
an other , but accordyng to nede & in_firmyte .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.137

<VS_6> And all thynges must be commyn emonge theym accordyng to the lyfe
of +te apostles . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.138

None presume to sey , suche a thynge is myne .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.139

<VS_7> Yf ony by founde gylty in thys venemouse offence of properte ,
lete them twyes or thries be correct , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.140

<VS_8> yf they doo not amende , see thenne to their chastysment .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.141

<Chapter_34> <VS_3> Yf at ony tyme one nede a lytyll thyng , thanke he
our lorde 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.142

and say he euer : " Deo gracias , " not beyng sory <VS_2> that an-other
that nede hath , that pite is shewid vppon hym .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.143

<VS_4> And he that hath suche pite shewyd upon hym shal not therof be
proude by countenaunce or by worde , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.144

<VS_5> and thus shall all the congregacyon be in rest and charitee ,
<VS_6> and grutchynge layd a syde , the whiche is perilous to be had
eyther by worde or sygne . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.145

<VS_7> Yf ony therin be founde culpable , anone put theim to streyt
disciplyne . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.146

<Chapter_35> <VS_1> EAch one be besy to serue other ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.147

& none is to be exscusid from +te dressing bord of +te kechyn , wythout
they be seke or other wyse occupyed for +te commyn well .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.148

<VS_2> In suche meke & low seruice is goten grete mede , charite and
rewarde . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.149

<VS_7> and whan they shall departe wekely from the kechyn by cours ,
they owe to make al thynges clene at theyr departyng ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.150

<VS_8> and +te clothes +tat the couent hath fyled with theyr handes or
fete they shall delyuer clene also wyth all mekenes .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.151

<VS_9> And moreouer theyr owne fete they shall make clene in theyr
departyng ; <VS_10> and delyuer al the naprye and clene clothes to the
celerer . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,129.152

<P_130>

<VS_12> Suche seruytoures by +te rule may take a lytyll refresshing of
mete & drynke afore high dyner , <VS_13> for by cause of their
attendaunce & seruyse at +te same . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,130.154

<Chapter_36> <VS_1> GRete attendaunce is to be had aboute seke persones
aboue all other thynges , as though it were to criste hymselfe , the
whiche doutlesse is seruyd in theym that is seke , <VS_2> as he seyth
hymselfe : " I was seke 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,130.155

and ye visited me , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,130.156

<VS_3> and that ye dide vnto the leest of theym that were seke , ye dide
it vnto me . " <VS_4> Wherfor those that ben seke shulde considre that
suche seruyce is doon to theym for the loue & honour of god ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,130.157

and therfore they shulde be righte ware to cause ony heuyness to theyr
seruytoures by ony superfluite or vncurtees demenour .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,130.158

<VS_5> Not for thy for theyr sekenes they owe pacyently to be suffred
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,130.159

, for of suche is goton grete rewarde herafter in heuen .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,130.160

<VS_6> The souereyn may not be neclygent to the ouersyght of suche seke
persones , serchyng wel that thei lacke noo helpe or comforte , <VS_7>
or ony thing that is necessary for theim , <VS_8> as is wasshing bathyng
, and medicynes , yeuyng as oft as nedeth , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,130.161

<VS_9> and to suche is grauntid by the rule for theyr sooner amendement
for to ete flesshe , so +tat after their recouer thei absteyn in ony
wyse therfro . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,130.162

<Chapter_37> <VS_1> Prouyde alway +tat fauour be had to Infantes , seke
persones , & aged . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,130.163

<Chapter_38> <VS_1> AT all refeccyons and meles , redying & lecture must
be had . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,130.164

<VS_2> And the reder , after the masse on the sonday , shall entre and
humbly desire of all the congregacyon to pray for hym , makynge a cross
in his forhede , for the euyll spirite of pryde and other , <VS_4> and
after the blessyng yeuen begyn to rede . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,130.165

<VS_a> and all the tyme of refeccyon or meles <VS_5> none to be soo
hardy to speke , but to kepe high silence as speche , noys , or other
wyse , preuy or aperte . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,130.166

<VS_9> how be it , the souereyn maye a lytyll speke of the processe that
is rad , or of other <VS_b> for edefieng of his ghestes or of other that
here hym , and not els . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,130.167

<VS_6> Also +te congregacion shal be seruyd of al thynges necessary to
theym at that tyme , so that none haue nede to aske ony thynge .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,130.168

<P_131>

<VS_7> Yf cace be +tat suche nede befall , thenne signes must be vsid
and no speche . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,131.170

<VS_10> The reder maye afore his lecture take a lytyll refeccyon that is
callyd mixtum yf nede be , for by cause of his redyng at@ @te mete .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,131.171

<VS_12> And suche owe to rede euer , the whiche by theyr redyng may best
edyfye the herers . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,131.172

<VS_c> And the same is to be obseruyd in all syngyng and redynge in the
chirche , or in prechyng , and that to be done in mekenes , sadnesse ,
and drede . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,131.173

<Chapter_39> <VS_a> IT folowyth in the rule of the mesures of mete ,
<Chapter_40> <VS_a> and drynke , <Chapter_41> <VS_a> and what howres
after the season and tyme of the year the congregacyon shall take theyr
repast and meles , <VS_b> And also how the souereyn must soo tempre and
dispose all suche thynges wyth other , so that the soules of his
subgettes may be saaf . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,131.174

<Chapter_43> <VS_1-2> TO the seruyce of god , as sone as is herde ony
bell or token , all thynges set aside , the couent owe to come in all
godely haste and relygyously therto , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,131.175

<VS_3> For noo thynge owe to be preferryd before the seruyce of god .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,131.176

<VS_a> And they that come late thereto shal not goo to their owne place
in +te quere , but to the place assigned for suche late commers , to
theyr rebuke , penaunce and amendement . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,131.177

<VS_b> How they shall be punysshid that come late to meles , and of
theyr sequestracyon from the feliship , and of theyr etyng alone in
penaunce after other , the rule with his expositour dooth specifye .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,131.178

<Chapter_45> <VS_1a> THo that fayle in psalmody , respons , anthemes ,
or lessons , yf they meke not theyr selfe openly afore all the
congregacion , <VS_a> as puttynge theyr hede downe to the grounde , or
other wyse by the rule , <VS_1b> for a satysfacyon , els they must haue
afterwarde more largelier & greter penaunce for their offence .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,131.179

<VS_3> And children euer for theyr trespace must be bette .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,131.180

<Chapter_46> <VS_1> WHo that euer in his laboures , as in the kechyn ,
in celary , in the gardyn , or in ony other occupacyon , offnedyth
<VS_2> or brekyth ony thyng , or els <P_132> lesith , <VS_3> and wyll
not knowleche his offence to the hede and souereyn or to the
congregacyon , they owe to haue grete penance , if yt be openly knowen ,
the offence . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,132.181

<VS_5> yf it be not knowen , but oonly to hym selfe , thenne lete hym
shew it bi confessyon to the souereyn or to his goostly fader and take
his penaunce . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,132.182

<Chapter_48> <VS_1a> IDilness is the enmye of +te soule , <VS_a>
wherfore lyke as the couent ben occupyed certeyn howres aboute the
seruyce of god , <VS_1b> soo certeyn other howres ben thei occupyed in
redying and studyeng of heuenly thynges , and in labou-res wyth theyr
body , <VS_7> in thynges that is good and necessary to theim or +te
place , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,132.183

<VS_8> for thenne thei ben very religious , whan thei thus folowe holy
faders and doon as the apostles dyden . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,132.184

<VS_15> IN the time of lent echon by theyr selfe haue the bible , the
whiche they owe to rede complete and hole besyde theyr seryse ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,132.185

<VS_16> and the seyde bible is to be delyuerd vnto theym at@ @te
begynnynge of lent . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,132.186

<VS_17> And the serchers of the relygyon owe to see warely aboute +tat
they be occupyed in lecture thereof sonday and other , <VS_18> & not
aboute fables , Iapes , or sluggisshenes . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,132.187

<VS_19> Yf ony suche be founde , see that they be spoken vnto sharply
ones or twyes , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,132.188

<VS_20> & yf they amende not theyrwyth , lete theym be correct , soo
that all other maye beware by them . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,132.189

<VS_23> If theyr be ony so slouthfull or neclygent , that they maye not
or wyll not be occupied in redying or holy medytacyon , thenne lete
theym be assigned to other occupacyons to doo , so that they be neuer
vnoccupied in vertu . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,132.190

<VS_24> If they be seke , or feble for age , thenne such an occupacyon
is to be put vnto theym +tat they maye awaye wyth , & not to be ydyll ,
<VS_25> by +te discrecion of the souereyn .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,132.191

<Chapter_49> <VS_1> HOw be it that a relygious persone owe euery tyme to
keep lent , <VS_2> yet for by cause that fewe haue thys vertu , therfore
we aduise and counseyll , seyth saynt benet , all of the relygyon
spiritually theys xl. dayes of lent to kepe in all clennesse of lyfe ,
<VS_3> and to put vtterly <P_133> awaye all theyr neclygences and olde
custome of synne . <VS_4> and thenne more spiritually to gyue theim to
prayer , waylyng and wepinge , redinge , and abstinence <VS_a> in mete
and drynke , wythdrawynge somwhat of theyr takynge in mete and drynke
<VS_6> other wyse than they dide afore , and that wyth good wyll ,
offerynge it in his mynde to god and to the poore peple . <VS_7> And to
wythdrawe some what of slepe and speche and wanton behauour .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.192

<VS_8> And as for abstynence of mete and drynke , it owe to be doon wyth
the consente euer of the souereyn and the helpe of prayer .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.193

<VS_9> For yf it be otherwyse doon , it is to be taken of presumpcyon
and vayne glory , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.194

and thenne it hath noo mede . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.195

<Chapter_52> <VS_1> NOo thynge is to be spoken in the chirche but prayer
. 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.196

<VS_2> And after that ony seruyce is there doon , all they owe to
departe wyth silence and lowe reuerence doon to god .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.197

<VS_3> Yf ony after woll praye of deuocyon , none shall let hym by theyr
noyse or ony other vncurteys delynge , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.198

<VS_4a> and thenne suche owe secretely to praye wyth deuocyon , and not
on high . but wepynge for his synnes <VS_a> and the Ignoraunce of the
peple and theyr synnes , <VS_4b> wyth all meke intencyon of herte and
soule . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.199

<VS_5> All other not soo there occupyed owe to avoyde .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.200

<Chapter_53> <VS_1> AL strangers or ghestes arn to be receyued for god &
as god . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.201

For here after they shal here hym saye to theim : " I was a stranger
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.202

& ye toke me In 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.203

<VS_a> and gaue me mete & drynke and lodgynge , "
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.204

and soo of other dedes of mercy . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.205

<VS_2> Euery persone is to be honourid for the ymage of god ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.206

thenne moche more those that ben of cristen religion and that commen for
god . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.207

<VS_3> Whan euer it is shewyd that a stranger is come , anone the
souereyn or his bredern shulde quykly goo to hym wyth all charyte ,
<VS_4> and after theyr prayer togider made and knyt togider in goddis
peas , <VS_5> kissyng togyder and salutyng other , <VS_9> with after
refresshing theim with mete and drynk and other necessaryes to their
power , redyng amonge the lawes of god to theyr edyfieng of soule .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,133.208

<VS_10> The souereyn may breke his <P_134> mele for a stranger , wythout
it be a spirituell fastynge daye , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,134.209

and thenne he owe not to breke it . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,134.210

<VS_11> The bredern may not breke ony faste for strangers .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,134.211

<VS_13> Also the souereyn wyth the congregacion shulde with all mekenes
folow oure lorde , and wasshe the fete of the strangers , <VS_14>
sayenge certeyn prayers , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,134.212

<VS_15> for in theim and poore folke is to be had diligent watche and
cure , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,134.213

for crist in theym is surely receyued . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,134.214

<VS_21> He +tat is asygned for suche gestes or poore folke , to gyue
vnto theim necessaries , shulde drede god gretly and haue mekenes and
pacience , <VS_22> and doo all thynges with wisdom <VS_23> and silence ,
euer fulfillyng the souereyns commaundement ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,134.215

<VS_24> & whan they ony other mete or see , they owe to enclyne mekely
and salute theim , departyng with silence .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,134.216

<Chapter_54> <VS_1> NOo wyse be it leefull to ony broder to take or
receyue of fader or moder ony letters , tokens , or yeftes , <VS_2> or
els to sende hymself , or to yeue ony , without the wyll and
comaundement of his hede and souereyn , <VS_3> the which had , he thenne
maye receiue theim , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,134.217

not forthy the souereyn after may yeue suche stuff to suche as it shall
please hym , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,134.218

<VS_4> and he that it was sent vnto shall take it in worthe & cherefully
, in that an other hath it , leest that occasion of grutchinge inwarde
or outwarde be yeuen to the by thy goostly enmye .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,134.219

<Chapter_55> <VS_1-2> CLothynge to the couent , and habyte , is to be
yeuen accordyng to the hete of the yere or to the coldenes of the
countre that they dwell in , lasse or more as nede is .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,134.220

<VS_3> And the souereyn must haue consideracion therof , <VS_7> and to
bye suche cloth that is made in that countre or prouynce , of the vilest
and lyghtest pryce . <VS_9> And as oft as they shal take new , thenne
to render vp the olde for the vse of pore peple .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,134.221

<VS_a> Of other thynges necessary for theyr body daye & nyght in wynter
and somer , and of theyr celles and lodgyng , and of their behauour in
theim with other , the hole rule certifieth . <VS_16> , <VS_18> And how
the souereyne shal dyligently serche that thei lacke no thyng to theym
necessary ; <VS_19> soo that all occasion of grutchyng , or for ony
<P_135> thynge werkynge , or for ony thynge keypng , haue no place in
+te relygyon ; <VS_20> euer remembryng the wordes wrytyn in the actes of
the apostles where it is seyde , that it was distribute & delyuerd to
echone of theym as theyr nede required . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,135.222

<Chapter_56> <VS_1> THe borde or table of the souereyn is to be
garnysshid wyth pilgrymes or ghestes . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,135.223

<VS_2> And whan there ben few strangers , the soouereyn maye call vnto
hym some of the brederen , <VS_3> so that parte of the senyours be left
wyth the couent for theyr awe and disciplyne .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,135.224

<Chapter_58> <VS_1> WHan ony commyth from the worlde to entre in to
religion , a light or soden entree is not to be graunted , <VS_2> but
for to doo after the apostle , preuynge the spirites , yf they be of god
. 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,135.225

<VS_3> Yf cace be that suche one be abydynge in hys purpose , and founde
pacyent for ony Iniuryes done vnto hym , or for delayeng of his entre &
suche other , thenne after iiij or v. dayes <VS_4> may be graunted vnto
hym entree , abidying after by certeyn space in the ghestys chambre ,
<VS_5> and after in the cell for nouices , theyr to be for a tyme in
prayer and medytacyon , and for to ete and drynke .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,135.226

<VS_6> And a senyoure of the relygyon is to be assigned vnto hym , the
whyche is apt to gete sowles to god . <VS_7> the whyche shall see vnto
hym warely and vysely that he be vertuously occupyed , sekynge our lorde
by prayer , and to folow hym by obedyence and suffryng of repreues .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,135.227

<VS_8> All the hardnesse and sharpnesse of the ordre is to be tolde hym
playnly , by the whiche he must goo to heuen .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,135.228

<VS_9> And yf he promyse to contynwe and to be stable in his purpoos ,
thenne after two monethes the rule shall be red hole by order vnto hym ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,135.229

<VS_10> and thus it shall be seyde vnto hym : " Beholde here the lawe
vndre whyche thou must sore laboure and fyght .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,135.230

Yf thou thynkyst that thou maye kepe it , come in ;
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,135.231

and yf thou may not , goo free ayen where it plesith +te . "
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,135.232

<VS_11> Yf he yet contynewe by hys promyse , thenne he shall be brought
ayen to the nouyces cell to be preued ayen , and yet ayen <P_136> after
in all pacience . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,136.233

<VS_12> & thenne after six monethes the rule ayen shall be red vnto hym
, soo that he may well know wherfore he entryth in to relygyon .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,136.234

<VS_13> and yf he contynue styll iiij. mounthes after , yet not for thy
+te rule ayen shall be red vnto hym . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,136.235

<VS_14> And yf he promyse thenne vtterly to kepe all thynges that is so
ofte red vnto hym , and to be obedient , thenne at@ @te firste shall he
be taken in to the congregacyon , <VS_15> knowlechyng thenne that he is
bounde to the law of the rule , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,136.236

and thenne after he may not departe from +te monestarye , <VS_16> nor
excsuse him , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,136.237

but that he is vnder the yocke of +te seyd rule to his deth .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,136.238

<VS_17> Thenne whan he is admyttid and taken in to the chirche to be
professid afore all the peple , there he shall promytte of his
stabylnesse and amendyng of his maners , & there vpon make his obedience
<VS_18> afore god and his sayntes , the whiche is to be done with all
his mynde and herte , leest that he mocke our lorde god to his
dampnacyon . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,136.239

<VS_19> Of his promyse and profession he shall make a peticyon in
writynge to god , and to all sayntes whos relykes ben in that chirche ,
and to the souereyn assygned thereto , <VS_20> the whiche he shal wryte
with his owne hande , or els an other of hym required , yf that he can
not write , & marke it with his owne sygne , the whiche he shall put
vpon +te awter afterwarde wyth his hande . <VS_21-22> & seye certayn
prayers therwyth . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,136.240

<VS_23> And after this he shall fall downe prostrate at fete of the
couent , prayeng theym to praye for hym , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,136.241

and after thys he shall be nombrid for euer , and named for one of the
congregacyon . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,136.242

<VS_24> Suche stuff that he hath not yeuen before to folke +tat ben
poore , or other wyse , openly shall he thenne yeue to the monestary ,
noo thyng reseruyng vnto hym selfe . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,136.243

<VS_25> for after that tyme he maye haue no propirte , not as moche as
his owne body . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,136.244

<VS_26> And whan in +te chirche he shal doo of his seculer arraye and be
cladde with the habite of the place , <VS_27> those that he puttyth of
shall be kept in the vestuary , <VS_28> leest that the enmye the fende
perswade and cause hym after , the whiche god defende , for to departe
from the religion , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,136.245

and thenne he must haue his seculer clothes ayen , and put out for euer
. 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,136.246

<VS_29> But his petycyon in wrytinge that he put on the awter in <P_137>
his firste entre , ought euer to remayn and to be kept in the monestary
. 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,137.247

<Chapter_59> <VS_1> YF a man of worship offre a yong childe , his sone ,
to god and to the religion , thenne shall he or his frendes make the
peticion , as is {TEXT:it}
{ED:cf._fn._5;_Caxton:_"as_it",_for_"as_is",_or_"as_it_is"} wryten afore
, for him with writyng , <VS_2> and their offryng wyth the hande of +te
childe , the whiche shall be rollyd togider in the pall or in the towell
of the awter ; 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,137.248

<VS_a> How poore children ; <Chapter_60> <VS_a> and secular prestes ;
<Chapter_61> <VS_a> & how mounkes strangers owe to be receyued ;
<Chapter_62> <VS_a> and of the ordynacion of prestes & of dekens wythin
+te selfe religion ; <VS_b> is shewid folowyngly in the complete rule by
large processe , the whiche I passe ouer for the grete change that is in
that religion and the length . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,137.249

<Chapter_63_part_2> <VS_15> WHan euer the bredern mete togider , the
yonger shall meke hymselfe , desirynge the blessynge of hys senyour .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,137.250

<VS_16> And whan ony senyour commyth at ony tyme before hym , he shal
arise and gyue place to sytte , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,137.251

and the sayd Ionger shall stande tyll he be commande to sitte .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,137.252

<VS_18> Yonge children of the religion both in chirche and at table &
elswhere shall kepe theyr place after their age in relygion ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,137.253

<VS_19> and they shal haue ouerseers , techinge theym & gyuynge
disciplyne , tyll they come to the age of vnderstondyng .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,137.254

<Chapter_66> <VS_1> To the gate of the monestary an aged persone , wise
and well manerd , is to be assigned , the whiche can take an answere
wittely or a message ; Whose good disposicyon woll not suffre hym to
wandre aboute or to be idle . <VS_2> The whiche broder owe to lodge
nygh the gate , soo that strangers that come maye euer fynde hym redy ,
of whom they shall take an answere . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,137.255

<VS_3> And whan someuer ony knockyth at gate , or els that the poore
peple crye , anone he shall seye : " Deo gracias , " cherefully , <VS_4>
and gyue theym an awnswere comfortably , in all mekenes and softnesse
and drede of god . <VS_5> The whiche broder portar shall haue helpe of
an other yonger broder , yf grete nede requyre .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,137.256

<VS_6> Suche a monestary is to be sette in such a place where all
<P_138> thynges necessary soone maye be had , <VS_7> so that the couent
nede not to passe the boundes of the clausures therof , the whiche yf
{COM:parasitic_gap} thei dide , shulde be perylle for theyr soules .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,138.257

<VS_8> Saynt benet woll that the rule be red effectuelly oftymes in the
yere afore the congregacion , for by cause none of hem shall pretende
Ignorance or ony exscuse . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,138.258

<Chapter_67> <VS_1> WHan ony of the bredern must doo a Iourney without
the clausure of the place , after licence had , he shall commende hym to
the prayer of his souereyn , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,138.259

<VS_2> and euer at last oryson in the seruyse of god shal a prayer be
sayd for him and all +tat is absent . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,138.260

<VS_3> And the daye that they come home ayen , they shal lye prostrate
all the seruyse tyme , <VS_4> & desyre the couent to praye for theym for
theyr excesses done in the iourney , as in syght , heryng of ony
vanytees , or euylle thynges , or ony voyde wordes .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,138.261

<VS_5> And they shall not tell ony thyng +tat they sawe or herd in theyr
iourney , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,138.262

for it is a grete meane to +te destruccion of suche a place of relygion
. 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,138.263

<VS_6-7> And he that presumyth to doo the contrary , or to goo oute of
the clausure of the monestary to ony place , though it be neuer so lytil
, wythout commandement or licence of the souereyn , owe to be streytly
punysshyd . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,138.264

<Chapter_68> <VS_1> IF ony greuouse or impossible thynges be put vnto a
broder of his souereyn to doo , he shall wyth all mekenesse and
obedience take the commaundement vpon hym .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,138.265

<VS_2> Yf cace be that it passe his power in ony wise to fulfill it ,
thenne wyth all lowlynesse he shal tell it to his souereyn , and the
cause of impossibilytee . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,138.266

<VS_4> And yf cace be the souereyn contynew in his sentence & wyll ,
thenne the broder owe to know that it is to hym right profitable <VS_5>
yet to obeye , puttynge his trust in the helpe of god , <VS_a> whiche
woll not forsake all theym that truste in him .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,138.267

<Chapter_69> <VS_1> EChe one shuld beware +tat he exscuse not or defende
an other in ony cause , <VS_2> though al he were neuer soo nygh to hym
of blode . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,138.268

<VS_3> For of it lightly wolde <P_139> growe grete occasion of sclaundre
to the religion . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,139.269

<VS_4> Who +tat is founde fawty in this trespace owe to be punysshid
greuosly . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,139.270

<Chapter_70> <VS_2> IT is ordeyned also that it is not lefull to ony of
the couent to punisshe or to bete an other of the same , but suche one
as the souereyn hath yeuen power vnto . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,139.271

<VS_3> Those that offende openly must be repreuyd and punysshid openly ,
that other maye be the rather aferd to offende .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,139.272

<VS_4> Children to the xv . yere of age shall stande euer vndir streyt
awe and diligent discipline , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,139.273

<VS_5> & all thynges er to be doon vnto theym mesurably with discrecyon
and reason , <VS_a> & vndir the commandement euer of the souereyn .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,139.274

<VS_6> And he that otherwise dooth , shall be correct wyth reguler
disciplyne , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,139.275

<VS_7> for it is writen in the gospell , All thynges that ye wolde +tat
other shuld doo vnto you , doo ye it to theym ,
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,139.276

<VS_b> and that ye wolde not haue done to you , doo it not to theim .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,139.277

<Chapter_71> <VS_1> OBedience is not oonly to be yeuen of al the couent
to the souereyn , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,139.278

but also echon to other must obeye , <VS_2> knowyng that by +te way of
obedience thei shall come vnto heuen . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,139.279

<VS_3> Whan the commaundement of the soueuereyn is doon by the subgette
, saynt Benet woll that besyde that , <VS_4> +tat euer the yonger in
religion obeye theyr senyours in all charite , dilygence , & mekenesse ;
<VS_5> who +tat woll not must be correct . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,139.280

<VS_6> Yf ony brother be blamed of his souereyn for ony cause , though
it be right small , <VS_7> as soone as that he knowyth that his souereyn
or his senyour is greued wyth hym or trowbled , though it be right
lityll , <VS_8> anone he owe to fall down prosstrate at his fete , so
longe to the tyme he that is greued be satisfied & plesid for his
humyliacyon . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,139.281

<VS_9> Yf ony disdeyn to doo thys , lete hym be punysshid on the nakyd
body , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,139.282

and yf he be obstynate , put hym out of the monestary .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,139.283

<Chapter_72> <VS_1> AS there is an euyll zele , loue or affeccyon , the
whiche departyth one from god and bringith hym to hell , <VS_2> soo
there is a zele or affeccion the whiche <P_140> departyth one from synne
and bryngith hym to god to euerlastyng lyfe , <VS_3> the whiche is to be
had in religion in all feruent desire , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,140.284

<VS_4> for by it echone gladly woll reuerence other , <VS_5> and echon
suffre other for ony infirmytee or condycions , and that wyth all
pacience , 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,140.285

<VS_6> and moreouer echone be glad who can best meke hymselfe and to be
obedient , <VS_7> neuer folowyng that thyng the whiche he demeth to be
profitable oonly to hymselfe , but moche more that thyng that is
profitable for other . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,140.286

<VS_8> Echone shewe charitee to other as brethren in all clene & chaste
loue , <VS_9> dredyng euer god , <VS_10> and louynge theyr souereyn in
charyte vnfeyned , <VS_11> preferrying euer goddis cause and mater afore
all other , <VS_12> the whiche woll brynge hem all togider to reygne in
the lyfe the whiche is eternalle . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,140.287

<VS_a> AMEN . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,140.288

<VS_b> Explicit . 1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,140.289

<VS_c> Of your charite praye for the translatour of thys sayd treatyse .
1490-CAXTON-BENET-M4,140.290
