<BEGIN_cmaelr4-m4>

<P_1>

<heading>

DE INSTITUTIONE INCLUSARUM CMAELR4-M4,1.4

<$$heading>

Here begynneth a tretys that is a rule and a forme of lyuynge perteynyng
to a recluse . CMAELR4-M4,1.6

<heading>

Capitulum primum CMAELR4-M4,1.8

Why suche solitary lyf was ordeyned of fadirs in the olde tyme
CMAELR4-M4,1.9

<$$heading>

Suster , thou hast ofte axed of me a forme of lyuyng accordyng to thyn
estat , inasmuche as thou art enclosed . CMAELR4-M4,1.11

That wolde Iesu thou haddist axid it of suche oon as coude haue
fulfilled thyn desire . CMAELR4-M4,1.12

Natheles after that simple felynge that God hath youen me , I shal write
to the a forme gadert out of holy fadirs tradiciouns afore-tymes .
CMAELR4-M4,1.13

First the behoueth to knowe why that suche a solitary lyf was ordeyned .
CMAELR4-M4,1.14

Somme ther wern to whom it was ful perilous to lyue among many .
CMAELR4-M4,1.15

Ther were also somme <em> to whom <$$em> , although it were not perilous
to lyue amonge many , natheles it was ful greuous . CMAELR4-M4,1.16

And many ther wern whiche dradden noon of thes too but chosen this lyf
as a lyf moost fruytful to helthe of soule . So that either thei
fledden perel whiche might haue falle , or muche harme whiche might
betyde thurgh her presence , or ellis that thei mighten by suche leiser
more frely syghe and snobbe after the loue of Iesu with longyng desire .
CMAELR4-M4,1.17

Many of these that fledden fro perel and harm whiche might falle wanne
her liflode in wildirnes with gret laboure . CMAELR4-M4,1.18

In that othir syde , thei that fledden for fredom of spirit chosen to be
closed in an house out of alle mennes sight , whiche part hast thou
chosen and avowed the to . CMAELR4-M4,1.19

But many ther ben that knowe not ne charge not the profit of solitary
liuyng , supposyng that it be ynow , oonly to shutte her body bitwene
too walles , whan not only the thoughte rennith aboute besynes of the
worlde , but also the tunge is occupied alday , either aboute tidynges ,
curiously enquering and sechinge after hem , or elles of her neighbores
yuel name , by way of bakbityng , so that vnnethes now-a-dayes shal@
@tow finde a solitary recluse , that either tofore the wyndowe shal
sitte an olde womman fedynge hir with tales , or elles a new iangeler
and teller of tidynges of that monke , or of that clerke , or of widowes
dissolucion , or of maidens wantownes , of the whiche arisith lawghyng ,
scornynge and vnclene <slash> thoughtes slepynge or wakynge , so that
atte last the recluse is fulfilled with lust and likynge , bakbitynge ,
sclaundre and hatrede and the tother with mete and drinke .
CMAELR4-M4,1.20

<P_2>

Alle thes causen gret lettyng to Goddes seruauntes bothe wakyng and
slepynge , in meditacion and praier and contemplacion . CMAELR4-M4,2.22

What happith herof , trowist thou ? CMAELR4-M4,2.23

Certeyn suche lusty tales gendren leccherous ymaginatyf thou+gtes ,
neuere cessynge vnto the tyme she consente to falle , sekynge by whom ,
where and whan she might fulfille in dede that the whiche hath so longe
be vnclenly thoughte . CMAELR4-M4,2.24

This wrecchidnes hath often be seen of hem that han ben enclosed , by
the whiche the wyndowe hath be maad moor , that euereyther might come in
or out to other , soo that atte last of a recluse or of an ancresse
selle is maad a bordel hous . CMAELR4-M4,2.25

<heading>

Capitulum ij CMAELR4-M4,2.27

That a recluse shal fle couetise and besynesse of getyng of worldly
godes CMAELR4-M4,2.28

<$$heading>

Somme also ther ben which ben busy in gadrynge of worldly good , in
bestaille , in wolle , in $multiplieng of peny to peny and shilyng , so
+tat thei oughten rather to be called housewyues than recluses .
CMAELR4-M4,2.30

They ordeyne mete for her bestes , herdes for her catell CMAELR4-M4,2.31

and atte yeres ende they loke after the nomber or after the price .
CMAELR4-M4,2.32

After this folewith byinge and sellynge , of the whiche cometh couetise
and auarice . CMAELR4-M4,2.33

Suche ben ofte deceyued by the fende counsailynge hem to gadre money
for@ @to departe it in almes , by releuynge of fadirles and modirles
children , or for her frendes , or for gystnynge of poure religious men
or wommen and suche othir ; CMAELR4-M4,2.34

and al this is but a disceyt . CMAELR4-M4,2.35

Al this longith not to the , but rathir to be poure and with pore peple
to resceyue thy liflode . CMAELR4-M4,2.36

It is a token of gret mistrust if a recluse care bisely for hir lyflode
, sithen oure lord Iesu Crist seith : Primum querite regnum dei et
iusticiam eius et hec omnia adicientur vobis . CMAELR4-M4,2.37

' First , ' he seith , ' sekith the kyngdom of heuen and the
rightwisnesse of him , CMAELR4-M4,2.38

and al that ye neden shal be cast to yow . ' CMAELR4-M4,2.39

Therfore take good heed CMAELR4-M4,2.40

and be wel war that thou haue not to do with gret besynesse of worldly
good CMAELR4-M4,2.41

but rather , if it may be , lyue with laboure and bysenesse of thin
hondes with som honest trauail with-in thiself , CMAELR4-M4,2.42

for that is the moor syker way to parfeccyon-warde . CMAELR4-M4,2.43

Natheles , if thy compleccion be feblyd and might not trauaile , than er
thou haddist ben | enclosed , thou shuldist haue enquered the suche
frendes where thou mightist resceyue thy liflode with othir pore peple ,
that thou mightist haue noo cause to gadir worldly good .
CMAELR4-M4,2.44

Ther shuld no poure peple crye after worldly good aboute thy selle .
CMAELR4-M4,2.45

Perauenture thou saist , ' Hoo might lette that ? ' CMAELR4-M4,2.46

I say not this CMAELR4-M4,2.47

for I wolde thou lettist it , CMAELR4-M4,2.48

bot I wolde that pitously thou sattist stil and <P_3> suffredist it
CMAELR4-M4,3.49

and yf they knewen that thei shuld no thinge resceyue , thei wolden sone
voide . CMAELR4-M4,3.50

Than sais@ @tow , ' This were a gret vnkyndenes ' ; CMAELR4-M4,3.51

yhe , CMAELR4-M4,3.52

and I say , ' If thou haue moor than mete and drinke and vesture , thou
art neither good mynchen ne recluse . ' CMAELR4-M4,3.53

Natheles , what that thou mightist gete with laboure of thyn hondes ouer
that the nedith , I wolde it were deled to pore peple by other menes
than thiself . CMAELR4-M4,3.54

Be wel war that no messanger , waiter of vnclennesse , bringer of
letters fro monke or from clerke rowne venym in thyn ere of veyn lust or
of likynge , CMAELR4-M4,3.55

for therof ariseth perels ; CMAELR4-M4,3.56

therfore for no thynge resceyue neither lettre ne rownyng without
audience of hym that is thy gostly fader , or som other honest persone .
CMAELR4-M4,3.57

<heading>

Captulum ii CMAELR4-M4,3.59

That a recluse shuld not haue to do of hospitalyte anempst religiouse
gystes , for it longith not to hir CMAELR4-M4,3.60

<$$heading>

Firthermore I wolde thou were war of resceiuynge of yistes by way of
hospitalite anempst wommen of deuocyon , religious or other ,
CMAELR4-M4,3.62

for ofte-sithes amonge gode ben medled badde ; CMAELR4-M4,3.63

al-though her communicacion atte begynnynge be of sadnes and vertuous
lyuynge , er than thei departe worldly daliaunce shal be shewed furthe ,
and otherwhile wordes of flesshly loue . CMAELR4-M4,3.64

Of suche be war , lest thou be compelled to here that thaw shuldist not
and to speke that thou woldist not . CMAELR4-M4,3.65

By this perauenture thou dredist shame , that neither thou maist
comforte pore folke in yeuynge of almes ne resceyue religious gystes :
CMAELR4-M4,3.66

yhe , CMAELR4-M4,3.67

and I say , drede not this , CMAELR4-M4,3.68

for whan they knowen thy naked purpos , thanne haue thei no cause to
repreue the , neither for pore folke ne for noo religious gystes .
CMAELR4-M4,3.69

I n@ @olde thou were a mony-maker : CMAELR4-M4,3.70

sithen than I n@ @olde , as I seyde before , that thou were a mony-maker
for noo suche causes , muche moor than for noo gret meyne in housholde .
CMAELR4-M4,3.71

Se now what meyne thou shuldist haue . CMAELR4-M4,3.72

First chese an honest anxient womman in lyuynge , no iangler ne
royler-aboute , noo chider , noo tidynges-teller , but such oon that may
haue witnesse of hir good conuersacyon , and honest . CMAELR4-M4,3.73

Hir charge <slash> shal be to kepe thyn houshold and thy lyflod , to
close thy dores and to resceyue that shuld be resceyued and to voide
that shuld be auoided . CMAELR4-M4,3.74

Vnder hir gouernaile shuld she haue a yonger womman of age to bere
gretter charges , in fettynge of wode and water and sethynge and
greithynge of mete and drynke . CMAELR4-M4,3.75

And that she be ouerloked vnder gret awe , lest thurgh hir wantownes and
dissolucyon thyn holy temple be defouled and sclaundred .
CMAELR4-M4,3.76

Be war also that thou be not occupyed in techynge of children .
CMAELR4-M4,3.77

For somme recluses ther ben that thorugh techinge of children turnen her
celle in-to a scole-house : CMAELR4-M4,3.78

<P_4>

doo not so , CMAELR4-M4,4.80

but holde the apayde , bothe to thy communicacyon and thy seruice , of
these too wommen afore-saide . CMAELR4-M4,4.81

<heading>

Capitulum 4 CMAELR4-M4,4.83

Hou a recluse shulde kepe hir in sylence CMAELR4-M4,4.84

<$$heading>

I shal now telle the of sylence , CMAELR4-M4,4.86

for there-in lyeth moor reste and muche fruyt : CMAELR4-M4,4.87

do as the prophete saith : CMAELR4-M4,4.88

Dixi , custodiam vias meas , vt non delinquam in lingua mea .
CMAELR4-M4,4.89

' I haue saide , ' seith the prophete , ' I shal kepe my waies , that I
offende not in my tonge . ' CMAELR4-M4,4.90

A recluse shuld euere drede hir lest she offended by hir tonge ,
CMAELR4-M4,4.91

for as Seint Iame saith , ' It is a membre that no man may tame ' ;
CMAELR4-M4,4.92

therfore kepe wel thy tunge by silence CMAELR4-M4,4.93

and sitte alone from worldly noyce CMAELR4-M4,4.94

and be styl , that thou may deserue to speke with him whiche list not to
speke but with suche that ben allone . CMAELR4-M4,4.95

And yf thou shalt speke , speke selde , as certeyn tymes and houres in
the day ; CMAELR4-M4,4.96

and that thou speke suche as is needful to body and to soule and that
mekely and esily with noon hye voice , ne sharply ne glosyngly ne with
noon hye chere . CMAELR4-M4,4.97

And sith this longith to eche honest recluse , gode sustir , and thou
wilt be Goddys owne derlynge , fle the homly communicacyoun of alle men
but if it be suche that ben assigned to the . CMAELR4-M4,4.98

Me semith she was a blessed womman and wel sette , that dradde hir to
speke with Seint Martyn CMAELR4-M4,4.99

and alle other neither wolde she se ne speke with . CMAELR4-M4,4.100

But for-asmuche as thou maist not kepe this straight liuynge to speke
with no man , se now with whom thou shuldist speke . CMAELR4-M4,4.101

Chese the a confessour , the whiche is an auncyant man of gode fame and
of gode oppinyon , of whom thou shalt resceyue comfort in al manere
doutes and sorwes . CMAELR4-M4,4.102

And in eny wyse bewar that thou kisse not hys honde ne he thyne , as it
were for | deuocyon , CMAELR4-M4,4.103

for that makith deed folke , be thei neuere so olde , prone and redy to
synne . CMAELR4-M4,4.104

Al this say I not oonly for the but for other that in tyme comynge mowe
atteyne to suche a forme of lyuynge . CMAELR4-M4,4.105

If eny worthy persone , abbot or priour , wolde speke with the , in
presence of som honest persone thou sholdist speke with hem .
CMAELR4-M4,4.106

In noo wyse be not to famulier in suche visitacions , CMAELR4-M4,4.107

for bothe thy good name and thy conscience shulden so be blemysshed ,
were thei neuere so good . CMAELR4-M4,4.108

For as ofte as thou seest him and herist him , so ofte in his absence
his ymage shal be enpressed in thy mynde and lette the fro many gode
meritory occupacions that thou art bounde to . CMAELR4-M4,4.109

Therfor shuldest thou speke with no man but with a veyl afore thy visage
, that neuer neither of you might se other . CMAELR4-M4,4.110

For I doute it not , CMAELR4-M4,4.111

it is ful dredful and right perylous ofte-sithes to admitte the voyce of
a man . CMAELR4-M4,4.112

Fle in eny wise the communicacyoun of yonge folke and suspecte persones
CMAELR4-M4,4.113

and speke not with hem but in presence of hym that is thy <P_5> gostly
fader , CMAELR4-M4,5.114

and yhit loke that gret nede cause it . CMAELR4-M4,5.115

Suche silence makith muche rest in conscience . CMAELR4-M4,5.116

Gete by grace the vertu of shamfastnesse , CMAELR4-M4,5.117

for that arayeth a clene soule in vertuous maners and vertuous speche ;
CMAELR4-M4,5.118

it gouernith the tonge , CMAELR4-M4,5.119

it swagith wratthe CMAELR4-M4,5.120

and auoidith chidynge . CMAELR4-M4,5.121

For if a chaste soule be a-shamed honestly to speke honest thinges , hou
shamfast shuld she be to speke vnshamful thynges or for@ @to grucche
with wronges or for@ @to speke with a spiryt of ire . CMAELR4-M4,5.122

A recluse shuld not aunswere to a chider ne edwite hir bakbiter , but
mekely to suffre alle wronges , bothe pryue and apert , ne charge it not
as for hirself , seieng as Seint Poule seith : Michi autem pro minimo
est vt a vobis iudicer . That is to saye , ' It is to me but litel
charge al-though I be demed of you . ' CMAELR4-M4,5.123

Trauaile therfor to gete reste and pees in herte CMAELR4-M4,5.124

and bisely kepe it CMAELR4-M4,5.125

and foryete suche outwarde thynges , hauynge hym in mynde that is
$liuyer euerlastynge , of whom the prophete seieth thus : In pace factus
est locus eius . CMAELR4-M4,5.126

' His dwellynge-place is in reste and pees of conscience . '
CMAELR4-M4,5.127

Oure lorde Iesu spekith by the prophete CMAELR4-M4,5.128

and seieth : Super quem requiescit spiritus meus nisi super humilem et
quietem et contritum spiritu et timentem sermones meos ?
CMAELR4-M4,5.129

' Vpon whom shal my spirit reste , but vpon the quiet and meke and
contrite of spirit and dredynge my wordes ? ' CMAELR4-M4,5.130

Al | this I saye for that I wolde thou louedist silence and litel speche
. CMAELR4-M4,5.131

<heading>

Capitulum v CMAELR4-M4,5.133

Also hou a recluse shuld speke and whanne CMAELR4-M4,5.134

<$$heading>

Now sith I haue tolde the of silence , I shal also shewe the of speche ,
whan thou shalt speke . CMAELR4-M4,5.136

From Exaltacyon of the Crosse vnto Estern , after tyme complyn is seyde
vnto pryme be do a-morwe , to speke with noon saaf after pryme with the
mynistres that seruen the , yit vnder fewe wordes of suche thynges as
the nedith ; CMAELR4-M4,5.137

and fro that tyme tyl thou haue ete , kepe the in silence , in deuoute
praiers and holy meditacions . CMAELR4-M4,5.138

And than vse communicacioun tyl euensonge-tyme CMAELR4-M4,5.139

and be wel war of dissolute speche , lest oure Lorde blame the and seie
: Sedit populus manducare et bibere et surrexerunt ludere :
CMAELR4-M4,5.140

' After the peple had ete and dronke , they rysen and pleyden . '
CMAELR4-M4,5.141

After euensonge is do , to speke with thy mynistres of thynges that the
bihoueth , til tyme of collacioun , CMAELR4-M4,5.142

and so kepe silence for al that nyght . CMAELR4-M4,5.143

From Estern til the Exaltacion of the Crosse come ayen , after tyme that
complyn is seide til the sonne arise a-morwe , to kepe silence and than
to speke with thy mynistres . CMAELR4-M4,5.144

After tyme pryme is seide tyl the thridde houre , to comune with othir
that comen , honestly and vnder fewe wordes . CMAELR4-M4,5.145

In the saam wise shalt thou do bitwene the houre of <P_6> noon , after
thou hast ete , tyl euensonge-tyme ; CMAELR4-M4,6.146

and after euensong is doon , than to speke with thy mynistres tyl the
tyme of collacyon . CMAELR4-M4,6.147

But in Lente kepe silence that thou speke with noon saaf with thy
confessour and thy mynistres , or ellys but it be som body that cometh
from fer contre . CMAELR4-M4,6.148

<heading>

Capitulum vj CMAELR4-M4,6.150

Hou a recluse shuld be occupyed CMAELR4-M4,6.151

<$$heading>

For-asmuche as ydelnesse is a deedly enemy to mannys soule , whiche may
be cleped moder of alle vices , wurcher of alle lustes , norsher of veyn
thoughtes , former of vnclene affeccions , sturer of vnclene desires ,
greither of heuynesse , I wolde thou were not vnoccupyed , but with
dyuerse honeste occupacions to voide this foule vice of ydelnesse .
CMAELR4-M4,6.153

After tyme thou hast saide diuyne seruice , thow shalt occupie the with
som honest labour of thyn hondes CMAELR4-M4,6.154

and than shalt thow renne to som pryuat prayer , as for a gret refute
and <slash> helpe of thyn holy purpos that thou stondist inne , and vse
it now lenger , now shorter , after that thou art stured by grace :
CMAELR4-M4,6.155

be wel war of multitude of psalmes in thy pryuat prayer ;
CMAELR4-M4,6.156

put it in noo certeyn , CMAELR4-M4,6.157

but as longe as thou delitist ther-inne , so longe vse hem .
CMAELR4-M4,6.158

And whan thou begynnest to waxe heuy of hem or wery , than take a boke
CMAELR4-M4,6.159

and rede , CMAELR4-M4,6.160

or do som labour with thyn hondes , soo that thorugh suche diuersite of
besinesse thou might putte away slouthe and ydelnesse .
CMAELR4-M4,6.161

Thus shalt thou be occupied bitwene euery diuyne houre of the nyght and
of the day , from the kalendes of Nouembre vnto Lente ; so that a litel
tofore complyn thou be occupied with redynge of holy faders priuely by
thiself in stede of thy collacyon , that thou mightest by grace gete the
som compunccyon of teres and feruour of deuocion in saienge of thy
complyn . CMAELR4-M4,6.162

And whan thou art thus replet and fedde with deuocion , reste the
CMAELR4-M4,6.163

and go to to thy bed , restynge the there vnto the tyme that it be
passed mydnyght ; CMAELR4-M4,6.164

here than thou begynne thy matyns , CMAELR4-M4,6.165

for thou shalt slepe no more of al day . CMAELR4-M4,6.166

This same rule shalt thou kepe from Estern vnto the kalendes of Nouember
, saaf that thou shalt slepe after mete afore the houre of noon .
CMAELR4-M4,6.167

Loke also that thou be in bed after complyn , by than the sonne goo to
reste . CMAELR4-M4,6.168

Take heed of oo thynge , that thou slepe not whan thou shuldest wake .
CMAELR4-M4,6.169

<P_7>

<heading>

Capitalum vij CMAELR4-M4,7.172

Hou deuoutly a recluse shulde behaue hyr in Lent-tyme CMAELR4-M4,7.173

<$$heading>

Amonge al the fastynge in the yere , the fastyng in Lente excelleth and
passith al othir in dignite , the whiche not oonly religiouse peple but
also euery cristen man is bounde to kepe . CMAELR4-M4,7.175

That this fastynge in Lente excellith alle othir we han witnes bothe of
the lawe , of prophetes and of the euangelistes . CMAELR4-M4,7.176

Moyses fasted fourty daies and fourty nyghtes , that he might deserue to
resceyue the lawe ; CMAELR4-M4,7.177

Helye the prophete fastid fourty daies and fourty nyght , that he might
deserue to here the voyce of God ; CMAELR4-M4,7.178

oure lorde and oure sauyour Iesu Crist , whan he had faste fourty daies
and fourty nyght , he ouercome the fende CMAELR4-M4,7.179

and anoon aungels mynistred to him . CMAELR4-M4,7.180

By this myght thou se that fastynge is ayenst al temptacion a myghty
<slash> shelde and in al tribulacion a profitable refute and to deuoute
praier a souereyn fode . CMAELR4-M4,7.181

The vertu of fastynge oure Lord Iesu taughte his disciples whan he saide
that ther was o kynde of deuels might not be caste oute but by praier
and fastynge ; CMAELR4-M4,7.182

al-though fastynge be the duke and the leder of al religion , without
whom chastite may not sikerly be kepte , yit the fastinge of Lente
mightily passeth al other . CMAELR4-M4,7.183

Here now why : CMAELR4-M4,7.184

the first place of oure duellynge was paradise . CMAELR4-M4,7.185

The seconde is this worlde ful of wrecchednes . CMAELR4-M4,7.186

The thridde shal be in heuen with blessed spirites and aungels , if we
wel do . CMAELR4-M4,7.187

Al the tyme that we lyue in this lyf betokeneth no more than fourty days
, CMAELR4-M4,7.188

for fro the tyme that Adam was put oute of paradyse vnto the last day
that we shul be delyuered oute of this worlde we lyuen in laboure ,
sorwe and drede , cast out of the sight of God , excluded from the ioye
of paradyse and fastynge from heuenly swetnes . CMAELR4-M4,7.189

Thys shuldest thou euere considre and beholde in al thy werkes , thorugh
weilynge of thy wrecchednesse , that thou art but a straunger and a
pilgrime in this wrecched worlde ; CMAELR4-M4,7.190

but for we ben freel and mowe not contynuely with-oute cessynge vse this
weilynge and wepynge , holichirche by worchinge of the Holigost hath
ordeyned a certayn tyme of contynuel wailynge , the whiche is called the
tyme of Lente , for to reduce to oure mynde that we ben putte away out
of paradyse . CMAELR4-M4,7.191

In the begynnynge of Lente it is saide thus : Memento quad cinis es et
in cinerem reuerteris . That is , ' Haue mynde that thou art asshes and
in-to asshes thou shalt be turned . ' CMAELR4-M4,7.192

To reduce to oure mynde that we ben letted from heuenly desire , ther is
hanged bitwene vs and Crist , his flesshe and his blood , the sacrament
of the autere , a veyl . CMAELR4-M4,7.193

To reduce to oure mynde that we ben fer fro that holy companye , the
whiche dwellen in blisse for euere , we leuen vnsongen in Lente a songe
and a worde of melodye that is called <P_8> Alleluia . CMAELR4-M4,8.194

To reduce to oure mynde that we be not fulfilled of heuenly suetnesse ,
we coarte oure flesshe with fastynge in tyme of Lente , moor than
a-nothir tyme . CMAELR4-M4,8.195

In that tyme shuld euery cristen man adde somwhat moor to his fastynge ,
as in besy keping his hert from veyn thoughtes , his mouthe from veyn
speche , moor than in a-nother tyme ; CMAELR4-M4,8.196

muche moor thou , that <slash> art a recluse and shuldest passe alle
othir in lyuynge , oughtist to plese hym passingly , $vowynge thiself to
his seruice , despisyng lustes and likinges , fleynge communicacion and
daliaunce , holdynge these days weddynge days , sighynge and sorwyng ,
wepyng and wailyng , knelyng and praienge after thy lorde , thy maker ,
thyn ayenbier , thy loue and thy louyer , thy spouse and thy domesman ,
Iesu Crist . CMAELR4-M4,8.197

The manere of +ti slepynge in this tyme a-fore mydnyght shal be lasse
than in a-nothir tyme , so that thou may night and day for +te moor
partie deuoutly be occupied with praier , meditacion and redyng .
CMAELR4-M4,8.198

<heading>

Capitulum viij CMAELR4-M4,8.200

Hou she shuld be dyeted and what shuld be hir array CMAELR4-M4,8.201

<$$heading>

Now shal I shewe the , suster , a certeyn forme and rule of etynge and
$drynkynge and also what shal be thyn array and vesture of thy body .
CMAELR4-M4,8.203

I write not this forme of lyuynge of etynge and drynkyng only to the ,
that hast euir holde thiself lowe thorugh scarsete of liflode , but to
othir whiche konnen not rule hem , that outher wiln take to muche ,
either to litel . CMAELR4-M4,8.204

Fro al manere of mete and drynke that the semeth shulde enflaume thy
compleccyon and make the prone and redy to synne , <em> abstyne the
<$$em> , but if thou be syke or feble . CMAELR4-M4,8.205

Abstyne the also from mete and drinke , as thou woldist vse a medicyn .
CMAELR4-M4,8.206

Al-though Seint Benet in his reule ordeyned to monkes a certeyn weight
of brede and a certeyn mesure of drynke in the day , yit natheles to
yonge folke and mighty of complexion , it is alday denyed ;
CMAELR4-M4,8.207

to feble , to syke , to tendir folke of complexion , it is suffred .
CMAELR4-M4,8.208

Fle delicat metes and doucet drinkes al the while thou art not syke ;
CMAELR4-M4,8.209

fle hem as venym and poyson , contrary to thy clene and chast purpose .
CMAELR4-M4,8.210

Serue so thy nede by etynge and drinkynge , that hunger be put away and
thyn appetyt be not fulfilled , with oo manere of potage , of wortes or
of peses or of benys , or elles of <em> formente potage <$$em> medled
with mylke or with oyle , to put away or a-voyde the bitternes ; and
with o kynde of fysshe , with apples or with herbes . CMAELR4-M4,8.211

And vpon the Wednesday , Friday and Saturday , to vse but Lent metes .
CMAELR4-M4,8.212

<P_9>

In Lente o manere of potage euery day , but siknesse it make ;
CMAELR4-M4,9.214

euery Friday brede and water . CMAELR4-M4,9.215

And the tyme of thy meles shal be euery day at <slash> hye none and in
Lente-tyme after euensonge . CMAELR4-M4,9.216

From Estern to Whitsontyde , outake rogacion days and $Whitsone Eue ,
thou shalt ete at mydday and sithen at euen . CMAELR4-M4,9.217

This rule shal@ @tow kepe al the somer-tyme , outake Wednesday and
Friday and othir solempne vigils . CMAELR4-M4,9.218

Also thou maist , and thou wilt , euery fastynge day in the somer ceson
, by cause thou hast noo meridyan after noon , to slepe bitwene matyns
and pryme . CMAELR4-M4,9.219

Thy vesture that thou shalt vse ben these : a warme pylche for wynter
and oo kirtel and oo cote for somer , with a blak habite aboue hem ; and
euereither tyme ij stamyns . CMAELR4-M4,9.220

Also loke the veyle of thyn heed be of noo precyouse clothe but of a
mene blak , lest preciosite or dyuersite of array and of precious
coloure defoule thy soule withynne . CMAELR4-M4,9.221

Be also wel war that thou haue no moor than the nedeth to $hosen and to
shoon and of other thynge that longeth to thy feet , CMAELR4-M4,9.222

but rather desire pouerte CMAELR4-M4,9.223

and kepe it . CMAELR4-M4,9.224

Loo , sustir , CMAELR4-M4,9.225

now I haue write the a forme of lyuynge touchinge thy conuersacion after
thin outwarde lyuinge . CMAELR4-M4,9.226

Now shal I write the a forme of lyuynge touchinge thin ynner
conuersacion , bi the helpe of Iesu and thy deuoute prayers .
CMAELR4-M4,9.227

<heading>

Capitulum ix CMAELR4-M4,9.229

A short commendacyon of maydenhood and of chastite CMAELR4-M4,9.230

<$$heading>

First take heed why thou shalt preferre solitary lyuynge aboue the
conuersacion of the worlde . CMAELR4-M4,9.232

Virgo , inquit apostolus , cogitat que dei sunt , quomodo placeat deo vt
sit sancta corpore et spiritu . I=a=Cor. 7. f. That is , ' A mayde ,
' saith the apostel , ' remembrith tho thinges that ben of God and in
what wise she might plese him , by the whiche she might be holy in body
and soule . ' CMAELR4-M4,9.233

This is a wilful sacrifice and a fre oblacyon , of whiche oure Lord
saith : Qui potest capere , capiat . That is , ' Whos may take , take
he ' : as ho saith , hoo may atteyne to come to the vertu of chastite ,
take he it CMAELR4-M4,9.234

and forsake it not . CMAELR4-M4,9.235

Hoo is he that may ? CMAELR4-M4,9.236

Certys , he that oure Lorde enspirith with good wille : CMAELR4-M4,9.237

therfore comaunde thyn holy purpos with al the deuocion of thin hert to
him that hath thus enspired it CMAELR4-M4,9.238

and biseche him in thy praier that thou may fele , by grace , the whiche
is impossible by nature . CMAELR4-M4,9.239

Thinke what mede what ioye maydenhood shal resceyue if it be contynued ;
also what confusion fallith to <slash> hem that losen it .
CMAELR4-M4,9.240

What is a moor preciouse tresoure than thilk that heuen is bought with ,
aungels deliten in , the whiche Crist coueitith to loue and to yeue -
CMAELR4-M4,9.241

what , trowist thou ? CMAELR4-M4,9.242

<P_10>

Certeyn , I dar wel say , him-self and hise , CMAELR4-M4,10.244

for the sweet odoure of maydenhood sauoreth mightily in the blys of
heuen . CMAELR4-M4,10.245

Se now what spouse thou hast chose to the , what frende thou hast take
to the : CMAELR4-M4,10.246

he passith in semlynesse the shap of eny man moor firther than the sonne
, excedynge the brightnes of the sterres , swatter than hony .
CMAELR4-M4,10.247

He it is that desireth thi bewte . CMAELR4-M4,10.248

In his righthonde lengthe of days , CMAELR4-M4,10.249

in his lifte honde riches and ioye ; CMAELR4-M4,10.250

he it is that hath chose the to his loue and wil crowne noon but such as
ben preued , CMAELR4-M4,10.251

for he that is not tempted is not proued . CMAELR4-M4,10.252

Thy maydenhood is golde , CMAELR4-M4,10.253

thy selle is an ouen , CMAELR4-M4,10.254

the fyre of this ouen is temptacyon , CMAELR4-M4,10.255

the vessel that thou berist is a vessel of cley , in the whiche thy
maydenhood is hid to be preued inne . CMAELR4-M4,10.256

If the fyre of temptacyon haue the maistrie , than is thy golden
maydenhood lost CMAELR4-M4,10.257

and thy vessel may neuere be reparailed ayen in-to the same estat .
CMAELR4-M4,10.258

These thinges shuld a mayde bisely kepe with gret drede and besinesse ,
that so lightly may be lost and so profitably be kept .
CMAELR4-M4,10.259

She shuld thenke on that blessed lombe , whider-so-euere he goo ; and on
oure blessed Lady goynge afore the queer of maydens , syngynge a songe
that noon othir may synge but suche as ben vndefouled .
CMAELR4-M4,10.260

Trowist thou not that thou maist lese thy maydenhod but thorugh
felouship of man : CMAELR4-M4,10.261

yhis certeyn , ful foule and $abhomynably ; CMAELR4-M4,10.262

be war of that . CMAELR4-M4,10.263

A mayde shulde therfore thenke that alle hyr lymes ben halowed ,
incorporat to the Holy Gost ; CMAELR4-M4,10.264

God forbede than that suche holy lymes shuld be youe to the fende .
CMAELR4-M4,10.265

Strecche out therfor al thy wille in kepynge this maydenhode
CMAELR4-M4,10.266

and atteyne , if thou maist come to that vertu , that thou may holde
honger , delices ; pouerte , rychesse ; dredful of mete and drynke , of
sleep , of worde , lest thou excede and passe the bondes of nede ,
wenynge that thou susteynest thy flesshe and thou norshist thyn enemy
and thyn aduersary . CMAELR4-M4,10.267

Whan thow sittist at thy mete , than shuldest thou chewe vpon chastite
and clennes , desirynge that Iesu Crist thy spouse shuld make it parfyt
in the , with syghinge and snobbynge , wepynge and <slash> wailynge ;
CMAELR4-M4,10.268

and if thou do thus , than shal@ @tow litel lust haue of mete or of
drynke but as nede axith , and vnnethes that . CMAELR4-M4,10.269

<heading>

Capitulum x CMAELR4-M4,10.271

Hou a recluse or an ankeras shuld comende hir chastite to God .
CMAELR4-M4,10.272

<$$heading>

Therfore , suster , whan thou gost to reste atte euen , commende thy
clennes in-to his hondes that loueth clene and chaste soules ,
remembrynge the hou thou hast mysspended the day , in thought , in worde
and in dede , by lightnes , ydelnes and negligence passynge the bondes
of honest gladnes and by dissolucyon of chere . CMAELR4-M4,10.274

If eny of these comen <P_11> to thy mynde , wayle hem CMAELR4-M4,11.275

and wepe hem CMAELR4-M4,11.276

and smyte the on the brest , that thou might the sonner by grace be
reconcyled to thy lord Iesu Crist . CMAELR4-M4,11.277

If thy body be stured with an vnclene heet of flesshly lust thorugh
entysynge of the fende , slepynge or wakynge , anoon remembre the of
these holy maydens , as Agnes , Cecile , Lucye and other moo , the
whiche ouercomen her enemyes and hadden the victory in tendir age ,
CMAELR4-M4,11.278

for they yaf no more , forsothe , of gold and siluer , riche array and
precyous stones , than they wolden by the foulist fen in the felde .
CMAELR4-M4,11.279

They chargeden no more the flaterynge of the domesman than the
thretnynge , but rather dredynge the sparynge of him than his
punysshynge . CMAELR4-M4,11.280

And somme ther were , as Seint Agnes , the whiche thorugh her prayer
turned a bordel hous in-to an oratory ; CMAELR4-M4,11.281

and the aungel of God was nyhe to auenge hir of hir enemy .
CMAELR4-M4,11.282

So if thou praye with teres of contricion whan thou art traueiled with
vnchastite , trust right wel that an aungel , keper of thy chastite ,
shal be ful nye . CMAELR4-M4,11.283

We rede also of othir maydens , whan thei were put in the fyre to be
brent , the fire vanysshed and did hem no harme . CMAELR4-M4,11.284

Why ? CMAELR4-M4,11.285

Certeyn for the leyt of flesshly lust was quenched in hem ; and also for
the fyre of charite , the whiche brenned withinne , ouercame the fire
that brent with-oute . CMAELR4-M4,11.286

As ofte , therfore , as thou art stured to vnclennes , haue mynde on
oure Lorde that beholdith the and what thou thenkest , he wote .
CMAELR4-M4,11.287

Also yelde reuerence to the aungel the $whiche <em> cherisshith the
<$$em> day and nyght , CMAELR4-M4,11.288

and say to thyn enemy , ' I haue an aungel to my loue , that bisely
kepith me day and nyght . ' CMAELR4-M4,11.289

If it need be , adde therto abstynence and other manere turmentynge of
thy flesshe , CMAELR4-M4,11.290

for truste it wel , CMAELR4-M4,11.291

where moche turmentynge is by affliccyon in flesshe , there is <slash>
litel flesshly delectacyon or noon . CMAELR4-M4,11.292

For if I shulde not flatere the but say the sothe , chastite may not wel
be kepte in yonge folke withoute gret affliccion of the body , sith it
so is that in olde folke and syke it stondith in gret perel .
CMAELR4-M4,11.293

Natheles , though chastite be a yifte of God and may not be gote ne had
with-out him , be we yit neuere so vertuous , whan we han it we shulden
kepe it as vertuously as we konne with affliccyon of oure flesshe , or
by othir vertuouse menes . CMAELR4-M4,11.294

It is ful harde to be amonge occasyon and not to be stured either by
etynge of deliciouse metes , or drinkynge of deliciouse drinkes , or
amongst conuersacion of children . CMAELR4-M4,11.295

I knewe a man that passingly was traueiled in the begynnynge of his
conuersion with many vnclene thoughtes , by the whiche he dredde hym to
falle . CMAELR4-M4,11.296

Atte last sodenly he roes ayen himself , no thinge hatynge so moche as
himself , vnto the tyme that he had brought hym so lowe <P_12> by
turmentynge of his flesshe that almost he failed for defaute .
CMAELR4-M4,12.297

After that he say himself feble and wayke , CMAELR4-M4,12.298

needfully he began to strengthe himself ayen litel and litel .
CMAELR4-M4,12.299

Thanne eftesone the saam temptacyon was as breem vpon hym after as it
was before , or moor : CMAELR4-M4,12.300

he praide , CMAELR4-M4,12.301

he wepte , CMAELR4-M4,12.302

he snobbed , CMAELR4-M4,12.303

he wailed , CMAELR4-M4,12.304

he bathed him in colde watir CMAELR4-M4,12.305

and rubbed his body with netlys , that the tone hete shuld ouercome the
tother ; CMAELR4-M4,12.306

not-withstondynge al this , the spirit of vnclennes lefte him not ,
CMAELR4-M4,12.307

but trauailed him mightily . CMAELR4-M4,12.308

Than he fel down atte fete of oure lord Iesu , besechinge him either to
delyuere hym out of this present lyf , if it plesed him , either hele
him of these vnclene thoughtes . CMAELR4-M4,12.309

And euere he saide with stedfaste abidynge , ' Lord , I shal not cesse
cryenge , CMAELR4-M4,12.310

I shal not go fro the , CMAELR4-M4,12.311

I shal not leeue the tyl thou graunte me that I aske . '
CMAELR4-M4,12.312

Sone after this he fonde rest for a tyme , CMAELR4-M4,12.313

but sikernesse might he noon gete CMAELR4-M4,12.314

and this passion lefte him neuere , yonge ne olde , CMAELR4-M4,12.315

but euere in sondry tymes began vpon him fresshe and fresshe .
CMAELR4-M4,12.316

Sithen oure Lord suffred thus a chosen soule be traueiled that mightily
withstood it , what shulden we say of hem that holden hem so seker that
, though they hadden oportunyte , leyser , tyme or space , thei witen
wel thei shold not falle ? CMAELR4-M4,12.317

Certeyn I dar wel seie , thay ben deceyued , <slash> CMAELR4-M4,12.318

for though the hete be quenched in somme , the wille and the desire is
not so . CMAELR4-M4,12.319

Therfor , suster , haue noo sikernesse of thiself CMAELR4-M4,12.320

but alway be dredful , hauynge thiself suspect , CMAELR4-M4,12.321

and doo as the culuer doth , that seeth in ryuers al a-fer the ensaute
and the pursute of hir enemy . CMAELR4-M4,12.322

So do thou : CMAELR4-M4,12.323

beholde in the ryuers of holy wryt hou besy thyn enemy is to ouercome
the CMAELR4-M4,12.324

and fle hym , CMAELR4-M4,12.325

for ther is no thinge that ouercometh so sone the fende as doth redynge
of deuoute thinge and prayer and meditacyon of Cristys passyon .
CMAELR4-M4,12.326

A mayde shuld so be occupied vpon oon of these thre , prayer ,
meditacion , or redynge , that though she were stured to do vnlauful
thinges , she shuld not be suffred for remors of conscience .
CMAELR4-M4,12.327

Vse wel this remedye , that whether thou slepe or wake , thy mynde be
euere vpon sum sentence of holy writ or vpon som seyntes lyf ,
CMAELR4-M4,12.328

for it is a souerayne remedy ayenst temptacyon . CMAELR4-M4,12.329

<heading>

Capitulum xj CMAELR4-M4,12.331

How somme dreden hem to doo wilful bodily penaunce for drede of
infirmyte . CMAELR4-M4,12.332

<$$heading>

Somme ther ben that wil not vse bodily affliccion by wakynge , by
abstinence , by liggynge , by weryng and such othir , for drede of
bodily infirmyte , lest thei shulde herby be chargeous to her frendes .
CMAELR4-M4,12.334

This is an excusacion of synne , CMAELR4-M4,12.335

for fewe ther ben the whiche han this feruour to chastise her body so .
CMAELR4-M4,12.336

Alle men ben witty and wyse and discret now-a-days , CMAELR4-M4,12.337

for for the drede of bodily siknes thei ben negligent aboute the helthe
of her <P_13> soule , as though thei myghten bettir suffre , and were
moor tolerable , temptacion than honger of the wombe : CMAELR4-M4,13.338

treuly thei ben to fauorable to hemself . CMAELR4-M4,13.339

Be war of that wyle , that for encheson of bodily infirmyte thou falle
in-to vnleeful thoughtes of flesshly lustes . CMAELR4-M4,13.340

For certeyn if it happe thou be syke or weyke , or thy stomak waxe drye
for abstynence , than shal al maner likynges and flesshly delectacions
be to the rather peynful than delitable or lustful . CMAELR4-M4,13.341

I knewe a man whiche might not kepe hym chaste , for cause he was
$custumably vsed to vnclennes in tendir age . CMAELR4-M4,13.342

Atte last he turned to himself CMAELR4-M4,13.343

and byhelde hou he had mysspended his lyf ; CMAELR4-M4,13.344

he waxe therby hugely ashamed CMAELR4-M4,13.345

and began with hymself a myghty batayl <slash> of abstinence , that
vnnethes wolde he suffre the body to resceyue that it neded ,
CMAELR4-M4,13.346

but ofte withdrowe it ; CMAELR4-M4,13.347

he waxe sad , CMAELR4-M4,13.348

he spak litel , CMAELR4-M4,13.349

ther was noo creature after that tyme sawe him iape ne lawghe ne herde
him speke an ydel worde ; CMAELR4-M4,13.350

he auoyded so al manere comforte of bodily thinges , that neither he
fonde eese in etynge ne drinkynge ne slepinge ; CMAELR4-M4,13.351

he was euere so scrupulous in conscience of mysspendynge of his
thoughtes , that he had euere ynow to do in amendynge of his lyf by
confession . CMAELR4-M4,13.352

Stood he , sate he , wente he , wroughte he and what-so-euere he dide ,
him thoughte he stood and was presented afore the dredful doom ;
CMAELR4-M4,13.353

he was so aferde that he dorst neuere lifte vp his eyen from the erthe .
CMAELR4-M4,13.354

Trowist thou not that alle these thinges dide him not gret eese ?
CMAELR4-M4,13.355

Yhis certeyn , he wanne herby the victory of his enemy :
CMAELR4-M4,13.356

after this he fel in gret passyng siknesse by an entishynge of his
stomak CMAELR4-M4,13.357

and yit not-withstondinge whan he shuld take his rest and ese of his
body for febilnes and wolde slepe , than wolde he say thus to himself ,
' Abyde now a litel while , CMAELR4-M4,13.358

for Iesu Crist cometh anoon to the doom . ' CMAELR4-M4,13.359

I say not this for that I wolde destroie thy discrecyon , but for I
wolde thou fleddist the matier of vices , as of glotonye , slouthe ,
lechery , rest of body , familiarite and suche other ; CMAELR4-M4,13.360

for often-tymes vnder colour of false discrecyon we hyden flesshly lust
. CMAELR4-M4,13.361

If it be discrecyon to put the soule aboue the body in reuerence , than
is it discrecion to put the body bynethe the soule by subieccyon
CMAELR4-M4,13.362

and that may not be if thou suffre the body haue his wille .
CMAELR4-M4,13.363

Alle this I say for thou shuldest knowe what besynesse is in the kepynge
of the vertu of chastite . CMAELR4-M4,13.364

<heading>

CAPITULUM XIJ CMAELR4-M4,13.366

HOU CHASTITE WITH-OUTE MEKENES IS AS A DRYE FLOURE . CMAELR4-M4,13.367

<$$heading>

Al-though chastite be the flour of alle vertues , yit with-oute
mekenesse she waxith drye CMAELR4-M4,13.369

and fadith his colour . CMAELR4-M4,13.370

Therfor I shal telle the somwhat of mekenes : CMAELR4-M4,13.371

ther is noon so syker a grounde and stable <P_14> foundement anemst alle
vertues as is mekenesse , with-oute whom alle gostly begynnynges ben ful
ruynous . CMAELR4-M4,14.372

Right as mekenesse is the grounde of alle vertues , as I haue saide
bifore , so is pride the grounde and the moder of alle vices , the
whiche caste Lucifer out of heuen and Adam oute of paradys .
CMAELR4-M4,14.373

Of this wrecched rote springen many $braunches : CMAELR4-M4,14.374

natheles alle mown be diuyded in-to too spices , that is in-to bodily
pride and gostly pride . CMAELR4-M4,14.375

Bodily pride stondith in bostynge and veyn-glory of outwarde bodily
thinges . CMAELR4-M4,14.376

Gostly pride stondith in bostynge and veyn-glory of inwarde gostly
thynges . CMAELR4-M4,14.377

Than if thou that shuldist be Cristys mayde haue eny veyn-glory with-in
thiself of eny array , of nobleye , of $tyre , of beute , of shap of
body , of semelyheed or of dyuerse ornamentes of thy selle , of clothes
, of peyntures or of ymages and suche othir , thou offendist thy lorde
and thy special louyer in pride of outward thinges . CMAELR4-M4,14.378

If thou haue eny veyn-glory of thy poure array for Goddis sake , of
deuocyons , of gostly felynges , of diuerse preseruacions day or nyght ,
not thonkynge Iesu Crist therfore bot wenynge that it cometh of thiself
, than thou offendist thy lord and thy special louyer in pride of inward
thinges . CMAELR4-M4,14.379

Oure Lord whom thou louest so specialy , whan he cam in-to this worlde ,
he made hym poure to make the riche CMAELR4-M4,14.380

and he chees a poure moder , a pore house , a poure meyne and a cracche
to lye inne , in stede of a ryal bedde . CMAELR4-M4,14.381

Loue him therfor wel CMAELR4-M4,14.382

and thanke him that he hath so enspired the to chese rather chastite and
clennes than flesshly lust and likynge , CMAELR4-M4,14.383

for certeyn thou hast chosen the best part ; CMAELR4-M4,14.384

kepe it if thou may CMAELR4-M4,14.385

and if thou be ioyful , be thou ioyful in God with-in-forthe ,
CMAELR4-M4,14.386

for +te prophete saith thus : Omnis gloria filie regis abintus in
fimbreis aureis circumamicta varietatibus . CMAELR4-M4,14.387

' Al the ioye of the kinges doughter ' , he saith , ' he shuld be
with-in-forthe , in golden hemmes vmbigon with diuersitees of vertues ,
' CMAELR4-M4,14.388

and there may she here his fader speke to hir and say , as the prophete
saith : Audi filia et vide et inclina aurem tuam et obliuiscere populum
tuum et domum patris tui quia concupiscet rex decorem tuum . That is to
say , ' Here , doughter , CMAELR4-M4,14.389

and se CMAELR4-M4,14.390

and bowe down thyn eere . ' CMAELR4-M4,14.391

Why ? CMAELR4-M4,14.392

To listne what he saith CMAELR4-M4,14.393

' Foryete the peple of veyn thoughtes and thy fadirs hous , that is to
say of worldly vanitees , CMAELR4-M4,14.394

for the kynge my sone hath desired thy beute . ' CMAELR4-M4,14.395

This is a blessed wower , that wowith for his sone . CMAELR4-M4,14.396

Here therfore CMAELR4-M4,14.397

and se , CMAELR4-M4,14.398

al this shuld be thyn in ioye ; CMAELR4-M4,14.399

this ioye shuld be witnes of thy conscience , CMAELR4-M4,14.400

this ioye shuld be thy gardeyn , thyn orcharde and thy disport .
CMAELR4-M4,14.401

Ther maist thow beholde and se hou dyuerse vertues swetely semblen hem
togidir : CMAELR4-M4,14.402

euery of hem encressith other vertues and fairnes , CMAELR4-M4,14.403

for she that is fair ynowgh in hir owen kynde , is fairir for hir <P_15>
felowe . CMAELR4-M4,15.404

Se now how : CMAELR4-M4,15.405

couple mekenes to chastite and ther is no thynge brighter ;
CMAELR4-M4,15.406

couple mercy to rightwesnes and ther is noo thynge swetter ;
CMAELR4-M4,15.407

couple symplenes to prudence and ther is no thynge lighter ;
CMAELR4-M4,15.408

couple myldenes to strengthe and ther is no thynge profitabler .
CMAELR4-M4,15.409

In this dyuersite of vertues occupie thy gostly eye in thy disport
CMAELR4-M4,15.410

and forme hem in thiself ; CMAELR4-M4,15.411

and if thou annexe hem to the gilden hemmes , than art thou rialy
arrayed with a mottely cote , the whiche thy lord Iesu hath ordeyned for
+te . CMAELR4-M4,15.412

An hemme is the lower partie and , as were , the ende of a cote .
CMAELR4-M4,15.413

By this hemme I vnderstonde charite , whiche is the ende and the hemme
of al the lawe , in a clene herte , a good conscience and a trewe feith
. CMAELR4-M4,15.414

In these thinges sette al thy ioye inwardly , and not in outwarde
thinges . CMAELR4-M4,15.415

<heading>

CAPITULUM XIIJ CMAELR4-M4,15.417

HOW THE AWTIER OF A RECLUSE ORATORYE SHULD BE ARRAYED CMAELR4-M4,15.418

<$$heading>

Now shal I shewe the how thou shalt arraye thyn oratory .
CMAELR4-M4,15.420

Arraye thyn autier with white lynnen clothe , the whiche bitokeneth
bothe chastite and symplenesse , CMAELR4-M4,15.421

Thenke first hou flexe cometh oute of the erthe and with gret labour is
maad white , as with dyuerse wasshinges and purginges , and than dryed
CMAELR4-M4,15.422

and at@ @te last , to make it moor whyte , it nedeth to haue both fire
and water . CMAELR4-M4,15.423

By this flexe I vnderstonde al mankynde that cam oute of the erthe , the
whiche mankynde is by grace maad white by baptem , where that wickednes
is put a-way , but not infirmyte , CMAELR4-M4,15.424

for in partie we resceyue clennes in baptem but not fully , for cause of
corrupcyon of nature that aboundith in vs . CMAELR4-M4,15.425

After this baptem mankynde nedeth to be dryed by abstinence and other
bodely affliccyons from vnclene an vnleeful humours CMAELR4-M4,15.426

and than nedith mankynde to be brused with yren hamours , that is with
dyuerse temptacions and so be rent with dyuerse hokes of disciplynes and
confessions to auoyde the foule rust of synne of quotidyan defautes the
whiche thei beren aboute . CMAELR4-M4,15.427

And firthermore , if thei wil ascende to an hyer grace of moor clennes ,
that is chastite , than mosten +tei passe by fire of tribulacion and
water of compunccyon . CMAELR4-M4,15.428

Thus shalt thou arraye thyn autier of thyn oratorye . CMAELR4-M4,15.429

In this autere sette an ymage of Cristis passion , that thou may haue
mynde and se hou he sette and spredde his armes a-brood to resceyue the
and al mankynde to mercy , if thai wil axe it . CMAELR4-M4,15.430

And if it plese the , sette on that oo syde an ymage of oure Lady and
a-nother on that other syde of Seint Iohn , for commendacyon of moor
chastite , in token that oure Lord is wel plesed with chastite , bothe
of man and of womman , the whiche he $halowed in oure Lady and Seint
Iohn . CMAELR4-M4,15.431

Beholde the ymage of oure Lady CMAELR4-M4,15.432

and thenke that she is helper of mankynde , ioye of <P_16> heuen ,
refute of wrecches , solace and comfort of disperate , lady of the
worlde , queen of heuen . CMAELR4-M4,16.433

And than renne to Cristys passyon , sekynge therin oo thynge , that is
oure Lorde himself , CMAELR4-M4,16.434

for who-so cleueth to him , he is oo spiryt with hym , passynge in-to
hym , the whiche is alway the same , whos yeres faylen neuere .
CMAELR4-M4,16.435

This cleuynge to Iesu is no thynge elles but charite , whiche is the
hemme and the ende of al the lawe , as I haue saide before .
CMAELR4-M4,16.436

Now haue I shewed the a motley cote , a weddynge cote , a cote with
golden hemmes , the whiche shuld be a maydens cote , vmbigoon with
diuersitees of vertues , annexed to the $whiche the hemme of charite ,
the whiche charite is dyuyded in-to tweyne , loue of God and loue of thy
neighboure ; CMAELR4-M4,16.437

the loue of thy neighbore stondith in good wille and in innocence .
CMAELR4-M4,16.438

Good wille wolde that al that thou woldist men diden to the , thou
shuldest do to hem . CMAELR4-M4,16.439

Innocence wolde that thou sholdest not do to a-no+ter , the whiche thou
woldist not were doon to the . CMAELR4-M4,16.440

The first the semeth is harde , sith thy profession wolde that thou
sholdist noo temperal good haue ; CMAELR4-M4,16.441

nay , is it not so . CMAELR4-M4,16.442

The seconde the semeth is light ynowgh , CMAELR4-M4,16.443

for thou maist hurte no man but with thy tonge . CMAELR4-M4,16.444

Certeyn the first is as light as thys , CMAELR4-M4,16.445

for ther may no matere be of yuel wille wher no couetise is ;
CMAELR4-M4,16.446

therfore wilne wel to alle folke CMAELR4-M4,16.447

and do the profyt that thou maist . CMAELR4-M4,16.448

Perauenture thou saist , ' What profyt shal I doo , sith I may be
suffred to haue no thynge for@ @to yeue to pore folke ? '
CMAELR4-M4,16.449

Thou seist wel , good suster ; CMAELR4-M4,16.450

knowe what staat thou standist in . CMAELR4-M4,16.451

Ther wern too sustirs : that one Martha and that o+tir Maria , as the
gospel tellith ; CMAELR4-M4,16.452

that oon labored , CMAELR4-M4,16.453

and that other was as she were ydel ; CMAELR4-M4,16.454

that one yaf , CMAELR4-M4,16.455

the tothir asked ; CMAELR4-M4,16.456

the tone serued , CMAELR4-M4,16.457

the tothir norisshed hir affeccyon , not rennynge aboute hyder and tyder
in resceyuynge of pore gestes ne distrayt of gouernayl of housholde ,
CMAELR4-M4,16.458

but she saat at Iesus feet , herynge deuoutly what he saide .
CMAELR4-M4,16.459

This is thy part , suster , CMAELR4-M4,16.460

in this stondist thou , dere sustir , CMAELR4-M4,16.461

for thou art deed and buryed to the worlde . CMAELR4-M4,16.462

Martha was commended as for good occupacion , CMAELR4-M4,16.463

but Marye was commended of oure Lorde as for the better partye .
CMAELR4-M4,16.464

Trowist thow that Marye grucched of Martha ? CMAELR4-M4,16.465

Nay , but rather Martha of Marye . CMAELR4-M4,16.466

<P_17>

<heading>

Capitulum xiiij CMAELR4-M4,17.469

Hou a recleuse shuld encresse the loue of Iesu in hir soule by
meditacion of +tinges whiche ben passed . Also of the meditacion of
+tinges that ben present . Also by meditacion of thinges whiche ben to
come CMAELR4-M4,17.470

<$$heading>

Thus moche haue I seyde of the loue of neighbore ; CMAELR4-M4,17.472

now shal I telle the of the loue of God , hou thou shalt loue him .
CMAELR4-M4,17.473

To the loue of God longeth too thinges , desire of the soule and
worchinge of the body . CMAELR4-M4,17.474

Desire of the soule lyethe in +te swetnes of gostly loue ;
CMAELR4-M4,17.475

vertuous worchinge of the body stondith in a maner of lyuynge , the
whiche is in fastinge , in wakynge , in laboure , in prayenge , in
redynge , in silence , in pouert and suche other . CMAELR4-M4,17.476

The desire of thy soule is norsshed with holy meditacions .
CMAELR4-M4,17.477

Than if the loue of Iesu shuld growe and encresse in thy desire , thre
thinges the nedeth to haue in mynde . That is , thinges <P_18> the
whiche ben passed , thinges that ben present and thinges whiche ben to
come . CMAELR4-M4,18.478

As touchinge to the first , whan thy soule is purged clerly from alle
vnclene thoughtes , than entre in-to that pryue chambre where oure
blessed Lady praide deuoutly vnto the tyme the aungel grette hir ,
beholdyng bisely hou she was occupied with redynge of suche prophecies
in the whiche weren profecyed <slash> Cristis comynge thorugh a maydens
birthe . CMAELR4-M4,18.479

Abyde there a@ @while and thou shalt se hou the aungel cometh and
gretith hir , seieng thus : Aue Maria gracia plena , dominus tecum .
CMAELR4-M4,18.480

Al-though thow be astonyed of this seconde comynge , natheles dresse the
vpward CMAELR4-M4,18.481

and grete oure Lady with the aungel CMAELR4-M4,18.482

and saye , Aue Maria gracia etcetera ; CMAELR4-M4,18.483

reherse and efte reherse the saam , merueilynge what fulnes of grace
this might be , of the whiche al the worlde is fulfilled .
CMAELR4-M4,18.484

Also beholde and meruaile the with deuocyon , what lord this myght be ,
the whiche vouchith-saaf to ben enclosed in a maydens wombe ;
CMAELR4-M4,18.485

than speke to hir CMAELR4-M4,18.486

and say , ' O blessed lady , what swetnesse myght that be that thou were
fulfilled with ? CMAELR4-M4,18.487

What fire might that be , that thou were enflaumed with , whan a blessed
lord chees a bodily substaunce , verray blode and flesshe of thy body ,
and whan thou felist the presence of his gostly maieste in thy blessed
wombe ? ' . CMAELR4-M4,18.488

This shuld be a maydens meditacion . CMAELR4-M4,18.489

Than goo furth with hir in-to the mountaynes CMAELR4-M4,18.490

and beholde the gretynge bitwene hir and Elizabeth , where also the
seruaunt knewe his lorde and with passynge ioye dide him reuerence ,
enclosed yit in the moder wombe . CMAELR4-M4,18.491

Mayde , what dost thou now ? CMAELR4-M4,18.492

I praie +te , renne furth CMAELR4-M4,18.493

and annexe the to that ioye ; CMAELR4-M4,18.494

falle dovn to euereither feet CMAELR4-M4,18.495

and in the maydens wombe wurshipe thy lorde and thyn husbonde
CMAELR4-M4,18.496

and in the wombe of the tother beholde louely thy frende .
CMAELR4-M4,18.497

Yit the nedeth to folewe hir firther in-to Bethleem with gret deuocyon
and whan thou comest there , be to hir obsequyous atte birthe of hir
childe and than breke oute and say with the prophete : Paruulus natus
est nobis et filius datus est nobis . That is to say , ' A litel
blessed childe is born to vs and a graciouse sone is youen to vs . '
CMAELR4-M4,18.498

Leeue not for no shame , CMAELR4-M4,18.499

but that thou kisse the cracche the whiche he lay in , putte a-way drede
with affeccyon and shame with loue ; CMAELR4-M4,18.500

after this occupye thy mynde vpon +te shepherdes wakyng wacche and vpon
the songe of aungels ; CMAELR4-M4,18.501

to that blessed melody put the boldely in prees , bothe with hert and
mouthe syngynge : Gloria in excelsis deo et in terra pax hominibus bone
voluntatis . CMAELR4-M4,18.502

Foryete not in thy meditacion the offrynge of thre kinges ,
CMAELR4-M4,18.503

ne forsake not his company whan he fledde in-to Egipte ,
CMAELR4-M4,18.504

but folewe him with as gret deuocyon as he can yeue the .
CMAELR4-M4,18.505

<P_19>

Were it not , trowist thou , a faire meditacyon to beholde <slash> hym ,
hou he obeyed to his moder , helpyng his norisshe Ioseph ?
CMAELR4-M4,19.507

What and thou soughtist him in Ierusalem with his moder , sittynge in
the temple amonge doctours , techynge and axinge questions ?
CMAELR4-M4,19.508

O what abundaunce of teres schuldist thou than haue , whan thou herdist
the moder mekely rebuke the childe , seyeng thus : Fili , quid fecisti
nobis sic ? Pater tuus et ego dolentes querebamus te . That is to say
, ' Sone , why has@ @tow do to vs so ? CMAELR4-M4,19.509

Thy fader and I with gret sorwe haue sought the . ' CMAELR4-M4,19.510

Wilt thov yit se pryuyer thynges ? CMAELR4-M4,19.511

Go furthe to the place wher he was baptised CMAELR4-M4,19.512

and there shalt thou here the Fader in a voyce , the Sone in the flesshe
, the Holy Gost in liknes of a culuer . CMAELR4-M4,19.513

Folewe yit this mayde vnto the feste of Architriclyne CMAELR4-M4,19.514

and there beholde a gostly weddynge and water turned in-to wyne ;
CMAELR4-M4,19.515

preye than thy gostly spouse Iesu that thy water of teres mown be turned
in-to delicyous wyne of brennynge loue . CMAELR4-M4,19.516

Yit passe further CMAELR4-M4,19.517

and beholde what Iesu saide to the womman the whiche was accused of
auoutrye ; CMAELR4-M4,19.518

ymagyne here hou mercifully , hou pitously , hou louely , how graciously
he lyfte vp his eyen and hou swetly he assoiled hir whan he had a-shamed
hir accusours and seyde : Nemo condempnauit te , mulier , nec ego te
condempnabo . Vade et iam amplius noli peccare . That is to say , '
Womman , noo body hath condempned the ne I condempne the not ;
CMAELR4-M4,19.519

go now CMAELR4-M4,19.520

and be in wille to synne no more . ' CMAELR4-M4,19.521

Praye him here that thou mowe disserue to here his blessed voys , though
thou be vnworthy . CMAELR4-M4,19.522

Who is he , trowist thou , wil condempne , if he say , ' I wil not
condempne ' ? CMAELR4-M4,19.523

Certeyn noon . CMAELR4-M4,19.524

Wilt thou se moor ? CMAELR4-M4,19.525

Go forthe in-to the pharisees hous CMAELR4-M4,19.526

and se hou thy lorde is sette atte mete . CMAELR4-M4,19.527

Seest thou not hov Mary Magdalen , that blessed synner , wassh Iesus
feet with teres and dried hem with her heres and swetly kissed hem ?
CMAELR4-M4,19.528

At last she anoynted hem with an holy oynement ; CMAELR4-M4,19.529

go furthe CMAELR4-M4,19.530

and do the saam CMAELR4-M4,19.531

and if he wil denye it the , lette not therfore , CMAELR4-M4,19.532

but go , CMAELR4-M4,19.533

procede furth contynuely with besy praier ; CMAELR4-M4,19.534

beholdynge hym with thy soor wepynge and weylinge , axe hym that thou
desirest . CMAELR4-M4,19.535

Wrastle with him as Iacob dide , that he may be ioyful to be ouercome of
the . CMAELR4-M4,19.536

It semeth other-while that Iesu turneth away from the and , as it were ,
hydeth hys feet from the , CMAELR4-M4,19.537

yit natheles praye and crye to hym with an vnpacyent loue .
CMAELR4-M4,19.538

Certeyn , if thou crye so , he wil not <slash> denye his feet fro the to
be moysted with thy teres , that vouched-saaf to suffre hem be kyssed of
a synner . CMAELR4-M4,19.539

Bythenke the firthermoor CMAELR4-M4,19.540

and se now hov a man that had the palseye was leyde at Iesus feet ,
axinge help of body and no thynge elles , CMAELR4-M4,19.541

and yit our Lorde by his merueilous mekenes and vnspecable mercy
graunted hym that he axed CMAELR4-M4,19.542

and yaf him therto helthe of soule , sayinge thus : Remittuntur tibi ,
fili , peccata tua ; that is , ' Sone , thy <P_20> synnes ben foryeue ;
ryse and goo . ' CMAELR4-M4,20.543

Now lyfte vp thin $hondes CMAELR4-M4,20.544

and pray to hym with snobbynge teres , that he vouche-saaf to foryeue
the thy synnes . CMAELR4-M4,20.545

And thou wolt do wel , CMAELR4-M4,20.546

yit go further in-to Bethanye , where the blessed bondes of loue and
frendship were knytte for euere bitwene oure Lorde and Mary Magdalen and
Martha and Lazarus . CMAELR4-M4,20.547

Truste right wel , CMAELR4-M4,20.548

he loued wel Lazar , wytnes of the blessed teres that he wepte for hym .
CMAELR4-M4,20.549

Beholde now what was doon to oure Lord when he was sette atte soper :
CMAELR4-M4,20.550

Martha serued , CMAELR4-M4,20.551

Lazarus saat with him atte soper CMAELR4-M4,20.552

and Mary anoynted hym . CMAELR4-M4,20.553

Art thou not wel apayde to se thys ? CMAELR4-M4,20.554

Truste right wel , CMAELR4-M4,20.555

this last office longith to the . CMAELR4-M4,20.556

Therfore breke the harde alebastir boxe of thyn hert CMAELR4-M4,20.557

and that that is with-in of deuocyon , of loue , of desire or of
affeccyon , helde it on Iesu thy spouses heed , wurshipynge God in man
and man in God . CMAELR4-M4,20.558

Though the pharise grucche with the as he dyde with Mary , charge it not
, CMAELR4-M4,20.559

for Iesu will excuse the . CMAELR4-M4,20.560

Leeue not this blessed idelnes for Marthays besynesse ,
CMAELR4-M4,20.561

for treuly thou hast chose the best partye . CMAELR4-M4,20.562

Arise now CMAELR4-M4,20.563

and lete vs go hens ; CMAELR4-M4,20.564

whider , trowist thou ? CMAELR4-M4,20.565

Certayn to folowe hym in-to Ierusalem , beholdynge hym hou he rideth on
an asse towarde hys passyon . CMAELR4-M4,20.566

Leeue hym not now CMAELR4-M4,20.567

but go with him in-to the hous where he made a soper to his disciples .
CMAELR4-M4,20.568

Be not ashamed , al-though thou be a womman , to come amonge men ;
CMAELR4-M4,20.569

let loue put away shame , CMAELR4-M4,20.570

or elles stonde a-fer as a pore womman CMAELR4-M4,20.571

and axe sum almes with wepyng teres . CMAELR4-M4,20.572

Loke vp now , I praye the , CMAELR4-M4,20.573

seest thou not who is he that leieth his heed so homly in Cristys lappe
? CMAELR4-M4,20.574

He is a blessed man , what-so-euere he be . CMAELR4-M4,20.575

I praye the , what hatte he ? CMAELR4-M4,20.576

Certes his name is Iohn . CMAELR4-M4,20.577

O Iohn , what grace , what swetnes , what deuocion foundist thou there ,
CMAELR4-M4,20.578

I praye +te telle me ? CMAELR4-M4,20.579

Certeyn ther-yn is al the tresour , <slash> I trowe , of wisdom and
konnynge hyd , CMAELR4-M4,20.580

for it is a welle of mercy , an hous of pyte and an honycombe of
euerlastynge swetnes . CMAELR4-M4,20.581

Blessed Iohn , hou disseruedist thou to come to this grace ?
CMAELR4-M4,20.582

Whethir thou be hyer than Petir and holyer than Andrew , worthier than
Iames ? CMAELR4-M4,20.583

This , woot I wel , is a specyal priuilege , certeyn , I trowe ,
CMAELR4-M4,20.584

for thou art a mayde chosen of oure Lord ; CMAELR4-M4,20.585

go to the mayde now CMAELR4-M4,20.586

and axe hym som part of this swetnesse to norisshe with thy deuocion .
CMAELR4-M4,20.587

Herkne now , CMAELR4-M4,20.588

herkne , CMAELR4-M4,20.589

herist thow not what oure Lord saith to his Fader for his disciples ?
CMAELR4-M4,20.590

Pater , serua eos in nomine meo ; that is , ' Fader , kepe my disciples
in my name , for I wil that where I am , they ben with me . '
CMAELR4-M4,20.591

Bowe down thyn heed , that thou be oon of thou . CMAELR4-M4,20.592

O here is good abidynge , ho-so myght tarye , CMAELR4-M4,20.593

bot thou must yit go ferther and folewe hym , as it were al a-fer , vnto
the Mounte of Olyuete and forsake him not . CMAELR4-M4,20.594

Al-though he toke with hym Petir and Iohn and Iames to <P_21> trete wi+t
hem of the counceyle of his passyon , yit he forbiddith the not , and
thou wilt come . CMAELR4-M4,21.595

Seest thou not now hov he fallith dovn and praieth and how he swetith
blood for anguisshe of his passyon ? CMAELR4-M4,21.596

Why stondist thou stille ? CMAELR4-M4,21.597

Go furthe CMAELR4-M4,21.598

and gadere vp clene these swete dropes , CMAELR4-M4,21.599

for certeyn they ben ful preciouse ; CMAELR4-M4,21.600

slepe not now as Petir dide . CMAELR4-M4,21.601

Beholde where Iudas that traytour cometh with a companye of peple to
take oure Lord : CMAELR4-M4,21.602

he kisseth ; CMAELR4-M4,21.603

they bynden his blessed hondes togiders CMAELR4-M4,21.604

and streyned hem ful soor . CMAELR4-M4,21.605

Maist thou suffre this ? CMAELR4-M4,21.606

I trowe , nay . CMAELR4-M4,21.607

I woot now hov it stondeth with the : CMAELR4-M4,21.608

thyn hert is fulfilled with pyte . CMAELR4-M4,21.609

I holde it no wonder , CMAELR4-M4,21.610

yit suffir a while CMAELR4-M4,21.611

and thou shalt se moor . CMAELR4-M4,21.612

Folewe him in-to the paleys CMAELR4-M4,21.613

and beholde hou vnkyndely they ferden with him . CMAELR4-M4,21.614

Se now how pitously , hou mercifully , hov graciously he beholdeth Petir
that thryes denyed hym atte voys of a womman , wepynge bitterly for
sorwe , CMAELR4-M4,21.615

and pray him that he vouche-saaf to beholde the with his merciful eye ,
that so ofte hast forsake him atte voys of a womman , the whiche is thyn
owne flesh , with wicked werkes and vnleful affeccyons .
CMAELR4-M4,21.616

Beholde now CMAELR4-M4,21.617

and se hou he stondeth as a meke lombe before the iuge , bowynge down
his heed and his eyen , spekynge fewe , redy to suffre repreues and
betynge . CMAELR4-M4,21.618

Se than hou his face is buffeted , CMAELR4-M4,21.619

his heed is crowned with thornes and his hondes despitously bounden with
bondes . CMAELR4-M4,21.620

I woot wel thou maist not suffre this , CMAELR4-M4,21.621

natheles yit loke vp <slash> with thyn wepynge eyen CMAELR4-M4,21.622

and beholde hou he berith his cros to his passyon with a clothe of
purpure arrayed , cleuynge ful sore to his forbeten woundes .
CMAELR4-M4,21.623

Now is he nayled to the cros and youen eysel medled with galle to drynke
, hangynge bytwene too theues . CMAELR4-M4,21.624

Heuen and erthe han meruaile ; CMAELR4-M4,21.625

hast thov no meruaile ? CMAELR4-M4,21.626

I trowe , yhis , CMAELR4-M4,21.627

for if heuen and erthe ben sory , thou must nedes be sory .
CMAELR4-M4,21.628

If stones breke , thyn hert must nedys breke . CMAELR4-M4,21.629

If wommen wepten beside his passyon , thou must nedes wepe .
CMAELR4-M4,21.630

And amonge alle thinges , haue mynde on his blessed pacience , hov he
shewed pyte for wronge : CMAELR4-M4,21.631

he heled hem that wounded him , CMAELR4-M4,21.632

he gate hem lyf that slowe him ; CMAELR4-M4,21.633

with what swetnes , what charite , trowist thou , he saide +tese wordes
: CMAELR4-M4,21.634

Pater , ignosce illis quia nesciunt quid faciunt . That is to say , '
Fader , foryeue hem CMAELR4-M4,21.635

for they wyte not what they doon . ' CMAELR4-M4,21.636

Falle down to his feet CMAELR4-M4,21.637

and beseche him that his blessed passyon mote commende the to his Fader
, seyenge thus , ' Fader , foryeue hem her trespas . '
CMAELR4-M4,21.638

Seest thou not how oure Lady wepith ? CMAELR4-M4,21.639

What eyleth the that thou maist not wepe ? CMAELR4-M4,21.640

Why ben thyn eyen so drye , and thorugh the soule of oure Lady wente a
swerde of sorwe ? CMAELR4-M4,21.641

Hou mais@ @tow here him speke to his moder , ' Womman , lo thy sone ' ,
wi+t-oute snobbynge ? CMAELR4-M4,21.642

An harde <P_22> hert is that , +te whiche may not wepe now .
CMAELR4-M4,22.643

Crepe in-to that blessed syde where that blood and water cam forthe ,
CMAELR4-M4,22.644

and hyde the ther as a culuer in the stoon , wel likynge the dropes of
his blood , til that thy lippes be maad like to a reed scarlet hood .
CMAELR4-M4,22.645

Abyde a-@ @while ; CMAELR4-M4,22.646

seest thou not al a-fer , wher an auncyent man cometh , Ioseph of
Armathye ? CMAELR4-M4,22.647

Stonde styl CMAELR4-M4,22.648

and se what that blessed man wil do . CMAELR4-M4,22.649

Als sone as he cometh , he vndoth the nayles of his hondes and feet
CMAELR4-M4,22.650

and byclippeth that swete body with his blessed armes for-@ @to burye it
; CMAELR4-M4,22.651

certeyn he myght wel say than , as I fynde in a boke of loue :
Fasciculus mirre dilectus meus mihi , that is to say , ' My welbeloued
Iesu is to me a boundel of myrre . ' CMAELR4-M4,22.652

Folewe this precious tresoure and helpe to bere vp eyther feet or hondes
CMAELR4-M4,22.653

or elles go behynde CMAELR4-M4,22.654

and gadre vp the smale dropes of blood that fallen by the way .
CMAELR4-M4,22.655

Se nov hou softly , hou swetly , thay anoynteden that blessed body with
bawme and wyndeth it in $sendel and so burieth it . CMAELR4-M4,22.656

Wil@ @tow now do wel ? CMAELR4-M4,22.657

Go nowe furthe with Mary Magdalen CMAELR4-M4,22.658

and ordeyne for oynementes <slash> ayenst the day of his resurreccyon
CMAELR4-M4,22.659

and than shalt thou se and here hou oure Lord spekith to Mary , clepynge
hir by hir name , ' Mary . ' CMAELR4-M4,22.660

O this was a swete voyce , a softe voyce and a iocunde ;
CMAELR4-M4,22.661

at thys voyce alle the veynes of hir body dissolued CMAELR4-M4,22.662

and stilled oute teres of swete deuocyon . CMAELR4-M4,22.663

O blessed Mary , what deuocion , what affeccyon , what desire , what
brennynge of loue was ther , whan thou aunswerdist , ' Raby , ' that is
to say , ' Maister . ' CMAELR4-M4,22.664

Treuly I trowe thy plenteuous wepynge wolde suffre the say no moor ,
CMAELR4-M4,22.665

for thou were stopped with desire of loue . CMAELR4-M4,22.666

Bot that was an harde worde and an vntolerable whan he seyde to the :
Noli me tangere ; that is , ' Mary , touche me not . '
CMAELR4-M4,22.667

Certys yit woldist thou not leeue therfore , CMAELR4-M4,22.668

for treuly I trowe thyn herte wold brest for wepynge but if thou haddist
touched hym . CMAELR4-M4,22.669

Gode suster , do thou the saam , al-though the seme that he withdraweth
and wil not suffre the , that thou touche him by swetnes of deuocyon ;
CMAELR4-M4,22.670

lette not therfore CMAELR4-M4,22.671

but abide a@ @while CMAELR4-M4,22.672

and it shal be right wel . CMAELR4-M4,22.673

Here now hou he comforted Mary ayen , after that he had seyde +tis worde
, ' CMAELR4-M4,22.674

Touche me not ' . CMAELR4-M4,22.675

' Mary , drede the not , CMAELR4-M4,22.676

for though I deferre hem now , I wil not withdrawe hem fro the ;
CMAELR4-M4,22.677

go now first CMAELR4-M4,22.678

and telle my brethren that I am rysen CMAELR4-M4,22.679

and than come ayen . ' CMAELR4-M4,22.680

Now renne thov fast with Mary , if thou wilt sone come ayen ;
CMAELR4-M4,22.681

hir erande was sone doo . CMAELR4-M4,22.682

Than cam she not alone but with other wommen CMAELR4-M4,22.683

and oure Lorde of his curtesy mette hem in the way CMAELR4-M4,22.684

and grette hem . CMAELR4-M4,22.685

What moor ? CMAELR4-M4,22.686

Than he yaf hem leeue to touche his feet : CMAELR4-M4,22.687

Accesserunt et tenuerunt eum . CMAELR4-M4,22.688

' And thay nyeden nye CMAELR4-M4,22.689

and touched him . ' CMAELR4-M4,22.690

Gode sustir , abide here as longe as thou maist CMAELR4-M4,22.691

and fede thy soule with these delicious meditacions . CMAELR4-M4,22.692

<P_23>

The seconde meditacion the whiche the nedith to haue is of thynges that
ben present , as to se how oure Lord hath suffred somme ben forshape or
deed in the moder wombe ; CMAELR4-M4,23.694

the and suche other that ben clene and hool in lymes , he hath kepte and
reserued from alle suche meschefs . CMAELR4-M4,23.695

Whethir this be not a gret matere to loue God ? CMAELR4-M4,23.696

Another that he voucheth-saaf to haue vs bore in suche place and amonge
suche , where we ben fed alday with the sacramentes of holy chirche .
CMAELR4-M4,23.697

Many ther ben whiche haue not this grace : CMAELR4-M4,23.698

why , trowist thou ? CMAELR4-M4,23.699

Certeyn for thai ben forsake by rightwesnes and we ben take and called
by grace and mercy . CMAELR4-M4,23.700

Se yit what oure Lord hath do moor . CMAELR4-M4,23.701

After tyme <slash> we were brought in-to this werld , he kepith vs from
dyuerse perels in-to this day , norshyng vs in good wille and feith of
holy chirche . CMAELR4-M4,23.702

And ouer this paciently suffrith oure wickednes vnto the tyme we wil
amende vs . CMAELR4-M4,23.703

Thenke ofte her-vpon CMAELR4-M4,23.704

and than shal al affeccyon of flesshe and worldly loue stynke vpon the ;
CMAELR4-M4,23.705

sette thyn hert ther wher thy tresoure is and not in a bagge of golde
and seluer , CMAELR4-M4,23.706

for thou maist not fle to heuen with a bagge of money .
CMAELR4-M4,23.707

Thynke also euery day that thou shalt dye or eue ; CMAELR4-M4,23.708

than litel shal thy thought be , hov thou shalt fare on the morwe .
CMAELR4-M4,23.709

Be not aferde CMAELR4-M4,23.710

ne care for honger ne colde , CMAELR4-M4,23.711

but caste al thy trust in hym whiche fedith birdes and clotheth lilyes .
CMAELR4-M4,23.712

He wil be thy berne and thy richesse , thy whicche and thy purse , thy
wurship and thy delytes and al that thou nedyst . CMAELR4-M4,23.713

<heading>

Capitulum xvj CMAELR4-M4,23.715

<$$heading>

The thridde meditacion the whiche +te nedith to thenke vpon , is of
thinges whiche ben to come : that is of thy deth , hou thou shalt dye .
CMAELR4-M4,23.717

For a blessed deth is the begynnyng of lyf , rest and ende of al trauayl
and deth of al vices . CMAELR4-M4,23.718

Beati mortui qui in domino moriuntur , amodo iam dicit spiritus vt
$requiescant a laboribus suis ; that is to say , ' Tho ben blessed folke
the whiche dyen in God , CMAELR4-M4,23.719

for fro this tyme forwarde , saith oure Lorde , thei shuln reste from al
her trauaile . ' CMAELR4-M4,23.720

This I say , disseuerynge the deeth of chosen soules fro the deeth of
repreued soules , CMAELR4-M4,23.721

for chosen soules dyen in $ioye of conscience . CMAELR4-M4,23.722

Why , trowist thou ? CMAELR4-M4,23.723

For the deeth of holy peple is precious in the sight of God .
CMAELR4-M4,23.724

They dyen also in ioye of conscience , at whos departyng aungels ben nye
. CMAELR4-M4,23.725

Rightwyse men ben obsequyous by prayer vnto the tyme the soule be in
Abrahams bosom . CMAELR4-M4,23.726

Certeyn +ter can no tonge telle the ioye and the reste whiche is in
<P_24> Abrahams $bosom , CMAELR4-M4,24.727

for ther shul chosen soules abide , tyl the nombre of other chosen
soules be fulfilled . CMAELR4-M4,24.728

Wiche folke dyen not thus , but in $foule fleshly luste and passynge
couetise of the world and suche other abhominable synnes , by the whiche
thei deseruen place of derknes for her mede . CMAELR4-M4,24.729

Considre now the dredful day of doom , in whiche day shal appere euery
thynge naked as it is in his owne kynd ; CMAELR4-M4,24.730

he is a blessed man that in that day is founde cleer to appere in the
sight of God . CMAELR4-M4,24.731

Ymagyne now in thyself hov thou apperist <slash> and stondist in the
doom bitwene chosen soules and repreued soules , not yit departed to the
toon syde ne to that othir . CMAELR4-M4,24.732

Beholde stondynge on the lift syde a wrecched companye with gret stenche
, gret drede and gret sorwe , gnastyng with her teeth , horrible in
sight ; CMAELR4-M4,24.733

hyde hem they wolden CMAELR4-M4,24.734

and thai n@ @ote whider . CMAELR4-M4,24.735

If they loke vp , they seen a dredful iuge ; CMAELR4-M4,24.736

if thy loke dovn , thei seen the horrible place of euerlastynge derknes
gapynge after hem ; CMAELR4-M4,24.737

the rightwyse domesman mown they neither plete ne accuse ,
CMAELR4-M4,24.738

for he is rightwys in his domes . CMAELR4-M4,24.739

Now turne we thens CMAELR4-M4,24.740

and beholde hem the whiche stonden on the rightsyde , to the whiche
company and feloushep Crist Iesu , thy loue and thy spouse , as thou
hopist hath chosen the to , CMAELR4-M4,24.741

for ther maist thou se som sittyng in doom , somme crouned with a
diademe of martirdom , somme white with virginite and chastite , somme
rewarded passyngly for almes-dede , somme for her trewe doctrine and
techynge CMAELR4-M4,24.742

and alle these ben annexed to oo bonde of chastite and charite
CMAELR4-M4,24.743

and oure Lorde beholdeth eche of hem ful amyable . CMAELR4-M4,24.744

Stonde now stylle , as it were in an vncerteyn whethir thou shalt be
sette to that oo syde or to that other . CMAELR4-M4,24.745

O that shal be an harde abidynge . CMAELR4-M4,24.746

If he sette the on the lyfte syde , what drede shal@ @tow than haue ?
CMAELR4-M4,24.747

If he sette the on the right syde , what ioye shal@ @tow than haue ?
CMAELR4-M4,24.748

Whan the sentence is youen vpon the dampned soules , lyfte vp than thy
gostly eye CMAELR4-M4,24.749

and se what a fair processyon of chosen soules goon to the blessed court
of heuen , euery in her degre , after her meryt resceyuynge her heritage
, the whiche was ordeyned for hem atte begynnynge of the worlde , whiche
ioye may no tonge telle ne hert thenke . CMAELR4-M4,24.750

But this knowe wel , CMAELR4-M4,24.751

ther shal no thynge lak that thou woldest were there present , ne no
thynge be present that thou woldist were absent ; CMAELR4-M4,24.752

and in specyal ther shal be and is oo thinge whiche passith al good ,
that is sight and knoulache and loue of oure Lord Iesu .
CMAELR4-M4,24.753

He shal be seen , in hymself and in alle creatures , gouernynge al thyng
without besynes , susteynyng alle thynge without trauail , yeuyng
himself to euery chosen soule as they neden with-oute diuysion and
<P_25> departyng ; CMAELR4-M4,25.754

he shal than be seen , not as it were in a myrrour , but as he is , face
to face . CMAELR4-M4,25.755

And than shal he fulfille hys promys whiche he behighte :
CMAELR4-M4,25.756

Qui diligit me , diligetur a patre meo et ego manifestabo ei <slash>
meipsum . That is to say , ' He that loueth me shal be loued of my
fadir and I shal loue him and shewe him myself as I am . '
CMAELR4-M4,25.757

Of this loue springeth out an excellent knowlache , of whiche knoulache
+tus I fynde write : Hec est vita eterna vt cognoscant te vnum deum et
quem misisti , Iesum Christum . That is to say , ' This is lyf
euerlastyng , that thy chosen soules mowe knowe the o God and hym that
thou sentyst in-to the erthe , Iesu Crist . ' CMAELR4-M4,25.758

Of thes too thinges , knouleche and loue , riseth suche swetnes and
charite and suche abundaunce in vsynge therof , that neither plente
lesith the desire ne the desire lesith plente . CMAELR4-M4,25.759

What this might be , can noon hert thenke ne tonge telle . To the
whiche ioye brynge vs he that boughte vs vpon the rode tre ,
CMAELR4-M4,25.760

amen . CMAELR4-M4,25.761

Here endith the Reule of a Recluse that Seynt Alrede wrote to his suster
. CMAELR4-M4,25.762

And here folewen the chapiters of +te same . CMAELR4-M4,25.763
