<BEGIN_cmastro-m3>

<P_662.C1>

<heading>

A TREATISE ON THE ASTROLABE CMASTRO-M3,662.C1.4

<$$heading>

Lyte Lowys my sone , I aperceyve wel by certeyne evydences thyn abilite
to lerne sciences touching nombres and proporciouns ;
CMASTRO-M3,662.C1.6

and as wel considre I thy besy praier in special to lerne the tretys of
the Astrelabie . CMASTRO-M3,662.C1.7

Than for as mochel as a philosofre saith , " he wrappith him in his
frend , that condescendith to the rightfulle praiers of his frend , "
therfore have I yeven the a suffisant Astrolabie as for oure orizonte ,
compowned after the latitude of Oxenforde ; upon which , by mediacioun
of this litel tretys , I purpose to teche the a certein nombre of
conclusions aperteynyng to the same instrument . CMASTRO-M3,662.C1.8

I seie a certein of conclusions , for thre causes . CMASTRO-M3,662.C1.9

The first cause is this : truste wel that alle the conclusions that han
be founde , or ellys possibly might be founde in so noble an instrument
as is an Astrelabie ben unknowe parfitly to eny mortal man in this
regioun , as I suppose . CMASTRO-M3,662.C1.10

Another cause is this , that sothly in any tretis of the Astrelabie that
I have seyn , there be somme conclusions that wol not in alle thinges
parformen her bihestes ; CMASTRO-M3,662.C1.11

and somme of hem ben to harde to thy tendir age of ten yeer to conceyve
. CMASTRO-M3,662.C1.12

This tretis , divided in 5 parties , wol I shewe the under full light
reules and naked wordes in Englissh , CMASTRO-M3,662.C1.13

for Latyn ne canst thou yit but small , my litel sone .
CMASTRO-M3,662.C1.14

But natheles suffise to the these trewe conclusions in Englissh as wel
as sufficith to these noble clerkes Grekes these same conclusions in
Grek ; and to Arabiens in Arabik , and to Jewes in Ebrew , and to Latyn
folk in Latyn ; whiche Latyn folk had hem first out of othere dyverse
langages , and <P_662.C2> writen hem in her owne tunge , that is to seyn
, in Latyn . CMASTRO-M3,662.C2.15

And God woot that in alle these langages and in many moo han these
conclusions ben suffisantly lerned and taught , and yit be diverse
reules ; right as diverse pathes leden diverse folk the righte way to
Rome . CMASTRO-M3,662.C2.16

Now wol I preie mekely every discret persone that redith or herith this
litel tretys to have my rude endityng for excusid , and my superfluite
of wordes , for two causes . CMASTRO-M3,662.C2.17

The first cause is for that curious endityng and hard sentence is ful
hevy at onys for such a child to lerne . CMASTRO-M3,662.C2.18

And the secunde cause is this , that sothly me semith better to writen
unto a child twyes a god sentence , than {it_seems} he forgete it onys .
CMASTRO-M3,662.C2.19

And Lowys , yf so be that I shewe the in my lighte Englissh as trewe
conclusions touching this mater , and not oonly as trewe but as many and
as subtile conclusiouns , as ben shewid in Latyn in eny commune tretys
of the Astrelabie , konne me the more thank . CMASTRO-M3,662.C2.20

And preie God save the king , that is lord of this langage , and alle
that him feith berith and obeieth , everich in his degre , the more and
the lasse . CMASTRO-M3,662.C2.21

But considre wel that I ne usurpe not to have founden this werk of my
labour or of myn engyn . CMASTRO-M3,662.C2.22

I n'@ @am but a lewd compilator of the labour of olde astrologiens ,
CMASTRO-M3,662.C2.23

and have it translatid in myn Englissh oonly for thy doctrine .
CMASTRO-M3,662.C2.24

And with this swerd shal I sleen envie . CMASTRO-M3,662.C2.25

Prima pars .- CMASTRO-M3,662.C2.26

The firste partie of this tretys shal reherse the figures and the
membres of thyn Astrelabie by cause that thou shalt have the gretter
knowing of thyn oune instrument . CMASTRO-M3,662.C2.27

<P_663.C1>

Secunda pars .- CMASTRO-M3,663.C1.29

The secunde partie shal techen the worken the verrey practik of the
forseide conclusiouns , as ferforth and as narwe as may be shewed in so
small an instrument portatif aboute . CMASTRO-M3,663.C1.30

For wel woot every astrologien that smallist fraccions ne wol not be
shewid in so small an instrument as in subtile tables calculed for a
cause . CMASTRO-M3,663.C1.31

Tertia pars .- CMASTRO-M3,663.C1.32

The thirde partie shal contene diverse tables of longitudes and
latitudes of sterres fixe for the Astrelabie , and tables of the
declinacions of the sonne , and tables of longitudes of citees and
townes ; and tables as well for the governaunce of a clokke , as for to
fynde the altitude meridian ; and many anothir notable conclusioun after
the kalenders of the reverent clerkes , Frere J. Somer and Frere N.
Lenne . CMASTRO-M3,663.C1.33

Quarta pars .- CMASTRO-M3,663.C1.34

The fourthe partie shal ben a theorike to declare the moevyng of the
celestiall <P_663.C2> bodies with the causes . The whiche fourthe
partie in speciall shal shewen a table of the verrey moeving of the mone
from houre to houre every day and in every signe after thyn almenak .
Upon which table there folewith a canoun suffisant to teche as wel the
manere of the worchynge of the same conclusioun as to knowe in oure
orizonte with which degre of the zodiak that the mone arisith in any
latitude , and the arisyng of any planete after his latitude fro the
ecliptik lyne . CMASTRO-M3,663.C2.35

Quinta pars .- CMASTRO-M3,663.C2.36

The fifthe partie shal be an introductorie , after the statutes of oure
doctours , in which thou maist lerne a gret part of the generall rewles
of theorik in astrologie . In which fifthe partie shalt thou fynden
tables of equaciouns of houses after the latitude of Oxenforde ; and
tables of dignitees of planetes , and othere notefull thinges , yf God
wol vouche_saaf and his Moder the Maide , moo than I behete .
CMASTRO-M3,663.C2.37

<P_663.C1>

<heading>

HERE BEGYNNETH THE DESCRIPCIOUN OF THIN ASTRALABIE .
CMASTRO-M3,663.C1.40

<$$heading>

1 . CMASTRO-M3,663.C1.42

Thyn Astralabie hath a ring to putten on the thombe of thi right hond in
taking the height of thinges . CMASTRO-M3,663.C1.43

And tak kep , CMASTRO-M3,663.C1.44

for from henes forthward I wol clepen the heighte of any thing that is
taken by the rewle " the altitude , " withoute moo wordes .
CMASTRO-M3,663.C1.45

2 . CMASTRO-M3,663.C1.46

This ryng renneth in a maner toret fast to the moder of thyn Astrelabie
in so rowme a space that it distourbith not the instrument to hangen
after his right centre . CMASTRO-M3,663.C1.47

3 . CMASTRO-M3,663.C1.48

The moder of thin Astrelabye is thikkest plate , perced with a large
hool , that resceiveth <P_663.C2> in hir wombe the thynne plates
compowned for diverse clymates , and thy reet shapen in manere of a nett
or of a web of a loppe . CMASTRO-M3,663.C2.49

4 . CMASTRO-M3,663.C2.50

This moder is dividid on the bakhalf with a lyne that cometh descending
fro the ring doun to the netherist bordure . The whiche lyne , fro the
forseide ring unto the centre of the large hool amidde , is clepid the
south lyne , or ellis the lyne meridional . CMASTRO-M3,663.C2.51

And the remenaunt of this lyne doun to the bordure is <P_664.C1> clepid
the north lyne , or ellis the lyne of midnyght . CMASTRO-M3,664.C1.52

5 . CMASTRO-M3,664.C1.53

Overthwart this forseide longe lyne ther crossith him another lyne of
the same lengthe from eest to west . Of the whiche lyne , from a litel
cros {COM:figure_omitted} in the bordure unto the centre of the large
hool , is clepid the est lyne , or ellis the lyne orientale .
CMASTRO-M3,664.C1.54

And the remenaunt of this lyne , fro the forseide centre unto the
bordure , is clepid the west lyne , or ellis the lyne occidentale .
CMASTRO-M3,664.C1.55

Now hast thou here the foure quarters of thin Astrolabie divided after
the <P_664.C2> foure principales plages or quarters of the firmament .
CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.56

6 . CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.57

The est syde of thyn Astrolabie is clepid the right syde ,
CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.58

and the west syde is clepid the left syde . CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.59

Forget not thys , litel Lowys . CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.60

Put the ryng of thyn Astrolabie upon the thombe of thi right hond ,
CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.61

and than wol his right side be toward thi lift side ,
CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.62

and his left side wol be toward thy right side . CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.63

Tak this rewle generall , as wel on the bak as on the wombe syde .
CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.64

Upon the ende of this est lyne , as I first seide , is marked a litel
cros {COM:figure_omitted} , where as evere_moo generaly is considerid
the entring of the first degre in which the sonne arisith .
CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.65

7 . CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.66

Fro this litel cros {COM:figure_omitted} up to the ende of the lyne
meridionall , under the ryng , shalt thou fynden the bordure divided
with 90 degrees ; CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.67

and by that same proporcioun is every quarter of thin Astrolabie divided
. Over the whiche degrees ther ben noumbres of augrym that dividen
thilke same degres fro 5 to 5 , as shewith by longe strikes bitwene .
Of whiche longe strikes the space bitwene contenith a myle wey , and
every degre of the bordure conteneth 4 minutes ; this is to seien ,
mynutes of an houre . CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.68

8 . CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.69

Under the compas of thilke degrees ben writen the names of the 12 Signes
: as Aries , Taurus , Gemini , Cancer , Leo , Virgo , Libra , Scorpio ,
Sagittarius , Capricornus , Aquarius , Piscis . CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.70

And the nombres of the degrees of thoo signes be writen in augrym above
, and with longe divisiouns fro 5 to 5 , dyvidid fro the tyme that the
signe entrith unto the last ende . CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.71

But understond wel that these degres of signes ben everich of hem
considred of 60 mynutes , and every mynute of 60 secundes , and so furth
into smale fraccions infinite , as saith Alkabucius .
CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.72

And therfore knowe wel that a degre of the bordure contenith 4 minutes ,
and a degre of a signe conteneth 60 minutes , CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.73

and have this in mynde . CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.74

9 . CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.75

Next this folewith the cercle of the daies , that ben figured in manere
of degres , that contenen in nombre 365 , dividid also with longe
strikes fro 5 to 5 , and the nombre in augrym writen under that cercle .
CMASTRO-M3,664.C2.76

<P_665.C1>

10 . CMASTRO-M3,665.C1.78

Next the cercle of the daies folewith the cercle of the names of the
monthes , that is to say , Januarius , Februarius , Marcius , Aprilis ,
Maius , Junius , Julius , Augustus , September , October , November ,
December . CMASTRO-M3,665.C1.79

The names of these monthes were clepid somme for her propirtees and
somme by statutes of lordes Arabiens , somme by othre lordes of Rome .
CMASTRO-M3,665.C1.80

Eke of these monthes , as liked to Julius Cesar and to Cesar Augustus ,
somme were compouned of diverse nombres of daies , as Julie and August .
CMASTRO-M3,665.C1.81

Than hath Januarie 31 daies , Februarie 28 , March 31 , Aprill 30 , May
31 , Junius 30 , Julius 31 , Augustus 31 , Septembre 30 , Octobre 31 ,
Novembre 30 , Decembre 31 . CMASTRO-M3,665.C1.82

Natheles , all_though that Julius Cesar toke 2 daies out of Feverer and
putte hem in his month of Juyll , and Augustus Cesar clepid the month of
August after his name and ordeined it of 31 daies , yit truste wel that
the sonne dwellith therfore nevere the more ne lasse in oon signe than
in another . CMASTRO-M3,665.C1.83

11 . CMASTRO-M3,665.C1.84

Than folewen the names of the holy daies in the Kalender , and next hem
the lettres of the A B C on whiche thei fallen . CMASTRO-M3,665.C1.85

12 . CMASTRO-M3,665.C1.86

Next the forseide cercle of the A B C , under the cross lyne , is marked
the skale in manere of 2 squyres , or ellis in manere of laddres , that
serveth by his 12 pointes and his dyvisiouns of ful many a subtil
conclusioun . CMASTRO-M3,665.C1.87

Of this forseide skale fro the cross lyne unto the verrey angle is
clepid Umbra Versa , CMASTRO-M3,665.C1.88

and the nethir partie is clepid Umbra Recta , or ellis Umbra Extensa .
CMASTRO-M3,665.C1.89

13 . CMASTRO-M3,665.C1.90

Than hast thou a brod reule , that hath on either ende a square plate
perced with certein holes , somme more and somme lasse , to resceyve the
stremes of the sonne by day , and eke by mediacioun of thin eye to knowe
the altitude of sterres by night . CMASTRO-M3,665.C1.91

14 . CMASTRO-M3,665.C1.92

Than is there a large pyn in manere of an extre , that goth thorugh the
hole that halt the tables of the clymates and the riet in the wombe of
the moder ; thorugh which pyn ther goth a litel wegge , which that is
clepid the hors , that streynith all these parties to-hepe .
CMASTRO-M3,665.C1.93

Thys forseide grete pyn in manere of an extre <P_665.C2> is ymagyned to
be the Pool Artik in thyn Astralabie . CMASTRO-M3,665.C2.94

15 . CMASTRO-M3,665.C2.95

The wombe syde of thyn Astrelabie is also divided with a longe cros in 4
quarters from est to west , fro southe to northe , fro right syde to
left side , as is the bakside . 16 . The bordure of which wombe side
is divided fro the point of the est lyne unto the point of the south
lyne under the ring , in 90 degrees ; CMASTRO-M3,665.C2.96

and by that same proporcioun is every quarter divided , as is the
bakside . CMASTRO-M3,665.C2.97

That amountith 360 degrees . CMASTRO-M3,665.C2.98

And understond wel that degres of this bordure ben aunswering and
consentrike to the degrees of the equinoxiall , that is dividid in the
same nombre as every <P_666.C1> othir cercle is in the highe hevene .
CMASTRO-M3,666.C1.99

This same bordure is divided also with 23 lettres capitals and a small
cross {COM:figure_omitted} above the south lyne , that shewith the 24
houres equals of the clokke . CMASTRO-M3,666.C1.100

And , as I have seid , 5 of these degres maken a myle wey ,
CMASTRO-M3,666.C1.101

and 3 milewei maken an houre . CMASTRO-M3,666.C1.102

And every degre of thys bordure contenith 4 minutes , and every minute
60 secundes . CMASTRO-M3,666.C1.103

Now have I told the twyes . CMASTRO-M3,666.C1.104

17 . CMASTRO-M3,666.C1.105

The plate under the riet is discrived with 3 cercles , of whiche the
leest is clepid the cercle of Cancre by cause that the heved of Cancre
turnith evermo consentrik <P_666.C2> upon the same cercle .
CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.106

In this heved of Cancer is the grettist declinacioun northward of the
sonne , CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.107

and therfore is he clepid solsticium of somer ; which declinacioun ,
after Ptholome , is 23 degrees and 50 minutes as wel in Cancer as in
Capricorn . CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.108

This signe of Cancer is clepid the tropik of somer , of tropos , that is
to seien " ageynward . " CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.109

For than beginneth the sonne to passen from us-ward .
CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.110

The myddel cercle in wydnesse , of these 3 , is clepid the cercle
equinoxiall , upon which turnith evermo the hevedes of Aries and Libra .
CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.111

And understond wel that evermo thys cercle equinoxiall turnith justly
from verrey est to verrey west as I have shewed the in the speer solide
. CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.112

This same cercle is clepid also Equator , that is the weyer of the day ;
CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.113

for whan the sonne is in the hevedes of Aries and Libra , than ben the
dayes and the nightes ylike of lengthe in all the world .
CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.114

And therfore ben these 2 signes called the equinoxiis .
CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.115

And all that moeveth withinne the hevedes of these Aries and Libra , his
moevyng is clepid northward ; CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.116

and all that moevith withoute these hevedes , his moevyng is clepid
southward , as fro the equinoxiall . CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.117

Tak kep of these latitudes north and south , CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.118

and forget it nat . CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.119

By this cercle equinoxiall ben considred the 24 houres of the clokke ;
CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.120

for evermo the arisyng of 15 degrees of the equinoxiall makith an houre
equal of the clokke . CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.121

This equinoxiall is clepid the gurdel of the first moeving , or ellis of
the first moevable . CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.122

And note that the firste moevyng is clepid moevyng of the firste
moevable of the 8 speer , which moeving is from est to west , and eft
ageyn into est . CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.123

Also it is clepid girdel of the firste moeving for it departith the
firste moevable , that is to seyn the spere , in two like partyes evene
distantz fro the poles of this world . CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.124

The widest of these 3 principale cercles is clepid the cercle of
Capricorne , by cause that the heved of Capricorne turneth evermo
consentrik upon the same cercle . CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.125

In the heved of this forseide Capricorne is the grettist declinacioun
southward of the sonne , CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.126

and therfore it is clepid the solsticium of wynter .
CMASTRO-M3,666.C2.127

This signe of Capricorne is also clepid the <P_667.C1> tropic of wynter
, CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.128

for than begynneth the sonne to come ageyn to us-ward .
CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.129

18 . CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.130

Upon this forseide plate ben compassed certeyn cercles that highten
almycanteras , of whiche somme of hem semen parfit cercles and somme
semen inparfit . CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.131

The centre that stondith amyddes the narwest cercle is clepid the cenyth
. CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.132

And the netherist cercle , or the firste cercle , is clepid the orizonte
, that is to seyn , the cercle that divideth the two emysperies , that
is , the partie of the hevene above the erthe and the partie bynethe .
CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.133

These almykanteras ben compowned by 2 and 2 , all be it so that on
diverse Astrelabies somme almykanteras ben divided by oon , and somme by
two , and somme by thre , after the quantite of the Astrelabie .
CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.134

This forseide cenyth is ymagined to ben the verrey point over the crowne
of thin heved . CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.135

And also this cenyth is the verray pool of the orizonte in every regioun
. CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.136

19 . CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.137

From this cenyth , as it semeth , there comen a maner croked strikes
like to the clawes of a loppe , or elles like the werk of a wommans
calle , in kervyng overthwart the almykanteras . CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.138

And these same strikes or divisiouns ben clepid azimutz ,
CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.139

and thei dividen the orisounte of thin Astrelabie in 24 divisiouns .
CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.140

And these azymutz serven to knowe the costes of the firmament , and to
othre conclusions , as for to knowe the cenyth of the sonne and of every
sterre . CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.141

20 . CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.142

Next these azymutz , under the cercle of Cancer , ben there 12
divisiouns embelif , muche like to the shap of the azemutz , that shewen
the spaces of the houres of planetes . CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.143

21 . CMASTRO-M3,667.C1.144

The riet of thin Astrelabie with thy zodiak , shapen in manere of a net
or of a lopweb after the olde descripcioun , which thou maist turnen up
and doun as thiself liketh , contenith certein nombre of sterres fixes ,
with her longitudes and latitudes determinat , yf so be that the
<P_667.C2> maker have not errid . CMASTRO-M3,667.C2.145

The names of the sterres ben writen in the margyn of the riet there as
thei sitte , of whiche sterres the smale point is clepid the centre .
CMASTRO-M3,667.C2.146

And understond also that alle the sterres sitting within the zodiak of
thin Astrelabie ben clepid sterres of the north , for thei arise by
northe the est lyne . CMASTRO-M3,667.C2.147

And all the remenaunt fixed oute of the zodiak ben clepid sterres of the
south . CMASTRO-M3,667.C2.148

But I seie not that thei arisen alle by southe the est lyne ;
CMASTRO-M3,667.C2.149

witnesse on Aldeberan and Algomeysa . CMASTRO-M3,667.C2.150

Generaly understond this <P_668.C1> rewle , that thilke sterres that ben
clepid sterres of the north arisen rather than the degre of her
longitude , and alle the sterres of the south arisen after the degre of
her longitude - this is to seyn , sterres fixed in thyn Astrelabie .
CMASTRO-M3,668.C1.151

The mesure of this longitude of sterres is taken in the lyne ecliptik of
hevene , <P_668.C2> under which lyne , whan that the sonne and the mone
be lyne-right , or ellis in the superficie of this lyne , than is the
eclipse of the sonne or of the mone , as I shal declare , and eke the
cause why . CMASTRO-M3,668.C2.152

But sothly the ecliptik lyne of thy zodiak is the utterist bordure of
thy zodiak there the degrees be marked . CMASTRO-M3,668.C2.153

Thy zodiak of thin Astrelabie is shapen as a compas which that contenith
a large brede as after the quantite of thyn Astrelabie , in ensample
that the zodiak in hevene is ymagyned to ben a superfice contenyng a
latitude of 12 degrees , whereas alle the remenaunt of cercles in the
hevene ben ymagyned verrey lynes withoute eny latitude .
CMASTRO-M3,668.C2.154

Amiddes this celestial zodiak is ymagined a lyne which that is clepid
the ecliptik lyne , under which lyne is evermo the wey of the sonne .
CMASTRO-M3,668.C2.155

Thus ben there 6 degres of the zodiak on that oo syde of the lyne and 6
degrees on that othir . CMASTRO-M3,668.C2.156

This zodiak is dividid in 12 principale divisiouns that departen the 12
signes , CMASTRO-M3,668.C2.157

and , for the streitnesse of thin Astrolabie , than is every smal
divisioun in a signe departed by two degrees and two ,
CMASTRO-M3,668.C2.158

I mene degrees contenyng 60 mynutes . CMASTRO-M3,668.C2.159

And this forseide hevenysshe zodiak is clepid the cercle of the signes ,
or the cercle of the bestes , CMASTRO-M3,668.C2.160

for " zodia " in langage of Grek sowneth " bestes " in Latyn tunge .
CMASTRO-M3,668.C2.161

And in the zodiak ben the 12 signes that han names of bestes , or ellis
for whan the sonne entrith into eny of tho signes he takith the propirte
of suche bestes , or ellis for that the sterres that ben ther fixed ben
disposid in signes of bestes or shape like bestes , or elles whan the
planetes ben under thilke signes thei causen us by her influence
operaciouns and effectes like to the operaciouns of bestes .
CMASTRO-M3,668.C2.162

And understond also that whan an hot planete cometh into an hot signe ,
than encrescith his hete ; CMASTRO-M3,668.C2.163

and yf a planete be cold , than amenusith his coldnesse by cause of the
hoote sygne . CMASTRO-M3,668.C2.164

And by thys conclusioun maist thou take ensample in alle the signes , be
thei moist or drie , or moeble or fixe , reknyng the qualite of the
planete as I first seide . CMASTRO-M3,668.C2.165

And everich of these 12 signes hath respect to a certeyn <P_669.C1>
parcel of the body of a man , CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.166

and hath it in governaunce ; as Aries hath thin heved , and Taurus thy
nekke and thy throte , Gemini thin armholes and thin armes , and so
furth , as shall be shewid more pleyn in the 5 partie of this tretis .
CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.167

This zodiak , which that is part of the 8 speer , over-kervith the
equinoxial , CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.168

and he overkervith him ageyn in evene parties ; CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.169

and that oo half declineth southward ; and that othir northward , as
pleinly declarith the Tretys of the Speer . CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.170

<P_669.C2>

Than hast thou a label that is shapen like a reule , save that it is
streit and hath no plates on either ende with holes .
CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.172

But with the smale point of the forseide label shalt thou calcule thin
equaciouns in the bordure of thin Astralabie , as by thin almury .
CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.173

Thin almury is clepid the denticle of Capricorne , or ellis the calculer
. CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.174

This same almury sitt fix in the heved of Capricorne ,
CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.175

and it serveth of many a necessarie conclusioun in equacions of thinges
as shal be shewid . CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.176

<font> Here endith the descripcioun of the Astrelabie
CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.177

and here begynne the conclusions of the Astrelabie . <$$font>
CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.178

<P_669.C1>

<heading>

1 . CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.181

TO FYNDE THE DEGRE IN WHICH THE SONNE IS DAY BY DAY , AFTER HIS COURS
ABOUTE . CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.182

<$$heading>

Rekne and knowe which is the day of thy month , CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.184

and ley thy rewle upon that same day , CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.185

and than wol the verrey poynt of thy rewle sitten in the bordure upon
the degre of thy sonne . CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.186

Ensample as thus : CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.187

The yeer of oure Lord 1391 , the 12 day of March at midday , I wolde
knowe the degre of the sonne . CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.188

I soughte in the bakhalf of myn Astrelabie CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.189

and fond the cercle of the daies , the whiche I knowe by the names of
the monthes writen under the same cercle . CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.190

Tho leyde I my reule over this foreseide day , CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.191

and fond the point of my reule in the bordure upon the firste degre of
Aries , a litel within the degre . CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.192

And thus knowe I this conclusioun . CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.193

Anothir day I wolde knowen the degre of my sonne , CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.194

and this was at midday in the 13 day of Decembre .
CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.195

I fond the day of the month in manere as I seide ; CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.196

tho leide I my rewle upon this forseide 13 day , CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.197

and fond the point of my rewle in the bordure upon the firste degre of
Capricorne a lite within the degre . CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.198

And than had I of this conclusion the ful experience .
CMASTRO-M3,669.C1.199

<P_669.C2>

<heading>

2 . CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.202

TO KNOWE THE ALTITUDE OF THE SONNE OR OF OTHRE CELESTIAL BODIES .
CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.203

<$$heading>

Put the ryng of thyn Astrelabie upon thy right thombe ,
CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.205

and turne thi lift syde ageyn the light of the sonne ;
CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.206

and remewe thy rewle up and doun til that the stremes of the sonne shine
thorugh bothe holes of thi rewle . CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.207

Loke than how many degrees thy rule is areised fro the litel cros upon
thin est lyne , CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.208

and tak there the altitude of thi sonne . CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.209

And in this same wise maist thow knowe by night the altitude of the mone
or of brighte sterres . CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.210

This chapitre is so generall evere in oon that there nedith no more
declaracioun ; CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.211

but forget it not . CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.212

<heading>

3 . CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.214

TO KNOWE EVERY TYME OF THE DAY BY LIGHT OF THE SONNE ; AND EVERY TYME OF
THE NYGHT BY THE STERRES FIXE ; AND EKE TO KNOWE BY NYGHT OR BY DAY THE
DEGRE OF ENY SIGNE THAT ASCENDITH ON THE EST ORISONTE , WHICH THAT IS
CLEPID COMOUNLY THE ASCENDENT , OR ELLIS HOROSCOPUM .
CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.215

<$$heading>

Tak the altitude of the sonne whan the list , as I have seid ,
CMASTRO-M3,669.C2.217

and set the degre of the sonne , in caas that it be beforn the myddel of
the day , <P_670.C1> among thyn almykanteras on the est syde of thin
Astrelabie ; CMASTRO-M3,670.C1.218

and if it be after the myddel of the day , set the degre of thy sonne
upon the west syde . CMASTRO-M3,670.C1.219

Take this manere of settyng for a general rule , ones for evere .
CMASTRO-M3,670.C1.220

And whan thou hast set the degre of thy sonne upon as many almykanteras
of height as was the altitude of the sonne taken by thy rule , ley over
thi label upon the degre of the sonne ; CMASTRO-M3,670.C1.221

and than wol the point of thi labell sitte in the bordure upon the
verrey tyde of the day . CMASTRO-M3,670.C1.222

Ensample as thus : CMASTRO-M3,670.C1.223

The yeer of oure lord 1391 , the 12 day of March , I wolde knowe the
tyde of the day . CMASTRO-M3,670.C1.224

I tok the altitude of my sonne , CMASTRO-M3,670.C1.225

and fond that it was 25 degrees and 30 minutes of height in the bordure
on the bak side . CMASTRO-M3,670.C1.226

Tho turned I myn Astrelabye , CMASTRO-M3,670.C1.227

and by cause that it was beforn mydday , I turned my riet
CMASTRO-M3,670.C1.228

and sette the degre of the sonne , that is to seyn the first degre of
Aries , on the right side of myn Astrelabye upon 25 degrees and 30
mynutes of height among myn almykanteras . CMASTRO-M3,670.C1.229

Tho leide I my label upon the degre of my sonne , CMASTRO-M3,670.C1.230

and fond the point of my label in the bordure upon a capital lettre that
is clepid an X . CMASTRO-M3,670.C1.231

Tho rekned I alle the capitale lettres <P_670.C2> fro the lyne of
mydnight unto this forseide lettre X , CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.232

and fond that it was 9 of the clokke of the day . CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.233

Tho loked I doun upon myn est orizonte , CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.234

and fond there the 20 degre of Geminis ascendyng , which that I tok for
myn ascendent . CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.235

And in this wise had I the experience for evermo in which manere I
shulde knowe the tyde of the day and eke myn ascendent .
CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.236

Tho wolde I wite the same nyght folewyng the houre of the nyght ,
CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.237

and wroughte in this wise : CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.238

Among an heep of sterres fixe it liked me for to take the altitude of
the faire white sterre that is clepid Alhabor , CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.239

and fond hir sittyng on the west side of the lyne of midday , 12 degrees
of heighte taken by my rewle on the bak side . CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.240

Tho sette I the centre of this Alhabor upon 12 degrees among myn
almykanteras upon the west side , by cause that she was founde on the
west side . CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.241

Tho leyde I my label over the degre of the sonne , that was discendid
under the west orisounte , CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.242

and rekned all the lettres capitals fro the lyne of midday unto the
point of my label in the bordure , CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.243

and fond that it was passed 9 of the clokke the space of 10 degrees .
CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.244

Tho lokid I doun upon myn est orisounte , CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.245

and fond there 10 degrees of Scorpius ascendyng , whom I tok for myn
ascendent . CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.246

And thus lerned I to knowe onys for ever in which manere I shuld come to
the houre of the nyght , and to myn ascendent , as verrely as may be
taken by so smal an instrument . CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.247

But natheles this rule in generall wol I warne the for evere :
CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.248

Ne make the nevere bold to have take a just ascendent by thin Astrelabie
, or elles to have set justly a clokke , whan eny celestial body by
which that thou wenyst governe thilke thinges be nigh the south lyne .
CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.249

For trust wel , whan the sonne is nygh the meridional lyne , the degre
of the sonne renneth so longe consentrik upon the almykanteras that
sothly thou shalt erre fro the just ascendent . CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.250

The same conclusion sey I by the centre of eny sterre fix by nyght .
CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.251

And more_over , by experience I wot wel that in our orisounte , from xi
of the clokke unto oon of the clokke , in taking of a just ascendent in
a portatif Astrelabie it is to hard to knowe - I mene from xi of the
clokke before the houre of noon til oon of the clokke next folewyng .
CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.252

<heading>

4 . CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.254

A SPECIAL DECLARACIOUN OF THE ASCENDENT . CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.255

<$$heading>

The ascendent sothly , as wel in alle nativites as in questions and
eleccions of tymes , is a thing which that these astrologiens gretly
observen . Wherfore me semeth convenyent , syth that I speke of the
ascendent , to make of it speciall declaracioun . CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.257

The ascendent sothly , to take it at the largest , is thilke degre that
ascendith at eny of these forseide tymes upon the est orisounte .
CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.258

And therfore , yf that eny planete ascende at thatt same tyme in thilke
forseide degre , than hath he no latitude fro the ecliptik lyne ,
CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.259

but he is than in the degre of the ecliptik which that is the degre of
his longitude . CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.260

Men sayn that thilke planete is in horoscopo . CMASTRO-M3,670.C2.261

But sothly the hous of the ascendent , that is to seyn , the first hous
or the est angle , is a <P_671.C1> thing more brod and large .
CMASTRO-M3,671.C1.262

For , after the statutes of astrologiens , what celestial body that is 5
degrees above thilke degre that ascendith , or withinne that nombre ,
that is to seyn neer the degree that ascendith , yit rekne they thilke
planete in the ascendent . CMASTRO-M3,671.C1.263

And what planete that is under thilke degre that ascendith the space of
25 degres , yit seyn thei that thilke planete is " like to him that is
the hous of the ascendent . " CMASTRO-M3,671.C1.264

But sothly , if he passe the boundes of these forseide spaces , above or
bynethe , thei seyn that the planete is " fallyng fro the ascendent . "
CMASTRO-M3,671.C1.265

Yit saien these astrologiens that the ascendent and eke the lord of the
ascendent may be shapen for to be fortunat or infortunat , as thus :
CMASTRO-M3,671.C1.266

A " fortunat ascendent " clepen they whan that no wicked planete , as
Saturne or Mars or elles the Tayl of the Dragoun , is in the hous of the
ascendent , ne that no wicked planete have noon aspect of enemyte upon
the ascendent . CMASTRO-M3,671.C1.267

But thei wol caste that thei have a fortunat planete in hir ascendent ,
and yit in his felicite ; CMASTRO-M3,671.C1.268

and than sey thei that it is wel . CMASTRO-M3,671.C1.269

Further_over thei seyn that the infortunyng of an ascendent is the
contrarie of these forseide thinges . CMASTRO-M3,671.C1.270

The lord of the ascendent , sey thei that he is fortunat whan he is in
god place fro the ascendent , as in an angle , or in a succident where
as he is in hys dignite and comfortid with frendly aspectes of planetes
and wel resceyved ; and eke that he may seen the ascendent ; and that he
be not retrograd , ne combust , ne joyned with no shrewe in the same
signe ; ne that he be not in his discencioun , ne joyned with no planete
in his descencioun , ne have upon him noon aspect infortunat ;
CMASTRO-M3,671.C1.271

and than sey thei that he is well . CMASTRO-M3,671.C1.272

Natheles these ben observaunces of judicial matere and rytes of payens ,
in whiche my <P_671.C2> spirit hath no feith , ne knowing of her
horoscopum . CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.273

For they seyn that every signe is departid in thre evene parties by 10
degrees , CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.274

and thilke porcioun they clepe a face . CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.275

And although that a planete have a latitude fro the ecliptik , yit sey
somme folk , so that the planete arise in that same signe with eny degre
of the forseide face in which his longitude is rekned , that yit is the
planete in horoscopo , be it in nativyte or in eleccion , etc.
CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.276

<heading>

5 . CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.278

TO KNOWE THE VERREY EQUACIOUN OF THE DEGRE OF THE SONNE YF SO BE THAT IT
FALLE BITWENE THYN ALMYKANTERAS . CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.279

<$$heading>

For as muche as the almykanteras in thin Astrelabie ben compowned by two
and two , where as somme almykanteras in sondry astrelabies be compowned
by 1 and 1 , or elles by 2 and 2 , it is necessarie to thy lernyng to
teche the first to knowe and worke with thin oune instrument . Wherfore
whan that the degre of thi sonne fallith bytwixe 2 almykanteras , or
ellis yf thin almykanteras ben graven with over-gret a poynt of a compas
<paren> for bothe these thinges may causen errour as wel in knowing of
the tide of the day , as of the verrey ascendent <$$paren> , thou must
worken in this wise : CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.281

Set the degre of thy sonne upon the hyer almykanteras of bothe ,
CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.282

and wayte wel where as thin almury touchith the bordure
CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.283

and set there a prikke of ynke . CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.284

Sett doun agayn the degre of the sunne upon the nether almykanteras of
bothe , CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.285

and sett there another pricke . CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.286

Remeve than thin almury in the bordure evene amiddes bothe prickes ,
CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.287

and this wol lede justly the degre of thi sonne to sitte bitwene bothe
almykanteras in his right place . CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.288

Ley than thy label over the degre of thi sonne , CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.289

and fynd in the bordure the verrey tyde of the day , or of the night .
CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.290

And as verraily shalt thou fynde upon thin est orisonte thin ascendent .
CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.291

<heading>

6 . CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.293

TO KNOWE THE SPRYNG OF THE DAWENYNG AND THE ENDE OF THE EVENYNG , THE
WHICHE BEN CALLED THE TWO CREPUSCULES . CMASTRO-M3,671.C2.294

<$$heading>

Set the nadir of thy sonne upon 18 degrees of height among thyn
almynkanteras on the west <P_672.C1> syde ; CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.296

and ley thy label on the degre of thy sonne , CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.297

and than shal the point of thy label shewen the spryng of the day .
CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.298

Also set the nader of thy sonne upon 18 degrees of height among thin
almykanteras on the est side , CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.299

and ley over thy label upon the degre of the sonne ,
CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.300

and with the point of thy label fynd in the bordure the ende of the
evenyng , that is verrey nyght . CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.301

The nader of the sonne is thilke degre that is opposyt to the degre of
the sonne , in the 7 signe , as thus : CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.302

every degre of Aries by ordir is nadir to every degre of Libra by ordre
, and Taurus to Scorpioun , Gemini to Sagittarie , Cancer to Capricorne
, Leo to Aquarie , Virgo to Piscis . CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.303

And if eny degre in thy zodiak be derk , his nadir shal declare hym .
CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.304

<heading>

7 . CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.306

TO KNOWE THE ARCH OF THE DAY , THAT SOME FOLK CALLEN THE DAY ARTIFICIALL
, FRO SONNE ARISYNG TYL IT GO TO RESTE . CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.307

<$$heading>

Set the degre of thi sonne upon thin est orisonte ,
CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.309

and ley thy label on the degre of the sonne , CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.310

and at the point of thy label in the bordure set a pricke .
CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.311

Turne than thy riet aboute tyl the degre of thy sonne sitte upon the
west orisonte , CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.312

and ley thy label upon the same degre of the sonne ,
CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.313

and at the poynt of thy label set there another pricke .
CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.314

Rekne than the quantite of tyme in the bordure bitwixe bothe prickes ,
CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.315

and tak there thyn arch of the day . CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.316

The remenaunt of the bordure under the orisonte is the arch of the nyght
. CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.317

Thus maist thou rekne bothe arches , or every porcioun , of whether that
the liketh . CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.318

And by this manere of worching maist thou se how longe that eny sterre
fix dwelleth above the erthe , fro tyme that he riseth til he go to
reste . CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.319

But the day naturall , that is to seyn 24 hours , is the revolucioun of
the equinoxial with as muche partie of the zodiak as the sonne of his
propre moeving passith in the mene while . CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.320

<heading>

8 . CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.322

TO TURNE THE HOURES INEQUALES IN HOURES EQUALES . CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.323

<$$heading>

Know the nombre of the degrees in the houres inequales ,
CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.325

and depart hem by 15 , CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.326

and tak there thin houres equales . CMASTRO-M3,672.C1.327

<P_672.C2>

<heading>

9 . CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.330

TO KNOWE THE QUANTITE OF THE DAY VULGAR , THAT IS TO SEYN FRO SPRYNG OF
THE DAY UNTO VERREY NYGHT . CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.331

<$$heading>

Know the quantite of thy crepuscles , as I have taught in the 3 chapitre
bifore , CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.333

and adde hem to the arch of thy day artificial , CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.334

and tak there the space of all the hool day vulgar unto verrey night .
CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.335

The same manere maist thou worche to knowe the quantite of the vulgar
nyght . CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.336

<heading>

10 . CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.338

TO KNOWE THE QUANTITE OF HOURES INEQUALES BY DAY .
CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.339

<$$heading>

Understond wel that these houres inequales ben clepid houres of planetes
. CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.341

And understond wel that som tyme ben thei lenger by day than by night ,
and som tyme the contrarie . CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.342

But understond wel that evermo generaly the houre inequal of the day
with the houre inequal of the night contenen 30 degrees of the bordure ,
which bordure is evermo answeryng to the degrees of the equinoxial .
Wherfore departe the arch of the day artificial in 12 , and tak there
the quantite of the houre inequale by day . CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.343

And if thou abate the quantite of the houre inequale by day out of 30 ,
than shal the remenaunt that levith parforme the houre inequale by night
. CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.344

<heading>

11 . CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.346

TO KNOWE THE QUANTITE OF HOURES EQUALES . CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.347

<$$heading>

The quantite of houres equales , that is to seyn the houres of the
clokke , ben departid by 15 degrees alredy in the bordure of thin
Astrelaby , as wel by night as by day , generaly for evere .
CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.349

What nedith more declaracioun ? Wherfore whan the list to knowe how
many houres of the clokke ben passed , or eny part of eny of these
houres that ben passed , or ellis how many houres or parties of houres
ben to come fro such a tyme to such a tyme by day or by night , know the
degre of thy sonne , and ley thy label on it . CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.350

Turne thy ryet aboute joyntly with thy label , CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.351

and with the poynt of it rekne in the bordure fro the sonne arise unto
that same place there thou desirist , by day as by nyght .
CMASTRO-M3,672.C2.352

This conclusioun wol I declare in the last chapitre of the 4 partie of
this <P_673.C1> tretys so openly that ther shal lakke no word that
nedith to the declaracioun . CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.353

<heading>

12 . CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.355

SPECIAL DECLARACIOUN OF THE HOURES OF PLANETES . CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.356

<$$heading>

Understond wel that evermo , fro the arisyng of the sonne til it go to
reste , the nadir of the sonne shal shewe the houre of the planete ;
CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.358

and fro that tyme forward al the night til the sonne arise , than shal
the verrey degre of the sonne shewe the houre of the planete .
CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.359

Ensample as thus : CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.360

The xiij day of March fyl upon a Saturday , peraventure ,
CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.361

and atte risyng of the sonne I fond the secunde degre of Aries sittyng
upon myn est orisonte , all be it that it was but litel .
CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.362

Than fond I the 2 degre of Libra , nadir of my sonne , discending on my
west orisonte , upon which west orisonte every day generaly , atte sonne
arist , entrith the houre of eny planete , after which planete the day
berith his name , and endith in the next strike of the plate under the
forseide west orisonte . CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.363

And evere as the sonne clymbith upper and upper , so goth his nadir
downer and downer , teching by suche strikes the houres of planetes by
ordir as they sitten in the hevene . CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.364

The firste houre inequal of every Saturday is to Saturne , and the
seconde to Jupiter , the thirde to Mars , the fourthe to the sonne , the
fifte to Venus , the sixte to Mercurius , the seventhe to the mone .
CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.365

And then ageyn the 8 is to Saturne , the 9 to Jupiter , the 10 to Mars ,
the 11 to the sonne , the 12 to Venus . CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.366

And now is my sonne gon to reste as for that Saturday .
CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.367

Than shewith the verrey degre of the sonne the houre of Mercurie entring
under my west orisonte at eve ; CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.368

and next him succedith the mone , CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.369

and so furth by ordir , planete after planete in houre after houre , all
the nyght longe til the sonne arise . CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.370

Now risith the sonne that Sonday by the morwe , CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.371

and the nadir of the sonne upon the west orisonte shewith me the entring
of the houre of the forseide sonne . CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.372

And in this manere succedith planete under planete fro Saturne unto the
mone , and fro the mone up ageyn to Saturne , houre after houre generaly
. CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.373

And thus knowe I this conclusyoun . CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.374

<heading>

13 . CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.376

TO KNOWE THE ALTITUDE OF THE SONNE IN MYDDES OF THE DAY THAT IS CLEPID
THE ALTITUDE MERIDIAN . CMASTRO-M3,673.C1.377

<$$heading>

<P_673.C2>

Set the degre of the sonne upon the lyne meridional ,
CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.380

and rekne how many degrees of almykanteras ben bitwyxe thin est orisonte
and the degre of thy sonne ; CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.381

and tak there thin altitude meridian , this to seyn , the highest of the
sonne as for that day . CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.382

So maist thou knowe in the same lyne the heighest cours that eny sterre
fix clymbeth by night . This is to seyn that whan eny sterre fix is
passid the lyne meridional , than begynneth it to descende ;
CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.383

and so doth the sonne . CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.384

<heading>

14 . CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.386

TO KNOWE THE DEGRE OF THE SONNE BY THY RYET , FOR A MANER CURIOSITE .
CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.387

<$$heading>

Sek besily with thy rule the highest of the sonne in mydde of the day .
CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.389

Turne than thin Astrelabie , CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.390

and with a pricke of ynke marke the nombre of that same altitude in the
lyne meridional ; CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.391

turne than thy ryet aboute tyl thou fynde a degre of thy zodiak
according with the pricke , this is to seyn , sitting on the pricke .
CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.392

And in soth thou shalt finde but 2 degrees in all the zodiak of that
condicioun ; CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.393

and yit thilke 2 degrees ben in diverse signes . CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.394

Than maist thou lightly , by the sesoun of the yere , knowe the signe in
which that is the sonne . CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.395

<heading>

15 . CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.397

TO KNOWE WHICH DAY IS LIK TO WHICH DAY AS OF LENGTHE .
CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.398

<$$heading>

Loke whiche degrees ben ylike fer fro the hevedes of Cancer and
Capricorne , CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.400

and loke when the sonne is in eny of thilke degrees ;
CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.401

than ben the dayes ylike of lengthe . This is to seyn that as longe is
that day in that month , as was such a day in such a month ;
CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.402

there varieth but litel . CMASTRO-M3,673.C2.403
