<BEGIN_cmbenrul-m3>

<P_1>

Son , Herkyn +te commandementis of +te mastir , CMBENRUL-M3,1.3

& lay to +te eere of +ty herte , CMBENRUL-M3,1.4

& gladly take And spedily fulfil +te warnyng of +te meke fadir , +tat
+tu mai turne a-gayne to hym by +te labur of obedience , fra whame +tu
had gane by +te slew+t of inobedience . CMBENRUL-M3,1.5

Tharfore my worde be now directe to the , +tat forsakis thy awne lustis
& takis +te ryght strang and doghty armur of obedience to seryf our
lorde Iesu criste , +te verrey kyng . CMBENRUL-M3,1.6

First +tat +tu aske of hym wid besy prayer alle gude +ting +tat +tu
begyns to do to be perfytely endid ; +tat he , +tat has vochyd_safe to
cownte vs in +te nummer of hys sons , be not greuyd ony tyme be our euyl
dedis . CMBENRUL-M3,1.7

Sa , for soth , it is to obey hym at al tyme for hys aune gudis +tat ere
in vs , +tat he , as a wrath fader , not alanly diseret vs os not hys
sons , Bot also os a dredful lord , wrathid thoro our euyl dedys ,
betake vs to perpetual payne os ful wykkyd seruandis , whylk wald not
folow hym to blis . CMBENRUL-M3,1.8

<heading>

PRIMUM CAPITULUM . CMBENRUL-M3,1.10

EXURGAMUS ERGO . CMBENRUL-M3,1.11

<$$heading>

In +tis first sentence bidis us sain benet +tat we be wakande ,
CMBENRUL-M3,1.13

and bidis we sal rise , +tat es of ure sinne , als it es writen , and
+tat yure ehin be opin , and yure $hertes , til godis $brihtnes , Godis
uoice +tat +ge here and under-stande <P_2> it , als it sais : " Hodie si
uocem eius - CMBENRUL-M3,2.14

Yef ye +te uoice of god herd o day , yure hertis ware noht hard ;
CMBENRUL-M3,2.15

it munde ma +tam neis ; " CMBENRUL-M3,2.16

Als haly writ says : " Qui habet aures audiendi , audiat -
CMBENRUL-M3,2.17

+Tat erin hauis , herkins wat +te haly spirt sais in haly writ . "
CMBENRUL-M3,2.18

wat sais he ? CMBENRUL-M3,2.19

" Cumis to me , CMBENRUL-M3,2.20

I sal yu lere +te dute of god , his wille +tat +ge may do .
CMBENRUL-M3,2.21

Rennes fast do wilis ye haue liht , +tat +te mirkenes o ded our-take +te
noht . " CMBENRUL-M3,2.22

+Te haly spirt bidis us +tat we trou his reed , +tat we may cum to +te
lif and se +te dais of godis sune in ioye wid-uten ende .
CMBENRUL-M3,2.23

" yef +tu will haue +tat ioy , gete +ti tunge , +tu speke na sca+te ,
and tine lippis fra iuel . CMBENRUL-M3,2.24

Turne +te fra iuil CMBENRUL-M3,2.25

& do +te gode , +tat ti lif folihe +taim . CMBENRUL-M3,2.26

wen +tat +ge +tus do , +tan sal min ezin be on +gow . CMBENRUL-M3,2.27

Til +gure praier $sal I here , sal +ge noht be for-getin .
CMBENRUL-M3,2.28

Or +tat +ge calle to me , I sal saie : I es here . " CMBENRUL-M3,2.29

My suete sistirs , I saie to yu : es na sueter uoice +tan of iesu ;
CMBENRUL-M3,2.30

sua sais sain benet . CMBENRUL-M3,2.31

God al-mihti kenne us +te rihte gate til endeles ioy . CMBENRUL-M3,2.32

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,2.33

<heading>

SECUNDUM CAPITULUM . CMBENRUL-M3,2.35

SUCCINCTIS ERGO FIDE . CMBENRUL-M3,2.36

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence mustirs sain benet us hu we sal lede ure lif ,
CMBENRUL-M3,2.38

and sais +tat we sal belt us wid chastiment , riht trouz +tat ye haue
wid gode dede , +tat tu belte +tine lendis sua , and +tat tine fete be
shod in riht gate , Als +te gospel tellis , in his tretes +tat +tu ga ,
til his rengne +tat +tu may cume , +tare hise frendis sal euir be , +tat
here hauis wele wroht . CMBENRUL-M3,2.39

Yef +tu wil to +tat rengne cume , do +te dedis of godis sune ;
CMBENRUL-M3,2.40

+tu sal $be +tidir broht . CMBENRUL-M3,2.41

we aske +te , lauerd , +turz +te muz of +te profete , Wha in +ti
tabernakil sal wne . CMBENRUL-M3,2.42

" An wha sal wne wid +te in +te muntain +tat es sua briht ? "
CMBENRUL-M3,2.43

Lauerd , +tan we haue askid +te , +te ancewer of +te sal we here :
CMBENRUL-M3,2.44

+te riht +tidir at cume +tai sal haue , CMBENRUL-M3,2.45

entre +tat ere wid-uten sinne ; +tat rihtuis es of dede and rihtuis of
speche in his hert of alle +ting ; +tat wid tunge lezis noht , bot
sothfastnes in his +toht ; CMBENRUL-M3,2.46

+Tat euil dos til nan , CMBENRUL-M3,2.47

ne reproues na man of +taire mis-dede . CMBENRUL-M3,2.48

He dos all to noht +te sinne +tat wnis in <P_3> his +toht and quites him
at te nede . CMBENRUL-M3,3.49

Lauerd , we prai +te +tat we may serue sua , in +ti tabernakil +tat we
may wne . CMBENRUL-M3,3.50

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,3.51

<heading>

TERCIUM CAPITULUM . CMBENRUL-M3,3.53

ERGO PREPARANDA . CMBENRUL-M3,3.54

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence sais sain benet til +ta +tat luuis god & dutes hym :
CMBENRUL-M3,3.56

yef +tu findis ani god in +te , til god sal +te louing be ,
CMBENRUL-M3,3.57

$and grace til him giue , of whame we haue al +te gude ;
CMBENRUL-M3,3.58

als +te prophete sais , " Non nobis domine - CMBENRUL-M3,3.59

Lord , of us es it noht , bot til +ti name ioy es broht " ;
CMBENRUL-M3,3.60

Als sain paul sais : " Lauerd , of me haue I noht , bot +tu sende it me
. " CMBENRUL-M3,3.61

In o+tir stede sais he : " In god sal man be glad and loue him in dede .
" CMBENRUL-M3,3.62

And heris wat ure lauerd sais in +te gospel : CMBENRUL-M3,3.63

" Qui audit - CMBENRUL-M3,3.64

Wha sam heris my word and dos it in werke , Til +te wyis man sembils he
, +tat fundes his hus opon +te stan fra +te water and te flod ;
CMBENRUL-M3,3.65

for +ti ne failed it noht , CMBENRUL-M3,3.66

for it $was wrht o-pon +te harde stane . " CMBENRUL-M3,3.67

+Tus kennis ure lauerd us his werkis , at folu his cumandementis .
CMBENRUL-M3,3.68

For +ti he giuis us respit , +tat we sal mende ure sinne and si+tin to
+te ioy be sent ; CMBENRUL-M3,3.69

Als +te postil sais +gur godes word : " And nescitis - CMBENRUL-M3,3.70

+Te sufferans may +tu noht wite of god her witerlike , +tat he to +te
hauis don ? " CMBENRUL-M3,3.71

Als ure lauerd sais : " Of +te sinfull will I noht +te dede , bot +tat
tay turne and liue . " CMBENRUL-M3,3.72

wen we aske +te , lauerd , wha in +ti tabernakill sall wone , and we
here +ti cumandement , and dos te werkis +tat fallis +tar-to , +tan sall
we be ayris in +ti ioye . CMBENRUL-M3,3.73

lord , for +ti mercy +tu gif us grace +tare at be . CMBENRUL-M3,3.74

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,3.75

<heading>

CAPITULUM IIII . CMBENRUL-M3,3.77

MONACHORUM . CMBENRUL-M3,3.78

<$$heading>

IN +tis sentence bidis us sain benet +tat we make ure hertis redy , and
ure bodis als-sua , in mekenes , yef we will wone wid god .
CMBENRUL-M3,3.80

+Tan ure force es gane us fra , we pray ure lauerd be ure help for his
mikill miht . CMBENRUL-M3,3.81

Yef we +te painis of helle will fle , and cum till ioy +tat ay sall be ,
+Tanne full-fille we his wille . CMBENRUL-M3,3.82

Loke +tat +ge renne sui+te , yef <P_4> +ge will to +te lange liue .
CMBENRUL-M3,4.83

+tare may help +te here to . CMBENRUL-M3,4.84

+Tus sais sain benet : Mi scole wil i stablis to godis seruise .
CMBENRUL-M3,4.85

Greue +ting will i noht stablis , na noht +tat wrange es ,
CMBENRUL-M3,4.86

bot a stresce will I make in mendnis of +goure sinne , And for to yeme
charite , +tat +ter nan iuil lares by-gynne , Bot +tat haly kirke +gow
lokis . CMBENRUL-M3,4.87

Loke +tu folow +ti domnum in haly religiun ; CMBENRUL-M3,4.88

+tan sall +ti charge be liht ; CMBENRUL-M3,4.89

+tan sal +ti hert liht be , in godis trouht yef +tu it se .
CMBENRUL-M3,4.90

In mikill suetnes may +tu renne , wen +tu can knau god and his
cumandement . CMBENRUL-M3,4.91

+Tan sall tu euir_mare wone wid him in +tat suete felazscap .
CMBENRUL-M3,4.92

+Tat here liuis in clene scrift and in paine , +tai sall haue part wid
him . CMBENRUL-M3,4.93

Lauerd , +tu grante it us sua , til +ti ioy +tat we ga .
CMBENRUL-M3,4.94

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,4.95

<heading>

I . CMBENRUL-M3,4.97

QUARTUM VERO GENUS CMBENRUL-M3,4.98

<$$heading>

Foure maner of Munkis es in religiun , sais sain benet .
CMBENRUL-M3,4.100

+Te first maner +tan er +ta in cuuent es gadird for to liue in godis
pais , vndir reul of dicipline , and a abbot ouir +tam .
CMBENRUL-M3,4.101

+Te to+tir maner +tan ere ermitis and reclusis , godis wille bi +tam ane
at do . CMBENRUL-M3,4.102

+Te ermitis and +te reclusis +tat liuis sua , kenning bi-hus +tam haue
for to fezte wid +tare miht a-gain +te deuil and a-gain +tar sinne .
CMBENRUL-M3,4.103

+Tanane by-houis +tam fezte +tam ane , at god es tar best help .
CMBENRUL-M3,4.104

+Te +tridde er +ta +tat in na reul will ga , na hauis na kenning .
CMBENRUL-M3,4.105

Als es o +taim at saie als +te gold +tu may se , +tat semis gode and es
noht : CMBENRUL-M3,4.106

wen it es forht broht , +tan es it als +te lede . CMBENRUL-M3,4.107

Bi-fore +te werld er +tai semande , CMBENRUL-M3,4.108

and fals-like liues , CMBENRUL-M3,4.109

and tines +taire mede , CMBENRUL-M3,4.110

And leris o-gain god of +tar abit . CMBENRUL-M3,4.111

+tai er unwise ; CMBENRUL-M3,4.112

+tai desaiue +tam-self and o+tir ba+te . CMBENRUL-M3,4.113

+Te ferde maner er wel werre , +tat nou+ter will wone ,
CMBENRUL-M3,4.114

bot gange fra stede til stede wil +tai , noure wone lange .
CMBENRUL-M3,4.115

+tair auen wille will +tai do . CMBENRUL-M3,4.116

Glutunie luue +tai . CMBENRUL-M3,4.117

better es to be stille +tan for to speke of +tair lif .
CMBENRUL-M3,4.118

Sain benet sais : now wil I blinne to speke of +taim , for it ne helpis
noht , & speke of <P_5> +ta +tat liuis in godis ordir .
CMBENRUL-M3,5.119

+tat we wid +taim may ga , god gif it us . CMBENRUL-M3,5.120

<heading>

II . CMBENRUL-M3,5.122

ABBAS QUI PREESSE . CMBENRUL-M3,5.123

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence mustirs sain benet wat man az at be abot .
CMBENRUL-M3,5.125

+Te abot ah $for to wite what his name singnefiis and whi he beris +te
curun . CMBENRUL-M3,5.126

He $ah at mustir gode dedis and wel rede and singe in haly kirke , Gode
a-saumpil til o+tir at giue for to liue riht . CMBENRUL-M3,5.127

+Te name of +te abot bitakins fadir of maine . CMBENRUL-M3,5.128

For he sal be in haly kirke in godis stede for to lere his munkis wisdom
and charite . CMBENRUL-M3,5.129

He ah na +ting at cumande bot +tat he may haue warant at god .
CMBENRUL-M3,5.130

Rihtuis ah he at be , and of charite , Als haly writ sais , wis of
speche , Of gode cunsaile at +te nede ; CMBENRUL-M3,5.131

sua az abot at be . CMBENRUL-M3,5.132

He sal lere his cuuent +te riht gate , in godis troht +tat +tai be .
CMBENRUL-M3,5.133

Euer sal be in his +toht +tat his munkis be wel lered , +tat +tai dute
god . CMBENRUL-M3,5.134

+Te abot sal be blamid if +te cuuent mis-ga . CMBENRUL-M3,5.135

+Ta +tat ere of ille dedis , he az at chasti ham . CMBENRUL-M3,5.136

+tan sall he be quit at +te iugement , And saie wid +te prophete : "
Lauerd , I ne hid noht in me +te rehtuisnes of +te . CMBENRUL-M3,5.137

I bad +tai sulde it gete . CMBENRUL-M3,5.138

Summe hauid me in despit , wen I lered +taim , CMBENRUL-M3,5.139

And did +taire azen wille . " CMBENRUL-M3,5.140

+Tanne sais saine benet of +taim +tat ere unbuxum ogain god , +tat +tai
sall to paine ga . CMBENRUL-M3,5.141

lauerd de-fende us +tar-fra . CMBENRUL-M3,5.142

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,5.143

<heading>

ERGO CUM ALIQUIS SUSCIPIT CMBENRUL-M3,5.145

<$$heading>

Sain benet spekis yet of +ta +tat sall be abotis : CMBENRUL-M3,5.147

Gode a-saumpil sal he giue , Of twine maner at lere his discipilis in
religiun in halynes at serue god : ba+te in word and dede , ba+te to +te
simplis and till +te harde of hart . CMBENRUL-M3,5.148

His dedis az at be suilke als he cumandis til o+tir . CMBENRUL-M3,5.149

He bidis +tai sall nan euil do . CMBENRUL-M3,5.150

Yef he kennis gode till o+tir , and him-self dos noht sua , God refusis
him ; CMBENRUL-M3,5.151

Als haly writ sais : " Quare tu enarras &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,5.152

Whi telles tu mi $rihtuisnes wid +ti muz , and dos it noht ?
CMBENRUL-M3,5.153

Dicipline +tu hatid , CMBENRUL-M3,5.154

and keste mine wordes obac ; CMBENRUL-M3,5.155

+tare forgat tu +te . CMBENRUL-M3,5.156

In +ti bro+tir ehe +tu ses a stra , and noht a balke in +tin azen . "
CMBENRUL-M3,5.157

+T@ @abot az at loue nane mare +tan $o+tir for his heze kinredin , bot
he be <P_6> buxum and religius bot ilkain o+tir bro+tir .
CMBENRUL-M3,6.158

For nede he may do an bi-fore $ano+ter for reuerance , yef he ne will
noht ilkain in his ordir , als he takis . CMBENRUL-M3,6.159

Ba+te yung and alde sall halde reul ; CMBENRUL-M3,6.160

til a god haue we tan . CMBENRUL-M3,6.161

Alle sal be louid eftir an in haly religiun , bot if +tai bettir do ;
CMBENRUL-M3,6.162

For +tai az at be louid euin-like in charite , ilkain als tay ere .
CMBENRUL-M3,6.163

$Scrift sal he do on +taim , +tare sinnis for to les .
CMBENRUL-M3,6.164

Lauerd , +tu giue us sua at do , +tat we may cume to +ti regne .
CMBENRUL-M3,6.165

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,6.166

<heading>

IN DOCTRINA SUA NAMQUE CMBENRUL-M3,6.168

<$$heading>

Sain benet sais +tat abot az at lere his cuuent , als sain pol bidis :
CMBENRUL-M3,6.170

Blame +tat mis-do , CMBENRUL-M3,6.171

$and do +tam liue riht ; CMBENRUL-M3,6.172

chasti +taim fra iuil wne , als +te fadir dos his sune .
CMBENRUL-M3,6.173

+Ta +tat ere fraward and recles , Lede +taim +te straiter .
CMBENRUL-M3,6.174

+Ta +tat er buxum and meke , +tai sall haue cumfort . CMBENRUL-M3,6.175

Yef ani faute be funden in +taim , +tat it be sone mendid .
CMBENRUL-M3,6.176

He sall vmbe-+tinke hym of +te prest of sylo , +te ire of god com to ,
CMBENRUL-M3,6.177

$for he ne chastid noht hise childir , CMBENRUL-M3,6.178

bot lete +taim in +taire wille . CMBENRUL-M3,6.179

+Te gode sall he chasty wid word and amonesce +taim . CMBENRUL-M3,6.180

+Tat er prude and kene , +tai sall be chastid wid wand .
CMBENRUL-M3,6.181

For it is writen +tat man sall chasti +taim : CMBENRUL-M3,6.182

" Percute filium &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,6.183

Smite +ti sune wid +ti wand , CMBENRUL-M3,6.184

and make him meke , CMBENRUL-M3,6.185

and deliuir his saule fra paine . " CMBENRUL-M3,6.186

Lauerd , +tu deliuer us fra paine . CMBENRUL-M3,6.187

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,6.188

<heading>

MEMINISSE . CMBENRUL-M3,6.190

<$$heading>

Ay , sais sain benet , +t@ @abot az at +tinke +tat , wat his name es .
CMBENRUL-M3,6.192

+Te mare he hauis in pouste , +te mare hauis he at yelde .
CMBENRUL-M3,6.193

Abot az at be wis ; CMBENRUL-M3,6.194

greueus +ting es hym bi-taht : +Te sauls for to gete , And mony +ting
for to wite . CMBENRUL-M3,6.195

Wid summe sal tu faire speke , and summe gete wid chastiment & haue +tam
under wand , and lere +taim ilkain eftir +tar maner wid resun .
CMBENRUL-M3,6.196

+Tan +tar +te noht be calanged of +te cuuent +tat es undir +te , +tat es
giuin $+te at yeme . CMBENRUL-M3,6.197

+Tur+g +te dute +tat +tai haue +te ioy of god , may +tai ler at serue
<P_7> him to will . CMBENRUL-M3,7.198

For nan er+telike pouste az he at for-gete +te sauls +tat es bitaht him
at yeme . CMBENRUL-M3,7.199

+Te tresur of god er +tai . CMBENRUL-M3,7.200

Resun sal he yelde to god of +taim . CMBENRUL-M3,7.201

Yef +tu be of litil uresun , be of riht trouz , CMBENRUL-M3,7.202

and here what haly boke sais : CMBENRUL-M3,7.203

" Primum querite regnum dei - CMBENRUL-M3,7.204

First sal tu seke godis rengne and his rihtuisnes , CMBENRUL-M3,7.205

+tan sall +ting multeplii +te . " CMBENRUL-M3,7.206

He +tat made +tis salme sais : " wha sua liuis riht , +tai sal haue na
ned . CMBENRUL-M3,7.207

Nichil de-esse - CMBENRUL-M3,7.208

Na +ting sal faile +taim +tat wil luue god . " CMBENRUL-M3,7.209

+T@ @abot az at under-stande of +te sauls he hauis at yeme , +tat he
sall yelde resun of +taim . CMBENRUL-M3,7.210

Loke +te numbir of his cuuent : CMBENRUL-M3,7.211

Als well az he to yeme +taim als his azen saul , yef he wil be sauf .
CMBENRUL-M3,7.212

+Tan he for o+tir sal ancewer swa , CMBENRUL-M3,7.213

full riht az he at ga , And mende him in dede . CMBENRUL-M3,7.214

+Te mare he mendis his cuuent , Till mare ioy sall he be sent , til god
at take his mede . CMBENRUL-M3,7.215

Lauerd , giue us sua at liue , +tat we may yelde +te resun for us-self
at +te day of dome . CMBENRUL-M3,7.216

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,7.217

Qui uiuis & regnas . CMBENRUL-M3,7.218

<heading>

III . CMBENRUL-M3,7.220

DE ADSCIENDIS AD CONSILIUM SORORIBUS - QUOCIENS ALIQUA .
CMBENRUL-M3,7.221

<$$heading>

Sain benet mustirs in +tis sentence Hu +t@ @abes sal take hir cunsale .
CMBENRUL-M3,7.223

Scho sall calle +te cuuent to-gidir and muster +taim +te nede , and loke
whilke sais best resun , and proue +tair wit sua . CMBENRUL-M3,7.224

+Tan ilkain hauis said +tair auis , +Tat es best , halde +tar-to .
CMBENRUL-M3,7.225

Sua bidis haly writ , +tat alle be cald til cunsaile , yung and alde ,
in hali religiun ; CMBENRUL-M3,7.226

For ofte sendis god resun til +te yunge +tat $a-no+tir ne can noht .
CMBENRUL-M3,7.227

+Tat all consentis to sal nan gain-saie , bot halde it in obedience .
CMBENRUL-M3,7.228

Als te decipill es at his maister cumandement , Als sal +t@ @abes
consent til +taire cunsail +tat resun es . CMBENRUL-M3,7.229

Alle sal folihe +te maister of +te reule , ba+te yung and alde .
CMBENRUL-M3,7.230

+Tat nan folu +tair ahen wille , ne nan bere +taim sua heze , +tat tay
striue ogain +tair abes . CMBENRUL-M3,7.231

Yef any sal take discipline , gruching sal sho make nane , bot halde +te
cumandement . CMBENRUL-M3,7.232

<P_8>

+Te dedis of +t@ @abbesse sal be in +te dute of god , CMBENRUL-M3,8.234

for sho $sal be set til resun of all hir iugemens and of al hir dedis
bi-for god , +tat es rihtuis of iugement . CMBENRUL-M3,8.235

+Tar es priue cunsale be at do , +te alde sal sho calle +tar-to ;
CMBENRUL-M3,8.236

Als haly writ bidis : " Omnia fac cum consilio - CMBENRUL-M3,8.237

Alle +ting do wid cunsale , CMBENRUL-M3,8.238

and eftir +te dede sal +te noht mis-like . " CMBENRUL-M3,8.239

Lauerd , we pray +te +tat we may suilke cunsal take , +tat we may do +ti
wille . CMBENRUL-M3,8.240

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,8.241

<heading>

IV . CMBENRUL-M3,8.243

QUE SUNT IN-STRUMENTA BONORUM OPERUM .- IN PRIUMIS DOMINUM .
CMBENRUL-M3,8.244

<$$heading>

IN +tis sentence spekis sain benet , CMBENRUL-M3,8.246

and mustirs til his cuuent what +taire god dedes ah at be .
CMBENRUL-M3,8.247

First sal ye luue god wid al yure herte and wid al yure saul and wid al
yure uertu , And ti prome als ti-self ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.248

sua ah ye at do . CMBENRUL-M3,8.249

Man ah ye noht at sla ; na to licherie ga ; Na til +tifte ; Na cuuatus ;
Ne bere fals witnes , bot onur alle men ; & do til na man bot als tu
walde man did to +te ; And leue +tin ahen wille , and foliz godis wil ;
and halde +te in chastite , and iuil langingis do away ;
CMBENRUL-M3,8.250

luue fasting ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.251

+te pouir help bi-for +te ga ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.252

+tat ere nakid cla+te ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.253

wisit +tat er seke ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.254

+te dede winde CMBENRUL-M3,8.255

and til eryd bringe ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.256

Sahtil +tat ere wraze ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.257

And uncu+te be wid +te dedis of +te werld ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.258

luue god ouir alle +ting . CMBENRUL-M3,8.259

when +tu es in ire , heuin +te noht ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.260

+tar-of cumis ille ending . CMBENRUL-M3,8.261

Halde na feluni in +ti harte ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.262

Ne giue na fals pes ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.263

Charite felle +tu noht ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.264

Iuil for iuil sal tu noht do , Ne wrang to na man ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.265

Til god uengance fallis it . CMBENRUL-M3,8.266

Yef ani do yu wrang , ye sal take it in pacience , Als hali boke
cumandis . CMBENRUL-M3,8.267

Ye sal luue yure enemis & striue noht ogain +tam , ne banne +tam noht ,
bot blisce +tam and suffir iugement . CMBENRUL-M3,8.268

Ye ne sal noht be prude in herte ; Ne ete our-mikil ; ne drinc
ouir-mikil ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.269

Mesurlike slepe ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.270

Ne be noht slau , Ne gruchande ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.271

In god al yure trouz , and ful of charite ; CMBENRUL-M3,8.272

And yef ye finde ani gode in yu , till god sal +te louing be ,
CMBENRUL-M3,8.273

and grace til him giue . CMBENRUL-M3,8.274

ye sal dute <P_9> domis-day And te fir of helle ; And haue god trouz til
+te lif +tat lastes ay ; CMBENRUL-M3,9.275

And ilke day +tat ye +tinke opon +te ded ; And haue bi-fore yu +tat god
in alle stedis may se ; CMBENRUL-M3,9.276

wicke +tohtis do oway +tat to yu cume , CMBENRUL-M3,9.277

and bide +taim ga forz , CMBENRUL-M3,9.278

and quite yu wid scrift ; CMBENRUL-M3,9.279

And gete yure mu+tes fra unait wordis ; CMBENRUL-M3,9.280

haly lescun bli+telike here ; CMBENRUL-M3,9.281

And clene uresun for to lere ; CMBENRUL-M3,9.282

wid teris and wid sizing knau yure sinne , CMBENRUL-M3,9.283

sua sal ye amende yu o-gain god ; CMBENRUL-M3,9.284

leue +te wille of yure fles , CMBENRUL-M3,9.285

sua sal ye yure sinnes les . CMBENRUL-M3,9.286

+tat yure abes cumandis yu , sal ye do , CMBENRUL-M3,9.287

and be not +tar-o-gain , Als ure lauerd bad his deciplis ;
CMBENRUL-M3,9.288

his cumandement do noht oway ; CMBENRUL-M3,9.289

luues chastite CMBENRUL-M3,9.290

and kaste pride oway ; CMBENRUL-M3,9.291

loke ye do sua . CMBENRUL-M3,9.292

+te alde men sal ye onur , +te yunge luue in god ; CMBENRUL-M3,9.293

And pray for yure enmis ; CMBENRUL-M3,9.294

and for-giue +taim +taire fautes +tat mis-do ogain yu .
CMBENRUL-M3,9.295

yef ye be wrad +tan +te sune rises make pes are it ga to rest .
CMBENRUL-M3,9.296

+tat ye ne falle in na mis-hope , bot in godis trouz to liue .
CMBENRUL-M3,9.297

+tis is +t@ @entendement of haly kirke for to wirke godis wille ;
CMBENRUL-M3,9.298

+tan sal it come be-for us at +te day of dome ; CMBENRUL-M3,9.299

he giuis us ure mede . CMBENRUL-M3,9.300

God giue us +tat ilke mede +tat he hizte til hise freendis , +tat nan
eye may se , ne erin here , ne herte forz telle , what god hauis graid
til +ta +tat luues him . CMBENRUL-M3,9.301

$Luues haly kirke and yure cloister ; CMBENRUL-M3,9.302

+tanne may ye do godis wille . CMBENRUL-M3,9.303

$Lauerd , giue us sua +tir cumandemens at do , +tat we may cum to +ti
ioy ! CMBENRUL-M3,9.304

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,9.305

<heading>

V . CMBENRUL-M3,9.307

<$$heading>

IN +tis sentence spekis sain benet of obedience , what it is at saie .
CMBENRUL-M3,9.309

$+Tat es te firste mekenes : wid-uten duelling til +tat man bidis yu do
. CMBENRUL-M3,9.310

$Meke bi-houis yu be for +te luue of god , CMBENRUL-M3,9.311

for he mekid him for yu . CMBENRUL-M3,9.312

$Meke yu to godis seruise in hali kirke CMBENRUL-M3,9.313

and do yure miht +tar-to , +tat ye may fle +te fir of helle and cum til
heuin-rike ; +tare es faire at be . CMBENRUL-M3,9.314

$+Tat yure abes cumandes yu at do , +tat ye do it suiftlike ; als god
cumandis : CMBENRUL-M3,9.315

" Ob auditu &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,9.316

$+Turz +te wordis ye here o me , +tan ah ye at be meke " ;
CMBENRUL-M3,9.317

als yure maistiresse leris yu , als it sais : " Qui uos audit -
CMBENRUL-M3,9.318

<P_10>

wha sam heris yu , +tan heris me . " CMBENRUL-M3,10.320

for +ti sal ye understande +taim : CMBENRUL-M3,10.321

+tat of mekenes wil lere , +tai sal here +te cumandemens , and do als
man bidis +tam . CMBENRUL-M3,10.322

ye sal leue yure ahen propir will , and do o+tir mens .
CMBENRUL-M3,10.323

+toz ye be in labur , and yure maistires cumande yu at do a-no+tir +ting
, ye sal laie it dune , & do +tat scho bidis ; CMBENRUL-M3,10.324

+tan er ye buxum under reule . CMBENRUL-M3,10.325

ilkain sal take discipline at o+tir , als hir mastiresse +toz scho ware
, in +te dute of god . CMBENRUL-M3,10.326

ye sal wne yu til strate gate , for +te luue of god ; CMBENRUL-M3,10.327

Als ure lauerd sais : " Angustia &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,10.328

Straite gatis toke I me for to giue yu a-saumpil at liue . "
CMBENRUL-M3,10.329

ye ne sal noht liue in yure ahen wille , bot giue yu til mekenes .
CMBENRUL-M3,10.330

ye sal do o+ter mens wille , yef ye wil cum to god . CMBENRUL-M3,10.331

+Ta +tat wil liue in cuuent , +tai sal haue maistiresse ouir +tam for to
yeme +taim , +tat tay foliz +te wordis of god , CMBENRUL-M3,10.332

als he sais : " Non veni &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,10.333

I ne come not in-til er+te for to do mi wille , bot my fadirs +tat me
sent . " CMBENRUL-M3,10.334

+tat es godis wille , +tat ye foliz yure ordir , and luue til yure prome
, and do with-uten gruching +tat yu es cumandid . CMBENRUL-M3,10.335

+te mekenes +turz god ye can , CMBENRUL-M3,10.336

als he sais him-self : " Qui uos audit - CMBENRUL-M3,10.337

+tat heris in yu , +tai here me . " CMBENRUL-M3,10.338

For +ti bi-houis +te decipils do +te mekenes , als +tai haue tane to ;
CMBENRUL-M3,10.339

+tat es godis wille . CMBENRUL-M3,10.340

+toz +tu gruche , +te cumandement sal be haldin . CMBENRUL-M3,10.341

And yef +tu gruches & dos +tat ilke +ting , god es noht paid +tar-of ;
CMBENRUL-M3,10.342

for he ses ty herte , CMBENRUL-M3,10.343

& for ty hauis +tou no mede of +tat +ting +tat tu dos gruchande ;
CMBENRUL-M3,10.344

for +ti sal tu quite +te wid scrift ; CMBENRUL-M3,10.345

ye , it bi-cimis yu . CMBENRUL-M3,10.346

lauerd gif us sua meke at be , +tat we may halde ure ordir , and syne
cume til +te ioy +tat lastes ay . CMBENRUL-M3,10.347

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,10.348

<heading>

VI . CMBENRUL-M3,10.350

<$$heading>

Sain benet spekis in +tis sentence of silence , how +ge sal it halde .
CMBENRUL-M3,10.352

he bidis +tat +ge do als +te prophete sais : CMBENRUL-M3,10.353

" kepe +gour tunge , it $speke no sca+te , & +gour lippis fra iuil ,
CMBENRUL-M3,10.354

& kepe +gow fro dedly synne . " CMBENRUL-M3,10.355

for +ti sal +ge seldin speke , CMBENRUL-M3,10.356

for +ge sal speke nan unat , ne vse yow noht +tar-to .
CMBENRUL-M3,10.357

& in o+tir stede es writen : " Mors & uita &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,10.358

In +te pointe of +te tunge es lif & ded . " CMBENRUL-M3,10.359

loke whe+ter +ge wil take to . CMBENRUL-M3,10.360

+te maistires aw at speke for to lere hyr dicipils wisdom .
CMBENRUL-M3,10.361

+te decipils sal here +tar lesson & understand it . CMBENRUL-M3,10.362

<P_11>

<heading>

VII . CMBENRUL-M3,11.365

<$$heading>

Of mekenes spekis sain benet in +tis sentence , CMBENRUL-M3,11.367

& sais with hali scripture : " Omnis qui se exaltat &c. -
CMBENRUL-M3,11.368

+ta +tat heyes +tam , +tai sal be mekid ; CMBENRUL-M3,11.369

& +tai +tat mekes +tam sal be heyed . " CMBENRUL-M3,11.370

vre lord saide +tat it es pride in +taim +tat hyes +taim .
CMBENRUL-M3,11.371

Til mekenes he bides yu se , & say als +te prophete saide , when he spac
til ure lauerd with mu+te : CMBENRUL-M3,11.372

" Domine , non est &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,11.373

lauerd , my hart es not heyid in me , ne min eyen . CMBENRUL-M3,11.374

Mikil o me ne held I noht to praise me-self . CMBENRUL-M3,11.375

yef I leuid at se to mekenes & heyid me , My lauerd munde do to my saul
als +te barne +tat is done fra his modir milke ouir-arlike . "
CMBENRUL-M3,11.376

Mikyl walde he fle pride , +te prophete , als hali writ sais .
CMBENRUL-M3,11.377

Yef ye wyl be hezid , lokes +tat ye be meke , CMBENRUL-M3,11.378

And make yure stize to he heuin wid yure gode dedis , +tat iacob saz
slapande : CMBENRUL-M3,11.379

he saz gode wid his angels cume dune and vp in +te stede +tare he lay .
CMBENRUL-M3,11.380

yef ye wil se to mekenes , +tare sal ye be hezed , and gang vp wid +tat
stize . CMBENRUL-M3,11.381

+tat bitakins , +tan +tai com dune , ye sal be lazed , yef ye be prude ;
and tan +tai yede vp , +tat ye sal be hezed , yef ye to mekenes can se .
CMBENRUL-M3,11.382

+Te stize betakins vre lif here . CMBENRUL-M3,11.383

+te stize hauis tua tres , bitakins +te body and te saul , ay+tar at
helpe o+tir . CMBENRUL-M3,11.384

+te stelis by-tuixe bitakins oure gude dedis , +tat sal bere vs vp to
god . CMBENRUL-M3,11.385

+te tres betakins mekenes to goddis seruise and vnder discipline .
CMBENRUL-M3,11.386

Lauerd , we prai +te for +ti misericorde +tat we mai sua yeme +tis reul
o mekenes , In +te felazscap of +tin angels +tat we may be .
CMBENRUL-M3,11.387

amen . CMBENRUL-M3,11.388

Qui viuis & regnas deus per omnia secula . CMBENRUL-M3,11.389

Sain Benet sais +tat te dedis of mekenes ere ful suete ;
CMBENRUL-M3,11.390

sua kennis he us ; CMBENRUL-M3,11.391

And sais +tat ye sal haue firste +te dute of god , +tat ye liue sua ,
+tat ye be noght for-getil and fle evil dedis , And tat ye recorde wel
+te cumantemens of god . CMBENRUL-M3,11.392

Loke +tat ye fle sinne , yef ye wile cume to +te ioy of heuin fra +te
pines of helle ; +tat yure wyl be euir at gete yu fra sca+te ; +tat ye
gete yu fra iuil +tohtes , yure tunges fra iuil speche , yure eyen ,
yure hend , yure fete fra vnait gate , fra iuil wylle ; And scere o-way
al +te langing of yure fleis . CMBENRUL-M3,11.393

God ses al yure +toght and al yure dedis . CMBENRUL-M3,11.394

<P_12>

+te angel +tat here yemis yu dos hym at wit all yure dedis ;
CMBENRUL-M3,12.396

sua sais te prophete . CMBENRUL-M3,12.397

Alle yure +tohtes may he se ; CMBENRUL-M3,12.398

And whyder +tai wyl lede yu , resun sal ye yelde of +tam .
CMBENRUL-M3,12.399

for +ti ah ye at gete yu fra iuil +tohtes , +tat ye may cume to +te ioy
of heuin . CMBENRUL-M3,12.400

god gyf it us ! CMBENRUL-M3,12.401

amen . CMBENRUL-M3,12.402

Of propir wyl spekis sain benet ; CMBENRUL-M3,12.403

and ye sall do it als god bidis in haly writ and sais :
CMBENRUL-M3,12.404

" Et a voluntatibus - CMBENRUL-M3,12.405

Turne yu fra yure wille CMBENRUL-M3,12.406

and gete yu fra iuil ; CMBENRUL-M3,12.407

+tan may ye liue in pais . " CMBENRUL-M3,12.408

Of yure ahen wylle sall ye blinne , al +tat wil do yu sinne ;
CMBENRUL-M3,12.409

Als it is wrytyn : " Sunt vie que - CMBENRUL-M3,12.410

+te rihte gate , it es til +te lyf +tat lastes ay . "
CMBENRUL-M3,12.411

+ta gates sal ye fle +tat wicke men gas to hell by . CMBENRUL-M3,12.412

for +ti ar +tai rotyn +tat folyzed wicke wylle ; CMBENRUL-M3,12.413

hauid tay na bettir mede . CMBENRUL-M3,12.414

sua sal yure antente be , +tat god may se al yure wylle ; Als te
prophete sais . CMBENRUL-M3,12.415

He sais : " all his langing es by-fore god . " CMBENRUL-M3,12.416

for +ti es gude +tat ye doe o-way yure wicke dedis & +tohtes ;
CMBENRUL-M3,12.417

+te dede is set to chasti +taim . CMBENRUL-M3,12.418

for witte ye wele +tat god may se ba+te iuil and gude ;
CMBENRUL-M3,12.419

es noght hyd be-fore hym . CMBENRUL-M3,12.420

God lokis ut of heuin in-tyl er+te tyll hise at visit +taim ,
CMBENRUL-M3,12.421

and lokes yef man askys hym ohte . CMBENRUL-M3,12.422

For +ti lokys +tat ye do wel , +tat yure angel may do yure nedis to god
of al +tat ye haue nede . CMBENRUL-M3,12.423

And getes yu wel , yure fautes be noght musterd by-fore god .
CMBENRUL-M3,12.424

Lauerd , +tu do vs sua at liue , +tat we may deliuir vs of al vre fautes
, And si+tin to ioy cume . CMBENRUL-M3,12.425

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,12.426

+Te to+tir maner o mekenes is , sais sain benet , For to hate yure ahen
propir wyl , And fulfil noght yure langing , bot do godis wylle , and
his desire fulfille ; CMBENRUL-M3,12.427

Als him-selfe sais : " Non veni &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,12.428

I ne cume noght for to do my wille , bot my fadirs +tat me sent . "
CMBENRUL-M3,12.429

And in odyr stede sais he : " Voluntas habet &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,12.430

Wille he hauide paine at do , at haue +te curune +tat lastes ay , als it
was hys wille . " CMBENRUL-M3,12.431

Lauerd , we pray +te +tat we may sua halde +tis mekenes , +tat we may do
+ti wille . CMBENRUL-M3,12.432

amen . CMBENRUL-M3,12.433

Of +te +tridde maner o mekenes spekys sain benet to +ta in his reul wyl
be , CMBENRUL-M3,12.434

And bidis +tat ye sal be meke vnder yure abbes and do godis seruise ;
CMBENRUL-M3,12.435

Als t@ @a-postil saide of godis sune , +tat he was meke riht tyl +te ded
. CMBENRUL-M3,12.436

God giue vs +tat we may sua be . CMBENRUL-M3,12.437

amen . CMBENRUL-M3,12.438

<P_13>

Of +te fer+te maner o mekenes spekys sain benet , hu ye sal meke yu of
+tingis +tat yu +tinc es igainis yu , +tat fallis to yure ordir .
CMBENRUL-M3,13.440

yef man dos yu ani wrang , ye sal take it in pacience , and noht fle
+tar-fore , ne leue yure gode dede ; CMBENRUL-M3,13.441

Als haly boke sais : " Qui perseuerauerit &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,13.442

Wha sua wel wirkis til endyng , +tai sal be sauf of alle +ting " ;
CMBENRUL-M3,13.443

Als +te prophete sais : " Confortetur &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,13.444

ye sal haue cumfort in yure hertis of god . " CMBENRUL-M3,13.445

For +ti sal ye be of pacience , for +te luue of god , of +ting +tat es
o-ganis yure fleis ; CMBENRUL-M3,13.446

Als te prophete sais to god : " Lauerd , we ere ilke day , for +te luue
of +te , in +te dute of dede als te shep +tat ere driuin to ded ,
CMBENRUL-M3,13.447

for we folih +te ; CMBENRUL-M3,13.448

bli+telike we suffir it , CMBENRUL-M3,13.449

for we sal haue mede of +te " ; CMBENRUL-M3,13.450

Als haly writ sais : " Probasti nos &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,13.451

Lauerd , +tu prouis vs here als te siluir +tat es brind ;
CMBENRUL-M3,13.452

+tu did vs in +te lay and noy opon vre bak . " CMBENRUL-M3,13.453

for we sulde lere vnder maistires hu we sulde liue ; CMBENRUL-M3,13.454

Als te letter sais : " Inposuisti &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,13.455

Ouir vs hauis +tu don men , " +ti wylle at fulfille .
CMBENRUL-M3,13.456

+Ta +tat ere vnbuxum , +tai sal be done to paine . CMBENRUL-M3,13.457

Of +taim spekis sain paul , CMBENRUL-M3,13.458

and sais +tat tay ere fals . CMBENRUL-M3,13.459

+Tai caste +tair mantil CMBENRUL-M3,13.460

and rennis a-mise . CMBENRUL-M3,13.461

+tat bytakins , +tai sal liue here bot a while . CMBENRUL-M3,13.462

Alle be blisced +tat weris taim . CMBENRUL-M3,13.463

God giue vs sua meke at be , and sua his wille at do , +tat we his ioy
cum to . CMBENRUL-M3,13.464

amen . CMBENRUL-M3,13.465

Of +te fifte maner o mekenes spekis sain benet for to lere hys sistirs
hu +tai salle scriue +taim to +tair abbes , ba+te nunne and sistir .
CMBENRUL-M3,13.466

Loke +tat ye be buxum and scriue yu of alle +te sinnis +tat ye haue don
; CMBENRUL-M3,13.467

Als haly writ bidis yu : " Reuela domino &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,13.468

Mustir til god al +ti gate , CMBENRUL-M3,13.469

& he sal make it in pes . " CMBENRUL-M3,13.470

And in odir stede sais he : " Confitemini &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,13.471

Knaus to god al yure sinne , CMBENRUL-M3,13.472

for he es of mercy and gude at al nede . " CMBENRUL-M3,13.473

yet sais +te prophete : " Delictum meum &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,13.474

Lauerd , I mustird +te myne dedis , CMBENRUL-M3,13.475

I ne hid tam noht and alle my herte . " CMBENRUL-M3,13.476

+tan ye do +tus , +tan sale yure sinnes be for-gyvin .
CMBENRUL-M3,13.477

Lauerd giue vs grace sua for to muster vre dedis , +tat we may til his
ioy cum . CMBENRUL-M3,13.478

amen . CMBENRUL-M3,13.479

Sain Benet spekis of +te sexte de-grece of mekenes Til his sistirs ,
CMBENRUL-M3,13.480

and sais +tat ilkain sal halde +taim-selfe lest of alle odir .
CMBENRUL-M3,13.481

And al +tingis +tat man bidis yu do , +tat ye do it mekely , +tat
resunnabil es . CMBENRUL-M3,13.482

+tu sal +tinke in +ti herte +tat tu es vndinge to gode dede ;
CMBENRUL-M3,13.483

Als +te prophete saide : <P_14> " Ad nichilum &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,14.484

Til na +ting es I made bot for to doe godis wylle . CMBENRUL-M3,14.485

ic is like tyl a mere +tat beris +tat man lais on hir bak . "
CMBENRUL-M3,14.486

In what dede sam ye be , loke +tat yure +toht and +gure herte $be to god
almihten . CMBENRUL-M3,14.487

Lauerd , we praie +te , what sam we do , +tat we to +te be broht .
CMBENRUL-M3,14.488

amen . CMBENRUL-M3,14.489

Sain benet spekis yet til his sistirs of +te seuind degrece o mekenes ,
CMBENRUL-M3,14.490

and bidis +tat ye sal meke yu ilka in-til o+tir , ba+te mare & lesse ,
And saie als te prophete saide : CMBENRUL-M3,14.491

" Ego sum &c. CMBENRUL-M3,14.492

Ic es wrmis and na man , And ut-castyng o men . CMBENRUL-M3,14.493

First was ic hezed , and si+tin lazed +tur scrifte , and ouir-cumin . "
CMBENRUL-M3,14.494

sua sal ye do , CMBENRUL-M3,14.495

& tanne mai ye sai with +te prophete : " Bonum michi &c. -
CMBENRUL-M3,14.496

Lauerd , god it es to me +tat +tu mekyd me to lere +tine cumandemens .
" CMBENRUL-M3,14.497

God giue vs sua his cumandemens at lere , +tat we may cume til his
mekenes . CMBENRUL-M3,14.498

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,14.499

Of +te ahtend maner o mekenes spekis sain benet til his cuuent ,
CMBENRUL-M3,14.500

and bidis +tat ye sal do als te reul sais , And als it cumandis , And
meke vnder +tare maistres in alle +taire dedis . CMBENRUL-M3,14.501

Lauerd , ye giue vs at halde +tis mekenes til +t@ @ending .
CMBENRUL-M3,14.502

amen . CMBENRUL-M3,14.503

Sain benet spekis til his cuuent of +te nihend degrece o mekenes ,
CMBENRUL-M3,14.504

And biddis +tat ye ne sal noght vse yu tyl mekil speche .
CMBENRUL-M3,14.505

for hali writ spekis +tare-of , CMBENRUL-M3,14.506

and sais +tat naman may mikil speke , bot yef +tare be sinne i-mang ,
CMBENRUL-M3,14.507

Na naman wil prayse +taim +tat es of mikil speche ; CMBENRUL-M3,14.508

Ofte speke +tai wrang . CMBENRUL-M3,14.509

Lauerd , +tu giue vs sua vre silence to yeme , +tat we may serue +te
to-queme , in yu+te and in elde . CMBENRUL-M3,14.510

amen . CMBENRUL-M3,14.511

Of +te tende maner o mekenes spekis sain benet til his cuuent ,
CMBENRUL-M3,14.512

And bidis +tat ye ne sal noght be ouir-lazand ; CMBENRUL-M3,14.513

and +tinkes what +te prophete sais : CMBENRUL-M3,14.514

" Stultus in risu &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,14.515

+te fool turnes hys +toght in-til lazter , CMBENRUL-M3,14.516

and helpis noht . " CMBENRUL-M3,14.517

Lauerd , we pray +te +tis resun be halden with vs , CMBENRUL-M3,14.518

and send vs +ti wit . CMBENRUL-M3,14.519

AMeN . CMBENRUL-M3,14.520

Sain benet spekis yet til his cuuent Of +te ellofte maner of mekenes ,
CMBENRUL-M3,14.521

And biddis +tat ye sal mekely speke when ye speke , & wid-vten lazter ,
and o fa wordis & stabil , and speke wiselike . CMBENRUL-M3,14.522

+tan +tu sal speke to +ti felahe , <P_15> crie noght o-pon hir ,
CMBENRUL-M3,15.523

bot faire aske +tin erand , als haly boke sais : CMBENRUL-M3,15.524

" Sapiens verbis &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,15.525

+te wyse man musters hym wid fa wordis & welle sitande . "
CMBENRUL-M3,15.526

Lauerd , we pray +te Of +tis maner +tat we may be . CMBENRUL-M3,15.527

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,15.528

Saint benet spekis in +tis sentence Of +te telfete maner o mekenes ,
CMBENRUL-M3,15.529

And bidis +tat ye sal meke yure herte til alle men , ba+te to mare & les
. CMBENRUL-M3,15.530

In what labur sam ye be , +toz ye be in +te kirke , Ou+tir in +te garde
, Ou+tir in gate , Ou+tir in felde , ou+tir what labur sam ye do , +tat
ye haue yure heuidis enclind to +t@ @er+te , And +teneke on yure synnys
for to mende +taim , And tat ye be als rad als ye saz +te iugiment of
god , And +tinke what +te puplicane saide , when he laide hym by-hinde
+te dore , Als te gospel telles : CMBENRUL-M3,15.531

" Domine , non sum dignus &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,15.532

Lauerd , I ne is noght digne at lifte mine ezin til heuin for mine
sinnes . " CMBENRUL-M3,15.533

loke what +te prophete sais til oure lauerd in haly writ :
CMBENRUL-M3,15.534

" Incuruatus sum &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,15.535

Ic is lazed and mekid til alle +tat mine ezin se . " CMBENRUL-M3,15.536

When ye haue fulfild +tis al , +tire mekenes , +tan sal ye cume til
perfite charite , til +te ioy +tat god hauis graid til mannis sunis .
CMBENRUL-M3,15.537

Lauerd , graunt it vs , +tat we may sua +tir mekenes halde , +tat we to
+ti ioy may cume . CMBENRUL-M3,15.538

amen . CMBENRUL-M3,15.539

Qui viuis &c. CMBENRUL-M3,15.540

<heading>

VIII . CMBENRUL-M3,15.542

<$$heading>

IN +te tyme of wintir , +tat es fra +te Kalandis of nouembir til +te
paskys , als it is forlokyd wyd resun , +tanne sal ye ryse at +te aztend
time of +te nyght , +tat it be litil ouir midnyght ; CMBENRUL-M3,15.544

+tan es tyme at rise , als it is set , til godis seruise ; And si+tin ,
+te space eftir matins , til sauters and til haly lescuns at here .
CMBENRUL-M3,15.545

+Tat es hele of +ta +tat ere in sekenes , +tat es at say in sinne .
CMBENRUL-M3,15.546

And fra +te paskis til +te Kalandis of nouembir sal +te tyme be sua set
, +tat tare be lytil entirual , +tat ta +tat sal ga til laburs , +tat
tay may haue +te morning in +te begining of +te lyth to +tair labur .
CMBENRUL-M3,15.547

<heading>

IX . CMBENRUL-M3,15.549

<$$heading>

IN +te tyme of wintir , +tan sal +te first vers be at matins : " Deus ,
in adiutorium " ; And in +te to+ter tyme +tris +tis vers : " Domine ,
labia mea aperies " ; CMBENRUL-M3,15.551

at +te <P_16> +tridde tyme aiont wid +te " gloria patri " ; and si+tin
after +te nihend-fer+te salme wid +te antefen ou+tir wid-vten ; and
sy+tin efter +te ymne ; And tare-eftyr sexe salmis wid +te antefens .
CMBENRUL-M3,16.552

Wen +tai ere said and te verset , +t@ @abbasse saie +te benecun ;
CMBENRUL-M3,16.553

+tan sal alle site , And nym +tre lescuns , red o-pon +te lettrun ,
CMBENRUL-M3,16.554

& bytuixe +te lescuns +tre respuns ; CMBENRUL-M3,16.555

and eftir +te +tridde respun +te vers wid +te " gloria patri , "
standande alle for +te onur of +te haly trinite . CMBENRUL-M3,16.556

+te boke of +te halizes sal be red , ba+te of +te newe lay & of +t@
@alde testament , and te exposiciuns of +taim Of oure fore-fadirs +tat
ware in stabil trouz . CMBENRUL-M3,16.557

Eftir +te +tre lescuns wid +te respuns , O+tir sexe salmis sungen wid
alleluia . CMBENRUL-M3,16.558

And eftir sal@ @be redde +te lescun of +t@ @a-postils wid gude deuocion
, and te vers , and si+tin +te letanie " Kyrieleison . "
CMBENRUL-M3,16.559

And sua finise matins . CMBENRUL-M3,16.560

<heading>

X . CMBENRUL-M3,16.562

<$$heading>

FRa +te paskis til +te kalandis of nouembir sal be halden a quantite of
+te salmis , als is said bi-fore ; CMBENRUL-M3,16.564

for +te nihtis er scorte als mikil , +tat te +tre lescunis be noght red
, bot an for +ta +tre of +t@ @alde testament , wid a scort respun ; Bot
al +te to+tir finist , als it sais by-fore , +tat na nyht be lesse saide
+tan tuelue salmis , vt-takyn +te +tridde and te nihende-fer+te salme .
CMBENRUL-M3,16.565

<heading>

XI . CMBENRUL-M3,16.567

<$$heading>

IN +te sunendais es for to ryse arliker , And halde yure mesur o waking
; +tat es +tat ye syng +te sexe salmis and te vers , als is ordainde
by-fore , sitande alle wid ordir , CMBENRUL-M3,16.569

and foure lescuns red wid respuns , als es ordainde , and eftir +te "
gloria patri " ; CMBENRUL-M3,16.570

+tan sal alle stande for +te reuerence ; CMBENRUL-M3,16.571

And efter o+tir sexe salmis wid +te antefens , als by-fore , wid +te
werset ; CMBENRUL-M3,16.572

And efter o+tir foure lescuns wid +te respuns , wid +tat ilke ordir
by-fore ; CMBENRUL-M3,16.573

And tare-eftir +tre cantikils of +te prophetis , als te abes stablis ,
and songen wid " alleluia " ; si+tin +te verset , and te abes te benicun
; CMBENRUL-M3,16.574

And si+tin foure lescuns red of +te new lay wid +tat like ordir by-fore
. CMBENRUL-M3,16.575

Efter +te fer+te Respun , +t@ @abbes sal by-gynne +tis ymne : " Te deum
laudamus . " CMBENRUL-M3,16.576

When it is finist , +tanne sal +t@ @abbes by-ginne a lescun of +te
gospel wid honur and <P_17> wyd +te dute of god ; CMBENRUL-M3,17.577

+tan sal alle stande . CMBENRUL-M3,17.578

when it is red , +te o+tir sal say amen ; CMBENRUL-M3,17.579

And t@ @abbesse by-ginne : " Te decet laus " ; CMBENRUL-M3,17.580

And giue +te benicun , CMBENRUL-M3,17.581

and biginne matins . CMBENRUL-M3,17.582

+Tis ordir sal be haldin euin-like opon +te sundais als wel in sumir als
in winter , bot if it sua be , +tat ye rise ouir-late ;
CMBENRUL-M3,17.583

+tan may ye make lesse lescun ; CMBENRUL-M3,17.584

bot loke +tat it be-time yu noht . CMBENRUL-M3,17.585

Loke +tat it be endid wid al +tat fallis +tar-to . CMBENRUL-M3,17.586

And yef it fallis yu ani time , On waim +te for-getilnes es on-long sal
man take amendis for +tat faute in +te kirke . CMBENRUL-M3,17.587

<heading>

XII . CMBENRUL-M3,17.589

<$$heading>

At matins on +te feste-dais , First sal ye saie sexe salmis wid-vten
antefens , And si+tin +te fyftyd salme wid " alleluia . "
CMBENRUL-M3,17.591

wen +tai ar said , +te hundred_seuintende and +te sextid_+te_secunde ,
si+tin +te benichune , and a leschun red of +ta apocalips wid gude
deuocion , & te respun , and te ymne ambrosine , and te uerset , and te
antefen of +te gospel , & te letanie , and sent forz .
CMBENRUL-M3,17.592

<heading>

XIV . CMBENRUL-M3,17.594

<$$heading>

IN +te haly dais al sal be als we haue bi-fore saide id on +te sundais ,
Bot +tat te salmis and te antefens and te lescuns be saide als fallis to
+te day . CMBENRUL-M3,17.596

Bot te vse bi-fore be haldin . CMBENRUL-M3,17.597

<heading>

XV . CMBENRUL-M3,17.599

<$$heading>

Fra +te paskis til +te witsundai salle " alleluia " be saide wid-vten
entirual als wel at te salmis als at te respuns . CMBENRUL-M3,17.601

And fra +te witsunday til +te lentyn sal it ilke niht be saide wid +te
sexe last salmis of te nocturne . CMBENRUL-M3,17.602

Ilke sunday wid-uten lentin sal +te cantikils be said wid " alleluia , "
Matins , Prime , Vndrin , Midday , Noon ; Al be saide wid " alleluia " ;
Bot te respuns noht Bot fra paskis til +te witsunday .
CMBENRUL-M3,17.603

<heading>

XVI . CMBENRUL-M3,17.605

<$$heading>

Als te prophete sais : " Sepcies in die laudem dixi tibi -
CMBENRUL-M3,17.607

Seuin si+te opo day saie I louing to +te . " CMBENRUL-M3,17.608

Whilke haly seuin sy+te er +ta +tat sal be ful-fild wid vs o +tis maner
, yef we folih +te vris of god : CMBENRUL-M3,17.609

Of Matins , Of prime , of Vndrin , Of Midday , Of noon , Of euensang ,
Of <P_18> cumplin . CMBENRUL-M3,18.610

Of +tes times sais he : " seuin sy+te opo day saie I louing to +te . "
CMBENRUL-M3,18.611

Til +ta +tat rysis o night and wakis Sais vre lauerd : " My frende , o
niht ras I for yu CMBENRUL-M3,18.612

and wakid . " CMBENRUL-M3,18.613

For +ti sal ye giue louing til hym , in +te iugiment of hys rihtvisnes ,
at matins , at prime , at vndern , At midday , at noon , at euensang ,
at cumplin ; And o nith ryse for to loue hym . CMBENRUL-M3,18.614

<heading>

XVII . CMBENRUL-M3,18.616

<$$heading>

Now haue we deuisid +te ordir of +te salmis on +te niht , at matins .
CMBENRUL-M3,18.618

Loke we now tyl +te vris +tat folihis . CMBENRUL-M3,18.619

At prime +tre salmis by +tam ane . CMBENRUL-M3,18.620

+Te ymne of +tis ilke vre sal be saide efter +tis verse : " Deus in
adiutorium meum , " Are ye beginne te salme . CMBENRUL-M3,18.621

when +te +tre salmis ere saide , a lescun sal be red , and si+tin +te
vers , And " Kyryeleison , " and finist +te hure . CMBENRUL-M3,18.622

Vndern , Midday , Noon wid +tat ilke ordir be sungen , +tat is , wid
vers , wid ymnis +tat fallis to +taim , +tre salmis , and lescuns , and
vers , and " Kyryeleison " ; CMBENRUL-M3,18.623

And sua finise +te vres . CMBENRUL-M3,18.624

+Te salmis sal be sung wid antefens , yef +te cuuent be mikil ;
CMBENRUL-M3,18.625

And yef +tai be fa , saie it plane forde . CMBENRUL-M3,18.626

Bot euensang sal be saide wid foure salmes And te Antefens ,
CMBENRUL-M3,18.627

And efter +te salmis A lescun , & si+tin +te respun , and si+tin +te
ymne and te verset , +te cantikyl of +te gospel , and te letanie , And
sy+tin +te " Pater noster . " CMBENRUL-M3,18.628

O +tis maner sal +te vris be sent forde . CMBENRUL-M3,18.629

Cumplin sal be saide wid +tre salmis wid-vten antefens , & si+tin +te
ymne +tat fallis +tar-to , A lescun , and te verset , & si+tin "
Kyryeleison , " and te benicun , and sent forde +te vris til god .
CMBENRUL-M3,18.630

<heading>

XVIII . CMBENRUL-M3,18.632

<$$heading>

Sain Benet cumandis +tat tis +ting be haldin , +tat yure " Pater noster
" be saide hezelike at matins and at euinsang , for +te sclandir +tat
hauis ben of religiun +tat cu+te noht +taire " pater noster . "
CMBENRUL-M3,18.634

Ilkain ah at quite +tam of +tis vice . CMBENRUL-M3,18.635

Alle ah at cune +tair " Pater noster " +tat in religiun wil be als god
cumandis . CMBENRUL-M3,18.636

for ye sal vmbe-+tinke yu what resun fallis to +tis vers , when ye it
saie : CMBENRUL-M3,18.637

" Et dimitte nobis debita nostra , sicut & nos dimittimus <P_19>
debitoribus nostris . " CMBENRUL-M3,19.638

+Tan prai we +tus : " Lauerd , +tu for-giue vs ure sinnis , als we
for-giue +taim +taire fautes +tat hauis mis-don a-gain vs . "
CMBENRUL-M3,19.639

When ye here +tis vers at matins , ye sal for-giue alle men +taire
trespas for +te loue o gode . CMBENRUL-M3,19.640

And als-sua at euinsang sal +ge for-giue . CMBENRUL-M3,19.641

for +ti wil sain benet +tat it be saide hezlike , CMBENRUL-M3,19.642

for alle wrezis sal be for-giuin . CMBENRUL-M3,19.643

Lauerd giue vs sua at liue , & sua at for-giue , +tat we may ga +te riht
gate til heuin . CMBENRUL-M3,19.644

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,19.645

<heading>

XIX . CMBENRUL-M3,19.647

<$$heading>

IN +tis sentence tellis sain benet hu ye sal do yure office , when ye
cume in-to +te kyrke . CMBENRUL-M3,19.649

Ye sal true +tat god may se in alle stedis ba+te vyl & gude .
CMBENRUL-M3,19.650

Ye az at say yure seruise als ye stode by-fore god , wyd als gude
deuocyon , And +tink wat te prophete saide : CMBENRUL-M3,19.651

" Seruite domino &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,19.652

Ye sal serue god wyd ahe , & here hym wyd dowte . " CMBENRUL-M3,19.653

And in o+tir stede sais he : " Psallite - CMBENRUL-M3,19.654

ye sal singe god wyslike " ; CMBENRUL-M3,19.655

Als haly write sais : " In conspectu &c. - CMBENRUL-M3,19.656

Lauerd , I sing to +te in +te siht of +tin angels to loue +te . "
CMBENRUL-M3,19.657

loke ye do yure seruise als ye stode by-fore god almihti .
CMBENRUL-M3,19.658

And lokis , when ye sing , +tat yure herte acorde wid yure voice ;
CMBENRUL-M3,19.659

+tan sing ye riht . CMBENRUL-M3,19.660

Lauerd , +tu giue vs sua vre seruise at do , to +te felazscap of angels
+tat we may cum . CMBENRUL-M3,19.661

<heading>

XX . CMBENRUL-M3,19.663

<$$heading>

Sain benet spekis in +tis sentence til hys cuuent , CMBENRUL-M3,19.665

and kennys +tam how +tai sal make +tair prayer to god & wid what
reuerence . CMBENRUL-M3,19.666

When ye wyl aske any +ting at a ryche man in erthtt , ye aske ful
mekelike yure erande . CMBENRUL-M3,19.667

wyd mekil mare deuociun ahte ye +tanne at pray to god , of whaim +tat al
+gude cumis . CMBENRUL-M3,19.668

yure antente sal be +tat ye ne sal noght be herde for yure many wordis ;
bot scort vrisun , and wyd deuocion , and wyd terys of herte ;
CMBENRUL-M3,19.669

for +ti sal yure vrisun be breue & clene , CMBENRUL-M3,19.670

Bot yef it sua bi-tide , +tat any falle in mis-trouz ; +tan sal scho
pray gerne to god . CMBENRUL-M3,19.671

Bot te cuuent vrisun sal be breue , +tat ere in stedfast trouz .
CMBENRUL-M3,19.672

Lauuerd , we prai +te +tat we may suilke vrisun make , +tat it be to +ti
wil . CMBENRUL-M3,19.673

AmeN . CMBENRUL-M3,19.674

<P_20>

<heading>

XXI . CMBENRUL-M3,20.677

<$$heading>

IN +tis sentence spekys sain Benet of +ta +tat sal be in officis ,
CMBENRUL-M3,20.679

and bidis , yef +te cuuent be mikil , +tat tay sal be chossin +tat sal
+te offficis yeme , CMBENRUL-M3,20.680

And by-kenne it taim +tat best can serue god & te cuuent ;
CMBENRUL-M3,20.681

als t@ @abbesse cumandis taim sal +tai do . CMBENRUL-M3,20.682

+T@ @abbes ah at set nan +tar-to bot +tat scho is sikir offe , +toz +tai
be noht +te ordenest , bot +tat tay be off clene life and leel .
CMBENRUL-M3,20.683

Yef any waxe prude in hir office , man sal byd hyr amend hyr Ane tyme ,
and a-no+tir tyme , And +te +tirdde tyme . CMBENRUL-M3,20.684

Yef +tai wil noht amende sua , man sal do +tam ut of +tair bayly , And
do a-no+tir in hir stede , +tat man ses es dingne . CMBENRUL-M3,20.685

Sain benet cumandis , yef priuresse be prudde , +tat man sal do sua wid
hir . CMBENRUL-M3,20.686

Lauerd , +tu giue vs sua vre office at do and resun at yelde , +tat we
may cume til ioy +tat lastes ay . CMBENRUL-M3,20.687

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,20.688

<heading>

XXII . CMBENRUL-M3,20.690

<$$heading>

Sain Benet spekys here , CMBENRUL-M3,20.692

and kennis yu hu ye sal slape ilkain in bedde by +tam ane , al wid ordir
, als t@ @abbesse lokys taym . CMBENRUL-M3,20.693

Yef yt sua may be , alle sal lie in a hus , +tat ilkain wite of o+tir .
CMBENRUL-M3,20.694

Yef +te hus be ouyr-litel , summe sal lie in a-no+tir huse , ten ou+tir
tuenty . CMBENRUL-M3,20.695

Bot te eldest be wyd +tam for to yeme +taim . CMBENRUL-M3,20.696

& +tat ye haue liht al +te nyht brinnande . CMBENRUL-M3,20.697

Ye sal lie clad and beltyd . CMBENRUL-M3,20.698

Knyvys sal ye haue nane by yure bed , nou+tir gret ne smal .
CMBENRUL-M3,20.699

When +te bel ringis , +tat ye be redy , and ilkain help o+tir , and ga
in-to +te kyrke til godys seruise . CMBENRUL-M3,20.700

+Te nouice beddis sal be +tat nane +taire may nehe o+tir ;
CMBENRUL-M3,20.701

By-tuix +t@ @alde +tai sal lie . CMBENRUL-M3,20.702

Man sal wakin +taim faire til godis seruise . CMBENRUL-M3,20.703

Lauerd giue vs sua for to lie and sua for to rise , +tat we may haue +te
ioy +tat lastes ay . CMBENRUL-M3,20.704

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,20.705

<heading>

XXIII . CMBENRUL-M3,20.707

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence leris sain Benet hys cuuent hu +taire fautes sal be
amendid . CMBENRUL-M3,20.709

Yef any be of grete herte and wyl noht be buxum , ou+tir prud , ou+tir
ani greuching make aigain haly religuin , ou+tir +te cumandement hauis
in despit , +ta +tat ere of suilke dedis , Priuelike man sal amoneste ,
+tat tay amende +taim . CMBENRUL-M3,20.710

yef +tay wyl noht <P_21> amende sua , +tai sal be broht by-fore +te
cuuent and tare amende hir faute . CMBENRUL-M3,21.711

Yef sho wyl not yet amende , sho sal be cursyd . CMBENRUL-M3,21.712

yef sho be a fole & ful of iuil , and mas na force of +te cursing , sho
sal be berid ful wel , and do hir a-mende it sua . CMBENRUL-M3,21.713

Lauerde schilde vs fra +tat cursing ; CMBENRUL-M3,21.714

and yef ani +tar-inne be , god for his grace bringe +tam vte .
CMBENRUL-M3,21.715

AmeN . CMBENRUL-M3,21.716

<heading>

XXIV . CMBENRUL-M3,21.718

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence mustirs sain Benet Hu man sal do wid +taim +tat es in
sentence , CMBENRUL-M3,21.720

and bidis +tat man sal do +taim efter +taire faute es .
CMBENRUL-M3,21.721

Yef +te faute be litil , +tai sal make +te cuuent at wite and a-ioingne
hir +tar-eftir . CMBENRUL-M3,21.722

Wylys sho is in sentence , sho ne sal noht be in cuuent , til it be
mendid , In kirke ne salme beginne ne antefin , lescun nan rede .
CMBENRUL-M3,21.723

sho sal $ete when alle hauis etin . CMBENRUL-M3,21.724

Yef +tai ete at midday , sho salle ete at noon ; CMBENRUL-M3,21.725

yef +tai ete at noon , sho sal ete at euin , als te ordir sais , til sho
haue amendid hir faute . CMBENRUL-M3,21.726

Lauerd giue vs sua vre scrifte at do , +tat we may hys rengne cum to .
CMBENRUL-M3,21.727

<heading>

XXV . CMBENRUL-M3,21.729

<$$heading>

Sain Benet spekys in +tis sentence til +ta +tat ere fallen in greuer
faute , Hu +tai sal amende . CMBENRUL-M3,21.731

+Tai ne sal noht cum in +te kirke , na in fraitur , Bot yef +t@ @abbesse
cumande hir . CMBENRUL-M3,21.732

Nan sal comun wid hir , Bot an +tat es set til hir . CMBENRUL-M3,21.733

Wid greting sal sho do , and wyd reu+te off herte , +te penance +tat es
laid on hir ; CMBENRUL-M3,21.734

sua salle hir fautes be mendid . CMBENRUL-M3,21.735

for sain paul sais +tat +tai +tat dos wicke dedis , +tat tay giue
+tam-selffe til +te deuil , CMBENRUL-M3,21.736

for +ti ah +tai at be chastid , +tat te saule ga noht til helle .
CMBENRUL-M3,21.737

And ta +tat ere in cursing , ah at dreze +taire penance wid reu+te of
herte and be sari of +tair dede , +tat te deuil haue na pouste ouir
+taim . CMBENRUL-M3,21.738

sho sal ete al-ane suilke als t@ @abes cumandis hir ; CMBENRUL-M3,21.739

nan sal blisse hir mete . CMBENRUL-M3,21.740

Lauerd for his grace , silde vs fra suilke paine . CMBENRUL-M3,21.741

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,21.742

<heading>

XXVI . CMBENRUL-M3,21.744

<$$heading>

Sain benet sais in +tis sentence : yef any sistir ou+tir bro+tir of +t@
@ordir be sua hardi at comun wid hir , wid-vten cumandement of +t@
@abbes , wid speche , ou+tir ani <P_22> erand sendis til hir , $suilke
sentence sal sho haue . CMBENRUL-M3,22.746

Lauerd for his grace , gete vs fra +tat $setence and fra alle o+tir .
CMBENRUL-M3,22.747

<heading>

XXVII . CMBENRUL-M3,22.749

<$$heading>

In al maner , sais sain benet , sal +t@ @abbesse ta yeme of +ta +tat
mis-dose ; CMBENRUL-M3,22.751

for +te hale hauis na mister of miri , CMBENRUL-M3,22.752

Bot te seke hauis mister . CMBENRUL-M3,22.753

For +ti sal sho do als te wyse miri dos , +tat wyl hele +te seke .
CMBENRUL-M3,22.754

Priuelike sal sho sende an ordane nunne til hir +tat es in sentence at
comfor+t hir , and for to turne hir wylle til amendement and til mekenes
, and for to moneste hir +tat sho haue reu+te in herte of hir misdedis
and rigt trouz ; CMBENRUL-M3,22.755

Als sain paul +t@ @apostil sais : " Mikil charite mustirs he . "
CMBENRUL-M3,22.756

al ah at prai for hym . CMBENRUL-M3,22.757

On alle maner sal +t@ @abbes entirmete hir Al maner of sentence at
muster til hir sep , +tat nan be tint . CMBENRUL-M3,22.758

for wyte sho wel sho hauis vnder-tan +te saules at gede , And noht at
striue o-gain +taim . CMBENRUL-M3,22.759

Bot sho sal haue dute of +tat vre lauerd saide wyd +te prophete til +te
hirdis of haly kirke : " Quod crassum videbatis &c. CMBENRUL-M3,22.760

+Tat fat ere , sal ye ta ; +tat ere febyl , let ga . "
CMBENRUL-M3,22.761

+Tis is at vnder-stande , +tat so ne sal noht entirmete hir sua mikil of
+ta +tat ere strang and hale als of +ta +tat ere febyl and seke .
CMBENRUL-M3,22.762

O +tis maner sal +t@ @abbesse folize +te saumpyl of Iesu , +te gude
herde , +tat lefte in +te munte ane wane of a_hundrez sep , and yede at
seke +tis ane +tat was want . CMBENRUL-M3,22.763

When he hauid funden it , sa fain he was ; CMBENRUL-M3,22.764

he toke it on his haly schuldirs CMBENRUL-M3,22.765

and broht it til +t@ @o+tir . CMBENRUL-M3,22.766

+Tis is at vnderstande +tat he lefte in heuin +te felascap of angels and
com in-til er+te at laite +te man +tat was tint ; CMBENRUL-M3,22.767

sua mekyl pyte hauid he of hym , +tat he +turz his haly grace by-com man
& bar manes kinde til +te felazscap of angels til paradis , where-in
Adam fel for hys synne . CMBENRUL-M3,22.768

Lauerd , for +ti merci giue vs grace sua at wirke , +tat we til +tat
felazscap may cume . CMBENRUL-M3,22.769

<heading>

XXVIII . CMBENRUL-M3,22.771

<$$heading>

Sain benet sais : yef any be tane ofte in faute , and sho be cursid ,
and wyl noht yet amende , wyd smerte beting sal sho be chastyd .
CMBENRUL-M3,22.773

Yef sho wyl noht o <P_23> +tis maner a-mende , bot wid pride defende hir
dede , +tan sal +t@ @abbes do als te sleze miri : CMBENRUL-M3,23.774

wen sho hauis laid hir plaisters and hir vinemens wid faire wordis and
te medicinis of haly writ , and cursid hyr , & berid , And may noht
helpe do hir best , +t@ @abbes & al +te cuuent sal pray for hir to god ,
+tat he make hyr hale . CMBENRUL-M3,23.775

Yef sho may noht be hale of +tat maner , sho sal be done oute of +tair
felahscap ; CMBENRUL-M3,23.776

Als te apostil sais : " Auferte malum &c. CMBENRUL-M3,23.777

Do a-way +te wycke fra yu . " CMBENRUL-M3,23.778

And in o+tir stede sais he : " Infidelis &c. CMBENRUL-M3,23.779

yef so be vnleel , do hyr A-way . " CMBENRUL-M3,23.780

for a wicke shep may spille al +te flok . CMBENRUL-M3,23.781

Lauerd , yef it be +ti wille , +tu gete vs fra +tis sentence .
CMBENRUL-M3,23.782

<heading>

XXIX . CMBENRUL-M3,23.784

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence sais sain Benet +tat wha sam es +turz +taire dedis don
out of +te kirke and wil cum i-gain , At te begining sal sho haite
a-mendement of hir faute warfore sho was don ut ; CMBENRUL-M3,23.786

+tanne sal so be racaiuid , And don at te laste ende for to loke hir
mekenes . CMBENRUL-M3,23.787

Yef sho gas ut a-no+tir tyme , +tris sal sho be recaiuid sua ;
CMBENRUL-M3,23.788

bot si+tin wite sho wel es tare na cuming a-gain . CMBENRUL-M3,23.789

Lauerd for his grace defend vs fra +tis vice . CMBENRUL-M3,23.790

<heading>

XXX . CMBENRUL-M3,23.792

<$$heading>

+Tis sais sain benet , +tat ta +tat ere of elde and vnderstandis , +tai
sal haue +taire mesur ; CMBENRUL-M3,23.794

& for +ti +te barnis +tat ere yunge , +tat vnderstandis noht what paine
fallis til cursing , when +tai misdo , wid fasting ou+tir wid smerte
beriing sal +tai be chastid ; CMBENRUL-M3,23.795

+tar-+turz sal +tai be helid . CMBENRUL-M3,23.796

Lauerd , for yure pite ye gete vs fra sinne , ba+te yunge & alde .
CMBENRUL-M3,23.797

<heading>

XXXI . CMBENRUL-M3,23.799

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence sais sain benet +tat te celeresse sal be chosin of +te
cuuent , +tat sho be meke , and sobur , and noht of mekil mete , ne
prude , ne noius , ne wrangdoande , ne latte , ne wastande , Bod god
dutande ; CMBENRUL-M3,23.801

Of al +tis sal ye ta yeme . CMBENRUL-M3,23.802

Wid-vten +te cumandement of +t@ @abbes sal sho na +ting do .
CMBENRUL-M3,23.803

+Tat sho cumandis hir sal sho do , CMBENRUL-M3,23.804

<P_24>

bot sho sal $noht noy hir sistirs . CMBENRUL-M3,24.806

Par_auenture yef ani man askis hir ohte +tat es a-gain resun , sho sal
noht for +tis haue +tam in despit , ne mis-ancewer +tam , Bot mekelike
saie naie of +taire ful asking . CMBENRUL-M3,24.807

Ouir al +ting sal sho gete hir saul & +tincke what ta apostil sais :
CMBENRUL-M3,24.808

" Qui bene &c. CMBENRUL-M3,24.809

wha sua seruis wel , mede by-fore god sal he haue . "
CMBENRUL-M3,24.810

Of +te seke , and of +te barnis , And of gestys , and of +te pouir sal
sho take yeme eftir hir miht . CMBENRUL-M3,24.811

For wite ye wel +tat sho sal yelde resun o domes-day of alle hir dedis .
CMBENRUL-M3,24.812

+Te vassels +tat fallis til hir mester sal sho yeme als onestelike als
te vassels +tat ere halized obute +t@ @auter . CMBENRUL-M3,24.813

for-getil ah sho noht to be , Ne ouir-mikil haue Ne ouir-mikil waste of
+tat fallis to +te huse , Bot alle +tingis do wid mesur , als t@ @abbes
cumandis hir . CMBENRUL-M3,24.814

Ouir +tat sho be buxum . CMBENRUL-M3,24.815

And when sho hauis noht at giue , +tat sho anscewer +taim faire , als
hali writ bidis : CMBENRUL-M3,24.816

" Sermo bonus &c. CMBENRUL-M3,24.817

God speche es better +tan grete gifte " ; CMBENRUL-M3,24.818

And do +tat t@ @abbes cumandis hir ; CMBENRUL-M3,24.819

and tat sho defendis do noht . CMBENRUL-M3,24.820

Sho sal grai+te +te cuuent mete wid-vten greuching and wid-vten duelling
, +tat tay be noht sclaundird ; And +tincke what vre lauerd sais in +te
gospel of +taim +tat sclandirs any of his barnis : CMBENRUL-M3,24.821

" him ware wel bettir , " he sais , " +tat a milnestane ware a-bute his
hals in +te deppest of +te se . " CMBENRUL-M3,24.822

Yef +te cuuent be mikil , +te celeresse sal haue a felaze at helpe hir ,
+tat sho wid gode wil may do hir labur +tat es bitaht hir , +tat sho may
do in time +tat sho ah for to do , +tat nan be $wrethid ne noid in godis
hus . CMBENRUL-M3,24.823

Lauerd , for +ti merci giue hir sua hir office at do , +tat so may haue
+tanc o god and of +te cuuent . CMBENRUL-M3,24.824

<heading>

XXXII . CMBENRUL-M3,24.826

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence cumandis sain Benet +tat t@ @abbesse sal ta yeme of
alle +ting +tat fallis til +te hus , CMBENRUL-M3,24.828

and of vstilement and o+tir +tingis sal sho puruaie of lif and ded +tat
so be sikir , and cumande til ilkain +tat sho ses ned at do .
CMBENRUL-M3,24.829

Sho sal haue +tam enbreuid , alle +tingis +tat fallis til +te hus , for
to wite what sho recauis and what sho giuis , when sho sal remue +tat
ere in officis . CMBENRUL-M3,24.830

yef ani haue ille <P_25> wroht wid +te +ting +tat was bitaht +taim at
yeme , sho sal be apreuid ; CMBENRUL-M3,25.831

yef sho wil noht mend , +te iugiment sal sho suffir .
CMBENRUL-M3,25.832

Lauerd , for +ti merci giue vs wel at yeme +tis sentence And alle +te
o+tir . CMBENRUL-M3,25.833

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,25.834

<heading>

XXXIII . CMBENRUL-M3,25.836

<$$heading>

Of propirte spekis sain Benet , CMBENRUL-M3,25.838

and sais +tat of alle o+tir vices sal man fle +tis , +tat nan be sua
hardy , +tat tay o-way do ne giue na +ting wid-vten leue of +t@ @abbesse
, ne +tat nan haue in propirte , boke ne tabils , ne nan o+tir +ting ;
CMBENRUL-M3,25.839

for nan may haue +tair ahen body at hys wylle ne at tair pouste .
CMBENRUL-M3,25.840

+tai sal haue alle +tingis at t@ @abbes +tat tay haue nede of .
CMBENRUL-M3,25.841

+tai sal haue na +ting bot +tat t@ @abesse deliuirs taim .
CMBENRUL-M3,25.842

+Tat ane hauis sal be comun til alle ; CMBENRUL-M3,25.843

Als haly boke cumandis : nan sal calle +tat tay haue +tair azen .
CMBENRUL-M3,25.844

Yef it be an +tat delitis tam in +tis vice , And wil not do it , Man sal
saie til hir an time , and a-no+tir time , and te +tridde .
CMBENRUL-M3,25.845

Yef so wil noht amende sua , Man sal do hir amende on o+tir maner .
CMBENRUL-M3,25.846

Lauerd , for +ti pite defende vs fra +tis vice . CMBENRUL-M3,25.847

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,25.848

<heading>

XXXIV . CMBENRUL-M3,25.850

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence cumandis sain Benet +tat t@ @abbes sal do als t@
@a-postils did at te begining of cristiante : CMBENRUL-M3,25.852

+tai departid +tair +ting til +ta +tat hauid nede . CMBENRUL-M3,25.853

" +tai departid , " als hali writ sais , " til ilkain , als tay hauid
ned . " CMBENRUL-M3,25.854

sua salle +t@ @abbes do . CMBENRUL-M3,25.855

sho salle noht loke what man he es and of what kinredin , Bot te sekenes
of ilkain , and do +tam efter +tat tay haue ned . CMBENRUL-M3,25.856

til god sal sho yelde grace , and noht be sari off hir giffte +tat so
hauis giuin til +ta +tat hauis mare nede +tan sho . CMBENRUL-M3,25.857

Tyl +te nedful sal sho meke hir for in ire sekenes , And noht bere hir
heze for +te helpe +tat god hauis lent hir ; CMBENRUL-M3,25.858

And o +tis maner sal al liue in pais . CMBENRUL-M3,25.859

Ouir al +ting sal +tai loke +te wicke +tat ere imangis +taim ;
CMBENRUL-M3,25.860

and yef +tare be ani funden , wid smerte beriing sal +tai be amendid .
CMBENRUL-M3,25.861

Lauerd , for +ti merci giue vs miht at fle al iuils .
CMBENRUL-M3,25.862

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,25.863

<heading>

XXXV . CMBENRUL-M3,25.865

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence bidis sain Benet +tat ye sal serue sua , +tat nan be
quit off +te seruise of +te kichin , Bot yef +tai be acumbird wid
sekenes ou+tir wid odir laburs ; CMBENRUL-M3,25.867

for <P_26> man sal haue grete mede for +tat seruise .
CMBENRUL-M3,26.868

Til +ta +tat ere febil sal ye finde helpe and cumfor+t , +tat tay ne
serue noht wid ouir-mikil noye . CMBENRUL-M3,26.869

Al sal haue comfort eftir +tat +te cuuent is mikil , and efter +tai ere
in ese to serue . CMBENRUL-M3,26.870

Yef +te cuuent be mikil , +te celeresse sal be quit of +te seruise of
+te kichin , And ta +tat ere aumbird wid laburs . CMBENRUL-M3,26.871

+Tis o+tir sal serue al wid luue . CMBENRUL-M3,26.872

+Ta +tat ere out of +taire wuke sal opo +te setirday ma +te maunde , and
waisse +te tuailis +tat tay sal wipe +taire hend opon and taire fete .
CMBENRUL-M3,26.873

+Ta +tat ga ut of +te wuke , and te to+tir +tat cumis in , sal waisse
+te o+tir fete at te maunde . CMBENRUL-M3,26.874

+te vassels +tat tay serue wid , sal +tai ta yeme to , & yelde +tame til
+te celeresse clene and hale ; CMBENRUL-M3,26.875

and sho sal loke what sho yeldis & what sho recaiuis .
CMBENRUL-M3,26.876

+Ta +tat serue o +te kichin sal miste bi-fore +te mikil mete bred ,
butter , +tat tay may serue wid-vten gruching and wid-vten noy .
CMBENRUL-M3,26.877

And so +tat gas vt of +te wuke , and so +tat cumis in , sal recaiue +te
benichun at morne at matins . CMBENRUL-M3,26.878

Sho +tat gas ut sal say +tis vres +tris , by-for +t@ @auter , and al +te
cuuent eftir : " Benedictus es . " CMBENRUL-M3,26.879

+tan so hase rechaiuid +te benichun , +tan sal +te to+tir , +tat sal
serue eftir hir , cume by-fore +t@ @auter and saie +tis vers +tris , and
alle +te cuuent eftir : " Deus , in adiutorium " ; And si+tin rechaiue
+te benichun , +tat god giue hir grace at serue +taim to pay .
CMBENRUL-M3,26.880

Lauerd , for +ti grace giue vs sua at serue , +tat we may $haue vre mede
of +te . CMBENRUL-M3,26.881

<heading>

XXXVI . CMBENRUL-M3,26.883

<$$heading>

Of +te seke spekis sain benet in +tis sentence , CMBENRUL-M3,26.885

And cumandis ouir al +ting +tat man sal ta yeme of +taim , +tat tay be
serued als it ware god him-selfe . CMBENRUL-M3,26.886

For he sal say on domis-day : " I was seke , CMBENRUL-M3,26.887

ye visit ; CMBENRUL-M3,26.888

+tat ye did til an of myne , ye did it me . " CMBENRUL-M3,26.889

Bot tay sal recaiue in +te onur of god +te seruise +tat man dos tam ;
CMBENRUL-M3,26.890

+tai ne sal noht +turz +tair surfait noy +taire sistirs +tat seruis tam
. CMBENRUL-M3,26.891

Bot yef it sua be , +tat taire iuil be sua mikil , man sal suffir +taim
+te mare and be of pacience , CMBENRUL-M3,26.892

for of +taim sal man haue grete mede of god . CMBENRUL-M3,26.893

+T@ @abbesse tal ta yeme of +te seke +tat tay haue na defaute .
CMBENRUL-M3,26.894

A hus sal +tai haue bi +tam ane . CMBENRUL-M3,26.895

And +tat so +tat sal serue +tam dute gode , CMBENRUL-M3,26.896

and do hir miht for to <P_27> serue +tam wel and wid luue .
CMBENRUL-M3,27.897

+Tai sal haue at ete alle timis +tat tay haue mister of ;
CMBENRUL-M3,27.898

bot til +te hale , +tat mai wel ete , and til +te yunge sal man giue
latter . CMBENRUL-M3,27.899

+Te seke +tat ere febil sal man giue fleis at ete at couir +tam wid-al .
CMBENRUL-M3,27.900

+T@ @abbes sal do hir antente to +te seke , +tat tay haue na defaute for
+te forgetilnes of +te celeeresse and of +te fermerier ;
CMBENRUL-M3,27.901

For sho sal a-mende al at tay misdo . CMBENRUL-M3,27.902

Lauerd , for +ti merci gete vs fra alle iuils of body & sal .
CMBENRUL-M3,27.903

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,27.904

<heading>

XXXVII . CMBENRUL-M3,27.906

<$$heading>

Of +te alde & +te barnis spekis sain benet in +tis sentence ,
CMBENRUL-M3,27.908

And sais +tat taire elde prais +tat man sal giue +tam charite , als te
reule es set to +taire mete ; CMBENRUL-M3,27.909

bot mikil pite birs man haue , +tat tay sal ete ar +te o+tir .
CMBENRUL-M3,27.910

<heading>

XXXVIII . CMBENRUL-M3,27.912

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence cumandis sain benet +tat te lescun sal noht faile at
mete . CMBENRUL-M3,27.914

O +tis maner sal +tis be stabilist , +tat nan ta +te boke at rede bot
sho +tat sal rede al +te wuke ; CMBENRUL-M3,27.915

sho sal beginne o-po +te sunday . CMBENRUL-M3,27.916

sho sal cum by-fore +t@ @auter o +te sunday efter +te messe and say +tis
verse , and al +te cuuent eftir : " Domine , labia mea aperies , " And
recaiue +te benediccion , +tat gete hir fra pride . CMBENRUL-M3,27.917

+Tai sal halde silence at te borde , +tat na uoice be herde bot of hir
+tat redis . CMBENRUL-M3,27.918

+Ta +tat serue sal ta yeme til +tam +tat etes , +tat tay haue na defaute
of +tat tay sal haue , wharfore +tai make na noise . CMBENRUL-M3,27.919

Yef wil aske ani +ting , sho salle make sinis and noght speke .
CMBENRUL-M3,27.920

Nane sal speke of na demande in +te lescun , whar-of noise may rise .
CMBENRUL-M3,27.921

Bot t@ @abbesse , yef sho wille , sho may breuelike , a sentence for to
amende . CMBENRUL-M3,27.922

sho +tat sal rede sal miste ay litil , be-fore sho rede , +tat sho ne be
not ouir-mikil engreuid . CMBENRUL-M3,27.923

Ye sal ordain nane for to rede bot +tat can do +te ofice , +tat may pai
al +tat it heris . CMBENRUL-M3,27.924

Lauerd , for his grace , he giue vs sua for to rede and singe , +tat we
may pai hym and al +tat vs heris . CMBENRUL-M3,27.925

<heading>

XXXIX . CMBENRUL-M3,27.927

<$$heading>

Of +te mesur of +te mete spekis sain benet in +tis sentence ,
CMBENRUL-M3,27.929

And sais +tat it es inoh , twane maner of <P_28> potage al +te wuke in
+te tweluemonez , what tyme sam ye ete , at midday ou+tir at none , +tat
tay +tat may noght ete of +te tane , lat +taim ete of +te to+tir .
CMBENRUL-M3,28.930

+tir tua mese sal +tai ilke day haue . CMBENRUL-M3,28.931

Yef +tai haue whar-of , +te +tridde may +tai haue of frute ou+tir of
o+tirkin felazscap . CMBENRUL-M3,28.932

A lafe of brede mesurde es inoh o day ba+te at none and at euyn .
CMBENRUL-M3,28.933

Yef +tai sal supe , +te celeres sal take +te +tridde parti of +te lafe &
laie it by-fore +tam at te super . CMBENRUL-M3,28.934

Yef t@ @abbes ses +tai haue mikil trauaile , yef sho wil , scho may
mende +tam ; CMBENRUL-M3,28.935

Bot gete +tar be nane owtrage , +tat nane be costiue , ne nane o+tir wil
, +turz sufait o mete . CMBENRUL-M3,28.936

for na +ting es als mikil igain cristen men als gluterie ;
CMBENRUL-M3,28.937

sua sais vre lord : " Videte &c. CMBENRUL-M3,28.938

Loke yure hertis be noght noyd +turz gluterie o mete ne drinke . "
CMBENRUL-M3,28.939

Til barnis sal man noht giue sua mikil als til +t@ @alde for to gete
mesur ouir_al . CMBENRUL-M3,28.940

Of +te beste +tat beirs foure fete sal nane ete bot ta +tat ere seke and
febil . CMBENRUL-M3,28.941

Lauerd , for +ti merci giue vs sua mesur-like at ete , +tat we alle wils
o bodi & saul mai fle . CMBENRUL-M3,28.942

<heading>

XL . CMBENRUL-M3,28.944

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence spekis sain Benet Of +te mesur o drink ,
CMBENRUL-M3,28.946

and sais +tat ilke man hauis propir gifte o god in al maner ;
CMBENRUL-M3,28.947

And for +ti stabelis sain Benet with mikil doute +te mesur of o+tir mens
liflade . CMBENRUL-M3,28.948

Na-for-+ti , for +te febilnes of +ta +tat may noht for-bere , hauis he
for-lokid til ilkain a mesur of wyne of +te day , Ou+tir suilke als t@
@abbesse may furde ; CMBENRUL-M3,28.949

+te mesur es callid eminan ; CMBENRUL-M3,28.950

+tai ne mai noht haue bot mesurlike anis +tar-of . CMBENRUL-M3,28.951

+Ta +tat may be of abstinens , mede of god sal +tai haue .
CMBENRUL-M3,28.952

Yef +tam by-houid mare ou+tir for trauaile ou+tir for hete , In +te
forloking of +t@ @abbesse sal it be . CMBENRUL-M3,28.953

Bot sho sal loke +tat +tai ne be not ouir-ful ne drunkin .
CMBENRUL-M3,28.954

We rede +tat wyne , ne na drinke +tat wil make man drunkin , ne feris
noht til men of religuin . CMBENRUL-M3,28.955

for +ti +tat te tyme is sua +tat ye ne mai noht al for-bere , for +ti
consentis sain Benet +tat ye drinke ay litil , bot noht sua mikil +tat
ye be ful ; CMBENRUL-M3,28.956

for ouir-mikil drinke dose man ofte do folie . CMBENRUL-M3,28.957

Yef it be ani +tat dar noht drinke hir mesur , +tai sal grace god and
gruche noht . CMBENRUL-M3,28.958

Ouir alle +tinges loke ye <P_29> ne be noht gruchande of na +ting .
CMBENRUL-M3,29.959

Lauerd , for +ti pite gete vs fra gruching and fra ouir-mikil drinke ,
sua +tat we mai haue +ti grace . CMBENRUL-M3,29.960

<heading>

XLI . CMBENRUL-M3,29.962

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence sais sain Benet +tat ye sal ete twise of +te day ilke
day fra +te haly paskis til +te witsunday ; CMBENRUL-M3,29.964

and si+tin til +te hali rodis dai in semtembir , Al +te wukis in +te
summir , sal ye faste ilke wuke tua dais , +te wedenisdai and te fryday
, CMBENRUL-M3,29.965

bot yef ye haue mikil trauaile , ou+tir feeste-day , ou+tir it be mikil
hete ; +tan relesses sain Benet yu +te fasting of +ta tua dais , Als t@
@abbesse forlokis . CMBENRUL-M3,29.966

sua sal sho ordain and a-tempir al hir +tingis , +tat +te saulis of hir
disciplis mai sauf be ; And at tay do wid-vtyn gruching +tat tay sal do
. CMBENRUL-M3,29.967

Fra +te haly rodes day til +te lentyn sal ye fast ilk day , bot if it be
for heze feste . CMBENRUL-M3,29.968

Fra +te beginning of lentyn til +te paskis sal ye ete eftir euensang ,
bot it sal be sua , +tat yu ne +tarf na candil , bot al be don by day
alle tyme , ba+te when ye faste and when ye ete tuis .
CMBENRUL-M3,29.969

sua sal +te time be sett . CMBENRUL-M3,29.970

lauerd , for +ti grace giue vs sua at be of discreciun ba+te of fastyng
and of mete , +tat we mai be sauf . CMBENRUL-M3,29.971

<heading>

XLII . CMBENRUL-M3,29.973

<$$heading>

Of silence eftir cumplin spekis sain Benet in +tis sentence ,
CMBENRUL-M3,29.975

and bidis +tat ye sal do yu payne at halde silence eftir cumplin .
CMBENRUL-M3,29.976

yef +te cuuent etis tuise , Als tite as tay rise fra +te supere , +tan
sal +tai site wid ordir in +te cloistir . CMBENRUL-M3,29.977

when colaciun ringis , +tan salle alle asembil in +te chapitir .
CMBENRUL-M3,29.978

and sal rede +te lescun of +te halizis , ou+tir of haly writ , for@ @to
comfor+t +taim +tat it heris . CMBENRUL-M3,29.979

In +tat tyme sal ye noht rede +te boke of +te kingis ,
CMBENRUL-M3,29.980

for nan vnait sal be herde +tat tyme for +ta +tat ere of febil +toht ;
CMBENRUL-M3,29.981

In o+tir tyme mai it be red . CMBENRUL-M3,29.982

yef it be fasting day , +tai sal haue gode entirual , CMBENRUL-M3,29.983

And when colaciun ringis , Alle +tat +te belle heris ga til colaciun ;
And si+tin eftir at cumplin ; CMBENRUL-M3,29.984

si+tin be nan sua hardy to speke . CMBENRUL-M3,29.985

yef ani es tan wid-al , +tat hauis brokin silence eftir cumplin , smerte
correccion salle man take of hir . CMBENRUL-M3,29.986

yef gestis cume , and t@ @abbesse cumandis at <P_30> speke , +tat tare
be nane vtrage . CMBENRUL-M3,30.987

Lauerd , for +ti merci giue vs miht at halde +tis sentence als sain
Benet cumandis . CMBENRUL-M3,30.988

<heading>

XLIV . CMBENRUL-M3,30.990

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence spekis sain Benet of +ta +tat cumis late til +tair
seruise o god and til +te borde . CMBENRUL-M3,30.992

Als tite als te belle es herde , ilkain sal leue +te werke +tat es in
+taire hende , and rinne hastelike til +te ure of god , +tat na man may
telle foly to +tam . CMBENRUL-M3,30.993

For na +ting sal man leue +te seruise o god . CMBENRUL-M3,30.994

+ta +tat cumis noht at te begining of matins byfore +te " gloria patri "
of +te " Venite , " sal noht ga intil +taire stalle , CMBENRUL-M3,30.995

bot sho sal go til +te grece byfore +te autir , +tat t@ @abbes mai se
and al +te cuuent ; CMBENRUL-M3,30.996

+taire sal sho be til +t@ @abbes giue hir leue at gange intil hir stalle
. CMBENRUL-M3,30.997

And for +ti wil sain Benet +tat ta +tat cume late ga til +te grece ,
+tat tay haue shame of +tair faute and sua salle be amendid .
CMBENRUL-M3,30.998

for suilke mai it be +tat duellis , +tat +tai wil slape , Ou+tir +tinke
vnait , whan +tat +te deuil mai finde achesun in +tam ;
CMBENRUL-M3,30.999

for +ti shal sho ga to +te grece for to amende hir faute , +tat sho
amende hir si+tin forward . CMBENRUL-M3,30.1000

At te huris alssua , yef sho ne cumis noht byfore +te " gloria patri "
of +te first salme , sho sal ga to +te grece and cum noht in hir stalle
, are +t@ @abes cummande hir ; CMBENRUL-M3,30.1001

Bot sho sal haue nane o+tir penance for +tat faute .
CMBENRUL-M3,30.1002

At te verse byffore +te mete sal alle be asembild at te borde ;
CMBENRUL-M3,30.1003

sho +tat is noht tarat , for hir neccligence man sal say ane tyme , and
ano+tir tyme . CMBENRUL-M3,30.1004

Yef sho wylle noht amende , sho ne sal noht ete wyd +te cuuent , bot by
hir ane , and +tarne hyr part of +te drinke , suilke als te o+tir haue ,
til sho haue amendid hir faute . CMBENRUL-M3,30.1005

Alssuilke sal sho haue +tat es fra +te vers eftir +te mete ;
CMBENRUL-M3,30.1006

for +ti es it forlokid , +tat ta +tat er noht at te vers sal ga til +te
grece bifore +te dese at say hir verse and aske leue at ete ;
CMBENRUL-M3,30.1007

si+tin mai sho ga at ete in hir ordir . CMBENRUL-M3,30.1008

Nan sal ete ne drink bot at te tyme +tat o+tir ete , bot yef it be wyd
leue . CMBENRUL-M3,30.1009

Yef +t@ @abbesse offirs ani +ting til ani of hir sisturs and sho refuse
it , when sho walde haue it , man salle noght giue it hir , Til sho haue
amendid hir faute . CMBENRUL-M3,30.1010

Lauerd , for +ti grace giue vs sua at yeme +tis sentence and al +te
o+tir , +tat we til +te ioy of paradise mai cume . CMBENRUL-M3,30.1011

AmeN . CMBENRUL-M3,30.1012

<P_31>

<heading>

XLIV . CMBENRUL-M3,31.1015

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence kennis sain Benet vs what amendement +tai sal do +tat
es in cursing , +tat es don owte of +te kirke for greue faute and owte
of +te fraitur . CMBENRUL-M3,31.1017

At ilke owre , when +te belle ringis , sal sho lie by-fore +te kirke
dore til alle +te cuuent be cumen in , And si+tin rise vp and obied
wid-vten +te kirke dore to +te vre be sungen . CMBENRUL-M3,31.1018

When +te cuuent cumes forz owte of +te kirke , sho sal lie dun agayne
by-fore +te dore til +tai be passid . CMBENRUL-M3,31.1019

+tus sal sho do ilke day til +t@ @abbesse bidde hir leue .
CMBENRUL-M3,31.1020

When sho sal be asoilid , sho sal cume in-til +te chapitir and take hir
veine by-fore +t@ @abbesse and crie hir merci . CMBENRUL-M3,31.1021

When +t@ @abes asoiles hir , sho sal falle til hir fete , & by-twixe tua
and tua o knees , and take hir veine . CMBENRUL-M3,31.1022

+Tan salle sho site +tar +t@ @abbes cumandis hir , bot noht in hir ordir
; CMBENRUL-M3,31.1023

bot sho ne salle noht by-ginne in kirke antefin ne Respun , ne rede
lescun , Bot yef +t@ @abbes cumande hir . CMBENRUL-M3,31.1024

Eftir " Benedicamus " at ilke vre sal sho take hir veine on knes , whare
sum sho standes in +te quer . CMBENRUL-M3,31.1025

+tis sal sho do ay til +t@ @abbes cumande hir at leue of +tat penance .
CMBENRUL-M3,31.1026

In +te kirke sal sho amende o +tis maner : CMBENRUL-M3,31.1027

At ilke vre , when +tai say " Kirieleison , " sal sho take hir veine
by-fore +te auter at te grece , & ligge +tare til +te " Benedicamus " be
saide . CMBENRUL-M3,31.1028

sua sal sho do til +t@ @abbes asoile hir , And recaiue +te benecun .
CMBENRUL-M3,31.1029

Lauerd , for +ti pite giue vs sua at mende vre fautis , +tat we may haue
+te benicun . CMBENRUL-M3,31.1030

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,31.1031

<heading>

XLV . CMBENRUL-M3,31.1033

<$$heading>

Sain benet cumandis in +tis sentence +tat ta +tat faile in +te kirke at
te minning of +te salmes , Ou+tir of +te Respuns , Ou+tir Antefens ,
Ou+tir lescuns , At te er+te sal sho take hir veine by-fore +tam al .
CMBENRUL-M3,31.1035

yef sho wil noht do it , Greuer correccion sal man take of hir ,
CMBENRUL-M3,31.1036

for sho walde noht with mekenes amende hir faute . CMBENRUL-M3,31.1037

+Te barnis sal man chasty wid wande for suik mis-dede .
CMBENRUL-M3,31.1038

Lauerd , yef it be +ti wil , giue vs welle at halde +tis sentence .
CMBENRUL-M3,31.1039

<heading>

XLVI . CMBENRUL-M3,31.1041

<$$heading>

Sain Benet sais : +ta +tat ere in laburs , In kichin ou+tir in calgard ,
in gard ou+tir wid-vten in ani labur , and sho trespasse , Tinis +tingis
o+tir brekis , yef sho mis-do , <P_32> o +tis maner sal sho amende :
CMBENRUL-M3,32.1043

sho sal cum in-til +te chapitir bi-fore alle +te cuuent and take al hir
veine , And knaw hir faute wid hir azen wille . CMBENRUL-M3,32.1044

Yef sho hydes it , and a-no+tir sais hir owte , Greuer correccion sal
man take of hir +tan {man_shall_take_if} sho hauid mustird it wid hir
azen wille . CMBENRUL-M3,32.1045

Yef it be priue sinne +tat wille a-noy +te saul , sho sal ga priuelike
til +t@ @abbesse and schriue hir , Ou+tir til a preste +tat kan hele hir
of hir sinne . CMBENRUL-M3,32.1046

Lauerd for his grace giue vs sua at schriue vs , and sua at mend vre
sinne , +tat we til his rengne mai ga . CMBENRUL-M3,32.1047

<heading>

XLVII . CMBENRUL-M3,32.1049

<$$heading>

Sain Benet cumandis in +tis sentence +tat +t@ @abbes sal take gude yeme
+tat +te vris of godis seruise be finist right ba+te day and niht .
CMBENRUL-M3,32.1051

Ou+tir sho hir-selfe sal finise +tam , Ou+tir set a nunn in hir stede
+tat wil ententiuelike do +te office o god . CMBENRUL-M3,32.1052

+Te salmes and te antefens sal +tai biginne eftir hir wid ordir .
CMBENRUL-M3,32.1053

Nane sal be don til +tat offfice bot +tat may singe and rede welle ,
+tat alle +tat heris be edefied +ter-of . CMBENRUL-M3,32.1054

sho +tat +t@ @abbes cumandis +tis office , wid mekenes sal sho do it ,
And stabelike wid-vten pride , And wid +te dowte of god .
CMBENRUL-M3,32.1055

Lauerd , for +ti merci giue vs sua for to singe and rede , +tat we mai
do +ti wille . CMBENRUL-M3,32.1056

<heading>

XLVIII . CMBENRUL-M3,32.1058

<$$heading>

Of +te trauaile spekis sain Benet in +tis sentence , CMBENRUL-M3,32.1060

and sais +tat vnait sete es il to +te saule . CMBENRUL-M3,32.1061

For +ti sall ye trauaile times , And in +te times at lescuns , als it es
ordaind . CMBENRUL-M3,32.1062

Fra +te paskis til +te Mihelmesse , when matins es done til heze vndirn
sal ye wirke , ilke day when time es , +tat es nede to do .
CMBENRUL-M3,32.1063

Fra vndirn to midday at lescuns . CMBENRUL-M3,32.1064

Eftir midday , when +tai haue etin , sal ye reste in yure bedde alle wid
silence . CMBENRUL-M3,32.1065

Yef any wille +tat tyme loke lescun , loke +tat sho rede sua , +tat sho
ne noy noht +te o+tir . CMBENRUL-M3,32.1066

Noon sal be rungen by_tyme , And si+tin wirke til euensang .
CMBENRUL-M3,32.1067

Yef +tai haue mikil at do , corn at gadir and o+tir laburs at do , +tai
salle noht gruche for +ti ; CMBENRUL-M3,32.1068

for +tan liue ye riht , yef ye liue wid +te labur or yure hende , Als
haly men did bi-fore yu , & t@ @a-postils ; CMBENRUL-M3,32.1069

bot mesurlike sal ye wirke for +ta +tat ere febil . CMBENRUL-M3,32.1070

<P_33>

Fra +te feeste of +te Mih+tel til +te lentin , when prime is sungen til
vndern salle ye studie in lescuns . CMBENRUL-M3,33.1072

When noon ringis , ilkain sal lay downe +tat es in +taire hende , and ga
til +te kirke ; And erftir mete til lescuns ou+tir salmes .
CMBENRUL-M3,33.1073

In lentin , fra prime til heze vndern sal ye entende yure lescun , And
sy+tin wirke til noon . CMBENRUL-M3,33.1074

At te bigining of lentyn sal be broght in-til +te chapitur alle +te
bokis , CMBENRUL-M3,33.1075

and ilkain take +taris CMBENRUL-M3,33.1076

and rede it ouir . CMBENRUL-M3,33.1077

+T@ @abbesse sal loke a simpil nunne ou+tir tua for to ga imangis taim
atte timis +tat tay sal saie for to loke +tat nane site vnait , And for
to loke wilke attendis mare til vnait +tan til hir lescun .
CMBENRUL-M3,33.1078

+Ta +tat ere funden suilke , for +ti +tat tay do iuil til +tam-selfe and
til o+tir als-sua , +tai sal be warnid ane tyme , and a-no+tir time .
CMBENRUL-M3,33.1079

Yef sho wil noht a-mende , Man sal take suilke amendis of hir , +tat te
o+tir be warnid +turz hir . CMBENRUL-M3,33.1080

At te timis +tat es set efter euensang til lescuns , +ta +tat ere
acumbird wid laburs sal noht studie on +te sundais , ne on +te o+tir
feste-dais , Bot t@ @o+tir alle at lescuns . CMBENRUL-M3,33.1081

Yef it be ani +tat mai noht studie ne rede , O+tir labur sal +tai do ,
+tat tay ne sitte noht al dom . CMBENRUL-M3,33.1082

+Ta +tat ere noht in ese , man sal giue +taim sum +ting at do , +tat tay
ne sitte noht vnait , Ne +tat tay ne be noght ouir-mikil greuid wid
trauaile ; CMBENRUL-M3,33.1083

+t@ @abbes sal loke +taire sekenes . CMBENRUL-M3,33.1084

Lauerd for his pite giue vs sua to wirk , and sua vre lescuns at
vnderstande , +tat we at te ende til heuin be broght .
CMBENRUL-M3,33.1085

Amen . CMBENRUL-M3,33.1086

<heading>

XLIX . CMBENRUL-M3,33.1088

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence kennis vs sain Benet how we sal gete +te tyme of lentin
. CMBENRUL-M3,33.1090

Alle timis off +te yer , he sais , sulde we wid rihte halde +te liflade
o lentin , CMBENRUL-M3,33.1091

bot faa it es +tat te vertu mai haue . CMBENRUL-M3,33.1092

And for+tir cumandis he +tat we sal in lentin gete vre lif in alle +ting
, +tat we mai amende vre fautes of o+tir times in +te dais of lentin .
CMBENRUL-M3,33.1093

+Tan may ye sauflike liue , yef ye gete yu fra alle ille vices , And yef
we do vre entente til vresun wid teris And til lescuns wid reu+te of
herte and wid abstinens . CMBENRUL-M3,33.1094

In +ta dais sal we here sum+ting of godis seruise mare +tan we do an
no+tir tyme , CMBENRUL-M3,33.1095

<P_34>

And priue vresuns , and o mare mesur of mete and drinke .
CMBENRUL-M3,34.1097

Ilkain salle , wid +taire ahen gude wille , Offir sum +ting to god mare
+tan +tai es cumandid , wid +te ioy of +te haly sprite ; +tat es , ye
draze yu mare fra mete and drinke , & fra slepe , and fra speche , And
fra gabbingis , +tat ye mai haly paskis o-byde wid ioy of spiritel
langing . CMBENRUL-M3,34.1098

bot ilkain salle mustir til +t@ @abbesse what ye wille offir to god ,
wid yure azen wil , of vresuns ; CMBENRUL-M3,34.1099

for yef ye ne do it wid leue of yure spiritel fadir , ye ne sal haue na
mede +tar-offe , bot turne yu to vanite . CMBENRUL-M3,34.1100

For +ti sal ye do als t@ @abbesse cumandis yu at do .
CMBENRUL-M3,34.1101

Lauerd for +ti merci giue vs sua +tis haly lentyn at yeme , +tat we mai
wid ioy of +te hali spirit hali paskis obide . CMBENRUL-M3,34.1102

<heading>

L . CMBENRUL-M3,34.1104

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence cumandis sain Benet +tat te sistirs +tat ere in labur
fer fra +te kirke , and mai noht cume in time til +taire vris , +t@
@abbes sal cumaaunde +taim o +tis maner , +tat whare sam +tai wirke ,
+tat tay do godis seruise And taire veinis in +te dute o god .
CMBENRUL-M3,34.1106

And als-sua +ta +tat aier by +te gate , +tai ne sal noht leue +te vris
+tat ere stablist , bot sua als tay mai , sai +taim And yelde god his
seruise . CMBENRUL-M3,34.1107

He giue vs for his grace , +tat we mai helde +te seruise +tat we ah til
hym . CMBENRUL-M3,34.1108

<heading>

LI . CMBENRUL-M3,34.1110

<$$heading>

Sain Benet spekis of +ta +tat ere sent owte ani erand and sal cum o-gain
+tat ilke day , +tat tay ne be noht sua hardy at ete owte , +toz man
pray +taim , Bot yef +t@ @abbes giue +taim leue ; CMBENRUL-M3,34.1112

yef +tai do , +tai sal be cursid . CMBENRUL-M3,34.1113

Lauerd for +ti , yef it be his wille , kepe vs fra cursing .
CMBENRUL-M3,34.1114

<heading>

LII . CMBENRUL-M3,34.1116

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence cumandis sain benet +tat +te ortorie be nane o+tir
+ting +tan it es cald . CMBENRUL-M3,34.1118

Of na +ting sal it serue bot for to aure , man to god , inne .
CMBENRUL-M3,34.1119

When +te vris of god es done , +tanne sal alle ga for+t and make
reuerence to god . CMBENRUL-M3,34.1120

Yef any wille dwelle for to make priue vrisun , sho ne sal make noise
for to sturbe +te o+tir , Bot simpelike gange in and make hir vresun wid
teris and wid reu+te of herte , And noht wid heze voice .
CMBENRUL-M3,34.1121

+Ta +tat wil noht do , +tai ne sal noht dwelle eftir in +te kirke for to
noy +te o+tir . CMBENRUL-M3,34.1122

<P_35>

Lauerd for his pite giue vs sua for to cuntaine vs in +te kirke , +tat
nane be desturbid for vs . CMBENRUL-M3,35.1124

<heading>

LIII . CMBENRUL-M3,35.1126

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence cumandis sain Benet +tat te gestis +tat cumis to yu be
als faire kald als it ware god hym-selfe . CMBENRUL-M3,35.1128

for he salle say at te day of dome : " Hospes fui &c.
CMBENRUL-M3,35.1129

I was geste , CMBENRUL-M3,35.1130

and ye recaiuid me . " CMBENRUL-M3,35.1131

Alle sal man comunlike recaiue , And men of religuin and pilgrims .
CMBENRUL-M3,35.1132

Als tit als te gestis cume , +te priuresse ou+tir a-no+tir nunne sal
gange againis tam wid luue & charite . CMBENRUL-M3,35.1133

Yef it be sistir , first sal +tai anure to-gidir and si+tin kis ;
CMBENRUL-M3,35.1134

bot bi-fore +te vre sal +tai noht basse for +t@ @enticement of +te deuil
. CMBENRUL-M3,35.1135

Allekin mekenes sal man muster til +te gestis . CMBENRUL-M3,35.1136

Ilkain , when +tai ga and when +tai cume , sal alure to-gidir ou+tir wid
+te heuidis ou+tir wid al +te bodi , CMBENRUL-M3,35.1137

and Iesu crist sal aure +tam . CMBENRUL-M3,35.1138

When +tai ere rechaiuid and aurid , +t@ @abbesse sal sitte wid +taim ,
ou+tir a-no+tir nunne , wilke sam sho cumandis , +tat can speke wid
+taim o godis lay for to comfort +taim and speke of man-hed .
CMBENRUL-M3,35.1139

+Te fasting sal +t@ @abbesse breke for +te gestis sake , yef sho will ,
Bot yef +te fasting be for hez feste , +tat sho ne may nan gate breke ;
CMBENRUL-M3,35.1140

bot t@ @o+tir sal foliz +te reule o fasting . CMBENRUL-M3,35.1141

+t@ @abbesse sal giue +te gestis water til +taire hende , And waisse
+taire feet , And alle +te cuuent wid hir . CMBENRUL-M3,35.1142

And si+tin sal +tai sai verse : " Suscepimus , deus &c.
CMBENRUL-M3,35.1143

Lauerd , we haue recaiuid +ti merci I-middis ti tempil . "
CMBENRUL-M3,35.1144

And ay ta yeme of +te pouir and of +te pilegrimis , for +tai er kald
godis men , And to +te rike als-sua ba+te for aze & for honur .
CMBENRUL-M3,35.1145

+t@ @abbesse kychin and of hir gestis sal be bi it ane , +tat te gestis
+tat cume noy noht te cuuent . CMBENRUL-M3,35.1146

In +tat kichin sal tua sistirs serue , +tat tay may do +te office +tat
apendis +tar-to . CMBENRUL-M3,35.1147

Yef +tai haue mikil at do , man sal finde +tam helpe ; And when +tai
haue lesse at do , ga til o+tir laburs , whare sua man cumandis +tam .
CMBENRUL-M3,35.1148

+Te howse to +te gestis sal man biteche a sistir at yeme +tat dowtis god
; CMBENRUL-M3,35.1149

sho sal puruay +tat tare be beddis inne ; CMBENRUL-M3,35.1150

sua sal godis howse be ordaind . CMBENRUL-M3,35.1151

Wid +te gestis salle nane speke bot +tai +tat hauis leue .
CMBENRUL-M3,35.1152

Yef ani sistir metis +tam , mekelike sal <P_36> sho aske +tair benicun
and si+tin passe forz , yef sho hauis na leue for to speke wid +tam .
CMBENRUL-M3,36.1153

Lauerd for his grace giue vs sua for to herberz his gestis , +tat we may
herber wid him in +te ioy of heuin . CMBENRUL-M3,36.1154

AmeN . CMBENRUL-M3,36.1155

<heading>

LIV . CMBENRUL-M3,36.1157

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence cumandis sain Benet +tat nane be sua hardy at recaiue
lettirs ne erand +tat cumis fra +tair frendis , ne fra nane o+tir man ,
ne noht recaiue giftis bot +turz +te leue of +t@ @abbesse .
CMBENRUL-M3,36.1159

Yef hir be sente ani +ting fra hir frende , sho sal noht recaiue it , ar
sho haue leue & musterd it +t@ @abbesse . CMBENRUL-M3,36.1160

Yef sho giuis hir leue at recaiue it , In +t@ @abbes pouste salle it be
at giue whare hir +tinke . CMBENRUL-M3,36.1161

Bot wrez hir noht +tat te +ting es sent to ; CMBENRUL-M3,36.1162

And yef +t@ @abbesse giuis it til a-no+tir , loke +tat sho ne wrez hir
noht +tat te +ting es sent to , wharefore +te deuil finde a-chesun in
hir ; CMBENRUL-M3,36.1163

yef sho dos , +te reul of discipline sal sho fele . CMBENRUL-M3,36.1164

Lauerd giue vs sua at yeme +tis sentence and al o+tir , +tat te deuil
finde nan achesun in vs . CMBENRUL-M3,36.1165

<heading>

LV . CMBENRUL-M3,36.1167

<$$heading>

Of +tair cla+ting spekis sain Benet in +tis sentence ,
CMBENRUL-M3,36.1169

and sais +tat man sal clazing til ilkain eftir +tat tay ere , and eftir
+te temprance es of +te cuntre . CMBENRUL-M3,36.1170

In caald cuntre es nede of warmer hend . CMBENRUL-M3,36.1171

+Tis sal be forlokid +turz +t@ @abbes . CMBENRUL-M3,36.1172

Of +te culur of +te clad , na of +te mikilnes , sal nane speke , bot
take suilke als man may finde in +te cuntre and of liht chepe bie .
CMBENRUL-M3,36.1173

+T@ @abbesse sal loke +tat tay be riht mesurd . CMBENRUL-M3,36.1174

When +tai ta +te newe , +tan salle +tai yelde +t@ @alde for to giue to
+te pure . CMBENRUL-M3,36.1175

Tuinne paire cla+tis sal ilkain haue for to scifte and for to waisse ;
CMBENRUL-M3,36.1176

yef +tai haue mare , it sal be scorn . CMBENRUL-M3,36.1177

+Tair beddis sal +t@ @abbes ofte ripe , +tat tay ne haue na propirte .
CMBENRUL-M3,36.1178

Yef sho findis ani +ting wid-vten hir leue , wid greue discipline sal it
be amendid ; CMBENRUL-M3,36.1179

And for +ti +tat it es vice of propirte , sal it be scorn als +tifte .
CMBENRUL-M3,36.1180

+T@ @abbes sal giue til ilk-ain als tay haue nede . CMBENRUL-M3,36.1181

+T@ @abbes sal ta yeme of +tis sentence of +te dedis of +te apostils ,
+tat sho depart til ilkain als tay haue mister . CMBENRUL-M3,36.1182

Sua sal +t@ @abbes ta yeme of +te <P_37> sekenes of +te nedful , And
noht to +te wikke wille of +t@ @enuius . CMBENRUL-M3,37.1183

In alle hir iugement sal sho unbe-+tinke hir what mede sho sal haue at
god . CMBENRUL-M3,37.1184

Lauerd giue vs sua at do , +tat we may haue owre mede of hym .
CMBENRUL-M3,37.1185

AmeN . CMBENRUL-M3,37.1186

<heading>

LVI . CMBENRUL-M3,37.1188

<$$heading>

Sain Benet sais +tat te Abbes bord sal be ay wid gestis and wid
pilegrimis . CMBENRUL-M3,37.1190

When sho hauis nane gestis , sho sal take wilke of hir sistirs sam sho
wille ; bot +tat sho leue in +te fraitur an ordene nunne ou+tir tua +te
ordir for to gete . CMBENRUL-M3,37.1191

Lauerd giue vs welle at gete oure ordir . CMBENRUL-M3,37.1192

<heading>

LVII . CMBENRUL-M3,37.1194

<$$heading>

Yef +tare be any +tat can any labur , wid mekenes sal +tai it do , als
sain Benet cumandis , +tat t@ @abbes cumaundis taim at do .
CMBENRUL-M3,37.1196

gyf +tai auantis taim of +tair werke , for +ti +tat sho +tinke sho dose
gude tille +te howse , sho sal be don owte of hir mister , til sho haue
amendid hir faute , yef sho wille noht be buxum til +tat +te abbes
cumandis hir at do . CMBENRUL-M3,37.1197

Yef any makis any +tinge +tat sal be salde , Loke what it is wrz , +tat
ye ne sette an felun price +tar-on . CMBENRUL-M3,37.1198

And +ge vmbe-+tinke yu of ananie & of sapher his wife , +tat salde
+taire lande in +te tyme of +ta apostils ; CMBENRUL-M3,37.1199

+tai helde a partie of +te price , CMBENRUL-M3,37.1200

and a-no+tir partie broht by-fore +ta apostils ; CMBENRUL-M3,37.1201

and sain petir was parcaiuid of +te tricherie , CMBENRUL-M3,37.1202

and askid +tam why +tai made propirte of +tat +tai hauid done in comun ;
CMBENRUL-M3,37.1203

And tai felle ba+te dede downe . CMBENRUL-M3,37.1204

Mikil dowte birde +tam haue +tat dose in +ting +tat fallis til hali
kirke , +tat taire sauls suffir na dede , als te cors dose here .
CMBENRUL-M3,37.1205

In +te price of +te +ting +tat +ge salle selle , loke +tare be na
cuuaitise inne ; CMBENRUL-M3,37.1206

bot betir chepe sal ye selle +tan +te men of +te werld dose , +tat god
may be payde of yure sale . CMBENRUL-M3,37.1207

he giue vs for his grace +tat we may sua wirke and sua selle , +tat he
be payde +tar-of . CMBENRUL-M3,37.1208

<heading>

LVIII . CMBENRUL-M3,37.1210

<$$heading>

When any wymmen of +te sekil , sais sain Benet , cummis at aske +t@
@ordir , man salle noght $light_like gif it tam , +te entre ,
CMBENRUL-M3,37.1212

bot man sal do als t@ @a-postil sais : CMBENRUL-M3,37.1213

<P_38>

" proue +taire hertis , yef +tai be to god . " CMBENRUL-M3,38.1215

yef sho be stabil in hir asking , And haitis for to suffir alle +te
uiltez +tat man wille put hir to , Eftir +te fifte day sal sho be
recaiuid in-til +te howse , And don in-til +te celle with +te nouices .
CMBENRUL-M3,38.1216

+Tare sal sho studie and ete and slape . CMBENRUL-M3,38.1217

suilk yeming sal sho haue , +tat te saule be turnid to god allemihtye ;
CMBENRUL-M3,38.1218

And ta yeme to hir for to loke yef +te spirte be to god , and yef sho
dose hir entente to godis seruise , And buxum , and of suffrance .
CMBENRUL-M3,38.1219

Man salle muster hir harde +tinges and smerte , +te riht gate to god .
CMBENRUL-M3,38.1220

Yef sho euir haitis stabilnes , eftir tua wukis sal hir be red +tis
reule of +t@ @ordir , And saye to hir : " +tis es +te rihte gate
whare-inne +tu salle life . CMBENRUL-M3,38.1221

Yef +tu may halde it , cum inne ; CMBENRUL-M3,38.1222

and yef +tu ne may , ga forz al deliuir . " CMBENRUL-M3,38.1223

Yef sho obidis yet , when sho is prouid o many maners , +tan sal man
rede hir +te reule , +tat sho may wite witerli whar-to sho salle halde
hir . CMBENRUL-M3,38.1224

And at te tuelmone+tes ende , when sho hauis herde +te reule +tris , yef
sho haitis for to halde it welle , all +tat man cumandis hir , +tanne
sall sho be recaiuid i-mang +te cuuent . CMBENRUL-M3,38.1225

bot witte sho welle , fra +tat day forward may sho noht gagne owte , Ne
+te life of +te reule fle , ne caste it fra hir nek ;
CMBENRUL-M3,38.1226

For sho hauid bi-fore laiser for to gange owte . CMBENRUL-M3,38.1227

when sho sall make hir professe , In +te Kirke bi-fore +tame alle sal
sho haite stabilnes and buxumnes , by-fore god and alle his hali+ges .
CMBENRUL-M3,38.1228

+Tat sho euir-mare brekis +tat cuuenant , witte sho welle +tat god sal
damne hir with-owtyn ende . CMBENRUL-M3,38.1229

+Tis +ting salle sho write with hir awne hande ; And yef sho canne noht
write , pray ane of hir sistirs ; CMBENRUL-M3,38.1230

Bot sho hir-selfe sal make +te singne of +te croice , and lay it on +t@
@auter , And si+tin say +tis verse : " Suscipe me &c.
CMBENRUL-M3,38.1231

Lauerd , +tu recaiue me , CMBENRUL-M3,38.1232

and I sal liue als te wordes es of +te ; CMBENRUL-M3,38.1233

+tat es myne entent , +tat I confunded be noht . " CMBENRUL-M3,38.1234

at +tis verse sal alle +te cuuent ansewere hir +tris ;
CMBENRUL-M3,38.1235

and si+tin " Gloria patri " at te laste . CMBENRUL-M3,38.1236

When sho es blissed , Fra +tat time forward sal sho be calde in cuuent .
Yef sho hauis ani katel , parte it i-mang +te pouir , Ou+tir make
offrand til +te kirke , +tat sho ne halde na +ting by-hinde ;
CMBENRUL-M3,38.1237

For fra +tat day forward sal sho haue na pouste of hir Awne body .
CMBENRUL-M3,38.1238

Hir cla+tis +tat sho bro+t sal man restore +te kirke with-alle , +tat
sho fra +tat day forward haue na wille at gange owte of +te kirke
+tur+ge enticement <P_39> of +te deuil . CMBENRUL-M3,39.1239

+Te bref of hir professe sal sho noht haue , CMBENRUL-M3,39.1240

bot in +te kirke sal be gete . CMBENRUL-M3,39.1241

Lauerd for his grace giue vs herte and wille in owre ordir to duelle .
CMBENRUL-M3,39.1242

<heading>

LIX . CMBENRUL-M3,39.1244

<$$heading>

When any riche man of +te sekil , sais sain Benet , Offirs his do+gtir
til god and til haly kirke , And +te childe be yunge , +tat it ne kan
noht aske +te peticiun , hir frendis sal aske for hir .
CMBENRUL-M3,39.1246

And when +tai offir hir hande , +tai salle winde +te tuaile +tar-a-bowte
of +t@ @auter . CMBENRUL-M3,39.1247

And +tanne sal +tai suere +tat +tai ne sal neuir_mare , ne na man +turz
+taim , o na maner giue +ting to +te childe , ne sende , whare-+turz
+tat +te childe haue wille to propirte . CMBENRUL-M3,39.1248

Bot yef +tai wille ani almus do til +te kirke , do it al opinlike , +tat
+tai wil giue . CMBENRUL-M3,39.1249

Yef it be lande , and +tai wil halde it +taim-selfe , +tai sal make
chartir , and yelde ilke +gere +te ferme +tat +tai may liue with-alle .
CMBENRUL-M3,39.1250

And sua sal +ge do wid alle +te +ting +tat fallis propirlie til +te
child , +tat na +ting bi-leue with hir frende , whare-+turz +tat sho
haue wil til propirte ; CMBENRUL-M3,39.1251

Sain Benet hauis te sperance of +t@ @o+tir . CMBENRUL-M3,39.1252

And on +tis ilke maner sal +te pure man childe be offird :
CMBENRUL-M3,39.1253

simpelie make +taire peticiun , and bi-fore whitnes offir +taire childir
. CMBENRUL-M3,39.1254

Lauerd for his grace giue +tat we may wel gyde +te offerande +tat owre
frendis made of vs . CMBENRUL-M3,39.1255

<heading>

LX . CMBENRUL-M3,39.1257

<$$heading>

Yef any preste , sais sain Benet , prais +gerne for to be recaiuid
in-til +t@ @ordir , +ge ne sal noght hastelie graunt it hym .
CMBENRUL-M3,39.1259

Bot yef he duellis in his asking & prayis +gerne , Man sal muster him
alle +te disciplines of +te reule , +tat he salle yeme with-owtyn reles
; +tat it be done als it is writin , And say til hym : " Amice , ad quid
venisti CMBENRUL-M3,39.1260

Frende , wharto es +tu cumen ? " CMBENRUL-M3,39.1261

Bot to+g-whe+tir sal +te howse be grauntid him , And recaiue benicun ,
and singe his mese , yef +t@ @abbes cumandis him . CMBENRUL-M3,39.1262

And yef it sua bitimis , +tat he ne wyl noght lere na sience , +te reule
of discipline sal he fele ; CMBENRUL-M3,39.1263

for he sulde giue o+tir ensampil of mekenes . CMBENRUL-M3,39.1264

Yef +tar be ani labur at do in +te kirke , Of him sal man ta yeme what
he dose , when he is entird in ; And noght for +tat he es preste and
+tai haue done him reuerence , <P_40> be vnbuxum . CMBENRUL-M3,40.1265

Yef any clerke desiris to ordir , o +tat ilke maner at be in felazscap ,
+tai sal be done in mene stede , O +tis maner , yef +tai haite for to
holde +te reule of discipline and stabil dwelling . CMBENRUL-M3,40.1266

<heading>

LXII . CMBENRUL-M3,40.1268

<$$heading>

Yef +t@ @abbes prais for preste ou+tir for dekin at be ordainde til
hym-selfe , He sal loke , +tat +tai be dingne +ter-to at be preste .
CMBENRUL-M3,40.1270

he salle fle pride & leue alle ille vices , ar he be preste .
CMBENRUL-M3,40.1271

And +tat he do na +ting bot +tat man cumandis him to do ;
CMBENRUL-M3,40.1272

And yef he do , he sal be vndir +te reule of discipline .
CMBENRUL-M3,40.1273

Ne +tat he for-gete noht +te ordir +tat he hauis tane , na +te reule of
obedience ne of discipline , CMBENRUL-M3,40.1274

And euir auance hym in godis seruise , CMBENRUL-M3,40.1275

And +tinke +tat he ne come noht to +te kirke , bot til godis seruise .
CMBENRUL-M3,40.1276

And yef +te cuuent wille , & +t@ @abes consentis +tar-to , +tai mai
auance hym for +te godenes of his life . CMBENRUL-M3,40.1277

Loke +tat he neuir-+te-later halde +te reule of stabilnes ba+te in and
owte in gudenes . CMBENRUL-M3,40.1278

And if he o+tirgate dose , and wil noht be buxum , bott rebel , whilk
man salle repreue hym ofte . CMBENRUL-M3,40.1279

Yef he wil noght sua amende , Man salle muster hym til +te bisschope .
CMBENRUL-M3,40.1280

Yef he ne may do him amende , Man sal muster his fautes alle opinlie ,
and do him owte of +te kirke , yef he be prowde , +tat he wil noght be
buxum vnder +te reule of haly kirke . CMBENRUL-M3,40.1281

<heading>

LXI . CMBENRUL-M3,40.1283

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence leris sain Benet vs , how we sal recaiue +te vncunyng
nunnis +tat cummis owte of fer landis . CMBENRUL-M3,40.1285

Yef sho wille als geste wne in +te kirke , and folow +te custume als sho
findes , And noy nan +tat langes to +te kyrke with hir surfait , bot
simpelike recaiue +tat sho findis , sho salle be recaiuid ay to whilis
+tat sho wille dwelle . CMBENRUL-M3,40.1286

Yef sho mustirs ani resun & with luue , +t@ @abbes sal quaintelike drahe
hir to hir , and +tanc gode +tat hir sent . CMBENRUL-M3,40.1287

yef sho wille +tar stabilnes make , loke +tat wille be noht refusid .
CMBENRUL-M3,40.1288

And als-sua , yef man may persaue , to whilis +tat sho es geste , +tat
sho es surfaitus & il_maner , Man sal noght fela+gscap with hir , bott
faire and swetelike latte hir ga , +tat <P_41> t@ @o+tir haue na shame
of hir . CMBENRUL-M3,41.1289

Yef sho be of gude maner , Man sal noht abide hir asking for to duelle ,
CMBENRUL-M3,41.1290

Bott man sal prai hir at dwelle , +tat +te to+tir mai be amendid +tur+g
+te sampil of hir ; CMBENRUL-M3,41.1291

For in alle stedis may man serue god . CMBENRUL-M3,41.1292

Yef +t@ @abbes ses hir life be suilke , sho may do hir in he+ger stede ,
if sho wille , +tan hir ordir askis . CMBENRUL-M3,41.1293

Bot loke +te abbes +tat sho knaw hir wel +tat sho sal halde in +te kirke
, Ou+gir +gurh hir abbes ou+tir +tur+g hir lettirs .
CMBENRUL-M3,41.1294

For hali write cumandis +tat +tu sal do to na man bot als +tu walde man
did to +te . CMBENRUL-M3,41.1295

Lauerd giue vs welle at gete +tis cumandement And all +t@ @o+tir .
CMBENRUL-M3,41.1296

<heading>

LXIII . CMBENRUL-M3,41.1298

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence cumandis sain Benet +tat ilkain be with order als +tai
cume in , And als t@ @abbes stablis +taim eftir +tat +tair lif es .
CMBENRUL-M3,41.1300

+t@ @abbes sal noht greue +te cuuent , +to+g +tai be giuin hir at yeme ,
Ne deliuir pouste haue nane for to giue of +te +ting +tat es stablist in
cumun , Bott vmbe-+tinke hir +tat sho sal yelde resun of alle hir
iugement til god . als tay ar ordainde , +tat tay be stablist and gang
in cumun . CMBENRUL-M3,41.1301

+Tai ne salle noht tine +taire ordir for yu+ghed ; CMBENRUL-M3,41.1302

For samuel and daniel , when +tai where barnis , +tai demid +te alde men
. CMBENRUL-M3,41.1303

alle sal be als +tai cume in-til +t@ @ordir , bot ta +tat t@ @abbes
he+gis ou+tir la+gis for a-chesun . CMBENRUL-M3,41.1304

sho +tat cumis at te secunde owre of +te day sal be done with hir +tat
cumis at +te first , O what elde sam sho be . CMBENRUL-M3,41.1305

Til +te barnis salle man halde discipline . CMBENRUL-M3,41.1306

+Te yung salle onur +t@ @alde , CMBENRUL-M3,41.1307

and +te alde salle lufe +te yunge . CMBENRUL-M3,41.1308

Nane sal calle o+tir by +taire name , CMBENRUL-M3,41.1309

bot +te priures sal calle +taim hir " sistirs . " CMBENRUL-M3,41.1310

+T@ @abbesse , for shoe es in godis stede , sal be callid " dame , "
noht for +te he+gnes +tat sho es abbes , bot for +te onur of god .
CMBENRUL-M3,41.1311

Loke +tat sho do sua , +tat sho be dingne at recaiue +tat onur .
CMBENRUL-M3,41.1312

When ane metis a-no+tir , +te yunger sal noht sitte bi hir , bot sho
haue leue ; CMBENRUL-M3,41.1313

for hali writ cumandis , +te yunger sal onur +t@ @elder .
CMBENRUL-M3,41.1314

+Te barnis sal +tinke on +taire ordir with discipline in kirke and in
fraitur ; CMBENRUL-M3,41.1315

with-outyn and with-in , in alle stedis , sal +tai haue geting &
chastiing . CMBENRUL-M3,41.1316

Lauerd , for +ti mercy giue vs welle at halde +tis sentence and euir +ti
wille do . CMBENRUL-M3,41.1317

AmeN . CMBENRUL-M3,41.1318

<P_42>

<heading>

LXIV . CMBENRUL-M3,42.1321

<$$heading>

Sain Benet leris vs in +tis sentence , how we sal chese vre abbesse .
CMBENRUL-M3,42.1323

Suilk resun , he sais , sal man loke at +te lecciun , +tat sho be ordene
and +tat al +te cuuent consentis to with +te dute of god .
CMBENRUL-M3,42.1324

Sho +tat +te haler partie of +te cuuent chesis , +tur+g gude life and
wisdom sal sho be chosin . CMBENRUL-M3,42.1325

Yef it sua be , +tat alle +te cuuent chesis ane +tat wil consent til
+taire vices , +te abbotis +tat es +tare , and +te folke of +te cuntre ,
sal defende +tat tat felun lecciun be noht forth broth .
CMBENRUL-M3,42.1326

Bott suilk sal +tai take +tat can guuerne godis howse and dingne es
+tar-to . CMBENRUL-M3,42.1327

And witte +tai wel , +tai sal haue gude mede , if +tai do it for +te
lufe of god , And sinne , yef +tai leue . CMBENRUL-M3,42.1328

+Te abbes , when sho es ordainde , sho salle vmbe-+tinke hir what charge
sho hase recaiuid , And +tat sho sal yelde resun of alle .
CMBENRUL-M3,42.1329

witte sho wele +tat mare bi-houis hir studie for to auance hir cuuent ,
+tan maistri for to haue . CMBENRUL-M3,42.1330

sho a+ght at be wise in goddis law , +tat sho dra+ge til witnes ba+te to
+te new law and til +te alde testament . CMBENRUL-M3,42.1331

Chaste a+ght sho at be , and sobir , & ful of pite , And euir he+ge +te
misericorde of god ouir hir iugement , +tat god do +tat ilke with hir .
CMBENRUL-M3,42.1332

Ille vices salle sho hate , and luue hir sistirs . In hir pouste loke
+tat +tare be nane vtrage in , Ne +tat sho ne chaste nan sa fellike ,
+tat +tai fle ne falle in wrang trou+g . CMBENRUL-M3,42.1333

+T@ @abbesse salle gete hir welle hir-fra , And euir haue hir a+gen
misdede bi-fore hir siht . CMBENRUL-M3,42.1334

Sho salle noht suffir +te beli pipe be brokin ; +tat when sho seis ani
of hir sistirs be chargid with sinne , sho salle noht greue hir sua
mikil , +tat sho fle a-way , CMBENRUL-M3,42.1335

bot sho salle be besy more to be luuid +tan to be dredde .
CMBENRUL-M3,42.1336

sho sal nott be trubellus , nor angri , nor ouir-obstinate , nor iolyose
, nor ouir-suspiciose , CMBENRUL-M3,42.1337

for +tan sal sho neuir haue reste . CMBENRUL-M3,42.1338

sho sal be wice & discrete in hir commandmentis , +tat +tai be ou+tir
efter godde or efter +te worlde . CMBENRUL-M3,42.1339

sho salle discerne and temper +te werkis whilk sho invinis to be done ,
thynkyng a-pon +te discrecion of sainte Iacob sayng in +tis wise : " If
I sulde make my herdis to labur to mikil in walkyng , +tai sal alle die
on one day . " CMBENRUL-M3,42.1340

Therefore sho sal take +tir and odir ma examples of discrecion , +te
moder of vertues , and tempir and dispone <P_43> all thingis sa , +tat
hir demenance be swylke , +tat sisters +tat er strang and of gude lyuyng
may desire and lufe it , & tay +tat er febil may bere it ; and namli
+tat sho kepe +tis present reule in all thingis , +tat when sho hase
welle done hir ministracion , sho may here +te worde of oure lorde whilk
+te gude seruande harde , +tat gafe corne to his seruandis in hi tyme :
" Amen dico vobis &c. CMBENRUL-M3,43.1341

For soth I say to +gow , godde sall sett hym ouir all his thingis . "
CMBENRUL-M3,43.1342

<heading>

LXV . CMBENRUL-M3,43.1344

<$$heading>

Sothly , ofte-timis it happins +tat be +te ordinance of +te prioresse
greuus sklaunders rysis in monesterys , whils +ter be sum bownyd with
+te wikkid sprete of pride , thinkis thame-selfe als gude os thayre
abbes , And takis a-pon thame tyranry , and nurischis sclaunders , and
makis dissensiones in +te conuente , And nameli in tha places where +te
prioressse es ordande of +te same sistir , or of +te abbesse , whilk
hase made be-fore +te abbas . Whilk inconueniens it es ethy to conseyue
; CMBENRUL-M3,43.1346

for +te prioresse is geuin a mater to be prowd in +te begynnyng of hyr
ordinance , when sho is geuyn in mynde be hir awne thoghtis +tat sho is
lowsid owte of +te power of hir abbesse , be-cause +te same persones
made hir prioresse whilk ordanid +te abbas be-fore .
CMBENRUL-M3,43.1347

Thoro +tat er raysid immonesis , strifis , bakbytyngis , haterede ,
dissensiones , And werangus ordinansis . CMBENRUL-M3,43.1348

And when +te abbas and +te prioresse er of contrary opynion , both
thayre awne saules bus nedly be in perel in +tat dissensione ,
CMBENRUL-M3,43.1349

And thay alswa +tat er vnder thame and $fagnis both partis fallis into
grete perel ; whilk peril fallis chefly opon thayme +tat hauis made
thame-selfe +te autors of chesyng of +te prioresse .
CMBENRUL-M3,43.1350

For +ti hauis sain Benet forlokid +tat t@ @abbes sal chese whilke sam
sho wille , for to halde pese and charite . CMBENRUL-M3,43.1351

Yef hir ordanment es in buxumnes , alle +tingis +tat fallis to +te kirke
sal be als t@ @abes cumandis , +tat an ne be noht prude of +tat es getyn
til comun . CMBENRUL-M3,43.1352

Yef +te cuuent askis resonabillike and in mekenes , And abbes sese it es
nede , +tai sal make priuresse , +tat sho <P_44> be chosin +tur+g +te
cunsaile of +ta +tat dutis god . CMBENRUL-M3,44.1353

When +te priuresse es ordainde , with mikil reuerence sal sho do +tat t@
@abbesse cumandis hir , +tat sho do na +ting a-gain hyr wille na a-gain
hir cumaundement . CMBENRUL-M3,44.1354

for +te mare +tat sho est he+gid ouir t@ @o+tir , +te mare a+gh sho at
halde +te cumandement of +te reule . CMBENRUL-M3,44.1355

And if sho be of ille vicis and prowde , ou+tir man may finde +tat sho
hauis +te haly reule in dispite , sho sal be repreuid foure si+te with
worde . CMBENRUL-M3,44.1356

Yef sho wil noht amende , +te reule of discipline sal sho fele .
CMBENRUL-M3,44.1357

Yef sho wil noht amende sua , sho sal be don owte , and a-no+tir , +tat
es dingne , be don in hir stede . CMBENRUL-M3,44.1358

Yef sho wil noht be buxum in cuuent , sho sal be done owte of +te kirke
til sho wil amende . CMBENRUL-M3,44.1359

+t@ @abbesse sal vmbe-+tinke hir +tat sho sal yelde resun on domes-day
of alle hir iugementis , And loke +tat +te lowe of envie and hateredin
ne brenne noht hir herte . CMBENRUL-M3,44.1360

Lauerd for his mercy defende vs fra envie and hateredin .
CMBENRUL-M3,44.1361

<heading>

LXVI . CMBENRUL-M3,44.1363

<$$heading>

At +te +gate , sais sain Benet , sal man do a sister +tat can wisdome ,
And can recaiue & +gelde answer ; +tat sho be stabil of worde and dede .
CMBENRUL-M3,44.1365

by-side +te +gate sal sho haue chaumber , +tat +tat +tat cum to +te
+gate , alle timis finde hir redi and speke with +taim .
CMBENRUL-M3,44.1366

Als tite as ony smitis on +te +gate , Ou+tir pouir crie , sho sal grace
god and with buxumnes hastelie ancewer +tam and do +taire erand .
CMBENRUL-M3,44.1367

Yef sho hauis mister of help , man sal finde hir helpe at +te +gate .
CMBENRUL-M3,44.1368

Yef +te howse may for+te it sua , +tan sal it be stablist o +tis maner ,
+tat +te water , & +te milne , and bakehuse , and breuhuse , and calgard
, and al +tat +ge haue mister of , be with-in +te gard , +tat +ge ne
haue na nede at sende owte ; CMBENRUL-M3,44.1369

for +tat es noht gude to +te saule . CMBENRUL-M3,44.1370

+Tis reule sal ofte be redde imang +te cuuent , +tat nane ascuse +tam of
+tis +ting +tat +tai ne do it . CMBENRUL-M3,44.1371

Lauerd for his pite giue vs sua at vnderstande +tis reule , and si+tin
for to wirke , +tat we may cum til +te life +tat lastis ay ,
CMBENRUL-M3,44.1372

god gif it vs . CMBENRUL-M3,44.1373

<heading>

LXVII . CMBENRUL-M3,44.1375

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence cumandis sain Benet +tat whilk sister sua man sendis
owte any erand , sal take +te benicun are +tai ga , And cumande hir in
+te vrisun of +t@ @abbes And <P_45> of alle hir sistirs ; And at ilke
vre of +te day +tat $+tai prai for +ta +tat er vte .
CMBENRUL-M3,45.1377

+Tat day +tat sho cumis hame , sal sho recaiue +te benicun at ilke ure
Of +tat +tai haue misdon with siht , ou+tir with iois , ou+tir with
speche , ou+tir any ivil dedis . CMBENRUL-M3,45.1378

+Tai sal noht telle til +te to+tir alle +tat +tai haue sene vte & herd ,
CMBENRUL-M3,45.1379

for +tat es ay mikil vice . CMBENRUL-M3,45.1380

Yef any dose , +te correccion of +te reule sal sho suffir .
CMBENRUL-M3,45.1381

And +tat ilke sal sho suffir +tat gase owte of +te cloister , labur for
to do , be it neuir sua litel , with-owtin leue of +t@ @abbes .
CMBENRUL-M3,45.1382

Lauerd for gete vs , +tat we ne do ne saie +ting +tat til destruciun
fallis . CMBENRUL-M3,45.1383

<heading>

LXVIII . CMBENRUL-M3,45.1385

<$$heading>

Yef man cumandis , sais sain Benet , ani +ting at do , and it be greue ,
and sho may noht do it , sho sal recaiue +te cumandement softelie and
wid mekenes . CMBENRUL-M3,45.1387

yef sho ses +tat +te charge of +te cumandement ouir-gase hir force ,
whit mekenes sal sho muster to +t@ @abbes hir sekenes , and noht with
pride , na with gain-sa+ge . CMBENRUL-M3,45.1388

When sho hauis musterd hir firmite , yef +te cumandement of +t@ @abbes
haldis for+ge , witte sho wele +tat it es hir prowe til +te saule ;
CMBENRUL-M3,45.1389

sho sal recaiue it in obedience in +te trou+ge of goddis lay .
CMBENRUL-M3,45.1390

Lauerd , he giue vs mekenes , for his merci , als he cumandis .
CMBENRUL-M3,45.1391

<heading>

LXIX . CMBENRUL-M3,45.1393

<$$heading>

Mikil a+g ye at fle +tis , sais sain Benet , +tat nane defende ne warne
o+tir for nane achesun , ne for sibredin , ne for na o+tir aquaintance ;
CMBENRUL-M3,45.1395

for mikil blame +tan may cum +terof . CMBENRUL-M3,45.1396

Yef ani trespassis +tis cumandement , greuelike sal it be amendid .
CMBENRUL-M3,45.1397

Lauerd defende vs fra alle achesun of sclandir . CMBENRUL-M3,45.1398

<heading>

LXX . CMBENRUL-M3,45.1400

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence cumandis sain Benet +tat a-@ @chesunnir sal be defendid
in haly kirke , als it es ordainde and stablist , +tat nane be sua hardy
for to curse o+tir , ne discipline , bot sho +tat +t@ @abbes giuis poust
. CMBENRUL-M3,45.1402

+Ta +tat tresspassis , by-fore +tam alle salle +tai be chastid , sua
+tat +te <P_46> o+tir haue dute +terof . CMBENRUL-M3,46.1403

Til +te barnis sal man halde discipline ententiuelike , Til +tai be o
fiftene winter elde . CMBENRUL-M3,46.1404

Alle sal do +tat to +tam with mesur and with resun .
CMBENRUL-M3,46.1405

Yef ani sistir with-outen +te cumandement of +t@ @abbes dose +te barnis
ani owterage , +te reule of discipline sal +tai fele ;
CMBENRUL-M3,46.1406

for haly write cummandis +tat +tu sal do to na no+tir bot als +tu walde
man did to +te . CMBENRUL-M3,46.1407

Lauerd for his pite giue vs well at halde his cumandemens .
CMBENRUL-M3,46.1408

<heading>

LXXI . CMBENRUL-M3,46.1410

<$$heading>

Sain Benet cumandis in +tis sentence +tat al sal make obediens , and
noht alane to +t@ @abbes , bot ilkane to o+tir . CMBENRUL-M3,46.1412

+Tur+g +te life of obediens may ye cum to heuin . CMBENRUL-M3,46.1413

+t@ @abbes and +te priuresse sal cumande til +ta +tat es vnder +taim ;
+tat na priue cumandement be hid in +taim . CMBENRUL-M3,46.1414

+te yunger sal meke +taim til +t@ @elder with mikil charite .
CMBENRUL-M3,46.1415

Yef any es funden with fawte , be it so litel , with +t@ @abbes , ou+tir
with priuresse , ou+tir with ony o+tir , sho sal acline to +t@ @er+te .
CMBENRUL-M3,46.1416

Yef sho haue whre+tid ani of hir sistirs , o what maner sam it be ,
hastelike with-vten dwellyng sal sho falle to her fete and aske hir
for-gifnes , and crie hir merci , And ligge +tare til sho for-giue it
hir and giue hir her benicun . CMBENRUL-M3,46.1417

Sho +tat at +tis amendment hauis an despite , and wille noht do it , Of
hir body sal man take amendement . CMBENRUL-M3,46.1418

Yef sho be rebel +tar-again , vte of +te kirke sal sho be putt .
CMBENRUL-M3,46.1419

Lauerd for his merci giue vs sua obediens and mekenes at hald , and
rebel at fle , +tat we may cum til +te ioy ay sal be .
CMBENRUL-M3,46.1420

<heading>

LXXII . CMBENRUL-M3,46.1422

<$$heading>

Of tua maner in a life spekis sain Benet in +tis sentence ,
CMBENRUL-M3,46.1424

And sais +tat +te ille lif , +tat es ful of wille , it departis man fra
god and ledis man til +te pinis of helle , And a-no+tir lif , +tat es
gude , +tat departis man fra helle and ledis man to god almihti .
CMBENRUL-M3,46.1425

+Tis gude life sal ye lere with lufe and gudenes , CMBENRUL-M3,46.1426

& ilkain auance o+tir wid onur and gude dede ; CMBENRUL-M3,46.1427

+te sekenes of youre bodi , +tan it cumis , take it in gude entente and
in pacience . CMBENRUL-M3,46.1428

Obedience , buxumnes , sal ilkain at o+tir lere hastiuelike ,
CMBENRUL-M3,46.1429

charite & gudenes ilkain lere o+tir , and chastite with luue .
CMBENRUL-M3,46.1430

Ye sal <P_47> dute god and yure abbesse with luue and charite .
CMBENRUL-M3,47.1431

And +tat sal lede yow til +te ioy with-outen ende . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1432

god giue it vs . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1433

<heading>

LXXIII . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1435

<$$heading>

In +tis sentence mustirs sain Benet mikil mekenes +tat in hym was .
CMBENRUL-M3,47.1437

For pure mekenes mustirs he here in +te last ende of his reule .
CMBENRUL-M3,47.1438

He sais +tat he ne hauis noht writyn alle +tingis +tat fallis to
rihtuisnes . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1439

Bott wha sam haldis wel +tise cumaundementis , he+g god , +tat es fadir
of alle , sal +gelde +taim +tair mede . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1440

We haue writin +tis reule for to mustir til +ta +tat ere suuerainis of
hali kirke haue clene luue til god and to +taire prome , And ilke sistir
til o+tir . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1441

Bot wha sua wil cume til +te he+gnes and til +te sikirnes of religiun ,
Loke +tat tay do eftir +te kening of +te haly fadir +tat wnis in manhed
in +te he+gnes +tat lastis ay . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1442

Of what boke sam ye here , of anikin kening of +t@ @alde lai ou+tir of
+te neu testament , Ou+tir what sum it es , +tan es it +te riht reule of
+tis life here . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1443

Of na boke ne make +ge force , bot +ge may ga +te right gate to god
alle-mihti . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1444

+te life of +te haly armitiss and +taire cumandemens . And +te reule of
sain basili , sal +ge fili+g . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1445

Til hali men , +tat gude lif haldes & luuis obedience and gude vertue ,
+tat may halde +tis lif . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1446

Bot we , sais sain benet , +tat er febil and for-getil and of febil lif
, +tis gude lif schamis vs , And confundis . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1447

Bot ye +tat wille cume hastelike to +te he+ge ioy +tat lastis ay ,
Haldes first +tur+g +te helpe of iesu crist +tis litil beginning of +te
reule +tat I haue writin yu , CMBENRUL-M3,47.1448

And salle ye cume til +te he+gnes of mare vertu +tur+g +te kenning +tat
I haue musterd . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1449

+Ta +tat it vnderstandis and haldis , Til +taim sal be oppind +te +gatis
of heuin . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1450

Lauerd , bigining and ending of alle gude dedis , giue vs sua +tis reule
of sain benet for to +geme , +tat te rengne of heuin be oppind til vs .
CMBENRUL-M3,47.1451

Godde gif it vs for his misericorde . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1452

AmeN . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1453

Qui viuis & Regnas , Deus , Per Omnia Secula Seculorum .
CMBENRUL-M3,47.1454

AMEN . CMBENRUL-M3,47.1455
