<BEGIN_cmbrut3-m3>

<P_1>

<heading>

The Brut , a Chronicle of England . CMBRUT3-M3,1.4

<$$heading>

In the noble lande of Surrye ther was a noble kyng and myghty , & a man
of grete renoun , +tat me called Dyocli-cian , +tat wel and worthily hym
gouernede , & rewlede thurgh his noble chiualrye , so +tat he conquered
alle +t=e= landes abowte hym , so that almoste all +t=e= kynges of +t=e=
world to hym were entendaunt . CMBRUT3-M3,1.6

Hyt befell thus , +tat this Dioclician spousede a gentyl damysele +tat
was wondyr fayr , +tat was hys Eemys doughter , Labana ; CMBRUT3-M3,1.7

& sche loued hym as reson wolde , so +tat he gate vpon here xxxiij
doughtres , of +te which +t=e= eldest me called Albyne . CMBRUT3-M3,1.8

And +tese Damysels , whan +tey comyn in-to Age , bycomen so fayre +tat
it was wondyr . Wherfore this Dioclician anon lete make A sompnyng , &
comaundid by his lettres +tat Alle +t=e= kyngys +tat heldyn of hym
schulde come at A certayn day , as in his lettres was conteyned , to
make A ryal feste . At which day , +tedir +tey comyn , & brought with
hem Amyralles , Prynces & Dukes , & noble Chiualrye . CMBRUT3-M3,1.9

+Te feste was ryally Arayd ; CMBRUT3-M3,1.10

& +tere +tey lyved in ioy and merthe y-now , that it was wonder to wete
. CMBRUT3-M3,1.11

And hit befelle +tus , +tat +tis Dioclician +toughte maryen his
Doughtres among all +to knyghtys +tat tho were at that solempnite ;
CMBRUT3-M3,1.12

<P_2>

and so they speken CMBRUT3-M3,2.14

& dede , that Albyne , his eldest doughter , & alle here sustres ,
richely were maryed vnto xxxiij kynges that wer lordes of gret honour ,
& Also power , at +tis solempnite . CMBRUT3-M3,2.15

And whanne +t=e= solempnite was done , euery kyng nome his wyf ,
CMBRUT3-M3,2.16

& lad hem into here owne cuntre , CMBRUT3-M3,2.17

and there maad hem quene . CMBRUT3-M3,2.18

And hit byfelle +tus aftyrward , +tat +tis dame Albyne bycome so stoute
& so sterne , +tat sche told litel prys of her lord , CMBRUT3-M3,2.19

And of hym hadde scorne and dyspite , CMBRUT3-M3,2.20

and wolde not done his wylle , CMBRUT3-M3,2.21

but wolde haue here owne wyll in diuerses maners . CMBRUT3-M3,2.22

And all her other sustres , eche on bere hem so euel a-yens here lordes
, +tat it was wonder to wete . CMBRUT3-M3,2.23

And for-as-mych as hem thought +tat here housebondes were not of so hye
parage comen as here fadyr . CMBRUT3-M3,2.24

But tho kynges +tat were her lordes , wolde haue chastysed with fayr
speche & byhestes , & also for +giftes , CMBRUT3-M3,2.25

and warnyd hem in fayr maner vpon all loue and frenschipe +tat +tei
scholde Amende hir lithir condi-cions ; CMBRUT3-M3,2.26

but al it was for nou+gt , CMBRUT3-M3,2.27

for they deden her owne wil in all +tyng +tat hem lykede & hadde of
power . wherfore +to xxxiij kynges vpon A tyme , and oftyn-tymes ,
beten here wyfes , for +tey wende that +tei wolde haue Amended here
tacches and here wykkyd thewes ; CMBRUT3-M3,2.28

but of such condicions +tei were +tat , for fayr speche & warnyng , +tei
deden the wors & for betynges eft-sone mych wors . Wherfore +t=e= kyng
+tat hadde wedded Albyne , wrote +t=e= tacches & +t=e= condicions of his
wyf Albyne , & +t=e= lettre sent to Dioclician , her fader .
CMBRUT3-M3,2.29

And whenne +t=e= other kynges herde that Albynes lord had sent lettre to
Dioclician , anon +tey sente lettres enseled with here seeles $of +t=e=
condicions and +t=e= tacches of here wyfes . CMBRUT3-M3,2.30

Whanne +t=e= Kyng Dioclician saw & herde so many pleyntes of his
doughters , he was sore a-schamed , CMBRUT3-M3,2.31

& bycome wonder Angry & wroth to-ward his doughters , CMBRUT3-M3,2.32

& +tought bo+t=e= nyght & day how he +to myghte amende hit +tat +tey so
mysdede . CMBRUT3-M3,2.33

And anon sente his lettres vnto +to xxxiij kynges , +tat +tey schulde
come to hym , & brynge with hem here wyfes , euerychon at a certayn day
, for he wolde +tere chastise hem of here wikkydnes , if he myghte in
eny maner wyse . So +tat +te kynges comen All at +te day & tyme +tat
<P_3> +to was sette bytwen hem ; CMBRUT3-M3,3.34

& +te Kyng Dioclician hem vndir-fenge with mychel honour ,
CMBRUT3-M3,3.35

& made A solempne feste to all +tat were vndir his lordschipe .
CMBRUT3-M3,3.36

And +te thrid day of +tat solempnyte , +te kyng Dioclician sente for his
xxxiij doughtres +tat +tei schulde come & speke with hym in his chambre
. CMBRUT3-M3,3.37

& whenne +tey were comen , he spak vn-to hem of here wikkydnes & of here
cruelte , CMBRUT3-M3,3.38

& dispitously hem reproued And vndirnam , CMBRUT3-M3,3.39

& to hem he sayde +tat , +gif +tei wolde not be chastised , +tei schulde
his loue lese for euermore . CMBRUT3-M3,3.40

And whanne +te ladyes herd al this , +tei becomen abasshed & gretly
a-schamed ; CMBRUT3-M3,3.41

& to here fadir +tey seyd +tat +tei wolde make al amendes ;
CMBRUT3-M3,3.42

& so +tey departed out from here fadres chambre . CMBRUT3-M3,3.43

and Dame Albyne , +tat was +t=e= eldest suster , lad hem all into her
chambre , CMBRUT3-M3,3.44

& +to made voide al +tat were +terin , so +tat no lyf was among hem but
sche & here sustres y-fere . CMBRUT3-M3,3.45

+t=o= saide +tis Albyne " My fair sustres , ful weel +ge knowi+t +tat
+te kyng oure fadir , vs hath reprouyd , schemed & dispised , for
encheson to make vs obedient vn-to oure housbandes ; CMBRUT3-M3,3.46

but certes +tat schal y neuere , whiles +tat I lyve , seth +tat I am
come of a more hyere kynges blod +tan my housband is . "
CMBRUT3-M3,3.47

& whan sche had so seyd , all here sustres seyd +te same .
CMBRUT3-M3,3.48

And +to seyd Albyne : " ful wel y wot , fayr sustres , +tat oure
housbandes haue playned vnto owre fadir vpon vs , wherfore he hath +tus
vs foul reproued & dispised . wherfore , sustres , my counseil is +tat
, +tis nyght , when owre housbandes ben abed , all we with on assent
cutten here throtes , CMBRUT3-M3,3.49

& +tan we mow be in pees of hem , CMBRUT3-M3,3.50

& better we mowe do +tis +ting vndir our fadres power +tan elles-where .
" CMBRUT3-M3,3.51

& anon All +te ladyes consentid and graunted vnto +tis counceil .
CMBRUT3-M3,3.52

And whan nyght was comyn , +t=e= lordes & ladies wente to bedde ,
CMBRUT3-M3,3.53

& anon as here lordes were in slepe , +tei cutte all here housbandes
throtes , CMBRUT3-M3,3.54

& so they slowen hem all . CMBRUT3-M3,3.55

whan +tat Dioclician her fader herd of +tis +ting , he by-come hugely
wroth A-+gens his Doughtres , CMBRUT3-M3,3.56

& anon wolde hem all haue brent ; CMBRUT3-M3,3.57

but Alle +t=o= barouns & lordes of Sirrye conceilyd hym not so for-@ @to
don suche sternys to his owne doughtres , but onlych schulde voide +t=e=
land of hem for euermore , so +tat +tei neuere schulde come a+gen ;
CMBRUT3-M3,3.58

& so he dede . CMBRUT3-M3,3.59

$And anon Dioclician , +tat <P_4> was here fadir , commaundid hem to gon
in-to schipe , CMBRUT3-M3,4.60

& deliueryd to hem vitailles for half a +geer . CMBRUT3-M3,4.61

and when +tis was don , all +t=e= sustryn went in-to Shipe ,
CMBRUT3-M3,4.62

& saylled forth in +t=e= See , CMBRUT3-M3,4.63

& be-toke alle her frendes to Appolyn , +tat was her god .
CMBRUT3-M3,4.64

And so long +tey sailled in +t=e= See , til at +te laste +tei come &
aryued in an yle +tat was all wyldernes . CMBRUT3-M3,4.65

And when dame Albyne was come to +tat land , & all her sustres , +tis
Albyne went ferst owt of +t=e= shipe , CMBRUT3-M3,4.66

& sayde to here o+ter sustres : " for-as-mich , " quod sche , " as I am
+t=e= eldest suster of all +tis cumpanye , & ferst +tis land haue takyn
, & for-as-meche as myn name is Albyne , y wil +tat +tis land be called
Albyon , after myn owne name ; " CMBRUT3-M3,4.67

& anon all here Sustren her graunted with a good wylle .
CMBRUT3-M3,4.68

Tho wenten owt all +t=e= Sustres of +t=e= Shippe , CMBRUT3-M3,4.69

& tokyn +t=e= lond Albyon , as here Suster called hit ; CMBRUT3-M3,4.70

& +tere +tei wente vp and doun , CMBRUT3-M3,4.71

and founde nei+ter man ne woman ne child , but wylde bestes of diuers
kyndes . CMBRUT3-M3,4.72

And whan here vitaill were dispendid , & hem faylled , +tei fedde hem
with erbes & frutes in seson of +t=e= +geer , CMBRUT3-M3,4.73

& so +tey lyued as +tei beste myght . CMBRUT3-M3,4.74

And after +tat , +tei tokyn flessh of diuers beestys , CMBRUT3-M3,4.75

and bycomen wondir fatte , CMBRUT3-M3,4.76

and so +tei desirid mannes cumpanye and mannys kynde +tat hem faylled ;
CMBRUT3-M3,4.77

and for hete they woxen wondir coraious of kynde +tat hem faylled , so
+tat +tey desirid more mannys cumpanye +tan eny other solas or merthe .
CMBRUT3-M3,4.78

Whanne +te Deuyll that perceyued and wente by diuers contres , & nome
bodyes of +t=e= eyre & lykyng natures shad of men , & come in-to +t=e=
land of Albyon and lay by +te wymmen , and schad tho natures vpon hem ,
& they conceiued , and after +tei broughten forth Geauntes , of +te
which on me called Gogmagog , and ano+ter Laugherigan , CMBRUT3-M3,4.79

& so +tei were nompned by diuers names ; CMBRUT3-M3,4.80

& in +tis manere they comen forth , CMBRUT3-M3,4.81

and weren boren horrible Geauntes in Albion ; CMBRUT3-M3,4.82

& +tey dwellyd in Cauys & in hulles at here will , CMBRUT3-M3,4.83

& had +t=e= lond of Albyon as hem liked , vn-to +t=e= tyme +tat Brut
Arryved & come to Tottenesse , +tat was in +t=e= Ile of Albyon .
CMBRUT3-M3,4.84

and +tere +tis Brut conqueryd & scomfyted these geaunte+g aboueseyd .
CMBRUT3-M3,4.85

<heading>

Here endeth +te prolog of Albyon , +tat +to was an Ile .
CMBRUT3-M3,4.87

and herkeneth now how Brute was geten , & how he slow , <P_5> ferst his
Modir , & Afterward his fadir ; & how he Con-quered Albyon , +tat After
he nepned Brytaigne , after his name , +tat now is y-called Engelond ,
After +te name of Engist of Saxoyne . CMBRUT3-M3,5.88

Capitulo Primo . CMBRUT3-M3,5.89

<$$heading>

In the noble Cyte of gret Troye , +ter was a noble knyght & a myghty , &
a man of gret power , +tat me callyd Eneas . CMBRUT3-M3,5.91

And whan +t=e= Cytee of Troye was lost & dystroyed thurgh hem of Greek ,
+tis Eneas , with al his mayn fled thens , CMBRUT3-M3,5.92

& come in-to Lumbardye , CMBRUT3-M3,5.93

+tat {COM:literal_translation_of_french_causal_"que"?} +to was lord &
gouernour of +tat land a kyng +tat me called Latyme , CMBRUT3-M3,5.94

and another kyng +to was +tat me called Turocelyn , +tat stronglich
werred vpon +tis Kyng Latyme , +tat often-tymes ded hym moche sorowe &
myche harm . CMBRUT3-M3,5.95

And whan +tis Kyng Latyme herde +tat Eneas was come , he vndirfonge hym
with myche honour , CMBRUT3-M3,5.96

and hym withhelde , for-as-myche as he had herd of hym , and wyst wel
+tat he was a noble knyght , & a worthy of body and of his dedes .
CMBRUT3-M3,5.97

This Eneas helpe Kyng Latyme in his werre ; CMBRUT3-M3,5.98

& schortly for-@ @to telle , so weel & worthyly he ded , +tat he slogh
Turocelyn , CMBRUT3-M3,5.99

& descomphyted al his peple . CMBRUT3-M3,5.100

And whan al this was don , kyng Latyme +gaf al +tat land +tat was
Turocelyns , CMBRUT3-M3,5.101

& +gaf it to Eneas in mariage with Lamane , his doughter , the moost
fayr creature +tat eny manne wiste ; CMBRUT3-M3,5.102

& so +tei louede to-gider in ioy & myrthe all here lyvys tyme .
CMBRUT3-M3,5.103

Hit bifel thus , +tat Eneas dide , as God wolde . CMBRUT3-M3,5.104

& whanne that he was ded , Asquanius his Sone , +tat come with hym from
Troye , vndirfenge +t=e= land , CMBRUT3-M3,5.105

and helde it al his lyvys tyme . CMBRUT3-M3,5.106

And after , he weddid A wyf , CMBRUT3-M3,5.107

& vpon here begate A Sone +tat me callyd Sylveyn . CMBRUT3-M3,5.108

And this Sylveyn , when he conde some reson of man , vnwetyng his fadir
, & a+gens his wyl , aqueynted with a damysell +tat was Cosyn to Lamane
+tat was Kyng Latymes doughter , the quen +tat was Eneas wyf ,
CMBRUT3-M3,5.109

and brought +t=e= damysell with Chylde . CMBRUT3-M3,5.110

And when Asquanius his fader yt wyste , anon he lete enquere of the
wysest maystres , & of +t=e= grettest Clerkys , what child +t=e=
damysele schulde bryng forth . CMBRUT3-M3,5.111

& +tey Answered CMBRUT3-M3,5.112

& seyde +tat sche schuld bryng forth a Sone +tat schuld qwelle bo+t=e=
fader & moder : CMBRUT3-M3,5.113

& so he dede : CMBRUT3-M3,5.114

for his modir dyde in beryng of <P_6> hym . CMBRUT3-M3,6.115

And whan +tis Child was born , his fadir lete calle hym Brut ;
CMBRUT3-M3,6.116

and +t=e= maystres sayd +tat +te Child schulde do mych harm & sorowe in
many diuers places ; CMBRUT3-M3,6.117

& after , he schulde come to gret honour and worschipe .
CMBRUT3-M3,6.118

This Kyng Asquanius deide whan god wolde ; CMBRUT3-M3,6.119

& Sylveyn his sone receyued +te land , CMBRUT3-M3,6.120

& made hym wonderlich wel be-louyd among his puple . CMBRUT3-M3,6.121

And whan Brut , +tat was Sylveynes sone , was xv +geer olde , he went
vpon A day with his fadir to pley & solace ; CMBRUT3-M3,6.122

& as this Brut schulde schete vnto an hert , his Arwe mys-happed &
glacede ; CMBRUT3-M3,6.123

And so there Brut quelled his fader . CMBRUT3-M3,6.124

<heading>

How Brut was dryue out of +t=e= land , & held hym in Greke .
CMBRUT3-M3,6.126

Capitulo ij=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,6.127

<$$heading>

And when this myschaunce byfalle was , +t=e= people of +t=e= land made
sorowe ynow , CMBRUT3-M3,6.129

& were an-Angryd ; CMBRUT3-M3,6.130

& for encheson +terof +tei dreven Brut out of +t=e= land ,
CMBRUT3-M3,6.131

& wolde not suffre hym among hem . CMBRUT3-M3,6.132

and he Saw +tat he moste not Abyde , CMBRUT3-M3,6.133

& went fro thens in-to +t=e= Greek ; CMBRUT3-M3,6.134

& +ter he fonde vij=Ml= men +tat were of +t=e= lynage & kynrede of Troy
, +tat weren come of gret blod , as +te story telleth as of men and
wommen & childryn , +te wheche weren all holden in thraldom and bondage
$by the Kyng Pandras of Greek , for the deth of Achilles , +tat was
betrayed and slayn at Troye . CMBRUT3-M3,6.135

This Brut was a wondir fair man , & a strong , & A huge of his Age , &
of glad chere and semblaunt , and also worthy of body , CMBRUT3-M3,6.136

& was wel beloued among his puple . CMBRUT3-M3,6.137

This Kyng Pandras herde speke of his goodnesse & his condicions ,
CMBRUT3-M3,6.138

& anon made hym dwell with hym , so +tat Brut be-come wondir +tryve &
mych belouyd with +t=e= kyng , so +tat longtyme Brut dwellyd with +te
kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,6.139

So at last +tei of Troy & Brut spoken to-gedre of kynrede & of lynage &
of Aqueyntaunce , CMBRUT3-M3,6.140

& +ter pleyned hem vnto Brut of her sorowe & her bondeage , & of meny
other schames +tat +t=e= $Kyng Pandras hem don . CMBRUT3-M3,6.141

& to Brut +tei seyde vpon A tyme : " +ge ben A lord of oure <P_7> lynage
, & A strang man & a myghty . CMBRUT3-M3,7.142

be +ge oure Avowe & oure lord , CMBRUT3-M3,7.143

& we wyl become +goure men , & +goure comandementes done in alle maner
thyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,7.144

and brynge +ge vs out of this wrechidnes & bondage , CMBRUT3-M3,7.145

& fyght we with +t=e= kyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,7.146

for thurgh +t=e= grace of +t=e= grete god we schul hym ouercome ;
CMBRUT3-M3,7.147

& we schul make +gou kyng of +t=e= land , & to +gow done homage ,
CMBRUT3-M3,7.148

& of +gow we schullen holde euer-more . " CMBRUT3-M3,7.149

Brut hadde +to gret pyte of hir bondage +tat +tei were brought Inne ,
CMBRUT3-M3,7.150

And pryvyly went hym from +t=e= kynges Court ; CMBRUT3-M3,7.151

& all +to +tat were of Troy went & put hem in-to wodes and Into
Moun-teynes , CMBRUT3-M3,7.152

and hem helde , CMBRUT3-M3,7.153

& sent to Kyng Pandras +tat he schulde +geue hem leue safely for-@ @to
wende out of +t=e= londe , CMBRUT3-M3,7.154

for +tei n@ @olde no lenger dwelle in his bondage . CMBRUT3-M3,7.155

The Kyng Pandras wax so sore anoyed , CMBRUT3-M3,7.156

& +to swore that he wolde sle hem echon , CMBRUT3-M3,7.157

& ordeyned a gret power , CMBRUT3-M3,7.158

& wente towardes hem all for-@ @to fight . CMBRUT3-M3,7.159

but Brut & his men anon manly hem defended , CMBRUT3-M3,7.160

& fersly foghten & quelled all +te kynges men , +tat non of hem Ascaped
, CMBRUT3-M3,7.161

& took +t=e= kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,7.162

& hym helden in pryson , CMBRUT3-M3,7.163

& ordeyned counceyl betwen hem what +tei myght do . CMBRUT3-M3,7.164

Sum seyd +tat he schuld be put to deth , CMBRUT3-M3,7.165

& summe seyd +tat he schulde be exyled out of +t=e= land ,
CMBRUT3-M3,7.166

& summe seyd +tat he schulde be brent . CMBRUT3-M3,7.167

And +t=o= spak a wyse knyght +tat me cleped Menprys , CMBRUT3-M3,7.168

& seyd to Brut & to all +to of Troy : " yf Kyng Pandras wold +gelde hym
, & haue his lyf , y counceyl +tat he +geue vnto Brut , +tat is our Duke
& oure souerayn , his doughter Gennogen to wyf , & in Mariage with here
an_hundrid Shippes wel arayed , & al his tresour of gold & of syluer ,
of corn , of wyn , & as myche as vs nedith for to haue of o thing & of
o+ter ; CMBRUT3-M3,7.169

& +tan go we out of +tis land , CMBRUT3-M3,7.170

& ordeine we vs land elles-wher ; CMBRUT3-M3,7.171

for we , ne non of our kynrede +tat comen after vs , schuld neuer haue
pees in +tis land amonges hem of Grek ; CMBRUT3-M3,7.172

for we haue sleyn so meny of her knyghtes & of o+ter frendes , +tat
euermor werre & contect schuld be Amonges vs . " CMBRUT3-M3,7.173

Brut +to , & his folk , consentyd wel to +tis counceyl ;
CMBRUT3-M3,7.174

& +tis +ting +tei tolden to Kyng Pandras . CMBRUT3-M3,7.175

And +t=e= kyng , for-@ @to haue his lyf , graunted as meche as +tei axed
, CMBRUT3-M3,7.176

& anon +gaf vn-to Brut , Gennogen his Doughter , to wyf , & +te hundred
<P_8> sheppes , with as myche as hem neded of all vitalles , as byfore
was ordeyned . CMBRUT3-M3,8.177

Brut +to toke his wyf , & all his men +tat forsoke +te lond of Greek ,
CMBRUT3-M3,8.178

& wenten hem vnto +t=e= see CMBRUT3-M3,8.179

& hadden wedir at wyll , CMBRUT3-M3,8.180

& comen +t=e= +trid day in-to An Ile +tat me calle+t Loegers .
CMBRUT3-M3,8.181

Brut anon sent of his men a land , for-@ @to aspye +t=e= maner of +te
Cuntre . CMBRUT3-M3,8.182

& +tey founden an olde Cyte al wasted & forlete , +tat n@ @as +ter-in
nor man ne woman , ne no thing dwellynge ; CMBRUT3-M3,8.183

& In +t=e= Myddyl of +tis Cytee +tey founden an olde Temple of a fayr
lady +tat me called Diane +te Goddesse . CMBRUT3-M3,8.184

and +tei comen a+gen vnto Brut , CMBRUT3-M3,8.185

& told hym what +tei had seyn & founden , CMBRUT3-M3,8.186

& counceyled hym to go & do sacrifice to Dame Diane , CMBRUT3-M3,8.187

for she was wont to +geue answere of what +ting +tat euere men prayed
here , & namely vn-to hem +tat her honoured with sacrifice .
CMBRUT3-M3,8.188

Brut went to +tat ymage , CMBRUT3-M3,8.189

& seyd : " Dyane , noble goddes , lady +tat al +ting hast in myght & in
+ty power , wyndes , watres , wodes , feldes , & al thinges of +te world
, & al maner bestes +tat +ter-In ben ! to +gow y make my prayer , +tat
+ge me counceyle & telle where & in what place y schal haue a
conuen-able dwellynge for me & for my peple ; CMBRUT3-M3,8.190

& +ter y schal make , in honour of +gow , a wel fayr temple , & a noble
, wheryn +ge schul euermore be honoured . " CMBRUT3-M3,8.191

When he had don his prayer , Dyane Answerid in this manere :
CMBRUT3-M3,8.192

" Brut , " quod sche , " go euenforth +ty wey ouer +te see in-to Fraunce
, toward +t=e= west , CMBRUT3-M3,8.193

& +ter +ge schul fynde an Ile +tat is called Albyon ; CMBRUT3-M3,8.194

and +tat Ile is bycompassed al with +t=e= see , CMBRUT3-M3,8.195

& no man may come +ter-In but it be by schippes ; CMBRUT3-M3,8.196

and in +tat lond were wont to be Geaunt+g ; CMBRUT3-M3,8.197

but it is not so , but al wyldir-nesse ; CMBRUT3-M3,8.198

and +tat lande to +gou is destynyed , & ordeigned for +gow & for +goure
peple . " CMBRUT3-M3,8.199

<heading>

How Coryn bycome Brutes man , & how Kyng Goffar was dis-comfited .
CMBRUT3-M3,8.201

Capitulo iij=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,8.202

<$$heading>

When Brut herde +tis Answere of Dyane +t=e= Goddes , anon he lete +t=e=
Ancres wynd vp , CMBRUT3-M3,8.204

& sayled in-to +t=e= hye see . CMBRUT3-M3,8.205

& whan he & his men had sayled xx dayes & more , +tei founden fast
bysyde a coste of +te see thre_hundred men of +te lynage & kynrede of
Troy , CMBRUT3-M3,8.206

& her souerayn & her mayster of all , men Called Coryn .
CMBRUT3-M3,8.207

<P_9>

And when Brut wyste whens +tei were , he +to vndirfong hem with mychel
ioy in-to his Shepys , CMBRUT3-M3,9.209

& hem lad forth with hym . CMBRUT3-M3,9.210

This Coryn +to bycome Brutes man , CMBRUT3-M3,9.211

& to hym dede fewte & homage . CMBRUT3-M3,9.212

& so long +tei sayled forth +tan in +t=e= See tul they come to Gas-coign
; CMBRUT3-M3,9.213

& anon +tei arryued in +t=e= hauene of Liegers , CMBRUT3-M3,9.214

& +ter +tei dwellidde viij dayes , hem for-@ @to rest , & her sayles to
Amend , +ter as nede was . CMBRUT3-M3,9.215

Tydyng sone come to Kyng Goffar , +tat was lord of +t=e= land , how +tat
myche folk of straunge land weren Arryued in his land in +t=e= hauene of
Liegiers ; wher-fore he was sore Angred & anoyed +tat +tey comen &
aryued in his land withoute leue . CMBRUT3-M3,9.216

and anon he ordeigned power hem to dryven owt , & to shende ;
CMBRUT3-M3,9.217

but Kyng Goffar was discomfyted , CMBRUT3-M3,9.218

& al his folk , & hym-self fledde in-to ffraunce to seche help & socour
. CMBRUT3-M3,9.219

And in +tat tyme regned in Fraunce xij kynges ; CMBRUT3-M3,9.220

& +t=e= elleueneth assembled a gret power for-@ @to helpe Goffar for-@
@to fight a+gens Brut . CMBRUT3-M3,9.221

Goffar dwelled with hem of Fraunce half a +gere & more .
CMBRUT3-M3,9.222

And Brut in +t=e= mene-tyme , & his cumpanye , destroyed al +t=e= land
of Gascoigne , CMBRUT3-M3,9.223

& lete take al +t=e= tresour +tat Kyng Goffar hadde , CMBRUT3-M3,9.224

& lete brynge it in-to his Shippes . CMBRUT3-M3,9.225

And +tis Brut fonde in +tat lond a fayr place & a couenable ;
CMBRUT3-M3,9.226

& +ter Brut made a fayr Castell & a strong . CMBRUT3-M3,9.227

whan +tat was don , Kyng Goffar come fro Fraunce , & xj kynges with hym
, CMBRUT3-M3,9.228

& broughten xx_M=l= men for-@ @to fight with Brut & his cumpanye .
CMBRUT3-M3,9.229

And Brut hadde but vij_M=l= men & thre_hundred . CMBRUT3-M3,9.230

Netheles , whan +te to ostes metten to-gider , Brutes folk -- thurgh
help of hym-self , & of Turyn his Cosyn , & of Coryn +tat
{COM:literal_translation_of_french_coordinating_"que"} wel & manly hym
defended & fought ; so +tat in litil tyme +tei hadde quelled of +te
Frenssh-men to M=l= & mo ; CMBRUT3-M3,9.231

& +to +tat were lyue fledden away . CMBRUT3-M3,9.232

And in this batayle Turyn , +tat was Brutes Cosyn , was sleyn ,
CMBRUT3-M3,9.233

& Brut lete hym entere worthyly , whan he had space & leyser , in +t=e=
Castell +tat he had made , CMBRUT3-M3,9.234

& +to lete <em> calle hit <$$em> Castel Tours after his owne name +tat
+tere was entered . CMBRUT3-M3,9.235

& +git in-to +tis day +ter is a noble Cytee +tat is called Tours .
CMBRUT3-M3,9.236

Whan Kyng Goffer wiste +tat Turyn was ded , he come a+gen with his men ,
CMBRUT3-M3,9.237

& after +gaf a strong battaylle vn-to Brut ; CMBRUT3-M3,9.238

but Brut & his men were so wery of fyghtynge +tat +tey myghte no lengere
<P_10> endure ; CMBRUT3-M3,10.239

but maugre hym & al his , Brut & his men went in-to his Castell with all
his men , CMBRUT3-M3,10.240

and made +t=e= +gates fast for-@ @to saue hem-self , & for-@ @to take
counceill amonges hem what were best to done . CMBRUT3-M3,10.241

Brut & Coryn nome counceill , CMBRUT3-M3,10.242

& ordeigned +tat Coryn pryuyly shuld gon out at a Posterne of +t=e=
Castell , with half his men , CMBRUT3-M3,10.243

& schuld go & bussh hem in A wode til amorowe , so +tat in +t=e= mornyng
, when Brut schuld fyght with his enemyes , Coryn schulde come with hes
folk in +tat o syde , & sle and do all +t=e= harme +tat he myght .
CMBRUT3-M3,10.244

And amorow in +te dawnenge , Brut went out of +t=e= Castell ,
CMBRUT3-M3,10.245

& faught with his enemyes , CMBRUT3-M3,10.246

& +tey hem fersly defendid . CMBRUT3-M3,10.247

but with_Inne a litil tyme Brut & his folk hadden slayn viij_C of
Goffars men ; CMBRUT3-M3,10.248

And +to come Coryn fro +te busshement , CMBRUT3-M3,10.249

& smote to grounde , he & his Cumpanye , al +tat wold stande or Abyde ,
so +tat Kyng Goffar & his folk were discomfited , CMBRUT3-M3,10.250

& faste they gunne to fle . CMBRUT3-M3,10.251

And Brut & Coryn , with here companye , fresshly hem pursued ,
CMBRUT3-M3,10.252

& quelled of hem mo in fleyng +tan +tei dede in batayll .
CMBRUT3-M3,10.253

And in +tat manere Brut hadde +t=e= victorye . CMBRUT3-M3,10.254

And ne+teles Brut made myche sorowe for his Cosyn Turyn , +tat +ter was
slayn , & for o+ter also +tat he had lost of his men , +tat is to seyne
, vij_C_and_xv , +te which $he noblich lete entere in +t=e= Castell of
Tours , +ter +tat he had entered Turyn his Cosyn . CMBRUT3-M3,10.255

<heading>

How Brut Aryued at Tottenes in +te Ile of Albyon ; & of +t=e= Bataylle
+tat was betwen Coryn & Gogmagog . CMBRUT3-M3,10.257

Capitulo quarto . CMBRUT3-M3,10.258

<$$heading>

Whan al +tis was done , Brut wolde no lengere +ter dwelle for to fight ,
ne mo lese of his peple , CMBRUT3-M3,10.260

for Kyng Goffarys peple myght euery day encrece mo & mo , & Brutes
lassen ; CMBRUT3-M3,10.261

& therfore he nome all his men , CMBRUT3-M3,10.262

& went vnto +t=e= See , CMBRUT3-M3,10.263

& hadde wynd & wedir at wille . CMBRUT3-M3,10.264

and +t=e= v day afterward they aryued in an hauene of Tot-nesse ,
CMBRUT3-M3,10.265

& comen in-to +t=e= Ile of Albion ; CMBRUT3-M3,10.266

& +ter +tey founde nei+ter man ne woman , as +t=e= story telle+t , but
Geauntz ; CMBRUT3-M3,10.267

& +tey woned in hulles and in Caues . CMBRUT3-M3,10.268

Brut saw +t=e= land was fayr , & at his likynge , & good also for hym &
for his folk , as Dyane +t=e= goddes had hym behyght .
CMBRUT3-M3,10.269

+to was Brut wonder glad , CMBRUT3-M3,10.270

& lete assemble vpon a day al his folk , to make a solempne sacrifice &
a gret feste in honour <P_11> & reuerence of Dyane , +turght whas
counceill he was come in-to +tat land . CMBRUT3-M3,11.271

And whan they had her solempnyte maad , as +tey vpon a day were at mete
, +ter come yn vpon hem sodenly xxx Geaunt+g , CMBRUT3-M3,11.272

& quellyd of Brutes men xxx . CMBRUT3-M3,11.273

Brut & his men anon stertyn vp , CMBRUT3-M3,11.274

& his men foughten with +t=e= Geaunt+g , CMBRUT3-M3,11.275

& quellyd hem euerychon but o Geaunt , +tat was Mayster of hem all ,
+tat me called Gogmagog , +tat was strenger & heyer +tan eny of +t=e=
other Geaunt+g ; CMBRUT3-M3,11.276

& Brut kepte hym , CMBRUT3-M3,11.277

& sauyd his lyf , for encheson +tat he schulde wrestle with Coryn ,
CMBRUT3-M3,11.278

for Coryn was grettere & hugere +tan eny of Brutes men fro +t=e= gerdel
stede vpward . CMBRUT3-M3,11.279

Gogmagog & Coryn vndirtook to wrastelyn y-fere ; CMBRUT3-M3,11.280

& so to-gider +tey wrasteled long tyme , CMBRUT3-M3,11.281

but at +te last Gogmagog helde Coryn so fast +tat he brak ij rybbys of
his syde , wherfore Coryn was sore agreuyd , CMBRUT3-M3,11.282

& nome +to Gogmagog betwene his Armes , CMBRUT3-M3,11.283

& cast hym doun vpon a roche , so +tat Gogmagog brak al to peces ,
CMBRUT3-M3,11.284

& so he dyde in evill deth ; CMBRUT3-M3,11.285

& +terfore +t=e= place is called +git in-to +tis day ' +te sawte of
Gogmagog . ' CMBRUT3-M3,11.286

& +to +gaf Brute al +tat Cuntre to Coryn ; CMBRUT3-M3,11.287

& Coryn called $hit after his name ' Cornewayle ' ; CMBRUT3-M3,11.288

& his men he called ' Corne-wayles ' CMBRUT3-M3,11.289

& $so schul men of +tat Cuntre be called for euermore .
CMBRUT3-M3,11.290

And in +tat Cuntre dwellyd Coryn & his men , CMBRUT3-M3,11.291

& made Tounes & houses , CMBRUT3-M3,11.292

& enhabited +te land at her wylle . CMBRUT3-M3,11.293

<heading>

How Brut made London , & Called +tis land Brytaigne , & Scotland Albyne
, & Walys Camber . CMBRUT3-M3,11.295

Capitulo quinto . CMBRUT3-M3,11.296

<$$heading>

Brut and his men wenten forth CMBRUT3-M3,11.298

& sought aboute in diuers places wher they myghte fynde a good place & a
couenable +tat +tey myghte $make in a Cytee for hym and for his folk ,
CMBRUT3-M3,11.299

so at +te laste +tey come by a fayr Ryuer +tat is called +t=e= Tamyse ;
CMBRUT3-M3,11.300

& +ter Brut be-gan a fayre Cyte for hym & for his folk ,
CMBRUT3-M3,11.301

& lete calle it ' +t=e= new Troye , ' in mynde & remembraunce of +t=e=
gret Troye , for which place all her lynage was comen .
CMBRUT3-M3,11.302

And +tis Brut lete felle adoun wodes , CMBRUT3-M3,11.303

& lete erye & sowe londes , CMBRUT3-M3,11.304

& done mow medes for sustinaunce of hym & of his peple .
CMBRUT3-M3,11.305

& he departed +t=e= land to hem , so +tat eche of hem had a certayn
place for to dwelle vpon . CMBRUT3-M3,11.306

And <P_12> Brut lete Calle al +tis land Britaigne , after his owne name
, CMBRUT3-M3,12.307

& his folk he lete calle Britouns . CMBRUT3-M3,12.308

And +tis Brut had geten on his wyf Gennogen iij sones +tat were worthy
of dedes : CMBRUT3-M3,12.309

+t=e= firste me callyd Lotryn , +t=e= secounde Albanac , & +t=e= thryd
kambyr . CMBRUT3-M3,12.310

And Brut bare Crowne in +t=e= Cyte of newe Troye xx +geer after tyme the
Cyte was made ; CMBRUT3-M3,12.311

& ther he made +te lawes +tat +t=e= Britouns holde+t : CMBRUT3-M3,12.312

& +tis Brut was wondirly weel byloued among all men ; CMBRUT3-M3,12.313

& Brutes Sones also loueden wonderly wel to-gydere . CMBRUT3-M3,12.314

And whan Brut had sowte all +t=e= lond in lengthe & brede , he fonde A
land +tat ioyned to Brytaigne in +t=e= north ; CMBRUT3-M3,12.315

and +tat land Brut +gaf to Albanac his sone , CMBRUT3-M3,12.316

and he lete calle yt Albanye after his name +tat now is called Scotland
. CMBRUT3-M3,12.317

And Brut fonde anothir Cuntre toward +t=e= west ; CMBRUT3-M3,12.318

& +tat he +gaf to Cambre his other sone , CMBRUT3-M3,12.319

& he lete calle yt Cambre aftyr his name , CMBRUT3-M3,12.320

& now is called Walys . CMBRUT3-M3,12.321

And when Brut had regnyd xx +geer , as byfore is sayd , he dyde in +t=e=
Cytee of newe Troy , CMBRUT3-M3,12.322

& +tere his Sones hym entered with mychil honour . CMBRUT3-M3,12.323

And Lotryn , Brutes sone , was Crowned kyng with myche solempnyte of all
+t=e= land of Brytaigne . CMBRUT3-M3,12.324

And after , whan he was Crouned , Albanak & Camber , his too brethryn ,
went a+gen in-to here owne Cuntre , CMBRUT3-M3,12.325

& leuedyn with myche honour , CMBRUT3-M3,12.326

& Lotryn here brother regned CMBRUT3-M3,12.327

& was kyng CMBRUT3-M3,12.328

and gouerned +t=e= land wel & wysely , CMBRUT3-M3,12.329

for he was a good man , & wondir wel belouyd of all his land .
CMBRUT3-M3,12.330

And it befel so +tat Albanac dwelde in his owne land with myche honour &
worschepe . CMBRUT3-M3,12.331

And so come Kyng Humbar of Hunland with a gret power & strengthe ,
CMBRUT3-M3,12.332

& Arryved in Albanye , CMBRUT3-M3,12.333

& wolde haue conqueryd +t=e= land , CMBRUT3-M3,12.334

& bygan to werre vpon Albanak , CMBRUT3-M3,12.335

& hym quelled in bataylle . CMBRUT3-M3,12.336

Whan Albanac was slayn , +te folk of +t=e= land flye vn-to Lotryn ,
CMBRUT3-M3,12.337

& told hym , for he was Kyng of Brytaigne , how +tat his brother was
slayn , CMBRUT3-M3,12.338

& prayed hym of help for-@ @to Auenge his brotherys deth .
CMBRUT3-M3,12.339

Lotryn anon lete asemble all +t=e= Brytouns of Kent , of Douorre , vn-to
Derewent , of Northfolk & Southfolc , of Kestefen & of Lyndeseye ;
CMBRUT3-M3,12.340

& whan they were all Assembled , +tei spedde faste toward her enemyes
for to +geue hem bataylle . CMBRUT3-M3,12.341

Lotryn had sent to Camber , his Brother , +tat he schuld come also to
hym with all +t=e= power that he myght , hym for-@ @to helpe ;
CMBRUT3-M3,12.342

& so he dede , with good <P_13> will . CMBRUT3-M3,13.343

So +tei comen all to-gedres , CMBRUT3-M3,13.344

& nome her wey priuyly for to seche Humbar wher +tey myghte hym fynde .
CMBRUT3-M3,13.345

And so it byfel +tat +tis Humbar was besides a water +tat was a gret
Ryuer , with his folk , hym for to dysport ; CMBRUT3-M3,13.346

and +to come Lotryn & Camber his brother , with all his folk sodeynly ,
or +tat eny of +tat o+ter it wyste . CMBRUT3-M3,13.347

And when Humbar saw hem come , he was sore adrad , forasmyche as his men
wist it not , CMBRUT3-M3,13.348

& also +tey were vnarrayed . CMBRUT3-M3,13.349

And anon Humbar for drede , lept in-to +t=e= water CMBRUT3-M3,13.350

& drenchyd hym-self , CMBRUT3-M3,13.351

& so deide : CMBRUT3-M3,13.352

he & his men weren all y-slayn , +tat non of hem ascaped .
CMBRUT3-M3,13.353

And +terfore is +tat water called Humbar , CMBRUT3-M3,13.354

& euer-more schal@ @be , for encheson +tat Kyng Humbar was +ter-In
drenched . CMBRUT3-M3,13.355

And after +tat , Lotryn wente to here shippes , CMBRUT3-M3,13.356

& toke +ter gold & siluer , and as myche as he fand vn-to hym-self ;
CMBRUT3-M3,13.357

& all +tat other pylfre he +gaf vn-to other folk of +t=e= ost .
CMBRUT3-M3,13.358

& +tei founden in oon of +to shippes A fayr Damysell +tat was Kyng
Humbarys doughter , CMBRUT3-M3,13.359

& me called her Estrilde . CMBRUT3-M3,13.360

And whan Lotryn saw here , he took here with hym for here fayrnesse ,
CMBRUT3-M3,13.361

and for here , was on_taken for loue , CMBRUT3-M3,13.362

& wolde haue weddid here . CMBRUT3-M3,13.363

+tis tydynges come to Coryn : CMBRUT3-M3,13.364

anon he thought to Auenge hym vpon Lotryn , for-as-meche as Lotryn had
made couenaunt for-@ @to spowsen Corynys doughter , +tat me called
Guentolen . CMBRUT3-M3,13.365

And Coryn in haste wente to hym , vn-to +t=e= Newe Troye ,
CMBRUT3-M3,13.366

& +tus sayd to Lotryn : CMBRUT3-M3,13.367

" Now certes , " quod he , " +ge rewarden me ful euel for all +t=e=
paynes +tat I suffryd & hadde many tymes for Brut , +goure fader ;
CMBRUT3-M3,13.368

& therfore I wyl now Auenge me vpon +gow ; " CMBRUT3-M3,13.369

& drow his fauchon an hye , CMBRUT3-M3,13.370

and wold haue slayn Lotryn , CMBRUT3-M3,13.371

but +t=e= Damysell went be-twen hem , CMBRUT3-M3,13.372

& made hem acorded in +tis manere , +tat Lotryn schuld spouse Guentolen
, +tat was Corynys doughter ; CMBRUT3-M3,13.373

and so Lotryn dede , CMBRUT3-M3,13.374

and ne+teles , +tei he had spoused Corynys doughter pryuylich , he come
to Estrilde , CMBRUT3-M3,13.375

& brought here with childe , CMBRUT3-M3,13.376

& gate on here A doughter +tat me called Abraham . CMBRUT3-M3,13.377

hyt byfel anon after , +tat Coryn dide ; CMBRUT3-M3,13.378

& anon as he was ded , Lotryn forsook Guentolen his wyf ,
CMBRUT3-M3,13.379

& made Estrylde quene . CMBRUT3-M3,13.380

And Guentolen went +tens al in wrathe in-to Cornewaylle ,
CMBRUT3-M3,13.381

& seised all +t=e= land in-to her hand , for-as-myche as sche was here
Fadrys eyr , CMBRUT3-M3,13.382

& vndirfonge feautes & homages of all +t=e= men of +t=e= land ,
CMBRUT3-M3,13.383

and after <P_14> Assembled a gret oste & a gret power , for-@ @to be
vpon Lotryn auenged , +tat was her lord , CMBRUT3-M3,14.384

and to hym come , CMBRUT3-M3,14.385

& +gaf hym A Strong bataill . CMBRUT3-M3,14.386

& +ter was Lotryn slayn , & his men descomfited , +t=e= v +geer of his
Reigne . CMBRUT3-M3,14.387

Guentolen lete take Estrilde , and Abraham here dougter ,
CMBRUT3-M3,14.388

and bynde bo+t=e= hondes and fete , CMBRUT3-M3,14.389

& caste hem in-to a water ; CMBRUT3-M3,14.390

& so +tey were drenchyd ; wherfore +tat water was euermore called after
, ' Abraham , ' after +t=e= name of +t=e= damysell +tat was Estrildes
doughter ; CMBRUT3-M3,14.391

& englissh-men called +tat water Seuerne , CMBRUT3-M3,14.392

& Walsshmen called +tat water Abraham , into +tis day .
CMBRUT3-M3,14.393

And when +tis was don Guentolen lete Crowne her quene of +tat land ,
CMBRUT3-M3,14.394

& gouerned +t=e= land ful well & wysely vnto +t=e= tyme +tat Madhon her
Sone , +tat Lotryn had begete vpon here , wer of xx +ger Age , +tat he
myght be kyng ; so +tat +t=e= qwen regned xv +geer ; CMBRUT3-M3,14.395

& +to lete she crowne here sone ; CMBRUT3-M3,14.396

& he regned & gouerned +t=e= land wel & honour-ably ; CMBRUT3-M3,14.397

& sche wente in-to Cornewaill , CMBRUT3-M3,14.398

& +ter sche dwellid al her lyves tyme . CMBRUT3-M3,14.399

<heading>

Of Kyng Madhan , how he regnede in pees al his lif ; and of Menpris and
of Manlyn his sones ; and how Menpris slough Manlyn his bro+ter , and
how wolfes drow him al to peces . CMBRUT3-M3,14.401

Capitulo Sexto . CMBRUT3-M3,14.402

<$$heading>

When Madhan hade regnede xxx=ti= +gere , he deide , CMBRUT3-M3,14.404

and li+t at newe Troye , CMBRUT3-M3,14.405

and he hade ij sones : CMBRUT3-M3,14.406

+tat on me callede Menpris , and +tat o+tere Manlyn ; CMBRUT3-M3,14.407

and +tise ij bre+terne , after here fadres deth , stryuen faste for +te
lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,14.408

and Menpris for enchesoun +tat he was eldest , wolde haue hade al +tat
Londe ; CMBRUT3-M3,14.409

and Manlyn wolde nou+gt suffren him , so +tat +tai token a day of loue
and of accorde ; CMBRUT3-M3,14.410

and at +tis day Menpris lete quelle his bro+ter +trou+g tresoun ,
CMBRUT3-M3,14.411

and him-self afterward helde +te lande , CMBRUT3-M3,14.412

and anone lete croune him kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,14.413

and regnede , CMBRUT3-M3,14.414

and after , he bicome so lu+ter a man +tat he destroyede in a while alle
+te men of his lande . CMBRUT3-M3,14.415

and at +te last he bicome so wickede and so leccherous , +tat he forsoke
his owen wif , CMBRUT3-M3,14.416

& vsede +te synne of Sodomye ; wherfore almighty God was wro+t , and
oppon him toke vengeance . CMBRUT3-M3,14.417

ffor vppon a day , as he went in a wode in huntyng , he loste his folc ,
CMBRUT3-M3,14.418

and went <P_15> allone vp and doun criyng after his men ;
CMBRUT3-M3,15.419

and +tere come wolfes , CMBRUT3-M3,15.420

and alto-drowe him into pecis ; CMBRUT3-M3,15.421

and +to he hade regnede xxiiij +ger . CMBRUT3-M3,15.422

and when his peple wist +tat he was dede , +tai made ioye ynow ,
CMBRUT3-M3,15.423

and anone made Ebrak his sone kyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,15.424

and he regnede with michil honour . CMBRUT3-M3,15.425

<heading>

Of Kyng Ebrac , how he conquerede ffraunce , and bigate xx=ti= sones and
xxiij dou+gtres . CMBRUT3-M3,15.427

Capitulo Septimo . CMBRUT3-M3,15.428

<$$heading>

This Ebrac regnede .lx. +ger , CMBRUT3-M3,15.430

and stronge man was , & mi+gty , CMBRUT3-M3,15.431

and +tis Ebrac , +trou+g his mi+gt , and helpe of his Britons ,
conquerede al ffraunce , CMBRUT3-M3,15.432

and wan +tere so miche golde and siluer +tat , when he come a+geyne into
+tis lande , he made a noble citee , CMBRUT3-M3,15.433

and after his name lete calle it Ebrac , after his name , +tat now is
callede Euerwik . CMBRUT3-M3,15.434

and +tis king Ebrac made +te castel of Maydenes +tat now is clepede
Edenburght . CMBRUT3-M3,15.435

This kyng hade xx sones and xxiij dou+gtres , be diuerse wymmen geten ;
CMBRUT3-M3,15.436

and +te sones were callede as +ge shul hure ; Brut Greneshal , Margand ,
Seisel , Morghwith Flenghan , Bladud , Iakyn , Kymbar , Rocelyn ,
Spadogh , Godeherl , Thormnan , Eldaugh , Iorkanghut , Haybor , Ketyn ,
Rother , Kaier , & Assaruth . CMBRUT3-M3,15.437

And +te doughtres highten as +ge shul hur after : Elegyne , Ymmogen ,
Oghdas , Guenbran , Guardiche , Angarel , Guentolde , Tangustel ,
Gorghon , Michel , Medham , Mailour , Ondur , Cambredan , Rogan ,
Reuthely , Neest , Cheghem , Scadud , Gladus , Heberhyn , Abalaghe , and
Blandan : CMBRUT3-M3,15.438

and +tise were +t=o= xxiij dou+gtres ; CMBRUT3-M3,15.439

and +te bre+terne bicome gode kny+gtes and wor+ti in meny contres .
CMBRUT3-M3,15.440

<heading>

Of +te Kyng Brut Greneshal , +te ferste sone of Ebrac the kyng .
CMBRUT3-M3,15.442

Capitulo Octauo . CMBRUT3-M3,15.443

<$$heading>

After +te deth of Kyng Ebrac , regnede Brut Greneshel , his sone xxx
+ger , +tat was Ebrakes ferst sone , +tat wel and noblye regnede .
CMBRUT3-M3,15.445

and when tyme come , he deide , CMBRUT3-M3,15.446

and li+t at +gork . CMBRUT3-M3,15.447

<heading>

Of kyng Leyl . CMBRUT3-M3,15.449

Capitulo. Nono . CMBRUT3-M3,15.450

<$$heading>

ANd when Brut Greneshal was dede , regnede his sone Leil xxij +gere ;
CMBRUT3-M3,15.452

and he made a faire toune , CMBRUT3-M3,15.453

and lete calle it Karleil after his name , CMBRUT3-M3,15.454

and was a wor+ti man , and miche bilouede <P_16> of his people ,
CMBRUT3-M3,16.455

and when he hade regnede xxij $years he deide , CMBRUT3-M3,16.456

and li+t at Karleil . CMBRUT3-M3,16.457

And in his tyme renede Kyng Salamon in Jerusalem , +tat made +te noble
temple ; CMBRUT3-M3,16.458

and to him come to Ierusalem , Sibille , Quene of Saba , for-@ @to hure
and see if it were so+te +tat men spoken of +te grete noblee and wisdome
, and of witte of Kyng Salamon : CMBRUT3-M3,16.459

and she founde it soth +tat men hade here tolde . CMBRUT3-M3,16.460

<heading>

Of Kyng Lud Ludibras , +tat was Kyng Leiles sone . CMBRUT3-M3,16.462

Capitulo x=mo= . CMBRUT3-M3,16.463

<$$heading>

And after +tis Kyng Leil , regnede his sone Lud Ludybras , +tat made +te
citee of Kaunterbery and of Wynchestre ; CMBRUT3-M3,16.465

and he regnede xiij +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,16.466

and deide , CMBRUT3-M3,16.467

and lith at Wynchestre . CMBRUT3-M3,16.468

<heading>

Of +te kyng Bladuc , +tat was Ludybras sone , CMBRUT3-M3,16.470

regnede , CMBRUT3-M3,16.471

and was a gode man and a nygromancer . CMBRUT3-M3,16.472

Capitulo xi=mo= . CMBRUT3-M3,16.473

<$$heading>

And after +tis Lud Ludebras , regnede Bladud his sone , a grete
nigromancer ; CMBRUT3-M3,16.475

and +trou+g his crafte of nigromancie he made +te meruailous hote bathe
, as +te gest telle+t , CMBRUT3-M3,16.476

& he regnede xxj +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,16.477

and he lith at +te newe Troye . CMBRUT3-M3,16.478

<heading>

OF KYNG LEIR , AND OF +TE ANSUERE OF HIS +GONGEST DOU+GTER , +TAT
GRACIOUSELY WAS MARIEDE TO +TE KYNG OF FRAUNCE . CMBRUT3-M3,16.480

C. XIJ . CMBRUT3-M3,16.481

<$$heading>

After +tis Kyng Bladud , regnede Leir his sone ; CMBRUT3-M3,16.483

and +tis Leir made +te toune of Leycestre , CMBRUT3-M3,16.484

and lete calle +te toune after his name ; CMBRUT3-M3,16.485

and he gouernede +te lande wel and $nobly . CMBRUT3-M3,16.486

+tis kyng Leir hade iij doughtres : CMBRUT3-M3,16.487

+te ferst highte Gonorille , +te secunde Rigan , and +te +tridde
Cordeile ; CMBRUT3-M3,16.488

and +te +gongest doughter was fairest and best of condiciouns .
CMBRUT3-M3,16.489

+te king here fader bicome an olde man , CMBRUT3-M3,16.490

and wolde +tat his doughtres were mariede or +tat he deide .
CMBRUT3-M3,16.491

but ferst he +tougt assaye whiche of ham louede him most and best ;
CMBRUT3-M3,16.492

for she +tat louede him best shulde best bene mariede .
CMBRUT3-M3,16.493

and he axede of +te ferst $doughter how miche she louede him ;
CMBRUT3-M3,16.494

and she ansuerede CMBRUT3-M3,16.495

and saide , ' bettre +tan here owen <P_17> lif . ' CMBRUT3-M3,17.496

" Now certes , " quod +te fader , " +tat is a grete loue . "
CMBRUT3-M3,17.497

+To axede he of +te secunde doughter , how miche she him louede ;
CMBRUT3-M3,17.498

and she saide , ' more , and passing al +te creatures leuyng of +te
worlde . ' CMBRUT3-M3,17.499

" ma foy , " quod +te fader , " y may no more axen . "
CMBRUT3-M3,17.500

And +to axede he of +te $+tridde {TEXT:pridde} doughter , how miche she
him louede . CMBRUT3-M3,17.501

" certes , fader , " quod she , " my sustres haue tolde +gow glosyng
wordes ; CMBRUT3-M3,17.502

but for-so+te y shal tel +gow treu+t : CMBRUT3-M3,17.503

for y loue +gow as miche as me owe+t to loue my fader ;
CMBRUT3-M3,17.504

and for@ @to bryng +gow more in certeine how loue go+t , I shal +gow
telle , CMBRUT3-M3,17.505

for-@ @as-@ @miche as +ge bene wor+te , as muche shal +ge bene louede .
" CMBRUT3-M3,17.506

The kyng here fader wende +tat she hade scornede him , CMBRUT3-M3,17.507

and bicome wonder wroth , CMBRUT3-M3,17.508

and swore by heuen and er+te +tat she shulde neuer haue goode of him ;
CMBRUT3-M3,17.509

but his dou+gtres +tat louede him so miche shulde be wel auauncede and
mariede . CMBRUT3-M3,17.510

and +te ferste dougter he mariede to Mangles , King of Scotlande ;
CMBRUT3-M3,17.511

And +te secunde he mariede to Hanemos , Erl of Cornewaile ;
CMBRUT3-M3,17.512

and so +tai ordeynede and speke bituene ham +tat +tai shulde departe +te
reaune bituene ham too , after +te de+t of Leir her fader , So +tat
Cordeil his +gongest doughter shulde no+ting haue of his lande .
CMBRUT3-M3,17.513

but +tis Cordeil was wonder faire , and of so goode condicions and
maners , +tat +te Kyng of Fraunce , Agampe , herde of here speke ,
CMBRUT3-M3,17.514

and sent to +te Kyng Leir , $her fader , for to haue her vnto wif ,
CMBRUT3-M3,17.515

and prayede him +terof . CMBRUT3-M3,17.516

And Kyng Leir here fader sent him worde +tat he hade departede the land
to his ij o+tere dou+gtres , CMBRUT3-M3,17.517

and saide he n@ @ade no more lande wherwi+t her for@ @to marie .
CMBRUT3-M3,17.518

And when Agampe herde +tis ansuere , he sent anone a+geyne to Leir ,
CMBRUT3-M3,17.519

and saide +tat he axede no+ting wi+t here , but oneliche heir clo+ting
and oneliche heir body ; CMBRUT3-M3,17.520

and anone Kyng Leire here fader sent here ouer +te see to +te Kyng of
France ; CMBRUT3-M3,17.521

and he resceyuede here wi+t michel worship and wi+t michel solempnite ,
CMBRUT3-M3,17.522

& made here Quene of Fraunce . CMBRUT3-M3,17.523

<P_18>

<heading>

HOW KYNG LEIR WAS DRYUEN OUT OF HIS LANDE +TROU+G HIS OWEN FOLYE ; AND
HOW CORDEIL HIS +GONGEST DOUGHTER HALPE HIM IN HIS NEDE .
CMBRUT3-M3,18.526

CAPITULO TERCIODECIMO . CMBRUT3-M3,18.527

<$$heading>

Thus it bifel afterwarde , +tat +to ij eldest doughtren wolde nou+gt
abide til +tat Leir here fader were dede , CMBRUT3-M3,18.529

but werrede oppon him whiles +tat he leuede , CMBRUT3-M3,18.530

and miche sorwe and shame him dede ; wherfore +tai binome him holly +te
reaume , and bituene ham hade ordeynede +tat one of ham shulde haue Kyng
Leir to soiourne al his lif tyme , with xl kny+gtes and heir squyers ,
+tat he might worshipfully gone & ryde whider +tat he wolde , and into
what contre +tat him likede , to playe and to solacen .
CMBRUT3-M3,18.531

So +tat Managles Kyng of Scotlande , hade Kyng Leir with him in +te
maner +tat is abouer-saide , CMBRUT3-M3,18.532

and , or o+tere half +gere were passede , Corneil his eldest dou+gter ,
+tat was Quene of Scotland , was so annoyed wi+t him and wi+t his peple
, +tat anone she and here lorde spoken to-gederes , wherefor his
kny+gtes half , and his squyers , fram him were gone , and nomo lefte
but oneliche xxx . CMBRUT3-M3,18.533

And when +tis was done , Leire biganne for@ @to make miche sorwe , for
enchesoun +tat his state was enpeirede , CMBRUT3-M3,18.534

and men hade of him more scorne and despite +tan euer +tai hade biforne
; wherfore he n@ @yst what for@ @to done ; and at +te last +tou+gt +tat
he wolde wende into Cornewaile , to Rigan his o+tere doughter .
CMBRUT3-M3,18.535

And when he was comen , +te erl and his wif , +tat was Leires doughter ,
him welcomede , CMBRUT3-M3,18.536

and with him made miche ioye ; CMBRUT3-M3,18.537

and +tere he duellede with xxx kny+gtes and squyers . CMBRUT3-M3,18.538

And he n@ @ade nought duellede +tere scarsly tuelf mone+t , +tat his
doughter of him n@ @as ful , and of his company ; CMBRUT3-M3,18.539

and her lorde and she , of him hade scorne and despite , so +tat fram
xxx kny+gtes +tai brou+gten vnto x , and afterwarde v ;
CMBRUT3-M3,18.540

and so +tere lefte wi+t him nomo . CMBRUT3-M3,18.541

+To made he sorwe ynow , CMBRUT3-M3,18.542

and saide , sore wepyng , ' allas +tat euer he come into +tat Lande ! '
CMBRUT3-M3,18.543

and saide , ' +gitte hade me bene bettre for@ @to haue duellede with my
ferst doughter CMBRUT3-M3,18.544

<em> and anon went +tens a+geyne to his ferst dou+gter <$$em> . '
CMBRUT3-M3,18.545

But anone as she saw him come , she swore by God and his holy names ,
and by as miche as she might , +tat he shulde haue nomo wi+t him but one
kny+gt , if he <P_19> wolde +tere abide . CMBRUT3-M3,19.546

+To bigan Leir a+geyn to wepe , CMBRUT3-M3,19.547

and made muche sorwe , CMBRUT3-M3,19.548

and saide +to : " allas ! now to longe haue y leuede , +tat +tis sorwe
and meschief is now to me falle ; CMBRUT3-M3,19.549

for now y am poer , CMBRUT3-M3,19.550

and some tyme y was ryche ; CMBRUT3-M3,19.551

but now haue y no frende ne kyn +tat me wil do eny maner goode .
CMBRUT3-M3,19.552

But when y was ryche , alle men me honourede and worsshepede ;
CMBRUT3-M3,19.553

and now euery man hath of me scorne and despite ! CMBRUT3-M3,19.554

and now y wote wel +tat Cordeil , my +gonge doughter , saide me treu+t
when she saide ' as michel as y hade , so michel shulde y be louede ' ;
CMBRUT3-M3,19.555

and all +te while +tat y hade goode , +to was y belouede and honourede
for my rychesse ; CMBRUT3-M3,19.556

but my ij doughtres me glosede +to , CMBRUT3-M3,19.557

and now of me +tai sette litel pris , CMBRUT3-M3,19.558

and so+t tolde me Cordeil , CMBRUT3-M3,19.559

but y wolde nou+gt bileue it , ne vnderstonde , CMBRUT3-M3,19.560

and +terfore y lete here gon fro me as a +ting +tat y sette litel pris
of ; CMBRUT3-M3,19.561

and now wote y neuer what for@ @to done , se+t my ij doughtres have me
+tus desceyuede , +tat y so michel louede ; CMBRUT3-M3,19.562

and now moste me nedes seche here +tat is in an o+tere lande , +tat
lighly y lete here go fro me without eny reward of +giftes ;
CMBRUT3-M3,19.563

and she saide +tat ' she louede me as miche as she outh here fader , bi
al maner resoun ' ; CMBRUT3-M3,19.564

and +to y shulde haue axede of here no more ; CMBRUT3-M3,19.565

and +to +tat me o+tere-wise bihi+gten +trou+g here faire speche , now
haue me desceyuede ! " CMBRUT3-M3,19.566

In +tis maner Leir longe tyme him bigan to mak his mone ;
CMBRUT3-M3,19.567

and at +te last he shoope him to +te see , CMBRUT3-M3,19.568

and passede ouer into France , CMBRUT3-M3,19.569

and axede and aspiede wher the Quene my+gt be founde ; CMBRUT3-M3,19.570

and men tolde where +tat she was . CMBRUT3-M3,19.571

And when he come to +te citee +tat she was in , priueliche he sent his
Squyer vnto +te quene , to tel her +tat heir fader was comen to her for
grete nede . CMBRUT3-M3,19.572

And when +te squyer come to the quene , he tolde her euery dele of heir
sustres fram +te bigynnyng vnto +te ende . CMBRUT3-M3,19.573

Cordeil +te Quene anone nome golde and siluer , grete plente ,
CMBRUT3-M3,19.574

and toke it to +te squyer , in conseile +tat he shulde go and bere it
vnto here fader , and +tat he shulde go into a certeyn Citee , and him
arreyen , ba+ten and wesshen , <P_20> and +tan come a+geyne to her , and
bryng with him an honest company of kny+gtes , xl. at +te leste , with
here meny ; and +tenne he shulde sende to here lorde +te kyng , and
sayen +tat he was comen for@ @to speke with his dou+gter , and him to
seene . CMBRUT3-M3,20.575

And when +te kyng and +te quene herde +tat , wi+t michel honour +tai
comen , CMBRUT3-M3,20.576

and him resceyuede . CMBRUT3-M3,20.577

+Te kyng of Fraunce lete sende +to +trou+g al his reaume ,
CMBRUT3-M3,20.578

and commandede +tat alle men to him shulde bene entendaunt , to Leire ,
+te Quenes fader , in al maner +ting as it were to him-self .
CMBRUT3-M3,20.579

when Leir hade duellede +tere a mon+te and more , he tolde to +te kyng
and to +te Quene his doughter , how his ij eldeste dou+gtres hade him
seruede . CMBRUT3-M3,20.580

Agampe anone lete ordeyne a grete hoste of Fraunce , CMBRUT3-M3,20.581

and sent it into Britaigne with Leir , +te Quenes fader , for@ @to
conquere his lande a+geyne , and his kyngdome ; CMBRUT3-M3,20.582

and Cordeil also come with her fader into Britaigne , for@ @to haue +te
reaume after her fadres deth . CMBRUT3-M3,20.583

And anon +tai went to shippe , CMBRUT3-M3,20.584

and passede +te see , CMBRUT3-M3,20.585

and come into Britaigne , CMBRUT3-M3,20.586

and fau+gt wi+t +te felons , CMBRUT3-M3,20.587

and ham scomfitede & quellede . CMBRUT3-M3,20.588

And Leir +to hade his lande a+geyne , CMBRUT3-M3,20.589

and after leuede iij +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,20.590

and helde his reaume in pees , CMBRUT3-M3,20.591

and afterwarde deide ; CMBRUT3-M3,20.592

& Cordeil his doughter him lete entere wi+t michel honour at Leycestre .
CMBRUT3-M3,20.593

<heading>

HOW MORGAN AND CONENEDAG +TAT WERE NEVEUS TO CORDEIL , WERREDE OPPON
HERE , AND PUT HERE INTO PRISON . CMBRUT3-M3,20.595

C. XIIIJ . CMBRUT3-M3,20.596

<$$heading>

When +tat Kyng Leir was dede , Cordeil his +gongest dou+gtre helde and
hade +te lande v +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,20.598

and in +te mene tyme deide here Lorde Agamp , +tat was Kyng of Fraunce ;
CMBRUT3-M3,20.599

and after his deth she lefte widue . CMBRUT3-M3,20.600

And +to come Morgan and Conenedag , +tat were Cordeiles sustres sones ,
and to here hade enuy , for-asmiche +tat her aunt shulde haue +te lande
; so +tat bituene ham +tai ordeynede a grete power , and vppon here
werrede gretlich ; CMBRUT3-M3,20.601

and <P_21> neuer +tai rest til +tat +tai hade here taken , and put her
vnto deth . CMBRUT3-M3,21.602

And +to Morgan and Conenedag seisede al +te lande , CMBRUT3-M3,21.603

and departede bituene ham , CMBRUT3-M3,21.604

and +tai helde it xij +gere . CMBRUT3-M3,21.605

And when the xij +gere were gone , +tere bigon bituene ham a grete
debate , so +tat +tai werrede strongely in-fere , and eueryche of ham
dede o+tere miche disese , CMBRUT3-M3,21.606

ffor Morgan wolde haue hade alle +te lande fram bi+gende Humber , +tat
Conedag helde ; CMBRUT3-M3,21.607

but he come a+geynes him with a strong power , so +tat Morgan derst
nou+gt abide , but fley awaye into Walys ; CMBRUT3-M3,21.608

and Conenedag pursuede him , CMBRUT3-M3,21.609

and toke him , CMBRUT3-M3,21.610

and quelde him . CMBRUT3-M3,21.611

+to come Conenedag a+geyne , CMBRUT3-M3,21.612

and seisede al +te lande into his hande , CMBRUT3-M3,21.613

and helde hit , CMBRUT3-M3,21.614

and regnede after , xxxiij +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,21.615

and +to deide , CMBRUT3-M3,21.616

and li+t at New Troye . CMBRUT3-M3,21.617

<heading>

OF RYNALLO , +TAT WAS CONEDAGUS SONE : HOW HE REGNEDE AFTER HIS FADER ;
AND IN HIS TYME IT RAYNEDE BLOODE IIJ DAIES , IN TOKENYNG OF GRET DETH .
CMBRUT3-M3,21.619

CAPITULO QUINTODESIMO . CMBRUT3-M3,21.620

<$$heading>

And after +tis Conenedag , regnede Rynallo his sone , an Wise kny+gt ,
and an hardy and curteise , +tat wel and nobly gouernede +te lande , and
wonder wel made him bilouede of al maner folc . CMBRUT3-M3,21.622

and in his tyme it raynede bloode +tat lastede iij dayes , as God wolde
; CMBRUT3-M3,21.623

and sone after +tere come a gret deth of peple , CMBRUT3-M3,21.624

for hostes with-out noumbre of peple fou+gten til +tat +tai were dede ,
Wherof no man my+gt ham lette til +tat almi+gty God +terof tok mercy and
pitee ; CMBRUT3-M3,21.625

and tho gan it cesse . CMBRUT3-M3,21.626

and +tis Raynolde regnede xxij +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,21.627

& deide , CMBRUT3-M3,21.628

& li+t at +Gork . CMBRUT3-M3,21.629

<heading>

HOW GORBODIAN REGNEDE IN PEES , +TAT WAS RYNALLO SONE ; AND AFTER , HE
DEIDE , AND LI+T AT +GORK CMBRUT3-M3,21.631

C. XVJ=O= . CMBRUT3-M3,21.632

<$$heading>

After +tis Ryuallo , regnede Gorbodyan his sone xv +gere ,
CMBRUT3-M3,21.634

and deide CMBRUT3-M3,21.635

and lith at +Gork . CMBRUT3-M3,21.636

<P_22>

<heading>

HOW GORBODIAN HADE IJ SONES , & HOW +TAT ON SLOUGH +TAT O+TERE , FOR@
@TO HAUE +TE HERITAGE ; & HOW YDOYNE HER MODER QUELLEDE +TAT O+TERE ,
WHERFORE +TE LANDE WAS DESTROIEDE . CMBRUT3-M3,22.639

CAPITULO XVJ=MO= . CMBRUT3-M3,22.640

<$$heading>

When +tis Gorbodian was dede , his ij sones +tat he hade , bicome stoute
men and proude , CMBRUT3-M3,22.642

& euer werrede to-geder for +te lande : CMBRUT3-M3,22.643

+tat one , men called Ferre+g , and +tat o+tere Porrex ;
CMBRUT3-M3,22.644

and +tis Ferre+g wolde haue hade al the lande , CMBRUT3-M3,22.645

but +tat o+tere wolde nou+gt suffren him . CMBRUT3-M3,22.646

Ferre+g hade a felounes hert , CMBRUT3-M3,22.647

and +tou+gt +trou+g tresoun slee his bro+tere ; CMBRUT3-M3,22.648

but priuely he went into Fraunce , CMBRUT3-M3,22.649

and +tere abode with +te kyng Syward til oppon a tyme +tat he come
a+geyne , and fau+gt wi+t his bro+ter Ferre+g ; CMBRUT3-M3,22.650

but ful euel it hapede +to , CMBRUT3-M3,22.651

for he was slayn ferst . CMBRUT3-M3,22.652

When Ydoyne , here moder , wist +tat Porrex was dede , she made grete
sorwe , for enchesoun +tat she louede him more +tan +tat o+tere ,
CMBRUT3-M3,22.653

and +tou+gt him for@ @to quelle . CMBRUT3-M3,22.654

priuely she come to here sone oppon a ny+gt wi+t ij knyfes ,
CMBRUT3-M3,22.655

and +terwi+t cotte his +trote , and +te body also into smale pecis .
CMBRUT3-M3,22.656

Who herde euer soche a cursede moder , +tat quellede with here owen
hondes here owen sone ! CMBRUT3-M3,22.657

and Longe tyme after Laste +te reprofe & shame to +te moder +tat , for
enchesoun of +tat o sone , mordrede +tat o+tere , and so loste ham bothe
. CMBRUT3-M3,22.658

<heading>

HOW IIIJ KYNGES CURTEISELY HELDE AL BRITAIGNE ; AND WHICHE BETH HERE
NAMES . CMBRUT3-M3,22.660

CAPITULO OCTODESIMO . CMBRUT3-M3,22.661

<$$heading>

When +tise ij bre+terne were so dede , +tai n@ @ade Lefte bihynde ham
noo sone ne doughter , ne none o+tere of +te kynrede +tat might haue +te
heritage . CMBRUT3-M3,22.663

& for-asmiche as +te strongest men dryuen and descomfitede +te feblest ,
and token al here landes , so +tat in euery contre +tai hade grete werre
and stryfe . CMBRUT3-M3,22.664

But amonge alle o+tere +tinges , +tere were amonges ham in +te contre
+tat ouercome alle +te o+tere ; CMBRUT3-M3,22.665

and +trou+g heir streng+t and my+gt +tai nomen and token al +te landes ;
CMBRUT3-M3,22.666

and eueryche of ham tok a certeyne contre ; CMBRUT3-M3,22.667

and in his contre lete calle hym kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,22.668

And on of ham , men <P_23> callede Stater ; CMBRUT3-M3,23.669

and he was Kyng of Scotland ; CMBRUT3-M3,23.670

and +tat o+tere me callede Dunwal , CMBRUT3-M3,23.671

and he was Kyng of Loegers , and of alle +te landes +tat was Lotrynes ,
Brutes sone . CMBRUT3-M3,23.672

+te +tridde , men callede Rudak , CMBRUT3-M3,23.673

and he was Kyng of Walys ; CMBRUT3-M3,23.674

and +te iiij me callede Cloten , CMBRUT3-M3,23.675

and he was Kyng of Cornewaile . CMBRUT3-M3,23.676

But +tis Cloten shulde haue hade al +te lande , be resoun for +tere was
no man +tat wist none so ru+gthful heire as he was ; CMBRUT3-M3,23.677

but +to +tat were strongest sette litel by ham +tat were of lasse estate
, CMBRUT3-M3,23.678

and +terfor +tis Cloten hade no more lande amonges ham +tan onliche
Cornewaile . CMBRUT3-M3,23.679

<heading>

OF KYNG DONEWALL , +TAT WAS CLOTENE+G SONE , AND HOW HE HADE WONNE +TE
LANDE . CMBRUT3-M3,23.681

CAPITULO XIX=O= . CMBRUT3-M3,23.682

<$$heading>

This Cloten hade a sone +tat me clepede Donewal , +tat , after +te deth
of his fader , bicome an hardy man , and a faire and a curteise , so
+tat he passede alle +te kynges of Britaigne of fairenesse and of
wor+tinesse . CMBRUT3-M3,23.684

And as he was knyght , he Wiste wel when his fader leuede he was moste
ryghtful heire of al +te lande , and shulde haue hade it by resoun ;
CMBRUT3-M3,23.685

but o+tere kynges +tat were of more streng+t +tan he , binome him his
lande . CMBRUT3-M3,23.686

And afterwarde +tis Donebande ordeynede him powere , CMBRUT3-M3,23.687

and ferst conquerede al +te lande of Loegers ; CMBRUT3-M3,23.688

and after he wolde haue conquerede al Scotland and Walys ;
CMBRUT3-M3,23.689

and Stater wi+t his men come , CMBRUT3-M3,23.690

and +gaf him bataile ; CMBRUT3-M3,23.691

and Rudak come a+geyne wi+t his Walshemen for@ @to helpe him ;
CMBRUT3-M3,23.692

But so it bifel +tat Rudak was slayn , and Skater also , in pleyn
bataile ; CMBRUT3-M3,23.693

and so Donewal hade +te victorye , CMBRUT3-M3,23.694

and conquerede al +te lande , CMBRUT3-M3,23.695

and wel mayntenede it in pees and quyete , +tat neuer bifore it was so
wel mayntenede . CMBRUT3-M3,23.696

<heading>

HOW DONEWAL WAS +TE FERST KYNG +TAT EUERE WEREDE CRONE OF GOLDE IN
BRITAIGNE . CMBRUT3-M3,23.698

CAPITULO VICESIMO . CMBRUT3-M3,23.699

<$$heading>

This Donewal lete make him a crone of golde , CMBRUT3-M3,23.701

and werede +te croune oppon his heuede , as neuer kyng dede bifore ;
CMBRUT3-M3,23.702

and he ordeynede a statute +tat , hade a man done neuer so miche <P_24>
harme , and he might come into +te temple , +tere shulde no man him
misdo , but gone +terin sauf and in pees , and aftre gone into what
contre +tat he wolde , withouten eny harme ; and if eny man sette hande
oppon him , he +tan shulde lese his lif . CMBRUT3-M3,24.703

And +tis Donewal made +te toune of Malmesbury , and +te toune of +te
Vise ; CMBRUT3-M3,24.704

& when he hade regnede wel and nobly .xl. +gere , he deide ,
CMBRUT3-M3,24.705

& li+t at newe Troye . CMBRUT3-M3,24.706

<heading>

HOW BRENNE AND BELYN DEPARTEDE BITUENE HAM +TE LANDE , AFTER +TE DETH OF
DONEWAL , HIR FADER ; & OF +TE WERRE . CMBRUT3-M3,24.708

CAPITULO XXJ=O= . CMBRUT3-M3,24.709

<$$heading>

And after +tat +tis Donewal was $dede , his sones +tat he hade ,
departede +te lande bituene ham as her fader hade ordeynede ; so +tat
Belyn , his eldest sone , hade al the lande a +tis halfe Humber , and
his bro+ter Brenne hade al +te lande fram Humber vnto Scotland ;
CMBRUT3-M3,24.711

but for-asmich as Belyn hade +te better parte , Brenne +terfor wax wro+t
, CMBRUT3-M3,24.712

and wolde haue hade more of +te lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,24.713

and Belyn his bro+ter wolde graunt him nomore ; Wherfor contak and werre
aroos bituene ham ij . CMBRUT3-M3,24.714

But Brenne +te +gonger bro+ter hade no my+gte ne streng+t a+geyn+g Belyn
; CMBRUT3-M3,24.715

and +terfor Brenne , +trou+g conseil of his folc , went fram +tens into
Norway , to +te Kyng Elsinges , CMBRUT3-M3,24.716

and prayede him of helpe and of socoure for@ @to conquere al +te lande
of Britayn vppon Belyn his bro+ter , oppon +tat couenaunt , +tat he
wolde haue his dou+gter to wyf ; CMBRUT3-M3,24.717

and +te Kyng Elsinges him grauntede . CMBRUT3-M3,24.718

Belyn , anone as his bro+ter was gone to Norway , he seisede into his
hande al +te lande of Northumberland , CMBRUT3-M3,24.719

and toke al +te castelles , CMBRUT3-M3,24.720

and lete ham arraie , and also kepe +te costes of +te see , +tat Brenne
shulde nou+gt arryue in no side but +tat he were take .
CMBRUT3-M3,24.721

The Kyng Elsinges lete assemble a grete hoste , CMBRUT3-M3,24.722

and delyuerede his doughter to Brenne , and alle +te peple +tat he hade
ordeynede . CMBRUT3-M3,24.723

And +tis damisel , Samye , hade longe tyme louede a kyng +tat me callede
Gutlagh ; CMBRUT3-M3,24.724

and to him she tolde al here counseil , how +tat Brenne shulde here haue
, and here lede wi+t him for euermore , CMBRUT3-M3,24.725

and so he shulde her lese , but if +tat she my+gt forsake Brenne .
CMBRUT3-M3,24.726

And <P_25> when Gutlagh herde +tise tydynges , he lay for@ @to aspie
Brenne , wi+t alse meny shippes as he my+gt haue , so +tat +to ij fletes
metten to-gederes , and longe tyme foughten , so +tat Brenne and his
shippes turnede a+geyne , and were descomfitede ; CMBRUT3-M3,25.727

and Kyng Gutlagh toke Samye , CMBRUT3-M3,25.728

and put here into shippe , CMBRUT3-M3,25.729

and Brenne shamefully fleye +tens as a man descomfitede .
CMBRUT3-M3,25.730

And Gutlagh wolde haue went into his countree ; CMBRUT3-M3,25.731

but +tere come oppon him a stronge tempest , +tat .v. dayes Laste , so
+tat +trou+g +tat tempest he was dryuen into Britaigne with iij shippes
, and wi+t no mo . CMBRUT3-M3,25.732

and +to +tat kepte +te costes of +te see token Gutlagh and Samye , and
all his folc , CMBRUT3-M3,25.733

and ham presentede vnto Belyn , CMBRUT3-M3,25.734

and he put ham into prisoun . CMBRUT3-M3,25.735

<heading>

HOW BELYN DELYUEREDE OUT OF +TIS LANDE KYNG GUTLAGH OF DENNEMARC , AND
SAMYE . CMBRUT3-M3,25.737

CAPITULO VICESIMO SECUNDO . CMBRUT3-M3,25.738

<$$heading>

Hit was nou+gt longe after , +tat Brenne ne come a+geyne with a stronge
meny , and sent to his bro+ter Belyn , +tat he shulde +gelde a+geyne his
lande to his wif and to his folc , & his castelles also , or elles he
wolde destroye his lande . CMBRUT3-M3,25.740

Belyn drade no +ting his manace , CMBRUT3-M3,25.741

and wolde no +ting done after +tat he saide . Wherfore Brenne come with
is folc , and fau+gt with him ; CMBRUT3-M3,25.742

and Brenne was descomfitede , and his folc slayne , CMBRUT3-M3,25.743

and him-self fleede wi+t xij men in Fraunce . CMBRUT3-M3,25.744

And +tis Belyn , +tat was Brennes bro+tere , went +ten vnto +Gork ,
CMBRUT3-M3,25.745

and toke counseil what he my+gt done , wi+t Kyng Gutlagh ;
CMBRUT3-M3,25.746

for Kyng Gutlagh proferede to bicome his man , and to holde his lande of
him , +geldyng by +gere M=l~= li of siluer for euer-more ;
CMBRUT3-M3,25.747

and for sikernesse of +tis couenaunt to bene holde , Gutlaghe shulde
bryng him gode hostages , CMBRUT3-M3,25.748

and to him shulde done homage , and al his folc , CMBRUT3-M3,25.749

and +gitte he shulde suere oppon the book +tat +tise couenauntes shulde
nou+gt bene broken ne falsede . CMBRUT3-M3,25.750

Belyn +to , by counseil of his folc , grantede him his axing ;
CMBRUT3-M3,25.751

and so Gutlagh bicome his man ; CMBRUT3-M3,25.752

and belyn vnderfonge of him his homage by othe , and by wrytyng +te same
couenaunt+g . CMBRUT3-M3,25.753

And oppon <P_26> +tis Couenant King Gutlagh tok Samye and his folc ,
CMBRUT3-M3,26.754

and went +tennes , CMBRUT3-M3,26.755

and turnede a+geyn to Dennemarc . CMBRUT3-M3,26.756

Euermore after were the couenauntes Halden , and +te truage paiede , til
+te tyme +tat Hauelok was Kyng of Denmarc , and also of +tis lande ,
+trou+g his wif Gildeburghe , +tat he hade spousede , CMBRUT3-M3,26.757

for she was +te ry+gt heire of +tis lande . CMBRUT3-M3,26.758

+tis Belyn duellede +to in pees , CMBRUT3-M3,26.759

and worshepliche him helde amonges his barons ; CMBRUT3-M3,26.760

and he made iiij real waies , one fram +te Est into West , and +tat was
callede Watlyngstrete ; and ano+tere fram +te North into +te South ,
+tat was callede Ikenyle strete ; CMBRUT3-M3,26.761

and ij o+tere waies he made in bossinge +trou+g-oute the lande :
CMBRUT3-M3,26.762

+tat one is callede Fosse , and +tat o+tere Fossedik ; CMBRUT3-M3,26.763

and he mayntenede wel +te gode Lawes +tat Doneband his fader hade made
and ordeynede in his tyme , as bifore is saide . CMBRUT3-M3,26.764

<heading>

HOW ACCORDE WAS MADE BITUENE BRENNE AND BELYN , THROUGH CORNEWENNE ,
HIRE MODER . CMBRUT3-M3,26.766

CAPITULO VICESIMO TERCIO . CMBRUT3-M3,26.767

<$$heading>

Brenne , that was Belynes bro+ter , hade longe tyme duellede in Fraunce
, CMBRUT3-M3,26.769

and +tere hade conquerede a grete lordeship +trou+g mariage ,
CMBRUT3-M3,26.770

for he was Duc of Burgoyne +trou+g +te dou+gter of +te duc Fewyn +tat he
hade spousede , +tat was right heire of +te lande . CMBRUT3-M3,26.771

and +tis Brenne ordeynede a grete power of his folc and also of Fraunce
, CMBRUT3-M3,26.772

and come into +tis lande for@ @to feight with Belyn his bro+ter .
CMBRUT3-M3,26.773

and Belyn come a+geynes him with a stronge powere of Britons ,
CMBRUT3-M3,26.774

and +to wolde haue +geue him bataile ; CMBRUT3-M3,26.775

but heir moder Cornewenne , +tat tho Leuede , herde +tat +te o bro+ter
wolde haue destroyede +tat o+tere , CMBRUT3-M3,26.776

and went bituene here sones , CMBRUT3-M3,26.777

and ham made accordede wi+t miche peyne ; so +tat at +te laste , +to ij
bre+terne , with miche blisse , went to-geder into newe Troye , +tat now
is callede London , CMBRUT3-M3,26.778

and +tere +tai duellede al a +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,26.779

and after , +tai toke Heire conseile for@ @to go conquere al Fraunce ;
CMBRUT3-M3,26.780

and so thai deden , CMBRUT3-M3,26.781

& brent tounes , CMBRUT3-M3,26.782

and destroyede al +te lande bo+te in leng+t and in Brede .
CMBRUT3-M3,26.783

and +te Kyng of Fraunce +gaf ham bataile wi+t his powere ;
CMBRUT3-M3,26.784

but he was ouercomen , CMBRUT3-M3,26.785

and +gaf truage vnto Belyn and to his bro+ter . CMBRUT3-M3,26.786

And <P_27> after +tat , +tai went for+te to Rome , CMBRUT3-M3,27.787

and conquerede Rome , and al Lumbardy and Germayne , CMBRUT3-M3,27.788

and toke homages and feautees of +te folc of +te Erles , barons , and
alle o+tere ; CMBRUT3-M3,27.789

and after , +tai comen into +tis lande of Britaigne , CMBRUT3-M3,27.790

and duellede with here Britounes in ioye and reste . CMBRUT3-M3,27.791

and +to made Brenne +te toune of Bristow ; CMBRUT3-M3,27.792

and si+t he went ouer +te see into his owen lordeshippe ,
CMBRUT3-M3,27.793

and +tere duellede al his lif . CMBRUT3-M3,27.794

and Belyn duellede atte Newe Troye ; CMBRUT3-M3,27.795

and +tere he made a faire gate +tat is clepede Billyngesgate , after his
owen name . CMBRUT3-M3,27.796

and when +tis Belyn hade regnede noble xj +gere , he deide ,
CMBRUT3-M3,27.797

& li+t at newe Troye . CMBRUT3-M3,27.798

<heading>

HOW KYNG CORINBATRUS QUELLEDE +TE KYNG OF DENNEMARC , FOR ENCHESOUN +TAT
HE WOLDE NOU+GT PAYE HIM HIS TRUAGE . CMBRUT3-M3,27.800

CAPITULO XXIIIJ=TO= . CMBRUT3-M3,27.801

<$$heading>

And after +tis Belyn , regnede his sone Corinbatrus , a gode man and a
wor+ti . CMBRUT3-M3,27.803

and +te Kyng of Denmarc wolde nou+gt paye him his truage , +tat is to
seyn , M=l= l~i , as he hade sworne by oth for@ @to paye hit , and also
be writyng of recorde , to Belyn his fader . wherfore he was euel
paiede and wro+t , and assemblede a grete hoste of Britons , and went
into Dennemarc and slough +te Kyng Gitclagh , and brou+gt +te lande in
subieccioun al new , and toke of folc feautes and homages , and after
went a+geyne into his lande . CMBRUT3-M3,27.804

And as he come forthe bi Orkeneye , he fonde xxx shippes ful of men and
of wymmen , bisides +te coste of +te see , CMBRUT3-M3,27.805

and +te kyng axede what +tai were . CMBRUT3-M3,27.806

an Erl , that was maistre of ham alle , curteisely ansuerede vnto the
kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,27.807

and saide +tat +tai were exilede oute of Spaygne , CMBRUT3-M3,27.808

and so +tai hade trauailede half +gere and more in +te see , to weten if
+tai my+gt fynde eny kyng , or eny lorde , +tat of ham wolde haue pitee
or mercy , to +geue ham eny lande in eny contre wherin +tai might duelle
and haue reste , and bicome his liege men , CMBRUT3-M3,27.809

and to him wolde done homage and feautes whiles +tat he leuede , and to
his heires after him , and of him and of his heires holde +tat londe for
euermore . CMBRUT3-M3,27.810

And when +te kyng +tis <P_28> herde , he hade pite of ham ,
CMBRUT3-M3,28.811

and +gaf ham an Ile al wildernesse , +tere +tat noman was duellyng , saf
oneliche wilde bestes . CMBRUT3-M3,28.812

and +te Erl +tankede miche +te kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,28.813

and bicome his man , CMBRUT3-M3,28.814

and dede him feaute and homage , CMBRUT3-M3,28.815

and tok alle his folc , CMBRUT3-M3,28.816

and went into +te same Ile . CMBRUT3-M3,28.817

and +te Erl me callede Irlanyal ; CMBRUT3-M3,28.818

and +terfore he lete calle +te lande Irlande , after his owen name .
CMBRUT3-M3,28.819

The kyng +to , Corinbatrus , come a+geyne into +tis Lande ,
CMBRUT3-M3,28.820

and regnede xxv +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,28.821

& after , he deide , CMBRUT3-M3,28.822

and li+t at newe Troye . CMBRUT3-M3,28.823

<heading>

How +te Kyng Guentolen regnede in godenesse , CMBRUT3-M3,28.825

& wel gouernede +te lande al his liftyme . CMBRUT3-M3,28.826

Capitulo vicesimo Quinto . CMBRUT3-M3,28.827

<$$heading>

And when Corinbatrus was dede , regnede Guentolen his sone , a man of
goode condiciouns , and wel bilouede ; CMBRUT3-M3,28.829

and he gouernede +te lande wel and wiseliche , CMBRUT3-M3,28.830

and he regnede xxvj +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,28.831

and after , deide , CMBRUT3-M3,28.832

and lith at newe Troye . CMBRUT3-M3,28.833

<heading>

How Kyng Seisel regnede , and wel gouernede +te lande after Guentolen .
CMBRUT3-M3,28.835

Capitulo xxvj=to= . CMBRUT3-M3,28.836

<$$heading>

And after +tis Guentolen , regnede his sone Seisel wel and wor+tely ,
CMBRUT3-M3,28.838

and wel gouernede +te lande as his fader hade done biforne him ;
CMBRUT3-M3,28.839

and he regnede xv +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,28.840

and after , deide , CMBRUT3-M3,28.841

and lith at newe Troye . CMBRUT3-M3,28.842

<heading>

How Kymore regnede after Seisel his fader ; CMBRUT3-M3,28.844

and he bigate Howan , +tat regnede after him . CMBRUT3-M3,28.845

Capitulo Vicesimo Septimo . CMBRUT3-M3,28.846

<$$heading>

ANd after +tis Seisel , regnede his sone Kymor wel and nobly xix +gere
in pees ; and Howan his sone x +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,28.848

and deide , CMBRUT3-M3,28.849

and li+t at Herbaldoun . CMBRUT3-M3,28.850

<heading>

How Kyng Morwith deide +trou+g meschaunce , +trou+g a beste for his
wickednesse . CMBRUT3-M3,28.852

Capitulo Vicesimo Octauo . CMBRUT3-M3,28.853

<$$heading>

ANd after +tis Howan , regnede Morwith ; CMBRUT3-M3,28.855

and he bicome wickede , and so sterne , til at +te laste , grete
vengeaunce come to him ; CMBRUT3-M3,28.856

for as he went on a tyme bi +te seeside , he mette a grete <P_29> beste
, +tat was blac , and horrible and hidouse ; CMBRUT3-M3,29.857

and he wende +tat it hade bene a whale of +te see , CMBRUT3-M3,29.858

and bent an Arweblast , CMBRUT3-M3,29.859

and wolde haue slayne +tat best wi+t a quarell ; CMBRUT3-M3,29.860

but he mi+gt nou+gt smyte hit . CMBRUT3-M3,29.861

and when he hade shotte alle his quarelles , +te beste anone come to him
in grete haste , CMBRUT3-M3,29.862

and him deuourede alif ; CMBRUT3-M3,29.863

and so he deide for his wickednesse , +trou+g vengeance of Gode , after
+tat he hade regnede ix +gere . CMBRUT3-M3,29.864

<heading>

Of Grandobodian , +tat was Morwithe+g sone , +tat made the toune of
Cambruge . CMBRUT3-M3,29.866

Capitulo Vicesimo Nono . CMBRUT3-M3,29.867

<$$heading>

After +tis Morwith was dede , +te Britouns cronede Grandobodian his sone
; CMBRUT3-M3,29.869

and +tis Grandobodian longe tyme regnede in godenesse ,
CMBRUT3-M3,29.870

and made temples and tounes ; CMBRUT3-M3,29.871

and +tis Grandobodian made +te toune of Cambrugge and +te toune of
Grantham , CMBRUT3-M3,29.872

and was wel bilouede of ryche and of pore , CMBRUT3-M3,29.873

for he honourede +te riche CMBRUT3-M3,29.874

and halpe +te poer . CMBRUT3-M3,29.875

This Grandobodian hade iiij sones , Artogaile , Hesider , Higamus , and
Petiter , CMBRUT3-M3,29.876

and when he hade regnede xj +gere , he deide , CMBRUT3-M3,29.877

& li+t at newe Troye . CMBRUT3-M3,29.878

<heading>

Of Artogaile , +tat was Grandobodianus sone : how he was made kyng , &
si+t put adoune for his wickednesse . CMBRUT3-M3,29.880

Capitulo Tricesimo . CMBRUT3-M3,29.881

<$$heading>

After Grandobodian , regnede his sone Artogaile v +gere ;
CMBRUT3-M3,29.883

and he bicome so wickede and so sterne , +tat +te Britons wolde nou+gt
suffre him to bene kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,29.884

but put him adoune , CMBRUT3-M3,29.885

and made Hesider his bro+ter kyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,29.886

and he bicome so gode and mercyable +tat men him callede ' kyng of pitee
. ' CMBRUT3-M3,29.887

and when he hade regnede v +gere , he hade so $miche pitee of his
bro+ter Artogaile , +tat was kyng bifore ; CMBRUT3-M3,29.888

and anone he forsoke his dignite , CMBRUT3-M3,29.889

and toke his bro+ter +te crone a+geyne , CMBRUT3-M3,29.890

and made him kyng a+geynes al +te barons wille of Britaigne .
CMBRUT3-M3,29.891

and afterwarde , +tis Artogaile bicome so gode of condi-ciouns +tat he
was wel bilouede of al +te lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,29.892

for he bicome so debonoure and free , CMBRUT3-M3,29.893

and dede right and resoun to alle maner man ; CMBRUT3-M3,29.894

and he regnede vj +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,29.895

and deide , CMBRUT3-M3,29.896

and lith at Grauntham . CMBRUT3-M3,29.897

<P_30>

<heading>

How Hesider was made kyng after +te deth of Artogaile his bro+ter .
CMBRUT3-M3,30.900

Capitulo xxxj=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,30.901

<$$heading>

After +te deth of Artogaile , the Britounes crounede an-o+tere tyme
Hesider ; CMBRUT3-M3,30.903

but his ij bre+tern Higamus and Petiter haden of him grete despite , and
eke scorne , CMBRUT3-M3,30.904

and ordeynede ham helpe for@ @to werre oppon +te kyng her bro+ter .
CMBRUT3-M3,30.905

and so +tai token him , CMBRUT3-M3,30.906

and put him into prisoun , the secunde +gere of his regne ;
CMBRUT3-M3,30.907

and +tai departede al Britaign bituene ham ij . CMBRUT3-M3,30.908

but Higamus leuede but vij +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,30.909

and +to hadde Petitur al +te lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,30.910

and he made +te toune of Pikeryng , CMBRUT3-M3,30.911

and after deide , +te secunde +gere of his regne , CMBRUT3-M3,30.912

& li+t at Pikeryng , CMBRUT3-M3,30.913

<heading>

How +te Britouns token Hesider oute of Prisoune , and made him kyng +te
+tridde tyme . CMBRUT3-M3,30.915

Capitulo Tricesimo Secundo . CMBRUT3-M3,30.916

<$$heading>

ANd when +tis Petitur was dede , the Britons toke anone right Hesider ,
CMBRUT3-M3,30.918

and made him kyng +te +tridde tyme , CMBRUT3-M3,30.919

and +to regnede he in pees xiiij +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,30.920

& after deide , CMBRUT3-M3,30.921

and li+t at Karleil . CMBRUT3-M3,30.922

<heading>

How xxxiij kynges regnede in pees , eche after o+tere , after +te deth
of Hesider . CMBRUT3-M3,30.924

Capitulo Tricesimo Tercio . CMBRUT3-M3,30.925

<$$heading>

After +te deth of Hesider , regnede xxxiij Kynges , eche after o+tere ,
in pees ; CMBRUT3-M3,30.927

and wi+tout eny longe tariyng y shal tel ham alle , and how longe euery
of ham regnede , as +te story telle+t . CMBRUT3-M3,30.928

The ferste kyng of +to xxxiij me clepede Gorbodia , CMBRUT3-M3,30.929

and he regnede xij +gere . CMBRUT3-M3,30.930

and after him regnede Morgan ij +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,30.931

and after him regnede Eigamus vj +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,30.932

and after him regnede Idwalan viij +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,30.933

and after him regnede Rohugo xj +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,30.934

and after him regnede Voghen xiij +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,30.935

and after him regnede Katil xv +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,30.936

and after him regnede Porrex ij +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,30.937

and after him regnede Cheryn xvij +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,30.938

<em> ; & after him regned Coil xij +ger <$$em> CMBRUT3-M3,30.939

and after him regnede Sulgenis xiiij +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,30.940

and after him regnede Esdad xx=ti= +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,30.941

<P_31>

And after him regnede Andragie xviij +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,31.943

And after him regnede Vran v +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,31.944

and after him regnede Elind ij +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,31.945

and after him regnede Eldagan xv +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,31.946

and after him regnede Claten xij +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,31.947

& after him regnede Quirgund viij +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,31.948

and after him regnede Morian vj +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,31.949

and after him regnede Bledaghe iij +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,31.950

and after him regnede Caph j +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,31.951

and after him regned Gen ij +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,31.952

and after him regnede Seisel and Kyng Bled xxj +gere ; and Kyng Grabreth
xj +gere ; and Archinal xiiij +gere ; and Erol xxx +gere ; And Rodengu
xxxij +gere ; and Herter v +gere , and Hampir vj +gere , And Carpoir vij
+gere , and Digneile iij +gere , and Samuel xxiiij +gere , and Rede ij
+gere , and Ely vij moune+ts ; CMBRUT3-M3,31.953

and +tis Ely hade iij sones , Lud , Cassabilam , and Enymyon .
CMBRUT3-M3,31.954

<heading>

How Lud was made kyng after +te de+t of Ely his fader .
CMBRUT3-M3,31.956

Capitulo Tricesimo Quarto . CMBRUT3-M3,31.957

<$$heading>

After +te de+t of Ely , regnede Lud his sone , CMBRUT3-M3,31.959

and gouernede wel +te lande , CMBRUT3-M3,31.960

and miche honourrede gode folc , CMBRUT3-M3,31.961

and temprede and amendit wickede folc . CMBRUT3-M3,31.962

This Lud louede more to duelle at Troye +tan at eny o+tere place of +te
lande ; Wherfore +te name of Troye was lafte , and +to was callede +te
citee of Ludstan ; CMBRUT3-M3,31.963

but now +tat name is chaungede +trou+g variance of lettres ,
CMBRUT3-M3,31.964

and now is callede London . CMBRUT3-M3,31.965

and +tis kyng made in the citee a faire gate , CMBRUT3-M3,31.966

and callede it Ludgate , after his name ; CMBRUT3-M3,31.967

and +te folc of +te citee lete hight Loundres , CMBRUT3-M3,31.968

and when he hade regnede xj +gere , he deide , CMBRUT3-M3,31.969

and li+t at London . CMBRUT3-M3,31.970

and he hade ij +gonge sones , Andraghen and Gormace ; CMBRUT3-M3,31.971

but +tai cou+t nei+tere speke ne go , for +geuge+t ; CMBRUT3-M3,31.972

& +terfore +te Britons crounede a stronge kny+gt +tat me called Lud +tat
was Cassibalamus bro+ter , CMBRUT3-M3,31.973

and made him kyng of Britagne . CMBRUT3-M3,31.974

<heading>

How +te Britons grantede to Cassibalam , +tat was Ludes bro+ter , +te
land : in whas time Iulius come ij tymes for@ @to con-quere +te lande .
CMBRUT3-M3,31.976

Capitulo Tricesimo quinto . CMBRUT3-M3,31.977

<$$heading>

After +te de+t of Kyng Lud , regnede his bro+ter Cassibalam ,
CMBRUT3-M3,31.979

and bicome a goode man , and miche bilouede of his Britons , so +tat ,
for his godenesse and curtesye , +tai grantede him +te reaume <P_32>
for-euermore , to him and to his heires . CMBRUT3-M3,32.980

And the kyng , of his gode-nesse , lete norisshe wor+tiliche bo+te his
bro+teres sones , +te childerne of Lud ; CMBRUT3-M3,32.981

And after , made +te eldeste sone Erl of Cornwaile , and +tat o+tere Erl
of London . CMBRUT3-M3,32.982

And while +tis kyng Cassibalam regnede , come Iulius Cesar , +tat was
Emperoure of Rome into +tis lande , with a power of Romayns ,
CMBRUT3-M3,32.983

and wolde haue hade +tis lande +trou+g streng+t ; CMBRUT3-M3,32.984

but Cassibalam him ouercome in bataile , +trou+g helpe of +te Britons ,
CMBRUT3-M3,32.985

and drof him oute of +tis Lande CMBRUT3-M3,32.986

and went a+geyne to Rome , CMBRUT3-M3,32.987

and assemblede grete power ano+ter tyme , CMBRUT3-M3,32.988

and come a+geyne into +tis lande for@ @to +geue bataile to Cassibalam ;
CMBRUT3-M3,32.989

but he was des-comfitede +trou+g streng+t of +te Britons , and +trou+g
helpe of +te erle of Cornwaile , and +te Erl of london , his bro+ter ,
and +trou+g helpe of Gudian , Kyng of Scotland , and of Corbande , Kyng
of north Wales , and of Bretaile , Kyng of Southwalys .
CMBRUT3-M3,32.990

and in +tis bataile was slayne Nemion , +tat was Cassibalamus bro+ter ,
wherfore he made miche sorwe ; CMBRUT3-M3,32.991

and so went Iulius Cesar oute of +tis lande with a fewe of Romayns +tat
were lefte a-lif ; CMBRUT3-M3,32.992

And +to Cassibalam went a+geyne to Loudon , CMBRUT3-M3,32.993

and made a fest vnto alle his folc +tat +to hade him holpen ;
CMBRUT3-M3,32.994

and when +te fest was done , eche man went into here owen contree .
CMBRUT3-M3,32.995

<heading>

Of +te debate +tat was bituene Cassibalam and +te Erle of London ; & of
+te truage +tat was payede to Rome . CMBRUT3-M3,32.997

Capitulo xxxvj=to= . CMBRUT3-M3,32.998

<$$heading>

ANd after , hit bifelle +tus oppon a day , +tat +te gentil-men of +te
kynges householde and +te gentelmen of +te Erles house-holde of London ,
after mete went in-fere for@ @to playe CMBRUT3-M3,32.1000

and +trou+g debate +tat arose amonges ham , Enelyn , +tat was +te erles
bro+ter of London , quellede Irenglas +tat was +te kynges cosyn ;
wherfore +te kyng swore +tat Enelyn shulde bene honget ;
CMBRUT3-M3,32.1001

but +te Erle of London , +tat was Enelynes lorde , wolde nou+gt suffren
hit ; wher-fore +te kyng was wroth towarde +te Erl , and +tou+gt him
destroye . CMBRUT3-M3,32.1002

and priuely +te Erl sent lettres to Iulius Cesar +tat he shulde come
<P_33> into +tis lande for@ @to helpe him , and helpe avenge him oppon
+te Kyng and he wolde helpe him with al his my+gte . CMBRUT3-M3,33.1003

And when +te Emperoure herde +tis tydynges , he was ful glade ,
CMBRUT3-M3,33.1004

and ordeynede a stronge power , CMBRUT3-M3,33.1005

and come a+geyne +te +tridde tyme into +tis land ; CMBRUT3-M3,33.1006

and +te Erl of Londone halpe him wi+t vij_M=l= men . CMBRUT3-M3,33.1007

and at +te +tridde tyme was Cassibalam ouercomen and descomfitede ,
CMBRUT3-M3,33.1008

and made pees to +te Emperoure for iij_M=l= li of siluer , +geldynge by
+gere for truage for +tis lande for euermore . CMBRUT3-M3,33.1009

and after half +gere passede , the Emperoure went to Rome , and +te Erl
of London wi+t him , CMBRUT3-M3,33.1010

for he derste nou+gt abide in +tis lande . CMBRUT3-M3,33.1011

and after , Cassibalam regnede xvij +gere in pees , CMBRUT3-M3,33.1012

and +to deide , +te xxvij +gere of his regne , CMBRUT3-M3,33.1013

and lithe atte +Gork . CMBRUT3-M3,33.1014

<heading>

How +te lordes of +te lande , after +te deth of Cassibalam , for
encheson +tat he hade none heire , made Andragen kyng .
CMBRUT3-M3,33.1016

Capitulo xxxvij=mo= CMBRUT3-M3,33.1017

<$$heading>

After +te deth of Cassibalam , for-asmiche as he hade none heire of his
body , +te lordes of +te lande , by commune assent , cronede Androgen ,
Erl of Cornewaile , CMBRUT3-M3,33.1019

and made him kyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,33.1020

and he regnede wel worthely , CMBRUT3-M3,33.1021

and was a gode man , CMBRUT3-M3,33.1022

and wel gouernede +te lande . CMBRUT3-M3,33.1023

and when he hade regnede viij +gere , he deide , CMBRUT3-M3,33.1024

& li+t at London . CMBRUT3-M3,33.1025

<heading>

Of Kymbalyn , +tat was Andragenus sone , a gode man , and wel gouernede
+te lande . CMBRUT3-M3,33.1027

Capitulo xxxviij . CMBRUT3-M3,33.1028

<$$heading>

After +te deth of Andragen , regnede Kembelyn his sone , +tat was a gode
man , CMBRUT3-M3,33.1030

and wel gouernede +te lande in miche prosperite and in pees al his lifes
tyme . CMBRUT3-M3,33.1031

And in his tyme was born Ihesus Crist oure saueoure , of +tat swete
virgine Marie . CMBRUT3-M3,33.1032

+tis Kyng Kembelyn hade ij sones , Ginder and Armoger , gode kny+gtes
and worthi . CMBRUT3-M3,33.1033

And when +tis Kyng Kembelyn hade regnede xxij +gere , he deide ,
CMBRUT3-M3,33.1034

and li+t at London . CMBRUT3-M3,33.1035

<heading>

Of Kyng Gynder , +tat was Kembalynes sone , +tat wolde nou+gt paye +te
truage to Rome for the lande +tat Cassibalam hade grantede ; & how he
was slayne of a Romayne . CMBRUT3-M3,33.1037

Capitulo xxxix=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,33.1038

<$$heading>

<P_34>

ANd after +te de+t of +tis Kembalyn , regnede Ginder his sone , a gode
man and a wor+ti ; CMBRUT3-M3,34.1041

and he was of so hie hert +tat he wolde nou+gt paye to Rome +tat truage
+tat Kyng Cassibalam hade grantede vnto Iulius Cesar ; wherfore +te
Emperoure +tat was +to , +tat me callede Claudius Cesar , was sore
annoyede , and ordeynede a grete power of $Romayns , and come into +tis
lande for@ @to conquere +te truage +trou+g streng+t , and haue it of +te
kyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,34.1042

but +te kyng Gynder , and Armoger his bro+ter , gadrede a grete hoste
ifere of Britouns , CMBRUT3-M3,34.1043

and +gaf bataile to +te Emperour Claudius , CMBRUT3-M3,34.1044

and quellede of Romains grete plente . CMBRUT3-M3,34.1045

The Emperour hade a Stiwarde +tat me clepede Hamon , +tat saw +tat her
peple was faste slayne : CMBRUT3-M3,34.1046

priuely he caste awai his owen armes , CMBRUT3-M3,34.1047

and toke the Armes of a dede Briton , CMBRUT3-M3,34.1048

and armede him wi+t his armure , CMBRUT3-M3,34.1049

and come into +te bataile to +te kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,34.1050

and saide in +tis maner : " Sire , beth of gode hert , for Godes loue ,
CMBRUT3-M3,34.1051

for +te Romayns +tat be+te +gour enemys anone shullen bene slayn and
descomfitede euerychon . " CMBRUT3-M3,34.1052

and +te kyng +gaf no kepe ne rewarde to his speche , for encheson of +te
armes +tat he hade oppon him , CMBRUT3-M3,34.1053

and wende it hade bene a Britoune ; CMBRUT3-M3,34.1054

but +te traitoure euer helde him nexte +te kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,34.1055

and priueliche , vnder +te shulders of his armure , he smote +te kyng ,
Wherfore he was dede anone , and fel doune vnto +te er+te .
CMBRUT3-M3,34.1056

When Armoger saw his bro+ter dede , he caste away his Arme+g ,
CMBRUT3-M3,34.1057

and toke to him his bro+teres Armes , CMBRUT3-M3,34.1058

and come into +te bataile amonge +te Britons , CMBRUT3-M3,34.1059

and bade hertly for@ @to fyght , CMBRUT3-M3,34.1060

and faste laide adoune +te Romaignes . CMBRUT3-M3,34.1061

and for +te armes , +tai wende it hade bene Kyng Gynder , +tat arst was
slayne , +tat +tai wist nou+gt , CMBRUT3-M3,34.1062

and +to gonne +te Britons hertly fei+gten , CMBRUT3-M3,34.1063

and quellede +te Romayns ; CMBRUT3-M3,34.1064

so at +te last +te Emperour forsoke +te felde , CMBRUT3-M3,34.1065

and fley as faste as +tai mi+gt into +te citee of Wynchestre .
CMBRUT3-M3,34.1066

and +te false traitour Hamonde , +tat hade quellede +te kyng , faste
anone gene for@ @to flee in al +te haste +tat he mi+gt ;
CMBRUT3-M3,34.1067

and Armoger , +te kynges bro+ter , pursuede him ful fersly wi+t a ferse
herte , CMBRUT3-M3,34.1068

and drof him vnto +te water , CMBRUT3-M3,34.1069

and +tere <P_35> he toke him , CMBRUT3-M3,35.1070

and anone smote of bo+te heuede , hendes , and feete ,
CMBRUT3-M3,35.1071

and hewe +te body halto pecis , CMBRUT3-M3,35.1072

and +to caste it into +te water ; Wherfore +tat water was callede
Hamondeshauen ; CMBRUT3-M3,35.1073

and after , +tere was made a faire toune +tat +gitte $standeth +tat is
callede South-ampton . CMBRUT3-M3,35.1074

And afterwarde , Armoger went to Wynchestre for@ @to seche Claudius
Cesar +te Emperour ; CMBRUT3-M3,35.1075

and +tere Armoger him toke . CMBRUT3-M3,35.1076

And Claudius +te Emperour , +trou+g conseil of his Romayns +tat with him
were lefte alyf , made pees wi+t Armoger in +tis maner as +ge shulle+t
hure , +tat is to seyne , how +tat Claudius +te emperour shulde +geue to
Armoger , Gennen his dou+gter , for@ @to haue to wif , so +tat +tis
lande fro +tat tyme afterwarde shulde be in +te Emperoure+g power of
Rome , oppon suche couenant , +tat none Emperour of Rome shulde take
none o+tere truage of +tis lande , but oneliche feaute ;
CMBRUT3-M3,35.1077

and so +tai were accordede . CMBRUT3-M3,35.1078

And oppon +tis couenant , Claudius Cesar sent to Rome for his dou+gter
Gennen ; CMBRUT3-M3,35.1079

and when she was comen , Claudius Cesar +gaf her to Armoger to Wif ;
CMBRUT3-M3,35.1080

and Armoger spoused here at London with michel solempnite and mer+te ;
CMBRUT3-M3,35.1081

and +to was Armoger cronede , and made Kyng of Britaigne .
CMBRUT3-M3,35.1082

<heading>

Of Kyng Armoger , in whas tyme seynt Peter prechede in Antyoche , wi+t
o+tere apostlis in diuerses contres . CMBRUT3-M3,35.1084

Ca-pitulo xl . CMBRUT3-M3,35.1085

<$$heading>

THis Kyng Armoger regnede wel , CMBRUT3-M3,35.1087

and worthely +te lande gouernede , CMBRUT3-M3,35.1088

and Claudis Cesar , in remembrance of +tis accorde , and for reuerence
and honour of his doughter , made in +tis lande a fare toune and a faire
castel , CMBRUT3-M3,35.1089

and lete calle +te toune after his owen name ' Claucestre , ' +tat now
is callede Gloucestr . CMBRUT3-M3,35.1090

and when +tis was al done , +te Emperoure toke his leue ,
CMBRUT3-M3,35.1091

and went a+geyne to Rome ; CMBRUT3-M3,35.1092

and Armoger was +to kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,35.1093

and gouernede +te lande wel and nobil al his lif tyme .
CMBRUT3-M3,35.1094

and this Armager gete a sone on his wif , +tat was callede Westmere .
CMBRUT3-M3,35.1095

and <P_36> whiles +tat +tis Armoger regnede , seynt Peter prechede in
Antioche ; CMBRUT3-M3,36.1096

and +tere he hade made a noble cherche , in +te whiche he satte ferste
in his chier , CMBRUT3-M3,36.1097

and +tere he duellede vij +gere . CMBRUT3-M3,36.1098

after , he went to Rome , CMBRUT3-M3,36.1099

and was made Pope , til +tat Nero +te Emperour lete him martre .
CMBRUT3-M3,36.1100

& +to prechede openly al +te Apostlis , in diuerses landes , +te ry+gt
fay . CMBRUT3-M3,36.1101

And when Armoger hade regnede xxiiij +gere , he deyde ,
CMBRUT3-M3,36.1102

and lith at London . CMBRUT3-M3,36.1103

<heading>

How Kyng Westmer +gaf to Berynger an Ilande forlete ; CMBRUT3-M3,36.1105

and +tere +tis Beringer made +te toune of Berwik . CMBRUT3-M3,36.1106

Capitulo xlj . CMBRUT3-M3,36.1107

<$$heading>

ANd after +tis Armoger , regnede his sone Westmer , a gode man , and a
wor+ti of body , CMBRUT3-M3,36.1109

and wel gouernede +te lande . CMBRUT3-M3,36.1110

Hit bifelle so +tat tydynges come to him oppon a day , +tat +te Kyng
Rodrik of Gascoigne was comen into +tis lande wi+t an huge noumbre of
peple , and was duellyng in Steynesmore . CMBRUT3-M3,36.1111

and when Kyng Westmer herde +to tydyngus , he lete assemble a grete host
of Britons , CMBRUT3-M3,36.1112

and come to +te Kyng Rodrik , CMBRUT3-M3,36.1113

and +gaf him bataile . CMBRUT3-M3,36.1114

and Kyng Westmer quellede Rodrik wi+t his owen hondes in pleyne bataile
; CMBRUT3-M3,36.1115

and when +tat kyng Rodrikes men saw +tat here Lorde was dede , +tai
+golden ham alle to +te Kyng Westmer , CMBRUT3-M3,36.1116

and bicome his men for euermore ; CMBRUT3-M3,36.1117

and he +gaf ham a contre +tat was forlete , wher-in +tai my+gt duelle ;
CMBRUT3-M3,36.1118

and +tider +tai went , CMBRUT3-M3,36.1119

and duellede +tere al here lifes tyme ; CMBRUT3-M3,36.1120

and ix_C men +tere were of ham , and nomo lefte alif at +tat bataile .
CMBRUT3-M3,36.1121

Here gouernour and her prince , me callede Berynger ; CMBRUT3-M3,36.1122

and anone he biganne a toune , +tat +tai my+gt +terein duelle and haue
resceyt , CMBRUT3-M3,36.1123

and lete calle +te toune Berwik vp Twede ; CMBRUT3-M3,36.1124

and +tere +tai duellede , CMBRUT3-M3,36.1125

and bicome riche . CMBRUT3-M3,36.1126

but +tai n@ @ade no wymmen amonges ham , CMBRUT3-M3,36.1127

and +te Britons wolde nou+gt +geue here dou+gtres to +to Straungers ;
Wherfore +tai went ouere +te see into Irland , and brou+gt with ham
Wymmen , and ham +to spousede ; CMBRUT3-M3,36.1128

but +te men cou+te nou+gt vnderstonde +te langage ne +te speche of +te
wymmen , ney+ter +te wymmen of +te men , CMBRUT3-M3,36.1129

and +terefore +tai speken to-gederes as scottes . CMBRUT3-M3,36.1130

and aftirwarde , +trou+g chaungeyng of her <P_37> langages , in al
Fraunce +tei were callede +to Scottes : CMBRUT3-M3,37.1131

and so +tai shal be callede for euermore . CMBRUT3-M3,37.1132

<heading>

How Kyng Westmer Lete arere a stone in +te entryng of West-merland ,
+tere +tat he slou+gt Rodrik ; CMBRUT3-M3,37.1134

& +tere he biganne ferste Housyng . CMBRUT3-M3,37.1135

Capitulo Quadragesimo Secundo . CMBRUT3-M3,37.1136

<$$heading>

ANd after this bataile +tat is aboue-saide , when Rodrik was dede , Kyng
Westmer , in remembraunce of his Victorie , lete arere +tere , bisides
+te way , a grete stone in hye , CMBRUT3-M3,37.1138

& +gitte it stande+t , CMBRUT3-M3,37.1139

and euermore shal stande , CMBRUT3-M3,37.1140

and Lete graue in +te stone lettres +tat +tus saide : ' The Kyng
Westmere of Britaigne quellede in +tis place Rodrik his enemy . '
CMBRUT3-M3,37.1141

And +tis Westmere was +te ferst man +tat made tounes and hous in
Engeland . CMBRUT3-M3,37.1142

and at +tat stone bigynneth Westmerland , +tat Westmer lete calle after
his owen name . CMBRUT3-M3,37.1143

and when Westmer hade so done , he duellede al his Lif tyme in +tat
contre of Westmerland , CMBRUT3-M3,37.1144

for he louede +tat contre more ; CMBRUT3-M3,37.1145

and when he hade regnede xxv +gere , he deide . CMBRUT3-M3,37.1146

& li+t at Karleile . CMBRUT3-M3,37.1147

<heading>

Of Kyng Coil , +tat was Westmeres sone , +tat helde his lande in pees
his lif-tyme . CMBRUT3-M3,37.1149

Capitulo xl Tercio . CMBRUT3-M3,37.1150

<$$heading>

After +tis Kyng Westmer , regnede his sone Coil , a goode man and a
wor+ti , and of gode condicions , CMBRUT3-M3,37.1152

and wel gouernede his lande , CMBRUT3-M3,37.1153

and of alle men he hade loue and pees ; CMBRUT3-M3,37.1154

and in his tyme was neuer contak , debate , ne werre in Britayn ;
CMBRUT3-M3,37.1155

and he regnede and was kyng in pees al his lif-tyme .
CMBRUT3-M3,37.1156

& When he hade bene kyng xj +gere , he deide , CMBRUT3-M3,37.1157

and li+t at +Gork . CMBRUT3-M3,37.1158

<heading>

How Kyng Lucye regnede after Coel his fader , +tat was a gode man ;
CMBRUT3-M3,37.1160

and after , he bicome cristen . CMBRUT3-M3,37.1161

Capitulo xl Quarto . CMBRUT3-M3,37.1162

<$$heading>

After Kyng Coel , regnede Lucie his sone , +tat was a gode man to God
and to al +te peple . CMBRUT3-M3,37.1164

he sent to Rome , to Apostle Eulenchie , +tat +to was ,
CMBRUT3-M3,37.1165

and seide +tat he wolde bicome a cristen man , and resceyue baptisme in
+te name of God , and turne to +te <P_38> ry+gt bileue .
CMBRUT3-M3,38.1166

Eulenchie sent ij legates , +tat me callede Pagan and Elibrayne , into
+tis lande , CMBRUT3-M3,38.1167

and baptisede +te kyng and alle his menye , CMBRUT3-M3,38.1168

and after went fro toune to toune , CMBRUT3-M3,38.1169

and baptisede +te peple til al +tat Lande was baptisede ,
CMBRUT3-M3,38.1170

and +tis was in +te c._lvj +gere after +te Incarnacion of Ihesu Crist .
CMBRUT3-M3,38.1171

and +tis kyng Lucye made +to in +tis lande ij erchebisshoppes , on at
Kaunterbery and ano+tere at +Gork , and o+tere meny bisshopes +tat +git
bene in +tis lande . CMBRUT3-M3,38.1172

And when +tise ij legates hade baptisede al +te lande +tai ordeynede
prestes for@ @to baptisen childern and for@ @to make +te Sacrament ;
CMBRUT3-M3,38.1173

and after , +tai went a+geyne to Rome , CMBRUT3-M3,38.1174

and +te kyng duellede in his lande , CMBRUT3-M3,38.1175

and regnede with michel honour xiij +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,38.1176

and after deide , CMBRUT3-M3,38.1177

and li+t at Gloucestre . CMBRUT3-M3,38.1178

<heading>

How +tis lande was longe wi+touten a kyng ; and how +te Britons chosen a
kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,38.1180

Capitulo Quadragesimo. Quinto . CMBRUT3-M3,38.1181

<$$heading>

THis kyng Lucie hade none heire of his body bigeten , +tat was
afterwarde grete harme and sorwe to +te lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,38.1183

ffor , after +tis kyng Lucies deth , none of +te grete lordes of +te
lande wolde suffren an-o+tere to bene kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,38.1184

but leuede in werre and debate amonges ham 1. +gere wi+touten kyng .
CMBRUT3-M3,38.1185

but +to it bifel aftirwarde +tat a grete Prince come fro Rome into +tis
lande +tat me callede Seuerey ; nou+gt for@ @to werr , but for@ @to saue
+te ryght of Rome . CMBRUT3-M3,38.1186

But no+teles , he n@ @ade nou+gt duellede half +gere in +tis lande ,
+tat +te Britons ne quellede him . CMBRUT3-M3,38.1187

when +to of Rome wiste +tat Seuerey was so slayn , +tai sent ano+tere
grete lorde into +tis lande , +tat me callede Allec , +tat was a stronge
man , and a my+gty of body , and duellede in +tis lande Longe tyme , and
dede miche sorwe to +te Britons , so +tat after , for pure malice , +tai
chosen ham a kyng amonges ham , +tat me callede Astlepades , and
assemblede a grete host of +te Britouns , and went to London to seche
Allec ; CMBRUT3-M3,38.1188

and +tere +tai founde him , CMBRUT3-M3,38.1189

and quellede him and alle his felawes +tat <P_39> were wi+t him ,
CMBRUT3-M3,39.1190

but one of his felawes , +tat me clepede Waloun , defendet him fersly ,
CMBRUT3-M3,39.1191

and fau+gt longe with +te Britouns , CMBRUT3-M3,39.1192

but at +te laste he was descomfitede ; CMBRUT3-M3,39.1193

and +te Britons token him , CMBRUT3-M3,39.1194

and bounde him Hondes and feete , CMBRUT3-M3,39.1195

and caste him into a water ; wher-fore +tat water afterwarde was clepede
euermore Walbroke . CMBRUT3-M3,39.1196

+To regnede +tis Astlepades in quiete , til one of his erles +tat me
callede Coel , made a faire toune a+geynes +te kynges wille , and lete
calle +te toune Colchestre after his name , wherfore +te kyng was ful
wroth , and +tou+gt destroie +te erle , and bigan to werre vppon him ,
and brou+gt grete power , and +gaf bataile to +te erl .
CMBRUT3-M3,39.1197

and +te erl defendede him fersly with his power , CMBRUT3-M3,39.1198

and slough +te kyng him-self in +tat bataile ; CMBRUT3-M3,39.1199

and +to was Coel cronede , and made kyng of +tis land .
CMBRUT3-M3,39.1200

+tis Coel regnede and gouernede +te lande wel and nobly ,
CMBRUT3-M3,39.1201

for he was a noble man , and wel bilouede amonges +te Britons .
CMBRUT3-M3,39.1202

When +to of Rome herde +tat Astlepades was slayne , +tai were wonder
glade , CMBRUT3-M3,39.1203

and sent ano+tere grete prince of Romayns , +tat me callede Constance ;
CMBRUT3-M3,39.1204

and he come to +te Kyng Coil for@ @to chalange +te truage +tat was wont
to bene paiede to Rome ; CMBRUT3-M3,39.1205

and +te kyng ansuerede wel and wor+tely , CMBRUT3-M3,39.1206

and saide +tat he wolde paye to Rome al +tat ry+gt and resoun wolde wi+t
godewil ; CMBRUT3-M3,39.1207

and so +tai accordede +to wi+t goode wil , and wi+touten eny contak ;
CMBRUT3-M3,39.1208

and bo+te +tai duellede togeder in loue . CMBRUT3-M3,39.1209

The Kyng Coel +gaf his dou+gter Elyne to Constance , for@ @to haue here
for his spouse , +tat was bo+te faire , wise , and gode , and wel
lettrede : CMBRUT3-M3,39.1210

and +tis Constance spousede here +tere with michel honour .
CMBRUT3-M3,39.1211

and it bifelle sone afterwarde , +tat +tis kyng Coel deide in the +gere
of his regne xiij , & Lith at Colchestre enterede . CMBRUT3-M3,39.1212

<heading>

Of Kyng Constance , +tat was a Romayn , +tat was chosen kyng after +te
deth of Coel , for-asmiche +tat he hade spousede Elyn , +tat was Kyng
Coeles dou+gter . CMBRUT3-M3,39.1214

Capitulo xlvj=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,39.1215

<$$heading>

After +tis Kyng Coel , Constance was made kyng , and cronede ,
for-asmiche as he hade spousede Kyng Coele+g dou+gter , +tat was heire
of +te lande . +te whiche Constance regnede and wor+tely <P_40>
gouernede +te lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,40.1217

and he bigate on his wif Elyn , a sone +tat me callede Constantyn .
CMBRUT3-M3,40.1218

and +tis kyng bare trew fay , CMBRUT3-M3,40.1219

and trewly dede to ham of Rome al his lif . CMBRUT3-M3,40.1220

& when he hade regnede xv +gere , he deide , CMBRUT3-M3,40.1221

and li+t atte +Gork . CMBRUT3-M3,40.1222

<heading>

How Constantyne , +tat was Kyng Constance+g sone , & +te sone of seynt
Elyne , gouernede and rewlede +te lande , & was Emperour of Rome .
CMBRUT3-M3,40.1224

Capitulo xl Septimo . CMBRUT3-M3,40.1225

<$$heading>

After Kyng $Constance+g deth , Constantyne , his sone of seynt Elyne ,
+tat founde +tat croice in +te holy londe , and how Constantyne bicome
Emperoure of Rome . CMBRUT3-M3,40.1227

Hit bifel so in +tat tyme +tere was an Emperour atte Rome , a sarasyne ,
a tyraunt , +tat me callede Maxence , +tat put to +te deth alle +tat
bileuede in God , CMBRUT3-M3,40.1228

and destroiede holy cherche by alle his power , CMBRUT3-M3,40.1229

and slought Cristen men +tat he my+gt fynde ; CMBRUT3-M3,40.1230

and amonge alle o+tere , he lete martre Seynt Kateryne , and meny o+tere
cristen peple +tat hade drede of deth , CMBRUT3-M3,40.1231

+tai fledden CMBRUT3-M3,40.1232

and comen into +tis lande to Kyng Constantyne , CMBRUT3-M3,40.1233

and tolde him of +te sorwe +tat Maxence dede to al cristiente . Wherof
Constantyn hade pite , and grete sorwe made , and assemblede a grete
hoste and grete power , and went ouere see to Rome , and toke +te citee
, and quellede al +tat +terin were mescreaunt , +tat he my+gt fynde .
CMBRUT3-M3,40.1234

And +to was he made Emperoure , CMBRUT3-M3,40.1235

And was a gode man , CMBRUT3-M3,40.1236

and gouernede him so wel , +tat al +te Landes to him were entendaunt
for@ @to be vnder his gouernaile . CMBRUT3-M3,40.1237

And +tis deuel tyraunt Maxence , +tat +to was in +te lande of Greke ,
when he herde +tis tydynges , he bicome wode , CMBRUT3-M3,40.1238

and sodeynely deide , CMBRUT3-M3,40.1239

and so he endede his lif . CMBRUT3-M3,40.1240

When Constantyne went fro +tis land to Rome , he toke wi+t him his moder
Elyn , for +te michel wisedome +tat she cou+te , and +tre o+tere grete
lordes +tat he moste louede : CMBRUT3-M3,40.1241

+tat one me callede Hoel , CMBRUT3-M3,40.1242

ano+tere me callede Taberne , and +te +tridde Morhyn ;
CMBRUT3-M3,40.1243

and toke al his lande to kepe vnto +te Erl of Cornwaile , +tat men
callede Octouyan . CMBRUT3-M3,40.1244

anone as +tis Octouian wiste +tat his lorde was duellyng at Rome , he
seisede al +te lande into his honde , CMBRUT3-M3,40.1245

and +terwi+t <P_41> dede al his wil amonges heye and law ,
CMBRUT3-M3,41.1246

& +to helde him for kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,41.1247

when +tis tydyng come to Constantyne +te Emperoure , he woxe wonder
wro+te towarde +te Erl Octouyan , CMBRUT3-M3,41.1248

and sent Taberne with xij_m=l= men for@ @to destroye the erl for his
falsenesse , CMBRUT3-M3,41.1249

and arryuede at Portesmouthe . CMBRUT3-M3,41.1250

And when Octouyan wiste +tat , he assemblede a grete power of Britons ,
CMBRUT3-M3,41.1251

and descomfitede Taberne . CMBRUT3-M3,41.1252

And Taberne fledde +tens into Scotlande , CMBRUT3-M3,41.1253

and ordeynede +tere a grete power , CMBRUT3-M3,41.1254

and come a+geyne into +tis lande for@ @to +geue bataile ano+tere tyme to
Octouyan . CMBRUT3-M3,41.1255

When Octouyan herde telle +tat , he assemblede a grete power ,
CMBRUT3-M3,41.1256

and come towarde Taberne as miche as he my+gt , so +tat +to ij hostes
metten oppon Staynesmore , CMBRUT3-M3,41.1257

and strongely smyten to-gederes . CMBRUT3-M3,41.1258

and +to was Octouyan descomfitede , CMBRUT3-M3,41.1259

and fledde +tens into Norwaye ; CMBRUT3-M3,41.1260

and Taberne seisede al +te lande into his hande , Tounes , castelles ,
and as mich as +tai +tere hade . CMBRUT3-M3,41.1261

And si+tenes Octouyan come a+geyne fro Norway wi+t a grete power ,
CMBRUT3-M3,41.1262

& slough Taberne , CMBRUT3-M3,41.1263

& seisede al +te lande a+geyne into his honde , CMBRUT3-M3,41.1264

& drof oute alle +te Romayns , CMBRUT3-M3,41.1265

and was +to made Kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,41.1266

and regnede . CMBRUT3-M3,41.1267

<heading>

How Maximian , +tat was +te Emperoure+g cosyn of Rome spousede
Octouyane+g dou+gter , and was made kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,41.1269

Capitulo xlviij=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,41.1270

<$$heading>

THis Kyng Octouian gouernede +tis lande wel and nobly ;
CMBRUT3-M3,41.1272

but he n@ @ad none heire , saf a dou+gter +tat was a +gonge childe ,
+tat he louede as miche as his lif . CMBRUT3-M3,41.1273

and forasmiche +tat he wax sike , and was in poynt of de+t , and my+gt
no lenger regne , he wolde haue made one of his Neveus to haue bene kyng
+te whiche was a noble kny+gt and stronge man , +tat me callede Conan
Merche-dok , CMBRUT3-M3,41.1274

and he shulde haue kepte +te kynges dou+gter , & haue mariede her when
tyme hade bene ; CMBRUT3-M3,41.1275

but +te lordes of +te lande wolde nou+gt suffre hit , CMBRUT3-M3,41.1276

but +gaf here conseile to bene mariede to some hye man of great honour ,
CMBRUT3-M3,41.1277

and +tan my+gt she haue al her wille at +te conseile of +te Emperoure
Constantyne , here Lorde . CMBRUT3-M3,41.1278

and at +tis conseile , +tai accordede and chose +to Cador , Erl of
Cornewail , for@ @to wende <P_42> to +te Emperour to done +tis message .
CMBRUT3-M3,42.1279

and he toked +te way , CMBRUT3-M3,42.1280

and went to Rome , CMBRUT3-M3,42.1281

and tolde +te Emperour +tis tydynges wel and wiselich .
CMBRUT3-M3,42.1282

and +te Emperoure sent +to into +tis lande with him his owen cosyn ,
+tat was his Vncles sone , a noble kny+gt and stronge , +tat me callede
Maximian ; CMBRUT3-M3,42.1283

and he spousede Octouyanus dou+gter , CMBRUT3-M3,42.1284

and was cronede kyng of +tis lande . CMBRUT3-M3,42.1285

<heading>

How Maximian , +tat was +te Emperourres cosyn , conquerede the Lande of
Amorican , and +gaf it to Conan Meriedok . CMBRUT3-M3,42.1287

Capitulo xlix=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,42.1288

<$$heading>

THis Kyng Maximian bicome so real , +tat he +tou+gt conquere +te lande
of Amorican for +te grete richesse +tat he harde telle +tat was in +tat
lande ; so +tat he ne lefte man +tat was of wor+ti-nesse -- kny+gt ,
squyer , ne none o+tere man -- +tat he ne toke ham with him , to grete
damage and harme to al +te lande , CMBRUT3-M3,42.1290

but nome ham with him fram +tis lande , xxx_M=l= kny+gtes +tat were
doughty mennes bodyes , CMBRUT3-M3,42.1291

and went ouer into +te lande of Amorican , CMBRUT3-M3,42.1292

and +tere slough +te kyng +tat me callede Imbal , CMBRUT3-M3,42.1293

and conquerede al +te lande . CMBRUT3-M3,42.1294

And when he hade so done , he callede Conan , CMBRUT3-M3,42.1295

and saide : " For-asmiche as +te Kyng Octouyan wolde haue made +gow kyng
of Britaigne , and +trou+g me +ge were lette and destourblede , +tat +ge
were nou+gt kyng , I +geue +gow al +tis lande of Amorican ,
CMBRUT3-M3,42.1296

and +gow +terof make kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,42.1297

And for-asmiche as +ge beth a Britoun , and +goure men also , and bene
comen fram Britaigne , I wille +tat +tis lande haue +te same name , and
nomore bene callede Amorican , but bene callede ' litel Britaigne ' ;
CMBRUT3-M3,42.1298

and +te lande fro whens +ge be+te comen shal bene callede ' michel
Britaigne ' ; CMBRUT3-M3,42.1299

and so shul men know +tat one Britaigne fram +tat o+tere . "
CMBRUT3-M3,42.1300

Conan Meriedok +tankede him hende-liche ; CMBRUT3-M3,42.1301

and so was he made kyng of litel Britaigne . CMBRUT3-M3,42.1302

and when al +tis was done , Maxence went +tens to Rome ,
CMBRUT3-M3,42.1303

and +tere was made Emperour after Constantyne . CMBRUT3-M3,42.1304

Conan Meriedok duellede in litel Britaigne with michel honour ,
CMBRUT3-M3,42.1305

and lete ordeyne ij_M=l= <P_43> ploughmen of +te lande for@ @to erie +te
lande , to harwe it and sowe , CMBRUT3-M3,43.1306

and feffede ham alle rychely , after +tat +tai were .
CMBRUT3-M3,43.1307

and for-asmiche +tat Kyng Conan , ne none of his kny+gtes , ne none of
his o+tere peple , wolde nou+gt take wifes of +te nacion of Fraunce , he
+to sent into grete $Britaigne , to +te Erl of Cornewaile +tat me
callede Dionotho , +tat chees +trou+g-oute alle +te lande xj_M=l= of
maydenes , +tat is to seyne , viij_M=l= for the mene peple , and
iij_M=l= for +te grettest lordes +tat schulde ham spouse .
CMBRUT3-M3,43.1308

And when Dionotho hade tak +tis commandement , he lete +to seche
+trou+g-out al grete Britaigne as meny as +te nombre come to ,
CMBRUT3-M3,43.1309

for noman derst wi+tstande his commandement , for-asmichel as al +te
lande was taken him to warde and kepe , to do al +ting +tat him +to
likede . CMBRUT3-M3,43.1310

And when alle +te maydenes were assemblede , he lete ham comme bifore
him to London , CMBRUT3-M3,43.1311

and lete ordeyne for ham shippes hastely , as miche as ham nedet to +tat
viage , CMBRUT3-M3,43.1312

and toke his owen doughter +tat me callede Vrsula , +tat was +te
faireste creature +tat eny man wist , CMBRUT3-M3,43.1313

and wolde haue sent her to Kyng Conan , +tat shulde haue spousede here ,
and made here quene of litel Britaigne ; CMBRUT3-M3,43.1314

but she hade made priuely to God a vow of chastite , +tat here fader
wiste it nou+gt , ne noman elles +tat was leuyng oppon er+te .
CMBRUT3-M3,43.1315

<heading>

How Vrsula , and xj_M=l= of maydenes +tat were in here company , went
towarde litil Britaigne , & al were martrede at Coloigne .
CMBRUT3-M3,43.1317

Capitulo Quinquagesimo . CMBRUT3-M3,43.1318

<$$heading>

THis Vrsula chees into her company xj_M=l= maydenes +tat of al o+tere
she was lady and maistres ; CMBRUT3-M3,43.1320

and alle +tai went into +te shippis at on tyme , in +te water +tat me
calle+t Tamise ; CMBRUT3-M3,43.1321

and commandede her kyn and alle her frendes to almy+gty God ,
CMBRUT3-M3,43.1322

and sailede for+t towarde litel Britaigne . CMBRUT3-M3,43.1323

But when +tai were comen in +te hye see , a stronge tempest arose , as
it was Goddes wil ; CMBRUT3-M3,43.1324

and Vrsula , wi+t her shippis and here company , was dryuen , and +to
xj_M=l= maidenes , toward Hundelande , +trou+g tempest ,
CMBRUT3-M3,43.1325

and arryuede in +te <P_44> hauen of +te citee of Coloigne .
CMBRUT3-M3,44.1326

The kyng of +te lande , +tat me callede Gowan , was +to in +te citee ;
CMBRUT3-M3,44.1327

and when he wist +to tydynges , +tat so meny faire maydenes were +tere
arryuede , he tok Elga his bro+ter , and o+tere of his householde , wi+t
him , CMBRUT3-M3,44.1328

and went to +te shippes to see +tat fair company . CMBRUT3-M3,44.1329

and when he sawe ham so faire , he and his company wolde haue ham
ouerlayne , and bynome here maydenhode . CMBRUT3-M3,44.1330

but Vrsula , +tat gode mayde , conseilede , prayede , warnede , and
tau+gte ham +tat were here felowes , +tat +tai shulde defende ham wi+t
al her my+gt , and ra+ter suffre deth +tan suffre here bodyes bene
defoulede . So +tat alle +te maydenes bicome so stedefast in God , +tat
+tai defendede ham +trou+g his grace , so +tat none of ham hade power to
done ham eny shame ; wherfore +te kyng was so sore annoiede , +tat he ,
for wra+t , lete slee ham euerychon anone ryght ; CMBRUT3-M3,44.1331

and so were alle +te maidenes martrede for +te loue of God ,
CMBRUT3-M3,44.1332

and ligget at Coloyn . CMBRUT3-M3,44.1333

<heading>

How Kyng Gowan come for@ @to destroye +tis lande ; and how a man of
grete power , +tat me callede Gracian , defendede +te lande .
CMBRUT3-M3,44.1335

Capitulo $Quinquagesimo Primo . CMBRUT3-M3,44.1336

<$$heading>

WHen al +tis was done , Kyng Gowan , +tat was a sarasyn , callede his
bro+ter Elga , CMBRUT3-M3,44.1338

and saide to him +tat he shulde gone to conquere +te lande +tat alle +to
faire maydenes were borne in . CMBRUT3-M3,44.1339

and he ordeynede +to a grete power of Peihtes , of Denmarc , of Orkeneye
, and of Norwaye , CMBRUT3-M3,44.1340

and +tai comen into +tis lande , CMBRUT3-M3,44.1341

and brent tounes , CMBRUT3-M3,44.1342

and slough folc , CMBRUT3-M3,44.1343

and caste adone cherches and houses of religioun , CMBRUT3-M3,44.1344

and robbede the lande in lengh and in brede , CMBRUT3-M3,44.1345

and put to deth alle +to +tat wolde noght forsake +te ryght bileue and
cristen-dome , for-asmiche as +tere was none souerayne in the lande +tat
my+gt ham helpe or defende . CMBRUT3-M3,44.1346

For +te Kyng Maximian hade taken wi+t him alle +te wor+ti men , when he
went to conquere litil Britaigne . CMBRUT3-M3,44.1347

and in +te same tyme +tat +ge hure now telle , was Seynt Albone martrede
+trou+g +te wode tyraunt Diodicinn in +te same place , wherin is now an
Abbay made of Seynt Albone , whiles +tat he was a paynyme .
CMBRUT3-M3,44.1348

But he conuertede him towarde God , +trou+g +te pre-dicacioun of a grete
clerc and a wyse , +tat me callede Ancibell , +tat <P_45> was
herburghede a nyght in his house ; CMBRUT3-M3,45.1349

and +tis was after +te Incar-nacion of Ihesu Crist .ij_C._iiij._vj +gere
. CMBRUT3-M3,45.1350

and men shullen vnder_stonde +tat Seynt Albone soffrede his martredome
bifore +tat Seynt Edmunde was martrede ; CMBRUT3-M3,45.1351

and +terfore is seynt Albone callede +te ferst martre of Engelande .
CMBRUT3-M3,45.1352

This Gowanus bro+ter , & his folk , +tat were Sarasynes , went
+trou+g-oute +te Lande , CMBRUT3-M3,45.1353

and destroyede al +ting +tat +tai fonde ; CMBRUT3-M3,45.1354

and no +ting +tai ne sparede . CMBRUT3-M3,45.1355

When +tis tyd-yng come to Rome , how +tat Kyng Gowan hade bigonne for@
@to destroye +tis lande , +te Emperour and +to of Rome sent a stronge
man , and of grete power , +tat me callede Gracian , $with xxiiij_M=l=
men wel feightyng , for@ @to caste oute Sarasynes of +tis lande ,
CMBRUT3-M3,45.1356

and alle +tai arryuede at Portesmouthe . CMBRUT3-M3,45.1357

Maximian my+gt nou+gt come him-self , for-asmiche as he was chosen
Emperoure after +te de+t of Constantyn , +tat was Seynt Elynes sone .
CMBRUT3-M3,45.1358

When +tis Gracian was arryuede wi+t his host , he lete aspie priuely
wher +te Kyng Gowan my+gt bene founden ; CMBRUT3-M3,45.1359

and he come vppon him sodeynly , as +tai Lay in her beddes ,
CMBRUT3-M3,45.1360

and descomfitede ham , CMBRUT3-M3,45.1361

and sloughe echeon , +tat non of hem Ascaped saf Gowan , +tat fledde
with mych sorowe in-to his cuntre . CMBRUT3-M3,45.1362

Sone aftir yt byfel +tat Maximian was slayn at Rome , +turgh treson ;
CMBRUT3-M3,45.1363

And when Gracian wyst +t=e= tydynge , he let Croune hym kyng of +tis
land . CMBRUT3-M3,45.1364

<heading>

How Gracyan made hym kyng whan Maximian was slayn ; & after , +te
Brytouns quelled hym for his wikkydnesse . CMBRUT3-M3,45.1366

Capitulo quinquagesimo ij=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,45.1367

<$$heading>

This Gracian , when he gan for@ @to regne , he bycome so wykked & so
sterne , & so mych sorow wrought to +t=e= Britouns , +tat +tey slow hym
amonges hem . CMBRUT3-M3,45.1369

Tho Kyng Gowan had vndirstande +tat Gracian was do to deth , he
Assembled a gret power , CMBRUT3-M3,45.1370

& come a+gen in-to +tis land ; CMBRUT3-M3,45.1371

& yf he had arst don a grete harme , +t=o= dede he mych more ;
CMBRUT3-M3,45.1372

for +t=o= distroyed he al this land , & al Crysten peple +tat was in
Myche Brytaigne , so +tat no man was so hardy for-@ @to nempne God ;
CMBRUT3-M3,45.1373

& ho +tat dede , anon he was put to strong deth . CMBRUT3-M3,45.1374

<P_46>

But +te bysshop of London +tat was +to , +tat me called Gosselyn ,
scaped , CMBRUT3-M3,46.1376

& went +tens to hem of Rome , to seche socour for-@ @to helpe dystroye
+te Sara+gins +tat had destroyed +tis land . CMBRUT3-M3,46.1377

And +t=e= Romayns seyde +tat +tey hadde be so ofte anoyed for her
sendyng after folk in-to Brytaigne , al for-@ @to helpe +t=e= Britouns ,
& +tey wold no more so do . CMBRUT3-M3,46.1378

And so +t=e= Bysshop Gosselyn went +tens with-oute ony Socour or helpe ;
CMBRUT3-M3,46.1379

& +to went he to +t=e= Kyng of litil Brytaigne , +tat me called Aldroye
, CMBRUT3-M3,46.1380

& +tis was +t=e= iij kyng after Gowan Meridiok , as bifore is sayd .
CMBRUT3-M3,46.1381

The bysshop prayed this Kyng Aldroye of socour & of helpe .
CMBRUT3-M3,46.1382

the kyng hadde herd how +t=e= bysshop fledde , & how +tat +t=e= Crystene
men were slayn in gret Brytaigne +turgh Paynynis & Sara+gins ,
CMBRUT3-M3,46.1383

& he graunted hym Constantyn his bro+ter , hym for-@ @to helpe , with
Poer of folk , CMBRUT3-M3,46.1384

& hem dede arraye hors armure , & schippes , & al thing +tat hem neded
to +tat viage . CMBRUT3-M3,46.1385

and when al thing was redy , he called +t=e= bysshop ,
CMBRUT3-M3,46.1386

& to hym seyd : " I take +gou here to helpe & socour Constantyn my
bro+ter , vpon this couenaunt , +tat +gif God +gife hym grace , +te
Paynems & Sara+gins to schende & discomfite , +tat +tanne +ge make hym
kyng of +t=e= land " : CMBRUT3-M3,46.1387

& +t=e= bysshop yt graunted with good wyll . CMBRUT3-M3,46.1388

Constantyn & +t=e= bysshop nome leue +to of +t=e= Kyng Aldroye ,
CMBRUT3-M3,46.1389

& by-took hym to God , CMBRUT3-M3,46.1390

& nome her men xij_M=l= , CMBRUT3-M3,46.1391

& went in-to her schippes , CMBRUT3-M3,46.1392

& sayled toward +t=e= gret Brytaigne , CMBRUT3-M3,46.1393

& Arryued in Tottenesse . CMBRUT3-M3,46.1394

when +t=e= Britouns herd +te tydyng +tat to hem come socour , +tey were
stronglich holpyn , CMBRUT3-M3,46.1395

& ordeigned hem an huge nombre of peple , CMBRUT3-M3,46.1396

& come to hem , CMBRUT3-M3,46.1397

& hem vndirfongen with mychel honour . CMBRUT3-M3,46.1398

Gowan , anon as he wyste of this +tyng , he Assemblyd all +te Sara+gins
, CMBRUT3-M3,46.1399

& come a+gens hym , CMBRUT3-M3,46.1400

& +gaf batayll . CMBRUT3-M3,46.1401

And Constantyn slow hym with his owne hand ; CMBRUT3-M3,46.1402

& all +t=e= othere Sara+gins were discomfited & slayn , +tat non
aschaped but +t=o= +tat were conuerted vnto God . CMBRUT3-M3,46.1403

<heading>

How Constantyn , +tat was +te kynges bro+ter of litel Britaigne , was
Crouned kyng , for his wor+tines , of mych Bretaigne .
CMBRUT3-M3,46.1405

Capitulo liij=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,46.1406

<$$heading>

Anon , aftir +t=e= batayll , alle +tey went to London ,
CMBRUT3-M3,46.1408

& crowned +tere Constantyn , CMBRUT3-M3,46.1409

& made hym kyng of +tis lond . CMBRUT3-M3,46.1410

And +t=e= bysshop Gosselyn sette +t=e= Croune vpon his hed ,
CMBRUT3-M3,46.1411

& anoynted hym , as <P_47> falleth to A kyng for-@ @to be ;
CMBRUT3-M3,47.1412

& +t=o= bygan Crystendom . CMBRUT3-M3,47.1413

This Constantyn , whan he was Crouned , anon aftir he spoused his wyf
+turgh counceil of +t=e= Britouns ; CMBRUT3-M3,47.1414

& he begate iij Sones on her : CMBRUT3-M3,47.1415

+t=e= ferst me called Constaunce , +tat other Aurylambros , & +t=e= iij
Vter . CMBRUT3-M3,47.1416

Constance , +t=e= eldest brother , when he come to Age , made hym a
monke at Wynchestre . CMBRUT3-M3,47.1417

Constantyn here fadir was slayn +turgh treson ; CMBRUT3-M3,47.1418

for it byfell vpon a tyme +tat a Pohete come to hym vpon a day , in
Message as yt were , CMBRUT3-M3,47.1419

& seyd +tat he wolde speke with +te kyng pryuyly in Counceyl .
CMBRUT3-M3,47.1420

The kyng lete voyde his Chambre of +t=o= men +tat were with-Inne ;
CMBRUT3-M3,47.1421

& +to Abide +tere nomo but +t=e= kyng & +te Pohete , CMBRUT3-M3,47.1422

& made a Contenaunce as +tey wolde speke to-gidere in his ere ;
CMBRUT3-M3,47.1423

& +tere he qwelled hym with a long knyf ; CMBRUT3-M3,47.1424

& after , went qweyntly out of +t=e= Chambre in-to ano+ter Chambre ;
CMBRUT3-M3,47.1425

so at +te laste no man wyst wher he was bycome . CMBRUT3-M3,47.1426

When +t=e= kynges men it wyste , +tat here lord was so ded , +tei made
so mych sorowe +tey n@ @yst all what for-@ @to done , for-as-mych as his
ij sones , Aurylambros & Vter , weren so yenge +tat non of hem myght be
kyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,47.1427

& +t=e= iij bro+ter was monke at Wynchestre , as I sayd before .
CMBRUT3-M3,47.1428

But Vortiger , +tat was Erl of Westsex , +tought pryuyly in his herte ,
thurgh queyntise , to be kyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,47.1429

& went to Wynchestre +ter +tat Constaunce was monk , CMBRUT3-M3,47.1430

& to hym seyde : " Constaunce quod he , " +goure fadir is ded ,
CMBRUT3-M3,47.1431

& +gour ij bre+terin +tat ben with Gosselyn , +t=e= bysshop of London ,
to noryssh , beth so yeng , +tat non of hem may be kyng ; wherfore y
counseyle +tat +ge forsake +goure Abyte , & come with me ,
CMBRUT3-M3,47.1432

& I schal do so to +t=e= Brytouns +tat +ge schul be made kyng . "
CMBRUT3-M3,47.1433

<heading>

Of Constaunce , +tat was Constantynus sone , +tat was Monk at Wynchestr
; & how he was made kyng after his faders deth , +turgh Counceill of
Vortiger , +tat was Erle of Westsex , for-as-mych as Aurilambros & Vter
, his ij bre+terin , were but of yonge age , & was slayn .
CMBRUT3-M3,47.1435

Capitulo liiij=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,47.1436

<$$heading>

This Vortiger counceyled +tis Constaunce so mych tyl he forsook his
Abyte , & went with hym . CMBRUT3-M3,47.1438

& anon aftir , he was Crouned and made kyng by Assent of +t=e= Brytouns
. CMBRUT3-M3,47.1439

This kyng Constance , <P_48> whan he was crouned & made kyng , he wyst
ne knew but litil of +t=e= world , CMBRUT3-M3,48.1440

ne cowde no thing as knyghthood axed , CMBRUT3-M3,48.1441

he made Vortiger his maister & his chef Counceillour ,
CMBRUT3-M3,48.1442

& yaf hym all his power , for-@ @to ordeigne & do as myche as to +t=e=
reaume perteyned , so +tat hym-self no +ting entrauelled , but only bare
+te name of kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,48.1443

Whan Vortiger saw +tat he had al +t=e= land in his warde & gouernayle ,
at his owne wyll , he +tought A pryue Treson , CMBRUT3-M3,48.1444

& +tought to sle Constance +te kyng , +tat he myght hym-self be Crouned
& made kyng & regne , CMBRUT3-M3,48.1445

& lete sende after a_C knyghttes of Pehetes , +t=e= worthiest of +t=e=
land , CMBRUT3-M3,48.1446

& hem helde with hym , to duelle wi+t him , and to bene Kepers of his
body , as he wolde wende +trou+g +te lande to ordeyne +tinges +tat
perteynede to a Kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,48.1447

And +tis Vortiger honourede so miche +to C kny+gtes CMBRUT3-M3,48.1448

and so miche +gaf ham of golde and siluer , & so ryche rewell , robes ,
hors , and o+tere noble plente , wherfore +tai helde him more lorde +tan
+tai deden +te kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,48.1449

And Vortyger tolde ham , if +tat he moste bene kyng , he , as it were
+trou+g tresoun , he wolde make ham richest of +te lande .
CMBRUT3-M3,48.1450

so at the laste , +trou+g grete +giftes +tat he hade +geue largely ,
+tai crieden +trou+g +te court +tat Vortiger were better wor+ti ben kyng
+tan Constance ; wherfore Vortiger made sem-blent as +tau+g he hade bene
wro+t , and departede +tens fro +te court , and saide he most gone
elles-where for +ting +tat he hade to done ; CMBRUT3-M3,48.1451

and so +te traitoure +gede for enchesoun +tat +tai shulde slee him ,
+tat is to seyne , Constance . CMBRUT3-M3,48.1452

When +tis Vortiger was gone , hit bifelle sone after +tat +to C kny+gt+g
of Peightes breken +te dores of +te kynges chambre , CMBRUT3-M3,48.1453

and +tere +tai him slough and smoten of his heuede , CMBRUT3-M3,48.1454

and bare it to Vortiger +tere +tat he duellede . CMBRUT3-M3,48.1455

and when Vortyger saw +tat heuede , he wepte ful tenderly wi+t his eye ;
CMBRUT3-M3,48.1456

and no+telese he was some dele glade of his deth , CMBRUT3-M3,48.1457

and anone lete take +to C kny+gtes of Peightes , CMBRUT3-M3,48.1458

& bonde here hondes bihynde ham , CMBRUT3-M3,48.1459

and lade ham to London ; CMBRUT3-M3,48.1460

& +tere +tai were dampnede to deth <P_49> as false traitoures .
CMBRUT3-M3,49.1461

and anone after , al +te britons of +te lande , by commune assent
cronede +tere Vortiger , CMBRUT3-M3,49.1462

& made him kyng of +te lande . CMBRUT3-M3,49.1463

<heading>

How +te wardeynes +tat hade +to ij childerne to kepe , +tat were
Constantines sones , lade ham to litel Britaigne , for the tresoun and
falsenesse of Vortiger . CMBRUT3-M3,49.1465

Capitulo Quin-quagesimo Quinto . CMBRUT3-M3,49.1466

<$$heading>

THis kyng Vortyger , when he was cronede , +to +tat hade +te ij
childerne in kepyng , Aurilambros and Vter , +trou+g ordenance of
Gosselyn , +tat was bisshop of London at his de+t , derst nou+gt duelle
in the lande wi+t +te childerne , CMBRUT3-M3,49.1468

but lade ham to +te kyng of litel Britaigne , forasmiche as he +to wiste
+te tresoun of Vortiger , +tat +to was made Kyng , +trou+g wham
Constance here bro+ter was slayn , wherfore +to C kny+gtes of Peightes
were put to +te deth , and bare al +te blame , as +tei+gt Vortiger hade
nou+gt wiste +terof , no+ter +terto consentede ; CMBRUT3-M3,49.1469

and so +te Kepers of +to ij childerne drade laste Vortiger wolde put ham
to deth , +trou+g his tresoun and falsenesse , as he hade done her
bro+ter biforne ; CMBRUT3-M3,49.1470

and +terfor +tai wer ladde ouer into litel Britaigne ,
CMBRUT3-M3,49.1471

and +te kyng ham resceyuede wi+t michel honour , CMBRUT3-M3,49.1472

and lete ham to norisshe ; CMBRUT3-M3,49.1473

and +tere +tai duellede til +tai bicome fair kny+gte+g & $strong and
ferse , CMBRUT3-M3,49.1474

and +tou+gt euer to bene avengede of +te deth of Constantyne here
bro+ter , when +tai saw here tyme ; CMBRUT3-M3,49.1475

and so +tai deden , as +te shul hur aftirward . CMBRUT3-M3,49.1476

Hit was nou+gt long after , +tat +te tydynges ne come ouer +te see , to
+te kynrede of +te C kny+gte+g of Peightes +tat were dampnede and put to
+te deth +trou+g Vortiger in +tis lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,49.1477

+terfore +tai weren wonderly wro+te , CMBRUT3-M3,49.1478

& sworen +tat +tai <em> would be avenged of her kins death , <$$em>
CMBRUT3-M3,49.1479

and comen into +tis lande wi+t a grete power , CMBRUT3-M3,49.1480

& rob-beden in meny places , CMBRUT3-M3,49.1481

& slou+g , CMBRUT3-M3,49.1482

& dede al +te sorw +tat +tai my+gt . CMBRUT3-M3,49.1483

When Vortyger hit wiste , he made sorw ynow CMBRUT3-M3,49.1484

and <P_50> sore was annoyede ; CMBRUT3-M3,50.1485

and in a-no+ter partie also tydynges come +tat Aurilambros & Vter
ordeynede ham , and assemblede a grete hoste for@ @to come into michel
Britaigne , +tat is to seyne , into +tis lande , to bene avenged of
Constance de+t her bro+ter so +tat in one half and in +tat o+ter he was
brou+gt into so miche sorwe +tat he n@ @yst whider to wende .
CMBRUT3-M3,50.1486

<heading>

How Engist and xj_M=l= men come into +tis lande , to whom Vortiger +gaf
a place +tat is callede Thongecastell . CMBRUT3-M3,50.1488

Capitulo lvj=to= . CMBRUT3-M3,50.1489

<$$heading>

ANd sone after +tis sorw , tidynges come to Vortiger , +tat a grete
nauye of straungers were arryuede in Kent ; CMBRUT3-M3,50.1491

but +tai wist nou+gt whens +tai were , ne wherfore +tai were comen .
CMBRUT3-M3,50.1492

The Kyng sent anone messagers +tider , +tat somme of ham shulde come and
speke wi+t him , for@ @to wete what folc +tai werne , and what +tai
axede , and into what contre +tai wolde gone . CMBRUT3-M3,50.1493

+tere were ij bre+terne , Prynces and maistres of +tat straunge company
: CMBRUT3-M3,50.1494

+tat on me callede Engist , and +tat o+tere Horn . CMBRUT3-M3,50.1495

Engist went +to to +te kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,50.1496

& tolde to him encheson wherefore +tai were +tere arryuede in his lande
, CMBRUT3-M3,50.1497

and saide : " sire ! we beth of a contre +tat is callede Saxoyue , +tat
is , +te Lande of Germayn , wherin is so miche sorw , +tat +te peple is
so myche +tat +te lande may nou+gt ham sustene ne suffice .
CMBRUT3-M3,50.1498

The maystres & Prynces +tat haue+t +te lande to gouerne and rewele ,
shul done come bifore ham men and wymmen , CMBRUT3-M3,50.1499

+te boldest +tat bene amonges ham and best mowen trauaile into diuerse+g
londes ; CMBRUT3-M3,50.1500

and so +tai shal ham +geue Horse and harneyse , armure , and al +ting
+tat ham nede+t ; CMBRUT3-M3,50.1501

and after +tai say to ham +tat +tai go into ano+ter contre , wher +tat
+tai mowen leue , as here auncestres deden biforne ham .
CMBRUT3-M3,50.1502

and +terfore , sire kyng , if +ge haue ou+gt to <P_51> done wi+t oure
company , we bene comen into +goure lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,51.1503

and wi+t gode wille +gow wil serue , and +gour lande helpe , kepe , &
defende fram +goure enemys , if +tat +gow nede+t . CMBRUT3-M3,51.1504

when Vortiger herde +tis tydynges , he saide he wolde gladeliche
wi+thalde ham , oppon soche couenant , CMBRUT3-M3,51.1505

if +tai my+gt delyuer his lande of his enemys , he wolde +geue ham
resonable landes , wher +tai shulde duelle for euermore .
CMBRUT3-M3,51.1506

Engist +tankede him godeliche ; CMBRUT3-M3,51.1507

and in +tis maner he and his company , xj._M=l= men , shulde duelle wi+t
+te Kyng Vortiger ; CMBRUT3-M3,51.1508

and so miche +tai deden +trou+g here boldenesse , +tat +tai delyuerede
+te lande clene of here enemys . CMBRUT3-M3,51.1509

+to praiede Engist +te Kyng , of so miche lande +tat he my+gt make to
him a citee , for him and for his menye . CMBRUT3-M3,51.1510

The kyng ansuerede CMBRUT3-M3,51.1511

& saide , ' it was nou+gt for@ @to done wi+touten conseile of his
Britons . ' CMBRUT3-M3,51.1512

Engist prayede him eftesones of as miche place as he my+gt compasse wi+t
a twonge of a skyn , wher-oppon he my+gt make him a maner , and
{COM:translation_of_french_adverbial_"et"?} for his to duelle in ;
CMBRUT3-M3,51.1513

and +te kyng grantede it frely . CMBRUT3-M3,51.1514

+to +tok Engist a bole skyn , CMBRUT3-M3,51.1515

and cotte it as smale as he my+gt , al into a twonge al rounde ,
CMBRUT3-M3,51.1516

& +ter-wi+t compassede as miche lande as he compassede ; wher-oppon he
made a faire castel . CMBRUT3-M3,51.1517

and when +tis castel was ymade , he lete calle it Twongecastel , for
asmiche as +te place was merkede wi+t a twonge . CMBRUT3-M3,51.1518

<heading>

Of Ronewenne , +tat was Engistes doughter , and how Kyng Vortyger
$spousede her for here beaute . CMBRUT3-M3,51.1520

C. lvij=mo= . CMBRUT3-M3,51.1521

<$$heading>

WHen +tis castel was makede , and ful wel arraiede , Engist priuely sent
bi lettre into +te contre +tat he come of , after an_hundrede shippis
fillede with strange men +tat were bolde and wel fei+gtyng in alle
batailes ; and +tat +tai shulde bryng wi+t ham Ronewenne , his dou+gter
, +tat was +te fairest creature +tat eny man my+gt see .
CMBRUT3-M3,51.1523

And when +te peple was comen , +tat he hade sende after , he toke ham
into +te castel wi+t michel ioye ; CMBRUT3-M3,51.1524

and him him-self , vppon a day , went vnto +te kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,51.1525

and prayede him derworly +tat he wolde come and see his new maner , +tat
he hade made in +te place +tat he hade compassede wi+t +te twong of +te
<P_52> skyn . CMBRUT3-M3,52.1526

+te kyng anone grantede him frely , CMBRUT3-M3,52.1527

and wi+t him went +tider , CMBRUT3-M3,52.1528

and was wel payede wi+t +te castel & wi+t +te faire werk ;
CMBRUT3-M3,52.1529

and togederes +tere +tai eten and dranken wi+t michel ioye .
CMBRUT3-M3,52.1530

And when ny+gt come , +tat +te kyng shulde go into his chambre for@ @to
take +tere his ny+gtes reste , Ronewenne , +tat was Engistes dou+gter ,
come wi+t a coupe of golde in here honde , CMBRUT3-M3,52.1531

and knelede bifore +te kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,52.1532

and saide to him " Whatsaile ! " CMBRUT3-M3,52.1533

and +te kyng wist nou+gt what it was for@ @to mene , ne what he shulde
ansuere , for-asmiche as himself ne none of his Britons +gitte cou+te
none Englisshe speke , ne vnderstonde it , but speken +to +tat same
langage +tat Britons +gitte done . CMBRUT3-M3,52.1534

No+teles , a Latymer tolde +te kyng +te fulle vnder-stondyng +terof '
whatsaill ' ; and +tat o+ter shulde ansuere ' drynkehaile ' :
CMBRUT3-M3,52.1535

and +tat was +te ferst tyme +tat ' whatsaile ' and ' drynkehaile ' come
vp into +tis lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,52.1536

and fram +tat tyme into this tyme it Ha+t bene wel vsede .
CMBRUT3-M3,52.1537

The Kyng Vortiger saw +te fairenesse of Ronewenne , CMBRUT3-M3,52.1538

and his armes layde aboute here nek , CMBRUT3-M3,52.1539

and +tries swetely cussede hir ; CMBRUT3-M3,52.1540

and anone ry+gt he was vnarmerede oppon hire , +tat he desirede to haue
here to wyf , CMBRUT3-M3,52.1541

and axede of Engist hir fader . CMBRUT3-M3,52.1542

and Engist grantede , oppon +tis couenaunt +tat +te kyng shulde +geue
him al the contre of Kent , +tat he my+gt duelle in , and al his peple .
CMBRUT3-M3,52.1543

+te kyng hym grantede priuely with a gode wille ; CMBRUT3-M3,52.1544

and anone after he spousede +te damisell . CMBRUT3-M3,52.1545

+tat was miche confusion to himself ; CMBRUT3-M3,52.1546

and +terfor al +te Britouns bicome so wro+t , for enchesoun +tat he hade
spousede a womman of mysbileue , wherfore +tai went al from him , and
no+ting to him toke kepe , ne helpe him in +tinges +tat he hade to done
. CMBRUT3-M3,52.1547

<heading>

How Vortymere , +tat was Vortigers sone , was made kyng , & Engist
dryuen oute ; & how Vortymer was slayn +trou+g Ronewenne .
CMBRUT3-M3,52.1549

Capitulo lviij=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,52.1550

<$$heading>

THis Engist went into Kent , CMBRUT3-M3,52.1552

and seisede al +te lande into his hande , for him and for al his men ;
CMBRUT3-M3,52.1553

and bicome in a litel while of so grete power , & so miche peple hade ,
+tat men wist nou+gt in litel tyme , whiche were +te kynges men , &
whiche were <P_53> Engistes men . wherfore al Britaigne hade of ham
drede , and saide amonges ham +tat , if +tai ne toke o+tere counseil
bituene ham , al +te lande shulde be bitrayede +trou+g Engist and his
peple . CMBRUT3-M3,53.1554

Vortyger +te kyng hade bigeten on his ferst wif iij sones :
CMBRUT3-M3,53.1555

+te ferst me callede Vortymer ; +te secunde , Catagren ; and +te +tridde
, Passent . CMBRUT3-M3,53.1556

+Te Britons , euerychon by one assent , chosen Vortymer for@ @to bene
here lorde , & here souerayne , and hir conseiler in euery bataile ,
CMBRUT3-M3,53.1557

and cronede him , CMBRUT3-M3,53.1558

and made him Kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,53.1559

and Wolde soffre Vortiger no longer to regne , for enchesoun of +te
alliance bituene Engist and him . CMBRUT3-M3,53.1560

+te Britons ordeynede a grete host to drif out Engist and his company of
+te lande , CMBRUT3-M3,53.1561

and +gaf him iij batailles : CMBRUT3-M3,53.1562

+te ferst was in Kent , +tere +tat he was lorde ; CMBRUT3-M3,53.1563

+te secunde was att Tetteford ; CMBRUT3-M3,53.1564

and +te +tridde was in a shire a +tis half Cool , in a more .
CMBRUT3-M3,53.1565

& in +tis batail ham mette Cattegren and Horn , Engistes bro+ter , so
+tat eueryche of ham slou+g o+ter ; CMBRUT3-M3,53.1566

but for-asmiche as +te contre was +geuen longe bifore to Horn , +trou+g
Vortyger , +to he hade spousede his cosyn ; +tere he hade made a faire
castel +tat me callede Horncastel , after his owen name .
CMBRUT3-M3,53.1567

And Vortymere was so annoiede for his bro+teres de+t , Cattegren , +tat
he was dede in soche a maner ; wherfore anone he lete felle +te castel
to +te grounde , CMBRUT3-M3,53.1568

and after +tat , he ne lefte ny+gt ne day til he hade dryuen out Engist
and all his peple of +te lande . CMBRUT3-M3,53.1569

And when Engist was dryuen away , Ronewenne his dou+gter made sorwe ynow
, CMBRUT3-M3,53.1570

and queyntly spake to ham +tat were nexte +te kyng Vortymere ,
CMBRUT3-M3,53.1571

and priueest wi+t him . CMBRUT3-M3,53.1572

and so miche she +gaf ham of +giftes , +tat he was apoysenede ,
CMBRUT3-M3,53.1573

& deide at London +te iiij +gere of his regne ; CMBRUT3-M3,53.1574

& +tere he lith . CMBRUT3-M3,53.1575

<heading>

How +te Britons chosen a-no+tere tyme Vortyger to bene here king ; and
Engist come into +tis lande a+geyne & +tai fou+gten to-gedres .
CMBRUT3-M3,53.1577

Capitulo lix=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,53.1578

<$$heading>

After Vortymeres de+t , +te Britons , by here commune assent , Eftesones
made Vortyger here kyng , vppon +tis couenaunt , +tat he shulde neuer
after soffren Engist , ne none of his , eftesones shulde come into +tis
lande . CMBRUT3-M3,53.1580

And when al +tis was done , <P_54> Ronewenne +te Quene sent priuely by
lettre to Engist , that she hade enpoisenede Vortymer , and +tat
Vortyger , her lorde a+geyne bare +te croune and regnede , and +tat he
shulde come a+geyne into +tat lande , wel arraiede wi+t miche peple ,
for@ @to avenge him vppon +te Britons , and to wynne his lande a+geyne .
CMBRUT3-M3,54.1581

of +tis tydyng Engist made grete ioye , CMBRUT3-M3,54.1582

and apparailede him hastely wi+t xv_M=l= men +tat were dou+gty en euery
batail . CMBRUT3-M3,54.1583

And when Vortyger herde telle +tat Engist was comen a+geyne wi+t a grete
power into +tis lande , he assemblede his Britons , CMBRUT3-M3,54.1584

and +to went a+geyns Engist for@ @to haue +geue him bataile , and his
folc ; CMBRUT3-M3,54.1585

but Engist hade him sore of +te Britons , CMBRUT3-M3,54.1586

for +tai hade descomfitede him biforn-hand , and dryuen him out by
streng+t ; wherfore Engist prayede him of a loue-day , and saide he was
nou+gt comen for@ @to fi+gt , but for@ @to haue his lande a+geyne of
Kent , if he might accorde wi+t +te Britons , and of ham haue grace .
CMBRUT3-M3,54.1587

The Kyng Vortiger , +trou+g conseile of his Britons , grauntede a
loue-day ; CMBRUT3-M3,54.1588

and +tus it was ordeynede +trou+g +te Britons , +tat +tilk loue-day
shulde ben holden faste bisides Salesbury , vppon an hull ;
CMBRUT3-M3,54.1589

and Engist shulde come +tider wi+t iiij=c= kny+gtes , wi+touten mo , and
+te kyng wi+t as meny of +te wisest of +tis lande . CMBRUT3-M3,54.1590

And at +tat day +te kyng come wi+t his conseil , as it was ordeynede ;
CMBRUT3-M3,54.1591

but Engist hade warnede his kny+gtes priueliche , and ham commandede
+tat eueryche of ham shulde put a Longe Knyf in his hose ;
CMBRUT3-M3,54.1592

and when he saide , " faire sires ! now is tyme for@ @to speke of loue
and pees , " eueryche anone , eueryche shulde draw his knyf & slee a
Britoun . CMBRUT3-M3,54.1593

& so +tai quellede xxx_M=l=_&_lxj of kny+gtes ; CMBRUT3-M3,54.1594

and wi+t miche sorwe meny of ham ascapede ; CMBRUT3-M3,54.1595

and Vortyger him-self was taken and Lade to Twongecastell , and put into
prisoun ; CMBRUT3-M3,54.1596

and somme of Engistes men wolde +tat +te kyng hade bene brent al quyk .
CMBRUT3-M3,54.1597

And Vortiger +to , to haue his lif , grauntede ham as miche as +tai
wolde axen , CMBRUT3-M3,54.1598

and +gaf vp all +te lande , tounes and castelles , citees and Burghes ,
to Engist and to his folc . CMBRUT3-M3,54.1599

and alle +te Britons fledde +tenns into Walys , CMBRUT3-M3,54.1600

and +tere helde ham stille . CMBRUT3-M3,54.1601

and Engist went +trou+g +te lande , CMBRUT3-M3,54.1602

and seisede alle +te lande with ffraunchises ; CMBRUT3-M3,54.1603

and in euery place lete caste adoune <P_55> cherche+g and houses of
religioun , CMBRUT3-M3,55.1604

and destroyede Cristendome +trou+g +te lande , CMBRUT3-M3,55.1605

and lete chaunge +te name of +te lande , +tat no man of his were so
hardy after +tat tyme to calle +tis lande Britaigne , but calle it
Engistes lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,55.1606

and he departede alle +tat lande to his men , CMBRUT3-M3,55.1607

and +tere made vij kynges for@ @to streng+t +te lande , +tat +te Britons
shulde neuer after come +terin . CMBRUT3-M3,55.1608

The ferst kyngdome was Kent +tere +tat Engist him-self regnede , and was
lorde & maystre ouer al +te o+tere ; CMBRUT3-M3,55.1609

Ano+tere kyng hade Southsex , where now is Chichestre ;
CMBRUT3-M3,55.1610

The +tridde kyng hade Westsex ; CMBRUT3-M3,55.1611

The fer+te kyng hade Essex ; CMBRUT3-M3,55.1612

The v kyng hade Estangle , +tat now is callede Northfolc , Southfolc ,
Merchemeriche , +tat is to seynt , +te Erldome of Nichol ;
CMBRUT3-M3,55.1613

+te sixte hade Leycestreshire , Northamptonshire , Hereford and
Huntyngdoune ; CMBRUT3-M3,55.1614

The vij hade Osenford , Gloucestr , Wynchestre , Warwik and Darbyshire .
CMBRUT3-M3,55.1615

<heading>

How Vortiger went into Walis , and biganne +tere a castel , +tat wolde
nou+gt stande wi+touten morter temprede wi+t mannes blode .
CMBRUT3-M3,55.1617

Capitulo Sexagesimo . CMBRUT3-M3,55.1618

<$$heading>

WHen Engist hade departede al +te lande in this maner bituene his men ,
he delyuerede Vortiger out of prison , CMBRUT3-M3,55.1620

and soffrede hym frely to gone whider +tat he wolde .
CMBRUT3-M3,55.1621

and he toke his way , CMBRUT3-M3,55.1622

and went into Walys , +tere +tat his Britons duellede , for-asmiche as
+tat lande was strong and wikkede to wynne . CMBRUT3-M3,55.1623

and Engist neuer come +tere , CMBRUT3-M3,55.1624

ne knew neuer bifore +tat Lande . CMBRUT3-M3,55.1625

Vortiger helde him +tere wi+t his Britons , CMBRUT3-M3,55.1626

and axede conseil what him was best al for@ @to done ;
CMBRUT3-M3,55.1627

and +tai +gaf him conseil to make a stronge castel +tat he my+gt
him-self +terin kepe and defende if it nede were . CMBRUT3-M3,55.1628

Masounes in hast +tere were fette , CMBRUT3-M3,55.1629

and bigonne +te werk oppon +te hull of Breigh ; CMBRUT3-M3,55.1630

but certes +tus it bi-felle , +tat al the werk +tat +te masounes made
aday , adoune it felle any+gt ; CMBRUT3-M3,55.1631

and +tat ferede so iij tymes or iiij , wherof +tai hadden grete wonder
what it my+gt bene CMBRUT3-M3,55.1632

& +terof +te kyng was sore annoiede of +tat chaunce , CMBRUT3-M3,55.1633

and wist nou+gt what to done ; wherfore he lete sende after +te wisest
clerkes , and also lewede men +tat weren +trou+g-out Walys , +tat myght
bene fonde , for +tai shulde telle wherfore +te <P_56> foundement so
failede $vnder +te werk , and +tat +tai shulde him telle what was best
to done . CMBRUT3-M3,56.1634

and when +te wisest men longe tyme hade studiet , +tai saide to +te kyng
+tat he shulde done sike a childe borne of a woman +tat neuer hade wi+t
man to done , CMBRUT3-M3,56.1635

& +tat childe he shulde sleen , & temper wi+t his blode +te morter of
+te werk , CMBRUT3-M3,56.1636

& so shulle +te werke endure euermore wi+touten ende .
CMBRUT3-M3,56.1637

<heading>

How +te kyng lete seche Merlyn +trou+g al Walys for@ @to speke wi+t him
. CMBRUT3-M3,56.1639

Capitulo lxj=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,56.1640

<$$heading>

When +te kyng herde +tis , he commandede his messagers anone to wende
+trou+g-out al Walys , to seche +tat childe if +tai myght him fynde ,
and +tat +tai shulde brynge him forthwi+t ham vnto him .
CMBRUT3-M3,56.1642

and in recorde and witnesse of +tis +ting , he toke ham his lettres ,
+tat +tai ne were destourblede of no man , ne lette .
CMBRUT3-M3,56.1643

And so faste spede ham the messagers , +tat +tai come vnto a toune +tat
me callede Kermerdyn ; CMBRUT3-M3,56.1644

and as +tai passede fourth in here way , +tai fonden ij childerne of
xiiij +gere age chiddyng togeder wi+t hastif wordes ; CMBRUT3-M3,56.1645

and one of ham saide to +tat o+ter " Donebat , " quod he , " +ge done al
wronge to chide or strif wi+t me , CMBRUT3-M3,56.1646

for +ge haue no witte ne resoun as I haue . " CMBRUT3-M3,56.1647

" Certes , Merlyn , " quod +tat o+tere , " of +goure witte and of +gour
resoun y make no forse , CMBRUT3-M3,56.1648

for men telle+t communeliche +tat +ge haue no +ting of god , si+t +ge
hade neuer fader , CMBRUT3-M3,56.1649

but alle men weten wel ho is +goure moder . " CMBRUT3-M3,56.1650

The kynges massagers , when +tai herde +tis strif bituene +to ij gromes
, +tai axede of men +tat stoden bituene ham , whens +tat Merlyn was born
, & who him norisshede ; CMBRUT3-M3,56.1651

and +te folc ham tolde +tat a grete gentil-woman him bare in Kermerdyne
, +tat me callede Adhan , but neuere my+gt men wete who was +te childes
fader . CMBRUT3-M3,56.1652

When +te messagers herde +tis tydynges , +tai went anone to him +tat was
wardeyne of +te toune , CMBRUT3-M3,56.1653

and tolde him +te kynges wille and his lettres , wherfore +tai were
comen +tider . CMBRUT3-M3,56.1654

Merlyn and his moder anone were sent bifore +te wardeyne of +te toune ,
CMBRUT3-M3,56.1655

and he commandede ham +tat +tai <P_57> shulde gone to +te kyng , as hit
was ordeynede by his messagers . CMBRUT3-M3,57.1656

Merlyn and his moder come vnto +te kyng CMBRUT3-M3,57.1657

and were vnder-fonge wi+t michel honour ; CMBRUT3-M3,57.1658

and +te kyng axede of +tat lady ' if +tat childe were her sone , and who
him bigate . ' CMBRUT3-M3,57.1659

The lady ansuerede , ful tender wepyng , CMBRUT3-M3,57.1660

and saide she hade neuer company of man worldely ; CMBRUT3-M3,57.1661

" but , sire , " quod shee , " as y was a +gonge maiden in my faderes
chambre , and o+tere of grete lynage were in my company , +tat ofte were
wont to playe and to solacen , I belefte allone in my chaumbre of my
fader , CMBRUT3-M3,57.1662

& wolde nou+gt gon out , for brennyng of +te sone . CMBRUT3-M3,57.1663

And oppon a tyme +tere come a faire bachiler , CMBRUT3-M3,57.1664

and entrede into my chaumbre +tere +tat I was allone ;
CMBRUT3-M3,57.1665

but how he come into me , & wher , I wiste neuer , ne +gitte wote ,
CMBRUT3-M3,57.1666

for +te dores were fast barrede ; CMBRUT3-M3,57.1667

and wi+ me he dede game of loue , CMBRUT3-M3,57.1668

for I n@ @ade no+ter my+gt ne power him to defende fro me ;
CMBRUT3-M3,57.1669

and ofte he come to me in the forsaide maner , so +tat he bigate one me
+tis same childe ; CMBRUT3-M3,57.1670

but neuer my+gt y wete of him what he was , ne whens he come , ne what
was his name . CMBRUT3-M3,57.1671

<heading>

Of +te ansuere of Merlyn , wherfore +te kyng axede whi his werk myght
nou+gt stande +tat he hade bigonne , my+gt nou+gt proue .
CMBRUT3-M3,57.1673

Capitulo lxij=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,57.1674

<$$heading>

When Merlyn hade herde al +tat his moder hade saide , he spake to +te
kyng in this maner : " sire , how y was bigeten , axe +ge no more ,
CMBRUT3-M3,57.1676

for hit falle+t nou+gt to +gow ne to none o+tere for@ @to wete ;
CMBRUT3-M3,57.1677

but telle me +te enchesone wherefore I ame to +gow brou+gt , and
wherfore +ge haue sent after me . " CMBRUT3-M3,57.1678

" Certes , " quod +te kyng , " my wise concelers hauen done me to
vnderstonde +tat +te morter of a werk +tat I haue done bigonne biheue+t
, ben temperede wi+t +gour blode , CMBRUT3-M3,57.1679

or +te fundement shal faile for euermore . " CMBRUT3-M3,57.1680

" Sire , " quod Merlyn , " wille +ge slee me for my blode for@ @to
temper wi+t +goure morter ? " CMBRUT3-M3,57.1681

" +Ge , " quod +te kyng , " or elles shal neuer my castel stonde , as my
conselers done me to vnderstonde . " CMBRUT3-M3,57.1682

+To ansured Merlyn to +te kyng : CMBRUT3-M3,57.1683

" sire , " he saide , " late ham come bifore me , +to wise conselers ,
and I wil proue +tat +tai say <P_58> nou+gt wel ne trewely .
CMBRUT3-M3,58.1684

and when +te wise were comen , Merlyn axede if his blode were +te
enchesoun to make +te werke stande to endure . CMBRUT3-M3,58.1685

Alle +tise wise were abasshede , CMBRUT3-M3,58.1686

and cou+t nou+gt ansuere , CMBRUT3-M3,58.1687

Merlyn +to saide to +te kyng : " sire , I shal telle +gow +te encheson
wherfore +gour werk +tus faile+t and may nou+gt stande .
CMBRUT3-M3,58.1688

+tere is vnder +te mountaigne +tere +tat +ge haue bigonne +gour tour a
grete ponde of water ; CMBRUT3-M3,58.1689

and in +te botume of +te ponde , vnder +te water , +tere be+t ij dragons
, -- +tat one is white , and +tat o+tere rede , -- +tat fei+gten
to-geder ageyne +goure werk . CMBRUT3-M3,58.1690

Do+t myne de+te til +gour men come to the ponde , CMBRUT3-M3,58.1691

and doth +gour men take away +te water al out , CMBRUT3-M3,58.1692

and +tan +ge shul see +te dragons , as I haue +gow tolde , +to togederes
fei+gten ageyne +gour werk ; CMBRUT3-M3,58.1693

and +tis is +te encheson , certes , wher-fore +gour fundement faile+t .
" CMBRUT3-M3,58.1694

the kyng anone lete degge vnder , til +tat men come to +te ponde ,
CMBRUT3-M3,58.1695

& lete do away al +te water ; CMBRUT3-M3,58.1696

and +tere +tai fonde ij dragons , as Merlyn hade tolde , +tat egrely
fou+gten togederes ; CMBRUT3-M3,58.1697

+te white dragoun egrely assailede +te rede , CMBRUT3-M3,58.1698

and laide on him so strong +tat he my+gt nou+gt endure ,
CMBRUT3-M3,58.1699

but wi+tdrowe him , CMBRUT3-M3,58.1700

& hidde him in the same Cafe , CMBRUT3-M3,58.1701

and restede . CMBRUT3-M3,58.1702

And when he hade a@ @while restede , he went bifore , CMBRUT3-M3,58.1703

and assailede +te rede dragoun angrely , CMBRUT3-M3,58.1704

and assailede him so sore +tat he my+gt nou+gt a+geynes him endure ,
CMBRUT3-M3,58.1705

but with-drow him CMBRUT3-M3,58.1706

and restede . CMBRUT3-M3,58.1707

And after come a+geyne +te white dragoun , CMBRUT3-M3,58.1708

and strongely fou+gt wi+t +te reede dragoune , CMBRUT3-M3,58.1709

and bote him euel , CMBRUT3-M3,58.1710

& him ouer-come , +tat he fley +tens , CMBRUT3-M3,58.1711

and nomore come a+geyne . CMBRUT3-M3,58.1712

<heading>

Of +te significacions of +to ij dragounes +tat were in +te botume of +te
ponde , +tat fou+gten togederes . CMBRUT3-M3,58.1714

Capitulo Sexagesimo tercio . CMBRUT3-M3,58.1715

<$$heading>

THe Kyng Vortiger and his men , +tat saw +tis bataile , hade grete
mervaile , CMBRUT3-M3,58.1717

and praede Merlyn to telle him what it myght bitoken .
CMBRUT3-M3,58.1718

" Sire , " quod Merlyn " y shal +gow telle : CMBRUT3-M3,58.1719

the rede dragoun bitokene+t +goure-self , CMBRUT3-M3,58.1720

& +te white bitokene+t +te folc of Saxoine , +tat ferst +ge toke and
helde in +tis lande , +tat now fei+gten a+geines +gow , <P_59> and +gow
haue dryuen and enchacede . CMBRUT3-M3,59.1721

But +te Britons +tat bene of +gour lynage ouercome ham ,
CMBRUT3-M3,59.1722

and dryuen ham a@ @while ; CMBRUT3-M3,59.1723

and si+ten , at +te comyng a+geyne of +te Saxoynes , +tai recouerede
+tis lande , CMBRUT3-M3,59.1724

and helde hit for euermore , CMBRUT3-M3,59.1725

and dryuen oute +te Britouns , CMBRUT3-M3,59.1726

and dede wi+t +tis lande al her wille , CMBRUT3-M3,59.1727

& destriede cristendome +trou+goute +tis lande . CMBRUT3-M3,59.1728

+Ge hade ferst ioye of here commyng , CMBRUT3-M3,59.1729

but now it is turnede to +gow grete damage & sorwe ; CMBRUT3-M3,59.1730

ffor +to ij bre+terne of Constance +tat was kyng , +tat +ge lete slee ,
shul comen bifore a Quin+gime passede wi+t a grete power fram litel
Britaigne , CMBRUT3-M3,59.1731

and shul avenge +te de+t of hire bro+ter : CMBRUT3-M3,59.1732

+tai shal brenne +gow ferst wi+t sorwe , CMBRUT3-M3,59.1733

& after +tai shul sle a grete partie of +te Saxoynes ,
CMBRUT3-M3,59.1734

and shul dryue al +te remanent oute of the lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,59.1735

and +terfore abide +ge no longer to make no castell ne none o+tere werk
, CMBRUT3-M3,59.1736

but anone gone elle+g-where , +goure lif for@ @to saue .
CMBRUT3-M3,59.1737

to God I +gow bitake , CMBRUT3-M3,59.1738

for treu+t I haue I-saide to +gow of +ting +tat shal bifalle .
CMBRUT3-M3,59.1739

And vnderstonde wel +tat Aurilambros shal bene kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,59.1740

but he shal bene enpoisenede , and litil while regne . "
CMBRUT3-M3,59.1741

<heading>

Of Kyng Aurilambros ; how he pursuede Vortiger and Engist , and how +tai
deiden . CMBRUT3-M3,59.1743

Capitulo Sexagesimo Quarto . CMBRUT3-M3,59.1744

<$$heading>

MErlyn and his moder departede fro +te kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,59.1746

and turnede a+geyne to Kermerdyn . CMBRUT3-M3,59.1747

and so after tydynges come to +te Britons +tat Aurilambros and Vter his
bro+ter were arryuede at Tottenesse wi+t a grete host ,
CMBRUT3-M3,59.1748

and +te Britouns anone assemblede ham , CMBRUT3-M3,59.1749

& went to vnderfong Aurilambros and Vter wi+t grete nobleye ,
CMBRUT3-M3,59.1750

& ladde ham to London , CMBRUT3-M3,59.1751

and cronede +tere Aurylambros , CMBRUT3-M3,59.1752

and made him kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,59.1753

and deden to him homage . CMBRUT3-M3,59.1754

and he axede wher Vortiger +tat was kyng myght bene founden ,
CMBRUT3-M3,59.1755

for he wolde bene avengede of his bro+tere+g de+t , CMBRUT3-M3,59.1756

and after he wolde werre oppon paynymes : CMBRUT3-M3,59.1757

and +tai tolde him +tat Vortiger was in Walis ; CMBRUT3-M3,59.1758

and so +tai ladde him +tiderward . CMBRUT3-M3,59.1759

Vortiger wist wel +tat +to ij bre+terne come him to conquere ,
CMBRUT3-M3,59.1760

& fleye +tens into a castel +tat me <P_60> callede Generth , +tat stode
vppon an hye mounteyne , CMBRUT3-M3,60.1761

& +tere him helde . CMBRUT3-M3,60.1762

Aurylambros , and Vter his bro+ter , and hire folc , hade bisegede +te
castel longe tyme , CMBRUT3-M3,60.1763

for +te castel was stronge and wel arraiede ; CMBRUT3-M3,60.1764

so at +te laste +tai cast wilde fire , CMBRUT3-M3,60.1765

and brent hous and men , and al here arraye , & as miche as was wi+tin
+te castel , so +tat Vortiger was brent amonge alle o+tere ;
CMBRUT3-M3,60.1766

and so deide he with michel sorwe . CMBRUT3-M3,60.1767

+To was Engist in Kent , CMBRUT3-M3,60.1768

and regnede +tere , CMBRUT3-M3,60.1769

and herde +tis tydynges CMBRUT3-M3,60.1770

and anone fledde , CMBRUT3-M3,60.1771

and wolde haue wende into Scotland for@ @to haue hade socour ,
CMBRUT3-M3,60.1772

but Aurilambros and his men mette wi+t him in the North contre ,
CMBRUT3-M3,60.1773

and +gaf him bataile , CMBRUT3-M3,60.1774

& Engist and his men ham defendede whiles +tai myght ,
CMBRUT3-M3,60.1775

but he and his folc were descom-fitede and slayn , CMBRUT3-M3,60.1776

and Otta his sone fley vnto +Gork , CMBRUT3-M3,60.1777

& Aurilam-bros him folwede egrely . CMBRUT3-M3,60.1778

Otta , a litel while a+geynes him stode , CMBRUT3-M3,60.1779

but afterwarde he put him to his mercy , CMBRUT3-M3,60.1780

and Aurilambros vnderfonge him ; CMBRUT3-M3,60.1781

& to him and to his men he +gaf +te contre of Galway in Scotland ,
CMBRUT3-M3,60.1782

and +tere +tai duellede . CMBRUT3-M3,60.1783

The Kyng Aurylambros went +to +trou+g +te lande , CMBRUT3-M3,60.1784

and put awaye +te name of Engistes lande , +tat $Engist , after his owen
name hade callede bifore , CMBRUT3-M3,60.1785

+to lete he it calle a+geyne Grete Britaigne , CMBRUT3-M3,60.1786

and lete make a+geyne cherches , houses of religioun , castelles ,
citees , and burghes and tounes +tat +te Saxoynes hade destroiede ,
CMBRUT3-M3,60.1787

and come to London , CMBRUT3-M3,60.1788

and lete make a+geyne the Wallis of +te citee , whiche Engist & his folc
hade caste adoune . CMBRUT3-M3,60.1789

+Te Britons ladde him to +te mount of Anbrian , wher some tyme was an
house of religioun +tat +to was destriede +trou+g paynemys , $whereof a
knyght +tat me callede Anbry , +tat some tyme was foundour of +te hous ,
CMBRUT3-M3,60.1790

and +terfor +te hulle was callede +te mount of Bryan ,
CMBRUT3-M3,60.1791

and after was callede Ambresbery , and shal for eueremore .
CMBRUT3-M3,60.1792

<heading>

How Aurilambros dede redresse +te lande of Grete Britaigne , +tat was
destroiede +trou+g Saxoynes . CMBRUT3-M3,60.1794

Capitulo Sexa-gesimo Quinto . CMBRUT3-M3,60.1795

<$$heading>

THe Kyng Aurilambros lete amende and redresse +te hous of Ambresbery ,
CMBRUT3-M3,60.1797

and +terin put monkes , CMBRUT3-M3,60.1798

but now +tere beth nonnes ; a litil fram +te place +tat me calle+t
Salesbury , +tere +tat <P_61> +te Britouns were quellede in +tat place
+tat Vortiger & Engist shulde haue made a loueday , in whiche place
+tere were slayne xxx_M=l= kny+gtes +trou+g tresoun of Engist .
CMBRUT3-M3,61.1799

+Te kyng +terof hade grete pitee , CMBRUT3-M3,61.1800

& +tou+gt to make , in mynde of ham , a monument of stone +tat my+gt
endure to +te worldes ende . CMBRUT3-M3,61.1801

and of +tis +ting +tai tok here conseile what +terof was best to done .
CMBRUT3-M3,61.1802

+To spake to +te kyng +te bishop of London +tat me called Ternekyn ,
+tat he shulde enquere after Merlyn , CMBRUT3-M3,61.1803

for he cou+te best telle how +tis +ting mi+gt bene made .
CMBRUT3-M3,61.1804

and merlyn after was sou+gt and founde , CMBRUT3-M3,61.1805

& come to +te kyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,61.1806

and +te kyng tolde him his wille of +te monument +tat he wolde haue made
. CMBRUT3-M3,61.1807

+to ansuerede Merlyn to +te kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,61.1808

and saide : " +tere be+t grete stones in Irlande , and longe vppon the
hulle of Kyan +tat men calle+t +te geant caroll ; CMBRUT3-M3,61.1809

and if +tai were put in +tis place as +tai be+t +tere , here +tai wolde
endure euermore , in remembraunce of +to knyghtes +tat here be+t
enterede . " CMBRUT3-M3,61.1810

" Par ma foy , " quod +te kyng , " as herde stones beth in my londe as
beth in Irland . " CMBRUT3-M3,61.1811

" so+t , " quod Merlyn , CMBRUT3-M3,61.1812

" but in all +gour lande beth non soche , CMBRUT3-M3,61.1813

for Geaunte+g sette ham for grete gode of hamself , CMBRUT3-M3,61.1814

ffor atte euery tyme +tat +tai were wonded , or in eny maner hurt , +tai
wasshen +te stones wi+t hote water , CMBRUT3-M3,61.1815

& +tan wosshen ham +terwi+t , CMBRUT3-M3,61.1816

and anone +tai were hole . " CMBRUT3-M3,61.1817

<heading>

How +te Britons went for@ @to seche +te grete stones in Irland .
CMBRUT3-M3,61.1819

Capitulo lxvj=to= . CMBRUT3-M3,61.1820

<$$heading>

WHen +te Britons hade herde of +tis +ting , +tai went CMBRUT3-M3,61.1822

and sworen ifere amonges ham , +tat +tai wolde gone to seche +te stones
; CMBRUT3-M3,61.1823

and toke wi+t ham Vter , +te kynges bro+ter , to bene here cheueteyne ,
& xv_M=l= men ; CMBRUT3-M3,61.1824

and Merlyn conseilede ham for@ @to gone into Irlande ,
CMBRUT3-M3,61.1825

and so +tai deden . CMBRUT3-M3,61.1826

And when +te Kyng of Irland , +tat me callede Guillomer , herde telle
+tat straungers were arryuede in his lande , he assemblede a grete power
, CMBRUT3-M3,61.1827

and fou+gt a+geyns ham ; CMBRUT3-M3,61.1828

but he & his folc were descomfitede . CMBRUT3-M3,61.1829

the Britons went four+t til +tai come to +te mount of Kylyan ,
CMBRUT3-M3,61.1830

and clymede vnto +te mount ; CMBRUT3-M3,61.1831

but when +tai saw +te stones , and +te maner how +tai stoden , +tai
hadden grete mervail , CMBRUT3-M3,61.1832

and saide bituene ham +tat ' noman shulde <P_62> ham remeve , for no
strenghe ne engyne , so huge +tai weren , and so long . '
CMBRUT3-M3,62.1833

But Merlyn , +trou+g his crafte and queyntise , remevede ham ,
CMBRUT3-M3,62.1834

and brou+gt ham into hire shippis , CMBRUT3-M3,62.1835

and come a+geyn into +tis lande . CMBRUT3-M3,62.1836

and Merlyn sette +te stones +tere +tat +te Kyng wolde haue ham ,
CMBRUT3-M3,62.1837

and sette ham in +te same maner as +tai stoden in Irland .
CMBRUT3-M3,62.1838

and when +te kyng saw +tat it was made , he +tankede Merlyn ,
CMBRUT3-M3,62.1839

and rychely him rewardede at his owen wille ; CMBRUT3-M3,62.1840

& +tat place he lete calle Stonhynges for euermore . CMBRUT3-M3,62.1841

<heading>

How Passent , +tat was Vortiger+g sonne , & +te Kyng Guillomer , come
into +tis land ; and how a traitoure +tat me callede Coppa , enpoisenede
+te Kyng Aurilambros . CMBRUT3-M3,62.1843

Capitulo Sexagesimo Septimo . CMBRUT3-M3,62.1844

<$$heading>

ANd men shul vnderstonde +tat Passent , +tat was Vortigers sone , leuede
in +te same tyme , CMBRUT3-M3,62.1846

and come into +tis lande wi+t a grete power , CMBRUT3-M3,62.1847

and arryuede in +te Northcontre , CMBRUT3-M3,62.1848

& wolde bene avengede of his fadere+g de+t Vortiger , CMBRUT3-M3,62.1849

and stronglich trust vppon +te com-pany +tat he hade brou+gt wi+t him
oute of +te lande of Germayne , CMBRUT3-M3,62.1850

and hade conquerede al +te Northcontre vnto +Gork . CMBRUT3-M3,62.1851

And when Kyng Aurilambros herde +tis , he assemblede a grete power of
Britons , CMBRUT3-M3,62.1852

and went for@ @to fei+gt wi+t him ; CMBRUT3-M3,62.1853

and Passent and his peple were descomfitede . CMBRUT3-M3,62.1854

But Passent ascapede +tens , wi+t some of his folc , CMBRUT3-M3,62.1855

and fledde +tennes into Irland , CMBRUT3-M3,62.1856

and come to Kyng Guillomer , CMBRUT3-M3,62.1857

and praede him of helpe and socoure . CMBRUT3-M3,62.1858

The kyng grantede him wi+t gode wil , CMBRUT3-M3,62.1859

and saide : " I wolde helpe +gow oppon +tat couenaunt , +tat I my-self
moste gon wi+t +gow wi+t al my power into Britaigne , CMBRUT3-M3,62.1860

and I wolde me avenge vppon +te Britons , CMBRUT3-M3,62.1861

for +tai comen into my londe . CMBRUT3-M3,62.1862

and token +te stones wi+t streng+t +tat is callede Geant Caroil . "
CMBRUT3-M3,62.1863

+te Kyng Guillomere lete ordeyne his shippis , CMBRUT3-M3,62.1864

and went to +te see wi+t xv_M=l= men , CMBRUT3-M3,62.1865

and arryuede in Walis CMBRUT3-M3,62.1866

and bigonne to robbe and miche sorwe to done . CMBRUT3-M3,62.1867

hit bifelle so +tat Kyng Aurilambros lay sike at Wynchestre ,
CMBRUT3-M3,62.1868

and myght nou+gt helpe himself , so +tat he sent in his name Vter his
bro+tere , with a grete power , for@ @to help Walys ; CMBRUT3-M3,62.1869

and +tiderwarde he went as miche as he my+gt . CMBRUT3-M3,62.1870

+Te <P_63> Kyng of Irland , and Passent , herde telle +tat Aurylambros
was sik ; CMBRUT3-M3,63.1871

and to ham come a sarasine +tat me clepede Coppa , CMBRUT3-M3,63.1872

and saide : " sire+g , duelle +ge here al in pees wi+t +goure hoste ,
and y bihote +gow , +trou+g my queyntise , +tat I shal slee +te Kyng
Aurylambros +tat li+t sike . " CMBRUT3-M3,63.1873

" If +ge do , " quod Passent , " y shal +gow richely auaunce . "
CMBRUT3-M3,63.1874

This traitoure Coppa put oppon him an habite of religioun ,
CMBRUT3-M3,63.1875

and lete shaue him a brode crone , CMBRUT3-M3,63.1876

and come to +te kynges court , CMBRUT3-M3,63.1877

and saide +tat he was a gode ffisician , CMBRUT3-M3,63.1878

and saide +tat he wolde hele +te kyng of his malady .
CMBRUT3-M3,63.1879

Tho saide +te traitour Coppa vnto +te kyng : " sire , be+t of gode
comfort , CMBRUT3-M3,63.1880

for y shal +geue +gow soche a medecyne +tat +ge shulle swete anone ry+gt
, and softe slepe , and haue gode reste . " CMBRUT3-M3,63.1881

& +te traitour +gaf him soche a poysoun +tat he slepte anone ryght , and
deide in his slepyng . CMBRUT3-M3,63.1882

and +te traitoure saide +tat he wolde gone oute into +te felde til +te
kyng were awakede ; CMBRUT3-M3,63.1883

and so scapede he away , CMBRUT3-M3,63.1884

for noman to him hade suspesion , for enchesoun of his habit +tat he was
in clo+tede , and also for his brode crone . CMBRUT3-M3,63.1885

But when +te kynges meny wist +tat he was dede , +tai bicome wonder sory
, CMBRUT3-M3,63.1886

and fast sou+gt +te traitour ; CMBRUT3-M3,63.1887

but +tai mi+gt nou+gt hem fynde , CMBRUT3-M3,63.1888

for Coppa turnede a+geyne to +te host fro whens that he come .
CMBRUT3-M3,63.1889

<heading>

When Aurilambros was dede , a sterr in the morne was seyne with a clere
light ; CMBRUT3-M3,63.1891

& at the bou+gte of +te beeme was seye +te heuede of an horrible Dragoun
. CMBRUT3-M3,63.1892

Capitulo Sexagesimo Octauo . CMBRUT3-M3,63.1893

<$$heading>

WHen the Kyng Aurilambros was +tus dede & enpysenede at Wynchestre , a
morn , after +tat he was dede , aboute +te tyme of prime , +tere was
seyn a sterr grete and clere ; CMBRUT3-M3,63.1895

and +te beeme of +te sterr was brighter +tan +te sone ;
CMBRUT3-M3,63.1896

and at +te bou+gt of +te beeme apperede a dragounes heuede ,
CMBRUT3-M3,63.1897

and oute of his mou+t comen ij huge li+gte+g +tat were as li+gt as eny
fire brynnyng . CMBRUT3-M3,63.1898

And +tat o beeme went towarde Fraunce , and strau+gt ouere +te see
+tiderward ; CMBRUT3-M3,63.1899

and out of +tat beem comen vij beemes ful clere and longe , as it were
+te li+gt of fire . CMBRUT3-M3,63.1900

+tis sterre was seyne of meny man ; CMBRUT3-M3,63.1901

but none of <P_64> ham wist what it bitokenede . CMBRUT3-M3,64.1902

Vter , +tat was +te kyngus bro+ter , +tat was in Walys wi+t his hoste of
Britouns , saw +tat sterre , and +te grete li+gt , +tat it +gaf .
CMBRUT3-M3,64.1903

he wondrede +teron gretly , what it my+gt bitoken ; CMBRUT3-M3,64.1904

he lete calle Merlyn , CMBRUT3-M3,64.1905

& praiede him for@ @to telle what it my+gt bitokene .
CMBRUT3-M3,64.1906

<heading>

Of +te bitokenyng of +tat sterr . CMBRUT3-M3,64.1908

Capitulo Sexagesimo ix=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,64.1909

<$$heading>

MErlyn saw +tat sterre , CMBRUT3-M3,64.1911

and bihelde hit longe tyme , CMBRUT3-M3,64.1912

and si+tenes he quok and wepte tenderly ; CMBRUT3-M3,64.1913

& saide : " allas , allas +tat so noble kyng and wor+ti is dede .
CMBRUT3-M3,64.1914

and I do +gow to vnderstonde +tat Aurilambros , +gour bro+ter , is
enpoysenede , CMBRUT3-M3,64.1915

and +tat I se wel in +tis sterre . CMBRUT3-M3,64.1916

and +goure-self bitokene+t bi +te heuedes of +te dragoun +tat is seyne
at +te bou+gt of +te beeme : CMBRUT3-M3,64.1917

+tat is +goureself , +tat shal bene kyng , and regne .
CMBRUT3-M3,64.1918

and by +te beem +tat stode towarde +te Est , is vnderstonde +tat +ge
shul geten a sone +tat shal conquere al Fraunce and alle +te landes +tat
be+t longeyng to +te Kyng of Fraunce , +tat shal bene a wor+tier Kyng ,
and more of honoure : +tan euer was eny of his ancestres .
CMBRUT3-M3,64.1919

And by +te beem +tat stracchet towarde Irland , is bitokenede +tat +ge
shul bigete a dou+gter +tat shal be quene of Irland ; CMBRUT3-M3,64.1920

and +te vij beemes bitokenes +tat +ge shul haue vij sones ;
CMBRUT3-M3,64.1921

and eueryche of ham shal bene kyng , and regne wi+t michel honououre .
CMBRUT3-M3,64.1922

and abide +ge no longer here , CMBRUT3-M3,64.1923

but go CMBRUT3-M3,64.1924

and +gif batail to +goure enemys , CMBRUT3-M3,64.1925

and fei+gt wi+t ham boldely , CMBRUT3-M3,64.1926

for +ge shul ouercome ham and haue +te victorie . " CMBRUT3-M3,64.1927

Vter +tankede hertly Merlyn , CMBRUT3-M3,64.1928

and tok his men , CMBRUT3-M3,64.1929

and went towarde his enemys ; CMBRUT3-M3,64.1930

and +tai fou+gten togeder mortally ; CMBRUT3-M3,64.1931

and so +tai des-comfited his enemys alle , CMBRUT3-M3,64.1932

& destroiede ham CMBRUT3-M3,64.1933

& him-self quel-lede Passent , +tat was Vortiger+g sone ;
CMBRUT3-M3,64.1934

and his Britons quellede Guillomer , +tat was Kyng of Irland , and alle
his men . CMBRUT3-M3,64.1935

and Vter anone after +tat bataile tok his way toward Wynchestre $for@
@to done entier Aurilambros kyng , +tat was his bro+ter ;
CMBRUT3-M3,64.1936

but +to was +te body born to Stonehynge wi+t michel honoure , +tat he
hade <P_65> done made in remembrance of +te Britons +tat +tere were
slayn +trou+g tresoune of Engist , +tat same day +tat +tai shulde haue
bene accordede ; CMBRUT3-M3,65.1937

& in the same place +tai enterede Aurilambros , +te secunde +gere of his
regne , wi+t al +te worship +tat myght bene longyng to soche a kyng , of
whos soule God haue mercy ! CMBRUT3-M3,65.1938

<heading>

Of Vter Pendragoun ; CMBRUT3-M3,65.1940

and wherfore he was callede so , after +ge shal here ;
CMBRUT3-M3,65.1941

& he was ouertake for +te grete loue of Igerne , +tat was +te Erles wif
of Cornwaile . CMBRUT3-M3,65.1942

Capitulo Septuagesimo . CMBRUT3-M3,65.1943

<$$heading>

After +te deth of Aurylambros , Vter his bro+ter was cronede ,
CMBRUT3-M3,65.1945

and regnede wel and wor+tily ; CMBRUT3-M3,65.1946

and in remembraunce of +te dragons +tat he was likenede to , he lete
make ij dragounes +trou+g conseile of his Britouns : +tat one to bene
borne bifore him when he went into bataile , & +tat o+tere to abide at
Wynchestre in the bisshoppes cherche ; CMBRUT3-M3,65.1947

And for +tat enchesoun he was callede euermore after , Vter Pendragoun .
CMBRUT3-M3,65.1948

And Octa , +tat was Engistes sone , commendet litil Vter +tat was made
newe kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,65.1949

and a+geynes him biganne for@ @to meve werr , CMBRUT3-M3,65.1950

and ordeynede a grete company of his frendes & of his kynne , and of
Ossa his bro+ter , CMBRUT3-M3,65.1951

and hade take al +te lande fro Humber vnto +Gork ; CMBRUT3-M3,65.1952

but +to of +Gork helde strongely agayne ham , CMBRUT3-M3,65.1953

and n@ @olde soffre ham come into +te toune , ney+ter to +gelde +te
citee to ham ; CMBRUT3-M3,65.1954

and he bisegede +te toune anone ry+gt , CMBRUT3-M3,65.1955

and +gaf +terto a stronge assaut , CMBRUT3-M3,65.1956

but tho of +te citee ham keped wel and strongely . CMBRUT3-M3,65.1957

And when Vter herde +terof , he come +tider wi+t a stronge power for@
@to helpe and rescue +te toune , CMBRUT3-M3,65.1958

and put away +te sege , CMBRUT3-M3,65.1959

& +gaf a stronge bataile ; CMBRUT3-M3,65.1960

and Octa & his company ham defendede as wel as +tai my+gt ,
CMBRUT3-M3,65.1961

but at +te last +tai were descomfitede , and +te moste part of ham
quellede ; CMBRUT3-M3,65.1962

and Octa & Ossa were taken , and put into prisoun at London .
CMBRUT3-M3,65.1963

And Vter him-self duellede a@ @while at +Gork , CMBRUT3-M3,65.1964

and after , he went to London . CMBRUT3-M3,65.1965

and at Ester after sewyng , he wolde bere crone , CMBRUT3-M3,65.1966

and helde a solempne feste , CMBRUT3-M3,65.1967

and lete sompne alle +te Erles and barons , +tat +tai shulde come to
+tat <P_66> feste ; CMBRUT3-M3,66.1968

and alle +tai comen at +te kynges commandement , as +tai were commandede
. CMBRUT3-M3,66.1969

The feste was richely holden , CMBRUT3-M3,66.1970

and alle wor+tely sette to +te mette after +tat +tai were of state , so
+tat +te Erl of Cornwaile & Igerne his wif setten al+ter_next +te kyng .
CMBRUT3-M3,66.1971

and +te kyng saw +te fairenesse of +tat lady +tat she hade ,
CMBRUT3-M3,66.1972

and was rauisshede for here beaute ; CMBRUT3-M3,66.1973

and after , he made towarde here nyce semblant in lokyng and lei+ghyng .
CMBRUT3-M3,66.1974

so at +te laste +te Erl perseuede +te priue lokyng and Laughing , and
+te loue bituene ham , CMBRUT3-M3,66.1975

and arose vp fram +te table al in wra+t , CMBRUT3-M3,66.1976

and tok his wif , CMBRUT3-M3,66.1977

and callede to him his kny+gtes , CMBRUT3-M3,66.1978

and went +tens al in wra+t , wi+touten takyng Leue of +te Kyng .
CMBRUT3-M3,66.1979

+te kyng anone sent after him +tat he shulde come a+geyne , & go nou+gt
+tens in despite of him ; CMBRUT3-M3,66.1980

and +te Erl wolde nou+gt come a+geyne in no maner wise . Wherfor +te
kyng was ful wro+t , & in wra+t him defiede as his dedelich enemy .
CMBRUT3-M3,66.1981

and +te Erl went +tens into Cornewaile wi+t his wif , into +te castel of
Tyntagell . CMBRUT3-M3,66.1982

and +te kyng lete ordeyne a grete host , CMBRUT3-M3,66.1983

& come into Cornewaile for@ @to destroie +te erl , if he my+gt ;
CMBRUT3-M3,66.1984

but he hade put him in soche a castel +tat was stronge and wel arraiede
, of Tyntagell , CMBRUT3-M3,66.1985

and wolde nou+gt +gelde him to the Kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,66.1986

The kyng anone bisegede +te castel , CMBRUT3-M3,66.1987

& +tere duellede xv daies , +tat neuer my+gt spede , CMBRUT3-M3,66.1988

and euer +tou+gt so miche of Igerne , CMBRUT3-M3,66.1989

and oppon her laide so miche loue , +tat he n@ @yst what to done .
CMBRUT3-M3,66.1990

So at +te laste he callede to him a kny+gt +tat me callede Vlfyne , +tat
was priue wi+t him , CMBRUT3-M3,66.1991

and tolde him al hes conseile , CMBRUT3-M3,66.1992

and axede of him what was best to done . CMBRUT3-M3,66.1993

" Sire , " quod he , " do+t sende after Merlyn , CMBRUT3-M3,66.1994

for he can telle +gow +te best consel of eny man leuyng . "
CMBRUT3-M3,66.1995

Merlyn anone was sent after , CMBRUT3-M3,66.1996

and come to +te kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,66.1997

and +te kyng tolde him al his wille . CMBRUT3-M3,66.1998

" Sire , " quod Merlyn , " I shal do so miche +trou+g crafte +tat I can
, +tat I shal make +gow come +tis ny+gt into +te castel of Tyntagell ,
CMBRUT3-M3,66.1999

& shal haue al +goure wille of +tat lady . " CMBRUT3-M3,66.2000

<heading>

How Vter bigate on Igerne , +tat was +te Erle+g wif of Corne-waile ,
Arthure +te kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,66.2002

Capitulo Septuagesimo primo . CMBRUT3-M3,66.2003

<$$heading>

<P_67>

MErlyn , +trou+g crafte +tat he cou+te , chaungede +te kyngus figure
into +te likenesse of Vlfyne his chaumberleyn , and to +te figure of
Iordan +tat was +te erle+g chaumberleyn , so +tat eche of ham was
transfigurede into o+tere likenesse . CMBRUT3-M3,67.2006

and when Merlyn hade so done , he saide to +te kyng : " sire , now may
+ge gone sodeynely to +te castel of Tyntagel , and axen entre +tere ,
and haue +goure wille . " CMBRUT3-M3,67.2007

the kyng tok priuelich , al +te host to gouerne & lede , to a kny+gt
+tat he miche louede , CMBRUT3-M3,67.2008

and toke his way toward +te castel ; CMBRUT3-M3,67.2009

and wi+t him went Vlfyne and Merlyn . CMBRUT3-M3,67.2010

and when +tat he come +tider , +te Porter wende +tat it hade bene his
owen lorde . CMBRUT3-M3,67.2011

and when tyme come for@ @to gone to bedde , the kyng went to bedde wi+t
Igerne , +te Erle+g wif , CMBRUT3-M3,67.2012

and dede wi+t her al his wille , CMBRUT3-M3,67.2013

and +to bigate on here a sone +tat me clepede Arthure .
CMBRUT3-M3,67.2014

Oppon +te morwe +te noble my+gty kyng toke his leue of +te lady ,
CMBRUT3-M3,67.2015

and went a+geyn to his hoste . CMBRUT3-M3,67.2016

and +te same ny+gt +tat +te kyng lay by Igerne in bedde ifere wi+t +te
erle+g wif , +te kynges men +gaf a strong assaute to +te castel .
CMBRUT3-M3,67.2017

and +te Erl and his men manliche ham defendede ; CMBRUT3-M3,67.2018

but at +te laste hit bifelle so +tat at +tat assaut +te erl him-self was
slayn , CMBRUT3-M3,67.2019

and +te castel was taken . CMBRUT3-M3,67.2020

and +te kyng anone turnede a+geyne to Tyntagell , CMBRUT3-M3,67.2021

and spousede Igerne wi+t michel honoure , CMBRUT3-M3,67.2022

& made hir Quene . CMBRUT3-M3,67.2023

& sone after , tyme come +tat she shulde bene delyuerede ,
CMBRUT3-M3,67.2024

and bare a sone +tat was callede Arthure . CMBRUT3-M3,67.2025

and after he gate on here a dou+gter +tat me clepede Amya ;
CMBRUT3-M3,67.2026

and when she come to age , she was nobly mariede to a noble Baroun +tat
me callede Aloth , +tat was lorde of Leones . CMBRUT3-M3,67.2027

When Vter longe tyme hade regnede , +tere come vppon him a grete
sikenesse , as it were a sorwe . CMBRUT3-M3,67.2028

& in +te mene tyme +to +tat haden to kepe Octa , +tat was Engistes sone
, and Ossa his bro+ter +tat +to were in prisoun , men lete ham gone for
grete +giftes +tat +tai ham +gaf , CMBRUT3-M3,67.2029

and went wi+t ham . CMBRUT3-M3,67.2030

And when +to ij bre+terne were ascaped , and comen a+geyne into hier
owen contre , +tai ordeynede ham a grete host & a grete power ,
CMBRUT3-M3,67.2031

& bigon to werre eftesones vppon +te kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,67.2032

<P_68>

<heading>

How Kyng Vter chees Aloth to kepe +te lande of Britaigne whiles +tat he
was sik . CMBRUT3-M3,68.2035

Capitulo Septuagesimo Secundo . CMBRUT3-M3,68.2036

<$$heading>

ANd for-asmiche as Kyng Vter was sik , and my+gt nou+gt helpe him-self ,
he ordeynede Aloth , +te sone of Elyne , +tat +to was to bene wardeyne
and chyueteyne of al his folc ; CMBRUT3-M3,68.2038

& he anone , and his Britons , assemblede a grete host ,
CMBRUT3-M3,68.2039

& +gaf bataile to Octa and to his folc ; CMBRUT3-M3,68.2040

but Octa at +te laste was descomfitede . CMBRUT3-M3,68.2041

Hit bifelle +tus afterwarde , +tat +tise Britons haden indignacioun at
+tis Aloth , CMBRUT3-M3,68.2042

& wolde nou+gt to him bene entendant ; wherfore +te kyng was annoyede
wonder sore , and lete put him in a liter in +te hoste amonges his folc
; CMBRUT3-M3,68.2043

and +tai ladde him to Veroleyne , +tat +to was a faire citee , +tere
+tat seynt Albone was martrede ; CMBRUT3-M3,68.2044

and after was +tat citee destroiede +trou+g paynemys & +trou+g werre .
CMBRUT3-M3,68.2045

and +tider went Ossa and Octa & her peple , CMBRUT3-M3,68.2046

& entrede into +te toune , CMBRUT3-M3,68.2047

and lete make faste +te +gates , CMBRUT3-M3,68.2048

& +tere +tai helde ham . CMBRUT3-M3,68.2049

& +te kyng come , CMBRUT3-M3,68.2050

and ham bisegede , CMBRUT3-M3,68.2051

& made a stronge assaut ; CMBRUT3-M3,68.2052

but +to +tat were wi+tin , manliche ham defended . CMBRUT3-M3,68.2053

The kyng lete ordeyne his gunnes & his engynes for@ @to breke +te wallys
; CMBRUT3-M3,68.2054

& +te wallis were so stronge +tat no+ting my+gt ham misdo .
CMBRUT3-M3,68.2055

Octa & his peple hade grete despite +tat a kyng liggyng in a liter ham
hade bisegede , CMBRUT3-M3,68.2056

& +tai token conseil amonges ham , for@ @to stande vp in +te morwe , &
come oute , and +geue bataile to +te kyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,68.2057

and so +tai deden . CMBRUT3-M3,68.2058

and in +tat bataile were bo+te Octa & Ossa slayne ; CMBRUT3-M3,68.2059

& al +te o+tere +tat ascapede alif , fledde +tens into Scotland ,
CMBRUT3-M3,68.2060

and made Colegryne her cheueteyne . CMBRUT3-M3,68.2061

& +te Saxoynes +tat were alif , and ascapede fro +te bataile , brou+gt
a+geyne a grete streng+t , CMBRUT3-M3,68.2062

& amonges ham saiden +tat , if the Kyng Vter were dede , +tai shulde wel
conquere +te lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,68.2063

and amonges ham +tai +tou+gt enpoysone +te kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,68.2064

and ordeynede men for@ @to done +tis dede , CMBRUT3-M3,68.2065

& +gaf ham of +giftes grete plente , +tis +ting to done .
CMBRUT3-M3,68.2066

& +tai ordeynede ham +tiderward +tere +tat +te kyng was <P_69> duellyng
, CMBRUT3-M3,69.2067

& clo+tede ham in pore wede , +te bettre for@ @to spede hire lu+ter
purpos ; CMBRUT3-M3,69.2068

but no+telesse , for al her falsenesse & queyntise , +tai my+gt neuer
come ney +te kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,69.2069

But at +te laste +tai aspiede +tat +te kyng drank none o+tere licours
but oneliche water of a clere welle +tat was ney+g bisides ;
CMBRUT3-M3,69.2070

and +tise false traitoures vppon a day priueliche went to +tat wel ,
CMBRUT3-M3,69.2071

and put +terin poisoun , so +tat al +te water was enpoysenede .
CMBRUT3-M3,69.2072

And anone after as +te Kyng hade dronke of +tat water , he biganne to
swelle , CMBRUT3-M3,69.2073

& sone after deide ; CMBRUT3-M3,69.2074

& alse meny as drank of +tat water deide also . CMBRUT3-M3,69.2075

And anone as +tis false-nesse was aspiede , folc of +te toune lete
stoppe +te welle for euermore . CMBRUT3-M3,69.2076

When +te Kyng was dede , his folc bare him to Stonehynge wi+t grete
solempnite of bisshopp+g and barons +tat were +tere , +tat buriede him
bisides Aurilambros his bro+ter ; CMBRUT3-M3,69.2077

and after turnede a+geyne +to euerycheon , CMBRUT3-M3,69.2078

& lete sende after Arthure his sone ; CMBRUT3-M3,69.2079

and +tai made him Kyng of +te lande wi+t michel reuerence , after his
faderes de+t , +te xvij +gere of his regne . CMBRUT3-M3,69.2080

<heading>

How Arthure , +tat was +te sone of Vter , was cronede after his faderes
de+t & how he drof Colegryn & +te Saxoynes , and Chelduc of Almayne ,
out of +tis lande . CMBRUT3-M3,69.2082

Capitulo lxxiij=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,69.2083

<$$heading>

WHen Arthure was made kyng of +te lande , he was but +gonge , of xv
+gere age , CMBRUT3-M3,69.2085

but he was faire , and bolde , & dou+gti of body , CMBRUT3-M3,69.2086

& to meke folc he was gode & curteise , CMBRUT3-M3,69.2087

& to prout folc he was stout & sterne ; CMBRUT3-M3,69.2088

& also he was gentil and curteise , and large of spendyng ,
CMBRUT3-M3,69.2089

& made him wel bilouede of al men +tere +tat it was nede .
CMBRUT3-M3,69.2090

And when he biganne to regne , he swore +tat Saxones neuer shulde haue
pees ne reste til +tat he hade drif ham out of his lande .
CMBRUT3-M3,69.2091

& he lete assemble a grete host , CMBRUT3-M3,69.2092

& fau+gt wi+t Colegrin , +tat , after tyme +tat Octa was dede , +te
Saxones mayntenede . CMBRUT3-M3,69.2093

And +tis Colegryne was descomfitede , CMBRUT3-M3,69.2094

& fley to +Gork , CMBRUT3-M3,69.2095

& tok +te tone , CMBRUT3-M3,69.2096

& +tere helde him . CMBRUT3-M3,69.2097

And +te Kyng bisegede +te tone , CMBRUT3-M3,69.2098

but he mi+gt no+ting spede , for +te toune was so strong ,
CMBRUT3-M3,69.2099

& +tai wi+tin <P_70> kepte +te toune wel & horpedly .
CMBRUT3-M3,70.2100

And in +te mene tyme Colegryne lete +te toune to Bladulf ,
CMBRUT3-M3,70.2101

& fley him-self to Cheldrik , +tat was Kyng of Almaigne , for@ @to haue
of him socour . CMBRUT3-M3,70.2102

and +te Kyng as-semblede a grete power , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2103

and come & arryuede in Scotland wi+t v._C. shippis .
CMBRUT3-M3,70.2104

& when Arthure wist of +tis tydyngus , +tat he hade nou+gt power ne
streng+t ynow to fei+gt a+geyne Sheldrik , he lete bene +te sege ,
CMBRUT3-M3,70.2105

and went to London , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2106

and sent anone his lettres to +te Kyng of Litil Britaigne , +tat me
callede Hoel , his neveu , his sustres sone , +tat he shulde come to him
wi+t al +te power +tat he my+gt . CMBRUT3-M3,70.2107

And he assemblede a grete hoste , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2108

& arryuede at South-ampton . CMBRUT3-M3,70.2109

And when Kyng $Arthure hit wiste , he was glade ynow ,
CMBRUT3-M3,70.2110

& went a+geynes ham , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2111

& ham resceyuede wi+t michel honour , so +tat +to ij hostes ham
assemblede , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2112

and toke her way euen to Nichole , +tat Cheldrik hade bisegede but
nou+gt +gitte taken . CMBRUT3-M3,70.2113

And +tai comen vppon Cheldrik & vppon his peple or +tai hit wiste ,
+tere +tat +tai werre , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2114

and ham egrely assailede . CMBRUT3-M3,70.2115

+te Kyng Cheldrik and his meny defendede ham manly by here power ,
CMBRUT3-M3,70.2116

but Kyng Arthure and his men quellede so meny Saxones , +tat neuer er
was seyne sochs a slau+gter ; CMBRUT3-M3,70.2117

and his men +tat were lefte alif , fledden away , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2118

and Arthure ham pursuede , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2119

and drof ham into a wode +tat +tai mi+gt no fer+ter passe .
CMBRUT3-M3,70.2120

Cheldrik and his men saw wel +tat +tai were brou+gt into miche disesse ,
CMBRUT3-M3,70.2121

& ham +golden to Arthure in +tis maner wise , +tat he shulde take here
horse and Here armure , & al +tat +tai hadde , +tat +tai most oneliche
gone on fote to here shippes , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2122

and so +tai wolde gone into here owen lande , & neuer come a+geyne into
+tis lande . CMBRUT3-M3,70.2123

And vppon assuraunce of +tis +ting , +tai +geuen him gode hostages ;
CMBRUT3-M3,70.2124

and Arthure , +trou+g conseile of his men , grauntede +tis +ting ,
CMBRUT3-M3,70.2125

and resceyuede +te hostages . CMBRUT3-M3,70.2126

& oppon +tis , +tise o+ter went vnto here shippes : CMBRUT3-M3,70.2127

and when +tai werne in +te hye see , hir wille chaungede , as +te deuel
it wolde , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2128

& +tai retournede hire nauye , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2129

& come a+geyne into +tis land , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2130

& arryuede at Tottenesse , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2131

& went out of here shippis , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2132

& toke +te lande , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2133

& clene robbede hit , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2134

& michel peple slou+g , CMBRUT3-M3,70.2135

& token al +te Armure +tat +tai my+gt fynde ; CMBRUT3-M3,70.2136

& so +tai wenten forthe til +tai comen to Bathe ; CMBRUT3-M3,70.2137

but +te men of <P_71> +te toune shitten faste here +gates ,
CMBRUT3-M3,71.2138

and wolde nou+gt suffren ham come +ter in +te toune , CMBRUT3-M3,71.2139

and +tai defendede ham wel and horpedly a+geyn+g ham ,
CMBRUT3-M3,71.2140

<heading>

How Arthure +gaf bataile to +te Saxones when +tai comen a+geyne , and
bisegede +te toune of Ba+te , & ham ouercome . CMBRUT3-M3,71.2142

Capstulo lxxiiij=to= . CMBRUT3-M3,71.2143

<$$heading>

WHen Arthure herde +tis tydynges , he lete honge anone +te hostages ,
CMBRUT3-M3,71.2145

& lefte Hoel of Britaigne , his nevew , for@ @to kepe +te Marche toward
Scotland wi+t half his peple , CMBRUT3-M3,71.2146

and him-self went helpe rescue +te toune of Bathe . CMBRUT3-M3,71.2147

And when he come +tider , he +gaf a strong batail to Cheldrik ,
CMBRUT3-M3,71.2148

and quelde almost al +te peple +tat he hade ; CMBRUT3-M3,71.2149

for no man my+gt him wi+tstande , ne endure vnder +te stroke of his
swerde ; CMBRUT3-M3,71.2150

and +tere bo+te were slayn , Colegrin and Bladud his bro+ter .
CMBRUT3-M3,71.2151

And Cheldrik fledde +tens , CMBRUT3-M3,71.2152

and wolde haue gone to his shippis ; CMBRUT3-M3,71.2153

but when Arthure hit wist , he tok xv_M=l= kny+gtes to Cador , +tat was
erl of Cornewaile , for@ @to lette and stoppe his com-myng ;
CMBRUT3-M3,71.2154

and Arthure him-self went a+geyne towarde +te Marche of Scotland ,
CMBRUT3-M3,71.2155

ffor messagers tolde him +tat +te Scottes hade bisegede Hoel of Britaign
+tere +tat he lay sike ; CMBRUT3-M3,71.2156

and +terfore he hastede +tiderward ; CMBRUT3-M3,71.2157

& Cador pursuede after Cheldrik , CMBRUT3-M3,71.2158

& toke him or +tat he my+gt come to his shippis , CMBRUT3-M3,71.2159

& quellede Cheldrik & his peple . CMBRUT3-M3,71.2160

And when Cador hade done +tis viage , he hastede him a+geyne , as faste
as he my+gt , towardes Arthure , CMBRUT3-M3,71.2161

and founde him in Scotland +tere +tat he hade rescuede Hoel of Britaigne
. CMBRUT3-M3,71.2162

But +te Scottes were al feire wi+tin Mounref , CMBRUT3-M3,71.2163

and +tere +tai helde ham a@ @while ; CMBRUT3-M3,71.2164

but Arthure ham pursuede , CMBRUT3-M3,71.2165

and +tai fledde +tens four+t into Lymoigne , CMBRUT3-M3,71.2166

+tat {COM:literal_translation_of_french_causal_"que"} were in +tat
contre lx Iles , & grete plente of briddes , & grete plente of Egles ,
+tat were wont to crie and fei+gten to-gederes , and make grete noise
when folc come to robbe +tat lande , and weren as miche as +tai mi+gt ;
CMBRUT3-M3,71.2167

and so +tai deden , CMBRUT3-M3,71.2168

for +te Scottes were so grete rauenours +tat +tai token al +tat +tai
my+gt fynde in +te lande of Lymoigne wi+t-outen eny sparyng ;
CMBRUT3-M3,71.2169

and +terwi+t +tai chargede a+geyne +te folc , into Scotland for@ @to
wende . CMBRUT3-M3,71.2170

<P_72>

<heading>

How Kyng Arthure axede of Merlyn +te aventures of vj the laste kynges
+tat weren to regne in Engeland , and how +te lande shulde ende .
CMBRUT3-M3,72.2173

Capitulo Septuagesimo Quinto . CMBRUT3-M3,72.2174

<$$heading>

" SIre , " quod Merlyn , " in +te +gere of Incarnacioun of oure Lorde
Ihesu Crist M=l=_CC_xv +tere shal come a lambe oute of Wynchestre +tat
shal haue a white tong and trew lippis , CMBRUT3-M3,72.2176

and he shal haue wryten in his hert ' Holynesse . ' CMBRUT3-M3,72.2177

This lambe shal make meny Goddes house , CMBRUT3-M3,72.2178

and he shal haue pees +te most parte of his lif , CMBRUT3-M3,72.2179

& he shal make one of +te faireste places of +te worlde +tat in his tyme
shal nou+gt fully ben made an ende . CMBRUT3-M3,72.2180

And in +te ende of his lif , a wolf of a straunge lande shal do him
grete harme ; CMBRUT3-M3,72.2181

but at +te ende +te lambe shal be maistre , +trou+g helpe of a rede Fox
+tat shal come out of +te Northwest , and him shal ouercome ;
CMBRUT3-M3,72.2182

and +te wolfe shal dye $in water ; CMBRUT3-M3,72.2183

and after +tat tyme +te lambe shal leue no while +tat he ne shal dye .
CMBRUT3-M3,72.2184

His sede +tan shal bene in strange lande , CMBRUT3-M3,72.2185

and +te lande shal bene wi+tout a gouernoure a litil tyme .
CMBRUT3-M3,72.2186

ANd after him shal come a dragoun mellede wi+t mercy and ek wodenesse ,
+tat shal haue a berde as a goot , +tat shal +geue in Engeland shadewe ,
and shal kepe the lande from colde and hete ; CMBRUT3-M3,72.2187

and his o foote shal be sette in Wik , and +tat o+tere in London ;
CMBRUT3-M3,72.2188

and he shal vnbrace iij habitacions , CMBRUT3-M3,72.2189

and he shal oppen his mou+t toward Walys , and +te tremblyng of +te
hidure of his mou+te , CMBRUT3-M3,72.2190

his heres shal strecche towarde meny habitaciouns and contres ,
CMBRUT3-M3,72.2191

and his bre+t shal bene ful suete in straunge landes ;
CMBRUT3-M3,72.2192

& in his tyme shal ryuers renne wi+t bloode and wi+t brayne ,
CMBRUT3-M3,72.2193

& he shal make in places of his lande , walles , +tat shal done miche
harme to his seede after his tyme . CMBRUT3-M3,72.2194

Than shal +tere come a peple out of +te Northwest duryng his regne ,
+tat shal bene lade +trou+g an wickede hare , +tat +te dragoun shal done
crone Kyng , +tat afterwarde shal flee ouer +te see wi+tout comyng
a+geyne , for drede of +te dragoun . CMBRUT3-M3,72.2195

In +tat tyme +te sonne shal bene also rede as blode , as meny men shul
see +trou+g al +te worlde : CMBRUT3-M3,72.2196

+tat shal bitoken grete pestilence , and de+t of folc +trou+g dent of
swerde ; CMBRUT3-M3,72.2197

and +tis peple shal bene faderles til +te tyme +tat +te dragon shal dye
+trou+g an hare +tat shal meve a+geynes him werr <P_73> in +te ende of
his lif , +tat shal nou+gt bene fulliche endede in his tyme .
CMBRUT3-M3,73.2198

This dragoun shal bene holden in his tyme +te best body of al +te worlde
; CMBRUT3-M3,73.2199

& he shal dye bisides +te Marche of a straunge lande ;
CMBRUT3-M3,73.2200

and +te lande shalle duelle $faderlesse , wi+touten a gode gouernoure ;
CMBRUT3-M3,73.2201

and me shal wepe for his de+t fram +te Ile of Shepe vnto +te hauen of
Marcill ; wherfore , ' allas ' shal bene +te commune songe of faderles
folc , +tat shal ouerleuen in his land destroiede . CMBRUT3-M3,73.2202

ANd after +tis dragone shal come a gote oute of a Kar , +tat shal haue
hornes & berde of siluer ; CMBRUT3-M3,73.2203

and +tere shal come out of his nose+trelles a drop +tat shal bitoken
hunger & sorw , & grete de+t of +te peple ; CMBRUT3-M3,73.2204

and miche of his lande in +te bigynnyng of his regne shal be wastede .
CMBRUT3-M3,73.2205

This goot shal go ouer into Fraunce CMBRUT3-M3,73.2206

& shal oppon +te floure of lif and of de+ . CMBRUT3-M3,73.2207

In his tyme +tere shal arise an Egle in Cornewaile +tat shal haue
fe+teres of golde , +tat of pride shal bene wi+touten pere of alle +te
lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,73.2208

and he shal despise lordes of blode ; CMBRUT3-M3,73.2209

and after , he shal flee shamefully by a Bere at Gauersiche ;
CMBRUT3-M3,73.2210

and after shal bene made brigges of men oppon +te costes of +te see ;
CMBRUT3-M3,73.2211

and stones shal falle fram castelles , CMBRUT3-M3,73.2212

and meny o+tere tounes shal ben made pleyne ; CMBRUT3-M3,73.2213

and a bataile shalle bene done vppon an Arme of +te see in a felde
ordeynede as a shelde ; CMBRUT3-M3,73.2214

and at +tat bataile shal dye meny white hedes ; wher-fore +tat bataile
shal bene callede ' +te white bataile . ' CMBRUT3-M3,73.2215

And +te forsaide Beere shal done +tis goote michel harme ,
CMBRUT3-M3,73.2216

and it shal bene oute of +te Southwest ; CMBRUT3-M3,73.2217

& of his bloode +tan shal +te goote lese miche of his lande til at +te
tyme +tat shendeship shal him ouer-comen ; CMBRUT3-M3,73.2218

& +tan shal he clop+ten him in a lyone+g skyn ; CMBRUT3-M3,73.2219

and +tan shal he wynne +tat he hade loste , and more +terto ,
CMBRUT3-M3,73.2220

ffor a peple shal come out of +te northwest +tat shal make +te goot sore
to bene adrade ; CMBRUT3-M3,73.2221

and he shal avenge him oppon his enemys , +trou+g conseil of ij oweles ,
+tat ferst shal bene in peril for@ @to bene vndone ; CMBRUT3-M3,73.2222

but +te olde owel shal wende ouer +te se into a $straunge lande ,
CMBRUT3-M3,73.2223

and +tere he shal duelle vnto a certeyne tyme ; CMBRUT3-M3,73.2224

and after , he shal come a+geyne into +tis lande . CMBRUT3-M3,73.2225

+Tise ij oweles shullen do grete harme <P_74> to meny on ;
CMBRUT3-M3,74.2226

and so +tai shullen counseil +te gote +tat he shal arere werre a+geynes
+te forsaid bere ; CMBRUT3-M3,74.2227

and at +te last , +te goot and +te oweles shullen come atte Bur vp Trent
, CMBRUT3-M3,74.2228

and shullen wende ouer ; CMBRUT3-M3,74.2229

and for drede , +te Bere shal flee , and a swan wi+t him , for his
company , to Bur towarde +te North , CMBRUT3-M3,74.2230

& +tere +tai shal bene wi+t an harde shoure . CMBRUT3-M3,74.2231

And +tan +te swan shal bene slayne wi+t sorwe , and +te Bere taken &
biheuedede , al+ter_nexte his neste , +tat shal $stand vppon a broken
brigge , vp wham +te sone shal caste his beemes ; CMBRUT3-M3,74.2232

and meny shal him seche , for vertu +tat fro hym shal come .
CMBRUT3-M3,74.2233

In +tat same tyme shal dye , for sorwe and care , a peple of his lande ,
so +tat meny shal bene oppon him +te more bolder afterward .
CMBRUT3-M3,74.2234

And +to ij oweles shullen do miche harme to +te forsaide floure of lif ,
CMBRUT3-M3,74.2235

and here shul lede in distresse , so +tat she shal passe ouer into
Fraunce , for@ @to make pees bituene +te gote & +te flour delice ;
CMBRUT3-M3,74.2236

and +tere she shal duelle to a tyme +tat her sede shal come to seche
here ; CMBRUT3-M3,74.2237

and +tere +tai shul bene stille til a tyme +tat +tai shul ham clo+te
with grace : CMBRUT3-M3,74.2238

and +tai shul seche the Owelyn , and put ham vnto despitous de+t .
CMBRUT3-M3,74.2239

And after shal +tis goot bene brou+gt to disese ; CMBRUT3-M3,74.2240

and in grete anguisshe and sorwe he shal leue al his lif .
CMBRUT3-M3,74.2241

Aftre +tis goote , shal come out of Wyndesore a Boor , +tat shal haue an
heuede of witte , a lyons hert , a pitouse lokyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,74.2242

his vesage shal be reste to sike men ; CMBRUT3-M3,74.2243

his bre+t shal bene stanchyn of +terst to ham +tat bene a+treste +terof
shal ; CMBRUT3-M3,74.2244

his worde shal bene gospelle ; CMBRUT3-M3,74.2245

his beryng shal bene meke as a Lambe . CMBRUT3-M3,74.2246

In +te ferste +gere of his regne he shal haue grete payne to iustifien
ham +tat bene vntrew ; CMBRUT3-M3,74.2247

and in his tyme shal his lande bene multipliede wi+t Aliens .
CMBRUT3-M3,74.2248

And +tis Boor , +trou+g fersenesse of hert +tat he shal haue , shal make
wolfes bicome lambes ; CMBRUT3-M3,74.2249

& he shal bene callede +trou+g-oute +te worlde ' Boor of holynesse and
of fersenesse , of nobeleye and of mekenesse , ' CMBRUT3-M3,74.2250

and he shal do mesurabli al +tat he shal haue to done vnto +te Burgh of
Ierusalem ; CMBRUT3-M3,74.2251

and he shal whet his tei+t vppon +te +gates of Parys , and vppon iiij
landes . CMBRUT3-M3,74.2252

Spayne shal tremble for drede of him ; CMBRUT3-M3,74.2253

Gascoyne shal swete ; CMBRUT3-M3,74.2254

in Fraunce he shal put his wynge ; CMBRUT3-M3,74.2255

his grete taile shal reste in Engeland softely ; CMBRUT3-M3,74.2256

Almayn shal quake for drede of him . CMBRUT3-M3,74.2257

+tis Boor shal <P_75> +geue mantels to ij tounes of Engeland ,
CMBRUT3-M3,75.2258

and he shal make +te ryuer rynne wi+t blode & wi+t brayn ,
CMBRUT3-M3,75.2259

and he shal make meny medowes reede , CMBRUT3-M3,75.2260

and he shal gete as miche as his auncestres deden ; CMBRUT3-M3,75.2261

& er +tat he bene dede he shal bere iij crones ; CMBRUT3-M3,75.2262

and he shal put on lande into gret subieccioun ; CMBRUT3-M3,75.2263

and after hit shal bene releuede , but nou+gt in his tyme .
CMBRUT3-M3,75.2264

This Boor , after +tat he is dede , for his dou+gty-nesse shal bene
enterede at Coloigne , CMBRUT3-M3,75.2265

and his lande shal bene +tan fulfillede wi+t al goode .
CMBRUT3-M3,75.2266

After +tis Boor shal come a lambe , +tat shal haue feete of leede , an
heuede of bras , an hert of a loppe , and a swynes skyn , and herde ;
CMBRUT3-M3,75.2267

and in his tyme his land shal bene in pees . CMBRUT3-M3,75.2268

+te ferst +gere of his regne he shal do make a citee , +tat al +te
worlde shal speke +terof . CMBRUT3-M3,75.2269

+tis lambe shal lese in his tyme a grete parte of his lande +trou+g an
hidouse wolf ; CMBRUT3-M3,75.2270

but he shal recouer it , an +gif an Lordeship to an Egle of his landes ;
CMBRUT3-M3,75.2271

and +tis Egle shal wel gouerne hit , til +te tyme +tat pride shal him
ouergone , -- CMBRUT3-M3,75.2272

allas +te sorwe ! -- CMBRUT3-M3,75.2273

for he shal dye +trou+g his bro+teres suorde . CMBRUT3-M3,75.2274

and after shal +te lande falle to +te forsaide lambe , +tat shal gouerne
in pees al his lifes tyme ; CMBRUT3-M3,75.2275

and after he shal dye , and +te lande bene fulfillede wi+t al maner gode
. CMBRUT3-M3,75.2276

After +tis lambe shal come a Moldewerpe acursede of Godes mou+t , a
caitif , a cowarde as an here . CMBRUT3-M3,75.2277

he shal haue an elderliche skyn as a goot ; CMBRUT3-M3,75.2278

and vengeance shal fal vppon him for synne . CMBRUT3-M3,75.2279

In +te ferst +gere of his regne he shal haue of al gode grete plente in
his lande , and toward him also ; CMBRUT3-M3,75.2280

and in his lande he shal haue grete praising til +te tyme +tat he shal
soffre his peple lyuen in to miche pride wi+touten chastisyng , wherfore
God wil ben wro+t . CMBRUT3-M3,75.2281

Than shal arisen vp a dragoun in +te North , +tat shal bene ful fers ,
CMBRUT3-M3,75.2282

and shal meve werre a+geynes +te forsaide Moldewerpe ,
CMBRUT3-M3,75.2283

and shal +geue him bataile vppon a ston . CMBRUT3-M3,75.2284

+tis dragoun shal gadre a+geyne into his company a wolf +tat shal come
oute of the West , +tat shal bygynne werre a+geynes +te forsaide
Moldewerp in his side ; CMBRUT3-M3,75.2285

& so shal +te dragoun and he bynde here tailes to-geder .
CMBRUT3-M3,75.2286

+tan shal come a lyon oute of Irlande , +tat shal fal in company wi+t
ham ; CMBRUT3-M3,75.2287

and +tan shal tremble +te lande , +tat +tan shal bene callede Engeland ,
as an aspe lef , CMBRUT3-M3,75.2288

and in +tat tyme shal <P_76> castelles bene fellede adoune vppon Tamise
; CMBRUT3-M3,76.2289

and it shal semen +tat Seuerne shal bene drye , for +te bodyes +tat shal
fallen dede +terin . CMBRUT3-M3,76.2290

+Te iiij chief flodes of Engeland shal rynne in blode ;
CMBRUT3-M3,76.2291

and grete drede shal bene , and anguisshe , +tat shul arisen after +te
Moldewerpe shal fle for drede ; CMBRUT3-M3,76.2292

and +te dragoun , +te lyoun and +te wolf , him shal dryuen away ,
CMBRUT3-M3,76.2293

and the lande shal bene wi+tout ham , CMBRUT3-M3,76.2294

and +te Moldewerpe shal haue no maner power , saf onely a shipp wherto
he may wende ; CMBRUT3-M3,76.2295

and after +tat , he shal come to lande when +te see is wi+tdraw .
CMBRUT3-M3,76.2296

And after +tat he shal +geue +te +tride part of his lande for@ @to haue
+te fer+te part in pees & reste ; CMBRUT3-M3,76.2297

and after he shal leue in sorw al his lif-tyme ; CMBRUT3-M3,76.2298

and in his tyme +te hote ba+tes shullen bicome colde ;
CMBRUT3-M3,76.2299

and after +tat shal +te Moldewerp dye aventurly and sodeynely , --
CMBRUT3-M3,76.2300

allas +te sorwe ! -- CMBRUT3-M3,76.2301

for he shal bene drenchede in a flode of +te see , CMBRUT3-M3,76.2302

his seede shal bicome pure faderles in straunge lande for euermore ,
CMBRUT3-M3,76.2303

and +tan shal the lande bene departede in iij parties , +tat is to seyn
, to the Wolf , to +te dragoune , & to +te lioun ; CMBRUT3-M3,76.2304

and so shal it bene for euermore . CMBRUT3-M3,76.2305

And +tan shal +tis land bene callede ' +te lande of conquest , '
CMBRUT3-M3,76.2306

& so shal +te ri+gt heires of Engeland ende . " CMBRUT3-M3,76.2307

<heading>

How Arthure ouercome Guyllomer +tat was Kyng of Irland & how +te Scottes
bicomen his men . CMBRUT3-M3,76.2309

Capitulo lxxvj=to= . CMBRUT3-M3,76.2310

<$$heading>

WHen Guillomer , +tat was Kyng of Irlande , hade tidynges +tat Kyng
$Arthur was entrede at Glastenbery , he ordeynede a grete power of
Irisshemen , CMBRUT3-M3,76.2312

& come to +te see wi+t his Yrisshe peple , CMBRUT3-M3,76.2313

and so come into Scotteland ouer +te see , CMBRUT3-M3,76.2314

and arryuede faste by +tere +tat Kyng Arthure was wi+t his hoste .
CMBRUT3-M3,76.2315

and anone as he herde +terof , he went towarde him CMBRUT3-M3,76.2316

& +gaf him bataile , CMBRUT3-M3,76.2317

and ouercome him anone ry+gt ; CMBRUT3-M3,76.2318

and Guillomer fledde wi+t his men a+geyne into Irland ,
CMBRUT3-M3,76.2319

and when +tis scomfiture was done , Arthure turnede him a+geyne +tere
+tat he was , into +te place +tat he hade lefte +te Scottes ,
CMBRUT3-M3,76.2320

& wolde haue ham al slayne . CMBRUT3-M3,76.2321

But +te bisshoppes , Abbotes , & o+tere folc of +te contre , and Ladies
, openheuedede , comen bifore Kyng Arthure , CMBRUT3-M3,76.2322

and criede him mercy , CMBRUT3-M3,76.2323

& saide : <P_77> " sire , gentil kyng & my+gty , haue mercy & pitee of
vs ! CMBRUT3-M3,77.2324

and as +goure-self is of +te ri+gt lawe , to holde and mayntene
cristendome , ful grete dishonour it shulde be to quelle ham +tat leue+t
in almy+gty Gode as +ge done . CMBRUT3-M3,77.2325

& for Godes loue haue mercy and pitee of vs , CMBRUT3-M3,77.2326

and suffren vs for@ @to lyuen , CMBRUT3-M3,77.2327

for we haue hade michel sorwe and pyne ; CMBRUT3-M3,77.2328

for +te Saxones hauen meny tymes +trou+g oure lande passede ;
CMBRUT3-M3,77.2329

but +tat is nou+gt ynou+gt to +gow ; CMBRUT3-M3,77.2330

for often-tymes +tai haue done vs miche sorwe & disese .
CMBRUT3-M3,77.2331

ffor oure castelles +tai hauen taken , & oure bestes slayne & eten ,
CMBRUT3-M3,77.2332

& mich harme +tai hauen vs done ; CMBRUT3-M3,77.2333

and if +ge wolde vs now quelle , hit were none Honoure to a Kyng to
quelle ham +tat crien him mercy ; CMBRUT3-M3,77.2334

for ynow +ge haue y-done vs , & vs ouercomen euerycheon ;
CMBRUT3-M3,77.2335

& , for +te loue of God , soffre vs for@ @to lyue , CMBRUT3-M3,77.2336

& haue+t mercy of Cristen peple +tat bileue+t in God as +ge done ! "
CMBRUT3-M3,77.2337

when Kyng Arthure herde +tis sorwe , he hade pite of ham ,
CMBRUT3-M3,77.2338

and +gaf ham lif and lyme ; CMBRUT3-M3,77.2339

and alle +tai felle adoune to his feete , CMBRUT3-M3,77.2340

and bicome his lege men , CMBRUT3-M3,77.2341

and he toke of ham homages . CMBRUT3-M3,77.2342

And after +tat , Kyng Arthure turnede a+geyne wi+t his host ,
CMBRUT3-M3,77.2343

and come a+geyne to +Gorke , CMBRUT3-M3,77.2344

and +tere he abode duryng +tat Viage . CMBRUT3-M3,77.2345

And +to +gaf he al Loegers to Loth , +tat hade spousede his sustre , and
o+tere +giftes grete plente . CMBRUT3-M3,77.2346

and +to was Gaweyn , his cosyn , but +gong of age ; CMBRUT3-M3,77.2347

and to alle his o+tere men +tat him hade seruede in his werr , he +gaf
riche +giftes , CMBRUT3-M3,77.2348

& he +tankede ham miche of here gode seruise . CMBRUT3-M3,77.2349

<heading>

How Kyng Arthure spousede Gunnore , +tat was Cadore+g cosyn , Erl of
Cornewaile ; CMBRUT3-M3,77.2351

& after he conquerede of Guillomer all Irland . CMBRUT3-M3,77.2352

Capitulo Septuagesimo Septimo . CMBRUT3-M3,77.2353

<$$heading>

WHen Arthure hade brou+gt his lande in pees and reste , & in gode state
, & reste was in euery contre , +to toke he and wedede a wif +tat me
callede Gunnore , CMBRUT3-M3,77.2355

& made here quene , a faire lady and a gentil , +tat Cador +te erle of
Cornewail hade longe tyme norisshede in his chaumbre +tat was his owen
cosyn ; CMBRUT3-M3,77.2356

but neuer +tai haden childe to-gedres , CMBRUT3-M3,77.2357

and no+telesse Kyng Arthure louede her wonder wel and derlich .
CMBRUT3-M3,77.2358

And anone as wynter was passede , he lete assemble a grete hoste , &
alle his barons , CMBRUT3-M3,77.2359

and saide <P_78> +tat he wolde wende into Irland for@ @to conquere the
Lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,78.2360

and he tarede nou+gt ful longe +tat he ne passede ouer into Irland .
CMBRUT3-M3,78.2361

And Guillomer , +te Kyng of Scotland , lete assemble a grete hoste ,
CMBRUT3-M3,78.2362

and +gaf batail to Kyng Arthur ; CMBRUT3-M3,78.2363

but Guillomer was descom-fitede , CMBRUT3-M3,78.2364

& +gelde him to +te Kyng Arthure , CMBRUT3-M3,78.2365

and bicome his man , CMBRUT3-M3,78.2366

and to him dede feaute & homage , CMBRUT3-M3,78.2367

and of him helde al +tat lande fro +tat tyme forward .
CMBRUT3-M3,78.2368

and after passede Kyng Arthur fer+ter , CMBRUT3-M3,78.2369

and conquerede Gutland and Irland , CMBRUT3-M3,78.2370

and toke homages of folc of +te lande , CMBRUT3-M3,78.2371

and +tere duellede xij +ger in pees , CMBRUT3-M3,78.2372

& regnede wi+t ioye and mer+te , CMBRUT3-M3,78.2373

& werrede vppon no maner man , ne no man vppon him . CMBRUT3-M3,78.2374

And he bicome so curteys and large , and so honourable , +tat +te
Emperoure+g court of Rome , ne none +trou+g-out al +te worlde , was none
acountede to Kyng Arthures , +tat eny man wist , ne none so preisede ;
CMBRUT3-M3,78.2375

and +terefore +te beste kny+gtes of al maner landes comen to him for@
@to duelle , CMBRUT3-M3,78.2376

& ham resceyuede wi+t gode wille and reuerence ; CMBRUT3-M3,78.2377

and alle +te kny+gtes weren so gode +tat no man knew +te werst ;
CMBRUT3-M3,78.2378

and +terefore Kyng Arthure made +te rounde table , +tat when +tai shulde
sitte to +te mete , alle shulde bene aliche hye , and euenlich seruede
at +te table , +tat none my+gt maken auant +tat none were hyer +tan
o+tere . CMBRUT3-M3,78.2379

and Kyng Arthure hade at +tat table Britons , Fraunchemen , Normannes ,
Flemynges , Burgoyners , Mansers , Loherin+g , and of alle +te landes a
+tis half +te mount of Gorie , and of his lande of Britaigne , and of
+te grete Cornewaile , of Walys , & of Irland , & of Scotland ;
CMBRUT3-M3,78.2380

and shortely to telle , of alle +te landes +tat wolde worshipe and
chyualry seche , comen to Kyng Arthurus court . CMBRUT3-M3,78.2381

<heading>

How Kyng Arthure come into Fraunce , CMBRUT3-M3,78.2383

& conquered +tat londe of Froll , +tat was a Romayn , CMBRUT3-M3,78.2384

& him quellede . CMBRUT3-M3,78.2385

Capitulo lxxviij=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,78.2386

<$$heading>

SIth hit bifelle +tat Kyng Arthure , +trou+g conseile of his barons and
lordes , wolde gone to conquere al Fraunce , +tat +to was clepede Galle
, +trou+g Romayns +tat +to helde +tat lande in here $power & in here
lordeshipe . CMBRUT3-M3,78.2388

and +te Romayns hade take +tat <P_79> lande to a noble kny+gt , and a
wor+ti of body , +tat me calle Frolle , CMBRUT3-M3,79.2389

and when he wist +tat Arthure come , he ordeynede an host & grete power
, CMBRUT3-M3,79.2390

& fau+gt wi+t +te kyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,79.2391

& he & his folc weren descomfitede ; CMBRUT3-M3,79.2392

and +tens +tai fledde vnto Parys , CMBRUT3-M3,79.2393

and entrede +te toun , CMBRUT3-M3,79.2394

& closede +te +gates , CMBRUT3-M3,79.2395

& +tere ham helde . CMBRUT3-M3,79.2396

Arthure wist +tat Froll was gone to Parys , CMBRUT3-M3,79.2397

he pursuede after , CMBRUT3-M3,79.2398

& come +tider , CMBRUT3-M3,79.2399

& him bisegede ; CMBRUT3-M3,79.2400

but +te citee was so strong and wel arraied ; CMBRUT3-M3,79.2401

& +to +tat were wi+tin defendede ham wel and manliche .
CMBRUT3-M3,79.2402

Kyng $Arthure duellede +tere more +tan a moun+te ; CMBRUT3-M3,79.2403

& +tere was so miche peple in +te citee , CMBRUT3-M3,79.2404

& hade despendede al her vitailes +tat were wi+tin , CMBRUT3-M3,79.2405

& so grete hunger bicome amonges ham , +tat +tai deide wonder +tik
wi+tin the citee for hunger , CMBRUT3-M3,79.2406

and comen to Froll , CMBRUT3-M3,79.2407

& prayede him to bene accordede wi+t Kyng Arthure for@ @to haue pees ;
CMBRUT3-M3,79.2408

& +tai wolde +gelde ham to him , & +te toun also . CMBRUT3-M3,79.2409

Froll saw +tat no longer he my+gt horde +te toun a+geynes her wille ,
and truste greteli oppon his owen streng+t , CMBRUT3-M3,79.2410

& sent to Kyng Authure +tat he shulde come to fei+gt wi+t him , body for
body , CMBRUT3-M3,79.2411

and so +tai shulde departe Fraunce bituene ham ij . CMBRUT3-M3,79.2412

Kyng Arthure anone graunted hit , CMBRUT3-M3,79.2413

and wolde +tat none of his peple vndertoke +te batail for him .
CMBRUT3-M3,79.2414

And oppon +te morwe , bo+te comen wel armede wi+touten Parys , +tere
+tat +tai shulde fi+gt ; CMBRUT3-M3,79.2415

and anone +tai smyten togederes so fersely ; CMBRUT3-M3,79.2416

and so wel , +tai fou+gten in bo+te sides , +tat no man cou+te deme +te
bettre of ham . CMBRUT3-M3,79.2417

and so Hit bifelle +tat Froll +gaf Arthure soche a stroke +tat he
knelede to +te grounde , wolde he n@ @olde he . CMBRUT3-M3,79.2418

& as Froll wi+tdrow his suerde , he wonded Kyng Arthure in +te forheuede
, +tat +te blode felle adoune by his eyes and face . CMBRUT3-M3,79.2419

Arthure anone sterte vp hertly , when he felede him hert , as a man +tat
semede almoste wode ; CMBRUT3-M3,79.2420

& he toke Tabourn , his gode suerde CMBRUT3-M3,79.2421

& drowe it vp an hye , CMBRUT3-M3,79.2422

& +gaf Froll soche a stroke +tat +terwi+t he cleuede his heuede doun to
+te shuldres , so +tat his helme my+gt nou+gt bene his warant ;
CMBRUT3-M3,79.2423

& so he felle adoun dede +tere in +te place , CMBRUT3-M3,79.2424

and +to of +te citee maden grete sorwe for Froll ; CMBRUT3-M3,79.2425

and anone euerycheon +gelde ham to Kyng Arthure , & +te toune also ,
CMBRUT3-M3,79.2426

and <P_80> bicome his men , CMBRUT3-M3,80.2427

and deden to him homage & feaute , CMBRUT3-M3,80.2428

& he vnder-fonge ham CMBRUT3-M3,80.2429

& toke of ham gode hostages . CMBRUT3-M3,80.2430

& Kyng Arthure , after +tat , went for+te wi+t his host ,
CMBRUT3-M3,80.2431

and conquerede Angon & Aungers , Gascoigne , Peihto , Nauerne , Burgoyne
, Bery , Loherne , Turyn and Peihters ; CMBRUT3-M3,80.2432

and alle +te o+tere landes of Fraunce he conquerede hollich .
CMBRUT3-M3,80.2433

and when he hade alle conquerede , & taken bi homages & feautes , he
turnede a+geyne to Parys , CMBRUT3-M3,80.2434

& +tere duellede longe tyme , CMBRUT3-M3,80.2435

and ordeynede pees ouer al the contrey , & +trou+g-out al Fraunce .
CMBRUT3-M3,80.2436

And when pees was made oueral , +trou+g his noble kny+gthode +tat he
hade , & also for his owen wor+tynesse , and no man , were he neuer so
grete a lorde , derst nou+gt meve werre a+geynes him , no+ter to arise
and for@ @to make +te lande of Fraunce in quiete & pees , he wonede
+tere ix +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,80.2437

& dede +tere meny grete wonders , CMBRUT3-M3,80.2438

& reprouede meny prout men & lu+ter tyraunte+g , CMBRUT3-M3,80.2439

& ham chastisede after her deseruise . CMBRUT3-M3,80.2440

<heading>

How Kyng Arthure auauncede alle his men +tat hade trauailed in his
seruise . CMBRUT3-M3,80.2442

Capitulo Septuagesimo Nono . CMBRUT3-M3,80.2443

<$$heading>

ANd after , hit bifelle +tus at Ester , +tere +tat he helde a feste at
Parys ; CMBRUT3-M3,80.2445

richely he gan auaunce his kny+gtes for here seruise +tat him hade
holpen in his conquest ; CMBRUT3-M3,80.2446

he +gaf to his stywarde +tat men cleped Kay , Angon & Angers ,
CMBRUT3-M3,80.2447

and to Bedeler his boteler he +gaf Normandye , +tat +to was callede
Neustrie ; CMBRUT3-M3,80.2448

and to Holden his chaumberleyn he +gaf Flaundres and Mance ;
CMBRUT3-M3,80.2449

and to Dorell his cosyn he +gaf Boloyne ; CMBRUT3-M3,80.2450

and to Richard his Nevew he +gaf Pountif ; CMBRUT3-M3,80.2451

And to alle o+tere he +gaf largely landes & fees after +tat +tai were of
state . CMBRUT3-M3,80.2452

And when Arthur hade +tus his kny+gtes feffede , at April after nexte
sewyng he come a+geyne into Britaigne , his owen lande .
CMBRUT3-M3,80.2453

And after , atte Whitsontide next sewyng , by conseil of his barons , he
wolde bene cronede Kyng of Glomergon , CMBRUT3-M3,80.2454

and halde a solempne fest , CMBRUT3-M3,80.2455

& lete sompne kynges , Erles and barons , +tat +tai shulde come +tider
euerycheon . CMBRUT3-M3,80.2456

Ther was Skater , kyng of Scotland ; Cadwere , kyng of South-walys ;
Guillomer , king of North Walys ; Madede , kyng of Irland ; Malgamus ,
kyng of <P_81> Gutland ; Achilles , kyng of Ikeland ; Aloth , kyng of
Denmerc ; Gonewas , kyng of Norweye ; and Hoel his cosyn , kyng of
Dorke-neye ; Cador , kyng of litel Britaigne ; Morwi+t , erl of
Cornne-waile ; Mauran , erle of Gloucestr ; Guerdon , erl of Wynchestre
; Boel , erl of Herford ; Vrtegi , erl of Oxenford ; Cursal , erl of
Bathe ; Ionas , erl of Chestre ; Eueral , erl of Dorcestre ; Kymar , erl
of Salesbury ; Waloth , erl of Kaunterbery ; Igern , erl of Checestre ;
Aral , erl of Leycestre , & +te Erl of Warwik , & o+tere riche Lordes .
CMBRUT3-M3,81.2457

Britons also +tere were ynow , +tat is to seyn , Dippon , Donand ,
Genu+g ; and meny o+tere +tat be+t nou+gt here nempnede weren at +tat
fest ; CMBRUT3-M3,81.2458

and meny ano-+tere faire feste Kyng Arthure hade holden biforn , but
neuer none soche , ne so solempne ; CMBRUT3-M3,81.2459

and +tat laste xv dayes wi+t michel Honoure and mer+te .
CMBRUT3-M3,81.2460

<heading>

Of +te lettre +tat was sent fram +te Citee of Rome for pride to Kyng
Arthure CMBRUT3-M3,81.2462

Capitulo Octogesimo . CMBRUT3-M3,81.2463

<$$heading>

The +teridde day , as kyng Arthure satte at his mete amonges his kynges
, & amonges ham +tat seten at +te fest biforne ham , comen in xij
elderne men of age , rychely arraiede , CMBRUT3-M3,81.2465

and curteisly saluede +te kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,81.2466

and saide +tat +tai comen fro Rome , sent messagers fram +te Emperour ,
CMBRUT3-M3,81.2467

and tok to him a lettre +tat +tus miche was to vnderstounde :
CMBRUT3-M3,81.2468

" Gretely vs mervailes , Arthure , +tat +tow art on so hardy , wi+t eyen
in +ti heuede , to maken oppen werr and contak a+geyns vs of Rome , +tat
owen al +te worlde to deme ; CMBRUT3-M3,81.2469

for +tow haste neuer +gitte bifore +tis tyme prouede ne assaiede +te
streng+t of +te Romayns , CMBRUT3-M3,81.2470

and +terfor , +tow it shalt in litil tyme . CMBRUT3-M3,81.2471

For Iulius Cessr conquerede al +te lande of Britaigne ,
CMBRUT3-M3,81.2472

and tok +terof truage , CMBRUT3-M3,81.2473

and oure folc longe tyme haue it hade ; CMBRUT3-M3,81.2474

and now , +trou+g +ti pryde , +tow hit witholdes ; wherfore we commande
+te +tat +tow +gelde a+geyne . CMBRUT3-M3,81.2475

and +gitte haste +tow more folye done , +tat +tow hast slayn Froll ,
+tat was oure baron of Fraunce , al wi+t wrong ; CMBRUT3-M3,81.2476

and +terfore alle +te communes of Rome warnen and commanden +te , oppon
lif and Lyme , +tat +tow in haste bene at <P_82> Rome , amendes to make
of +te misdede+g that +tow haste done ; CMBRUT3-M3,82.2477

and if hit so be +tat +tow come nou+gt , we shul passe +te hull of Ioye
wi+t streng+t , CMBRUT3-M3,82.2478

and we shul +te seke wher-euer +tow may ben founde , CMBRUT3-M3,82.2479

and +tow shalt nou+gt haue a foote of lande of +tyn owen +tat we ne shal
destroy ; CMBRUT3-M3,82.2480

and aftirward wi+t +ti body we shal done oure wille . "
CMBRUT3-M3,82.2481

When +tis lettre was rade , & alle men hit herde , +tai were annoyede ,
alle +tat were at +te solempnite ; CMBRUT3-M3,82.2482

and +te Britons wolde haue slayne +te messagers , CMBRUT3-M3,82.2483

but Arthure wolde nou+gt soffre hit , CMBRUT3-M3,82.2484

and saide +tat +te messagers shulde haue none harme , and mow by resoun
none deserue ; CMBRUT3-M3,82.2485

but he commanded hem to bene wor+tely seruede . CMBRUT3-M3,82.2486

and after mete he toke conseil of kyngus , Erles and Barons , what
ansuere me my+gt +geue to +te messagers ; CMBRUT3-M3,82.2487

and +tai conseilede at ones +tat he shulde assemble a grete power of
alle +te landes of +te whiche he hade lordeshipe , & manliche avenge him
oppon +te Emperour , of +te despite +tat he hade sent to him soche a
lettre ; CMBRUT3-M3,82.2488

and +tai suoren bi God and by his names +tat +tai wolde him pursue &
brenne in-alsemiche as +tai my+gt , CMBRUT3-M3,82.2489

& saide +tat +tai wolde neuer faile Kyng Arture , and ra+tere to bene
dede : CMBRUT3-M3,82.2490

and +tai lete writen a lettre to sende to +te Emperour by +te same
messagers in +tis maner : CMBRUT3-M3,82.2491

<heading>

Of +te bolde ansuere +tat Kyng Arthure sent to +te Emperour of Rome & ;
to +te Romayns . CMBRUT3-M3,82.2493

Capitulo iiij primo . CMBRUT3-M3,82.2494

<$$heading>

" $UVnderstondes amonges +gow of Rome , +tat I am Kyng Arthure of
Britaigne , and frely hit holde , and shal holde ; CMBRUT3-M3,82.2496

and at Rome hastely y shal be , nou+gt to +geue +gow truage , but for@
@to axen truage ; CMBRUT3-M3,82.2497

ffor Constantyne , +tat was Elynus sone , +tat was Emperour of Rome and
of al +te honour +tat +tereto bilongede ; CMBRUT3-M3,82.2498

ffor Maxinian conquerede al Fraunce and Almaigne , CMBRUT3-M3,82.2499

& mount Ioye passede , CMBRUT3-M3,82.2500

& conquerede al Lumbardye ; CMBRUT3-M3,82.2501

and +tise ij were myn ancestres ; CMBRUT3-M3,82.2502

and +tat +tai hade and helde , I shulde haue , +trou+g Godes wille . "
CMBRUT3-M3,82.2503

<P_83>

<heading>

Of +te reuerence +tat Kyng Authure dede to +te Emperourre+g messagers of
Rome . CMBRUT3-M3,83.2506

Capitulo iiij Secundo . CMBRUT3-M3,83.2507

<$$heading>

WHen +tis lettre was made and enselede , Kyng Arthure to +te messagers
+gaf grete +giftes ; CMBRUT3-M3,83.2509

and after +tat , +te messagers toke here leue , CMBRUT3-M3,83.2510

& went +tens to +te court of Rome a+geyne , CMBRUT3-M3,83.2511

and tolde +te Emperour how wor+tely +tei were vnderfonge , & whiche real
company he <em> K. Arthur <$$em> hade him for@ @to serue , & how he was
more really seruede +tan +te Emperour , or eny kyng leuyng in +te worlde
. CMBRUT3-M3,83.2512

And when +te Emperour hade seyne +te lettre of Arthure , & herde what
was +terin , and saw +tat Arthure wolde nou+gt bene rewelede by him , he
lete assemble & ordeyne an huge hoste for@ @to destroie Kyng Arthure if
he my+gt . CMBRUT3-M3,83.2513

and Kyng Arthure , as tochyng his partye , ordeynede his power of
kny+gtes of +te rounde table . CMBRUT3-M3,83.2514

<heading>

Of +te kynges & lordes +tat comen to helpe Kyng Arthure a+geyne+g +te
Emperour of Rome . CMBRUT3-M3,83.2516

Capitulo Octogesimo Tercio . CMBRUT3-M3,83.2517

<$$heading>

THe kynges of Scotland , & of Irland & of Gutland , of Denmarc and of
Almaigne , eueryche of ham hade x_M=l= of men . CMBRUT3-M3,83.2519

Thei of Normandye , Gascoigne & Spaigne & Flaundres & Pehito , & of
Boloigne , hade iiij_M=l= . CMBRUT3-M3,83.2520

Geryn of Chartres hade x_M=l= ; CMBRUT3-M3,83.2521

Hoel of Britaigne hade xij_M=l= , CMBRUT3-M3,83.2522

and him-self $Arthur hade of his owen Londe xij_M=l= , & of Arblasters
and of Archires , & of o+tere folc on foote , +tat noman cou+te ham
nombre . CMBRUT3-M3,83.2523

and when +tai weren al redy for@ @to wende , Kyng Arthur , his lande &
Gunore his wif , he bitoke to one of his Nevewes +tat was a wise kny+gt
, & an herdy , +tat me callede Mordrede ; CMBRUT3-M3,83.2524

but he was nou+gt al trewe , as +ge shul here afterwarde .
CMBRUT3-M3,83.2525

Kyng Arthure toke al his reame to +tis Mordrede , saue oneliche +te
crone . CMBRUT3-M3,83.2526

And after +tat , kyng Arthure tok his host CMBRUT3-M3,83.2527

and went to Southampton , +tere +tat +te shippes were brou+gt .
CMBRUT3-M3,83.2528

and +te folc assemblede , CMBRUT3-M3,83.2529

and +tai deden ham to +te <P_84> see , CMBRUT3-M3,84.2530

and hade gode wynde & weder at wille . CMBRUT3-M3,84.2531

and as sone as +tai my+gten , +tai arryuede at Berflete ,
CMBRUT3-M3,84.2532

& wenten oute of here shippis , CMBRUT3-M3,84.2533

and spraden al +te contreye . CMBRUT3-M3,84.2534

<heading>

How Kyng Arthure fau+gt wi+t a Geaunt in Spaigne , +tat me callede
Denab+g , +tat quellede Elyne , +tat was Kyng Hoele+g Cosyne , of litel
Britaigne . CMBRUT3-M3,84.2536

Capitulo =xx=iiij iiij=to= . CMBRUT3-M3,84.2537

<$$heading>

KYng Arthure hade duellede in +te contre but a litil while , +tat men ne
tolde him +tat +ter was comen a grete Geaunt into Spayne , and hade
rauesshede faire Elyne , +tat was cosyn to Hoel of Britaigne , & hade
brou+gt here vppon an hull +tat is clepede +te Mount of seynt Barnard ;
CMBRUT3-M3,84.2539

& +tere was noman in +tat contre so bolde , ne so hardy , +tat derst
wi+t him to fei+gt , ne come ney+g +te place +tere +te Geaunt duellede ;
CMBRUT3-M3,84.2540

and men callede him Dynab+g , +tat miche sorwe dede in +te contre .
CMBRUT3-M3,84.2541

When Kyng Arthure herde +tis tydynges , he callede Kay & Bedewer ,
CMBRUT3-M3,84.2542

& commaundede ham +tat +tai shulde gon pryuely , and aspie Where +te
Geaunt my+gt bene founde . CMBRUT3-M3,84.2543

and +tai come to +te Ryuage +tere +tat men shulde gon to +te mount ,
+tat was al enclosede about wi+t water , and +git is and euer shal be ;
CMBRUT3-M3,84.2544

and +tai saw a brynnyng fire oppon +te Hull ; CMBRUT3-M3,84.2545

and +tere was also ano+ter hull ney+g , +tat +tere was oppon ano+tere
fire brynnyng . CMBRUT3-M3,84.2546

Kay and Bedewer comen to +te nexte hull , CMBRUT3-M3,84.2547

and founden a widowe openheuede , sittyng bisides a tounbe , sore wepyng
, CMBRUT3-M3,84.2548

& grete sorwe made ; CMBRUT3-M3,84.2549

and ofte she saide " Elyn ! Elyn ! " CMBRUT3-M3,84.2550

and Kay & Bedwere axede what her ailede , & wherfore she made so miche
sorwe , & who lay in +tat tombe . CMBRUT3-M3,84.2551

" O , " quod she , " what sorwe and what mysauenture , faire lordes ,
make +ge here for CMBRUT3-M3,84.2552

if +te Geant may +gow here fynde , +ge wor+t dede anone . "
CMBRUT3-M3,84.2553

" ben stille , gode wif , " quod +tai , " CMBRUT3-M3,84.2554

+terof dismal +te nou+gt , CMBRUT3-M3,84.2555

but tel vs +te so+te whi +tow makes so myche sorwe & wepyng . "
CMBRUT3-M3,84.2556

" Sires , " quod she , " for a damiselle +tat I norisshede wi+t my brest
, +tat me callede <P_85> Elyne , -- +tat was nece to Hoel , Kyng of
litel Britaigne , CMBRUT3-M3,85.2557

and here li+t +te bodye in +tis tombe , +tat to me was bitaken to
norisshe . CMBRUT3-M3,85.2558

so +tere come a deuel , a Geaunt , CMBRUT3-M3,85.2559

& rauasshede here , & me Also , CMBRUT3-M3,85.2560

& lade vs bo+te away ; CMBRUT3-M3,85.2561

and he wolde haue forleyn +tis maide +tat was so +gonge & tendre of age
, CMBRUT3-M3,85.2562

but she my+gt hit nou+gt soffren , so grete and so huge +te Geant is .
CMBRUT3-M3,85.2563

and if he now come as he was wont to done , certes he wille +gow quelle
, bo+te ij ; CMBRUT3-M3,85.2564

and +terfore faste wende +ge hens . " CMBRUT3-M3,85.2565

" and wherfore , " saide +tai , " go +ge nou+gt hens ? "
CMBRUT3-M3,85.2566

" Certes , Sires , " quod she , " When +tat Elyne was dede , +te Geaunt
made me to abide , to done and haunt his wille , CMBRUT3-M3,85.2567

and me most nedes it soffren . CMBRUT3-M3,85.2568

and God hit wote , I do hit nou+gt wi+t my gode wille ,
CMBRUT3-M3,85.2569

for leuer me were to bene dede +tan wi+t him to dele , so miche payne I
haue when he me forlei+g . " CMBRUT3-M3,85.2570

When Kay and Bedwere hade herde al +tat +tis woman hade tolde , +ta
turnede a+geyne , CMBRUT3-M3,85.2571

and comen to Kyng Arthure , CMBRUT3-M3,85.2572

& tolde him al +tat +tai hade seyne & harde . CMBRUT3-M3,85.2573

Arthure anone toke ham bo+te with him , CMBRUT3-M3,85.2574

and went priuely by ny+gt , +tat none of his hoste it wiste ,
CMBRUT3-M3,85.2575

and come on +te morne to +te Ghaunt , CMBRUT3-M3,85.2576

and fau+gt wi+t him strongely , CMBRUT3-M3,85.2577

and at +te laste him slou+g . CMBRUT3-M3,85.2578

and Arthure bede Bedwere smyte of hes heuede , and bryng it to +te hoste
to shewe ham for a wonder , CMBRUT3-M3,85.2579

for it was so grete & so huge . CMBRUT3-M3,85.2580

When +tai comen a+geyne to +te hoste , +tai tolde wherfore +tai hade
bene out , CMBRUT3-M3,85.2581

and shewede to ham +te heuede ; CMBRUT3-M3,85.2582

& euery man was glade & ioyful of +te wor+ti dede +tat Kyng Arthure hade
done , her lorde . CMBRUT3-M3,85.2583

And Hoel was ful sorweful for his nece +tat was so loste ;
CMBRUT3-M3,85.2584

and after , when he hade space , he lete make a faire chapel of oure
Lady ouer Elyne+g Tumbe . CMBRUT3-M3,85.2585

<heading>

How Kyng Arthure +gaf bataile to +te Emperour , in +te whiche bataile
+te Emperoure was slayn . CMBRUT3-M3,85.2587

Capitulo Octogesimo v=to= . CMBRUT3-M3,85.2588

<$$heading>

ARthure and his peple hade tydynges +tat +te Emperour hade assemblede
grete power , as wel of Sarasynes and of paynemys as of Cristen men ,
Wherof +te noumbre was =xx=iiij_M=l= of horsemen and of fote men .
CMBRUT3-M3,85.2590

Arthure and his peple ordeynede <P_86> ham fast for+t in here Way
towarde +te Emperour , CMBRUT3-M3,86.2591

and passede Normandy & Fraunce vnto Burgoyne , CMBRUT3-M3,86.2592

and wolde euen haue gone to +te host , CMBRUT3-M3,86.2593

for men tolde him +tat +te Emperoure+g host was comen to Lucye .
CMBRUT3-M3,86.2594

The Emperour and his host , in +te byginning of August , remevede fram
Rome , CMBRUT3-M3,86.2595

and come fourth ry+gt +te way toward +te host . CMBRUT3-M3,86.2596

tho comen Kyng Arthures aspie+g , CMBRUT3-M3,86.2597

and saide , if +tat Arthure wolde , he shulde fynde +tere faste bisides
, +te Emperour ; CMBRUT3-M3,86.2598

but +tai saiden +tat +te Emperoure hade so grete power wi+t him of
kynges of +te lande , & of Paynemys yfere , & also cristen peple , +tat
it were but grete folie to Kyng Arthure for@ @to mete wi+t him ,
CMBRUT3-M3,86.2599

for +te espies tolde +tat +te Emperour hade v men or vj a+geynes one of
his . CMBRUT3-M3,86.2600

Kyng Arthure was bolde and hardy , CMBRUT3-M3,86.2601

and for no+ting him dismaiede , CMBRUT3-M3,86.2602

& saide : " go we for+t in Goddes name a+geynes +te Romayns , +tat wi+t
ham lede+t Sarasines & Paynemes +tat no maner truste +tai hauen to God ,
but oneliche oppon here streng+t ! CMBRUT3-M3,86.2603

Go we now , CMBRUT3-M3,86.2604

and seche ham sharpely in +te name of almy+gty God , CMBRUT3-M3,86.2605

and slee we +te paynemys and Cristen men +tat bene enemys wi+t ham for@
@to destroe Cristen men ; CMBRUT3-M3,86.2606

and God shal vs helpe , CMBRUT3-M3,86.2607

for we haue+t the ry+gt , CMBRUT3-M3,86.2608

& +terfore haue we gode trust in God ; CMBRUT3-M3,86.2609

& done we so +tat +te enemys +tat bene to Cristendome & to Gode mow bene
dede & destroiede , & +tat men mow recorde +te wor+tinesse of kny+gthode
! " CMBRUT3-M3,86.2610

When Kyng Arthure hade +tus saide , +tai criden al wi+t an hye voice , "
God , fader almi+gty , Worsheppede be +tine name Wi+touten ende ,
CMBRUT3-M3,86.2611

Amen ! CMBRUT3-M3,86.2612

and grant vs grace wel to done , and to destrie oure enemys +tat be+t
a+geynes Cristendome ! CMBRUT3-M3,86.2613

In +te name of +te fader & of +te sone and of +te holy gost , Amen !
CMBRUT3-M3,86.2614

And God +geue ham neuer grace ne worshipp in the worlde , ne mercy of
him to haue , +tat +tis day shal feynten wel for@ @to smyte , and egrely
! " CMBRUT3-M3,86.2615

and so +tai riden softly , CMBRUT3-M3,86.2616

and ordeynede her wenges wel and wisely . CMBRUT3-M3,86.2617

The Emperoure herde telle +tat Kyng Arthure & his folc were redy
arraiede for@ @to fei+gt wi+t him ; CMBRUT3-M3,86.2618

and +tider +tai comen wher he ordeynede his wenges in +te best manere
+tat he my+gt , and more <P_87> trust oppon his streng+t +tan in God
almy+gty . CMBRUT3-M3,87.2619

and +tat was seyn afterward , CMBRUT3-M3,87.2620

ffor when +to ij hostes metten , the Emperour loste soche foure of his
folc as dede Kyng Arthur ; CMBRUT3-M3,87.2621

and so meny were slayne , what
{COM:literal_translation_of_french_coordinating_"que"} in o side and in
+tat o+tere , +tat hit was grete pite to wete and to seen .
CMBRUT3-M3,87.2622

In +tis bataile were slayn +trou+g Kyng Arthure , v kyng+g of paynemys ,
& of o+tere , Wonder miche peple . CMBRUT3-M3,87.2623

And Kyng Arthures men fou+gten so wel , +tat +te Romaines and paynemys
hade no more power ne streng+t to wi+tstande hem , +tan xx shepe
a+geynes v. wolfes . CMBRUT3-M3,87.2624

And so hit bifelle +tat in +tis bataile in a shoure +tat was wonder
herde and longe duryng , in +tat o side and in +tat o+tere , +te
Emperour amonges ham +tere was slayn ; CMBRUT3-M3,87.2625

but noman wist forso+t who him slou+g . CMBRUT3-M3,87.2626

<heading>

How Kyng Arthure lete entere his kny+gtes +tat he hade Loste in bataile
; and how he sent +te Emperourre+g body to Rome , +tat +tere was slayne
in bataile . CMBRUT3-M3,87.2628

Capitulo Octogesimo vj=to= . CMBRUT3-M3,87.2629

<$$heading>

When +te Romayns wist +tat +te Emperour was dede , +tai for-soke +te
felde , and +te paynemys also ; CMBRUT3-M3,87.2631

and Kyng Arthure after ham chasede til it was ny+gt , CMBRUT3-M3,87.2632

and so meny of ham quellede +tat hit was wonder to telle ;
CMBRUT3-M3,87.2633

and +to turnede Kyng Arthure a+geyne when it was ny+gt ,
CMBRUT3-M3,87.2634

and +tankede almy+gty God of his Vittorie . CMBRUT3-M3,87.2635

And on +te morwe he lete loke & seke al +te felde for his kny+gtes +tat
he hade +tere lost , +tat is to seyne , Borell , erl of Maans ; Bed-were
& Kay , and Lygers , Erl of Boloigne ; Vrtegi , erl of Baat , Aloth ,
erl of Wynchestre ; Cursale , erl of Chestre ; and Holdeyn , erl of
Flaundres : CMBRUT3-M3,87.2636

+tise were +te grete Lordes +tat Kyng Arthure Loste in +tat bataile
amonges o+tere wor+ti kny+gtes ; CMBRUT3-M3,87.2637

and somme he lete entere in Abbayes by +te contre , CMBRUT3-M3,87.2638

and some he lete bene borne into here owen contre ; CMBRUT3-M3,87.2639

and +te Emperourres body he lete take and put oppon a bere ,
CMBRUT3-M3,87.2640

& sent hit to Rome , CMBRUT3-M3,87.2641

and sent to say to +te Romaynes +tat ' as for Britaigne & Fraunce whiche
+tat he helde , o+tere truage he wolde none paie ; CMBRUT3-M3,87.2642

and if +tai axend him eny o+tere , ri+gt suche he wolde ham paye . '
CMBRUT3-M3,87.2643

Kyng Arthur lete <P_88> bere Kay to Kenen , his owen castel ,
CMBRUT3-M3,88.2644

and +tere he was enterede ; CMBRUT3-M3,88.2645

and Ligers was born to Boloyne , +tere +tat he was lorde ;
CMBRUT3-M3,88.2646

and Holdeyn was borne to Flaundres , CMBRUT3-M3,88.2647

& +tere he was enterede ; CMBRUT3-M3,88.2648

and alle the o+tere he lete entier wi+t michel honour in Abbayes & in
house+g of Religioun in +te contrey +tere +tat +tai were dede .
CMBRUT3-M3,88.2649

And Arthure him-self soiournede +te same +gere in Burgoigne wi+t his
host , CMBRUT3-M3,88.2650

and +tou+gt +tat same +gere follewyng , passe +te mount Ioye , & haue
gone to Rome , for@ @to haue take +te citee , and haue put +te Romayns
in subieccion ; CMBRUT3-M3,88.2651

but +te wickede tiraunt Mordrede him lettede , as after +ge shul here .
CMBRUT3-M3,88.2652

<heading>

How Mordrede +te traitour to whome Kyng Arthure tok his lande to kepe ,
and his castelles , and {COM:translation_of_french_adverbial_"et"?}
helde it a+geynes him . CMBRUT3-M3,88.2654

Capitulo Octogesimo Septimo . CMBRUT3-M3,88.2655

<$$heading>

WHen Kyng Arthure hade taken to Mordrede his reaume to kepe , and was
gone a+geynes +te Emperoure of Rome , & was passede +te see , Mordrede
anone toke homages and feautes of al ham +tat were in +tis lande ,
CMBRUT3-M3,88.2657

and wolde haue hade +te lande to his owen vse , CMBRUT3-M3,88.2658

and toke castelles about , CMBRUT3-M3,88.2659

and lete ham arraie ; CMBRUT3-M3,88.2660

and after his falsenease he dede ano+tere grete wrong ,
CMBRUT3-M3,88.2661

ffor , a+geynes +te law of Cristiente , he toke his owen Emes wif , as a
traitour shulde , CMBRUT3-M3,88.2662

and ordeynede him a grete hoste a+geynes Arthures comyng , to halde the
lande a+geyns him wi+t streng+t for euermore , and to slee Kyng Arthure
yf he my+gt ; CMBRUT3-M3,88.2663

and lete sende by +te Cee and lande , CMBRUT3-M3,88.2664

and lete assemble Paynymes and cristen peple ; CMBRUT3-M3,88.2665

and he sent to Saxones and to Danoys for@ @to help him .
CMBRUT3-M3,88.2666

and also Mordrede sende to Chel-drik , to done men come to him out of
Saxoyne , +tat was a wor+ti Duc , CMBRUT3-M3,88.2667

and bihi+gt him , if +tat he brou+gt wi+t him peple , he wolde graunt
him al +te lande fram bi+gonde Humber vnto Scotland , and al +te lande
+tat Engist hade of Vortigers +gifte , When +tat he hade spousede his
dou+gter . CMBRUT3-M3,88.2668

And Cheldrik come wi+t grete streng+t and power of Peple :
CMBRUT3-M3,88.2669

and Mordrede him assemblede also in his half , +tat +tai hade xl_M=l= of
stronge kny+gtes when +tat +tai hade nede . CMBRUT3-M3,88.2670

<P_89>

<heading>

How Arthure enchacede Mordrede +te traitour , and how he was slayne ,
and Kyng Arthure also wondede to +te dethe . CMBRUT3-M3,89.2673

Capitulo Octogesimo Octauo . CMBRUT3-M3,89.2674

<$$heading>

WHen +tis tydynges come to Kyng Arthure +tere +tat he was in Burgoyne ,
he was ful sore annoiede , CMBRUT3-M3,89.2676

and toke al Fraunce to Hoel for@ @to kepe , wi+t haluendele his men ,
CMBRUT3-M3,89.2677

& praiede him +tat he wolde hit kepe til +tat he comen a+geyne ,
CMBRUT3-M3,89.2678

ffor him-self wolde wende into Britaigne and avenge him oppon Mordrede
+tat was his traitoure ; CMBRUT3-M3,89.2679

and four+t went his waye , CMBRUT3-M3,89.2680

and come to Swit-sand , CMBRUT3-M3,89.2681

& made his men to gone into shippe , CMBRUT3-M3,89.2682

& wolde haue arryuede at Sandewiche , CMBRUT3-M3,89.2683

and brou+gt wi+t him an grete hoste of Fraunce also wi+t his owen lande
. CMBRUT3-M3,89.2684

but er +tat he myght come to lande wi+t his peple +tat were comen out of
+te shippis , Mordrede was comen wi+t all his power , CMBRUT3-M3,89.2685

and +gaf a stronge bataile , so +tat Kyng Arthure loste meny a man er
+tat he mi+gt comen to land ; CMBRUT3-M3,89.2686

ffor +tere was Gaweyn his Nevewe slayne , and Anguissel +tat helde
Scotland , and meny o+tere , wherof Kyng Arthure was ful sory .
CMBRUT3-M3,89.2687

But after +tat +tai were comen to lande , Mordrede myght nougt a+geynes
him endure , CMBRUT3-M3,89.2688

but anone was descomfitede , CMBRUT3-M3,89.2689

and flede +tens +tat same ny+gt Wi+t his men , CMBRUT3-M3,89.2690

and oppon +te morwe come to London ; CMBRUT3-M3,89.2691

but +to of the citee wolde nou+gt soffre ham come in ;
CMBRUT3-M3,89.2692

and fro +tens he fledde to Wynchestre , CMBRUT3-M3,89.2693

and +tere helde him wi+t his peple +tat with him come .
CMBRUT3-M3,89.2694

Kyng Arthure lete take +te body of Gaweyn his cosyn , & +te body of
Anguissel , CMBRUT3-M3,89.2695

and lete ham bene borne into Scotland into her owen contre ,
CMBRUT3-M3,89.2696

and +tere +tai were enterede . CMBRUT3-M3,89.2697

And anone after +tat , Kyng Arthur toke his wey to destroie Mordrede ;
CMBRUT3-M3,89.2698

and he fledde fro +tens into Cornewaile . CMBRUT3-M3,89.2699

The Quene Gunnore , +tat was Kyng Arthures wif , +tat
{literal_translation_french_coordinating_"que"?} +to soiournede at +Gork
CMBRUT3-M3,89.2700

and herde +tat Mordrede was fledde +tens +tat he was , and mi+gt nou+gt
endure a+geyues Kyng Arthure , CMBRUT3-M3,89.2701

she was sore adrade , CMBRUT3-M3,89.2702

and hade grete doute , CMBRUT3-M3,89.2703

and wist nou+gt what was best al for@ @to done , CMBRUT3-M3,89.2704

for she wiste wel here lorde Kyng Arthure wolde nou+gt of her haue
<P_90> mercy , for +te grete shame +tat she to him hade done ;
CMBRUT3-M3,90.2705

and toke her wai priuely wi+t iiij men and wi+t no mo ,
CMBRUT3-M3,90.2706

& come to Kerlioun , CMBRUT3-M3,90.2707

and +tere she duellede al her lifes tyme , +tat neuer was seyn amonges
folc , her lif duryng . CMBRUT3-M3,90.2708

Arthure wist +tat Mordrede was fledde into Cornewail .
CMBRUT3-M3,90.2709

he lete sende after his men into Scotland , & into Northumberland vnto
Humber CMBRUT3-M3,90.2710

and lete assemble folc wi+tout noumbre , CMBRUT3-M3,90.2711

& come fro +tens into Cornewaile to seche and pursue after Mordrede .
CMBRUT3-M3,90.2712

and Mordrede hade assemblede al +te folc of Cornwayle ,
CMBRUT3-M3,90.2713

and hade peple wi+toute nombre , CMBRUT3-M3,90.2714

& wist +tat Arthure Was comyng . CMBRUT3-M3,90.2715

he hade leuer to Dye and tak his chaunce , +tan lenger flee ,
CMBRUT3-M3,90.2716

and abode CMBRUT3-M3,90.2717

and +gaf an harde bataile to Kyng Arthur & to his peple , so +tat so
miche peple was slayn , -- What
{COM:literal_translation_of_french_coordinating_"que"} in +tat one halfe
and in +tat o+ter , -- +tat noman wiste who +tat hade +te better partie
. CMBRUT3-M3,90.2718

But so hit bifelle at the laste , +tat Mordrede was slayn , and al his
folc , and al +te gode chiualry +tat Kyng Arthure hade gaderede and
norisshede of diuerse+g landes ; CMBRUT3-M3,90.2719

and also +te noble Knyghtes of +te rounde table , +tat so miche were
preisede +trou+g al +te worlde , weren +tere slayn ; CMBRUT3-M3,90.2720

and Arthure him-self was wondede to +te deth . CMBRUT3-M3,90.2721

but he lete him bene born in a litel to Auyoun , to bene helede of his
wondes ; CMBRUT3-M3,90.2722

and +gitte +te Britons supposen +tat he Leue+t in a-no+tere lande , and
+tat he shal come +git and conquere al Britaigne ; CMBRUT3-M3,90.2723

but certes +tis is +te prophecie of Merlyn : CMBRUT3-M3,90.2724

he saide +tat his de+t shulde bene dotous ; CMBRUT3-M3,90.2725

and he saide sothe , CMBRUT3-M3,90.2726

for men +terof +gitte hauen doute , and shal for euermore , as me sai+t
, CMBRUT3-M3,90.2727

for men weten nou+gt whe+ter +tat he leue+t or is dede .
CMBRUT3-M3,90.2728

Arthure was born to Auyoun +te xxij +gere of his regne After +te
Incarnacioun of oure lorde Ihesu Crist v._C_and_xlvj=ti= +gere .
CMBRUT3-M3,90.2729

<heading>

How Kyng Arthure delyuerede +te reame to Constantyn , +te sone of Cador
, his nevew . CMBRUT3-M3,90.2731

Capitulo Octogesimo Nono . CMBRUT3-M3,90.2732

<$$heading>

WHenne Kyng Arthure wist +tat he mi+gt no longer regne , he lete come
bifore him Constantyne , +tat was Cadore+g sone , erl of Cornwail , his
cosyn , CMBRUT3-M3,90.2734

and to him bitoke al his reaume , CMBRUT3-M3,90.2735

and to <P_91> him saide , CMBRUT3-M3,91.2736

& bade him +terof to bene Kyng til +tat he come a+geyne , for-asmiche as
he hade none heire of his body bigeten : CMBRUT3-M3,91.2737

and grete harme was hit +tat soche a noble Kyng , and so doughty , hade
none childe of his body bigeten ; CMBRUT3-M3,91.2738

but al +ting +tat God wil haue done , moste bene done , Whos name ben
blessede wi+touten ende ! CMBRUT3-M3,91.2739

Amen . CMBRUT3-M3,91.2740

<heading>

How Kyng Constantyne was werrede of Mordredus ij sones .
CMBRUT3-M3,91.2742

Capitulo Nonogesimo . CMBRUT3-M3,91.2743

<$$heading>

THis Constance was a noble knyght and a wor+ti of body ;
CMBRUT3-M3,91.2745

and +to ij sones +tat Mordrede hade bigeten , hade grete $enuy to
Constantyne , +tat +to was cronede kyng ; and so +tat +tai bigonne to
meve werr a+geynes him , CMBRUT3-M3,91.2746

and assemblede a grete hoste of ham +tat were to-fore wi+t Mordrede ,
and hade bene dryuen away . CMBRUT3-M3,91.2747

+tai deden miche sorwe +trou+g al +tat lande : CMBRUT3-M3,91.2748

+tat o bro+ter ordeynede him to London for@ @to take +te citee , and
+tat o+tere to Wynchestre ; CMBRUT3-M3,91.2749

but Constantin come to London CMBRUT3-M3,91.2750

and slough him +tat was +tere ; CMBRUT3-M3,91.2751

and after , he went to Wynchestre , CMBRUT3-M3,91.2752

and slough him +tat +tere was also , so +tat bo+te his enemys were dede
. CMBRUT3-M3,91.2753

and when Constantyn had regnede wor+tely iiij +ger , he deide ,
CMBRUT3-M3,91.2754

& li+t at London . CMBRUT3-M3,91.2755

<heading>

Of +te Kynges Adelbright and of Edelf . CMBRUT3-M3,91.2757

Capitulo Nono-gesimo primo . CMBRUT3-M3,91.2758

<$$heading>

After Kyng Constantynus deth +tere were ij kynges in Britaigne :
CMBRUT3-M3,91.2760

+tat on me callede Adelbright , +tat was a Danoys , +tat helde +te
contre of Northfolc and Southfolc ; CMBRUT3-M3,91.2761

+tat o+tere hi+gt Edelf , CMBRUT3-M3,91.2762

and was a Britoun , +tat helde Nichole , Lyndeseye , and al +te lande
vnto Humber . CMBRUT3-M3,91.2763

+tise ij kynges faste werrede to-gederes , CMBRUT3-M3,91.2764

but afterwarde +tai were accorded , CMBRUT3-M3,91.2765

and louede to-geder as +tai haden bene borne of o body .
CMBRUT3-M3,91.2766

The Kyng Edelf hade a sustre +tat me callede Orewenne ,
CMBRUT3-M3,91.2767

and he +gaf here +trou+g grete frendeship to Kyng Adelbright to wif ,
CMBRUT3-M3,91.2768

and he bigate on here a doughter +tat me callede Argentill .
CMBRUT3-M3,91.2769

and in +te +tridde +gere after , him come vppon a stronge <P_92>
sikenesse , +tat nedes he moste dye ; CMBRUT3-M3,92.2770

and he sent to Kyng Edelf his brother-in-lawe , that he shulde come and
speke with him ; CMBRUT3-M3,92.2771

& he come to him with gode wille . CMBRUT3-M3,92.2772

Tho praiede he the $king , CMBRUT3-M3,92.2773

and coniurede also in the name of God , +tat after when he were dede ,
he shulde tak Argentill his dou+gter , & +te lande , & +tat he kepte
here wel , and norisshede in his Chaumbre , CMBRUT3-M3,92.2774

and when she were of age he shulde done here bene marede to +te
strongest and wor+tieste man +tat he my+gt fynde , CMBRUT3-M3,92.2775

and +tan he shulde +gelde vp her lande a+geyne . CMBRUT3-M3,92.2776

Edelf hit grauntede , CMBRUT3-M3,92.2777

and by oth hit confermede at his power . CMBRUT3-M3,92.2778

And when Adelbright was dede and enterede , Edelfe toke +te damisel
Argentil , CMBRUT3-M3,92.2779

and norisshede her in his chaumbre , CMBRUT3-M3,92.2780

and she bicome +te faireste creature +tat eny man my+gt fynde .
CMBRUT3-M3,92.2781

<heading>

How +te Kyng Edelf mariede +te damisel Argentil to a knaue of his
Kechyne . CMBRUT3-M3,92.2783

Capitulo =xxx=iiij & xij=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,92.2784

<$$heading>

THis Kyng Edelf , +tat was Vncle to the Damisel Argentil , bi+tou+gt how
+tat he myght falseliche haue +te lande fram his nece for euermore ;
CMBRUT3-M3,92.2786

& falsely , a+geynes his oth , +tou+gt to desceyu +te damisell ,
CMBRUT3-M3,92.2787

and mariede here to a knaf of his kechyne +tat me callede Curan ;
CMBRUT3-M3,92.2788

and he bicome +te wor+tiest man & strongest of body +tat eny man wiste
in eny lande +tat +to leuede ; CMBRUT3-M3,92.2789

and to him he +tou+gt here shendefully haue mariede for@ @to haue hade
hir lande afterward ; CMBRUT3-M3,92.2790

but he was clene desceyuede . CMBRUT3-M3,92.2791

ffor +tis Curan was Hauelockes sone , +tat was Kyng of Kirkelane in
Denmark ; CMBRUT3-M3,92.2792

and +tis Curan con-querede his wifes landes , CMBRUT3-M3,92.2793

and slough Kyng Edelf +tat was his wifes Vncle , CMBRUT3-M3,92.2794

& hade al here lande as in ano+ter stede hit telle+t more oppenly ;
CMBRUT3-M3,92.2795

and he ne regnede but iij +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,92.2796

for Saxoynes and Danoys him quellede ; CMBRUT3-M3,92.2797

and +tat was grete harme to al Britaigne ; CMBRUT3-M3,92.2798

and Britons bere him to Stonehynge , CMBRUT3-M3,92.2799

and +tere +tai him enterede wi+t michel honoure and solempnite .
CMBRUT3-M3,92.2800

<heading>

Of Kyng Conan . CMBRUT3-M3,92.2802

Capitulo Nonogesimo Tercio . CMBRUT3-M3,92.2803

<$$heading>

After +tis Curan , regnede Conan , +tat was his cosyn , +tat was a
wonder proude kny+gt and regnede . CMBRUT3-M3,92.2805

he cou+te haue no maner loue , CMBRUT3-M3,92.2806

but euer he was medlyng wi+t his owen peple , CMBRUT3-M3,92.2807

and toke <P_93> his Vncle wi+t werre , CMBRUT3-M3,93.2808

and helde his ij childerne . CMBRUT3-M3,93.2809

The Saxoynes werrede a+geynes him oftetymes , CMBRUT3-M3,93.2810

but he ham ouercome at +te laste ; CMBRUT3-M3,93.2811

& so he was in pees al his lifes tyme ; CMBRUT3-M3,93.2812

and he regnede xiiij +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,93.2813

and after , he deide , CMBRUT3-M3,93.2814

and li+t at London . CMBRUT3-M3,93.2815

<heading>

Of Kyng Certif ; and of Gurmonde , +tat come +trou+g paynemys into
Britaigne . CMBRUT3-M3,93.2817

Capitulo Nonogesimo Quarto . CMBRUT3-M3,93.2818

<$$heading>

After +tis Conan , regnede his cosyn Certif , +tat was bihatede of all
his peple , and no+ting bilouede . CMBRUT3-M3,93.2820

and +tis Certif loste al Britaigne +trou+g werre . CMBRUT3-M3,93.2821

And in his tyme felle +tat grete meschief in Britaigne , +tat
Cristendome was destroede , and alle +te Britons were dryuen oute , &
+te lande loste wi+touten eny recoueryng ; CMBRUT3-M3,93.2822

but afterwarde lefte +te lande to Saxoynes , as +ge shul afterwarde hure
. CMBRUT3-M3,93.2823

For in +tat tyme +tere was a paynyme +tat me callede Gurmonde , +tat was
+te Kynges sone Daufrik , of +te Paynymes folc , +tat hade +te reaume
after his fader , and was kyng , saf he biqua+t & +gaf hit to his
bro+ter , and saide +tat he wolde neuer bene kyng but if he might
conquere and gete a reaume in a straunge contrey ; CMBRUT3-M3,93.2824

for he was bolde , and ek stronge of body . CMBRUT3-M3,93.2825

& of him prophecied Merlyn CMBRUT3-M3,93.2826

and saide +tat ' he shulde bene a wolf of +te see ' ; CMBRUT3-M3,93.2827

and lete assemble paynymes wi+tout nombre , CMBRUT3-M3,93.2828

and lete apparaile shippis , CMBRUT3-M3,93.2829

and went by meny londes , CMBRUT3-M3,93.2830

and toke homages and feautes of meny . CMBRUT3-M3,93.2831

and so he went by +te see fram lande to lande , CMBRUT3-M3,93.2832

& conquerede diuerses landes , so +tat he come to Irland ,
CMBRUT3-M3,93.2833

and conquered +tat lande +tat ofte-tymes werrede vppon Brit-aigne , and
Britons vppon ham ; CMBRUT3-M3,93.2834

and often wonnen , CMBRUT3-M3,93.2835

& ofte losten , CMBRUT3-M3,93.2836

and +geuen hostages to Britons . CMBRUT3-M3,93.2837

and so +tai senten to Gurmond , +tere +tat he was in Irland , +tat he
shulde come into Britaigne , and helpe ham a+geynes +te Britons , to
helpe ham deliuere +tat lande of ham ; CMBRUT3-M3,93.2838

and +tai wolde him holde gladly for her lorde ; CMBRUT3-M3,93.2839

for he was a paynyme , CMBRUT3-M3,93.2840

and +tai were paynemes , CMBRUT3-M3,93.2841

and +te Britons were cristen : CMBRUT3-M3,93.2842

wel au+gt him +tan ham for@ @to helpe , so as <P_94> +tai weren of on
law . CMBRUT3-M3,94.2843

When Gurmond herde +tis praier he hastede him as miche as he mi+gt ,
CMBRUT3-M3,94.2844

and arryuede in Scotland , CMBRUT3-M3,94.2845

and come into Northumberlond +tere +tat +te Saxones were duellyng ;
CMBRUT3-M3,94.2846

& +tai confermede +te couenaunte+g bituene ham , +tat were made by o+tes
and by hostages , for@ @to beren him trew fay , & halde him for lorde ,
and paye to him truage by +gere . CMBRUT3-M3,94.2847

Tho bigonne +te Saxoynes & +te Aufricans to destroye , robbe and brenne
tounes , and destroye al +ting , as michel as +tai my+gt
CMBRUT3-M3,94.2848

and sparede nei+tere man , woman , ne childe , Lewede ne lernede ,
CMBRUT3-M3,94.2849

+tan alle +tai quellede , CMBRUT3-M3,94.2850

& caste adoun tounus , & castelle , & cherches , CMBRUT3-M3,94.2851

& so put +tai al +te lande to grete destruccioun . CMBRUT3-M3,94.2852

And as sone as the Britons my+gt flee , +tai fledde +tens , as wel poer
as ryche , Bisshoppis , Abbotes , Chanons , & alle o+tere , grete and
smale ; somme into litel Britaign , & some into Cornwail ; alle +to +tat
shippis mi+gt haue . CMBRUT3-M3,94.2853

<heading>

How Kyng Gurmonde drof +te Kyng Certif to Chichestre , and quellede +te
Britons , & +trou+g $queyntise gete the toune . CMBRUT3-M3,94.2855

<em> Capitulo nonagesimo quinto . <$$em> CMBRUT3-M3,94.2856

<$$heading>

SErtif +te kyng , fleye +tens into Chichestre , +tat +to was a gode cite
and a strong , CMBRUT3-M3,94.2858

and +tere helde him xx daies . CMBRUT3-M3,94.2859

and +tis Gurmonde hit bisegede ; CMBRUT3-M3,94.2860

but +te citee was so strong +tat he mi+gt nou+gt hit gete be no maner
engyne +tat he my+gt done . CMBRUT3-M3,94.2861

+to bi+tou+gt +tai oppon a grete queyntise for@ @to brenne the toune :
CMBRUT3-M3,94.2862

+tai maden engynes of glew and of nettes , CMBRUT3-M3,94.2863

and token peces of tunder & fire , CMBRUT3-M3,94.2864

and bonde to sparwe feet , CMBRUT3-M3,94.2865

& afterward lete ham flee ; CMBRUT3-M3,94.2866

and +tai fley anon ry+gt , CMBRUT3-M3,94.2867

and loggede ham in +te toune +tere +tat her nestes were , and in stackes
& in euesynges of house ; CMBRUT3-M3,94.2868

& +te fire biganne anone to tende and brenne al +te toune .
CMBRUT3-M3,94.2869

and whenne +te Britons saw +te toune brenne on euery side , +tai hiede
ham out , CMBRUT3-M3,94.2870

and fau+gt ; CMBRUT3-M3,94.2871

but anone +tai were slayn & descomfitede . CMBRUT3-M3,94.2872

and whiles +te bataile durede , +te kyng priuely hud him ,
CMBRUT3-M3,94.2873

& stale away into Walys , CMBRUT3-M3,94.2874

& men wiste neuer where he bicome ; CMBRUT3-M3,94.2875

& so was +te toun <P_95> of Chichestre taken & destroiede .
CMBRUT3-M3,95.2876

and after , went Gurmonde , CMBRUT3-M3,95.2877

& destroiede citees & tounes +tat neuer were afterward made a+geyne , as
it is seen +gitte in meny stedes . CMBRUT3-M3,95.2878

<heading>

How +tis lande was clepede Engeland for +te name of Engist ; and how
meny Kynges were mad after in +te Londe . CMBRUT3-M3,95.2880

Capitulo Nonogesimo Sexto . CMBRUT3-M3,95.2881

<$$heading>

WHen Gumronde hade wastede and destroiede al +te lande +trou+g-out , he
+gaf +te londe to +te Saxones ; CMBRUT3-M3,95.2883

and +tai toke hit wi+t gode wille , CMBRUT3-M3,95.2884

for +te Saxones longe tyme hade desirede hit , for-as-miche as +tai were
of Engistes Kynrede , +tat first hade al +te lande of Britain ;
CMBRUT3-M3,95.2885

and +to lete ham bene callede Englisshemen , for-asmiche as in his tyme
hit was callede Engistes lande , when he hade con-querede it of Vortiger
+tat hade spousede his dou+gter . CMBRUT3-M3,95.2886

but fram +te tyme +tat Brut come ferst into Engeland , +tis land was
callede Britaigne , & +te folc Britons , til +te tyme +tat +tis Gurmond
eftesones conquerede hit & +gaf it vnto Saxonus , CMBRUT3-M3,95.2887

and +tai anone ri+gt chaunged +te name , as bifore is saide .
CMBRUT3-M3,95.2888

And when +tis was done , Gur-mond passede ouer into Fraunce ,
CMBRUT3-M3,95.2889

& +tere conquered meny londes , CMBRUT3-M3,95.2890

& destroed all cristen peple +tere +tat he come . CMBRUT3-M3,95.2891

and +te Danois duellede in +tis lande , CMBRUT3-M3,95.2892

& bigonne faste hit inhabit at here owen wille ; CMBRUT3-M3,95.2893

and +tai wolde haue made newe kynges and lordes , CMBRUT3-M3,95.2894

but +tai my+gt neuer assenten to haue onelich o kyng , for@ @to bene to
him entendaunt : CMBRUT3-M3,95.2895

and +terfore +tai maden meny kynges in diuerses shires , as hit was in
Engistes tyme . CMBRUT3-M3,95.2896

The ferst kyngdome was Kent , and +tat o+tere Southsex , and +te +tridde
Westsex , and +te fer+t Estsex , and +te fifte Northumberland , and +te
sixte Estangle , +tat is to seyn Northfolc & Southfolc , and +te
seuene+t Merchenoroth , CMBRUT3-M3,95.2897

and +tat is +te Erldome of Nichole , Huntyngdon and Hereford ,
Glou-cestre , Wynchestre , Warrwyk and Darby ; CMBRUT3-M3,95.2898

and so departede +te Englisshe-men al Engeland into vij parties .
CMBRUT3-M3,95.2899

And after , hit <P_96> bifelle +tat +to kynges werrede to-gederes
ofte-tymes ; CMBRUT3-M3,96.2900

and euer he +tat was strongest binome ham +tat were feblest ;
CMBRUT3-M3,96.2901

& so hit was longe tyme +tat +tai n@ @ade no kyng cronede amonges ham ,
CMBRUT3-M3,96.2902

ne no cristen men was +to amonges ham , ne cristendome nei+tere ,
CMBRUT3-M3,96.2903

but were pay-nemys 1. +gere , til +tat seynt Gregori was pope of Rome ,
+tat hade seyne childerne of +te nacioun in +te citee of Rome , +tat
were wonder faire creatures , & hade grete wille and desire ham for@ @to
biholde , and axede of +te marchauntes whens +tai were , & of what
nacioun ; CMBRUT3-M3,96.2904

& men tolde him +tat +tai were of Engeland , CMBRUT3-M3,96.2905

& Englisshe +tai were callede ; CMBRUT3-M3,96.2906

but +tai and all +te peple of Engeland were paynemes ,
CMBRUT3-M3,96.2907

& bileuede nou+g in God . CMBRUT3-M3,96.2908

" Allas , " quod seynt Gregori , " wel mow +tai bene callede Englissh ,
CMBRUT3-M3,96.2909

for +tai haue +te visages of Angeles ; CMBRUT3-M3,96.2910

and +terfor wel au+gt ham +ten ben cristen men . " CMBRUT3-M3,96.2911

And for +tis enchesoun seynt Gregor sent seynt Austyne into Engeland ,
and xl. goode men wi+t him , +tat were of gode lif , and holy men , to
preche and teche , and to conuerte +te Englisshe peple , and ham turne
to God : CMBRUT3-M3,96.2912

and +tat was in +te vj +gere +tat seynt Gregor hade bene Pope , +tat is
to seyne , after +te Incarnacioun of oure Lorde Ihesu Crist ,
v._C._=xx=iiij_and_vij +gere , as +te cronicles telle+t .
CMBRUT3-M3,96.2913

<heading>

How Seynt Austyne baptisede & conuertede Kyng Adelbright , and ij
bisshopis +tat he callede his felawes . CMBRUT3-M3,96.2915

Capitulo =xx=iiij xvij=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,96.2916

<$$heading>

WHen Seynt Austyne come ferst into Engeland , he arryuede in +te Ile of
Tenet , CMBRUT3-M3,96.2918

and so passede fourth , CMBRUT3-M3,96.2919

& come vnto Kaunterbery , CMBRUT3-M3,96.2920

and +tere soiournede . CMBRUT3-M3,96.2921

And Kyng Adelbright of Kent , +tat was of +te lynage of Engist , faire
vnderfong seynt Austyn & his felowes wi+t michel honour ,
CMBRUT3-M3,96.2922

& ham fonde al +tat ham nedede ; CMBRUT3-M3,96.2923

& fer+termore he +gaf ham a faire place +tat now is callede +te Abbay of
seynt Austynus , in whiche place he li+t him-self shrinede .
CMBRUT3-M3,96.2924

This Kyng Adelbright was a gode man , CMBRUT3-M3,96.2925

and wi+t godewel herde seynt Austynus predicaciouns , CMBRUT3-M3,96.2926

and +gaf him leue to <P_97> preche +trou+g al his lande of Kent , to
tourne & to conuerte to him al +te peple +tat he mi+gt .
CMBRUT3-M3,97.2927

Hit bifelle so afterwarde , +trou+g Goddes grace , +tat in litel tyme
+te kyng him-self was conuertede to Gode , CMBRUT3-M3,97.2928

and all his peple of his lande was baptisede . CMBRUT3-M3,97.2929

And in the mene-while +tat +te peple turnede ham to God , seynt Austyn
come to Rochestre , CMBRUT3-M3,97.2930

and +tere prechede Goddes worde . CMBRUT3-M3,97.2931

+te paynemys +terfor him scornede , CMBRUT3-M3,97.2932

and caste on him righe tailes , so +tat al his mantel was hongede ful of
righe tailes ; CMBRUT3-M3,97.2933

and for more despite +tai caste oppon him +te guttes of ryghe & of
ffisshe ; wherfore +te gode man seynt Austyn was sore agreuede ,
CMBRUT3-M3,97.2934

and prayede to God +tat alle +te childerne +tat shulde bene borne
afterwarde in +tat citee of Rouchestre moste haue tailes .
CMBRUT3-M3,97.2935

And when +te Kyng herde and wist of +tis vengeance +tat was falle
+trou+g seynt Austynus praier , he lete make an house in +te honoure of
God , wherein wymmen shulde haue childerne at +te bruges ende , in
whiche hous wymmen +git be+t delyuere of childe . CMBRUT3-M3,97.2936

When seynt Gregory hade herde tel +tat +te Englisshe-men were turnede to
Gode , and conuertede , He sent to seynt Austyn his Pallyoun , by a
bisshop +tat me callede Paulyn , CMBRUT3-M3,97.2937

and made him primate & Erchebisshop of al Engeland , CMBRUT3-M3,97.2938

And sent him worde +tan +tat he shulde make bisshopis in +te land .
CMBRUT3-M3,97.2939

And anone as seynt Austyn hade +te Pallioun of +te dignite of +te
erchebisshop , he made ij bisshoppes of his felawes +tat come wi+t him
fram Rome : on +tat me callede Mellite , CMBRUT3-M3,97.2940

& he duellede at London , CMBRUT3-M3,97.2941

And +tat o+tere me callede Iustyn , +tat helde +te dignite of Rouchestre
. CMBRUT3-M3,97.2942

And +tis bisshop Mellyt went to preche into Essex , CMBRUT3-M3,97.2943

& baptisede +te kyng of +te contre , +tat me callede Sicwith , +tat was
Kyng Adelbright+g cosyn , his sustres sone . CMBRUT3-M3,97.2944

This Iustyne went to preche in Southsex , CMBRUT3-M3,97.2945

& turnede miche of +te peple to god ; CMBRUT3-M3,97.2946

and seynt Austyne went him-self prechyng +trou+g-oute +te lande .
CMBRUT3-M3,97.2947

<P_98>

<heading>

How seynt Austyne went into Walys , +tere +tat +te Britouns were ; & how
+tai n@ @olde nou+gt bene obedient to +te Erche-bisshop of Kanterbury .
CMBRUT3-M3,98.2950

Capitulo =xx=iiij=o= xviij=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,98.2951

<$$heading>

WHen al Engeland was baptisede and turnede to God , seynt Austyn went
into +tat lande +tere +tat +te Britons were , and for@ @to kepe ham fro
Englisshe-men , +tat is to seyn , into Walys , CMBRUT3-M3,98.2953

& +tere he founde monkes & Abbayes , & vij bisshoppes ;
CMBRUT3-M3,98.2954

for +te Britons destroiede alwai +te cristen peple +tat seynt Austyne
hade baptisede , CMBRUT3-M3,98.2955

& saide to +te bisshoppes +tat ' he was a legate of Rome , & primat of
al Engeland , & +tat +tai shulde by al resoun to him bene obedient . '
CMBRUT3-M3,98.2956

And +tai saide +tat ' +tai n@ @olde but to +te Erche-bisshop of Kerlyoun
' ; CMBRUT3-M3,98.2957

& saide ' +tai n@ @olde neuer , for no maner +ting , bene obedient vnto
+te Englisshe-men ' ; CMBRUT3-M3,98.2958

" ffor +te Englisshe-men , " +tai saide , " be+t oure aduersaries & oure
enemys , CMBRUT3-M3,98.2959

and hauen dryuen vs out of oure owen contre ; CMBRUT3-M3,98.2960

& we be+t Cristen men , CMBRUT3-M3,98.2961

and euer ha+t bene ; CMBRUT3-M3,98.2962

& +te Englisshe-men haue+t euermore bene Paynymes , but now late +tat
+tai be+t conuertede . " CMBRUT3-M3,98.2963

Seynt Austyne my+gt of ham none o+tere ansuere haue , CMBRUT3-M3,98.2964

but saide apertely +tat +tai n@ @olde neuer ham meke to him ne to +te
peple of Rome . CMBRUT3-M3,98.2965

And seynt Austyne turnede +to a+geyne to Kyng Adelbright , +tat was kyng
of Kent , CMBRUT3-M3,98.2966

and tolde him +tat +tis folc wolde nou+gt to no man bene obedient but to
+te Erche-bisshop of Kerlyoun . CMBRUT3-M3,98.2967

and when +te Kyng herde +tis , he was sore annoiede , CMBRUT3-M3,98.2968

and saide +tat he wolde ham destroye , CMBRUT3-M3,98.2969

& sent to Elfride , Kyng of Northumberland , +tat was his frende , +tat
he shulde come to him wi+t al +te power +tat he my+gt , & +tat he wolde
mete him at Leycestre , CMBRUT3-M3,98.2970

and fro +tens +tai wolde gone into Walys , & destroye +te Erchebisshop
of Kerlyoun , & alle +to +tat hade refusede seynt Austyn .
CMBRUT3-M3,98.2971

<P_99>

<heading>

How Kyng $Adelbright and +te Kyng Elfride quellede Brecyual , +tat was a
Kyng of Britons +tat helde +te contre of Leicestre . CMBRUT3-M3,99.2974

Capitulo Nonogesimo ix=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,99.2975

<$$heading>

HIt bifelle so +tat +tere was a Kyng Britoun +tat helde +te contre of
Leycestre , and al +te cuntre aboute him , of Brecyual .
CMBRUT3-M3,99.2977

And +tis Kyng Briton herde telle +tat +to ij Englisshe kyng+g wolde mete
+tere at Leycestre , for@ @to wende into Walys . CMBRUT3-M3,99.2978

he lete ordeyne al +te power +tat he hade , for@ @to fei+gt wi+t +tise
ij kynges ; CMBRUT3-M3,99.2979

but litil hit availede him , CMBRUT3-M3,99.2980

for his folc +tat he hade was slayn , CMBRUT3-M3,99.2981

& him-self fledde , CMBRUT3-M3,99.2982

& loste his lande+g for euermore . CMBRUT3-M3,99.2983

And +tise ij kynges , Adelbright and Elfride , duellede a@ @while at
Leycestre , CMBRUT3-M3,99.2984

& departede +te lande amonges ham , CMBRUT3-M3,99.2985

& toke homages & feautes of +te folc of +te cuntree ; CMBRUT3-M3,99.2986

and after , +tai wenten towarde Walys , CMBRUT3-M3,99.2987

& +to of Walys hade herde telle of +te scomfiture +tat
{TEXT:of;_+tat_from_DO} Brecyual hade at Leycestre , CMBRUT3-M3,99.2988

and were wonder sore adrade of +to ij kynges , CMBRUT3-M3,99.2989

and toke and chose amonges ham gode men & holy , of heremytes , monkes
and prestes , and o+tere folc grete plente , +tat wenten bare-fote and
wolward , for@ @to haue mercy of +to ij kynges . CMBRUT3-M3,99.2990

But +to kynges were so sterne and so wickede +tat +tai n@ @olde neuer
speke with ham , CMBRUT3-M3,99.2991

but quellede ham euerychon -- CMBRUT3-M3,99.2992

Allas +te sorwe ! -- CMBRUT3-M3,99.2993

for +tai ne sparede ham nomore +tan +te wolfe doth +te shepe ,
CMBRUT3-M3,99.2994

but smyten of +te heuedes of euerychon ; CMBRUT3-M3,99.2995

& so al were +tere martrede +tat to ham come , +tat is to vnderstonde ,
v=c=._&_xl . CMBRUT3-M3,99.2996

And after , +to ij kynges went to Bangor , for@ @to quelle al +to +tat
+tai my+gt +tere fynde of +te Britons . CMBRUT3-M3,99.2997

And when +te Britons +tat herde , +tai assemblede & ordeynede al here
power for@ @to fi+gt wi+t ham . CMBRUT3-M3,99.2998

+to +tere a Britoun in Walys , +tat me callede Bledrik of Cornwaile ,
+tat somme-tyme was lorde of Deuenshire , CMBRUT3-M3,99.2999

but +te Kyng Adelbright hade dryuen him into Walys , CMBRUT3-M3,99.3000

and +geue him bataile ; CMBRUT3-M3,99.3001

and at +tat bataile was Kyng Adelbright slayne , & Elfride woundede sore
, CMBRUT3-M3,99.3002

& forsoke +te felde , & +te most parte of his folc slayn ;
CMBRUT3-M3,99.3003

and Elfride fleye into Northumberland , +tat was his owen <P_100> lande
; CMBRUT3-M3,100.3004

and afterwarde +te peple of Leycestreshire made wi+t streng+t Cadwaladre
, +tat was Brecyuale+g sone , Kyng of Leycestre , CMBRUT3-M3,100.3005

& he after regnede nobli & wi+t grete honoure . CMBRUT3-M3,100.3006

<heading>

How Cadewaladre , +tat was Kyng of Leycestre , and Elfride , Kyng of
Northumberland , weren frendes ; CMBRUT3-M3,100.3008

& of +te debate +tat after was bituene Edwyne & Cadewalayn , +tat were
bo+te here sones . CMBRUT3-M3,100.3009

Capitulo Centesimo . CMBRUT3-M3,100.3010

<$$heading>

ANd after +tat +tis bataile was done , +te Britons assemblede ham ,
CMBRUT3-M3,100.3012

and went +tens , CMBRUT3-M3,100.3013

and come vnto Leicestre , CMBRUT3-M3,100.3014

& made Cadwaladre , +tat was Brecyuales sone , kyng of Leicestr and of
all +te contre . CMBRUT3-M3,100.3015

and he toke homages & feautes of +te folc of +tat contre ;
CMBRUT3-M3,100.3016

and after +tat , he assembled a grete hoste , CMBRUT3-M3,100.3017

and saide ' he wolde go into Northumberland for@ @to destroi Kyng
Elfride , & slee him , if +tat he myght . ' CMBRUT3-M3,100.3018

and when he was comen +tider , frendes went so bituene ham ,
CMBRUT3-M3,100.3019

& made ham accordede in +tis maner , +tat Elfride shulde horde al +te
lande fram Humber vnto Scotlande , and Cadwalader shulde halde al +te
lande a@ @+tis half Humber vnto +te South ; CMBRUT3-M3,100.3020

and after +tat +tai bicome gode frendes al here lif duryng ,
CMBRUT3-M3,100.3021

& louede to-gedre as $they hade bene ij bre+terne . CMBRUT3-M3,100.3022

And +tis Elfride hade a sone +tat me callede Edwynne , +tat hade and
helde al +te lande of Northumbreland after his fadres deth , as his
fader hade horde al his lif-tyme . CMBRUT3-M3,100.3023

And Cadwaladre hade ano+tere sone +tat me callede Cadwalayn , +tat helde
his fadres lande as he it helde while he was alif ; CMBRUT3-M3,100.3024

and +tai louede to-gedre as +tai hade bene bre+tern .
CMBRUT3-M3,100.3025

and +te loue laste bituene ham but onely ij +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,100.3026

and after biganne debate bituene ham +trou+g a lu+ter eneuious cosyne of
Cadwalayn , +tat men callede Briens , so +tat +tai assemblede a grete
hoste in bo+te parties ; CMBRUT3-M3,100.3027

& at +te laste hit bifelle +tat Cadewalayn was descomfitede ,
CMBRUT3-M3,100.3028

& Edwyne him pursuede , CMBRUT3-M3,100.3029

and drof fram place to place . CMBRUT3-M3,100.3030

so at +te laste he fleye into Irlande ; CMBRUT3-M3,100.3031

and +tis o+tere destroiede his lande , CMBRUT3-M3,100.3032

& caste adoune his castelles , CMBRUT3-M3,100.3033

and brennede his maneres , CMBRUT3-M3,100.3034

and departede al Cadwalaynes lande amonge his frendes .
CMBRUT3-M3,100.3035

And longe tyme after come Cadwalayn <P_101> a+geyne fram Irlande , with
a stronge power , CMBRUT3-M3,101.3036

and in pleyn bataile quellede Edwynne and alle his frendeshippes , &
namely +to +tat wi+thelde his landes +trou+g Edwynes +gifte .
CMBRUT3-M3,101.3037

<heading>

How Kyng Oswolde was quellede +trou+g Kyng Cadwaleyne and Peanda ;
CMBRUT3-M3,101.3039

& how Oswy , +tat was seynt Oswoldes+g bro+ter , regnede after him , &
quelde Peanda . CMBRUT3-M3,101.3040

Capitulo Centesimo primo . CMBRUT3-M3,101.3041

<$$heading>

WHen +tat Edwynne was slayn , Offris his sone vnderfonge +te werr
a+geyns Cadwaleyn his Eme , so +tat +tis Offris deide duryng +te werre .
CMBRUT3-M3,101.3043

and after +te de+t of Offris , +to regned a gentile Cristen man +tat
miche louede God , -- +tat hade all +te lande of Northumberland by
herytage , -- +tat me $called Oswolde , CMBRUT3-M3,101.3044

and he was kyng of al +tat lande . CMBRUT3-M3,101.3045

but for-asmiche as he was frende to Edwyne , and helde a grete parte of
+te lande of Cadwalyn , +te same Cadewalyn werred oppon him ,
CMBRUT3-M3,101.3046

and drof him toward Scotland . CMBRUT3-M3,101.3047

and when Cadwalyn saw +tat he wolde nou+gt abide , Cadwalyn wolde no
longer him pursue , CMBRUT3-M3,101.3048

but toke some of his folc to Peanda , his bro+ter-in-law ,
CMBRUT3-M3,101.3049

& praiede Peanda to pursue Oswolde til +tat he were take and slayne ;
CMBRUT3-M3,101.3050

and Cadwalyn turnede +to home a+geyne . CMBRUT3-M3,101.3051

When Oswolde herde +te tidynges +tat Cadwaleyn turnede home a+geyn , he
wolde no longer flee , CMBRUT3-M3,101.3052

but abode Peanda , CMBRUT3-M3,101.3053

& +gaf him bataile ; CMBRUT3-M3,101.3054

& Peanda was descomfitede CMBRUT3-M3,101.3055

and fley , CMBRUT3-M3,101.3056

and come a+geyne to Cadwaleyn , CMBRUT3-M3,101.3057

& saide +tat ' he wolde neuere horde a foote of lande of him but if it
were so +tat he wolde avenge him oppon Oswolde . ' CMBRUT3-M3,101.3058

Cadwaleyne lete assemble a grete host for@ @to fi+gt wi+t Oswolde ; so
+tat he and Peanda come into Northumberland , CMBRUT3-M3,101.3059

and +geuen bataile vnto Oswolde ; CMBRUT3-M3,101.3060

and in +tat same bataile was Oswolde slayn , & his heuede smyten of ;
CMBRUT3-M3,101.3061

& after he was enterede at +te Abbay of Berdeneye , in whiche place God
ha+t wrou+gt for him meny a faire miracle , bo+te +tere and elles-where
. CMBRUT3-M3,101.3062

And anone Oswy his bro+ter seisede into his hands al +te lande +tat was
Oswoldes ; CMBRUT3-M3,101.3063

& +te folc of Northumberlande louede him wonder wel ,
CMBRUT3-M3,101.3064

and helde him for here lorde ; CMBRUT3-M3,101.3065

but he hade men of his kyn wor+ti ynow +tat wolde haue departede +te
lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,101.3066

& +tai <P_102> werrede to-gedre . CMBRUT3-M3,102.3067

& for-asmiche as +tai were nou+gt stronge ynow , +tai come to Peanda ,
CMBRUT3-M3,102.3068

& praiede him of helpe and socour , CMBRUT3-M3,102.3069

& bihight him of +tat lande largely , oppon +tat couenant +tat he wolde
ham ghye , helpe , & conseile . CMBRUT3-M3,102.3070

Peanda herde her praier , CMBRUT3-M3,102.3071

& so spake wi+t +te Kyng Cadwalyn +tat he shulde ordeyne a grete hoste ,
and faste ordeyne him into Northumberland for@ @to fi+gt wi+t Oswy .
CMBRUT3-M3,102.3072

and Oswy was a meke man , CMBRUT3-M3,102.3073

& miche louede pees and charite , CMBRUT3-M3,102.3074

& prayede Peanda of loue and pees , CMBRUT3-M3,102.3075

& proferede him of golde & siluer grete plente . CMBRUT3-M3,102.3076

And +tis Peanda was so proude +tat he wolde graunt him no pees for no
maner +ting , CMBRUT3-M3,102.3077

but for al +ting $he wolde wi+t him fei+gt . CMBRUT3-M3,102.3078

so at +te laste +tere was sette a day of $bataille ; CMBRUT3-M3,102.3079

and Oswy euere hade truste oppon Gode , CMBRUT3-M3,102.3080

& +tis Peanda triste to miche oppon his pride & oppon his host +tat he
hade . CMBRUT3-M3,102.3081

and to-gedre +tai smyten egrely ; CMBRUT3-M3,102.3082

but Peanda anone was descomfitede & slayn . CMBRUT3-M3,102.3083

And +tat was after +te Incarnacioun of oure lorde Ihesu Criste
V._C._&_lv . CMBRUT3-M3,102.3084

And +tis Oswy +to regnede xxviij +gere . CMBRUT3-M3,102.3085

And a kyng +tat me callede Oswyn , +tat was Peandae+g cosyn , werrede
oppon Kyng Oswy , CMBRUT3-M3,102.3086

and to-gedre fou+gten ; CMBRUT3-M3,102.3087

but Oswy hade +te victorie ; CMBRUT3-M3,102.3088

and Oswyne was descomfitede & slayn , CMBRUT3-M3,102.3089

and lith at Tynnemouthe . CMBRUT3-M3,102.3090

<heading>

Of Kyng Ossa , +tat was souereyne of alle +te kynges of Engeland ; & how
eueryche werrede oppon o+tere in his tyme . CMBRUT3-M3,102.3092

Capitulo Centesimo Secundo . CMBRUT3-M3,102.3093

<$$heading>

HIt bifelle so +tat alle +te kynges in +tat tyme +tat were in +te londe
, as +to of Westsex , Mercheneriche , Est Angle , of Kent , & of
Southsex & of o+tere costes , eueryche werrede oppon o+tere ;
CMBRUT3-M3,102.3095

and +tai +tat were moste my+gtiest toke +te lande of ham +tat were moste
feblest . CMBRUT3-M3,102.3096

But +tere was a kyng amonges ham +tat me callede Ossa , +tat was seynt
Oswoldes bro+ter . CMBRUT3-M3,102.3097

+tis Ossa conquerede alle +te kynges of +te lande , CMBRUT3-M3,102.3098

& regned aboue ham alle . CMBRUT3-M3,102.3099

And so grete was +te werr in euery contre bituene kyngus , +tat no man
my+gt wete how +te lande went . CMBRUT3-M3,102.3100

But Abbotes , prioures , & men of religioun , writen +te lifes and dedes
of kynges , & how <P_103> longe eueryche hade regnede , in what contre ;
& in what maner eueryche kyng deide , and of bisshoppis also ,
CMBRUT3-M3,103.3101

and +terof made grete bokes , CMBRUT3-M3,103.3102

& lete calle ham +te Cronicles : CMBRUT3-M3,103.3103

and +te goode Kyng Alurede hade +tat boke in his warde ,
CMBRUT3-M3,103.3104

and lete brynge hit to Wynchestre , CMBRUT3-M3,103.3105

& lete hit faste bene tackede to a piler , +tat men my+gt hit nou+gt
remeve ne bere +tenns , so +tat euery man mi+gt hit see and +tereoppon
loke , CMBRUT3-M3,103.3106

for +terin be+t +te lifes of alle +te Kynges +tat euer wer in Engeland .
CMBRUT3-M3,103.3107

<heading>

How +te Kyng of Northumberlond , Osbright , forleye +te wif of Buerne
Bocard +trou+g streng+t ; CMBRUT3-M3,103.3109

& after +tis Buerne con-querede +te Kyng wi+t stronge power .
CMBRUT3-M3,103.3110

Capitulo Centesimo tercio . CMBRUT3-M3,103.3111

<$$heading>

ANd +tus hit bifelle in the same tyme , +tat +tere was a kyng in
Northumberlond +tat me callede Ossebright , & soiournede in +Gork ,
CMBRUT3-M3,103.3113

and +tis kyng wente him oppon a day into a wode , him for@ @to desporte
; CMBRUT3-M3,103.3114

and when he come a+geyne , he went priuely into a gode manus house +tat
me callede Buerne Bocard . CMBRUT3-M3,103.3115

& +te gode man of +tat place was gone +tat tyme to +te see ,
CMBRUT3-M3,103.3116

for ofte-tymes he was wonede +tere aspie +teues & robboures , +tat
ofte-tymes were wont to come into +te londe to robbe & brenne and slee .
CMBRUT3-M3,103.3117

+te lady +tat was +tis Buernes wif , was a wonder faire woman ,
CMBRUT3-M3,103.3118

and welcomede +te Kyng wi+t michel honour , CMBRUT3-M3,103.3119

and wor+tely him seruede in al +ting . CMBRUT3-M3,103.3120

When +te Kyng hade eten , he toke +te lady by +te hande ,
CMBRUT3-M3,103.3121

and lad her into chaumbre , CMBRUT3-M3,103.3122

& saide +tat he wolde speke wi+t here a counsele . CMBRUT3-M3,103.3123

and al +te folc fram +te chaumbre he made voyede , saf onely +te lady
and he . CMBRUT3-M3,103.3124

but +te Lady wiste nou+gt wherfore he it dede , til +tat he hade done
wi+t here his wille . CMBRUT3-M3,103.3125

and when he hade done +tis dede , he turnede a+geyne to +Gork ,
CMBRUT3-M3,103.3126

& +te lady he lefte +tere wonder sore wepyng for +te dede +tat he hade
ydone . CMBRUT3-M3,103.3127

And when here lorde was come home , & saw here wepe , and soche mornyng
make , he axede of here what she hade done , & whi she made soche sorwe
. CMBRUT3-M3,103.3128

" Sire , " quod she , " queyntly and <P_104> falsely +te Kyng Osbright
me ha+t done shame and vilonye , a+geynes my wille , " ;
CMBRUT3-M3,104.3129

and tolde him treu+te , How the kyng hade her forleyn wi+t streng+t ;
wherfore she saide she hade leuer to dye +tan leue .
CMBRUT3-M3,104.3130

" Faire leef , bi@ @stille , " quod he , " CMBRUT3-M3,104.3131

for a+geynes streng+t $febleness is litel wor+t ; CMBRUT3-M3,104.3132

& +terfore of me shal yow neuer +te lesse bene Louede , and namely for
yow haste tolde me treu+te . CMBRUT3-M3,104.3133

and if Almyghty God grant me lif , y shal +te wel avenge . "
CMBRUT3-M3,104.3134

This Buerne was a gret man and a mi+gty lorde , CMBRUT3-M3,104.3135

and was wel bilouede , CMBRUT3-M3,104.3136

& grete frendes hade , CMBRUT3-M3,104.3137

and lete sende for +te greteste lordes of +te lande ,
CMBRUT3-M3,104.3138

& to ham made his compleynt of +te despite +tat +te kyng to him hade
done , CMBRUT3-M3,104.3139

& saide +tat he wolde bene avengede , how +tat euer it were .
CMBRUT3-M3,104.3140

and alle his frendes conseilede and grantede to wende towarde +Gork ,
+tere +tat +te kyng was . CMBRUT3-M3,104.3141

& Buerne toke his menye , CMBRUT3-M3,104.3142

& come to +te kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,104.3143

and when +te kyng him saw , he callede him curtesly Buerne by name ;
CMBRUT3-M3,104.3144

and Buerne him ansuerede CMBRUT3-M3,104.3145

& saide : " Sire , y +gow defye , CMBRUT3-M3,104.3146

& +gelde op feautes , homages , and londes , and as miche as y haue
holde of +gow ; CMBRUT3-M3,104.3147

and so , fro +tis tyme afterwarde , y wil no +ting of +te holde . "
CMBRUT3-M3,104.3148

& so he departede fram +te kyng with-outen more speche or eny abidyng ,
CMBRUT3-M3,104.3149

& toke leue of his frendes , CMBRUT3-M3,104.3150

and went to Denmarc , CMBRUT3-M3,104.3151

and pleynede to +te Kyng Godryn , CMBRUT3-M3,104.3152

& tolde him of +te dispite +tat Kyng Osbright to him hade done of his
wif , CMBRUT3-M3,104.3153

& praiede him of socoure & of helpe , him to avenge .
CMBRUT3-M3,104.3154

When Kyng Godrin of Denmarc & +te Danoys , CMBRUT3-M3,104.3155

when +tai hade herde +te pleynt of +tis Buerne & of +te praer +tat he
hade , +tai were wonder glade in hert , for-asmiche as +tai my+gt fynde
cause for@ @to gone into Engeland for@ @to werr oppon +te Englisshe-men
, & also for@ @to avenge Buerne of +te despite +tat +te kyng hade done
to his wif , & for-asmiche as Buerne was sib to +te Kyng of Denmarc .
CMBRUT3-M3,104.3156

Anone +tai lete ordeyne a grete hoste of men , CMBRUT3-M3,104.3157

& lete ordeyne shippis , and as miche as was nede to +tat Viage .
CMBRUT3-M3,104.3158

and when alle +te hoste was <P_105> redy , +te kyng made his ij
bre+terne cheueteyns , +tat were noble Kny+gtes and bolde :
CMBRUT3-M3,105.3159

+tat one me callede Humger , & +tat o+tere Hubba . CMBRUT3-M3,105.3160

<heading>

How +te Danoys toke +Gork & quellede Kyng Osbright , and afterwarde Kyng
Elle . CMBRUT3-M3,105.3162

Capitulo Centesimo Quarto . CMBRUT3-M3,105.3163

<$$heading>

WHen al +ting was aredy , +to ij bre+terne tok leue of +te Kyng Godrin ,
CMBRUT3-M3,105.3165

and went towarde +te see , for@ @to wende into Engelande as faste as
+tai my+gt spede . CMBRUT3-M3,105.3166

Now is Buerne so wel comfortede , CMBRUT3-M3,105.3167

& faste hiede him wi+t +te Danoys ; CMBRUT3-M3,105.3168

and +tai arryue in +te Northcontre , CMBRUT3-M3,105.3169

& come +trou+g-out Holdernesse , CMBRUT3-M3,105.3170

& destroiede al +te contre , CMBRUT3-M3,105.3171

and brent tounes CMBRUT3-M3,105.3172

and robbede folc , CMBRUT3-M3,105.3173

& quellede al +tat +tai my+gt take , til +tat +tai come to +Gorke .
CMBRUT3-M3,105.3174

And when Kyng Osbright saw ham come , he toke +te peple +tat he hade ,
CMBRUT3-M3,105.3175

and come out of +te citee , CMBRUT3-M3,105.3176

& with ham fau+gte ; CMBRUT3-M3,105.3177

but no foysoun he n@ @ade a+geynes ham ; CMBRUT3-M3,105.3178

& miche was +te peple +tat +tere was slayn in bo+te parties ;
CMBRUT3-M3,105.3179

and Kyng Osbright himself +tere was slayn , CMBRUT3-M3,105.3180

and +te citee anone was take , CMBRUT3-M3,105.3181

& +te Danoys wenten in . CMBRUT3-M3,105.3182

And +tere was also ano+tere kyng in Northumberlond +tat Buernes frendes
hade chosen , & helde him for kyng , a man +tat me clepede Elle ,
for-asmiche as +tai n@ @olde nou+gt to Kyng Osbright bene entendant ,
for +te despite +tet he hade done to Buerne here cosyn .
CMBRUT3-M3,105.3183

Hit bifelle +tus , +tat +te Kyng Elle was gon to +te wode him for@ @to
desporte : CMBRUT3-M3,105.3184

and of venysoun somdele he hade tak . CMBRUT3-M3,105.3185

and as he satte in the wode at mete , to a knyght he saide : " we haue
wel y-spedde , & michel venysoun taken . " CMBRUT3-M3,105.3186

and wi+t +tat worde +tere come in a man , CMBRUT3-M3,105.3187

& to him saide : " Sire , if +ge so miche of venysoun haue y-wonne ,
an_C. tymes so miche +tere a+geyns +ge hauen loste ;
CMBRUT3-M3,105.3188

for al +tis contre +te Danois hauen gete , & take +te cite of +Gork ;
CMBRUT3-M3,105.3189

& a+geynes +gow shal it holde , +tat neuer +ge shul come +terin ;
CMBRUT3-M3,105.3190

& forsothe +tai <P_106> hauen slayn Kyng Osbright . "
CMBRUT3-M3,106.3191

And when Kyng Elle +tise wordes herde , he lete assemble al +te folc of
+te cuntre , CMBRUT3-M3,106.3192

& ordeynede al +te power +tat he mi+gt haue , CMBRUT3-M3,106.3193

and wold haue gete +te toune of +Gork wi+t streng+t .
CMBRUT3-M3,106.3194

but +te Danois comen out anon CMBRUT3-M3,106.3195

& +gaf ham bataile , CMBRUT3-M3,106.3196

& quellede +te kyng & +te moste part of his men +tat he hade brou+gt
wi+t him : CMBRUT3-M3,106.3197

and +te same place +tere +tat +tai were slayne shal euer bene callede
Ellecrofte ; CMBRUT3-M3,106.3198

and +tat place is a litel fram +Gork CMBRUT3-M3,106.3199

and +to abode +te Danois neuer , til +tai hade conquerede al
Northumberland . CMBRUT3-M3,106.3200

and in +tat contre +tai made Werdeynes , CMBRUT3-M3,106.3201

& went fer+ter into +te lande , CMBRUT3-M3,106.3202

and token Notyngham . CMBRUT3-M3,106.3203

and +tere +tai abiden al +te wynter , CMBRUT3-M3,106.3204

and deden al +te sorwe +tat +tai myght . CMBRUT3-M3,106.3205

and after , when somer tyme come , +tai remevede fram Notyngham ,
CMBRUT3-M3,106.3206

& come vnto Nichole , & to Lyndessey , & to Holand , CMBRUT3-M3,106.3207

for no man mi+gt ham withstande , so miche power & streng+t +tai hade .
CMBRUT3-M3,106.3208

<heading>

How Seynt Edmunde +te Kyng was martrede . CMBRUT3-M3,106.3210

Capitulo Cen-tesimo v=to= . CMBRUT3-M3,106.3211

<$$heading>

ANd so ferre hade +te Danois passede fram contre vnto contre , &
euermore brennyng & robbyng , CMBRUT3-M3,106.3213

& destroiede al +tat +tai mi+gt , til +tat +tai come vnto Tetteford .
CMBRUT3-M3,106.3214

& in +tat contre +tai fonden a Cristen Kyng +tat miche louede God and
his Werkes , +tat me callede Edmunde ; CMBRUT3-M3,106.3215

& he was Kyng of Northfolc and Southfolc . CMBRUT3-M3,106.3216

+tis Seynt Edmunde +te kyng ordeynede as miche folc as he my+gt ,
CMBRUT3-M3,106.3217

& fau+gt wi+t +te Danois ; CMBRUT3-M3,106.3218

but he and his folc were scomfitede , & +te kyng him-self dryuen vnto a
castel of Framelyngham . CMBRUT3-M3,106.3219

& +te Danois him pursuede , CMBRUT3-M3,106.3220

& comen vnto +te same castel . CMBRUT3-M3,106.3221

and when Kyng Edmunde saw +tat +te castel myst nou+gt ham wi+tstonde ,
he comen a+geynes ham . with whame +te Danois ferst speken ;
CMBRUT3-M3,106.3222

and anone +tai axede of him where Kyng Edmunde was .
CMBRUT3-M3,106.3223

" now forsoth , " quod he , " when y was in +te castell , y was kyng ;
CMBRUT3-M3,106.3224

& when y went oute of +te castel , he went out also ;
CMBRUT3-M3,106.3225

and whe+ter +tat he shal ascape or dye , at Godes wil <P_107> most hit
be . " CMBRUT3-M3,107.3226

When Seynt Edmunde hade nempnede God , by +tat worde +tai wiste alle
+tat it was he him-self . CMBRUT3-M3,107.3227

and anone Hubba & Hungar tok him , CMBRUT3-M3,107.3228

& saide +tat he shulde God forsake , al cristen law , as alle o+tere
hade done +trou+g ham biforn . CMBRUT3-M3,107.3229

and Seynt Edmunde saide +tat ' he wolde neuer , CMBRUT3-M3,107.3230

but ra+ter he wolde suffre deth for Godes sone , and his law to kepe .
' CMBRUT3-M3,107.3231

+to tok +tai Kyng Edmunde , CMBRUT3-M3,107.3232

& bounde him vnto a tree , CMBRUT3-M3,107.3233

and made Archires to him shote with Arwes , til +tat his body stickede
alse ful of Arwes as an hirchone is ful of prickes ; CMBRUT3-M3,107.3234

but for alle +te payne +tat he hade , he wolde neuer God forsake .
CMBRUT3-M3,107.3235

& in +te same pyne he deide wi+t +tat turmentyng , CMBRUT3-M3,107.3236

& bitoke his soule to almy+gty God . CMBRUT3-M3,107.3237

& when +tai saw +tat he was dede , +tai smyten of his heuede ;
CMBRUT3-M3,107.3238

& in +tis maner was Seynt Edmunde martrede . CMBRUT3-M3,107.3239

<heading>

How Hubba & Hungar toke +te toune of Redyng . CMBRUT3-M3,107.3241

Capitulo Centesimo vj=to= . CMBRUT3-M3,107.3242

<$$heading>

$WHen sent Edmunde was martrede , Hunguar and Hubba went +tens , with al
here Danoys , vnto Redyng . CMBRUT3-M3,107.3244

and as +tai went +tiderwarde , +tai brent tounes & citees ,
CMBRUT3-M3,107.3245

& quellede al Cristen peple +tat wolde nou+gt God forsake ,
CMBRUT3-M3,107.3246

and caste adoun cherches , CMBRUT3-M3,107.3247

and comen to Redyng , CMBRUT3-M3,107.3248

and toke +te toun , CMBRUT3-M3,107.3249

and +tere holde ham til +tat +te Kyng Edelf of Westsex come +tider wi+t
al his power for@ @to take +te toune . CMBRUT3-M3,107.3250

+to come oute +te Danoys for@ @to +geue bataile to Kyng Elfride ;
CMBRUT3-M3,107.3251

and at +tat bataile was quellede an Erl of Danoys +tat me callede Gydrak
. CMBRUT3-M3,107.3252

Oppon +te morwe come +te Kyng Eldrede , and his bro+ter Alurede , with a
stronge power and grete host . CMBRUT3-M3,107.3253

and +te Kyng Edelf come a+geyne <paren> +tat hade fou+gten wi+t +te
Danois +te day toforne <$$paren> to +tat bataile . CMBRUT3-M3,107.3254

& +te Danois +to comen out for@ @to fei+gt wi+t ham .
CMBRUT3-M3,107.3255

and +tat batale was wonder strong , for meny a man was +tere slayn ;
CMBRUT3-M3,107.3256

and +te Danois +tat day hade +te vittori ; CMBRUT3-M3,107.3257

and +te Kyng Eldrede & his bro+ter <P_108> Alurede +tat day were
descomfited . CMBRUT3-M3,108.3258

but +te xiiij day afterwarde , +te Danois and +te Englisshe-men fou+gten
to-gederes oppon Elkelden , CMBRUT3-M3,108.3259

& +tere was slayne a kyng of Denmarc +tat was callede Rasyng , and iiij
Erles of grete power ; CMBRUT3-M3,108.3260

and +tat day hade +te Danoys shame , for +tai were dryuen vnto
Engelfilde . CMBRUT3-M3,108.3261

and +te xv day after , +te Danois & +te Englisshemen fou+gten ano+tere
tyme at Rasyng , CMBRUT3-M3,108.3262

and +tere were +te Englisshe-men descomfitede . CMBRUT3-M3,108.3263

and fram +tens a Danois , +tat me callede Roynt , went to Redyng wi+t
his hoste , CMBRUT3-M3,108.3264

& destroiede al +tat he myght tak ; CMBRUT3-M3,108.3265

and Kyng Eldrede fau+gt wi+t him , CMBRUT3-M3,108.3266

but he was woundede so , wherefore he was dede ; CMBRUT3-M3,108.3267

and he n@ @ade regnede but v. +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,108.3268

and deide , CMBRUT3-M3,108.3269

and li+t atte Wonburne . CMBRUT3-M3,108.3270

<heading>

Of Kyng Alurede ; & how +te Danoys in his tyme praiede him of mercy ,
+tat +tai moste gone out of +te lande . CMBRUT3-M3,108.3272

Capitulo Centesimo vij=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,108.3273

<$$heading>

After +te deth of +tis Eldrede , regnede his bro+ter Alurede , +tat
Dolfynes was callede . CMBRUT3-M3,108.3275

+to went +te Danois , CMBRUT3-M3,108.3276

& assemblede ham , CMBRUT3-M3,108.3277

and went for@ @to seche Alurede , +tat +to was +te new kyng of Southsex
. CMBRUT3-M3,108.3278

and +tere +tai fonde him at Wilton , wi+t a litel peple ;
CMBRUT3-M3,108.3279

& no+teles he fau+gt with ham ; CMBRUT3-M3,108.3280

but at the laste he fledde +tens fram +te felde , CMBRUT3-M3,108.3281

and went vnto Westsex , CMBRUT3-M3,108.3282

and ordeynede so miche peple of his owen reaume & also of o+tere , so
til +tat he hade a stronge host , so +tat +te Danois hade non power
a+geynes him to stande . CMBRUT3-M3,108.3283

and he come to London wi+t his host , +tere as +te Danois soiournede ;
CMBRUT3-M3,108.3284

and +tere wolde he haue fou+gten wi+t ham , CMBRUT3-M3,108.3285

but +te Danois derste nou+gt wi+t him fei+gt , CMBRUT3-M3,108.3286

but praiede him of pees , & +tat +tai most gone a+geyne into her owen
contre , & neuermore into Engeland for@ @to come a+geyne , eny harme
for@ @to done , CMBRUT3-M3,108.3287

and oppon +tis couenant +tai shulde +geue him to plegge , gode hostages
, & soche as +te Englisshemen wolde axen . CMBRUT3-M3,108.3288

<P_109>

<heading>

How Hubba & Hunguar were quellede at Chippenham ; & how +te Danoys
brou+gt hir kyng vnto oure kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,109.3291

Capitulo Centesimo Octauo . CMBRUT3-M3,109.3292

<$$heading>

ANd +te same day +tat +te Danois departede fram London , so faste +tai
riden , bo+te nyght and day , CMBRUT3-M3,109.3294

and neuer toke reste of goyng til +tat +tai comen vnto Excestre ,
CMBRUT3-M3,109.3295

and token +te toune , CMBRUT3-M3,109.3296

& +tere helde ham . CMBRUT3-M3,109.3297

When Kyng Alurede herde +to tidynges , anone he lete tak +te hostages ,
CMBRUT3-M3,109.3298

and went fram +tens vnto Excestre wi+t al +te power +tat he hade .
CMBRUT3-M3,109.3299

And when +te Danois herde tel of his comyng , +tai went fro +tens forth
into Westsex , CMBRUT3-M3,109.3300

and comen to Chippenham ; CMBRUT3-M3,109.3301

and +tere +tai deden miche harme in +te contre ; CMBRUT3-M3,109.3302

+tai robbede folc , CMBRUT3-M3,109.3303

& brou+gt ham into prisoun . CMBRUT3-M3,109.3304

The Kyng Alurede ham pursuede , CMBRUT3-M3,109.3305

& come oppon ham , CMBRUT3-M3,109.3306

and fersly ham assailede ; CMBRUT3-M3,109.3307

& +tere were slayn bo+te Hubba , and Hunguar his bro+ter , and Buerne
Bocard . CMBRUT3-M3,109.3308

and in +tat bataile was michel folc slayn in +tat o partye and in +tat
o+tere , CMBRUT3-M3,109.3309

but +te gree of +te felde lefte wi+t +te Danois , for-asmiche as +te
kyng +to come but with litel company . CMBRUT3-M3,109.3310

The Kyng Hastede him as miche as he myght , for@ @to wende a+geyn ;
CMBRUT3-M3,109.3311

and when +te Danois fonden Hubba his bodye liggyng dede , +tai enterede
hit , CMBRUT3-M3,109.3312

& made oppon him a grete logge , CMBRUT3-M3,109.3313

and lette calle hit Hubbeslaw ; CMBRUT3-M3,109.3314

& so it is callede into +tis day ; CMBRUT3-M3,109.3315

and +tat place is in Deuenesshire . CMBRUT3-M3,109.3316

+te barons of Westsex , Wilteshire and Dorset , harde telle how +tat
here kyng was descomfitede ; CMBRUT3-M3,109.3317

and ordeynede al +te power +tat +tai mi+gt haue , CMBRUT3-M3,109.3318

and come to +te kyng +tere +tat he was , CMBRUT3-M3,109.3319

& +tankede God +tat +tai hade him fonden alif , CMBRUT3-M3,109.3320

for +tai wende +tat +te Danois hade him slayne . CMBRUT3-M3,109.3321

+to toke +tai a counseil , +te kyng and his barons , CMBRUT3-M3,109.3322

& +tai wolde gone seche +te Danois , with ham for@ @to fei+gt .
CMBRUT3-M3,109.3323

and so +tai riden al +tat ny+gt ham for@ @to seche , CMBRUT3-M3,109.3324

and come amorw , about prime , to Abyngdon , +tere +tat +te Danois were
. CMBRUT3-M3,109.3325

+te kyng +to , Alurede and his barons , assemblede , CMBRUT3-M3,109.3326

and +tere <P_110> assailede +te Danois egrely , CMBRUT3-M3,110.3327

and +tere +gaf ham a stronger bataile +tan euere he dede bifore ;
CMBRUT3-M3,110.3328

and +te Danois nobli put ham of , longe tyme , +tat no man wist in
whe+ter partie more peple were slayn . CMBRUT3-M3,110.3329

But +tus hit bifelle , as God wolde , +tat Kyng Alurede hade +te
vittorie with michel honoure ; CMBRUT3-M3,110.3330

for +te Danois were so dryuen +tat +tai wist nou+gt whider to wende .
CMBRUT3-M3,110.3331

xv dayes +te kyng ham pur-suede at his wille , +tat glade & fayne +tai
were for@ @to speken of pees & of accorde , CMBRUT3-M3,110.3332

& toke him gode hostages , CMBRUT3-M3,110.3333

& saide +tat +tai wolde neuer oppon him werre , ne debate arere .
CMBRUT3-M3,110.3334

And more-ouer +tai bihight to +te Kyng Alurede +tat +tai wolde go and
brynge her owen kyng vnto him , and +tat her kyng & +tai all shulde bene
baptisede . CMBRUT3-M3,110.3335

& oppon +tis condicioun , Kyng Alurede ham grauntede lif and lyme ,
CMBRUT3-M3,110.3336

and saide to ham +tat +tai shulde gon here kyng for@ @to fecche , and at
a certeyne day to come a+geyne , +tat to ham was sette .
CMBRUT3-M3,110.3337

And so +tai went for+t fast , CMBRUT3-M3,110.3338

and come a+geyne at here day +tat was assignede , CMBRUT3-M3,110.3339

and alle +te Danois brou+gt here kyng wi+t ham . CMBRUT3-M3,110.3340

The Kyng Alurede anone lete ham ben baptisede , and here names chaunged
, so +tat +te kyng of Danois was callede Athelston , CMBRUT3-M3,110.3341

& xxx=ti= of his felawe+g names were chaungede also ,
CMBRUT3-M3,110.3342

& +te o+tere were baptisede to +te right bileue ; CMBRUT3-M3,110.3343

and al +tis was done at Westmynstre . CMBRUT3-M3,110.3344

and after , Kyng Alurede helde wi+t him Kyng Athelstone & alle his
Danois xij daies at soiune wi+t miche solempnite , CMBRUT3-M3,110.3345

and +gaf ham grete +giftes after +tat +tai were overcome ,
CMBRUT3-M3,110.3346

and so +tai departede . CMBRUT3-M3,110.3347

Tho was Kyng Alurede al at ese when he hade his enemys ouercomen , &
+tat +tai were turnede to +te bileue of almi+gty God .
CMBRUT3-M3,110.3348

<heading>

How +te Danois +tat comen into Fraunce wi+t Gurmonde , come a+geyne into
Engeland ; & of +te de+t of Kyng Alured . CMBRUT3-M3,110.3350

Capitulo Centesimo Nono . CMBRUT3-M3,110.3351

<$$heading>

<P_111>

ANd +tus hit bifelle afterwarde , +tat +te Danoys of Northumber-land ,
+tat were paynemys , comen with a grete host of Fraunce , +tat is to
vnderstonde , with ham +tat went into Fraunce with Gurmonde of Aufrik ,
when he hade conquerede Engeland , & it +gaf vnto Saxonus .
CMBRUT3-M3,111.3354

and +to +tat come fro Fraunce arryuede in Kent , CMBRUT3-M3,111.3355

and sent into Northumberlande +tat +tai shulde come to ham .
CMBRUT3-M3,111.3356

and when +to ij hostes were comen & assemblede , anone +tai went to
destroie +te Cristen peple of Engeland fram place vnto place ,
CMBRUT3-M3,111.3357

and deden miche sorwe . CMBRUT3-M3,111.3358

Hit bifelle +tus , as almi+gty God hit wolde , an harde chaunce in
Engeland ; CMBRUT3-M3,111.3359

ffor +te gode Kyng Alurede , +tat was wont to abate +te Danois , deide
in +te mene-tyme . CMBRUT3-M3,111.3360

+tis Alured regnede xxx=ti= +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,111.3361

and a gode kyng hade bene , CMBRUT3-M3,111.3362

and wel cou+te chastice his enemys ; CMBRUT3-M3,111.3363

And was a gode clerc , CMBRUT3-M3,111.3364

and lete mak menye bokes . CMBRUT3-M3,111.3365

& on boke he made of Englisshe , of Auentures of kynges and of batailes
+tat hade bene done in +te lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,111.3366

and meny o+tere bokes of gestes , he lete ham write , +tat were of grete
wisdome and of gode lernyng , +trou+g whiche bokes meny man may him
amende +tat wille ham rede and oppon lok ; oppon whos soule almighty God
haue mercy ! CMBRUT3-M3,111.3367

& +tis Kyng Alurede li+t at Wynchestr . CMBRUT3-M3,111.3368

<heading>

Of Kyng Edward , +tat was Kyng Aluredus sone . CMBRUT3-M3,111.3370

Capitulo Cen-tesimo x=mo= . CMBRUT3-M3,111.3371

<$$heading>

ANd after +tis Alurede , regnede Edward his sone , +tat was a gode man &
a wise , +tat men callede $Edward , +tat was wonder curteise .
CMBRUT3-M3,111.3373

The Danois deden miche sorwe in +te lande , CMBRUT3-M3,111.3374

and her power encresede , CMBRUT3-M3,111.3375

and biganne for@ @to wexe fram day to day , CMBRUT3-M3,111.3376

for +te Danois comen ofte wi+t here companies into +tis lande .
CMBRUT3-M3,111.3377

And when +te kyng saw +tat he mi+gt no bettre done , he tok trewes with
ham , CMBRUT3-M3,111.3378

and granted ham his pees . CMBRUT3-M3,111.3379

And no+telesse +te trewes durede nou+gt longe , +tat +te Danois ne
bigonne strongeliche for@ @to were oppon +te Englisshe-men ,
CMBRUT3-M3,111.3380

& dede ham miche sorwe . Wher-fore Kyng Edwarde dede assemble a grete
hoste for@ @to fi+gt with <P_112> ham ; CMBRUT3-M3,112.3381

and +to +tis Kyng Edwarde deide when God wolde . CMBRUT3-M3,112.3382

This Kyng Edward regnede xxiiij +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,112.3383

& li+t at Wynchestre bisides his fader . CMBRUT3-M3,112.3384

<heading>

Of Kyng $Athelstone , & of Edmunde , Eldrede , & of Edwynne his bro+ter
. CMBRUT3-M3,112.3386

Capitulo Centesimo Vndecimo . CMBRUT3-M3,112.3387

<$$heading>

After +tis Edward , regnede Athelston his sone ; CMBRUT3-M3,112.3389

& when he hade regnede iiij +gere , he helde bataile a+geynes +te Danois
, CMBRUT3-M3,112.3390

and drof Kyng Gaufride , +tat was kyng of +te Danois , and al his hoste
vnto +te see , CMBRUT3-M3,112.3391

& restede by Scotland , CMBRUT3-M3,112.3392

& nomen strongliche +te contrey al a +gere . CMBRUT3-M3,112.3393

And after +tat , +to of Cumberland , & +te Scottes of Westmerlande ,
bigonne to werre oppon Kyng Athelston ; CMBRUT3-M3,112.3394

and he ham +gaf so strong bataile +tat he quellede so meny of ham +tat
no man cou+te telle +te nombre of ham . CMBRUT3-M3,112.3395

and after +tat he ne regnede but iij +gere ; CMBRUT3-M3,112.3396

& he regnede in al xxv +gere CMBRUT3-M3,112.3397

and li+t at Malmesbery . CMBRUT3-M3,112.3398

And after +tis Athelston , regnede Edmund his bro+ter , for-as-miche as
Kyng Athelston hade none sone . CMBRUT3-M3,112.3399

and +tis $Edmunde was a wor+ti kny+gt , and a dou+gty man of body , and
a noble knyght . CMBRUT3-M3,112.3400

and +te +tridde +gere after +tat he was kyng , he went ouer Humber , in
whiche place he hade ij Kynges of Danois : CMBRUT3-M3,112.3401

+tat one me callede Enelaf , and +tat o+ter Renaud .
CMBRUT3-M3,112.3402

This Kyng Edmund drof ham bo+te fram +te lande , CMBRUT3-M3,112.3403

and after went CMBRUT3-M3,112.3404

and tok grete preye in Comberland . CMBRUT3-M3,112.3405

Edmund ne regnede but vij +ger , CMBRUT3-M3,112.3406

and li+t at Glastynbery . CMBRUT3-M3,112.3407

And after +tis Edmunde , regnede Eldrede his bro+ter , +tat vengede
Edwarde his fadre of his enemys +tat him quelde ; CMBRUT3-M3,112.3408

and aftir-warde he seisede Northumberland into his hand ,
CMBRUT3-M3,112.3409

and made +te Scottes abowe and meke vnto his Wille .
CMBRUT3-M3,112.3410

And +te secunde +gere +tat he hade regned $come Arnalaf Quyran , +tat
was kyng of Denmarc , CMBRUT3-M3,112.3411

and seisede al Northumberland , CMBRUT3-M3,112.3412

and helde +tat lande ij +gere . CMBRUT3-M3,112.3413

and after +tat come Kyng Eldrede wi+t a grete power ,
CMBRUT3-M3,112.3414

and drof him oute of +tis lande . CMBRUT3-M3,112.3415

And +tis Kyng Eldrede was a noble man and a goode , of whos godenesse
seynt Dunston prechede . CMBRUT3-M3,112.3416

& +tis Kyng Eldrede regnede xj +gere , CMBRUT3-M3,112.3417

& li+t at Wynchestr . CMBRUT3-M3,112.3418

<P_113>

And after +tis Eldrede , Edwynne his bro+ter regnede ,
CMBRUT3-M3,113.3420

& was a lu+ter man towarde God and to +te peple ; CMBRUT3-M3,113.3421

for he hatede folc of his owen land , CMBRUT3-M3,113.3422

and louede & honourede strange men , CMBRUT3-M3,113.3423

& sette litel by holy cherche , CMBRUT3-M3,113.3424

and bynom of holy cherche all +te tresoure +tat he my+gt haue :
CMBRUT3-M3,113.3425

+tat was grete shame and velonye to himself , and perile of his soule ,
CMBRUT3-M3,113.3426

& +terfore God wolde nou+gt +tat he shulde regne no longer than iiij
+ger , CMBRUT3-M3,113.3427

and after deide , CMBRUT3-M3,113.3428

and Lith at Wynchestre . CMBRUT3-M3,113.3429

<heading>

Of Kyng Edgare , +tat regned aboue +te kyngus of Scotland & of Walys ; &
how he was bigilede +trou+g takyng of his wif . CMBRUT3-M3,113.3431

Capitulo Centesimo Duodecimo . CMBRUT3-M3,113.3432

<$$heading>

ANd after +tis Edwynne , regnede Edgare his sone , a man +tat miche
louede God , and pees , & holy cherche also , and was a wor+ti lorde ,
bolde and myghty , & mayntenede wel +tis land in pees .
CMBRUT3-M3,113.3434

And +tis Edgare was Kyng and lorde aboue alle +te kynges of Scotland ,
and of Walys : CMBRUT3-M3,113.3435

fram +te tyme +tat Arthure was gone , neuer was si+ten kyng of his power
. CMBRUT3-M3,113.3436

And +tis Edgare was seynt Edwardes fader . CMBRUT3-M3,113.3437

And when Edgarus wif was dede , +tat was seynt Edwardes moder , &
enterede , he herde speke of +te fairenesse of Estrilde , +tat was
Orgarus dou+gter , a baroun of Deuenshire , +tat was so faire a women
+tat alle men spake +terof . CMBRUT3-M3,113.3438

He callede one of his kny+gtes +tat he miche louede & trust oppon ,
CMBRUT3-M3,113.3439

and tolde him : " Go , " quod he , " to +te noble Baron Orgar of
Deuenshire , CMBRUT3-M3,113.3440

and se if his dou+gter be so faire as men speke of ; CMBRUT3-M3,113.3441

& if it be so+t , y wil haue here vnto my wif . " CMBRUT3-M3,113.3442

+tis kny+gt +tat me callede Edelwolde , went for+t +tere +tat +te lady
+to was ; CMBRUT3-M3,113.3443

& when he saw her so faire , he +tou+gt haue her himself to wif ,
CMBRUT3-M3,113.3444

and +terfore spake to Orgar here fader . CMBRUT3-M3,113.3445

and Orgar was an olde man , CMBRUT3-M3,113.3446

& hade no mo childerne but here on ; CMBRUT3-M3,113.3447

and saw +tat Edelwolde was a faire +gonge kny+gt , and wor+ti and riche
, CMBRUT3-M3,113.3448

& was wel with +te kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,113.3449

& +tou+gt his dou+gter shulde wel bene mariede , & wel bisette oppon him
, CMBRUT3-M3,113.3450

and grauntede him his dou+gter , if +te gode lorde +te Kyng wolde assent
+terto . CMBRUT3-M3,113.3451

+tis Edelwolde come a+geyn to +te <P_114> Kyng CMBRUT3-M3,114.3452

and saide ' she was faire ynow oppon to see , but of body she was wonder
lo+tly , ' CMBRUT3-M3,114.3453

+to ansuerede +te Kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,114.3454

and saide +tat he toke of her litel charge . CMBRUT3-M3,114.3455

" Sire , " quod Edelwolde +to , " she is her faderes heire ,
CMBRUT3-M3,114.3456

and y am nou+gt riche of londes , CMBRUT3-M3,114.3457

and if +ge wolde consent and grant +tat y most her haue , +tan shulde y
be riche ynow . " CMBRUT3-M3,114.3458

" In Godes name , " quod +te Kyng , " I assent +terto . "
CMBRUT3-M3,114.3459

Edelwolde +tankede +to michel +te Kyng CMBRUT3-M3,114.3460

and went a+geyne into Deuenshire CMBRUT3-M3,114.3461

& spousede +te damisel , CMBRUT3-M3,114.3462

and in +tat contre duellede . CMBRUT3-M3,114.3463

And +tus hit bifel oppon a tyme , +tat he tolde his conseil & al +tis
+ting vnto his wif , how & in what maner he hade bigilede his lorde +te
Kyng , +tat wolde haue hade her to wif . CMBRUT3-M3,114.3464

and anone as she it wist , she louede him neuermore afterwarde as she
hade done bifore . CMBRUT3-M3,114.3465

+tis lady conseyuede by him a sone ; CMBRUT3-M3,114.3466

and when tyme was +tat +tis childe shulde ben born , Eldelwolde come to
+te Kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,114.3467

& praede him to heue a sone of his at +te fountston .
CMBRUT3-M3,114.3468

+te Kyng him grantede , CMBRUT3-M3,114.3469

and lete calle him Edgare , after his owen name . CMBRUT3-M3,114.3470

And when +tis was ydon , he +tou+gt +tat he was siker ynow of +te Kyng ,
CMBRUT3-M3,114.3471

for bifore +tat tyme +tis Edelwolde him drede lest Kyng Edgare wolde
haue taken his wif , forasmiche as his lorde was a Ioly man and an
Amerus . CMBRUT3-M3,114.3472

<heading>

How +tat Kyng Edgare wedede Estrilde afte +te deth of Edelwolde .
CMBRUT3-M3,114.3474

Capitulo Centesimo terciodecimo . CMBRUT3-M3,114.3475

<$$heading>

THus hit bifelle , +tat al men in Kyng Edgares court +to speken ,
CMBRUT3-M3,114.3477

and saide +tat ' Edelwolde was richely auansede +trou+g +te mariage +tat
he hade by his wif ' ; CMBRUT3-M3,114.3478

' and +git , ' +tai saide ' he was auauncede an hundred-folde more ' for
he hade spousede +te fairest woman +tat euer was seyn .
CMBRUT3-M3,114.3479

and when +te Kyng herde speke so miche of here beaute , he +tou+gt +to
+tat Edelwolde hade him desseyuede & bigilede , CMBRUT3-M3,114.3480

& +tou+gt priuely in his hert +tat he wolde gone into Deuenesshire , as
it were for@ @to hunt for hert and hynde and o+tere wilde bestes ,
CMBRUT3-M3,114.3481

and +tan he shulde see +tere +te lady or he departede +tens .
CMBRUT3-M3,114.3482

And +tis lady was duellyng at a manere bisides <P_115> +te forest +tere
+tat +te Kyng wolde hunte , CMBRUT3-M3,115.3483

and at +tat maner was herburghede al nyght . CMBRUT3-M3,115.3484

and when tyme come +tat +te Kyng shulde sope , and +te sonne shoone ,
+te Kyng axede after his Gossib and after his godsone ,
CMBRUT3-M3,115.3485

and Edelwolde made here come bifore +te Kyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,115.3486

and no+teles , and it o+ter my+gt haue bene , she shulde nou+gt haue
comen in his sight bi his wille . CMBRUT3-M3,115.3487

+te lady welcomede +te Kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,115.3488

and suetely him kissede ; CMBRUT3-M3,115.3489

and he toke her by +te hande , CMBRUT3-M3,115.3490

& +to nexte to him her sette , CMBRUT3-M3,115.3491

and so soppede +tai togeder . CMBRUT3-M3,115.3492

And +to was a custume and an vsage +tat , when a man drank vnto ano+ter
, +te drynker shulde say ' Wassaile , ' CMBRUT3-M3,115.3493

and +tat o+tere shulde ansure ' drynkhaile ' : CMBRUT3-M3,115.3494

and +tus dede +te Kyng & +te lady meny tymes , CMBRUT3-M3,115.3495

& also kiste . CMBRUT3-M3,115.3496

And after soper , when tyme was to gone to bede , +te $Kyng went vnto
his bed , hertly +tenkyng oppon +te ladies fairnesse ;
CMBRUT3-M3,115.3497

and +to was ouercomen for here loue , +tat him +tou+gt he wolde dye ,
but of here his wille he hade . CMBRUT3-M3,115.3498

Oppon +te morwe +te Kyng aroos , CMBRUT3-M3,115.3499

and into +te fforeste went , him +tere to desporte & salace wi+t hertes
and hyndes , and alle o+ter wilde bestes ; CMBRUT3-M3,115.3500

& of +te hertes grete plente , to +te lady he sent ; CMBRUT3-M3,115.3501

and +trise he went to salace and speke wi+t +tat lady whiles he duellede
in +tat contre . CMBRUT3-M3,115.3502

And after +tat , +te Kyng remevede +tens , CMBRUT3-M3,115.3503

and +tou+gt how he myghte best delyuer Edlewolde $fram his wif , as he
hade him ferste desceyuede . CMBRUT3-M3,115.3504

and +te Kyng anone , after viij dayes , lete ordeyne a parlement at
Salesbury of al his baronage , conseile to haue , & for@ @to ordeyn how
+te contre of Northumberland mi+gt beste bene kepte , +tat +te Danoys
come nou+gt +tere , the londe for@ @to destroye . CMBRUT3-M3,115.3505

And +tis Edelwolde come also to +te Kynges Parlement ;
CMBRUT3-M3,115.3506

and +te Kyng sent him to +Gork for@ @to bene keper of +tat contre .
CMBRUT3-M3,115.3507

And +tus hit fel , +tat men +tat knew him nou+gt , slow him by +te waye
. CMBRUT3-M3,115.3508

And anone as +te Kyng herde +tat he was dede , he lete sende after +te
Lady Estrilde , +tat she shulde come to +te citee of London , and +tere
bene weded to +te Kyng wi+t grete solempnite & worshipe ;
CMBRUT3-M3,115.3509

and helde a solempne fest ; CMBRUT3-M3,115.3510

and he werede a crone of $gold , and +te Quene ano+ter .
CMBRUT3-M3,115.3511

And seynt <P_116> Dunston on +te morwe come vnto +te Kyng into +te
Kyngus chaumbre CMBRUT3-M3,116.3512

and fonde +te Kyng abed , & +te quene also in fere ; CMBRUT3-M3,116.3513

and seynt Dunston axede who +tat she was . CMBRUT3-M3,116.3514

+te Kyng ansuerede , " +tis is +te Quene Estrilde . "
CMBRUT3-M3,116.3515

and +te Erchebisshop seynt Dunstan saide +tat ' he dede grete wrong ,
and a+geyns Godes wille to tak a woman to wif , whos childe he ha+t take
at +te funtston ' ; CMBRUT3-M3,116.3516

and +te Quene for +tat worde neuer after louede seynt Dunston ;
CMBRUT3-M3,116.3517

and no+teles +te gode man warnede ham ofte-tymes +tat folie to lete ;
CMBRUT3-M3,116.3518

but his warnyng availede litel , CMBRUT3-M3,116.3519

for +te loue bituene ham was so miche . CMBRUT3-M3,116.3520

+te Kyng bigate oppon her a sone +tat me callede Eldred ;
CMBRUT3-M3,116.3521

and when +tis childe was vj +ger olde , +te Kyng his fader deide ;
CMBRUT3-M3,116.3522

& aboute +tat tyme he hade regnede xvij +ger , CMBRUT3-M3,116.3523

and lith at Glastynbery . CMBRUT3-M3,116.3524

<heading>

Of seynt Edward +te Martir ; CMBRUT3-M3,116.3526

how Estrilde his stepmoder lete him quelle , for@ @to make Eldred , her
owen sone , Kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,116.3527

Capitulo Centesimo xiiij=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,116.3528

<$$heading>

ANd after +tis Edgare , regnede Edward his sone , +tat he bigate in his
ferst wif , +tat wel and noble gouernede +te lande ; CMBRUT3-M3,116.3530

for he was ful of al maner godenesse , CMBRUT3-M3,116.3531

and lad ful holy lif ; CMBRUT3-M3,116.3532

& aboue al +ting he louede God & holy cherche . CMBRUT3-M3,116.3533

& +te quene Estrilde , his stepmoder , lete him slee , for enchesoun to
make her owen sone Eldred kyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,116.3534

and +tus was he slayn , as afterward +ge shul her . CMBRUT3-M3,116.3535

Hit bifelle +tus oppon a day +tat +tis Kyng Edwarde went him into a wode
for@ @to play in +te Southcontre , bisides a toune +tat is callede
Warham ; in +te whiche forest was grete plente of Hertes & of hyndes .
CMBRUT3-M3,116.3536

and as he hade bene a@ @while +tere him for@ @to playe , he +tou+gt him
oppon his bro+ter Eldred , +tat Was wi+t his moder +te quene ,
CMBRUT3-M3,116.3537

for her place was ney+g +te forest ; CMBRUT3-M3,116.3538

& +tou+gte for@ @to go visite & see his bro+ter ; CMBRUT3-M3,116.3539

and tok Wi+t him but a litel meny , CMBRUT3-M3,116.3540

and went , him +to toward his Stepmoders house , +tat in +tat tyme
soiournede in +te castel of Corf . CMBRUT3-M3,116.3541

and as he rode in +te +tickenesse of +te wode , to aspie his game , hit
bifelle +tat he went amys , CMBRUT3-M3,116.3542

& loste his meny +tat were wi+t him . CMBRUT3-M3,116.3543

& at +te last he come out of +te <P_117> wode ; CMBRUT3-M3,117.3544

& as he lokede about , he saw +tere faste bisides him +te maner +tat his
Stepmoder duelled in ; CMBRUT3-M3,117.3545

& +tiderward he went allon . CMBRUT3-M3,117.3546

and anone hit was tolde +te Quene how +tat +te Kyng was comen allone
wi+tout company ; CMBRUT3-M3,117.3547

and +terfore she made ioye ynow , CMBRUT3-M3,117.3548

& +tou+gt how she my+gt do +tat he were slayn as priuely as she my+gt .
CMBRUT3-M3,117.3549

And anone priuely she called to her on of here kny+gtes , to whom she
hade tolde miche of here consel bituene ham . CMBRUT3-M3,117.3550

and bo+te +tai come to +te Kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,117.3551

and curtesly him resceyuede ; CMBRUT3-M3,117.3552

& +te Kyng tolde +tat he was com her to Visite , & also for@ @to speke
wi+t Eldrede his bro+ter . CMBRUT3-M3,117.3553

+te Quene meny tymes him +tankede , CMBRUT3-M3,117.3554

and him praiede to ali+gt and herburgh wi+t her for@ @to haue al +tat
nyght . CMBRUT3-M3,117.3555

+te Kyng saide +tat he myght nou+gt , CMBRUT3-M3,117.3556

but a+geyne he wolde wende vnto his folc , if he myght ham fynde .
CMBRUT3-M3,117.3557

And when +te Quene saw +tat he wolde nou+gt abide , she praiede him +tat
he wolde ones drynk ; CMBRUT3-M3,117.3558

& he grauntede her . CMBRUT3-M3,117.3559

and anone as +te drynk come , +te Quene drank to +te Kyng ,
CMBRUT3-M3,117.3560

& +te Kyng toke +te coppe CMBRUT3-M3,117.3561

& sette hit to his mou+t . CMBRUT3-M3,117.3562

& in +te mene-tyme whiles +tat he drank , +te kny+gt +tat was wi+t +te
Quene , wi+t a knyf smote euen +te Kyng to +te hert ,
CMBRUT3-M3,117.3563

& +tere he felle adoune dede of his palfray vnto +te er+te .
CMBRUT3-M3,117.3564

the Quene , for +tis dede , +gaf to +te Kny+gt golde & siluer grete
plente , and of o+ter richesse ynow . CMBRUT3-M3,117.3565

and +te kny+gt , anone as +tis was do , went him overe +te see ;
CMBRUT3-M3,117.3566

& so ascapede he oute of +tis lande . CMBRUT3-M3,117.3567

When +tis Kyng Edward +tus was matrede , Hit was in +te +gere after +te
Incarnacion of oure Lorde Ihesu Crist , ix_C._&_=xx=iiij +ger ,
CMBRUT3-M3,117.3568

and he hade regnede xij +gere & an half , CMBRUT3-M3,117.3569

& lith at Glastenbery . CMBRUT3-M3,117.3570

<heading>

Of Kyng Eldrede ; & how +te Kyng Swyn of Denmarc helde Engelond ; & how
Eldrede , +tat was seynt Edwardes bro+ter , was nou+gt bilouede in his
reme , and +terfore fledde into Normandye . CMBRUT3-M3,117.3572

Capitulo Centesimo Quintodecimo . CMBRUT3-M3,117.3573

<$$heading>

After +tis Kyng Edward , regnede Eldrede his bro+ter ;
CMBRUT3-M3,117.3575

and seynt Dunstan cronede him . CMBRUT3-M3,117.3576

& +tis seynt Dunstan deide sone after +tat he hade for+geue +te Quene
her trespasse , <P_118> Estrild , for encheson +tat she was cause of
Kyng Edwardes deth . CMBRUT3-M3,118.3577

and seynt Dunstan hade her assoilede , and penaunce her en-ioynede ;
CMBRUT3-M3,118.3578

and she leuede after , chaste lif & clene . CMBRUT3-M3,118.3579

+tis Kyng Eldrede wedede an Englisshe-woman ; CMBRUT3-M3,118.3580

& on here he bigate Edmunde Irenside , and ano+ter sone +tat me callede
Edwynne ; CMBRUT3-M3,118.3581

and after , deide +te Quene his moder . CMBRUT3-M3,118.3582

And in +tat tyme come into Engeland Swyn , +tat was Kyng of Denmarc ,
for@ @to chalange and conquere al +tat his Ancestres hade bifore +tat
tyme . CMBRUT3-M3,118.3583

& so he conquerede , CMBRUT3-M3,118.3584

& hade it al at his axing ; CMBRUT3-M3,118.3585

ffor +te gode Erle Cuthbert of Lyndeseye , and al +te peple of
Northumberlond , & almost al +te grete of Engeland , helde with Swyne
+tat was Kyng of Dennemarc , for-asmiche as +tai louede nou+gt Kyng
Eldrede , ffor cause +tat gode bro+ter Edward was slayn falsely for
enchesoun of him ; CMBRUT3-M3,118.3586

and +terfore no man sette but litil bi hym ; Wherfore Kyng Swyn hade al
his wille , and toke al +te lande . CMBRUT3-M3,118.3587

And Eldrede +te Kyng +to fledde into Normandye , CMBRUT3-M3,118.3588

and so spak to +te Duk , +tat +te Duc +gaf him his sustre to wif ; oppon
+te whiche he bigate ij sones : CMBRUT3-M3,118.3589

+tat on me callede Alrud , & +tat o+tere Edward . CMBRUT3-M3,118.3590

And when Swyn hade conquerede al +te lande , he regnede nobli ,
CMBRUT3-M3,118.3591

& leuede but xv +ger , CMBRUT3-M3,118.3592

& deide , CMBRUT3-M3,118.3593

and li+t at +Gork . CMBRUT3-M3,118.3594

<heading>

How Kyng Eldrede come a+geyne fram Normandye ; & how Knoth +te Danoys
regnede ; & of +te werr bituene him & Edmunde Irenside .
CMBRUT3-M3,118.3596

Capitulo Centesimo Sexto decimo . CMBRUT3-M3,118.3597

<$$heading>

After +te de+t of Swyne , +tat was a Danois , Knoght , his sone ,
duellede in Engeland , CMBRUT3-M3,118.3599

and wolde haue bene kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,118.3600

and +to come a+geyn Eldrede out of Normandy , with miche peple & wi+t
stronge meny , +tat Knoght derst nou+gt abide , CMBRUT3-M3,118.3601

but fley +tens into Denmarc . CMBRUT3-M3,118.3602

+te Kyng Eldrede hade a+geyn his reaume , CMBRUT3-M3,118.3603

& helde so grete lordeship +tat he bigan to destroi al +tat hade holpen
Swyn , +tat was a Danois , a+geynes him . CMBRUT3-M3,118.3604

And after-warde come a+geyn +tis Knoght fram Denmarc , with a grete
power , so +tat Kyng $Eldrede derst nou+gt wi+t him fi+gt ,
CMBRUT3-M3,118.3605

but fley fro <P_119> +tens vnto London , CMBRUT3-M3,119.3606

& +tere helde him . CMBRUT3-M3,119.3607

+to come Knoght , CMBRUT3-M3,119.3608

and him bisegede so longe til Kyng Eldrede diede in +te cite of London ,
and li+t at seynt Paules ; CMBRUT3-M3,119.3609

& he regnede ix +gere . CMBRUT3-M3,119.3610

<heading>

Of Kyng Knoght . CMBRUT3-M3,119.3612

Capitulo Centesimo Septuagesimo . CMBRUT3-M3,119.3613

<$$heading>

After +te deth of +tis Eldred , Knoght , +tat was a Danois , bigan +to
for@ @to regne , CMBRUT3-M3,119.3615

but Edmunde Irenside , +tat was Kyng Eldredus sone by his ferst wif ,
ordeynede a grete host , CMBRUT3-M3,119.3616

& bigan to werr oppon Kyng Knoght ; CMBRUT3-M3,119.3617

and so he dede meny tymes and ofte ; CMBRUT3-M3,119.3618

and +te werre was so $stronge and harde , +tat wonder hit was to wete .
CMBRUT3-M3,119.3619

And +te Quene Emme , +tat duelled +to at Wynchestre , hade grete drede
of her ij sones , for +te werr of Alured & Edward , leste +tai shulde
ben defoulede & misdon +trou+g +tis werre , wherfore she sent ham ouer
+te se into Normandy , to +te duc Richard her Vncle ;
CMBRUT3-M3,119.3620

and +tere +tai duelled in safte and pees longe tyme .
CMBRUT3-M3,119.3621

+tis Edmunde Irenside & Knou+gt werrede strongliche to-geder ;
CMBRUT3-M3,119.3622

but at +te laste +tai were accorded in +tis maner , +tat +tai shulde
departe +te reaume bituenes ham ; CMBRUT3-M3,119.3623

and so +tai deden ; CMBRUT3-M3,119.3624

& after , +tai bicome gode frendes , CMBRUT3-M3,119.3625

and so wel louede togederes as +tai hade bene bri+ter , geten of o body
, & of o moder born . CMBRUT3-M3,119.3626

<heading>

How Kyng Edmunde Irenside traiterousely was slayn , +trou+g a tratour
+tat me callede Edrith of Statton . CMBRUT3-M3,119.3628

Capitulo Centesimo xviij=mo= . CMBRUT3-M3,119.3629

<$$heading>

ANd after , +to regnede Kyng Edmunde Irenside and Knoght +te Danois .
CMBRUT3-M3,119.3631

but +tus it fel aftirward , and in +te same +gere +tat +tai were
accorded , CMBRUT3-M3,119.3632

and somiche loueden togeder , whereof a false +tef traitoure hade enuy
vnto +te loue +tat was bituene ham , and frendeship , whos name was
Edrith of Stratton , +tat was a grete lorde , +tat was Edmunde Irensides
man , & of him helde all +te londe +tat he hade . CMBRUT3-M3,119.3633

And no+teles he +tou+gt his lorde to bitraie , <P_120> & make Knoght
kyng of +te lande , to +tat entent richely to ben auauncede , & wi+t him
bene wel bilouede . Wherfore he praiede his lorde , Edmunde Irenside ,
oppon a day wi+t him for@ @to eten , and wi+t him duelle .
CMBRUT3-M3,120.3634

and +te kyng curteisly him grantede , CMBRUT3-M3,120.3635

& to him come at his praier ; CMBRUT3-M3,120.3636

and at +te mete +te kyng richely was seruede with diuerse metis &
drynkes . CMBRUT3-M3,120.3637

And when nyght come +tat he shulde gone to bede , +te kyng tok his owen
meny , CMBRUT3-M3,120.3638

& went into chambre . CMBRUT3-M3,120.3639

& as he lokede aboute , he saw a wonder faire ymage , & wel made ,
CMBRUT3-M3,120.3640

& in semblant as it were an Archire , wi+t a bowe bent in his honde , &
in +te bowe a fyne Arwe . CMBRUT3-M3,120.3641

Kyng Edmunde went +to neir , to biholde hit bettr , what it mi+gte bene
; CMBRUT3-M3,120.3642

and anone as his honde tochede +te Arwe , anone +te arwe him smote
+trou+g +te body , CMBRUT3-M3,120.3643

& +tere slough +te kyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,120.3644

for +tat engyne was made to quelle his lorde traiterousely .
CMBRUT3-M3,120.3645

And when +te $Kyng Edmund +tus was dede & slayn , he n@ @ad regnede but
x +gere . CMBRUT3-M3,120.3646

his peple for him made miche sorw , CMBRUT3-M3,120.3647

and his body +tai bare to Glastenbury CMBRUT3-M3,120.3648

and +tere +tai him enterede . CMBRUT3-M3,120.3649

And +tus traitour Edrik anone went to +te Quene , +tat was Kyng Edmundes
wif , +tat wiste of here lordes de+t . CMBRUT3-M3,120.3650

anone he toke fram her hir ij sones , +tat were faire and +gong , +tat
her lorde hade oppon hier geten , -- CMBRUT3-M3,120.3651

& +tat on me callede Edward , & +tat o+ter Edwyn , --
CMBRUT3-M3,120.3652

& lade ham wi+t him to London , CMBRUT3-M3,120.3653

and toke ham vnto Kyng Knoght , +tat he shulde done with ham what his
willes were ; CMBRUT3-M3,120.3654

& tolde him how queyntly he hade quellede Kyng Edmunde , for enchesoun &
loue of him , so +tat Kyng Knoght all Engeland in his power holly mi+gt
haue . CMBRUT3-M3,120.3655

" O +tow false traitoure ! CMBRUT3-M3,120.3656

haste +tow my trewe wedbro+ter slayn for cause of me ? a man +tat y
moste Louede in +te Worlde . CMBRUT3-M3,120.3657

now , be myn heuede , I shal for +ti trauail +te wel reward as +tow hast
deseruede ! " CMBRUT3-M3,120.3658

and anone lete him take and bynde , hondes & feete in maner of a
traitour , CMBRUT3-M3,120.3659

& lete caste him into Thamise ; CMBRUT3-M3,120.3660

and in +tis <P_121> maner +te false traitour endede his lif .
CMBRUT3-M3,121.3661

+te Kyng tok +to ij childerne to +te Abbot of Westmynstr , to warde and
to kepe til he wiste what was beste wi+t ham to done .
CMBRUT3-M3,121.3662

<heading>

How Kyng Knoght sent Edmundes sones bo+te into Denmarc for@ @to slee ; &
how +tai were sauede . CMBRUT3-M3,121.3664

Capitulo Centesimo xix=mo= . CMBRUT3-M3,121.3665

<$$heading>

HIt bifelle sone after +tat Kyng Knoght hade al +te lande into his hande
and spousede +te Quene Emme +trou+g consent of his baronage ,
CMBRUT3-M3,121.3667

for she was a faire womman , CMBRUT3-M3,121.3668

& was Eldredes wif , and +te dukes suster of Normandye :
CMBRUT3-M3,121.3669

& +tai leueden to-geder with miche loue , as resoun wolde .
CMBRUT3-M3,121.3670

+te Kyng axede oppon a day conseile of +te Quene , what was beste for@
@to done wi+t the sones +tat wer Edmundes Irenside .
CMBRUT3-M3,121.3671

" Sire , " quod she ; " +tai be+t +te right heirs of +te londe ;
CMBRUT3-M3,121.3672

& if +tai leuen , +tai wille do +gow miche sorwe with werr ;
CMBRUT3-M3,121.3673

and +terfor lete sende ham into a strange lande aferr , to some man +tat
may ham defoule & destroie . " CMBRUT3-M3,121.3674

The Kyng anone lete calle a Danois +tat me callede Walgar ,
CMBRUT3-M3,121.3675

and commandede him +tat he shulde lede +to ij childerne into Denmarc ,
and so do for ham +tat neuer +tai herde more tydyngus of ham .
CMBRUT3-M3,121.3676

" Sir , " saide +tis Walger , " gladely +goure commandement shal bene
done , " CMBRUT3-M3,121.3677

And tok +to ij childerne , CMBRUT3-M3,121.3678

& lad ham into Denmarc . CMBRUT3-M3,121.3679

& for-asmiche as he saw +tat +te childern were wonder fair , and also
meke , he had of ham grete pitee and reuthe , CMBRUT3-M3,121.3680

& wolde nou+gt ham slee , CMBRUT3-M3,121.3681

but lade ham to +te Kyng of Hungrie for@ @to norisshe :
CMBRUT3-M3,121.3682

For this Walgar was wel knowen wi+t +te Kyng , and wel bilouede .
CMBRUT3-M3,121.3683

Anone +te Kyng axede whens +te childern were . CMBRUT3-M3,121.3684

And Walger tolde him , CMBRUT3-M3,121.3685

& saide +tat ' +tai were +te right heirs of Engeland ,
CMBRUT3-M3,121.3686

& +terfor men wolde ham destroye ' ; CMBRUT3-M3,121.3687

" and +terfore , sire , to +gow +tai be+t comen , mercy & helpe to
biseche ; CMBRUT3-M3,121.3688

& forso+t if +tai mowen leue , <P_122> +gour men +tai shullen becomen ,
CMBRUT3-M3,122.3689

and of +gow +tai shal holde al hire land . CMBRUT3-M3,122.3690

The Kyng of Hungrie ham vnderfonge with michel honour ,
CMBRUT3-M3,122.3691

and lete ham worthely to bene kepte . CMBRUT3-M3,122.3692

And +tus hit bifelle afterwarde , +tat Edwyne , +te +gonger bro+ter ,
deide , CMBRUT3-M3,122.3693

and Edward +te elder bro+ter leuede , a fair man , a stronge , & a large
of body , and gentil and curteise of condicions , so +tat alle men him
louede . CMBRUT3-M3,122.3694

And +tis Edward , in +te cronicles is callede amonges Englishhemen , '
Edward +te outelaghe . ' CMBRUT3-M3,122.3695

And when he was made knyght , +te Kyngus doughter of Hungary so miche
him louede , for his godenesse and his fairenesse , +tat she made &
callede him her derlyng . CMBRUT3-M3,122.3696

The Kyng +tat was her fader , perceyuede wel +te loue +tat was bituene
ham too , CMBRUT3-M3,122.3697

And hade non heir but +tat doughter . CMBRUT3-M3,122.3698

And +te Kyng fouchede his dou+gter to no man so wel as he dede vnto him
+tat her louede , & she him ; CMBRUT3-M3,122.3699

& he +gaf here to him wi+t gode wille ; CMBRUT3-M3,122.3700

and Edward her spousede wi+t michel honour . CMBRUT3-M3,122.3701

The Kyng of Hungrie sent after al his baronage , CMBRUT3-M3,122.3702

& made a solempne fest and ryche weddyng , CMBRUT3-M3,122.3703

and made al men to vnderstonde +tat he shulde ben Kyng when he were dede
; CMBRUT3-M3,122.3704

and +terof +tai maden al gret ioye ; CMBRUT3-M3,122.3705

and of +tat tydyng +tai wer ful glade . CMBRUT3-M3,122.3706

+tis Edwarde bigate oppon +tis lady a sone +tat me callede Edgar Helyng
and afterward , a doughter +tat me callede Margarete , +tat $aftirward
was Quene of Scotland ; CMBRUT3-M3,122.3707

and , by +te Kyng of Scotland +tat me callede Maucolom , she hade a
dou+gter +tat was callede Maude , +tat afterwarde was Quene of Engeland
+trou+g Kyng Henry , +tat was +te ferst sone of +te Conqueroure , +tat
her weded ; CMBRUT3-M3,122.3708

& he bigate on her a dou+gter +tat me callede Maude , +tat afterward was
Emperesse of Almaign ; CMBRUT3-M3,122.3709

and of +tis Maude come Henry +te Kyng of Engeland , +tat into +tis day
is callede ' Henry , +te Emperesse sone . ' CMBRUT3-M3,122.3710

And +git hade +tis Edward ano+ter dou+gter by his wif , +tat me called
Cristian , CMBRUT3-M3,122.3711

and she was a none . CMBRUT3-M3,122.3712

<P_123>

<heading>

How Kyng Knoght , +tat was a proude man , conquered Nor-waye & how he
bicome afterwarde meke . CMBRUT3-M3,123.3715

Capitulo Centesimo xx=mo= . CMBRUT3-M3,123.3716

<$$heading>

NOw haue +ge herde of Edmundes sones wi+t +te Irenside , +tat Kyng
Knoght wende +tai hade ben dede , as he hade com-mandede Walger bifor .
CMBRUT3-M3,123.3718

And this Knoght hade in his honde al Engeland and Denmarc .
CMBRUT3-M3,123.3719

And after +tat , he went to Norwaye , +tat londe to conquere .
CMBRUT3-M3,123.3720

But +te Kyng of +te lande +tat me callede Elaf , come with his peple ,
CMBRUT3-M3,123.3721

& wende his lande wel haue kepte & defendede ; CMBRUT3-M3,123.3722

& so +tere he fau+gt with ham , til at +te laste he was slayn in +tat
bataile ; CMBRUT3-M3,123.3723

& +to +tis Knoght toke al +tat lande into his hande .
CMBRUT3-M3,123.3724

And when he hade conquerede al Norwaye , and taken feautes & homages
+tere , he come after a+geyne into Engelond , CMBRUT3-M3,123.3725

and helde him-self so grete lorde , +tat him +tou+gt in al +te worlde no
man his pier was ; CMBRUT3-M3,123.3726

& bicome so prout & hauten +tat hit was grete wonder .
CMBRUT3-M3,123.3727

And so hit bifelle , oppon a day as he hade herde masse at Westmynstre ,
and wolde haue gone into his palice , +te water of Tamise so swiftely
a+geynes him comen , +tat Almost hit tochede his fete .
CMBRUT3-M3,123.3728

+to saide +te Kyng with a prout hert , " y com-mande +te water turne
a+geyn , CMBRUT3-M3,123.3729

or elles y shal +te make . " CMBRUT3-M3,123.3730

+te wawys for his commandement wolde nou+gt spare , CMBRUT3-M3,123.3731

but flowede euer on hye more & more . CMBRUT3-M3,123.3732

The Kyng was so prout of hert +tat he wolde nou+gt flee +te water ,
CMBRUT3-M3,123.3733

but abode stille in +te water , CMBRUT3-M3,123.3734

and bete +te water wi+t a smal +gerd +tat he helde in his hande ,
CMBRUT3-M3,123.3735

& comandede +te water +tat it shulde wende no fer+tere ;
CMBRUT3-M3,123.3736

but for al his commandement +te water wolde nou+gt cesse ,
CMBRUT3-M3,123.3737

but euer waxe more & more an hye , so +tat +te Kyng was al wete ,
CMBRUT3-M3,123.3738

and stode depe in +te water . CMBRUT3-M3,123.3739

And when he saw +tat he hade abide +tere or longe , & +te water wolde
no+ting done his commandement , +to sone he wi+tdrowe him ,
CMBRUT3-M3,123.3740

and +to stode oppon a stone CMBRUT3-M3,123.3741

& helde his hondes an hye , CMBRUT3-M3,123.3742

& saide +tis worde in heryng of al +te peple : CMBRUT3-M3,123.3743

" +tis God +tat make+t +te see +tus arise an <P_124> hye , he is Kyng of
alle Kynges , & of myghtes most ; CMBRUT3-M3,124.3744

& y ame a caitif and a man deadly , CMBRUT3-M3,124.3745

& he may neuer dye ; CMBRUT3-M3,124.3746

& alle +ting doth his commandement , CMBRUT3-M3,124.3747

& to him is obedient . CMBRUT3-M3,124.3748

To +tat God Y praye +tat he be my waraunt , CMBRUT3-M3,124.3749

for y knowliche me caitif feble , & of none power ; CMBRUT3-M3,124.3750

and +terfore y wil gone to Rome wi+tout eny lettyng , my Wickednesse
for@ @to punisshe , and me to amende ; CMBRUT3-M3,124.3751

ffor of +tat God y cleyme my landes for@ @to holde , and of none o+tere
" ; CMBRUT3-M3,124.3752

and anone made his heir , CMBRUT3-M3,124.3753

and him-self $went to Rome wi+touten eny lettyng , CMBRUT3-M3,124.3754

& by +te way dede meny almes dedes , & when he come to Rome also .
CMBRUT3-M3,124.3755

And when he hade bene +tere , and for his synnes done penaunce , he come
a+geyne into Engeland , CMBRUT3-M3,124.3756

and bicome a gode man and an holy , CMBRUT3-M3,124.3757

and lefte al maner pride & stoutenesse , CMBRUT3-M3,124.3758

& leuede an holy lif al his lif after , CMBRUT3-M3,124.3759

and made ij Abbayes of seynt Benet , one in Engeland & +tat o+tere in
Norway , for-asmiche as he louede specialy seynt Benet bifore al o+tere
seyntes ; CMBRUT3-M3,124.3760

and miche he louede also soynt Edmunde +te kyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,124.3761

& ofte he +gaf grete +giftes to +te hous , wherfore it was made ryche .
CMBRUT3-M3,124.3762

and when he had regnede xx +gere , he deide , CMBRUT3-M3,124.3763

& li+t at Wynchestr . CMBRUT3-M3,124.3764

<heading>

Of Kyng Harolde , +tat leuer hade gone in foot +tan ryde on hors .
CMBRUT3-M3,124.3766

Capitulo Centesimo $xxi=mo= . CMBRUT3-M3,124.3767

<$$heading>

THis Knoght , of wham y haue spoken bifor , hade ij sones by his wif ;
CMBRUT3-M3,124.3769

& +tat on me callede Herdiknoght , & +tat o+tere Harolde ;
CMBRUT3-M3,124.3770

and he was so li+t of fote +tat men callede him +terfore Harolde
Harefote . CMBRUT3-M3,124.3771

& +tis Harolde hade no+ting +te condicions ne maners of Kyng Knoght +tat
was his fader , CMBRUT3-M3,124.3772

for he sette but litil pris of chyanlry ne of curtesye , ney+ter of
worship , but onely by his owen wille ; CMBRUT3-M3,124.3773

& he bicome so wickede +tat he exilede his moder . CMBRUT3-M3,124.3774

& +to she went out of +te land into Flaundres , CMBRUT3-M3,124.3775

& +tere she duellede wi+t +te Erl ; wherfor after +tere was neuer gode
loue bituene him & his bro+ter , CMBRUT3-M3,124.3776

for his bro+ter him hatede dedely ; CMBRUT3-M3,124.3777

and when he hade regnede ij $yere & a litil more , he deide ,
CMBRUT3-M3,124.3778

& li+t at Westmynstre . CMBRUT3-M3,124.3779

<P_125>

<heading>

Of Kyng Hardiknoght , +tat was Haroldes bro+ter . CMBRUT3-M3,125.3782

Capitulo Centesimo $xxij=mo= . CMBRUT3-M3,125.3783

<$$heading>

After +tis Harolde Harefoot , regnede his bro+ter Hardiknoght , a noble
Knyght & a wor+ti , CMBRUT3-M3,125.3785

& miche louede chiualrye and al maner godenesse . CMBRUT3-M3,125.3786

And when +tis Hardiknoght hade regnede a litil while , he lete vncouere
his bro+ter Harolde , CMBRUT3-M3,125.3787

and smote of his Heuede +tat was his bro+ter , at Westmynstr ,
CMBRUT3-M3,125.3788

and lete caste +te heuede into a gonge , and +te body into +te Tamyse .
CMBRUT3-M3,125.3789

and after come fisshers , CMBRUT3-M3,125.3790

& toke +te body wi+t her nettes by nyght , CMBRUT3-M3,125.3791

and bere him vnto seynt Clement+g cherche , CMBRUT3-M3,125.3792

& +tere him buryede ; CMBRUT3-M3,125.3793

and in +tis maner avengede him Hardeknoght of his bro+ter ,
CMBRUT3-M3,125.3794

for in none o+tere maner +tai mygh nou+gt hym avenge .
CMBRUT3-M3,125.3795

This Kyng Hardiknoght was so large +geuer of mete and of drynk , +tat
his tables were sette euer +tre tymes ful wi+t real metes for his owen
mayne , & for al +tat comen to his court to bene rychely seruede of real
metes . CMBRUT3-M3,125.3796

And +tis Kyng Hardeknoght sent after Emme his moder ,
CMBRUT3-M3,125.3797

& made hir come a+geyne into Engeland , CMBRUT3-M3,125.3798

ffor she was dryue out of Enge-land whiles +tat Harolde Harefote regnede
, +toru+g conseil of +te Erl Godwyne , +tat +to was +te grettest lorde
of al Engeland next +te kyng , and moste myght done what he wolde
+trou+g al Engeland +trou+g his commaundement , for-asmiche as he hade
spousede +te doughter of +te gode Kyng Knoght +tat was a danoys , whiche
doughter he hade by his ferst wif . CMBRUT3-M3,125.3799

And when +tis quene was dryuen out of Engeland , & come to +te Erl of
Flaundres +tat me callede Balde-wynne , her cosyn , he fonde here +tere
al +ting +tat hir nedede , Vnto the tyme +tat she went a+geyne into
Engeland , +tat +te Kyng Hardiknoght hade sent for her , +tat was her
sone , & made here come a+geyn wi+t michel honour . CMBRUT3-M3,125.3800

This Kyng Hardeknoght , when he hade v +gere regnede , he deide ,
CMBRUT3-M3,125.3801

& li+t at Wynchestre . CMBRUT3-M3,125.3802

<heading>

Of +te Vylonye +tat +te Danoys dede to +te Englisshe-men ; wherfore fro
+tat tyme afterward was none Danoys made Kyng of Engeland .
CMBRUT3-M3,125.3804

Capitulo Centesimo Vicesimo iij=o= . CMBRUT3-M3,125.3805

<$$heading>

<P_126>

After +te deth of +tis Kyng Hardeknoght , forasmiche as he n@ @ad non
heire of his body bigeten , +te Erles and barons assembled and maden a
counseil ; CMBRUT3-M3,126.3808

and neuer-more after +tat tyme no man +tat was a Danois , +tou+g he were
ner so grete a man amonges ham , he shulde neuer bene Kyng of Engeland ,
for +te despite +tat +te Danois hade done to +te Englisshemen .
CMBRUT3-M3,126.3809

For euermore biforne-honde , if it were so +tat Englisshe-men & Danois
hapden to mete oppon a bruge , +te Englisshe-men shulde nou+gt bene so
herdy to meve ne stere on foot , CMBRUT3-M3,126.3810

but stande still , til +tat +te Danois were passede forth .
CMBRUT3-M3,126.3811

And more-ouer , if +te Englisshe-men hade nou+gt bowede adoun here
heuedes , to done reuerence vnto +te Danois , +tai shulde haue bene bete
& defoulede ; CMBRUT3-M3,126.3812

& soche maner despites and Vilonyes deden +te Danois to oure
Englisshe-men ; Wherfore +tai were dryuen out of +te lande after +te
tyme +tat Kyng Herdeknoght was dede , CMBRUT3-M3,126.3813

for +tai had non lord +tat ham myght mayntene . CMBRUT3-M3,126.3814

In +tis maner voided +te Danois Engeland , +tat neuer +tai comen a+geyne
. CMBRUT3-M3,126.3815

+te Erles and barouns , by here com-mune assent & conseile , senten into
Normandy for@ @to seche +to ij bre+tern Alurede & Edward , +tat were
duellyng wi+t +te duk Richard +tat Was here eme , CMBRUT3-M3,126.3816

to +tat intent for@ @to crone Alurede +te elder bro+ter , & him make
Kyng of Engeland and of +tis +ting to make an ende , +te erles & barons
made her oth ; CMBRUT3-M3,126.3817

But +te Erl Godwyne of Westsex falsely +tou+gt to slee +to ij bre+terne
anone as +tai shulde come into Engelonde , to +tat entente for@ @to make
his sone Harolde Kyng , +te whiche sone he hade bigete oppon his wif ,
+tat was Kyng Knoghtes doughter , +tat was a Danoys .
CMBRUT3-M3,126.3818

And +tis Godwyn pryue-ly went him to Southampton , for@ @to mete +tere
+to ij bre+tern when +tat +tai shulde come to lande .
CMBRUT3-M3,126.3819

And +tus hit bifelle , +tat +te messagers +tat wenten into Normandye ,
fonden nou+gt but onely Alurede , +tat was +te eldest bro+ter ;
CMBRUT3-M3,126.3820

for Edward , his +gonger bro+ter , was gone to Hungrie for@ @to speke
wi+t his cosyn Edward +te outelaw , +tat was Edmondes sone wi+t +te
Irenside . CMBRUT3-M3,126.3821

+te messagers <P_127> tolde & saide to Alurede , how +tat +te Erles &
barons of Engeland senten after him , and +tat he boldeliche shulde come
into Engeland and vnderfonge +te reaume ; CMBRUT3-M3,127.3822

for Kyng Herdeknoght was dede , CMBRUT3-M3,127.3823

& alle +te Danois were dryuen out of +te lande . CMBRUT3-M3,127.3824

<heading>

How Godewyne , +te false traitoure , tok Alurede oppon Gildes-doun ,
when he come fro Normandye to bene Kyng of Engeland , & dede him bene
martrede in +te Ile of Ely . CMBRUT3-M3,127.3826

Capitulo Centesimo xxiiij=to= . CMBRUT3-M3,127.3827

<$$heading>

WHen Alurede herde +tis tydynges , he +tankede God , CMBRUT3-M3,127.3829

& into shipp went , wi+t al +te hast +tat he myght , CMBRUT3-M3,127.3830

and passede +te see , CMBRUT3-M3,127.3831

& arryuede at Southnmpton , +tere +tat Godewyne +te traitour was .
CMBRUT3-M3,127.3832

And when +tis $traitoure saw +tat he was comen , he wel-comede him
CMBRUT3-M3,127.3833

& vnderfonge him wi+t michel ioye , CMBRUT3-M3,127.3834

and saide +tat he wolde lede him to London , +tere +tat al +te lordes &
barons of Engeland him abode , for@ @to maken him kyng .
CMBRUT3-M3,127.3835

and so +tai wenten in her way toward London . CMBRUT3-M3,127.3836

& when +tai comen oppon Gildes-doune , +to saide +te traitoure Godwyne
to Alurede , " take+t kepe , " quod he , " aboute +gow , bo+t on +te
lefte side & in +te ryght side ; CMBRUT3-M3,127.3837

and of all +ge shul bene kyng & of suche an hundrede more . "
CMBRUT3-M3,127.3838

" Now forso+te , " quod Alurede , " I behote , &
{COM:translation_of_french_adverbial_"et"?} if y be kyng , I shal ordeyn
& make soche lawes wherof God & all folc shullen holden ham wel paied .
" CMBRUT3-M3,127.3839

Now hade +te traitoure comaunded alle his men +tat were wi+t him , +tat
when +tai were comen oppon Gildesdoun , +tat +tai shulde slee alle +to
+tat were in Aluredes com-pany +tat comen wi+t him fram Normandye , and
after +tat , taken Alurede , & lede him into +te Ile of Ely , & +tere
put out bo+te his eyne of his heued , and afterward bryng him vnto +te
deth . CMBRUT3-M3,127.3840

& so +tai deden , CMBRUT3-M3,127.3841

ffor +tai quellede al his company +tat xij_$hundred were in nombre , of
gentil-men +tat were comen wi+t Alurede fram Nor-mandye ;
CMBRUT3-M3,127.3842

And after token Alurede , CMBRUT3-M3,127.3843

& lade him into +te Ile of Ely , CMBRUT3-M3,127.3844

& put out his eyen of his heuede , CMBRUT3-M3,127.3845

& rent his wombe , CMBRUT3-M3,127.3846

& token +te chief of his bowailes , CMBRUT3-M3,127.3847

& put a stake into +te gronde , CMBRUT3-M3,127.3848

& an ende of his bowailes +terto fastenede , CMBRUT3-M3,127.3849

& wi+t nedles of Iren pricked +te body of +te gode childe ,
CMBRUT3-M3,127.3850

and so made him gone aboute +te stake <P_128> til +tat his bowales were
alle drawen out : CMBRUT3-M3,128.3851

& so deide +tere Alurede +trou+g treson of +te Erl Godwyne .
CMBRUT3-M3,128.3852

When +te lordes of Engeland hade herde & wist how Alured , +tat shulde
have ben her kyng , was put to de+t +trou+g +te false traitoure , +te
Erl Godwynne , +tai weren al wonder wroth , CMBRUT3-M3,128.3853

& swore bituene ham , by God & by his names , +tat he shulde die in mor
worse deth +tan dede Edrik of Stratton , +tat hade bitraiede his Lord
$Edmunde Irenside . CMBRUT3-M3,128.3854

and +tai wolde haue taken him , & put him vnto +te de+t ,
CMBRUT3-M3,128.3855

but +te +tef traitoure fley +tens into Denmarc , CMBRUT3-M3,128.3856

& +tere helde him iiij +gere & more , CMBRUT3-M3,128.3857

& loste all his londes in Engeland . CMBRUT3-M3,128.3858

<heading>

Of Seynt Edward +te Confessoure , +tat was Aluredes bro+ter ;
CMBRUT3-M3,128.3860

How he was Kyng of Engelande . CMBRUT3-M3,128.3861

Capitulo Cen-tesimo xxv=to= CMBRUT3-M3,128.3862

<$$heading>

ANd when +tis was done , alle +te Barons of $Engeland senten ano+ter
tyme into Normandye , for +tat Edward shulde come into Engeland with
michel honour . CMBRUT3-M3,128.3864

And +tis Edward in his childehode louede al-myghty God ,
CMBRUT3-M3,128.3865

& him drade CMBRUT3-M3,128.3866

& in honeste and clennesse leued his lif , CMBRUT3-M3,128.3867

and hatede synne as de+t . CMBRUT3-M3,128.3868

And when he was cronede and annoyntede wi+t real power , he for+gate
nou+gt his gode maners & condicions & custumes +tat he ferst vsede , for
no maner honour , ne for no richesse , ne for no maner hyenesse ,
CMBRUT3-M3,128.3869

but euer more & more +gaf him to godenesse , CMBRUT3-M3,128.3870

and wel louede God & al mekenesse , CMBRUT3-M3,128.3871

& louede God & holy cherche passyng al maner +ting , & pore men also ,
CMBRUT3-M3,128.3872

& ham helde as +tai hade bene his owen bre+terne , CMBRUT3-M3,128.3873

& to ham ofte +gaf grete almesse wi+t gode wille . CMBRUT3-M3,128.3874

<P_217>

<heading>

OF +TE SCOMFITURE OF BURBRIGGE . CMBRUT3-M3,217.3877

CAPITULO CENTESIMO NONOGESIMO SEPTIMO . CMBRUT3-M3,217.3878

<$$heading>

The gode Erl Thomas of Lancastre , Hunfray de Bohon , Erl of Herford ,
and +te barouns +tat wi+t ham wer , toke a conseile bituene ham at +te
Frere Prechoures at Pountfrett . CMBRUT3-M3,217.3880

+to +tou+gt Thomas vppon +te traitour Robert Holond ,
CMBRUT3-M3,217.3881

and saide in reprofe , " Allas ! Holonde me ha+t bitraiede !
CMBRUT3-M3,217.3882

Ay is in +te rede of somme euel shrede . " CMBRUT3-M3,217.3883

And by commune assent +tai shulde alle gone to +te castel of
Dunstanburghe , the whiche perteynede to +te Erldome of Lancastre , and
+tat +tai shulde abide +tere til +te Kyng hade for+geue ham his
male-talent . CMBRUT3-M3,217.3884

but when +te gode Erl Thomas +tis herde , he ansuerede in +tis maner ,
CMBRUT3-M3,217.3885

and saide : " Lordes , " quod he , " if we gone toward +te north , men
wil seyn +tat we gon toward +te Scottes ; CMBRUT3-M3,217.3886

and so we shul be holde traitoures , for cause of distaunce +tat is
bituene Kyng Edward and Robert +te Brus , +tat made him Kyng of Scotland
. CMBRUT3-M3,217.3887

And +terfore y say , as tochyng myself , +tat y wil go no fer+ter into
+te North +tan to myn owen castel of Pountfrett . " CMBRUT3-M3,217.3888

And when Sire Roger Clifford herde +tis , he aros vp anone in wra+t ,
CMBRUT3-M3,217.3889

and drow his suorde , CMBRUT3-M3,217.3890

& swore by Almygty God and by his holy names , but if +tat he wolde go
wi+t ham , he shulde be dede , and +tat he wolde slee him +tere .
CMBRUT3-M3,217.3891

+Te noble Erl Thomas of Lancastre was sore adrade , CMBRUT3-M3,217.3892

and saide : " faire sires , y wil go wi+t +tow whider-so-euer +ge me
lede . " CMBRUT3-M3,217.3893

+To went +tai togederes into +te North ; CMBRUT3-M3,217.3894

and wi+t ham +tai hade vij=c= men of Armes , CMBRUT3-M3,217.3895

and come to Burbrig . CMBRUT3-M3,217.3896

And when Sire Andrew of Herkela - +tat was in +te North-contre +trou+g
ordenance of +te Kyng , for@ @to kepe +te cuntre of Scotland <P_218> -
herde telle how +tat Thomas of Lancastre was descomfitede , and his
company were descomfitede at Burton vp Trent , he ordeynede him a
stronge power , and Sir Symond Ward also , +tat +to was shirryf of +Gork
, CMBRUT3-M3,218.3897

& come & mette +te barons at Burbrig ; CMBRUT3-M3,218.3898

& anone +tai breken +te brige , +tat was made of tre .
CMBRUT3-M3,218.3899

And when Sir Thomas of Lancastre herde +tat Sire Andrew of Herkela hade
brou+gt wi+t him soche a power , he was sore adrade ,
CMBRUT3-M3,218.3900

& sent for Sir Andrew of Herkela , CMBRUT3-M3,218.3901

& wi+t him spake , CMBRUT3-M3,218.3902

and saide to him in +tis maner : " Sire Andrew , " quod he , " +ge mow
wel vnderstonde how +tat our Lord +te Kyng is ladde and misgouernede by
miche false conseil , +trou+g Sir Hugh +te Spenser +te fader , & Sir
Hugh +te sone , & Sir Iohn Erl of Arundel , and +trou+g Maistre Robert
Baldok , a false pilede clerc , +tat is in +te Kyngus court duellyng ;
wherfore y praye +gow +tat +ge wil come wi+t vs , wi+t al +te power +tat
+ge haue ordeynede , and helpe to destroie +te venyme of Engeland , and
+te traitoures +tat bene +terin , CMBRUT3-M3,218.3903

and we wil +gif vnto +gow +te best part of v Erldomes +tar We haue+t &
holde+t ; CMBRUT3-M3,218.3904

and We wil mak vnto +gow an oth +tat we wil neuer do +ting wi+tout +gour
consel , CMBRUT3-M3,218.3905

and so +ge shul bene as wele at ese wi+t vs as euer was Robert Holande .
" CMBRUT3-M3,218.3906

+To ansuerede Sir Andrew of Herkela , CMBRUT3-M3,218.3907

and saide : " Sir Thomas ! +tat wolde y nou+gt do , ne consent +terto ,
for no maner +ting +tat yhe might me +geue , wi+touten +te wil and
commaundement of our lord +te Kyng ; CMBRUT3-M3,218.3908

for +tan shulde y be holde a traitoure for euer-more . "
CMBRUT3-M3,218.3909

And when +te noble Erl Thomas of Lancastre saw +tat he n@ @olde consent
to him for no maner +ting , " Sir Andrew , " he saide , " wil +ge nou+gt
consent to destroye +te venyme of +te reaume , as we bene consented ?
CMBRUT3-M3,218.3910

At on worde , Sir Andrew , y telle +te , +tat or +tis +ger be gon , +tat
+ge shal be take and holde for a traitoure , and more +tan +ge holde vs
nowe ; CMBRUT3-M3,218.3911

and in worse deth +ge shul die , +tan euer dede Knyght of Engeland ;
CMBRUT3-M3,218.3912

and vnderstonde wel +tat neuer +ge dede +ting +tat sorer +gow shal
repent . CMBRUT3-M3,218.3913

And now go+t CMBRUT3-M3,218.3914

and do what +gow gode likes ; CMBRUT3-M3,218.3915

and y wil put me to <P_219> +te mercy and grace of God . "
CMBRUT3-M3,219.3916

And so went +te false traitoure , Sir Andrew of Herkela , in his way as
a false traitour , a tiraunt , & forsuore man . CMBRUT3-M3,219.3917

for +trou+g +te noble Erl Thomas of Lancastre he vnderfonge +te armes of
chiualry , CMBRUT3-M3,219.3918

and +trou+g him he was made knyght . CMBRUT3-M3,219.3919

Thoo might men seen Archieres drawen ham in +tat on side and in +tat
o+tere ; CMBRUT3-M3,219.3920

and Kny+gtes also fou+gten togeder wonder sore ; CMBRUT3-M3,219.3921

and amonge o+tere , Sir Hunfray de Bohoun , Erl of Herford , a wor+ti
knyght of renoune +trou+gout al Cristendome , stode & fau+gt with his
enemys apon +te brigge . CMBRUT3-M3,219.3922

And as the noble lorde stode and fau+gt oppon +te brugge , a +tef , a
ribaude , scolkede vnder +te brigge , CMBRUT3-M3,219.3923

and fersly wi+t a spere smote the noble knyght into +te fondement , so
+tat his bowailles comen out +tere . CMBRUT3-M3,219.3924

Allas +te sorwe ! CMBRUT3-M3,219.3925

for +tere was slayn +te floure of solace and of comfort , & also of
curtesye . CMBRUT3-M3,219.3926

and Sire Roger of Clifford , a noble knyght , stode euer , and faught ,
CMBRUT3-M3,219.3927

& wel and nobly him defendede as a wor+ti baron ; CMBRUT3-M3,219.3928

but at +te laste he was sore wounded in +te heuede , CMBRUT3-M3,219.3929

& Sire William of Sulley & Sir Roger of Bernesfelde were slayn in +tat
bataile . CMBRUT3-M3,219.3930

And Sir Andrew of Herkela saw Sir Thomas men of Lancastre laske and
slake . CMBRUT3-M3,219.3931

Anone he & his company comen to the Gentil Knyght , Thomas of Lancastre
, CMBRUT3-M3,219.3932

& saiden " +gelde +te , traitour ! CMBRUT3-M3,219.3933

+gelde +te ! " CMBRUT3-M3,219.3934

The gentil Erl ansuerede +to , CMBRUT3-M3,219.3935

and saide : " nay , lordes ! traitour be we none , CMBRUT3-M3,219.3936

and to +gow wille we neuer vs +gelde while +tat our lifes lasten ;
CMBRUT3-M3,219.3937

but leuer we hauen to be slayn in oure treu+t , +tan {we_have} +gelde vs
to +gow . " CMBRUT3-M3,219.3938

And Sir Andrew a+gein criede oppon Sir Thomas company , +gellynge as a
wolfe , CMBRUT3-M3,219.3939

and saide ; " +gelde +gow , traitour taken ! CMBRUT3-M3,219.3940

+gelde +gow ! " CMBRUT3-M3,219.3941

and wi+t an hye voice saide : " be+t ware , sires , +tat no man of +gow
be so hardy , oppon lif and lyme , to mysdo Thomas body of Lancastre .
" CMBRUT3-M3,219.3942

And wi+t +tat worde , +te gode Erl Thomas went into a chapel ,
CMBRUT3-M3,219.3943

and saide , knelyng doun oppon his knees , CMBRUT3-M3,219.3944

and turnede his visage toward +te crois , CMBRUT3-M3,219.3945

and saide : " almyghti God ! to +te y me +gelde , CMBRUT3-M3,219.3946

and holliche put me into +ti <P_220> mercy . " CMBRUT3-M3,220.3947

And wi+t +tat , +te vileins ribaudes lepten about him , on euery side
+tat Gentil Erl , as tiraunt+g and Woode turmentures ,
CMBRUT3-M3,220.3948

and despoilede him of his Armure , CMBRUT3-M3,220.3949

& clo+tede him in a robbe of Ray , +tat was his $squyers liueray ,
CMBRUT3-M3,220.3950

and four+t lade him vnto York by water . CMBRUT3-M3,220.3951

+tere might men see miche sorwe and care , CMBRUT3-M3,220.3952

for +te gentil knyghtes fledden on euery side , CMBRUT3-M3,220.3953

and +te ribaudes and vileins egrely ham descriede , CMBRUT3-M3,220.3954

and criede in hye , " +gelde +gow , traitoures ! CMBRUT3-M3,220.3955

+gelde +gow ! " CMBRUT3-M3,220.3956

And when +tai were +golden , +tai wer robbed , and bonde as +teues .
CMBRUT3-M3,220.3957

Allas +te shame & despite , +tat +te gentil ordre of Knyghthode +tere
hade at +tat bataile ! CMBRUT3-M3,220.3958

And +te land +to was wi+touten Law , CMBRUT3-M3,220.3959

for holy cherche +to hade nomore reuerence +tan {it_would_have_if} hit
hade bene a bordel hous . CMBRUT3-M3,220.3960

And in +tat bataile was +te fader a+geins +te sone , and +te vncle
a+geins his nevew ; CMBRUT3-M3,220.3961

for so miche vnkyndenesse was neuer seyne bifore in Engeland amonges
folc of on nacioun ; CMBRUT3-M3,220.3962

for o kynrede had no more pite of +tat o+ter , +tan an_hundred wolfes
haue+t on o shepe ; CMBRUT3-M3,220.3963

and hit was no wonder , CMBRUT3-M3,220.3964

for +te grete lordes of Engeland were nou+gt alle of o nacioun ,
CMBRUT3-M3,220.3965

but were mellede wi+t o+tere nacions , +tat is for@ @to seyn , somme
Britons , Somme Saxones , somme Danois , somme Peghtes , somme
Frenche-men , somme Normans , somme Spaignardes , somme Romayns , some
Henaudes , some Flemyngus , and of o+tere diuerse naciouns , +te whiche
nacions acorded nou+gt to +te kynde bloode on Engeland .
CMBRUT3-M3,220.3966

And if +te grete Lordes of Engeland hade bene onelich wedded to
Englisshe peple , +tan shulde pees haue bene , and reste amongus ham ,
wi+touten eny envy . CMBRUT3-M3,220.3967

And at +tat bataile was Sir Roger Clifford tak , Sire Iohn Mounbray ,
Sire William Tuchet , Sir William Fit+g-William , and meny o+ter wor+ti
Knyghtes ; CMBRUT3-M3,220.3968

and Sir Hugh Dauill +te next day after was taken and put into prisoun ,
CMBRUT3-M3,220.3969

& shulde haue ben done to +te de+t if he hade nou+g spousede +te Kynges
nece , +tat was +te Erl Gilbertus sustre of Gloucestre .
CMBRUT3-M3,220.3970

<P_221>

And anone after , was Sir Bartholomev of Bedelesmer taken att Stawe Park
, a maner of +te Bisshoppes of Lincoln , +tat was his nevew , and meny
o+ter barons and baronettes ; Wherfore was made miche sorwe .
CMBRUT3-M3,221.3972

<heading>

HOW THOMAS OF LANCASTRE WAS BIHEUEDEDE ATTE POUNTFRETT , & V BARONS
HONGEDE AND DRAW +TERE . CMBRUT3-M3,221.3974

CAPITULO CENTESIMO NONOGESIMO OCTAUO . CMBRUT3-M3,221.3975

<$$heading>

And now y shal telle +gow of +te noble Erl Thomas of Lancastre .
CMBRUT3-M3,221.3977

When he was taken & brou+gt to +Gork , meny of +te citee were ful glade
, CMBRUT3-M3,221.3978

and oppon him criede wi+t hye voice , " A , sire traitoure ! +ge arne
welcome , CMBRUT3-M3,221.3979

blessed be God ! CMBRUT3-M3,221.3980

for now shal +ge haue +te reward +tat longetyme +ge haue diserued ! "
CMBRUT3-M3,221.3981

and caste oppon him meny snoweballes , CMBRUT3-M3,221.3982

and meny o+ter reproues dede him . CMBRUT3-M3,221.3983

But +te gentil Erl +tat soffrede , CMBRUT3-M3,221.3984

and saide ne+ter on ne o+tere . CMBRUT3-M3,221.3985

And in +tat same tyme +te Kyng herde of +tat scomfiture ,
CMBRUT3-M3,221.3986

and was ful glade , CMBRUT3-M3,221.3987

and in haste come to Pountfrett ; CMBRUT3-M3,221.3988

and Sir Hugh +te Spenser , and Sir Hugh his sone , and Sir Iohn , Erl of
Arundel , and Sir Edmund of Wodestok , +te Kyngus bro+ter , Erl of Kent
, and Sir Aymer of Valance , Erl of Penbrok , & maistre Robert of Baldok
, a false pilede clerc , +tat was priue & duellyng in +te Kynges court ;
and alle +tai come +tider wi+t +te Kyng . CMBRUT3-M3,221.3989

And Sir Rauf of Beeston +gaf vp the castel to the Kyng ;
CMBRUT3-M3,221.3990

and +te Kyng entrede into +te castel ; CMBRUT3-M3,221.3991

& Sir Andrev of Herkela , +te false tiraunt , +trou+g +te Kynges
commandement tok with him +te gentil Erl Thomas to Pountfret ;
CMBRUT3-M3,221.3992

and +tere he was prisonede in his owen castel +tat he hade new made ,
+tat stode a+geins +te Abbay of Kyng Edward . CMBRUT3-M3,221.3993

And Sir Hugh +te Spenser +te fader , and Sir Hugh his sone , caste and
+tou+gt how and in what maner +te God Erl Thomas of Lancastre shulde
bene dede , wi+touten iugement of his peris ; wherfore hit was ordeinede
+trou+g +te Kynges Iustice+g , +tat +te Kyng shulde put oppon him
poyntes of traitery . CMBRUT3-M3,221.3994

And so hit bifelle <P_222> +tat he was ladde to +te barr bifore +te
Kynges Iustice+g , bare-heuede as a +tef , in a faire halle wi+tin his
owen castel , +tat he hade made +terin meny a faire fest , bo+t to riche
and eke to pore . CMBRUT3-M3,222.3995

And +tise were his Iustice+g : Sir Hugh +te Spenser +te fader , Sir
Aymer of Valance , Erl of Penbrok , Sire Edmund of Wodestok , Erl of
Kent , Sire Iohn of Britaign , Erl of Richemond , & Sir Robert of
Maleme+trop , iustice ; CMBRUT3-M3,222.3996

and Sir Robert him acoupede in +tis maner : CMBRUT3-M3,222.3997

" Thomas ! atte +te ferst , oure lord +te Kyng & +tis court exclude+t
+gow of al maner ansuere . CMBRUT3-M3,222.3998

Thomas ! oure lorde +te Kyng put oppon +gow +tat +ge haue in his lande
riden wi+t baner displaiede , a+geynes his pees , as a traitour . "
CMBRUT3-M3,222.3999

And wi+t +tat worde , +te gentil Erl Thomas , wi+t an hie voice saide ,
" Nay , Lordes ! forso+t , and by Seint Thomas , y was neuer traitoure
. " CMBRUT3-M3,222.4000

The iustice saide a+gein +to : " Thomas ! our Lord +te Kyng put oppon
+te +tat +ge hauen robbede his folc , and mordred his folc , as a +tef .
CMBRUT3-M3,222.4001

Thomas ! +te Kyng also put oppon you +tat he descomfitede +gow and
+gour peple wi+t his folc in his owen reaume ; Wherfore +ge went and
fley to +te wode as an outlawe , and also +ge were taken as an outlaw .
CMBRUT3-M3,222.4002

& Thomas , as a traitoure +ge shull be hongede by resoun , but +te Kyng
ha+t for+geue +gow +tat gewys for +te loue of Quene Isabell .
CMBRUT3-M3,222.4003

And , Thomas , resoun wolde also +tat +ge shulde ben hongede ;
CMBRUT3-M3,222.4004

but +te Kyng ha+t for+geue +tat gewys for cause and loue of +gour lynage
. CMBRUT3-M3,222.4005

But Thomas , for-asmiche as +ge were tak fleyng , & as an outlaw , +te
Kyng wil +tat +gour heued be smyten of , as +ge haue wel deseruede .
CMBRUT3-M3,222.4006

Anone doth him out of pres , CMBRUT3-M3,222.4007

and bringe him to his iugement ! " CMBRUT3-M3,222.4008

+te gentil knyght , when he hade herde alle +tise wordes , wi+t an hye
voice he criede , sore weping , CMBRUT3-M3,222.4009

and saide : " Allas , Seint Thomas , faire fader ! Allas !
CMBRUT3-M3,222.4010

shal y be dede +tus ? CMBRUT3-M3,222.4011

graunt me now , blisseful God , ansuere ! " CMBRUT3-M3,222.4012

but al it availede him no+ting ; CMBRUT3-M3,222.4013

for +te cursede Gascoignes put him hider and +tider ,
CMBRUT3-M3,222.4014

and on him criede wi+t an hye voice , " O Kyng Arthur , most dredeful !
wel knowen now is +tin open traitery ! CMBRUT3-M3,222.4015

<P_223>

in euel de+t shalt +tow dye , as +tow hast wel diseruede . "
CMBRUT3-M3,223.4017

+to sette +tai oppon his heuede in scorn an olde chapelet , al-@
@to_rent & torn , +tat was nou+gt wor+t an halpeny ; CMBRUT3-M3,223.4018

& after +tai sette him oppon a lene white palfray , ful vnsemeliche ,
and ek al bare , wi+t an olde bridel ; CMBRUT3-M3,223.4019

and wi+t an horrible noyse +tai drow him out of +te castel toward his
de+t , CMBRUT3-M3,223.4020

and caste on him meny balles of snowe . CMBRUT3-M3,223.4021

And as +te turmentoures lade him out of +te castel , +to saide he +tise
pitouse wordes , CMBRUT3-M3,223.4022

and his Handes helde vp in hye toward heuen : CMBRUT3-M3,223.4023

" Now , +te Kyng of Heuen +geue vs mercy , CMBRUT3-M3,223.4024

for +te er+tely Kyng ha+t vs forsak ! " CMBRUT3-M3,223.4025

And a frere prechoure went wi+t him oute of +te castel , til +tat he
come to +te place +tat he endede-@ @in his lif ; vnto whom he shroue him
al his lif . CMBRUT3-M3,223.4026

And +te gentil Erl helde +te frere wonder faste by +te clo+tes ,
CMBRUT3-M3,223.4027

and saide : " fair fader , abide wi+t vs til +tat y be dede ;
CMBRUT3-M3,223.4028

for my flesshe quake+t for drede of de+t . " CMBRUT3-M3,223.4029

And so+t for@ @to saie , +te gentil Erl sette him oppon his Knees ,
CMBRUT3-M3,223.4030

& turned him toward +te East ; CMBRUT3-M3,223.4031

but a Ribaude +tat men callede Hugon of Moston , sette hande oppon +te
gentil Erl , CMBRUT3-M3,223.4032

and said in despite of him : " Sir traitoure , turne +te toward +te
Scottes , +tin foule deth to vnderfonge " ; CMBRUT3-M3,223.4033

and turnede +te Erl toward +te North . CMBRUT3-M3,223.4034

The noble Erl Thomas ansuered +to wi+t a milde voice ,
CMBRUT3-M3,223.4035

and saide : " Now , fair Lordes , y shal do al +gour owen wille . "
CMBRUT3-M3,223.4036

And wi+t +tat worde +te frere went fram him ful sore ;
CMBRUT3-M3,223.4037

and anone a ribaude went to him , CMBRUT3-M3,223.4038

and smote of his heuede , +te xj Kalendus of April , in +te +ger of
grace M=l=CCC_xxj . CMBRUT3-M3,223.4039

Allas +tat euer soche a gentil blode shulde ben don to de+t with-outen
cause and resoun ! CMBRUT3-M3,223.4040

And traiterousely was +te Kyng conseilede when he , +trou+g false
conseil of +te false Spensers , soffrede Sir Thomas , his vncles sone ,
bene put to soche a de+t , & so ben-@ @heuedede a+geyns al maner resoun
. CMBRUT3-M3,223.4041

And grete pitee hit was also , +tat soche a noble Kyng shulde ben
desceyuede and mysgouernede +trou+g false Spensers , +te whiche he
mayntenede +trou+g loselry a+geins his honour and ek profit ;
CMBRUT3-M3,223.4042

for afterward +tere felle grete vengeaunce in <P_224> Engeland for
enchesoun of +te forsaide Thomas de+t . CMBRUT3-M3,224.4043

When +te gentil Erl of +tis lif was passede , +te Prioure and +te monkes
of Pounfrett geten Sir Thomas body of +te Kyng , CMBRUT3-M3,224.4044

and +tai buriede hit bifor +te hye auter in the right side .
CMBRUT3-M3,224.4045

And +tat same day +tat +te gentil lord was dede , +tere wer honged and
draw for +te same querel at Pountfrett , Sir William Tuchet , Sir
William Fit+g-William , Sire Warein of Ysillee , Sire Henry of Bradboure
, Sir William Cheyne , barons alle , & Iohn Page , Squyer .
CMBRUT3-M3,224.4046

And sone after at +Gork , wer draw and Honget , Sire Roger of Clifford ,
Sir Iohn of Mounbray , barons , & Sire Gosselyn Dauil , Knyght .
CMBRUT3-M3,224.4047

And at Bristow were draw and honged , Sire Henry of Wynington , and Sire
Henry of Mounford , barons . CMBRUT3-M3,224.4048

And at Gloucestre wer draw and hongede , Sire Iohn Giffard & Sire
William of Elmebruge , barons . CMBRUT3-M3,224.4049

And at London wer Honget & draw , Sir Henry Tyeys , baron ; & at
Winchelse , Sir Thomas Culpeper , knyght ; & at Wyndesore , Sir
Fraunceys of Waldenham , baron ; CMBRUT3-M3,224.4050

& at Kaunterbury was draw and honged , Sire Bartholomew of Badelesmer &
Sir Bartholomev of Assheburnham , barons ; And at Kerdif in Walys , Sir
William Flemynge , baron . CMBRUT3-M3,224.4051

<heading>

HOW KYNG EDWARD WENT INTO SCOTLAND WI+T AN_C=ML= MEN OF ARMES , AND
MIGHT NOU+GT SPEDE . CMBRUT3-M3,224.4053

CAPITULO CENTESIMO NONOGESIMO NONO . CMBRUT3-M3,224.4054

<$$heading>

And when Kyng Edward of Engeland hade brou+gt +te flour of chiualry vnto
+tis de+t , +trou+g conseil of Sir Hughe +te Spensers +te fader , & Sir
Hugh his sone , he bicome as wood as a lyoun ; CMBRUT3-M3,224.4056

and what-so-euer the Spensers wolde haue done , it was don .
CMBRUT3-M3,224.4057

And so wel the Kyng louede ham , +tat +tai might do wi+t him al +tat
+tai wolde ; wherfore the King +gaf vnto Sir Hugh +te Spenser +te fader
, +te Erldome of Wynchestre , and to Sir Androv of Herkela +te Erldome
of Carlele , in preiudice and harmyng of his croune .
CMBRUT3-M3,224.4058

And Kyng Edward +to , +trou+g conseil of <P_225> +te Spensers ,
disheritede alle ham +tat hade bene a+geins him in eny querell wi+t
Thomas of Lancastre ; CMBRUT3-M3,225.4059

and meny o+tere wer disherited also , for encheson +tat +te Spensers
coueitede for@ @to haue her londes ; CMBRUT3-M3,225.4060

and so +tai hade al +tat +tai wolde desire , wi+t wronge , and a+geyns
al resoun . CMBRUT3-M3,225.4061

+to made +te Kyng , Robert of Baldok , a false pilede clerc ,
Chaunceller of Engeland , +trou+g conseil of +te forsaide Spensers ;
CMBRUT3-M3,225.4062

and he was a false rybaude and a couetous ; CMBRUT3-M3,225.4063

and so +tai conselede +te Kyng so miche , +tat +te Kyng lete take to his
owen ward alle +te godes of +te lordes +tat wrongefully were put vnto
+te de+t , into his owen honde ; CMBRUT3-M3,225.4064

and aswel +tai token +te godes +tat were in holy cherche , as +te godes
+tat were wi+tout , CMBRUT3-M3,225.4065

and lete ham ben put into his tresorie $at London , CMBRUT3-M3,225.4066

and lete ham calle his forfait+g ; CMBRUT3-M3,225.4067

and by her conseile +te Kyng wrought , and disheritede al ham +tat +te
gode oweden ; CMBRUT3-M3,225.4068

and +trou+g her conseil lete arere a talliage of alle +te godes of
Engeland ; wherfore he was +te richest Kyng +tat euer was in Engeland ,
after William Bastard of Normandy , +tat conquerede Engeland .
CMBRUT3-M3,225.4069

And +gitte , +trou+g consell of ham , him semede +tat he hade nou+gt
ynou+g , CMBRUT3-M3,225.4070

but made +gitte euery toun of Engeland fynde a man of Armes oppon her
owen costages , for@ @to gon and werr oppon the Scottes +tat Wer his
enemys . Wherfore +te Kyng went into Scotland wi+t an_hundred_+tousande
men of Armes at Whitsontide , in the +gere of our Lord God
M=l=CCC_&_xxij . CMBRUT3-M3,225.4071

But +te Scottes went CMBRUT3-M3,225.4072

and hud ham in Mounteyns and in Wodes , CMBRUT3-M3,225.4073

and tariede +te Englisshe-men fro day to day , +tat +te Kyng myght for
no maner +ting ham fynde in pleyn felde ; wherfore meny Englisshe-men ,
+tat few vitailes hade , for hunger +tere deiden wonder faste , and
sodeynly , for hunger in goyng and in comyng , and nameliche +to +tat
hade bene a+geyns Thomas of Lancastre , and hade robbet his men oppon
his landes . CMBRUT3-M3,225.4074

When Kyng Edward saw +tat vitailes failede him , he was +to wonder sore
discomfortede , for enchesoun also +tat his men so deide , and also for
he might nou+gt spede of his enemys ; CMBRUT3-M3,225.4075

so at +te <P_226> last he come a+geyne into Engeland .
CMBRUT3-M3,226.4076

And anone after come Iames Douglas and Thomas Randolf wi+t an huge ost
into Engeland , into Northumberland , and wi+t ham +te Englisshe-men
+tat wer dryuen out of Engeland , CMBRUT3-M3,226.4077

& come CMBRUT3-M3,226.4078

and robbet the contre , CMBRUT3-M3,226.4079

and quellede +te peple , CMBRUT3-M3,226.4080

and also brent +te toun +tat was callede North-allertoun , and meny
o+ter tounes vnto +Gork . CMBRUT3-M3,226.4081

And when +te Kyng herd +tis +ting , he lete $sompne alle maner men +tat
might trauaile . CMBRUT3-M3,226.4082

And so +te Englisshemen mette +te Scottes atte +te Abbay of Beiheland ,
+te xv day after Michelmasse in +te same +ger abouesaide ;
CMBRUT3-M3,226.4083

And +te Englisshe-men wer +tere descomfited ; CMBRUT3-M3,226.4084

& at +tat scomfiture was tak Sir Iohn of Britaygn , Erl of Richemonde ,
+tat helde +te contre and the Erldome of Lancastre ; CMBRUT3-M3,226.4085

and after , he paiede an huge raunsoun , CMBRUT3-M3,226.4086

and was lete gone ; CMBRUT3-M3,226.4087

and after +tat he went into Fraunce CMBRUT3-M3,226.4088

and come neuer after a+geyn . CMBRUT3-M3,226.4089

<heading>

HOW SIR ANDREW OF HERKELA WAS TAKEN , AND PUT VNTO +TE DE+T , +TAT WAS
ERL OF CARDOILE . CMBRUT3-M3,226.4091

CAPITULO CC=MO= . CMBRUT3-M3,226.4092

<$$heading>

And at +tat tyme Sir Andrew of Herkela , +tat newe was made Erl of
Cardoile , for cause +tat he hade taken +te goode Erl of Lancastre , he
hade ordeyned , +trou+g +te Kyngus commandement of Engeland , for@ @to
bryng him all +te power +tat he might , for@ @to helpe him a+geyns +te
Scottes atte +te Abbay of Behigland . CMBRUT3-M3,226.4094

And when +te false traitoure hade gadrede all +te peple +tat he might ,
and shulde haue comen to +te Kyng to +te Abbay of Biegland , +te false
traitoure lad ham by ano+ter contre +trou+g Copeland , and +trou+g +te
Erldome of Lancastr , CMBRUT3-M3,226.4095

and went +trou+g +te contre , CMBRUT3-M3,226.4096

and robbit and quellede folc , al +tat he might . CMBRUT3-M3,226.4097

And fer+termore +te false traitour hade take a gret some of golde of Sir
Iamys Douglas , for@ @to bene a+geyns +te Kyng of Engeland , and to bene
helpyng and holdyng wi+t +te Scottes ; +trou+g whos tresoun +te Kyng of
Engeland was scomfitede at Biheland er +tat he come +tider ; wherfore
+te Kyng was toward him ful wro+t , and lete priuely enquere in +te
contre about , how hit was . CMBRUT3-M3,226.4098

and so men <P_227> enquerede and aspiede , so +tat at the laste treu+t
was founde , and sought , CMBRUT3-M3,227.4099

and he atteint and taken as a false traitour , - as +te noble Erl Thomas
of Lancastre him tolde , er +tat he were don to dede at his takyng att
Burbrig , and to him saide , +tat ' or +tat +gere wer Don , he shulde
ben take and holde a traitour ' : CMBRUT3-M3,227.4100

and so hit was , as +te holy man saide . Wherfore +te Kyng sent priuely
to Sire Antoyn of Lucye , a kny+gt of +te contre of Cardoile , +tat he
shulde tak Sir Andrew of Herkela , and put him vnto +te de+t .
CMBRUT3-M3,227.4101

And to bryng +tis +ting to +te ende , +te Kyng sent his commission , so
+tat +te same Andrew was take at Carleel , & ledde vnto +te barr in
maner of an Erl , worthely arraied , and with a suorde gert aboute him ,
and hosede and spored . CMBRUT3-M3,227.4102

+to spak Sir Antoyn in +tis maner , " Sir Andrew , " quod he , " +te
Kyng put oppon +te +tat , for-asmiche as +ge haue bene orpede in +gour
dedes , he dede vnto +gow michel honour , and made +gow Erle of Carlele
; CMBRUT3-M3,227.4103

and +tow , as traitoure vnto +ti lord +te Kyng , laddest his peple of
+tis contrey , +tat shulde haue holpe him at +te bataile of Bihiland ;
CMBRUT3-M3,227.4104

and +tow laddest ham away by +te contre of Copeland , and +trou+g +te
Erldome of Lancastr , wherfor our lord +te Kyng was scomfitede in
bataile +tere of the Scottes , +trou+g +ti tresoun and falsenesse .
CMBRUT3-M3,227.4105

And if +tow hadest come betyme , he hade yhade +te maistre ;
CMBRUT3-M3,227.4106

and al +tat tresoun +tow dedest , for +te grete somme of golde and
siluer +tat +tow vnderfong of Iames Douglas , a Scott , +te Kynges enemy
. CMBRUT3-M3,227.4107

And our Lorde +te Kyng@ @us wille is , +tat +ge , +te ordre of
Knyghthode , - by +te whiche +tow vnderfonge al +tin honour and worship
oppon +ti body , - be al brou+gt to nou+gt , and +ti state vndone , +tat
o+tere knyghtes of lawer Degre mowe after +te be-ware ; +te whiche lorde
ha+t +te auancede hugely in diuerses contrees of Engeland ; and +tat
alle may take ensample by +te , her lord aftirward trewely for@ @to
serue . " CMBRUT3-M3,227.4108

+to commanded he a knaf anone to hew of his spores of his <P_228> heles
; CMBRUT3-M3,228.4109

& after he lete breke +te suerde ouer his heuede , +te whiche +te Kyng
him +gaf to kepe and defende his lande +terwi+t , when he made him Erl
of Cardoile ; CMBRUT3-M3,228.4110

and after he lete him vnclo+te of his furrede mantel and of his hood ,
and of his furrede Cotes and of his gerdell . CMBRUT3-M3,228.4111

And when +tis was don , Sire Antoyne saide vnto him : " Andrew , " quod
he , " now art +tow no kny+gt , but a knaue ; CMBRUT3-M3,228.4112

and for +ti treson +te Kyng wille +tat +tow bene honged & drawe , and
+tin heuede smyten of , and +ti bowelles taken out of +ti body , and +ti
bowelles brent , and +ti body quarterede , and +tin heuede smyten of ,
and sent vnto London ; CMBRUT3-M3,228.4113

and +tere hit shal be sette oppon London Brigge ; CMBRUT3-M3,228.4114

and +ti iiij quarters shal be sent to iiij tounes of Engeland , +tat
alle o+tere mowe be-ware and chastisede by +te . " CMBRUT3-M3,228.4115

And as Antoyne saide , so hit was done , al maner +ting , on +te last
day of Ottobre , in +te +ger of grace M=l=CCC_xxij +gere ;
CMBRUT3-M3,228.4116

and +te sonne +to turnede into blode , as +te peple it saw .
CMBRUT3-M3,228.4117

and +tat durede fro +te morne , til hit was xj of +te Clokke of +te day
. CMBRUT3-M3,228.4118
