<BEGIN_cmedthor-m34>

<P_16>

Incipit Speculum Sancti Edmundi Cantuarensis Archipiscopi in Anglicis .
CMEDTHOR-M34,16.3

Here begynnys The Myrrour of Seynt Edmonde +te Ersebechope of
Canterberye . CMEDTHOR-M34,16.4

Videte vocacionem vestram . CMEDTHOR-M34,16.5

This wordes , sayse Saynte Paule , in his pistyll , CMEDTHOR-M34,16.6

and thay are thus mekill to saye one ynglysche , CMEDTHOR-M34,16.7

' Seese +gowre callynge . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,16.8

This worde falles till vs folke of religioun : CMEDTHOR-M34,16.9

and +tat sais he , till excite vs till perfeccyone . CMEDTHOR-M34,16.10

And ther-fore , what houre +tat I thynke of my-selfe , one nyghte or on
day , On a syde hafe I gret Ioye , and on ano+ter syde gret sorowe : --
CMEDTHOR-M34,16.11

Ioy , for +te haly religion ; CMEDTHOR-M34,16.12

sorowe and confusyon for my febill conuersasione . CMEDTHOR-M34,16.13

And +tat es na wondire , CMEDTHOR-M34,16.14

for I hafe gret encheson . CMEDTHOR-M34,16.15

Als +te wyese man saise in his sermon , he sais , ' to com to Religion
es souerayne perfeccyone ; CMEDTHOR-M34,16.16

and there-In noghte perfitly to lyffe es souerayne dampnacyone . '
CMEDTHOR-M34,16.17

And thar-for +tare es na turne of +te way bot ane , to come in
congregacyone , +tat es , to drawe to perfeccione als +tou will +ti
saluacyone , to leue all +tat es in this worlde and all +tat +ter-to
langys , and sett thi myghte to lyffe perfitly . CMEDTHOR-M34,16.18

To lyffe perfitly , as Sayne Bernarde vs kennys , +tat es , to lyffe
honourabilly , mekely , & lufesomly . CMEDTHOR-M34,16.19

Honourabilly , als to God , +tat +tou sett thyn Entente to do Hys will ,
+tat es $at say in all thynges +tat +tou sall thynke in hert , or say
with mouthe , or doo in dede , with any of +ti fyve wittes ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,16.20

alls with seynge of eghe , <P_17> Herynge of Ere , Smellynge of neese ,
Suellynge of throtte , towchynge of hande , Gangand , or standande ,
Lygand , or sittande , thynke at +te begynnynge if +tat it be Goddes
will or noghte . CMEDTHOR-M34,17.21

And if it be Goddis will , do it at thy powere . CMEDTHOR-M34,17.22

And if it be noughte Hys will , do it noghte , for to suffre +te dede .
CMEDTHOR-M34,17.23

Bot now may +tou aske mee ' what es Goddes will ? ' CMEDTHOR-M34,17.24

I say +te , His will es na no+ter thynge bot +ti haylnes .
CMEDTHOR-M34,17.25

Als +te Appostill in his pystill : - Hec est Voluntas Dei ,
Sanctificacio vestra : +Tat is to say , +tat es Goddes will , +tat +ge
be haly . CMEDTHOR-M34,17.26

bot now may +tou aske me : ' What mase man haly ? ' CMEDTHOR-M34,17.27

I say +te , twa thynges with-owtten may , +tat es , knaweynge and lufe .
Knaweyng of sothefastnes , and Lufe of gudnes . CMEDTHOR-M34,17.28

Bot to +te knaweynge of Godde , +tat es sothefastnes , ne may +tou
noughte com Bot be knaweynge of thi selfe ; CMEDTHOR-M34,17.29

ne +git to +te luf of Godde may +tou noughte com , bot thurghe +te luf
of thynn evyn-crystyn . CMEDTHOR-M34,17.30

To +te knaweyng of +ti selfe may +tou com with besy vmby-thynkynge ; And
to +te knaweynge of Godde thurghe pure contemplacionne .
CMEDTHOR-M34,17.31

To +te knaweynge of +ti self +tou may com on +tis manere :
CMEDTHOR-M34,17.32

Thynke besely and ofte what +tou erte , what +tou was , and what +tou
shall be . CMEDTHOR-M34,17.33

Fyrste , als vn-to +ti body : +tou erte now vylere +tan any mukke ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,17.34

+tou was getyn of sa vile matire and sa gret fylthe , +tat it is schame
for to nevynn , and abhomynacyon for to thynke ; CMEDTHOR-M34,17.35

+tou sall be delyuerde to tades and to neddyrs for to ete .
CMEDTHOR-M34,17.36

What +tou has bene and what thow erte , now sall +tou als to +ti saule ,
thynke , CMEDTHOR-M34,17.37

For what +tou sall be +tou may noghte wyete nowe . CMEDTHOR-M34,17.38

Vmbe-thynke +te nowe how +tou has don gret synns and many , and how thou
has lefte gret gudnes and many . CMEDTHOR-M34,17.39

Thynke how lange +tou hase lyffede , and what thow has rescheyuede , and
how +tou has dyspende it . CMEDTHOR-M34,17.40

For ilke an houre +tat +tou has noghte thoghte one Godde , +tou has it
tynte . CMEDTHOR-M34,17.41

For +tou sall +gelde resonne of ilke-ane ydill thoghte , of ilke-ane
ydill dede , of ilke-ane ydill worde . CMEDTHOR-M34,17.42

And righte as +tou has noghte ane hare of thi heude +tat it ne sall be
gloryfyede , if swa be +tou be safede , Righte swa sall schape nane
houre +tat it ne sall $be accountede . CMEDTHOR-M34,17.43

A Ihesu , mercy ! CMEDTHOR-M34,17.44

If all +tis worlde ware full of <P_18> smalle powdire , wha sulde be sa
qwaynte +tat he sulde or moghte Iugge ilke a thoghte , ilke a sawe ,
ilke a dede by +tam selfe , and twyn ilke ana fra o+ter ?
CMEDTHOR-M34,18.45

Certis na thynge bot +te saule , +tat es a_thowsande sythes gretter +tan
all +tis worlde , if it ware a_thowsande sythes gretter +tan it es .
CMEDTHOR-M34,18.46

And it es so full of dyuerse thoghtes , lykynges and +gernynges ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,18.47

wha moghte +tan thus seke his herte +tat he moght knawe all +tat es
+tare-in or thynke it ? CMEDTHOR-M34,18.48

See nowe , my dere hertly frende , howe +tou has gret nede of knawynge
of thi selfe . CMEDTHOR-M34,18.49

Sythen aftyrwarde take gude hede whate +tou erte nowe , als vn-to +ti
saule ; howe +tow has littyll of gude in the , and littill of witte and
littill of powere ; CMEDTHOR-M34,18.50

For +tou +gernys ilke a daye +tat at noghte avayles the , and euer_mare
ouer lattyl +tat at may availe the . CMEDTHOR-M34,18.51

Dere frende , +tou erte dessayfede sa ofte with vayne Ioye ; nowe
trauelde with drede , CMEDTHOR-M34,18.52

nowe erte +tou lyftede one lofte with false trayste .
CMEDTHOR-M34,18.53

See now on +te to+ter syde : CMEDTHOR-M34,18.54

+Tou ert chaungeabill : CMEDTHOR-M34,18.55

+tat at +tou will doo to day , +tou will noghte to morne .
CMEDTHOR-M34,18.56

And ofte sythes +tou erte anoyede eftire many thynges , and turment if
+tou hafe thaym noghte . CMEDTHOR-M34,18.57

And sythen when +tou has +tam at +ti will , +tan erte +tou of thaa
thynges annoyede . CMEDTHOR-M34,18.58

Thynke +gitt one +te to+ter syde , how +tou erte lyghte to fande , frele
to agayne-stande , and redy to assente . CMEDTHOR-M34,18.59

Off all +tese wrechidnes now has +te delyuerde Ihesu +ti spouse ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,18.60

and delyuers +te ylke day mare and mare . CMEDTHOR-M34,18.61

For when +tou was noghte , He mad +te in saule aftire His awen lyknesse
and His ymage , CMEDTHOR-M34,18.62

and +ti body made of foule stynkande skyum of +te erthe , whare-of es
abhomynacyone to thynke , CMEDTHOR-M34,18.63

He mad +te in witte and in membirs sa nobill and sa faire +tat nane can
deuyse . CMEDTHOR-M34,18.64

Thynke now besyly , +ge +tat has fleschely frendis and kynredyn , why
+ge luffe +tam sa derely and sa tendirly . CMEDTHOR-M34,18.65

If +tou say +tat +tou lufes +ti fadire or +ti modire for-thi +tat +tou
ert of +taire blude and of flesche getyn , Sa are +te wormes +tat comes
of +tam day be day . CMEDTHOR-M34,18.66

On a-no+ter syde +tou has no+ter of +tam body ne saule ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,18.67

Bot +tou +tan has of God thurghe thaym . CMEDTHOR-M34,18.68

For whate sulde +tou hafe bene if +tou had duellyde swilke as +tou was
of thaym , and +tou genderide in fylthe and in syn ? CMEDTHOR-M34,18.69

One +te to+ter syd , if +tou lufe brethire or <P_19> systers or o+ter
kynredyn , for-thi +tat +tay are of +te same flesche of fadir or of
modire , and of +taire blude , by +te same skyll solde +tou lufe a pece
of +taire flesche if it $ware schorne a-waye ; CMEDTHOR-M34,19.70

and +tat solde be errour gret with-owtten mesure . CMEDTHOR-M34,19.71

+Gyfe +tou say +tat +tou lufes +tam for-thi +tat +tay hafe fleschely
fegure in lyknes of man , and for-thy +tat +tay haue saule ryghte als
+tou has , +tan es +ti bro+ter fleschely na nerre +tan ano+ter ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,19.72

bot in als mekill als +tou and he hase bathe a fadire and a modire
fleschely , The begynnynge of +ti flesche , +tat es , a lyttill filth ,
stynkande and full to see . CMEDTHOR-M34,19.73

Thare-fore +tou sall lufe Hym of whaym all +ti fairenes commes .
CMEDTHOR-M34,19.74

And +tou sall lufe gastely ilk a man , and flee fra now-forthwarde to
lufe fleschly . CMEDTHOR-M34,19.75

And swa sall +tou doo certaynly if +tou conabilly thynke of gudes +tat
He has done gudly for +te ; CMEDTHOR-M34,19.76

and mare sall doo if +tou lufe Hyme enterely ; CMEDTHOR-M34,19.77

For , als I saide at +te begynnynge , - when +tou was noghte , He made
+te of noghte ; CMEDTHOR-M34,19.78

and when +tou was tynte , He fande +te ; CMEDTHOR-M34,19.79

and when +tou was peryschede , He soghte +te ; CMEDTHOR-M34,19.80

and when +tou was saulde with sin , +tan He boghte +te ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,19.81

and when +tou was dampnede , +tan He sauede +te , CMEDTHOR-M34,19.82

and when +tou was borne in syn , He bapty+gede +te ; CMEDTHOR-M34,19.83

and sythen aftirwarde , when +tou synnede sa foully and sa ofte , +tan
He sufferde +te so frely , CMEDTHOR-M34,19.84

and habade thynne amendemente sa lange , CMEDTHOR-M34,19.85

and sythen rescheyuede +te sa swetly , CMEDTHOR-M34,19.86

and +te has sett in sa swete a falachipe . CMEDTHOR-M34,19.87

And ilke a day when +tou mysdose , +tan He reprofes +te ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,19.88

and when +tou repentis +te ; +tan He forgyffes the ; CMEDTHOR-M34,19.89

and when +tou erris , +tan He amendis +te ; CMEDTHOR-M34,19.90

and when +tou dredis +te ; +tan He leris +te ; CMEDTHOR-M34,19.91

and when +tou hungers , +tan He fedis +te ; CMEDTHOR-M34,19.92

and when +tou erte calde , +tan He warmes +te ; CMEDTHOR-M34,19.93

and when +tou has hete , +tan He kelis +te ; CMEDTHOR-M34,19.94

and when +tou slepis , +tan He saues +te ; CMEDTHOR-M34,19.95

and when +tou rysez vpe , +tan He vphaldes +te ; CMEDTHOR-M34,19.96

and euer-mare when +tou erte at male eese , +tan He comforthes +te .
CMEDTHOR-M34,19.97

Thyre gudnes , and many o+ter , hase done vnto +te thi swete spouse
Ihesu Criste . CMEDTHOR-M34,19.98

And +te swettnes of His herte sall +tou thynke euer-mare , and euer
speke +tare-of , and euer-mare lofe Hym , and euer thanke Hym , and that
bathe nyghte & day , if +tou oghte kan of lufe . CMEDTHOR-M34,19.99

And +tare-for , when +tou ryses of +ti bedde at morne or at <P_20>
mydnyghte , thynke als tite how many thowsand men & women ere perischede
in body or in saule +tat nyghte : Some in fyre , Some in o+ter manere ,
als in water or one lande ; Some robbide , woundide , Slayne , dede
sodanly with-owttyn sacramentis , and fallyn in-till dampnacione ay
lastande . CMEDTHOR-M34,20.100

Thynk alswa how many thowsande +tat nyghte are in perill of saule , +tat
es to say , in dedly syn , als in glotony , lechery , Couetyse , in
manes-slaynge , and in many o+ter folyes . CMEDTHOR-M34,20.101

And of all +tise illes , the has delyuered thy swete Lorde Ihesu ,
with-owtten +ti deserte . CMEDTHOR-M34,20.102

What seruyce hase +tou donne , whare-fore He hase +tusgate keped +te ,
and many o+ter loste and forsaken ? CMEDTHOR-M34,20.103

For sothe , if +tou take gud kepe how gret gude He has done +te on ilk a
syde , +tou sall fynd hym ocupiede aboute +ti profet , als He did nan
o+ter thynge , bot anely ware entendande to +te and to +ti hele , als if
He had forgetyn all +tis worlde for to be anely intendand vn-to +te .
CMEDTHOR-M34,20.104

And when +tou hase +tis thoghte , lyfte vpe thi handis
CMEDTHOR-M34,20.105

and thanke thi Lorde of +tis and of all o+ter gudes ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,20.106

and say one +tis manere , ' My Lorde Ihesu Criste ! grace I +gelde ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,20.107

and thanke +te , +tat me , thyne vnworthy seruande , +tou hase kepid
couerde and vesete in +tis nyghte <paren> Or in +tis day <$$paren> ,
hale , safe , and wemles vn-to +tis tym +tou hase made to come , and for
all o+ter gudes and benefitis +tat +tou hase geffyn me , anely thurghe
+ti gudnes and +ti pete , +tou +tat lyffes and regnes endles .
CMEDTHOR-M34,20.108

Amen . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,20.109

Dere frende , in +tis same manere sall +tou say when +tou rysez at morne
, and when +tou lygges down at evyn . CMEDTHOR-M34,20.110

And when +tou has done swa , +tan sall +tou besyly thynke how +tou hase
spende +tat day <paren> or +tat nyght <$$paren> , and pray God of mercy
of +te ill +tat +tou hase done , and of +te gude +tat +tou hase lefte
vn-till +tat tym . CMEDTHOR-M34,20.111

And , dere frende , do na thynge in +tis lyfe till +tou commend +ti
selfe , and thi frendes qwykke and dede , in the handis of this swete
Lorde Ihesu Criste , CMEDTHOR-M34,20.112

and say one +tis maner , ' Lorde Ihesu Criste ! in <P_21> +ti handis ,
and in +te handis of thyn haly Angellis , I gyffe in +tis nyghte <paren>
or in +tis day <$$paren> my saule and my body , my Fadir and my Modire ,
my brothire and my systirs , frendis and seruandes , neghtburs and
kynredyn , my gude-doers , and all folke righte trowande .
CMEDTHOR-M34,21.113

Kepe vs , Lorde , in +tis nyghte <paren> or +tis day <$$paren> thurgh
+te gud dedis and +te prayere of +te blyssed mayden Marie and all thi
halous , fra vices and fra wykked +gernyngez , fra synns and fra
fandynges of +te deuell , fra sodayne and avysede dede , and fra +te
paynes of helle . CMEDTHOR-M34,21.114

Lyght my herte of the Haly Gaste and of thi haly grace !
CMEDTHOR-M34,21.115

Lorde ! +tou make me to be bouxsome euer-mare to +ti byddynges ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,21.116

and suffire me neuer_mare to twyn fra the , endles Ihesu Lorde in
Trinite ! CMEDTHOR-M34,21.117

Amen ! ' CMEDTHOR-M34,21.118

My dere frende , if +tou hase +tis manere , +tan sall +tou hafe verray
knaweynge of thi selfe , CMEDTHOR-M34,21.119

For thus saise haly Writte , ' If +tou trayste one thy selfe , to +ti
selfe +tou sall be takyn ; CMEDTHOR-M34,21.120

and +gif +tou trayste one Gode and noghte one +ti-selfe , to God +tou
sall be gyffen . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,21.121

And +tis maner of consederatyone es callede ' medytacyone , '
CMEDTHOR-M34,21.122

For by +tis maner of knawynge of +ti selfe , & by +tis maner of
medytacone , sall +tou come to +te knaweynge of Gode , by haly
contemplacyone . CMEDTHOR-M34,21.123

Wiet +tou +tat +tare es thre manere of contemplacyone .
CMEDTHOR-M34,21.124

The fyrste es in creaturs . CMEDTHOR-M34,21.125

The to+ter es in haly scripture . CMEDTHOR-M34,21.126

The thirde es in Gode hym-selfe in His nature . CMEDTHOR-M34,21.127

Thow sall wyet +tat contemplacyone es na no+ter thynge bot thoghte of
Godde in gret lykynge in saule , And to se His gudness in His creaturs .
CMEDTHOR-M34,21.128

His gudnes in His creaturs may +tou see one +tis manere .
CMEDTHOR-M34,21.129

Thre thynges pryncypaly ere in Gode , +tat es to say , Myghte , Wysdome
, and gudnes . CMEDTHOR-M34,21.130

Myghte es appropirde to Godd +te Fadire . Wysdome , to God +te Son .
Gudnes , to God +te Haly Gaste . CMEDTHOR-M34,21.131

Thurgh Goddes myghte ere all thynges made , CMEDTHOR-M34,21.132

and thurgh His wysdome ere all thynges meruailously ordaynede ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,21.133

and thurgh His gudnes ilke a day ere all thynges waxande .
CMEDTHOR-M34,21.134

His powere may +tou see by +taire gretness and by thaire makynge ; His
wysdom by +taire fairenes of +taire ordaynynge ; CMEDTHOR-M34,21.135

His gudnes may +tou see by +taire Encressynge . CMEDTHOR-M34,21.136

+Taire gretnes may +tou see by +taire four partynges , +tat es to saye ,
by +taire heghte , and by <P_22> +taire depnes , and by +taire largenes
, and by +taire lenghe . CMEDTHOR-M34,22.137

His wysdom may +tou see if +tou take kepe how He hase gyffen to ylke a
creature to be . CMEDTHOR-M34,22.138

Some He hase gyffen to be anely , with-owtten mare , als vn-to stanes .
Till o+ter to be & to lyffe , als to grysse and trees . Till o+ter to
be , to lyffe , to fele , als to bestes . Till o+ter to be , to lyffe ,
to fele , and with resone to deme , als to mane and to angells .
CMEDTHOR-M34,22.139

For stanes erre , CMEDTHOR-M34,22.140

bot +tay ne hafe nogte lyffe , CMEDTHOR-M34,22.141

ne felys noghte , CMEDTHOR-M34,22.142

ne demes noghte . CMEDTHOR-M34,22.143

Trees are : CMEDTHOR-M34,22.144

+tay lyffe , CMEDTHOR-M34,22.145

Both thay fele noghte . CMEDTHOR-M34,22.146

Men are : CMEDTHOR-M34,22.147

+tay lyffe , CMEDTHOR-M34,22.148

+tay fele , CMEDTHOR-M34,22.149

and +tay deme , CMEDTHOR-M34,22.150

and +tay erre with stanes , CMEDTHOR-M34,22.151

$+tay lyffe with trees , CMEDTHOR-M34,22.152

+tay fele with bestes , CMEDTHOR-M34,22.153

and demys with angells . CMEDTHOR-M34,22.154

Here sall +tou thynke besyly +te worthynes of manes kynde , how it
ouer-passes ilke a creature . CMEDTHOR-M34,22.155

And +tare-fore saise Saynt Austyn , ' I wald noghte hafe +te stede of
ane angelle , if I myghte hafe +te stede +tat es purvayede to man . '
CMEDTHOR-M34,22.156

Thynk also +tat man es worthy gret schenchipe +tat will noghte lyffe
eftyre hys degre and eftyre his condicyone askis ; CMEDTHOR-M34,22.157

For all +te creaturs in +te worlde ere made anley for man .
CMEDTHOR-M34,22.158

+Tas +tat ere meke , ere made for thre skylles ; For to helpe us at
trauayle , als nate , Oxen , kye and horse ; For to couer vs & clethe vs
, als lyne , and wolle and lethire ; for to fede us and vphalde vs , als
bestes , Corne of +te erthe , Fysche of +te See ; CMEDTHOR-M34,22.159

and +te noyande creaturs , als ill trees and venemous bestes , +te wylke
are made for thre thynges , For oure chastyyng , for oure amendement ,
and for oure kennynge . CMEDTHOR-M34,22.160

We ere chastied and puneschet , when we ere hurte . CMEDTHOR-M34,22.161

And +tat es gret mercy of Godde , +tat he will chasty vs bodyly +tat we
be noghte punescht lastandly . CMEDTHOR-M34,22.162

We erre amendid when we thynke +tat all +tese ere broghte vs for oure
syn . CMEDTHOR-M34,22.163

For when we see +tat sa lyttill creaturs may noye vs , +tan we thynke
one oure wrechidnes , CMEDTHOR-M34,22.164

and +tan we ere mekyde . CMEDTHOR-M34,22.165

We ere Eftir-warde kende , for-+ti +tat we see in +tise creaturs +te
wondirfull werkes of God oure Makere . CMEDTHOR-M34,22.166

For mare vs availes till oure ensampill and Edifycacione , +te werkes of
+te pyssmowre +tan dose +te strenghe of +te lyone or of +te bere .
CMEDTHOR-M34,22.167

Als-swa , righte als I haue said of bestes , reght swa vndirstande of
trees ; CMEDTHOR-M34,22.168

and when +tou hase donne on +tis manere , Raise vp thy herte vn-till
<P_23> Godd , CMEDTHOR-M34,23.169

and thynke how it es grete myghte to make all thynges of noghte , and to
gyffe +tam to bee , and grete wysdom to ordayne +tam in sa gret fairenes
, and in swa gret bounte , to multyply +tam ilk a day for oure prowe .
CMEDTHOR-M34,23.170

A ! mercy Godd ! CMEDTHOR-M34,23.171

how we are vnkynde ! CMEDTHOR-M34,23.172

We dyspende all His creaturs , CMEDTHOR-M34,23.173

and He +tam makes ! CMEDTHOR-M34,23.174

We confound +tam , CMEDTHOR-M34,23.175

and He +tam gouernes . CMEDTHOR-M34,23.176

We distruy +tam ilke a day , CMEDTHOR-M34,23.177

and He +tam multyplies . CMEDTHOR-M34,23.178

And +tare-fore say till Hym in thi herte , ' Lorde ! for-+ti +tat +tou
arte , +tay ere , CMEDTHOR-M34,23.179

and for-+ti +tat +tou arte fayre , +tay are faire ; CMEDTHOR-M34,23.180

and for-+ti +tat +tou arte gude , +tay are gude . CMEDTHOR-M34,23.181

With gud ryghte +tay loue +te , CMEDTHOR-M34,23.182

and Onoures +te , CMEDTHOR-M34,23.183

and gloryfyes +te , all thy creatures . CMEDTHOR-M34,23.184

O blyssed Godd in Trinyte ! with gud ryghte +tay loue +te for +taire
gudness , CMEDTHOR-M34,23.185

with gud ryghte +tay anouren +te for thaire fairenes ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,23.186

with gud righte +tay glorifye +te for +taire profet , all +ti creaturs ,
blyssed Trinyte ! Of wham all thynges ere thurgh His powere made ;
$Thurgh whaym all thynges are thurgh Hys wysdom gouernede ; In whaym all
thynges are thurgh His bounte multipliede ; CMEDTHOR-M34,23.187

Till Hym honour and louynge with-owten $ende . CMEDTHOR-M34,23.188

Amen ! ' CMEDTHOR-M34,23.189

+TE to+ter degre of contemplacyone es in Haly Wryte .
CMEDTHOR-M34,23.190

Bot nowe may +tou say to me , ' I +tat knawes na letters , how may I
euer_mare com to contemplacyone of haly Writte ? ' CMEDTHOR-M34,23.191

Now , my dere frende , vndirstande me swetely , and I sall say perchance
to +te all +tat es wreten , if +tou kan noghte vndirstand haly Writt .
CMEDTHOR-M34,23.192

Here gladly +te gud +tat men saise +te : CMEDTHOR-M34,23.193

and when +tou heres Haly Wryte , ow+ter in sermon or in priue collacyone
, take kepe als tyte , if +tou here oghte +tat may availe +te till
edyfycacyon , to hate syn and to lufe vertue , and to dowte payne , and
to +gerne Ioye , To dispyse +tis worlde , and to hye to blysse , and
whate +tou sall doo and whate +tou sall lefe , and all +tat lyghtes
+tinne vndirstandynge in knawynge of sothefastnes , and all +tat
kyndills +ti lykynge in brynnynge of charite ; CMEDTHOR-M34,23.194

For of +tise twa gudnes , es all +tat es wretyn in preue or in apperte .
CMEDTHOR-M34,23.195

Owte of haly writte sall +tou drawe and cun witte , whilke are +te seuen
dedly synnes , and +te seuen vertus , and +te ten comandmentis , and +te
tuelfe artycles of +te trouthe , and +te seuen sacramentis of Haly Kyrke
and +te <P_24> seuen gyftis of +te Haly Gaste , and +te seuen werkes of
mercy , and +te seuen vertuz of +te Gospell , and +te seuen prayers of
+te pater noster . CMEDTHOR-M34,24.196

+Tir are +te seuen dedly synnes : - Pryde and Envy , Ire , Slouth ,
Couetyse , Glotony and Lechery . CMEDTHOR-M34,24.197

Pryde es lufe of vnkyndly heghyng ; CMEDTHOR-M34,24.198

and +tar-of comes +tir seuen vnbouxomnes agayne God , or agayne
souerayngne , +tat es to say , to lefe +tat +tat es commandyd , and to
do +tat that es defendyde . CMEDTHOR-M34,24.199

The to+ter branch of pride es surquytry , +tat es , to vndirtake thyng
ouer his powere , or wenys to be mare wyse +tan he es , or better +tan
he es , and auauntez hym of gude +tat he hase of o+ter , or of ill +tat
he hase of hym-selfe . CMEDTHOR-M34,24.200

The thrid braunche of pride es ypocrisye , +tat es , when he feynys him
to hafe gudness +tat he has noghte , and hydes +te wykkednes +tat he
hase . CMEDTHOR-M34,24.201

The ferth braunch of pride es despyte of thyne euencristen , +tat es ,
when man lesses gudnes of o+ter , for-thi +tat hym selfe suld seme +te
bettir . CMEDTHOR-M34,24.202

The fyfte braunche , +tat es , when man makes lyknes be-twyx his awen
wykkednes and o+ter mens wikkednes , +tat his awen may seme +te lesse .
CMEDTHOR-M34,24.203

The sexte braunche of Pryde es vnschamefulness , +tat es , when men hase
noghte schame of ill ded aperte . CMEDTHOR-M34,24.204

The seuen braunche of pryde es Elacion , +tat es , when a man hase heghe
herte , +tat he will no+gte suffire to felawe ne mayster .
CMEDTHOR-M34,24.205

Dere frende , +tou sall wit +tat thre thynges ere , whare-of a man
Enprides hym , +tat es to say , of +te gudez +tat he hase of kynde , als
fairnes or strenghe or of gude witte or of nobille kynredyn .
CMEDTHOR-M34,24.206

The to+ter thyng es +tat men hase of purchase , als cunnynge , Grace ,
gud loos , or dyngyte or offyce . CMEDTHOR-M34,24.207

The thirde thynge es erthely thynge or erthely gude , als clethyngre ,
houssynge , Rentez , Possession , Men+ge , horssyng , and honour of +tis
worlde . CMEDTHOR-M34,24.208

Pride makes man to be of gret herte and heghe , to despyse his
euencristen , and to +gerne heghenes and maystry ouer o+ter .
CMEDTHOR-M34,24.209

The to+ter dedly syn es ' Envy . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,24.210

And +tat es , Ioye of o+ter mens harme , and sorowe of o+ter mens
wele-fare . CMEDTHOR-M34,24.211

And +tat may be in herte with lykynge , or in mouth with bakbyttynge ,
or in werke with mens gudnes wythdrawyng , or ells with ills procurynge
. CMEDTHOR-M34,24.212

<P_25>

Envye mase man to hafe +te herte hevy of +tat he sese o+ter men mare
worthi +tan he in any thyng . CMEDTHOR-M34,25.214

The third dedly syn es ' wrethe , ' +tat es , ane vnresonabyll
temperoure of herte ; CMEDTHOR-M34,25.215

and of it comes stryfes and contekes schamefull , and dyuerse wordes ,
and deuyouse and wikked sclandirs . CMEDTHOR-M34,25.216

The ferthe dedly syn es ' slouthe ; ' CMEDTHOR-M34,25.217

and +tat mase manes herte hevy and slawe in gude dede ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,25.218

and makes man to yrke in prayere or halynes , CMEDTHOR-M34,25.219

and puttes man in wykkedness of wanhope , CMEDTHOR-M34,25.220

for it slokyns +te lykynge of gastely lufe . CMEDTHOR-M34,25.221

The fyfte dedly syn es ' couetyse , ' CMEDTHOR-M34,25.222

and +tat es , ane vn-mesurabill luffe to hafe erthely gudes ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,25.223

and it destroyes & blyndes manes herte . CMEDTHOR-M34,25.224

And +tare-of commes tresones , False athes , wykked reste , Malice and
hardnes of herte agaynes mercy . CMEDTHOR-M34,25.225

The sexte dedly syn es ' glotony ; ' CMEDTHOR-M34,25.226

and +tat makes man to serue and to be bouxome till wykked lykynges of
+te flesche , +te whilke man suld maister and ouercome with measure .
CMEDTHOR-M34,25.227

Of glotony commes vayne Ioy , lyghtnes , and littill vndirstandynge .
CMEDTHOR-M34,25.228

The seuen dedly syn es ' lecherye ; ' CMEDTHOR-M34,25.229

and +tat mase manes herte to melte , and to playe thare +tare his herte
lykes , and heldes , and +tat with-owten gouernynge of resoune .
CMEDTHOR-M34,25.230

Of lechery commes blyndynge of herte , in prayere vnstabilnes and fulle
hastynes , lufe of hym selfe , hatreden of Godde , lufe of +tis worlde ,
vgglynes , and whanhope of +te blysse of heuen . CMEDTHOR-M34,25.231

Dere frende , thire are +te seuen dedly synnes ; CMEDTHOR-M34,25.232

and wele ere +tay callid dedly synnes , CMEDTHOR-M34,25.233

For Pride twynnes fra man his Godde , Envy his euencristen ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,25.234

Ire hym-selfe twynnes , CMEDTHOR-M34,25.235

Slouthe hym tourmentes , CMEDTHOR-M34,25.236

Couetyse hym be-gyles , CMEDTHOR-M34,25.237

Glotony hym dessayues , CMEDTHOR-M34,25.238

and Lecherye hym in thraledome settis . CMEDTHOR-M34,25.239

Nowe hase +tou herde +te seuen sekenes of manes saule .
CMEDTHOR-M34,25.240

Sythen aftirwarde commes +te souerayne leche , CMEDTHOR-M34,25.241

and takes +tere medcynes , CMEDTHOR-M34,25.242

and waresche man of +tese seuen seknes CMEDTHOR-M34,25.243

and stabills hym in +te seuen vertus ; thurgh +te gyftes of +te Haly
Gaste . +Te whilke are +tese , +te gaste of wysdom and vndirstandynge ,
+te gaste of consaile and of stalworthenes , +te gaste of cunnynge and
of pete , and +te gaste of drede of Godde Almyghty .
CMEDTHOR-M34,25.244

Thurghe +tese gyftes oure Lord Ihesu lerres man all +tat he has myster
till +te lyfe +tat es callid actyfe and til +te lyfe called
contemplatyfe . CMEDTHOR-M34,25.245

<P_26>

And se howe firste , man suld lefe +te euyll and do +te gude :
CMEDTHOR-M34,26.247

lefe +te euyll , +tat teches vs +te gaste of drede of Godd Almyghty ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,26.248

and do +te gude , $+tat leres vs +te gaste of pete .
CMEDTHOR-M34,26.249

And for-+ti +tat twa thynges are +tat lettis vs to do gude , that es at
saye , wele-fare and tributacione of +tis worlde ; CMEDTHOR-M34,26.250

For wele-fare desayues vs with losengery , tribulacion with hardnes of
noyes & dysses ; CMEDTHOR-M34,26.251

for-+ti sall +tou despyse +te wele-fare of +tis worlde , +tat +tou be
noghte +ter-with dessayued ; CMEDTHOR-M34,26.252

and +tat leres +te +te gaste of cunnynge ; CMEDTHOR-M34,26.253

and +tou sall stallworthly suffire tribulacyon , +tat +tou be noghte
ouercommen ; CMEDTHOR-M34,26.254

and +tat teches vs +te gaste of stallworthenes . CMEDTHOR-M34,26.255

And +tire foure suffice till +te lyfe +tat es callid actyfe .
CMEDTHOR-M34,26.256

And +te to+ter thre fallys to +te lyfe +tat es callid contemplatyfe ,
For thre maners of contemplacion . CMEDTHOR-M34,26.257

Ane es in creaturs ; CMEDTHOR-M34,26.258

and +tat leres +te gaste of vndirstandynge . CMEDTHOR-M34,26.259

The to+ter es in Haly Writte , whare +tou sese whatte +tou doo & what
+tou sall lefe , CMEDTHOR-M34,26.260

and +tat leres +te gaste of consaile . CMEDTHOR-M34,26.261

The thirde manere es in Godde Hym-selfe ; CMEDTHOR-M34,26.262

and +tat leres vs +te gaste of wysdom . CMEDTHOR-M34,26.263

Now +tou sese thurgh +te gyftes of Ihesu , how He es besy abowte oure
hele . CMEDTHOR-M34,26.264

Eftire +tis sall +tou wiete whilke ere +te ten comandementis .
CMEDTHOR-M34,26.265

+Te firste comandement es +tis , CMEDTHOR-M34,26.266

' Thow sall wirchippe bot a Godde , +ti Lorde , CMEDTHOR-M34,26.267

and till Hym anely +tou sall serue . ' +Tat es at say , wyrchipe Hym
with righte trouthe , CMEDTHOR-M34,26.268

Serue untill anely with gude werkes . CMEDTHOR-M34,26.269

Here sall +tou thynke if +tou hafe lelly serued Godde & wirchiped Godde
; if +tou hafe seruede Hym ouer all thynge , if +tou hafe +golden Hym
+tat that +tou hyghte , or if +tou hafe done lesse penance , and if +tou
hafe +goldyn Hym +tat that +tou hyghte Hym in +ti cristyndom , That was
, to forsake +te deulle and all his werkes , and in God lelly to trowe .
CMEDTHOR-M34,26.270

And thurghe +tis commandement es man ordaynede ynence God +te Fadire .
CMEDTHOR-M34,26.271

+Te to+ter commandement es defendid to take Goddes name in vayne ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,26.272

and lying and falsenes +tare-in es defendid ; CMEDTHOR-M34,26.273

and thurghe +tis commandement es man ordaynede ynence Godd +te Son ,
+tat saise Hym-selfe ' I am sothefastnes . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,26.274

+Te thirde commmandemente es , ' vmbythynke +te +tat +tou kepe +te
haly-dayes , ' +tat es to saye , in +tine awen herte , to kepe +te in
riste and pees with-owtten seruage of syn or of bodyly <P_27> dedis .
CMEDTHOR-M34,27.275

And +tis commandement ordaynes man to reschayfe +te Haly Gaste .
CMEDTHOR-M34,27.276

+Tise thre commandmentes lerres man how-gates he sall hafe hym ynence
Godd +te Trynite , to whas lyknes he es made in saule .
CMEDTHOR-M34,27.277

+Te o+ter seuen commandementes leres man how he sall hafe him ynence his
euencristen . CMEDTHOR-M34,27.278

+Te firste es , ' +tou sall honour +ti fadire and +ti modire fleschely
and gastely , and +tat in twa maners , +tat es to say , +tat +tou be
bouxom to thaym in reuerence and honour , and +tou helpe +tam at thy
powere in all thynges +tat +tay hafe myster , +tat +tou be of lange lyfe
in erthe ; CMEDTHOR-M34,27.279

For if +tou will be of lange lyfe , it es reson +tat +tou honoure thaym
of whaym +tou hase +te lyfe ; CMEDTHOR-M34,27.280

For he +tat will noghte honoure hym thurgh whaym he es , it es noghte
righte +tat he be mare +tan he es . CMEDTHOR-M34,27.281

+Te to+ter commandement es +tis , CMEDTHOR-M34,27.282

' +Tou sall sla na man . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,27.283

Here sall +tou wyt +tat slaughter es of many maneres .
CMEDTHOR-M34,27.284

For +ter es manes-slaghter of hand , of tunge , of herte .
CMEDTHOR-M34,27.285

Mannes-slaynge of hande es when a man slaes ano+ter with his handez , or
when he duse him in bandis of dede , als in preson or in o+ter stede
+tat may be encheson of his dede . CMEDTHOR-M34,27.286

Manes-slaynge of tunge es in twa maners , thurghe commandement , or
thurghe enticement . CMEDTHOR-M34,27.287

manes-slaynge of herte es alswa one twa maners , +tat es , when men
+gernys and couaytes ded of o+tter , and when he suffyrs man to dy , and
will noghte delyuer him if he hafe powere . CMEDTHOR-M34,27.288

+Te thirde commandement es +tis : CMEDTHOR-M34,27.289

' +Tou sall do na lechery ; ' CMEDTHOR-M34,27.290

and +tis es ryghte . CMEDTHOR-M34,27.291

Wha-sa will hafe +te lyfe with-owteen corupeyone in +te Ioy of heuen ,
hym byhoues kepe his lyfe +tat es dedly , with-owtten corupcione of body
. CMEDTHOR-M34,27.292

The ferthe commandement es +tis , CMEDTHOR-M34,27.293

' +Tou sall do na thyfte ne na falsenes ; ' CMEDTHOR-M34,27.294

and +tat es rygthe . CMEDTHOR-M34,27.295

For he +tat will safe o+tther menes lyfe , he sall noughte do away +tat
that moghte his lyfe sustayne . CMEDTHOR-M34,27.296

The fyfte commandement es +tis , CMEDTHOR-M34,27.297

' +Tou sall noughte bere false wittnes agaynes thyne euen-cristyn with
hym +tat will noye hym or sla hym . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,27.298

And +tat es ryghte ; CMEDTHOR-M34,27.299

For he +tat will noghte sekathe his euencristyn , he sall noghte
consente , ne na consaile gyffe , to do hym ill . CMEDTHOR-M34,27.300

+Te sexte commandement and +te seuend er +tir , CMEDTHOR-M34,27.301

' +Tou sall noghte couaite +ti neghtboure wyfe , CMEDTHOR-M34,27.302

ne +tou sall noghte couaite his <P_28> house , ne nane of his gude
wrangwystly , ' CMEDTHOR-M34,28.303

For he +tat hase wykked will and ill Entente in his herte , he may
noghte lang with-haldynge hym fra wykkide dede ; CMEDTHOR-M34,28.304

and +ter-fore , if +tou will noghte do lecherye , +tou sall noghte
consente to man ne to woman +tat it duse ; CMEDTHOR-M34,28.305

and if +tou will noghte stele , +tou sall noughte couayte o+ter mennes
thynges in +ti herte . CMEDTHOR-M34,28.306

Dere frende , +tir are +te ten commandementes +tat God gafe till Moyses
in the mounte of Synay . CMEDTHOR-M34,28.307

The thre fyrste er pertenande to +te lufe of God , and the to+ter seuen
to +te lufe of +ti-selfe and of thyne euen crystyn .
CMEDTHOR-M34,28.308

Now , efter , sall +tou wyt whilke ere +te seuen vertus+g , +tat es to
saye Trouthe , Trayste , and lufe , Wysedom and Rightwysenes , Mesure
and Force . CMEDTHOR-M34,28.309

Of +te same matire er +te seuen vertus +tat +te ten commandementis ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,28.310

bot +tis es +te varyance be-twyx thaym : CMEDTHOR-M34,28.311

The ten commandmentis kennes vs what we sall do , CMEDTHOR-M34,28.312

and +te seuen vertus kennes vs how we shall doo . CMEDTHOR-M34,28.313

The thre fyrste , +tat es to say , Trouthe , trayste and lufe , ordaynes
the how +tou sall lyfe als to Godd : +te to+ter foure how +tou sall
ordayne thyne awen lyfe +tat sall lede till +te Ioye of heuen .
CMEDTHOR-M34,28.314

Dere frende , the awe to wyt +tat we ere all made for ane End , +tat es
to say for to knawe Godde , to hafe Hym , and to lufe Hym .
CMEDTHOR-M34,28.315

Bot thre thynges er nedefull at puruaye till oure cunnynge , That es to
wyte , whedyr we sall ga , and +tat we wyll comme thedyre , and +tat we
hafe trayste to com thedyre ; CMEDTHOR-M34,28.316

For gret foly ware it to be-gyn +te thynge mane may noghte ende ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,28.317

+gitte , one +te to+ter syde , +te mane +tat will wyele doo , hym nedide
to haf wysdom , myghte , and will ; +tat es to say , +tat he konn doo ,
and +tat he may doo , and +tat he wyll doo . CMEDTHOR-M34,28.318

Bot for-+ti +tat we hafe noghte cunnynge , myghte , ne will of oure
selfe , for-+ti hase Godde gyfen vs trouthe , for to fulfill +te defaute
of oure myghte . CMEDTHOR-M34,28.319

Sothefaste lufe es for to ordayne oure will to +te tane and to +te
to+ter . CMEDTHOR-M34,28.320

Trouthe ordaynes vs to Godde +te Son , to whaym es appropyrde Wysdom :
Trayste , till Godd +te Fadyre , to whaym es appropyrde myghte ; Lufe ,
to +te Haly Gaste , till wham es appropyrde gudnes .
CMEDTHOR-M34,28.321

And +tare trouthe makes vs to hafe knawynge ; CMEDTHOR-M34,28.322

and +tat knaweynge vs sayse +tat He es wondyrfull ; CMEDTHOR-M34,28.323

Fre es He +tat <P_29> one +tis manere and tus largely gyffes of His
gudnes ; CMEDTHOR-M34,29.324

and of +tat comes trayste , CMEDTHOR-M34,29.325

and $of +tat knawynge , +tat sais +tat He es gude Commes +te thyrde
Sothefastnes , +tat es lufe , CMEDTHOR-M34,29.326

For ylke a thynge luffes kyndely +te gude . CMEDTHOR-M34,29.327

Dere frende , here sall +tou wyte whilke are +te twelue artycles of +te
trouthe . CMEDTHOR-M34,29.328

The firste es +tis , +tat Godde es ane in Hym-selfe and thre in personns
, with-owteen begynnynge , and with-owtten Endynge , and +tat all
thynges $were made of noghte with His worde . CMEDTHOR-M34,29.329

+Te to+ter artecle es , +tat Goddes son tuke flesche and blode of +te
blyssed mayden Marie and , was borne of hire , sothefaste Godd and
sothefaste man . CMEDTHOR-M34,29.330

+Te thirdes es , +tat He was dede and grauen , noghte for nede , Bot for
to by vs of His fre will . CMEDTHOR-M34,29.331

The ferthe artecle es , +tat +te same Ihesu rase fra dede to lyfe ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,29.332

and we sall ryse alswa . CMEDTHOR-M34,29.333

The fyfte artecle es , +tat +te same Sothefaste God and man , steighe vp
in till heuen in manhed and goldhede ; CMEDTHOR-M34,29.334

and we sall steighte vp alswa thurgh His grace . CMEDTHOR-M34,29.335

+Te sext artecle es baptymme , +tat mase man clene of syn +tat he drawes
of kynde , and gyffes grace to clense . CMEDTHOR-M34,29.336

The Seuend artecle es confirmacion , +tat confermys +te Haly Gaste one
man +tat es cristenede . CMEDTHOR-M34,29.337

+Te aughtened artecle es penance , +tat duse awaye all maner of syn
dedly and venyall . CMEDTHOR-M34,29.338

+Te nynde es +te Sacrament of +te Auter , +tat confermys +te penance ,
and gyffes hym force +tat he fall noghte efte in syn , and vphaldes hym
and reconsailles hym . CMEDTHOR-M34,29.339

+Te tend artecle es Ordyre , +tat gyffes powere till +taym +tat are
ordeynede to do +taire Offece and to do +te sacramentis .
CMEDTHOR-M34,29.340

+Te elleuend artecle es Matrimone , +tat defendis dedly syn in werke of
generacyon by-twyx man and woman . CMEDTHOR-M34,29.341

+Te twelfed artecle es Enoyntynge , +tat men enoyntes +te seke in perell
of dede , for alegeance of body and saule . CMEDTHOR-M34,29.342

Dere frende , aftyre sall +tou wyt whilke are +te foure vertus
cardynalles , thurgh whilke all manes lyfe es gouernede in +tis worlde ,
+tat es , Cunnynge and Rightwisnes , Force and Mesure .
CMEDTHOR-M34,29.343

Of thir foure , saise +te Haly Gaste in +te buke of Wysdom , +tat +tare
es na thynge mare profytabill till man in erthe ; CMEDTHOR-M34,29.344

and so nowe , whare-fore , wha-sa walde any thynge wele do , firste hym
byhouys +tat he konn chese +te ill fra +te gude , and of twa gude ,
chese <P_30> +te bettire and leffe +te lesse gude ; CMEDTHOR-M34,30.345

and +tis es the vertu +tat es callede ryghtwysnes . CMEDTHOR-M34,30.346

And for-+ti +tat twa thynges lettes man to do wele and lefe +te yll ,
+tat es at say , wele-fare of +tis worlde , for it dessayfes hym with
false vanytes ; CMEDTHOR-M34,30.347

+te to+ter es tribulacyon , to putt hym down with many scharpnes :
CMEDTHOR-M34,30.348

agaynes wele-fare sall +tou hafe mesure , +tat +tow be noghte ouer hye .
CMEDTHOR-M34,30.349

And +tis vertu es called ' temperance . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,30.350

And agayne aduersyte sall +tou hafe ' hardynes , ' +tat +tou be noghte
casten downne . CMEDTHOR-M34,30.351

And +tat vertue es callyde Force or strenghe . CMEDTHOR-M34,30.352

Here-eftyre sall +tou wyte whylke are +te seuen werkes of mercy .
CMEDTHOR-M34,30.353

The firste werke of Mercy es , to gyffe mete to +te hunngry .
CMEDTHOR-M34,30.354

The to+ter es , to gyffe drynke to +te thrysty . CMEDTHOR-M34,30.355

The thirde es , to clethe +te nakede . CMEDTHOR-M34,30.356

+Te ferthe es , to herbere +te herblerles . CMEDTHOR-M34,30.357

+Te fyfte es , to vesete +tam +tat ere in prisonne .
CMEDTHOR-M34,30.358

+Te sexte es , to comforth +te seke . The Seuend , to bery +te dede .
CMEDTHOR-M34,30.359

Thyse are +te seuen werkes of mercy +tat are langande to +te body .
CMEDTHOR-M34,30.360

Bot nowe may +tou say to me , ' how sulde I +tat es in Relygyon , and
noghte hase to gyffe at ete ne at drynke , ne clathes to +te nakede , ne
herbery to +te herberles , CMEDTHOR-M34,30.361

For I am at o+ter mens will , and noghte at myn awen ?
CMEDTHOR-M34,30.362

For-thi ware it better +tat I ware seculere , +tat I myghte do +tise
werkes of mercy . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,30.363

A , dere frende , be noghte begylede ! CMEDTHOR-M34,30.364

Better it es to hafe pete and compassione in +ti herte of hym +tat hase
mysese and wrechednes , Thane {it_would_be_if} +tou hade all +tis werlde
to gyffe for charyte ; CMEDTHOR-M34,30.365

For it es bettir wyth compassion to gyffe +ti-selfe als +tou erte , +tan
it es to gyffe +tat that +tou hase . CMEDTHOR-M34,30.366

There-fore , dere frende , gyffe thi-selfe ; and +tan gyffes +tou mare
+tan es in all +tis worlde . CMEDTHOR-M34,30.367

Bot now may +tou Say me one +tis manere : CMEDTHOR-M34,30.368

- ' Sothe it es +tat it es better to gyffe hym-selfe +tan it es to gyffe
of his , CMEDTHOR-M34,30.369

bot better es +te tane and +te to+ter +tan es ane be it selfe ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,30.370

for lesse es a gud +tan twa . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,30.371

It es noghte swa : CMEDTHOR-M34,30.372

For whethire es better be callede Godde , or His seruande .
CMEDTHOR-M34,30.373

Thow wate wele +tat es better to be callede Godd . CMEDTHOR-M34,30.374

Bot +tase +tat suffirs hunngere , thryste , caulde and defaute , and
o+ter wrechidnes and mysese , calles oure Lorde <P_31> Ihesu Criste
Hym-selfe ; CMEDTHOR-M34,31.375

For He saise +tus in +te Gospelle , CMEDTHOR-M34,31.376

' What als +tou dyde to +te leste of myn , +tou did to me . '
CMEDTHOR-M34,31.377

Saynt Barnarde says , ' Thire pure hase noghte in erhte ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,31.378

ne thire riche hase noghte in heuen ; CMEDTHOR-M34,31.379

and +tare-fore , if +te Riche will it hafe , thaym byhoues bye it at +te
pure . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,31.380

Now wate I wele +tou couaytes to wyte whilkes are verray pure , and
whilke noghte . CMEDTHOR-M34,31.381

Now herken with deuocyon . CMEDTHOR-M34,31.382

Sum are +tat hase reches and lufes thaym , CMEDTHOR-M34,31.383

and +tase are +te haldande and couaytourse of +tis worlde .
CMEDTHOR-M34,31.384

Othere are +tat hase +tam noghte , CMEDTHOR-M34,31.385

bot thay luffe thaym , CMEDTHOR-M34,31.386

and thay walde hafe thaym gladly ; CMEDTHOR-M34,31.387

and +tase are +te wrechide beggers of +te worlde , and +te false folke
in religyon CMEDTHOR-M34,31.388

and +tase are als riche and richere +tan +te o+ter .
CMEDTHOR-M34,31.389

And of tham Ihesu saise in +te gospelle +tat ' lyghtere it ware a
camelle to passe thurghe a nedill eghe , +tan +te riche to com in-to +te
blysse of heuen . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,31.390

Sum are +tat hase reches , CMEDTHOR-M34,31.391

bot thay lufe thaym noghte ; CMEDTHOR-M34,31.392

Noghte_for-thy +tay will wele hafe +tam ; CMEDTHOR-M34,31.393

and +tase are +te gude folke +tat are in religion CMEDTHOR-M34,31.394

and +tase are sothefastly pure ; CMEDTHOR-M34,31.395

and +tairs es +te Ioye of heuen , CMEDTHOR-M34,31.396

For +tat es the benyson of +te pure . CMEDTHOR-M34,31.397

Than it behufes +tat +te riche hafe +te reuere of +tat benyson ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,31.398

and +tarefore may I say , ' Blyssede be +te pouer , CMEDTHOR-M34,31.399

for +taires es +te kyngdom and +te Ioye of heuen . '
CMEDTHOR-M34,31.400

And swa may I say of +te riche , CMEDTHOR-M34,31.401

For +tairs es pyne of helle . CMEDTHOR-M34,31.402

Alswa pouer +tay are +tat hase Pouerte and lufes na reches ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,31.403

and pouer +tay are +tat hase reches and lufes pouert .
CMEDTHOR-M34,31.404

Now aftire +tis , awe +te to wyte whylke are +te seuen prayers of +te
Pater Noster , +tat duse away all ill and purchase all gude .
CMEDTHOR-M34,31.405

And +tase seuen prayers er contende in +te Pater Noster , +te wilke oure
Lorde Ihesu Criste kennde till His discyples , how +tay $suld pray Godd
+te Fadire , CMEDTHOR-M34,31.406

and said thaym one +tis manere , CMEDTHOR-M34,31.407

' When +ge sall praye , one +tis wyese sall +ge say ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,31.408

Pater noster qui es in celis , &c. CMEDTHOR-M34,31.409

' Now , my frende , wit +tou +tat oure Lorde Ihesu Cryste kennes vs in
+te gospelle to make +tis prayere . CMEDTHOR-M34,31.410

And +tare-fore I walde at +tou wyste at +te begynnynge whate es prayere
or orysone , and sythyn +tat +tou vndirstande <P_32> +te prayere of +te
pater noster . CMEDTHOR-M34,32.411

Prayere or Oryson es noghte elles bot +gernyng of saule , with certayne
trayste +tat it commes +tat +tou prayes . CMEDTHOR-M34,32.412

And in +tat trayste vs settis Ihesu Criste when He kennes vs to call
Godde oure fadyre +tat es in heuen , CMEDTHOR-M34,32.413

For in Hym sall man hafe certayne trayste +tat He may and will all
gudness gyffe +tat oure saule kan +gerne , and mekill mare ; +te whilke
es betakynde by +tis wordes , CMEDTHOR-M34,32.414

Qui es in celis , +tat es to say , +te whilke es in heuen .
CMEDTHOR-M34,32.415

For if Godde will call Hym-selfe oure fadyre , +tan He makes vs to wiet
+tat He lufes vs als childyre , and at He will gyfe us all +tat we hafe
myster of . CMEDTHOR-M34,32.416

Bot certanly if all +te lufe +tat euer had fadire or modire vn-to +taire
childyre , and all othire lufes of +tis worlde ware gedirde to-gedyre in
a lufe , and +git +tat lufe ware multipliede als mekill als mans herte
moghte thynke , +git it moghte na thynge atteyne to +te lufe +tat Godde
oure fadyre hase vn-till vs , +tare whare we are hys enmys .
CMEDTHOR-M34,32.417

and +tat sall we wele see thurgh +te grace of Godde , If we se one what
manere He is oure Fadyr , and what He has don for vs .
CMEDTHOR-M34,32.418

Wit +tou , +tat when God made all creaturs of noghte , we rede noghte
+tat He made any creature till His lyknes bot man allanne ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,32.419

and +tare-fore Godd He es , and makere of all thynges of +te worlde ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,32.420

Bot He es noghte +taire fadyre ; CMEDTHOR-M34,32.421

Bot vn-till vs , thurghe His awen myghte full of mercy , es He Godd and
makere and Fadyr , For +tat our saule es lelly lyke vn-till +te lyknes
of +te Fadyr , and +te Son , and +te Haly Gaste , +tat ere hallyly a
Godd and persons thre . CMEDTHOR-M34,32.422

And all +tis werlde He hase made to serue man , whils mane will duelle
in His lele lufe als His awen childyre . CMEDTHOR-M34,32.423

Bot als tyte als we twyn fra +tat lele lufe , for lufe of +tis lyfe , or
for any o+ter thynge , we losse +te lordechipe of +tis worlde ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,32.424

and becommes thralles dreryly to +te deuelle , +tare we ware be-fore fre
and ayers of +te erytage of +te kyngdom of heuen , and to welde +te
welthe of +tis werlde . CMEDTHOR-M34,32.425

Allas may saye , Allas ! Allas ! CMEDTHOR-M34,32.426

what here es a sorowfull chaunge wha-sa it vndyrstode !
CMEDTHOR-M34,32.427

Wit +tou wele +tat here es gret lykynge of lufe , when Godd +tat es
with-owttyn begynnynge , and es with-owtten chaungeyng , and duellys
with-owttyn Endynge , for He es al-+tir-myghtyeste and al+tirwyseste ,
and alswa al+tire-beste <P_33> +tat mannes herte may noghte thynke , in
whaym es lufe and Ioy endles , here , I say , es takyn of gret lufe ,
+tat He deyned Hym to make vs till His awen lyknes righte als we had
bene His awen chosen childyre , and moghte hafe lefte vs to be a littill
vyle matire als we ware made of oure modyr , +tat vile es to neuen ; or
He moghte hafe made vs at His will any@ @kyn o+ter bestis ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,33.428

and +tan had we dyede to-gedire , bathe body and saule .
CMEDTHOR-M34,33.429

Bot when He hade made vs man , and gafe vs +te saule to His awen lyknes
, <paren> louede and luffede be +tat Lorde ! <$$paren> for to be ayers
of +te Erytage of heuen and lyfe in +tat gret Ioye with-owetten Ende ,
Now es na herte sa herde +tat it na moghte nesche , and lufe Swylke a
Godd with all his myghte . CMEDTHOR-M34,33.430

And his herte suld melte , filled of Ioy , if it thoghte sothely of +tat
grace +tat oure Lorde hase don till vs by-fore all o+ter creaturs .
CMEDTHOR-M34,33.431

And +gitt did He mare thurghe His mekill mercy ; CMEDTHOR-M34,33.432

For , whene we ware , thurghe oure Sorofull syn , twynnede fra Godd ,
oure Sweteste Fadire , and become thralles to +te ill gaste , Than He ,
thurghe His maste mercy , Sente His awen Sonne , +tat with Hym es Godd
in His God-hede , for to take flesche and blode of +te Virgyn Marie ,
Mayden and modyr , lastand in Ioy ; CMEDTHOR-M34,33.433

and one +tis manere did He +te dede . CMEDTHOR-M34,33.434

In state of thralle tuke He oure flesche to suffre +te gylteste pouerte
, and schame , and noyes , and paynnes , +tat neuer dyd ill ne na maner
of syn , CMEDTHOR-M34,33.435

and Sythen delyuerde Hym till +te vileste dede , and +te schamefulleste
+tat man moghte thynke , to delyuer vs wreches of sorowfull bandis , and
of +te pynand preson puttid in hell , and to make vs to comme till +te
heghe heuen , whare we sall be als kynges corounde in blyse , if we do
+te will of +tat swet Lorde , +tat for vs ordeynede Hym to dye one +te
crosse als +tofe He had benne a wykkid thefe . CMEDTHOR-M34,33.436

Dere Frende , nowe has +tou here twa thyngez in +te whilke Godde hase
schewede vs +tat He es oure fadire , and +tat He lufes vs als His awen
childyre +tare we are agayne Hym with oure wykked syn .
CMEDTHOR-M34,33.437

The firste es , +tat He made vs till His awen lyknes ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,33.438

and +te to+ter es , +tat He boghte vs fra presoun with His precyouse
dede of His manhede . CMEDTHOR-M34,33.439

For +te fyrste , es man halden till Hym , for to lufe Hym with all his
herte . CMEDTHOR-M34,33.440

Bot +tan may +tou aske , ' what sall I do Hym for +te to+ter <P_34>
thynge ? CMEDTHOR-M34,34.441

For if I sall with pouerhede lofe Godd +te Fadyr , and lufe Hym and
serue Him with all my saule and with all my herte in all thynges ,
for-+ti +tat He made me of noghte and gafe me saule aftir His awen
lyknes , - als it was commandyd in +te alde lawe be-fore Godde was borne
and be-com man for vs , - what moghte I now do Hym , when He , for me
wrechid synnere , sa mekill Hym lawede +tat He walde becomme man , and
He gafe Hym to me , when he , thurghe His sweteste mercy , walde dye for
me , and of +te maste noyouse and +te moste vile dede +tat euer was
thoghte ? CMEDTHOR-M34,34.442

I wate neuer what I may say here ; CMEDTHOR-M34,34.443

For if I myghte lyffe a_hundrethe +gere , and if I moghte in +tat tym ,
ilk a day at a tym , dye als vile ded als He for me dide , +git ne ware
it noghte ynence His gret gyftez , when He es sothely said Goddes Sonne
of heuen , and gaffe Hym selfe till vs , +tat tynte was for syn thurgh ,
and put in to +te pyne of helle , and +tare , in +te dispytte of Hym ,
seruede to +te deuelle . CMEDTHOR-M34,34.444

How sulde we +tan +gelde Hym +te gude gret gyfte , when He walde sende
His awen Sone to be pynede for oure syn ? ' CMEDTHOR-M34,34.445

Now I sall lere the , if God gyffe me grace , how oure dere Fadir askes
nane o+ter store bot that we , with herte , knawe oure awen Febillnes
and oure wrechidnes , +tat we hafe for oure awen syn .
CMEDTHOR-M34,34.446

Thane sall we be in bitternes of penance , and crye till Hym faste mercy
, +tat He vs saue for His haly name , CMEDTHOR-M34,34.447

For of oure selfe hafe we noghte Hym for to +gelde ; CMEDTHOR-M34,34.448

+tare-fore said the prophete in +te psalme , Quid retribuam Domino pro
omnibus que retribuit michi ? Calicem salutaris accipiam , et nomen
Domini invocabo , etc. ' +tat es , ' what sall I +gelde to God for all
His gud gyftes +tat He me gyffes als Lorde , with-owtten my deserte ?
CMEDTHOR-M34,34.449

The coppe of hele I sall take , and calle +te name of my lorde . '
CMEDTHOR-M34,34.450

The cope of hele whare-of dranke oure Lord Ihesu oure Saueour , +tat es
, the bytternes of +te penance in His grete pynes , CMEDTHOR-M34,34.451

and +tat man in all his thoghtez calles Godez name , +tat sothefastly
knawes +tat he hase noghte of hym-selfe bot sorowe and synne .
CMEDTHOR-M34,34.452

And wit thou +tat , if sothefastenes be sett faste in thi saule , +te
mare +tat +tou knawes +te for wrechide and febyll , +te mare sall +tou
<P_35> meke +te , and calle on Hys mercy . CMEDTHOR-M34,35.453

And +tus it was of oure swete Lady , mayden and modyr ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,35.454

For scho had mare of grace +tane any in this lyfe , man or woman +tat
euer was borne , CMEDTHOR-M34,35.455

Thare-fore scho halde hir lesse and lawere +tan any o+ter wyghte ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,35.456

and mare cryede scho mercy +tan any o+ter man , when sothefaste Goddes
Son lighte in hir wambe . CMEDTHOR-M34,35.457

My dere frende , se now aftir-warde why oure Lord Ihesu kennes vs in +te
Gospelle to saye ' oure Fadire , ' and noghte ' my Fadir ' ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,35.458

For by +tat will He kenn vs +tat we suld gedyre all men with vs in oure
prayers , CMEDTHOR-M34,35.459

For all ere oure brethire , crystende and vncristend men , For +tat all
of a gouernaylle hafe we a Fadyr . CMEDTHOR-M34,35.460

And +tat +tou may +tis thynge , thurghe +te grace of Godd , clerelyere
See , Gyffe gude Entente till +tat at I say . CMEDTHOR-M34,35.461

Hym calles +tou ' thi fleschely bro+ter , ' +tat has his body of +te
same man and woman of whaym +tou hase thyne . CMEDTHOR-M34,35.462

Thane sall +tou wele halde hym +ti bro+ter +tat hase his saule of +te
Same fadir of heuen of whaym +tou hase +ti saule , and of swylke a kynd
, and of swylke a lyknes ; CMEDTHOR-M34,35.463

For als wele made Godd ilke man till lyknes of +te Trinyte als He did
+te . CMEDTHOR-M34,35.464

And +tis bro+ter-hede mare suld we lufe , and mare dere halde , +tan +te
bro+terhede of +te flesche , in als mekill als +te saule es mare nobyll
+tan +te flesche , and in als mekill als Godd , oure fadir , of heuen ,
es mare nobill , and mare for to lufe , +tan oure fleschly fadir .
CMEDTHOR-M34,35.465

And +tat suld we do if we saghe als clerely with oure gastely eghe als
we do with oure bodyly eghe . CMEDTHOR-M34,35.466

Bot for-thy +tat we see noghte bot with +te fleschely eghe , als it ware
bestes , we hafe na knawynge ne na lufe bot of +tat bro+terhede +tat
commes of +te flesche stynkande and foule . CMEDTHOR-M34,35.467

Allas ! Allas ! what sorowfull thynge thus hase blyndid us !
CMEDTHOR-M34,35.468

Certis , na thynge mare blyndis manes saule +tane lufe of erthely thynge
+tat sonne takes ende . CMEDTHOR-M34,35.469

For-+ti behufes man lefe his propire will , if he will perfitly knawe
+te lufe-somest bro+terhede . Whare-of now mekill I hafe spoken ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,35.470

For whate-sa-euer we hafe in body or in saule of gudnes or of fayrenes ,
we hafe it of oure fadyr of heuen , Godd , +tat es till vs fadir , and
Euenly till all His creaturs , noghte anely for His makynge of noghte ,
ne for His gouernyng of His grace , for His purchasynge +tat He made of
vs +tat ware tynt <P_36> childir , with His flesche and His blode +tat
He for vs gafe , als Saynt Austyn +te nobill clerke witnes .
CMEDTHOR-M34,36.471

He sayse ' +te Fadir gaffe His Son , thurgh whaym He walde by vs
thralles ; CMEDTHOR-M34,36.472

He gafe +te Haly Gaste , thurgh whaym He walde purchase +te thralles in
His childire . CMEDTHOR-M34,36.473

+Te Sonn , He gafe in pryse of raunson ; +te Haly Gaste , in preuelege
of purchase ; CMEDTHOR-M34,36.474

and +tar-fore +te Fadir kepis Hym selfe in Erytage till His childir +tat
He $purchased . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,36.475

And +tarefore , dere frende , na man sall mystrayste of +te lufe of His
swete Fadirhede , and His dere pete ; CMEDTHOR-M34,36.476

For mare es His mercy +tan all oure wykkednes ; CMEDTHOR-M34,36.477

For wha sa calles till Hym with all his herte , with-owteen faile He
will here hym , CMEDTHOR-M34,36.478

for He es full of mercy . CMEDTHOR-M34,36.479

And +tare-fore , als I be-fore saide , with +gernyge of saule and
certayne trayste , calle apon Hym trewely with all thi herte .
CMEDTHOR-M34,36.480

He es +ti Fadir pereles , +tat purchacecez +te pees ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,36.481

and saye traystely till Hym als Hym-selfe vs lerede , Pater noster qui
es in celis , +tat es to say , Oure Fadir that es in heuen ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,36.482

sanctificetur nomen tuum , +tat es to say , halyed be +ti name ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,36.483

adveniat regnum tuum , CMEDTHOR-M34,36.484

it com , +ti kyngedom ; CMEDTHOR-M34,36.485

Fiat voluntas tua , sicut in celo et in terra , CMEDTHOR-M34,36.486

+ti will be donne , swa in erthe als it es in heuen ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,36.487

panem nostrum cotidianum da nobis hodie , CMEDTHOR-M34,36.488

Oure ylke day brede +tou gyffe vs to day ; CMEDTHOR-M34,36.489

Et dimitte nobis debita nostra , sicut et nos dimittimus debitoribus
nostris , CMEDTHOR-M34,36.490

and forgyffe vs oure dettis als we forgyffe our dettours ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,36.491

Et ne nos inducas in temptacionem , CMEDTHOR-M34,36.492

and suffire vs noghte be ledde in-to fandyngis , CMEDTHOR-M34,36.493

Set libera nos a malo , CMEDTHOR-M34,36.494

bot delyuer vs fra all ill thynges CMEDTHOR-M34,36.495

Amen ! +Tat es to say , Swa mot it be ! CMEDTHOR-M34,36.496

Now , my dere frende , +tou sall wyt +tat +tis Oryson passes all o+ter
prayers , pryncypally in twa thynges , +tat es to say , in worthynes and
in profyte . CMEDTHOR-M34,36.497

In worthynes , for +tat God Hym-selfe mad it ; CMEDTHOR-M34,36.498

and for-+ti do +tay gret schame and gret vnreuerence till Ihesu , Goddes
Son , +tat takes +tam till wordis rynnand and curius , and leues +te
prayere +tat He vs kennede , +tat wate all +te will of Godd +te Fadir ,
and +te whilke orysone commes mare till His plesynge , and whate thynges
+te wrechede caytyfe has myster at pray fore . CMEDTHOR-M34,36.499

Alswa , als I hafe sayde , He wate anely all +te Fadir wyll ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,36.500

and He wate all oure nede ; CMEDTHOR-M34,36.501

and +tare-fore a_hundrethe_thousande er <P_37> dyssayued with
multyplicatione of wordes and of orysouns ; CMEDTHOR-M34,37.502

For , when +tay wene +tat +tay hafe grete deuocyon , +tan hafe +tai a
fulle fleschely lykynge , For-thy +tat ilk a fleschely lykynge delytes
+tam kyndely in swylke turnede langage ; CMEDTHOR-M34,37.503

and +tare-fore I walde +tat +tou war warre , CMEDTHOR-M34,37.504

For I say +te sykerly , +tat it es a foule lychery for to delyte +te in
rymmes and slyke gulyardy ; CMEDTHOR-M34,37.505

+git one a-no+ter syde , Saynt Austyne , and Saynt Gregore , and o+ter
halowes +tat prayede als was +taire lykynge . CMEDTHOR-M34,37.506

I blame noghte prayers , CMEDTHOR-M34,37.507

bot I blame +tase +tat lefes +te prayere of Godd +tat Hym-selfe made ,
and lerede vs for to pray , +tat es , Pater noster , and takes +tam till
+te Orysons of a synfull Saynte whare +tay fynde it wretten ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,37.508

For oure Lorde Ihesus Hym-selfe sayse in the gospell , ' when +ge will
praye , prayes noghte with many wordes , CMEDTHOR-M34,37.509

bot praye one +tis manere , CMEDTHOR-M34,37.510

Pater noster &c ' . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,37.511

Dere frende , +git sall +tou wit one anot+ter syde +tat +te Pater noster
passes all o+ter prayers in worthynes ; CMEDTHOR-M34,37.512

For +tare-in es contende all thyngez what-sa we hafe myster of , till
+tis lyfe or till +te to+ter . CMEDTHOR-M34,37.513

For we praye +tare-in Godd +te Fadyr , +tat He delyuer vs of all illes ,
and +tat He gyffe vs all gudes , and +tat He make vs swylke +tat we may
neuer do ill , ne +tat we may noghte fayle of gude .
CMEDTHOR-M34,37.514

And now , all +te ille +tat vs greues , ou+ter es it , ille +tat es
donne , CMEDTHOR-M34,37.515

or it es ille for to com , CMEDTHOR-M34,37.516

or elles it es ille +tat we suffire nowe . CMEDTHOR-M34,37.517

Of +tat ille +tat es donne and passede , we praye oure swete Lorde +tat
He delyuer vs +ter-of when we say Dimitte nobis debita nostra , etc ' .
CMEDTHOR-M34,37.518

We pray Hym delyuer vs of ill +tat es for to com , when we say et ne nos
inducas in temptacionem . CMEDTHOR-M34,37.519

Of illes +tat we suffire nowe , we praye Hym +tat He delyuer vs , when
we say Set libera nos a malo . CMEDTHOR-M34,37.520

+Git , dere Frende , on a o+ter syde , wit +tou +tat all maner of gude
+tat es , Ou+ter it es erthely gude , or gastely gude , or gude lastande
endles . CMEDTHOR-M34,37.521

For erthely gude we praye , when we saye Panem nostrum cotidianum da
nobis hodie ; CMEDTHOR-M34,37.522

For gastely gude we praye , when we say Fiat voluntas tua , sicut in
celo et in terra ; CMEDTHOR-M34,37.523

For endles gude we praye , when we say Adveniat regum tuum ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,37.524

and confermyng of all this we praye , when we say Sanctificetur nomen
tuum . CMEDTHOR-M34,37.525

<P_38>

Now , my dere frende , +tese ere seuen prayers of +te Ewangelle +tat
oure Lorde Ihesu Criste kenned till His dyscypills .
CMEDTHOR-M34,38.527

And +tou sall wit +tat +tese foure wordes +tat comes be-fore , +tat es
to wit , Pater noster qui es in celis , leres vs how we sall praye , and
what oure selfe sall be in prayere ; CMEDTHOR-M34,38.528

For we sall , in ylke ane Oryson , haue foure thynges , +tat es to say ,
perfite lufe till Hym till whaym we praye , and certayne trayste to haue
+tat at we praye fore , and stabill trouth in Hym in whaym we trowe ,
and sothefaste mekenes of +tat , that of oure selfe , na gude we haue .
CMEDTHOR-M34,38.529

Perfite lufe es vndirstanden in +tis worde Pater , CMEDTHOR-M34,38.530

For ylke a creature kyndly lufes his Fadir . CMEDTHOR-M34,38.531

Certayne trayst es contende in +tis worde noster ; CMEDTHOR-M34,38.532

For if He be ours , +tan may we sekerly trayst in Hym +tat He es halden
till vs . CMEDTHOR-M34,38.533

Stabill trouthe es taken in +tise wordes Qui es ; CMEDTHOR-M34,38.534

For when we say qui es , +tan graunt we wele +tat Godd es +tat we neuer
sawe ; CMEDTHOR-M34,38.535

and +tat es ryghte trouthe , CMEDTHOR-M34,38.536

For trouthe es na no+ter thyng bot trowyng of thyng +tat may noghte be
sene . CMEDTHOR-M34,38.537

Sothefaste mekenes es betakynde in +tis worde In celis ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,38.538

For when we thynke how He es heghe in Ioy , and how we are here lawe in
besynes , than we are mekide . CMEDTHOR-M34,38.539

Bot when we hafe festenede +tere foure thynges in oure hertes , +tan may
we hardyly praye , and saye with all oure affeccyon , Sanctificetur
nomen tuum , +tat es to say , ' haly be thi name ! '
CMEDTHOR-M34,38.540

als swa stabill +ti name , +tat es , Fadir , in vs , +tat we be one +tat
manere +ti childire +tat we do na thyng +tat be agaynes +ti will and
that euer-mare we doo +tat at commes to +ti plesyng , thurgh grauntynge
of +ti grace . CMEDTHOR-M34,38.541

And for-thi +tat we may noghte euer-mare do +tat perfitely whyls we ere
in +tis caytifede worlde , +tare-fore pray we +tus , CMEDTHOR-M34,38.542

and sayse , Adveniat regnum tuum , +tat es to say , it com till vs , +ti
kyngdom , +tat we regne in +te , Ihesu , in +tis lyfe thurgh thi grace
and +tou in vs in +te to+ter lyfe turgh Ioy . CMEDTHOR-M34,38.543

And +tis ilke we praye for +tase +tat are in purgatorie ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,38.544

and for-+ti +tat we neuer-mare may hafe parte with Ioye of heuen if we
do noghte thi will in erthe , +tare-fore we praye thus , Fiat voluntas
tua , sicut in celo et in terra , +tat es to say , thi will be done ,
als in heuen , swa in erthe . CMEDTHOR-M34,38.545

Alswa say ' make vs to do +ti wyll , ' +tat es to say , +tou gyffe
<P_39> vs grace to do all +tat +tou commandes , and to lefe all +tat
+tou defendis , and +tat swa in erthe als in heuen , +tat es to say ,
als Michaelle , and Gabrielle , and Raphaelle , Cherubyn and Seraphyn ,
and all +te o+ter angells and archangells , and all +tase +tat are
Ordeynede to +te endles lyfe in Ioy , in ilke a kynde , in ilke ane
ordire , and in ilke ane elde , thi wille duse ; CMEDTHOR-M34,39.546

and for-thi +tat we may noghte do +ti will whills we lyffe in +tis body
, if +tou ne sustayne vs noghte , +tare-fore say we +tus , Panem nostrum
cotidianum da nobis hodie , +tat es to say , Oure ilke day brede +tou
gyffe vs to-day ; CMEDTHOR-M34,39.547

als swa say ' +tou gyffe vs Force in body and in saule , and hele , if
it be +ti will , of +te tane and offe +te to+ter . '
CMEDTHOR-M34,39.548

And here es for to wit , +tat +tare es thre maners of brede , +tat es ,
bodyly brede , +tat es to say , Fode and clethynge ; CMEDTHOR-M34,39.549

+tare es brede gastely , +tat es to say , of haly wrytte +te leryng ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,39.550

and +tare es +te brede of Eukaryste , +tat es +te grace in +te sacrament
of +te autere , for to comforthe +te kynde of +te tane and +te to+ter .
CMEDTHOR-M34,39.551

Bot for-thi +tat we ere worthi na gudnes whills we ere bownden in synn ,
+tare-fore say we +tus , Dimitte nobis debita nostra sicut et nos
dimittimus debitoribus nostris , +tis es to say , ' Forgyffe vs oure
dettis als we forgyffe oure dettours . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,39.552

+tou sall wyt +tare oure synns byndis oure dettours to pynne ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,39.553

+tare-fore we pray Ihesu to for-gyff vs synnes , +tat es to say , all
+tat we hafe synnede in thoghte , in worde and in dede ; and +tat ryghte
als we for-gyffe till +tase +tat hase mysdone agaynes vs .
CMEDTHOR-M34,39.554

And for-+ti +tat a lyttill vs helpes to hafe forgyfnes of syn , if we
may noghte kepe vs fra syn , +tare-fore pray we +tus , Et ne nos inducas
in temptacionem , CMEDTHOR-M34,39.555

and +tis es to say , ' lede us no+gte in-to na fandyngis ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,39.556

als swa say , Suffere vs noghte be ouer-commen in fandyngez of +te
deuell , ne of +te flesch , ne of +te werlde . CMEDTHOR-M34,39.557

And noghte allanly we pray +tat we be delyuered of all euyll fandyngez ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,39.558

Bot alswa we pray +tat we be delyuered of all ill thyngis , when we say
, Set libera nos a malo ; CMEDTHOR-M34,39.559

and +tis es to say , ' Bot delyuer vs of all ill thyngis , ' +tat es ,
of body and of saule , of syn and of pyne , For syn that now es or sall
be . CMEDTHOR-M34,39.560

Say we Amen ! +tat es to say , ' swa be it ! ' CMEDTHOR-M34,39.561

and for-thi sayse oure Lorde <P_40> Ihesu Criste in +te gospelle , '
What sa +tou prayes my fadir in my name , He sall do it ; '
CMEDTHOR-M34,40.562

and +ter-fore say at +te Ende , Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Cristum ,
filium tuum , &.c ' . CMEDTHOR-M34,40.563

And now , my dere frende , vndirstande noghte +tat +tou sall say +ti
Pater noster with mouthe , als I hafe it here wretyn be-fore +te .
CMEDTHOR-M34,40.564

Bot say all anely +te nakede lettir with +ti mouthe ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,40.565

and thynke in +ti herte of this +tat I hafe said here , of ilke a worde
by it-selfe ; CMEDTHOR-M34,40.566

and rekk noghte +tof +tou ne multyply many Pater nosters ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,40.567

For it es better to say a Pater noster with gude deuocyon , +tan
{to_say} a_thousande with-owtten deuocyon ; CMEDTHOR-M34,40.568

For +tus sais Saynte Paule appertly ; CMEDTHOR-M34,40.569

he sayse , ' me ware leuer say fyve wordes in herte deuotely , +tane
{to_say} fyve_thousande with my mouthe with-owtten lykynge . '
CMEDTHOR-M34,40.570

and one +te same manere sall +tou say and do at thyne offece in +te
qweire ; CMEDTHOR-M34,40.571

for swa sayse +te prophete , Psallite sapienter ; CMEDTHOR-M34,40.572

and +tat is to say , ' Synges and versy wysesly , ' +tat es , to say or
to syng wyesly , +tat es , +tat thi herte be one +tat at +tou saise ,
and one +tat at o+ter saise , +tat +tou here it besyly ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,40.573

For if +ti body be at thi seruyce , and +ti mouthe speke one a wyse ,
and thi herte thynke of wrechidnes caytefly , +tan es +tou twynned .
CMEDTHOR-M34,40.574

For when +tou swa es twynned , +tou tynes +te mede of +ti seruyce ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,40.575

For +te awe to serue Godd with all +ti herte , with all +ti saule , and
with all +ti vertu ; CMEDTHOR-M34,40.576

and swa +tou may pay +ti Godd . CMEDTHOR-M34,40.577

Bot +tare es many thynges +tat ere cause of swylke wrechede twynnynge ,
als mete , drynke , Reste , cleythynge , layke , discorde , Thoghte ,
laboure , hethynge . CMEDTHOR-M34,40.578

These makes hippynge , homerynge , of medles momellynge .
CMEDTHOR-M34,40.579

And +tare-fore take kepe what oure Lorde Ihesu Criste saise in +te
gospell : CMEDTHOR-M34,40.580

' Firste , ' He saise , ' sekes +te kyngdom of heuen , and all +tat +ge
hafe myster of sall be gyffen +gowe with-owttyn any askynge . '
CMEDTHOR-M34,40.581

Thare-fore , dere Frende , +tou sall wit what +tou sall hafe in +te
blysse of heuen . CMEDTHOR-M34,40.582

Wit +tou wele +tat +tou sall hafe Seuen gyftes in body , and Seuen in
saule , +tat es to say , Fairenes in body with-owttyn fylth , lyghtenes
with-owttyn slewth , Force with-owtten Feblesce , Frenes with-owtten
thralledom , lykynge with-owtten noye , lufelynes with-owttyn envye ,
hele with-owttyn sekenes , lange lyfe with-owttyn ende .
CMEDTHOR-M34,40.583

Thou sall hafe in salue , Wysedome <P_41> with-owtten ygnorance ,
Frenchipe with-owtten hateredyn , Accorde with-owtten discorde , Myghte
with-owtten wayknes , honour with-owtten dishonour , Sekirnes
with-owtten drede , Ioy with-owtten sorowe . Bot +te wreches in helle ,
all +te reuerce , both in body and in saule , +tat es to say , Fylth
with-owttyn fairenes , Slouthe with-owtten lyghtenes , Feblesce
with-owtten force , Thraldom with-owtten freenes , Angwyse with-owtten
lykynge , Sekenes with-owtten hele , ded with-outten ende .
CMEDTHOR-M34,41.584

Thare sall be in +tair saules , Ignorance with-owttyn Wysdome , hatredyn
with-owtten lufe , Discorde with-owtten Accorde , feblesce with-owtten
powere , Schame with-owtten honour , Dred with-owtten sekernes , and
Sorowe with-owtten Ioy . CMEDTHOR-M34,41.585

And for +tis sall +tou seke with all +ti myghte , +tat +tou may wyn +te
Ioye of heuen ; CMEDTHOR-M34,41.586

for +tare es sa gret Ioye and sa mekill swettnes +tat , if +tou myghte
lyffe fra +te begynnynge of +te worlde vn-till +te ende , and hafe all
+te lykynge +tat +tou couthe ordeyne , +git +tou sulde with gret ryghte
lefe all +tase for to be a day in +te Ioy of heuen .
CMEDTHOR-M34,41.587

And thus endys +te to+ter degre of contemplacyone , +tat es to say , +te
contemplacione of haly writte ; of +te whylke , if +tou take gud kepe in
+ti herte , it sall be lyghte vnto +te , ilke a worde to halde .
CMEDTHOR-M34,41.588

One ane o+ter syde , if +tou hafe mater to speke vn-to +te clerkez , be
+tay neuer sa wyse , or to lewede men , be +tay neuer so ruyde , of +te
clerkes +tou mofe som matirs of +tis , and alswa at +tou may lere more .
CMEDTHOR-M34,41.589

And when +tou spekes till sympill men , and ruyde , gladly +tou lere
+tam with swettnes . CMEDTHOR-M34,41.590

For +tou hafe enoghe whare-of +tou may speke , and how +tou sall +ti
lyfe amende and gouerne , and o+ter menes alswa . CMEDTHOR-M34,41.591

+Te thirde degre of contemplacyon es in Godd Hym-selfe .
CMEDTHOR-M34,41.592

And +tat may be on twa maners , +tat es , with-owtten in His manhede ,
and in His Godhede so blyschede . CMEDTHOR-M34,41.593

For +tus saise Saynt Austyn , For-+ti be-come Godd man , For to make
mane to Se Godd in his kynde ; CMEDTHOR-M34,41.594

For whe+ter som he +gode with-in or with-owtten , euer-mare moghte man
fynde pasture ; with-owtten , thurgh consederacyon of His manhed ;
with-in , thurghe contemplacyon of His Godhede . CMEDTHOR-M34,41.595

Of His manhede sall +tou thynke <P_42> thre thyngez : +te meknes of His
Incarnacyon , +te sweteness of His conuersasion , and +te grete charite
of His passione . CMEDTHOR-M34,42.596

Bot +tis may +tou noghte do all att anes ; CMEDTHOR-M34,42.597

and +tare-fore hafe I twynnned the thaym by +te Seuen houres of +te daye
+tat +tou saise in +te kyrke , Swa +tat nan houre passe the , +tat +tou
ne sall be swetely ocupyed in +ti herte . CMEDTHOR-M34,42.598

Bot nowe for to do +tis , +tan sall +tou wit +tat till ilke ane houre of
+te daye es dowbyll medytacyon , ane of His passyon , and ano+ter of +te
to+ter seson . CMEDTHOR-M34,42.599

Now , dere frende , before matyns sall +tou thynke of +te swete byrthe
of Ihesu Cryste al-+ter-fyrste , and sythyn eftyrwarde of His passion .
CMEDTHOR-M34,42.600

Of His byrth , sall thou thynke besyly +te tym , and +te stede and +te
houre , +tat oure Lorde Ihesus Criste was borne of His modir Marie .
CMEDTHOR-M34,42.601

+Te tyme was in myd-wynter , when it was maste calde ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,42.602

+te houre was at mydnyghte , +te hardeste houre +tat es :
CMEDTHOR-M34,42.603

+te stede was in mydwarde +te strete , in a house with-owtten walles .
CMEDTHOR-M34,42.604

In clowtis was He wonden , CMEDTHOR-M34,42.605

and als a chylde was He bunden ; CMEDTHOR-M34,42.606

and in a crybbe by-fore ane oxe and ane asse , +tat lufely lorde layde
was , CMEDTHOR-M34,42.607

for +tare was na no+ter stede voyde . CMEDTHOR-M34,42.608

And here sall +tou thynke of +te kepynge of Marye , and of hir childe ,
and of hir spouse Ioseph - wat Ioye Ihesu +tam sente .
CMEDTHOR-M34,42.609

thou sall thynke also of +te hyrdes +tat saw +te takyn of His byrthe ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,42.610

and +tou sall thynke of +te swete felachippe of Angells , and rayse vpe
thi herte and syng with +tam , Gloria in excelsis Deo , &c.
CMEDTHOR-M34,42.611

Of +te passion sall +tou thynke how +tat He was at swylke a tym of +te
nyghte betrayed by His descyple , and taken als a traytoure , and
bownden als a thefe , and ledde als a felon . CMEDTHOR-M34,42.612

Be-fore pryme +tou sall thynke of +te passion of Ihesu and of His
Ioyfull ryssynge . CMEDTHOR-M34,42.613

Of His passyoun sall +tou thynke how +te Iewes ledd Hym into +taire
counsaile , and bare false wytnes agayne Hym , and put appone Hym +tat
He had saide blasefeme , +tat es , sclandyre in Godd , and +tat He had
said +tat He suld haue distroyede +te temple of Godd , and make agayne
ano+ter with-in the thirde day ; CMEDTHOR-M34,42.614

and +tan +tay began to dryfe Hym till hethyng , and to fulle Hym als a
fule , and spite one Hym in dispyte in His faire face ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,42.615

and sythyn thay hide His eghen , CMEDTHOR-M34,42.616

and gafe Hym bofetes grete , CMEDTHOR-M34,42.617

and sythen asked Hym whate He was +tat Hym <P_43> smate ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,43.618

and sythen , +tay ledde Hym dreryly to +te dede CMEDTHOR-M34,43.619

and +gitt neuer He sayde till thaym anes why +tay swa dyde .
CMEDTHOR-M34,43.620

Many othyre wykkydnes +tay dide Hym , +tat lange ware to telle .
CMEDTHOR-M34,43.621

+Gitt before pryme sall +tou thynke of +te haly rysesynge , +tat at +tat
tyme of +te daye Ihesu Ioyfully rase fra dede to lyfe , when +tat He
hade destruyede helle and delyuerede haly sawles owte of +te powere of
+te deuelle . CMEDTHOR-M34,43.622

+Gitt before vndrone sall +tou thynke of +te passion and of +te
witsondaye . CMEDTHOR-M34,43.623

Of +te passion sall +tou thynke , how +tat tyme oure Lorde Ihesu Cryste
dispytousely was dispuylede , nakkynde and bownden till a tree in Pylate
house , and swa wykkedly scourgede and doungen , +tat of His swete body
, fra +te heued till +te fute , noghte was lefte hale .
CMEDTHOR-M34,43.624

And at +tat ilke houre +tou sall thynke of +te witsonnday , how +te tym
of +te day oure Lorde Ihesu Criste sente +te Haly Gaste till His
disciples , in liknes of fyre , and of tunnges , in takynnynge +tat +tay
sulde hafe abowndance in worde and brynnynge in lufe , and +tat ryghte
es +te purueance of oure Lorde puruayde ; CMEDTHOR-M34,43.625

For in twa maners +te wykked gaste begylede man in paradyse , +tat es to
saye , with wykked entycement of his tunge , and with +te caldnes of his
venym . CMEDTHOR-M34,43.626

And for-+ti come +te Haly Gaste in lyknes of tung , agayne +te
Entycement of +te deuelle , and in fyre for to distruye +te caldnes of
his venym . CMEDTHOR-M34,43.627

Before myddaye sall +tou thynke of +te Anunciacyon , and of Ihesu
passion . CMEDTHOR-M34,43.628

And of +te Anunciacion sall +tou thynke of +te grete mercy of oure Lorde
Ihesu Criste , whi +tat He walde be-comme man , and For vs suffire +te
dede in +tat swete manhed Sen He moghte hafe boghte vs agayne on o+ter
manere . CMEDTHOR-M34,43.629

And +tat dyde He for till drawe till Hym +ti luffe .
CMEDTHOR-M34,43.630

For if ane hade bene +ti maker , and ano+ter thi byere , and hade
sufferde in thaire bodyes all oure sorowe for to by all oure lufe , Than
hade noghte oure trouthe bene anely in ane . CMEDTHOR-M34,43.631

Off +te passion sall +tou thynke at +tat houre how oure Lorde Ihesu was
done one +te Crosse be-twyx twa thefes , ane one His ryghte syde , and
ano+ter one His lefte syde , CMEDTHOR-M34,43.632

and Hym-selfe +tay hangede be-twix +tam twa , alls mayster of thefes .
CMEDTHOR-M34,43.633

For if all +te sekenes of +tis werlde and all +te sorowe ware in +te
body of a man anely , and +tat man myghte consayfe <P_44> alls mekill
noye and Angwysce and Sorowe in his body als all +te men of +tis werlde
moghte thynke , +gitt it ware full littill or ells noghte to regarde of
+te sorowe +tat He sufferde for vs ane houre of +te daye .
CMEDTHOR-M34,44.634

Before nonne sall +tou thynke of +te passion and of +te gloriouse
Ascension . CMEDTHOR-M34,44.635

Of +te passione sall +tou thynke , +tat at swylke a tym of +te daye
dyede +te makere of lyfe , for +ti lufe . CMEDTHOR-M34,44.636

And here sall +tou thynke of +te wordes +tat Ihesu spake on +te crose ,
and of +te foure takynes +tat be-felle in His dede .
CMEDTHOR-M34,44.637

The fyrste worde was +tis +tat He spake , CMEDTHOR-M34,44.638

' Fadire , for-gyffe +tam +tis syn , CMEDTHOR-M34,44.639

for +tay wate noghte whate +tay doo . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,44.640

The to+ter worde was +tis , +tat He said to +te thefe ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,44.641

' For sothe I say the , +tis day sall +tou be with me in paradyse . '
CMEDTHOR-M34,44.642

The thirde was +tat He saide to His modire of Sayne John His cosynne ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,44.643

' Woman , lo +tare thi son ! ' CMEDTHOR-M34,44.644

And to +te discyple saide He , ' Manne , lo +tare thy Modire ! '
CMEDTHOR-M34,44.645

The ferthe worde +tat He saide was this , CMEDTHOR-M34,44.646

' Godd , my Godd , whi hase +tou lefte me +tus . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,44.647

The fyfte was , ' Scicio , ' +tat es to say , ' I haf thriste . '
CMEDTHOR-M34,44.648

The sexte worde was this , CMEDTHOR-M34,44.649

' In manus tuas Domine , &c. ' whilke es for to saye , ' Fadir , in-to
+ti haundis I gyffe my sawle . ' CMEDTHOR-M34,44.650

The Seuend worde was +tis , CMEDTHOR-M34,44.651

Consummatum est , +tat es to say , ' Now es +te prophecye fulfillede , '
CMEDTHOR-M34,44.652

and with +tat worde he helde His hede downne , CMEDTHOR-M34,44.653

and gafe +te gaste . CMEDTHOR-M34,44.654

Now +te takynes +tat ware in His dede ere +tire . CMEDTHOR-M34,44.655

Firste , all +te erthe by-gane to tremble , CMEDTHOR-M34,44.656

and +te vaile of +te temple braste in twa CMEDTHOR-M34,44.657

and felle doun , CMEDTHOR-M34,44.658

+te stanes raue in soundire , CMEDTHOR-M34,44.659

+te groues opyned CMEDTHOR-M34,44.660

and +te dede men rase , CMEDTHOR-M34,44.661

and +te sonne with-drewe his lyghte fra +te werlde fra myddaye to noune
. CMEDTHOR-M34,44.662

Of +te Ascencione sall +tou thynke that swylke a tym of +te daye wente
vpe oure Lorde Ihesu Criste in-till +te mounte of Olyuete , Seande His
discyples and His swete modire Marie , how He steighe in-till heuen ,
and sett Hym one Fadir righte hande ; and how His dysciples turnede
agayne into +te Cete , and ware in fastynge and in prayere vntill +te
commynge of +te Haly Gaste ; CMEDTHOR-M34,44.663

and +tare ware togedire a_hundreth_and_twentty in a house for to abyde
+te commynge of +te Haly Gaste , als oure Lorde commande +tam before .
CMEDTHOR-M34,44.664

Before euensange sall +tou thynke of Ihesu passion and of His supere .
CMEDTHOR-M34,44.665

Of +te passion sall +tou thynke how Iospeh <P_45> of Aramathy purchaste
Ihesu body of Pilate , and how +tey come to +te crosse +tare He hange ,
and +tay brakke +te twa thee-banes of +te twa thefes .
CMEDTHOR-M34,45.666

And +tare was a knyghte redye with a spere , CMEDTHOR-M34,45.667

and perchede +te syde of Ihesu , CMEDTHOR-M34,45.668

and smate Hym to +te herte ; CMEDTHOR-M34,45.669

and als sone come rynnande downe +te precyouse blode and watire .
CMEDTHOR-M34,45.670

And +tat was +te Rawnsone of +te whilke I be-fore spake -
CMEDTHOR-M34,45.671

louede be that Lorde ! CMEDTHOR-M34,45.672

- And +tan Ioseph tuke Hym downe of +te crosse , for-+ti +tat na bodye
sulde duelle on +te crosse in so hye a daye als was one +te morne .
CMEDTHOR-M34,45.673

Of +te supere of Ihesu sall +tou thynke , how +tat tym He gafe His
precyouse flesche and His blude in lyknes of brede and of wyne +tat we
may See ; CMEDTHOR-M34,45.674

and it es sothefastely flesche and blude of Ihesu Criste , +tat we may
noghte See with bodyli eghen . CMEDTHOR-M34,45.675

+Te thirde thynge es gastely , +te grace +tat we rescheyue when we take
+tat flesche and +tat blude . CMEDTHOR-M34,45.676

We se +tare lyknes of brede and of wyne , CMEDTHOR-M34,45.677

and it es noghte ; CMEDTHOR-M34,45.678

bot we trowe +tat +tare es sothefastly +te flesche and +te blude of
Ihesu Criste . CMEDTHOR-M34,45.679

And noghte_forthi +te lyknes of flesche ne may we noghte see .
CMEDTHOR-M34,45.680

And +tare-fore , +tare whare we sulde hafe vgglynes als vn-till oure
body , for to ete flesche and drynke blude of man , Oure Lorde Ihesu
Criste turnede His flesche and His blude in liknes of brede and of wyne
, for to comforthe oure bodily witte thurghe swylke fude als we ere
wounte for to see , and alswa for to helpe oure trouthe thurghe +tat ,
+tat we see a thynge and trowes ano+ter . CMEDTHOR-M34,45.681

And +tare-fore , dere frende , when +tou sall gaa for to reschaife +tat
swete flesche and +tat blude of Ihesu thi saueour , luke at +tou haue
verray contricyon , and repentance , and clensynge of thi syn in thi
herte ; CMEDTHOR-M34,45.682

For +tare +tou ressayfes in sacrament reghte als +tou ressayfede Hym in
flesche and blude - CMEDTHOR-M34,45.683

blescede be +tat grace ! CMEDTHOR-M34,45.684

Be-fore complyn sall +tou thynke how +tat Ioseph and Nicodemus wande
Ihesu body in faire schetis , and enoynte it with precyouse oynementes ,
and laide it in a monumente of stane , and sett +taire seles apon +te
stane , and knyghtes +tat sulde it kepe . CMEDTHOR-M34,45.685

The to+ter thynge +tat +tou sall thynke in +te same tyme es +tis , how
Ihesus , in +te daye of supere , when He had souppede , He +gode in-till
a gardyn with His discyples , and felle downe in Orysoun , and bygann
for <P_46> to swete one swilke manere +tat +te droppis of blode droppede
of His blyssede face vn-till +te erthe . CMEDTHOR-M34,46.686

Now hase +tou matire and manere for to thynke of Goddis manhede .
CMEDTHOR-M34,46.687

And eftirwarde sall +tou wit how +tou sall thynke one Hym in His heghe
Godhede . CMEDTHOR-M34,46.688

To +tat sall +tou wit +tat Godd temperd swa His knaweynge fra +te
begynnynge of mankynde , +tat He walde noghte all hally schewe Hym to
man , ne all hally hele Hym fra man . CMEDTHOR-M34,46.689

For if He hade all hally schewede Hym to man , +tan hadd trouthe noghte
bene worthe CMEDTHOR-M34,46.690

and mysbileue had noghte bene +tan ouercomen , CMEDTHOR-M34,46.691

For trouthe es of thynge +tat may noghte be sene ; CMEDTHOR-M34,46.692

+tan +tat at I see es noghte trouthe ; CMEDTHOR-M34,46.693

and if He had all hallily helede fra man , +tan had trouthe noghte bene
helpede , CMEDTHOR-M34,46.694

and mysbileue hade bene excusede ; CMEDTHOR-M34,46.695

and for-+ti +tan walde He in party schewe Hym , and in party hele Hym .
CMEDTHOR-M34,46.696

Bot now may +tou aske me , ' in how many maners He walde schewe Hym . '
CMEDTHOR-M34,46.697

I say in twa maners , ane with-in , ano+ter with-owtten .
CMEDTHOR-M34,46.698

With-in He schewede Hym thurgh reuelacyon and thurgh resonn .
With-owtten , thurgh halye writte and thurgh creaturs .
CMEDTHOR-M34,46.699

Thurgh reuelacyon , when He schewede Hym till any folke thurgh
inspiracion and thurghe myracle . CMEDTHOR-M34,46.700

By resonn , commes He till +te knawynge of man one +tis manere :
CMEDTHOR-M34,46.701

- Ilke a man may wele see in hym-selfe +tat at he es , and +tat at he
hase bene , CMEDTHOR-M34,46.702

bot he may wele wit +tat he hase noghte bene ay , CMEDTHOR-M34,46.703

and for +tat he wate wele +tat sum tym he be-gan for to be ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,46.704

+tan was +taire sum tym when he was noghte . CMEDTHOR-M34,46.705

Bot when he was noghte , +tan moghte he one na wyese make hym-selfe ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,46.706

and +tis seghes man in his creature , CMEDTHOR-M34,46.707

For he sees ilke a day sum ga and sum com , CMEDTHOR-M34,46.708

For-+ti , sen ilke thynges erre , and +tay erre noghte of thaym selfe ,
+tare-fore it behoues nede +tat +tare be ane to gyffe all thynges to be
, +tat es to saye of whaym alle thynge are ; CMEDTHOR-M34,46.709

+tare-fore it behoues of force +tat He thurghe whaym alle thynges erre ,
be with-owtten begynnynge . CMEDTHOR-M34,46.710

For if He hade begynnyng , than it behoufede +tat He had begynnyng of
sum o+ter ; CMEDTHOR-M34,46.711

+tan had He noghte bene +te first autour and +te fyrste begynnyng of all
thyngez . CMEDTHOR-M34,46.712

Bot +tare was na thynge before Hym , CMEDTHOR-M34,46.713

+tan he come of na no+ter , CMEDTHOR-M34,46.714

+tan hade He neuer na begynnynge . CMEDTHOR-M34,46.715

<P_47>

And +tare-fore it behoufes one all maner of +te werlde , +tat +tare be a
thynge +tat neuer hade begynnynge . CMEDTHOR-M34,47.717

And when reson of man sese of force +tat it may na no+ter wysse be ,
+tan he begynnys for to trowe stabilly +tat a thynge +tat was
with-owtten begynnynge , +tat es Awtour , and makere , and gouernere of
all thynges +tat ere . CMEDTHOR-M34,47.718

And Hym calles men Godd by This skill , For +tis worde Deus , +tat es to
say , Godd , commes of a worde of grewe +tat es called theos ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,47.719

and +tat es als mekill for to say als ane anely Godd .
CMEDTHOR-M34,47.720

And +tat betakyns +tis worde Godd . CMEDTHOR-M34,47.721

And , dere frend , +tou awe to wit +tat +tare ne es bot a Godd ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,47.722

and +tou awe to wit +tat na gude may faile to Godd .
CMEDTHOR-M34,47.723

Bot for-+ti +tat swete thynge and gud thynge es comforthe of felaschepe
, +tan may noghte Godd be with-owtten gudness of felaschipe .
CMEDTHOR-M34,47.724

Than be-houede it nede +tat +tare ware many persones in Godd , +te
hegheste gudnes . CMEDTHOR-M34,47.725

And for-+ti +tat felyschepe may noghte be be-twyx faere +tan twa ,
+tare-fore be-houes it be +tat in Godd be at +te leste twa persones .
CMEDTHOR-M34,47.726

And for-+ti +tat felyschipe es littill worthe whare +tare es nan Alyance
ne lufe , For-thi it behoues +tat +te thirde person ware in godd , +tat
ware the alyance and +te lufe be-twyx the twa . CMEDTHOR-M34,47.727

And for-+ti +tat anehede es gude , and manyhede alswa , +tare-fore it
behouede nede +tat anehede and manyhede bathe ware in Godd .
CMEDTHOR-M34,47.728

And by +tis skill commes man to +te knaweynge of Godd , +tat He es a
Godd in Hymselfe , and thre in persones . CMEDTHOR-M34,47.729

And +tis ilke may man see in hym-selfe , CMEDTHOR-M34,47.730

For he sese at +te begynnynge +tat he hase in hym-selfe Powere ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,47.731

and sythen eftir powere he hase wysdom . CMEDTHOR-M34,47.732

And sythen be-gane he for to lufe +tat wysdom ; CMEDTHOR-M34,47.733

and +tan begynnes he for to knawe apertely +tat +tare es in +te saule
Mighte , CMEDTHOR-M34,47.734

and of +tat myghte commes wysdom , CMEDTHOR-M34,47.735

and of thayme bathe comes lufe . CMEDTHOR-M34,47.736

And when man sese +tat it es one swylke manere in hym , Of +tat awe hym
to wit +tat one swylke man awe it to be in Godd +tat es abouen hym ,
+tat es to say , +tat in Godd es myghte , and of +tat commes his wysdome
; and of powere and wysedom bathe comes lufe . CMEDTHOR-M34,47.737

And for-+ti +tat of +te fyrste personne commes +te to+ter , and oowte of
thaym bathe comes +te thyrde , For-thi calles he +te firste personne
Godd +te Fadire , +te to+ter Godd +te Sonne , +te thirde <P_48> Godd +te
Haly Gaste . CMEDTHOR-M34,48.738

And for +tat it wounte to be thus in-manges men , +tat +te Fadir was
mare Febill +tan +te sonne , for his elde , and +te sonne mare vnwyse
+tan +te Fadire for his +gouthe ; CMEDTHOR-M34,48.739

and for +tat a man sulde noghte wene +tat it ware swa of Godd ,
CMEDTHOR-M34,48.740

Tharefore es powere appropirde to Godd +te Fadir , wysdom to Godd +te
Sonne . CMEDTHOR-M34,48.741

And for-+ti +tat +tis worde Gaste sownnes sumwhate into fellenes ,
For-+ti es swetnes , lufe , and gudenes appropirde to +te Haly Gaste .
CMEDTHOR-M34,48.742

Oppon +tis maner commes man firste to +te knaweynge of his Godd , how He
es with-owtten be-gynnynge , and whi He es called Godd , ane in
substance and thre in persones , and whi +te firste persone es callede
Godd +te Fadir , +te to+ter , Godd +te Sonne , +te thyrde , Godd +te
Haly Gaste ; and whi powere es appropirde to Godd +te Fadir , and wysdom
to Godd +te Sonne , and gudnes to Godd +te Haly Gaste .
CMEDTHOR-M34,48.743

In swylke manere sall +tou knawe +ti Godd . CMEDTHOR-M34,48.744

The fyrste degre of contemplacion es , +tat +te saule be ledde agayne to
+te selfe , and gedire it all with-in +te selfe . CMEDTHOR-M34,48.745

The to+ter degre es , +tat man see whate he es , swa gedyrde to-gedire .
CMEDTHOR-M34,48.746

The thirde degre es , +tat he lefte hym selfe abouen hym-selfe , and
payne hym for to luke one his Godd in his awen kynde .
CMEDTHOR-M34,48.747

Bot till selfe may he neuer_mare comme , vntill he hafe lerede to
resayfe ilke a bodyly ymagynacyone erthely and gastely , +tat commes to
his awen herte , ow+ter of herynge , or of tastynge , or of sweloynge ,
or of any o+ter bodily wite , to refuse it and to defule it , +tat it
may see the selfe swylke as it es with-owtten +te bodye .
CMEDTHOR-M34,48.748

Thare-fore , dere Frende , take gud hede how +te saule es wondirfull in
+te selfe , and howe it es ane in +te kynde , and noghte_forthi +git it
duse dyuerse thynges ; CMEDTHOR-M34,48.749

For +te selfe , it sese +tat at +tou ses with thyn eghne , heris with
thyne eres , Swelawes with thi mouthe , Smelles with +ti nese , and
al_swa +tat at +tou touches with all +ti membris . CMEDTHOR-M34,48.750

Thynke +git Eftyrwarde , howe +ti saule es grete , +tat all anely with a
thoghte it may comprehende heuen and erthe and all +tat in thaym are ,
if +tay ware a hundreth_falde grettere +tan +tay are or may be .
CMEDTHOR-M34,48.751

When manes lyfe es grete and swa nobill +tat na creature may <P_49>
vndirstande it perfitly , Thane grete and nobill es he +tat swa nobill
thynge made of noghte . CMEDTHOR-M34,49.752

He es abouen all thynge , and with-in all thynge , and with-owtten all
thynge , and be-nethe all thynge . CMEDTHOR-M34,49.753

He is abouen all thynge , all thynge gouerande , Be-nethe all thynge ,
berande all thynge , with-in all thynge , Fullfillande all , with-owtten
all thynge , abowte gangande all . CMEDTHOR-M34,49.754

Swylke manere of contemplacione Engendyrs in man Faste trouthe and
sekire deucyone . CMEDTHOR-M34,49.755

Eftir +tis sall +tou thynke howe +tat he es large : CMEDTHOR-M34,49.756

and +tat may +tou see one many maners . CMEDTHOR-M34,49.757

See at +te begynnynge howe +tat he es large of erthely gude ; how he
gyfes his gudes als wele to +te ille als to +te gude in alle thynges
+tat +tou sese in erthe . CMEDTHOR-M34,49.758

Sythen eftirward see howe +tat he es large for to Forgyffe :
CMEDTHOR-M34,49.759

For if a man hym ane hade donne alls mekill ille als alle +te men of
+tis werlde moghte doo , +gitt sulde he be mare redy be +te hundrethe
parte for to Forgyffe hym +tan +tat caytife sulde bee for to sake of hym
forgyfenes . CMEDTHOR-M34,49.760

Nowe , my dere Frende , if +tou lyfe eftir +tis kennynge , +tan sall
+tou lyfe honourabily , CMEDTHOR-M34,49.761

- and +tat es +te fyrste parte of oure sermon +tat I touchede at +te
begynnynge , CMEDTHOR-M34,49.762

- and eftir +tat sall +tou studye to lyffe lufely als to thyne
euencrysten ; CMEDTHOR-M34,49.763

and vntill +tat sall +tou sette all hally +ti myghte to lufe and for to
be lufede . CMEDTHOR-M34,49.764

Thou sall lufe all menne in Godd , +tat es at sayd , anely in gudnes ,
and noghte for +taire fairenes of bodye for to lufe , ne for force , ne
for na no+ter bodily vertu . CMEDTHOR-M34,49.765

For +tay +tat lufes in swylke manere , +tay lufe noghte for Goddes sake
; CMEDTHOR-M34,49.766

and for to lufe man in Godd es na no+ter thynge bot for to lufe hym for
any thynge +tat may noghte be lufede with-owtten Godd , als for gudnes
or for rightewysnes , or for sothefastenes . CMEDTHOR-M34,49.767

If we do gude , +tane hafe we na frende bot gude , ne nane Enemy bot ill
; CMEDTHOR-M34,49.768

and +tar-fore +tase +tat er gude sall we lufe for-thi +tat +tay er gude
, CMEDTHOR-M34,49.769

and +te ille sall we lufe for-+ti +tat +tay may be gude .
CMEDTHOR-M34,49.770

In +tis manere lufe +tou na thynge bot gudnes , sen +tat +tou lufes all
thynges for gudnes ; CMEDTHOR-M34,49.771

and if +tou will be lufede , schewe thi selfe lufely .
CMEDTHOR-M34,49.772

Ife +tou will be lufely , resayfe these thre wordes with-owtten
forgetynge . CMEDTHOR-M34,49.773

Do +tat at man biddis +te or praies +te +tat gude es ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,49.774

Take +tat at man gyffes +te ; CMEDTHOR-M34,49.775

and gruche noghte ; CMEDTHOR-M34,49.776

<P_50>

and +tat at men will say +te , suffire it mekely , CMEDTHOR-M34,50.778

and wrethe the noghte . CMEDTHOR-M34,50.779

If +tou lyfe +tus lelely , +tan lyfes thou lufely . CMEDTHOR-M34,50.780

Dere Syster and frende , Syen eftirward sall +tou studye for to lyffe
mekely ; CMEDTHOR-M34,50.781

and to +tis sall +tou ewn wit +tat +tare are twa maners of mekenes .
CMEDTHOR-M34,50.782

The tane commes of sothefastenes , CMEDTHOR-M34,50.783

and +te to+ter commes of charite . CMEDTHOR-M34,50.784

By +te firste may +tou hafe knaweynge of thi selfe , CMEDTHOR-M34,50.785

For thou may noghte in na manere of +tis worlde see +ti selfe whate +tou
arte in sothefastenes , if +tou be noghte mekyde . CMEDTHOR-M34,50.786

The to+ter manere of meknes may +tou hafe if thou thynke of +te meknes
of Ihesu Crhiste , how +tat he mekid hym +tat neuer dyde syn ;
CMEDTHOR-M34,50.787

and swylke mekenes commes clenely of charyte . CMEDTHOR-M34,50.788

Now my dere syster and Frende , wate +tou whate it es to lyffe
honourabili , lufely , and mekely ; CMEDTHOR-M34,50.789

and +tat es to lyffe perfitly . CMEDTHOR-M34,50.790

Now oure swete Lorde Ihesu Christe gyffe vs grace swa Godd for to honour
, and oure euencristen for to lufe , and oure self for to meke , +tat we
may for oure honourynge be honourede , and for oure lufe be lufede , and
for oure mekenes be lyftede vp in-to +te heghe blysse of heuen +tat he
boghte vs to , Ihesu with his swete blude and his preciouse passion .
CMEDTHOR-M34,50.791

Amen ! CMEDTHOR-M34,50.792

Explicit speculum sancti Edmundi Cantuarensis Archi - espiscopi . Dulce
nomen Domini nostri Ihesu Christi : sit benedictum in secula seculorum !
Amen ! CMEDTHOR-M34,50.793
