<BEGIN_cmequato-m3>

<P_18>

In the name of god pitos & merciable seide $leyk the largere +t=t= thow
makest this instrument <slash> the largere ben thi chef deuisiouns
<slash> CMEQUATO-M3,18.3

the largere +t=t= ben tho deuisiouns <slash> in hem may ben mo smale
fracciouns <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,18.4

& euere the mo of smale fracciouns the ner the trowthe of thy
conclusions <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,18.5

tak ther fore a plate of metal or elles a bord +t=t= be smothe shaue
<slash> by leuel <slash> & euene polised <slash> of which whan it is
rownd <paren> by compas <$$paren> <slash> the hole diametre shal contene
.72. large enches or elles .6. fote of mesure <slash> the whiche
rownde bord for it shal nat werpe ne krooke <slash> the egge of <paren>
the <$$paren> circumference shal be bownde w=t= a plate of yren in maner
of a karte whel . <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,18.6

this bord yif the likith may be vernissed or elles glewed w=t= perchemyn
for honestyte <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,18.7

tak thanne a cercle of metal +t=t= be .2. enche of brede <slash> &
+t=t= the hole dyametre <paren> w=t=_in this cercle shal <$$paren>
contene <em> the forseide <$$em> .68. enches <slash> or .5. fote
<paren> & .8. enches <$$paren> <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,18.8

& subtili lat this cercle be nayled vp on the circumference of this bord
CMEQUATO-M3,18.9

or ellis mak this cercle of glewed perchemyn . <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,18.10

this cercle wole I clepe the lymbe of myn equatorie +t=t= was compowned
the yer of crist .1392. complet the laste meridie of decembre <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,18.11

this lymbe shal@ @tow deuyde in 4 quarters by .2. diametral lynes in
maner of the lymbe of a comune astrelabye & lok thy croys be trewe
proued by geometrical conclusioun <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,18.12

tak thanne a large compas +t=t= be trewe CMEQUATO-M3,18.13

& set the ffyx point ouer the middel of the bord <paren> on <$$paren>
which middel shal be nayled a plate of metal rownd <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,18.14

the hole diametre of this plate shal contiene .16. enches large
CMEQUATO-M3,18.15

for in this plate shollen ben perced alle the centris of this equatorie
<slash> CMEQUATO-M3,18.16

& ek in proces of tyme may this plate be turned a_bowte after +t=t=
auges of planetes ben moeued in the .9. spere CMEQUATO-M3,18.17

thus may thin instrument laste perpetuel . <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,18.18

tak thanne as I haue seid by_forn the fix fot of thy compas
CMEQUATO-M3,18.19

& set it in the middel of this plate CMEQUATO-M3,18.20

& w=t= the moeuable point of thi compas descriue a cercle in the
ferthest circumference of thy lymbe <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,18.21

& nota +t=t= the middel poynt of this plate wher as the fix fot of thy
compas stondith <slash> wole I calle centre .aryn. <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,18.22

mak thanne a narwer cercle +t=t= be descriued vp on the same centre aryn
but litel quantite fro the forthest forseid cercle in the lymbe in
whiche space shollen ben deuyde mynutes of the lymbe <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,18.23

mak thanne a narwere cercle som what ferther distaunt fro the laste seid
cercle <slash> in whiche shal be deuyded the degres of the same lymbe
CMEQUATO-M3,18.24

mak yit a narwere cercle som what ferthere distaunt fro this laste
cercle in which shal ben writen the nombres of <P_20> degres <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,20.25

mak yit a narwere cercle som what ferther distaunt fro this laste seid
cercle in which shollen ben writen the names of 12 signes <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,20.26

& nota +t=t= this laste seid cercle wole I calle the closere of the
signes <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.27

now has@ @tow .5. cercles in thy lymbe <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.28

& alle ben descriued vp on centre aryn <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.29

and euerich of the .4. quarters in thi lymbe shal ben deuided in 90
degres +t=t= is to sein .3. signes CMEQUATO-M3,20.30

& eueri degre shal be deuided in 60 mi=a= <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.31

& shortly thi lymbe is deuided in maner of the lymbe in the bakside of
an astrelabie <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.32

deuyde thanne thilke lyne +t=t= goth fro centre aryn vn_to the cercle
closere of the sygnes <paren> versus finem geminorum <$$paren> in 32
parties equales . whiche parties ben <paren> cleped <$$paren> degres of
the semydiametre <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.33

marke thise parties dymli <paren> ut postea deleantur <$$paren> <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,20.34

and nota +t=t= this diametral lyne deuided in 32 parties shal be cleped
lyne alhudda <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.35

set thanne the fix point of thy compas vp on the ende of the firste
deuysioun fro centre aryn in lyne alhudda <slash> & the moeuable point
vp on the ende of the 30 deuisioun fro the fix poynt of thi compas in
the same lyne <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.36

so dwelleth ther but .1. deuisioun by_twixe thy moeuable point & the
closere of the signes <slash> & .1. deuysioun bi_twixe thy fix poynt &
the centre aryn <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.37

& descryue thus a cercle <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.38

& tak ther the eccentrik cercle of the sonne <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.39

scrape thanne awey the deuysiouns of lyne alhudda <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,20.40

deuyde yit <paren> dymly oculte <$$paren> the same lyne alhudda fro
centre aryn <slash> vn_to the closere of the signes in 60 parties
equales <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.41

set thanne the fix poynt of thy compas in centre aryn <slash> & the
moeuable point in .12. degres & 28 mi=a= of lyne alhudda
CMEQUATO-M3,20.42

& descriue a cercle <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.43

& +t=t= is the centre defferent of the mone <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.44

perce thanne <paren> al <$$paren> the circumference of this defferent in
360 subtil holes equales of space CMEQUATO-M3,20.45

& thise spaces by_twixe the holes <slash> ben deuyded owt of the degres
of the lymbe <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.46

& nota +t=t= the yer of crist 1392 <paren> complet <em> - vltimo .10.bre
in meridie london <$$em> <$$paren> the aux of saturnus was the <paren>
last <$$paren> meridie of decembre at londone CMEQUATO-M3,20.47

I seye the aux of saturne in the .9. spere was .4. dowble signes 12
g=a= 7 mi=a= .3. 2=a= & cetera <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.48

the remenaunt of auges sek hem in the table of auges folwynge <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,20.49

tak thanne a Rewle CMEQUATO-M3,20.50

& ley +t=t= on ende in centre aryn <slash> & +t=t= other ende in the
lymbe <slash> in the ende of the minut wher as endith the aux of the
planete <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.51

& draw ther a lyne w=t= a sharp instrument fro centre aryn vn_to the
closere of the signes <slash> & no ferthere for empeiryng of the lymbe
CMEQUATO-M3,20.52

& faste@ @by this lyne writ the name of the planete <paren> cuius est
aux <$$paren> CMEQUATO-M3,20.53

this rewle is general for alle planetis <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.54

sek thanne in thi table of centris <slash> the distaunce of the centre
equant of saturne fro centre aryn whiche is .6. g=a= 50 mi=a= <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,20.55

set thanne the fix point of thy compas in centre arin <slash> & the
moeuable poynt in 6 g=a= & 50 mi=a= in lyne alhudda fro centre aryn
<slash> CMEQUATO-M3,20.56

turne than softely thy compas abowte . til +t=t= the moeuable poynt
<em> til it <$$em> towche the lyne of the aux of saturne
CMEQUATO-M3,20.57

& <P_22> stondinge alwey <paren> stille <$$paren> the fix poynt of thy
compas in centre aryn <slash> marke w=t= thy moeuable poynt in the lyne
of the aux of saturnus a dep prikke <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.58

for in +t=t= prikke shal be perced a smal hole for the centre equant of
saturnus <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.59

& faste by this hole mak an E in signefyeng of equant <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,22.60

thanne tak awey thy compas <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.61

& loke in thi table of centris <slash> the distaunce of the centre
defferent of saturnus <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.62

& +t=t= is .3. g=a= & 25 mi=a= <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.63

set <paren> a centre aryn <$$paren> thanne the fix point of thy compas
in centre aryn & thy moeuable point in .3. g=a= & 25 mi=a= in lyne
alhudda <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.64

& torne softely thi compas til +t=t= the moeuable point towche the
<paren> forseide <$$paren> lyne of the aux of saturne <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,22.65

& stonding stille thy fix poynt of thi compas in centre aryn <slash>
marke w=t= the moeuable poynt in the lyne of the aux of saturne a dep
prikke CMEQUATO-M3,22.66

for ther in shal be perced a smal hole for the centre defferent of
saturnus <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.67

& faste@ @by this hole mak an .D. for defferent <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,22.68

& nota +t=t= by this ensample of saturnus shal@ @tow make the centres
defferentes <slash> & ek the equantes of alle the planetis <slash> after
hir distaunces <paren> in tabulis <$$paren> fro centre aryn
CMEQUATO-M3,22.69

& prikke hem in the lynes of hir auges <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.70

thanne shal@ @tow sette the fix point of thy compas in the lyne of the
aux of mercurie euene by_twixe the centre .E. & centre .D. of
mercurius <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.71

& strid the moeuable poynt til it wole towche bothe centre E & ek centre
.D. of mercurius <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.72

& descryue ther a litel cercle CMEQUATO-M3,22.73

& thanne shal@ @tow se +t=t= the lyne of the aux of mercurie departith
this litel cercle in .2. arkes equals <slash> this is to seye <slash>
+t=t= the lyne kerueth this litel cercle euene amidde <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,22.74

this litel cercle shal be perced ful of smale holes <paren> in
circumferencia circuli <$$paren> by euene proporcioun as is the centre
defferent of the mone in 360 holes yif it be possible or in .180. or in
90 atte leste <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.75

but sothly the spaces by_twixe the holes <paren> ne <$$paren> shal nat
be deuided owt of the grete lymbe of the instrument <slash> as is the
centre defferent of the mone <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.76

but owt of the circumference of the same litel cercle it shal be deuided
by thy compas <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.77

scrape thanne awey thilke 60 deuysiouns in lyne alhudda <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,22.78

& yit deuyde the same lyne alhudda in .5. parties equales <paren> by
compas <$$paren> fro centre aryn vn_to the cercle +t=t= is closere of
the signes <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.79

& euerych of thilke .5. parties shal be deuided in 60 parties <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,22.80

thise diuisiouns ne shal nat ben scraped awey <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.81

deuyde thanne the line +t=t= goth fro centre aryn to the hed of
capricone whiche lyne is cleped in the tretis of the astrelabie the
midnyht line <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.82

I seye deuyde this midnyht lyne in .9. parties equals fro centre aryn
<paren> vn <$$paren> to the closere of the signes <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,22.83

& euerich of thise deuysiouns shal be deuided by thy compas in 60
parties equales <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.84

thise deuysiouns ne shal nat be scraped awey <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,22.85

laus deo vero CMEQUATO-M3,22.86

now has@ @tow the visage of this precios equatorie <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,22.87

nota +t=t= thise last seid .9. diuisiouns in the midnyht lyne shollen
seruen for Equacioun of the 8=e= spere CMEQUATO-M3,22.88

<P_24>

$now for the composicioun of the Epicicle for the visage of thyn
equatorie <slash> thow shalt make a cercle of metal of the same brede &
of the same widnesse in circumference in diametre <slash> & in alle
thinges lik to the lymbe of thin instrument CMEQUATO-M3,24.90

& in the same manere shal it be deuyded in mynutis . in degres in
nombres in names of signes <slash> & in 5 cercles compased <slash> as is
the firste seid lymbe <slash> saue +t=t= the eccentrik of the sonne
<slash> ne shal nat be in the epicicle & also +t=t= it be nat filed to
ney to the closere of his signes list thow perce the hole <paren>
foramen <$$paren> of thi commune centre defferent amys <slash> or elles
list the hole breke $+t=t= <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,24.91

this epicicle mot haue suffisaunt thikkenesse to sustene hym self
<slash> CMEQUATO-M3,24.92

Tak thanne this epicicle & ley it <paren> sadly & <$$paren> euene vp on
the visage of thin equatorie so +t=t= <paren> capud <$$paren> aries of
thin epicle lie euene vp on the hed of aries in the lymbe of thin
equatorie <slash> & libra vp on libra & cancer vp on cancer & capricorne
vp on capricorne & <paren> euery <$$paren> signe vp on signe this is to
seyn the hed of euery signe vp on hed of euery signe <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,24.93

tak thanne a Renspyndle or a boydekyn <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,24.94

& in direct of the hed of cancer . <paren> thow shalt <$$paren> in the
cercle +t=t= is closere of the signes <paren> perce <$$paren> make a
litel hole thorw the epicicle <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,24.95

& thanne shal@ @tow se <paren> +t=t= <$$paren> yif thow haue trewely
compased thy cercles <slash> +t=t= the poynt of thy renspindle shal haue
towched the closere of the signes in direct of the hed of cancer in thyn
equatorie <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,24.96

this litel hole +t=t= is no grettere than a smal nedle shal be cleped
the comune centre defferent of planetes <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,24.97

tak than a barre of metal of the brede of a large enche & of suffisaunt
thyknesse <slash> <paren> of <$$paren> the whiche barre +t=t= on ende
shal be sowded to the closere of <paren> the <$$paren> signes in direct
of aries in this epicicle & +t=t= other ende shal be sowded to the
closere of the signes in direct of libra in the same epicicle <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,24.98

draw thanne by thi rewle a lyne fro the hed of aries to the hed of libra
endelong the barre <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,24.99

& draw swich another lyne <paren> ouerthwart <$$paren> $in the barre fro
the hed of cancer to the hed of capricorne <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,24.100

& in the seccioun of this crois is the centre of the epicicle <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,24.101

tak thanne a rewle of latoun that <paren> ne <$$paren> be nat ful thykke
<slash> CMEQUATO-M3,24.102

& lat it be the brede of an enche CMEQUATO-M3,24.103

& the lengthe shal be as long as al hol the diametre of the Epicicle
CMEQUATO-M3,24.104

this rewle mot be shape in maner of a label on an astrelabie <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,24.105

the centre of this rewle shal be nayled to the centre of the forseide
barre in swich a manere +t=t= this label may torne abowte as doth the
label of an astrelabie <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,24.106

in middes of this nayl +t=t= fastnyth the barre & the label to_gidere
ther mot be a smal prikke +t=t= be dep <slash> which prikke <paren> id
est punctus <$$paren> is the centre of thin epicicle <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,24.107

tak thanne by thy large compas the distaunce by_twixe centre aryn & the
closere of the signes <slash> which distaunce is the lengthe of lyne
alhudda <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,24.108

& be it on a long rewle or elles be it on a long percemyn <slash> marke
w=t= thy compas the forseide distaunce <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,24.109

& deuyde it in 60 parties equals CMEQUATO-M3,24.110

& than has@ @tow a newe lyne alhudda <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,24.111

sek thanne in thy table of centres <slash> the semydiametre of the
epicicle of saturnus <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,24.112

& +t=t= is .6. g=a= & 30 mi=a= of swiche degres as ben 60
{COM:chopped_"of"} in line alhudda <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,24.113

tak thanne w=t= thy compas the space of .6. g=a= & 30 mi=a=. of lyne
alhudda <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,24.114

& set the fix point of thy compas in the centre of thin <P_26> Epicicle
+t=t= is the poynt <paren> punctus <$$paren> in the hed of the nail
<slash> CMEQUATO-M3,26.115

& endelong the label set the moeuable poynt of thi compas
CMEQUATO-M3,26.116

& w=t= +t=t= moeuable poynt mak a marke a strik in the label
CMEQUATO-M3,26.117

& faste by the strik writ .sa. for saturne <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,26.118

this ensample of saturne techith how to maken in the label alle the
semydiametres of Epicicles of alle the planetis <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,26.119

nota +t=t= the sonne <paren> ne <$$paren> hath non epicicle <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,26.120

& nota +t=t= alwey as the label turnyth <slash> so shewith it the
epicicle of euery planete <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,26.121

laus deo vero CMEQUATO-M3,26.122

now has@ @tow complet thyn equatorie w=t= alle hise membris <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,26.123

and nota +t=t= eccentrik of the sonne shal nat be compassed in this
epicicle <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,26.124

Explicit CMEQUATO-M3,26.125

the face of the equatorie CMEQUATO-M3,26.126

{COM:sign_omitted}

nota +t=t= euery centre mot ben also smal as a nedle <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,26.128

& in euery equant mot be a silk thred CMEQUATO-M3,26.129

{COM:sign_omitted}

nota +t=t= the eccentrik of the sonne is compaced on the bord of the
instrument & nat on the lymbe for sparing of metal <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,26.131

{COM:sign_omitted}

nota shortly +t=t= but so be +t=t= bothe the closeres of the signes ben
precisly ilike of widnesse <slash> & but so be +t=t= centre aryn stonde
precise as fer fro his closere of the signes as the centre of thin
epicicle stondith fro the comune centre defferent precise <slash> thyn
epicicle is fals <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,26.133

but natheles yif thow myshappe in this cas i shal teche the a@ @remedie
<slash> CMEQUATO-M3,26.134

knokke thi centre defferent innere or owtre til it stonde precise vp on
the closere of the signes in the lymbe of thin equatorie <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,26.135

so wole thanne the centre of thin epicicle precise stonde vp on centre
aryn CMEQUATO-M3,26.136

the sixte cercle is the eccentric of the sonne CMEQUATO-M3,26.137

& the .5. cercle +t=t= is red is the closere of the signes
CMEQUATO-M3,26.138

& the seccioun of the crois is centre aryn <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,26.139

& +t=t= other centre is the centre of the eccentrik of the sonne <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,26.140

& the lyne deuyded in .9. is the midnyht lyne CMEQUATO-M3,26.141

I wot wel it is figured boistosly <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,26.142

& the cercle abowte centre aryn is the centre defferent of the mone
<slash> CMEQUATO-M3,26.143

the litel cercle is the defferent of mercurie <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,26.144

the smale lynes ben lynes of auges CMEQUATO-M3,26.145

the prikkes in the lynes ben the centris equantis & defferentis <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,26.146

& alle thise centres saue the equant of mars ben by_twixe centre aryn &
the centre defferent of the mone CMEQUATO-M3,26.147

the owterest space is mynutis CMEQUATO-M3,26.148

& the nexte space is degres CMEQUATO-M3,26.149

& the thridde space is nombres of degres CMEQUATO-M3,26.150

& the ferthe space is for names of signes CMEQUATO-M3,26.151

but natheless the narwere cercle of the signes is cleped the closere of
the signes <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,26.152

& it is compased with red <P_28> the epicicle CMEQUATO-M3,28.153

nota CMEQUATO-M3,28.154

file nat to ney the rede +t=t= is closere of the signes <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,28.155

list the commune centre defferent breke lat stonde a litel lippe as
shewith in direct of the hed of cancer CMEQUATO-M3,28.156

nota I conseile the ne write no names of signes <paren> id est in
epiciclo <$$paren> til +t=t= thow hast proued <paren> +t=t= <$$paren>
thi comune centre defferent is treweli & justli set in direct of the
closere of the signes of thin equatorie <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,28.157

this epicicle is deuyded & compased in alle thinges lik to the lymbe of
the equatorie <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,28.158

but it hath non eccentrik of the sonne <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,28.159

the prikke +t=t= stant in the closere of the signes in direct of the
ende of geminis is the commune centre defferent - <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,28.160

but natheless thus lith thin instrument whan thow makest equacioun of
thy mone CMEQUATO-M3,28.161

<P_30>

pro argumentis trium superiorum minue eorum med~ mot~ de med~ mot~ solis
<slash> & remanet argumentum <em> satur .io. & martis & vener <$$em>
CMEQUATO-M3,30.163

$sek medius motus of saturnus Juppiter mars & venus <slash> & hir mene
argumentis in thy tables <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,30.164

& writ hem in thy sklat <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,30.165

put thanne a blak thred in centre aryn <paren> terre <$$paren> & a whit
thred in centre equant of any planete +t=t= the list haue of equacion .
CMEQUATO-M3,30.166

and put the comune centre defferent of thyn Epicicle <slash> vp on the
centre different in thy plate <slash> of thilke planete +t=t= thow
desirest to haue equacioun {COM:chopped_"of"} CMEQUATO-M3,30.167

I sey +t=t= w=t= a nedle thow shalt stike the comune centre defferent of
thin Epicicle <slash> vp on the centre defferent +t=t= is perced on thy
plate for swich a planete a the list to haue of equacoun <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,30.168

loke thanne <paren> pro successione signorum <$$paren> fro the hed of
aries wher the mene motus of thy planete endith <slash> in the grete
lymbe of thy plate <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,30.169

& ley ther thy blake thred . <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,30.170

ley thanne thy white thred equedistant by the blake thred in the same
lymbe . CMEQUATO-M3,30.171

& proeue by a compas +t=t= thy thredes lyen equedistant vnder whiche
white thred ley the pool of thyn Epicicle <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,30.172

& stondinge thyn Epicicle stille in this maner <slash> I seye stondinge
the pool of thin epicicle vndir thy white thred stille <slash> & the
commune centre different fix w=t= thy nedle to the foreseide centre
defferent of the planete desired <slash> tak than thy blake thred
CMEQUATO-M3,30.173

& ley it so +t=t= it kerue the centre of the Epicicle <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,30.174

& streche forth vp vn to vpperest part of the same epicicle <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,30.175

and than shal this blake thred shewe bothe the verrey motus <paren>
locum <$$paren> of the epicicle in the grete lymbe <slash> & ek the
verrey aux of the planete in the epicicle <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,30.176

& thanne the ark by_twixe medios motus of the planete <slash> & the
verrey motus of the epicicle <slash> is cleped the equacion of his
centre in the lymbe <paren> zodiacus <$$paren> to whom is lik the
equacion of his argument in his epicicle . +t=t= is to sein the ark
by_twixe his mene aux & his verrey aux . <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,30.177

for sothly the mene aux is shewed in the Epicle by the white thred
<slash> vnder which thow puttest the pol of the epicicle
CMEQUATO-M3,30.178

& the verrey aux is shewed in the epicicle by the blake thred <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,30.179

& stondinge stille thin Epicicle in this same disposicioun <slash> ley
the ende of thy label +t=t= is grauen fro the white thred as many signes
degres & mi=a=. as shewith the mene argument in thy $grene tables for
+t=t= day of thy planete desired <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,30.180

& rekne this mene argument fro the white thred after successioun of
signes of euery planete saue only of the mone CMEQUATO-M3,30.181

<em> sa 1 31 19 22 44 <$$em> CMEQUATO-M3,30.182

<P_32>

& ligginge the marked ende of thy label vpon the the ende of this mene
argument in the epicicle <slash> ley thy blake thred vp on the marke of
thy planete +t=t= is grauen in thi label . CMEQUATO-M3,32.184

& wher as the same blake thred keruyth the lymbe of thy plate tak ther
the verrey place <paren> locum <$$paren> of the planete in the .9.
spere <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,32.185

and the ark by_twixe the verrey place <paren> locum <$$paren> of the
planete <paren> in limbo <$$paren> & the verrey place of the epicicle
considered in the lymbe is cleped equacioun of his argument
CMEQUATO-M3,32.186

this maner of equacioun is for saturnus Juppiter mars & venus <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,32.187

but in the remenaunt of planetes in some thinges it varieth
CMEQUATO-M3,32.188

sol <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,32.189

the mene motus of the sonne ben rekned fro the hed of aries after
successioun of signes <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,32.190

the sonne hath non Epicicle ne non Equant CMEQUATO-M3,32.191

& therfor the pol of the epicicle mot ben in stide of the body of the
sonne in the .9. spere <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,32.192

the white thred +t=t= thow puttest in his centre defferent in the plate
<paren> lamina <$$paren> mot ben in stide of the white thred +t=t= othre
planetes han in hir centres equantis <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,32.193

the blake thred +t=t= euermo stant in centre aryn <slash> mot be leid at
the ende of his mene motus <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,32.194

tak thanne his white thred CMEQUATO-M3,32.195

& lei it equedistant in the lymbe by the blake thred <slash> whiche
blake thred shewith the mene motus of the sonne <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,32.196

fixe thanne w=t= thy nedle the commune centre defferent of thyn Epicicle
to centre aryn . CMEQUATO-M3,32.197

& remew nat thy <paren> nedle <$$paren> <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,32.198

& vnder this white thred ley softely the pol of the Epicicle
CMEQUATO-M3,32.199

& wher as the white thred keruyth the grete lymbe tak ther ther the
verrey place of the sonne in the .9. spere <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,32.200

the ark of the lymbe by_twixe his aux +t=t= is now in cancer . & the
blake thred is the argument of the sonne <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,32.201

the ark by_twixe the blake thred & the white in the lymbe is the
equacion of the sonne <slash> which ark n@ @is but litel . <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,32.202

the mene motus of the sonne is the ark in the lymbe by_twixe the hed of
aries & the blake thred in the same lymbe <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,32.203

the verrey motus of the sonne is the ark of the lymbe by_twixe the hed
of aries & the blake thred whan it <paren> id est filum <$$paren> is
remewed fro the mene motus & crossith the white thred in the in the pol
of the Epicicle <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,32.204

the same verrey motus was shewed erst by the white thred of <paren> the
<$$paren> defferent whan it lay equedistant by the blake thred in the
limbe CMEQUATO-M3,32.205

{COM:sign_omitted}

& nota +t=t= the markes in thy label descriuen the Epicicles of planetes
as the label turneth CMEQUATO-M3,32.207

<P_34>

$mercurius CMEQUATO-M3,34.209

this canon is fals CMEQUATO-M3,34.210

$Rekne after succession of signes fro the hed of aries in the lymbe
<slash> the mene motus of mercurius <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,34.211

& considere ek how mochel in the same lymbe is by_twixe the hed of aries
. & the lyne of his aux <slash> +t=t= yit is <paren> in <$$paren> the
lattere ende of libra <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,34.212

& rekne alwey after successioun of signes <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,34.213

w=t=_draw thanne the quantite in the lymbe . by_twix the hed of aries &
the forseid aux <slash> owt of his mene motus <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,34.214

& considere how moche is the remnaunt of his mene motus whan this aux is
thus w=t=_drawe owt of al the hoole mene mot <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,34.215

& so mochel rekne after succession of signes in his litel cercle <slash>
fro the lyne of his aux +t=t= keruyth the same litel cercle <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,34.216

I seye rekne after successioun of signes . from lettere .D. +t=t= is
grauen in his lytel cercle <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,34.217

& procede in the same litel cercle to_ward lettere .E. opposit to .D.
<slash> CMEQUATO-M3,34.218

I sey rekne thilke remnaunt <paren> of the mene motus <$$paren> +t=t=
dwelde whan the quantite of his aux was w=t=_draw owt of his hole mene
motus as I haue seid by_forn <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,34.219

& wher as - thilk remnaunt forseid endith in the litel cercle <slash>
tak ther the verrey centre defferent of mercurie . as it happith
diuersely som tyme in on hole & som tyme in an other <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,34.220

for lettere .D. ne serueth of nothyng ellis but for to shewe the wher
thow shalt bygynne thy reknyng in thy litel cercle <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,34.221

ne lettere <paren> E <$$paren> ne seruyth nat but for to shewe the which
wey +t=t= thow shalt procede fro lettere .D. <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,34.222

now has@ @tow founde thy defferent & thin equant in which equant put a
whit thred <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,34.223

& stike w=t= a nedle the comune centre defferent vp on his centre
defferent in the plate <paren> lamina <$$paren> . <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,34.224

& w=t= thin Epicle wirk & w=t= thy thredes as thow workest w=t= saturnus
Juppiter mars & venus <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,34.225

nota +t=t= yif the aux of mercurie be fro the hed of aries more than his
mene motus fro the same hed . <slash> than shal@ @tow adde .12. signes
to his mene motus <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,34.226

than maist@ @tow w=t=draw his aux owt of his mene motus <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,34.227

& nota generaly +t=t= thy nedle ne be nat remewed whan it is stikyd
thorw the commune centre defferent in to any centre different on thy
plate til thin equacion of the planete be endid <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,34.228

for yif thy commune centre different stirte fro the centre <paren>
$deffer <$$paren> on thy plate al thin equacion of thy planete desired
is lorn <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,34.229

{COM:sign_omitted}

hic nota +t=t= the centre defferent of mercurie hath but 24. holes as
in myn instrment wher for .I. rekne but .2. holes for a signe as in
the gretter cerkle of mercurie fro the lyne of his aux
CMEQUATO-M3,34.231

<P_36>

luna CMEQUATO-M3,36.233

$Rekne after succession of signes fro the hed of aries in the lymbe the
mene motus of the mone <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,36.234

& rekne in the same manere the mene motus of the sonne <paren> a capite
arietis <$$paren> as fer as it strechcheth CMEQUATO-M3,36.235

w=t=_draw thanne the mene motus of the sonne owt of the mene motus of
the mone <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,36.236

<em> & as moche as the mene mot of the mone is more than the mene mot of
the sonne <$$em> <paren> & <$$paren> considere +t=t= difference <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,36.237

and the quantite of that difference +t=t= I clepe the remenaunt <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,36.238

rekne it fro the <paren> ende of the <$$paren> mene motus of the sonne
in the lymbe bakward agayn successioun of signes <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,36.239

& wher@ @as endith this remenaunt <slash> mak a mark in the lymbe
<slash> CMEQUATO-M3,36.240

draw thanne thy blake thred to this forseide mark CMEQUATO-M3,36.241

& wher as thy blake thred keruyth the cercle defferent of the mone in
that same hole is the centre defferent of the mone as it happith .
<slash> CMEQUATO-M3,36.242

& in the nadyr of this hole is the centre equant <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,36.243

put thanne in this centre equant a whit thred <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,36.244

now has@ @tow thy two centres <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,36.245

stike thanne thy commune centre defferent vp on the centre defferent of
the mone <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,36.246

w=t= thy nedle <slash> yit rekne agayn the mene motus of the mone fro
the hed of aries after successioun of signes CMEQUATO-M3,36.247

& ley ther thy blake thred <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,36.248

& ley thy white thred equedistant by the blake thred in the lymbe
CMEQUATO-M3,36.249

moeue thanne softely the pool of thyn Epicicle vnder thy blake thred
CMEQUATO-M3,36.250

<paren> tak thanne thy white thred CMEQUATO-M3,36.251

& ley it ouer the pol of the epicicle <$$paren> CMEQUATO-M3,36.252

& wher@ @as thy white thred keruyth the cercle of the Epicicle tak ther
the mene aux in thyn Epicicle CMEQUATO-M3,36.253

& fro this white thred rekne in thyn Epicicle bakward a_gayns
successioun of signes thy mene argument <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,36.254

I seye rekne it in the degres of thin Epicicle <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,36.255

& where as endith thy reknynge in the Epicicle . ley ther the marked
ende of thy label . <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,36.256

& ley thy blake thred vp on the mark of the mone in thy label .
CMEQUATO-M3,36.257

& wher as this same blake thred keruyth the lymbe tak <paren> ther
<$$paren> the verrey place of the mone in the .9. spere <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,36.258

nota +t=t= the pool of the Epicicle ne shal nat ben leyd vnder the blake
thred of non other .planete. saue only of the mone CMEQUATO-M3,36.259

<P_38>

and nota +t=t= yif the mene motus of the sonne is more than the mene mot
of the mone than shal@ @tow adde .12. signes to the mene mot of the
mone CMEQUATO-M3,38.261

& thanne mais@ @tow w=t=drawe the mene mot of the sonne owt of the mene
motus of the mone . CMEQUATO-M3,38.262

& shortly for to speken of this theorike I sey +t=t= the centre of hir
<paren> lune <$$paren> epicicle <paren> in voluella <$$paren> moeuyth
equaly aboute the centre of the zodiac +t=t= is to sein aboute the pol
of the epicicle +t=t= is thy riet <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,38.263

& thy blake thred whan it first leid thorw the pol of thyn Epicicle it
shewith the verrey aux of the planete <paren> in epiciclo <$$paren> riht
as the white thred shewith the mene aux in the same epicicle .
CMEQUATO-M3,38.264

Item CMEQUATO-M3,38.265

whan thow <paren> hast <$$paren> rekned the argument of a planete in
thin epicicle . thanne is the body of the planete in thin Epicicle at
the ende of thyn argument CMEQUATO-M3,38.266

& whan <paren> thy <$$paren> blak thred is leid thorw the marke of a
planete in thi label . in maner forseid than shewith thy blake thred
the verre place of the planete at regard of the .9. spere as shewith in
thy lymbe CMEQUATO-M3,38.267

& the ark by_twixe the verrey motus & the mene motus of the mone is the
equacion of his argument in the lymbe <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,38.268

& the ark by_twixe his mene aux & his verrey aux is the equacion of his
argument in the Epicicle <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,38.269

to knowe the latitude of the mone by thyn instrument loke in thyn
almenak the verrey motus of the mone & the verrey motus of caput. dra.
lune. at same tyme <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,38.270

& yif so be +t=t= thy verre mot of thy mone be lasse than .6. signes
fro caput draconis w=t=draw the verrey motus of caput owt of the verey
motus of the mone <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,38.271

& writ +t=t= difference <paren> id est verum argumentum latitudinis lune
<$$paren> CMEQUATO-M3,38.272

for +t=t= is hir <paren> lune <$$paren> verrey argument <paren> id est
latitudinis <$$paren> CMEQUATO-M3,38.273

& so many signes degres & mi=a= as thow hast in the <paren> verrey
<$$paren> argument <paren> of hir latitude <$$paren> rekne hem fro the
hed of aries after successioun of signes in thy lymbe <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,38.274

& wher as endith thy reknyng ley +t=t= on end of thy thred
CMEQUATO-M3,38.275

& +te middel of thy thred shal kerue the meridional lyne <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,38.276

& strechche <P_40> so forth ouerthwart as the dyametre of thy plate vnto
the lymbe <slash> as thus I suppose +t=t= on ende of thy thred laye
after succession of signes .10. g=a=. fro the hed of aries in the
lymbe <slash> +t=t= other ende of thy thred shold lye .20 g=a=. of
virgo <slash> in the lymbe <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,40.277

considere thanne how many .g=a=. & mi=a= +t=t= the middel of thy thred
lith fro centre aryn . wher as euermo bygynnith this reknyng <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,40.278

I seye considere in the seccions of the meridional lyne how many g=a= &
mi=a= lith the middel of thy thred fro centre aryn <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,40.279

& tak ther the nombre of the latitude .7._trional {COM:northern} of thy
mone fro the Ecliptik <slash> which $latitude ne passith neuer .5.
g=a=. <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,40.280

& yif the verrey motus of the mone be more than .6. signes fro the
verrey mot of caput <slash> than shal@ @tow w=t=draw the verrey motus of
cauda owt of the verrey motus of the mone . and bygynne thy reknynge at
the hed of libra <slash> & procede bakward agayns successioun of signes
<slash> as thus +t=t= yif +t=t= on ende of thy thred laye agayn
successioun of signes .10. g=a= fro the hed of libra than sholde +t=t=
other ende lye in the .10. g=a= fro the hed of aries after successioun
of signes <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,40.281

considere thanne in the merdional lyne the quantite meridional of the
latitude of thy mone fro the Ecliptik <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,40.282

as I haue told by_forn +t=t= the quantite of g=a= & mi=a= +t=t= the
middel of thy thred in the meridional lyne lith fro centre aryn the same
quantite of degres & mi=a= is the latitude of the mone fro the eclyptik
be it north be it sowth <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,40.283

& nota +t=t= generaly euermo bothe endes of of thy thred shollen lyen
equedistant fro thilke diametre +t=t= keruyth the heuedes of aries &
libra <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,40.284

yit quykly vnderstond this canon . CMEQUATO-M3,40.285

I sey whan the forseide verrey argument of the mone is precisly .90.
degres fro the hed of aries in the lymbe after succession of signes
<slash> tak ther the grettest <P_42> latitude of the mone 7trional
<paren> id est ab ecliptica <$$paren> <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,42.286

& yif so be +t=t= hir verrey argument passe <paren> anything <$$paren>
.90. degres fro the hed of aries <slash> styrt ouer the meridianal lyne
in to the firste of cancer CMEQUATO-M3,42.287

& ley ther +t=t= on ende of thy thred & +t=t= other ende in to the laste
of geminis <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,42.288

& so forth day be day shal@ @tow descende in the meridional lyne after
+t=t= the reknynge of thy verrey argument requerith . <slash> til thow
come agayn to centre aryn . CMEQUATO-M3,42.289

for than has@ @tow mad equacion of latitudes for .6. signes as I first
seide <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,42.290

& euere_mo lith thy thred equedistant fro the diametre +t=t= keruyth the
heuedes of aries & libra <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,42.291

& euer_mo as many degres & mi=a= as the midel of thy thred lith in the
meridional lyne fro centre aryn . so many g=a= & mi=a= is the latitude
of the mone fro the Ecliptik <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,42.292

& whan thy verrey argument passith .6. signes wyrk w=t= cauda as I
tawhte the CMEQUATO-M3,42.293

& ascende vpward in the meridional lyne day by day to the laste of
geminis in the lymbe <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,42.294

& fro thennes discende agayn as I haue seid by_forn <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,42.295

& nota +t=t= whan the mone is direct w=t= caput or cauda . she hath no
latitude & whan she passith caput til she be 3 signes <paren> in
<$$paren> distance <paren> pro successione+g signorum <$$paren> fro
caput she is 7trional ascendinge <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,42.296

& in hir gettest latitude 7trional <slash> & fro the ende of thilke 3
signes she is 7trional descending til she come to the opposit of caput
+t=t= is to seyn cauda draconis & fro cauda til she come mid wey <paren>
in medio <$$paren> by_twix capud & cauda CMEQUATO-M3,42.297

& fro thennes is she meridional assending til she come agayn at capud
<slash> CMEQUATO-M3,42.298

<paren> 1391 .17. decembris <$$paren> CMEQUATO-M3,42.299

Ensample CMEQUATO-M3,42.300

my mone was .12. g=a= .21. mi=a= of virgo <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,42.301

& caput was 4 g=a= 46 mi=a= of aries CMEQUATO-M3,42.302

tho drow I the verrey motus of caput +t=t= is to seyn .0. in signes .4.
g=a= 46 mi=a= owt of the verrey moeuyng <slash> of the mone +t=t= is to
sein owt of 5 signes .12. g=a= 21 mi=a= <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,42.303

tho fond I +t=t= the verrey argument of the mone dwelde .5. sig=a= 7
g=a= 35 mi=a= CMEQUATO-M3,42.304

tho rekned I after successioun of signes fro the hed of aries in the
lymbe <paren> the same <$$paren> 5 signes .7 g=a= 35 m=a= <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,42.305

& ther leide I +t=t= on ende of my thred CMEQUATO-M3,42.306

& +t=t= other ende lay in .22 g=a= 35. mi=a= of aries <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,42.307

tho karf <paren> the <$$paren> midel of my thred the meridional lyne .1.
degre & 54 mi=a= fro centre aryn by which I knew +t=t= the latitude of
my mone was .1. degre & 54 mi=a= 7trional descending fro the Ecliptik
CMEQUATO-M3,42.308

<P_44>

<paren> 1391 .19. februarii <$$paren> CMEQUATO-M3,44.310

another ensample CMEQUATO-M3,44.311

I fond <paren> scilicet in almenak <$$paren> my mone in .8. g=a=d 13
m=a= of virgo & caput draconis in 20 g=a= & 42. mi=a= of aries
CMEQUATO-M3,44.312

<paren> .tho. <$$paren> drow I the verrey motus of - caput for the
verrey motus of the mone in this manere . <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,44.313

I say wel +t=t= I myht nat drawe .20 degres owt of .8. degres <slash>
ne 42 minutis owt of 13 mi=a= CMEQUATO-M3,44.314

tho added I .30. degres to the forseide .8. degres of virgo & 60 mi=a=
to the .13. mi=a= of the same virgo . CMEQUATO-M3,44.315

& tho drow I the verrey motus of caput owt of the verrey motus of the
mone <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,44.316

tho dwelde me the verrey argument of the latitude of the mone +t=t= is
to seyn <paren> .4. sig=a= <$$paren> .17. g=a= 31 mi=a=
CMEQUATO-M3,44.317

tho leide I +t=t= on ende of my thred 4 signes 17 degres <paren> 31
minuta <$$paren> fro the hed of aries in the lymbe after successioun of
signes CMEQUATO-M3,44.318

& +t=t= other ende <paren> lay <$$paren> equedistant fro the diametre
+t=t= passith by the heuedes of aries & libra <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,44.319

& tho fond I the middel of my thred karf the meridional lyne at .3.
degres & 22 mi=a= fro the centre of the Erthe +t=t= is centre aryn
<slash> wher for I knew wel +t=t= my mone was 3 degres .22. mi=a= in
latitude 7trional descendinge fro the Ecliptik <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,44.320

<paren> 1391 23 februarii <$$paren> CMEQUATO-M3,44.321

the thridde ensample is this CMEQUATO-M3,44.322

I fond in myn almenak the verrey motus of the mone was 6 degres 24 mi=a=
of Scorpio & the verrey motus of caput was 20 degres .29. mi=a= of
aries . CMEQUATO-M3,44.323

tho moste I wirke w=t= cauda by cause +t=t= verre motus of my mone
passed mor than .6. signes CMEQUATO-M3,44.324

tho drow I the verrey motus of cauda owt of the verrey motus of the mone
<slash> in this maner <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,44.325

I added 30 g=a= to .6. g=a= of scorpio & 60 mi=a= to 24 mi=a= of the
same scorpio <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,44.326

tho dwelde me the verrey argument <paren> of latitude <$$paren> of the
mone .0. in signes 15 g=a= & 55 mi=a= <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,44.327

tho leide I +t=t= on ende of my thred in signes 15 g=a= 55 mi=a= fro the
hed of libra <paren> agains succession of signes <$$paren> by cause
+t=t= I wirke w=t= cauda <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,44.328

& +t=t= other ende of my thred lay equedistant fro the diametre +t=t=
passith by the heuedes of aries & libra <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,44.329

& tho fond I +t=t= the middel of my thred karf the meridional lyne .1.
degre 22 mi=a= fro centre aryn bi which I knew the latitude of my mone
was - .1. g=a= 22 m=a= fro the Ecliptil meridional discendinge <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,44.330

thus shal@ @tow procede day by day vpward fro the hed of libra vn_to 90
degres agayns succession of signes +t=t= is to seyn vnto the firste of
cancer & thanne stirt ouer the meridional lyne whan thy verrey argument
of thy latitude of the mone passit anything 90 g=a= <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,44.331

& ley +t=t= on ende of thy thred in gemini & +t=t= other ende in cancer
<slash> CMEQUATO-M3,44.332

& so com downward day bi day til thow come agayn at centre aryn <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,44.333

& thanne wirk w=t= caput as I haue told by_fore <slash>
CMEQUATO-M3,44.334

& nota +t=t= whan any eclips <paren> lune <$$paren> fallith in aries
taurus gemini . cancer . leo . virgo <slash> than is than is the
Eclips in caput <slash> CMEQUATO-M3,44.335

& the remenant of the Eclipses ben in cauda CMEQUATO-M3,44.336
