<BEGIN_cmgregor-m4>

<P_95>

<heading>

Rychardus Wedyngton , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,95.4

John Woodecocke CMGREGOR-M4,95.5

William Asckeham CMGREGOR-M4,95.6

A=o= xxj=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,95.7

<$$heading>

Ande the same yere , the nexte Sonday aftyr the Translacyon of Syn
Thomas of Cantyrbury , that was viij day of Juylle , the kyng commaundyd
alle hys mayne for to mete with hym at the Mylys Ende ; CMGREGOR-M4,95.9

and so they dede . CMGREGOR-M4,95.10

And thenne he roode forthe unto Plasche ; CMGREGOR-M4,95.11

and there he restyd the Duke of Glouceter erly in the mornynge , and the
Duke of Arundelle , and the Erle of Warwyke , and the Lorde E. Cobham ,
and Syr John Cheyne ; CMGREGOR-M4,95.12

alle thes were a_restyde the same tyme , CMGREGOR-M4,95.13

and the Duke of Glouceter was sende unto Calys in to preson ;
CMGREGOR-M4,95.14

ande at Saynt Bartholomewe ys tyde nexte aftyr the Erle Marchelle was
sende unto Calys to hym . CMGREGOR-M4,95.15

And on the morne <P_96> hyt was Sonday , CMGREGOR-M4,96.16

and that daye men sayde that he $diede , CMGREGOR-M4,96.17

but Gode wote howe , CMGREGOR-M4,96.18

but dede he was . CMGREGOR-M4,96.19

On the morne aftyr Hooly Rode day , the kyng made a grete justysse
be-syde Kyng ys towne uppe Temys ; CMGREGOR-M4,96.20

and on the Sonday aftyr the Erle of Derby helde his feste in John Roetis
Place , in Flet Strete . CMGREGOR-M4,96.21

And the xxj day of September be-ganne the Parlement at Westemyster .
CMGREGOR-M4,96.22

And there was made a grete hale in the palysse , CMGREGOR-M4,96.23

and there ynne the Parlyment was holde . CMGREGOR-M4,96.24

And that day the knyghtys of the shyre were i-chosyn , CMGREGOR-M4,96.25

ande sherevys chosyn hyr Speker , wyche name was Syr John Buschey ;
CMGREGOR-M4,96.26

and every man was commaundyd for to leve his bowe and his arowys at home
in hys inne . CMGREGOR-M4,96.27

And on the nexte day was the Parlement playnely be-gunne .
CMGREGOR-M4,96.28

And on the Wanysday nexte aftyr was askyd as for +te clargy a procter
for to speke for hem in the Parlyment , CMGREGOR-M4,96.29

for they myght nought be in that place there as jugement shulde be gevyn
for treson of felony . CMGREGOR-M4,96.30

And thenne they chosynne Syr Thomas Percy , CMGREGOR-M4,96.31

and so schulde they have for hym a proctoure in the Par-lyment for
evyr_more for poyntys of tresoune and felony . CMGREGOR-M4,96.32

And the Fryday aftyr was the $Erle of Arundelle att hys aunswere ;
CMGREGOR-M4,96.33

and that day was geve juggement on hym , that he shulde be drawe ,
hanggyd , ande i-quarteryd , and be-heddyd . CMGREGOR-M4,96.34

But at the prayer of lordys the kyng relessyd hym , CMGREGOR-M4,96.35

and commaundyd that he shulde be ladde thorowe London unto the Towre
Hylle from Weste-myster , and there hys hedde to be smytte of .
CMGREGOR-M4,96.36

And so hit was . CMGREGOR-M4,96.37

And thenne was the body ande the hedde borne unto fryer Austynnys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,96.38

and then hit was byryde . CMGREGOR-M4,96.39

And on the Fryday next aftyr was Syr Thomas Mortymer jugyd unto the same
dethe that the Erle hadde , but that he com yn whythe_yn vj monythys .
CMGREGOR-M4,96.40

And the Sonday hylde the Duke of Lancaster hys feste in the byschoppys
place of Durham . CMGREGOR-M4,96.41

And the Monday aftyr was the Lorde Cobham accusyd . CMGREGOR-M4,96.42

And the Thursday aftyr helde the lordys a Prevye Conselle ;
CMGREGOR-M4,96.43

and on the morne aftyr was the Erle of Warwyke at hys answere ,
CMGREGOR-M4,96.44

and <P_97> was juggyd unto the same dethe jugement that the Erle of
Arun-delle hadde , CMGREGOR-M4,97.45

but he submyttyd hym so louly unto the kyngys grace and to his plesaunce
, that the kyng gaffe hym grace and lyffe , CMGREGOR-M4,97.46

and sende hym unto the Towre a-yenne . CMGREGOR-M4,97.47

And the Satyrday was the Parlyment enjornyde unto Shrouysbury .
CMGREGOR-M4,97.48

And that day there were made v dukys and a duches , and a markes , and
iiij erlys , the whiche namys folowyn aftyr here : CMGREGOR-M4,97.49

Syr Harry Erle of Derby made Duke of Herforde , Edwarde Erle of Rutlonde
Duke of Arundylle , Thomas the Erle Marchelle made Duke of Northe-folke
, Syr John Holand Duke of Exceter , and the Erle of Kentte made Duke of
Surreye . And the Countesse of Northefolke i-made Duches of Northefolke
, the Erle of Somersett Markys of Dorsett , the Lorde Spencer i-made
Erle of Glouceter , the Lorde Nevyle i-made Erle of Westemorelonde , Syr
Thomas Percy Erle i-made the Erle of Worceter , and Syr Wylliam Schroppe
i-made Erle of Wyldschyre . CMGREGOR-M4,97.50

Ande the Sonday aftyr helde the kynge hys feste , CMGREGOR-M4,97.51

and the Monday was the terment of the Lorde Moumbrey at the Whytte
Freerys in +t=e= cytte of London ys subbarbys . CMGREGOR-M4,97.52

And every nyght durynge the Parlyment the kyng was wacchyde , on lorde
with his mayny one nyght , and anothyr lorde anothyr nyghte , duryng
alle the Parlyment . CMGREGOR-M4,97.53

And that same yere the kyng and the Duke of Herford , and the Duke of
Northefolke , shulde have foughte at Covyntre ; CMGREGOR-M4,97.54

but whenne that they were ensemblyd in the place afore the kynge , ande
he toke hit uppon hys juggement , and a_non in the same place they were
bothe exylyde , but Harry Duke of Herforde but for x yere , and the Duke
of Northefolke for a_hun-dryd wynter . CMGREGOR-M4,97.55

Alle so the same yere Thomas Aroundelle the Arche_Byschoppe of
Cantyrbury was exylyde , CMGREGOR-M4,97.56

and Syr Robert Waldon was made Arche_Byschoppe of Cauntyrbury .
CMGREGOR-M4,97.57

And thenne the kyng , thoroughe wyckyd consayle , deseneyreyd the heyrys
of the <P_98> lordys that were exilyde and done to dethe be_fore tyme .
CMGREGOR-M4,98.58

And thenne he sende unto Rome to have the statutys and the ordy-naunce
made in the Parlyment that was begunne at Westemyster and i-endyd at
Shrouysbury confermyde by the Poope ; CMGREGOR-M4,98.59

hyt was donne ande grauntyd by the Poope , and by hym conformyd , the
whiche was pronounsyd at Powlys Crosse and at Synt Mary Spetylle by
fforne and in audyence of pepylle . CMGREGOR-M4,98.60

Alle so the kyng thorowe conselle that was not goode he hadde the cytte
of London and many othyr cytteys and townys in grette hate and in
indygna-cyon , CMGREGOR-M4,98.61

and were endytyd as for rebellys ; CMGREGOR-M4,98.62

and he toke hym to Cheschyre men , +t=e= whiche were most famulyer with
hym , wherefore the cytesynnys of London and the pepille of the sayde
townys and schyrys endytyd , as hit ys i-sayde byfore , were fulle hevy
and in grete hevynes of herte . Where fore the sayde cyttesynnys of
Lon-don in plesauns of the kynge and by conselle and helpe of Syr Roger
Walden , Archebischoppe of Cauntyrbury , ande Syr Robert Baybroke ,
Byschoppe of London , putte a supplicacion unto the kyng , of whyche the
tenoure folowyth . CMGREGOR-M4,98.63

{COM:supplication_omitted}

And then anon , aftyr the pre-sentacyon of the sayde supplycacion ,
there were made many blanke chartours , CMGREGOR-M4,98.65

and alle +t=e= men of any crafte in the citte , as welle servauntys as
maysterys , were chargyd for to come to the Yelde halle to sette hyr
selys to the sayde blanke chartours . CMGREGOR-M4,98.66

And soo they dyd also for the moste parte of Inglond , CMGREGOR-M4,98.67

and no man wyste what hyt mente . CMGREGOR-M4,98.68

<heading>

Drewe Baryntyne , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,98.70

John Wade CMGREGOR-M4,98.71

John Warner CMGREGOR-M4,98.72

xxij=o= Anno . CMGREGOR-M4,98.73

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere Thomas Aryndelle , the sone and ayre of the Erle of
Arundelle , whiche +tat aftyr the dethe of hys fadyr was dwellyng in
howshold with Syr John of Holon , Duke of Exceter , and holde at non
reputacyon but in grete repreffe and dyspyte and moche dysseysse ,
prevely thorowe helpe of Wylliam Schotte , mercer of London , in a
gromys wede he saylyd ovyr +t=e= see CMGREGOR-M4,98.75

and came unto hys onkylle , the Archebyschope of Cauntyrbury , that was
that tyme in Coleyne . CMGREGOR-M4,98.76

Al so the same yere dyde Syr John Gaunte , Duke of Lanchaster ,
CMGREGOR-M4,98.77

and ys beryd at Poulys at London . CMGREGOR-M4,98.78

And that yere Kyng Rychard saylyd the secunde tyme in to Yrlonde sone
aftyr Estyr . CMGREGOR-M4,98.79

And he hadde with hym Harry , the eldyste $sone of the Dukys of Herford
, the whiche Harry was made knyght in Irlonde . CMGREGOR-M4,98.80

And in the begynnyng of xxiij yere of the raygne Harry , Duke of
Lancaster , that was exilyd whithe the Archebyschoppe of Cantyrbury and
hys owne sone Thomas , and the sone of the Erle of Arundelle , londyd in
the northe contre at a place callyde Raynspouer be-syde Weldynton , to
whom there come hastely Syr Harry Percy of Northehumbyrlonde , and Harry
Percy hys sone , and many othyr lordys , CMGREGOR-M4,98.81

and thenne the Duke of Lancaster whithe alle othyr lordys went strayt
unto Brystowe , CMGREGOR-M4,98.82

and there they fonde Syr Wylliam Schroppe , Treserer of Inglond , and
Syr John Busche , and Syr John Grene , the whiche were brought by_fore
the Duke of York , that tyme beynge Levtenaunte of Inglonde ,
CMGREGOR-M4,98.83

and there they were be_heddyd . CMGREGOR-M4,98.84

And thenne was Syr <P_102> John Solake a-restyd at Westemyster , the
dene of the kyngys chapylle , and putte in preson in Luddegate ,
CMGREGOR-M4,102.85

and othir certayne monkys of the Abbey of Westemyster were a-restyd al
so . CMGREGOR-M4,102.86

And the same yere were a-restyd Syr Wylliam Baggot , knyght , in Irlonde
, faste by Deuelyn , CMGREGOR-M4,102.87

and he was brought unto London and putte in preson in Newgate .
CMGREGOR-M4,102.88

And that same yere was Moraunte , fyschemanger , i-slayne at Synt Mary
at the Hylle be-syde Byllyngysgate . CMGREGOR-M4,102.89

Thes benne the namys of Mayrys and of Sherevys of the cytte of London in
the tyme of Kyng Harry the iiij that was crownyd at Westemyster the xiij
day of October , the yere of oure Lorde M=i=_ccc_lxxxxix .
CMGREGOR-M4,102.90

<heading>

Thoma Knollys , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,102.92

William Walderne CMGREGOR-M4,102.93

Wylliam Hyde CMGREGOR-M4,102.94

Anno primo . CMGREGOR-M4,102.95

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere , a-non aftyr Crystysse masse , was be-heddyd at
Sussetyr the Erle of Kentt , and the Erle of Saulysbury , and the Erle
of Oxynforde , and Syr Thomas Blounte , and Syr Raffe Lumney , Syr Benet
Cely , knyghtys , and Syr Thomas Wyntyrsylle , sqwyer ;
CMGREGOR-M4,102.97

also Syr John Holand , Erle of Huntyngdone , was beheddyd at Playsche in
Exsex , CMGREGOR-M4,102.98

and the Lord Spenser was be-heddyd at Brystowe ; CMGREGOR-M4,102.99

and a-non aftyr dyde Kyng Rychard CMGREGOR-M4,102.100

and was beryd at Langley . CMGREGOR-M4,102.101

And that same yere Syr Barnarde Brokers was heddyd at Tyburne ,
CMGREGOR-M4,102.102

and Syr Thomas Celley , knyght , and Mawdleyn ande Ferby , clerkys ,
were drawyn and hangyd at Tyburne . CMGREGOR-M4,102.103

And that same yere the kynge roode in to Schotlonde .
CMGREGOR-M4,102.104

And there he be-ganne the werre at Walys by Gwyn Glandowre , squyer ,
ayenste the Kyng of Inglonde , Harry the iiij , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,102.105

<heading>

John Fraunseys , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,102.107

John Wackeley CMGREGOR-M4,102.108

John Obete CMGREGOR-M4,102.109

Anno ij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,102.110

<$$heading>

<P_103>

Ande that yere a quarter of whete was worthe xvj s .
CMGREGOR-M4,103.113

The secunde yere . CMGREGOR-M4,103.114

And thenne that yere Syr Wylliam Sawtre , preste , was brente ynne
Smethefylde for eresy . CMGREGOR-M4,103.115

And that yere , the xiij day of September , the yere of oure Lorde
M=l=_cccc_and_ij , was the batylle at Halydon Hylle , at the whyche
batylle was takynne the Erle Douglas , the Erle of Fyfe , and many moo
othyr knyghtys and squyers . CMGREGOR-M4,103.116

<heading>

John Schadworthe , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,103.118

William Fremyngham CMGREGOR-M4,103.119

William Venoure , junyor CMGREGOR-M4,103.120

Anno iij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,103.121

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere was Dame Jone , Duches of Bretayne , i-weddyd to
Kyng Harry the iiij . CMGREGOR-M4,103.123

Also thys yere there was a sterre that was callyd Comata , id_est a
blasyng sterre , CMGREGOR-M4,103.124

and he shewyd in the weste , CMGREGOR-M4,103.125

and he duryd v wekys and more . CMGREGOR-M4,103.126

Al so the same yere the Priour of Launde and Syr Roger of Claryngdone ,
knyght , and hys men , were drawe and hanggyd , and viij Freers Minors
whythe them , at Tyburne , CMGREGOR-M4,103.127

and Syr Roger Walden , the byschoppe , and Rychard Clydrowe were
i-quytte by a queste of men of London . CMGREGOR-M4,103.128

Ande that yere was the batyle at Humbyldon Hylle . CMGREGOR-M4,103.129

<heading>

John Walkotte , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,103.131

Richardus Merlowe CMGREGOR-M4,103.132

Robert Chycheley CMGREGOR-M4,103.133

Anno iiij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,103.134

<$$heading>

And that yere , the yere of our Lorde M=l=_cccc_iiij , was the batylle
of Shrouysbury , that was uppon Mary Mawdelyn Evyn , in the whyche
bataylle Syr Harry Percy was sayle , CMGREGOR-M4,103.136

and Thomas Percy was i-takynne and kept iij dayes aftyr ,
CMGREGOR-M4,103.137

and thenne he was drawe , hanggyd , quarteryd , and be-heddyd ;
CMGREGOR-M4,103.138

and the quarters was sende one unto London Brygge . CMGREGOR-M4,103.139

And in the same bataylle was the Prynce shotte thorowe the hedde with an
arowe , CMGREGOR-M4,103.140

and the Erle of Stafforde was i-slayne in the kyngys cote armure undyr
his baner , CMGREGOR-M4,103.141

and many mo lordys and knyghtes lost there lyvys , and squyers and many
a goode yemon . CMGREGOR-M4,103.142

For hit was one of the wyrste bataylys that evyr came to Inglonde , and
unkyndyst , CMGREGOR-M4,103.143

for there was the fadyr a-yenst <P_104> the sone and the sone ayenste
the fadyr , and brother and cosyn a-yenste eche othyr .
CMGREGOR-M4,104.144

<heading>

William Askam , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,104.146

Thomas Faukener CMGREGOR-M4,104.147

Thomas Polle CMGREGOR-M4,104.148

Anno v=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,104.149

<$$heading>

And that yere Serle , that was one of thoo that mortheryd the Duke of
Glouceter at Calys , was takyn in the Marche of Schotlond ,
CMGREGOR-M4,104.151

and was brought unto London , CMGREGOR-M4,104.152

and was hangyd at Tyburne . CMGREGOR-M4,104.153

<heading>

John Hynde , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,104.155

William Lowthe CMGREGOR-M4,104.156

Stevyn Spylman CMGREGOR-M4,104.157

Anno vj=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,104.158

<$$heading>

Ande that yere Syr Thomas the kyngys sone was Amerelle of the See ,
CMGREGOR-M4,104.160

and he wente unto Flaundrys CMGREGOR-M4,104.161

and brent bothe in Cachante and in Flaundrys , CMGREGOR-M4,104.162

ande londyd at Scluse CMGREGOR-M4,104.163

and gaffe there to a stronge sawte . CMGREGOR-M4,104.164

Alle so he toke carrekys of Jene CMGREGOR-M4,104.165

and brought them unto Wynchylse , CMGREGOR-M4,104.166

and they were brent thorowe mysse_gover-naunce and moche of the goode
ther ynne . CMGREGOR-M4,104.167

Alle so the same yere Syr Richard Schroppe Archebyschoppe of Yorke , and
the Lorde Mombray , were be-hedyd at Yorke . CMGREGOR-M4,104.168

<heading>

John Woodecocke , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,104.170

Wylliam Crowmer CMGREGOR-M4,104.171

Harry Barton CMGREGOR-M4,104.172

A=o= vij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,104.173

<$$heading>

Ande that yere alle the werys bytwyne London and Mydway were drawe downe
by the conselle of the kynge and of the mayre of London , and of the
comyns of the same cytte , CMGREGOR-M4,104.175

for they dyd moche harme in the ryver of Themys , CMGREGOR-M4,104.176

for they dystroyed moche yonge frye , CMGREGOR-M4,104.177

for the pepylle gaffe hit hir hoggys , CMGREGOR-M4,104.178

and soo uncomely devouryd hyt . CMGREGOR-M4,104.179

<heading>

Rychard Wytyngdon , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,104.181

Nicholaus Wotton CMGREGOR-M4,104.182

Geffray Booke CMGREGOR-M4,104.183

A=o= viij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,104.184

<$$heading>

Ande that yere the Erle of Kent weddyd the Erlys doughter of Mylayne ,
at Synt Mary Overeys in Sowtheworke , the xiiij day of Juylle .
CMGREGOR-M4,104.186

And that yere deyd Syr Robert Knollys , CMGREGOR-M4,104.187

and ys byryd at the Whytte Freers at London . CMGREGOR-M4,104.188

<P_105>

<heading>

Wylliam Stawndon , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,105.191

Harry Pomfrett CMGREGOR-M4,105.192

Harry Halton CMGREGOR-M4,105.193

Anno ix=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,105.194

<$$heading>

Ande that yere the Erle of Northehumberlond ande the Lorde Bardoffe were
take in the Northe countre ande be-heddyd and quarteryd ;
CMGREGOR-M4,105.196

and the hedde of the erle and the quartyr of the lorde were brought unto
Londyn Brygge . CMGREGOR-M4,105.197

And that yere was a grete froste , CMGREGOR-M4,105.198

and that duryd xxv wekys and more . CMGREGOR-M4,105.199

Alle so the same yere the Erle of Kentt was slayne at the castelle of
Bryake whythe a stone . CMGREGOR-M4,105.200

<heading>

Drewe Barentyne , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,105.202

William Norton CMGREGOR-M4,105.203

Thomas Duke CMGREGOR-M4,105.204

A=o= x=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,105.205

<$$heading>

Ande that yere was the grette playe at Skynners Welle in London .
CMGREGOR-M4,105.207

Ande that yere there were grete justys in Smethefylde by_twyne the Erle
of Somersett and the Synyschalle of Henowde , CMGREGOR-M4,105.208

and Syr John Corwayle and Syr Rycharde of Arundelle , and the sone of
Syr John Chenye , and othyr Fraynysche men dede the dedys of armys there
. CMGREGOR-M4,105.209

<heading>

Richardus Merlowe , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,105.211

John Lane CMGREGOR-M4,105.212

Wylliam Checheley CMGREGOR-M4,105.213

A=o= xj=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,105.214

<$$heading>

And that yere ther was an heretyke , that was callyd John of Badby ,
that be-levyd nought in the Sacrament of the Auter , CMGREGOR-M4,105.216

and he was brought $unto Smethefylde for to be brent , and bownde unto a
stake ; CMGREGOR-M4,105.217

and Syr Harry Percy of Walys conselyd hym to holde the very ryght beleve
of Hooly Chyrche , CMGREGOR-M4,105.218

and he shulde faylle nothyr lacke noo goode . CMGREGOR-M4,105.219

Al so the Chaunceler of Oxynford , on Mayster Corteney , informyd hym in
the faythe of Holy Chyrche , CMGREGOR-M4,105.220

and the Pryour of Syn Bartholomewys brought the hooly sacrament with xij
torchys CMGREGOR-M4,105.221

and brought hyt before hym . CMGREGOR-M4,105.222

And hyt was askyd howe that he be-levyde . CMGREGOR-M4,105.223

Ande he answeryd CMGREGOR-M4,105.224

and sayde that he wyste welle that hit was hooly brede , and nought
Goodys oune blessyde body . CMGREGOR-M4,105.225

And thenne was the tonne putt ovyr hym ande fyre put unto hym ;
CMGREGOR-M4,105.226

and whenne he felde fyre he cryde marcy . CMGREGOR-M4,105.227

And a-non the prynce commaundyd to take a_wey the fyre ,
CMGREGOR-M4,105.228

and hit was don soo anon . CMGREGOR-M4,105.229

And then the prynce askyd hym yf that <P_106> he wolde for-sake hys
heresy and be-leve on the faythe of alle Hooly Chyrche ,
CMGREGOR-M4,106.230

and he wolde gyffe hym hys lyffe and goode i-nowe whyle he levyd ;
CMGREGOR-M4,106.231

but he wolde nought , CMGREGOR-M4,106.232

but contynuyde forthe in hys heresye . CMGREGOR-M4,106.233

And thenne the prynce commaundyd hym up to be brende at onys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,106.234

and soo he was . CMGREGOR-M4,106.235

And John Gylott , vynter , he made ij wevers to be take , the whyche
folowyd the same waye of heresy . CMGREGOR-M4,106.236

And the same tyme was the hurlynge in Estechepe by the lorde Thomas and
the lorde John , the kyngys sone , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,106.237

Versus Hereticus credat ne perustus ab orbe recedat ; Ne fides ledat
$Satel hunc baratro sibi predat . CMGREGOR-M4,106.238

<heading>

Thomas Knollys , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,106.240

Thomas Pyke CMGREGOR-M4,106.241

Thomas Penne CMGREGOR-M4,106.242

A=o= xiij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,106.243

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere there com inbassetours to the kynge from the Duke of
Burgeyne for to have men sowdyd whithe hym ayenst the Duke of Orlyauns ,
CMGREGOR-M4,106.245

but the kynge wolde not graunte hym non . CMGREGOR-M4,106.246

And they spake unto the prynce , CMGREGOR-M4,106.247

and he sende thedyr the Erle of Arundelle and Syr John Oldecastelle ,
Lorde of Cobham , and many mo knygtys and squyers of thys londe .
CMGREGOR-M4,106.248

<heading>

Robert Checheley , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,106.250

John Raynewelle CMGREGOR-M4,106.251

William Cotton CMGREGOR-M4,106.252

A=o= xiij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,106.253

<$$heading>

And that yere , the xij day of October , the yere of oure Lord
M=l=cccc_and_xj , ther was in Temys iij flodys in oo day .
CMGREGOR-M4,106.255

And that yere the Lorde Thomas , the kyngys sone , was made Duke of
Clarence , CMGREGOR-M4,106.256

and that yere there com inbassetours fro the Duke of Orlyaunce unto the
kyng for to wage men ayenst the Duke of Burgayne , CMGREGOR-M4,106.257

and +t=e= kyng sende thedyr the Duke of Clarence and othyr certayne
lordys ; CMGREGOR-M4,106.258

and at the feste of Synt Laurence they londyd at Hoggys .
CMGREGOR-M4,106.259

And the same yere the kyng let make to be smetyn newe nowblys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,106.260

but they were of lasse wyght thenne was the olde nobylle by the paysse
of an halpeny wyght , soo that a <P_107> nobylle shuld wey but iiij d.
and halfe a peny , and that l. nowblys shulde make a pounde of Troye
wyght . CMGREGOR-M4,107.261

<heading>

Wylliam Walderne , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,107.263

Raffe Lubnaham CMGREGOR-M4,107.264

William Sevenok CMGREGOR-M4,107.265

A=o= xiiij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,107.266

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere the kyng dyde at Westemyster , the xx day of Marche
, the yere of oure Lorde M=l=cccc_and_xij ; CMGREGOR-M4,107.268

and he ys byryde at Cauntyrbury be-syde the schryne .
CMGREGOR-M4,107.269

And that same yere Syr John Olde_Castelle was a_restyde at Wynsore and
sende to the Toure of London for poyntys of heresy that he was accusyd
of ; CMGREGOR-M4,107.270

and at the Frere Prechourys he was examnyd by_fore alle the clargy of
thys realme , spyritualle and temporalle and relygyous ,
CMGREGOR-M4,107.271

and he was sent unto the Toure a-yenne ; CMGREGOR-M4,107.272

and sone aftyr he brake owt of the Towre CMGREGOR-M4,107.273

and wentte in to Walys ; CMGREGOR-M4,107.274

and aftyr he was take ayen by the Lorde Powes in the tyme of Rychard
Merlowe , as ye shalle hyre aftyr . CMGREGOR-M4,107.275

Walderne , mayor , the same xiiij yere of his fadyr and the fyrste yere
of the sone , CMGREGOR-M4,107.276

ande thys ys rekynde but for oone yere . CMGREGOR-M4,107.277

Thes ben the namys of Mayrys of London and of the Sherevys of the same
for-sayde cytte in the tyme of Kyng Harry the v , that was crownyd the
ix day of Aprylle at Westemyster , the yere of oure Lorde M=l=cccc_xiij
. CMGREGOR-M4,107.278

And hyt was apon Passyon Sonday , CMGREGOR-M4,107.279

and that was a fulle wete day of rayne . CMGREGOR-M4,107.280

<heading>

William Walderne , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,107.282

Raffe Lubnaham CMGREGOR-M4,107.283

William Sevenok CMGREGOR-M4,107.284

Anno Primo . CMGREGOR-M4,107.285

<$$heading>

Ande that yere the kyng made to be brought the bonys of Kyng Rychard to
Westemyster , CMGREGOR-M4,107.287

and they were beryd and put in his owne sepulture , that he let make hym
selfe with Quene Anne his wyfe . CMGREGOR-M4,107.288

+tis was the laste yere of raygne of the fadyr , and the fyrste yere of
the raygne of the sone , Kyng Harry the v . CMGREGOR-M4,107.289

<heading>

William Crowmer , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,107.291

John Sutton CMGREGOR-M4,107.292

John Nichole CMGREGOR-M4,107.293

Anno ij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,107.294

<$$heading>

<P_108>

Ande that same yere , on the Twelfe the nyght , were a-restyd certayne
personys , called Lollers , atte the sygne of the Ax , whithe_owte
Byschoppe ys gate , the whyche Lollers hadde caste to have made a
mommynge at Eltham , and undyr coloure of the mommynge to have dystryte
the kyng and Hooly Chyrche . CMGREGOR-M4,108.297

And they hadde ordaynyde to have hadde the fylde be-syde Syn Gylys .
CMGREGOR-M4,108.298

But , thonkyd be God Almyghty , owre kyng hadde warnyng thereof ,
CMGREGOR-M4,108.299

and he come unto London CMGREGOR-M4,108.300

and toke the felde be_syde Syn Jonys in Clerkynwelle ;
CMGREGOR-M4,108.301

and as they come the kyng toke them , and many othyr .
CMGREGOR-M4,108.302

And there was a knyght take that was $namyd Syr Roger of Acton ,
CMGREGOR-M4,108.303

and he was drawe and hanggyd be_syde Syn Gyly , CMGREGOR-M4,108.304

for the kynge let to be made iiij payre of galowys , the whiche that
were i-callyd the Lollers galowys . CMGREGOR-M4,108.305

Al so a preste that hyght Syr John Bevyrlay , and a squyer that hyght
John Browne of Olde-castellys , they were hanggyd ; CMGREGOR-M4,108.306

and many moo were hanggyd and brent , to the nomber of xxxviij personys
and moo . CMGREGOR-M4,108.307

And that yere was Tebayne Breste , a preste , slayne in London by a
squyer that was callyd Yownser and hys men ; wherefore the same Yownser
with iij of his men for-swore the lond . CMGREGOR-M4,108.308

And that yere was the Parlyment at Layceter . CMGREGOR-M4,108.309

<heading>

Thomas Faukener , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,108.311

John Michell CMGREGOR-M4,108.312

Thomas Aleyne CMGREGOR-M4,108.313

Anno iij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,108.314

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere was brent in Smethefild John Claydon , schynner ,
and Rychard Turmyn , baker , for heresye that they were convycte a-pon .
CMGREGOR-M4,108.316

Al so the same yere the kyng toke his jornay CMGREGOR-M4,108.317

and wagyd in to Normandy ; CMGREGOR-M4,108.318

and the xv day of Juny the kyng roode thorowe London CMGREGOR-M4,108.319

whithe sherevys , aldermen , and alle the comeners brought the kynge at
Blacke Hethe ; CMGREGOR-M4,108.320

and there the mayre ande alle hys aldermen with alle the comyns toke
there leve of +t=e= kynge , CMGREGOR-M4,108.321

and <P_109> the kyng bade the mayre goo home and kepe welle hys chambyr
in hys absens , CMGREGOR-M4,109.322

and <em> yave hym <$$em> Crystysse blessyng and hys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,109.323

and he sayde " Cryste save London . " CMGREGOR-M4,109.324

And he roode forthe hys way tylle he cam to Hampton ,
CMGREGOR-M4,109.325

and there he mosteryd hys mayne . CMGREGOR-M4,109.326

And there were certayne personys that had caste to slayne oure kynge ,
CMGREGOR-M4,109.327

but God that knewe alle trougthe , he sende warnynge to oure kyng ;
CMGREGOR-M4,109.328

and hys enmys , the whiche namys folowythe aftyr , Syr Richarde
Camborowe , Erle of Cambryge , Syr Harry , Lorde Scrope , ande Syr
Thomas Gray , knyght , with moo of hyr assent , +t=e= whiche personys
were a-restyde and put in the preson , ande do to dethe .
CMGREGOR-M4,109.329

And the xij day of Auguste the kyng saylyd towarde Arflewe , whythe
M=l=M=l= sperys and moo ; CMGREGOR-M4,109.330

and the xvj day of the same monythe he londyd at Kytkawys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,109.331

and the Satyrday he leyde sege unto the towne of Arflewe ,
CMGREGOR-M4,109.332

and that was the Satyrday nexte aftyr of the Assompsyon of oure Lady ;
CMGREGOR-M4,109.333

and the sege contynuyd unto the Sonday nexte be_fore the feste of Synt
Mychelle , on the whiche Sonday the towne of Arflewe was delyveryd uppe
to the kyng , CMGREGOR-M4,109.334

that was xxij day of Septembre . CMGREGOR-M4,109.335

But hit ys to wyte that the Tewysday before , that ys to saye the xvj
day of the same monythe , at xij of the clocke whytheynne nyght , the
lordys that were the capytaynys and governowrys of the towne , that ys
to wete the Lorde Gawcorte , the Lorde Tutvyle , and moo othyr lordys ,
sende owte herodys of armys unto the Duke of Clarens , prayng hym at the
reverens of God that he wolde of hys hyghe lordeschippe that he wolde
graunte them lyve and leve for to trete whythe what personys that the
kyng wolde a-sygne unto hem ; CMGREGOR-M4,109.336

and the kyng at the reverens of God and at hyre requeste he assygnyde
the Duke of Exceter , the Lorde Fehewe , and Syr Thomas Erpyngham , to
hyre whatt they wolde say and desyre . CMGREGOR-M4,109.337

And they desyryd that the kyng wolde nought warre on them fro that oure
of mydnyght unto the Sonday nexte aftyr the feste of Synt Mychell ,
CMGREGOR-M4,109.338

and but hyt were <P_110> rescwyd by batayle by that day by the Frenysche
kyng or by the Dolfynne , ellys at that daye to delyver the towne unto
the kynge , and they to have hyr lyvys and hyr goodys .
CMGREGOR-M4,110.339

Ande the kyng sende hem worde yf that they wolde delivery the towne on
the morne aftyr , be the oure of mydnyght a_bove sayde , with_owte any
con-dyscyon , he wolde accepte hyt , CMGREGOR-M4,110.340

and in non othyr wyse he bade hem for to trete . CMGREGOR-M4,110.341

Ande yette the Fraynysche lordys prayde our lordys that they wolde
fochesave to be-seche the kynge at the reverens of God and of oure Lady
that he wolde graunte them respyte fro the same Twysday at nyght unto
the Sonday nexte aftyr tylle one owre aftyr none ; CMGREGOR-M4,110.342

and in the mayne tyme the lordys that were captaynys of the towne to
come to the kynge whithe xxiiij knyghtys and squyers with hem , of the
moste suffycyent men whithe_in the towne , and they to be sworne on
Goddys body opynly before alle the pepylle . CMGREGOR-M4,110.343

But yf hit soo were that the Fraynysche kynge or the Dolfynne rescwyde
hem by that Sonday by the owre of none , othyr ellys a-non aftyr none ,
they for to delyvery the towne to the kyng and alle hyr bodys and goodys
to don whythe hem what so {to_do} hem evyr lyste , whythe any condiscyon
. CMGREGOR-M4,110.344

Whythe that the kynge sufferde hem to sende unto Frauns viij personys
owte of the towne lettyng hym wytte in what plytte that they stode yn ,
CMGREGOR-M4,110.345

and the kyng grauntyd hem ; CMGREGOR-M4,110.346

and uppe the Wanysday by +t=e= mone the lordys come owte , and xxij
knyghtys and squyers whythe hem ; CMGREGOR-M4,110.347

and thenne come the prosessyon solempny and stately , whithe xxiiij
copys of clothe of golde by-fore Goddys body , whythe many worschipfulle
lordys , knyhtis , and squyers , and othyr multytude of pepylle from
+t=e= kyngys tente , solempny and stately as evyr was done suche a thyng
be-for tyme . CMGREGOR-M4,110.348

But the kyng was nott here present . CMGREGOR-M4,110.349

And the Franysche lordys made thare hyr othys a-pon the sacrament ;
CMGREGOR-M4,110.350

and , the othys done , the Fraynysche lordys were brought unto the
kyngys tente , CMGREGOR-M4,110.351

and there they dynyd in the kyngys halle , CMGREGOR-M4,110.352

but in alle thys tyme they sawe nought the kynge . CMGREGOR-M4,110.353

And whanne that they hadde etyn they departyd CMGREGOR-M4,110.354

and <P_111> delyveryd to sartayne for to kepe yn ostage tylle the Sonday
on none , as hyt was a cordyment i-made before tyme whenne that they
toke hyr othys . CMGREGOR-M4,111.355

And the Sonday at the same owre a-signyd the kyng hadde a tente phyght
a-pone a hylle be-fore the towne , CMGREGOR-M4,111.356

and there he sate in his estate , ryally , CMGREGOR-M4,111.357

and alle hys lordys aboute hym . CMGREGOR-M4,111.358

And thenne come the Fraynysche lordys , with lxiiij whythe hem of the
moste suffycyentt men that were whythe_yn the towne , to the kyngys owne
propyr person , CMGREGOR-M4,111.359

and delyveryd uppe the keyes of the towne and hyr boodys and hyr goodys
to the kynges grace , whithe_owte any condyscyon . CMGREGOR-M4,111.360

And thys was the xxij day of Septembre , the yere of our Lorde
M=l=ccccxv . CMGREGOR-M4,111.361

And thenne sone aftyr the kynge and hys mayne ostyde from thens xxj
dayes thorowe the realme of Fraunce towarde Caleys .
CMGREGOR-M4,111.362

And the Fraynysche men hyrde telle of his comyng that way ,
CMGREGOR-M4,111.363

and they brake the bryggys there that the kyng shulde passe ovyr , and
in so moche that he myght not passe noo way but he moste nedys mete with
the Fraynysche oste . CMGREGOR-M4,111.364

And a-pon the Fryday , that ys to saye , the day of Syn Cryspyn and
Cryspynyany , alle the ryalle pouer of Fraunce come by-fore oure kynge
and hys lytylle blessyd mayne . CMGREGOR-M4,111.365

And thenne they sawe the Dolfynne whythe alle the lordys of France were
by-fore oure good kynge enbatellyd in iij batellys the nomber of
iij_schore_M=l= men of armys . CMGREGOR-M4,111.366

And that was the fayryste syght of armyde men that evyr any man saye in
any place . CMGREGOR-M4,111.367

And the kyng sawe he myght not passe whythe_out batayle ,
CMGREGOR-M4,111.368

and thenne he sayde unto hys lytylle mayne , " Serys and felowys ,
yendyr maynye wylle lette us of oure waye , CMGREGOR-M4,111.369

and they wylle not come unto us . CMGREGOR-M4,111.370

But nowe lette every man preve hym-selfe a goode man thys day and
a-vance hys baner in the beste tyme of the day and yere . "
CMGREGOR-M4,111.371

Ande the kyng roode CMGREGOR-M4,111.372

ande hys basnet in hys hede , CMGREGOR-M4,111.373

and alle othyr men wente on hyr foote a-@ @passe in hyr hoole araye $an
{TEXT:and} Englysche myle or that they assemblyde . CMGREGOR-M4,111.374

And thorowe Goddys grace the kynge made hys way thoroughe the thyckyste
of alle the batayle ; CMGREGOR-M4,111.375

and ther was slayne on the kyngys syde the Duke of Yorke , the <P_112>
Erle Southeffolke , and ij knyghtys , and Davy Gam , and of the gentylle
men no moo , CMGREGOR-M4,112.376

and of alle maner of Englysche men hyt passyd not xxviij personys .
CMGREGOR-M4,112.377

And on the Fraynysche syde was slayne the Duke of Launsonne , the Duke
of Barre , the Duke of Braban , ande vij erlys , and the Constabylle of
Fraunce , and the Senschalle of Henowde , and the Mayster Alblester ,
and many moo lordys , and knygtys and squyers v_M=l= and moo .
CMGREGOR-M4,112.378

And there was take the Duke of Orlyaunce , the Duke of Burbon , the
Counte of Rychemounde , and the Counte of Ewe , +t=e= Marchalle of
Fraunsce , Syr Bursegaunte , and many moo othyr knyghtys and squyers .
CMGREGOR-M4,112.379

And whanne thys was done the kyng bode alle nyghte in a vyllage faste
be-syde ther that the batelle was done . CMGREGOR-M4,112.380

And on the morowe he toke hys waye unto Calys whythe hys lordys and hys
presoners , whythe hys owne mayne . CMGREGOR-M4,112.381

And the xxiij day of November the kyng come unto London whythe alle hys
presoners a_bove_sayd . CMGREGOR-M4,112.382

And there he was ressayvyd worthely and ryally , CMGREGOR-M4,112.383

for the mayre , with alle the aldermen , whythe alle good comyners ,
roode CMGREGOR-M4,112.384

and fette hym ynne . CMGREGOR-M4,112.385

And whythe a ryalle processyon he was brought ynne ; CMGREGOR-M4,112.386

and there was mad , stondyng apone the brygge , Syn Gorge ryally armyd ,
CMGREGOR-M4,112.387

and at the Crosse in Cheppe was made a castelle , CMGREGOR-M4,112.388

and there yn was moche solempnyte of angelys and virgenys syngyng merely
. CMGREGOR-M4,112.389

And soo he roode unttylle that he came to Powlys , CMGREGOR-M4,112.390

and there mette whithe hym xvj byschoppys and abbattys whithe processyon
CMGREGOR-M4,112.391

and sensyd hym , CMGREGOR-M4,112.392

and brought hym uppe in to +t=e= qwere whythe devoute songe ,
CMGREGOR-M4,112.393

and there he offerde and the Franysche lordys alle_soo .
CMGREGOR-M4,112.394

And thenne he rode forthe unto Westemyster ; CMGREGOR-M4,112.395

and the mayre and hys bretheryn brought hym there . CMGREGOR-M4,112.396

Ande thys same yere be-ganne the generalle Conselle at Custaunce of alle
clargye and of alle maner of nacyons . CMGREGOR-M4,112.397

<heading>

Nicholaus Wotton , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,112.399

William Cambryge CMGREGOR-M4,112.400

Alayne Everarde CMGREGOR-M4,112.401

A=o= iiij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,112.402

<$$heading>

And in that same yere , onne the morne aftyr Syn Symonnys day <P_113>
and Jude , that the mayre shulde ryde to Westemyster for to take hys
othe , come tydyngys to London of the batayle a-bove sayde by the
Byschoppe of Worseter , that tyme beyng Chaunceler , CMGREGOR-M4,113.404

for he come to London erly in the mornynge , CMGREGOR-M4,113.405

and warnyd the mayre . CMGREGOR-M4,113.406

And thenne thorowe London they lette rynge the bellys in every chyrche
CMGREGOR-M4,113.407

and song Te Deum ; CMGREGOR-M4,113.408

and at Powlys , at ix of the clocke , the tydyngys were oppynly
proclaymyd to alle the comeners of +t=e= cytte and to alle othyr
strangerys . CMGREGOR-M4,113.409

And thenne the Quene , and alle hyr byschoppys and alle the lordys +tat
were in London that tyme , wentte to Westemyster on hyr fete a
prosessyon to Synt Edwarde ys schryne , whythe alle the prestys , and
clerkys , and fryers , and alle othyr relygyous men , devoutely syngynge
ande saynge the letanye . CMGREGOR-M4,113.410

And whenne they hadde offerde , the mayre com home rydynge merely whythe
alle hys aldermen and comeners as they were i-wounte for to doo .
CMGREGOR-M4,113.411

<heading>

Le Feste de Sentt Gorge a Wyndesore . CMGREGOR-M4,113.413

<$$heading>

<heading>

LE FESTE DE SENTT GORGE A WYNDESORE . CMGREGOR-M4,113.416

<$$heading>

Ande thys yere com the Emperowre of Almayne in to London be-fore the
Feste of Synt Gorge . CMGREGOR-M4,113.418

Ande the feste was deferryde unto hys commynge , CMGREGOR-M4,113.419

and that was done solempny at the castylle of Wyndesore .
CMGREGOR-M4,113.420

And at the prosessyon the kynge went a-pone the upper-moste syde of the
emperowre , CMGREGOR-M4,113.421

and soo alle the masse tyme he stode a-bove the emperoure .
CMGREGOR-M4,113.422

Ande at the mete the kyng sate on the ryght syde of the emperoure ,
CMGREGOR-M4,113.423

and the Duke of Bedforde sate on the lefte syde , CMGREGOR-M4,113.424

and the Chaunceler of Inglonde and the Byschoppe of Devylyn sate on the
left syde , CMGREGOR-M4,113.425

and the Duke of Bryga and a-nothyr duke of the emperours sate on the
kyng ys syde ; CMGREGOR-M4,113.426

and alle thosse vij satte on oo syde of +t=e= table .
CMGREGOR-M4,113.427

And the fyrste sotellete of the fyrste cours was howe Oure Lady armyd
Syn Gorge and a aungylle doyng on hys sporys . CMGREGOR-M4,113.428

And the secunde sotellete was Syn Gorge rydynge and fyghtyng whythe a
dragon <P_114> whythe hys spere in hys honde . CMGREGOR-M4,114.429

And the iij sotellete was a castelle , and Syn Gorge and the kynges
doughter ledyng the lambe in at the castelle gatys .
CMGREGOR-M4,114.430

And all thes sotelleteys were servyd be-fore the emperoure and the kyng
and noo ferther ; CMGREGOR-M4,114.431

ande othyr lordys were servyd with sotelleteys aftyr hyr astate and
degre . CMGREGOR-M4,114.432

And that same yere come the Duke of Holand into London ,
CMGREGOR-M4,114.433

but he was nought at the feste a-fore sayde . CMGREGOR-M4,114.434

And the emperoure lay at Westmyster alle the wyle that he was here for
the moste party , and the Duke William of Holand in the byschope ys
place of Ely ; CMGREGOR-M4,114.435

and sone aftyr Mydsomer the kyng went to Caleys whythe the emperoure ,
CMGREGOR-M4,114.436

and the duke saylyd home ayenne CMGREGOR-M4,114.437

and mette whythe kyng at Caleys . CMGREGOR-M4,114.438

And the Duke of Burgayne and the Counte of Charlys sone come to
Gravelynge ; CMGREGOR-M4,114.439

and the kynge sende thedyr the Duke of Glouceter hys brother and the
Erle of Marche to abyde there in ostage , wylys that the Duke of
Burgayne come to Calys to speke with the kynge ; CMGREGOR-M4,114.440

and in the myddys of the ryver the lordys mette togedyr .
CMGREGOR-M4,114.441

And the dukys sone of Burgayn ressayvyd oure lordys CMGREGOR-M4,114.442

and led hem in to Fraunce , CMGREGOR-M4,114.443

and the Erle of Warwyke ressayvyd the Duke of Burgayne
CMGREGOR-M4,114.444

ande brought hym to Calys , CMGREGOR-M4,114.445

and there they hadde a conselle twyne hem two ; CMGREGOR-M4,114.446

and thenne he toke hys leve of the kyng . CMGREGOR-M4,114.447

And the Erle of Warwyke brought hym unto Gravelyng water and in to the
same place there as they mette at the fyrste metynge ;
CMGREGOR-M4,114.448

and there every party toke hyr leve of othyr . CMGREGOR-M4,114.449

And thenne the kynge retornyd ayenne into Inglonde CMGREGOR-M4,114.450

and the emperoure saylyde unto Holande CMGREGOR-M4,114.451

and so passyd forthe in to Constaunce . CMGREGOR-M4,114.452

Alle so that same yere the Duke of Bedforde and the Erle of Marche , on
oure Lady Day the Assumpsyon , they fought whythe viij grete carykys of
Jene and whythe l. othyr shyppys , CMGREGOR-M4,114.453

and they toke hem whythe hyr patronys CMGREGOR-M4,114.454

and drownyde a grette hulke of the contre of Flaundrys .
CMGREGOR-M4,114.455

<heading>

Harry Barton , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,114.457

Robert Wedyngton CMGREGOR-M4,114.458

John Covyntre CMGREGOR-M4,114.459

Anno v=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,114.460

<$$heading>

ande the same yere , on Syn Petrys eve and Poule , the Erle of <P_115>
Huntyngdon whythe o+tyr certayne lordys faughtyn whithe carakys of Gene
, CMGREGOR-M4,115.462

and dyscomfyte hem , CMGREGOR-M4,115.463

and toke iiij of +t=e= grettyste of them and hyr patronys .
CMGREGOR-M4,115.464

And the amerelle of hem was the Duke of Burbone , CMGREGOR-M4,115.465

and he was take whithe hem whythe alle the tresoure that sholde have
wagyd hem for halfe a yere . CMGREGOR-M4,115.466

Al so the same yere the kynge saylyd unto Normandye the second tyme ,
CMGREGOR-M4,115.467

ande he londyd on Lammas day by-syde Tooke in Normandye .
CMGREGOR-M4,115.468

And the same tyme the kyng wanne the towne of Tooke CMGREGOR-M4,115.469

and assaylyd the castelle , the whyche castelle on Syn Lauerens evynne
was yolde unto the kynge , CMGREGOR-M4,115.470

and he gave hyt unto hys brother the Duke of Clarens whithe alle the
lorschippys dependaunt there too ; CMGREGOR-M4,115.471

and thenne the Duke of Clarens roode forthe to Cane whythe othyr lordys
whythe hym . CMGREGOR-M4,115.472

And one oure Lady evyn , the Assumpcyon , he mustryd hys men by-fore the
towne of Cane ; CMGREGOR-M4,115.473

and the xij day of August the kyng layde sege to Cane ,
CMGREGOR-M4,115.474

and that contynuyd tylle the day of the Natyvyte of oure Lady nexte
folowynge ; CMGREGOR-M4,115.475

uppon the same day the towne whythe grete sawte was yoldyd and wonne .
CMGREGOR-M4,115.476

And thenne the kyng layde sege unto the castelle , CMGREGOR-M4,115.477

and that in shorte tyme was yoldyn unto the kynge ; CMGREGOR-M4,115.478

and whylys the kyng boode in Cane , the Duke of Clarens roode to Bayeux
CMGREGOR-M4,115.479

and wanne that . CMGREGOR-M4,115.480

And the same yere the kyng wanne Argentyne , bothe the towne and the
castelle . CMGREGOR-M4,115.481

And the kyng wanne Alansonne and many moo stronge castellys and townys
and stronge abbeyes . CMGREGOR-M4,115.482

Ande the same yere , a-pon Estyr daye at aftyr_none , the Lorde Stronge
and Syr John Trusselle , knyght , fylle at debate for hyr wyvys in the
chyrche of Syn Donstonys in the Este , evyn at the prechyng tyme .
CMGREGOR-M4,115.483

In the same fraye Thomas Pedwardynne , fyschemonger , was slayne as he
wolde have lettyde hem of hyr fyghtynge , CMGREGOR-M4,115.484

and many men were i-hurte ; CMGREGOR-M4,115.485

and therefore the chyrche was suspendyd . CMGREGOR-M4,115.486

Ande thenne was the Lorde Stronge a-restyde and brought unto the Counter
in the Pultrye , CMGREGOR-M4,115.487

and the Sonday nexte aftyr he was cursyde in every chyrche in London ,
whithe boke , belle , and candelle , in one houre of the day .
CMGREGOR-M4,115.488

And aftyr he dyde hys penaunsse opynly thorow London for hys trespas
ayenst Hooly <P_116> Chyrche . CMGREGOR-M4,116.489

And that yere was a dyre yere of whete , CMGREGOR-M4,116.490

for a buschelle was worthe ij s . CMGREGOR-M4,116.491

<heading>

Rycharde Merlowe , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,116.493

Harry Rede CMGREGOR-M4,116.494

John Gedney CMGREGOR-M4,116.495

A=o= vj=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,116.496

ande the same yere , scilicet , in anno v=to= , the general conselle was
endyd , and a unyte made in Hooly Chyrche , and oo pope chosynne at
Custaunce on Syn Martyns daye , by comyn assente of alle the generalle
counselle , the whyche was callyd Pope Martyn the fyrste .
CMGREGOR-M4,116.497

Alle so the same yere Syr Johnne Oldecastelle was take in the Marche of
Walys and brought unto the Westemyster in a chare , CMGREGOR-M4,116.498

and there he was juggyde to the dethe ; CMGREGOR-M4,116.499

and thys was hys juggement , that he shulde be ladde thorowe London in
the same chare unto Towre Hylle , and there to be layde on a hyrdylle
and drawe to Syn Gylys galowys , and there to be hanggyd and brent .
CMGREGOR-M4,116.500

And so he was hanggyd by a stronge chayne . CMGREGOR-M4,116.501

For there was the Duke of Bedforde , the Duke of Exceter , and alle the
lordys of thys londe that were +tat tyme a-bowte London , tylle that
they hadde sene hys juggement . CMGREGOR-M4,116.502

Ande the same day the person of Wortham , theffe , and hys peramowre was
broughte unto Westemyster Halle . CMGREGOR-M4,116.503

And he was sente to Newgate , CMGREGOR-M4,116.504

and there he dyde . CMGREGOR-M4,116.505

Ande that same yere the kyng layde sege unto Faleys the fyrste day of
Novembre , CMGREGOR-M4,116.506

and that sege contynuyde unto the xx day of Decembre , the yere of grace
M=l=CCCCxvij . CMGREGOR-M4,116.507

Thenne the towne dysendyd for to trete whythe the kynge ,
CMGREGOR-M4,116.508

and the kyng commyttyd the trety unto Thomas Erle of Saulysbury , and to
Harry Lorde Fehewe , and to Syr Johnne Cornewale , and to Syr Wylliam
Haryngdon , knyghtes and commyssyoners for hys partye ;
CMGREGOR-M4,116.509

and as for the party of the towne , Syr Wylliam Molene , Syr Gylberte
<P_117> Mounstrewys , lorde of Fayete , capytaynys of men of armys , and
of the schotte whythe_ynne the towne of Faleys , and whythe $them a_pon
the same trete , the lord of Gamulle ; which parteys entretid ande
a_cordyd uppon the artyculys and poyntmentys aftyr folowyng .
CMGREGOR-M4,117.510

{COM:articles_omitted}

<P_121>

The whyche towne in maner and forme as hyt ys be-fore sayde was yoldynne
to our soverayne lorde the kynge of Inglonde +t=e= seconde daye of
Janyver as hyt was before lemytyd , CMGREGOR-M4,121.513

ande the castelle be lefte stylle $un-yoldon unto the fyrste daye of
Fevyrer ; the whyche castelle was yoldynne the seconde daye of the
monythe a-bove sayde , and delyveryd in maner and forme a-fore-sayde ,
&c. CMGREGOR-M4,121.514

Ande thenne the Kyng of Inglonde lette parte his oste to prynces thens
on dyversse wayes ; that ys to saye , on party toke my lorde the Duke of
Clarens whythe many fulle worthy lordys whythe hym , CMGREGOR-M4,121.515

and he gate many townys and castellys and stronge abbeys .
CMGREGOR-M4,121.516

And the Duke of Glouceter toke a nothyr partye of the oste , and whythe
hym the Erle of Marche , the Lorde Graye , the Lorde Clyfforde , Syr
Watyr Hongerford , stywarde of the kyngys howse , whythe many othyr
knyghtys and squyers ; CMGREGOR-M4,121.517

and he gate , or he layde sege to Chyrborowe , xxiiij townys and
castellys . CMGREGOR-M4,121.518

And sone aftyr Ester he layde sege to the towne of Chyrborowe ,
CMGREGOR-M4,121.519

and contynowyde unto Mychelmasse , CMGREGOR-M4,121.520

and thenne the towne and the castelle was yolde unto hym .
CMGREGOR-M4,121.521

Ande the iij party of the oste the kynge <P_122> delyveryde unto the
Erle of Warwyke and othyr lordys whythe hym . CMGREGOR-M4,122.522

And they gate many stronge townys and castellys and abbeys .
CMGREGOR-M4,122.523

Here begynnythe the vj yere . CMGREGOR-M4,122.524

Ande aftyr Ester the kyng layde sege unto Lovers CMGREGOR-M4,122.525

ande wanne hyt , CMGREGOR-M4,122.526

and aftyr that he wanne Pountte Large . CMGREGOR-M4,122.527

And the kynge layde sege unto the cytte of Reyne , CMGREGOR-M4,122.528

and that contynuyd tylle the XXiiij day of Janyver nexte aftyr .
CMGREGOR-M4,122.529

<heading>

Wylliam Sevenoke , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,122.531

John Bryon CMGREGOR-M4,122.532

Raffe Barton CMGREGOR-M4,122.533

John Pernys CMGREGOR-M4,122.534

A=o= vij . CMGREGOR-M4,122.535

<$$heading>

The same John Bryan scheryve unto the ix day of Octobre ,
CMGREGOR-M4,122.537

and thenne he dyde ; CMGREGOR-M4,122.538

and thenne John Pernys was chose sheryve for the yere .
CMGREGOR-M4,122.539

And fro that day of Saynt Edwarde contynuyd the sege of Rone unto the
xxiiij day of Janyver , as hyt ys by-fore sayde ; at the whiche day they
of the cytte desyryd to trete . CMGREGOR-M4,122.540

And the kynge commaundyd the Erle of Warwyke , and the Erle of Salysbury
, the Lorde Fehewe , Syr Watyr Hungerforde , Gylbert Houmfryvyle , John
Vasquyes de Almada , and Robert Knyght , to trete whythe hem .
CMGREGOR-M4,122.541

And for the party of Roone <em> these folowyng <$$em> :
CMGREGOR-M4,122.542

{COM:treaty_omitted}

<P_127>

And so the fore_sayde cytte was yoldyd to oure soverayne lord the kynge
uppon Synt Wolstonys day . CMGREGOR-M4,127.545

And aftyr that he gatte many townys and castellys , as hyt shalle aftyr
thys be wretyn alle the processe . CMGREGOR-M4,127.546

<P_128>

<heading>

Richarde Wytyngdon , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,128.549

Robert Whtyngham CMGREGOR-M4,128.550

John Butteler CMGREGOR-M4,128.551

A=o= viij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,128.552

<$$heading>

Ande in that yere , the xx day of May , the yere of oure Lorde
M=l=_cccc_xx , the kyng come unto Troys , in Chaunpeyne ,
CMGREGOR-M4,128.554

and there he was worthely ressayvyde of alle the lordys spyrytualle and
temporalle +tat were there whithe the Kynge of Fraunce .
CMGREGOR-M4,128.555

And on the morne the Kyng and Quene of Fraunce , and Dame Katerynne ,
and the Duke of Burgayne , mette to_gedyr in Synt Petrys chyrche in
Troys ; whiche metyng was in the body of the chyrche .
CMGREGOR-M4,128.556

Ande thenne they went upe to the hyghe auter , CMGREGOR-M4,128.557

and there were the artyculys of the pes redde , and the othys made on
aythyr partye . CMGREGOR-M4,128.558

And thenne was the kyng and Dame Katerynne swryde to-gedyr .
CMGREGOR-M4,128.559

And on the morne aftyr was Trenyte Sonday , CMGREGOR-M4,128.560

that was the iij day of June , the yere of oure Lorde M=l=_cccc_xx , in
the chyrche of Troys , CMGREGOR-M4,128.561

the kyng spowsyd Dame Kateryne , Kyng Charlys doughter of Fraunce ;
CMGREGOR-M4,128.562

and thenne he was made Regent of Fraunce , CMGREGOR-M4,128.563

and the conveneyons of the whiche acordyd folowynge here aftyr ,
CMGREGOR-M4,128.564

{COM:conventions_omitted}

<P_138>

And thenne , aftyr the feste and solempnyte was done of that maryage ,
the kyng conqueryd many townys and castellys in Normandy .
CMGREGOR-M4,138.567

And thenne the kynge layde sege to Myleu sur-Sen ; CMGREGOR-M4,138.568

and duryng the sege the mayre and the sherevys of London were chosyn .
CMGREGOR-M4,138.569

And at that syge laye the Kynge of Fraunce , the Kynge of Inglonde , and
the Kynge of Scottys , and the Quene of Fraunce , and the Quene of
Inglonde , with hyr mayny , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,138.570

<heading>

Wylliam Cambryge , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,138.572

John Butlere CMGREGOR-M4,138.573

John Wellys CMGREGOR-M4,138.574

A=o= ix=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,138.575

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere , on Candylmasday yn the mornynge , the kyng com in
to Inglonde and the quene with hym CMGREGOR-M4,138.577

and they londyd at Dovyr ; CMGREGOR-M4,138.578

ande the xiiij day of Fevery the kyng com to London ,
CMGREGOR-M4,138.579

and the xxj day of the same monythe was crownyde at Westemyster ;
CMGREGOR-M4,138.580

and the solempnyte was done in chyrche of Synt Petyr ,
CMGREGOR-M4,138.581

and she was brought fulle worthely towarde +te palys into the grete
halle , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,138.582

Nowe of the statys and of the coronacyon of Quene Kateryn and <P_139> of
othyr manyr of servyse . CMGREGOR-M4,139.583

Fyrste the quene sette in hyr astate , CMGREGOR-M4,139.584

and the Archebyschope of Cantyrbury and the Byschoppe of Wynchester sate
on the ryght syde of the quene , CMGREGOR-M4,139.585

and they were servyd nexte unto the quene every cours coveryde as the
quene ; CMGREGOR-M4,139.586

and on the lyfte syde was the Kyng of Schottys sette in hys a-state
uppon the lyfte syde of the quene , that was servyd alle_wey nexte the
quene and the byschoppys a-fore sayde ; CMGREGOR-M4,139.587

the Duchyes of Yorke and the Countas of Huntyngdone satte in the same
syde , CMGREGOR-M4,139.588

and the Duke of Gloucester was ovyr_seer , the Erle of Marche knelyng on
the hye deys on the ryght syde of the quene and held a cepture in hys
hond of the quenys , and the Erle Marchelle knelyng on the lyfte syde at
the dyes and helde anothyr cepture of the quenys ; CMGREGOR-M4,139.589

and the Countasse of Kentt was syttyng at hyr ryght fote of the quene
undyr the tabylle , CMGREGOR-M4,139.590

and the Counteys Marchalle sate on the lyfte syde of the quene undyr the
tabylle ; CMGREGOR-M4,139.591

Syr Rycharde Nevyle kervyr before the quene , the Erle of Sowthefolke
cuppe berer , Syr John Stywarde sewer unto the quene , the Lord
Clyfforde panter in the stede of the Erle of Warwyke , the Lorde Wylleby
butler in stede of the Erle of Arundelle , the Lorde Gray Ryffyn naperer
, the Lorde of Audely amyner in stede of the Erle of Cambryge , the Duke
of Bedforde Constabylle of Inglond , the Erle of Warwyke Stywarde of
Inglond in stede of the Duke of Clarence , the Erle of Worceter
Marchalle of Inglonde in the stede of the Erle Marchelle , &c.
CMGREGOR-M4,139.592

<heading>

The maner of syttyng of the astatys yn the halle at Wystemyster .
CMGREGOR-M4,139.594

<$$heading>

Fyrste , the baronys of v Portys be-ganne the tabylle in the halle on
the ryght honde of the quene , and by_nethe hem at the same tabylle the
bowgerys of the chauncery ; CMGREGOR-M4,139.596

and the mayre of London and hys aldyrman be-ganne the borde on the lyfte
syde of the quene in the halle with othyr worthy comyners of the same
cytte , <P_140> and othyr men benethe hem at the same tabylle .
CMGREGOR-M4,140.597

The byschoppys beganne the tabylle in the myddys of the halle on the
ryght honde nexte the v Portys , the Byschoppe of London withyn the
tabylle , the Byschoppe of Dereham nexte hym whythe_yn the tabylle , and
the Byschoppe of Bathe and the Byschoppe of Exceter be-fore hem ; the
Byschoppe of Norwyche , and the Byschoppe of Saulysbury , the Byschoppe
of Syn Davys , and the Byschoppe of Bangar , the Byschoppe of Lyncolle ,
the Byschoppe of Carlylle , and the Abbott of Waltham with hem .
CMGREGOR-M4,140.598

And thenne aftyr them sate the justyse , and worthy knyghtys and
squeyers . CMGREGOR-M4,140.599

And thenne the ladys be-ganne the tabylle in myddys of the halle on the
lyfte honde of the quene , nexte the mayre of London .
CMGREGOR-M4,140.600

The Countasse of Stafforde , sum tyme doughter of the Duke of Gloucester
; the Countesse of Marche hyr doughter ; the Countasse of Arundelle ;
the Countesse of Westemerlonde ; the Countasse of Northehormerlond ; the
Countasse of Oxforde ; the Lady Nevyle , sum tyme the lordys wyffe
Nevyle that was sone to the Erle of Westemerlonde , and doughter to the
Erle of Somersette ; Dame Margarete the dukys doughter of Northefolke
and suster to the Erle Marchalle ; the yonger doughter to the Erle of
Somersett ; the Lady Ros ; the Lady Clyfforde , suster to Harry the Erle
of Northehumberlond ; the Lady Bergeveny ; the Lady Talbat ; the Lady
Wylby ; the Lady Mawley ; the wyffe of Rycharde <P_141> Nevyle ,
doughter to the Erle of Salusbury , and noo moo ladys of state .
CMGREGOR-M4,141.601

And thenne forthe with jentylle wemmen thys tabylle was occupyde and a
quarter of the byschoppe ys tabylle ther to . CMGREGOR-M4,141.602

Thes lordys sewyng were asygnyd for to do servyse ryallys before the
quene ; CMGREGOR-M4,141.603

the Erle of Northehumberlond and the Erle of Westemorelond , the Lorde
Fehewe , the Lorde Furnevale , the Lorde Gray of Wylton , the Lorde
Ferrys of Groby , the Lorde of Ponyngys , the Lorde Haryngton , the
Lorde Darsy , and the Lorde Della ware , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,141.604

<heading>

The servyse of the fyrste cours . CMGREGOR-M4,141.606

<$$heading>

Braune with mustarde , elys in burneus , furmenty with bakyn , pyke ,
lampray powderyd whythe elys , pouderyde trought , coddelyng , plays
with merlyng fryde , grette crabbys , lesche lumbarde , a bake mete in
paste , tartys , and a sotylte i-callyd pellycane , etc.
CMGREGOR-M4,141.608

<heading>

The secunde cours in the halle . CMGREGOR-M4,141.610

<$$heading>

Jely , blandesoure , bremme , congur , solys with myllott , chevyn ,
barbylle , roche , samon fresche , halybutte , gurnarde rostyd , roget
boylyde , smelte fryde , lopstere , cranys , lesche damaske , lampray in
paste , flampayne . CMGREGOR-M4,141.612

A sotelte , a panter & a mayde before hym , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,141.613

<heading>

The servyse of iij cours in the halle . CMGREGOR-M4,141.615

<$$heading>

Datys in composte , creyme motley , and poudrid welkys , porpys rostyd ,
meneuse fryde , crevys of douce , datys , pranys , rede $schrymppys ,
grette elys and lamprays rostyd , a lesche callyd whythe leysche , a
bake mete in paste with iiij angelys . CMGREGOR-M4,141.617

A sotelte , a tygyr and Syntt Gorge ledyng hyt . CMGREGOR-M4,141.618

<P_142>

And uppon Ester eve , thet was the xxij day of Marche , and the raygne
of the kynge +t=e= ix , the Duke of Clarans with many othyr lordys were
slayne in Fraunce and many lordys takyn presoners . CMGREGOR-M4,142.620

And the same yere the kyng helde a Parlymentt at Westemyster aftyr Estyr
in monythe of May , in the whyche Parlyment was axyde no talege ,
wherefore the Byschoppe of Wynchester lentte the kynge xx_M=l= pounde .
CMGREGOR-M4,142.621

And in thys Parlymentt was ordaynyde , by cause that golde was gretely
a_payryde by clyppyng and waschynge , that no man shulde aftyr
Crystysmas nexte aftyr put forthe no enpayryd golde in no paymente uppon
payne of furfeture there of ; where fore every man for the moste party
ordaynyd hym balans . CMGREGOR-M4,142.622

And the same yere , a_non aftyr Wytson tyde , the kyng saylyd in to
Fraunce a-yenne CMGREGOR-M4,142.623

and the Duke of Bedforde was made Lewtenaunte of Inglonde .
CMGREGOR-M4,142.624

Ande the same yere came the Duchyes of Holonde in to Inglond .
CMGREGOR-M4,142.625

<heading>

Roberte Chycheley , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,142.627

Ric. Goslyne CMGREGOR-M4,142.628

Wylliam Weston CMGREGOR-M4,142.629

Anno x=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,142.630

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere the Duke of Bedforde held a Parlyment at Wystemyster
, CMGREGOR-M4,142.632

and that be_gan the iij day of Decembir ; in the whyche Parlyment was
grauntyd a quyndesyn and a dyme to the kynge , that tyme beyng at the
sege of Mewys in Brye , in Fraunce , and the halfe quyndesym and dyme to
be payde antt Candelmasse nexte folowynge , and that the kyng shuld
ressayve soche payment as went that tyme : that ys to say , yf a nobylle
were worth v s . CMGREGOR-M4,142.633

and viij d. the kyng shulde take hyt for a fulle nobylle of vj s. &
viij d. ; CMGREGOR-M4,142.634

and yf the nobylle soo appayryde were better thenne v s. viij d. , the
kyng too paye the ovyr_plus of v s. viij d . CMGREGOR-M4,142.635

Also that yere was grette scarsyte of whyte mony that men myght unnethe
have any golde changyd , thoughe hit were nevyr soo good and of fulle
whyghte . CMGREGOR-M4,142.636

Also that yere , on Syn Nicholas day in Decembyr , the yere of oure
Lorde M=l=cccc_and_xxj , Harry , the fyrste begotyn sone of Kyng Harry
the v , was borne in the castelle of Wyndesore ; to whom was god fadyrs
at the fonte <P_143> Harry Byschoppe of Wynchester , John Duke of
Bedforde , CMGREGOR-M4,143.637

and the Duchyes of Holond , Jacomyne , was the godmodyr ;
CMGREGOR-M4,143.638

and at the confirmacyon the Archebyschoppe of Cantyrbury , Harry
Chycheley . was godfadyr . CMGREGOR-M4,143.639

Also the same yere , in the monythe of May , the yere of oure Lorde
M=l=cccc_xxij , and of the raygne of the kynge the x , the cytte in
Mewys in Bry , whyche long tyme hadde be be_besegyd <em> was yolden
<$$em> in the maner as folowythe aftyr CMGREGOR-M4,143.640

{COM:articles_omitted}

<P_148>

And soo the X day of the same monythe the sayde markett of Mewys in Bry
and alle the towne was yoldyn in maner and forme as hyt ys above sayde .
CMGREGOR-M4,148.643

The same yere the xiij day of Auguste a newe wedyrcoke was sette at
Powlys stypylle in London . CMGREGOR-M4,148.644

Also the same yere , the laste day of Auguste , the yere of oure Lorde
M=l=_cccc_xxij , the good and nobylle Kyng , Harry the V aftyr the
Conqueste of Inglonde , floure of chevalrye of Crystyn men , endyd hys
lyffe in Fraunce , at Boys in Vincent , be_syde Parys , the X yere of
hys raygne , to whom God graunte mercy . CMGREGOR-M4,148.645

Amen . CMGREGOR-M4,148.646

Ande that same yere , the xx day of Auguste , deyde the Byschoppe of
London , Clyfforde , CMGREGOR-M4,148.647

and thenne was made byschoppe Mayster John Kempe , whos bonys , the viij
day of Novembyr next folowyng , worthely at Westmynyster were interyde .
CMGREGOR-M4,148.648

Here foloweythe namys of the townys and castellys , abbeys , pylys , and
pylettys , in Normandy , that oure fulle excellent lorde the Kyng Harry
the v. wanne and conqueryde in Normandy and in Fraunce , to hym and to
hys ayrys , in maner and forme as hit ys bove sayde .
CMGREGOR-M4,148.649

<P_149>

Fyrste the towne of Hareflewe and the castelle of the same , the
castelle of Toke , the castelle and towne of Cane , the towne and the
castelle of Argentyne , the towne and the castelle of Fallex , the towne
and the castelle of Mewys in Bry , the towne and the cytte and the
castelle of Rone , and many moo , the nombyr of an_C townys and
castellys , abbeys , and strong-holdys . CMGREGOR-M4,149.651

Here benne the namys of Mayrys and Sherevys in the tyme of Kynge Harry
the vj , the fyrste begotyn sone of Kyng Harry the v. , the whyche yere
of hys raygne be_ganne the fyrste daye of Septembyr , the yere of oure
Lorde M=l=_cccc_xxij , and the age of the Kyng Harry the vj nought fully
xij monythys whenne he beganne hys raygne . CMGREGOR-M4,149.652

<heading>

Wylliam Walderne , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,149.654

Wylliam Estefyllede CMGREGOR-M4,149.655

Robert Tedyrsale CMGREGOR-M4,149.656

A=o= j=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,149.657

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere , the xxj day of October , in the mornynge by_twyne
vij and viij of the belle , Kyng Carlys of Fraunce dyde , whos body ys
worthely enteryde at Syn Denys . CMGREGOR-M4,149.659

Also the same yere the kyngys Parlyment was holde at Westemyster ,
CMGREGOR-M4,149.660

and that be-ganne the ix day of November , in the whyche Parlyment was
ordaynyde the governaunce of the kynge , howe he shulde be governyd in
hys tendyr age . CMGREGOR-M4,149.661

Also in that Parlyment was grauntyd unto the kyng v. noblys of every
sacke wolle duryng the terme of the yere . CMGREGOR-M4,149.662

Also the same yere , the secunde day of Marche , was Syr Wylliam
Tayloure , preste , brende in Smethefylde for heresye .
CMGREGOR-M4,149.663

And the for_sayde secunde day of Marche wasse made the trety of the
delyveraunce of Pounte Mylanke , that was take and longe tyme holdyn by
the party callyde the Armonackys , and delyveryd as hyt in maner aftyr
folowy+te :- CMGREGOR-M4,149.664

{COM:appointments_omitted}

<P_156>

Also the same yere Newgate was be_gon to be made a Newgate by the
executourys of that famos marchant and merser , Rycharde Whytyngdone .
CMGREGOR-M4,156.667

<P_157>

<heading>

Wylliam Crowmere , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,157.670

Nicholas Jamys CMGREGOR-M4,157.671

Thomas Wansforde CMGREGOR-M4,157.672

A=o= ij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,157.673

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere there was a Parlyment at Westemyster ,
CMGREGOR-M4,157.675

and that be-ganne the xxj day of October ; CMGREGOR-M4,157.676

and in that yere , the xxj day of Feveryr , was Syr Thomas Mortymere
drawe , hangyd , and quarteryde , and hys hede smete of at Tyborne ,
CMGREGOR-M4,157.677

and hys body was buryd at Syn Johnys at Clerkyn-welle and hys herte at
Fryer Menowrys be_syde Newgate . CMGREGOR-M4,157.678

And that yere was the batylle in Verney , in Perche , the xxvij day of
Auguste , by my lorde the Regaunte of Fraunce , John Duke of Bedforde ,
with othyr lordys with hym of Englysche lordys ; CMGREGOR-M4,157.679

and in that batayle was slayne the Erle Dugelas , the Erle of Bogham ,
the Erle of Marre , CMGREGOR-M4,157.680

and alle the Scottys that durste a-byde in the fylde were slayne and
take . CMGREGOR-M4,157.681

And there was take on the Fraynysche syde the Duke of Launsun and the
Erle of Almarre , CMGREGOR-M4,157.682

and many mo othyr knyghtes an squyers were takyn and slayne , the nombyr
of v_m=l= Scottys and Armonackys , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,157.683

And that same yere , in the monythe of Feverer , the Stywarde of the
Kyngys of Scottys , whas name was Jamys , weddyd the Erlys doughter of
Somersett at Synt Mary Overes . CMGREGOR-M4,157.684

<heading>

John Mychelle , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,157.686

Symon Seman CMGREGOR-M4,157.687

John Bythewater CMGREGOR-M4,157.688

A=o= iij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,157.689

<$$heading>

Ande that yere there was a Parlyment att Westemyster ;
CMGREGOR-M4,157.691

and that Parlyment beganne the laste day of Aprylle .
CMGREGOR-M4,157.692

And at that Parlyment the Erle Marchalle was made Duke of Northefolke ;
CMGREGOR-M4,157.693

and in that Parlyment was moche altercacyon by-twyne +te lordys and the
comyns for tonage and poundage . CMGREGOR-M4,157.694

And at that Parlyment was grauntyd that alle maner of alyentys shulde be
put to hoste as Englysche men benne in othyr londys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,157.695

and ovyr that condyscyon was the tonage grauntyd ; the whyche condyscyon
was brokyn in the same yere by the Byschoppe of Wynchester , as the
moste pepylle sayde , he beyng Chaunseler the same tyme ,
CMGREGOR-M4,157.696

and there-fore there was moche hevynesse and trowbylle in thys londe .
CMGREGOR-M4,157.697

And that <P_158> yere , the xiij day of Feverer at nyght , were caste
many byllys in the cytte and in the subbarbys a-gayne the Flemyngys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,158.698

and sum were set in the byschoppe ys gate of Wynchester , and in othyr
bischoppys gatys . CMGREGOR-M4,158.699

And in the morowe the Byschoppe of Wynchester sent Richarde Woodevyle ,
squyer , to kepe the Towre of London with men of armys as thoughe hyt
hadde bene in the londe of warre , CMGREGOR-M4,158.700

and so induryd tylle the feste of Symon and Jude nexte aftyr folowynge .
CMGREGOR-M4,158.701

And that yere there were many worthy men of London apechyde of treson by
a false boy Peloure by excytacyon of the Byschoppe of Wynchester , as
many men noysyde and sayde ; yf were trewe or no I remytte me to Gode .
And of many moo othyr townys , as Cauntyrbury , Exceter , and Brystowe ,
Covyntre , Yorke , Chester , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,158.702

Ande that yere the Duke of Gloucester with hys wyffe wentte into Ennowde
; CMGREGOR-M4,158.703

and she was Duches of Holand . CMGREGOR-M4,158.704

And there he lefte hyr byhynd hym . CMGREGOR-M4,158.705

Ande the same yere the Byschoppe of Wynchester sende to Wyndesore for
certayne men of the kyngys howsholde , CMGREGOR-M4,158.706

and lefte the kyng but with a fewe men , CMGREGOR-M4,158.707

and for alle the prentys of Courte , unto Westemyster ;
CMGREGOR-M4,158.708

and there they come in there beste a-raye ; CMGREGOR-M4,158.709

and thenne he sende for the Mayre of London and hys aldermen .
CMGREGOR-M4,158.710

And there he restyde many worthy men of the cytte . CMGREGOR-M4,158.711

And that yere dyde the Erle of Marche in Irlonde , the xviij day of
Janyver , in the castelle of Trynne . CMGREGOR-M4,158.712

And that yere come the kyngys sone of Portyng-gale in to Englonde ;
CMGREGOR-M4,158.713

and on Mychelle-mas evyn he com to London , CMGREGOR-M4,158.714

and was loggyd in the byschoppe ys place of London .
CMGREGOR-M4,158.715

Ande in that yere there was a Perlyment at Westemyster ,
CMGREGOR-M4,158.716

and that Parlyment be-ganne the laste daye of Aprylle .
CMGREGOR-M4,158.717

And that Parlyment hadde an evylle faryng ende , to shamefully for to be
$namyd of any welavysyd man . CMGREGOR-M4,158.718

<P_159>

<heading>

John Covyntre , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,159.721

Wylliam Myldrede CMGREGOR-M4,159.722

John Brockeley CMGREGOR-M4,159.723

A=o= iiij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,159.724

<$$heading>

And that same yere that the mayre rode to Westmyster on the same daye
for to take hys othe , that ys , was the xxix daye of Septembyr , whenne
that he come home to hys mete with hys aldyrmen and with hys goode
comyners , or that they hadde fully ete , the Duke of Glouceter sende
for the mayre and hys aldyrmen that they shulde come speke with hym ;
CMGREGOR-M4,159.726

and whenne they come he cargyd the mayre that he shulde kepe welle the
cytte that nyght and make goode wache ; CMGREGOR-M4,159.727

and so there was , alle that nyghte , CMGREGOR-M4,159.728

for my Lorde of Glouceter and the Byschoppe of Wynchester were not goode
frendys as in that tyme . CMGREGOR-M4,159.729

And on the morowe certayne men kepte the gatys of the brygge of London
by the commaundement of the Lorde of Glouceter and of the mayre .
CMGREGOR-M4,159.730

And by-twyne ix and x of the belle +ter come certayne men of the
Byschoppys of Wynchester and drewe the chaynys of the stulpys at the
brygge ende in Southeworke ys syde , the whiche were bothe knyghtys and
squyers , with a grete mayny of archerys , CMGREGOR-M4,159.731

and they enbaytaylyd them , CMGREGOR-M4,159.732

and made defens of wyndowys and pypys as hyt hadde bene in the londe of
warre , as thowe they wolde have fought agayne the kyngys pepylle and
brekyng of the pes . CMGREGOR-M4,159.733

And thenne the pepylle of the cytte hyrde there of , CMGREGOR-M4,159.734

and they in haste schytte in ther shoppys CMGREGOR-M4,159.735

and come downe to the gatys of the brygge in kepyng of the cytte ande
savacyon of the cytte a-gayns the kyngys enmys , CMGREGOR-M4,159.736

for alle the shoppys in London were schytte in one howr .
CMGREGOR-M4,159.737

And thenne come my Lorde of Cauntyrbury ande the Prynce of Portynggale ,
CMGREGOR-M4,159.738

and tretyd by_twyne my Lorde of Glouceter and the Byschoppe of
Wynchester , CMGREGOR-M4,159.739

for they rode viij tymes by_twyne the duke and the byschoppe that day .
CMGREGOR-M4,159.740

And thonkyd be God , thoroughe goode governaunce of the mayre and hys
aldyrmen , alle the pepylle was sessyde CMGREGOR-M4,159.741

and wentte home ayenne every mann , CMGREGOR-M4,159.742

and none harme done thorough ealle the cytte , CMGREGOR-M4,159.743

thonkyd be God . CMGREGOR-M4,159.744

<P_160>

Ande the v day of Novembyr aftyr that , the kynge came fro Eltam to
London ; CMGREGOR-M4,160.746

ande with hym come the Duke of Glouceter and the Prynce of Portynggale ,
and alle the lordys that were a-boute London that tyme , with the mayre
and alle his aldyrmen , and with alle the trewe and goode comyners of
the cytte of London ; CMGREGOR-M4,160.747

and that was with a gode araye . CMGREGOR-M4,160.748

And the x day of Janyver came the Duke of Bedforde to London , and my
lady hys wyffe with hym , CMGREGOR-M4,160.749

and they come to the Byschoppe of Wynchester ; CMGREGOR-M4,160.750

and the mayre and alle the cytte fette hym CMGREGOR-M4,160.751

and mette whythe hym at Merton , CMGREGOR-M4,160.752

and broughte hym to Westemyster . CMGREGOR-M4,160.753

And in the kyngys palys he was loggyd , and my lady hys wyffe and the
Byschoppe of Wynchester in the abbay faste by hym . CMGREGOR-M4,160.754

And the mayre with the cytte gaf my lorde of Bedforde a payre of
basonnys of sylvyr over_gylte , and M=l= marke in them to hys welcome .
CMGREGOR-M4,160.755

And yet they hadde but lytylle thanke . CMGREGOR-M4,160.756

Ande the xxj day of Feverer be_ganne the counsel at Synt Albonys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,160.757

but there hyt was enjornyd unto Northehampton . CMGREGOR-M4,160.758

And the xxv day of Marche nexte aftyr be-ganne the Parlyment at Layceter
, CMGREGOR-M4,160.759

and that induryd unto the fyrste day of June , CMGREGOR-M4,160.760

and every man was warnyd and i-cryde thoroughe the towne that they
shulde leve hyr wepyn yn hyr ynnys , that ys to saye , hyr swerdys and
bokelers , bowys and arowys . CMGREGOR-M4,160.761

And thenne the pepylle toke grete battys in hyr neckys
CMGREGOR-M4,160.762

and so they wentte . CMGREGOR-M4,160.763

The nexte day they were chargyde that they shulde leve hyr battys at hyr
ynnys , CMGREGOR-M4,160.764

and thenne they toke grete stonys yn hyr bosomys and hyr slyvys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,160.765

and so they wennte to the Parlyment with hyr lordys .
CMGREGOR-M4,160.766

Ande thys Parlyment sum men callyd the Parlyment of Battys .
CMGREGOR-M4,160.767

And at thys Parlyment was the kyng made knyght , and xxxv moo whythe hym
of lordys and lordys sonys . CMGREGOR-M4,160.768

Fryste my Lorde of Yorke , the Erle of Oxynforde , and hys brother , the
sone and the eyre of the Duke of Northefolke , the sone and the ayre of
the Erle of Urmounde , the sone of the Lorde Hungerford , and Syr John
Chaynye , Chyffe Justysse of the Kyngys Benche , Syr Wylliam Babyngton ,
Chyffe Justys of the Comyn Place , and Syr John June , the Chyffe Baron
<P_161> of the Kyngys Chekyr , and many mo , to the nombyr above sayde .
CMGREGOR-M4,161.769

And the fyrste day of Juylle be-ganne the counselle at London at
Westemyster , CMGREGOR-M4,161.770

ande duryd fully iij wekys . CMGREGOR-M4,161.771

Ande the same yere , the xxviij day of Novembyr , deyde the Countasse of
Huntyngdon at the Colde Herborowe , in London , CMGREGOR-M4,161.772

and she ys buryd at the Fryer Prechowrys at Ludgate .
CMGREGOR-M4,161.773

Ande same yere , the vj daye of Marche , Arthure of Bretayne with othyr
lordys , the nombyr of x._m=l=. knyghtys and squyers , made a saute to
the towne of Synt Jakys de Bouerne . CMGREGOR-M4,161.774

Ande there were slayne of hem a_m=l=_and_v_c of men of armys , of the
whiche were viij_c legge harnys with hyr cote armourys one of hem .
CMGREGOR-M4,161.775

And he toke alle hyr ordynauns of gonnys and alle hyr vytayle , with
alle the othyr stoffe that was at the sege , that is to saye , xiiij
gonnys , with the powdrys , and iij_c pypys of wyne , and ij_c pypys of
brede and floure , and a_m=l=. panyers with fyggys and raysonys , and
herynge , and othyr stuffe of pavys and tentys , &c.
CMGREGOR-M4,161.776

<heading>

John Raynewelle , the goode Mayre of the cytte of London
CMGREGOR-M4,161.778

Robert Arnolde CMGREGOR-M4,161.779

John Hygham CMGREGOR-M4,161.780

A=o= v=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,161.781

<$$heading>

Ande that yere John Duke of Bedforde and Regaunte of Fraunce wennte in
to Fraunce agayne , and the Byschoppe of Wynchester whythe hym ,
CMGREGOR-M4,161.783

and they londyd at Calys . CMGREGOR-M4,161.784

And ther the Byschoppe of Wynchester was made Cardynalle upon oure Lady
Daye in Lentyn , in Saynt Mary chyrche . CMGREGOR-M4,161.785

Ande there was grete solempnyte , CMGREGOR-M4,161.786

for there come two legatys CMGREGOR-M4,161.787

and broughte hys bullys and hys hatte from the Pope CMGREGOR-M4,161.788

and the Regaunt set on hys hatte ond hys hedde . CMGREGOR-M4,161.789

Ande that same yere a theffe that was i-callyd Wille Wawe was hangyd at
Tyborne . CMGREGOR-M4,161.790

And that yere was smytte owte many buttys of Romnaye of Lumbardys makyng
in dyvers placys of the Cytte , CMGREGOR-M4,161.791

for they were corrupte and also they very pyson , &c.
CMGREGOR-M4,161.792

Ande that same yere , the xiiij day of Juylle , cam the Erle of
Saulysbury in to London owte of Fraunce . CMGREGOR-M4,161.793

And that yere there <P_162> was a Parlyment at Westemyster ,
CMGREGOR-M4,162.794

and that beganne a Synt Edwardys day in Lent . CMGREGOR-M4,162.795

And that yere the towre on the draught brygge of London was be-gonne .
CMGREGOR-M4,162.796

And the Mayre layde the fyrste stone , and mo othyr aldyrmen with hym .
CMGREGOR-M4,162.797

<heading>

John Gedney , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,162.799

Robert Otle CMGREGOR-M4,162.800

Harry Frowyke CMGREGOR-M4,162.801

Anno vj=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,162.802

<$$heading>

Ande that yere the Erle of Warwyke com home in to Inglonde owte of
Fraunce , CMGREGOR-M4,162.804

and he was made governer of the kynge . CMGREGOR-M4,162.805

Ande that yere the Pope sende into Inglond , and in to alle Crystyn
londys , a pardon ayenste the erytekys the whyche were in the londe of
Hungery , yn the cytte of Prage ; the whyche pardon was that $men shulde
every Sonday in the begynnyng of every monythe shulde goo in processyon
, whythe vij Psalmys and the Letany , CMGREGOR-M4,162.806

and they shulde have a_c dayes of pardon unto the same processyon .
CMGREGOR-M4,162.807

The kyng and the quene , and alle othyr lordys spyrytualle & temporalle
, wentt on processyon thoroughe London the ij day of June .
CMGREGOR-M4,162.808

And that same day the Erle of Saulysbury toke hys jornaye towarde
Fraunce the secunde tyme ; CMGREGOR-M4,162.809

and he schyppyd at Sondewyche , CMGREGOR-M4,162.810

and he londyd in Normandy , CMGREGOR-M4,162.811

and wente forthe unto Orlyaunce , CMGREGOR-M4,162.812

and there he layde sege unto the towne as hyt ys a-bove sayde .
CMGREGOR-M4,162.813

Ande that same yere , the fyrste of September , the Cardynalle and
Byschoppe of Wynchester came yn to Ingelonde , and soo to London ;
CMGREGOR-M4,162.814

and he was ressayvyd there worthely and ryally of the mayre and of alle
hys bretheryn , CMGREGOR-M4,162.815

for they roode and fette hym yn to the cytte of London , ande the
spyrytualle party whythe processyon . CMGREGOR-M4,162.816

And +tat yere hyt was a wete somer CMGREGOR-M4,162.817

for hyt raynyd for the moste party from oure Lady Day in Lentyn unto the
feste of Mychelmas nexte folowynge . CMGREGOR-M4,162.818

And that yere there was a grete morayne of bestys , and pryncypally of
schyppe , for the more party of alle Inglonde , CMGREGOR-M4,162.819

for sheppe deyde ynne every contray of Ingelonde . CMGREGOR-M4,162.820

<heading>

Harry Barton , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,162.822

Thomas Dufhous CMGREGOR-M4,162.823

John Abbotte CMGREGOR-M4,162.824

Anno vij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,162.825

<$$heading>

<P_163>

Ande that same yere , the xxx day of October , there was a grette fyre
at Baynardeys Castelle , the whyche fyre dyde moche harme .
CMGREGOR-M4,163.828

And the viij day of Novembyr the Duke of Northefolke wolde have rowyde
thoroughe the brygge of London , CMGREGOR-M4,163.829

and hys barge was rentte agayne the arche of the sayde brygge ,
CMGREGOR-M4,163.830

and there were drownyde many men , the nombyr of xxx personys and moo of
gentylmen and goode yemen . CMGREGOR-M4,163.831

Ande the same yere , the xxx day of October , the Erle of Saulysbury was
hurte at the sege of Orlyaunce beforesayde , CMGREGOR-M4,163.832

and the secunde day of Novembyr he dyde . CMGREGOR-M4,163.833

Ande the fyrste Sonday of Advente he was enteryde at Poulys by the
Cardynalle of Wynchester and ij Arche-byschoppys , one of Cantyrbury and
that othyr of Yorke , that tyme beynge in London . CMGREGOR-M4,163.834

And the secunde daye of Advente there were ij heretykys objuryd atte
Poulys Crosse , and the iij herytyke commyttyde to preson ,
CMGREGOR-M4,163.835

for he was convycte . CMGREGOR-M4,163.836

And that same yere the bonys of Mayster John Wykclyffe were take uppe
and brentte at Lutterworthe in Layceter schyre there that he was buryde
. CMGREGOR-M4,163.837

And thys was done by the commaundement of +te pope and alle hys clargye
. CMGREGOR-M4,163.838

And the xij evyn aftyr was i-broughte unto London , CMGREGOR-M4,163.839

and hadde hys masse at Poulys , and hys bonys buryde at Birsham .
CMGREGOR-M4,163.840

Ande the same yere , the xij day of Feverer , Syr John Fastolfe , Syr
Thomas Ramston , and Syr John Salveyne , toke and slowe the nombyr of
viij_schore Schottys of cote armyvorys , CMGREGOR-M4,163.841

and toke iiij_c Dolfynnys mayne that were towarde Orlyaunce for to have
brokyn the sege , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,163.842

And that same yere the Duke of Burbone was sworne Englysche in the
kyngys manyr of Eltam besyde Grenewyche . CMGREGOR-M4,163.843

And the xxj day of Feverer Syr Rycharde Nevyle was made Erle of
Saulysbury . CMGREGOR-M4,163.844

And that same yere there was a stronge thefe that was namyd Bolton was
drawe , hanggyd , and i-quarteryde . CMGREGOR-M4,163.845

And that same <P_164> yere there was a ryche wedowe i-slayne at Whyte
Chapylle ; CMGREGOR-M4,164.846

and the same theffe that kylde hyr fledde to Syn Gorgys yn Sowtheworke ;
CMGREGOR-M4,164.847

and the Fryday nexte folowynge he for-swore the londe ;
CMGREGOR-M4,164.848

and he was a-sygnyd the same way that he slowe the woman ,
CMGREGOR-M4,164.849

and there wemmen mette with hym CMGREGOR-M4,164.850

and slowe hym in the waye by_twyne the Whyte Chapylle and Algate .
CMGREGOR-M4,164.851

Ande the same yere , the v day of June , there was a fryer i-slayne in
the Towre of London , and the person of the same Towre with hym also .
CMGREGOR-M4,164.852

And that yere hyt was a dyre yere of corne and pryncypally of whete and
of alle maner of vytayle , CMGREGOR-M4,164.853

for a buschelle of whete was worthe xx d . CMGREGOR-M4,164.854

And that same yere , in the monythe of May , was the sege of Orlyaunce
i-broke with the Pusylle , Bastarde of Burbon , and othyr Armynackys .
CMGREGOR-M4,164.855

And there was slayne the Lorde Molaynys , and Glasdale , squyer , and
many moo worthy men . CMGREGOR-M4,164.856

And the x day of June the Erle of Sowthefolke brothyr , and the Lorde of
Ponyngys sone hys ayre , were slayne at a jornaye be-syde Orlyaunce ,
CMGREGOR-M4,164.857

and the Lorde Talbot , and the Lorde Schalys , and Syr Thomas Ramston
were takyn , CMGREGOR-M4,164.858

and the erlys brother of Sowthefolke was slayne , and many mo othyr ,
&c. CMGREGOR-M4,164.859

Ande the xxij day of June the Cardynalle of Wynchester toke hys jornay ,
CMGREGOR-M4,164.860

and was purposyd into the londe of Beame ; CMGREGOR-M4,164.861

but he cam not there , CMGREGOR-M4,164.862

but bode stylle yn Fraunce whythe the Regaunte that tyme .
CMGREGOR-M4,164.863

And on Synte Petrys day aftyr Syr John Radeclyffe wentte unto Fraunce
unto the Regaunte with a nothyr mayny . CMGREGOR-M4,164.864

And the same yere , the xxij day of Septembyr , be-gan the Parlyment at
Westemyster , CMGREGOR-M4,164.865

and hyt duryde unto the xxiij day of Feverer nexte folowynge ; in the
whyche Parlyment was grauntyd that John Raynewelle shulde be mayre of
the stapylle of Callys iij yere folowynge . CMGREGOR-M4,164.866

<heading>

Wylliam Estefylde , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,164.868

Wylliam Russe CMGREGOR-M4,164.869

Raulyn Holande CMGREGOR-M4,164.870

A=o= viij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,164.871

<$$heading>

Ande that yere , the vj day of Novembyr , the yere of oure Lorde
a_M=l=._cccc._xxix and the Sonday letter or Dominical letter B , Kyng
<P_165> Harry the vj was crownyd at Westemyster on Syn Lenardys day .
CMGREGOR-M4,165.873

And at the coronacyon was made xxxij knyghtys of the Bathe ;
CMGREGOR-M4,165.874

and on the morne aftyr the Pryncys sone of Portynggale was made knyghte
in the Whyte Halle at Westemyster . CMGREGOR-M4,165.875

Nowe of the solempnyte of the coronacyon . CMGREGOR-M4,165.876

Alle the prelatys wente on processyon beryng eche of hem a certayne
relyke ; CMGREGOR-M4,165.877

and the Pryor of Westemyster bare a rodde callyde Virga regia ,
CMGREGOR-M4,165.878

ande the Abbot of Westemyster bare the kyngys ceptoure .
CMGREGOR-M4,165.879

And my Lorde of Warwyke bare the kynge to chyrche in a clothe of
scharlet furryd , evyn as the newe knyghtys of the Bathe wente whythe
furryde hoodys with menyver . CMGREGOR-M4,165.880

And thenne he was led up in to the hyghe schaffold , whyche schaffolde
was coveryd alle with saye by_twyne the hyghe auter and the quere .
CMGREGOR-M4,165.881

And there the kyng was sette in hys sete in the myddys of the schaffold
there , beholdynge the pepylle alle a-boute saddely and wysely .
CMGREGOR-M4,165.882

Thenne the Arche-byschoppe of Cantyrbury made a proclamacyon at the iiij
quarterys of schaffolde , sayynge in thys wyse : " Syrys , here comythe
Harry , Kyng Harry the v ys sone , humylyche to God and Hooly Chyrche ,
askynge the crowne of $thys realme by ryght and dyscent of herytage .
CMGREGOR-M4,165.883

Yf ye holde you welle plesyd with alle and wylle be plesyd with hym ,
say you nowe , ye ! CMGREGOR-M4,165.884

and holde uppe youre hondys " CMGREGOR-M4,165.885

And thenne alle the pepylle cryde with oo voyce , " Ye ! ye ! "
CMGREGOR-M4,165.886

Thenne the kynge went unto the hyghe auter , CMGREGOR-M4,165.887

and humely layde hym downe prostrate , hys hedde to the auter warde ,
longe tyme lyyng stylle . CMGREGOR-M4,165.888

Thenne the arche-byscoppys and byschoppys stode rounde a-boute hym ,
CMGREGOR-M4,165.889

and radde exercysyons ovyr hym , CMGREGOR-M4,165.890

and many antemys i-song by note . CMGREGOR-M4,165.891

And thenne the arche-byschoppes wente to hym CMGREGOR-M4,165.892

and strypte hym owte of hys clothys in to hys schyrte .
CMGREGOR-M4,165.893

And there was yn hys schyrte a thynge lyke grene taffata , whyche was
i-lasyd at iiij placys of hym . CMGREGOR-M4,165.894

Thenne was he layde a downe a_yenne , CMGREGOR-M4,165.895

and helyd hym with hys owne clothys yn the same maner a-fore sayde .
CMGREGOR-M4,165.896

And thenne the Byschoppe of Chester and of Rouchester songe <P_166> a
letany ovyr hym . CMGREGOR-M4,166.897

And the Arche-byschoppe of Cantyrbury radde many colettys ovyr hym .
CMGREGOR-M4,166.898

Thenne the arche-byschoppys toke hym uppe a_gayne CMGREGOR-M4,166.899

and unlasyd hym , CMGREGOR-M4,166.900

and a-noyntyd hym . Fyrste hys bryste and hys ij tetys , and the myddys
of hys backe , and hys hedde , alle a-crosse hys ij schylderys , hys ij
elbowys , hys pamys of hys hondys ; CMGREGOR-M4,166.901

and thenne they layde a certayne softe thynge as cotton to alle the
placys a-noyntyd ; CMGREGOR-M4,166.902

and on hys hedde they putt on a whyte coyffe of sylke .
CMGREGOR-M4,166.903

And so he wentte viij dayes ; CMGREGOR-M4,166.904

and at the viij dayes the byschoppys dyde wasche hit a-waye with whyte
wyne i-warmyd leuke_warme . CMGREGOR-M4,166.905

And the knyghtys of the Garter helde a clothe of a-state ovyr hym alle
the whyle of his waschynge . CMGREGOR-M4,166.906

To the fyrste processe , aftyr the oyntynge he layde hym doune prostrate
a-gayne . CMGREGOR-M4,166.907

Thenne the arche-byschoppys raddyn solempne colettys with a solempne
prefas . CMGREGOR-M4,166.908

And thenne they toke hym up a-gayne CMGREGOR-M4,166.909

and putte a-pon hym a goune of scharlette whythe a pane of ermyn , and
Synt Edwarde ys sporys , CMGREGOR-M4,166.910

and toke hym hys cepter in hys honde , and the kyngys yerde i-callyd
Virga regia in hys othyr honde , sayyng there-with , Reges eos in virga
ferrea , &c. , he syttyng thenne in a chayre by_fore the hyghe auter .
CMGREGOR-M4,166.911

And thenne alle the byschoppys seseden with a swerde , they alle
syttynge there hondys thereon , ande alle they saynge thes wordys thys
to hym , Accingere gladio tuo super femur tuum potentissime .
CMGREGOR-M4,166.912

And at every tyme the kyng answeryd CMGREGOR-M4,166.913

and sayde , Observabo . CMGREGOR-M4,166.914

Thenne toke they the swerde a_gayne fro hym , CMGREGOR-M4,166.915

and layde the swerde on the hyghe auter . CMGREGOR-M4,166.916

Thenne bought the kyng hys swerde a_gayne of Holy Chyrche for an_c s.
in signe and in tokyn that the vertu and power sholde come fyrste fro
Hooly Chyrche . CMGREGOR-M4,166.917

Thenne sette they on hys hedde Synt Edwarde ys crowne .
CMGREGOR-M4,166.918

Thenne rose he owte of hys chayre CMGREGOR-M4,166.919

and layde hym downe prostrate a_gayne . CMGREGOR-M4,166.920

And there the byschoppys sayde ovyr hym many hooly colettys .
CMGREGOR-M4,166.921

And thenne they toke hym up CMGREGOR-M4,166.922

and dyspoylyd hym of hys gere a-yen , CMGREGOR-M4,166.923

and thenne a-rayde hym as a byschoppe that sholde synge a masse , with a
dalmadyke lyke unto <P_167> a tunycule with a stole a_bowte hys necke ,
not crossyd , and a_pon hys fete a payre of sandellys as a byschoppe ,
and a cope and glovys lyke a byschoppe ; CMGREGOR-M4,167.924

and thenne sette a_yen on hys hedde Synt Edwarde ys crowne ,
CMGREGOR-M4,167.925

and layde hym a-pon the schaffolde CMGREGOR-M4,167.926

and sette hym a sete of hys astate , and ij byschoppys stondyng on every
syde of hym , helpyng hym to bere the crowne , CMGREGOR-M4,167.927

for hyt was ovyr hevy for hym , CMGREGOR-M4,167.928

for he was of a tendyr age . CMGREGOR-M4,167.929

And then they be-ganne the masse , CMGREGOR-M4,167.930

and the Arche-byschoppe of Cauntyrbury songe the masse .
CMGREGOR-M4,167.931

And a nothyr byschop radde the pystylle . CMGREGOR-M4,167.932

And the Byschoppe of Worsethyr radde the gospelle at the auter .
CMGREGOR-M4,167.933

And at the offretory come the kynge downe CMGREGOR-M4,167.934

and made the oblacyon of brede and wyne , there whythe offerynge a
pounde weyght of golde , the whiche contaynyd xvj marke of nobbelys .
CMGREGOR-M4,167.935

And thenne wente he uppe agayne in to the schaffolde CMGREGOR-M4,167.936

and satte there in hys sete tylle the iij Angus Dei ,
CMGREGOR-M4,167.937

and thenne he come downe agayne CMGREGOR-M4,167.938

and layde hym downe prostrate , sayng there hys Confyteor ,
CMGREGOR-M4,167.939

and alle the prelatys sayde Miscreator . CMGREGOR-M4,167.940

And thenne he sate uppe , knelynge with humylyte and grete devocyon ,
ressayvyng the iij parte of the holy sacrament apon the paten of the
chalys of the Arche-byschoppe handys . CMGREGOR-M4,167.941

Thenne there come the Byschoppe of London with the grete solempne chalys
of Synt Edwarde and servyd hym whythe wyne ; the whyche chalis by Synt
Edwarde ys dayes was praysyd at xxx_M=l= marke ; CMGREGOR-M4,167.942

and the Cardenalle of Wynchester and a nothyr byschoppe helde to hym the
towelle of sylke ; CMGREGOR-M4,167.943

and so he knelyd stylle tylle mas was i-doo . CMGREGOR-M4,167.944

Thenne rosse he up a-gayne CMGREGOR-M4,167.945

an yede a-fore the schryne , CMGREGOR-M4,167.946

and there was he dyspoylyde of alle the ornamentys that he weryde , lyke
the ornamentys of a byschoppe , as hyt was sayde by-fore ;
CMGREGOR-M4,167.947

and thenne he was a-rayde lyke a kynge in a ryche clothe of golde , with
a crowne sette on hys hedde , whyche crowne Kynge Rycharde hadde made
for hym selfe . CMGREGOR-M4,167.948

And so the kynge was ladde thoroughe the palys yn to the halle , and
alle the newe knyghtys be-fore hym in hyr a-raye of scharlette ; and
thenne all the othyr lordys comynge aftyr hym ; CMGREGOR-M4,167.949

thenne come the othyr <P_168> lordys comynge aftyr hem .
CMGREGOR-M4,168.950

Thenne come the chaunceler with hys crosse bare_heddyd ;
CMGREGOR-M4,168.951

and aftyr hym come the cardenelle with hys crosse in hys abyte lyke a
chanon yn a garment of rede chamelett , furryd whythe whyte menyver .
CMGREGOR-M4,168.952

And thenne folowyde the Kynge , CMGREGOR-M4,168.953

and he was ladde by-twyne the Byschoppe of Dyrham and the Byschoppe of
Bathe ; CMGREGOR-M4,168.954

and my goode Lorde of Warwyke bare uppe his trayne .
CMGREGOR-M4,168.955

And byfore hym rode my Lorde of Saulysbury as Constabylle of Ingelonde
in my Lorde of Bedforde hys stede , and thenne my Lorde of Glouceter as
Stywarde of Inglonde . CMGREGOR-M4,168.956

And aftyr hym rode the Duke of Northefolke as Marchalle of Ingelonde .
CMGREGOR-M4,168.957

And before the kynge iiij lordys bare iiij swerdys , ij in there
schaberdys and ij nakyde . CMGREGOR-M4,168.958

And one $was poynteles of the iiij swerdys above sayde .
CMGREGOR-M4,168.959

And as they $were syttyng at mete the kynge kepte hys astate .
CMGREGOR-M4,168.960

Ande on the ryght honde sate the Cardynalle whythe a lower astate ;
CMGREGOR-M4,168.961

and on the lyfte syde sate the chaunceler and a byschoppe of Fraunce ,
and noo moo at that tabylle . CMGREGOR-M4,168.962

And on the ryght honde of the halle at that borde kepte the baronys of
the Fyffe portys , and soo forthe , clerkes of the Chaunsery ;
CMGREGOR-M4,168.963

and on the lefte honde sate the Mayre of London and hys aldyrmen , and
othyr worthy comynerys of the cytte of London . CMGREGOR-M4,168.964

Ande in the myddys of the halle sate the byschoppys , and justysys , and
worthy knyghtys , and squyers , CMGREGOR-M4,168.965

and soo fyllyde bothe the myddylle tabyllys of the halle .
CMGREGOR-M4,168.966

And at the ryght honde of the halle , uppon a schaffolde , stode the
kyngys of harowdys alle the mete tyme in hyr cote armorys and hyr
crownys in hyr heddys . CMGREGOR-M4,168.967

Ande at the fyrste course they come downe CMGREGOR-M4,168.968

and wente by_fore the kyngys champyon , Syr Phylyppe Dymmoke , that rode
in the halle i-armyde clene as Syn Jorge . CMGREGOR-M4,168.969

And he proclaymyd in the iiij quarterys of the halle that the kynge was
ryghtefulle ayre to the crowne of Ingelonde , CMGREGOR-M4,168.970

and what maner man +tat wolde nay hyt , he was redy for to defende hyt
as hys knyghte and hys champyon . CMGREGOR-M4,168.971

Ande by that offyce he holdythe hys londys , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,168.972

<P_169>

<heading>

The fyrste course that was i-servyd yn to the halle before the kynge .
CMGREGOR-M4,169.975

<$$heading>

The fyrste that come yn was a berys hedde , enarmyde in a castelle
ryalle . Furmenty with venson . Vyant ryalle gylte . Grosse chare .
Swanne . Capyn stewyde . Hayryn . Grete pyke . Rede lesche whythe a
whyte lyon crownyde there yn . Custarde ryalle with a lybarde of golde
sette there ynne holdyng a flowredelys . Frytoure like a son , a
floure_de_lysse there yn . Ande a sotelte , Synt Edwarde and Synt Lewys
armyd in hyr cotys of armys , bryngyng thys yong kyng , Harry the vj ,
in fygure y-armyde by_twyne hem two , in hys cote of armys , whythe thys
reson : CMGREGOR-M4,169.977

{COM:poetry_omitted}

<heading>

The secunde coursse unto the kynge syttynge in the halle .
CMGREGOR-M4,169.980

<$$heading>

Viaunde blanke . Gely wrytyn and notyd , Te Deum laudamus . Pygge in
doory . Crane . Byttore . Cony . Chykynnys endoryd . Parteryche .
Pecoke . Grete breme ; leche whythe an antloppe crownyde there yn , and
schynynge as golde . Flampayne pouderyde with lybardys and
flowredelyssys of golde . Frytoure . Custarde . A lybarde ys hedde
why+te ij esterygys fetherys . And a sotellete , - The Emperoure and
Kynge Harry the v=te= in mantellys of garterys , bryngyng yn Kyng Harry
the vj=te= yn the same sute , whythe thys reson imperyalle :
CMGREGOR-M4,169.982

{COM:poetry_omitted}

<P_170>

<heading>

The thyrde course of thys ryalle feste in to the halle .
CMGREGOR-M4,170.986

<$$heading>

Quynsys in composte . Blaundsore . Veneson rostyde . Egretys .
Curlewys rostyde . Wodekocke . Ploverys . Quaylys . Snytys . Grete
bryddys . Larkys . Grete crabbys . Lesche i-made as vyolet colourys .
Bakemetes . Chekynnys , i-pouderyde with losyngys , gylte whythe the
flourys of borage . Frytoure cryspe . A sotelte , - Owre Lady syttynge
, and hyr Chylde in hyr lappe , holdyng in every honde a crowne , Syn
Gorge knelyng on that one syde and Synt Denys in that othyr syde , and
they ij presentyng the kynge to owre Lady whythe thys reson :
CMGREGOR-M4,170.988

{COM:poetry_omitted}

<P_171>

Ande that yere there was a Parlyment at Westemyster ,
CMGREGOR-M4,171.991

and that be_gan the xxij day of Septembyr CMGREGOR-M4,171.992

and hyt duryd unto the xxiij day of Feverer nexte folowynge .
CMGREGOR-M4,171.993

And in that Parlyment was grauntyde ij fyftenys to brynge thys yonge
kynge in to Fraunce . CMGREGOR-M4,171.994

And that same yere , the xx day of Janyver , there was an erytyke , one
Rycharde Hundenne , wolpacker , brent at Toure Hylle .
CMGREGOR-M4,171.995

And the xxiiij day of the same monythe there was a batylle in
Smethefylde by_twyne two men of Fevyrsham , that on John Upton ,
pellaunte , and that othyr John Downe , fendaunte . CMGREGOR-M4,171.996

And on Syn Mathewys daye , in Feverer , the kynge toke hys leve of the
cytte of London , CMGREGOR-M4,171.997

and he rode thoroughe London unto Eltham towarde Fraunce .
CMGREGOR-M4,171.998

And that yere the kynge helde hys Ester at Cauntylbury .
CMGREGOR-M4,171.999

And in Syn Gorgys day in the mornyng the kyng schippyd in the mornyng ,
CMGREGOR-M4,171.1000

and he londyd at Calys the same daye at x of the belle be_fore none
whythe hys lordys . CMGREGOR-M4,171.1001

And the xxiij day of the monythe of May the Pusylle was takyn be_fore
Compayne by the Duke of Burgayne . CMGREGOR-M4,171.1002

And the xxx day of May the Arche_byschoppe of Burdowys dyde in the
wyntyr in London , CMGREGOR-M4,171.1003

and he ys buryd at Whythe Freers in Flete Strete . CMGREGOR-M4,171.1004

And in the monythe of Auguste , the iij day , deyde the Contasse of
Urmonde be_syde Schene , CMGREGOR-M4,171.1005

and the viij day of the same monythe she was broughte to London
CMGREGOR-M4,171.1006

and ys buryde at Syn Thomas of Acrys . CMGREGOR-M4,171.1007

And that yere there come enbassytourys oute of Spayne and also oute of
Portynggale for to trete whythe oure kynge . CMGREGOR-M4,171.1008

<heading>

Nicholas Wotton , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,171.1010

Watyr Chyrchesey CMGREGOR-M4,171.1011

Robert Large CMGREGOR-M4,171.1012

A=o= ix=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,171.1013

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere , the xiij day of Janyver , be-gan the Parlyment at
Westemyster . CMGREGOR-M4,171.1015

And the xix daye of the same monythe come the bonys of the Lord Bowcer
to London CMGREGOR-M4,171.1016

and they ben buryde at Westemyster . CMGREGOR-M4,171.1017

Ande the same yere com enbassystourys from the Kyng of Scottys unto the
Parlyment for to trete of pes bytwyne Ingelonde and Schotlonde .
CMGREGOR-M4,171.1018

Also the same yere , the secund day of Marche , there was an erytyke
i-brente in <P_172> Smethefylde whas name was Mayster Thomas Bagle .
CMGREGOR-M4,172.1019

And the xx day of the same monythe endyd the Parlyment above sayde .
CMGREGOR-M4,172.1020

And that yere in Lentyn deyde Pope Martyn . CMGREGOR-M4,172.1021

And at Estyr aftyrwarde the Erle of Perche of Mortenne , the Lorde of
Fewater , ande the Lorde of Audeley , wente in to Fraunce with a new
retenewe to the kyng ; CMGREGOR-M4,172.1022

in the secunde day of May wente the Cardynalle of Wynchester in to
Fraunce , the Byschoppe of Northewyche and the Lorde Cromewelle whythe a
nothyr mayny ; CMGREGOR-M4,172.1023

and the ij day of June aftyr went the Erle of Salysbury in to Fraunce
whythe a fulle fayre mayny . CMGREGOR-M4,172.1024

Ande that yere there was on namyd hym selfe Jacke Sharpe that wolde have
made a rysynge in the cytte of London , CMGREGOR-M4,172.1025

for he wolde have take owte the temperalteys of Hooly Chyrche ;
CMGREGOR-M4,172.1026

but the xix day of May he was take at Oxforde and v moo of secte ,
CMGREGOR-M4,172.1027

and whythe_yn fewe dayes he was drawyd , hangyde , and quarteryde , and
hys hede sete on London Brygge , and hys quarterys i-sent to dyvers
townys of Ingelonde , as to Oxforde , Abyngdon , and to moo othyr .
CMGREGOR-M4,172.1028

And sum of his felowys were takyn at Covyntre , CMGREGOR-M4,172.1029

and there they were drawe , hangyd , and quarteryd ;
CMGREGOR-M4,172.1030

and a woman was be-heddyd at the galous . CMGREGOR-M4,172.1031

Ande the xxiij day of May the Pusylle was brent at Rone ,
CMGREGOR-M4,172.1032

and that was a_pon Corpus Crysty evyn . CMGREGOR-M4,172.1033

And the xxiij day of Julyy there was one Russelle i-drawe , hanggyd ,
and quarteryde , CMGREGOR-M4,172.1034

and hys hedde was sette on Londyn Brygge , and hys quarterys in dyvers
placys in London ; CMGREGOR-M4,172.1035

for he wolde have made newe lordys , dukys , erlys , and baronys , aftyr
hys entente & hys oppynyon , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,172.1036

Ande the same yere , in the monythe of Juylle , the xvij day , the
posterne be-syde the Towre sanke downe into the erthe vij fote and more
. CMGREGOR-M4,172.1037

And the same yere , the xj day of Auguste , the Erle of Warwyke , the
Erle of Stafforde , slowe and toke a grete nombyr of pepylle be-syde
Bevys ; CMGREGOR-M4,172.1038

and ther was take on Potyn and a scheparde that was namyd le Bergere ,
CMGREGOR-M4,172.1039

and he namyd hym sylfe hooly and a saynte , CMGREGOR-M4,172.1040

for the Fraynysche men hadde a be-leve on <P_173> hym that yf he hadde
layde hys honde on a castelle walle that hyt shulde have fallyn downe by
the power of hys holynys . CMGREGOR-M4,173.1041

<heading>

John Wellys , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,173.1043

John Adyrley CMGREGOR-M4,173.1044

Stevyn Browne CMGREGOR-M4,173.1045

Anno x=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,173.1046

<$$heading>

Ande that yere the kyng passyde the see in to Fraunce ,
CMGREGOR-M4,173.1048

and wente unto Parysse ; CMGREGOR-M4,173.1049

and he come thedyr the thyrde day of Decembyr . CMGREGOR-M4,173.1050

And the xiij day of the same monythe he was crownyde at Parysse ;
CMGREGOR-M4,173.1051

for there he was worthely and ryally ressayvyd as they cowthe devyse
whythe alle the statys of the towne . CMGREGOR-M4,173.1052

And there he hylde hys feste raylly to alle maner of nacyons that were
in that contre , that yf hyt plesyde hem thedyr for to come .
CMGREGOR-M4,173.1053

And in Syn Johnys day in the Crystysmasse weke the kynge remevyd towarde
Roone , CMGREGOR-M4,173.1054

and on the xij evyn he come unto Calys . CMGREGOR-M4,173.1055

Ande the xxix day of Janyver he londyd at Dovyr . CMGREGOR-M4,173.1056

And yn Syn Volantynys day he come unto London ; CMGREGOR-M4,173.1057

and he was worthely fette in to the cytte whythe the mayre and hys
aldyrmen whythe alle the worthy comyns of the cytte and every crafte in
hyr devys . CMGREGOR-M4,173.1058

And whenne the kynge come to Londyn Brygge there was made a towre , and
there yn stondynge a gyaunte welle arayde and welle be-sene , whythe a
swerde holdynge uppe on hye , sayynge thys reson in Latyn ,
CMGREGOR-M4,173.1059

Inimicos ejus induam confusione . CMGREGOR-M4,173.1060

And on every syde of hym stode an antiloppe , that one holdynge the
armys of Ingelond and that othyr the armys of Fraunce .
CMGREGOR-M4,173.1061

Ande at the drawe_brygge there was a nothyr ryalle toure , there yn
stondynge iij empryssys ryally arayde , whythe crownys on hyr heddys ,
the whyche namys folowyn here : CMGREGOR-M4,173.1062

fyrste , Nature ; the secunde , Grace ; the thyrde , Fortune ,
presentyng hym whythe gyftys of grace . CMGREGOR-M4,173.1063

The fyrste gaffe hym Scyence an Cunnynge , CMGREGOR-M4,173.1064

and the secunde gaffe hym Prosperyte and Ryches . CMGREGOR-M4,173.1065

And on the ryght syde of the emperyssys stode vij fayre maydyns clothyde
alle in whyte , i-powderyde whythe sonnys of golde , presentynge the
kyng whythe vij gyftys of the Holy Goste in the lykenys of vij whyte
dovys by fygure owtwarde , whythe thys resonys : CMGREGOR-M4,173.1066

Impleat te Dominus spiritu a sapiencie <P_174> et intellectus , spiritu
consilij fortitudinis , sciencie et pietatys , spiritu timorys Domini .
CMGREGOR-M4,174.1067

And on the lyfte syde of thes emperysse stode vij othyr fayre maydyns in
whythe , powderyde whythe sterrys of golde , presentyng the kyng whythe
vij gyftys of worschyppe . CMGREGOR-M4,174.1068

The fyrste was a crowne of glorye , the seconde with a cepter of
clennysse , the iij whythe a swyrde of ryght and vyctorye , the iiij
whythe a mantelle of prudence , the v whythe a schylde of faythe , the
vj an helme of helme , the vij a gyrdylle of love and of parfyte pes .
CMGREGOR-M4,174.1069

And thys maydens song an hevynly songe unto the kynge of praysynge and
of hys vyctorye and welle comynge home . CMGREGOR-M4,174.1070

And whenne he come unto Cornehylle , there yn the vij scyence , and
every scyence schewynge hys propyr comyng wondyrly i-wroughte .
CMGREGOR-M4,174.1071

And whenne he come to the Condyte of Cornhylle there was a tabernacule ,
and there yn syttynge a kynge whythe a ryalle aparayle .
CMGREGOR-M4,174.1072

And on the ryght syde sate the lady of Mercy , CMGREGOR-M4,174.1073

ande on the lyfte syde sate the lady of Troughthe , and the lady of
Clennysse hem inbrasyng with Reson . CMGREGOR-M4,174.1074

And by-fore the kyng stode ij jugys of grete worthynys , whythe viij
sergauntys of lawe ther presente for the comyn profyte representynge of
dome and of ryghtuysnysse , with thys scryptura , CMGREGOR-M4,174.1075

{COM:poetry_omitted}

And so the kyng rode forthe an esy passe tylle he come unto the Grete
Condyte , CMGREGOR-M4,174.1077

ande there was made a ryalle syghte lyke unto Paradys , whythe alle
maner of frontys of delys . CMGREGOR-M4,174.1078

And there were vyrgynnys there , drawyng waterys and wynys of joye , and
of plesaunce and comforte , the whyche ranne to every mannys comforte
and helthe . CMGREGOR-M4,174.1079

Thes maydyns were namyd : Mercy , Grace , and Pytte .
CMGREGOR-M4,174.1080

And in thys Paradys stode ij olde men lyke hevynly folke , the whyche
were Ennocke and Ely , saluynge the kynge whythe wordys of grace and
vertu . CMGREGOR-M4,174.1081

And soo rode he forthe unto the Crosse in Cheppe . CMGREGOR-M4,174.1082

There stode a ryalle castelle of jasper grene , and there yn ij grene
treys stondyng uppe_ryght , shewyng the ryght tytyllys of the Kyng of
<P_175> Inglond and of Fraunce , convaying fro Synt Edwarde and Synt
Lowys be kyngys unto the tyme of Kyng Harry the vj=te= , every kynge
stondynge whythe hys cote armowre , sum lyberdys and sum flouredelysse ;
CMGREGOR-M4,175.1083

and on that othyr syde was made the Jesse of owre Lorde ascendyng
uppewarde from Davyd unto Jesu . CMGREGOR-M4,175.1084

And so rode he forthe unto the Lytylle Condyte . CMGREGOR-M4,175.1085

And there was a ryalle mageste of the Trynyte , fulle of angelys syngyng
hevynly songys , blessynge ande halowynge the kyngys whythe thes resonys
in Latyn wrytyn : CMGREGOR-M4,175.1086

Angelis suis mandavit de te ut custodiant te , etc. Longitudinem dierum
replebo in eum et ostendam illi salutare meurn . CMGREGOR-M4,175.1087

And thenne wente he forthe unto Poulys , CMGREGOR-M4,175.1088

and there he was ressayvyd whythe many byschoppys and prelatys whythe
dene and the quere , and whythe devoute songe , as hyt longythe to a
kynge . CMGREGOR-M4,175.1089

Ande so he offerryd there CMGREGOR-M4,175.1090

and thankyd God of hys goode speede and of hys welfare .
CMGREGOR-M4,175.1091

And thenne he rode to Westemyster , CMGREGOR-M4,175.1092

and there he restyd hym ; CMGREGOR-M4,175.1093

and on the nexte day folowynge the mayre and the aldyrmen whythe a
certayne comeners that were worthy men , and they presentyde the kynge
whythe an hampyr of sylvyr and gylte , whythe a_M=l=_=li= there yn of
nobellys , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,175.1094

Ande the xij day of May be-ganne the Parlement at Westemyster ,
CMGREGOR-M4,175.1095

and that duryd unto the xvj day of Juylle nexte followynge .
CMGREGOR-M4,175.1096

And that same yere on Syn Kateryn ys eve was the Lorde Fewater drownyd ,
and moche pepylle whythe hym . And moche harme done in the see of loste
of schyppys that were lade whythe wyne fro Bordowys by the grete
tempasse in the see . CMGREGOR-M4,175.1097

<P_176>

<heading>

John Parnys , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,176.1100

John Olney CMGREGOR-M4,176.1101

John Padysley CMGREGOR-M4,176.1102

Anno xj=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,176.1103

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere be_ganne the generalle consayle at Basyle of alle
Crystyn londys ; CMGREGOR-M4,176.1105

and thedyr come the Parganers , that ys to saye they of Parge ;
CMGREGOR-M4,176.1106

and Mayster Perrys , clerke , of Ingelonde , a regeaunte and a herytyke
, come from Oxforde thedyr $with $them
{TEXT:whym;_ed._proposes_with_them} as an herytyke ;
CMGREGOR-M4,176.1107

and there were many artyculys and poyntys of the faythe determyte ande
spokyn . CMGREGOR-M4,176.1108

And soo they partyde , CMGREGOR-M4,176.1109

and wente agayn unto Prage whythe_owte any lettynge ;
CMGREGOR-M4,176.1110

and the cause was for they of Prage hadde worthy clerkys of oure faythe
in plegge for hem of Prage for to goo save and come save ,
CMGREGOR-M4,176.1111

and ellys they hadde gon to the fyre , as moste men supposyd .
CMGREGOR-M4,176.1112

Ande that same yere , a-non aftyr Ester , was the conselle of Ingelonde
holdyn at Calys by the counselle of Ingelonde , CMGREGOR-M4,176.1113

for there was the Duke of Bedeforde , Regaunte of Fraunce , and the Duke
of Glouceter , with many moo lordys of the Counselle ;
CMGREGOR-M4,176.1114

and there were cartayne personys done unto dethe , that ys to wete , iij
sowdyers were banyschyde the towne of Caleys . CMGREGOR-M4,176.1115

And the same yere deyde the Duchyes of Bedforde in Fraunce , the wyffe
of the Regyaunte , whos terment was solempny holde at Syn Poulys in
London . CMGREGOR-M4,176.1116

And the same yere the Duke of Bedforde , and Regyant of Fraunce ,
weddyde the dukys doughter of Syn Powle the xxij day at Tyruyn .
CMGREGOR-M4,176.1117

And that same yere the kynge hylde hys Parlyment at Wystemystyr ,
CMGREGOR-M4,176.1118

that be_ganne the viij day of Juylle ; CMGREGOR-M4,176.1119

and soo forthe hyt induryd unto Lammas , CMGREGOR-M4,176.1120

and thenne hyt was enjornyde unto Syntte Edwarde ys day nexte folowynge
; CMGREGOR-M4,176.1121

unto the whyche Parlyment came the Regaunt of Fraunce .
CMGREGOR-M4,176.1122

Ande he come unto London on Syn Johnys evyn the Baptyste ,
CMGREGOR-M4,176.1123

and was worthely ressayvyde of the Mayre of London whythe alle hys
aldyrmen and worthy comyners of the cytte . CMGREGOR-M4,176.1124

And the same yere the Erle of Hontyngdone wente into Fraunce whythe a
fayre mayny for to kepe the contreye , CMGREGOR-M4,176.1125

and <P_177> he dyde many fayre jornayes . CMGREGOR-M4,177.1126

And that same yere a-non aftyr the xij day , the xxix day of Janyver was
the Lorde Fehewe ys brothyr was stallyd Byschoppe of London .
CMGREGOR-M4,177.1127

Ande that same yere apperyde stella comata , othyr wyse namyde a
blasynge starre , yn the sowthe weste , etc. CMGREGOR-M4,177.1128

<heading>

John Brocle , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,177.1130

Thomas Chalton CMGREGOR-M4,177.1131

John Lynge CMGREGOR-M4,177.1132

A=o= xij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,177.1133

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere , the ix day of November , was the terement of the
Erle of Syn Powle worthely i-holde at the chyrche of Syn Poulys in
London . CMGREGOR-M4,177.1135

Ande the x daye of Marche the Lorde Talbot wente in too Fraunce whythe a
goodely meyne . CMGREGOR-M4,177.1136

Ande that yere at the Counselle of Basyle deyde the Byschoppe of
Rochester . CMGREGOR-M4,177.1137

And that same yere was slayne the Erle of Arundelle in France .
CMGREGOR-M4,177.1138

<heading>

Robert Otley , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,177.1140

Thomas Barnewellel CMGREGOR-M4,177.1141

Symon Eyre CMGREGOR-M4,177.1142

A=o= Xij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,177.1143

<$$heading>

Ande that yere was the Counselle of Aras of alle Crystyn nacyons for to
trete of pes by_twyne thes ij realmys , Ingelonde and Fraunce , there
beynge iij cardynallys ; the Cardynalle of Wynchester for the realme of
Ingelonde , and hys name was Syr Harry Bewforde , the Kyng of Ingelonde
ys onkylle ; the Cardynalle of Syn Crosse , and the Cardynalle of Ciprys
. CMGREGOR-M4,177.1145

And there was the Duke of Burgayne and many moo othyr lordys of that
party . Ande of Ingelonde the Erle of Huntyngdone , whythe many othyr
spyrytualle and temporalle of oure partye . CMGREGOR-M4,177.1146

But was not to noo profyte , CMGREGOR-M4,177.1147

for the Fraynysche parte was not alle trewe in hyr comyng .
CMGREGOR-M4,177.1148

Ande that same yere , the xiiij day of Septembyr , deyde the Duke of
Bedforde , Regaunte of alle Fraunce , in the castelle of Rone , bytwyne
ij and iij in the mornynge ; CMGREGOR-M4,177.1149

and hys body ys buryde in Nostre Dame Chyrche of Roone .
CMGREGOR-M4,177.1150

And of hys soule ande alle Crystyn soulys God have marcy ,
CMGREGOR-M4,177.1151

Amen . CMGREGOR-M4,177.1152

<P_178>

Ande that same yere there was a grete wyntyr and a colde froste , that
duryd fro Syn Kateryns day to Synt Valentynys day next sewynge , soo
that noo schippe myght passe ; wherefore the vyntage come by londe ynne
cartys unto London fro the Downys , thoroughe Kent and ovyr Scheters
Hylle , CMGREGOR-M4,178.1154

for men provesyde be-fore +tat the vyntage of Gascon and Gyan shulde
come ovyr Scheters Hylle , CMGREGOR-M4,178.1155

and men made but a mocke ther of . CMGREGOR-M4,178.1156

And that yere the kyng hylde a Parlyment at Westemyster , that duryd fro
Mychellemasse unto the Feste of Crystysmas next folowynge .
CMGREGOR-M4,178.1157

<heading>

Harry Frowyke , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,178.1159

Thomas Catworthe CMGREGOR-M4,178.1160

Robert Clopton CMGREGOR-M4,178.1161

A=o= xiiij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,178.1162

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere , aboute Crystysmas , the Fraynysche parte gate
a_yenne Arflewe and many moo othyr townys . CMGREGOR-M4,178.1164

And that same yere the Fraynysche party in the monythe of Aprylle wanne
a-gayne Parys . CMGREGOR-M4,178.1165

And that same yere the Mayre of London sende , by the goode a-vyse and
consent of craftys , sent sowdyers to Calys , CMGREGOR-M4,178.1166

for hyt was sayde that the Duke of Burgone lay sege unto Calis .
CMGREGOR-M4,178.1167

And soo he dyd sone aftyr , as ye shalle hyre here after .
CMGREGOR-M4,178.1168

And at the Parlyment be-fore hyt was ordaynyde that the Duke of Yorke
shulde in to Fraunce with certayne lordys with hym in stede of the
Regaunt . CMGREGOR-M4,178.1169

And whythe hym went the Erle of Salysbury . CMGREGOR-M4,178.1170

Ande the Erle of Mortayne wente to Calys sone aftyr Estyr .
CMGREGOR-M4,178.1171

And the xilij day aftyr he made a roode in to Flaunders ,
CMGREGOR-M4,178.1172

and he slowe and toke xv._c. of Flemmyngys , and many bestys ;
CMGREGOR-M4,178.1173

the nombyr ys more thenne I canne certaynely reherse .
CMGREGOR-M4,178.1174

And a-non aftyr the Duke of Burgone layde hys sege unto Calys whythe a
stronge ordynaunce and a myghty , with xl_M=l= men and moo .
CMGREGOR-M4,178.1175

And they made grete bulworkys , and grete bastylys , and stronge
fortyfycacyon . CMGREGOR-M4,178.1176

And on Mary Magdelene ys day the kyng hylde hys counselle at Cauntyrbury
, whythe a grete party of hys lordys . CMGREGOR-M4,178.1177

Ande xij day of Juylle the Erle of Mortayne , the Lorde Camyse , whythe
othyr moo knyghtes and squyers went owte whythe a <P_179> goodely mayny
unto the Bastyle , CMGREGOR-M4,179.1178

and wanne hyt manfully , CMGREGOR-M4,179.1179

and sette hyt a fyre ; CMGREGOR-M4,179.1180

and in that same Bastyle was v._c. men of armys , of the whyche v._c.
schapyd not a_way the nombyr of xij men , as letters made mencyon that
were sente into Ingelonde . CMGREGOR-M4,179.1181

Ande a-non the Duke of Burgone with alle hys oste fledde cowardely ;
CMGREGOR-M4,179.1182

and he lefte the moste parte of hys stoffe and ordynance be_hynde ,
CMGREGOR-M4,179.1183

for he hadde haste in hys fleynge ; CMGREGOR-M4,179.1184

for there were lefte many grete gonnys , and many of othyr ordynaunce ,
whythe moche vytayle of flesche , flowre , wyne , bere , and a grete
nomber of barellys whythe botyr , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,179.1185

Ande the xxvj day of Juylle the Duke of Glouceter whythe alle the
substaunce of the lordys of Ingelonde schyppyde at Sondewyche with
xl._M=l=. men of alle the contreys of Ingelonde , CMGREGOR-M4,179.1186

for every towne , cytte , or borowe fonde certayne men whythe dyvers
lyvereys of the bagys of the towne , CMGREGOR-M4,179.1187

and soo dyd abbeys and pryorys in the same wyse of alle Ingelonde .
CMGREGOR-M4,179.1188

And the same day they londyd at Calys , CMGREGOR-M4,179.1189

and there they hylde hyr consaile the Fryday , Satyrday , and Sonday .
CMGREGOR-M4,179.1190

And on the Monday he toke hys jornaye in-to Flaunders warde ;
CMGREGOR-M4,179.1191

ande he rode thoroughe Pycardye CMGREGOR-M4,179.1192

and dyd moche harme yn the contre of Flaunders , CMGREGOR-M4,179.1193

for he brent Poperyng and Belle , ij goode townys , and many moo othyr
vylagys in Flaunders and in Pycardye ; CMGREGOR-M4,179.1194

and soo he come home a-yenne to Calys whythe_owte any lettynge of any
person , CMGREGOR-M4,179.1195

thonkyd be God . CMGREGOR-M4,179.1196

Ande that same yere the Erle of Northehomerlonde made a viage in-to
Scotlonde , CMGREGOR-M4,179.1197

and there he made a nobylle jornay . CMGREGOR-M4,179.1198

<heading>

John Mychell , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,179.1200

Thomas Morestede CMGREGOR-M4,179.1201

Wylliam Gregory CMGREGOR-M4,179.1202

A=o= xv=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,179.1203

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere Quene Kateryn dyde at Bredmonsey the iij day of
Janyver . CMGREGOR-M4,179.1205

And that same yere on of the gatys of Londyn Bryge and one of the
$grettyste arche of the same bryge , fylle a downe in to Temys
wondyrfully ; thonkyd be God , noo man , woman , nor chylde i-hurte nor
perchyde . CMGREGOR-M4,179.1206

And that yere the kynge ordaynyde the Parlyrnent to be holde at
Caumbryge , CMGREGOR-M4,179.1207

but aftyr warde by goode counselle hyt was tornyde and holde att
Westemyster ; CMGREGOR-M4,179.1208

the whyche Parlyment be_ganne the xxj day of Janyver .
CMGREGOR-M4,179.1209

And to that <P_180> Parlyment come the Byschoppe of Tyrwynne ande the
counselle of the Erle of Armanacke . CMGREGOR-M4,180.1210

Ande the ix day of Feverer Quene Kateryn aforesayde was broughte to
Powlys yn London , CMGREGOR-M4,180.1211

and there sche hadde a solempne deryge ande a masse on the morne .
CMGREGOR-M4,180.1212

And thenne she was hadde unto Westemyster . CMGREGOR-M4,180.1213

And the iij day aftyr she was worthely enteryde and buryde in Oure Lady
chapylle at Westemyster in the Abby ; of whos soule God have mercy .
CMGREGOR-M4,180.1214

Ande the same yere the Kynge of Schottys was trayturly slayne in hys
owne londe , of a false squyr and the squyer ys sone , of the same londe
, that was namyd Robert Grame . The whyche squyer and hys sone were
take anon aftyr , CMGREGOR-M4,180.1215

and there they were playnely put to dethe , as welle worthy was , to
be_traye any kynge or prynce . CMGREGOR-M4,180.1216

And the same yere dyde Quene Jane at Averyng at the Bowre , in Esex , in
the monythe of Juylle , CMGREGOR-M4,180.1217

and she ys buryde at Cauntyrbury whythe hyr hosbonde , Kynge Harry the
iiij=the= . CMGREGOR-M4,180.1218

Ande the same yere the kyng put downe the Mayre of Norwyche ,
CMGREGOR-M4,180.1219

and certayne aldyrmen were devydyd unto othyr certayne placys , sum to
Lynne and sum to Cauntyrbury . CMGREGOR-M4,180.1220

And John Wellys , Aldyrman of London , was made Wardon of Northewyche .
CMGREGOR-M4,180.1221

Ande the same yere the Erle of Warwyke went into Fraunce the xxix day of
Auguste ; CMGREGOR-M4,180.1222

he schippyd at Portysmouthe , CMGREGOR-M4,180.1223

and the Duke of Yorke come home into Ingelonde owte of Fraunce .
CMGREGOR-M4,180.1224

<heading>

Wylliam Estefylde , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,180.1226

Wylliam Chapman CMGREGOR-M4,180.1227

Wylliam Halys CMGREGOR-M4,180.1228

A=o= xvj=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,180.1229

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere deyde the Emperowre of Rome , CMGREGOR-M4,180.1231

and hys termentte was solempnly holde at Syn Poulys at the cytte of
London the iij day of May , there beynge the kynge and hys lordys .
CMGREGOR-M4,180.1232

And the same yere on Estyr day there was on John Gardyner take at Synt
Mary at the Axe in London , CMGREGOR-M4,180.1233

for he was an herytyke ; CMGREGOR-M4,180.1234

for whenne shulde have benne houselyd he wypyd hys mouthe whithe a foule
clothe CMGREGOR-M4,180.1235

and layde the oste there yn ; CMGREGOR-M4,180.1236

and so he was takyn by <P_181> the person of the chyrche ,
CMGREGOR-M4,181.1237

and the xiiij day of May he was i-brent in Smethefylde .
CMGREGOR-M4,181.1238

Ande the same yere the Erle of Mortayne was made Erle of Dorsette ,
CMGREGOR-M4,181.1239

and he was sentte unto Anjoye and Mayne . CMGREGOR-M4,181.1240

And the same yere there was a grete conselle at Calys , there beynge in
oure party the Cardynalle Arche-byschoppe of Yorke and many moo
spirytualle and temporalle lordys . And on that othyr party the Duchyes
of Burgone and many moo lordys , bothe spyrytualle and temporalle .
CMGREGOR-M4,181.1241

Ande the same yere the iiij day of June certayne men of Kentte were
a-reste at Maydestone for rysynge , CMGREGOR-M4,181.1242

and v. of hem were drawe , hanggyde , and quarteryde , and be-heddyde ,
CMGREGOR-M4,181.1243

and hyr heddys were sette on Londyn Brygge ; and sum of hyr heddys at
Cauntyrbury and in othyr certayne townys in Kente a_boute in the schyre
, for to cause men to be ware . CMGREGOR-M4,181.1244

And that yere was grete dyrthe of corne , CMGREGOR-M4,181.1245

for a buschelle of whete was worthe ij s vj d . CMGREGOR-M4,181.1246

And that yere was grete pestylaunce , and namely in the northe contraye
. CMGREGOR-M4,181.1247

And the same yere deyde the Countasse of Stafforde , and the Clerke of
the Rollys , Mayster Jon Franke ; CMGREGOR-M4,181.1248

and he was holde one of the rycchyste men that deyde many dayes be-fore
. CMGREGOR-M4,181.1249

<heading>

Stevyn Browne , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,181.1251

Hewe Duke CMGREGOR-M4,181.1252

Nychol Yoo CMGREGOR-M4,181.1253

A=o= xvij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,181.1254

<$$heading>

Ande the same yere duryde the dyrthe of corne and of alle maner of
grayne thoroughe Ingelonde . CMGREGOR-M4,181.1256

And the laste day of Aprylle deyde the Erle of Warwyke at Roone .
CMGREGOR-M4,181.1257

Ande the same yere the Cardynalle Archebyschoppe of Yorke , the
Byschoppe of Northewyche , the Byschoppe of Syn Davys and many othyr
docters , and the Duke of Northefolke , the Erle of Stafford , the Lorde
Bowcer , and the Lorde Hungerforde , with a grete mayny , wente unto
Calys ; CMGREGOR-M4,181.1258

and they hadde the Duke of Orlyaunce with hem for to trete of pes
by_twyne Ingelonde and Fraunce . CMGREGOR-M4,181.1259

And there mette with hem the grete lordys of Fraunce , that ys to wyte ,
of spyrytualle and temporalle , the Archebyschoppe of Raynys , whythe
many moo <P_182> othyr byschoppys , the Erle of Wendon , the Bastarde of
Orlyaunce , and many othyr lordys of Fraunce ; CMGREGOR-M4,182.1260

and thedyr come the Byschoppe of Spayne and of Colayne , and many moo
othyr dyvers contreys that com fro the Counselle of Basylle .
CMGREGOR-M4,182.1261

Ande the same yere in the same tretys the Fraynsche party wanne Mewys in
Bry ayenne , in the whyche was Captayne Syr Wylliam Chambyrlayne .
CMGREGOR-M4,182.1262

And the same yere the Erle of Huntyngdone wente unto Gyenne whythe a
grete navy . CMGREGOR-M4,182.1263

And the same yere went Syr $Richard Woodevyle in to Normandy and Syr
Wylliam Peytowe , and many moo othyr , whythe a fayre mayne .
CMGREGOR-M4,182.1264

And that same yere , a-pon Wytsondaye , the kyng made knyghtys at
Kenyngton , that ys to wete , the sone and hayre of the Lorde of
Huntyngdon , and the sone ande the ayre of the Erle of Aroundelle ,
Lewys John , and Wylliam Estefylde , marchaunt of London .
CMGREGOR-M4,182.1265

And the mayre ordaynyd that yere that comyn wemmen shulde were raye
hoodys , and bawdys to the pelory . CMGREGOR-M4,182.1266

And thys was cryde the v day of Auguste the same yere ,
CMGREGOR-M4,182.1267

and so hyt was done at dyvers tymys . CMGREGOR-M4,182.1268

And the same yere , att the generalle counseylle , the Emperoure of
Costantyne the Nobylle and hys sone , whythe alle the clergy of Gryke ,
obeyd hym unto the Chyrche of Rome of certayne artyculys of the faythe ;
CMGREGOR-M4,182.1269

and they hylde more thanne v._c. yere , and alle the realme of Ermonye
that haddyn ben owte ix._c. yere , fro the beleve not on the Hooly
Goste , nor on the sacrament , nor noo Pyrgatorye , nor noo suffragys of
Hooly Chyrche , as prayers and almysdedys . CMGREGOR-M4,182.1270

And there were of Rome viij cardynallys and moo thanne v._c. myters ,
whythe_owte docters . CMGREGOR-M4,182.1271

And thus was proclaymyd at Powlys Crosse the xxviij day of August above
sayde , etc. CMGREGOR-M4,182.1272

<heading>

Robert Large , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,182.1274

Robert Marchalle CMGREGOR-M4,182.1275

Phylyppe Malpas CMGREGOR-M4,182.1276

A=o= xviij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,182.1277

<$$heading>

Ande that yere was the Parlyment concludyd , CMGREGOR-M4,182.1279

and ordaynyd that Lumbardys sholde goo to hoste . CMGREGOR-M4,182.1280

And that same yere alyens were putte to hyr fynaunce to pay a certayne a
yere to the kynge . CMGREGOR-M4,182.1281

Also in the same yere there were ij traytours hangyde on a payre of
<P_183> galowys that were made in Temys for the same purposse , be_syde
, Syn Kateryns . CMGREGOR-M4,183.1282

And that same yere there was a preste i-callyd Syr Rycharde Wyche and
hys servand brent atte the Tourehylle , for the whyche there was moche
trobil amonge the pepylle , in soo moche that alle the wardys in London
were assygnyd to wake there day and nyght that the pepylle myght nought
have hyr ylle purpose as at that tyme . CMGREGOR-M4,183.1283

<heading>

John Patesle , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,183.1285

John Sutton CMGREGOR-M4,183.1286

Wylliam Wetynhale CMGREGOR-M4,183.1287

Anno xix=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,183.1288

<$$heading>

Ande in that same yere the Duke of Orlyaunce made hys othe at
Westemyster CMGREGOR-M4,183.1290

and there uppon ressayvyde the blessyd sacrament on Cryspyn and
Cryspynyan ys day . CMGREGOR-M4,183.1291

And the Fryday aftyr Allehalowyn day he went towarde Fraunce ,
CMGREGOR-M4,183.1292

and whythe hym he hadde Syr John Corneuale , knyght , and many othyr
knyghtys and squyers . CMGREGOR-M4,183.1293

Ande that same yere werre the barrys in Smethefylde newe made ,
CMGREGOR-M4,183.1294

for Syr Rycharde Woodevyle , knyght , was chalengyd of a knyght of
Spayne for to donne certayne poyntys of armys in the felde .
CMGREGOR-M4,183.1295

Ande the xvj day of May the Duke of Yorke , the Erle of Oxynforde , the
Erle of Ewe , the Erle of Ormounde , and Syr Richard Woodevyle , whythe
many othyr knyghtys and squyers , toke the way towarde Fraunce ,
CMGREGOR-M4,183.1296

and they schippyd at Portysmouthe . CMGREGOR-M4,183.1297

And the same yere the Crosse in Chepe was take a dovvne and a newe sette
uppe there +tat the olde Crosse stode . CMGREGOR-M4,183.1298

And in the same yere there were take certayne traytourys , the whyche
purposyd to slee oure lege lorde the kyng by crafte of egremauncey ,
CMGREGOR-M4,183.1299

and there instrumentys were opynly shewyde to alle men at the Crosse in
Powlys chyrche yerde a-pon a schaffolde i-made there-for . Att the
whyche tyme was present one of the same traytours , whiche was callyd
Roger Bulbroke , a clerke of Oxforde , CMGREGOR-M4,183.1300

and for that same tresoun my Lady of Glouceter toke sayntwerye at
Westemyster ; CMGREGOR-M4,183.1301

and the xj day of Auguste thenne next folowynge she toke +te way <P_184>
to the castelle of Lesnes . CMGREGOR-M4,184.1302

And on Syn Symon and Jude ys eve was the wycche be_syde Westemyster
brent in Smethefylde , CMGREGOR-M4,184.1303

and on the day of Symon and Jude the person of Syn Stevynnys in Walbroke
, whyche that was one of the same fore_sayde traytours , deyde in the
Toure for sorowe . CMGREGOR-M4,184.1304

<heading>

Robert Clopton , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,184.1306

Wylliam Combys CMGREGOR-M4,184.1307

Rycharde Ryche CMGREGOR-M4,184.1308

A=o= xx=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,184.1309

<$$heading>

Ande in that same yere the Lady of Glouceter for the same treson she was
juggyde by the spyrytualle lawe to iij sondyr or dyvers placys , that ys
to wete , on Mondaye , the xiij daye of Novembyr , to Powlys ; and on
the Wanysday i-sygnyd unto Crychyrche ; and on the Fryday nexte folowyng
to Synt Mychellys in Cornehylle . CMGREGOR-M4,184.1311

And on the Satyrday next folowyng was Roger Bulbroke hanggyde , and
drawe , and quarteryde at Tyburne . CMGREGOR-M4,184.1312

Ande the xxx day of Janyver was certayne poyntys of armys done in
Smethefylde by_twyne a knyght of Catelan and a Engelysche squyer ,
i-callyde Syr John Ascheley ; of the whiche tyme the sone of the sayde
knyght , in presens of alle the pepylle there , was made knyght opynly
by the kyngys owne hondys . CMGREGOR-M4,184.1313

And the sayde John Ayschelay also was made knyght att the same tyme .
CMGREGOR-M4,184.1314

Ande the xxv day of May my Lorde Talbot toke hys way towarde the see ,
for to passe yn to Fraunce whythe hys retenowe . CMGREGOR-M4,184.1315

Ande in that same yere deyde John Wellys , the nobylle Aldyrman , and
sum tyme Mayre of London . CMGREGOR-M4,184.1316

<heading>

John Hatherley , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,184.1318

Thomas Bemound CMGREGOR-M4,184.1319

Rycharde Nordon CMGREGOR-M4,184.1320

A=o= xx=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,184.1321

<$$heading>

Ande in that same yere there was a pynner hyngge hym sylfe on a Palme
Sondaye . CMGREGOR-M4,184.1323

And he was alle nakyd save hys breche ; CMGREGOR-M4,184.1324

and then he was caryd in a carte owte of the cytte .
CMGREGOR-M4,184.1325

And that same yere was a woman of Westemyster brentt at Tourehylle for
kyllynge of hyr hosbond . CMGREGOR-M4,184.1326

Ande that same yere there was founde in a walle in the Gylhalle a
certayne sum of mony , and alle in pense , CMGREGOR-M4,184.1327

and every peny weyde j d. ob. , and sum a goode dele more , and sum
more ; CMGREGOR-M4,184.1328

and hyt was of <P_185> many dyvers cunys , CMGREGOR-M4,185.1329

for sum were made yn London and sum in Cheschyre , and sum in Lancaster
, and in many othyr dyvers placys of the londe , CMGREGOR-M4,185.1330

but alle was the kyngys owne kune . CMGREGOR-M4,185.1331

And on the same yere , the viij day of Septembyr , there was done a
grete vyage yn Fraunce by the Duke of Somesette and his retynowe ;
CMGREGOR-M4,185.1332

and at the same viage were slayne and takyn to the nombyr of
iij._M=l=._vij._c. , whereof were ix lordys and a squyer , whyche that
was a grete captayne . CMGREGOR-M4,185.1333

<heading>

Thomas Catworthe , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,185.1335

John Norman CMGREGOR-M4,185.1336

Nicho' Wyfolde CMGREGOR-M4,185.1337

A=o= xxij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,185.1338

<$$heading>

Ande in that yere were streppettys i-dreve a-boute the Cytte of London
whythe raye hodys . CMGREGOR-M4,185.1340

And in that same yere one on the pelerry , the whyche wrought by a
wycckyd spyryte , the whyche was callyd Oberycom , CMGREGOR-M4,185.1341

and the maner of hys proces and werkyng was wretyn and hanggyd a_bowte
hys necke whenne he was in the pellery . CMGREGOR-M4,185.1342

<heading>

Harry Frowyke , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,185.1344

Sthevyn Foster CMGREGOR-M4,185.1345

Hewe Wyche CMGREGOR-M4,185.1346

A=o= xxiij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,185.1347

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere the Duke of Sowthefolke and othyr whythe many worthy
knyghtys and squyers wentte ovyr the see to fette home the quene .
CMGREGOR-M4,185.1349

Ande the same yere was Syn Poulys stypylle fyryd a-pon Candylmas evyn
whythe the lyghtenynge . CMGREGOR-M4,185.1350

And that same yere , the x day of October , was ordaynyd by the
archebyschoppys and bysschoppys , and there uppon proclaymyd oppynly
ynne chyrchys , that the day of Synt Edward shulde be kepte hooly day
fro that day forthewarde . CMGREGOR-M4,185.1351

And yn the same yere a schippe y-namyde Grace de Dyeu , whyche was
chargyd of goode of Sprusse , sche was loste a lytylle whythe_yn Temys .
CMGREGOR-M4,185.1352

And yn the same yere come dyvers enbassytourys of lordys of Fraunce for
to trete of the pes . CMGREGOR-M4,185.1353

And that same yere was the Erle of Warwyke made Duke of Warwyke .
CMGREGOR-M4,185.1354

And a_pon the fyrste day of Aprylle Quene Margarete <P_186> londyd at
Portysmowthe , CMGREGOR-M4,186.1355

and a-pon the x day of the same monythe sche was weddyd at a lytylle
velage in Hampschyre i-namyd <lacuna> CMGREGOR-M4,186.1356

And a_gayne hyr comynge to London were ordaynyde many notabylle devysys
in the cytte , as at the brygge of London , and in othyr dyvers placys ,
at Ledynne halle , and in Cornehylle , and in iiij placys yn Chepe ,
that ys to say , at the Grete Condyte , and at the Standarde , and at
the Crosse , and atte the Lytylle Condyte . CMGREGOR-M4,186.1357

And uppon Thorsday , the xxvj day of May , the kyng made xlvj Knyghtys
of the Bathe yn the Towre of London . CMGREGOR-M4,186.1358

And uppon the morowe , that was the Fryday , lordys of the realme ,
whythe nobylle and grete and costelowe araye , the Mayre of London and
the aldyrmen in scharlet , whythe alle the craftys of London in blewe ,
wythe dyvers dyvysyngys , every crafte to be knowe from othyr , rydyng
agayne Quene Margarete and brought hyr unto the Toure of London , the
quene havynge whythe hyr xvij charys with ladys . CMGREGOR-M4,186.1359

And a-pon the morowe , the Satyrday , she was brought thoroughe London
syttyng in a lytter by_twyne ij goode and nobylle stedys i-trappyd with
whyte satton , CMGREGOR-M4,186.1360

and sche was conveyyde unto Westemyster . CMGREGOR-M4,186.1361

And apon the morowe the Sonday was the coronacyon , CMGREGOR-M4,186.1362

and ij dayes aftyr there was grette revylle of justys of pes in the
sayntewery at Westemyster , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,186.1363

Ande in the monythe of Juylle next folowynge there come owte of Fraunce
a grette enbasset of lordys to trete by-twyne ij realmys of Ingelonde
and of Fraunce and for dyvers contreys to hem , &c.
CMGREGOR-M4,186.1364

<heading>

Symon Ayre , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,186.1366

John Derby CMGREGOR-M4,186.1367

Geffrey Fyldyng CMGREGOR-M4,186.1368

A=o= xxiiij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,186.1369

<$$heading>

Ande in that same yere was a Parlyment holdyn at Westemyster ,
CMGREGOR-M4,186.1371

and same yere there was on Wylliam Nete , yeman of the Quenys charyetes
, drawyn and hanggyd in Horse Downe for sleyng of a damselle callyd
Johne Gooche . CMGREGOR-M4,186.1372

Ande that same yere there was a pechyng i-made uppon the <P_187> Erle of
Ormounde by the pryour of Kylmayn for certayne poyntys of treson , the
whyche was takyn in to the kyngys grace , where uppon hyt lykyd oure
soverayne lorde to graunte a generalle pardon unto the sayde Erle .
CMGREGOR-M4,187.1373

But nevyrtheles the sayde pryour appayryde in Smethefylde the iiij day
of the monythe of October , as hyt was apoyntyde , fulle clenly
harnyssyd , redy whythe alle hys fetys and whythe alle hys wepyns ,
kepynge the fylde tylle hyghe none . CMGREGOR-M4,187.1374

And that same yere the Prevy Scalle comynge fro enbassetry owte of
Fraunce was gretely comberyd with fortune of the see , in soo moche that
many of hys men were drownyde . CMGREGOR-M4,187.1375

And in that same yere was a nothyre chalenge i-made in Smethefylde by on
Arblastre and a-nothyr man of London , CMGREGOR-M4,187.1376

but hyt was putte of by trete , CMGREGOR-M4,187.1377

and the same Arblastre ranne yn to the contente . CMGREGOR-M4,187.1378

Ande that same yere my Lorde of Glouceter wente yn-to a place i-callyd
the Vyse . CMGREGOR-M4,187.1379

And that same yere was a gernarde be-gon for pore pepylle of the
contraye that myght nought utter hyr graynys ; CMGREGOR-M4,187.1380

and hyt was made by the coste and goodys of Symon Eyre , Mayre of London
. CMGREGOR-M4,187.1381

<heading>

John Olney , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,187.1383

Robert Horne CMGREGOR-M4,187.1384

Geffray Bolayne CMGREGOR-M4,187.1385

Anno xxv=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,187.1386

<$$heading>

Ande in that same yere there was an armyrer CMGREGOR-M4,187.1388

and hys owne man fought whythe_yn the lystys in Smethefylde the laste
day of Januer , CMGREGOR-M4,187.1389

ande there the mayster was slayne and dyspoylyde owte of hys harnys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,187.1390

and lay stylle in the fylde alle that day and that nyght next folowynge
. CMGREGOR-M4,187.1391

And thenne $aftyrward , by the kyngys commaundement , he was $drawyn ,
hanggyde , and be-heddyde , and hys hedde sette on London Brygge , and
the body hynggyng a-bove erthe be-syde the towre . CMGREGOR-M4,187.1392

Ande that same yere was a Parlyment be-gon at Byry ;
CMGREGOR-M4,187.1393

and that same yere there was grete wache at Syn Donstonys in the Este ,
by the sofferens of oure sufferayne lorde the kyng , in every warde of
<P_188> London alle the xvj dayes in Crystysmasse by the commaundement
of the kynge . CMGREGOR-M4,188.1394

Ande at Schroffe tyde nexte aftyr there was ordaynyd a Parlyment at Synt
Edmondys Bury ; CMGREGOR-M4,188.1395

ande att the comyng of the goode Duke Umfray , sum tyme Duke of
Glouceter , uppon the Satyrday anon as he was a_lyght of hys hors he was
a-restyde of dyvers lordys for treson by commaundement of the kyng ,
CMGREGOR-M4,188.1396

and men sayde at that tyme . CMGREGOR-M4,188.1397

And uppon the Thursseday next folowynge he dyssesyd CMGREGOR-M4,188.1398

ande passyde owte of thys wrecchyde and false trobely worlde .
CMGREGOR-M4,188.1399

And he ys buryde at Syn Albonys . CMGREGOR-M4,188.1400

Ande uppon Ester nexte folowynge , Harry Byschoppe of Wynchester and
Cardynalle , and lythe enteryde at Wynchester . CMGREGOR-M4,188.1401

And a-non aftyr the dethe of the Duke of Glouceter there were a_reste
many of the sayde dukys to the nombyr of xxxviij squyers , be-syde alle
othyr servantys that nevyr ymagenyd no falsenys of the that they were
put a-pon of . CMGREGOR-M4,188.1402

And on Fryday the xiiij day of Juylle nexte folowynge by jugement at
Westemyster , there by_fore v personys were dampnyd to be drawe ,
hanggyd , and hyr bowellys i-brente by_fore hem , and thenne hyr heddys
to ben smetyn of , ande thenne to be quarteryde , and every parte to be
sende unto dyvers placys by assygnement of the jugys . Whyche personys
were thes : Arteys the bastarde of the sayde Duke of Glouceter , Syr
Rogger Chambyrlayne knyght , Mylton squyer , Thomas Harberde squyer ,
Nedam yeman , whyche were the sayde xiiij day of Juylle i-drawe fro Syn
Gorgys thoroughe_owte Sowthewerke and on Londyn Brygge , ande so forthe
thorowe the cytte of London to the Tyborne , CMGREGOR-M4,188.1403

and there alle they were hanggyde , and the ropys smetyn a-sondyr , they
beynge alle lyvynge , CMGREGOR-M4,188.1404

and thenne , ar any more of any markys of excecusyon were done , the
Duke of Sowthefolke brought them alle yn generalle pardon and grace from
our lorde and soverayne Kynge Harry the vj=te= . CMGREGOR-M4,188.1405

Also that same yere dyssesyde the Duke of Exceter , CMGREGOR-M4,188.1406

and he was enteryd at Syn Kateryns . CMGREGOR-M4,188.1407

<P_189>

<heading>

Stephyn Browne , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,189.1410

John Cauntelowe CMGREGOR-M4,189.1411

Wylliam Marowe . CMGREGOR-M4,189.1412

A=o= xxvij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,189.1413

Ande that same yere the Duke of Yorke , Rycharde Plantagenet , was
exsylyde in to Irlonde for hys rebellyon , as thoo a_boute the kynge
informyde hym , fully ande falsely as hyt was aftyr warde i-knowe .
CMGREGOR-M4,189.1414

And that same yere was a tretys of trewys takyn whythe the Schottys by
Mayster Adam Molaynys for iiij yere , that tyme he beyng enbasytor in to
Schotlonde , and aftyr that Prevy Seale , ande thenne i-made Byschoppe
of Chychester , and with_ynne shorte tyme aftyr put to dethe .
CMGREGOR-M4,189.1415

<heading>

Thomas Chalton , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,189.1417

Thomas Canyngys CMGREGOR-M4,189.1418

John Hewlyn CMGREGOR-M4,189.1419

A=o= xxviij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,189.1420

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere was the moste $parte of Normandy y-loste ,
CMGREGOR-M4,189.1422

and a Parlymentte was at Westemyster . CMGREGOR-M4,189.1423

In the mene whyle was the $city of Roon , Mustarde Vylers , and Herflete
i-loste by_fore Crystysmasse , CMGREGOR-M4,189.1424

and thenne the Parlyment was prolongyd tylle aftyr Syn Hyllary ys day .
CMGREGOR-M4,189.1425

Ande at that tyme beyng many sowdyers at Portysmowthe , the whyche
haddyn take the kyngys wagys for to pass ovyr the see .
CMGREGOR-M4,189.1426

And anon aftyr Crystysmasse was sende unto the see syde the Prevye
Sealle , whyche was callyd Mayster Adam Molaynys , to have take the
monster at the see syde , he beynge that tyme Byschoppe of Chychester .
CMGREGOR-M4,189.1427

Ande for hys covetysse , as hyt was reportyde , schippemen put hym to
dethe , CMGREGOR-M4,189.1428

and sum mys-a-wysyd men of the sowdyers holpyn welle there-to .
CMGREGOR-M4,189.1429

And thys was done at Portysmouthe . CMGREGOR-M4,189.1430

Ande aftyr Synt Hyllary ys day the Parlyment was remevyd unto Laycetter
; CMGREGOR-M4,189.1431

ande yn the mene tyme was Cane yoldyn , ande alle the remenaunt of
Normandy , savyng Chyrborowe . CMGREGOR-M4,189.1432

Ande the Duke of Sowthefolke was a-pechyde at that Parlyment , he beynge
at London , of verry graunte treson , and of many poyntys ; among alle
othyr , for that he schulde have solde Normandy , and also for the dethe
of that nobylle prynce the Duke of Glouceter , and for many <P_190>
othyr poyntys of treson , for the whyche he was exylyd owte of Ingelonde
for certayne yerys . CMGREGOR-M4,190.1433

Ande at hys passynge ovyr the see warde he was mette with by-twyne Dovyr
and Calys by dyvers schyppys , of the whyche was here Admyralle Nycholas
of the Towre ; CMGREGOR-M4,190.1434

and yn that schyppe soo beyng in the see they smote of hys hedde of the
fore_sayde Duke of Sowthefolke , CMGREGOR-M4,190.1435

and they caste bothe body and hys hedde in to the see .
CMGREGOR-M4,190.1436

And aftyr that hyt was takyn uppe and brought unto the towne of Dovyr ,
and aftyr from thens brought unto Wynkylfylde in the Sowthefolke ,
CMGREGOR-M4,190.1437

and there hyt ys i-buryde ; whos name was Syr Wylliam Pole .
CMGREGOR-M4,190.1438

Ande aftyr that the comyns of Kent a_rosse with certayne othyr schyrys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,190.1439

and they chesse hem a captayne , the whyche captayne compellyd alle the
gentellys to a-rysse whythe hem . CMGREGOR-M4,190.1440

Ande at the ende of the Parlyment they come whythe a grete myght and a
stronge oste unto the Blacke hethe , be_syde Grene_wyche , the nomber of
xlvj_M=l= ; CMGREGOR-M4,190.1441

and there they made a fylde , dykyd and stakyde welle a-bowt , as hyt
ben in the londe of warre , save only they kepte ordyr among them ,
CMGREGOR-M4,190.1442

for als goode was Jacke Robyn as John at the Noke , CMGREGOR-M4,190.1443

for alle were as hyghe as pygysfete , unto the tyme that they shulde
comyn and speke with suche statys and massyngerys as were sende unto hem
; CMGREGOR-M4,190.1444

thenne they put alle hyr pouer unto the man that namyd hym captayne of
alle hyr oste . CMGREGOR-M4,190.1445

And there they a-bode certayne days too the comyng of the kynge fro the
Parlymentte at Leyceter . CMGREGOR-M4,190.1446

Ande thenne the kyng send unto the captayne dyvers lordys bothe
spyrytualle and temporalle , to wytte and to have knowleche of that
grette assembelynge and gaderyng of that grete $and mysavysyd
feleschyppe . CMGREGOR-M4,190.1447

The captayne of hem sendyng worde agayne unto the kynge , that hyt was
for the wele of hym oure soverayne lorde , and of alle the realme , and
for to dystrye the traytours beyng a-boute hym , whythe othyr dyvers
poyntys that they wolde see that hyt were in schorte tyme a-mendyde .
Uppon whyche answere that the kyng , thedyr sent by hys lordys , dyd
make a crye in the kyngys name of Engelonde that alle the <P_191> kyngys
lege men of Engelonde shulde a-voyde the fylde . CMGREGOR-M4,191.1448

And a-pon the nyght aftyr they were alle voydyd and a-goo .
CMGREGOR-M4,191.1449

The morne aftyr , the kynge rode armyd at alle pecys from Syn John ys
be-syde Clerkyn welle thoroughe London ; and whythe hym the moste party
of temporalle lordys of thys londe of Engelond in there a beste raye .
CMGREGOR-M4,191.1450

Aftyr that they were every lorde whythe hys retenowe , to the nombyr of
x_M=l= personys , redy as they alle shulde have gon to batayle in to any
londe of Crystyn-dome , whythe bendys a-bove hyr harnys that every lorde
schulde be knowe from othyr . CMGREGOR-M4,191.1451

And yn the fowarde , as they wolde have folowyde the captayne , was
slayn Syr Umfray Stafforde and Wylliam Stafford , squyer , one the
mannylste man of alle thys realme of Engelonde , whythe many moo othyr
of mene personys at Sevenocke , in Kentt , in hyr oute ragyng fro hyr
oste of our soverayne lordys the kyng , Harry the vj=te= .
CMGREGOR-M4,191.1452

And the kyng loggyd that nyght at Grenewyche , CMGREGOR-M4,191.1453

and sone aftyr every lorde whythe hys retynewe rood home in to hyr
contraye . CMGREGOR-M4,191.1454

Ande aftyr that , uppon the fyrste day of Juylle , the same captayne
come agayne , as the Kenttysche men sayde , CMGREGOR-M4,191.1455

but hyt was a-nothyr that namyd hymselfe the captayne ,
CMGREGOR-M4,191.1456

and he come to the Blacke Hethe . CMGREGOR-M4,191.1457

And uppon the morowe he come whythe a grette hoste yn to Sowtheworke ,
CMGREGOR-M4,191.1458

and at the Whythe Herte he toke his loggynge . CMGREGOR-M4,191.1459

And a-pon the morowe , that was the Fryday , a_gayn evyn , they smote a
sondyr the ropys of the draught brygge CMGREGOR-M4,191.1460

and faught sore a manly , CMGREGOR-M4,191.1461

and many a man was mortheryde and kylde in that conflycte ,
CMGREGOR-M4,191.1462

I wot not what $to name hyt for the multytude of ryffe raffe .
CMGREGOR-M4,191.1463

And thenne they enteryde in to the cytte of London as men that hadde ben
halfe be-syde hyr wytte ; CMGREGOR-M4,191.1464

and in that furynys they wente , as they sayde , for the comyn wele of
the realme of Ingelonde , evyn strayght unto a marchaunte ys place
i-namyd Phylyppe Malpas of London . CMGREGOR-M4,191.1465

Yf hyt were trewe as they surmysyd aftyr ther doyng , I remytte me to
ynke and pauper - Deus scit et ego non . CMGREGOR-M4,191.1466

But welle I wote that every ylle begynnynge moste comynly hathe <P_192>
an ylle endyng , CMGREGOR-M4,192.1467

and every goode begynnyng hathe the wery goode endyng .
CMGREGOR-M4,192.1468

Proverbium : - Felix principium finem facit esse beatum .
CMGREGOR-M4,192.1469

And that Phylyppe Malpas was aldyrman , CMGREGOR-M4,192.1470

and they spoylyd hym CMGREGOR-M4,192.1471

ande bare a-way moche goode of hys , and in specyalle moche mony , bothe
of sylvyr and golde , the valowe of a notabylle som , and in specyalle
of marchaundys , as of tynne , woode , madyr , and alym , whythe grette
quantyte of wollyn clothe and many ryche jewellys , whythe othyr
notabylle stuffe of fedyr beddys , beddyng , napery , and many a ryche
clothe of arys , to the valewe of a notabylle sum - CMGREGOR-M4,192.1472

nescio , set Deus omnia scit . CMGREGOR-M4,192.1473

Ande in the evenynge they went whythe hyr sympylle captayne to hys
loggynge ; CMGREGOR-M4,192.1474

botte a certayne of hys sympylle and rude mayny a-bode there alle the
nyght , $wenynge to them that they hadde wytte and wysdome for to have
gydyde or put in gydyng alle Ingelonde , alsosone at they hadde gote the
cytte of London by a mysse_happe of cuttynge of ij sory cordys that nowe
be alteryde , and made ij stronge schynys of yryn unto the draught
brygge of London . CMGREGOR-M4,192.1475

But they hadde othyr men with hem , as welle of London as of there owne
party . CMGREGOR-M4,192.1476

And by hem of on parte and of that othyr parte they lefte noo thyng
unsoffethe , CMGREGOR-M4,192.1477

and they serchyd alle that nyght . CMGREGOR-M4,192.1478

Ande in the morne he come yn a-gayne , that sory and sympylle and
rebellyus captayne whythe hys mayny ; CMGREGOR-M4,192.1479

that was Saturday , CMGREGOR-M4,192.1480

and hyt was also a Synt Martyn ys day , the dedycacyon of Synt Martynys
in the Vyntry , the iiij day of Juylle . CMGREGOR-M4,192.1481

And thenne dyvers questys were i-sompnyd at the Gylhalle ;
CMGREGOR-M4,192.1482

and ther Robert Horne beynge alderman was a-restyde and brought in to
Newegate . CMGREGOR-M4,192.1483

And that same day Wylliam Crowemere , squyer , and Scheryffe of Kentt ,
was be-heddyde in the fylde whythe_owte Algate at +t=e= mylys ende
be-syde Clopton ys Place . CMGREGOR-M4,192.1484

And a nothyr man that was namyde John Bayle was be-heddyd at the Whytte
Chapylle . CMGREGOR-M4,192.1485

And the same day aftyr-non was be-heddyd in Cheppe a-fore the Standard ,
Syr Jamys Fynes , beyng that tyme the Lorde Saye and Grette Treserer of
Ingelonde , the whyche was brought oute of the <P_193> Toure of London
unto the Gylde Halle , CMGREGOR-M4,193.1486

and there of dyvers tresons he was exampnyd , of whyche he knowlachyd of
the dethe of that notabylle and famos prynce the Duke of Glouceter .
CMGREGOR-M4,193.1487

And thenne they brought hym unto the Standard in Cheppe ,
CMGREGOR-M4,193.1488

and there he ressayvyd hys jewys and hys dethe . CMGREGOR-M4,193.1489

And so forthe alle the iij heddys that day smetyn of were sette uppon
the Brygge of London , and the ij othyr heddys takyn downe that stode
a-pon the London Brygge by-fore . CMGREGOR-M4,193.1490

And at the comyng of the camptayne yn to Sowtheworke , he lete smyte of
the hedde of a strong theff that was namyd Haywardyn .
CMGREGOR-M4,193.1491

And uppon the morowe the Sonday at hyghe mas tyme a_lette to be heddyd a
man of Hampton , a squyer , the whyche was namyd Thomas Mayne .
CMGREGOR-M4,193.1492

And that same evyn Londyn dyd a_rysse and cam owte uppon hem at x $of
the belle , beyng that tyme hyr captaynys the goode olde lorde Schalys
and Mathewe Goughe . CMGREGOR-M4,193.1493

Ande from that tyme unto the morowe viij of belle they were ever
fyghtynge uppon London Brygge , CMGREGOR-M4,193.1494

ande many a man was slayne and caste in Temys , harnys , body , and alle
; CMGREGOR-M4,193.1495

and monge the presse was slayne Mathewe Goughe and John Sutton aldyrman
. CMGREGOR-M4,193.1496

Ande the same nyght , a-non aftyr mydnyght , the Captayne of Kentte dyde
fyre the draught brygge of London ; CMGREGOR-M4,193.1497

and be-fore that tyme he breke bothe Kyngys Bynche and the Marchelsy ,
CMGREGOR-M4,193.1498

and lete owte alle the presoners that were yn them .
CMGREGOR-M4,193.1499

And uppon the morowe by_tymys came my lorde the Cardynalle of Yorke ,
and my Lorde of Cauntyrbury , and the Byschoppe of Wynchester ,
CMGREGOR-M4,193.1500

and they tretyde by_twyne the Lorde Schalys and that captayne , that the
sore conflycte and skarmasche was sessyde , CMGREGOR-M4,193.1501

ande gaffe the captayne and hys mayne a generalle chartoure for hym and
for alle hys company in hys name , callyng hym selfe John Mortymere ,
CMGREGOR-M4,193.1502

and thoroughe that mene they were i-voydyde the moste partye .
CMGREGOR-M4,193.1503

And the vj day aftyr that , the Satyr-daye at evyn , the iij heddys were
takyn downe of London Brygge , that ys to say , the Lorde Say ys hedde ,
Crowmers , <P_194> and the Bayleyes , and the othyr ij heddys sette uppe
a-yenne that stode a-pon London Brygge be-fore , CMGREGOR-M4,194.1504

and the body whythe hedde were i-burydde at the Gray Fryers at London .
CMGREGOR-M4,194.1505

And uppon the xij day of Juylle , the yere a-fore sayde , the sayde
camptayne was cryde and proclaymyd traytoure , by the name of John Cade
, in dyvers placys of London , and also in Sowtheworke , whythe many moo
, that what man myght or wolde bryng the sayde John Cade to the kyng ,
qwyke or dede , shulde have of the kynge a_thousande marke .
CMGREGOR-M4,194.1506

Also who som evyr myght brynge or wolde brynge any of hys chyffe
counsellourys , or of afynyte , that kepte any state or rewle or
governansse undyr the sayd fals captayne John Cade , he schulde have to
hys rewarde of the kynge v._C. marke . CMGREGOR-M4,194.1507

And that day was that fals traytoure the Captayne of Kentte i-take and
slayne in the Welde in the countre of Sowsex , CMGREGOR-M4,194.1508

and uppon the morowe he was brought in a carre alle nakyd ,
CMGREGOR-M4,194.1509

and at the Herte in Sowetheworke there the carre was made stonde stylle
, CMGREGOR-M4,194.1510

the wyffe of the howse myght se hym yf hyt were the same man or no that
was namyd the Captayne of Kente , CMGREGOR-M4,194.1511

for he was loggyd whythe_yn hyr howse in hys pevys tyme of hys
mys_rewylle and rysynge . CMGREGOR-M4,194.1512

And thenne he was hadde in to the Kyngys Bynche , CMGREGOR-M4,194.1513

and there he lay from Monday at evyn unto the Thursseday nexte folowynge
at evyn ; CMGREGOR-M4,194.1514

and whythe_yn the Kynges Benche the sayde captayne was be-heddyde and
quarteryde ; and the same day $i-drawe a-pon a hyrdylle in pecys whythe
the hedde by-twyne hys breste from the Kyngys Benche thoroughe_owte
Sowthewerke , and thenne ovyr Londyn Brygge , and thenne thoroughe
London unto Newegate , CMGREGOR-M4,194.1515

and thenne hys hedde was takyn and sette uppon London Brygge .
CMGREGOR-M4,194.1516

And the same yere was the Byschoppe of Sawlysbury slayne at Edyngton , a
myle owte of the towne , a-pon a hyghe hylle ; CMGREGOR-M4,194.1517

hyt was the xiiij day of June , CMGREGOR-M4,194.1518

and alle hys goode mevabylle was departyde to every man dwellynge there
that any of hys lyflode laye ; CMGREGOR-M4,194.1519

for bothe oxsyn , sheppe , hors , swyne , carte , plowe , corne , hay ,
tymbyr , strawe , harnys in castellys of hys , clothynge for hys owne
<P_195> body , bokys , chalys and alle that longyd to any manyr of hys ,
and the very ledde that coveryd the howsys and wodys wer fylde downe in
sum placys , but not in every place , but in som , as at Shyrbone in
Dorsette schyre . CMGREGOR-M4,195.1520

And the men that toke a-pon hem alle thys mys_rewle , whenne they
undyrstode that hyt was wronge that they hadde done bothe to hym , and
in specyalle unto the kynge , they a-non wente thoroughe_owte alle the
towne of Shyrborne CMGREGOR-M4,195.1521

an toke to every man , woman , and chylde that was above xij yere age
and iij chore , everyche of hem hadde vj=d= ; CMGREGOR-M4,195.1522

and they madde them to swere to be trewe ande holde to_gedyr , by cause
yf the kynge wolde have take any execucyon a-pon hyt he moste have take
hyt a-pone alle the hoole schyre and contrays there that hys lyflode was
. CMGREGOR-M4,195.1523

And for cause here of the kynge gaffe a generalle pardon to alle maner
men . CMGREGOR-M4,195.1524

Ande that same yere was slayne Tresham , the man of lawe , that was
Speker of the Parlymentt , CMGREGOR-M4,195.1525

and hys sone was soore woundyde in Northehampton schyre .
CMGREGOR-M4,195.1526

And by the kynge and hys counselle a Parlyment was ordaynyde to be-gyn
on Syn Leonarde ys day nexte folowynge . CMGREGOR-M4,195.1527

In the mene tyme many strange and woundyrfulle bylle were sete in dyvers
placys , sum at the kyngys owne chambyr doore at Westemyster , in hys
palysse , and sum at the halle dore at Westemyster , ande sum at Poulys
chyrche dore , and in many othyr dyvers placys of London .
CMGREGOR-M4,195.1528

Ande in the ende of the sayde same yere Rycharde , the Duke of Yorke ,
come to the sayde Parlymentt , CMGREGOR-M4,195.1529

for the sayde Duke was before banyschyd for certayne yerys , whythe a
notabylle felyschippe of fensabylle men , and the Duke of Northefolke
whythe a grete multytude of defensabylle men . And every lorde whythe
hyr retynowe welle harnysyd and welle be-sene ; CMGREGOR-M4,195.1530

and every lorde hadde hys bagge a-pon hys harnys , and hyr mayny also ,
that they myght ben knowe by hyr baggys and levereys .
CMGREGOR-M4,195.1531

<heading>

Nycholas Wyfolde , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,195.1533

Wylliam Deere CMGREGOR-M4,195.1534

John Myddelton CMGREGOR-M4,195.1535

A=o= xxix=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,195.1536

<$$heading>

Ande that same yere , the ij day of Decembyr , the Duke of <P_196>
Somersett was a-tachyde in the Fryer Prechourys at London .
CMGREGOR-M4,196.1538

And that day he was robbyde of alle hys goodys , CMGREGOR-M4,196.1539

and hys jewellys were takyn and borne a-way by lordys mayny .
CMGREGOR-M4,196.1540

Ande in the morowe they dyspoylyd the placys and longgynges of many
dyvers lordys , CMGREGOR-M4,196.1541

and they bare away alle the goodys that were with_ynne hem , that ys to
say , Syr Thomas Stodenham , thenne beynge wardroper , Syr Thomas Hoo
the Lorde Hastynge , sum tyme the Chambyrlayne of Normandy .
CMGREGOR-M4,196.1542

And the same day was a man of the forsayde feleschyppe , the whyche was
at the spoylynge and robbynge of the Fryer Prechourys , be-heddyde at
the Standarde in Cheppe , for to ben an exampylle unto alle othyr ;
CMGREGOR-M4,196.1543

but hyt was nevyr the bettyr , CMGREGOR-M4,196.1544

for hyt causyd moche the more herte brennyng a_gayne the duke and the
lordys by-fore sayde , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,196.1545

And that same day , the aftyr_non , the Duke of Yorke roode thoroughe
London . CMGREGOR-M4,196.1546

And he made to be cryde in dyvers placys that what maner a man that
robbyd or ryfylde any persone schulde have as hastely jewys as the sayde
man hadde . CMGREGOR-M4,196.1547

And uppon Thursday nexte folowynge the kynge come fro Westemyster ,
ryddyng thoroughe London ; and whythe the Duke of Yorke , and the moste
dele in substans of alle the lordys in thys londe , with hyr retenowys
of fensabylle men ; whyche was a gay and gloryus syght if hit hadde ben
in Fraunce , but not in Ingelonde , CMGREGOR-M4,196.1548

for hyt boldyd sum mennys hertys that hyt causyd aftyr many mannys dethe
. CMGREGOR-M4,196.1549

Wher was or ys the defaute I wotte not , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,196.1550

Ande the same yere , on Candylmas daye , the kynge was at Cauntyrbury ,
CMGREGOR-M4,196.1551

and whythe hym was the Duke of Excetyr , the Duke of Somersette , my
lorde of Schrofuysbury , whythe many moo othyr lordys and many justyces
; CMGREGOR-M4,196.1552

and there they helde the cessyons iiij dayes , CMGREGOR-M4,196.1553

and there were dampnyde many men of the captayne ys men for hyr rysyng ,
and for hyr talkyng a_gayne the kyng , havynge more favyr unto the Duke
of Yorke thenne unto the kynge . CMGREGOR-M4,196.1554

And the dampnyde men were drawe , hanggyde , and quarteryde ,
CMGREGOR-M4,196.1555

but <P_197> they were pardonnyde to be buryde , bothe hyr quarters of
hyr bodys and hyr heddys with_alle . CMGREGOR-M4,197.1556

Ande at Rochester ix men were be-heddyd at that same tyme ,
CMGREGOR-M4,197.1557

and hyr heddys were sende unto London by the kyngys commaundement , and
sette uppon London Brygge alle at one tyme ; CMGREGOR-M4,197.1558

and xij heddys at a nothyr tyme were brought unto London $and {TEXT:at}
sette uppe undyr the same forme , as hyt {TEXT:hys} was commaundyd by
the kyng . CMGREGOR-M4,197.1559

Men calle hyt in Kente the harvyste of hedys . CMGREGOR-M4,197.1560

Mayseter Fyldynge , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,197.1561

Ric. Lee CMGREGOR-M4,197.1562

Ric. Alle CMGREGOR-M4,197.1563

Anno xxxj=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,197.1564

That yere hyt was competent welle and pessabylle as for any rysynge
a-mong oure selfe , CMGREGOR-M4,197.1565

for every man was in cheryte , CMGREGOR-M4,197.1566

but sum <P_198> what the hertys of the pepyl hyng and sorowyd for that
the Duke of Glouceter was dede , CMGREGOR-M4,198.1567

and sum sayde that the Duke of Yorke hadde grete wronge ,
CMGREGOR-M4,198.1568

but what wronge there was noo man that darste say , CMGREGOR-M4,198.1569

but sum grounyd CMGREGOR-M4,198.1570

and sum lowryd CMGREGOR-M4,198.1571

and hadde dysdayne of othyr , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,198.1572

<heading>

John Norman , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,198.1574

John Walden CMGREGOR-M4,198.1575

Thomas Coke CMGREGOR-M4,198.1576

Anno xxxij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,198.1577

<$$heading>

Ande that yere there was a batayle at Synt Albonys by-twyne Kyng Harry
the VI. and the Duke of Yorke , CMGREGOR-M4,198.1579

and thys batayle was the weke be-fore Whytte Sonday .
CMGREGOR-M4,198.1580

And Kyng Harry was in harnys hys owne propyr person ,
CMGREGOR-M4,198.1581

and was hurte with the shotte of an arowe in the necke .
CMGREGOR-M4,198.1582

And the Duke of Yorke brought hym unto London as kynge and not as a
presener . CMGREGOR-M4,198.1583

The Erle of Wyltschyre bare the kyngys baner that day in the batayle ,
CMGREGOR-M4,198.1584

for he was at that tyme namyd but Syr Jamys Urmon ; CMGREGOR-M4,198.1585

and thys sayde Jamys sette the kyngys baner agayne an howse ende
CMGREGOR-M4,198.1586

and fought manly with the helys , CMGREGOR-M4,198.1587

for he was a_feryd of lesynge of beute , CMGREGOR-M4,198.1588

for he was namyd the fayryd knyght of thys londe . CMGREGOR-M4,198.1589

And with_yn a lytyl whyle aftyr was made the Erle of Wyltscnyre .
CMGREGOR-M4,198.1590

The chaptaynys of thys fylde undyr the Duke of Yorke was the Erle of
Warwyke , the Erle of Saulysbury . CMGREGOR-M4,198.1591

And in that batayle wer slayne the Duke of Somersett , the Erle of
Northehomerlonde , the Lorde Clyfforde , with many moo othyr , bothe of
gentylle men and yemen . CMGREGOR-M4,198.1592

And the kynge lete alle thys mater be in a dormon a grete and a long
tyme aftyr , as ye shalle hyre , CMGREGOR-M4,198.1593

for hyt was noo seson to trete of pesse , CMGREGOR-M4,198.1594

for sum were welle contente and sum evylle plesyd , CMGREGOR-M4,198.1595

but at the laste the pepylle sayde that the Duke of Somersett was worthy
to suffer that dethe by so moche that he <P_199> brought Kyng Harry at
Claryngdon be-syde Saulysbury and there he toke hys grete sekenys .
CMGREGOR-M4,199.1596

<heading>

Wylliam Marowe , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,199.1598

John Jonge CMGREGOR-M4,199.1599

Holgrave CMGREGOR-M4,199.1600

Anno xxxiij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,199.1601

<$$heading>

Here was the rysynge and wanton reule of +te mayre and the mercers of
London a-gayne the Lombardys . CMGREGOR-M4,199.1603

The Lombardys were so yntretyd that they were fayne to voyde the Cytte
of London , CMGREGOR-M4,199.1604

ande many of them come to Sowthe Hampton and unto Wynchester for to be
an habyte there . CMGREGOR-M4,199.1605

And they toke grete olde mancyons in Wyncherter for terme of lyffe , and
sum but for yerys , CMGREGOR-M4,199.1606

and causyd the londe lordys to do grete coste in reparacyons ,
CMGREGOR-M4,199.1607

and when alle was don they come not there , CMGREGOR-M4,199.1608

and that causyd grete loste unto the londe lordys .
CMGREGOR-M4,199.1609

Also sum of the Lumbardys were take ande put in warde ,
CMGREGOR-M4,199.1610

and the comyn talkynge ande noyse was that they shulde nevyr be
delyveryd butt contynue in perpetualle preson . CMGREGOR-M4,199.1611

Also that yere a thyffe , one Thomas Whytehorne , was take in the
Neweforeste be-syde Beuley and put yn preson at Wynchester .
CMGREGOR-M4,199.1612

And when the day of delyverans com he appelyd many trewe men ,
CMGREGOR-M4,199.1613

and by that mene he kepte hys lyffe in preson . CMGREGOR-M4,199.1614

And thoo men that he appelyd were take and put yn stronge preson
CMGREGOR-M4,199.1615

and sufferde many grete paynys , CMGREGOR-M4,199.1616

and was that they sholde confesse and a-corde unto hys fals pelyng ;
CMGREGOR-M4,199.1617

and sum were hongyd that hadde noo frende_shyppe and goode ,
CMGREGOR-M4,199.1618

and thoo that hadde goode gate hyr charters of pardon .
CMGREGOR-M4,199.1619

And that fals and untrewe peler hadde of the kynge every day j d. ob .
CMGREGOR-M4,199.1620

And thys he contynuyd al_moste iij yere , CMGREGOR-M4,199.1621

and dystryde many men that were sum tym in hys company .
CMGREGOR-M4,199.1622

And at the laste he appelyd on that outerly sayde that he was fals in
hys appelynge , and sayde that $he wolde preve hvt with hys hondys , and
spende hys lyfe and blode a-pone hys fals body . CMGREGOR-M4,199.1623

And thys mater was fulle dyscretely take and hyrde of bothe pelerrys
parte , and of the defendente ys parte also . CMGREGOR-M4,199.1624

And a notabylle man , and the moste petefullyste juge of al thys londe
in syttyng a-pon lyffe and dethe , <P_200> toke thys sympylle man that
offeryd to fyght with the peler , CMGREGOR-M4,200.1625

ande fulle curtesly informyd hym of alle the condyscyons of the fyghtyng
and duelle of repreffe that shulde be by-twyne a peler of the kyngys ,
fals or trewe , in that one party , and by-twyne the defendent , trewe
or false , in that othyr party . CMGREGOR-M4,200.1626

For in cas that the peler prevaylyd in that fyght he shulde be put in
preson ayen , CMGREGOR-M4,200.1627

but he shulde fare more better than he dyd be_fore tyme of fyghtynge ,
and be i-lowe of the kyng ij d. every $day as longe as hit plesyd the
kyng that he shulde lyf . CMGREGOR-M4,200.1628

For in prosses the kynge may by the lawe put hym to dethe , as for a man
sleer , bycause that hys pelyng , fals or trewe , hathe causyd many
mannys dethys , CMGREGOR-M4,200.1629

for a very trewe man schulde with_yn xxiiij howrys make opyn to be knowe
alle suche fals hyd thyngys of felony or treson , yf he be nott
consentynge unto the same felowschyppe , undyr payne of dethe ;
CMGREGOR-M4,200.1630

and thys peler ys in the same cas , wherefore he moste nedys dy by very
reson . CMGREGOR-M4,200.1631

Thys ys for the pelers party . CMGREGOR-M4,200.1632

The defendaunte ys party ys , as that nobylle man , Mayster Myhelle
Skyllyng , sayde ande informyde the defender , that he and the peler
moste be clothyd alle in whyte schepys leter , bothe body , hedde ,
leggys , fete , face , handys , and alle . Ande that they schulde have
in hyr hondys ij stavys of grene hasche , the barke beynge a-pon , of
iij fote in lenghthe , and at the ende a bat of the same govyn owte as
longe as the more gevythe any gretenys . And in that othyr ende a horne
of yryn , i-made lyke unto a rammys horne , as scharpe at the smalle
ende as hit myght be made . CMGREGOR-M4,200.1633

And there why+te they schulde make hyr foule batayle a-pone the moste
sory and wrecchyd grene that myght be founde a-bowte the towne , havyng
nothyr mete ne drynke whythe , CMGREGOR-M4,200.1634

bot both moste be fastynge . CMGREGOR-M4,200.1635

And yf hyr frowarde wepyn ben i-broke they moste fyght with hyr hondys ,
fystys , naylys , tethe , fete , and leggys ; CMGREGOR-M4,200.1636

hyt ys to schamfulle to reherse alle the condyscyons of thys foule
conflycte ; CMGREGOR-M4,200.1637

and yf they nede any drynke , they moste take hyr owne pysse .
CMGREGOR-M4,200.1638

And yf the defendent sle +tat pelers , fals or trewe , the defendent
shalle be <P_201> hangyde by-cause of man sleynge , by soo moche that he
hathe i-slayne the kyngys prover , CMGREGOR-M4,201.1639

for by hys meny the kynge hadde mony of suche as were appelyd ,
CMGREGOR-M4,201.1640

and that mony +tat rosse of hyr stuffe or goodys +tat they hadde was put
to +te kynge almys , CMGREGOR-M4,201.1641

and hys amener dystrybutyd hit unto the pore pepylle .
CMGREGOR-M4,201.1642

But the kyng may by hys grace pardon the defendent yf he wylle , $yf
{TEXT:ys} the defendent be welle namyd and of competent governaunce in
the toune or citte there at hys abydyng ys ; CMGREGOR-M4,201.1643

but thys fulle seldon sene by cause of the vyle and unmanerly fyghtynge
. CMGREGOR-M4,201.1644

And by reson they shulde not ben beryd in noo holy sepulture of Crystyn
mannys beryng , but caste owte as a man +tat wylfully sleythe hym selfe
. CMGREGOR-M4,201.1645

Nowe remembyr thys foule batayle , whethey ye wylle doo hyt or noo .
CMGREGOR-M4,201.1646

And bothe partys consentyde to fyght , with alle the condyscyons that
long there too . CMGREGOR-M4,201.1647

And the fendent desyryd that the juge wolde sende unto Mylbroke there
that he dwellyde , to inquere of hys gydynge and of conversacyon .
CMGREGOR-M4,201.1648

And alle the men in that toune sayde that he was the trewyste laborer in
alle that contre , and the moste gentellyste there with ,
CMGREGOR-M4,201.1649

for he was a fyscher and tayler of crafte . CMGREGOR-M4,201.1650

And the peler desyryd the same , CMGREGOR-M4,201.1651

but he was not a-bydynge in no place passynge a monythe .
CMGREGOR-M4,201.1652

And in every place there as inquesyscyon was made men sayde , " Hange
uppe Thome Whythorne , CMGREGOR-M4,201.1653

for he ys to stronge to fyght with Jamys Fyscher the trewe man whythe an
yryn rammys horne . " CMGREGOR-M4,201.1654

And thys causyd the juge to have pytte a-pon the defendent .
CMGREGOR-M4,201.1655

<heading>

The maner of fyughtynge of thes ij poore wrecchys by-syde Wynchester .
CMGREGOR-M4,201.1657

<$$heading>

The peler in hys a-rayment ande parelle whythe hys wepyn come owte of
the Este syde , and the defendent owte of the Sowthe-Weste syde in hys
aparayle , with hys wepyn , fulle sore wepynge , and a payre of bedys in
hys hond ; CMGREGOR-M4,201.1659

and he knelyd downe a-pone the erthe towarde the Este
CMGREGOR-M4,201.1660

and cryde God marcy and alle the worlde , CMGREGOR-M4,201.1661

and prayde every man of forgevenys , CMGREGOR-M4,201.1662

and every man there beyng <P_202> present prayde for hym .
CMGREGOR-M4,202.1663

And the fals peler callyde and sayd " +tou fals trayter ! why arte +tou
soo longe in fals bytter be-leve ? " CMGREGOR-M4,202.1664

And thenne the defendent rosse upe CMGREGOR-M4,202.1665

and hym and sayde , " My quarelle ys as faythefulle and alle soo trewe
as my by-lyve , CMGREGOR-M4,202.1666

and in that quarelle I wylle fyght , " CMGREGOR-M4,202.1667

and with the same worde smote at the peler that hys wepyn breke ;
CMGREGOR-M4,202.1668

and thenne the peler smote a stroke to the defendent ,
CMGREGOR-M4,202.1669

but the offycers were redy that he shulde smyte no more ,
CMGREGOR-M4,202.1670

and they toke a-way hys wepyn fro hym . CMGREGOR-M4,202.1671

And thenn they fought to_gederys with hyr fystys long tyme
CMGREGOR-M4,202.1672

and restyd hem , CMGREGOR-M4,202.1673

ande fought agayne , CMGREGOR-M4,202.1674

and thenn restyd agayne ; CMGREGOR-M4,202.1675

and thenn they wente togedyr by the neckys . And then they bothe with
hyr tethe , that the lethyr of clothyng and flesche was alle to_rente in
many placys of hyr bodys . CMGREGOR-M4,202.1676

And thenn the fals peler caste that meke innocent downe to the grownde
CMGREGOR-M4,202.1677

and bote hym by the membrys , that the sely innocent cryde owt .
CMGREGOR-M4,202.1678

And by happe more thenne strengythe that innocent recoveryd up on hys
kneys CMGREGOR-M4,202.1679

and toke that fals peler by the nose with hys tethe CMGREGOR-M4,202.1680

and put hys thombe in hys yee , that the peler cryde owte and prayde hym
of marcy , CMGREGOR-M4,202.1681

for he was fals unto God and unto hym . CMGREGOR-M4,202.1682

And thenn +te juge commaundyd hem to cesse and hyr bothe hyr talys ;
CMGREGOR-M4,202.1683

and the peler sayde that he hadde accusyd hym wronge-fully and xviij men
, CMGREGOR-M4,202.1684

and be-sought God of marcy and of for-gevenys . CMGREGOR-M4,202.1685

And thenn he was confessyd ande hanggyd , of whos soule God have marcy .
CMGREGOR-M4,202.1686

Amen . CMGREGOR-M4,202.1687

As for the defendent was pardonyd of hys lyfe , leme , and goodys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,202.1688

and went home ; CMGREGOR-M4,202.1689

and he be-come an hermyte CMGREGOR-M4,202.1690

and with schorte tyme dyde . CMGREGOR-M4,202.1691

<heading>

Mayster Canyngys , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,202.1693

Raffe Verney Stewarde CMGREGOR-M4,202.1694

A=o= xxxiiij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,202.1695

<$$heading>

That same yere the Lorde Egramounde brake owt of Newegate with many
othyr men . CMGREGOR-M4,202.1697

<heading>

Geffray Bolayne , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,202.1699

Reyner Edwar CMGREGOR-M4,202.1700

Anno xxxv=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,202.1701

<$$heading>

<P_203>

Ande thys same yere at Covyntre there was made a pesse by-twyne the Duke
of Somersett Harry , and the Erle of Saulysbury , and the Erle of
Warwycke , for the dethe of hys fadyr Duke of Somersette , that the Duke
of Yorke put to dethe at Synt Albonys . CMGREGOR-M4,203.1704

And thys tretys was made at Covyntre , in the holy tyme of Lentyn , by
the mene of Kyng Harry the VI . CMGREGOR-M4,203.1705

And alle that holy tyme of Lentyn there myght noo mane man that shulde
preche by-fore the kynge , but that he shulde shewe hys sarmon in
wrytyng , were he docter or other , in so moche the lordys woldys A B C
wolde assygne what he schulde say , as for any thynge that longyd unto
the comyn wele , CMGREGOR-M4,203.1706

and yf he passyd hyr commaundement he schulde lese hys costys , and goo
as he come , withowte mete and drynge . CMGREGOR-M4,203.1707

But a becheler of holy devynyte come to that cytte ,
CMGREGOR-M4,203.1708

and whenn he come to preche by-fore the kyng , as Maystyr Wylliam Saye ,
Dene of Poulys and Dene of the kyngys chapylle , hadde desyryd and
asygnyd , A B C axyd hys name , CMGREGOR-M4,203.1709

and hys name was Mayster Wylliam Ive , at that tyme beyng at Wynchester
in Wycham ys college . CMGREGOR-M4,203.1710

And A B C sayde that they moste nedys se hys sarmon and hys purposse ,
that he was a_vysyd to say by-fore the kynge the Sonday nexte comynge .
CMGREGOR-M4,203.1711

And he fulle goodly toke them hys papyr ; CMGREGOR-M4,203.1712

and they seyng and redynge hys papyr , commaundyd to leve owte and put
a_way many troughtys . CMGREGOR-M4,203.1713

But that same Mayster Wylliam Ive sayde but lytylle ,
CMGREGOR-M4,203.1714

but whenn he come to pulpyt he sparyd not to sayd the troughthe ,
CMGREGOR-M4,203.1715

and reportyd by-fore the kyng that A B C made the sarmonys that were
sayde fore , and not thoo that prechyd , and that causyd that +te men
that prechyd hadde but sympylle sarmons , for hyr purposse was alle
turnyde upsodowne , and that they hadde made love days as Judas made
whythe a cosse with Cryste for they cyste ovyr the mane .
CMGREGOR-M4,203.1716

The grete rewarde that he hadde for hys labyr was the rydyng of viij=xx=
myle yn and owte for hys travayle , and alle hys frendys fulle sory for
hym . CMGREGOR-M4,203.1717

But qui veritatem dicit caput fractum habebit , &c.
CMGREGOR-M4,203.1718

And that same yere alle thes lordys departyd from the Parlyment ,
CMGREGOR-M4,203.1719

but they come nevyr alle <P_204> togedyr aftyr that tyme to noo
Parlyment nor conselle , but yf hyt were in fylde with spere and schylde
. CMGREGOR-M4,204.1720

<heading>

Mayster Skoot , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,204.1722

Raffe Gosselyn CMGREGOR-M4,204.1723

Nedham CMGREGOR-M4,204.1724

Anno xxxvj=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,204.1725

<$$heading>

Ande thys yere was done a grete jornaye at the Blowre Hethe by the Erle
of Saulysbury ande the Quenys galentys . CMGREGOR-M4,204.1727

And that day the kynge made vij knyghtys , CMGREGOR-M4,204.1728

fyrste , Syr Robert Molyners , Syr John Daune , Syr Thomas Uttyng , Syr
John Brembly , Syr Jon Stanley , Syr John Grysly , and Syr Rychard
Hardon ; CMGREGOR-M4,204.1729

and v of thes knyghtys were slayne fulle manly in the fylde , and many
men of yemonry soore hurte , CMGREGOR-M4,204.1730

and a fulle nobylle knyght , the Lorde Audeley , and Syr Thomas Hamdon ,
knyght , was the getynge of the fylde , and Thomas Squyer and
Counteroller of the Pryncys house fulle sore hurte .
CMGREGOR-M4,204.1731

And $the batayle or jornay lastyd alle the aftyr_none , fro one of the
clocke tylle v aftyr non , CMGREGOR-M4,204.1732

and the chasse lastyd unto vij at the belle in the mornynge .
CMGREGOR-M4,204.1733

And men were maymyd many one in the Quenys party . CMGREGOR-M4,204.1734

There were in the Quenys party v_M=l=. , and in that othyr party v_c ,
a grete wondyr that evyr they myght stonde the grete multytude not
ferynge , the kynge beyng with_yn x myle and the quene with_yn v myle at
the castelle of Egyllyssale . CMGREGOR-M4,204.1735

But the Erle of Saulysbury hadde ben i-take , save only a Fryer Austyn
schot gonnys alle that nyght in a parke that was at the backe syde of
the fylde , CMGREGOR-M4,204.1736

and by thys mene the erle come to Duke of Yorke . CMGREGOR-M4,204.1737

And in the morowe they founde nothyr man ne chylde in that parke but the
fryer , CMGREGOR-M4,204.1738

and he sayde that for fere he a-bode in that parke alle that nyght .
CMGREGOR-M4,204.1739

But in the mornyng , by-twyne the fylde and Chester , Syr John Dawne ys
sone that was at home in hys fadyrs place hadde worde that hys fadyr was
slayne ; CMGREGOR-M4,204.1740

a-non he raysyd hys tenantys CMGREGOR-M4,204.1741

and toke by-syde a-@ lytyl towne i-namyd Torperlay Syr Thomas Nevyle ,
Syr Jolm Nevyle , and Syr Thomas Haryngdon , CMGREGOR-M4,204.1742

and brought hem unto the castelle of Chester , CMGREGOR-M4,204.1743

ande there they a-boode tylle the batayle of Northehampton was done ,
&c. CMGREGOR-M4,204.1744

Also alle that seson the Erle of Warwyke with sowdyers of <P_205>
Calysse were comynge unto the Duke of Yorke , CMGREGOR-M4,205.1745

and he come ovyrwharte Colsylle be-syde Covyntre , CMGREGOR-M4,205.1746

and the Duke of Somerset whythe hys men rode a-longe thoroughe the towne
, CMGREGOR-M4,205.1747

and yet non of hem mette whythe othyr as hyt happyd ,
CMGREGOR-M4,205.1748

or by lyckely_hode they wold have made a newe fraye .
CMGREGOR-M4,205.1749

Ande the same day Androwe Throllope consayvyd that the Erle of Warwyke
was goyng unto the Duke of Yorke and not unto the kynge ,
CMGREGOR-M4,205.1750

and utterly for-soke hym CMGREGOR-M4,205.1751

and come unto the kynge CMGREGOR-M4,205.1752

and was pardonyd ; CMGREGOR-M4,205.1753

and that made the duke fulle sore a-frayde when he wyste that sum olde
soudyers went from hym unto the kynge , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,205.1754

<heading>

Wylham Hewlyn , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,205.1756

Plomer CMGREGOR-M4,205.1757

Sokker CMGREGOR-M4,205.1758

Anno xxxvij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,205.1759

<$$heading>

Ande thys same yere there was a grete afray at Lodlowe by_twyne the
kynge and the Duke of Yorke , the Erle of Salusbury , the Erle of
Warwyke , the Erle of Marche . CMGREGOR-M4,205.1761

The Duke of Yorke lete make a grete depe dyche CMGREGOR-M4,205.1762

and fortefyde it with gonnys , cartys , and stakys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,205.1763

but hys party was ovyr weke , CMGREGOR-M4,205.1764

for the kyng was mo thenn xxx_M=l= of harneysyd men , by-syde nakyd men
that were compellyd for to come with the kynge . CMGREGOR-M4,205.1765

And thenne the duke fledde fro place to place in Walys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,205.1766

and breke downe the bryggys aftyr hym that the kyngys mayny schulde not
come aftyr hym . CMGREGOR-M4,205.1767

And he wente unto Irlonde . CMGREGOR-M4,205.1768

And there he taryd tylle the jornay was endyd at Northehampton .
CMGREGOR-M4,205.1769

And he made newe grotys of a newe kune in Irlonde ; CMGREGOR-M4,205.1770

in on syde of the grote was a crowne and in that othyr syde a crosse .
CMGREGOR-M4,205.1771

And there he made many newe statutys , CMGREGOR-M4,205.1772

and hys yong sonys were sende by_yende the see unto the Duke of Burgayne
, CMGREGOR-M4,205.1773

and they were fulle welle ande worschypfully ressayvyd .
CMGREGOR-M4,205.1774

The Erle of Saulysbury , the Erle of Warwycke , the Erle of Marche , Syr
John Wenlocke , alle thes come unto Devynschyre to Syr John Denham , and
alle thes by the conveynge of Syr John Denham ; CMGREGOR-M4,205.1775

and they bought a smalle vesselle in that contray , CMGREGOR-M4,205.1776

an they were conveyde unto Garnesey , ande from Garnesaye unto Calys ,
for fere of dethe that they sayde was ymagenyde by the kyng and <P_206>
hys lordys , and of hyr owne housolde mayny for hyr dystruccyon , by the
counselle and consent of King Harry the VI . CMGREGOR-M4,206.1777

Thes lordys departyd owte of Ingelonde on Synt Edwarde ys evyn , Synt
Edwarde bothe kynge and confessoure , the xij day of October ,
CMGREGOR-M4,206.1778

and they taryd at Calys xxxvj wekys . CMGREGOR-M4,206.1779

But the Erle of Warwycke come unto Sondewyche , CMGREGOR-M4,206.1780

and there he toke +te Lord Ryvers with hys ladye , the lady and Duchyes
of Bedforde , CMGREGOR-M4,206.1781

and brought hem to Calys , CMGREGOR-M4,206.1782

for he was commaundyd to have londyd at $Calys by the kynge ,
CMGREGOR-M4,206.1783

but he was brought there sonner then hym lekyd . CMGREGOR-M4,206.1784

Ande Duke Harry of Somerset was i-commaundyd to goo to Gyon ,
CMGREGOR-M4,206.1785

and soo he dyd , CMGREGOR-M4,206.1786

and fulle manly made sautys to Calys , CMGREGOR-M4,206.1787

ande ranne byfore Calys almoste dayly , CMGREGOR-M4,206.1788

and many a men were hurte by hym and hys men . CMGREGOR-M4,206.1789

Ande thes fore_sayde lordys sende letters unto many placys of Inglonde
howe they were a_vysyde to reforme the hurtys and myschevys ande grevys
that raynyd in thys londe ; CMGREGOR-M4,206.1790

and that causyd them moche the more to be lovyde of the comyns of Kente
and of London ; CMGREGOR-M4,206.1791

and by thys mene the comyns of Kent sende hem worde to ressayve hem and
to go with hem in that a-tente that they wolde kepe trewe promys , and
as for the more parte of thys londe hadde pytte that they were attaynte
and proclaymyd trayters by the Parlement at was holde at Covyntre .
CMGREGOR-M4,206.1792

Also that same yere the Duchyes of Yorke com unto Kyng Harry
CMGREGOR-M4,206.1793

and submyttyd hyr unto hys grace , CMGREGOR-M4,206.1794

and she prayde for hyr husbonde that he myght come to hys answere and to
be ressayvyd unto hys grace ; CMGREGOR-M4,206.1795

and the kynge fulle humbely grauntyde hyr grace , and to alle hyrs +tat
wolde come with hyr , and to alle othyr that wolde com yn with_yn viij
dayes . And after viij days to done +te execusyon of the lawe as hit
requyryd . CMGREGOR-M4,206.1796

And many men , bothe <P_207> knyghtys and squyers , come whythe Syr
Water Deverose , in hyr schyrtys and halters in hyr hondyg , fallynge
by-fore the kynge , CMGREGOR-M4,207.1797

and alle hadde grace and marcy bothe of lyffe and lym .
CMGREGOR-M4,207.1798

The mysrewle of the kyngys galentys at Ludlowe , whenn they hadde drokyn
i-nowe of wyne that was in tavernys and in othyr placys , they fulle
ungoodely smote owte the heddys of the pypys and hoggys hedys of wyne ,
that men wente wete-schode in wyne , CMGREGOR-M4,207.1799

and thenn they robbyd the towne , CMGREGOR-M4,207.1800

and bare a-waye beddynge , clothe , and othyr stuffe ,
CMGREGOR-M4,207.1801

and defoulyd many wymmen . CMGREGOR-M4,207.1802

The Duchyes of Yorke was take to the Duke Bokyngham and to hys lady ,
CMGREGOR-M4,207.1803

for they two ben susters , CMGREGOR-M4,207.1804

and there she was tylle the fylde was done at Northehampton ,
CMGREGOR-M4,207.1805

and she was kept fulle strayte and many a grete rebuke .
CMGREGOR-M4,207.1806

Alle soo thes for_sayde lordys come agayne unto Sondewyche the xxj day
of June nexte folowyng . CMGREGOR-M4,207.1807

And the comyns of Kente and there welle-wyllers brought hem to Lundon ,
and so forthe to Northehampton . CMGREGOR-M4,207.1808

And there they mete with the kynge CMGREGOR-M4,207.1809

and foughte manly with the kyngys lordys and mayny ,
CMGREGOR-M4,207.1810

but there was moche favyr in that fylde unto the Erle of Warwycke .
CMGREGOR-M4,207.1811

And there they toke the kynge , CMGREGOR-M4,207.1812

and made newe offycers of the londe , as the chaunceler and tresyrar and
othyr , CMGREGOR-M4,207.1813

but they occupyde not $forthe-with , CMGREGOR-M4,207.1814

but a-bode a seson of the comyng of Duke of York owte of Irlonde .
CMGREGOR-M4,207.1815

And in that fylde was slayne the Duke of Bokyngham , stondyng stylle at
hys tente , the Erle of Schrovysbury , the Lord Bemond , and the Lord
Egremond , with many othyr men . CMGREGOR-M4,207.1816

Ande many men were drownyd by_syde the fylde in the revyr at a mylle .
CMGREGOR-M4,207.1817

And that goode knyght Syr Wylliam Lucy that dwellyd be-syde
Northehampton hyrde the gonne schotte , CMGREGOR-M4,207.1818

and come unto the fylde to have holpyn +te kynge , CMGREGOR-M4,207.1819

but the fylde was done or that he come ; CMGREGOR-M4,207.1820

an one of the Staffordys was ware of hys comynge , CMGREGOR-M4,207.1821

and lovyd that knyght ys wyffe CMGREGOR-M4,207.1822

and hatyd hym , CMGREGOR-M4,207.1823

and a-non causyd hys dethe . CMGREGOR-M4,207.1824

<heading>

Richarde Lee , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,207.1826

John Lambard CMGREGOR-M4,207.1827

John Flemmyng CMGREGOR-M4,207.1828

Anno xxxviij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,207.1829

<$$heading>

<P_208>

Ande thys same yere the Duke of Yorke come owte of Yrlonde ,
CMGREGOR-M4,208.1832

and londyd at the Redde Clyffe in Loncaschyre , CMGREGOR-M4,208.1833

and hys lyvery was whyte and brewe in hyr clothyng , and i-brawderyd
a-bove with fetyrlockys . CMGREGOR-M4,208.1834

And thys he come forthe towarde London ; CMGREGOR-M4,208.1835

ande +ten hys lady the duchyes met with hym in a chare i-coveryd with
blewe felewette , and iiij pore coursserys ther-yn .
CMGREGOR-M4,208.1836

And so he come to Habyngdon , CMGREGOR-M4,208.1837

and there he sende for trompeters and claryners to bryng hym to London ,
CMGREGOR-M4,208.1838

and there he gave them baners with the hole armys of Inglonde with_owte
any dyversyte , CMGREGOR-M4,208.1839

and commaundyd hys swerde to ben borne uppe_ryghte be-fore hym ;
CMGREGOR-M4,208.1840

and soo he rode forthe unto Lundon tylle he come to Westemyster to Kyng
Harrys palys , CMGREGOR-M4,208.1841

ande there he claymyde the crowne of Inglonde . CMGREGOR-M4,208.1842

Ande he kepte Kynge Harry there by fors and strengythe , tylle at the
laste the kynge for fere of dethe grauntyd hym +te crowne ,
CMGREGOR-M4,208.1843

for a man that hathe by lytylle wytte wylle sone be a_feryd of dethe ,
CMGREGOR-M4,208.1844

and yet I truste and bee-leve there was no man that wolde doo hym bodely
harme . CMGREGOR-M4,208.1845

But the lordys entretyd that Kyng Harry shuld rejoyse the crowne durynge
hys lyffe , and aftyr hys lyffe that the crowne sholde returne unto the
dukys ys hayrys as hyt requyrythe by that tytylle , CMGREGOR-M4,208.1846

and here uppon they were swore to ben faythefulle and trewe unto Kyng
Harry . CMGREGOR-M4,208.1847

And alle so that hyt shulde $be graunte treson to them that spake any
evyr by the Duke of Yorke or hys wyffe , or any of hys chyldryn .
CMGREGOR-M4,208.1848

And alle the lordys grauntyd there to , CMGREGOR-M4,208.1849

and soo hyt was proclaymyd in London and in many placys of Inglond .
CMGREGOR-M4,208.1850

And that the for-sayde duke shulde have owte of the $crowne yerely to
hys expence , for hym and hys hayrys durynge Kyng Harrys lyffe , x_M=l=
marke in mony . CMGREGOR-M4,208.1851

Thys a-cordement was made the laste day of October .
CMGREGOR-M4,208.1852

And that same nyght the kynge remevyde unto London a-gayne hys wylle ,
to the byschoppe ys palys of London , CMGREGOR-M4,208.1853

and the Duke of Yorke com unto hym that same nyght by the torchelyght
CMGREGOR-M4,208.1854

and toke a-pon hym as kyng , CMGREGOR-M4,208.1855

and sayde in many placys that thys ys owrys by very ryght .
CMGREGOR-M4,208.1856

Ande thenn the quene hyrynge thys she voydyde <P_209> unto Walys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,209.1857

but she was met with be-syde the Castelle of Malepas ,
CMGREGOR-M4,209.1858

and a servand of hyr owne that she hadde made bothe yeman and gentylman
, and aftyr a-poyntyd for to be in offysce with hyr sone the prynce ,
spoylyde hyr CMGREGOR-M4,209.1859

and robbyde hyr , CMGREGOR-M4,209.1860

and put hyr soo in dowt of hyr lyffe and sonys lyffe also .
CMGREGOR-M4,209.1861

And thenn she com to the Castelle of Hardelowe in Walys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,209.1862

and she hadde many grete gyftys and gretely comfortyd ,
CMGREGOR-M4,209.1863

for she hadde nede there of , CMGREGOR-M4,209.1864

for she hadde a fulle esy many a-boute hyr , the nombyr of iiij
personnys . CMGREGOR-M4,209.1865

And moste colnynly she rode by-hynde a yonge poore gentylle-man of xiiij
yere age , CMGREGOR-M4,209.1866

hys name was Jon Combe , i-borne at Amysbery in Wyltschyre .
CMGREGOR-M4,209.1867

And there hens she remevyd fulle prevely unto the Lorde Jesper , Lorde
and Erle of Penbroke , CMGREGOR-M4,209.1868

for she durste not a_byde in noo place that $was opyn but in pryvatt .
CMGREGOR-M4,209.1869

The cause was that conterfete tokyns were sende unto hyr as thoughe that
they hadde come from hyr moste dradde lorde the Kyng Harry the VI. ;
CMGREGOR-M4,209.1870

but hyt was not of hys sendyng nothyr of $his doynge , but forgyd
thyngys , CMGREGOR-M4,209.1871

for they that brought the tokyns were of the kyngys howse , and sum of
+t=e= pryncys howse , and sum of hyr owne howse , CMGREGOR-M4,209.1872

and bade hyr beware of the tokyns , that she gave noo creldans there too
; CMGREGOR-M4,209.1873

for at the kyngys departynge fro Covyntre towarde the fylde of
Northehampton , he kyste hyr CMGREGOR-M4,209.1874

and bessyd <$$em> the prynce , CMGREGOR-M4,209.1875

and commaundyd hyr that she shulde not com unto hym tylle that $he sende
a specyalle tokyn unto hyr that no man knewe but the kynge and she .
CMGREGOR-M4,209.1876

For the lordys wolde fayne hadde hyr unto Lundon , CMGREGOR-M4,209.1877

for they knewe welle that alle the workyngys that were done growe by hyr
, CMGREGOR-M4,209.1878

for she was more wyttyer then the kynge , CMGREGOR-M4,209.1879

and that apperythe by hys dedys , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,209.1880

Then the Quene havynge knowelechynge of thys praty whyle sche sende unto
the Duke of Somersett , at that tyme beynge in Dorset schyre at the
Castelle of Corffe , and for the Erle of Devyschyre , and for Elysaundyr
Hody , CMGREGOR-M4,209.1881

and prayde hem to com to hyr as hastely as they myght , with hyr
tenantys as stronge in hyr harnys as men of warre , CMGREGOR-M4,209.1882

for the Lorde Rosse , the Lorde Clyfforde , the <P_210> Baron of
Grestocke , the Lorde Nevyle , the Lorde Latymer , were waytyng a-pon
the Duke of $Execter to mete with hyr at Hulle . CMGREGOR-M4,210.1883

And thys mater was not taryd but fulle prevely i-wrought ;
CMGREGOR-M4,210.1884

and she sende letters unto alle hyr chyffe offycers that they wold doo
the same , and that they shulde warne alle +to servantys that lovyd hyr
or purposyd to kepe and rejoyse hyr offysce , to wayte a-pon hyr at
Hulle by that day as is {TEXT:hit--error_for_"is"?_ed._doesn't_note.}
a-poyntyd by hyr . CMGREGOR-M4,210.1885

Alle thes pepylle were gaderyd and conveyde so prevely that they wer
hole in nombyr of xv_M=l= or any man wolde be-leve hyt ;
CMGREGOR-M4,210.1886

in so moche yf any man sayde , or tolde , or talkyd of suche gaderyng ,
he shulde be sehende , CMGREGOR-M4,210.1887

and sum were in grete donger , CMGREGOR-M4,210.1888

for the comyn pepylle sayde by thoo that tolde +t=e= , troughthe , " Ye
talke ryght CMGREGOR-M4,210.1889

ye wolde hit were , " CMGREGOR-M4,210.1890

and gave noo credens of hyr sayynge . CMGREGOR-M4,210.1891

But the laste the lordys purposyd to knowe the trough+te .
CMGREGOR-M4,210.1892

And the ix day of December nexte folowyng the Duke of Yorke , the Erle
of Salysbury , the Erle Rotlond <paren> he was the Duke of Yorke ys
secunde sone , one the beste dysposyd lorde in thys londe <$$paren> ,
and Syr Thomas Haryngdon , whythe many mo knyghtys and quyers and grete
pepylle with hem , and soo departyd owte of London towarde Yorke , &c.
CMGREGOR-M4,210.1893

Ande the same yere , the xxx day of December , the Duke of Exceter , the
Duke of Somersett , the Erle of Northehomberlond , the Lorde Roos , the
Lorde Nevyle , the Lorde Clyfforde , with many mo lordys , knyghtys ,
squyers , and gentyllys , and the commyns of the Quenys party , met with
the Duke of Yorke at Wakefylde , CMGREGOR-M4,210.1894

and there they made a grete jorney a-pon the Lorde and Duke of Yorke ,
CMGREGOR-M4,210.1895

and toke hym and the Erle of Saulysbury , the Erle of Rutlond , and the
Lorde Haryngdon , and Syr Thomas Nevyle , and Syr Thomas Haryngdon ,
CMGREGOR-M4,210.1896

and many mo knyghtys were take a slayne by_syde alle the comyns .
CMGREGOR-M4,210.1897

But thys good Duke of Yorke with hys lordys afore sayde loste hyr heddys
; CMGREGOR-M4,210.1898

God have marcy on there soulys , CMGREGOR-M4,210.1899

for they loste in that jorneys the nombyr of xxv_c men .
CMGREGOR-M4,210.1900

And in the Quenys party were slay but ii_c men , &c.
CMGREGOR-M4,210.1901

As for the sege of the Towre , hyt ys com and opyn i-knowe ,
CMGREGOR-M4,210.1902

I <P_211> passe ovyr . CMGREGOR-M4,211.1903

But sone aftyr the ende of the sege the Lorde Schalys , that notabylle
warryoure , was slayne at Synt Mary Overeyes with water men ,
CMGREGOR-M4,211.1904

and laye there dyspoyly nakyd as a worme . CMGREGOR-M4,211.1905

But the lordys were fulle sory of hys dethe . CMGREGOR-M4,211.1906

Alle so Edwarde Erle of Marche , the Duke of Yorke ys sone and heyre ,
hadde a gre jornaye at Mortymer ys Crosse in Walys the secunde day of
Februar nexte soo folowynge , CMGREGOR-M4,211.1907

and there he put to flyght the Erle of Tenbroke , the Erle of
Wylteschyre . CMGREGOR-M4,211.1908

And there he toke and slowe of knyghtys and squyers , and of the , to
the nomber of iij_M=l=. , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,211.1909

Ande in that jornay was Owyn Tetyr i-take and brought unto Herforde este
, CMGREGOR-M4,211.1910

an he was be_heddyde at the market place , and hys hedde sette a-pone
the hygheyste gryce of the market crosse , CMGREGOR-M4,211.1911

and a madde woman kembyd hys here CMGREGOR-M4,211.1912

and wysche a_way the blode of hys face , CMGREGOR-M4,211.1913

and she gate candellys CMGREGOR-M4,211.1914

and sette a-boute hym brennynge , moo then a_c . CMGREGOR-M4,211.1915

Thys Owyne Tytyr was fadyr unto the Erle of Penbroke ,
CMGREGOR-M4,211.1916

and hadde weddyd Quene Kateryn , Kyng Harry the VI. ys modyr , wenyng
and trustyng all_eway that he shulde not be hedyd tylle he sawe the axe
and the blocke , CMGREGOR-M4,211.1917

and whenn that he was in hys dobelet he trustyd on pardon and grace
tylle the coler of hys redde vellvet dobbelet was ryppyd of .
CMGREGOR-M4,211.1918

Then he sayde , " That hede shalle ly on the stocke that was wonte to ly
on Quene Kateryns lappe , " CMGREGOR-M4,211.1919

and put hys herte and mynde holy unto God , CMGREGOR-M4,211.1920

and fulle mekely toke hys dethe . CMGREGOR-M4,211.1921

Alle soo the same day that the Erle of Marche shulde take hys jornaye
towarde Mortyrner ys Crosse fro Herforde este , he mousterd hys many
with_owte the towne wallys in a mersche that ys callyd Wyg mersche .
CMGREGOR-M4,211.1922

And ovyr hym men say iij sonnys schynyng . CMGREGOR-M4,211.1923

Ande the xvij day nexte folowynge Kyng Harry roode to Synt Albonys , and
the Duke of Northefolke with hym , the Erle of Warwycke , the Erle of
Arundelle , the Lorde Bouser , the Lorde Bonvyle , with many grete
lordys , knyghtys , and squyers , and commyns of an_c_M=l= men .
CMGREGOR-M4,211.1924

And there they hadde a grete batayle <P_212> whythe the Quene ,
CMGREGOR-M4,212.1925

for she come ever on fro the jornaye of Wackefylde tylle sche come to
Synt Albonys , with alle the lordys a_fore_sayde ; CMGREGOR-M4,212.1926

and hyr mayny and every lorde ys men bare hyr lordys leverey , that
every man myghte knowe hys owne feleschippe by hys lyverey .
CMGREGOR-M4,212.1927

And be-syde alle that , every man and lorde bare the Pryncys levery ,
that was a bende of crymesyn and blacke with esteryge ys fetherys .
CMGREGOR-M4,212.1928

The substance that gate that fylde were howseholde men and feyd men .
CMGREGOR-M4,212.1929

I wene there were not v_M=l= men that fought in the Quenys party ,
CMGREGOR-M4,212.1930

for +t=e= moste parte of Northeryn men fledde a-way ,
CMGREGOR-M4,212.1931

and sum were take and spoylyd owte of hyr harnysse by the way as they
fledde . CMGREGOR-M4,212.1932

And sum of them robbyd evyr as they yede , CMGREGOR-M4,212.1933

a petyffulle thynge hit ys to hyre hit . CMGREGOR-M4,212.1934

But the day before that batayle there was a jornay at Dunstapyl ;
CMGREGOR-M4,212.1935

but the kyngys mayny lackyd good gydiyng , CMGREGOR-M4,212.1936

for sum were but newe men of warre , CMGREGOR-M4,212.1937

for the chevyste captayne was a boucher of the same towne ;
CMGREGOR-M4,212.1938

and there were the kyngys mayny ovyr_throughe only by the Northeryn men
. CMGREGOR-M4,212.1939

And sone aftyr the bocher , for schame of hys sympylle gydynge and loste
of the men , the nombyr of viij_c , for very sorowe as hyt ys sayde ,
hynge hym selfe ; CMGREGOR-M4,212.1940

and sum men sayde that hyt was for loste of hys goode ,
CMGREGOR-M4,212.1941

but dede he ys - CMGREGOR-M4,212.1942

God knowythe the trought . CMGREGOR-M4,212.1943

And in the myddys of the batayle Kynge Harry wente unto hys Quene
CMGREGOR-M4,212.1944

and for-soke alle hys lordys , CMGREGOR-M4,212.1945

ande truste better to hyr party thenne unto hys owne lordys .
CMGREGOR-M4,212.1946

And thenn thoronghe grete labur the Duke of Northefolke and the Erle of
Warwycke a_schapyd a-waye ; CMGREGOR-M4,212.1947

the Byschoppe of Exceter , that tyme Chaunceler of Ingelond , and
brother unto the Erle of Warwycke , the Lorde Bouser , whythe many othyr
knyghtys , squyers , and comyns fledde , and many men slayne in bothe
partys . CMGREGOR-M4,212.1948

And the Lorde Bonevyle was be-heddyd , the comyn sayynge that hys
longage causyd hym to dye . CMGREGOR-M4,212.1949

The Prynce was jugge ys owne sylfe . CMGREGOR-M4,212.1950

Ande ther was slayne that manly knyght Syr Thomas Keryel .
CMGREGOR-M4,212.1951

The nomber of ded men was xxxv_c an moo , +tat were slayne .
CMGREGOR-M4,212.1952

The lordys in Kyng Harrys party pycchyd a fylde CMGREGOR-M4,212.1953

and fortefyd hyt fulle stronge CMGREGOR-M4,212.1954

and lyke unwvyse men brake <P_213> hyr raye and fyld
CMGREGOR-M4,213.1955

and toke a-nothyr , CMGREGOR-M4,213.1956

and or that they were alle sette a_buskyd to batayle , the Quenys parte
was at hond whythe hem in towne of Synt Albonys , CMGREGOR-M4,213.1957

and then alle +tyng was to seke and owte of ordyr , CMGREGOR-M4,213.1958

for hyr pryckyers come not home to bryng no tydyng howe ny that the
Quene was , save one come and sayd that she was ix myle of .
CMGREGOR-M4,213.1959

And ar the goners and borgeners couthe levylle hyr gonnys they were
besely fyghtyng , CMGREGOR-M4,213.1960

and many a gynne of wer was ordaynyd that stode in lytylle a-vayle or
nought ; CMGREGOR-M4,213.1961

for the burgeners hadde suche instrumentys that wolde schute bothe
pellettys of ledde and arowys of an elle of lenghthe with vj fetherys ,
iij in myddys and iij at the othyr ende , with a grete myghty hedde of
yryn at the othyr ende , and wylde fyre with_alle .
CMGREGOR-M4,213.1962

Alle thes iij thyngys they myght schute welle and esely at onys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,213.1963

but in tyme of nede they couthe not schut not one of thes ,
CMGREGOR-M4,213.1964

but the fyre turnyd backe a-pon them that wold schute thys iij thyngys .
CMGREGOR-M4,213.1965

Also they hadde nettys made of grete cordys of iiij fethem of lengthe
and of iiij fote brode , lyke unto an haye , CMGREGOR-M4,213.1966

and at every ij knott there was an nayl stondyng uppe_ryght , that there
couthe no man passe ovyr hyt by lyckely_hode but he shulde be hurte .
CMGREGOR-M4,213.1967

Alle so they hadde pavysse bore as a dore i-made with a staffe foldynge
uppe and downe to sette the pavys where the lykyd , and loupys with
schyttyng wyndowys to schute owte at , they stondyng by_hynde +te pavys
, and the pavys as fulle of iij=d= nayle aftyr ordyr as they myght
stonde . CMGREGOR-M4,213.1968

And whenn hyr schotte was spende and done they caste the pavysse by-fore
hem , CMGREGOR-M4,213.1969

thenn there myght noo man come unto them ovyr the pavysse for the naylys
that stode up-ryghte , but yf he wolde myschyffe hym sylfe .
CMGREGOR-M4,213.1970

Alle so they hadde a thynge made lyke unto a latysse fulle of naylys as
the net was , CMGREGOR-M4,213.1971

but hit wolde be mevyd as a man wolde ; CMGREGOR-M4,213.1972

a man myght bryse hyt to-gedyr that the lengythe wolde be more then ij
yerdys long , CMGREGOR-M4,213.1973

and yf he wolde he myght hale hyt a brode , CMGREGOR-M4,213.1974

thenn hit wolde be iiij square . CMGREGOR-M4,213.1975

And that servyd to lye at gappys there at horsemen wolde entyr yn , and
many a caltrappe . CMGREGOR-M4,213.1976

And as the substaunce of men of worschyppe that wylle not glose nor cory
favyl for no parcyallyte , they cowthe <P_214> not undyrstond that alle
thys ordenaunce dyd any goode or harme but yf hyt were a_mong us in owre
parte with Kyng Harry . CMGREGOR-M4,214.1977

There fore hyt ys moche lefte , CMGREGOR-M4,214.1978

and men take hem to mallys of ledde , bowys , swyrdys , gleyvys , and
axys . CMGREGOR-M4,214.1979

As for speremen they ben good to ryde be-fore the foote men and ete and
drynke uppe hyr vetayle , CMGREGOR-M4,214.1980

and many moo suche prety thyngys they doo , CMGREGOR-M4,214.1981

holde me excusyd thoughe I say the beste , CMGREGOR-M4,214.1982

for in the fote men ys alle the tryste . CMGREGOR-M4,214.1983

Ande at the nyght aftyr the batayle the kynge blessyd hys sone the
Prynce , CMGREGOR-M4,214.1984

and Doctor Morton brought forthe a boke that was fulle of orysons ,
CMGREGOR-M4,214.1985

and there the boke was oppenyd , CMGREGOR-M4,214.1986

and blessyd that yong chylde cum pinguedine terre et cum rore celi ,
CMGREGOR-M4,214.1987

and made hym knyght . CMGREGOR-M4,214.1988

And the yong knyght weryd a payre of bregant yerys i-coveryd with
purpylle velvyt i-bete with golde-smythe ys worke .
CMGREGOR-M4,214.1989

And the Prynce made many knyghtys . CMGREGOR-M4,214.1990

The fryste that he made was Androwe Trolloppe , CMGREGOR-M4,214.1991

for he was hurte CMGREGOR-M4,214.1992

and myght not goo for a calletrappe in hys fote ; CMGREGOR-M4,214.1993

and he sayde , " My lorde , I have not deservyd hit CMGREGOR-M4,214.1994

for I slowe but xv men , CMGREGOR-M4,214.1995

for I stode stylle in oo place CMGREGOR-M4,214.1996

and they come unto me , CMGREGOR-M4,214.1997

but they bode stylle with me . " CMGREGOR-M4,214.1998

And then come Whytyngam , Tresham , and many moo othyr ,
CMGREGOR-M4,214.1999

and were made knyghtys that same tyme . CMGREGOR-M4,214.2000

Ande the Kynge and the Quene toke hyr jornay unto Yorke wardys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,214.2001

for they demyde that the Northeryn men wolde have ben to creuelle in
robbyng yf they hadde come to London . CMGREGOR-M4,214.2002

But by the a-vyse of Docter Morton they sende certayne knyghtys and men
unto London and to Westemyster , CMGREGOR-M4,214.2003

but they myght not be sufferde to entery in to the towne .
CMGREGOR-M4,214.2004

Ande sum of hyr mayny were slayne for hyr cursyd longege .
CMGREGOR-M4,214.2005

Ande the mayre ordaynyd bothe brede and vytayle to be sende unto the
quene , and a certayne sum of money with_alle . CMGREGOR-M4,214.2006

But whenn men of London and comyns wyste that the cartysse shulde goo to
the Quene , they toke the cartys CMGREGOR-M4,214.2007

and departyde +te brede and vytayle a-monge the comyns .
CMGREGOR-M4,214.2008

And on John Byschopye was a grete doer of thys mater ,
CMGREGOR-M4,214.2009

for he was chyffe coke to the knyght Syr John Wenlocke .
CMGREGOR-M4,214.2010

But as for the mony , <P_215> I wot not howe hit was departyd ;
CMGREGOR-M4,215.2011

I trowe the pursse stale the mony . CMGREGOR-M4,215.2012

Then come tydyngys of the comynge of +te Erle of Marche unto London ;
CMGREGOR-M4,215.2013

thenn alle the cytte where fayne , CMGREGOR-M4,215.2014

and thonkyd God , CMGREGOR-M4,215.2015

and sayde that <poetry> He that had Londyn for_sake Wolde no more to hem
take , <$$poetry> CMGREGOR-M4,215.2016

and sayde , " Lette us walke in a newe wyne yerde , CMGREGOR-M4,215.2017

and lette us make us a gay gardon in the monythe of Marche with thys
fayre whyte ros and herbe , the Erle of Marche . " CMGREGOR-M4,215.2018

And the Erle of Warwycke mette with the Erle of Marche by-syde Oxforde ,
x myle owte of hit , at a towne of hys owne i-namyd Burford a-pon the
Wolde ; CMGREGOR-M4,215.2019

for the Erle of Marche come fro Walys , CMGREGOR-M4,215.2020

and was fulle sore a-ferde of the loste of the ij fyldys that were loste
by-fore , CMGREGOR-M4,215.2021

Wakefylde that one , and Synt Albonys that othyr , CMGREGOR-M4,215.2022

and he sorowde sore for hys fadyr the Duke of Yorke , and for hys good
brother the Erle of Rutlond , and for alle othyr lordys and comyns , &c.
CMGREGOR-M4,215.2023

There the Erle of Warwycke informyd hym of the gydynge and dysposyscyon
of Kyng Harry , and of the Quene , and of the love and favyr that the
comyns hadde unto hym , and by ryght to occupy the crowne of Inglonde ,
CMGREGOR-M4,215.2024

and soo hys hert was sum what made gladde and comfortyd .
CMGREGOR-M4,215.2025

But he was sory that he was soo pore , CMGREGOR-M4,215.2026

for he hadde no mony , CMGREGOR-M4,215.2027

but the substance of hys mayny come at hyr owne coste .
CMGREGOR-M4,215.2028

Alle soo the xxvj day of Februer nexte folowyng Edwarde Erle of Marche
com to London owt of Walys and the Erle of Warwycke with hym , and
xl_M=l= men with hem bothe , CMGREGOR-M4,215.2029

and they entervd unto the cytte of London , CMGREGOR-M4,215.2030

and there he toke uppon hym the crowne of Inglond by the avysse of the
lordys spyrytual and temporalle , and by the elexyon of the comyns .
CMGREGOR-M4,215.2031

And so he be-gan hys rayne the iiij day of Marche , in the yere of oure
Lorde God M=l=_cccc_lxj , the Sondy letter D as for that yere .
CMGREGOR-M4,215.2032

<P_216>

<heading>

Thys ys the fyrste of hys rayne of Kynge Edwarde the iiij=the= .
CMGREGOR-M4,216.2035

<$$heading>

Now gon messyngers by_twyne contraye and contraye , CMGREGOR-M4,216.2037

and harowdys were fulle schante , CMGREGOR-M4,216.2038

for they ne wyste what was beste to done , CMGREGOR-M4,216.2039

but sufferens and fayr speche dyd them moche ese . CMGREGOR-M4,216.2040

And bothe +t=e= newe kynge and the olde were fulle besyd to make hyr
party stronge , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,216.2041

The xiij day of Marche the kynge , owre newe Kynge Edwarde , toke hys
jornaye unto the Northe , and the Duke of Northefolke with hym . The
Erle of Warwycke and the Lorde Fauconbrygge , with many knyghtes ,
squyers , and comyns , to the nomber of ii_c_M=l= men .
CMGREGOR-M4,216.2042

And the xxviij day of Marche , that was +t=e= Palme Sunday evyn , the
Lorde Fewater was slayne at Ferybryge , CMGREGOR-M4,216.2043

and many with hym was slayne and drownyd . CMGREGOR-M4,216.2044

And the Erle of Warwycke was hurte yn hys legge with an arowe at the
same jornaye . CMGREGOR-M4,216.2045

Ande the xxix day of the same monythe of Marche that was Palme Sunday ,
the kyng mette with the lordys of the Northe at Schyrborne .
CMGREGOR-M4,216.2046

And there was on Harrys party that was kynge - Prynce Edwarde , Kyng
Harrys son . The Duke of Exceter . The Duke of Somersett . The Erle
of Northehumberlond . The Erle of Devynschyre . The Lorde Roos . The
Lorde Bemound . The Lorde Clyfforde . The Lorde Nevyle . The Lorde
Wellys . The Lorde Wylby . The Lorde Harry of Bokyngham . The Lorde
Ryvers . The Lorde Schalys . <P_217> The Lorde Maule . The Lorde
Ferys of Groby . The Lorde Foschewe . The Lorde Lovelle . Syr Thomas
Hammys , captayne of alle the fote men . Syr Androwe Thorlloppe . Syr
Thomas Tressam . Syr Robert Whytyngham . Syr John Dawne . And the
yonge Lorde of Schronysbury , and many moo othyr , bothe lordys ,
knyghtys , and squyers . CMGREGOR-M4,217.2047

Here ben the namys of the lordys that were slayne in the felde in Kynge
Harrys party . CMGREGOR-M4,217.2048

The Erle of Northehumberlond , The Lorde Clyfforde , The Lorde Nevyle ,
The Lorde Wellys , The Lorde Maules , And many moo then I can reherse ;
CMGREGOR-M4,217.2049

but whythe +tes and othyr that were slayne in the fylde ys a grete
nombyr , by_syde xlij knyghtys that were slayne aftyr ;
CMGREGOR-M4,217.2050

the hoole nombyr ys xxxv_M=l= of comeners . CMGREGOR-M4,217.2051

Jhesu be +tou marcyfulle unto hyr soulys . CMGREGOR-M4,217.2052

Amen . CMGREGOR-M4,217.2053

And the lordys before wretyn fledde , the substance in to Schotlond with
the Kynge Harry and Quene Margarete , and sone the Prynce with hym ,
fulle of sorowe and hevynys , no wondyr . CMGREGOR-M4,217.2054

God knowythe , CMGREGOR-M4,217.2055

but every man deme the beste tylle the trought be tryde owte .
CMGREGOR-M4,217.2056

For many a lady lost hyr beste be_lovyd in that batayle .
CMGREGOR-M4,217.2057

The Erle of Devynschyre was seke , CMGREGOR-M4,217.2058

and myght not voyde a_waye , CMGREGOR-M4,217.2059

and was take and be_heddyd . CMGREGOR-M4,217.2060

And the Erle of Wylte schyre was take and brought unto Newe Castell to
the Kynge . CMGREGOR-M4,217.2061

And there hys <P_218> hedde was smete of , and send unto London to be
sette uppon London Brygge . CMGREGOR-M4,218.2062

And Docter Morton , the Prynces chaunceler , was take with hym and put
in the Towre , CMGREGOR-M4,218.2063

but he schapyd a_way longe tyme aftyr , CMGREGOR-M4,218.2064

and ys by_yonde the see with the Quene , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,218.2065

Ande the Kynge taryd in the Northe a grette whyle , CMGREGOR-M4,218.2066

a made grete inquerens of the rebellyens a-gayne hys fadyr .
CMGREGOR-M4,218.2067

And toke downe hys fadyrs hedde fro the walle of Yorke .
CMGREGOR-M4,218.2068

And made alle the contray to ben sworne unt hym and to hys lawys .
CMGREGOR-M4,218.2069

And then he returnyd unto Lundon agayne . CMGREGOR-M4,218.2070

And there he made xviij knyghtys and many lordys . CMGREGOR-M4,218.2071

And then he rode to Westemyster . CMGREGOR-M4,218.2072

And there he was crounyd the xxviij day of June , and the yere of oure
Lorde M=l=_cccc_lxj , CMGREGOR-M4,218.2073

blessyd be God of hys grete grace , etc. CMGREGOR-M4,218.2074

<heading>

Hewe Wythe , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,218.2076

Gorge Irlond CMGREGOR-M4,218.2077

John Loke CMGREGOR-M4,218.2078

Anno ij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,218.2079

<$$heading>

And thys same yere the Erle of Oxforde , the Lord Abbry , the Lorde of
Oxforde ys sone , Syr Thomas Todenham knyght , John Mongomery , and
William Terelle squyer , were takyn in Esex , and brought unto Lundon to
the Towre . CMGREGOR-M4,218.2081

Ande thenne they were ledde to Westemyster to the Kynges palys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,218.2082

and there they were attaynte of hyghe and myghthy treson that they
ymagenyd agayne +te Kynge . CMGREGOR-M4,218.2083

And thenn they were drawe to the Towre from Westemyster .
CMGREGOR-M4,218.2084

And at the Towre hylle was made a schaffolde for them
CMGREGOR-M4,218.2085

and there hyr heddys were smetyn on , and hyr bodys beryd , as hyt
plesyd them to be_qwethe hyr bodys . CMGREGOR-M4,218.2086

<heading>

Thomas Coke , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,218.2088

Bartholomewe Jamys CMGREGOR-M4,218.2089

Wylliam Hampton CMGREGOR-M4,218.2090

Anno iij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,218.2091

<$$heading>

Thys yere Quene Margarete com owt of Frauns with lij schyppys , with
Freynysche men and sum Engelysche men in the schyppys .
CMGREGOR-M4,218.2093

And they londyd in Northe Humberlonde , CMGREGOR-M4,218.2094

hyt was vij dayes be-fore Alle Halwyn tyde . CMGREGOR-M4,218.2095

And there sche toke the castelle of Anwyke CMGREGOR-M4,218.2096

and put hyt fulle of Fraynyschemen . CMGREGOR-M4,218.2097

And thenn she retornyd in to Schotlonde by water . CMGREGOR-M4,218.2098

And there rosse suche a tempaste uppon hyr that she for_soke hyr se
schippe , CMGREGOR-M4,218.2099

and a_schapyd with the bote of +te schyppe . CMGREGOR-M4,218.2100

And the schyppe was drownyd with moche of hyr stuffe and iij grete
schippys moo . CMGREGOR-M4,218.2101

And iiij_c_an_vj Fraynysche men <P_219> were take in the chyrche of
Hooly Ylond . CMGREGOR-M4,219.2102

Thenn Kyng Edward hyrde telle of thys , CMGREGOR-M4,219.2103

and made hym redy towarde the Northe with many lordys , gentellys , and
comyns with hym . CMGREGOR-M4,219.2104

And there he layde a sege to Anwyke Castelle , and to the castelle of
Bamborowe , and to Dunsterborowe . CMGREGOR-M4,219.2105

Bamborowe and Dunsterborowe was kepte by Syr Raffe Persy and Syr Harry
Bewforde , late Duke of Somersett , and the castelle of Anwyke with the
Lorde Hungerforde . CMGREGOR-M4,219.2106

And Bamborowe and Dunsterborowe were yoldyn be Syr Raffe Percy and Syr
Harry Beuford , late Duke of Somersett , to the Kyngys wylle , whythe
the condyscyons that the sayde Raffe Percy schulde have the kepynge of
the ij castellys , Bamborowe and Dunstarborowe . CMGREGOR-M4,219.2107

The sayde Syr Raffe Percy and Syr Harry Bewforde , late Duke of
Somersett , were sworne to be trewe and faythefulle as trewe lege men
unto owre kynge and soverayne lorde Edwarde the iiij=the= .
CMGREGOR-M4,219.2108

And they com to Derham , CMGREGOR-M4,219.2109

and there they were sworne byfore owre kynge . CMGREGOR-M4,219.2110

And the kynge gaffe hem hys levery and grete rewardys .
CMGREGOR-M4,219.2111

Ande thenn the for_sayde Raffe Percys retornyde a-gayne in to
Northehumberlond , CMGREGOR-M4,219.2112

and hadde the kepynge of the sayde ij castellys accordynge unto the
poyntment . CMGREGOR-M4,219.2113

And the sayde Syr Harry Beuforde a-bode stylle whithe the kynge ,
CMGREGOR-M4,219.2114

and roode with hym to Lundon . CMGREGOR-M4,219.2115

And the Kynge made fulle moche of hym ; in soo moche that he loggyd
whythe the kynge in hys owne bedde many nyghtys , CMGREGOR-M4,219.2116

and sum tyme rode a huntynge be_hynde the kynge , the kynge havynge
a_boute hym not passynge vj hors at the moste , CMGREGOR-M4,219.2117

and yet iij were of the Dukys men of Somersett . CMGREGOR-M4,219.2118

The kyng lovyd hym welle , CMGREGOR-M4,219.2119

but the duke thought treson undyr fayre chere and wordys , as hyt
apperyd . CMGREGOR-M4,219.2120

And for a grete love the kyng made a grete justys at Westemyster , that
he shuld se sum maner sporte of chevalry aftyr hys grete labur and
hevynys . CMGREGOR-M4,219.2121

And with grete instans the kynge made hym to take harnys uppon hym ,
CMGREGOR-M4,219.2122

and rode in the place , CMGREGOR-M4,219.2123

but he wolde nevyr cope whithe no man CMGREGOR-M4,219.2124

and no man myght not cope whythe hym , tylle the kynge prayd hym to be
mery and sende hym a tokyn , CMGREGOR-M4,219.2125

and thenn he ranne fulle justely and merely , CMGREGOR-M4,219.2126

and hys helme was a sory hatte of strawe . CMGREGOR-M4,219.2127

And thenn every man markyd hym welle . CMGREGOR-M4,219.2128

<P_220>

But within schorte tyme aftyr the sayde Syr Raffe Percy by fals colysyon
and treson he lete the Fraynysche men take the castelle of Bamborowe fro
hym nolens volo . CMGREGOR-M4,220.2130

As for the castelle of Anwyke alle the men of werre that were of
worschip brake owte of the castelle by fors and warre
CMGREGOR-M4,220.2131

and rescuyd Syr Perys de Brasylle on xij day by $v the morne ,
CMGREGOR-M4,220.2132

and they that were with_yn the castelle gaffe hit uppe by a-poyntement ,
&c. CMGREGOR-M4,220.2133

And then Kyng Edwar made Syr John Ascheley , the knyght that fought so
manly in Smethefylde with an alyon that calengyd , he was made captayne
of the castelle , and Syr Raffe Gray constabylle of the sayde castelle
of Anwycke . CMGREGOR-M4,220.2134

And withyn iij or iiij monythys aftyr that fals knyght and traytoure ,
Syr Raffe Graye , by fals treson toke the sayde Syr John Ascheley
presoner , CMGREGOR-M4,220.2135

and delyveryd hym to Quene Margarete , CMGREGOR-M4,220.2136

and thenn delyveryde the castelle to the Lorde Hungerforde and unto the
Fraynysche men accompanyd whythe hym ; CMGREGOR-M4,220.2137

and by thys mene he put the kyng owre soverayne lorde owte of possessyon
. CMGREGOR-M4,220.2138

And thenne aftyr that come Kyng Harry that was , and the Quene to the
Kynge of Schottys , Syr Perys de Brasylle , with iiij=xx=_M=l= Schottys
, CMGREGOR-M4,220.2139

and layde a sege unto the castelle of Norham , CMGREGOR-M4,220.2140

and lay there xviij dayes . CMGREGOR-M4,220.2141

And thenn my Lorde of Warwycke and hys brother the Lorde Montegewe put
them in devyr to rescewe +t=e= sayde castelle of Norham ,
CMGREGOR-M4,220.2142

and soo they dyd , CMGREGOR-M4,220.2143

and put bothe Kynge Harry and the Kyng of Schotys to flyghte .
CMGREGOR-M4,220.2144

And Quene Margarete whythe alle hir consayle , and Syr Perys de Brasey
whythe the Fraynysche men , fledde a-way by water with iiij balyaggers ;
CMGREGOR-M4,220.2145

and they londyd at the Scluse in Flaundyrs , CMGREGOR-M4,220.2146

and lefte Kyng Harry that was be_hynde hem , and alle hyr hors and hyr
harneys , they were so hastyd by my Lorde of Warwycke , and hys brother
the Lorde Mountegrewe , and by hyr feleschippe with them accompanyde .
CMGREGOR-M4,220.2147

And at the departynge of Syr Perys de Brasyl and hys feleschippe was on
manly man that purposyd to mete with my Lorde of Warwycke ,
CMGREGOR-M4,220.2148

that was a taberette , CMGREGOR-M4,220.2149

for he stode a-pon an hylle with hys tabyr and hys pype , taberyng and
pyping as merely as any man <P_221> myght , CMGREGOR-M4,221.2150

stondyng by hym selfe , tylle my lorde come unto hym he wold not lesse
hys grownd ; CMGREGOR-M4,221.2151

and there he be-come my lordys man ; CMGREGOR-M4,221.2152

ande yet he ys with hym fulle good and to hys lorde .
CMGREGOR-M4,221.2153

Thenn the Kynge Edwarde the iiij purposyd to make an arme into
Schotlonde by londe and by water , that the grete rebellyous Harry ande
the Quene Margarete shulde not passe a_way by water .
CMGREGOR-M4,221.2154

And the kyng made the Erle of Worseter captayne by water .
CMGREGOR-M4,221.2155

And thenn there was ordaynyd a grete navy and a grete armye bothe by
watyr and by lond . CMGREGOR-M4,221.2156

And alle was loste and in vayne , CMGREGOR-M4,221.2157

and cam too noo purposse , neyther by water ne by londe .
CMGREGOR-M4,221.2158

Alle so the kynge sone aftyr dysposyd hym , CMGREGOR-M4,221.2159

and was purposyd to ryde into Yorke schyre and to the contray a_boute ,
to see and understonde the dysposyscyon of the pepylle of the Northe .
CMGREGOR-M4,221.2160

And toke with hym the Duke of Somersett , and ij_c of hys men welle
horsyd and welle i-harnaysyd . CMGREGOR-M4,221.2161

Ande the sayde Duke , Harry of Somersett , ande his men were made the
Kyngys garde , CMGREGOR-M4,221.2162

for the Kyng hadde that duke in moche favyr CMGREGOR-M4,221.2163

and trustyd hym welle . CMGREGOR-M4,221.2164

But +te garde of hym was as men shulde put a lombe a_monge wolvysse of
malyscyus bestys ; CMGREGOR-M4,221.2165

but Alle_myghty God was the scheparde . CMGREGOR-M4,221.2166

And whenn the kynge departyd from London he toke hys way to
Northehampton , CMGREGOR-M4,221.2167

and thedyr the kynge com a Syn Jamys day the Apostylle , ande that fals
duke with hym . CMGREGOR-M4,221.2168

And the comyns of the towne of Northehampton and of the schyre a-boute
sawe that the fals duke and traytoure was so nyghe the Kyngys presens
and was made hys garde . CMGREGOR-M4,221.2169

The comyns a_rosse uppon that fals traytur thee Duke of Somersett ,
CMGREGOR-M4,221.2170

and wolde have slayne hym with_yn the kyngys palys .
CMGREGOR-M4,221.2171

And thenn the kynge with fayre speche and grete defeculte savyde hys
lyffe for that tyme , CMGREGOR-M4,221.2172

and that was pytte , CMGREGOR-M4,221.2173

for the savynge of hys lyffe at that tyme causyd mony mannys dethys son
aftyr , as ye shalle heyre . CMGREGOR-M4,221.2174

And then the Duke sende that fals Duke of Somersett in to a castelle of
hys owne fulle secretly , for save_garde of hys the dukys lyffe , and
the dukys men unto Newe Castelle , to kepe the <P_222> towne ,
CMGREGOR-M4,222.2175

and gave hem goode wages fulle treuly payde . CMGREGOR-M4,222.2176

And the Kyng fulle lovyngly gave the comyns of Northehampton a tonne of
wyne that they shulde drynke and make mery . CMGREGOR-M4,222.2177

And +te wyne was drunkyn merely in the market place ,
CMGREGOR-M4,222.2178

for they hadde many fayre pecys of sylvyr . CMGREGOR-M4,222.2179

I dar@ @say ther ys no taverne that hathe not so moche of stuffe as they
occupyde in hys hyr {COM:so_in_ms.} tavernys . CMGREGOR-M4,222.2180

For sum fette wyne in basynnys , and sum in caudryns , and sum in bollys
, and sum in pannys and sum in dyschys . CMGREGOR-M4,222.2181

Loo , the grete tresoure that they scheuyd +tat tyme .
CMGREGOR-M4,222.2182

<heading>

Mathewe Phylyppe , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,222.2184

Muschampe CMGREGOR-M4,222.2185

Basset CMGREGOR-M4,222.2186

Anno iiij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,222.2187

<$$heading>

Thys yere , a-bute Mydsomyr , a the ryalle feste of the Sargantys of the
Coyfe , the Mayre of London was desyryde to be at that feste .
CMGREGOR-M4,222.2189

And at denyr tyme he come to the feste with his offecers , a-greyng and
a-cordyng unto hys degre . CMGREGOR-M4,222.2190

For with_yn London he ys next unto the kyng in alle maner thynge .
CMGREGOR-M4,222.2191

And in tyme of waschynge the Erle of Worseter was take be-fore the mayre
and sette downe in the myddys of the hy tabylle . CMGREGOR-M4,222.2192

And the mayre seynge that hys place was occupyd hylde hym contente ,
CMGREGOR-M4,222.2193

and went home a_gayne with_owt mete or drynke or any thonke ,
CMGREGOR-M4,222.2194

but rewarde hym he dyd as hys dygnyte requyryd of the cytte .
CMGREGOR-M4,222.2195

And toke with hym the substance of hys bretheryn the aldyrmen to his
place , CMGREGOR-M4,222.2196

and were sette and servyd also sone as any man couthe devyse , bothe of
sygnet and of othyr delycatys i-nowe , that alle the howse mervelyd howe
welle alle tynge was done in soo schorte a tyme , and prayde alle men to
be mery and gladde , CMGREGOR-M4,222.2197

hit shuhle be a_mendyd a nothyr tyme . CMGREGOR-M4,222.2198

Thenn the offesers of the feste , fulle evylle a_schamyd , informyd the
maysters of the feste of thys mysse_happe that ys be-falle .
CMGREGOR-M4,222.2199

And they consyderynge the grete dygnyte and costys and charge that
longgyd unto the cytte , and a-non sende unto the mayre a present of
mete , brede , wyne , and many dyvers sotelteys . CMGREGOR-M4,222.2200

But whenn they that come with the presentys say alle the gyftys , and
the sarvyse that was at the borde , he was fulle sore a_schamyd that
shulde doo <P_223> +te massage , CMGREGOR-M4,223.2201

for the present was not better thenn the servyse of metys was by_fore
the mayre , and thoroughe_owte the hyghe tabylle . CMGREGOR-M4,223.2202

But hys demenynge was soo that he hadde love and thonke for hys massage
, and a grette rewarde with_alle . CMGREGOR-M4,223.2203

And thys the worschippe of the cytte was kepte , and not loste for hym .
CMGREGOR-M4,223.2204

And I truste that nevyr hyt shalle , by the grace of God .
CMGREGOR-M4,223.2205

Ande thys same yere a-boute Crystysmas that fals Duke of Somersett ,
with_owte any leve of the kyng , stale owte of Walys with a prevy mayny
towarde the Newecastelle , CMGREGOR-M4,223.2206

for he and hys men were confeteryde for to have be-trayde the sayde
Newecastelle . CMGREGOR-M4,223.2207

And in +te wey thedyrwarde he was aspyde , and lyke to have ben takyn
be_syde Dereham in hys bedde . CMGREGOR-M4,223.2208

Notwithstondynge he a_schapyde a-way in hys schyrt and barefote ,
CMGREGOR-M4,223.2209

and ij of hys men were take . CMGREGOR-M4,223.2210

And they toke with hem that fals dukys caskette and hys harneys .
CMGREGOR-M4,223.2211

And whenn that hys men knewe that he was aschapyd , and hys fals treson
aspyde , hys men stale from the Newecastelle as very fals traytourys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,223.2212

and sum of hem were take CMGREGOR-M4,223.2213

and loste hyr heddys for hyr labur , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,223.2214

Ande thenn the kynge , owre soverayne lorde Edwar the iiij , hadde
knowleche of hys fals dysposyscyon of thys fals Duke Harry of Somersett
. CMGREGOR-M4,223.2215

The kynge sende a grete feleschippe of hys housolde men to kepe the
towne of Newecastelle , CMGREGOR-M4,223.2216

and made the Lorde Scrope of Bolton captayne of the towne ;
CMGREGOR-M4,223.2217

and soo they kepte hyt surely alle that wyntyr . CMGREGOR-M4,223.2218

Ande a-boute Ester nexte aftyr the Schottys sewyd unto oure soverayne
lorde the kynge for pes . CMGREGOR-M4,223.2219

And the kynge ordaynyde Commyssourys to mete whythe +te Schottys .
CMGREGOR-M4,223.2220

The names of the Commyssyonourys be wretyn here aftyr folowyng :
CMGREGOR-M4,223.2221

The Chaunceler of Ingelond , The Erle of Warwycke , The Lorde Montegewe
, And Many othyr for the Englysche partye to brynge hyt to a conclusyon
. CMGREGOR-M4,223.2222

The poyntement was that they Schottys and +tey shulde mete at Yorke .
CMGREGOR-M4,223.2223

And thenn was my Lorde of Mountegewe assygnyd to fecche yn the Schottys
pesseabylly , CMGREGOR-M4,223.2224

for he was Wardon of the Marchys . CMGREGOR-M4,223.2225

And then my Lorde of Mountegewe toke hys jornaye towarde the Newe
castelle . CMGREGOR-M4,223.2226

And by the waye was fulle falsely <P_224> i-purvyde that fals Duke Harry
of Somersett and Percy , with hyr feleschyppe assocyat unto them , that
there was layde by the waye , a lytylle from the Newecastel , in a woode
, that fals traytoure Syr Umfray Nevyle , with iiij_schore sperys . and
the bowys there too . CMGREGOR-M4,224.2227

And they shulde have falle on the Lorde Mountegeue sodenly , and slayne
hym sodenly , CMGREGOR-M4,224.2228

but , God be thonkyd , hyr fals treson was aspyde and knowe .
CMGREGOR-M4,224.2229

And thenne the Lorde Montegewe toke a nothyr waye , CMGREGOR-M4,224.2230

and made to be gaderyd a grete feleschippe , CMGREGOR-M4,224.2231

and went to the Newecastelle , CMGREGOR-M4,224.2232

and soo toke hys jornaye unto Norham warde . CMGREGOR-M4,224.2233

Ande in the wey thedyrwarde there met with hym that fals Duke of
Somersette , Syr Raffe Percy , the Lorde Hungerforde , and the Lorde
Roos , whythe alle hyr company , to the nombyr of v_M=l= men of armys .
CMGREGOR-M4,224.2234

And thys metynge was a_pon Synte Markys day ; CMGREGOR-M4,224.2235

and that same day was Syr Raffe Percy slayne . CMGREGOR-M4,224.2236

And whenn that he was dede alle +te party was schomfytyd and put to
rebuke . CMGREGOR-M4,224.2237

Ande every man avoydyd CMGREGOR-M4,224.2238

and toke hys way with fulle sory hertys . CMGREGOR-M4,224.2239

And thenn my Lorde of Mountegeue toke hys hors CMGREGOR-M4,224.2240

and roode to Norham , CMGREGOR-M4,224.2241

and fecchyd yn the Schottys , CMGREGOR-M4,224.2242

and brought hem unto the Lordys Commyssyonourys . CMGREGOR-M4,224.2243

And there was concludyd a pes for xv yere with the Schottys .
CMGREGOR-M4,224.2244

And the Schottys ben trewe hyt moste nedys contynu so longe ,
CMGREGOR-M4,224.2245

but hit ys harde for to tryste unto hem , CMGREGOR-M4,224.2246

for they byn evyr founde fulle of gyle and dyssayte .
CMGREGOR-M4,224.2247

Ande the xiiij daye of May nexte aftyr , my Lorde of Mountegeue toke hys
jornaye toward Hexham from the Newecastelle . CMGREGOR-M4,224.2248

And there he toke +tat fals Duke Harry Benford of Somersett , the Lord
Roos , the Lorde Hungerforde , Syr Pylyppe Wenteworthe , Syr Thomas
Fyndorne , whythe many o+tyr ; CMGREGOR-M4,224.2249

loo , soo manly a man ys thys good Erle Mountegewe ,
CMGREGOR-M4,224.2250

for he sparyd not hyr malysse , nor hyr fallssenysse , nor gyle , nor
treson , CMGREGOR-M4,224.2251

and toke meny of men CMGREGOR-M4,224.2252

and slowe many one in that jornaye . CMGREGOR-M4,224.2253

The xv day of May folowynge thys good Lorde Mountegewe let to be smete
of the heddys of thes men , the whyche that hyr namys here folowyn in
wrytyng : CMGREGOR-M4,224.2254

<P_225>

Summa v . CMGREGOR-M4,225.2256

The Dukys hedde of Somersett , Edmon Fysche , knyght , Edmon Bradschawe
, Water Hunte , Blacke Jakys . CMGREGOR-M4,225.2257

At the Newecastelle , the xvij day of May , he let to be smete of the
heddys , as the namys of hem done appere here aftyr in wrytynge :
CMGREGOR-M4,225.2258

Summa v . CMGREGOR-M4,225.2259

Fyrste , the hedde of the Lorde Hungerforde , The Lorde Roos , Syr
Thomas Fyndorne , Barnarde de la Mare , Nycholas Massam .
CMGREGOR-M4,225.2260

Ande the xviij day of May he let to be smyte of at Mydlam the hedys of
thes men that hyr namys folowyn here in wrytynge : CMGREGOR-M4,225.2261

Summa vij . CMGREGOR-M4,225.2262

Syr Phylippe Wentworthe , knyght , Wyllam Penyngton , Warde of Copclyffe
, Olyver Wentworthe , Wylliam Spyller , John Senyer , of Yorke , Thomas
Hunte , foote man . CMGREGOR-M4,225.2263

At Yorke , the xxvj day of May , he let to be smete of the heddys of
thos men that hyr namys folowyn here in wrytynge : CMGREGOR-M4,225.2264

Summa xiiij CMGREGOR-M4,225.2265

Syr Thomas Hoosy , Thomas Gosse , Rohert Myrfyn , John Butler , Roberte
Wattys , porter to Kyng Harry , Thomas Fenwyke , Robert Cockefelde ,
Wylliam Bryce , Wylliam Dauson , <P_226> John Chapman , John Edyrbeke ,
Rycharde Taverner , John Russelle , Robert Conqueror .
CMGREGOR-M4,226.2266

Ande be_syde Newecastelle , the same monythe , +ter was i-take Taylbosse
in a cole pyt , CMGREGOR-M4,226.2267

and he hadde moche mony with hym , bothe golde and sylvyr , that schulde
have gon unto Kyng Harry : CMGREGOR-M4,226.2268

and yf $it had come to Harry , lat Kynge of Ingelonde , hyt wolde have
causyd moche sory sorowe , CMGREGOR-M4,226.2269

for he had ordaynyd harneys and ordenance i-nowe , CMGREGOR-M4,226.2270

but the men wolde not go one fote with hym tylle they had mony .
CMGREGOR-M4,226.2271

And they waytyd dayly and howrely for mony that thys Taylebosse shulde
have send unto hem or brought hyt ; CMGREGOR-M4,226.2272

the summa was iij_M=l= marke . CMGREGOR-M4,226.2273

And the lordys mayny of Montegewe were sore hurte and seke ,
CMGREGOR-M4,226.2274

and many of hys men wer slayne by_for in the grete jornays ,
CMGREGOR-M4,226.2275

but thys mony was departyd a-monge hem , CMGREGOR-M4,226.2276

and was a very holsum salfe for hem . CMGREGOR-M4,226.2277

And in the day folowyng Taylebosse loste hys hedde at Newecastelle .
CMGREGOR-M4,226.2278

Nowe take hode what love may doo , CMGREGOR-M4,226.2279

for love wylle not nor may not caste no faute nor perelle in noo thyng .
CMGREGOR-M4,226.2280

That same yere , the fyrste day of May be_fore sayde or wrete , oure
soverayne lorde the Kynge , Edwarde the iiij , was weddyd to the Lorde
Ryvers doughter ; CMGREGOR-M4,226.2281

hyr name ys Dame Elyzabethe , that was wyffe unto Syr John Grey , sone
and heyre unto the Lady Ferys of Groby . CMGREGOR-M4,226.2282

And thys maryage was kepte fulle secretely longe and many a day , that
no man knewe hyt ; CMGREGOR-M4,226.2283

but men mervelyd that oure soverayne lorde was so longe with_owte any
wyffe , CMGREGOR-M4,226.2284

and were evyr ferde that he had be not chaste of hys levynge .
CMGREGOR-M4,226.2285

But on Alle Halowe day at Redyng there it was knowe ,
CMGREGOR-M4,226.2286

for there the kynge kepte hys comyn conuselle , CMGREGOR-M4,226.2287

and the lordys mevyd hym and exortyd hym in Goddys name to ben weddyd
and to lyffe undyr the lawe of God and Chyrche , CMGREGOR-M4,226.2288

and they wold sente in too sum stronge lond to <P_227> inquere a quene
good of byrthe , a-cordyng unto hys dygnyte . CMGREGOR-M4,227.2289

And thenn our soverayne myght not no longer hyde hys maryage ,
CMGREGOR-M4,227.2290

and tolde hem howe he hadde done , CMGREGOR-M4,227.2291

and made that the maryage shuld be oppynde unto hys lordys .
CMGREGOR-M4,227.2292

Alle so the same somer my Lorde of Warwycke and hys brether the Lorde
Mountegewe , that was made Erle of Northehumberlond by the kynge , they
ij layde a sege unto the castelle of Anwyke CMGREGOR-M4,227.2293

a gate hyt by a-poyntement . CMGREGOR-M4,227.2294

And in the same wyse and forme they gate the castelle of Dunsterborowe
by the same mene . CMGREGOR-M4,227.2295

And thenne they layd sege to the castelle of Bamborowe ,
CMGREGOR-M4,227.2296

and layde grete ordynans and gonnys there too . CMGREGOR-M4,227.2297

And manly they gate hyt by fors , CMGREGOR-M4,227.2298

and toke there yn that fals traytur Syr Raffe Gray ,
CMGREGOR-M4,227.2299

and brought hym unto the kynge to the castelle of Pomfrete .
CMGREGOR-M4,227.2300

And fro thens he was ladde to Dankester , CMGREGOR-M4,227.2301

and there hys hedde was smete of and sent to London ,
CMGREGOR-M4,227.2302

and hyt was sette a-pon Londyn Bryge . CMGREGOR-M4,227.2303

<heading>

Raffe Gosselyn , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,227.2305

John Tate CMGREGOR-M4,227.2306

John Stone CMGREGOR-M4,227.2307

Anno v=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,227.2308

<$$heading>

And thys yere was hyt ordaynyd that the noubylle of vj s. viij d.
shulde goo for viij s. iiij d. CMGREGOR-M4,227.2310

And a newe cune was made . CMGREGOR-M4,227.2311

Fyrste they made an Angylle CMGREGOR-M4,227.2312

and hit went for vj s. viij d. , and halfe ande Angyl for xl d. ;
CMGREGOR-M4,227.2313

but they made non farthyngys of that gold . CMGREGOR-M4,227.2314

And thenne they made a gretter cune CMGREGOR-M4,227.2315

and namyd hyt a ryalle , CMGREGOR-M4,227.2316

and that wentte for x s. , and halfe the ryalle for v s. , and the
farthynge for ij s. vj d . CMGREGOR-M4,227.2317

And they made newe grotys not soo goode as the olde ,
CMGREGOR-M4,227.2318

but they were worthe iiij d . CMGREGOR-M4,227.2319

And then sylvyr rosse to a grytter pryce , CMGREGOR-M4,227.2320

for an unce of sylvyr was sette at iij s. , and better of sum sylvyr .
CMGREGOR-M4,227.2321

But at the be-gynnynge of thys mony men grogyd passynge sore ,
CMGREGOR-M4,227.2322

for they couthe not rekyn that gold not so quyckely as they dyd the olde
golde . CMGREGOR-M4,227.2323

And men myght goo thoroughe_owte a strete or thoroughe a hoole parysche
or that he myght chonge hit . CMGREGOR-M4,227.2324

And sum men sayd that the newe golde was not soo good as the olde golde
was , CMGREGOR-M4,227.2325

for it was alayyd . CMGREGOR-M4,227.2326

Alle soo in thys yere in the monythe of May was Quene Elyzabet <P_228>
crownyd at Westemyster . CMGREGOR-M4,228.2327

And many knyghtys were made of the Bathe , of the whyche the were v
aldyrmen of the cytte of London i-made with hem . CMGREGOR-M4,228.2328

Thes v aldyrmen were made knyghtys of the Bathe : Syr Hewe Wyche ,
mercer Thomas Coke , draper . Raffe Gosselyn , draper , Syr John Plomer
, Syr Harry Whafyr . And no moo of the cytte but thes v ,
CMGREGOR-M4,228.2329

and hyt ys a grete worsehyppe unto alle the cytte .
CMGREGOR-M4,228.2330

Alle soo that yere be-ganne a gre cyssym by_twyne fryers and prystys ,
CMGREGOR-M4,228.2331

but the Fryer Charmys , that ys to saye the Whyte Freers , be-ganne hyt
fryste at Poules Crosse . CMGREGOR-M4,228.2332

He that be-ganne thys matyr was borne in Flete Strete , a skyner ys sone
, CMGREGOR-M4,228.2333

and hys name ys Syr Harry Parker ; CMGREGOR-M4,228.2334

he blamyd men for there grete copy of hyr goodys , CMGREGOR-M4,228.2335

and in specyalle he $blamyd benefysyd men that had grete benyficys and
prestys that had temporalle lyffelod . CMGREGOR-M4,228.2336

For he sayd and affermyd that non of the xij Apostolys nor Cryste hadde
no thyng in propyr but alle in comyn , CMGREGOR-M4,228.2337

and sayd and affyrmyd by hys connyng , as strong as he cowthe , that
Cryste was a begger and had nought but by way of almys .
CMGREGOR-M4,228.2338

And that made men to groge and to muse passyng soore .
CMGREGOR-M4,228.2339

But the Sonday aftyr there was a docter of devynyte , Maystyr Wylliam
Ive , the mayster of Whytyngdon ys College , sayde agayne the fryer ,
and prevyd that Cryste was poore and kepte noo grete tresoure ,
CMGREGOR-M4,228.2340

but as for beggyng he utterly denyde hyt , CMGREGOR-M4,228.2341

and by hooly scrypture prevyd hit soo that men undyrstode that the fryer
erryd sore agayne Hooly Chyrche ; CMGREGOR-M4,228.2342

ande thenne the fryers gan malyngne a_gayne thys docter .
CMGREGOR-M4,228.2343

Thenne in Advente they provyde a docter of the Whyte Fryers , Mastyr
Thomas Haldon , and that he schulde preche agayne +te Mayster Wylliam
Ive before sayd , CMGREGOR-M4,228.2344

and there he talkyd moke of the beggyng of Cryste , CMGREGOR-M4,228.2345

and put the pepylle that the <P_229> same mater schulde ben determenyd
in there scholys by_twyne hym and a Grey Fryer at the White Fryers in
Flete Strete the Wanysdaye vij nyght aftyr . CMGREGOR-M4,229.2346

And the Sonday folowyng , a docter of devynyte , Mayster Edwarde Story ,
person of Alle Halowys the More in London , and aftyr confessor unto the
Quene , and aftyr that Byschoppe of Carlylle , prechyd at Poulys Crosse
, CMGREGOR-M4,229.2347

and as moche as he myght wolde have passefyde the mater ,
CMGREGOR-M4,229.2348

and sayde that hyt $was blasphemy soo to reherse and say by oure Lord
Cryste . CMGREGOR-M4,229.2349

But that same Sonday the fryers set uppe byllys at every chyrche dore
that the docter sayde nott trought , CMGREGOR-M4,229.2350

but the trought shulde be schewyd ande sayd by Docter Mayster John
Mylverton , the pryor of the same place , CMGREGOR-M4,229.2351

and he was provyncyalle of the same ordyr . CMGREGOR-M4,229.2352

And that aftyr_noone in hys sarmon he raylyd soore and grevysly to
fortefy hys bretheryn ys sayyngys , that sum laye men were wrothe with
the fryers and whythedrewe hyr almys from them ; CMGREGOR-M4,229.2353

and sum men were not plesyd with hyr curettes , CMGREGOR-M4,229.2354

and sayde that they hadde noo ryght to have any offerynge but lyffe by
almys as Cryste dyde ; CMGREGOR-M4,229.2355

ande thys men were devydyd , sum welle and sum ylle .
CMGREGOR-M4,229.2356

But the Wanysday the docter , Mayster Halden , kepte the scholys with_in
the Fryers CMGREGOR-M4,229.2357

and dysputyd a_gayne a Gray Fryer as he promysyd ; CMGREGOR-M4,229.2358

and at that scholys were many grete docters and clerkys to geve hym
audyens . CMGREGOR-M4,229.2359

And they thought he yode soo farre that Mayster Alcocke , a docter of
lawe and commyssary unto the Dene of Synt Martyns in the Graunte ,
assytyd the fryer that he shulde appere by_fore the Arche_Byschoppe of
Cauntylbury at Lambeffe . CMGREGOR-M4,229.2360

And the fryer sayde he wold not obbey his cytacyon ,
CMGREGOR-M4,229.2361

for alle fryers ben exempte for alle the byschoppe ys power , but hit
were for eresy ; CMGREGOR-M4,229.2362

and the docter of lawe sytyd hym for eresy . CMGREGOR-M4,229.2363

Thenne at the begynnyng of the terme aftyr Estyr the fryer apperyd
by_fore Mayster Docter Wynterborne , my lordys offycer and juge in suche
causys and othyr as for spyrytualte . CMGREGOR-M4,229.2364

And +ter were many worthy docters a_gayne the fryer ,
CMGREGOR-M4,229.2365

but he lenyd evyr <P_230> unto hys prevelege , CMGREGOR-M4,230.2366

but he schewyd non but a bylle unselyd . CMGREGOR-M4,230.2367

Thenne the mater was put to my Lorde of London , by so moche that alle
thys trobylle was done in hys dyossy , CMGREGOR-M4,230.2368

and the Chaunceler of Inglond , that was my Lorde of Warwycke ys brother
, toke party a-gayne the fryers ; CMGREGOR-M4,230.2369

and the day folowynge the provyncyalle and Docter Haldon come to Poulys
by_fore my Lorde of London CMGREGOR-M4,230.2370

and brought hyr prevelegys with hem , CMGREGOR-M4,230.2371

but +t=e= prevelege wolde not serve that tyme for noo cause of eresy .
CMGREGOR-M4,230.2372

And my lorde lawfully a-sytyd them to appere by_fore hym that same
aftyr_non , CMGREGOR-M4,230.2373

but they come not , CMGREGOR-M4,230.2374

for the provyncyalle toke hys way a-non towarde Rome .
CMGREGOR-M4,230.2375

And Docter Haldon toke noo leve of the byschoppe . CMGREGOR-M4,230.2376

And thenn my Lord Chaunceler hyrde that they were gone ,
CMGREGOR-M4,230.2377

and send for the yong fryer Harry Parker CMGREGOR-M4,230.2378

and commaundyd hym to preson . CMGREGOR-M4,230.2379

And he was take from preson and sende unto my Lorde of London .
CMGREGOR-M4,230.2380

And the Sonday aftyr the same fryer , Harry Parker , objuryd that he
sayd , CMGREGOR-M4,230.2381

and sayde as we saye , that Cryste ys lorde of ovyr alle thynge ,
CMGREGOR-M4,230.2382

and he confessyd alle so that very nede causyd them to saye that Cryste
beggyd , by cause that men shulde take the ordyr of fryers moste
parfytyste of alle orders . CMGREGOR-M4,230.2383

But one fryer couthe not be ware by a nother , CMGREGOR-M4,230.2384

for with a whyle in the vacacyon tyme a Blake Fryer prechyd alle_moste
the same . CMGREGOR-M4,230.2385

And he was exampnyd by_fore my Lorde of London , CMGREGOR-M4,230.2386

and was made to preche agayne and revokyd . CMGREGOR-M4,230.2387

Thenne my Lord of London cursyd thes ij docters , Mayster John Mylverton
and Docter Thomas Halden , at Poulys Crosse for there contymacy ,
CMGREGOR-M4,230.2388

and hyt happyd that Docter Ive dyde the execucyon of the curse ,
CMGREGOR-M4,230.2389

and +tat grevyd the fryers soore , CMGREGOR-M4,230.2390

and sayde that he was sette alle in malys ; CMGREGOR-M4,230.2391

but thys Docter Ive myght not chese . CMGREGOR-M4,230.2392

Ande be_fore thys tyme the fore_sayde Docter Ive kepte the scolys at
Poulys +tat ys undyr the chapter house , CMGREGOR-M4,230.2393

and there he radde many fulle nobylle lessonnys to prove that Cryste was
lorde of alle and noo begger , CMGREGOR-M4,230.2394

and he dyde hyt aftyr the forme of scholys , CMGREGOR-M4,230.2395

for <P_231> he hadde hys abyte and hys pelyon , and a vyrger with a
sylvyr rodde waytynge uppon hym . CMGREGOR-M4,231.2396

And the same fryer of Menors that answeryd the Whyte Fryer answeryd hym
onys , CMGREGOR-M4,231.2397

and many tymys he dyspute and radde in that scholys ;
CMGREGOR-M4,231.2398

he kepte hyt more then ij yere . CMGREGOR-M4,231.2399

Thenn the fryers straynyd curtesy whoo sholde answery hym .
CMGREGOR-M4,231.2400

And ssum fryers desyryd to answerye hym , CMGREGOR-M4,231.2401

but at the day of hyr desyre +tey apperyd not . CMGREGOR-M4,231.2402

And thenn men layde grete wagers the Provyncyalle wolde come home and
doo many thyngys , CMGREGOR-M4,231.2403

and causyd that a fryer of Rome made a tretysse of the beggyng of Cryste
, that welle was hym that myght have a copy of hyt ,
CMGREGOR-M4,231.2404

and they were to sylle at many placys in Rome , CMGREGOR-M4,231.2405

and sum were sende home to the Whyte Freers , CMGREGOR-M4,231.2406

but yet hit happyd that they come to thys Docter Ive , that he
undyr_stode the consayte welle i-nowe and sayde fulle lytylle or nought
. CMGREGOR-M4,231.2407

Thenn the Pope havyng woundyr of the complaynt of thys frye , and
inqueryde of suche men as come late owte of Inglonde of the mater ;
CMGREGOR-M4,231.2408

and whenne he undyrstode the mater , he wrote downe to the
Arche_Byschoppe of Cauntyrbury and to the Byschoppe of London ,
CMGREGOR-M4,231.2409

and thonkyd hem that they were so trewe to Cryste and Hooly Chyrche ,
CMGREGOR-M4,231.2410

and desyryd to have alle the hoole mater and proscesse i-sende unto hym
by wrytynge . CMGREGOR-M4,231.2411

And so hyt was , every thyng as ny as {that_it_was} they couthe ymageny
, puttyng alle favyr and parcyallyte and malysce a syde .
CMGREGOR-M4,231.2412

But the very trewe processe thys nobylle Docter Ive wrote unto the Pope
the maner , sayyng , and prechyng in hyr sermonys , bothe hys doyng and
sayyng , as welle as the fryers , and the actys of bothe scholys .
CMGREGOR-M4,231.2413

And ix docters of devynyte and bachelers of devynyte subscrybyd hyr
namys with hyr owne hondys , CMGREGOR-M4,231.2414

and testefyde that alle was trewe that thys sayde Docter Ive hadde
wretyn , CMGREGOR-M4,231.2415

for hyt was exampnyd and radde by_fore alle +te byschoppys that tyme
beyng at London , and by the same docters and clerkys that subscrybyd .
CMGREGOR-M4,231.2416

And that large and grete letter was sende with <P_232> the byschopys
letters . CMGREGOR-M4,232.2417

And yf that Docter Ivys letter hadde ben i-selyd with sum lordys sele
spyrytualle , or an notarys syne there on , the freer had ben brende in
shorte tyme ; CMGREGOR-M4,232.2418

hit hadde non othyr sele but hys owne sygnett . CMGREGOR-M4,232.2419

Ande the kynge toke a grete party on thys mater , CMGREGOR-M4,232.2420

for thes fryers hadde causyd moche trobylle a_monge hys pepylle ,
CMGREGOR-M4,232.2421

and therfore he desyryd that holy fadyr the Pope to chastysse suche
trespasserrys and brekers of the pesse , CMGREGOR-M4,232.2422

and send forthe a letter with the othyr letters . CMGREGOR-M4,232.2423

Thenne the Pope ressayvyd thes letters , CMGREGOR-M4,232.2424

and undyrstode alle the hoole processe , CMGREGOR-M4,232.2425

and made hys cardynallys to exampne the fryer , CMGREGOR-M4,232.2426

and by hys answerynge they found ix moo poyntys that he erryd on ,
CMGREGOR-M4,232.2427

and sone aftyr he was put into the castylle of Angylle in stronge preson
, CMGREGOR-M4,232.2428

and laye there yn alle_moste iij yere . CMGREGOR-M4,232.2429

And evyr hys frendys and the fryers lokyd aftyr hys comyng home ,
CMGREGOR-M4,232.2430

but he may not , CMGREGOR-M4,232.2431

for he hathe bund hym sylfe unto the Pope by an yryn oblyacyn faste
i-selyd a-boute hys ij helys . CMGREGOR-M4,232.2432

And +ten he lackyd mony and frende_schyppe , CMGREGOR-M4,232.2433

submyttyd hym to the Pope ; CMGREGOR-M4,232.2434

but whenn he shalle cum hom I wotte not , CMGREGOR-M4,232.2435

but for sothe hys artycylys ben dampnyd , CMGREGOR-M4,232.2436

whether he be or nought I wot ner ; CMGREGOR-M4,232.2437

I truste ye shalle knowe aftyr in tyme comyng by Goddys grace , hoo have
us alle in hys blessyd kepyng . CMGREGOR-M4,232.2438

Amen for cheryte . CMGREGOR-M4,232.2439

Raffe Vernay , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,232.2440

Costantyne CMGREGOR-M4,232.2441

Syr Harry Wafer CMGREGOR-M4,232.2442

A=o= vj=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,232.2443

That yere the mayr had a pesabylle yere and a plentefulle of alle Goddys
goode . CMGREGOR-M4,232.2444

Annd he festyd the kyng , the quene , and the quene ys modyr , the lady
of Bedford , and many othyr lordys . CMGREGOR-M4,232.2445

And whenn they had done and dynyd the offesers $had to there reward the
clothe of state that was ovyr the tabylle , honggyng ovyr hit .
CMGREGOR-M4,232.2446

And the substance of napery was gyffe with dyvers men of offyce .
CMGREGOR-M4,232.2447

Alle so that yere Kyng Harry that was come in to Lonkesschyre owte of
Schotland ; CMGREGOR-M4,232.2448

tylle he com in to Forneysse Fellys he was nevyr i-knowe ,
CMGREGOR-M4,232.2449

but there he was knowe and take , CMGREGOR-M4,232.2450

and a_pon Syn <P_233> Jamys eve he was brought to the Towre of London ,
and iij moo with hym ; CMGREGOR-M4,233.2451

ij were hys chapelaynys , Mayster Docter Bydon , Docter of Devynyte ,
and Mayster Thomas Mannynge , Bacheler of Lawe , and sum tyme Dene of
Wyndesore and secretary unto the Quene . CMGREGOR-M4,233.2452

But he was sone delyveryd owte of preson by cause +tat he was agyd and
infecte with a whyte lepyr . CMGREGOR-M4,233.2453

But Docter Bydon was in preson long tyme , CMGREGOR-M4,233.2454

and hys frendys laboryd for hym soore CMGREGOR-M4,233.2455

and payde moche mony for hys delyverans . CMGREGOR-M4,233.2456

But he couthe not kepe hys tounge , CMGREGOR-M4,233.2457

but in schorte tyme he was put yn a_gayne , CMGREGOR-M4,233.2458

and was there more thenne a quarter of a yere , CMGREGOR-M4,233.2459

and +ten uppon hys othe he was delyveryd CMGREGOR-M4,233.2460

and ys owte of donger , &c. CMGREGOR-M4,233.2461

John Yonge , Mayre of London ; CMGREGOR-M4,233.2462

menne callyd hym the good Mayre CMGREGOR-M4,233.2463

John Brommer CMGREGOR-M4,233.2464

Harry Bryce CMGREGOR-M4,233.2465

Anno vij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,233.2466

That yere the mayre beryd $his lady , and hys scheryffe and hys
swyrdeberer . CMGREGOR-M4,233.2467

And thenn Stocketon +te mercer was chose for Harry Bryce , the scheryffe
that was , CMGREGOR-M4,233.2468

and he was made scheryffe fro that tyme tylle Mychellemasse , and no
lenger . CMGREGOR-M4,233.2469

Alle soo thys same yere there was an herryke i-brende at the Towre Hylle
, CMGREGOR-M4,233.2470

for he dyspysyd the sacrament of the auter ; CMGREGOR-M4,233.2471

hys name was Wylliam Balowe , CMGREGOR-M4,233.2472

and he dwellyd at Walden . CMGREGOR-M4,233.2473

And he and hys wyffe were abjuryd longe tyme be-fore .
CMGREGOR-M4,233.2474

And my Lorde of London kepte hym in preson longe tyme ,
CMGREGOR-M4,233.2475

and he wolde not make noo confessyon unto noo pryste , but oonly unto
God , CMGREGOR-M4,233.2476

and sayde that no pryste had noo more pouer to hyre confessyon thenn
Jacke Hare . CMGREGOR-M4,233.2477

And he had no consyence to ete flesche aftyr Estyr , as welle as thoo
that were bothe schryffe and houselyd . CMGREGOR-M4,233.2478

At the tyme of hys brennynge a Docter , Mayster Hewe Damelet , person of
Syn Petrys in the Cornehylle , laboryd hym to be-leve in the hooly
sacrament of the auter . CMGREGOR-M4,233.2479

And thys was the herytyke ys sayyng : CMGREGOR-M4,233.2480

" Bawe ! bawe ! bawe ! CMGREGOR-M4,233.2481

What menythe thys pryste ? CMGREGOR-M4,233.2482

Thys I wotte welle , +tat on Goode Fryday ye make many goddys to be
putte in the sepukyr , CMGREGOR-M4,233.2483

but at Ester day they can not a_ryse them <P_234> self , but that ye
moste lyfte them uppe and bere them forthe , or ellys they wylle ly
stylle yn hyr gravys . " CMGREGOR-M4,234.2484

Thys was that tyme of hys departyng from +tat worschipfulle docter .
CMGREGOR-M4,234.2485

Alle soo that same yere there were many chyrchys robbyd in the cytte of
London only of the boxys with the sacrament . CMGREGOR-M4,234.2486

And men had moche wondyr of thys , CMGREGOR-M4,234.2487

and sad men demyd that there had ben sum felyschippe of heretykes
assocyat to_gederys . CMGREGOR-M4,234.2488

But hyt was knowe aftyr that it was done of very nede that they robbyd ,
wenyng unto the thevys that the boxys hadde ben sylvyr ovyr gylt , but
was but copyr . CMGREGOR-M4,234.2489

And by a copyr smythe hit was a_spyde of hyr longe contynuans in hyr
robbory . CMGREGOR-M4,234.2490

At a tyme , alle the hole feleschippe of thevys sat at sopyr to_gedyr ,
CMGREGOR-M4,234.2491

and had be_fore hem fulle goode metys . CMGREGOR-M4,234.2492

But that copyr smythe sayde , " I wolde have a more deynty mosselle of
mete , CMGREGOR-M4,234.2493

for I am wery of capon , conynge , and chekyns , and suche smalle metes
. CMGREGOR-M4,234.2494

And I mervyl I have ete ix goddys at my sopyr that were in the boxys .
" CMGREGOR-M4,234.2495

And that schamyd sum of them in hyr hertys . CMGREGOR-M4,234.2496

Ande a smythe of lokyers crafte , that made hyr instruments to opyn
lockys , was +ter that tyme , CMGREGOR-M4,234.2497

for hit was sayde at the sopyr in hys howse . CMGREGOR-M4,234.2498

And in the mornynge he went to chyrche to hyre a masse ,
CMGREGOR-M4,234.2499

and prayde God of marcy ; CMGREGOR-M4,234.2500

but whenn the pryste was at the levacyon of the masse he myght not see
that blessyd sacrament of the auter . CMGREGOR-M4,234.2501

Thenn he was sory , CMGREGOR-M4,234.2502

and a_bode tylle a nothyr pryste wente to masse and helpyd the same
pryste to masse . CMGREGOR-M4,234.2503

and say howe the oste lay a-pon the auter and alle the tokyns and sygnys
that the pryste made ; CMGREGOR-M4,234.2504

but whenn the pryste hylde uppe that hooly sacrament at the tyme of
levacyon he myght se no thynge of that blessyd body of Cryste at noo
tyme of the masse , not somoche at Agnus Dei ; CMGREGOR-M4,234.2505

and thenn he demyd that hit had ben for febyllenys of hys brayne .
CMGREGOR-M4,234.2506

And he went unto the ale howse CMGREGOR-M4,234.2507

and dranke a ob. of goode alle , CMGREGOR-M4,234.2508

and went to chyrche agayne , CMGREGOR-M4,234.2509

and he helpyd iij moo prystys to masse , CMGREGOR-M4,234.2510

and in no maner a wyse he ne myght se that blessyd sacrament ;
CMGREGOR-M4,234.2511

but +ten bothe he and hys feleschyppe lackyd grace .
CMGREGOR-M4,234.2512

And in schorte tyme aftyr iiij of hem were take , CMGREGOR-M4,234.2513

and the samelokyer was one of +t=e= iiij , CMGREGOR-M4,234.2514

and they were <P_235> put in Newgate . CMGREGOR-M4,235.2515

And by processe they were dampnyd for that trespas and othyr to be
hangyd and to be drawne fro Newgate to Tyborne , CMGREGOR-M4,235.2516

and soo they were . CMGREGOR-M4,235.2517

And the same daye that they shulde dy they were confessyd .
CMGREGOR-M4,235.2518

And thes iiij docters were hyr confessourys , Mayster Thomas Eberalle ,
Maystyr Hewe Damylett , Mayster Wylliam Ive , and Mayster Wylliam
Wryxham . CMGREGOR-M4,235.2519

Thenn Mayster Thomas Eberalle wente to masse , CMGREGOR-M4,235.2520

and that lokyer aftyr hys confessyon myght see that blessyd sacrament
welle i-nowe , CMGREGOR-M4,235.2521

and thenne rejoysyd CMGREGOR-M4,235.2522

and was gladde , CMGREGOR-M4,235.2523

and made an opyn confessyon by_fore the iiij sayde docters of devynyte .
CMGREGOR-M4,235.2524

And I truste that hyr soulys ben savyd . CMGREGOR-M4,235.2525

Lo , ye obstinat herytykys that holdythe a-gayn confessyon , here ys an
exampylle grete i-nowe to converte you yf ye have any grace withyn you ,
CMGREGOR-M4,235.2526

for the boke saythe that non est verior probacio quam oculorum
demonstracio . CMGREGOR-M4,235.2527

But ye ben soo i-blyndyd that thoughe ye hyre of suche men that have
sene suche thyngys ye wylle not be_leve but ye hit see ,
CMGREGOR-M4,235.2528

and thenn ye lese your demeryte ; CMGREGOR-M4,235.2529

for scripture saythe , Fides non habet meritum ubi humana racio habet
experimentum . CMGREGOR-M4,235.2530

God geve you to a_mende . CMGREGOR-M4,235.2531

Amen . CMGREGOR-M4,235.2532

Thys yere there come many inbasyters into Ingelond fro the Kynge of
Fraunce for many dyvers thynges , CMGREGOR-M4,235.2533

but they desyred a perpetualle pesse . CMGREGOR-M4,235.2534

And sum inbassyters com fro the Kyng of Spayne . CMGREGOR-M4,235.2535

And a Patryarke come from the Emperoure , CMGREGOR-M4,235.2536

and that Patryarke was of Antyoche . CMGREGOR-M4,235.2537

And from Schotlond come inbassyters . CMGREGOR-M4,235.2538

And sum com from the Duke of Burgon , and sum from Bratayne .
CMGREGOR-M4,235.2539

Also there com inbassyters from the Kynge of Napyllys .
CMGREGOR-M4,235.2540

And inbassytors com from the Conte de Ferare . CMGREGOR-M4,235.2541

And that same yere come a legatt from the Pope ; CMGREGOR-M4,235.2542

and he lay at Syn Bartolomewe the <P_236> Lasse in a grete place of a
Lombardys , CMGREGOR-M4,236.2543

and he kepte a goode housholde , CMGREGOR-M4,236.2544

and hys men were fulle welle gydyd . CMGREGOR-M4,236.2545

That legat wolde nevyr come at noo festys nor dyners with no man , with
kyng nor lorde , save with grete instance he rode to More with the
Arche_Byschoppe of Yorke , CMGREGOR-M4,236.2546

and dynyd there CMGREGOR-M4,236.2547

and com home to hys bedde . CMGREGOR-M4,236.2548

Where fore that he com to thys lond fulle fewe men can say ,
CMGREGOR-M4,236.2549

but he was the best Latyn man that com into Inglond many yerys , and
fulle curtesse with_alle . CMGREGOR-M4,236.2550

Men drede that in tyme comyng hit wylle be knowe that hys comyng hedyr
was kept so prevely . CMGREGOR-M4,236.2551

Alle so the same yere there was ded of armys done by_fore Mydsomer in
Smethefylde by_twyne the Lorde Schalys , the Quenys brother , and the
Bastarde of Burgoyn , bothe on horsse backe and in fote ;
CMGREGOR-M4,236.2552

but I wot not what I shalle say of hit , whethyr hit was fortune ,
crafte , or cunnynge , CMGREGOR-M4,236.2553

but thys ys a trought , that the Bastarde of Burgayn lay in the fylde
bothe hors and man , CMGREGOR-M4,236.2554

and hys hors was so brusyd that he dyde with a whyle aftyr .
CMGREGOR-M4,236.2555

Thenne the nexte tyme they fought on fote fulle welle .
CMGREGOR-M4,236.2556

I reporte me unto hem that saye thys : CMGREGOR-M4,236.2557

I doo aftyr hyryng . CMGREGOR-M4,236.2558

Or ax of em that felde the strokys , CMGREGOR-M4,236.2559

they can telle you best . CMGREGOR-M4,236.2560

Alle so that sam tyme there was dede of armys done by_twynne ij Gasconys
of the kyngys house and other ij men of the Bastarde of Borgayn .
CMGREGOR-M4,236.2561

And the ij men in the kyngys party ther namys were Thomas Dalalaund ,
and that othyr Lewys de Brytellys ; CMGREGOR-M4,236.2562

and that ortheyr ij men in the Bastard ys syde there namys were Syr John
de Cassy , knyght , and that othyr Botton , squyer .
CMGREGOR-M4,236.2563

But the kynges men were better thenn they , bothe an hors backe and on
foote . CMGREGOR-M4,236.2564

And thes dedys of armys was for lyffe and dethe . CMGREGOR-M4,236.2565

And soo hyt was by_twyne the Lorde Schalys and the Bastarde of Burgayne
. CMGREGOR-M4,236.2566

<heading>

Thomas Olgrave , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,236.2568

Unfray Hayforde CMGREGOR-M4,236.2569

Thomas Stalbroke CMGREGOR-M4,236.2570

Anno viij=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,236.2571

<$$heading>

That yere were meny men a_pechyd of treson , bothe of the cytte and of
othyr townys . CMGREGOR-M4,236.2573

Of the cytte Thomas Coke , knyght and aldyrman , and John Plummer ,
knyght and aldyrman , CMGREGOR-M4,236.2574

but the kyng <P_237> gave hem bothe pardon . CMGREGOR-M4,237.2575

And a man of the Lorde Wenlockys , John Haukyns was hys name , was
hangyd at Tyburne and be_heddyd for treson . CMGREGOR-M4,237.2576

And Umfray Hayforde , the Scheryffe of London , was a_pechyd
CMGREGOR-M4,237.2577

and loste hys cloke for the same mater ; CMGREGOR-M4,237.2578

and many moo of the cytte loste moche goode for suche maters .
CMGREGOR-M4,237.2579

Ande that same yere the Kyngys suster , my Lady Margerete , was weddyd
unto the Duke of Burgon ; CMGREGOR-M4,237.2580

and she was brught thedyr with many worschypfulle lordys , knyghtys ,
and squyers . CMGREGOR-M4,237.2581

And the Byschoppe of Salysbury resayvyd hyr , CMGREGOR-M4,237.2582

for he hadde ben in that londe many dayes before . CMGREGOR-M4,237.2583

And sum gentylly men that brought hyr there bare hem soo evylle in hyr
gydynge , that they loste hyr heddys at London sone aftyr that they come
home . CMGREGOR-M4,237.2584

One Rychard Skyrys , squyer , Pounyngys , and Alphey , the iij were
by_heddyd at the Towre Hylle . CMGREGOR-M4,237.2585

Alle so that yere the Lorde Herberd of Walys gate the castelle of
Hardelowe in Walys ; CMGREGOR-M4,237.2586

that castylle ys so stronge that men sayde that hyt was inpossybylle
unto any man to gete hyt , CMGREGOR-M4,237.2587

but poyntment hit was gotyn . CMGREGOR-M4,237.2588

And sum of the pety captaynys were be-heddyd at the Towre Hylle at
London , CMGREGOR-M4,237.2589

for that castelle was fortefyd and vytaylyd by suche at lovyd Kyng Harry
; CMGREGOR-M4,237.2590

one of the men was callyd John Treublode . CMGREGOR-M4,237.2591

Alle soo that yere , a lytylle be-fore the sege of that castelle , the
olde Lorde Jesper and sum tyme Erle of Pembroke was in Walys ;
CMGREGOR-M4,237.2592

and he roode ovyr the contraye CMGREGOR-M4,237.2593

and helde many cessyons and cysys in Kyng Harrys name .
CMGREGOR-M4,237.2594

But men wene that he was not owte of Walys whenn that the Lord Herberde
come with hys oste ; CMGREGOR-M4,237.2595

but favyr at sum tyme dothe grete ese , as hit ys prevyd by the hydynge
of that lorde sum tyme Erle of Penbroke . CMGREGOR-M4,237.2596

Alle so that same yere the men that come home from Brougayne at hadde
ben at the maryage of my Lady Margarete were purposyd to have myschevyd
alle the Flemmyngys in Sowtheworke . CMGREGOR-M4,237.2597

And they wolde have take hyr conselle at a crosse be_syde Redclyffe ;
CMGREGOR-M4,237.2598

<P_238>

and alsosone as they myght have hadde any botys +tey wolde have londyd
at Horsey Downe and take the Flemmyngys owte of hyr beddys and slayne
them ; CMGREGOR-M4,238.2600

and many bot men were consenntyng unto hem , CMGREGOR-M4,238.2601

but they were a_spyde and lette of hyr purposse . CMGREGOR-M4,238.2602

And tho +tat were the causers of thys mater were set in preson .
CMGREGOR-M4,238.2603

Alle so hit was reportyd by the moste party of thoo men that com from
the maryage , that aftyr the dayes that were assynyd that every man
shuld wayte a_pon hys owne lord , lady , or mayster , and com noo more
at the dukys corte , that the Burgoners shewyd no more favyr unto
Englysche men thenn they wolde doo unto a Jewe . CMGREGOR-M4,238.2604

For mete and drynke was dyre i-nowe as thoughe hit hadde ben in the
londe of warre , CMGREGOR-M4,238.2605

for a schuldyr of motyn was solde for xij d . CMGREGOR-M4,238.2606

And as for beddyng , Lyard my hors had more ese thenn had sum good yeman
, CMGREGOR-M4,238.2607

for my hors stode in the howse CMGREGOR-M4,238.2608

and the yeman sum tyme lay with_owte in the strete ,
CMGREGOR-M4,238.2609

for las and iiij d a man shulde not have a bedde a nyght .
CMGREGOR-M4,238.2610

Lo howe sone they couthe play the nygardys ! CMGREGOR-M4,238.2611

Alle so that yere the Pope sende a bulle for the Cordyners ,
CMGREGOR-M4,238.2612

and cursyd thoo that made any longe pykys passynge ij yenchys of lengthe
, and that no Cordyner shuld not sylle no schone a_pone the Sonday , ne
put no schoo a_pon no man us fote , ne goo to noo fayrys a_pon the
Sonday uppon payne of cursynge . CMGREGOR-M4,238.2613

And the kynge grauntyd in a conselle and in the Parlement that hyt
shulde by put in execussyon , CMGREGOR-M4,238.2614

and thys was proclaymyd at Poulys Crosse . CMGREGOR-M4,238.2615

And sum men sayd that they wolde were longe pykes whethyr Pope wylle or
n@ @ylle , CMGREGOR-M4,238.2616

for they sayde the Popys curse wolde not kylle a flye .
CMGREGOR-M4,238.2617

God amend thys . CMGREGOR-M4,238.2618

And with_in schorte tyme aftyr sum of the Cordyners gate prevy selys and
proteccyons to make longe pykes , CMGREGOR-M4,238.2619

and causyd tho same men of hyr crafte that laboryd to the Pope for the
dystruccyon of longe pykes to be trobelyd and in grete donger .
CMGREGOR-M4,238.2620

<P_239>

<heading>

Maystyr Tayler , Mayre of London CMGREGOR-M4,239.2623

Synkyn Smythe CMGREGOR-M4,239.2624

Anno ix=o= . CMGREGOR-M4,239.2625

<$$heading>

That same yere in the Lentyn , whyle men were at sarmonys the Sonday
aftyr noon , a yong man that was watyng a_pon a man of the kyngys house
was soore vexyd and bound with the devylle . CMGREGOR-M4,239.2627

And that man after tyme that he was unbound by mannys hondys lay
specelys long tyme aftyr . CMGREGOR-M4,239.2628

And as sone as he myght speke men of worschippe com to hym ,
CMGREGOR-M4,239.2629

and sum grete statys alle so com to hym CMGREGOR-M4,239.2630

and desyryd hym to telle hem of hys syghtys that he had sene in hys
ferfulle vexacyon . CMGREGOR-M4,239.2631

And he tolde them many thyngys that he say , as ye shalle hyre here
aftyr by wrytyng and by confessyon of hym selfe unto the Pryer of
Chartyr Howse , and to many dyvers docters . CMGREGOR-M4,239.2632

For the Pryer of Chartyrhouse made a grete dyner to the docters ,
CMGREGOR-M4,239.2633
