<BEGIN_cminnoce-m4>

<P_1>

<heading>

IN DIE INNOCENCIUM SERMO PRO EPISCOPO PUERORUM . LAUDATE PUERI DOMINUM
. PSALMO CENTESIMO XII=O= ET PRO HUJUS COLLACIONIS FUNDAMENTO .
CMINNOCE-M4,1.4

<$$heading>

" Prayse ye childerne almyghty God , " as the Phylosophre sayth in
dyverse places . CMINNOCE-M4,1.6

All those thynges that have the habyte of parfyght cognycyon may move
themself and conveye themself to theyr ende , as a beest havynge
sensyble knowlege , CMINNOCE-M4,1.7

and man more parfyghter , bothe sensyble and intellygyble , may move
themself whether they wyll , CMINNOCE-M4,1.8

and so conveye al theyr accyons and dedes to theyr naturall ende ;
CMINNOCE-M4,1.9

but carencia cognicione , those thynges that lacke cognycyon , have no
mocyon of themself , CMINNOCE-M4,1.10

nother be dyrected to theyr ende without the helpe of an other . As an
arowe of hymself can not be movyd ne dyrected unto the prycke without
the redy conveyaunce of hym that shoteth , thrugh whom dyrectly he
attayneth his ende and is shotte to the prycke . CMINNOCE-M4,1.11

In as moche thenne as mankynde is ordeyned unto an ende ferre excedynge
the lymytes of nature , as it is wryten by the Holy Ghost in Ysay
lxiiij=o= , Oculus non vidit , Deus , absque te quae preparasti
exspectantibus te ; et prima ad Corintheos secundo - Oculus non vidit ,
nec aures audivit , nec in cor hominis ascendit quae preparavit Deus
diligentibus illum . " The eye of a man hath not seen , nother his
eeres herde , nother it can not be thought in his herte , th@ @ende that
Almyghty God hath ordened for them that lovyth hym . " To this ende man
, havynge the use of reason and parfyte knowlege , is dyrected <P_2> by
his free wyll as by a pryncypall in hymself to move hym to God . And
also by fayth as a pryncypall above naturall knowlege , without the
whiche it is impossyble to plese God and attayne to the ende of grace in
this present lyf and glory in heven , as it is wreten , CMINNOCE-M4,2.12

Sine fide impossibile est placere Deo . CMINNOCE-M4,2.13

Whyle it is so that man endowed with use of reason , havynge naturall
knowlege and free , maye not suffycyently dyrect hymself to the ende
that God hath ordeyned to without the helpe of fayth , as it is wryten ,
Jheremiae iiij=o= , Non est enim hominis vincere , neque viri est ut
ambuleter et dirigat gressus ejus . It is not in mannes power for to
overcome vyce of hymself , nother for to walke parfyghtly and dyrecte
his gooynge in the lawe of God , but by his grace assystente .
CMINNOCE-M4,2.14

Moche more those that bene chylderne for tendernesse of age and lacke of
knowlege can not dyrect theyr dedes convenyentely to that ende without
specyall helpe of God . CMINNOCE-M4,2.15

In token herof childerne newely sette to scole , lackynge the use of
reason and the habyte of cognycyon , have a recourse to Goddes dyreccyon
, fyrste lernynge this <paren> <font> Cristis Crosse be my spede
<$$font> <$$paren> , CMINNOCE-M4,2.16

and so begynnyth the A. B. C . CMINNOCE-M4,2.17

In wytnesse of defawte of this perfeccion in knowlege , Pyctagoras , to
the dyreccyon of Chylderne , he founde fyrste this letter in the A. B.
C. Y , the whyche as Ysider sayth Ethimologis is formyd and made after
the symylytude of mannes lyfe , CMINNOCE-M4,2.18

for this letter Y is made of two lynes ; CMINNOCE-M4,2.19

one is a right lyne , CMINNOCE-M4,2.20

the other is half ryght and half crokyd . CMINNOCE-M4,2.21

And soo verely the Infant age of a childe is ryght neyther dysposed to
vertue neyther to vyce , as the Phylosophre sayth , CMINNOCE-M4,2.22

Tanquam tabula nuda in qua nichil depingitur . CMINNOCE-M4,2.23

But the seconde age is called Adolescencia , CMINNOCE-M4,2.24

and hath two lynes , a ryght and a crokyd , sygnefyenge the dysposycion
that he hath thenne to vyce and thenne to vertue . In the whiche age is
the brekynge of every chylde to goodnes or to lewdenes .
CMINNOCE-M4,2.25

Therfore that age is moost uncertayn in knowlege , as Salomon sayth ,
CMINNOCE-M4,2.26

Proverbior . xxx=o= , Tria sunt michi difficilia ad cognoscendum , et
quartum penitus ignoro . Viam navis in medio maris , et viam viri in
adolescencia . CMINNOCE-M4,2.27

" Thre thynges <paren> sayth Salomon <$$paren> bene <P_3> harde to me to
knowe , CMINNOCE-M4,3.28

and the fourth utterly I knowe not . CMINNOCE-M4,3.29

The flyghte of the egle in the ayer ; CMINNOCE-M4,3.30

The waye of the serpent on the erthe ; CMINNOCE-M4,3.31

The sayllyng of a shyppe in the see ; CMINNOCE-M4,3.32

But the fourth and moost hardest is to understande the waye of a man in
his growynge age . " CMINNOCE-M4,3.33

Tho children thenne the whiche lacke dyscrecyon , use of reason , and
parfyght cognycyon , and yet attayne to the ende that is prepared for
mannes blysse , as thyse blessyd Innocentes whoos solempnyte we halowe
this daye <paren> Qui non loquendo sed moriendo confessi sunt <$$paren>
may moost in a specyall laude that gloryous Lorde <paren> sequentes
Agnum quocumque ierit , <$$paren> to whom by our Moder Holy Chirche in
tytle of tryumphe may contynually be applyed the wordes of my tyme
<paren> Laudate , pueri , Dominum <$$paren> , CMINNOCE-M4,3.34

ye chosen chylderne of God , lackynge the use of cognycyon and yet
gloryfyed by your passyon in lyfe everlastynge , prayse ye God .
CMINNOCE-M4,3.35

In the begynnynge thenne of this symple exhortacyon , that I a chylde ,
wantynge the habyte of connynge , maye be dyrected by hym that gave to
that childe Danyell Sermonem rectum et Spiritum Deorum , somwhat to say
to his laude and praysynge , and to alle pure chylderne that bene here
present edifyenge , we shall atte this tyme devoutly make our prayers .
In the whiche prayers I recommende unto your devocyons the welfare of
all Chrysts chirche ; our holy fader the Pope with alle the Clergye , my
Lorde of Caunterbury , and the ryghte reverende fader and worshypfull
lorde my broder Bysshopp of London your dyocesan , also for my
worshypfull broder $the Deane of this cathedrall chirche , wyth all
resydensaryes and prebendaryes of the same . CMINNOCE-M4,3.36

And moost intyerly I praye you to have myself in your specyal devocyon ,
so that I may contynue in this degree that I now stande , and never more
herafter to be vexed with Jerom's vysyon , the whiche is wryten Jeremiae
primo : CMINNOCE-M4,3.37

whan the good Lorde askyd of Jeremye , Quid tu vides , Jeremia ? he
answered CMINNOCE-M4,3.38

and sayd Virgam vigilantem ego video , CMINNOCE-M4,3.39

" A waken rodde I see , " sayd Jeremye . CMINNOCE-M4,3.40

Truely thys waken rodde oftentymes hath troubled me in my childehode ,
that lumbi mei impleti <P_4> sunt illusionibus , et non est sanitas in
carne mea ; afflictus sum et humiliatus sum nimis . CMINNOCE-M4,4.41

And therfor , though I be now in hye dygnyte , yet whan I see other here
my mayster that was thenne , operuit confusio faciem meam ; a voce
contremuerunt labia mea . CMINNOCE-M4,4.42

As Nero the Emperour wold to his mayster Seneca , the same wysshe I wold
to my mayster I love soo well . CMINNOCE-M4,4.43

And for theyr true dylygence that all my maysters the whiche taughte me
ony connynge in my youthe gave to me , I wolde they were promytted to be
perpetuall felowes and collegeners of that famouse college of the Kynges
foundacyon in Southwerke that men calle the Kynges Benche .
CMINNOCE-M4,4.44

Gretter worshypp I can@ @not wysshe than for to sytte in the Kynges owne
Benche . CMINNOCE-M4,4.45

And for by cause charyte is parfyght yf it be extendyd as well to the
ende of the lyf as it is the lyf self , I wolde they sholde ende ther
lyf in that holy waye the whyche often tymes I radde whan that I was
Querester , in the Marteloge of Poules , where many holy bodyes deyed ,
callyd in Latyn Via Tiburtina : in Englysshe asmoche to saye as the
highe waye to Tyburne . CMINNOCE-M4,4.46

In this behalf ye shall praye specyally for all prelates that cometh to
theyr dygnytee as I dyde ; CMINNOCE-M4,4.47

for , thanked be God , wythout conspyracy , lordshyp , or symony I was
sette in thys degree ; CMINNOCE-M4,4.48

for verely promocyon in ony realme hadde per demonum Simonem et
principem hath and shall brynge Crystys chirche in confusionem
dampnabilem . CMINNOCE-M4,4.49

In the seconde partye ye shall praye for the wele and peas of all
Crysten reames , specyally for the reame of Englonde , Our soverayne
lorde the Kyng , Our soverayne lady the Quene , My lorde the Prynce , My
lady the Kynges Moder , My lorde her Husbonde , with all the Lordes of
the Realme ; The welfare of this Cyte , for my ryght worshypful broder
and lover of the Mayer , with all the Aldermen and Shyrefs .
CMINNOCE-M4,4.50

In the thyrde partye , all the soules lyenge in the paynes of Purgatory
; specyally for the soule of the reverende fader my <P_5> lorde Thomas
Kempe late Bysshop , and for the soules of all Benefactours of thys
chirche of Poules , wyth all Crysten soules , for the whiche and for the
entent premysed I praye you devoutly saye a Pater Noster and an Ave .
CMINNOCE-M4,5.51

Laudate Pueri Dominum <paren> ut supra <$$paren> . CMINNOCE-M4,5.52

In as moche as Cryste sayth in the Gospell , Sinite parvulos venire ad
me , quia talium est regnum Celorum <paren> Mathei xix=o= . <$$paren> "
Suffre ye childerne to come to me , for of suche the kyngdom of heven is
fulfylled , " by whom , after saynt Austyn <paren> in originali , ubi
thema <$$paren> , it is not oonly understonde those that bene chylderne
of age , but those that bene chylderne pure in clennesse from synne and
malyce . CMINNOCE-M4,5.53

As the holy appostle saynt Poule sayth , Nolite effici pueri sensibus ,
malicia autem parvuli estote <paren> prima ad Corintheos xiiij=o=
<$$paren> " Be ye not chylderne in your wyttes ; CMINNOCE-M4,5.54

but from all synne and malyce be ye chylderne in clennesse . "
CMINNOCE-M4,5.55

And in this fourme alle maner of people and al maner of ages in
clennesse of lyf ought to be pure as childerne , to whom generally may I
saye Laudate , pueri , Dominum ; Laudate , pueri , Dominum in infantia ;
laudate Dominum in adolescentia ; laudate Dominum in perseverante etate
humana , - " Prayse , ye childerne , your God in your infant age ;
CMINNOCE-M4,5.56

Prayse ye hym in your growynge age ; CMINNOCE-M4,5.57

And prayse ye hym perseverauntly <paren> usque in senectum et senium
<$$paren> in your mannes age . " CMINNOCE-M4,5.58

And in thyse thre praysynge of thre ages shall stande the processe of
this symple Collacyon . CMINNOCE-M4,5.59

Thyse thre ages after the consceyte of the appostle <paren> ad Galathas
and ad Romanos <$$paren> is lykened to the thre lawes , - that is to
saye - to the Lawe of Kynde , the Lawe Wryten , and the Lawe of Grace .
CMINNOCE-M4,5.60

The first age is likenyd unto the Lawe of Kynde . CMINNOCE-M4,5.61

A childe fyrste whan he is in his infant age is not constreyned unto no
lawes ; CMINNOCE-M4,5.62

he is not corrected nother beten ; CMINNOCE-M4,5.63

and there is no defaute layde unto hym , CMINNOCE-M4,5.64

but utterly he is lefte unto the lawe of kynde . CMINNOCE-M4,5.65

Do he what somever he wyll , no man doth blame hym . CMINNOCE-M4,5.66

Morally the state of man inmedyatly after synne was verely the state of
childehode <P_6> and infans havinge no nouryce . CMINNOCE-M4,6.67

Whan that man was utterly left without ony expressyd lawe , havynge no
mayster , to his owne naturall inclynacyon as to his lawe , there was no
lawe of God newe put to hym . CMINNOCE-M4,6.68

Many defawtes dyde he , CMINNOCE-M4,6.69

and to many inconvenyences he ranne . CMINNOCE-M4,6.70

Correccyon was there none , but utter destruccyon , as Noes floode ,
destroyenge all infantes of mankynde save viij. persones <paren>
Genesis vij=o= . <$$paren> CMINNOCE-M4,6.71

The destruccyon of Sodome and of Gomor with other cytees <paren> Genesis
xix=o= . <$$paren> CMINNOCE-M4,6.72

And lyke wyse as a childe , havynge noo nouryce nor guyder deputed to
hym , may as well renne in to the fyre or water as to go besyde , soo
verely in the fyrste age of man , in the lawe of kynde , a man beynge
wythout a nouryce or guyder , lefte to hys naturall guydynge , mysusyd
soo ferre hymselfe , that he ranne to water where he was utterly
destroyed as I sayde before , save Noes housholde , and also to the fyre
, where a grete parte was destroyed . CMINNOCE-M4,6.73

And verely , Maysters , yf we clerely consydre our lyf and state that we
stande in now in thyse dayes , I fere me we shall fynde ourself soo
ferre guyded by our sensuall nature , that we shall nede to be purefyed
to our streyte correccyon wyth a streyte afflyccyon , as the water or
the fyre . CMINNOCE-M4,6.74

And all for lacke of our maysters and nouryces all wrapped in neclygence
taketh none attendaunce to us . CMINNOCE-M4,6.75

Our maysters and nouryces spyrytuall , Querentes quae sua sunt et non
quae Jhesu Christi , sunt canes muti non valentes latrare <paren> Ysaye
lvi=o= . <$$paren> CMINNOCE-M4,6.76

Our temporall rulers Infideles , socii furum , diligunt munera ,
sequuntur retribuciones ; pupillo non judicant , causa viduae non
ingreditur ad eos . <paren> Ysaye i=o= . <$$paren> CMINNOCE-M4,6.77

This neclygence in our nouryces spyrytuall and temporall causeth in the
Chirche insolent lyf , seculer conversacyon <paren> In habitu interiori
et exteriori , ut qualis populus talis sit et sacerdos . <$$paren>
CMINNOCE-M4,6.78

In the temporalte it causeth that manslaughter is not sette by ;
CMINNOCE-M4,6.79

lechery is pleysure ; CMINNOCE-M4,6.80

robbery and dysceyte is called chevesaunce ; extorcyon lordshyp , power
; falshede , a fete of wytte ; usury counted no synne .
CMINNOCE-M4,6.81

Quomodo facta est meretrix civitas fidelis , plena judicii . Justicia
habitavit in ea , nunc autem homicidae . Argentum tuum versum est in
scoriam . Vinum tuum mixtum est aqua . <paren> Ysaye i=o= . <$$paren>
CMINNOCE-M4,6.82

A merveyllous chaunge ! CMINNOCE-M4,6.83

somtyme our reame was prosperous , CMINNOCE-M4,6.84

<P_7>

now it is in mysery ; CMINNOCE-M4,7.86

somtyme Ryghtwysnesse was the cheyf ruler , CMINNOCE-M4,7.87

now Falshede is quarter-mayster ; CMINNOCE-M4,7.88

somtyme was inhabytaunt Peas , Love , and Charyte , now Wrathe and
Manslaughter and false Dyssymulacyon ; CMINNOCE-M4,7.89

somtyme Trouth was mayster of our marchauntes , <paren> nunc vero usura
et dolus <$$paren> . CMINNOCE-M4,7.90

And somtyme Trouth stode upryght , CMINNOCE-M4,7.91

now he is fallen . CMINNOCE-M4,7.92

Good men have inserchyd the strete where he felle ; CMINNOCE-M4,7.93

some sayde he fell in Lombarde Strete , some sayde in Buklarsbury .
CMINNOCE-M4,7.94

And whan it was utterly knowe he was fallen in every strete <paren>
Veritas corruit in plateis <$$paren> , CMINNOCE-M4,7.95

the cause is none other but we lacke our maysters and guyders that
sholde streytly attende in this Infant age of condycyon that we bene in
. CMINNOCE-M4,7.96

Whan that infant age is ended , the fader provydeth for hys childe for a
mayster , the whyche gyveth instruccyon in small doctrynes , as in hys
Donate , Partes of reason , and suche other , the whiche mayster
comunely is called Pedagogus in Latyne . CMINNOCE-M4,7.97

This mayster gevyth commaundementes to the childe in his growynge age .
CMINNOCE-M4,7.98

And he breke them he is sharpely correctyd . CMINNOCE-M4,7.99

There is no fawte that he doth but he is punysshed . CMINNOCE-M4,7.100

Somtyme he wryngeth hym by the eeres . CMINNOCE-M4,7.101

Sometyme he geveth hym a strype on the honde wyth the ferell .
CMINNOCE-M4,7.102

Some tyme beteth hym sharpely with the rodde . CMINNOCE-M4,7.103

And so with commaundementes and sharpe correccyon he geveth hym full
instruccyon in the lawer scyence . CMINNOCE-M4,7.104

So in lyke manere after the lawe of kynde . CMINNOCE-M4,7.105

As mankynde grewe in age almyghty God provyded to man an enfourmer that
was called Moyses , the whiche sholde teche man his pryncypalles and
small and rude doctrynes . CMINNOCE-M4,7.106

And so the olde lawe taught to man his Donate and Partes of reason .
CMINNOCE-M4,7.107

Also he taught hym how he sholde gyve to God his partes : the whyche
were sacrefyces , oblacyons and tythes justely and truely to be gyven to
God - as it is wryten <paren> Ecclesiasticis xxxv=o= . <$$paren>
CMINNOCE-M4,7.108

Da Altissimo secundum Donatum ejus . CMINNOCE-M4,7.109

That what thou sholdest gyve <P_8> also to thy neyghbour and broder his
partes , that is to saye , almes dedes frely wythout grutchynge ,
lenynge of thy good without ony trust or hope of usury , and forgevynge
thy neyghbour yf he be in necessyte without trouble for Goddes sake ;
CMINNOCE-M4,8.110

and lyke wyse as the people under Moyses growynge in childehode , thyse
thynges were taught by the whiche specyally Goddes lawe and praysynge
was encreaced , so in our growyng age in vertue that gode Lorde <paren>
cujus laus est in ecclesia sanctorum <$$paren> canne not be better
praysed , than {he_can_be_praised} yf we gyve unto hym justly and truely
his Donat , to hym oblacyons , sacrefyces , and tythes .
CMINNOCE-M4,8.111

To our neyghbour mercyfully geve oure almesse , CMINNOCE-M4,8.112

and pyteuously forgyve offences and dettes to theym that bene nedy and
maye not paye . CMINNOCE-M4,8.113

Thyse bene the thynges that longeth to Goddes praysynge in mankyndes
childehode , as is wryten of Thoby <paren> Thobie primo , <$$paren>
CMINNOCE-M4,8.114

Haec et his similia puerulus secundum legem observabat .
CMINNOCE-M4,8.115

In Moyses tyme streyte commaundementes were gyven to Man , streyte
punysshmentes and sharpe correccyons ; CMINNOCE-M4,8.116

they were taken by the eere streytly , whan it commaunded in the Lawe
aurem pro aure , dentem pro dente , without ony mercy .
CMINNOCE-M4,8.117

He that gadred styckes on the Sabot daye was stoned unto the dethe .
CMINNOCE-M4,8.118

And for one grutched ayenst theyr mayster Moyses , the whiche was but
Pedagogus , the chosen woman moost accepte , Maria , Aaron 's sister ,
was smytten of God with the infyrmyte of leprehode . CMINNOCE-M4,8.119

How ofte tymes breke we our holy daye ! CMINNOCE-M4,8.120

How oft tymes grutche we ayenst our maysters , not holdynge us content
with noo kynge , nother prynce , archebysshopp , nor bysshopp ; beynge
as varyaunt as the mone ! CMINNOCE-M4,8.121

And yet the good Lorde spareth us . CMINNOCE-M4,8.122

The old lawe was harde to observe ; in the whiche tyme God entreatyd
mankynde after his wrath and punysshement . Wherfore he was callyd Deus
ulcionum , for whoos delyver mercy cryed to almyghty God to sende
mankinde a newe mayster that sholde entreate hym and teche more
curtously ; CMINNOCE-M4,8.123

and it lyked hym , Non ex operibus justiciae quae fecimus nos , sed
secundum suam misericordiam , <paren> Ad Titum iij=o=. <$$paren> to
come downe hymself CMINNOCE-M4,8.124

and toke on hym oure mortallyte , CMINNOCE-M4,8.125

gave us a newe lawe , CMINNOCE-M4,8.126

<P_9>

wold suffre none but hymselfe to be oure mayster ; where with all love
and benygnyte , without sharpnesse , he taught us noo rude nother grose
erthly doctrynes , as they were taughte in the olde lawe ;
CMINNOCE-M4,9.128

but he taughte us subtyll thynges , hevenly dyvynytee , oure glory and
oure blysse <paren> Docebat eos de regno Dei <$$paren> .
CMINNOCE-M4,9.129

And as longe as we bene in the scole of mercyfull benygnytee and
gentylnesse , though we doo fawtes , purposynge to amende , soo longe he
abydeth us pacyently , holdynge hymself content . CMINNOCE-M4,9.130

For by cause we bene now in mannes state and parfyght age with oure owne
correccyon <paren> Propterea expectat Deus ut misereatur vestri
<$$paren> <paren> Ysaye tricesimo . <$$paren> CMINNOCE-M4,9.131

And yf we dyfferre and wyll not correcte our selfe here in the scole of
mercy , full grevously and moost sharply shall we abyde the swerde of
correccyon of his ryghtwysnesse , as dayly by experyence we maye fele .
CMINNOCE-M4,9.132

Therfore , in the thre ages of oure lyfe lette us besye ourselfe to
prayse God wyth pure childerne , amendynge our lyfe by dedes of penaunce
and vertuouse dedes usynge , exhortynge you with the wordes of my tyme -
CMINNOCE-M4,9.133

Laudate , pueri , Dominum . CMINNOCE-M4,9.134

The fourme and the maner how that we sholde worshyp and love almyghty
God in the thre Ages , that is to saye , in Childehode , Yongthe , and
Manhode , is shewed to us by a prety conceyte of oure comyn Kalender in
every boke of servyce . CMINNOCE-M4,9.135

Ye shall understande that every moneth noted in the Kalender is dyvyded
in thre partyes , that is to say Kalendas , Nonas , and Ydus .
CMINNOCE-M4,9.136

The fyrst daye of every moneth is called and named Kalendas ;
CMINNOCE-M4,9.137

the seconde is namyd , not Kalendas , but quarto , quinto , or sexto
Nonas , and soo tyll ye come to Nonas ; CMINNOCE-M4,9.138

and after Nonas , the dayes bene namyd Ydus tyll ye come to the myddell
, and thenne all the moneth after named Kalendas after certen nombres ;
as the myddes of the monthe is namyd <font> xix. <$$font> other <font>
xviii. <$$font> Kalendas , countynge lesse tyll ye come to the ende .
CMINNOCE-M4,9.139

Morally by these thre , Kalendas , Nonas , and Ydus , is understande the
thre Ages of Man . CMINNOCE-M4,9.140

By Kalendas is understande Childhode ; CMINNOCE-M4,9.141

Kalendae is as moche to saye quasi colendo , CMINNOCE-M4,9.142

for the consuetude of the <P_10> Romaynes was , the fyrste daye of the
moneth that is called Kalendas falleth , to solempnyse to ther goddes
Hely , Juno et Jupyter . CMINNOCE-M4,10.143

So verely the childehode of man is dedycate to devocyon .
CMINNOCE-M4,10.144

Thenne sette the faders the childerne to scole ; CMINNOCE-M4,10.145

and thenne be they taughte to serve God , to saye grace , to helpe the
preest to synge ; for to be meke , gentyll , and lowely .
CMINNOCE-M4,10.146

Thenne saye they our Lady matens , and bene ryght devoute . Of whom may
be verefyed that is wryten by Davyd - CMINNOCE-M4,10.147

Haec est generacio quaerencium Dominum , CMINNOCE-M4,10.148

that is the generacyon that besyly by devocyon seke almyghty God .
CMINNOCE-M4,10.149

By the seconde daye that is callyd Nonas I understande the seconde age ,
that is callyd Juventus , Youthe . CMINNOCE-M4,10.150

Nonae dicuntur quasi nullae , CMINNOCE-M4,10.151

for in that daye the Romayns worshypt no Goddes , CMINNOCE-M4,10.152

nother in that season was noo festyvall dayes ; CMINNOCE-M4,10.153

or elles nonae dicuntur quasi nundinae , as moche to saye as a fayer ,
CMINNOCE-M4,10.154

for in that tyme they occupied themself in fayers and marchaundyses .
CMINNOCE-M4,10.155

And herto convenyently may be the Youthe of man applyed ,
CMINNOCE-M4,10.156

that is in specyall from xiiij. yeres unto xviij. , in the whiche he
is ful of undevocyon , CMINNOCE-M4,10.157

and all_moost forgetith to worshyp his God or ony saynt .
CMINNOCE-M4,10.158

And yf he do it with his mouthe , his herte is ful ferre from God aboute
worldly vanytees . CMINNOCE-M4,10.159

As it is wryten , Populus hic labiis me honorat , cor autem eorum longe
est a me <paren> Ysay . xxix=o= . <$$paren> CMINNOCE-M4,10.160

Congruently also Youthe maye be namyd Nonae i. nundinae - a fayer or
market , CMINNOCE-M4,10.161

for in this age is the marchaundyse of the devyll . CMINNOCE-M4,10.162

The worlde habundauntly bought . CMINNOCE-M4,10.163

Here the yonge man byeth a strompettes body for his body and soule .
CMINNOCE-M4,10.164

Here all vayne marchaundyses of the worlde bene bought , to the whiche
is very prone and redy oure youthe of Englonde , as we may see dayly .
CMINNOCE-M4,10.165

There is no vanyte in no partye of the worlde but we bene redy to bye it
: longe heres and shorte collers of Almayns ; evyll fasshenyd garmentes
and devyllisshe shoone and slyppers of Frensmen ; powches and paynted
gyrdylles of Spaynardes ; newe founde hattes of Romayns ;
CMINNOCE-M4,10.166

and so is fulfylled the wordes of oure Lord wryten in holy scrypture
CMINNOCE-M4,10.167

<paren> Jeremiae xi=o= . <$$paren> , CMINNOCE-M4,10.168

Elongaverunt a me , et ambulaverunt post vanitatem , et vani facti sunt
. CMINNOCE-M4,10.169

" This Youthe <paren> sayth our Lorde , <$$paren> hath ferre put
hymselfe fro me , CMINNOCE-M4,10.170

and they have <P_11> walked after theyr owne vanytees ,
CMINNOCE-M4,11.171

and by theyr invencyons they bene all vayne and undoubtyd . "
CMINNOCE-M4,11.172

This alterable vanytees in garmentes is a true argument and a faythfull
conclusyon to all wyse straungers that Englysshemen bee as chaungable in
theyr maners and wyttes as they be in outwarde garmentes .
CMINNOCE-M4,11.173

And yf this vayne marchaundyse were oonly in youth of the reame it were
more tollerable , CMINNOCE-M4,11.174

but inveterati dierum malorum , boyes of fyfty yere of age are as
newe_fangled as ony yonge men be . The whiche by reasons holde torne
theyr face from the worlde , consideryng the ende of theyr lyfe .
CMINNOCE-M4,11.175

But lytell that is consydered ; CMINNOCE-M4,11.176

ye , rather in theyr vanytees they bene praysed . CMINNOCE-M4,11.177

Quoniam laudatur peccator in desideriis animae suae , et iniquus
benedicitur . <paren> Psalmo , etc. <$$paren> CMINNOCE-M4,11.178

And the thyrde daye is callyd Ydus , the whiche is asmoche to saye as
divisio , a departynge . By whom I understande the latter age of man ,
in the whiche man is dyvyded from the worlde by dethe , to the ende for
to receyve good or evyll as he hath deserved in this present lyfe .
CMINNOCE-M4,11.179

Lyke wyse thenne , as in the fyrst part of the moneth there is but one
daye that is callyd Kalendae , the whiche is the fyrste daye of all ,
but in the later ende there be many dayes that bene named of the worde
Kalendas , so , in comparyson of the fyrst daye of thy lyfe , that is to
say of thy childehode , in the whiche thou wert well disposyd in
devocyon , multeplye thy good lyf and holy dysposycyon in thy latter
dayes , that thou mayest deserve oure Lordes mercy , sayenge with the
Prophete in the sawter , Et senectus mea in misericordia uberi .
CMINNOCE-M4,11.180

And how be it thou hast often before in thy yonge age and myddell age
dyvydyd thy lyfe somtyme to vertue , somtyme to vyce , ye as now in thy
latter age kepe thy lyfe holy in vertue . CMINNOCE-M4,11.181

Dyvyde it no more tyll dethe dyvyde it , after the counsell of the
Gospelles , CMINNOCE-M4,11.182

Joh'is xix=o= : CMINNOCE-M4,11.183

Non scindamus eam , sed sorciamur de ea cujus sit - CMINNOCE-M4,11.184

" Lete us not cutte it , CMINNOCE-M4,11.185

but lete us draw lottes whose it shall be . " CMINNOCE-M4,11.186

How be it this texte after the letter is understonde of Crystys cote
without seme , yet convenyently it may be understonde of every mannys
lyfe or soule - CMINNOCE-M4,11.187

Tunica dicitur quasi tua <P_12> unica . CMINNOCE-M4,12.188

Whether is more surer thyne owne than thy soule , for the whiche prayeth
the Prophete , sayeng , Erue a framea , Deus , animam meam , et de manu
canis unicam meam . CMINNOCE-M4,12.189

And whyle it is so that man lyveth here in two lyves , one lyvynge after
the pleasur of the worlde , the tother lyvynge here in vertue by grace
to come to blysse , tho that woll geve one partye of theyr lyfe to vyces
and another to vertue , and specially in theyr age , thyse maner of men
dyvyde theyr cote , CMINNOCE-M4,12.190

and they , nother all the tayllers in the worlde , shall never make it
hole ayen ; CMINNOCE-M4,12.191

for , as saynt Jerome sayth in a pystle , Difficile , ymmo impossibile
est , ut quis in praesenti et in futuro fruatur gaudiis , ut hic ventrem
et ibi mentem , et de deliciis transiat - " It is harde ,
CMINNOCE-M4,12.192

ye it is impossyble , that a man may have alle joye in this worlde and
also in heven - here to fylle his body and there to fylle his mynde ; "
CMINNOCE-M4,12.193

for truly the delytes of this worlde and the joyes of heven can never be
togyder in one cote of thy soule . Wherfore yf thy cote of thy soule be
ones hoole in vertue , without ony seme of vice , departe it never , but
lete it retorne in sortem Domini , and contynewe thy lyfe in goodnesse
without ony interrupcyon . CMINNOCE-M4,12.194

And lyke wyse as in thy childehode thou begannest vertue oonly , where
thrugh in that age thou prayseste almyghty God , so in thy myddell age ,
all wanton vanytees layed apart , encresse thy vertu as tho dyde of whom
it is wryten , Ibunt de virtute in virtutem quousque videatur Deus .
CMINNOCE-M4,12.195

And that the ende may be conformable to his pryncyple without dyvysion ,
followynge the wayes of Innocency with thyse holy Innocents , in whose
commendacions syngeth our moder holy chirche , Novit Dominus viam
Innocentum qui non steterunt in viis peccatorum . CMINNOCE-M4,12.196

And yf we be in synne to repare ourselfe to the state of grace without
wyll to falle agayn . CMINNOCE-M4,12.197

And in recognysaunce of this gracyous benefyte of remyssyon we may
lovyngly prayse God as I exhortyd you <P_13> before , sayeng , Laudate ,
Pueri , Dominum , graunt us all , Cryste Jhesus Splendor Patris , corona
Innocencium . CMINNOCE-M4,13.198

Amen . CMINNOCE-M4,13.199

Explicit sermo ista . CMINNOCE-M4,13.200
