<BEGIN_cmmalory-m4>

<P_2>

<heading>

I . CMMALORY-M4,2.4

Merlin CMMALORY-M4,2.5

<$$heading>

HIT befel in the dayes of Uther Pendragon , when he was kynge of all
Englond and so regned , that there was a myghty duke in Cornewaill that
helde warre ageynst hym long tyme , CMMALORY-M4,2.7

and the duke was called the duke of Tyntagil . CMMALORY-M4,2.8

And so by meanes kynge Uther send for this duk chargyng hym to brynge
his wyf with hym , CMMALORY-M4,2.9

for she was called a fair lady and a passynge wyse , CMMALORY-M4,2.10

and her name was called Igrayne . CMMALORY-M4,2.11

So whan the duke and his wyf were comyn unto the kynge , by the meanes
of grete lordes they were accorded bothe . CMMALORY-M4,2.12

The kynge lyked and loved this lady wel , CMMALORY-M4,2.13

and he made them grete chere out of mesure CMMALORY-M4,2.14

and desyred to have lyen by her , CMMALORY-M4,2.15

but she was a passyng good woman CMMALORY-M4,2.16

and wold not assente unto the kynge . CMMALORY-M4,2.17

And thenne she told the duke her husband CMMALORY-M4,2.18

and said , ' I suppose that we were sente for that I shold be
dishonoured . Wherfor , husband , I counceille yow that we departe from
hens sodenly , that we maye ryde all nyghte unto oure owne castell . '
CMMALORY-M4,2.19

And in lyke wyse as she saide so they departed , that neyther the kynge
nor none of his counceill were ware of their departyng .
CMMALORY-M4,2.20

Also soone as kyng Uther knewe of theire departyng soo sodenly , he was
wonderly wrothe ; CMMALORY-M4,2.21

thenne he called to hym his pryvy counceille CMMALORY-M4,2.22

and told them of the sodeyne departyng of the duke and his wyf .
CMMALORY-M4,2.23

Thenne they avysed the kynge to send for the duke and his wyf by a grete
charge : CMMALORY-M4,2.24

' And yf he wille not Come at your somons , thenne may ye do your best ;
CMMALORY-M4,2.25

thenne have ye cause to make myghty werre upon hym . ' CMMALORY-M4,2.26

Soo that was done , CMMALORY-M4,2.27

and the messagers hadde their ansuers ; CMMALORY-M4,2.28

and that was thys , shortly , that neyther he nor his wyf wold not come
at hym . CMMALORY-M4,2.29

Thenne was the kyng wonderly wroth ; CMMALORY-M4,2.30

and thenne the kyng sente hym playne word ageyne CMMALORY-M4,2.31

and badde hym be redy and stuffe hym and garnysshe hym ,
CMMALORY-M4,2.32

for within forty dayes he wold fetche hym oute of the byggest castell
that he hath . CMMALORY-M4,2.33

Whanne the duke hadde thys warnynge anone he wente CMMALORY-M4,2.34

and furnysshed and garnysshed two stronge castels of his , of the whiche
the one hyght Tyntagil and the other castel hyght Terrabyl .
CMMALORY-M4,2.35

So his <P_3> wyf , dame Igrayne , he putte in the castell of Tyntagil ,
CMMALORY-M4,3.36

and hymself he putte in the castel of Terrabyl , the whiche had many
yssues and posternes oute . CMMALORY-M4,3.37

Thenne in all haste came Uther with a grete hoost CMMALORY-M4,3.38

and leyd a syege aboute the castel of Terrabil , CMMALORY-M4,3.39

and ther he pyght many pavelyons . CMMALORY-M4,3.40

And there was grete warre made on bothe partyes and moche peple slayne .
CMMALORY-M4,3.41

Thenne for pure angre and for grete love of fayr Igrayne the kyng Uther
felle seke . CMMALORY-M4,3.42

So came to the kynge Uther syre Ulfius , a noble knyght ,
CMMALORY-M4,3.43

and asked the kynge why he was seke . CMMALORY-M4,3.44

' I shall telle the , ' said the kynge . CMMALORY-M4,3.45

' I am seke for angre and for love of fayre Igrayne , that I may not be
hool . ' CMMALORY-M4,3.46

' Wel , my lord , ' said syre Ulfius , ' I shal seke Merlyn
CMMALORY-M4,3.47

and he shalle do yow remedy , that youre herte shal be pleasyd . '
CMMALORY-M4,3.48

So Ulfius departed CMMALORY-M4,3.49

and by adventure he mette Merlyn in a beggars aray , CMMALORY-M4,3.50

and ther Merlyn asked Ulfius whome he soughte , CMMALORY-M4,3.51

and he said he had lytyl ado to telle hym . ' CMMALORY-M4,3.52

Well , ' saide Merlyn , ' I knowe whome thou sekest , CMMALORY-M4,3.53

for thou sekest Merlyn ; CMMALORY-M4,3.54

therfore seke no ferther , CMMALORY-M4,3.55

for I am he . CMMALORY-M4,3.56

And yf kynge Uther wille wel rewarde me and be sworne unto me to
fulfille my desyre , that shall be his honour and profite more than myn
, CMMALORY-M4,3.57

for I shalle cause hym to have alle his desyre . ' CMMALORY-M4,3.58

' Alle this wyll I undertake , ' said Ulfius , ' that ther shalle be
nothyng resonable but thow shalt have thy desyre . ' CMMALORY-M4,3.59

' Well , ' said Merlyn , ' he shall have his entente and desyre ,
CMMALORY-M4,3.60

and therfore , ' saide Merlyn , ' ryde on your wey , CMMALORY-M4,3.61

for I wille not be long behynde . ' CMMALORY-M4,3.62

Thenne Ulfius was glad CMMALORY-M4,3.63

and rode on more than a paas tyll that he came to kynge Uther Pendragon
and told hym he had met with Merlyn . CMMALORY-M4,3.64

' Where is he ? ' said the kyng . CMMALORY-M4,3.65

' Sir , ' said Ulfius , ' he wille not dwelle long . ' CMMALORY-M4,3.66

Therwithal Ulfius was ware where Merlyn stood at the porche of the
pavelions dore , CMMALORY-M4,3.67

and thenne Merlyn was bounde to come to the kynge . CMMALORY-M4,3.68

Whan kyng Uther sawe hym he said he was welcome . CMMALORY-M4,3.69

' Syr , ' said Merlyn , ' I knowe al your hert every dele .
CMMALORY-M4,3.70

So ye wil be sworn unto me , as ye be a true kynge enoynted , to
fulfille my desyre , ye shal have your desyre . ' CMMALORY-M4,3.71

<P_4>

Thenne the kyng was sworne upon the four Evangelistes .
CMMALORY-M4,4.73

' Syre , ' said Merlyn , ' this is my desyre : the first nyght that ye
shal lye by Igrayne ye shal gete a child on her ; and whan that is borne
, that it shall be delyverd to me for to nourisshe there@ @as I wille
have it , CMMALORY-M4,4.74

for it shal be your worship and the childis availle as mykel as the
child is worth . ' CMMALORY-M4,4.75

' I wylle wel , ' said the kynge , ' as thow wilt have it . '
CMMALORY-M4,4.76

' Now make you redy , ' said Merlyn . CMMALORY-M4,4.77

' This nyght ye shalle lye with Igrayne in the castel of Tyntigayll .
CMMALORY-M4,4.78

And ye shalle be lyke the duke her husband , CMMALORY-M4,4.79

Ulfyus shal be lyke syre Brastias , a knyghte of the dukes ,
CMMALORY-M4,4.80

and I will be lyke a knyghte that hyghte syr Jordanus , a knyghte of the
dukes . CMMALORY-M4,4.81

But wayte ye make not many questions with her nor her men ,
CMMALORY-M4,4.82

but saye ye are diseased , CMMALORY-M4,4.83

and soo hye yow to bedde CMMALORY-M4,4.84

and ryse not on the morne tyll I come to yow , CMMALORY-M4,4.85

for the castel of Tyntygaill is but ten myle hens . ' CMMALORY-M4,4.86

Soo this was done as they devysed . CMMALORY-M4,4.87

But the duke of Tyntigail aspyed hou the kyng rode fro the syege of
Tarabil . CMMALORY-M4,4.88

And therfor that nyghte he yssued oute of the castel at a posterne for
to have distressid the kynges hooste , CMMALORY-M4,4.89

and so thorowe his owne yssue the duke hymself was slayne or ever the
kynge cam at the castel of Tyntigail . CMMALORY-M4,4.90

So after the deth of the duke kyng Uther lay with Igrayne , more than
thre houres after his deth , CMMALORY-M4,4.91

and begat on her that $nyght Arthur ; CMMALORY-M4,4.92

and or day cam , Merlyn cam to the kyng CMMALORY-M4,4.93

and bad hym make hym redy , CMMALORY-M4,4.94

and so he kist the lady Igrayne CMMALORY-M4,4.95

and departed in all hast . CMMALORY-M4,4.96

But whan the lady herd telle of the duke her husband , and by all record
he was dede or ever kynge Uther came to her , thenne she merveilled who
that myghte be that laye with her in lykenes of her lord .
CMMALORY-M4,4.97

So she mourned pryvely CMMALORY-M4,4.98

and held hir pees . CMMALORY-M4,4.99

Thenne alle the barons by one assent prayd the kynge of accord betwixe
the lady Igrayne and hym . CMMALORY-M4,4.100

The kynge gaf hem leve , CMMALORY-M4,4.101

for fayne wold he have ben accorded with her ; CMMALORY-M4,4.102

soo the kyng put alle the trust in Ulfyus to entrete bitwene them .
CMMALORY-M4,4.103

So by the entrete at the last the kyng and she met togyder .
CMMALORY-M4,4.104

' Now wille we doo wel , ' said Ulfyus ; CMMALORY-M4,4.105

' our kyng is a lusty knyghte and wyveles , CMMALORY-M4,4.106

and my lady Igrayne is a passynge fair lady ; CMMALORY-M4,4.107

it were grete joye unto us all and hit myghte please the kynge to make
her his quene . ' CMMALORY-M4,4.108

<P_5>

Unto that they all well accordyd CMMALORY-M4,5.110

and meved it to the kynge . CMMALORY-M4,5.111

And anone lyke a lusty knyghte he assentid therto with good wille ,
CMMALORY-M4,5.112

and so in alle haste they were maryed in a mornynge with grete myrthe
and joye . CMMALORY-M4,5.113

And kynge Lott of Lowthean and of Orkenay thenne wedded Margawse that
was Gaweyns moder , CMMALORY-M4,5.114

and kynge Nentres of the land of Garlot wedded Elayne :
CMMALORY-M4,5.115

al this was done at the request of kynge Uther . CMMALORY-M4,5.116

And the thyrd syster , Morgan le Fey , was put to scole in a nonnery ,
CMMALORY-M4,5.117

and ther she lerned so moche that she was a grete clerke of nygromancye
. CMMALORY-M4,5.118

And after she was wedded to kynge Uryens of the lond of Gore that was
syre Ewayns le Blaunche Maynys fader . CMMALORY-M4,5.119

Thenne quene Igrayne waxid dayly gretter and gretter .
CMMALORY-M4,5.120

So it befel after within half a yere , as kyng Uther lay by his quene ,
he asked hir by the feith she ought to hym whos was the child within her
body . CMMALORY-M4,5.121

Thenne was she sore abasshed to yeve ansuer . CMMALORY-M4,5.122

' Desmaye you not , ' said the kyng , ' but telle me the trouthe , and I
shall love you the better , by the feythe of my body ! '
CMMALORY-M4,5.123

' Syre , ' saide she , ' I shalle telle you the trouthe .
CMMALORY-M4,5.124

The same nyghte that my lord was dede , the houre of his deth as his
knyghtes record , ther came into my castel of Tyntigaill a man lyke my
lord in speche and in countenaunce , and two knyghtes with hym in
lykenes of his two knyghtes Barcias and Jordans , CMMALORY-M4,5.125

and soo I went unto bed with hym as I ought to do with my lord ;
CMMALORY-M4,5.126

and the same nyght , as I shal ansuer unto God , this child was begoten
upon me . ' CMMALORY-M4,5.127

' That is trouthe , ' saide the kynge , ' as ye say , CMMALORY-M4,5.128

for it was I myself that cam in the lykenesse . CMMALORY-M4,5.129

And therfor desmay you not , CMMALORY-M4,5.130

for I am fader to the child , ' CMMALORY-M4,5.131

and ther he told her alle the cause how it was by Merlyns counceil .
CMMALORY-M4,5.132

Thenne the quene made grete joye whan she knewe who was the fader of her
Child . CMMALORY-M4,5.133

Sone come Merlyn unto the kyng CMMALORY-M4,5.134

and said , ' Syr , ye must purvey yow for the nourisshyng of your child
. ' CMMALORY-M4,5.135

' As thou wolt , ' said the kyng , ' be it . ' CMMALORY-M4,5.136

' Wel , ' said Merlyn , ' I knowe a lord of yours in this land that is a
passyng true man and a feithful , CMMALORY-M4,5.137

and he shal have the nourysshyng of your child ; CMMALORY-M4,5.138

and his name is sir Ector , CMMALORY-M4,5.139

and he is a lord of fair lyvelode in many partyes in Englond and Walys .
CMMALORY-M4,5.140

And this lord , sir <P_6> Ector , lete hym be sent for for to come and
speke with you , CMMALORY-M4,6.141

and desyre hym yourself as he loveth you that he will put his owne child
to nourisshynge to another woman and that his wyf nourisshe yours .
CMMALORY-M4,6.142

And whan the child is borne lete it be delyverd to me at yonder pryvy
posterne , uncrystned . ' CMMALORY-M4,6.143

So like as Merlyn devysed it was done . CMMALORY-M4,6.144

And whan syre Ector was come he made fyaunce to the kyng for to
nourisshe the child lyke as the kynge desyred , CMMALORY-M4,6.145

and there the kyng graunted syr Ector grete rewardys .
CMMALORY-M4,6.146

Thenne when the lady was delyverd the kynge commaunded two knyghtes and
two ladyes to take the child bound in a cloth of gold , ' and that ye
delyver hym to what poure man ye mete at the posterne yate of the castel
. ' CMMALORY-M4,6.147

So the child was delyverd unto Merlyn , CMMALORY-M4,6.148

and so he bare it forth unto syre Ector CMMALORY-M4,6.149

and made an holy man to crysten hym CMMALORY-M4,6.150

and named hym Arthur . CMMALORY-M4,6.151

And so sir Ectors wyf nourysshed hym with her owne pappe .
CMMALORY-M4,6.152

Thenne within two yeres kyng Uther felle seke of a grete maladye .
CMMALORY-M4,6.153

And in the meanewhyle hys enemyes usurpped upon hym CMMALORY-M4,6.154

and dyd a grete bataylle upon his men CMMALORY-M4,6.155

and slewe many of his peple . CMMALORY-M4,6.156

' Sir , ' said Merlyn , ' ye may not lye so as ye doo ,
CMMALORY-M4,6.157

for ye must to the feld , though ye ryde on an hors-lyttar .
CMMALORY-M4,6.158

For ye shall never have the better of your enemyes but yf your persone
be there , CMMALORY-M4,6.159

and thenne shall ye have the vyctory . ' CMMALORY-M4,6.160

So it was done as Merlyn had devysed , CMMALORY-M4,6.161

and they caryed the kynge forth in an hors-lyttar with a grete hooste
towarde his enemyes , CMMALORY-M4,6.162

and at Saynt Albons ther mette with the kynge a grete hoost of the North
. CMMALORY-M4,6.163

And that day syre Ulfyus and sir Bracias dyd grete dedes of armes ,
CMMALORY-M4,6.164

and kyng Uthers men overcome the northeryn bataylle CMMALORY-M4,6.165

and slewe many peple CMMALORY-M4,6.166

and putt the remenaunt to flight ; CMMALORY-M4,6.167

and thenne the kyng retorned unto London CMMALORY-M4,6.168

and made grete joye of his vyctory . CMMALORY-M4,6.169

And thenne he fyll passynge sore seke so that thre dayes and thre
nyghtes he was specheles ; wherfore alle the barons made grete sorow and
asked Merlyn what counceill were best . CMMALORY-M4,6.170

' There n@ @ys none other remedye , ' said Merlyn , ' but God wil have
his wille . CMMALORY-M4,6.171

But loke ye al barons be bifore kynge Uther to-morne , and God and I
shalle make hym to speke . ' CMMALORY-M4,6.172

So on the morne alle the barons with Merlyn came tofore the kyng .
CMMALORY-M4,6.173

Thenne Merlyn said aloud unto kyng Uther , <P_7> ' Syre , shall your
sone Arthur be kyng after your dayes of this realme with all the
appertenaunce ? ' CMMALORY-M4,7.174

Thenne Uther Pendragon torned hym CMMALORY-M4,7.175

and said in herynge of hem alle , ' I gyve hym Gods blissyng and myne ,
CMMALORY-M4,7.176

and byd hym pray for my soule , and righteuously and worshipfully that
he clayme the croune upon forfeture of my blessyng , ' CMMALORY-M4,7.177

and therwith he yelde up the ghost . CMMALORY-M4,7.178

And thenne was he enterid as longed to a kyng , wherfor the quene ,
fayre Igrayne , made grete sorowe and alle the barons .
CMMALORY-M4,7.179

Thenne stood the reame in grete jeopardy long whyle , CMMALORY-M4,7.180

for every lord that was myghty of men maade hym stronge ,
CMMALORY-M4,7.181

and many wende to have ben kyng . CMMALORY-M4,7.182

Thenne Merlyn wente to the Archebisshop of Caunterbury CMMALORY-M4,7.183

and counceilled hym for to sende for all the lordes of the reame and
alle the gentilmen of armes that they shold to London come by Cristmas
upon payne of cursynge , and for this cause , that Jesu , that was borne
on that nyghte , that He wold of His grete mercy shewe some myracle , as
He was come to be Kynge of mankynde , for to shewe somme myracle who
shold be rightwys kynge of this reame . CMMALORY-M4,7.184

So the Archebisshop by the advys of Merlyn send for alle the lordes and
gentilmen of armes that they shold come by Crystmasse even unto London ,
CMMALORY-M4,7.185

and many of hem made hem clene of her lyf , that her prayer myghte be
the more acceptable unto God . CMMALORY-M4,7.186

Soo in the grettest chirch of London - whether it were Powlis or not the
Frensshe booke maketh no mencyon - alle the estates were longe or day in
the chirche for to praye . CMMALORY-M4,7.187

And whan matyns and the first masse was done there was sene in the
chircheyard ayenst the hyhe aulter a grete stone four square , lyke unto
a marbel stone ; CMMALORY-M4,7.188

and in myddes therof was lyke an anvylde of stele a foot on hyghe ,
CMMALORY-M4,7.189

and theryn stack a fayre swerd naked by the poynt , CMMALORY-M4,7.190

and letters there were wryten in gold aboute the swerd that saiden thus
: ' WHOSO PULLETH OUTE THIS SWERD OF THIS STONE AND ANVYLD IS RIGHTWYS
KYNGE BORNE OF ALL $ENGLOND . ' CMMALORY-M4,7.191

Thenne the peple merveilled CMMALORY-M4,7.192

and told it to the Archebisshop . CMMALORY-M4,7.193

' I commande , ' said th'@ @Archebisshop , ' that ye kepe yow within
your chirche and pray unto God still ; that no man touche the swerd tyll
the hyhe masse be all done . ' CMMALORY-M4,7.194

So whan all masses were done all the lordes wente to beholde the <P_8>
stone and the swerd . CMMALORY-M4,8.195

And whan they sawe the scripture som assayed suche as wold have ben kyng
, CMMALORY-M4,8.196

but none myght stere the swerd nor meve hit . CMMALORY-M4,8.197

' He is not here , ' said the Archebisshop , ' that shall encheve the
swerd , CMMALORY-M4,8.198

but doubte not , God will make hym knowen . CMMALORY-M4,8.199

But this is my counceill , ' said the Archebisshop , ' that we lete
purvey ten knyghtes , men of good fame , and they to kepe this swerd .
' CMMALORY-M4,8.200

So it was ordeyned , CMMALORY-M4,8.201

and thenne ther was made a crye that every man shold assay that wold for
to wynne the swerd . CMMALORY-M4,8.202

And upon Newe Yeers day the barons lete maake a justes and a tournement
, that alle knyghtes that wold juste or tourneye there myght playe .
CMMALORY-M4,8.203

And all this was ordeyned for to kepe the lordes togyders and the comyns
, CMMALORY-M4,8.204

for the Archebisshop trusted that God wold make hym knowe that shold
wynne the swerd . CMMALORY-M4,8.205

So upon New Yeres day , whan the servyce was done , the barons rode unto
the feld , some to juste and som to torney . CMMALORY-M4,8.206

And so it happed that syre Ector that had grete lyvelode aboute London
rode unto the justes , CMMALORY-M4,8.207

and with hym rode syr Kaynus , his sone , and yong Arthur that was hys
nourisshed broder ; CMMALORY-M4,8.208

and syr Kay was made knyght at Alhalowmas afore . CMMALORY-M4,8.209

So as they rode to the justes ward sir Kay had lost his suerd ,
CMMALORY-M4,8.210

for he had lefte it at his faders lodgyng , CMMALORY-M4,8.211

and so he prayd yong Arthur for to ryde for his swerd .
CMMALORY-M4,8.212

' I wyll wel , ' said Arthur , CMMALORY-M4,8.213

and rode fast after the swerd . CMMALORY-M4,8.214

And whan he cam home the lady and al were out to see the joustyng .
CMMALORY-M4,8.215

Thenne was Arthur wroth CMMALORY-M4,8.216

and saide to hymself , ' I will ryde to the chircheyard and take the
swerd with me that stycketh in the stone , CMMALORY-M4,8.217

for my broder sir Kay shal not be without a swerd this day . '
CMMALORY-M4,8.218

So whan he cam to the chircheyard sir Arthur alight CMMALORY-M4,8.219

and tayed his hors to the style , CMMALORY-M4,8.220

and so he wente to the tent CMMALORY-M4,8.221

and found no knyghtes there , CMMALORY-M4,8.222

for they were atte justyng . CMMALORY-M4,8.223

And so he handled the swerd by the handels , CMMALORY-M4,8.224

and lightly and fiersly pulled it out of the stone , CMMALORY-M4,8.225

and took his hors CMMALORY-M4,8.226

and rode his way untyll he came to his broder sir Kay and delyverd hym
the swerd . CMMALORY-M4,8.227

And as sone as sir Kay saw the swerd he wist wel it was the swerd of the
stone , CMMALORY-M4,8.228

and so he rode to his fader syr Ector CMMALORY-M4,8.229

and said , ' Sire , loo here is the swerd of the stone , wherfor I must
be kyng of thys land . ' CMMALORY-M4,8.230

When syre Ector beheld the swerd he retorned ageyne CMMALORY-M4,8.231

and cam <P_9> to the chirche , CMMALORY-M4,9.232

and there they alighte al thre CMMALORY-M4,9.233

and wente into the chirche , CMMALORY-M4,9.234

and anon he made sir Kay to swere upon a book how he came to that swerd
. CMMALORY-M4,9.235

' Syr , ' said sir Kay , ' by my broder Arthur , CMMALORY-M4,9.236

for he brought it to me . ' CMMALORY-M4,9.237

' How gate ye this swerd ? ' said sir Ector to Arthur .
CMMALORY-M4,9.238

' Sir , I will telle you . CMMALORY-M4,9.239

When I cam home for my broders swerd I fond nobody at home to delyver me
his swerd , CMMALORY-M4,9.240

and so I thought my broder syr Kay shold not be swerdles ,
CMMALORY-M4,9.241

and so I cam hyder egerly CMMALORY-M4,9.242

and pulled it out of the stone withoute ony payn . ' CMMALORY-M4,9.243

' Found ye ony knyghtes about this swerd ? ' seid sir Ector .
CMMALORY-M4,9.244

' Nay , ' said Arthur . CMMALORY-M4,9.245

' Now , ' said sir Ector to Arthur , ' I understande ye must be kynge of
this land . ' CMMALORY-M4,9.246

' Wherfore I ? ' sayd Arthur , ' and for what cause ? '
CMMALORY-M4,9.247

' Sire , ' saide Ector , ' for God wille have hit soo ,
CMMALORY-M4,9.248

for ther shold never man have drawen oute this swerde but he that shal
be rightwys kyng of this land . CMMALORY-M4,9.249

Now lete me see whether ye can putte the swerd ther@ @as it was and
pulle hit oute ageyne . ' CMMALORY-M4,9.250

' That is no maystry , ' said Arthur , CMMALORY-M4,9.251

and soo he put it in the stone . CMMALORY-M4,9.252

Therwithalle sir Ector assayed to pulle oute the swerd CMMALORY-M4,9.253

and faylled . CMMALORY-M4,9.254

' Now assay ' , said syre Ector unto syre Kay . CMMALORY-M4,9.255

And anon he pulled at the swerd with alle his myghte , CMMALORY-M4,9.256

but it wold not be . CMMALORY-M4,9.257

' Now shal ye assay , ' said syre Ector to Arthur . CMMALORY-M4,9.258

' I wyll wel , ' said Arthur , CMMALORY-M4,9.259

and pulled it out easily . CMMALORY-M4,9.260

And therwithalle syre Ector knelyd doune to the erthe and syre Kay .
CMMALORY-M4,9.261

' Allas ! ' said Arthur , ' myne own dere fader and broder , why knele
ye to me ? ' CMMALORY-M4,9.262

' Nay , nay , my lord Arthur , it is not so . CMMALORY-M4,9.263

I was never your fader nor of your blood , CMMALORY-M4,9.264

but I wote wel ye are of an hyher blood than I wende {COM:chopped_"of"}
ye were , ' CMMALORY-M4,9.265

and thenne syre Ector told hym all how he was bitaken hym for to
nourisshe hym and by whoos commandement , and by Merlyns delyveraunce .
CMMALORY-M4,9.266

Thenne Arthur made grete doole whan he understood that syre Ector was
not his fader . CMMALORY-M4,9.267

' Sir , ' said Ector unto Arthur , ' woll ye be my good and gracious
lord when ye are kyng ? ' CMMALORY-M4,9.268

<P_10>

' Els were I to blame , ' said Arthur , CMMALORY-M4,10.270

' for ye are the man in the world that I am most beholdyng to , and my
good lady and moder your wyf that as wel as her owne hath fostred me and
kepte . CMMALORY-M4,10.271

And yf ever hit be Goddes will that I be kynge as ye say , ye shall
desyre of me what I may doo CMMALORY-M4,10.272

and I shalle not faille yow . CMMALORY-M4,10.273

God forbede I shold faille yow . ' CMMALORY-M4,10.274

' Sir , ' said sire Ector , ' I will aske no more of yow but that ye
wille make my sone , your foster-broder syre Kay , $senceall of alle
your landes . ' CMMALORY-M4,10.275

' That shalle be done , ' said Arthur , ' and more , by the feith of my
body , that never man shalle have that office but he whyle he and I lyve
. ' CMMALORY-M4,10.276

Therewithall they wente unto the Archebisshop CMMALORY-M4,10.277

and told hym how the swerd was encheved and by whome .
CMMALORY-M4,10.278

And on twelfth day alle the barons cam thyder and to assay to take the
swerd who that wold assay , CMMALORY-M4,10.279

but there afore hem alle ther myghte none take it out but Arthur .
Wherfor ther were many lordes wroth and saide it was grete shame unto
them all and the reame to be overgovernyd with a boye of no hyghe blood
borne . CMMALORY-M4,10.280

And so they fell oute at that tyme , that it was put of tyll Candelmas ,
CMMALORY-M4,10.281

and thenne all the barons shold mete there ageyne , CMMALORY-M4,10.282

but alwey the ten knyghtes were ordeyned to watche the swerd day and
nyght , CMMALORY-M4,10.283

and so they sette a pavelione over the stone and the swerd ,
CMMALORY-M4,10.284

and fyve alwayes watched . CMMALORY-M4,10.285

Soo at Candalmasse many moo grete lordes came thyder for to have wonne
the swerde , CMMALORY-M4,10.286

but there myghte none prevaille . CMMALORY-M4,10.287

And right as Arthur dyd at Cristmasse he dyd at Candelmasse
CMMALORY-M4,10.288

and pulled oute the swerde easely , wherof the barons were sore agreved
and put it of in delay till the hyghe feste of Eester .
CMMALORY-M4,10.289

And as Arthur sped afore so dyd he at Eester . CMMALORY-M4,10.290

Yet there were some of the grete lordes had indignacion that Arthur
shold be kynge , CMMALORY-M4,10.291

and put it of in a delay tyll the feest of Pentecoste .
CMMALORY-M4,10.292

Thenne the Archebisshop of Caunterbury by Merlyns provydence lete
purveye thenne of the best knyghtes that they myghte gete , and suche
knyghtes as Uther Pendragon loved best and moost trusted in his dayes .
CMMALORY-M4,10.293

And suche knyghtes were put aboute Arthur as syr Bawdewyn of Bretayn ,
syre Kaynes , syre Ulfyus , syre Barsias ; CMMALORY-M4,10.294

all these with many other were alweyes about Arthur day and nyghte till
the feste of Pentecost . CMMALORY-M4,10.295

<P_11>

And at the feste of Pentecost alle maner of men assayed to pulle at the
swerde that wold assay , CMMALORY-M4,11.297

but none myghte prevaille but Arthur , CMMALORY-M4,11.298

and he pulled it oute afore all the lordes and comyns that were there .
Wherfore alle the comyns cryed at ones , ' We wille have Arthur unto our
kyng ! CMMALORY-M4,11.299

We wille put hym no more in delay , CMMALORY-M4,11.300

for we all see that it is Goddes wille that he shalle be our kynge ,
CMMALORY-M4,11.301

and who that holdeth ageynst it we wille slee hym . '
CMMALORY-M4,11.302

And therwithall they knelyd at ones both ryche and poure
CMMALORY-M4,11.303

and cryed Arthur mercy bycause they had delayed hym so longe .
CMMALORY-M4,11.304

And Arthur foryaf hem CMMALORY-M4,11.305

and took the swerd bitwene both his handes CMMALORY-M4,11.306

and offred it upon the aulter where the Archebisshop was ,
CMMALORY-M4,11.307

and so was he made knyghte of the best man that was there .
CMMALORY-M4,11.308

And so anon was the coronacyon made , CMMALORY-M4,11.309

and ther was he sworne unto his lordes and the comyns for to be a true
kyng , to stand with true justyce fro thens forth the dayes of this lyf
. CMMALORY-M4,11.310

Also thenne he made alle lordes that helde of the croune to come in and
to do servyce as they oughte to doo . CMMALORY-M4,11.311

And many complayntes were made unto sir Arthur of grete wronges that
were done syn the dethe of kyng Uther , of many londes that were bereved
lordes , knyghtes , ladyes , and gentilmen ; wherfor kynge Arthur maade
the londes to be yeven ageyne unto them that oughte hem .
CMMALORY-M4,11.312

Whanne this was done that the kyng had stablisshed alle the countreyes
aboute London , thenne he lete make syr Kay sencial of Englond ,
CMMALORY-M4,11.313

and sir Baudewyn of Bretayne was made constable , CMMALORY-M4,11.314

and sir Ulfyus was made chamberlayn , CMMALORY-M4,11.315

and sire Brastias was maade wardeyn to wayte upon the Northe fro Trent
forwardes , CMMALORY-M4,11.316

for it was that tyme the most party the kynges enemyes .
CMMALORY-M4,11.317

But within fewe yeres after Arthur wan alle the North , Scotland and
alle that were under their obeissaunce , also Walys ; CMMALORY-M4,11.318

a parte of it helde ayenst Arthur , CMMALORY-M4,11.319

but he overcam hem al as he dyd the remenaunt thurgh the noble prowesse
of hymself and his knyghtes of the Round Table . CMMALORY-M4,11.320

Thenne the kyng remeved into Walys CMMALORY-M4,11.321

and lete crye a grete feste , that it shold be holdyn at Pentecost after
the incoronacion of hym at the cyte of Carlyon . CMMALORY-M4,11.322

Unto the fest come kyng Lott of Lowthean and of Orkeney with
fyve_hondred knyghtes with hym ; CMMALORY-M4,11.323

also ther come to the feste kynge Uryens of Gore with four_hondred
knyghtes with hym ; CMMALORY-M4,11.324

also ther come to that feeste kyng Nayntres of Garloth <P_12> with
seven_hundred knyghtes with hym , CMMALORY-M4,12.325

also ther came to the feest the kynge of Scotland with sixe_honderd
knyghtes with hym , CMMALORY-M4,12.326

and he was but a yong man . CMMALORY-M4,12.327

Also ther came to the feste a kyng that was called the Kyng with the
Honderd Knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,12.328

but he and his men were passyng wel bisene at al poyntes ;
CMMALORY-M4,12.329

also ther cam the kyng of Cardos with fyve_honderd knyghtes .
CMMALORY-M4,12.330

And kyng Arthur was glad of their comynge , CMMALORY-M4,12.331

for he wende that al the kynges and knyghtes had come for grete love and
to have done hym worship at his feste , wherfor the kyng made grete joye
and sente the kynges and knyghtes grete presentes . CMMALORY-M4,12.332

But the kynges wold none receyve , CMMALORY-M4,12.333

but rebuked the messagers shamefully CMMALORY-M4,12.334

and said they had no joye to receyve no yeftes of a berdles boye that
was come of lowe blood , CMMALORY-M4,12.335

and sente hym word they wold none of his yeftes , but that they were
come to gyve hym yeftes with hard swerdys betwixt the neck and the
sholders ; CMMALORY-M4,12.336

and therfore they came thyder , so they told to the messagers playnly ,
CMMALORY-M4,12.337

for it was grete shame to all them to see suche a boye to have a rule of
soo noble a reaume as this land was . CMMALORY-M4,12.338

With this ansuer the messagers departed CMMALORY-M4,12.339

and told to kyng Arthur this ansuer , wherfor by the advys of his barons
he took hym to a strong towre with fyve_hondred good men with hym .
CMMALORY-M4,12.340

And all the kynges aforesaid in a maner leyd a syege tofore hym ,
CMMALORY-M4,12.341

but kyng Arthur was well vytailled . CMMALORY-M4,12.342

And within fyftene dayes ther came Merlyn amonge hem into the cyte of
Carlyon . CMMALORY-M4,12.343

Thenne all the kynges were passyng gladde of Merlyn CMMALORY-M4,12.344

and asked hym , ' For what Cause is that boye Arthur made your kynge ?
' CMMALORY-M4,12.345

' Syres , ' said Merlyn , ' I shalle telle yow the cause ,
CMMALORY-M4,12.346

for he is kynge Uther Pendragons sone borne in wedlok , goten on Igrayne
, the dukes wyf of Tyntigail . ' CMMALORY-M4,12.347

' Thenne is he a bastard , ' they said al . CMMALORY-M4,12.348

' Nay , ' said Merlyn , ' after the deth of the duke more than thre
houres was Arthur begoten , CMMALORY-M4,12.349

and thirtene dayes after kyng Uther wedded Igrayne , CMMALORY-M4,12.350

and therfor I preve hym CMMALORY-M4,12.351

he is no bastard . CMMALORY-M4,12.352

And , who saith nay , he shal be kyng and overcome alle his enemyes ,
CMMALORY-M4,12.353

and or he deye he shalle be long kynge of all Englond and have under his
obeyssaunce Walys , Yrland , and Scotland , and moo reames than I will
now reherce . ' CMMALORY-M4,12.354

<P_13>

Some of the kynges had merveyl of Merlyns wordes CMMALORY-M4,13.356

and demed well that it shold be as he said , CMMALORY-M4,13.357

and som of hem lough hym to scorne , as kyng Lot , CMMALORY-M4,13.358

and mo other called hym a wytche . CMMALORY-M4,13.359

But thenne were they accorded with Merlyn that kynge Arthur shold come
oute and speke with the kynges , CMMALORY-M4,13.360

and to come sauf and to goo sauf , suche suraunce ther was made .
CMMALORY-M4,13.361

So Merlyn went unto kynge Arthur CMMALORY-M4,13.362

and told hym how he had done CMMALORY-M4,13.363

and badde hym , ' Fere not , CMMALORY-M4,13.364

but come oute boldly CMMALORY-M4,13.365

and speke with hem ; CMMALORY-M4,13.366

and spare hem not , CMMALORY-M4,13.367

but ansuere them as their kynge and chyvetayn , CMMALORY-M4,13.368

for ye shal overcome hem all , whether they wille or n@ @ylle . '
CMMALORY-M4,13.369

Thenne kynge Arthur came oute of his tour CMMALORY-M4,13.370

and had under his gowne a jesseraunte of double maylle ,
CMMALORY-M4,13.371

and ther wente with hym the Archebisshop of Caunterbury , and syr
Baudewyn of Bretayne , and syr Kay , and syre Brastias ;
CMMALORY-M4,13.372

these were the men of moost worship that were with hym .
CMMALORY-M4,13.373

And whan they were mette there was no mekenes but stoute wordes on bothe
sydes , CMMALORY-M4,13.374

but alweyes kynge Arthur ansuerd them CMMALORY-M4,13.375

and said he wold make them to bowe and he lyved , wherfore they departed
with wrath . CMMALORY-M4,13.376

And kynge Arthur badde kepe hem wel , CMMALORY-M4,13.377

and they bad the kynge kepe hym wel . CMMALORY-M4,13.378

Soo the kynge retornyd hym to the toure ageyne CMMALORY-M4,13.379

and armed hym and alle his knyghtes . CMMALORY-M4,13.380

' What will ye do ? ' said Merlyn to the kynges . CMMALORY-M4,13.381

' Ye were better for to stynte , CMMALORY-M4,13.382

for ye shalle not here prevaille , though ye were ten so many . '
CMMALORY-M4,13.383

' Be we wel avysed to be aferd of a dreme-reder ? ' said kyng Lot .
CMMALORY-M4,13.384

With that Merlyn vanysshed aweye CMMALORY-M4,13.385

and came to kynge Arthur CMMALORY-M4,13.386

and bad hym set on hem fiersly . CMMALORY-M4,13.387

And in the menewhyle there were thre_honderd good men of the best that
were with the kynges that wente streyghte unto kynge Arthur ,
CMMALORY-M4,13.388

and that comforted hym gretely . CMMALORY-M4,13.389

' Syr , ' said Merlyn to Arthur , ' fyghte not with the swerde that ye
had by myracle til that ye see ye go unto the wers ; CMMALORY-M4,13.390

thenne drawe it out CMMALORY-M4,13.391

and do your best . ' CMMALORY-M4,13.392

So forthwithalle kynge Arthur sette upon hem in their lodgyng ,
CMMALORY-M4,13.393

and syre Bawdewyn , syre Kay , and syr Brastias slewe on the right hand
and on the lyfte hand , that it was merveylle ; CMMALORY-M4,13.394

and alweyes kynge Arthur on horsback leyd on with a swerd
CMMALORY-M4,13.395

and dyd merveillous dedes of armes , that many of the kynges had grete
joye of his dedes and <P_14> hardynesse . CMMALORY-M4,14.396

Thenne kynge Lot brake out on the bak syde , and the kyng with the
Honderd Knyghtes and kyng Carados , CMMALORY-M4,14.397

and sette on Arthur fiersly behynde hym . CMMALORY-M4,14.398

With that syre Arthur torned with his knyghtes CMMALORY-M4,14.399

and smote behynd and before , CMMALORY-M4,14.400

and ever sir Arthur was in the formest prees tyl his hors was slayne
undernethe hym . CMMALORY-M4,14.401

And therwith kynge Lot smote doune kyng Arthur . CMMALORY-M4,14.402

With that his four knyghtes $reskowed hym CMMALORY-M4,14.403

and set hym on horsback ; CMMALORY-M4,14.404

thenne he drewe his swerd Excalibur , CMMALORY-M4,14.405

but it was so bryght in his enemyes eyen that it gaf light lyke thirty
torchys , CMMALORY-M4,14.406

and therwith he put hem on bak CMMALORY-M4,14.407

and slewe moche peple . CMMALORY-M4,14.408

And thenne the comyns of Carlyon aroos with clubbis and stavys
CMMALORY-M4,14.409

and slewe many knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,14.410

but alle the kynges helde them togyders with her knyghtes that were
lefte on lyve , CMMALORY-M4,14.411

and so fled and departed ; CMMALORY-M4,14.412

and Merlyn come unto Arthur CMMALORY-M4,14.413

and counceilled hym to folowe hem no further . CMMALORY-M4,14.414

So after the feste and journeye kynge Arthur drewe hym unto London .
CMMALORY-M4,14.415

And soo by the counceil of Merlyn the kyng lete calle his barons to
counceil , CMMALORY-M4,14.416

for Merlyn had told the kynge that the sixe kynges that made warre upon
hym wold in al haste be awroke on hym and on his landys ; wherfor the
kyng asked counceil at hem al . CMMALORY-M4,14.417

They coude no counceil gyve , CMMALORY-M4,14.418

but said they were bygge ynough . CMMALORY-M4,14.419

' Ye saye well , ' said Arthur , CMMALORY-M4,14.420

' I thanke you for your good courage ; CMMALORY-M4,14.421

but wil ye al that loveth me speke with Merlyn ? CMMALORY-M4,14.422

Ye knowe wel that he hath done moche for me , CMMALORY-M4,14.423

and he knoweth many thynges . CMMALORY-M4,14.424

And whan he is afore you I wold that ye prayd hym hertely of his best
avyse . ' CMMALORY-M4,14.425

Alle the barons sayd they wold pray hym and desyre hym .
CMMALORY-M4,14.426

Soo Merlyn was sente for and fair desyred of al the barons to gyve them
best counceil . CMMALORY-M4,14.427

' I shall say you , ' said Merlyn , CMMALORY-M4,14.428

' I warne yow al , CMMALORY-M4,14.429

your enemyes are passyng strong for yow , CMMALORY-M4,14.430

and they are good men of armes as ben on lyve . CMMALORY-M4,14.431

And by thys tyme they have goten to them four kynges mo and a myghty
duke , CMMALORY-M4,14.432

and onlesse that our kyng have more chyvalry with hym than he may make
within the boundys of his own reame , and he fyghte with hem in batail ,
he shal be overcome and slayn . ' CMMALORY-M4,14.433

' What were best to doo in this cause ? ' said al the barons .
CMMALORY-M4,14.434

' I shal telle you , ' said Merlyn , ' myne advys . CMMALORY-M4,14.435

There ar two bretheren <P_15> beyond the see , CMMALORY-M4,15.436

and they be kynges and merveillous good men of her handes :
CMMALORY-M4,15.437

and that one hyghte kynge Ban of Benwic , CMMALORY-M4,15.438

and that other hyght kyng Bors of Gaule , that is Fraunce .
CMMALORY-M4,15.439

And on these two kynges warrith a myghty man of men , the kynge Claudas
, CMMALORY-M4,15.440

and stryveth with hem for a castel ; CMMALORY-M4,15.441

and grete werre is betwixt them . CMMALORY-M4,15.442

But this Claudas is so myghty of goodes wherof he geteth good knyghtes
that he putteth these two kynges moost parte $to the werse . Wherfor
this is my counceil : that our kyng and soverayne lord sende unto the
kynges Ban and Bors by two trusty knyghtes with letters wel devysed ,
that and they wil come and see kynge Arthur and his courte and helpe hym
in hys warrys , that he wolde be sworne unto them to helpe hem in theire
warrys agaynst kynge Claudas . CMMALORY-M4,15.443

Now what sey ye unto thys counceyle ? ' seyde Merlyon . '
CMMALORY-M4,15.444

Thys ys well councelde , ' seyde the kynge . CMMALORY-M4,15.445

And in all haste two barownes ryght so were ordayned to go on thys
message unto thes two kyngis , CMMALORY-M4,15.446

and lettirs were made in the moste plesauntist wyse accordynge unto
kynge Arthurs desyre , CMMALORY-M4,15.447

and Ulphuns and Brastias were made the messyngers ; CMMALORY-M4,15.448

and so rode forth well horsed and well i-armed and as the gyse was that
tyme , CMMALORY-M4,15.449

and so passed the see CMMALORY-M4,15.450

and rode towarde the cite of Benwyk . CMMALORY-M4,15.451

And there besydes were eyght knyghtes that aspyed hem ,
CMMALORY-M4,15.452

and at a strayte passage they mette with Ulphuns and Brastias
CMMALORY-M4,15.453

and wolde a takyn presoners . CMMALORY-M4,15.454

So they preyde them that they myght passe , CMMALORY-M4,15.455

for they were messyngers unto kyng Ban and Bors isente frome kynge
Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,15.456

' Therefore , ' seyde the knyghtes , ' ye shall dey othir be presoners ,
CMMALORY-M4,15.457

for we be knyghtes of kynge Claudas . ' CMMALORY-M4,15.458

And therewith two of them dressed their sperys unto Ulphuns and Brastias
, CMMALORY-M4,15.459

and they dressed their sperys CMMALORY-M4,15.460

and ran togydir with grete random . CMMALORY-M4,15.461

And Claudas his knyghtes brake theire spearis , CMMALORY-M4,15.462

and Ulphuns and Brastias bare the two knyghtes oute of their sadils to
the erth CMMALORY-M4,15.463

and so leffte them lyynge CMMALORY-M4,15.464

and rode their wayes . CMMALORY-M4,15.465

And the other six knyghtes rode before to a passage to mete with them
ayen , CMMALORY-M4,15.466

and so Ulphuns and Brastias othir two smote downe CMMALORY-M4,15.467

and so paste on hir wayes . CMMALORY-M4,15.468

And at the fourthe passage there mette two for two CMMALORY-M4,15.469

and bothe were leyde unto the erthe . CMMALORY-M4,15.470

So there was none of the eyght knyghtes but he was hurte sore othir
brused . CMMALORY-M4,15.471

<P_16>

And whan they com to Benwyke hit fortuned both the kynges be there , Ban
and Bors . CMMALORY-M4,16.473

Than was hit tolde the two kyngis how there were com two messyngers .
CMMALORY-M4,16.474

And anone there was sente unto them two knyghtes of worshyp ,
CMMALORY-M4,16.475

that one hyght Lyonses , lorde of the contrey of $Payarne , and sir
Pharyaunce , a worshipfull knyght ; CMMALORY-M4,16.476

and anone asked them frome whens they com , CMMALORY-M4,16.477

and they seyde frome kyng Arthure , kynge of Ingelonde .
CMMALORY-M4,16.478

And so they toke them in theire armys CMMALORY-M4,16.479

and made grete joy eche of othir . CMMALORY-M4,16.480

But anone as they wyste they were messyngers of Arthurs there was made
no taryynge , CMMALORY-M4,16.481

but forthwith they spake with the kyngis . CMMALORY-M4,16.482

And they welcommed them in the most faythfullyst wyse CMMALORY-M4,16.483

and seyde they were moste welcom unto them before all the kynges men
lyvynge . CMMALORY-M4,16.484

And therewith they kyssed the lettirs CMMALORY-M4,16.485

and delyvird them . CMMALORY-M4,16.486

And whan kynge Ban and Bors undirstoode them and the lettirs , than were
they more welcom than they were tofore . CMMALORY-M4,16.487

And $aftir the haste of the lettirs they gaff hem thys answere that they
wolde fulfille $the desire of kyng Arthurs wrytynge , CMMALORY-M4,16.488

and bade sir Ulphuns and sir Brastias tarry there as longe as they wolde
, CMMALORY-M4,16.489

for they shulde have such chere as myght be made for them in thys
marchis . CMMALORY-M4,16.490

Than Ulphuns and Brastias tolde the kynge of theire adventure at the
passagis for the eyght knyghtes . CMMALORY-M4,16.491

' A ha , ' seyde Ban and Bors , ' they were oure good frendis .
CMMALORY-M4,16.492

I wolde I had wyste of them , CMMALORY-M4,16.493

and they sholde nat so $have ascaped . ' CMMALORY-M4,16.494

So thes two knyghtes had good chere and grete gyfftis as much as they
myght bere away , CMMALORY-M4,16.495

and had theire answere by mowth and by wrytynge that the two kynges
wolde com unto Arthure in all the haste that they myght .
CMMALORY-M4,16.496

So thes two knyghtes rode on afore CMMALORY-M4,16.497

and passed the see CMMALORY-M4,16.498

and com to their lorde CMMALORY-M4,16.499

and tolde hym how they had spedde , wherefore kyng Arthure was passyng
glad and seyde , ' How suppose you , CMMALORY-M4,16.500

at what tyme woll thes two kynges be here ? ' CMMALORY-M4,16.501

' Sir , ' they seyde , ' before Allhalowmasse . ' CMMALORY-M4,16.502

Than the kynge lette purvey a grete feste , CMMALORY-M4,16.503

and also he lette cry both turnementis and justis thorowoute all his
realme , CMMALORY-M4,16.504

and the day appoynted and sette at Allhalowmasse . CMMALORY-M4,16.505

And so the tyme drove on CMMALORY-M4,16.506

and all thynges redy ipurveyed . CMMALORY-M4,16.507

Thes two noble kynges were entirde the londe and comyn ovir the see with
three_hondred knyghtes full well arayed both for the pees and also for
the werre . CMMALORY-M4,16.508

And so royally <P_17> they were resceyved and brought towarde the cite
of London . CMMALORY-M4,17.509

And so Arthure mette them ten myle oute of London , CMMALORY-M4,17.510

and there was grete joy made as couthe be thought . CMMALORY-M4,17.511

And on Allhalowmasse day at the grete feste sate in the hall the three
kynges , CMMALORY-M4,17.512

and sir Kay the Senesciall served in the halle , and sir Lucas the
Butler that was Duke Corneus son , and sir Gryfflet that was the son of
God of Cardal : CMMALORY-M4,17.513

thes three knyghtes had the rule of all the servyse that served the
kyngis . CMMALORY-M4,17.514

And anone as they were redy and $wayshen , all the knyghtes that wolde
juste made hem redy . CMMALORY-M4,17.515

And be than they were redy on horsebak there was seven_hondred knyghtes
. CMMALORY-M4,17.516

And kynge Arthure , Ban , and Bors , with the Archebysshop of
Caunterbyry , and sir Ector , Kays fadir , they were in a place covirde
with clothys of golde lyke unto an halle , with ladyes and jantillwomen
for to beholde who dud beste and thereon to gyff a jugemente .
CMMALORY-M4,17.517

And kyng Arthure with the two kyngis lette departe the seven_hondred
knyghtes in two partyes . CMMALORY-M4,17.518

And there were three_hondred knyghtes of the realme of Benwyke and Gaule
that turned on the othir syde . CMMALORY-M4,17.519

And they dressed their shyldis CMMALORY-M4,17.520

and began to couche hir sperys , many good knyghtes .
CMMALORY-M4,17.521

So sir Gryfflet was the firste that sette oute , CMMALORY-M4,17.522

and to hym com a knyght , CMMALORY-M4,17.523

hys name was sir Ladynas , CMMALORY-M4,17.524

and they com so egirly togydir that all men had wondir ,
CMMALORY-M4,17.525

and they so sore fought that hir shyldis felle on pecis and both horse
and man felle to the erthe , CMMALORY-M4,17.526

and both the Frensh knyght and the Englysh knyght lay so longe that all
men wente they had bene dede . CMMALORY-M4,17.527

Whan Lucas the Butler saw sir Gryfflet ly so longe , he horsed hym
agayne anone , CMMALORY-M4,17.528

and they too ded many mervelous dedis of armys with many bachelers .
CMMALORY-M4,17.529

Also sir Kay com oute of a bushemente with fyve knyghtes with hym ,
CMMALORY-M4,17.530

and they six smote othir six downe . CMMALORY-M4,17.531

But sir Kay dud that day many mervaylous dedis of armys , that there was
none that dud so welle as he that day . CMMALORY-M4,17.532

Than there com Ladynas and Grastian , two knyghtes of Fraunse ,
CMMALORY-M4,17.533

and dud passynge well , that all men praysed them . CMMALORY-M4,17.534

Than com in sir Placidas , a good knyght , that mette with sir Kay and
smote hym downe horse and man , wherefore sir Gryfflet was wroth and
mette with sir Placidas so harde that horse and man felle to the erthe .
CMMALORY-M4,17.535

But whan the fyve knyghtes wyst that sir Kay had <P_18> a falle they
were wroth oute of mesure CMMALORY-M4,18.536

and therewithall ech of them fyve bare downe a knyght .
CMMALORY-M4,18.537

Whan kynge Arthur and the two kynges saw hem begynne wexe wroth on bothe
partyes , they leped on smale hakeneyes CMMALORY-M4,18.538

and lette cry that all men sholde departe unto theire lodgynge .
CMMALORY-M4,18.539

And so they wente home CMMALORY-M4,18.540

and unarmed them , CMMALORY-M4,18.541

and so to evynsonge and souper . CMMALORY-M4,18.542

And aftir souper the three kynges went into a gardyne CMMALORY-M4,18.543

and gaff the pryce unto sir Kay and unto sir Lucas the Butler and unto
sir Gryfflet . CMMALORY-M4,18.544

And than they wente unto counceyle , and with hem Gwenbaus , brothir
unto kynge Ban and Bors , a wyse clerke ; CMMALORY-M4,18.545

and thidir wente Ulphuns , Brastias and Merlion . CMMALORY-M4,18.546

And aftir they had $ben in her counceyle they wente unto bedde .
CMMALORY-M4,18.547

And on the morne they harde masse , CMMALORY-M4,18.548

and to dyner and so to theire counceyle , CMMALORY-M4,18.549

and made many argumentes what were beste to do . CMMALORY-M4,18.550

So at the laste they were concluded that $Merlion sholde go with a tokyn
of kynge Ban , that was a rynge , unto hys men and kynge Bors ;
CMMALORY-M4,18.551

Gracian and Placidas sholde go agayne and kepe their castels and theire
contreyes ; CMMALORY-M4,18.552

and as for kynge Ban of Benwyke and kynge Bors of Gaule , $they had
ordayned them all thynge . CMMALORY-M4,18.553

And so $they passed the see CMMALORY-M4,18.554

and com to Benwyke . CMMALORY-M4,18.555

And whan the people sawe kynge Bannys rynge , and Gracian and Placidas ,
they were glad CMMALORY-M4,18.556

and asked how theire kynge fared CMMALORY-M4,18.557

and made grete joy of their welfare . CMMALORY-M4,18.558

And accordyng unto theire soveraigne lordis desire , the $men of warre
made hem redy in all haste possible , so that they were fyftene_thousand
on horsebacke and foote , CMMALORY-M4,18.559

and they had grete plente of vitayle by Merlions provisions .
CMMALORY-M4,18.560

But Gracian and Placidas were leffte at home to furnysh and garnysh the
castell for drede of kyng Claudas . CMMALORY-M4,18.561

Ryght so Merlion passed the see well vitayled bothe by watir and by
londe . CMMALORY-M4,18.562

And whan he com to the see he sente home the footemen agayne ,
CMMALORY-M4,18.563

and toke no mo with hym but ten_thousand men on horse-bake , the moste
party of men of armys ; CMMALORY-M4,18.564

and $schipped CMMALORY-M4,18.565

and passed the see into Inglonde CMMALORY-M4,18.566

and londed at Dovir . CMMALORY-M4,18.567

And thorow the wytte of Merlion he ledde the oste northwarde the
pryveyst wey that coude be thought , unto the foreste of Bedgrayne ,
CMMALORY-M4,18.568

and there in a valey lodged hym secretely . CMMALORY-M4,18.569

Than rode Merlion to Arthure and to the two kynges , CMMALORY-M4,18.570

and tolde hem how he had spedde , whereof they had grete mervayle that
ony man on erthe myght spede so sone to go <P_19> and com .
CMMALORY-M4,19.571

So Merlion tolde them how ten_thousande were in the forest of Bedgrayne
well armed at all poyntis . CMMALORY-M4,19.572

Than was there no more to sey , CMMALORY-M4,19.573

but to horsebak wente all the oste as Arthure had before provyded .
CMMALORY-M4,19.574

So with twenty_thousand he passed by nyght and day . CMMALORY-M4,19.575

$But there was made such an ordinaunce afore by Merlyon that there
sholde no man of warre ryde nothir go in no contrey on this syde Trente
watir but if he had a tokyn frome kynge Arthure , wherethorow the kynges
enemyes durst nat ryde as they dud tofore to aspye . CMMALORY-M4,19.576

And so wythin a litill whyle the three kyngis com to the forest of
Bedgrayne CMMALORY-M4,19.577

and founde there a passynge fayre felyship and well besene , whereof
they had grete joy , and vitayle they wanted none . CMMALORY-M4,19.578

Thys was the causis of the northir hoste , that they were rered for the
despite and rebuke that the $six kyngis had at Carlyon .
CMMALORY-M4,19.579

And tho six kyngis by hir meanys gate unto them fyve othir kyngis ;
CMMALORY-M4,19.580

and thus they began to gadir hir people , CMMALORY-M4,19.581

and $now they swore nother for welle nothyr wo they sholde nat lyve tyll
they had destroyed Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,19.582

And than they made an othe , and the first that began the othe was the
deuke of $Canbenet , that he wolde brynge with hym $fyve_thousand men of
armys , the which were redy on horsebakke . CMMALORY-M4,19.583

Than swore kynge Brandegoris of Strangore that he wolde brynge with hym
fyve_thousand men of armys on horsebacke . CMMALORY-M4,19.584

Than swore kynge Clarivaus of Northumbirlonde <em> that he <$$em> wolde
brynge $three_thousand men of armys with hym . CMMALORY-M4,19.585

Than swore the Kynge with the Hondred Knyghtes that was a passynge good
man and a yonge , that he wold brynge four_thousand good men of armys on
horsebacke . CMMALORY-M4,19.586

Than there swore kynge Lott , a passyng good knyght and fadir unto sir
Gawayne , that he wolde brynge fyve_thousand good men of armys on
horsebak . CMMALORY-M4,19.587

Also $ther swore kynge Uryens that was sir Uwaynes fadir of the londe of
Goore , CMMALORY-M4,19.588

and he wolde brynge six_thousand men of armys on horsebak .
CMMALORY-M4,19.589

Also there swore kynge Idres of Cornuwaile that he wolde brynge
fyve_thousand men of armys on horsebake . CMMALORY-M4,19.590

Also there swore kynge Cradilmans to brynge fyve_thousand men on
horsebacke . CMMALORY-M4,19.591

Also there swore kyng Angwysshauns of Irelonde to brynge fyve_thousand
men of armys on horsebak . CMMALORY-M4,19.592

Also there swore kynge Nentres to brynge fyve_thousand men on <P_20>
horsebak . CMMALORY-M4,20.593

Also there swore kynge Carados to brynge fyve_thousand men of armys on
horsebak . CMMALORY-M4,20.594

So hir hole oste was of clene men of armys : CMMALORY-M4,20.595

on horsebacke {TEXT:horscbacke} was fully fyffty_thousand . and on
foote ten_thousand of good mennes bodyes . CMMALORY-M4,20.596

Than they were sone redy CMMALORY-M4,20.597

and mounted uppon horsebacke , CMMALORY-M4,20.598

and sente forthe before the foreryders . CMMALORY-M4,20.599

For thes a_eleven kynges in hir wayes leyde a sege unto the castell of
Bedgrayne ; CMMALORY-M4,20.600

and so they departed CMMALORY-M4,20.601

and drew towarde Arthure , CMMALORY-M4,20.602

and leffte a fewe to byde at the sege , CMMALORY-M4,20.603

for the castell of Bedgrayne was an holde of kynge Arthurs
CMMALORY-M4,20.604

and the men that were within were kynge Arthurs men all .
CMMALORY-M4,20.605

So by Merlyons advice there were sente foreryders to skymme the contrey
; CMMALORY-M4,20.606

and they mette with the foreryders of the Northe CMMALORY-M4,20.607

and made hem to telle which way the oste com . CMMALORY-M4,20.608

And than they tolde kynge Arthure , CMMALORY-M4,20.609

and by kynge Ban and Bors his counceile they lette brenne and destroy
all the contrey before them there they sholde ryde . CMMALORY-M4,20.610

The Kynge of the Hondred Knyghtis that tyme mette a wondir dreme two
nyghtes before the batayle : that there blew a grete wynde and blew
downe hir castels and hir townys , CMMALORY-M4,20.611

and aftir that com a watir CMMALORY-M4,20.612

and bare hit all away . CMMALORY-M4,20.613

And all that herde of that swevyn seyde hit was a tokyn of grete batayle
. CMMALORY-M4,20.614

Than by counceile of Merlion , whan they wyst which wey the an_eleven
kynges wolde ryde and lodge that nyght , at mydnyght they sette uppon
them as they were in their pavilions . CMMALORY-M4,20.615

But the scowte-wacche by hir oste cryed : ' Lordis , to $armes !
CMMALORY-M4,20.616

for here be oure enemyes at youre honde ! ' CMMALORY-M4,20.617

Than kynge Arthure and kynge Ban and Bors with hir good and trusty
knyghtes sette uppon them so fersely that he made them overthrowe hir
pavilions on hir hedis . CMMALORY-M4,20.618

But the eleven kynges by manly prouesse of armys toke a fayre champion ,
CMMALORY-M4,20.619

but there was slayne that morow tyde ten_thousand good mennes bodyes .
CMMALORY-M4,20.620

And so they had before hem a stronge passage ; CMMALORY-M4,20.621

yet were there fyffty_thousand of hardy men . CMMALORY-M4,20.622

Than hit drew toward day . CMMALORY-M4,20.623

' Now shall ye do by myne advice , ' seyde Merlyon unto the three kyngis
, CMMALORY-M4,20.624

and seyde : ' I wolde kynge Ban and Bors with hir felyship of
ten_thousand men were put in a woode here besyde in an inbusshemente and
kept them prevy , and that they be leyde or the lyght of the day com ,
and that they stire nat tyll that <P_21> ye and youre knyghtes $have
fought with hem longe . CMMALORY-M4,21.625

And whan hit ys daylyght , dresse youre batayle evyn before them and the
passage , that they may se all youre oste , CMMALORY-M4,21.626

for than woll they be the more hardy whan they se you but aboute
twenty_thousande , and cause hem to be the gladder to suffir you and
youre oste to com over the passage . ' CMMALORY-M4,21.627

All the three kynges and the hole barownes seyde how Merlion devised
passynge well , CMMALORY-M4,21.628

and so hit was done . CMMALORY-M4,21.629

So on the morn whan aythir oste saw othir , they of the Northe were well
comforted . CMMALORY-M4,21.630

Than Ulphuns and Brastias were delyvirde three_thousand men of armys ,
CMMALORY-M4,21.631

and they sette on them fersely in the passage , CMMALORY-M4,21.632

and slew on the ryght honde and on the lyffte honde that hit was wondir
to telle . CMMALORY-M4,21.633

But whan the eleven kynges saw that there was so few a felyship that dud
such dedis of armys , they were ashamed CMMALORY-M4,21.634

and sette on hem agayne fersely . CMMALORY-M4,21.635

And there was sir Ulphuns horse slayne , CMMALORY-M4,21.636

but he dud mervelously on foote . CMMALORY-M4,21.637

But the duke $Estanse of $Canbenet and kynge Clarivaunce of
Northehumbirlonde were allwey grevously set on Ulphuns .
CMMALORY-M4,21.638

Than sir Brastias saw his felow yfared so withall , he smote the duke
with a spere , that horse and man felle downe . CMMALORY-M4,21.639

That saw kyng Claryvauns , CMMALORY-M4,21.640

and $returned unto sir Brastias , CMMALORY-M4,21.641

and eythir smote othir so that horse and man wente to the erthe .
CMMALORY-M4,21.642

And so they lay longe astoned , CMMALORY-M4,21.643

and theire horse knees braste to the harde bone . CMMALORY-M4,21.644

Than com sir Kay the Senesciall with six felowis with hym
CMMALORY-M4,21.645

and dud passynge well . CMMALORY-M4,21.646

So with that com the eleven kyngis , CMMALORY-M4,21.647

and there was Gryfflette put to the erth horse and man , and Lucas the
Butler horse and man , $by kynge Brandegoris and kynge Idres and kynge
Angwyshaunce . CMMALORY-M4,21.648

Than wexed the medlee passyng harde on both parties .
CMMALORY-M4,21.649

Whan sir Kay saw sir Gryfflet on foote , he rode unto kynge Nentres
CMMALORY-M4,21.650

and smote hym downe , CMMALORY-M4,21.651

and ledde his horse unto sir Gryfflette CMMALORY-M4,21.652

and horsed hym agayne . CMMALORY-M4,21.653

Also sir Kay with the same spere smote downe kynge Lotte
CMMALORY-M4,21.654

and hurte hym passynge sore . CMMALORY-M4,21.655

That saw the Kynge with the Hondred Knyghtes CMMALORY-M4,21.656

and ran unto sir Kay CMMALORY-M4,21.657

and smote hym downe , CMMALORY-M4,21.658

and toke hys horse CMMALORY-M4,21.659

and gaff hym kynge Lotte , whereof he seyde gramercy .
CMMALORY-M4,21.660

Whan sir Gryfflet saw sir Kay and sir Lucas de Butler on foote , he with
a sherpe spere grete and square rode to Pynnel , a good man of <P_22>
armys , CMMALORY-M4,22.661

and smote horse and man downe , CMMALORY-M4,22.662

and than he toke hys horse CMMALORY-M4,22.663

and gaff hym unto sir Kay . CMMALORY-M4,22.664

Than kynge Lotte saw Kynge Nentres on foote , CMMALORY-M4,22.665

he ran unto Meliot de la Roche CMMALORY-M4,22.666

and smote hym downe horse and man , CMMALORY-M4,22.667

and gaff hym <em> to kynge Nentres <$$em> the horse CMMALORY-M4,22.668

and horsed hym agayne . CMMALORY-M4,22.669

Also the Kynge with the Hondred Knyghtes saw kynge Idres on foote ,
CMMALORY-M4,22.670

he ran unto Gwyniarte de Bloy CMMALORY-M4,22.671

and smote hym downe horse and man , CMMALORY-M4,22.672

and gaff kynge Idres the horse CMMALORY-M4,22.673

and horsed hym agayne . CMMALORY-M4,22.674

Than kynge Lotte smote downe Clarinaus de la Foreyste Saveage
CMMALORY-M4,22.675

and gaff the horse unto duke Estans . CMMALORY-M4,22.676

And so whan they had horsed the kyngis agayne , they drew hem all eleven
kynges togydir , CMMALORY-M4,22.677

and seyde they wolde be revenged of the damage that they had takyn that
day . CMMALORY-M4,22.678

The meanewhyle com in kyng Arthure with an egir countenans ,
CMMALORY-M4,22.679

and founde Ulphuns and Brastias on foote , in grete perell of dethe ,
that were fowle defoyled undir the horse feete . CMMALORY-M4,22.680

Than Arthure as a lyon ran unto kynge Cradilment of North Walis
CMMALORY-M4,22.681

and smote hym thorow the lyffte syde , that horse and man felle downe .
CMMALORY-M4,22.682

Than he toke the horse by the reygne CMMALORY-M4,22.683

and led hym unto Uphine CMMALORY-M4,22.684

and seyde , ' Have this horse , myne olde frende , CMMALORY-M4,22.685

for grete nede hast thou of an horse . ' CMMALORY-M4,22.686

' Gramercy , ' seyde Ulphuns . CMMALORY-M4,22.687

Than kynge Arthure dud so mervaylesly in armys that all men had wondir .
CMMALORY-M4,22.688

Whan the Kyng with the Hondred Knyghtes saw kynge Cradilmente on foote ,
he ran unto sir Ector , sir Kayes fadir , that was well ihorsed
CMMALORY-M4,22.689

and smote horse and man downe , CMMALORY-M4,22.690

and gaff the horse unto the kynge CMMALORY-M4,22.691

and horsed hym agayne . CMMALORY-M4,22.692

And whan kynge Arthure saw that kynge ryde on sir Ectors horse he was
wrothe , CMMALORY-M4,22.693

and with hys swerde he smote the kynge on the helme , that a quarter of
the helme and shelde clave downe ; CMMALORY-M4,22.694

and so the swerde carve downe unto the horse necke , CMMALORY-M4,22.695

and so man and horse felle downe to the grounde . CMMALORY-M4,22.696

Than sir Kay com unto kynge Morganoure , senesciall with the Kynge of
the Hondred Knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,22.697

and smote hym downe horse and man , CMMALORY-M4,22.698

and ledde the horse unto hys fadir , sir Ector . CMMALORY-M4,22.699

Than sir Ector ran unto a knyght that hyght Lardans CMMALORY-M4,22.700

and smote horse and man downe , CMMALORY-M4,22.701

and lad the horse unto sir Brastias , that grete nede had of an horse
and was gretly defoyled . CMMALORY-M4,22.702

Whan Brastias behelde <P_23> Lucas the Butler that lay lyke a dede man
undir the horse feete - and ever sir Gryflet dud mercyfully for to
reskow hym , and there were allwayes fourtene knyghtes upon sir Lucas -
and than sir Brastias smote one of them on the helme , that hit wente
unto his tethe ; CMMALORY-M4,23.703

and he rode unto another CMMALORY-M4,23.704

and smote hym , that hys arme flow into the felde ; CMMALORY-M4,23.705

than he wente to the thirde CMMALORY-M4,23.706

and smote hym on the shulder , that sholdir and arme flow unto the felde
. CMMALORY-M4,23.707

And whan Gryfflet saw rescowis he smote a knyght on the templis , that
hede and helme wente of to the erthe ; CMMALORY-M4,23.708

and Gryfflet toke that horse CMMALORY-M4,23.709

and lad hym unto sir Lucas , CMMALORY-M4,23.710

and bade hym mownte uppon that horse and revenge his hurtis -
CMMALORY-M4,23.711

for sir Brastias had slayne a knyght tofore - CMMALORY-M4,23.712

and horsed sir Lucas . CMMALORY-M4,23.713

Than sir Lucas saw kynge Angwysschaunce that $nyghe had slayne Maris de
la Roche ; CMMALORY-M4,23.714

and Lucas ran to hym with a sherpe spere that was grete ,
CMMALORY-M4,23.715

and he gaff hym suche a falle that the horse felle downe to the erthe .
CMMALORY-M4,23.716

Also Lucas founde there on foote Bloyas de la $Flaundres and sir Gwynas
, two hardy knyghtes ; CMMALORY-M4,23.717

and in that woodnes that Lucas was in , he slew two bachelers
CMMALORY-M4,23.718

and horsed them agayne . CMMALORY-M4,23.719

Than wexed the batayle passynge harde one bothe partyes .
CMMALORY-M4,23.720

But kynge Arthure was glad that hys knyghtes were horsed agayne .
CMMALORY-M4,23.721

And than they fought togiders , that the noyse and the sowne range by
the watir and woode . Wherefore kynge Ban and Bors made hem redy and
dressed theire shyldis and harneysse , and were so currageous that their
enemyes shooke and byverd for egirnesse . CMMALORY-M4,23.722

All thys whyle sir Lucas , Gwynas , Bryaunte , and Bellias of Flaundres
helde stronge medle agaynste six kynges , which were kynge Lott , kynge
Nentres , kynge Brandegoris , kynge Idres , kyng Uriens and kynge
Angwysshauns . CMMALORY-M4,23.723

So with the helpe of sir Kay and of sir Gryfflet they helde thes six
kyngis harde , that unneth they had ony power to deffende them .
CMMALORY-M4,23.724

But whan kynge Arthure saw the batayle wolde nat be ended by no manner ,
he fared woode as a lyon CMMALORY-M4,23.725

and stirred his horse here and there on the ryght honde and on the
lyffte honde , that he stynted nat tylle he had slayne twenty knyghtes .
CMMALORY-M4,23.726

Also he wounded kynge Lotte sore on the shulder , CMMALORY-M4,23.727

and made hym to leve that grownde , CMMALORY-M4,23.728

for sir Kay with sir Gryfflet dud with kynge Arthure grete dedis of
armys there . CMMALORY-M4,23.729

Than sir Ulphuns , Brastias and sir Ector encountirde agaynste the
<P_24> duke Estans and kynge Cradilmante and kynge Clarivauns of
North-humbirlonde and kynge Carados and the Kynge with the Hondred
Knyghtes . CMMALORY-M4,24.730

So thes kynges encountird with thes knyghtes , that they made them to
avoyde the grounde . CMMALORY-M4,24.731

Than kynge Lotte made grete dole for his damagis and his felowis ,
CMMALORY-M4,24.732

and seyde unto the kyngis , ' But if we woll do as I have devised , we
all shall be slayne and destroyed . CMMALORY-M4,24.733

Lette me have the Kynge with the Hondred Knyghtes , and kynge
Angwysshaunce , and kynge Idres , and the duke of $Canbenet . And we
fyve kyngis woll have ten_thousand men of armys with us ,
CMMALORY-M4,24.734

and we woll go on one party whyle the six kynges holde the medle with
twelve_thousand . CMMALORY-M4,24.735

And whan we se that ye have foughtyn with hem longe , than woll we com
on freysshly ; CMMALORY-M4,24.736

and ellis shall we never macche them , ' seyde kynge Lotte , ' but by
thys means . ' CMMALORY-M4,24.737

So they departed as they here devised , CMMALORY-M4,24.738

and thes six kyngis made theire party stronge agaynste kynge Arthure
CMMALORY-M4,24.739

and made grete warre longe in the meanwhyle . CMMALORY-M4,24.740

Than brake the bushemente of kynge Banne and Bors ; CMMALORY-M4,24.741

and Lionse and Phariaunce had that advaunte-garde , CMMALORY-M4,24.742

and they two knyghtes mette with kynge Idres <em> and his felauship ,
CMMALORY-M4,24.743

and there began a grete medele of brekyng of speres and smytyng of
swerdes with sleynge of men and horses , <$$em> that <em> kynge Idres
<$$em> was nere discomfited . CMMALORY-M4,24.744

That saw kynge Angwysshaunce , CMMALORY-M4,24.745

and put Lyonses and Phariaunce in poynte of dethe , CMMALORY-M4,24.746

for the duke <em> of Canbenet <$$em> com on with a grete felyship .
CMMALORY-M4,24.747

So thes two knyghtes were in grete daungere of their lyves , that they
were fayne to returne ; CMMALORY-M4,24.748

but allweyes they rescowed hemselff and hir felyship merveylously .
CMMALORY-M4,24.749

Whan kynge Bors saw tho knyghtes put on bak hit greved hym sore .
CMMALORY-M4,24.750

Than he com on so faste that his felyship semed as blak as inde .
CMMALORY-M4,24.751

Whan kynge Lotte had aspyed kynge Bors , he knew hym well ,
CMMALORY-M4,24.752

and seyde , ' Jesu defende us from dethe and horryble maymes ,
CMMALORY-M4,24.753

for I se well we be in grete perell of dethe ; CMMALORY-M4,24.754

for I se yondir a kynge , one of the moste worshipfullyst <em> men , and
the <$$em> best knyghtes of the worlde be inclyned unto his felyship .
' CMMALORY-M4,24.755

' What ys he ? ' seyde the Kynge with the $Hundirde Knyghtes .
CMMALORY-M4,24.756

' Hit ys , ' he seyde , ' kynge Bors of Gaule . CMMALORY-M4,24.757

I mervayle , ' seyde he , ' how they com unto this contrey withoute
wetynge of us all . ' CMMALORY-M4,24.758

' Hit was by Merlions advice , ' seyde a knyght . CMMALORY-M4,24.759

<P_25>

' As for me , ' seyde kynge Carados , ' I woll encountir with kynge Bors
, CMMALORY-M4,25.761

and ye woll rescow me whan myster ys . ' CMMALORY-M4,25.762

' Go on , ' seyde they , CMMALORY-M4,25.763

' for we woll all that we may . ' CMMALORY-M4,25.764

Than kynge Carados and hys oste rode on a soffte pace tyll they com as
nyghe kynge Bors as a bowe-draught . CMMALORY-M4,25.765

Than eythir lette theire horsys renne as faste as they myght .
CMMALORY-M4,25.766

And Bleobris that was godson unto kynge Bors , he bare his chyeff
standard ; CMMALORY-M4,25.767

that was a passyng good knyght . CMMALORY-M4,25.768

' Now shall we se , ' seyde kynge Bors , ' how thes northirne Bretons
can bere theire armys ! ' CMMALORY-M4,25.769

So kynge Bors encountird with a knyght CMMALORY-M4,25.770

and smote hym throwoute with a spere , that he felle dede unto the erthe
; CMMALORY-M4,25.771

and aftirwarde drew hys swerde CMMALORY-M4,25.772

and dud mervaylous dedis of armys , that all partyes had grete wondir
thereof . CMMALORY-M4,25.773

And his $knyghtes fayled nat CMMALORY-M4,25.774

but dud hir parte . CMMALORY-M4,25.775

And kynge Carados was smytten to the erthe . CMMALORY-M4,25.776

With that com the Kynge with the Hondred Knyghtes CMMALORY-M4,25.777

and rescowed kynge Carados myghtyly by force of armys ,
CMMALORY-M4,25.778

for he was a passynge good knyght and but a yonge man .
CMMALORY-M4,25.779

Be than com into the felde kynge Ban as ferse as a lyon , with bondis of
grene and thereuppon golde . CMMALORY-M4,25.780

' A ha , ' seyde kynge Lott , ' we muste be discomfite ,
CMMALORY-M4,25.781

for yondir I se the moste valiante knyght of the worlde , and the man of
moste renowne , CMMALORY-M4,25.782

for such two brethirne as ys kynge Ban and kynge Bors ar nat lyvynge .
Wherefore we muste nedis voyde or dye , CMMALORY-M4,25.783

and but if we avoyde manly and wysely there ys but dethe . '
CMMALORY-M4,25.784

So wan thes two kyngis , Ban and Bors , com into the batayle , they com
in so fersely that the strokis $redounded agayne fro the woode and the
watir . Wherefore kynge Lotte wepte for pite and dole that he saw so
many good knyghtes take their ende . CMMALORY-M4,25.785

But thorow the grete force of kynge Ban they made bothe the northirne
batayles that were parted hurteled togidirs for grete drede .
CMMALORY-M4,25.786

And the three kynges and their knyghtes slew on ever , that hit was pite
to se and to beholde the multitude of peple that fledde .
CMMALORY-M4,25.787

But kyng Lott and the Kynge with the Hundred Knyghtes and kynge
Morganoure gadred the peple togydir $passynge knyghtly ,
CMMALORY-M4,25.788

and dud grete proues of armys , CMMALORY-M4,25.789

and helde the batayle all the day lyke harde . CMMALORY-M4,25.790

Whan the Kynge with the Hundred Knyghtes behelde the <P_26> grete damage
that kynge Ban $dyd he threste unto hym with his horse
CMMALORY-M4,26.791

and smote hym an hyghe on the helme a grete stroke CMMALORY-M4,26.792

and stoned hym sore . CMMALORY-M4,26.793

Than kynge Ban was wood wrothe with hym CMMALORY-M4,26.794

and folowed on hym fersely . CMMALORY-M4,26.795

The othir saw that CMMALORY-M4,26.796

and caste up hys shelde CMMALORY-M4,26.797

and spored hys horse forewarde , CMMALORY-M4,26.798

but the stroke of kynge Ban downe felle CMMALORY-M4,26.799

and carve a cantell of the shelde , CMMALORY-M4,26.800

and the swerde sloode downe by the hawbirke byhynde hys backe
CMMALORY-M4,26.801

and kut thorow the trappoure of stele and the horse evyn in two pecis ,
that the swerde felle to the erth . CMMALORY-M4,26.802

Than the Kynge of the Hundred Knyghtes voyded the horse lyghtly ,
CMMALORY-M4,26.803

and with hys swerde he broched the horse of kynge Ban thorow and thorow
. CMMALORY-M4,26.804

With that kynge Ban voyded lyghtly from the dede horse
CMMALORY-M4,26.805

and smote at that othir so egirly on the helme that he felle to the
erthe . CMMALORY-M4,26.806

Also in that ire he felde kynge Morganoure , CMMALORY-M4,26.807

and there was grete slawghtir of good knyghtes and muche peple .
CMMALORY-M4,26.808

Be that tyme com into the prees kynge Arthure CMMALORY-M4,26.809

and founde kynge Ban stondynge amonge the dede men and dede horse ,
fyghtynge on foote as a wood lyon , that there com none nyghe hym as
farre as he myght reche with hys swerde ; CMMALORY-M4,26.810

but he caught a grevous buffette , whereof kynge Arthure had grete pite
. CMMALORY-M4,26.811

And kynge Arthure was so blody that by hys shylde there myght no man
know hym , CMMALORY-M4,26.812

for all was blode and brayne that stake on his swerde and on hys shylde
. CMMALORY-M4,26.813

And as kynge Arthure loked besyde hym he sawe a knyght that was
passyngely well horsed . CMMALORY-M4,26.814

And therewith kynge Arthure ran to hym CMMALORY-M4,26.815

and smote hym on the helme , that hys swerde wente unto his teeth ,
CMMALORY-M4,26.816

and the knyght sanke downe to the erthe dede . CMMALORY-M4,26.817

And anone kynge Arthure toke hys horse by the rayne CMMALORY-M4,26.818

and ladde hym unto kynge Ban CMMALORY-M4,26.819

and seyde , ' Fayre brothir , have ye thys horse , CMMALORY-M4,26.820

for ye have grete myster thereof , CMMALORY-M4,26.821

and me repentys sore of youre grete damage . ' CMMALORY-M4,26.822

' Hit shall be sone revenged , ' seyde kynge Ban , CMMALORY-M4,26.823

' for I truste in God myne hurte ys none suche but som of them may sore
repente thys . ' CMMALORY-M4,26.824

' I woll welle , ' seyde kynge Arthure , CMMALORY-M4,26.825

' for I se youre dedys full actuall ; CMMALORY-M4,26.826

nevertheless I myght nat com to you at that tyme . ' CMMALORY-M4,26.827

But whan kynge Ban was mounted on horsebak , than there began a new
batayle whych was sore and harde , and passynge grete slaughtir .
CMMALORY-M4,26.828

And so thorow grete force kyng Arthure , kynge Ban , and kynge Bors made
hir knyghtes alyght to wythdraw hem to a lytyll <P_27> wood ,
CMMALORY-M4,27.829

and so over a litill ryvir ; CMMALORY-M4,27.830

and there they rested hem , CMMALORY-M4,27.831

for on the nyght before they had no grete reste in the felde .
CMMALORY-M4,27.832

And than the eleven kyngis put hem on an hepe all togydirs , as men
adrad and oute of all comforte . CMMALORY-M4,27.833

But there was no man that myght passe them ; CMMALORY-M4,27.834

they helde hem so harde togydirs bothe behynde and before that kynge
Arthure had mervayle of theire dedis of armys and was passynge wrothe .
CMMALORY-M4,27.835

' A , sir Arthure , ' seyde kynge Ban and kynge Bors , ' blame hem nat ,
CMMALORY-M4,27.836

for they do as good men ought to do . CMMALORY-M4,27.837

For be my fayth , ' seyde kynge Ban , ' they ar the beste fyghtynge men
and knyghtes of moste prouesse that ever y saw other herde off speke .
CMMALORY-M4,27.838

And tho eleven kyngis ar men of grete worship ; CMMALORY-M4,27.839

and if they were longyng to you , there were no kynge undir hevyn that
had suche eleven kyngis nother off suche worship . ' CMMALORY-M4,27.840

' I may nat love hem , ' seyde kynge Arthure , ' CMMALORY-M4,27.841

for they wolde destroy me . ' CMMALORY-M4,27.842

' That know we well , ' seyde kynge Ban and kynge Bors ,
CMMALORY-M4,27.843

' for they ar your mortall enemyes , CMMALORY-M4,27.844

and that hathe bene preved beforehonde . CMMALORY-M4,27.845

And thys day they have done their parte , CMMALORY-M4,27.846

and that ys grete pite of their wylfulnes . ' CMMALORY-M4,27.847

Than all the eleven kynges drew hem togydir . CMMALORY-M4,27.848

And than seyde Lott , ' Lordis , ye muste do othirwyse than ye do ,
CMMALORY-M4,27.849

othir ellis the grete losses ys behynde : CMMALORY-M4,27.850

for ye may se what peple we have loste and what good men we lese because
we wayte allweyes on thes footemen ; CMMALORY-M4,27.851

and ever in savying of one of thes footemen we lese ten horsemen for hym
. CMMALORY-M4,27.852

Therefore thys ys myne advise : CMMALORY-M4,27.853

lette us putte oure footemen frome us , CMMALORY-M4,27.854

for hit ys nere nyght . CMMALORY-M4,27.855

For thys noble kynge Arthure woll nat tarry on the footemen ,
CMMALORY-M4,27.856

for they may save hemselff : CMMALORY-M4,27.857

the woode ys nerehonde . CMMALORY-M4,27.858

And whan we horsemen be togydirs , looke every of you kyngis lat make
such ordinaunce that none breke uppon payne of deth . And who that
seeth any man dresse hym to fle lyghtly , that he be slayne ;
CMMALORY-M4,27.859

for hit ys bettir we sle a cowarde than {it_is} thorow a coward all we
be slayne . CMMALORY-M4,27.860

How sey ye ? ' seyde kynge Lotte . CMMALORY-M4,27.861

' Answere me , all ye kynges ! ' CMMALORY-M4,27.862

' Ye say well , ' seyde kynge Nentres . CMMALORY-M4,27.863

So seyde the Kynge with the Hondred Knyghtes ; CMMALORY-M4,27.864

the same seyde kynge Carados and kynge <P_28> Uryens ;
CMMALORY-M4,28.865

so seyde kynge Idres and kynge Brandegoris ; CMMALORY-M4,28.866

so dud kyng Cradilmasse and the duke of $Canbenet ; CMMALORY-M4,28.867

the same seyde kynge Claryaunce , CMMALORY-M4,28.868

and so dud kynge Angwysshaunce , CMMALORY-M4,28.869

and swore they wolde never fayle other for lyff nothir for dethe .
CMMALORY-M4,28.870

And whoso that fledde all they sholde be slayne . CMMALORY-M4,28.871

Than they amended their harneyse CMMALORY-M4,28.872

and ryghted their sheldis , CMMALORY-M4,28.873

and toke newe speris CMMALORY-M4,28.874

and sette hem on theire thyghes , CMMALORY-M4,28.875

and stoode stylle as hit had be a plumpe of woode . CMMALORY-M4,28.876

Whan kynge Arthure and kynge Ban and Bors behelde them and all hir
knyghtes , they preysed them much for their noble chere of chevalry ,
$for the hardyeste fyghters that ever they herde other saw .
CMMALORY-M4,28.877

So furthwith there dressed a_fourty knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,28.878

and seyde unto the three kynges they wolde breke their batayle .
CMMALORY-M4,28.879

And thes were their namys : Lyonses , Phariaunce , Ulphuns , Brastias ,
Ector , Kayus , Lucas de Butler , Gryfflet la Fyse de Deu , Marrys de la
Roche , Gwynas de Bloy , Bryaunte de la Foreyste Saveage , Bellaus ,
Morians of the Castel Maydyns , Flaundreus of the Castel of Ladyes ,
Annecians that was kynge Bors godson , a noble knyght , and Ladinas de
la Rouse , Emerause , Caulas , Graciens le Castilion , Bloyse de la Case
, and sir Colgrevaunce de Goore . CMMALORY-M4,28.880

All thes knyghtes rode on before with sperys on theire thyghes
CMMALORY-M4,28.881

and spurred their horses myghtyly . CMMALORY-M4,28.882

And the eleven kyngis with parte of hir knyghtes rushed furthe as faste
as they myght with hir sperys , CMMALORY-M4,28.883

and there they dud on bothe partyes merveylous dedes of armys .
CMMALORY-M4,28.884

So there com into the thycke of the prees Arthure , Ban , and Bors ,
CMMALORY-M4,28.885

and slew downeryght on bothe hondis , that hir horses wente in blood up
to the fittlockys . CMMALORY-M4,28.886

But ever the eleven kyngis and the oste was ever in the visage of
Arthure . Wherefore kynge Ban and Bors had grete mervayle consyderyng
the grete slaughter that there was ; CMMALORY-M4,28.887

but at the laste they were dryven abacke over a litill ryver .
CMMALORY-M4,28.888

With that Com Merlion on a grete blacke horse CMMALORY-M4,28.889

and seyde unto kynge Arthure , ' Thou hast never done .
CMMALORY-M4,28.890

Hast thou nat done inow ? CMMALORY-M4,28.891

Of three_score_thousande thys day hast thou leffte on lyve but
fyftene_thousand ! CMMALORY-M4,28.892

Therefore hit ys tyme to sey " Who ! " CMMALORY-M4,28.893

for God ys wroth with the CMMALORY-M4,28.894

for thou woll never have done . CMMALORY-M4,28.895

For yondir a_eleven kynges at thys tyme woll nat be overthrowyn ,
CMMALORY-M4,28.896

but and thou tary on them ony lenger thy <P_29> fortune woll turne
CMMALORY-M4,29.897

and they shall encres . CMMALORY-M4,29.898

And therefore withdraw you unto youre lodgynge CMMALORY-M4,29.899

and reste you as sone as ye may , CMMALORY-M4,29.900

and rewarde youre good knyghtes with golde and with sylver ,
CMMALORY-M4,29.901

for they have well deserved hit . CMMALORY-M4,29.902

There may no ryches be to dere for them , CMMALORY-M4,29.903

for of so fewe men as ye have there was never men dud more worship-fully
in proues than ye have done to-day : CMMALORY-M4,29.904

for ye have macched thys day with the beste fyghters of the worlde . '
CMMALORY-M4,29.905

' That ys trouthe , ' seyde kynge Ban and Bors . CMMALORY-M4,29.906

Than Merlyon bade hem , ' Withdraw where ye lyste , CMMALORY-M4,29.907

for thys three yere I dare undirtake they shall nat dere you ;
CMMALORY-M4,29.908

and by that tyme ye shall hyre newe tydyngis . ' CMMALORY-M4,29.909

Than Merlion seyde unto Arthure , ' Thes eleven kyngis have more on
hande than they are ware off , CMMALORY-M4,29.910

for the Sarezynes ar londed in their contreies mo than fourty_thousande
, CMMALORY-M4,29.911

and brenne and sle CMMALORY-M4,29.912

and have leyde syege to the castell Wandesborow , CMMALORY-M4,29.913

and make grete destruction : CMMALORY-M4,29.914

therefore drede you nat thys yere . CMMALORY-M4,29.915

Also , sir , all the goodis that be gotyn at this batayle lette hit be
serched , CMMALORY-M4,29.916

and whan ye have hit in your hondis lette hit be geffyn frendly unto
thes two kyngis , Ban and Bors , that they may rewarde their knyghtes
wythall : CMMALORY-M4,29.917

and that shall cause straungers to be of bettir wyll to do you servyse
at nede . CMMALORY-M4,29.918

Also ye be able to rewarde youre owne knyghtes at what tyme somever hit
lykith you . ' CMMALORY-M4,29.919

' Ye sey well , ' seyde Arthure , CMMALORY-M4,29.920

' and as thou haste devised so shall hit be done . ' CMMALORY-M4,29.921

Whan hit was delyverde to thes kynges , Ban and Bors , they gaff the
godis as frely to theire knyghtes as hit was gevyn to them .
CMMALORY-M4,29.922

Than Merlion toke hys leve of kynge Arthure and of the two kyngis , for
to go se hys mayster Bloyse that dwelled in Northumbir-londe .
CMMALORY-M4,29.923

And so he departed CMMALORY-M4,29.924

and com to hys mayster that was passynge glad of hys commynge .
CMMALORY-M4,29.925

And there he tolde how Arthure and the two kynges had spedde at the
grete batayle , and how hyt was endyd , CMMALORY-M4,29.926

and tolde the namys of every kynge and knyght of worship that was there
. CMMALORY-M4,29.927

And so Bloyse wrote the batayle worde by worde as Merlion tolde hym ,
how hit began and by whom , and in lyke wyse how hit was ended and who
had the worst . CMMALORY-M4,29.928

And all the batayles that were done in Arthurs dayes , Merlion dud hys
mayster Bloyse wryte them . CMMALORY-M4,29.929

Also he dud wryte all the batayles that every worthy knyght ded of
Arthurs courte . CMMALORY-M4,29.930

<P_30>

So aftir this Merlion departed frome his mayster CMMALORY-M4,30.932

and com to kynge Arthure that was in the castell of Bedgrayne , that was
one of the castels that stondith in the foreyste of Sherewood .
CMMALORY-M4,30.933

And Merlion was so disgysed that kynge Arthure knewe hym nat ,
CMMALORY-M4,30.934

for he was all befurred in blacke shepis skynnes , and a grete payre of
bootis , and a boowe and arowis , in a russet gowne , CMMALORY-M4,30.935

and brought wylde gyese in hys honde . CMMALORY-M4,30.936

And hit was on the morne aftir Candil-masse day . CMMALORY-M4,30.937

But kynge Arthure knew hym nat . CMMALORY-M4,30.938

' Sir , ' seyde Merlion unto the kynge , ' woll ye geff me a gyffte ? '
CMMALORY-M4,30.939

' Wherefore , ' seyde kynge Arthure , ' sholde I gyff the a gyffte ,
chorle ? ' CMMALORY-M4,30.940

' Sir , ' seyd Merlion , ' ye were bettir to gyff me a gyffte that ys
nat in youre honde than to lose grete rychesse . CMMALORY-M4,30.941

For here in the same place there the grete batayle was , ys grete
tresoure hydde in the erthe . ' CMMALORY-M4,30.942

' Who tolde the so , chorle ? ' CMMALORY-M4,30.943

' Sir , Merlyon tolde me so , ' seyde he . CMMALORY-M4,30.944

Than Ulphuns and Brastias knew hym well inowghe CMMALORY-M4,30.945

and smyled . CMMALORY-M4,30.946

' Sir , ' seyde thes two knyghtes , ' hit ys Merlion that so spekith
unto you . ' CMMALORY-M4,30.947

Than kynge Arthure was gretly abaysshed CMMALORY-M4,30.948

and had mervayle of Merlion , CMMALORY-M4,30.949

and so had kynge Ban and Bors . CMMALORY-M4,30.950

So they had grete disporte at hym . CMMALORY-M4,30.951

Than in the meanewhyle there com a damesell that was an erlis doughter ;
CMMALORY-M4,30.952

hys name was Sanam CMMALORY-M4,30.953

and hir name was Lyonors , a passynge fayre damesell .
CMMALORY-M4,30.954

And so she cam thidir for to do omage as other lordis ded after that
grete batayle . CMMALORY-M4,30.955

And kynge Arthure sette hys love gretly on hir , CMMALORY-M4,30.956

and so ded she uppon hym , CMMALORY-M4,30.957

and so the kynge had ado with hir CMMALORY-M4,30.958

and gate on hir a chylde . CMMALORY-M4,30.959

And hys name was Borre , that was aftir a good knyght and of the Table
Rounde . CMMALORY-M4,30.960

Than $ther com worde that kynge Ryens of North Walis made grete warre on
kynge Lodegreaunce of Camylarde , for the whiche kynge Arthure was
wrothe , CMMALORY-M4,30.961

for he loved hym welle CMMALORY-M4,30.962

and hated kyng Royns , CMMALORY-M4,30.963

for allwayes he was agenst hym . CMMALORY-M4,30.964

<paren> So by ordinauns of the three kynges ther were sente home unto
Benwyke $all $that wolde departe , for drede of kynge Claudas .
CMMALORY-M4,30.965

Thes knyghtes : Pharyaunce , Anthemes , Graciens , <em> and Lyonses
<$$em> <P_31> Payarne were the leders of them that sholde kepe the two
kynges londis . <$$paren> CMMALORY-M4,31.966

And than kynge Arthure , kynge Ban and kynge Bors departed with hir
felyship , a_twenty_thousand , CMMALORY-M4,31.967

and cam within seven dayes into the contrey of Camylarde ;
CMMALORY-M4,31.968

and there rescowed kynge Lode-graunce , CMMALORY-M4,31.969

and slew there muche people of kynge Ryons , unto the numbir of
ten_thousand , CMMALORY-M4,31.970

and putte hem to flyght . CMMALORY-M4,31.971

And than had thes thre kynges grete chere of kynge Lodegraunce ,
CMMALORY-M4,31.972

and he thanked them of theire grete goodnes that they wolde revenge hym
of his enemyes . CMMALORY-M4,31.973

And there had Arthure the firste syght of queene Gwenyvere , the kyngis
doughter of the londe of Camylarde , CMMALORY-M4,31.974

and ever afftir he loved hir . CMMALORY-M4,31.975

And aftir they were wedded , as hit tellith in the booke .
CMMALORY-M4,31.976

So breffly to make an ende , they took there leve to go into hir owne
contreyes , CMMALORY-M4,31.977

for kynge Claudas dud grete destruction on their londis .
CMMALORY-M4,31.978

Than seyde Arthure , ' I woll go with you . ' CMMALORY-M4,31.979

' Nay , ' seyde the kyngis , ' ye shall nat at thys tyme ,
CMMALORY-M4,31.980

for ye have much to do yet in thys londe . CMMALORY-M4,31.981

Therefore we woll departe . CMMALORY-M4,31.982

With the grete goodis that we have gotyn in this londe by youre gyfftis
we shall wage good knyghtes and withstonde the kynge Claudas hys malice
, CMMALORY-M4,31.983

for , by the grace of God , and we have nede , we woll sende to you for
succour . CMMALORY-M4,31.984

And ye have nede , sende for us , CMMALORY-M4,31.985

and we woll nat tarry , by the feythe of oure bodyes . '
CMMALORY-M4,31.986

' Hit shall nat nede , ' seyde Merlion , ' thes two kynges to com agayne
in the wey of warre ; CMMALORY-M4,31.987

but I know well kynge Arthure may nat be longe frome you .
CMMALORY-M4,31.988

For within a yere or two ye shall have grete nede , CMMALORY-M4,31.989

than shall he revenge you of youre enemyes as ye have done on his .
CMMALORY-M4,31.990

For thes eleven kyngis shall dye all in one day by the grete myght and
prouesse of armys of two valyaunte knyghtes , ' - as hit tellith aftir .
CMMALORY-M4,31.991

Hir namys $ben Balyne le Saveage and Balan , hys brothir , that were
merveylous knyghtes as ony was tho lyvynge . CMMALORY-M4,31.992

Now turne we unto the eleven kynges that returned unto a cite that hyght
Surhaute , which cite was within kynge Uriens londe ; CMMALORY-M4,31.993

and there they refreysshed them as well as they myght ,
CMMALORY-M4,31.994

and made lechys serche for their woundis CMMALORY-M4,31.995

and sorowed gretly for the deth of hir people . CMMALORY-M4,31.996

So with that there com a messyngere CMMALORY-M4,31.997

and tolde how there was comyn into theyre londis people that were lawles
, as well as <P_32> Sarezynes a_fourty_thousande , and have brente and
slayne all the people that they may com by withoute mercy , and have
leyde sege unto the castell Wandesborow . CMMALORY-M4,32.998

' Alas ! ' seyde the eleven kyngis , ' here ys sorow uppon sorow ,
CMMALORY-M4,32.999

and if we had nat warred agaynste Arthure as we have done , he wolde
sone a revenged us . CMMALORY-M4,32.1000

And as for kynge Lodegreaunce , he lovithe Arthure bettir than us ;
CMMALORY-M4,32.1001

and as for kynge Royens , he hath ynow ado with kynge Lodegreauns ,
CMMALORY-M4,32.1002

for he hath leyde sege unto hym . ' CMMALORY-M4,32.1003

So they condescended togydir to kepe all the marchis of Cornu-wayle , of
Walis , and of the Northe . CMMALORY-M4,32.1004

So firste they put kynge Idres in the cite of Nauntis in Bretayne with
four_thousand men of armys to wacche bothe watir and the londe .
CMMALORY-M4,32.1005

Also they <em> put in the cyte of Wyndesan kynge Nauntres of Garlott
with four_thousand knyghtes to watche both on water and on lond .
CMMALORY-M4,32.1006

Also they <$$em> had of othir men of warre mo than eyght_thousand for to
fortefye all the fortresse in the marchys of Cornuwayle .
CMMALORY-M4,32.1007

Also they put mo kyngis in all the marchis of Walis and Scotlonde with
many good men of armys , CMMALORY-M4,32.1008

and so they kept hem togydirs the space of three yere
CMMALORY-M4,32.1009

and ever alyed hem with myghty kynges and dukis . CMMALORY-M4,32.1010

And unto them felle kynge Royns of Northe Walis which was a myghty kynge
of men , and Nero that was a myghty man of men . CMMALORY-M4,32.1011

And all thys whyle they furnysshed and garnysshed hem of good men of
armys and vitayle and of all maner of ablemente that pretendith to warre
, to avenge hem for the $batayle of Bedgrayne , as hit tellith in the
booke of adven-tures . CMMALORY-M4,32.1012

Than aftir the departynge of kynge Bans and Bors , kynge Arthure rode
unto the cite of Carlyon . CMMALORY-M4,32.1013

And thydir com unto hym kynge Lottis wyff of Orkeney in maner of a
message , CMMALORY-M4,32.1014

but she was sente thydir to aspye the courte of kynge Arthure ,
CMMALORY-M4,32.1015

and she com rychely beseyne with hir four sonnes , Gawayne , Gaheris ,
Aggravayne and Gareth , with many other knyghtes and ladyes ,
CMMALORY-M4,32.1016

for she was a pass-ynge fayre lady . Wherefore the kynge caste grete
love unto hir and desired to ly by her . CMMALORY-M4,32.1017

And so they were agreed , CMMALORY-M4,32.1018

and $he begate uppon hir sir Mordred . CMMALORY-M4,32.1019

And she was syster on the modirs syde Igrayne unto Arthure .
CMMALORY-M4,32.1020

So there she rested hir a monthe , CMMALORY-M4,32.1021

and at the laste she departed . CMMALORY-M4,32.1022

Than the kynge dremed a mervaylous dreme whereof he was sore <P_33>
adrad . CMMALORY-M4,33.1023

<paren> But all thys tyme kynge Arthure knew nat kynge Lottis wyff was
his sister . <$$paren> CMMALORY-M4,33.1024

But thus was the dreme of Arthure : CMMALORY-M4,33.1025

hym thought there was com into hys londe gryffens and serpentes ,
CMMALORY-M4,33.1026

and hym thought they brente and slowghe all the people in the londe ;
CMMALORY-M4,33.1027

and than he thought he fought with them and they dud hym grete harme and
wounded hym full sore , CMMALORY-M4,33.1028

but at the laste he slew hem . CMMALORY-M4,33.1029

Whan the kynge waked , he was passynge hevy of hys dreme ;
CMMALORY-M4,33.1030

and so to putte hit oute of thought he made hym redy with many knyghtes
to ryde on huntynge . CMMALORY-M4,33.1031

And as sone as he was in the foreste , the kynge saw a grete harte
before hym . CMMALORY-M4,33.1032

' Thys harte woll I chace , ' seyde kynge Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,33.1033

And so he spurred hys horse CMMALORY-M4,33.1034

and rode aftir longe , CMMALORY-M4,33.1035

and so be fyne force oftyn he was lyke to have smytten the herte .
Wherefore as the kynge had chased the herte so longe that hys horse lost
his brethe and felle downe dede , than a yoman fette the kynge another
horse . CMMALORY-M4,33.1036

So the kynge saw the herte unboced and hys horse dede ,
CMMALORY-M4,33.1037

he sette hym downe by a fowntayne , CMMALORY-M4,33.1038

and there he felle downe in grete thought . CMMALORY-M4,33.1039

And as he sate so hym thought he herde a noyse of howun-dis to the som
of thirty , CMMALORY-M4,33.1040

and with that the kynge saw com towarde hym the strongeste beste that
ever he saw or herde of . CMMALORY-M4,33.1041

So thys beste wente to the welle CMMALORY-M4,33.1042

and dranke , CMMALORY-M4,33.1043

and the noyse was in the bestes bealy <em> lyke unto the questyng of
thirty coupyl houndes , CMMALORY-M4,33.1044

but alle the whyle the beest dranke there was no noyse in the bestes
bealy <$$em> . CMMALORY-M4,33.1045

And there-with the beeste departed with a grete noyse , whereof the
kynge had grete mervayle . CMMALORY-M4,33.1046

And so he was in a grete thought , CMMALORY-M4,33.1047

and therewith he felle on slepe . CMMALORY-M4,33.1048

Ryght so there com a knyght on foote unto Arthure , CMMALORY-M4,33.1049

and seyde , ' Knyght full of thought and slepy , telle me if thou saw
any stronge beeste passe thys way . ' CMMALORY-M4,33.1050

' Such one saw I , ' seyde kynge Arthure , ' that ys paste nye two myle
. CMMALORY-M4,33.1051

What wolde ye with that beeste ? ' seyde Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,33.1052

' Sir , I have folowed that beste longe and kylde myne horse ,
CMMALORY-M4,33.1053

so wolde God I had another to folow my queste . ' CMMALORY-M4,33.1054

Ryght so com one with the kyngis horse . CMMALORY-M4,33.1055

And whan the knyght saw the horse he prayde the kynge to gyff hym the
horse , CMMALORY-M4,33.1056

' for I have folowed this queste thys twelve-monthe ,
CMMALORY-M4,33.1057

and othir I shall encheve hym othir blede of the beste bloode in my body
. ' CMMALORY-M4,33.1058

<paren> Whos name was <P_34> kynge Pellynor that tyme folowed the
questynge beste , CMMALORY-M4,34.1059

and afftir hys dethe sir Palomydes folowed hit . <$$paren>
CMMALORY-M4,34.1060

' Sir knyght , ' seyd the kynge , ' leve that queste and suffir me to
have hit , and I woll folowe hit anothir twelve-monthe . '
CMMALORY-M4,34.1061

' A , foole ! ' seyde the kynge unto Arthure , ' hit ys in vayne thy
desire , CMMALORY-M4,34.1062

for hit shall never be encheved but by me other by my nexte kynne . '
CMMALORY-M4,34.1063

And therewithe he sterte unto the kyngis horse CMMALORY-M4,34.1064

and mownted into the sadyl CMMALORY-M4,34.1065

and seyde , ' Gramercy , for this horse ys myne owne . '
CMMALORY-M4,34.1066

' Well , ' seyde the kynge , ' thou mayste take myne horse by force ,
CMMALORY-M4,34.1067

but and I myght preve hit I wolde weete whether thou were bettir worthy
to have hym or I . ' CMMALORY-M4,34.1068

Whan the kynge herde hym sey so he seyde , ' Seke me here whan thou
wolte , and here nye thys welle thou shalte fynde me , '
CMMALORY-M4,34.1069

<em> and soo passed on hys weye . CMMALORY-M4,34.1070

Thenne the kyng sat in a study <$$em> CMMALORY-M4,34.1071

and bade hys men fecche another horse as faste as they myght .
CMMALORY-M4,34.1072

Ryght so com by hym Merlyon lyke a chylde of fourtene yere of ayge
CMMALORY-M4,34.1073

and salewed the kynge CMMALORY-M4,34.1074

and asked hym whye he was so pensyff . CMMALORY-M4,34.1075

' I may well be pensiff , ' seyde the kynge , ' CMMALORY-M4,34.1076

for I have sene the mervaylist syght that ever I saw . '
CMMALORY-M4,34.1077

' That know I well , ' seyde Merlyon , ' as welle as thyselff , and of
all thy thoughtes . CMMALORY-M4,34.1078

But thou arte a foole to take thought for hit that woll nat amende the .
CMMALORY-M4,34.1079

Also I know what thou arte , and who was thy fadir , and of whom thou
were begotyn : CMMALORY-M4,34.1080

for kynge Uther was thy fadir CMMALORY-M4,34.1081

and begate the on Igrayne . ' CMMALORY-M4,34.1082

' That ys false ! ' seyde kynge Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,34.1083

' How sholdist thou know hit , CMMALORY-M4,34.1084

for thou arte nat so olde of yerys to know my fadir ? '
CMMALORY-M4,34.1085

' Yes , ' seyde Merlyon , ' I know hit bettir than ye or ony man lyvynge
. ' CMMALORY-M4,34.1086

' I woll nat beleve the , ' seyde Arthure , CMMALORY-M4,34.1087

and was wrothe with the chylde . CMMALORY-M4,34.1088

So departed Merlyon , CMMALORY-M4,34.1089

and com ayen in the lyknesse of an olde man of four_score yere of ayge ,
whereof the kynge was passynge glad , CMMALORY-M4,34.1090

for he semed to be ryght wyse . CMMALORY-M4,34.1091

Than seyde the olde man , ' Why ar ye so sad ? ' CMMALORY-M4,34.1092

' I may well be sad , ' seyde Arthure , ' for many thynges .
CMMALORY-M4,34.1093

For ryght <P_35> now there was a chylde here , CMMALORY-M4,35.1094

and tolde me many thynges that me@ @semythe he sholde nat knowe ,
CMMALORY-M4,35.1095

for he was nat of ayge to know my fadir . ' CMMALORY-M4,35.1096

' Yes , ' seyde the olde man , ' the chylde tolde you trouthe ,
CMMALORY-M4,35.1097

and more he wolde a tolde you and $ye wolde a suffirde hym .
CMMALORY-M4,35.1098

But ye have done a thynge late that God ys displesed with you ,
CMMALORY-M4,35.1099

for ye have lyene by youre syster CMMALORY-M4,35.1100

and on hir ye have gotyn a childe that shall destroy you and all the
knyghtes of youre realme . ' CMMALORY-M4,35.1101

' What ar ye , ' seyde Arthure , ' that telle me thys tydyngis ? '
CMMALORY-M4,35.1102

' Sir , I am Merlion , CMMALORY-M4,35.1103

and I was he in the chyldis lycknes . ' CMMALORY-M4,35.1104

' A , ' seyde the kynge , ' ye ar a mervaylous man !
CMMALORY-M4,35.1105

But I mervayle muche of thy wordis that I mou dye in batayle . '
CMMALORY-M4,35.1106

' Mervayle nat , ' seyde Merlion , CMMALORY-M4,35.1107

' for hit ys Goddis wylle that youre body sholde be punyssed for your
fowle dedis . CMMALORY-M4,35.1108

But I ought ever to be hevy , ' seyde Merlion , CMMALORY-M4,35.1109

' for I shall dye a shamefull dethe , to be putte in the erthe quycke ;
CMMALORY-M4,35.1110

and ye shall dey a worshipfull dethe . ' CMMALORY-M4,35.1111

And as they talked thus , com one with the kyngis horse ,
CMMALORY-M4,35.1112

and so the kynge mownted on hys horse , and Merlion on anothir ,
CMMALORY-M4,35.1113

and so rode unto Carlyon . CMMALORY-M4,35.1114

And anone the kynge askyd Ector and Ulphuns how he was begotyn ,
CMMALORY-M4,35.1115

and they tolde hym how kynge Uther was hys fadir , and quene Igrayne hys
modir . CMMALORY-M4,35.1116

' So Merlion tolde me . CMMALORY-M4,35.1117

I woll that my modir be sente for , that I myght speke with hir .
CMMALORY-M4,35.1118

And if she sey so hirselff , than woll I beleve hit . '
CMMALORY-M4,35.1119

So in all haste the quene was sente for , CMMALORY-M4,35.1120

and she brought with hir Morgan le Fay , hir doughter , that was a fayre
lady as ony myght be . CMMALORY-M4,35.1121

And the kynge welcommed Igrayne in the beste maner .
CMMALORY-M4,35.1122

Ryght so com in Ulphuns CMMALORY-M4,35.1123

and seyde opynly , that the kynge and all myght hyre that were fested
that day , ' Ye ar the falsyst lady of the worde , and the moste
traytoures unto the kynges person . ' CMMALORY-M4,35.1124

' Beware , ' seyde kynge Arthure , ' what thou seyste :
CMMALORY-M4,35.1125

thou spekiste a grete worde . ' CMMALORY-M4,35.1126

' Sir , I am well ware , ' seyde Ulphuns , ' what I speke ,
CMMALORY-M4,35.1127

and here ys my gloove to preve hit uppon ony man that woll sey the
contrary : that thys quene Igrayne ys the causer of youre grete damage
and of youre grete warre , CMMALORY-M4,35.1128

for and she wolde have uttirde hit in the lyff of Uther of the birth of
you , and how ye were begotyn , than had ye <P_36> never had the mortall
warrys that ye have had . CMMALORY-M4,36.1129

For the moste party of your barownes of youre realme knewe never whos
sonne ye were , ne of whom ye were begotyn ; CMMALORY-M4,36.1130

and she that bare you of hir body sholde have made hit knowyn opynly ,
in excusynge of hir worship and youres , and in lyke $wyse to all the
realme . Wherefore I preve hir false to God and to you and to all youre
realme . CMMALORY-M4,36.1131

And who woll sey the contrary , I woll preve hit on hys body . '
CMMALORY-M4,36.1132

Than spake Igrayne CMMALORY-M4,36.1133

and seyde , ' I am a woman CMMALORY-M4,36.1134

and I may nat fyght ; CMMALORY-M4,36.1135

but rather than I sholde be dishonoured , there wolde som good man take
my quarell . CMMALORY-M4,36.1136

But , ' thus she seyde , ' Merlion knowith well , and ye , sir Ulphuns ,
how kynge Uther com to me into the castell of Tyntagyl in the lyknes of
my lorde that was dede thre owres tofore , CMMALORY-M4,36.1137

and there begate a chylde that nyght uppon me , CMMALORY-M4,36.1138

and aftir the thirtenth day kynge Uther wedded me . CMMALORY-M4,36.1139

And by his com-maundemente , whan the chylde was borne , hit was
delyvirde unto Merlion and fostred by hym . CMMALORY-M4,36.1140

And so I saw the childe never aftir , CMMALORY-M4,36.1141

nothir wote nat what ys hys name ; CMMALORY-M4,36.1142

for I knew hym never yette . ' CMMALORY-M4,36.1143

Than Ulphuns seyde unto Merlion , ' Ye ar than more to blame than the
queene . ' CMMALORY-M4,36.1144

' Sir , well I wote I bare a chylde be my lorde kynge Uther ,
CMMALORY-M4,36.1145

but I wote never where he ys becom . ' CMMALORY-M4,36.1146

Than the kynge toke Merlion by the honde seying thys wordis :
CMMALORY-M4,36.1147

' Ys this my modir ? ' CMMALORY-M4,36.1148

' Forsothe , sir , yee . ' CMMALORY-M4,36.1149

And therewith com in sir Ector , CMMALORY-M4,36.1150

and bare wytnes how he fostred hym by kynge Uthers commaundemente .
CMMALORY-M4,36.1151

And therewith kyng Arthure toke his modir , quene Igrayne , in hys armys
CMMALORY-M4,36.1152

and kyssed her , CMMALORY-M4,36.1153

and eythir wepte uppon other . CMMALORY-M4,36.1154

Than the kynge lete make a feste that lasted eyght dayes .
CMMALORY-M4,36.1155

So on a day there com into the courte a squyre on horsebacke ledynge a
knyght tofore hym , wounded to the deth , CMMALORY-M4,36.1156

and tolde how there was a knyght in the foreste that had rered up a
pavylon by a welle , ' that hath slayne my mayster , a good knyght :
CMMALORY-M4,36.1157

hys name was Myles . Wherefore I besech you that my maystir may be
buryed , and that som knyght may revenge my maystirs dethe . '
CMMALORY-M4,36.1158

Than the noyse was grete of that knyghtes dethe in the courte ,
CMMALORY-M4,36.1159

<P_37>

and every man seyde hys advyce . CMMALORY-M4,37.1161

Than com Gryfflet that was but a squyre , CMMALORY-M4,37.1162

and he was but yonge , of <em> the ayge of the kyng Arthur <$$em> .
CMMALORY-M4,37.1163

So he besought the kynge for all hys servyse that he had done hym to
gyff hym the Order of Knyghthoode . CMMALORY-M4,37.1164

' Thou arte but yonge and tendir of ayge , ' seyd kynge Arthure , ' for
to take so hyghe an $order uppon you . ' CMMALORY-M4,37.1165

' Sir , ' seyde Gryfflett , ' I beseche you to make me knyght . '
CMMALORY-M4,37.1166

' Sir , ' seyde Merlion , ' hit were pite' to lose Gryfflet ,
CMMALORY-M4,37.1167

for he woll be a passynge good man whan he ys of ayge ,
CMMALORY-M4,37.1168

and he shall abyde with you the terme of hys lyff . CMMALORY-M4,37.1169

And if he aventure his body with yondir knyght at the fountayne , hit ys
in grete perell if ever he com agayne , CMMALORY-M4,37.1170

for he ys one of the beste knyghtes of the worlde and the strengyst man
of armys . ' CMMALORY-M4,37.1171

' Well , ' seyde Arthure , ' at thyne owne desire thou shalt be made
knyght . ' CMMALORY-M4,37.1172

<em> So at the desyre of Gryflet the kynge made hym knyght . <$$em>
CMMALORY-M4,37.1173

' Now , ' seyde Arthure unto Gryfflet , ' sith I have made the knyght ,
thou muste gyff me a gyffte . ' CMMALORY-M4,37.1174

' What ye woll , ' seyde Gryfflet . CMMALORY-M4,37.1175

' Thou shalt promyse me by thy feyth of thy body , whan thou haste
justed with that knyght at the fountayne , whether hit falle ye be on
horsebak othir on foote , that ryght so ye shall com agayne unto me
withoute makynge ony more debate . ' CMMALORY-M4,37.1176

' I woll promyse you , ' seyde Gryfflet , ' as youre desire ys . '
CMMALORY-M4,37.1177

Than toke Gryfflet hys horse in grete haste CMMALORY-M4,37.1178

and dressed hys shelde CMMALORY-M4,37.1179

and toke a spere in hys honde , CMMALORY-M4,37.1180

and so he rode a grete walop tylle he com to the fountain .
CMMALORY-M4,37.1181

And thereby he saw a ryche pavilion , CMMALORY-M4,37.1182

and thereby undir a cloth stood an horse well sadeled and brydyled ,
CMMALORY-M4,37.1183

and on a tre hynge a shelde of dyvers coloures , and a grete spere
thereby . CMMALORY-M4,37.1184

Than Gryfflet smote on the shylde with the butte of hys spere , that the
shylde felle downe . CMMALORY-M4,37.1185

With that the knyght com oute of the pavilion CMMALORY-M4,37.1186

and seyde , ' Fayre knyght , why smote ye downe my shylde ? '
CMMALORY-M4,37.1187

' Sir , for I wolde juste with you , ' seyde Gryfflet .
CMMALORY-M4,37.1188

' Sir , hit ys bettir ye do nat , ' seyde the kynge ,
CMMALORY-M4,37.1189

' for ye ar but yonge and late made knyght , CMMALORY-M4,37.1190

and youre myght ys nat to myne . ' CMMALORY-M4,37.1191

' As for that , ' seyde Gryfflet , ' I woll jouste with you . '
CMMALORY-M4,37.1192

<P_38>

' That ys me loth , ' seyde the knyght , CMMALORY-M4,38.1194

' but sitthyn I muste nedis , I woll dresse me thereto .
CMMALORY-M4,38.1195

Of whens be ye ? ' seyde the knyght . CMMALORY-M4,38.1196

' Sir , I am of kynge Arthurs courte . ' CMMALORY-M4,38.1197

So the two knyghtes ran togydir , that Gryfflettis spere all to-shevirde
. CMMALORY-M4,38.1198

And therewithall he smote Gryfflet thorow the shelde and the lyffte syde
, CMMALORY-M4,38.1199

and brake the spere , that the truncheon stake in hys body ,
CMMALORY-M4,38.1200

and horse and man felle downe to the erthe . CMMALORY-M4,38.1201

Whan the knyght saw hym ly so on the grounde he alyght
CMMALORY-M4,38.1202

and was passyng hevy , CMMALORY-M4,38.1203

for he wente he had slayne hym . CMMALORY-M4,38.1204

And than he unlaced hys helme CMMALORY-M4,38.1205

and gate hym wynde ; CMMALORY-M4,38.1206

and so with the troncheon he sette hym on his horse CMMALORY-M4,38.1207

and gate hym wynde , CMMALORY-M4,38.1208

and so betoke hym to God CMMALORY-M4,38.1209

and seyde , ' He had a myghty herte ! ' CMMALORY-M4,38.1210

And seyde , ' If he myght lyve , he wolde preve a passyng good knyght ,
' CMMALORY-M4,38.1211

and so rode forthe sir Gryfflet unto the courte , whereof passyng grete
dole was made for hym . CMMALORY-M4,38.1212

But thorow good lechis he was heled and saved . CMMALORY-M4,38.1213

Ryght so com into the courte twelve knyghtes that were aged men , whiche
com frome the Emperoure of Rome . CMMALORY-M4,38.1214

And they asked of Arthure trwage for hys realme , CMMALORY-M4,38.1215

othir ellis the Emperour wolde destroy hym and all hys londe .
CMMALORY-M4,38.1216

' Well , ' seyde kynge Arthure , ' ye ar messyngers :
CMMALORY-M4,38.1217

therefore ye may sey what ye woll , CMMALORY-M4,38.1218

othir ellis ye sholde dye therefore . CMMALORY-M4,38.1219

But thys ys myne answere : CMMALORY-M4,38.1220

I owghe the Emperour no trewage , CMMALORY-M4,38.1221

nother none woll I yelde hym , CMMALORY-M4,38.1222

but on a fayre fylde I shall yelde hym my trwage , CMMALORY-M4,38.1223

that shall be with a sherpe spere othir ellis with a sherpe swerde .
CMMALORY-M4,38.1224

And that shall nat be longe , be my fadirs soule Uther ! '
CMMALORY-M4,38.1225

And therewith the messyngers departed passyngly wrothe , and kyng
Arthure as wrothe ; CMMALORY-M4,38.1226

for in an evyll tyme com they . CMMALORY-M4,38.1227

But the kynge was passyngly wrothe for the hurte of sir Gryfflet ,
CMMALORY-M4,38.1228

and so he commaunded a prevy man of hys chambir that or hit were day his
beste horse and armoure ' and all that longith to my person be with-oute
the cite' or tomorow day ' . CMMALORY-M4,38.1229

Ryght so he mette with his man and his horse , CMMALORY-M4,38.1230

and so mownted up , CMMALORY-M4,38.1231

and dressed his shelde CMMALORY-M4,38.1232

and toke hys spere , CMMALORY-M4,38.1233

and bade hys chambirlayne tary there tylle he com agayne .
CMMALORY-M4,38.1234

And so Arthure rode a soffte pace tyll hit was day .
CMMALORY-M4,38.1235

And than was he ware of thre chorlys chasyng Merlion CMMALORY-M4,38.1236

and wolde have slayne hym . CMMALORY-M4,38.1237

Than the kynge rode unto them CMMALORY-M4,38.1238

and bade hem : ' Fle , chorlis ! ' CMMALORY-M4,38.1239

Than they fered sore whan they sawe a knyght com , CMMALORY-M4,38.1240

and fledde . CMMALORY-M4,38.1241

<P_39>

' A , Merlion ! ' seyde Arthure , ' here haddist thou be slayne for all
thy crafftis , had nat I bene . ' CMMALORY-M4,39.1243

' Nay , ' seyde Merlyon , ' nat so , CMMALORY-M4,39.1244

for I cowde a saved myselffe and I had wolde . CMMALORY-M4,39.1245

But thou arte more nere thy deth than I am , CMMALORY-M4,39.1246

for thou goste to thy dethe warde , CMMALORY-M4,39.1247

and God be nat thy frende . ' CMMALORY-M4,39.1248

So as they wente thus talkynge , they com to the fountayne and the ryche
pavilion there by hit . CMMALORY-M4,39.1249

Than kynge Arthure was ware where sate a knyght armed in a chayre .
CMMALORY-M4,39.1250

' Sir knyght , ' seyde Arthure , ' for what cause abydist thou here that
there may no knyght ryde thys way but yf he juste with the ?
CMMALORY-M4,39.1251

I rede the to leve that custom . ' CMMALORY-M4,39.1252

' Thys custom , ' seyde the knyght , ' have I used and woll use magre'
who seyth nay . CMMALORY-M4,39.1253

And who that ys agreved with my custum lette hym amende hit . '
CMMALORY-M4,39.1254

' That shall I amende , ' seyde Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,39.1255

' And I shall defende the , ' seyde the knyght . CMMALORY-M4,39.1256

And anone he toke hys horse , CMMALORY-M4,39.1257

and dressed hys shelde CMMALORY-M4,39.1258

and toke a grete spere in hys honde , CMMALORY-M4,39.1259

and they come togydir so harde that eythir smote other in mydde the
shyldis , that all to-shevird theire speris . CMMALORY-M4,39.1260

Therewith anone Arthure pulled oute his swerde . CMMALORY-M4,39.1261

' Nay , nat so , ' seyde the knyght , CMMALORY-M4,39.1262

' hit ys bettir that we twayne renne more togydirs with sherpe sperys .
' CMMALORY-M4,39.1263

' I woll well , ' seyde Arthure , ' and I had ony mo sperys here . '
CMMALORY-M4,39.1264

' I have inow , ' seyde the knyght . CMMALORY-M4,39.1265

So there com a squyre CMMALORY-M4,39.1266

and brought forthe two sperys , CMMALORY-M4,39.1267

and Arthure chose one and he another . CMMALORY-M4,39.1268

So they spurred theire horsis CMMALORY-M4,39.1269

and come togydir with all theire myghtes , that eyther brake their
sperys to their hondis . CMMALORY-M4,39.1270

Than Arthure sette honde on his swerde . CMMALORY-M4,39.1271

' Nay , ' seyde the knyght , ' ye shall do bettir . CMMALORY-M4,39.1272

Ye ar a passyng good juster as ever y mette withall ,
CMMALORY-M4,39.1273

and onys for the hyghe Order of Knyghthode lette us jouste agayne . '
CMMALORY-M4,39.1274

' I assente me , ' seyde Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,39.1275

And anone there was brought forth two grete sperys , CMMALORY-M4,39.1276

and anone every knyght gate a spere ; CMMALORY-M4,39.1277

and therewith they ran togiders , that Arthures spere all to-shevirde .
CMMALORY-M4,39.1278

But this other knyght smote hym so harde in myddis the shelde that horse
and man felle to the erthe . CMMALORY-M4,39.1279

<P_40>

And therewith Arthure was egir , CMMALORY-M4,40.1281

and pulde oute hys swerde , CMMALORY-M4,40.1282

and seyde , ' I woll assay the , sir knyght , on foote ,
CMMALORY-M4,40.1283

for I have loste the honoure on horsebacke , ' seyde the kynge .
CMMALORY-M4,40.1284

' Sir , I woll be on horsebacke stylle to assay the . '
CMMALORY-M4,40.1285

Than was Arthure wrothe CMMALORY-M4,40.1286

and dressed his shelde towarde hym with his swerde drawyn .
CMMALORY-M4,40.1287

Whan the knyght saw that he alyght , CMMALORY-M4,40.1288

for hym thought no worship to have a knyght at such avayle , he to be on
horsebacke and hys adversary on foote , CMMALORY-M4,40.1289

and so he alyght CMMALORY-M4,40.1290

and dressed his shelde unto Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,40.1291

And there began a stronge batayle with many grete strokis ,
CMMALORY-M4,40.1292

and so they hew with hir swerdis , that the cantels flowe unto the
feldys , CMMALORY-M4,40.1293

and muche bloode they bledde bothe , that all the place there@ @as they
fought was ovirbledde with bloode . CMMALORY-M4,40.1294

And thus they fought longe CMMALORY-M4,40.1295

and rested them . CMMALORY-M4,40.1296

And than they went to the batayle agayne , CMMALORY-M4,40.1297

and so hurteled togydirs lyke too rammes that aythir felle to the erthe
. CMMALORY-M4,40.1298

So at the laste they smote togyders , that bothe hir $swerdys mette evyn
togyders . CMMALORY-M4,40.1299

But kynge Arthurs swerde brake in two pecis , wherefore he was hevy .
CMMALORY-M4,40.1300

Than seyde the knyght unto Arthure , ' Thou arte in my daungere ,
whethir me lyste to save the or sle the ; CMMALORY-M4,40.1301

and but thou yelde the to me as overcom and recreaunte , thou shalt dey
. ' CMMALORY-M4,40.1302

' As for that , ' seyde kynge Arthure , ' dethe ys wellcom to me whan
hit commyth . CMMALORY-M4,40.1303

But to yelde me unto the I woll nat ! ' CMMALORY-M4,40.1304

And therewithall the kynge lepte unto kynge Pellynore ,
CMMALORY-M4,40.1305

and toke hym by the myddyll , CMMALORY-M4,40.1306

and overthrew hym , CMMALORY-M4,40.1307

and raced of hys helme . CMMALORY-M4,40.1308

So whan the knyght felte that , he was adradde , CMMALORY-M4,40.1309

for he was a passynge bygge man of myght . CMMALORY-M4,40.1310

And so forthewith he wrothe Arthure undir hym CMMALORY-M4,40.1311

and raced of hys helme , CMMALORY-M4,40.1312

and wolde have smytten off hys hede . CMMALORY-M4,40.1313

And therewithall com Merlion CMMALORY-M4,40.1314

and seyde , ' Knyght , holde thy honde , CMMALORY-M4,40.1315

for and thou sle that knyght thou puttyst thys realme in the gretteste
damage that evir was realme : CMMALORY-M4,40.1316

for thys knyght ys a man of more worshyp than thou wotist off . '
CMMALORY-M4,40.1317

' Why , what ys he ? ' seyde the knyght . CMMALORY-M4,40.1318

' For hit ys kynge Arthure , ' seyde Merlyon . CMMALORY-M4,40.1319

Than wolde he have slayne hym for drede of hys wratthe ,
CMMALORY-M4,40.1320

and so he lyffte up hys swerde . CMMALORY-M4,40.1321

And therewith Merlion caste an inchaunte-mente on the knyght , that he
felle to the erthe in a grete slepe . CMMALORY-M4,40.1322

Than <P_41> Merlion toke up kynge Arthure CMMALORY-M4,41.1323

and rode forthe on the knyghtes horse . CMMALORY-M4,41.1324

' Alas ! ' seyde Arthure , ' what hast thou do , Merlion ?
CMMALORY-M4,41.1325

Hast thou slayne thys good knyght by thy craufftis ?
CMMALORY-M4,41.1326

For there lyvith nat so worshipffull a knyght as he was .
CMMALORY-M4,41.1327

For I had levir than the stynte of my londe a yere that he were on lyve
. ' CMMALORY-M4,41.1328

' Care ye nat , ' seyde Merlion , CMMALORY-M4,41.1329

' for he ys holer than ye : CMMALORY-M4,41.1330

he ys but on slepe CMMALORY-M4,41.1331

and woll awake within thys owre . CMMALORY-M4,41.1332

I tolde you , ' seyde Merlyon , ' what a knyght he was .
CMMALORY-M4,41.1333

Now here had ye be slayne had I nat bene . CMMALORY-M4,41.1334

Also there lyvith nat a bygger knyght than he ys one ;
CMMALORY-M4,41.1335

and afftir this he shall do you goode servyse . CMMALORY-M4,41.1336

And hys name ys kynge Pellinore , CMMALORY-M4,41.1337

and he shall have two sonnes that shall be passyng good men as ony
lyvynge : CMMALORY-M4,41.1338

save one in thys worlde they shall have no felowis of prouesse and of
good lyvynge , CMMALORY-M4,41.1339

and hir namys shall be Percyvall and sir Lamorake of Walis .
CMMALORY-M4,41.1340

And he shall telle you the name of youre owne son begotyn of youre
syster , that shall be the destruccion of all thys realme . '
CMMALORY-M4,41.1341

Ryght so the kynge and he departed CMMALORY-M4,41.1342

and wente unto an ermytage , CMMALORY-M4,41.1343

and there was a good man and a grete leche . CMMALORY-M4,41.1344

So the ermyte serched the kynges woundis CMMALORY-M4,41.1345

and gaff hym good salves . CMMALORY-M4,41.1346

And so the kyng was there three dayes , CMMALORY-M4,41.1347

and than wer his woundis well amended , that he myght ryde and goo ;
CMMALORY-M4,41.1348

and so departed . CMMALORY-M4,41.1349

And as they rode , kynge Arthur seyde , ' I have no swerde . '
CMMALORY-M4,41.1350

' No force , ' seyde Merlyon , CMMALORY-M4,41.1351

' hereby ys a swerde that shall be youre , and I may . '
CMMALORY-M4,41.1352

So they rode tyll they com to a laake that was a fayre watir and brode .
CMMALORY-M4,41.1353

And in the myddis Arthure was ware of an arme clothed in whyght samyte ,
that helde a fayre swerde in that honde . CMMALORY-M4,41.1354

' Lo , ' seyde Merlion , ' yondir ys the swerde that I spoke off . '
CMMALORY-M4,41.1355

So with that they saw a damesell goynge uppon the laake .
CMMALORY-M4,41.1356

<em> ' What damoysel is that ? ' said Arthur . CMMALORY-M4,41.1357

' That is the Lady of the Lake , ' <$$em> seyde Merlion .
CMMALORY-M4,41.1358

' There ys a grete roche , CMMALORY-M4,41.1359

and therein ys as fayre a paleyce as ony on erthe , and rychely besayne
. CMMALORY-M4,41.1360

And thys damesel woll come to you anone , CMMALORY-M4,41.1361

and than speke ye fayre to hir , that she may gyff you that swerde . '
CMMALORY-M4,41.1362

So anone com this damesel to Arthure CMMALORY-M4,41.1363

and salewed hym , and he hir agayne . CMMALORY-M4,41.1364

<P_42>

' Damesell , ' seyde Arthure , ' what swerde ys that yondir that the
arme holdith aboven the watir ? CMMALORY-M4,42.1366

I wolde hit were myne , CMMALORY-M4,42.1367

for I have no swerde . ' CMMALORY-M4,42.1368

' Sir Arthure , ' seyde the damesel , ' that swerde ys myne ,
CMMALORY-M4,42.1369

and if ye woll gyff me a gyffte whan I aske hit you , ye shall have hit
. ' CMMALORY-M4,42.1370

' Be my feyth , ' seyde Arthure , ' I woll gyff you what gyffte that ye
woll aske . ' CMMALORY-M4,42.1371

' Well , ' seyde the damesell , ' go ye into yondir barge , and rowe
yourselffe to the swerde , and take hit and the scawberde with you .
And I woll aske my gyffte whan I se my tyme . ' CMMALORY-M4,42.1372

So kynge Arthure and Merlion alyght CMMALORY-M4,42.1373

and tyed their horsis unto two treys ; CMMALORY-M4,42.1374

and so they wente into the barge . CMMALORY-M4,42.1375

And whan they come to the swerde that the honde hylde , than kynge
Arthure toke hit up by the hondils CMMALORY-M4,42.1376

and bare hit with hym , CMMALORY-M4,42.1377

and the arme and the honde wente undir the watir . CMMALORY-M4,42.1378

And so he com unto the londe CMMALORY-M4,42.1379

and rode forthe . CMMALORY-M4,42.1380

And kynge Arthure saw a ryche pavilion . CMMALORY-M4,42.1381

' What signifieth yondir pavilion ? ' CMMALORY-M4,42.1382

' Sir , that ys the knyghtes pavilys that ye fought with laste , sir
Pellynore ; CMMALORY-M4,42.1383

but he ys oute . CMMALORY-M4,42.1384

He ys nat at home , CMMALORY-M4,42.1385

for he hath had ado with a knyght of youres that hyght Egglame ,
CMMALORY-M4,42.1386

and they had foughtyn togyddyr ; CMMALORY-M4,42.1387

but at the laste Egglame fledde , CMMALORY-M4,42.1388

and ellis he had bene dede , CMMALORY-M4,42.1389

and he hath chaced hym evyn to Carlion . CMMALORY-M4,42.1390

And we shall mete with hym anone in the hygheway . '
CMMALORY-M4,42.1391

' That ys well seyde , ' seyde Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,42.1392

' Now have I a swerde CMMALORY-M4,42.1393

I woll wage batayle with hym and be avenged on hym . '
CMMALORY-M4,42.1394

' Sir , ' seyde Merlion , ' nat so ; CMMALORY-M4,42.1395

for the knyght ys wery of fyghtynge and chasynge , that ye shall have no
worship to have ado with hym . CMMALORY-M4,42.1396

Also he woll nat lyghtly be macched of one knyght lyvynge ,
CMMALORY-M4,42.1397

and therefore hit ys my counceile : CMMALORY-M4,42.1398

latte hym passe , CMMALORY-M4,42.1399

for he shall do you good servyse in shorte tyme , and hys sonnes afftir
hys dayes . CMMALORY-M4,42.1400

Also ye shall se that day in shorte space that ye shall be ryght glad to
gyff hym youre syster to wedde for hys good servyse .
CMMALORY-M4,42.1401

Therefore have nat ado with hym whan ye se hym . ' CMMALORY-M4,42.1402

' I woll do as ye avise me . ' CMMALORY-M4,42.1403

Than kynge Arthure loked on the swerde CMMALORY-M4,42.1404

and lyked hit passynge well . CMMALORY-M4,42.1405

Than seyde Merlion , <P_43> ' Whethir lyke ye better the swerde othir
the scawberde ? ' CMMALORY-M4,43.1406

' I lyke bettir the swerde , ' seyde Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,43.1407

' Ye ar the more unwyse , CMMALORY-M4,43.1408

for the scawberde ys worth ten of the swerde ; CMMALORY-M4,43.1409

for whyles ye have the scawberde uppon you , ye shall lose no blood , be
ye never so sore wounded . CMMALORY-M4,43.1410

Therefore kepe well the scawberde allweyes with you . '
CMMALORY-M4,43.1411

So they rode unto Carlion ; CMMALORY-M4,43.1412

and by the wey they mette with kynge Pellinore . CMMALORY-M4,43.1413

But Merlion had done suche a crauffte unto kynge Pelli-nore saw nat
kynge Arthure , CMMALORY-M4,43.1414

and so passed by withoute ony wordis . CMMALORY-M4,43.1415

' I mervayle , ' seyde Arthure , ' that the knyght wold nat speke . '
CMMALORY-M4,43.1416

' Sir , he saw you nat ; CMMALORY-M4,43.1417

for had he seyne you , ye had nat lyghtly parted . '
CMMALORY-M4,43.1418

So they com unto Carlion , wherof hys knyghtes were passynge glad .
CMMALORY-M4,43.1419

And whan they herde of hys adventures , they mervayled that he wolde
jouparde' his person so alone . CMMALORY-M4,43.1420

But all men of worship seyde hit was myrry to be under such a chyfftayne
that wolde putte hys person in adventure as other poure knyghtis ded .
CMMALORY-M4,43.1421

So thys meanewhyle com a messyngere frome kynge Royns of Northe Walis ,
CMMALORY-M4,43.1422

and kynge he was of all Irelonde and of Iles . CMMALORY-M4,43.1423

And this was hys message , gretynge well kyng Arthure on thys maner of
wyse , sayng that kynge Royns had discomfite and overcom eleven kyngis ,
CMMALORY-M4,43.1424

and every of them dud hym omage . CMMALORY-M4,43.1425

And that was thus to sey CMMALORY-M4,43.1426

they gaff theire beardes clene flayne off , as much as was bearde ;
wherefore the messyngere com for kynge Arthures berde .
CMMALORY-M4,43.1427

For kynge Royns had purfilde a mantell with kynges berdis ,
CMMALORY-M4,43.1428

and there lacked one place of the mantell ; wherefore he sente for hys
bearde , CMMALORY-M4,43.1429

othir ellis he wolde entir into his londis and brenne and sle , and
nevir leve tylle he hathe the hede and the bearde bothe .
CMMALORY-M4,43.1430

' Well , ' seyde Arthure , ' thou haste seyde thy message , the whych ys
the moste orgulus and lewdiste message that evir man had isente unto a
kynge . CMMALORY-M4,43.1431

Also thou mayste se my bearde ys full yonge yet to make off a purphile .
CMMALORY-M4,43.1432

But telle thou thy kynge thus , that I owghe hym <em> none homage <$$em>
ne none of myne elders ; CMMALORY-M4,43.1433

but or hit be longe to , he shall do me omage on bothe his knees ,
CMMALORY-M4,43.1434

other ellis he shall lese hys hede , by the fayth of my body !
CMMALORY-M4,43.1435

For thys ys the moste shamefullyste message that ever y herde speke off
. CMMALORY-M4,43.1436

I have aspyed thy kynge never <P_44> yette mette with worshipfull man .
CMMALORY-M4,44.1437

But telle hym I woll have hys hede withoute he do me omage . '
CMMALORY-M4,44.1438

Than thys messyngere departed . CMMALORY-M4,44.1439

' Now ys there ony here that knowyth kynge Royns ? '
CMMALORY-M4,44.1440

Than answerde a knyght that hyght Naram , ' Sir , I know the kynge well
: CMMALORY-M4,44.1441

he ys a passynge good man of hys body as fewe bene lyvynge and a
passynge proude man . CMMALORY-M4,44.1442

And , sir , doute ye nat he woll make on you a myghty puyssaunce .
CMMALORY-M4,44.1443

' Well , ' seyde Arthure , ' I shall ordayne for hym in shorte tyme . '
CMMALORY-M4,44.1444

Than kynge Arthure lette sende for all the children that were borne in
May-day , begotyn of lordis and borne of ladyes ; CMMALORY-M4,44.1445

for Merlyon tolde kynge Arthure that he that sholde destroy hym and all
the londe sholde be borne on May-day . Wherefore he sente for hem all
in payne of dethe , CMMALORY-M4,44.1446

and so there were founde many lordis sonnys and many knyghtes sonnes ,
CMMALORY-M4,44.1447

and all were sente unto the kynge . CMMALORY-M4,44.1448

And so was Mordred sente by kynge Lottis wyff . CMMALORY-M4,44.1449

And all were putte in a shyppe to the se ; CMMALORY-M4,44.1450

and som were four wekis olde and som lesse . CMMALORY-M4,44.1451

And so by fortune the shyppe drove unto a castelle , CMMALORY-M4,44.1452

and was all to-ryven and destroyed the moste party , save that Mordred
was cast up , CMMALORY-M4,44.1453

and a good man founde hym , CMMALORY-M4,44.1454

and fostird hym tylle he was fourtene yere of age , CMMALORY-M4,44.1455

and than brought hym to the courte , as hit rehersith aftirward and
towarde the ende of the MORTE ARTHURE . CMMALORY-M4,44.1456

So , many lordys and barownes of thys realme were displeased
CMMALORY-M4,44.1457

for hir children were so loste ; CMMALORY-M4,44.1458

and many putte the wyght on Merlion more than of Arthure .
CMMALORY-M4,44.1459

So what for drede and for love , they helde their pece .
CMMALORY-M4,44.1460

But whan the messynge com to the kynge Royns , than was he woode oute of
mesure , CMMALORY-M4,44.1461

and purveyde hym for a grete oste , as hit rehersith aftir in the BOOKE
OF BALYNE LE SAVEAGE that folowith nexte aftir : CMMALORY-M4,44.1462

that was the adventure how Balyne gate the swerde . CMMALORY-M4,44.1463

<heading>

II . CMMALORY-M4,44.1465

BALIN OR THE KNIGHT WITH THE TWO SWORDS CMMALORY-M4,44.1466

<$$heading>

Afftir the deth of Uther regned Arthure , hys son , which had grete
warre in hys dayes for to gete all Inglonde into hys honde ;
CMMALORY-M4,44.1468

<P_45>

for there were many kyngis within the realme of Inglonde and of
Scotlonde , Walys and Cornuwayle . CMMALORY-M4,45.1470

So hit befelle on a tyme whan kynge Arthure was at London , ther com a
knyght and tolde the kynge tydyngis how the kynge Royns of Northe Walis
had rered a grete numbir of peple and were entred in the londe and
brente and slew the kyngis trew lyege people . CMMALORY-M4,45.1471

' Iff thys be trew , ' seyde Arthure , ' hit were grete shame unto myne
astate but that he were myghtyly withstonde . ' CMMALORY-M4,45.1472

' Hit ys trouthe , ' seyde the knyght , CMMALORY-M4,45.1473

' for I saw the oste myselff . ' CMMALORY-M4,45.1474

' Well , ' seyde the kynge , ' I shall ordayne to wythstonde hys malice
. ' CMMALORY-M4,45.1475

Than the kynge lette make a cry that all the lordis , knyghtes and
jantilmen of armys sholde draw unto the castell called Camelot in tho
dayes , CMMALORY-M4,45.1476

and there the kynge wolde lette make a counceile generall and a grete
justis . CMMALORY-M4,45.1477

So whan the kynge was com thidir with all his baronage and logged as
they semed beste , also there was com <em> a damoisel <$$em> the which
was sente frome the grete Lady Lyle of Avilion . CMMALORY-M4,45.1478

And whan she com before kynge Arthure she tolde fro whens she com , and
how she was sente on message unto hym for thys causis .
CMMALORY-M4,45.1479

Than she lette hir mantell falle that was rychely furred ,
CMMALORY-M4,45.1480

and than was she gurde with a noble swerde whereof the kynge had
mervayle and seyde , ' Damesel , for what cause ar ye gurte with that
swerde ? CMMALORY-M4,45.1481

Hit besemyth you nought . ' CMMALORY-M4,45.1482

' Now shall I telle you , ' seyde the damesell . CMMALORY-M4,45.1483

' Thys swerde that I am gurte withall doth me grete sorow and
comberaunce , CMMALORY-M4,45.1484

for I may nat be delyverde of thys swerde but by a knyght ,
CMMALORY-M4,45.1485

and he muste be a passynge good man of hys hondys and of hys dedis , and
withoute velony other trechory and withoute treson .
CMMALORY-M4,45.1486

And if I may fynde such a knyght that hath all thes vertues he may draw
oute thys swerde oute of the sheethe . CMMALORY-M4,45.1487

For I have bene at kynge Royns , CMMALORY-M4,45.1488

for hit was tolde me there were passyng good knyghtes ;
CMMALORY-M4,45.1489

and he and all his knyghtes hath assayde CMMALORY-M4,45.1490

and none can spede . ' CMMALORY-M4,45.1491

' Thys ys a grete mervayle , ' seyde Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,45.1492

' If thys be sothe I woll assay myselffe to draw oute the swerde , nat
presumynge myselff that I am the beste knyght ; CMMALORY-M4,45.1493

but I woll begynne to draw youre swerde in gyvyng an insample to all the
barownes , that they shall assay everych one aftir othir whan I have
assayde . ' CMMALORY-M4,45.1494

<P_46>

Than Arthure toke the swerde by the sheethe and gurdil
CMMALORY-M4,46.1496

and pulled at hit egirly , CMMALORY-M4,46.1497

but the swerde wolde nat oute . CMMALORY-M4,46.1498

' Sir , ' seyd the damesell , ' ye nede nat for to pulle halffe so sore
, CMMALORY-M4,46.1499

for he that shall pulle hit oute shall do hit with litill myght . '
CMMALORY-M4,46.1500

' Ye sey well , ' seyde Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,46.1501

' Now assay ye all , my barownes . ' CMMALORY-M4,46.1502

' But beware ye be nat defoyled with shame , trechory , nother gyle ,
CMMALORY-M4,46.1503

for than hit woll nat avayle , ' seyde the damesel , CMMALORY-M4,46.1504

' for he muste be a clene knyght withoute vylony and of jantill strene
of fadir syde and of modir syde . ' CMMALORY-M4,46.1505

The moste parte of all the barownes of the Rounde Table that were there
at that tyme assayde all be rew , CMMALORY-M4,46.1506

but there myght none spede . CMMALORY-M4,46.1507

Wherefore the damesel made grete sorow oute of mesure and seyde , ' Alas
! I wente in this courte had bene the beste knyghtes of the worlde
withoute trechory other treson . ' CMMALORY-M4,46.1508

' Be my faythe , ' seyde Arthure , ' here ar good knyghtes as I deme as
ony be in the worlde , CMMALORY-M4,46.1509

but their grace ys nat to helpe you , CMMALORY-M4,46.1510

wherefore I am sore displeased . ' CMMALORY-M4,46.1511

Than hit befelle so that tyme there was a poore knyght with kynge
Arthure that had bene presonere with hym half a yere for sleyng of a
knyght which was cosyne unto kynge Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,46.1512

And the name of thys knyght was called Balyne , CMMALORY-M4,46.1513

and by good meanys of the barownes he was delyverde oute of preson ,
CMMALORY-M4,46.1514

for he was a good man named of his body , CMMALORY-M4,46.1515

and he was borne in Northehumbirlonde . CMMALORY-M4,46.1516

And so he wente pryvaly into the courte CMMALORY-M4,46.1517

and saw thys adventure whereoff hit reysed his herte ,
CMMALORY-M4,46.1518

and wolde assayde as othir knyghtes ded . CMMALORY-M4,46.1519

But for he was poore and poorly arayde , he put hymselff nat far in
prees . CMMALORY-M4,46.1520

But in hys herte he was fully assured to do as well if hys grace happed
hym as ony knyght that there was . CMMALORY-M4,46.1521

And as the damesell toke $her leve of Arthure and of all the barownes ,
so departynge , thys knyght Balyn called unto her CMMALORY-M4,46.1522

and seyde , ' Damesell , I pray you of youre curteysy suffir me as well
to assay as thes other lordis . CMMALORY-M4,46.1523

Thoughe that I be pourely arayed yet in my herte me@ @semyth I am fully
assured as som of thes other , CMMALORY-M4,46.1524

and me@ @semyth in myne herte to spede ryght welle . '
CMMALORY-M4,46.1525

Thys damesell than behelde thys poure knyght CMMALORY-M4,46.1526

and saw he was a lyckly man ; CMMALORY-M4,46.1527

but for hys poure araymente she thought he sholde nat <P_47> be of no
worship withoute vylony or trechory . CMMALORY-M4,47.1528

And than she seyde unto that knyght , ' Sir , hit nedith nat you to put
me to no more payne , CMMALORY-M4,47.1529

for hit semyth nat you to spede there@ @as all thes othir knyghtes have
fayled . ' CMMALORY-M4,47.1530

' A , fayre damesell , ' seyde Balyn , ' worthynes and good tacchis and
also good dedis is nat only in araymente , CMMALORY-M4,47.1531

but manhode and worship <em> ys hyd <$$em> within a mannes person ;
CMMALORY-M4,47.1532

and many a worshipfull knyght ys nat knowyn unto all peple .
CMMALORY-M4,47.1533

And therefore worship and hardynesse ys nat in araymente . '
CMMALORY-M4,47.1534

' Be God , ' seyde the damesell , ' ye sey soth , CMMALORY-M4,47.1535

therefore ye shall assay to do what ye may . ' CMMALORY-M4,47.1536

Than Balyn toke the swerde by the gurdyll and shethe CMMALORY-M4,47.1537

and drew hit oute easyly ; CMMALORY-M4,47.1538

and whan he loked on the swerde hit pleased hym muche .
CMMALORY-M4,47.1539

Than had the kynge and all the barownes grete mervayle that Balyne had
done that aventure ; CMMALORY-M4,47.1540

many knyghtes had grete despite at hym . CMMALORY-M4,47.1541

' Sertes , ' seyde the damesell , ' thys ys a passynge good knyght and
the beste that ever y founde , and moste of worship withoute treson ,
trechory , or felony . CMMALORY-M4,47.1542

And many mervayles shall he do . CMMALORY-M4,47.1543

Now , jantyll and curtayse knyght , geff me the swerde agayne . '
CMMALORY-M4,47.1544

' Nay , ' seyde Balyne , ' for thys swerde woll I kepe but hit be takyn
fro me with force . ' CMMALORY-M4,47.1545

' Well , ' seyde the damesell , ' ye ar nat wyse to kepe the swerde fro
me , CMMALORY-M4,47.1546

for ye shall sle with that swerde the beste frende that ye have and the
man that ye moste love in the worlde , CMMALORY-M4,47.1547

and that swerde shall be youre destruccion . ' CMMALORY-M4,47.1548

' I shall take the aventure , ' seyde Balyn , ' that God woll ordayne
for me . CMMALORY-M4,47.1549

But the swerde ye shall nat have at thys tyme , by the feythe of my body
! ' CMMALORY-M4,47.1550

' Ye shall repente hit within shorte tyme , ' seyde the damesell ,
CMMALORY-M4,47.1551

' for I wolde have the swerde more for youre avauntage than for myne ;
CMMALORY-M4,47.1552

for I am passynge hevy for your sake , CMMALORY-M4,47.1553

for and ye woll nat leve that swerde hit shall be youre destruccion ,
CMMALORY-M4,47.1554

and that ys grete pite` . ' CMMALORY-M4,47.1555

So with that departed the damesell CMMALORY-M4,47.1556

and grete sorow she made . CMMALORY-M4,47.1557

And anone afftir Balyn sente for hys horse and armoure ,
CMMALORY-M4,47.1558

and so wolde departe frome the courte , CMMALORY-M4,47.1559

and toke his leve of kynge Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,47.1560

' Nay , ' seyde the kynge , ' I suppose ye woll nat departe so lyghtly
<P_48> from thys felyship . CMMALORY-M4,48.1561

I suppose that ye ar displesyd that I have shewed you unkyndnesse .
CMMALORY-M4,48.1562

But blame me the lesse , CMMALORY-M4,48.1563

for I was mysseinfourmed ayenste you : CMMALORY-M4,48.1564

but I wente ye had nat bene such a knyght as ye ar of worship and
prouesse . CMMALORY-M4,48.1565

And if ye woll abyde in thys courte amonge my felyship , I shall so
avaunce $you as ye shall be pleased . ' CMMALORY-M4,48.1566

' God thanke youre Hyghnesse , ' seyde Balyne . CMMALORY-M4,48.1567

' Youre bounte` may no man prayse halff unto the valew ,
CMMALORY-M4,48.1568

butt at thys tyme I muste nedis departe , besechynge you allway of youre
good grace . ' CMMALORY-M4,48.1569

' Truly , ' seyde the kynge , ' I am ryght wroth of youre departynge .
CMMALORY-M4,48.1570

But I pray you , fayre knyght , that ye tarry nat longe frome me ,
CMMALORY-M4,48.1571

and ye shall be ryght wellcom unto me and to my barownes ,
CMMALORY-M4,48.1572

and I shall amende all mysse that I have done agaynste you . '
CMMALORY-M4,48.1573

' God thanke youre good grace , ' seyde Balyn , CMMALORY-M4,48.1574

and therewith made hym redy to departe . CMMALORY-M4,48.1575

Than the moste party of the knyghtes of the Rounde Table seyde that
Balyne dud nat this adventure $all $only by myght but by wycchecrauffte
. CMMALORY-M4,48.1576

So the meanwhyle that thys knyght was makynge hym redy to departe ,
there com into the courte the Lady of the Laake , CMMALORY-M4,48.1577

and she com on horsebacke rychely beseyne , CMMALORY-M4,48.1578

and salewed kynge Arthure CMMALORY-M4,48.1579

and there asked hym a gyffte that he promysed her whan she gaff hym the
swerde . CMMALORY-M4,48.1580

' That ys sothe , ' seyde Arthure , CMMALORY-M4,48.1581

' a gyffte I promysed you , CMMALORY-M4,48.1582

but I have forgotyn the name of my swerde that ye gaff me . '
CMMALORY-M4,48.1583

' The name of hit , ' seyde the lady , ' ys Excalibir ,
CMMALORY-M4,48.1584

that ys as muche to sey as Kutte Stele . ' CMMALORY-M4,48.1585

' Ye sey well , ' seyde the kynge . CMMALORY-M4,48.1586

' Aske what ye woll CMMALORY-M4,48.1587

and ye shall have hit and hit lye in my power to gyff hit . '
CMMALORY-M4,48.1588

' Well , ' seyde thys lady , ' than I aske the hede of thys knyght that
hath wonne the swerde , othir ellis the damesels hede that brought hit .
CMMALORY-M4,48.1589

I take no force though I have both theire hedis : CMMALORY-M4,48.1590

for he slew my brothir , a good knyght and a trew ; CMMALORY-M4,48.1591

and that jantillwoman was causer of my fadirs death . '
CMMALORY-M4,48.1592

' Truly , ' seyde kynge Arthure , ' I may nat graunte you nother of
theire hedys with my worship ; CMMALORY-M4,48.1593

therefore aske what ye woll els , and I shall fulfille youre desire . '
CMMALORY-M4,48.1594

' I woll aske none other thynge , ' seyde the lady .
CMMALORY-M4,48.1595

So whan Balyn was redy to departe , he saw the Lady of the Lake <P_49>
which by hir meanys had slayne hys modir ; CMMALORY-M4,49.1596

and he had sought hir three yere before . CMMALORY-M4,49.1597

And whan hit was tolde hym how she had asked hys hede of kynge Arthure ,
he wente to hir streyght CMMALORY-M4,49.1598

and seyde , ' Evyll be $ye founde : CMMALORY-M4,49.1599

ye wolde have myne hede , CMMALORY-M4,49.1600

and therefore ye shall loose youres ! ' CMMALORY-M4,49.1601

And with hys swerde lyghtly he smote of hyr hede before kynge Arthure .
CMMALORY-M4,49.1602

' Alas , for shame ! ' seyde the kynge . CMMALORY-M4,49.1603

' Why have ye do so ? CMMALORY-M4,49.1604

Ye have shamed me and all my courte , CMMALORY-M4,49.1605

for thys lady was a lady that I was muche beholdynge to ,
CMMALORY-M4,49.1606

and hyder she com undir my sauffconduyghte . CMMALORY-M4,49.1607

Therefore I shall never forgyff you that trespasse . '
CMMALORY-M4,49.1608

' Sir , ' seyde Balyne , ' me forthynkith of youre displeasure ,
CMMALORY-M4,49.1609

for this same lady was the untrwyste lady lyvynge , CMMALORY-M4,49.1610

and by inchauntement and by sorcery she hath bene the destroyer of many
good knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,49.1611

and she was causer that my modir was brente thorow hir falsehode and
trechory . ' CMMALORY-M4,49.1612

' For what cause soever ye had , ' seyde Arthure , ' ye sholde have
forborne in my presence . CMMALORY-M4,49.1613

Therefore thynke nat the contrary : CMMALORY-M4,49.1614

ye shall repente hit , CMMALORY-M4,49.1615

for such anothir despite had I nevir in my courte . CMMALORY-M4,49.1616

Therefore withdraw you oute of my courte in all the haste that ye may .
' CMMALORY-M4,49.1617

Than Balyn toke up the hede of the lady CMMALORY-M4,49.1618

and bare hit with hym to hys ostry , CMMALORY-M4,49.1619

and there mette with hys squyre that was sory he had displeased kynge
Arthure , CMMALORY-M4,49.1620

and so they rode forthe oute of towne . CMMALORY-M4,49.1621

' Now , ' seyde Balyne , ' we muste departe ; CMMALORY-M4,49.1622

therefore take thou thys hede CMMALORY-M4,49.1623

and bere hit to my frendis CMMALORY-M4,49.1624

and telle hem how I have spedde , CMMALORY-M4,49.1625

and telle hem in Northhumbirlonde how my moste foo ys dede .
CMMALORY-M4,49.1626

Also telle hem how I am oute of preson , and what adventure befelle me
at the getynge of this swerde . ' CMMALORY-M4,49.1627

' Alas ! ' seyde the squyre , ' ye ar gretly to blame for to displease
kynge Arthure . ' CMMALORY-M4,49.1628

' As for that , ' seyde Balyne , ' I woll hyghe me in all $the haste
that I may $to mete with kyng Royns and destroy hym , othir ellis to dye
therefore . CMMALORY-M4,49.1629

And iff hit may happe me to wynne hym , than woll kynge Arthure be my
good frende . ' CMMALORY-M4,49.1630

' Sir , $wher shall I mete with you ? ' seyde his squyre .
CMMALORY-M4,49.1631

' In kynge Arthurs courte , ' seyde Balyne . CMMALORY-M4,49.1632

So his squyre and he <P_50> departed at that tyme . CMMALORY-M4,50.1633

Than kynge Arthure and all the courte made grete dole
CMMALORY-M4,50.1634

and had grete shame of the Lady of the Lake . CMMALORY-M4,50.1635

Than the kynge buryed hir rychely . CMMALORY-M4,50.1636

So at that tyme there was a knyght , the which was the kynges son of
Irelonde , CMMALORY-M4,50.1637

and hys name was Launceor , the which was an orgulus knyght and
accompted hymselff one of the beste of the courte . CMMALORY-M4,50.1638

And he had grete despite at Balyne for the enchevynge of the swerde ,
that ony sholde be accompted more hardy or more of prouesse ,
CMMALORY-M4,50.1639

and he asked kynge Arthure licence to ryde afftir Balyne and to revenge
the despite that he had done . CMMALORY-M4,50.1640

' Do youre beste , ' seyde Arthur . CMMALORY-M4,50.1641

' I am ryght wrothe with Balyne . CMMALORY-M4,50.1642

I wolde he were quytte of the despite that he hath done unto me and my
courte . ' CMMALORY-M4,50.1643

Than thys Launceor wente to his ostre` to make hym redy .
CMMALORY-M4,50.1644

So in the meanewhyle com Merlyon unto the courte of kynge Arthure ,
CMMALORY-M4,50.1645

and anone was tolde hym the adventure of the swerde and the deth of the
Lady of the Lake . CMMALORY-M4,50.1646

' Now shall I sey you , ' seyde Merlion ; CMMALORY-M4,50.1647

' thys same damesell that here stondith , that brought the swerde unto
youre courte , I shall telle you the cause of hir commynge .
CMMALORY-M4,50.1648

She ys the falsist damesell that lyveth - CMMALORY-M4,50.1649

she shall nat sey nay ! CMMALORY-M4,50.1650

For she hath a brothir , a passyng good knyght of proues and a full trew
man , CMMALORY-M4,50.1651

and thys damesell loved anothir knyght that hylde her as paramoure .
CMMALORY-M4,50.1652

And thys good knyght , her brothir , mette with the knyght that helde
hir to paramoure , CMMALORY-M4,50.1653

and slew hym by force of hys hondis . CMMALORY-M4,50.1654

And whan thys false damesell undirstoode this she wente to the lady Lyle
of Avylion CMMALORY-M4,50.1655

and besought hir of helpe to be revenged on hir owne brothir .
CMMALORY-M4,50.1656

' And so thys lady Lyle of Avylion toke hir this swerde that she brought
with hir , CMMALORY-M4,50.1657

and tolde there sholde no man pulle hit oute of the sheethe but yf he be
one of the beste knyghtes of thys realme , and he sholde be hardy and
full of prouesse ; CMMALORY-M4,50.1658

and with that swerde he sholde sle hys brothir . CMMALORY-M4,50.1659

Thys was the cause , damesell , that ye com into thys courte .
CMMALORY-M4,50.1660

I know hit as well as ye . CMMALORY-M4,50.1661

God wolde ye had nat come here ; CMMALORY-M4,50.1662

but ye com never in felyship of worshipfful folke for to do good , but
allwayes grete harme . CMMALORY-M4,50.1663

And that knyght that hath encheved the swerde shall be destroyed thorow
the swerde ; for the which woll be grete damage , CMMALORY-M4,50.1664

for there lyvith nat a knyght of more <P_51> prouesse than he ys .
CMMALORY-M4,51.1665

And he shall do unto you , my lorde Arthure , grete honoure and
kyndnesse ; CMMALORY-M4,51.1666

and hit ys grete pite` he shall nat endure but a whyle ,
CMMALORY-M4,51.1667

for of his strengthe and hardinesse I know hym nat lyvynge hys macche .
' CMMALORY-M4,51.1668

So thys knyght of Irelonde armed hym at all poyntes CMMALORY-M4,51.1669

and dressed his shylde on hys sholdir CMMALORY-M4,51.1670

and mownted uppon horsebacke CMMALORY-M4,51.1671

and toke hys glayve in hys honde , CMMALORY-M4,51.1672

and rode aftir a grete pace as muche as hys horse myght dryve .
CMMALORY-M4,51.1673

And within a litill space on a mowntayne he had a syght of Balyne ,
CMMALORY-M4,51.1674

and with a lowde voice he cryde , ' Abyde , knyght !
CMMALORY-M4,51.1675

for ells ye shall abyde whethir ye woll other no . CMMALORY-M4,51.1676

And the shelde that ys tofore you shall nat helpe you , ' seyde thys
Iryshe knyght , CMMALORY-M4,51.1677

' therefore com I affter you . ' CMMALORY-M4,51.1678

' Peradventure , ' seyde Balyne , ' ye had bene bettir to have holde you
at home . CMMALORY-M4,51.1679

For many a man wenyth to put hys enemy to a rebuke , CMMALORY-M4,51.1680

and ofte hit fallith on hymselff . CMMALORY-M4,51.1681

Oute of what courte be ye com fro ? ' seyde Balyn .
CMMALORY-M4,51.1682

' I am com frome the courte of kynge Arthure , ' seyde the knyght of
Irelonde , ' that am com hydir to revenge the despite ye dud thys day
unto kynge Arthure and to his courte . ' CMMALORY-M4,51.1683

' Well , ' seyde Balyne , ' I se well I must have ado with you ;
CMMALORY-M4,51.1684

that me forthynkith that I have greved kynge Arthure or ony of hys
courte . CMMALORY-M4,51.1685

And youre quarell ys full symple , ' seyde Balyne , ' unto me ;
CMMALORY-M4,51.1686

for the lady that ys dede dud to me grete damage , CMMALORY-M4,51.1687

and ellis I wolde have bene lothe as ony knyght that lyvith for to sle a
lady . ' CMMALORY-M4,51.1688

' Make you redy , ' seyde the knyght Launceor , CMMALORY-M4,51.1689

' and dresse you unto me , for that one shall abyde in the fylde . '
CMMALORY-M4,51.1690

Than they fewtred their spearis in their restis CMMALORY-M4,51.1691

and com togidirs as muche as their horsis $myght dryve .
CMMALORY-M4,51.1692

And the Irysh knyght smote Balyn on the shylde that all wente to shyvers
of hys spere . CMMALORY-M4,51.1693

And Balyne smote hym agayne thorow the shylde , CMMALORY-M4,51.1694

and $the hawbirk perysshed , CMMALORY-M4,51.1695

and so bore hym thorow the body and over the horse crowper ;
CMMALORY-M4,51.1696

and anone turned hys horse fersely CMMALORY-M4,51.1697

and drew oute hys swerde , CMMALORY-M4,51.1698

and wyst nat that he had slayne hym . CMMALORY-M4,51.1699

Than he saw hym lye as a dede corse , CMMALORY-M4,51.1700

he loked aboute hym CMMALORY-M4,51.1701

and was ware of a damesel that com rydynge full faste as the horse myght
dryve , on a fayre palferey . CMMALORY-M4,51.1702

And whan she aspyed that Launceor was slayne she made sorow oute of
mesure CMMALORY-M4,51.1703

and seyde , <P_52> ' A ! Balyne , two bodyes thou haste <em> slain in
<$$em> one herte , and two hertes in one body , CMMALORY-M4,52.1704

and two soules thou hast loste . ' CMMALORY-M4,52.1705

And therewith she toke the swerde frome hir love that lay dede ,
CMMALORY-M4,52.1706

and felle to the grounde in a swowghe . CMMALORY-M4,52.1707

And whan she arose she made grete dole oute of mesure , which sorow
greved Balyn passyngly sore . CMMALORY-M4,52.1708

And he wente unto hir for to have tane the swerde oute of hir honde ;
CMMALORY-M4,52.1709

but she helde hit so faste he myght nat take hit oute of hir honde but
yf he sholde have hurte hir . CMMALORY-M4,52.1710

And suddeynly she sette the pomell to the grounde , CMMALORY-M4,52.1711

and rove hirselff thorowoute the body . CMMALORY-M4,52.1712

Whan Balyne aspyed hir dedis he was passynge hevy in his herte and
ashamed that so fayre a damesell had destroyed hirselff for the love of
hys dethe . CMMALORY-M4,52.1713

' Alas ! ' seyde Balyn , ' me repentis sore the dethe of thys knyght
for the love of thys damesel , CMMALORY-M4,52.1714

for there was muche trw love betwyxte hem . ' CMMALORY-M4,52.1715

And so for sorow he myght no lenger beholde them , CMMALORY-M4,52.1716

but turned hys horse CMMALORY-M4,52.1717

and loked towarde a fayre foreste . CMMALORY-M4,52.1718

And than was he ware by hys armys that there com rydyng hys brothir
Balan . CMMALORY-M4,52.1719

And whan they were mette they put of hyr helmys CMMALORY-M4,52.1720

and kyssed togydirs CMMALORY-M4,52.1721

and wepte for joy and pite` . CMMALORY-M4,52.1722

Than Balan seyde , ' Brothir , I litill wende to have mette with you at
thys suddayne adventure , CMMALORY-M4,52.1723

but I am ryght glad of youre delyveraunce of youre dolerous presonment :
CMMALORY-M4,52.1724

for a man tolde me in the Castell of Four Stonys that ye were delyverde
, CMMALORY-M4,52.1725

and that man had seyne you in the courte of kynge Arthure .
CMMALORY-M4,52.1726

And therefore I com hydir into thys contrey , CMMALORY-M4,52.1727

for here I supposed to fynde you . ' CMMALORY-M4,52.1728

And anone Balyne tolde hys brothir of hys adventure of the swerde and
the deth of the Lady of the Laake , and how kynge Arthure was displeased
with hym . ' Wherefore he sente thys knyght afftir me that lyethe here
dede . CMMALORY-M4,52.1729

And the dethe of thys damesell grevith me sore . ' CMMALORY-M4,52.1730

' So doth hit me , ' seyde Balan . CMMALORY-M4,52.1731

' But ye must take the adventure that God woll ordayne you . '
CMMALORY-M4,52.1732

' Truly , ' seyde Balyne , ' I am ryght hevy that my lorde Arthure ys
displeased with me , CMMALORY-M4,52.1733

for he ys the moste worshypfullist kynge that regnith now in erthe ;
CMMALORY-M4,52.1734

and hys love I woll gete CMMALORY-M4,52.1735

othir ellis I woll putte my lyff in adventure . CMMALORY-M4,52.1736

For kynge Ryons lyeth at the sege of the Castell Terrable ,
CMMALORY-M4,52.1737

and thydir woll we draw in all goodly haste to preve oure worship and
prouesse uppon hym . ' CMMALORY-M4,52.1738

<P_53>

' I woll well , ' seyde Balan , ' that ye so do ; CMMALORY-M4,53.1740

and I woll ryde with you and put my body in adventure with you , as a
brothir ought to do . ' CMMALORY-M4,53.1741

' Now go we hense , ' seyde Balyne , CMMALORY-M4,53.1742

' and well we beth mette . ' CMMALORY-M4,53.1743

The meanewhyle as they talked there com a dwarff frome the cite` of
Camelot on horsebacke as much as he myght , CMMALORY-M4,53.1744

and founde the dede bodyes ; wherefore he made grete dole
CMMALORY-M4,53.1745

and he pulled hys heyre for sorowe CMMALORY-M4,53.1746

and seyde , ' Which of two knyghtes have done this dede ? '
CMMALORY-M4,53.1747

' Whereby askist thou ? ' seyde Balan . CMMALORY-M4,53.1748

' For I wolde wete , ' seyde the dwarff . CMMALORY-M4,53.1749

' Hit was I , ' seyde Balyn , ' that slew this knyght in my defendaunte
; CMMALORY-M4,53.1750

for hyder he com to chase me , CMMALORY-M4,53.1751

and othir I muste sle hym other he me . CMMALORY-M4,53.1752

And this damesell slew hirself for his love , which repentith me .
CMMALORY-M4,53.1753

And for hir sake I shall owghe all women the bettir wylle and servyse
all the dayes of my lyff . ' CMMALORY-M4,53.1754

' Alas ! ' seyde the dwarff , ' thou hast done grete damage unto
thyselff . CMMALORY-M4,53.1755

For thys knyght that ys here dede was one of the moste valyauntis men
that lyved . CMMALORY-M4,53.1756

And truste well , Balyne , the kynne of thys knyght woll chase you
thorow the worlde tylle they have slayne you . ' CMMALORY-M4,53.1757

' As for that , ' seyde Balyne , ' the I fere nat gretely ;
CMMALORY-M4,53.1758

but I am ryght hevy that I sholde displease my lorde , kynge Arthure ,
for the deth of thys knyght . ' CMMALORY-M4,53.1759

So as they talked togydirs there com a kynge of Cornuwayle rydyng ,
which hyght kyng Marke . CMMALORY-M4,53.1760

And whan he saw thes two bodyes dede , and undirstood howe they were
dede , $by the two knyghtes aboven-seyde , $thenne made the kynge grete
sorow for the trew love that was betwyxte them , CMMALORY-M4,53.1761

and seyde , ' I woll nat departe tyll I have on thys erth made a towmbe
. ' CMMALORY-M4,53.1762

And there he pyght his pavylyons CMMALORY-M4,53.1763

and sought all the contrey to fynde a towmbe , CMMALORY-M4,53.1764

and in a chirch they founde one was fayre and ryche .
CMMALORY-M4,53.1765

And than the kyng lette putte $hem bothe in the erthe ,
CMMALORY-M4,53.1766

and leyde the tombe uppon them , CMMALORY-M4,53.1767

and wrote the namys of hem bothe on the tombe , how ' here lyeth
Launceor , the kyngis son of Irelonde , that at hys owne rekeyste was
slayne by the hondis of Balyne , ' and how ' this lady Columbe and
peramour to hym slew hirself with hys swerde for dole and sorow .
CMMALORY-M4,53.1768

<P_54>

The meanewhyle as thys was adoynge , in com Merlion to kynge Marke
CMMALORY-M4,54.1770

and saw all thys doynge . CMMALORY-M4,54.1771

' Here shall be , ' seyde Merlion , ' in this same place the grettist
bateyle betwyxte two $knyghtes that ever was or ever shall be , and the
trewyst lovers ; CMMALORY-M4,54.1772

and yette none of hem shall slee other . ' CMMALORY-M4,54.1773

And there Merlion wrote hir namys uppon the tombe with lettirs of golde
, that shall feyght in that place : which namys was Laucelot du Lake and
Trystrams . CMMALORY-M4,54.1774

' Thou $art a merveylous man , ' seyde kynge Marke unto Merlion , ' that
spekist of such mervayles . CMMALORY-M4,54.1775

Thou arte a boysteous man and an unlyckly , to telle of suche dedis .
CMMALORY-M4,54.1776

What ys thy name ? ' seyde kynge Marke . CMMALORY-M4,54.1777

' At thys tyme , ' seyde Merlion , ' I woll nat telle . '
CMMALORY-M4,54.1778

{COM:part_of_line_missing?} tyme sir Trystrams ys takyn with his
soveraigne lady , CMMALORY-M4,54.1779

than shall ye here and know my name ; CMMALORY-M4,54.1780

and at that tyme ye shall $here tydynges that shall nat please you . '
CMMALORY-M4,54.1781

' A , Balyne ! ' seyde Merlion , ' thou haste done thyselff grete hurte
that thou saved nat thys lady that slew herselff ; CMMALORY-M4,54.1782

for thou myghtyst have saved hir and thou haddist wold . '
CMMALORY-M4,54.1783

' By the fayth of my body , ' seyde Merlion , ' I myght nat save hir ,
CMMALORY-M4,54.1784

for she slewe hirselff suddeynly . ' CMMALORY-M4,54.1785

' Me repentis hit , ' seyde Merlion ; CMMALORY-M4,54.1786

' because of the dethe of that lady thou shalt stryke a stroke moste
dolerous that ever man stroke , excepte the stroke of oure Lorde Jesu
Cryste . CMMALORY-M4,54.1787

For thou shalt hurte the trewyst knyght and the man of moste worship
that now lyvith ; CMMALORY-M4,54.1788

and thorow that stroke , three kyngdomys shall be brought into grete
poverte' , miseri and wrecchednesse twelve yere . CMMALORY-M4,54.1789

And the knyght shall nat be hole of that wounde many yerys . '
CMMALORY-M4,54.1790

Than Merlion toke hys leve . CMMALORY-M4,54.1791

' Nay , ' seyde Balyn , ' nat so ; CMMALORY-M4,54.1792

for and I wyste thou seyde soth , I wolde do so perleous a dede that I
wolde sle myself to make the a lyer . ' CMMALORY-M4,54.1793

Therewith Merlion vanyssed away suddeynly , CMMALORY-M4,54.1794

and than Balyn and his brother toke their leve of kynge Marke .
CMMALORY-M4,54.1795

' But first , ' seyde the kynge , ' telle me youre name . '
CMMALORY-M4,54.1796

' Sir , ' seyde Balan , ' ye may se he beryth two swerdis and thereby ye
may calle hym the Knyght with the Two Swerdis . ' CMMALORY-M4,54.1797

<P_55>

And so departed kynge Marke unto Camelot to kynge Arthure .
CMMALORY-M4,55.1799

And Balyne toke the way to kynge Royns , CMMALORY-M4,55.1800

and as they rode togydir they mette with Merlion disgysed so that they
knew hym nought . CMMALORY-M4,55.1801

' But whotherward ryde ye ? ' seyde Merlion . CMMALORY-M4,55.1802

' We had litill ado to telle you , ' seyde thes two knyghtes .
CMMALORY-M4,55.1803

' But what ys thy name ? ' seyde Balyn . CMMALORY-M4,55.1804

' At thys tyme , ' seyde Merlion , ' I woll nat telle . '
CMMALORY-M4,55.1805

' Hit ys an evyll sygne , ' seyde the knyghtes , ' that thou arte a trew
man , that thou wolt nat telle thy name . ' CMMALORY-M4,55.1806

' As for that , ' seyde Merlion , ' be as hit be may .
CMMALORY-M4,55.1807

But I can telle you wherefore ye ryde thys way : CMMALORY-M4,55.1808

for to mete with kynge Royns . CMMALORY-M4,55.1809

But hit woll nat avayle you withoute ye have my counceyle . '
CMMALORY-M4,55.1810

' A , ' seyde Balyn , ' ye ar Merlion . CMMALORY-M4,55.1811

We woll be ruled by youre counceyle . ' CMMALORY-M4,55.1812

' Com on , ' seyde Merlion , ' and ye shall have grete worship .
CMMALORY-M4,55.1813

And loke that ye do knyghtly , CMMALORY-M4,55.1814

for ye shall have nede . ' CMMALORY-M4,55.1815

' As for that , ' seyde Balyne , ' dred you nat , CMMALORY-M4,55.1816

for we woll do what we may . ' CMMALORY-M4,55.1817

Than there lodged Merlion and thes two knyghtes in a woode amonge the
levis besydes the hyghway , CMMALORY-M4,55.1818

and toke of the brydyls of their horsis CMMALORY-M4,55.1819

and putte hem to grasse , CMMALORY-M4,55.1820

and leyde hem downe to reste tyll hit was nyghe mydnyght .
CMMALORY-M4,55.1821

Than Merlion bade hem ryse and make hem redy : CMMALORY-M4,55.1822

' for here commyth the kynge nyghehonde , that was stoolyn away frome
his oste with a_three_score horsis of hys beste knyghtes ,
CMMALORY-M4,55.1823

and twenty of them rode tofore the lorde to warne the Lady de Vaunce
that the kynge was commynge . ' CMMALORY-M4,55.1824

For that nyght kynge Royns sholde have lyen with hir .
CMMALORY-M4,55.1825

' Which ys the kynge ? ' seyde Balyn . CMMALORY-M4,55.1826

' Abyde , ' seyde Merlion , CMMALORY-M4,55.1827

' for here in a strete $weye ye shall mete with hym . '
CMMALORY-M4,55.1828

And therewith he shewed Balyn and hys brothir the kynge .
CMMALORY-M4,55.1829

And anone they mette with hym , CMMALORY-M4,55.1830

and smote hym downe CMMALORY-M4,55.1831

and wounded hym freyshly , CMMALORY-M4,55.1832

and layde hym to the growunde . CMMALORY-M4,55.1833

And there they slewe on the ryght honde and on the lyffte honde mo than
fourty of hys men ; CMMALORY-M4,55.1834

and the remanaunte fledde . CMMALORY-M4,55.1835

Than wente they agayne unto kynge Royns CMMALORY-M4,55.1836

and wold have slayne hym , had he nat yelded hym unto hir grace .
CMMALORY-M4,55.1837

Than seyde he thus : CMMALORY-M4,55.1838

<P_56>

' Knyghtes full of prouesse , sle me nat ! CMMALORY-M4,56.1840

For be my lyff ye may wynne , and by my dethe litill . '
CMMALORY-M4,56.1841

' Ye say sothe , ' seyde the knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,56.1842

and so leyde hym on an horse littur CMMALORY-M4,56.1843

So with that Merlion vanysshed , CMMALORY-M4,56.1844

and com to kynge Arthure aforehonde CMMALORY-M4,56.1845

and tolde hym how hys moste enemy was takyn and discomfite
CMMALORY-M4,56.1846

' By whom ? ' seyde kynge Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,56.1847

' By two knyghtes , ' seyde Merlion , ' that wolde fayne have youre
lordship . CMMALORY-M4,56.1848

And to-morrow ye shall know what knyghtis they ar . '
CMMALORY-M4,56.1849

So anone aftir com the Knyght with the Two Swerdis and hys brothir ,
CMMALORY-M4,56.1850

and brought with them kynge Royns of Northe Waalis , CMMALORY-M4,56.1851

and there delyverde hym to the porters , CMMALORY-M4,56.1852

and charged hem with hym . CMMALORY-M4,56.1853

And so they two returned agen in the dawnyng of the day .
CMMALORY-M4,56.1854

Than kynge Arthure com to kynge Royns CMMALORY-M4,56.1855

and seyde , ' Sir kynge , ye ar wellcom . CMMALORY-M4,56.1856

By what adventure com ye hydir ? ' CMMALORY-M4,56.1857

' Sir , ' seyde kynge Royns , ' I com hyder by an harde adventure . '
CMMALORY-M4,56.1858

' Who wanne you ? ' seyde kynge Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,56.1859

' Sir , ' seyde he , ' the Knyght with the Two Swerdis and hys brothir ,
which ar two mervayles knyghtes of prouesse . ' CMMALORY-M4,56.1860

' I know hem nat , ' seyde Arthure CMMALORY-M4,56.1861

' but much am I beholdynge unto them . ' CMMALORY-M4,56.1862

' A , sir , ' seyde Merlion , ' I shall telle you . CMMALORY-M4,56.1863

Hit ys Balyn that encheved the swerde and his brothir Balan , a good
knyght : CMMALORY-M4,56.1864

there lyvith nat a bettir of proues , nother of worthynesse .
CMMALORY-M4,56.1865

And hit shall be the grettist dole of hym that ever y knew of knyght ;
CMMALORY-M4,56.1866

for he shall nat longe endure . ' CMMALORY-M4,56.1867

' Alas , ' seyde kynge Arthure , ' that ys grete pite` ;
CMMALORY-M4,56.1868

for I am muche beholdynge unto hym , CMMALORY-M4,56.1869

and I have evill deserved hit agayne for hys kyndnesse . '
CMMALORY-M4,56.1870

' Nay , nay , ' sede Merlion , ' he shall do much more for you ,
CMMALORY-M4,56.1871

and that shall ye know in haste . CMMALORY-M4,56.1872

But , sir , ar ye purveyde ? ' seyde Merlion . CMMALORY-M4,56.1873

' <em> For to-morn <$$em> the oste of kynge Nero , kynge Royns brothir ,
woll sette on you or none with a grete oste . CMMALORY-M4,56.1874

And therefore make you redy , CMMALORY-M4,56.1875

for I woll departe frome you . ' CMMALORY-M4,56.1876

Than kynge Arthure made hys oste redy in ten batayles ;
CMMALORY-M4,56.1877

and Nero was redy in the fylde afore the Castell Terrable with a grete
<P_57> oste . CMMALORY-M4,57.1878

And he had ten batayles with many mo peple than kynge Arthure had .
CMMALORY-M4,57.1879

Than Nero had the vawarde with the moste party of the people .
CMMALORY-M4,57.1880

And Merlion com to kynge Lotte of the Ile of Orkeney ,
CMMALORY-M4,57.1881

and helde hym with a tale of the prophecy tylle Nero and his peple were
destroyed . CMMALORY-M4,57.1882

And there sir Kay the Senesciall dud passyngely well , that dayes of hys
lyff the worship wente never frome hym , and sir Hervis de Revel that
dud merveylous dedys of armys that day with Arthur .
CMMALORY-M4,57.1883

And kynge Arthure slew that day twenty knyghtes CMMALORY-M4,57.1884

and maymed fourty . CMMALORY-M4,57.1885

So at that tyme com in the Knyght with the Two Swerdis and his brothir ,
CMMALORY-M4,57.1886

but they dud so mervaylously that the kynge and all the knyghtes
mervayled of them . CMMALORY-M4,57.1887

And all they that behelde them seyde they were sente frome hevyn as
angels other devilles frome helle . CMMALORY-M4,57.1888

And kynge Arthure seyde hymself they were the doughtyeste knyghtes that
ever he sawe , CMMALORY-M4,57.1889

for they gaff such strokes that all men had wondir of hem .
CMMALORY-M4,57.1890

So in the meanewhyle com one to kynge Lotte CMMALORY-M4,57.1891

and tolde hym whyle he tarryed there how Nero was destroyed and slayne
with all his oste . CMMALORY-M4,57.1892

' Alas , ' seyde kynge Lotte , ' I am ashamed ; CMMALORY-M4,57.1893

for in my defaute there ys <em> many a worshipful man slayne ;
CMMALORY-M4,57.1894

for and we had teen togyders there had ben <$$em> none oste undir hevyn
were able to have macched us . CMMALORY-M4,57.1895

But thys faytoure with hys prophecy hath mocked me . '
CMMALORY-M4,57.1896

All that dud Merlion , CMMALORY-M4,57.1897

for he knew well that $and kynge Lotte had bene with hys body at the
first batayle , kynge Arthure had be slayne and all hys peple distressed
. CMMALORY-M4,57.1898

And well Merlion knew that one of the kynges sholde be dede that day ;
CMMALORY-M4,57.1899

and lothe was Merlion that ony of them bothe sholde be slayne ,
CMMALORY-M4,57.1900

but of the tweyne he had levir kyng Lotte of Orkeney had be slayne than
Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,57.1901

' What ys beste to do ? ' seyde kynge Lotte . CMMALORY-M4,57.1902

' Whether ys me bettir to trete with kynge Arthur othir to fyght ?
CMMALORY-M4,57.1903

For the gretter party of oure people ar slayne and distressed .
CMMALORY-M4,57.1904

' Sir , ' seyde a knyght ' sette ye on Arthure , CMMALORY-M4,57.1905

for they ar wery and forfoughtyn , CMMALORY-M4,57.1906

and we be freyssh . ' CMMALORY-M4,57.1907

' As for me , ' seyde kynge Lott , ' I wolde that every knyght wolde do
hys parte as I wolde do myne . ' CMMALORY-M4,57.1908

Than they avaunced baners CMMALORY-M4,57.1909

and smote togydirs CMMALORY-M4,57.1910

and brused hir <P_58> sperys . CMMALORY-M4,58.1911

And Arthurs knyghtes with the helpe of the Knyght with Two Swerdys and
hys brothir Balan put kynge Lotte and hys oste to the warre .
CMMALORY-M4,58.1912

But allwayes kynge Lotte hylde hym ever in the forefronte
CMMALORY-M4,58.1913

and dud merveylous dedis of armys ; CMMALORY-M4,58.1914

for all his oste was borne up by hys hondys , CMMALORY-M4,58.1915

for he abode all knyghtes . CMMALORY-M4,58.1916

Alas , he myght nat endure , the whych was grete pite` !
CMMALORY-M4,58.1917

So worthy a knyght as he was one , that he sholde be overmacched , that
of late tyme before he had bene a knyght of kynge Arthurs , and wedded
the syster of hym . CMMALORY-M4,58.1918

And for because that kynge Arthure lay by hys wyff and gate on her sir
Mordred , therefore kynge Lott helde ever agaynste Arthure .
CMMALORY-M4,58.1919

So there was a knyght that was called the Knyght with the Strange Beste
, CMMALORY-M4,58.1920

and at that tyme hys ryght name was called Pellynore , which was a good
man off prouesse as few in tho dayes lyvynge . CMMALORY-M4,58.1921

And he strake a myghty stroke at kynge Lott as he fought with hys
enemyes , CMMALORY-M4,58.1922

and he fayled of hys stroke CMMALORY-M4,58.1923

and smote the horse necke , that he foundred to the erthe with kyng Lott
. CMMALORY-M4,58.1924

And therewith anone kynge Pellinor smote hym a grete stroke thorow the
helme and hede unto the browis . CMMALORY-M4,58.1925

Than all the oste of Orkeney fledde for the deth of kynge Lotte ,
CMMALORY-M4,58.1926

and there they were takyn and slayne , all the oste .
CMMALORY-M4,58.1927

But kynge Pellynore bare the wyte of the dethe of kynge Lott , wherefore
sir Gawayne revenged the deth of hys fadir the ten yere aftir he was
made knyght , CMMALORY-M4,58.1928

and slew kynge Pellynor hys owne hondis . CMMALORY-M4,58.1929

Also there was slayne at that batayle twelve kynges on the syde of kynge
Lott with Nero , CMMALORY-M4,58.1930

and were buryed in the chirch of Seynte Stevins in Camelot .
CMMALORY-M4,58.1931

And the remanent of knyghtes and other were buryed in a grete roche .
CMMALORY-M4,58.1932

So at the enterement com kyng Lottis wyff , Morgause , with hir four
sonnes , Gawayne , Aggravayne , Gaheris , and Gareth .
CMMALORY-M4,58.1933

Also there com thydir kyng Uryens , sir Uwaynes fadir , and Morgan le
Fay , his wyff , that was kynge Arthurs syster . CMMALORY-M4,58.1934

All thes com to the enterement CMMALORY-M4,58.1935

But of all the twelve kyngis kynge Arthure lette make the tombe of kynge
Lotte passynge rychely , CMMALORY-M4,58.1936

and made hys tombe by hymselff CMMALORY-M4,58.1937

And than Arthure lette make twelve images of laton and cooper and
overgylte with golde in the sygne of the twelve kynges ;
CMMALORY-M4,58.1938

and eche one of hem helde a tapir of wexe in hir honde that brente nyght
<P_59> and day . CMMALORY-M4,59.1939

And kynge Arthure was made in the sygne of a fygure stondynge aboven
them with a swerde drawyn in hys honde , CMMALORY-M4,59.1940

and all the twelve fygures had countenaunce lyke unto men that were
overcom . CMMALORY-M4,59.1941

All thys made Merlion by hys subtyle craufte . CMMALORY-M4,59.1942

And there he tolde the kynge how that when he was dede thes tapers
sholde brenne no lenger , ' aftir the adventures of the Sankgreall that
shall com amonge you and be encheved . ' CMMALORY-M4,59.1943

Also he tolde kynge Arthure how Balyn , the worshipfull knyght , shall
gyff the dolerouse stroke , whereof shall falle grete vengeaunce .
CMMALORY-M4,59.1944

' A , where ys Balyne , Balan , and Pellinore ? ' CMMALORY-M4,59.1945

' As for kynge Pellinore , ' seyde Merlion , ' he woll mete with you
soone . CMMALORY-M4,59.1946

And as for Balyne , he woll nat be longe frome you .
CMMALORY-M4,59.1947

But the other brothir woll departe : CMMALORY-M4,59.1948

ye shall se hym no more . ' CMMALORY-M4,59.1949

' Be my fayth , ' seyde Arthur , ' they ar two manly knyghtes ,
CMMALORY-M4,59.1950

and namely that Balyne passith of proues off ony knyght that ever y
founde , CMMALORY-M4,59.1951

for much am I beholdynge unto hym . CMMALORY-M4,59.1952

Wolde God he wolde abyde with me ! ' CMMALORY-M4,59.1953

' Sir , ' seyde Merlion , ' loke ye kepe well the scawberd of Excaleber
, CMMALORY-M4,59.1954

for ye shall lose no bloode whyle ye have the scawberde uppon you ,
thoughe ye have as many woundis uppon you as ye may have . '
CMMALORY-M4,59.1955

<paren> So aftir for grete truste Arthure betoke the scawberde unto
Morgan le Fay , hys sister . CMMALORY-M4,59.1956

And she loved another knyght bettir than hir husbande , kynge Uriens ,
othir Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,59.1957

And she wolde have had Arthure hir brother slayne , CMMALORY-M4,59.1958

and therefore she lete make anothir scawberd for Excaliber <em> lyke it
by enchauntement , CMMALORY-M4,59.1959

and gaf the scawberd Excaliber to her lover <$$em> .
CMMALORY-M4,59.1960

And the knyghtes name was called Accolon , that aftir had nere slayne
kynge Arthure . CMMALORY-M4,59.1961

But aftir thys Merlion tolde unto kynge Arthure of the prophecy that
there sholde be a grete batayle besydes Salysbiry , and Mordred hys owne
sonne sholde be agaynste hym . CMMALORY-M4,59.1962

Also he tolde hym that Bagdemagus was his cosyne germayne , and unto
kynge Uryens . <$$paren> CMMALORY-M4,59.1963

So within a day or two kynge Arthure was somwhat syke ,
CMMALORY-M4,59.1964

and he lette pycch hys pavilion in a medow , CMMALORY-M4,59.1965

and there he leyde hym downe on a paylet to slepe ; CMMALORY-M4,59.1966

but he myght have no reste . CMMALORY-M4,59.1967

Ryght so he herde a grete noyse of an horse , CMMALORY-M4,59.1968

and therewith the kynge loked oute at the porche dore of the pavilion
CMMALORY-M4,59.1969

and saw a knyght commynge evyn by hym makynge grete dole .
CMMALORY-M4,59.1970

<P_60>

' Abyde , fayre sir , ' seyde Arthure , ' CMMALORY-M4,60.1972

and telle me wherefore thou makyst this sorow . ' CMMALORY-M4,60.1973

' Ye may litill amende me , ' seyde the knyght , CMMALORY-M4,60.1974

and so passed forth to the Castell of Meliot . CMMALORY-M4,60.1975

And anone aftir that com Balyne . CMMALORY-M4,60.1976

And whan he saw kyng Arthur he alyght of hys horse CMMALORY-M4,60.1977

and com to the kynge one foote CMMALORY-M4,60.1978

and salewed hym . CMMALORY-M4,60.1979

Be my hede , ' seyde Arthure , ' ye be wellcom . CMMALORY-M4,60.1980

Sir , ryght now com rydynge thys way a knyght makynge grete morne ,
CMMALORY-M4,60.1981

and for what cause I can nat telle . Wherefore I wolde desire of you ,
of your curtesy and of your jantilnesse , to fecche agayne that knyght
othir by force othir by his good wylle . CMMALORY-M4,60.1982

' I shall do more for youre lordeship than that , ' seyde Balyne , '
CMMALORY-M4,60.1983

othir ellis I woll greve hym . ' CMMALORY-M4,60.1984

So Balyn rode more than a pace CMMALORY-M4,60.1985

and founde the knyght with a damesell undir a foreyste
CMMALORY-M4,60.1986

and seyde , ' Sir knyght , ye muste com with me unto kynge Arthure for
to telle hym of youre sorow . ' CMMALORY-M4,60.1987

' That woll I nat , ' seyde the knyght , ' CMMALORY-M4,60.1988

for hit woll harme me gretely and do you none avayle . '
CMMALORY-M4,60.1989

' Sir , ' seyde Balyne , ' I pray you make you redy ,
CMMALORY-M4,60.1990

for ye muste go with me CMMALORY-M4,60.1991

othir ellis I muste fyght with you and brynge you by $force
CMMALORY-M4,60.1992

And that were me lothe to do . ' CMMALORY-M4,60.1993

' Woll ye be my warraunte , ' seyde the knyght , ' and I go with you ?
' CMMALORY-M4,60.1994

' Yee , ' seyde Balyne , ' CMMALORY-M4,60.1995

othir ellis , by the fayth of my body I woll dye therefore . '
CMMALORY-M4,60.1996

And so he made hym redy to go with Balyne CMMALORY-M4,60.1997

and leffte the damesell stylle . CMMALORY-M4,60.1998

And as were evyn before Arhturs pavilion , there com one invisible
CMMALORY-M4,60.1999

and smote the knyght that wente with Balyn thorowoute the body with a
spere . CMMALORY-M4,60.2000

' Alas ! ' seyde the knyght , ' I am slayne undir youre conduyte with a
knyght called $Garlon . CMMALORY-M4,60.2001

Therefore take my horse that is bettir than youres , CMMALORY-M4,60.2002

and ryde to the damesell CMMALORY-M4,60.2003

and folow the queste that I was in as she woll lede you ,
CMMALORY-M4,60.2004

and revenge my deth whan ye may . CMMALORY-M4,60.2005

' That shall I do , ' seyde Balyn , CMMALORY-M4,60.2006

' and that I make a vow to God and knyghthode . ' CMMALORY-M4,60.2007

And so he departed frome kynge Arthure with grete sorow .
CMMALORY-M4,60.2008

So kynge Arthure lette bury this knyght rychely , CMMALORY-M4,60.2009

and made mencion <P_61> $on his tombe how here was slayne Berbeus and by
whom the trechory was done of the knyght $Garlon . CMMALORY-M4,61.2010

But ever the damesell bare the truncheon of the spere with hir that sir
Harleus le Berbeus was slayne withall . CMMALORY-M4,61.2011

So Balyne and the damesell rode into the foreyste CMMALORY-M4,61.2012

and there mette with a knyght that had bene an hontynge .
CMMALORY-M4,61.2013

And that knyght asked Balyn for what cause he made so grete sorow .
CMMALORY-M4,61.2014

' Me lyste nat to telle , ' seyde Balyne . CMMALORY-M4,61.2015

' Now , ' seyde the knyght , ' and I were armed as ye be , I wolde fyght
with you but iff ye tolde me . ' CMMALORY-M4,61.2016

' That sholde litell nede , ' seyde Balyne , ' CMMALORY-M4,61.2017

I am nat aferde to telle you , ' CMMALORY-M4,61.2018

and so tolde hym all the case how hit was . CMMALORY-M4,61.2019

' A , ' seyde the knyght , ' ys thys all ? CMMALORY-M4,61.2020

Here I ensure you by the feyth of my body never to departe frome you
whyle my lyff lastith . ' CMMALORY-M4,61.2021

And so they wente to their ostre` CMMALORY-M4,61.2022

and armed hem CMMALORY-M4,61.2023

and so rode forthe with Balyne . CMMALORY-M4,61.2024

And as they com by an ermytage evyn by a $chyrcheyerde , there com
$Garlon invisible CMMALORY-M4,61.2025

and smote this knyght , Peryne de Mounte Belyarde , thorowoute the body
with a glayve . CMMALORY-M4,61.2026

' Alas , ' seyde the knyght , ' I am slayne by thys traytoure knyght
that rydith invisible . ' CMMALORY-M4,61.2027

' Alas , ' seyde Balyne , ' thys ys nat the firste despite that he hath
done me . ' CMMALORY-M4,61.2028

And there the ermyte and Balyne buryed the knyght undir a ryche stone
and a tombe royall . CMMALORY-M4,61.2029

And on the morne they founde letters of golde wretyn how that sir
Gawayne shall revenge his fadirs deth <em> kynge Lot <$$em> on kynge
Pellynore . CMMALORY-M4,61.2030

And anone aftir this Balyne and the damesell rode forth tylle they com
to a castell . CMMALORY-M4,61.2031

And anone Balyne alyghte CMMALORY-M4,61.2032

and wente in . CMMALORY-M4,61.2033

And as sone as <em> Balyne came with_in the castels yate <$$em> the
portecolys were lette downe at his backe , CMMALORY-M4,61.2034

and there felle many men aboute the damesell CMMALORY-M4,61.2035

and wolde have slayne hir . CMMALORY-M4,61.2036

Whan Balyne saw that , he was sore greved CMMALORY-M4,61.2037

for he myght nat helpe her . CMMALORY-M4,61.2038

But than he wente up into a towre CMMALORY-M4,61.2039

and lepte over the wallis into the dyche CMMALORY-M4,61.2040

and hurte nat hymselff . CMMALORY-M4,61.2041

And anone he pulled oute his swerde CMMALORY-M4,61.2042

and wolde have foughtyn with them . CMMALORY-M4,61.2043

And they all seyde nay , they wolde nat fyght with hym ,
CMMALORY-M4,61.2044

for they dud nothynge but the olde custom of thys castell ,
CMMALORY-M4,61.2045

<P_62>

and tolde hym that hir lady was syke and had leyne many yeres , and she
myght nat be hole but yf she had bloode in a sylver dysshe_full of a
clene mayde and a kynges doughter . CMMALORY-M4,62.2047

' And therefore the custom of thys castell ys that there shall no
damesell passe thys way but she shall blede of hir bloode a sylver
dysshefull . ' CMMALORY-M4,62.2048

' Well , ' seyde Balyne , ' she shall blede as much as she may blede ,
CMMALORY-M4,62.2049

but I woll nat lose the lyff of hir whyle my lyff lastith . '
CMMALORY-M4,62.2050

And so Balyn made hir to bleede by hir good wylle , CMMALORY-M4,62.2051

but hir bloode holpe nat the lady . CMMALORY-M4,62.2052

And so she and he rested there all that nyght CMMALORY-M4,62.2053

and had good chere , CMMALORY-M4,62.2054

and in the mornynge they passed on their wayes . CMMALORY-M4,62.2055

And as hit tellith aftir in the SANKGREAL that sir Percivall his syster
holpe that lady with hir blood , whereof she was dede .
CMMALORY-M4,62.2056

Than they rode three or four dayes CMMALORY-M4,62.2057

and nevir mette with adventure . CMMALORY-M4,62.2058

And so by fortune they were lodged with a jantilman <em> that was a
ryche man and well at ease . <$$em> CMMALORY-M4,62.2059

And as they sate at souper Balyn herde one complayne grevously by hym in
a chambir . CMMALORY-M4,62.2060

' What ys thys noyse ? ' seyde Balyn . CMMALORY-M4,62.2061

' For sothe , ' seyde his oste , ' I woll telle you .
CMMALORY-M4,62.2062

I was but late at a justynge CMMALORY-M4,62.2063

and there I justed with a knyght that ys brothir unto kynge Pellam ,
CMMALORY-M4,62.2064

and twyse I smote hym downe . CMMALORY-M4,62.2065

And than he promysed to quyte me on my beste frende .
CMMALORY-M4,62.2066

And so he wounded thus my son that can nat be hole tylle I have of that
knyghtes bloode . CMMALORY-M4,62.2067

And he rydith all invisyble , CMMALORY-M4,62.2068

but I know nat hys name . ' CMMALORY-M4,62.2069

' A , ' seyde Balyne , ' I know that knyghtes name , which ys $Garlon ,
CMMALORY-M4,62.2070

and he hath slayne two knyghtes of myne in the same maner .
CMMALORY-M4,62.2071

Therefore I had levir mete with that knyght than all the golde in thys
realme , for the despyte he hath done me . ' CMMALORY-M4,62.2072

' Well , ' seyde hys oste , ' I shall telle you how .
CMMALORY-M4,62.2073

Kynge Pellam off Lystenoyse hath made do cry in all the contrey a grete
feste that shall be within thes twenty dayes , and no knyght may com
there but he brynge hys wyff with hym othir hys paramoure .
CMMALORY-M4,62.2074

And that your enemy and myne ye shall se that day . '
CMMALORY-M4,62.2075

' Than I promyse you , ' seyde Balyn , ' parte of his bloode to hele
youre sonne withall . ' CMMALORY-M4,62.2076

' Than we woll be forewarde to-morne , ' seyde he . CMMALORY-M4,62.2077

So on the morne they rode all three towarde kynge Pellam ,
CMMALORY-M4,62.2078

and they had fyftene dayes journey or they com thydir .
CMMALORY-M4,62.2079

And that same <P_63> day began the grete feste . CMMALORY-M4,63.2080

And so they alyght CMMALORY-M4,63.2081

and stabled their horsis CMMALORY-M4,63.2082

and wente into the castell , CMMALORY-M4,63.2083

but Balynes oste myght $not be lette in because he had no lady .
CMMALORY-M4,63.2084

But Balyne was well receyved and brought unto a chambir
CMMALORY-M4,63.2085

and unarmed hym . CMMALORY-M4,63.2086

And there was brought hym robis to his plesure , CMMALORY-M4,63.2087

and wolde have had Balyn leve his swerde behynde hym .
CMMALORY-M4,63.2088

' Nay , ' seyde Balyne , ' that woll I nat , CMMALORY-M4,63.2089

for hit ys the custom of my contrey a knyght allweyes to kepe hys wepyn
with hym . CMMALORY-M4,63.2090

Other ells , ' seyde he , ' I woll departe as I $cam . '
CMMALORY-M4,63.2091

Than they gaff hym leve with his swerde , CMMALORY-M4,63.2092

and so he wente into the castell CMMALORY-M4,63.2093

and was amonge knyghtes of worship and hys lady afore hym .
CMMALORY-M4,63.2094

So aftir this Balyne asked a knyght CMMALORY-M4,63.2095

and seyde , ' Ys there nat a knyght in thys courte which his name ys
$Garlon ? ' CMMALORY-M4,63.2096

' Yes , sir , yondir he goth , the knyght with the blacke face ,
CMMALORY-M4,63.2097

for he ys the mervaylyste knyght that ys now lyvynge .
CMMALORY-M4,63.2098

And he destroyeth many good knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,63.2099

for he goth invisible . ' CMMALORY-M4,63.2100

' Well , ' seyde Balyn , ' ys that he ? ' CMMALORY-M4,63.2101

Than Balyn avised hym longe , CMMALORY-M4,63.2102

and thought : ' If I sle hym here , I shall nat escape .
CMMALORY-M4,63.2103

And if I leve hym now , peraventure I shall never mete with hym agayne
at such a stevyn , CMMALORY-M4,63.2104

and muche harme he woll do and he lyve . ' CMMALORY-M4,63.2105

And therewith thys $Garlon aspyed that Balyn vysaged hym ,
CMMALORY-M4,63.2106

so he com CMMALORY-M4,63.2107

and slapped hym on the face with the backe of hys honde
CMMALORY-M4,63.2108

and seyde , ' Knyght , why beholdist thou me so ? CMMALORY-M4,63.2109

For shame , ete thy mete CMMALORY-M4,63.2110

and do that thou com fore . ' CMMALORY-M4,63.2111

' Thou seyst soth , ' seyde Balyne , CMMALORY-M4,63.2112

' thys ys nat the firste spite that thou haste done me .
CMMALORY-M4,63.2113

And therefore I woll do that I com fore . ' CMMALORY-M4,63.2114

And rose hym up fersely CMMALORY-M4,63.2115

and clave his hede to the sholdirs . CMMALORY-M4,63.2116

' Now geff me $the troncheon , ' seyde Balyn <em> to his lady <$$em> , '
that he slew youre knyght with . ' CMMALORY-M4,63.2117

And anone she gaff hit hym , CMMALORY-M4,63.2118

for allwey she bare the truncheoune with hir . CMMALORY-M4,63.2119

And therewith $Balyn smote hym thorow the body CMMALORY-M4,63.2120

and seyde opynly , ' With that troncheon thou slewyste a good knyght ,
CMMALORY-M4,63.2121

and now hit stykith in thy body . ' CMMALORY-M4,63.2122

Than Balyn called unto hys oste CMMALORY-M4,63.2123

and seyde , ' Now may we fecche blood inoughe to hele youre son withall
. ' CMMALORY-M4,63.2124

<P_64>

So anone all the knyghtes rose frome the table for to sette on Balyne .
CMMALORY-M4,64.2126

And kynge Pellam hymself arose up fersely CMMALORY-M4,64.2127

and seyde ' Knyght , why hast thou slayne my brothir ?
CMMALORY-M4,64.2128

Thou shalt dey there fore or thou departe . ' CMMALORY-M4,64.2129

' Well , ' seyde Balyn , ' do hit youreselff . ' CMMALORY-M4,64.2130

' Yes , ' seyde kyng Pellam , ' there shall no man have ado with the but
I myselff , for the love of my brothir . ' CMMALORY-M4,64.2131

Than kynge Pellam <em> caught in his hand <$$em> a grymme wepyn
CMMALORY-M4,64.2132

and smote egirly at Balyn , CMMALORY-M4,64.2133

but he put hys swerde betwyxte hys hede and the stroke ,
CMMALORY-M4,64.2134

and therewith hys swerde braste in sundir . CMMALORY-M4,64.2135

And when Balyne was wepynles he ran into a chambir for to seke a wepyn
$and fro chambir to chambir , CMMALORY-M4,64.2136

and no wepyn coude he fynde . CMMALORY-M4,64.2137

And allwayes kyng Pellam folowed afftir hym . CMMALORY-M4,64.2138

And at the last he enterde into a chambir $whych was mervaylously dyght
and ryche , and a@ @bedde arayed with cloth of golde , the rychiste that
myght be , and one lyyng therein , CMMALORY-M4,64.2139

and thereby stoode a table of clene golde <em> with four pyllars of
sylver that bare up the table <$$em> . CMMALORY-M4,64.2140

And uppon the table stoode a mervaylous spere strangely wrought .
CMMALORY-M4,64.2141

So when Balyn saw the spere he gate hit in hys honde CMMALORY-M4,64.2142

and turned to kynge Pellam CMMALORY-M4,64.2143

and felde hym CMMALORY-M4,64.2144

and smote hym passyngly sore with that spere , that kynge Pellam $felle
downe in a sowghe . CMMALORY-M4,64.2145

And there-with the castell brake roffe and wallis CMMALORY-M4,64.2146

and felle downe to the erthe . CMMALORY-M4,64.2147

And Balyn felle downe CMMALORY-M4,64.2148

and myght nat styrre hande nor foote , CMMALORY-M4,64.2149

and for the moste party of that castell was dede thorow the dolorouse
stroke . CMMALORY-M4,64.2150

Ryght so lay kynge Pellam and Balyne three dayes . CMMALORY-M4,64.2151

Than Merlion com thydir , CMMALORY-M4,64.2152

and toke up Balyn CMMALORY-M4,64.2153

and gate hym a good horse , for hys was dede , CMMALORY-M4,64.2154

and bade hym voyde oute of that contrey . CMMALORY-M4,64.2155

' Sir , I wolde have my damesell , ' seyde Balyne . CMMALORY-M4,64.2156

' Loo , ' seyde Merlion , ' where she lyeth dede . '
CMMALORY-M4,64.2157

And kynge Pellam lay so many yerys sore wounded , CMMALORY-M4,64.2158

and myght never be hole tylle that Galaad the Hawte Prynce heled hym in
the queste of the Sankgreall . CMMALORY-M4,64.2159

For in that place was parte of the bloode of oure Lorde Jesu Cryste ,
which Joseph off Aramathy brought into thys londe . CMMALORY-M4,64.2160

And there hymselff $lay in that ryche bedde . CMMALORY-M4,64.2161

And that was the spere whych Longeus smote oure Lorde with to the herte
. CMMALORY-M4,64.2162

<P_65>

And kynge Pellam was nyghe of Joseph his kynne , CMMALORY-M4,65.2164

and that was the moste worshipfullist man on lyve in tho dayes ,
CMMALORY-M4,65.2165

and grete pite` hit was of hys hurte , CMMALORY-M4,65.2166

for thorow that stroke hit turned to grete dole , tray and tene .
CMMALORY-M4,65.2167

Than departed Balyne frome Merlyon , CMMALORY-M4,65.2168

' for , ' he seyde , ' nevir in thys worlde we parte nother meete no
more . ' CMMALORY-M4,65.2169

So he rode forthe thorow the fayre contreyes and citeys
CMMALORY-M4,65.2170

and founde the peple dede slayne on every syde , CMMALORY-M4,65.2171

and all that evir were on lyve cryed CMMALORY-M4,65.2172

and seyde , ' A , Balyne ! Thou hast done and caused grete $dommage in
thys contreyes ! CMMALORY-M4,65.2173

For the dolerous stroke thou gaff unto kynge Pellam thes three contreyes
ar destroyed . CMMALORY-M4,65.2174

And doute nat but the vengeaunce woll falle on the at the laste ! '
CMMALORY-M4,65.2175

But when Balyn was past tho contreyes he was passynge fayne ,
CMMALORY-M4,65.2176

and so he rode eyght dayes or he mette with many adventure .
CMMALORY-M4,65.2177

And at the last he com into a fayre foreyst in a valey ,
CMMALORY-M4,65.2178

and was ware of a towure . CMMALORY-M4,65.2179

And there besyde he mette with a grete horse tyed to a tree ,
CMMALORY-M4,65.2180

and besyde there sate a fayre knyght on the grounde CMMALORY-M4,65.2181

and made grete mournynge , CMMALORY-M4,65.2182

and he was a lyckly man and a well made . CMMALORY-M4,65.2183

Balyne seyde , ' God you save ! CMMALORY-M4,65.2184

Why be ye so hevy ? CMMALORY-M4,65.2185

Tell me , and I woll amende and I may to my power . '
CMMALORY-M4,65.2186

' Sir knyght , ' he seyde , ' thou doste me grete gryeff ,
CMMALORY-M4,65.2187

for I was in $mery thoughtes CMMALORY-M4,65.2188

and thou puttist me to more payne . ' CMMALORY-M4,65.2189

Than Balyn went a litill frome hym CMMALORY-M4,65.2190

and loked on hys horse , CMMALORY-M4,65.2191

than herde Balyne hym sey thus : CMMALORY-M4,65.2192

' A , fayre lady ! Why have ye brokyn my promyse ? CMMALORY-M4,65.2193

For ye promysed me to mete me here by noone . CMMALORY-M4,65.2194

And I may curse you that ever ye gaff me that swerde ,
CMMALORY-M4,65.2195

for with thys swerde I woll sle myselff , ' CMMALORY-M4,65.2196

and pulde hit out . CMMALORY-M4,65.2197

And therewith com Balyne CMMALORY-M4,65.2198

and sterte unto hym CMMALORY-M4,65.2199

and toke hym by the honde . CMMALORY-M4,65.2200

' Lette go my hande , ' seyde the knyght , ' or ellis I shall sle the !
' CMMALORY-M4,65.2201

' That shall nat nede , ' seyde Balyn , CMMALORY-M4,65.2202

' for I shall promyse you my helpe to gete you youre lady
CMMALORY-M4,65.2203

and ye woll telle me where she ys . ' CMMALORY-M4,65.2204

' What ys your name ? ' seyde the knyght . CMMALORY-M4,65.2205

' Sir , my name ys Balyne le Saveage . ' CMMALORY-M4,65.2206

' A , sir , I know you well inowghe : CMMALORY-M4,65.2207

ye ar the Knyght with the Two Swerdis , and the man of moste proues of
youre hondis lyvynge . ' CMMALORY-M4,65.2208

<P_66>

' What ys your name ? ' seyde Balyne . CMMALORY-M4,66.2210

' My name ys Garnysh of the Mownte , a poore mannes sonne ,
CMMALORY-M4,66.2211

and be my proues and hardynes a deuke made me knyght CMMALORY-M4,66.2212

and gave me londis . CMMALORY-M4,66.2213

Hys name ys duke Harmel , CMMALORY-M4,66.2214

and hys doughter ys <em> she that I love , and she me , as I demed . '
CMMALORY-M4,66.2215

' Hou fer is she hens ? ' sayd Balyn . CMMALORY-M4,66.2216

' But six myle , ' said the knyghte . CMMALORY-M4,66.2217

' Now ryde we hens , ' sayde these two knyghtes . CMMALORY-M4,66.2218

So they rode more than a paas tyll that they cam to a fayr castel wel
wallyd and dyched . CMMALORY-M4,66.2219

' I wylle into the castel , ' sayd Balen , ' and loke yf she be ther .
' CMMALORY-M4,66.2220

Soo he wente in CMMALORY-M4,66.2221

and serched fro chamber to chambir CMMALORY-M4,66.2222

and fond her bedde , CMMALORY-M4,66.2223

but she was not there . CMMALORY-M4,66.2224

Thenne Balen loked into a fayr litil gardyn , CMMALORY-M4,66.2225

and under a laurel tre he sawe her lye upon a quylt of grene samyte ,
and a knyght in her armes fast halsynge eyther other , and under their
hedes grasse and herbes . CMMALORY-M4,66.2226

Whan Balen sawe her lye so with the fowlest knyghte that ever he sawe ,
and she a fair lady , thenne Balyn wente thurgh alle the chambers ageyne
CMMALORY-M4,66.2227

and told the knyghte how he fond her as she had slepte fast ,
CMMALORY-M4,66.2228

and so brought hym in the place there she lay fast slepynge .
CMMALORY-M4,66.2229

And when Garnyssh beheld hir so lyeng , for pure sorou his mouth and
nose brast oute on bledynge , CMMALORY-M4,66.2230

and with his swerd he smote of bothe their hedes . CMMALORY-M4,66.2231

And thenne he maade sorowe oute of mesure CMMALORY-M4,66.2232

and sayd , ' O , Balyn ! Moche sorow hast thow brought unto me ,
CMMALORY-M4,66.2233

for haddest thow not shewed me that syght I shold have passed my sorow .
' CMMALORY-M4,66.2234

' Forsoth , ' said Balyn , ' I did it to this entent that it sholde
better thy courage and that ye myght see and knowe her falshede , and to
cause yow to leve love of suche a lady ; CMMALORY-M4,66.2235

God knoweth I dyd none other but as I wold ye dyd to me . '
CMMALORY-M4,66.2236

' Allas , ' said Garnysshe , ' now is my sorou doubel that I may not
endure , CMMALORY-M4,66.2237

now have I slayne that I moost loved in al my lyf ! '
CMMALORY-M4,66.2238

And therwith sodenly he roofe hymself on his own swerd unto the hyltys .
CMMALORY-M4,66.2239

When Balen sawe that , he dressid hym thensward , lest folke wold say he
had slayne them . CMMALORY-M4,66.2240

And so he rode forth , CMMALORY-M4,66.2241

and within thre dayes he cam by a crosse ; CMMALORY-M4,66.2242

and theron were letters of gold wryten that said : <P_67> ' it is not
for no knyght alone to ryde toward this castel . ' CMMALORY-M4,67.2243

Thenne sawe he an old hore gentylman comyng toward hym that sayd , '
Balyn le Saveage , thow passyst thy bandes to come this waye ,
CMMALORY-M4,67.2244

therfor torne ageyne and it will availle the , ' CMMALORY-M4,67.2245

and he vanysshed awey anone . CMMALORY-M4,67.2246

And soo he herd an horne blowe as it had ben the dethe of a best .
CMMALORY-M4,67.2247

' That blast , ' said Balyn , ' is blowen for me , CMMALORY-M4,67.2248

for I am the pryse , CMMALORY-M4,67.2249

and yet am I not dede . ' CMMALORY-M4,67.2250

Anone withal he sawe an_honderd ladyes and many knyghtes that welcommed
hym with fayr semblaunt CMMALORY-M4,67.2251

and made hym passyng good chere unto his syght , CMMALORY-M4,67.2252

and ledde hym into the castel , CMMALORY-M4,67.2253

and ther was daunsynge and mynstralsye and alle maner of joye .
CMMALORY-M4,67.2254

Thenne the chyef lady of the castel said , ' Knyghte with the Two
Suerdys , ye must have adoo and juste with a knyght hereby that kepeth
an iland , CMMALORY-M4,67.2255

for ther may no man passe this way but he must juste or he passe . '
CMMALORY-M4,67.2256

' That is an unhappy customme , ' said Balyn , ' that a knyght may not
passe this wey but yf he juste . ' CMMALORY-M4,67.2257

' Ye shalle not have adoo but with one knyghte , ' sayd the lady .
CMMALORY-M4,67.2258

' Wel , ' sayd Balyn , ' syn I shalle , therto I am redy ;
CMMALORY-M4,67.2259

but traveillynge men are ofte wery and their horses to ,
CMMALORY-M4,67.2260

but though my hors be wery my hert is not wery . CMMALORY-M4,67.2261

I wold be fayne ther my deth shold be . ' CMMALORY-M4,67.2262

' Syr , ' said a knyght to Balyn , ' me@ @thynketh your sheld is not
good ; CMMALORY-M4,67.2263

I wille lene yow a byggar , CMMALORY-M4,67.2264

therof I pray yow . ' CMMALORY-M4,67.2265

And so he tooke the sheld that was unknowen CMMALORY-M4,67.2266

and lefte his owne , CMMALORY-M4,67.2267

and so rode unto the iland CMMALORY-M4,67.2268

and put hym and his hors in a grete boote . CMMALORY-M4,67.2269

And when he came on the other syde he met with a damoysel ,
CMMALORY-M4,67.2270

and she said , ' O , knyght Balyn , why have ye lefte your owne sheld ?
CMMALORY-M4,67.2271

Allas ! ye have put yourself in grete daunger , CMMALORY-M4,67.2272

for by your sheld ye shold have ben knowen . CMMALORY-M4,67.2273

It is grete pyte` of yow as ever was of knyght , CMMALORY-M4,67.2274

for of thy prowesse and hardynes thou hast no felawe lyvynge . '
CMMALORY-M4,67.2275

' Me repenteth , ' said Balyn , ' that ever I cam within this countrey ;
CMMALORY-M4,67.2276

but I maye not torne now ageyne for shame , CMMALORY-M4,67.2277

and what aventure shalle falle to me , be it lyf or dethe , I wille take
the adventure that shalle come to me . ' CMMALORY-M4,67.2278

And thenne he loked on his armour CMMALORY-M4,67.2279

and understood he was wel armed , CMMALORY-M4,67.2280

and therwith blessid hym CMMALORY-M4,67.2281

and mounted upon his hors . CMMALORY-M4,67.2282

<P_68>

Thenne afore hym he sawe come rydynge oute of a castel a knyght , and
his hors trapped all reed , and hymself in the same colour .
CMMALORY-M4,68.2284

Whan this knyghte in the reed beheld Balyn hym thought it shold be his
broder Balen by cause of his two swerdys , CMMALORY-M4,68.2285

but by cause he knewe not his sheld he demed it was not he .
CMMALORY-M4,68.2286

And so they aventryd theyr speres CMMALORY-M4,68.2287

and came merveillously fast togyders , CMMALORY-M4,68.2288

and they smote other in the sheldes , CMMALORY-M4,68.2289

but theire speres and theire cours were soo bygge that it bare doune
hors and man , that they lay bothe in a swoun . CMMALORY-M4,68.2290

But Balyn was brysed sore with the falle of his hors ,
CMMALORY-M4,68.2291

for he was wery of travaille . CMMALORY-M4,68.2292

And Balan was the fyrst that rose on foote and drewe his swerd and wente
toward Balyn , CMMALORY-M4,68.2293

and he aroos CMMALORY-M4,68.2294

and wente ageynst hym ; CMMALORY-M4,68.2295

but Balan smote Balyn fyrste , CMMALORY-M4,68.2296

and he put up his shelde CMMALORY-M4,68.2297

and smote hym thorow the shelde CMMALORY-M4,68.2298

and tamyd his helme . CMMALORY-M4,68.2299

thenne Balyn smote hym ageyne with that unhappy swerd
CMMALORY-M4,68.2300

and wel nyghe had fellyd his broder Balan , CMMALORY-M4,68.2301

and so they fought ther togyders tyl theyr brethes faylled .
CMMALORY-M4,68.2302

Thenne Balyn loked up to the castel CMMALORY-M4,68.2303

and sawe the towres stand ful of ladyes . CMMALORY-M4,68.2304

Soo they went unto bataille ageyne CMMALORY-M4,68.2305

and wounded everyche other dolefully , CMMALORY-M4,68.2306

and thenne they brethed oftymes , CMMALORY-M4,68.2307

and so wente unto bataille that alle the place there@ @as they fought
was blood reed . CMMALORY-M4,68.2308

And att that tyme ther was none of them bothe but they hadde eyther
smyten other seven grete woundes so that the lest of them myght have ben
the dethe of the myghtyest gyaunt in this world . CMMALORY-M4,68.2309

Thenne they wente to batail ageyn so merveillously that doubte it was to
here of that bataille for the grete blood shedynge ; CMMALORY-M4,68.2310

and their hawberkes unnailled , that naked they were on every syde .
CMMALORY-M4,68.2311

At@ @te last Balan , the yonger broder , withdrewe hym a lytel
CMMALORY-M4,68.2312

and leid hym doune . CMMALORY-M4,68.2313

Thenne said Balyn le Saveage , ' What knyghte arte thow ?
CMMALORY-M4,68.2314

For or now I found never no knyght that matched me . '
CMMALORY-M4,68.2315

' My name is , ' said he , ' Balan , broder unto the good knyght Balyn .
' CMMALORY-M4,68.2316

' Allais ' sayd Balyn , ' that ever I shold see this day , '
CMMALORY-M4,68.2317

and therwith he felle backward in a swoune . CMMALORY-M4,68.2318

Thenne Balan yede on al four feet and handes , CMMALORY-M4,68.2319

and put of the helme of his broder , CMMALORY-M4,68.2320

and myght not knowe hym by the vysage , it was so ful hewen and bledde ;
CMMALORY-M4,68.2321

but when he awoke he sayd , <P_69> ' O , Balan , my broder ! Thow hast
slayne me and I the , wherfore alle the wyde world shalle speke of us
bothe . ' CMMALORY-M4,69.2322

' Allas ! ' sayd Balan , ' that ever I sawe this day that thorow myshap
I myght not knowe yow ! CMMALORY-M4,69.2323

For I aspyed wel your two swerdys , CMMALORY-M4,69.2324

but bycause ye had another shild I demed ye had ben another knyght . '
CMMALORY-M4,69.2325

' Allas ! ' saide Balyn , ' all that maade an unhappy knyght in the
castel , CMMALORY-M4,69.2326

for he caused me to leve myn owne shelde to our bothes destruction .
CMMALORY-M4,69.2327

And yf I myght lyve I wold destroye that castel for ylle customes . '
CMMALORY-M4,69.2328

' That were wel done , ' said Balan , CMMALORY-M4,69.2329

' for I had never grace to departe fro hem syn that I cam hyther ,
CMMALORY-M4,69.2330

for here it happed me to slee a knyght that kept this iland ,
CMMALORY-M4,69.2331

and syn myght I never departe , and no more shold ye , broder , and ye
myght have slayne me as ye have and escaped yourself with the lyf . '
CMMALORY-M4,69.2332

Ryght so cam the lady of the toure with four knyghtes and six ladyes and
six yomen unto them , CMMALORY-M4,69.2333

and there she herd how they made her mone eyther to other and sayd , '
We came bothe oute of one $wombe , that is to say one moders bely ,
CMMALORY-M4,69.2334

and so shalle we lye bothe in one pytte . ' CMMALORY-M4,69.2335

So Balan prayd the lady of her gentylnesse for his true servyse that she
wold burye them bothe in that same place there the bataille was done ,
CMMALORY-M4,69.2336

and she graunted hem with wepynge it shold be done rychely in the best
maner . CMMALORY-M4,69.2337

' Now wille ye sende for a preest that we may receyve our sacrament and
receyve the blessid body of oure Lord Jesu Cryst ? '
CMMALORY-M4,69.2338

' Ye , ' said the lady , ' it shalle be done ; ' CMMALORY-M4,69.2339

and so she sente for a preest CMMALORY-M4,69.2340

and gaf hem her ryghtes . CMMALORY-M4,69.2341

' Now , ' sayd Balen , ' when we are buryed in one tombe and the mensyon
made over us how two bretheren slewe eche other , there wille never good
knyght nor good man see our tombe but they wille pray for our soules , '
CMMALORY-M4,69.2342

and so alle the ladyes and gentylwymen wepte for pyte` .
CMMALORY-M4,69.2343

Thenne anone Balan dyed , CMMALORY-M4,69.2344

but Balyn dyed not tyl the mydnyghte after . CMMALORY-M4,69.2345

And so were they buryed bothe , CMMALORY-M4,69.2346

and the lady lete make a mensyon of Balan how he was ther slayne by his
broders handes , CMMALORY-M4,69.2347

but she knewe not Balyns name . CMMALORY-M4,69.2348

In the morne cam Merlyn CMMALORY-M4,69.2349

and lete wryte Balyns name on the tombe with letters of gold that ' here
lyeth Balyn le Saveage that <P_70> was the knyght with the two swerdes
and he that smote the dolorous stroke . ' CMMALORY-M4,70.2350

Also Merlyn lete make there a bedde , that ther shold never man lye
therin but he wente oute of his wytte . CMMALORY-M4,70.2351

Yet Launcelot de Lake fordyd that bed thorow his noblesse .
CMMALORY-M4,70.2352

And anone after Balyn was dede Merlyn toke his swerd CMMALORY-M4,70.2353

and toke of the pomel CMMALORY-M4,70.2354

and set on another pomel . CMMALORY-M4,70.2355

So Merlyn <$$em> bade a knyght that stood before hym to handyll the
swerde , CMMALORY-M4,70.2356

and he assayde hit CMMALORY-M4,70.2357

and myght nat handyll hit . CMMALORY-M4,70.2358

Than Merlion lowghe . CMMALORY-M4,70.2359

' Why lawghe ye ? ' seyde the knyght . CMMALORY-M4,70.2360

' Thys ys the cause , ' seyde Merlion : CMMALORY-M4,70.2361

' there shall never man handyll thys swerde but the beste knyght of the
worlde , CMMALORY-M4,70.2362

and that shall be sir Launcelot other ellis Galahad , hys sonne .
CMMALORY-M4,70.2363

And Launcelot with hys swerde shall sle the man in the worlde that he
lovith beste : CMMALORY-M4,70.2364

that shall be sir Gawayne . ' CMMALORY-M4,70.2365

And all thys he lette wryte in the pomell of the swerde .
CMMALORY-M4,70.2366

Than Merlion lette make a brygge of iron and of steele into that ilonde
, CMMALORY-M4,70.2367

and hit was but halff a foote brode , CMMALORY-M4,70.2368

' and there shall never man passe that brygge nother have hardynesse to
go over hit but yf he were a passynge good man withoute trechery or
vylany . ' CMMALORY-M4,70.2369

Also the scawberd off Balyns swerde Merlion lefte hit on thys syde the
ilonde , that Galaad sholde fynde hit . CMMALORY-M4,70.2370

Also Merlion lette make by hys suttelyte` that Balynes swerde was put
into a marbil stone stondynge upryght as grete as a mylstone , and hoved
allwayes above the watir , and dud many yeres . CMMALORY-M4,70.2371

And so by adventure hit swamme downe by the streme unto the cite` of
Camelot , that ys in Englysh called Wynchester , CMMALORY-M4,70.2372

and that same day Galahad the Haute Prynce com with kynge Arthure ,
CMMALORY-M4,70.2373

and so Galaad brought with hym the scawberde CMMALORY-M4,70.2374

and encheved the swerde that was in the marble stone hovynge uppon the
watir . CMMALORY-M4,70.2375

And on Whytsonday he enchevyd the swerde , as hit ys rehersed in THE
BOOKE OF THE SANKGREALL . CMMALORY-M4,70.2376

Sone aftir thys was done Merlion com to kynge Arthur CMMALORY-M4,70.2377

and tolde hym of the dolerous stroke that Balyn gaff kynge Pellam , and
how Balyn and Balan fought togydirs the $merveylyste batayle that evir
was herde off , and how they were buryed bothe in one tombe .
CMMALORY-M4,70.2378

' Alas ! ' seyde kynge Arthure , ' thys ys the grettist pite` that ever
I herde telle off of two knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,70.2379

for in thys worlde I knewe never such two knyghtes . '
CMMALORY-M4,70.2380

<P_71>

THUS ENDITH THE TALE OF BALYN AND BALAN , TWO BRETHIRNE THAT WERE BORNE
IN NORTHUMBIRLONDE , THAT WERE TWO PASSYNGE GOOD KNYGHTES AS EVER WERE
IN THO DAYES . EXPLICIT . CMMALORY-M4,71.2382

<P_180>

<heading>

THE NOBLE TALE OF SIR LAUNCELOT DU LAKE CMMALORY-M4,180.2385

<$$heading>

SONE aftir that kynge Arthure was com from Rome into Ingelonde than all
the knyghtys of the Rounde Table resorted unto the kynge
CMMALORY-M4,180.2387

and made many joustys and turnementes . CMMALORY-M4,180.2388

And some there were that were but knyghtes encresed in armys and worshyp
that passed all other of her felowys in prouesse and noble dedys ,
CMMALORY-M4,180.2389

and that was well proved on many . CMMALORY-M4,180.2390

But in especiall hit was prevyd on sir Launcelot de Lake ,
CMMALORY-M4,180.2391

for in all turnementes , justys , and dedys of armys , both for lyff and
deth , he passed all other knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,180.2392

and at no tyme was he ovircom but yf hit were by treson other
inchauntement . CMMALORY-M4,180.2393

So this sir Launcelot encresed so mervaylously in worship and honoure ;
CMMALORY-M4,180.2394

therefore he is the fyrste knyght that the $Freynsh booke makyth
$mencion of aftir kynge Arthure com frome Rome . Wherefore quene
Gwenyvere had hym in grete favoure aboven all other knyghtis ,
CMMALORY-M4,180.2395

and so he loved the quene agayne aboven all other ladyes dayes of his
lyff , CMMALORY-M4,180.2396

and for hir he dud many dedys of armys CMMALORY-M4,180.2397

and saved her from the fyre thorow his noble chevalry .
CMMALORY-M4,180.2398

Thus sir Launcelot rested hym longe with play and game ;
CMMALORY-M4,180.2399

and than he thought hymself to preve in straunge adventures ,
CMMALORY-M4,180.2400

and bade his nevew , sir Lyonell , for to make hym redy , ' for we muste
go seke adventures ' . CMMALORY-M4,180.2401

So they mounted on their horses , armed at all ryghtes
CMMALORY-M4,180.2402

and rode into a depe foreste and so into a playne .
CMMALORY-M4,180.2403

So the wedir was hote aboute noone , CMMALORY-M4,180.2404

and sir Launcelot had grete luste to slepe . CMMALORY-M4,180.2405

Than sir Lyonell aspyed a grete appyll-tre that stoode by an hedge ,
CMMALORY-M4,180.2406

and seyde , ' Sir , yondir is a fayre shadow , CMMALORY-M4,180.2407

there may we reste us and oure horsys . ' CMMALORY-M4,180.2408

' Hit is trouthe , ' seyde sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,180.2409

' for this seven yere I was not so slepy as I am nowe . '
CMMALORY-M4,180.2410

So there they alyted CMMALORY-M4,180.2411

and tyed there horsys unto sondry treis , CMMALORY-M4,180.2412

and sir Launcelot layde hym downe undir this appyll-tre , and his helmet
undir his hede . CMMALORY-M4,180.2413

And sir Lyonell waked whyles he $slepte . CMMALORY-M4,180.2414

So sir Launcelot slepte passyng faste . CMMALORY-M4,180.2415

And in the meanewhyle com there three knyghtes rydynge , as faste
fleynge as they myght ryde , CMMALORY-M4,180.2416

and there folowed hem three but one knyght . CMMALORY-M4,180.2417

And when sir Lyonell hym sawe , he thought he sawe never so grete a
knyght nother so well-farynge a man and well appareyld unto all ryghtes
. CMMALORY-M4,180.2418

So within a whyle this stronge knyght <P_181> had overtakyn one of the
three knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,181.2419

and there he smote hym to the colde erth , that he lay stylle ;
CMMALORY-M4,181.2420

and than he rode unto the secunde knyght CMMALORY-M4,181.2421

and smote hym so that man and horse felle downe . CMMALORY-M4,181.2422

And so streyte unto the thirde knyght , CMMALORY-M4,181.2423

and smote hym behynde his horse ars a spere-lengthe ;
CMMALORY-M4,181.2424

and than he alyght downe CMMALORY-M4,181.2425

and rayned his horse on the brydyll CMMALORY-M4,181.2426

and bounde all three knyghtes faste with the raynes of theire owne
brydelys . CMMALORY-M4,181.2427

Whan sir Lyonell had sene hym do thus , he thought to assay hym
CMMALORY-M4,181.2428

and made hym redy , CMMALORY-M4,181.2429

and pryvaly he toke his horse CMMALORY-M4,181.2430

and thought nat for to awake sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,181.2431

and so mounted uppon his hors CMMALORY-M4,181.2432

and overtoke the strong knyght . CMMALORY-M4,181.2433

He bade hym turne , CMMALORY-M4,181.2434

and so he turned CMMALORY-M4,181.2435

and smote sir Lyonell so harde that hors and man he bare to the erth .
CMMALORY-M4,181.2436

And so he alyght downe CMMALORY-M4,181.2437

and bounde hym faste CMMALORY-M4,181.2438

and threw hym over-thwarte his owne horse as he had served the other
three , CMMALORY-M4,181.2439

and so rode with hem tyll he com to his owne castell .
CMMALORY-M4,181.2440

Than he unarmed them CMMALORY-M4,181.2441

and bete them with thornys all naked , CMMALORY-M4,181.2442

and aftir put them in depe preson where were many mo knyghtes that made
grete dole . CMMALORY-M4,181.2443

So when sir Ector de Marys wyste that sir Launcelot was paste oute of
the course to seke adventures , he was wroth with $hymself
CMMALORY-M4,181.2444

and made hym redy to seke sir Launcelot . CMMALORY-M4,181.2445

And as he had redyn longe in a grete foreste , he mette with a man was
lyke a foster . CMMALORY-M4,181.2446

' Fayre felow , ' seyde sir Ector , ' doste thou know this contrey or
ony adventures that bene nyghe here honde ? ' CMMALORY-M4,181.2447

' Sir , ' seyde the foster , ' this contrey know I well .
CMMALORY-M4,181.2448

And hereby within this myle is a stronge maner and well dyked ,
CMMALORY-M4,181.2449

and by that maner on the lyffte honde there is a fayre fourde for horse
to drynke off , CMMALORY-M4,181.2450

and over that fourde there growys a fayre tre . CMMALORY-M4,181.2451

And thereon hongyth many fayre shyldys that welded somtyme good knyghtes
, CMMALORY-M4,181.2452

and at the $bole of the tre hongys a basyn of couper and latyne .
CMMALORY-M4,181.2453

And stryke uppon that basyn with the butte of thy spere three tymes ,
and sone aftir thou shalt hyre new tydynges ; CMMALORY-M4,181.2454

and ellys haste thou the fayreste $grace that ever had knyghte this many
yeres that passed thorow this foreste . ' CMMALORY-M4,181.2455

' Gramercy , ' seyde sir Ector CMMALORY-M4,181.2456

and departed . CMMALORY-M4,181.2457

And com unto this tre CMMALORY-M4,181.2458

and sawe many fayre shyldys , CMMALORY-M4,181.2459

and amonge them all he sawe hys brothirs shylde , sir Lyonell , and many
mo that he knew that were of his felowys of the Rounde Table , the
whyche greved his herte , CMMALORY-M4,181.2460

<P_182>

and promysed to revenge his brother . CMMALORY-M4,182.2462

Than anone sir Ector bete on the basyn as he were woode ,
CMMALORY-M4,182.2463

and than he gaff his horse drynke at the fourde . CMMALORY-M4,182.2464

And there com a knyghte behynde hym CMMALORY-M4,182.2465

and bade hym com oute of the water and make hym redy .
CMMALORY-M4,182.2466

Sir Ector turned hym shortly , CMMALORY-M4,182.2467

and in feawtir caste his spere CMMALORY-M4,182.2468

and smote the other knyght a grete buffette , that his horse turned
twyse abowte . CMMALORY-M4,182.2469

' That was well done , ' seyde the stronge knyght , CMMALORY-M4,182.2470

' and knyghtly thou haste strykyn me . ' CMMALORY-M4,182.2471

And therewith he russhed his horse on sir Ector CMMALORY-M4,182.2472

and caught hym undir his ryght arme CMMALORY-M4,182.2473

and bare hym clene oute of the sadyll , CMMALORY-M4,182.2474

and so rode with hym away into his castell CMMALORY-M4,182.2475

and threw hym downe in myddyll of the floure . CMMALORY-M4,182.2476

<em> The name of this knyghte was sir Tarquyn <$$em> .
CMMALORY-M4,182.2477

Than this seyde $Tarquyn seyde unto sir Ector , ' For thou hast done
this day more unto me than ony knyght dud this twelve yere , now woll I
graunte the thy lyff , so thou wolt be sworne to be my trew presoner .
' CMMALORY-M4,182.2478

' Nay , ' sayde sir Ector , ' that woll I never promyse the but that I
woll do myne advauntage . ' CMMALORY-M4,182.2479

' That me repentis , ' seyde sir $Tarquyn CMMALORY-M4,182.2480

Than he gan unarme hym CMMALORY-M4,182.2481

and bete hym with thornys all naked , CMMALORY-M4,182.2482

and sytthyn put hym downe into a depe dongeon , CMMALORY-M4,182.2483

and there he knewe many of his felowys . CMMALORY-M4,182.2484

But when sir Ector saw sir Lyonell , than made he grete sorow .
CMMALORY-M4,182.2485

' Alas , brother ! ' seyde sir Ector , ' how may this be ,
CMMALORY-M4,182.2486

and where is my brothir sir Launcelot ? ' CMMALORY-M4,182.2487

' Fayre brother , I leffte hym on slepe , when that I frome hym yode ,
undir an appil-tre , CMMALORY-M4,182.2488

and what is becom of hym I can nat telle you . ' CMMALORY-M4,182.2489

' Alas , ' seyde the presoneres , ' but yf sir Launcelot helpe us we
shall never be delyverde , CMMALORY-M4,182.2490

for we know now no knyght that is able to macch with oure maystir
Tarquyne . ' CMMALORY-M4,182.2491

Now leve we thes knyghtes presoners , CMMALORY-M4,182.2492

and speke we of sir Launcelot de Lake that lyeth undir the appil-tre
slepynge . CMMALORY-M4,182.2493

Aboute the none so there com by hym four queenys of a grete astate ;
CMMALORY-M4,182.2494

and for the hete sholde nat nyghe hem , CMMALORY-M4,182.2495

there rode four knyghtes aboute hem CMMALORY-M4,182.2496

and bare a cloth of grene sylke on four sperys betwyxte hem and the
sonne . CMMALORY-M4,182.2497

And the quenys rode on four whyghte mulys . CMMALORY-M4,182.2498

<P_183>

Thus as they rode they herde a grete horse besyde them grymly nyghe .
CMMALORY-M4,183.2500

Than they loked CMMALORY-M4,183.2501

and were ware of a slepynge knyght lay all armed undir an appil-tre .
CMMALORY-M4,183.2502

And anone as they loked on his face they knew wel hit was sir Launcelot
, CMMALORY-M4,183.2503

and began to stryve for that knyght , CMMALORY-M4,183.2504

and every of hem seyde they wolde have hym to hir love .
CMMALORY-M4,183.2505

' We shall nat stryve , ' seyde Morgan le Fay , that was kyng Arthurs
sister . CMMALORY-M4,183.2506

' I shall put an inchauntement uppon hym that he shall nat awake of all
this seven owres , CMMALORY-M4,183.2507

and than I woll lede hym away unto my castell . CMMALORY-M4,183.2508

And when he is surely within my horde , I shall take the inchauntement
frome hym , and than lette hym chose whych of us he woll have unto
peramour . ' CMMALORY-M4,183.2509

So this enchauntemente was caste uppon sir Launcelot ,
CMMALORY-M4,183.2510

and than they leyde hym uppon his shylde CMMALORY-M4,183.2511

and bare hym so on horsebak betwyxte two knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,183.2512

and brought hym unto the Castell Charyot ; CMMALORY-M4,183.2513

and there they leyde hym in a chambir colde , CMMALORY-M4,183.2514

and at nyght they sente unto hym a fayre dameselle with his souper redy
idyght . CMMALORY-M4,183.2515

Be that the enchauntement was paste . CMMALORY-M4,183.2516

And when she com she salewed hym CMMALORY-M4,183.2517

and asked hym what chere . CMMALORY-M4,183.2518

' I can not sey , fayre damesel , ' seyde sir Launcelot ,
CMMALORY-M4,183.2519

' for I wote not how I com into this castell but hit be by
inchauntemente . ' CMMALORY-M4,183.2520

' Sir , ' seyde she , ' ye muste make good chere ; CMMALORY-M4,183.2521

and yf ye be suche a knyght as is seyde ye be , I shall telle you more
to-morn be pryme of the day . ' CMMALORY-M4,183.2522

' Gramercy , fayre damesel , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' of your good
wylle . ' CMMALORY-M4,183.2523

And so she departed , CMMALORY-M4,183.2524

and there he laye all that nyght withoute ony comforte .
CMMALORY-M4,183.2525

And on the morne erly com thes four quenys passyngly well besene , and
all they byddynge hym good morne , and he them agayne .
CMMALORY-M4,183.2526

' Sir knyght , ' the four quenys seyde , ' thou muste undirstonde thou
art oure presonere , CMMALORY-M4,183.2527

and we know the well that thou art sir Launcelot du Lake , kynge Banis
sonne . CMMALORY-M4,183.2528

And because that we undirstonde youre worthynesse , that thou art the
noblest knyght lyvyng , CMMALORY-M4,183.2529

and also we know well there can no lady have thy love but one ,
CMMALORY-M4,183.2530

and that is quene Gwenyvere , CMMALORY-M4,183.2531

and now thou shalt hir love lose for ever , and she thyne .
CMMALORY-M4,183.2532

For hit behovyth the now to chose one of us four , CMMALORY-M4,183.2533

for I am quene Morgan le Fay , quene of the londe of Gore ,
CMMALORY-M4,183.2534

and here is the quene of <P_184> North Galys , and the quene of Estlonde
, and the quene of the Oute Iles . CMMALORY-M4,184.2535

Now chose one of us , whyche that thou wolte have to thy peramour ,
other ellys to dye in this preson . ' CMMALORY-M4,184.2536

' This is an harde ease , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' that other I muste
dye other to chose one of you . CMMALORY-M4,184.2537

Yet had I lever dye in this preson with worshyp than to have one of you
to my peramoure , magre` myne hede . CMMALORY-M4,184.2538

And therefore ye be answeryd : CMMALORY-M4,184.2539

I woll none of you , CMMALORY-M4,184.2540

for ye be false $enchauntresses . CMMALORY-M4,184.2541

And as for my lady , dame Gwenyvere , were I at my lyberte` as I was , I
wolde prove hit on youres that she is the treweste lady unto hir lorde
lyvynge . ' CMMALORY-M4,184.2542

' Well , ' seyde the quenys , ' ys this your answere , that ye woll
refuse us ? ' CMMALORY-M4,184.2543

' Ye , on my lyff , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' refused ye bene of me . '
CMMALORY-M4,184.2544

So they departed and leffte hym there alone that made grete sorow .
CMMALORY-M4,184.2545

So aftir that noone com the damesel unto hym with his dyner
CMMALORY-M4,184.2546

and asked hym what chere . CMMALORY-M4,184.2547

' Truly , damesel , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' never so ylle . '
CMMALORY-M4,184.2548

' Sir , ' she seyde , ' that me repentis , CMMALORY-M4,184.2549

but and ye woll be ruled by me I shall helpe you oute of this dystresse
, CMMALORY-M4,184.2550

and ye shall have no shame nor velony , so that ye $wold $hold my
promyse . ' CMMALORY-M4,184.2551

' Fayre damesel , I graunte you ; CMMALORY-M4,184.2552

but sore I am of thes quenys crauftis aferde , CMMALORY-M4,184.2553

for they have destroyed many a good knyght . ' CMMALORY-M4,184.2554

' Sir , ' seyde she , ' that is soth , CMMALORY-M4,184.2555

and for the renowne and bounte` that they here of you they woll have
your love . CMMALORY-M4,184.2556

And , sir , they sey youre name is sir Launcelot du Lake , the floure of
knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,184.2557

and they be passyng wroth with you that ye have refused hem .
CMMALORY-M4,184.2558

But , sir , and ye wolde promyse me to helpe my fadir on Tewysday nexte
commynge , that hath made a turnemente betwyxt hym and the kynge of
North Galys - for the laste Tewysday past my fadir loste the felde
thorow three knyghtes of Arthurs courte - and yf ye woll be there on
Tewysday next commynge and helpe my fadir ; and to-morne be pryme by the
grace of God I shall delyver you clene . ' CMMALORY-M4,184.2559

' Now , fayre damesell , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' telle me your fadyrs
name , and than shall I gyff you an answere . ' CMMALORY-M4,184.2560

' Sir knyght , ' she seyde , ' my fadyrs name is kynge Bagdemagus , that
was foule rebuked at the laste turnemente . ' CMMALORY-M4,184.2561

<P_185>

' I knowe your fadir well , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' for a noble kyng
and a good knyght , CMMALORY-M4,185.2563

and by the fayth of my body , your fadir shall have my servyse , and you
bothe at that $day . ' CMMALORY-M4,185.2564

' Sir , ' she seyde , ' gramercy , CMMALORY-M4,185.2565

and to-morne loke ye be redy betymys , and I shall delyver you and take
you your armoure , your horse , shelde and spere . CMMALORY-M4,185.2566

And hereby wythin this ten myle is an abbey of whyght monkys ,
CMMALORY-M4,185.2567

and there I pray you to abyde me , CMMALORY-M4,185.2568

and thydir shall I brynge my fadir unto you . ' CMMALORY-M4,185.2569

' And all this shall be done , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' as I am trew
knyght . ' CMMALORY-M4,185.2570

And so she departed CMMALORY-M4,185.2571

and come on the morne erly CMMALORY-M4,185.2572

and founde hym redy . CMMALORY-M4,185.2573

Than she brought hym oute of twelve lockys , CMMALORY-M4,185.2574

and toke hym his armour and his owne horse ; CMMALORY-M4,185.2575

and lyghtly he sadyld hym CMMALORY-M4,185.2576

and toke his spere in his honde , CMMALORY-M4,185.2577

and so rode forth , CMMALORY-M4,185.2578

and sayde , ' Damesell , I shall not fayle , by the grace of God . '
CMMALORY-M4,185.2579

And so he rode into a grete foreste all that day , CMMALORY-M4,185.2580

and never coude fynde no hygheway . CMMALORY-M4,185.2581

And so the nyght fell on hym , CMMALORY-M4,185.2582

and than was he ware in a slade of a pavylyon of rede sendele .
CMMALORY-M4,185.2583

' Be my feyth , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' in that pavylyon woll I lodge
all this nyght . ' CMMALORY-M4,185.2584

And so he there alyght downe , CMMALORY-M4,185.2585

and tyed his horse to the pavylyon , CMMALORY-M4,185.2586

and there he unarmed hym . CMMALORY-M4,185.2587

And there he founde a bed , CMMALORY-M4,185.2588

and layde hym therein , CMMALORY-M4,185.2589

and felle on slepe sadly . CMMALORY-M4,185.2590

Than within an owre there com that knyght that ought the pavylyon .
CMMALORY-M4,185.2591

He wente that his lemman had layne in that bed , CMMALORY-M4,185.2592

and so he leyde hym adowne by sir Launcelot CMMALORY-M4,185.2593

and toke hym in his armys CMMALORY-M4,185.2594

and began to kysse hym . CMMALORY-M4,185.2595

And when sir Launcelot felte a rough berde kyssyng hym he sterte oute of
the bedde lyghtly , and the othir knyght after hym .
CMMALORY-M4,185.2596

And eythir of hem gate their swerdys in their hondis ,
CMMALORY-M4,185.2597

and oute at the pavylyon dore wente the knyght of the pavylyon ,
CMMALORY-M4,185.2598

and sir Launcelot folowed hym . CMMALORY-M4,185.2599

And there by a lytyll slad sir Launcelot wounded hym sore nyghe unto the
deth . CMMALORY-M4,185.2600

And than he yelded hym to sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,185.2601

and so he graunted hym , so that he wolde telle hym why he com into the
bed . CMMALORY-M4,185.2602

' Sir , ' sayde the knyghte , ' the pavylyon is myne owne .
CMMALORY-M4,185.2603

And as this nyght I had assigned my lady to have slepte with hir ,
CMMALORY-M4,185.2604

and now I am lykly to dye of this wounde . ' CMMALORY-M4,185.2605

' That me repentyth , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' of youre hurte ,
CMMALORY-M4,185.2606

but I <P_186> was adrad of treson , CMMALORY-M4,186.2607

for I was late begyled . CMMALORY-M4,186.2608

And therefore com on your way into youre pavylyon , CMMALORY-M4,186.2609

and take youre reste , CMMALORY-M4,186.2610

and as I suppose I shall staunche your bloode . ' CMMALORY-M4,186.2611

And so they wente bothe into the pavylyon , CMMALORY-M4,186.2612

and anone sir Launce-lot staunched his bloode . CMMALORY-M4,186.2613

Therewithall com the knyghtes lady that was a passynge fayre lady .
CMMALORY-M4,186.2614

And when $she aspyed that her lorde Belleus was sore wounded she cryed
oute on sir Launcelot CMMALORY-M4,186.2615

and made grete dole oute of mesure . CMMALORY-M4,186.2616

' Pease , my lady and my love , ' seyde sir Belleus ,
CMMALORY-M4,186.2617

' for this knyght is a good man and a knyght of aventures . '
CMMALORY-M4,186.2618

And there he tolde hir all the case how he was wounded .
CMMALORY-M4,186.2619

' And when that I yelded me unto hym he laffte me goodly ,
CMMALORY-M4,186.2620

and hath staunched my bloode . ' CMMALORY-M4,186.2621

' Sir , ' seyde the lady , ' I require the , telle me what knyght thou
art , and what is youre name . ' CMMALORY-M4,186.2622

' Fayre lady , ' he sayde , ' my name is sir Launcelot du Lake . '
CMMALORY-M4,186.2623

' So me thought ever be youre speche , ' seyde the lady ,
CMMALORY-M4,186.2624

' for I have sene you oftyn or this , CMMALORY-M4,186.2625

and I know you bettir than {that_I_know_you} ye wene .
CMMALORY-M4,186.2626

But now wolde ye promyse me of youre curtesye , for the harmys that ye
have done to me and to my lorde , sir Belleus , that when ye com unto
kyng Arthurs court for to cause hym to be made knyght of the Rounde
Table ? CMMALORY-M4,186.2627

For he is a passyng good man of armys and a myghty lorde of londys of
many oute iles . ' CMMALORY-M4,186.2628

' Fayre lady , ' sayde sir Launcelot , ' latte hym com unto the courte
the next hyghe feste , and loke ye com with hym , and I shall do my
power ; CMMALORY-M4,186.2629

and he preve hym doughty of his hondis he shall have his desyre . '
CMMALORY-M4,186.2630

So within a whyle the nyght passed CMMALORY-M4,186.2631

and the day shone . CMMALORY-M4,186.2632

Than sir Launcelot armed hym CMMALORY-M4,186.2633

and toke his horse , CMMALORY-M4,186.2634

and so he was taughte to the abbey , CMMALORY-M4,186.2635

<em> and thydir he rode within the pace of two owrys <$$em> .
CMMALORY-M4,186.2636

And as sone as he come thydir the doughter of kyng Bagdemagus herde a
grete horse trotte on the $pavymente , CMMALORY-M4,186.2637

and she than arose CMMALORY-M4,186.2638

and yode to $a wyndowe , CMMALORY-M4,186.2639

and there she sawe sir Launcelot . CMMALORY-M4,186.2640

And anone she made men faste to take his horse frome hym ,
CMMALORY-M4,186.2641

and lette lede hym into a stable ; CMMALORY-M4,186.2642

and hymself <em> was ledde <$$em> unto a chambir CMMALORY-M4,186.2643

and unarmed hym . CMMALORY-M4,186.2644

And this lady sente hym a longe gowne , CMMALORY-M4,186.2645

and <P_187> com hirself CMMALORY-M4,187.2646

and made hym good chere ; CMMALORY-M4,187.2647

and she seyde he was the knyght in the worlde that was moste welcom unto
hir . CMMALORY-M4,187.2648

Than in all haste she sente for hir fadir Bagdemagus that was within
twelve myle of that abbey , CMMALORY-M4,187.2649

and afore evyn he come with a fayre felyshyp of knyghtes with hym .
CMMALORY-M4,187.2650

And when the kynge was alyght of his horse he yode streyte unto sir
Launcelotte his chambir , CMMALORY-M4,187.2651

and there he founde his doughtir . CMMALORY-M4,187.2652

And than the kynge toke hym in his armys CMMALORY-M4,187.2653

and eythir made other good chere . CMMALORY-M4,187.2654

Than sir Launcelot made his complaynte unto the kynge , how he was
betrayed ; and how he was brother unto sir Lyonell , whyche was departed
frome hym he wyste not where , and how his doughter had delyverde hym
oute of preson . CMMALORY-M4,187.2655

' Therefore , whyle that I lyve , I shall do hir servyse and all hir
kynrede . ' CMMALORY-M4,187.2656

' Than am I sure of your helpe , ' seyde the kyng , ' on Tewysday next
commyng ? ' CMMALORY-M4,187.2657

' Yee , sir , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' I shall nat fayle you ,
CMMALORY-M4,187.2658

for so have I promysed my lady youre doughter . CMMALORY-M4,187.2659

But , sir , what knyghtes be tho of my lorde kyng Arthurs that were with
the kyng of North Galys ? ' CMMALORY-M4,187.2660

' Sir hit was sir Madore de la Porte and sir Mordred and sir Gahalantyne
that all forfared my knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,187.2661

for agaynste hem three I nother none of myne myght bere no strenghthe .
' CMMALORY-M4,187.2662

' Sir , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' as I here sey that turnement shall be
here within this three myle of this abbey . CMMALORY-M4,187.2663

But , sir , ye shall sende unto me three knyghtes of youres suche as ye
truste , CMMALORY-M4,187.2664

and loke that the three knyghtes have all whyght sheldis and no picture
on their shyldis CMMALORY-M4,187.2665

and ye shall sende me another of the same sewte ; CMMALORY-M4,187.2666

and we four wyll oute of a lytyll wood in myddys of bothe partyes com ,
CMMALORY-M4,187.2667

and we shall falle on the frunte of oure enemyes and greve hem that we
may . CMMALORY-M4,187.2668

And thus shall I not be knowyn what maner a knyght I am . '
CMMALORY-M4,187.2669

So they toke their reste that nyght . CMMALORY-M4,187.2670

And this was on the Sonday , CMMALORY-M4,187.2671

and so the kynge departed CMMALORY-M4,187.2672

and sente unto sir Launcelot three knyghtes with four whyght shyldys .
CMMALORY-M4,187.2673

And on the Tewysday they lodged hem in a lytyll leved wood besyde there@
@as the turnemente sholde be . CMMALORY-M4,187.2674

And there were scaffoldys and $holes , that lordys and ladyes myght
beholde and gyff the pryse . CMMALORY-M4,187.2675

Than com into the fylde the kynge of North Galys with nyne_score helmys
, CMMALORY-M4,187.2676

and than the three knyghtis of kyng Arthurs stood by <P_188> themself .
CMMALORY-M4,188.2677

Than com into the felde kynge Bagdemagus with four_score helmys ;
CMMALORY-M4,188.2678

and than they feautred their sperys CMMALORY-M4,188.2679

and come togydyrs with a grete daysshe . CMMALORY-M4,188.2680

And there was slayne of knyghtes at the fyrste recountir twelve knyghtes
of kynge Bagdemagus parte` , and syx of the kynge of North Galys syde
and party ; CMMALORY-M4,188.2681

and kynge Bagdemagus his party were ferre sette asyde and abak .
CMMALORY-M4,188.2682

Wyth that com in sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,188.2683

and he threste in with his spere in the thyckyst of the pres ;
CMMALORY-M4,188.2684

and there he smote downe with one spere fyve knyghtes ,
CMMALORY-M4,188.2685

and of four of them he brake their backys . CMMALORY-M4,188.2686

And in that thrange he smote downe the kynge of North Galys ,
CMMALORY-M4,188.2687

and brake his thygh in that falle . CMMALORY-M4,188.2688

All this doynge of sir Launcelot saw the three knyghtes of Arthurs ,
CMMALORY-M4,188.2689

and seyde , ' Yondir is a shrewde geste , ' <em> seyde sir Mador de la
Porte , <$$em> CMMALORY-M4,188.2690

' therefore have here ons at hym . ' CMMALORY-M4,188.2691

So they encountred , CMMALORY-M4,188.2692

and sir Launcelot bare hym downe horse and man so that his sholdir wente
oute of joynte . CMMALORY-M4,188.2693

' Now hit befallyth me , ' seyde sir Mordred , ' to stirre me ,
CMMALORY-M4,188.2694

for sir Mador hath a sore falle . ' CMMALORY-M4,188.2695

And than sir Launcelot was ware of hym . CMMALORY-M4,188.2696

and gate a spere in his honde CMMALORY-M4,188.2697

and mette with hym . CMMALORY-M4,188.2698

And sir Mordred brake his spere uppon hym ; CMMALORY-M4,188.2699

and sir Launcelot gaff hym suche a buffette that the arson of the sadill
brake , CMMALORY-M4,188.2700

and so he drove over the horse tayle , that his helme smote into the
erthe a foote and more , that nyghe his nek was broke ,
CMMALORY-M4,188.2701

and there he lay longe in a swowe . CMMALORY-M4,188.2702

Than com in sir Gahalantyne with a grete spere , and sir Launcelot
agaynste hym in all that they myght dryve , that bothe hir sperys
to-brastevyn to their hondys ; CMMALORY-M4,188.2703

and than they flange oute with her swerdes CMMALORY-M4,188.2704

and gaff many sore strokys . CMMALORY-M4,188.2705

Than was sir Launcelot wroth oute of mesure , CMMALORY-M4,188.2706

and than he smote sir Gahalantyne on the helme , that his nose , erys
and mowthe braste oute on bloode ; CMMALORY-M4,188.2707

and therewith his hede hynge low , CMMALORY-M4,188.2708

and with that his horse ran away with hym , CMMALORY-M4,188.2709

and he felle downe to the erthe . CMMALORY-M4,188.2710

Anone therewithall sir Launcelot gate a speare in his honde ,
CMMALORY-M4,188.2711

and or ever that speare brake he bare downe to the erthe syxtene
knyghtes , som horse and man and som the man and nat the horse ;
CMMALORY-M4,188.2712

and there was none that he hitte surely but that he bare none armys that
day . CMMALORY-M4,188.2713

And than he gate a spere CMMALORY-M4,188.2714

and smote downe twelve knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,188.2715

and the moste party of hem never throoff aftir . CMMALORY-M4,188.2716

And than the <P_189> knyghtes of the kyng of North Galys party wolde
jouste no more , CMMALORY-M4,189.2717

and there the gre was gevyn to kyng Bagdemagus . CMMALORY-M4,189.2718

So eythir party departed unto his owne , CMMALORY-M4,189.2719

and sir Launcelot rode forth with kynge Bagdemagus unto his castel .
CMMALORY-M4,189.2720

And there he had passynge good chere bothe with the kyng and with his
doughter , CMMALORY-M4,189.2721

and they profyrde hym grete yefftes . CMMALORY-M4,189.2722

And on the morne he toke his leve CMMALORY-M4,189.2723

and tolde the kynge that he wolde seke his brothir sir Lyonell that
wente frome hym whan he slepte . CMMALORY-M4,189.2724

So he toke his horse CMMALORY-M4,189.2725

and betaughte hem all to God , CMMALORY-M4,189.2726

and there he seyde unto the kynges doughter . CMMALORY-M4,189.2727

' Yf that ye have nede ony tyme of my servyse , I pray you let me have
knowlecche , CMMALORY-M4,189.2728

and I shall nat fayle you , as I am trewe knyght . '
CMMALORY-M4,189.2729

And so sir Launcelot departed , CMMALORY-M4,189.2730

and by adventure he com into the same foreste there he was takynge his
slepe before ; CMMALORY-M4,189.2731

and in the myddys of an hygheway he mette a damesel rydynge on a whyght
palfray , CMMALORY-M4,189.2732

and there eythir salewed other . CMMALORY-M4,189.2733

' Fayre damesel , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' know $ye in this contrey ony
adventures nere hande ? ' CMMALORY-M4,189.2734

' Sir knyght , ' seyde the damesel , ' here ar adventures nyghe , and
thou durste preve hem . ' CMMALORY-M4,189.2735

' Why sholde I not preve ? ' seyde sir Launcelot .
CMMALORY-M4,189.2736

' For for that cause com I hydir . ' CMMALORY-M4,189.2737

' Welle , ' seyde she , ' thou semyst well to be a good knyght ,
CMMALORY-M4,189.2738

and yf thou dare mete with a good knyght I shall brynge the where is the
beste knyght and the myghtyeste that ever thou founde , so thou wolte
telle me thy name and what knyght thou art . ' CMMALORY-M4,189.2739

' Damesell , as for to telle you my name , I take no grete force .
CMMALORY-M4,189.2740

Truly , my name is sir Launcelot du Lake . ' CMMALORY-M4,189.2741

' Sir , thou besemys well ; CMMALORY-M4,189.2742

here is adventures fast by that fallyth for the . CMMALORY-M4,189.2743

For hereby dwellyth a knyght that woll nat be overmacched for no man I
know but ye do overmacche hym . CMMALORY-M4,189.2744

And his name is sir Tarquyn . CMMALORY-M4,189.2745

And , as I undirstonde , he hath in his preson of Arthurs courte
three_score_and_four that he hath wonne with his owne hondys .
CMMALORY-M4,189.2746

But when ye have done that journey , ye shall promyse me , as ye ar a
trew knyght , for to go and helpe me and other damesels that ar
dystressed dayly with a false knyght . ' CMMALORY-M4,189.2747

<P_190>

' All youre entente , damesell , and desyre I woll fulfylle , so ye woll
brynge me unto this knyght . ' CMMALORY-M4,190.2749

' Now , fayre knyght , com on youre way . ' CMMALORY-M4,190.2750

And so she brought hym unto the fourde and the tre where hynge the basyn
. CMMALORY-M4,190.2751

So sir Launcelot lette his horse drynke , CMMALORY-M4,190.2752

and sytthen he bete on the basyn with the butte of his spere tylle the
bottum felle oute . CMMALORY-M4,190.2753

And longe dud he so , CMMALORY-M4,190.2754

but he sye no man . CMMALORY-M4,190.2755

Than he rode end-longe the gatys of that maner nyghe halfe an howre .
CMMALORY-M4,190.2756

And than was he ware of a grete knyght that droffe an horse afore hym ,
CMMALORY-M4,190.2757

and overthwarte the horse lay an armed knyght bounden .
CMMALORY-M4,190.2758

And ever as they com nere and nere sir Launcelot thought he sholde know
hym . CMMALORY-M4,190.2759

Than was he ware that hit was sir Gaherys , Gawaynes brothir , a knyght
of the Table Rounde . CMMALORY-M4,190.2760

' Now , fayre damesell , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' I se yondir a knyght
faste ibounden that is a felow of myne , CMMALORY-M4,190.2761

and brother he is unto sir Gawayne . CMMALORY-M4,190.2762

And at the fyrste begynnynge I promyse you , by the leve of God , for to
rescowe that knyght . CMMALORY-M4,190.2763

But yf his maystir sytte the bettir in his sadyl , I shall delyver all
the presoners that he hath oute of daungere , CMMALORY-M4,190.2764

for I am sure he hath two bretherne of myne presoners with hym . '
CMMALORY-M4,190.2765

But by that tyme that eythir had sene other they gryped theyre sperys
unto them . CMMALORY-M4,190.2766

' Now , fayre knyght , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' put that wounded
knyghte of that horse CMMALORY-M4,190.2767

and lette hym reste a whyle , CMMALORY-M4,190.2768

and lette us too preve oure strengthis . CMMALORY-M4,190.2769

For , as hit is enfourmed me , thou doyste and haste done me grete
despyte , and shame unto knyghtes of the Rounde Table .
CMMALORY-M4,190.2770

And therefore now defende the ! ' CMMALORY-M4,190.2771

' And thou be of $the Rounde Table , ' seyde Terquyn , ' I $defy the and
all thy felyshyp ! ' CMMALORY-M4,190.2772

' That is overmuche seyde , ' sir Launcelot seyde , ' of the at thys
tyme . ' CMMALORY-M4,190.2773

And than they put there sperys in their restys CMMALORY-M4,190.2774

and come togedyrs with hir horsis as faste as they myght ren ;
CMMALORY-M4,190.2775

and aythir smote other in myddys of their shyldis , that both their
horsys backys braste undir them , and the knyghtes were bothe astoned .
CMMALORY-M4,190.2776

And as sone as they myght they avoyded their horsys CMMALORY-M4,190.2777

and toke their shyldys before them CMMALORY-M4,190.2778

and drew oute their swerdys CMMALORY-M4,190.2779

and com togydir egirly ; CMMALORY-M4,190.2780

and eyther gaff <P_191> other many stronge strokys ,
CMMALORY-M4,191.2781

for there myght nothir shyldis nother harneyse holde their strokes .
CMMALORY-M4,191.2782

And so within a whyle they had bothe many grymme woundys
CMMALORY-M4,191.2783

and bledde passyng grevously . CMMALORY-M4,191.2784

Thus they fared two owres and more trasyng and rasyng eyther othir where
they myght hitte ony bare place . CMMALORY-M4,191.2785

Than at the laste they were brethles bothe , CMMALORY-M4,191.2786

and stode lenyng on her swerdys . CMMALORY-M4,191.2787

' Now , felow , ' seyde sir Terquyne , ' holde thy honde a whyle ,
CMMALORY-M4,191.2788

and telle me that I shall aske of the . ' CMMALORY-M4,191.2789

' Sey on , ' seyde sir Launcelot . CMMALORY-M4,191.2790

Than sir Terquyn seyde , ' Thou art the byggyst man that ever I mette
withall , and the beste-brethed , and as lyke one knyght that I hate
abovyn all other knyghtes . CMMALORY-M4,191.2791

So be hit that thou be not he , I woll lyghtly acorde with the ,
CMMALORY-M4,191.2792

and for thy love I woll delyver all the presoners that I have , that is
three_score_and_four , so thou wolde telle me thy name .
CMMALORY-M4,191.2793

And thou and I woll be felowys togedyrs and never to fayle the whyle
that I lyve . ' CMMALORY-M4,191.2794

' Ye sey well , ' seyde sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,191.2795

' but sytthyn hit is so that I have thy frendeshyppe and may have , what
knyght is that that thou hatyste abovyn all thynge ? '
CMMALORY-M4,191.2796

' Feythfully , ' seyde sir Terquyn , ' his name is sir Launcelot de Lake
, CMMALORY-M4,191.2797

for he slowe my brothir sir Carados at the Dolerous Towre , that was one
of the beste knyghtes on lyve ; CMMALORY-M4,191.2798

and therefore hym I excepte of alle knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,191.2799

for may I hym onys mete , the tone shall make an ende , I make myne avow
. CMMALORY-M4,191.2800

And for sir Launcelottis sake I have slayne an_hondred good knyghtes ,
CMMALORY-M4,191.2801

and as many I have maymed all uttirly , that they myght never aftir
helpe themself , CMMALORY-M4,191.2802

and many have dyed in preson . CMMALORY-M4,191.2803

And yette have I three_score_and_four , CMMALORY-M4,191.2804

and all $shal be delyverde , so thou wolte telle me thy name , so be hit
that thou be nat sir Launcelot . ' CMMALORY-M4,191.2805

' Now se I well , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' that suche a man I myght be
, I myght have pease ; CMMALORY-M4,191.2806

and suche a man I <em> myghte be <$$em> that there sholde be mortall
warre betwyxte us . CMMALORY-M4,191.2807

And now , sir knyght , at thy requeste I woll that thou wete and know
that I am sir Launcelot du Lake , kynge Bannys son of Benwyke , and
verry knyght of the Table Rounde . CMMALORY-M4,191.2808

And now I defyghe the , CMMALORY-M4,191.2809

and do thy beste ! ' CMMALORY-M4,191.2810

' A ! ' seyde sir Tarquyne , ' thou arte to me moste welcom of <P_192>
ony knyght , CMMALORY-M4,192.2811

for we shall never departe tylle the tone of us be dede . '
CMMALORY-M4,192.2812

Than they hurteled togedyrs as two wylde bullys , russhynge and
laysshyng with hir shyldis and swerdys , that somtyme they felle bothe
on their nosys . CMMALORY-M4,192.2813

Thus they foughte stylle two owres and more CMMALORY-M4,192.2814

and never wolde have reste , CMMALORY-M4,192.2815

and sir Tarquyne gaff sir Launcelot many woundys , that all the grounde
there@ @as they faughte was all besparcled with bloode .
CMMALORY-M4,192.2816

Than at the laste sir Terquyne wexed faynte CMMALORY-M4,192.2817

and gaff somwhat abakke , CMMALORY-M4,192.2818

and bare his shylde low for wery . CMMALORY-M4,192.2819

That aspyed sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,192.2820

and lepte uppon hym fersly CMMALORY-M4,192.2821

and gate hym by the bavoure of hys helmette CMMALORY-M4,192.2822

and plucked hym downe on his kneis , CMMALORY-M4,192.2823

and anone he raced of his helme CMMALORY-M4,192.2824

and smote his necke in sundir . CMMALORY-M4,192.2825

And when sir Launcelot had done this he yode unto the damesell
CMMALORY-M4,192.2826

and seyde , ' Damesell , I am redy to go with you where ye woll have me
, CMMALORY-M4,192.2827

but I have no horse . ' CMMALORY-M4,192.2828

' Fayre sir , ' seyde this wounded knyght , ' take my horse ,
CMMALORY-M4,192.2829

and than lette me go into this maner and delyver all thes presoners . '
CMMALORY-M4,192.2830

So he toke sir Gaheris horse CMMALORY-M4,192.2831

and prayde hym nat to be greved . CMMALORY-M4,192.2832

' Nay , fayre lorde , I woll that ye have hym at your commaunde-mente ,
CMMALORY-M4,192.2833

for ye have bothe saved me and my horse . CMMALORY-M4,192.2834

And this day I sey ye ar the beste knyght in the worlde ,
CMMALORY-M4,192.2835

for ye have slayne this day in my syght the myghtyeste man and the beste
knyght excepte you that ever I sawe . CMMALORY-M4,192.2836

But , fayre sir , ' seyde sir Gaherys , ' I pray you telle me your name
. ' CMMALORY-M4,192.2837

' Sir , my name is sir Launcelot du Lake that ought to helpe you of
ryght for kynge Arthurs sake , and in especiall for my lorde sir Gawayne
his sake , youre owne brother . CMMALORY-M4,192.2838

And when that ye com within yondir maner , I am sure ye shall fynde
there many knyghtes of the Rounde Table ; CMMALORY-M4,192.2839

for I have sene many of their shyldys that I know hongys on yondir tre .
CMMALORY-M4,192.2840

There is sir Kayes shylde , <em> and sir Brandeles shylde <$$em> , and
sir Galyhuddys shylde , and sir Bryan de Lystenoyse his shylde , and sir
Alydukis shylde , with many mo that I am nat now avysed of , and sir
Marhaus , and also my too brethirne shyldis , sir Ector de Marys and sir
Lyonell . Wherefore I pray you grete them all frome me and sey that I
bydde them to take suche stuff there as they fynde , that in ony wyse my
too brethirne go unto <P_193> the courte and abyde me there tylle that I
com , CMMALORY-M4,193.2841

for by the feste of Pentecoste I caste me to be there ; for as at thys
tyme I muste ryde with this damesel for to save my promyse . '
CMMALORY-M4,193.2842

And so they departed frome Gaherys ; CMMALORY-M4,193.2843

and Gaherys yode into the maner , CMMALORY-M4,193.2844

and there he founde a yoman porter kepyng many keyes .
CMMALORY-M4,193.2845

Than sir Gaherys threw the porter unto the grounde CMMALORY-M4,193.2846

and toke the keyes frome hym ; CMMALORY-M4,193.2847

and hastely he opynde the preson dore , CMMALORY-M4,193.2848

and there he lette all the presoners oute , CMMALORY-M4,193.2849

and every man lowsed other of their bondys . CMMALORY-M4,193.2850

And when they sawe sir Gaherys , all they thanked hym ,
CMMALORY-M4,193.2851

for they wente that he had slayne sir Terquyne because that he was
wounded . CMMALORY-M4,193.2852

' Not so , syrs , ' seyde sir Gaherys , CMMALORY-M4,193.2853

' hit was sir Launcelot that slew hym worshypfully with his owne hondys
, CMMALORY-M4,193.2854

and he gretys you all well CMMALORY-M4,193.2855

and prayeth you to haste you to the courte . CMMALORY-M4,193.2856

And as unto you , sir Lyonell and sir Ector de Marys , he prayeth you to
abyde hym at the courte of kynge Arthure . ' CMMALORY-M4,193.2857

' That shall we nat do , ' seyde his bretherne . CMMALORY-M4,193.2858

' We woll fynde hym and we may lyve . ' CMMALORY-M4,193.2859

' So shall I , ' seyde sir Kay , ' fynde hym or I com to the courte , as
I am trew knyght . ' CMMALORY-M4,193.2860

Than they sought the house there@ @as the armour was ,
CMMALORY-M4,193.2861

and than they armed them ; CMMALORY-M4,193.2862

and every knyght founde hys owne horse and all that longed unto hym .
CMMALORY-M4,193.2863

So forthwith there com a foster with four horsys lade with fatte venyson
. CMMALORY-M4,193.2864

And anone sir Kay seyde , ' Here is good mete for us for one meale ,
CMMALORY-M4,193.2865

for we had not many a day no good repaste . ' CMMALORY-M4,193.2866

And so that venyson was rosted , sodde , and bakyn ;
CMMALORY-M4,193.2867

and so aftir souper som abode there all nyght . CMMALORY-M4,193.2868

But sir Lyonell and sir Ector de Marys and sir Kay rode aftir sir
Launcelot to fynde hym yf they myght . CMMALORY-M4,193.2869

Now turne we to sir Launcelot that rode with the damesel in a fayre
hygheway . CMMALORY-M4,193.2870

' Sir , ' seyde the damesell , ' here by this way hauntys a knyght that
dystressis all ladyes and jantylwomen , CMMALORY-M4,193.2871

and at the leste he robbyth them CMMALORY-M4,193.2872

other lyeth by hem . ' CMMALORY-M4,193.2873

' What ? ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' is he a theff and a knyght ? And a
ravyssher of women ? CMMALORY-M4,193.2874

He doth shame unto the Order of Knyght-hode , and contrary unto his oth
. CMMALORY-M4,193.2875

Hit is pyte` that he lyvyth ! CMMALORY-M4,193.2876

But , <P_194> fayre damesel , ye shall ryde on before youreself ,
CMMALORY-M4,194.2877

and I woll kepe myself in coverte ; CMMALORY-M4,194.2878

and yf that he trowble yow other dystresse you I shall be your rescowe
and lerne hym to be ruled as a knyght . ' CMMALORY-M4,194.2879

So thys mayde rode on by the way a souffte amblynge pace ,
CMMALORY-M4,194.2880

and within a whyle com oute a knyght on $horsebak owte of the woode and
his page with hym . CMMALORY-M4,194.2881

And there he put the damesell frome hir horse , CMMALORY-M4,194.2882

and than she cryed . CMMALORY-M4,194.2883

With that com sir Launcelot as faste as he myght tyll he com to the
knyght , sayng , ' A , false knyght and traytoure unto knyghthode , who
dud lerne the to distresse ladyes , damesels and jantyllwomen ? '
CMMALORY-M4,194.2884

Whan the knyght sy sir Launcelot thus rebukynge hym he answerde nat ,
CMMALORY-M4,194.2885

but drew his swerde CMMALORY-M4,194.2886

and rode unto sir Launcelot . CMMALORY-M4,194.2887

And sir Launcelot threw his spere frome hym CMMALORY-M4,194.2888

and drew his swerde , CMMALORY-M4,194.2889

and strake hym suche a buffette on the helmette that he claffe his hede
and necke unto the throte . CMMALORY-M4,194.2890

' Now haste thou thy paymente that longe thou haste deserved ! '
CMMALORY-M4,194.2891

' That is trouth , ' seyde the damesell , CMMALORY-M4,194.2892

' for lyke as Terquyn wacched to dystresse good knyghtes , so dud this
knyght attende to destroy and dystresse ladyes , damesels and
jantyllwomen ; CMMALORY-M4,194.2893

and his name was sir Perys de Foreste Savage . ' CMMALORY-M4,194.2894

' Now , damesell , ' seyde sir Launcelot ' woll ye ony more servyse of
me ? ' CMMALORY-M4,194.2895

' Nay , sir , ' she seyde , ' at thys tyme , CMMALORY-M4,194.2896

but Allmyghty Jesu preserve you wheresomever ye ryde or goo ,
CMMALORY-M4,194.2897

for the curteyst knyght thou arte , and mekyste unto all ladyes and
jantylwomen that now lyvyth . CMMALORY-M4,194.2898

But one thyng , sir knyght , me@ @thynkes ye lak , ye that ar a knyght
wyveles , that ye woll nat love som mayden other jantylwoman .
CMMALORY-M4,194.2899

For I cowde never here sey that ever ye loved ony of no maner of degre`
, CMMALORY-M4,194.2900

and that is grete pyte` . CMMALORY-M4,194.2901

But hit is noysed that ye love quene Gwenyvere , and that she hath
ordeyned by enchauntemente that ye shall never love none other but hir ,
nother none other damesell ne lady shall rejoyce you ; $wherefore there
be many in this londe , of hyghe astate and lowe , that make grete sorow
. ' CMMALORY-M4,194.2902

' Fayre damesell , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' I may nat warne peple to
speke of me what hit pleasyth hem . CMMALORY-M4,194.2903

But for to be a weddyd man , I thynke hit nat , CMMALORY-M4,194.2904

for than I muste couche with hir and leve armys and turnamentis ,
batellys and adventures . CMMALORY-M4,194.2905

And as for to sey to take my <P_195> pleasaunce with peramours , that
woll I refuse : in prencipall for drede of God , CMMALORY-M4,195.2906

for knyghtes that bene adventures sholde nat be advoutrers nothir
lecherous , CMMALORY-M4,195.2907

for than they be nat happy nother fortunate unto the werrys ;
CMMALORY-M4,195.2908

for other they shall be overcome with a sympler knyght than they be
hemself , CMMALORY-M4,195.2909

other ellys they shall sle by unhappe and hir cursednesse bettir men
than they be hemself . CMMALORY-M4,195.2910

And so who that usyth peramours shall be unhappy , and all thynge
un-happy that is aboute them . ' CMMALORY-M4,195.2911

And so sir Launcelot and she departed . CMMALORY-M4,195.2912

And than he rode in a depe foreste two dayes and more ,
CMMALORY-M4,195.2913

and hadde strayte lodgynge . CMMALORY-M4,195.2914

So on the thirde day he rode on a longe brydge , CMMALORY-M4,195.2915

and there sterte uppon hym suddeynly a passyng foule carle .
CMMALORY-M4,195.2916

And he smote his horse on the nose , that he turned aboute ,
CMMALORY-M4,195.2917

and asked hym why he rode over that brydge withoute lycence .
CMMALORY-M4,195.2918

' Why sholde I nat ryde this way ? ' seyde sir Launcelotte ,
CMMALORY-M4,195.2919

' I may not ryde besyde . ' CMMALORY-M4,195.2920

' Thou shalt not chose , ' seyde the carle , CMMALORY-M4,195.2921

and laysshed at hym with a grete club shodde with iron .
CMMALORY-M4,195.2922

Than sir Launcelot drew his swerde CMMALORY-M4,195.2923

and put the stroke abacke , CMMALORY-M4,195.2924

and clave his hede unto the pappys . CMMALORY-M4,195.2925

And at the ende of the brydge was a fayre vyllage , CMMALORY-M4,195.2926

and all peple , men and women , cryed on sir Launcelot
CMMALORY-M4,195.2927

and sayde , ' Sir knyght , a worse dede duddyst thou never for thyself ,
CMMALORY-M4,195.2928

for thou haste slayne the cheyff porter of oure castell . '
CMMALORY-M4,195.2929

Sir Launcelot lete hem sey what they wolde , CMMALORY-M4,195.2930

and streyte he rode into the castelle . CMMALORY-M4,195.2931

And when he come into the castell he alyght CMMALORY-M4,195.2932

and tyed his horse to a rynge on the walle . CMMALORY-M4,195.2933

And there he sawe a fayre grene courte , CMMALORY-M4,195.2934

and thydir he dressid hym , CMMALORY-M4,195.2935

for there hym thought was a fayre place to feyght in .
CMMALORY-M4,195.2936

So he loked aboute hym CMMALORY-M4,195.2937

and sye muche peple in dorys and in wyndowys that sayde , ' Fayre
knyghte , thou arte unhappy to com here ! ' CMMALORY-M4,195.2938

Anone withall there com uppon hym two grete gyauntis well armed all save
there $hedys , with two horryble clubbys in their hondys .
CMMALORY-M4,195.2939

Sir Launcelot put his shylde before hym CMMALORY-M4,195.2940

and put the stroke away of that one gyaunte , CMMALORY-M4,195.2941

and with hys swerde he clave his hede in sundir . CMMALORY-M4,195.2942

Whan his felowe sawe that , he ran away as he were woode , and sir
Launcelot aftir hym with all his myght , CMMALORY-M4,195.2943

and smote hym on the shuldir CMMALORY-M4,195.2944

and clave hym to the navyll . CMMALORY-M4,195.2945

<P_196>

Than sir Launcelot wente into the halle , CMMALORY-M4,196.2947

and there com afore hym three_score of ladyes and damesels ,
CMMALORY-M4,196.2948

and all kneled unto hym CMMALORY-M4,196.2949

and thanked God and hym of his delyveraunce . CMMALORY-M4,196.2950

' For , ' they seyde , ' the moste party of us have bene here this seven
yere presoners , CMMALORY-M4,196.2951

and we have worched all maner of sylke workys for oure mete ,
CMMALORY-M4,196.2952

and we are all grete jentylwomen borne . CMMALORY-M4,196.2953

And blyssed be the tyme , knyght , that ever thou were borne ,
CMMALORY-M4,196.2954

for thou haste done the moste worshyp that ever ded knyght in this
worlde ; CMMALORY-M4,196.2955

that woll we beare recorde . CMMALORY-M4,196.2956

And we all pray you to telle us your name , that we may telle oure
frendis who delyverde us oute of preson . ' CMMALORY-M4,196.2957

' Fayre damesellys , ' he seyde , ' my name is sir Launcelot du Laake .
' CMMALORY-M4,196.2958

' A , sir , ' seyde they all , ' well mayste thou be he ,
CMMALORY-M4,196.2959

for ellys save yourself , as we demed , there myght never knyght have
the bettir of thes jyauntis ; CMMALORY-M4,196.2960

for many fayre knyghtes have assayed , CMMALORY-M4,196.2961

and here have ended . CMMALORY-M4,196.2962

And many tymes have we here wysshed aftir you , CMMALORY-M4,196.2963

and thes two gyauntes dredde never knyght but you . '
CMMALORY-M4,196.2964

' Now may ye sey , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' unto your frendys <em> how
and who hath delyverde you , <$$em> and grete them all fro me ; and yf
that I com in ony of your marchys , shew me such chere as ye have cause
. CMMALORY-M4,196.2965

And what tresoure that there is in this castel I yeff hit you for a
rewarde for your grevaunces . CMMALORY-M4,196.2966

And the lorde that is the ownere of this castel , I wolde he ressayved
hit as his ryght . ' CMMALORY-M4,196.2967

' Fayre sir , ' they seyde , ' the name of this castell is called
Tyntagyll , CMMALORY-M4,196.2968

and a deuke ought hit somtyme that had wedded fayre Igrayne ,
CMMALORY-M4,196.2969

and so aftir that she was wedded to Uther Pendragon ,
CMMALORY-M4,196.2970

and he gate on hir Arthure . ' CMMALORY-M4,196.2971

' Well , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' I undirstonde to whom this castel
longith . ' CMMALORY-M4,196.2972

And so he departed frome them CMMALORY-M4,196.2973

and betaught hem unto God . CMMALORY-M4,196.2974

And than he mounted uppon his horse CMMALORY-M4,196.2975

and rode into many stronge countreyes and thorow many watyrs and valeyes
, CMMALORY-M4,196.2976

and evyll was he lodged . CMMALORY-M4,196.2977

And at the laste by fortune hym happynd ayenste nyght to come to a fayre
courtelage , CMMALORY-M4,196.2978

and therein he founde an olde jantylwoman that lodged hym with goode
wyll ; CMMALORY-M4,196.2979

and there he had good chere for hym and his horse .
CMMALORY-M4,196.2980

And when tyme was his oste brought hym into a garret over the gate to
his bedde . CMMALORY-M4,196.2981

There sir <P_197> Launcelot unarmed hym CMMALORY-M4,197.2982

and set his harneyse by hym CMMALORY-M4,197.2983

and wente to bedde , CMMALORY-M4,197.2984

and anone he felle on slepe . CMMALORY-M4,197.2985

So aftir there com one on horsebak CMMALORY-M4,197.2986

and knokked at the gate in grete haste . CMMALORY-M4,197.2987

Whan sir Launcelot herde this he arose up CMMALORY-M4,197.2988

and loked oute at the wyndowe , CMMALORY-M4,197.2989

and sygh by the moonelyght three knyghtes com rydyng aftir that one man
, and all three laysshynge on hym at onys with swerdys ;
CMMALORY-M4,197.2990

and that one knyght turned on hem knyghtly agayne CMMALORY-M4,197.2991

and defended hym . CMMALORY-M4,197.2992

' Truly , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' yondir one knyght shall I helpe ,
CMMALORY-M4,197.2993

for hit were shame for me to se three knyghtes on one ,
CMMALORY-M4,197.2994

and yf $he be there slayne I am partener of his deth . '
CMMALORY-M4,197.2995

And therewith he toke his harneys CMMALORY-M4,197.2996

and wente oute at a wyndowe by a shete downe to the four knyghtes .
CMMALORY-M4,197.2997

And than sir Launcelot seyde on hyght , ' Turne you , knyghtis , unto me
, CMMALORY-M4,197.2998

and leve this feyghtyng with that knyght ! ' CMMALORY-M4,197.2999

And than they three leffte sir Kay CMMALORY-M4,197.3000

and turned unto sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,197.3001

and <em> there beganne grete batayle , CMMALORY-M4,197.3002

for they alyghte all three CMMALORY-M4,197.3003

and strake many grete strokes at sir Launcelot CMMALORY-M4,197.3004

and <$$em> assayled hym on every honde . CMMALORY-M4,197.3005

Than sir Kay dressid hym to have holpen sir Launcelot .
CMMALORY-M4,197.3006

' Nay , sir , ' sayde he , ' I woll none of your helpe .
CMMALORY-M4,197.3007

Therefore , as ye woll have my helpe , lette me alone with hem . '
CMMALORY-M4,197.3008

Sir Kay for the plesure of that knyght suffyrd hym for to do his wylle
CMMALORY-M4,197.3009

and so stoode on syde . CMMALORY-M4,197.3010

Than anone within seven strokys sir Launcelot had strykyn hem to the
erthe . CMMALORY-M4,197.3011

And than they all three cryed , ' Sir knyght , we yelde us unto you as a
man of myght makeles . ' CMMALORY-M4,197.3012

' As to that , I woll nat take youre yeldyng unto me , but so that ye
woll yelde you unto thys knyght ; CMMALORY-M4,197.3013

and on that covenaunte I woll save youre lyvys , and ellys nat . '
CMMALORY-M4,197.3014

' Fayre knyght , that were us loth , CMMALORY-M4,197.3015

for as for that knyght , we chaced hym hydir , CMMALORY-M4,197.3016

and had overcom hym , had nat ye bene . CMMALORY-M4,197.3017

Therefore to yelde us unto hym hit were no reson . '
CMMALORY-M4,197.3018

' Well , as to that , avyse you well , CMMALORY-M4,197.3019

for ye may chose whether ye woll dye other lyve . CMMALORY-M4,197.3020

For and ye be yolden hit shall be unto sir Kay . ' CMMALORY-M4,197.3021

' Now , fayre knyght , ' they seyde , ' in savyng of oure lyvys , we
woll do as thou commaundys us . ' CMMALORY-M4,197.3022

' Than shall ye , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' on Whytsonday nexte commynge
go unto the courte of kynge Arthure , CMMALORY-M4,197.3023

and there shall ye yelde <P_198> you unto quene Gwenyvere and putte you
all three in hir grace and mercy , and say that sir Kay sente you thydir
to be her presoners . ' CMMALORY-M4,198.3024

' Sir , ' they seyde , ' hit shall be done , by the feyth of oure bodyes
, and we be men lyvyng . ' CMMALORY-M4,198.3025

And there they sware every knyght uppon his swerde ,
CMMALORY-M4,198.3026

and so sir Launcelot suffyrd hem to departe . CMMALORY-M4,198.3027

And than sir Launcelot cnocked at the gate with the pomell of his swerde
; CMMALORY-M4,198.3028

and with that come his oste , CMMALORY-M4,198.3029

and in they entyrd , he and sir Kay . CMMALORY-M4,198.3030

' Sir , ' seyde his oste , ' I wente ye had bene in your bed . '
CMMALORY-M4,198.3031

' So I was , CMMALORY-M4,198.3032

but I arose and lepe oute at my wyndow for to helpe an olde felowe of
myne . ' CMMALORY-M4,198.3033

So when they come nye the lyght sir Kay knew well hit was sir Launcelot
, CMMALORY-M4,198.3034

and therewith he kneled downe CMMALORY-M4,198.3035

and thanked hym of all his kyndenesse , that he had holpyn hym twyse
frome the deth . CMMALORY-M4,198.3036

' Sir , ' he seyde , ' I have nothyng done but that me ought for to do .
CMMALORY-M4,198.3037

And ye ar welcom , CMMALORY-M4,198.3038

and here shall ye repose you and take your reste . '
CMMALORY-M4,198.3039

Whan sir Kay was unarmed he asked aftir mete . CMMALORY-M4,198.3040

Anone there was mete fette for hym CMMALORY-M4,198.3041

and he ete strongly . CMMALORY-M4,198.3042

And when he had sowped they wente to their beddys CMMALORY-M4,198.3043

and were lodged togydyrs in one bed . CMMALORY-M4,198.3044

So on the morne sir Launcelot arose erly CMMALORY-M4,198.3045

and leffte sir Kay slepyng . CMMALORY-M4,198.3046

And sir Launcelot toke sir Kayes armoure and his shylde
CMMALORY-M4,198.3047

and armed hym ; CMMALORY-M4,198.3048

and so he wente to the stable CMMALORY-M4,198.3049

and sadylde his horse , CMMALORY-M4,198.3050

and toke his leve of his oste CMMALORY-M4,198.3051

and departed . CMMALORY-M4,198.3052

Than sone aftir arose sir Kay CMMALORY-M4,198.3053

and myssid sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,198.3054

and than he aspyed that he had his armoure and his horse .
CMMALORY-M4,198.3055

' Now , be my fayth , I know welle that he woll greve som of the courte
of kyng Arthure , CMMALORY-M4,198.3056

for on hym knyghtes woll be bolde and deme that hit is I ,
CMMALORY-M4,198.3057

and that woll begyle them . CMMALORY-M4,198.3058

And bycause of his armoure and shylde I am sure I shall ryde in pease .
' CMMALORY-M4,198.3059

And than sone sir Kay departed CMMALORY-M4,198.3060

and thanked his oste . CMMALORY-M4,198.3061

Now turne we unto sir Launcelot du Lake that com home two dayes before
the feste of Pentecoste , CMMALORY-M4,198.3062

and the kynge and all the courte were passyng fayne .
CMMALORY-M4,198.3063

And when Gawayne , sir Uwayne , sir Sagramoure , and sir Ector de Mares
sye sir Launcelot in Kayes armour , than they wyste well that hit was he
that smote hem downe all wyth one spere . CMMALORY-M4,198.3064

Than there was lawghyng and smylyng amonge them , CMMALORY-M4,198.3065

Now turne we unto sir Launcelot that had ryddyn longe in a grete foreste
. CMMALORY-M4,198.3066

And at the laste he com unto a low countrey full of fayre ryvers and
fayre meedys ; CMMALORY-M4,198.3067

and before hym he sawe a longe brydge , CMMALORY-M4,198.3068

and three pavylyons stood thereon , of sylke and sendell of dyverse hew
. CMMALORY-M4,198.3069

And withoute the pavylyons hynge three whyght shyldys on trouncheouns of
sperys , CMMALORY-M4,198.3070

and grete longe sperys stood upryght by the pavylyons ,
CMMALORY-M4,198.3071

and at every pavylyon dore stoode three freysh knyghtes .
CMMALORY-M4,198.3072

<P_199>

And so sir Launcelot passed by hem CMMALORY-M4,199.3074

and spake no worde . CMMALORY-M4,199.3075

But whan he was paste the three knyghtes knew hym CMMALORY-M4,199.3076

and seyde hit was the proude sir Kay : CMMALORY-M4,199.3077

' He wenyth no knyght so good as he , CMMALORY-M4,199.3078

and the contrary is oftyn proved . CMMALORY-M4,199.3079

Be my fayth , ' seyde one of the knyghtes , his name was sir Gawtere , '
I woll ryde aftir hym and assay hym for all his pryde ;
CMMALORY-M4,199.3080

and ye may beholde how that I spede . ' CMMALORY-M4,199.3081

So sir Gawtere armed hym CMMALORY-M4,199.3082

and hynge his shylde uppon his sholdir , CMMALORY-M4,199.3083

and mounted uppon a grete horse , CMMALORY-M4,199.3084

and gate his speare in his honde , CMMALORY-M4,199.3085

and wallopte aftir sir Launcelot . CMMALORY-M4,199.3086

And whan he come nyghe hym he cryed , ' Abyde , thou proude knyght , sir
Kay ! CMMALORY-M4,199.3087

for thou shalt nat passe all quyte . ' CMMALORY-M4,199.3088

So sir Launcelot turned hym , CMMALORY-M4,199.3089

and eythir feautyrd their sperys CMMALORY-M4,199.3090

and com togedyrs with all their myghtes . CMMALORY-M4,199.3091

And sir Gawters speare brake , CMMALORY-M4,199.3092

but sir Launcelot smote hym downe horse and man . CMMALORY-M4,199.3093

And whan he was at the erthe his brethyrn seyde , ' Yondir knyght is nat
sir Kay , CMMALORY-M4,199.3094

for he is far bygger than he . ' CMMALORY-M4,199.3095

' I dare ley my hede , ' seyde sir Gylmere , ' yondir knyght hath slayne
sir Kay and hath takyn hys horse and harneyse . ' CMMALORY-M4,199.3096

' Whether hit be so other no , ' seyde sir Raynolde , ' lette us mounte
on oure horsys and rescow oure brothir , sir Gawtere .
CMMALORY-M4,199.3097

For payne of deth , we all shall have worke inow to macche that knyght ;
CMMALORY-M4,199.3098

for ever me@ @semyth by his persone hit is sir Launcelot other sir
Trystrams other sir Pelleas , the good knyght . CMMALORY-M4,199.3099

Than anone they toke their horsys CMMALORY-M4,199.3100

and overtoke sir Launcelot . CMMALORY-M4,199.3101

And sir Gylmere put forth his speare CMMALORY-M4,199.3102

and ran to sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,199.3103

and sir Launcelot smote hym downe , that he lay in a sowghe .
CMMALORY-M4,199.3104

' sir knyght , ' seyde sir Raynolde , ' thou arte a stronge man ,
CMMALORY-M4,199.3105

and as I suppose thou haste slayne my two bretherne , for the whyche
rysyth my herte sore agaynste the . CMMALORY-M4,199.3106

And yf I myght wyth my worshyppe I wolde not have ado with the ,
CMMALORY-M4,199.3107

but nedys I muste take suche parte as they do . CMMALORY-M4,199.3108

And therefore , knyght , kepe thyselfe ! ' CMMALORY-M4,199.3109

And so they hurtylde togydyrs with all their myghtes
CMMALORY-M4,199.3110

and all to-shevird bothe there spearys , CMMALORY-M4,199.3111

and than they drew hir swerdys CMMALORY-M4,199.3112

and laysshed togydir egirly . CMMALORY-M4,199.3113

Anone there $with_all arose sir Gawtere CMMALORY-M4,199.3114

and come unto his brother sir Gyllymere , CMMALORY-M4,199.3115

and bade hym aryse , CMMALORY-M4,199.3116

' and helpe we oure brothir , sir Raynolde , that yondir merveylously
macchyth yondir good knyght . ' CMMALORY-M4,199.3117

Therewithall they hurteled unto sir Launcelot . CMMALORY-M4,199.3118

<P_200>

And whan he sawe them com he smote a sore stroke unto sir Raynolde ,
that he felle of his horse to the grounde , CMMALORY-M4,200.3120

and than he caste to the othir two bretherne , CMMALORY-M4,200.3121

and at two strokys he strake hem downe to the erthe .
CMMALORY-M4,200.3122

Wyth that sir Raynolde gan up sterte with his hede all blody
CMMALORY-M4,200.3123

and com streyte unto sir Launcelot . CMMALORY-M4,200.3124

' Now let be , ' seyde sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,200.3125

' I was not far frome the whan thou were made knyght , sir Raynolde ,
CMMALORY-M4,200.3126

and also I know thou arte a good knyght , CMMALORY-M4,200.3127

and lothe I were to sle the . ' CMMALORY-M4,200.3128

' Gramercy , ' seyde sir Raynolde , ' of your goodnesse ,
CMMALORY-M4,200.3129

and I dare say as for me and my bretherne , $we woll nat be loth to
yelde us unto you , with that we know youre name ; CMMALORY-M4,200.3130

for welle we know ye ar not sir Kay . ' CMMALORY-M4,200.3131

' As for that , be as be may . CMMALORY-M4,200.3132

For ye shall yelde you unto dame Gwenyvere , CMMALORY-M4,200.3133

and loke that ye be there on Whytsonday and yelde you unto hir as
presoners , and sey that sir Kay sente you unto hir . '
CMMALORY-M4,200.3134

Than they swore hit sholde be done , CMMALORY-M4,200.3135

and $so passed forth sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,200.3136

and ecchone of the bretherne halpe other as well as they myght .
CMMALORY-M4,200.3137

So sir Launcelotte rode into a depe foreste , CMMALORY-M4,200.3138

and there by hym in a slade he sey four knyghtes hovynge undir an oke ,
CMMALORY-M4,200.3139

and they were of Arthurs courte : CMMALORY-M4,200.3140

one was sir Sagramour le Desyrus , and sir Ector de Marys , and sir
Gawayne , and sir Uwayne . CMMALORY-M4,200.3141

And anone as these four knyghtes had aspyed sir Launcelot they wende by
his armys that hit had bene sir Kay . CMMALORY-M4,200.3142

' Now , be my fayth , ' sayde sir Sagramoure , ' I woll preve sir Kayes
myght , ' CMMALORY-M4,200.3143

and gate his spere in his honde CMMALORY-M4,200.3144

and com towarde sir Launcelot . CMMALORY-M4,200.3145

Than sir Launcelot was ware of his commyng CMMALORY-M4,200.3146

and knew hym well , CMMALORY-M4,200.3147

and feautred his speare agaynste hym CMMALORY-M4,200.3148

and smote sir Sagramoure so sore that horse and man wente bothe to the
erthe . CMMALORY-M4,200.3149

' Lo , my felowys , ' seyde sir Ector , ' yondir may ye se what a
buffette he hath gyffen ! CMMALORY-M4,200.3150

Me@ @thynkyth that knyght is muche bygger than ever was sir Kay .
CMMALORY-M4,200.3151

Now shall ye se what I may do to hym . ' CMMALORY-M4,200.3152

So sir Ector gate his spere in his honde CMMALORY-M4,200.3153

and walopte towarde sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,200.3154

and sir Launcelot smote hym evyn thorow the shylde and his sholdir ,
that man and horse wente to the erthe , CMMALORY-M4,200.3155

and ever his spere helde . CMMALORY-M4,200.3156

<P_201>

' Be my fayth , ' sayde sir Uwayne , ' yondir is a stronge knyght ,
CMMALORY-M4,201.3158

and I am sure he hath slayne Kay . CMMALORY-M4,201.3159

And I se be his grete strengthe hit woll be harde to macche hym . '
CMMALORY-M4,201.3160

And therewithall sir Uwayne gate his speare CMMALORY-M4,201.3161

and rode towarde sir Launcelot . CMMALORY-M4,201.3162

And sir Launcelot knew hym well CMMALORY-M4,201.3163

and lette $his horse renne on the playne CMMALORY-M4,201.3164

and gaff hym suche a buffette that he was astooned ,
CMMALORY-M4,201.3165

and longe he wyste nat where he was . CMMALORY-M4,201.3166

' Now se I welle , ' seyde sir Gawayne , ' I muste encountir with that
knyght , ' CMMALORY-M4,201.3167

and dressed his shylde CMMALORY-M4,201.3168

and gate a good speare in his honde CMMALORY-M4,201.3169

and lete renne at sir Launcelot with all his myght ;
CMMALORY-M4,201.3170

and eyther knyght smote other in myddys of the shylde .
CMMALORY-M4,201.3171

But sir Gawaynes spere braste , CMMALORY-M4,201.3172

and sir Launcelot charged so sore uppon hym that his horse reversed
up-so-downe , CMMALORY-M4,201.3173

and muche sorow had sir Gawayne to avoyde his horse .
CMMALORY-M4,201.3174

And so sir Launcelot passed on a pace CMMALORY-M4,201.3175

and smyled CMMALORY-M4,201.3176

and seyde , ' God gyff hym joy that this spere made ,
CMMALORY-M4,201.3177

for there cam never a bettir in my honde . ' CMMALORY-M4,201.3178

Than the four knyghtes wente echone to other CMMALORY-M4,201.3179

and comforted each other . CMMALORY-M4,201.3180

' What sey ye by this geste , ' seyde sir Gawayne , ' that with one
spere hath felde us all four ? ' CMMALORY-M4,201.3181

' We commaunde hym to the devyll , ' they seyde all ,
CMMALORY-M4,201.3182

' for he is a man of grete myght . ' CMMALORY-M4,201.3183

' Ye may say hit well , ' seyde sir Gawayne , ' that he $is a man of
myght , CMMALORY-M4,201.3184

for I dare ley my hede hit is sir Launcelot : CMMALORY-M4,201.3185

I know hym well by his rydyng . ' CMMALORY-M4,201.3186

' Latte hym go , ' seyde sir Uwayne , CMMALORY-M4,201.3187

' for whan we com to the courte we shall wete . ' CMMALORY-M4,201.3188

Than had they much sorow to gete their horsis agayne .
CMMALORY-M4,201.3189

Now leve we there CMMALORY-M4,201.3190

and speke we of sir Launcelot that rode a grete whyle in a depe foreste
. CMMALORY-M4,201.3191

And as he rode he sawe a blak brachette sekyng in maner as hit had bene
in the feaute of an hurte dere . CMMALORY-M4,201.3192

And therewith he rode aftir the brachette CMMALORY-M4,201.3193

and he sawe lye on the grounde a large feaute of bloode .
CMMALORY-M4,201.3194

And than sir Launcelot rode faster , CMMALORY-M4,201.3195

and ever the brachette loked behynde hir , CMMALORY-M4,201.3196

and so she wente thorow a grete marys , CMMALORY-M4,201.3197

and ever sir Launcelot folowed . CMMALORY-M4,201.3198

And than was he ware of an olde maner , CMMALORY-M4,201.3199

and thydir ran the brachette and so over a brydge .
CMMALORY-M4,201.3200

So sir Launcelot rode over that brydge that was olde and feble ,
CMMALORY-M4,201.3201

and whan he com in the myddys of <P_202> a grete halle there he seye lye
dede a knyght that was a semely man , CMMALORY-M4,202.3202

and that brachette lycked his woundis . CMMALORY-M4,202.3203

And therewithall com oute a lady wepyng and wryngyng hir hondys ,
CMMALORY-M4,202.3204

and sayde , ' Knyght , to muche sorow hast thou brought me . '
CMMALORY-M4,202.3205

' Why sey ye so ? ' seyde sir Launcelot . CMMALORY-M4,202.3206

' I dede never this knyght no harme , CMMALORY-M4,202.3207

for hydir by the feaute of blood this brachet brought me .
CMMALORY-M4,202.3208

And therefore , fayre lady , be nat dyspleased with me ,
CMMALORY-M4,202.3209

for I am full sore agreved for your grevaunce . ' CMMALORY-M4,202.3210

' Truly , sir , ' she seyde , ' I trowe hit be nat ye that hath slayne
my husbonde , CMMALORY-M4,202.3211

for he that dud that dede is sore wounded CMMALORY-M4,202.3212

and is never lykly to be hole , CMMALORY-M4,202.3213

that shall I ensure hym . ' CMMALORY-M4,202.3214

' What was youre husbondes name ? ' seyde sir Launcelot .
CMMALORY-M4,202.3215

' Sir , his name was called sir Gylberd the Bastarde , one of the beste
knyghtys of the worlde , CMMALORY-M4,202.3216

and he that hath slayne hym I know nat his name . '
CMMALORY-M4,202.3217

' Now God sende you bettir comforte , ' seyde sir Launcelot .
CMMALORY-M4,202.3218

And so he departed CMMALORY-M4,202.3219

and wente into the foreste agayne , CMMALORY-M4,202.3220

and there he mette with a damesell the whyche knew hym well .
CMMALORY-M4,202.3221

And she seyde on lowde , ' Well be ye founde , my lorde .
CMMALORY-M4,202.3222

And now I requyre you of your knyghthode helpe my brother that is sore
wounded and never styntyth bledyng ; CMMALORY-M4,202.3223

for this day he fought with sir Gylberte the Bastarde
CMMALORY-M4,202.3224

and slew hym in playne batayle , CMMALORY-M4,202.3225

and there was my brother sore wounded . CMMALORY-M4,202.3226

And there is a lady , a sorseres , that dwellyth in a castel here bysyde
, CMMALORY-M4,202.3227

and this day she tolde me my brothers woundys sholde never be hole tyll
I coude fynde a knyght wolde go into the Chapel Perelus ,
CMMALORY-M4,202.3228

and there he sholde fynde a swerde and a blody cloth that the woundid
knyght was lapped in ; CMMALORY-M4,202.3229

and a pece of that cloth and that swerde sholde hele my brother , with
that his woundis were serched with the swerde and the cloth . '
CMMALORY-M4,202.3230

' This is a mervelouse thyng , ' seyde sir Launcelot ,
CMMALORY-M4,202.3231

' but what is your brothirs name ? ' CMMALORY-M4,202.3232

' Sir , ' she seyde , ' sir Melyot de Logyrs . ' CMMALORY-M4,202.3233

' That me repentys , ' seyde sir Launcelotte , CMMALORY-M4,202.3234

' for he is a felow of the Table Rounde , CMMALORY-M4,202.3235

and to his helpe I woll do my power . ' CMMALORY-M4,202.3236

Than she sayde , ' Sir , folow ye evyn this hygheway , and hit woll
brynge you to the Chapel Perelus , CMMALORY-M4,202.3237

and here I shall abyde tyll God <P_203> sende you agayne .
CMMALORY-M4,203.3238

And yf you spede nat I know no knyght lyvynge that may encheve that
adventure . ' CMMALORY-M4,203.3239

Ryght so sir Launcelot departed , CMMALORY-M4,203.3240

and whan he com to the Chapell Perelus he alyght downe
CMMALORY-M4,203.3241

and tyed his horse unto a lytyll gate . CMMALORY-M4,203.3242

And as sone as he was within the chyrche-yerde he sawe on the frunte of
the chapel many fayre ryche shyldis turned up-so-downe ,
CMMALORY-M4,203.3243

and many of tho shyldis sir Launcelot had sene knyghtes bere byforehande
. CMMALORY-M4,203.3244

With that he sawe by hym there stonde a_thirty grete knyghtes , more by
a yerde than any man that ever he had sene , CMMALORY-M4,203.3245

and all they grenned and gnasted at sir Launcelot .
CMMALORY-M4,203.3246

And whan he sawe their countenaunce he dredde hym sore ,
CMMALORY-M4,203.3247

and so put his shylde before hym CMMALORY-M4,203.3248

and toke his swerde in his honde redy unto batayle .
CMMALORY-M4,203.3249

And they all were armed all in blak harneyse , redy with her shyldis and
her swerdis redy drawyn . CMMALORY-M4,203.3250

And as sir Launcelot wolde have gone thorow them they skaterd on every
syde of hym CMMALORY-M4,203.3251

and gaff hym the way , CMMALORY-M4,203.3252

and therewith he wexed bolde CMMALORY-M4,203.3253

and entyrde into the chapel . CMMALORY-M4,203.3254

And there he sawe no lyght but a dymme lampe brennyng ,
CMMALORY-M4,203.3255

and than was he ware of a corpus hylled with a clothe of sylke .
CMMALORY-M4,203.3256

Than sir Launcelot stouped doune CMMALORY-M4,203.3257

and kutte a pese away of that cloth , CMMALORY-M4,203.3258

and than hit fared undir hym as the grounde had quaked a lytyll ;
CMMALORY-M4,203.3259

therewithall he feared . CMMALORY-M4,203.3260

And than he sawe a fayre swerde lye by the dede knyght ,
CMMALORY-M4,203.3261

and that he gate in his honde CMMALORY-M4,203.3262

and hyed hym oute of the chapell . CMMALORY-M4,203.3263

Anone as ever he was in the chapell-yerde all the knyghtes spake to hym
with grymly voyces CMMALORY-M4,203.3264

and seyde , ' Knyght , sir Launcelot , lay that swerde frome the or thou
shalt dye ! ' CMMALORY-M4,203.3265

' Whether that I lyve other dye , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' with no
wordys grete gete ye hit agayne . CMMALORY-M4,203.3266

Therefore fyght for hit and ye lyst . ' CMMALORY-M4,203.3267

Than ryght so he passed thorowoute them . CMMALORY-M4,203.3268

And byyonde the chappell-yarde there mette hym a fayre damesell
CMMALORY-M4,203.3269

and seyde , ' sir Launcelot , leve that swerde behynde the , other thou
wolt dye for hit . ' CMMALORY-M4,203.3270

' I leve hit not , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' for no thretyng . '
CMMALORY-M4,203.3271

' No , ' seyde she , ' and thou dyddyste leve that swerde quene
Gwenyvere sholde thou never se . ' CMMALORY-M4,203.3272

' Than were I a foole and I wolde leve this swerde . '
CMMALORY-M4,203.3273

<P_204>

' Now , jantyll knyghte , ' seyde the damesell , ' I requyre the to
kysse me but onys . ' CMMALORY-M4,204.3275

' Nay , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' that God me forbede . '
CMMALORY-M4,204.3276

' Well , sir , ' seyde she , ' and thou haddyst kyssed me thy lyff dayes
had be done . CMMALORY-M4,204.3277

And now , alas , ' she seyde , ' I have loste all my laboure ,
CMMALORY-M4,204.3278

for I ordeyned this chapell for thy sake and for sir Gawayne .
CMMALORY-M4,204.3279

And onys I had hym within me , CMMALORY-M4,204.3280

and at that tyme he fought with this knyght that lyeth dede in yondir
chapell , sir Gylberte the Bastarde , CMMALORY-M4,204.3281

and at that tyme he smote the lyffte honde of sir Gylberte .
CMMALORY-M4,204.3282

' And , sir Launcelot , now I telle the : I have loved the this seven
yere , CMMALORY-M4,204.3283

$but there may no woman have thy love but quene Gwenyver ;
CMMALORY-M4,204.3284

and sytthen I myght nat rejoyse the nother thy body on lyve , I had
kepte no more joy in this worlde but to have thy body dede .
CMMALORY-M4,204.3285

Than wolde I have bawmed hit and sered hit , and so to have kepte hit my
lyve dayes ; CMMALORY-M4,204.3286

and dayly I sholde have clypped the and kyssed the , dispyte of quene
Gwenyvere . ' CMMALORY-M4,204.3287

' Ye sey well , ' seyde sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,204.3288

' Jesu preserve me frome your subtyle crauftys ! ' CMMALORY-M4,204.3289

And therewithall he toke his horse CMMALORY-M4,204.3290

and so departed frome hir . CMMALORY-M4,204.3291

And as the booke seyth , whan sir Launcelot was departed she toke suche
sorow that she deyde within a fourtenyte ; CMMALORY-M4,204.3292

and hir name was called Hallewes the Sorseres , lady of the castell
Nygurmous . CMMALORY-M4,204.3293

And anone sir Launcelot mette with the damesel , sir Melyottis systir ,
CMMALORY-M4,204.3294

and whan she sawe hym she clapped hir hondys CMMALORY-M4,204.3295

and wepte for joy . CMMALORY-M4,204.3296

And than they rode into a castell thereby where lay sir Melyot ,
CMMALORY-M4,204.3297

and anone as sir Launcelot sye hym he knew hym , CMMALORY-M4,204.3298

but he was passyng paale as the erthe for bledynge .
CMMALORY-M4,204.3299

Whan sir Melyot saw sir Launcelot he kneled uppon his kneis
CMMALORY-M4,204.3300

and cryed on hyghte : ' A , lorde , sir Launcelot , helpe me anone ! '
CMMALORY-M4,204.3301

Than sir Launcelot lepe unto hym CMMALORY-M4,204.3302

and towched his woundys with sir Gylbardys swerde , CMMALORY-M4,204.3303

and than he wyped his woundys with a parte of the bloody cloth that sir
Gylbarde was wrapped in ; CMMALORY-M4,204.3304

and anone an holer man in his lyff was he never . CMMALORY-M4,204.3305

And than there was grete joy betwene hem , CMMALORY-M4,204.3306

and they made sir Launcelot all the chere that they myghte .
CMMALORY-M4,204.3307

And so on the morne sir Launcelot toke his leve CMMALORY-M4,204.3308

and bade sir Melyot hyghe hym ' to the courte of my lorde Arthure ,
CMMALORY-M4,204.3309

for hit drawyth nyghe to the feste of Pentecoste . CMMALORY-M4,204.3310

<P_205>

And there , by the grace of God , ye shall fynde me . '
CMMALORY-M4,205.3312

And therewith they departed . CMMALORY-M4,205.3313

And so sir Launcelot rode thorow many stronge contrayes , over mores and
valeis , tyll by fortune he com to a fayre castell .
CMMALORY-M4,205.3314

And as he paste beyonde the castell hym thought he herde bellys rynge ,
CMMALORY-M4,205.3315

and than he was ware of a faucon com over his hede fleyng towarde an
hyghe elme , and longe lunes aboute her feete . CMMALORY-M4,205.3316

And she flowe unto the elme to take hir perche , the lunes overcast
aboute a bowghe ; CMMALORY-M4,205.3317

and whan she wolde have tane hir flyght she hynge by the leggis faste .
CMMALORY-M4,205.3318

And sir Launcelot syghe how $she hynge , CMMALORY-M4,205.3319

and behelde the fayre faucon perygot ; CMMALORY-M4,205.3320

and he was sory for hir . CMMALORY-M4,205.3321

The meanewhyle cam a lady oute of a castell CMMALORY-M4,205.3322

and cryed on hyghe : CMMALORY-M4,205.3323

' A , Launcelot , Launcelot ! as thow arte a floure of all knyghtes ,
helpe me to gete me my hauke ; CMMALORY-M4,205.3324

for and my hauke be loste my lorde wolde destroy me ,
CMMALORY-M4,205.3325

for I kepte the hauke CMMALORY-M4,205.3326

and she slypped fro me . CMMALORY-M4,205.3327

And yf my lorde my husbande wete hit , he is so hasty that he wyll sle
me . ' CMMALORY-M4,205.3328

' What is your lordis name ? ' seyde sir Launcelot .
CMMALORY-M4,205.3329

' Sir , ' she seyde , ' his name is sir Phelot , a knyght that longyth
unto the kynge of North Galys . ' CMMALORY-M4,205.3330

' Well , fayre lady , syn that ye know my name and requyre me of
knyghthode to helpe , I woll do what I may to gete youre hauke ;
CMMALORY-M4,205.3331

and yet God knowyth I am an evyll clymber , CMMALORY-M4,205.3332

and the tre is passynge hyghe , and fewe bowys to helpe me withall . '
CMMALORY-M4,205.3333

And therewith sir Launcelot alyght CMMALORY-M4,205.3334

and tyed his horse to the same tre , CMMALORY-M4,205.3335

and prayde the lady to onarme hym . CMMALORY-M4,205.3336

And so whan he was unarmed , he put of all his clothis unto his shurte
and his breche , CMMALORY-M4,205.3337

and with myght and grete force he clambe up to the faucon
CMMALORY-M4,205.3338

and tyed the lunes to a grete rotyn boysh , CMMALORY-M4,205.3339

and threwe the hauke downe with the buysh . CMMALORY-M4,205.3340

And anone the lady gate the hauke in hir honde ; CMMALORY-M4,205.3341

and therewithall com oute sir Phelot oute of the grevys suddeynly , that
was hir husbonde , all armed and with his naked swerde in his honde ,
CMMALORY-M4,205.3342

and sayde , ' A knyght , sir Launcelot , now I have founde the as I
wolde , ' he stondyng at the boole of the tre to sle hym .
CMMALORY-M4,205.3343

' A , lady ! ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' why have ye betrayed me ? '
CMMALORY-M4,205.3344

' She hath done , ' seyde sir Phelot , ' but as I commaunded hir ,
CMMALORY-M4,205.3345

and <P_206> therefore there is none othir boote but thyne oure is com
that thou muste dye . ' CMMALORY-M4,206.3346

' That were shame unto the , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' thou an armed
knyght to sle a nakyd man by treson . ' CMMALORY-M4,206.3347

' Thou gettyste none other grace , ' seyde sir Phelot ,
CMMALORY-M4,206.3348

' and therefore helpe thyself and thou can . ' CMMALORY-M4,206.3349

' Truly , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' that shall be thy shame ;
CMMALORY-M4,206.3350

but syn thou wolt do none other , take myne harneys with the
CMMALORY-M4,206.3351

and hange my swerde there uppon a bowghe that I may gete hit ,
CMMALORY-M4,206.3352

and than do thy beste $to sle me and thou can . ' CMMALORY-M4,206.3353

' Nay , ' seyde sir Phelot , ' for I know the bettir than
{that_I_know_thee} thou wenyste . CMMALORY-M4,206.3354

Therefore thou gettyst no wepyn and I may kepe the therefro . '
CMMALORY-M4,206.3355

' Alas , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' that ever a knyght sholde dey
wepynles ! ' CMMALORY-M4,206.3356

And therewith he wayted above hym and undir hym , CMMALORY-M4,206.3357

and over hym above his hede he sawe a rowgh spyke , a bygge bowghe
leveles . CMMALORY-M4,206.3358

And therewith he brake hit of by the body , CMMALORY-M4,206.3359

and than he com lowar , CMMALORY-M4,206.3360

and awayted how his owne horse stoode , CMMALORY-M4,206.3361

and suddenyly he lepe on the farther syde of his horse froward the
knyght . CMMALORY-M4,206.3362

And than sir Phelot laysshed at hym egerly to have slayne hym ,
CMMALORY-M4,206.3363

but sir Launcelot put away the stroke with the rowgh spyke ,
CMMALORY-M4,206.3364

and therewith toke hym on the hede , that downe he felle in a sowghe to
the grounde . CMMALORY-M4,206.3365

So than sir Launcelot toke his swerde oute of his honde
CMMALORY-M4,206.3366

and strake his necke in two pecys . CMMALORY-M4,206.3367

' Alas ! ' than cryed that lady , ' why haste thou slayne my husbonde ?
' CMMALORY-M4,206.3368

' I am nat causer , ' seyde sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,206.3369

' but with falshede ye wolde have had me slayne with treson ,
CMMALORY-M4,206.3370

and now hit is fallyn on you bothe . ' CMMALORY-M4,206.3371

And than she sowned as though she wolde dey . CMMALORY-M4,206.3372

And therewith sir Launcelot gate all his armoure as well as he myght
CMMALORY-M4,206.3373

and put hit uppon hym for drede of more resseite , CMMALORY-M4,206.3374

for he dredde hym that the knyghtes castell was so nyghe hym ;
CMMALORY-M4,206.3375

and as sone as he myght he toke his horse CMMALORY-M4,206.3376

and departed , CMMALORY-M4,206.3377

and thanked God that he had escaped that harde adventure .
CMMALORY-M4,206.3378

So sir Launcelot rode many wylde wayes thorowoute morys and mares ,
CMMALORY-M4,206.3379

and as he rode in a valay , he sey a knyght chasyng a lady with <P_207>
a naked swerde to have slayne hir . CMMALORY-M4,207.3380

And by fortune , as this knyght sholde have slayne thys lady , she cryed
on sir Launcelot CMMALORY-M4,207.3381

and prayde hym to rescowe her . CMMALORY-M4,207.3382

Whan sir Launcelot sye that myschyff , he toke his horse
CMMALORY-M4,207.3383

and rode betwene hem , sayynge , ' Knyght , fye for shame , why wolte
thou sle this lady ? CMMALORY-M4,207.3384

Shame unto the and all knyghtes ! ' CMMALORY-M4,207.3385

' What haste thou to do betwyxte me and my wyff ? CMMALORY-M4,207.3386

I woll sle her magre` thyne hede . ' CMMALORY-M4,207.3387

' That shall ye nat , ' sayde sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,207.3388

' for rather we woll have ado togydyrs . ' CMMALORY-M4,207.3389

' sir Launcelot , ' seyde the knyght , ' thou doste nat thy parte ,
CMMALORY-M4,207.3390

for thys lady hath betrayed me . ' CMMALORY-M4,207.3391

' Hit is not so , ' seyde the lady , CMMALORY-M4,207.3392

' truly , he seyth wronge on me . CMMALORY-M4,207.3393

And for bycause I love $and cherysshe my cousyn jarmayne , he is jolowse
betwyxte me and hym ; CMMALORY-M4,207.3394

and as I mutte answere to God there was never sene betwyxte us none
suche thynges . CMMALORY-M4,207.3395

But , sir , ' seyde the lady , ' as thou arte called the worshypfullyest
knyght of the worlde , I requyre the of trewe knyghthode , kepe me and
save me , CMMALORY-M4,207.3396

for whatsomever he sey he woll sle me , CMMALORY-M4,207.3397

for he is withoute mercy . ' CMMALORY-M4,207.3398

' Have ye no doute : CMMALORY-M4,207.3399

hit shalle nat lye in his power . ' CMMALORY-M4,207.3400

' sir , ' seyde the knyght , ' in your syght I woll be ruled as ye woll
have me . ' CMMALORY-M4,207.3401

And so sir Launcelot rode on the one syde and she on the other syde .
CMMALORY-M4,207.3402

And he had nat redyn but a whyle but the knyght bade sir Launcelot turne
hym and loke behynde hym , and seyde , ' sir , yondir com men of armys
aftir $us rydynge . ' CMMALORY-M4,207.3403

And so sir Launcelot turned hym CMMALORY-M4,207.3404

and thought no treson ; CMMALORY-M4,207.3405

and therewith was the knyght and the lady on one syde ,
CMMALORY-M4,207.3406

and suddeynly he swapped of the ladyes hede . CMMALORY-M4,207.3407

And whan sir Launcelot had aspyed hym what he had done , he seyde and so
called hym : ' Traytoure , thou haste shamed me for evir ! '
CMMALORY-M4,207.3408

And suddeynly sir Launcelot alyght of his horse CMMALORY-M4,207.3409

and pulde oute his swerde to sle hym . CMMALORY-M4,207.3410

And therewithall he felle to the erthe CMMALORY-M4,207.3411

and gryped sir Launcelot by the thyghes CMMALORY-M4,207.3412

and cryed mercy . CMMALORY-M4,207.3413

' Fye on the , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' thou shamefull knyght !
CMMALORY-M4,207.3414

Thou mayste have no mercy : CMMALORY-M4,207.3415

therefore aryse CMMALORY-M4,207.3416

and fyghte with me ! ' CMMALORY-M4,207.3417

<P_208>

' Nay , ' sayde the knyght , ' I woll never aryse tyll ye graunte me
mercy . ' CMMALORY-M4,208.3419

' Now woll I proffyr the fayre : CMMALORY-M4,208.3420

I woll unarme me unto my shyrte , CMMALORY-M4,208.3421

<em> and I woll have nothynge upon me but my shyrte <$$em> and my swerde
in my honde , CMMALORY-M4,208.3422

and yf thou can sle me , quyte be thou for ever . '
CMMALORY-M4,208.3423

' Nay , sir , that woll I never . ' CMMALORY-M4,208.3424

' Well , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' take this lady and the hede ,
CMMALORY-M4,208.3425

and bere $it uppon the ; CMMALORY-M4,208.3426

and here shalt thou swere uppon my swerde to bere hit allwayes uppon thy
bak and never to reste tyll thou com to my lady , quene Gwenyver . '
CMMALORY-M4,208.3427

' sir , that woll I do , by the feyth of my $body . '
CMMALORY-M4,208.3428

' Now what is youre name ? ' CMMALORY-M4,208.3429

' sir , my name is sir $Pedyvere . ' CMMALORY-M4,208.3430

' In a shamefull oure were thou borne , ' seyde sir Launcelot .
CMMALORY-M4,208.3431

So sir Pedyvere departed with the lady dede and the hede togydir ,
CMMALORY-M4,208.3432

and founde the quene with kynge Arthure at Wynchestir ;
CMMALORY-M4,208.3433

and there he tolde all the trouthe . CMMALORY-M4,208.3434

' sir knyght , ' seyde the quene , ' this is an horryble dede and a
shamefull , and a grete rebuke unto sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,208.3435

but natwythstondyng his worshyp is knowyn in many dyverse contreis .
CMMALORY-M4,208.3436

But this shall I gyff you in penaunce : CMMALORY-M4,208.3437

make ye as good skyffte as ye can , CMMALORY-M4,208.3438

ye shall bere this lady with you on horsebak unto the Pope of Rome , and
of hym resseyve youre penaunce for your foule dedis .
CMMALORY-M4,208.3439

And ye shall nevir reste one nyght there@ @as ye do another ,
CMMALORY-M4,208.3440

and ye go to ony bedde the dede body shall lye with you . '
CMMALORY-M4,208.3441

This oth he there made CMMALORY-M4,208.3442

and so departed . CMMALORY-M4,208.3443

And as hit tellyth in the Frenshe booke , whan he com unto Rome the Pope
there bade hym go agayne unto quene Gwenyver , CMMALORY-M4,208.3444

and in Rome was his lady buryed by the Popys commaundement .
CMMALORY-M4,208.3445

And after thys knyght sir Pedyvere fell to grete goodnesse
CMMALORY-M4,208.3446

and was an holy man and an hermyte . CMMALORY-M4,208.3447

<P_209>

and ever now and now com all the knyghtes home that were presoners with
sir Terquyn , CMMALORY-M4,209.3449

and they all honoured sir Launcelot . CMMALORY-M4,209.3450

Whan sir Gaherys herde $hem speke he sayde , ' I sawe all the batayle
from the begynnynge to the endynge , ' CMMALORY-M4,209.3451

and there he tolde kynge Arthure all how hit was and how sir Terquyn was
the strongest knyght that ever he saw $excepte sir Launcelot ;
CMMALORY-M4,209.3452

and there were many knyghtes bare hym recorde , three_score .
CMMALORY-M4,209.3453

Than sir Kay tolde the kynge how sir Launcelot rescowed hym when he
sholde have bene slayne , and how ' he made the three knyghtes yelde hem
to me and nat to hym . ' CMMALORY-M4,209.3454

And there they were all three CMMALORY-M4,209.3455

and bare recorde . CMMALORY-M4,209.3456

' And by Jesu , ' seyde sir Kay , ' sir Launcelot toke my harneyse
CMMALORY-M4,209.3457

and leffte me his , CMMALORY-M4,209.3458

and I rode in Goddys pece CMMALORY-M4,209.3459

and no man wolde have ado with me . ' CMMALORY-M4,209.3460

Anone therewith com three knyghtes that fought with sir Launce-lot at
the longe brydge ; CMMALORY-M4,209.3461

and there they yelded them unto sir Kay , CMMALORY-M4,209.3462

and sir Kay forsoke them CMMALORY-M4,209.3463

and seyde he fought never with hem . CMMALORY-M4,209.3464

' But I shall ease your hertes , ' seyde sir Kay , '
CMMALORY-M4,209.3465

yondir is sir Launcelot that overcam you . ' CMMALORY-M4,209.3466

Whan they wyste that , they were glad . CMMALORY-M4,209.3467

And than sir Melyot de Logrys come home CMMALORY-M4,209.3468

and tolde hym and the kynge how sir Launcelot had saved hym frome the
deth , CMMALORY-M4,209.3469

and all his dedys was knowyn : how the quenys sorserers four had hym in
preson , and how he was delyverde by the kynge Bagdemagus doughter .
CMMALORY-M4,209.3470

Also there was tolde all the grete armys that sir Launcelot dud betwyxte
the two kynges , that ys for to say the kynge of North Galys and kyng
Bagdemagus : CMMALORY-M4,209.3471

all the trouth sir Gahalantyne dud telle , and sir Mador de la Porte ,
and sir Mordred , CMMALORY-M4,209.3472

for they were at the same turnement . CMMALORY-M4,209.3473

Than com in the lady that knew sir Launcelot when that he wounded sir
Belleus at the pavylyon ; CMMALORY-M4,209.3474

and there at the requeste of sir Launcelot sir Belleus was made knyght
of the Rounde Table . CMMALORY-M4,209.3475

And so at that tyme sir Launcelot had the grettyste name of ony knyght
of the worlde , CMMALORY-M4,209.3476

and moste he was honoured of hyghe and lowe . CMMALORY-M4,209.3477

<P_626>

<heading>

I . CMMALORY-M4,626.3480

The Departure CMMALORY-M4,626.3481

<$$heading>

AT the vigyl of Pentecoste , when all the felyship of the Table Rownde
were com unto Camelot and there harde hir servyse , so at the laste the
tablys were sette redy to the meete , ryght so entird into the halle a
full fayre jantillwoman on horsebacke that had ryddyn full faste , for
hir horse was all beswette . CMMALORY-M4,626.3483

Than she there alyght CMMALORY-M4,626.3484

and com before the kynge CMMALORY-M4,626.3485

and salewed hym , CMMALORY-M4,626.3486

and he seyde , ' Damesell , God you blysse ! ' CMMALORY-M4,626.3487

' Sir , ' seyde she , ' for Goddis sake telle me where ys sir Launcelot
. ' CMMALORY-M4,626.3488

' He ys yondir , CMMALORY-M4,626.3489

ye may se hym , ' seyd the kynge . CMMALORY-M4,626.3490

Than she wente unto sir Launcelot CMMALORY-M4,626.3491

and seyde , ' Sir Launcelot , I salew you on kynge Pelles behalff ,
CMMALORY-M4,626.3492

and I also requyre you to com with me hereby into a foreste . '
CMMALORY-M4,626.3493

Than sir Launcelot asked her with whom she dwelled .
CMMALORY-M4,626.3494

' I dwelle , ' she seyde , ' with kynge Pelles . ' CMMALORY-M4,626.3495

' What woll ye with me ? ' seyde sir Launcelot . CMMALORY-M4,626.3496

' Ye shall know , ' she seyde , ' when ye com thydir . '
CMMALORY-M4,626.3497

' Well , ' seyde he , ' I woll gladly go with you . '
CMMALORY-M4,626.3498

So sir Launcelot bade hys squyre sadyll hys horse and brynge hys armys
in haste . CMMALORY-M4,626.3499

So he ded hys commandemente . CMMALORY-M4,626.3500

Than come the quene unto sir Launcelot CMMALORY-M4,626.3501

and seyde , ' Woll ye leve us now alone at thys hyghe feste ? '
CMMALORY-M4,626.3502

' Madam , ' seyde the jantyllwoman , ' wyte you well he shall be with
you to-morne by dyner tyme . ' CMMALORY-M4,626.3503

' If I wyste , ' seyde the quene , ' that he sholde nat be here with us
to-morne , he sholde nat go with you be my good wyll ! '
CMMALORY-M4,626.3504

Ryght so departed sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,626.3505

and rode untyll that he com into a foreste and into a grete valey where
they sye an abbey of nunnys . CMMALORY-M4,626.3506

And there was a squyre redy , CMMALORY-M4,626.3507

and opened the gatis , CMMALORY-M4,626.3508

and so they entird CMMALORY-M4,626.3509

and descended of their horsys . CMMALORY-M4,626.3510

And anone there cam a fayre felyship aboute sir Launcelot
CMMALORY-M4,626.3511

and wellcomed hym , CMMALORY-M4,626.3512

<em> and were passyng gladde of his comynge <$$em> ;
CMMALORY-M4,626.3513

and than they ladde hym unto the abbas chambir CMMALORY-M4,626.3514

and unarmed hym . CMMALORY-M4,626.3515

And ryght so he was ware uppon a bed lyynge two of hys cosyns , sir Bors
and sir Lyonell . CMMALORY-M4,626.3516

And anone he waked them , CMMALORY-M4,626.3517

and whan they syghe hym they made grete joy . CMMALORY-M4,626.3518

<P_627>

' Sir , ' seyde sir Bors unto sir Launcelot , ' what adventure hath
brought you hidir ? CMMALORY-M4,627.3520

For we wende to have founde you to-morne at Camelot . '
CMMALORY-M4,627.3521

' So God me helpe , ' seyde sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,627.3522

' a jantillwoman brought me hydir , CMMALORY-M4,627.3523

but I know nat the cause . ' CMMALORY-M4,627.3524

So in the meanewhyle that they thus talked togydir , there com in twelve
nunnes that brought with hem Galahad , the whych was passynge fayre and
welle made , that unneth in the worlde men myght nat fynde hys macche .
CMMALORY-M4,627.3525

And all tho ladyes wepte . CMMALORY-M4,627.3526

' Sir , ' seyd they all , ' we brynge you hyre thys chylde the whycch we
have norysshed , CMMALORY-M4,627.3527

and we pray you to make hym knyght , CMMALORY-M4,627.3528

for of a more worthyer mannes honde may he nat resceyve the Order of
Knyghthode . ' CMMALORY-M4,627.3529

Sir Launcelot behylde thys yonge squyer CMMALORY-M4,627.3530

and saw hym semely and demure as a dove , with all maner of goode
fetures , that he wende of hys ayge never to have scene so fayre a
fourme of a man . CMMALORY-M4,627.3531

Than seyde sir Launcelot , ' Commyth thys desyre of hymselff ? '
CMMALORY-M4,627.3532

He and all they seyde ' yes . ' CMMALORY-M4,627.3533

' Than shall he , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' resseyve the Order of
Knyghthode at the reverence of the hyghe feste . ' CMMALORY-M4,627.3534

So that nyght sir Launcelot had passyng good chere .
CMMALORY-M4,627.3535

And on the $morne at the howre of pryme at Galahaddis desyre he made hym
knyght , CMMALORY-M4,627.3536

and seyde , ' God make you a good man , CMMALORY-M4,627.3537

for of beaute` faylith you none as ony that ys now lyvynge .
CMMALORY-M4,627.3538

Now , fayre sir , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' woll ye com with me unto the
courte of kynge Arthure ? ' CMMALORY-M4,627.3539

' Nay , ' seyde he , ' I woll nat go with you at thys tyme . '
CMMALORY-M4,627.3540

Than he departed frome them CMMALORY-M4,627.3541

and toke hys two cosynes with hym . CMMALORY-M4,627.3542

And so they com unto Camelot by the owre of undirne on Whytsonday .
CMMALORY-M4,627.3543

So by that tyme the kynge and the quene was gone to the mynster to here
their servyse . CMMALORY-M4,627.3544

Than the kynge and the quene were passynge glad of sir Bors and sir
Lyonel , CMMALORY-M4,627.3545

and so was all the felyshyp . CMMALORY-M4,627.3546

So whan the kynge and all the knyghtes were com frome servyse the
barownes aspyed in the segys of the Rounde Table all aboute wretyn with
golde lettirs : <P_628> ' HERE OUGHT TO SITTE HE ' , and ' HE OUGHT TO
SITTE HYRE . ' CMMALORY-M4,628.3547

And thus they wente so longe tylle that they com to the Sege Perelous ,
where they founde lettirs newly wrytten of golde , whych seyde : '
FOUR_HONDRED WYNTIR AND FOUR_AND_FYFFTY ACOMPLYVYSSHED AFTIR THE PASSION
OF OURE LORDE JESU CRYST OUGHTE THYS SYEGE TO BE FULFYLLED . '
CMMALORY-M4,628.3548

Than all they seyde , ' Thys ys a mervylous thynge and an adventures !
' CMMALORY-M4,628.3549

' In the name of God ! ' seyde sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,628.3550

and than accounted the terme of the wrytynge , frome the byrth of oure
Lorde untyll that day . CMMALORY-M4,628.3551

' Hit semyth me , ' seyd sir Launcelot , ' that thys syge oughte to be
fulfylled thys same day , CMMALORY-M4,628.3552

for thys $ys the Pentecoste after the four_hondred_and_four_and_fyffty
yere . CMMALORY-M4,628.3553

And if hit wolde please all partyes , I wolde none of thes lettirs were
sene thys day tyll that he be com that ought to enchyve thys adventure .
' CMMALORY-M4,628.3554

Than made they to ordayne a cloth of sylke for to cover thes lettirs in
the Syege Perelous . CMMALORY-M4,628.3555

Than the kynge bade haste unto dyner . CMMALORY-M4,628.3556

' Sir , ' seyde sir Kay the Stywarde , ' if ye go now unto youre mete ye
shall breke youre olde custom of youre courte , CMMALORY-M4,628.3557

for ye have nat used on thys day to sytte at your mete or that ye have
sene some adventure . ' CMMALORY-M4,628.3558

' Ye sey sothe , ' seyde the kynge , CMMALORY-M4,628.3559

' but I had so grete joy of sir Launcelot and of hys cosynes whych bene
com to the courte hole and sounde , that I bethought me nat of none olde
custom . ' CMMALORY-M4,628.3560

So as they stood spekynge , in com a squyre that seyde unto the kynge ,
' Sir , I brynge unto you mervaylous tydynges . ' CMMALORY-M4,628.3561

' What be they ? ' seyde the kynge . CMMALORY-M4,628.3562

' Sir , there ys here bynethe at the ryver a grete stone whych I saw
fleete abovyn the watir , CMMALORY-M4,628.3563

and therein I saw stykynge a swerde . ' CMMALORY-M4,628.3564

Than the kynge seyde , ' I woll se that mervayle . '
CMMALORY-M4,628.3565

So all the knyghtes wente with hym . CMMALORY-M4,628.3566

And when they cam unto $the ryver they founde there a stone fletynge ,
as hit were of rede marbyll , CMMALORY-M4,628.3567

and therein stake a fayre ryche swerde , CMMALORY-M4,628.3568

and the pomell <P_629> thereof was of precious stonys wrought with
lettirs of golde subtyle` . CMMALORY-M4,629.3569

Than the barownes redde the lettirs whych seyde in thys wyse : ' NEVER
SHALL MAN TAKE ME HENSE BUT ONLY HE BY WHOS SYDE I OUGHT TO HONGE
CMMALORY-M4,629.3570

AND HE SHALL BE THE BESTE KNYGHT OF THE WORLDE . ' CMMALORY-M4,629.3571

So whan the kynge had sene the lettirs he seyde unto sir Launcelot , '
Fayre sir , thys swerde ought to be youres , CMMALORY-M4,629.3572

for I am sure ye be the beste knyght of the worlde . '
CMMALORY-M4,629.3573

Than sir Launcelot answerde full sobirly , ' Sir , that ys nat my swerde
; CMMALORY-M4,629.3574

also , I have no hardines to sette my honde thereto ,
CMMALORY-M4,629.3575

for hit longith nat to hange be my syde . CMMALORY-M4,629.3576

Also , who that assayth to take hit and faylith of that swerde , he
shall resseyve a wounde by that swerde that he shall nat be longe hole
afftir . CMMALORY-M4,629.3577

And I woll nat ye weyte that thys same day shall the adventure of the
Sankgreall begynne , that ys called the holy vessell . '
CMMALORY-M4,629.3578

' Now , fayre nevew , ' seyde the kynge unto sir Gawayne , ' assay ye
for my love . ' CMMALORY-M4,629.3579

' Sir , ' he seyde , ' sauff youre good grace , I shall nat do that . '
CMMALORY-M4,629.3580

' Sir , ' seyde the kynge , ' assay to take the swerde for my love and
at my commaundemente . ' CMMALORY-M4,629.3581

' Sir , youre commaundemente I woll obey . ' CMMALORY-M4,629.3582

And therewith he toke the swerde by the handyle , CMMALORY-M4,629.3583

but he myght nat stirre hit . CMMALORY-M4,629.3584

' I thanke you , ' seyde the kynge . CMMALORY-M4,629.3585

' My lorde sir Gawayne , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' now wete you well
thys swerde shall touche you so sore that ye wolde nat ye had sette
youre honde thereto for the beste castell of thys realme . '
CMMALORY-M4,629.3586

' Sir , ' he seyde , ' I myght nat withsey myne unclis wyll . '
CMMALORY-M4,629.3587

But whan the kynge herde thys he repented hit much CMMALORY-M4,629.3588

and seyde unto sir Percyvall , ' Sir , woll ye assay for my love ? '
CMMALORY-M4,629.3589

And he assayed gladly for to beare sir Gawayne felyship ,
CMMALORY-M4,629.3590

and therewith he sette to hys honde on the swerde CMMALORY-M4,629.3591

and drew at hit strongely , CMMALORY-M4,629.3592

but he myght nat meve hytte . CMMALORY-M4,629.3593

Than were there $no mo that durste be so hardy to sette their hondis
thereto . CMMALORY-M4,629.3594

<P_630>

' Now may ye go to youre dyner , ' seyde sir Kay unto the kynge ,
CMMALORY-M4,630.3596

' for a mervalous adventure have ye sene . ' CMMALORY-M4,630.3597

So the kynge and all they wente unto the courte , CMMALORY-M4,630.3598

and every knyght knew hys owne place CMMALORY-M4,630.3599

and sette hym therein . CMMALORY-M4,630.3600

And yonge men that were good knyghtes served them .
CMMALORY-M4,630.3601

So whan they were served and all syegis fulfylled sauff only the Syege
Perelous , anone there befelle a mervaylous adventure : that all the
doorys and wyndowes of the paleyse shutte by themselff .
CMMALORY-M4,630.3602

Natforthan the halle was nat gretly durked , CMMALORY-M4,630.3603

and therewith they abaysshed bothe one and other . CMMALORY-M4,630.3604

Than kynge Arthure spake fyrste CMMALORY-M4,630.3605

and seyde , ' Be God , fayre felowis and lordis , we have sene this day
mervayles ! CMMALORY-M4,630.3606

But or nyght I suppose we shall se gretter mervayles . '
CMMALORY-M4,630.3607

In the meanewhyle com in a good olde man and an awnciente , clothed all
in whyght , CMMALORY-M4,630.3608

and there was no knyght knew from whens he com . CMMALORY-M4,630.3609

And with hym he brought a yonge knyght , CMMALORY-M4,630.3610

and bothe on foote , in rede armys , withoute swerde other shylde sauff
a scawberd hangynge by hys syde . CMMALORY-M4,630.3611

And thes wordys he seyde : ' CMMALORY-M4,630.3612

Pees be with you , fayre lordys ! ' CMMALORY-M4,630.3613

Than the olde man seyde unto kynge Arthure , ' Sir , I brynge you here a
yonge knyght the whych ys of kynges lynage and of the kynrede of Joseph
of Aramathy , whereby the mervayles of this courte and of stronge
realmys shall be fully complevysshed . ' CMMALORY-M4,630.3614

The kynge was ryght glad of hys wordys CMMALORY-M4,630.3615

and seyde unto the good man , ' Sir , ye be ryght wellcom , and the
yonge knyght with you . ' CMMALORY-M4,630.3616

Than the olde man made the yonge man to unarme hym .
CMMALORY-M4,630.3617

And he was in a cote of rede sendell , CMMALORY-M4,630.3618

and bare a mantell uppon hys sholder that was furred with ermyne ,
CMMALORY-M4,630.3619

and put that uppon hym . CMMALORY-M4,630.3620

And the olde knyght seyde unto $the yonge knyght , ' Sir , swith me . '
CMMALORY-M4,630.3621

And anone he lad hym to the Syege Perelous where besyde sate sir
Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,630.3622

and the good man lyffte up the clothe CMMALORY-M4,630.3623

and founde there the lettirs that seyde thus : ' THYS YS THE SYEGE OF
SIR GALAHAD THE HAWTE PRYNCE . ' CMMALORY-M4,630.3624

' Sir , ' seyde the olde knyght , ' weyte you well that place ys youres
. ' CMMALORY-M4,630.3625

<P_631>

And than he sette hym downe surely in that syge , CMMALORY-M4,631.3627

and than he seyde unto the olde man ' Now may ye , sir , go youre way ,
CMMALORY-M4,631.3628

for well have ye done in that that ye were commaunded .
CMMALORY-M4,631.3629

And recommaunde me unto my grauntesyre , kynge Pelles , and unto my
lorde kynge Pecchere , CMMALORY-M4,631.3630

and sey hem on my behalff I shall com and se hem as sone as ever y may .
' CMMALORY-M4,631.3631

So the good man departed . CMMALORY-M4,631.3632

And there mette hym twenty noble squyers , CMMALORY-M4,631.3633

and so toke their horsys CMMALORY-M4,631.3634

and wente their wey . CMMALORY-M4,631.3635

Than all the knyghtes of the Table Rounde mervayled gretly of sir
Galahad that he durst sitte there and was so tendir of ayge ,
CMMALORY-M4,631.3636

and wyste nat from whens he com but all only be God .
CMMALORY-M4,631.3637

All they seyde , ' Thys ys he by whom the Sankgreall shall be encheved ,
CMMALORY-M4,631.3638

for there sate never none but he there but he were myscheved . '
CMMALORY-M4,631.3639

Than sir Launcelot behylde hys sonne CMMALORY-M4,631.3640

and had grete joy of hym . CMMALORY-M4,631.3641

Than sir Bors tolde hys felowis , ' Uppon payne of my lyff thys yonge
knyght shall com to grete worship ! ' CMMALORY-M4,631.3642

So thys noyse was grete in all the courte , that hit cam unto the quene
. CMMALORY-M4,631.3643

And she had mervayle what knyght hit <em> myghte be <$$em> that durste
adventure hym to sytte in that Sege Perelous . CMMALORY-M4,631.3644

Than som seyde he resembled much unto sir Launcelot .
CMMALORY-M4,631.3645

' I may well suppose , ' seyde the quene , ' that sir Launcelot begate
hym on kynge Pelles doughter , whych made hym to lye by her by
enchauntemente , CMMALORY-M4,631.3646

and hys name ys Galahad . CMMALORY-M4,631.3647

I wolde fayne se hym , ' seyde the quene , CMMALORY-M4,631.3648

' for he muste nedys be a noble man , CMMALORY-M4,631.3649

for so hys fadir ys that hym begate : CMMALORY-M4,631.3650

I reporte me unto all the Table Rounde . ' CMMALORY-M4,631.3651

So when the mete was done , that the kynge and all were rysen , the kyng
yode to the Sege Perelous CMMALORY-M4,631.3652

and lyfft up the clothe CMMALORY-M4,631.3653

and founde there the name of sir Galahad . CMMALORY-M4,631.3654

And than he shewed hit unto sir Gawayne CMMALORY-M4,631.3655

and seyde , ' Fayre nevew , now have we amonge us sir Galahad , the good
knyght that shall worship us all . CMMALORY-M4,631.3656

And uppon payne of my lyff he shall encheve the Sankgreall , ryght as
sir Launcelot had done us to undirstonde . ' CMMALORY-M4,631.3657

Than cam kynge Arthure unto sir Galahad CMMALORY-M4,631.3658

and seyde , ' Sir , ye be ryght wellcom , CMMALORY-M4,631.3659

for ye shall meve many good knyghtes to the queste of the Sankgreall ,
CMMALORY-M4,631.3660

and ye shall enchyve that many other knyghtes myght never brynge to an
ende . ' CMMALORY-M4,631.3661

<P_632>

Than the kynge toke hym by the honde CMMALORY-M4,632.3663

and wente downe frome the paleyes to shew Galahad the adventures of the
stone . CMMALORY-M4,632.3664

Than the quene harde thereof CMMALORY-M4,632.3665

and cam aftir with many ladyes , CMMALORY-M4,632.3666

and <em> so they <$$em> shewed her the stone where hit hoved on the
watir . CMMALORY-M4,632.3667

' Sir , ' seyde the kynge unto sir Galahad , ' here ys a grete mervayle
as ever y sawe , CMMALORY-M4,632.3668

and ryght good knyghtes have assayde and fayled . '
CMMALORY-M4,632.3669

' Sir , ' seyde sir Galahad , ' hit ys no mervayle ,
CMMALORY-M4,632.3670

for thys adventure ys nat theyrs but myne . CMMALORY-M4,632.3671

And for the surete` of thys swerde I brought none with me ,
CMMALORY-M4,632.3672

but here by my syde hangith the scawberte . ' CMMALORY-M4,632.3673

And anone he leyde hys honde on the swerde , CMMALORY-M4,632.3674

and lyghtly drew hit oute of the stone , CMMALORY-M4,632.3675

and put hit in the sheethe , CMMALORY-M4,632.3676

and seyde unto the kynge ' Now hit goth <em> better than hit dyd
aforehand . ' CMMALORY-M4,632.3677

<$$em> ' Sir , ' seyde the kynge , ' a shylde God may sende you . '
CMMALORY-M4,632.3678

' Now have I the swerde that somtyme was the good knyghtes Balyns le
Saveaige , CMMALORY-M4,632.3679

and he was a passynge good knyght of hys hondys ; CMMALORY-M4,632.3680

and with thys swerde he slew hys brothir Balan , CMMALORY-M4,632.3681

and that was grete pite` , CMMALORY-M4,632.3682

for he was a good knyght . CMMALORY-M4,632.3683

And eythir slew othir thorow a dolerous stroke that Balyn gaff unto
kynge Pelles , the whych ys nat yett hole , nor naught shall be tyll
that I hele hym . ' CMMALORY-M4,632.3684

So therewith the kynge <em> and all <$$em> aspyed com rydynge downe the
ryver a lady on a whyght palferey a grete paace towarde them .
CMMALORY-M4,632.3685

Than she salewed the kynge and the quene CMMALORY-M4,632.3686

and asked if that sir Launcelot were there , CMMALORY-M4,632.3687

and than he answerd hymselff CMMALORY-M4,632.3688

and seyde , ' I am here , my fayre lady ! ' CMMALORY-M4,632.3689

Than she seyde all with wepynge there , ' A , sir Launcelot !
CMMALORY-M4,632.3690

How youre grete doynge ys chonged sytthyn thys day in the morne ! '
CMMALORY-M4,632.3691

' Damesell , why sey ye so ? ' CMMALORY-M4,632.3692

' Sir , I say you sothe , ' seyde the damesell , CMMALORY-M4,632.3693

' for ye were thys day in the morne the best knyght of the worlde .
CMMALORY-M4,632.3694

But who sholde sey so now , he sholde be a lyer , CMMALORY-M4,632.3695

for there ys now one bettir than ye be , CMMALORY-M4,632.3696

and well hit ys preved by the adventure of the swerde whereto ye durst
nat sette to your honde . CMMALORY-M4,632.3697

And that ys the change of youre name and levynge . CMMALORY-M4,632.3698

Wherefore I make unto you a remembraunce that ye shall nat wene frome
hensforthe that ye be the best knyght of the worlde . '
CMMALORY-M4,632.3699

<P_633>

' As towchyng unto that , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' I know well I was
never none of the beste . ' CMMALORY-M4,633.3701

' Yes , ' seyde the damesell , ' that were ye , CMMALORY-M4,633.3702

and ar yet , of ony synfull man of the worlde . CMMALORY-M4,633.3703

And , sir kynge , Nacien the eremeyte $sendeth the worde that the shall
befalle the grettyst worship that ever befelle kynge in Bretayne ,
CMMALORY-M4,633.3704

and I sey $you wherefore : CMMALORY-M4,633.3705

for thys day the Sankegreall appered in thy house CMMALORY-M4,633.3706

and fedde the and all thy felyship of the Rounde Table . '
CMMALORY-M4,633.3707

So she departed and wente the same way that she cam .
CMMALORY-M4,633.3708

' Now , ' seyde the kynge , ' I am sure at this quest of the Sankegreall
shall all ye of the Rownde Table departe , CMMALORY-M4,633.3709

and nevyr shall I se you agayne hole togydirs , CMMALORY-M4,633.3710

therefore ones shall I se you togydir in the medow , all hole togydirs !
CMMALORY-M4,633.3711

Therefore I wol se you all hole togydir in the medow of Camelot , to
juste and to turney , that aftir youre dethe men may speke of hit that
such good knyghtes were here , such a day , hole togydirs . '
CMMALORY-M4,633.3712

As unto that counceyle and at the kynges rekeyst they accorded all ,
CMMALORY-M4,633.3713

and toke on the harneyse that longed unto joustenynge .
CMMALORY-M4,633.3714

But all thys mevynge of the kynge was for thys entente , for to se
Galahad preved ; CMMALORY-M4,633.3715

for the kynge demed he sholde nat lyghtly com agayne unto the courte
aftir thys departynge . CMMALORY-M4,633.3716

So were they assembled in the medowe , both more and lasse .
CMMALORY-M4,633.3717

Than sir Galahalt by the prayer of the kynge and the quene dud on a
noble jesseraunce uppon hym , CMMALORY-M4,633.3718

and also he dud on hys helme , CMMALORY-M4,633.3719

but shylde wolde he take none for no prayer of the kynge .
CMMALORY-M4,633.3720

So than sir Gawayne and othir knyghtes prayde hym to take a speare .
CMMALORY-M4,633.3721

Ryght so he dud . CMMALORY-M4,633.3722

So the quene was in a towure with all hir ladyes for to beholde that
turnement . CMMALORY-M4,633.3723

Than sir Galahad dressed hym in myddys of the medow CMMALORY-M4,633.3724

and began to breke spearys mervaylously , that all men had wondir of hym
, CMMALORY-M4,633.3725

for he there surmownted all othir knyghtes . CMMALORY-M4,633.3726

For within a whyle he had defowled many good knyghtes of the Table
Rounde sauff all only tweyne , CMMALORY-M4,633.3727

that was sir Launcelot and sir Persyvale . CMMALORY-M4,633.3728

Than the kynge at the quenys desyre made hym to alyght and to unlace hys
helme , that the quene myght se hym in the vysayge .
CMMALORY-M4,633.3729

Whan she avysed hym she seyde , ' I dare well sey sothely that sir
Launcelot begate hym , CMMALORY-M4,633.3730

for never <P_634> two men resembled more in lyknesse .
CMMALORY-M4,634.3731

Therefore hit ys no mervayle thoughe he be of grete proues . '
CMMALORY-M4,634.3732

So a lady that stood by the quene seyde , ' Madam , for Goddis sake ,
ought he of ryght to be so good a knyght ? ' CMMALORY-M4,634.3733

' Ye , forsothe , ' seyde the quene , CMMALORY-M4,634.3734

' for he ys of all partyes comyn of the beste knyghtes of the worlde and
of the hyghest lynage : CMMALORY-M4,634.3735

for sir Launcelot ys com but of the eyghth degre` from oure Lorde Jesu
Cryst , CMMALORY-M4,634.3736

and thys sir Galahad ys $the nyneth degre` frome oure Lorde Jesu Cryst .
CMMALORY-M4,634.3737

Therefore I dare sey they be the grettist jantillmen of the worlde . '
CMMALORY-M4,634.3738

And than the kynge and all the astatis wente home unto Camelot ,
CMMALORY-M4,634.3739

and so wente unto evynsong to the grete monester . And so aftir uppon
that to sowper , CMMALORY-M4,634.3740

and every knyght sette in hys owne place as they were toforehonde .
CMMALORY-M4,634.3741

Than anone they harde crakynge and cryynge of thundir , that hem thought
the palyse sholde all to-dryve . CMMALORY-M4,634.3742

So in the myddys of the blast entyrde a sonnebeame , more clerer by
seven tymys than ever they saw day , CMMALORY-M4,634.3743

and all they were alyghted of the grace of the Holy Goste .
CMMALORY-M4,634.3744

Than began every knyght to beholde other , CMMALORY-M4,634.3745

and eyther saw other , by their semynge , fayrer than ever they were
before . CMMALORY-M4,634.3746

Natforthan there was no knyght that myght speke one worde a grete whyle
, CMMALORY-M4,634.3747

and so they loked every man on other as they had bene doome .
CMMALORY-M4,634.3748

Than entird into the halle the Holy Grayle coverde with whyght samyte ,
CMMALORY-M4,634.3749

but there was none that myght se hit nother whom that bare hit .
CMMALORY-M4,634.3750

And there was all the halle fulfylled with good odoures ,
CMMALORY-M4,634.3751

and every knyght had such metis and drynkes as he beste loves in thys
worlde . CMMALORY-M4,634.3752

And when the Holy Grayle had bene borne thorow the hall , than the holy
vessell departed suddeynly , that they wyst nat where hit becam .
CMMALORY-M4,634.3753

Than had they all breth to speke , CMMALORY-M4,634.3754

and than the kyng yelded thankynges to God of Hys good grace that He had
sente them . CMMALORY-M4,634.3755

' Sertes , ' $seyde the kynge , ' we ought to thanke oure Lorde Jesu
Cryste gretly that he hath shewed us thys day at the reverence of thys
hyghe feste of Pentecost . ' CMMALORY-M4,634.3756

' Now , ' seyde sir Gawayne , ' we have bene servyd thys day of what
metys and drynkes we thought on . CMMALORY-M4,634.3757

But one thyng begyled us , that we myght nat se the Holy Grayle :
CMMALORY-M4,634.3758

hit was so preciously coverde . <P_635> Wherefore I woll make here a
vow that to-morne , withoute longer abydynge , I shall laboure in the
queste of the Sankgreall , and that I shall holde me oute a twelve-month
and a day or more if nede be , CMMALORY-M4,635.3759

and never shall I returne unto the courte agayne tylle I have sene hit
more opynly than hit hath bene shewed here . CMMALORY-M4,635.3760

And iff I may nat spede I shall returne agayne as he that may nat be
ayenst the wylle of God . CMMALORY-M4,635.3761

So when they of the Table Rounde harde sir Gawayne sey so , they arose
up the moste party CMMALORY-M4,635.3762

and made such avowes as sir Gawayne hathe made . CMMALORY-M4,635.3763

Anone as kynge Arthur harde thys he was gretly dysplesed ,
CMMALORY-M4,635.3764

for he wyst well he myght nat agaynesey their avowys .
CMMALORY-M4,635.3765

' Alas ! ' seyde kynge Arthure unto sir Gawayne , ' ye have nygh slayne
me for the avow that ye have made , CMMALORY-M4,635.3766

for thorow you ye have berauffte me the fayryst and the trewyst of
knyghthode that ever was sene togydir in ony realme of the worlde .
CMMALORY-M4,635.3767

For when they departe frome hense I am sure they all shall never mete
more togydir in thys worlde , CMMALORY-M4,635.3768

for they shall dye many in the queste . CMMALORY-M4,635.3769

And so hit forthynkith nat me a litill , CMMALORY-M4,635.3770

for I have loved them as well as my lyff . Wherefore hit shall greve me
ryght sore , the departicion of thys felyship , CMMALORY-M4,635.3771

for I have had an olde custom to have hem in my felyship . '
CMMALORY-M4,635.3772

And therewith the teerys felle in hys yen , CMMALORY-M4,635.3773

and than he seyde , ' Sir Gawayne , $Gawayne ! Ye have sette me in
grete sorow , CMMALORY-M4,635.3774

for I have grete doute that my trew felyshyp shall never mete here more
agayne . ' CMMALORY-M4,635.3775

' A , sir , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' comforte youreself !
CMMALORY-M4,635.3776

For hit shall be unto us a grete honoure , and much more than we dyed in
other placis , CMMALORY-M4,635.3777

for of dethe we be syker . ' CMMALORY-M4,635.3778

' A , Launcelot ! ' seyde the kynge , ' the grete love that I have had
unto you all the dayes of my lyff makith me to sey such dolefull wordis
! CMMALORY-M4,635.3779

For there was never Crysten kynge that ever had so many worthy men at
hys table as I have had thys day at the Table Rounde .
CMMALORY-M4,635.3780

And that ys my grete sorow . CMMALORY-M4,635.3781

' Whan the quene , ladyes , and jantillwomen knew of thys tydyng they
had such sorow and hevynes that there myght no tunge telle ,
CMMALORY-M4,635.3782

for tho knyghtes had holde them in honoure and charite` .
CMMALORY-M4,635.3783

But aboven all othir quene Gwenyver made grete sorow .
CMMALORY-M4,635.3784

<P_636>

' I mervayle ' , seyde she , ' that my lorde woll suffir hem to departe
fro hym . ' CMMALORY-M4,636.3786

Thus was all the courte trowbled for the love of the departynge of these
knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,636.3787

and many of tho ladyes that loved knyghtes wolde have gone with hir
lovis . CMMALORY-M4,636.3788

And so had they done , had nat an olde knyght com amonge them in
relygious clothynge and spake all on hyght and seyde , ' Fayre lordis
whych have sworne in the queste of the Sankgreall , thus sendith you
Nacien the eremyte worde that none in thys queste lede lady nother
jantillwoman with hym , CMMALORY-M4,636.3789

for hit ys nat to do in so hyghe a servyse as they laboure in .
CMMALORY-M4,636.3790

For I warne you playne , he that ys nat clene of hys synnes he shall nat
se the mysteryes of oure Lorde Jesu Cryste ' . CMMALORY-M4,636.3791

And for thys cause they leffte thes ladyes and jantillwomen .
CMMALORY-M4,636.3792

So aftir thys the quene come unto sir Galahad CMMALORY-M4,636.3793

and asked hym of whens he was and of what contrey .
CMMALORY-M4,636.3794

Than he tolde hir of whens he was . CMMALORY-M4,636.3795

' And sonne unto sir Launcelot ? ' <em> she seyde <$$em> .
CMMALORY-M4,636.3796

As to that $he seyde nother yee nother nay . CMMALORY-M4,636.3797

' So God me helpe , ' seyde the quene , ' CMMALORY-M4,636.3798

ye $darf nat shame , CMMALORY-M4,636.3799

for he ys the goodlyest knyght , and of the beste men of the worlde
commyn , and of the strene , of all partyes , of kynges . Wherefore you
ought of ryght to be of youre dedys a passyng good man .
CMMALORY-M4,636.3800

And sertayne ' , she seyde , ' ye resemble hym much . '
CMMALORY-M4,636.3801

Than sir Galahad was a lityll ashamed CMMALORY-M4,636.3802

and seyde , ' Madame , sithyn ye know in sertayne , wherefore do ye aske
hit me ? CMMALORY-M4,636.3803

For he that ys my fadir shall be knowyn opynly and all betymys . '
CMMALORY-M4,636.3804

And than they wente unto reste them . CMMALORY-M4,636.3805

And in honoure of the hyghnes of knyghthod $of sir Galahad he was ledde
into kynge Arthures chambir , CMMALORY-M4,636.3806

and there rested in hys owne bedde . CMMALORY-M4,636.3807

And as sone as hit was day the kynge arose , CMMALORY-M4,636.3808

for he had no reste of all that nyght for sorow . CMMALORY-M4,636.3809

Than he wente unto sir Gawayne and unto sir Launcelot that were arysen
for to hyre masse , CMMALORY-M4,636.3810

and than the kynge agayne seyde , ' A , Gawayne , Gawayne ! Ye have
betrayed me , CMMALORY-M4,636.3811

for never shall my courte be amended by you . CMMALORY-M4,636.3812

But ye woll never be so sory for me as I am for you ! '
CMMALORY-M4,636.3813

<P_637>

And therewith the tearys began to renne downe by hys vysayge ,
CMMALORY-M4,637.3815

and therewith the kynge seyde , ' A , curteyse knyght , sir Launcelot !
I requyre you that ye counceyle me , CMMALORY-M4,637.3816

for I wolde that thys queste were at an ende and hit myght be . '
CMMALORY-M4,637.3817

' Sir , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' ye saw yestirday so many worthy
knyghtes there were sworne that they may nat leve hit in no maner of
wyse . ' CMMALORY-M4,637.3818

' That wote I well , ' seyde the kynge , CMMALORY-M4,637.3819

' but hit shall so hevy me at their departyng that I wote well there
shall no maner of joy remedy me . ' CMMALORY-M4,637.3820

And than the kynge and the quene wente unto the mynster .
CMMALORY-M4,637.3821

So anone sir Launcelot and sir Gawayne commaunded hir men to brynge hir
armys , CMMALORY-M4,637.3822

and when they all were all armed sauff hir shyldys and her helmys , than
they com to their felyship whych were all redy in the same wyse for to
go to the monastery to hyre their masse and servyse .
CMMALORY-M4,637.3823

Than aftir servyse the kynge wolde wete how many had undirtake the
queste of the Holy Grayle ; CMMALORY-M4,637.3824

than founde they be tale an_hondred_and_fyffty , CMMALORY-M4,637.3825

and all tho were knyghtes of the Rounde Table . CMMALORY-M4,637.3826

And than they put on their helmys CMMALORY-M4,637.3827

and departed CMMALORY-M4,637.3828

and recommaunded them all hole unto the kynge and quene .
CMMALORY-M4,637.3829

And there was wepyng and grete sorow . CMMALORY-M4,637.3830

Than the quene departed into the chambir CMMALORY-M4,637.3831

and horde hir there , that no man shold perceyve hir grete sorowys .
CMMALORY-M4,637.3832

Whan sir Launcelot myssed the quene he wente tyll hir chambir ,
CMMALORY-M4,637.3833

and when she saw hym she cryed alowde CMMALORY-M4,637.3834

and seyde , ' A , sir Launcelot , Launcelot ! Ye have betrayde me and
putte me to the deth , for to leve thus my lorde ! '
CMMALORY-M4,637.3835

' A , madam , I pray you be nat displeased , CMMALORY-M4,637.3836

for I shall com agayne as sone as I may with my worship . '
CMMALORY-M4,637.3837

' Alas , ' seyde she , ' that ever I syghe you ! CMMALORY-M4,637.3838

But He that suffird dethe uppon the Crosse for all menkynde , He be unto
you good conduyte and saufte` , and all the hole felyshyp ! '
CMMALORY-M4,637.3839

Ryght so departed sir Launcelot CMMALORY-M4,637.3840

and founde hys felyship that abode hys commyng , CMMALORY-M4,637.3841

and than they toke their horsys CMMALORY-M4,637.3842

and rode thorow the strete of Camelot . CMMALORY-M4,637.3843

And there was wepyng of ryche <P_638> and poore , CMMALORY-M4,638.3844

and the kynge turned away CMMALORY-M4,638.3845

and myght nat speke for wepyng . CMMALORY-M4,638.3846

So within a whyle they rode all togydirs tyll that they com to a cite` ,
and a castell that hyght Vagon . CMMALORY-M4,638.3847

And so they entird into the castell , CMMALORY-M4,638.3848

and the lorde thereof was an olde man that hyght Vagon , and good of hys
lyvyng , CMMALORY-M4,638.3849

and sette opyn the gatis CMMALORY-M4,638.3850

and made hem all the chere that he myght . CMMALORY-M4,638.3851

And so on the morne they were all accorded that they sholde departe
everych from othir . CMMALORY-M4,638.3852

And on the morne they departed with wepyng chere , CMMALORY-M4,638.3853

and than every knyght toke the way that hym lyked beste .
CMMALORY-M4,638.3854

<heading>

II. The Miracles CMMALORY-M4,638.3856

<$$heading>

Now rydith Galahad yet withouten shylde , CMMALORY-M4,638.3858

and so rode four dayes withoute ony adventure , CMMALORY-M4,638.3859

and at the fourthe day aftir evynsonge he com to a whyght abbay .
CMMALORY-M4,638.3860

And there was he resceyved with grete reverence and lad untyll a chambir
, CMMALORY-M4,638.3861

and there was he unarmed . CMMALORY-M4,638.3862

And than was he ware of two knyghtes of the Table Rounde ,
CMMALORY-M4,638.3863

$one was sir Bagdemagus , and sir Uwayne , CMMALORY-M4,638.3864

and when they sy hym they $went to sir Galahad CMMALORY-M4,638.3865

and made of hym grete solace . CMMALORY-M4,638.3866

And so they wente unto supper . CMMALORY-M4,638.3867

' Sirs , ' seyde sir Galahad , ' what adventure brought you hydir ? '
CMMALORY-M4,638.3868

' Sir , ' they seyde , ' hit ys tolde us that in thys place ys a shylde
that no man may bere hit aboute his necke but he be myscheved other dede
within three dayes , other maymed for ever . CMMALORY-M4,638.3869

But , sir , ' seyde kynge Bagdemagus , ' I shall beare hit to-morne for
to assay thys adventure . ' CMMALORY-M4,638.3870

' In the name of God ! ' seyde sir Galahad . CMMALORY-M4,638.3871

' Sir , ' seyde Bagdemagus , ' and I may nat encheve the adventure of
thys shylde ye shall take hit uppon you , CMMALORY-M4,638.3872

for I $am sure ye shall nat fayle . ' CMMALORY-M4,638.3873

' Sir , I ryght well agre` me thereto , CMMALORY-M4,638.3874

for I have no shylde . ' CMMALORY-M4,638.3875

So on the morne they arose CMMALORY-M4,638.3876

and herde masse . CMMALORY-M4,638.3877

Than syr Bagdemagus asked where the adventures shylde was .
CMMALORY-M4,638.3878

Anone a munke ledde hym behynde an awter where the shylde hynge as
whyght as ony snowe , CMMALORY-M4,638.3879

but in the myddys was a rede crosse . CMMALORY-M4,638.3880

<P_639>

' Syrres , ' seyde $the monke , ' thys shylde oughte nat to be honged
aboute the nek of no knyght but he be the worthyest knyght of the worlde
. CMMALORY-M4,639.3882

Therefore I counceyle you , knyghtes , to be well avysed . '
CMMALORY-M4,639.3883

' Well , ' seyde sir Bagdemagus , ' I wote well I am nat the beste
knyght , CMMALORY-M4,639.3884

but I shall assay to bere hit , ' CMMALORY-M4,639.3885

and so bare hit oute of the monaster . CMMALORY-M4,639.3886

Than he seyde unto sir Galahad , ' And hit please you to abyde here
styll tylle that ye wete how that I spede . ' CMMALORY-M4,639.3887

' Sir , I shall abyde you , ' seyde sir Galahad . CMMALORY-M4,639.3888

Than kynge Bagdemagus toke with hym a good squyre , to brynge tydynges
unto sir Galahad how he spedde . CMMALORY-M4,639.3889

Than they rode two myle CMMALORY-M4,639.3890

and com to a fayre valey before an ermytayge , CMMALORY-M4,639.3891

and than they saw a knyght com frome that partyes in whyght armour ,
horse and all , CMMALORY-M4,639.3892

and he com as faste as hys horse myght renne , and hys speare in hys
reeste . CMMALORY-M4,639.3893

Than sir Bagdemagus dressed hys speare ayenste hym CMMALORY-M4,639.3894

and brake hit uppon the whyght knyght , CMMALORY-M4,639.3895

but the othir stroke hym so harde that he braste the mayles
CMMALORY-M4,639.3896

and threste hym thorow the ryght sholdir , CMMALORY-M4,639.3897

for the shylde coverde hym nat as at that tyme . CMMALORY-M4,639.3898

And so he bare hym frome hys horse , CMMALORY-M4,639.3899

and therewith he alyght CMMALORY-M4,639.3900

and toke hys whyght shylde from hym , saynge , ' Knyght , thou hast done
thyselff grete foly , CMMALORY-M4,639.3901

for thys shylde ought nat to be borne but by hym that shall have no pere
that lyvith . ' CMMALORY-M4,639.3902

And than he com to Bagdemagus squyre CMMALORY-M4,639.3903

and bade hym ' bere thys shylde to the good knyght sir Galahad that thou
leffte in the abbey , CMMALORY-M4,639.3904

and grete hym well by me . ' CMMALORY-M4,639.3905

' Sir , ' seyde the squyre , ' what ys youre name ? '
CMMALORY-M4,639.3906

' Take thou none hede of my name , ' seyde the $knyghte , '
CMMALORY-M4,639.3907

for hit ys nat for $the to know , nother none erthely man . '
CMMALORY-M4,639.3908

' Now , fayre sir , ' seyde the squyre , ' at the reverence of Jesu
Cryst , telle me be what cause thys shylde may nat be borne but if the
berer therof be myscheved . ' CMMALORY-M4,639.3909

' Now syn thou hast conjoured me , ' seyde the knyght , ' thys shelde
behovith unto no man but unto sir Galahad . ' CMMALORY-M4,639.3910

Than the squyre wente unto Bagdemagus CMMALORY-M4,639.3911

and asked hym whethir he were sore wounded or none .
CMMALORY-M4,639.3912

' Ye forsoth , ' seyde he , ' I shall ascape harde frome the deth . '
CMMALORY-M4,639.3913

Than he fette hys horse CMMALORY-M4,639.3914

and ledde hym with a grete payne tylle they cam unto the abbay .
CMMALORY-M4,639.3915

Than he was takyn downe sofftely and <P_640> unarmed and leyde in hys
bedde and loked there $to hys woundys . CMMALORY-M4,640.3916

And as the booke tellith , he lay there longe CMMALORY-M4,640.3917

and ascaped hard with the lyff . CMMALORY-M4,640.3918

' Sir Galahad , ' seyde the squyre , ' that knyght that wounded
Bag-demagus sende you gretyng , CMMALORY-M4,640.3919

and bade that ye sholde bere thys shylde wherethorow grete adventures
sholde befalle . ' CMMALORY-M4,640.3920

' Now blyssed be good fortune ! ' seyde sir Galahad .
CMMALORY-M4,640.3921

And than he asked hys armys CMMALORY-M4,640.3922

and mownted uppon hys horse backe CMMALORY-M4,640.3923

and hanged the whyght shylde aboute hys necke CMMALORY-M4,640.3924

and com-maunded hem unto God . CMMALORY-M4,640.3925

So sir Uwayne seyde he wolde beare hym felyshyp if hit pleased hym .
CMMALORY-M4,640.3926

' Sir , ' seyde sir Galahad , ' that may ye nat , CMMALORY-M4,640.3927

for I must go alone , save thys squyre shall bere me felyship . '
CMMALORY-M4,640.3928

And so departed sir Uwayne . CMMALORY-M4,640.3929

Than within a whyle cam sir Gala-had there@ @as the whyght knyght abode
hym by the ermytayge , CMMALORY-M4,640.3930

and everych salewed other curteysly . CMMALORY-M4,640.3931

' Sir , ' seyde sir Galahad , ' by thys shylde bene many mervayles
fallen . ' CMMALORY-M4,640.3932

' Syr , ' seyde the knyght , ' hit befelle aftir the Passion of oure
Lorde Jesu Cryste two_and_thirty yere that Joseph of Aramathy , that
jantyll knyght the whych toke downe our Lorde of the holy Crosse , at
that tyme he departed frome Jerusalem with a grete party of hys kyn-rede
with hym . CMMALORY-M4,640.3933

And so he labourde tyll they com to a cite` whych hyght Sarras .
CMMALORY-M4,640.3934

And that same owre that Joseph com to Sarras , there was a kynge that
hyght Evelake that had grete warre ayenst the Sarezens , and in
especiall ayenste one Sarezyn the whych was kynge Evelakes cousyn , a
ryche kynge and a myghty , whych marched nyghe hys londe ,
CMMALORY-M4,640.3935

and hys name was called Tholome la Feyntis . CMMALORY-M4,640.3936

So on a day thes two mette to do batayle . CMMALORY-M4,640.3937

' Than Joseph , the sonne of Aramathy , wente to kyng Evelake
CMMALORY-M4,640.3938

and tolde hym he sholde be discomfite and slayne but he leffte hys
beleve of the olde law and beleeve uppon the new law .
CMMALORY-M4,640.3939

And anone he shewed hym the ryght beleve of the Holy Trynyte` , for the
whyche he agreed unto with all hys herte . CMMALORY-M4,640.3940

' And there thys shylde was made for kynge Evelake in the name of Hym
that dyed on the Crosse . CMMALORY-M4,640.3941

And than thorow hys goodly belyeve he had the bettir of kynge Tholome .
CMMALORY-M4,640.3942

For when kynge <P_641> Eve-lake was in the batayle there was a clothe
sette afore the shylde , CMMALORY-M4,641.3943

and whan he was in the grettist perell he lett put awey the cloth ,
CMMALORY-M4,641.3944

and than hys enemyes saw a vigoure of a man on the crosse , where-thorow
they all were discomfite . CMMALORY-M4,641.3945

' And so hit befelle that a man of kynge Evelakes was $smytten hys honde
off , CMMALORY-M4,641.3946

and bare that honde in hys other honde . CMMALORY-M4,641.3947

And Joseph called that man unto hym CMMALORY-M4,641.3948

and bade hym with good devocion touche the crosse .
CMMALORY-M4,641.3949

And as sone as that man had towched the crosse with hys honde hit was as
hole as ever hit was tofore . CMMALORY-M4,641.3950

' Than sone afftir $there felle a grete mervayle , that the crosse of
the shylde at one tyme vanysshed , that no man wyste where hit becam .
CMMALORY-M4,641.3951

And than kynge Evelake was baptyzed , and the moste party of all the
people of that cite` . CMMALORY-M4,641.3952

' So sone aftir Joseph wolde departe , CMMALORY-M4,641.3953

and kynge Evelake wolde nedys go with hym whethir he wolde or n@ @olde .
CMMALORY-M4,641.3954

And so by fortune they com into thys londe that at that tyme was called
Grete Bretayne , CMMALORY-M4,641.3955

and there they founde a grete felon paynym that put Joseph into preson .
CMMALORY-M4,641.3956

And so by fortune that tydynges com unto a worthy man that hyght
Mondrames , CMMALORY-M4,641.3957

and he assembled all hys people for the grete renowne he had herde of
Joseph . CMMALORY-M4,641.3958

And so he com into the londe of Grete Bretaygne CMMALORY-M4,641.3959

and disheryted thys fellon paynym , CMMALORY-M4,641.3960

and confounded hym , CMMALORY-M4,641.3961

and therewith delyverde Joseph oute of preson . CMMALORY-M4,641.3962

And after that all the people withturned to the Crystyn feythe .
CMMALORY-M4,641.3963

' So nat longe afftir Joseph was leyde in hys dedly bedde ,
CMMALORY-M4,641.3964

and whan kyng Evelake saw that , he had muche sorow ,
CMMALORY-M4,641.3965

and seyde , ' " For thy love I leffte my contrey , CMMALORY-M4,641.3966

and syth ye sholl departe frome me oute of thys worlde , leve me som
$tokyn that I may thynke on you . " ' CMMALORY-M4,641.3967

' Than Joseph seyde , " That woll I do full gladly .
CMMALORY-M4,641.3968

Now brynge me youre shylde that I toke you when ye wente into batayle
ayenst kyng Tholome . " CMMALORY-M4,641.3969

' Than Joseph bledde sore at the nose , that he myght nat by no meane be
staunched , CMMALORY-M4,641.3970

and there , uppon that shylde , he made a crosse of hys owne bloode
CMMALORY-M4,641.3971

and seyd , ' " Now may ye se a remembrance that I love you ,
CMMALORY-M4,641.3972

for ye shall never se thys shylde but ye shall thynke one me .
CMMALORY-M4,641.3973

And hit shall be allwayes as freysh as hit ys now , CMMALORY-M4,641.3974

and never shall no man beare thys <P_642> shylde aboute hys necke but he
shall repente hit , unto the tyme that Galahad , the good knyght , beare
hit . And laste of my lynayge have hit aboute hys necke , that shall do
many mervaylous dedys . " CMMALORY-M4,642.3975

' " Now , " seyde kyng Evelake , " where shall I put thys shylde , that
thys worthy knyght may have hit ? " CMMALORY-M4,642.3976

' " Sir , ye shall leve hit there@ @as Nacien the ermyte shall put hit
afftir hys dethe , CMMALORY-M4,642.3977

for thydir shall that good knyght com the fiftenth day afftir that he
shall reseyve the Order of Knyghthode . " CMMALORY-M4,642.3978

' And so that day that they sette ys thys tyme that he have hys shylde .
CMMALORY-M4,642.3979

And in the same abbay lyeth Nacien the eremyte . ' CMMALORY-M4,642.3980

And the whyght knyght vanyshed . CMMALORY-M4,642.3981

Anone as the squyre had herde thes wordis he alyght of hys hakenay
CMMALORY-M4,642.3982

and kneled downe at Gala-hadys feete , CMMALORY-M4,642.3983

and prayde hym that he myght go <em> with hym <$$em> tyll he had made
hym knyght . CMMALORY-M4,642.3984

' If I wolde <em> have ony felyshyp I wolde <$$em> nat refuse you . '
CMMALORY-M4,642.3985

' Than woll ye make me a knyght ? ' seyde the squyre .
CMMALORY-M4,642.3986

' And that Order , by the grace of God , shall be well besette in me .
' CMMALORY-M4,642.3987

So sir Galahad graunted hym CMMALORY-M4,642.3988

and turned ayen unto the abbay there they cam fro , CMMALORY-M4,642.3989

and there men made grete joy of sir Galahad . CMMALORY-M4,642.3990

And anone as he was alyght there was a munke brought hym unto a tombe in
a chircheyarde , ' where ys such a noyse that who hyryth hit veryly
shall nyghe be madde other lose hys strengthe . CMMALORY-M4,642.3991

And , sir , we deme hit ys a fyende . ' CMMALORY-M4,642.3992

' Now lede me thydir , ' seyd sir Galahad . CMMALORY-M4,642.3993

And so they dud , all armed sauff hys helme . CMMALORY-M4,642.3994

' Now , ' seyde the good man , ' go to the tombe CMMALORY-M4,642.3995

and lyffte hit up . ' CMMALORY-M4,642.3996

And so he dud , CMMALORY-M4,642.3997

and herde a grete noyse ; CMMALORY-M4,642.3998

and pyteuously he seyde , that all men myght hyre , ' Sir Galahad , the
servaunte of Jesu Crist , com thou nat nyghe me , CMMALORY-M4,642.3999

for thou shalt make me go agayne there where I have bene so longe . '
CMMALORY-M4,642.4000

But sir Galahad was nothynge aferde , CMMALORY-M4,642.4001

but heve up the stone . CMMALORY-M4,642.4002

And there com oute a fowle smoke , CMMALORY-M4,642.4003

and aftir that he saw the fowlyst vygoure lepe thereoute that ever he
saw in the lyknes of a man . CMMALORY-M4,642.4004

And than he blyssed hym CMMALORY-M4,642.4005

and wyst well hit was a fyende . CMMALORY-M4,642.4006

Than herde he a voyce sey , ' Sir Galahad , I se there envyrowne aboute
the so many angels that my power may nat deare the ! '
CMMALORY-M4,642.4007

<P_643>

Ryght so sir Galahad saw a body all armed lye in that tombe and besyde
hym a swerde . CMMALORY-M4,643.4009

' Now , fayre brothir , ' seyde sir Galahad , ' lette remeve thys body .
CMMALORY-M4,643.4010

For he ys nat worthy to lye within thys chyrcheyarde ,
CMMALORY-M4,643.4011

for he was a false Crysten man . ' CMMALORY-M4,643.4012

And therewithall they departed CMMALORY-M4,643.4013

and wente to the abbay . CMMALORY-M4,643.4014

And anone as he was unarmed a good man cam CMMALORY-M4,643.4015

and set hym downe by hym CMMALORY-M4,643.4016

and seyd , ' Sir , I shall telle you what betokenyth of that ye saw in
the tombe . CMMALORY-M4,643.4017

Sir , that that coverde the body , hit betokenyth the duras of the
worlde , and the grete synne that oure Lorde founde in the worlde .
CMMALORY-M4,643.4018

For there was suche wrecchydnesse that the fadir loved nat the sonne ,
nother the sonne loved nat the fadir . CMMALORY-M4,643.4019

And that was one of the causys that oure lorde toke fleysh and bloode of
a clene maydyn ; CMMALORY-M4,643.4020

for oure synnes were so grete at that tyme that well-nyghe all was
wyckednesse . ' CMMALORY-M4,643.4021

' Truly , ' seyde sir Galahad , ' I beleve you ryght well . '
CMMALORY-M4,643.4022

So sir Galahad rested hym there that nyght , CMMALORY-M4,643.4023

and uppon the morne he made the squyre a knyght CMMALORY-M4,643.4024

and asked hym hys name and of what kynred he was com .
CMMALORY-M4,643.4025

' Sir , ' he seyde , ' men calle me Melyas de Lyle ,
CMMALORY-M4,643.4026

and I am the sonne of the kynge of Denmarke . ' CMMALORY-M4,643.4027

' Now , fayre sir , ' seyde Galahad , ' sitthyn that ye be com of kynges
and quenys , now lokith that knyghthode be well sette in you ,
CMMALORY-M4,643.4028

for ye ought to be a myrroure unto all chevilry . '
CMMALORY-M4,643.4029

' Sir , ' seyde sir Melyas , ' ye sey soth . CMMALORY-M4,643.4030

But , sir , sytthyn ye have made me a knyght ye must of ryght graunte me
my first desyre that ys resonable . ' CMMALORY-M4,643.4031

' Ye say soth , ' seyde sir Galahad , CMMALORY-M4,643.4032

' I graunte hit you . ' CMMALORY-M4,643.4033

' Grauntmercy , myne owne lorde , ' seyde he , ' and that ye woll suffir
me to ryde with you in thys queste of the Sankgreall tyll that som
adventure departe us . ' CMMALORY-M4,643.4034

' I graunte you , sir . ' CMMALORY-M4,643.4035

Than men brought sir Melias hys armour and his speare and hys horse .
CMMALORY-M4,643.4036

And so sir Galahad and he rode forth all that wyke or ever they founde
ony adventure . CMMALORY-M4,643.4037

And than uppon a Munday in the mornynge , as they were departed frome an
abbay , they com to a crosse <P_644> whych departed two wayes ,
CMMALORY-M4,644.4038

and in that crosse were letters wretyn that seyd thus : ' NOW YE
KNYGHTES ARRAUNTE WHICH GOTH TO SEKE KNYGHTES ADVENTURYS , SE HERE TWO
WAYES : CMMALORY-M4,644.4039

THAT ONE WAY DEFENDITH THE THAT THOU NE GO THAT $WAY ,
CMMALORY-M4,644.4040

FOR HE SHALL NAT GO OUTE OF THE WAY AGAYNE BUT IF HE BE A GOOD MAN AND A
WORTHY KNYGHT . CMMALORY-M4,644.4041

AND IF THOU GO ON THE LYFFTE HONDE THOU SHALL NAT THERE LYGHTLY WYNNE
PROUESSE , CMMALORY-M4,644.4042

FOR THOU SHALT IN THYS WAY BE SONE ASSAYDE . ' CMMALORY-M4,644.4043

Sir , ' seyde Melyas unto sir Galahad , ' if hit lyke you to suffir me
to take the way on the lyffte honde <em> lette me <$$em> ,
CMMALORY-M4,644.4044

for I shall well preve my strength . ' CMMALORY-M4,644.4045

' Hit were bettir , ' seyde sir Galahad , ' ye rode nat that way ,
CMMALORY-M4,644.4046

for I deme I sholde bettir ascape in that way , better than ye . '
CMMALORY-M4,644.4047

' Nay , my lorde , I pray you lette me have that adventure . '
CMMALORY-M4,644.4048

' Take hit in Goddys name , ' seyde sir Galahad . CMMALORY-M4,644.4049

NOW TURNYTH THE TALE UNTO SYR MELYAS DE LYLE . CMMALORY-M4,644.4050

And than rode sir Melyas into an olde foreyste , CMMALORY-M4,644.4051

and therin he rode two dayes and more . CMMALORY-M4,644.4052

And than he cam into a fayre medow , CMMALORY-M4,644.4053

and there was a fayre lodge of bowys . CMMALORY-M4,644.4054

And than he aspyed in that lodge a chayre wherein was a crowne of golde
, ryche and subtyly wrought . CMMALORY-M4,644.4055

Also there was clothys coverde uppon the erthe , and many delycious
metis sette thereon . CMMALORY-M4,644.4056

So sir Melyas behylde thys adventure CMMALORY-M4,644.4057

and thought hit mervayl-ous , CMMALORY-M4,644.4058

but he had no hungir . CMMALORY-M4,644.4059

But of the crowne of golde he toke much kepe , CMMALORY-M4,644.4060

and therewith he stowped downe CMMALORY-M4,644.4061

and toke hit up , CMMALORY-M4,644.4062

and rode hys way with hit . CMMALORY-M4,644.4063

And anone he saw a knyght com rydyng aftir hym CMMALORY-M4,644.4064

and seyde , ' Sett downe that crowne whych ys nat youres ,
CMMALORY-M4,644.4065

and therefore defende you ! ' CMMALORY-M4,644.4066

Than sir Melyas blyssed hym CMMALORY-M4,644.4067

and seyde , ' Fayre Lorde of Hevyn , helpe and save thy new-made knyght
! ' CMMALORY-M4,644.4068

And than they lette their horses renne as faste as they myght ,
CMMALORY-M4,644.4069

and so they smote togydirs . CMMALORY-M4,644.4070

But the othir knyght smote sir Melyas thorow hawbirke and thorow the
$lyfft syde , that he felle to the <P_645> erth nyghe dede ,
CMMALORY-M4,645.4071

and than he toke hys crowne CMMALORY-M4,645.4072

and yode hys way . CMMALORY-M4,645.4073

And sir Melyas lay stylle CMMALORY-M4,645.4074

and had no power to styrre hym . CMMALORY-M4,645.4075

So in the meanewhyle by fortune com sir Galahad CMMALORY-M4,645.4076

and founde hym there in perell of dethe . CMMALORY-M4,645.4077

And than he seyde , ' Sir Melyas , who hath wounded you ?
CMMALORY-M4,645.4078

Therefore hit had bene better to have ryddyn the other way . '
CMMALORY-M4,645.4079

And whan sir Melyas herde hym speke , ' Sir , ' he seyde , ' for Goddys
love , let me nat dye in thys foreyst , CMMALORY-M4,645.4080

but brynge me to the abbey here besyde , that I may be confessed and
have my ryghtes . ' CMMALORY-M4,645.4081

' Hit shall be done , ' seyde sir Galahad . CMMALORY-M4,645.4082

' But where ys he that hath wounded you ? ' CMMALORY-M4,645.4083

So with that sir Galahad herde on amonge the levys cry on hyght , '
Knyght , kepe the from me ! ' CMMALORY-M4,645.4084

' A , sir ! ' seyde sir Melyas , ' beware , CMMALORY-M4,645.4085

for that $ys he that hath slayne me . ' CMMALORY-M4,645.4086

Sir Galahad answerde CMMALORY-M4,645.4087

and seyde , ' Sir knyght , com on your perell ! ' CMMALORY-M4,645.4088

Than aythir dressed to other CMMALORY-M4,645.4089

and com as fast as they myght dryve . CMMALORY-M4,645.4090

And sir Galahad smote hym so that hys speare wente thorow his shuldir ,
CMMALORY-M4,645.4091

and smote hym downe of hys horse , CMMALORY-M4,645.4092

and in the fallyng sir Galahaddis speare brake . CMMALORY-M4,645.4093

So with that com oute another knyght oute of the grene levys
CMMALORY-M4,645.4094

and brake a spere uppon sir Galahad or ever he myght turne hym .
CMMALORY-M4,645.4095

Than sir Galahad drew oute hys swerde CMMALORY-M4,645.4096

and smote the lyffte arme off , that hit felle to the erthe ;
CMMALORY-M4,645.4097

and than he fledde CMMALORY-M4,645.4098

and sir Galahad sewed faste aftir hym . CMMALORY-M4,645.4099

And than he turned agayne unto sir Melyas , CMMALORY-M4,645.4100

and there he alyght CMMALORY-M4,645.4101

and dressed hym softely on hys horse tofore hym , CMMALORY-M4,645.4102

for the truncheon of hys speare was in hys body . CMMALORY-M4,645.4103

And sir Galahad sterte up behynde hym CMMALORY-M4,645.4104

and hylde hym in hys armys , CMMALORY-M4,645.4105

and so brought hym to the abbay , CMMALORY-M4,645.4106

and there unarmed hym CMMALORY-M4,645.4107

and brought hym to hys chambir . CMMALORY-M4,645.4108

And than he asked hys Saveoure , CMMALORY-M4,645.4109

and when he had reseyved Hym he seyde unto sir Galahad , ' Syr , latte
dethe com whan hit pleasith Hym . ' CMMALORY-M4,645.4110

And therewith he drew the truncheon of the speare oute of hys body ,
CMMALORY-M4,645.4111

and than he sowned . CMMALORY-M4,645.4112

Than com there an olde monke whych somtyme had bene a knyght ,
CMMALORY-M4,645.4113

and behylde sir Melyas . CMMALORY-M4,645.4114

And anone he ransaked hym , CMMALORY-M4,645.4115

and than he seyde unto sir Galahad , <P_646> ' I shall heale hym of hys
play , by the grace of God , within the terme of seven wykes . '
CMMALORY-M4,646.4116

Than was sir Galahad glad CMMALORY-M4,646.4117

and unarmed hym CMMALORY-M4,646.4118

and seyde he wolde abyde there stylle all that nyght .
CMMALORY-M4,646.4119

Thus dwelled he there three dayes , CMMALORY-M4,646.4120

and than he asked sir Melyas how hit stood with hym .
CMMALORY-M4,646.4121

Than he seyde he was turned into helpynge , CMMALORY-M4,646.4122

God be thanked . CMMALORY-M4,646.4123

' Now woll I departe , ' sir Galahad seyde , CMMALORY-M4,646.4124

' for I have much on honde , CMMALORY-M4,646.4125

for many good knyghtes be fulle bysy aboute hit . CMMALORY-M4,646.4126

And thys knyght and I were in the same quest of the Sankgreal . '
CMMALORY-M4,646.4127

' Sir , ' seyde a good man , ' for hys synne he was thus wounded .
CMMALORY-M4,646.4128

And I mervayle , ' seyde the good man , ' how ye durste take uppon you
so rych a thynge as the hyghe Order of Knyghthode ys withoute clene
confession . CMMALORY-M4,646.4129

That was the cause that ye were bittirly wounded , CMMALORY-M4,646.4130

for the way on the ryght hande betokenyd the hygheway of oure Lorde Jesu
Cryst , and the way of a good trew lyver . CMMALORY-M4,646.4131

And the othir way betokenyth the way of synnars and of myssebelevers .
CMMALORY-M4,646.4132

And when the devyll saw your pryde and youre persumpcion for to take you
to the queste of the Sankgreal , and that made you to be overthrowyn ,
CMMALORY-M4,646.4133

for hit may nat be encheved but by vertuous lyvynge .
CMMALORY-M4,646.4134

' Also the wrytyng on the crosse was a $significacyon of hevynly dedys ,
and of knyghtly dedys in Goddys workys , and no knyghtes dedys in
worldly workis ; CMMALORY-M4,646.4135

and pryde ys hede of every synne : CMMALORY-M4,646.4136

that caused thys knyght to departe frome sir Galahad .
CMMALORY-M4,646.4137

And where thou toke the crowne of golde thou ded syn in covetyse and in
theffte . CMMALORY-M4,646.4138

All this was no knyghtly dedys . CMMALORY-M4,646.4139

And so , sir Galahad , the holy knyght which fought with the two
knyghtes $the $two $knyghtes {COM:"the_two_knyghtes"_added_by_ed.} ,
signyfyeth the two dedly synnes whych were holy in thys knyght , sir
Melias ; CMMALORY-M4,646.4140

and they myght nat withstonde you , CMMALORY-M4,646.4141

for ye ar withoute dedly synne . ' CMMALORY-M4,646.4142

So now departed sir Galahad frome thens CMMALORY-M4,646.4143

and betaughte hem all unto God . CMMALORY-M4,646.4144

Than sir Melias seyde , ' My lord , syr Galahad , as sone as I may ryde
I shall seke you . ' CMMALORY-M4,646.4145

' God sende you helthe ! ' seyde sir Galahad . CMMALORY-M4,646.4146

And so he toke hys horse CMMALORY-M4,646.4147

and departed CMMALORY-M4,646.4148

and rode many journeyes forewarde and bakwarde , CMMALORY-M4,646.4149

and departed frome a place that hyght Abblasowre CMMALORY-M4,646.4150

and had harde no masse . CMMALORY-M4,646.4151

Than sir Galahad com to a mountayne where he founde a chapell passyng
olde , CMMALORY-M4,646.4152

and founde <P_647> therein nobody , CMMALORY-M4,647.4153

for all was desolate . CMMALORY-M4,647.4154

And there he kneled before the awter CMMALORY-M4,647.4155

and besought God of good counceyle , CMMALORY-M4,647.4156

and so as he prayde he harde a voyce that seyd , ' Go thou now , thou
adventurous knyght , to the Castell of Madyns , CMMALORY-M4,647.4157

and there do thou away the wycked customes ! ' CMMALORY-M4,647.4158

Whan sir Galahad harde thys he thanked God CMMALORY-M4,647.4159

and toke hys horse , CMMALORY-M4,647.4160

and he had nat ryddyn but a whyle but he saw in a valey before hym a
stronge castell with depe dychys , CMMALORY-M4,647.4161

and there ran besyde hyt a fayre ryver that hyght Sevarne .
CMMALORY-M4,647.4162

And there he mette with a man of grete ayge , CMMALORY-M4,647.4163

and ayther salewed other , CMMALORY-M4,647.4164

and sir Galahad asked hym the castels name . CMMALORY-M4,647.4165

' Fayre sir , ' seyde he , ' hit ys the Castell of Maydyns .
CMMALORY-M4,647.4166

That ys a cursed castell and all they that be conversaunte therein ,
CMMALORY-M4,647.4167

for all pite` ys oute thereoff , CMMALORY-M4,647.4168

and all hardynes and myschyff ys therein . CMMALORY-M4,647.4169

Therefore I counceyle you , sir knyght , to turne agayne . '
CMMALORY-M4,647.4170

' Sir , ' sir Galahad seyde , ' wete you welle that I shall nat turne
agayne . ' CMMALORY-M4,647.4171

Than loked sir Galahad on hys armys that nothyng fayled hym ,
CMMALORY-M4,647.4172

and than he putte hys shylde before hym . CMMALORY-M4,647.4173

And anone there mette hym seven fayre maydyns the whych seyde unto hym ,
' Sir knyght , ye ryde here in grete foly , CMMALORY-M4,647.4174

for ye have the watir to passe over . ' CMMALORY-M4,647.4175

' Why shold I nat passe the watir ? ' seyde sir Galahad .
CMMALORY-M4,647.4176

So rode he away frome hem CMMALORY-M4,647.4177

and mette with a squyre that seyde , ' Knyght , thoo knyghtes in the
castell defyeth you CMMALORY-M4,647.4178

and defendith you ye go no farther tyll that they wete what ye wolde .
' CMMALORY-M4,647.4179

' Fayre sir , ' seyde sir Galahad , ' I com for to destroy the wycked
custom of thys castell . ' CMMALORY-M4,647.4180

' Sir ' and ye woll abyde by that ye shall have inowghe to do . '
CMMALORY-M4,647.4181

' Go ye now , ' seyde sir Galahad , CMMALORY-M4,647.4182

' and hast my nedys . ' CMMALORY-M4,647.4183

Than the squyre entird into the castell , CMMALORY-M4,647.4184

and anone aftir there com oute of the castell seven knyghtes ,
CMMALORY-M4,647.4185

and all were brethirne . CMMALORY-M4,647.4186

And whan they saw sir Galahad they cryed , ' Knyght , kepe the !
CMMALORY-M4,647.4187

For we assure you nothyng but dethe . ' CMMALORY-M4,647.4188

' Why , ' seyd Galahad , ' woll ye all have ado with me at onys ? '
CMMALORY-M4,647.4189

' Yee , ' seyde they , ' thereto mayste thou truste ! '
CMMALORY-M4,647.4190

Than Galahad put forth hys speare CMMALORY-M4,647.4191

and smote the formyst to the <P_648> erthe , that nerehonde he brake hys
necke . CMMALORY-M4,648.4192

And therewithall the other six smote hym on hys shylde grete strokes ,
that their sperys brake . CMMALORY-M4,648.4193

Than sir Galahad drew oute hys swerde CMMALORY-M4,648.4194

and sette uppon hem so harde that hit was mervayle ,
CMMALORY-M4,648.4195

and so thorow grete force he made hem for to forsake the fylde .
CMMALORY-M4,648.4196

And sir Galahad chased hem tylle they entird into the castell
CMMALORY-M4,648.4197

and so passed thorow the castell at another gate . CMMALORY-M4,648.4198

And anone there mette <em> sir Galahalte <$$em> an olde man clothyd in
relygyous clothynge CMMALORY-M4,648.4199

and seyde , ' Sir , have here the kayes of thys castell . '
CMMALORY-M4,648.4200

Than sir Galahad openyd the gatis CMMALORY-M4,648.4201

and saw so muche people in the stretys that he myght nat numbir hem .
CMMALORY-M4,648.4202

And all they seyde , ' Sir , ye be wellcom , CMMALORY-M4,648.4203

for longe have we abydyn here oure delyveraunce ! '
CMMALORY-M4,648.4204

Then com to hym a jantillwoman CMMALORY-M4,648.4205

and seyde , ' Sir , thes knyghtes be fledde , CMMALORY-M4,648.4206

but they woll com agayne thys nyght , and here to begyn agayne their
evyll custom . ' CMMALORY-M4,648.4207

' What woll ye that I do ? ' seyde sir Galahad . CMMALORY-M4,648.4208

' Sir , ' seyde the jantillwoman , ' that ye sende aftir all the
knyghtes hydir that holde their londys of thys castell , and make hem
all to swere for to use the customs that were used here of olde tyme .
' CMMALORY-M4,648.4209

' I woll well , ' seyde sir Galahad . CMMALORY-M4,648.4210

And there she brought hym an horne of ivery boundyn with golde rychely ,
CMMALORY-M4,648.4211

and seyde , ' Sir , blow thys horne whiche woll be harde two myles
aboute . ' CMMALORY-M4,648.4212

Whan sir Galahad had blowyn the horne he sette hym downe uppon a bedde .
CMMALORY-M4,648.4213

Than com a pryste to Galahad CMMALORY-M4,648.4214

and seyde , ' Sir , hit ys past a_seven yere agone that thes seven
brethirne com into thys castell and herberowde with the lorde of the
castell that hyght the dyuke Lyanowre , CMMALORY-M4,648.4215

and he was lorde of all this contrey . CMMALORY-M4,648.4216

And whan they had aspyed the dyukes doughter that was a full fayre woman
, than by there false covyn they made a bate betwyxte hemselff .
CMMALORY-M4,648.4217

And the deuke of hys goodnes wolde have departed them ,
CMMALORY-M4,648.4218

and there they slew hym and hys eldyst sonne . CMMALORY-M4,648.4219

And than they toke the maydyn and the tresoure of the castell ,
CMMALORY-M4,648.4220

and so by grete force they helde all the knyghtes of the contrey undir
grete servayge and trewayge . CMMALORY-M4,648.4221

So on a day the deukes doughter seyde to them , <P_649> ' " Ye have done
grete wronge to sle my fadir and my brothir and thus to holde oure
londys . CMMALORY-M4,649.4222

Natforthan , " she seyde , " ye shall nat holde thys castell many yerys
, CMMALORY-M4,649.4223

for by one knyght ye shall all be overcom . " CMMALORY-M4,649.4224

Thus she prophecyed seven yerys agone . CMMALORY-M4,649.4225

' " Well , " seyde the seven knyghtes , " sytthyn ye sey so , there
shall never lady nother knyght passe thys castell but they shall abyde
magre their hedys other dye therefore tyll that knyght be com by whom we
shall lose thys castell . " CMMALORY-M4,649.4226

' And therefore hit ys called the Maydyns Castell , CMMALORY-M4,649.4227

for they have devoured many maydyns . ' CMMALORY-M4,649.4228

' Now , ' seyde sir Galahad , ' ys she here for whom thys castell was
loste ? ' CMMALORY-M4,649.4229

' Nay , sir , ' seyde the pryste , ' she was dede within three nyghtes
aftir that she was thus forsed , CMMALORY-M4,649.4230

and sytthen have they kepte their yonger syster whych enduryth grete
payne with mo other ladyes . ' CMMALORY-M4,649.4231

By thys were the knyghtes of the contrey com , CMMALORY-M4,649.4232

and than he made hem to do omage and feawte` to the dukes doughter
CMMALORY-M4,649.4233

and sette them in grete ease of harte . CMMALORY-M4,649.4234

And in the morne there com $one CMMALORY-M4,649.4235

and tolde sir Galahad how that sir Gawayne , sir Gareth and sir Uwayne
had slayne the seven brethirne . CMMALORY-M4,649.4236

' I supposse well , ' seyde sir Galahad , CMMALORY-M4,649.4237

and toke hys armoure and hys horse , CMMALORY-M4,649.4238

and commaunded hem unto God . CMMALORY-M4,649.4239

HERE LEVITH THE TALE OF SIR GALAHAD CMMALORY-M4,649.4240

AND SPEKITH OF SIR GAWAYNE . CMMALORY-M4,649.4241

Now seyth the tale , aftir sir Gawayne departed he rode many journeys
both towarde and frowarde , CMMALORY-M4,649.4242

and at the laste $he com to the abbey where sir Galahad had the whyght
shylde . CMMALORY-M4,649.4243

And there sir Gawayne lerned the way to sewe aftir sir Galahad ,
CMMALORY-M4,649.4244

and so he rode to the abbey where Melyas lay syke .
CMMALORY-M4,649.4245

And there sir Melyas tolde sir Gawayne of the mervaylous adventures that
sir Galahad dud . CMMALORY-M4,649.4246

' Certes , ' seyde sir Gawayne , ' I am nat happy that I toke nat the
way that he wente . CMMALORY-M4,649.4247

For and I may mete with hym I woll nat departe from hym lyghtly ,
CMMALORY-M4,649.4248

for all mervaylous adventures sir Galahad enchevith . '
CMMALORY-M4,649.4249

' Sir , ' seyde one of the munkes , ' he woll nat of youre felyship . '
CMMALORY-M4,649.4250

' Why so ? ' seyde sir Gawayne . CMMALORY-M4,649.4251

<P_650>

' Sir , ' seyd he , ' for ye be wycked and synfull ,
CMMALORY-M4,650.4253

and he ys full blyssed . ' CMMALORY-M4,650.4254

So ryght as they thus talked there com in rydynge sir Gareth ,
CMMALORY-M4,650.4255

and than they made grete joy aythir of other . CMMALORY-M4,650.4256

And on the morne they harde masse CMMALORY-M4,650.4257

and so departed , CMMALORY-M4,650.4258

and by the way they mett with sir Uwayne le Avowtres .
CMMALORY-M4,650.4259

And $there sir Uwayne tolde sir Gawayne that he had mette with none
adventures syth he departed frome the courte . CMMALORY-M4,650.4260

' Nother yet we , ' seyd sir Gawayne . CMMALORY-M4,650.4261

And so ayther promysed othir of tho three knyghtes nat to de-parte whyle
they were in that queste but if suddayne fortune caused hyt .
CMMALORY-M4,650.4262

So they departed CMMALORY-M4,650.4263

and rode by fortune tyll that they cam by the Castell of Maydyns .
CMMALORY-M4,650.4264

And there the seven brethirn aspyed the three knyghtes
CMMALORY-M4,650.4265

and seyde , ' Sytthyn we be flemyd by one knyght from thys castell , we
shall destroy all the knyghtes of kyng Arthurs that we may overcom , for
the love of sir Galahad . ' CMMALORY-M4,650.4266

And therewith the seven knyghtes sette uppon hem three knyghtes .
CMMALORY-M4,650.4267

And by fortune sir Gawayne slew one $of the brethren ,
CMMALORY-M4,650.4268

and ech one of hys felowys overthrew anothir , CMMALORY-M4,650.4269

and so $slew all the remenaunte . CMMALORY-M4,650.4270

And than they toke the wey undir the castell , CMMALORY-M4,650.4271

and there they loste the way that sir Galahad rode .
CMMALORY-M4,650.4272

And there everych of hem departed from other . CMMALORY-M4,650.4273

And sir Gawayne rode tyll he com to an ermytayge , CMMALORY-M4,650.4274

and there he founde the good man seyynge hys evynsonge of oure Lady .
CMMALORY-M4,650.4275

And there sir $Gawayne asked herberow for charite` ,
CMMALORY-M4,650.4276

and the good man graunted hym gladly . CMMALORY-M4,650.4277

Than the good man asked hym what he was . CMMALORY-M4,650.4278

' Sir , ' he seyde , ' I am a knyght of kynge Arthures that am in the
queste of the Sankgreall , CMMALORY-M4,650.4279

and my name ys sir Gawayne . ' CMMALORY-M4,650.4280

' Sir , ' seyde the good man , ' I wolde wete how hit stondith betwyxte
God and you . ' CMMALORY-M4,650.4281

' Sir , ' seyd sir Gawayne , ' I wyll with a good wyll shew you my lyff
if hit please you . ' CMMALORY-M4,650.4282

There he tolde the eremyte how a monke of an abbay ' called me wycked
knyght ' . CMMALORY-M4,650.4283

' He myght well sey hit , ' seyde the eremyte , CMMALORY-M4,650.4284

' for when ye were made first knyght ye sholde have takyn you to
knyghtly dedys and vertuous lyvyng . CMMALORY-M4,650.4285

And ye have done the contrary , CMMALORY-M4,650.4286

for ye have lyved <P_651> myschevously many wyntirs .
CMMALORY-M4,651.4287

And sir Galahad ys a mayde CMMALORY-M4,651.4288

and synned never , CMMALORY-M4,651.4289

and that ys the cause he shall enchyve where he goth that ye nor none
suche shall never attayne , nother none in youre felyship ,
CMMALORY-M4,651.4290

for ye have used the moste untrewyst lyff that ever I herd knyght lyve .
CMMALORY-M4,651.4291

For sertes , had ye nat bene so wycked as ye ar , never had the seven
brethirne be slayne by you and youre two felowys : CMMALORY-M4,651.4292

for sir Galahad hymself alone bete hem all seven the day toforne ,
CMMALORY-M4,651.4293

but hys lyvyng ys such that he shall sle no man lyghtly .
CMMALORY-M4,651.4294

' Also I may sey you that the Castell of Maydyns betokenyth the good
soulys that were in preson before the Incarnacion of oure Lorde Jesu
Cryste . CMMALORY-M4,651.4295

And the seven knyghtes betokenyth the seven dedly synnes that regned
that tyme in the worlde . CMMALORY-M4,651.4296

And I may lyckyn the good knyght Galahad unto the Sonne of the Hyghe
Fadir that lyght within a maydyn and bought all the soules oute of
thralle : CMMALORY-M4,651.4297

so ded sir Galahad delyver all the maydyns oute of the woofull castell .
CMMALORY-M4,651.4298

Now , sir Gawayne , ' seyde the good man , ' thou muste do penaunce for
thy synne . ' CMMALORY-M4,651.4299

' Sir , what penaunce shall I do ? ' CMMALORY-M4,651.4300

' Such as I woll gyff the , ' seyde the good man . CMMALORY-M4,651.4301

' Nay , ' seyd sir Gawayne , ' I may do no penaunce ,
CMMALORY-M4,651.4302

for we knyghtes adventures many tymes suffir grete woo and payne . '
CMMALORY-M4,651.4303

' Well , ' seyde the good man , CMMALORY-M4,651.4304

and than he hylde hys pece . CMMALORY-M4,651.4305

And on the morne than sir Gawayne departed frome the ermyte
CMMALORY-M4,651.4306

and bytaught hym unto God . CMMALORY-M4,651.4307

And by adventure he mette wyth sir Agglovale and sir Gryfflet , two
knyghtes of the Rounde Table , CMMALORY-M4,651.4308

and so they three rode four dayes withoute fyndynge of ony adventure .
CMMALORY-M4,651.4309

And at the fifth day they departed CMMALORY-M4,651.4310

and everych hylde as felle them by adventure . CMMALORY-M4,651.4311

HERE LEVITH THE TALE OF SYR GAWAYNE AND HYS FELOWYS CMMALORY-M4,651.4312

AND SPEKITH OF SIR GALAHAD . CMMALORY-M4,651.4313

So whan sir Galahad was departed frome the Castell of Maydyns he rode
tyll he com to a waste forest , CMMALORY-M4,651.4314

and there he mette with sir Launcelot and sir Percivale .
CMMALORY-M4,651.4315

But they knew hym nat , CMMALORY-M4,651.4316

for he was new dysgysed . CMMALORY-M4,651.4317

Ryght so hys fadir , sir Launcelot , dressed hys speare
CMMALORY-M4,651.4318

and brake hit uppon sir Galahad , CMMALORY-M4,651.4319

and sir Galahad smote hym so agayne that he bare downe horse and man .
CMMALORY-M4,651.4320

And than he drew his swerde CMMALORY-M4,651.4321

<P_652>

and dressed hym unto sir Percyvall CMMALORY-M4,652.4323

and smote hym so on the helme that hit rooff to the coyff of steele ,
CMMALORY-M4,652.4324

and had nat the swerde swarved sir Percyvale had be slayne .
CMMALORY-M4,652.4325

And with the stroke he felle oute of hys sadyll . CMMALORY-M4,652.4326

So thys justis was done tofore the ermytayge where a recluse dwelled .
CMMALORY-M4,652.4327

And whan she saw sir Galahad ryde she seyde , ' God be with the , beste
knyght of the worlde ! CMMALORY-M4,652.4328

A , sertes , ' seyde she all alowde , that sir $Launcelot and Percyvall
myght hyre , ' and yondir two knyghtes had knowyn the as well as I do ,
they wolde nat have encountird with the . ' CMMALORY-M4,652.4329

Whan sir Galahad herde hir sey so he was adrad to be knowyn ,
CMMALORY-M4,652.4330

and therewith he smote hys horse with his sporys CMMALORY-M4,652.4331

and rode a grete pace toward them . CMMALORY-M4,652.4332

Than perceyved they bothe that he was sir Galahad , CMMALORY-M4,652.4333

and up they gate on their horsys CMMALORY-M4,652.4334

and rode faste aftir hym . CMMALORY-M4,652.4335

But within a whyle he was oute of hir syght , CMMALORY-M4,652.4336

and than they turned agayne wyth hevy chere CMMALORY-M4,652.4337

and seyde , ' Lat us spyrre som tydynges , ' seyde Percyvale , ' at
yondir rekles . ' CMMALORY-M4,652.4338

' Do as ye lyst , ' seyde sir Launcelot . CMMALORY-M4,652.4339

So whan sir Percyvale com to the recluse she knew hym well ynoughe and
sir Launcelot both . CMMALORY-M4,652.4340

But syr Launcelot rode overthwarte and endelonge a wylde foreyst
CMMALORY-M4,652.4341

and hylde no patthe but as wylde adventure lad hym .
CMMALORY-M4,652.4342

And at the last he com to a stony crosse whych departed two wayes in
waste londe , CMMALORY-M4,652.4343

and by the crosse was a stone that was a marble , CMMALORY-M4,652.4344

but hit was so durke that sir Launcelot myght nat wete what hyt was .
CMMALORY-M4,652.4345

Than sir Launcelot loked bysyde hym CMMALORY-M4,652.4346

and saw an olde chapell , CMMALORY-M4,652.4347

and there he wente to have founde people . CMMALORY-M4,652.4348

And anone sir Launcelot fastenyd hys horse tylle a tre ,
CMMALORY-M4,652.4349

and there he dud of hys shylde CMMALORY-M4,652.4350

and hynge hyt uppon a tre , CMMALORY-M4,652.4351

and than he wente to the chapell dore CMMALORY-M4,652.4352

and founde hit waste and brokyn . CMMALORY-M4,652.4353

And within he founde a fayre awter full rychely arayde with clothe of
clene sylke , CMMALORY-M4,652.4354

and there stoode a clene fayre candyllstykke whych bare six grete
candyls therein , CMMALORY-M4,652.4355

and the candilstyk was of sylver ; CMMALORY-M4,652.4356

and whan sir Launcelot saw thys lyght he had grete wylle for to entir
into the chapell , CMMALORY-M4,652.4357

but he coude fynde no place where he myght entir . CMMALORY-M4,652.4358

Than was he passyng hevy and dysmayed , CMMALORY-M4,652.4359

and returned ayen CMMALORY-M4,652.4360

and cam to hys horse , CMMALORY-M4,652.4361

and dud of hys sadyll and brydyll CMMALORY-M4,652.4362

and leete hym pasture <P_653> hym , CMMALORY-M4,653.4363

and unlaced hys helme CMMALORY-M4,653.4364

and ungerde hys swerde CMMALORY-M4,653.4365

and layde hym downe to slepe uppon hys shylde tofore the crosse .
CMMALORY-M4,653.4366

And so he felle on slepe ; CMMALORY-M4,653.4367

and half wakyng and half slepynge he saw commyng by hym two palfreyes ,
all fayre and whyght , whych bare a lytter , and therein lyyng a syke
knyght . CMMALORY-M4,653.4368

And when he was nyghe the crosse he there abode stylle .
CMMALORY-M4,653.4369

All thys sir Launcelot sye CMMALORY-M4,653.4370

and behylde hit , CMMALORY-M4,653.4371

for he slepte nat veryly , CMMALORY-M4,653.4372

and he herde hym sey , ' A , sweete Lorde ! Whan shall thys sorow leve
me , CMMALORY-M4,653.4373

and whan shall the holy vessell com by me wherethorow I shall be heled ?
CMMALORY-M4,653.4374

For I have endured thus longe for litill trespasse , a full grete whyle
! ' CMMALORY-M4,653.4375

Thus complayned the knyght CMMALORY-M4,653.4376

and allways sir Launcelot harde hit . CMMALORY-M4,653.4377

So with that sir Launcelot sye the candyllstyk with the $six tapirs cam
before the crosse , CMMALORY-M4,653.4378

and he saw nobody that brought hit . CMMALORY-M4,653.4379

Also there cam a table of sylver and the holy vessell of the Sankgreall
which sir Launcelot had sene toforetyme in kynge $Pescheors house .
CMMALORY-M4,653.4380

And therewith the syke knyght sette hym up , CMMALORY-M4,653.4381

and hylde up both hys hondys , CMMALORY-M4,653.4382

and seyde , ' Fayre swete Lorde whych ys here within the holy vessell !
take hede unto me , that I may be hole of thys malody ! '
CMMALORY-M4,653.4383

And therewith on hys hondys and kneys he wente so nyghe that he towched
the holy vessell and kyst hit , CMMALORY-M4,653.4384

and anone he was hole . CMMALORY-M4,653.4385

And than he seyde , ' Lorde God , I thanke The , CMMALORY-M4,653.4386

for I am helyd of thys syknes ! ' CMMALORY-M4,653.4387

So whan the holy vessell had bene there a grete whyle hit went unto the
chapell with the chaundeler and the lyght , so that sir Launcelot wyst
nat where hit was becom ; CMMALORY-M4,653.4388

for he was overtakyn with synne , that he had no power to ryse agayne
the holy vessell . Wherefore aftir that many men seyde hym shame ,
CMMALORY-M4,653.4389

but he toke repentaunce aftir that . CMMALORY-M4,653.4390

Than the syke knyght dressed hym up CMMALORY-M4,653.4391

and kyssed the crosse . CMMALORY-M4,653.4392

Anone hys squyre brought hym hys armys CMMALORY-M4,653.4393

and $asked hys lorde how he ded . CMMALORY-M4,653.4394

' Sertes , ' seyde he , ' I thanke God , ryght well !
CMMALORY-M4,653.4395

Thorow the holy vessell I am heled . CMMALORY-M4,653.4396

But I have mervayle of thys slepyng knyght that he had no power to awake
whan thys holy vessell was brought hydir . ' CMMALORY-M4,653.4397

' I dare well sey , ' seyde the squyre , ' that he dwellith in som dedly
synne whereof he was never confessed . ' CMMALORY-M4,653.4398

<P_654>

' Be my fayth , ' seyde the knyght , ' whatsomever he be , he ys
un-happy . CMMALORY-M4,654.4400

For as I deme he ys of the felyship of the Rounde Table whych ys entird
in the queste of the Sankgreall . ' CMMALORY-M4,654.4401

' Sir , ' seyde the squyre , ' here I have brought you all youre armys
save youre helme and youre swerde , CMMALORY-M4,654.4402

and therefore , be myne assente , now may ye take thys knyghtes helme
and his swerde . ' CMMALORY-M4,654.4403

And so he dud . CMMALORY-M4,654.4404

And whan he was clene armed he toke there sir Launcelottis horse ,
CMMALORY-M4,654.4405

for he was bettir than hys , CMMALORY-M4,654.4406

and so departed they frome the crosse . CMMALORY-M4,654.4407

Than anone sir Launcelot waked and sett hym up CMMALORY-M4,654.4408

and bethought hym what he had sene there and whether hit were dremys or
nat . CMMALORY-M4,654.4409

Ryght so harde he a voyse that seyde , ' Sir Launcelot , more harder
than ys the stone , and more bitter than ys the woode , and more naked
and barer than ys the lyeff of the fygge-tre ! CMMALORY-M4,654.4410

Therefore go thou from hens , CMMALORY-M4,654.4411

and withdraw the from thys holy places ! ' CMMALORY-M4,654.4412

And whan sir Launcelot herde thys he was passyng hevy
CMMALORY-M4,654.4413

and wyst nat what to do . CMMALORY-M4,654.4414

And so departed sore wepynge CMMALORY-M4,654.4415

and cursed the tyme that he was $borne , CMMALORY-M4,654.4416

for than he demed never to have worship more . CMMALORY-M4,654.4417

For tho wordis wente to hys herte , tylle that he knew where-fore he was
called so . CMMALORY-M4,654.4418

Than sir Launcelot wente to the crosse CMMALORY-M4,654.4419

and founde hys helme , hys swerde , and hys $horse away .
CMMALORY-M4,654.4420

And than he called hymselff a verry wrecch and moste unhappy of all
knyghtes , CMMALORY-M4,654.4421

and there he seyde , ' My synne and my wyckednes hath brought me unto
grete dis-honoure ! CMMALORY-M4,654.4422

For whan I sought worldly adventures for worldely de-syres I ever
encheved them CMMALORY-M4,654.4423

and had the bettir in every place , CMMALORY-M4,654.4424

and never was I discomfite in no quarell , were hit ryght were hit
wronge . CMMALORY-M4,654.4425

And now I take uppon me the adventures to seke of holy thynges ,
CMMALORY-M4,654.4426

now I se and undirstonde that myne olde synne hyndryth me and shamyth me
, that I had no power to stirre nother speke whan the holy bloode
appered before me . ' CMMALORY-M4,654.4427

So thus he sorowed tyll hit was day , CMMALORY-M4,654.4428

and harde the fowlys synge ; CMMALORY-M4,654.4429

than somwhat he was comforted . CMMALORY-M4,654.4430

But when sir Launcelot myssed his horse and hys harneyse than he wyst
well God was displesed with hym . CMMALORY-M4,654.4431

And so he departed frome the crosse on foote into a fayre <P_655>
foreyste , CMMALORY-M4,655.4432

and so by pryme he cam to an hyghe hylle CMMALORY-M4,655.4433

and founde an ermytage and an ermyte therein whych was goyng unto masse
. CMMALORY-M4,655.4434

And than sir Launcelot kneled downe CMMALORY-M4,655.4435

and cryed on oure Lorde mercy for hys wycked workys .
CMMALORY-M4,655.4436

So whan masse was done sir Launcelot called hym , CMMALORY-M4,655.4437

and prayde hym for seynte charite` for to hyre hys lyff .
CMMALORY-M4,655.4438

' With a good wylle , ' seyde the good man , CMMALORY-M4,655.4439

and asked hym whethir he was of kyng Arthurs and of the felyship of the
Table Rounde . CMMALORY-M4,655.4440

' Ye , forsoth , sir , CMMALORY-M4,655.4441

and my name ys sir Launcelot du Lake , that hath bene ryght well seyde
off . CMMALORY-M4,655.4442

And now my good fortune ys chonged , CMMALORY-M4,655.4443

for I am the moste wrecch of the worlde . ' CMMALORY-M4,655.4444

The ermyte behylde hym CMMALORY-M4,655.4445

and had mervayle whye he was so abaysshed . CMMALORY-M4,655.4446

' Sir , ' seyde the ermyte , ' ye ought to thanke God more than ony
knyght lyvynge , CMMALORY-M4,655.4447

for He hath caused you to have more worldly worship than ony knyght that
ys now lyvynge . CMMALORY-M4,655.4448

And for youre presumpcion to take uppon you in dedely synne for to be in
Hys presence , where Hys fleyssh and Hys blood was , which caused you ye
myght nat se hyt with youre worldely yen , CMMALORY-M4,655.4449

for He woll nat appere where such synners bene but if hit be unto their
grete hurte other unto their shame . CMMALORY-M4,655.4450

And there is no knyght now lyvynge that ought to yelde God so grete
thanke os ye , CMMALORY-M4,655.4451

for He hath yevyn you beaute` , bownte` , semelynes , and grete
strengthe over all other knyghtes . CMMALORY-M4,655.4452

And therefore ye ar the more beholdyn unto God than ony other man to
love Hym and drede Hym , CMMALORY-M4,655.4453

for youre strengthe and your manhode woll litill avayle you and God be
agaynste you . ' CMMALORY-M4,655.4454

Than sir Launcelot wepte with hevy harte CMMALORY-M4,655.4455

and seyde , ' Now I know well ye sey me sothe . ' CMMALORY-M4,655.4456

' Sir , ' seyde the good man , ' hyde none olde synne frome me . '
CMMALORY-M4,655.4457

' Truly , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' that were me full lothe to discover
, CMMALORY-M4,655.4458

for thys fourtene yere I never discoverde one thynge that I have used ,
CMMALORY-M4,655.4459

and that may I now wyghte my shame and my disadventures . '
CMMALORY-M4,655.4460

And than he tolde there the good man all hys lyff , and how he had loved
a quene unmesurabely and oute of mesure longe . CMMALORY-M4,655.4461

' And all my grete dedis of armys that I have done for the moste party
was for the quenys sake , CMMALORY-M4,655.4462

and for hir sake wolde I do batayle were hit ryght other wronge .
CMMALORY-M4,655.4463

And never dud I batayle all only $for <P_656> Goddis sake , but for to
wynne worship and to cause me the bettir to be beloved ,
CMMALORY-M4,656.4464

and litill or nought I thanked never God of hit . '
CMMALORY-M4,656.4465

Than sir Launcelot seyde , ' Sir , I pray you counceyle me . '
CMMALORY-M4,656.4466

' Sir , I woll counceyle you , ' seyde the ermyte , ' $yf ye shall
ensure me by youre knyghthode ye shall no more com in that quenys
fely-ship as much as ye may forbere . ' CMMALORY-M4,656.4467

And than sir Launcelot promysed hym that he n@ @olde , by the faythe of
hys body . CMMALORY-M4,656.4468

' Sir , loke that your harte and youre mowth accorde , ' seyde the good
man , ' and I shall ensure you ye shall have the more worship than ever
ye had . ' CMMALORY-M4,656.4469

' Holy fadir , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' I mervayle of the voyce that
seyde to me mervayles wordes , as ye have herde toforehonde . '
CMMALORY-M4,656.4470

' Have ye no mervayle , ' seyde the good man , ' thereoff ,
CMMALORY-M4,656.4471

for hit semyth well God lovith you . CMMALORY-M4,656.4472

For men may undirstonde a stone ys harde of kynde , and namely one more
than another , CMMALORY-M4,656.4473

and that ys to undirstonde by the , sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,656.4474

for thou wolt nat leve thy synne for no goodnes that God hath sente the
. CMMALORY-M4,656.4475

Therefore thou arte more harder than ony stone , CMMALORY-M4,656.4476

and woldyst never be made neyssh nother by watir nother by fyre ,
CMMALORY-M4,656.4477

and that ys the hete of the Holy Goste may nat entir in the .
CMMALORY-M4,656.4478

' Now take hede , CMMALORY-M4,656.4479

in all the worlde men shall nat fynde one knyght to whom oure Lorde hath
yevyn so much of grace as He hath lente the , CMMALORY-M4,656.4480

for He hathe yeffyn the fayrenes with semelynes ; CMMALORY-M4,656.4481

also He hath yevyn the wytte and discression to know good frome ille .
CMMALORY-M4,656.4482

He hath also yevyn prouesse and hardinesse , and gevyn the to worke so
largely that thou hast had the bettir all thy dayes of thy lyff
where-somever thou cam . CMMALORY-M4,656.4483

And now oure Lorde wolde suffir the no lenger but that thou shalt know
Hym whether $thou wolt other n@ @ylt . And why the voyce called the
bitterer than the woode , CMMALORY-M4,656.4484

for wheresomever much synne dwellith there may be but lytyll swetnesse ;
wherefore thou art lykened to an olde rottyn tre . CMMALORY-M4,656.4485

' Now have I shewed the why thou art harder than the stone and bitterer
than the tre ; CMMALORY-M4,656.4486

now shall I shew the why thou art more naked and barer than the
fygge-tre . CMMALORY-M4,656.4487

Hit befelle that oure Lorde on Palme Sonday preched in Jerusalem ,
CMMALORY-M4,656.4488

and there He founde in the people that all hardnes was herberowd in them
, CMMALORY-M4,656.4489

and there He founde in all <P_657> the towne nat one that wolde herberow
Hym . CMMALORY-M4,657.4490

And than He wente oute of the towne CMMALORY-M4,657.4491

and founde in myddis the way a fygge-tre which was ryght fayre and well
garnysshed of levys , CMMALORY-M4,657.4492

but fruyte had hit none . CMMALORY-M4,657.4493

Than oure Lorde cursed the tre that bare no fruyte ;
CMMALORY-M4,657.4494

that betokenyth the fyg-tre unto Jerusalem that had levys and no fruyte
. CMMALORY-M4,657.4495

So thou , sir Launcelot , whan the Holy Grayle was brought before the ,
He founde in the no fruyte , nother good thought nother good wylle , and
defouled with lechory . ' CMMALORY-M4,657.4496

' Sertes , ' seyde sir Launcelot , ' all that ye have seyde ys trew ,
CMMALORY-M4,657.4497

and frome hensforewarde I caste me , by the grace of God , never to be
so wycked as I have bene but as to sew knyghthode and to do fetys of
armys . ' CMMALORY-M4,657.4498

Than thys good man joyned sir Launcelot suche penaunce as he myght do
and to sew knyghthode , CMMALORY-M4,657.4499

and so assoyled hym , CMMALORY-M4,657.4500

and prayde hym to abyde with hym all that day . CMMALORY-M4,657.4501

' I woll well , ' seyde sir Launcelot , CMMALORY-M4,657.4502

' for I have nother helme , horse , ne swerde . ' CMMALORY-M4,657.4503

' As for that , ' seyde the good man , ' I shall helpe you or to-morne
at evyn of an horse and all that longith unto you . '
CMMALORY-M4,657.4504

And than sir Launcelot repented hym gretly of hys myssededys .
CMMALORY-M4,657.4505

HERE LEVITH THE TALE OF SIR LAUNCELOT CMMALORY-M4,657.4506

AND BEGYNNYTH OF SIR PERCYVALE DE GALIS . CMMALORY-M4,657.4507

<heading>

III . CMMALORY-M4,657.4509

SIR PERCEVAL CMMALORY-M4,657.4510

<$$heading>

Now seyth the tale that whan sir Launcelot was ryddyn aftir sir Galahad
, the whych had all thes adventures aboven seyd , sir Percivale turned
agayne unto the recluse where he demed to have tydynges of that knyght
that sir Launcelot folowed . CMMALORY-M4,657.4512

And so he kneled at hir wyndow , CMMALORY-M4,657.4513

and the recluse opened hit CMMALORY-M4,657.4514

and asked sir Percivale what he wolde . CMMALORY-M4,657.4515

' Madam , ' he seyde , ' I am a knyght of kyng Arthurs courte
CMMALORY-M4,657.4516

and my name ys sir Percivale de Galis . ' CMMALORY-M4,657.4517

Whan the recluse herde his name she had grete joy of hym ,
CMMALORY-M4,657.4518

for mykyll she loved hym toforn passyng ony other knyght ;
CMMALORY-M4,657.4519

she ought so to do , CMMALORY-M4,657.4520

for she was hys awnte . CMMALORY-M4,657.4521

And than she commaunded the gatis <P_658> to be opyn ,
CMMALORY-M4,658.4522

and there he had grete chere , as grete as she myght make hym or ly in
hir power . CMMALORY-M4,658.4523

So on the morne sir Percyvale wente to the recluse CMMALORY-M4,658.4524

and asked her if she knew that knyght with the whyght shylde .
CMMALORY-M4,658.4525

' Sir , ' seyde she , ' why woll ye wete ? ' CMMALORY-M4,658.4526

' Truly , madam , ' seyde sir Percyvale , ' I shall never be well at
ease tyll that I know of that knyghtes felyship and that I may fyght
with hym , CMMALORY-M4,658.4527

for I may nat leve hym so lyghtly , CMMALORY-M4,658.4528

for I have the shame as yette . ' CMMALORY-M4,658.4529

' A , sir Percyvale ! ' seyde she , ' wolde ye fyght with hym ?
CMMALORY-M4,658.4530

I se well ye have grete wyll to be slayne , as youre fadir was thorow
outerageousnes slayne . ' CMMALORY-M4,658.4531

' Madam , hit semyth by your wordis that ye know me . '
CMMALORY-M4,658.4532

' Yee , ' seyde she , ' I well oughte to know you , CMMALORY-M4,658.4533

for I am your awnte , allthoughe I be in a poore place .
CMMALORY-M4,658.4534

For som men called me somtyme the Quene of the Wast Landis ,
CMMALORY-M4,658.4535

and I was called the quene of moste rychesse in the worlde .
CMMALORY-M4,658.4536

And hit pleased me never so much my rychesse as doth my poverte` . '
CMMALORY-M4,658.4537

Than Percyvale wepte for verry pite` whan he knew hit was hys awnte .
CMMALORY-M4,658.4538

' A , fayre nevew , ' seyde she , ' whan herde you tydynges of youre
modir ? ' CMMALORY-M4,658.4539

' Truly , ' seyde he , ' I herde none of hir , CMMALORY-M4,658.4540

but I dreme of hir muche in my slepe , CMMALORY-M4,658.4541

and therefore I wote nat whethir she be dede other alyve . '
CMMALORY-M4,658.4542

' Sertes , fayre nevew , youre modir ys dede , CMMALORY-M4,658.4543

for aftir youre departynge frome her she toke such a sorow that anone as
she was confessed she dyed . ' CMMALORY-M4,658.4544

' Now god have mercy on hir soule ! ' seyde sir Percyvale .
CMMALORY-M4,658.4545

' Hit sore forthynkith me ; CMMALORY-M4,658.4546

but all we muste change the lyff . CMMALORY-M4,658.4547

Now , fayre awnte , what ys that knyght ? CMMALORY-M4,658.4548

I deme hit be he that bare the rede armys on Whytsonday . '
CMMALORY-M4,658.4549

' Wyte you well , ' seyde she , ' that this ys he , CMMALORY-M4,658.4550

for othirwyse ougth he nat to do but to go in rede armys .
CMMALORY-M4,658.4551

And that same knyght hath no peere , CMMALORY-M4,658.4552

for he worchith all by myracle , CMMALORY-M4,658.4553

and he shall never be overcom of none erthly mannys hande .
CMMALORY-M4,658.4554

' Also Merlyon made the Rounde Table in tokenyng of rowndnes of the
worlde , CMMALORY-M4,658.4555

for men sholde by the Rounde Table undirstonde the <P_659> rowndenes
signyfyed by ryght . CMMALORY-M4,659.4556

For all the worlde , crystenyd and hethyn , repayryth unto the Rounde
Table , CMMALORY-M4,659.4557

and whan they ar chosyn to be of the felyshyp of the Rounde Table they
thynke hemselff more blessed and more in worship than
{they_think_themself_if} they had gotyn halff the worlde .
CMMALORY-M4,659.4558

' And ye have sene that they have loste hir fadirs and hir modirs and
all hir kynne , and hir wyves and chyldren , for to be of youre felyship
. CMMALORY-M4,659.4559

Hit ys well seyne be you , CMMALORY-M4,659.4560

for synes ye departed from your modir ye wolde never se her , ye founde
such felyship at the Table Rounde . CMMALORY-M4,659.4561

' Whan Merlyon had ordayned the Rounde Table he seyde , " By them whych
sholde be felowys of the Rounde Table the trouth of the Sankgreall
sholde be well knowyn . " CMMALORY-M4,659.4562

And men asked hym how they myght know them that sholde best do and to
encheve the Sankgreall . CMMALORY-M4,659.4563

Than he seyde , " There sholde be three whyght bullis sholde encheve hit
, CMMALORY-M4,659.4564

and the two sholde be maydyns CMMALORY-M4,659.4565

and the thirde sholde be chaste . CMMALORY-M4,659.4566

And one of thos three shold passe hys fadir as much as the lyon passith
the lybarde , both of strength and of hardines . " CMMALORY-M4,659.4567

' They that herde Merlion sey so seyde thus : CMMALORY-M4,659.4568

" Sitthyn there shall be such a knyght , thou sholdyst ordayne by thy
craufftes a syge , that no man sholde sytte in hit but he all only that
shold passe all other knyghtes . " CMMALORY-M4,659.4569

Than Merlyon answerde that he wold so do , CMMALORY-M4,659.4570

and than he made the Syge Perelous <em> in the <$$em> whych Galahad sate
at hys mete on Whyttsonday last past . ' CMMALORY-M4,659.4571

' Now , Madam , ' seyde sir Percyvale , ' so much have I herde of you
that be my good wyll I woll never have ado with sir Galahad but by wey
of goodnesse . CMMALORY-M4,659.4572

And for Goddis love , fayre awnte , can ye teche me $where I myght fynde
hym ? CMMALORY-M4,659.4573

For much I wolde love the felyship of hym . ' CMMALORY-M4,659.4574

' Fayre nevew , ' seyde she , ' ye muste ryde unto a castell , the whych
ys called Gooth , where he hath a cousyn jermayne , CMMALORY-M4,659.4575

and there may ye be lodged thys nyght . CMMALORY-M4,659.4576

And as he techith you , sewith afftir as faste as ye can ;
CMMALORY-M4,659.4577

and if he can telle you no tydynges of hym , ryde streyte unto the
castell of Carbonek where the Maymed Kyng ys lyyng ,
CMMALORY-M4,659.4578

for there shall ye hyre trew tydynges of hym . ' CMMALORY-M4,659.4579

Than departed sir Percivale frome hys awnte , aythir makyng grete sorow
. CMMALORY-M4,659.4580

And so he rode tyll aftir evynsonge , CMMALORY-M4,659.4581

and than he herde <P_660> a clock smyte . CMMALORY-M4,660.4582

And anone he was ware of an house closed well with wallys and depe
dyches , CMMALORY-M4,660.4583

and there he knocke at the gate . CMMALORY-M4,660.4584

And anone he was lette in , CMMALORY-M4,660.4585

and <em> he alyght CMMALORY-M4,660.4586

and <$$em> was ledde unto a chamber and sone onarmed .
CMMALORY-M4,660.4587

And there he had ryght good chere all that nyght . CMMALORY-M4,660.4588

And on the morne he herde hys masse , CMMALORY-M4,660.4589

and in the monestery he founde a preste redy at the awter ,
CMMALORY-M4,660.4590

and on the ryght syde he saw a pew closed with iron ,
CMMALORY-M4,660.4591

and behynde the awter he saw a ryche bedde and a fayre , as of cloth of
sylke and golde . CMMALORY-M4,660.4592

Than sir Percivale aspyed that therein was a man or a woman ,
CMMALORY-M4,660.4593

for the visayge was coverde . CMMALORY-M4,660.4594

Than he leffte of hys lokynge CMMALORY-M4,660.4595

and herd hys servyse . CMMALORY-M4,660.4596

And whan hit cam unto the sakarynge , he that lay within the perclose
dressyd hym up CMMALORY-M4,660.4597

and uncoverde hys hede , CMMALORY-M4,660.4598

and than hym besemed a passyng olde man , CMMALORY-M4,660.4599

and he had a crowne of golde uppon hys hede , CMMALORY-M4,660.4600

and hys shuldirs were naked and unhylled unto hys navyll .
CMMALORY-M4,660.4601

And than sir Percyvale aspyed hys body was full of grete woundys , both
on the shuldirs , armys , and vysayge . CMMALORY-M4,660.4602

And ever he hylde up hys hondys agaynst oure Lordis Body
CMMALORY-M4,660.4603

and cryed , ' Fayre swete Lorde Jesu Cryste , forgete nat me ! '
CMMALORY-M4,660.4604

And so he lay nat downe , CMMALORY-M4,660.4605

but was allway in hys prayers and orysons , CMMALORY-M4,660.4606

and hym semed to be of the ayge of three_hondred wynter .
CMMALORY-M4,660.4607

And whan the masse was done the pryste toke oure Lordys Body
CMMALORY-M4,660.4608

and bare hit unto the syke kynge . CMMALORY-M4,660.4609

And whan he had used hit he ded of hys crowne CMMALORY-M4,660.4610

and commaunded the crowne to be sett on the awter .
CMMALORY-M4,660.4611

Than sir Percyvale asked one of the brethirn what he was .
CMMALORY-M4,660.4612

' Sir , ' seyde the good man , ' ye have herde much of Joseph of
Aramathy ; how he was sent <em> by Jesu Cryst <$$em> into thys londe for
to teche and preche the holy Crysten faythe , CMMALORY-M4,660.4613

and therefor he suffird many persecucions the whych the enemyes of Cryst
ded unto hym . CMMALORY-M4,660.4614

And in the cite` of Sarras he converted a kynge whos name was Evelake ,
CMMALORY-M4,660.4615

and so the kyng cam with Joseph into thys londe , CMMALORY-M4,660.4616

and ever he was bysy to be there@ @as the Sankgreall was .
CMMALORY-M4,660.4617

And on a tyme he nyghed hit so nyghe that oure Lorde was displeased with
hym , CMMALORY-M4,660.4618

but ever he folowed hit more and more tyll God stroke hym allmoste
blynde . CMMALORY-M4,660.4619

Than thys $kynge cryed mercy CMMALORY-M4,660.4620

and seyde , ' " Fayre Lorde , lat me never dye tyll the good knyght of
my blood <P_661> of the ninth degre` <em> be com <$$em> , that I may se
hym opynly that shall encheve the Sankgreall , and that I myght kysse
hym . " CMMALORY-M4,661.4621

' Whan the kynge thus had made hys prayers he herde a voyce that seyde ,
" Herde ys thy prayers , CMMALORY-M4,661.4622

for thou shalt nat dye tylle he hath kyssed the . CMMALORY-M4,661.4623

And whan that knyght shall com the clerenes of youre yen shall com
agayne , CMMALORY-M4,661.4624

and thou shalt se opynly , CMMALORY-M4,661.4625

and thy $woundes shall be heled , CMMALORY-M4,661.4626

and arst shall they never close . " CMMALORY-M4,661.4627

' And thus befelle of kynge Evelake , CMMALORY-M4,661.4628

and thys same kynge hath lyved four_hondred yerys thys holy lyff ,
CMMALORY-M4,661.4629

and men sey the knyght ys in thys courte that shall heale hym .
CMMALORY-M4,661.4630

Sir , ' seyde the good man , ' I pray you telle me what knyght that ye
be , and if that ye be of the Rownde Table . ' CMMALORY-M4,661.4631

' Yes , forsoth , and my name ys sir Percyvale de Galis . '
CMMALORY-M4,661.4632

And whan the good man undirstood hys name he made grete joy of hym .
CMMALORY-M4,661.4633

And than sir Percyvale departed CMMALORY-M4,661.4634

and rode tylle the owre of none . CMMALORY-M4,661.4635

And he mette in a valey aboute twenty men of armys whych bare in a beere
a knyght dedly slayne . CMMALORY-M4,661.4636

And whan they saw sir Percyvale they $asked hym of whens he was ,
CMMALORY-M4,661.4637

and he seyde , ' Of the courte of kynge Arthur . ' CMMALORY-M4,661.4638

Than they cryed at onys , ' Sle hym ! ' CMMALORY-M4,661.4639

Than sir Percivale smote the firste to the erth and hys horse uppon hym
, CMMALORY-M4,661.4640

and than seven of the knyghtes smote uppon hys shylde at onys
CMMALORY-M4,661.4641

and the remenaunte slew hys horse , that he felle to the erth ,
CMMALORY-M4,661.4642

and had slayne hym or takyn hym , had nat the good knyght $sir Galahad
with the rede armys com there by adventure into tho partys .
CMMALORY-M4,661.4643

And whan he saw all tho knyghtes uppon one knyght he seyde , ' Save me
that knyghtes lyve ! ' CMMALORY-M4,661.4644

And than he dressed hym towarde the twenty men of armys as faste as hys
horse myght dryve , with hys speare in hys reaste , CMMALORY-M4,661.4645

and smote the formyste horse and man to the erth . CMMALORY-M4,661.4646

And whan his speare was brokyn he sette hys honde to hys swerde
CMMALORY-M4,661.4647

and smote on the ryght honde and on the lyffte honde , that hit was
mervayle to se ; CMMALORY-M4,661.4648

and at every stroke he smote downe one CMMALORY-M4,661.4649

or put hym to a rebuke , so that they wolde fyght no more ,
CMMALORY-M4,661.4650

but fledde to a thyk foreyst , CMMALORY-M4,661.4651

and sir Galahad folowed them . CMMALORY-M4,661.4652

And whan sir Percyvale saw hym chace them so , he made grete <P_662>
sorow that hys horse was away . CMMALORY-M4,662.4653

And than he wyst well hit was sir Galahad , CMMALORY-M4,662.4654

and cryed alowde CMMALORY-M4,662.4655

and seyde , ' Fayre knyght , abyde CMMALORY-M4,662.4656

and suffir me to do you thankynges , CMMALORY-M4,662.4657

for much have ye done for me . ' CMMALORY-M4,662.4658

But ever sir Galahad rode fast , that at the last he past oute of hys
syght . CMMALORY-M4,662.4659

And as fast as sir Percyvale myght he wente aftir hym on foote , cryyng
. CMMALORY-M4,662.4660

And than he mette with a yoman rydyng uppon an hakeney which lad in hys
ryght honde a grete steede blacker than ony bere` .
CMMALORY-M4,662.4661

' A , fayre frende , ' seyde sir Percivale , ' as ever y may do for you
, and to be youre knyght in the first place ye woll requyre me , that ye
woll lende me that blacke steed , that I myght overtake a knyght which
$rydeth before me . ' CMMALORY-M4,662.4662

' Sir , ' seyde the yoman , ' that may I nat do , CMMALORY-M4,662.4663

for the horse is such a mannys horse that <em> and I lente hit you or
ony man that <$$em> he wolde sle me . ' CMMALORY-M4,662.4664

' Alas , ' seyde sir Percivale , ' I had never so grete sorow as I have
for losyng of yondir knyght . ' CMMALORY-M4,662.4665

' Sir , ' seyde the yoman , ' I am ryght hevy for you ,
CMMALORY-M4,662.4666

for a good horse wolde beseme you well , CMMALORY-M4,662.4667

but I dare nat delyver you thys horse but if ye wolde take hym frome me
. ' CMMALORY-M4,662.4668

' That woll I nat , ' seyde sir Percivale . CMMALORY-M4,662.4669

And so they departed , CMMALORY-M4,662.4670

and sir Percivale sette hym downe under a tre CMMALORY-M4,662.4671

and made sorow oute of mesure . CMMALORY-M4,662.4672

And as he sate there cam a knyght rydynge on the horse that the yoman
lad , CMMALORY-M4,662.4673

and he was clene armyd . CMMALORY-M4,662.4674

And anone the yoman com rydynge and pryckyng aftir as fast as he myght
CMMALORY-M4,662.4675

and asked sir Percivale if he saw ony knyght rydyng on hys blacke steede
. CMMALORY-M4,662.4676

' Ye , sir , forsothe . Why aske ye me , sir ? ' CMMALORY-M4,662.4677

' A , sir ! that steede he hath benomme me with strengthe ,
CMMALORY-M4,662.4678

wherefore my lorde woll sle me in what place somever he fyndith me . '
CMMALORY-M4,662.4679

' Well , ' seyde sir Percyvale , ' what woldist thou that I ded ?
CMMALORY-M4,662.4680

Thou seest well that I am on foote . CMMALORY-M4,662.4681

But and I had a good horse I sholde soone brynge hym agayne . '
CMMALORY-M4,662.4682

' Sir , ' seyde the yoman , ' take my hakeney CMMALORY-M4,662.4683

and do the beste ye can , CMMALORY-M4,662.4684

and I shall sew you on foote to wete how that ye shall spede . '
CMMALORY-M4,662.4685

<P_663>

Than sir Percivale bestrode the hakeney CMMALORY-M4,663.4687

and rode as faste as he myght , CMMALORY-M4,663.4688

and at the last he saw that knyght . CMMALORY-M4,663.4689

And than he cryde , ' Knyght , turne agayne ! ' CMMALORY-M4,663.4690

And he turned CMMALORY-M4,663.4691

and he set hys speare ayenst sir Percivale , CMMALORY-M4,663.4692

and he smote the hackeney in myddis the breste , that he felle downe
$dede to the erthe . CMMALORY-M4,663.4693

And there he had a grete falle CMMALORY-M4,663.4694

and the other rode hys way . CMMALORY-M4,663.4695

And than sir Percivale was wood wrothe CMMALORY-M4,663.4696

and cryed , ' Abyde , wycked knyght ! CMMALORY-M4,663.4697

Cowarde and false-harted knyght , turne ayen , CMMALORY-M4,663.4698

and fyght with me on foote ! ' CMMALORY-M4,663.4699

But he answerd nat , CMMALORY-M4,663.4700

but past on hys way . CMMALORY-M4,663.4701

Whan sir Percivale saw he wolde nat turne he kest away shylde , helme
and swerde , CMMALORY-M4,663.4702

and seyde , ' Now I am a verry wreche , cursed and moste unhappy of all
other knyghtes ! ' CMMALORY-M4,663.4703

So in thys sorow there he abode all that day tyll hit was nyght ,
CMMALORY-M4,663.4704

and than he was faynte CMMALORY-M4,663.4705

and leyde hym downe CMMALORY-M4,663.4706

and slepte tyll hit was mydnyght . CMMALORY-M4,663.4707

And than he awaked CMMALORY-M4,663.4708

and saw before hym a woman whych seyde unto hym ryght fyersely , ' sir
Percivale , what dost thou here ? ' CMMALORY-M4,663.4709

' I do nother good nother grete ille . ' CMMALORY-M4,663.4710

' If thou wolt ensure me , ' seyde she , ' that thou wolt fulfylle my
wylle whan I somon the , I shall lende the myne owne horse whych shall
bere the whother thou wolt . ' CMMALORY-M4,663.4711

sir Percivale was glad of hir profer CMMALORY-M4,663.4712

and ensured hir to fulfylle all hir desire . CMMALORY-M4,663.4713

' Than abydith me here , and I shall go fecche you an horse . '
CMMALORY-M4,663.4714

And so she cam sone agayne CMMALORY-M4,663.4715

and brought an horse with her that was $inkly black .
CMMALORY-M4,663.4716

Whan sir Percyvale behylde that horse he mervaylde that he was so grete
and so well apparayled . CMMALORY-M4,663.4717

And natforthan he was so hardy he lepte uppon hym CMMALORY-M4,663.4718

and toke none hede off hymselff . CMMALORY-M4,663.4719

And anone as he was uppon hym he threst to hym with hys spurres ,
CMMALORY-M4,663.4720

and so rode by a foreste ; CMMALORY-M4,663.4721

and the moone shoone clere , CMMALORY-M4,663.4722

and within an owre and lasse he bare hym four dayes journey thense
untyll he com to a rowghe watir whych rored , CMMALORY-M4,663.4723

and that horse wolde have borne hym into hit . CMMALORY-M4,663.4724

And whan sir Percivale cam nye the brymme he saw the watir so boysteous
he doutted to passe over hit , CMMALORY-M4,663.4725

and than he made a sygne of <P_664> the crosse in hys forehed .
CMMALORY-M4,664.4726

Whan the fende felte hym so charged he shooke of sir Percivale ,
CMMALORY-M4,664.4727

and he wente into the watir cryynge <em> and rorynge <$$em> and makying
grete sorowe , CMMALORY-M4,664.4728

and hit semed unto hym that the watir brente . CMMALORY-M4,664.4729

Than sir Percivale perceyved hit was a fynde , the whych wolde have
broughte hym unto perdicion . CMMALORY-M4,664.4730

Than he commended hymselff unto God , CMMALORY-M4,664.4731

and prayde oure Lorde to kepe hym frome all suche temptacions .
CMMALORY-M4,664.4732

And so he prayde all that nyght tylle on the morne that hit was day ,
CMMALORY-M4,664.4733

and anone he saw he was in a wylde mounteyne whych was closed with the
se nyghe all aboute , that he myght se no londe aboute hym whych myghte
releve hym , but wylde bestes . CMMALORY-M4,664.4734

And than he wente downe into a valey , CMMALORY-M4,664.4735

and there he saw a serpente brynge a yonge lyon by the necke ,
CMMALORY-M4,664.4736

and so he cam by sir Percivale . CMMALORY-M4,664.4737

So with that com a grete lyon cryynge and $roryng aftir the serpente .
CMMALORY-M4,664.4738

And as faste as sir Percivale saw thys he hyghed hym thydir ,
CMMALORY-M4,664.4739

but the lyon had overtake the serpente CMMALORY-M4,664.4740

and began batayle with hym . CMMALORY-M4,664.4741

And than sir Percivale thought to helpe the lyon , CMMALORY-M4,664.4742

for he was the more naturall beste of the two , CMMALORY-M4,664.4743

and therewith he drew hys swerde CMMALORY-M4,664.4744

and sette hys shylde afore hym , CMMALORY-M4,664.4745

and there he gaff the serpente suche a buffett that he had a dedely
wounde . CMMALORY-M4,664.4746

Whan the lyon saw that , he made no sembelaunte to fyght with hym
CMMALORY-M4,664.4747

but made hym all the chere that a beest myghte make a man .
CMMALORY-M4,664.4748

Whan sir Percivale perceyved hit he kyst downe his shylde whych was
brokyn , CMMALORY-M4,664.4749

and than he dud of hys helme for to gadir wynde , CMMALORY-M4,664.4750

for he was gretly chaffed with the serpente ; CMMALORY-M4,664.4751

and the lyon wente allwey aboute hym fawnynge as a spaynell ,
CMMALORY-M4,664.4752

and than he stroked hym on the necke and on the sholdirs
CMMALORY-M4,664.4753

and thanked God of the feliship of that beste . CMMALORY-M4,664.4754

And aboute noone the lyon toke hys lityll whelpe CMMALORY-M4,664.4755

and trussed hym CMMALORY-M4,664.4756

and bare hym there he com fro . CMMALORY-M4,664.4757

Than was sir Percivale alone . CMMALORY-M4,664.4758

And as the tale tellith , he was at that tyme , one of the men of the
worlde whych moste beleved in oure Lorde Jesu Cryste ,
CMMALORY-M4,664.4759

for in tho dayes there was but fewe folk at that tyme that beleved
perfitely ; CMMALORY-M4,664.4760

for in tho dayes the sonne spared nat the fadir no more than a straunger
. CMMALORY-M4,664.4761

And so sir Percivale comforted hymselff in oure Lorde Jesu
CMMALORY-M4,664.4762

and besought Hym that no temptacion sholde brynge hym oute of Goddys
servys , but to endure as His trew champyon . CMMALORY-M4,664.4763

Thus whan sir <P_665> Percyvale had preyde he saw the lyon com towarde
hym CMMALORY-M4,665.4764

and cowched downe at his feet . CMMALORY-M4,665.4765

And so all that nyght the lyon and he slepte togydirs .
CMMALORY-M4,665.4766

And whan sir Percivale slepte he dremed a mervaylous dreme ; that two
ladyes mette with hym , and that one sate uppon a lyon , and that other
sate uppon a serpente ; and that one of hem was yonge , and that other
was olde , and the yongist , hym thought , seyde , ' sir Percyvale , my
lorde salewith and $sendeth the worde thou aray the and make the redy ,
for to-morne thou muste fyght with the $strongest champion of the worlde
. CMMALORY-M4,665.4767

And if thou be overcom thou shalt nat be quytte for losyng of ony of thy
membrys , CMMALORY-M4,665.4768

but thou shalt be shamed for ever to the worldis ende . '
CMMALORY-M4,665.4769

And than he asked her what was hir lorde , CMMALORY-M4,665.4770

and she seyde ' the grettist lorde of the worlde ' .
CMMALORY-M4,665.4771

And so she departed suddeynly , that he wyst nat where .
CMMALORY-M4,665.4772

Than com forth the tothir lady , that rode uppon the serpente ,
CMMALORY-M4,665.4773

and she seyde , ' sir Percivale , I playne unto you of that ye have done
unto me , CMMALORY-M4,665.4774

and I have nat offended unto you . ' CMMALORY-M4,665.4775

' Sertes , madam , ' seyde he , ' unto you nor no lady I never offended
. ' CMMALORY-M4,665.4776

' Yes , ' seyde she , ' I shall sey you why . CMMALORY-M4,665.4777

I have norysshed in thys place a grete whyle a serpente whych pleased me
much <em> and served me a grete whyle <$$em> . CMMALORY-M4,665.4778

And yestirday ye slew hym as he gate hys pray . CMMALORY-M4,665.4779

Sey me for what cause ye slew hym , CMMALORY-M4,665.4780

for the lyon was nat youres . ' CMMALORY-M4,665.4781

' Madam , I know well the lyon was nat myne , CMMALORY-M4,665.4782

but for the lyon ys more of jantiller nature than the serpente ,
therefore I slew hym , CMMALORY-M4,665.4783

and me@ @semyth I dud nat amysse agaynst you . CMMALORY-M4,665.4784

Madam , ' seyde he , ' what wolde ye that I dud ? '
CMMALORY-M4,665.4785

' I wolde , ' seyde she , ' for the amendis of my beste that ye becam my
man . ' CMMALORY-M4,665.4786

And than he answerde CMMALORY-M4,665.4787

and seyde , ' That woll I nat graunte you . ' CMMALORY-M4,665.4788

' No ? ' seyde she . ' Truly , ye were never but my servaunte syn ye
resseyved the omayge of oure Lorde Jesu Cryste . CMMALORY-M4,665.4789

Therefore I you ensure , in what place that I may fynde you withoute
kepyng , I shall take you as he that somtyme was my man . '
CMMALORY-M4,665.4790

And so she departed fro sir Percivale CMMALORY-M4,665.4791

and leffte hym slepynge , <P_666> whych was sore travayled of hys
avision . CMMALORY-M4,666.4792

And on the morne he arose CMMALORY-M4,666.4793

and blyssed hym , CMMALORY-M4,666.4794

and he was passynge fyeble . CMMALORY-M4,666.4795

Than was sir Percivale ware in the see where com a shippe saylyng toward
hym , CMMALORY-M4,666.4796

and sir Percivale wente unto the ship CMMALORY-M4,666.4797

and founde hit coverde within and without with whyght samyte .
CMMALORY-M4,666.4798

And at the helme stoode an olde man clothed in a surplyse , in lyknes of
a pryste . CMMALORY-M4,666.4799

' Sir , ' seyde sir Percivale , ' ye be wellcom . '
CMMALORY-M4,666.4800

' God kepe you , ' seyde the good man . CMMALORY-M4,666.4801

' And of whense be ye ? ' CMMALORY-M4,666.4802

' Sir , I am of kynge Arthurs courte and a knyght of the Rounde Table ,
whych am in the queste of the Sankgreall , CMMALORY-M4,666.4803

and here I am in grete duras and never lyke to ascape oute of thys
wyldernes . ' CMMALORY-M4,666.4804

' Doute ye nat , ' seyde the good man , CMMALORY-M4,666.4805

' and ye be so trew a knyght as the Order of Shevalry requyrith , and of
herte as ye ought to be , ye shold nat doute that none enemy shold slay
you . ' CMMALORY-M4,666.4806

' What ar ye ? ' seyde sir Percyvale . CMMALORY-M4,666.4807

' Sir , I am of a strange contrey , CMMALORY-M4,666.4808

and hydir I com to comforte you . ' CMMALORY-M4,666.4809

' Sir , ' seyde sir Percivale , ' what signifieth my dreme that I dremed
thys nyght ? ' CMMALORY-M4,666.4810

And there he tolde hym alltogydir . CMMALORY-M4,666.4811

' She which rode uppon the lyon , hit betokenyth the new law of Holy
Chirche , that is to undirstonde fayth , good hope , belyeve and baptyme
; CMMALORY-M4,666.4812

for she semed yonger $than that othir hit ys grete reson ,
CMMALORY-M4,666.4813

for she was borne in the Resurreccion and the Passion of oure Lorde Jesu
Cryste . CMMALORY-M4,666.4814

And for grete love she cam to the to warne the of thy grete batayle that
shall befalle the . ' CMMALORY-M4,666.4815

' With whom , ' seyde sir Percivale , ' shall I fyght ? '
CMMALORY-M4,666.4816

' With the moste douteful champion of the worlde , CMMALORY-M4,666.4817

for , as the lady seyde , but if thou quyte the welle thou shalt nat be
quytte by losyng of one membir , CMMALORY-M4,666.4818

but thou shalt be shamed to the worldis ende . CMMALORY-M4,666.4819

And she that rode on the serpente signifieth the olde law ,
CMMALORY-M4,666.4820

and that serpente betokenyth a fynde . CMMALORY-M4,666.4821

And why she blamed the that thou slewyst hir servaunte , hit betokenyth
nothynge $aboute the serpente ye slewe ; CMMALORY-M4,666.4822

that betokenyth the devyll that thou rodist on to the roche .
CMMALORY-M4,666.4823

And whan thou madist a sygne of the crosse , there thou slewyst hym
CMMALORY-M4,666.4824

and put away hys power . CMMALORY-M4,666.4825

And whan she asked the amendis and to becom hir man , than thou saydist
nay , CMMALORY-M4,666.4826

that was to make the beleve on her and leve thy baptym . '
CMMALORY-M4,666.4827

So he commaunded sir Percivale to departe , CMMALORY-M4,666.4828

and so he lepte over <P_667> the boorde , CMMALORY-M4,667.4829

and the shippe and all wente away CMMALORY-M4,667.4830

he wyste nat whydir . CMMALORY-M4,667.4831

Than he wente up into the roche CMMALORY-M4,667.4832

and founde the lyon whych allway bare hym felyship ,
CMMALORY-M4,667.4833

and he stroked hym uppon the backe CMMALORY-M4,667.4834

and had grete joy of hym . CMMALORY-M4,667.4835

Bi that sir Percivale had byddyn there tyll mydday he saw a shippe com
saylyng in the see as all the wynde of the worlde had dryven hit ,
CMMALORY-M4,667.4836

and so hit londid undir that rocche . CMMALORY-M4,667.4837

And when sir Percivale saw thys he hyghed hym thydir
CMMALORY-M4,667.4838

and founde the shippe coverde with sylke more blacker than ony bere` ,
CMMALORY-M4,667.4839

and therein was a jantillwoman of grete beaute` , CMMALORY-M4,667.4840

and she was clothe rychly , CMMALORY-M4,667.4841

there myght be none bettir . CMMALORY-M4,667.4842

And whan she saw sir Percivale she asked hym who brought hym into thys
wylderness ' where ye be never lyke to passe hense ,
CMMALORY-M4,667.4843

for ye shall dye here for hunger and myscheff . ' CMMALORY-M4,667.4844

' Damesell , ' seyde sir Percivale , ' I serve the beste man of the
worlde , CMMALORY-M4,667.4845

and in Hys servyse He woll nat suffir me to dye , CMMALORY-M4,667.4846

for who that $knockith shall entir , CMMALORY-M4,667.4847

and who that askyth shall have , CMMALORY-M4,667.4848

and who that sekith Hym , He hydyth Hym not unto Hys wordys . '
CMMALORY-M4,667.4849

But than she seyde , ' Sir Percivale , wote ye what I am ? '
CMMALORY-M4,667.4850

' Who taught you my name ? ' now seyde sir Percivale .
CMMALORY-M4,667.4851

' I knowe you bettir than {that_I_know_you} ye wene :
CMMALORY-M4,667.4852

I com but late oute of the Waste Foreyste where I founde the Rede Knyght
with the whyghte shylde . CMMALORY-M4,667.4853

' A , fayre damesell , ' seyde he , ' that knyght wolde I fayne mete
withall . ' CMMALORY-M4,667.4854

' Sir knyght , ' seyde she , ' and ye woll ensure me by the fayth that
ye owghe unto knyghthode that ye shall do my wyll what tyme I somon you
, and I shall brynge you unto that knyght . ' CMMALORY-M4,667.4855

' Yes , ' he seyde , ' I shall promyse you to fullfylle youre desyre .
' CMMALORY-M4,667.4856

' Well , ' seyde she , ' now shall I telle you . CMMALORY-M4,667.4857

I saw hym in the Waste Foreyste chasyng two knyghtes unto the watir
whych ys callede Mortayse , CMMALORY-M4,667.4858

and they drove into that watir for drede of dethe .
CMMALORY-M4,667.4859

And the two knyghtes passed over , CMMALORY-M4,667.4860

and the Rede Knyght passed aftir , CMMALORY-M4,667.4861

and there hys horse was drowned , CMMALORY-M4,667.4862

and he thorow grete strenghte ascaped unto the londe . '
CMMALORY-M4,667.4863

Thus she tolde hym , CMMALORY-M4,667.4864

and sir Percivale was passynge glad thereoff . CMMALORY-M4,667.4865

Than she asked hym if he had ete ony mete late . CMMALORY-M4,667.4866

' Nay , madam , truly I yeete no mete nyghe thes three dayes ,
CMMALORY-M4,667.4867

but <P_668> late here I spake with a good man that fedde me with hys
good wordys <em> and holy <$$em>

and refreyshed me gretly . ' CMMALORY-M4,668.4869

' A , sir knyght , that same man , ' seyde she , ' ys an inchaunter and
a multiplier of wordis , CMMALORY-M4,668.4870

for and ye belyve hym , ye shall be playnly shamed and dye in thys roche
for pure hunger and be etyn with wylde bestis . CMMALORY-M4,668.4871

And ye be a yonge man and a goodly knyght , CMMALORY-M4,668.4872

and I shall helpe you and ye woll ' CMMALORY-M4,668.4873

' What ar ye , ' seyde sir Percivale , ' that proferyth me thus so grete
kyndenesse ? ' CMMALORY-M4,668.4874

' I am , ' seyde she , ' a jantillwoman that am diseryte , whych was the
rychest woman of the worlde . ' CMMALORY-M4,668.4875

' Damesell , ' seyde sir Percivale , ' who hath disheryte you ?
CMMALORY-M4,668.4876

For I have grete pite` of you . ' CMMALORY-M4,668.4877

' Sir , ' seyde she , ' I dwelled with the grettist man of the worlde ,
CMMALORY-M4,668.4878

and he made me so fayre and so clere that there was none lyke me .
CMMALORY-M4,668.4879

And of that grete beawte` I had a litill pryde , more than I oughte to
have had . CMMALORY-M4,668.4880

Also I sayde a worde that plesed hym nat , CMMALORY-M4,668.4881

and than he wolde nat suffir me to be no lenger in $his company .
CMMALORY-M4,668.4882

And so he drove me frome myne herytayge CMMALORY-M4,668.4883

and disheryted me for ever , CMMALORY-M4,668.4884

and he had never pite` of me nother of none of my counceyle nother of my
courte . CMMALORY-M4,668.4885

And sitthyn , sir knyght , hit hath befallyn me to be so over-throwyn
and all myne , CMMALORY-M4,668.4886

yet I have benomme hym som of hys men and made hem to becom my men ,
CMMALORY-M4,668.4887

for they aske never nothynge of me but I gyff hem that and much more .
CMMALORY-M4,668.4888

Thus I and my servauntes $werre ayenste hym nyght and day ,
CMMALORY-M4,668.4889

therefore I know no good knyght nor no good man but I gete hem on my
syde and I may . CMMALORY-M4,668.4890

And for that I know that ye ar a good knyght I beseche you to helpe me ,
and for ye be a felowe of the Rounde Table , wherefore ye ought nat to
fayle no jantillwoman which ys disherite and she besought you of helpe .
' CMMALORY-M4,668.4891

Than sir Percivale promysed her all the helpe that he myght ,
CMMALORY-M4,668.4892

and than she thanked hym . CMMALORY-M4,668.4893

And at that tyme the wedir was hote . CMMALORY-M4,668.4894

Than she called unto her a jantillwoman CMMALORY-M4,668.4895

and bade hir brynge forth a pavilion . CMMALORY-M4,668.4896

And so she ded CMMALORY-M4,668.4897

and pyghte hit uppon the gravell . CMMALORY-M4,668.4898

' Sir , ' seyde she , ' now may ye reste you in thys hete of thys day .
' CMMALORY-M4,668.4899

Than he thanked her , CMMALORY-M4,668.4900

and she put of hys helme and hys shylde . CMMALORY-M4,668.4901

And there he slepte a grete whyle . CMMALORY-M4,668.4902

<P_669>

And so he awoke CMMALORY-M4,669.4904

and asked her if she had ony mete , CMMALORY-M4,669.4905

and she seyde ' yee , ye shall have inowghe . ' CMMALORY-M4,669.4906

And anone there was leyde a table , CMMALORY-M4,669.4907

and so muche meete was sette thereon that he had mervayle ,
CMMALORY-M4,669.4908

for there was all maner of meetes that he cowde thynke on .
CMMALORY-M4,669.4909

Also he dranke there the strengyst wyne that ever he dranke , hym
thought , CMMALORY-M4,669.4910

and therewith he was chaffett a lityll more than he oughte to be .
CMMALORY-M4,669.4911

With that he behylde that jantilwoman , CMMALORY-M4,669.4912

and hym thought she was the fayryst creature that ever he saw .
CMMALORY-M4,669.4913

And than sir Percivale profird hir love CMMALORY-M4,669.4914

and prayde hir that she wolde be hys . CMMALORY-M4,669.4915

Than she refused hym in a maner when he requyred her , for cause he
sholde be the more ardente on hir . CMMALORY-M4,669.4916

And ever he sesed nat to pray hir of love . CMMALORY-M4,669.4917

And when she saw hym well enchaffed , than she seyde , ' Sir Percivale ,
wyte you well I shall nat fulfylle youre wylle but if ye swere frome
henseforthe ye shall be my trew servaunte , and to do nothynge but that
I shall commaunde you . CMMALORY-M4,669.4918

Woll ye ensure me thys as ye be a trew knyght ? ' CMMALORY-M4,669.4919

' Yee , ' seyde he , ' fayre lady , by the feythe of my body ! '
CMMALORY-M4,669.4920

' Well , ' seyde she , ' now shall ye do with me what ye wyll ,
CMMALORY-M4,669.4921

and now , wyte you well , ye ar the knyght in the worlde that I have
moste desyre to . ' CMMALORY-M4,669.4922

And than two squyres were $commaunded to make a bedde in myddis of the
pavelon , CMMALORY-M4,669.4923

and anone she was unclothed and leyde therein . CMMALORY-M4,669.4924

And than sir Percivale layde hym downe by her naked .
CMMALORY-M4,669.4925

And by adventure and grace he saw hys swerde ly on the erthe $naked ,
where in the pomell was a rede crosse and the sygne of the crucifixe
$therin , CMMALORY-M4,669.4926

and bethought hym of hys knyghthode and hys promyse made unto the good
man tofornehande , CMMALORY-M4,669.4927

and than he made a sygne in the forehed of hys . CMMALORY-M4,669.4928

And therewith the pavylon turned up-so-downe CMMALORY-M4,669.4929

and than hit chonged unto a smooke and a blak clowde .
CMMALORY-M4,669.4930

And than he drad sore CMMALORY-M4,669.4931

and cryed alowde , ' Fayre swete Lorde Jesu Cryste , ne lette me nat be
shamed , which was nyghe loste had nat Thy good grace bene ! '
CMMALORY-M4,669.4932

And than he loked unto her shippe CMMALORY-M4,669.4933

and saw her entir therein , which seyde , ' Syr Percivale , ye have
betrayde me . ' CMMALORY-M4,669.4934

And so she wente with the wynde , rorynge and yellynge , that hit semed
all the water brente after her . CMMALORY-M4,669.4935

<P_670>

Than sir Percivale made grete sorow CMMALORY-M4,670.4937

and drew hys swerde unto hym CMMALORY-M4,670.4938

and seyde , ' Sitthyn my fleyssh woll be my mayster I shall punyssh hit
. ' CMMALORY-M4,670.4939

And therewith he rooff hymselff thorow the thygh , that the blood sterte
aboute hym , CMMALORY-M4,670.4940

and seyde , ' A , good Lord , take thys in recompensacion of that I have
myssedone ayenste The , Lorde ! ' CMMALORY-M4,670.4941

So than he clothed hym CMMALORY-M4,670.4942

and armed hym CMMALORY-M4,670.4943

and called hymself wrecche of all wrecchis : CMMALORY-M4,670.4944

' How nyghe I was loste , and to have lost that I sholde never have
gotyn agayne , that was my virginite` , CMMALORY-M4,670.4945

for that may never be recoverde aftir hit ys onys loste . '
CMMALORY-M4,670.4946

And than he stopped hys bledyng wound with a pece of hys sherte .
CMMALORY-M4,670.4947

Thus as he made hys mone he saw the same shippe com from the Oryente
that the good man was in the day before . CMMALORY-M4,670.4948

And thys noble knyght was sore ashamed of hymselff ,
CMMALORY-M4,670.4949

and therewith he fylle in a sowne . CMMALORY-M4,670.4950

And when he awooke he wente unto hym waykely , CMMALORY-M4,670.4951

and there he salewed the good man . CMMALORY-M4,670.4952

And than he asked sir Percivale , ' How haste thou done syth I departed
? ' CMMALORY-M4,670.4953

' Sir , ' seyde $he , ' here was a jantillwoman CMMALORY-M4,670.4954

and ledde $me into dedly synne . ' CMMALORY-M4,670.4955

And there he tolde hym all@ @togidirs . CMMALORY-M4,670.4956

' Knew ye nat that mayde ? ' seyde the good man . CMMALORY-M4,670.4957

' Sir , ' seyde he , ' nay , but well I wote the fynde sente hir hydir
to shame me . ' CMMALORY-M4,670.4958

' A , good knyght , ' seyde he , ' thou arte a foole ,
CMMALORY-M4,670.4959

for that jantill woman was the mayster fyende of helle , which hath
pouste` over all other devyllis . CMMALORY-M4,670.4960

And that was the olde lady that thou saw in thyne avision rydyng on the
serpente . ' CMMALORY-M4,670.4961

Than he tolde sir Percivale how oure Lord Jesu Cryste bete hym oute of
hevyn for hys synne , whycch was the moste bryghtist angell of hevyn ,
CMMALORY-M4,670.4962

and therefore he loste hys heritaige . CMMALORY-M4,670.4963

' And that was the champion that thou fought withall , whych had overcom
the , had nat the grace of God bene . CMMALORY-M4,670.4964

Now , sir Percivale , beware CMMALORY-M4,670.4965

and take this for an insample . ' CMMALORY-M4,670.4966

And than the good man vanysshed . CMMALORY-M4,670.4967

Than sir Percivale toke hys armys CMMALORY-M4,670.4968

and entirde into the shippe , CMMALORY-M4,670.4969

and so he departed from thens . CMMALORY-M4,670.4970

SO LEVITH THYS TALE CMMALORY-M4,670.4971

AND TURNYTH UNTO SIR LAUNCELOT . CMMALORY-M4,670.4972
