<BEGIN_cmmirk-m34>

<P_1>

<heading>

1 . CMMIRK-M34,1.4

ADVENT SONDAY . CMMIRK-M34,1.5

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , +tys day , as +ge knowen well , ys cleped Sonenday
yn +te Aduent ; +tat ys , +te Sonenday of Cristys comyng . Wherfor +tys
day holy chyrch makyth mencyon of two comyngys of Crist , Godys sonne ,
ynto +tys world , for@ @to by mankind out of +te deueles bondage , and
to bryng hym and weldoers to +te blys +tat euer schall last .
CMMIRK-M34,1.7

And his o+ter comyng , +tat schall be at +te day of dome , for@ @to deme
all wikytdoers ynto +te pyt of hell for euermor . CMMIRK-M34,1.8

But +te $forme comyng of Cryst ynto +tys world broght ioy and blysse
wyth hym ; CMMIRK-M34,1.9

+terfor holy chyrch vsyth summe songes of melody , as Alleluja and o+ter
. CMMIRK-M34,1.10

And for +te comyng of Cryst to +te dome schall be so jrus and so cruell
, +tat no tong may tell , +terfor holy chirch layth downe sum songes of
melody as : ' Te Deum laudamus , ' ' Gloria in excelsis , ' and '
Weddyng . ' CMMIRK-M34,1.11

For aftyr +tat day schall weddyng neuer be . CMMIRK-M34,1.12

+Tus holy chirche lay+te downe songys of melody befor , yn tokenyng of
vengans +tat woll come aftyr . CMMIRK-M34,1.13

Then of +te fyrst comyng of Cryst into +tys world , +tus sayth Seynt
Austyne : ' +Ter ben +tre +tyngys +tat ben ryuet yn +tys world : burth ,
trauell , and de+te . ' CMMIRK-M34,1.14

+Tys ys +te testament +tat Adam , our formast fadyr , made to all his
ospryng aftyr hym , +tat ys : for@ @to be borne yn sekenes , for@ @to
lyuen yn trauayle , and for@ @to dye yn drede . CMMIRK-M34,1.15

But Crist - blessyt most he be ! - he come for@ @to be executure of
+tys testament : CMMIRK-M34,1.16

and was borne , CMMIRK-M34,1.17

and trauayld , CMMIRK-M34,1.18

and dyet . CMMIRK-M34,1.19

He was borne to bryng man out of sekenes ynto euerlastyng hele ;
CMMIRK-M34,1.20

he trauaylde for@ @to bryng man ynto euerlastyng <P_2> reste ;
CMMIRK-M34,2.21

he was ded for@ @to bryng man ynto +te lyfe +tat neuer schall haue ende
. CMMIRK-M34,2.22

+Tys was +te cause of Crystys fyrst comyng ynto +tys world . Wherfor he
+tat wyll scape +te dome +tat he wyll come to at +te second comyng , he
most lay downe all maner of pride and heynes of hert , and know hymselfe
+tat he ys not but a wryche and slyme of erth , and soo hold mekenes yn
his hert . CMMIRK-M34,2.23

He most trauayl his body yn good werkes , and gete his lyfe wyth swynke
, and put away all ydylnes and slewth . CMMIRK-M34,2.24

For he +tat wyll not trauayle here wyth men , as Seynt Barnard sayth ,
he schall trauayle ay wyth +te fendes of hell . CMMIRK-M34,2.25

And for dred of deth he mot make hym redy to his God , when he woll send
aftyr hym , +tat ys : schryuen of his synnys , and allway kepe his
concyens clene not for@ @to abyde from lenton to lenton , but as sone as
he fele+te +tat he hath synnet , anoon goo schryue hym , and mekly take
+te dome of his schryft-fadyr : CMMIRK-M34,2.26

+ten schall he haue yn +te day of dome gret remedy and worschip .
CMMIRK-M34,2.27

For ryght as a knyght scheweth +te wondys +tat he ha+te yn batayle , yn
moche comendyng to hym ; ryght so all +te synnys +tat a man hath
schryuen hym of , and taken hys penans for , schull be +ter yschewet yn
moch honowre to hym , and moche confucyon to +te fende .
CMMIRK-M34,2.28

And +tose +tat haue not schryuen hom , hit schall be schowet to all +te
world yn gret confusyon and schenschyp . CMMIRK-M34,2.29

+Tys ys sayde for +te fyrst commyng of Cryst ynto +tys world .
CMMIRK-M34,2.30

The secunde comyng of hym to +te dome schall so cruell be , and ferdfull
, and horrybull , +tat +ter schal com befor xv dayes of gret drede ;
CMMIRK-M34,2.31

so by +te drede of +tes dayes +tat comen befor , a man may know aparty
the horobylyte +tat schall be yn +te dome , +tat comyth aftyr .
CMMIRK-M34,2.32

The fyrst day , as Saynt Jerom sayth , +te see schall aryse vp yn hyr
styd , soo +tat +te watyr schall be hear then ayny hyll , by xl=ti=
cubytys , stondyng styll yn her styd , as hit wer a wall .
CMMIRK-M34,2.33

The ij. day hit schall fall downe , so +tat vnne+te hit schall be
yseyne . CMMIRK-M34,2.34

The iij. day +te seeswyne and +te cloppys of +te see schull <P_3> stond
on +te see and make roryng noyse so hyddous , +tat no man can tell hit
but God hymselfe . CMMIRK-M34,3.35

The iiij. day +te see and all watyrs schull bren . CMMIRK-M34,3.36

The v. day treus and herbys schull swete blode , CMMIRK-M34,3.37

and all fowles schull come togedyr and no+ter ete ne drynke for ferd of
+te dome comyng . CMMIRK-M34,3.38

The vj. day all byldyngys and castelles schull fall adowne to +te
grownde , CMMIRK-M34,3.39

and an horrybull fyre schall aryse at +te sonne goyng downe , and +ten
a+geyne at +te vprysyng of hym . CMMIRK-M34,3.40

The vij. day all stons and rockes schull vche all tobeton o+ter wyth a
hydwes noyse , whech noyse God hymselfe schall know and vndyrstond .
CMMIRK-M34,3.41

The viij. day +te er+te schall quake so horribuly , +tat no best schall
stond on hit , CMMIRK-M34,3.42

but all schall fal to +te grownd . CMMIRK-M34,3.43

The ix. day all hyllys and mowntaynys schull turne ynto powdyr ,
CMMIRK-M34,3.44

and +te er+te schall be made playne and euen . CMMIRK-M34,3.45

The x. day men schull goo out of hur dennys +ter +tay daret for drede
so amated for fer , +tat non schall speke to o+ter . CMMIRK-M34,3.46

The xj. day all +te bones of +te ded men schull ryse and stond vp on
hor graues , CMMIRK-M34,3.47

and +tat day all graues schull opyn . CMMIRK-M34,3.48

The xij. day sterres schull fall from heuen and spred out of hom
brennyng lemes . CMMIRK-M34,3.49

The xiij. day all men schull be redy to aryse +tat haue ben ded befor .
CMMIRK-M34,3.50

The xiiij. day heuen and er+te schull bren so horrybly , +tat no man
may tell hit . CMMIRK-M34,3.51

The xv. day heuen and er+t schull be made newe , CMMIRK-M34,3.52

and all men and woymen and childyrne schull aryse vp yn +te age of
xxx=ti= +gere and come to +te dome . CMMIRK-M34,3.53

Then schal Ihesu Crist , veray God and man , come to +te dome , and al
seyntys wyth hym , and schow all his wondys all fresch , and newe , and
bledyng , as +tat day +tat he deyet on +te crosse . CMMIRK-M34,3.54

And +ter +te crosse schall be schewet all blody , and all o+ter
ynstrumentys of his passyon . CMMIRK-M34,3.55

Then sory may +tay be +tat haue ben wont to swer by his hert , by sydes
, by blod and bones of hym ; CMMIRK-M34,3.56

+tat schall be to hym a hygh fure and a hygh confusyon , CMMIRK-M34,3.57

but +tay wer sory +terof befor . CMMIRK-M34,3.58

<P_4>

Then schall Cryst heghly +tonke hom , and prayse hom +tat han don mercy
to hor euen-cristyn , CMMIRK-M34,4.60

and schall say +tus to hom : ' My fadyrs blessyd chyldyrne come+te ynto
+te joy +tat euer schall last . CMMIRK-M34,4.61

For when I was hongry , +ge fedden me ; CMMIRK-M34,4.62

when I was thursty , +ge gaf me dryngke ; CMMIRK-M34,4.63

when I was naket , +ge clo+tet me ; CMMIRK-M34,4.64

when I was herberles , +ge herbert me ; CMMIRK-M34,4.65

when I was seke , +ge vyset me ; +gevyng me +tat +tat was nedfull to me
; CMMIRK-M34,4.66

when I was yn pryson , +ge come to me CMMIRK-M34,4.67

and confortet me . CMMIRK-M34,4.68

For when +ge dyddyn +tus for my loue , +ge dydden hyt to me
CMMIRK-M34,4.69

and as moche +tonke I kan you for +tat +ge dydden to +te lest of myn ,
as +ge hadden don hit to myn owne selfe ; wherfor goo +ge now ynto +tat
ioye +tat euer schall last . ' CMMIRK-M34,4.70

Then schall he horrubly rebuken ryche men +tat han don no mercy , and
say to hom spytwysly +tus : ' Goo +ge curset lystes ynto +te payne of
helle , CMMIRK-M34,4.71

for +ge hadden ynogh wherof to haue fed me and my seruantys , and +geue
me dryngke , yclo+tet me , and herbert me , and holpen me yn my sekenes
, and vyset me yn my dyses , CMMIRK-M34,4.72

and +ge wold not , CMMIRK-M34,4.73

but louet your good and not me . Wherfor goo +ge now ynto +te fyre of
helle +tat ys ordeynt to +te fendys of hell wythout any mercy ;
CMMIRK-M34,4.74

for +ge wold do no mercy , CMMIRK-M34,4.75

and +terfor +ge schull haue no mercy . ' CMMIRK-M34,4.76

Then woo schall be to hom +tat schall here +tys rebuke yn +tat day ;
CMMIRK-M34,4.77

+ter schall no pleder helpe , ne gold , ne syluyr , ne othyr yftes ;
CMMIRK-M34,4.78

but as a man hath don , he schall haue . CMMIRK-M34,4.79

He schall haue accusars aboue hym , wythyn hym , on aythyr syde hym ,
and vndyr hym , +tat he schall no way scape . CMMIRK-M34,4.80

Aboue hym schall be Crist his domes-man so wro+te , +tat no tong con
tell , for he dyt no mercy ; wythyn hym his on concyens accusyng hym of
+te lest +toght +tat euer he dyd amys ; hys angyll on +tat on syde
tellyng hym redely wher and how oft he ha+te don amys ; on +tat o+ter
syde fendes chalenchyng hym horres as by ryght ; vndyr hym helle
+geonyng , and galpyng , and spyttyng fyre and stench for@ @to swolon
hym ynto +te payne +tat neuer schall haue ende . CMMIRK-M34,4.81

Thys , good men , +ge schull know well +tat yn +te day of dome pore men
schull be domes-men wyth Cryst , and dome +te ryche . CMMIRK-M34,4.82

For all +te woo +tat pore men hauen , hit ys by +te ryche men ;
CMMIRK-M34,4.83

<P_5>

and +togh +tay haue moche wrong , +tay may not gete amendes , tyll +tay
come to +tat dome ; CMMIRK-M34,5.85

and +ter +tay schall haue all hor one lust of hom . CMMIRK-M34,5.86

For when +tay haue wrong , and mow gete non amendys , +ten +tay pray ful
hertely to God for@ @to qwyt hom yn +te day of dome ; CMMIRK-M34,5.87

and woll he truly . CMMIRK-M34,5.88

For +tus he sayth by his profyt : ' Kepytt your veniauns to me , and I
wyll qwyt you . ' Wherfor , syrs , for Goddys loue , whyll +ge byn here
, makyth amendes for your mys-dedys , and maky+te hom your frendes +tat
schall be our domes-men , and tryst +ge not to hom +tat schall com aftyr
you , lest +ge ben deseyuet , and dredyth +te payne of hell +tat schall
last wythouten any ende . CMMIRK-M34,5.89

Seynt Bede telle+te +tat +ter was a husbond-man here yn Englond +tat
fell seke , and lay as for ded from +te euentyde tyll +te morow .
CMMIRK-M34,5.90

+Ten aros he , CMMIRK-M34,5.91

and departed his gedys yn +tre partyes , CMMIRK-M34,5.92

and his partye he gaf to pore men , CMMIRK-M34,5.93

and +gede CMMIRK-M34,5.94

and was made a monke yn an abbay +tat stod by a watyr syde . Ynto +te
whech watyr ych nyght he +gede yn , wer hyt neuer soo coold forste ,
CMMIRK-M34,5.95

and stod ther long tyme of +te nyght . CMMIRK-M34,5.96

And when he was asket , why he put hymselfe ynto so moche penaunce , he
vnswered : ' For@ @to eschoyn +te more payne +tat I haue seyn , '
CMMIRK-M34,5.97

and ete barly-bred , CMMIRK-M34,5.98

and dranke watyr all his lyfe aftyr . CMMIRK-M34,5.99

And he wold tell to relygyous men +te payne +tat he segh , +tat was soo
gret , +tat he cowthe not tel hit openly . CMMIRK-M34,5.100

He sayde +tat an angyll lad hym ynto a place +tat on +te toon syde was
suche a colde , that no tong myght tell +te payne +terof ;
CMMIRK-M34,5.101

and on +tat o+ter syde was suche a hete , +tat no man myght tell +te
payne +terof , ny of +te hete : CMMIRK-M34,5.102

and sowles wern cast out of +tat won into +te to+ter . CMMIRK-M34,5.103

And so +tat angyll schewet hym +te fyre +tat come out at +te mow+te ,
+tat was +te fyre of hell ; +tat was so hote , +tat als ferre as he
myght seen hit , hym +toght he brennet for hete . CMMIRK-M34,5.104

And yn +te lees +terof he segh sowles bulmyng vp and don , cryyng
horrybuly , and a noyse of fendes cryyng : ' Sle , sle , sle , sle , sle
, sle , CMMIRK-M34,5.105

opon +te broche , CMMIRK-M34,5.106

rost hote , CMMIRK-M34,5.107

cast ynto +te cawdren , CMMIRK-M34,5.108

sethe fast yn pyche , and cood , and brymston , and hot leed ! '
CMMIRK-M34,5.109

+Tus +tay +tat ben dampnet to hell , +tay styntyn neuer to cry and
+gelle : ' Woo ys hym +tat +tedyr schall goo . ' CMMIRK-M34,5.110

God hymselfe scheld vs +terfro , CMMIRK-M34,5.111

and bryng vs to +te blys he boght vs to . CMMIRK-M34,5.112

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,5.113

<P_6>

<heading>

2 . CMMIRK-M34,6.116

DE FESTO SANCTI ANDREE ET EIUS SOLEMPNITATE SERMO BREUIS .
CMMIRK-M34,6.117

<$$heading>

Good men and weymen , such a day +ge schull haue Seynt Andrawys daye ,
and fast +te euen . +Te whech dey +ge schull come to +te chyrch to
serue God , and for@ @to worschip the holy apostoll for +te speciall
uertues +tat he hade : CMMIRK-M34,6.119

an for his hygh holynes of lyvyng , ano+ter for gret myracles doyng ,
the thrid for gret pas-syon suffryng . CMMIRK-M34,6.120

He was a man of holy lyuing ; CMMIRK-M34,6.121

for when he herd +tat Seynt Ion Baptyst prechet yn deserte , he $laft al
his worldes occupacyon , CMMIRK-M34,6.122

and +gede to hym , CMMIRK-M34,6.123

and was his descypull . CMMIRK-M34,6.124

Then befell hit apon a day Crist come walkyng , CMMIRK-M34,6.125

and when Seynt Ion segh hym walkyng , he sayde +tys to his dyscypull :
CMMIRK-M34,6.126

' Lo , +gonde ys Godys lombe +tat schall do away +te syn of +te world .
' CMMIRK-M34,6.127

And when Seynt Andrew herd +tat , anon he laft Ion CMMIRK-M34,6.128

and suet Cryst . CMMIRK-M34,6.129

And when he herd Crist preche , hym lyket soo well +tat he fatte Seynt
Petyr , his bro+ter , to Crist for@ @to here his prechyng .
CMMIRK-M34,6.130

And +ten +tay bo+te casten such a loue to Cryst , +tat on a day sone
aftyr , as +tay wer yn +te see of Galyle fyschyng , Cryst come by hom ,
and callet hom . CMMIRK-M34,6.131

+Ten +tay bo+te anon laften hor schippe , and hor nettys , and all +tat
+tay hadden , CMMIRK-M34,6.132

and sewet Crist for+te ay , tyll he stegh ynto Heuen . CMMIRK-M34,6.133

And when he was gon ynto Heuen , Andraw prechet Goddys worde to +te
pepull . Among +te wheche was on , callad Nicol , +tat lyvet lx=ti=
wyntyr and more yn lechery . CMMIRK-M34,6.134

But by grace of God he +toght to amende his lyfe , CMMIRK-M34,6.135

and let wryte a gospell on a boke , CMMIRK-M34,6.136

and had +tat wyth hym yn hopyng +tat +te vertu of Cryst schull put away
his temptacyon . CMMIRK-M34,6.137

And soo , by +te vertu of Goddys worde , he abstaynet hym of his synne a
while ; CMMIRK-M34,6.138

but +get by entysyng of +te fend , on a day , he for+get hymselfe ,
CMMIRK-M34,6.139

and +gede to +te bordell-hous , as he was wont to do . CMMIRK-M34,6.140

And when he come +tedyr , +te womon criet vpon hym , CMMIRK-M34,6.141

and sayde : ' Vnsley old man , goo he+ten ! CMMIRK-M34,6.142

for I se apon +te mony meruayles . ' CMMIRK-M34,6.143

+Ten +tys Nycol by+toght hym +tat he hade Goddys gospell on hym .
CMMIRK-M34,6.144

And anon he +gede to Seynt Andraw , CMMIRK-M34,6.145

and told hym +tys caas , CMMIRK-M34,6.146

and prayde hym for@ @to pray for hym to God +tat his sole wer not
forlorne . CMMIRK-M34,6.147

Then Seynt Andraw sayde +tat he wold neuer ete ne <P_7> dryng , tyll he
wyst whe+ter he schuld be saued or noo . CMMIRK-M34,7.148

+Ten he fast fyf dayees prayng and bysechyng for hym . CMMIRK-M34,7.149

+Ten , at +te fyuet dayes ende , +ter come a voyce to hym ,
CMMIRK-M34,7.150

and sayde : ' As +tou fastes and prayes to God , make Nycol for@ @to don
; and +ten he schall be sauet . ' CMMIRK-M34,7.151

+Ten callet he +tis Nicol to hym , CMMIRK-M34,7.152

and bade hym fast fourty dayes bred and watyr , and pray bysily to God ;
CMMIRK-M34,7.153

and soo he dyd . CMMIRK-M34,7.154

And when +te fourty dayes wer done , sone aftyr +tys Nicol deyd .
CMMIRK-M34,7.155

+Ten come +ter a voyce to Andraw , CMMIRK-M34,7.156

and sayde : ' By +ty prayer I haue wonen Nicoll +tat was lost . '
CMMIRK-M34,7.157

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,7.159

<$$heading>

Also a +gong man com to Seynt Andraw , CMMIRK-M34,7.161

and preuely sayde to hym : ' Syr , my modyr ha+te besoght me for@ @to
lye by hure ; CMMIRK-M34,7.162

but for I wold not , hoo hath accuset me to +te justyce . Wherfor well
I wot y schall be ded . CMMIRK-M34,7.163

And +get I haue leuer take +te deth +ten sclaundyr my modyr soo fowle .
Wherfor , syr , for Godys loue pray for me +tat I may take my deth
mekely . ' CMMIRK-M34,7.164

+Ten sayde Saynt Andraw : ' Sonne , goo forth to +ty dome , and I wyll
goo wyth +te . ' CMMIRK-M34,7.165

+Ten anon comme men , CMMIRK-M34,7.166

and fatten hym to +te justyce . CMMIRK-M34,7.167

And his modyr accusyt hym styfly to +te justice ; CMMIRK-M34,7.168

and he held his tong , CMMIRK-M34,7.169

and sayd naght . CMMIRK-M34,7.170

Then spake Seynt Andraw CMMIRK-M34,7.171

and sayde to hys modyr : ' +Tou wyket woman , +tat for lust of +ti
lechery art aboute to do +ti sonne to deth ; veniaunce wol fall apon the
! ' CMMIRK-M34,7.172

+Ten seyd ho to +te justyce : ' Syr , sy+ten my sonne wold haue done
+tys orybull dede , and myght not spede , he has drawen to +tys man for
socowr . ' CMMIRK-M34,7.173

+Ten +te justyce commaundet to put +te sonne yn a fet , and cast hym yn
a watyr for@ @to drowne hym , and Andraw ynto prison , tyll he wer
aviset on what de+te he schuld sle hym . CMMIRK-M34,7.174

Then Saynt Andraw $prayde bysyly to God for help . CMMIRK-M34,7.175

+Ten anon com a hydewes +tondyr +tat made all hom aferde , +tat +tay
wern all fayne to fach Andraw out of pryson . CMMIRK-M34,7.176

And +terwyth com a bolt of layte , CMMIRK-M34,7.177

and brant +te modyr to colys yn syght of all men . CMMIRK-M34,7.178

And +tus he sauet +te man fro +te deth , CMMIRK-M34,7.179

and turnet +te justyce and all +te pepull to +te faythe of Crist .
CMMIRK-M34,7.180

Herby +ge may vndyrstond +tat he was a man of holy lyvyng .
CMMIRK-M34,7.181

He was also gret yn myracles doyng . CMMIRK-M34,7.182

For on a day , as he walket on +te see-warth , he segh a drownet man
cast vp on +te <P_8> watyr . CMMIRK-M34,8.183

+Ten he prayde to God to reysen hym to lyue . CMMIRK-M34,8.184

+Ten anon +tys body ros to lyue . CMMIRK-M34,8.185

And when he was raysed to lyue , Seynt Andraw askyt hym how he was
drownet . CMMIRK-M34,8.186

+Ten he vnsward CMMIRK-M34,8.187

and sayd +tus : ' We wer fourty +geong men ynfere , CMMIRK-M34,8.188

and herden of a holy man +tat was yn +tys contre , CMMIRK-M34,8.189

and wolden haue gon to hym to haue herd his prechyng . CMMIRK-M34,8.190

But when we wern yn +te see , a tempest comme on vs , CMMIRK-M34,8.191

and drownet all ynfere . CMMIRK-M34,8.192

But wold God +tat we haden ben cast vp all ynfere , +tat we myghten haue
ben rayset all togedyr ! ' CMMIRK-M34,8.193

Then , at +te prayer of Seynt Andraw , all +te bodyes wern cast to lond
on dyuerse partyes . CMMIRK-M34,8.194

Then Seynt Andraw made to gedyr hom togedyr , CMMIRK-M34,8.195

and knelet adon , CMMIRK-M34,8.196

and prayde longe for hom , tyll +tay werne rayset all .
CMMIRK-M34,8.197

Then Seynt Andraw prechet hom +te fayth of Cryst , CMMIRK-M34,8.198

and folowed hom all ; CMMIRK-M34,8.199

and when +tay werne stedfast yn +te fay+te , he send hom to hor contray
a+geayne wyth moche ioye and myr+te . CMMIRK-M34,8.200

Mony o+ter myracles he dyd +tat wer to long to tell ; CMMIRK-M34,8.201

but hereby +ge may know +tat he was myghty yn makyng of myracles , +tat
+tus rayset fourty drowned bodyes infere . CMMIRK-M34,8.202

He sufferd also gret passyon for Cristis loue . CMMIRK-M34,8.203

For when he was yn +te cite of Patras , he turnet to +te fayth a wyf of
+te iustyce , +tat was called Egeas : CMMIRK-M34,8.204

he made men to do mawmetry , +tat ys , to offerne to fendys .
CMMIRK-M34,8.205

But for Saynt Andraw repreuet hym +terof , anon he made to take hym ,
and constrayne hym for@ @to haue done +te same . CMMIRK-M34,8.206

But for he stedfastly a+geynstode hym , preuyng by mony resons +tat he
and all o+ter men schullden worschyp God of Heuen , and not +te fende of
hell . Then Egeas wax wod wroth , CMMIRK-M34,8.207

and made men to do Andraw naket , and bete hym wyth scorgys , +tat all
his body ran on blod . CMMIRK-M34,8.208

And aftyr he commaundet to bynd hym hond and fote to a cros , +tat he
schuld payne +ter long , or he deyet . CMMIRK-M34,8.209

But when Seynt Andraw come to +te place +ter +te cros was made redy , he
knelyd adowne , CMMIRK-M34,8.210

and sayd : ' Hayl be +te cros +tat my maystyr Ihesu Crist deyd on .
CMMIRK-M34,8.211

I worschippe +te wyth all my hert , CMMIRK-M34,8.212

and desyre for@ @to clyp +te . Wherfor now take me to +te , and +geld
me to my maystyr +tat deyd apon +te . ' CMMIRK-M34,8.213

+Ten he stode vp , CMMIRK-M34,8.214

and dyd of his clo+tys , CMMIRK-M34,8.215

and +gaf hom to +te tormentowrs , CMMIRK-M34,8.216

and bade hom do , as Egeas commawndyd <P_9> hom . CMMIRK-M34,9.217

Then +tay bonden hym to +te crosse , hond and fote , so hard and strayte
, +tat +te blod wrast apon yche a knot . CMMIRK-M34,9.218

+Tus he hongyt on +te crosse twoo dayes alyue , prechyng allway +te
pepull , so +tat +ter come to his prechyng mony a +towsand of folke .
CMMIRK-M34,9.219

And for +te rew+te +tay hadden of hym , +tay beden Egeas do hym downe of
+te crosse , CMMIRK-M34,9.220

or ellys +tay wold sle hym . CMMIRK-M34,9.221

+Ten , for fer of +te pepull , he come for@ @to haue taken hym downe .
CMMIRK-M34,9.222

But +ten Andraw a+geynestode CMMIRK-M34,9.223

and sayde : ' Egeas wyt +tou well +tat +tou schalt haue no myght for@
@to take me downe ; CMMIRK-M34,9.224

for her I woll deye on +te crosse . ' CMMIRK-M34,9.225

Then +ter come a gret lyght , so +tat +ter myght no man se hym half an
oure , CMMIRK-M34,9.226

and yn +tat lyght he af vp +te gost . CMMIRK-M34,9.227

+Tus , when Egeas segh +tat he was ded , he +geode homward .
CMMIRK-M34,9.228

+Ten aftyr +te way he waxet wod , CMMIRK-M34,9.229

and sone aftyr , among all men , he stervet yn +te way .
CMMIRK-M34,9.230

And Maximilla , his wyfe , herd +terof . CMMIRK-M34,9.231

Anon scho mad take Seynt Andraws body downe , and bury hit yn a tombe .
Out of +te whech tombe manna and oyle walle+t out yfere , so +tat men of
+tat contre mowun know , when +tay schull haue der+te , and when gret
chep . CMMIRK-M34,9.232

For when hit schall be dere , hit walleth scarce ; CMMIRK-M34,9.233

and when hit schall be gret schep , hit walle+te plentwysly ynogh .
CMMIRK-M34,9.234

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,9.236

<$$heading>

Aftyrward hit fell +tat +ter was a byschoppe +tat louet well Saynt
Andrew , so +tat all +tyng +tat he dyd , he commendyd hit to Saynt
Andrew . CMMIRK-M34,9.238

Then , for +te deuell my+gt not putt hym out of purpos , he come to +tis
byschoppe yn +te lickenes of a fayre woman , prayng +tat ho most speke
wyth hym yn schryft ; CMMIRK-M34,9.239

and he graunted . CMMIRK-M34,9.240

+Ten scho began to speke +tus : ' Syr , ' ho sayde , ' I am a kynges
doghtyr CMMIRK-M34,9.241

and haue ben cheresly ynorysched ; CMMIRK-M34,9.242

but , for I se +te well of +tys world n@ @ys but a floure , I haue
avowet chastite . CMMIRK-M34,9.243

And when my fadyr wold haue mariet me to a gret Prince , for I wold not
breke my vow , pryuely yn a nyght , I stale for+te yn pore wede .
CMMIRK-M34,9.244

And when I hert of your gret holynes , I drewe to you to haue your helpe
, and consayle , and sokur . Wherfor , syr , I pray you +tat +ge
ordeyne so for me , +tat I may be holpen , +tat +te fende let me not of
my purpos . ' CMMIRK-M34,9.245

Then +te byschoppe confortet hur , CMMIRK-M34,9.246

and bade ho schuld haue trust yn <P_10> God ; CMMIRK-M34,10.247

for ho +tat had sette soo gret a purpos yn hir hert , he wold +gif hur
grace wyth . CMMIRK-M34,10.248

' But , +tis day , +ge schull ete wyth me ; CMMIRK-M34,10.249

and aftyr mete , we schull be good cownseyle soo ordeyne for you , +tat
+ge schull be holpen . ' CMMIRK-M34,10.250

' Nay , syr , not so , lest men wold haue suspessyon of euell . '
CMMIRK-M34,10.251

' +Terof no charch , ' quod +te byschop . CMMIRK-M34,10.252

For we schull be so fele yn company +tat +ter schall be no suspessyon of
mys . CMMIRK-M34,10.253

+Ten ho gentyllych +tonket hym , CMMIRK-M34,10.254

and was sette yn a chayre befor hym at mete . CMMIRK-M34,10.255

But euer when +te byschoppe loket on hur , hym +toght hur soo fayre +tat
he was soo temptyd apon hur , +tat he had negh for+geetyn hymselfe .
CMMIRK-M34,10.256

Then anon +ter come a pylgrym to +te +geate , CMMIRK-M34,10.257

and put open +te +geate so hard , +tat all +tat weren yn +te halle ,
werne astonyet . CMMIRK-M34,10.258

Then sayde +te byschoppe : ' $Dame , schall +tys man com yn or no ? '
CMMIRK-M34,10.259

' Syr , ' sayde ho , ' fyrst let hym vnswar to a questyon ,
CMMIRK-M34,10.260

and +ten lette hym yn . ' CMMIRK-M34,10.261

' Dame , ' sayde +te byschop , ' make +ge +tys questyon ,
CMMIRK-M34,10.262

for we byn vnavyset as now . ' CMMIRK-M34,10.263

Then sayde ho : ' Let aske hym : what ys +te grettest merueyll +tat euer
God made yn a fote of erthe ? ' CMMIRK-M34,10.264

Then when +te pylgrym was asket +tus , he vnswerd and sayde : ' A manys
face ; CMMIRK-M34,10.265

for +tat ys er+te , and but a manys one fote . CMMIRK-M34,10.266

For +togh all +te men and wymen , +tat euer wer borne , stonden yfere ,
I schuld know on by ano+ter by summe degre . ' CMMIRK-M34,10.267

Then when he had made +tys vnswar , he was gretly commendet for his wyse
vnswar . CMMIRK-M34,10.268

Then sayde ho : ' I se +tat he ys wyse . CMMIRK-M34,10.269

Byd hym make ano+ter vnswar ; CMMIRK-M34,10.270

aske hym whe+ter +tat er+te ys herre +ten Heuen ? ' CMMIRK-M34,10.271

Then when +te pylgrym was asket +tis , +ten he sayde : ' +Ter@ @as Cryst
ys bodylyche . CMMIRK-M34,10.272

For Crystys body ys of oure kynd , CMMIRK-M34,10.273

and oure kynd ys er+te . Wherfor , +ter@ @as Crystys body ys , +ter is
Crystys body herre +ten Heuen ; CMMIRK-M34,10.274

for Crist ys herre +ten any Heuen . ' CMMIRK-M34,10.275

Then when he had made +tis vnswer , he was alowet and beden come yn .
CMMIRK-M34,10.276

Then sayde ho : ' Let him asoyle +te thryd questyon , CMMIRK-M34,10.277

and +ten let hym com yn . CMMIRK-M34,10.278

Late aske hym , how ferre hit ys from Heuen to helle ? '
CMMIRK-M34,10.279

Then when he was aposet of +tis , he vnswerd and sayd to +te messagere :
' Goo a+geyne , ' sayde he to +te messager , CMMIRK-M34,10.280

' and byd hur +tat sytty+te yn +te chayre byfor +te byschoppe make +tis
vnswar ; CMMIRK-M34,10.281

for ho con bettyr +ten I . CMMIRK-M34,10.282

Ho ys a fende , CMMIRK-M34,10.283

and ha+te mette hit ; CMMIRK-M34,10.284

and so dyd I neuer . CMMIRK-M34,10.285

Ho fell downe , wyth Lucyfer , from Heuen <P_11> to helle :
CMMIRK-M34,11.286

scho sytty+te +ter for@ @to tempte +te byschoppe , and make hym les his
sowle . ' CMMIRK-M34,11.287

+Ten when +te messager herd +tys , he was all hevy ; CMMIRK-M34,11.288

but he made +tys $vnswar +tat all myghten here . CMMIRK-M34,11.289

+Ten anon +tys fend vanechet away wyth an horrybull stenche .
CMMIRK-M34,11.290

+Ten +te byschoppe by+toght hym of +tys temptacyon , CMMIRK-M34,11.291

and was sory yn his hert , CMMIRK-M34,11.292

and made send aftyr +tis pylgrym . CMMIRK-M34,11.293

But by +tat +te messager come to +te +geate , +te pylgrym was goon ,
CMMIRK-M34,11.294

and my+gt not be fonde . CMMIRK-M34,11.295

Then +te byschoppe made all men for@ @to pray to God for@ @to send hom
wyttyng , what +tys pylgrym was +tat soo godly halpe hym yn his nede .
CMMIRK-M34,11.296

+Ten come +ter a voyce CMMIRK-M34,11.297

and seyde hit was Seynt Andrew , +tat come for@ @to socour hym for +te
good lyfe and serues +tat he dyd to hym . CMMIRK-M34,11.298

And bade hym eft be war yn tyme comyng , and preche +tat to +te pepull
yn help of hom . CMMIRK-M34,11.299

Now +ge schull knele adowne , and make your prayer to +tis holy apostoll
, Seynt Andrew , +tat he be your mediator bytwyx God and you , prayng
hym to +gyue you grace suche a lyfe to lede here , +tat hit be plesyng
to hymselfe , and to our lady , and to all +te company of Heuen .
CMMIRK-M34,11.300

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,11.301

And also +ge schull pray for +te state of all holy chyrch , and for +te
pope of Rome and all his cardenalles , et cetera . CMMIRK-M34,11.302

<heading>

3 . CMMIRK-M34,11.304

DE FESTO SANCTI NICHOLAI ET EIUS SOLEMPNITATE SERMO BREUIS .
CMMIRK-M34,11.305

<$$heading>

Goode men and woymen , such a day ys Saynt Nycholas-daye . +Te wheche
nome ys vndyrstonden +te praysyng of +te pepull ; CMMIRK-M34,11.307

for among all corseyntys of Heuen , Seynt Nycholas ys heghly yprayset of
+te pepull , and also yn holy chyrch specyaly for +tre vertues : for his
meke lyuyng , for his heuenly chesyng , and for his gret compassyon
hauyng . CMMIRK-M34,11.308

He was meke of lyuyng ; CMMIRK-M34,11.309

for as we reden , he had a fadyr +tat was callet Epyphanyus , and a
modyr +tat was heton Ioon . +Te wheche yn hor +gou+te geton Saynt
Nycholas . CMMIRK-M34,11.310

And when he was borne , +tay auoued chastyte , CMMIRK-M34,11.311

and delet no mor togedyr , CMMIRK-M34,11.312

but hulden hom payet of +te chyld . CMMIRK-M34,11.313

+Ten +tay maden for@ @to cristen hym , CMMIRK-M34,11.314

and callet hym Nychol +tat ys a manys name ; CMMIRK-M34,11.315

but Nicholas , +tat ys a chyldys name , so <P_12> +tat , all his
lyfe-dayes , he huld +tat name of a chyld , CMMIRK-M34,12.316

and +te vertues wyth +tat ben mekenes , and sympulnes , and wythout
maleys . CMMIRK-M34,12.317

Also when he was yn cradull , he fast Wennysday and Fryday ; +te wheche
dayes he n@ @old sowke but ones yn +te day , and soo hold hym apayde .
CMMIRK-M34,12.318

And for he huld for+te +tes vertues all his lyfe-days wyth his chyldes
name , +get childyr dydden hym worschyp spesyaly byfor any o+ter seynt .
CMMIRK-M34,12.319

+Tus all his lyfe-dayes , he lyued so mekly , and so symply , and soo
wythout maleys , +tat all +te pepull hym louet and praysyd for his meke
leuyng . CMMIRK-M34,12.320

He was choson by a voyce , +tat com from Heuen , for@ @to be byschoppe
of +te syte of Myrre . CMMIRK-M34,12.321

For when +te byschoppe of +tat cyte was ded , +te byschoppys of +te
contrey comen togedyr for@ @to chese ano+ter byschoppe .
CMMIRK-M34,12.322

+Ten com +ter a voyce to on of hom +tat was chef of hom ,
CMMIRK-M34,12.323

and bade him goo erly yn +te morow to +te chyrchedurre and make hym
byschoppe +tat he fond +ter , CMMIRK-M34,12.324

' and he ys callet Nycholas . ' CMMIRK-M34,12.325

Thus on +te morow +te byschoppe was erly vp , CMMIRK-M34,12.326

and +gede to +te chyrche-dyr , CMMIRK-M34,12.327

and fonde +ter Nycholas , CMMIRK-M34,12.328

and sayde to hym : ' What ys +ti name ? ' CMMIRK-M34,12.329

+Tan he , as he was full meke , vnswerd : ' Syr , ' he sayde , lowtyng
downe wyth hys hed , ' Nycholas , seruant to your holynes . '
CMMIRK-M34,12.330

+Ten sayde he : ' Comme , my sonne , wyth me ; CMMIRK-M34,12.331

I haue for@ @to speke wyth +te yn pryuety . ' CMMIRK-M34,12.332

And ladde hym to +tes o+ter byschoppys CMMIRK-M34,12.333

and seyde : ' Lo , syrres , here he ys +tat God ha+te schowet vs before
! ' CMMIRK-M34,12.334

and sakeret hym byschoppe . CMMIRK-M34,12.335

+Tus was he made byschoppe by heuenly chesyng . CMMIRK-M34,12.336

He had also gret compassyon to all +tat werne yn woo .
CMMIRK-M34,12.337

For when his fadyr and his modyr bo+te werne dede , +tay laftyn hym
wordely good inogh , +te wheche he spende apon hom +tat weren nedy .
CMMIRK-M34,12.338

Then fell hit soo +tat +ter was a ryche man , +tat had +tre doghtren ,
fayre woymen and +gong ; CMMIRK-M34,12.339

but by myschet , he was fallen yn suche pouerte , +tat for gret nede he
ordeynet his doghtren for@ @to becomyn woymen , and so to gete hor
lyuyng and his , bo+te . CMMIRK-M34,12.340

But when Nicholas herd +terof , he had gret compassyon of hem ;
CMMIRK-M34,12.341

and on a nyght , priuely at a wyndow , he cast ynto +te mannys chambur a
gret some of gold yn a bagge . CMMIRK-M34,12.342

+Ten yn +te mornyng , when +tys mon $found +tys gold , he was soo glad ,
+tat no man cow+te tell ; CMMIRK-M34,12.343

and wyth +tis gold anon he mariet <P_13> his eldyst doghtyr .
CMMIRK-M34,13.344

Then , yn ano+tir nyght , Seynt Nycolas kest yn ano+tir somme of gold
ynto +te mannys chambur , as he dede er befor ; and soo +te thryd tyme ,
tyll +tay were all yweded . CMMIRK-M34,13.345

But +te thryt tyme , when +tys man herd +te gold fall dowen , anon he
+gede out , CMMIRK-M34,13.346

and ouertoke Nycholas , CMMIRK-M34,13.347

and knew +tat hyt was he +tat so holpe hym yn his nede .
CMMIRK-M34,13.348

But Nycholas charched hym for@ @to kepe hit cownsell , whyles he lyuet .
CMMIRK-M34,13.349

Also ano+tir tyme , men weren yn +te see yn despeyre of hor lyues ,
cryyng to Seynt Nycholas for helpe . CMMIRK-M34,13.350

+Ten anon he com to hom , goyng on +te watyr , CMMIRK-M34,13.351

and sayd to hom : ' Loo , I am here redy at your callyng , '
CMMIRK-M34,13.352

and holpe hom soo , +tat +tay comen sonde to hauen . CMMIRK-M34,13.353

Also +tat tyme was suche a derth and hongyr yn +tat contrey , +tat all
negh spylleden for defawte . CMMIRK-M34,13.354

+Tan hit happude so , +tat +ter comen schyppys of +te Emperour , freght
wyth whete , ynto +te hauen . CMMIRK-M34,13.355

Then went Seynt Nycholas to hom , prayng hom to grawnte hym of yche
skynnys corn yn +te schyppe a_hundered boschelles , and of whete , for
to releue +te pepull wyth ; CMMIRK-M34,13.356

and he wold vndertake +tat +tay schuld want ryght noght of hor mette ,
when +tay comen home ; CMMIRK-M34,13.357

and so he had his askyng . CMMIRK-M34,13.358

And when +tys schyppe-men comen home , +tay had all hor mette ,
CMMIRK-M34,13.359

and wonted ryght noght . CMMIRK-M34,13.360

And hit +tat Saynt Nycholas hadde by hys holy prayer , hit was of suche
fuson and $plente , +tat hit fond all +te pepull to ete and to sowe +te
+gerthe aftyr . CMMIRK-M34,13.361

Thre knyghtes also weren enpeched to +te Emperour of traytere by fals
suggestyon , CMMIRK-M34,13.362

and wer commawndet to pryson for@ @to haue ben slayne +tat nyght .
CMMIRK-M34,13.363

But for +tes knyghtys wepyng and cryyng to Seynt Nycholas , then he come
+tat nyght to +te Emperour , as he lay yn hys bedde , CMMIRK-M34,13.364

and sayde +tus to hym : ' Why hast +tou soo wrongfully ydampned +tes
knyghtes to deth ? CMMIRK-M34,13.365

Ryse vp anon , and make for@ @to delyuer hom , or elles I pray God +tat
he rayse a batayle a+geynys +te yn +te whech +tou schalt be ded ,
CMMIRK-M34,13.366

and bestys schull ete +te . ' CMMIRK-M34,13.367

Then sayde +te Emperour : ' Who art +tou +tat spekys so boldly to me ?
' CMMIRK-M34,13.368

' I am , ' he sayde , ' Nycholas , +te byschoppe of Mirre . '
CMMIRK-M34,13.369

Then was +te Emperour soo aferd , +tat anon he send aftyr +te knyghtys
to hym , CMMIRK-M34,13.370

and sayd +tus : ' What wychecraft con +ge , +tat +ge haue trowblet me al
+tys nyght ; CMMIRK-M34,13.371

know +ge a man +tat hatte Nycholas , +te byschoppe of Myrre ? '
CMMIRK-M34,13.372

+Ten when +tay herd his name , +tay fellen to +te grownde on knees ,
CMMIRK-M34,13.373

and helden vp hor hondes , thonkyng <P_14> Seynt Nycholas .
CMMIRK-M34,14.374

And whan +tay haden told +te Emperour of his lyfe , he bade hom goo to
hym , and +tonke hym hor lyfe , and pray hym heghly +tat he schuld
+trete hym no more so : CMMIRK-M34,14.375

but pray to hym +tat he pray to God for me and for my reme .
CMMIRK-M34,14.376

And so +tay dydden . CMMIRK-M34,14.377

+Tus +ge mvn se +tat he hadde gret compassyon of all +tat weron yn doses
. CMMIRK-M34,14.378

And +tan aftyr , when he wyste +tat he schuld dye , he prayde to God
for@ @to send hym an angyll and fache hys soule . CMMIRK-M34,14.379

And when he segh +te angell comyng , he lowtet downe wyth hys hed
CMMIRK-M34,14.380

and sayde : ' In manus tuas , Domine , commendo spiritum meum , '
CMMIRK-M34,14.381

and soo +gelde vp +te gost . CMMIRK-M34,14.382

And when he was buryet , at +te hed of +te tombe sprong a well of oyle
+tat dyd medysyn to all seke . CMMIRK-M34,14.383

+Ten fell hit so +tat , mony +gere aftyr , Turkes stryeden +te cyte of
Myrre +ter Saynt Nycholas lay . CMMIRK-M34,14.384

And when men of +te cyte of Barus herden +tat , seuen_and_fourty
knyghtys with hor helpes , ordeynet hom schyppes , CMMIRK-M34,14.385

and +geodyn +tedyr . CMMIRK-M34,14.386

And when +tay comen +tedyr , by tellyng of four monkes +tat werne lafte
+ter , +tay knew hys tombe ; CMMIRK-M34,14.387

and anon +tay vndedyn hit , CMMIRK-M34,14.388

and fonden his bones swymmyng yn oyle . CMMIRK-M34,14.389

And +ten +tay token hom vp , CMMIRK-M34,14.390

and broghton hom ynto +te cyte of Barus wyth mekyll joye and mur+te .
CMMIRK-M34,14.391

Then aftyr , for gret myrackles +tat wern ywroght +ter , hit fell +tat a
Jew lett make an ymage of Saynt Nycholas , CMMIRK-M34,14.392

and set hyt yn his schop among his good , CMMIRK-M34,14.393

and bade hym kepe well his good , whyll he wer from home ,
CMMIRK-M34,14.394

othyr ellys he schuld der abye hit ; CMMIRK-M34,14.395

and soo went his waye . CMMIRK-M34,14.396

So , when ho was gon , comen theves CMMIRK-M34,14.397

and stelen his good , CMMIRK-M34,14.398

and beren hit away . CMMIRK-M34,14.399

Soo when +tys Jew was commen home and fonde hys good ystolne , he was
wod wroth wyt Saynt Nycholas , CMMIRK-M34,14.400

and toke and schowrget and bete +tus image of Saynt Nycholas , as hyt
had ben Seynt Nycholas hymselfe , CMMIRK-M34,14.401

and +tus spake to hym : ' I toke +te my good to kepe , Nycholas ,
CMMIRK-M34,14.402

for gret tryst I had yn +te ; CMMIRK-M34,14.403

and now +tow hast +tus fowle seruet me . CMMIRK-M34,14.404

+Tow schall bye hyt ych day , tyll I haue my good a+geyne . '
CMMIRK-M34,14.405

Than , as +tes +tefes weren yfere to depart +tis stolen goode , come
Seynt Nycholas to hom CMMIRK-M34,14.406

and sayde : ' How +ge haue made me betyn for +tis good ? '
CMMIRK-M34,14.407

and schowet hom hys sydys all blody . CMMIRK-M34,14.408

' Goth , ' sayde <P_15> he , ' and beryth +tis good a+geyne , othyr
elles vengeans schall falle apon you , CMMIRK-M34,15.409

and +ge schull be hongyd ych on . ' CMMIRK-M34,15.410

Then sayde +tay to hym : ' Who art +tou +tat +tretyst vs +tis ? '
CMMIRK-M34,15.411

+Ten sayde he : ' I am Nycholas , Goddys seruant , +tat +te Jew betoke
his good to kepe . ' CMMIRK-M34,15.412

+Ten wer +tay sory aferd +tat anon , +tat same nyght , +tay beren
a+geyne all +tys good . CMMIRK-M34,15.413

Then , on +te morow , when +te Jew segh his good $broght holy a+geyne ,
anon he toke fologht , CMMIRK-M34,15.414

and was aftyr a trew crysten man , CMMIRK-M34,15.415

and hadde +te blysse of Heuen . To +te whech blysse , +trogh +te prayer
of Seynt Nycholas , God bryng vs to . CMMIRK-M34,15.416

<heading>

4 . CMMIRK-M34,15.418

DE CONCEPCIONE BEATE MARIE ET $EIUS FESTIUITATE . CMMIRK-M34,15.419

<$$heading>

Alsoo , good men and woymen , suche a day +ge schull haue our Lady-day
+tat ys callet +te Concepcyon . Of +te wheche day holy chyrch maketh
mencyon of +te concepcyon of hyr for +tre specyall poyntes : for hor
fadyr holynes , for hor modyr goodnes , and for hyr owne choson mekenes
. CMMIRK-M34,15.421

Scho had a fadyr +tat was callet Iohachym , +tat was of such holynes
+tat , when he was fyften +gere old , he departyd his good yn +tre
partyes : on to wydows and to fadyrles chyldyrn ; ano+tyr to +to +tat
wern pore and nedfull , and seruet God nyght and day yn +te tempull ;
CMMIRK-M34,15.422

the thryd he kepyd to his howswold . CMMIRK-M34,15.423

And when he was xx=ti= +gere old , for +te gret godenesse +tat he herd
and knew by Saynt Anne , he weddyd hur , CMMIRK-M34,15.424

and werne yfere xx=ti= +gere . +Te wheche tyme , Anne neuer dysplesyd
hym , by nyght nor be day , for +te gret godenes +tat was wythyn hur .
CMMIRK-M34,15.425

But +ta+g +tay wer bo+te good and holy , God gaue hom no fruyth of hor
body ; CMMIRK-M34,15.426

but wern barayne bo+te . CMMIRK-M34,15.427

Therfor +tay maden a vow to God , bothe , yf he wold +gif hom a chyld ,
+tay wold offyr hit vp ynto +te tempull +tat schulld serue hit day and
nyght . CMMIRK-M34,15.428

Then as Iohachym , on a day , wyth hys neghtboures +gede to +te tempull
, for@ @to bryng his offryng to +te byschop of +tat contrey , +tat heght
Isakar , and he rebuket hym openly , CMMIRK-M34,15.429

and +tus to hym sayde : ' Iohachym , ' quod he , ' hyt fallyth not to
+te +tat art barayne , for@ @to offyr yn company wyth +tes +tat God hath
+geuen fruyte yn Israell . ' CMMIRK-M34,15.430

Then was Iohachym sore aschamet of his rebuke , +tat he went home wepyng
, CMMIRK-M34,15.431

and preuely toke his schepherdus wyth his schepe , CMMIRK-M34,15.432

and +gede forth yn ferre contrey among hylles , CMMIRK-M34,15.433

and <P_16> purposet hym for@ @to haue lyuet +ter all his lyfe-dayes ,
and neuer efte haue sene Anne , his wyfe . CMMIRK-M34,16.434

Then was Anne sory , CMMIRK-M34,16.435

and prayde to God CMMIRK-M34,16.436

and sayde +tus : ' Lord , ' scho sayde , ' +tat me ys woo , for I am
barayne , and may haue no chyldren ; and now more , for my husbond ys
gon , and I n@ @ot whethyr . CMMIRK-M34,16.437

Lord , haue mercy on me ! ' CMMIRK-M34,16.438

Then , as scho prayde this , an angyll com to hur , CMMIRK-M34,16.439

and comforted hur , CMMIRK-M34,16.440

and sayde : ' Anne , be of good chere , CMMIRK-M34,16.441

+tou schalt haue a chyld suche +tat neuer noon had lyke , ny neuer
schall be {COM:understood_the_like} byfore nor aftyr . '
CMMIRK-M34,16.442

Then was Anne aferde of +tys angeles worde and of +te syght of hym ,
CMMIRK-M34,16.443

and lay all day yn hur prayers , as scho had ben ded .
CMMIRK-M34,16.444

Then went +tis same angell to Iohachym , CMMIRK-M34,16.445

and sayde to hym +te same wordes , CMMIRK-M34,16.446

and bade hym take a lombe , and offyr hit to God yn sacryfyce .
CMMIRK-M34,16.447

And soo he dyd . CMMIRK-M34,16.448

And when he had ydone , fro mydday to euensong tyme he lay apon +te
erthe yn his prayers , +tonkyng God wyth all hys hert and all hys myght
. CMMIRK-M34,16.449

Then , on +te morow , as +te angell bade , he +gede homward on soft pace
wyth hys schepe . CMMIRK-M34,16.450

And when he come negh home , +te angell come to Anne , CMMIRK-M34,16.451

and bade hyr goo to +te +geate +tat was called +te gylden +geate , and
abyde hor husbond +ter . CMMIRK-M34,16.452

+Ten was scho glad and fayne , CMMIRK-M34,16.453

and toke hor maydens wyth hor , CMMIRK-M34,16.454

and +gede thedyr , CMMIRK-M34,16.455

and met +ter wyth Iohachym , hor husbond , CMMIRK-M34,16.456

and sayde : ' Now , Lord , I thonke +te heghly , CMMIRK-M34,16.457

for I was wedow , CMMIRK-M34,16.458

and now I am noon ; CMMIRK-M34,16.459

I was barayne , CMMIRK-M34,16.460

and now I schall haue a chyld ; CMMIRK-M34,16.461

I was yn mornyng and woo , CMMIRK-M34,16.462

and now I schall be yn joy and lykyng , and conseyue our lady .
CMMIRK-M34,16.463

And when scho was borne , scho called hor Mary as +te angell bade before
. CMMIRK-M34,16.464

Then aftyr , when scho was wened , +tay broght hur to +te tempull ,
CMMIRK-M34,16.465

and laften hyr among o+ter maydens to serue God day and nyght .
CMMIRK-M34,16.466

Then was scho so meke yn all hor doyngys , +tat all othyr vyrgenes
called hor qwene of maydens , so +tat scho was and ys +get +te mekest
seynt yn Heuen , and most redy ys ay to helpe all +to +tat callyth to
hyr yn nede . CMMIRK-M34,16.467

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,16.469

<$$heading>

I rede ther was a lord +tat trade a peny-reue , +te wheche hade gederet
hys lordes rent , and +gede to bere hyt to hym . CMMIRK-M34,16.471

+Ten wer +ter +tefes set for hym yn a wod +tat he most nede goo +trogh .
CMMIRK-M34,16.472

But when he come ynto +te wode , he be+toght hym +tat he had not sayde
oure lady sawter +tat he was wont to saye ych day . CMMIRK-M34,16.473

+Ten anon <P_17> he kneled adowne , CMMIRK-M34,17.474

and bygan for@ @to say . CMMIRK-M34,17.475

Then anon com oure lady lyke a fayre mayden , CMMIRK-M34,17.476

and set a garlond on his hedde ; CMMIRK-M34,17.477

and at yche ' Aue , ' scho set a rose yn +te garlond +tat schon as
bryght as a sterre . CMMIRK-M34,17.478

So by +tat he had jsayde , +te garlond was made ; CMMIRK-M34,17.479

hyt was so bryght , +tat all +te wode schon +terof . CMMIRK-M34,17.480

Thus when he had ydone , he kysset +te er+te , CMMIRK-M34,17.481

and went his way . CMMIRK-M34,17.482

+Ten wer +tes +tefes redy , CMMIRK-M34,17.483

and broght hym to hor mayster +tat hade seyn all +tys doyng .
CMMIRK-M34,17.484

+Ten sayde +te +tef to hym : ' I wot +tou art suche a lordys seruant ,
and haues hys mone wyth +te . CMMIRK-M34,17.485

But tell me what woman was +tat , that set +tis garland apon +ti hed ?
' CMMIRK-M34,17.486

' For sothe , I segh no woman , CMMIRK-M34,17.487

nor haue no garlond +tat I knew . CMMIRK-M34,17.488

But for I hade for+geton for@ @to say our lady sawter and was adred of
you , I kneled adown CMMIRK-M34,17.489

and seyde hit , prayng to hir to helpe me at my nede . '
CMMIRK-M34,17.490

Then sayde +te +tef : ' For hor loue , now go +ti way ,
CMMIRK-M34,17.491

and pray hor for vs . ' CMMIRK-M34,17.492

And soo he +gede sonde and saf hys way by socour of our lady .
CMMIRK-M34,17.493

But now schull +ge here how +tys fest was fyrst fonden .
CMMIRK-M34,17.494

+Ter was yn Englond a kyng , was cleput Wylliam +te Conquerour +tat send
+te abbot of Ramsey to +te kyng of Denmarke on message .
CMMIRK-M34,17.495

But when he was yn +te see , +ter com a derkenesse to hym and such
tempest wyth +tat , +tat he and all +tat wern wyth hym , went to haue be
yspyld anon ryght . CMMIRK-M34,17.496

Then yche man prayde bysyly on his ende to dyuerse sayntys of Heuen , to
haue helpe and socour yn +tat gret nede . CMMIRK-M34,17.497

+Ten as +tys abbot prayde deuoutly to God , +ter come a fayre man to hym
CMMIRK-M34,17.498

and sayde +tus : ' Woldyst +tou halow +te concepcyon of oure lady , +tat
ys +te secunde daye aftyr Saynt Nycholas-day , he woll socowr +te and
+ti men now yn +tys nede . ' CMMIRK-M34,17.499

' Syr , ' sayde he , ' wyth a hertly wyll , soo +tat +tou telle , what
schall +tat serues ben . ' CMMIRK-M34,17.500

+Ten sayde he : ' +Te same , worde for worde , +tat ys yn hor natyuyte ,
saue turne +te natyvyte ynto +te concepcyon . ' CMMIRK-M34,17.501

' Ful gladly , ' sayde he , ' schall +tys be don . ' CMMIRK-M34,17.502

And anon sesut +te tempest , CMMIRK-M34,17.503

and clere wedyr com a+geyne . CMMIRK-M34,17.504

And he dyd his mesage , CMMIRK-M34,17.505

and spedde wele yn all his doyng . CMMIRK-M34,17.506

And when he had told +te kyng of +tys vysion , +te kyng made preche hit
ouer all +te reme . CMMIRK-M34,17.507

And soo hit was halowet for euermore yn holy chyrche ; CMMIRK-M34,17.508

and so , out of +te reme , hyt ys now cananyset yn +te courte of Rome ,
and halowet +tro+g all crystyndome . CMMIRK-M34,17.509

Now pray we to oure lady wyth good entent of our lyuyng <P_18> to haue
amendement , CMMIRK-M34,18.510

and pray for vs to hor sonne +tat we may $be wyth hym yn Heuen .
CMMIRK-M34,18.511

Lady , we pray +tat hit soo be . CMMIRK-M34,18.512

Amen , amen ; CMMIRK-M34,18.513

pur charyte . CMMIRK-M34,18.514

<heading>

5 . CMMIRK-M34,18.516

DE FESTO SANCTI THOME APOSTOLI ET EIUS SOLEMPNITATE SERMO BREUIS .
CMMIRK-M34,18.517

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , such a day +ge schull haue Seynt Thomas-day of
Ynde , +tat was Crystys holy apostull , and fast +te euen , and come to
chyrche +tat day to worschyppe God and his holy apostole Seynt Thomas ,
as all holy chyrche dothe , and specyalle for +te propurtes +tat +tis
apostle had ; +tat ben to say : hegh preuyng of our fay , grette wondres
yn his way , and gret myracles on his day . CMMIRK-M34,18.519

This holy apostoll preuet so oure fay , +tat he lafte no scrypull yn no
parte +teryn . CMMIRK-M34,18.520

For when all +te dyscypull beleuedon and tolden hym , +tat Cryst was
rysyn from dethe to lyue , and +tay haden seen hym on lyue , and spoken
wyth hym , Thomas vnswaret and sayde he wold neuer beleue +tat , tyll he
had put hys fyngyr yn +te wond +ter +te nayles wern dryuen yn Crystes
hondes , and put his hondes yn Crystys syde , yn +te wond of +te spere .
CMMIRK-M34,18.521

Then VIII dayes aftyr , when all +te dyscypules wern yfere , and Thomas
wyth hom , +ten come Ihesu bodely to hom , CMMIRK-M34,18.522

and seyde to hom : ' Pees be to you ! ' CMMIRK-M34,18.523

And +ten he sayde to Thomas : ' Come CMMIRK-M34,18.524

and put +ti fyngres yn +te holes of +te nayles +tat persed my hondys ,
CMMIRK-M34,18.525

and put +ty hondys ynto my syde , CMMIRK-M34,18.526

and be no lengyr out of beleue , but heraftyr stedfast yn +te byleue .
' CMMIRK-M34,18.527

Then when Thomas had soo ydo , anon he criet for wondyr and for fere ,
CMMIRK-M34,18.528

and sayde : ' My Lorde and my God ! ' +Tat ys for@ @to say : ' Now I
beleue , Ihesu , +tat +tou art God and man . ' CMMIRK-M34,18.529

Then sayde Cryst to hym : ' Thomas , for +tou haues seen me , +tou
beleuest yn me . ' CMMIRK-M34,18.530

This +te taryng of Thomas byleue broght vs yn full byleue , and to +te
beneson of Ihesu Cryst . CMMIRK-M34,18.531

Of thys sayth Saynt Gregory +tus : ' Moch more Thomas of Inde helpys me
to +te fayth +tat wold not byleue , tyll he had hondelet and groped +te
wondes of Cryst , +ten Mary Mawdelen +tat byleuet anon at +te forme tyme
and furst . ' CMMIRK-M34,18.532

+Tus Thomas preuet our fay . CMMIRK-M34,18.533

He made also wonders yn his way . CMMIRK-M34,18.534

For when +te kyng of <P_19> Inde had send a messager , +tat heght
Abbanes , ynto +te contre of Cesare , to seche hym a carpenter +tat
cou+te make hym a palyce , then Crist speke wyth Abbanes ,
CMMIRK-M34,19.535

and sayde to Thomas of Inde : ' Goo wyth hym . ' CMMIRK-M34,19.536

And when +tay wer passed +te see , +tay comen to a cyte of +te wheche
+te kyngys doghtyr was +tat day weded . Wherfor yche man was commawndet
for@ @to come yn to +te mete . CMMIRK-M34,19.537

Then , among o+ter , Thomas and Abbanes comen yn to +te fest .
CMMIRK-M34,19.538

But for Thomas had all his +toght yn God , and had no lust to ete , +te
butler smot hym on +te cheke , CMMIRK-M34,19.539

and bade hym ete . CMMIRK-M34,19.540

Then sayd Thomas : ' I n@ @yll not ryse of +tys place , tyll +tat same
hond be gnawen wyth dogges , and be broght hedyr befor me . '
CMMIRK-M34,19.541

Then anon +te butler +gede aftyr watyr , CMMIRK-M34,19.542

and a lyon slow hym , CMMIRK-M34,19.543

and dranke hys blod ; CMMIRK-M34,19.544

and dogges etyn his body . Among +te wheche +ter was won blacke dogge
+tat toke hys hond yn his mowth , and broght hyt ynto +te hall , yn
syght of all men , and leyde hit downe befor Saynt Thomas .
CMMIRK-M34,19.545

Then was +ter a woman , a mynstrell , +tat vndyrstode Thomas wordes .
The whech anon fell downe to Thomas fete , and cryed +tat all men herden
: ' O+ter +tou art God o+ter Goddys dyscypull ; CMMIRK-M34,19.546

for ryght as +tou saydes , hit ys fallen ! ' CMMIRK-M34,19.547

Then was +te kyng and all men abasschet , CMMIRK-M34,19.548

and prayden Thomas +tat he wold bless hys doghtyr and hor hosbond .
CMMIRK-M34,19.549

Then Thomas prechedde hom bo+te , so +tat he made +te husbond byschop of
+te cyte , and +te wyfe a nonne +tat weren bothe martyres for Crystys
sake . CMMIRK-M34,19.550

Then went Thomas forth ynto Inde to +te kyng , CMMIRK-M34,19.551

and beheght +te kyng to make hym a pales , abull for a kyng . Wherfor
+te kyng was glad , and made to delyuer hym a gret som of gold for@ @to
make +te pales wyth . CMMIRK-M34,19.552

And soo he went ynto ano+ter feer contre , whyll Thomas schuld make +tys
place . CMMIRK-M34,19.553

But for Thomas +toght +tat hit was bettyr for@ @to make hym a palyse yn
Heuen +ten yn erth , +terfor he toke +tys money CMMIRK-M34,19.554

and dalt hit among pore men and woymen , and ouer all +ter@ @as was nede
. CMMIRK-M34,19.555

And soo aftyr went about , CMMIRK-M34,19.556

and preched Goddys worde to +te pepull , CMMIRK-M34,19.557

and turnet mony ynto +te faythe of Cryst . CMMIRK-M34,19.558

Then aftyr +te kyng come home , and had gret hope to haue his paleyse
made redy , and herd how Thomas had don he was wod wroth
CMMIRK-M34,19.559

and wold do Thomas and <P_20> Abbanes bothe to deth . CMMIRK-M34,20.560

But for his bro+ter was dede +tat same tyme , +terfore he made for@ @to
do hom bo+te yn pryson , tyll +te tyme he had buryet his brothyr .
CMMIRK-M34,20.561

+Ten , as God wold , whan hys brother had layne longe ded , he ros from
deth to lyue , CMMIRK-M34,20.562

and told +te kyng +tat he had yseen +te palyce +tat Thomas had made to
hym : ' Wherfor I pray the , let me bye hit , and I wyll +gef +te as
moche as hit cost +te . ' CMMIRK-M34,20.563

Then +te kyng bythoght hym , CMMIRK-M34,20.564

and by counsell he sayde : ' Naye ! ' CMMIRK-M34,20.565

and toke folo+gt and mony +tousandys of pepull wyth . CMMIRK-M34,20.566

+Ten seon +te byschoppys of mawmetry +tat all +te pepull laft hor lawe ,
and +geden to crysten fayth . Wherfor +tay wer so wroth wyth Thomas ,
+tat won of hom seyde he wold wreke his goddys ; and wyth a sper ryuede
Thomas +trogh +te body , and slogh hym . CMMIRK-M34,20.567

Then crysten men buryeden hym yn a tombe of crystall .
CMMIRK-M34,20.568

+Ter God worcheth mony wondyrfull myracles for hym ; CMMIRK-M34,20.569

for the honde +tat was yn Crystys syde , hit wold neuer ynto +te towmbe
, CMMIRK-M34,20.570

but lythe euer wythout . CMMIRK-M34,20.571

Thus he dyd mony wondres yn hys daye . CMMIRK-M34,20.572

He dyd also mony wonders on his day ; CMMIRK-M34,20.573

for alle +te contre cometh +tedur on hys day , CMMIRK-M34,20.574

and taketh howsell of hys hond yn +tis wyse . CMMIRK-M34,20.575

The byschop of +te see syngyth +te masse +tat day . CMMIRK-M34,20.576

When he beginyth +te masse , er he say +te ' Confyteor , ' he taketh a
branche of a vyne , CMMIRK-M34,20.577

and puttyth yn Thomas hond ; CMMIRK-M34,20.578

and soo goth to masse . CMMIRK-M34,20.579

+Ten oute of this branche burgeneth out grapes . CMMIRK-M34,20.580

And soo , by +tat +tat +te gospell be sayde , +te byschop taketh +tis
grapes , CMMIRK-M34,20.581

and wrengyth ynto +te chales , CMMIRK-M34,20.582

and syngyth wyth +tat wyne , CMMIRK-M34,20.583

and howseleth all +te pepull aftyrward +terwyth ; CMMIRK-M34,20.584

and puttyth +te ost ynto Thomas honde , CMMIRK-M34,20.585

and so howseleth all +te pepull . CMMIRK-M34,20.586

But when any comyth +tat ys vnworthy , anon +te hond closyth togedyr ,
CMMIRK-M34,20.587

and woll not open , tyll he be schrevyn clene ; CMMIRK-M34,20.588

and +ten hit openeth CMMIRK-M34,20.589

and howseleth hym . CMMIRK-M34,20.590

Also when men byn yn debate , +tay ben ybroght byfor +te towmbe of Saynt
Thomas , and sette on twyn , CMMIRK-M34,20.591

and +te cause of +te debates ys rehersed . CMMIRK-M34,20.592

+Ten wyll +te hond turne to hym +tat ys yn +te ryght ; CMMIRK-M34,20.593

and so ben +tay made at wone . CMMIRK-M34,20.594

Thus he preuet our fay CMMIRK-M34,20.595

and dude wondres yn his way , and gret myracles on his day . Wherfor
pray we to hym to make vs studfast yn our fay And helpe vs yn oure long
day , <P_21> And bryng vs +ter as ys no nyght but euer day :
CMMIRK-M34,21.596

That ys +te joy +tat lestyth ay . CMMIRK-M34,21.597

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,21.598

Ion Grysostom seyth , +tat Thomas come to +tat contray wher +te kynges
of Coleyne were , and folowed hom , and made hom crysten men .
CMMIRK-M34,21.599

For , +togh +tay haden worschypped Crist yn his burthe , +tay herden no
more of hym , tyll Thomas come to home , and taght hom +te faythe . +Te
whyche now +tay lyne at Colen . CMMIRK-M34,21.600

<heading>

6 . CMMIRK-M34,21.602

DE NATIVITATE DOMINI NOSTRI IHESU CRSTI ET EIUS SOLEMPNITATE .
CMMIRK-M34,21.603

<$$heading>

Godde men and woymen and crysten creatures , as +ge here and sethe ,
+tys day all holy chyrche syngythe , and redythe , and maketh melody yn
mynde of +te swete byr+te of our Lord , Ihesu Cryst , veray God and man
, +tat was as +tys day borne of hys modyr , Seynt Mary , yn gret help
and socour to all monkynd , but specyaly for +tre causes : for@ @to
+gyue pes to men of good wyll , for@ @to lyghten hom +tat loken ill ,
and for@ @to draw men so wyth loue hym tylle . CMMIRK-M34,21.605

Then , as to +te forme cause +tat he was borne for@ @to +geuen pes to
men of good wyll , I may preue +tus . CMMIRK-M34,21.606

For when he was borne angeles songen +tus : ' Gloria in excelsis Deo .
' +Tat ys to say : ' Ioye be to God +tat ys hegh yn Heuen ,
CMMIRK-M34,21.607

and pes be yn er+te to men of good wyll . ' CMMIRK-M34,21.608

At $mydnyght Crist was borne , CMMIRK-M34,21.609

for +ten alle +tyng be kynd taketh rest yn schewyng +tat he ys prynce of
pes , and was comen to make pes bytwyx God and man , and bytwyx angeles
and man , and bytwyx man and man . CMMIRK-M34,21.610

He made pes bytwyx God and mon ; wherfore for@ @to be a trewe mediatur
bytwyx hom , he toke kynde of bo+te : and veray God and man .
CMMIRK-M34,21.611

And soo , by hys medyacyon , he knet +te loue of God to man so sadly ,
+tat +te fadyr of Heuen spared not his owne sonne , but send hym for@
@to bye man wyth his blod , and bryng hym by wayes of mekenes a+geyne to
+te joye of paradyse +tat man lost by couetyse and heghnes .
CMMIRK-M34,21.612

Thus he made pes bytwyx God and man . CMMIRK-M34,21.613

He made pes bytwyx angeles and man ; CMMIRK-M34,21.614

for when angeles <P_22> seon +tat hor Lorde was wroth wyth man for
vnbuxamnes - fore vmbuxomnes is a thing that angeles haten - wherfor
+tay kepton +te +geatys of paradyse , and letten no sowle come yn , tyll
+tay seen hor Lord borne yn mankynde . +Ten anon , for loue of hor Lord
, +tay deden mon worschippe , CMMIRK-M34,22.615

and speken godely and louyngly to pore schephordes +tat kepten hor
schepe yn +te contre by , CMMIRK-M34,22.616

and bade hom goo ynto +te cyte of Bedelem ; CMMIRK-M34,22.617

for +ter +tay schuld fynd a chyld borne and layde yn a cracche , and do
hym worschip . CMMIRK-M34,22.618

And soo +tay dedyn , so +tat euer sethen angeles haue ben frendys and
seruandys to all good men and woymen , and all yn +te reuerens of +te
yncarnacyon of oure Lord Ihesu Cryst . CMMIRK-M34,22.619

Thus he made pes bytwyx angeles and man . CMMIRK-M34,22.620

He made also pes bytwyx man and man . CMMIRK-M34,22.621

For a+geyne tyme +tat he wold be borne , he made such pes +trogh all +te
world , +tat +ter@ @as kyndomes and prouynces wern at werre , yche on
wyth o+ter , in his burth-tyme was soo gret pes , +tat on man +tat heght
Octauian , and was Emperour of Rome , and had +te gouernance of all +te
world , and all +te world was suget to +te Emperour of Rome , and duret
soo +trytty wyntyr yn so moche +tat +tan was send out a mawndement
+trogh all +te world , comawndyng +tat euer-yche man schuld go to +te
cyte +tat he drogh lynage of , and ley a peny apon his hed , and offeren
hit vp knowlachyng +tat he was suget to +te Emperour of Rome .
CMMIRK-M34,22.622

Then most Ioseph , our ladyes husbond , nedys go to +te cyte of Bedelem
to offyr wyth o+ter men . CMMIRK-M34,22.623

But , for he had no money , he toke an ox wyth hym for@ @to sell +ter ,
and make hym money of . CMMIRK-M34,22.624

But , for he durst not leeue our lady byhynd hym - for scho was negh
tyme of burthe - he sette hyr on an asse , CMMIRK-M34,22.625

and toke hyr wyth hym . CMMIRK-M34,22.626

But when +tay comen ynto +te cyte , hit was soo full of pepull , +tat
+tay myght gete hom no herber ; CMMIRK-M34,22.627

but turnet ynto a caue +tat was bytwene two howsys , +ter@ @as men
setten hor capuls when +tay comen to +te marked , CMMIRK-M34,22.628

and fonden +ter a crcche wyth hay , CMMIRK-M34,22.629

and setten +te ox and +te asse +terto . CMMIRK-M34,22.630

Then , a lytyll byfor mydny+gt , oure lady bade Ioseph gete hyr mydwyues
, CMMIRK-M34,22.631

for scho schuld be delyuerd . CMMIRK-M34,22.632

But , <P_23> whyle he was yn +te towne aftyr mydwyues , our lady was
delyuerd , CMMIRK-M34,23.633

and lappyd hyr sonne yn clo+tes , CMMIRK-M34,23.634

and layde hym yn the cracche befor +te ox and the asse .
CMMIRK-M34,23.635

And +tay anon knewen hor Lorde , CMMIRK-M34,23.636

and fellen downe on knees , CMMIRK-M34,23.637

and worschepen hym , CMMIRK-M34,23.638

and ete no more of +te hay . CMMIRK-M34,23.639

That same tyme as men of +te contrey +geden at +te plogh , exen speken
to the plogh-men CMMIRK-M34,23.640

and sayden : ' +Tese sedys schull encrese CMMIRK-M34,23.641

and men schull wax few . ' CMMIRK-M34,23.642

Then , sone aftyr , com Ioseph wyth two mydwyues , +gebel and Salome .
CMMIRK-M34,23.643

But when +gebell fonde well +tat our lady was clene mayden , scho cryed
anon CMMIRK-M34,23.644

and sayde : ' A mayden hath borne a chylde ! ' CMMIRK-M34,23.645

Then +tat o+tyr , Salome , would not leue +tat , CMMIRK-M34,23.646

but busturly hondeled our lady ; CMMIRK-M34,23.647

and +terwyth anon hor hondes dryden vp . CMMIRK-M34,23.648

Then come +ter an angell , CMMIRK-M34,23.649

and bade hyr towch +te chylde , and be hole . CMMIRK-M34,23.650

And soo scho dyd , CMMIRK-M34,23.651

and was hole . CMMIRK-M34,23.652

Then went Ioseph , CMMIRK-M34,23.653

and dyd hys offryng wyth o+tyr men , CMMIRK-M34,23.654

and kept oure lady yn +te same caue whyll scho was yn chyld-bed .
CMMIRK-M34,23.655

+Tus , good men , +ge mou vndyrstonde how God +geueth pes to hom +tat
ben men and wymen of good wyll , and callyth hom his chyldren .
CMMIRK-M34,23.656

In verefiyng of thys thyng +te fyrst masse +tat ys songon +tis day sone
aftyr mydnyght , begynnyth thus : ' Dominus dixit ad me : filius meus es
tu ! ' CMMIRK-M34,23.657

' God sayde to me : +tou art my sonne . ' CMMIRK-M34,23.658

God calle+te hym his sonne +tat loueth here pees and rest ;
CMMIRK-M34,23.659

and when he parte+te from +tis world , he wyll bryng hym to +te blysse
+tat euer schall last . CMMIRK-M34,23.660

And +tay +tat wyll haue no pees here , +tay schull go hethen ynto
euerlastyng wo . CMMIRK-M34,23.661

+Tus Crist +geuyth pes to men of good wyll , CMMIRK-M34,23.662

and blessyth hys pepull yn pees . CMMIRK-M34,23.663

He leghteneth also +tat loketh euell . CMMIRK-M34,23.664

Herby , good men , +ge schull vndyrstond +tat Cryst heled not +too +tat
weren blynde yn body , but mony mo +tat wern blynd yn sowle , and
combyrd wyth derkenes of synful levyng . CMMIRK-M34,23.665

For , as Seynt Austeyne saythe : ' When Cryst schuld be borne , +te
world was so full of derknes of synful lyuyng , and nomely of syn of
lechery , and of syn a+geyne kynde , +tat had nye to haue laft to haue
ben yborne of mankynd . ' Wherfor +tat nyght +tat Cryst was borne , all
+tat doden synne a+geyne kynd , deydyn sodenly +trogh all +te world , in
schowyng how horrybly +tat synne ys before Goddys een .
CMMIRK-M34,23.666

Then loket +tay full euell and had gret nede to be jlyghnet +tat haden
ay her hert to synne . Wherfor Cryst <P_24> was borne at mydnyght , and
turnet +te darkenes of nyght ynto day-lyght , schowyng +tat +tan was +te
sonne of ryghtwysnes comen , for@ @to lyghten all +tat wern combret
wythyn-forthe wyth darkenes of synne . CMMIRK-M34,24.667

Also +tat same tyme +tat he was yborne , as mony doctors sayn , Crist
apered yn a bryght sterre to +tre kynges yn +te est , CMMIRK-M34,24.668

and bade hom goo ynto Bedeleem , and worschip +ter a chyld +tat schuld
be kyng of Iewes +tat was borne . CMMIRK-M34,24.669

And soo +tay deden , suyng +te sterre , tyll +tay comen +tedyr .
CMMIRK-M34,24.670

Thus he leghtenet hom +tat byfore loked full euell . CMMIRK-M34,24.671

For before +tay wer paynones , CMMIRK-M34,24.672

and leued on mawmetrye and fals goddys . CMMIRK-M34,24.673

But aftyr +tay loueden Crist , CMMIRK-M34,24.674

and wern holy men ; CMMIRK-M34,24.675

and now +tay lyen at Coleyn . CMMIRK-M34,24.676

+Tus +te byrth of Cryst made mony to see full well +tat befor loked full
euell . CMMIRK-M34,24.677

For he lokyth full euell +tat algate ha+te er to his good and to wordely
worschippe . CMMIRK-M34,24.678

For +tys maketh a man blynd , so +tat he for+geted his God , and hath no
lyst for@ @to desyre +te ryches of Heuen , ne for@ @to see +te lyght
+tat +ter ys but maketh hys good his god and hys mawmet .
CMMIRK-M34,24.679

For +tat a man loueth most yn +tys world , +tat ys callet his god and
his mawmet . CMMIRK-M34,24.680

Then - for Cryst was borne for@ @to destrye suche mawmetry - whan +tat
Herode pursewed hym , and wold haue slayne hym , his modyr bare hym ynto
+te lond of Egypt . CMMIRK-M34,24.681

And when he come +tedyr , anon all +te mawmetys +tat weron yn +te lond ,
+tay fellen downe to +te grownde , doyng to vndyrstond +tat he was yn
+te world +tat schuld cast don yn monnys hert +te mawmetry of couetyse
of good and of worldes worschyppe , and pompe , and pride +tat men
vseden +tat tyme . Wherfor , +tagh he hymselfe wer lord of all lordes ,
he was borne full porly , and of a pore mayden , and yn pore place , and
yn a pore araye , +geuyng ensampull to all men for@ @to set not by
worldly ryches , no+ter by pryde of +tys world ; CMMIRK-M34,24.682

for haue a man neuer so moche good ne so moch worschyp , here he
fyndythe hit , CMMIRK-M34,24.683

and here he schall leue hit . CMMIRK-M34,24.684

Thus Cryst by myracles +tat he scheweth yn hys burthe , lyghtenyth
mony-on wythyn-forthe +tat weren before fallen blynd .
CMMIRK-M34,24.685

Yn tokenyng of +tis +te secunde masse of this day ys sayde yn +te dawyng
, when nyght and daye departyth . +Te wheche masse begennyth +tus : '
Lux fulgebit hodie super nos . ' CMMIRK-M34,24.686

' Lyght schall <P_25> schyne +tys day apon vs . ' CMMIRK-M34,25.687

For +te Fadyr of Heuen sendyth grace of gostly lyght apon all hom +tat
leueth +tat Cryst was borne +tis day , veray God and man , of his modyr
Mary , veray modyr and mayden . CMMIRK-M34,25.688

And sette noght be vanyte of +tis world , CMMIRK-M34,25.689

but set all his hope yn Cryst and yn his modyr Mary . CMMIRK-M34,25.690

+Tus Crystys burth lyghtned mony +tat befor loket euell .
CMMIRK-M34,25.691

Also wyth loue he drogh men hym tyll . CMMIRK-M34,25.692

+Ge seen wele , good men , by experyment al day , +tat a fayre chyld
drawet loue of +to +tat sene hyt , and maketh hem to haue lykyng to
speke and to play wyth hyt . CMMIRK-M34,25.693

Thus Crist was borne a chyld , +te fayrest +tat euer was borne of a
woman , for@ @to draw loue to hym of mankynd . CMMIRK-M34,25.694

For whyll a chyld ys +geong and wythout synne , hit ys more amyable +ten
hit ys aftyr , when he comyth to man-state . CMMIRK-M34,25.695

This not only for his bewte , but also for hys bonte yche man ha+te
mater for@ @to drawe to hym , and do hym worschyppe as dude Octouiam ,
+te Emperour . +Te whech Emperour plesed so +te empyre of Rome , +tat
all men wolden haue worschypped hym as hor God . CMMIRK-M34,25.696

But +ten +te Emperour was so wyse , CMMIRK-M34,25.697

and knew well +tat he was but a man as o+ter werne , CMMIRK-M34,25.698

and durst not take +tat name apon hym ; CMMIRK-M34,25.699

but send aftyr Sybyll , +te sage , CMMIRK-M34,25.700

and asked hyr whe+tur ther shuld be after him eny iborne , +tat schuld
be grattyr +ten he . CMMIRK-M34,25.701

Then Sybyll loket yn +te sonne , CMMIRK-M34,25.702

and sygh at mydday a cercule of gold aboute +te sonne , and yn +te
myddyll of +te cerkyll a wondyr fayre mayden , and a chyld yn hyr barme
. CMMIRK-M34,25.703

And when Syble had schewet +tys to +te Emperour , scho sayde to hym : '
This chyld schall be grettyr +ten +tou ; wherfor do hym worschyp and
reuerence . ' CMMIRK-M34,25.704

+Ten +te Emperour toke sens , CMMIRK-M34,25.705

and dyd hym sacryfyce ; CMMIRK-M34,25.706

and charget all men +tat +tay schulden do also , and call +tat chyld God
, and not hym . CMMIRK-M34,25.707

By +tys ensampull ych crysten mon and woman schuld lerne to do reuerence
, and seruyce , and honor +tys day to +tys child . Wherfor +te +trydde
masse of +tys day ys sayde at mydday , yn schewyng +tat yche man and
woman ys holden to come and offer of +tis child and of hys modyr ; and
soo schowe hym seruant and soget to hym , and knewlech +tys schyld for
hys God and for his Lorde . CMMIRK-M34,25.708

And , for euery man schuld do +tus for loue and not for awe , +te masse
bygynneth +tus : ' Puer natus est nobis . ' CMMIRK-M34,25.709

' A chyld ys borne <P_26> to vs . ' CMMIRK-M34,26.710

A chyld , he sayth , and not a man , soo +tat all men and woymen for
loue schuld haue boldnesse for@ @to com to hym to seche grace . And for
he ys full of grace and redy for@ @to do mercy to hem +tat askyth hit
mekely wyth dew reuerence ; CMMIRK-M34,26.711

and he ys ay redy to +geue grace and mercy . CMMIRK-M34,26.712

Yn tokenyng of +tys +tyng , +tat same day Cryst was borne yn Bedeleem ,
a well yn Rome of watyr turned ynto oyle CMMIRK-M34,26.713

and ran soo all +tat day , schewyng +tat +te well of grace and of mercy
was borne +tat day +tat schuld +geue grace and mercy to all +tat wold
come to hym +terfor . CMMIRK-M34,26.714

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,26.716

<$$heading>

I rede of a woman +tat was defowled wyth +te synne of lechere , and
almost fell yn dyspayre . CMMIRK-M34,26.718

For when scho +toght on Crystys dome , scho knewe hur gylty ;
CMMIRK-M34,26.719

when scho +toght on +te paynes of hell , scho knew well +tat +tylke
paynes wer ordeynet for suche as scho was ; CMMIRK-M34,26.720

when scho +toght on paradyse , scho wyst well scho my+gt not come +ter ,
CMMIRK-M34,26.721

for scho was vnworthy ; CMMIRK-M34,26.722

when scho +toght on +te passyon of Cryst , scho wyst well +tat scho was
vnkynde to hym +tat suffred so moche for hur . CMMIRK-M34,26.723

At +te last , scho be+toght hur how +tat chyldern don no vengeans , but
lyghtly ben sa+gt , +togh +tay ben wrothe . Wherfor scho cryet to Cryst
prayng hym for his chyldhede +tat he wold haue mercy on hor , and
for+geuen hor hyr synne and hyr trespas . CMMIRK-M34,26.724

Then scho held a voyce on hegh +tat sayde : ' +Ty trespas ys for+geuen
+te . ' CMMIRK-M34,26.725

And soo hertly pray we to hym +tat he for+geue vs our synnes , and +geue
vs +te blysse +tat he bo+gt vs to . To +te wheche blys God bryng vs all
to . CMMIRK-M34,26.726

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,26.727

<heading>

7 . CMMIRK-M34,26.729

DE FESTO SANCTI STEPHANI ET EIUS SOLEMPNITATE . CMMIRK-M34,26.730

<$$heading>

Blessyd pepyll of Goddys mowth , +tat byn comen +tys day to holy chyrche
yn worschyp of God and +tys holy martyr , Seynt Steven , +tat ys callet
Goddys fyrst martyr , for +te enchesen +tat he was +te fyrst martyr +tat
sufferd deth for Crystys loue , aftyr +tat he was ascendet ynto Heuen .
CMMIRK-M34,26.732

Then , for@ @to ster you to deuocyon +te more to +tis holy martyr , +ge
schull now here what he sufferd <P_27> for Crystys loue .
CMMIRK-M34,27.733

As +te boke of +te dedys of +te apostoles tellyth , whan Cryst was styet
vp into Heuen , +te apostoles tentedon all to prechyng of Goddys wordes
and to holy prayeours , CMMIRK-M34,27.734

and myght not serue all +tat turneden to +te fayth , CMMIRK-M34,27.735

+tay chosen syx holy men and goode out of syxty_and_ten +tat wern
Crystys dyscyples for@ @to helpen hom yn Goddys seruyce . Of +te wheche
Seynt Steven was +te fyrst and +te wysyst , and was full of grace and
myght of +te Holy Gost , +tat he dyd mony wondres and myracles yn +te
pepyll . CMMIRK-M34,27.736

But , +tagh a man be neuer soo holy a lyuer , +get he schall haue enmyes
. Wherfor +te Iewes of dyuerse contre +tat haden envy to Seynt Steuen ,
rysen , a+geynes hym , and dysputed wyth hym a+geynes Crystys faythe ,
hauyng full purpos , yf +tay myghten , to ouercome hym by dysputson ,
and by fals wytnes , to do hym to deth . CMMIRK-M34,27.737

But when Seynt Steven knew hor males , he +toght for@ @to sese hom wyth
won of +tes +tre wayes : by schamyng yn dysputeson , o+tir by drede of
reuelacyon , othyr by loue and holy oryson . CMMIRK-M34,27.738

But furst he assayeth by schamyng and dysputeson . CMMIRK-M34,27.739

For +tay began to dyspute wyth hym ; CMMIRK-M34,27.740

but he was so full of +te Holy Gost , +tat +tay haden no wytte ne no
powste for@ @to +geynestonde hym . CMMIRK-M34,27.741

But openly he ouercome yn all hor maters , CMMIRK-M34,27.742

and preued hor wyttys fals , CMMIRK-M34,27.743

and sayde , he was redy for@ @to take dethe yn verefyyng of all +tat he
had sayde . CMMIRK-M34,27.744

And preued wele +tat hit was a gret schame to all hom +tat werne gret
clerkes , and knew +te lawe and +te profesyes +tat schulden come and wer
fulfylled yn Ihesu Cryst +tat he prechet ; and +get wold not leue in hym
. CMMIRK-M34,27.745

But algate a+geynstode +te Holy Gost +tat spake yn hor hertes ,
CMMIRK-M34,27.746

and schewet hom yn concyens +tat +tay dedden amys . CMMIRK-M34,27.747

And , +ter@ @as +tay seen +te comyn pepull turne to +te faythe for
wondyrs and myracles +tat God schowet ynto hor syght , +tay algate
a+geynestoden styfly , CMMIRK-M34,27.748

and setten Goddys werkes at noght , only by males of envyus hertys and
by no maners of resyn of scriptures . CMMIRK-M34,27.749

+Ten wer +tay more anangrede a+geynes hym , CMMIRK-M34,27.750

and freton hor hertys wythyn , CMMIRK-M34,27.751

and gryspude wyth hor teeth a+geynes hym . CMMIRK-M34,27.752

And , for +tay myght not ouercome hym wyth dyspytson , +tay +toghten
for@ @to take hym wyth som wordes of sclawndyr yn God , wherby +tay
myghten lawfully haue mater and cause to do hym to dethe .
CMMIRK-M34,27.753

Then knew Saynt <P_28> Steuen hor malyce , CMMIRK-M34,28.754

and lyft vp his een ynto Heuen CMMIRK-M34,28.755

and segh Ihesu , Goddys Sonne , stondyng at his Fadyr ryght hond .
CMMIRK-M34,28.756

And +ten sayde Seynt Steuen : ' Loo , I see Ihesus stondyng at hys Fadyr
ryght hond , redy for@ @to helpe me . ' CMMIRK-M34,28.757

And +terwyth anon his face schone lyght , as +tagh he had ben an angell
of Heuen . CMMIRK-M34,28.758

But when +tay herdyn hym speke soo , +tay weren fayne CMMIRK-M34,28.759

and stoppet hor eres , als +toght +tay haden herde hym speke fals
sclawndyr yn God , and had ben to horryble for any mon to haue herd hym
lye so . CMMIRK-M34,28.760

Then anon +tay drowen hym out of +te cyte , for@ @to stenen hym to dethe
, as for a sclawndyr of God , CMMIRK-M34,28.761

and chosen two men +tat cowth best hurle stones at hym ,
CMMIRK-M34,28.762

and despoyled hym of his clo+tes , CMMIRK-M34,28.763

and layden hom at +te fete a +gong man +tat was callet Sawle , +tat was
aftyrward called Paule ; CMMIRK-M34,28.764

for he was of +te chef of hom +tat dyden Saynt Steuen to deth .
CMMIRK-M34,28.765

But when Saynt Steven segh +tat he myght not sesen hom byfor by
reuelacyon , +ten he turnet to devot oryson ; CMMIRK-M34,28.766

and when +tay hurled at hym stones , and smytten out his braynes , he
cryed to God CMMIRK-M34,28.767

and sayde : ' Lord God , take my sowle . ' CMMIRK-M34,28.768

And , for he wold pray more devotly for his enmyes +ten for hymselfe ,
he knelet don to +te erthe CMMIRK-M34,28.769

and sayde : ' Lord Ihesu , reet not to hom +tis synne ,
CMMIRK-M34,28.770

but for+geue hom +tis gylt . ' CMMIRK-M34,28.771

And when he had sayde soo , anon he sleput yn God . CMMIRK-M34,28.772

+Ten taketh hede , good crysten men , whyche a brennyng loue +tys mon
had yn hys hert , +tat prayde more devotly for his bodely enmyes +tan he
dyd for hymselfe . CMMIRK-M34,28.773

In +tis he +gaf an hegh ensampull to all crysten men for@ @to haue
charyte yche on to o+tir , and for@ @to pray hertfully for herre enmys ,
and for yche mon +tat pursewyth hom , or doth hom any doses .
CMMIRK-M34,28.774

For he +tat praythe deuotly for his enmy , he ys yn +tat a martyr ;
CMMIRK-M34,28.775

for martyrdom fallyth by +tre wayes : +tat ys , by passyon and wyll
+terto , by wyll wythout passyon , by passyon wythout wyll .
CMMIRK-M34,28.776

In schewyng of +tes +tre martyrdomes , +tes +tre festys +tat seu+te +te
byrth of Crist , ben set togedyr , in tokenyng +tat whosoo sufferth any
of +tes , he schall be sett next Cryst yn Heuen . CMMIRK-M34,28.777

Seynt Steuen , he ys set next , CMMIRK-M34,28.778

for he had passyon and wyll +terto . CMMIRK-M34,28.779

Seynt Ion had wyll , CMMIRK-M34,28.780

but he was not slayne . CMMIRK-M34,28.781

The Innocentys , thay suffreden <P_29> deth , CMMIRK-M34,29.782

but +tay had no wyll +terto , but not a+geynes wyll . CMMIRK-M34,29.783

+Tus may a man be a martyr , +tagh he sched no blod , +tat ys when he
suffereth wrong , and ys pursued of euell men , and +tonketh God +terfor
, and taketh hit wyth good wyll , and prayth for his enmyes to God yn
full scharyte . CMMIRK-M34,29.784

For martyrdome wythout charyte , as Seynt Poule saythe , profuty+te
noght . Wherfor taketh good hede , and +ge schull fynde +tat +tes +tre
wern full of charyte . CMMIRK-M34,29.785

Seynt Steven when he schuld dye , he knelet adown for@ @to pray for his
enmyes . CMMIRK-M34,29.786

Seynt Ion when he went to hys deth , he sayde to hom +tat ladden hym : '
My chyldyren , loueth togedyr , and +tat ys ynogh . ' CMMIRK-M34,29.787

The Innocentes , for +tay wern so +gong , +tat +tay cowthe not speke ,
+tay schewet hor loue by open sygne . CMMIRK-M34,29.788

For +tay dydden lagh on hom +tat slowen hem , CMMIRK-M34,29.789

and playde wyth hor hondes when +tay seen hor bryght swerdes schyne .
CMMIRK-M34,29.790

Then , for enchesen +tat Saynt Steuen was so gloryous martyr , God
schewet mony myracles for hym of +te wheche +tis ys on .
CMMIRK-M34,29.791

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,29.793

<$$heading>

Ther was an honest woman , CMMIRK-M34,29.795

and had seuen sonnes and +tre doghtyrs . CMMIRK-M34,29.796

But yn a myshappe , apon a day , all +tay wra+teden hor modyr , so +tat
scho yn a gret maleyse cursed hom all . CMMIRK-M34,29.797

And anon +terwyth fell vengeans apon hom , so +tat +te membrys of hom
qwoken , +tat all +tat seen hom , had compassyon of hom , and reweden
hom gretly . CMMIRK-M34,29.798

And for +tay myght not do no good , +tay +geden as maset bestes +turgh
all +te contre . CMMIRK-M34,29.799

Then hapenet hit so +tat a brothur of hem +tat het Pole , and a sustyr
+tat het Pallyda , comen ynto a chyrche of Saint Steuen .
CMMIRK-M34,29.800

And when +tys man herd how deuotly Seynt Steuen prayde for hem +tat
sloghen hym , he had full tryst +tat he wold pray for hym ,
CMMIRK-M34,29.801

and he wold be hys seruant alway aftyr . CMMIRK-M34,29.802

And so , yn +tys full hope , he +gede ynto chansele , CMMIRK-M34,29.803

and wyth all hys hert prayde Seynt Steven of helpe . CMMIRK-M34,29.804

And anon yn seght of all men he was all hole . CMMIRK-M34,29.805

+Ten when his syster segh hyr bro+ter hole , prayde +te same wyse +ten
to Seynt Steuen . CMMIRK-M34,29.806

And +ten , as scho prayde , scho fell on slepe ; CMMIRK-M34,29.807

and when scho woke , scho was hole , CMMIRK-M34,29.808

and wyth all hyr hert thonket God and Seynt Steuen . CMMIRK-M34,29.809

Ano+ter myracull Seynt Austeyn telleth +tus : CMMIRK-M34,29.810

A senatour of <P_30> Rome wyth his wyfe went to Ierusalem ,
CMMIRK-M34,30.811

and ther byld a fayre chapell yn worschyp of Seynt Steuen .
CMMIRK-M34,30.812

And when he was ded , he ordeynet hymselfe to be buryed +teryn by Seynt
Steuen . CMMIRK-M34,30.813

But , longe aftyr hys deth , his wyfe wold goo a+geyne to hyr contrey ,
CMMIRK-M34,30.814

scho wold haue +te bonys of hyr maystyr wyth hyr . CMMIRK-M34,30.815

And soo wyth $prayers and yftes , +te byschop broght hur +te bones of
Steuen and of hyr husbond , CMMIRK-M34,30.816

and sayde to hyr : ' I know not , whe+ter ben +te bonys of +ty maystyr .
' CMMIRK-M34,30.817

+Ten sayde scho : ' Syr , I know well , +tes ben my maysters bones , '
CMMIRK-M34,30.818

and toke Seynt Steuen 's bonys ynstude of hyr maystyrs , vnwyttyng .
CMMIRK-M34,30.819

+Ten , when scho come on +te see , angeles songen yn +te ayre ,
CMMIRK-M34,30.820

and as swete sauour come out of +te bones +tat passed any spyces .
CMMIRK-M34,30.821

And +terwyth fendys cryedyn : ' Wo ys vs , CMMIRK-M34,30.822

wo ys vs ; CMMIRK-M34,30.823

for Steuen goth , CMMIRK-M34,30.824

and byttyrly brennyth vs . CMMIRK-M34,30.825

and betyth vs . ' CMMIRK-M34,30.826

And +terwyth reryth a tempest +tat +te schepmen wenden to haue byn
$drownet , and cryed to Seynt Steuen . CMMIRK-M34,30.827

And he anon aperet to hom CMMIRK-M34,30.828

and seyde : ' Be not adred , ' CMMIRK-M34,30.829

and anon +te tempest sesud . CMMIRK-M34,30.830

Then herden +tay fendes cryyng : ' +Tou wykked prince , our mayster
brenne +te scheppe , CMMIRK-M34,30.831

for Steven , +tat ys our aduersary , ys +teryn ! ' CMMIRK-M34,30.832

Then +te prynce of fendys sende fyue fendes for@ @to brenne +te schyppe
; CMMIRK-M34,30.833

but +ten was +te angell of God redy , CMMIRK-M34,30.834

and drownet hom ynto +te grownde of +te see . CMMIRK-M34,30.835

And when +tay come wyth +te schyppe to londe , fendes cryedyn : ' Goddys
seruand comyth +tat was stenet to deth wyth wyket Iewys ! '
CMMIRK-M34,30.836

Then , yn +te worschyppe of Seynt Steven , men maden a chyrche ,
CMMIRK-M34,30.837

and put hys bonys +teryn , wher God wroght many myracles for hym .
CMMIRK-M34,30.838

Now pray we to +tys blesset martyr of Crist +tat he woll pray for vs ,
+tat we may come to +te blysse +tat euer schall last . To +te whech
blys God bryng you and me to . CMMIRK-M34,30.839

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,30.840

<heading>

8 . CMMIRK-M34,30.842

DE FESTO SANCTI IOHANNIS , APOSTOLI ET EUANGELISTE , SERMO BREUIS .
CMMIRK-M34,30.843

<$$heading>

Goddys blessyd pepull , +ge ben comen +tys day to holy chyrch to
worschyp God and our lady and Seynt Ion , +te Euangelyst , +tat ys
Goddys owne derlyng . Wherfor all holy chyrche +tys day <P_31> maketh
mencyon of +te specyall grace +tat Cryst +gaf hym befor all o+ter
dyscyples . CMMIRK-M34,31.845

He +gaf hym grace of vyrgynyte , and grace of kepyng of his modyr fre ,
and grace of schowyng of hys pryuyte . CMMIRK-M34,31.846

He +gaf hym grace of vyrgynyte , +tat ys , of maydenhode .
CMMIRK-M34,31.847

For as +te story tellyth , and summe han an opyneon , when he schuld
haue wedded Mary Mawdelen , Cryst called hym CMMIRK-M34,31.848

and bede hym sewe hym . CMMIRK-M34,31.849

And he anon laft all +tis worldes vanyte , CMMIRK-M34,31.850

and sewed Crist forth , CMMIRK-M34,31.851

and kept hym clene mayden tyll his endyng-day . CMMIRK-M34,31.852

In a preuyng of +tis , as we reden , when Domician , +te Emperour of
Rome , herd +tat Ion prechet yn a contrey +tat ys called Asy , and byld
mony chyrches , he was wroth +terwyth , CMMIRK-M34,31.853

and send aftyr Ion , CMMIRK-M34,31.854

and made put hym yn a brasyn tonne foll of oyle , CMMIRK-M34,31.855

and so settyth hym +teryn . CMMIRK-M34,31.856

But when he had long sothen +teryn , and all men went he had ben sothyn
to pesys , +ten +te Emperour bade upon +te tonne . CMMIRK-M34,31.857

And when +to tonne was openet , Ion come out of +te oyle and of +te
brennyng of +te fure , as hole and as sond yn ych parte of his body , as
he was clene of part of womonnys body , bo+te of +toght and of dede .
CMMIRK-M34,31.858

And o+ter assay he had full hard . CMMIRK-M34,31.859

When he see a tempull of Iewes full of mawmetry , he prayde to God for@
@to dystrye hit . CMMIRK-M34,31.860

And +terwyth anon hit fell downe ynto powdyr ; wherfor Arystodemus , a
byschop of +te tempull , pursewed Ion to +te de+te . CMMIRK-M34,31.861

+Ten sayde Ion to hym : ' What woll +tou , +tat I do for@ @to make +te
byleue on Ihesu Crist , my Lord ? ' CMMIRK-M34,31.862

+Ten sayde he : ' I wyll make venym , and do men for@ @to dryngke hit
befor +te . CMMIRK-M34,31.863

And when +tou sest hom ded , drynke +tou +tat wythout harm ; and +ten I
schall leue on +ty God . ' CMMIRK-M34,31.864

Then sayd Ion : ' Goo , CMMIRK-M34,31.865

and do as +tou sayst . ' CMMIRK-M34,31.866

+Ten ordeynet +tis byschop poysen , CMMIRK-M34,31.867

and geten two men +tat wern dampned to +te deth , CMMIRK-M34,31.868

and made hom drynke of +tat poysen befor Ion . CMMIRK-M34,31.869

And when +tay haden drongken , +tay werne ded anon ryght .
CMMIRK-M34,31.870

Then Ion toke +tat poysen , CMMIRK-M34,31.871

and blessed hyt ; CMMIRK-M34,31.872

and so drangke hit of , CMMIRK-M34,31.873

and was neuer +te wors , CMMIRK-M34,31.874

and semede lyflaker aftyr , +ten he was before . CMMIRK-M34,31.875

For as clene as he was wythout venym of lechery , so clene he was of
+tat poysen , aftyr he had drongken hit . CMMIRK-M34,31.876

But +get +tys byschop seyde , he myght not leue , tyll he segh +te men
reyset a+geyne to lyue +tat wern sleyne by dryngkyng of +tat venym .
CMMIRK-M34,31.877

Then Ion cast of hys cote , CMMIRK-M34,31.878

and sayde : ' Haue +tis , CMMIRK-M34,31.879

and lay hit apon +te ded bodyes , CMMIRK-M34,31.880

and say +tus : Ion , Crystys apostole , <P_32> send me to you ,
CMMIRK-M34,32.881

and bede you ryse vp yn Crystys name . ' CMMIRK-M34,32.882

And when he had don so , +tay rysyn a+geyne to lyue . CMMIRK-M34,32.883

Then this byschop wyth mony o+ter leued yn Cryst , CMMIRK-M34,32.884

and weron folowet of Ion ; CMMIRK-M34,32.885

and he was aftyr a full holy man . CMMIRK-M34,32.886

Thus he +tat hath grace to kepe hym clene yn body and sowle , +tagh +te
fende held ynto hym venym of lechery or of othyr synne , hyt schall do
hym no harme ; CMMIRK-M34,32.887

but yn +te a+geynestondyng of his lust , he ys a martyr befor God ,
CMMIRK-M34,32.888

and he schall be taken as for worthy to be koper of Crystys modyr .
CMMIRK-M34,32.889

Then +tus , for +te clennes +tat Cryst sygh yn Ion befor all o+ter ,
when he schuld dye , he charget Ion wyth +te kepyng of hys modyr ;
CMMIRK-M34,32.890

and he , as a goode sonne , schuld take hyr ynto hys kepyng .
CMMIRK-M34,32.891

So +tat when Cryst was ded and ley in his tombe , Ion wyth o+ter help
bare hyr ynto his hous , CMMIRK-M34,32.892

and kept hir +ter , tyll Cryst was rysen a+geyne to lyue .
CMMIRK-M34,32.893

And eft when Cryst stegh ynto Heuen , he kept hyr yn +te same chambyr ,
as long as sho lyued aftyr here yn erthe . CMMIRK-M34,32.894

Thus had he grace of kepyng of Crystys modyr fre . CMMIRK-M34,32.895

And he had also grace yn schowyng of Goddys pryuetye .
CMMIRK-M34,32.896

Thus was furst when Cryst sate at hys soper on Scher +Tursday ,
CMMIRK-M34,32.897

for gret loue +tat he had to Cryst , he lenet his hed to Crystys brest .
CMMIRK-M34,32.898

And +ten ryght as a man leneth to a well and dryngketh his body full of
watyr , ryght soo Ion drangke of +te well of wysdom +tat ys yn Crystys
brest , CMMIRK-M34,32.899

and fulled hys sowle so full of gostly wysdome , so +tat aftyr he passed
all othyr yn wysdome . CMMIRK-M34,32.900

Thus Crist schowed hym of hys priuete before all othyr .
CMMIRK-M34,32.901

Also for he wold not stynte to preche Goddys worde , the Emperour exilet
hym alonly ynto +te yle of Pathmos . CMMIRK-M34,32.902

But when he was +ter hys one , God schewet hym +te apocalyppys of +tys
world +tat were for@ @to come , and most of Antecryst , and of +te
worldes endyng , and of +te day of dome . CMMIRK-M34,32.903

And as he segh hit , he wrot hit yn gret confyrmacyon of holy chyrche .
CMMIRK-M34,32.904

But aftyr when +te Emperour was ded , Ion was callet a+geyne to +te cyte
of Ephesim , +ter he was byschop . CMMIRK-M34,32.905

And when he come +tedyr , a wydow +tat het Drusyan , lay ded on bere .
CMMIRK-M34,32.906

+Ten for Ion segh mony wepe for hyr , Ion sayde to hyr : ' Drusyan ,
ryse vp , CMMIRK-M34,32.907

and go , CMMIRK-M34,32.908

and make me some mete . ' CMMIRK-M34,32.909

And scho anon ros vp , as +togh scho had rysen from slepe .
CMMIRK-M34,32.910

Ano+ter day , two +gong men and rych , by +te prechyng of Saynt Ion ,
+tay solden all hor godes , CMMIRK-M34,32.911

and sewoden hym . CMMIRK-M34,32.912

+Ten , on a day , <P_33> as +tay comen ynto a cyte of Pergame , when
+tay segh +tos +tat wer hor seruandys byfor , gon yn ryche araye , and
+tay homselfe yn pore wede , by temptacyon of +te fende , +tay forthoght
hor purpos , CMMIRK-M34,33.913

and wer sory +tat +tay haden so laft hor goodys . CMMIRK-M34,33.914

Then anon , by reuelacyon of +te priuetye of God , Ion knew hor +toght
CMMIRK-M34,33.915

and sayde to hom : ' I see how +te deuell tempteth you , and makyth you
forthynke your purpos +tat +ge ben yn . Wherfor goo +ge to +te wode ,
CMMIRK-M34,33.916

and bryngyth ay+ter of you hys burden of +gardys ; CMMIRK-M34,33.917

and aftyr go+te to +te see , CMMIRK-M34,33.918

and bryngyth ay+ter of you hys borden of stones . ' CMMIRK-M34,33.919

And so +tay deden . CMMIRK-M34,33.920

Then , at +te prayer of Seynt Ion , +te +gardys turnet ynto gold , and
+te stons ynto jewels . CMMIRK-M34,33.921

And +ten Ion sayd to hom : ' Now takes +tys gold and +tese precyous
stones ; and +ge be as rych as +ge wer befor ; CMMIRK-M34,33.922

and knoweth well +tat +ge haue lost +te kyndom of Heuen . '
CMMIRK-M34,33.923

Then happened hit +tat men broghten a ded body to burye hit .
CMMIRK-M34,33.924

When +te modyr of +te corse segh Ion , scho fell on knees to hym ,
prayng hym +tat he wold rere hyr sonne to lyue , as he reryd Drusyan ,
+te wedow . CMMIRK-M34,33.925

+Ten Ion prayde to God ; CMMIRK-M34,33.926

and anon he +tat was ded , roos vp . CMMIRK-M34,33.927

+Ten Ion sayde to hym : ' I bydde +te , tell +tes men whad +tou hast
yseyne , and whad joy +tes men han lost . ' CMMIRK-M34,33.928

Then he , yn heryng of all men , told of +te joye of paradyse and of the
paynes of hell , how strong and how horrybly +tay wern ; and how he segh
gloryous places ordeynet for +tos men ; and now how sore hor angeles
wepton for loue of hom ; CMMIRK-M34,33.929

and much joye fendes maden , CMMIRK-M34,33.930

for +tay wer turnet from hor perfyt louyng . CMMIRK-M34,33.931

+Ten anon +tese weren sory yn hor hertys , CMMIRK-M34,33.932

and repenteden hom for hor doyng , CMMIRK-M34,33.933

and wepyng cryed to Ion +tat he schuld pray to God for hom , and +geue
hom penaunce . CMMIRK-M34,33.934

And when +tay haden don hor penaunce , anon +te gold turned a+geyne ynto
+geardes , and +te jewelles ynto stones ; CMMIRK-M34,33.935

and +tay wer holy men aftyr . CMMIRK-M34,33.936

Ano+ter reuelacyon Ion had by schowyng of Goddys priuete ;
CMMIRK-M34,33.937

for on a day he segh a child +tat was lyke for@ @to haue ben a good man
. Wherfor Ion broght hym to a byschop , and bade hym kepe hym and teche
hym . CMMIRK-M34,33.938

+Ten +tis chyld waxed a man , CMMIRK-M34,33.939

and +gaf hym to foly , CMMIRK-M34,33.940

and so fell to a company of +tefes , CMMIRK-M34,33.941

and was sone aftyr a maystyr of hom . CMMIRK-M34,33.942

+Ten , by reuelacyon of God , Ion knew +tat anon ; CMMIRK-M34,33.943

and he +gede to +te byschop , CMMIRK-M34,33.944

and blamed hym sore for myskepyng of hys chyld , CMMIRK-M34,33.945

and bade tell hym wher he was . CMMIRK-M34,33.946

Then +te byschop , wyth moche fere , sayde he was a leder of +teues yn
<P_34> suche a place . CMMIRK-M34,34.947

+Ten Ion , for he was old , and myght not well goo , toke a hors ,
CMMIRK-M34,34.948

and rode +tedyr . CMMIRK-M34,34.949

And when +tys +tef segh Ion , he was aschamed +tat he flogh .
CMMIRK-M34,34.950

Then Ion rode aftyr , CMMIRK-M34,34.951

and sayde : ' My swete sonne , my dere sonne , abyde CMMIRK-M34,34.952

and speke wyth me , +ty old fadyr . ' CMMIRK-M34,34.953

So , at +te last , +tys mon abode . CMMIRK-M34,34.954

+Ten Ion preched hym , so +tat he laft all hys foly , CMMIRK-M34,34.955

and was aftyr so holy a mon , +tat he was a byschoppe aftyr .
CMMIRK-M34,34.956

+Tus Ion had reuelacyon of Goddys pryuete . CMMIRK-M34,34.957

Ano+ter reuelachyon he had when he was L=ti= wyntyr old and VII .
CMMIRK-M34,34.958

+Ten come Ihesu to hym wyth his dyscyples CMMIRK-M34,34.959

and +tus to hym sayde : ' My derlyng , come now to me ;
CMMIRK-M34,34.960

for now hit ys tyme to ete wyth me and thy brethern yn my fest . '
CMMIRK-M34,34.961

+Ten anon he arose , CMMIRK-M34,34.962

and wold have gon . CMMIRK-M34,34.963

Then sayde Cryst to hym : ' Apon Sonday +tow schalt come to me . '
CMMIRK-M34,34.964

+Ten , by Sonday , he was so febull , +tat he made lede hym to +te
chyrche , CMMIRK-M34,34.965

and euer , as he myght , speke to hom +tat ladden hym :
CMMIRK-M34,34.966

' Chyldren , loue+t yche on othyr . ' CMMIRK-M34,34.967

+Ten sayde on to hym : ' Fadyr , why say +ge +tus soo oft ? '
CMMIRK-M34,34.968

+Ten sayde he : ' For , yf +ge louen togedyr , hit ys jnogh to saluacyon
. ' CMMIRK-M34,34.969

Then made he to make hym a graue before +te auter . CMMIRK-M34,34.970

And when hyt was made , he lay downe yn hit ; CMMIRK-M34,34.971

and ther come such a lyght apon hym , a gret whyll , +tat no man myght
see hym . CMMIRK-M34,34.972

And when +tis lyght was gon , +te put was full of manna ,
CMMIRK-M34,34.973

and wallut vp so doth sonde yn well wyth watyr . CMMIRK-M34,34.974

In +te lyfe of Saynt Edward +te Confessour +tat lythe at Westmynster ,
ys wrytten +tat Saynt Ion aperyth to Seynt Edward on a day , as he +gode
on processyon , CMMIRK-M34,34.975

and prayd hym for@ @to +geue hym summe good for Seynt Ionys loue , th'@
@Evangelyst ; CMMIRK-M34,34.976

for he louet hym moche . CMMIRK-M34,34.977

But for +te kyng hadde noght elles redy for@ @to +geue hym , he toke +te
ryng of hys fyngyr , CMMIRK-M34,34.978

and +gaf hym ; CMMIRK-M34,34.979

and soo Ion had +te ryng VII +gere . CMMIRK-M34,34.980

And at +te VII +gerys ende , Ion aperet to a knyght of +te kyngys
by+gonde +te see , CMMIRK-M34,34.981

and bade hym bere +tat ryng to +te kyng , CMMIRK-M34,34.982

and bade hym be+tenke hym well for whos sake he +gaf hyt away , and say
+tat he greteth hym wele , CMMIRK-M34,34.983

and bade hym make hym redy , CMMIRK-M34,34.984

for he schall dey sone . CMMIRK-M34,34.985

And so he dyd , CMMIRK-M34,34.986

and +gede to +te blysse of Heuen . To +te whech blysse God bryng you
and me to , yf hit be his wyll . CMMIRK-M34,34.987

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,34.988

<P_35>

<heading>

9 . CMMIRK-M34,35.991

DE INNOCENTIBUS ET EORUM FESTIUITATE . CMMIRK-M34,35.992

<$$heading>

Goddys owne blessed chyldern , +tat byn comen +tis day to holy chyrch yn
+te worschyp of God and +te chyldern +tat weren yslayne for Goddys sake
. CMMIRK-M34,35.994

As holy chyrche +tis day maketh mynde , and redu+te and syngythe of hom
, +tes chyldren ben called yn holy chyrche Innocentys , +tat ys yn
Englysche : wytheouten nye . CMMIRK-M34,35.995

For +tay wer not nyes to God by pride , CMMIRK-M34,35.996

for God ys euer anyed wyth pryde , men and woymen , CMMIRK-M34,35.997

and a+gaynestondyth hom , nor to hor neghtbur by no wrong doyng , ny to
homselfe by no concent of synne . CMMIRK-M34,35.998

I may well say , +tay lyueden here clanly wythout schame , +tay dyedyn
wythout blame , and wern folowed yn her same . CMMIRK-M34,35.999

This Innocentes +tat holy chyrche syngeth of , lyueden her wythout
schame ; CMMIRK-M34,35.1000

for +tay wer all within two +ger of age . Wherfor +tay wer not aschamet
of hor owne schappe ; CMMIRK-M34,35.1001

for when a chyld ys wythyn state of innocentes , he ys not aschamet of
hys schappe , CMMIRK-M34,35.1002

for he ys not defowled wyth fulth of synne , CMMIRK-M34,35.1003

but of +te synne +tat he hathe , he draweth of +te synne of Adam and of
Eue . CMMIRK-M34,35.1004

For so ferden +tey yn +te same wyse . CMMIRK-M34,35.1005

For whyle +tay wer yn paradyse yn +te state of jnnocentes , +tay wer
naket ; CMMIRK-M34,35.1006

but +tay wer not aschamet of hor schappe , CMMIRK-M34,35.1007

for +tay wer wythout synne . CMMIRK-M34,35.1008

But as sone as +tay haden synned , +tay seen hor schappe ,
CMMIRK-M34,35.1009

and wern aschamet +terof , CMMIRK-M34,35.1010

and hydden hit wyth leues of fygge-tre . CMMIRK-M34,35.1011

Thus , when synne bygynnyth to take rote yn a chyld , +ten jnnocentes
gothe away ; CMMIRK-M34,35.1012

for +ten he begynnyth to know +te good from +te euell .
CMMIRK-M34,35.1013

+Ten he synneth , CMMIRK-M34,35.1014

and +ten he greueth hys God . CMMIRK-M34,35.1015

But +tes chyldyr lyued not soo long for@ @to knew +te good from +te
euell , CMMIRK-M34,35.1016

but wern jslayne wythyn degre of jnnocentes . Wherfor +tay lyuedon here
wythout schame . CMMIRK-M34,35.1017

+Tay dyeden alsoo wythout blame ; CMMIRK-M34,35.1018

for Herode , kyng of Iewes , made to sle hom wythout gult .
CMMIRK-M34,35.1019

For when +te kyngys comen to Herod , and askyt hym wher +te kyng of
Iewes was borne , and bede tell hom , for +tay wern comen to worschyppe
hym ferr out of +te est . +Ten was Herod all astonyed of hor wordes ,
CMMIRK-M34,35.1020

and asked his clerkes wher he schuld be borne . CMMIRK-M34,35.1021

+Ten sayde +tay yn +te cyte <P_36> of Bedeleem . CMMIRK-M34,36.1022

+Ten sayde Herod to +te kynges , byddyng hom goo +tedyr , and do hym
worschip ; and come a+geyne to hym , and telle hym all hor doyng , +tat
he myght come and worschip hym also . CMMIRK-M34,36.1023

But when +tes kynges haden don hor offryng to Cryst , +tay +gedyn hom by
anothyr way . CMMIRK-M34,36.1024

Then was Horod wondyr wrothe , CMMIRK-M34,36.1025

and schaped anon to haue slayn Cryst . CMMIRK-M34,36.1026

But when he had made hym redy +terfor , +tat same tyme , +te Emperour of
Rome sende to hym by lettyr for@ @to come to hym yn all +te hast +tat he
myght ; CMMIRK-M34,36.1027

for two of his owne sonnes hadden apechet hym of traytery to +te
Emperour . CMMIRK-M34,36.1028

Soo at +tat tyme he laft +te sleyng of Cryst , CMMIRK-M34,36.1029

and +gede to Rome , CMMIRK-M34,36.1030

and had +te bettyr of hys sonnes , CMMIRK-M34,36.1031

and come hom wyth mor worschip +ten he had byfor-hond . Wherfor he
+toght +te more for@ @to sle Cryst , lest he had , when he come to
monnys state , put hym out of hys kyndome . CMMIRK-M34,36.1032

Then send he anon men , CMMIRK-M34,36.1033

and bade sle all +te chyldyr +tat weren yn Bedeleem and yn +te contrey
abowte , +tat wer too +ger old and wythynn , +tagh hyt were a chyld +tat
was borne +tat same day . CMMIRK-M34,36.1034

And soo +tay dedyn . CMMIRK-M34,36.1035

He was aferd , lest Crist +tat made +te sterre brynge +te kynges so
ferre , cou+te haue turnet hym ynto dyuerse ages , and made hymselfe
oldyr or +gongyr , at his one lyst . CMMIRK-M34,36.1036

And for he was a +gere goyng and comyng to Rome , +terfor he made to sle
all +te chyldre +tat wern two +ger olde or within two .
CMMIRK-M34,36.1037

And for wrach schuld falle on hymselfe yn party , +terfor a chyld of his
owne +tat was don to norysche yn +te contrey was slayn among o+ter .
CMMIRK-M34,36.1038

But +ten come +ter an angyll to Ioseph , CMMIRK-M34,36.1039

and bade hym take +te chyld and his modyr , and fle ynto +te lond of
Egypt , and be +ter tyll he wernet hym . CMMIRK-M34,36.1040

And so +tay dyden . CMMIRK-M34,36.1041

+Tus +tes Innocentes wern slayn wythout blame . CMMIRK-M34,36.1042

Thay wer also folowed yn hor same , +tat ys to say , yn hor owne blod .
CMMIRK-M34,36.1043

+Tay wer not folowet yn no font , but yn $schedyng of hor blod .
Wherfor +ge schull vndrystond +tat folo+gt come+t +tre maner of wyse :
yn watyr , as we ben crystened yn +te fonte at +te chyrch ; in chedyng
blod , as +te childyr and mony +towsandys of o+ter martyrs +tat schedden
hor blod for Crystys loue ; CMMIRK-M34,36.1044

the +tryd fologht ys in fayth , yn +te wheche all +te patryarches , and
prophetys , and all othyr holy fadyrs +tat wern befor Crystys
yncarnacyon +tat leuedyn yn Cristes comyng ; CMMIRK-M34,36.1045

+tay wern folowed yn fologht of faythe . CMMIRK-M34,36.1046

Thus +ge mou see how much cruelte +tis man <P_37> had yn hert , +tat
slogh so many chylderne for envy +tat he had to Cryst +tat noght gult to
hym nor non o+ter . CMMIRK-M34,37.1047

+Ten , for he made mony a modyr chyldles , and for@ @to wepe for hor
deth , God wroght so for hom +tat he made to sle his owne schylldren .
CMMIRK-M34,37.1048

And aftyr , as he pared an appull , wyth +te same knyfe he slogh
hymselfe . CMMIRK-M34,37.1049

Thus he +tat was lusty for to schedde gyltles blod , at +te last he
schedde hys owne hert-blod . CMMIRK-M34,37.1050

For he that ys wythout mercy , vengeans schall fall apon hym .
CMMIRK-M34,37.1051

And he +tat loueth to do mercy , God wyll +geue hym mercy .
CMMIRK-M34,37.1052

And +tis I aferme by ensampull +tat I fynde yn +te lyfe of Seynt
Syluestyr . CMMIRK-M34,37.1053

Ther I fynde +tat Constantyn , +te Emperour , was mesele and , by
consele of hys leches , he made for@ @to get +tre_+towsand chyldren
yfere , for@ @to haue slayn hom ; CMMIRK-M34,37.1054

and all hor blod schuld haue be done yn a vessell , and +te Emperour be
bathyd +teryn , whyll hit had ben hote . CMMIRK-M34,37.1055

Then when +tese chyldren wern gedert yn a place , +tis Emperour com
rydyng in a chare +tedyr . CMMIRK-M34,37.1056

But when he come negh , +te modyrs of +te chyldren comen a+geynys hym ,
cryyng , and wepyng , and makyng a dulfull noyse . CMMIRK-M34,37.1057

+Ten asket +te Emperour , what woymen +tay wern . CMMIRK-M34,37.1058

+Ten sayden o+ter , +tay wern +te modyrs of +te chyldren +tat schuld be
ded , and made +tat noyse for sorow of hor chyldren .
CMMIRK-M34,37.1059

Then sayde +te Emperour , hyt wer a cruell dede of vs for@ @to make so
fele bodiys to be slayn , for@ @to hel my body +tat am but on man ;
CMMIRK-M34,37.1060

and mony of hom may be full worthy men here aftyr . CMMIRK-M34,37.1061

+Ten stode +te Emperour yn full gret stude . CMMIRK-M34,37.1062

' Nay ! ' quod he , ' I woll not so , CMMIRK-M34,37.1063

let hom goo hom a+gayne hole and sonde , and I wyll take +te penance
+tat ys ordeynet for me ! ' CMMIRK-M34,37.1064

And made +gef +te modyrs gret +giftes , CMMIRK-M34,37.1065

and so bade hom goo hom wyth myrth and laghyng +tat comen +tedyr wyth
sorow and wepyng . CMMIRK-M34,37.1066

Then +te nyght aftyr as +te Emperour slepyd yn his bed , Petyr and Poule
comen to hym CMMIRK-M34,37.1067

and sayden , for +te gret compassyon +tat he had of +te chyldren and hor
modyrs , God send hym word +tat he wold haue compassyon of hym ,
CMMIRK-M34,37.1068

and bade hym send aftyr Seynt Syluestyr , and folow hym ;
CMMIRK-M34,37.1069

and +ten he schuld be hole . CMMIRK-M34,37.1070

And soo he dyd . CMMIRK-M34,37.1071

So when +tat he was folowed +ter anon yn +te watyr , +te lepull felle
away from hym , CMMIRK-M34,37.1072

and he was as clene of skynne and hyde as any chyld +tat he delyuerd
before . CMMIRK-M34,37.1073

Thus +ge mow se , good men , how he +tat woll do mercy , schall <P_38>
haue mercy ; CMMIRK-M34,38.1074

and he +tat wyll do vengeans , vengeans schall fall on hym .
CMMIRK-M34,38.1075

So for Herod dyd vengeans , vengeans fell on hym ; CMMIRK-M34,38.1076

and for +tys o+ter man dyd mercy , he had mercy and grace , bo+te her
and yn Heuen . To +te whech mercy God bryng you and me , +tat for vs
dyed on +te rode-tre . CMMIRK-M34,38.1077

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,38.1078

<heading>

10 . CMMIRK-M34,38.1080

DE FESTO SANCTI THOME , MARTIRIS ET EIUS SOLEMPNITATE .
CMMIRK-M34,38.1081

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , +tat ben ytaght by Goddys lawes for@ @to come +tys
day to holy chyrch , for@ @to worschip God and +tys holy martyr Seynt
Thomas +tat was slayn for +te lawes of holy chyrch and for +te ryght of
+te rem . CMMIRK-M34,38.1083

This holy Seynt Thomas was born yn +te cyte of London ,
CMMIRK-M34,38.1084

and had a fadyr was callet Gylbert , +tat was scheryue of London .
CMMIRK-M34,38.1085

+Ten felle hit , as +tys Gylbert went to +te holy lond , he was taken
and put yn dysstres . CMMIRK-M34,38.1086

+Ten come +ter a worschypfull woman of +te contrey to hym
CMMIRK-M34,38.1087

and sayde , yf he wold plyght hys troth to wed hur , scho wold helpe hym
out of his doses . CMMIRK-M34,38.1088

And soo scho dyd . CMMIRK-M34,38.1089

Then went Gylbert hom to Englond . CMMIRK-M34,38.1090

And when scho segh hyr tyme , scho come aftyr CMMIRK-M34,38.1091

and met wyth hym at Seynt Poules chyrch yn London . CMMIRK-M34,38.1092

Then made Gylbert +te byschop of +te cyte for@ @to folow hur , and aftyr
for@ @to wed hom . CMMIRK-M34,38.1093

And so Gylbert gate Thomas of this woman . CMMIRK-M34,38.1094

And when scho was wyth chyld , scho met yn a nyght +tat scho come to
Saynt Poulys chyrch ; CMMIRK-M34,38.1095

but when scho wold haue gon yn , hur wombe was so gret +tat scho myght
not by no way . CMMIRK-M34,38.1096

Then , on +te morow , scho +gode to hur scheryft-fadyr ,
CMMIRK-M34,38.1097

and told hym hur swyuen . CMMIRK-M34,38.1098

+Ten sayde he : ' Dame , be glad CMMIRK-M34,38.1099

and +tonke your God ; CMMIRK-M34,38.1100

for +tou hast a chyld yn +ty body +tat schall be so holy a man , +tat
all holy chyrche schall be to lytyll to receyue hym .
CMMIRK-M34,38.1101

+Ten was scho glad CMMIRK-M34,38.1102

and +tonked God +gorne . CMMIRK-M34,38.1103

And aftyr , when +tis chyld was borne , he was folowed and callet Thomas
, +tat ys to vndrystond : alle mon . CMMIRK-M34,38.1104

For he was aftyr a man at all ; CMMIRK-M34,38.1105

for he serued +te kyng monly , CMMIRK-M34,38.1106

he serued God devotly , CMMIRK-M34,38.1107

and deyd for +te law mekely . CMMIRK-M34,38.1108

For what tyme he was made chaunseler ; +tys lond was full of <P_39>
Flemyngys , and so ouersette wyth hom , +tat a man myght not goo bytwyx
townes for hom vnrobbet . CMMIRK-M34,39.1109

But yn a schort tyme , Thomas , what wyth wysdome , what wyth monhed ,
drof hom out of +tys lond , CMMIRK-M34,39.1110

and made suche rest and pees +trogh all +te lond , +tat a man myght goo
wher he wold vnrobbet , wyth his good yn hys hond . CMMIRK-M34,39.1111

He was also monfull yn reparelyng of +te kynges maners +tat wer astryed
, and namely of +te kyngys palyce yn London +tat was all forlet .
CMMIRK-M34,39.1112

But bytwen Astyr and Whyssentyde Thomas made reparayle hyt a+geyne ;
CMMIRK-M34,39.1113

for he had so mony werkemen of dyuerse craftys , +tat a man schuld not
here his felow speke for dount of strokes . CMMIRK-M34,39.1114

He was also monfull yn dede of armes . CMMIRK-M34,39.1115

For +ter@ @as +te kyng had be+gonde +te see mony castellys and townys
out of his hond , and had spende moche goode , and sched moche blode ,
for@ @to gete hom , and myght not avayle , then Thomas wyth hys wytte
and monhed gete hom a+geyne . CMMIRK-M34,39.1116

And also yn werres of +te kynges of Fraunce , he bare hym soo , +tat
euer aftyr +te kyng loued hym cherly , CMMIRK-M34,39.1117

and was aftyr hys best frende yn exhile , and his chef helpe and socoure
. CMMIRK-M34,39.1118

He was also monfull yn all his aray , clo+tede yn +te rychest clo+t +tat
myght be fonde , and yn furures . CMMIRK-M34,39.1119

He had also +te best horses +tat wern yn +te reem . CMMIRK-M34,39.1120

And also hys sadyls and brydyls , +tay schone all of syluer .
CMMIRK-M34,39.1121

He was monfull yn howshold , +tat hys hall was yche day of +te +gere new
strawed , yn somyr wyth grene rosches , and yn wyntyr wyth clen hay ,
for@ @to saue knyghtys clo+tys +tat setton on +te flore for defaute of
place on +te benche : so fele comen yche day to his mete .
CMMIRK-M34,39.1122

For of all +te dayntees +tat weren wythyn +te reem , yn his howshold
weren plente . CMMIRK-M34,39.1123

So +tat +te kyng hymselfe wold mony a tyme vnwarned come to +te mete ,
and sytte downe , bo+te for +te loue +tat he had to Thomas , also for@
@to se +te aray of Thomas howshold +tat all men speken so moche +terof .
CMMIRK-M34,39.1124

For trewer loue was neuer bytwene two men +ten was bytwen +te kyng and
Thomas , whyll hit last . Wherfor I put here +tys ensampull :
CMMIRK-M34,39.1125

Yn a cold wyntyrs-day , as +te kyng and Thomas rydyn yfere yn +te Chepe
of@ @London , +ten was +te kyng war of a pore man , sore acold wyth
toren clo+tes , CMMIRK-M34,39.1126

and sayde to Thomas , hit wer almes for@ @to +geue +gondyr pore man
warmer clo+tes +ten he ha+te , CMMIRK-M34,39.1127

' he semeth sore acold . ' CMMIRK-M34,39.1128

' Syr , ' quod Thomas , ' so hit wer CMMIRK-M34,39.1129

and to suche +ge schuld take hede . ' CMMIRK-M34,39.1130

+Ten sayde +te kyng ; ' He schall <P_40> haue +tys . '
CMMIRK-M34,40.1131

Then had Thomas a clo+te on hym +tat was of fyne scarlad , well yfurred
wyth grys . CMMIRK-M34,40.1132

This clo+te +te kyng pullet at fast , for@ @to haue drawen hyt of ,
CMMIRK-M34,40.1133

but Thomas logget a+geyne . CMMIRK-M34,40.1134

+Tus +tay wrastelet long , soo +tat +tay wer negh to haue fallen to
grounde . CMMIRK-M34,40.1135

But for@ @to fauer +te kyng , Thomas suffred hym to pull hit of .
CMMIRK-M34,40.1136

And when he had hit of , +te kyng kest hyt to +te pore man ,
CMMIRK-M34,40.1137

and bade hym ren away fast , CMMIRK-M34,40.1138

and sayde : ' Haue +tis , CMMIRK-M34,40.1139

and sell hit , CMMIRK-M34,40.1140

and by +te o+tir klo+tes ; CMMIRK-M34,40.1141

for yf +tou besette hit well , +tou myght fare +te bettyr al +te dayes
of +ti lyfe . ' CMMIRK-M34,40.1142

Then Thomas faynet hym wroth , CMMIRK-M34,40.1143

but he was well apayde +terof +tat hit was so beset .
CMMIRK-M34,40.1144

Then haden men furst gret mervayle , whad come bytwene +te kyng and
Thomas ; CMMIRK-M34,40.1145

but when +tay knew how hit was , all men logh CMMIRK-M34,40.1146

and maden gret joye and borde +terof . CMMIRK-M34,40.1147

Thus I schow by ensampull how +tay loued togedyr ; CMMIRK-M34,40.1148

for bettyr loue , ne trewer , was neuer bytwene two bre+ter , +ten was
bytwene +te kyng and Thomas , whyle hyt last . CMMIRK-M34,40.1149

+Tus Thomas serued +te kyng monfully . CMMIRK-M34,40.1150

He serue+t God devotly . CMMIRK-M34,40.1151

For als sone as he was made archebyschop of Caunturbury , anon ho waxyd
ano+tir man , CMMIRK-M34,40.1152

and turned al hys lyfe ynto bettyr , CMMIRK-M34,40.1153

and +toght for@ @to serue +te Kyng of Heuen als well afture , als he dyd
hys kyng yn er+te befor . CMMIRK-M34,40.1154

+Ten anon he leyde away scarlat and ryche forres , CMMIRK-M34,40.1155

and wered blake klo+tes of myddyll price , CMMIRK-M34,40.1156

and kest away sylke and syndall , CMMIRK-M34,40.1157

and wered next his flesche an hard heyre and a breche syde to hys hommes
of +te same +tat bred so moch vermyn on hym , +tat hit was an horrybull
syght for@ @to se . CMMIRK-M34,40.1158

But +tis penance no mon knoweth , but he +tat hath seyn hit .
CMMIRK-M34,40.1159

But he euer hudde hym , so +tat +ter wer but few +tat knew hit .
CMMIRK-M34,40.1160

Also , yche Wenysday and Fryday , he made hys confessour bete hym wyth a
+garde apon +te backe al bare , as a chyld ys beten yn scole .
CMMIRK-M34,40.1161

Alsoo , yche day , he vsyd for@ @to wasche +te fete of xxx=ti= por men ,
knelyng , CMMIRK-M34,40.1162

and +gef yche man IIII penyes of syluer . CMMIRK-M34,40.1163

Moche more holynesse he vsed of prayng and of wakyng +tat wer now to
longe for@ @to telle . CMMIRK-M34,40.1164

But for@ @to schew +tat God suffrede hym specyaly , +tus ensampull I
tell : CMMIRK-M34,40.1165

When Thomas was exilet , and dwelled yn +te abbay of Ponteney , on a day
, when he had sayde his masse , he kneled adon byfor an auter yn hys
prayers . CMMIRK-M34,40.1166

And as he kneled don +ter , the abbot of +te place sayde he hadde to
speke wyth hym , CMMIRK-M34,40.1167

<P_41>

and abode wythout pryuely vndyr a pilere . CMMIRK-M34,41.1169

And as he stode +ter , he herd our Lord , Ihesu Cryst , speke wyth
Thomas , CMMIRK-M34,41.1170

and told hym , how he schuld be slayn yn his owne chyrche for his loue ;
wherfor he bade hym be studfast , and hold forth as he had begonnen .
CMMIRK-M34,41.1171

+Ten when Thomas was comen out of his chapell , +te abbot felle downe to
+te grownde CMMIRK-M34,41.1172

and sayde : ' Syr , +ge mowe blesse +te tyme +tat +ge wer borne , for@
@to haue suche vysitacion , as I now haue herde . ' CMMIRK-M34,41.1173

+Ten sayde Thomas : ' Yf +tou haue oght herde , I charche +te +tat +tou
neuer telle hit , whyll I am on lyue . ' CMMIRK-M34,41.1174

Soo , whyllys he lyued , he kept hit clos ; CMMIRK-M34,41.1175

but when Thomas was ded , he told hit openly to all men .
CMMIRK-M34,41.1176

Thus , I say , Thomas seruet God deuotly . CMMIRK-M34,41.1177

He deyd also full mekely . CMMIRK-M34,41.1178

For when he segh +te kyng ouerset holy chyrch , and made lawes suche as
schuld destrye +te londe , +ten Thomas put hym forth ,
CMMIRK-M34,41.1179

and repreued +te kyng of hys mysdoyng . CMMIRK-M34,41.1180

+Ten was +te kyng wroth , CMMIRK-M34,41.1181

and made a parlament at Northhampton all yn myschaunce of Thomas .
CMMIRK-M34,41.1182

And for Thomas wold not sette to hys sele of +te curset lawe +tat +te
kyng and his sory cownsell haden made , he was dampned as a traytour to
+te kyng , and exiled out of +te lond . CMMIRK-M34,41.1183

Then went Thomas to +te kyng of France for socour ; CMMIRK-M34,41.1184

and he louyngly receyued hym and his clerkys all , CMMIRK-M34,41.1185

and fond hom almost VII +gere all +tat hom behoued . CMMIRK-M34,41.1186

+Ten , aftyr mony deseses and greues and wrongys +tat he had mekely
suffered of +te kyng of Englond and of his offycers , bo+te yn Englond
and by+gonde +te see , by trety of +te pope and of +te kyng of Fraunce ,
+ter was made a faynt loueday bytwene +te kyng of Englond and Thomas .
CMMIRK-M34,41.1187

But when +te kyng schuld haue kyssed Thomas , he wold not ;
CMMIRK-M34,41.1188

for he sayde , he had made a vow +tat he wold neuer kysse Thomas ;
CMMIRK-M34,41.1189

but bade hym boldely goo home to hys chyrche . CMMIRK-M34,41.1190

+Ten , whad by cownsell of +te kyng of Fraunce , and pryncypaly for the
byddyng of +te pope , he +gode hom to Canturbury . CMMIRK-M34,41.1191

Then wer +ter foure knyghtys of cursed lyuyng +tat for gret hope +tat
+tay hadden for@ @to be thonked of +te kyng , +tay maden a vow yfere to
sle Thomas . CMMIRK-M34,41.1192

And soo at Chyldyrmas-day , almost at nyght , +tay come to Canturbury
ynto Thomas halle : Syr Raynald Bereson , Syr William Tracy , Syr
Rychard Bretane , Syr Hewe Morvyle . CMMIRK-M34,41.1193

Then Raynold Bereson - for he was boystres of kynde - wythouten any
gretyng he <P_42> sayde to Thomas +tus : ' +Te kyng +tat ys by+gonde +te
see , sendes vs to +te , CMMIRK-M34,42.1194

and byddys +te +tat +tou asoyle the byschoppys +tat +tou hast acursed .
' CMMIRK-M34,42.1195

Then sayd Thomas +tus : ' Syres , +tay ben acurset by +te pope , and not
by me ; CMMIRK-M34,42.1196

and I may not asoyle +tat +te pope hath acurset . ' CMMIRK-M34,42.1197

' Well ! ' quad Raynald , ' +ten we sene +tat +tou wyll not do +te
kyngys byddyng . CMMIRK-M34,42.1198

By +te een of God , +tou schalt be ded ! ' CMMIRK-M34,42.1199

+Terfor +ten cryed the o+ter knyghtys : ' Sle , CMMIRK-M34,42.1200

sle , CMMIRK-M34,42.1201

sle , ' CMMIRK-M34,42.1202

and +goden CMMIRK-M34,42.1203

and armed hom yn +te courte . CMMIRK-M34,42.1204

Then clerkes and monkes droghen Thomas to +te chyrch ,
CMMIRK-M34,42.1205

and sparrut +te dyrres to hom . CMMIRK-M34,42.1206

But when Thomas herd +te knyghtes yarmed yn +te cloystyr , and wold haue
comen yn , and myght not , Thomas +gede to +te dyr , CMMIRK-M34,42.1207

and vnbarret +te dyrre , CMMIRK-M34,42.1208

and toke a knyght by hond , CMMIRK-M34,42.1209

and sayde : ' Hit besemeth not to make holy chyrche a castell :
CMMIRK-M34,42.1210

cometh yn , my chyldern ! ' CMMIRK-M34,42.1211

+Ten for hyt was darke +tat +tay myght not well know Thomas by ano+ter ,
+ten on sayde : ' Wher ys +tat traytour ? ' CMMIRK-M34,42.1212

' Nay ! ' quod Thomas , ' no traytour , but +te archbyschop . '
CMMIRK-M34,42.1213

+Ten sayde he a+geyne : ' Fle , CMMIRK-M34,42.1214

for +tou , art but ded . ' CMMIRK-M34,42.1215

' Nay ! ' quod Thomas , ' I come not for@ @to fle , but to abyde , and
take my deth for Goddys loue and for +te ryght of +tys chyrch . '
CMMIRK-M34,42.1216

Then Raynald , wyth hys swerdys poynt , put of his cappe +tat he had on
hys hed , CMMIRK-M34,42.1217

and smot at hym , CMMIRK-M34,42.1218

and kut halfe his crowne . CMMIRK-M34,42.1219

+Ten anothyr smot aftyr , CMMIRK-M34,42.1220

and hut yn +te same stroke , CMMIRK-M34,42.1221

and smot his crowne all of +tat hit hongyt by , as hyt hade be a dysche
. CMMIRK-M34,42.1222

Then Thomas fel down on knees and elbous , CMMIRK-M34,42.1223

and sayd : ' God , ynto thy hondys I betake my cawse and the ry+gt of my
chyrche . ' CMMIRK-M34,42.1224

And +ten +te thyrdde knyght smot , CMMIRK-M34,42.1225

and hutte half his stroke upon +te clerkeys arme +tat held +te crosse
before Thomas ; CMMIRK-M34,42.1226

and +tat other dele of +te stroke fell downe to Thomas hed .
CMMIRK-M34,42.1227

And he +tat had half +te stroke anon he wythdrogh hys arme
CMMIRK-M34,42.1228

and flagh away . CMMIRK-M34,42.1229

Then smot +te fourth knyght his swerde to +te pament ,
CMMIRK-M34,42.1230

and barst +te poynt of his swerde . CMMIRK-M34,42.1231

And when +tay had so don , +tay sayd : ' Goo we hens ,
CMMIRK-M34,42.1232

he ys ded . ' CMMIRK-M34,42.1233

But when +tay werne at +te chyrch dyrr outward on Robert Brok turnet
a+geyne , CMMIRK-M34,42.1234

and set his fote in Thomas necke , CMMIRK-M34,42.1235

and scraput out +te brayne of +te scolle about on +te pament .
CMMIRK-M34,42.1236

+Tus for ryght of holy chyrch and +te lawes of +te lond , Thomas take
his deth full mekely . CMMIRK-M34,42.1237

+Ten how +tys martyrdome was knowen yn Ierusalem , hit fell <P_43> +tus
: CMMIRK-M34,43.1238

In Ierusalem was an abbay of monkes , yn +te whech +tat same day +tat
Thomas deyd , lay a monke at +te poynt of deth . CMMIRK-M34,43.1239

+Ten , for he was a good man of lyuyng , +te abbot bade hym , yf God wer
apayde , +tat he schuld com to hym aftyr his deth , and tell hym of hys
fare . CMMIRK-M34,43.1240

And soo aftyr +tat he was ded , he come a+geyne CMMIRK-M34,43.1241

and told +te abbot +tat , when he deyd , angeles broghten hym befor God
, CMMIRK-M34,43.1242

and as he stode +ter , he segh a byschop come wyth a huge company of
angeles and of o+tyr seyntys . CMMIRK-M34,43.1243

And as he stode befor God , his hed dreppyd downe of blode of his wondes
+tat he had . CMMIRK-M34,43.1244

Then sayde God to hym : ' Thomas , +tus hit besemyth +te for@ @to come
ynto +ty Lordes court . ' CMMIRK-M34,43.1245

And set a huge croune of brennyng gold on his hede +tat was ywonded ,
CMMIRK-M34,43.1246

and sayde : ' As moche joye as I haue geven Seynt Petyr , I +geue to +te
. ' CMMIRK-M34,43.1247

And +ten he sayde : ' Hereby know I now , +tat +tylke gret byschop of
Caunturbury ys +tys day slayne for Goddys sake . CMMIRK-M34,43.1248

And soo know +ge well +tat I goo to blysse . ' CMMIRK-M34,43.1249

Thus told +te patryarcha of Ierusalem , sone aftyr hys deth , when he
come ynto Englond aftyr men to feght a+geynes +te Sarysens .
CMMIRK-M34,43.1250

Then hit $befell aftyr , a bryd +tat couthe speke , as he herd +te
pepull +tat comen on pylgremage to Seynt Thomas , on a day , he went out
of his cage , and a sparowhawke wold haue slayne hym .
CMMIRK-M34,43.1251

Then +tis brydde cryed , ' Saynt Thomas , helpe ' ; CMMIRK-M34,43.1252

and anon +tys sparhawke fell downe ded . CMMIRK-M34,43.1253

Thus so sone as Seynt Thomas herd a bryd +tat wyst not what ho seyde ne
mant , moche more and sannyr he heruth hom +tat callyth to hym wyth all
hor hertys . CMMIRK-M34,43.1254

Ano+ter man +tat Saynt Thomas loued yn his lyue , was seke ,
CMMIRK-M34,43.1255

and come to Saynt Thomas prayng to hym of helpe ; CMMIRK-M34,43.1256

and anon he was helyd . CMMIRK-M34,43.1257

But aftyr , he +toght +tat God send hym +tat sekenes for gret encrese of
soule mede , CMMIRK-M34,43.1258

and +gede a+geyne to Saynt Thomas prayng hym , yf hit wer more helpe to
his soule to be secke +ten to be hoole , +tat he most be seke a+geyne .
CMMIRK-M34,43.1259

Then anon +te sekenes toke hym a+geyn , CMMIRK-M34,43.1260

and he thonkyd God and Saynt Thomas . CMMIRK-M34,43.1261

Thus whan +te kyng herd how God wroght so many myracles for Saynt Thomas
, he come to Caunturbury , wolward and barfote , and all naked but a
febull cote , for@ @to hyde his body ; CMMIRK-M34,43.1262

and +gede <P_44> barfote yn +te myre and yn +te lake , as he had ben +te
porest man yn +te reme , cryyng and sekyng full sore , prayng Saynt
Thomas of helpe and of for+geuenesse . CMMIRK-M34,44.1263

Soo when he come to Saynt Thomas tombe , he made +te couent of +te place
by and by to +geue hym dyscyplyn upon his bare backe wyth a scharpe
+gerde , CMMIRK-M34,44.1264

and +ter +te sory customs and lawes +tat made debate bytwen Thomas and
hym , byfor all his pepull +ter he dampnet hom , CMMIRK-M34,44.1265

and graunted +te chyrch hys fredomes for euermor ; CMMIRK-M34,44.1266

and soo he +geode his way . CMMIRK-M34,44.1267

Thes foure knyghtes when +tay herden , how God wroght for Saynt Thomas ,
+tay weren full sory of hor cursed dedes , CMMIRK-M34,44.1268

and cursed +te tyme +tat hit befelle hom soo , CMMIRK-M34,44.1269

and lafton all hor lordschyppys and londes and rentes +tat +tay hadden ,
CMMIRK-M34,44.1270

and wenten to Ierusalem ; CMMIRK-M34,44.1271

and +ter +tay werredyn on Goddys enmys . CMMIRK-M34,44.1272

But William Tracy , by lettyng +tat he had , he taryed behynde ,
CMMIRK-M34,44.1273

and fell seke , CMMIRK-M34,44.1274

and rotud all his body , so +tat hymselfe lompmale wyth his hondes kest
away hys flesche ynto +te flore , CMMIRK-M34,44.1275

and had an horrybull deth . CMMIRK-M34,44.1276

The thre o+ter also deyden on spytues de+tes , so +tat , wythyn +tre
+gere aftyr , Thomas deth was thus venget . CMMIRK-M34,44.1277

And +tus +tay wer ded all ; CMMIRK-M34,44.1278

but euer , whill +tay lyueden , +tay euer cryed mercy to God and Seynt
Thomas . CMMIRK-M34,44.1279

And soo do we , +tat we may haue +te blys +tat he boght vs to . To +te
wheche blysse , +trogh the prayer of Saynt Thomas of Caunturbury , God
$bryng vs to . CMMIRK-M34,44.1280

<heading>

11 . CMMIRK-M34,44.1282

DE CIRCUMCISIONE DOMINI NOSTRI , IHESU CRISTI . CMMIRK-M34,44.1283

<$$heading>

Goddys owne seruandys , as +ge know well , +tys day ys called
New-+gerus-day , as endyng of +te +ger +tat ys gon , and begynnyng of
+te +gere +tat ys comyng . Wherfor , as I hope , +ge ben comen as +tys
day to holy chyrch , for@ @to contynue your seruice forth +tys +gere als
well o+ter bettyr +tat comy+te , as +ge dyddyn +te +gere +tat ys gon ,
wythouten any new cownant makyng . CMMIRK-M34,44.1285

For a good seruand +tat hath a good maystyr , he maketh but onys cownant
wyth hym , CMMIRK-M34,44.1286

but soo holdeth forth from +gere to +gere , hauyng full tryst yn his
maystyr +tat he woll for his good seruyce reward at hys ende <P_45> and
at his nede . CMMIRK-M34,45.1287

Now right soo Goddys seruandys maketh couenant wyth hym , onys at +te
fonte when +tay ben jcrystenet . CMMIRK-M34,45.1288

And soo holden forth hor couenantys , hauyng full tryst yn hor God +tat
he woll at hor endyng be hor socoure , and +geuen hom auauncement in his
court of Heuen . CMMIRK-M34,45.1289

Then schull +ge +tat ben Goddys seruantys , know wele +tat +tis day ys
called New-+geris-day , and also +te circumsicyon of oure Lord , and +te
vtas of +te natyuyte . CMMIRK-M34,45.1290

Hit ys callet New-+gerys-day , for hit ys +te forme day of +te kalender
. CMMIRK-M34,45.1291

Then , for +te +gere ys rewlet and gouernet by +te kalender , and +tis
day stondeth yn +te begynnyng +terof , hit ys callet +geres-day .
CMMIRK-M34,45.1292

Then sayth Seynt Austeyn +tat , +tis day and +tis nyght , paynene vsen
many fals opynyons of wychecraft and of fals fayth , +te whech ben noght
to telle among crysten men , lest +tay wer drawen yn vse . Wherfor ,
+ge +tat ben Goddys seruandes , be +ge well war , lest +ge ben deseyvet
by any sorsery and by any byleue : as by takyng of howsell of on man
raythyr +ten of ano+tyr , othyr for@ @to bye othyr selle , and aske or
borue . Yn +te whyche some men haue dyuerse opynyons +tat , +gyf +tay
werne clene schereven , +tay wer worthy gret penawnce for mysbeleue ;
CMMIRK-M34,45.1293

for +tat comyth of +te fende , and not of God . CMMIRK-M34,45.1294

+Tis ys callet alsoo +te cyrcumcysyon of our Lord . CMMIRK-M34,45.1295

For , as holy chyrche techeth +tys , he was circumsiset ,
CMMIRK-M34,45.1296

and sched hys blode +tis day for our sake . CMMIRK-M34,45.1297

For when his flesch was kytte from hym , he bledde +gorne and full sore
to hym . CMMIRK-M34,45.1298

For he was +gong and tendyr of age , but eght dayes old ;
CMMIRK-M34,45.1299

and +terfor he bledde +te more . CMMIRK-M34,45.1300

+Ten +ge schull know +tat he bled for vs v tymes . CMMIRK-M34,45.1301

+Te fyrst day was +tat day when he was circumcyset . CMMIRK-M34,45.1302

+Tat othyr tyme was for fere of his passyon , as he prayde to hys fadyr
; CMMIRK-M34,45.1303

+ten he swet blode and watyr for drede . CMMIRK-M34,45.1304

For ryght as a chyld wepyth for fere , when he segh +te +gerde come ,
and +get hath no stroke , ryght soo +te flesche of Cryst was aferde of
+te strong passion +tat was comyng ; CMMIRK-M34,45.1305

and soo swat blod and watyr for drede . CMMIRK-M34,45.1306

The thryd tyme was yn flagellacyon , when he was wyth fers knyghtes
beten wyth scorges upon his bare body , +tat he was rennyng on blod all
aboute . CMMIRK-M34,45.1307

The fourthe tyme was , when he was naylet hond and fote to +te crosse ,
and soo heuen vp , +tat +te body paysude downe to hys fete .
CMMIRK-M34,45.1308

The <P_46> v tyme was , when +te spere openet hys syde , and blod and
watyr ranne out . CMMIRK-M34,46.1309

+Tes fyve tymes he sched his blod for vs . CMMIRK-M34,46.1310

Then , syth +tat Cryst was wythout synne , and circumsision was ordeynet
yn remedy of synne , why wold he be circumsyset ? CMMIRK-M34,46.1311

Seynt Austyne seyth : for foure causes . CMMIRK-M34,46.1312

On was for@ @to make a sy+t wyth +te Iewes ; CMMIRK-M34,46.1313

elles +tay myghten skylfully haue sayde to hym : ' +Tou art not of our
lawe ; wherfor we receyue +te not , ne concenten to +ty techyng . '
CMMIRK-M34,46.1314

The secunde cause was to desayue +te fende . CMMIRK-M34,46.1315

For ryght as he deseyuet our allur modyr and soo dampnet all monkynd ,
ryght soo lay to Cryst for@ @to desayue hym , wher+trogh al monkynde
schuld be boght to +te blysse a+geyne . CMMIRK-M34,46.1316

+Ten when +te fend sygh Cryst ycircumcised as othyr werne , he wende ,
he had taken +tat penaunce yn remedy of orygnall synne ,
CMMIRK-M34,46.1317

and soo knew hym not by ano+ter synfull mon . CMMIRK-M34,46.1318

For yf he had knowen hym redely +tat he had comen for@ @to by monkynd
out of his bondam , he wold neuer haue tysut mon to haue don hym to deth
. CMMIRK-M34,46.1319

This was also +te cause , why oure lady was wedded to Ioseph , for@ @to
deseyue +te fende , +tat he schuld wene , +tat he was his fadyr , and
not conseyuet of +te Holy Gost . CMMIRK-M34,46.1320

The +trid cause was why he was circumcysed , for@ @to conferme +te old
lawe , yn gret comfort of oure faders of +te old lawe and testament .
CMMIRK-M34,46.1321

For yf he had ben foloet and anon circumcyset , hit had byn a gret
dyscomfort to all +tat wern befor +te yncarnacyon of Cryst .
CMMIRK-M34,46.1322

The four+te cause was of hys cyrcumcysyon . CMMIRK-M34,46.1323

For he wyst well +tat heretykes schuld come , +tat wolden say , +tat
Cryst had a body of +te ayre by fantesy , and not veray flesch and blod
as we haue . CMMIRK-M34,46.1324

+Ten for a body of +te ayre may not bledde , ne ha+te no blod yn hym ,
+terfor , for@ @to put away +te erroure , Cryst was cyrcumsysed ,
CMMIRK-M34,46.1325

and bled yn +te kyttyng of his flesche . CMMIRK-M34,46.1326

+Te whech flesche +tat was so kytte from hys membur , an angell broght
hit aftyr to kyng Charles , for +te most veray relyk of all +tat lond .
CMMIRK-M34,46.1327

And he , for worschyppe +tat he cow+te do +terto , he broght hit ynto
Rome to +te chyrch +tat ys callet Sancta Sanctorum . CMMIRK-M34,46.1328

For +tes foure causes Cryst was $circumcyset . CMMIRK-M34,46.1329

This day $ys also callet +te vtas , +tat ys , +te eght day of oure ladys
byr+te , yn techyng to $ych crysten seruand for@ @to +tenke on +te
<P_47> eght dayys +tat sewyth +te byrth-day . CMMIRK-M34,47.1330

+Te fyrst ys for@ @to +tenke ynwardly on +te sede +tat he ys conceyuet
of , +tat ys so fowle yn hymselfe and so wlatfull , +tat man o+ter woman
, be he neuer so fayre , and he see +te matere +tat he ys made of , his
hert wold wlaton and be aschamed of hymselfe , to +tenk +tat he wer
conceyuet of so fowle +tyng . CMMIRK-M34,47.1331

The secunde day ys for@ @to +tenke , how greuesly he paynes his modyr yn
hys burthe-tyme yn so moche , +tat hit ys Goddys hegh miracull +tat sche
skapyth to lyue . The +tryd , +tenke how febull and how wrecche he ys ,
when he ys bore . CMMIRK-M34,47.1332

For all bestes of kynde , yn somwhat , con helpe hymselfe , saue +te man
; CMMIRK-M34,47.1333

he no+ter may , ne con helpe hymself yn no degre ; CMMIRK-M34,47.1334

but schuld dye anon , +gyf he wer not holpen of othyr .
CMMIRK-M34,47.1335

The fourthe ys for@ @to +tenke , how moche drede and pareyle he leueth
yn alway ; CMMIRK-M34,47.1336

for euermore , yn ych place , deth sewe+t hym redy , for@ @to falle on
hym , what tyme , ny wher , he wot neuer . CMMIRK-M34,47.1337

The fyfte ys for@ @to +tenke , how horryble deth ys when he come+te ;
CMMIRK-M34,47.1338

for yn schort tyme , he makyth hym for@ @to stynke , +tat all hys best
frendes ben besy , for@ @to put yn +te er+te , and hyde hym +ter .
CMMIRK-M34,47.1339

The syxte ys for@ @to +tenke , how rew+tefull ys +te partyng of +te
sowle from +te body +tat may not be departyd , tyll +te hert yn +te body
breke , for syghtes +tat the sowle se+te . CMMIRK-M34,47.1340

The seuent ys for@ @to +tenke , how dredfull ys +te dome +tat he goth to
. CMMIRK-M34,47.1341

Anon +ten he +tat +tenkyth bysely on +tes seuen dayes , he schall be
circumcyset yn +te +geght day , +tat ys to say , he schall kytte away
from hym +te lust of his flesche and worldes lykyng ; and so schall he
come to +te vtas of Cryst , +tat ys , to +te joy +tat ys yn heuen-blys .
To +te whech joye God bryng you and me to , +gif hit be hys wyll .
CMMIRK-M34,47.1342

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,47.1343

<heading>

12 . CMMIRK-M34,47.1345

DE EPIPHANIA DOMINI SERMO BREUIS . CMMIRK-M34,47.1346

<$$heading>

Goddys worschypfull seruantys , as +ge knoe+te all , +tis day +ge
calleth Twelfeday . CMMIRK-M34,47.1348

But all mys ; CMMIRK-M34,47.1349

for hit ys +te +tretteneth day of Crystynmasse . +Te whych day holy
chyrche make+te and calleth +te Epyphany , +tat ys yn Englysche tonge :
+te schowyng of our Lord Ihesu Cryst , veray God and man , +tat he was .
CMMIRK-M34,47.1350

For +tys day holy chyrche make+te mynde , how Ihesu Cryst was schewet
veray <P_48> God and man +tre wayes : by +tre kynges offryngys , yn his
one folowyng , and by watyr ynto wyne turnyng . CMMIRK-M34,48.1351

The +tretten day aftyr his bur+te , he was schewet by offryng of +tre
kynges ; CMMIRK-M34,48.1352

and +tat same day , IX_and_XX=ti= wyntyr and XIII dayes aftyr , he was
folowet yn +te watyr of flem Iordan . CMMIRK-M34,48.1353

And +tat same day , $twelmon+te aftyr , he turnet watyr ynto wyne at +te
weddyng yn +te Cane of Galyle . CMMIRK-M34,48.1354

But , for +tys fest make+te mynde of +tes kyngys offryng , +terfor
pursew we +te forme of holy chyrche , CMMIRK-M34,48.1355

and tell how yn hor offryng Ihesu Cryst was schewet veray God and man .
CMMIRK-M34,48.1356

These +tre kyngys werne of +te lynage of Balaam +tat prophysyet , how
+tat a sterre shuld spryng of Iacob ; CMMIRK-M34,48.1357

and +togh +tay wern no Iewes of kynde , neuer+teleesse +tay haden herd
by ansetry of +te sterre . Wherfor +tay wylnet moche for@ @to here ,
and oft-tyme , on nyghtys , comen togedyr upon a certeyne hyll , for@
@to dyspytte by astronomy of +tys sterre . CMMIRK-M34,48.1358

Then upon Cristenmassenyght , +te same tyme +tat Cryst was born , as
+tay wer ifere disputyng of +tat sterre , a sterre come to hom bryghtyr
+ten any sonne , and yn +te sterre a fayre chyld , and vndyr hys hed a
$bryght crosse of gold , CMMIRK-M34,48.1359

and sayde +tus to hom : ' Goos anon yn all +te hast ynto +te lond of
Iewre , CMMIRK-M34,48.1360

and take wyth you gold , and ensens , and myrre , CMMIRK-M34,48.1361

and offreth +tes +tre to hym +tat ys now +ter borne kyng of Iewes ,
veray God and man . CMMIRK-M34,48.1362

And I woll be your gyde , and led you +te next way +tedyr . '
CMMIRK-M34,48.1363

Then +tay , wythe gret hast , token dromendarys +tat ben of kynd so
swyft , +tat +tay woll renne on a day fur +ten any o+ter hors {will_run}
yn +tre dayes , CMMIRK-M34,48.1364

and soo ryden to Ierusalem , +tat ys +te hed-cyte of Iewre , hopyng for@
@to wytte +ter sone wher +tys chyld was borne . CMMIRK-M34,48.1365

But anon , as +tay turnet ynto +te cyte , +tay lost +te sight of +te
sterre , +tat er glode tofor hom , tyll +tay come +tedyr , bryghtyr +ten
+te sonne . CMMIRK-M34,48.1366

Then , for kyng Herode was +ter , +tay +goden to hym ,
CMMIRK-M34,48.1367

and asked wher +te kyng of Iewes was borne , CMMIRK-M34,48.1368

and sayden : ' We seghen his sterre yn +te est , CMMIRK-M34,48.1369

and ben comen wyth offryng to worschyppe hym . ' CMMIRK-M34,48.1370

Then was Herod all trowbuld , and all +te cyte wyth hym , more for
glaueryng +ten for any loue +tat +tay hadden to hym .
CMMIRK-M34,48.1371

Then asked he his clerkys wher +te chyld schuld be borne ;
CMMIRK-M34,48.1372

and +tay sayde yn Bedeleem . CMMIRK-M34,48.1373

Then Herod asket preuely +tes kynges of +te sterre , CMMIRK-M34,48.1374

and bade hom <P_49> goo to Bedeleem , and worschyp +tis chyld , and come
a+geyne to hym , and tel hym wher he schuld fynd hym , so +tat he myght
go and worschip hym as +tay dydden . CMMIRK-M34,49.1375

Then , when +te kynges passyd +te towne toward Bedeleem , anon +te
sterre apered a+geyne to hom ; CMMIRK-M34,49.1376

and when +tay syghen +te sterre comyng a+geyne , +tay wer gretly ioyet
yn hor hertys . CMMIRK-M34,49.1377

+Ten , as hit yn mony place ys payntude and corven , +tat kyng +tat ys
yn +te mydyll , for gret ioy +tat he had , wryde bakward to@ @hys felow
byhynd , CMMIRK-M34,49.1378

and pytte hys hond vp , schewyng hym +te sterre ; CMMIRK-M34,49.1379

lewde men hauen an opynyon CMMIRK-M34,49.1380

and sayne , +tat he had slayne a mon , wherfor he turned backeward .
CMMIRK-M34,49.1381

But God forbede +tat +tys opynyon wer trew . CMMIRK-M34,49.1382

For now ys mony hundred of seyntes +tat wer befor men-sleers ,
CMMIRK-M34,49.1383

and dydden mony an holy martyr to de+te ; CMMIRK-M34,49.1384

but aftyr +tay wer turnet , CMMIRK-M34,49.1385

and wern holy martyrs homselfe , CMMIRK-M34,49.1386

and seen God yn his face euermor . CMMIRK-M34,49.1387

Then +tes kynges sudyn +tys sterre forth , tyll +tay come ynto Bedeleem
. CMMIRK-M34,49.1388

+Ten when he come ouer +te hous wher Cryst was , he stode styll .
CMMIRK-M34,49.1389

Then +tes kynges lyghten don , CMMIRK-M34,49.1390

and +goden ynto the hous , CMMIRK-M34,49.1391

and fonden +te chyld wyth hys modyr . CMMIRK-M34,49.1392

And +ten wyth all +te reuerence +tat +tay cowthen , +tay kneleden done ,
CMMIRK-M34,49.1393

and offeryd yche on of hom +tes +tre +tenges : gold , and ensens , and
myrre ; knowlechyng by +te gold +tat he was kyng of all kynges , and by
ensens +tat he was veray God , and by myrre +tat he was veray man , +tat
schuld be ded , and layde yn graue wythout rotyng . CMMIRK-M34,49.1394

For gold ys kyng of metelles ; CMMIRK-M34,49.1395

ensens is brent yn holy chyrche in worschip of God ; CMMIRK-M34,49.1396

myrre ys an oynement +tat kepyth ded bodyes from rotyng .
CMMIRK-M34,49.1397

Thus when +tes kynges hadden don hor offryng , by techyng of an angell ,
+tay laften Herode , CMMIRK-M34,49.1398

and wenton hom by ano+ter way . CMMIRK-M34,49.1399

And +te sterre vanesched away ynto hor forme kynde . CMMIRK-M34,49.1400

Then Ioseph , as Bernard sayth , kept of +te gold as much as hym nedet
for his tribut +tat he schuld +geue to +te Emperour , and more +tat hym
nedet to oure lady , whyll scho lay yn chyld-bedde ; CMMIRK-M34,49.1401

and +te remenant he dalt to suche as hadden nede . CMMIRK-M34,49.1402

The ensens he brent to put away +te stench of +te stabull +ter scho lay
. CMMIRK-M34,49.1403

And wyth myrre our Lady wassched hur chyld , to kepe hym from wormes and
o+ter ful+tes . CMMIRK-M34,49.1404

But what fell aftyr of +tes kynges , <P_50> I fynde nothyng put yn
certeyne , but by opynyons +tat sayn how Saynt Thomas of Inde when he
come ynto +tat contre , he folowed hom . CMMIRK-M34,50.1405

And +ten ryght as +te sterre lyghtneth hom to Crystys byrth , ryght so
+te Holy Gost leghteneth hom wythyn , CMMIRK-M34,50.1406

and schewed hom , whad was +te most profytabull way to Heuen , so +tat
+tay lafton all hor remes and hor lordschyppys , and +goden forth as
pylgrymys to Ierusalem , and so to o+ter places as Cryst suffred de+te ,
and so forth to Melayne ; CMMIRK-M34,50.1407

and +ter +tay deyeden . CMMIRK-M34,50.1408

But aftyr +tay werne translat to Coleyne , CMMIRK-M34,50.1409

and so byn called +te kynges of Colen . CMMIRK-M34,50.1410

Now , good men , +ge haue herd how our Lord Ihesu Cryst was +tis day
schewed by +tes kyngys offryng . Wherfor as +tay offered +ten to hym ,
soo schuld +ge do your offryng to hym . CMMIRK-M34,50.1411

+Tus when +ge come to holy chyrche wyth all +te mekenes and reuerens
+tat +ge can , knelyth adowne , not on your kne as to a lord temporall ,
but on bo+te your knees , CMMIRK-M34,50.1412

and do hym worschippe . CMMIRK-M34,50.1413

And yf +ge soo done , +ten +ge offeren to hym precyous gold .
CMMIRK-M34,50.1414

For +ter n@ @ys no gold yn +tys world so precyous to God , as ys a meke
hert and a lowe of a man or of a woman . CMMIRK-M34,50.1415

+Ten herwyth hold vp your hondes to hym wyth a deuot hert
CMMIRK-M34,50.1416

and say +tus : ' Lord , God of Heuen , haue mercy on me synfull . '
CMMIRK-M34,50.1417

And +ten +ge offren to hym sence . CMMIRK-M34,50.1418

For +ter n@ @ys no brent sence +tat sauereth so swete yn mannys nase ,
as do+te a deuote oreson yn Goddys nase and yn +te angeles about hym .
CMMIRK-M34,50.1419

And sy+te make+te a crosse yn +te erthe CMMIRK-M34,50.1420

and sayth : ' Lord , when I +tat am erthe schall dye and turne ynto
erthe , +ten , Lord God , haue my soule . ' CMMIRK-M34,50.1421

And +ten +ge offern to hym myrre . CMMIRK-M34,50.1422

For ryght as myrre kepyth a body from stenche and rotyng , ryght so
myght of deth kepyth a soule from rotyng and stenche yn dedly synne .
CMMIRK-M34,50.1423

In thys wyse do+te your offryng , CMMIRK-M34,50.1424

and getyth you as moche mede as +tes kyngys haden . CMMIRK-M34,50.1425

He was also schowet at his foloyng . CMMIRK-M34,50.1426

For when he come to flem Iordan , he +ged ynto +te watyr
CMMIRK-M34,50.1427

and halowet hit . CMMIRK-M34,50.1428

For ryght as he was circumsyset , to fulfyll and conferme +te old lawe ,
ryght soo he was folowed , to begynne and to halow +te crysten lawe for
no nede +tat he had +terto , for he was clene wythout synne , but for@
@to make +te sacrament +tat schuld wasschen and clanse hom <P_51> +tat
taky+te cristyndome yn hys name , of all synne . CMMIRK-M34,51.1429

+Ten was Ion Baptyst redy +ter and moche pepull wyth hym +tat comen
+tedyr , to be folowed . CMMIRK-M34,51.1430

And then Iohn seid to Cryst qwakyng and tremblyng for fere : ' Lord ,
+ge +tat ben Godys lombe wythout synne , +ge haue no nede to be folowed
of me ; CMMIRK-M34,51.1431

but I +tat am a man getyn and borne yn synne , I most com to +te , to be
folowed yn Ierusalem of my synnes . ' CMMIRK-M34,51.1432

+Ten sayde Crist to Ion : ' Suffyr at +tys tyme , CMMIRK-M34,51.1433

for we most fulfull all rightwesnes . ' CMMIRK-M34,51.1434

Then Ion folowed Ihesu Cryst ; CMMIRK-M34,51.1435

and as hit ys credebule , oure Lord was folowed , and othyr +tat wern
Cristes discipules aftyr hym , and all +te pepull +tat wern come +tedyr
. CMMIRK-M34,51.1436

Then when all werne folowet , our Lord Ihesu Crist went out of +te watyr
. CMMIRK-M34,51.1437

And as he prayde on +te waters brynke , and all +te pepull wyth , a gret
ly+gt vmbeclypped hym . CMMIRK-M34,51.1438

And so , yn syght of Seynt Ion and all +te pepull , +te Holy Gost yn
lykenesse of a whyte dowe lyght on Crystes hed , CMMIRK-M34,51.1439

and +te Fadyr of Heuen spake +tus yn heryng of all : ' +Tis ys my dere
belouet sonne +tat well plesyth me . ' CMMIRK-M34,51.1440

Al +tus was done , for@ @to teche yche cristen man his byleue .
CMMIRK-M34,51.1441

For yche crysten man or woman ys holden for@ @to beleue yn +te Fadyr ,
and yn +te Sonne , and yn +te Holy Gost , +tat ben +tre persons and won
God . CMMIRK-M34,51.1442

And +tagh +te Fadyr spake abouen , and +te Sonne Ihesu Crist wer ther
bodely , and +te Holy Gost yn lickenesse of a dowve , +ge schull beleue
+tat here ben +tre persons and on God yn Trynyte . CMMIRK-M34,51.1443

This byleue +ge knowlachen on +te watyrs brynke , +tat ys +te brynke of
+te fonte when +ge ben folowed . Wherfor he +tat byleueth and doth +te
werkes of +te byleue wythout dowte , he schall be sauet ;
CMMIRK-M34,51.1444

and he +tat beleueth not , he schall be dampnet . CMMIRK-M34,51.1445

The werkes of +te byleue byn mekenes and charyte . CMMIRK-M34,51.1446

For wythout +tes two schall +ter no man be sauet ; CMMIRK-M34,51.1447

and +te +tat hath +tes two , he ys wrytten yn +te geanology of Cryst .
Wherfor , yn wytnes of +tys geanology +tat ys red yn mydwyntyr-nyght ,
begynnyth aboue at Abraham , and so comyth downe to Ioseph , and soo to
oure lady Mary , in schouyng +tat ys most mekest of hert , ys next to
oure Lorde ; CMMIRK-M34,51.1448

and seche he avaunset . CMMIRK-M34,51.1449

And +terfor +te geanology +tat ys red this nyght , begynyth at Ihesu
Cryst , CMMIRK-M34,51.1450

and goth vp to Adam , <P_52> and so ynto God , yn schewyng +tat he +tat
hath perfyte loue to hys eme-crysten , ys wryttyn yn +te geanologe of
God yn Heuen ; and schall be as cosyn and dere derlyng to God +ter
wythouten ende . CMMIRK-M34,52.1451

Thus Cryst was schowet by watyr ynto wyn turnyng for +te fest of Ion +te
Euangelyst and Mary Mawdelen . CMMIRK-M34,52.1452

+Ten for Ion was Crystes ante sonne , he and hys modyr , and moo of his
dyscypuls werne callet +tedyr . CMMIRK-M34,52.1453

+Ten hit happant so +tat hom wonted wyne at +te mete .
CMMIRK-M34,52.1454

+Ten bade Ihesus seruandus full syxe stones +tat stoden +ter wyth watyr
, CMMIRK-M34,52.1455

and when +tay hadden don soo , Ihesus blessed hom , CMMIRK-M34,52.1456

and bade hom holden and bere to hym +tat began +te bord .
CMMIRK-M34,52.1457

Then sayde he , +tat was wyne passyng any o+ter . CMMIRK-M34,52.1458

Thus Ihesus schowet hym veray God and man ; CMMIRK-M34,52.1459

veray God yn +tat he turned watyr ynto wyne , and veray man yn +tat he
ete and drangke wyth hom . CMMIRK-M34,52.1460

This myracull he dyd yn schewyng +tat he blessyth +te weddyng +tat ys
done , as +te lawe of holy chyrche ordeyneth . CMMIRK-M34,52.1461

Now , good men , +ge han herd , how oure Lord Ihesu Crist +tis day was
schewed by kynges offryng , and efte yn his holy folewyng , and eftsonus
by myracles at +te weddyng . Wherfor do hym honowre and worschippe wyth
$+goure offryng , and buth stydfast yn +te fayth of your folowyng , and
brekyth not +tat hygh troth +tat +ge maken at your weddyng .
CMMIRK-M34,52.1462

And +ten +ge schall come to +te blysse +tat ys euerlastyng . To the
wheche blysse God bryng you and me , yf hit be his will .
CMMIRK-M34,52.1463

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,52.1464

<heading>

13 . CMMIRK-M34,52.1466

DE CONUERCIONE SANCTI PAULI CMMIRK-M34,52.1467

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , suche a day +ge schull haue a hegh fest yn holy
chyrch +tat ys callet +te conuersyon of Saynt Pole ; +tat ys yn
Englysche : +te conuertyng of Seynt Pole . CMMIRK-M34,52.1469

For +tat day , he was conuerted from a curset tyrand ynto Goddys seruant
, from an hegh man and a prowde ynto a meke man and a devot , and from
+te deuellys dyssypull ynto Goddys holy apostoll . CMMIRK-M34,52.1470

Soo , for +tis man was so yturnet from all wyckednesse ynto all
goodnesse , yn gret streng+te and helpe to holy chyrch , +terfor holy
chyrch halewo+te his conuersyon . CMMIRK-M34,52.1471

And soo +tay do+te of non o+ter seynt , <P_53> but only of hym .
CMMIRK-M34,53.1472

And +tat ys for +tre skylles : furst for gret myracull yn hys turnyng ,
and for gret joy yn his defendyng , and for hegh ensampull in amendyng .
CMMIRK-M34,53.1473

Furst +tys man or he was turnet , he was callet Sawle .
CMMIRK-M34,53.1474

For ryght as Saule , +te kyng of Ierusalem , pursued Dauid , to haue
slayne hym , ryght soo +tis Saule pursewet Cryst , and his dyscyples ,
and his seruantys , to haue broght hom to +te de+te . Wherfor , whill
Crist +gode on erth here , he wold neuer come to hym , for@ @to here his
techyng . CMMIRK-M34,53.1475

But as sone as he was styed ynto Heuen , +ten anon - for he was lerede
and cowthe +te Iewes lawe - he began to a+geynesette Crystys dyscipuls ,
dysputyng a+geynes hom , and pursuyng hom yn all +tat he myght , in full
entent to haue destryed Crystys lawes . CMMIRK-M34,53.1476

Then , on a day , he dysputyth wyth Seynt Steven ; CMMIRK-M34,53.1477

and for he myght not ouercome hym , he schaped how he myght bryng hym to
+te deth , so +tat he laft hym neuer tyll +tat he was stenet to +te
dethe . CMMIRK-M34,53.1478

+Ten , as hit ys +te maner of +te fendys chyldyr when +tay haue don a
foule turne , +tay reioysen hom +teryn , CMMIRK-M34,53.1479

and ben fayne and prowde yn hor hertys , CMMIRK-M34,53.1480

and encresen yn hor maleyse , CMMIRK-M34,53.1481

so was +tys Sawle glad of +te de+te of Seynt Steven .
CMMIRK-M34,53.1482

And for he wold haue geten hym a name of wykednesse passyng all o+ter ,
he +geode to hom +tat haden +te lawe of Iewes to kepe ,
CMMIRK-M34,53.1483

and gete hym lettyrs of warant , for@ @to take and bryng all crysten men
and woymen +tat +tay myght fynde yn any place , and bryng hom bonden
ynto Ierusalem , for@ @to take hor deth +ter . CMMIRK-M34,53.1484

And when he had +tos letteres , he toke suche a pryde , and such envy yn
his hert a+geyn cristen men , +tat when he herd speke of hom , anon he
snorted at +te nose , and fro+te at +te mowth for angur , thretyng and
manassyng so hely toward hom , +tat yche man was wondyr sor aferde of
hym . CMMIRK-M34,53.1485

Then , for he herd +tat yn +te cyte of Damaske wer mony crysten men hud
for drede , anon he toke hys hors and his men wyth hym ,
CMMIRK-M34,53.1486

and rode +tedyrward in all +te hast . CMMIRK-M34,53.1487

But +ten our Lord Ihesu Crist - blessed mote he be ! - schewed +te
swetnes of his grace +tus . CMMIRK-M34,53.1488

When +tys Saule was yn his pryde and malys , and yn purpos for@ @to haue
don most males and harme ; +ten aboute mydday , when +te sonne schone
allur_clerust , then Crist cast a lyght of grace aboute Saule +tat was
ferre bryghtyr +ten +te sonne ; CMMIRK-M34,53.1489

and <P_54> yn +tat lyght spak +tus to hym : ' Saule , Saule , qwhy
pursues +tou me ? ' CMMIRK-M34,54.1490

+Ten anon he was so sore aferd , +tat he fell downe of his hors ,
CMMIRK-M34,54.1491

and for gret fere sayde : ' Lord , whad art +tou ? ' CMMIRK-M34,54.1492

Then sayde oure Lord : ' I am Ihesus of Na+gareth +tat +tou pursues . '
CMMIRK-M34,54.1493

He sayde not : I am God of Heuen , ne Goddys sonne of Heuen .
CMMIRK-M34,54.1494

But for crysten men byleven +tat Ihesu was rysen from deth to lyue ,
+terfor Saule pursued most hom CMMIRK-M34,54.1495

and sayde +tat +tay leuedon on a ded mon . CMMIRK-M34,54.1496

Herfore oure Lord Ihesu sayde : ' I am Ihesu of Na+gareth ' ;
CMMIRK-M34,54.1497

for +tat ys +te name of monhode . CMMIRK-M34,54.1498

Then leued Saule yn hym CMMIRK-M34,54.1499

and sayde : ' Lord , what wold +tou make me ? ' CMMIRK-M34,54.1500

+Ten sayde Ihesu , our Lord : ' Ryse and go ynto +te cyte , and +ter
schall be sayd to +te what +tou schalt do . ' CMMIRK-M34,54.1501

Then seen his men +tys lyght , CMMIRK-M34,54.1502

and herden +te voyce , CMMIRK-M34,54.1503

but +tay seen no man ; CMMIRK-M34,54.1504

but +geden to Saule , CMMIRK-M34,54.1505

and token hym by the hond , for he was blynd , CMMIRK-M34,54.1506

and ladden hym ynto +te cyte to a good mannys howse .
CMMIRK-M34,54.1507

And +ter he was +tre dayes and +tre nyghtes fastyng , CMMIRK-M34,54.1508

and myght not seon ; CMMIRK-M34,54.1509

but euer he prayde to God for drede +tat he had of +tat vysyon . +Te
whech tyme , +te Holy Gost taght hym Crystys lawe . CMMIRK-M34,54.1510

Then +te thryd day come to hym won of Crystys dyscypuls +tat hat Anany ,
as God bade hym , CMMIRK-M34,54.1511

and sayde to hym full sore aferd : ' Saule , brothyr , oure Lord Ihesu
Cryst hathe sende me to +te , +tat +tou schalt see and be folowed . '
CMMIRK-M34,54.1512

And when he layde his hondys on his hed , anon he segh ;
CMMIRK-M34,54.1513

and +ten +ter fellen from his eyn lyke skalus of fyssch .
CMMIRK-M34,54.1514

And when he had folowed hym , he callet hym Paule . CMMIRK-M34,54.1515

And when he had eten , he was conforted , CMMIRK-M34,54.1516

and had his strengthe a+geyne , CMMIRK-M34,54.1517

and was wyth +te dyscypuls +tat wer +ter a few dayes .
CMMIRK-M34,54.1518

And +ten he went ynto +te tempull , CMMIRK-M34,54.1519

and openly preched Ihesu Crystys , prechyng clerly +tat he was Cryst and
non o+ter . So +tat yche man wondyr of his sodeyne conuersyon ,
CMMIRK-M34,54.1520

and sayden to homself +tat hit was an hegh myracull of God +tat he +tat
was so curset of lyvyng , was so sone turned ynto so blessyd a man .
CMMIRK-M34,54.1521

Thus , good men , +ge mo se and here how gret a myracull God schewet yn
his conuertyng . CMMIRK-M34,54.1522

Holy chyrche maketh alsoo gret joy for hys defendyng .
CMMIRK-M34,54.1523

Hit was gret gladnesse to all cristen men for@ @to see hym +tat was so
lyghtly before redy for@ @to destrye hom , +ten so sodenly bysy for@ @to
<P_55> encrese hom . CMMIRK-M34,55.1524

And he +tat was glad for@ @to schede hor blode for hom , and he +tat
+gede , to drawe hom to +te deth , +ten put hym forth $boldely , to take
deth for hom . CMMIRK-M34,55.1525

And +ter@ @as no man durst preche Goddys worde for hym , aftyr , by
comfort of hym , +tay sparad no+ter for kyng , ne for non o+ter lord ;
CMMIRK-M34,55.1526

but opynly preched +te faythe of Ihesu Crist yn iche place .
CMMIRK-M34,55.1527

And he +tat was soo prowde byfor , aftyr fell to yche crysten mannys
fote +tat he had gult to , to aske mercy wyth full meke hert . Wherfor
Saynt Austyn lykene+te him vnto an vnycorne and seith : ' +Te vnycorn ,
of kynd , he beryth a horne yn his nose , and wyth +te horne sley all
bestys +tat he feghtyth wyth and $is soo feers +tat +ter may no hunter
take hym , by no craft . CMMIRK-M34,55.1528

But +tus he woll spye wher hys walk ys , CMMIRK-M34,55.1529

and +ter he setty+te a woman +tat ys clene mayden . CMMIRK-M34,55.1530

And when +tys vnycorn segh hyr , anon of kynd he falleth don ,
CMMIRK-M34,55.1531

and layth hys hed yn hur barme , myghtles wythout strengthe :
CMMIRK-M34,55.1532

and soo ys taken . CMMIRK-M34,55.1533

Thus , ' he seyth , ' Paule was $fyrst so fers and prowde , +tat +ter
durst no prechour dele wyth hym ; CMMIRK-M34,55.1534

but when God schewed hym +tys maydyn , +tat ys +te faythe of holy chyrch
, anon he fell don of his pryde , CMMIRK-M34,55.1535

and was sympull , and meke , and soget to Crystys seruantys .
CMMIRK-M34,55.1536

Hereof holy chyrche ys glad of his defendyng . CMMIRK-M34,55.1537

He was set also for ensampull of heg amendyng . CMMIRK-M34,55.1538

God ys soo gracyous yn hymselfe , +tat he woll +tat no man be lorne ;
CMMIRK-M34,55.1539

but he woll +tat all men and woymen ben sauet . Wherfor , yn hegh
ensampull and confort to all synfull , he settu+te Seynt Paule to loken
on . CMMIRK-M34,55.1540

For +tagh a man o+ter woman haue don neuer so moch a synne or lyued so
curset a lyfe , yf he woll taken ensampull of Seynt Paule , +tat ys ,
leue pryde and be meke , leue synne and be bysy to amende , +ten schall
he make God and all +te Court of Heuen make moche mor myrth yn Heuen of
his conuercyon , +ten do+te holy chyrch yn erth of Paules conuersyon .
CMMIRK-M34,55.1541

But mor harme ys : +ter byn men and woymen +tat lyuen hor synnes mor
+ten God ; +tat woll no+ter for loue of God , ne for drede of God and
+te paynes of hell leue hor synne ; CMMIRK-M34,55.1542

but sayn +tat God wyll not lese +tat he ha+te boght wyth hys hert-blod .
CMMIRK-M34,55.1543

' But +tou +tat says so , be +tou war +tat +tou lese not +tyself .
CMMIRK-M34,55.1544

But whill +tou louest +ty synne mor +ten +ti God , and hades leuer be
+te deueles seruant +ten Goddys , +tou dampnes +tiself ,
CMMIRK-M34,55.1545

and art cause of +tyn owne <P_56> damp-nacyon . ' Wherfor to suche ,
God ha+te ordeynt to turment fendes , and $bryng hom to +te payne +tat
ha+te non ende . CMMIRK-M34,56.1546

For , as Gregory seyth , +to +tat schull be dampnet , +tay begynnyn hor
penaunce in party here , CMMIRK-M34,56.1547

and so aftyr hor de+te contynue+te for+te . Wherfor I telle +tis
ensampull +tat was told me of suche +tat knewyn hit done yn dede .
CMMIRK-M34,56.1548

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,56.1550

<$$heading>

Ther was a man , a curset lyuer , +tat was an officer to a lord .
CMMIRK-M34,56.1552

And as he rode to a maner of +te lordes , he fell wod ,
CMMIRK-M34,56.1553

and so vnbrydylt his hors +tat bare hym into a maner of +te lordes .
CMMIRK-M34,56.1554

But when he come yn , anon +te bayly sagh what +te man ayled ,
CMMIRK-M34,56.1555

and made anon his hynes bynd hym to a post yn +te berne .
CMMIRK-M34,56.1556

Then when +te bayly had ysoupyd , he bade on of his hynes go and loke
how +tys man dyd . CMMIRK-M34,56.1557

And when he come to +te berne , he segh +tre grete doggus as blacke as a
cole on yche a syde plucke away hys flesche . CMMIRK-M34,56.1558

+Ten was +tys hyne so sore aferd , +tat vnne+te he huld hys wytte , but
+gode to his bed , and lay seke +ter longe aftyr . CMMIRK-M34,56.1559

But , on +te morow , when men comen to +te berne , +tay fonden no mor of
+tys man , but his bare bonys and all +te flesche away .
CMMIRK-M34,56.1560

Thus who so lyueth a fowle lyfe , he may be sure of a foule ende .
CMMIRK-M34,56.1561

And +tagh his ende be fayre to mannys syght , hyt ys ryght fowle yn
Goddys syght and all his angeles . Wherfor ych man take good ensampull
, whyll he ys here , by Saynt Paule , and amende hym whill he hath space
and tyme of amendyng ; CMMIRK-M34,56.1562

for aftyr +tat a man ys ded , +ter n@ @ys no tyme of amendyng .
CMMIRK-M34,56.1563

And he +tat soo do+te , he schall come to Saynt Paule and haue +te ioye
+tat euer schall last . To +te whech ioye God bring vs all , yf hyt be
his wyll . CMMIRK-M34,56.1564

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,56.1565

<heading>

14 . CMMIRK-M34,56.1567

DE PURIFICACIONE BEATE MARIE ET EIUS SOLEMPNITATE . CMMIRK-M34,56.1568

<$$heading>

Good cristen men and woymen , +tat louy+te to serve oure lady , and to
fast hur euens bred and watyr in hegh mede to you , <P_57> such a day
+ge schull haue Candylmasse-day ; wherfor do+te in +tat euen as your
deuocyon teche+te you . CMMIRK-M34,57.1570

For , +tat day , holy chyrche maketh gret melody yn worschyppe of hyr
and of hyr swete sonne Ihesu Crist , our Lord , specyaly yn +tre +tynges
: yn our lady puryfiyng , in Symones metyng , and yn candels offryng .
CMMIRK-M34,57.1571

This day , good men , is called +te puryfycacyon of our lady ; +tat ys
yn Englyssche tong , +te clansyng of oure lady ; CMMIRK-M34,57.1572

for no nede +tat scho had , CMMIRK-M34,57.1573

for scho was clansed so wyth +te worchyng of +te Holy Gost yn conceyvyng
of hur sonne , +tat +ter was laft yn hir no mater of synne , ne of non
othyr ful+te . CMMIRK-M34,57.1574

But for +tat day was +te fourty fro +te byrthe of hyr sonne , and was
called yn +te Iewes lawe +te day of purgacion not only of oure lady ,
but for all o+ter wymen of +te lawe ; wherfor +get we callen hit +te
puryficacyon of our lady . CMMIRK-M34,57.1575

The lawe of the Iewes was +ten suche +tat a woman +tat was delyuerde of
a man-chyld sculd be holden vnclene by +te lawe VII dayes aftyr hur
burth ; CMMIRK-M34,57.1576

and +ten +te lawe +gaf hur leue to go to hur husbondys bed .
CMMIRK-M34,57.1577

But +get scho was vnclene by +te lawe +tre_and_xxx=ti= dayes aftyr , so
+tat tyll fourty dayes wer fulfylled , scho schuld not come wythyn +te
temple . CMMIRK-M34,57.1578

+Ten , +tat day , scho schuld come to +te tempull wyth hyr offryng and
wyth hur sonne , and offre for a ryche man a lombe , and for a pore a
payre of turturs o+ter two culuer-bryddes . CMMIRK-M34,57.1579

And soo offred oure lady for hyr sonne . CMMIRK-M34,57.1580

And yf a woman wer delyuerd of a mayden-chyld , scho schuld dowbull +te
dayes of comyng to chyrch , and to hur husbonddys bed , and comyng ynto
+te tempull . CMMIRK-M34,57.1581

For , as clerkes techen , hit ys VII dayes aftyr a woman conseyueth of
+te man , er +tan +te sede turne ynto blod ; and +tre_and_+trytty dayes
aftyr +tat +ten , or hit haue shap of man : CMMIRK-M34,57.1582

and +ten God sendyth lyfe ynto hit . CMMIRK-M34,57.1583

And yf hit be a maydechylde , hit dowbulth all +te dayes , bo+te of
turnyng ynto blod , and ynto schappe of body . CMMIRK-M34,57.1584

And +tys ys +te cause +tat for encheson +tat +te forme woman Eue vexude
God more +ten dyd man , +terfor scho ys more lengyr yn formyng +ten +te
man . CMMIRK-M34,57.1585

+Tus for fleschly coupull of man and woman ys vnclene yn hymselfe ,
+terfor lawe ordeyneth a remedy for@ @to clanse hom .
CMMIRK-M34,57.1586

But +ten +ge schull know wele +tat oure lady had no nede to +tys <P_58>
clansying , CMMIRK-M34,58.1587

for scho conceyuet not of coupull of man but only of +te Holy Gost , so
+tat scho was clene of all maner fulthe towchyng conseyt of man .
CMMIRK-M34,58.1588

Neuer+teles , scho +gode to +te tempull as o+ter woymen dydden for foure
skylles . CMMIRK-M34,58.1589

The fyrst was to fulfyll scripture +tat bydde+te +tus : ' +Te grettyr
+tou be , +te meker make +te yn all +tyng ' ; CMMIRK-M34,58.1590

+tus scho dyd . CMMIRK-M34,58.1591

For +tagh scho wyst +tat scho was modyr to Goddys Sonne of Heuen , and
was so full of worschyp passyng all othyr woymen , +get scho made hur as
+te porest woman +tat was yn hur company . CMMIRK-M34,58.1592

The secunde skyll was to fulfyll +te lawe . CMMIRK-M34,58.1593

For ry+gt as scho fulfylled +te lawe yn +te circumcysyon of hur sonne ,
ryght soo scho fulfyllet hit yn hur puryficacyon and offryng of hur
sonne yn +te tempull , doyng for hym as o+tir pore woymen dydden for hor
chyldyrn . CMMIRK-M34,58.1594

The +trid skylle was for@ @to stoppe mowthes , lest +tay had sayde +tat
+tay dyd not +te lawe , and soo cast a gret chalange a+geyns hom yn tyme
comyng +teraftyr . CMMIRK-M34,58.1595

The fowrth skylle was to ensampull to all cristen woymen +tat +tay
schuld come to +te chyrche aftyr hor burth , and +tonke God heghly +tat
had saued hom hole and sonde yn hor trauayle ; CMMIRK-M34,58.1596

for +ter n@ @ys non euel +tat go+te so nygh +te de+te wyth scapyng as
do+te hit . CMMIRK-M34,58.1597

For +tes skylles God made mynde of our lady purefiyng .
CMMIRK-M34,58.1598

He made also mynde of Symones and Anne a+geyncomyng .
CMMIRK-M34,58.1599

+Tys Symeon was a passyng old man ; CMMIRK-M34,58.1600

but for he prayde besely day and nyght to God +tat he most see Cryst
bodely , er +ten he deyd , and soo God grawnted hym his bone , and +tis
Anne also , not Anne , our ladyes modyr , but ano+ter +tat was weddyd
seven +gere , and +ten when hur husband was ded , scho lyued tyll scho
was foure_skore +gere old , and serued God yn +te tempull day and nyght
. CMMIRK-M34,58.1601

+Tat also +tat had grawnte of God to see Crist er scho deyd .
CMMIRK-M34,58.1602

Then when our lady come toward +te tempull wyt hor sonne , +te Holy Gost
warnet +tys Symeon and +tys Anne ; CMMIRK-M34,58.1603

and +tay +ter wyth mecull ioye +gode a+geynes hom , CMMIRK-M34,58.1604

and broght hom ynto +te tempull . CMMIRK-M34,58.1605

+Ten Symeon toke hym yn his armes wyth all +te reuerens +tat he cow+te ,
CMMIRK-M34,58.1606

and cussed hym , CMMIRK-M34,58.1607

and +tonked hym heghly +tat he let hym lyue to +te tyme for@ @to se hym
bodely wyth his een . Wherfor , +get yn mynde of +tys processe , when a
woman cometh <P_59> to +te chyrche-dyrre tyll +te pryst come and cast
holy watyr on hyr , and clansu+t hur , and so takyth hyr by +te hond ,
and bryngyth hur to +te chyrche , +geuyng hur leue to come to +te chyrch
, and to goo to hur husbandys bed . CMMIRK-M34,59.1608

For and scho haue ben at hys bed befor , scho most take hor penance and
he , bothe . CMMIRK-M34,59.1609

+Terfor holy chyrch maketh mynde +tys day of candels offryng .
CMMIRK-M34,59.1610

+Ge seen , good men , +tat hyt ys comyn vse to all crysten men for@ @to
come to +te chyrche +tys day , and bere a candyll yn processyon , as
+tagh +tay +gedyn bodyly wyth oure lady to chyrch , and aftyr offyr wyth
hyr yn worschip and high reuerens of hur . CMMIRK-M34,59.1611

Then now hereth how +tys worschip was furst yfond , when +te Romaynes by
gret chyualry conquerod all +te world . CMMIRK-M34,59.1612

For +tay wern euerous yn hor doyng +tat retten not to God of Heuen +tat
+gaf hom +tat euere ; CMMIRK-M34,59.1613

but made hom dyuerse goddys , aftyr hor owne lust . CMMIRK-M34,59.1614

And soo , among othyr , +tay hadden a god +tat was callet Mars , +tat
was byfor +tat tyme a chyualrous knyght , and an euerous yn batayle .
Wherfor +tay called hym god of batayle , prayng +gorne to hym for helpe
. CMMIRK-M34,59.1615

And for +tay wolden spede +te bettyr , +tay dyd gret worschyp to his
modyr +tat was callet Februa ; aftyr +te whech woman , as mony haue
opynyon , +tys mon +tat now ys was called February . Wherfor +te fyrst
day of +tys mone +tat now ys Candylmasse-day , +te Romans wold goo al
nyght about +te cyte of Rome wyth torches , and blasus and canduls
brennyng , yn worschip of +tys woman Februa , hopyng for +tys worschip
to haue +te ray+tyr helpe of hyr sonne Mars yn hor doyng .
CMMIRK-M34,59.1616

Then was +ter a pope +tat heght Sergyus . CMMIRK-M34,59.1617

For he segh cristen men drawe to thys mawmetry , he +toght to turne +tat
foule custom ynto Goddys worschyp and oure lady Seynt Mary ,
CMMIRK-M34,59.1618

and commaundyd all cristen men and wymmen for@ @to come +tys same day to
chyrche and iche on offyr a candyll brennyng yn worschyp of our lady and
hur swete sonne . CMMIRK-M34,59.1619

Soo yche man aftyr , by processe of tyme , lafton +tat worschip +tat
+tay dyden to +tat woman Februa , CMMIRK-M34,59.1620

and duden worschip to our lady and to hyr sonne , so +tat now +tys
solempnyte ys halowed +trogh crystendame , CMMIRK-M34,59.1621

and yche man , and woman , and chyld of age come+te +tys day to +te
chyrche , CMMIRK-M34,59.1622

and offren brennyng condyls ; as +togh +tay wer bodyly wyth our lady to
chyrche , on chyld hopyng for +tys reuerens +tat +tay <P_60> don to hyr
yn er+te , to haue a gret reward +terfor yn Heuen . CMMIRK-M34,60.1623

And so +tay may be sure +terof . CMMIRK-M34,60.1624

For a candyll brennyng bytokenyth oure lady , and hor sonne , and a man
hymselfe ; CMMIRK-M34,60.1625

for a candyll ys made of whyte weke and of wax brennyng wyth fyre .
CMMIRK-M34,60.1626

+Tus Crystys whyt soule was hydde wyth his monhede CMMIRK-M34,60.1627

and brenne+te wyth +te fyre of his Godhed ; CMMIRK-M34,60.1628

hit bytokenyth also our ladyys modyrhode and maydynhede , lightnet wyth
+te fyre of loue ; CMMIRK-M34,60.1629

hyt bytokeneth also yche good man and woman +tat do+te good dedes wyth
good entent , and yn full loue and charite to God and to his
euen-cristen . Wherfor yf any of you ha+te soo trespassyd to his
neghtbur wherby +tat +tys candyll of charyte ys qwenchet , furst go he
and acord hym wyth his neghtbur , and so tend his condyll a+geyne , and
+ten offyr his condyll to +te pryst . CMMIRK-M34,60.1630

For +tys ys Godys commaundment ; CMMIRK-M34,60.1631

and elles he lesyth hys meryt of his offryng . CMMIRK-M34,60.1632

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,60.1634

<$$heading>

I rede yn +te lyfe of Saynt Dunstan how +tat his modyr , when scho was
gret wyth chyld wyth hym , scho come on Condylmasseday to +te chyrch .
CMMIRK-M34,60.1636

And when all +te pepull had gon on processyon wyth candyls brennyng ,
and stoden all yn +te chyrche , yche on wyth his lyght yn hys hond ,
sodenly all the condyls +tat wern yn +te chyrche wern quaynt ,
CMMIRK-M34,60.1637

and a gret derkenes come wyth all , so +tat vnneth on myght se ano+ter .
CMMIRK-M34,60.1638

And when +tay haden stond soo long sore aferd , +ten come +ter a fayre
lyght from Heuen , CMMIRK-M34,60.1639

and lyght +te candyll +tat Saynt Dunstanys modyr had yn hond ;
CMMIRK-M34,60.1640

and so offryd hyr condyll . CMMIRK-M34,60.1641

And so of hure al o+ter werne lyght , so +tat wythyn a whyle aftyr , all
+te chyrche was so lyght a+geyne , yn token he was yn hyr wombe +tat
schuld aftyr tynd mony mannys charite , +tat was befor qwenchet by envy
. CMMIRK-M34,60.1642

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,60.1644

<$$heading>

I rede of anothyr woman +tat was soo deuot yn oure lady seruyce , +tat
scho +gaf for hor loue all +te clo+tys +tat scho had , saue +te
febullyst +tat scho +god yn herselfe . CMMIRK-M34,60.1646

Hit fell so +tat on Condylmasse-day , scho wold haue goon to chyrche .
CMMIRK-M34,60.1647

But for scho was not honest arayde , scho dyrst not for schame ;
CMMIRK-M34,60.1648

for scho had non <P_61> honest clo+tes , as scho was wont to haue .
CMMIRK-M34,61.1649

Then when othyr men went to +te chyrch , scho was wondyr sory ;
CMMIRK-M34,61.1650

for scho schuld be wythout masse +tat holy fest . Wherfor scho went
into a chapell +tat was negh hur place and was +ter yn hur prayer .
CMMIRK-M34,61.1651

And so as scho prayde , scho fell on slepe , CMMIRK-M34,61.1652

and +toght +tat scho was yn a fayre chyrche , CMMIRK-M34,61.1653

and sygh a gret company of maydens comyng ynto +te chyrche ; and on +tat
was passyng fayre of hom +ten any went befor , hauyng a fayre crowne of
schynnyng gold on hur hed . CMMIRK-M34,61.1654

Then sate scho done all othyr wyth . CMMIRK-M34,61.1655

And when +tay werne sette , +ter come yn won wyth a gret burthen of
condylls ; CMMIRK-M34,61.1656

and furst +gaue +te chef-mayden +tat had +te crowne , won candyll ,
CMMIRK-M34,61.1657

and so dalt all aftyr +tat wern yn +te chyrche . CMMIRK-M34,61.1658

And so scho come to +tys woman CMMIRK-M34,61.1659

and +gaf hur a candull , CMMIRK-M34,61.1660

and +ten was scho fayne . CMMIRK-M34,61.1661

Then segh scho a prest and too dekens honestly reueschet , wyth too
sergeberers goyng to +te auter ; CMMIRK-M34,61.1662

and as hur +to+gt Crist was +te pryst , two angels +te too dekens ,
CMMIRK-M34,61.1663

and Laurence and Vyncent +tay beren +te serges . CMMIRK-M34,61.1664

And so too +gong men begonnen +te masse wyth a mery note .
CMMIRK-M34,61.1665

So when +te $gospell was red , +te qwene of maydens furst offered hur
condull to +te prest , and soo aftyr ych on yn rew . CMMIRK-M34,61.1666

But when all haden offryd , and +tis prest abode aftyr +tis woman , +te
qwene sayde to hyr CMMIRK-M34,61.1667

and bade hyr goo offyr . CMMIRK-M34,61.1668

And when +tys messager had sayde hys ernde , +tys woman vnswared scho
wold not leue hyr serge , but scho wold kepe hit for gret deuocyon .
CMMIRK-M34,61.1669

Then send +te qwene ano+ter messager CMMIRK-M34,61.1670

and bade say to hur +tat scho was vncurtes for@ @to tary +te prest soo ;
CMMIRK-M34,61.1671

and but yf scho wold offyr hit wyth a good wyll , scho bade take hit of
hur . CMMIRK-M34,61.1672

+Get scho sayde nay , CMMIRK-M34,61.1673

scho wold not offyr vp hur serge . CMMIRK-M34,61.1674

Then +tys messager wold haue taken hyt of hur wyth strength .
CMMIRK-M34,61.1675

But for scho huld so fast bytwyx hom two , +te serge brake yn +te myddys
. CMMIRK-M34,61.1676

And half +te messager bar forth , CMMIRK-M34,61.1677

and +tat o+ter part +te woman huld wyth hur . CMMIRK-M34,61.1678

And so yn wrastelyng , scho woke of hyr slepe CMMIRK-M34,61.1679

and foude halfe yn hor hond . CMMIRK-M34,61.1680

And scho +tonkyd oure lady hertly +tat scho was not wythout masse +tat
day , and for scho +gaf hur such a relycke to kepe , whill scho lyued
aftyr . CMMIRK-M34,61.1681

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,61.1683

<$$heading>

Ano+ter woman was of so euell lyuyng , +tat scho dyd neuer good dede yn
hir lyue , CMMIRK-M34,61.1685

but only fonde a serge brennyng byfor <P_62> an ymage of oure lady yn a
chyrch . CMMIRK-M34,62.1686

Then fel hit , when scho was ded , fendys comen and fattyn hur soule to
hell . CMMIRK-M34,62.1687

But when +tay wern at hell-+geate , +ter come two angelys
CMMIRK-M34,62.1688

and rebuket +te fendes +tat +tay wern soo bold to fache any soule
wythouten dome . CMMIRK-M34,62.1689

Then sayde +tay hur nedyd no dome , for scho had neuer don good dede yn
hyr lyue . CMMIRK-M34,62.1690

Then sayden +te angeles : ' Bryngy+te +te soule byfor our lady ' ;
CMMIRK-M34,62.1691

and soo +tay dydden . CMMIRK-M34,62.1692

But when hit was fond +tat scho dyd neuer good dede , scho most nede goo
to hell . CMMIRK-M34,62.1693

Then sayde our lady : ' Scho fonde a serge befor me brennyng
CMMIRK-M34,62.1694

and wold euer whyll scho had lyued ; CMMIRK-M34,62.1695

+ten wyll I be as kynd to hur as scho was to me . ' Wherfor scho bade
an angell take a gret serge and lyght hyt , and bade hym sette hit so
brennyng byfor hur yn hell , and commaunde +tat no fende schuld be so
hardy for@ @to come nygh hit , but let hit brenne +ter for euermor .
CMMIRK-M34,62.1696

Then sayde +te fendes +tat hit schuld be a hoge confort to all +tat ben
yn hell ; wherfor +tay had leuer leue +tat soule , +ten do such an ese
to +te soules +tat ben yn payne . CMMIRK-M34,62.1697

+Ten bade oure lady an angyll to ber +te soule a+geyne to +te body ,
CMMIRK-M34,62.1698

and soo he dud . CMMIRK-M34,62.1699

And when scho was comen a+geyne to lyue , +ten scho be+toght hyr on +tat
hard dome +tat scho was toward , CMMIRK-M34,62.1700

and +gede , CMMIRK-M34,62.1701

and scherof hyr ; CMMIRK-M34,62.1702

and was aftyr a good woman , CMMIRK-M34,62.1703

and seruet our lady deuotly all hur lyue-dayes aftyr ,
CMMIRK-M34,62.1704

and had +te blysse of Heuen . To +te wheche blis God bryng you and me
to yf hyt be hys wyll . CMMIRK-M34,62.1705

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,62.1706

<heading>

15 . CMMIRK-M34,62.1708

DE DOMINICA IN SEPTUAGESIMA BREUIS SERMO . CMMIRK-M34,62.1709

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , +ge schull all know well +tat +tys day is called
Sonday yn +te Septagesin . CMMIRK-M34,62.1711

Then for enchesen +tat holy chyrche ys modyr to all cristen pepull ,
scho taketh hede to hyr chyldern as a good modyr ouyth for@ @to do ,
CMMIRK-M34,62.1712

and seyth hom all sore seke yn +te sekenes of synne , and mony of hom
wonded to de+te wyth +te swerd of synne . +Te wheche sekenesse +tay
haue caght all +tys +gere before , but namely +tes Cristynmasse-dayes
+tat wern ordeynet in holy chyrche for gret solempnyte .
CMMIRK-M34,62.1713

For yche man schuld +tat tyme make more solempnyte , and more bysyly ,
and more mekely , and more deuotly serue God +ten any o+ter <P_63> tyme
of +te +gere ; for cause +tat God schewed all mankynd thelke dayes hegh
swetnes of his loue , +tat he wold lowen hymself so , for@ @to be born
yn +te same flesche and blod as on of vs , and was layde yn a cracche
more porly +ten any of vs , and aftyr was folowed yn watyr as won of vs
, and come to a weddyng , hymself and his modyr wyth his dyscypuls ,
for@ @to halow weddyng and for@ @to clanse hit of synne all for@ @to
make vs holy , and bre+tern to hym , and ayres of +te blysse of Heuen .
CMMIRK-M34,63.1714

For +tes causes , men and woymen yn old tyme wern full glad yn soule
this tyme , CMMIRK-M34,63.1715

and maden gret solempnite , making homselfe clene yn body and yn soule
of all ful+te and vnclennes of synne , CMMIRK-M34,63.1716

and dyddyn grownd hom yn sadde loue to God and to hor euen-cristen ,
doyng gret almes , yche mon aftyr hys hauyng , to hom +tat haden nede .
CMMIRK-M34,63.1717

But now more harme ys +tat solempnite and holynes ys turned ynto ful+te
of synne and sekenes of soule , ynto pryde by dyuerse gyses of clo+tyng
, CMMIRK-M34,63.1718

into couetyse wylnyng worschyp on byfor ano+ter vnskylfully ;
CMMIRK-M34,63.1719

into envy , for on ys arayde bettyr +ten ano+ter ; CMMIRK-M34,63.1720

in gloteny by surfet of dyuerse metys and drynkes ; CMMIRK-M34,63.1721

into lechery +tat seweth alway gloteny ; CMMIRK-M34,63.1722

into slou+te of Goddys seruyce liyng yn +te morow-tyde long yn bedde for
owtrage wakyng ouer nyght ; CMMIRK-M34,63.1723

in rawtyng , in reuelyng , and playes of vanyte , in iapys makyng of
rybawdy and harlottry , so +tat he ys most worthi +tat most rybawdy can
make and spende . CMMIRK-M34,63.1724

+Tus +te holy dayes of +tat fest +tat wer ordeynt yn hegh worschyp to
God and to hys sayntys , now ben turned ynto hegh offence of God and
ynto gret hyndryng and loos of manys sowle . Wherfor holy chyrche seyng
hir chyldryn far +tus , as a modyr full of compassyon for +te gret
myslykyng +tat scho ha+te yn hyr hert for hom , +tys day , scho layth
downe Alleluia and o+ter songys of melody , and take+te for+te tractus ,
+tat ben songys of mowrnyng , and sykyng , and longyng .
CMMIRK-M34,63.1725

And also for +te holy sacrament of weddyng ys moche defoulet by suche
vanytes , scho layth hom downe +tes dayes +tat ben comyng , and yn +te
Aduent , and also for new weddet +geuen hom to lykyng and lust of hor
body , and +tenke all on +te lyfe , and noght on +te deth .
CMMIRK-M34,63.1726

But , as a holy clerke sayth , hit ys moche <P_64> more spedfull to
manys soule for@ @to goo to +te house +ter@ @as a cors ys , +tat all
wepen +ten to +te hous +tat all reuely+te and laghyth ;
CMMIRK-M34,64.1727

for such worldys murthe makyth a man to for+gete his God and hymselfe
alsoo . CMMIRK-M34,64.1728

But +ter@ @as ys +te syght of corses and wepyng , +tat makyth a man to
thenke on his deth , +tat ys +te chefe helpe to put away synne and +te
worldys vanyte . CMMIRK-M34,64.1729

For so taght Salamon his sonne CMMIRK-M34,64.1730

and bade hym haue hys last ende yn mynde , CMMIRK-M34,64.1731

and +ten he schuld neuer synne dedly . CMMIRK-M34,64.1732

Then holy chyrche , hauyng gret compassyon of hure chyldryn , ordeyned
+tre maner of saluys to hele hur chyldryn wyth ; CMMIRK-M34,64.1733

that ben : to thynke on de+te ynwardly , for@ @to labyr bysyly , and
for@ @to chastyce +te body resnably . CMMIRK-M34,64.1734

To +te fyrst , for@ @to thenke on deth ynwardly , holy chyrche +geuyth
an ensampull +tus yn +te offyce of +te masse . CMMIRK-M34,64.1735

+Ter he saythe +tus : ' Circumdederunt me gemitus mortis . ' That ys in
Englisch : ' The sykyngys of deth hauen vmbeclypped me . '
CMMIRK-M34,64.1736

+Tus sayth he techyng his good chyldryn , for@ @to haue yn mynde how
hard he ys vmbstad wyth deth on yche syde yn so moch , +tat he may not
away-scape ; CMMIRK-M34,64.1737

but euer de+te sewyth hym wyth his bow drawen and an arow +teryn redy to
choton at hym , CMMIRK-M34,64.1738

he wot neuer wher ne what tyme . CMMIRK-M34,64.1739

+Tys ys a pryncypall salue to ych man +tat take+te hit to hert , to put
away all maner worldes vanyte , and vayn murthe , and reuell .
CMMIRK-M34,64.1740

But for@ @to vndyrstond +tys +te bettyr , I schew +tys by ensampull .
CMMIRK-M34,64.1741

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,64.1743

<$$heading>

I rede of a kyng +tat was a man euer hevy of chere , and wold neuer lagh
ne make glad chere ; but euer was yn mornyng and heuynesse .
CMMIRK-M34,64.1745

Then , for his meyne and all o+ter men wern greuet +terwyth , +tay
+godyn to +te kyngys bro+ter prayng hym for@ @to speke to +te kyng +tat
he wer of gladdyr chere , yn comfort of all his meyne and all othyr .
CMMIRK-M34,64.1746

Then went hys brothyr to +te kyng CMMIRK-M34,64.1747

and sayde +tat he greuet all +tat werne aboute hym , wyth his heuy chere
, CMMIRK-M34,64.1748

and counselyt hym for@ @to leue +tat heuy cowntenance and taken lyghtyr
chere to hym , yn tyme comyng . CMMIRK-M34,64.1749

Then was +te kyng wyse , CMMIRK-M34,64.1750

and +toght for@ @to chast hys $brothyr by a wyle , CMMIRK-M34,64.1751

and wro+tly bade hym go hom and medyll hym of +tat he had to do of , and
noght of hym . CMMIRK-M34,64.1752

Then was hit +te maner of +tat contre +tat when any man shuld be don to
deth , ther shuld come trompers and <P_65> trompe befor +te +geate .
CMMIRK-M34,65.1753

+Ten sende +te kyng trompers byddyng trompe befor his brothyr +geate ,
and men wyth , for@ @to haue rest hym and bryng hym to hym .
CMMIRK-M34,65.1754

But , +tis mene whyle , +te kyng called to hym VII men +tat he tryst ,
CMMIRK-M34,65.1755

and bade hom , when hys brothyr come , for@ @to drawe hor swerdys and
stond aboute hym , wyth all +te poyntys about hys hert .
CMMIRK-M34,65.1756

Soo , when +tys brothyr was comen , anon +tes VII men dydden as +te kyng
bade . CMMIRK-M34,65.1757

Then +te kyng commawndyt all men for@ @to dawnce and to make al +te
reuell +tat +tay couthe , on yche syde ; CMMIRK-M34,65.1758

and so +tay dydden . CMMIRK-M34,65.1759

Then sayde +te kyng to hys brothyr : ' Brothyr , why art +tou of so heuy
a schere ? CMMIRK-M34,65.1760

Heue vp +tyn hert , CMMIRK-M34,65.1761

and make mery . CMMIRK-M34,65.1762

Lo , al +tys myr+te ys made yn comfort of +te ! ' CMMIRK-M34,65.1763

Then vnswared he CMMIRK-M34,65.1764

and sayde : ' How schuld I be of any chere , and se here VII swerdys set
to my hert , and wot neuer wheche of hom schall furst be my dethe ? '
CMMIRK-M34,65.1765

Then sayde +te kyng : ' Put vp your swerdys ! ' CMMIRK-M34,65.1766

and spake to his bro+tyr +tus : ' Hit faryth by me wher +tat euer y be ,
+te VII dedly synnys ben euer redy , for@ @to rowe me to +te hert ;
CMMIRK-M34,65.1767

and +tys makyth me +tat I make no gladdyr chere , CMMIRK-M34,65.1768

but euer am aferde of my sowle de+te . ' CMMIRK-M34,65.1769

Then sayde his bro+ter : ' Syr , y crye you mercy ! CMMIRK-M34,65.1770

I knew +tys neuer or now ; CMMIRK-M34,65.1771

and now schall I be wysyr whyle +tat I lyue . ' Wherfor y say $boldely
: he +tat wyll take +tys to hert , he schall haue bettyr lust for@ @to
lowren +ten to lagh , for@ @to syke +ten for@ @to syng , to reme +ten
rymov , to drowpe +ten to daunce ; so +tat he schall fynde mynde of
de+te +te pryncipall helpe for all maner synne . CMMIRK-M34,65.1772

That othyr salue ys for@ @to labur bysyly . CMMIRK-M34,65.1773

To +tis labour Seynt Paule , yn hys pystyll of +tys day , teche+te and
saythe +tus : ' Sic currite , ut comprehendatys . ' CMMIRK-M34,65.1774

' Rennyth soo +tat +ge may gripe +te gome . ' CMMIRK-M34,65.1775

By +tys gomen and rennyng +ge schall vndyrstond bysy labour .
CMMIRK-M34,65.1776

For he +tat renny+te for +te gamen , he enforsu+te hym yn all his myght
to ren swyftly . CMMIRK-M34,65.1777

So most yche good seruand enforse hym for@ @to laboure yn +te degre +tat
God hath sette hym yn . CMMIRK-M34,65.1778

Men of holy chyrche schuld labour bysily prayng and studiyng for@ @to
teche Godys pepull ; CMMIRK-M34,65.1779

lordys and o+ter rented men schuld labur bysyly , to kepe holy chirch yn
pees and rest , and all othyr comyn pepull ; CMMIRK-M34,65.1780

the comyns schuld labour bysyly , for@ @to gete lyflode to homselfe and
to all o+tir . CMMIRK-M34,65.1781

Then , for no man ne no woman schuld excuse hym of +tys labour , God yn
+te gospell of +tys day +geue+te an <P_66> ensampull , sayyng +tus : ' A
husband-man +gede yn +te morow at pryme , and eftsones at vndyr , and
efte at mydday , and eftsonys at none of +te day , and at euensong ,
CMMIRK-M34,66.1782

and hyryd men to his vyne+gorde for labour . ' CMMIRK-M34,66.1783

Soo by all +te tydes of +te day , all +te ages and degres ben
vndyrstonden , CMMIRK-M34,66.1784

and ben hyred by Good , for@ @to labour whyll +tay ben yn +tis world .
CMMIRK-M34,66.1785

For , as Iop saythe , a mon ys borne to labour ; CMMIRK-M34,66.1786

and Seynt Barnard seyth : ' He +tat wyll not labour her wyth men , he
schall labour yn hell wyth fendes . ' CMMIRK-M34,66.1787

For +tat ys +te testament +tat Adam laft to all his ospryng : labour and
sorow . CMMIRK-M34,66.1788

To +tys labour holy $chyrche +geueth ensampull , +ter@ @as he , +tys day
, rehersyth how God made Adam and Eue , for@ @to laboure and to kepe
paradyse , and bade hom ete of all +te treun yn paradyse , excepte won
tre +tat he kepte a chefe to hymselfe . CMMIRK-M34,66.1789

So , as oft as +tay sen +tat tre , +tay schuld +tenke on hym , and know
hym as for God ; CMMIRK-M34,66.1790

and for +tay schuld not be to for+getfull yn hor wele , he forbade hom
to ete +terof yn payne of deth . CMMIRK-M34,66.1791

Then , for +te fende segh hom +ter yn so moche wele and hymselfe yn so
moche payne , he had envy to hom , CMMIRK-M34,66.1792

and +gede to Eue , CMMIRK-M34,66.1793

and asked Eue why +tay ete not of +tat tre . CMMIRK-M34,66.1794

+Ten sayde scho : ' For God had forbedyn vs +tat tre , in payne of deth
. ' CMMIRK-M34,66.1795

Then sayde +te fende : ' He wot full well +tat what tyme +g@ @eten
+terof , +ge schull be as Godys , knowyng bo+te good and euell .
CMMIRK-M34,66.1796

And yf +ge wyll preue +tat I say sothe , ete of +te tre
CMMIRK-M34,66.1797

and say . ' CMMIRK-M34,66.1798

+Ten ete Eue of +te tre CMMIRK-M34,66.1799

and +gaf Adam ; CMMIRK-M34,66.1800

and fore Adam loued hyr and wold not wroth hur , ho toke an appull .
CMMIRK-M34,66.1801

And anon +terwyth ay+ter segh o+terys schappe , CMMIRK-M34,66.1802

and wern aschamed of hyt , CMMIRK-M34,66.1803

and token leues of a fyge-tre CMMIRK-M34,66.1804

and hydden hit . CMMIRK-M34,66.1805

Then come God anon , CMMIRK-M34,66.1806

and for +tay myght not deyn yn paradyse ne suffyr payne +ter , he drof
hom naket out of paradyse ynto +te wrecchet world , wepyng and sore
sekyng . CMMIRK-M34,66.1807

+Ter +tay schulden drye woo and sorow , and gete hor mete wyth labour
and swot , and dye at +te last . CMMIRK-M34,66.1808

Then prayde Adam sore wepyng to God +tat he schuld not set to hard
vengens apon hym , but haue mercy apon hym , and haue reward how he
synned by ygnorance , and not by males , and was deceyuet by envy of the
fende . CMMIRK-M34,66.1809

Then had God rew+te of hym CMMIRK-M34,66.1810

and for +tay wer naket , he clo+ted hom wyth pylches ,
CMMIRK-M34,66.1811

and bade Adam labour and ete his mete wyth swote , and Eue bere hur
bur+tes yn woo and payne ; CMMIRK-M34,66.1812

and +gaf Adam dyuerse ynstrumentys for@ @to labour wyth ,
CMMIRK-M34,66.1813

and laft hym +ter . CMMIRK-M34,66.1814

By +tys ensampull <P_67> +ge schull take hede for@ @to labour bysyly ;
CMMIRK-M34,67.1815

for yf Adam and Eue had bysyede hom yn labour , +te fende schuld not
haue ouercomen hom so sone . CMMIRK-M34,67.1816

For +te fend kepyth no more when he woll tempte man , but fynd hym ydull
. Wherfor +ge schull know well +tat hit ys a ryche salue to hele synne
: labour bysyly . CMMIRK-M34,67.1817

The +tryd ys for@ @to chastes +ty body dyscretly . CMMIRK-M34,67.1818

Herto Saynt Paule techyth vs yn +te pystyll of +tys day , +ter he sayth
+tus : ' Castigo corpus meum et in seruitutem redigo . ' That ys yn
Englysche : ' I chast my body and dresse hit ynto seruage of +te soule .
' CMMIRK-M34,67.1819

For mannys flesche ys so wyld and lusty to synne , +tat hyt wyll no way
leue his lust and serue +te soule tyll hit be chastet wyth penance ; so
+tat , by scharpenes of penaunce , +te lyking of synne schall be slayne
yn +te flessche +tat dothe +te synne . CMMIRK-M34,67.1820

Thus dyd Adam and Eue yn ensampull to all +tat comen of hom .
CMMIRK-M34,67.1821

For , fele +geres byfor hur deth , ay+ter of hom stode yn a watyr ,
nyghtys fer from o+ter , vp to +te chyn , for penaunce .
CMMIRK-M34,67.1822

+Ten when hor flessch was grene as grece for cold , +te fend come to Eue
, bryght as an angell , CMMIRK-M34,67.1823

and sayd to hur +tat God had send hym from Heuen , CMMIRK-M34,67.1824

and bade hur : ' Go to Adam CMMIRK-M34,67.1825

and say hym how +tat God byddyth hym sese of hys penaunce ;
CMMIRK-M34,67.1826

for he ha+te don ynogh for hys gylt , and +tou also for +tyn . '
CMMIRK-M34,67.1827

Then +gode Eue to Adam CMMIRK-M34,67.1828

and sayde hym soo . CMMIRK-M34,67.1829

But , for Adam wyst well +tat +tys come of +te fende , and not of Godys
sonde , he sayde to hur : ' When God drof vs out of paradyse for oure
synne , and had compassyon of vs , when we wepyd on hym , and mekely
prayde on hym for mercy , he set vs here , to do penaunce to our lyues
ende . CMMIRK-M34,67.1830

But +ten , for suche a gret synne may not be qwaynt but wyth gret
penaunce , +te more penaunce we don , +te more ys oure mede befor God .
Wherfor go a+geyne ynto +ty penance yn Godys name . '
CMMIRK-M34,67.1831

Eft he come a+geyne to Eue CMMIRK-M34,67.1832

and sayde : ' God ha+te take rewarde of your gret penance +tat +ge
suffren , CMMIRK-M34,67.1833

and hath for+geuen your synne ; wherfor byd Adam be glad and leue of his
penance , lest God be wro+te wyth hym +tat he take no reward to his
sonde . ' CMMIRK-M34,67.1834

Then , when Eue had sayde to Adam +tus , he vnswared and sayde : ' I wot
well +tat oure penawnce greueth hym moch mor +ten vs ,
CMMIRK-M34,67.1835

and he ys aboute as moche as he may , to make vs to leue of , and so
for@ @to lese oure mede befor God . CMMIRK-M34,67.1836

But for God rewardyth a good endyng , <P_68> and not +te begynnyng ,
+terfor lese we not our mede , CMMIRK-M34,68.1837

but do we forth oure penance tyll our lyues +gende . '
CMMIRK-M34,68.1838

+get +te +trid tyme he come a+geyne to hur CMMIRK-M34,68.1839

and sayde : ' Goo to Adam CMMIRK-M34,68.1840

and say +tat he began foule , and wel foulyr he woll ende .
CMMIRK-M34,68.1841

For +ge gylton furst by ynnocens and by defaute of +te fende ,
CMMIRK-M34,68.1842

and now +ge synneth by good deliberacyon CMMIRK-M34,68.1843

and knoweth +tat +ge don mys ; wherfor your gylt ys now wors and dowbull
dampnacyon or +tat hyt was before . ' CMMIRK-M34,68.1844

Then was Eue aferd , CMMIRK-M34,68.1845

and +gede to Adam , CMMIRK-M34,68.1846

and sayde hym soo . CMMIRK-M34,68.1847

+Ten sykut Adam sore CMMIRK-M34,68.1848

and sayde to hur : ' Vnsely woman , God of his goodnesse made of on of
my rybbys for@ @to helpe me ; CMMIRK-M34,68.1849

and now +tou art bysy by techyng of +te fende eft for@ @to combyr me .
CMMIRK-M34,68.1850

But +tenke on +tat ; CMMIRK-M34,68.1851

for oure forme synne stanke soo yn Godys nase , +tat all our ospryng
schall be enfecte and $envenemode +terof ynto +te worldys ende .
Wherfor +togh we myght do as moch penance as all our ospryng , hit wer
to lytyll for@ @to qwyt vs to our God . CMMIRK-M34,68.1852

But for God for hys he+g grace alowe+te a good wyll +ter@ @as myght
fayleth , +terfor do we oure penance wyth a good wyll , +togh hit be
lytyll whyll we ben here ; CMMIRK-M34,68.1853

and +ten I hope +tat God woll +geue vs +te oyle of mercy when tyme of
mercy comyth . ' CMMIRK-M34,68.1854

Then +gede Eue a+geyne CMMIRK-M34,68.1855

and dud hyr penaunce mekely tyll hyr lyues ende . CMMIRK-M34,68.1856

And when +tay haden lyued IX_hundyrt wyntyr and +trytty , and haden
+tritty sonnes and +tritty doghtyrs , +tay deydyn , CMMIRK-M34,68.1857

and wer buriet yfere . CMMIRK-M34,68.1858

Thus , good men , know +tat Adam and Eue wern bo+te holy or +tay deydyn
, and +toghten on de+te $ynwardly , and laburt bo+te bysely , and
chastest hor body resnably ; CMMIRK-M34,68.1859

and so most all +tat comen of hom , +tat hopen for@ @to come to +te joye
of paradyse , and to +te lyfe +tat euer shall last . CMMIRK-M34,68.1860

In tokenyng of +tys , +tis Sonday ys called ' Yn Septuagesin , ' +tat ys
a nowmbyr of syxty dayes and x . +Te wheche nowmbyr bygynnyth +tys day
and endythe +te Settyrday yn +te Estyr-weke ; so +tat holy chyrche ys yn
mornyng for hur chyldyr from +tis day ynto Setyrday yn Astyr-euen .
CMMIRK-M34,68.1861

Then scho takythe comfort to hyr yn party CMMIRK-M34,68.1862

and sengyth on Alleluia wyth a tracte , for encheson +tat scho ys not
+get yn full murth tyll Settyrday aftyr +tat ys callyd Settyrtday in
Albis . CMMIRK-M34,68.1863

+Ten scho ley+t don tractys , and grayles , CMMIRK-M34,68.1864

and syngy+te dowbull Alleluia , techyng yche good Godis child for@ @to
do penance and labour jn longyng , tyll he come to Astyr Setyrday ; +tat
is , tyll his soule passe to rest . CMMIRK-M34,68.1865

But <P_69> +get +te sowle ys not yn full joy tyll Setyrday in Albys ,
+tat is , tyll +te day of dome when +te body and sowle schull come
togedyr , and be yclo+ted in albys , +tat ys yn whit , seuen sy+tys
brightyr +ten +te sonne . CMMIRK-M34,69.1866

And +ten schull +tay syng yfere dowbull Alleluia yn +te joye +tat euer
schall last . To +te whech ioy God bryng you and me , yf hit be his
wyll . CMMIRK-M34,69.1867

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,69.1868

<heading>

16 . CMMIRK-M34,69.1870

DE DOMINICA IN SEXAGESIMA BREUIS SERMO . CMMIRK-M34,69.1871

<$$heading>

Goode men and woymen , +tys day ys called yn holy chirch Sonday yn
Sexagesin . CMMIRK-M34,69.1873

+Ten +ge schull knowe well +tat Sexagesin ys sette for a nowmbur of
+tre_score . By +te whech nowmbyr +ge schull vndyrstond +tat holy
chyrche techeth yche man and woman , to +tenke on how schort a mannis
lyfe is now in our dayes o+ter +tat hit was in olde tyme before .
CMMIRK-M34,69.1874

For , summe tyme , men lyuedon IX_hundyrt wyntur and more ;
CMMIRK-M34,69.1875

but , now , he +tat lyuy+te +tre_score +ger or summewhat more , he ys
taken for a long_lyuyng man . CMMIRK-M34,69.1876

But +te goodnes of God ys so moche , +tat yf we wyll be wyse yn our
schort lyue for@ @to plese God and saue our soules , he woll +geue vs as
moche mede yn Heuen , as he +gaf hom +tat lyued soo mony +geres .
CMMIRK-M34,69.1877

+Ten he +tat woll haue +tat mede of God , he most haue +tre +tynges
wythe hym ; +tat ys : for@ @to suffyr tribulacyon mekly , for@ @to do
almes-dede dyscretly , and for@ @to hate synne namly .
CMMIRK-M34,69.1878

+Ten , for a manys dayes byn schort , he most suffyr +te more
tribulacyon wyth good wyll , and not wyth grychyng a+geyne hym .
CMMIRK-M34,69.1879

For hyt comy+te of specyall grace of God when he sendys any man
tribulacyon o+ter any dysese ; CMMIRK-M34,69.1880

for hyt ys o+ter for remedy of his synnys for@ @to haue his penance here
, o+ter yn hey encres of his joy befor God . CMMIRK-M34,69.1881

+Ten , for Saynt Paule , Godis holy apostoll , woll +tat yche man take
ensampull by hym for@ @to suffyr tribulacyon wyth good wyll , he
rehersyth yn +te pystyll of +tys day moche of +te tribulacyon +tat he
suffyrd CMMIRK-M34,69.1882

and saythe thus : ' I haue be put ynto prison oft-tymes , and suffyrd
wondys of gret chaynes and o+ter dyuerse yrens ; and fyue tymes betyn
wyth scorgys of +te Iewes , and had yche tyme nene_and_+trytty strokes
on my bare body ; <P_70> and +tryse beton wyth +gardys of paynones ; and
onys beton wyth stons ; and +tryse ben yn schipwrak on +te see , and was
yn +te grond of +te see on nyght and on day ; and ofte-tyme in pareyle
of flodys , and yn pareyl of +teves , and yn pareyle of fals bre+tern
+tat schewedon hom to me louyng and trewe , and werne false and entyset
o+ter to do me doses . ' CMMIRK-M34,70.1883

He rehersyth all +te woo +tat he suffyrd yn dyuerse trauayls , yn
myscheves , yn colde , yn nakedschip , yn +turst , yn hongur , yn long
wakyng , yn fastyng , and yn mony o+ter myscheves +tat he suffurd , +tat
wern to long to tell . CMMIRK-M34,70.1884

And all he suffyrd wyth good wyll , CMMIRK-M34,70.1885

and euer +tonked God of hys swete sonde ; CMMIRK-M34,70.1886

for wele he wyst +tat all +te doses +tat God send to hym , was for syn
+tat he dyd befor , and for encrese of his meryt aftyr . Wherfor yche
man +tat will plese God - what maner doses come+te to hym , be hit
sekenes , be hit lose of goodys +tat ben worldly , o+ter deth of any
frende - take hyt as esely as +ge may ; CMMIRK-M34,70.1887

for in tyme aftyr when he is maystyr of hymselfe , +ten +tonke he God
CMMIRK-M34,70.1888

and pray hym mekely of mercy of his ynpaciens . CMMIRK-M34,70.1889

God knowe+te your fragelte , CMMIRK-M34,70.1890

and +terfor he for+geueth sone all +to +tat askyth hym mercy wyth a meke
hert . CMMIRK-M34,70.1891

+Tus most a man suffyr tribulacyon mekely . CMMIRK-M34,70.1892

He most also do almys-dede dyscretly , +te wheche byn fyguret by +tes
Syxagesin +tat byn syxty dayes . CMMIRK-M34,70.1893

For syxty ys syx tymys ten , so +tat by +te syx +ge schull vndyrstond
+te syx werkes of charyte +tat comen out of +te ten commawndementys of
God . +Te whech werkes byn : for@ @to +gyue mete to +te hongry ; for@
@to +geue drynke to +te +tursty ; to clo+te hom +tat byn acold for
defaute of clo+tes ; for@ @to +geue hom herber +tat hauen non ; for@ @to
help hom +tat byn seke of +tat hom nedyth ; for@ @to viset presoners ,
and socour hom wyth mete , and drynke , and o+ter +tat hom nedyth ;
CMMIRK-M34,70.1894

and othyr werke holy chyrch layth to ; +tat ys : for@ @to bury +te pore
+tat ha+te no helpe as Toby dude . CMMIRK-M34,70.1895

+Tys ben +te werkes of charite and of mercy +te whech ych man and woman
most nedely do , +tat wyll haue mercy of God yn +te dredfull day of dome
. Wherfor +tis Sexagesin bygynnyth +tys day and endyth +te Wonnysday yn
Astyr-weke ; +te wheche holy chyrche syngu+te : ' Venite benedicti
Patrys mei etc. , ' that ys in Englysche : ' Com +ge , my fadyrys
blessed chyldyrne , and takyth +te kyndome of Heuen +tat ys ordeynt to
you . ' CMMIRK-M34,70.1896

Thes same wordys God schall say to you at +te day of dome <P_71> and to
all +tat han don +te werkes of mercy dyscretly . Wherfor all +tat han
wherof , +tay moten do hom yn dede ; and +tay +tat haue not wherof ,
+tay moten haue good wylle for@ @to do , yf +tay hadyn wherof ; so +tat
hor good wyll schall fulfyll +tat hor nonpower may not .
CMMIRK-M34,71.1897

Then , for +tes werkes moten be don dyscretly , lest a man lese all
yfere , God techythe by ensampull yn +te gospell of +tys day how +tay
schull be don CMMIRK-M34,71.1898

and seythe +tus : ' A mon +gode out , for@ @to sowe his sede ;
CMMIRK-M34,71.1899

and when he sew , som sede fell by +te way , CMMIRK-M34,71.1900

and fowles of +te ayre etyn hit ; CMMIRK-M34,71.1901

and som fell on a stone , CMMIRK-M34,71.1902

and hit dryet vp for defaute of humore ; CMMIRK-M34,71.1903

and somme fell among +tornes , CMMIRK-M34,71.1904

and hoo in +te grownde choket hit ; CMMIRK-M34,71.1905

and som fell yn good erthe , CMMIRK-M34,71.1906

and hyt bro+gt furthe frute an hundyrthfold . ' CMMIRK-M34,71.1907

This way say+te Cryst : ' I am +te way to Heuen . ' Wherfor his sede
fallyth bysyde +te way , +tat +geue+te hys almes not only for Crystys
loue , but for pompe of +te world , and vayn glory , and for@ @to be
holden a holy man ; and so lesy+te al yfere . CMMIRK-M34,71.1908

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,71.1910

<$$heading>

I rede +tat +ter was a wondyr $rych {TEXT:ry_h} man , som tyme , yn
Eirlond , CMMIRK-M34,71.1912

and dyd so mony almys-dedys yn hys lyue , +tat all men wendon +tat he
had ben a gret seynt before God . CMMIRK-M34,71.1913

But when he was ded , he apered to won +tat loued hym wele yn his lyue ,
as blak as pyche wyth an horrybull stenche , CMMIRK-M34,71.1914

and sayde to hym : ' +ge wenyn I am a saynt ; CMMIRK-M34,71.1915

but now I am such as +tou may se . ' CMMIRK-M34,71.1916

Then sayde +tat o+ter : ' Wher byn all +tyn almys-dedys bycomen ? '
CMMIRK-M34,71.1917

+Ten sayde he : ' +Te wynd of vayn glorye hathe blowen hom away . '
CMMIRK-M34,71.1918

Thus he +tat do+te almys-dedys for vayne glorie , he lesyth all his mede
, CMMIRK-M34,71.1919

and fendys of +te ayre strien hit . CMMIRK-M34,71.1920

His sede fallyth on a stone , +tat +geuyth his almys to suche as he
knoweth well , +tat ben groundyd in dedly synne and woll not leue hit ,
CMMIRK-M34,71.1921

or whosoo mantaynyth hom yn hor synne , he lesy+te his mede .
CMMIRK-M34,71.1922

His sede also +tat fallyth among +tornes , +tat +geuyth hys almes to
ryche men +tat haue no nede +terto , and also +geuyth hit to his
seruandys in reward of hor hyre , and soo lesyth hys mede .
CMMIRK-M34,71.1923

But his sede fally+te yn good erthe , +tat +geueth his almes to good ,
pore , trew men +tat ben Godys ayr , and othyr wher +ter he wot , hit ys
almes . CMMIRK-M34,71.1924

And +tys sede schall +geld a hundrethfold fruyt , and be euerlastyng
fode yn <P_72> Heuen . CMMIRK-M34,72.1925

+Tus +ge +tat don almes dyscretly , schull haue +gour fode yn Heuen
perpetuall . CMMIRK-M34,72.1926

He most also hate syn namely , and sle hit yn all +tat he may ;
CMMIRK-M34,72.1927

for he +tat hatyth synne , louyth God , CMMIRK-M34,72.1928

and God louyth hym ; CMMIRK-M34,72.1929

and so he is made on spyryte wyth God . CMMIRK-M34,72.1930

God hatyth synne so moche , +tat he toke vengeans on all +te world , as
holy chyrche nowe makyth mynde , and namely for synne of $lechery and of
vowtrye , and for synne a+geyne kynd . CMMIRK-M34,72.1931

Then , for God segh +tis wikednes namly of +tes synnys regnyng yn +te
world , he sayde +tus : ' Me forthenkyth +tat I made man . ' Wherfor he
sayde to Noye : ' All +te world ys enfect wyth synne so greuesly , +tat
I woll strye hit wyth a flod . Wherfor make +te a schyppe , as I woll
teche +te , of planke-bordes , and make chambors +teryn , and take of
all clene bestys +tre coupull and on by hymself of all o+ter vnclene
bestys take on cowpull yn , and mete wyth hom . ' CMMIRK-M34,72.1932

Then made Noye +tys schyppe as God taght hym , sqware in +te bo+tom , of
+tre_hundyrt cubytes yn lengthe , and yn brede fyfty cubytys , and
+trytty cubites yn heght ; so +tat +tis schippe was yn makyng a_hundyrt
wyntyr , for@ @to schew how mercyable God ys , and how lo+te he ys to do
vengeans . CMMIRK-M34,72.1933

And he do+te hit , for@ @to loke yf men wold amend and aske mercy .
CMMIRK-M34,72.1934

But for +te pepull wold not amende , but was euer +te lengyr +te worse ,
al maner of bestys , as God bade byfore , werne jbroght byfore Noye by
help of +te angelys , and don yn +te schippe . CMMIRK-M34,72.1935

And when all wern broght yn , God bade Noye and his +tre sonnes goo ynto
+te schyppe by homself ; and Noyeys wyfe and hys sonnes wyues by
homselfe ; for encheson +tat , yn tyme of affliccyon , men schuld absten
hom from coupull of woymen . CMMIRK-M34,72.1936

So when +tay wern alle in , God closud +te dore aftyr hom wythout-forth
; CMMIRK-M34,72.1937

and +ten hit rayned so gretly fourty dayes and fourty nyghtys , +tat +te
watyr bare +te schyppe herre +ten any hull by fyfty cubytys ,
CMMIRK-M34,72.1938

and stod so styll an_hundyrt dayes and fyfty , CMMIRK-M34,72.1939

And so was all +te world drownet , bo+te man and best , outtaken hom
+tat werne in +te schyppe . CMMIRK-M34,72.1940

Neuer+teles Ioseph sayth +tat in Armeny ys a hull +tat ys called Baris ,
+tat was herre +ten +te watyr where mony men and woymen were ysaued , as
men haue an oppynyon . CMMIRK-M34,72.1941

+Ter was <P_73> Noye a twolfmony+te yn +te schyppe . CMMIRK-M34,73.1942

+Ten he put out a raven for@ @to bryng worde yf +te watyr wer all sesyd
or no . CMMIRK-M34,73.1943

+Ten fond +tys rauen a drowned careyn , CMMIRK-M34,73.1944

and fulled hym +terof , CMMIRK-M34,73.1945

and come not a+geyne . CMMIRK-M34,73.1946

Aftyr Noye send a culuer out +tat come a+geyne wyth a branche of an
olyue-tre in hur byll ; wherby Noye knew +tat +te watyr was sesyt and
+tonkyd God heghly . CMMIRK-M34,73.1947

Then when God bade hym go out , he +gede out , CMMIRK-M34,73.1948

and toke out +te hed-best of +te clene bestys , CMMIRK-M34,73.1949

and brent hym yn offryng to God . Wherfor God was so wele payde +tat he
+gaf hym and all men aftyr hym leue for@ @to ete flesche of clene bestys
, and for@ @to drynke wyne +ter@ @as befor +te flod men etyn no flessche
, ne drynkyd no drynke but watyr ; CMMIRK-M34,73.1950

for +te erthe was so badfull byfor , +tat hom nedud non o+ter fode , but
suche as come of +te erth . CMMIRK-M34,73.1951

+Tus , good men , +ge most vndyrstond how gret vengeans God toke on +te
world for wykednesse of synne , CMMIRK-M34,73.1952

and now , more harme ys , +te pepull ar as full of synne as +tay wer
+tat tyme ; CMMIRK-M34,73.1953

and +terfor God will take vengeans , n@ @er +te prayers of holy sayntys
and specyaly of our lady . CMMIRK-M34,73.1954

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,73.1956

<$$heading>

For +tis I rede yn +te lyfe of Seynt Domink CMMIRK-M34,73.1958

when he was on a nyght yn his deuocyons he segh our Lord Ihesu holdyng
+tre speres yn his hond , redy for@ @to schote to +te world for vengeans
. CMMIRK-M34,73.1959

Then come our lady anon , CMMIRK-M34,73.1960

and kneled befor hym , CMMIRK-M34,73.1961

and sayde : ' My dere sonne and swet , what wyll +ge do ? '
CMMIRK-M34,73.1962

Then sayde he : ' Dere modyr , +te world ys so full of pride , and of
couetyse , and of lechery ; wherfor , wyth +tese +tre swerdys , I woll
schote at hom . ' CMMIRK-M34,73.1963

Then sayde our lady : ' My swete sonne , haue mercy , CMMIRK-M34,73.1964

and +get abyde a whyle ; CMMIRK-M34,73.1965

I haue on trew seruand , +te wheche schall goo , and preche , and turne
+te world to +te . ' CMMIRK-M34,73.1966

And so scho send forth Saynt Domink , CMMIRK-M34,73.1967

and bade hym go , and preche Godys worde , and turne +te pepull ;
CMMIRK-M34,73.1968

and so he dude . CMMIRK-M34,73.1969

Thus , good men , +ge haue herde how by prayer of our lady and by
prechyng of +tys good man , God spared to do vengeans +tat tyme .
CMMIRK-M34,73.1970

But nowe , more harme ys , +te pepull ys combyrt wyth +te same synne ,
CMMIRK-M34,73.1971

and ys full like to be smytten wyth +te same vengeans o+ter wyth wors ;
CMMIRK-M34,73.1972

for now +te pepull setty+te but lytyll by God : CMMIRK-M34,73.1973

for +tagh +tay heren prechyng and techyng , +tay wyll <P_74> not amendde
hom , ny leue hor synne . Wherfor God smyty+te yn parte now , and woll
hereaftyr well hardyr and sarre . Wherfor +ge schull pray to God to
hold vp his hond of vengeans +tat hyt fall not yn our dayes ; but +tat
we may come to amendement and haue +te blysse +tat he bo+gt vs to . To
+te wheche blysse God bryng you and me , yf hit be hys wyll .
CMMIRK-M34,74.1974

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,74.1975

<heading>

17 . CMMIRK-M34,74.1977

DE DOMINICA IN QUINQUAGESIMA SERMO BREUIS . CMMIRK-M34,74.1978

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , +tys day is callet yn holy chyrche Sonday yn
Quinquagesin . CMMIRK-M34,74.1980

+Ten schull +ge know +tat +tys word quinquagesin ys an nowmbur of fyfty
, +te wheche nowmbur bytokenyth remission and ioye . CMMIRK-M34,74.1981

For yn +te old lawe , ych fyfty wynter , all men and woymen +tat wern
sette wyth seruice and bondage , +tay wern made fre in gret ioy and
murth to hom . Wherfor +tys nowmbur bygynnyth +tys day , and endyth yn
Estyrday , schewyng +tat yche godys-seruand +tat ys oppressyd wyth
tribulacyon , and takyth hit mekely yn his hert , he schall be made fre
yn his resurrecyon : +tat ys yn +te day of dome , and be made +te ayre
of +te kyndome of Heuen . CMMIRK-M34,74.1982

And +get yn more comfort of all Godys pepull yche fyfte +gere , +te pope
of Rome graunty+te a full remyssion of all synnys to yche man and weman
+tat comyth to Rome +tat +gere . CMMIRK-M34,74.1983

But for all men may not come +tedyr and haue +tys pardon , +terfor +te
Pope of Heuen , Ihesu Cryst , of his specyall grace graunty+te all men
and woymen full pardon of hor synnys yn hor deth-day , so +tat +tay woll
kepe by hor lyue +tre +tyngys +tat ben nedefull to hom . +Te wheche ben
+tese : full contricion wyth schryft , full charite wythout feynyng ,
and stabull fayth wythout flateryng . CMMIRK-M34,74.1984

And , sothly , wythout +tes +tre , +ter may no man haue pardon at Rome
ne elleswher . Wherfor he +tat wyll be asoylet of +te Pope of Heuen ,
and haue playne remyssyon of hys synnys , he most be full contryte ,
+tat ys , ynwardly sory for hys synnys and his gyltes ; and so schryue
hym clene , and be yn full purpos neuer for@ @to synne more .
CMMIRK-M34,74.1985

Whoso do+te +tus , leue he wele , God for+geuyth hym his trespas , and
full <P_75> perdon +terof . CMMIRK-M34,75.1986

For a man may haue suche a contricion , +tat hyt schall quench all +te
paynes +tat wer ordeynt for hym . CMMIRK-M34,75.1987

Ensampull we haue of Petyr +tat forsoke Cryst wyth he+g othys .
CMMIRK-M34,75.1988

But for he was contryte , and byttyrly wepte , +terfor God +tat ys full
of mercy , foraf hym his trespas , CMMIRK-M34,75.1989

and made hym more chere +teraftyr +ten he dude byfore .
CMMIRK-M34,75.1990

Ano+ter ensampull . CMMIRK-M34,75.1991

I fynde +tat +ter was a gret man and was so wykyd of lyvyng , +tat all
demede hym to helle . CMMIRK-M34,75.1992

+Ten happyd hym so , +tat he fell seke yn his de+te-bed .
CMMIRK-M34,75.1993

And when he felde he schuld be ded , he +toght how wyckedly he had
ylyued before , CMMIRK-M34,75.1994

and caght such a contricion in his hert , +tat he wepte day and nyght ,
CMMIRK-M34,75.1995

and neuer sesed seuen dayes +tat he lyued . CMMIRK-M34,75.1996

And made prestys to be wyth hym , day and nyght ; CMMIRK-M34,75.1997

and euer as hys synne come to mynde , wyth hegh repentance , he schrof
hym , CMMIRK-M34,75.1998

and euer cryed to God of mercy deuotly , +tat iche man ha+te rewthe of
hym . CMMIRK-M34,75.1999

And so deyd fruth . CMMIRK-M34,75.2000

Then was +ter bysyde , in an abbay , a monke +tat deyd +tat same tyme ,
+tat +tis man dude , CMMIRK-M34,75.2001

and was bedon by his abbot com a+geyne , and telle hym of hys state .
CMMIRK-M34,75.2002

And so he dude , CMMIRK-M34,75.2003

and sayde to his abbot : ' Syr , I am come as +ge bade me .
CMMIRK-M34,75.2004

+Geue me leue to go my way ; CMMIRK-M34,75.2005

for I goo to joye . ' CMMIRK-M34,75.2006

+Ten sayde +te abbot : ' Was +ter any soule +tat +gede to +te joye
wythout payne , +tat day , +tat +tou dyddyst dye ? ' CMMIRK-M34,75.2007

+Ten sayde +te monke : ' For so+te on and no moo , CMMIRK-M34,75.2008

and +tat was +te soule of +tat man , ' CMMIRK-M34,75.2009

and told his nome . CMMIRK-M34,75.2010

+Ten sayde +te abbot : ' Now I se well +tat +tou art a fend , and not my
monke +tat art ycomyn , to temp me ; CMMIRK-M34,75.2011

for well I wot , +gyf any sowle be yn payne , +ten ys hys soule . '
CMMIRK-M34,75.2012

Then sayde +te monke : ' Ful vnwor+ty ys any man to knowe +te pryuete of
Godis dome . CMMIRK-M34,75.2013

+Tat man had suche contricyon , and wepte so byttyrly , er +tat he deyd
, for hys synnys , +tat +te watyr of his een persued all hys clo+tis ,
and +te brest , and so don into +te erthe . Wherfor goo +tedyr
to-morrow , and when +tou fyndyst hit so+te +tat I say , leue +tat I am
trew and goo to joye . ' CMMIRK-M34,75.2014

Then +gede +te abbot +tedyr ; CMMIRK-M34,75.2015

and when he fonde all sothe +tat +te monk told , +ten he knelyd don ,
CMMIRK-M34,75.2016

and herut God , CMMIRK-M34,75.2017

and bade all men be glad : CMMIRK-M34,75.2018

for he was +tus certefyet , +tat his soule was yn blysse .
CMMIRK-M34,75.2019

+Tus +te gret contrycyon +tat +tys man hadde , er he deyd , quenched +te
gret payne +tat was ordeynt to hym . CMMIRK-M34,75.2020

<P_76>

Hereby +ge may know opynly how spedfull hyt ys to a man to be contrite
of his synnys . Wherfor for@ @to draw men to contricion namly +tes
fyfty dayes , +te fyft psalme of +te sauter , +tat ys : ' Miserere mei ,
Deus ! ' ys more rehersyd +tes dayes +ten any o+ter tyme of +te +gere .
+Te wheche ys +tus to say yn Englysche : ' God , aftyr +ty gret mercy
haue mercy on me ; and aftyr +ty multytude of +ty mercyus , do away my
wickednesse ! ' and soo forth . CMMIRK-M34,76.2022

Thus when a man ys sory for hys synnys and sayth +tes wordys wyth full
hert , God heryth his prayer CMMIRK-M34,76.2023

and for+geueth hym hys trespas , so +tat he be yn full wyll to amende
hym yn tyme comyng , and also full of charyte wythout faynyng .
CMMIRK-M34,76.2024

For , what maner vertu +tat a man haue , but yf he be yn charyte , hit
stondys hym in no vayle ; CMMIRK-M34,76.2025

for +togh he wepe and crye to God : whyll he ys wythout charyte to any
of hys euencristen , God heryth hym not . CMMIRK-M34,76.2026

Herto acordyth Seynt Paule yn +te pystyll of +tys day CMMIRK-M34,76.2027

and sayth +tus : ' Thagh I were as eloquent yn speche as any man or any
angell ; +tagh I had prophecyus and knew +te priuetyes of God ; or +tagh
I had so full fayth , +tat I myght remewe hylles ; or +tagh I dalt all
my goodys to pore men for Godys sake ; or +tagh I put my body to brenne
for Godys loue : +gif I haue no charite , all prophetyth me noght . '
Wherfor , +tagh a man wenyth he leue+te his God and loue not hys
euencristen , he ys dysceyuet ; CMMIRK-M34,76.2028

for he loue+te his God , +tat loue+te all +tat God loue+te .
CMMIRK-M34,76.2029

Thus most a man haue full charite +tat woll be sauet befor God .
CMMIRK-M34,76.2030

For he +tat deyth yn charite , schall be sauet ; CMMIRK-M34,76.2031

and he +tat deyth yn dedly synne , schall be dampnet : whefor of all
vertues charite is most necessary . CMMIRK-M34,76.2032

+Get +ge most haue stabull fayth wythout flateryng , so +tat +ge leue
saddely as holy chyrche leuyth , +tat is , yn +te Fadyr , and yn +te
Sonne , and yn +te Holy Gost . CMMIRK-M34,76.2033

+Te Fadyr full God , and +te Sonne full God , and +te Holy Gost full God
; CMMIRK-M34,76.2034

and +get +tes +tre but on God +tat made all +tyng of noght .
CMMIRK-M34,76.2035

Thus fayth was furst schewed to +te holy patryark Abraham , as holy
chyrche +tys day maketh mynde , and sayth +tat Abraham was yn +te vale
of Mambre , and segh +tre fayre men comyng toward hym .
CMMIRK-M34,76.2036

And <P_77> +ten he +gede a+geyne hom CMMIRK-M34,77.2037

and , +tagh he see +tre , he worschepyd but on , +geuyng all men
ensampull for@ @to se yn hor spyryte +te Fadyr , and +te Sonne , and +te
Holy Gost ; +tre persons , and on godhed ; and worschip hom as on God .
CMMIRK-M34,77.2038

And alsoo +ge schull leue yn +te yncarnacyon of oure Lord Ihesu Crist
+tat oure lady conceyuet of +te Holy Gost wythout wem of hyr body , and
was borne of hur yn flessch and blode as on of vs , CMMIRK-M34,77.2039

and he was veray God and man +tat aftyr was ded on +te crosse , and
buryet , CMMIRK-M34,77.2040

and aros from de+te to lyue +te +tryd day , CMMIRK-M34,77.2041

and stegh ynto Heuen on +te Holy +Tursday , CMMIRK-M34,77.2042

and schall come a+geyne , for@ @to deme +te quycke and +te ded .
CMMIRK-M34,77.2043

This was fygurt by Isaake , +tat was +te sonne of Abraham , +te wheche
Abraham gete by his wyfe Sare +turgh byhest of God when +tay wer bo+te
past age for@ @to gete chyldyr ; of +te whech sonne God behet Abraham ,
+tat he schuld haue fruyt as mony as wer sterres of Heuen .
CMMIRK-M34,77.2044

+Ten when +tys chyld was borne , he was called Isaake .
CMMIRK-M34,77.2045

But when he was xxv +gere old , God asayde Abraham yn +tys wyse :
CMMIRK-M34,77.2046

he bade hym take hys sonne Isaak +tat he loued wele , and go to suche an
hull +tat he wold schew hym , and +ter offyr vp hym yn sacryfyce ,
CMMIRK-M34,77.2047

+tat was , sle hym and brenne hym , as +te maner was +tat tyme .
CMMIRK-M34,77.2048

+Ten Abraham , +togh he loued his sonne moche and had behest of God to
haue gret vssu by hym , neuer+telese he toke hym anon wythout grucchyng
, CMMIRK-M34,77.2049

and +gede to +tat hulle , CMMIRK-M34,77.2050

and made Isaak to ber wod to bren hymself wyth . CMMIRK-M34,77.2051

And when +tay come to +te hullys cop , Abraham made an auter of +te
brondys , CMMIRK-M34,77.2052

and set hom on fure ; CMMIRK-M34,77.2053

and +ten toke his sonne Isaake , CMMIRK-M34,77.2054

and wold han slayne hym , and offred hym vp soo to God .
CMMIRK-M34,77.2055

Then anon spake an angyll to hym , CMMIRK-M34,77.2056

and bade hym leue of , and take +te wedyr +tat ys byhynde hym , tyed by
+te hornys to brerys , ' and offor hyt ynstede of +ty sonne ' ;
CMMIRK-M34,77.2057

and so he dyd . CMMIRK-M34,77.2058

Then by Abraham +ge schull vndyrstonde +te Fadyr of Heuen , and by Isaac
his sonne Ihesu Crist . +Te whech he sparyd not for no loue +tat he had
to hym ; but suffered +te Iewes to lay +te wode apon hym , +tat was +te
crosse apon hys schuldres , and ladden hym to +te mount of Caluary , and
+ter dydyn hym on +te autre of wode , +tat was +te crosse , +tat was
made of foure treus : <P_78> cydyr , cypur , olyue , and palme ; and
+ter dyed for all mankynd . CMMIRK-M34,78.2059

Thus may Crist well be called Isaac +tat ys to vndyrstond laghtur for
mony a soule . CMMIRK-M34,78.2060

He broght out of helle laghyng +tat +gode +tedyr , full sor wepyng .
CMMIRK-M34,78.2061

+Ten as +tus was fygur of Crystys passyon longe or he wer borne , ryght
so Crist hymselfe +tys day yn +te gospell tolde to his dyscypuls how he
schuld be scornyd , and betyn wyth scorgys , and don to deth on +te
crosse , and ryse +te +tryd day a+geyne to lyue . CMMIRK-M34,78.2062

And , for +tay schuld haue full leue hereto , anon befor hom he made a
blynd man to see +tat cryed to hym and sayde : ' Ihesu , Dauid sonne ,
haue mercy on me ! ' CMMIRK-M34,78.2063

+Ten sayde Crist to hym : ' What wolt +tou +tat I do to +te ? '
CMMIRK-M34,78.2064

And he sayde : ' Lorde , +tat I may see ! ' CMMIRK-M34,78.2065

+Ten sayde Ihesus : ' +Ty faythe ha+te heled +te , CMMIRK-M34,78.2066

behold forth ! ' CMMIRK-M34,78.2067

and anon he sygh gracyously CMMIRK-M34,78.2068

and heryed God hertfully . CMMIRK-M34,78.2069

+Tys most yche man +tat wyll haue pardon of God : CMMIRK-M34,78.2070

he most haue full contrycyon wyth schryft , and hole charite wythout
faynyng , and stydfast beleue wythout flateryng . CMMIRK-M34,78.2071

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,78.2073

<$$heading>

I rede +tat +ter was a byschop of Lyncolne +tat hatte Robert Grosched ,
CMMIRK-M34,78.2075

and was holden on of +te grettyst clerkys yn +te world in hys tyme .
CMMIRK-M34,78.2076

And when he laye in hys dethe-bedde , +ter come to hym a gret multytude
of fendys , CMMIRK-M34,78.2077

and spyted wyth hym so of +te faythe , +tat +tay hadden negh turned hym
, and put hym ynto dyspayre . CMMIRK-M34,78.2078

But +ten was oure lady redy , +tat ys ay redy in nede ,
CMMIRK-M34,78.2079

and sayde to hym : ' My seruand , say +tou beleuyst as holy chyrch do+te
. ' CMMIRK-M34,78.2080

And he cried and sayde : ' Y beleue as holy chyrch beleuyth . '
CMMIRK-M34,78.2081

And +terwyth +te fendes vanechid away anon ; CMMIRK-M34,78.2082

and he +gaf vp his spyryte . CMMIRK-M34,78.2083

Now schul +ge all pray to God +tat he +geue you all stydfastnes yn +te
beleue of holy chyrch , +tat +te fende haue no power of you yn your
deth-tyme and graunt +tat blysse to you that he boght you to .
CMMIRK-M34,78.2084

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,78.2085

<P_79>

<heading>

18 . CMMIRK-M34,79.2088

DE FESTO SANCTI MATHIE , APOSTOLI , ET EIUS SOLEMPNITATE .
CMMIRK-M34,79.2089

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , suche a day +ge schull haue Seynt Mathis day ,
Godys holy apostull . +Te whech ha+te non euen set yn certeyne for@ @to
fast , but at monnys deuocyon , as Ion Belet sayes , +tat ys a doctor of
holy chyrch ; for cause +tat he was not chosen of Crist hymselfe , whyll
he went here yn er+te . CMMIRK-M34,79.2091

Then schull +ge know well , good men , +tat Cryst whyll he was here yn
erthe , he ches hym twelf apostull , for@ @to sewe hym , to se , and to
here all +tat he dude and preched ; CMMIRK-M34,79.2092

for +tay schuld bere wyttenes to +te pepull aftyr hys assencyon of all
+tyng +tat he dyde . CMMIRK-M34,79.2093

For +te Iewes werne so hard a+geyne hym yn all +tyng , +tat +tay wold
not beleue no+tyng +tat he dyd ; CMMIRK-M34,79.2094

but +tat most be preuet by wytnes . CMMIRK-M34,79.2095

Then was Iudas Skaryot on of +tos twelfe +tat Crist had chosen to hym .
CMMIRK-M34,79.2096

+Tat Iudas had befor slayne his owne fadyr , and bylayn hys owne modyr ;
CMMIRK-M34,79.2097

and so com to Crist , to be won of hys dyscypuls . CMMIRK-M34,79.2098

+Ten Crist made hym on of hys dyscypull . CMMIRK-M34,79.2099

But , for he was wont before to stele , and cow+te not leue his old wone
, he wex wery of Cristys holy lyuyng ; CMMIRK-M34,79.2100

and for heye couetyse of money , he sold his Lord Ihesu Crist to +te
Iewes for thrytty penyes . CMMIRK-M34,79.2101

And so , when he segh +tat Crist was demed to +te deth by hys sale ,
anon he fell yn dyspayre , CMMIRK-M34,79.2102

and +gede anon , CMMIRK-M34,79.2103

and hongyd hymselfe wyth +te grenne of a rope . CMMIRK-M34,79.2104

So , by ryght dome , +tat +trote +tat spake +te wordes of traytery
a+geynys his Lord , +tat +trote was ystrangled wyth +te grynne of a rope
; CMMIRK-M34,79.2105

for he wold haue sayde mony foule wordys by his Lord aftyr his de+te ,
+tat dyd so foule by hym yn his lyue . CMMIRK-M34,79.2106

And for +te fend myght not draw his soule out by +te mo+te +tat had
kyssed +te mou+te of Godys sonne so late befor , +terfor he barst hys
wombe , CMMIRK-M34,79.2107

and outsched hys guttys , CMMIRK-M34,79.2108

and drew out his soule +tat way , CMMIRK-M34,79.2109

and bar hyt to hell . CMMIRK-M34,79.2110

But +get , for bycause +tat God ys so good yn hymself , and woll +tat
yche man haue his good dedes rewardud , and +tat yche synne be
yponysched , CMMIRK-M34,79.2111

<P_80>

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,80.2114

<$$heading>

We reden +tat Saynt Brandan , as +te schyppyd in +te see , he sawe +tys
Iudas syttyng on a stone yn +te see , and a clo+te hongyng befor hym
+tat was putte yn +te watyr , and bete hym yn +te face +gorne and thykke
. CMMIRK-M34,80.2116

+Ten Brendan went hyt had ben some holy man , +tat had suffred +ter for
penaunce , CMMIRK-M34,80.2117

and asked hym yn +te name of God what he was . CMMIRK-M34,80.2118

Then vnswared he CMMIRK-M34,80.2119

and sayde : ' I am Iudas , Godis traytour , +tat haue +tis place of
Godys curtesy , for refreschyng of +te gret hete +tat I suffred wythyn ;
CMMIRK-M34,80.2120

and for no gret merete +tat euer I deseruet , me thynkyth I am yn
paradyse , whyll I am here . ' CMMIRK-M34,80.2121

Then sayde Brandan : ' Why hast +tou +tat stone vndyr +te ,
CMMIRK-M34,80.2122

and why betyth +tat clo+te +te yn +ti face ? ' CMMIRK-M34,80.2123

Then sayde he +tat he layde +te stone yn a hegh-way +ter@ @as +te comyn
pepull schuld trede +teron , and be esyd +terby ; CMMIRK-M34,80.2124

and +te clo+te he +gaue to a mesyll . CMMIRK-M34,80.2125

' But for +te clo+te was ano+ter mannys , and noght myn ; +terfor hit
do+te but halfe +te refreschyng as hit schuld , had hit byn myn owne .
' CMMIRK-M34,80.2126

Then sayde Brandan : ' How long has +tou +tys ees ? '
CMMIRK-M34,80.2127

+Ten sayde he : ' Yche Sonenday from euensong to euensong , and from
mydwyntyr to +te XII day , and yn +te Passyon-day of oure lady , and in
Candylmasse-day . ' CMMIRK-M34,80.2128

Then Brendan +tonkyd God +tat ys soo mercyabull yn all +tyng ,
CMMIRK-M34,80.2129

and bade hys felawes rowe fast , +tat +tay wer goon ; CMMIRK-M34,80.2130

for +tay schuld here ty+tyngys sone . CMMIRK-M34,80.2131

And +terwyth come out of an hull +tat was bysyde , mony fyndes
CMMIRK-M34,80.2132

and casten blomes of brennyng yerne ynto +te see . CMMIRK-M34,80.2133

Aftyr +tat +te see brent in ych syde of hom ; CMMIRK-M34,80.2134

but God kept hom so , +tat +tay haden non harme . CMMIRK-M34,80.2135

+Ten for bycause +tat +tis Iudas was won of +te XII apostoles , and +te
nowmbyr of hom most nede be fulfyllyd aftyr +tat Crist was styed ynto
Heuen , +te eleuon apostyll wyth o+tyr mony of Crystys dyscypuls weren
togedyr yn a plase . CMMIRK-M34,80.2136

+Ten sayde Petyr to all : ' Good men and bretherne , hit ys knowen to
you how +tat Iudas was on of vs twelfe apostols , CMMIRK-M34,80.2137

and fore bycause +tat +tylke nombyr may not be vnfulle , hit ys nedfull
to chese on of +tes men , +tat haue ben wyth our Lord Ihesu from +te
tyme +tat he was folowed ynto +te tyme +tat he stegh ynto Heuen , for@
@to be wyttenes of his vprist wyth vs . CMMIRK-M34,80.2138

Then +tay setten out two men , Iosep <P_81> Barsabas and Mathy ,
CMMIRK-M34,81.2139

and layden loot apon hom , prayng God to chese , whedyr he wold haue of
hom two ; CMMIRK-M34,81.2140

and soo +te lote fell apon Mathy , CMMIRK-M34,81.2141

and was nombyrt wyth +te o+ter aleuen apostolis . CMMIRK-M34,81.2142

Then went Mathy anon ynto Iure , CMMIRK-M34,81.2143

and preched Godis worde ; CMMIRK-M34,81.2144

and for he had gret grace for@ @to do myracles , he turned moche pepull
to +te fay+te . CMMIRK-M34,81.2145

Then was +te fende sory , CMMIRK-M34,81.2146

and aperyd to +te byschop of +te Iewes lawe in lykenes of a +gong chyld
wyth long herus , and hory , and vnsemely , CMMIRK-M34,81.2147

and bade hom take Mathy , and do hym to +te de+te ; CMMIRK-M34,81.2148

othyr elles he wold turne all +te pepull to Cristys faythe ,
CMMIRK-M34,81.2149

' and +ten schull +ge be sette at noght , and be wreches , and begers
euermor aftyr . ' CMMIRK-M34,81.2150

Then +tys byschopys werne wood wroth , CMMIRK-M34,81.2151

and senden men to take Mathy ; CMMIRK-M34,81.2152

and so +tay dydyn , CMMIRK-M34,81.2153

and bonden his hondys byhynd hym , CMMIRK-M34,81.2154

and casten a rope about his necke , CMMIRK-M34,81.2155

and laddon hym ynto pryson , CMMIRK-M34,81.2156

and bonden hym wyth chaynes fast . CMMIRK-M34,81.2157

But +tat nyght aftyr our Lord Ihesu Crist come to hym wyth moche lyght ,
CMMIRK-M34,81.2158

and lowsed his hondys . CMMIRK-M34,81.2159

And when he had wele confortyd hym , he openyd +te pryson-dyrre ,
CMMIRK-M34,81.2160

and bade hym go , and preche +te faythe , and spare for no man ;
CMMIRK-M34,81.2161

and soo he dyd . CMMIRK-M34,81.2162

Then , as he preched , +ter wer som +tat a+geynestoden hym ,
CMMIRK-M34,81.2163

and letted o+ter +tat wold haue turned to +te faythe .
CMMIRK-M34,81.2164

Then sayde Mathy : ' Y tell you befor +tat +ge schull falle done qwycke
ynto hell ' ; CMMIRK-M34,81.2165

and +terwythe anon , yn syght of all +te pepull , +te erth openyd ,
CMMIRK-M34,81.2166

and sowoluyd hom yn body and soule , CMMIRK-M34,81.2167

and neuer was more seyn of hom . CMMIRK-M34,81.2168

+Ten was +te pepull sore aferde of +tat syght , CMMIRK-M34,81.2169

and turned to +te fay+te , a gret nowmbyr of hom . CMMIRK-M34,81.2170

Then , when +te byschopys herden hereof , +tay maden to take Mathy
eftsones , CMMIRK-M34,81.2171

and set hom to throw stonys at hym ; CMMIRK-M34,81.2172

and so +tay dyddyn . CMMIRK-M34,81.2173

And when he was negh +te de+te , he bade cristen men bury +te stones
+tat he was slayne wyth , wyth hym yn his graue , yn wytnes of his
martyrdome ; CMMIRK-M34,81.2174

and he knelyd don , CMMIRK-M34,81.2175

and hef vp his hondys to God , CMMIRK-M34,81.2176

and +gaf vp +te gost . CMMIRK-M34,81.2177

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,81.2179

<$$heading>

Rondylf Hyldon , monke of Chestyr , telly+te yn hys cronyclys ano+tyr
myracull CMMIRK-M34,81.2181

and seyth : When Saynt Wolstan vyset hys byschopryche , men broghten a
mon befor hym +tat dyd hys nehtbur moch doses , and woll neuer be yn pes
, prayng +tat holy <P_82> byschop +tat he wold chast hym .
CMMIRK-M34,82.2182

But when +tys byschop had preched hym al +tat he cou+te , and fonde hym
euer +te lengur +te wors , +ten he prayde to Seynt Mathy to schewe his
myracull to hym and yeve him that he was wor+ty . CMMIRK-M34,82.2183

Then anon , yn@ @s_yght of all men , +ter come of +te erthe two fendes
wyth two brennyng howkes , CMMIRK-M34,82.2184

and pullet +tys man quyk don ynto hell ; wherby +te pepull was well
comfortet , and euer aftyr lyued yn pes and rest . CMMIRK-M34,82.2185

And so y pray to God +tat we may . CMMIRK-M34,82.2186

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,82.2187

<heading>

DE DOMINICA IN QUADRAGESIMA SERMO BREUIS . CMMIRK-M34,82.2189

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , +tys day ys called in holy chyrch Sonday yn
Quadragesin . CMMIRK-M34,82.2191

+Ten ys quadragesin a nowmbur of fourty ; CMMIRK-M34,82.2192

for fro +tis day to Astyr ben forty dayes +tat byth +te te+tedayes of
+te +gere . CMMIRK-M34,82.2193

And for ych man dothe forfet more o+ter las , +terfor , for@ @to make
satysfaccyon for +tat gylt , yche man ys holden by +te lawe of holy
chyrch to fast +tes fourty dayes , outtaken hom +tat +te lawe dyspensyth
wyth for nede . CMMIRK-M34,82.2194

That ben chyldyr wythyn xxi +gere , woymen wyth chyld , old men passed
age and myghtles to fast , pylgrymys , and seke , and pore , and +tes
+tat labryn sore fore hor lyuelod : CMMIRK-M34,82.2195

+tus +te lawe dyspensyth wyth apon hore concyens . CMMIRK-M34,82.2196

+Ten for bycause +tat Sonday ys no day of fastyng , +terfor +ge schull
begyn your fast at Aske-Wanysday , and +tat day com to holy chyrche ,
and take askes at +te prestys hond , and ber forth in your hert +tat he
sayth to you , when he layth askes on your hedys . CMMIRK-M34,82.2197

+Ten he saythe +tus : ' Man , thynke +tat +tou art but eskys ,
CMMIRK-M34,82.2198

and to eskys +tou schalt a+geyne turne . ' CMMIRK-M34,82.2199

+Ten byn +ter +tre dyuerse skylles why +ge schull fast +tes fourty dayes
. CMMIRK-M34,82.2200

On ys , bycause as +te gospell of +tys day telly+te , how +tat +te Holy
Gost lad our Lord ynto desert +tat was bytwyx Ierusalem and Ieryco ,
for@ @to be temptyd of +te fende . CMMIRK-M34,82.2201

And was +ter fourty dayes and so mony nyghtys fastyng for our loue ,
schouyng to vs and all cristen men and pepull +te uertu and +te mede
+tat comyth of fastyng ; +te wheche uertu and mede ben expressed yn +te
<P_83> preface yn +te masse +tat ys sayde in holy chyrche +tes fourty
dayes . CMMIRK-M34,83.2202

Ther ys sayde +tus : ' +Te bodely fast +trostys don vysis ,
CMMIRK-M34,83.2203

and lyfty+te manys hert to God , CMMIRK-M34,83.2204

and +gevyth hym vertu and mede ; CMMIRK-M34,83.2205

hit +geuyth hym mede in Heuen +tat euer schall last , and uertu yn er+te
gret . ' CMMIRK-M34,83.2206

For , as clerkys telly+te and techyth , for +te spolde of a fasting man
may sle any eddyr bodyly . CMMIRK-M34,83.2207

Then , moche mor , he schall sle +te myght of +te deuyll , +tat ys +te
old eddyr , +te fende of hell , +tat come to Eue yn paradyce in lyckenes
of an eddyr , for@ @to tempt hur of gloteny , of vayne glory , and of
couetyce . CMMIRK-M34,83.2208

Ryght so he come to Crist yn lykenes of a man , lest he had ben knowyn ,
CMMIRK-M34,83.2209

and temptyd hym of +tat same synne . CMMIRK-M34,83.2210

Thus , as +te gospell telly+te , when Crist had fast so long , and was
by kynd of manhed anhongred , +te fende come to hym , CMMIRK-M34,83.2211

and schewed hym stonys , CMMIRK-M34,83.2212

and sayde : ' Yf +tou be Godys sonne , make +tes stonys brede ' ; +tat
ryght as Eue , when scho sygh +te appull , was raght for@ @to ete +terof
, ryght so he had hope for@ @to haue made Crist , and so by gloteny haue
eten of +te brede : CMMIRK-M34,83.2213

for gloteny ys not yn a manys mete , but yn foule appetyte .
CMMIRK-M34,83.2214

+Ten sayd Crist to hym : ' A man schall not only lyue by bred ; but yche
word +tat go+te out of Godys mow+te . ' CMMIRK-M34,83.2215

+Ten +te fende toke Crist , CMMIRK-M34,83.2216

and set hym on a pynacull on +te tempull , CMMIRK-M34,83.2217

and sayde : ' Yf +tou be God sonne , bryng +tyselfe downe wythout monys
helpe , +tat I may know +te for Godys sonne . ' CMMIRK-M34,83.2218

Then sayde Crist : ' Tou schalt not tempte God , +ty Lorde . '
CMMIRK-M34,83.2219

+get , +te +tryd tyme , he toke hym , CMMIRK-M34,83.2220

and set hym on a hegh hulle , CMMIRK-M34,83.2221

and schewed hym all +te kyndomes of +te world by takyng , and all +te
ioyes of hom . CMMIRK-M34,83.2222

And when he had all told hym , he sayd +tus to hym : ' All +tes I woll
+geue +te , so +tat +tou wolt fall don to +te er+te and worschyp me . '
CMMIRK-M34,83.2223

Then he vnswared and sayde : ' Goo on bak , Sathan , CMMIRK-M34,83.2224

hit ys wryttyn : +tou schalt worschyp +ty Lord God , and only serve hym
. ' CMMIRK-M34,83.2225

+Ten +te fende lafte hym , CMMIRK-M34,83.2226

and angelys comyn , CMMIRK-M34,83.2227

and broghten hym mete . CMMIRK-M34,83.2228

Then , for +te fende ys most bysy for@ @to make yche man to gylt yn +tes
+tre synnes , most +tes fourty dayes , +terfor you nedythe +tre helpys
a+geynys hom ; CMMIRK-M34,83.2229

+tat ben +tese : a+geynys gloteny , abstynens ; a+geynys pryde , mekenes
; a+geynes couetyse , largenes . CMMIRK-M34,83.2230

Then a+geyne gloteny +ge most fast , +tat ys , not ete befor tyme ; but
abyde tyll none of +te daye . CMMIRK-M34,83.2231

And when +ge byn at your mete , ete +ge not <P_84> frechudly , no more
+ten ano+ter tyme , CMMIRK-M34,84.2232

ny sytte for lust no lengyr +ten ano+ter day , CMMIRK-M34,84.2233

and be+te well war +tat +ge fast , bo+te day and nyght , as Crist dude .
CMMIRK-M34,84.2234

Ther byth mony +tat fastyn +te day at on mele ; CMMIRK-M34,84.2235

but +tay wyll sytte moche of +te nyght , and drynke , and soo full hor
wombe wyth drynke as well as wyth mete ; CMMIRK-M34,84.2236

and +tay +tat don so , don gloteny . CMMIRK-M34,84.2237

And also +ge most fast from all maner flesch mete and whyt-mete ;
CMMIRK-M34,84.2238

for as Ierom says : ' Eggys and chese byn molton flesche ,
CMMIRK-M34,84.2239

and mylke ys wyth blod . ' CMMIRK-M34,84.2240

And for@ @to shew ensampull of holy chyrch , takyth hede on +te prest
+tat go+te to masse , +tat ys , to Godys bord , how he at hys bygynnyng
bow+te his knees to God , and byddy+te all o+ter do soo ;
CMMIRK-M34,84.2241

and also , at +te end of hys masse , he byddu+te all men bow herre hedys
to God . CMMIRK-M34,84.2242

So do +ge when +ge gon to your Lord : CMMIRK-M34,84.2243

furst worschip +ge God wyt a Pater Noster and an Aue o+ter mo , as your
deuocyon ys , CMMIRK-M34,84.2244

and maketh a crosse on your mete , CMMIRK-M34,84.2245

and aftyr mete +tonkyth God wyth ano+ter Pater Noster and an Aue , +tat
euer sendyth you mete at your nede . CMMIRK-M34,84.2246

+Tus +ge schull a+geynes gloteny . CMMIRK-M34,84.2247

And a+geyn vayn glory +tat ys yn mannys hert , +ge most fast
wythyn-forth gostly . CMMIRK-M34,84.2248

+ge schull put away all euell +toghtes of heghnes , and haue +toghtys of
lones . CMMIRK-M34,84.2249

+Tenky+te how a man ys borne febull , and seke , and naked , and pore ;
and how he go+te yche day a journay toward his deth , woll he , n@ @yll
he ; and how +tat , at +te last , dethe comy+te and casty+te hym downe
seke yn hys bed , gronyng and sykyng , and sone casty+te vp hys mete and
hys drynke , and turnet hyde and hew ; and how his brethe stinkyth , hys
lyppys wexyn blew , hys face pale , hys een +golow , hys mow+te fro+tys
: and so , at +te last , wyth depe +goskyng +geldyth vp +te gost .
CMMIRK-M34,84.2250

Then lythe +ter but a stynkyng stoke of +gerthe , CMMIRK-M34,84.2251

and ys hyed to be putte ynto +te er+te , and laft +ter , and sone
for+getyn . CMMIRK-M34,84.2252

Hold +tys yn your mynd ; and I hope +tys schall put away pryde .
CMMIRK-M34,84.2253

A+geynes couetyse +ge schull fast wythyn and wythout .
CMMIRK-M34,84.2254

Wythyn : for oure bysy +toghtys of $worldys occupacyon and of hardnes ,
to hold good a+geynes Godys byddyng . CMMIRK-M34,84.2255

Also wythout : CMMIRK-M34,84.2256

your hondys +tat han ben ay redy for@ @to take , now +ge schull make hom
redy for@ @to reche +te pore mete , and drynke , and +tat +tay han nede
to ; CMMIRK-M34,84.2257

for +te hondys be not wor+ty to heue vp to God , +tat be not wont to
reche +te pore mete . CMMIRK-M34,84.2258

And $+tilke folke +tat han ben bysy erly and late to walke aboute
worldely good , now schuld be <P_85> bysy , alsoo , to vyset pore and
seke , and goo on pylgrymage , and goo to +te chyrch , to here Godys
seruyce . CMMIRK-M34,85.2259

And +ge +tat ha+te before fast for chynchnes , now schall spare on hys
mou+te , to +geue suche +tat haue nede . CMMIRK-M34,85.2260

Thys fast plesyth God more CMMIRK-M34,85.2261

and helpeth +te soule hegly ; CMMIRK-M34,85.2262

for ryght as watyr quenchyth fyre , ryght so almys-dede quenchyth synne
. Wherfor +te profyt sayth +tus : ' +geue allmes , and all +tyng schall
be clene to you , soo +tat hyt be +geuen wyth good wyll . '
CMMIRK-M34,85.2263

But , mor harme ys , +ter byn mony +tat han mor lust to fede hor owne
bodyes wyth lusty metys , and drynkes , and daynte+ts , +ten for@ @to
+geue a pore man a schyue of bred . CMMIRK-M34,85.2264

<P_86>

<heading>

20 . CMMIRK-M34,86.2267

DE DOMINICA PRIMA QUADRAGESIME . CMMIRK-M34,86.2268

<$$heading>

Hortamur vos , ne in vacuum graciam Dei recipiatis . Corintheos VI=to=
. CMMIRK-M34,86.2270

Good men and woymen , +tes wordes +tat I haue sayde yn Lateyn , byn +tus
to say yn Englysch : ' We amonechen you , +tat +ge take not +te grace of
God yn vayn . ' CMMIRK-M34,86.2271

+Tes ben +te wordes of Seynt Paule , Cristys holy apostull , +tat ben
red yn +te pystyll of +tys day ; by +te wheche word +tys holy apostull
chargyth all good pepull , +tat +tay take hede what grace God sendyth
hom , and +tat +tay taken not +tat grace yn vayn . CMMIRK-M34,86.2272

God +geuyth grace to man all tymes ; CMMIRK-M34,86.2273

but for a man nedy+te more hys grace +tys tyme +ten ano+ter , +terfor ,
of hys hegh mercy , he +geuyth now-dayes more habundant of Lenton +ten
any o+ter tyme . The whech grace he partu+te yn +tre wayes , +tat ys to
say : in way of gracyous abydyng , in way of gracyous demyng , and yn
way of gracyous amendys makyng . CMMIRK-M34,86.2274

+Tes +tre wayes God sendyth hys grace to you now . Wherfor , ryght as
Seynt Paule monysche+te hys dyscypuls , ryght soo I monyssch you +tat
ben my chyldyr yn God , +tat +ge take not +tys grace of God yn vayn .
CMMIRK-M34,86.2275

+Ge haue a comyn sayng among you , CMMIRK-M34,86.2276

and sayn +tat Godys grace ys worth a new fayre . CMMIRK-M34,86.2277

+Ten takyth hede how moche worth Godys grace ys ; CMMIRK-M34,86.2278

for +tagh any of you had as moche gold as a fayre ys worth , but he had
Godys grace wyth hyt , hyt schuld turne hym more ynto schenschip +ten
ynto worschyp . CMMIRK-M34,86.2279

+Tus +ge may se by veray reson +tat Godys grace ys more wor+ty +ten any
fayre . CMMIRK-M34,86.2280

But +get +ge schull know for+ter , CMMIRK-M34,86.2281

for , +tagh a man had neuer soo moche riches and prorperyte here +tat
comyth all of Godys grace , but yf he take +tat grace wele and ples his
God wythall , hyt schall turne hym ynto dampnacyon . CMMIRK-M34,86.2282

But for +te pore playnyth on +te ryche , and sayn +tay ben vnkynd to God
, and don not as God byddyth hom doo , and full eldyr seen a mote yn
ano+ter manys ee +tat con not se a beem yn hor one : +terfor +ge schall
knowe wele +tat hyt ys a specyall grace of God , when he makyth a man
ryche and som mon pore . CMMIRK-M34,86.2283

He maky+te hom rych , +tat +tay wyth hor ryches schuld socour +te pore
yn hor nede , and soo wyth hor good <P_87> by hom Heuen ;
CMMIRK-M34,87.2284

and som he makyth pore , +tat hor pouerte schall be hor saluacyon .
CMMIRK-M34,87.2285

For God knowe+te wele , yf +tay wern rych , +tay wold for+gete hor God ,
and soo spyll homselfe . Wherfor we amonyschen yow , bo+te ryche and
pore , +tat +ge take not +tys grace of God yn ydull nor yn vayn .
CMMIRK-M34,87.2286

But he +tat is rych , set not hys hert +terapon ; CMMIRK-M34,87.2287

but euer be yn drede , lest he myspend hit , CMMIRK-M34,87.2288

and +tonk God of hys grace . CMMIRK-M34,87.2289

And he +tat ys pore , gruche he noght a+geynes his God ,
CMMIRK-M34,87.2290

ne deme he not +te rych ; CMMIRK-M34,87.2291

but take his pouerte in pacyence CMMIRK-M34,87.2292

and +tonke God of hys grace : CMMIRK-M34,87.2293

for , at +te last , he schall haue +tat for +te best .
CMMIRK-M34,87.2294

But a man , be he ryche or be he pore , yf he haue grace of God , to se
how moche he takyth of God , and how lytyll he +geuyth agayne , verray
reson woll tell +tat he ys more wor+ty dampnacyon +ten saluacyon .
CMMIRK-M34,87.2295

But for God ys full of grace , and schewyth hys grace to all his
hondywerk , and for he knowet oure frelte , he ha+te compassyon of vs ,
CMMIRK-M34,87.2296

and +geuyth vs hys grace in abydyng of amendement . +Tat ys +ta+g thow
trespas sore a+geyne hym , he woll not smyte anon , but gracyously
abydyth ; CMMIRK-M34,87.2297

for he ha+te moche leuer for@ @to do grace then vengeans .
CMMIRK-M34,87.2298

And +tat ys for two caues , as Saynt Austyne seyth . CMMIRK-M34,87.2299

On ys , yf God had don vengeans , anon the world had ben endyd mony a
day agoo , and so mony had be vnborne +tat now ben holy sayntys yn Heuen
. CMMIRK-M34,87.2300

That o+ter cause ys , for@ @to schewe how full he ys of grace , and how
fayn he wyll do grace and mercy to all +tat wyll leue +te euell and take
+te good . Wherfor he sayth +tus by his prophet : ' Nolo mortem
peccatoris , sed vt magis conuertatur et viuat . ' CMMIRK-M34,87.2301

' I woll not , ' he says , ' +tat a synfull man be ded ,
CMMIRK-M34,87.2302

but I woll raythyr +tat he turne to good lyue . ' CMMIRK-M34,87.2303

+Tus +ge heryth how gracyous God ys yn abydyng . Wherfor I monyssche
you +tat +ge take not +tys grace yn vayn ; CMMIRK-M34,87.2304

but thenkyth well how he hathe spared you from Astyr hydyrto , +ter@ @as
he myght , by ryght , haue smytyn you wyth hys swerde of vengeans , ych
day . CMMIRK-M34,87.2305

For , as Saynt Anselm sayth , +te lest synne +tat a man doth , hyt
vnworschypyth God . CMMIRK-M34,87.2306

Then , yf a man dyd any +tyng +tat vnworschypyd his worldly-kyng , he
wer worthy to take hys deth ; CMMIRK-M34,87.2307

moche more ys a man worthy +te deth +tat vnworschypyth hym +tat ys Kyng
of Heuen , and Lord and Kyng ouer all kynges . CMMIRK-M34,87.2308

But ryght as he passyth all yn dygnyte , ryght soo he passyth all yn
grace and <P_88> bonte . CMMIRK-M34,88.2309

But +togh +ge felen hym gracyous , be neuer +te boldyr to lye yn synne ;
CMMIRK-M34,88.2310

bot hyth you for@ @to clanse you +terof . CMMIRK-M34,88.2311

For +tagh he abyde long , at +te last , he woll smyte suche +tat woll
not amende hom ; CMMIRK-M34,88.2312

and when he smytyth , he smytyth sore . CMMIRK-M34,88.2313

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,88.2315

<$$heading>

I rede +tat +ter was a knyght +tat had no rentys of his owne , but he
had geton moche good yn werres . CMMIRK-M34,88.2317

And when he hadde all spend out , he +gode CMMIRK-M34,88.2318

and weddyd a lady of +tat contray +tat was rych ynogh ;
CMMIRK-M34,88.2319

and +togh he was pore , he was a semly man of person .
CMMIRK-M34,88.2320

Scho sayd to hym +tus : ' I wot wele +tat +tou art a semly man of body ;
CMMIRK-M34,88.2321

but for +tou art pore , y may not , for schame , take +te , but yf +tou
haue moche gold o+ter mony rentys . CMMIRK-M34,88.2322

But for +tou has no gold , do as I teche +te , CMMIRK-M34,88.2323

and gete gold . CMMIRK-M34,88.2324

Goo ynto suche a place +ter mony rych marchandys comen , and gete +te
gold , and +ten +tou schalt haue me . ' CMMIRK-M34,88.2325

Then went he +tedyr . CMMIRK-M34,88.2326

And hit hapend +tat +ter come a ryche marchand +tat way ;
CMMIRK-M34,88.2327

and he anon toke hym , CMMIRK-M34,88.2328

and bar forth hys gold , CMMIRK-M34,88.2329

and slogh hym , CMMIRK-M34,88.2330

and buryet hym , CMMIRK-M34,88.2331

and +ten aftyr come to +te lady , CMMIRK-M34,88.2332

and sayde : ' Lo +te som of gold I haue geton of suche a man and buryet
hym +ter . ' CMMIRK-M34,88.2333

Then sayde +te lady : ' Go a+gene to-nyght CMMIRK-M34,88.2334

and loke , yf +tou oght here . ' CMMIRK-M34,88.2335

Then +gede he +tat nyght CMMIRK-M34,88.2336

and stode by +te ded graue . CMMIRK-M34,88.2337

And at mydnyght +ter come a lyght from Heuen downe to +te graue ;
CMMIRK-M34,88.2338

and +ten +te graue opened , CMMIRK-M34,88.2339

and +te cors sate vp , CMMIRK-M34,88.2340

and helde vp his hondys to God , CMMIRK-M34,88.2341

and sayde : ' Lorde +tat art ryghtwys juge , +tou wreke me apon +tis man
+tat ha+te +tus falsly slayne me for my trew catayle . '
CMMIRK-M34,88.2342

And +terwyth come a voyce from Heuen CMMIRK-M34,88.2343

and sayde : ' Thys day +trytty wyntyr , +tou shalt haue vengeans ' ;
CMMIRK-M34,88.2344

and +ten +te cors +tonkyd God , CMMIRK-M34,88.2345

and lay downe yn hys graue a+geyne . CMMIRK-M34,88.2346

+Ten was +tys knyght sore aferd , CMMIRK-M34,88.2347

and went to +tys lady , CMMIRK-M34,88.2348

and told hur all , and how +te voyce sayde how , +tat day +trytty wyntyr
, he schuld haue vengeance . CMMIRK-M34,88.2349

Then sayde +te lady : ' +Ge , ' qwod scho , ' moche may fall yn +trytty
wyntyr ; CMMIRK-M34,88.2350

goo we togedyr CMMIRK-M34,88.2351

and be weddyd ! ' CMMIRK-M34,88.2352

So +tay lyuedyn yfere , xx=ti= +gere , yn prosperyte and wele ;
CMMIRK-M34,88.2353

but euer +tis knyght was adred of +tys vengeans , CMMIRK-M34,88.2354

and sayde to +te lady : ' Now xx=ti= +gere byn pased ,
CMMIRK-M34,88.2355

and +te x woll hye fast . CMMIRK-M34,88.2356

What is +ty best cownsell ? ' CMMIRK-M34,88.2357

+Ten sayde scho : ' We woll make +tys castell als <P_89> sykur and as
strong as we may ; CMMIRK-M34,89.2358

and +tat same day , we schull gedyr all oure frendes , and stuffe vs
wyth men ynow ; CMMIRK-M34,89.2359

and soo we schall scape wele ynogh . CMMIRK-M34,89.2360

And soo +tay dyddyn . CMMIRK-M34,89.2361

When +te day come , +tay gedyrt a grete some of men ynto +te castell ,
CMMIRK-M34,89.2362

and set hom to +te mete , CMMIRK-M34,89.2363

and maden all +te myrthe +tat +tay cowthe . CMMIRK-M34,89.2364

+Ten was +ter an harper , CMMIRK-M34,89.2365

and harpyd allway at +te mete . CMMIRK-M34,89.2366

But , for +ter may no wyked spyryte come +ter , ne haue no pouste als
fere as +te harpe ys herd , +ter come out of +te kychon a bro+tell
bowdet wyth gres , CMMIRK-M34,89.2367

and rubbyd hys stryngys wyth hys bawdy hondys . CMMIRK-M34,89.2368

Then was +tys harper wondyr wroth , CMMIRK-M34,89.2369

and wyth hys harpe wold haue smyton thys brothell ; CMMIRK-M34,89.2370

bot for he flagh fast away , +te harper suet hym out of +te castell ;
CMMIRK-M34,89.2371

and when he come out , +tis brothell vaneschyd away .
CMMIRK-M34,89.2372

Then +tys harper turned a+geyne , CMMIRK-M34,89.2373

and sygh +tys castell synke ynto +te er+te , all on fyre .
CMMIRK-M34,89.2374

Thus +ge may se , +tagh God abyde longe , at +te last he smytyth sore .
Wherfor I amonysch you , +tat +ge take not hys grace of abydyng yn vayne
; CMMIRK-M34,89.2375

bot bythynkyth you wele of your mysdedys , CMMIRK-M34,89.2376

and comyth by_tyme CMMIRK-M34,89.2377

and clansyth you . CMMIRK-M34,89.2378

For God +geuyth you all an hegh grace of demyng ; CMMIRK-M34,89.2379

for +ter@ @as he ys , ys treu+t and ryghtwysnes , CMMIRK-M34,89.2380

and may not deme but wyth ryghtwysnes . CMMIRK-M34,89.2381

And +ten schall non scape vndampned ; CMMIRK-M34,89.2382

for , as Iop saythe : ' +Togh we wold $stryve wyth him , we may not
vnswar of on good dede for a_+tousand +tat he +geuyth vs . '
CMMIRK-M34,89.2383

Thus , for he sees +tat no man may scape his dome vndampned , +terfor he
, of hys hegh grace , +geuyth hys power to a curatour , to deme all +tat
comen to hym , hauyng ferme and stabull all +tat comyth to hym ; as +tus
+ter schall no good dede be vnquyte , nor no euell vnponysched .
CMMIRK-M34,89.2384

Therfor yf a curatour +geue +te more penaunce +ten +te nedyth , +tat ys
more , hit schall be quyte , and stonde +te in gret joye of encrese
byfor God ; CMMIRK-M34,89.2385

+gyf he +geue +te euen , +tou art quyte ; CMMIRK-M34,89.2386

but yf he +geue +te to lytyll , +ten schall hyt be fulfylled yn
purgatory . CMMIRK-M34,89.2387

Soo +tat a man schall neuer be dampned for no synne +tat he ys mekly
schryuen of , and takyth hys dome mekely of hys schryftfadyr ;
CMMIRK-M34,89.2388

for all +tyng +tat ys not clansed here by schryft and penance , schall
be clansed yn purgatory . CMMIRK-M34,89.2389

For when +tou comyst to schryfte , +tou comyst for@ @to be demed of thy
<P_90> schryft-fadyr ; wherfor God woll neuer deme +te twy for on +tyng
. CMMIRK-M34,90.2390

Then take hede wheche an hegh grace God +geuyth you yn demyng , when he
ordeynet a synfull man , as +tow art , to be +ty domysman ;
CMMIRK-M34,90.2391

for all ys yn hegh helpe to you , to +geue boldnes to you to telle out
all +tat lythe yn your hert , and no+tyng for@ @to hyde ;
CMMIRK-M34,90.2392

for all +tat ys not now helyd yn schryft , schall be , at +te day of
dome , knowen to all +te world wyth moche confusyon .
CMMIRK-M34,90.2393

And +ten schall he be demed of God +terfor ynto +te fyre of helle .
CMMIRK-M34,90.2394

+Terfor +te apostull sayth +tus : ' Horrendum est incidere in manus Dei
omnipotentis ' ; that ys to say : ' Hit ys horryble and grysly to falle
ynto Godys hondys . ' Wherfor I amonysch you +tat +ge take not +tis
grace of demyng yn vayn , CMMIRK-M34,90.2395

but schryuyth you clene , CMMIRK-M34,90.2396

and leue noght yn your hert . CMMIRK-M34,90.2397

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,90.2399

<$$heading>

For +tus I rede of a woman +tat had done an horrybull synne , and myght
neuer , for schame , schryue hyr +terof . CMMIRK-M34,90.2401

And oft , when ho come to schryf , scho was yn purpos for@ @to haue ben
schryuen ; CMMIRK-M34,90.2402

but euer +te fend put such a schame yn hur hert , +tat scho had neuer
grace to clanse hur +terofe . CMMIRK-M34,90.2403

Then , on a nyght , as scho lay yn hur bed , and +toght moch on +tat
synne , Ihesu Crist come to hur CMMIRK-M34,90.2404

and sayde : ' My doghtyr , why wol +tou not schew me +ty hert , and
schryue +te of +tat synne +tat +tou lyse yn ? ' CMMIRK-M34,90.2405

' Lord , ' quod scho , ' I may not , for schame . ' CMMIRK-M34,90.2406

+Ten sayde Crist : ' Schew me +ty hond ' ; CMMIRK-M34,90.2407

and toke hur hond , CMMIRK-M34,90.2408

and put hit ynto hys syde , CMMIRK-M34,90.2409

and sayde , CMMIRK-M34,90.2410

and drogh hit all blody out : CMMIRK-M34,90.2411

' Be +tou no more aschamed to opyn +ty hert to me , +ten I am to opon my
syde to +te . ' CMMIRK-M34,90.2412

Then was +tys woman $agrysed of +te blod , CMMIRK-M34,90.2413

and wold haue weschyn hit away ; but scho myght not , be no way , tyll
scho had schryuen hur of +tat synne . CMMIRK-M34,90.2414

Then , when scho was schryuen , anon +te hond was clene as +tat o+tyr .
CMMIRK-M34,90.2415

+Tus God do+te grace yn esy demyng . CMMIRK-M34,90.2416

He do+te alsoo grace yn amendys makyng . CMMIRK-M34,90.2417

Whyll for a lytyll penance +tat a man do+te here , God for+geuyth hym
+te gret penance yn helle , and so settyth a man at +te large to do hys
penance , and not yn destresse ; but +geuyth hym chose whe+tyr he wyll
do mekely , wyth good wyll , o+ter no . CMMIRK-M34,90.2418

And yf he do mekely hys penance , he wyll for+geue hym hys gult , and
cheressche hym <P_91> more +ten he dyd byfore , and avaunse hym yn +te
court of Heuen . CMMIRK-M34,91.2419

And +togh he wold do no penance , but prudly put hit away , +get , ynto
hys deth-day , he abydyth from +gere to +gere , to loke +gyf he wyll
amende ; CMMIRK-M34,91.2420

and +gyf he wyll not , he wyll make bynde hym hond and fote , and cast
hym ynto prison , +tat ys , ynto +te paynes of helle .
CMMIRK-M34,91.2421

And soo ys wele worthy . CMMIRK-M34,91.2422

Thus , good men , +ge haue herd how +tat God geuyth you grace yn +tre
wayes : yn gracyous abydyng , yn gracyous demyng , and yn gracyous
amendys makyng . CMMIRK-M34,91.2423

For gracyously he abydyth CMMIRK-M34,91.2424

and woll not take vengeans anon , CMMIRK-M34,91.2425

but euer abydyth amendement ; CMMIRK-M34,91.2426

and gracyously he woll +tat a man be demed wyth mercy and not to +te
vtmast here ; CMMIRK-M34,91.2427

and gracyously he takyth a monnys amendys , whyll for penaunce of a
schort tyme , he for+geuyth +te penaunce +tat euer schall last .
CMMIRK-M34,91.2428

And aftyr +tat he ha+te done his penaunce , he for+geuyth hym all hys
gylt , CMMIRK-M34,91.2429

and avaunsu+te hym yn Heuen . CMMIRK-M34,91.2430

For +tus moche y presume of Godys grace and hys mercy +tat +te fende of
hell , and he wold aske mercy wyth a meke hert to God , God woll +geue
hym mercy . CMMIRK-M34,91.2431

+Ten moche more he wold +geue a man mercy +tat he sched his hert-blod
for . CMMIRK-M34,91.2432

And herof I tell an ensampull , CMMIRK-M34,91.2433

and make an end . CMMIRK-M34,91.2434

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,91.2436

<$$heading>

I rede +ter wer two chapmen dwellyng bysyde +te cyte of Norwych . Of
+te whech on was a good lyuer , and +tat o+ter a curset lyuer ;
CMMIRK-M34,91.2438

but for +tys good man durst not depart from +tat o+ter , as oft as he
durst , he conseylet hym to schryue hym , and amend hym of hys lyuyng .
CMMIRK-M34,91.2439

+Ten +tat othyr wold say hyt wer tyme ynogh , for@ @to be schryuen when
he schuld dye . CMMIRK-M34,91.2440

Then hit fell aftyr so +tat +tys euell man fell seke , and lay on hys
deth-bed ; CMMIRK-M34,91.2441

and when hys felaw knew , he cryet on hym fast and +gorne to schryue hym
, and send aftyr his prest , CMMIRK-M34,91.2442

for he was bot ded . CMMIRK-M34,91.2443

But +tat o+ter ouerprudly sayde nay , he wold not ; CMMIRK-M34,91.2444

for he wyst well ynogh , God wold not for+geue hym for hys long abydyng
. CMMIRK-M34,91.2445

Then +tys good man was wondyr sory for hym , CMMIRK-M34,91.2446

and made fach prestys and frendys , and all +tat he hopyd wold haue
holpen hym , and consayle hym to goode . CMMIRK-M34,91.2447

But euer he made +te same vnswar to hom as he dyd to +te good man ,
CMMIRK-M34,91.2448

and sayde he wold not schryue hym , ne <P_92> mercy aske .
CMMIRK-M34,92.2449

+Ten had +tys man a lampe brennyng on nyghtys byfor hys bed ,
CMMIRK-M34,92.2450

and yn a bed bysyde hym lay o+ter two men , to wake hym .
CMMIRK-M34,92.2451

Then , aboute mydnyght , +tay saw Ihesu Cryst bodyly wyth blody wondys
stondyng before +te seke manys bed , CMMIRK-M34,92.2452

and sayde to hym +tus : ' My sonne , why wyll +tou not schryue +te and
put +te ynto my mercy , +tat am redy alway to +geue mercy to all hom
+tat wyll mekely aske mercy . ' CMMIRK-M34,92.2453

+Ten wyth +tat sayde he : ' For I wot well I am vnworthy to haue mercy ;
wherfor +tou wolt +geue me non mercy . ' CMMIRK-M34,92.2454

' +Gus , sonne , for so+te , aske hyt mekely and +tou schalt haue ' ;
CMMIRK-M34,92.2455

and euer he vnswaret as he dyd before . CMMIRK-M34,92.2456

Then Cryst toke out of hys wonde yn hys syde his hond full of blod
CMMIRK-M34,92.2457

and sayde : ' +Tou fendys-chyld , +tys schall be redy token bytwyx me
and +te yn +te day of dome , +tat I wold haue don +te mercy , and +tou
woldyst not . ' CMMIRK-M34,92.2458

And +terwyth cast +te blod ynto hys face ; CMMIRK-M34,92.2459

and +terwyth anon +tys seke man cryed and sayd : ' Alas ! Alas ! I am
dampnet for ay ! ' CMMIRK-M34,92.2460

and soo deyd . CMMIRK-M34,92.2461

Then +tys o+ter man was so aferd of +tys syght and of bo+te hor speche ,
+tat hit was long or he dyd ryse . CMMIRK-M34,92.2462

Then , at +te last , he ros vp , CMMIRK-M34,92.2463

and lyght a candull at +te lampe , CMMIRK-M34,92.2464

and come to hys felow , CMMIRK-M34,92.2465

and fond hym dede , and +te red blod yn hys face , and +te body blacke
as pych . CMMIRK-M34,92.2466

+Ten , for ferd , +tys man cryed for helpe ; CMMIRK-M34,92.2467

and when men comen , he told hom +te case , and how Cryst dyd to hym ,
and how he vnswared a+geyne . Wherfor y amonysch you +tat +ge take not
+tys grace yn vayne ; but schryue you clene of your synnes , and put you
fully ynto hys mercy and ynto his grace . CMMIRK-M34,92.2468

And +ten woll he take you ynto his mercy and into hys grace , and bryng
you to +te joye +tat euer schall last . To +te wheche joy God graund
you and me . CMMIRK-M34,92.2469

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,92.2470

<heading>

21 . CMMIRK-M34,92.2472

DE DOMINICA SECUNDA QUADRAGESIME . CMMIRK-M34,92.2473

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , +tys day ys +te secunde Sonday yn clene Lenton .
Wherfor , as +ge haue ben bysy all +tys +gere for@ @to make you clene
and honest wythout-forth in body , now schull +ge be as bysy , for@ @to
clanse you wythyn-forth yn your soule ; CMMIRK-M34,92.2475

for +tat ys Godys wyll +tat +ge so done . Wherfor +tys tyme of Lenton
ys <P_93> ordeynt only to scowre and to clanse your concyens of all
maner roust and ful+te of synne +tat scho ys defowled wyth , so +tat +ge
may wyth a clene consyens receyue , on Astyr-day , +te clene body of our
Lord Ihesu Crist . Wherfor Seynt Paule tellyth and techy+te you yn +te
pystyll of +tys day and sayth +tus : ' Hec est voluntas mea etc.
CMMIRK-M34,93.2476

This ys Godys wyll , +tat +ge be holy , and +tat +ge con hold your
vessell yn holynes and worschyp . CMMIRK-M34,93.2477

+Ten hit prevyth well +tat he doth God worschyp +tat busyu+t hym to
clans his vessell a+geyne +te comyng of our Lord . CMMIRK-M34,93.2478

+Ten schull +ge know well +tat +tys vessell ys noght elles , as Saynt
Bernard sayth , but a manys concyens ; CMMIRK-M34,93.2479

hyt ys a trew vessell , and a hole , CMMIRK-M34,93.2480

and kepy+te truly all +tat ys put +teryn , ynto +te day of dome .
CMMIRK-M34,93.2481

That day , yche manis vessell , +tat ys ych manys conciens , schall be
openyd , so +tat all +te world schall see what a man ha+te kepte +teryn
, be hit bettyr , be hyt worse . CMMIRK-M34,93.2482

+Ten wele schall hym be +tat bryngyth +tat day a clene vessell befor +te
justyce ! CMMIRK-M34,93.2483

Then , how schall a man kepe hys vessell clene , holy chyrche techyth by
ensampull of an holy patryark , Iacob , +tat ys red and songen of yn
holy chyrche all +tys weke , CMMIRK-M34,93.2484

and sayth +tus : ' Thys Iacob had a fadyr +tat was called Isaac , and a
modyr +tat was Rebecca . CMMIRK-M34,93.2485

+Ten had +tys Rebecca two sonnys at onys by hur husbond ,
CMMIRK-M34,93.2486

+tat on +tat was furst borne het Esav , CMMIRK-M34,93.2487

and +tat o+ter het Iacob . CMMIRK-M34,93.2488

+Ten God ordeynt so +tat +te fadyr loued Esav , CMMIRK-M34,93.2489

and +te modyr louet Iacob . ' CMMIRK-M34,93.2490

But , for +te story ys long , we schull , at +tys tyme , take +tat +tat
ys most spedfull , and leue +tat o+tyr . CMMIRK-M34,93.2491

Then God +gaf +te patryarke suche a grace +tat , what maner blessyng
+tay +gaue hor chyldyr , +tay schulden haue hit . CMMIRK-M34,93.2492

+Ten , for +tys Isaac was old , and blynd , and nygh his de+te , he bade
hys sonne Esav goo , and hunt , and gete som mete , +tat he myght ete of
, CMMIRK-M34,93.2493

and he wold +geue hym hys blessyng . CMMIRK-M34,93.2494

But when Esav was goon , by techyng of hys modyr and sleght , Iacob +tat
was +te +gongyr , gate hys fadyrys blessyng , CMMIRK-M34,93.2495

and was made ayre and lord of all his bre+tyrn , CMMIRK-M34,93.2496

and curset all +tat cursy+te hym , CMMIRK-M34,93.2497

and blessyth all +tat blessyth hym . CMMIRK-M34,93.2498

Then when Esav come home and knew +tys , he hatyd hys bro+ter Iacob ,
CMMIRK-M34,93.2499

and +to+gt to haue slayn hym . Wherfor , by consell of hys modyr , he
went out of +te contrey to a vncull of hys +tat het Laban .
CMMIRK-M34,93.2500

And as he went by +te way , he come ynto <P_94> a contre of euell-lyuyng
men , CMMIRK-M34,94.2501

and durst not herber wyth hom ; CMMIRK-M34,94.2502

but all nyght lay by +te way , CMMIRK-M34,94.2503

and layde a stone vndyr hys hed CMMIRK-M34,94.2504

and so slepyd . CMMIRK-M34,94.2505

And as he slepte , hym +toght he saw a laddyr +tat raght from +te erth
to Heuen ; CMMIRK-M34,94.2506

and God joynut to +te laddyr , and angyll goyng vp and don +te laddyr .
CMMIRK-M34,94.2507

+Ten spake God to hym CMMIRK-M34,94.2508

and sayd : ' I am God of Abraham , Isaac , and Iacob ;
CMMIRK-M34,94.2509

and woll +geue +te +tys lond , and be +ty keper yn +te way . '
CMMIRK-M34,94.2510

Then woke Iacob CMMIRK-M34,94.2511

and sayd : ' For so+te , God ys yn +tys place , CMMIRK-M34,94.2512

and I wyst not . ' CMMIRK-M34,94.2513

And so +gede forth to hys vncull , CMMIRK-M34,94.2514

and was wyth hym xx=ti= +gere his seruand , CMMIRK-M34,94.2515

and wedde hys two deghtren ; CMMIRK-M34,94.2516

+tat on het Rachel , CMMIRK-M34,94.2517

+tat o+ter het Lya . CMMIRK-M34,94.2518

And when he had byn +ter soo long , he had longyng to goo home ynto hys
one contrey , CMMIRK-M34,94.2519

and toke wyth hym hys wyves and chyldyr , and all +te catell and good
+tat he had , CMMIRK-M34,94.2520

and +gede forth . CMMIRK-M34,94.2521

But +get , for he dred hys bro+ter , +ter come , to helpe hym , a gret
multytude of angelys yn lykenes of men . CMMIRK-M34,94.2522

+Ten , when he come to a forde of Iaboc , he made all hys meyne and all
his catell go befor ouer +te forde , CMMIRK-M34,94.2523

and he hymself abode byhynd . CMMIRK-M34,94.2524

And as he was yn hys prayers , an angyll com to hym lyke a mon ,
CMMIRK-M34,94.2525

and wrasteled wyth hym , all +te nyght tyll on +te morow ,
CMMIRK-M34,94.2526

and towched +te gret senew of hys +tegh , CMMIRK-M34,94.2527

and made hym halt allway aftyr . CMMIRK-M34,94.2528

Then sayde +te angyll to Iacob : ' What ys +ty name ? '
CMMIRK-M34,94.2529

and he sayde : ' Iacob . ' CMMIRK-M34,94.2530

' Nay , ' quod he , ' +tou schalt not lengyr het Iacob ,
CMMIRK-M34,94.2531

but Israell schall be +ty name ' ; CMMIRK-M34,94.2532

and soo blessyd hym , CMMIRK-M34,94.2533

and laft hym +ter halt . CMMIRK-M34,94.2534

And soo he +gede home ynto his contre yn mycull prosperyte .
CMMIRK-M34,94.2535

+Tys story ys yn holy chyrch yn hegh ensampull to yche Goddes seruant
+tat desyryth to gete +te blessyng of hys Fadyr of Heuen , and +te
herytage +tat ys +ter . CMMIRK-M34,94.2536

He most furst be Iacob , and aftyr Israell ; CMMIRK-M34,94.2537

for by Iacob ys vndyrstond a wrasteler , and by Israell a man +tat se+te
God : CMMIRK-M34,94.2538

for he +tat wyll se God yn Heuen , he most wrastyll in er+te wyth +te
euell angyll , +tat ys +te fende , and wyth hys one flessch +tus .
CMMIRK-M34,94.2539

When he goth to schryue hym , and ha+te an horrybull synne , +te fende
putty+te such a schame yn hys hert , so , +togh hit be yn his mouthe ,
he may not for schame tell hit out ; CMMIRK-M34,94.2540

+ten most he wrastyll wyth +te fende , and ouercom hym , and so tell out
opynly all +te circumstance +terof . CMMIRK-M34,94.2541

Then woll hys flessch be aferd of hys penance , CMMIRK-M34,94.2542

and he do+te hyt not aftyr he ys beden <P_95> for@ @to do , for drede
+terof . CMMIRK-M34,95.2543

But +ten most he also wrastyll wyth hys flesch , and make hym do hys
penance fully as he ys beden . CMMIRK-M34,95.2544

Takyng also ensampull of a woman +tat come of ferre to Cryst , as +te
gospell telly+te , to haue bote and helpe of hyr doghtyr +tat was
trauayld wyth a fende . CMMIRK-M34,95.2545

+Ten , among o+ter wordys when scho cryet to Cryst , as +te gospell
telly+te , to haue helpe , he vnswaryd and sayde : ' Hyt ys not good to
take bred of chyldyrn , and +geue hyt howndys to ete . '
CMMIRK-M34,95.2546

But +tys rebuke +tys woman toke mekely CMMIRK-M34,95.2547

and sayde : ' +Gus , Lord , for whelpes eten of cromes +tat fallen from
hor lordeyis bord . ' CMMIRK-M34,95.2548

+Ten sayd Crist : ' Woman , +tou art of gret byleue ; wherfor as +tou
wolt , be +ty doghtyr hole . ' CMMIRK-M34,95.2549

Thys woman and hur doghtyr bytokenyth a man +tat ha+te hys concyens
trauelyng wyth +te fende of dedly synne +tat may no way be holpen , but
+gyf he goo to God and holy chyrch , and opynly schryue hym to +te prest
, sparyng no rebuke , ne for no schame , ne drede ; but mekely suffyr
+tat +te prest say+te , and take hys penance deuotly ;
CMMIRK-M34,95.2550

and so schall he be delyuerd of +te fend that trauelyth hys concyens .
CMMIRK-M34,95.2551

For +tat man +tat ha+te don a dedly synne , yf he schall be saued , he
schall neuer take rest yn hys concyens , tyll he be schryuen of .
CMMIRK-M34,95.2552

For ryght as hownd gnawyth a boon , ryght soo +tat synne schall gnawe
hys concyens , schewyng by experyment how howndys of hell schull gnawe
hys soule euermor , wythout rest , +tat dey+te wyttyngly yn dedly synne
+tat he myght haue be schryuen of , and wold not . CMMIRK-M34,95.2553

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,95.2555

<$$heading>

I rede of a woman +tat had don an horrybull synne ; CMMIRK-M34,95.2557

and oft scho wold haue schryuen hur +terof , CMMIRK-M34,95.2558

but scho myght neuer for schame tell hit to +te prest .
CMMIRK-M34,95.2559

+Ten , on a nyght , as scho lay and +toght moche how scho myght do for
schame , Crist come to hur bodely CMMIRK-M34,95.2560

and sayde : ' My doghtyr , why schryues +tou +te not of +tat synne ? '
CMMIRK-M34,95.2561

+Ten sayde scho : ' Lord , for I may not for schame . '
CMMIRK-M34,95.2562

Then sayde Crist to hur : ' Schewe me +ty hond ' ; CMMIRK-M34,95.2563

and put hur hond ynto hys syde , vp to +te elbow , CMMIRK-M34,95.2564

and sayde ' What felys +tou ? ' CMMIRK-M34,95.2565

And scho , qwakyng for ferd , sayde : ' Lorde , I fele +ty hert . '
CMMIRK-M34,95.2566

+Ten sayde he : ' Be +tou no mor aschamed to schew me +ty hert , +ten I
am to suffur +te to fele my hert . ' CMMIRK-M34,95.2567

Then +tys woman <P_96> ros vp , CMMIRK-M34,96.2568

and wyth a candyll segh hyr hond blody , CMMIRK-M34,96.2569

and wold haue waschen hyt away ; CMMIRK-M34,96.2570

but hyt wold not be , tyll scho +gode on +te morow to a prest , to
schryue hur . CMMIRK-M34,96.2571

And anon , as scho was schryuen , +ten anon +tat hond was as whyte as
+tat o+tyr ; CMMIRK-M34,96.2572

and soo scho hade for+gyfnes of God , and +te blysse of Heuen . To +te
wheche blysse God bryng you and me to , yf hyt be hys wyll .
CMMIRK-M34,96.2573

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,96.2574

<heading>

22 . CMMIRK-M34,96.2576

DE DOMINICA TERCIA QUADRAGESIME SERMO BREUIS . CMMIRK-M34,96.2577

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , +tys ys +te +trydde Sonenday of Lenton . Wherfor
we redyn yn +te gospell of +tys day how our Lord Ihesu Crist cast out a
dombe fende of a man ; CMMIRK-M34,96.2579

and when +te fende was out , +ten +te man spake . CMMIRK-M34,96.2580

Then schull +ge vndyrstond by +tys dombe man all +tat haue no pouste yn
hor tong to schryue hom of ydull o+tes , of ydull wordys , and of ydull
+toghtys +tat a man wyth delyte occupyeth his hert yn .
CMMIRK-M34,96.2581

And when he comyth to schryft , +ten ys he dombe , CMMIRK-M34,96.2582

and speky+te not of hom , wenyng hyt be no synne to +tenke on an ydull
+toght , ne for@ @to speke ydull wordys to make men to lagh , ne for@
@to swer an oth do+te no harme . CMMIRK-M34,96.2583

+Gus , for so+te , hit ys such a synne , as Crist sayth hymselfe , +tat
a man schall +geue acownte +terof , yn +te day of dome , of yche ydull
word +tat a man spekyth . Wherfore for@ @to wythdraw all men of such
o+tes and wordys , Seynt Poule yn +te pystull of +tys day forbedyth yche
cristen man not to speke all maner ydull speche , and rybaudy , and
harlatry , and all othyr speches +tat turnyth to foly and to noght .
And byddyth hom speke suche wordys +tat ben worschypfull to God , and
profet to hom +tat heryn hom . And byddy+te +tat suche foly wordys and
rybawdy schuld not be nempnyd among Godis pepull ; CMMIRK-M34,96.2584

for +ter@ @as +tay ben oft ynempnet , +tay ben +toght on ,
CMMIRK-M34,96.2585

and so +tay fallyn ynto +te dede of synne , CMMIRK-M34,96.2586

and +togh +te dede of synne sewe not , neuer+teles +te lyst +tat a man
ha+te yn spekyng , ys a gret synne . CMMIRK-M34,96.2587

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,96.2589

<$$heading>

I rede of an abbas +tat was a clene woman of hyr body as for dede of
lechery ; CMMIRK-M34,96.2591

but scho had gret lust to talke +terof . CMMIRK-M34,96.2592

So when <P_97> scho was ded , scho was buryet yn +te chyrch .
CMMIRK-M34,97.2593

And so , +te ny+gt aftyr , fendes token vp +te body , CMMIRK-M34,97.2594

and beten hyt wyth brennyng scorgys from +te nauell vpward , +tat hyt
was as blak as pych ; CMMIRK-M34,97.2595

but from +te nauell donward , +tay myght do no+gt +terto ,
CMMIRK-M34,97.2596

for +tat part schon as +te sonne . CMMIRK-M34,97.2597

But euer as +te fendes beten hyr , sho cryed so pittusly , +tat two of
hur sustyrn +tat werne sextens , wer sore agrysut +terof ;
CMMIRK-M34,97.2598

but +get ay+tyr confortyd o+ter , +tat +tay comen +ter +te body lay ,
CMMIRK-M34,97.2599

and se+gen how +te fendys ferden wyth hur . CMMIRK-M34,97.2600

Then sayde scho to hur sustren : ' +Ge knowen well ynogh +tat I was
clene mayden as for dede of flessche ; wherfor +tat party of my body
+tat was clene , +tat schynyth as +ge se now . CMMIRK-M34,97.2601

But , for I had lust for@ @to speke of fulth of +te flessch and of o+tyr
rybawdy , +terfor +tat party of my body +tat ys gulty , hit ha+te hys
penaunce as +ge seen . Wherfor I pray you +tat +ge pray for me ;
CMMIRK-M34,97.2602

for by your prayers I may be holpen , CMMIRK-M34,97.2603

and bu+te war by me yn tyme comyng . ' CMMIRK-M34,97.2604

By +tys ensampull +ge may know , how gret synne hyt ys to speke of
rybawdy . Wherfor +te same apostull bydde+te you absteyne you from
rybawdy and all such doyng , and sewe Crist , and walke yn loue as Crist
dyd , and suffred for you mony scornes , and rebukes , and despytes ,
and mekely +geuyng ensampull to all his pepull to do ryght so ;
CMMIRK-M34,97.2605

for +tat is nedefull to ych Godis seruant . CMMIRK-M34,97.2606

For +tat schapi+t hym to lyue in rest and pes , he schall haue gret
persecucyon of euell men ; CMMIRK-M34,97.2607

but yf he take hit mekely and yn charyte , he ys a martyr befor God .
Wherfor , yn confort of all such Godys seruantes , holy chyrch makyth
mynd , +tys day and all +te weke aftyr , of a holy man +tat was called
Ioseph , +tat suffryd gret persecucyon ; CMMIRK-M34,97.2608

but for he toke hit mekely , God broght hym aftyr ynto gret worschyp ,
as +ge schull now here . CMMIRK-M34,97.2609

But for +te story ys ouerlong , we schull take +terof +tat ys most
nedfull , and leve +tet o+tyr . CMMIRK-M34,97.2610

Thys Ioseph had a fadyr +tat heght Iacob , CMMIRK-M34,97.2611

and had o+ter eleuen bre+tren to Ioseph . CMMIRK-M34,97.2612

And for hys fadyr loued hym specyaly befor all +tat o+tyr , +terfor +tay
hatud hym , and moche more for a swyuen of hys +tat he had told hys
bre+tyr , wherby +tay had euer troyng +tat he schuld be a lord to hom ,
and all schuld do hym worschip ; CMMIRK-M34,97.2613

herfor +tay had schapon to haue slayne hym . CMMIRK-M34,97.2614

But +tay durst not , for +te aw of God , sched hys blod ;
CMMIRK-M34,97.2615

but sold hym ynto +te lond of <P_98> Egypt to a man , for +trytty penyes
. CMMIRK-M34,98.2616

+Ten , for God was wyth hym , +te maystyr of the kyngys knyghtys +tat
heght Putyfare , boght Ioseph , CMMIRK-M34,98.2617

and made hym chefe of hys howshold . CMMIRK-M34,98.2618

But +get +te deuell had envy to hym , CMMIRK-M34,98.2619

and made +te lady of +te howse to couet hym to haue layn by hur .
CMMIRK-M34,98.2620

And soo , on a day , when scho see tyme , scho toke hym by the mantell
CMMIRK-M34,98.2621

and spake to hym of +tat mater ; CMMIRK-M34,98.2622

but when he herd that , anon he flogh away , CMMIRK-M34,98.2623

and lafte his mantell +ter . CMMIRK-M34,98.2624

+Ten +tys woman rerud cry , CMMIRK-M34,98.2625

and told hyr lord how Ioseph wold haue layne by hur ; CMMIRK-M34,98.2626

and , for he schuld not say nay , scho huld his mantell yn wytnesse
a+geynys hym . Wherfor +te lord anon made cast Ioseph ynto prison wher
kyng Pharo had don hys botler and hys baxter byfore .
CMMIRK-M34,98.2627

Then met +tay two sweuons +te whech Ioseph dude rucche and sayd +tat ,
wythyn +tre dayes aftyr , +te kyng wold restore hys boteler a+geyne ynto
hys offyce , and +te baxter schuld , wythyn +tre dayes aftyr , be hongyd
: CMMIRK-M34,98.2628

and hit was sothe as he sayde . CMMIRK-M34,98.2629

Then fell hit soo , that +te kyng hymselfe met a swyuen ;
CMMIRK-M34,98.2630

but for +ter cou+te no man tell what schuld fall +terof , by steryng of
+te boteler , +te kyng send aftyr Ioseph . CMMIRK-M34,98.2631

And when +te kyng had told hym hys swyuen , +ten sayde Ioseph +tat God
had send warnyng to +te kyng to be war and puruay before ,
CMMIRK-M34,98.2632

for he schuld haue VII +gere plente+te of corne and all o+ter vytayle ,
CMMIRK-M34,98.2633

and aftyr hom schuld come seven +gere of hongur +tat schuld ete out and
destrye all +tat myght be geton +te VII good +geres befor .
CMMIRK-M34,98.2634

Then sayde +te kyng : ' I know no man +tat cou+te +tus do but +tou ;
wherfor I make +te vndyr me +te grettyst yn my reme , and all schall bow
to +te as to me , and do +ty commawndement yn all +tyng . '
CMMIRK-M34,98.2635

Then Ioseph anon let make +te gretyst bernys +tat euer wer ,
CMMIRK-M34,98.2636

and gedyr corne +tylke VII +gere . CMMIRK-M34,98.2637

So at +te VII +geres ende , as he sayde , dere +gere and hongyr come .
CMMIRK-M34,98.2638

And when all men haden spende +tat +tay had , +ten +tay come to Ioseph
+tat had jnogh , and sold hom corne and o+tyr vytayles .
CMMIRK-M34,98.2639

Then , when Iacob , Ioseph fadyr , herd +tat +ter was corn to byen yn
Egypte , he send +tydyr hys x sonnes , for@ @to bye corne .
CMMIRK-M34,98.2640

And when +tay segh Ioseph , as hys swyuen wold XXII +gere before , all
+tay fell on knes CMMIRK-M34,98.2641

and honowred hym ; CMMIRK-M34,98.2642

for +tay knew not Ioseph . CMMIRK-M34,98.2643

But for he knew hem well , he spake hard wordes to <P_99> hom by a
latymere , lest he had ben knowen , CMMIRK-M34,99.2644

and sayd +tay werne spyes , CMMIRK-M34,99.2645

and wern come to spye +te lond . CMMIRK-M34,99.2646

And +tay sayde nay , CMMIRK-M34,99.2647

+tay wern all on manys sonnes , CMMIRK-M34,99.2648

and on bro+tyr +tay haden laft at home wyth hor fadyr ,
CMMIRK-M34,99.2649

ano+tyr bro+tyr +tay hadden , CMMIRK-M34,99.2650

but he was not alyve CMMIRK-M34,99.2651

<paren> +tat +tay speken by Ioseph , for +tay wenden he had ben ded
<$$paren> . CMMIRK-M34,99.2652

Then sayde Ioseph he wold preue hom , whe+ter +tay wer trew ,
CMMIRK-M34,99.2653

and made bynde on of hom +tat het Symeon , CMMIRK-M34,99.2654

and sayde he wold hold hym fast , tyll +tay broght to hym +tat bro+ter
+tat was at home , CMMIRK-M34,99.2655

and made full hor sackes wyth corne , CMMIRK-M34,99.2656

and put money yn +te mou+te of ych sake , vnwytyng hom ;
CMMIRK-M34,99.2657

and so made hom go home to hor fadyr . CMMIRK-M34,99.2658

So when +tay come home and powred out +te corne , +tay fonden money yn
hor sakkes CMMIRK-M34,99.2659

and tolden hor fadyr all $tythyng . CMMIRK-M34,99.2660

Then was +te fadyr sory for hys sonne +tat was laft byhynde yn bondes ,
CMMIRK-M34,99.2661

and most nede send hym forth +tat he louet most ; CMMIRK-M34,99.2662

for he was Iosephys own brothyr , CMMIRK-M34,99.2663

and +tat o+ter werne hys half-bre+tern . CMMIRK-M34,99.2664

But +togh he wer lo+te to leue hym , when hys corn faylyd , he most nede
haue more CMMIRK-M34,99.2665

and send forth Beniamyn to Ioseph . CMMIRK-M34,99.2666

And when Ioseph segh hym , he myght not forgo to wepe ,
CMMIRK-M34,99.2667

and +gede ynto hys chambur , CMMIRK-M34,99.2668

and bade delyuer hur o+tyr bro+tyr Symeon to hom , CMMIRK-M34,99.2669

and sette hom to mete , CMMIRK-M34,99.2670

and bade full hor sekkes wyth corn and putte priuely hys cuppe +tat he
dranke of hymself , yn Beniamyn sacke , CMMIRK-M34,99.2671

and soo made hom go hore way . CMMIRK-M34,99.2672

But when +tay wern all gone yn good spede as +tay wenden , +ten send
Ioseph aftyr hom men +tat sayden +tat +tay wern wycked men +tat aftyr
+tat hur lord had made hom wele at +gees , had stolen hys cuppe +tat he
loued most . CMMIRK-M34,99.2673

Then wern +tay sory CMMIRK-M34,99.2674

and sayden hit was not soo , CMMIRK-M34,99.2675

but bade hom ronsak hom yche on . CMMIRK-M34,99.2676

And +tay begonen at +te eldyst , tyll +tay come to +te +gongyst ,
CMMIRK-M34,99.2677

and token hym +tat +tay fonden hit wyth , CMMIRK-M34,99.2678

and ladden hym a+geyne , to here hor lordeys wylle ; CMMIRK-M34,99.2679

for hom +toght hyt had ben sykur +tat hit had not ben soo .
CMMIRK-M34,99.2680

Then when +tay come to Beniamyn +tat was Ioseph bro+tyr , +tay fonden
+te coppe yn +te bo+tom of +te sakke . CMMIRK-M34,99.2681

+Ten wer +tay all sory , CMMIRK-M34,99.2682

and turnet a+geyne sore wepyng , CMMIRK-M34,99.2683

and come before Ioseph . CMMIRK-M34,99.2684

But when he se hom all wepe and hys one bro+tyr makyng most sorow , for
hyt was fond wyth hym , then Ioseph spake to hym , CMMIRK-M34,99.2685

and bade hym be of good confort , CMMIRK-M34,99.2686

and sayde : ' I am Ioseph , your bro+tyr , CMMIRK-M34,99.2687

be +ge <P_100> not aferd : CMMIRK-M34,100.2688

God ha+te send me tofore you hedyr for your good . '
CMMIRK-M34,100.2689

And soo send aftyr hys fadyr , CMMIRK-M34,100.2690

and dwellut ay aftyr +ter yn +tat lond in gret well and prosperite .
CMMIRK-M34,100.2691

Lo , good men , +tys story ys red +tys weke yn holy $chyrche ,
CMMIRK-M34,100.2692

for Godys chyldyrne schuld take ensampull at old holy fadyrs , to suffyr
desese and persecucyon wyth meke hert , and yn full charyte for Godys
loue , as he suffred for vs . CMMIRK-M34,100.2693

And he +tat takyth persecucyon a+geynes hert and grucche+te a+geynes God
and sayth : ' A , why do+te God +tus wyth me , CMMIRK-M34,100.2694

what haue I trespassed +tat he faryth +tus wythe me ? '
CMMIRK-M34,100.2695

I do you well to wytte +tat +ge most schryf you +terof , and aske God
mercy for youre inpacyens and of all o+tyr synnys , ben +tay neuer soo
small yn your eye ; CMMIRK-M34,100.2696

for +te trespas of on synne may let moch grace . CMMIRK-M34,100.2697

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,100.2699

<$$heading>

I rede yn a myracull of Saynt Wenfryd +tat a man come to hur , vnne+te
broght apon two croches , full of all maner woo . CMMIRK-M34,100.2701

+Ten , be helpe of +tys holy mayden and virgyn , he was helud ,
CMMIRK-M34,100.2702

and soo al day aftyr went hole ynto yche hous of +te abbay , +tonkyng
God and +te holy mayden of hys hele . CMMIRK-M34,100.2703

But at nyght he +gode ynto hys bed +ter he lay before , hopyng to haue
gon yn +te morow home all hole . CMMIRK-M34,100.2704

Also sone as he come ynto hys bed , anon +te sekenes toke hym wors +tan
hit dyd befor ; CMMIRK-M34,100.2705

and soo lay all nyght cryyng +tat hit was rewth to here .
CMMIRK-M34,100.2706

Then , on +te morow , mongkes come to hym askyng what he had agylt ,
+tat hys sekenes was comen a+geyne . CMMIRK-M34,100.2707

And he sayde : ' No+tyng . ' CMMIRK-M34,100.2708

+Ten sayde on : ' Was +tou schryuen se+ten +tou come . '
CMMIRK-M34,100.2709

And he sayde nay , CMMIRK-M34,100.2710

for sothe he had no nede , CMMIRK-M34,100.2711

and sayde he stele neuer ox ne cow ne hors , CMMIRK-M34,100.2712

ne neuer dyd no greues synne ; wherfor he had no nede to schryue hym .
CMMIRK-M34,100.2713

+Ten sayde +te monke a+geyne +tus : ' For +tagh a man do no gret synnes
, he may do soo mony venyall synnys vnschryuen , may charche his soule ,
and make a dedly synne . CMMIRK-M34,100.2714

For ryght as a man may wyth mony smal cornys ouercharche a strong hors ,
so , wyth mony venyall synnys $vnschryuen , may charch hys soule , +tat
he schall fall ynto +te lake of helle . CMMIRK-M34,100.2715

Then +tys man toke a prest CMMIRK-M34,100.2716

and schrof hym . CMMIRK-M34,100.2717

And when he was schryuen , anon he had hys hele , CMMIRK-M34,100.2718

and was hole ay aftyr ; CMMIRK-M34,100.2719

and heyly +tonked God <P_101> +tat he was helut , bo+te yn body and yn
soule , by confessyon and prayer of +tis holy mayden Seynt Wenefryde .
CMMIRK-M34,101.2720

And so pray we to God +tat we may be helud yn our bodyes and specyaly in
our soules , +tat we may haue +te blysse +tat he boght vs to .
CMMIRK-M34,101.2721

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,101.2722

<heading>

23 . CMMIRK-M34,101.2724

DE DOMINICA QUARTA QUADRAGESIME . CMMIRK-M34,101.2725

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , as +ge all know well , +tys ys +te four+te Sonday
of Lenton . Yn +te wheche day all holy chyrch maky+te mynde of a holy
profyt +tat was called Moyses , +te whech was a figur of our Lord Ihesu
Crist mony +geres er he was borne of our lady . CMMIRK-M34,101.2727

Then , as we redyn thys weke yn holy chyrch , as +tys Moyses was yn
desert of Synay , God spake to hym CMMIRK-M34,101.2728

and sayde : ' Pharao , +te kyng of Egypt , oppressyth the pepull of
Israell wyth bondage and wyth vnresynabull werkes , CMMIRK-M34,101.2729

and +tay , for woo of oppressyng , cryen to me for socour and helpe .
Wherfor goo +tou thedyr , and fache hom out of hys bondage , and bryng
hom hedyr , and offeryth to me yn +tis styd ; and I wyll bryng hom into
a lond plentwys of all good . ' CMMIRK-M34,101.2730

So , when he had taght Moyses all how he schuld do , +ten he +gode
+tedyr , CMMIRK-M34,101.2731

and gederyd all +te old men of hom +tat knew by prophesy how +tay schuld
be lad out of +tat lond , CMMIRK-M34,101.2732

and sayde to hom as God bade hym . CMMIRK-M34,101.2733

Then wer +tay wondur glad and fayne , CMMIRK-M34,101.2734

and suyd hym forth more and lasse , tyll +tay come to +te Red See .
CMMIRK-M34,101.2735

And God was befor hom yn a pelere of a clowde , to refresch hom for hete
of +te sonne , and in +te nyght yn a pyler of fure , to leghten hom from
harme of edyrs and o+ter vemens bestys . CMMIRK-M34,101.2736

But when +tat Pharao herd +tat Moyses had lad forth +tis pepull , he
toke +tre_hundyrt of charyotes of hys owne , and o+tyr +tre_hundyrt of
+te lond , and fyfty_+towsand of horsmen , and two_hundyrt_+towsand of
fotemen , CMMIRK-M34,101.2737

and +gode aftyr hom . CMMIRK-M34,101.2738

But when Moyses segh +tys pepull comyng , he prayde to God for helpe .
CMMIRK-M34,101.2739

And God bade hym smyte +te see wyth his +gerde , CMMIRK-M34,101.2740

and hyt schuld open and +geue way to hys pepull . CMMIRK-M34,101.2741

And when he had smyten +te <P_102> see wyth hys +gerde , hit cleue yn
two partyes , so +tat +te watyr stod on ay+tyr syde as walles ,
CMMIRK-M34,102.2742

and +te grounde was dry sond . CMMIRK-M34,102.2743

Then +gode Moyses yn , CMMIRK-M34,102.2744

and all +ta pepull sewet hym , tyll +tay wer all ouerpassyd .
CMMIRK-M34,102.2745

Then went Pharao to haue don soo , CMMIRK-M34,102.2746

and +gode yn aftyr . CMMIRK-M34,102.2747

But when he and all hys ost wern yn +te see , +te watyr went a+geyne
togedyr , CMMIRK-M34,102.2748

and drowned hym and all hys ost , so +tat +ter wer laft of hom not on
man . CMMIRK-M34,102.2749

Then when Moyses and his pepull segh +tat , +tay +tonkyd God , wyth hegh
steuen , CMMIRK-M34,102.2750

and dwellyd +ter seuen dayes aftyr ; CMMIRK-M34,102.2751

and yche day +gode to +te see wyth mynstrelsy , +tonkyng God of hur
wondyrfull scapyng . CMMIRK-M34,102.2752

+Get yn mynde herof , all +te Astyr-weke , processyon ys made to +te
fonte . CMMIRK-M34,102.2753

Then went Moyses forth wyth hys pepull ynto +te desert , tyll +tay come
to +te hull of Synay . CMMIRK-M34,102.2754

And +ter he laft +te pepull byne+te , CMMIRK-M34,102.2755

and he hymselfe +gode vp ynto +te hull +ter God was ;
CMMIRK-M34,102.2756

and was fourty dayes +ter and fourty nyghtys wythout mete or drynke .
CMMIRK-M34,102.2757

Then God +gaf hym twoo tables of stone yn +te whech God wrote wyth hys
fyngyrs +te x commaundementys , CMMIRK-M34,102.2758

and bade Moyses teche hom to hys pepull . CMMIRK-M34,102.2759

And when he come done to +te pepull , hys face was so bryght
CMMIRK-M34,102.2760

and two spyres of fyre stoden out of hys hed lyke two hornes , so +tat
+te pepull myght not speke wyth hym for clerte , tyll he toke a kerchef
and hulyd hys face . CMMIRK-M34,102.2761

Then wer +ter wryton yn +te on lefe +te +tre comaundementys +tat
longy+te to God , and seuen yn +tat o+ter +tat longy+te to +ty neghtbur
. CMMIRK-M34,102.2762

+Te +tre commawndementys +tat longy+te to God ben +tese :
CMMIRK-M34,102.2763

' Thow schalt loue God and worschyp hym befor all +tyng , so +tat +tou
schalt yn all +tyng pyt Godys wyll byfore +ty wyll , and so sewe hys
wyll and not +tyne . ' CMMIRK-M34,102.2764

That o+ter ys : ' +Tou schalt not take Godys name yn vayne . ' +Tat ys
: +tou schalt not be callet a cristen mon , but yf +tou lyue a cristen
lyfe ; CMMIRK-M34,102.2765

for +togh +tou be called a cristen man and serues +te fende , +tat name
stondyth +te in veyn . CMMIRK-M34,102.2766

And also +tou schalt not swer by God , ne by no party of hys body , ne
by no +tyng +tat he made , but yn affermyng of trewth , and +get when
+tou art constrayned +terto . CMMIRK-M34,102.2767

The thryd ys this : ' Thow schalt hold +ty holyday . ' +Tat ys : +tow
schalt ben as erly vp and as late don , and be as besy to serue God as
+tou art on +te werkeday to serue +te world . CMMIRK-M34,102.2768

The four+te is : ' +Tou schalt worschyp +ty fadyr and +ty modyr +tat han
broght +te ynto +tys <P_103> world , and +ty god-fadyr and +ty god-modyr
+tat holpen to make +te a cristen man , and thy faydr vndyr God +tat
ha+te +te charche of +ty soule , CMMIRK-M34,103.2769

and schall +geue vnswar +terof befor God . ' CMMIRK-M34,103.2770

The v. ys +tys : CMMIRK-M34,103.2771

' +Tow schalt no+tyr sley wyth +ty hond , ne wyth +ty ee nor wyth +ty
tong , ne wyth euell ensampull ; ne wythdrawe lore and techyng to hom
+tat +tou art holden to tech . ' CMMIRK-M34,103.2772

The VI. is +tys : CMMIRK-M34,103.2773

' +Tou schalt do no lechery yn no degre wythout wedlok . '
CMMIRK-M34,103.2774

The VII. ys +tys : CMMIRK-M34,103.2775

' +Tou schalt not stele no +tyng , grete ne small . '
CMMIRK-M34,103.2776

The VIII. is +tys : CMMIRK-M34,103.2777

' +Tou schalt not bere no false wyttenes a+geynys no man , by no way .
' CMMIRK-M34,103.2778

The IX. ys : ' +Tou schalt no+tyr couet seruant , ne ox , ne no +tyng
+tat ys +ty neghtbur , a+geynys hys wyll . ' CMMIRK-M34,103.2779

The X. ys +tys : CMMIRK-M34,103.2780

' +Tou schalt not wylne +ty neghtburs wyfe , ne cownsell hur , by no
maner way , to euell , ne to +tat +tat ys harme or veleny to hur husbond
. ' CMMIRK-M34,103.2781

Thes byn +te commawndementys +te whech ych crysten man ys bondon for@
@to kepe . CMMIRK-M34,103.2782

Thus was Moyses a fygur and a token of Cryst ; CMMIRK-M34,103.2783

for Moyses com before CMMIRK-M34,103.2784

and +gaf +te lawe , CMMIRK-M34,103.2785

and Crist come aftyr CMMIRK-M34,103.2786

and +gaf grace , and mercy , and trew+te . CMMIRK-M34,103.2787

For ryght as Moyses fatte +te pepull out of Egypte +trogh +te see to +te
hull of Synay , ryght soo Cryst , when he com , he , by prechyng and
myracles doyng , fat +te pepull out of +te darknes of synne and euell
lyuyng +trogh +te watyr of folowyng to +te hull of vertu .
CMMIRK-M34,103.2788

For he +tat woll schryue hym clene , and leue hys fowle leuyng , and
hold +te couenantes +tat he made wyth God yn hys folowyng , he schall
gedyr vertu so togedyr , +tat +te $heght of hym schall passe +te heght
of any erthly hulle . CMMIRK-M34,103.2789

But he +tat woll +tus do , he most be fed of Cryst wyth fyve lovys and
two fyschys , as we rede yn +te gospell , how he fedde v_+towsand of
pepull wyth v louys and two fysches . CMMIRK-M34,103.2790

The fyrst lofe of +tes v ys contrycyon of hert . CMMIRK-M34,103.2791

The secund ys trew schryft of mou+te . CMMIRK-M34,103.2792

The +tryd ys satysfaccyon of hys trespas . CMMIRK-M34,103.2793

The IIII. ys drede of redemacion , +tat is , of turnyng a+geyne from
hys synne ; CMMIRK-M34,103.2794

for he +tat ys allgate aferde , he schall do well . CMMIRK-M34,103.2795

The v. ys persauaracyon in God . CMMIRK-M34,103.2796

The two fyschys ben orysons and almes-dede , CMMIRK-M34,103.2797

for +tes ben noresched yn terus of deuocyon . CMMIRK-M34,103.2798

+Tes two susters geton whatsoeuer +tay woll of hym .
CMMIRK-M34,103.2799

<P_104>

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,104.2802

<$$heading>

I rede +tat +ter was summe tyme a man +tat was called Perys ,
CMMIRK-M34,104.2804

and was full rych ; CMMIRK-M34,104.2805

but he was so hard , +tat no begger myght gete no good of hym , by no
maner wyse . CMMIRK-M34,104.2806

+Ten fell hyt soo , +tat a company of beggers setyn togedyr and speken
of +tys Perus , and how +tay myght gete no good of hym .
CMMIRK-M34,104.2807

Then spake on +tat was as a maystyr of hom , CMMIRK-M34,104.2808

and sayd : ' What woll +ge lay wyth me +tat I schall gete no good of hym
? ' CMMIRK-M34,104.2809

So +tay layden a wager . CMMIRK-M34,104.2810

+Ten went +te begger forth CMMIRK-M34,104.2811

and set hym yn +tys Peres hall-porche , to abyd hym , tyll he come .
CMMIRK-M34,104.2812

+Ten anon , as he segh hym come , +tys begger began to halson hym so
heyly and so horrybly , +tat +tys Perys , for gret angur +tat he had of
hys grete halsyng as hys seruant come by hym wyth a basket full of bred
, he kaght a lofe , and wyth all hys myght he cast at +tys begger , and
smot hym on +te brest , and sayde : ' Stop thy mouthe herwyth ;
CMMIRK-M34,104.2813

+te deuell of hell choke +te ! CMMIRK-M34,104.2814

How begynnys +tou on me ! ' CMMIRK-M34,104.2815

+Ten , +togh +tys begger had an stroke , +get he was fayne +tat he had
somwhat , for@ @to wynne wyth hys wager ; CMMIRK-M34,104.2816

and toke +te lofe , CMMIRK-M34,104.2817

and +gode to hys felaws . CMMIRK-M34,104.2818

' Lo , ' quod he , ' +Tys I haue geton , ' CMMIRK-M34,104.2819

and had hys wagyr . CMMIRK-M34,104.2820

Then , yn +te nyght aftyr , hyt happut soo +tat +tys Perys sterfe yn hys
bede ; CMMIRK-M34,104.2821

and anon fendys comen and fattyn his soule to helle .
CMMIRK-M34,104.2822

But +ten was our lady redy , CMMIRK-M34,104.2823

and bade hom bryng +te sowle fyrst to +te dome , CMMIRK-M34,104.2824

and so +tay dydden . CMMIRK-M34,104.2825

Then was +ter no+tyng to helpe +tys soule , but only +tat lofe +tat he
cast at +te pore man . CMMIRK-M34,104.2826

+Ten sayden +te fendes +tat he +gaf hyt a+geynys hys wyll ; wherfor , by
ryght , hyt schuld not helpe hym . CMMIRK-M34,104.2827

Then went our lady to hyr sonne , prayng hym to graunt +te soule to goo
a+geyne to +te body , for@ @to loke , +gyf he wold amend hym .
CMMIRK-M34,104.2828

Then bade he bryng +te soule a+geyne to +te body . CMMIRK-M34,104.2829

And when hyt was soo , anon +te body sate vp , CMMIRK-M34,104.2830

and +gaf a gret syke , CMMIRK-M34,104.2831

and called to hym a+geyne all hys housemeyne , CMMIRK-M34,104.2832

and told how hard a dome he was at , and how he had ben dampned , n@ @er
+tat +te lofe had byn +tat he cast at +te begger . Wherfor anon he made
to sell all hys good , and dele hit to pore men for Godys loue .
CMMIRK-M34,104.2833

And when he had so ydon , he was made a religyous man ,
CMMIRK-M34,104.2834

and was aftyr a holy man . CMMIRK-M34,104.2835

<P_105>

Herby +ge may know how gret vertu ys yn almys-dede .
CMMIRK-M34,105.2837

Oresons maky+te a man preue wyth God for oft spekyng wyth hym ;
CMMIRK-M34,105.2838

for as oft as a man pray+t deuotly , so oft he speky+te wyth God .
CMMIRK-M34,105.2839

And almys-dede makyth hym sykur a+geyns the day of dome .
CMMIRK-M34,105.2840

For all +tat han done almes-dede for Godys loue , schall be sauet +tat
day . CMMIRK-M34,105.2841

Also for we speke aboue of +te synne of vowtre , +tat is , a man to
bylyon hys neghtbors wyfe , o+ter the wyfe to take ano+ter +ten hur
husbond , +terfor I tell you +tys ensampull . CMMIRK-M34,105.2842

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,105.2844

<$$heading>

Ther was a man +tat made charcolys yn a gret lordys parke ,
CMMIRK-M34,105.2846

and when he had made a gret fure , he lay +terby all nyght .
CMMIRK-M34,105.2847

+Ten a lytull befor mydnyght , +ter come a woman , halfe naked also
faste os scheo myghte renne , CMMIRK-M34,105.2848

and scheo ferde os scheo were out of hur wytte , and aftyr hyr a knyght
rydyng on a blacke hors as fast as he myght pryke , wyth a drawen swerde
, CMMIRK-M34,105.2849

and hunted her all about +te cole-fure . CMMIRK-M34,105.2850

And soo , at +te last , +tys knyght slogh +tys woman ,
CMMIRK-M34,105.2851

and hew hyr to pecys , CMMIRK-M34,105.2852

and kest hom ynto +te fure , CMMIRK-M34,105.2853

and rode a+geyne wyth all hys myght . CMMIRK-M34,105.2854

So when +tys man saw +tys syght fele nyghtys aftyr , at +te last , he
+gode to hys lorde CMMIRK-M34,105.2855

and told hym all togedyr . CMMIRK-M34,105.2856

Then was +tys man a bold man , CMMIRK-M34,105.2857

and sayde he wold wytte what +tat myght be , CMMIRK-M34,105.2858

and come +tedyr +te nyght aftyr , CMMIRK-M34,105.2859

and se all +tat +te man had told hym before . CMMIRK-M34,105.2860

+Ten , when +te knyght had slayne +te woman and cast hur ynto +te fure ,
+tat o+tyr lord halset +te knyght +tat dyd soo , CMMIRK-M34,105.2861

and bade hym tell hym what he was and why he did soo .
CMMIRK-M34,105.2862

Then he vnswared and sayde +tat he was such a man +tat was hys seruant a
lytyll before , and +tat woman was such ano+tyr knyghtys wyfe .
CMMIRK-M34,105.2863

And for he had bylayn hur vndyr hor husbond , ' +terfor we wer put bo+te
to such a penance . ' CMMIRK-M34,105.2864

And sayde +tat yche nyght he all tosley hur and brent hur +ter ;
CMMIRK-M34,105.2865

and +te hors +tat he rod on , was a fende +tat brent hym an hundyrtfold
hattyr +ten any er+tly fure . CMMIRK-M34,105.2866

And soo +tat penance +tay most suffur , tyll +tay wer holpen by certeyne
masses and o+tyr certeyn almys-dedys ; CMMIRK-M34,105.2867

and told hym what . CMMIRK-M34,105.2868

Then +tat o+tyr knyght <P_106> behette hym +tat all schuld be done for
hym , CMMIRK-M34,106.2869

and dyd so , CMMIRK-M34,106.2870

and halp hym so of hys penance +trogh +te mercy of God . +Te whech
mercy God graunt vs , yf hit be hys wyll . CMMIRK-M34,106.2871

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,106.2872

<heading>

24 . CMMIRK-M34,106.2874

DE ANUNCIACIONE DOMINICA SERMO BREUIS . CMMIRK-M34,106.2875

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , +tat louen to serue our lady , suche a day +ge
schull haue an hegh fest in holy chyrch , +tat ys callyd +te
Annunciacyon of our lady . +Te whech euen +ge schull fast , ych man
aftyr hys deuocyon , and aftyr he ha+te made a vow , and also as he ys
joynet of +te holy gostly fadyr . CMMIRK-M34,106.2877

The {COM:sic_but_probably_error} schull +ge know well +tat +tis fest ys
callet +te Annuncyacyon of our lady . CMMIRK-M34,106.2878

For +tys skyll +te hygh Fadyr of Heuen send hys holy angell Gabryell
downe out of Heuen into +te cite of Na+gareth vnto our lady , +tat was
new yweddyd by Godys byddyng and reuelacyon of +te Holy Gost , to an old
man , +tat was called Ioseph . CMMIRK-M34,106.2879

And as scho was yn hur chambur yn hyr deuocyon , +te angyll Gabryell
come , CMMIRK-M34,106.2880

and gret hur wyth myld steuen , CMMIRK-M34,106.2881

and sayde : ' Heyl be +tou , full of grace ; CMMIRK-M34,106.2882

God ys wyth +te ; CMMIRK-M34,106.2883

blessy+t be +tou of all woymen ! ' CMMIRK-M34,106.2884

Then was scho gretly abaschot of +tys metyng . CMMIRK-M34,106.2885

For +ter was +tat tyme in +tat contre a man +tat cow+te moch of
wycchecraft , CMMIRK-M34,106.2886

and so , by helpe of +te fende , he made hym lyke an angyll ,
CMMIRK-M34,106.2887

and come to dyuers maydyns , CMMIRK-M34,106.2888

and sayde he was send from God to hom on +tys message ;
CMMIRK-M34,106.2889

and soo lay by hom , CMMIRK-M34,106.2890

and dude hom gret vylany . CMMIRK-M34,106.2891

Then , for oure lady herd tell of +tys manys doyng , scho was sore adred
, lest hyt had be he . CMMIRK-M34,106.2892

For oft before scho had spoken wyth angelys , CMMIRK-M34,106.2893

but such wordys ny gretyng +tay made neuer to hyr . CMMIRK-M34,106.2894

Then +tys angyll conforted hur CMMIRK-M34,106.2895

and sayd : ' Mary , be not adred , CMMIRK-M34,106.2896

+tou hast fond grace wyth God . CMMIRK-M34,106.2897

For among all maydyns +tat ben o+ter wern and schull be , God ha+te
chosen +te for mekest to be modyr to hys owne sonne ,
CMMIRK-M34,106.2898

and hym +tou schalt conceyue by fey+te and loue of +te Holy Gost
wythouten any werke of man , +tat schall vmbeschadow +te wythout , and
quenche all maner flesschly lust in +te , and tend +te fyre of gostly
loue yn +ty hert . CMMIRK-M34,106.2899

And so , by fay+t and by loue , +tow schalt conceyue +te sonne of +te
hye God of Heuen , CMMIRK-M34,106.2900

and <P_107> +tus +tou be modyr and mayden yfere ; CMMIRK-M34,107.2901

and soo was neuer non befor +te , CMMIRK-M34,107.2902

ne aftyr schall be . ' CMMIRK-M34,107.2903

Then , when our lady herd +tys word , anon +ter come such a spirituall
swetness and a joy yn hor hert , +tat non er+tly mon cou+t tell hit .
CMMIRK-M34,107.2904

And soo , wyth all +te reuerence and mekenes +tat scho cou+te , scho
vnswared +tus : ' Lo here , Godis owne meke hond-maydon , redy to do
Godys wyll , prayng +tat hyt most be don to me ryght as +tou sayst . '
CMMIRK-M34,107.2905

+Tus scho conceyued our Lord Ihesu Crist in euerlastyng joy to all +te
world . CMMIRK-M34,107.2906

Thus may I resenably lyken to a precyous ston +tat ys callyd Onys , and
ys as clere as cristall , and schall of kynd , when +te sonne schyne+te
hote on hym , opyn and receyue won droppe of +te dewe of heuen ynto hym
, and clos hym a+geyne tyll IX mone+ts aftyr . CMMIRK-M34,107.2907

And +ten hit fally+te , CMMIRK-M34,107.2908

and openyth a stone out of +te same kynd , CMMIRK-M34,107.2909

and soo closy+te a+geyne as euer hit was , wythout any wem ,
CMMIRK-M34,107.2910

and neuer openyth aftyr . CMMIRK-M34,107.2911

Thus oure lady was as clene as any crystall , CMMIRK-M34,107.2912

and +te hote low of +te Holy Gost openyth hyr hert , CMMIRK-M34,107.2913

and receyuyth +te vertu of +te hegh God of Heuen . CMMIRK-M34,107.2914

And , at +te IX monyth ende , was delyuerd of hur sonne Ihesu Crist ,
CMMIRK-M34,107.2915

and scho euer aftyr as clene mayden as scho was befor .
CMMIRK-M34,107.2916

Then , when +te angyll had don hys message and was gon a+geyne to Heuen
, our lady went anon to hyr cosyn Ely+gabeth +tat was gret wyth chyld ,
wyth Saynt Ion +te Baptyst . CMMIRK-M34,107.2917

And soo , when scho come to Ely+gabeth , scho grette hur full mekely .
CMMIRK-M34,107.2918

And soo anon , as our lady spake to Ely+gabeth , +te chyld yn Ely+gabeth
wombe pleyude , CMMIRK-M34,107.2919

and made gret joy , CMMIRK-M34,107.2920

for he saw +tat our Lord had take mankynd , CMMIRK-M34,107.2921

and was com for@ @to saue hom +tat wer forlore . CMMIRK-M34,107.2922

Then our lady dwellyd +ter wyth hur cosyn tyll Seynt Ion was borne ,
CMMIRK-M34,107.2923

and was mydwyff to Eli+gabeth , CMMIRK-M34,107.2924

and toke Ion from +te er+te . CMMIRK-M34,107.2925

And soo scho lernd all +tat hur nedyd , for@ @to come a+geyne +te tyme
+tat hur sonne schuld be borne of hor . CMMIRK-M34,107.2926

Sy+ten scho was parfyt +terof , scho mekely toke hyr leue ,
CMMIRK-M34,107.2927

and +gode home a+geyne to Na+gareth . CMMIRK-M34,107.2928

Then +toght Ioseph +tat he wold goo and loke how hys wyf ferde .
CMMIRK-M34,107.2929

And when our lady herd of hys come , scho +gode a+geynes hym ,
CMMIRK-M34,107.2930

and gret hym full mekely , als scho full wele cou+te .
CMMIRK-M34,107.2931

But when Ioseph se hur gret wyth chyld , he merueylt gretly how +tat
myght be ; CMMIRK-M34,107.2932

for he wyst well hyt was not hys , CMMIRK-M34,107.2933

for scho had neuer part of hys body . CMMIRK-M34,107.2934

And also he knew well scho had made a vow <P_108> before +tat scho wold
neuer haue part of manys body . CMMIRK-M34,108.2935

+Ten he +toght how he was made to wed hur +trogh +te byddyng of God and
gret schewyng of myracles , CMMIRK-M34,108.2936

and +toght yn hys hert +tat he was not wor+ty to dwell yn hur company ,
CMMIRK-M34,108.2937

and schaput hym priuely to goo home a+geyne and leue hur +ter .
CMMIRK-M34,108.2938

Then come +ter an angell to hym CMMIRK-M34,108.2939

and sayd : ' Ioseph , be not aferd to take Mary , +ty wyfe , ynto +ty
kepyng , CMMIRK-M34,108.2940

hit ys of +te Holy Gost +tat ys qwyk yn hur . Wherfor +tou schalt be
hur keper , and norys to hur chyld . CMMIRK-M34,108.2941

And when hit ys borne , +tou call hym Ihesu ; CMMIRK-M34,108.2942

for he schall be sauyour of mankynd . CMMIRK-M34,108.2943

Thus schull +ge knowe +tat for +tre skylles , as Seynt Ambros sayth ,
our lady was wedded to +tys old man Ioseph . CMMIRK-M34,108.2944

The fyrst was : yf scho had conceyuet out of wedlocke , +te Iewes wold
haue sayde scho had ben a lechore ; and soo by hor lawe haue stenet hyr
to deth . CMMIRK-M34,108.2945

The secunde cause was : fore scho was so schamfast ; CMMIRK-M34,108.2946

and had any man put any fame on hur , scho schuld for schame haue byn
ded . CMMIRK-M34,108.2947

The +tryd cause was : for +tat Ioseph schuld be wytnes to hur of hur
maydonhed ; CMMIRK-M34,108.2948

for when +te wyfe trespassy+te yn +tat degre , +te husbond bysyu+te hym
most to knew the so+te . CMMIRK-M34,108.2949

The fowrth cause ys : for +tat Ioseph most be helper to hur yn hur burth
, and bryng hur to Bedeleem , and aftyr ynto Egypte , and soo a+geyne
ynto hur owne contre . CMMIRK-M34,108.2950

For +tes causes scho was weddyt to +tis holy man ; CMMIRK-M34,108.2951

and soo , for@ @to begyle +te fende +tat he schuld not know hym by
ano+tyr chyld . CMMIRK-M34,108.2952

Thus , good men , +ge haue now herd of +tys annuncyacyon .
CMMIRK-M34,108.2953

+Ten ben +ter summe +tat asken why +ter stondyth a wyne-potte and a lyly
bytwyx our lady and Gabyrell at hur salutacyon . CMMIRK-M34,108.2954

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,108.2956

<$$heading>

Thus was +te skyll ; CMMIRK-M34,108.2958

for our lady at hur salutacyon conceyuet by syght . CMMIRK-M34,108.2959

And +tat was +te fyrst myracull +tat was wroght yn prevyng of Cristys
fayth . CMMIRK-M34,108.2960

And fell +tus +tat a cristen man and a Iewe seton togedyr talkyng of +te
comyng of our lady . CMMIRK-M34,108.2961

And +ter as +tay wern , a wyne-potte stode bytwene hom .
CMMIRK-M34,108.2962

Then sayd +te cristyn man to +te Iewe : ' We belevyn ryght as +te stalke
of +te lyly grouy+t , and conceyuyth colour of grene , and aftyr
bryngyth <P_109> forthe a whitte flowre wythout craft of man or any
enpayryng of +te $stalke ; ry+gt soo our lady conceyuet of +te Holy Gost
, and aftyr broght forth hor sonne wythout wem of hyr body , +tat ys
flour and chefe fruyt of all wymen . CMMIRK-M34,109.2963

Then sayde +te Iewe : ' When I se a lyly spryng out of +tys potte , I
wyll leue , and er not . ' CMMIRK-M34,109.2964

Then anon +terwyth a lyly sprang out of +te potte , +te fayryst +tat
euer was seyn . CMMIRK-M34,109.2965

And when +te Iew sawe +tat , anon he fell down on knees
CMMIRK-M34,109.2966

and sayde : ' Lady , now I leue +tat +tou conceyuedyst of +te Hohy Gost
Ihesu Cryst , God sonne of Heuen , and +tou clene maydyn befor and aftyr
. ' CMMIRK-M34,109.2967

And soo +gode , CMMIRK-M34,109.2968

and was crystenyd , CMMIRK-M34,109.2969

and was a holy man aftyr . CMMIRK-M34,109.2970

For +tis skyll , +te potte and +te lyly ys sette bytwyx our lady and
Gabryell . CMMIRK-M34,109.2971

For ryght as +tys Iewe dyspute+te wyth +tys crysten man of +te maner of
+te conceyte of our lady ; ryght soo oure lady sputyd wyth +te angell of
+te maner , and how scho schuld conceyue , and be mayden er and aftyr .
CMMIRK-M34,109.2972

+Ten scho asentyd +terto . CMMIRK-M34,109.2973

Then +ge +tat fasten +te v euenes of our lady yn worschyp of hur fyue
joyes , +ge schull know wele +tat +tys was +te forme day of joy +tat
scho had of hyr sonne , when scho conceyuet hym of +te Holy Gost ,
CMMIRK-M34,109.2974

and so was made modyr to Godys sonne of Heuen . CMMIRK-M34,109.2975

The secunde joy was of Cristynmasse-day , when scho Was delyuerd of hur
sonne wythouten any payne of hur body . CMMIRK-M34,109.2976

For ryght as scho conceyuet hym wythout any lust of flessche , ryght soo
scho was delyuerd wythout any payne of flesche . CMMIRK-M34,109.2977

The +tryd joy was on Astyr-day , when hur sonne ros from deth to lyue ,
CMMIRK-M34,109.2978

and come to hur , CMMIRK-M34,109.2979

and kyssud hur , CMMIRK-M34,109.2980

and made hur more joyfull of hys vpryst , +ten scho was sory before of
hys deth . CMMIRK-M34,109.2981

The fourth joy was , when scho segh hym stye vp ynto Heuen on Holy
+Tursday , yn +te same flessche and blod +tat he toke of hur body .
CMMIRK-M34,109.2982

The v. joye was yn hur assumpcyon , when scho segh hur swete sonne come
wyth gret multitude of angelys and sayntys , and fache hur ynto Heuen ,
CMMIRK-M34,109.2983

and crowned hur qwene of Heuen , and emperess of hell , and lady of all
+te world . CMMIRK-M34,109.2984

Sy+ten all +tat ben yn Heuen , schull do hur reuerens and worschyp ;
CMMIRK-M34,109.2985

and +tos +tat ben yn hell , schall be buxom to hur byddyng ;
CMMIRK-M34,109.2986

and +tos +tat byn yn erthe , schall do hur seruyce and gretyng .
CMMIRK-M34,109.2987

Thes byn +te v joyes +tat scho had of hur swete sonne Ihesu .
CMMIRK-M34,109.2988

Then schull +ge know well +tat he schall neuer fele +te <P_110> soroues
of hell +tat woll deuotly yche day grete hur wyth +tes v joyes yn erthe
. CMMIRK-M34,110.2989

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,110.2991

<$$heading>

I rede of a holy mayden +tat was deuot yn our lady seruyce and , ych day
, grete hur wyth +tese v joyes . CMMIRK-M34,110.2993

+Ten hyt befell +tat scho was seke ; CMMIRK-M34,110.2994

and when scho felde wele +tat scho schuld be ded , scho sykyd wondyr
sore CMMIRK-M34,110.2995

and made gret moon , for bycause +tat scho wyst not whedir scho schuld
goo aftyr hur deth . CMMIRK-M34,110.2996

+Ten come our lady to hur CMMIRK-M34,110.2997

and sayde : ' Why art +tou soo sory , +tat has made me oft joye ,
gretyng me wyth +te v joyes +tat I hadde of my sonne ? Wherfor wytte
+tou well +tat +tou schalt goo wyth me to +te blys +tat euer schall last
. ' CMMIRK-M34,110.2998

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,110.3000

<$$heading>

I rede of Saynt Fylbert +tat was negh ded of +te swynasy .
CMMIRK-M34,110.3002

And when hys +trote was soo gret swolne , +tat he myght vnne+te draw
breth , our lady come to hym CMMIRK-M34,110.3003

and sayde : ' Fylbert , my seruant , hyt wer euell ydone +tat +ty throt
schuld suffyr lengyr +tys penance , +tat ha+te so oft gladyd me wyth my
v joyes . ' CMMIRK-M34,110.3004

And +terwyth toke out hyr swete pappe , CMMIRK-M34,110.3005

and mylked on hys +trote , CMMIRK-M34,110.3006

and soo +gode hur way . CMMIRK-M34,110.3007

And anon , wyth +tat , he was hole as a fyssh , CMMIRK-M34,110.3008

and +tonked our lady heyly , CMMIRK-M34,110.3009

and taght all othyr to do soo , CMMIRK-M34,110.3010

and at his endyng went to +te blys of Heuen ; to +te whech blys God
bryng vs to . CMMIRK-M34,110.3011

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,110.3012

<heading>

25 . CMMIRK-M34,110.3014

DE DOMINICA IN PASSIONE DOMINI NOSTRI IHESU CRISTI .
CMMIRK-M34,110.3015

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , +tys day ys called yn holy chyrch +te Sonenday yn
+te Passyon ; for bycause +tat our Lord Ihesu Cryst began hys passyon
+tys day . CMMIRK-M34,110.3017

The Iewys and +te Pharyses haden suche envy to hym , for bycause +tat he
tolld hom hor vyses and repreuet hor wyked lyuyng , +tat +tys day +tay
wer fully assentyd to do hym to deth . CMMIRK-M34,110.3018

Oft befor +tay werne about to haue slayne hym , CMMIRK-M34,110.3019

but euer +tay were lettyd by drede of +te pepull ; CMMIRK-M34,110.3020

for +te pepull heldyn hym a profyt . CMMIRK-M34,110.3021

But +tys day +tay knytten hom soo <P_111> togedyr , +tat +tay n@ @olde
spare no lengyr , but algatys he schuld be ded . Wherfor , as +te
gospell of +tis day tellyth , as Crist preched yn +te tempull , +te
Iewes spytwysly rebuket hym so foule , +tat +tay sayde to hymselfe +tat
he had a deuell wythyn hym ; and all for@ @to tempte hym , for@ @to haue
made hym to haue spoken summe worde by +te wheche +tay myght haue put
hym to repreue . CMMIRK-M34,111.3022

And for he told hom +tat he was Godys sonne of heuen , +tay wer about to
haue stenet hym to +te deth ; CMMIRK-M34,111.3023

but for he knew well hor malyce , he hudde hym , CMMIRK-M34,111.3024

and +gode from hom out of +te tempull . CMMIRK-M34,111.3025

Thus , good men , Crist began +tys day hys passyon . Wherfor holy
chyrch redy+te +tys weke +te boke of +te prophyt Ieremy +tat fyrst
prophesyet of Crystys passyon , and told how and on what maner Iewys
schuld do hym to deth . CMMIRK-M34,111.3026

Then schull +ge know wele : ryght as +te Iewys pursuet Cryst to +te deth
whyll he was yn er+te , ry+gt soo byn +ter now mony false crysten men
+tat pursuen hym regnyng yn Heuen . CMMIRK-M34,111.3027

And Saynt Austyn say+t +tat he synneth more greuysly +tat pursuet hym
regnyng in Heuen , +ten +te Iewes +tat dydden hym to de+te yn erthe .
CMMIRK-M34,111.3028

Then , +gif +ge wyll know whech +tos byn , taky+t hede how Crist wyth
hys owne mou+te markyth hom , +ter@ @as he says +tus yn +te gospell of
+tys day , wher he sayth +tus : ' Whosoeuer ys of God , heryth Godys
worde . ' Wherfor +ge here not , for +ge be not of God .
CMMIRK-M34,111.3029

Thus Cryst hymselfe schewyth whech +tay ben +tat pursuen hym now yn
Heuen . CMMIRK-M34,111.3030

These byn glad , when +tay haue don a fowle dede , CMMIRK-M34,111.3031

and ben growndud yn fowle lyuyng , CMMIRK-M34,111.3032

and wol not amend hom for no +tyng , for no prechyng , ne for no techyng
. CMMIRK-M34,111.3033

But euer defendyth hor gult by ensampull of such o+tyr as +tay ben ,
CMMIRK-M34,111.3034

and ben wro+te and redy for@ @to fyght wyth hym +tat tellyth hom hor
so+te . CMMIRK-M34,111.3035

For more harme ys : +te world ys such +tat he schall haue mony enmys
+tat say+t +te so+te now allway . CMMIRK-M34,111.3036

Herby I may schewe you an ensampull . CMMIRK-M34,111.3037

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,111.3039

<$$heading>

I rede +tat +ter was summe tyme a mawmet in a cite , +tat wold tell of
all stolen +tyngys , and who hyt had . CMMIRK-M34,111.3041

So was +ter a +gong man +tat had stolen a +tyng , CMMIRK-M34,111.3042

and was adred of +tat mawmet , <P_112> lest he had dyskeuered hym ,
CMMIRK-M34,112.3043

and sayde : ' Wele I wot +tou myght do me schame and vyleny , yf +tou
wolt . CMMIRK-M34,112.3044

But by +tat God I leue on , and +tou dyskeuer me , I woll breke +ty hed
' ; CMMIRK-M34,112.3045

and so +gode forth hys way . CMMIRK-M34,112.3046

Then sone aftyr com +tay +tat mysseden hor +tyng , prayng +te mawmet to
tell hom who hyt had . CMMIRK-M34,112.3047

And when +tay prayde soo longe , at +te last , +tys mawmet spake
CMMIRK-M34,112.3048

and sayde +tus : ' Tymes byn changet , CMMIRK-M34,112.3049

men byn worsont ; CMMIRK-M34,112.3050

and now +ter may no man say +te soth , but +gef hys hed be broken .
CMMIRK-M34,112.3051

Thus wo ys +te trew man +tat lyuyth yn +tys world , CMMIRK-M34,112.3052

for he schall be so pluckyt at on yche syde , +tat he schall not wytte
to whom he schall dyskeuer hys counseyl ; CMMIRK-M34,112.3053

for +tylk +tat wyll fyrst dessayue a man , +tay woll fyrst speke fayre
to hym . ' CMMIRK-M34,112.3054

For , as we redyn yn +te Boke of Kyngys , how +ter wer two knyghtys +tat
envyut o+tyr : Ioab and Amasa . CMMIRK-M34,112.3055

Then , on a day as +tay meten , Ioab logh on Amansa CMMIRK-M34,112.3056

and sayd : ' Hayl bro+ter ! ' CMMIRK-M34,112.3057

and toke hym by +te chynne , CMMIRK-M34,112.3058

and cussed hym ; CMMIRK-M34,112.3059

but wyth +tat o+tyr hond , he smote hym yn +te backe CMMIRK-M34,112.3060

and slogh hym . CMMIRK-M34,112.3061

Thus faryth moche pepull now-on-dayes +tat woll speke fayre befor a man
, but bihynd +tay woll sle hym wyth hor tong . CMMIRK-M34,112.3062

Thes ben +tay +tat heron not Godys worde , ny setty+t noght +terby ;
CMMIRK-M34,112.3063

for +togh +tay heren hit wyth hor heres , hit synkyth not ynto hor
hertys . Wherfor God compleyny+te greuously by +tis holy prophyt Ieremy
and sayth +tus : ' What gult fonde your fadyrs why +tat +tay wenton fro
me , CMMIRK-M34,112.3064

+gyf I haue trespast to you yn any+tyng , telly+te ! '
CMMIRK-M34,112.3065

Allas , for schame to your pryde , God ys yn +te ryght .
CMMIRK-M34,112.3066

And +get he trety+te wyth you +tat ben yn +te wrong ;
CMMIRK-M34,112.3067

he proferyth mercy or we hyt aske ; CMMIRK-M34,112.3068

he mekyth hym to vs +tat dysplesyth hym , CMMIRK-M34,112.3069

and schewyth loue +ter non ys wor+ty . CMMIRK-M34,112.3070

Thus byn our hertys hardyr +ten stonys , CMMIRK-M34,112.3071

thus byn we worse +ten Iewes , CMMIRK-M34,112.3072

thus ben we vnkynd to hym +tat schewyth vs al maner kyndnesse , and euer
cryeth to vs , CMMIRK-M34,112.3073

and sayt +tus : ' I am lyft on hegh , CMMIRK-M34,112.3074

for all schuld here me speke . CMMIRK-M34,112.3075

Comyth a+geyne to me , and I woll receyue you . CMMIRK-M34,112.3076

Loo , myne armes ben sprad on brode , redy to klyp you ;
CMMIRK-M34,112.3077

my hed ys bowed , redy to kysse you ; CMMIRK-M34,112.3078

my syde ys open , to schew my hert to you ; CMMIRK-M34,112.3079

my hondys and fete bledyth , to schew you what I suffryd for you .
CMMIRK-M34,112.3080

And +get +ge wryeth away CMMIRK-M34,112.3081

and grucched to <P_113> come to me , CMMIRK-M34,113.3082

and +gif +ge wyll not come to me for loue , com for +gyftys .
CMMIRK-M34,113.3083

Comyth to me , and I wyll +geue you tresur wythout nombyr ;
CMMIRK-M34,113.3084

I schall avance you wythout comperson : CMMIRK-M34,113.3085

I wyll +geue you lyfe and rest and pees wythout ende , soo +tat all +te
defaute schall be yn you , and not yn me . CMMIRK-M34,113.3086

+Tus God prechet and techeth , CMMIRK-M34,113.3087

and +get +ter byn but few +tat wyll here hym , ne +tat hauen +tes wordes
sadde yn hor hertys . CMMIRK-M34,113.3088

But all byn bysy to be rych and wylfull yn +te lyfe +tat ys here ,
CMMIRK-M34,113.3089

and recchyth lytyll of +te lyfe +tat ys comyng , CMMIRK-M34,113.3090

and takyth lytyll hede how sore Crist suffryd , to bryng vs to blys +tat
euer schall last . Wherfor Saynt Barnard yn Cristys person makyth gret
waymentacyon for +te vnkyndnesse +tat he sethe yn men and sayth +tus : '
Thow man for vanyte syngyst and rowtes , CMMIRK-M34,113.3091

and I for +te crye and wepe ; CMMIRK-M34,113.3092

+tou hast on +ty hed a garland of flowres , CMMIRK-M34,113.3093

and I for +te on my hed suffyr a wre+te of stynkyng +tornes ;
CMMIRK-M34,113.3094

+tou hast on +ty hondys whyt gloues , CMMIRK-M34,113.3095

and I for +ty loue haue blody hondys ; CMMIRK-M34,113.3096

thow hast +tyn armes sprad on brode ledyng carallys ,
CMMIRK-M34,113.3097

and I for +ty loue haue myn armes sprad on +te tre , and tachut wyth
grete nayles ; CMMIRK-M34,113.3098

thow hast +ty clo+te raggyd and pynchyt smale , CMMIRK-M34,113.3099

and I haue my body for thy loue full of gret walus .
CMMIRK-M34,113.3100

And ouer +tys +tat greuyth me most , +tou settyst no+gt by my passyon
that I suffryd for +te ; CMMIRK-M34,113.3101

but by me horrybull swerus all day , CMMIRK-M34,113.3102

vmbraydys me sweryng by my face , by myn een , by myn armes , by myn
nayles , by myn hert , by my blod , and soo forth , by all my body .
CMMIRK-M34,113.3103

And soo +tou marterys me by a foule vse and custom of sweryng , +tat
schuldust do reuerence and worschip to my wondys and to my passion ,
+tat I suffred soo sore for +ty sake . ' CMMIRK-M34,113.3104

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,113.3106

<$$heading>

I rede yn +te Gestus of +te Romayns +tat +te Emperour send a gret man to
a lond , to be a justice ouer hom . CMMIRK-M34,113.3108

But befor his comyng , +ter was no man +tat cowthe swere non o+tyr oth
bot +gey and nay . CMMIRK-M34,113.3109

Then aftyr +tat +tys justice come , he made all men to swere on bokes ,
yn schyres and hundurdes . CMMIRK-M34,113.3110

And he and all his men wer soo ywont for@ @to swere by Godys passion ,
and armes , and sydys , and blody wondys , +tat all +te pepull toke
<P_114> at hom soo yn vse , +tat all +te pepull swere as horrybull as
+tay dyd . CMMIRK-M34,114.3111

Then , on a day , as +tys justyce sate yn hys justyre , yn sight of all
men , +ter come yn +te fayryst woman +tat euer +tay seghen , clothyd all
yn grene , and broght a fayre child yn hor lappe , blody and all
tomarturd . CMMIRK-M34,114.3112

And ho sayde to +te justyce : ' Sir , what byn +tay wor+ty +tat han +tus
ferd wyth my child ? ' CMMIRK-M34,114.3113

Then sayde +te justyce : ' +Tay byn worthi to haue +te deth . '
CMMIRK-M34,114.3114

Then scho vnswared and saide +tus : ' +Tou and +ty men wyth your
horrybull o+tes han dismembryd my sonne Ihesu Cryst , +tat I am modyr to
, CMMIRK-M34,114.3115

and soo +ge haue taght all +tys lond . Wherfor +tou schalt haue thyn
owne dome . ' CMMIRK-M34,114.3116

Then anon , yn sight of all the pepull , the erth opened
CMMIRK-M34,114.3117

and +te justyce fell don ynto hell . CMMIRK-M34,114.3118

And soo aftyr +te pepull was gretly agast CMMIRK-M34,114.3119

and amendyd hom of hor o+tys . Wherfor , syrs and dames , do +ge as
crysten men schulden do : CMMIRK-M34,114.3120

leue+t your o+tys , CMMIRK-M34,114.3121

and do+te reuerence to Cristys passyon and to hys wondys ,
CMMIRK-M34,114.3122

and techi+te all o+tyr to do +te same . CMMIRK-M34,114.3123

And kneli+t now adon , prayng to Crist +tat he for+geue you +tat +ge
haue trespassyd a+geyns hym by recheles sweryng , bysechyng hym for hys
gret mercy for@ @to kepe you yn tyme comyng , +tat +ge may amend +tat
+ge haue don mys a+geynes hym and his swete modyr , and haue +te blys
+tat he boght you to . CMMIRK-M34,114.3124

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,114.3125

<heading>

26 . CMMIRK-M34,114.3127

DOMINICA IN RAMIS PALMARUM SERMO BREUIS . CMMIRK-M34,114.3128

<$$heading>

Cristen men and woymen , as +ge knowy+te well , +tys day is called
Palme-Sonday . CMMIRK-M34,114.3130

But for bycause +tat +te seruyce of +tys day is so long , I woll
schortly tell you whi +tys day is called soo . CMMIRK-M34,114.3131

Thys day , as Seynt Ion telly+te , our Lord Ihesu Crist was in Bethany
wher he reisyd a mon from de+te to lyue +tat had layne four dayes
stynkyng yn +te tombe , +tat was called La+garus , and was bro+tyr to
Mary Mawdelen and Martha , hyr sustyr . CMMIRK-M34,114.3132

Then wist Ihesu Crist hys passion was negh , CMMIRK-M34,114.3133

and toke La+gar wyth hym , CMMIRK-M34,114.3134

and so rydyng on an asse +gode to Ierusalem . CMMIRK-M34,114.3135

And when +te pepull herdyn +tat , all +goden a+geynes hym , bo+te for
<P_115> wondyr of +te mon +tat was raysud from de+te to lyue , and also
for@ @to do Crist worschip . Wherfor mony strawed flowres in hys way ,
and mony broken branches of olyue and of palme and keston in +te way ,
and spradden clo+tys in +te way , makyng melody and syngyng +tus : '
Blessid be +tou +tat comys in +te name of our Lord , Kyng of Israel ! '
Wherfor holy chyrch , +tys day , make+te a solemp procescyon in mynd of
+tat procescyon +tat Crist made +tis day , and also for mony of you ben
raysed from de+te to lyue +tat han leyn four dayes dede , +tat ben
synfull +toghtys , synfull speches , synfull werkes , and synfull
customs . CMMIRK-M34,115.3136

But now I hope +tat +ge ben reysed from de+te of euel lyuyng to +te lyfe
of grace , and +tat angeles yn Heuen maken as moche melody yn Heuen for
your arysyng as +te pepull dyd for wondyr of rysyng of +te La+gare .
CMMIRK-M34,115.3137

But for bycause we haue no olyf +tat beren grene leues , we taken ive
instede of that and palmes CMMIRK-M34,115.3138

and beren about on procession ; CMMIRK-M34,115.3139

and so +tys day we callne Palme-Sonday . CMMIRK-M34,115.3140

And as +tay songen and duden worschip to Crist in hor procescyon , ry+gt
soo we worschip +tis day +te cros yn our procescyon , +trys knelyng to
+te cros yn worschip and in mynd of hym +tat was for vs don on +te
crosse , and welcomyng hym wyth songe into +te chirch , as +tay welcomet
hym syngyng into +te cyte of Ierusalem . CMMIRK-M34,115.3141

+Ten asky+te Ion Belet a qwestion : ' Sy+ten +tat Crist had +te grattest
worschyp ridyng on an asse +tat euer he had in +tys world , and aftyr of
+te same pepull was don on +te cros in +te grattest vyleny +tat euer he
$had {TEXT:ha_followed_by_space_for_one_letter} yn +tys world , whi we
worschip +te cros , and not +te asse ? ' CMMIRK-M34,115.3142

To +tys qwestion he vnswares hymselfe CMMIRK-M34,115.3143

and say+te +tat all +te worschip of +tys world turny+te all to vanyte
and to no+gt , and maky+te a man bo+te to for+geton hys God and hymselfe
, +ter@ @as myschef and woo maky+te a man to thynke on hys God and to
know hymselfe . CMMIRK-M34,115.3144

Herefor , cristen men , putty+te away vanyte +tat bryngy+te a man to
euerlastyng payne , CMMIRK-M34,115.3145

and worschipy+te +te cros +tat was cause of our saluacyon and +te ioy
+tat we all hopyn for@ @to come to . CMMIRK-M34,115.3146

Then , when Crist was comen into +te cyte , anon he +gode into +te
tempull , CMMIRK-M34,115.3147

and drof out all byers and sellers +tat he fonde <P_116> +teryn
CMMIRK-M34,116.3148

and sayde to hom : ' My fadyrs house ys a hous of prayers and of oresons
, and +ge han made hyt a den of +teues ' ; +geuyng ych cristyn man hegh
ensampull for@ @to leue chaffaryng on Sonday , and namly in chirch .
CMMIRK-M34,116.3149

Ano+tyr skyll ys whi +tys day is called Palme-Sonday , for bycause palme
bytokeny+te victory . Wherfor ych cristyn man and woman schall +tys day
bere palmes yn processyon , schewyng +tat he ha+te foghten wyth +te fend
, and ha+te +te vyctory of hym by clene schryft of mow+te and repentans
of hert , and mekely don his penance , and in +tis wyse ouercome his
enmy . CMMIRK-M34,116.3150

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,116.3152

<$$heading>

Hit was +te maner , summe tyme , as we redyn in +te Gestys of +te
Romayns , +tat when any lond of the world ros a+geyne +te Emperour of
Rome , anon +te Emperour wold send a wor+ty knyght wyth pepull ynogh to
+tat lond , for@ @to set hyt downe and make hit soget to +te Emperour .
CMMIRK-M34,116.3154

And when +te kny+gt had so don , +ten schuld he be set in a chayre , as
ryaly as he my+gt , wyth clo+tys of gold drawyn ouer hym and a palme in
hys hond , schewyng +tat he had +te victory , CMMIRK-M34,116.3155

and so wyth gret worschip schuld be lad a+geyne to Rome .
CMMIRK-M34,116.3156

But when he come +trogh any cyte , +ter schuld a man stond by hym in +te
char , and bete hym in +te mowth wyth a branche of olyf , sayng +tus : '
Anothe selitos ' ; +tat is to say : ' Know thyselfe . ' As +togh he
sayde to hym +tus : +tagh +tou haue +te victory now , hit may happen
+tat +tou schalt ano+tyr tyme have +te wors , and so turne +te in as
moch vyleny as now +tis do+te to worschip ; wherfor be not prowde of
+tyselfe . CMMIRK-M34,116.3157

Thus , good men and woymen , +ge schull bete yourselfe in +te mow+te of
your soule wythyn-forth wyth +te branch of olyfe , +tat ys , wyth +te
uertu of mekenes . CMMIRK-M34,116.3158

And soo hold mekenes in hert , beyng allway adred , lest +ge fall
a+geyne to your synne , and soo lese +te worschyp +tat +ge haue now
ywonon , wittyng well +tat mekenes ys +te vertu +tat most ouercomen your
enmy , and most growndy+t a man in doyng good werk and vertu . Wherfor
+ge schull all now pray to God +tat he woll of his hygh grace +geue you
myght and streng+te in tyme comyng soo to ouercome your enmy , +tat +ge
may haue +te victory of hym , and haue +te blys +tat euer schall last .
CMMIRK-M34,116.3159

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,116.3160

<P_117>

<heading>

27 . CMMIRK-M34,117.3163

SERMO ISTE DEBET DICI AD TENEBRAS . CMMIRK-M34,117.3164

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , as +ge se holy chyrch vsy+te +tes +tre dayes ,
for@ @to say seruyce in +te euentyde in derkenes . Wherfor hyt ys
called wyth you teneblus ; CMMIRK-M34,117.3166

but holy chyrch cally+te hit tenebras , +tat is to say , derkenes .
CMMIRK-M34,117.3167

Then why +tys seruyce is don in derkenes , holy fadyrs wryty+te to vs
+tre skylles . CMMIRK-M34,117.3168

On skyll ys , for bycause +tat Crist +tys nyght , before +tat he was
taken , he +gode +tries ynto +te hull of Olyuete , CMMIRK-M34,117.3169

and prayde his fadyr to put away +te hard payne +tat hym was toward , yf
hit wer his wyll and elles not ; CMMIRK-M34,117.3170

and soo , for drede of +te passion +tat he feld in his spyryte comyng ,
he swat blod and watyr . CMMIRK-M34,117.3171

Ano+tyr skyll ys , for anon , aftyr mydny+gt , Iudas gedyrd knyghtys ,
strong and bold , wyth o+tyr gret company of mysdoers , and comen for@
@to take Crist . CMMIRK-M34,117.3172

But for hyt was derke nyght , and +tay cow+te not well know Crist by
Saynt Iame +tat was soo lyke to Crist , +tat he a was callyd Cristys
brothyr , lest +tay hadden taken Iames ynsted of Crist , Iudas bade hom
take hym +tat he kyssud . CMMIRK-M34,117.3173

And soo wyth a kysse betrayde hys maystyr . CMMIRK-M34,117.3174

And so token Crist all in darkenes , CMMIRK-M34,117.3175

and dydden hym all +te despyte and vylany yn bobbyng and spyttyng yn hys
louely face . CMMIRK-M34,117.3176

Tho +tryd skyll ys , for when Crist was naylet fote and hond , hongyng
on +te cros , +tre oures of +te day from vndure to none , +te sonne
wythdro+g hyr ly+gt CMMIRK-M34,117.3177

and was darke +trogh +te world , schewyng +tat +te maker of ly+gt payned
+tat tyme to de+te . CMMIRK-M34,117.3178

For +tes +tre skylles +te seruyce of +tes +tre nyghtys is don yn
darkenes . +Te whech seruyce maky+te mynd how Iudas be-trayde Crist ,
and how +tes Iewes comen wyth fors and armes as priuely as +tay cow+t ,
for drede of +te pepull . Wherfor to +tys seruyce ys no bell rongyn ,
but a sowne made of tre wherby ych cristen man and woman is enformed ,
for@ @to com to +tys seruyce wythout noyse makyng . CMMIRK-M34,117.3179

And all +tat +tay spekyn , goyng and comyng , schall sowne of +te tre
+tat Crist was don on , and of +te <P_118> wordes +te whech Crist spake
hongyng on +te tre , +tat ben : how he comawndyd his modyr to Saynt Ion
, his dyscypull , and how he grawnty +te +tef paradyse +tat askyd mercy
, and how he betoke his soule ynto his fadyr hond , and so +gelde vp +te
gost . CMMIRK-M34,118.3180

+Tus , goyng and comyng to +tys seruyce , ych cristen man and woman
schall leue talkyng of all vanyte , and only talke of +te cros .
CMMIRK-M34,118.3181

Ano+tyr skyll is , when +tat Iudas had trayde Crist , and sy+g +tat by
his traytery he schuld be ded , anon he fell ynto dyspayre , and +gode
and hongyd hymself on a tre , so +tat he wra+tut Crist more for hongyng
hymselfe yn dyspayre , +ten dyd +te traytery +tat he dyd befor .
CMMIRK-M34,118.3182

For Crist is so mercyabull in hymself , +tat he wold haue +gyuen hym
mercy , and he wold haue askyd hyt wyth contryte hert .
CMMIRK-M34,118.3183

Also at +tys seruyce is set a hers wyth candull brennyng , aftyr as +te
vse ys som plase moo , summe las . +Te whech ben qwenched ych on aftyr
o+tyr , yn schewyng how Cristis dyscypull stelen from hym , when he was
taken , yche on aftyr o+tyr . CMMIRK-M34,118.3184

But when all ben quenchyd , +get on leue+te lyght . +Te whech ys borne
away a whyll , whill +te clerkes syngen Kyrieleysons and +to versys wyth
+te whech bytokeny+te +te woman +tat made lamentacyon ouer Cristis
sepulcur . CMMIRK-M34,118.3185

Then , aftyr +tys , +te candyll ys broght a+geyne , and all o+tyr at hit
jlyght . +Te whech bytokenyth Crist , +tat was for a whyll ded and hud
yn hys sepulcur , but sone aftyr he ros from de+t to lyue , and +gaf
ly+gt of lyfe to all hom +tat werne qwenchit by dyspayre .
CMMIRK-M34,118.3186

+Te strokes +tat +te prest +geuy+t on +te boke bytokeny+te +te clappys
of +tondyr +tat Crist brake hell-+gatys wyth , when he com +tedyr and
spylud hom . CMMIRK-M34,118.3187

Now , good men , +ge haue herde what +tys seruyce betokeny+te . Wherfor
holdu+te hit in your hert , and be +ge not vnkynd to your God , +tat
+tus suffryd for you ; CMMIRK-M34,118.3188

for vnkyndnes ys a synne +tat he haty+t he+gly . Wherfor Seynt Ambros
say+te +tat +ter may no man fynde a payne , for@ @to poynych dewly +te
vyce of vnkyndnes . CMMIRK-M34,118.3189

<P_119>

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,119.3192

<$$heading>

An ensampull of +tys I fynd , as Alisandyr Nekkam telle+te ,
CMMIRK-M34,119.3194

and is +tys . CMMIRK-M34,119.3195

+Ter was summe tyme a kny+gt +tat went out of his contrey into ferre
contray , for@ @to sech aventurs . CMMIRK-M34,119.3196

And so hyt fell +tat he come into a gret forest and herd a gret noyse of
a best +tat was , as hym +to+gt , in gret dystres . CMMIRK-M34,119.3197

Then , for he wold se what hit was , he +gode nygh CMMIRK-M34,119.3198

and sech how an horrybull neddyr of gretnes and of leng+te had
vmbeclyppyd a lyon , and soo bond hym to a tre as he lened hym to slepe
. CMMIRK-M34,119.3199

And when +tys lyon awoke , and fond hymself fast , and my+gt not helpe
hymselfe , he made an hygys noyse ; CMMIRK-M34,119.3200

and when he saw +tys knyght , +ten made he grettyr noyse , wilnyng helpe
of hym . CMMIRK-M34,119.3201

Then had +tys kny+gt compassyon of +tys lyon , CMMIRK-M34,119.3202

but +get he dred , lest , when he had losyd hym , he wold haue fallen to
hym and fo+gten wyth hym . CMMIRK-M34,119.3203

But +get , for bycause +tat he was a kny+gt , and saw +te lyon , +tat ys
kyng of all bestys , yn destres , he drogh out his swerde ,
CMMIRK-M34,119.3204

and smot +te edyr yn two pecys . CMMIRK-M34,119.3205

Then anon , +te lyon felyng hym lose , he fell downe to +te knightes
fete as meke as a spaynell . CMMIRK-M34,119.3206

And soo allgate , ny+gt and day , in ych pase , he sewet +tys kny+gt ,
CMMIRK-M34,119.3207

and lay at his bedys fete ych ny+gt , CMMIRK-M34,119.3208

and in ich turment and batayle he helpe hys maystyr ; soo +tat all men
speken of +tys knyght and of +tys lyon . CMMIRK-M34,119.3209

+Get , by counsell of summe men , he had +tys lyon yn suspescyon .
Wherfor when he +gode a+geyne hom to hys one contre , priuelych , wyll
+te lyon slepte , he +gode into a schyp , and soo saylet forth .
CMMIRK-M34,119.3210

But when +te lyon woke and myst hys maystyr , anon he +gaf a gret rore ,
CMMIRK-M34,119.3211

and +gode aftyr hym to +te see ; CMMIRK-M34,119.3212

and when he se non o+tyr bote , he swam aftyr hym als ferre as he my+gt
, CMMIRK-M34,119.3213

and when his my+gt fayled hym , +ten was he drowned .
CMMIRK-M34,119.3214

By +tys kny+gt we may vndyrstond Crist , Godys sonne of Heuen , +tat
come of a ferre contre , +tat ys , out of Heuen , into +tys world , and
fonde mankynd bondyn wyth +te old neddyr , +tat is , wyth +te fende , to
+te tre of ynobedyens . Wherfor wyth +te swerde of his holy worde and
wyth hys hard pascyon , he lowsed monkynd out of hys bondys and made hym
fre . Wherfor ich man +tat is kynd to hys God , he woll +tonke hym for
+tat lawsyng , and loue hym , and <P_120> be buxom to hym all +te tyme
+tat he lyue+te here , sewyng +te lore and +te techyng of hys God .
CMMIRK-M34,120.3215

And soo , when he passyth +trogh +te salt-watyr of payne of de+te , he
schall com to +te joy +tat euer schall last . To +te whech ioy God
bryng you and me . CMMIRK-M34,120.3216

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,120.3217

<heading>

28 . CMMIRK-M34,120.3219

SERMO DICENDUS AD PAROCHIANOS IN PARASCEUE DOMINI HOC MODO .
CMMIRK-M34,120.3220

<$$heading>

Cristen men and women , +ge schull vndyrstond +tat Crist +tys day sched
hys hert-blod for vs . CMMIRK-M34,120.3222

As +ge all knowen wele , +tys day is called Good Fryday ;
CMMIRK-M34,120.3223

for all +tyng turned +te pepull to good +tat Crist +tys day suffryd for
hom vndyr Pounce Pylat . CMMIRK-M34,120.3224

Then , for hyt ys oft sene , all euell bygynnyng ha+te a foule endyng ,
wherfor we se now how +tys Pylat bygan and how he endyd ;
CMMIRK-M34,120.3225

and for he began cursetly , he endyd wrecchedly . CMMIRK-M34,120.3226

For as Seynt Austyn sayth : ' A cursyd lyuyng before , asky+te a cursyd
endyng aftyr ; CMMIRK-M34,120.3227

and he +tat for+gety+te God in his lyuyng , he schall for+gete hymself
yn his endyng . ' CMMIRK-M34,120.3228

Thus pylat was a kyngus sonne +tat was called Tyrus , +tat gate hym of a
woman +tat hatte Ato . CMMIRK-M34,120.3229

So when +tys chyld was borne , +ten setten +tay +te modyr name befor and
+ten +te graunsyre name aftyr , CMMIRK-M34,120.3230

and soo of bo+te hor names called hym Pylat . CMMIRK-M34,120.3231

+Ten aftyr +tat he was +tre +ger old , +te modyr bro+gt hym to +te
kyngys court to his fadyr . CMMIRK-M34,120.3232

Then had +te kyng by his wyfe ano+tyr sonne negh euen-old to Pylat .
CMMIRK-M34,120.3233

But for +tys chyld was yn all doyng more gentyll and more monfall ,
Pylat had envy to hym CMMIRK-M34,120.3234

and ofttyme fa+gt wyth hym . CMMIRK-M34,120.3235

So , at +te last , he slogh hym . CMMIRK-M34,120.3236

Soo when +tys chyld was ded , +te kyng was wondyr sory for hym ;
CMMIRK-M34,120.3237

but for he wold not sle hym +ten anon aftyr +tat o+tyr , and soo make
two harmes of on , he send Pylat to Rome , for@ @to be +ter yn hostage
for a tribet +tat +te kyng schuld +geue to +te Emperour .
CMMIRK-M34,120.3238

+Ten fell hit so +tat +te kyng of Fraunce had send his sonne also +tedyr
for +te same cause . CMMIRK-M34,120.3239

Then , for Pylat segh +tat he had more loue , and for men dydden +te
kyng sonne more reuerence +ten hym , he had envy +terto ,
CMMIRK-M34,120.3240

and on a day wayted his tyme , CMMIRK-M34,120.3241

and slogh hym . CMMIRK-M34,120.3242

Then , for he <P_121> was so fers and cursyd , +te Emperour , by consell
of +te Romayns , send hym ynto a contre +tat was called Ponse , wheryn
wer men so cursed , +tat +tay slogh all +tat wer send for@ @to be
maystyr ouyr hom . CMMIRK-M34,121.3243

So when Pylat come +tedyr , he conformed hym so to hor maners , +tat
wyth wyll and sleghtys he had +te maystry ouer hom ; CMMIRK-M34,121.3244

and soo gate his nome CMMIRK-M34,121.3245

and was called Pylat of Ponse . CMMIRK-M34,121.3246

Then when +tat Herod , kyng of Ierusalem , knew +te fershode of Pylat ,
he send aftyr hym , CMMIRK-M34,121.3247

and made hym lefetenant vndyr hym of all his lond of Iury .
CMMIRK-M34,121.3248

Then , for Pylat lyked well +tat offyce , priuely he send to +te
Emperour CMMIRK-M34,121.3249

and had his office confermyd of hym , vnwyttyng of Herod +te kyng .
Wherfor Herode and he wern enmys tyll +te tyme +tat Crist was taken ;
CMMIRK-M34,121.3250

and soo in +te assent of Cristys de+te +tay becom frendys .
CMMIRK-M34,121.3251

Then fell hit soo +tat +te Emperour was seke and send aftyr Cryst , to
hele hym ; CMMIRK-M34,121.3252

for hit was told hym +tat Crist helyd all men +tat come to hym .
CMMIRK-M34,121.3253

+Ten was Pylat adred CMMIRK-M34,121.3254

and toke on hym Cristys cote , soo +tat euer whill +tat cote was on hym
, +te Emperour and all o+tyr made hym gret chere . CMMIRK-M34,121.3255

Then had mony o+tyr gret wondyr why +te Emperour made hym so gret chere
, +tat befor had sworen his de+te , CMMIRK-M34,121.3256

and counseylet +te Emperour for@ @to dyspoyle hym . CMMIRK-M34,121.3257

And anon as Pylat was dyspoyled of Cristys cote , anon +te Emperour was
gretly agreued a+geynys hym , +tat he made to cast hym yn prison , tyll
he had taken counsell on what foule de+te he schuld dye .
CMMIRK-M34,121.3258

Then , when Pylat knewe +tat , anon wyth hys owne knyfe he slogh
hymselfe . CMMIRK-M34,121.3259

Then , when +te Emperour herd +tat , he made to bynd a gret ston to his
nekke , and cast hym into +te watyr of Tybur . CMMIRK-M34,121.3260

But for fendes madyn such a noyse abowte hym +ter , +tat all +te cyte
was afrayde +terof , he was cast ynto a watyr bytwyx too hylles .
CMMIRK-M34,121.3261

+Ter wer long tyme aftyr horribull syghtys yseen . CMMIRK-M34,121.3262

Vndyr +tis cursyd man our Lord Ihesu Crist +tys day suffred de+te for
all cristen pepull . CMMIRK-M34,121.3263

For when he was taken , +tay buffed hym CMMIRK-M34,121.3264

and bobbyd hym , CMMIRK-M34,121.3265

and aftyr striput hym naked , CMMIRK-M34,121.3266

and betyn soo dysputysly wyth scorgys all hys body , soo +tat from his
toppe to hys too was no+tyng laft hole on hym , but all ran on blod .
CMMIRK-M34,121.3267

And aftyr +tay wrythen a crowne of +tornys CMMIRK-M34,121.3268

and setten on his hed , CMMIRK-M34,121.3269

and so betyn hit on wyth staues of redys , +tat +te +tornys persed
<P_122> hys braynes . CMMIRK-M34,122.3270

And when +tay hadyn payned hym soo , thay ladden hym all blody toward
+te hull of Caluary , for@ @to be done to de+te . CMMIRK-M34,122.3271

Then woymen +tat seghen hym +tus ferd wyth , had compassyon of hym ,
CMMIRK-M34,122.3272

and wayled , CMMIRK-M34,122.3273

and wepyd for hym . CMMIRK-M34,122.3274

Then spake Crist to hom CMMIRK-M34,122.3275

and sayde : ' Doghturs of Ierusalem , wepy+te +ge noght on me ,
CMMIRK-M34,122.3276

but wepu+te on yourselfe and apon your chyldren ; CMMIRK-M34,122.3277

for +ter schall dayes come yn +te whech +ge schull blesse +te wombes
+tat wern barayne , and +te pappes +tat neuer +gaf sowke . '
CMMIRK-M34,122.3278

+Tus he +ten prophysyet before of wracch +tat aftyr fell on +tat cite of
Ierusalem for vengeans of hys de+te . +Te whech vengeans Ieremy +te
prophit speky+te of in trenis +tat is red +tes +tre dayes at tenebrys .
+Te whech was so horrybull of dyuerce myscheues and specyaly of hongyr .
Of +te whech Iosephus tellyth , +tat +ter was +ten yn +te cyte of
Ierusalem , when hit was beseget , so gret hungyr , +tat chyldyr lay +te
stretes full , for defawte of mete , criyng to hor modyr for mete .
CMMIRK-M34,122.3279

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,122.3281

<$$heading>

Then +ter was a woman of gret kynne +tat for hungyr toke hor one chyld
+tat scho fed wyth hor owne pappys , and slogh hyt , and partyd hyt yn
too . CMMIRK-M34,122.3283

Soo +te halfe scho rostud at +te fyre , CMMIRK-M34,122.3284

and half kepyd tyll +te morow . CMMIRK-M34,122.3285

Then , as men come by +te strete , +tay hadden sauer of +te rost
CMMIRK-M34,122.3286

and com yn , for@ @to haue parte . CMMIRK-M34,122.3287

But when +tay segh how +te modyr rostyd hur own child , +tay wern
anvgged +terof CMMIRK-M34,122.3288

and myght not ete . CMMIRK-M34,122.3289

+Ten toke +te modyr CMMIRK-M34,122.3290

and ete +terof boldly CMMIRK-M34,122.3291

and sayd : ' +Tis ys myn owne chyld +tat I bare of myn own body , and
fedde of my brest . CMMIRK-M34,122.3292

But +get I woll ray+ter ete hyt , +ten dee for hongyr . '
CMMIRK-M34,122.3293

+Tys I tell , for@ @to schew +te vengeans +tat fell ynto +tat cyte aftyr
Crystys de+te . CMMIRK-M34,122.3294

Soo aftyr +tat +tay had broght hym to Caluary , +tay strayned hym soo
wyth cordys on +te cros , +tat ych boon of hys body my+gt haue ben told
. CMMIRK-M34,122.3295

And soo nayled hys hondys and hys fete to +te cros , CMMIRK-M34,122.3296

and heuyn hym vp , +tat +te body paysyd soo downe , +tat +te blod ran
down by his armys and by his sidys , down to +te ground .
CMMIRK-M34,122.3297

And soo , when he schuld dey , he bygan , as Ion Belet telly+te ,
CMMIRK-M34,122.3298

and sayde : ' Deus , Deus meus , respice in me ! ' And so for+te all
+te IX psalmys sewyng , tyll he come to : ' In te , Domine , <P_123>
speram ! ' CMMIRK-M34,123.3299

And soo at +te verse : ' In manus tuas , Domine , ' while he seyde +tat
verse , he +gaf vp +te gost , +gevyng an hygh ensampull to cristen man
and woman for@ @to haue +tys verse yn mynde , when he schall +geld vp
+te gost . Wherfor yche man +tat con rede , schuld say +tes psalmes
+tys day ; CMMIRK-M34,123.3300

and he +tat say+te +tes ych Fryday , schall neuer dey euell de+te .
CMMIRK-M34,123.3301

Then , aftyr +te passyon , +ter suen orysons wyth knelyng at ych oryson
, saue at +te oryson +tat ys sayde for +te Iewes ; CMMIRK-M34,123.3302

at hyt holy chyrch knely+te not : CMMIRK-M34,123.3303

for +te Iewes as +tys day skornyd oure Lord knelyng thryse .
CMMIRK-M34,123.3304

Then , yn +tes orisons , holy chyrch prayth for all maner folke , for
Iewes , and Sarsyns , for herytykys , for scismatys .
CMMIRK-M34,123.3305

But for cursed men holy chyrch prayde not ; CMMIRK-M34,123.3306

for whill a man or a woman stondy+te acursed , he ys dampned befor God ,
CMMIRK-M34,123.3307

and schall be dampned for euermore , but yf he repent and aske mercy .
Wherfor Seynt Austyn say+te +tus : ' Yf +tat I wist for certeyne +tat my
fadyr wer dampned , I wold pray no mor for hym +ten a fende ' ;
CMMIRK-M34,123.3308

for +ter is no suffrage of holy chyrch +tat may help a dampned mon .
CMMIRK-M34,123.3309

Then , aftyr +te oryson , +te cros is bro+gt for+te , +te whech ych
cristen man and woman schall worschip +tys day , in worschip of hym +tat
as +tys day dyed on +te cros , and pray to God to for+geue all +tat haue
trespast a+geynys you , as Crist prayd hys fadyr to for+geue +tilke +tat
dydden hym to de+te +tis day , hongyng on +te cros .
CMMIRK-M34,123.3310

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,123.3312

<$$heading>

Thus dyd a knyght +tat was a gret lord , and had a +gong man to hys
sonne +te whech schuld haue ben hys ayre . +Te whech sonne ano+ter
kny+gt +tat wonet bysyde , as +tay fallen at debate , slogh +tys +gong
man ; wherfor +te fadyr of +tys +gong man +tat was ded , gedered a gret
company , and pursued +tys kny+gt +tat soo had slayne hys sonne , ny+gt
and day , +tat he my+gt nowher haue rest , bot ay flo+g for fere of
de+te . CMMIRK-M34,123.3314

Then fell hyt on a Good Fryday , when he saw all cristen men and woymen
draw to chirch , for@ @to worschip hor God , he +to+gt +tat Crist deyd
+tat day on +te cros for all mankynd , and put hym holy yn Godis mercy ,
and +gede to +te chyrch wyth o+tyr men , to here and to se Godys seruyce
. CMMIRK-M34,123.3315

But when he was in +te chyrch , anon +tat o+tyr knygt had <P_124>
warnyng , CMMIRK-M34,124.3316

and come wyth gret company of men wyth hym ynto +te chyrch , wyth his
swerd drawen in his hond . CMMIRK-M34,124.3317

And when +tat o+tyr kny+gt se+g and knew well he had trespast to heyly
a+geynes hym , he +gode a+geynys +tat o+tyr knyght , CMMIRK-M34,124.3318

and fell downe to +te grownd , wyth hys armes sprad abrod , as Crist
sprad hys armes on +te cros , CMMIRK-M34,124.3319

and sayd to hym : ' For his loue +tat +tys day sprad hys armes on +te
cros , and deyd for +te and me and all mankynd , and for+gaf +tylke +tat
dydden hym to de+te , haue mercy on me , CMMIRK-M34,124.3320

and for+geue me +tat I haue trespast a+geynys +te ! '
CMMIRK-M34,124.3321

Then +tys o+tyr kny+gt +to+gt +tat had ben to horrybull a dede for@ @to
haue don o+gt amys to hym +ter yn +te chirche , whill +tat he meked hym
soo , and soo lowly prayde of mercy for Cristys sake .
CMMIRK-M34,124.3322

And when he had well be+to+gt hym , he vnswared and sayde : ' Now , for
hys loue +tat +tis day deyd on +te crosse for mankynd , I for+geue +te ,
' CMMIRK-M34,124.3323

and toke hym vp , CMMIRK-M34,124.3324

and kyssyd hym , CMMIRK-M34,124.3325

and so went togedyr , to worschyp +te cros . CMMIRK-M34,124.3326

+Ten , when +tys kny+gt com crepyng to +te cros and kyssud +te fete ,
+te ymage losyd his armes , CMMIRK-M34,124.3327

and clyppyd +te kny+gt about +te necke , CMMIRK-M34,124.3328

and kyssyd hym , CMMIRK-M34,124.3329

and sayde +tus +tat all +te chyrch herd : ' I for+geue +te , as +tow
hast for+geuen for me . ' CMMIRK-M34,124.3330

+Tus schull +ge for+geue o+tyr for Cristis loue , and klip , and kys ,
and be frendes ; CMMIRK-M34,124.3331

and +ten woll Crist clyppe and kys you , and +geue you +te joy +tat euer
schall last . To +te whech joy God bryng you and me .
CMMIRK-M34,124.3332

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,124.3333

<heading>

29 . CMMIRK-M34,124.3335

SERMO ISTE SEQUENS NON DICENDUS EST AD PARASCEUES , SED QUAEDAM FORMACIO
NECESSARIA CAPELLANIS . HOC MODO . CMMIRK-M34,124.3336

<$$heading>

For hyt ys $oft ysene +tat lewde men +te wheche bu+te of mony wordys and
proude in hor wit , woll aske prestes dyuerse questyons of +tynges +tat
towchen to seruyce of holy chyrche , and namly of +tys tyme , and gladly
suche prestys as con not make a gray+te vnswar so , for@ @to put hom to
aschame , wherfor I haue tytuld here dyuerse poyntys whech +tat byn
nedfull to yche prest to know . CMMIRK-M34,124.3338

So he +tat woll loke and hold hit yn hys hert , <P_125> he may make an
vnswar , soo +tat he schall do hymselfe worschyp and o+tyr profyt .
CMMIRK-M34,125.3339

Furst , yf a man aske why Schere +Tursday ys called soo , say +tat in
holy chyrch hit is called our Lordys supperday . CMMIRK-M34,125.3340

For $+tylke day he sowped wyth hys dyscypuls openly ;
CMMIRK-M34,125.3341

and aftyr supper +gaf hom his flesche and hys blod for@ @to ete and for@
@to drynke ; CMMIRK-M34,125.3342

and sone aftyr waschod all hor fete , schewyng +te he+g mekenes +tat was
in hym and +te gret loue +tat he had to hom . CMMIRK-M34,125.3343

Hyt is alsoo in Englysch tonge : Scher +Tursday ; CMMIRK-M34,125.3344

for , in old fadyrs dayes , men wold +tat day make scher hom honest ,
CMMIRK-M34,125.3345

and dodde hor heddys , CMMIRK-M34,125.3346

and clyp hor berdys , CMMIRK-M34,125.3347

and so make hom onest a+geynes Astyr-day . CMMIRK-M34,125.3348

For , on +te morow , +tay wold do hor body non ese , but suffyr penance
yn mynd of hym +tat suffred so hard for hom . CMMIRK-M34,125.3349

On Settyrday +tay my+gt not haue whyll , what for long seruyce , what
for o+tyr occupacyon +tat +tay haden for +te weke comyng ;
CMMIRK-M34,125.3350

and aftyr mete was no tyme for holyday . CMMIRK-M34,125.3351

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,125.3353

<$$heading>

For I rede yn +te lyfe of Seynt Rychard +tat was bysy on a Settyrday
befor none , +tat he makud to schaue his berd on Settyrday aftyr none .
CMMIRK-M34,125.3355

And +ten was +te fende redy CMMIRK-M34,125.3356

and gedyrd vp +te herys ; CMMIRK-M34,125.3357

but when +tis holy man segh +tat , he coniured +te fende ,
CMMIRK-M34,125.3358

and bade hym tell why he dyd soo . CMMIRK-M34,125.3359

Then sayde he : ' For +tou dos no reuerence to Sonenday , +tat ys Godys
owne day ; to +te whech day ych man +tat ys cristen , ys holden for@ @to
do reuerence yn worschip of Cristys resurreccyon . Wherfor +tes heres I
woll kepe tyll +te day of dome in hegh repreue to +te .
CMMIRK-M34,125.3360

Then anon +tis man made leef his schavyng , CMMIRK-M34,125.3361

and toke +te herys of +te fende , CMMIRK-M34,125.3362

and made for@ @to bren hom yn hys owne hond for penance ;
CMMIRK-M34,125.3363

and soo abode half schauen and half vnschauen tyll +te Monday aftyr .
CMMIRK-M34,125.3364

This y sette here yn a repref of hom +tat sparyth not for@ @to worch on
Settyrdayes aftyr none . CMMIRK-M34,125.3365

Then , as John Belet tellyth and techy+te , on Scher +Tursday a man
schall dodde his hed and klippe his berd ; CMMIRK-M34,125.3366

and a prest schall schaue hys crowne , soo +tat +ter schall no+tyng be
bytwene <P_126> God almyghty and hym . CMMIRK-M34,126.3367

He schall alsoo schaue +te herys of his berd +tat comyth of superfluyte
of humors of +te stomok , and par +te nayles of his hondys +tat comy+t
of superfluyte of humors of +te hert . CMMIRK-M34,126.3368

So ry+gt as we schauen and scheren away +te superfluyte of ful+te
wythout , so we schall schaue and schere away +te superfluyte of synne
and of vyce wythin-for+te . CMMIRK-M34,126.3369

+Te vayle +tat ha+te be drawen all +te Lenton bytwene +te auter and +te
qwere , +tat bytokeny+te +te prophesy of Cristis passion +tat was huld
and vnknowen , tyll +tes days comen . +Te whech +tes dayes ben don away
, and +te auter opynly schewed to all men . CMMIRK-M34,126.3370

For +tes days Crist suffred so opynly hys passyon , +tat he sayde
hongyng on +te cros : ' Consummatum est ' ; that is : all +te prophesy
of my passion now ha+te an end . Wherfor +te clo+tys of +te auter byn
taken away ; CMMIRK-M34,126.3371

for Cristis clo+tys wern drawn of hym and don all naked , save hur lady
, his modyr , wonde hyr kerchef about hym to hyll his membrys .
CMMIRK-M34,126.3372

The auter-ston bytokeny+te Cristis body +tat was drawon on +te crosse as
ys a skyn of parchement on +te harow , soo +tat all his bonys my+gt be
told . CMMIRK-M34,126.3373

The besom +tat hit ys waschen wyth , betokeny+t +te scorges +tat beton
hys body , and +te +tornes +tat he was crowned wythall .
CMMIRK-M34,126.3374

The watyr and +te wyne +tat hyt is waschen wyth , betokne+te +te blod
and +te watyr +tat ran downe aftyr +te spere from Cristis hert +tat
waschet his body . CMMIRK-M34,126.3375

The wyne +tat is powred on +te v crossys , bytokne+te +te blod +tat ran
out of +te fyue wondys principale of hys body . CMMIRK-M34,126.3376

This day n@ @ys no pax +geuyn at mas , CMMIRK-M34,126.3377

for Iudas betrayde Crist +tys ny+gt wyth a cosse : CMMIRK-M34,126.3378

+tus was +te prophesy of +te passion +tys day endyd . Wherfor +tys
ny+gt , when he had sowped , he made +te sacrament of hys owne body ,
and +gaf hyt to hys dyscypulys for@ @to ete and for@ @to drynke , and so
began +te sacrament of +te masse and of +te new law ;
CMMIRK-M34,126.3379

and aftyr +tys soper , he wassched his dyscyples fete +tat was a maner
of new $folght . CMMIRK-M34,126.3380

For as he sayd +ten to Petyr : ' He +tat is waschen wyth watyr , he is
clene of $folght of all dedly synne , CMMIRK-M34,126.3381

he ha+te no nede but to wasche his fete , CMMIRK-M34,126.3382

for +tat bytokene+te +te affeccyon of venyall synne .
CMMIRK-M34,126.3383

<P_127>

Then , yf a man aske+t why prestes don not hor masse aftyr soper , as
Crist dyd , say +tou : for +tat was turned into more $honeste and mor
saluacyon of mannys soule . CMMIRK-M34,127.3385

For , as Hayme telly+t apon +te pystyll of Seynt Powle , mony yn +te
begynnyng of +te fayth comen to chyrch on +te Scher +Tursday .
CMMIRK-M34,127.3386

And +tylk +tat wer rych bro+gt mete and drynke wyth hom
CMMIRK-M34,127.3387

and +ter eten and dronken , tyll +tay wer dronke and to full of mete ,
CMMIRK-M34,127.3388

and soo at ny+gt token hor howsull , sayyng +tat Crist +gaf hom +tat
ensampull . CMMIRK-M34,127.3389

But whyll +te rych etyn and dronken , +te pore +tat had no+gt aboden ,
till +te rych had don , sor ahongyr ; CMMIRK-M34,127.3390

and +ten eton of relef , CMMIRK-M34,127.3391

and soo aftyr toke hor howsull . Wherfor , as +tys pystyll of +tys day
telly+te , Seynt Poule rebuke+te hom +terof , and turny+t +tat foule vse
into more $honeste and holynes , +tat is , for@ @to syng +te mas fastyng
, and all men for@ @to take hor howsull fastyng . CMMIRK-M34,127.3392

On Astyr-euen +te paschall is maky+te , CMMIRK-M34,127.3393

+tat bytokeny+te Crist ; CMMIRK-M34,127.3394

for as +te paschall is +te chef tapor +tat is in +te chyrch , so is
Crist +te chef saynt +tat ys in the chyrch . CMMIRK-M34,127.3395

Also +tys paschall bytokene+te +te pyler of fure +tat +gode befor +te
chyldyr of Israell , when +tay went out of Egypte into +te lond of
behest , +tat is now Ierusalem , CMMIRK-M34,127.3396

and as +tay +goden +trogh +te Red See , hole and sonde , seuen dayes ,
aftyr +tay comen to +te see all , ych day , CMMIRK-M34,127.3397

and +tonked God for hor passage . CMMIRK-M34,127.3398

Herfor holy chirch all +te Astyr-weke gon yn prosessyon to +te font ,
+tat is now +te Red See to all cristen pepull +tat ben folowed in font .
CMMIRK-M34,127.3399

For +te watyr yn +te fonte betokeny+t +te red blod and watyr +tat ran
down of +te wondys of Cristis syde in +te wheche +te power of Pharo ,
+tat is , +te veray fend , ys drowned , and all hys my+gt lorne , and
all cristen pepull sauet . CMMIRK-M34,127.3400

The font is on Astyr-even halowed and on Whytsone-even ;
CMMIRK-M34,127.3401

for , at +te begynnyng of holy chirch , all men , and woymen , and
chyldren wern kepte to be folowed at +tes days at +te font-halowyng .
CMMIRK-M34,127.3402

But now , for bycause +tat mony in so long abydynge deyd bout folo+gt ,
+terfor holy chirch ordeyny+te to folow all +te tyme of +te +gere , saue
VIII dayes befor +tes euens a child schall be kepte to +te
fonte-halowyng , yf +tat he may sauely for parell of de+te , and elles
not . CMMIRK-M34,127.3403

Thus is +te paschall halowed , and ly+gt wyth new fure ,
CMMIRK-M34,127.3404

and of hyt all o+tyr tapyrs byn ly+gt ; CMMIRK-M34,127.3405

for all ly+gt and holynes of good <P_128> worchyng comy+te of Cristis
lore , CMMIRK-M34,128.3406

and holy chyrch ys li+gt wyth brennyng charyte of his behestys .
CMMIRK-M34,128.3407

Fyue pepynce of encens ben steked in +te paschall lyke to +te crosse .
CMMIRK-M34,128.3408

+Tat bytokeny+te +te v wondys , as Bede say+te , +tat Crist suffred in
hys body , and schull be kepte fresch and swete as encense tyll +te day
of dome , in rebuke of hom +tat schall be dampned , +tat haden no beleue
in Cristis passion , and wold aske hym no mercy for hor synnes .
CMMIRK-M34,128.3409

In +te fonte-halowyng +te prest castys watyr out in four partyes of +te
fonte ; CMMIRK-M34,128.3410

for Crist bade hys dyscyples go in foure partyes of +te world , and
prech and tech +te foure gospels , and folowing in +te name of +te Fadyr
, and of +te Sonne , and of +te Holy Gost . CMMIRK-M34,128.3411

Aftyr +te prest bre+tes in +te watyr ; CMMIRK-M34,128.3412

for +te Holy Gost , in +te makyng of +te $world , was born on +te watyrs
. Wherfor , when God for Adam synne cursed +te er+te , he sparud +te
watyr . CMMIRK-M34,128.3413

Aftyr he droppy+t yn +te watyr wax of a tapur brennyng ; +te whech
bytokeny+t +te manhode of Crist +tat was folowed in +te watyr , and in
his folo+gt halowed all +te watyr of folo+gt . CMMIRK-M34,128.3414

Aftyr oyle and creme byn put in +te watyr ; CMMIRK-M34,128.3415

for yn +tat sacrament +tilk +tat ben in Heuen and +tilk +tat ben in
er+te , ben joynet togedyr . CMMIRK-M34,128.3416

+Tat was preued in Cristis baptyem ; CMMIRK-M34,128.3417

for +ter +te Fadyr of Heuen spake , +tat all +te pepull herd ,
CMMIRK-M34,128.3418

+te Holy Gost was send like a culuer . CMMIRK-M34,128.3419

+Tus was +te fonte halowed twyys in +te +gere , at +te begynnyng of holy
chyrche , and now aftyr by +te +gere +tat was on Astyr-euen , for +ten
all +te pepull was bro+gt out of +traldam of +te fende by Cristis
passion ; and on Whytson-euen , for +ten is +te Holi Gost +geuen , +tat
is , remyssyon of all synnys . CMMIRK-M34,128.3420

+Ten , from +te font , men gon to +te qwere syngyng +te letany , prayng
all +te sayntys of Heuen for@ @to pray to God , +geue hom +tat ben
folowed grace for@ @to kepe +te he+g couenant +tat +tay haue made in hor
folowyng . CMMIRK-M34,128.3421

Then men gon to masse +tat is bygonnen wythout office , +tat is called
+te hed of +te masse ; CMMIRK-M34,128.3422

for Crist , +tat is hed of all holy chyrch , ys not +get risen from de+t
to lyue . CMMIRK-M34,128.3423

Kyrieleyson is sayd ; CMMIRK-M34,128.3424

for in iche office of holy chyrch , and namly yn +te masse , hit ys gret
nede for@ @to aske helpe and socour of God , for@ @to defende vs out of
temptacyon +tat assayly+t vs namly in Godys seruyce .
CMMIRK-M34,128.3425

<P_129>

' Gloria in excelsis ' ys sayde ; CMMIRK-M34,129.3427

for +te Fadyr of Heuen is gretly ioyet for@ @to behold +te pepull +tat
his sonne ha+te bo+gt wyth hys passyon , +tat lyuen in charyte and in
pes , ych on wyth o+tyr . CMMIRK-M34,129.3428

Grayle is non sayde ; CMMIRK-M34,129.3429

for +tylke +tat ben folowed , be not +get parfyte to walke yn +te greus
of vertu . CMMIRK-M34,129.3430

Alleluia ys songen ; CMMIRK-M34,129.3431

for hyt ys gret ioy to angeles to sen +te ruyne of angeles be restowred
by +tylke +tat ben folowed . CMMIRK-M34,129.3432

Aftyr Alleluia +te tracte ys songen ; CMMIRK-M34,129.3433

for +tagh +tay ben , in hor folo+gt , waschan of all synnys , +get +tay
most travayle bysyly , for@ @to kepe hom out of combrans of +te fend ,
+tat he fall not into dedly synne a+geyne . CMMIRK-M34,129.3434

Offertory is non sayde ; CMMIRK-M34,129.3435

for +te wymmen +tat comen , for@ @to offyr to Cristys body oynmentes ,
+tay fond hym not in his tombe . CMMIRK-M34,129.3436

' Agnus Dei ' ys sayde , CMMIRK-M34,129.3437

but no pax ys borne ; CMMIRK-M34,129.3438

for Crist +tat is hed of pes , was not +get rysen . CMMIRK-M34,129.3439

Postcomyn is non sayde ; CMMIRK-M34,129.3440

for +tay +tat ben folowed schul not be howsyld +tys day , but on +te
morow ; CMMIRK-M34,129.3441

for in +te begynnyng of holy chirch +ter comen moo to folow of gret age
+ten of chyldren . CMMIRK-M34,129.3442

A schort euensong ys don , lest +tay +tat ben folowet for cold o+tyr
sekenes wer anyet of long seruyce . CMMIRK-M34,129.3443

+Ten is all +tys seruyce endyd vndyr on colet for all +te sacra-ment of
holy chirch , CMMIRK-M34,129.3444

and of folo+gt is endyd in +te passion of Crist . CMMIRK-M34,129.3445

<heading>

30 . CMMIRK-M34,129.3447

DE FESTO PASCHE . CMMIRK-M34,129.3448

<$$heading>

Cristes pepull , bo+te men and woymen , as +ge all knowen wele , +tys
day is called in sum place Astyr-day , and in sum plase Pase-day , and
in sum plas Godis Sonday . CMMIRK-M34,129.3450

Hyt is called Astyr-day , as Candylmas-day of candyls , and Palme-Sonday
of palmes . CMMIRK-M34,129.3451

For wel nygh in ych plase , hyt ys +te maner +tys day for@ @to do fyre
out of +te hall at +te astyr , +tat ha+te all +te wyntyr brent wyth fyre
and blakyd wyth smoke . CMMIRK-M34,129.3452

Hit schall +tys day ben arayde wyth grene rusches , and swete flowres
strawed all aboute , schewyng an hegh ensampull to all men and woymen
+tat , ryght as +tay maken clene +te howse all wythyn , beryng out +te
fure and strawyng flowres , ry+gt soo +ge schull clanse +te howse of
your soule , <P_130> doyng away +te fyre of lechery and of dedly wra+t
and of envy , and straw +ter swete erbes and flowres ;
CMMIRK-M34,130.3453

and +tat ben vertues of goodnes and of mekenes , of kyndnes , of loue
and charite , of pes and of rest : CMMIRK-M34,130.3454

and soo make +te howse of your soule abull to receyue your God .
CMMIRK-M34,130.3455

For ry+gt as +ge wyll not suffyr no +tyng in your howse +tat stynky+te
or saueryth euell , wherby +tat +ge may be dosesyd ; ryght soo Crist ,
when he comy+t into +te hows of your soule , and fyndeth +ter any
stynkyng +tyng of wra+t or of envy or any o+tyr dedly synne , he woll
not abyde +ter : CMMIRK-M34,130.3456

but anon he go+te out , CMMIRK-M34,130.3457

and +te fende comy+te yn CMMIRK-M34,130.3458

and abydy+te +ter . CMMIRK-M34,130.3459

Then may +tat soule be full sory +tat scho ys forsaken of God and
betaken to +te fende . CMMIRK-M34,130.3460

+Tus don +tay +tat holden dedly wra+te and dedly envy in hor hertys ,
and woll not for+geue +tylk +tat haue trespast to hom , for no prayer .
Wherfor take hit wyth certeyne : CMMIRK-M34,130.3461

+togh +ge mow wyth glosyng wordys desayve me , and say +ge ben yn full
charyte as +ge owen for@ @to be , +togh +ge be not soo , you gayne+t not
for@ @to begyle God , +tat se+te ych cornell of your hertys . Wherfor ,
for Godys loue , dessayue +ge not yourselfe , but bu+te all besy for@
@to kepe your soules clene wythyn to Godis sy+gt , as +ge ben {busy} to
make your house clene to mannys sy+gt . CMMIRK-M34,130.3462

And ryght as +ge clo+tu+t your astyr wyth fresche flowres and swete ,
ry+gt so clo+te your astyr of your soule , +tat is , your hert , in fayr
clo+te of charyte , and of loue , and of pes , and of rest wyth all
Godys pepull , +tat +ge mow abull be for@ @to receyve +te best frende
+tat +ge haue , +tat is Crist , Godis sonne of Heuen , +tat +tys tyme
suffred de+te , for@ @to bryng you to +te lyfe +tat euer schall last .
CMMIRK-M34,130.3463

This day is also callyd Pase-day , +tat is in Englysch , +te passyng day
. CMMIRK-M34,130.3464

And soo hyt is for two skylles : CMMIRK-M34,130.3465

on for +tys day ych cristen man , in reuerence of God , schuld for+geue
+tat haue gylt to hom , and ben in full loue and charyte to Godis pepull
passyng all o+ter dayes of +te +gere ; CMMIRK-M34,130.3466

for all +tat is mysdon all +te +gere befor , schall be helyd +tys day
wyth +te salue of charyte . CMMIRK-M34,130.3467

Hit ys alsoo a passyng day : for ych Godys chyld schall passe out of
euell levyng into good lyuyng , out of vyces ynto vertuys , out of pride
into mekenes , out of couetyse into largenes , out of slo+t into holy
bysynes , out of envy into loue and charite , out of wra+te into mercy ,
out of gloteny into abstynens , out of lechery into charyte , out of +te
fendys clochus ynto Godis barm ; and soo of Godys <P_131> enmy make hym
hys frende and derlyng . CMMIRK-M34,131.3468

Whoso passy+te +tus , he ys wor+ty for@ @to come to +tat gret fest +tat
God maky+te +tys day to all +tat +tys passage makut .
CMMIRK-M34,131.3469

This day ys called Godis Sonday ; for Crist , Godis sonne of Heuen ,
+tys day roos from de+t to lyue , and soo glady+t all hys seruantes and
frendys wyth his vprist . Wherfor all holy chrych maky+te myr+t +tys
day and syngyth +tus : ' This ys +te day +tat our lord made ;
CMMIRK-M34,131.3470

be we glad and ioyfull in hure ! ' CMMIRK-M34,131.3471

+Te Fadyr of Heuen makyth wyth all hys angelys soo gret melody for +te
vpryst of hys sonne , +tat he maky+te +tys day a gret passyng fest , and
byddy+te all hys pepull +terto , als wele hom +tat ben in Heuen as
+tylke +tat ben in er+te . CMMIRK-M34,131.3472

+Ten as wele as hym schall be +tat comy+te to +tys fest wele arayde in
Godys lyuere , clo+tyd in loue and scharyte , als euell schall hym be
+tat comy+te yn fendys lyuere , clo+tyd in envy and dedly wra+te ;
CMMIRK-M34,131.3473

for +tes , as +te gospell telly+te , schall be taken and cast into +te
prison of hell . Soo that while o+tyr lagh and make mery , +tes o+tyr
wepe and be sory ; CMMIRK-M34,131.3474

and whyll +tat o+tyr eten and drynken at Godis bord , +tay schall sytte
grennyng wyth hor te+te for paynyng of hell-wormys +tat gnawen hom .
CMMIRK-M34,131.3475

For as +tey eten o+tyr wyth bakbytyng here in er+te , +tey schull ete
hym backe and body wythout end in payne of hell . Wherfor , good men
and woymen , I charch you heyly in Godys byhalue +tat non of you to-day
com to Godys bord , but he be in full charyte to all Godis pepull ; and
also +tat +ge be clene schryuen and yn full wyll to leue your synne .
CMMIRK-M34,131.3476

For yf I wyst whech of you wer out of charyte and vnschryuen , I most ,
be techyng of holy men , wyth a foule mou+te say +tus to hym , in
audyens of all men : ' I +geue +te here not +ty howsyll , but +ty
dampnacyon into euerlastyng payne , tyll +tou com to amendement . '
Wherfor , for Cristis loue , yche man sech well his conciens and clanse
hyt , +tat he may abull receyue hys sauyour . CMMIRK-M34,131.3477

And +get , for@ @to styr you more in concyens , y tell you +tys
ensampull . CMMIRK-M34,131.3478

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,131.3480

<$$heading>

I rede of a holy byschop +tat prayd God bysily to +geue hym grace to
wytte whech wer wor+ty to receyue +te sacrament and whech onworthy .
CMMIRK-M34,131.3482

Then , when +te pepull com to Godys bord , he <P_132> sagh som com wyth
hor face red as blod , and blod droppyng out of hor mow+tys , som hor
face as blacke as any pyche , summe as whyte as snow , and summe fayre
and rody and lusty for@ @to behold . CMMIRK-M34,132.3483

Then , among o+tyr , he sagh two comyn wymen comyng and hor facys
schonyng as bryght as +te sonne . CMMIRK-M34,132.3484

+Ten had he moch wondyr of +tys syght , CMMIRK-M34,132.3485

and prayde to God to +geue hym reuelacyon and knowyng what all +tys
bytokenyd . CMMIRK-M34,132.3486

Then come +ter an angyll to hym CMMIRK-M34,132.3487

and sayd : ' +Tes +tat han blody facys and blod droppe out of hor
mow+tes , +to ben envyous men and woymen , and full of dedly wra+te ,
CMMIRK-M34,132.3488

and woll not amend hom , CMMIRK-M34,132.3489

and gnawen hom byhynd , CMMIRK-M34,132.3490

and be vsed to swere horrybull o+tys by Godys sydys and his blod , and
vmbrayden God of his passyon , and don hym no reuerence : wherfor hor
mow+tys schull droppe of blod , tyll +tay com to amendement .
CMMIRK-M34,132.3491

+Tay +tat haue blak facys , ben lecherys men and woymen +tat wyll not
leue hor synne , ne hor lyst , ne schryue hom +terof .
CMMIRK-M34,132.3492

+Tay +tat haue whit facys as snow , ben +tay +tat haue don gret synnys ,
and ben schryuen +terof , and wyth +te wepyng of hor een han wasshen hor
soules so whyt and clene . CMMIRK-M34,132.3493

+Tylke +tat ben fayre and rody , ben good comyn lyuers +tat lyuen truly
by hor mayn swynke , CMMIRK-M34,132.3494

and so kepy+te hom out of dedly synne . CMMIRK-M34,132.3495

And +tes two woymen +tat schynen passyng all o+tyr , wer two comyn
woymen and of euell lyuyng ; CMMIRK-M34,132.3496

but when +tay come into +te chyrch , +tay toke suche repentans in hor
hertys , +tat +tay maden a vow to God +tat +tay wold do neuermore amys
wyth +te helpe of his grace . Wherfor God of hys mercy ha+t for+geuen
hom hor synne , and so clene wasschen hor sowles , +tat +tay schyne +tus
passyng all o+ter . ' CMMIRK-M34,132.3497

Then +tys angyll went his way , CMMIRK-M34,132.3498

and +tys byschop +tonkyd God of hys hegh grace +tat he schewed hym
reuelacyon , CMMIRK-M34,132.3499

and serued God euer aftyr wyth all hys myght , CMMIRK-M34,132.3500

and had +te blysse of Heuen . The wheche blysse God graunte you and me
. CMMIRK-M34,132.3501

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,132.3502

<heading>

31 . CMMIRK-M34,132.3504

DE FESTO SANCTI GEORGII , MARTYRIS . CMMIRK-M34,132.3505

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , such a day +ge schull haue +te fest of Saynt
George . +Te wheche day +ge schull come to holy chyrch . in <P_133>
worschyp of God and of +tat holy martyr Seynt George +tat bo+gt his day
full dere . CMMIRK-M34,133.3507

For as I rede in hys lyfe , I fynde +tat +ter was an horrybull dragon ,
+tat men of +te cyte wer so aferd , +tat +tay , by cownsell of the kyng
, yche day , +geuen hym a schepe and a chyld for@ @to ete ; for he shuld
not come into +te cyte and ete hom . CMMIRK-M34,133.3508

Then when all +te chyldyr of +ta cyte wer eten , for bycause +tat +te
kyng +gaf hom +tat consell , +tay constrayned hym +tat had but on
doghtyr for@ @to +geue hyr to +te dragon , as +tay had hor chyldyr
before . CMMIRK-M34,133.3509

Then +te kyng , for fere of +te pepull , wyth wepyng and gret sorow
makyng , delyuerd hom hys doghtyr yn hyr best aray .
CMMIRK-M34,133.3510

Then +tay settyn hur yn +te place +ter +tay wer wont to set o+tyr
chyldyr , and a schepe wyth hyr , for@ @to abyde +te tyme tyll +te
dragon wold come . CMMIRK-M34,133.3511

But +ten , by ordenance of God , Seynt George come rydyng +tat way ;
CMMIRK-M34,133.3512

and when he saw +te aray of +tys damesell , hym +toght well +tat hyt
schuld be a womon of gret renon , CMMIRK-M34,133.3513

and askyd hur why scho stode +ter wyth soo mornyng a chere .
CMMIRK-M34,133.3514

+Ten vnswared scho CMMIRK-M34,133.3515

and sayde : ' Gentyll kny+gt , well may I be of heuy chere , +tat am a
kyngys doghtyr of +tys cyte , and am sette here for@ @to be deuoured
anon of an horrybull dragon +tat ha+te eton all +te chyldyr of +tys cyte
. CMMIRK-M34,133.3516

And for all ben eten , now most I be eten ; CMMIRK-M34,133.3517

for my fadyr +gaf +te cyte +tat consell . Wherfor , gentyll knyght ,
gos hens fast and saue +tyselfe , lest he les +te as he woll me ! '
CMMIRK-M34,133.3518

' Damesell , ' quod George , ' +tat wer a gret vyleny to me , +tat am a
kny+gt well i-armed , yf I schuld fle , and +tou +tat art a woman schuld
abyde . ' CMMIRK-M34,133.3519

Then wyth +tys worde , +te horrybull best put vp his hed , spyttyng out
fure , CMMIRK-M34,133.3520

and proferet batayll to George . CMMIRK-M34,133.3521

+Ten made George a cros befor hym , CMMIRK-M34,133.3522

and set hys spere in +te grate , CMMIRK-M34,133.3523

and wyth such myght bare down +te dragon into +te erth , +tat he bade
+tis damysell bynd hur gurdull about his necke and lede hym aftyr hur
into +te cyte . CMMIRK-M34,133.3524

Then +tys dragon sewet her forth , as hyt had ben a gentyll hownde ,
mekly wythout any mysdoyng . CMMIRK-M34,133.3525

But when +te pepull of +te cyte saw +te dragon come , +tay floen , ych
man into hys hyrn , for ferd . CMMIRK-M34,133.3526

Then callyd George +te pepull a+geyne , CMMIRK-M34,133.3527

and bade +tay schuld not be aferd ; CMMIRK-M34,133.3528

for yf +tay wolden leue in Crist and take fologht , he wold befor hom
all sle hym , <P_134> and so delyuer hom of hor enmy .
CMMIRK-M34,134.3529

Then wer +tay all so glad , +tat xx=ti=_+towsand of men , wythout woymen
and chyldren , wer folowed , CMMIRK-M34,134.3530

and +te kyng was fyrst folowed and all hys houshold .
CMMIRK-M34,134.3531

+Ten George slogh +tys dragon , CMMIRK-M34,134.3532

and bade bryng x exen to hym , and draw hym out of +te cyte , +tat +te
sauer of hym schuld do hom no greue . CMMIRK-M34,134.3533

And bade +te kyng byld fast in euery hurne of hys lond chyrches , and be
lusty for@ @to here Godys seruyce , and do honour to all men of holy
chrych , and euer haue mynd and compassion of all men +tat wer nedy and
pore . CMMIRK-M34,134.3534

Then , when +tat George had +tus turnyd +tys lond to Godis fay+te , he
herd how +te Emperour Dyaclisian dyd mony cristen men to de+t .
CMMIRK-M34,134.3535

Then he went to hym boldely , CMMIRK-M34,134.3536

and repreued hym of +te cursed dede . CMMIRK-M34,134.3537

Then +te Emperour anon commawndyd for@ @to do hym into prison and lay
hym +ter vpryght , and a mylne-ston vpon his brest , for@ @to haue so
cruschet hym to de+t . CMMIRK-M34,134.3538

But when he was seruet so , he prayd to God of help ;
CMMIRK-M34,134.3539

and God kept hym so , +tat he feld no harme yn no party of hys body .
CMMIRK-M34,134.3540

But when +te Emperour herd +terof , he bade make a whele set full of
howkes yn +tat on syde of +te whele , and swerde poyntys in +tat o+tyr
syde a+geyne +tat , and set George in +te myddys , and so for@ @to turne
+te wheles and all torase hys body on ay+tyr syde . CMMIRK-M34,134.3541

But when he was yn +te turment , he prayd to Crist of socour ,
CMMIRK-M34,134.3542

and was holpen anon . CMMIRK-M34,134.3543

Aftyr he was put in an hote brennyng lyme-kylne and closed +teryn , for@
@to haue ben brent ; CMMIRK-M34,134.3544

but God turnet wyth hys my+gt +te hete into cold dew .
CMMIRK-M34,134.3545

+Gette , +te +tryd day aftyr , when all men wendon he had ben brent to
coles , +ten was he fonde lyght and mery , CMMIRK-M34,134.3546

and +tonked God . CMMIRK-M34,134.3547

Aftyr when he was fatte and sette before +te Emperour , he repreuyd hym
of hys false goddys , CMMIRK-M34,134.3548

and sayde +tay wer but fendys , and wythout myght , and false at nede .
CMMIRK-M34,134.3549

Then made +tys Emperour for@ @to bete his mou+te wyth stonys , tyll hyt
was all topounet , CMMIRK-M34,134.3550

and made to bete hys body wyth dry bolle-senows , tyll +te flessch fell
from +te bon and hys guttes myght be seyne . CMMIRK-M34,134.3551

+Get aftyr +tay made hym to drynke venom +tat was made strong for +te
nonys , for@ @to haue poysont hym to +te de+t anon .
CMMIRK-M34,134.3552

But when George had made +te syngne of +te cros on hit , he dranke hyt
wythout any greve , soo +tat , for wondyr +terof , +te man +tat <P_135>
made +te poysen , anon turned to the fay+te , and anon was don to de+te
for Crystys sake . CMMIRK-M34,135.3553

Then , +te ny+gt aftyr , as George was in prison prayng to God , God
come to hym wyth gret lyght , CMMIRK-M34,135.3554

and bade hym be of good comfort ; CMMIRK-M34,135.3555

for in +te morow he schuld make an end of hys passyon ,
CMMIRK-M34,135.3556

and so com to hym into +te ioy +tat euer schall last .
CMMIRK-M34,135.3557

And when he had set a crown of gold apon hys hed , he +gaf hym hys
blessyng CMMIRK-M34,135.3558

and stegh into Heuen . CMMIRK-M34,135.3559

Then anon , on +te morow , for he wold not do sacryfice to +te
Emperourys false goddys , he made to smyte of hys hed ;
CMMIRK-M34,135.3560

and soo passed to God . CMMIRK-M34,135.3561

And when +te Emperour wold haue gone to hys palys , +te layte fure brent
hym and all hys seruantes . CMMIRK-M34,135.3562

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,135.3564

<$$heading>

In a story of Antioch ys wrytton +tat , when cristen men beseget
Ierusalem , a fayre +gong kny+gt aperut to a prest , CMMIRK-M34,135.3566

and sayde +tat he was Saynt George and leder of cristen men ,
CMMIRK-M34,135.3567

and commaundyd +tat he schuld bere wyth hom hys relykes , and com wyth
hom to +te sege . CMMIRK-M34,135.3568

But when +tay comen to +te walles of Ierusalem , +te Saracens weren so
strong wythyn +tat cristen men durst not clymbe vp hor laddres .
CMMIRK-M34,135.3569

Then com Seynt George , clo+tyd yn whyte , and a red crosse on hys brest
, CMMIRK-M34,135.3570

and +gode vp +te laddyrs , CMMIRK-M34,135.3571

and bade +te cristen men com aftyr hym . CMMIRK-M34,135.3572

And so wyth +te helpe of Seynt George , +tay wonen +te cyte ,
CMMIRK-M34,135.3573

and slogh all +te Saresyns +tay fonden +teryn . CMMIRK-M34,135.3574

And +terfor pray we to Saynt George +tat he wyll be our helpe at oure
nede , and saue +tys reem to +te worschyp of God and his modyr Mary and
all +te company of Heuen . CMMIRK-M34,135.3575

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,135.3576

<heading>

32 . CMMIRK-M34,135.3578

DE SANCI MARCO SERMO BREUIS . CMMIRK-M34,135.3579

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , such a day +ge schall haue Seynt Marcus day , +tat
was on of +te foure +tat wryton +te gospellys , and prechet hom to +te
pepull . CMMIRK-M34,135.3581

Then was +tys Marke furst an he+ten man , CMMIRK-M34,135.3582

but aftyr he was folowet of Seynt Petyr CMMIRK-M34,135.3583

and soo sewet Petyr long aftyr , tyll he was full ta+gt in +te byleue .
CMMIRK-M34,135.3584

And when he was full ylurned of Cristys fay+te , +ten Seynt Petyr made
hym goo and prech +te pepull Godys word . CMMIRK-M34,135.3585

And for he was soo holy a man , +te pepull allgate wold make hym a prest
, he , for gret <P_136> mekenes of hymselfe , made to kyt of his +tombe
; CMMIRK-M34,136.3586

neuer+teles when God wold haue hyt , Seynt Petyr wyth gret instaunce
made hym to take +te ordyr of prest . CMMIRK-M34,136.3587

Then was he besy day and ny+gt for@ @to prech Godys word to +te pepull ;
CMMIRK-M34,136.3588

and all +tat he sayde wyth worde , he confermed wyth good ensampull and
wyth doyng of myracles . CMMIRK-M34,136.3589

Thus , by inspyracyon of +te Holy Gost , he +gode to +te cyte of
Alysandyr , for@ @to turne +te pepull of +te cyte to +te fay+t of Crist
. CMMIRK-M34,136.3590

Then when he come into +te cyte , at +te forme fote +tat he set yn at
+te +gate , hys scho+g barst CMMIRK-M34,136.3591

and was toren ; wherby he wyst well +tat he schuld not go from +tens ,
but +tat he schuld take hys ende +ter : CMMIRK-M34,136.3592

and soo dyd . CMMIRK-M34,136.3593

Then , when he com ynto +te cyte , he saw a man clowtyng pore men schone
+tat werne torne ; CMMIRK-M34,136.3594

and +to+g +tis man wer a panyme , he was cristen yn hys doyng . Wherfor
Saynt Marke prayde for@ @to amende his schone +tat wer torne .
CMMIRK-M34,136.3595

+Ten +tis man , for he saw +tat Marke was pore , and nedy , and of
sympull aray , hym +to+gt +tat hyt was almys for@ @to helpe hym ,
CMMIRK-M34,136.3596

and toke hys schone to hym , CMMIRK-M34,136.3597

and began for@ @to sawe on hit . CMMIRK-M34,136.3598

And as he sewet full helt , by Godis ordenance , he wondyd hym-selfe in
+te honde wyth his nalle grevesly ; CMMIRK-M34,136.3599

and so , what for ache and penance +tat he had +terof , among his woo he
called helpe of God . CMMIRK-M34,136.3600

And when Saynt Marke herd +tat , he +tonkyd God ; CMMIRK-M34,136.3601

and anon he spytte in +te er+te , CMMIRK-M34,136.3602

and makyd fene , CMMIRK-M34,136.3603

and wyth +tat fen anoynted +te mannys hond in +te name of Ihesu Crist :
CMMIRK-M34,136.3604

and anon he was hole . CMMIRK-M34,136.3605

Then , when +tys man segh such vertu yn Saynt Marke , he prayde hym for@
@to dwell wyth hym . CMMIRK-M34,136.3606

Then Marke dwelled wyth +tys man CMMIRK-M34,136.3607

and preched hym , so +tat he folewet hym and all hys howshold ;
CMMIRK-M34,136.3608

and aftur for gret holynes . +tat he saw yn hym , he made +tys man a
byschop . CMMIRK-M34,136.3609

Thus when men of +te cyte seen how Marke preched +te fayth of Crist ,
and dyspysyd hor fals goddys , they token hym , CMMIRK-M34,136.3610

and tyed hym by +te neke wyth a rope , CMMIRK-M34,136.3611

and drewen hym on +te stonys , cryyng yfere in despyte of hym : ' Draw
we +tys bugull to +te bygulstede ! ' CMMIRK-M34,136.3612

So when tay had drawen hym negh to +te de+te , +ten +tay putten hym ynto
+te prison tyll on +te morow . CMMIRK-M34,136.3613

+Ten <P_137> com +tat ny+gt Crist into +te prison to hym
CMMIRK-M34,137.3614

and sayde : ' Pes be to +te , Marke our euangelyst , CMMIRK-M34,137.3615

be no+gt agast ; CMMIRK-M34,137.3616

for I am wyth +te ! ' CMMIRK-M34,137.3617

Then on +te morow +tey come a+geyn , CMMIRK-M34,137.3618

and fat hym out a+geyn , CMMIRK-M34,137.3619

and drewen hym tyll he was ded . CMMIRK-M34,137.3620

And when he felde +tat he schuld dye , he sayd : ' In manus tuas ,
Domine , commendo spiritum meum , redimisti ' ; CMMIRK-M34,137.3621

and so +terwyth +gaf vp hys gost . CMMIRK-M34,137.3622

Then aftyr , when +tay wold haue brent hys body for malyce , anon +ter
come such a powdyr and layte and er+te-qwake , +tat no man durst abyde ,
CMMIRK-M34,137.3623

but all fleen away . CMMIRK-M34,137.3624

+Ten yn +te ny+gt aftyr Cristen men token hys body , CMMIRK-M34,137.3625

and buryet hyt wyth gret worschyp , as hyt was worthy .
CMMIRK-M34,137.3626

Then fell hyt soo aftyr +tat yche contrey halowet Seynt Markeys day ,
saue on contrey the whech was callyd Appuleo . +Te whech contrey was so
desesut by hete and vnkynd dro+gt , +tat all +te cornes and frutys
faylut hom , +tat +tay wer negh enfamyscht for defaute of corne .
CMMIRK-M34,137.3627

But +ten come +ter a voyce from Heuen , CMMIRK-M34,137.3628

and bade halow Saynt Markeys day , as o+tyr crysten men duden ,
CMMIRK-M34,137.3629

and +ten schuld +tay be releuet . CMMIRK-M34,137.3630

And when +tay dydden soo , God send to hom all maner of frutys .
CMMIRK-M34,137.3631

Now , good men and woymen , +ge haue herd of +tis seyntis lyfe , and why
hys day ys halowet ; CMMIRK-M34,137.3632

+ten hit is nedfull to tell you why +ge schull fast his day and goo in
processyon . CMMIRK-M34,137.3633

<heading>

Narracio . CMMIRK-M34,137.3635

<$$heading>

I rede +tat in +te cyte of Rome on +tis day fell such a qwalme and soden
deth among +te pepull of +te cyte , +tat when a man gonet o+tyr neset ,
anon +terwyth he +gaf vp +te gost ; CMMIRK-M34,137.3637

and o+tyr deydyn sodenly a gret nownbyr . CMMIRK-M34,137.3638

Then +te pope Pelagius bade ych man , when he gonet , to make a cros on
his mou+te ; CMMIRK-M34,137.3639

and when a man herd ano+tyr nese , he schuld bydde : ' Crist helpe +te !
' CMMIRK-M34,137.3640

and so mony wern sauet . CMMIRK-M34,137.3641

And also he made +te pepull fast , and to go about in procession barfot
, and soo pray holy seyntys of Heuen for@ @to pray for hom to God , +tat
he of his goodnes schuld haue mercy of hom ; CMMIRK-M34,137.3642

and soo dyd . CMMIRK-M34,137.3643

Then come aftyr Seynt Gregory , CMMIRK-M34,137.3644

and made hom do +te same ych +gere on Saynt Markeys day , bo+te fast and
go on processyon , CMMIRK-M34,137.3645

and canonysyt hit , for@ @to be don alway aftyr . CMMIRK-M34,137.3646

Then come aftyr a pope was <P_138> called Liberius , CMMIRK-M34,138.3647

and segh how +te frute of +te erth and of tren , for $tendyrnes of
homselfe , token at +tys day ofte-tyme gret harme , what by +tondyr and
by layte , by vnkynde hete , be vnkynd stormys , by whyrlyng-wynde , by
mystes , by myldewys , be grene wormys , be long-taylet fleys .
CMMIRK-M34,138.3648

And also , for +te pepull to sone aftyr +te receyuyng of hor howsyll
turnet a+geyne to synne , hauyng no reward to +tat hegh sacrament ,
+terfor God send vengeans among +te pepull mor +tat tyme of +te +gere
+ten ano+tyr , of pestylens , of werres , of der+tes , of dyuerse
sekenes . Wherfor +tys holy pope , for@ @to put away Godys wra+t from
+te pepull , he commaundet all cristen men and woymen for@ @to halow
+tys day , and fast not to certeyne +geres as lewde pepull tellyth , but
allway forth on , and for@ @to come +tat day to +te chyrch , and goo on
pro-cession wyth +te letany . Wherfor , good men , +ge schull wete well
+tat all +tylke +tat don a+geyne +te constytucyons of holy chyrche
wytyng , he ys acurset tyll he come to amendement ; CMMIRK-M34,138.3649

and yf he dey yn +tat curs vnschryuen , he is dampnet fore euer befor
God . CMMIRK-M34,138.3650

Herefor , good men and woymen , I charch you on holy chyrche byhalfe ,
+tat +ge fast +tat day , but hit fall on a Sonenday o+tyr yn Astyr weke
; CMMIRK-M34,138.3651

and comyth +tat day to +te chyrch ; CMMIRK-M34,138.3652

and heruth God seruyce as cristen men owen for@ @to do ;
CMMIRK-M34,138.3653

and pray+te hertly to Seynt Marke +tat he woll pray for you to God for@
@to put away all myscheues of body and of soule , and +tat +ge may haue
+te blys +tat he bo+gt you to . To +to whech blys God bryng you and me
to , yf hyt be hys will . CMMIRK-M34,138.3654

Amen . CMMIRK-M34,138.3655

<heading>

33 . CMMIRK-M34,138.3657

DE FESTO APOSTOLORUM PHILIPPI ET IACOBI ET EORUM SOLEMPNITATE .
CMMIRK-M34,138.3658

<$$heading>

Good men and woymen , such a day N +ge schull haue an hegh fest in holy
$chyrch : Seynt Phelypys day and Seynt Iacobs , Cristys holy apostolys .
CMMIRK-M34,138.3660

But for +tys comy+t wythyn +te tyme of Astyr seruyce , +ge schull not
fast +te euen ; CMMIRK-M34,138.3661

but comyth to +te chyrch as Godys owne pepull , to worschyp God and his
holy apostolys . CMMIRK-M34,138.3662

Then schull +ge know +tat +tys Phylyp was send by all +tat o+tyr
apostolys into a contre +tat was called Cythya , for@ @to prech Godis
<P_139> worde to +te vnbeleued pepull . CMMIRK-M34,139.3663

But when he come +tedyr , and preched a+geyn hor mawmetys , preuyng +tat
+tay wer fendys , and not goddys , anon +tys mysbeleued pepull token
+tys holy apostull , CMMIRK-M34,139.3664

and ladden hym ynto hor tempull , CMMIRK-M34,139.3665

and constrayned hym to do sacryfyce to hor mawmetys ,
CMMIRK-M34,139.3666

o+tir ellys he schuld be ded . CMMIRK-M34,139.3667

Then , as +tay wern besy for@ @to haue done +tys doses , sodenly a gret
dragon com out of +te er+te , CMMIRK-M34,139.3668

and slogh +tre of +tes mysbeleued men , CMMIRK-M34,139.3669

and venemet so +te pepull wyth hys bre+tyng , +tat +ter fell on hom all
such a sekenes , +tat for woo and passyon +tat +tay hadon , +tay cryed
all waylyng and wepyng yche on to $o+tyr . CMMIRK-M34,139.3670

Then sayde Phelyp to hom : ' +Gyf +ge woll be helyd of your sekenes +tat
greue+te you , and also +tes men be bro+gt a+geyne to lyve +tat ben ded
, castys don +tes mawmetys +tat +ge wolden haue me to worschyp ,
CMMIRK-M34,139.3671

and setty+te +ter a cros lyke to +te cros +tat my maystyr dyed apon ,
CMMIRK-M34,139.3672

and worschyp hyt . ' CMMIRK-M34,139.3673

Then dyd +tay so gladly and fayn , for@ @to be holpen of hor woo +tat
greuet hom soo sore . CMMIRK-M34,139.3674

And when +tay hadden soo don , anon ry+gt +tay wern all hole ;
CMMIRK-M34,139.3675

and Saynt Phelyp , be callyng of Cristys nome , reryd vp a+geyne to lyue
+tre men +tat wern ded . CMMIRK-M34,139.3676

And when he had don soo , he commaundyd +te dragon for@ @to go into
wyldernes +ter@ @as he schuld neuer greue man ny best ;
CMMIRK-M34,139.3677

and so +gode forth , CMMIRK-M34,139.3678

and was neuer seen aftyr . CMMIRK-M34,139.3679

Thus when Seynt Phelyp had preched +te pepull , and made hom stedfast in
+te fay+te of Ihesu Crist , and +gode forth into a cyte Ieropolym ;
CMMIRK-M34,139.3680

and for he prechet +te fay+te of Ihesu Crist +tat was don on +te cros ,
+terfor wykked men of +tat cyte token hym , CMMIRK-M34,139.3681

and dydden hym on a cros , as Crist was , CMMIRK-M34,139.3682

and soo payned hym to +te de+te . CMMIRK-M34,139.3683

And soo he +gode to Crist , hys maystyr , for@ @to dwell wy+te hym in
+te ioy +tat neuer schall haue ende . CMMIRK-M34,139.3684

Now +ge schull here of Seynt Iacob , +tat was called among +te apostolys
' Iamys +te lasse , ' for@ @to be know from ' Iamys +te more ' +tat was
Seynt Ionys bro+tyr . CMMIRK-M34,139.3685

But +tys Iacob , o+tyr Iames , +tat ys all on name , was called Cristys
bro+tyr ; CMMIRK-M34,139.3686

for he was soo lyke to Crist , +tat when +te Iewes token oure Lord Crist
, +tay cow+te not know +tat on by +tat o+tyr , but as Iudas trayde Crist
by a cosse , and soo ta+gt hom to hym . CMMIRK-M34,139.3687

Thys Iamys was soo holy from +te tyme +tat he was borne , all +te tyme
of hys lyfe , +tat he dranke no wyne ny syser ne ale ;
CMMIRK-M34,139.3688

for +tys $+tere n@ @ys non yn +tat contrey . CMMIRK-M34,139.3689
