<BEGIN_cmpolych-m3>

<P_VI,3>

<heading>

capitulum tertiumdecimum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,3.4

<$$heading>

SEINT Birinus +te confessour was i-sent of Honorius +te pope for to
preche to Englisshe men ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,3.6

and while Birinus seilede in +te see of Britayne he by+tou+gte hym of
his restelles +tat he hadde for+gete in +te haven , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,3.7

and +gede uppon +te see CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,3.8

and fette $his restelles . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,3.9

Beda , libro 3=o= , capitulo 6=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,3.10

+Tis Birinus convertede Kyngilsus kyng of West Saxons ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,3.11

and cristened hym at +te citee Dortik , +tat is Dorchestre ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,3.12

+tere was $kyng Oswald present , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,3.13

and was Kyngilsus his godfader , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,3.14

and wedded his dou+gter afterward . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,3.15

And bo+te kynges +gaf Birinus +tat citee for to ordeyne +tere a
bisshoppes see ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,3.16

and <P_VI,5> +tere Birinus deide after +te fourtene +gere of his
bisshopriche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,5.17

and was i-buried +tere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,5.18

Bote atte +te laste , by Hedda bisshop of Wynchestre , Birinus was
translated to wynchestre , into +te chirche of $Seynt Peter and Poul .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,5.19

But +te chanouns of Dorchestre sei+t nay , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,5.20

and sei+t +tat it was ano+ter body +tan seint Birinus his body +tat was
so translated ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,5.21

+terfore a beere of a wonder werk is +git i-seie at Dorchestre , above
+te place of his firste grave : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,5.22

+tat citee Dortic o+ter Dorkynga , +tat now hatte Dorchestre , is sevene
myle besouthe +te citee Oxen-ford , i-sette bytwene +te tweie riveres of
Tame and of Temse . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,5.23

Also it is i-founde in cronykes +tat Kyngilsus assignede al +te lond
seven myle aboute for to make a bisshoppes see in Wyn-chestre , and for
+te sustenaunce of $+te mynystres ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,5.24

and for +te kyng was i-lette by his de+t yvel +tat he mi+gte nou+gt it
ful-fille , he swoor +tat his sone Kenwalkus schulde it fulfille
afterward . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,5.25

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 2=o= CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,5.26

+tis citee Dorchestre longede to +te bisshoppis of Mercia from +tat tyme
<P_VI,7> anon to +te comynge of +te Normans . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.27

But in William Con-querours tyme +te bisshoppes see was i-chaunged to
Lyncoln . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.28

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro primo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.29

+Tat +gere Felix of +te nacioun of Burgoyn , +tat had be homeliche wi+t
Sigebertus kyng of Est Angles , while he was exciled in Fraunce , com
with hym into Engelonde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.30

and was i-made bisshop first of Domnyk , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.31

and was +tere bisshop sixtene +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.32

Beda , libro 3=o= , capitulo 17=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.33

+Tis Sigebertus hadde +te kyngdom after his bro+ter Corpwaldus ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.34

and ordeyned scoles of lettrure in his kyngdom as he hadde i-seie in
Fraunce , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.35

and assignede pedagoges and maistres for children in +te manere of
Caunterbury men ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.36

at +te laste he be_took his kyngdom to his nevew Egritus ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.37

and was i-schore monk in an abbay +tat he hym self bulde ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.38

but aftirward kyng Penda paganus werred in +tat kyngdom ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.39

and Sigebertus was i-drawe out of +te abbay as it were for to streng+te
+te kny+gtes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.40

and so he was i-slawe in his simplenesse , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.41

and bare but a +gerd on his hond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.42

and nygh al his oost was i-slawe ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.43

after hym regnede Anna , Enus his sone ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.44

hym slou+g Penda . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,7.45

Bote while Sigebertus regnede , an holy man +tat hi+gte Furseus com out
<P_VI,9> of Irlond into +te province of Est Angles , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,9.46

and in +te wey con-vertede meny men CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,9.47

o+ter made hem more studefast in +te fey . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,9.48

+Tere in a tyme he was seek , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,9.49

and was i-warned in a visioun by an aungel +tat he schulde besiliche do
as he hadde bygonne , and besiliche wake and bidde his bedes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,9.50

+Tanne by help of the kyng he bulde an abbay by +te see , in a castel
+tat hatte Cunbrisburgh ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,9.51

+tere eft he wor+te seek , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,9.52

and i-was i-ravisshed out of his body anon to +te holy si+gt of aungles
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,9.53

and in +te wey +tere in a tyme he was seek , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,9.54

+tere he herde sowne +tat vers of +te sauter " Holy men schul go for+t
from vertue to vertue ; God of goddes schal be seyn in Syon ; "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,9.55

also he was brou+gt to his body , and i-lad eft a+gen the +tridde day ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,9.56

and sigh not onliche +te grete ioye of holy seyntes but also +te
grettest strif of evel spirites , by +te whiche +tei fonde+t to lette
holy men . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,9.57

+Tanne he was i-left an hi+ge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,9.58

and si+ge under hym foure fuyres in +te ayer , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,9.59

and +te aungel +tat ladde hym <P_VI,11> expowned hym +te fuyres in +tis
manere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.60

and seide : " +tese fuyres schal destroye +te world :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.61

+te firste fuyre is +te fuyre of lesynge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.62

for men do+t nou+gt as +tey byheet in her bapteme ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.63

the secounde is +te fuyre of covetise , whan richesses is more i-loved
+tan God Almy+gti ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.64

+te +tridde is fuyre of discord and of strif , whan men greve+t her
neighe-boures with_oute cause ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.65

+te fer+te is +te fuyre of wikked-nesse , whanne +te gretter drede+t not
for to undo and de-stroye +te lasse . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.66

+Tese fuyres semede i-gadrede as it were al into oon .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.67

+Tanne Furseus was sore adrad , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.68

and cride , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.69

and +te aungel to hym seide : " What +tou hast not i-sette afuyre in +te
schal not brenne ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.70

+tis fuyre schal examyne and serche alle men dedes . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.71

+Tan Furseus com to +te +gate +tat was open , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.72

and fendes +trewe on hym a man +tat +tey tor-mented in fuyre ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.73

and +terwi+t Furseus his schuldre and his cheke were i-brent .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.74

Anon Furseus knewe +tat man , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.75

and knewe +tat he hadde i-fonge his clo+t when he deide ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.76

+te aungel +tat ladde Furseus +trewe +tat cloo+t into +tat fuyre ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,11.77

and a fende <P_VI,13> seide : " +Trow not awey +tat +tou hast
to_forhonde approved , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,13.78

for +tou hast i-fonge the goodes of synful men , so +tou schalt be
partyner of here peynes . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,13.79

" Nay , " quo+t +te aungel , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,13.80

and seide , " he feng it nou+gt for covetise , but for savacioun of his
soule . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,13.81

And +tan +te fuyre cesede , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,13.82

and +te aungel seide to Forseus , " what +tou hast sette on fyre +tat
ha+t i-brene on +te . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,13.83

+Tanne Furseus was i-brou+gt to his body a+ge . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,13.84

+Te same merk and tokene +tat he hadde i-felt in his soule he bare alwey
after i-sene on his schulder and cheke . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,13.85

Afterward as ofte as Furseus tolde +tis tale , +tey he hadde +tynne
clo+tynge in +te myddel of +te colde wynter , he schulde alwey swete for
drede . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,13.86

At +te laste Furseus lefte +tat abbay to his bro+ter Fullanus ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,13.87

and he wente free wi+t ano+ter bro+ter Ulcanus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,13.88

and lyved hermytes lyf al oon +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,13.89

+Tanne +te province was swi+te destourbed by rennynge of reses of
straungers , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,13.90

and he seillede into Fraunce , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,13.91

and <P_VI,15> deide +tere after meny grete dedes of vertu ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,15.92

and was i-buried at Pernia . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,15.93

After Honorius Severus was pope oon +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,15.94

in his tyme +te Iewes were converted to Cristene fey .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,15.95

Heraclius +te emperour , aftir his noble victours , errede out of +te
fey , and +tat by counsaile of Cirus patriark of Alexandria , and of
Sergius patriark of Constantynnoble ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,15.96

and Heraclius deide in +te dropesie , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,15.97

and was i-schend with +tat heresy of +te Iacobytes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,15.98

+tat where +tey +tat mysunderstood seint Iame +te Apostel .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,15.99

Capitulum quartumdecimum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,15.100

ABOUTE +tat tyme lyvede Machometus +te false prophete , duke and ledere
of Saracenes and of Turkes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,15.101

+Tis storie is $y-brou+gte in +tis manere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,15.102

bote Stevene of Caunterbury and Girald of Cambria helpe+t moche in +tis
manere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,15.103

Somtyme while +te empere of Rome was in gret my+gt and streng+te ,
Cristendom was nyh wydder +tan +te empere of Rome ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,15.104

and is <P_VI,17> no wonder , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,17.105

ffor Cristendom was so encresed +tat it conteyned Europa and meny
provinces of Asia and wel nygh al Affrica wi+t_ynne his merkes and
boundes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,17.106

At +te laste , by discord and stryf of Cristen men bytwene hem self , it
was i-do +tat +te Agarenes wexe stronge . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,17.107

+Te Agarenes haue+t +tre names , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,17.108

and bee+t i-cleped Agarenes , Ismaelites , and Saracenes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,17.109

Of here empere propheciede Methodius +te martir , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,17.110

and seide +tat Cristene religioun schuld litel have with_oute +te endes
of Europa . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,17.111

Also after +tat errour of Saracenes hadde infecte al Affrica , hit
defoulede also a grete deel of Spayne , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,17.112

and but Goddes grace and mercye hadde i-holde it wolde have in-fecte and
schend also Fraunce wi+t Spayne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,17.113

+Tanne after +te grete Gregories tyme +te empere of Rome , +tat
strecche+t somtyme from +te occean of Bretayn anon to +te endes of Pers
, was so destroyed wi+t tyrandise and wi+t civil batailles , +tat it was
nou+gt of power to defende hym self a+genst enemyes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,17.114

+Tanne +te cruel paynym oost of Pers gan to occupie meny provinces of
+te lordschipe of Rome and of men of Cristene fey in the estlondes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,17.115

+Tanne as +te grete flye folwe+t +te tras <P_VI,19> of +te malschave ,
so after o+ter woo com +te pestilence of +te Ismaelites , +tat was more
grevous , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,19.116

and destroyed nygh +te Cristene men +tat were i-left in +te estlondes by
ledynge of +te province Machometis , in Heraclius +te emperour his tyme
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,19.117

+Tanne +te fifte pope Bonefas his tyme , while Heraclius regnede ,
aboute +te +gere of oure Lord sixe_hondred_and_twenty , Machometis +te
false prophete +te whiche bygiled +te Ismaelitis $and Agarenes in +tis
manere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,19.118

A famous clerk was at the court of Rome CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,19.119

and my+gt nou+gt spede at his wille , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,19.120

and passede +te see , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,19.121

and plesede meny men , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,19.122

and hadde hem at his assent . Among +te whiche he byhet Machometis +tat
he wolde make hym prince of his peple gif he wolde doo as he seide .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,19.123

+Tanne +tis clerk fedde up a colver CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,19.124

and made hym fecche his mete in Machometis ere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,19.125

for +tere he dede +te corn +tat the colver schulde ete ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,19.126

and +terof +te colver ofte schulde fede hym self .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,19.127

+Tanne in a day +tis clerk gadrede +te peple to_geders ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,19.128

and byheet +tat he wolde make hym here <P_VI,21> prince whom +te Holy
Goost wolde schewe in colveres liche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.129

and lete fle his colver anon , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.130

and +te colver , as he was i-woned , satte uppon Machometus his
schuldres , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.131

and putte his bele in Machometus his eres ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.132

+terfore Machometus was i-chose prince and ledere of +te peple .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.133

+Tis +tat is i-seide in +te comyn table , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.134

but what now folowe+t is more alowed and apreved .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.135

A monk +tat heet Sergius was i-put out of +te companye of +te monkes
+tat he was among CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.136

for he was i-falle into Nistorius his errour . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.137

He com into Arabia , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.138

and putte hym self to Macho-metus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.139

and enformed hym ; +tei+g it be i-red +tat +tis Sergius were archedecon
of Antiochia o+ter patriark of Ierusalem . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.140

+Tanne Machometus faderles and moderles was in his emes kepynge in his
childhode ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.141

he worschipped mawmetrie som-what of tyme wi+t his contrey men of Arabia
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.142

and he +gaf hym specialliche to worschippe Venus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.143

and +terfore it is +tat +git the Saracens holde+t +te Fridy holy as +te
Iewes doo+t +te Satirday and we +te Soneday . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.144

After +tat Machometus com to age , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.145

and was scharp of witte , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,21.146

and wente into meny londes <P_VI,23> by cause of marchaundise ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.147

and ofte was in companye of Iewes and of Cristen men ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.148

and lernede +te maneres and usages and customs of bo+te lawes of Cristen
men and of Iewes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.149

and kou+te bo+te wicchecraft and nigromancie , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.150

and was a wonderfel man and fer castynge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.151

and hadde nobil ffacounde and faire speche . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.152

+Tan he com to +te lady of +te province Coro+gonia ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.153

+te lady heet Cadygan , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.154

and somdel wi+t spices +tat he brou+gte , wi+t wicchecraft , and wi+t
faire wordes , he made +te lady so mad and so nyce +tat sche worschipped
hym as +te grettest prophete of God Almy+gty , o+ter as it were Messyas
+tat +te Iewes abide+t , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.155

and sche desired hym to housbonde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.156

It is +te usage of +tat province to be $y-ruled also by wommen .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.157

+Tanne he wedded +te wymmen +tat was quene , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.158

and so he was i-made lorde of +te province . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.159

+Tanne he drow+g to hym +te Arabes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.160

and occupiede +te est empere anon to Alexandria a+genst Heraclius +te
emperour . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.161

+Tanne he took +te manere spekinge of trewe prophetes , as +tey God
hadde i-spoke in hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.162

and spak in +tis manere in his bookes +tat he made :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.163

" Oure Lord spak to his prophete Machomete CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.164

and seide ; " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,23.165

<P_VI,25>

for so +te bookes +tat he feyned gylfulliche schulde be i-trowed as
+tou+g +tey were i-made by auctorite of God Almy+gti .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,25.167

Whan nou+gt onliche his owne men but also men of fer londes fil to hym
and bowed to hym in every side , he hedde greet likynge to have gretter
lordschipe ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,25.168

and as it were for to brynge men into good manere lyvynge , and as it
were by heste of God Almy+gte , he assailede +te naciouns +tat wonede
ny+g hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,25.169

and dede by crafte and by gile what he my+gte nou+gt doo by dedes of
armes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,25.170

+Terfore whan Egipt , Libia , Arabia , and Siria were suget , for he
wolde seme +te more holy , he drou+g +te peple +tat were suget to his
false lawe , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,25.171

and made hem forsake +te usages and +te lawes here forfadres .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,25.172

And he forbeed +te paynyms mametrie , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,25.173

and graunted circumcisioun to +te Iewes as +tey+g hadde i-used it ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,25.174

and i-feyned of his some newe lawes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,25.175

and alleide witnes of ei+ter testament . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,25.176

+Te Saracenes clepe+t +tat lawe his lawe +git anon to +tis tyme ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,25.177

and be_heet +te Saracenes circumcide hem as te Iewes do+t ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,25.178

and forbeed hem +tat wil folwe hym etynge of swynes flesche .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,25.179

And Makometus wolde telle +te cause why he forbeed +te etynge <P_27> of
swynes $flesche , CMPOLYCH-M3,27.180

and seide +tat swyn come of camels drit after Noe his flood ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,27.181

and +terfore clene men schulde schonye it as mete +tat is unclene ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,27.182

and $as it were to acorde with Cristen men in +te manere of cristenynge
, he ordeyned ofte wasshynge of lemes in water , as it were for
clensynge of synnes . CMPOLYCH-M3,27.183

And for to brynge +te peple +tat was $so bygiled +te faster in snarl ,
what he knewe +tat was most plesynge to manis likynge , he ordeyned for
lawe , CMPOLYCH-M3,27.184

and so he ordeyned +tat a man schulde have as many wifes and concubynes
as he my+gte susteyne wi+t his catel . Also +tat a man my+gte have
wifes of his owne kynrede anon to +te noumbre of foure , and +tat a man
my+gte four si+tes foresake his wif and take hir a+ge , +tat he suffrede
, and also +tat he my+gte have as meny concubinus as a wolde of wymmen
+tat were ybo+gt o+ter prisoners , and also +tat a my+gte selle hem but
+gif he hadde ibrou+gt eny of hem wi+t childe ; CMPOLYCH-M3,27.185

and ordeyned hem to use sobernesse in mete and in drinke ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,27.186

and forbeed hem mete and <P_VI,29> drynkenge of wyn but it were in
certeyne solempne dayes in +te +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,29.187

And for he wolde somdel varie from +te Iewes +tat worschippe+t God
westward , and from Cristen men +tat worschippe+t God estward , he
tau+gte his peple to worschippe God sou+tward with ofte knelynges ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,29.188

for in +te sou+t is plente of li+gt . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,29.189

He ordeyned hem to worschippe the goddes Venus , and to holde +te day
+terof solempne and holy , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,29.190

+tat is Friday . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,29.191

He heet worschippe $on Almy+gti God , Creatour and Makere of alle
+tinges , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,29.192

and seide +tat Moyses and Iohn were prophetes , but +tat Crist was
grettere , and grettest of alle prophetes , and +tat he was i-bore of
+te mayde Marie by vertu of God wi+t_oute mannys mone , as he sei+t in
his book +tat hatte Alcoranum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,29.193

No+teles he melled som false sawes with soo+t sawes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,29.194

and seide +tat Crist was $afterward i-hove up into hevene , and nou+gt
i-slawe ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,29.195

for he sei+t +tat Iudas +te traytour sou+gte Crist in a den ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,29.196

and chaungede into +te likenesse of Crist , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,29.197

and so was i-take and i-nayled to +te cros in stede of Crist .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,29.198

Also he hete +tat +te men of his lawe schulde every +gere , +gif +tey
my+gte , goo in to Goddis hous +tat is in Matha for to bidde here bedes
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,29.199

$and <P_VI,31> whanne +tey were i-come +tider +tey schulde be bygoo
aboute and i-clo+ted in oon manere clo+tynge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,31.200

and +tey schulde +trowe out stones +torow holes of +te walles , as it
were for to stene the devel ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,31.201

and seide +tat Abraham made +tat hous for his children Ismaelites ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,31.202

for +tey schulde +tere bidde here bedes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,31.203

Also by Machometus his lawe he +tat were i-take with a womman in
spousebreche schulde be stened to de+te , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,31.204

and +gif he dede ffornicacioun wi+t a sengle woman he schulde have
foure_score lasshes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,31.205

A +teef +te firste tyme and +te secounde schulde be i-bete ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,31.206

and +te +tridde tyme he schulde lese his hondes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,31.207

and +te fer+te tyme he schulde lese his feet . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,31.208

And he sei+t +tat who +tat holde+t al +tis and o+tere hestes of his lawe
God Almy+gti byhote+t hym paradys , +te orchard of likynge , +tere is
noon distemperure no+ter peyne , +tere is no manere greef , but al
manere of wel+te and of likynge ; +tere is likynge mete for to ete , and
clo+tes to werie , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,31.209

and maydens to beclippe faire schal serve hem +tere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,31.210

+te aungels bee+t so huge and so greet +tat from +te oon y+ge to +tat
o+ter is +te <P_VI,33> space of a day his iornay .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,33.211

And to hem +tat holde+t nou+gt his lawe , he byhote+t hem fuyre and
peyne of helle wi+t_outen ende . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,33.212

And also in his book +tat hatte Alcoranum he preyse+t al +te fadres of
+te Olde Testament , and specialliche Moyses , Iohn Baptiste , Crist ,
and Machometus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,33.213

Also he preyse+t al +tat trowe+t in God and doo+t ri+gtwisnesse ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,33.214

but it is nou+gt +tere i-rad what is +te ri+gt fey , no+ter what men
bee+t of ri+gtbileve no+ter what men be+t of misbileve .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,33.215

Also +tere is i-write +tat fyve bookes com doun from heven for
infornacioun of mankynde , +te Sau+gter , Moyses bookes , +te bookes of
prophetes , +te gospel , and Machometus his Alcoranum .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,33.216

In +tat Alcoranum it is i-wrete +tat Almy+gti God wolde rule , and lede
mankynde into +te way of savacioun , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,33.217

and after Abraham he +gaf +te children of Israel lawe , by whiche lawe
+tey schulde knowe God and worschippe hym ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,33.218

but for +tey tolde nou+gt of +tis lawe , God +gaf the gospel to o+ter
men . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,33.219

And also +tey mysused his lawe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,33.220

And +te Arabies +tat com of Abraham by Ismael were moo men and gretter
peple +tan +te Iewes +tat come of Abraham by Isaac ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,33.221

and the Arabes +tat were i-left were i-left wi+t_oute lawe .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,33.222

+Terfore out of +te concistorie of <P_VI,35> Goddis ri+gtwisnesse com a
decre +tat a prophete of here owne peple schulde be i-sent to
Ismaellites wi+t a lawe , +te whiche prophete and lawe +te Saracenes
shold folowe as the Jewes folowed Moyses , and Crysten men Cryst ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,35.223

and therfore the Sarasyns holde+t hem self bettre +tan Iewes and
Cristene men ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,35.224

for +tey holde+t holiche here lawes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,35.225

and Iewes and Cristen men ofte trespasi+t a+genst here owne lawe .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,35.226

For to brynge +tis aboute Machometus norsched and fedde a faire camel in
a prive place , so +tat +te camel hadde no mete but of his owne honde ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,35.227

and Machometus wayted his tyme , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,35.228

and heng +tat corsede book Alcoranum aboute +te camel his nekke ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,35.229

in +tat book were +te forsayd lawes y-write ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,35.230

and Machometus let goo +te camel into +te feeldes wi+t +te book aboute
his nekke to_fore +te day ly+gt . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,35.231

+Tanne +te camel , as it was no wonder , gan to lepe and $to sterte ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,35.232

and made grete ioye for he was at large , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,35.233

and fli+g eche man , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,35.234

and wolde come nyh no manis hond . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,35.235

Speche of +tis wonder sprang out in feeldes and townes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,35.236

and +te peple gadrede +tider on everyside . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,35.237

<P_VI,37>

But whan Machometus was i-come +te beest sigh hym afer +tat +gaf hym
alwey mete , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,37.239

and ran to hym anon ri+gt , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,37.240

and bowed a doun CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,37.241

and likked his hondes as he was i-tau+gt . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,37.242

+Tanne +te peple cride and seide , in +tis dede is i-schewed +te
holynesse of Goddis prophete , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,37.243

and prayed hym +tat he wolde undo +te book wi+t his holy hondes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,37.244

And whan +te book was i-opened , " Loo , " quod Mahometus , " here is
+goure lawe , nou+gt i-write wi+t manis ynke , but wi+t angelis hondes ,
and i-sente from hevene for to by holde evere wi+t_oute $eny ende .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,37.245

In +tis book +ge be i-tau+gt how +ge schal worship God , and how grete
mede +ge schal hope to fonge of hym for kepynge of +tis lawe . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,37.246

+Te dey +tat +tis was i-doo ynne is every +gere i-made solempne and holy
, and i-cleped +te feste of +te camel . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,37.247

And +tei faste+t a mone+t to_fore +tat feste in +tis manere :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,37.248

everiche day of +tat mone+t from +te firste li+gt of +te day , whanne me
may knowe $bytwene white and blak , anon to +te goynge doun of +te sonne
, +tey faste+t CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,37.249

and ete+t nou+gt , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,37.250

no+ter dele+t wi+t hir wifes , bote seke men and feble ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,37.251

but bee+t alwey in <P_VI,39> here bedes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.252

but after +te goynge doun of +te sonne anon to +te dawenynge a+gen +tey
ete+t and drinke+t CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.253

and ligge+t by here wifes : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.254

bote seke men and feble bee+t nou+gt i-holde so for to faste .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.255

+Tis Machometus displesede ofte his wif , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.256

for he hadde ofte +te fallynge evel , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.257

and in +tat evel he fel doun ofte to grounde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.258

Bote he plesed here and o+tere +tat had y-fonge his lawe in +tis mannere
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.259

and seide +tat he fil to +te grounde for +te wordes of Seint Mychel the
archangel +tat spak wi+t hym ofte . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.260

For a fleschelich man , he seide , may nou+gt suffre an aungels wordes
but +gif he falle . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.261

He hated wyn dronkenes , ribaudye , and harlottie ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.262

uppon caas for hete of +te contray he wolde have it i-spared .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.263

But in a ny+gt he was dronke , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.264

and fel doun in +te strete , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.265

and +tere swyn hete hym , +tat he hylde unclene bestes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.266

+terfore +tey +tat holde+t his lawe spare+t wyn and swynes flesch .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.267

In +te firste poynt it seme+t +tat +tei folwe+t +te Iewes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,39.268

in +te secounde poynt it semeth +tat +tey <P_VI,41> folowe+t +te
philosofy of hir maister . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,41.269

Also after +te de+t of Machometus +tat cursede secte encresede so faste
+tat it drou+g my+gti men of Pers to +te corsed law of +te Arabes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,41.270

Al +tat sette ha+t infecte anon to +tis tyme al Affrica and a greet deel
of Spayne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,41.271

And +te archebisshop Turpius telle+t +tat Mako-metus his ymage of latoun
, +tat he made wi+t his owne hondes , stonde+t in +te see stronde ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,41.272

and ha+t his face toward +te sou+t . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,41.273

In +tat ymage Machometus by wichecraft closed a legioun of fendes :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,41.274

a Cristen man +tat come+t +tere li+gtliche i-persed ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,41.275

but <P_VI,43> a Saracen goo+t awey hole and sound ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,43.276

a bridde +tat come+t +tere deie+t anone . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,43.277

+Te ymage holde+t a mace in his ri+gt hond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,43.278

and +tat mace schal first falle whanne a kyng is i-bore in Gallia +tat
schal renewe al Spayne wi+t Cristene lawe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,43.279

And whanne +te mace is i-falle , +tanne +te Saracens schal flee and leve
here tresorie . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,43.280

+Te famous nory of +tis cursede secte , Saladinus , duke of Turkes , +te
strong hamer of Cristen men , aboute +te +gere of oure Lord
eleven_hondred_foure_score_and_ten , he herde +tat Cristen men used meny
messes at oon mele , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,43.281

and seide +tat men were nou+gt wor+ty to have +te holy lond .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,43.282

Also he was fel and sli+g for to preise his owne secte , and to blame
and despise oure lawe , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,43.283

and +tat is i-knowe by +tis ensample . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,43.284

In a tyme were tweie white monkes i-brou+gt to_fore hym , +tat +teeves
of Torkes hadde i-take , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,43.285

and he knewe by here straunge clo+tinge +tat +tey were philosofres and
Cristen men ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,43.286

and he axede by oon +tat knewe bo+te longages of hem bo+te what men +tey
were , and of what con-dicioun <P_VI,45> and professioun ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.287

and +tey seide +tat +tey were monkes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.288

and hadde i-made here professioun to Seint Benet his rule .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.289

+Tanne he axede besiliche of meny poyntes of +tat rule ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.290

and specialliche among o+ter he axede by here rule +gif +tey schulde ete
flesche o+ter drinke wyn . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.291

+Tey answerde CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.292

and seide +tat +tey hadde at al tyme somwhat of wyn for to drynke ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.293

but flesche schulde +tey noon ete but it were for sekenesse o+ter for
grete nede . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.294

+Too +ty tyraunt heet +tat +tey schulde have more large kepyng , and
have tweye faire +gong wommen to serve hem , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.295

and heet +tat +tey schulde ete flesche and drynke water ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.296

and so +tey ete flesche CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.297

and dronke water , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.298

and took ensaumple of Seint Iob , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.299

and made covenant wi+t hir ey+gen +tat +tey wolde nou+gt +tenke of folye
ne fil+te $and of synne , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.300

and were besy alwey in here bedes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.301

+Tanne Saladinus was war +terof , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.302

and took fro hem +tat flesche and +te water , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.303

and heet serve hem wi+t fische and wi+t wyn . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,45.304

And $+gef he badde i-doo so to +tat entent +tat Salamon mene+t , and
sei+t , " +geve+t wyn to hem +tat bee+t in greet sorwe , +tat +tey mowe
<P_VI,47> drynke and for+gete here sorwe and her nede , " +tanne he
hadde i-do goodliche and as he schulde ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,47.305

but he caste gilful-liche to begile symplenes by falshede and by gilful
crafte , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,47.306

for he wolde +gif he my+gte +terby +te secte chalenge and blame upon
$+te religioun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,47.307

+Tanne +te monkes dronke wyn , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,47.308

and wex mery and glad , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,47.309

and for+gat +tat +tey schulde have in mynde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,47.310

and fil to CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,47.311

and lay by +te wommen . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,47.312

+Tanne amorwe , whanne +te wyn was defied , +tey +tou+gt on here trespas
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,47.313

and gonne for to wepe ful sore . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,47.314

+Te tyraunt sigh hem wepe , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,47.315

and seide , " Why bee+t +ge more sory +tan +ge were i-woned to be ? "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,47.316

" For we have+t i-synned grevously , " quod +tey , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,47.317

" and were overcome wi+t wyn . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,47.318

+Tan he seide , " While +ge ete flesche and drank water +ge helde for+t
+goure purpos rediliche inow , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,47.319

but whanne +ge were overcome with wyn wi+t_oute flesche +ge brake +goure
rule and +goure purpos , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,47.320

+terfore it is i-knowe +tat Benett , +te auctor of +goure rule , was
unwys to forbede +gow etynge of flesche , +tat destourbe+t <P_VI,49> not
a manis wit , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,49.321

and grauntede +gow to drynke wyn , +tat rote+t up +te streng+te of
resoun , as +ge have+t assayed by newe assaye . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,49.322

+Tanne he +tat made oure lawe , Machometus , +tat forbeed us wyn +tat
destourbe+t mannis wyt , and graunted us +te use of flesche , was wiser
+tan +goure Benet . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,49.323

But what may be +goure remedie and clensynge of +tis synne , now +ge
have+t $y-broke +goure rule and +goure purpos ? " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,49.324

" Penaunce , , " quo+t they , " and satisfaccioun , by ordynance of oure
elder fader . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,49.325

" +Tanne , " quod he , " mowe +ge nou+gt be clensed among us ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,49.326

goo+t to +goure owne CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,49.327

and bee+t i-clensed in +goure $owne manere wise ; "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,49.328

and so he lete hem goo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,49.329

+Tis man was ful of olde pestilence of slei+te and wyles ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,49.330

and what +te wily schrewe my+gte nou+gt have savour ynne , he gan to
despice , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,49.331

ffor he wolde blame +te holy man Seint Benett . Of +te which Seint
Benet +te grete Gregorie sei+t +tat he wroot the rule of monkes ful of
wit and of wisdom , and open and cleer in wordes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,49.332

for it was a wys dede to wi+tdrawe $fro hem +tat goo+t to holy chevalrie
likynge of metes +tat wi+tdrawe+t +te soule from holynesse of dedes and
of +tou+gtes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,49.333

and by the apostles lore he graunted hem a litel what of wyn for@ @to
streng+te <P_VI,51> somwhat +te febelnesse of +te flesche ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,51.334

and graunted hem but litel , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,51.335

for it schulde nou+gt greve +te scharpnesse of +te soule .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,51.336

<heading>

Capitulum quintumdecimum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,51.338

Heraclonas CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,51.339

<$$heading>

HERACLONAS , Heraclius his sone , regned two +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,51.341

+Te senatoures of Rome putte hym and his wif Martina out of his kyngdom
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,51.342

and his moder nose and here tonge were i-kutte of al bo+te .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,51.343

After +te four+te Iohn , Theodorus was pope sixe +gere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,51.344

+tat tyme was Isedre bisshop Hispalensis in his floures ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,51.345

he was somtyme +te greet Gregorie his disciple . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,51.346

Isedre lefte after hym meny goode bookes +tat he hadde i-made : +te
bookes Ethimologiarum , De Summo Bono , De Ordine Creature , Sino nima ,
and meny o+ter good bookes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,51.347

Edbaldus kyng of Kent deide , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,51.348

and lefte after hym his sone and his heire Ercon-bertus , <P_VI,53> +tat
he hadde y-gete on Emma , a womman of Fraunce . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,53.349

Econbertus regnede foure_and_twenty +gere in Kent ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,53.350

he destroyede +te temples of mawmetrie , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,53.351

and ordeynede +tat +te Lent fastynge schulde be i-holde in his kyngdom .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,53.352

Of his wif Sexburga +te dou+gter of Anna , kyng of Est Angles , he gat a
dou+gter Enkengoda , +tat was i-made mynchoun in +te abbey Bryggense in
Gallia , +tat is in Fraunce ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,53.353

+tere here aunte Ethelburga servede God in +tat abbey .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,53.354

Ethelburga hadde i-be Edwynus his wif ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,53.355

also +tere afterward ei+ter of hem was abbas . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,53.356

+Tat tyme , +tey+g +tere were many abbayes in Engelond , +git Englische
men used for to goo into abbayes of Fraunce by cause of conversacioun
and of +te manere of levynge , and specialliche at Brugges , at Caleys ,
and at Andilegium . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,53.357

+Tat tyme Audomarus +te bisshop , and Bertinus +te bisshop , and
Bertinus +te abbot , were in here floures in +te contray of Tarvernens
in Gallia , +tat is Fraunce . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,53.358

Paulus libro 5=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,53.359

+Te +tridde Constantinus was Heraclius his <P_VI,55> sone , and
Heraclioun his bro+ter , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.360

and regnede ey+gte_and_twenty +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.361

He was begiled of Paulis , grauntsire of Sergius , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.362

+terfore he exciled pope Martyn CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.363

and spoylede Rome . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.364

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 4=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.365

He unheled chirches roves and coppes +tat were i-heled wi+t slattes of
bras , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.366

and took awey +te slattes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.367

but he loste hem at Siracusa in Sicilia , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.368

and was i-slawe by Saracenes in a bath , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.369

and +tey ladde awey +tat pray into Alexandria . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.370

Beda , libro 3=o= , capitulo 6=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.371

+Tat +gere Kyngulsus , kyng of West Saxons , was dede ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.372

and his sone Kenwalkus regnede after hym oon_and_+tritty +gere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.373

for his eldere bro+ter Quichelinus hadde ra+ter i-regned wi+t his fader
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.374

and deide +te same +gere +tat he was y-cristened wi+t his fader ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.375

and lefte after hym his sone Cuthredus , +tat was i-cristned also
Birinus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.376

$R CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.377

Here take hede +tat Beda and William varie+t , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.378

for Beda sei+t +tat Quychelinus was Kyngilsus his sone ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.379

and William sei+t +tat he was Kyngilsus his bro+ter .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.380

Beda ut supra . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,55.381

+Tis Ken-walcus in +te bygynnynge of his kyngdom wolde nou+gt fonge
<P_VI,57> +te fey of Cristendom , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.382

and +terfore ri+gtfulliche he loste his kyngdom ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.383

for he dede awey his wif +tat was kyng Penda his suster ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.384

and wedded ano+ter , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.385

and +terfore Penda , in +te fifte +gere of his kyngdom , chasede hym
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.386

and droof hym awey . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.387

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.388

And he hydde hymself +tre +gere with Anna , kyng of Estangles ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.389

+terfore after-ward Penda slou+g hym . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.390

But in +te tyme of his excilynge Kenwalcus was i-cristned of Felix , +te
bisshop of his province , while he was wi+t Anna , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.391

and rekevered his kyngdom by help of Anna , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.392

and made bisshop of his province oon Agelbertus , a Frenscheman , +tat
com out of Irlond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.393

and he was bisshop of Wynchestre in West Saxon fiftene +gere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.394

and +te kyng of strange tonge was greved and noyful ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.395

o+ter for som o+ter cause I n@ @oot , he was wroo+t ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.396

and brou+gte yn ano+ter of his owne longage and tonge ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.397

and was i-cleped Wyne by his name ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.398

he was ordeyned in Fraunce , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,57.399

and +to kyng bytook hym tweye provinces i-deled in tweye <P_VI,59>
parisches , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.400

and sette +te cheef bisshoppes see at Wynchestre ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.401

+terfore Agibertus was wroo+t , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.402

and wente into Fraunce , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.403

and was afterward bisshop of Parys ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.404

and nou+gt longe after +tis Wyn , after $+te two +gere of his prelacie ,
was i-putt $oute by +te kyng , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.405

and boute +te see of Londoun of +te kyng of Mercya Wolferus ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.406

and hilde it while he was onlyve ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.407

and so +te province of West Saxons was foure +gere bisshoples .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.408

At +te laste kyng Kenwalcus was ofte hard bysette wi+t his enemyes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.409

and sente for Agibertus , +tat was i-putte out , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.410

but he wolde nou+gt o+tere he my+gte not come , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.411

and sente his nevew Leu-therius in his stede , +tat was confermed of +te
archebisshop Theodorus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.412

and was bisshop +tere sevene +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.413

Willelmus de Regibus , libro primo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.414

+Tis Kenwalcus overcom +te Britouns tweis , first at White Gosnesburgh
and eft at +te hil of Pentya , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.415

and for wreche of his fader persecucion he bynam Wilferus , Penda his
sone , a greet deel of his kyngdom . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.416

Beda , libro 3=o= , capitulo 8=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,59.417

+Tat +gere Oswald kyng of Nor+thum-berlond was i-slawe by a paynym kyng
Penda , in a place +tat <P_VI,61> hatte Mezerfeld ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,61.418

+tere ofte God doo+t myracles and wondres : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,61.419

Penda heet honge his armes and his heed in +te stokkes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,61.420

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro primo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,61.421

After oon +gere his bro+ter Oswy , +tat was kyng after hym , come +tider
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,61.422

and buried +te heed in +te chirchehawe of Lyndefare ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,61.423

but me sei+t +te hede is now at Durham bytwene Seint Cuthbert his armes
; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,61.424

but he dede Oswold his armes in +te citee Bebbanburgh .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,61.425

But Ostrida queene of Mercia , +tat was Oswy his dou+gter and
Etheldredus his wif , brou+gte +te body and +te o+ter deel of bones wi+t
here to +te abbey of Bardeneye : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,61.426

+tere sche my+gtte nou+gt be i-fonge or a piler of li+gt were i-seie
schyne uppon +tilke relikes al an ny+gt . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,61.427

Meny +gere after men of straunge nacioun +te Danes werred in +tat lond ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,61.428

and Elfleda , lady of Mercia , brou+gte +tilke boones at Gloucetre in a
chirche of chanouns . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,61.429

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 4=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,61.430

$But Seynt Oswald his arm is in +te abbay at Peterisborgh hool <P_VI,63>
and som , wi+t flesche and wi+t senewes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,63.431

as me sei+t it was +te flesche i-stole out of +te olde restynge place ,
and +tider i-brou+gt , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,63.432

and +tere is i-seie in a shryne +tat is precious and riche .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,63.433

But +te fey hereof is somdel unstedefast , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,63.434

for +tere me hire+t and aspie+t and see+t nou+gt +terof ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,63.435

I seie nou+gt +tus for doute +tat I have of +te holynesse of +tis seynt
, but for I kepe nou+gt to hastiliche afferme whe+ter it be in +tat
place o+ter no . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,63.436

Paulus , libro 5=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,63.437

Aboute +tat tyme Cesarea , +te kyng his wif of Pers , come wi+t fewe
Cristen men to Con-stantynnoble for to be y-cristened :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,63.438

here housbonde herde +terof , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,63.439

and sente messagers to Constantynnoble for to axe his wif of +te
emperour . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,63.440

But Cesarea answerde CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,63.441

and seide : " Telle+t my lord +goure kyng +tat but +gif he wil fonge my
fey and trowe in my God he schal nevere have me to his wif . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,63.442

+Te kynge herde +tis , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,63.443

and com wi+t sixty_+towsand men in pes to +te emperour ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,63.444

and was i-cristened , he and <P_VI,65> alle hise , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.445

and hadde greet worschippe , he and al his , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.446

and took meny grete +giftes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.447

and took his wif CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.448

and wente home a+ge . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.449

Beda , libro 3=o= , capitulo 13=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.450

Whan Oswald was i-slawe , after hym his bro+ter Oswy was kyng of
Northumberlond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.451

and regnede nobilleche in Deyra . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.452

Oswynus , Osricus his sone , of Edwynus his blood , was a stedefast man
, and holy and mylde , and faire of speche . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.453

But kyng Oswy made hym i-slawe in erle Hunbaldus his hous ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.454

Oswynus was i-flowe to erle Hunbaldus for helpe and socour ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.455

and after hym Oswy hadde a felowe in +te kyndom of Deyra Oswaldus
Oswoldis sone . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.456

After Theodorus +te firste Martyn was pope sixe +gere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.457

a swerdman of Olympus fondede to slee hym at his au+gter while he song
his masse ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.458

but whyle he gan to smyte anon he wor+t blynde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.459

+Te emperour of Constantynnoble excilede +tis pope ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.460

for he hadde i-dampned Paulus , patriark of Con-stantynnoble ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.461

and hadde falsliche +tat name . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.462

Beda , libro 3=o= , capitulo 13=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,65.463

+Te pope deide Paulynus +tat was $+to <P_VI,67> bisshop of Rouchestre ,
and hadde i-be somtyme erchebisshop of +gork ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,67.464

and after hym Thamar was bisshop . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,67.465

Also Felix deide , +te first bisshop of Est Angles ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,67.466

and Thomas was bisshop after hym . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,67.467

Beda , libro 3=o= , capitulo 21=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,67.468

Aboute +tat tyme +te Est Saxons fenge +te fey +tat +tey hadde
to_forehonde i-caste awey and forsake : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,67.469

Oswynus , kyng of Northumberlond , made hem now receyve and fonge +te
fey ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,67.470

for here kyng Sigebertus was i-cristned of Fynanus bisshop of
Northum-berland , faste by +te longe wal +tat departede somtyme betwene
Britouns and Scottes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,67.471

+Tanne he took wi+t hym oon Cedde , a preost , +te bro+ter of Chedda ,
out of +te province of Mercia , for to preche to his men of +te Est ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,67.472

and whan he hadde i-doo +tat dede he tornede a+gen to +te forsaide
Fynanus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,67.473

and was i-made bisshop of hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,67.474

and wente ofte for to preche to +te Est Angles in a place +tat hatte
Stanchestre , +tat is by +te brynke of +te water Ponte , and also in +te
toun of Tillebury , +tat is faste by Tempse . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,67.475

But byfel in a tyme in +tat contray +tat the for-saide <P_69> bisshop
Ced corsede an erle and alle +tat communed wi+t hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,69.476

for he held a womman in unlaweful wedlok . CMPOLYCH-M3,69.477

And $kyng Sigebertus despisede +te bisshop his heste ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,69.478

and com at +tat erle his prayer , CMPOLYCH-M3,69.479

and eet wi+t +tat erl in his hous . CMPOLYCH-M3,69.480

And whanne +te kyng wente from +te mete +te bisshop Cedde mette +te kyng
, CMPOLYCH-M3,69.481

and touched hym wi+t a +gerde +tat he bare in his honde ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,69.482

and seide to +te kyng in +tis manere : " For +tou woldest not at myn
heste wi+tdrawe +te and holde +te out of +tat lost and corsede manis
hous , in +te same hous +tou schalt deie . " CMPOLYCH-M3,69.483

And so it byfel +tat +te same erl and his bro+ter slou+g +te kyng in
+tat same hous ; CMPOLYCH-M3,69.484

and afterward , whan he axed hym wy +tei hadde i-doo +tat cursede dede ,
+tey answerde nou+gt elles , CMPOLYCH-M3,69.485

but seide +tat +te kyng was to esy to his enemyes , CMPOLYCH-M3,69.486

wolde li+gtliche for+geve wronges and trespas . CMPOLYCH-M3,69.487

Trevisa . CMPOLYCH-M3,69.488

It is soo+t +tat corsed men hate+t god , and here good dedes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,69.489

and so +te corsed erle slou+g +te kyng , CMPOLYCH-M3,69.490

for he was gracious and good . CMPOLYCH-M3,69.491

+Tanne it folowe+t in +te story : CMPOLYCH-M3,69.492

also +tat <P_VI,71> +gere kyng Oswy leet slee kyng Oswynus in erl
Hunbald his hous . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,71.493

Oswynus hadde i-left his oost , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,71.494

and was i-flowe for greet trust to erle Hunbaldus , as it were for to
abide betre tyme for to fi+gte . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,71.495

It is i-seide of +tis Oswynus +tat he hadde somtyme i-+geve his beste
hors to Aidanus +te bisshop , +tat used more to goo oon foot +tan on
hors for to ride . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,71.496

But sone afterward a pore man prayed +te bischop of his almesse ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,71.497

for +tis bisshop hadde but oon hors , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,71.498

and +tat he +gaf to +te poore man for almesse , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,71.499

for he hadde nou+gt elles at honde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,71.500

Whanne +tat was i-tolde +te kyng , +te kynge was swi+te wrooth ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,71.501

and seide to Aidanus as he satte by hym at +te meete : " What hast y-doo
, sire bisshop , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,71.502

hadde we nou+gt +tinges of lasse prise +tat my+gte suffice for almesse
dede . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,71.503

" What spekest +tou , lord sire kyng ? " quo+t +te bisshop ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,71.504

" schal a mare sone be levere to us +tan Mary sone ? "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,71.505

Anon +te kyng fil <P_VI,73> doun to +te bischopps feet ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.506

and prayed mercye and for+gifnesse , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.507

and byhet truliche +tat he wolde nevere after +tat tyme speke evel of
+tat dede . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.508

+Tanne +te kyng and the bisshop bo+te were wel apaide and seete in fere
at +te mete , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.509

and +te bisshop gan $sodenliche to wepe , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.510

and wepte meny sore teres . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.511

+Tanne me axede hym the cause of his wepynge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.512

and he answerede CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.513

and seide , " +Tis kyng schal nou+gt longe wi+t us be here onlyve .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.514

Unne+te I have i-seie kyng meke afore +tis tyme , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.515

and +tis evel peple is nou+gt wor+ty to have suche a kyng longe tyme .
" CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.516

+Tanne it happede sone aftir +tat +te kyng was i-slawe as it is i-seide
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.517

and +te bisshop Aydanus lyvede after but twelve dayes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.518

and seint Cuthbert sigh angels bere his soule into hevene .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.519

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.520

Also deide +tis +gere Byrinus +te firste bisshop of Dorchestre , after
+te fourten+te +gere of his comynge and of his bisshopriche .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.521

Beda sei+t +tat Hedda bisshop of Wynchestre translated Birinus his body
out of Dorchestre to Wynchestre ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.522

look more hereof in +te firste book de Pontificibus Westsaxonum .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.523

Beda , libro 3=o= , capitulo 23=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.524

After Martyn Eugenius was pope as it were +tre +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,73.525

+Tis +ger +te kyng of Deira Odilwaldus , Oswald <P_VI,75> his sone ,
+gaf to Ced , bisshop of +te Est , +tat com ofte into +te nor+te , a
place in hy hilles +tat hatte Loftyngay , for to bulde +tere an abbay .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,75.526

But +tis Ced or he wolde founde +te abbay faste al a Lente everiche day
save +te Soneday al day for_to it were eve , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,75.527

and +tanne he wolde ete a litel what of mylk and oon hen ey and a litel
what of mylk i-melled wi+t water , as Aidanus his disciples usede ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,75.528

of hem he hadde i-lerned CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,75.529

and was i-tou+gt . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,75.530

After hym his bro+ter Chunbillus governed +tat place ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,75.531

and was i-buried +tere in a pestilence tyme . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,75.532

And after hym Chedda rulede +tat place . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,75.533

<heading>

Capitulum sextumdecimum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,75.535

<heading>

Affter Eugenius Vitalianus was pope fourtene +gere : he sente to +te
cherches of Engelonde and +te archebisshop Theodorus , monk of Tarsens .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,75.537

Beda , libro 3=o= , capitulo 9=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,75.538

<P_VI,77>

+Tat +gere +te Merces , +tat bee+t men of myddel Engelond , fenge
Cristendom under her prince Weda , Penda his sone ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,77.540

for +tis Weda , willynge his fader , hadde i-wedded Effleda , kyng Oswy
his dou+gter , uppon a condicioun +tat he schulde be a Cristen man ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,77.541

and he dede it wi+t +te bettre wille , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,77.542

ffor Alfridus , Oswy his sone , hadde i-spoused Oswy his suster
Kyneburga ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,77.543

+terfore Weda hadde i-bro+gt wi+t hym foure preostes out of
Northumberlond for to preche his peple and his men .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,77.544

+Te prestes were Cedde , Adda , Becti , and Duina ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,77.545

and kyng Penda forbede nou+gt to converte to Cristene fey al +tat evere
wolde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,77.546

Also +tat +gere deide Honorius , arche-bisshop of Caunterbury ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,77.547

and after oon +gere aftirward oon Deusdedit was bisshop nyne +gere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,77.548

hym confermede Ithamar , bisshop of Rochestre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,77.549

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 3=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,77.550

+Tat +gere Benet bisshop , +te abbot +tat norschede Beda +te preoste ,
and was kyng Oswy his servaunt , forsook his hous and home , his cosyns
, and al his kyn for Cristes love , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,77.551

and took <P_VI,79> +te wey to Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.552

and com ef a+ge : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.553

fyve si+tes he wente to Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.554

and brou+gte bookes and holy seintes relikes hoom to his abbayes +tat
were in +te brynke of +te river Wyre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.555

He was +te firste +tat brou+gte glasier his crafte into his contray .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.556

He bulde tweie abbayes of Petir and Of Poule uppon +te brinke of +te
ryver Wyre ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.557

were oon in +te on side , and +tat o+ter in +te o+tir side in Girvum ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.558

and was abbot of bo+te ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.559

he took his noble norrey Beda , a childe of sevene +gere olde ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.560

and tau+gte hym whiles he was onlyve . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.561

Willelmus de Regibus , libro primo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.562

Beda wondre+t of his pacience and of his witt . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.563

Of his wit , for he brou+gte so many bookes and craftes men into
Engelond , and was pilgrim wel nygh al his lyf tyme .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.564

In hym love of +te contray and likynge of fairnesse overcome +te strong
travailles . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.565

He wondre+t of his pacience , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.566

for he was i-made abbot by +te kyng of Kent , and in pos-sessioun of +te
abbay of Seynt Austyn at Canturbury , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.567

and at comynge of Adrian he lefte it wi+t good wille ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.568

and leet Adrian be abbot +tere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.569

Also +te abbayes of Wyre made hem ano+ter abbot while he was absent ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.570

and he suffred it wi+t good wille , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,79.571

<P_VI,81>

and dede +te newe abbot whan he come home worschippe as o+tere men dede
; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,81.573

also he was at +te laste i-smyte wi+t a palsye , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,81.574

and made +te +tridde abbot +terto . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,81.575

Also +tat +gere Penda , kyng of Mercia , slou+g Anna , kyng of $Est
Angles , in a bataille , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,81.576

for he hadde i-favored kyng Kenwalcus a+genst hym .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,81.577

Also +tat +gere Bothulphus bulde an abbay byside Lyn-colne in a place
+tat hatte Icanno . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,81.578

Beda , libro 3=o= , capitulo 24=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,81.579

+Tat +gere deide Penda kyng of Mercia , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,81.580

and was i-slawe , he and +tritty cheventeynes +tat come into +te contray
of Nor+t-humberlond for to slee kyng Oswy , $as he hadde i-slawe his
bro+ter Oswald somtyme , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,81.581

and spared nou+gt for alye and affinite +tat was bytwene hem sones and
hir dou+gtres . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,81.582

No+teles kyng Oswy profred hym meny grete +giftes for to wende out of
his lond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,81.583

but he wolde nou+gt therof ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,81.584

+tanne Oswy seide , " Yf +tis pay-nym can nou+gt fonge oure +giftes ,
+tanne $we schal profre and offre to hym +tat can . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,81.585

+Tan kyng Oswy made a vow +tat +gif he hadde +te victorie in +tat
bataille he wolde offre his dou+gter Elfleda to God of hevene , and also
possessiouns for <P_VI,83> to bulde twelve abbayes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,83.586

+Tanne +te bataille was i-doo in +te contray Leedes , not fer from +gork
, faste by +te ryver Wynwed , +tat was +to hugelich aryse and
over_flowed a greet deel of +te contray ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,83.587

in +tat batayle Penda was i-slawe , and +tritty dukes and leders of his
; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,83.588

and +git he hadde suche +tre so hardy men in his oost as +te o+ter hadde
in his ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,83.589

ffor +tey +tat askapede +te swerd were adreynt in +te ryver .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,83.590

+To Alfridus hadde i-be with his fader , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,83.591

bote Egfridus was i-holde in hostage with Penda his wif .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,83.592

+To Odilwald his sone hadde i-be wi+t Penda , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,83.593

but he stood aside for to see what ende +te bataille schulde have .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,83.594

Whanne +tis victorie was i-doo , +te kyng Oswy bytook his dou+gter of
+tre +gere olde to +te lore of Hilda , +te abbas afterward in +te abbay
of Hertiseie , +tat is Hertes Ilond . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,83.595

But aftirward sche was abbas of Strenischalt , +tat is , +te bosom o+ter
+te lappe of corn , +tat now hatte Whiteby , and is +tritty myle from
+gork ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,83.596

+tere Elflede was abbas aftirward . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,83.597

+Tanne Oswy +gaf possessiouns for to bulde abbayes , as he hadde byhote
, sixe in province of Deira , and <P_VI,85> sixe in +te province of
Brenisia . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.598

Trevisa . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.599

Loke more of Deyra and Brenisia in +te firste book , capitulo 51=o= .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.600

+Tan it folowe+t in the storie : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.601

and he +gaf to Weda , +tat hadde i-wedded his dou+gter , +te kyngdom of
Sou+t Mercia , +tat con-teyne+t , as me sei+t , fyve_+towsand housholdes
and meynees , and is departed from Nor+t Mercia by +te water of Trent .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.602

But Weda after +tre +gere of his kyngdom was sone i-spyld by tresoun of
his owne wif . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.603

Whanne Weda was dede +te Merces wax rebel a+genst +te kyng Oswy ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.604

and took Wlferus , Penda his sone , +tat +tey had priveliche i-kept ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.605

and made hem here kyng . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.606

He was +te firste Cristen man of alle +te kynges of Mercia ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.607

and wedded Ermenilda , Ercomber his dou+gter , kyng of Canturbury ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.608

and gat on here Kenredus and Wereburga , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.609

and overcome nobilliche Kenwalcus , kyng of West Saxons ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.610

and wan +te yle of Wyght , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.611

and +gaf it aftirward to +te kyng of Est Angles for to be a Cristen man
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.612

and was his godfader whan he was i-cristened . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.613

At +te laste , after seventene +gere of his kyngdom , he was i-buried at
Lichefeld . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,85.614

Clodoneus , after his fader Dogobertus , regnede in Fraunce seventene
+gere of <P_VI,87> his kingdom ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,87.615

by entysynge of +te devel he made kutte of seint Denys his arme .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,87.616

Also +tat +gere deide seynt Wandregisi-lius +te abbot .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,87.617

Aboute +tat tyme Girmaldus , kyng of Longo-bardes , aspied +tat his
kny+gt Bertaricus was i-flowe to Cacanus , kyng of Avares ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,87.618

and sente to kyng Cacanus worde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,87.619

and seide +tat he schulde leve Bertaricus o+ter he schulde have no pees
wi+t +te Longobardes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,87.620

Bertaricus herde hereof , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,87.621

and wente into Italy a+ge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,87.622

and by help of his frend Hunnul-phus he was reconsiled , and i-made at
oon wi+t +te kyng . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,87.623

Som wikked men sight +tat Berthericus hadde good semblant of meny men ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,87.624

and made sugestioun to +te kyng , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,87.625

and seide but +tat Berthericus were +te sonner i-slawe +te kyng schulde
lese his kyngdom . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,87.626

+Te kyng herde +tat , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,87.627

and sente kny+gtes and o+tere men to bysette Berthericus his hous , for
he schulde nou+gt ascape , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,87.628

and Hunulphus aspied +tat , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,87.629

and dede a bur+ten of bedclo+tes on Berthericus his nekke ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,87.630

and bete hym with <P_89> his feest , CMPOLYCH-M3,89.631

and schuft hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,89.632

and putte hym for+t +toru+g +te myddel of +te citee anon to +te walles ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,89.633

and lefte hym +tere , CMPOLYCH-M3,89.634

and Berthericus fli+g into Fraunce . CMPOLYCH-M3,89.635

Whanne me axede of Hunnul-phus why he dede soo , he answerde
CMPOLYCH-M3,89.636

and seide : " For +tis +tat is my wicked servaunt wolde have i-bedded me
in +te dronken Bertaricus his beddechamber , CMPOLYCH-M3,89.637

but for +tat was unlikynge to me , I make hym bere +te clo+tes a+gen
home to myne owne hous ; " CMPOLYCH-M3,89.638

and so +te kny+gtes were begiled , CMPOLYCH-M3,89.639

and fonde not in Bertaricus his chambre ; CMPOLYCH-M3,89.640

and +tey took Bertari-cus his servaunt , +tat wist of +tis scapynge ,
and was assentynge +terto , CMPOLYCH-M3,89.641

and drou+g hym out by +te heer , CMPOLYCH-M3,89.642

and brou+gt hym out to +te kyng . CMPOLYCH-M3,89.643

+Te servaunt was i-dampned to +te deth , CMPOLYCH-M3,89.644

but +git +te kyng preysed hym and Hunnulphus wonderliche wel ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,89.645

for +tey were so stedefast and so trusty , CMPOLYCH-M3,89.646

and +gaf hym choys whe+ter hem were levere abyde wi+t hym in his court
for evermo o+ter wende to here leve frende Bertaricus .
CMPOLYCH-M3,89.647

+Tanne +tey wente into Fraunce to here leve frend Bertsricus wi+t alle
+tat +tey hadde . CMPOLYCH-M3,89.648

Also +tat $+gere Egfridus , kyng Oswy his sone , spousede seint
Etheldreda , +tat was to_forehonde i-wedded to erle Todber .
CMPOLYCH-M3,89.649

+Tey heo were twyes yspoused and bysylych ywowed to cosses and clippynge
and fleschely lokynge ; +git sche lefte clene mayde , CMPOLYCH-M3,89.650

and was departed from Egfridus , CMPOLYCH-M3,89.651

and wente into +te abbey of Elyg , CMPOLYCH-M3,89.652

and was i-made abbas +tere , CMPOLYCH-M3,89.653

and dede many faire myracles and grete . CMPOLYCH-M3,89.654

Aboute +tat tyme Hunarus , prince of Saracenes in Siria bulde a newe
temple +tat is now in Ierusalem , +tere +te Saracenes worschippe+t God
and bidde+t here bedes . CMPOLYCH-M3,89.655

Beda , libro 4=o= , capitulo primo . CMPOLYCH-M3,89.656

Ercombertus , kyng of Caunterbury , deide , CMPOLYCH-M3,89.657

and his sone Egebertus was kyng after hym nyne +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,89.658

Also +tat +gere deide +te archebisshop +tat heet Deusdedit ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,89.659

+tan +te kyng of Kent and +te kyng of Northumberlond , by oon assent ,
sente Wyghardus to pope Vitalianus for to be archebisshop of Caunterbury
. CMPOLYCH-M3,89.660

But he and wel nygh al his companye deyde in $+te greet pestilence +tat
was +to strong in al Engelond ; CMPOLYCH-M3,89.661

<P_VI,93>

and +te pope ordeyned oon Theodoricus , a monk , governour of +te
cherches of Englelond . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,93.663

Beda , libro 3=o= , capitulo 21=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,93.664

Also +tat +gere fel greet pestilence in al Bretayne ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,93.665

and bygan in +te south contrayes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,93.666

In +tat pestilence byfel +tat +tat is i-rad of Egbertus +te monk +tat
wer+te seek +tat tyme . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,93.667

+Tis man felede +tat he was sike , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,93.668

and wente privelich out of his bed at matyn tyme , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,93.669

and was verray contrite and sorwful in his herte , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,93.670

and prayed God besiliche +tat he schulde nou+gt deie at +tat tyme , or
he had ful clensed him of his synnes that he hadde i-doo to_forehonde ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,93.671

and he made his avow +tat +gif he my+gte scape +tat pestilence he wolde
deie in pilgrymage ; and +tat wi+t_oute +te ful service he wolde every
day seie +te sawter , but +gif sikenesse of body hym lette ; and +tat
everiche woke he wolde faste oon day , and +te nyght +terto .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,93.672

Whanne +tis was i-doo he wente priveliche to his bed a+gen .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,93.673

Bote wi+t som manere rouschelynge +tat he made in lig-ynge adoun his
felowe awook , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,93.674

and spak to hym CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,93.675

and seide : <P_95> " Egbert , what hast +tou i-doo ? CMPOLYCH-M3,95.676

y hopede +tat we tweyne schulde wende in fere to reste ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,95.677

but what +tou hast i-prayed it is $y-graunted to +te . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,95.678

+Tanne +tat felawe deide , CMPOLYCH-M3,95.679

and +tis Egebertus leng+tede his owne lif to +te +gere of his age
foure_score_and_ten : CMPOLYCH-M3,95.680

but he dede more +tan +te ra+ter avow , CMPOLYCH-M3,95.681

and faste +tries in +te +gere fourty dayes contynuallyche to breed and
to +tynne mylk ; fourty dayes continualliche in +te Lente , fourty dayes
in +te Advent , and fourty dayes to_fore Witsonday ; CMPOLYCH-M3,95.682

but al +te creem and fatnesse of +tat mylke +tat he hadde to his breed
schulde be overblowe and i-take awey . CMPOLYCH-M3,95.683

Beda , libro 6=o= , capitulo 25=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,95.684

<heading>

Capitulum septimumdecimum . CMPOLYCH-M3,95.686

<$$heading>

ABOUTE +tis tyme deyde Aydanus and Fynanus , bisshops of Northumberlond
; CMPOLYCH-M3,95.688

and Colmannus , a Scot , com after hem to be bisshop +tre +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,95.689

In his tyme come Agelbertus bisshop <P_97> of West Saxons into +te
contrayes of Northumberlond , CMPOLYCH-M3,97.690

and ordeyned +tere Wilfridus +tat was tho abbot of Rypoun ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,97.691

and made hym preost at +te prayour of kyng Oswynus . CMPOLYCH-M3,97.692

+Tat tyme was a grete questioun i-made and i-meoved of +te holdynge of
+te Ester terme , +tat was nou+gt +tat tyme lawe-fulliche i-holde of
Scottes and of Britouns , CMPOLYCH-M3,97.693

but it was y-suffred for reverence of Columba , of Adyanus , of Fynanus
and of o+tere holy noble fadres . CMPOLYCH-M3,97.694

+Tere was a counsail i-made in the abbay of Hilda +te abbesse at
Strenischalt +te +gere of oure Lorde sixe_hondred_sixty_and_foure .
CMPOLYCH-M3,97.695

+Tere in +te oon side come Colmannus +te bisshop and Hilda +te abbas ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,97.696

and aleyde for hem +tat here predecessours were holy men and worthy ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,97.697

and hilde +te Estertyde from +te fourten+te day of +te mone to +te
xx=ti= day of +te mon+te , CMPOLYCH-M3,97.698

and specialliche seint Iohn +te Evaungeliste hilde so the Estertyde in
Asia . CMPOLYCH-M3,97.699

In +te o+ter side a+genst hem com Egelbertus <P_VI,99> bisshop of West
Saxons , Iames +tat was somtyme Paulinus +te archebisshop of +gork his
preost , and Wilfridus abbot of Ripoun , and Alfridus +te kynges sone .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,99.700

And Wilfridus desputede for hem , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,99.701

and +tey alleyde for hem +tat +te manere and +te usage of al holy
chirche of Grees , of Italy , of Rome , of Gallia , and of Fraunce ,
schulde be i-sette to_fore +te manere and custom and usage of a corner
of +te worlde , +tat knewe nou+gt +te decrees of synodus , as it is no
wonder , namliche while Iohn +te Evangelist in +te bygynnynge of holy
chirche , +tat was tho +gong and tendre , heeld +te ordinaunce of Moyses
lawe , in meny +tinges and folwede +too the Iewes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,99.702

and Iohan mu+gte nou+gt +git schave al awey at +te fulle ; as it is
i-wrete of Poule +tat he circumcided Thimotheus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,99.703

and +tey offred oystes in +te temple , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,99.704

and schare his heed with Aquila and Priscilla at Corinthi ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,99.705

and +tat was profitable to no+ting but for to putte of +te sclaundre of
the Iewes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,99.706

And also Seint Iohn , by +te usage of +tat lawe , bygan to holde +te
Ester tyde the fourten+te day of +te firste mon+te ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,99.707

and rou+gt nou+gt whe+ter hit fel in a Satirday o+ter in a no+ter day of
+te woke . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,99.708

And Peter +te Apostel , +tat was primat of holy chirche , and hadde
power to <P_VI,101> bynde and unbynde , he abode +te fourten+te day of
+te mone whanne +te moone were at +te folle , as Seint Iohn dede ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,101.709

and bygan to holde +te Ester tyde at eve +te next Sonday after +te fulle
of +te moone , and +te evenes of +te day and +te ny+gt ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,101.710

and hilde +tat tyde to +te oon_and_twenty day of +te moone ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,101.711

and +gif +te fourten+te day of +te moone fil in a Sonday , he hilde
nou+gt +tere +te Ester day , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,101.712

for +tat Sonday was of +te ra+ter +gere , and nou+gt of +te newe +gere
+tat schulde +to bygynne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,101.713

Kyng Oswy herde +tis , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,101.714

and seide ; " Si+t+te +tat +ge telle+t +tat so meny and so greet
privyleges and powere were i-graunted to Peter , I dar nou+gt wi+t_seie
so grete and suche a fissher and porter , leste he close hevene +gate
a+genst me whan +tat I schulde come in to hevene . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,101.715

Whan +tis was i-seide +te multitude assented ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,101.716

bote Eede bisshop of +te Est was +tere present , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,101.717

and hilde hym corrected from +tat tyme for+tward .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,101.718

But Colmaunus , +tat was the bisshop of Nor+tumberlond , was wroo+t ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,101.719

and wente +tennes into +te contray of Scottes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,101.720

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,101.721

+Tan for to fynde +te Ester terme wi+t_oute <P_VI,103> any faile , by
Beda his lore , libro 5=o= , de Gestis Anglorum , me mote take hede of
+tre and abide +te +tre : +te evenes of +te day and ny+gt in springing
tyme , +tat now hatte Lente , and +te Sonday ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,103.722

for as +te bygynnynge of +te world +te sonne passede out of +te myddel
of +te Est CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,103.723

and markede +te evenes of +te day and ny+gt in sprinynge tyme with hys
arysyng , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,103.724

and +tanne whanne +te sonne +gude adoun , +te voll mone com after out of
the myddel of +te Est . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,103.725

And so all +te +geres after me mote take hede to +te same firste mon+te
of +te moone , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,103.726

for nou+gt to_fore +te evenes of +te day and ny+gt , but in +te evenes
of +te day and ny+gt , as it was i-doo in +te bygynnynge of +te world ;
o+ter after +te evenes of +te day and ny+gt , as hit was y-doo in +te
bygynnyng of the worlde ; o+ter after +te evenes of +te day and ny+gt ,
me mote take hede whanne the mone is at +te fulle .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,103.727

+Tanne when +te mone $+tat is at +te fulle to +te evenes of +te day and
ny+gt , as it was i-doo in +te bygynnynge of +te world , whe+ter it be
of fourtene days olde , <P_VI,105> of fiftene , o+ter of sixtene , and
so for+t , it longe+t to +te laste mon+te of +te +gere +tat is a_passed
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,105.728

and +terfore it is nou+gt con-venable to holde +terby +te Esterday .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,105.729

But what mone is at +te fulle in +te evenes of +te day and ny+gt ,
durynge +tat mone in +te +tridde woke of +te firste mon+te of +te mone
from +te fourten+te day to +te eve of +te oon and twenti+te day , +tere
+te firste Sonday falle+t , +tere Esterne schal be i-holde .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,105.730

But +te errour +tat holy chirche suffre+t in oure kalender +tat we use+t
is so incresed , +tat +te styntinge of +te sonne , and +te evenes of +te
day and nyght , and +te entringe of +te sonne and +te evenes into +te
signes , bee+t a_passed bakward by twelve dayes in oure kalender now ,
aboute +te +gere of oure Lord a_+towsand_+tre_hondred_and_twenty .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,105.731

And +terfore , but oure kalender +tat we use+t be amended by
wi+tdrawynge of +te dayes +tat bee+t i-putte to in +te lepe +gere in a
certeyne tyme , o+ter in som o+ter manere wise , +gif +te tyme of grace
dure+t to ei+gtene_+towsand +gere , Ester day schal falle <P_VI,107>
aboute +te schorteste day of al +te +gere by oure kalender ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,107.732

and +gif +te sixte age of +te world dure+t suche two so longe , +te
feste of +te bur+te of Seint Iohn the Baptiste schal falle in +te
schorteste day of +te +gere , and +te feste of +te bur+te of oure Lord
in +te lengeste day of +te +gere : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,107.733

+te cause of +tis errour is declared in Tholomeus his book , in
Almagestes Tholomey . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,107.734

Trevisa . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,107.735

Here have in mynde +tat twyes in a +gere falle+t +te styntynge of +te
sonne , and so doo+t +te evenes of +te day and of +te ny+gt ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,107.736

+te stintynge of +te sonne is in wynter whan +te day is schortest , and
eft in somer when +te day is lengest . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,107.737

+Te evenes of +te day and of +te ny+gt is ones in +te Lente , and efte
in hervest , whan +te day and +te ny+gt bee+t i-liche longe :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,107.738

and for we speke of +te sonne his entrynge into signes , +terfore have
in mynde +tat everiche mon+te ones +te sonne passe+t out of oo signe and
entre+t into a no+ter . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,107.739

And for we speke of +te mon+te of mone , have mynd +tat +te mon+te of
+te mone is from chaunge to chaunge o+ter from prime to prime .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,107.740

Also +te firste mon+te of +te mone is here i-cleped +te tyme of +te mone
+tat is ful whan +te day and +te ny+gt bee+t i-liche longe , o+ter next
after ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,107.741

for in suche a tyme +te world was first i-made in +te mon+te of Marche .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,107.742

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 3=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,107.743

+Tanne Colmannus , bisshop of <P_VI,109> Nor+t-humberlond , was convict
by Wilfridus of mysholdynge of +te Ester day , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,109.744

and was wroo+t , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,109.745

and wente a+gen to +te Scottes as it is forsaide ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,109.746

and +te same Wilfridus was i-chose arche-bisshop of +gork , by
procurynge of Alfridus , +tat was +te kynges sone ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,109.747

and he was i-sent into Fraunce for to be sacred .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,109.748

For Deusdedit +te archebisshop of Caunterbury was dede , +tat schulde
hym sacre here in Engelonde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,109.749

+Tat tyme Kenwalkus kyng of West Saxons delede his province in tweie
bisshopriches . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,109.750

+Terfore Egilbertus was wroo+t , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,109.751

and wente a+gen into Fraunce , +tere he was i-bore ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,109.752

and o+ter +tinges , as it is i-seide in +te same book , capitulo 15=o= .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,109.753

Paulus , libro 6=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,109.754

Aboute +tat tyme Con-stantyn +te emperour wolde delivere Italy of +te
hondes of Longobardes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,109.755

and come to Tarent in Italy , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,109.756

and axede +tere of an holy man +tat was solitaire , where he my+gte
overcome +te Longobardus o+ter no . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,109.757

He answerde +tat it my+gte nou+gt +git be i-doo , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,109.758

for bycause of an abbay +tat is founded in Italy in worschippe of Seint
Iohan Baptiste , Seint Iohan praye+t alwey for +te Longobardes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,109.759

bote tyme schal come whanne <P_VI,111> +te oratorye schal be despised ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,111.760

and unwor+ty personnes schal woyne +terynne , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,111.761

and +tanne +te Longobardus schal first be ipersed .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,111.762

+Te emperour rou+gt nou+gt here of , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,111.763

and wente for+t a+genst +te Longobardus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,111.764

but it sped nou+gt . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,111.765

But he spoylede Rome nou+gtwi+tstondynge +tat Vitalianus +te pope
prayede hym for to leve . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,111.766

And +te emperour dede meny grete tyrandis in Sicilia ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,111.767

and hadde at +te laste his penaunce in a bath . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,111.768

Wilfridus , as it is i-seide , was i-chose archebisshop of +gork ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,111.769

and was by+gonde see wi+t Agelbertus abidynge his confirma-cioun :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,111.770

+tanne by counsaile of +te quartadecimannes , +tat bee+t +tey +tat heeld
+te Ester day in +te fourten+te day of +te mone , kyng Oswynus took
Cedda abbot of Lastyngay , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,111.771

and made him archebisshop of +gork a+genst +te ordynaunce of holy lawes
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,111.772

Willelmus , libro 3=o= , capitulo 27=o= , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,111.773

and sente hym into Kent for to be sacred bisshop .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,111.774

But for +te archebisshop Deusdedit was dede , Cedde tornede to Wyna
bisshop of West Saxons , for to be i-ordeyned of hym ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,111.775

and took wi+t hym tweie bisshoppes <P_VI,113> of Britouns in his
companye to be wi+t hym at his sacrynge . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,113.776

+Tanne Wilfridus come out of Fraunce , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,113.777

and sigh Cedda i-made bisshop in his stede ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,113.778

+tanne Wilfridus abood in Kent +tre +gere , anon to +te comynge of
Theodorus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,113.779

and made +tere ordres , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,113.780

and halowede chirches , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,113.781

and made oon Pucta , a connynge man of song , bisshop of Rouchestre .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,113.782

Also +tat +gere Benet bisshop wente efte to Rome ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,113.783

and in his comynge homward he was i-schore in +te abbey Lirnesse
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,113.784

and was +tere two +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,113.785

and +tennes he wente to Rome +git +te +tridde tyme ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,113.786

and com a+gen into Englelond wi+t Theodorus +te bisshop , and Adrianus
+te abbot , at +te heste of Vitulianus +te pope .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,113.787

Cissa +te kyng , kyng Ine his fader , made an abbay at Abyndoun .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,113.788

+Tat +gere Seint Leodegarius suffred deth under oon Ebroymus , +te
grettest man of +te kynges hous . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,113.789

Constantynus +te emperour is i-slawe of his owne men in a bath in
Sicilia . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,113.790

After Vitalianus +te holy pope Adeodatus was pope foure +gere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,113.791

in his tyme Seynt Benet his body was translated , wi+t the body of
<P_VI,115> his suster Scolastica ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,115.792

Augustinus , a monk of Floria , trans-lated hem in to +te abbay of
Floria , +tat is besides Aurelia , $out of +te hil mont Cassyn , +tat is
in +te province Beneventana . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,115.793

<heading>

Capitulum octodecimum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,115.795

Constantinus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,115.796

<$$heading>

THE four+te Constantyn , +te forsaide Constantyn his sone , was emperour
seventene +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,115.798

Grymwaldus kyng of Longobardes , +te nyn+te day after his blodles ,
scheet to a colver , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,115.799

and his veyne to_brak ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,115.800

and leches leyde +terto venymous +tinges , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,115.801

and so he was dede . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,115.802

Beda , libro quarto , capitulo sucundo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,115.803

+Tat yere Theodorus +te archebisshop com into Kent fyve dayes to_fore
Iuyn , in +te secounde +gere of his consecracioun ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,115.804

and he was bisshop +tere oon_and_twenty +gere <P_VI,117> and foure
mon+tes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,117.805

+Tis man was a monk , i-bore in Tars in Sicilia , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,117.806

and was connynge bo+te in holy lettrure and in seculer lettrure , in Gru
and Latyn . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,117.807

Whanne he was +tre_score +gere olde and sixe , Vitalianus +te pope sente
hym bisshop into Engelond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,117.808

and sente Adrian +te abbot wi+t hym for@ @to helpe hym , for he schulde
bringe no +ting +tat is a+genst +te fey into holy chirche in Engelond ,
as +te Grees doo+t . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,117.809

Anon as he was i-come he wente aboute into al +te ylond ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,117.810

and tau+gte +te ordre of ri+gt levynge , and +te laweful manere of +te
holdynge of +te Ester day , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,117.811

and tau+gte his disciples +te crafte of singinge , of calculinge , of
astronomy , bo+te in Latyn and in Gru , by help of Adrian ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,117.812

and ordeyned bisshoppes in certeyne places . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,117.813

And bisshoppes +tat were nou+gt lawfully y-ordeyned , he putte hem awey
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,117.814

o+ter ordeyned hem eft in a laweful manere . Among +te whiche Cedda ,
+tat was nou+gt lawefulliche i-ordeyned bisshop of <P_VI,119> +gork ,
knoweleched mekeliche his owne defaute , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,119.815

and Theo-dorus put hym awey from +te see of +gork ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,119.816

and restored +tere Wilfridus ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,119.817

and ordeyned Cedda , +tat was confermed at +te laste bisshop of Mercia
at +te prayenge of kyng Wulferus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,119.818

and heet hym ride on an hors $his bak . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,119.819

Beda , libro 3=o= , capitulo 26=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,119.820

+Tat tyme doctours were ful besy to serve God and nou+gt +te world , +te
herte and nou+gt +te wombe ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,119.821

+terfore +te abite of religioun was +too in greet worschippe , so +tat a
monk o+ter a clerk schulde be gladliche underfonge ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,119.822

and men +tat wente by +te wey prayde his blessynge ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,119.823

and +tey wente for non o+ter cause aboute weyes and stretes bote for to
preche and teche , for cristenynge and for savacioun of manis soule .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,119.824

And +tey wolde fonge non possessiouns for to bulde abbayes , but it were
i-profred hem , and +tey were i-dryve to fonge it by streng+te of lordes
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,119.825

Beda , libro 4=o= , capitulo 5=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,119.826

Also +tat +gere deyde Oswy kyng of Nor+thumberlond ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,119.827

his sone Egfridus was kyng after hym fiftene +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,119.828

Item , capitulo 18=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,119.829

+Tis hadde i-wedded Etheldrida , +tat hadde i-be Cutbertus his
<P_VI,121> wif , prince of +te sou+t Girewies . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,121.830

Whan Egfridus hadde i-had hir to wife twelve +gere , and my+gte have no
leve of here to ligge by here for prayers no+ter for +giftes ; +tanne
sche hadde leve of +te kyng , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,121.831

and was i-made mynchoun oon +gere at Colud under Aebba , kyng Egfridus
his aunte ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,121.832

and after +tat sche was made abesse at Hely , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,121.833

+tere sche ete but ones a day , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,121.834

and used nevere lynnen clo+tes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,121.835

After +te ny+gt collacioun sche wook anon to +te day ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,121.836

sche deide after +tat sche hadde i-be abesse sevene +gere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,121.837

and lay hool and sound sixtene +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,121.838

Beda , libro 4=o= , capitulo 5=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,121.839

+Tat +gere was i-made a cinod of bisshoppes under Theodorus , at Tetford
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,121.840

In +tat synod was ordeyned a statute of +te ri+gt holdynge of +te
Estertyde ; the secounde +tat no bisshop schulde assayle ano+ter manis
bisshopriche ; +te +tridde +te bisshoppes schulde nou+gt destourbe
abbayes ; +te four+te +tat clerkes and monkes schulde nou+gt chaunge
benefice wi+toute <P_VI,123> leve of here soveraynes ; +te fifte +tat in
a province +te synod schulde be gadred , namliche ones a +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.841

Egebertus kyng of Kent deide , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.842

and his bro+ter Lotharius regned after hym enlevene +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.843

Marcianus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.844

Also Agelbertus +tat +gere , bisshop of West Saxones , wente awey
wro+teliche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.845

for Kenwalkus +te kyng departed +te bisshopriche in tweyne ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.846

and Leutherius was i-made bisshop in his stede , and con-fermed of
Theodorus $by +te kynges wille , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.847

and he was bisshop sevene +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.848

+Tat +gere was greet slau+gter of foules +tat fou+gte to_gidres .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.849

Kenwakus kyng of West Saxons deide +te +gere of his kyngdom +tritty .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.850

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.851

His wif Sexburga regnede after hym oon +gere CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.852

but Beda sei+t +tat under kynges +tey delede +te kyngdom bytwene hem ten
+gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.853

Beda , libro 4=o= , capitulo 6=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.854

+Tat +gere Seint Chedde deide at Lichefilde , +te +tridde +gere of his
bisshopriche . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.855

Theodorus made Wynefrede , Chedde his decon , bisshop in his stede ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.856

and putte hym doun nou+gt longe after , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.857

for he was unobedient , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.858

and made Sexwulfus abbot of Medehamstede , bisshop in his stede .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.859

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.860

Medehamstede hatte now Seint Peterisborw , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,123.861

and was somtym <P_VI,125> in +te kyndom of Girwies .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,125.862

Wulfridus was so i-putte doun +te four+te +gere of his consecracioun ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,125.863

and wente to Barowe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,125.864

After Adeodatus pope Bonus was pope a +gere and sixe monthes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,125.865

Beda ut supra . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,125.866

After +te deth of Wyna , Erkenewold +te +tridde bisshop of Londoun made
tweie abbaies , oon to hym self in Southereye , in +te ilond Cereot ,
+tat now hatte Certeseie , fiftene myle out of Londoun westward ; and
ano+ter to his suster Ethelberga , by Est Londoun , in the province of
Essex , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,125.867

+te abbay hatte Berkyng ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,125.868

+tere sche was abbesse in greet holynesse ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,125.869

to here Seint Aldelme brou+gte a book of maydenhood .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,125.870

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,125.871

Me trowe+t +tat by +te prayers of +tis holy mayde it is +tat +tat place
was nevere +git destroyed . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,125.872

But +te o+ter abbay of Certeseie was destroyed by the Danes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,125.873

and kyng Edgar bulde it a+gen . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,125.874

+Tat +gere Oswynus bygan to regne over +te West Saxons ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,125.875

and regnede +tre +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,125.876

and fau+gt a+genst Wul-ferus <P_VI,127> kyng of Mercia at Wydanheaf .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,127.877

Also +tat +gere deide Wulferus kyng of Mercia , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,127.878

and his bro+ter Etheldredus regnede after hym +tritty +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,127.879

For Wulferus his sone Kynredus my+gte nou+gt regne ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,127.880

for he was so +gong . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,127.881

Wulferus his wif Ermenilda , whanne here housbonde was dede , was i-made
mynchoun at Hely , and her dou+gter Werburga , under Etheldreda .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,127.882

Marcianus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,127.883

Here eem Etheldredus made +tis Werburga mynchoun in some abbayes of
maydens at Trykenham , at Wedunam , at Hamburgam .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,127.884

Sche deide in +te firste abbay , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,127.885

and was i-buried in +te +tridde , as sche hadde i-hote while sche was on
lyve : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,127.886

+tere sche lay hool and sownde aboute a_+tre_hondred +gere , anon to +te
comynge of +te Danes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,127.887

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,127.888

At +te laste , whanne +te Danes lay at Rependoun , and hadde i-drive
awey +te kyng of Mercia , +te citizeyns of Hamburga dradde ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,127.889

and took +te bere +tat con-teyned +te body of +tat mayde , +tat was +to
firste i-torned into poudre , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,127.890

and fli+g +terwi+t into Legecestria , +tat is Chestre , as <P_VI,129>
+te most siker place a+genst peril and meschif of aliens and of straunge
naciouns . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,129.891

In +tat cite Chestre were seculer cha-nouns from kyng Athelston his tyme
to +te comynge of Normandes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,129.892

and ofte possessiouns were i-+gove +terto , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,129.893

and +tanne monkes of religiouns wonede +tere in worschippe of +te mayde
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,129.894

Marcianus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,129.895

+Tanne kyng Wulferus hadde +tre bre+teren , as it is forsaide , Weda ,
Etheldredus , and Merwaldus +tat was kyng of Westmercia ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,129.896

his quene Ermenberga bar hym +tre holy dou+gtres , Milburga , Mildred ,
and Milginda , and oon sone Meresyn , a man of greet holynesse .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,129.897

Queene Ermenberga was Ermenredus dou+gter , kyng of Kent .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,129.898

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 4=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,129.899

Also Wilferus hadde tweie holy sustres , Kynedda and Kyneswida ,
mynchouns , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,129.900

and were bo+te i-buryed at Medehamstede +tat now hatte Burgh ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,129.901

+tere Seint Ethelwoldus bulde an abbay afterward .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,129.902

Kyneswyda convertede so +te kyng +tat after +tat sche hadde forsake hym
to housbonde , he wente to Rome wi+t Kynredus <P_VI,131> and Egwynus ,
bisshop of +te Wicties , and bycom a monk . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,131.903

Agatho was pope +tre +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,131.904

in his secounde +gere was i-made +te sixte synod at Constantynnoble , of
two_hondred bisshoppes and foure_score . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,131.905

In +tat synod it is i-seide +tat in Crist bee+t tweie willes and tweie
kyndes , willes and kyndes of +te Godhede and manhede .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,131.906

<heading>

Capitulum decimum nonum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,131.908

Theodorus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,131.909

<$$heading>

THEODORUS , kyng of Fraunce , regnede after his fader Clo-tarius
ey+gtene +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,131.911

Beda , libro primo , capitulo 10=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,131.912

+Tat +gere Etheldredus , kyng of Mercia , destroyed Kent ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,131.913

and Pucta , bisshop of Rouchestre , wente from Rochestre to Sex-wulfus ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,131.914

<P_VI,133>

and feng of hym +te cherche of Hereforde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,133.916

+Tere he took more hede to +te melodye of holy chirche +tan to amende
his owne bisshopriche . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,133.917

Also +tat +gere Benet bisshop took wi+t hym Colfridus $+te monke ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,133.918

and wente +te for+te tyme to Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,133.919

and brou+gte wi+t hym Iohn +te archechaunter . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,133.920

Beda , libro 4=o= , capitulo 18=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,133.921

Also +tat +gere was i-doo a greet bataille bytwene Egfridus kyng of
Nor+thomberlond and Ethel-dredus kyng of Mercia , bysides +te ryver
Trent ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,133.922

and +te kyng Egfridus his bro+ter was i-slawe +tat heet Elswynus ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,133.923

and was leef to bo+te kyngdom : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,133.924

for his deth was moche money i-+geve at +te instaunce of Theodorus +te
archebisshop , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,133.925

and so was i-made acorde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,133.926

In +tat fitynge oon of kyng Ethel-fridus his kny+gtes was grevously
i-wounded , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,133.927

and Etheldredus his men toke hym while he wolde aryse .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,133.928

And as ofte as he was in bondes wi+t his enemyes , o+ter wi+t oon Fryson
+tat hadde <P_VI,135> bou+gt hym , his bondes breke as ofte , in +te
same houre as his bro+ter , a preost , song a masse for hym as for a
deed man , and +tat alway forto his raunsom was y-payde +te money , and
$he come to his bro+ter a+ge . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,135.929

Also +tat +gere was i-seie a sterre +tat hatte stella comata +tre
mon+tes in +te hervest tyme . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,135.930

+Tat tyme kyng Egfridus , at +te excitynge of his wyf , putte Wilfridus
out of +te bisshopriche of Nor+thum-berlond . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,135.931

Trevisa . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,135.932

Stella comata is a sterre wi+t a li+gt blasynge crest above ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,135.933

and evere bode+t pestilence , de+t , and werre , o+ter some harde happes
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,135.934

Willelmus de Regibus , libro primo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,135.935

Theodorus +te archebisshop halp to putte Wil-fridus out of his
bisshopriche ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,135.936

and for to folowe +te kynges wille , whanne Wilfridus was i-put out , he
ordeyned Bosa bisshop at +gork in his stede , and Eada at Lyndefare
cherche , and Tunbertus at Hagustald chirche , and Trunwynus at Candida
Casa , +tat is +te White hous in +te lond of Pictes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,135.937

Marianas , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,135.938

And putte Eadhedus in +te chirche of Ripoun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,135.939

Eadhedus was i-come out of Lyndeseye , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,135.940

for Ethel-dredus <P_VI,137> kyng of Mercia hadde i-recovered +te
province a+genst Egfridus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,137.941

Willelmus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,137.942

+Tere it my+gte be i-seie and sorwfully $be mened +tat +te wrecchednesse
of mankynde , +teigh it have greet holynesse , +git it putte+t not
attefulle maneres of rebelnes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,137.943

For as ferfor+t as we conne caste , Theodorus putte out Wilfridus
wrongfulliche . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,137.944

Beda , libro 5=o= , capitulo 19=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,137.945

+Tanne Wilfridus was so i-put out , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,137.946

and wente to Rome for his cause ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,137.947

but seyllynge in +te see he was wynd_dryven into Affrica ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,137.948

+tere he , firste of alle men , con-vertede meny men ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,137.949

and Willebrordes fulfilled it afterward . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,137.950

At +te laste he come to Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,137.951

and come tofore pope Agatho , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,137.952

and was i-herd and allowed . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,137.953

And +tere $in a synod of an_hondred bisshoppes and fyve_and_twenty he
desputede a+genst +te errour of hem +tat wolde teche +tat in Crist is
but oon wille and oon kynde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,137.954

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro primo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,137.955

And he folwede his owne cause soberliche , +tat he greved not Theodorus
, +tat was i-sent by +te court of Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,137.956

and putte <P_VI,139> none grevous accusaciouns uppon hym ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.957

but meyntened his owne ri+gtwisnesse CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.958

and suffred $hyt nou+gt to flecche . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.959

He spak to +te pope CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.960

and seide , " Why is it , sire , +tat Theodorus , while I am onlyve ,
ha+t i-ordeyned in my see +tre bisshoppes by his owne auctorite ,
wi+t_oute myn assente . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.961

For he was i-sent by +te court of Rome , I accuse hym nou+zt . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.962

Bote +tey Wilfridus were alowed +tere he hadde $nou+gt indede ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.963

and +tat made +te kynges frowardnesee and Theodorus his assent .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.964

Beda , libro 4=o= , capitulo 12=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.965

+Terfore Wilfridus torned hym to +te Sou+t Saxons ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.966

and bulde an abbay in Selyseye , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.967

and preched fiftene +gere anon to +te Egfridus his de+t ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.968

and convertede +te peple . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.969

Also for +tre +gere to_fore his comynge was +tere no reyne ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.970

+te first day of his cristnynge hit bygan to reigne ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.971

+te er+te was grene , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.972

and herbes gan to springe ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.973

he gadrede eel nettes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.974

and tau+gte men of +te contray to fische . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,139.975

<P_VI,141>

Oswynus kyng of West Saxon deyde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,141.977

and Kentwynus regnede after hym nyne +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,141.978

+Tat +gere deide Leutherius , bisshop of +tat province ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,141.979

and Theodorus ordeyned Hedda bisshop , +tat was bisshop at Wynchestre
+tritty +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,141.980

Seynt Audoenus , bisshop of Rothomager , is ded CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,141.981

and chyld Beda is i-bore . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,141.982

After Agatho +te secounde Leo was pope as it were +tre +gere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,141.983

and +te pope-riche cesede oon +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,141.984

Beda , libro 4=o= , capitulo 20=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,141.985

Seynt Etheldreda , abbes of Hely , deyde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,141.986

Marianus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,141.987

Aftir here hir suster Sexburga was abbesse , +tat hadde i-be somtyme +te
wyf of Ercombertus kyng of Caunterbury . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,141.988

Beda , ubi supra . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,141.989

+Tat +gere deide Hilda , abbesse of Whitby , +tat hadde i-be seek sixe
+gere , fourtene dayes to_fore Decembre , +te +gere of here age
+tre_score_and_sixe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,141.990

Sche was kyng Edwyn his nese ; an holy womman , wys and redy , and well
i-lettred . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,141.991

Out of here abbay come fyve bisshopes , Bosa , Eata , Offor , Iohn , and
Wilfridus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,141.992

In here abbay was a bro+ter +tat heet Cedmon , +tat was i-tau+gt by
inspiracioun of God to make songes <P_VI,143> and ditee in +te contre
longage +tat schulde moeve men to devocioun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.993

In +tat manere doynge no man my+gte be his peere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.994

And he hym self couthe no+ting doo in o+ter matir , but onliche in matir
of devocioun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.995

He com +terto in +tis manere : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.996

he wente in a tyme from a feste ful sore aschamed ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.997

for he was i-prayed for to synge to +te harpe , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.998

and kou+te nou+gt synge . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.999

+Tanne he was sory , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.1000

and fel on slepe , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.1001

and oon com to hym in his slepe CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.1002

and chargede hym +tat he schulde synge . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.1003

" I can nou+gt , " quo+t he , " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.1004

and +terfore I flee . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.1005

" After +tis , " quo+t +tat o+tir , " synge boldeliche of hym +tat ha+t
i-made alle +tinges . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.1006

+Tis man awook , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.1007

and after +tat tyme he made wonder poysies as it were of alle +te
stories of holy writte . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.1008

Henricus , libro 3=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.1009

+Tat +gere Theodorus made a counsail of bisshoppes and o+tir doctours at
Hatfelde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.1010

for he wolde wite and knowe of what byleve alle men were , as pope
Agatho hadde i-hote $hym by his archechauntur Iohn , +tat was present in
+tat synod . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,143.1011

+Tat <P_VI,145> tyme +te provynce of Mercia , +tat Sexwulfus ruled
allone , was departed in fyve bisshopriches , oon at Chestre , ano+ter
at Worcestre , +te +tridde at Lichefeld , +te four+te at Sedema in
Lendeseye , +te fifte at Dorchestre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,145.1012

But Pucta lefte at Hertford , +tere Sexwulfus hadde i-putte hym somtyme
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,145.1013

Paulus , libro 7=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,145.1014

Cunebertus , kyng of Longobardes , stood under his chamber wyndowe ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,145.1015

and counsailled wi+t oon of his secretaries how he my+gte slee his
kny+gt Aldo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,145.1016

+Tanne +tere was a greet flye , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,145.1017

and +te kyng fondede to slee +tis flye , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,145.1018

and kutte of +te fli+ge foot wi+t a knyf . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,145.1019

In +te mene tyme Aldo was nou+gt war of +te kynges cast ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,145.1020

and com toward +te kynges court , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,145.1021

and mette wi+t an halt man , +tat +gede by a staf , and spak to Aldo in
+tis manere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,145.1022

" War +te , Aldo , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,145.1023

for +gif +tou comest to the kynges court +tou schalt be i-slawe wi+t +te
kynges $hond . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,145.1024

Whanne Aldo herde +tat , he fly+g to Seynt Romayn his chirche ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,145.1025

and +te kyng axede hym why he dede <P_VI,147> soo ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,147.1026

and he answerede CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,147.1027

and seide for an halt man hadde i-warned hym of his de+t .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,147.1028

Anoon +te kyng understood +tat he +tat halted so was a wicked spirit ,
+tat he hadde kutte of his foot in liknesse of a flye , and hadde so
i-wreyed his counseil and his privete , and on caas hadde excited hym
$to Aldo his deth , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,147.1029

and so the kyng feng Aldo to his pees . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,147.1030

After Leo +te secounde Benet was pope as it were fyve +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,147.1031

Osricus , under +te kyng of Mercia , bulde an abbay at Gloucetre ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,147.1032

and $made his suster Keneburgh abbesse +tere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,147.1033

+Tat +gere kyng Kentwynus chasede +te west Bretouns anon to +te see ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,147.1034

and Benet bisshop bulde an abbey of Seynt Poul at Girvum , on +te brynke
of +te ryver Wyre ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,147.1035

and hadde to_forehonde i-bulde ano+ter abbay of Seint Petir in +te o+tir
brynke of +te same ryver by helpe of kyng Egfridus ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,147.1036

and made Colfridus abbot +tere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,147.1037

+Tat +gere Beda , a child of sevene +gere olde , was i-take to Benet
bisshop his lore , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,147.1038

and he <P_VI,149> wente +te fifte tyme to Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1039

and bytook Beda to Colfridus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1040

Beda , libro 4=o= , capitulo 12=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1041

+Tat +gere is gadered a synod under kyng Egfridus bysides +te ryver Alne
, in a place +tat hatte Twyford , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1042

there was Theodorus : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1043

+tere Tundbertus was putte doun of thee bisshopriche of Hagustald ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1044

and Cuthberd was i-made bisshop in his stede ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1045

bote for he lovede more +te chirche of Lyndefarn , +tider he wente ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1046

and Eata was i-made bisshop at Hangustald in his stede .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1047

Beda , libro 4=o= , capitulo 23=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1048

+Tis Cuthberd was firste i-made monk in +te abbay of Maylros , and
+tanne preost , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1049

and at +te laste he lyvede anker his lyf in +te ilond Farn .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1050

Also +tat +gere kyng Egfridus destroyed wrecchedly +te men of Scotland ,
+tat were alwey most freendes to Englische men , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1051

and +tey prayed help of God , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1052

and feyned hem for to flee , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1053

and gylede Egfridus nou+gt_wi+tstondynge +te prayers of his frendes ,
for he wolde nou+gt doo after hem , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1054

and tollede hem , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,149.1055

and drou+g hem into <P_VI,151> streyte places bytwene hilles and
mounteynes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1056

and slow hym +tere , and a greet deel of his oost .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1057

From +tat tyme for+tward +te streng+te of +te Angles bygan to falle
aweyward , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1058

and Pictes and Scottes and meny of +te Bretouns feng her londes wi+t
fredom a+gen . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1059

Cedwalla , a stalwor+te +gongelyng of kyngene kynde of +te Gewesses ,
+tat bee+t West Saxons , he regnede over +te West Saxons after Kentwynus
his de+t . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1060

Willelmus de Regibus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1061

He was Kentbrihtis sone , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1062

Kentbritus was Ceadda his sone , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1063

Ceadda was Cuta his sone , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1064

Cutha was Ceaulinus his bro+ter , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1065

Ceaulynus was Kynricus his sone , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1066

Kynricus was Cerdicus his sone , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1067

anon he slou+g Athelwold kyng of Sou+tsex , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1068

and made his province +tral , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1069

and destroyed Kent , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1070

and took +te ile of Wight , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1071

and +gaf +te four+te deel +terof to Seynt Wilfridus for +te love of God
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1072

In +tat partie of +te ile were acounted +tre_hondred meynyes and
housholdes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1073

+Tat +gere $in Northumberlond Egfridus was i-slawe ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,151.1074

and his bro+ter Alfridus Notus , bastard , regned after <P_VI,153> hym
two_hondred +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,153.1075

+Tat +gere Sar+gyns com out of Egipt into Affrica ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,153.1076

and took Cartage CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,153.1077

and destroyed it ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,153.1078

and Constantyn deyde at Constantynnoble . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,153.1079

<heading>

Capitulum visesimum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,153.1081

Iustinianus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,153.1082

<$$heading>

THE secounde Iustinianus , after his fader Constantyn , was emperoure
ten +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,153.1084

After Benet , +te fifte Iohn was pope oon +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,153.1085

After hym Zeno was pope two +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,153.1086

Beda , libro 4=o= , capitulo 23=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,153.1087

Lotharius kyng of Canturbury deyde of a wounde +tat he hadde i-fonge in
+te fi+gting of +te Sou+t Saxons a+genst Cedwalla .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,153.1088

After hym , he +tat slou+g hym , Edricus , Egbertus his sone , regnede
oon +ger and an half . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,153.1089

After hym +tat kyngdom was longe tyme unstedefast under certeyne kynges
forto Wyhtred , Egbertus his sone , was converted <P_VI,155> and regnede
in +tat kyngdom . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1090

Mull , kyng Cedwalla his bro+ter , and twelve kny+gtes were bysette and
i-brend in Kent . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1091

+Terfore Cedwalla was wroo+t CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1092

and destroyed Kent eftsones , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1093

and Wilfridus feng +te bisshopriche of Hangustald at +te pray-ere of
kyng Alfridus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1094

For seynt Iohn of Beverly went to +gork whanne Boso was dede .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1095

After Zeno , Sergius was pope +trittene +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1096

he ordeyned +tat Agnus Dei schulde be +treis i-songe in +te masse ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1097

and by schewynge of God he fonge a greet deel of +te cros in Seynt Peter
his sacrarie . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1098

Giraldus , distictione prima , capitulo 17=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1099

+Te firste Pipinus , +tat heet Vetulus , Brevis also , +te sone of
Hansegesilus , +te sone of seint Arnulphus , was i-made +te grettest of
+te kynges hous , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1100

and feng +te principate of +te est party of Fraunce ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1101

and was $prince sevene_and_twenty +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1102

he fau+gt first a+genst Theo-doricus kyng of Fraunce ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1103

and chasede hym anon to Parys , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1104

and whanne +te kyngdom , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1105

and savede +te kinges lyf and his name . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1106

Paulus , libro 7=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1107

+Tat tyme in Fraunce kynges torned from +te wit and stren+te +tat kynges
were i-woned to have . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1108

<P_VI,155>

And +tey +tat semede grettest in +te kynges hous rulede +te kyngdom ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1110

for God ha+t i-ordeyned +tat +te kyngdom scholde torne to +te blood of
hem . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1111

+Tat +gere deide seint Cuthbert in +te ilond Farn , +tat he hadde
i-loved alwey , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1112

but his body was i-bore into +te lond Lindefare ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1113

his bisshopriche reulede Wil-fridus oon +gere , forto he was i-put out
by +te kyng . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1114

+Tat +gere +gedwalla , kyng of West Saxons , whanne he hadde nobleliche
i-ruled his peple +tre +gere , he forsook the empere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1115

and wente in pilgrimage to Rome ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1116

+tere he was i-cristned of pope Sergius , and i-cleped Peter ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1117

+get while he was sette in white he was i-take with sikenesse
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1118

and deyde , not fulliche +trittene +gere olde , +trittene dayes tofore
May , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1119

and was i-buried in Seint Peteris chirche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1120

and was wor+ty to have suche famous writ-ynge on his tombe :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,155.1121

" Lordschipe , riches , children , plente of <P_VI,159> riches and of
wel+te , clo+tes and riche aray , prayeres , hous , catsels , and walled
townes +tat his fadre and he hadde i-wonne by stren+te , Ceadwal +te
my+gty man of armes lefte and forsook for love of God Almy+gti . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,159.1122

Giraldus , distinctione prima , capitulo 17=o= .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,159.1123

Here take hede +tat +tis Cadwaledrus +te laste kyng of Bretouns is
i-cleped Cedwalla in +te storie of Romayns and of Longobardes , and in
Beda his storie also . But corupliche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,159.1124

for +tey knewe nou+gt +te longage of Britouns , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,159.1125

+terfore in som place in +te laste vers on his tombe it is i-write in
+tis manere : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,159.1126

" Kyng Cadwaldrus lefte for +te love of God . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,159.1127

For it is i-seide +tat he was i-cristned of Sergius , +tat is to
understondynge +tat he was confermed by anoyntynge of holy crisme , and
+to his propre name was i-chaunged , as it happe+t in confirmacioun of
children . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,159.1128

And +tey he were of <P_VI,161> Bretouns he was i-cleped kyng of West
Saxons , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,161.1129

for he was kyng of hem also , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,161.1130

for +tey ioyne+t to +te Walshe men . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,161.1131

Walsche men telle+t +tat +tey schulde eft have kynges whan Cadwaldrus
his boones bee+t i-brou+gt from Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,161.1132

but I holde +tat but a fable , as I doo +te storie of Gaufridus in +te
ende . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,161.1133

After Cedwalla regnede Yne , of +te lynage of kynges , +te sone of
Kynredus , +te sone of Ceolwold , +te sone $of Cutha , +te sone of
Cuthwyn , +te sone of Ceaulinus , and so for+t ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,161.1134

and Yne regned sevene_and_+tritty +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,161.1135

and +to he wente to Rome in pope Gregory his tyme ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,161.1136

and so dede meny o+ter +tat tyme . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,161.1137

Also +tat +gere deide Benet Bisshop , +te twelf+te day of Ianyver .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,161.1138

Colfridus was abbot after hym in his either abbay in +te brynke of +te
ryver Wyre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,161.1139

Also Theodorus the archebisshop deide , +te +gere of his age
foure_score_and_sevene , $and of his bisshop-riche two_and_twenty .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,161.1140

After hym abbot Bri+gtwold was arche-bisshop : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,161.1141

anon to +tat tyme +te archebisshoppis were of Rome ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,161.1142

and se+t+te +tat tyme +te archebisshoppes were of Engelond .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,161.1143

Seynt Wilfridus $was eft accused of kyng Alfridus to_fore <P_VI,163>
meny bisshoppes , and i-put out of his bisshopriche .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1144

+Terfore he appelede to +te court of Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1145

and defendede so his cause tofore +te pope Iohn +tat he hadde lettres of
+te pope to +te kynges of Engelond to his restitucioun .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1146

+Te redynge of +te synod +tat was +too rehersed was gret help to his
cause . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1147

+Tis Wilfridus hadde i-be at +tat synod in pope Agatho his tyme .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1148

+Te lettres were i-rad +tat were i-sent for hym to kyng Alredus ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1149

bote +te kyng wolde nou+gt +git fonge hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1150

+terfore he tornede to +te kyng of Mercia , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1151

and feng of hym +te bisshopriche of Lege-cestria , +tat is Chestre ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1152

and helde it anon to Alfridus his deth . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1153

Beda , libro 5=o= , capitulo 9=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1154

Aboute +tat tyme Egbertus +te monk , +tat we speke of to_forehonde ,
+tat scapede the moreyn by prayers and avowes , hadde i-seilled about
Bretayne , and caste for to converte +te men of Germania ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1155

but dedes and warn-ynge of hevene hym lette . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1156

For +te schippe +tat he hadde i-ordeyned for +tat iornay was to-broke
wi+t a sodeyn tempest of weder , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1157

and +tere oon of his bre+teren was i-warned by a visioun ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1158

and spak to Egebertus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1159

and seide +tat he moste , whe+ter he wolde o+ter no , wende to Seint
Columba his abbay a+gen , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,163.1160

<P_VI,165>

for here plow+ges +gede nou+gt ary+gt . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,165.1162

+Terfore he sente Willebrordus wi+t twelve felawes into ye contrays of
Germania , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,165.1163

and he tornede moche folk to +te fey by help of +te elder Pipinus , duke
of Frenshce men , +tat hadde i-wonne +te hider Frisia ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,165.1164

and at +te laste by auctorite of pope Gregory he was i-made bisshop of
Traies , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,165.1165

and rulede +tat bisshopriche wel and nobelliche aboute an_fourty +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,165.1166

Offorus deide , bisshop of Wicties , +tat hadde men of +te bisshopriche
of Wircetre ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,165.1167

and Egwinus was bisshop after hym , +tat sone afterward bulde the abbay
of Evesham , by assent of kyng Ethelredus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,165.1168

Whanne Theodoricus kyng of Fraunce was dede , +tat Pipinus Vetulus hadde
myldeliche i-suffred to reigne wi+t hym , he made his sone Clodonius
kyng . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,165.1169

Pipinus Vetulus heet Pipinus Brevis also . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,165.1170

+Tat +gere +te men of Caunterbury made pees wi+t Yne , the kyng of West
Saxons , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,165.1171

and +geve +tre_+towsand pound for +te de+t of Mull Cedwallus his bro+ter
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,165.1172

Iustinianus Cesar was prived of +te ioye of his kyngdom for gilt of
mysby-leve , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,165.1173

and wente exciled into Pontus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,165.1174

Leo Patricius refte hym <P_VI,167> his nose and his tonge ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,167.1175

and exciled hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,167.1176

and sente him into Cersona . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,167.1177

<heading>

Capitulum vicesimum primum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,167.1179

Leo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,167.1180

<$$heading>

THE secounde Leo was emperour +tre +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,167.1182

In his tyme Clodoneus , kyng of Fraunce , was deed ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,167.1183

and Pipinus made his bro+ter , Childebertus , kyng .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,167.1184

+Te men of Nor+thumberlond slou+g Ostria , Etheldredus his wif , +tat
was kyng Oswy his dou+gter . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,167.1185

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 4=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,167.1186

+Tat +gere Cuthlacius +te confessour forsook armes and +te boost and
pompe of +tis world , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,167.1187

and wente to +te abbay of Rependoun , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,167.1188

and +tere , under +te abbas Alfrida , he took tonsure and habit of clerk
, +te +gere of his age foure_and_twenty . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,167.1189

+Tanne +te +tridde +gere after he <P_VI,169> wente into +te yle of
Crouland , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,169.1190

and +tere he bygan to lyve an anker his lyf , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,169.1191

and dede meny myracles , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,169.1192

and hadde power over unclene spirites so greet , as +te comyn tale
telle+t , +tat he made hem bulde meny booldes and closede suche a spirit
in a se+tinge crokke . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,169.1193

+Tere his body ly+t is bulde an abbay , +tat was nevere destroyed among
alle +te stryf and werre and chaungynge of tymes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,169.1194

+Tere reste+t +te confessour Nootus , +tat was somtyme +te disciple of
Erkenwald , bisshop of Londoun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,169.1195

And +tey+g no man now come to +tat place of Crowlond but by schippe
o+ter by boote , +git +tat place is nevere wel nygh wi+toute gestes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,169.1196

Beda . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,169.1197

+Tat +gere byfel ones in Bretayne +tat wonder +tat is wor+ty to be i-had
in mynde to make men +tynke of +te soule his staat ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,169.1198

ffor oon +tat hi+gt Bri+gtwoldus was ded somdel longe tyme ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,169.1199

and aros a+gen to lyve , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,169.1200

and tolde meny +tinges to meny men , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,169.1201

and deled his catel anon a +tre , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,169.1202

and +gaf <P_VI,171> his wif oon deel , and his children ano+ter ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1203

and kept hymself +te +tridde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1204

and delede it to pore men , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1205

and ended his lyf in +te abbay of Maylros . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1206

+Te +tridde Tiberius was emperour sevene +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1207

he aros a+genst Leo CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1208

and assaillede his kyngdom , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1209

and hilde hym in warde as long as he regnede . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1210

In his tyme +te secounde Iustinianus , +tat was exciled in Cersona ,
made openliche his boost +tat he schulde rekevere +te empere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1211

+terefore +te people was y-meoved for love of Tiberius ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1212

and fondede for@ @to slee Iustinianus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1213

+Terfore he fli+g to +te prince of Turkes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1214

and spoused his suster , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1215

and rekevered +te empere at +te laste by help of hym and of the Bulgares
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1216

and slou+g Leo and Tyberius +tat hadde assailled +te emperour ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1217

and as ofte as he wyped of a drope of corrupcioun of his nose , +tat was
somtyme i-kutte , so ofte he made slee som of his enemyes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1218

+Te fifte general synod was i-holde in Aquila in Sergius his tyme .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1219

After Sergius his tyme +te +tridde Leo was pope two +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,171.1220

He is nou+gt i-rekened in +te ordre of bisshoppes , on caas <P_VI,173>
for he was wrongfulliche i-putte yn by Patricius .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1221

Beda , libro 5=o= , capitulo 15=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1222

Aboute +tat tyme Arnulphus , bisshop of Galles , com into Bretayne .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1223

He wente to Ierusalem for to visite holy places ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1224

and +gede aboute into al +te lond of byheste , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1225

and com to Damascus , to Constantynnoble , to Alisaundre , and into meny
ilondes of +te see , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1226

and seillede homward into his contre a+ge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1227

and was i-cast by streng+te of tempest to +te west clyves of Bretayne .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1228

+Tere he fonde God his servaunt Adamnanus , abbot of +te ilond Hii ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1229

and tau+gte hym wondres of holy places , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1230

and he made a book +terof anon as he hadde i-herd +te wondres
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1231

and sente it to kyng Alfridus to reede . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1232

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1233

It semeth +tat Beda took of +tat book afterward what he wroot of holy
places . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1234

After Leo , +te sixte Iohn was pope +tre +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1235

+tat tyme Etheldredus , kyng of Mercia , forsook +tis worldliche kyngdom
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1236

and was i-schore monk at Bardeneye . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1237

After hym regnede Leuredus fyve +gere , +te sone of his bro+ter Wulferus
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1238

+Te seven+te Iohn was pope as it were +tre +gere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1239

+tat tyme deide <P_VI,173> Hedda bisshop of Wynchestre .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1240

After hym +tat bisshopriche was departed atweyne ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1241

ffor Brithelmus +te arhcebisshop dede Daniel at Wynchestre , and seynt
Aldelyn at Schireborne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1242

Seint Aldelyn was to_forehonde abbot of Malteby , +tat is Malmesbury .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1243

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 4=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1244

Also +tat +gere deide Sexwulfus bisshop of Mercia .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1245

After hym Hedda hilde Lichefeld , and Wilfridus Legecestre , +tat is
Chestre ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1246

but after two +gere Alfridus , kyng of Nor+thumberlond , deide ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1247

and Wilfridus turnede a+gen to +te bisshopriche of Hagustald ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1248

and was bisshop afterward foure +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1249

and +to Hedda hilde bo+te bisshopriches of Lichefeld and of Chestre .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1250

<heading>

Capitulum vicesimum secundum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1252

Iustinianus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1253

<$$heading>

THE secounde Iustinianus regned eft wi+t his sone Tyberius sixe +gere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1255

+tis is he +tat was prived of +te empere by Leo ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,173.1256

but <P_VI,177> for he rekeverede +te emper +tis +gere , +terfore +te
storie make+t eft of hym mynde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1257

+Tan Iustinianus was restored , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1258

and hilde +te ri+gt fey , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1259

and worschipped Constantyn the pope , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1260

and destroyed Cresona , +te place of his excilynge ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1261

and slou+g al +tat wonede +tere , out_take children ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1262

and eft whanne he wolde sle +te chil-dren , men of +te province made hem
a cheventeyn on Philipicus +tat was exciled and wonede +tere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1263

and anon he wente to Constantynnoble CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1264

and slou+g Iustinianus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1265

+Tat +gere deie Alfridus , kyng of Dryfeld . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1266

After hym his sone Osredus , a child of viii. +gere , reynede enlevene
+gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1267

Sysinnus was pope twenty dayes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1268

After hym +te firste Constantyn was pope sevene +gere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1269

$he denunced Philipicus an heretyk , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1270

for he hadde $y-doo ymages of holy seyntes out of chirches .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1271

Beda , libro 5=o= , capitulo 9=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1272

+Tat +gere Kenredus , kyng of Mercia , lefte his kyngdom to Colredus ,
the soone of his eem Ethelredus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1273

and wente to Rome wi+t Offa , +te kyng his sone of Est Saxons , and wi+t
Egwynus bisshop of Wicties . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1274

Trevisa . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,177.1275

+Te see of Wyke <P_VI,179> was i-torned to Wirchestre ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,179.1276

and is +tere +git . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,179.1277

+Tanne it folowe+t in +te storie : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,179.1278

<P_VI,181>

Colredus , kyng of Mercia , translated first +te body of seynt Werburgh
, +te mayde , out of +te er+te at +te abbay of Hamburgh , +tat hadde
i-lay +tere ynne nyne +gere hool and sounde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1280

and durede so hool and sounde anon to +te comynge of +te Danes at
Repentoun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1281

Aldelm bisshop of Shireborne deide , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1282

hym buried Egwynus ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1283

+tis Aldelm was kyng Ine his bro+ter sone Kenten ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1284

and was i-cleped Aldelm as it were an olde Elyn o+ter on olde Helyn ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1285

and was most konnynge in lettres of Grew and of Latyn .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1286

He hadde and used instrumentis of musik , pipes and strenges , and
o+tere manere of glee . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1287

First he was a monk , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1288

and +tanne he was i-made preost and abbot at Malmesbury .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1289

He took uppon $him +tat martirdom +tat whanne he were i-tempted of his
flesche , he wolde holde wi+t hym a faire mayde in his bed while he
seide +te sawter from +te bygynnynge to +te ende .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1290

Trevisa . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1291

Save reverence of seynt Aldelyn , +tis seme+t non holynesse no+ter
wisdom , but pure verray folye , bo+te for hym self and for peril and
drede of temptacioun of +te womman , as it may be i-preved bo+te by
auctorite and by resoun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1292

+Tanne it folowe+t in +te storie : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1293

in +te seven+te day of +te woke , whanne chapmen com , he preched hem
besily Goddes word . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1294

At +te laste his grete fame excited Sergius +te holy man , pope , to
sende after hym by lettres and by pistles ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1295

+tan he come to Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1296

and hadde desired longe tyme to see +tat citee , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1297

and hadde wi+t hym vestimentes +tat he hadde alwey with hym aboute ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1298

and song his masse to_fore +te pope in Seynt Iohn his chirche +te
Lateran . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1299

+Tere in a day after his masse he trowede have i-take his chesible
bakward to his servauntes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1300

bo+te +te servauntes were awey , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1301

and +te chesible fil on +te sonne beme , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1302

and +te sonne beem bare it longe tyme , +tere o+tere servauntes faillede
; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1303

+tat chesible is +git in +te abbay of Malmesbury .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1304

Also +tat tyme +te holy pope was deffamed +tat he hadde bygete a bastard
childe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1305

Whanne +te childe was nyne dayes olde it was i-brou+gt to cristenynge to
seynt Aldelyn , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1306

and seint Aldelyn coniure+t +te childe of nyne dayes olde it was
i-brou+gt to cristenynge +tat he schulde telle +gif Sergius +te pope
hadde i-gete hym ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1307

+te childe answerde hym CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1308

and seide +tat +te pope was gilteles of +tat dede .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,181.1309

At +te <P_VI,183> laste Aldelme wi+t many priveleges wente hoom a+ge to
his abbay , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1310

and wroot noble bookes , de virginitate , de termino Paschali , de
veteris ac novi testamenti floribus , de caritate , de sensibilium rerum
natura , de regulis pedum metricorum , de mathaplasmo , de metrico
dialogo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1311

He was abbot of Malmesbury fourty +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1312

and was bisshop foure +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1313

and +tat tyme his bre+teren made hem a no+ter abbot ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1314

but +tey buried hym whanne he was dede , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1315

and Egwynus +te bisshop come to his burienge , as me trowe+t , by
warnynge of God Almy+gti . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1316

Afterward +te holy bisshop Dunston worschipped hugeliche
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1317

and hi+gte his place and his schryne , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1318

and +gaf +terto organs and belles , holy relikes and ornamentes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1319

and for me schulde nou+gt take hem awey unskilfulliche he corsede
+terfore , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1320

and wroot in +tis manere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1321

" Bisshop Dunstan +geve+t seint Aldelyn organs .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1322

Who +tat take+t hem away , leese $he +te kyng-dom of hevene . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1323

Also in a waterstene it is i-write in +tis manere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1324

" Archebisshop Dunstan het +git +tis stene for it schulde in +te holy
temple serve seint Aldelyn . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1325

Also in the belle of +te fraytour hit is i-write in +tis manere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,183.1326

" In hi+ge <P_VI,185> halle of hevene com he nevere +tat steli+t +tis
belle out of seynt Aldelyn his seete . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1327

Trevisa . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1328

+Tis writynge my+gte be translated somdel in metre in +tis manere :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1329

" Organs of holy Dunstan bisshop holy Aldelyn ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1330

he schal lese hevene +tat wil hem take awey . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1331

In +te pycher +tus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1332

" +tis picher het +git Dunstan ri+gt +te archebisshop , ffor it schulde
serve seynt Aldelyn in +te temple . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1333

In +te belle +tus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1334

" Hi+g in +tat halle schal he com nevere of hevene +tat stele wole +tat
belle of seynt Alde-lyn from +tis place . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1335

Aboute +tis +gere deyde seynt Wil-fredus ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1336

in his tombe bee+t suche vers i-write : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1337

" Wilfridus holy by mynde , wor+ty be +ty name . Greved wi+t perilles
here wel many longe tyme ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1338

+tre tyme fiftene +gere bisshop he was here on lyve ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1339

and passe+t wi+t ioye to +te blisse +tat is in hevene . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1340

Beda , libro 5=o= , capitulo 19=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1341

+Tis child was of scharp wit , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1342

and wente in +te fourte+te +gere of his age to +te abbay of Lyndefare ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1343

and lernede +tere meny +tinges of +te lore of religioun ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1344

and knewe +tanne +tat som +tinges were nou+gt ri+gtfulliche i-holde of
+te Scottes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1345

and wente to Rome for to lerne more perfite lore .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,185.1346

+Tere he lernede $+te foure <P_VI,187> Gospell of Bonefas +te archedecon
, and +te compot of Es-terne , and o+ter nedeful +tinges to +te use of
holy chirche . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,187.1347

In his comynge a+ge he dwellede wi+t Alfynus , bisshop of Lug-dunens ,
+tre +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,187.1348

for he was i-slawe by +te queene Batilde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,187.1349

+Tanne Wilfridus wente a+gen into Bretayne , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,187.1350

and feng lond of kyng Oswynus for to make an abbay at Rypoun ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,187.1351

+tere he was i-made preost of Agelbertus ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,187.1352

after +tat , whan +te stryf was i-ended of +te Ester terme , he was
i-chose bisshop of +gork , as it is i-seide to_forehonde .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,187.1353

Whan he was dede his preost Acca was bisshop after hym at Hagustald
cherche . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,187.1354

Beda , libro 5=o= , capitulo 20=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,187.1355

+Tat +gere deide Adrianus , abbot of Seynt Peter , and helper of
Theodorus +te archebisshop ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,187.1356

his disciple and successour was Albynus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,187.1357

of hym it is i-wrete innere_more . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,187.1358

Item , capitulo 21=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,187.1359

+Tat tyme Nactanus , kyng of Pictes , sente messangers to Colfridus ,
abbot of Beda his abbay , +tat is in +te abbay Girwie , to be enformed
of +te verray holdynge of +te Ester tyde , and of +te manere of tonsure
of holy cherche . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,187.1360

<P_VI,189>

Among o+ter +tinges he wroot to hym +tat for to holde ari+gt +te Ester
tyme +tre rules bee+t nedeful to knowe ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,189.1362

tweyne +terof be+t conteyned in Moyses lawe , and +te +tridde in +te
gospel by ordenaunce of +te apostles : so +tat in +te firste mon+te , in
+te +tridde woke of +te same mon+te , +from +te fifte+te day of +te mone
to +te oon and twenti+te day of the mone , +te Estertyde schal be
i-holde ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,189.1363

in +te same +tridde woke me schal abyde +te Soneday .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,189.1364

So for to acounte +tat nou+gt +te fourte+te day , but +te eve +terof ,
+tat is +te fourte+te day of +te mone , +tat is +te by-gynnynge of +te
+tridde woke and +te ny+gt of +te fifte+te day of +te mone me mote nedes
abyde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,189.1365

By $+tat auctorite of +te book Numerorum , +tanne +tey wente out of
Ramesse , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,189.1366

+te fifte+te day of +te firste mon+te fil on a Sonday ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,189.1367

+tanne we my+gte alwey holde +te Ester tyde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,189.1368

and +te o+ter day +tey made pasch to oure Lord , +tat is to meninge +tey
hilde +te Ester day , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,189.1369

and so it schal cure to +te eve of +te oon and twenti+te day .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,189.1370

And +gif it my+gte be +tat alwey the fifte+te day of +te firste mon+te
fil in a Sonday , +tan we my+gte alwey holde +te Estertyde in oon and
<P_VI,191> +te same tyme +tat oure fadres hilde it in Moyses his law ,
+tey we have o+ter manere sacrament +tan +tey hadde .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,191.1371

By +te evenes of +te day and ny+gt in springynge tyme it may be i-founde
which is +te firste o+ter +te laste mon+te of +te +gere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,191.1372

by men of $+te Est londes , $and by +te Egipcians , +te evenesse of $+te
day and ny+gt in springynge tyme is i-woned for to come elevene dayes
to_fore Avarel , +tat we have+t i-sayed and i-preved by an orlege .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,191.1373

+Tanne what mone is fourtene dayes olde o+ter fiftene to_fore +te evenes
of +te day and ny+gt , +tat mone parteyne+t to +te laste mone+t of +te
+gere +tat is agoo ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,191.1374

+terfore it is nou+gt able for to holde +te Ester day .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,191.1375

Whanne +te mone is at the fulle in +te evenes of +te day and ny+gt ,
o+ter after , ri+gt as it was in +te bygynnynge of +te worlde , in +tat
ful mone +te firste Sonday is Ester day . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,191.1376

+Te secounde Iustinianus sente his oost for to take Philippicus , +tat
he hadde i-left at Pontus in Cersona . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,191.1377

Bote +te oost tornede to Philippicus his side , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,191.1378

and slou+g Iustinianus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,191.1379

+Te secounde Philippicus , +tat heet Dardanicus also , was emperour oon
+gere and sixe mon+tes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,191.1380

He fli+g into Sicilia for +te oost of Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,191.1381

and for he was an heretik he heet scrape of al +te peynture of cherches
; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,191.1382

+terfore <P_VI,193> +te Romayns +trewe away al manere money +tat his
ymage was i-grave ynne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,193.1383

+Te secounde Anastacius was emperour +tre +gere after +tat he hadde
i-slawe Philipicus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,193.1384

In his tyme Dagobertus was kyng of Fraunce after his fader Childebertus
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,193.1385

and regnede enlevene +gere by suffraunce of Pipinus Vetulus , +tat +git
rulede +te kynges hous . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,193.1386

After Constantinus +te secounde Gregory was pope sixtene $+gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,193.1387

+Tat +gere seint Guthlacus , +te anker , deide in Crowlond ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,193.1388

and Ine , kyng of West Saxons , and Colredus , kyng of Mercia , fau+gte
at Wodenesburgh so sharpliche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,193.1389

and ei+ter of hem hadde hymself so ungraciousliche , +tat me woste
nevere whe+ter of hem hadde worse spede . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,193.1390

+Te +tridde Theodocius was emperour oon +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,193.1391

and was goodliche and benigne , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,193.1392

and overcome his predecessour Anastacius , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,193.1393

and made hym a preost . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,193.1394

But after oon +gere Theodocius was i-putte doun and i-made a clerk by
his sucessour , +te +tridde Leo +te stronge . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,193.1395

In his tyme come many Sara+gyns CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,193.1396

and by-segede <P_VI,195> Constantynnoble +tre +gere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,195.1397

hit seme+t +tat Iohn Dama-scenus was +tat tyme in his floures ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,195.1398

and was i-bro+gt in to Pers . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,195.1399

+Tere were lettres i-wrete of his enemyes , and i-+trowe for+t and
i-founde and openliche i-rad . In +te whiche lettres was con-ceyved his
conspiracie a+genst the prince , +tat +te ri+gt hond was i-smyte of ,
for he schulde nevere afterward write . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,195.1400

But he prayed faste to oure lady +tat he servede besiliche ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,195.1401

and his hond was restored to hym a+gen . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,195.1402

It is nou+gt to trowynge +tat +tis Iohn is Iohn the Ermyte +tat is
i-sette in +te book of fadres , sone afterward Hyllarioun , and warnede
Theodocius +te emperour of o+ter victories . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,195.1403

He is ano+ter Iohn +tat was in +tis +tridde Theodocius his tyme in Gres
, and afterward in Pers , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,195.1404

and made many noble bookes in bo+te of philosofie .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,195.1405

+Tat Iohn +te Ermyte was longe tyme to_fore +te grete Gregorie ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,195.1406

and this Iohan Damascenus was long tyme after the grete Gregorye ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,195.1407

+tat is i-knowe by that , that +tis Iohn Damascenus <P_VI,197> in his
bookes of divinite alleye+t +te grete Gregorye his noble and grete
myracle of +te delyverance of Traianus , +tat may not be understonde of
Gregory Nazazenus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,197.1408

for he was aboute Constantynnoble and aboute Pontus ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,197.1409

and unne+te com nevere at Rome ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,197.1410

bote mynde of +tat myracle of +te deliveraunce of Traianus at +te
sepulcre of +te apostles in +te citee of Rome , by +te grete Gregorie
pope , is i-holde , as everich +gere holy chirche make+t mynde .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,197.1411

In tretynge of dedes +tat helpe+t hem +tat bee+t dede , Iohn Damascenus
alleye+t +tat myracle . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,197.1412

<heading>

Capitulum vicesimum tertium . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,197.1414

Leo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,197.1415

<$$heading>

THE +tridde Leo , with his sone Constantyn , was emperour
fyve_and_twenty +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,197.1417

In his first +gere deide Pipinus Vete-lus , after +tat he hadde
i-governed +te kynges hous ei+gte_and_twenty +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,197.1418

After hym com Charles , +tat was i-gete on a concubyne , and heet
Tutides and Marcellus also , and hadde <P_VI,199> suche names of slegges
and hameres , wi+t +te whiche smythes smyte+t and tempre+t grete gaddes
of iren ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,199.1419

tudes o+ter malleus in Latyn is a slegge , o+ter an hamer , in Englissh
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,199.1420

+Tis Charles fau+gt nobleliche a+genst +te Sarasyns +tat com out of
Affrica , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,199.1421

and made hem flee in oon batayle at Peytow , and in ano+ter batayle at
Narbon , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,199.1422

and chasede hem into Spayne ; in +te whiche batailles were i-slawe
foure_hondred_+towsand_and_fyve_and_sixty_+towsand of Sarasyns .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,199.1423

Also he fau+gt a+genst +te Saxons and a+genst the Bavarres , and also
a+genst Hudo , a duke of Gyen , and a+genst Raufredus duke of Anyo .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,199.1424

Also this Charles , for besynesse of werres and batailles +tat fil uppon
hym , bytook +te goodes of holy chirche to lewed men ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,199.1425

+ter-fore Eucherius , bisshop of Aurelians , while he lay in his beedes
, sigh +tis Charles in body and in soule i-tormented in helle .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,199.1426

+te aungel +tat schewed +tat sight to +te bisshop seide +tat +tat is +te
dome of men +tat byneme+t +te goodes of holy chirche <P_VI,201> o+ter of
pore men . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,201.1427

+Tanne by $+te warnynge of +te bisshop +te abbot of Seint Denys and
Pipinus his preost wente to Charles his grave , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,201.1428

and tornede +te stoon , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,201.1429

and sight a grete dragoun fle out of +te grave , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,201.1430

but +tere was no body i-founde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,201.1431

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 4=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,201.1432

+Tat +gere at Rome , at +te ryver Tyber was so grete and so huge +tat
+te watres +tat fille mette hem and ioynede to_gidres from port Seint
Peter to pont Millvium , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,201.1433

and durede so sevene dayes , for_to +te citi+geyns made a letany .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,201.1434

+Tat +gere deide kyng Ethelredus , after +tat he hadde i-be kyng of
Mercia +tritty +gere , and monk of Bardeneye +trittene +gere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,201.1435

and he was i-buried at Lichefeld . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,201.1436

After hym his cosyn Ethelbaldus regnede , +tat was Penda his nevew sone
in his bro+ter side , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,201.1437

and so he was +te sone of +te sone of Alwy Penda his bro+ter .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,201.1438

And Ethelbaldus regnede fourty +gere , as Guthlacus +te confessour hadde
i-seide . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,201.1439

+Tis Ethelbaldus in +te ei+gtene +gere of his kyngdom byseged Somertoun
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,201.1440

and wan it , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,201.1441

and spoylede <P_VI,203> North-umberlond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1442

and overcome +te Walsche men ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1443

but in +te sevene_and_+tritty +gere of his kyngdom he was overcome of
Cuthredus , kyng of West Saxons . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1444

+Te laste +gere of his kyngdom his owne men slow+g hym at Secandoun .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1445

Also +tat +gere Colfridus , abbot of Girwie , deyde at Lyngoun in
pilgrimage . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1446

Beda , libro 5=o= , capitulo 6=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1447

+Tat $+gere deide $seint Egwynus +te +tridde bisshop of Wicties ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1448

+tat bisshopriche is now i-cleped +te bisshopriche of Wirchestre .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1449

In a tyme Egwynus by+tou+gte hym of +te synnes of his +gou+te ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1450

and gyvede hym self , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1451

and +trew +te keyes of +te gyves into +te ryver Avene ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1452

and wente i-gyved openliche to Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1453

and seide +tat he schulde be skeer of his synnes whenne his gyves were
unloke by virtue of God , o+ter elles by +te same keyes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1454

And he wente so i-gyved to Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1455

and me sei+t +tat +te belles of +te citee gonne to rynge by hem self in
his comynge . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1456

He com a+ge wi+t priveleges for his chirche ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1457

while he seillede in +te see of Britayne a greet fische leep into +te
schip , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,203.1458

<P_VI,205>

and in +te gutte of +te fische was i-founde a keye +tat unleek his gyves
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,205.1460

Beda , libro 5=o= , capitulo 6=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,205.1461

Seint Iohn , bisshop of +gork , deide at Deyrewode , +tat is Beverlay ,
+te +gere of his bisshopriche fyve_and_+tretty , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,205.1462

and was i-buried in +te porche of +te mynstre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,205.1463

In his first +geres , and specialliche in Leynte , he dwellede in Seint
Michel his chapel at Hagustald chirche , nou+gt fer from +te ryver Tyne
, in +te nor+t hille of +te same place , +tat hatte Hernischow an
Englesshe , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,205.1464

bote in Englishce +tat is now i-used it hatte Ern his hulle ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,205.1465

and he deide at +te laste at Beverlay , +tat is foure_and_twenty myle
out of +gork estward . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,205.1466

And +tat place hatte Beverlay , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,205.1467

and heet Brook his lay , for many brokkes were somtyme i-woned to come
+tider out of +te hilles +tat bee+t +tere nyh . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,205.1468

+Tere seynt Iohn bulde a cherche of Seynt Nicholas , and ano+ter of
Seynt Iohn Baptiste in +te hille , for refresshynge and fedynge of
bre+teren . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,205.1469

+Te fredom and +te privileges of +tat place is encressed to grete profit
and worschippe , so +tat +tere is i-fonge no bataille and <P_VI,207>
stryf bytwene tweyne , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1470

but who +tat is accused schal purge hymself wi+t his owne hond .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1471

Iter , Beda , ubi supra . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1472

After +tis Iohn , his preost Wilfridus was bisshop aboute a_+tritty
+gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1473

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1474

+Tis hatte +te +gonge Wilfridus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1475

and overpasse+t Beda his tyme ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1476

ffor +tere were +tre famous Wilfridus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1477

+Te firste was +te more Wilfridus , +tat wente +tries to Rome ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1478

of hym we have+t i-spoke to_forehonde ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1479

+te o+ter was the +gonger Wilfridus , +tat was bisshop of +gork after
seynte Iohn of Beverle ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1480

+te +tridde was bisshop of Wicties after Egwinus .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1481

$Trevisa . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1482

As it is i-seide toforehonde , +te bisshopriche of Wicties hatte now +te
bisshopriche of Worcestre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1483

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1484

Kyng Ine bulde an abbay at Glastyngbury , as Aldelyn hadde i-counseilled
somtyme . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1485

+Tat tyme +tat abbay durede nobeliche anon to +te tyme of Danes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1486

but afterward by help of Donston , under kyng Edmond and kyng Edgare ,
+tat abbay was nobilleche amended and i-hi+gt anon to +te comynge of
Normans ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1487

but after +tat tyme , I n@ @ot by what myshappes , it is alwey asset
with ful wicked travailles . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,207.1488

<P_VI,209>

Also +te abbotes of +tat place for grete richesse bee+t proude ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,209.1490

and bycome+t tyraunt+g , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,209.1491

and swelle+t in pryde outward , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,209.1492

and bee+t nou+gt wor+t , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,209.1493

and bee+t cruel inward and nou+gt profitable , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,209.1494

and +tat was specialliche i-knowe in abbot Thursinus his tyme .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,209.1495

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,209.1496

+Tider were translated +te bones of seint Hilda +te abbas , of Colfridus
+te abbot of Girwie , and som bones of bisshop Aydan , +te whiche bones
kyng Edmond brou+gte wi+t hym whan he was in +te contray a+genst +te
Scottes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,209.1497

+tere reste+t +te secounde seint Patrik of Irlond , abbot and confessour
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,209.1498

+Te martiloge +tat is i-rad of seint Bartholomew his day , sei+t +tat he
wolde converte +te Irische men , and my+gte nou+gt ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,209.1499

+terfore he forsook Irlond CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,209.1500

and com to Glastyngbury , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,209.1501

and deide +tere in a seint Bartholomew his day .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,209.1502

<heading>

CAPITULUM VICESIMUM QUARTUM . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,209.1504

<$$heading>

Leo +te emperour lete be +te enemyes of +te empere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,209.1506

and werrede a+genst figures and ymages of holy seyntes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,209.1507

Pope <P_VI,211> Gregory and Germanius of Constantynnoble wi+tstood hym
nameliche , as +te olde usage and custome wolde +tat is allowed and
apreeved by holy cherche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,211.1508

and seide +tat it is wor+ty and medeful to do hem +te affecioun of
worschippe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,211.1509

For we worschippe+t in hem but God , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,211.1510

$and in worschippe of God and of holy seyntes , +tat man have+t in mynde
efte by suche ymages , God allone schal be princepalliche worschipped ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,211.1511

<em> and after hym creatures schal be i-worschipped <$$em> in worschippe
of hym . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,211.1512

Beda , libro 5=o= , capitulo 24=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,211.1513

+Tat +gere deide Withredus kyng of Caunterbury , and Thobias bisshop of
Rouchestre , +tat cou+te Latyn and Grew as wel as his owne longage .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,211.1514

Paulus , libro 7=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,211.1515

+Tat +gere Sarasyns com to Constantynnoble CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,211.1516

and byseged it +tre +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,211.1517

and took +tennes moche good and catel . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,211.1518

Withbrandes kyng of Longobardes herde +terof , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,211.1519

and raunsoned +te relikes of seint Austyn <em> +te doctor <$$em> , +te
whiche relikes were somtyme translated to Sardinia for reses of straunge
enemyes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,211.1520

and he made hem i-bore to +te citee of Geene , and +tennes to Papie ,
+tat heet Tinum somtyme . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,211.1521

Willelmus de Regibus , <P_VI,213> libro primo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,213.1522

Kyng Ine betook his kyngdom of West Saxons to his cosyn Ethelardus ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,213.1523

and went to Rome . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,213.1524

Me sei+t +tat he was +te firste of kynges +tat grauntede to seynt Peter
of everiche hous of his kyngdom a peny , +tat longe tyme of Englisshe
men was i-cleped Rome scot , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,213.1525

but in Latyn it is i-cleped Peter his peny . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,213.1526

+Te kyng his wyf Ethelburga +gaf hym occasioun to take +tat pilgrimage ,
and +tat in +tis manere : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,213.1527

she hadde ofte i-counsailled her housbonde to forsake +te riches of +te
world , and specialliche in +te laste +geres of his lyf ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,213.1528

but sche spedde nou+gt . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,213.1529

+Terfore at +te laste sche fondede to overcome hym wi+t gile ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,213.1530

and in a tyme whanne +tey hadde i-leide to_gidres in +te real citee ,
and were agoo , +tanne after +tre dayes +te governour of +te citee
defouled +te paleys wi+t al +te fil+te +tat he my+gte , wi+t tunge and
dritt of bestes , wi+t gaderynge of dunge and of fil+te of mukhilles ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,213.1531

and +tere +te kyng had i-leye and i-slepe , he leide a sowe wi+t here
pigges +tat hadde late i-favored . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,213.1532

Al +tis he dede by assent and heste of +te queene .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,213.1533

+Tanne +te queene by+gede here housbonde wi+t benygne flaterynge ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,213.1534

and prayed hym for to come to +tat place +tere he hadde i-be ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,213.1535

+te kyng graunted CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,213.1536

and come +tider , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,213.1537

and sigh <P_VI,215> +tat place +tat was somtyme poore to Sardanapallus
his likynge +to so desrayed and defouled ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1538

whan sche hadde +tis occasioun sche spak to +te kyng
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1539

and seide : " I pray +gow , my lord , where bee+t now +te cortyns and al
+te riche array of halles and chambres ? CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1540

Where is now +te pleysynge service of hem +tat were i-woned to flatere
wi+t +gou ? CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1541

Where is +te likynge and plesynge of glotonye and of leccherie ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1542

bee+t +tey not al apassed ? CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1543

So , my lord , schal my flesche passe and fal awey , +tat is now
i-norsched in gold and in riche array . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1544

Herwith here housbonde was overcome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1545

and after his noble batailles and victories and grete prayes +tat he
hadde i-take , he bytook +te kyngdom to his nevew ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1546

and wente to Rome . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1547

+Tere he come nou+gt openliche in si+gte , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1548

but he schare his heed , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1549

and clo+ted hym as a pore man , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1550

and wax olde among beggers ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1551

bote +te queene Ethelburga wente to +te abbay of Berkynge ; +tere here
suster hadde i-be abbas . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1552

And sche was afterward i-made abbas of +te same maydens ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1553

and made a blessed ende , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1554

and passed to reste . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1555

Beda , libro 5=o= , capitulo 29=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1556

Osricus kyng of Nor+thumberlond deide after +te nyn+te +gere <em> of his
kyngdom . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1557

After hym Colwulfus regnede nyne +gere <$$em> ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,215.1558

to <P_VI,217> hym Beda wroot +te storie Historiarum Angliae .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1559

Beda , ubi supra . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1560

+Tat gere were i-seie twey griselich sterres wi+t blasynge crestes
aboute +te sonne , +tat durede tweye wokes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1561

+Tat oon of hem passede erliche tofore the sonne ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1562

and +te o+ter com after +te sonne at eve ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1563

and +tese sterres blasede CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1564

and caste as it were brennynge brondes toward +te nor+tside ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1565

and bodede greet deth and manslau+gter ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1566

ffor +tanne com a grevous mescheef of Sarsyns , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1567

and bete doun Gallia , +tat is Fraunce . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1568

Beda , libro 5=o= , capitulo 25=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1569

+Tat +gere deyde Bri+gtwoldus archebisshop of Dorobernya , +tat is
Canturbury . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1570

After hym Tadwynus was archebisshop , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1571

and was i-sacred of +te bisshoppes of Londoun , of Wyrchestre , and of
Rouchestre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1572

Also +tat +gere +te sou+t provinces anon to +te marche of +te ryver
Humber were suget to Ethelbaldus king of Mercia ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1573

+te Pictes and +te Scottes hadde pees wi+t +te Angles ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1574

som Bretons were at here owne lawe , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1575

and som servede +te Angles . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1576

After +te secounde Gregorye <em> +te +tridde Gregory <$$em> was pope
enlevene +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,217.1577

he confermed +te worschippynge of holy ymages in a <P_VI,219> counsaile
+tat was i-made at Rome of aboute a_+towsand bisshoppes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,219.1578

and cursed dredfulliche al +tat do+t a+genst +tat statute of
worschippynge of holy ymages . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,219.1579

Also +tat +gere oon Petronax Brixianus wente to +te hille mont Casin ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,219.1580

and restored +te place covenableliche of goodes and catel and of monkes
by heste and comfort of pope Gregorie . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,219.1581

Tadwynus archebisshop of Caunterbury deide , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,219.1582

and Nothelmus bisshop of Londoun was archebisshop after hym .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,219.1583

Also +tat +gere deyde Alwynus +tat was bisshop of Lichfeld ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,219.1584

and Wicta was bisshop of Lichefeld whan he was dede .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,219.1585

And Coita was bisshop of Legecestria , +tat is Chestre ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,219.1586

and Eada durede +git at Dorchestre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,219.1587

+Tat +gere deide +tat worthy man Beda +te preost .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,219.1588

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 5=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,219.1589

+Te seven+te +gere of his age he was i-take to norschynge and to lore to
Benet Bisshop , abbot of Girwy , and after his de+t to Colfridus , abbot
of +te same place . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,219.1590

In his nyn+te +gere he was i-made decon of Iohn bisshop of +Gork , and
preost in his +tritten+te +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,219.1591

+Tat +gere <P_VI,221> he bygan to write , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,221.1592

and so he spende al his lyftyme in +te same abbay ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,221.1593

and made hym besy to studie and expowne holy writt ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,221.1594

and among +te besynesse +tat he ne hadde <em> everiche day in +te
service of religioun and in syngynge in chirche , he hadde <$$em> greet
swetnesse and likynge to lerne , to teche , and to write .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,221.1595

He wroot +trescore bookes and ey+gtene ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,221.1596

+te bookes he rekene+t in his storie Anglicana .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,221.1597

Here lakke+t and faille+t wit and speche to wondre at +te fulle +tat a
man +tat was so wi+t_oute use of scole made so many noble volumes in so
sober wordes in so litel space of his lyftyme . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,221.1598

Of al +tis I conclude +tat he com nevere at Rome ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,221.1599

+tey som men wil mene +tat he went to Rome to be +tere present , and to
schewe +tat his bookes were accordynge to +te loore of holy chirche ,
and +tat if +tey were nou+gt accordynge for to amende hym at +te pope
his heste . But +tat he wente blynd aboute for to preche , +tat he was
i-ladde by fraude of his man for to preche to stones as it were to men ,
+tat he herde +te voys of stones +tat answerede and seide Amen , +tat he
wente +treis to Rome , +tat he fonde +tre R and +tre F i-write , and
expowned what it was to mene , I fynde it nou+gt i-write in bookes of
auctorite . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,221.1600

Som men telle+t <P_VI,223> +tat suche <em> a wrytynge was founden , R.
R. R. F. F. F. , and such <$$em> an exposicioun : regna ruent Romae
ferro flammaque fameque ; +tat is to menynge , kyngdoms of Rome schal
falle by fuyre and iren , also by honger . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,223.1601

Willelmus de Regibus , libro primo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,223.1602

But by pope Sergius his pistel +tat was i-sent to abbot Colfridus it is
i-knowe +tat Beda was i-sent after and i-prayed for to come to Rome for
to assoyle questiouns +tat were +tere i-mevede .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,223.1603

Here take hede how wor+ty +te court of Rome <em> hylde hym , +tat +te
court of Rome <$$em> hadde nede to have hym to declare and to assoille
+te questiouns +tat +tere were i-meved . And also how wor+ty we schal
holde hym by manere of his leuynge and of his techynge .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,223.1604

He my+gte not be vicious +tat spende so his witte and +tou+gt in
expouninge of holy writte . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,223.1605

But his clennesse was moche i-sene at his laste ende ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,223.1606

for sevene wookes contynualliche his stomak hadde indignacioun of mete
and drynke , so +tat unne+te he my+gte eny mete holde , and was strei+gt
and schort bre+ted . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,223.1607

But for al +tat he sparede not +te travayle of lettrure and of bookes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,223.1608

bote everiche day , among +te <P_VI,225> detty travayle of service and
of psalmes , he tau+gte his disciples in lessouns and in questiouns ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1609

and he tornede Seynt Iohn his gospel into Englisshe ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1610

and seide , " Lerne+t , my smale children , while I am wi+t +gou ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1611

I wot nou+gt how longe I schal wi+t +gow abyde ; "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1612

and evere among he seide +tat sawe of Ambrose , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1613

" I have nou+gt so i-leved among +gow +tat me schame+t to lyve ; no+ter
me drede+t to deye , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1614

for me have+t a good Lord . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1615

By ny+gte , whanne he hadde no man to teche , he travailled besiliche in
bedes-byddynge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1616

and +tonked God of alle . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1617

+Te Tewesday tofore +te Ascencioun his dee+t neighede ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1618

and his feet gonne to swelle ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1619

he was i-led and anoynt and i-housled , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1620

and kessed his bre+teren , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1621

and prayed hem alle to have of hym mynde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1622

and he +gaf to meny of his servauntes +tinges +tat he hadde i-kept in
privete . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1623

In +te Ascencioun day +te clo+te of here was i-sprad ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1624

and he leyde hym doun CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1625

and prayed +te grace of +te Holy Goost , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,225.1626

and seide : " Oo Kyng of bliss , Lord of vertues , +tat hast +te pris ,
and art <P_VI,227> +tis day i-steie up above alle hevenes , leve +tou us
not faderles , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,227.1627

but sende +tou into us +tat byheste of +te Fader +te Goost for so+tnesse
. " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,227.1628

Whanne +tat was i-ended he +galde up +te laste bree+t wi+t a wel greet
swetnesse of smyl , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,227.1629

and so he was i-buried +tere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,227.1630

but +te comyn fame telle+t , +tat he is at Durham now+te , with Seynt
Cuthbert ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,227.1631

and wi+t hym was i-buryed wel nygh , al +te knowleche anon to +te
conquest of dedes of Engelond , and nygh al +te connynge of lettres ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,227.1632

for after his tyme after lewed come more lewed , as +te shameliche vers
+tat were i-wrete on his tombe bere+t greet witnesse of unkonnynge ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,227.1633

+tat vers were unwor+ty to be i-wrete on so wor+ty a manis tombe ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,227.1634

+tese bee+t +te vers : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,227.1635

" Beda +te preost reste+t here i-buried in +te flesch ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,227.1636

Crist graunte his soule to be glad in hevene for evere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,227.1637

Graunt hym to drinke +te wel of wisdom +tat he ha+t now+te Desired
besiliche alwey ri+gt wi+t love gret . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,227.1638

Aboute +tat tyme Ricoldus duke of Frisons was i-tornede by the prechynge
of Seynt Wilfranus +te bisshop , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,227.1639

and wolde i-cristned be ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,227.1640

and putte his owne <P_VI,229> foot into +te fontstoon ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1641

and wi+tdrou+g +tat o+ter , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1642

and axede of hem +tat stood aboute whe+ter +tere were mo of his
predecessours in paradys o+ter in helle , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1643

and he was answerd +tat +tere were mo in helle ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1644

he herd +tat CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1645

and drough his foot out of +te water , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1646

and seide : " It is esiere +tat I folwe +te more +tan +te lasse . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1647

And so he was bygiled of +te fende , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1648

and deide after +te +tridde day . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1649

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 4=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1650

Aboute +tat tyme deyde Seint Fredeswyde +te mayde , i-bore at Oxenforde
, +te dou+gter of duke Didianus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1651

Kyng Algarus , a lecheruos man , folowede here anon to +te citee of
Oxenford , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1652

and whanne +te mayde was i-entred into +te citee +te +gates closede
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1653

and were i-schette al by hymself , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1654

and the kyng wer+t blynde +tat purswerde here . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1655

But by prayeng of +te mayde he hadde his si+ght a+ge .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1656

Se+t+te after +tat tyme kynges of Engelonde drede+t for to come
wi+t_ynne +tat citee for drede of mishappes +tat my+gte hym befalle .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,229.1657

Colwulfus , kyng of Nor+thomberlond , <P_VI,231> after ei+gte +gere of
his kyngdom , lefte his kyngdom to his cosyn Egbertus , +te sone of his
fader bro+ter , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,231.1658

and bycam a monk at Beda his abbay ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,231.1659

and Egbertus $regnede nyntene +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,231.1660

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,231.1661

Bote William de Regibus sei+t +tat he was i-schore at Lyndefare cherche
, and at +te laste i-buryed byside Seynt Cuthbert .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,231.1662

Notelmus archebisshop of Caunterbury deide , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,231.1663

and Cuthberd , bisshop of Herford , was archebisshop after hym .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,231.1664

<heading>

Capitulum vicesimum quintum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,231.1666

<$$heading>

THE fif+te Constantinus , after his fader Leo , was emperour
+tre_and_+tritty +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,231.1668

+tis , as his fader used , took ymages out of chirche in everiche place
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,231.1669

and sette hem a fuyre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,231.1670

Etheldredus , kyng of West Saxons , deide +te fourten+te +gere of his
kyngdom . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,231.1671

His cosyn Cuthbert was kyng after hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,231.1672

and wered ofte tyme a+genst Ethelbaldus kyng of Mercia ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,231.1673

and regnede sixtene +ger . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,231.1674

His cosyn Sigebertus regnede after hym two +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,231.1675

He was <P_VI,233> proude of +te happes of his predecessour ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1676

and by-ladde his sugettes harde and evel , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1677

and tornede +te lawes at his owne wille , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1678

and slou+g +te noble erle Cumbranus evel and wrecchedliche ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1679

for he hadde i-spoke to hym of his evel berynge and dedes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1680

but at +te laste , for he wolde nou+gt be amended , he was i-put out of
+te kyngdom . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1681

+Tanne he wente into a woode CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1682

and hidde hym self , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1683

and +te eorle his swynherde +tat was i-slawe fonde hym
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1684

and slow+g hym . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1685

Aboute +tat tyme deyde Charles Martellus ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1686

after hym his tweie sones , +te secounde Pipinus and Charloman , come to
+te principate of +te kynges hous ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1687

but Charloman , after +te four+te +gere of his principate , left of +te
principate of +te kynges hous by counseile of his bro+ter ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1688

and took +te wey to Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1689

and was i-schore monk in pope Zakarias his tyme ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1690

and made an abbay in +te hille mont Serapte , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1691

and lyvede +tere somdel longe tyme ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1692

but at +te laste , for Frenche men come +tider to ofte to hym as to hire
lord , as +tey dede somtyme , he wente +tennes to mont Cassyn .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,233.1693

+Te pope <P_VI,235> dede as he was i-prayed hym , +tat he wolde sende
lettres to +te kyng of Fraunce for to restore a+gen Seynt Benet his body
to mont Cassyn . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,235.1694

+Te pope dede as he was i-prayed , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,235.1695

and +te kyng of Fraunce heet +te monkes of Floriacer delyvere Seynt
Benet his body . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,235.1696

+Tanne +te monkes gonne to wepe and to faste , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,235.1697

and prayed God besilich +tat +te body moste wi+t hem abyde .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,235.1698

God herde here prayers , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,235.1699

and smot +te messangers +tat were i-sent , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,235.1700

and made hem start blynde ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,235.1701

and so +tey faillede of her purpos , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,235.1702

and wente into Italy a+ge . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,235.1703

+To the secounde Pipinus , prefecte of +te paleys , governed +te kynges
hous of Fraunce under kyng Hildericus , +te sone of Theodoricus ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,235.1704

for he was an unprofitable man and to esy , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,235.1705

and feng nou+gt of +te kyngdom bote +te name of kyng and his lyflode .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,235.1706

Pipinus axede of +te pope Zacharias , +gif he schulde be kyng +tat hilde
hym apayde onliche wi+t +te name of kyng , and +gaf hym to sleu+te , and
dede non o+ter good . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,235.1707

+Te poope wroot a+gen CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,235.1708

and seide +tat he schulde have <P_VI,237> +te name and be kyng +tat
rule+t wel +te comynte . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1709

+Te Frensche men were glad of +tis answere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1710

and closede Hildericus in an abbay , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1711

and made Pipinus kyng , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1712

and after +te ey+gte+te +gere he was made emperour by decree of
Zacharias +te pope . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1713

+Tanne he compellede Astulphus , kyng of Italy , +tat impugnede +te
ri+gt of Rome , for to restore +tat he hadde i-take ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1714

and made hym delyvere and +geve plegges . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1715

After Gregory Zacharias was pope twelve +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1716

+Tis wente toward Ravenna ry+gt in +te mydel of Iuyn ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1717

and was i-heled alday with a cloude +tat God hadde i-sente for he
schulde nou+gt be i-brent wi+t +te grete hete of the sonne ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1718

and al ny+gt +tat cloude abood by_sides his tente ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1719

and roos eft amorwe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1720

Also fury ostes wente to_fore +tat holy man in +te cloudes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1721

+Te order of Esterne was destourbed ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1722

+te +gounger Wilfridus , bisshop of +gork , deyde ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1723

and after hym Egbertus , kyng Egbertus his bro+ter , was bisshop
sex_and_+tritty $+geres . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1724

Willelmus de Regibus , libro $primo , et de Pontificibus , libro 4=o= .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,237.1725

By his witt and sley+te and his bro+ter <P_VI,239> +te kyng@ @es money
he apparailed +te see CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,239.1726

and amended it in tweye places , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,239.1727

for he was a man of greet herte and of grete wits ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,239.1728

and took strongliche heede +tat , as it is greet pryde to coveyte and
desire ou+gt +tat is no+gt ri+gtful , so it is greet lewednesse and
wrecchednesse to forgendre what is detty and ri+gtful .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,239.1729

+Terfore +te archebisshop his pal , +tat +te firste Paulinus +tat was
i-putte out by stren+te of enemyes hadde i-lefte at Rouchestre , and
menye of his predecessours hadde forgendred it +tere , he gat it a+gen
by grete instaunce and menye +tat he made at +te court of Rome .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,239.1730

Also he ordeyned at +gork a noble librarye . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,239.1731

+Te nobel doctour of Englisshe men Alcuinus , +tat was i-sent to kyng
Charles for pees of Englisshe men , in his pistel +tat he sente to holy
chirche into Engelond , of +tat library make+t noble mynde ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,239.1732

also he write+t to kyng Charles in +tis manere : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,239.1733

" +geve+t me bookes of loore , suche as I hadde in my contray in
Engelond , by +te wit of my maister Egbertus , and I schal sende to +gow
some of oure children , +tat schal take +terof what is nedefulle , and
brynge into <P_VI,241> Fraunce +te floures of Bretayne ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1734

for allone oon orchard i-closed schal be at +gork , and at Turon +te
springynge of Paradyse . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1735

+Tat +gere diede Seint Danyel , bisshop of Wynchestre ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1736

after hym com Hunfridus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1737

After Zacharias , Stevene was pope fyve +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1738

+tis anoynted Pipinus his tweie sones , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1739

and made hem emperours , Charloman and the grete Charles .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1740

Se+t+te +tat tyme +te empere of Rome passede from +te Grees to Frensche
men , and +tanne to Germans . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1741

Kenulphus of Serdicus his kynde in +te fifte degre , Penda his nevew
i-gete of Kenwalchus , was a grete man ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1742

his vertues passede his fame . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1743

By help of +te West Saxons , he putte here kyng Sigebertus out of +tat
kyngdom for +te gretnes of his evel dedes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1744

and regnede in his stede +tritty +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1745

but he graunted hym +te province of Hamptoun CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1746

for he hadde i-slawe duk Cumbranus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1747

+To he was i-putte al awey , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1748

and hidde hym in a wode , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1749

and was i-slawe of +te kynges swynherd . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1750

Ethelbaldus , kyng of Mercia , was i-slawe at Sigeswolde of Beornredus
+te tyraunt , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,241.1751

and was <P_VI,243> i-buried at Rependoun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,243.1752

But now longe afterward Offa , Ethebaldus his nevew , slou+g Beornredus
+te tyraunt , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,243.1753

and regnede in his stede nyne_and_+tritty +gere in Mercia .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,243.1754

+Tis overcom in batayle +te Northumbres , +te West Saxons , and
Kentisshe men , so +tat he tornede +te archebisshop his see out of
Caunterbury to Lichefeld in +te province of Mercia .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,243.1755

Also he translated Seynt Albon his bones to +te more abbay +tat he hadde
i-bulde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,243.1756

He +gaf to +te pope , Peter his vicary , a rente by +te +gere of everich
hous of +te kyngdom . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,243.1757

He made also a greet dyche +tat is evere i-sene to departe bytwene Wales
and +te kyngdom of Mercia , +te whiche diche +git hatte Offediche :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,243.1758

loke more herof in +te firste book , capitulo de plateys regalibus .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,243.1759

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 1=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,243.1760

+Tis Offa fondede to gete frendschipe of kynges ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,243.1761

and maried his dou+gter Ethelburga to Brithiricus , kyng of West Saxons
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,243.1762

He sente Alcuinus Abinus , doctor of Englisshe men , to Charles kyng of
Fraunce , for to procure pees . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,243.1763

For +tere was so greet discord and stryf bytwene +te <P_VI,245> kyngdoms
+tat passage of marchandyse was forbode in ey+ter side .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1764

Organs com first into Fraunce , i-send of Constantyn +te emperour $kyng
of Grees , to Pipinus , kyng of Fraunce . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1765

Egbertus , kyng of Northumberlond was i-schore monk ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1766

and his sone Oswulfus regnede after hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1767

and was i-slawe in +te ende of his firste +gere of $+te Nor+thumbres .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1768

After hym Moll , +tat heet Ethelwold also , regnede sevene +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1769

Marianus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1770

After Stevene , Paul was pope ten +gere , a mylde man in alle +tinges .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1771

In his tyme Gengulphus was in his floures in Burgoyn .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1772

In his tyme he bou+gte a welle in Fraunce , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1773

and prayed of God , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1774

and hadde it graunted , +tat +tat welle moste springe out in Burgoyne .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1775

+Tis lefte his wif , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1776

for sche hadde i-broke spousebreche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1777

and was i-slawe of +te clerk +tat lay by his wyf .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1778

Whanne he was dede , God dede meny miracles for hym ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1779

but his wif spak yvel of +te myracles , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1780

and seide : " +gif Gengulphus , myn housbonde , do+t myracles myn ers
schal synge ; " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1781

and so it was i-doo , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,245.1782

ffor as ofte as sche spak after-ward , <P_VI,247> afterward her ers
wolde synge wi+t a foule noyse . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,247.1783

Molle , kyng of Nor+thumberlond , lefte +te kyngdom ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,247.1784

and Alrudus regnede after hym nyne +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,247.1785

+Tis Alrudus hadde tweie sones , Osredus , +tat was +te +tridde +tat
regnede in his stede after hym ; also Seynt Alcmundus , +tat was i-slawe
aftirward when he halp +te men of Mercia a+genst +te West Saxons .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,247.1786

Paul , +te pope , deide , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,247.1787

and Constantyn , a lewed man , was i-made pope by maistrie and by
streng+te , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,247.1788

and was pope oon +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,247.1789

and dede sclaundre to all holy chirche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,247.1790

but by cherte of Cristen men , he was y-put out of cherche ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,247.1791

and his ey+gen $were i-put out . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,247.1792

+Tat +gere deyde Pipinus , kyng of Fraunce , in an evel +tat was bytwene
vel and flesche , after +tat he hadde i-regned ei+gte_and_twenty +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,247.1793

<heading>

Capitulum vicesimum sextum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,247.1795

Carolus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,247.1796

<$$heading>

WHANNE Pipinus was dede the Frenche men delede +te kyngdom bytwene his
tweie sones , Charles and Charleman ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,247.1798

<P_VI,249>

but Charleman deide after two +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1800

and +tanne Charles hadde al +te kyngdom , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1801

and governed it nobeliche after +tat tyme sixe_and_fourty +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1802

+Tanne Charleman his wif and his children fli+g to Deserius , kyng of
Longobardes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1803

and prayed hym of help and socour wi+t_oute eny nede ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1804

for no man compellede hem +terto . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1805

But Charles firste overcome duke Hanald , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1806

and wan Gyen CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1807

and made it suget . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1808

At +te prayer of pope Adrian he bysegede Desiderius , kyng of Italy , in
+te citee of Papie , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1809

for he was rebel a+genst +te cherche of Rome , as his bro+ter Astulphus
hadde i-be . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1810

Charles took hym in +te citee of Papie , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1811

and exciled hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1812

and made his owne sone Pipinus kyng of Italy in his stede .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1813

In +tat batayle deide Amicus and Amelius , Crist his kny+gtes , and his
herty frendes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1814

of hem bee+t i-rad wonderful dedes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1815

At +te laste he chastede +te Saxons and +te Sclaves ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1816

and took meny of hem CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1817

and sente hem into dyvers places of Fraunce ; so +tat +te Saxons forsook
here mametrie , and were i-made oon peple Saxons and Frenche men .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,249.1818

+Ter-fore <P_VI,251> Charles wente to Spayne , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,251.1819

and wan +te dales , laundes , and contrayes aboute +te hilles montes
Pireney . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,251.1820

But he was assailled in +te way wi+t busshementes of Gaskyns , so +tat
+tey slou+g +te utter deel of his oost ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,251.1821

+tere Olyver , cheef sewere of +te kynges bord , and Rouland , eorl of
+te paleys , were i-slawe , and meny $o+tere of +te peeres of Fraunce .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,251.1822

De libro Turpini . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,251.1823

In a day whan trewes was i-graunted $in ei+ter side , Aigolandus , a
strong prince of Spayne , com to Charles to be i-cristned ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,251.1824

and sigh al +tat were at +te bord realliche i-clo+ted and likyngliche
i-fedde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,251.1825

and sigh afer +trittene pore men sitte on +te grounde and have foule
mete and symple wi+t_oute eny bord , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,251.1826

and he axede what +tey were . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,251.1827

Me answerde hym CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,251.1828

and seide : " +tese +trittene bee+t Goddes messangers ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,251.1829

and praye+t for us , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,251.1830

and bringe+t to us mynde of +te nombre of Cristes disciples . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,251.1831

" As I see , " quod Aigolandus , " +goure lawe is nou+gt ri+gtful +tat
suffre+t Goddes messengers be +tus evel bylad ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,251.1832

he <P_VI,253> serve+t evel his lord +tat so fonge+t his servauntes ; "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1833

and so he was lewedliche offended , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1834

and despised cristenynge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1835

and wente hoom a+gen ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1836

but Charles worschipped afterward pore men +te more .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1837

Trevisa . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1838

Aigolandus was a lewed goost , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1839

and lewedliche i-meved as +te devel hym tau+gte ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1840

and blende hym +tat he kou+te nou+gt i-knowe +tat men schulde be
i-served as here astaat axe+t . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1841

Giraldus , prima , capitulo 17=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1842

Here after Charles wan Gallia Narbonensis , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1843

and made suget +te Capuanes and +te Beneventanes , +te Danes and +te
Sweves , +tat were i-confe+tered to hem ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1844

and he dede al +tat $at on iornay . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1845

Kynges of Bretouns , of Angles , of Scottes , of Peers , $and of Grees ,
worschipped hym wi+t +giftes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1846

and , as Turpyn +te archebisshop telle+t , Charles was faire , and a wel
farynge man of body but sturne of face . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1847

His body was eyte foot of leng+te , his face a span and an half ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1848

and his berd was $of a foot longe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,253.1849

He cleef a two wi+t his swerd a kny+gt i-armed <P_VI,255> at oon strook
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,255.1850

He wolde esiliche wi+t his hondes folde and bende foure hors schoon at
ones . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,255.1851

He wolde heve a stondynge kny+gt i-armed from the grounde wi+t his oon
hond . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,255.1852

He wolde ete an hare al hool , o+ter tweye hennes ; o+ter a goos , at
oon mele ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,255.1853

and he wolde drynke a litel wyne i-watred . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,255.1854

He was so scars of drynke +tat seelde he wolde drynke +treis passyng in
his soper . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,255.1855

+Tis was gracious and mylde to pore men and to cherches .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,255.1856

Over +te Ryne , at Magons , he made a brigge of fyve_hondred paas .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,255.1857

As Frensche men doo+t , he tau+gte his sones as sone as +tey my+gte for
+gou+te to ride and honte , and to doo dedes of armes , and lerne
science of scole . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,255.1858

He ordeyned his dou+gtres to worche wolwerk wi+t spyndel and with distaf
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,255.1859

and ordeyned hem to use suche werkes for +tey schulde nou+gt wexe slou+g
by idelnesse . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,255.1860

He hylde hym nou+gt apayde wi+t his contray speche .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,255.1861

He cou+te bettre understonde +te longage of Grew +tan {he_could} speke
it . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,255.1862

In loore of gramer , Peter of Pise was <P_VI,257> his maister ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1863

and in o+ter science of clergy , Alcuinus Albinus , an Englische man ,
was his maister . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1864

Charles fondede to write lettres ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1865

+terfore he bare a peyre of tables for to write ynne ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1866

but it profited ri+gt nou+gt , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1867

for +tat travaille was bygonne to late . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1868

He wolde be at chirche erliche and late , and at houres +tat was i-seide
by ny+gte . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1869

He ordeyned and assigned gret almes to pore men +tat were in fer londes
, in Egipt , and in Affrica . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1870

He hadde a lyster at mete , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1871

and hadde greet likynge in Austyn his bookes ; and nameliche in his
bookes de Civitate Dei . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1872

In somer-tyme after mete , in +te undermele tyde , he wolde take somwhat
of apples , and drynke ones +terto , and doo of his clo+tes and goo to
bedde as it were by ny+gte , and slepe tweie houres .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1873

By ny+gte he wolde ofte slepe in +tis manere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1874

now onliche awake , and eft slepe ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1875

but he wolde foure si+tes o+ter fyve si+tes awake and aryse , and ligge
doun and slepe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1876

+Treis he com to Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1877

and li+gt doun of his hors a myle of +tis half Rome ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1878

and +gede on fote into al +te citee , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,257.1879

<P_VI,259>

and cussed al +te pylers of chirches . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,259.1881

He delyvered +te Holy Lond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,259.1882

and com a+gen to Constantynnoble ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,259.1883

and forsook al +te precious and greet +giftes +tat Constantyn +te
emperour profred hym , outake relikes of holy seyntes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,259.1884

He fenge a party of oure Lordes crosse , and a party of +te crowne of
+tornes , +tat +tere in his sight gan to blowe and bare floures . And
$on of Cristes nayles , oure lady smok , and Seynt Symeon his arme ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,259.1885

and brou+gte +tese relikes with hym to Seynt Mary Chirche at Acquisgrani
+tat he hadde i-founded , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,259.1886

and lyth i-buried +tere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,259.1887

He founded as meny abbayes as be+t lettres in +te A B C .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,259.1888

In everich of +tilke abbayes , by +te ordre of +te fundacioun +terof ,
he sette and pighte a lettre of gold of +te wight of an_hondred pound of
Turoneys . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,259.1889

Trevisa . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,259.1890

God woot what wight +tat schulde be ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,259.1891

but , by a statute of the universite of Oxenford , whan eny man is
i-congyed +tere to commence in eny faculte , he schal swere +tat he
schal not spende at his comencement passynge +tre_+towsand of grootes
turonens . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,259.1892

+Te groot turoney is somwhat lasse wor+ty +tan an Englische groote ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,259.1893

ffor at Brisak uppon $+te Ryne I have i-fonge in chaunge enlevene grotes
turoneys for a duket , +tat is wor+ty half an Englisshe noble .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,259.1894

<P_VI,261>

But +tere is double manere of money of turoneis , more and lasse ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,261.1896

+te more hatte grossus turonensis in Latyn , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,261.1897

and +te lasse hatte parvis turonensis . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,261.1898

But it may wel be +tat +te pound of Turoneys is i-take by tale of money
of Turon , o+ter by certeyn wey+gtes +tat was +tere i-used .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,261.1899

+Tanne it folowe+t in +te storie : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,261.1900

of +tis man Charles it is wonder +tat he wolde unne+te marye eny of his
dou+gtres while he was on lyve , outake his eldest dou+gter , +te whiche
he mariede to +te kyng of Grees +tat heet Constantyn .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,261.1901

Charles seide +tat he my+gte nou+gt be wi+t_oute companye of his
dou+gters ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,261.1902

+terfore +tey he were gracious in o+ter dedes , in +tat poynt a+genst
fortune he was to blame : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,261.1903

and +tey+g +tere were grete speche +terof among +te peple , he made it
as +tey he knewe it nou+gt , and as non supeccioun were of +tat foly
dede . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,261.1904

+Terfore som men wene+t +tat +tat was +te synne of Charles +tat he wolde
nevere of_schryve hym wi+t his mou+te ; but unne+te at +te laste by
writynge of Seint Gyles . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,261.1905

Also +tis Charles or he deyde deled his catel in +tre parties :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,261.1906

oon partie he assignede to pore men , ano+ter to chirches ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,261.1907

and +gitte +te +tridde partie he delede in foure parties ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,261.1908

oon +terof he kepte for to holde his mynde day , +tat o+ter to everich
dayes use ; +te +tridde to his sonnes and nevewes , and +te four+te to
his ser-vauntes <P_VI,263> +tat were of his meyny .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,263.1909

He sat ones at mete , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,263.1910

and his maister Alcuinus sat to_fore hym ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,263.1911

+tanne he axede of his master : " How grete difference and space was
bytwene a sot and a Scot . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,263.1912

" But +te brede of a metebord , " quod his maister .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,263.1913

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,263.1914

For to speke and bring stories to acord +tat seme+t out of acorde ,
spekynge of +te empere and of +te kyngdom of Charles . Take hede +tat
+tis Charles while he was +gong was anoynt kyng of the secounde pope
Stevene , +te +gere of oure Lord seven_hondred_and_foure_and_fifty ,
while his fader Pipinus was onlyve , and regned wi+t his fader and under
hym fiftene +gere anon to his fadir deth . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,263.1915

+Tanne , after his fadres de+t , +tat deide +te +gere oure Lord
seven_hondred_+tre_score_and_ei+gte , he regned wi+t his bro+ter
Charleman two +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,263.1916

After his bro+ter , +tat deide +te +gere of oure Lord
seven_hondred_and_lxx. , Charles helde +te kyngdom al hool fourtene
+gere , to +te +gere of oure Lord seven_hondred_foure_score_and_foure .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,263.1917

+Tat +gere he wente first to Rome to be i-crowned emperour of Adrian +te
pope ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,263.1918

and +terafter he was <P_VI,265> emperour fourtene +gere , to +te +gere
of oure Lord ey+gte_hondred , whanne +te four+te pope Leo confermed
Charles eft emperour : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,265.1919

+terafter he was emperour fourtene +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,265.1920

and deide +te +gere of his age +tre_score_and_twelve ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,265.1921

+tat was +te +gere of oure Lord ei+gte_hondred_and_fourtene .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,265.1922

+Tanne after +tat somme men telle+t in +te stories , +tat he regnede in
al sixe_and_fourty +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,265.1923

+tat schal be understonde from his fadir de+t to his owne deth .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,265.1924

But who so wil se more of Charles his lyf , mote loke +te bookes of his
maister Alcuinus , o+ter Torpyn +te archebisshop his bookes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,265.1925

+Tat day +tat Charles deide at Viean in Fraunce , Turpyn was in his
bedes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,265.1926

and sigh a companye of blak kny+gtes wende toward Aquisgrani for to take
Charles soule ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,265.1927

and he coniurede +te laste of hem +tat he schulde com a+gen whanne +tey
hadde i-doo , and telle hym truliche what +tey dede and how hem spedde .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,265.1928

+Tanne +te fend wente CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,265.1929

and com a+ge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,265.1930

and Turpyn axede of hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,265.1931

and seide : " What have +ge i-doo ? " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,265.1932

" We have+t , " quod +te fende , " i-weie Charles his soule ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,265.1933

but +tilke Iame of Spayne , +tat was byheded , leyde so meny <P_VI,267>
stones and trees in +te weie and balaunce , +tat +tat Charles his goode
dedes hadde +te maistrie , and weie more +tan his evel dedes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,267.1934

and so we have+t ri+gt not i-brou+gt a+gen wi+t us .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,267.1935

Charles , " quod +te fend , " used to bulde meny chirches in worschippe
of Seynt Iame . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,267.1936

After +tat Constantyn , +tat hadde assaied +te poperiche , and i-take it
wi+t his streng+te , was i-putte out , pope Stevene was pope foure +gere
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,267.1937

Anon he gadrede a synod , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,267.1938

and wi+tcleped al +tat was i-doo by his predecessour , outake bapteme
and crisme $and what is ordeyned to savacioun of hem +tat dye+t .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,267.1939

<heading>

Capitulum vicesimum septimum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,267.1941

<$$heading>

AFTER Stevene +te firste Adrian was pope foure_and_twenty +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,267.1943

First +tis gadrede +te secounde counsaile at Constantynnoble of
+tre_hondred fadres and fifty ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,267.1944

he made ano+ter counsaille in +te citee of Rome with +tre_hondred fadres
and fifty ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,267.1945

kyng Charles was present +tere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,267.1946

+To hym was i-graunted ri+gt in +te electioun of +te pope , and of +te
ordeynynge of +te popes see . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,267.1947

<P_VI,269>

+Te Nor+thombres put out here kyng Aluredus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1949

and took Ethelbertus , +tat heet Ethelredus also , +te sone of Mollus ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1950

and made hym here kyng . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1951

He regned over hem fyve +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1952

+Te four+te Leo , +te sone of +te fifte Constantyn regnede in Grees
foure +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1953

he brende for first in greet covetise ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1954

he took of a cherche a crowne +tat was realliche i-hi+gte with
charbunkel stones , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1955

and sette it on his heed , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1956

and was i-take wi+t a sodeyn fevere CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1957

and deide . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1958

+Tat +gere Offa kyng of Mercia spoylede Lambert archebisshop of
Caunterbury of his dignite of primate , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1959

and brou+gte +tat dignite at Lichefeld , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1960

and hilde it +tere while he was onlyve by assent of pope Adrian .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1961

+Te sixte Constantyn , +te sone of +te four+te Leo , regned in Grees
wi+t his moder Iren ten +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1962

In his laste +gere fil discord and stryf bytwene +te sone and moder ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1963

and +te moder took +te sone CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1964

and putte hym in prison , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,269.1965

and <P_VI,271> so sche regnede allone fyve +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1966

At +te laste the sone hadde help and counsaile of +te Armonyes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1967

and cam out of prison , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1968

and pursewed cruelliche his moder and here fautoures .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1969

+Tanne aftirward +te sone for his $greet cruelnes was i-take by heste
and streng+te of +te moder , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1970

and his y+gen were i-putte out in so evel manere +tat he deide sone
aftirward ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1971

and $so Yrene regnede eft allone fyve +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1972

But Nichoforus Patricius , +tat had i-had greet worschippe of Yrene ,
roos a+genst hir , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1973

and took +te crowne a+genst +te peples wille . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1974

And took of here +te tresoure of +te empere wi+t an oth i-made to be
harmeles , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1975

and excilede here , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1976

and so exciled sche deyde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1977

+Te firste +gere of +tis Constantyn , in a dede man his grave at
Constantynnoble was i-founde a plate of gold , in +te whiche plate it
was i-write in +tis manere : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1978

" Crist schal be bore of a mayde Marye . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1979

In hym I beleve . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1980

Under Constantyn and Yrene soone after me +tu schalt i-see . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1981

Marianus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1982

+Tat +gere Kenulphus kyng of West Saxone , and Offa kyng of Mercia ,
fau+gt strongliche for +te citee of Bensyngtoun ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1983

but Offa hadde +te victorie and +te citee . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1984

+Tat +gere +te Nor+thumbres put out here kyng Ethelbertus , +tat heet
Etheldredus also , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,271.1985

and made <P_VI,273> Alwold kyng , +tat regnede enlevene +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.1986

+Tat +gere +te secounde synod was i-made at Nicene of +tre_hondred
bisshoppes and fifty in Adrian his tyme . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.1987

In +tat synod a+genst +te opinioun of +te Grees it is i-seide +tat +te
Holy Goost come+t of +te Fader and of +te Sone .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.1988

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 4=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.1989

Kenulphus kyng of West Saxons caste for to putte Kynehard out of his
kyngdom , +te bro+ter of his predecessour Sigebertus ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.1990

and cam by ny+gte to a wommans hous at Mertoun +tat was his lemman .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.1991

+Tere Clito cam wi+t foure_score felawes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.1992

and bysette +te kyng al aboute . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.1993

But whan +te kynge was awaked he defended manliche hym self ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.1994

but he was i-slawe at +te laste . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.1995

And +te kynges kny+gtes resede and forsook Clito his faire byhestes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.1996

but for +tey were fewe , +tei were dede alle at +te laste .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.1997

Erliche amorwe it was kou+te +tar +te kyng was deed ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.1998

and Osricus +te kynges ledere come wi+t his felowes to +te place ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.1999

and slow+g Clito and his felowes everich one , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.2000

and took +te kyng his body , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.2001

and buried it at Wynchestre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,273.2002

After Kenulphus Brithricus , of Cerdicus his blood , was kyng of West
Saxons <P_VI,275> fiftene +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,275.2003

Anon by help of kyng Offa , whos dou+gter he hadde i-wedded , he put out
Egbertus +te sone of Alcmundus +te underkyng , +tat was +te sone of Offa
, +tat cam of +te blood $of Kyngilphus and of Ine .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,275.2004

Anon as he was so i-putte out he wente into Fraunce ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,275.2005

and usede +te scole of chivalrie ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,275.2006

and whanne Brithricus was dede he come a+ge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,275.2007

and regned , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,275.2008

and tau+gte +te scole of chivalrye as he hadde i-lerned in Fraunce .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,275.2009

Lull archebisshop of Cauterbury deyde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,275.2010

and Ruchilfus was archebisshop after $hym ey+gte_and_twenty +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,275.2011

He bygan to bulde Seynt Albons his grete chirche , from the foundement
of a wonder werk of brend tyle , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,275.2012

and brou+gt $hit nobleliche to a good ende . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,275.2013

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro primo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,275.2014

+Tis +gere kyng Offa mariede his dou+gter Ethelburga to Bri+gtricus kyng
of West Saxons ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,275.2015

of here it is i-seide +tat sche fondede besiliche by my+gt o+ter by
venym for to slee alle +te meynyals of here housbonde .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,275.2016

+Tanne in a tyme sche +gaf venym for to slee +gongelynges +tat was
homeliche wi+t +te kyng , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,275.2017

and slou+g bo+te <P_VI,277> +te kyng and +te +gonglyng .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,277.2018

+Tanne sche wente to +te kyng of Fraunce , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,277.2019

and hadde wi+t here greet tresoure and riches . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,277.2020

+Tanne in a tyme +te kynges sone stood in a solere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,277.2021

and +te kyng +gaf here choys whe+ter sche wolde have to housbonde of +te
fader or of +te sone ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,277.2022

and sche chees +te sone . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,277.2023

" Haddest $+tu i-chose me , " quo+t +te kyng , " +tou scholdest have
$had my sone . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,277.2024

But for +tu hast forsake me , +tu schalt not have me no+ter my sone ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,277.2025

+tu moste leve +te pride of +te world and goo into an abbay . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,277.2026

+Tere a lewed man lay by here , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,277.2027

and sche was i-putte out , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,277.2028

and deide in povert . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,277.2029

After +tat time +tereof it com to be used among $the Angles +tat +te
kny+gtes wif schulde not be i-cleped queene no+ter sitte by +te kyng in
+te kynges sete . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,277.2030

Henricus , libro 4=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,277.2031

+Tat +gere was i-seie a wonder signe of +te cros on Englisshe men
clo+tes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,277.2032

and blood fil doun from hevene to +te er+te . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,277.2033

We +geve+t none unwise doom wethir +tis byfel in token of +te mocioun of
Ierusalem +tat fel +tre_hondred +gere afterward in William +te Reede his
<P_VI,279> tyme , o+ter elles to amende Englische men for +tey schulde
drede +te wreche +tat was i-come uppon hem by +te Danes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2034

bote we lete+t God i-wor+te wi+t his owne privete .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2035

+Tat +gere +te Danes come first into Engelond ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2036

+te kynges steward of West Saxons wente a+genst hem unwisliche wi+t fewe
men , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2037

and was of hem i-slawe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2038

Seynt Oswold kyng of Nor+thumberlond is i-slawe of his owne men ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2039

his nevew Osredus , +te sone of Aluredus and bro+ter of Alcmundus ,
regnede after hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2040

and was sone after i-putte out and i-slawe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2041

After hym Etheldredus , +tat was somtyme i-put out of his kyngdom ,
regned eft , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2042

and was sone after i-slawe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2043

+Terfore Colwulfus bisshop of Lyndifare forsook bo+te ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2044

and lefte +te see and +te kyngdom . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2045

Here after Oswaldus regnede aftir fewe dayes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2046

After hym Ardulphus regnede oon +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2047

+Tere after +tre_score +gere and sixtene kynges regnede +tere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2048

+te laste of hem were Osbrith and Elle . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2049

+Te Danes slou+g hem at +te citee of +gork , and al +te floure of here
men +te +gere of oure Lorde ey+gte_hondred_+tre_score_and_seventene .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,279.2050

After +tat <P_VI,281> tyme +te Danes regnede in Nor+thumberlond
two_and_fifty +gere anon to Ethelstan his tyme .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,281.2051

Pipinus +te sone of Charles conspired a+genst his fader ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,281.2052

but his counsaile was i-wried , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,281.2053

and he was i-schore monk and i-closed in an abbay ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,281.2054

and his felowes were som byheded and some anhonged by +te +trote .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,281.2055

Seynt Ethelbertus , kyng of Est Angles , was i-prived bo+te of his
kyngdom and of his $lyf by heste of kyng Offa , and by excitynge and
counsail of his owne wif Kyneswyda . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,281.2056

<heading>

Capitulum vicesimum octavum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,281.2058

<$$heading>

OFFA deide , kyng of Mercia , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,281.2060

his son Eserkus regnede after hym oon +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,281.2061

and after hym a mylde man , Kenulphus , Cuthbert his sone , was kyng ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,281.2062

he gat on his wif queene Alfritha Quendrida , Burgenilda , and Seynt
Kenelyn . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,281.2063

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 1=o= in fine . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,281.2064

+Tis Kenulphus was Penda his nevew in +te fifte degree ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,281.2065

and was a greet man ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,281.2066

his virtues passed his fame ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,281.2067

at <P_VI,283> home he was devoute and mylde ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2068

in batayle he was stalwor+t , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2069

and ofte hadde +te victorie . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2070

After Offa he took wre+te a+genst Kentische men ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2071

and werrede strongliche in here lond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2072

and took here kyng Egbert , +tat heet Pern by his surname ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2073

and lad hym wi+t hym i-bounde into Mercia . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2074

But sone after he was i-mylded by mercy of manhede in +te buldynge in
+te cherche of Wynchecombe +tat he bulde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2075

At +te au+gter he +gaf +te kyng fredom +tat was prisoner .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2076

+Tere were present +trittene bisshoppes and ten dukes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2077

for +tat dede al +te cherche sownede for joye , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2078

and +te street grucched , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2079

cryde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2080

and made noyse , stertynge aboute . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2081

Also +tis restored a+ge +te dignite of primat to Athelardus bisshop of
Canturbury , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2082

and deyde at +te laste after +te +gere of his kyngdom foure_and_twenty ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2083

and was i-buried at Wynche-combe , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2084

and lefte Kenelme after hym to be his eyre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2085

+Tat tyme at Constantynnoble +te sonne wi+tdrow+g his light seventene
dayes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2086

and was nou+gt i-seie , so +tat meny men trowede +tat +tat was byfalle
for +te blyndynge and puttynge out of kyng Constantyn his ei+gen .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2087

Alfridus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,283.2088

Also +tat +gere , +tat was +te ten+te +gere of Brithricus , were fury
dragoune i-seie in <P_VI,285> Engelond fleynge by the ayer ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2089

after +tat signe com tweie pestilens , strong honger , and +te werre of
+te Danes +tat assaillede first Nor+thumberlond and +tanne Lyndeseie .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2090

But at +tat tyme +te Danes were overcome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2091

and fli+g to here schippes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2092

After Adrianus +te four+te Leo was pope twenty +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2093

In a tyme +tis wente to Seynt Peter in a Seint Markes day , wi+t +te
letayne , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2094

and was i-take in , $and his ey+gen i-put out , and his tonge i-kut of .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2095

But God by myracle restored $hym his sight and his speche , so +tat he
spak wi+t_oute lettynge . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2096

Afterward he wente to Charles into Fraunce , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2097

and com wi+t hym a+gen to Rome ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2098

$+tanne wreche was i-take of +te pope his enemyes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2099

and +te pope purged hym of +tat me bare hym on honde ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2100

and +to eft he crowned Charles , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2101

and confermed hym +tat was ra+ter i-crowned . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2102

Nichoforus Patricins excilede Yrene +te emperesse of Grees ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2103

and assailede and took +te empere with wyles and wi+t streng+te ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2104

and regned ei+gte +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,285.2105

<P_VI,287>

In his tyme +te Est empere faillede al oute . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,287.2107

+Te body of Seynt Withburg +te mayde was i-founde hool and sounde in +te
town of Derham , +tere it was i-buried , after fyve_and_fifty +gere :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,287.2108

Withburg was +te dou+gter of kyng Anna and +te suster of Sexburga .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,287.2109

+Tat +gere Charles was i-crowned emperour of Leo +te pope ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,287.2110

se+t+te +tat tyme +te empere passede from +te Grees to +te Frenschemen
and to +te Germans , +tat bee+t Almayns . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,287.2111

Giraldus , distinctio prima , capitulo 7=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,287.2112

For +tis passynge of +te empere +te Grees , $+tey+g +tey faillede in
hemself , and stryve more wi+t venym +tan wi+t vertue , more with craft
+tan wi+t streng+te of bataille , and of Mars +tat is i-cleped god of
batayle ; +git +tey have+t so grete envie to +te Latyns +tat +tey have+t
wi+t_drawe hem out of $+te subieccioun and obedience of +te chirche of
Rome . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,287.2113

And +terfore whanne +te popes of Rome charged hem ofte to be obedient ,
and to come a+ge to +te unite of holy chirche , +tey usede for to write
a+gen in +tis manere : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,287.2114

" +ge have+t wi+t_drawe +gow from us , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,287.2115

and we wi+tdrawe+t us from +gow . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,287.2116

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= , et de Pontificibus libro 3=o= .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,287.2117

Bri+gtricus kyng of West Saxons deyde , i-poysoned <P_VI,289> by +te
venym of his wyf . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,289.2118

After hym Egbertus +te sone of Alcmundus +te underkyng , +tat was +te
sone of Offa , of Ine his blood and kynde , regnede seven_and_+tritty
+gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,289.2119

Somtyme +tis was i-chased of Brithricus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,289.2120

and fli+g into Fraunce , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,289.2121

and come a+ge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,289.2122

and tau+gte what he hadde i-lerned of chevalrie to his sugettis , to al
+te peple +tat were free . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,289.2123

He ordeynede kny+gtes delyvere men , strong and swy+ter ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,289.2124

and made wepoun i-bore in tyme of pees . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,289.2125

In a tyme Bernulphus kyng of Mercia scornede his doynge ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,289.2126

and he +tat was idel and ful of reste meove+t hym to batayle +tat is
i-used in dedes of armes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,289.2127

and heet hym sturnliche +tat +tey schulde doo hym homage .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,289.2128

+Tanne +te bataille was i-doo in somertyme at Elyndoun in +te Province
of Hamptoun ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,289.2129

+tere was unleche noumbre of array of kny+gtes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,289.2130

for a+genst an_hondred of Egbert his kny+gtes , +tat were pale men and
lene , come a_+towsand +tat were rody and fat , and were ra+ter
i-stuffed wi+t swoot +tan with blood ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,289.2131

bote whan +te bataille was i-doo Egbertus onede the kyngdoms of Mercia ,
of Kent , and of <P_VI,291> Nor+thumberlond to his kyngdom ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2132

and took Chestre uppon +te Britouns , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2133

for +te Britouns hilde Chestre anon to +tat tyme .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2134

+Tanne he cleped +te lordes to_gidres at Wynchestre ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2135

and was i-crowned kyng of al Britanyne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2136

+Tere he ordeyned and heet +tat al +te Saxouns and Iutes schulde be
i-cleped Angles from +tat day for+tward , and +tat Bretayne schulde be
i-cleped Anglia . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2137

Bretayne conteyne+t Engelond and Wales and Scotlond .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2138

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2139

+Tat +gere +tat kyng Bri+gtricus deyde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2140

and Marianus sei+t , Ethelmundus kyng of Mercia went out of his owne
lond anon to the forde of Chemerforde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2141

and fau+gte a+genst Weoftan duke of Wiltoun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2142

In +tat bataille +te dukes were i-slawe in ei+ter side ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2143

and +te Wiltoun men hadde +te victorie ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2144

but Seynt Alcmundus +te martir , +te sone of kyng Alrudus of
Northumberlond , come to Ethelmundus his side , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2145

and was i-slawe +tere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2146

His body was first i-buried at +te white abbay , and aftirward at Derby
in +te nor+t chirche +tat is i-bulde in his name .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2147

+Tere he doo+t meny tokenes and myracles , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,291.2148

and +te Nor+thumbres <P_VI,293> come+t to hym ofte a pilgrimage .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,293.2149

Willelmus de Regibus , libro primo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,293.2150

+Tat +gere Albinus an Englissheman , +tat heet Alcuinus also , a
connynge man of clergy , passede over $+te see into Fraunce ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,293.2151

and byschoon +tat lond wi+t li+gt of his lore ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,293.2152

and ordeyned here orisouns and office of masse for ferial dayes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,293.2153

and he brou+gte to Parys studie +tat +te Grees hadde somtyme i-chaunged
to Rome . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,293.2154

After Beda and Aldelyn +tis was +te wisest man of al Englisshe men +tat
I have i-redde of . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,293.2155

And he was i-take and lefte $specialich wi+t +te kyng Charles , whe+ter
it were for clennesse of +te lond o+ter for manhed of +te kyng ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,293.2156

and tau+gte hym logike and sophistrie , rethorike and astronomye .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,293.2157

And +te kyng bytook hym Seynt Martyn his abbay at Turoun to governe by
+te abbottes ry+gt . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,293.2158

For +te monkes +tere were a_falle into a greet outragie ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,293.2159

+terfore among hem he sygh tweye aungels come into here dortour and slee
alle +te monkes of +tat place , outake hym +tat sigh +tat si+gt .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,293.2160

At +te laste Alcuinus rested at Seynt Poule of Cor-marik , <P_VI,295>
+tere is every day almesse i-deled for his soule foure monken mete .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,295.2161

Aboute +tis tyme Seint Giles +te abbot , of +te nacioun of Grees , was
in his floures . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,295.2162

He com into +te over Fraunce by warnynge of God ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,295.2163

and lyved first anker his lyf faste by +te ryver of Rone .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,295.2164

Also +tat tyme Paule +te decone of Rome was in his floures , +tat
descrevede +te Longobardes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,295.2165

he com out of +te abbay of Mont Cassyn into Fraunce for love of kyng
Charles . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,295.2166

Among +te Grees Michel , a mylde man , is y-made emperour .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,295.2167

In his +tridde +gere +te sone faillede in +te sonne resynge ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,295.2168

and sone +terafter +te emperour was i-schore monk .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,295.2169

And a greet pestilence of re+teren destroyed wel nygh al Europa , and
namliche Britayne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,295.2170

+Te grete Charles was seek foure +gere in +te feveres ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,295.2171

and deide +te four+te day of fevere at Aquisgrani ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,295.2172

and was i-buried +tere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,295.2173

Marianus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,295.2174

In his laste +gere +te treen brigge of fyve_hondred paas , +tat he hadde
made wi+t cost and travaille in ten +gere over +te Ryne at Magoncia ,
was so i-brend in +tre houres +tat <P_VI,297> +tere was nou+gt oon spone
+terof i-seie flete uppon +te water . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,297.2175

Meny men wole mene +tat +tat happe fille at +te prayer of Riculphus +te
bisshop for manslau+gter and robberye +tat was ofte by ny+gte i-doo
uppon +tat brigge ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,297.2176

but o+ter men wil mene +tat it fil by som happe and non o+ter wise .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,297.2177

<heading>

Capitulum vicesimum nonum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,297.2179

Lodowicus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,297.2180

<$$heading>

LOWYS +te mylde , Charles his eldeste sone , was emperour after his
fader sixe_and_twenty +gere and enlevene mon+tes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,297.2182

In his tyme bisshoppes and clerks dede awey barred gurdelles and gay
blasynge clo+tes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,297.2183

Giraldus , $distinctio prima , capitulo 17=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,297.2184

+Tis Lowys unto his firste wyf Hirmengard get +tre sones ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,297.2185

Lotharius was oon of hem ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,297.2186

he was crowned of pope Paschal in an Esterday , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,297.2187

and his fader maad $hym <P_VI,299> kyng of Italy and felowe of +te
empere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,299.2188

and $he made Lowys +te secounde regne in Germania , and Pipinus +te
+tridde in Gyean and in Gasquyne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,299.2189

On his $secounde wif Iuditha , +te dou+gter of +te duk of Bavarria , he
gat Charles +te balled , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,299.2190

and +gaf hym Burgoyne to governe and to rule . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,299.2191

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,299.2192

For +te fader loved most +tis balled Charles , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,299.2193

and kissed hym ofte in sight of his bre+teren , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,299.2194

Lotharius was wroo+t , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,299.2195

and hadde indignacioun +terof ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,299.2196

+terfore he pursewed ofte his fader , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,299.2197

and put hym in prisoun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,299.2198

Also +tis Lowys , for he was so mylde , was ofte disesed bo+te of his
owne men and of o+tere , for_to he dede more wiseliche , and rulede +te
reme more sturneliche . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,299.2199

Me sei+t +tat +tat happed hym for his wif Inditha was to nygh of his kyn
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,299.2200

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro primo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,299.2201

+Terfore whan +tis kyng hadde avaunced oon Fredericus to +te
bisshopriche of Trajette and Frisia , and sat by hym at +te mete +te
firste day of his ordenaunce in his <P_VI,301> ri+gt hond , he chargede
+te bisshop , among o+ter +tinges , +tat he schulde have mynde +tat he
was a +gong bisshop , and fowede +te stabilnesse of his antecessours ,
and +tat he schulde purpose +te so+te wi+t_oute accepcioun of persouns ,
and punsche mysdoers . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,301.2202

+te bisshop answerde hym CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,301.2203

and seide : " Sire , +tou doost ri+gtfulliche by me +tat confortest +te
tendernesse of my professioun wi+t holy counsaile and lore ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,301.2204

but I praye +tat it greve +gow nou+gt , and +goure majeste +tey+g I
telle +gow openliche what ha+t longe tyme i-halowed in myn herte .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,301.2205

Whe+ter is it more honest to tame +tis flesche +tat is here i-set first
at +te heed o+ter at +te tayle ? " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,301.2206

+te kynge wiste nou+gt how faste he hadde i-glewed hym self ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,301.2207

but answerde hastiliche CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,301.2208

and seide : " At +te heed of +te fische schal be first atamed . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,301.2209

" So it is , lord emperour , " quo+t +te bishop , " +tat Cristene fey
mow firste make +te cese of thyn errours , +tat +ty sugettes be nou+gt
hardy to forsake what +tey see+t +tey suffre and fonge :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,301.2210

+tanne forsake +tow +te unlawful wedlok +tat +tu hast i-made <P_VI,303>
with +tilke Iuditha . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2211

+Tis word was hevy to +te kyng , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2212

but +git he took it awor+t . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2213

+Tis word was hevy , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2214

and sprang wel wyde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2215

and gladed men of holy chirche +tat herde +terof , so +tat a counsaile
was i-mad +terof for +tat dede and $the wedlok was undo , and +te kyng
putte doun hym self , and +te womman was i-closed in an abbay .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2216

Bote at +te laste , by myldnesse of +te court of Rome , it was
i-ordeyned by better counsaile and dome +tat penaunce schulde be i-sette
, and +tey schulde after +tat tyme use laweful wedlok .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2217

+Te emperour for+gaf gladliche al wronges , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2218

and lete +te sentence passe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2219

Bote +te womman hired tweye kny+gtes +tat slou+g +te forseide bisshop in
his vestimentes , after +tat he hadde i-songe his masse .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2220

Giraldus , distinctio prima , capitulo 17=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2221

At +te laste +tis Lowys +gaf to his sone Charles +te ballede +tat he
hadde i-gete on Iuditha Almayne and Rethica ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2222

+terfore +te o+tere +tre bre+teren hadde indignacioun ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2223

and were wroo+t , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2224

and forsook Lowys by help of +te Galles , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2225

and made +te eldest sone Lotharius kyng . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2226

He prisoned his fader Lowys by assent of the four+te pope Gregory
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2227

and exciled his fader wif Iuditha , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,303.2228

and putte here sone <P_VI,305> Charles +te ballede in +te castel of
Privingue . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,305.2229

But soone after +te princes of Fraunce delivered +te kyng ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,305.2230

and acorded hym and his sone ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,305.2231

but by counsaile of Pipinus false men accused falsliche +te queene
Iuditha , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,305.2232

and made here a mynchoun ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,305.2233

but +te same +gere +te kyng hadde +te queene a+gen by help of +te pope .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,305.2234

For Bernard purged hym lawefulliche of +te spouse breche +tat hym was
i-bore an honde , so +tat noon of hem +tat hadde accused hym was hardy
a+gent hym for@ @to stryve . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,305.2235

After Leo +te four+te Stevene was pope +tre +gere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,305.2236

after hym Paschal was pope sevene +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,305.2237

he crowned Lotharius , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,305.2238

and made a gadrynge of monkes of Grees at Rome in +te chirche of Seint
Praxede . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,305.2239

Willelmus de Regibus , libro primo , et de Pontificibus , libro 4=o= .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,305.2240

Kenulphus kyng of Mercia deide , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,305.2241

and his sone Kenelyn , a childe of sevene +gere olde , regnede after hym
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,305.2242

After fewe monthes , by entisyng of his suster Quendreda , Kenelyn was
i-slawe of oon Heskebertus in a +tikke wode , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,305.2243

and he was i-founde by a piler of li+gt +tat stood up from his body into
<P_VI,307> hevene . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,307.2244

But by a scrowe +tat was i-wrete in Englisshe wi+t goldene lettres ,
+tat a colvere brou+gte and leyde and lefte to_fore +te pope uppon Seynt
Peter his au+gter , +tat was i-rad of an Englisshe man +tat was +tere
present , Kenelyn his deth , and +te place of his deth , was i-knowe at
Rome . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,307.2245

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,307.2246

In +tat scrowe it was i-wrete in +tis manere : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,307.2247

" At Clent in Cowbache Kenelin kynebern lith under +torn heved byweved .
" CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,307.2248

In Englisshe +tat now is used +tat is to menynge in +tis manere :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,307.2249

" In Clent at Convale under a thorne Kenelin lyeth heedles i-slawe by
fraude . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,307.2250

+Tanne whanne Kenelin his body was i-bore to his graveward from +te
place +tat he deyede inne , sche +tat was gilty of his deth herde men
synge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,307.2251

and putte out here heede at a wyndow , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,307.2252

and for to cese +te gladnesse of +te syngers sche seide +tat psalm , "
Deus laudem , " bakward ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,307.2253

but I n@ @ot what wichecraft , and what schrewednesse sche wolde mene .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,307.2254

No+teles sche loste bo+te here ey+gen with rennynge dropes of <P_VI,309>
blood . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,309.2255

The bloode is +git i-seie , in mynde of Goddes wreche , in +te Psauter
+tat +to sche hilde in here honde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,309.2256

<heading>

Capitulum tricesimum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,309.2258

<$$heading>

AFFTER Kenelin , his eeme in his fader side Colwulfus regnede in Mercia
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,309.2260

bote after two +gere Beornulphus +te tiraunt put hym out ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,309.2261

and regnede in his stede two +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,309.2262

He was in a tyme overcome at Elyngdoun , of Egbertus kyng of West Saxons
, as it is i-seide to_forhonde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,309.2263

He meoved $to a jornay a+genst +te Est Angles +tat hadde i-holpe
Egbertus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,309.2264

and was i-slawe of hem ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,309.2265

his sucessour and his nygh kynnesman Ludecan wolde awreke his deth ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,309.2266

and fau+gte a+genst +te Est Angles , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,309.2267

and was i-slawe of hem also , and +tre dukes of his .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,309.2268

After hym his nyh kynnesman Wilganus regnede +trittene +gere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,309.2269

bote Egbertus destourbede hym long tyme . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,309.2270

After <P_VI,311> Paschal , +te four+te Eugenius was pope foure +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,311.2271

He sente seint Sebastyan his bones to Hyldewynus , abbot of Seynt Denys
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,311.2272

After Eugenius , Valentinus was pope foure +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,311.2273

In his tyme +te childe Swythyn was i-bore at Wynchestre , +tat dede
myracles +ter after Hemstan his de+t . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,311.2274

After Valentinus , +te four+te Gregory was pope +trittene +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,311.2275

Giraldus , distinctio prima , capitulo 17=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,311.2276

In +tis popes tyme Thodulphus was in his floures , +tat was first abbot
of Floria , and +tanne bisshop of Aurelians : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,311.2277

he was exciled CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,311.2278

and was in +te citee of Angeo by assent of kyng Lowys , whanne his
enemyes hadde falseliche acused hym ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,311.2279

+tanne it happede in a Palme Sonday +tat +te kyng passed +terfor+t ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,311.2280

and he made and song vers +tat bygonne in +tis manere :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,311.2281

" Gloria , laus tibi sit , " and so for+t . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,311.2282

By +te ditee and not of +te vers +te kyng was i-meoved ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,311.2283

and delivered hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,311.2284

and brou+gt hym to his ra+ter grace . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,311.2285

+Tat tyme Rabanus was in his floures , monk and abbot of Mildens in
Germania , a greet poet and a greet clerk of dyvynyte :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,311.2286

he made a book , <P_VI,313> " De naturis rerum , " and ano+ter , " De
laude crucis , " i-hi+gte in metre wi+t dyvers manere of faire spekynge
; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,313.2287

his disciple was Strabus , a greet expositour in divinite .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,313.2288

+Tat +gere +te Danes spoylede +te ilond of Shiphey beside Kent ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,313.2289

+terfore kyng Egbertus fau+gte a+genst hym at Carru ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,313.2290

and was i-chased . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,313.2291

At Tullens a wenche of twelve +gere olde fenge Goddes body an Ester day
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,313.2292

and faste afterward sixe mon+tes continualliche to brede and watir , and
abstenence +terafter +tre +gere from all manere mete and drynke ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,313.2293

and tornede a+gen at +te laste to comyn lyvynge .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,313.2294

Also +tat tyme som mysdoers of +te Romayns sente to +te Sowdan of
Babilonia +tat he schulde come and be lorde of Italy ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,313.2295

+tanne he come with greet multitude and streng+te ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,313.2296

and spoiled Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,313.2297

and made a stable of Seynt Petres chirche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,313.2298

and destroyede Tuscia and Sicilia . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,313.2299

At the laste , at +te prayer and requirynge of pope Gregory , Gy of
Marchia wi+t his Longobardes , and Lowys wi+t his Galles , chasede him
out of +tat londes and contrayes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,313.2300

And +tey <P_VI,315> seillede toward Affrica , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2301

and were a-dreynt wel nygh everychone . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2302

+Tat +gere deyde Helmstan bisshop of Wynchestre ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2303

and seynt Swythyne was bisshop after hym . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2304

+Te Danes , wi+t greet navey , londede in a place +tat $hatte a Crual
among +te West Britouns , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2305

and made confetheracie wi+t +te Britouns , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2306

and wente in fere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2307

and assailede kyng Egbertus his londes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2308

Bote hy were overcome at Hengistdoun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2309

Wllellmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2310

Egbertus kyng of West Saxons deide , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2311

and his sone Athulphus , +tat heet Ethelwulfus , regned after hym
two_and_twenty +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2312

+Tis was somtyme i-take to norschynge to Helmstan bisshop of Wynchestre
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2313

and made hym subdecon . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2314

Bote at the laste , by graunte of Leo +te pope he was i-made kyng ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2315

and hadde a wyf Osburga , +tat was his owne botelere his dou+gter ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2316

and gat on here +tre noble sones , +tat regnede after +te fader everiche
in his tyme . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2317

He took wi+t hym the +gongeste of his sones , Alrudes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2318

and wente to Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2319

and dwelled +tere oon +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,315.2320

and repairelede +tere nobelliche +te scole <P_VI,317> of Saxons +tat was
, as me sei+t , first i-ordeyned by kyng Offa ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,317.2321

bote it was i-brend +te laste +gere tofore honde .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,317.2322

Also he sigh +tre outlawes and men +tat deden open penaunce do here
penaunce in iren i-bounde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,317.2323

+Tanne he purchasede of +te pope +tat Englisshe men schulde nevere after
+tat tyme , out of here owne contray , do penaunce in bondes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,317.2324

Me sei+t +tat +terfore it was +tat he graunted of everich hous of his
kyngdom everich +gere a peny to Seynt Peter , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,317.2325

and after +tat tyme he sente everiche +gere +tre_hondred mark to Rome :
an_hondred to Seynt Peter his li+gt , an_hondred to Seynt Poules li+gt ,
and an_hondred to +te pope . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,317.2326

Also he delyvered and quitte alle +te cherches of his kyngdom of alle
manere kynges tribute , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,317.2327

and of fredom to God +te ten+te deel of his catel .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,317.2328

In his comynge a+gen from Rome , in +te twenti+te +gere of his kyngdom ,
he spousede Iuditha +te dou+gter of Charles +te ballede ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,317.2329

and brou+gte here wi+t hym in to Engelond ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,317.2330

and for he sette here in trone beside hym a+genst +te manere of +te
kyngdom of West Saxons , his eldest sone roos a+genst hym , and meny
o+ter lordes , so +tat a greet <P_VI,319> deel of +te kyngdom was i-take
to his eldest sone ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,319.2331

but +git unne+te +te strif was i-cesed . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,319.2332

For among hem it was i-used +tat +te queene schulde nou+gt have suche
worschippe , and +tat for wrethe of Ethelburga , kyng Offa his dou+gter
, +tat hadde i-poysoned here housbonde Brightricus .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,319.2333

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,319.2334

Also for his sone Aluredus , +tat he loved moche , hadde an evel
incurable , he sent hym into Irlond to be i-heded of seynt Modwenna ,
+tat wonede +too +tere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,319.2335

And +terfore whanne +te cherche of Modwenna was destroyed in Irlond sche
com into Engelond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,319.2336

and +te kyng +gaf here lond for to bulde tweie abbayes of maydons . Oon
$in Arderne at Polisworth , +tat +git dure+t ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,319.2337

+tere Ositha and Athea +te maydons dwellede wi+t seint Edithe , kyng
Athulphus suster . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,319.2338

But Modwenna dwellede somwhat of tyme in +te o+ter abbay at Streneshale
; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,319.2339

+tennes sche wente +treis to Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,319.2340

and sche deide at +te laste <P_VI,321> in +te ilond Andreisye , besides
Burtoun , after +tat sche was closed sevene +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,321.2341

+Tat +gere +te Danes slow+g meny men in Lyndeseie in Est Engelond and in
Kent . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,321.2342

+Tat +gere deide Wyglaf kyng of Mercia , +te +gere of his kyngdom
+trittene , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,321.2343

and was i-buried at Rependoun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,321.2344

He hadde i-gete Wygmundus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,321.2345

and Wygmundus hadde i-gete Wistan +te martir ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,321.2346

but after Wiglaf Bertuphus was kyng over Mercia twelve +gere :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,321.2347

his sone Bertsericus slou+g seint Wistan cruelliche .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,321.2348

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,321.2349

<heading>

Capitulum tricesimum primum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,321.2351

Lotharius . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,321.2352

<$$heading>

WHANNE Lowys was dede his eldest sone Lotharius , +tat was emperour
fiftene +gere while his fader was onlyve , and after his fader ey+gtene
+gere , in +te partie of Italy +tat is next to Alpes , +tat hatte
Lotharingia after his name , as it were Lotharius his kyngdom ; he aroos
a+genst his tweie bre+teren Lowys and <P_VI,323> Charles the ballede ,
for +te kyngdom of Gyean , +tat here bro+ter Pipinus hadde i-holde
somtyme . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,323.2354

Giraldus , distinctio prima . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,323.2355

And +tey fou+gte at Fantanet ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,323.2356

+tere Lotharius fli+g CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,323.2357

and was i-chasede ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,323.2358

+tere was so gret slau+gter in ei+ter side +tat +tey my+gte no lenger
wi+tstonde here enemyes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,323.2359

+Te Sar+gyns in Affrica , $and in Spayne herde herof ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,323.2360

and arrayed hem to assaile +te kyngdom of Romayns .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,323.2361

Sone hereafter Lowys +te myddel bro+ter deyde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,323.2362

and Charles +te ballede helde +te empere somwhat of tyme allone .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,323.2363

+Tat +gere seint Bartholomew his body was i-translated to Boneventan .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,323.2364

After Gregory +te secounde Sergius was pope nyne +gere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,323.2365

+tis heet first Os porci , Swyn his mou+t . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,323.2366

+Terfore after his tyme alle +te popes chaunged her names , and +tat for
+tre skiles : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,323.2367

oon is , whan Crist ches his apostles he chaunged here names .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,323.2368

Another is for as they chaunge her names so +tey schulde chaunge here
livinge . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,323.2369

+Te +tridde is for he +tat is i-chose to an <P_VI,325> excellent state
schulde nou+gt be defouled wi+t a foule name . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,325.2370

+Tat +gere +te body of seynt Helene , Constantyn his moder , +tat was
i-buried at Rome , was i-bro+gt to +te dyocise of Remene in Fraunce :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,325.2371

+tat +gere +te Normans come first into Fraunce by +te water of Seyne .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,325.2372

+Tat +gere Berthulphus in a Whit-sontide slou+g wickedliche seynt Wistan
: CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,325.2373

his body is i-buried at Rependoun in +te grave of his grauntsire Wyglaf
; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,325.2374

and in +te place +tere he was i-slawe stood up +tritty dayes a $cleer
pyler of li+gt . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,325.2375

After Sergius +te fifte Leo was pope fyve +gere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,325.2376

he amended +te chirches +tat +te paynyms hadde destroyed in +te citee of
Rome . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,325.2377

Also , for +te men of Naples fau+gte in +te see a+genst +te Sara+gyns ,
he made +tis orisoun , " Deus , cujus dextera beatum Petrum apostolum in
fluctibus , " and so for+t ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,325.2378

and after +tat he hadde amended Seynt Peter his chirche , he seide +tis
orisoun , " Deus , qui beato Petro collatis clavibus , " and so for+t .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,325.2379

Also +tis made Aluredus his sone adoptivus , +tat was +te sone of
Ethelwulfus +te kyng of West <P_VI,327> Saxons .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2380

And he anoynt Aluredus by assent of his fader to be kyng afterward .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2381

+Tat +gere deide Berthulphus kyng of Mercia , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2382

and Burdredus was kyng after hym ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2383

he wedded anon Ethewitha , kyng Athulphus his dou+gter .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2384

By help of +tis Athulphus he made sugett +te Britouns of +te myddel lond
+tat wone+t bytwene Mercia and +te West see . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2385

Trevisa . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2386

Loke more of Mercia in +te firste book , capitulo 51=o= .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2387

+Tanne it folowe+t in +te storie . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2388

Also +tis Burdredus , +te two_and_twenti+te +gere of his kyngdom , was
i-put out by +te Danes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2389

and wente +tanne to Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2390

and lyved +tere nou+gt ful longe tyme at +te scole of Saxsons ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2391

and was i-buryed at Seint Marye chirche . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2392

Also +tat +gere , after +tat +te Danes hadde i-spoylled Londoun and Kent
, and chassed kyng Berthulphus , +tey were overcome and i-bete adoun in
Sou+terey at Oclea of kyng Ethelwulphus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2393

+Tat +gere Lotharius +te emperour forsook +te worlde ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2394

and was i-schore monk in +te abbay of Primye , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2395

and deide +tere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2396

For his soule was greet strif betwene aungeles and fendes , so +tat +tey
+tat stood by sigh +te body as it were to_haled hider and +tider ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2397

but monkes prayede , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,327.2398

and the fendes were i-dryve <P_VI,329> awey . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,329.2399

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,329.2400

+Tis Lotharius hadde by Ermengarda , Houwe his dou+gter , +tre sones ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,329.2401

and lefte hem after hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,329.2402

on het Lowys , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,329.2403

to hym he bytook the kyngdom of Romayns and of Italy ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,329.2404

+te o+ter het Lotharius , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,329.2405

to hym he bytook +te kyngdom of Fraunce ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,329.2406

+te +tridde heet Charles , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,329.2407

to hym he bytoke the province : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,329.2408

bote Charles was sone deed , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,329.2409

and Lowys and Lotharius deled +te kyngdom bytwene hem tweyne , Charles
his kyngdom that was Province . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,329.2410

<heading>

Capitulum tricesimum secundum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,329.2412

<heading>

THE secounde Lowys , as som men telle+t , regnede fiftene +gere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,329.2414

but Marcius telle+t +tat he regnede two_and_twenty +gere , and was
i-crowned of Sergius +te pope ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,329.2415

and he hadde tweie sones , Lowys kyng of Norikes , +tat bee+t Normans ,
and Charles +te +gonger +tat heet Grossus also .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,329.2416

+Tis Charles <P_VI,331> also was i-tormented of a fend +tre dayes in
presence of his fader , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2417

and knowleched +tat he was so i-tormented for he hadde conspired a+genst
his fader . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2418

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2419

In +tis Lowys his tyme Iohn Scot com into Fraunce ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2420

and translated Denys his bookes out of Grew into Latyn at +te prayere of
kyng Charles , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2421

and made +te book Perifisioun , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2422

+tat is +te book of +te departynge of Kynde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2423

But +terafter kyng Aluredus sente for hym for he schulde come into
Engelond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2424

and so he dede , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2425

and tau+gte children at Malmesbury , +te whiche children stiked hym to
dethe wi+t here poyntelles . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2426

+Tat +gere seynt Edmond bygan to regne over +te Est Angles ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2427

but he was i-slawe in +te fourten+te +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2428

Ethelwulfus kyng of West Saxons deide +te +tritten+te day of Ianyver ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2429

and was i-buried at Wynchestre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2430

After hym his eldest sone Ethel-waldus regnede but oon +gere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2431

and +tat was no wonder , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2432

for whanne his fadir was deed he wedded his owne stepdame , a+genst +te
lawe and usage of holy chirche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2433

and he was i-buried at Schirborne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2434

Marcianus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,331.2435

After pope Leo , Iohn Englisshe <P_VI,333> was pope two +gere and fyve
mon+tes : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,333.2436

me sei+t +tat Iohn Englisshe $sche was a womman , and was in childehode
i-lad wi+t here leman in manis clo+tinge to Athene , and lernede +tre
dyvers science , so +tat +tereafter sche come to Rome , and hadde +tere
greet men to scolers , and radde +tre +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,333.2437

+Tanne he was i-chose pope by favoure of all men ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,333.2438

and here lemman brou+gte here wi+t childe ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,333.2439

bote for sche knewe nou+gt here tyme whanne sche schulde have childe ,
as sche wente from Seint Peter to +te chirche of Seint Iohn +te Lateran
, sche gan to travaille of childe , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,333.2440

and hadde childe bytwene Colloseum and Seint Clement .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,333.2441

Trevisa . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,333.2442

Colloseum was +te place of +te ymages of provinces and of londes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,333.2443

loke more +terof in +te firste book , capitulo 24=o= .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,333.2444

+Tanne it folwe+t in +te story , as me sei+t , +tat sche was afterward
i-buried +tere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,333.2445

And for +te pope turne+t +tere out of +tat wey , me trowe+t +tat it is
for hate of +tat wonder myshap . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,333.2446

+Tis pope is nou+gt i-rekened in +te <P_VI,335> book of poopes
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2447

for he was of wommen kynde , +tat schulde nou+gt be pope .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2448

Aboute +tat tyme +te kyng of Bulgares and his men tornede to Cristes fey
and bileve , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2449

and was so perfit , +tat he bitoke +te kyngdom to his eldest sone ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2450

and toke hym silf +te abyt of monk ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2451

but whanne his sone turned to mametrie , he turned to chilvalrye a+ge ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2452

and pursewed his son a+gen , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2453

and took hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2454

and put out bo+te his ey+gen , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2455

and leide hym in prisoun CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2456

and closede hym +tere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2457

and made his +gonger sone kyng , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2458

and took +te holy abyte a+gen . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2459

After Ethelwaldus his bro+ter Ethelbertus was kyng of West Saxons fyve
+gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2460

In his tyme a greet oost of Danes destroyede Wynchestre ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2461

and were i-slawe of +te kynges dukes or +tey my+gte come to here
schippes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2462

After Iohn , +te +tridde Benet was pope foure +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2463

Seynt Swythyn bisshop of Wynchestre deide , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2464

and Dun-bertus was bisshop after hym : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,335.2465

of hem tweyne bee+t wondres <P_VI,337> i-rad . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,337.2466

After Benet , +te firste Nicol was pope ei+gte +gere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,337.2467

he was i-likned to the grete Gregorie , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,337.2468

for in his tyme Cirillus +te apostel of Sclaves brou+gt seint Clement
his body out of Cersona to Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,337.2469

and leide it in Seint Clement his cherche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,337.2470

and deide +tere after , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,337.2471

and dede many myracles $+tar . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,337.2472

+Tat +gere Lowys kyng of Fraunce wolde leve his ri+gtful wif for his
lemman Waldrada , +tat he hadde to moche i-loved in his +gou+te in his
fader hous . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,337.2473

+Tanne pope Nichol at +te instaunce of +te queene bre+teren , +tat
pleyned to hym of +tat dede , sente his tresorer Arsenius into Fraunce ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,337.2474

and he made a counsaille of bisshoppes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,337.2475

and compelled the kyng to take his wif a+ge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,337.2476

and made hym swere uppon a book +tat he schulde nevere +tat o+ter womman
take . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,337.2477

Bote whanne +te legat of Rome was agoo +te kyng putte awey +te queene ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,337.2478

and took a+gen Waldrada ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,337.2479

+terfore in pleyn consistorie +te pope cursede Wal-drada and alle +tat
comuned wi+t here . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,337.2480

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,337.2481

Butte Marre <P_VI,339> telle+t us +tis of Lotharius , and nou+gt of
Lowes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,339.2482

Etheldredus , +te +tridde bro+ter of bur+te , was kyng of West Saxons
after his tweye bre+teren ei+gte +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,339.2483

In his firste +gere a greet navey of Danes londede in Est Engelond ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,339.2484

and lay +tere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,339.2485

+Terafter at +gork +tey were compelled to defende hem self ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,339.2486

for whanne +te Nor+thombres hadde i-doo awey here kyng Osbrucus , as +te
devel hem radde , and i-made a tyraunt kyng +tat heet Ella , at +te
laste for drede of enemyes +tey were somdel i-ceesed ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,339.2487

and wente wi+t here ei+ter kyng to fi+gte wi+t +te Danes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,339.2488

and com-pelled hem to flee $to +te citee of +gork , +tat was not ful
i-walled ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,339.2489

+tanne +te Nor+thombres disarayede hem self , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,339.2490

and wente unwiseliche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,339.2491

and were i-bete a doun , som in oon place and som in ano+ter ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,339.2492

and here kynges were y-slawe , so +tat +tey +tat my+gte askape made pees
wi+t +te Danes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,339.2493

and so faillede +te kynges of Nor+thombres . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,339.2494

+Tat +gere +te Danes lefte Nor+thomberlond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,339.2495

and com into the kyngdom of Mercia , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,339.2496

and <P_VI,341> dwellede al a +gere at Snotyngham , +tat now hatte
Notyngham ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2497

+tat Burdredus kyng of Mercye and +te kyng of West Saxons come a+genst
hem . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2498

Bote +te Danes were wi+t_ynne +te streng+te of +te toure ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2499

and wolde +geve no batayle , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2500

and Eng-lisshe men my+gte nou+gt spede to breke +te wal ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2501

+tanne pees was i-made , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2502

and +te kynges tornede hoom a+ge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2503

and +te Danes went a+gen to +gork , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2504

and dwellede +tere all a +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2505

After Nichol , +te secounde Adrianus was pope two +gere :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2506

to hym +te secounde kyng Lowys of Fraunce , +tat was somtyme acorsed of
+te pope Nichol , wrot lettres , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2507

and prayed hym +tat he wolde fonge hym wi+t grace .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2508

+Te pope wroot to hym a+gen in +tis manere : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2509

" +gif +tou knowest thy self gulteles , com to Rome ; "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2510

and " +gif +tou knowest +tyself gilty , make +te redy to doo wor+ty
penaunce . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2511

+Tanne +te kyng com , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2512

and +te pope axede of hym if he hadde i-holde his oth and pope Nichol
his hestes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2513

+Te kyng and his fautoures seide " +gis al at +te fulle . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,341.2514

" +Tanne , " quo+t the pope , " +ge moste commune wi+t us +tat +ge be
i-oned to Crist his <P_VI,343> lymes , from +te whiche +ge were kutte
and departed . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2515

And whanne the masse was i-doo he houselede hem ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2516

and seide : " +gif +ge bee+t gultles +tis connynge moot be to +gow
remis-sioun and for+gevenesse , and elles $dampnacioun . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2517

+Tanne it happede +tat noon of hem alle lyvede oon +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2518

But +te kyng was anon i-take wi+t a siknesse , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2519

and deide in +te citee Placencia . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2520

+Terafter fel a greet pestilence on +te peple . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2521

Also +tat +gere +te Danes destroyed +te citee Alcluit ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2522

and wente out of Nor+thomberlond to Est Anglond ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2523

and lay al a +gere at Tetforde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2524

+Tat +gere Hingar and Hubba , tweie Danes , slou+g seint Edmond +te kyng
at Egbesdoun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2525

Trevisa . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2526

Est Ang-lond conteyne+t Nor+tfolk and Sou+tfolk ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2527

loke more +terof in +te firste book , capitulo 51=o= .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2528

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2529

Seynt Edmond his heed lay i-hidde among busshes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2530

and spak to hem +tat sou+gt hym in +te contray longage ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2531

and seide , " Heere , heere , heere . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,343.2532

+Tere a wolfe was i-founde +tat <P_VI,345> byclipped the kynges heed ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,345.2533

and folowede myldeliche the men +tat were i-come .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,345.2534

Willelmus de Regibus , et de Pontifi-cibus , libro 2=o= .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,345.2535

After +te sleynge of +te kynges bro+ter Ed-woldus hatede +te likynge of
+te world , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,345.2536

for hard fortune took hym and his bro+ter , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,345.2537

and levede an ermytes lyf onliche by brede and water , at the abbay of
Cerne in Dorsete , by +te cleer welle +tat seynt Austyn , by his prayers
, made springe somtyme for to baptise +te people +tat tornede to
Cristene byleve . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,345.2538

Hit falli+t ful ofte +tat a gentil herte , i-warned by harde $happes and
meschief of +tis world , torne+t +te more besiliche to God , +tat can
nou+gt begile no+ter be bygiled . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,345.2539

+Te abbay +tat was +tere i-bulded was afterward riche inow , +gif +tey
+tat schulde governe it dele it to Goddes servauntes , and nou+gt to
glotouns . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,345.2540

Bote in oure tyme covetise and pride ha+t so i-chaunged al +ting in
Engelond , +tat +tinges +tat were i-+geve $vrelyche to abbayes in olde
tyme bee+t now more i-wasted in glotenye and outrage of honures +tanne
in <P_VI,347> sustenaunce and help of nedy men and of gestes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,347.2541

But cer-teynliche +te +gevers schal not lese here mede ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,347.2542

for here wille and here entent is i-weye in Goddes balaunce .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,347.2543

<heading>

Capitulum tricesimum tertium . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,347.2545

Lodowici . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,347.2546

<$$heading>

THE +tridde Lowys regnede in Fraunce after his fader +te secounde Lowys
foure +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,347.2548

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,347.2549

+Tis +gere +te oost of Danes lefte Est Anglond CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,347.2550

and come wi+t here dukes Hungar and Hubba toward Redynge in West Saxon ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,347.2551

+tere +te +tridde day of here comynge +te tweye dukes of Danes wente out
for to take prayes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,347.2552

and were i-slawe at En-gelfilde ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,347.2553

+tere , after the four+te day , tweye bre+teren , kynges of West Saxons
, mette to_gidres CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,347.2554

and made a greet slau+gter of +te Danes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,347.2555

At +te laste +te Danes breek out of +te toure , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,347.2556

and <P_VI,349> slou+g Ethelwulphus duke of Barrokschire ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,349.2557

and compelled +te Englisshe men to wende a bakward .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,349.2558

For +tat schame Englisshe men were i-moeved , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,349.2559

and arrayed a bataylle +te four+te day +terafter uppon Aschedoun .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,349.2560

+Tere Aluredus was i-dryve for grete nede to come to +te batayle to_fore
his bro+ter +te kyng , +tat herde a masse +tat tyme ; +te whiche kyng
his prayers to God +tat day were moche worthy . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,349.2561

For +tey+g +te Danes hadde i-take +te hi+ger place of +te hille ,
Cristen men com from +te foot of +te hille upward a+genst hem ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,349.2562

and slou+g Osrik kyng of Danes , and fyve of his dukes , and meny
+towsandes of enemyes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,349.2563

and chasede +tere o+tere al day anon to +te Redynge ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,349.2564

bote +te fourte+te day +terafter at Basynge +te Danes +gaf a batayle ,
and eft tweie mon+tes +terafter at Mer-toun , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,349.2565

and hadde +te victorie . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,349.2566

In +te mene tyme +te kynges of Mercia , of Nor+thomberlond , and of Est
Angles hadde no wille to suffre +te lordschippe of West Saxons ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,349.2567

+terfore hem was <P_VI,351> levere susteyne +te enemyes and favoure hem
in +te seege +tan helpe here owne contraymen +tat travaillede for +te
lond . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,351.2568

+Terfore it was +tat +te enemyes encresede and hadde maistrie ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,351.2569

and men of +te londe were overcome and i-bore adoun
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,351.2570

and maad deol and sorwe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,351.2571

+Te nexte +gere +terafter , after meny batailles , Etheldredus kyng of
West Saxons deyde ey+gte dayes tofore May , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,351.2572

and was i-buried at Wynborne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,351.2573

After Adrian , +te ei+gte+te Iohn was pope twelve +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,351.2574

In a tyme +tis dwelled wi+t Lewys Balbus kyng of Fraunce al a +gere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,351.2575

and was prisoned of $+te Romayns , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,351.2576

for he wolde nou+gt favoure Charles , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,351.2577

Also +tis $pope +gaf to Ansegisus bisshop of Senons +te grete Gregory
his heed , and pope Leo his arme , for to do hem in his cherche .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,351.2578

In +tis his tyme +te fifte synod of Constan-tynnoble was i-made of
+tre_hondred bisshoppes +tre_score_and_+trittene .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,351.2579

Also in his tyme Sarasyns priked in Italy , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,351.2580

and <P_VI,353> destroyed Seynt Benet his abbay in Mont Caasyn +to +te
secounde tyme . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,353.2581

Marcianus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,353.2582

<heading>

Explicit liber quintus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,353.2584

INCIPIT LIBER SEXTUS . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,353.2585

Capitulum primum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,353.2586

<$$heading>

ALUREDUS , +te four+te bro+ter of bur+te , was evere i-holde behynde
while his bre+teren regnede . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,353.2588

But he hadde after hem +te hole kyngdom of West Saxons nyne_and_twenty
+gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,353.2589

and rulede it nobilliche , but with greet travaille .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,353.2590

Here take hede of his bygynnynge , of his for+t goynge , and of his
laste ende , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,353.2591

ffor Aluredus was faire of shap and more i-loved bo+te of fader and of
moder +tan his o+ter bre+teren , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,353.2592

and dwelled in <P_VI,355> his fader court to +te +gere of his age twelve
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,355.2593

and was no+g itt i-lettred . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,355.2594

+Terafter +te childe lerned ri+gt wel , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,355.2595

and helde Saxoun poesy in mynde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,355.2596

He passed o+ter men in craft of hontynge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,355.2597

and was a sotel maister of buldynge and of o+ter werkes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,355.2598

he gadrede psalmes and orisouns to_gedres in a litel book ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,355.2599

and cleped +tat book manual , +tat is an hond book ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,355.2600

he hadde +te book wi+t hym alwey ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,355.2601

he kou+te his gramer but sympilliche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,355.2602

for +tat tyme was nou+gt oon techer of gramer in al his kyngdom .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,355.2603

+Terfore by counsail of Neotus +te abbot , whom he visited ful ofte , he
was +te firste +tat ordeyned comyn scole at Oxenforde of dyverse artes
and sciens , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,355.2604

and procrede fredom and priveleges in many articles to +tat citee ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,355.2605

he suffrede no man to stye up to what manere dig-nitee it were of holy
chirche , but he were wel i-lettred . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,355.2606

He tornede +te beste lawes into Englissh tonge .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,355.2607

At +te laste he <P_VI,357> auntred hym to torne +te psauter in to
Englisshe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,357.2608

But he tornede unne+te +te firste party to_fore his ende day .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,357.2609

Whanne he come to age he wolde stable his herte and his +tou+gt in
Goddes hestes CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,357.2610

the leccherie of his flesche greved hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,357.2611

and lette hym ofte tyme ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,357.2612

+terfore for to putte away +tat tempta-cioun of flescheliche likynge he
wente to and visited ful ofte temples of holy seyntes erliche and late
and at cokkes crow-ynge CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,357.2613

and prayed God +tat he wolde chaste his flesche with suche a siknesse
+tat he schulde nou+gt be unprofitable to worldliche dedes , and +tat he
my+gte +te more freliche serve God Almy+gty : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,357.2614

at Goddes ordenaunce he hadde many +gere +te evel +tat hatte ficus ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,357.2615

+tat is a schrewed evel , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,357.2616

for it seme+t +tat his bom is oute +tat ha+t +tat evel .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,357.2617

At <P_VI,359> +te laste he was oute of hope to be i-heled ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,359.2618

and wente into Cornewayle to Seynt Gueroun his chirche , +tere seynt
Neotus reste+t o+ter for to cese it o+ter for to chaunge it .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,359.2619

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,359.2620

But some men telle+t +tat seynt Modwenna +te Irisch mayde helede hym of
+tat evel . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,359.2621

At +te laste , whanne he hadde his wille , a wors evel hym took in his
wedded tyme , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,359.2622

and greved hym wel more from his twenti+te +gere to his +gere
foure_and_fourty . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,359.2623

His queene Ethelswida bare hym tweie sones , Edward +te eldere and
Egelward ; and +tre dou+gtres , Elfleda lady of Mercia , Ethelgora a
mynchoun , and Elfrida : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,359.2624

$and he made hem alle lerne gramer and o+tere fre artes and science .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,359.2625

+Tanne Aluredus , +gever of almesse and herere of masses , sou+gte
besiliche lore of arte and of craftes +tat he knewe nou+gt ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,359.2626

and sente for seint Grymbaldus +te monk , a connynge man of lettrure and
of song , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,359.2627

and prayed hym for to come to hym out of Fraunce into Enge-lond .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,359.2628

Also he sente for Iohn monk , a konnynge man of let-trure and of song ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,359.2629

and prayed hym for to come to hym out of Fraunce into Engelond .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,359.2630

Also he sente for Iohn , monk of Seynt Davy his abbay in Menevia , for
he schulde come to hym out of +te uttermeste ende of Wales for to teche
hym lettrure and clergie . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,359.2631

He excitede and confortede +te lordes of his lond to lurne lettrure and
clergy , so +tat +tey schulde sette here children to scole ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,359.2632

and +gif +tey hadde no children <P_VI,361> +tey schulde graunte here
bonde men fredom , and sette hem to scole +gif +tey hadde good witte and
were able to lerne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,361.2633

He enquerede and aspiede besiliche +te doynge and deedes of his officers
and servauntes , and nameliche of iuges and of domesmen ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,361.2634

and +gif he knewe eny of hem errede and dede amys , whe+ter it were for
unkonnynge o+ter for covetise , he put hym out of his offys .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,361.2635

Also he made Werefredus bisshop of Wircestre translate and torne into
Saxoun speche Gre-gory his bookes dialogie . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,361.2636

Willelmus de Regibus , libro primo . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,361.2637

He deled a thre al +tat he my+gte spende , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,361.2638

and +git he delede +te firste del a +tre : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,361.2639

+te firste del +terof he delede to +te kynge his mynystres +tat were
i-deled in +tre parties . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,361.2640

For +te tweie parties of +te kynges mynistres were tweyne at home , for
to ordeyne for homeliche +tinges ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,361.2641

in +te +tridde mon+te everiche partie and companye schulde serve tofore
+te kyng . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,361.2642

He as-signede +te secounde part of +tis firste part to dyverse workmen
<P_VI,363> +tat he gadrede out of everiche side ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,363.2643

+te +tridde partye he deled to comers and to straungers .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,363.2644

+Tanne +te secounde cheef partie of +tat he my+gte spende , he deled it
$+git a foure : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,363.2645

+te firste partye +terof he +gaf to pore men and nedy , +te secounde to
foundynge of abbayes , +te +tridde to scolers of Oxenforde +tat were
i-gadered and schulde be i-gadered +tere , and +te four+te deel to
amendynge of chirches . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,363.2646

And for he wolde weie his owne lif ari+gt he delede in +tre +te
foure_and_twenty houres of +te day and ny+gt , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,363.2647

and spente ey+gte +terof in writynge and in redynge and biddynge of
beedes , ey+gte aboute his body nedes , and ey+gte aboute nedes of +te
kyngdom . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,363.2648

And to departe +tese houres rediliche he sette a candel in his chapel of
foure_and_twenty parties , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,363.2649

and schulde be i-warned of hem +tat were i-ordeyned +terfore as ofte as
eny of +tilke foure_and_twenty were i-spend . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,363.2650

After +te mon+te of his kyngdom he fau+gte wi+t +te Danes at Wiltoun
wi+t grete harme of bo+te oostes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,363.2651

For Englisshe men were destroyed wi+t ei+gte batailles in oon +gere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,363.2652

and were moche i-feble ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,363.2653

+terfore +tat +gere Englisshe men <P_VI,365> made pees wi+t +te Danes
uppon +tat covenant +tat +tey schulde wend from hem ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2654

and so +tey dede . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2655

For +tat +gere +tey dwellede at Londoun , and +te next +gere after at
Lyndeseie , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2656

and +te Merces made pees wi+t +te Danes also +tat tyme ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2657

but $in +te +tridde +gere +te Danes breek $+te pees ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2658

and wente out of Lynde-seye anon to Rependoun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2659

Charles +te eldere , +te +tridde Lowys his bro+ter , took +te wey to
Rome whanne his bro+ter was deed , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2660

and was i-crowne emperour of pope Iohn , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2661

and regnede two +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2662

For while he ordeyned at Papy for +te comyn profit of +te empere , he
herde of +te comynge of Charloman , +tat was his owne bro+ter sone ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2663

and his herte gan to falle for drede , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2664

and wente toward Fraunce , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2665

and deide among +te grete hilles +tat hatte Alpes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2666

After hym his sone Lowys Balbus regnede two +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2667

After hym Charles +te +gonger , +tat heet Grossus , +tat is greet , +te
sone of +te +tridde Lowys , regned ten +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2668

+Tat +gere +te Danes lefte Lyndeseie CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2669

and come to Rependoun ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2670

+tere +tei putte out Burdredus kyng of Mer-cia , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,365.2671

and bytook +tat kyngdom to oon Colwulfus , +tat was Burdredus his
servaunt , uppon suche a condicioun , +tat +tey <P_VI,367> schulde have
+tat kyngdom a+ge whanne +tat +tey wolde ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2672

but after +tre +gere +tey delede som of +te kyngdom bytwene hem ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2673

and some byleft to Colwulfus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2674

and +tis Colwulfus was +te laste kyng of Mercia .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2675

After his de+t Aluredus inned Londoun first , and Colwulfus deel to his
owne kyngdom . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2676

Also +tat +gere +te Danes come eft to Rependoun ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2677

and +te men of Hamburgh , +tat is fyve myle from Rependoun , were wonder
sore aferd , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2678

and took +te body of seynt Werburgh +te mayde , +tat hadde longe tyme
i-leie i-buried +tere , and was alwey hool and sounde anon to +tat tyme
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2679

and translate it to Chestre as to a syker place .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2680

Also +tat +gere kyng Aluredus made pees wi+t the Danes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2681

and +tey slou+g +te kyng his horsmen alle in oon ny+gt ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2682

+terfore +te kyng was i-meoved , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2683

and chasede hem anon to Chestre , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2684

and +ter Danes delyverede and +gaf eft plegges , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2685

and dwelled a +gere +tere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2686

Henricus , libro 5=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2687

+Tat +gere Rollo +te Dane come first into Normandie ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2688

and regnede +tere fourty +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2689

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,367.2690

First oon Hastynges and +tanne Rollo Nori-cus , +tat is a Dane +tat
hadde no contray of his owne , bote by <P_VI,369> heste of +te kyng he
excitede mysdoers +tat coveitede o+ter men good and catel ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2691

and brou+gte hem in grete hope of grete wynnynge ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2692

and ladde hem wi+t hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2693

and werrede in lond and in see from +te Brittisshe occean anon to +te
see +tat hatte Mare Tyrenum , +tat is +te see +tat strecche+t to Italy .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2694

+Tanne he com to Carnotum , +tere +te cite+geyns truste not on here
walles no+ter on here streng+te , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2695

but +tey took oure lady smok , +tat Charles +te Ballede had i-brou+gt
wi+t o+ter relikes out of Constantyn-noble , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2696

and sette +te smok uppon +te pinacles , as it were a baner .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2697

+Te enemyes scornede +te smok , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2698

and schette +terto , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2699

and were i-smete wi+t blyndenesse , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2700

but Rollo scapede CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2701

and oc-cupiede Rothomage , +te +gere of oure Lord
ei+gte_hondred_+tre_score_and_sixtene , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2702

+tat was oon +gere to_fore +te de+t of Charles +te Ballede .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2703

His sone Lowys overcome +te Normans , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2704

but he putte hem nou+gt out ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2705

and Charles Simplex +tat het grossus also , +tis Lowys his bro+ter , and
his bro+ter Charles +te Balled his nevew , was ofte oversette in
batailles wi+t Rollo , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2706

and took counsaile at +te laste , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2707

and cordede with Rollo , so +tat he schulde be i-cristned ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,369.2708

and knowleche +tat he hilde Nor-mandye <P_VI,371> and Armorica , +tat is
Litel Bretayne , of the kyng of Fraunce as of +te cheef lord .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,371.2709

Whan +tat was i-doo , men +tat stood by counsailled Rollo +tat he
schulde kisse +te kynges feet +tat +gaf hym suche a +gifte .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,371.2710

But he hadde indignacioun , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,371.2711

and was to proude to falle adoun on his knees , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,371.2712

and took up +te kynges foot to his mouth , so +tat he +trewe +te kyng
upri+gt . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,371.2713

For +tat hap Normans gonne to lau+ge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,371.2714

and Frensche men wexe ri+gt wroo+t ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,371.2715

Rollo excuse+t hym of +tat boistous dede , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,371.2716

and alleye+t +te manere and usage of his contray .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,371.2717

+Tan Rollo wente a+ge to Rothomage , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,371.2718

and ordeyned for his catel and +tynges , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,371.2719

and deide sone after . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,371.2720

<heading>

Capitulum secundum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,371.2722

<$$heading>

LOWYS Balbus regnede in Fraunce two +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,371.2724

In his firste +ger +te Danes seylede from Warham toward Excetre ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,371.2725

and loste sixe_score schippes in a tempest of +te see .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,371.2726

Bote som men of +te Danes occupied +te real toun Cheppenham , and +te
<P_VI,373> contray aboute CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,373.2727

and chasede awey meny Englisshmen CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,373.2728

o+ter made hem sugette . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,373.2729

In +te mescheef of +tat tyme kyng Aluredus with fewe men ladde uncerteyn
and unesy lyf in +te wode contrayes of Somersete ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,373.2730

for he hadde nou+gt to lyve by but what he my+gte wynne by prayes o+ter
wi+t hontynge o+ter wi+t fisshynge . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,373.2731

In a tyme while his felowes were a fyschynge , and he comforted his
uncerteyn and unstedefast lyf wi+t confort of bookes , a pilgrime com to
hym CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,373.2732

and axede almesse in Goddes name . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,373.2733

+Te kyng have up bo+te his hondes to hevene CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,373.2734

and seide , " I +tonke God +tat visite+t his pore man +tis day by a pore
man , +tat he wole vouchesauf +tis day to axe me +tat he ha+t i-yeve me
, and restore a+ge wi+t increse +tat he axe+t of me . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,373.2735

Anon +te kyng cle+te+t his servaunt , +tat hadde but oon loof and litel
what of wyn , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,373.2736

and hete hym +geve +te halvendel to +te pore man .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,373.2737

+Te pore man +tonked hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,373.2738

and vansched sodenly awey , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,373.2739

and noon wey was i-sene of <P_VI,375> his goynge in the nesche moore .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,375.2740

And also al +tat was i-+geve hym was i-founde hool and sounde .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,375.2741

And +tey+g +tat were a fisshynge brou+gte fisshe in grete plente .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,375.2742

+Tan whanne +te kyng was on slepe oon appered to hym in a bisshoppes
wede , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,375.2743

and charged hym +tat he schulde love God , and kepe ri+gtwisnesse , and
be merciable a+genst pore men , and worschippe preostes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,375.2744

and seide more to hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,375.2745

" Aluredus , Crist knowe+t thy conscience and +ty wille ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,375.2746

and putte+t an ende of +ty sorwe and care , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,375.2747

ffor tomorwe stronge helperes schal be wi+t +te ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,375.2748

by help of hem +tu schalt overcome +tyn enemyes . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,375.2749

" Who art +tou , " quod +te kyng . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,375.2750

" I am Cuthbert , " quod he , " +te pilgrym +tat was here +gisterday
wi+t the , to whom +tou +gaf breed and wyn : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,375.2751

I am besy for +te and for +tyne ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,375.2752

have mynde hereof whan it is wel wi+t +te . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,375.2753

Bote how he made mynde of his pilgrym , by +te fredom and possessioun of
+te chirche of Durham it is now i-sene . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,375.2754

Willelmus de Regibus , <P_VI,377> libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2755

+Tan Aluredus com out of prison , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2756

and putte hym to a peril of greet fraude and gile .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2757

For he wente into +te kyng of Danes his pavilons and tentes in a
mynstral his liche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2758

and aspied al +tat he wolde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2759

and come a+gen to Ethelyng , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2760

and declared to his felawes +te sleu+te of his enemyes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2761

+Tanne he fil sodenliche on his enemyes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2762

and slow+g mo of hem +tan {that_he_slew} me wolde trowe .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2763

For +te day after come to hym +te men of Wiltschire , of Somersete , and
of Hampschire ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2764

by help of hem he bulde a toure at Ethelynge , +tat is to menynge an
Englisshe +tat now is i-used , +te ilond of noble men .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2765

Out of +tat towr he resede ofte on his enemyes CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2766

and overcome hem , and nameliche bysides Selwode , +tat is greet woode
in Englische +tat now is i-used , so +tat he fenge hostages and plegges
+te beste +tat +tey wolde chese . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2767

And Guttrun kyng of Danes was i-cristened , and twenty of +te grettest
+tat were wi+t hym , +te whiche kyng Alfredus feng of +te colde water ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2768

and +gaf hym a name CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2769

and cleped hym Athelstan ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2770

+terfore +te kyng Gurthrym , +tat we clepe+t Gurmundus , were i-+geve
+te provinces of Est Angles and of Nor+thomberlond for to wonye ynne .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,377.2771

But for +te <P_VI,379> Blewman chaunge+t nou+gt li+gtliche his skyn ,
+tis Gurthrym destroyed +tese londes with tiraundise and wi+t pryde
elevene +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,379.2772

and deide +te twelf+te +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,379.2773

+Te o+ter Danes +tat he wolde nou+gt be_cristene wente into Fraunce .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,379.2774

+Tat place +tat hatte Ethelynge o+ter Ethelyngeseye is nou+gt an ilond
of +te see , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,379.2775

but it stonde+t in water mareys and meores so +tat me may nou+gt come
+terto $but by schi+t no+ter by boot ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,379.2776

+te place conteyne+t +te space of tweye dayen er+te in brede ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,379.2777

and +git +tere is wylde bestes and venysoun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,379.2778

Charles +te +gonger , +tat heet Grossus , +tat is greet , was +te
+tridde Lowys his sone , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,379.2779

and regnede in Fraunce after his eme Lowys Balbus ten +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,379.2780

He wente out of Almayn CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,379.2781

and occupiede Italy fewe dayes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,379.2782

and come to Rome CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,379.2783

and was i-sacred emperour of pope Iohn . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,379.2784

In his tyme bygan +te erldom of Flaundres , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,379.2785

for +tat tyme Flaundres was nou+gt of greet name ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,379.2786

but it was i-ruled by +te kynges forsters of Fraunce .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,379.2787

Also +tis Charles <P_VI,381> dede awey his wif CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,381.2788

for it semede +tat sche was to prive wi+t +te bisshop of Vercelle ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,381.2789

+terfore +te kyng of Fraunce knowleched openliche +tat he hym self hadde
nevere i-seie flescheliche by here ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,381.2790

and sche was glad of here manhode , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,381.2791

and wente into an abbay whanne sche was forsake .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,381.2792

At +te laste , +te ten+te +gere of his kyngdom , +tis Charles wente out
of Fraunce into Italy , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,381.2793

and was i-poysoned of a Iewe +tat hatte Sedechias ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,381.2794

and deide at +te hulles Alpes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,381.2795

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,381.2796

It seme+te +tat +tis is +tat Charles +tat maryed his dou+gter Gilla +tat
he hadde by his ra+ter wif to duke Rollo , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,381.2797

and graunted wi+t here +te ducheries of Normandye and of Litel Bretayne
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,381.2798

Bote Rollo hadde no childe by Gilla , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,381.2799

+terfore he spousede oon Popa , Gy his dou+gter erle of Silvanect ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,381.2800

and gat on here a dou+gter +tat heet Gerlota , and a sone William Longa
Spata +tat noble duke . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,381.2801

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,381.2802

Also +tat +gere deyde Dunbertus bisshop of Wynchestre ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,381.2803

and kyng Aluredus made Dunewulphus bysshop in his stede , +tat he hadde
i-founde in +te wode in his <P_VI,383> hydynge tyme kepynge bestes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,383.2804

But whanne he knewe his good witte , after grete age he dede hym to
scole to lerne lettrure and clergie . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,383.2805

+Tat +gere kyng Alrudus amended +te citee of Cepton , tat is
Schaftesbury , as a greet stoon witnesse+t +tat +tere in +te chapitre
hous of mynchouns lye+t above er+te . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,383.2806

After Iohn , Martyn was pope oon +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,383.2807

he relesed to +te scole of Saxons al manere tribute at +te prayer of
kyng Alrudes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,383.2808

Also he sente $to Alrudes a greet party of +te holy cros .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,383.2809

After Martyn Agapitus was pope oon +gere ; +te whiche +gere +te Danes
come out of Fraunce and byseged Rochestre , and bulde a toure a+genst
+te +gates of +te citee ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,383.2810

bote +te cite+geyns defended +te citee for_to $+tat Aluredus com and
took all +te hors of +te Danes , and compellede hem to flee :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,383.2811

+tanne +te Dane wente into Fraunce $a+ge ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,383.2812

and +te kyng sente his navey ful of men of armes out of Kent into Est
Anglond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,383.2813

and took sixtene schippes of Danes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,383.2814

bote in +te comynge a+ge +te kynges navey was overcome .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,383.2815

Trevisa . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,383.2816

Est Anglond conteyne+t Nor+tfolk and Sou+tfolk : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,383.2817

loke more +terof in +te firste book , capitulo 5=o= .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,383.2818

It folowe+t in +te <P_VI,385> storie : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,385.2819

+tat +gere +te Danes rowede in +te water of Seyne ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,385.2820

and bysegede Parys a +gere al hool . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,385.2821

+Tat +gere kyng Aluredus reparaylede Londoun , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,385.2822

and bytook it to kepynge to Etheldredus kyng of Mercia .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,385.2823

+To +te Englisshe men +tat were desperbuled +gaf hem self to kyng
Aluredus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,385.2824

+Tat tyme the kyng sente his almesse to Rome and to Ynde ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,385.2825

and bulde tweie abbayes , oon of men at Ethelyngeseye , and ano+ter of
women at Schaftesbury , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,385.2826

and made his dou+gter Ethelgof abbesse +tere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,385.2827

After Agapitus , +te +tridde Adrianus was pope oon +gere ; after hym
Basilius oon +gere ; after hym Stevene sixe +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,385.2828

<heading>

Capitulum tertium . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,385.2830

<$$heading>

CHARLES Grossus was i-poysoned of a Iewe , as it is i-seide to_forehonde
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,385.2832

and wex strongliche sike ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,385.2833

+terfore Arnulphus , sone of his bro+ter Charlomon , was i-chose kyng ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,385.2834

but whan <P_VI,387> Charles was dede were i-ordeyned fyve kynges ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,387.2835

but the empere lefte wi+t Arnulphus CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,387.2836

and was i-crowned at +te laste of Formosus +te pope , +tat he beet adoun
+te Normans and +te Danes +tat hadde i-werred in Fraunce fourty +gere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,387.2837

at +te laste he was hard i-holde with a strong sikenesse ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,387.2838

and my+gte nou+gt be i-heled no+ter i-saved wi+t no manere medecyne ,
+tat he n@ @as destroyed , and i-+gete with luys ri+gt to +te deth .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,387.2839

Franco archebisshop of Rothomage cristned Rollo ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,387.2840

and kyng Guttrun is deed . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,387.2841

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,387.2842

For reses of Normans and of Danes , seynt Martyn his body was translated
from Turon to Seint German his chirche at Altissiodore ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,387.2843

and +tere were meny myracles i-doo , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,387.2844

and +te monkes of Turon and of Altissiodore pletede for $the offrynge .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,387.2845

And for +te seynt schulde deme whe+ter of hem hadde ri+gt to +te
offrynge , tey brou+gte for+t a mesel , +tat was i-heled in +tat syde of
his body +tat was toward seynt Martyn , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,387.2846

and +te o+ter del of his body lefte foul , and nou+gt i-heled ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,387.2847

+tan for me schulde wene <P_VI,389> +tat +tat was happilyche byfalle ,
+tey tornede +te o+ter foul side toward seynt Martyn ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,389.2848

and anon it was i-heled also . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,389.2849

+Tanne +te monkes of Turon hadde al +te offrynge for_to +te werre was
i-sesede , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,389.2850

and +tanne +tei hadde here owne seynt $hoom a+gen to here owne hous .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,389.2851

+Tis byfel nou+gt in +tis manere for non-power of seynt German ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,389.2852

but he sparede and dede his gest reverence in his owne hous .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,389.2853

Henricus , libro 5=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,389.2854

+Tat +gere come foure oostes of Danes a+genst Aluredus , oon in
Nor+thomberlond , ano+ter in Est Anglond , +tat conteyne+t Nor+tfolk and
Sou+tfolk , +te +tridde at Excetre , +te four+te at Chestre ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,389.2855

but at Chestre +te Danes were som
{COM:sic;_other_mss._have_"so"_or_"soo"} byseged +tat +tey ete here hors
for honger . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,389.2856

+Te Scottyshe men Dusblan , Mahbon , and Malumyn desirede to lede
pilgryms lyf , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,389.2857

and took wi+t hem liflode for oon woke , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,389.2858

and took a carabum , +tat is a schippe i-made but of tweie hydes and an
half , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,389.2859

and wente +terynne wonderliche withoute seile , wi+toute rope and ore
and alle manere craft of schi+tcraft , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,389.2860

and come alonde in Corne-wayle <P_VI,391> after sevene dayes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2861

and come to kyng Aluredus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2862

After Stevene , Formosus was pope fyve +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2863

Somtyme , for drede of pope Iohn , he left his bisshopriche of Portune ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2864

but for whanne he was i-cleped he wolde nou+gt come a+ge , he was
acorsed ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2865

at +te laste he com to pope Iohn into Fraunce , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2866

and was degraded anon to +te staat of a lewed man .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2867

Also he was i-made swere +tat he schulde nevere torne a+gen to his
bisshopriche , no+ter come into +te citee of Rome ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2868

but at +te laste he was restored a+gen by pope Martyn , +tat was pope
Iohn his successour . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2869

Plegmundus archebisshop of Cauturbury , +tat was a nobil man of clergie
, feng +te pal of Formosus $+te pope , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2870

and ordeyned sevene bisshoppes to chirches of Engelond in oon day .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2871

+Tat +gere kyng Aluredus chased +te Danes first out of Kent , of Excetre
, and of Chichestre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2872

Henricus , libro 5=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2873

The Danes +tat were at Chestre were bysegede +tre dyes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2874

and were compelled for honger to leve +te citee ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2875

+tanne +tey spoylede Nor+t Wales , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2876

and wente so aboute by Nor+thomberlond into Est Anglond , +tere here
wifes and here schippes were . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,391.2877

$+Tey <P_VI,393> i-entred ynto +te ryver Luy , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,393.2878

and bulde a castel +tere faste by ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,393.2879

but +te Londoners , by help of +te kyng , destroyed +tat castel ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,393.2880

and to-deled +tat ryver in +tre chanelles and stremes , so +tat +te
Danes my+gte nou+gt brynge out here schippes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,393.2881

+tanne +te Danes lefte here schyppes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,393.2882

and dwelled at +te brigge uppon Sevarne , faste by Wales ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,393.2883

and bulde +tere a strong castel ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,393.2884

and also +tese +tre +gere Engelond was hard bysette wi+t +tre manere of
sorwes , wi+t werre of +te Danes , moreyn of men , and pestilence of
bestes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,393.2885

After Formosus , Bonefas was pope fiftene dayes ; after hym +te sixte
Stevene oon +gere and +tre mon+tes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,393.2886

$+terafter he lefte +te poperiche , and was i-made monk , +tat was
somtyme i-made bishop of Angun by pope Formosus Ysus ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,393.2887

but afterward , whanne he was pope , he pursuede so Formosus , +tat
no+gt onliche he wi+tcleped his doynge and his dedes , but also he leet
take up Formosus his body whan he was deed out of +te eor+te ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,393.2888

and made men brynge <P_VI,395> hym in to $+te pleyn conscistorie
i-clo+ted as a pope , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2889

and +tanne he made men unclo+te hym , and take of hym +tat manere
clo+tinge , and clo+te hym as a lewed man , and kutte of tweie fyngres
of his ri+gtt hond , and caste hym into Tyber . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2890

After +tis Stevene , Romanus was pope foure mon+tes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2891

Lowys , Arnulphus his sone , regnede in Fraunce twelve +gere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2892

but he hadde nevere the crowne of +te empere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2893

and in hym was +te ende of +te empere touchynge Charles his ofspringe .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2894

In his tyme were fyve popes , Theodorus , Iohn , Benet , Leo and
Cristofre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2895

Of hem Theodorus +te secounde , +tey+g he were pope $but oon mon+te ,
+git he roos a+genst pope Stevene his doynge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2896

and withcleped his dedes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2897

and confermede +te dedes of pope Formosus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2898

+Te nyn+te Iohn was pope two +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2899

he made a counseile at Ravenna , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2900

and dampnede pope Stevene his dedes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2901

and fau+gt a+genst +te Romayns . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2902

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2903

+Tis +gere deide kyng Aluredus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2904

and was first i-buried in +te cathedral chirche at Wynchestre ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,395.2905

but for +te madnesse and ravynge of +te chanouos , +tat seide +tat
spirites of kynges take+t +te careyn and walke+t aboute by ny+gte from
hous to hous , his <P_VI,397> sone Edward took +te fadres body
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,397.2906

and dede it in $+te New abbay . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,397.2907

+Tis and o+tere suche lewed tales Englisshe men holde+t by a mysbyleve
+tat ha+t ful longe i-dured , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,397.2908

and borowe+t it of mysbileved men +tat +tey trowe+t not , +tat after a
manis deth +te body walke+t and goo+t aboute by mevynge of +te fende ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,397.2909

+terof speke+t Virgil , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,397.2910

and sei+t whan de+t come+t what semynge schappes flee+t aboute .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,397.2911

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,397.2912

In preisynge of +tis kyng , Henricus libro primo sette+t vers in +tis
manere : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,397.2913

" Kyndeliche nobelnesse and goodnesse +geve+t to +te worschippe , and
goodnesse travaille , my+gty werriour Aluredus , and travaille name to
+te wi+toute eny ende . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,397.2914

Ioye with woo medled $he hadde in every tyme . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,397.2915

Alwey +tin hope was medled wi+t gretene drede . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,397.2916

+Tey he were now doun , he rayed bataille amorwe .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,397.2917

<em> +gif he were wictord he dredde +te batayle a morwe . <$$em>
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,397.2918

After travaille of lyf of rennynge bo+te now+te his verray reste by
Crist wi+t_oute eny ende . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,397.2919

<heading>

<P_399>

Capitulum quartum . CMPOLYCH-M3,399.2922

Mar. , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,399.2923

<$$heading>

EDWARD , +te Eldere by his surname , regned after his fader
foure_and_twenty +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,399.2925

he was lowere +tan his fader in worshippe of lettrure , and heyere +tan
he in worldliche ioye and worshippe , CMPOLYCH-M3,399.2926

for he bulde newe citees CMPOLYCH-M3,399.2927

and amended citees +tat were i-peyred CMPOLYCH-M3,399.2928

and sprad +te endes of his kyngdom wydder +tan dede his fader .
CMPOLYCH-M3,399.2929

He made +te kynges of Scottes and of Combres and of Walschemen +gelde
hem to hym . CMPOLYCH-M3,399.2930

He wan Estsex , Nor+thumberlond , and Mercia wi+t streng+te out of +te
honde of Danes , CMPOLYCH-M3,399.2931

and hadde all Mercia after +te deth of his suster Elfleda .
CMPOLYCH-M3,399.2932

On his firste wyf Egwyna he gat his eldest sone Ethelstan ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,399.2933

oon queene Edgiva he gat Edredus and Edwynus and sevene dou+gtres ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,399.2934

he maried oon of hem to Otho +te emperour , and ano+ter to Charles kyng
of West Fraunce , and +te +tridde to Siththricus duke of <P_VI,401>
Nor+thomber-lond . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,401.2935

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,401.2936

On his +tridde wif Ethelswitha he gat Edmond and Edred ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,401.2937

ei+ter of hem regnede after here bro+ter Athelston ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,401.2938

he gat also tweie dou+gtres , seint Edburgh +tat was i-sacred to God ,
and reste+t at Wynchestre , and Edgiva +te faire , +tat was i-maried to
Lowys kyng of Gyan . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,401.2939

Also +tis made his sones lerne lettrure ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,401.2940

and he made his dou+gtres firste lerne lettrure ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,401.2941

and +terafter he made hem lese +te nedle and +te distaf .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,401.2942

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,401.2943

Of +tis mayde Edburga it is i-rad +tat whanne sche was +tre +gere olde
here fader wolde wete and assaye whe+ter sche wolde torne to God o+ter
to +te world , and dede in +te oon side of his chambre meny faire
iewelles and dyvers and grete richesse , and in o+ter side chalys and
gospelles , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,401.2944

+tanne in ano+ter place he dede besauntes , broches , and rynges ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,401.2945

+tanne +te norse brou+gt for+t +te childe , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,401.2946

+tanne +te childe was i-bede chese and take what he <P_VI,403> wolde ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,403.2947

and sche creep on honde and on foot CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,403.2948

and took +te gospel . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,403.2949

+Tanne +te fader custe +te childe , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,403.2950

and seide , " Goo +tider as God clepe+t +te ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,403.2951

sewe hym with a gracious foot +tat lede+t the ; "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,403.2952

and so +terafter sche was i-made mynchoun ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,403.2953

kyng his blood made here nevere torne aweyward , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,403.2954

but sche wolde take +te schoon of here sustres priveliche by ny+gte and
wasche hem and smere hem , and priveliche brynge hem a+gen .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,403.2955

After Iohn +te four+te Benet was pope +tre +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,403.2956

Also +tat +gere seynt Grymbalde +te confessour , +tat was kyng Aluredus
his techer , deide at Wynchestre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,403.2957

+Tat +gere Plegmundus +te archebisshop in +te citee Dorobernia , +tat is
Caunturbury , ordeyned sevene bisshoppes to +te chirches of Engelond ;
fyve to +te lond of Giweysys , +tat bee+t West Saxons , $oon at
Wynchestre , oon in Cornwaile , oon at Shireborne , oon at Welles , $oon
at Crittoun . Also among +te Sou+t Saxons oon , and in Mercia oon at
Dorkynga , +tat is now Dorchestre bysides Oxenforde ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,403.2958

for Formosus +te pope hadde i-+geve his curse <P_VI,405> to kyng Edward
and to Englisshe men for scarste of bisshoppes in here lond , +tat hadde
i-be bisshoples sevene +gere to_gidres . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,405.2959

+Tat +gere brede faillede in Irlond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,405.2960

for wormes +tat were tweie_to+ted and i-liche to wontes fil doun from
hevene CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,405.2961

and ete +te brede corne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,405.2962

But +te wormes were i-doo awey by prayenge and fastynge .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,405.2963

Clito Ethelwoldus , kyng Edward his emes sone , roos a+genst +te kyng ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,405.2964

and occupiede +te citee of Wyneborne besides Bathe ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,405.2965

and seide , +tat he wolde have +te maistrie o+ter deie +tere ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,405.2966

but he ravisched and tok awey a mynchoun of +te abbay of Wynborne ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,405.2967

and wente +tens to +te Danes of Nor+thomberlond ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,405.2968

and prayed hem of helpe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,405.2969

But +te kyng pursewede hem so strongliche +tat he forsook Engelond , and
wente into Fraunce ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,405.2970

but +te kyng brou+gte wi+t hym +te mynchoun a+gen ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,405.2971

and restored here into here abbay : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,405.2972

but +te same +gere Ethelwoldus com a+gen wi+t schippes in grete array ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,405.2973

and took wi+t hym +te Danes +tat woned in Est Anglond ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,405.2974

and assailede and destroyede al +tat he my+gte fynde anon to <P_VI,407>
Crekanforde , +tat is Crekelade ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2975

+tanne he passede Tempse , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2976

and spoillede and robbede +te londe anon to Bradenestok ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2977

and so he wente a+gen to Est Anglond , +tat conteyne+t Northfolk and
Sou+tfolk , as it is i-seide to_forehonde ofte tyme .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2978

+Te kyng folowede after , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2979

and destroyede and spoylede +te londe of his enemyes from +te ryvors to
+te bondes of seint Edmond his lond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2980

and heet his men +tat non of hem schulde abyde byhynde ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2981

bot +te Kentisshe men forgendrede +te kynges hetse ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2982

and abide +tere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2983

and were i-slawe nyh alle $of +te Danes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2984

meny were i-slawe in ei+ter side , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2985

bote Clito Ethelwoldus was i-slawe among his enemyes :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2986

+tanne +te Danes sigh +tat kyng Edward my+gte nou+gt be overcome ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2987

and made pees wi+t hym . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2988

After Benet , +te fifte Leo was pope twenty mon+tes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2989

for his preost Cristofre prisoned hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2990

and toke +te poperiche so by maystrie , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2991

but he was cast out after +te four+te mon+te . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2992

+Te four+te , Sergius put out Cristofre , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2993

and was pope +terafter seven +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2994

Som tyme he was decon cardynal , and reproved of Formosus +te pope ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,407.2995

and wente to Frensche <P_VI,409> men . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,409.2996

By help of hem he prisoned Cristofre +tat asseylede +te poperiche and
hylde hit by streng+te , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,409.2997

and +tanne he hym self occupiede +te poperiche .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,409.2998

And in wreche of his $of_puttynge he made hem take up Formosus +te pope
out of his grave , and smyte of his heed , and +trewe +te body into
Tyber . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,409.2999

Bote at +te laste fischers founde +tat body , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,409.3000

and brou+gte it to Seynt Peter his cherche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,409.3001

and +te ymages of holy seyntes dede +tat body greet reverens and
worschippe in his comynge . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,409.3002

+Tat +gere +te citee Carlegioun , +tat is Legecestria , +tat now hatte
Chestre , after +tat he was destroyede by +te Danes , was restored a+gen
by help of Etheldredus duke of Mercia , and of his wif Elfleda ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,409.3003

+tat citee was +too i-closed aboute wi+t newe walles , and i-made nyh
suche two as it was ra+ter . So +tat +te castel +tat was somtyme by +te
water wi+t_oute +te walles is now in +te toun wi+t_ynne +te walles .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,409.3004

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,409.3005

Kyng Edward bulde a castel at Hereforde ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,409.3006

+tat tyme was +te abbay of Cluni i-founded of William +te mylde , prince
of Burgoyne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,409.3007

+Te firste abbot of +tat place was seint Odo , +te secounde Majolus .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,409.3008

William de <P_VI,411> Pontificibus , libro 4=o= , sei+t +tat firste +te
monkes of +tat place were riche in +te worlde , and of cleer religioun
in God . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,411.3009

+Tat tyme Etheldredus duke of Mercia and his wif Elfleda translated +te
bones of seint Edward +te kyng from Bardeneye to Gloucetre , +tere +tey
bulde an abbay in worschippe of seint Peter . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,411.3010

<heading>

Capitulum quintum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,411.3012

<$$heading>

CONRADUS after Lowys was i-made prince among +te Almaignes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,411.3014

but for he was nou+gt emperour in Italy he is nou+gt i-rekened among
emperours , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,411.3015

no+ter he was i-hi+gt wi+t sacrynge and benesouns ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,411.3016

but he regnede sevene +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,411.3017

In +tis $yere +te empere gan to passe from +te Frensche men to +te
Almayns , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,411.3018

for Lowys +te predecessour of +tis my+gte no+gt diffende +te Romayne
a+genst +te Longobardes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,411.3019

+te empere passede from +te Frenshce men , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,411.3020

and so were tweye emperoures , oon in Almayne and ano+ter in Italy ,
anon to +te firste Otho , +tat was emperour of <P_VI,413> bo+te .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,413.3021

+Tat +gere in +te province of Stafford at Thotenhale +te Englisshe men
overcome +te Danes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,413.3022

and afterward at Wodenesfeld kyng Edward slou+g of +te Danes tweye
kynges , tweye erles , and meny +towsand of men of Danes of
Northumberlond . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,413.3023

Etheldredus , duke and ledere , under-kyng of Mercia , deide ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,413.3024

and his wyf Elfleda , kyng Edward his suster , regnede nobleliche longe
tyme in al Mercia , outtake Londoun and Oxenforde , +te whiche +te kynge
hylde to hymselfward . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,413.3025

Sche bulde meny citees and townes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,413.3026

and amendede meny oon , +tat bee+t Brymmesbury , Brygge uppon Sevarn ,
Thomewor+t besides Lichefeld , Stafford , Warwyk , Shroysbury brigge
uppon Sevarn , Watusbury , Edisbury in +te forest bysides Chestre , +tat
now is al destroyed . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,413.3027

Also sche bulde a citee wi+t a castel in +te nor+t endes of Mercia ,
uppon +te ryver Merce , +tat +too heet Runcofan ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,413.3028

but now it hatte Runcorn . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,413.3029

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,413.3030

The strong virago Elfleda , favour of cite+geynes <P_VI,415> and drede
of enemyes , help moche her bro+ter +te kyng in +gevynge of counsaile
and in buldynge of citees ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,415.3031

whanne sche hadde assayed +te woo and +te sorwe onlich of oon childe
+tat sche bare , sche hatede +te clippynge of a man +terafter for
everemore , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,415.3032

and took witnesse of God , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,415.3033

and seide +tat it was nou+gt semeliche to a kynges dou+gter to use
$suche flescheliche likynge , +tere suche sorwe moste come nedes after .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,415.3034

+te see +teves of Danes +tat wente out of Engelond into Fraunce aboute
$an_nyntene +gere toforehonde , come newe a+ge into Engelond ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,415.3035

and seillede aboute Cornewayle CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,415.3036

and come into Sevarne see , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,415.3037

and took prayes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,415.3038

and took a Britisshe bisshop in Irchenefeld , +te whiche bisshop kyng
Edwarde raunsoned for fourty pounde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,415.3039

and chasede +te enemyes into Irlond ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,415.3040

and made a castel at +te mouth of +te water of Avene , and o+tere
castelles at Bokyngham in +te ei+ter side of +te ryver Ouse ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,415.3041

and made sugette +te Danes +tat woned at Bedeford and at Nor+thamptoun ,
and here kyng Turketillus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,415.3042

Anastacious was pope two +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,415.3043

After hym Laudo was pope fyve +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,415.3044

+tat +gere +te <P_VI,417> Hungaries +tat bee+t by +te ryver Danubius
destroyed Italy . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3045

+Te ten+te Iohn was pope fourtene +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3046

+tis was pope Sergius his sone and bisshop of Raven .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3047

By his help Albericus the markys put out +te Sarsyns out of Irlond .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3048

At +te laste fil strif and discord bytwene hem , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3049

and +te pope putte +te markys out of +te citee ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3050

+terfore he was wroo+t , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3051

and brou+gte +te Hungaries +tat hadde destroyed Italy ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3052

+terfore +te markys was i-slawe , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3053

bote +te pope was i-strangled of +te markes his kny+gtes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3054

+Tat +gere deide Rollo +te firste duke of Normandye i-translated out
after +te four+te +gere of his ducherie ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3055

his sone William Longa Spata was duke after hym fyve_and_twenty +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3056

Elfleda queene of Mercia toke prayes in +te lond of Bretouns at Brehnok
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3057

and took +te kynges wyf of Wales , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3058

and renewede Legecestre , +tat is Chestre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3059

Kyng Edward bulde +te citee of Toucestre and of Wiggemore ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3060

and destroyed +te castel +tat +te Danes hadde y-buld at Themesforde .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3061

Elfleda took +te citee of Derby uppon +te Danes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,417.3062

here foure mynistres were <P_VI,419> i-slawe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,419.3063

Henry , +te sone of duke Otho of Saxon , regnede ey+gtene +gere over +te
Almayns , bote nou+gt in Italy , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,419.3064

and +ter-fore he is nou+gt acounted among +te emperours .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,419.3065

+Tis overcome +te Hungaries , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,419.3066

and tornede to +te fey +te duke of Normandye , William Longa Spata .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,419.3067

Longa spata is a long swerd in Englisshe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,419.3068

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,419.3069

+Tat +gere deide Elfleda , ei+gtene dayes tofore Iuyl , fyve +gere
tofore +te de+t of hire bro+ter kyng Edward . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,419.3070

And sche was i-buried at Glow-cestre in Seynt Peter his cherche , +tat
sche and hire housbonde hadde i-bulde uppon kyng Oswaldes bones , +tat
+tey hadde i-brou+gt +tider from Bardeneye ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,419.3071

bote +te Danes destroyed +tat cherche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,419.3072

and Aldredus , bisshop bo+te of +gork and of Worcestre , <P_VI,421>
repayrallede ano+ter +tat is now +te cheef abbay of +te citee .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,421.3073

Kyng Edward took +te power of Mercia from Elfwyna +te dou+gter of
Elfleda , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,421.3074

and lad here wi+t hym into West Saxon . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,421.3075

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,421.3076

In preysinge of +tis Elfleda , Henricus , libro 5=o= .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,421.3077

O Elflede my+gti , O mayde mennene drede ; victrice of kynd , wel wor+ty
+ty name of a manne ; and +te wel bri+gter now kynde ha+t i-maked a
mayde ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,421.3078

goodnesse ha+t +te made to have +te name of a manne ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,421.3079

kynde teche+t +te to chaunge nou+gt but +te name ; my+gte queene and
kyng victorious to arraye . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,421.3080

Cesar triumphus were nou+gt so moche wor+ty ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,421.3081

Nobler +tan Cesar , mayde Virago , farewel . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,421.3082

Whan kyng Edward herde of +te dee+t of his suster he made suget to hym
Thomeworth and Snotyngham , +tat now hatte Notyngham ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,421.3083

+tere he bulde a new citee in +te sou+t side ri+gt a+genst +te olde
<P_VI,423> citee , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,423.3084

and sette a brugge uppon Trente , bytwene +te tweie citees .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,423.3085

+Terafter +te same +gere +tre kynges +gelde hem freliche to hym ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,423.3086

+tat were +te kynges of Scotland , of Danes , and of Wales .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,423.3087

+Tat +gere kyng Edward bulde a citee at Thelwal , +tat is in +te nor+t
endes of Mercia by +te water of Mercie , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,423.3088

and +tere he sette kepynge of kny+gtes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,423.3089

+Tanne he passede +te water of Mercie , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,423.3090

and restored +te citee of Manchestre , +tat is in +te sou+t endes of
Nor+thumberlond . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,423.3091

Kyng Edward deide at Faryngdoun twelve myle be west Oxenford ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,423.3092

and was i-buryed at Wynchestre in +te newe abbay .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,423.3093

<heading>

Capitulum sextum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,423.3095

Athelstanus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,423.3096

<$$heading>

ATHELSTAN , kyng Edward his eldeste sone , was i-made kyng of Kyngestoun
besides Londoun in Southeray ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,423.3098

he <P_VI,425> regnede sextene +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,425.3099

In his firste yere +te nobel child Don-ston was i-bore in +te contray of
Glastenbury ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,425.3100

al his lif from his bur+te to his ende day schoon by vertues and by
myracles . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,425.3101

Alfridus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,425.3102

Kyng Athelston maried his suster to Sithricus kynge of the Danes of
Northumberlonde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,425.3103

Sythrycus dyed sone after , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,425.3104

and the kynge put oute Sythrycus his sone , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,425.3105

and ioynede +tat kyngdom to his owne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,425.3106

+Tanne by bataille he made suget Hoelus kyng of Britouns , and
Constantyn kyng of Scottes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,425.3107

and fenge hem whanne +tey were i-+golde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,425.3108

Kyng Athelston made +tis Constantyn kyng of Scotland ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,425.3109

+tanne Constantyn seide , " It is more worschippe to make a kyng +tan it
is to be a kyng . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,425.3110

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,425.3111

Also kyng Athelston maried his o+ter suster to Otho +te emperour ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,425.3112

and feng of hym hors and precious stones , and a maner vessel i-made of
a stoon +tat hatte onichinus , +tat was cleer and bri+gt , and lettede
nou+gt the passynge of li+gt no+ter of si+gt , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,425.3113

and it was i-made sotilliche by gravynge craft +tat it semed
ver-railiche +tat corn growynge +terynne wawed hider and <P_VI,427>
+tider , as longe corn doo+t in feeldes , and +tat vynes burgonede , and
ymages of men moevede . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3114

Also he feng of hym +te grete Constantyn his swerde .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3115

In +tat $swerd +te ownere his name was i-rad in lettres of gold in +te
hilt +terof ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3116

uppon grete plates of gold was i-steked on $of +te foure irene nayles
+tat Crist was i-nayled with to +te rode . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3117

He fenge of hym +te grete Charls his spere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3118

evere whanne Charles schook +tat spere he hadde +te maistrie ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3119

me telle+t +tat +tat spere opened Cristes side ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3120

and sente out Morys his baner . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3121

That baner Charles usede a+genst +te Saresyns . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3122

Also he feng a party of +te holy crosse , and som of +te crowne of
+torne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3123

Kyng Athel-ston brou+gte som of +tese relikes to +te abbay of
Malmes-bury . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3124

Marcianus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3125

+Te sexte Leo was pope foure yere and sevene mon+tes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3126

Odo is i-made bisshop of Wiltoun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3127

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3128

Frithstan bisshop of Wyn-chestre deide , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3129

and Birstan was bisshop after hym . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,427.3130

Of +tis <P_VI,429> Birstan it is i-rad +tat he song every day for alle
Cristen soules ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,429.3131

+tanne in a ny+gt he +gede aboute a chirche hawe ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,429.3132

and seide salmes for alle Cristene soules ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,429.3133

+tanne in a ny+gt whanne he hadde all i-seide , +tanne he seide "
Requiescant in pace , " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,429.3134

$and he herde a voys of a grete oost answere out of +te graves ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,429.3135

and seide Amen . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,429.3136

Odo bisshop of Wyn-chestre is i-made archebisshop of Dorobernia , +tat
is Caun-terbury . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,429.3137

+To Stevene was pope sevene +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,429.3138

Odo bisshop of Wynchestre is dede ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,429.3139

after hym Elpheges +te ballede was bisshop of Wynchestre ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,429.3140

+tat man was a prophete , and nyh of seynt Donstan his kynne .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,429.3141

Willelmus de Pontificibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,429.3142

In an Aschewednesday , as +te manere is , he dede hem +tat schulde doo
open penaunce out of cherche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,429.3143

and chardede o+ter men +tat +tey schulde in +tilke dayes faste and be
chaste , and spare +te likynge of here wifes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,429.3144

Among hem alle oon spak , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,429.3145

and seide : " Sire , I may not at +tis tyme leve bo+te my feste and
<P_VI,431> my wif . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3146

Bote +te wif +tat I have put awey for +te tyme I schal sone take a+gen .
" CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3147

" Wrecche , " quo+t +te bisshop , " +tou makest me sory ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3148

+tou wost not what is i-ordeyned for +te a+genst tomorwe : "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3149

+tanne a morwe he was i-founde deed in his bed .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3150

Also in a tyme +tis Elfleges made +tre monkes preostes , Dunston ,
Ethelwolde , and Ethelstan . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3151

And whanne +te service was i-doo , he spak to hem ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3152

and seide , " +tis day to_fore God I have i-sette my honde uppon +tre
men ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3153

tweyne of hem schul be bisshoppes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3154

bote +te +tridde schal make a wrecched ende . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3155

+Tanne Athelstan was +te more home-liche by cause of kynrede ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3156

and spak CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3157

and seide , " Schal I be a bisshop ? " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3158

" +tou schalt have no part in +tis ordre , " quod Elphegus ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3159

" no+ter +tou schalt not long bere +tis clo+t-inge . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3160

For Sconstantyn kyng of Scottes hadde i-broke covenant , kyng Ethelstan
arayed hym toward Scotland , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3161

and in +te way he wente a pilgrymage to seint Iohn of Be-verley ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,431.3162

<P_VI,433>

and leyde his knyf to wedde uppon seint Iohn his au+gter ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,433.3164

and heet +tat +gif he come a+gen wi+t +te victorie , he wolde raunsoun
his knyf wi+t a wor+ty prys . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,433.3165

After +te victorie , whanne he come a+gen , he prayed God +tat he wolde
, +toru+g +te prayer of seint Iohn of Beverlay , schewe som open tokene
by +te whiche tokone +tey +tat bee+t and schal be mowe knowe +tat the
Scottes by ri+gt schulde be suget to Englische men .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,433.3166

+Tanne +te kynges swerd smoot on a greet stoon faste by +te castel of
Dunbarre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,433.3167

In +tat stoon +git to +tis day is i-sene of +tat strook a chene of an
elne longe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,433.3168

+Tanne +te kyng com a+gen , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,433.3169

and raunsoned his knyf wi+t wor+ty doynge . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,433.3170

+Te enleven+te Iohn was pope oon +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,433.3171

after hym +te seven+te Leo was pope +tre +ger and sixe mon+tes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,433.3172

Lowys +te sone of Charles +te symple , and of kyng Edward his dou+gter ,
regnede after his fader in West Fraunce nyntene +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,433.3173

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,433.3174

He was in a tyme i-pursewed of oon Isenbardus , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,433.3175

and axede help of +te lordes of his lond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,433.3176

and +tey +gaf hym non answere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,433.3177

+tanne Huwe a symple kny+gt , eorle Roberd his sone of Mont Desire ,
<P_VI,435> took wilfulliche +te bataille for his lord ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3178

and slou+g hym wi+t_ynne +te lystes +tat woldes nedes fi+gte .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3179

+Tanne sone +terafter , whanne +tis kyng was feble , he made +tis Huwe
his heyre , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3180

and so cesede +te ofspringe of Charls , o+ter for his wif was bareyne ,
o+ter for he lyved but a schort tyme : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3181

+tanne +tis Huwe wedded kyng Edwardes o+ter dou+gter .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3182

+Te firste Otho +te sone of +te firste Herry , was +te firste emperour
of Duches men , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3183

and regnede sevene_and_+tritty +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3184

In a Ester tyme he made a grete feste to his princes and lordes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3185

and or +tei were al i-sette a prince his sone took a messe of +te borde
, as a childe $schulde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3186

and +te kynges sewer smoot +te childe wi+t a staf ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3187

+te childes maister si+g +tat , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3188

and slow +te sewere anon . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3189

+Tanne +te emperour wolde have i-dampned hym wi+t_oute audience ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3190

he +trewe doun +te emperour to +te er+te , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3191

and strangled hym almost ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3192

+te emperour was unne+te delyvered out of +tis childes maister hondes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3193

But +tanne he heet save +te childe his maister $lyf ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3194

and cride and seide +tat he hymself was to blame ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3195

for he hadde nou+gt i-spared hym for soo greet a feste .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,435.3196

<P_VI,437>

+Tat +gere Anlaf , a paynym , kyng of Irlond and of meny ilondes ,
Sithiricus his sone , by visitynge of his wifes fader , +tat was
Constantyn kyng of Scotland , Anlaf entrede into +te mouth of +te ryver
of Humber wi+t a strong navey . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,437.3198

Kyng Athelstan and his bro+ter Edmond mette hym at Brunfort .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,437.3199

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,437.3200

Whanne +te hostes were i-gadred Anlaf by_+tou+gte hym of a queynt gyle ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,437.3201

and took an harpe on honde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,437.3202

and come into Ethelstan his tente in an harpour $his lich .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,437.3203

+Tere in +te mete tyme he aspyed al +tat he wolde ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,437.3204

and hadde money for his harpynge . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,437.3205

He hadde +te money a+genst herte , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,437.3206

and buried it priveliche under hym in +te eor+te ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,437.3207

+tat was aspied of oon +tat hadde i-be somtyme a soudeour wi+t Anlaf ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,437.3208

and he warned Ethelstan whan Anlaf was a_goo ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,437.3209

+te kyng blamede hym for he warned hym nou+gt ra+ter ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,437.3210

he answerde CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,437.3211

and seide : " O kyng , +te same fey +tat I owe now to +te I +gaf to
Anlaf somtyme ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,437.3212

+terfore +gif I breke +tat fey now to hym +tou woldest wene +tat I wolde
<P_VI,439> doo +te same to +te ano+ter tyme . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3213

But now take hede of my counsaille , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3214

and remeve +ty tente out of +tis place , +tat whanne he come+t
unwiseliche he mowe faille of his purpose +tat +tou my+gte overcome hym
wi+t grete sobernesse . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3215

+Tis was i-doo , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3216

and Anlaf come hastiliche by ny+gte , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3217

and in +te wey he slou+g a bisshop +tat remevede his tente and his meyne
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3218

and passed for+t CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3219

and fil on +te kynges tente , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3220

but +te kyng was awaked wi+t so grete noyse , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3221

and his swerd fil out of his scaberge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3222

and he cride to God and seint Aldelyn . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3223

And at +te prayere of Odo +te archebisshop +tat was +too wi+t +te kyng ,
+te kyng fonde his swerd i-falle into his scaberge a+gen ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3224

+tat swerd is +git i-kept in the kynges tresorye ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3225

+tat swerde is +git kervynge in +te oon side , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3226

and fonge+t in no place no+ter gold ne silver . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3227

But by +tat +gifte of God +te kyng was +to i-holpe ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3228

and chasede his enemyes al +tat dawenynge and al day amorwe :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,439.3229

+tere kyng Constantyn was i-slawe , and fyve o+ter smale kynges
<P_VI,441> and twelve dukes , and wel ny+g al +te gaderynge of straunge
naciouns . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,441.3230

Here after he chasede +te Nor+t Britouns at Herford , so +tat +tey
schulde paye hym every +gere twenty pound of gold , and +tre_hondred
pound of silver , and fyve_and_twenty_hondred re+teren :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,441.3231

+tanne he took to his subieccioun Cornugallia , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,441.3232

and amendede Excetre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,441.3233

In preysinge of hym oon made +tis ditee : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,441.3234

" Kynges blood brou+gte for+t a man ful noble a kny+gt bri+gt precious
stone +to byschone oure derke so bri+gt greet Ethelstanus hi+gte of lond
pa+t to +te ry+gt noble wor+tynesse +te so+te forsake ne my+gte . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,441.3235

After Leo +te +tridde Martyn was pope +tre +gere and sixe mon+tes ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,441.3236

also +tat +gere Ethelstan deide at Gloucestre , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,441.3237

and hadde no children , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,441.3238

and he was i-buried at Madulf . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,441.3239

<heading>

Capitulum septimum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,441.3241

<$$heading>

WHANNE Athelstan was dede his bro+ter Edmond bygan to regne in his
twenti+te +gere of age , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,441.3243

and regnede aboute <P_VI,443> an_sevene +gere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,443.3244

and gat on his queene Elgiva tweie sones , Edwyn and Edgar +te pesible .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,443.3245

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,443.3246

In +tis Edmond his tyme +te Nor+thombres become rebel ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,443.3247

and sent for Anlaf out of Irlond . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,443.3248

But kyng Edmond overcome hym , and Reynold Gormundus his sone ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,443.3249

and outlawed hem , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,443.3250

and took Nor+thomberlond to his owne worschippe ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,443.3251

and bet doun Comberlond +tat was rebel , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,443.3252

and +gaf it to Malcolyn kyng of Scotlond , so +tat he schulde helpe hym
in everiche side where he were . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,443.3253

It semeth +tat in +tis iorney kyng Edmond took wi+t hym +te bones of
Colfridus +te abbot , and of Hilda +te abbas , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,443.3254

and brou+gte hem to Glastenbury . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,443.3255

Alfridus sei+t , and Marianus also , +tat +tis kyng in +te seven+te
+gere of his kyngdom wolde delyvere his sewere out of his enemyes hondes
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,443.3256

and was +to i-slawe of hem ri+gt +tere at Pulkyrcherche ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,443.3257

but Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= , sei+t +tat +te kyng was at +te
feste at Pulkercherche in a seynt Austyns day , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,443.3258

and he seigh on Leof , a +teef +tat he hadde exciled for his trespas ,
sitte +tere at mete <P_VI,445> among o+ter men ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,445.3259

and +te kyng leep over +te borde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,445.3260

and took +te +teof by +te heere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,445.3261

and +trewe hym to grounde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,445.3262

and +te +teef glotoun wi+t his knyf rent out +te kynges bowels ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,445.3263

+tanne +te +teof , bytwene +te hondes of hem +tat made noyse and cryde ,
woundede and slou+g meny men , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,445.3264

and was al to-hakked of kny+gtes and of o+tere men .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,445.3265

After Martyn +te secounde Aga-pitis was pope sexe +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,445.3266

+Tat +gere Lowys kyng of Fraunce , +te sone of Charles , made slee
gilefulliche William Longa Spata , +te secounde duke of Normandye , +te
sone of Rollo ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,445.3267

+terfore +te lordes of Normandye were wroo+t , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,445.3268

and took +te kyng , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,445.3269

and hilde hym in Rothomage for_to +tat he hadde byhote and i-swore +tat
he schulde +gelde Normandye to Richard , duke William his sone , and
+tat ever after +tat tyme , in everiche speche whan +te kyng and +te
duke speke to_giders +te duke schulde be i-gerd wi+t a swerd , and +te
kyng schulde no+ter bere swerd ne knyf . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,445.3270

After +tis duke William his +gonge sone Richard was a duke <P_VI,447>
And +git while +tis Richard was +gong he was i-cleped Richard +te olde ,
and wi+t_oute drede , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3271

for he dradde nevere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3272

he was duke of Normandye two_and_fifty +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3273

and come to his ducherie by hard travaille and greet ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3274

on his wyf Gunora , a Dane , he gat fyve sones and tweie dou+gtres ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3275

+te firste heet Emma , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3276

and was +te floure of Normandye ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3277

her fader maried hire to Etheldredus kyng of Englond .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3278

+Tis duke Richard usede to bidde his bedes in everiche cherche +tat he
com nyh , and nameliche wi+toute +gif he my+gte nou+gt com into +te
chirche . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3279

In a ny+gt he come into +te chirche allone , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3280

and fonde a cors +tere ligge in a bere , and no man +terwi+t .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3281

While he badde his bedes , he leyde his gloves on a desk ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3282

and for+gat hem +tere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3283

and wente on his way . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3284

+Tanne the dede man aroos wi+t greet noyse , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3285

and spradde his armes in +te cherche dore a+genst +te duke .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3286

+Te duke made +te signe of +te crosse in his forhede wi+t his +tombe ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3287

and conjured +te dede man +tat he schulde reste , bot al for nou+gt ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3288

for it wolde nou+gt bee . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3289

+Tanne +te duke wi+t his swerd smote +te cors atweyne ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,447.3290

and be+tou+gte hym whan he was oute +tat <P_VI,449> he hadde for+gete
his gloves , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3291

+tanne he tornede a+gen CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3292

and fette his gloves . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3293

Afterward he ordeyned in al his lond +tat aboute a dede cors schulde be
wacche al +te ny+gt longe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3294

Hit happede +tat a monke of Seint Audoenus of Rothomage wolde in a ny+gt
goo to his lemman , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3295

and fil doun of a brigge into a water , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3296

and was i-stufled ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3297

+tanne for his soule was strif by-twene an aungel and a fende ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3298

and ei+ter of hem putte the cause uppon duke William his doome ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3299

and he +gaf suche a dome , +tat +te soule schulde be restored a+gen to
+te body , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3300

and +te body schulde be $y-sette on +te brygge of +te which he hadde
i-falle . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3301

And +gif he +gede +tanne to doo +te synne he schulde be i-dampned ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3302

and elles he schulde be i-saved . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3303

Whanne +tis was i-doo +te monk fleigh to chirche ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3304

+te duke wente amorwe erliche to +te same chirche ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3305

and fonde +te monkes clo+tes +git al wete , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3306

and tolde +te abbot of +te place +te dede +tat was byfalle .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,449.3307

Whanne +te duke and Gunnora hadde i-lyved <P_VI,451> longe in hordom +te
peple spak moche +terof , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,451.3308

and +te duke by counsaille of +te peple wedded hire at +te laste .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,451.3309

+Tanne the firste ny+gt after +te weddynge , whanne +tey come to bedde ,
whe+ter it were in game or in ernest , Gunnora tornede here bak and here
buttokes toward +te duke , as sche hadde nevere to_forehonde i-doo ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,451.3310

me axede of hire why sche dede soo ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,451.3311

" For now first , " quo+t sche , " I may doo now what me like+t . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,451.3312

Also +tis duke wer+te sike in a tyme , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,451.3313

and made hym a greet cheste , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,451.3314

and filled it ful of whete , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,451.3315

and deled it to pore men every Friday to his lyves ende .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,451.3316

Henricus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,451.3317

Edmond kyng of Engelond took and wan out of +te Dane hondes , +tat were
paynyms , fyve noble citees , Lyncolne , Snot-yngham , +tat is Notingham
, Derby , Stafford , and Lege-cestre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,451.3318

He bynam hem +tese citees in +tat +tat +tey were pay-nyms ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,451.3319

and he by_schoon +tese citees wi+t lawhe of ri+gt byleve ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,451.3320

ffor he feng Anlaf of +te colde water . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,451.3321

Anlaf was i-cristened more by streng+te +tan by prechynge of Goddes
<P_VI,453> word . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3322

Also +tis kyng ordeyned and made ordynaunces , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3323

and amended what schulde be amended by counsaile of Donstan ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3324

and made +te abbay of Glastenbury nobel in catel and in monkes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3325

R . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3326

As it is i-seide to_forehonde , at +te laste he deide at Pultercherche ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3327

and was i-buried at Glastingbury . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3328

<heading>

Capitulum octavum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3330

Marianus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3331

ODREDUS was anoynt at Kyngestoun of Odo +te archebisshop
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3332

and regned after his bro+ter Edmond ten +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3333

For Edmond his sones Edwyn and Edgar were +git of +gong age , and to
+gonge for to regne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3334

+Tis Edredus , in +te firste +gere of his kyngdom , beet doun
strongliche +te Nor+thumbres +tat were rebel . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3335

+Terfore +te Scottes dredde hem , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3336

and +gelde hem to hym . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3337

After Agapitus +te twelf+te Iohn was pope $+te ey+gte +gere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3338

His fader Albertus was my+gti in +te citee of Rome ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,453.3339

and made +te noble men of +te citee swere +tat +tey schulde <P_VI,455>
make his sone Octavianus pope whanne Agapitus were deed ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3340

and so +tey dede , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3341

and chaungede his name , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3342

and cleped hym Iohn . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3343

He was an hunter and a leccherous man , so +tat he helde wommen wi+t hym
opounliche . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3344

+Terfore some of +te cardinales write to Otho emperour of Saxons ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3345

and prayed hym +tat he wolde come to Rome and helpe $to do awey +te
sclaundre of holy cherche . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3346

+Te pope was war +terof , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3347

and made kutte of +te nose of +te conselour , and +te hond of the writer
+tat wroot +tat lettre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3348

+Tanne he was ofte i-warned by +te emperour and by +te clergie +tat he
schulde amende hym self ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3349

and for he wolde nou+gt he was i-sette doun , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3350

and Leo was i-made pope in his stede . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3351

But whan +te emperour was agoo , Benet was i-putte in +te poperiche ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3352

+terfore +te emperour come a+gen , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3353

and byseged Rome , for_to +tey +gelde Benet to hym , and restored Leo
a+gen . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3354

Lowys +te kyng of West Fraunce is dede , +te sone of Charles +te symple
; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3355

after hym his sone Lotharius was kyng sevene_and_+tritty +gere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,455.3356

and deide with_oute <P_VI,457> children ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3357

he pursewede Richard duke of Normandye , as his fader hadde i-pursewed
Richard his fader . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3358

Marcianus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3359

Bote at +te laste , $Edredus for +te untrow+te of $+te Nor+t-hombres ,
he destroyed here lond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3360

and sette +te abbay of Ripoun a fire . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3361

Whanne +te kyng wente +tennes homward an oost brak outward of +gork ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3362

and dede greet harme on +te laste partye of +te kynges oost ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3363

+terfore +te kyng was wroo+t , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3364

and +tou+gte to destroye al Northumberlond ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3365

but +te Nor+thombres dede awey Hircus , +tat +tey hadde i-made here kyng
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3366

and plesede kyng Edredus wi+t +giftes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3367

Kyng Edredus wer+t sore seek , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3368

and sente to his schriftfader Donstan , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3369

and he com wi+t grete spede ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3370

and as he cam in +te weye a voys cam and spak to hym clerliche
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3371

and seide : " Now reste+t kyng Edredus in pees . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3372

At +tat voys +te hors +tat Donstan sat uppon fil doun
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3373

and deide , wi+toute hurtynge of hym +tat satte above .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,457.3374

Donstan buried +te kyng at Wynchestre in +te olde <P_VI,459> abbay .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3375

After +tis kyng , +tat diede wi+t_oute children , Edwynus was kyng ,
Edmund his eldeste sone , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3376

and was anoynt kyng of Engelond in +te real toun Kyngestoun besides
Londoun , of Odo +te archebisshop . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3377

+Te firste day of his sacrynge he fil into an unlawful leccherie ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3378

+terfore Dunstan wi+t_seide hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3379

and undertook and blamed hym +terfore . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3380

And +terfore he exciled Donston , and meny monkes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3381

and bynam hem what hey hadde ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3382

he put out +te monkes of Malmesbury , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3383

and +gaf the abbay to his clerkes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3384

At +te last +te Merces and +te Northumbres put +tis Edwyn out of his
kyngdom for his evel lyvynge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3385

and made his bro+ter Edgar kyng whan he was sixtene +gere olde .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3386

In Edgar his bygynnynge seynt Donston herde aungels synge in +tis manere
: CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3387

" Pees be to +te lond of Englisshe men in +te childes tyme +tat now is
i-bore , and in Donston his tyme . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3388

And so it was +too i-made +tat +te ryver of Tempse to_dele +te tweie
kyngene londes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3389

and Edwyn ragnede an_foure +gere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3390

and deide at +te laste , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3391

and was i-beried at Wynchestre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,459.3392

But his soule was delyvered out of helle by +te prayere of seynt
Don-ston , <P_VI,461> and translated to +te lot of soules +tat do+t
penaunce in +te wey of savacioun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,461.3393

Trevisa . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,461.3394

Here take hede , Cristene men , of +te menynge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,461.3395

for +te wordes bee+t perilousliche i-sette ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,461.3396

+terfore have+t mynde now of tweie manere helles ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,461.3397

in +te oon was Adam , Abraham , Isaac and Iacob , and o+tere holy
forfadres +tat deide tofore Crist . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,461.3398

Into +tat helle Crist ali+gte after his passioun ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,461.3399

and brou+gte wi+t hym +tens +te holy fadres +tat +tere were .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,461.3400

+Te o+ter helle is a place for hem +tat bee+t and schal be i-dampned for
everemore ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,461.3401

who +tat come+t in +tat helle schal nevere after be $saved no+ter come
out of peyne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,461.3402

But as me sei+t in comyn speche +tat a +teef is delyvered from hongynge
and from +te galowes +tey+g he come not +tere , +gif he is delyvered out
of here power +tat wolde lede hym to +te galewes and honge hym +teruppon
, so in som manere menynge he +tat is delyvered out of +te fendes power
+tat wolde brynge hym in helle , is delivered out of helle , +tey+g he
come nou+gt +tere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,461.3403

So mene+t +te prophete in +te sawter , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,461.3404

and sei+t : " +tou hast delyvered my soule out of +te lowere helle . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,461.3405

Willelmus de Regibus , libro 2=o= . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,461.3406

And as +te same fond bere+t evel herbes and good , as +te netle growe+t
somtyme next +te rose , so of +te same mylde Edmond com Edwyn +te worste
and Edgar +te beste . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,461.3407

<P_VI,463>

<heading>

Capitulum novum . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3410

Edgarus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3411

<$$heading>

EDGAR +gong of sixtene +gere olde was i-made kyng ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3413

and regnede after his bro+ter aboute an_sixtene $yere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3414

In +te twel+te +gere of hym in Athamannus his citee , +tat is Ba+te ,
+te fifte+te day of May , in a Witsonday , he was anoynt kyng of +te
holy bisshops Donston and Oswold ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3415

anon he reconsilede Donston , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3416

and made hym of +te abbot of Gastyngbury bisshop of Wircestre ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3417

he onede +te kyngdoms +tat were to_deled , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3418

and made +terof oon kyngdom . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3419

He bare doun wickded men , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3420

and chastede hem +tat were rebel ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3421

he loved wel good men and sobre ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3422

he rapayralde and amended chirches . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3423

In meny places he dede awey clerkes +tat lyvede in outrage ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3424

and dede +tere o+ter monkes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3425

Trevisa . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3426

In +tat , save reverens of Edgar , he was lewedlich i-meoved , while
+tere were o+ter clerkes +tat lyvede wel i-now .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3427

+Tanne it folowe+t in +te storie : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,463.3428

he bulde moo +tan fourty abbayes , amonge +te whiche he made <P_VI,465>
riche Glastyngbury , Abyngdoun , Burgh , Thorney , Ramsey , Wiltoun ,
and Wynchestre ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,465.3429

but at Wynchestre , in +te newe abbay +tat now hatte Hida for an happe
+tat +tere byfel , he was +te firste +tat dued monkes in stede of
clerkes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,465.3430

for clerkes fli+g +te travayle of +te queere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,465.3431

and spended +te catel of holy cherche in o+ter places at here owne wille
, CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,465.3432

and dede vikers in here stede +tat hadde ful litel for to lyve by ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,465.3433

and whanne +tey wolde nou+gt be amended by warnynge of kyng Edgar ,
no+ter of bisshop Ethelwolde , no+ter of +te arche-bisshop Donston , +te
kyng +gaf +te provendres of +tese chirches to +te forseide vikers .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,465.3434

But +te vikers were worse +tanne +te ra+tere whan +tey were i-made
persouns , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,465.3435

and lyvede in more out-rage +tan +te ra+ter dede ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,465.3436

and now for +te moste partie monkes bee+t worste of alle ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,465.3437

for +tey be+t to riche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,465.3438

and +tat make+t hem to take more hede aboute seculer besynesse +tan
gostely devo-cioun ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,465.3439

+terfore , as it is i-seide bifore in 4=o=. libro in +te 26 capitulo ,
by Ierom , se+t+te holy cherche encresede in possessiouns hit ha+t
decresed in vertues . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,465.3440

+Terfore seculer lordes schulde take awey the superfluyte of here
possessiouns , and +geve it to hem +tat nede+t , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,465.3441

or elles whan +tey knowen +tat , +tey bee+t cause and mayn-tenours of
here evel dedes , se+t+te +tey helpe+t nou+gt to amende hit while it is
in hir power , what evere covetous preostes seyn .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,465.3442

<P_VI,467>

For it were almesse to take awey +te superfluite of here possessiouns
now , +tan it was at +te firste fundacioun to +geve hem what hem nedede
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,467.3444

+Tanne +te kyng was agreved , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,467.3445

and by assent of +te +trittente+te pope Iohn he put awey +te clerkes
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,467.3446

and brou+gt +tere monkes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,467.3447

Willelmus ubi supra . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,467.3448

In his tyme was noon +teof i-take , open ne prive , +tat he ne hadde his
peyne . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,467.3449

Also +tis kyng caste to destroye +te wilde bestes +tat desire+t blood ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,467.3450

+terfore he made Ludwallus kyng of Wales bere hym certeyne +geres a
tribute of +tre_hondred wolfes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,467.3451

and whanne he hadde payed +tus +tre +gere to_giders , in +te four+te
+gere my+gte nevere a wolf be founde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,467.3452

Item Willelmus . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,467.3453

+Teigh +tis Edgar were smal and litel of stature he wolde overcome
everich man , were he evere so strong , +tat wolde wi+t hym fi+gte .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,467.3454

In a tyme at a feste +tere iangelers schewe+t hem self most , me sei+t
+tat Kynadrius , kyng of Scottes , seide in his game +tat it semede
wonder +tat so meny provinces and londes were suget to so litel a man as
Edgar was . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,467.3455

A mynstral herde +tat worde CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,467.3456

and tolde <P_VI,469> +te kyng fore , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3457

and he tolde nou+gt his men $fore , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3458

but aroos up from +te feste +tere Kynadius was , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3459

and hadde Kynadius to hym as it were for a greet counsaile ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3460

and ladde hym fer into a wode , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3461

and took hym oon of tweie swerdes +tat he hadde brou+gt wi+t hym ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3462

and spak to Kynadius , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3463

and seide : " Now +tou hast leve to ky+te +ty strenge+te , and assaye
whe+ter of us tweyne schal be suget to o+ter , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3464

for now we bee+t here al alone : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3465

hit is a foule +ting for a kyng to iangle moche at +te feste and nou+gt
fi+gte in batayle . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3466

Kynadius was aschamed , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3467

and fil doun to Edgar his feet , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3468

and prayed hym for-+gifnesse of +tat symple word +tat he hadde i-seide
in his game . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3469

Everich somer after he wolde gadre schippes to_gidres , and departe hem
afoure , and sette hem in +te foure parties of Enge-lond .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3470

+Tanne wi+t +te weste navey he wolde seile into +te nor+t contrey ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3471

wi+t +te nor+t navey he wolde seyle into +te est contray ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3472

wi+t +te est navey he wolde seille into +te sou+t contray , and wi+t +te
sou+t navey into +te west contray . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,469.3473

In +tat doynge <P_VI,471> he was a mylde aspie for see +teves schulde
nou+gt greve in water no+ter in londe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,471.3474

In +te wynter tyme he wolde ryde aboute in +te lond , and enquere and
aspye for see +teeves and +te domes and dedes of his ministres .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,471.3475

He wolde take cruel wreche of hem +tat trespased a+genst +te law .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,471.3476

At al tyme he was a profitable counsaillour for +te comynte ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,471.3477

but he favored +te Danes unwisely in hire axynge ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,471.3478

ffor unne+te was +tere oon street in Engelonde but Danes woned +terynne
with Englische men . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,471.3479

+Tat was i-suffred wi+t a good herte , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,471.3480

but +terof com a wel grevous ende , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,471.3481

for +te Danes were grete drynkers by kynde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,471.3482

and lefte wi+t Englisshe men +tat oon doynge +tat is i-knowe and dure+t
alwey , so +tat now +te doynge of Englisshe men do+t preiudice to al +te
world in emptynge of cuppes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,471.3483

+Terfore kyng Edgar made stike nayles in +te cuppes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,471.3484

and marked so +te cuppes , for +tey schulde drynke by mesure anon to +te
nayles . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,471.3485

Willelmus de Regibus et Pontificibus , libro 2=o= .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,471.3486

+Tan +tis Edgar on his wif Egelfleda , +te white by hir surname , he
ghat his eldest sone Edward , +tat was aftirward kyng and martir .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,471.3487

+Tan oon Alfritha , +te duke his dou+gter of <P_VI,473> Devenschire , he
gat Edmond +tat deide tofore his fader , and Egelredus +tat regnede
after seint Edward . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,473.3488

At +te laste on seint Wilfritha he gat seint Edithe +te mayde .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,473.3489

+Tis Wilfritha was nou+gt verrayliche a mynchoun , as +te comoun sawe
madliche mene+t , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,473.3490

but for drede of kyng Edgar , +tat desirede here unlawfulliche , sche
took mynchene clo+tynge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,473.3491

but so sche was i-brou+gt to +te kynges bed : CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,473.3492

and for +te kyng lay by +tat womman +tat was i-hold and semede a
mynchoun , he was i-blamed of seynt Donston , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,473.3493

and dede penaunce sevene +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,473.3494

Also whan sche hadde childe sche forsook flescheliche likinge and manis
companye , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,473.3495

and lyvede religiousliche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,473.3496

and is i-holde a seynt in +te abbay of Wiltoun , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,473.3497

so it is i-seide . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,473.3498

Also of here dou+gter Edithe it is i-seide +tat while sche was a
myn-choun at Wiltoun sche used ofter gayer clo+tes +tan here professioun
axede , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,473.3499

and sche was +terfore i-blamed of seint Ethelwold ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,473.3500

and sche answerde no+ter unkovenabeliche no+ter ful curteisliche :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,473.3501

" Goddes dome , " quod sche , " $+tat may <P_VI,475> nou+gt faille , is
i-plesed onliche wi+t conscience ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,475.3502

+terfore I trowe +tat as clene a soule may be under +tis clo+tes +tat
bee+t arayed wi+t golde , as under +tyn slit furrour skynnes . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,475.3503

In a tyme while Donston halowed a chirche , he sigh +tis mayde croyse
ofte here owne forhede wi+t here ri+gt +tombe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,475.3504

Donston was glad +terof , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,475.3505

and seide : " I praye God +tat +tat +tombe mote nevere roote . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,475.3506

And anon at +te masse Donston gan to wepe , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,475.3507

and seide , " Anon after sexe wokes +tis faire rose schal folwe : "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,475.3508

and so it byfel . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,475.3509

For afterward whan here body was i-take up of +te er+te it was i-founde
al i-roted and i-torned into powder , out_take +te thombe and here wombe
wi+t +te prive chose byne+te . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,475.3510

Donston hadde +terof greet won-der , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,475.3511

and +tou+gte moche +terynne , and why it my+gte be .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,475.3512

+Tanne sche appered to hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,475.3513

and tolde hym +te cause , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,475.3514

and seide : " Wonder +tow ri+gt nowt +tey I be hole and sownde in +te
ne+ter partie of my body , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,475.3515

for I was nevere gilty of out-rage <P_VI,477> of mete and drynke ,
no+ter of flescheliche likynge . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,477.3516

Also of +tis holy mayde it is i-rad +tat while kyng Canutus lyvede litel
on seyntes of Engelond , ones in a Witsontyde at Wiltoun at a feste he
made open mowes , and scornede seint Edithe , and seide +tat he wolde
nevere trowe +tat of Edgar his children , +tat was leccherous and a
greet tyraunt , schulde be a seynt . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,477.3517

Ednotus +te archebisshop wi+tseide , +tat +to was present +tere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,477.3518

and opened anon +te grave of +te mayde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,477.3519

+Tanne sche arered here self up $to +te girdel stede , so +tat it semede
as +tey+g sche schulde have i-resed on +te rebel kyng .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,477.3520

For +tat drede +te kyng was astonyed , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,477.3521

and fil doun to +te grounde as +tey+g he were i-sowe ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,477.3522

and drow+g breth at +te laste , CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,477.3523

and was aschamed , and glad +tat he was i-saved and i-kept to do wor+ty
penaunce . CMPOLYCH-M3,VI,477.3524

<P_VIII,83>

<heading>

CAPITULUM VICESIMUM QUINTUM . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,83.3527

<$$heading>

Kyng Henry is deed at Fontenbraud , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,83.3529

and his sone Richard was kyng after hym , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,83.3530

and regnede ten +gere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,83.3531

Stephene of Canturbury discreved cleerliche his manere and his dedes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,83.3532

and for +tis storye schulde $not mysse +te noble dedes of so greet a
duke , I have studied to take +te floures of Stevenes book .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,83.3533

+Tis kyng ordeyned redeliche his +tinges by+gonde +te see ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,83.3534

and cam into Engelond for to be crowned . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,83.3535

In his comynge prisouns were i-oponed CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,83.3536

and he was i-crowned at Londoun of Baldewyn , archebisshop of
Caunterbury , +te +tridde day of Septembre , +te whiche is acounted an
evel day by +te veyn bileve and usage of mysbileved men , as is i-cleped
$in +te kalender dayes dies Egipciacus , and dies malus , an evel day by
+te veyn bileve , as it were a day of bodynge of evel happes to +te
Iewes ; <em> for +te Iewes of Engelond +tat hadde evel <$$em> happes
+tat day . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,83.3537

Meny $Iewes come to +tis solempnite leste +te wel+te +tat +tei hadde
under +te olde kyng schulde be wi+tdrawe in +te newe kynges tyme .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,83.3538

But +te kyng heet and comaundede +tat +te Iewes schulde nou+gt come into
+te chirche while he were i-crowned no+ter into +te paleys while he were
at mete . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,83.3539

But while +te kyng <P_VIII,85> was at mete som of +te Iewes parsed among
o+tere CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3540

and come with_ynne +te paleys gate , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3541

and oon of hem was i-smete wi+t a manis feest .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3542

+Tan +te rabbisshe peple wende +tat +te kyng had so i-hote ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3543

and up wi+t staves , battes , and stoones , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3544

and leide on +te Iewes CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3545

and madde hem to flee . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3546

Here of sprank likynge tidynges into al +te citee , as +tey +te kyng
hadde i-hote , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3547

and up with staves to destroye +te Iewes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3548

And +te peple , resynge and crienge , breck up +te hous +tere +te Iewes
were i-flowe for drede , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3549

and brende CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3550

and spoylede CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3551

and took what +tey my+gte , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3552

and wolde nou+gt leve for +te kynges sendynge .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3553

But outrage of so greet woodnesse +gif it were i-suffred schulde passe
meny cruel dedes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3554

and blenschede moche +te bygynnynge of +te kyng .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3555

But for +te grete multitude of hem +tat were gilty he moste lete passe
what he my+gt nou+gt take of ful wreche . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3556

At +te laste +te Iewes had pees i-graunted , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3557

and anon +te kyng +geve+t dignetees +tat voyde+t .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3558

And al wi+t_oute +tat his bro+ter Iohn hadde of his fader +gifte in
Irlond and in Normandie , he +gaf hym +te provinces of Cornewayle , of
Devenschire , of Notingham , of Lancastre . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,85.3559

Also he +gaf hym +te eorles dou+gter <P_VIII,87> of Gloucetre to wif ,
+tat was his cosyn in +te +tridde degree , wi+t al her fader lordschippe
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,87.3560

+Te lordschepe of +te four+te deel +tat was i-+gove , i-made hym unkynde
and untrewe , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,87.3561

and desired +te hool kyngdom . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,87.3562

+Te kyng committed +te destourbance of +te reawme to +te bisshop of
Durham , +tat schulde more skilfulliche and semeliche occupie hym self
in Goddis service +tan in +te kynges service . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,87.3563

For +te gospel sei+t +tat no man may serve ei+ter lord at +te fulle as
he schulde , +tey +te bisshop wolde to_dele hym self for to plese ei+ter
kyng of hevene and of er+te . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,87.3564

Certeynliche +te Kyng of hevene allowe+t nou+gt service +tat is so
to-deled , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,87.3565

for he wolde be served with al +te my+gt of +te soule .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,87.3566

And what +gif +te bisshop +tat is but half i-+geve to Goddes service
do+t nou+gt his service ne his offys as he schulde , but ordeyne+t
unwor+ty and recheles persons in his sted , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,87.3567

for he wol serve holiche in +te paleys o+ter in +te feyre and court .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,87.3568

For in non half man make+t good at +te fulle of +te acountes of an
er+telich prince . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,87.3569

Also +te kynge for to have +te more large spens toward Ierusalem , he
resignede +te castelles of Berwik and of Rokesburgh to +te kyng of
Scotlond for ten_+towsand pound . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,87.3570

Also he begiled +te olde man +te riche bisshop of Durham ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,87.3571

and he made hym begge his $owne province for a greet somme of money .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,87.3572

+Terfore +te kyng seide ofte in his game , " I am a wonder crafty man ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,87.3573

for I have i-made a newe eorle of an olde bisshop . "
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,87.3574

By suche <P_VIII,89> manere while and speche he emptede meny men purses
and bagges , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,89.3575

and solde dignetees and lordschippes +tat longede to +te kyng , as
+tey+g he +tou+gte nevere for to come a+gen . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,89.3576

In a tyme his frendes +tat were homliche wi+t hym blamede hym +terfore ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,89.3577

and he answerde CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,89.3578

and seide : " I wolde selle Londoun , and I my+gte fynde a chapman +tat
my+gte wel paye . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,89.3579

Meny men bou+gte wi+t +te bettre wil , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,89.3580

for me trowed +tat +te kyng wolde nevere come a+gen hom .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,89.3581

He hadde i-fonge power of +te pope +tat he my+gte beneme +te crosse
whome $+tat he wolde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,89.3582

and +terby he gat many +towsand pound . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,89.3583

+Tan +te kyng as it semed bytook rechelesliche +te governaunce of his
kyngdom to his chaunceller , bisshop of Hely , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,89.3584

and seilled into Normandie tofore mydwynter tyde .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,89.3585

+Tat tyme at Dunstapil +te signe of +te cros was i-seie in hevene ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,89.3586

and sone +terafter +te schap of +te cros was i-seie forsake +te baner
and passe somwhat of space +terfrom , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,89.3587

telle who +tat wil what it my+gte mene , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,89.3588

for I have i-lerned to telle +tis wonder , and not to discreve what it
schulde mene . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,89.3589

+Tanne +te kynges of Engelond and of Fraunce after +tat +tey hadde
i-made suerte bytwene hem tweyne , +tat dwelled at Turon in Fraunce for@
@to abide somer , to wende in +te wey to +te Holy Land nou+gt onliche in
holy entent and for <P_VIII,91> cause of $+te fey , but for to desire of
her owne helthe and hope of greet hap and fortune .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3590

Bote +te ri+gtwisnesse of God allowe+t non suche $a manere doynge ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3591

but semeliche God ordeyne+t +tat outrage $pryde of mysbileved men
schulde be alayde in +tat manere . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3592

<em> Also wi+t_oute +te mescheef and woo +tat Iewes suffrede in here
body and catel at Lyncolne and at Lynne , +get at +Gork after a longe
sege and greet mescheef and woo , Raby , mayster of Iewes , forkutte +te
veynes of foure_hondred Iewes , and his owne veynes also , and his wifes
+trote <$$em> . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3593

Also at Staunforde Iewes were i-bete , i-slawe , and i-spild .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3594

And oon Iohn , moost hardy of Cristen men , com to Northamptoun wi+t
many grete prayes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3595

+tere his hostiler slow+g hym priveliche by ny+gt for covetise of money
+tat he hadde i-brou+gt , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3596

and +trew +te body by ny+gte wi+t_oute +te citee ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3597

and fley+g awey as a +teef schulde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3598

+Tanne olde wyfes mette , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3599

and +tere were i-seie wonder false si+gtes and fals tokenes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3600

and +te sely men bere an honde +tat it was for +te holynesse of +tat man
, +tat +tey hilde a verray martir , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3601

and worschipped +te sepulcre of +te dede man wi+t solempne wacches and
+giftes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3602

bote wise men lowh hem to scorne ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3603

bote clerkes of +te place were wel apaide +terwith ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3604

ffor +tey hadde profi+gt +terby . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3605

+Tis was i-tolde +te bisshop , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3606

and anon he forbeed +te doynge of symple men uppon the peyne of cursynge
, and +te greet boost of coveytous men and of hir false martir .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3607

In +te mene tyme , while kyng Richard was absent , William bisshop of
Hely , +te kynges chaunceller , procuratour of +te rewme , +te popes
legat in Engelond i-made for money , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,91.3608

he hilde lowe the <P_VIII,93> clergie , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3609

and spak by +te kynges power , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3610

and bare down +te kynges peple , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3611

and schewed auctorite of +te pope of Rome , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3612

and rood wi+t a_+towsand hors . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3613

He greved abbayes with paymentis and with +giftes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3614

and made his allye +te grettest of +te lond ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3615

ei+ter primat his see he hilde low+g inow at his owne wille ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3616

for Baldewyn +te archebisshop of Caunterbury deide at Tyrus tofore +te
comynge of +te kyng to +te Holy Lond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3617

and +te kynges bro+ter Geffray , elyt of +Gork , he hadde i-let ten
+gere +tat he was nou+gt i-sacred . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3618

And also Giffray londede at Dovere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3619

and he bynam his catel , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3620

and drow+g hym out of Seynt Martyns abbay , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3621

and putte hym in +te kynges tour ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3622

and made a counsaile at Westmynstre as +te kynges procuratour and +te
popes legat . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3623

+Tere his fautour Hewe Nonant , bisshop of Chestre , putte for+t a
pleynt +tat $+te monkes of Coventre had i-sched his blood ri+gt tofore
+te hi+ge au+gter ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3624

+terfore William bisshop of Hely demede +tat monkes schulde be putte
awey from Coventre , and clerkes i-brou+gt +tider +tat lyve+t by
provendres . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,93.3625

By occasioun herof +tis Hewe , +tat was gylful of wit , schameles and
hardy in evel dedes , connynge in lettrure and <P_VIII,95> faire speche
, and had alway i-made debaat and strif bytwene the priour and +te
covent of Coventre , now wi+t streng+te of men of armes he put out +te
monkes as passing evel doers , and gulty of huge trespas ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,95.3626

and sente anon to the court of Rome men of answere ful informed , wi+t
lettres of bisshops witnessynge +tat +te monkes had forsake Cristes
chivalry , and were afalle to wordliche likynge ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,95.3627

+terfore he prayed of +te pope fre power of +te ordenaunce of +tat abbay
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,95.3628

+Te pope abood sixe mon+tes wi+t +te sentence for to abide +gif eny man
wolde come and speke for +te monkes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,95.3629

bote defaute of spense and lette +te monkes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,95.3630

and made +tat +te bisshop had al his wille . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,95.3631

+Te monkes come unne+te at +te laste , whan +tey had $longe i-wope +te
wrong of her violent out puttynge ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,95.3632

but +te bisshoppes my+gt and power hadde +te maistrye by money and by
slei+te , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,95.3633

and meny +geres +te monkes were disperbled , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,95.3634

and what +tey hadde was i-ordeyned to provendres to clerkes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,95.3635

and +tey lyved poorliche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,95.3636

and gat her liflode as +tey my+gte . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,95.3637

+Terfore whan +tis bisshop $Hew woor+t seek at Becco in Normandie in a
Good Friday , and my+gte no man fynde +tat wolde sette hym penaunce , as
it is i-seide , <em> +tan he seide <$$em> , " And I deme myself
<P_VIII,97> to ligge in +te peyne of purgatorie for myn evel dedes anon
to +te day of doome . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,97.3638

<P_VIII,99>

<heading>

CAPITULUM VICESIMUM SEXTUM . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,99.3641

+TE CROWNYNGE OF +TE EMPEROUR . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,99.3642

<$$heading>

Affter Clement , +te +tridde Celestinus was pope sixe +gere and ei+gte
mon+tes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,99.3644

+Te secounde day of his consecracioun he <P_VIII,101> crowned +te fifte
Henry emperour , Frederik his sone , in +tis manere :
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,101.3645

first tofore +te grees of +te cherche of Rome he feng an oo+t of +tis
Henry +tat he schulde defende and meyntene holy chirche and +te ri+gtes
of holy chirche , and +gif ou+gt were bynome of seynt Petres londes , he
schulde restore it a+gen wi+t al his my+gt . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,101.3646

+Tanne he sat in his chayer CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,101.3647

and hilde +te emperours crowne with his feet , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,101.3648

and +te emperour bowed doun his heed , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,101.3649

and +te pope let falle +te crowne uppon +te emperours heed ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,101.3650

and smot it $of a+gen of +te emperours heed anon wi+t his feet ri+gt to
+te grounde , in token +tat +te pope ha+t power to make +te emperoure
and sette hym down , if he is wor+ty . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,101.3651

+Te cardynals stood by , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,101.3652

and took up +te crowne , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,101.3653

and sette it a+gen uppon +te emperours heed . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,101.3654

While kyng William was absent , +te forsaide William de Longchamp ,
bisshop of Hely , prevede Hughe bisshop of Durham of al manere
worschippe , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,101.3655

and greved +te bisshop of Wynchestre , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,101.3656

and wre+t+ted nyh alle . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,101.3657

In +te mene tyme meny were arrayed for to passe +te see to have and axe
a remedie of +te kyng , and of help a+genst +te comoun <P_VIII,103>
tiraunt ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3658

but he was ware +terof , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3659

and com tofore all o+tere , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3660

and hadde alle his wille , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3661

and com a+gen or o+ter men come to +te kyng ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3662

but o+ter men hadde lettres also suche as +tey wolde ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3663

and oon of hem , +tat was bisshop of <em> Lyncolne , cam a+gen ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3664

and persewede William bisshop <$$em> of Hely anon to Lyncolne ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3665

+tere was i-sette a day to answere , and +te castel of Tykhulle ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3666

+tere whan +te bisshop of Durham was i-come , +tis William spak to hym
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3667

and seide , " I take +te nou+gt bisshop <em> a byschop <$$em> ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3668

but I chaunceller , take +te castellan , forto +tou +geve plegges to
+gilde up +te kynges castelles . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3669

+Te fame of +tis evel man William fulfilled al Engelond , so +tat +te
grete grucchede a+genst hym , and +te smale cursed wel faste .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3670

The kynges bro+ter Iohn was wroo+t for +te takynge of his bro+ter
Geffray , elyt of +Gork , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3671

and gadrede greet streng+te of his owne province and of Walsche men wi+t
meny bisshoppes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3672

and chased +tis William from Wyndesore to +te toure of Londoun , and
from +tennes to Dovere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3673

+tere +tis William dredde leste he schulde nou+gt freliche passe +te see
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,103.3674

and took a womman cloo+t <P_VIII,105> above his owne cle+tinge ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3675

and hyled his heed and +te more deel of his $face wi+t kerchefes and
wymples , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3676

and walked on +te clef , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3677

and bar on his lift arme a webbe of lynnen clo+t , as it were to
sellynge , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3678

and bare a met+gerde in his ri+gt hond , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3679

for he wolde sliliche ascape and passe by +tat craft and nou+gt be
aspied . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3680

But for he cou+te not selle and undo his cloo+t as a womman schulde , he
was i-take by his prive membres and despitouslyche aspied ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3681

but at +te laste he passed +te see , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3682

and +te bisshop of Rothomage had +te rulynge of reaume by maundement of
+te kyng +tat was in Sicilia . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3683

Also the bisshop of Bathe was i-chose archebisshop ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3684

but he was soon dede ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3685

and +git William bisshop of Hely purchased a wel stronge maundement of
Celestinus +te pope , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3686

and hadde +te same auctorite and power +tat he hadde ra+ter , as it were
for amaundement of +te kyngdom of Engelond , and for@ @to wi+tstonde
Iohn +tat wolde byneme his bro+ter +te kyngdom while he was absent ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3687

but in al +tis he was begiled , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3688

for he conspired CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3689

and was assentynge to Iohn for +giftes o+ter $for faire byhestes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3690

And +git al for nou+gt , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3691

for +tey he schewed at Dovere +te greet warant of his legacie , +git +te
queen Alianore and +te archebishops of Rothomage and of +Gork and meny
o+ter compelled hym for to seille a+gen . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,105.3692

+Tanne after +tat +tey hadde abide springing tyme at Turon , +te kynges
of Fraunce and of Engelond <P_VIII,107> wente , +tat oon by londe and
+tat o+ter by water , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3693

and com to Sicilia ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3694

+tere +te kyng of Fraunce let passe +te trespas of his men unpunsched ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3695

and was cleped a lombe ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3696

but +te kyng of Engelonde leet no trespas unpunsched ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3697

+terfore he was i-cleped a leon . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3698

Also kyng Richard ffau+gt wi+t Griffon , in Calabria and in Sicilia ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3699

and hadde +te maistrie . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3700

He made a castel of tree to be i-lad aboute , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3701

and he rerede +tat castel <em> a+genst +te citee of Messan ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3702

and cleped +tat castel <$$em> Mategrysphom ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3703

with +tat castel afterward he to +te citee of Acres .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3704

And +tere his moder brou+gt hym a faire mayde of schap and of speche ,
Berengaria , +tat was +te kynges dou+gter of Navarne ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3705

and kyng Richard wedded her to wyfe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3706

+Tanne +te kyng of Fraunce wente ffor+t into Siria ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3707

and +te kyng of Engelond abood somwhat after +tat he was a_goo .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3708

Bote in +tat abidynge he was nou+gt idel , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3709

but he sente for+t vitailles CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3710

and made engynes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3711

+Tanne he wente out of Sycil CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3712

and com into Cipres , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3713

and by+tou+gt hym +tat tweyne of +te kynges schippes were to-broke wi+t
tempest in +te see , and i-spoyled by men of Cipres .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,107.3714

+Terfore kyng Richard chasede +te kyng of <P_VIII,109> +te lond , +tat
wolde nou+gt doo amendes , from citee to citee , for_to +te kyng +galde
hym to kyng Richard . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,109.3715

And +te kyng +galde hym self uppon covenant +tat he schulde nou+gt be
putte in bondes of iren . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,109.3716

Kynge Richard grauntede , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,109.3717

but he put hym in bondes of silver , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,109.3718

and dwelled +tere tweie mon+tes , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,109.3719

and hadde +te londe at his wille . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,109.3720

+Tan he wente to Acres , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,109.3721

and took in +te see oon of +te sowdans greet schippes i-lade with grete
riches , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,109.3722

and bolgede and +trulled it in +te ey+ter side .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,109.3723

Whan he come to Acres , fil strif bytwene hym and +te kyng of Fraunce
{COM:here_begins_an_extract_from_other_manuscripts} in +tis manere .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,109.3724

By covenant that was made bytwene him at Turon , the kynge of Fraunce
chalanged half that was wonne in Cypres . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,109.3725

Kynge Richard ayenesayde , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,109.3726

and sayde that the covenaunt was made of +te wynnynge in +te Holy Lond
$and a+genst +te Sarsyns . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,109.3727

Also +tere was ano+ter cause <P_VIII,111> of stryf ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,111.3728

for the kyng wolde leve no+ting to +te eorl of Champayn , +tat was +to
ful nedy and in greet mescheef , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,111.3729

but he wolde legge Champayn to +te kyng to wedde .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,111.3730

+Tan +te eorle seide , " Ich have y-doo +tat y schulde ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,111.3731

here after y schal doo what me nede+t : CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,111.3732

myn owne lord fonge+t me nou+gt but for myne ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,111.3733

+terfore y schal goo to hym +tat is more redy to geve +tan {he_is} to
fonge . " CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,111.3734

+Tanne he cam to kyng Richard , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,111.3735

and was riche ynowe . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,111.3736

{COM:here_ends_an_extract_from_other_manuscripts}

Also kyng Richard faverede Gy kyng of Ierusalem a+genst Conradus Markys
kyng of Tyrus , +tat +te kyng of Fraunce faverede in +te o+ter side .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,111.3738

But he come+t to +te seege of Acres , +tat was byseged two +gere
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,111.3739

and al +te travayle i-lost . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,111.3740

For +te engynes +tat were i-brou+gt a+genst +te citee were i-brend wi+t
Grekkische fuyre , +tat no water my+gte aquenche , no+ter o+ter element
. CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,111.3741

Also +te Cristene men wax lasse and lasse , somdel for siknes and somdel
for o+ter defau+gtes and mescheef . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,111.3742

Also it was to_deled in parties <em> for +te stryf <$$em> +tat was
bytwene Gy and +te Markes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,111.3743

Also som greet of oure side hadde i-fonge money and mede of +te sowdon .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,111.3744

<P_VIII,347>

+Te sixte pope Clement deide at seynt Nicolas day ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,347.3746

and anon +te popes cheef penytauncer , Stevene bisshop Hostiensis , was
i-chosen pope , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,347.3747

and was i-cleped +te sixte Innocent . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,347.3748

Also +tat +gere bygan grete der+te of +tinges +tat schulde be soolde ,
so +tat +te sale of +tynges was of double price to +tat it was i-wont
{COM:to_be} . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,347.3749

Also +te see and +te lond gan to wexe more bareyne +tan +tey were
to_forhonde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,347.3750

+Tis +gere it was accorded and i-swore bytwene +te kynges of Engelond
and of Fraunce , oute_take +tat +te kynges seeles were nou+gt i-sette
too +te endentures +tat were i-wrete : CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,347.3751

+te accorde was +tat +te kyng of Engelond schulde have alle his londes
of +te ducherye of Gyan +tat were bynome hym to_forehonde by +te kyng of
Fraunce , <em> so +tat +te kyng of Engelond shulde leve and resigne up
to +te kyng of Fraunce <$$em> al +te right and +te cleyme +tat he had to
+te reume of Fraunce . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,347.3752

Uppon +tat doynge were solempne messangers i-sent in +te kynges byhalf
of Engelond , Henry +te nobil duke of Lancastre , Henry erle of Arundel
, Michel of Nor+teburgh bisshop of Londoun , and Gy de Bryan ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,347.3753

+tese were i-sent to the popes court for@ @to have <P_VIII,348> +tese
covenauntes recorded by +te popes billes ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,348.3754

but by sodeyn fraude of Fraunce , and by assent of +te pope , +tese
covenantes were i-putte of and undo ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,348.3755

+terfore Engelond arraye+t for@ @to fi+gte for@ @to recovere and wynne
+te londes +tat were bynome wi+t wrong , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,348.3756

and +te kyng of Engelond entred into Fraunce wi+t greet streng+te of
kny+gtes . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,348.3757

But he herde telle +tat Berwyk was i-take , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,348.3758

and come a+gen , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,348.3759

and delyvered Berwyk of +te power of +te Scottes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,348.3760

+Tis +gere was so grete drow+te +tat +tre mon+tes togidres , Averel ,
May , and June , unne+te fel a drope of reyn doun to the er+te .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,348.3761

On Friday in Wytsonwyke were tweye freres of +te ordre of Menoures
i-brent in Avyoun for som fals opiniouns , as it semed +te pope and +te
cardynales . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,348.3762

+Te same +gere , at +te Nativite of oure Lord , +te kyng of Engelond his
eldest sone Edward seilled into Gascoyne wi+t many men of armes and
archeres , to recovere and wynne +te londes of +te ducherie of Gyan ,
+tat +te kyng of Fraunce hadde long tyme wrongfulliche wi+tholde ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,348.3763

+tere Edward dwelled al a +gere wi+t_oute eny reese of enemyes .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,348.3764

But in mene tyme he took <P_VIII,349> and beet doun and spoylled and
brent huge citees +tat were rebel a+genst hym , as Narboun , Carcason ,
and o+tere ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,349.3765

bot in +te ende of +te +gere of his comynge , +te oon_and_twenty day of
+te mon+te of Septembre , while +te duke of Lancastre byseged +te citee
of Berenens in Bretayne , Edwerd passed by +te brynkes of +te ryver of
Leyr , +tat is of +te ducherie of Gyan , +tere come +te kyng of Fraunce
wi+t a greet oost , and fau+gt wi+t hym ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,349.3766

but +te kyng of Fraunce@ @s men weren i-slawe and i-chasede ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,349.3767

and +te kyng of Fraunce was i-take and i-brou+gt at Burdewys , in
Gascoyne , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,349.3768

and was +tere forto Witsontyde . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,349.3769

<em> +Tis +gere about Witsontide <$$em> the forseyde Edward seyled out
of Gascoyne into Engelond <em> with Joon kyng of Frenschemen <$$em> ;
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,349.3770

+tan tweie cardynales come into Engelond for@ @to to_trete of pees
bytwene +te tweie kynges . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,349.3771

+Tese cardynales dwelled in Engelond a ful +gere ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,349.3772

and +te +tridde cardynal come of his owne heed to conforte the kyng of
Fraunce , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,349.3773

and dwellid wi+t the o+tere cardynales at Londoun .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,349.3774

Also +tis +gere , $+tat was +gere of oure Lord
a_+towsand_+tre_hondred_and_seven_and_fifty , $aboute alle Alewen tide ,
Davyd le Bruce , kyng of Scotlond , <P_VIII,350> was delyvered , +tat
hadde i-be long tyme in warde enlevene +gere in +te castel of Odiam ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,350.3775

and he paide a grete raunsoun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,350.3776

Also +tis +gere at +te court of Rome bygan greet stryff bytwene $+te
primat Armacan and freres beggers . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,350.3777

Also +te same +gere was grete destruccioun in Bretayne and in Normandye
, by Phelip +tat was +te kynges bro+ter of Navare , and sir Iames Pypyn
and Robert Knolles , and many o+ter Englisshe men wi+touten heed and
wi+touten waraunt of +te kyng of Engelond . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,350.3778

+Tis +gere aboute +te Assumpcioun of oure Lady , Edward kyng of Engelond
, and his eldest sone Edward prince of Wales , +te duke of Lancastre ,
and nygh alle +te lordes of Engelond , wi+t a greet oost of horsmen and
of archers i-gadred wi+t aboute a_+towsand chariottes , dwelled somtyme
longe tyme at Sandewiche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,350.3779

and aboute Myghelmasse next +terafter +te forsaide duke seilled to
Caleys ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,350.3780

+te kyng and +te prince seilled to +te same place aboute Candelmasse ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,350.3781

and bygunne to ride anon in +te reaume of Fraunce , but +tat +tey lay in
+te feelde of <P_VIII,351> Burgoyne and in +te champayne anon to +te
Anunciacioun of oure Lady . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,351.3782

In +te mene tyme +te Normans londed at Wynchilsee wi+t a litel navey in
Engelond , +te fifte day of Marche , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,351.3783

and assailled +tat toun , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,351.3784

and slou+g men , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,351.3785

and brent some of +te toun . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,351.3786

But +tere meny of +te see +tefes were i-slawe and i-dreynt ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,351.3787

and +te o+tere deel of +te see +tefes fly+ge to +te schippes ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,351.3788

and went out of Engelond , as +tey were compelled by +te abbot of
Bataylle and streng+te +tat was wi+t hym . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,351.3789

+Tis +gere , aboute seynt Donstones day and feste , Edward kyng of
Engelond toke trewes wi+t +te kyng of Fraunce , in hope of pees ,
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,351.3790

and cam wi+t his oost a+gen into Engelond . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,351.3791

But he loste many men , horses , and chariottes , besides Parys , the
ey+gte+te day after Estre , by a storme of weder +tat fel +tere +tat
tyme . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,351.3792

Aboute Lamasse next +terafter Armacan and +te ordres of beggers of +te
stryf +tat was bytwene hem cessed by heste of +te pope .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,351.3793

Also +te same +gere +te prince of Wales , +te duke of Lancastre , and
many o+ter lordes of Engelond , and +te kyng of Fraunce , wente to
Caleys to reforme the pees bytwene Engelond <P_VIII,352> and Fraunce .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,352.3794

+Tere +te pees was refourmed and assured wi+t suerte of o+ter in ey+ter
side , CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,352.3795

and +te kynges of Engelond and of Fraunce wente home a+gen to her owne
kyngdoms aboute Mychemasse ; CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,352.3796

and sone +terafter were messangers i-sent to Avyon to +te pope , to
conferme +te pees and covenante in ey+ter side .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,352.3797

God be +tonked of al his nedes : CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,352.3798

+tis translacioun is i-ended in a +Torsday , +te ey+gte+te day of Averyl
, +te +gere of oure Lord a_+towsand_+tre_hondre_foure_score_and_sevene ,
+te ten+te +gere of kyng Richard +te secounde after +te conquest of
Engelond , +te +gere of my lordes age , sire Thomas $lorde of Berkeley ,
+tat made me make +tis translacioun , fyve_and_thrytty .
CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,352.3799

Deo gracias . CMPOLYCH-M3,VIII,352.3800
