<BEGIN_cmpurvey-m3>

<P_I,1>

<heading>

PROLOGUE . CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.4

Here bygynneth a prolog for alle the bokis of the Bible of the oolde
testament . CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.5

CAP. I. CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.6

<$$heading>

FYUE_and_twenty bookis of the olde testament ben bookis of feith , and
fulli bookis of holy writ ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.8

the first is Genesis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.9

the ij. is Exodi , CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.10

the iij. is Leuitici , CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.11

the iiij. is Numeri , CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.12

and the v. is Deutronomye ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.13

and these fyue ben the bookis of Moises , whiche ben clepid propurly the
lawe ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.14

the vj. book is Josue , CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.15

the vij. book is Judicum , that enclosith the story of Ruth ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.16

the viij. book , ix. x. and xj. and xij. and xiij. ben the foure
bookis of Kyngis and twey bookis of Paralipominon ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.17

the xiiij. book is Esdre , that comprehendeth Neemye ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.18

and al is o bok anentis Ebreyes , as Jerom seith , CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.19

but anentis Grekis and Latyns these ben twey bookis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.20

and the xv. is Hester , CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.21

the xvj. is Joob , CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.22

the xvij. is the Sauter ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.23

the xviij. book , xix. and xx. ben the iij. bookis of Salamon ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.24

the first is Prouerbis , either Parablis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.25

the ij. is Eclesiastes , CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.26

and the iij. is Songis of Songis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.27

the xxi. book , xxij. xxiij. and xxiiij. ben the foure grete
prophetis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.28

Isaie is the first , CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.29

Jeremye is the ij . CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.30

Ezechiel is the iij . CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.31

and Daniel is the fourth ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.32

the xxv. book is o book of xij. smale prophetis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.33

Osee is the first , CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.34

Joel is the ij . CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.35

Amos is the iij . CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.36

Abdie is the iiij . CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.37

Jonas is the fyuethe , CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.38

and Michee is the vj . CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.39

Naum is the vij . CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.40

Abacuk is the viij . CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.41

Sofonye is the ix . CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.42

Aggeye is the x . CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.43

Sacharie is the xi . CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.44

and Malachie is the xij. ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.45

and alle these xij. smale prophetis ben o book , and in this ordre .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.46

And what euer book in the olde testament is out of these fyue_and_twenty
byfore seid , shal be set among apocrifa , that is , with_outen autorite
of bileue ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.47

therfore the book of Wisdom and Eclesiastici and Judith and Tobie be not
of bileue . CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.48

The first book of Machabeies was founden write in Ebreu ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.49

and the ij. book of Machabeyes was writen first in Grek .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.50

Jerom seith al this sentence in the prologe on the first book of Kyngis
. CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.51

Also the book of Baruc and the pistle of Jeremye ben not of the autorite
of the bible anentis Ebreyes , ne the preyer of Manasses , as Jerom
witnessith , CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.52

and how mich of the book of Hester and of Daniel is of autorite anentis
Ebreyes , and in Ebreu lettre , it is told in the same bookis by Jerom
hym self ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.53

netheles Jerom , in suynge Ebreyes , comprehendith alle these bookis in
xxij. ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.54

for Ebreies maken oo book of the first and ij. book of Kyngis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.55

and clepen it Samuel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.56

and thei maken oo book of the iij. and iiij. book of Kyngis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.57

and clepen it Malachym , CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.58

and thei comprehenden in oo book the ij. bookis of Paralipominon .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.59

But certis , litel charge is of this rikenyng , whether the bookis of
Kyngis ben noumbred foure , as Latyns doen , either tweyn , as Ebreies
doen . CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.60

Also litel charge is , whether Paralipominon be departid in ij. bookis
, as Latyns vsen , either be oo book aloone , as Ebreis doen ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,1.61

and so of the first book of Esdras and of Neemye , litel charge is ,
whether thei ben tweyne , as Latyns and <P_I,2> Grekis vsen , other oon
aloone , as Ebreyes vsen . CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.62

Netheles it semeth , that Latyns and Grekis han more reson in this
rikenyng than Ebreies han , CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.63

but hou euer these bookis ben noumbrid , alle these ben of autorite of
bileue , either of cristen feith . CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.64

Thanne if the first book of Esdre and the book of Neemye ben noumbrid
for tweyne , as Grekis and Latyns vsen , and if men taken Judith for a
book of holy Scripture , as the general congregacioun of clergie dide at
the Seyne of Nicene , as Jerom witnessith in the prologe on Judith ,
thanne in the olde testament ben xxvij. bookis of bileue .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.65

Also Eclesiastici was writen in Ebreu , CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.66

and the book of Wisdom is not anentis Ebreies , CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.67

but sowneth Grek eloquence , CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.68

and summe olde writers affermen , that the Jew Filo made it .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.69

Therfore as holy chirche redith Judith and Tobie and the bookis of
Machabeies , but resceyueth not tho among holy Scripturis , so the
chirche redith these ij. bookis Eclesiastici and Sapience to edifying
of the peple , not to conferme the autorite of techingis of holy chirche
; CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.70

Jerom seith this pleynly in the prologe on Prouerbis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.71

Also Jerom translatide the first book of Esdre and Neemye ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.72

and biddith that no man delite in the dremis of the iij. and iiij.
book of Esdre that ben apocrifa , that is , not of autorite of bileue ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.73

for anentis Ebreies the wordis of Esdre and of Neemye ben driuen in to o
book ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.74

and the bookis of the olde testament , that ben not anentis Ebreies ,
and ben not of the noumbre of holy writ , owen to be cast fer awey ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.75

Jerom seith this in the prolog of Esdre . CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.76

And therfore translatide not the thridde neither the fourthe book of
Esdre , that ben apocrifa ; but onely the first , and of Neemye , that
ben rikened for twey bookis anentis Grekis and Latyns , and ben of
autorite of bileue . CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.77

Netheles apocrifa ben seid in twey maners , CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.78

as Catholicon seith on this word apocrifa ; a book is seid apocrifum ,
either for the autor is vnknowen , and the treuthe therof is opyn ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.79

and hooly chirche resseyueth sich a book not to preuyng of feith , but
to lernyng of vertues ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.80

and siche ben the bookis of Judith and other , whiche Seynt Jerom
noumbrith in the prologe on Regum ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.81

either a book is seid apocrifum , for me doutith of the treuthe therof ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.82

and holy chirche resceyueth not siche bookis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.83

and siche ben the book of the +gong childhed of the Sauyour , and the
book of the takyng up of the body of Seynt Marye to heuen ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.84

Catholicon seith this on that word apocrifa . CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.85

But sothely alle the bookis of the newe testament , that is , foure
gospelleris , Matheu , Mark , Luk , and Jon ; xij. pistelis of Poul ,
vij. smale pistils , the Dedis of Apostlis , and the Apocalips ben
fulli of autorite of bileue ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.86

therfore cristen men and wymmen , olde and +gonge , shulden studie fast
in the newe testament , CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.87

for it is of ful autorite , and opyn to vndirstonding of simple men , as
to the poyntis that be moost nedeful to saluacioun ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.88

and the same sentence is in the derkiste placis of holy writ , whiche
sentence is in the opyn placis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.89

and ech place of holy writ , bothe opyn and derk , techith mekenes and
charite ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.90

and therfore he that kepith mekenes and charite hath the trewe
vndirstondyng and perfectioun of al holi writ , as Austyn preuith in his
sermoun of the preysing of charite . CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.91

Therfore no simple man of wit be aferd vnmesurabli to studie in the text
of holy writ , for whi tho ben wordis of euerlastyng lif , as Petir
seide to Crist in the vj. chapitre of Jon ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.92

and the Holy Gost stirede hooly men to speke and write the wordis of
hooly writ for the coumfort and saluacioun of meke cristen men , as
Petir in the ij. pistle in the ende , and Poul in xv. chapitre to
Romayns witnessen . CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.93

And no clerk be proude of the verrey vndirstondyng of holy writ , for
whi verrey vndirstonding of hooly writ with_outen charite , that kepith
Goddis heestis , makith a man depper dampned , as James and Jhesu Crist
witnessen ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.94

and pride and couetise of clerkis is cause of her blindenes and eresie ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,2.95

and priueth hem fro verrey vndir-stondyng <P_I,3> of holy writ ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.96

and maken hem go quyk in to helle , as Austyn seith on the Sauter , on
that word , Descendant in infernum viventes . CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.97

<heading>

CAP. II. CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.99

<$$heading>

THE old testament is departid in to thre parties , in to moral
comaundementis , iudicials , and cerimonyals . CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.101

Moral comaundementis techen to holde and preise and cherishe vertues ,
and to fle and repreue vicis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.102

and these comaundementis bynden euer , CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.103

and han strengthe , CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.104

for tho ben groundid in charite and reson , and in lawes of kynde .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.105

Judicials techen domes and peynes for orrible synnes ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.106

and the iudicials of Moises lawe weren ful iust and profitable for men ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.107

for tho weren ordeined of God , that may not erre in his domes , and
lawis , and workis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.108

Netheles sithen Crist was maad man , and ordeyned lawe of mercy and of
charite , and wole not the deth of a sinful man , bot repentaunce and
saluacioun , cristen men ben not bounden to kepe the iudicials of Moyses
lawe , that was endid in the tyme of Cristis passioun .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.109

But +git cristen lordis that han the swerd , and ben Goddis vikers , in
xiij. c=o=. to Romayns , moun punishe men , that trespassen openly ,
in catel and bodyly prisoun , and somtyme bi bodily deth , whanne the
synne may not ellis be distried , neither the comynte may ellis be
stablishid in pees , as the foure doctours and other latter preuen
opynly by holy writ and resoun ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.110

but looke that this be don for charite and comyn profit , with mercy and
compassioun of bretheren , not for couetise , nether pride , neither for
veniaunce of a mannes owne wrong . CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.111

Cerymonials techen figuris and sacramentis of the olde lawe , that
figureden Crist and his deth , and the misteries of holy chirche in the
lawe of grace ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.112

and these cerimonials ceessiden outirly , as to obligacioun , in the
tyme of Cristis deth , CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.113

and ben noyful and dampnable to men that kepen tho , CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.114

and for that the gospel is prechid and knowen generally ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.115

for if tho cerymonyes ben kept now , the kepers of tho knowlechen , that
Crist is not +git comen , neither suffrid deth for mankynde ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.116

and this knowleching is opyn heresie ; for whi the treuthe and fredom of
the gospel suffisith to saluacioun with_out keping of cerymonyes maad of
God in the old lawe , and mych more with_out cerimonyes of sinful men
and vnkunnynge , that ben made in the tyme of Antecrist , and of
vnbyndyng of Sathanas , in xx. c=o=. of Apocalips .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.117

Therfore as it is opyn eresie to seie , that the gospel with his treuthe
and fredom suffisith not to cristen mennes saluacioun with_outen kepyng
of cerimonyes of Goddis lawe +gouen to Moyses , so it semith opyn
heresie to seie , that the gospel with his treuthe and fredom suffisith
not to saluacioun of cristen men with_out kepyng of ceremonyes and
statutis of sinful men and vnkunnynge , that ben maad in the tyme of
Sathanas and of Antecrist . CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.118

<heading>

CAP. III. CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.120

<$$heading>

SYMPLE men of wit moun be edified mych to heuenly lyuyng bi redyng and
knowyng of the olde testament , CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.122

for in the bigynnyng of Genesis they moun knowe , hou God made heuen and
erthe and alle creaturis of nou+gt , CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.123

and made man to his owne ymage and licnesse , and to haue blisse in body
and soule with_outen ende . CMPURVEY-M3,I,3.124

Also men moun knowe , hou sore God punishide Adam and Eue for brekyng of
his comaundement ; and hou Abel plesid God by feith , mekenesse and
charite ; and hou Caym displeside hym by synnes , and specialli by enuye
, hatrede and manquellyng . Also hou Noe was loued of God , and al the
world , outaken viij. persones , was distried for synne ; and hou for
pride and other synnes God departid many langagis , that no man
vndirstood other in the tour of Babel ; and hou feithful and obedient to
God Abraham was , that he +gede out of his lond in to a straunge cuntre
, and was redy to sle his owne sone Isaac at the wille of God , and gat
therfore mich reward of God ; and hou God distried Sodom and Gommor ,
and other thre cytees , for leccherye and <P_I,4> other synnes , that
tho weren sunkun doun ; and the dede see is now where tho grete cytees
weren . Also hou trewe and obedient to God weren Isaac and Jacob and
Joseph , and hou God kepte hem in alle perels . CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.125

Al this proces of Genesis shulde stire cristen men to be feithful , and
for to drede and loue God , and in alle thingis do his wille .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.126

Also in Exodi men moun knowe , hou God kept his simple peple in Egipt ,
and encresside hem gretly in that lond , vndir the persecucioun and
tirauntrie of Farao , and deliueride hem by many miraclis , and punishid
Farao and his peple with ten stronge veniauncis , and fedde hem
meruelously in desert xl. +geris , where no duelling of men was bifore
, and made hem to ouercome the strong peple of Amalech .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.127

Aftir this God tau+gte hem wyis gouernayle , CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.128

and bitook to hem the ten comaundementis and other iudicials , to
punishe gretly opyn grete synnes . CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.129

Also they weren ful bisy to make a costlew tabernacle to the onour of
God , by his bidding and techyng , that figuride holi chirche and
vertues in mennes soulis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.130

At the laste God took gret veniaunce on hem for idolatrie , whanne thei
forsoken the feith and worshipyng of God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.131

and onoureden +goten calues bi stiryng of the deuel .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.132

And thanne Moyses was a trewe mediatour bitwix God and the sinful peple
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.133

and seide thus to God , for gret trist of his mercy and ri+gtfulnes ,
and for gret charite to the peple , " either for+giue thou this trespas
to hem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.134

either do me out of thi book in which thou hast writen me ; "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.135

and for this deuout preier and greet charite of Moyses God sparede the
synful pepil , CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.136

and distryede not sodeynly al the pepil , CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.137

but took hem to mercy and grace . CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.138

And this proces of Exodi shulde make men trysty in Goddis help , and to
be trewe in his loue , and eschewe his offence with al her my+gtis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.139

The iij. book clepid Leuitici techith men sacrificis due to God , and
for synnes of the peple , in the tyme of the olde testament , and that
no man vnworthi shulde ney+ge to the seruise and sacrifice of God .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.140

These sacrificis owen not to be kept now , CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.141

for tho figureden the passioun and deth of Crist , and remissioun of
synnes bi the blood and merit of Crist , in the lawe of grace .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.142

Also this book techith men to absteyne fro wedlok of ny+g kyn and
affynyte , with_ynne the ij. degre , CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.143

and ordeyneth peyne of deeth for ydolatrie , and weddyng with_ynne the
ij. degre of consanguynyte and affynite . CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.144

At the last this book techith men to kepe Goddis heestis , and for to
loue her nei+gboris and to do equyte to hem , and werkis of mercy to
nedy men ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.145

and comaundith iust wey+gtis and mesures , and domes ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.146

and forbedith strongly ydolatrye and wicche craftis and false
coniouryngis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.147

and tellith prosperite that shal come to hem that kepen Goddis heestis ,
and veniaunce and peyne to hem that breken Goddis heestis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.148

And this proces of Leuitici shulde make cristen men aferd to breke
Goddis heestis , and ioyful to kepe tho to lyf and deth , for reward of
God in euerlastyng blisse . CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.149

The iiij. book clepid Numeri tellith the noumbre of peple led out of
Egipt , bothe of lewid men and of prestis and of dekenys ; and how God
kept hem longe in the orrible desert , and punisshide hem alle bi deeth
, out_taken Caleph and Josue , for grucchyng and mystriste to Goddis
word , and punisshide Marie , Moyses sistyr , with lepre , for bacbytyng
of Moyses , the mylde seruaunt of God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.150

Also whanne God wolde haue distryed the peple for grucchyng a+gens hym ,
Moyses preyede with al his herte for the peple that wolde stoone hym to
deeth . CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.151

Also God techith there , that he that doth ony synne by pride shal be
deed , and that he that brak the sabot , +ghe by gaderyng of stickis ,
shulde be stooned of alle the peple . CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.152

Also God punisshide soore Chore , Dathan , and Abyron , that weren rebel
a+gens Moyses and Aaron , and made discencioun in the peple , so that
the erthe openyde , and deuouride hem with here tabernaclis , and al her
catel , and thei +geden doun quyke in to helle . CMPURVEY-M3,I,4.153

+Git whanne the <P_I,5> peple grucchide a+geyns Moyses and Aaron , and
wolde sle hem vniustly , and God killide mony thousendis of the peple
herfore , Moyses bad Aaron preye , and offre encense for the peple ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.154

and so he ceesside the veniaunce . CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.155

Also God techith there , that prestis shulen haue the firste fruytis and
the first boren thingis , and part of sacrificis and avowis and
offringis ; and dekenys shulen haue tithis of the peple , and +giue her
tithis , that is , the tenthe part of tithis whiche thei token of the
peple , to the hi+gest prest , and prestis and dekenys shulen holde hem
apayed with her spiritual part of tithis and offryngis , and take no
possessioun in the lond of her britheren , CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.156

for God hymself shal be the part and eritage of prestis , in the myddys
of the sones of Israel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.157

Also for Moyses and Aaron bileueden not fully to Goddis word , but
doutiden of his byheest at the water of a+genseying , God suffride not
hem for to entre in to the lond of byheest , CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.158

but bothe weren deed in desert . CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.159

Also in this book ben told the duellyngis of the children of Israel in
desert , and the batels whiche thei hadden a+geyns hethen men ; and of
Balaam hou he was huyrid to curse Goddis peple , and hou God compellyd
hym to blesse his peple , and to seye profesie of Crist .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.160

And for the peple of Israel dide fornicacioun and idolatrie , God bad
Moyses hange alle the princis a+gens the sunne , that the strong
veniaunce of God were turned awey fro the peple of Israel .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.161

And for as myche as Fynees the prest killide a duke of Israel , that
dide fornicacioun with an hethen womman , and dide this for feruent loue
to God , he gat of God euerlastyng presthod for hym and his seed ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.162

and turned awey Goddis wraththe fro the children of Israel .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.163

Also there is tau+gt , who shal be eyr of a man ; and of halydayes , and
sacrificis , and offryngis maade in tho ; and whiche avowis shulen be
holden , and whiche not ; and of batels ; and hou the preyes shulden be
departid among the peple , and what shulde falle to the prest ; and hou
the lond of byheest shulde be departid to xij. lynagis ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.164

and dekenys shulden haue citees to enhabite in tho , and the subarbees
to here sheep and beestys ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.165

and citees of refuyt shulden be ordeyned for hem that shedden blood
vnwilfully , not of purpos , neithir hatrede byfore goynge ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.166

and he that is gilty of mannis deeth shal be slayn with_outen ony
redempcioun . CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.167

This proces of Numeri shulde stire cristen men for to loue here enemyes
, and do good to hem , as Moyses and Aaron diden , and to kepe Goddis
heestis , and shede not mannis blood vniustly . CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.168

The fyfthe book clepid Deutronomye is a rehersyng and confermyng of al
the lawe biforegoyng , CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.169

and styrith men gretly to kepe and teche Goddis heestis , and adde no
thing to tho , neither drawe awey ony thing fro tho ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.170

and first it techith , that wise men and my+gty shulen be maad iugis ,
and deme iustly the pore and the riche ; aftirward hou the Jewis
ouercamen Seon , the kyng of Hesebon , and token his lond and alle the
goodis therynne in to her owne possessioun , and dedyn in lyk maner to
Og the kyng of Basan , and to his lond and goodis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.171

Ferthermore God comaundith men to kepe hise heestis , and adde no thing
therto , neither drawe ony thing ther fro , and that they drede and loue
God of al her herte , and al her soule , and al her strengthe , and
eschewe ydolatrie , and serue and worshipe hym aloone ; and that thei
teche Goddis heestis to here sones , and thenke on tho heestis in hous
and weye , slepynge and wakynge . CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.172

Also God comaundith his peple to eschewe weddyngis of hethen men and
wymmen to her children , lest they ben drawen to idolatrye ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.173

and bihetith many blessyngis to hem and miche encresyng of goodis , if
thei kepen treuly hise comaundementis , and that strong veniaunce and
distryyng shal come on the Jewis , if thei doen ydolatrie , and ben
vnobedient to God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.174

Also God biddith hem haue mynde , that they weldiden the lond of byheest
, not for her owne ri+gtfulnesse and strengthe , but for the synnes of
men that duelliden therynne , and for the ooth of God which he made to
Abraham and to other hooly men . CMPURVEY-M3,I,5.175

And thanne God remembrith to hem many grete synnis , to make hem war
that thei trespase no more , but that thei drede God <P_I,6> and loue
hym in alle her hert and soule , kepe hise comaundementis , and swere by
his name , and loue pilgrymes either comelyngis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.176

Eft God biddith hem haue hise wordis in her hertis and wittis , and haue
tho for a singne in the hondis , and bytwyxe her y+gen , and that they
teche her sones to bithenke on the wordis of God euere , and that they
write the wordis of God on the postis and +gatis of her hous ; and
tellith and +giueth his blessyng to hem , if thei kepen hise heestis ,
and +giueth his curs to hem , if they breken hise heestis , and
worshipen aliene goddis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.177

Also they shulen distrye the placis wherynne hethen men diden ydolatrie
, and distrye her auters , ymagis , woodis and ydols ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.178

and thei shulen make her sacrifices , and offre her tithis , and the
firste fruytis , and +giftis and avowis in the place which the Lord hath
chose to his name , CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.179

and this was the temple of Jerusalem . CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.180

Also a prophete , either a feynere of dremys , that wole styre men to do
ydolatrye shal be slayn , and so shal a frend either citee that doth
idolatrye , eithir styrith other men therto . CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.181

Also thou shalt paye tithis of alle fruytis that growen in erthe , of
whete , of wyn , and of oyle , and the first boren thingis of neet and
sheep ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.182

and in the thridde +gere thou shalt departe an othir tithe of alle
thingis that growen to thee , and kepe it with_ynne thine +gatis , to
susteyne the dekene , pylgrym outher comelyng , fadirles child either
modirles , and wydue , that ben with_ynne thy +gatis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.183

Also in the vij. +geer shal be remissioun of dette to citeseynes and
kynnesmen , netheles not to a pylgrym and comelyng , CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.184

for he may be compellid to paye . CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.185

Outirly a nedy man and begger shal not be among Goddis peple ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.186

but pore men shulen not fayle in the lond , CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.187

therfore ryche men shulen helpe hem with loue , and helpe hem wilfully
in here nede . CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.188

Thanne God techith of thre grete solempnetees , of pask , of the feeste
of woukis either pentecost , and of the feeste of tabernaclis ; and that
maystris and iugis shulen be ordeyned in alle +gatis either citees by
ech lynage , to deme the peple by iust doom , and take not +giftis
nether persones . CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.189

Ferthermore God techith , that who euer is conuyct by tweyne eithir thre
witnessis , that he hath do idolatrie , he shal be stoonyd , first by
the witnessis , and thanne by al the pepil . CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.190

He that is proud and wole not obeye to the comaundement of the hi+ge
prest , and to the doom of the iugis , in that that thei techen Goddis
lawe , shal be deed . CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.191

Thanne God techith , what maner kyng the pepil shal make , and what shal
be his office . CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.192

Aftirward God techith , that prestis and dekenys , and alle that ben of
the same lynage , shulen not haue part and eritage with the residue
pepil of Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.193

for they shulen ete the sacrifices of the Lord , and the offringis of
hym , CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.194

and thei shulen take noon othir thing of the possessioun of her
bretheren ; for whi God hym self is her eritage . CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.195

Ferthermore God forbedith idolatrie , and to enquere coniourers , and to
kepe dremys and chiteryng of briddis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.196

and comaundith that no wicche neithir enchaunter be , and that men take
not councel at hem that han spiritis in cloos , neithir at false
dyuynours , neithir axe of deede men the trouthe . CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.197

Also God shal reise a profete of her brethir , that is Crist the Sauyour
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.198

and he that hath not hise wordis shal be punishid . CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.199

A profete that wole speke by pride in the name of God that thing that
God bad not hym , eithir bi the name of othir goddis , shal be slayn .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.200

Also vj. citees of refuyt eithir of fraunchise shulen be , that he that
sleeth a man , not by hatrede but a+gens his wille , be saued ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.201

and he that sleeth a man bi hatrede and bifore_castyng , shal be slayn
with_oute mercy , eithir raunsoun . CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.202

He that is conuict to have seid fals witnessyng a+gens his brothir ,
shal haue the same peyne to which his brothir shulde be put , if he
hadde be gilty . CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.203

Also prestis shulen coumforte hem that gon to iust batel , to haue trist
in God , and drede not her enemyes , and that ferdful men , and thei
that han newly byldyd an hous , eithir newly plauntid a vyne , eithir
newly weddid a wyf , and not vsid hir , go not to batel ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.204

and first werryours shulen profre pees to a citee , CMPURVEY-M3,I,6.205

and if the citee +gelde it self , men ther <P_I,7> ynne shulen lyue
vndir tribute , CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.206

ellis alle men ther ynne shulen be slayn ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.207

and this is vndirstonden of tho citees that be not +gouen in to
possessioun to the pepil of Israel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.208

And there is teld the departyng of preyes , and what trees shulen be kit
doun in bisegynge . CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.209

Also God techith what shal be doon , whanne a man is founden slayn , and
the sleer is vnknowun . CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.210

A child rebel to the fadir and modir , and that +giueth hym silf to
glotenye , leccherye and drunkennesse , shal be stoonyd of al the citee
. CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.211

A man shal kepe the oxe and sheep of his brothir , that is strayed awey
, and bringe it a+gen to his brothir , and so of other beestis and of
ech thing ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.212

and if thou knowist not , whose tho ben , thou shalt kepe tho stille ,
tyl thi brothir seke and resseyue tho . CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.213

Who euer doth avoutrie , shal be deed ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.214

if a man defoulith a virgyne , he shal wedde hir , and +giue l. siclis
of siluer to her fadir . CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.215

Thou shalt not take a seruaunt to his lord , which seruaunt fledde to
thee , CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.216

bot he shal duelle with thee in a place that plesith hym .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.217

Noon hoore shal be of the dou+gtris of Israel , neithir a lechour of the
soones of Israel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.218

Thou shalt not leene to thi brothir for vsure . CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.219

If a man hatith his wife , he shal write and +giue to hir a libel of
forsakyng ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.220

but this is forbedun of Crist in the gospel of M=t= .v=to=. ca=o=. and
xix ca=o= . CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.221

Whanne a man hath take late a wyf , he shal not go to batel ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.222

neithir ony comyn office shal be put on hym , CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.223

but oon +geer he shal be glad with his wif , and take heede to his hous
. CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.224

He that proloyneth his brothir , which is a fre man , and sillith hym ,
shal be slayn . CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.225

Thou shalt +gelde at ny+gt to a pore man his weed , CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.226

and in the same day thou shalt paye to a nedy traueylour his huyre .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.227

Fadris shulen not be slayn for the sones , neithir sones for the fadris
. CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.228

Whanne thou repist corn in the feeld , and for+getist an handful , thou
shalt not turne a+gen to take it , CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.229

but thou shalt suffre that a comelyng , fadirles child and wydewe take
it awey ; and so of gaderyng of olyues and of gaderyng of grapis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.230

Whanne twey men ben at debatyng , and the wif of oon wole delyuere hir
housbond fro the hond of the strenger , and take hym by the preuy
membris , sche shall leese her hond withouten eny mercy .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.231

And there God forbedith false wei+gtis and mesures , a more and a lesse
. CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.232

Also dekenes schulen pronunce and seie with hi+g vois to alle the men of
Israel , he is cursid that doth ydolatrie , eithir brekith eny
comaundement of God eithir doth a+gens eny part of the lawe of God ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.233

and al the peple schal seie , Amen . CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.234

Also God biheetith greet prosperite to his peple , if thei kepe his
heestis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.235

and thei schulen be blessid in citee and in feeld , CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.236

and the fruit of her wombe and the fruyt of her lond shal be blessid ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.237

and alle thingis that perteynen to hem schulen be blessid ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.238

and thei schulen haue victorie of hire enemyes , CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.239

and manye prosperites of soule and of bodi schulen bifalle to hem ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.240

and if thei kepen not Goddis heestis , thei schulen be cursid in cite
and feeld , CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.241

the fruit of her wombe , and alle thingis that perteynen to hem schul be
cursid ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.242

God schal sende hem hungir , thirst , pestilence , feuer and coold ,
brennynge and heete , and corupt eir , til thei perischen ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.243

enemyes schulen haue victorie , and conquere hem , and take hem
presoners ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.244

and +git God schal punysche hem with huge veniaunce , that alle that
heeren ben astonyed . CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.245

Natheles if whanne alle these veniances ben fallen on hem , thei
repenten verily in the herte , and turne a+gen to God , and obeyen to
hise heestis in al her herte and al her soule , the Lord shal haue mercy
on hem , and bringe hem a+gen to hire lond fro alle folkis , among
whiche thei weren scaterid , CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.246

and God schal blesse hem , and make hem to be of more noumbre than her
fadris weren , CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.247

and schal turne alle the cursis on her enemyes ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.248

and God schal +geue to hem aboundaunce in alle werkis of her hondis ,
and in alle thingis that perteynen to hem . CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.249

Moises spac alle these wordis to al the puple of Israel ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.250

and bad hem drede not her enemyes , CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.251

for God schal go bifore his peple , and ouercome her enemyes .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,7.252

And Moises ordeyned Josue to be ledere of the peple bifore al the
multitude of the sones <P_I,8> of Israel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.253

Moises wroot this lawe CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.254

and +gaf it to prestis , the sones of Leuy , and to the eldre men of
Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.255

and bad hem rede the wordis of this lawe bifore al Israel , in the
heeringe of alle men and wymmen , litel children , and comelingis ,
eithir conuersis to the feith of Jewis , that thei heere and lerne and
dreede oure Lord God , and kepe and fille alle the wordis of this lawe .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.256

Moises bi Goddis comaundement wroot a greet song , CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.257

and tau+gte it the children of Israel , that it schulde be into
witnessing a+gens hem ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.258

and Moises clepide togidere alle the eldre men and techeris ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.259

and clepide heuene and erthe into witnessing a+gens hem ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.260

and whanne Moises hadde fillid alle the wordis of this greet song , he
styede into an hil , CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.261

and was deed there , CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.262

and God biryede him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.263

and man knew not his sepulcre til_into this day . CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.264

Cristen men schulde myche reede and heere and kunne this book of
Deutronomye that conprehendith al the lawe of Moises , and disposith men
for to bileeue in Crist , and heere and kepe his wordis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.265

<heading>

CAP. IV. CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.267

<$$heading>

The vj. book , which is clepid Josue , tellith in general , that Josue
brou+gte the peple into the lond of biheeste , and departide it bi lott
to hem ; and first how God bihi+gte to Josue that noon schulde mowe
a+genstonde him and his peple in alle the daies of his lijf ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.269

and God bihi+gte that Josue schulde departe bi lot to his peple the lond
of biheest ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.270

and God comaundide him to kepe al the lawe , and bowe not fro it , but
thenke therinne bi daies and ny+gtis , that he kepe and do tho thingis
that ben writen therinne . CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.271

Aftir this Josue sente aspies to bihoolde the lond and the citee of
Jerico ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.272

and thei entriden in to the hous of a comun womman Raab ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.273

and weren sauid there bi counceil and helpe of the womman .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.274

Thanne Josue bad the prestis take the arke of boond of pees of the Lord
, and goo bifore the peple , CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.275

and thei diden so . CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.276

And whanne the prestis camen with the arke to the brinke of Jurdan , the
greet watir of Jurdan wente awey to the deed se , CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.277

and the hi+gere wateris stooden stille as a wal , so that the peple
passide bi the drie botme , and the prestis stoodin on the drie erthe in
the myddis of Jurdan . CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.278

Also Josue bad xij. men of xij. lynagis of Israel take xij. greete
stoonis fro the botme of Jordan , and sette tho in Galgalis , where the
peple settide tentis in the ny+gt aftir the passage of Jurdan , and take
xij. stoonis of the lond , and putte in the myddis of Jordan , where
the arke hadde stoonde ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.279

and bad that fadris schulden teche hire children , hou thei passiden bi
the drie botme of Jurdan , CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.280

for God driede the watris theroffe , as he hadde do before in the reed
se , CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.281

and the prestis and princis and al the peple obeyede to Josue .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.282

Thanne Josue circumcide the peple that was vncircumcidid xl. +geer in
desert , CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.283

and the peple made paask in the xiiij. day of the monthe at euentid ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.284

and Josue si+g an aungel of the Lord , which aungel was prince of Goddis
oost . CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.285

Also the stronge wallis of Jerico felden doun at Goddis ordynaunce ,
whanne the prestis brayeden with vij. trumpis , and alle the peple
criede an hi+g in the vij. day of cumpassing of the citee .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.286

And the peple of Israel distroiede and brente the citee and alle thingis
therinne , outaken Raab and tho that weren in her hous , and outtaken
gold and syluer , and vessels of bras and yroun , whiche thei haleweden
in to the tresorie of the Lord . CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.287

Also for Achar dide a+gens Goddis bidding , and took to himself a thing
reserued to Goddis vs , he was stoonid and brent , CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.288

and alle hise goodis weren brent with hym ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.289

and til this punysching was doon on hym , the peple of Israel my+gte not
stoonde , CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.290

but was ouercomen of hire enemyes . CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.291

After this punysching of Achar Josue took the citee of Hay ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.292

and killede the king and al the peple , CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.293

and distroiede and brente the citee , CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.294

and hangide the king therof in a iebat . CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.295

Thanne Josue bildide an auter to God in the hill of Hebal ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.296

and offride theronne brent sacrifice and peesible sacrificis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,8.297

and wroot the Deutronomye of Moyses lawe on <P_I,9> stoonis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.298

And first he blesside the peple of Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.299

and aftir these thingis he redde alle the wordis of blessing and of
cursing , and alle thingis that weren writen in the book of lawe ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.300

he lefte noo thing vntouchid of these thingis whiche Moises hadde
comaundid , CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.301

but he declaride alle thingis bifore al the multitude of Israel , to
wymmen and litel children , and to comelyngis that dwelliden among hem .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.302

Also men of Gabaon feyneden hem to be of fer cuntre ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.303

and bi this fraude thei gaten of Josue and other princis pees and lijf ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.304

and for this fraude thei and alle hire successouris weren maad boonde ,
to bringe woode and watir to the seruise of the auter and of al the
multitude of Israel for euere . CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.305

Also Josue by Goddis help ouercam v. greete kingis in oo day ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.306

and made hise princis trede on the neckis of these kingis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.307

and aftirward hangide these kingis in v. iebatis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.308

and he ouercam alle the kingis and her peplis that dwelliden in the lond
of biheest , that weren xxxj. kingis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.309

and departide the lond of biheest to xij. lynagis of Israel bi lot ,
and citees of refuyt , and citees to prestis and dekenes to dwelle inne
, as God comaundide . CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.310

This processe of Josue schulde stire cristene men to haue greet trist in
God , and dreede noo man neither peple , as longe as thei seruen treuly
Almy+gty God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.311

The vij. book clepid Judicum tellith that the puple of Israel was
reulid with iugis , either domysmen , aftir the deeth of Josue , and
sumtyme bi a womman Delbora . CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.312

Whanne the peple felde to greete synnes , and specialy to ydolatrie ,
God sente aduersaries on hem that turmentiden the Jewis ful sore , and
killide many thousendis of hem , and heeld othere vndir tribute and
greet thraldam . CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.313

And whanne the peple repentide vereily , and criede to God with al her
herte , he sente help to hem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.314

and reiside a iuge that ouercam her enemyes , CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.315

and reulide hem wel in pees and in Goddis lawe . CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.316

This prosces of Judicum schulde stire cristene men for to flee synne ,
and loue God that doith so greet mercy to hem that repentyn verili .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.317

This book comprehendith the storie of Ruth , that was an hethene womman
, and lefte her nacoun , and ydolatrie , and bileeuede in God , and
kepte his lawe . CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.318

Therfore sche was weddid to a noble man of the Jewis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.319

and is set in the genelogie either kynrede of oure Sauyour .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.320

This story schulde stire alle men to forsake her synne , and serue God
treuly in al hire lijf , for reward of heuenly blisse .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.321

The first book of Kingis tellith , how the prest Ely and his sones weren
repreued and slayn , for thei gouerneden yuele Goddis peple , and for
her synne and necligence the peple dide myche synne , and was ouercomen
of hethene men , and the arke of God was taken of hethene men , and thei
killeden manye thousindis of the Jewis ; and how the trewe chijld Samuel
was a feithful prophete of the Lord , and gouernede wel the peple in
Goddis seruise and ri+gtfulnesse , and dide noon extorcioun , neither
took +giftis of eny man , neither coueitide eny mannis good , but dide
alle thingis in his offis iustly bifore God and man .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.322

And whanne Samuel was eeld , he settide his sones iuges of Israel ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.323

and for thei bowide aftir auarice , and tooken +giftis , and peruertiden
doom , the peple axiden a king on hem , to greet indignacoun of God and
harm of hemself . CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.324

Thanne Saul that was pore and meke , and sou+gte the assis of his fadir
, was maad king , CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.325

and dide wel a lytel while , CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.326

and aftirward for his pride and coueitise he was repreued of God , and
pryued fro the reume , bothe he and his kyn ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.327

and pore Dauith was chosen king bi Goddis ordynaunce for his meeknesse ,
mersy , and charite . CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.328

Dauith sparyde Saul his enemye , that pursuede him to deeth vniustly ,
and was a traitour and blasfemere of God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.329

and not oonly sparide him twyes bitaken in to his hoondis , whanne he
my+gte haue slayn him , and +git ascapide harmles , CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.330

but also lettide hise men to smyte hym , whanne thei my+gten haue slayn
him , and scapid harmles . CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.331

And +git the wickid tyraunt Saul pursuede him for enuye ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,9.332

<P_I,10>

and sou+gte his deth in manye maners , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.334

and euere God kepte Dauith in alle perrels , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.335

and +geldide peyne to Saul for his tyrauntrie and wickidnesse ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.336

and made him to be slayn of hethene men . CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.337

This processe of the firste book of Kingis schulde stire prestis to be
not necligent in her offis , neither to be coueytous , and styre seculer
lordis to be meke and iust to God and men . CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.338

The ij. book of Kingis tellith first , hou Dauith biweylide greetly the
deth of Saul and of Jonatas , and of Goddis peple ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.339

and Dauith killede the man of Amalech that killede Saul outirly , aftir
the deeth wounde of Saul , and brou+gte to Dauith the coroune and bye of
Saul . CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.340

Aftir this the lynage of Juda corounnede either anoyntide Dauith in
Ebron , that he schulde reyne on the hous of Juda ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.341

and thanne was longe werre bytwixxe Hisboseth , sone of Saul , and
bitwixe the hous of Dauith ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.342

Dauith encreside euere , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.343

and waxe strongere and strongere , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.344

and the hous of Saul dicreeside ech day ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.345

and Dauith rengnide vij. +geer in Ebron , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.346

and gat vj. sones . CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.347

Also Dauith made mychel sorewe for the deth of Abner , whanne Joab hadde
killid him bi treesoun . CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.348

Also Dauith killide Baana and Rechab , that killeden bi treesoun
Hisboseth his enemye . CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.349

Thanne al Israel cam in to Ebron , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.350

and anoyntide Dauith in to king of Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.351

and Dauith regnede on Juda in Ebron vij. +geer and an half ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.352

and regnede in Jerusalem xxxiij. +geer on al Israel and Juda ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.353

and was xxx. +ger eeld whanne he began to rengne , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.354

and rengnede xl. +geer . CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.355

Aftir this the noble king Dauith hadde twyes victorie of Filisteis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.356

Thanne Dauith took xxx._thousind chosen men of Israel to bringe to his
place the arke of God , for reuerence and deuocioun .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.357

Dauith made greet mynstrelsye , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.358

and mekide himself bifore the arke , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.359

and suffride rebukinge of Mycol , the dou+gtir of Saul ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.360

therfore Dauith thougte to bylde an hous to the ark of God .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.361

Thanne God telde to Dauith that his sone schulde bylde this hous ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.362

and the trone of the reume of Dauith schal be stable withouten ende ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.363

and this is fillid in Crist . CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.364

Thanne Dauith hadde victorie of many londis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.365

and made tho tributarie to Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.366

and God kepte Dauith in alle thingis , to whiche he +ged forth .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.367

And Dauith dide dom and ri+gtfulnesse to al his peple ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.368

and he dide mercy and curtesie to Myfyboseth , sone of Jonatas .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.369

Aftir these thingis Dauith dwellide at home , whanne Joab and the oost
wente to bateile , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.370

and in this tyme Dauith dide auoutrie with Bersabee , the wijf of Vrie ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.371

and procuride the deth of Vrie bi tresoun . CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.372

Thanne God sente Nathan the prophete to repreue Dauith of this synne ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.373

and he took meekly his repreuyng , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.374

and knoulechide that he synnede a+gens God ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.375

and God for+gaf the synne , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.376

but swerd and persecusioun +gede neuere awey fro his hous ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.377

for God killede the sone of Bersabee , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.378

and oo sone of Dauith killede another , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.379

and Absolon his sone roos a+gens him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.380

and droof him out of Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.381

and sou+gte with stronge oost to slee him . CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.382

Thanne Dauith +gede out of Jerusalem on his feet , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.383

and sti+gide with bare feet into the hi+gnesse of the hille of Olyuete ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.384

and wepte , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.385

and al his peple wepte bittirly . CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.386

And Dauith mekede him to God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.387

and seide , " +gif God seith to me , thou pleesist not me , I am redy ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.388

do he that that is good bifore himself . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.389

Thanne Semey , that was of the kyn of Saul , dispiside Dauith ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.390

and clepide him a manquellere , and a man of Belial , and a rauenour of
the rewme , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.391

and he curside Dauith , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.392

and castide stoonis and erthe a+gens Dauith , and a+gens alle the
seruauntis of king Dauith ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.393

and whanne Abisay wolde slee this cursere , Dauith bad him suffre Semey
to curse him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.394

and seide , God comaundide hym that he curse Dauith .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.395

And the kyng seide to Abysay and to alle his seruauntis , " Loo ! my
sone that +gede out of my wombe seekith my lijf , that is , to slee me ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.396

how myche more now this sone of Gemyny ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.397

suffre +ge him to curse bi comaundement of the Lord ; if in caas the
Lord bihoolde my turment , and +gelde good to me for this cursing to day
. " CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.398

Aftirward Absolon defoulide opynly his fadris wijfes bifore al Ysrael .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.399

Thanne Achitofel +gaf a fel counceyl , to pursue Dauith in that ny+gt
with xij. thousandis of men , and sle him bifore that he were war ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,10.400

but this counceil was <P_I,11> distroied bi Goddis wille , and bi a wijs
conuceil of Chusy , the frend of Dauith . CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.401

Thanne Absolon gaderide al the power of Israel to make opyn werre a+gens
his fadir ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.402

natheles Dauith for pite and charite comaundide thre princis of his oost
to kepe Absolon alyue , that he my+gte repente , and be sauid .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.403

And whanne Dauith knew that Absolon was slayn , he made so gret sorewe ,
that almest he was deed , CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.404

and al the peple was in poynt to forsake Dauith . CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.405

Thanne for this perel Dauith lefte his moornyng , CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.406

and sat opinly in the +gate , to conforte al his oost .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.407

After this the counceil of al Israel cam to Dauith , that thei wolde
brynge him in to his rewme worschipfully ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.408

and Dauith for+gaf the opyn tresoun to hem that thei hadden do bifore ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.409

and stiride swetly , men of Juda , that weren specialy his traytouris ,
to come and bringe hym in to his rewme , CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.410

and for+gaf her tresoun , CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.411

and he for+gaf the souereyn tresoun to Amasa , that was of his owne kyn
, and was prince of the oost of Absalon to slee Dauith ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.412

and Dauith swor to make this Amasa prince next Joab ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.413

and for+gaf the synne and cursing and tresoun to Semey ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.414

and swor that he shulde not dy+ge . CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.415

+Git bifore that Dauith cam to Jerusalem , a new debate roos bitwixe the
men of Israel and the men of Juda , CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.416

for this bringing a+gen of the king was not teld first to men of Israel
; CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.417

and bi stiring of Syba , a man of Belial , that was of kyn of Saul , al
Israel was departid fro Dauith , CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.418

and suede this Syba ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.419

and in this tyme Joab killyde bi tresoun the noble kny+gt Amasa .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.420

Thanne this Syba passide bi alle the lynagis of Israel til_into Habela ,
and into Bethmaka , CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.421

and alle chosen men weren gaderid to him . CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.422

And Joab and his oost bysegeden these citees , CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.423

and wolde distroie the greet citee Habela , CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.424

and a wijs woman of the citee sauid it bi hire counceil ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.425

and made Syba to be slayn , and al the peple to be sauid on bothe sydis
. CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.426

Also vij. men of the kyn of Saul weren slayn of Gabaonytis , bi
suffring of Dauith , and bi counceil of God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.427

for Saul killede wickidly the men of Gabaon ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.428

and for this synne of Saul hungir was maad thre +geer in the daies of
Dauith ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.429

and aftir this veniaunce don on the hous of Saul , God dide mersy to the
lond . CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.430

Thanne is set a greet song of Dauith , which he spac to God , whanne he
hadde delyuered him fro the hond of alle his enemyes ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.431

thanne sueth the noumbre of stronge men of Dauith .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.432

At the laste Dauith for pride and a+gens the lawe noumbride the peple of
Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.433

and therfore lxx._thousind of men weren deed bi pestilence .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.434

Thanne Dauith repentide him sore , CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.435

and mekide him to God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.436

and seide thus , " I it am , that synnede , CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.437

and I dide wickidly ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.438

what han these men don that ben scheep , that is , symple and innocent
in comparisoun of me ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.439

I biseche that thin hond be turnid a+gens me , and a+gens the hous of my
fadir . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.440

Thanne God sente his profete Gad to hym , CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.441

and bad him make an auter , and offre brent sacrifices and peesible
sacrifices ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.442

and God dide mercy to the lond , CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.443

and the veniaunce ceeside of Israel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.444

The prosces of this ij. book ou+gte to stire kingis and lordis to mersy
and ri+gtfulnesse , and euere to be war of ydilnesse , that brou+gte
Dauith to auoutrie and othere myscheues , and euere to be meeke to God
and hise prestis , and sore repente of hire mysdeedis , and make amendis
to God and men , and wilfully for+geue wroongis don to hem , and euere
be war of pride and extorcouns , leest God take veniaunce on al the
peple , as he dide on Dauith and his peple , and euere to be pacient and
mersiful , as Dauith was , to gete remissioun of synnes bifore don , and
to gete pees , and prosperite , and heuenly blisse withouten ende .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.445

<heading>

CAP. V. CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.447

<$$heading>

The thridde book of Kingis tellith first , how Adonyas , sone of Dauith
, wolde haue , regned , and Dauith in his lijf ordeynede Salomon to be
king , and he regnede bifore the deeth of Dauith . CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.449

Thanne Adonyas fledde for dreede to the tabernacle of God ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,11.450

and heeld <P_I,12> the corneer of the auter , tyl Salamon seide , that
if he were a good man , he schulde not dye ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.451

ellis , if yuel were founden in him , he schulde di+ge .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.452

Thanne Dauith , in the tyme of his dy+ginge , chargide Salamon to kepe
wel Goddis lawe , and to quyte to the sones of Bersellay the trewthe and
kyndnesse of her fadir , and to punysche Joab for his trecherouse
manquelling of Abner and of Amasa in the tyme of pees , and to punysche
wisely Semey for his wrste {COM:sic} cursing , which he dide to Dauith .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.453

Aftir these thingis Salamon made Adonyas to be slayn ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.454

for he purposide gilefully to be king . CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.455

And Salamon castide awey Abiathar , that he was not the prest of the
Lord , CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.456

and exylide him also , CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.457

for he assentide to Adonyas , CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.458

and was traytour to the king . CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.459

Also Salamon comaundide Joab to be slayn in the taber-nacle at the auter
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.460

for he hadde slayn gilefully twey princis in pees , withoute wyting of
Dauith ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.461

and the king ordeynede Sadoch prest for Abiathar . CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.462

Thanne the king comaundide Semey , that he schulde not go out of
Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.463

and if he passide the stronde of Cedron , he schulde be deed ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.464

and Semey acceptide this ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.465

and for he passide these boundis , the king comaundide him to be slayn ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.466

and so he was slayn by comaundement of the king . CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.467

Aftir these thingis the rewme was confermed in to the hondis of Salamon
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.468

and he weddide the dou+gter of Faroo , king of Egipt .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.469

Thanne God bad Salamon axe of him , what hym lykide ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.470

and he axide that God schulde +geue to him wijs herte , that he my+gte
deme his peple , and make discrescyoun eithir departyng bitwixe good and
yuel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.471

And this axing pleeside God ful myche , CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.472

therfore God +gaf to him a wijs herte and vndirstondinge , in so myche
that noon bifore hym was lyk hym , neithir schal rise aftir hym .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.473

Also God +gaf to him richesse and glorie , that noon among kingis was
lyk him in alle daies bifore . CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.474

Thanne for Salamon +gaf a wijs sentense of dom bitwixe twey comen wymmen
, that passide the wit of comun men , thei dredden the king ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.475

and seyin that Goddis wisdom was in him to make dom .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.476

Thanne is toold the worschipeful meyne and houshoold of Salamon .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.477

Aftir these thingis Salamon bildide a noble hous to himself , and a
famouse temple to God in Jerusalem . CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.478

And aftir that the temple was fully maad , alle the eldre men and
princis of lynagis and dukis of meynes of the children of Israel weren
gaderid to king Salamon in Jerusalem , to bringe the arke of God fro
Syon in to his owne place in the temple . CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.479

Thanne the king axide of God manye preieris , and profitis for hem that
preieden deuoutly in the temple , CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.480

and God grauntide tho . CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.481

Aftir these thingis God halewide the temple , CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.482

and certyfiede to Salamon , that if he kepte alle his comaundementis ,
he shulde sette the trone of Salamons rewme on Israel withouten ende ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.483

and if the pepel of Israel and her children kepen not Goddis heestis ,
but worschipen alyen goddis , he schal do awey Israel fro the face of
lond which he +gaf to hem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.484

and God schal caste awey fro his si+gt the temple which he halewide to
his name , CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.485

and Israel schal be into a prouerbe and fable either tale to alle peplis
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.486

and this hous schal be into ensaumple . CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.487

Aftir this the qwene of Saba cam to Salamon , CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.488

and hadde greet aray of men and of jewelis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.489

and +gaf manye jewelis to Salamon , and he a+geen to hire .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.490

Also Salamon tau+gte hire alle thingis that sche hadde in hire herte ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.491

and sche blessid God and Salamon and his seruauntis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.492

and +gede into hire lond . CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.493

Thanne Salamon made manye scheeldis and bokelers of gold ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.494

and made a greet trone of yuer , CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.495

and clothide it with fyn gold . CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.496

Thanne king Salamon was magnified ouer alle kyngis of erthe in richessis
and wisedom , CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.497

and al erthe desyride to see his face , and to heere his wisdom , which
his God hadde +goue in his herte . CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.498

Aftir alle these thingis Salamon , whanne he was eeld , louede gretly
manye hethene wymmen , CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.499

and hadde a_thousind wijues , principal and secundaries ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.500

and thanne his herte was bischrewid and peruertid bi tho wymmen , that
he suede alyen goddis , and worschipide hem . CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.501

Therfore God reiside an aduersarie to Salamon in his lijf ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,12.502

and departide <P_I,13> his rewme in the tyme of Roboam his sone ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.503

and +gaf ten lynagis to Joroboam his seruaunt , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.504

and kepte oo lynage to his sone for the merit of Dauith his fadir .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.505

And this departyng bifelde myche , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.506

for Roboam forsook the counceil of eelde and wijse men ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.507

and suede the counceil of +gunge men , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.508

and spac harde wordis to the peple . CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.509

Thanne Roboam gaderide proudly al the hous of Juda , and the lynage of
Beniamyn , an_c._thousind_and_iiij._score_thousind of chosen men and
werrouris , that thei schulden fi+gte a+gens the hous of Israel , and
bringe a+gen the rewme to Roboam , the sone of Salamon ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.510

but God forbed this werre to Roboam and al his peple , for whi this word
of departyng of the rewme was don of God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.511

Thanne Jeroboam made ij. golden caluys , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.512

and bad Israel worschipe tho , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.513

and sti+ge no more to Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.514

and seide , " Israel , lo ! these ben thi goddis , that ledden thee out
of the lond of Egipt ; " CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.515

and he made vnworthi prestis of the laste men of the peple , that were
not of the sones of Leuy , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.516

and he made templis in hi+ge placis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.517

Also whanne Jeroboam stood on the auter and castide encense , a man of
God cam fro Juda bi the word of God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.518

and seide , " A sone , Josias bi name , schal be born to the hous of
Dauith , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.519

and he schal sle on this auter the prestis of hi+ge placis , that brenne
now encense in this autir , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.520

and he schal brenne boonys of men on this auter ; " CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.521

and the prophete +gaf this singne , that the auter schal be cleft , and
the asche therinne schal be sched out . CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.522

Thanne Jeroboam heeld forth his hond , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.523

and bad take that prophete , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.524

and his hond was drie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.525

and hee my+gte not drawe it a+gen , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.526

and bi preier of the prophete the hond was heelid .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.527

And singne bifelde on the auter , as the prophete seide ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.528

and for that prophete eet breed in that place a+gens Goddis bidding ,
+ghe bi disseit of a fals prophete , the trewe prophete of God was slayn
of a lyoun in the wey homward . CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.529

Aftir these wordis Jeroboam turnede not a+gen fro his worste weie ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.530

but a+genward of the laste peples he made prestis of hi+ge placis , who
euere wolde , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.531

fyllede his hond , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.532

and was maad prest of hi+ge placis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.533

and for this cause the hous of Jeroboam synnede , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.534

and was distroied , and doon awey fro the face of erthe .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.535

Aftir this the prophete Ahia , that was blynd for eelde , knew the wijf
of Joroboam , that feynede hire to be anothir womman ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.536

and he bifore seide to hire , that hire syk sone schulde di+ge in hir
entryng in to hir hous , and that the hous of Jeroboam schulde be
distroied outtirly for his synnes ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.537

and Israel schal be dryuen out of his good lond for the synnes of
Joroboam , that synnede , and made Israel to do synne .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.538

Also the peple of Juda dide ydolatrie ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.539

therfore the king of Egipt took awey the tresouris of Goddis hous , and
of the kingis hous , and the golden scheeldis of Salamon , for whiche
Roboam made scheeldis of bras . CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.540

And batail was bitwixe Roboam and Jeroboam in alle daies .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.541

Thanne Abia regnede thre +geer on Juda , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.542

and +gede in alle the synnes of his fadir . CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.543

Aftir him roos king Asa in Juda , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.544

and he dide ri+gtfulnesse bifore God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.545

and dide awey idolatrie and sodomytis fro the lond ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.546

and his herte was perfit with God in alle daies . CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.547

And schortly amonge alle the kingis of Israel was noon feithful to God ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.548

summe weren goode amonge the kingis of Juda ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.549

and this figurith , that among men of hooly chirche be summe goode ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.550

but among eretikis is noon good outtirly , as Jerom seith .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.551

Aftir manye yuele kingis of Israel roos Acab , the worste of alle bifore
hym , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.552

and he weddide Jesabel , an hethene womman , the dou+gtir of Mechaal ,
king of Sydonyes , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.553

and Achab dide manyfoold idolatrie . CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.554

Thanne roos Elie the prophete , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.555

and seide to Acab , that in thre +geer and an half neither reyn neither
dew schal be . CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.556

Aftir this the prophete Elye hidde himself in the stronde of Carith ,
a+gens Jordan , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.557

and drank watir , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.558

and was fed of rauenys there , whiche brou+gten to him breed and flesch
in the euentid and morewtid , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.559

and aftir that the stronde was dried up , God bad Elye go into Sarepta
of Sydoneyes , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.560

and there he was fed of a widewe , CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.561

and the pot of mele and the pot of oile fallede not to the widewe , til
God +gaf reyn on the erthe . CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.562

Thanne Elie reiside to lijf the deed chijld of a womman , at whom he was
myche susteyned . CMPURVEY-M3,I,13.563

And aftir manye daies God bad Elye schewe him to Acab , that God
<P_I,14> schulde +geue reyn on the lond ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.564

and Elie dide so ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.565

and greet hungir was in Samarie . CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.566

Thanne Elie apperide first to Abdie , that dredde God ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.567

and fedde an_c. prophetis of God , whanne Jesabel killide the prophetis
of God ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.568

and Elie swor to Abdie bi the Lord of oostis , that he wolde appere in
that day to Achab . CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.569

Thanne Acab axide Elye , " Wher thou art he , that distrowblist Israel ?
" CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.570

And Elie seide , " Not I distrowblide Israel , but thou and the hous of
thi fadir , that han forsaken Goddis heestis , and han sued Balym , han
distroublid Israel . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.571

Aftir this the prophete Elie conuyctid bi an opyn myracle
viij._c._and_l. prophetis of Baal of opin ydolatrie ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.572

and killede hem alle with helpe of the peple , that bileeuede to God for
the greet myracle . CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.573

And aftir this God sente greet rayn , CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.574

and Elye ran bifore Acab to the citee Jesrael . CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.575

Aftir these thingis Elye fledde for dreede of Jesabel , that manaside to
slee hym , CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.576

and whanne he hadde fled into disert bi the jurney of oo day , he axide
of God to di+ge ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.577

and whanne he slepte , an aungel bad hym rise , and eete breed baken
vndir aischis , and drinke watir ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.578

and he +gede in the strengthe of that mete xl. daies and xl. ny+gtis ,
til_to Oreb the hil of God ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.579

and whanne he was hid there in a denne , and seide , that he was left
aloone a prophete of the Lord , and thei sou+gten to slei him , God bad
him go to Damask , and anoynte Asahel king on Sirie , and anoynte Hieu
king on Israel , and anoynte Elisee a prophete for him ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.580

and these thre schulden do veniaunce on trespasouris , and slee hem ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.581

and God lefte to himself vij._thousind of men in Israel , whois knees
were not bowid bifore Baal . CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.582

Thanne it sueth how Elisee suede Elie . CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.583

Aftir these thingis king Acab hadde twey greete and merueilous victories
a+gens Benadab , king of Sirie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.584

for he blasfemede God of Israel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.585

And for king Acab dide false mersy and killide not this blasfemere
Benadab , whom God bitook into hise hondis , God sente a prophete to
Acab , CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.586

and telde thus , " For thou suffredist a man wrthi the deth to go fro
thin hond , thi lijf schal be for his lijf , CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.587

and thi peple schal be for his peple . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.588

Aftirward Jesabel the qwene made Nabath to be stonyd to deth bi false
witnesse , and assent of Acab , CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.589

for he n@ @oolde chaunge neither sille his vyner to the king ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.590

and whanne Acab +gede doun to take possessioun of this vyner , God bad
Elye meete him , and seie thus , " Thou hast slayn CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.591

and hast take possessioun ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.592

the Lord seith these thingis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.593

in this place wherinne doggis lickiden the blood of Nabath , thei
schulen licke also thi blood . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.594

And Acab seide to Elye , " Wher thou hast founden me thin enemy ? "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.595

And Elye seide , " I haue founde , for thou art seeld to do yuel in
Goddis si+gt , CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.596

therfore God schal distroie and slee ech man of the house of Acab , and
+geue his hous as the hous of Jeroboam , and as the hous of Baasa ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.597

for Acab terride God to wraththe , CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.598

and made Ysrael to do synne . CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.599

Also doggis scholen ete Jesabel in the feeld of Jesrael ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.600

if Acab di+geth in the citee , doggis scholen ete him ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.601

if he dieth in the feeld , briddis of the eir schulen ete him . "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.602

Noon othir was such as Acab , that was seeld to do yuel bifore God ;
forwhi Jesabel his wijf excitide him , and he dide abomynable ydolatrie
. CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.603

Thanne Acab dide ful greet penaunce , CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.604

and was mekid bifore God ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.605

therfore God brou+gte not yn this yuel in his daies , but in the daies
of his sone . CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.606

In the thridde +geer aftir these thingis , aboute iiij._c. prophetis of
Baal conuceiled Acab to make werre a+gens the king of Syrie for a citee
clepid Ramoth of Galaad , CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.607

and bihi+gten victorie and prosperite to Acab . CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.608

But Mychee , oo prophete of God , telde to Acab in Goddis name , that
the spirit of leesingis disceyuede him bi his false prophetis , and that
Acab schulde be slayn in that bateil ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.609

and so it bifelde in deede , CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.610

but Mychee was dispisid and beten of the false prophetis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.611

and was prisonyd , purposid to be slayn of the king , whanne he cam
a+geen in pees ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.612

and king Josophat , a good man , was in this bateile with cursid Acab ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.613

but Acab was slayn , CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.614

and doggis lickeden his blood , CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.615

and Josophat was sauid bi Goddis help . CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.616

Thanne roos Ocosias , king of Israel , for Acab his fadir ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.617

and Ocosias worschipide Baal , CMPURVEY-M3,I,14.618

and terride God to ire bi alle thingis which <P_I,15> his fadir hadde do
. CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.619

This prosces of the iij. book of Kingis schulde stire kingis and lordis
, to be mersyful and pytouse on her sugetis that trespasen a+gens hem ,
and in alle thingis eschewe ydilnesse , leccherie , tresoun , ydolatrie
, and false counceilouris and vnwyse , and euere distroie synne , and
take counceil at hooly scripture and trewe prophetis , and triste not to
false prophetis , be thei neuer so manye , and crie faste a+gens oon
either fewe trewe men . CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.620

<heading>

CAP. VI. CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.622

<$$heading>

The iii.j book of Kingis tellith in general , how the rewme of Israel
and the rewme of Juda weren conquerid of hethene men , for manye synnes
which thei diden a+gens God and men , and weren obstynat , and dide not
fruytfull penance in due tyme . CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.624

First it tellith in special , hou the wickid king Ocosyas sente to take
counceil at Belsabub , wher he my+gte lyue , and rekyuere of his
syknesse ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.625

therfore God sente Elye , the prophete , to telle to him that he schulde
die , and go not doun of his bed . CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.626

Thanne this king sent to Elye a prince on {COM:sic_means_"of"_or_"over"}
l. men , and l. men with hym , to clepe Elye to the king ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.627

and fijer cam doun fro heuene , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.628

and deuouride this prince , and l. men that weren with him ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.629

for in scorn thei clepiden Elye the man of God ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.630

and in lyk manere fijer deuouride another prince , and l. men with him
; CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.631

the thridde prince and hise l. that mekeden hem to God and to the
prophete , weren sauid on lyue . CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.632

And God bad Elie go doun with hem to the king , and repreue him of his
synne , and telle to the king himself , that he schal die and go not
doun of his bed . CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.633

Aftir this the prophete Elie schulde be rauyschid awey fro erthe ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.634

and Elisee knew this , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.635

and suede him in ech place til_to rauysching ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.636

and Elie smoot with his mantel the watris of Jordon ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.637

and tho weren departid therbi , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.638

and Elie and Elysee +geden ouere bi the drie botme therof .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.639

Thanne Elie was rauyschid in a char of fijer fro Elisee ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.640

and sti+gede bi a whirlwynd in to heuene ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.641

and the double spirit of Elye restide on Elisee , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.642

and with the mantel of Elye Elysee smoot twies the watris of Jordon ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.643

and in the secunde tyme tho weren departid , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.644

and Elysee passide ouere . CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.645

Aftirward Elisee dwellide in Jerico , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.646

and heelide the watris fro bittirnesse and bareynesse , bi putting of
salt in the watir . CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.647

Thanne Elysee sti+gede into Betel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.648

and as he sti+gede bi the weye , litle children +geden out of the citee
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.649

and seiden to him in scorn , " Thou ballard , sti+g up ! "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.650

and he curside hem in the name of God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.651

and twey beeris +geden out of the forest , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.652

and to-renten of hem xlij. children . CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.653

After these thingis Joram , the king of Israel , and Josophat , the king
of Juda , and also the thridde king , that was king of Edom , weren in
desert , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.654

and hadden no watir , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.655

and weren in poynt of perisching . CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.656

These thre kingis camen to Elisee for helpe , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.657

and bi spirit of prophecie he bad hem make dychis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.658

and thei si+gen neither wynd neither reyn , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.659

and the botme of dychis was fillid of watris ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.660

and he bifore_seide that God schulde bitake Moab in to the hondis of
these kingis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.661

and thei schulden distroie citees , and feeldis , and trees ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.662

and thus it was don in dede . CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.663

Also Elysee multypliede a litil oile , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.664

and made a pore widewe fille manye vessels therof , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.665

and bad hir paie her dettis bi sum therof , and that sche and her sones
schulden lyue bi the residue therof . CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.666

Aftirward Elysee biforeseide to a good womman , that herbouride him
freely and largely , that sche schulde consceyue a sone ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.667

and whanne Elisee knew , that this sone was deed , he sente his seruaunt
Giesi with his staaf to reise him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.668

and neither vois neither feeling was in the chijld .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.669

Thanne Elysee entride in to a closet , where the chijld lay deed ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.670

and preiede to God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.671

and lay on the chijld , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.672

and leide his mouth to the mouth of the chijld , and hise hondis on the
chijldis hondis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.673

and the chijld +goxide vij. sithes , CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.674

and openede his i+gen ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.675

and Elisee bitook the chijld qwyk to his modir . CMPURVEY-M3,I,15.676

Also Elysee , whanne hungir was in Galgala , heelyde the pot of noyful
mete , bi sendinge in of mele , that no <P_I,16> more bitternesse was in
the mete . CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.677

Thanne Elisee made a litil breed to suffice to an_c. men ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.678

and thei leften relijfs . CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.679

Whanne the king of Sirie sente lettris to the king of Israel , that he
schulde cure Naaman of his lepre , and the king of Israel to-rente his
clothis for sorewe , Elysee bad , that Naaman schulde be waischen vij.
sithes in the water of Jordan , and so he schulde be curid ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.680

and thus it was don in deede . CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.681

Thanne Naaman knoulechide , that noon other God is in al the erthe
no_but oonly the God of Israel ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.682

and Elisee took noo +gifte , CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.683

+ghe freely profrede and preeside of Naaman . CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.684

Thanne Giesy ran aftir Naaman , vnwytinge either not consentinge his
maistir , CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.685

and made a lesing , that Elisee sente to him , that he schulde +geue a
talent of syluer and double chaunging clothis to twey +gunge men of the
sones of profetis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.686

And Naaman constreynede him to take the double that he axide ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.687

and ordeynede twey children to bere bifore him . CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.688

But herfore Elisee seide , that the lepre of Naaman schulde cleue to
Giesi and to his seede withouten ende ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.689

and Giesi +gede out fro Elisee , CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.690

and was a mesel as snow . CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.691

Whanne the sonis of prophetis +geden to the wode , to hewe doun wode to
bylde placis to hem to dwellin inne , the irun of an axe felde doun in
to watir ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.692

and Elisee castide doun the tree , either helue , CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.693

and the irun houede , CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.694

and was taken up therbi . CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.695

Whanne the king of Sirie sette buschementis preuyly a+gens the king of
Israel , Elisee warned the king of Israel therof ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.696

and whanne it was certified to the king of Sirie that Elisee telde his
preuytes to the king of Israel , the king of Sirie sente a greet
multitude of the oost to take Elysee , CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.697

and whanne the oost cumpaside the citee Dotaym , wherinne Elysee was ,
God made this oost blynd at the preier of Elisee , CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.698

and so he ledde hem into the myddis of Samarie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.699

and whanne the king of Israel wolde slee hem , Elisee seide nay ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.700

but bad make redy a feeste to hem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.701

and late hem go in pees to her lord . CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.702

And whanne ful strong hungre was in Samarie , that wymmen eetyn her owne
children , oo womman axide doom of the king a+gens another womman , that
wolde not bi couenaunt bringe forth hir chijld to be etyn , whanne thei
hadden eten the chijld of the first womman . CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.703

Thanne the king , that weeride the heire nexte his body , to-rente his
clothis for sorwe , CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.704

and swoor strongly , that in that day he wolde girde of the heed of
Elisee . CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.705

Elisee biforeknew the comynge of this messanger to do this deede ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.706

and bad men close the dore , and suffre not him for to entre ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.707

for his lord comith anoon aftir him to reuoke his ooth and sentence .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.708

Thanne Elise seide in Goddis name , that to morewe in this tyme a
buschel of wheete flour schal be for oo stater , that is , a litel
quantite of moneye , as it were a peny , and twey buschellis of barly
for oo stater , in the +gate of Samarie . CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.709

And Elisee seide to a gret duk , that bileeuede not this word , " Thou
schalt see it with thin i+gen , CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.710

and schal not ete therof ; " CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.711

and thus it was in dede , CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.712

for whanne the oost of Sirie fledde by ny+gt , for drede that God made
among hem , thei leften alle her goodis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.713

and fledden nakid , CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.714

and coueitiden oonly to saue her lyues ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.715

and whanne a buschel of wheete flour was seeld on the morewe for oo
stater , the king made that noble duk kepere at the +gate ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.716

and the companye trade him to deeth , as Elisee bifore_seide .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.717

Also Elisee spac to the womman whos sone he made to lyue ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.718

and bad hir and hir hous goo a pilgrimage either straunge lond , where
euere sche fond couenable , CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.719

for God schal bringe strong hungir on the lond vij. +geer
CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.720

and at the vij. +geeris ende the king restoride to hire alle hir
thingis , and alle the rentis of fieldis in the tyme of hir absence .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.721

Benadab , king of Sirie , sent Asael to Elisee to enqueere whether this
king my+gte rekeuere of his syknesse ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.722

and God schewide to Elysee , that Benadab schulde di+ge ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.723

and Elisee wepte ful sore , whanne he si+g Asael , CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.724

for God schewide to him that Asael schulde be king of Sirie , and do
manye yuelis to the children of Israel , brenne of her strong citees ,
and slee bi swerd the +gunge men of hem , and hurle doun the litel
children of hem , and kerue wymmen with chijlde . CMPURVEY-M3,I,16.725

Joram , the sone of Josophat , dide yuel in Goddis <P_I,17> si+gt , as
the hous of Acab dide ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.726

for the dou+gtir of Acab was his wijf ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.727

but God n@ @olde distroie Juda , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.728

for Dauith his seruaunt , as he bihi+gte to him , to_+geue a lanterne to
him and to hise sones in alle daies . CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.729

Aftir these thingis Elisee bad oon of the sones of prophetis anoynte
Hyeu in to king on Israel , and sey to him ; " Thou schalt distroie the
hous of Acab , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.730

and God schal make it as the hous of Jeroboam , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.731

and doggis schulen ete Jesabel in the feeld of Jesrael ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.732

and noon shall berie hir . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.733

And Hieu killide Joram , king of Israel , and Ocosias , king of Juda ,
and Jesabel the cursid quene ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.734

and doggis etyn the flesch of Jesabel ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.735

and hir flesch was a tord on the face of erthe . CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.736

Thanne Hieu made lxx. sones of Acab to be slayn of hir keperis , and
nurschers ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.737

and he killide xlij. men britheren of Ocosias ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.738

and aftir this doinge Hieu feynede hym to worschipe Baal more than Acab
dide , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.739

and bi this feyning he gaderid to_gidere alle the prophetis , and
prestis , and seruauntis of Baal in the temple of Baal ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.740

and killide hem alle , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.741

and castide out of the temple of Baal his ymage , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.742

and brent it , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.743

and drof it al to dust ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.744

and distroiede the hous of Baal , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.745

and made gongis for it ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.746

and so Hieu dide awey Baal fro Israel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.747

Natheles Hieu +gede not awey fro the synnes of Joroboam ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.748

nether forsok golden caluis that weren in Betel and Dan ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.749

but for Hieu dide this veniaunce a+gens the hous of Acab , God seide ,
that his sones til the iiij. generacoun schulen sitte on the trone of
Israel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.750

Thanne Atalia , the modir of Ocosias , whanne hir sone was deed ,
killede al the blood of the king , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.751

and regnide vi. +geer . CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.752

But Joas , the sone of Ocosias king , was kept preuyly vj. +geer in the
temple of God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.753

and in the vij. +geer he was maad king bi help of Joiada , the gret
prest , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.754

and Atalia was slayn . CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.755

Therfore Joiada made a boond of pees bitwixe God , and the king , and
the peple , that hit schulde be the peple of God , and bitwixe the king
and the peple ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.756

and the peple distroiede the auteris of Baal , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.757

and al to-braken his ymagis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.758

and killeden Mathan , the prest of Baal , bifore the auter .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.759

This Joas bigan to regne whanne he was vij. +geer eld ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.760

and regnede xl. +geer in Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.761

and dide ri+gtfulnesse bifore God in alle the daies in whiche Joiada the
prest tau+gte him . CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.762

And Joas bad prestis take al the money that was offrid for priys of
soulis , and bi free wille , to make reperacoun of the temple ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.763

and for prestis weren neclygent in this reparacoun , Joas the king bad
the prestis +geelde the money to reparacoun , and take it no more .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.764

And the chaunceler of the king and the bischop Joiada heelden out of the
arke the moneye , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.765

and +gauen it in to hond of maistris of werkmen , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.766

and thei spendeden it wel in this offis and necessarie reparacoun ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.767

and made noo rekenyng to souereyns , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.768

but treeteden this moneye in feith , eithir good conscience .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.769

For as myche as Asael , king of Sirie , cam with his oost to werre
a+gens Jerusalem , Joas , king of Juda , took alle thingis which fadris
hadden halewid , and whiche he hadde offrid and al the syluer that
my+gte be founden in the tresouris of the temple of God , and in the
paleys of the king , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.770

and sente al to Asael , king of Sirie ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.771

and he +gede awey fro Jerusalem . CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.772

The seruauntis of Joas sworen togidere , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.773

and killeden him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.774

and Amasias his sone regnede for hym . CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.775

Joachas the sone of Hieu regnede on Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.776

and dide yuel , as Joroboam dide . CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.777

Therfore God bitook Israel in to the hondis of Asael , king of Sirie ,
and of Benadab his sone in alle daies , that there weren not left to
Joachas of al the peple of Israel no but v._hundrid horsmen , and x.
charis , and x._thousind of footmen . CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.778

Thanne Joachas bisou+gte God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.779

and he +gaf a sauyour to Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.780

and Israel was delyuered fro the hond of the king of Sirie .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.781

Thanne Elisee felde in to gret siknesse , bi which he was deed ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.782

and whanne Joas , king of Israel , cam to him , and wepte , Elisee bad
hym bringe a bowe and arewis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.783

and bad him sette his hond on the bowe ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.784

and Elisee settide his hondis on the kingis hondis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.785

and bad him scheete out at the eest wyndow opened ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,17.786

and Elisee seide , " This is <P_I,18> the arewe of Goddis helthe a+gens
Sirie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.787

and thou schalt smyte Sirie , in Affech , til thou waaste it . "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.788

Efte Elisee bad Joas smyte the erthe with a darte ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.789

and whanne he had smyte thries , and styntide , and Elisee was wrooth
a+gens him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.790

and seide , " If thou haddist smyte v. sithes , either vj. sithes ,
either vij. sithes , thou schuldust haue smyte Sirie til_to the ending
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.791

but now thou schalt smyte it thries . CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.792

Elisee di+gede , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.793

and was beried , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.794

and whanne a deed bodi was beried in the sepulcre of Elisee , and hadde
touchid the boonys of Elyse , the man lyuede a+gen ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.795

and stood on his feet . CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.796

Amasias , king of Juda , regnede ix. +geer , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.797

and dide ri+gtfulnesse in party , but not as Dauith .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.798

He killide x._thousind men of Edom , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.799

and for pride therof he terride the king of Israel to werre ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.800

and Amasias was ouercomen in this bateile , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.801

and the king of Israel took him presoner , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.802

and brak the wal of Jerusalem bi iiij._c. cubitis ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.803

and the king of Israel took awey al the gold and syluer , and alle the
vesselis that were founden in Goddis hous , and in the tresouris of the
king , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.804

and took pleggis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.805

and turnede a+geen in to Samarie . CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.806

At the laste the men of Amasias conspireden a+gens him ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.807

and he fledde in to Lachis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.808

and thei sentyn thidir , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.809

and killede hym there , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.810

and birieden him in Jerusalem with his fadris ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.811

and Asarie his sone regnede for hym in Jeruselem l. +geer
CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.812

He dide ri+gtfulnesse in party , as Amasias his fadir dide ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.813

and God smoot hym with leepre til_into the day of his deeth ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.814

and Joathas his sone gouernede the paleys , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.815

and deemyde the peple of the lond , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.816

and euere the kingis of Israel diden yuele , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.817

and +geden in the synnes of Jeroboam . CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.818

And in the dayes of Manahen , king of Israel , Ful , the king of
Assiriens , took greet tribute of him , to make Manahen stronge in the
rewme . CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.819

And in the daies of Facee king of Israel , that dide yuel in Goddis
si+gt , cam Teglath Falasar , king of Assur , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.820

and took manye placis in the lond of Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.821

and he took Galaad , and Galilee , and al the lond of Neptalym ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.822

and translatide hem into Assiriens . CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.823

Aftir ward Acas regnede on Juda xvj. +geer in Jerusalem ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.824

and +gede in the weies of kingis of Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.825

and dide foul ydolatrie . CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.826

And aftir these thingis Osee , the king of Israel , rengnede ix. +geer
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.827

and dide yuel , but not as the kingis of Israel that weren bifore hym .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.828

And this Osee was maad tributarie to Salmanasar , king of Assiriens ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.829

and whanne this Osee wolde be rebel , and paie not tribute to Salmanasar
, he biseegide Osee , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.830

and presonyde hym , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.831

and bisegide Samarie three +geer , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.832

and took it in the nynthe +geer of Osee , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.833

and translatide Israel into Assyriens . CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.834

Thanne the scripture rehersith many grete synnes of the peple of Israel
, for whiche thei weren conquerid , and dryuen out of her lond .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.835

Thanne the king of Assiriens brou+gte peple fro Babiloyne , and fro
manye othere hethene cuntreis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.836

and settide hem in the citees of Samarie , for the children of Israel ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.837

and for this peple dredde not God , he sente in to hem lyouns , that
killeden hem ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.838

therfore the king of Assiriens sente thidir oo prest of Israel , to
teche hem the lawe of God of Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.839

and so thei worschipiden God of Israel , and hire hethene goddis
togidere . CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.840

<heading>

CAP. VII. CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.842

<$$heading>

Ezechie , king of Juda , rengnide xxix. +geer , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.844

and dide good bifore God bi alle thingis whiche his fadir Dauith hadde
do ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.845

he distroiede hi+ge placis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.846

and al to-brak ymagis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.847

and hewyde doun wodis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.848

and brak the serpent of brasse ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.849

for the children of Israel brente ensense to it ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.850

and he hopide in God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.851

Therfore of alle the kingis of Juda was noon lyk him aftir him , but
neither among these kingis that weren bifore him . CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.852

And in the xiiij. +geer of Ezechie , Senagerib , king of Assiriens ,
sti+gede to alle wallide citees of Juda , CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.853

and took tho . CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.854

Thanne Ezechie +gaf to hym al the syluer that was founden in Goddis hous
, and in the tresouris of the king , for he schulde goo awey , and
distrie not Jerusalem neither Judee ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.855

and for Senagerib kepte not couenaunt , Ezechie rebellide a+gens him ,
in trist of Goddis help . CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.856

Thanne Senagerib sente Rapsaces with strong oost to Jerusalem , to
blasfeme God , and make the peple +gelde hem to him for dreede .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,18.857

Thanne Ezechie to-rente his clothis for <P_I,19> sorwe ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.858

and was hilid with a sak , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.859

and entride into Goddis hous , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.860

and sente the hi+ge prest and othere eelde men clothid with sakkis to
the prophete Isaie , that he schulde preie to God a+gens the blasfemye
of Assyriens . CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.861

And Isaie seide , in Goddis name , that thei schulde not drede of thes
wordis of Assiriens , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.862

for God schal sende a spirit to Senacharib , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.863

and he schal here a messanger , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.864

and he schal turne a+gen into his lond ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.865

and God schal caste hym doun bi swerd in his lond ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.866

and whanne Senacherib +gede hoom to defende his lond a+gens the king of
Ethiopie , he sente blasfeme lettris to Ezechie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.867

and seide , that his God my+gte not delyuere hym fro his hondis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.868

Therfore God counfortide Ezechie bi the prophete Isaie , that he schulde
not dreede Senacherib , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.869

for Senacherib schal not entre into Jerusalem , neither sende arwe into
it , neither ocupie it , neither biseege it ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.870

but God schal defende and saue Jerusalem , for himself , and for Dauith
his seruaunt . CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.871

And in that ny+gt the aungel of God killede in the tentis of Assiriens
an_c._thousind_and_lxxxv._thousind ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.872

and in the morewe tyde Senacherib +gede into his lond ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.873

and his owne sones killiden hym in the temple of his God Nestrach ,
while he worschipide Nestrach . CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.874

Aftir this whanne Ezechie was syik to the deeth , Isaie seide to hym in
Goddis name , " Dispose thin hous , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.875

for thou schalt di+ge and not lyue . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.876

And for Ezechie wepte greetly , God curide him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.877

and made him go into the temple on the thridde day ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.878

and encreeside xv. +geer to his lif ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.879

and in singne herof God made the sunne go bacward bi ten grees .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.880

Aftir this doinge the king of Babiloyne sente lettris , messengeris ,
and +giftis to Ezechie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.881

and bi pride he schewide alle hise tresouris and iewelis to the
messengeris . CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.882

Therfor God seide bi Isaie to him , that daies schulen come , and alle
thingis in thin hous schulen be taken awey into Babiloyne .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.883

And Ezechie seide , " The word of God is good ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.884

oonly pees and treuthe be in my daies . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.885

Aftir Ezechie Manasses his sone regnede lv. +geer in Jerusalem ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.886

and dide gret yuel in Goddis si+gt , and mychel ydolatrie ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.887

and the peple of Juda was disceyued of Manasses , that thei diden more
yuel than hethene men , whiche God distroiede fro the face of the sones
of Israel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.888

And for Manasses dide these worste abomynacouns ouer alle thingis whiche
the men of Amereys diden , and he sched ful myche innocent blood , til
Jerusalem was fillid til_to the mouth , God seide , that he wolde bringe
in yuelis on Jerusalem and Juda , that , who euere heerith , bothe hise
eeris tyngle ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.889

and he schal do awey Jerusalem , as tablis on boord ben wont to be don
awey , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.890

but God schal leue remenauntis of his eritage , and bitake hem in the
hond of her enemyes . CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.891

Manasses diede , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.892

and was buried in the orcherd of his hous ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.893

and Amon his sone regnede for hym ij. +geer , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.894

and dide yuel as his fadir dide , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.895

and forsook God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.896

and seruede vnclennesses and ydolis , as his fadir dide ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.897

and worschipide thoo . CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.898

And his seruauntis settiden tresoun to him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.899

and killeden hym in his hous ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.900

and the peple of the lond killiden alle men , that hadden conspyrid
a+gens the kyng Amon ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.901

and for hym thei ordeyneden Josie his sone king to hem .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.902

Josie bygan to rengne whanne he was viij. +geer eeld ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.903

and rengnede xxxj. +ger in Jerusalem ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.904

and he dide that that was pleesaunt bifore God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.905

and +gede bi alle the weies of Dauith his fadir . CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.906

In the xviij. +geer of Josie he hadde besynesse that the temple of God
were reparailid ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.907

and whanne the book of lawe was red bifore the king , he to-rente hise
clothis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.908

and sente solempne messengeris to take counceil at God for himself and
his reume ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.909

for he seide , that greet veniaunce of God is kynlid a+gens vs ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.910

for oure fadris herden not the wordis of this book , to do al that is
writen to vs . CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.911

And God seide bi the prophetesse Olda , the wijf of Sellum , " I schal
bringe yuelis on this place , and on the dwelleris thereof , alle the
wordis of the lawe whiche Josie redde , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.912

for they forsooken me , CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.913

and maden sacrifice to alyen goddis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,19.914

and for thou , Josiee , herdist the wordis of the book , and thin herte
was afeerd , and thou were meekid bifore me , and to-rentist thi clothis
, and weptist bifore me , therfore thou schalt di+ge in pees , that thin
i+gen se not <P_I,20> alle these yuelis , whiche I schal bringe in on
this place . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.915

Thanne Josie gaderide to hym alle the olde men of Juda and of Jerusalem
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.916

and the king sti+gede into the temple of God , and alle men of Juda and
alle men that dwelliden in Jerusalem , prophetis and prestis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.917

and al the peple styede with hym , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.918

and he redde to alle men heeringe alle the wordis of the book of
couenaunt of the Lord , that was founden in the hous of the Lord .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.919

And the king stood on the grees , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.920

and smoot couenaunt bifore the Lord , that thei schulden go aftir the
Lord , and kepe alle hise heestis , and witnessingis , and cerymonies ,
in al the herte and in al the soule , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.921

and the peple assentide to the couenaunt . CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.922

And the king bad the bischop and prestis and porters caste out of Goddis
temple alle vessels that weren maad to Baal , and to other ydols ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.923

and he brent tho out of Jerusalem , in the valey of Cedron ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.924

and bar the dust of tho into Bethel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.925

And he distroide ydolatrours , and the hous of lecchours that weren in
the hous of God ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.926

and he distroide auteris and hi+ge placis of ydols , and ymagis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.927

and took out boonys fro sepulcris , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.928

and brente tho on the autir in Bethel , that seruide to ydolatrie .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.929

Also Josie dide awey alle templis of hi+ge placis , that weren in the
citee of Samarie , whiche the kingis of Israel hadden maad to terre the
Lord to wraththe ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.930

and he dide to tho as he hadde do in Bethel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.931

and he killide the prestis of hi+ge placis , whiche prestis weren there
ouer the auters , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.932

and he brente mennis boonys on tho auters . CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.933

Also Josie made the puple to make a solempne pask , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.934

and such pask was not maad fro the daies of iugis , and alle kingis of
Israel and Juda , as was this pask maad , in the xviij. +geer of Josie
. CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.935

And hee dide awey spiritis spekinge in mennis wombis , and false
dyuynouris , and figuris of ydols , and vnclennessis , and abomynacyouns
, that weren in the lond of Juda and of Jerusalem .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.936

No king bifore him neither aftir him was lyk him , that turned a+gen to
God in al his herte , and in al his soule , and in al his vertu , bi al
the lawe of Moises . CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.937

Natheles for the orrible synnes of Juda God turnede not awey fro his
strong veniaunce , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.938

but seide , that he wolde take awey Juda fro his face , as he dide awey
Israel , and that he wolde caste awey the citee Jerusalem whiche he
chees . CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.939

Therfor Farao Nechao , king of Egipt , killide Josye in Magedo ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.940

and Joachas his sone was maad kyng for his fadir ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.941

and he rengnede thre monethis in Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.942

and dide yuel bifore God bi alle thingis whiche his fadris hadden do ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.943

and this Farao prisonyde him in Reblatha , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.944

and took tribute of the lond , an_c. talentis of syluer , and oo talent
of gold ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.945

and this Farao made king Elyachym , the sone of Josie ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.946

and turnede his name Joachym ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.947

and this Farao ledde Joachas in to Egipt ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.948

and Joachym dide yuele bifore God bi alle thingis whiche his fadris
hadden do . CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.949

And this Joachym was maad seruaunt thre +geer to Nabugodnosor , king of
Babilonie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.950

and eft he rebellyde a+gens Nabugodnosor , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.951

and God sente theuis of Caldeys , and theuis of Sirie , and theuis of
Moab , and theuis of the sones of Amon into Juda , that he schulde
distroie it , as he spac bi his prophetis , and specialy for the synnes
of Manasses . CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.952

This Joachym di+gede , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.953

and his sone Joakyn rengnide iij. monethis in Jerusalem ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.954

and dide yuel bifore God , as hise fadris hadden do .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.955

In that tyme the seruauntis of Nabugodnosor sti+gede to Jerusalem ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.956

and biseegeden it . CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.957

Thanne Nabugodnosor came to Jerusalem to ouercome it ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.958

and Joakyn , and his modir , and his seruauntis , and princis , and
chaumbirleyns +geden out to Nabugodnosor , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.959

and he translatide Joakyn and his oost , x._thousind , and many crafty
men in to Babiloyne ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.960

and took alle the tresouris of Goddis hous , and of the kingis hous ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.961

and bet togidere alle the golden vessels , whiche king Salamon hadde
maad in the temple . CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.962

And Nabugodnosor ordeynede Mathanye , the brother of Josie , to be kinge
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.963

and clepide hym Sedechie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.964

and he rengnede xj. +geer in Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.965

and dide yuel bifore God bi alle thingis that Joachym hadde do ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.966

for God was wrooth a+gens Jerusalem and Juda , til he castide hem awey
fro his face . CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.967

And Sedechie +gede awey fro the king of Babilonye , CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.968

and in the ix. +geer of Sadechie Nabugodonosor cam with al his oost ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.969

and bisegide Jerusalem til_to the xi. +geer of Sedechie ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,20.970

<P_I,21>

and thanne the citee was broken , CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.972

and Sedechie and his warriouris fledden bi ny+gt , CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.973

and the oost of Caldeys pursuede and took him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.974

and brou+gte him to Nabugodonosor in Reblatha . CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.975

And Nabugodonosor spac dom with Sedechie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.976

and killide hise sones bifore him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.977

and puttide out his i+gen , CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.978

and boond him with chaynes , CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.979

and brou+gte hym in to Babiloyne . CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.980

Thanne Nabusardan , the prince of the oost , brente Goddis hous , and
the kingis hous , and the housis of Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.981

and distroiede the wallis of Jerusalem in cumpas ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.982

and he translatide into Babiloine the residue puple of Juda , outaken a
fewe pore men , vyntilieris and erthetilieris ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.983

and he brak alle the brasen vessels and of metal in the temple ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.984

and bare the metal into Babilone . CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.985

Thanne Nabugodonosor made Godolye to be souereyn of the peple left in
the lond of Juda , CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.986

and thanne alle the dukis of kny+gtis camen to Godolie in Maspha ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.987

and he made an ooth to hem , that it schulde be wel to hem , if thei
wolden serue the king of Babilone . CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.988

And Ismael , that was of the kingis blood , killide Godolye , and Jewis
and Caldeis that weren with him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.989

and al the peple of Juda and the princis of kni+gtis fledden into Egipte
, for drede of Caldeys . CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.990

At the laste , Euylmeradach , king of Babilone , reiside Joachyn fro
presoun , CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.991

and settide his trone aboue the trones of othir kingis that weren with
hym in Babilone ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.992

and Joachyn eet euere breed in the kingis si+gt of Babilone , in alle
the daies of his lijf . CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.993

This prosces of Godolie and that sueth is teld largeliere in the ende of
Jeremye than heere in the ende of Kingis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.994

This prosces of the iiij. book of Kingis schulde stire alle men , and
namely kingis and lordis , for to hate synne , as ydolatrie and
coueitise , and brekinge of Goddis heestis , for whiche the peple of
Israel and the peple of Juda was thus punschid , and conquerid of
hethene men , and for to loue vertues and kepinge of Goddis heestis ,
and distroyinge of opyn sinnes , for whiche manye goode kingis , as
Esechie , Josie , and many othere , hadden grek {COM:sic} thank and
socour of God in manye greete perels , and blisse of heuene withouten
ende . CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.995

God for his mercy graunte this blisse to vs ! CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.996

Amen . CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.997

<heading>

CAP. VIII. CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.999

<$$heading>

The bookis of Paralypomynon ben ful nescessarie to vndirstonde the
stories of the elde testament , in so myche , as Jerom seith , that if
eny man withouten these bookis wole presume to haue the kunnynge of
hooly scripturis , he scorne himself , that is , disseyue eithir make
himself worthi to be scorned ; for whi the stories left out in the
bookis of Kingis be touchid in these bookis , and vnnumberable
questiouns of the gospel ben declarid by these bookis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.1001

The firste book of Paralypomynon tellith in the bigynnynge the
generacyouns fro Adam til_to Jacob , and so forth til_to Dauith ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.1002

and touchith schortly manye stories of Saul , and of Dauith , and of
Salomon , in the ende therof ; and how Dauith ordeynede prestis and
dekyns in her offis , and how and bi what seruise thei schulden serue
God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.1003

The bigynnyng of the ij. book of Paralipomynon tellith hou Salomon
axide of God wisedom to deme his peple , CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.1004

and God +gaf to him wisdom , and kunnyng , and richesse , and glorie ,
so that noon among kingis neither bifore neither aftir him was lyk him .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.1005

Thanne is toold how Salomon byldide the temple of Jerusalem , and an
hous to himself . CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.1006

Aftir this the queene of Saba cam to Salomon , CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.1007

and brou+gte many precious iewelis to him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.1008

and preuede his kunnynge and wisdom in many thingis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.1009

And alle the kingis of the erthe desyreden to see the face of Salomon ,
for to here the wisdom of God , which he hadde +goue in his herte .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.1010

Aftir this it sueth hou Roboam departide the x. lynagis fro the hous of
Dauith bi his pride and harde wordis , and bi suynge of the counceil of
+gunge men ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.1011

and whanne the rewme of Juda was confermyd to him , he forsook the lawe
of God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,21.1012

and al <P_I,22> Israel dide the same with him . CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1013

Therfore God sente the king of Egipt with vnnoumbrable peple on hem ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1014

and took awey the tresours of Goddis hous and of the kingis hous ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1015

and thei serueden the king of Egipt , to knowe the dyuersite of Goddis
seruise , and of the seruise of the rewme of the londis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1016

Aftir him regnede Abia , his sone , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1017

and he tretide wijsely with the peple of Israel , that thei schulde
forsake her synne , and werrey not a+gens Goddis puple and the rewme of
Juda ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1018

and for thei wolde proudly werreye a+gens the rewme of Juda , and a+gens
this good counceil of Abia , he killyde of hem bi Goddis help
v._hundrid_thousynd of stronge men . CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1019

Aftir this counceil Abia di+gede , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1020

and Asa his sone rengnede for him ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1021

and in the daies of Asa the lond was in reste x. +geer ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1022

and Asa dide that that was good and plesaunt in the si+gt of God ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1023

and he distroiede auteris of ydolatrie , and hi+ge placis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1024

and he brak ymagis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1025

and hewyde doun wodis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1026

and comaundide the peple of Juda to seeke the Lord God of her fadris ,
and do his lawe , and kepe alle hise heestis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1027

He rengnide in pees , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1028

and byldide stronge citees with wallis , and touris , and +gatis , and
lockis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1029

and he hadde in his oost thre_hundrid_thousind of Juda , of men beringe
scheeldis and speris , and of Beniamyn
ij._hundrid_thousind_and_lxx._thousind of men of armes , and of archeris
. CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1030

And he ouercam the king of Ethiopie , that cam with x._c._thousind men
and iij._c. charris ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1031

and Asa hadde the victorie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1032

for in trist of Goddis help he cam a+gens this gret multitude .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1033

Thanne the prophete of God seide to Asa and al his peple , " The Lord is
with +gow , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1034

for +ge weren with hym ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1035

if +ge seeken hym +ge schulen fynde ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1036

and if +ge forsaken him he schal forsake +gou ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1037

many daies schulen passe in Israel withoute veri God , and without prest
, and techere , and lawe ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1038

and whanne thei turnen a+gen in her angwische , and crien to God , and
seekyn him , thei schulen fynde him . CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1039

Be +ge confortid , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1040

and +goure hondis be not maad vnstedfast , for whi mede schal be to
+goure werk . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1041

And whanne Asa hadde herd these wordis , and profecie , he was
coumfortid , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1042

and dide awey alle ydols fro al the lond of Juda and of Beniamyn , and
fro the citees whiche he hadde take of Effraym . CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1043

And he gaderide to_gidere al the puple vndir him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1044

and he entride into Jerusalem , to make stronge the boond of pees , that
thei schulden seeke the Lord God of her fadris in al her herte and al
her soule , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1045

and he seide , " If eny man seekith not the Lord God of Israel , di+ge
he , fro the leeste til_to the meeste , fro man til_to womman . "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1046

And thei sworen with al hire herte and with al hire wille ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1047

thei sou+gten God CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1048

and founden hym , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1049

and God +gaf reste to hem bi cumpas . CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1050

And whanne the king of Israel werride a+gens Aza , Asa sente mychil gold
and syluer to the king of Syrie , to helpe him , and to werreye a+gens
the king of Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1051

and he dide so . CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1052

Thanne God blamyde Asa greetly , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1053

for he triste in the king of Sirie , and not in God .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1054

" And therfor the oost of the king of Sirie ascapide fro thin hond , "
seide God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1055

" and also bateiles schulen rise a+gens thee in present tyme . "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1056

And Asa was wrooth a+gens the prophete , that telde this to hym ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1057

and puttide him in the stockis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1058

and God hadde ful gret indingnacoun on this thing ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1059

and killide full manye men of the puple in that tyme .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1060

And in the ende of his lijf Asa hadde ful greet syknesse of his feet ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1061

and in his syknesse he sou+gte not the Lord , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1062

but triste more in the craft of lechis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1063

And Asa di+gede , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1064

and Josophat his sone regnede for hym , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1065

and was strong a+gens lsrael . CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1066

And king Josophat ordeynede noumbris of kni+gtis in alle wallid citees
of Juda , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1067

and ordeynede strong hooldis in the lond of Juda , and in the citees of
Effrahym , whiche Asa his fadir hadde take . CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1068

And the Lord was with Josophat , CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1069

and he +gede in the firste weies of Dauith his fadir ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1070

and he hopide not in Baalym , but in God Almy+gty ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1071

and +gede in his comaundementis , and not bi the synnes of Israel .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1072

And God confermyde the rewme in the hond of Josophat ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1073

and he hadde ful many richessis and myche glorie ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,22.1074

and whanne his herte hadde take trist for the weies of the Lord , he
dide aweye also hi+ge placis and woodis fro Judea , where the puple made
offring out of <P_I,23> Jeru-salem a+gens the lawe .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1075

And Josophat in the iij. +geer of his rewme sente fyue of his princis ,
that thei schulde teche in the citees of Juda ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1076

and he sente ix. deknes with hem , and ij. prestis with hem ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1077

and thei hadden the book of Goddis lawe , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1078

and tau+gten the peple in Juda ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1079

and thei cumpassiden alle the citees of Juda , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1080

and tau+gten al the peple . CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1081

Therfore the drede of the Lord was maad on alle rewmys of londis that
weren bi the cumpas of Juda , and dursten not werreye a+gens Josophat .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1082

And he hadde redy at his hond xj._c._thousind_and_lx._c._thousind of
kni+gtis , and men of armys , and archers , outaken othere whiche he
hadde set in wallid citees , and in all Juda . CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1083

And Filisteyis and Arabeyes brou+gten to Josophat +giftis and tributis ,
and many thousindis of scheep and buckis of geet .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1084

And aftir this doinge Josophat was alyed to Acab , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1085

and +gede with hym to bateile into Ramoth of Galaad ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1086

and iiij._c. prophetis , that weren disseyued bi a spirit of lesing ,
excitide Acab to this werre , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1087

and bihi+gte prosperite and victorie to him ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1088

but Mycheas , oo trewe prophete of God , telde to Acab that he schulde
di+ge in this bataile , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1089

and so it was indeede ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1090

and Josophat , that was in moost perel of this bateile , was sauid bi
Goddis help . CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1091

Aftir this bateil Josophat turnede a+geen in pees to Jerusalem ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1092

and a prophete of God mette him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1093

and seide , " Thou helpist the wickid man , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1094

and art ioyned in frenschip to hem that haten God ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1095

and therfor thou disseruedist the wraththe of God ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1096

but goode werkis ben founden in thee , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1097

for thou didest awey wodis fro the lond of Juda , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1098

and madist redy thin herte to seeke the Lord God of thi fadris . "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1099

Therfore Josophat dwellide in Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1100

and eft he +gide out to the peple fro Bersabe til_to the hil of Effraym
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1101

and clepide hem a+gen to the Lord God of her fadris ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1102

and he ordeynede iugis of the lond in alle stronge citees of Juda bi ech
place ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1103

and he comaundide thus to the iugis , " See +ge , what +ge owen to do ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1104

for +ge vsen the dom not of man but of the Lord , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1105

and what euer thing that +ge schal deme , schal turne into +gou ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1106

the dreede of the Lord be with +gou , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1107

and do +ge alle thingis with diligence ; for whi neither wickidnesse ,
neither taking of persoones , neither coueitise of +giftis , is anentis
+goure Lord God . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1108

And in Jerusalem Josophat ordeynede dekenes and prestis , and princis of
meynes of Israel , that thei schulde deme to the dwelleris therof the
doom and cause of God ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1109

and he comaundide to hem CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1110

and seide , " Thus +ge schulen do in the drede of the Lord feithfully ,
and in a perfit herte ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1111

ech cause that cometh to +gou of +goure britheren that dwellen in her
citees , bitwixe kinrede and kynrede , where euere is questioun either
doute of the lawe of comaundement of cerymonies of instifijngis , schewe
+gee to hem , that thei do not synne a+gens the Lord , and wraththe
either veniaunce come not on +gow , and on +goure britheren ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1112

therfore do +ge thus and +ge schule not do synne ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1113

and Amarie , +goure prest and bischop , schal be souereyn in these
thingis that perteynyn to God . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1114

Aftir these thingis the sones of Amon , and the sones of Moab , and with
men of Ydume , weren gaderid togidere to werrye a+gens Josophat .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1115

Thanne Josophat +gaf him al to beseche God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1116

and prechide fasting to al Juda , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1117

and al Juda was gaderid to biseeche the Lord ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1118

and Josophat knoulechide , that he hadde not power to a+genstonde so
greet a multitude of enemyes . CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1119

Thanne God coumfortide him and his peple bi a prophete , that thei
schulde not dreede this greet multitude of enemyes ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1120

for God himself schulde fi+gte and ouercome her enemyes , without strook
of his peple ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1121

and so it was in dede . CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1122

At the laste , Josophat made frenschipe with Ocosie , king of Israel ,
whois werkis weren ful yuele , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1123

and thei weren felowis to make schippis , that schulden go into Tarsis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1124

Therfor God bi his prophete seide to Josophat , " For thou haddist boond
of pees with Ocosie , God hath smyte thi werkis , "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1125

and the schippis ben al to-broken CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1126

and my+gten not go into Tarsis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1127

Thanne di+gede Josophat , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1128

and Joram his sone rengnyde for hym . CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1129

This Joram weddide the dou+gtir of Acab , CMPURVEY-M3,I,23.1130

and killide <P_I,24> hise owne britheren , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1131

and +gede in the weies of the kingis of Israel , as the hous of Acab
hadde do ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1132

and he dide ydolatrie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1133

and made the dwelleris of Jerusalem and also Juda to breke Goddis lawe .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1134

Therfor Edom and Lobna +geden awey fro his lordschipe ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1135

for he hadde forsake the Lord God of his fadris ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1136

and therfore God reiside a+gens him Filisteys and Arabeys , that
coosteyen with Ethiopiens , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1137

and thei distroieden the lond of Juda , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1138

and token awey al the catel that was founden in the hous of the king ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1139

and tooken awey his wijf and sones , outaken Joachas the +gungeste .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1140

And God smoot Joram with vncurable sorewe of wombe twey +ger , so that
he rotid on erthe , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1141

and castide out hise entrailis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1142

and di+gede in worst syknesse . CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1143

And his sone Ocosias rengnyde for him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1144

and dide yuele as the hous of Acab , for whi his modir excitide him to
do wickidly ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1145

and thei of the hous of Acab weren his councelers into his deth ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1146

and he +gede in the counceil of hem . CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1147

And therfore Hieu , whanne he distroyede the hous of Acab , killide
Ocosie , and the prince of Juda , and the sones of the britheren of
Ocosie . CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1148

After these thingis Joas waas maad king , bi the helpe of Joiada the
prest , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1149

and the curside womman Atalia was slayn . CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1150

The prestis and grete men of the peple brou+gten out of Goddis hous the
sone of the king , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1151

and settiden a coroun on his heed , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1152

and +gauen in his hond the lawe to be kept , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1153

and maden him king . CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1154

And Joiada made couenaunt bitwixen him and al the peple and the king ,
that thei schulden be the peple of God , that is , forsake ydolatrie ,
and kepe treuly Goddis lawe . CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1155

Therfore al the peple +gede into the hous of Baal ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1156

and distroyeden it , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1157

and braken the auters and symylacris , either ymagis of him ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1158

and thei killeden bifore the auteer Mathan , the prest of Baal .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1159

This Joas dide wel in the tyme of Joiada , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1160

and reparilide the temple of Jerusalem , that was distroyed bi Atalia
and hir sones ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1161

but aftir the deeth of Joiada he was flaterid bi the princis of Juda ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1162

and thei felden to idolatrie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1163

and forsoken the temple of God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1164

And the wraththe of God was maad a+gens Juda and Jerusalem for his synne
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1165

and he sente prophetis to hem , that thei schulden turne a+gen to God ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1166

and thei n@ @olde heere these profetis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1167

And Sacarie , the prest and sone of Joiada , repreuede hem for this
synne , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1168

and thei stonyden hym to deth in the purseynt of Goddis hous , by
comaundement of the king . CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1169

And whanne the +geer was endid the oost of Syrie sti+gede a+gens hym ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1170

and cam in to Juda and Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1171

and killide alle the princis of the peple , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1172

and senten al the prey in to Damask to the king . CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1173

And certis whanne a ful litil noumbre of men of Sirie was comen , God
bitook in her hondis a multitude withouten ende , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1174

for thei hadden forsake the Lord God of her fadris ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1175

and thei vsiden schameful domes in Joas , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1176

and +geden forth , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1177

and leftyn him in greet sorewis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1178

and his seruaunts risen a+gens him for veniaunce of the blood of the
sone of Joiada the prest , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1179

and killiden him in his bed ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1180

and Joas was deed , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1181

and Amasie his sone rengnide for him . CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1182

<heading>

CAP. IX. CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1184

<$$heading>

Amasie dide good in party , but not in a parfit herte ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1186

and he killide hem that hadden slayn the king his fadir ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1187

but he killide not her sones , as God bad in the lawe .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1188

This Amasie foond in al Juda and Beniamyn fro xx. +geer and aboue ,
xxx._thousind of +gunge men that +geden out to bateile , and heelden
spere and scheeld ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1189

and he hyride of Israel an_c._thousind of ful stronge men for an_c.
talentis of syluer , to fi+gte a+gens the sones of Edom .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1190

And a man of God seide to Amasie , " A ! thou king , the oost of Israel
go not out with thee , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1191

for the Lord is not with Ysrael , and with alle the sones of Effraym ;
that if thou gessist that bateilis stonden in the strengthe of oost ,
the Lord schal make thee to be ouercomen of thin enemyes ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1192

for it is propir to God for to helpe , and for to turne into fli+gt . "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1193

Therfore Amasie departyde awey the oost of Israel ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1194

and tristily ledde forth his puple to bataile ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1195

and he hadde the victorie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1196

and killide xl._thousind of his enemyes in this bataile .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1197

And aftir this victorie Amasie worschipide the goddis of Edom ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,24.1198

and brente encense to hem ; <P_I,25> wherfor God was wrooth a+gens
Amasie , and sente to him a prophete , that schulde seie to him , " Whi
hast thou worschipid goddis that delyueriden not her puple fro thin hond
? " CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1199

Whanne the prophete spac these thingis to him , he answeride to the
prophete , " Wher thou art a counceler of the king ?
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1200

ceese thou , lest perauenture I slee thee . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1201

Therfore the prophete +gede awey , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1202

and seide , " I woot that the Lord thou+gte to slee thee ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1203

for thou hast doo this yuel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1204

and ferthermore thou assentidist not to my counceil : "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1205

and so it bifelde in deede , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1206

for bi pride he terride the king of Israel to werre ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1207

and n@ @olde ceese for heleful counceil of the king of Israel .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1208

Therfore the king of Israel ouercam the puple of Juda ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1209

and took Amasie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1210

and distroiede the wal of Jerusalem bi iiij._c. cubitis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1211

and took awey al the tresour and vessels whiche he foond in Goddis hous
, and in the kingis hous . CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1212

And aftir this doing Amasie fledde out of Jerusalem into Lachis , for
tresoun doon to him of his men ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1213

and thei senten , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1214

and killiden him in Lachis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1215

And Osias his sone regnede for him lij. +geer in Jerusalem ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1216

and sou+gte God in the daies of Sacarie , vndirstondinge and seeinge God
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1217

and whanne he sou+gte God , he louyde him in alle thingis ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1218

and God helpide him a+gens Filisteys , and a+gens Arabeys , and a+gens
Ammonytis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1219

And Ammonitis payeden +giftis to Osias , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1220

and his name was puplischid til_to the entring of Egipt , for ofte
victories . CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1221

He bildide manye touris in Jerusalem , and also in wildirnesse ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1222

for he hadde many beestis , and vynes , and vyntilieris ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1223

for he was a man +gouen to erthe tilthe . CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1224

He hadde in his oost ij._thousynd_and_vj._c. princes of stronge men ,
and iij._c._thousind_and_vij._thousind_and_v._c. that weren able to
bateil , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1225

and fou+gten for the king a+gens aduersaries ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1226

and his name +gede out fer , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1227

for God helpide him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1228

and made him stronge . CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1229

But whanne he was maad stronge , his herte was reisid into his deth ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1230

and he dispiside his Lord God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1231

for he +gede into the temple of God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1232

and wolde brenne encense on the auter of encense , a+gens the lawe .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1233

And whanne the bischop and many noble prestis a+genstodyn him , and
teldyn the lawe that was a+gens him , hee was wrooth ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1234

and helde the censer , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1235

and manaside hem ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1236

and anoon lepre roos in his forheed bifore the prestis in Goddis hous .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1237

Thanne the prestis puttiden him out , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1238

and he hastide to go out , for drede , and for he feelide anon the
veniaunce of God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1239

Therfore king Osias was leprouse til_to the day of his deth ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1240

and dwellide in an hous departid . CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1241

And Joathan his sone gouernede the kingis hous , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1242

and deemyde the puple of the lond . CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1243

And Joathan rengnyde xvj. +geer in Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1244

and dide ri+gtfulnesse bifore God , bi alle thingis whiche Osias his
fadir hadde do , outaken this , that he entride not into the temple of
God ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1245

and +git the puple trespasside . CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1246

He byldide manye thingis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1247

and fau+gt a+gens the king of the sones of Amon , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1248

and ouercam him ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1249

and the sones of Amon +gauen to hym an_c. talentis of syluer , and
x._thousind corus of barly , and as manye of whete ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1250

and a corus conteyneth xxx. buschellis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1251

And Joathan was maad strong , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1252

for he hadde dressid his weyes bifore his Lord God ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1253

and he was deed , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1254

and Achas his sone regnede for hym xvj. +geer in Jerusalem .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1255

This Acas dide not ri+gtfulnesse in Goddis si+gt , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1256

but +gede in the weies of the kingis of Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1257

and made ymagis to Baal , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1258

and dide manyfold ydolatrie ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1259

and God bitook him in to the hond of the king of Sirie , which king
smoot Acas , and took a gret prey of his rewme into Damask ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1260

and Acas was bitaken to the hondis of the king of Israel ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1261

and was smyten with a greet wounde . CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1262

And Facee , the sone of Romelye , killide of Juda vj._score_thousind in
oo day , alle the werriouris ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1263

for thei hadden forsake the Lord God of her fadris ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1264

and the sones of Israel tooken of hire britheren of Juda ij._c._thousind
of wymmen , and of children , and of damyselis , and prey withouten ende
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1265

and baren it in to Samarie . CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1266

And Obed , the prophete of God , seide to the men of Israel , that thei
hadden do greet cruelte , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1267

and synned a+gens God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,25.1268

and bad hem lede a+gen the prisoneris of Juda , " for whi <P_I,26> greet
veniaunce of the Lord nei+geth to +gou . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1269

Therfore the princes of Israel maden the werriouris to forsake the prey
, and alle thingis whiche thei hadden take ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1270

and the princis clothiden hem that weren nakid , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1271

and refreschiden hem with mete , and drinke , and anoyntyng of oile ,
for traueile , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1272

and senten hem hoom benyngly . CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1273

Thanne king Acas sente to the king of Assiriens , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1274

and axide help ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1275

and Ydumeys camen , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1276

and killiden manye men of Juda , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1277

and tooken greet prey ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1278

and Filisteys tooken many citees of Juda , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1279

and dwelliden in tho . CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1280

And God made low the puple of Juda for Acas the king of Israel , for he
hadde maad him nakid of help , and for he hadde dispisid God .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1281

And God brou+gte a+gens him Teglath Falasar , the king of Assiriens ,
that turmentide him , and distroiede , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1282

for noon a+genstood . CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1283

Therfore Acas spoilide Goddis hous , and the hous of kingis and of
princis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1284

and +gaf +giftis to the king of Assiriens ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1285

and natheles it profitide no thing to him ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1286

and Acas , in the tyme of his anguysch , encreside dispising a+gens God
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1287

and offride sacrifices to the goddis of Damask , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1288

and he seide , " The goddis of Sirie helpen hem , whiche goddis I schal
plese with sacrifices , and thei schulen helpe me , " whanne a+genward
thei weren fallyng to him , and to al Israel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1289

Therfor Acas rauyschide and brak alle the vessels of Goddis hous ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1290

and closide the +gatis of Goddis temple , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1291

and made to him auteris in alle corners of Jerusalem , and in alle the
citees of Juda , to brenne encense , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1292

and terride God to wraththe . CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1293

And he di+gede , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1294

and Esechiee his sone rengnide for him xxix. +geer in Jerusalem ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1295

he dide that that was plesaunt in Goddis si+gt , bi alle thingis which
Dauith his fadir hadde do . CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1296

And he opynede the +gatis of Goddis hous , in the firste +geer of his
rewme , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1297

and made prestis and dekenes to clense and halewe the temple and auter
of God , with al the vessels and purtenaunsis of the temple ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1298

and he gaderide togidere alle the princis of the citee ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1299

and sti+gide into Goddis hous ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1300

and thei offriden vij. boolis and vij. rammes , vij. lambren , and
vij. buckis of geet , for synne , for the rewme , for the sentuarie ,
and for Juda . CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1301

And he seide to the prestis , the sones of Aaron , that thei schulden
offre on the auter of God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1302

and thei diden so . CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1303

And he ordeynede dekenys in the hous of God , with symbals and sautrees
and harpis , bi the ordynaunce of Dauith , and of Gad , the prophete of
the king , and of Nathan the prophete ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1304

for it was the comaundement of God bi the hond of hise prophetis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1305

And dekenys stooden CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1306

and heelden the orgenys of Dauith , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1307

and prestis heldyn trumpis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1308

And Esechie comaundide that thei schulden offre brent sacrifices on the
auter , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1309

and whanne brent sacrifices weren offrid , thei bigunnen to singe
heryingis to God , and to sounne with trumpis and diuerse orgenys ,
whiche Dauith the king of Israel hadde maad redy for to sounne .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1310

And Esechie and the princis comaundiden to the dekenys that thei
schulden herie God with the wordis of Dauith , and of Asaph the prophete
. CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1311

And Esechie sente to al Israel and Juda , CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1312

and wroot epistlis to Effraym and Manasses , that thei schulden come to
Goddis hous in Jerusalem , and make pask to the Lord God of Israel .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1313

And it pleside the king {COM:sic} and al the multitude ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1314

and thei demeden to sende messangeris into al Israel , fro Bersabee
til_to Dan , that thei schulden come and make pask to the Lord God of
Israel in Jerusalem . CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1315

And currowris +geden out with epistlis , bi comaundement of the king and
of hise princes , in to al Israel and Juda , as the king hadde comaundid
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1316

and precheden , " Sones of Israel , turne +ge a+geen to the Lord God of
Abraham , of Isaac , and of Israel , and he schal turne a+gen to the
remenauntis that ascapiden the hondis of the king of Assiriens ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1317

serue +ge to the Lord God of youre fadris , and the wraththe of his
strong veniaunce schal be turned awey fro +gou ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1318

for if +ge turnen a+gen to the Lord , +goure britheren and +goure sones
schulen haue mersy bifore hire lordis , that ledden hem prisoners ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,26.1319

and thei schulen turne a+gen into <P_I,27> this lond . "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1320

Therfore currouris +geden swiftly fro citee in to citee , by the lond of
Effraym and of Manasses til_to Sabulon , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1321

and thei scorneden and bymowiden the messengeris ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1322

natheles summe of Aser and of Manasses and of Sabulon assentiden to the
counceil , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1323

and camen in to Jerusalem . CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1324

Goddis hond was maad in Juda , that he +gaf to hem oon herte ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1325

and thei diden the word of God bi comaundement of the king and of
princis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1326

and many puplis weren gaderid in Jerusalem , to make the solempnite of
pask in the ij. monthe ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1327

and thei distroieden the auteris that weren in Jerusalem ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1328

and thei distroieden alle thingis in which encense was offrid to ydolis
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1329

and castiden forth in to the stronde of Cedron . CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1330

Whanne these thingis weren halewid ri+gtly , al Israel +gede out , that
was founden in the citees of Juda , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1331

and thei braken symylacris , either ymagis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1332

and hewiden doun wodis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1333

and distroieden hi+ge placis and auteris , and not oonly of al Juda and
Beniamyn , but also of Effraym and Manasses , til thei distroieden thoo
outtirly . CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1334

And Esechie ordeynede cumpanyes of prestis and of dekenis , bi her
departingis , ech man in his owne offis , as wel of prestis as of
dekenis , to brent sacrifices and peesible sacrifices , that thei
schulden mynystre and knouleche and singe in the +gatis of the castels ,
eithir oostis , of the Lord . CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1335

And Esechie comaundide to the puple to +geue to prestis and deknes her
partys , that is , the firste fruytis and tithis , that thei my+gten
+geue tent to the lawe of God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1336

And there is teld myche of the paying and deeling of tithis and other
hooly thingis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1337

Thanne it sueth hou Sennagerib blasfemede God of Israel , and hou
Esechie counfortide the puple a+gens his blasfemye and pride .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1338

And Esechie and Ysaie the prophete preieden a+gens the blasfemye ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1339

and crieden til_in_to heuene ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1340

and God sente his aungel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1341

and he killide ech strong man , and werriour , and prince of the oost of
the king of Assiriens , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1342

and he turnide a+gen with schenschipe into his lond ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1343

and hise owne sones killiden him bi swerd . CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1344

And God sauide Esechie and the dwelleris of Jerusalem fro the hond of
Senacherib , king of Assiriens , and fro the hond of alle men ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1345

and +gaf to hem reste bi cumpas . CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1346

Aftir these thingis Esechie was syk to the deeth , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1347

and he preiede to God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1348

and God herde him . CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1349

And the herte of Esechie was reisid to pride , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1350

and wraththe was maad a+gens him , and a+gens Juda , and a+gens
Jerusalem . CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1351

And aftir he was meekid , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1352

for his herte was reysid , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1353

bothe he and the dwelleris of Jerusalem weren mekid ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1354

and therfore the veniaunce of God cam not in the daies of Esechie .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1355

And Esechie was ful riche and noble , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1356

and in alle hise werkis he dide welsumly , what euer thing he wolde .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1357

Natheles in the message of princes of Babilone , that weren sente to him
to axe of the grete wondir that bifel on erthe , God forsook him , that
he was temptid , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1358

and alle thingis weren knowen that weren in his herte .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1359

Thanne di+gede Esechie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1360

and Manasses his sone rengnide in Jerusalem lv. +geer .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1361

And Manasses dide yuele bifore God , bi abomynacioun of hethen men ,
which God distroiede bifore the sones of Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1362

and he byldide hi+ge placis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1363

and made auteris to Baalym , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1364

and dide manyfold ydolatrie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1365

and seruede to wicche craftis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1366

and sette ydolis in the temple of God ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1367

and he disseyuede the puple of Juda and the dwelleris of Jerusalem ,
that thei diden yuel more than hethene men , which the Lord hadde
distroied fro the face of the sones of Israel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1368

And God spac to him and to his puple , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1369

and thei n@ @olden take heede ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1370

therfore he brou+gte on hem the princis of the oost of the king of
Assiriens ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1371

and thei tooken Manasses , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1372

and bounden him with chaynes and gyues , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1373

and ledde him into Babilone ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1374

and aftir that he was angwischid , he preiede his Lord God ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1375

and he dide penaunce gretly bifore the God of his fadris ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1376

and he preiede hertily , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1377

and bisou+gte God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1378

and God herde his preier , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1379

and brou+gte him a+gen in to Jerusalem , into his rewme .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1380

And Manasses knew that the Lord himself is God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1381

and he dide awey alien goddis , and symylacris , either idolis fro
Goddis hous , CMPURVEY-M3,I,27.1382

and distroiede auteris whiche he hadde maad in the hil of Goddis hous
and <P_I,28> in Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1383

and castide alle out of the citee , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1384

and he restoride the auteer of God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1385

and offride on it sacrificis and herying , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1386

and comaundide the puple of Juda to serue the Lord God of Israel ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1387

and natheles the puple offride +git in hi+ge placis to her Lord God .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1388

Manasses di+gede , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1389

and Amon his sone regnide for him ij. +ger in Jerusalem ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1390

and he dide yuel in Goddis si+gt , as Manasses his fadir hadde do ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1391

and offride and seruede to alle idolis , which Manasses hadde maad ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1392

and he reuerenside not the face of God , as Manasses reuerenside ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1393

and he dide many greetere trespasis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1394

and whanne his seruauntis hadden conspirid a+gens him , thei killiden
him ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1395

and the puple killide hem that hadden slayn Amon , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1396

and made Josie his sone king for him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1397

and he regnide xxxj. +geer in Jerusalem . CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1398

Josie dide that that was ri+gtful in Goddis si+gt ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1399

and +gede in the weies of Dauith , his fadir , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1400

and bowide neither to the ri+gt side neither to the lift side .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1401

In the viij. +geer of his rewme , whanne he was +git a chijld , he
bigan to seke the God of Dauith , his fadir , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1402

and in the xij. +geer , aftir that he bigan , he clenside Juda and
Jerusalem fro hi+ge placis , and ymagis and ydolis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1403

Thei distroieden bifore him the auters of Baalym , and the symylacris
that weren put aboue ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1404

he kittide doun , and altobrak wodis and grauen ymagis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1405

and scateride the relijfis on the biriels of hem that weren wont to
offre . CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1406

Ferthermore he brente the boonys of prestis in the auteris of idolis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1407

and he clenside Juda and Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1408

and distroiede alle ydolis in the citees of Manasses and of Effrahym and
of Symeon til_to Neptalym . CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1409

In the xviij. +geer of his rewme , whanne the lond and the temple of
God was clensid , he sente worthi men to reparaile Goddis hous ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1410

and so thei diden in deede . CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1411

And Elchie , the gret prest , +gaf to Saphan , the scriueyn and solempne
messenger , the book of Goddis lawe , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1412

and he bar it to the king ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1413

and whanne the king hadde herd the wordis of the lawe , he to-rente hise
clothis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1414

and he comaundede Elchie and othere grete men to goo , and preie the
Lord for the king , and for the resydues of Israel and of Juda , on alle
the words of the book of Goddis lawe ; " for whi greet veniaunce of God
hath droppid on vs , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1415

for oure fadris kepten not the wordis of God , that thei diden alle
thingis that ben writen in this book . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1416

Therfore Elchie , and thei that weren sent togidere of the king , +geden
to Olda , a profetesse , the wijf of Sellum ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1417

and God seide bi hir that he schal bringe in on this place and dwelleris
therof yuelis , and alle cursinges that ben writen in this book of
Goddis lawe ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1418

for thei forsoken God CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1419

and sacrificiden to alyen goddis , to terre him to wrathfulnesse , in
alle the werkis of her hondis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1420

" but for thou , king of Juda , herdist the wordis of the book , and
were meekid in Goddis si+gt , and weptist and to-rentist thi clothis , I
haue herd thee , " seith God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1421

" and thou schalt be born in to thi sepulcre in pees ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1422

and thin i+gen schulen not see al the yuel which Y schal bringe in on
this place , and on the dwelleris therof . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1423

And whanne Josie hadde herd these wordis , he clepide togidere alle the
eldre men of Juda and of Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1424

and he sti+gide in to Goddis hous , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1425

and alle men of Juda and the dwelleris of Jerusalem sti+giden togidere ,
prestis and deknis , and al the puple fro the leeste til_to the moste ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1426

and in audiense of hem the king redde in Goddis hous alle the wordis of
the book ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1427

and he stood in his trone , eithir seete of doom , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1428

and smoot boond of pees bifore God , that he schulde go aftir God , and
kepe hise heestis , and witnessingis , and iustifyingis , in al his
herte and al his soule , and do tho thingis that ben writen in that book
whiche he hadde red . CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1429

And he chargide gretly on this thing alle men that weren founden in
Jerusalem and Beniamyn ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1430

and the dwelleris of Jerusalem diden bi the couenaunt of the Lord God of
her fadris . CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1431

Therfore Josie dide awey alle abomynaciouns fro alle the cuntreys of the
sones of Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1432

and made alle men , that weren residue in Israel , to serue her Lord God
; CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1433

in alle the daies of his lijf thei +geden not awey fro the Lord God of
her fadris . CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1434

Aftirward Josie made pask in Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,28.1435

and <P_I,29> ordeynede prestis in hire officis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1436

and bad hem mynystre in Goddis hous , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1437

and bad dekenis serue God and his puple Israel , and make hem redy bi
hire housis and kinredis in the departing of ech , as Dauith , king of
Israel , comaundide , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1438

and bad hem serue in the seyntuarie , bi the meynes and cumpanyes and
dekenis , and that thei be halewid , and offre pask , and make redy her
britheren therto . CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1439

And Josie made such a pask , that noon was lyk in Israel , fro the daies
of Samuel the prophete , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1440

neithir eny of the kingis of Israel made pask , as Josie dide , to
prestis , and dekenes , and to al Juda and Israel , and to the dwelleris
of Jerusalem ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1441

for he +gaf to al the puple that was founden in Jerusalem in the
solempnite of pask , xxx._thousinde lambrin and kidis and othere scheep
, and iij._thousind of oxun . CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1442

Aftir that Josie hadde reparelid the temple , Necao , king of Egipt ,
sti+gide to fi+gte in Cartamys , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1443

and Josie +gede forth a+gens him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1444

and the king of Egipt seide to Josie , " I come not to day a+gens thee ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1445

but I fi+gte a+gens another hous , to whiche God bad and made me go in
haste ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1446

therfore ceese , thou king of Juda , to day a+gens God , which is with
me , lest he sle thee . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1447

Josie n@ @olde turne a+gen , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1448

but made himself redy to bataile a+gens the king of Egipt ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1449

and assentide not to the wordis of the king of Egipt , spoken bi Goddis
mouth . CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1450

Therfore Josie was slayn of the king of Egipt , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1451

and the peple of the lond made Joacas his sone king in Jerusalem .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1452

He regnide iij. moonthis in Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1453

and the king of Egipt puttide him doun , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1454

and condempnide the lond of Juda in an_c. talentis of syluer , and in a
talent of gold , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1455

and made Eliachym his brothir kyng for him on Juda and Jerusalem ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1456

and turnide his name Joachym . CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1457

He regnide xj. +geer in Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1458

and dide yuel bifore God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1459

Therfore Nabugodonosor took him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1460

and ledde him boundyn with chaynes into Babilone , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1461

and baar thidir the vessels of Goddis temple ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1462

and Joakin his sone rengnide for him iij. moonthis and x. daies in
Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1463

and dide yuel in Goddis si+gt . CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1464

Thanne Nabugodonosor sente men that ledden hym into Babilone and bare
out the preciouseste vessels of Goddis hous ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1465

and Nabugodonosor made Sedechie king on Juda and Jerusalem .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1466

He rengnide xj. +geer in Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1467

and dide yuel in Goddis si+gt , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1468

neithir was aschamyd of the face of Jeremye , the prophete , that spac
to him of Goddis mouth . CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1469

He brak the ooth maad too Nabugodnosor ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1470

therfore Nabugodnosor cam CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1471

and took hym , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1472

and ledde him and alle the vessels and the tresouris of Goddis hous and
of the king and princis into Babilone , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1473

and killide the puple , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1474

and distroiede and brente Jerusalem ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1475

and the puple that was left alyue was led into Babilone ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1476

and seruede the king and his sones , til the king of Perseys rengnide ,
and til l. +ger weren fullid , bi Goddis word seid bi the mouth of
Jeremye . CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1477

And Cirus , king of Perseys , comaundide to be prechid , +ghe bi
writinge in al his rewme , that Jewis schulden turne a+gen into Judee .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1478

<heading>

CAP. X. CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1480

<$$heading>

This proces of Paralypomynon in the j. and ij. book schulde stire
cristene kingis and lordis to distroie synne , and loue vertu , and make
Goddis lawe to be knowe and kept of her puple , CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1482

for heere thei mown se , hou sore God punschide yuele kingis , that
lyueden yuele , and drowen the puple to idolatrie , either other gret
synnes , and hou greetly God preyside , rewardide , and cherischide good
kinges , that lyueden wel , and gouernede wel the puple in Goddis lawe ,
and opin resoun , and good conscience . CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1483

And thou+g kingis and lordis knewen neuere more of hooly scripture than
iij. stories of the ij. book of Paralypomynon and of Regum , that is ,
the storie of king Josophat , the storie of king Ezechie , and the
storie of king Josie , thei my+gte lerne sufficiently to lyue wel and
gouerne wel hire puple bi Goddis lawe , and eschewe al pride , and
ydolatrie , and coueitise , and other synnes . CMPURVEY-M3,I,29.1484

But alas ! alas ! alas ! where king Jozophat sente hise princis , and
dekenes , and prestis , to ech citee of <P_I,30> his rewme with the book
of Goddis lawe , to techen opinly Goddis lawe to the puple , summe
cristene lordis senden general lettris to alle her mynistris , and
leegemen eithir tenauntis , that the pardouns of the bisschopis of Rome
, that ben opin leesingis , for thei graunten many c. +geeris of
pardoun aftir domes day , be prechid generaly in her rewmes and
lordschipis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1485

and if eny wijse man a+genseith the opin errouris of anticrist , and
teche men to do her almes to pore nedy men , to ascape the peynes of
helle , and to winne the blisse of heuene , he be prisoned , as a man
out of cristen bileue , and traytour of God , and of cristen kingis and
lordis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1486

And where king Ezechie made him ful bisy to clense Goddis hous , and do
awey al vnclennesse fro the sentuarie , and comaundide prestis to offre
brent sacrifice on Goddis auteer , and ordeynede dekenis in Goddis hous
to herie God , as Dauith and other prophetis ordeyneden , summe cristene
lordis in name , and hethene in condiscouns defoulen the sentuarie of
God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1487

and bringin in symonient clerkis , ful of coueitise , eresie , and
ypocrisie , and malice , to stoppe Goddis lawe , that it be not knowen
and kept , and frely prechid ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1488

and +git summe cristene lordis holden many prelatis and curatis in her
courtis and in seculer offis a+gens Goddis lawe and mannis opinly ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1489

and withholden hem fro her goostly offis and helping of cristen soulis ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1490

and where king Josie prechide opinly Goddis lawe in the temple to al the
puple , and castide awey idolis , and brente the boonis of prestis ,
that diden idolatrie , summe cristen lordis in name not in dede ,
preisen and magnifien freris lettris , ful of disceit and leesingis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1491

and make hire tenauntis and meyne to swere bi herte , boonis , nayles ,
and sydes , and other membris of Crist , CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1492

and pursuen ful cruely hem that wolden teche treuly and freely the lawe
of God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1493

and preisen , mayntenen , and cherischen hem , that prechen fablis ,
lesingis , and synful mennis tradiciouns , either statutis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1494

and letten greetly the gospel to be prechid , and holy writ to be knowen
and kept . CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1495

But wite these vnwyse lordis , that Elye the prophete , oon aloone hadde
the treuthe of God , and king Acab with viij._c._and_l. prestis and
prophetis of Baal hadde the false part ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1496

and eft Mycheas , oon aloone prophete of God , hadde the treuthe a+gens
iiij._c. prophetis of Baal , that counceileden Acab go to werre to his
owne schenschipe and deth ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1497

so now a fewe pore men and idiotis , in comparisoun of clerkis of scole
, mown haue the treuthe of holy scripture a+gens many thousinde prelatis
and religiouse , that ben +gouen to worldly pride and coueitise ,
symonie , ypocrisie and other fleschly synnes , moost sithen these pore
men desiren oonly the treuthe and fredom of the hooly gospel , and of
hooly scripture , CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1498

and accepten manis lawis and ordynauncis , oonly in as myche as thei ben
groundid in holy scripture , eithir good resoun , and comyn prophit of
cristen puple ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1499

and worldly prelatis and feyned relygious grounden hem on synful mennis
statutis , that sounnen pride and coueitise , CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1500

and letten the treuthe and fredom of Goddis lawe to be knowen and kept ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1501

and bringen cristen puple in nedeles tharldam and greet cost .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1502

But it is for to drede ful sore lest kingis and lordis ben now in the
formere synnes of Manasses ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1503

God graunte that thei repenten verily and make amendis to God and men ,
as he dide , in the ende ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1504

for thei setten idolis in Goddis hous , CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1505

and exciten men to idolatrie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1506

and scheden innocent blood in many maners , as Manasses dide .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1507

First thei setten in her herte , that schulde be the temple and specialy
chaumbre of God , the idole of coueitise , either of glotonie , either
of pride , either of other greet synnes , CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1508

for seint Poul seith , that oure bodies ben the temple of the Hooly
Goost , CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1509

and eft he seith , that auarice is the seruise of idolis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1510

and eft he seith , that glotouns maken her bely her God ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1511

and God seith bi Job , that the deuil is king ouer alle the sones of
pride , CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1512

and Jhesu Crist seith , that the deuil is prince of this world , that is
, as Austin seith , of false men that dwellen in this world .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,30.1513

Thanne thei that setten pride , either coueitise , either glotonie ,
either rauyn , in her herte , settyn idolis of <P_I,31> Baal , either of
the deuil , in the temple of God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1514

Specialy lordis setten idolis in Goddis hous , whanne thei maken
vnworthi prelatis either curatis in the chirche ; for whi such vnable
prelatis either curatis ben idolis , as God seith in xj. c. of Zacarie
to an vnable prelat , " A ! thou schepherde , and idole , forsakinge
the floc ; " wherfor Erchedekene in Rosarie , which is oon of the
famouseste doctouris , and of the popis lawe , writith thus , " an yuel
prelat is seid a rorynge lyoun , and a wolf rauysching prey ; "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1515

and in the xxxiiij. c. of Esechiel , he is seid to feede him self and
not the scheep ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1516

also he is seid to seke his owne profitis temporal ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1517

therfore he is not of Goddis children , as Austyn seith in viij. cause
, j. questioun , c=o=. sunt quidam , CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1518

and for this thing power schal be taken awey fro him , as God seith in
the xxxiiij. c. of Ezechiel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1519

Also an yuel prelat is seid a wolf , as the lawe witnessith in lxxxiij.
distincioun c=o=. nichil ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1520

also for defaute of gouernaile he is seid a vnchaast dogge , as Austyn
witnessith in ij. cause vij. questioun , c=o=. qui nec ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1521

also he is a crowe , either a rauen , for the blacknesse of synnes , as
the lawe witnessith there , in c=o=. non omnis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1522

also he is seid fonned salt , not prophitable to eny thing , as the lawe
witnessith there , in c=o=. non omnis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1523

also he is seid an hog , as the lawe witnessith in xliij. distinctioun
, in c=o=. in mandatis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1524

also he is seid a cherl of cherlysched of yuel lijf , as the lawe
witnessith in xlvij. distinctioun , in the bigynnyng ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1525

also he is seid a capoun , CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1526

for he hath the manere of an hen , CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1527

for as a capoun crowith not , so an yuel prelat crowith not in preching
; CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1528

also an yuel prelat gendrith not bi preching of Goddis word ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1529

neithir he fi+gtith for hise sogetis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1530

also as the capoun clepith not hennis , so an yuel prelat clepith not
pore men to mete ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1531

also as a capoun makith fat himself , so an yuel prelat makith fat
himself . CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1532

Therfore sithen he seekith plenteuousnesse , metis , and richessis , he
schal be put into the fijer of helle , as Jerom witnessith on Mychee ,
and in the xxxv. distinctioun , c=o=. ecclesie principes .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1533

Erchedekene writith al this in xliij. distinctioun , in c=o=. sit
rector , on the word muti . CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1534

Also a doumb prelat is an ydol , and not a very prelat ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1535

a doumb prelat is not a very prelat , sithen he vsith not the offis of a
prelat , CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1536

bot he hath oonly the licnesse of a prelat , as an ydol that vsith not
the offis of a man is oonly lijk a man , but it is noo man ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1537

therfore suche doumbe prelatis moun ri+gtfully be seid symylacris ,
either ydolis , of whiche it is seid in the vi. c=o=. of Baruk , " the
trees of hem ben maad fair of a carpenter , CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1538

and tho ben araied with gold and syluer , CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1539

and moun not speke , " CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1540

and thei that maken suche prelatis ben lijk hem , whiche makeris schulen
be dampned with suche prelatis , bi that word of Dauith ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1541

" thei that maken tho ben maad lijk tho . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1542

But marke wel , that hethene men hadden symylacris of vj. kyndis , that
is , of cley , of tree , of bras , of stoon , of syluer , and of gold ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1543

we moun fynd these vj. kyndis in yuel prelatis ; for whi symylacris of
cley ben fleschly prelatis , of whiche God seith in the sautir , " I
schal do hem awey as the cley of streetis ; " CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1544

symylacris of tree ben vnwise prelatis and boistous and without wit , of
which it is seid in holy scripture , " a tree is wlappid in siluer ; "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1545

and these ben seid to be maad of nou+gt in to prelatis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1546

thes ben beestis clepid chymeres , that han a part of ech beest ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1547

and suche ben not no_but oonly in opynyoun , either speche , and not in
dede , neither in kynde ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1548

symylacris of bras ben thei , that han oonly worldly eloquence , for whi
brasse +geueth greet soun , in i. pistle to Corinth , xiij. c .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1549

" if I speke in the langagis of men and of aungels , and I have not
charite , I am maad as bras sounnynge ; " CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1550

symylacris of stoon ben thei , that ben broken fro ri+gtfulnesse and
vertu , for temporal strengthe , CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1551

these prelatis ben not the stoon which is set into the heed of the
corner , CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1552

but these ben the stoon of hirtyng and of sclaundre ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,31.1553

symylacris of syluer ben thei that ben maad bi moneye , eithir richessis
, whiche prelatis seyn , what wolen <P_I,32> +ge +geue to vs ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1554

and we schulen bitraie Crist to +gou ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1555

golden symylacris ben thei that ben maad oonly for worldly nobleie , for
whi gold singnefieth nobley , CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1556

and therfore the heed of the ymage of Nabugodonosor was of gold in ij.
c. of Daniel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1557

Erchedekene tellith al this in xliij. distinctioun , c=o=. sit rector
, on the word mutus . CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1558

Thou+g this doctour of the popis lawe be pleyn and scharp , he seith
treuthe sesonable , CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1559

for the chirche now acordith with hooly writ , and resoun , and comun
doctouris of holy scripture ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1560

for in xi. c. of Sacariee , God clepith an yuel prelat an ydol ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1561

and in Ezechiel and other prophetis he licneth tyrauntis and raueynouris
to lyouns , woluis , beeris , and othere vnresonable beestis , to
dispise her synne . CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1562

Here lordis and other prelatis moun see in party , hou perilous it is to
ordeyne yuele prelatis eithir curatis in the chirche ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1563

for as seint Gregory seith , in i. part of Pastoralis , ij. c=o=. noo
man harmeth more in the chirche , than he that doth weiwardly , and
holdith the name of ordre , eithir of holynesse ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1564

and the lawe seith de electionibus , c=o=. nichil , that no thing
harmeth more the chirche of God , than {it_harms_the_church} that
vnworthi men be taken to the gouernaile of soulis ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1565

and Grostede seith in his sermoun Premonitus a venerabili patre , that
to make vnable prelatis eithir curatis in the chirche of God , is to
haue come to the hi+gest degree of trespasis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1566

also in his sermoun Dominus noster Jhesus Cristus , he writeth thus to
the pope , " he that bitakith the cure of soulis to a man vnmy+gti ,
vnkunnynge , either not wilful to kepe duly the soulis , is gilty of
alle the soulis , thou+g eny ascapith , and is sauid bi Goddis grace ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1567

and he that bitakith the cure of soulis to him that is opinly vnable
therto , techith to sette more pris bi vnresonable beestis than by men ,
and for to loue more erthly thingis , that passyn schortly , than
everlastinge thingis , and more than the deeth and blood of Goddis sone
; CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1568

and he that +geueth thus the cure of soulis to vnable men , is werse
than Eroude , that pursuede Crist , and worse thanne Jewis and hethene
men , that crucifieden Crist . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1569

Grostede seith this pleynly , CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1570

and preueth it opinly bifore the pope and al his clergie ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1571

and thei that procuren beneficis and richessis to men , haten hem to
whiche thei procuren thus , as if thei procured hem to be set in the cop
of the chirche , in whirlwijndis and greet tempestis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1572

Grostede seith this in his sermoun Scriptum est de leuitis ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1573

and he that is necligent to drawe soulis out of the pit of synne , as
myche as he may , bi the ordre of lawe , and he that lettith him of his
werk , sleeth the soulis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1574

and he that settith more prijs bi a fleschly scheep than a goostly
scheep , that is , mannis soule , settith more pris bi a peny than bi
the lijf of Goddis sone , which is worth al this world .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1575

A recheles curat , and that sleeth sogettis bi yuel ensaumple , and
withdrawing of Goddis word , is worse than vnresonable beestis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1576

and he is wrse than the crucifieris of Crist , CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1577

for he crucifieth him in hise membris . CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1578

Goode counceilouris thei ben aloone , that ben wijse men , and drede God
, for whi alle coueitouse men ben foolis , and vnwijse men ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1579

and to be led bi the counceil of hem is to dispose of henne cotis bi the
counceil of foxis , and to dispose of foldis of scheep bi the counceil
of woluis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1580

Grostede seith this in a sermoun Premonitus a venerabili patre .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1581

See , +ge lordis and prelatis , that maken vnable curatis , for fleschly
affeccioun and +giftis , and specialy for pleyinge at the bere , and
othere vnleeful iapis , what tresoun +ge doon to God , and what harm to
Cristis chirche and +goure auaunseeis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1582

+ge maken orrible abomynacoun of discoumfort stoonde in the hooly place
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1583

for +ge make anticrist to stonde at the hi+ge auter , in the stede of
Crist , CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1584

and trete the holy sacrament of Cristis flesch and his blood ful
vnworthily , CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1585

and as Parisience seith , whanne +ge maken a coueitouse prest to stonde
at the auter , +ge maken a maldworp stonde there , in the stede of Crist
; CMPURVEY-M3,I,32.1586

and whanne +ge maken a fonned bischop , that can not and loueth not
Goddis lawe , stonde <P_I,33> my-trid at the auter , +ge make an horned
asse stonde at the auter , in the stede of Crist ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1587

and so of othere vnresonable beestis , as lyouns , wluis , beeris , apis
, dragouns , hoggis , horsis , doggis ; and othere viciouse prestis ,
proude , coueitouse , raueynouris , wrathful , ypocritis , trecherouse ,
glotenouse , lecherouse , enuyouse , and bacbiteris ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1588

and +ge transfiguren Satanas into an aungel of li+gt , whanne +ge maken
curatis either prelatis , that ben contrarie to Crist , to ocupie the
offis of bischop , abbot , either of prest . CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1589

Lordis and prelatis , that han sett suche idolis in Goddis hous , as
Manasses dide , sue +ge Manasses in very repentaunce , and making of
amendis to God and men . CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1590

Also lordis and prelatis exciten strongly men to ydolatrie ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1591

for thei sweren custumably nedelesly , and ofte vnavisily and fals , bi
the membris of God , of Crist , and bi seintis , in so myche that ech
lord and greet prelat comynly makith to him an ydole of sum seint , whom
he worschipith more than God ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1592

for comunly thei sweren bi oure Lady of Walsingham , seint Joon Baptiste
, seint Edward , seint Thomas of Caunterbury , and such othere seintis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1593

and chargen more this ooth than thou+g thei sweren by the Hooly Trinite
; CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1594

and in al this thei onoren more these seintis than thei onouren the
Hooly Trinite . CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1595

Thou+g it were leeueful to swere bi seintis , this is ydolatrie , to
charge more an ooth maad bi suche seintis than bi God Almy+gty , either
bi the Hooly Trinite ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1596

natheles Crisostom witnessith on the v. c=o=. of Matheu , that to
swere bi eny creature , is to do idolatrie ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1597

for as Jerom there , and Decrees , in xxij. cause , j. questione ,
c=o=. si quis per capitulum , and c=o=. next bifore , and Decretals de
jure jurando , c=o=. et si Christus , witnessen pleynly , to swere bi a
creature is a+gens Goddis comaundement ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1598

and therfore Crist in the v. c=o=. of Math. , comaundith to swere ,
not bi heuene , neither bi erthe , CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1599

and vndirstondith bi heuene and erthe creaturis of heuene and creaturis
of erthe ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1600

and in al the old lawe it is not founden , where God grauntith to swere
bi eny creature , but oonly bi his owne name , either bi himself ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1601

and therfore the wise man seith in the xxiij. c=o=. of Ecclesiastici "
a man that swerith mychil schal be fillid with wickidnesse ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1602

and veniaunce schal not go awey fro his hous ; " CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1603

and eft he seith , " thi mouth be not customable to swering , for whi
myche fallyng is in it ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1604

the nemyng of God be not customable in thi mouth , " that is , to swere
bi his name in veyn , either fals , either for an yuel ende ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1605

" and be thou not medlid with the names of seintis , " that is , to
swere bi seintis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1606

" for thou schalt not be giltlees of hem . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1607

Here lordis and prelatis moun see how thei don opin ydolatrie , whanne
thei gessen to onoure seintis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1608

and hire opin deedis of ydolatrie and blasfemye ben opin bookis of
ydolatrie and blasfemye to hire sugetis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1609

therfore , as Gregory seith in ij. bok of Pastrals v. c=o=. ,
prelatis ben worthi so many dethis , hou manye ensaumplis of perdiscoun
thei senden to sogettis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1610

and in xxv. c=o=. of Numery , God bad Moises hange alle the princis in
iebatis a+gens the sunne , CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1611

for the peple of Israel dide leccherie and idolatrie bi ensaumple and
suffraunce of hem . CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1612

Now in Engelond it is a comyn proteccioun a+gens persecuscioun of
prelatis and of summe lordis , if a man is customable to swere nedeles ,
and fals , and vnauisid , bi the boonys , nailes , and sidis , and other
membris of Crist , and to be proud and leccherous , and speke not of
Goddis lawe , and repreue not synne aboute him ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1613

and to absteyne fro oothis nedeles and vnleeueful , and to eschewe pride
, and speke onour of God and of his lawe , and repreue synne bi weie of
charite , is matir and cause now whi prelatis and summe lordis
sclaundren men , and clepen hem lollardis , eretikis , and riseris of
debate and of tresoun a+gens the king ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1614

now Manasses settith idolis opinly in the temple of God ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,33.1615

and sterith men gretly to do idolatrie , and cherischen hem that breken
opinly Goddis heestis , and punysche hem soore , as hethene men either
eretikis , that bisien hem to lerne , kepe , and <P_I,34> teche Goddis
heestis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1616

the iij. tyme lordis and prelatis bothe schedden innocent blood , as
Manasses dide , CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1617

for thei waastyn folily hire goodis in wakingis and pleyingis bi ni+gt ,
and in rere-soperis and othere vanites , CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1618

and taken grete and vnmesurable taxis of the comyns ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1619

and lesse lordis and prelatis doon greet extorciouns to pore men ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1620

and taken pore mennis goodis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1621

and paien litil either nou+gt and out of tyme for tho .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1622

Therfore , as Mychee the prophete seith in iij. c. , thei hyilden pore
men , CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1623

and eten her flesch ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1624

and Grostede declarith wel this in his dicte that bygynneth thus , sint
lumbi vestri precinti , and in the xiij. dicte ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1625

and God seith in the Sautir of suche tirauntis , " thei deuouren my
puple as the mete of breed . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1626

How myche blood lordis scheden in werris , for pride and coueitise , by
counceil of false prelatis , confessouris , and prechouris , it passith
mannis wit to telle fully in this lijf ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1627

but of scheding of blood and sleeing of pore men , bi withdrawing of
almes , and in +geuynge it to dede stockis , either stoonis , either to
riche clerkis and feyned religiouse , were to speke now , if a man hadde
the spirit of goostly strengthe . CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1628

Now men knelyn , and preien , CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1629

and offren faste to dede ymagis , that han neither hungir neither coold
; CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1630

and dispisen , beten , and sleen Cristen men , maad to the ymage and
lycnesse of the Holy Trynite . CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1631

What onour of God is this to knele and offre to an ymage , maad of
synful mannis hondis , and to dispise and robbe the ymage maad of Goddis
hondis , that is , a cristen man , either a cristen womman .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1632

Whanne men +geue not almes to pore nedy men , but to dede ymagis ,
either riche clerkis , thei robbyn pore men of her due porcoun , and
needful sustenaunce assingned to hem of God himself ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1633

and whanne suche offereris to dede ymagis robben pore men , thei robben
Jhesu Crist , as he seith in xxv. c=o=. of Math. , " that , that +ge
diden to oon of these leeste of myne , +ge diden to me , "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1634

and if thei schulen be dampned that +geuen not mete and drinke , and
othere nescessaries to pore men , as Crist seith , where schulen thei
become that robben pore men , and so Jhesu Crist himself ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1635

and if these tweyne , that +geuen not lyflode , and that robben pore men
, schulen be dampned so depe in helle , where schulen false techeris ,
stireris , and confessouris bicome , that stiren lordis and riche men to
robbe thus pore men , and to do this vndir the colour of excellent almes
and holynesse ? CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1636

But morne we sore for this cursidnesse , CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1637

and preie we to God with al oure herte , that sithen lordis and prelatis
suen Manasses in these opyn synnes , God stire hem to sue Manasses in
very penaunce , and make amendis to God and men , lest oure reume be
conquerid of aliens , either hethen men , for these opyn synnes and many
moo . CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1638

<heading>

CAP. XI. CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1640

<$$heading>

The firste book of Esdras tellith , how Cirus , king of Perseys , +gaf
lycence to Jewis to turne a+gen in to Jerusalem and Judee , and bylde
the temple of God in Jerusalem , and bad that other men in his rewme
schulden helpe to this bylding ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1642

and he +gaf the vessels herto whiche Nabugodnosor hadde take awey fro
Jerusalem . CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1643

Thanne is teld the noumbre of hem that turnede a+gen into Judee , vndir
Josue the prest , the sone of Josedech , and vndir Sorobabel , the duyk
; and hou thei bygunnen to bylde the auter and temple ; and what letting
thei hadden of enemyes , and what coumfort of God , and of hise
prophetis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1644

Thanne it is teld , what sorwe Esdras made , for the princis and prestis
and comyns token hethene wommen to wyues a+gens the lawe ; and how the
princis and the puple repentiden mekely and verily , and maden amendis
to God and men . CMPURVEY-M3,I,34.1645

In the book of Neemye , which is clepid the ij. book of Esdras , is
teld , how Neemye gat graunt of the king to bylde the wallis of
Jerusalem , and how he and othere men , bothe prestis and othere ,
princis and comyns , bildiden the wallis , and +gatis , and lockis , and
touris aboue , for defense a+gens <P_I,35> enemyes ; and how the enemyes
of Jewis purposiden with strong hond to slee Jewis preuely , and
distroie hire werk . CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1646

Thanne half the part of +gunge men made the werk , CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1647

and half the part was redy to bateyle ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1648

with oon hond thei maden the werk , CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1649

and with the other thei helden the swerd ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1650

and eche of hem that bildide was gird with his swerd .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1651

Thanne it sueth how Neemye , duk of the puple , dide freely his offis ,
and took noo costis assingned to the duk , CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1652

and he dide thus for the pouert of the puple . CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1653

Aftir this doinge Esdras redde in the book of Goddis lawe , fro the
morewitide til_to noon bifore the multitude of men and wymmen ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1654

and dekenes made silence in the puple to here the lawe ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1655

and Esdras redde in the book of Goddis lawe fro the firste day til_to
the laste . CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1656

Thanne the children of Israel camyn togidere in fasting and in sackis ,
either heiris , CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1657

and erthe was on hem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1658

and the seed of the sones of Israel was departid fro ech alyen sone ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1659

and thei stoden bifore the Lord , CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1660

and knoulechiden her synnes , and the wickidnessis of hire fadris ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1661

and thei risiden togidere to stonde , CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1662

and thei redden in the book of lawe of hire God fouresithis in the day ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1663

and fouresithis in the ny+gt thei knoulechiden and heryeden hire Lord
God ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1664

and dekenes cryeden with gret vois to hire Lord God ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1665

and baddin the puple rise and blesse God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1666

Thanne sueth the solempne confessioun of Esdras , how he knoulechide
first the glorious werkis of God , and aftirward the orrible synnes of
al the puple , and of hire fadris ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1667

and thanne al the peple made couenaunt , CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1668

and swor to kepe Goddis lawe , and to bie not in the sabat and haliday
of hem that brou+gten viteilis to selle ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1669

and thei bihi+gten to paie the firste fruitis to prestis , and tithis to
the dekenes , and to bringe al this to the temple of God .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1670

At the laste Neemye suffride neither Jewis neither straungeris sille
neither bie in the sabotis , not oonly in Jerusalem , but neither in
placis ny+g the wallis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1671

and he rebuykede , and curside , and beet men , and made hem ballid ,
that token alien wommen to be hire wyues , as of Asotus , of Amon , and
of Moab ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1672

and chargide hem greetly in the Lord , that thei schulden not +geue hire
dou+gtris to the sones of hethen men , and take nou+gt of the dou+gtris
of hethen men to hire owne sones , and to hem self .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1673

This proces of Esdras and of Neemye schulde styre vs to be bisy to
biylde vertues in oure soule , aftir turnyng a+gen fro caitifte of synne
, and to fi+gte a+gens temptaciouns , and byilde faste vertues , as thei
fou+gten with oon hond a+gens enemyes , and biyldeden with the tothir
hond ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1674

and we schulden be ful bisy to kepe the gostely sabot in goode werkis
and herying of God , sithen thei were so besy to kepe the figuratif
sabot . CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1675

Thou+g the book of Tobie is not of bileeue , it is ful deuout storie ,
and profitable to the symple puple , to maken hem to kepe patience and
Goddis heestis , to do werkis of mercy , and teche wel hire children ,
and to take wyues in the drede of God , for loue of children , and not
al for foul lust off body , neither for coueitise of goodis of this
world ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1676

and also children moun lerne heere bi +gunge Tobie to be meke and
obedient , and redy to serue fadir and modir in her nede .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1677

Therfore amonge alle the bookis of the elde testament symple men of wit
schulden rede and here ofte this book of Tobie , to be trewe to God in
prosperite and aduersite , and eschewe idolatrie , glotenye and
coueitise , and to be pacient in tribulacoun , and go neuere awey fro
the dreede and loue of God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1678

Thou+g the seene of clerkis , either general gadering of clergie , hath
take the book of Judith among the noumbre of hooly scripturis , natheles
it is not of the canoun eithir feith of the bible anentis Ebreis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1679

for thei resseyuen not the autoritie of this book ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1680

natheles it was writen in Caldee langage , CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1681

and is noumbrid among stories , as Jerom witnessith on the prolog .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,35.1682

But natheles this book comendith chastite and abstinence , penaunce and
wideuhood of Judith , and her loue <P_I,36> which sche hadde to deliuere
Goddis puple fro her enemyes , and to kepe the feith and worschiping of
God among his peple . CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1683

Also this book comendith the feith and treuthe of Achior , that was
conuertid to Goddis lawe bi myracle of sleeing of Olofernes , bi the
hondis of the widewe Judith . CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1684

Thanne Judith repreuede prestis CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1685

for thei temtide God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1686

and consentiden to deliuere the citee to enemyes , if God sente not
helpe to hem withinne v. daies , CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1687

and goode prestis tooken meekly this repreuyng of a womman ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1688

and sche tau+gte hem hou thei schulden do penaunce for this trespas ,
and coumforte the puple to triste in God , and abyde his mercy and help
, at his owne wille . CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1689

Vs nedith not to excuse Judith fro lesingis and tresoun to Olofernes ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1690

but we moun fauorably excuse hire fro deedly synne in this doinge , for
the greet loue that sche hadde to Goddis peple , and to slee Olofernes ,
a blasfemyere of God , and distroiere of his lawe and peple ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1691

and iustly God took this veniaunce on Olofernes , for his synnes and
harmes don to Goddis peple , and whiche he purposide to do , if he
my+gte lyue longe . CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1692

Of this proces proude werriouris schulden drede God , that made proud
Olofernes to be slayn of a womman , and al his greet oost to be scaterid
and distroied ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1693

and cristen men schulden be coumfortid greetly , for to haue ful trist
in God , and in his helpe , that so my+gtily delyuerede his puple fro so
greet an enemy and strong oost , withouten perisching of his peple .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1694

And sithen Judith hadde so greet preising for hire doinge , that was
medelid with manye synnes , myche more preising schulen thei haue in
heuene , withouten ende , that putten forth hem silf to be martirid for
Goddis cause , with trewe meenes of pacience and of charite .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1695

The book of Ester tellith first , how the qwene Vasti was forsaken for
hire pride , and was departid fro mariage of king Assuerus , and hou
Ester , for hire meekenesse , bewte , and Goddis grace was maad qwene in
the stide of Vasty . CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1696

Also the trewe Mardoche , the fadir in lawe of adopcioun of this womman
Ester , tau+gte hire to loue God , and kepe his lawe ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1697

and sche was full meke and obedient to Mardochee , +ghe , whanne sche
was qwene , as to hire fadir in lawe . CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1698

Thanne Aaman , of the kinrede of Agag , conspyride bi sotil malice to
distroie al the peple of Jewis , in the lond of Assuerus ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1699

and hadde graunt of the king , at his owne wille , CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1700

and the day of distroiyng and of sleeing of the Jewis was pupplischid
thour+g al the rewme . CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1701

Thanne Mardochee and the Jewis diden greet penaunce ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1702

and maden gret sorwe , CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1703

and preieden God to helpe in that gret nede . CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1704

And Mardochee sente to Ester , that sche schulde do the same , and goo
to the king , in perel of hire lijf , to axe grace of him , and reuoking
of lettris and power grauntid to Aman , the enemy of Jewis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1705

And aftir myche fasting , penaunce , and preier , Estir bitook hirself
to Goddis disposicioun , and to perel of her deth ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1706

and entride to the king , +ghe , a+gens the lawe of the lond , whanne
sche was not clepid , to axe mercy and help of the king , for hirsilf
and al hire puple . CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1707

And God turnede the feersnesse and cruelte of the king to mekenesse ,
mersy , and benyngnite a+gens Ester , and the peple of Jewis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1708

And thanne he reuokide the power grauntid to Aaman ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1709

and leet hange him , as he purposide to haue hangid the trewe Mardochee
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1710

and +gaf general power to Jewis to slee alle hire enemyes in his empire
. CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1711

Aftir these thingis the king enhaunside Mardochee ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1712

and made him grettist next the king , CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1713

and +gaf greet fraunchise and onour to the Jewis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1714

This story of Ester schulde stire men to be trewe to God and his lawe ,
and putte awey pride and enuye , and euere triste in God in alle perrels
; CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1715

and tirauntis schulden be aferd to conspire a+gens Goddis seruauntis ,
leest God take veniaunce on hem , as he dide on this man Aaman , that
conspiride the deeth and general distroiyng of Jewis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1716

The book of Job is ful sotil in vndirstonding , CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1717

for Job argueth a+gens hise enemyes , that wolden bringe hym out of
cristen feith , CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1718

and concludith many errouris that suen of hire false bileeue and opynyon
; CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1719

and Job affermith not that al is soth that he spekith a+gens hise
aduersaries , CMPURVEY-M3,I,36.1720

but concludith hem in hire fals <P_I,37> bileeue , that many errouris
suen therof ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1721

and for I haue declarid in party in the glos hou the harde sentensis of
Job schulen be vndirstonden , therfore I passe ouer li+gtly now .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1722

First this book tellith the kyn of Job , and hise richessis , and holy
lijf of him and hise children ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1723

and aftirward it tellith what tribulacoun bifelde to Joob in his catel ,
in hise children , and in his owne bodi , and hou paciently he suffride
this , and thankide God in alle hise dissesis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1724

Thanne his wijf , whom the deuel reseruede as a special instrument to
him , to disseyue Joob by his wif , as he disseyuede Adam bi Eue ,
counceld him to blasfeme God , and therbi di+ge ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1725

and Joob repreuede hire foly , CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1726

and seide , if we han resseyued goodis of Goddis hond , whi suffre we
not yuels , that is , peynes . CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1727

In alle these thingis Joob synnede not in hise lippis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1728

Thanne sueth the disputing bitwixe Joob and hise freendis , almest
til_to the ende of the book . CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1729

Job heeld strongly the treuthe of cristen feith , and specialy of the
rising a+gen of bodies at domis day ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1730

and hise freendis seiden many treuthis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1731

and medleden falsnesse , CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1732

and euere purposiden an yuel ende and falsed , CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1733

for thei helden that meede is +gouen oonly in this lijf for goode werkis
, and that no man is punyschid here , no_but for synnes passid ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1734

and as a man is punyschid more than an other in this lif , so he hath
synned more than another man lesse punschid ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1735

but al this is fals , as Joob preuith , and God confermith in the ende .
For whi reward of goode deedis is myche more in the lijf to comynge ,
thanne in present lijf , and a vertuose man is punyschid here for to
haue mede in heuene ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1736

and comunly a iust man hath more tribulacoun in this lijf thanne a
wickid man , as it is opin of Crist , that suffride heere myche dissese
, and of tyrauntis that han prosperite in this lijf .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1737

And therfore Joob telde opinly hise goode dedis to coumforte him a+gens
dispeir , to whiche hise frendis wolden bringe him ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1738

but Joob dide this ouer myche , and with sum pride ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1739

and iustifiede himself ouer myche , that hise freendis conseyueden that
he blasfemyde God , and preuede God vnri+gtful ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1740

and of thes twey poyntis Joob repentide in the ende .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1741

Thanne God for+gaf to him this litil synne , CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1742

and appreued his trewe sentense , CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1743

and dampnede the errour of hise aduersaries . CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1744

Thanne Job preiede , CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1745

and made sacrifice for hise aduersaries , CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1746

and God herde him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1747

and dide mercy to hem ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1748

and God addide alle thingis double , that Joob hadde ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1749

and he hadde xiiij._thousind of scheep , and vj._thousind of camelis ,
and a_thousind +gockis of oxen , and a_thousind femal assis , and vij.
sones , and iij. dou+gtris ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1750

and Joob lyuede vij._score +geer aftir his turment ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1751

and si+g hise sones and the sones of his sones til_to the fourthe
generacoun . CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1752

This proces of Job schulde stire men to be iust of lyuyng , and to be
pacient in aduersitees , as Joob was , and to be stedfast in cristen
feith , and answere wijsely and meekly to eretikis and aduersaries of
oure feith , as Petir and Poul techen , and euere be meke and ful of
charite , and preie for oure enemyes , and looke aftir meede in heuene ,
and not in erthe , for oure good deedis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1753

The Sautir comprehendith al the elde and newe testament ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,37.1754

and techith pleynly the mysteries of the Trinite , and of Cristis
incarnacoun , passioun , rising a+gen , stying in to heuene , and
sending doun of the Holy Gost , and preching of the gospel , and the
coming of Antecrist , and the general <P_I,38> dom of Crist , and the
glorie of chosen men to blisse , and the peynes of hem that schulen be
dampned in helle ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,38.1755

and ofte rehersith the stories of the elde testament ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,38.1756

and bringith in keping of Goddis heestis , and loue of enemyes .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,38.1757

Noo book in the eld testament is hardere to vndirstonding to vs Latyns ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,38.1758

for oure lettre discordith myche fro the Ebreu , CMPURVEY-M3,I,38.1759

and many doctouris taken litel heede to the lettre , but al to the
goostly vndirstonding . CMPURVEY-M3,I,38.1760

Wel <P_I,39> were him that koude wel vndirstonde the Sautir , and kepe
it in his lyuyng , and seie it deuoutly , and conuicte Jewis therbi ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,39.1761

for manye men that seyn it vndeuoutly , and lyuen out of charite , lyen
foule on hemself to God , CMPURVEY-M3,I,39.1762

and blasfemen hym , whanne thei crien it ful loude to mennis eeris in
the chirche . CMPURVEY-M3,I,39.1763

Therfore God +geue grace to vs to lyue wel in charite , <P_I,40> and sey
it deuoutly , and vndirstonde it treuly , and to teche it opinly to
Cristen men and Jewis , and bringe hem therby to oure Cristen feith ,
and brennynge charite . CMPURVEY-M3,I,40.1764

The Prouerbis either Parablis of Salamon teche men to lyue iustly to God
and man . CMPURVEY-M3,I,40.1765

Ecclesiastes techith men to forsake and sette at nou+gt alle goodis in
the world , and to drede God , and kepe hise heestis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,40.1766

The Songis of Songis techen men to sette al hire herte in the loue of
God , and of hire nei+geboris , and trewe preching , and wilful suffring
of peyne and deth , if nede be . CMPURVEY-M3,I,40.1767

Prouerbis speken myche of wijsedom and keping of Goddis heestis , in
comendinge trewe teching , and in repreuyng fals teching ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,40.1768

and Prouerbis treten mychel of ri+gtfulnesse , and iust domes and
gouernaunce , and of punysching of auoutrie and othere falsenessis
CMPURVEY-M3,I,40.1769

<P_I,41>

and comenden myche iust lordis and sogetis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1771

and repreuen strongly wrongful lordis and rebel sogettis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1772

Also Prouerbis techen derkly the mysteries of Crist , and of hooly
chirche , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1773

and techen myche wijsdom and prudence , for the soule and the body .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1774

Therfore lordis , and iugis , and comuneris also , and namely prestis ,
schulden stodie wel this book , and rule hemself therbi , to saluacoun
of body and of soule . CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1775

Ecclesiastes is a ful sotil book , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1776

for Salamon spekith in many persones , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1777

and concludith her entent and sentence , not in appreuyng the sentence
of fleschly men , that preisen more bodily goodis and lustis of the body
than heuenly goodis and lyking of vertues , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1778

and dampneth many errours of worldly men , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1779

and schewith that al is vanite , til me come to the drede of God , and
keeping of hise heestis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1780

Therfore men moten bee wel war hou thei vndirstonden Salamon in this
book , that thei appreue noon errour , and dampne noo treuthe , for
mysconseyuing of Salamonys wordis , and the Hooly Goostis wordis in this
book . CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1781

The Songis of Songis touchen derkly the staat of the synagoge , fro the
gooing out of Egipt til_to Cristis incarnacoun and passioun ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1782

and thanne tho Songis touchen the staat of Cristis chirche , and of the
synagoge in the ende of the world , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1783

and treetyn hi+gly of loue to God and nei+gebore also ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1784

and this book is so sotil to vndirstonde , that Jewis ordeyneden , that
no man schulde stodie it , no_but he were of xxx. +geer , and hadde
able wit to vndirstonde the goostly preuytees of this book ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1785

for sum of the book seemith to fleschly men to sounne vnclene loue of
leccherie , where it tellith hi+g goostly loue , and greet preuytees of
Crist and of his chirche . CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1786

Therfore men moten be ful wel war to conseyue wel the wordis of the Holy
Goost in this book , and knowe whanne Crist spekith to the chirche ,
either to the synagoge , and whanne the synagoge spekith to God , and
whanne the chirche spekith to Crist , and whanne God spekith to aungels
, patriarkis , and prophetis , and apostlis , and whanne these persones
speken to the synagoge either to the chirche , either a+genward .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1787

The book of Wijsedam , thou+g it be not a book of bileeue , techith
myche ri+gtfulnesse , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1788

and preisith wysdom , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1789

and repreuith fleschly men for hire false bileeue and yuel lyuynge ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1790

and comendith myche iust men , sad in bileeue and vertuouse lyuynge ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1791

and touchith myche of Cristis incarnacoun , his manheed and godheed
togidere , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1792

and dampneth gretly idolatrie , and fals worschiping of idolis , and
false goddis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1793

Thou+g Ecclesiastici be no book of bileeue , it techith myche wisdom and
prudence for soule and body , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1794

and hath myche the sentence of Prouerbis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1795

and comaundith men to thenke and speke of Goddis heestis , and for to
dreede God , and loue him , and euere haue mynde of deth , and of the
greet dom , to kepe men out of synne , and in parfit loue to God and man
. CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1796

Also it preisith myche almes and good preier , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1797

and repreuith gretly extorcouns , and wrong , and false oothis , and
false mesuris , and false wey+gtis , and al fraude , preuy and apert ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1798

at the laste it comendith goode men , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1799

and herieth God , that delyuereth fro alle perrelis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1800

If this book be wel vndirstonden , it is profitable bothe to goostly
gouernours and bodily lordis , and iustisis and comyns also .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1801

The Prophetis han a general prologe for alle , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1802

and for I declaride sumdel the grete profetis , and in party the litil
prophetis , and thenke soone to make an ende , with Goddis help , of the
glos on the smale prophetis , I thenke now to passe ouer withouten eny
tarying . CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1803

The firste book of Macabeis tellith hou gret distruccioun and cruelte
Antioke the noble dide a+gens the Jewis , and hou many thousindis he
killide of hem , that wolden holde Goddis lawe , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1804

and brente the bookis of Goddis lawe , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1805

and defoulide the temple of Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,41.1806

and compellide men , for drede of deth , <P_I,42> to do idolatrie , and
forsake God and his lawe ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1807

and he took vessels and tresouris in the temple , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1808

and bar into his lond , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1809

and he brente the citee of Jerusalem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1810

and distroiede the housis therof and the wallis therof in cumpas ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1811

and he took the hi+ge tour of Dauith , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1812

and sette men of armes therinne to lette men come to Jerusalem .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1813

And thei diden mychel harm to the puple of Israel ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1814

and who euere heeld the bookis of Goddis testament and kepte his lawe ,
was slayn bi comaundement of Antiok the king , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1815

and wymmen that circumcideden her children weren slayn , bi comaundement
of Antioke the king , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1816

and thei hangiden children bi the neckis , bi alle the housis of men of
Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1817

and killiden hem that circumcideden children . CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1818

Thanne roos Matatyas , the prest , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1819

and fledde fro Jerusalem into Modyn , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1820

and biweylide gretly this distroying of the puple , of the temple and
citee , and of al the lond ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1821

and he a+genstood the king and hise mynistris , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1822

and killide the kingis mynistris , that compellide men to do idolatrie ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1823

and he killide a man , that dide ydolatrie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1824

and distroiede the auter wheronne idolatrie was don .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1825

Thanne Matatias and hise sones fledden into hillis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1826

and leften alle thingis whiche thei hadden in the citee ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1827

and manye men that sou+gten doom and ri+gtfulnesse , and wolden kepe
Goddis lawe , camen to hem in desert . CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1828

And hethen men maden werre on hem in sabatis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1829

and manye di+geden in her sympilnesse , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1830

for thei n@ @olden make bateil in sabatis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1831

Thanne manye Jewis were gaderid to him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1832

and maden a greet oost , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1833

and weren redy to fi+gte in sabotis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1834

and thei killeden synners in greet wraththe . CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1835

And Matatias and hise freendis cumpassiden and distroieden auteris ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1836

and circumcididen alle children , whiche thei founden in the coostis of
Israel , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1837

and thei pursueden the children of pride ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1838

and the werk hadde prosperite in her hondis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1839

and thei gaten the lawe fro the hondis of hethen men and of kingis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1840

and +gaue not strengthe to the synful man . CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1841

And whanne Matatias was in point of deeth , he coumfortide hise sones to
putte hire lyues for the lawe of God , bi ensaumple of Abraham and
othere hooly men bifore goyng ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1842

and he ordeynede Judas Macabeus to be duk of bateil ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1843

and ordeynede Symount his sone to be fadir and prest to hem ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1844

for he was a man of counceil . CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1845

Thanne ben teld many batels of Judas Macabeus a+gens hethene men , and
of grete victories bi Goddis help . CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1846

Thanne Judas Macabeus made frenschipe with Romayns , for hire prudence ,
ri+gtfulnesse and power . CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1847

And whanne Judas was deed in bateile , the peple ordeynede Jonathas ,
his brother , prince and duyk , for to holde werre a+gens hethen men .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1848

Thanne ben teld many bateiles of Jonathas , and victories whiche he
hadde a+gens hethen men . CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1849

Thanne Jonatas , aftir manye victories , sente to renule frenschip with
Romayns , and with Sparciatis , that weren of the kyn of Jewis ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1850

and Jonathas and hise sones weren slayn at the laste , bi tresoun of
Trifon , that was an hethene man , and my+gty duyk .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1851

Thanne Symount was maad duyk of the peple , and in the stede of Judas
Macabeus and of Jonatas ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1852

and he dide manye bateiles and stronge , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1853

and hadde greet victories a+gens hethene men ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1854

and Jewis hadden myche reste vndir hym ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1855

and he made stronge hooldis and citees in Juda , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1856

and he renulide frenschipe with Romayns and Sparciatis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1857

and hadde myche glorie of his folc , and of hethene kingis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1858

At the laste Symount and his twey sones weren slayn bi tresoun ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1859

and Jon , his sone , was prince of prestis , aftir his fadir day ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1860

and dide many bateiles a+gens hethene men . CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1861

The ij. book of Macabeis tellith myche the same sentence of the first
book , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1862

and hath a fewe special poyntis , of Elyodorus , of Eleasarus , and of
the noble wydue and hire vij. sones . CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1863

Eliodorus was sent of the hethen king to take awey the tresouris of the
temple of Jerusalem , and bere tho to the king , CMPURVEY-M3,I,42.1864

and thou+g the tresouris weren kept for the lijflode of widewis and
fadirles children , and summe weren another mannis goodis , Elyodorus
wolde algate bere <P_I,43> al to the king ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1865

but God made hym and his felowis soore aferd , CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1866

and Eliodorus was beten almest to the deth , of a ferdful oon sittinge
on a hors , that hadde twey +gunge men aboute him ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1867

and Eliodorus was cast doun to the grounde , CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1868

and was born out on a bere , CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1869

and lay domb . CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1870

And whanne the hi+gest prest offride sacrifice , and preiede for the
helthe of Eliodorus , God grauntide lijf to him , CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1871

and he thankide God , and the hi+gest prest , CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1872

and +gede to the king CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1873

and tolde to him hou it stood ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1874

and he witnesside to alle men the grete werkis of God , whiche he hadde
seyn with hise i+gen . CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1875

Thanne is toold of the curside deedis of Jason the prest , that cam in
by symonye , and wolde bringe Jewis to idolatrie and sodomye , and to
forsake God and his lawe . CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1876

Thanne is teld of greet cruelte of Antioke , whiche he dide a+gens the
Jewis and the hooly place of Jerusalem ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1877

and God suffride this for the synnes of the peple , for whi God chees
not the folc for the place , but the place for the folc .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1878

Thanne Eleasarus ches to di+ge a scharp deeth , rathere than he wolde
breke Goddis lawe in a litil poynt , to ete pork , +ghe , to feyne to
ete pork . CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1879

Aftir this it sueth hou the blissid widewe and hire vij. sones were
martiride , for thei n@ @olden breke Goddis lawe , and hou gloriously
the blessid modir coumfortid hem to take deeth with ioie for the lawe of
God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1880

This storie and proces of Macabeis schulde stire cristen men to holde
Goddis lawe to lijf and deth , CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1881

and if kni+gtis schulden vse the swerd a+gens eny curside men , thei
schulden vse it a+gens lordis and prestis principaly , that wolen
compelle men , for drede of prisoun and deth , to forsake the treuthe
and fredom of Cristis gospel ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1882

but God for his greet mercy +geue very repentance to hem , that thus
pursuen trewe men , CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1883

and graunte pacience , meekenesse , and charite to hem that ben thus
pursued ! CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1884

Amen . CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1885

<heading>

Cap. XII. CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1887

<$$heading>

But it is to wite that holy scripture hath iiij. vndirstondingis ;
literal , allegorik , moral , and anagogik . CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1889

The literal vndirstonding techith the thing don in deede ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1890

and literal vndir-stonding is ground and foundament of thre goostly
vndirstondingis , in so myche as Austyn , in his Pistle to Vincent , and
othere doctouris seyn , oonly bi the literal vndirstond-ing a man may
argue a+gens an aduersarie . CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1891

Allegorik is a goostly vndirstonding , that techith what thing men owen
for to bileeue of Crist either of hooly chirche . CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1892

Moral is a goostly vndirstonding , that techith men , what vertues thei
owen to sue , and what vices thei owen to flee . CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1893

Anagogik is a goostly vndirstonding , that techith men , what blisse
thei schal haue in heuene . CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1894

And these foure vndirstondingis moun be taken in this word Jeru-salem ;
for whi to the literal vndirstonding it singnefieth an erthly citee , as
Loundoun , either such another ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1895

to allegorie it singnefieth hooly chirche in erthe , that fi+gtith
a+gens synnes and fendis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1896

to moral vndirstondinge it singnefieth a cristen soule ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1897

to anagogik it singnefieth hooly chirche regnynge in blisse either in
heuene , and tho that ben therinne . CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1898

And these thre goostly vndirstondingis ben not autentik either of
beleeue , no_but tho ben groundid opynly in the text of holy scripture ,
in oo place other other , either in opin resoun that may not be
distroied , either whanne the gospelris either other apostlis taken
allegorie of the eelde testament , and confeermyn it , as Poul in the
pistle to Galat. in iiij. c=o=. preveth , that Sara , the free wijf
and principal of Abraham , with Isaac hir sone , singne-fieth bi
allegorie the newe testament and the sones of biheeste ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1899

and Agar , the hand mayde , with hir sone Ismael , signefieth bi
allegorie the elde testament , and fleschly men that schulen not be
resseyued in to the eritage of God with the sones of biheeste , that
holden the treuthe and freedom of Cristis gospel with endeles charite .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,43.1900

Also holy scripture hath <P_I,44> many figuratif spechis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1901

and as Austyn seith in the iij. book Of Cristen Teching , that autouris
of hooly scripture vsiden moo figuris , that is , mo fyguratif spechis ,
than gramariens moun gesse , that reden not tho figuris in holy
scripture . CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1902

It is to be war in the bigynnyng , that we take not to the lettre a
figuratif speche , CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1903

for thanne , as Poul seith , the lettre sleeth , CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1904

but the spirit , that is , goostly vndirstonding , qwykeneth ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1905

for whanne a thing which is seid figuratifly is taken so as if it be
seid propirly , me vndirstondith fleschly ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1906

and noon is clepid more couenably the deth of soule , than whanne
vndirstonding , that passith beestis , is maad soget to the fleisch in
suynge the lettre . CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1907

What euer thing in Goddis word may not be referrid propirly to oneste of
vertues neither to the treuthe of feith , it is figuratyf speche .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1908

Onestee of vertues perteyneth to loue God and the nei+gebore ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1909

treuthe of feith perteyneth to knowe God and the nei+gebore .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1910

Hooly scripture comaundith no thing no_but charite ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1911

it blamith no thing no_but coueitise ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1912

and in that manere it enfoormeth the vertues either goode condiscouns of
men . CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1913

Holy scripture affermith no thing no_but cristen feith bi thingis passid
, present , and to_comynge , CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1914

and alle these thingis perteynen to nursche charite , and make it strong
, and to ouercome and quenche coueitise . CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1915

Also it is figuratijf speche , where the wordis maken allegorie , ether
a derk lycnesse , either parabl , CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1916

and it is figuratyf speche in i. c. of Jeremye , CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1917

" to day I have ordeyned thee on folkis and rewmys , that thou draw up
bi the roote , and distroie , and bylde , and plaunte ; " that is , that
thou drawe out elde synnes , and distroie circumstaunces either causis
of thoo , and bylde vertues , and plaunte goode werkis and customys .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1918

Alle thingis in holy scripture , that seemyn to vnwijse men to be ful of
wickidnesse a+gens a man himself , either a+gens his nei+gebore ben
figuratyf spechis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1919

and the preuytees , either goostly vndirstondinges , schulden be sou+gt
out of vs , to the feeding either keping of charite .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1920

Such a reule schal be kept in figuratif spechis , that so longe it be
turned in mynde bi diligent consideracioun , til the expownyng either
vndirstonding be brou+gt to the rewme of charite ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1921

if eny speche of scripture sounneth propirly charite , it owith not to
be gessid a figuratif speche ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1922

and for-beedith wickidnesse , either comaundith profyt either good
doynge , it is no figuratyf speche ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,44.1923

if it seemith to comaunde cruelte , either wickidnesse , either to
forbede prophit , <P_I,45> either good doinge , it is a figuratijf
speche . CMPURVEY-M3,I,45.1924

Crist seith , " If +ge eten not the flesch of mannis sone and drinke not
his blood , +ge schulen not haue lijf in +gou . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,45.1925

This speche semith to comaunde wickidnesse either cruelte ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,45.1926

therfore it is a figuratif speche , CMPURVEY-M3,I,45.1927

and comaundith men to comune with Cristis passioun , and to kepe in
mynde sweetly and pro-fitably , that Cristis flesch was woundid and
crucified for vs . CMPURVEY-M3,I,45.1928

Also whanne hooly scripture seith , " If thin enemy hungrith , feede
thou hym , if he thurstith , +geve thou drinke to hym , " it comaundith
benefice , either good doinge . CMPURVEY-M3,I,45.1929

whanne it seith , " thou schalt gadere togidere coolis on his heed , "
it seemith that wickidnesse of yuel wille is comaundid .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,45.1930

This is seid bi figuratijf speche , that thou vndirstonde , that the
coolys of fijer ben brennynge weylyngis , either moornyngis of penaunce
, bi whiche the pride of hym is mad hool , which sorwith , that he was
enemy of a man that helpith and releuith his wrecchidnesse .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,45.1931

Also the same word either the same thing in scripture is taken sumtyme
in good , and sumtyme in yuel , as a lyoun singnefieth sumtyme Crist ,
and in another place it singnefieth the devyl . CMPURVEY-M3,I,45.1932

Also sour dou+g is set sumtyme in yuel , where Crist seith , " be +ge
war of the sour dou+g of Farisees , which is ypocrisie ; "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,45.1933

sour dou+g is sett also in good , whanne Crist seith , " the rewme of
heuenes is lyk sour dou+g , " etc. CMPURVEY-M3,I,45.1934

And whanne not oo thing aloone but tweyne , either mo , ben feelid ,
either vndirstonden , bi the same wordis of scripture , thou+g that it
is hid , that he vndirstond that wroot , it is no perel , if it may be
prevyd bi othir placis of hooly scripture , that ech of tho thingis
acordith with treuthe . CMPURVEY-M3,I,45.1935

And in hap the autour of scripture seith thilk sentense in the same
wordis which we wolen vndirstonde ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,45.1936

and certys the Spirit of God , that wrou+gte these thingis bi the autour
of scripture , bifore si+g withoute doute , that thilke sentense schulde
come to the redere , either to the herere , CMPURVEY-M3,I,45.1937

+ghe , the Holy Goost purueyde , that thilke sentence , for it is
groundid on trewthe , schulde come to the redere , either to the herere
, for whi what my+gte be purueyed of God largiliere and plentyuousliere
in Goddis spechis , than {it_might_be_purveyed} that the same wordis be
vndirstonden in manye maners , whiche maners , either wordis of God ,
that ben not of lesse autorite , maken to be preued .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,45.1938

Austin in iij. book of Cristen Teching seith al this and myche more ,
in the bigynnyng therof . CMPURVEY-M3,I,45.1939

Also he whos herte is ful of charite conprehendith , withouten eny
errour , the manyfoold abundaunce and largest teching of Goddis
Scripturis , for whi Poul seith , " the fulnesse of lawe is charite , "
and in another place , " the ende of lawe , " that is , the perfeccioun
, either <P_I,46> filling , of the lawe , " is charite of clene herte ,
and of good conscience , and of feith not feyned , "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1940

and Jhesu Crist seith , " thou schalt love thi Lord God of al thin herte
, and of al thi soule , and of al thi mynde , and thi nei+gebore as thi
self , CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1941

for in these twey comaunde-mentis hangith al the lawe and prophetis . "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1942

And as the roote of alle yuels is coueitise , so the roote of alle
goodis is charitee . CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1943

Charite , bi which we louen God and the nei+gebore , holdith sykirly al
the greetnesse and largnesse of Goddis spechis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1944

Therefore if it is not leisir to seeke alle holy scriptures , to
expounne alle the wlappingis of wordis , to perse alle the preuytes of
scripturis , holde thou charite , where alle thingis hangen , so thou
schalt holde that that thou lernydist there ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1945

also thou schalt holde that that thou lernedist not ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1946

for if thou knowist charite , thou knowist sum thing wheronne also that
hangith that in hap thou knowist not ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1947

and in that that thou vndirstondist in scripturis , charite is opin ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1948

and in that that thou vndirstondist not , charite is hid ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1949

therfore he that hooldith charite in vertues , either in goode
condiscouns , hooldith bothe that that is opyn and that that is hid in
Goddis wordis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1950

Austyn seith al this and myche more in a sermoun of the preysing of
charite . CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1951

Also vij. reulis of Tyconye and of Austyn declaren many derke thingis
of hooly scripturis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1952

The first reule is of Jhesu Crist , and of his holy spirit ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1953

oo persoone of the heed and of the body , that is , of Crist and of holy
chirche , is schewid to vs in this reule , CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1954

for it is not seid in veyn to feithful men , " +gee ben the seed of
Abraham , " whanne ther is oo seed of Abraham , which seed is Crist .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1955

Doute we not , whanne scripture goith fro the hed to the body , either
fro the body to the heed , and natheles it goith not awey fro oon and
the same persone , for whi oo persone spekith in Isaie ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1956

" he settide a myter to me as to a spouse , CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1957

and he onouride me as a spousesse with an ournement . "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1958

And natheles it is to vndirstonde what of these tweyne acoordith to the
heed , that is , Crist , and what acordith to the body , that is , hooly
chirche , for whi a myter acordith to Crist , which is the spouse , and
an ournement acordith to hooly chirche , which is the spouse of Crist .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1959

The secunde reule , as Ticonye seith , is of the bodi of Crist , which
bodi is departid into tweyne , CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1960

but ceertis this bodi of Crist ou+gte not be clepid so ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1961

for treuly it is not the bodi of Crist , which shal not be with him
withouten ende , CMPURVEY-M3,I,46.1962

but it schal be seid of the veri bodi and of the medlid body of Crist ,
either of the veri bodi and feyned body of Crist ; for whi ypocritis
schulen be seid to be not with Crist , not oonly withouten ende , but
also now , thou+g thei seemyn to be in the chirche of Crist . Wherfor
this reule my+gt be clepid thus , <P_I,47> that it were seid of the
medlid chirche , that is , that conprehendith chosen men to blisse , and
also ipocritis , that schulen be dampned . CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1963

And this reule axith a waking either diligent redere ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1964

whanne it spekith of other men , it semith to speke now as to the same
men to whiche it spac bifore , CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1965

either it seemith to speke of the same men , whanne it spekith of othere
men ; as if oo body be of euer either , for temporal medlyng , and for
comynyng of sacramentis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1966

To this reule it perteyneth , that the chirche seith in Songis , " I am
blac and fair as the tabernaclis of Cedar , as the skynnes of Salomon ;
" CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1967

the chirche seide that sche is euer either , for temporal vnite withinne
oo net of goode fischis and of yuel fischis ; for whi the tabernaclis of
Cedar parteynen to Ismael , that schal not be eir with the sone of the
free wijf . CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1968

The thridde reule is of byheestis and of lawe ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1969

this reule may be seid also of the spirit and lettre ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1970

it may be seid also of grace and of comaundement ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1971

and Tyconie erride in seyinge , that werkis ben +gouen of God to vs for
meryt of feith , CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1972

but feith it silf is so of vs , that it is not of God to vs .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1973

The iiij. reule is of al and of party , whanne summ of a thing is set
for al , eithir a+genward al is set for a party . CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1974

The v. reule is of tymes , CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1975

and this is bi a figure clepid synodoches , whanne a part is set for al
, either al is set for oo part . CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1976

Oon euangelist seith , that it was don aftir viij. daies , whanne the
face of Crist schynede as the sunne , CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1977

and another gospeler seide , that it was don aftir vj. daies ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1978

euer either my+gte not be soth , that is seid of the noumbre of daies ,
no_but he that seide aftir viij. daies be vndirstonden to haue sett for
the hool day the last part of the day , sithen Crist bifore_seide it to
come , and to haue set for the hool day the first part of the day , in
whiche he schewith , that the appering of Cristis face was fully don ;
and that he that seide aftir vj. daies , rekynede alle the hool daies
and the myddil daies , and noon other . CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1979

Bi this kynde of speche , bi which kinde al is singnefied by a part ,
thilk questioun of Cristis rising a+gen is asoiled ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1980

the laste part of the day , wherinne Crist suffride deth , is taken for
al the day with the ny+gt passid bifore , CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1981

and the first part of Sunday , in whos morewitide he roos a+gen , is
taken for al Sunday and the ny+gt bifore goynge ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1982

and the Sabot with the hool ny+gt bifore goynge is al hool day and ny+gt
. CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1983

If these ny+gtis and daies be not taken thus , ther moun not be iij.
daies and iij. ny+gtis , in whiche he bifore seide , that he schulde be
in the herte of erthe . CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1984

Also this reule of tymes is taken for lawful noumbris , as ben vij. x.
and xij. and suche moo , CMPURVEY-M3,I,47.1985

for ofte suche noumbris ben sett for al tyme , as this that Dauith seith
, " seuen sithis in the day I seide preysing , either herying , to thee
, " is noon othir thing <P_I,48> than this , " his herying be euere in
my mouth . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.1986

Also bi an_c._and_xliii. in Apoc. is singne-fied the vniuersite ,
either al the multitude , of seintis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.1987

The vi. reule is of recapitulacoun , either rehersing a thing don
bifore , not in ordre , as it is sett ; for whi summe thingis ben seid
so , as if tho suen in the ordre of tyme , either ben teld bi contynuyng
of thingis , that is , that ben ioyned next togidere , whanne the
telling is clepid a+gen preuyly to the formere thingis , that weren left
out ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.1988

and if men vndirstonden not such seying bi this reule , thei erren ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.1989

as in Genesis it is seid , " God plauntide paradys in Eden , at the eest
, and settide there the man that he foormyde , and God brou+gte forth
+git of erthe ech fair tre , " etc. ; this is seid bi recapitulacoun .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.1990

In lyk maner there " the lond was of oo lippe , " that is , speche , it
is seid bi recapitulacoun . CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.1991

The vij. reule is of the deuel and of his bodi , CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.1992

for he is heed of alle wickide men , that ben his body in a manere , and
schulen go with him in to the turment of euerlasting fijer , as Crist is
the heed of hooly chirche , which is his body , and schal be with hym in
rewme and glorie euerlastinge . CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.1993

Also thei that haue lykinge for to studie in holy writ , schulen be
chargid , that thei kunne the kyndis and maners of spekingis in holy
scriptures ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.1994

and thei that perseyue diligently CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.1995

and holde wel in mynde , hou a thing is wont to be seid in holy
scripturis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.1996

Also that is souereyn help and moost nedful , preie thei , that God
+geue to hem the veri vndirstonding of holy scripture ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.1997

for thei reden in tho scripturis , aboute whiche thei ben studiouse ,
that God +geueth wisdom , and kunnyng , and vndirstonding of his face ,
that is , +gifte and grace . CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.1998

Also if her stodie is don with meek-nesse , and loue of cristen lore ,
it is of God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.1999

Austyn writith al this in the iij. book of Cristen Teching , aboute the
myddil , and in the ende . CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.2000

Isidre , in the j. book of Souereyn Good , touchith these reulis
schortliere , CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.2001

but I haue hym not now , CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.2002

and Lyre , in the bigyn-nyng of the bible , touchith more opinly these
reulis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.2003

but I haue him not now , CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.2004

and Ardma-can , in the bigynnyng of his book de Questionibus Armenorum ,
+geueth many goode groundis to vndirstonde holy scripture to the lettre
, and goostly vndirstonding also , CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.2005

but I haue him not now . CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.2006

Also no thing may seme to be wijsere , no thing of more eloquence , than
is hooly scripture , and the autours therof , that weren enspijrid of
God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.2007

And thei ou+gten not to speke in other manere than thei diden ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.2008

and the prophetis , and moost Amos , weren ful eloquent ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.2009

and seint Poul waas ful eloquent in his pistlis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,48.2010

Also the autouris of hooly scrip-ture spaken derkly , that the preuyteis
therof ben hid fro vnfeithful men , and goode men ben exercisid , either
ocupied , and that in expounnynge hooly scripture thei haue a newe
<P_I,49> grace , diuerse fro the first autouris . CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2011

Austin , in the bigynnyng of the iiij. book of Cristen Teching .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2012

Also , as the litle richessis of Jewis , whiche thei baren awey fro
Egipt , weren in comparisoun of richessis which thei hadden aftirward in
Jerusalem , in the tyme of Salomon , so greet is the prophitable
kunnynge of filosoferis bookis , if it is comparisouned to the kunnynge
of hooly scripturis ; for whi what euer thing a man lernith withouten
hooly writ , if the thing lerned is veyn , it is dampned in holy writ ,
if it is prophitable , it is foundid there . CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2013

And whanne a man fyndith theere alle thingis whiche he lernyde
pro-fitably in other place , he schal fynde myche more plenteuously tho
thingis in hooly scrip-ture , whiche he lernede neuere in other place ,
but ben lerned oonly in the wondirful hi+gnesse and in the wondirful
meeknesse of hooly scripturis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2014

Austin seith this in the ende of ij. book of Cristen Teching .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2015

Also hooly scripture conteyneth al prophitable treuthe , and alle othere
sciencis preuyly in the vertu of wittis , either vndirstondingis , as
wynes ben conteyned in grapis , as ripe corn is conteyned in the seed ,
as bowis ben conteyned in the rootis , and as trees ben conteyned in the
kernels . CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2016

Grostede , in a sermoun Premonitus a venerabili patre .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2017

Also hooly scripture wlatith sofymys , CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2018

and seith , he that spekith sofistic-aly , either bi sofymys , schal be
hatful , CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2019

and he schal be defraudid in ech thing , as the wijse man seith in
xxxvij. c. of Ecclesiastici . CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2020

If filosoferis , and moost the disciplis of Plato , seiden eny treuthis
, and prophitable to oure feith , not oonly tho treuthis owen not to be
dred , CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2021

but also tho schulen be calengid into oure vs , eithir profijt , fro hem
, as fro vniust possessouris . CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2022

And as Jewis token , bi autorite of God , the gold , and syluer , and
clothis of Egipcyans , so cristene men owen to take the trewe seyingis
of filosoueris , for to worschippe oo God , and of techingis of vertues
, whiche treuthis the filosoueris founden not , but diggeden out of the
metals of Goddis puruyaunce , which is sched euery where .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2023

So dide Ciprian , the swettest doctour and moost blessid martir ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2024

so diden Lactancius , Victori-nus , and Illarie , and Greekis withoute
noumbre . CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2025

Austin in ij. book of Cristen Teching . CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2026

Bi these reulis of Austin and bi iiij. vndirstondingis of hooly
scripture , and bi wijs know-ing of figuratijf spechis , with good
lyuynge and meeknesse , and stodyinge of the bible , symple men moun
sumdel vndirstonde the text of holy writ , and edefie myche hemself and
other men ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2027

but for Goddis loue , +ge symple men , be war of pride , and veyn
iangling and chyding in wordis a+gens proude clerkis of scole and veyn
religions , CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2028

and answere +gee mekely and prudently to enemyes of Goddis lawe ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2029

and preie +ge hertly for hem , that God of his greet mercy +geue to hem
very knowing of scripturis , and meekenesse , and charite ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2030

and euere be +ge redy , what euer man techith eny treuthe of God , to
take that meekely , and with greet thankingis to God ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2031

and if eny man in erthe , either aungel of heuene , techith +gou the
contrarie of holy writ , either eny thing a+gens resoun and charite ,
fle fro him in that , as fro the foul deuel of helle ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2032

and holde +ge stedfastly to lijf and deeth the treuthe and freedom of
the hooly gospel of Jhesu Crist , CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2033

and take +ge mekely mennis seyingis and lawis , onely in as myche as
thei acorden with holy writ and good conscience , and noo ferther , for
lijf neither for deth . CMPURVEY-M3,I,49.2034

<P_I,50>

<heading>

Cap. XIII. CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2037

<$$heading>

Also holy scripture is betere knowen bi licnesses and bi derknessis ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2039

it doth awey anoyes , CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2040

and we owe to thenke and bileeue , that the thing that is writen in holy
scripture , +ghe , thou+g it be hid , either not knowen , is betere and
trewere than that {that_it_is} we moun vndir-stonde bi vsself ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2041

and worschipfully and heelfully the holy Goost mesuride so holy
scrip-turis , that in opyn placis he settide remedie to oure hungir ,
and in derk placis he wipte awey anoies ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2042

for almest no thing is seyn in tho derknessis , which thing is not
founden seid ful pleynly in other placis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2043

Therfore bifore alle thingis it is nedeful , that a man be conuertid bi
Goddis drede , and be mylde bi pite , either cristen religioun ; and
that he a+gensie not hooly scripture , wher it be vnderstonden , thou+g
it smyte eny synnes of oure , whether it be not vndirstonden , as if we
moun vndirstonde betere , either comaunde , either teche betere .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2044

Be the +gifte of drede and of pitee , me comith to degre of kunnyng ,
for whi ech fructuous man of hooly scripturis exercisith himself in this
thing , and to fynde noon other thing in tho , than for to loue God for
God himself , and for to loue his nei+gebore for God .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2045

Thanne thilke drede , bi which he thenkith on Goddis dom , and thilke
pite , bi which he must nedis bileeue and +geue stide to autorite of
holy bookis , conpellith hym to beweyle hymself , for whi this kunnyng
of good hope makith a man not to auaunce himself , but biweile himself ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2046

and bi this affeccioun , either good wille , he geetith with besy
preieris the coumfort of Goddis help , that he be not broken bi dispeir
; CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2047

and he bigynneth to be in the fourthe degre of goostly strengthe , in
whiche he hungrith and thirstith ri+gtfulnesse ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2048

thanne in the v. degree , that is , in the counceyl of mercy , he
purgith the soule , that makith noise and vnrestfulnesse of coueitise of
erthly thingis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2049

and thanne he dispisith filthis of soule , CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2050

and louith God and nei+geboris , +ghe enemyes ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2051

bi this he sti+gith to the vj. degre , where he purgith the i+ge of
soule , bi which i+ge God may be seyn , as myche as he may be seyn of
hem that di+gen to this world , as myche as thei mowen ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2052

for in so myche thei seen God in her soule , thour+g feith and loue ,
hou myche thei di+gen to this world ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2053

and in as myche as thei leuyn to this world , thei seen not God ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2054

and in this degre , wherinne a man di+gith to the world , he neither
preferrith , neither makith euene himself , neither his nei+gebore ,
with the treuthe of hooly writ ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2055

therfore this hooly man schal be so symple and clene of herte , that
neither for plesaunce of men he be drawe awey fro treuthe , nether bi
cause to eschewe eny harmys of himself , that ben contrarie to this lijf
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2056

such a chiild sti+gith to verey wis-dom , which is the laste and the
vij. , which he vsith in pees and in reste . CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2057

Seint Austyn seith al this in the bygynnyng of the ij. book of Cristen
Teching . CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2058

Heere is a blissid entring bi these vij. vertues to the kunnyng of holy
scripture in this lifj , to haue here reste of soule , and aftirward ful
reste of bodi and soule in heuene , withouten ende .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2059

Alas ! what don proude and coueitouse wrecchis at hooly scripture ,
that seeken the world and fleschly eese , and wolen not conuerten hem
fro these cursidnessis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2060

thei disseyuen hemself , and the puple that gessen hem wijse men ,
whanne thei ben opyn foolis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2061

and maken hem-self deppere dampned , and other men also that suen her
folye , and blasfemyn God . CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2062

Thes worldly foolis schulden wite , that hooly lijf is a launterne to
bringe a man to very kun-nynge , as Crisostom seith ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2063

and the drede and love of God is the bigynning and perfeccioun of
kunnyng and wijsdom ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2064

and whanne these fleschly apis and worldly moldewerpis han neither the
bigynnyng of wijsdom , neither desyren it , what doon thei at hooly
scripture , to schenschipe of hemself and of othere men ?
CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2065

As longe as pride and coveitise of worldly goodis and onouris is rootid
in her herte , thei maken omage to Satanas , CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2066

and offren to him bothe bodi and soule , and al her witt and fynding .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,50.2067

Such foolis schulden thenke , that <P_I,51> wijsedom schal not entre
into an yvel willid soule , neither schal dwelle in a body soget to
synnes ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2068

and Jhesu Crist seith , that the fadir of heuene hijdith the prevytees
of hooly scripture fro wijse men and prudent , that is wijse men and
prudent to the world , and in her owne si+gt , and schewith tho to meke
men ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2069

therfore worldly foolis , do +ge first penaunce for +goure synnes , and
forsake pride and coveitise , and be +ge meke , and drede +ge God in
alle thingis , and love him over alle other thingis , and +goure
nei+geboris as +goure self ; and thanne +ge schulen profite in stodie of
hooly writ . CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2070

But alas ! alas ! alas ! the moost abo-mynacoun that ever was herd
among cristen clerkis is now purposid in Yngelond , bi worldly clerkis
and feyned religiouse , and in the cheef universitee of oure reume , as
manye trewe men tellen with greet weylyng . CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2071

This orrible and develis cursednesse is purposid of Cristis enemyes and
traytouris of alle cristen puple , that no man schal lerne dyuynite ,
nei-ther hooly writ , no_but he that hath doon his fourme in art , that
is , that hath comensid in art , and hath ben regent tweyne +geer aftir
; CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2072

this wolde be ix. +geer either ten bifore that he lerne hooly writ ,
aftir that he can comunly wel his gramer , thou+g he haue a good witt ,
and traueile ful soore , and haue good fynding ix. either x. +geer
aftir his gramer . CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2073

This semith vttirly the deuelis purpos , that fewe men either noon
schulen lerne and kunne Goddis lawe ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2074

But God seith bi Amos , on thre greete trespasis of Damask and on the
iiij. , " I schal not conuerte him ; " where Jerom seith , the firste
synne is to thenke yuelis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2075

the ij. synne is to consente to weyward thou+gtis ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2076

the iij. synne is to fille in werk , CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2077

the iiij. synne is to do not penaunce aftir the synne , and to plese
himself in his synne . CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2078

But Damask is interpretid drinkynge blood , either birling blood .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2079

Lord ! whether Oxunford drinke blood and birlith blood , bi sleeinge of
quyke men , and bi doinge of sodomye , in leesinge a part of mannis
blood , wherbi a chijld myte be fourmed , deme thei that knowen ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2080

and wher Oxunforde drinke blood of synne , and stirith othere men of the
lond to do synne , bi boold-nesse off clerkis , deme thei iustly , that
seen it at i+ge , and knowen bi experiens . CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2081

Loke now wher Oxunford is in thre orrible synnes and in the fourthe , on
which God restith not til he punsche it . CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2082

Sumtyme children and +gunge men arsistris weren deuout and clene as
aungels , in comparisoun of othere ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2083

now men seyn thei ben ful of pride and leccherie , with dispitouse
oothis , needles and false , and dispising of Goddis heestis ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2084

sumtyme cyvylians and canonistris weren deuout , and so bisy on her
lernyng , that they tooken ful litil reste of bed ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2085

now men seyn that thei ben ful of pride and nyce aray , enuye , and
coueitise , with leccherie , glotonie and ydilnesse ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2086

sumtyme dyuynys weren ful hooly and deuout , CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2087

and dispisiden outtirly the world , CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2088

and lyueden as aungels in meeknesse , clennesse , souereyn chastite ,
and charite , CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2089

and tau+gten treuly Goddis lawe in werk and word ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2090

now men seyn , thei ben as deligat of hir mouth and wombe , and as
coueitouse as othere worldly men , and flateren , and maaken leesingis
in preching , to eschewe bodyly persecuscoun , and to gete benefices .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2091

The firste grete synne is generaly in the vniuersite , as men dreden and
seen at i+ge ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2092

the ij. orrible synne is sodomye and strong mayntenaunce thereof , as
it is knowen to many persones of the reume , and at the laste parlement
. CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2093

Alas ! dyuynys , that schulden passe othere men in clennesse and
hoolynesse , as aungels of heuene passen freel men in vertues , ben
moost sclaundrid of this cursid synne a+gens kynde .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2094

The iij. orrible synne is symonie , and forswering in the semble hous ,
that schulde be an hous of ri+gtfulnesse and hoolynesse , where yuelis
schulde be redressid ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2095

this symonie with portenauncis thereof is myche worse and more
abomynable than bodily sodomye . CMPURVEY-M3,I,51.2096

+Git on these thre abomynacouns God wolde graciously conuerte clerkis ,
if thei wolden do very penaunce , and +geve hem hooliche <P_I,52> to
vertues ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2097

but on the iiij. most abomynacoun purposid now to letten Cristen men ,
+ghe prestis and curatis , to lerne freely Goddis lawe , til thei han
spendid ix. +geer either x. at art , that conprehendith many strong
errouris of hethene men a+gens Cristen bileeue , CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2098

it seemith wel that God wole not ceese of veniaunce , til it and othere
ben punschid soore ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2099

for it seemith that worldly clerkis and feyned relygiouse don this ,
that symple men of wit and of fynding knowe not Goddis lawe , to preche
it generaly a+gens synnes in the reume . CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2100

But wite +ge , worldly clerkis and feyned relygiouse , that God bothe
can and may , if it lykith hym , speede symple men out of the
vniuersitee , as myche to kunne hooly writ , as maistris in the
vniuersite ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2101

and therfore no gret charge , thou+g never man of good wille be poisend
with hethen mennis errouris ix. +geer either ten ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2102

but euere lyue wel CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2103

and stodie hooly writ , bi elde doctouris and newe ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2104

and preche treuly and freely a+gens opin synnes , to his deth .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2105

See therfore what Jerom seith on Amos , CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2106

God bifore_seith yuels to_comynge , that men heere , and amende hemself
, and be delyuered fro the perel nei+ginge , either if that thei
dispisen , thei ben punschid iustiliere ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2107

and God , that bifore_seith peynes , wole not punsche men that synnen ,
but that thei be amendid . CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2108

Jerom seith this in the ende of the j. book of Amos .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2109

God , for His gret mercy , graunte that clerkis here the greet veniaunce
manasid of God , and amende hemself treuly , that God punsche not hem ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2110

for if thei amenden not hemself , thei ben eretikis maad hard in her
synnes ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2111

but see what Jerom seith a+gens ere-tikis , and in comendinge of hooly
scripture ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2112

he seith thus on Amos , " Eretikis that seruen the wombe and glotonye ,
ben clepid ri+gtfully fattest kyin , either kyin ful of schenschipe . "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2113

" We owen to take hooly scripture on thre maneris ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2114

first , we owen vndirstonde it bi the lettre , and do alle thingis that
ben comaundid to vs therinne ; the ij. tyme bi allegorie , that is ,
goostly vndirstonding ; and in the iij. tyme bi blisse of thingis to
comynge . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2115

Jerom seith this in the ij. book on Amos , and in iiij. c. of Amos .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2116

Natheles for Lyre cam late to me , see what he seith of the
vndirstonding of holy scripture ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2117

he writith thus on the ij. prologe on the bible : " Joon seith in v.
c. of Apoc. ' I sy+g a book written withinne and withouteforth in the
hond of the sittere on the trone ; ' CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2118

this book is holy scripture , which is seid writen without forth , as to
the literal vndirstonding , and withinne , as to the preuy and goostly
vndirstonding ; " CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2119

and in the j. prologe he declarith iiij. vndirstond-ingis of hooly
writ in this manere : CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2120

" Holy writ hath this specialte , that vndir oo lettre it conteyneth
many vndirstondingis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2121

for the principal autour of hooly writ is God himself , in whos power it
is , not oonly to vse wordis to singnifie a thing as men don ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2122

but also he vsith thingis singnefied bi wordis to singnefie other
thingis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2123

therfore bi the singnyfying bi wordis is taken the literal vndirstonding
, either historial , of holy scripture , CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2124

and bi the singnefying which is maad bi thingis is taken the preuy ,
either goostly vndirstonding , which is thre maneres , allegorik , moral
, either tropologik , and anogogik . CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2125

If thingis singnefied bi wordis ben referrid to singnefie tho thingis
that owen to be bileeued in the newe testament , so it is taken the
sense of allegorik ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2126

if thingis ben referrid to singnefie tho thingis whiche we owen to do ,
so it is moral sense , either tropologik ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2127

If thingis ben referrid to singnefie tho thingis that scholen be hopid
in blisse to_comynge , so it is ana-gogik sense . CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2128

The lettre techith what is doon ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2129

allegorie techith what thou owist for to bileeue ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2130

moral techith what thou owist for to do ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2131

anagogic techith whedir thou owist to go ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2132

and of these iiij. sensis , either vndirstondingis , may be set
ensaumple in this word Jerusalem ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2133

for bi the literal vndirstonding Jerusalem singnefieth a cyte , that was
sumtyme the cheef citee in the rewme of Jude , CMPURVEY-M3,I,52.2134

and Jerusalem was foundid first of <P_I,53> Mel-chisedech ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2135

and aftirward it was alargid , and maad strong bi Salomon ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2136

bi moral sense it singnefieth a feithful soule , bi which sense it is
seid in lij. c. of Isaie , ' rise thou , rise thou , sette thou
Jerusalem ; ' CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2137

bi sense allegorik it singnefieth the chirche fi+gtinge a+gens synnes
and feendis , bi which sense it is seid in xxj. c. of Apoc. , ' I
si+g the hooly citee newe Jerusalem comynge doun fro heuene , as a
spouse ourned to hire housbonde ; ' CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2138

bi sence anagogik it singnefieth the chirche rengninge in blisse ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2139

bi this sence it is seid in iiij. c. to Galat . ' thilke Jerusalem
which is aboue , which is oure modir , is free ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2140

and as en-saumple is set in oo word , so it might be set in oo resoun ,
and as in oon , so and in othere . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2141

Lire seith al this in the firste prologe on the bible .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2142

<heading>

CAP. XIV. CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2144

<$$heading>

Natheles alle goostly vndirstondinges setten bifore , eithir requyren ,
the literal vndir-stonding , as the foundement ; wherfore as a bylding
bowing awey from the foundement is disposid to falling , so a goostly
expociscoun , that discordith fro the literal sense , owith to be
arettid vnseemely and vncouenable , either lesse seemely , and lesse
couenable ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2146

and ther-fore it is nedful to hem , that wolen profite in the stodie of
holy scripture , to bigynne at the vndirstonding of literal sence ,
moost sithen bi the literal sense aloone , and not bi goostly sencis may
be maad an argument , either preef , to the preuyng , either declaring ,
of a doute , as Austin seith in his Pistle to Vincent Donatiste .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2147

Seint Isidre , in the firste book of Souereyn Good xx. c. settith vij.
reulis to expounne hooly scripture , CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2148

and summe clepen these reulis the keies of scripture ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2149

for bi these rulis the vndirstonding of scripture is openid in many
thingis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2150

The firste reule is of oure Lord Jhesu Crist , and of his goostly body ,
which is holy chirche , for whi for the knytting togidrere of the heed
to the body hooly scripture spekith sumtyme of euer either vndir oo
resoun , as vndir oo persone , and passith fro oon to anothir ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2151

in ensaumple in lxj. c=o=. of Isaie it is seid , " He clothide me with
clothis of helthe , CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2152

and he compasside me with clothing of ri+gtfulnesse , as a spouse maad
fair with a coroune , and as a spousesse ourned with hire brochis ; "
for whi this that is seid " as a spouse , " etc. is vndirstonden of
Crist , and this that sueth " as a spousesse " etc. is vndir-stonden of
holy chirche . CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2153

Also in the j. c. of Songis it is seid , " Kisse he me with the cosse
of his mouth , CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2154

for thi tetis ben betere than wyn ; " CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2155

for whanne it is seid , " kisse he me " etc. , it is the word of the
spousesse desiringe to haue the spouse ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2156

and this that sueth , " for thi tetis , " etc. is the word of the
spouse , preising the spousesse ; wherfore in such thingis , knyt so
togidere bi resoun biforeseid , a prudent redere owith to perseyue what
accordith to the heed , and what to the body . CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2157

The ij. reule is of the very body and of the feyned body of oure Lord
Jhesu Crist , for whi hooly chriche , which is the goostly body of Crist
, is a nett which is not drawen +git to the brinke ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2158

therfor it hath yuele men meddlid with goode men til_to the doom , in
whiche these schulen be departid fro hem , CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2159

and ther-fore in holy scripture yuele men ben preisid sumtyme with goode
men , with whiche thei ben medlid ; as in the xj. c. of Osee God seith
thus , " Israel is a chijld , and I louede him ; " CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2160

and a+genward sumtyme goode men ben blamed with yuel men , as in j.
c=o=. of Isaie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2161

" An oxe knew his lord CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2162

and an asse knew the cracche of his lord , CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2163

but Israel knew not me CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2164

and my puple vndirstood not ; " CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2165

and sumtyme in the same resoun it is expressid what perteyneth to goode
men and what to yuele men , as in j. c=o=. of Songis it is seid , " I
am blac but fair , +ge dou+gtris of Jerusalem , as the tabernaclis of
Cedar , as the skynnes of Salamon ; " CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2166

these ben the wordis of the spousesse , which for resoun of yuel men
conteyned in the chirche , seith , " I am blac , " CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2167

but for resoun of goode men it addith , " but fair ; "
CMPURVEY-M3,I,53.2168

and <P_I,54> this that sueth , as for ensaumple , " as the tabernaclis
of Cedar , " is referrid to yuele men ; for whi Cedar was the sone of
Ysmael , as it is seid in xxv. c=o=. of Genesis , of whom Sara-cenus
camen forth , CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2169

and this that is addid , " as the skynnes of Salamon , " is referrid to
goode men . CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2170

Therfore bi Salamon here is vndirstonden God himself , bi cristen
expocitouris and Ebreies ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2171

and therfore the skynnes of Salamon ben seid tho with which the
tabernacle was heelid , in which tabernacle goode men worschipiden God .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2172

The iij. reule is of the spirit and of the lettre ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2173

this reule is expounned thus comunly , that the historial , either
literal sense , and the mystik , either goostly sense , is taken vndir
the same lettre , for whi the treuthe of the storie schal be holden ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2174

and natheles it schal be referrid to the goostly vndirstonding .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2175

This reule may be expounned also in another manere , that it be referrid
oonly to the literal sense , as othere reulis ben ; aboute which thing
it is to see , that the same lettere hath sum tyme double literal sense
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2176

in ensaumple in j. book of Paralypomy-non , xvij. c=o=. , God seith
to Salamon , " I schal be to him in to a fadir , CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2177

and he schal be to me into a sone ; " CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2178

and this to the lettere is vndirstonden of Salomon , in as myche as he
was the sone of God , bi grace in +gungthe , wherfore Nathan the
prophete clepide hym , " amyable to the Lord " in ij. book of Kingis ,
xij. c . CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2179

Also the forseid autorite , " I schal be to hym in to a fadir , " etc.
is brou+gt in of Poul in j. c=o=. to Ebreis , as seid to the lettre of
Crist himself , CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2180

and this is opyn bi this , that Poul bringith it in to preue , that
Crist is more than aungels ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2181

but such preuynge may not be maad bi goostly sense , as Austin seith
a+gens Vincent Donatiste ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2182

forsothe the forseid autorite was fillid to the lettre in Salomon ,
natheles lesse parfitly , CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2183

for he was the sone of God oonly bi grace , CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2184

but it was fillid parfitlier in Crist , that was the sone of God bi
kinde ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2185

but natheles euer either expocisscioun is literal outtirly .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2186

Natheles the ij. expociscoun , which is of Crist , is goostly and preuy
in sum maner , in as myche as Salamon was the figure of Crist .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2187

The iiij. reule is of al and of part , for whi scripture passith fro
oon to the tothere , and a+genward , as in xiij. c=o=. of Isaie ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2188

the scripture spekith first a+gens Babilone specialy , whanne it is seid
, " the birthen of Babi-lone , " CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2189

and thanne the scripture passith to vndirstonde the word generaly of al
the world , bi this that sueth , CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2190

" the Lord cometh fro the hy+gnesse of heuene , CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2191

and the vessels of his stronge veniaunce comen , that he distroie all
erthe ; " CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2192

aftirward the scripture turneth a+gen to speke a+gens Babilone specialy
, whanne it is seid , " Lo ! I schal rise on +gou Medeys , that schul
not seeke syluer ; " for whi Darius Medey , with Cirus , his cosyn ,
took Babilone , and killide Baltasar , the king of Babilone , as it is
seid in the v. c=o=. of Daniel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2193

The v. reule is of tymes , which reule bifallith in iiij. maners ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2194

in oo manere bi a figure clepid synodoches , whanne a part of tyme is
set for al the tyme , as it is seid in the gospel , that Crist lay thre
daies in the sepulcre , CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2195

and natheles the first day and the thridde weren not hool daies .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2196

In another maner this reule bifallith for smale partys of tyme , that
ben noumbrid sumtyme in scripture , and sumtyme ben left out ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2197

and bi this the scripture that spekith of sum noumbre of +geris , in
manye placis , settith sumtyme moo +geris , rekenynge the forseid smale
partys , CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2198

in another place it settith fewere +geeris , in leuyng out the smale
partys . CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2199

In iij. maner this reule bifallith , for that the rekenyng of +geeris
bigynneth in oo place at the formere terme , and in another place at the
latter teerme , as in xv. c=o=. of Genesis , it was said to Abraham ,
that his seed schal be a pilgrym bi iiij._c. +geer , and in xij. c=o=.
of Exodi it is seid of this pilgrimage , that the dwelling of the sones
of Israel in the lond of Egipt was of iiij._c. +geer and xxx. ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2200

for the rekenyng of this more noumbre bigynneth at the tyme , in which
it was seid to Abraham in xij. c=o=. of Genesis , " go out of thi lond
, " etc. , CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2201

and the rekenyng of the lesse noumbre bigynneth at the natyuite of Isaac
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,54.2202

that was xxx. +geer aftir the goinge out <P_I,55> of Abraham fro Aran .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2203

The iiij. tyme this reule bifallith , for that hooly scripture spekith
of thing to_comynge bi the maner of thing passid , as in the ix. c=o=.
of Isaie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2204

" a litil child was born to vs , " etc. ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2205

and this is to singnefie the certeynte of profecie , whos bifalling of
tyme to_comynge is so certeyn , as if it were passid now ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2206

and this is for certeynte of Goddis bifore_knowing , bi whiche the
reuelacoun is maad to the prophete . CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2207

Natheles such maner of speche hath noo place , no but in profecie of
predestynacoun , either ful determynyng of God ; which prophecie is ,
whanne a thing to comyng in noun_certeyn to mannis knowing , is schewid
to the prophete in that maner , bi which it is in the bifore_knowing of
God , which bifore_knowing of God bihooldith so without fayling thingis
to_comynge , as thingis present and passid . CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2208

But in profecie of manaasinge , such maner of speech hath noo place ,
which profecie of manaas is , whanne eny peyne worthi to be brou+gt in
on a puple , either on a persoone , is schewid to the prophete , not bi
that that it is in the bifore_knowing of God , but bi the ordre of
secunde causis , as bi the yuel disseryungis of men ; as is thilke
prophecie of Jonas iij. c=o=. , " +Git xl. daies , and Nynyue schal
be distroied ; " for whi the synnes of that citee hadden disseryud this
distroying ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2209

natheles for such a cause is chaung-able , therfore sumtyme the effect ,
that is , peyne manaasid , sueth not , as heere , CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2210

for Nyny-uytis diden penaunce , CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2211

and so the Lord brou+gte not in the peyne manaasid .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2212

The vj. reule is of recapitulacoun , that is , rehersing of thing don
bifore , and of anticipacoun , either bifore_takinge , that is , setting
in of thing bifore that it is don ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2213

for in hooly scripture not euere stories and deedis ben writen in the
same ordre in whiche thoo ben don , CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2214

and therfore whanne lattere thingis ben sett bifore , it is seid
anticipacioun , either byfore_taking , CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2215

and whanne the formere thingis ben set byhynde , it is seid
recapitulacoun , either rehersing of thing doon bifore , as in x. c=o=.
of Genesis it is seid of the sones of Noe , " the ilis of hethene folkis
in her cuntrees weren departid of these sones of Noe , ech man bi his
langage ; " CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2216

and withinne in the same x. c=o=. it is seid , " these ben the sones
of Cham , in kynredis and langagis , " CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2217

and aftirward it is seid in xj. c=o=. , " the lond was of oo langage
and of the same wordis ; " wherof it is opin , that this that is
bifore_seid of the departyng of langagis , is seid bi anticipacoun ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2218

in lyk maner in ij. c=o=. of Genesis , aftir that Moises in j. c=o=.
hadde discriued the creacoun , either making of nou+gt of heuene and of
erthe , and the departing and ournyng of the world , he seide , " these
ben the generacouns of heuene and of erthe , in the day in whiche tho
weren mad ; " wherof it is opin that this is seid bi recapitulacoun ,
either rehersing of thing don bifore . CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2219

The vij. reule is of the deuil and of his body , CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2220

for as Gregori seith in the x. Omelie , " Certys the deuil is heed of
alle wickid men , CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2221

and alle wickide men ben membris of this heed , " CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2222

and therfore for the knytting togidere of the heed to the membris , the
scripture that spekith of oon , passith in the same knytting to-gidere
of resoun to speke of the tother , as in xiiij. c=o=. of Isaie , where
the scripture spekith of the king of Babilone , that was a membre of the
deuil , it passith to speke of the prince of fendis , whanne it is seid
there , " Lucifer , that rysidist eerly , hou feldist thou doun fro
heuene ; " CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2223

and in the xxviij. c. of Ezechiel , where the scripture spekith of the
prince of Tire , it passith to speke of the deuil , whanne it is addid ,
" thou , a singnet , either a prente , of the licnesse of God , were ful
of wisdom , and parfit in fairnesse , in the delices of paradys of God .
" CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2224

Lyre seith al this in the ij. prologe of Genesis .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2225

Heere Lire re-hersith the sentence of seint Austyn , and of Isidre in
these reulis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2226

and declarith hem opinly bi holy scripture and resoun ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2227

and countrith not Austin , CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2228

but declareth him ful mychel to symple mennis witt ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2229

and addith more bi scripture and resoun , that Austin touchith not .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,55.2230

<P_I,56>

Thou+g these reulis either keies of scripture bringen men to greet
vndirstonding thereof , +git men moten taken heede , what is seid of
Crist bi his godheed , and what bi his manheed , CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2232

for Crist bi his manheed , is seid lesse than the fadir ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2233

and bi the godheed he is seid euene with the fadir ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2234

and for as myche as Crist is bothe God and man , we graunten that God is
deedly , and di+gede on the crosse , not bi his godheed , but bi the
manheed of Crist , that was ioyned in oonhed of persone with the godheed
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2235

and we graunte , as the gospel doith , that man , while he was deedly on
erthe , was in heuene , CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2236

for his godheed was there , and he also bi resoun therof .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2237

Also we moun graunte wel , that a man made heuene and erthe ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2238

for Crist bi his godheed , which Crist is and was man , dide thus .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2239

Also hooly scripture tellith ofte the thou+gtis of men , and ofte the
wordis and deedis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2240

and whanne the thou+gtis , and wordis , and deedis of men ben contrarie
, oo gospeller tellith the thou+gtis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2241

and another tellith the wrdis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2242

and bi this eguiuocacoun , either diuerse speking , thei ben acordid ,
+ghe , whanne thei seemen contrarie in wordis ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2243

also ofte in storial mateer scripture rehersith the comune opynyoun of
men , CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2244

and affirmeth not , that it was so in dede . CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2245

In this maner the gospel seith , that Joseph was the fadir of Crist ,
thou+g he neuere gendride Crist ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2246

for Marie , Cristis modir , was euere clene virgyne .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2247

Thus the gospel seith , that at the biheeding of Joon Baptist , Eroude
was soory , CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2248

and +git , as doctouris seyn , he was ful glad thereof ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2249

but he feynede him sory for the puple , CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2250

and the puple gessid him sory . CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2251

Also thou+g scripture rehersith , hou hooly men lyueden , and comendith
hem greetly , it appreueth not alle hire deedis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2252

for many greete seyntis erriden foule in manye poyntis ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2253

and thou+g scripture tellith the stories of yuel men and dampned , it
repreuith not herfore alle thingis whiche thei diden ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2254

for thou+g thei weren hemsilf ful cursid , thei diden many goode deedis
of kynde , and sumtyme perauenture goode dedis of vertu , if thei weren
in grace for a tyme . CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2255

At the laste take +ge good heede , whanne scripture spekith bi
comaundement to all men , and whanne it +geueth comaundement to certeyn
persones of diuerse statis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2256

In the first poynt , alle men moten do , as it seith ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2257

in the ij. tyme , the persoones of staatis specified moten nedis obeye
; CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2258

whanne scripture speketh oonly bi counceil , men moun be sauid , thou+g
thei do not the counceil , as ful many men and wymmen moun be sauid ,
thou+g thei take not virginite , neither contynence , neither +geuen
alle her goodis to pore men , CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2259

and +git these ben heere counceils of Jhesu Crist in the gospel .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2260

<heading>

CAP. XV. . CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2262

<$$heading>

For as myche as Crist seith that the gospel shal be prechid in al the
world , and Dauith seith of the postlis and her preching , " the soun of
hem +gede out into ech lond , and the wordis of hem +geden out into the
endis of the world , " and eft Dauith seith , " the Lord schal telle in
the scripturis of puplis , and of these princis that weren in it , "
that is , in holi chirche , and as Jerom seith on that vers , " hooly
writ is the scripture of puplis , for it is " maad , that alle puples
schulden knowe it , " and the princis of the chirche , that weren
therinne , ben the postlis , that hadden autorite to writen hooly writ ,
for bi that same that the postlis writiden her scripturis bi autorite ,
and confermynge of the Hooly Goost , it is hooly scripture , and feith
of cristen men , and this dignite hath noo man aftir hem , be he neuere
so hooly , neuer so kunnynge , as Jerom witnessith on that vers . Also
Crist seith of the Jewis that crieden Osanna to him in the temple , that
thou+g thei weren stille stoonis schulen crie , CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2264

and bi stoonis he vndirstondith hethen men , that worshipiden stoonis
for her goddis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2265

And we Englische men ben comen of hethen men , CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2266

therfore we ben vndirstonden bi thes stonis , that schulden crie hooly
writ , CMPURVEY-M3,I,56.2267

and as Jewis , interpretid knowlechinge , singnefien clerkis , that
schulden knouleche to God , bi repentaunce of synnes , and bi vois
<P_I,57> of goddis heriyng , so oure lewide men , suynge the corner ston
Crist , mowen be singnefied bi stonis , that ben harde and abydinge in
the foundement ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2268

for thou+g couetouse clerkis ben woode by simonie , eresie , and manye
othere synnes , and dispisen and stoppen holi writ , as myche as thei
moun , +git the lewid puple crieth aftir holi writ , to kunne it , and
kepe it , with greet cost and peril of here lif . CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2269

For these resons and othere , with comune charite to saue alle men in
oure rewme , whiche God wole haue sauid , a symple creature hath
translatid the bible out of Latyn into English . CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2270

First , this symple creature hadde myche trauaile , with diuerse felawis
and helperis , to gedere manie elde biblis , and othere doctouris , and
comune glosis , and to make oo Latyn bible sumdel trewe ; and thanne to
studie it of the newe , the text with the glose , and othere doctouris ,
as he mi+gte gete , and speciali Lire on the elde testament , that
helpide ful myche in this werk ; the thridde tyme to counseile with elde
gramariens , and elde dyuynis , of harde wordis , and harde sentencis ,
hou tho mi+gten best be vndurstonden and translatid ; the iiij. tyme to
translate as cleerli as he coude to the sentence , and to haue manie
gode felawis and kunnynge at the correcting of the translacioun .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2271

First it is to knowe , that the best translating is out of Latyn into
English , to translate aftir the sentence , and not oneli aftir the
wordis , so that the sentence be as opin , either openere , in English
as in Latyn , and go not fer fro the lettre ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2272

and if the lettre mai not be suid in the translating , let the sentence
euere be hool and open , CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2273

for the wordis owen to serue to the entent and sentence ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2274

and ellis the wordis ben superflu either false . CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2275

In translating into English , manie resolucions moun make the sentence
open , as an ablatif case absolute may be resoluid into these thre
wordis , with couenable verbe , the while , for , if , as gramariens
seyn ; as thus , the maistir redinge , I stonde , mai be resoluid thus ,
while the maistir redith , I stonde , either if the maistir redith ,
etc. either for the maistir , etc. ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2276

and sumtyme it wolde acorde wel with the sentence to be resoluid into
whanne , either into aftirward , thus , whanne the maistir red , I stood
, either aftir the maistir red , I stood ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2277

and sumtyme it mai wel be resoluid into a verbe of the same tens , as
othere ben in the same resoun , and into this word et , that is , and in
English , as thus , CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2278

arescentibus hominibus prae timore , that is , and men shulen wexe drie
for drede . CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2279

Also a participle of a present tens , either preterit , of actif vois ,
eithir passif , mai be resoluid into a verbe of the same tens , and a
coniunccioun copulatif , as thus , dicens , that is , seiynge , mai be
resoluid thus , and seith , eithir that seith ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2280

and this wole , in manie placis , make the sentence open , where to
Englisshe it aftir the word , wolde be derk and douteful .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2281

Also a relatif , which mai be resoluid into his antecedent with a
coniunccioun copulatif , as thus , which renneth , and he renneth .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2282

Also whanne oo word is oonis set in a reesoun , it mai be set forth as
ofte as it is vndurstonden , either as ofte as reesoun and nede axen ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2283

and this word autem , either vero , mai stonde for forsothe , either for
but , CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2284

and thus I vse comounli ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2285

aud sumtyme it mai stonde for and , as elde gramariens seyn .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2286

Also whanne ri+gtful construccioun is lettid bi relacion , I resolue it
openli , thus , where this reesoun , Dominum formidabunt adversarij ejus
, shulde be Englisshid thus bi the lettre , the Lord hise aduersaries
shulen drede , I Englishe it thus bi resolucioun , the aduersaries of
the Lord shulen drede him ; and so of othere resons that ben like .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2287

At the bigynning I purposide , with Goddis helpe , to make the sentence
as trewe and open in English as it is in Latyn , either more trewe and
more open than it is in Latyn ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,57.2288

and I preie , for charite and for comoun profyt of cristene soulis ,
that if ony wiys man fynde ony defaute of the truthe of translacioun ,
let him sette in the trewe sentence and opin of holi writ , but loke
that he <P_I,58> examyne truli his Latyn bible , CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2289

for no doute he shal fynde ful manye biblis in Latyn ful false , if he
loke manie , nameli newe ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2290

and the comune Latyn biblis han more nede to be correctid , as manie as
I haue seen in my lif , than hath the English bible late translatid ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2291

and where the Ebru , bi witnesse of Jerom , of Lire , and othere
expositouris discordith fro oure Latyn biblis , I haue set in the margyn
, bi maner of a glose , what the Ebru hath , and hou it is vndurstondun
in sum place ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2292

and I dide this most in the Sauter , that of alle oure bokis discordith
most fro Ebru ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2293

for the chirche redith not the Sauter bi the laste translacioun of Jerom
out of Ebru into Latyn , but another translacioun of othere men , that
hadden myche lasse kunnyng and holynesse than Jerom hadde ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2294

and in ful fewe bokis the chirche redith the translacioun of Jerom , as
it mai be preuid bi the propre origynals of Jerom , whiche he gloside .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2295

And where I haue translatid as opinli or opinliere in English as in
Latyn , late wise men deme , that knowen wel bothe langagis , and knowen
wel the sentence of holi scripture . CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2296

And wher I haue do thus , or nay , ne doute , thei that kunne wel the
sentence of holi writ and English togidere , and wolen trauaile , with
Goddis grace , theraboute , moun make the bible as trewe and as opin ,
+gea , and opinliere in English than it is in Latyn .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2297

And no doute to a symple man , with Goddis grace and greet trauail , men
mi+gten expoune myche openliere and shortliere the bible in English ,
than the elde greete doctouris han expounid it in Latyn , and myche
sharpliere and groundliere than manie late postillatouris , eithir
expositouris , han don . CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2298

But God , of his grete marci , +geue to vs grace to lyue wel , and to
seie the truthe in couenable manere , and acceptable to God and his
puple , and to spille not oure tyme , be it short be it long at Goddis
ordynaunce . CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2299

But summe , that semen wise and holi , seyn thus , CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2300

if men now weren as holi as Jerom was , thei mi+gten translate out of
Latyn into English , as he dide out of Ebru and out of Greek into Latyn
, CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2301

and ellis thei shulden not translate now , as hem thinkith , for defaute
of holynesse and of kunnyng . CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2302

Thou+g this replicacioun seme colourable , it hath no good ground ,
neither resoun , neithir charite , for whi this replicacioun is more
a+gens seynt Jerom , and a+gens the firste lxx. translatouris , and
a+gens holi chirche , than a+gens symple men , that translaten now into
English ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2303

for seynt Jerom was not so holi as the apostlis and euangelistis , whos
bokis he translatide into Latyn , CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2304

neither he hadde so hi+ge +giftis of the Holi Gost as thei hadden ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2305

and myche more the lxx. translatouris weren not so holi as Moises and
the profetis , and speciali Dauith , CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2306

neither thei hadden so greete +giftis of God , as , Moises and the
prophetis hadden . CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2307

Ferthermore holi chirche appreueth , not oneli the trewe translacioun of
meene cristene men , stidefast in cristene feith , but also of open
eretikis , that diden awei manie mysteries of Jhesu Crist bi gileful
translacioun , as Jerom witnessith in oo prolog on Job , and in the
prolog of Daniel . CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2308

Myche more late the chirche of Engelond appreue the trewe and hool
translacioun of symple men , that wolden for no good in erthe , bi here
witing and power , putte awei the leste truthe , +gea , the leste lettre
, either title , of holi writ , that berith substaunce , either charge .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2309

And dispute thei not of the holynesse of men now lyuynge in this deadli
lif , CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2310

for thei kunnen not theron , CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2311

and it is reseruid oneli to Goddis doom . CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2312

If thei knowen ony notable defaute bi the translatouris , either helpis
of hem , lete hem blame the defaute bi charite and merci ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2313

and lete hem neuere dampne a thing that mai be don lefulli be Goddis
lawe , as weeryng of a good cloth for a tyme , either riding on an hors
for greet iourney , whanne thei witen not wherfore it is don ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,58.2314

for suche thingis moun be don of symple men , with as greet charite and
vertu , as <P_I,59> summe , that holden hem greete and wise , kunnen
ride in a gilt sadil , either vse cuyssyns and beddis and clothis of
gold and of silk , with othere vanitees of the world .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2315

God graunte pite , merci , and charite , and loue of comoun profyt ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2316

and putte awei such foli domis , that ben a+gens resoun and charite .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2317

+Git worldli clerkis axen gretli what spiryt makith idiotis hardi to
translate now the bible into English , sithen the foure greete doctouris
dursten neuere do this ? CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2318

This replicacioun is so lewid , that it nedith noon answer , no_but
stillnesse , eithir curteys scorn ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2319

for these greete doctouris weren noon English men ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2320

neither thei weren conuersaunt among English men , CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2321

neithir in caas thei kouden the langage of English ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2322

but thei ceessiden neuere til thei hadden holi writ in here modir tunge
, of here owne puple . CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2323

For Jerom , that was a Latyn man of birthe , translatide the bible ,
bothe out of Ebru and out of Greek , into Latyn , CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2324

and expounide ful myche therto ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2325

and Austyn , and manie mo Latyns expouniden the bible , for manie partis
, in Latyn , to Latyn men , among whiche thei dwelliden ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2326

and Latyn was a comoun langage to here puple aboute Rome , and bi+gondis
, and on this half , as Englishe is comoun langage to oure puple ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2327

and +git this day the comoun puple in Italie spekith Latyn corrupt , as
trewe men seyn , that han ben in Italie ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2328

and the noumbre of translatouris out of Greek into Latyn passith mannis
knowing , as Austyn witnessith in the ij. book of Cristene Teching ,
and seith thus , " the translatouris out of Ebru into Greek moun be
noumbrid , CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2329

but Latyn translatouris , either thei that translatiden into Latyn ,
moun not be noumbrid in ony manere . " CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2330

For in the firste tymes of feith , ech man , as a Greek book came to him
, and he semyde to him silf to haue sum kunnyng of Greek and of Latyn ,
was hardi to translate ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2331

and this thing helpide more than lettide vndurstonding , if rederis ben
not necligent , forwhi the biholding of manie bokis hath shewid ofte ,
eithir declarid , summe derkere sentencis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2332

This seith Austyn there . CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2333

Therfore Grosted seith , that it was Goddis wille , that diuerse men
translatiden , and that diuerse translacions be in the chirche ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2334

for where oon seide derkli , oon either mo seiden openli .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2335

Lord God ! sithen at the bigynnyng of feith so manie man translatiden
into Latyn , and to greet profyt of Latyn men , lat oo symple creature
of God translate into English , for profyt of English men ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2336

for if worldli clerkis loken wel here croniclis and bokis , thei shulden
fynde , that Bede translatide the bible , and expounide myche in Saxon ,
that was English , either comoun langage of this lond , in his tyme ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2337

and not oneli Bede , but also king Alured , that foundide Oxenford ,
translatide in hise laste daies the bigynning of the Sauter into Saxon ,
and wolde more , if he hadde lyued lengere . CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2338

Also Frenshe men , Beemers , and Britons han the bible , and othere
bokis of deuocioun and of exposicioun , translatid in here modir langage
; CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2339

whi shulden not English men haue the same in here modir langage , I can
not wite , no_but for falsnesse and necgligence of clerkis , either for
oure puple is not worthi to haue so greet grace and +gifte of God , in
peyne of here olde synnes . CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2340

God for his merci amende these euele causis , CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2341

and make oure puple to haue , and kunne , and kepe truli holi writ , to
lijf and deth ! CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2342

But in translating of wordis equiuok , that is , that hath manie
significacions vndur oo lettre , mai li+gtli be pereil ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2343

for Austyn seith in the ij. book of Cristene Teching , that if equiuok
wordis be not translatid into the sense , either vndurstonding , of the
autour , it is errour ; as in that place of the Salme , the feet of hem
ben swifte to shede out blood , the Greek word is equiuoik to sharp and
swift , and he that translatide sharpe feet , erride ,
CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2344

and a book that hath sharpe feet , is fals , CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2345

and mut be amendid ; as that sentence vnkynde +gonge trees shulen not
+geue depe rootis , owith to be thus , plauntingis of auoutrie shulen
not +geue depe rootis . CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2346

Austyn seith this there . CMPURVEY-M3,I,59.2347

Therfore <P_I,60> a translatour hath greet nede to studie wel the
sentence , both bifore and aftir , and loke that suche equiuok wordis
acorde with the sentence , CMPURVEY-M3,I,60.2348

and he hath nede to lyue a clene lif , and be ful deuout in preiers ,
and haue not his wit ocupied about worldli thingis , that the Holi
Spiryt , autour of wisdom , and kunnyng , and truthe , dresse him in his
werk , and suffre him not for to erre . CMPURVEY-M3,I,60.2349

Also this word ex signifieth sumtyme of , CMPURVEY-M3,I,60.2350

and sumtyme it signifieth bi , as Jerom seith ; CMPURVEY-M3,I,60.2351

and this word enim signifieth comynli forsothe , CMPURVEY-M3,I,60.2352

and , as Jerom seith , it signifieth cause thus , forwhi ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,60.2353

and this word secundum is taken for aftir , as manie men seyn , and
comynli , CMPURVEY-M3,I,60.2354

but it signifieth wel bi , eithir vp , thus bi +goure word , either vp
+goure word . CMPURVEY-M3,I,60.2355

Manie such aduerbis , coniuncciouns , and preposiciouns ben set ofte oon
for another , and at fre chois of autouris sumtyme ;
CMPURVEY-M3,I,60.2356

and now tho shulen be taken as it acordith best to the sentence .
CMPURVEY-M3,I,60.2357

Bi this maner , with good lyuyng and greet trauel , men moun come to
trewe and cleer translating , and trewe vndurstonding of holi writ ,
seme it neuere so hard at the bigynnyng . CMPURVEY-M3,I,60.2358

God graunte to us alle grace to kunne wel , and kepe wel holi writ , and
suffre ioiefulli sum peyne for it at the laste ! CMPURVEY-M3,I,60.2359

Amen . CMPURVEY-M3,I,60.2360
