<BEGIN_cmroyal-m34>

<P_9>

{ED:2}

Seynt Powle , +te chefe doctoure of holychurche , brennynge hy+gly in
+te loue of almy+gthy God and of is ney+gbore , wro+gthe all +te dayes
of is life aftur +tat he was turned to +te lawe of Criste to +te
edificacion of +te churche , wrytynge on too wyze , gretely commendynge
+te peple +tat vertuosly lyvyd , CMROYAL-M34,9.4

and +tonked God +terof , CMROYAL-M34,9.5

and repreved +to+g peple +tat fell to synne a+geyn withe sharpenes
modified by resone . CMROYAL-M34,9.6

Who-so rede+t is pistels shall knowe well +tat it $is so .
CMROYAL-M34,9.7

And so he wryte+t and teche+t in is pistell of +tis daye , preysynge God
for +te god liffe of a peple of Grece called Corynthi , seynge on +tis
wyze : CMROYAL-M34,9.8

" I do +tonkes to my God for you . " CMROYAL-M34,9.9

By +tis he +geve+t ensampull to vs +tat we oure-selfe shuld +tanke God
for oure goodes +tat we receued of God , se+t +tat he +tonked God so
hertely for is euencristen . CMROYAL-M34,9.10

But in what wyze +tat we shall +tonke God and prey to him , Criste
hym-selfe teche+t vs in +te gospell , a preyour +tat is chefe of all
preyours , +te wiche is +te Pater Noster . CMROYAL-M34,9.11

+Tis prayoure passe+t all o+tur in worthynesse , CMROYAL-M34,9.12

for God hym-selfe made itt ; CMROYAL-M34,9.13

also in goodenesse , for all +tat vs nede+t to preye is had +ter-in ;
CMROYAL-M34,9.14

also in avantage , for Criste , +tat all can , ordeyn itt .
CMROYAL-M34,9.15

By +tis preyour , +tan , late ichon of vs +tonke and preye God as Crist
and Seynt Poule teche+t vs . CMROYAL-M34,9.16

In +te begynnynge , et cetera . " Gracias ago , " et cetera .
CMROYAL-M34,9.17

Good men and wymmen , oure Lorde Ihesu tau+gth is disciples , as +te
gospell wittenesse+t , Mathei 6=to= , Luce 11=mo= , +tis preyoure of +te
Pater Noster , by +te wiche +tat euery man shuld preye to God when +tat
+tei preyed , as Poule dude by +te wordes of my teme , +tus seynge : " I
do +tonkes to my Lorde God , " as I seid at +te begynnynge .
CMROYAL-M34,9.18

In +tis worthy prayere of +te Pater Noster ben vij asshyngus , +te wiche
iij firste perteynen to +te +tre persons <P_10> in Trynite and oo God .
CMROYAL-M34,10.19

+Te fyrste longe+t to +te Fadur of heven , to whom is apropred all +te
powre in heven and in erthe , as +te gospell wittenes ;
CMROYAL-M34,10.20

and +tat prayour is +tis : CMROYAL-M34,10.21

" Fadere oure , +tou arte in heven , CMROYAL-M34,10.22

blessed be +ti name . " CMROYAL-M34,10.23

+Te seconde ashynge longe+t to +te Sonne , +te seconde person in +te
Trinite , oure Lorde Ihesu Criste , to whom all wisdome is apropred , as
Seynt Poule se+t , CMROYAL-M34,10.24

Romanos , 13=o= ; CMROYAL-M34,10.25

and it is +tis : CMROYAL-M34,10.26

" Ti kyngedom com to +te . " CMROYAL-M34,10.27

The +tride askynge pertene+t to +te +trid persone of +te Trynyte , +te
Holygoste , to whom is apropred loue and charite , as Seynt Iohn se+t :
CMROYAL-M34,10.28

" Deus caritas est ; " CMROYAL-M34,10.29

and it is +tis : CMROYAL-M34,10.30

" Be +ti will don in erthe as itt is in heven . " CMROYAL-M34,10.31

And +te o+tur foure askynges pertene+t to +te helpe of mankynde both
bodely and goostely . CMROYAL-M34,10.32

+Te firste of +te foure is +tis : CMROYAL-M34,10.33

" Oure euery dayes brede +geue vs to-daye . " CMROYAL-M34,10.34

The second is , " And for-+geue vs oure dettys as we for+geue oure
dettours . " CMROYAL-M34,10.35

The +tride is , " And lede vs not in-to temptacion . "
CMROYAL-M34,10.36

The fourte and +te laste is +tis : CMROYAL-M34,10.37

" But delyuer vs from euyll . CMROYAL-M34,10.38

Amen . " CMROYAL-M34,10.39

In +tis prayour is conteyned more witt +tan anny erthly man can tell ,
CMROYAL-M34,10.40

and +ter-fore I concell you +tat +ge loue to vse +tis prayour a-boven
all prayours . CMROYAL-M34,10.41

In +te firste askynge , when +tat +tou seyste , " Fader oure , +tat arte
in heven , blessed be +ti name " - in +tat +tat +tou calleste hym fader
, +ter +tou knalachesse +tat he is maker and lorde of heven and of erthe
and hell and gouernour of all creatures , of whom all goodenesse comes ;
CMROYAL-M34,10.42

and +tus +tou knalages is my+gthe . CMROYAL-M34,10.43

And se+t +tat he is lorde and fadere , euery man owe+t $hym drede and
loue : drede by-cause +tat he is lorde , and worshippe be-cause +tat he
is fader . CMROYAL-M34,10.44

These vij asskyngys of +te Pater Noster putte+t owte +te vij dedely
synnes CMROYAL-M34,10.45

and purchase+t +te vij +geftes of +te Holygooste . CMROYAL-M34,10.46

We excludon pride when we sey " oure Fadur " and not " myn . "
CMROYAL-M34,10.47

+Tis worde sey+t +tat we ben all bretheren , grett and small , ryche
<em> and poure <$$em> , hy+g and lawe , of oon fader and oo moder , +tat
is God and holychurche . CMROYAL-M34,10.48

And in +tat we seyn , " Halowed be +ti name , " we halowon God in vs ,
as Seynt John Crisostom sey+t . CMROYAL-M34,10.49

When we +tenke on hym , we dredon hym CMROYAL-M34,10.50

and wakon besely leste we <P_11> defowle +te holynesse of is name in vs
by oure euell werkes . CMROYAL-M34,11.51

In +te seconde asshynge , when we seye , " Com to $+te +ti kyngedom , "
we prayon +tat +tis kyngedom of +tis world , of +te wiche +tou arte
kynge +tat bow+gtest vs on +te Crosse by +ti precious blode , mott com
and be with +te in +te ioye of hevene . CMROYAL-M34,11.52

The +trid is +tis : CMROYAL-M34,11.53

" Be +ti will done in erthe as in heven . " CMROYAL-M34,11.54

Here we prayon God +tat is will be do here in erthe amonge synfull mene
+torow amendynge of her liffe as itt is don in ryghtwys men , +te wiche
is heven goostely . CMROYAL-M34,11.55

+Tan +tis is a good preyour . CMROYAL-M34,11.56

The fourte asshynge is , " Oure euery dayes brede +geue vs to-daye . "
CMROYAL-M34,11.57

Seynt Austyne sey+t +tat +tis iche dayes brede may be takon for nedefull
lyvelod of oure bodye , and also for +te Sacrament of Cristes bodye ,
and for goostely mete of +te sowle , +te wiche is Goddes worde .
CMROYAL-M34,11.58

The v asshynge is +tis : CMROYAL-M34,11.59

" And for-+geue vs oure dettys as we for-+geue to oure dettoures . "
CMROYAL-M34,11.60

+Tan by +tis witty techynge of oure Lorde Ihesu Criste , malicious and
veniabull wreches may well knowon +tat +tei be in +te veye to-hell-warde
as longe as +te dwell in here cursed malice . CMROYAL-M34,11.61

For by +tese dettys ben vndirstond synnes +tat we don a+geyns God , as
Seynt Austyne and o+ture seyntes seyon . CMROYAL-M34,11.62

+Giff +tou be in evyll to +ti ney+gbore , how sey+t +tou +tan +ti Pater
Noster ? CMROYAL-M34,11.63

+Tou preyest God ryght so to for+geue +te as +tou doste to o+ture men .
CMROYAL-M34,11.64

+Tou wilte not for+geue ; CMROYAL-M34,11.65

how mayste +tou +tan be for+geue of God ? CMROYAL-M34,11.66

The vj asshynge is +tis , +tat +tou lede not vs in-to temptacion .
CMROYAL-M34,11.67

We prayon not here +tat we be not tempted , CMROYAL-M34,11.68

for no $man may be proved with-owt temptacion ; CMROYAL-M34,11.69

but we praye +tat God lede vs not in-to temptacion - +tat is , +tat he
suffre not vs to falle in suche temptacions +te wiche we may not suffre
. CMROYAL-M34,11.70

The vij asshynge is +tis , and +te laste : CMROYAL-M34,11.71

" But delyvere vs from all evyll . CMROYAL-M34,11.72

Amen . " CMROYAL-M34,11.73

In +tis we praye God to delyvere vs from euyll of peyne +tat we deserue
+torowe synne presente in +tis liffe and fro euyll of peyne aftur +tis
lyffe +tat men shall haue for synne . CMROYAL-M34,11.74

<P_12>

+Tis prayore euery Cristen man is bondon to conne , and to preye to God
by +tis preyour , and do as Seynt Poule dothe by +te wordes of my teme :
CMROYAL-M34,12.76

" I do +tonkes to my Lord God . " CMROYAL-M34,12.77

+Tis prayoure is euery man and childe hold to kunne +gif he passe vij
+gere olde ; CMROYAL-M34,12.78

and +tere frendes be in grett perill +geff hei teche hem nott is Pater
Noster , Aue Maria , and is Beleue . CMROYAL-M34,12.79

This Aue Maria is in +te i chapter of Luke , CMROYAL-M34,12.80

and is +tis in Englisshe to youre vndirstondynge : CMROYAL-M34,12.81

" Haill , Marye , full of grace ; oure Lorde is with +te .
CMROYAL-M34,12.82

Blessed be +tou a-monge all wymmen ; CMROYAL-M34,12.83

and blessed be +te fruyte of +ti wombe , Ihesus . CMROYAL-M34,12.84

Amen . " CMROYAL-M34,12.85

By +tis preyoure +tou shuldeste grett Oure Lady , +tat she be goode mene
to hure Sonne Criste Ihesu to haue mercy on +te +tat +tou my+gthe at
Domes-day com to +tat ioye +tat euer shall laste . To +te wiche ioye
God brynge $you and me , +tat for vs dyed on Rode Tre .
CMROYAL-M34,12.86

Amen . CMROYAL-M34,12.87

<P_16>

{ED:4}

Worshippfull men and wymmen , +te worthye clerke Aristotle in +te laste
boke of is Ethicus sey+t +tat +tere is +tre manere of frenshippes :
amicicia propter vtile , amicicia pro voluptate , et amicicia propter
bonum morale . CMROYAL-M34,16.90

Som man , sey+t he , is a frende to an o+tur for is owne avauntage , as
courteours and seruuauntes , +tat dare in no wise displese here maisters
o+tur lord ; CMROYAL-M34,16.91

and +tis frenshippe is now+gthe . CMROYAL-M34,16.92

The second maner of frenshippe is frenshippe of luste , as lecherous men
o+tur wymmen vsen for a tyme ; CMROYAL-M34,16.93

but als-so sone as +te luste is fulfillid , +tan +te frenshippe is gone
. CMROYAL-M34,16.94

The +trid maner of frenshippe is frenshippe of wertewe , +te wiche +tat
on hathe to an o+ture for is good lyvynge and vertuous ;
CMROYAL-M34,16.95

+tis is a verry frenshippe +tat holy writte speke+t of ,
CMROYAL-M34,16.96

" Iam non dico vos seruos , sed amicos . " CMROYAL-M34,16.97

In +tis wyze bene all good levers called +te frendes of God .
CMROYAL-M34,16.98

As to my purpose , oure Lord God , as +te gospell of +tis daye beres
wittenesse by +te wordes of my teme , calle+t an evill levere is frende
, seyinge to hym on +tis wyze , " Frende , howe commeste +tou hydure ?
" CMROYAL-M34,16.99

As who se+t , " All-@ @be-@ @itt +tat +tou arte man , +gitt parauntur
+tou arte not cristened ; CMROYAL-M34,16.100

and +giff +tou be cristeynd , +gitt parauntur +tou leueste not as Criste
biddeste +te . CMROYAL-M34,16.101

How commes +tou +tan amonge is mene ? " CMROYAL-M34,16.102

+Tou canste not sey but by stalthe . CMROYAL-M34,16.103

And +ter-fore drede +tou leste he do commaunde to bynde +te honde and
fote and putt +te in-to +te innere derkenesse . CMROYAL-M34,16.104

" But sir , " +tou seiste parauntur , " Criste calle+t +te frend
CMROYAL-M34,16.105

and +ter-fore he will do well with +te and shewe +te of is mercye . "
CMROYAL-M34,16.106

+Ge sir , trewly +tou arte frende to hyme +giff +tou leue synne and
euyll levynge and loue in good wyze for +tin own avauntage ;
CMROYAL-M34,16.107

for +tis is good for +tin soule . CMROYAL-M34,16.108

For +ter is no frenshippe good but +tat +tat is grownded of vertewe .
CMROYAL-M34,16.109

And as to +tat , +tat +tou seist +tat he will do mercy , so he will .
CMROYAL-M34,16.110

Whe+ture-euer +tou be saued or dampned , +tou <P_17> shalte fele of is
mercye ; CMROYAL-M34,17.111

for and +tou had rygoressnes of ryght with-owte mercy , +tan +tou
my+gthe neuer bere itt , as all holywritt sei+t . CMROYAL-M34,17.112

I pray God to lat vs neuer com to +tat plite . CMROYAL-M34,17.113

In +te begynnynge , et cetera . " Amice , " et supra .
CMROYAL-M34,17.114

Good men and wymmen , +te wordes of my teme bethe writte in +te gospell
of +tis daye and +tus muche on Englissh : CMROYAL-M34,17.115

" Frende , how commest +tou here , or hydere ? " CMROYAL-M34,17.116

Oure Lorde God seys to vs +tat +te kyngedome of heven is like to a kynge
+tat made veddynggus to is sonne . CMROYAL-M34,17.117

+Tis kynge sente oute is seruauntes to bid hem +tat were bede com to +te
feste ; CMROYAL-M34,17.118

and +tei wolde nott come . CMROYAL-M34,17.119

+Tan +tis kynge sende o+tur seruauntes to bid hem come ,
CMROYAL-M34,17.120

and bad +tat +tei shuld sey , " My mete is redye and all well ;
CMROYAL-M34,17.121

come+t to +te weddyngus . " CMROYAL-M34,17.122

+Tei sett no+gth by +te messangeres ; CMROYAL-M34,17.123

butt som +gede forthe in-to here towne , som abowte here marchandize ,
CMROYAL-M34,17.124

and some toke +te messangeres CMROYAL-M34,17.125

and slow+g hem . CMROYAL-M34,17.126

+Tan when +te kynge herde here-of he lete slee +tise men
CMROYAL-M34,17.127

and brent hure citte . CMROYAL-M34,17.128

And +tan he seide to is owne seruauntes , " My weddynggus ben redie ,
CMROYAL-M34,17.129

butt +tei +tat were bede were not worthye . CMROYAL-M34,17.130

Goy+t +ge owte in-to +te weye ; CMROYAL-M34,17.131

and qwom-euer +tat +ge fynde , calle+t hem to my weddynggus . "
CMROYAL-M34,17.132

+Tan +tese seruauntes feched in bothe good and euyll CMROYAL-M34,17.133

and filled +te place of +te tables . CMROYAL-M34,17.134

+Tan +tis kynge com CMROYAL-M34,17.135

and see +te men sittynge at +te mete CMROYAL-M34,17.136

and fonde oon +tat was not clothed of is weddynge leuere
CMROYAL-M34,17.137

and seid to hym to wordes of my teme , " Frende , how comeste +tou in
here - o+tur hidur - and haste no leueree of my weddynggus ? "
CMROYAL-M34,17.138

+Tan seid +te kynge far+turmore to +te seruauntes , " Bynde+t hym honde
and fote CMROYAL-M34,17.139

and put hym in-to innere derkenes , +ter-@ @as is wepynge and gryntynge
of te+te . CMROYAL-M34,17.140

Many ben called , CMROYAL-M34,17.141

butt fewe ben choson . " CMROYAL-M34,17.142

+Tis is +te sentence of +te gospell in +tis daye . CMROYAL-M34,17.143

" But sir , " +tou seiste parauntur , " how is +tis kyngedome of heven
like +tis kynge ? " CMROYAL-M34,17.144

Sir , I shall tell +te . CMROYAL-M34,17.145

+Tis kynge +tat made weddynggus to is sonne betokene+t +te Fadere of
heuen , +tat all +tinge made of no+gthe . CMROYAL-M34,17.146

He <P_18> made a weddynge to is Sonne , oure Lorde Ihesu Criste ,
CMROYAL-M34,18.147

and weddit he was to euery mans soule at is folewte .
CMROYAL-M34,18.148

He send is seruauntes to bid men com to +te feste - apostles , martirs ,
confessours , and virgyns - to +te feste in +te kyngedome of heven ;
CMROYAL-M34,18.149

but +tei wold not come . CMROYAL-M34,18.150

He send o+tur messangers to bid men come to heven , as doctours and
prechors of +te word of God , as +tei do now daye by daye ,
CMROYAL-M34,18.151

but +ge sett not by hem , +te more harme is . CMROYAL-M34,18.152

Som goyn to youre citte , +tat is , to youre vnclene felishippe , as to
+te taueron and to o+tur vnhoneste place ; som to youre vn+trifty
marchandize , full of vsure , okre , and o+tur falsenes ;
CMROYAL-M34,18.153

som takon is prechors CMROYAL-M34,18.154

and punyssh hem vn-to +te dethe . CMROYAL-M34,18.155

But what shall +te kynge do +tere-to ? CMROYAL-M34,18.156

+Tis Kynge of kynges , certeyn , sir , as Criste hym-selfe seid , he
shall lat slee hem and brenne +te cite of hem . CMROYAL-M34,18.157

Far+turmore +tis Kynge shall sende oute is techars and prechars and bid
hem come to is feste , all +tat +tei fynden , bothe good and euyll .
CMROYAL-M34,18.158

But be-ware , CMROYAL-M34,18.159

I counsell +te , +tat +tou come not to +te feste , +tat is , to +te Dome
dredefull , but +tou haue oon +te leveree of clennes of +tat weddynge ,
leste +tat oure Lorde Ihesu when +tat he comme+t to behold +te , repreue
+te , and ordeyne +te to be putt in-to euery lastynge peyne for +tin
evill lyvynge , seyinge on +tis wyze , " Frende , how comme+t +tou hydur
? " as I seid at +te begynnynge . CMROYAL-M34,18.160

In +tis wyze , +tan , as I haue told +te , +te kyngedome of heven is
like to a kynge +tat ordeynt weddynggus to is sonne .
CMROYAL-M34,18.161

Sirs , I counsell all maner of men fully to +tenke on +tis Dome ,
CMROYAL-M34,18.162

for Seynt Ierome sei+t whe+tur +tat he ete , drynke , or slepe , or
what-euer els +tat he dothe , it seme+t hym , sei+t he , +tat +te angels
trompe sowne+t in is eere seyinge +tus , " Ryse , +ge dede men ,
CMROYAL-M34,18.163

and com to +te Dome . " CMROYAL-M34,18.164

I concell and I preye euerichon of you to conceyue and knowe +tat oure
Lorde God at +te Day of Dome shall shewe ryght with-oute mercye , full
rygorysly , full sturnely , and aske of vs howe +tat we haue spende +te
vij verkes of mercy , as +te gospell wittenes . CMROYAL-M34,18.165

But for-as-muche as euery man and wymman shall +geue a-countes of +te
vij werkes of mercye , +ter-fore I purpose fully to <P_19> teche you
wiche ben +te vij verkes of bodely mercye and of goostely , bothe .
CMROYAL-M34,19.166

The vij verkes of bodely mercy ben +tese : fede +te hongery , +geue
drynke to +te +tursty , clothe +te naked and nedye , herbowre +te
howslesse , comforte +te seke , visite prisoners , and bury +te dede .
CMROYAL-M34,19.167

+Tese vij verkes +tou arte bondon to fulfill by verke and dede +giff +ti
powere be , or els by +ti good will +giff +ti powere faill , in payne of
euer_lastynge dampnacion +giff +tou repente not . CMROYAL-M34,19.168

For of +tese werkes of mercy Criste shall speke inspeciall of at +te Day
of Dome . CMROYAL-M34,19.169

I praye eueriche of you to haue +tis in mynde . CMROYAL-M34,19.170

And +te vij verkys of goostely mercy ben +tese : CMROYAL-M34,19.171

teche men +te trouthe , howe +tei shuld com to heven ;
CMROYAL-M34,19.172

the seconde , counsell men besely to hold with Cristes lawe ; the +tride
, chastyse synners by moderate reprevynge in charite ; the $iv ,
comforte sorowfull men with Cristes passion ; the v , for+geue wronges
done to +ti-selfe , as +tou wolte be $for+geue of God ; the vj , suffre
mekely repreves for +te ryght of Goddes lawe ; the vij , preye hertely
for frend and for foo . CMROYAL-M34,19.173

+Tese verkes ben of goostely mercye , +te wiche also +tou arte bond to
knowe and to fulfill hem in dede ; CMROYAL-M34,19.174

for and +tou volte +tenke hertely of +te dredefull Dome , +tan +tou
shulteste euer be besye with +tou+gth , worde , and dede to plese God
and to fulfill +tise verkes of mercye , as +tou wolte +tat God haue
mercye on +te . CMROYAL-M34,19.175

And +tan +giff God assh +te at +te Day of Dome , " Frende , howe
entereste +tou hidre ? " +tan +tou maiste seye , " Lorde , I haue on
+ti leueree CMROYAL-M34,19.176

and I am +ti man , CMROYAL-M34,19.177

and as +ti man I entred ; where-fore I preye +te , late me reioyse +te
kyngedome of heven , +tat +tou haste ordeynt for +ti seruauntes . " To
+te wiche ioye and infinite blisse brynge vs oure swete Lorde Ihesus .
CMROYAL-M34,19.178

Amen . CMROYAL-M34,19.179

{ED:41}

<P_251>

This glorious Ladie with all hur vertewes and preuilegees as +tis day
was taken vp in soule aboven +te hiest ordere of angels - and in bodie
also , as Seynt Austyn and Anselme haue +ter oppinions ;
CMROYAL-M34,251.182

and Ierom in ys pistell fauors +te same : " Exaltata est sancta Dei
genitrix , " et cetera - where she besely praye+t +tat we may sewe hure
in lyvynge . CMROYAL-M34,251.183

+Tan se+t she is of all seyntes +te cheff pure creature , as holychurche
sey+t of hur ad mores , sanctorum sancta , +ter-fore we shuld besi vs to
be hure folovers , and so to be seyntes here and aftur in heven .
CMROYAL-M34,251.184

But here what Dauid +te prophete seys , +tat oure seyntes ben goyn avey
: CMROYAL-M34,251.185

" Saluum me fac , Domine , quoniam defecit sanctus - CMROYAL-M34,251.186

good Lord , sey+t he , make vs saue , CMROYAL-M34,251.187

for seyntes +ter is none as +ter were . " CMROYAL-M34,251.188

I sey more pleynly +tus : CMROYAL-M34,251.189

I knowe well no man shall be saued but +giff +tat he ende is liff as a
seynt , CMROYAL-M34,251.190

sine peccato mortali , <P_252> Mathei 25=to= capitulo .
CMROYAL-M34,252.191

But how +te multitudo of +te peple lyvi+t and ende+t when +tat +tei die
, whe+tur +tei die as seyntes or non I wot neuer , Lord ,
CMROYAL-M34,252.192

no+tur I will not +geue iugement vppon +ti previe dome .
CMROYAL-M34,252.193

But as by mans dome and as it seme+t by reson , I shall afferme +tat
+giff +tis world be an enterludie , as doctors ymagynne , I wote neuer
who shall pley +te seynte in oure enterludie . CMROYAL-M34,252.194

For in comparison +tat it was som tyme , vertewes morall ben goyn .
CMROYAL-M34,252.195

Fey+gth , hope , and charite be welny+g exiled , CMROYAL-M34,252.196

and sewerly with-owte +tise vertewes may be no seynt in +tis liff .
CMROYAL-M34,252.197

Haa , good Lord God , where is +te fey+gth of Abraam , +te good hope of
Ysaak , +te prudens of Iacob ? CMROYAL-M34,252.198

Where is +te chastite of Ioseph , the paciens of Moyses , +te gret zele
of Finees , of all +te wiche scripture rememburs , CMROYAL-M34,252.199

Genesis , Exodi , Numerorum diuersis capitulis ? CMROYAL-M34,252.200

Where is be-com +te sadenes of Sent Petre , +te charite of Seynt Poule ,
+te holynes of Iacob , oure Lordes bro+tur , and +te heuenly wisdom of
Seynt Iohn +te Euaungelist , of +te wiche scripture wittenes Actuum
diuersis capitulis , Iohanis primo ? CMROYAL-M34,252.201

And +giff +tat we shall speke of latter men and of lowe degre , where is
suche on as Paule , +te first heremite , dwellyng sole in +te inmaste of
wildernes in a cote , where fourty wynter God send hym by a ravyn brede
to lyve by dayly , CMROYAL-M34,252.202

and whan +tat he was ded wild lions made is pitt CMROYAL-M34,252.203

and buried at +te commaundement of Seynt Antonij , as Seynt Ierom
wryte+t in Vitis Patrum ? CMROYAL-M34,252.204

Where is now suche a seynt as Seynt Benet was amonge all +te enhabite
monasteries - inter senobitas ? CMROYAL-M34,252.205

Is liff was angelike , +te wiche withstode terraundes and devels with is
holy worde , to whom sprites obeied as to +ter maister , as Seynt
Gregory teche+t , CMROYAL-M34,252.206

2=o= Dialogorum ? CMROYAL-M34,252.207

Where is +te gret douocion of Seynt Barnard be-com in all is seculere
diligence , +te wiche wrote full wondirfull myracles , lyvyng so
far-forth +tat all +tat were vexed with devels he <P_253> heled hem at
is commaundement , as Ianuensis write+t in ys lif ? CMROYAL-M34,253.208

Now +giff +tat we shuld speke of holines in prelacie , where is suche a
fadur now as was Seynt Basile , bishop of Cesare in Capodocia ?
CMROYAL-M34,253.209

+Tis man was +te distroer of +te heretikes , Arrianus .
CMROYAL-M34,253.210

When +tat he shuld die , a leche +tat was a Iewe told hym +te tyme when
+tat he shuld die and +te day . CMROYAL-M34,253.211

" What , " quod he , " and I may live till to-morow ? "
CMROYAL-M34,253.212

" I woll be-com a $Cristen man . " CMROYAL-M34,253.213

And so by myracle hes liff was lenghed vn-to +tat he was cristened .
CMROYAL-M34,253.214

+Tus write+t of hym Amphilotus , Yconie episcopus , in historia sua .
CMROYAL-M34,253.215

Where is suche accepte auctorite in anny prelate as was in Gregore
Nazanzene , whos doctrine and writynge was suche +tat +ter was neuer man
a+geyn-seid hym into oure tyme , as Seynt Thomas write+t ,
CMROYAL-M34,253.216

prima parte Summe , questione 61 , articulo 3=O= , in pede ?
CMROYAL-M34,253.217

Where is +te mekenes and wisdom be-com of Seynt Gregore , doctour and
pope , as is verke vppon Iob wittenes , +te wiche is so gret +tat +to+g
all +te principall partes of man were turned on-to tounges , +git man
myght not declare is wisdom and holynes , as Isedere write+t ,
CMROYAL-M34,253.218

De Viris Illustribus , de Gregorio agens ? CMROYAL-M34,253.219

+Giff we shuld suche aftur holynes amonge gentilmen of wurshipp , it is
not as it was . CMROYAL-M34,253.220

Where is now so wertewous a ientilman as was Iob , kynge of Edom , clere
in fey+gthe , excellent in mekenes , a nobull housholdere , ease to be
tau+gth , large in almes , riche in money , plentewous in children ?
CMROYAL-M34,253.221

But sodenly is children were slayn , CMROYAL-M34,253.222

+te dewell sore tempted hym and is wiff also and is frendes ;
CMROYAL-M34,253.223

and neuer gruched a+gens God , as Ysidore sais , CMROYAL-M34,253.224

De Ortu et Obitu Patrum . CMROYAL-M34,253.225

Where is now so gret loue , zele , and fauour vn-to men of holy churche
and to +te pepull as had +te gret emperour Constantyne , +te wiche chose
ra+tur all is liff tyme to be smytte with a lepre +tan he wold suffure
+te innocentes blod to be shed to saue hym as by bathes , as +te
Cronicle of Rome telle+t vs ? CMROYAL-M34,253.226

<P_254>

Where is +tat very iust man and emperour Egrite Traiane , +te wiche
demed is own sonne and is eyre to be ded for +tat he necligently had
ouer-riden a widow sonne , as Gregore teche+t vs in is bokes Regestre ?
CMROYAL-M34,254.228

Lo , +tan , I se well +giff +tat I be not begiled +tat in men of
holychurche , no+ture in gentilmen , no+tur in +te comon peple , but +te
old holines is goyn from hem . Where-fore I may sey as me semeth after
+te old maner , +tat +ter is no man able to pley on oure seynt :
CMROYAL-M34,254.229

" Saluum me fac , Domine , quoniam defecit sanctus . "
CMROYAL-M34,254.230

Parauntur it is replied a+geyns me +tat +ter be many holy men , al-@
@be-@ @it +tei com not to +te holynes of oure old holy faders .
CMROYAL-M34,254.231

I answere as Seynt Barnard seith , sermone 33 super Cantico ,
vndirstondyng is language as for +te more parte : CMROYAL-M34,254.232

" Serpit hodie putrida tabes per omne corpus ecclesie -
CMROYAL-M34,254.233

fowle stynkynge mater of synne growe+t now thorowe-owte all Cristendom .
Qwere-of Y dispeyre +te more CMROYAL-M34,254.234

for he growe+t full large . CMROYAL-M34,254.235

Som tyme +te prophett spake +ter-of CMROYAL-M34,254.236

and now it is fulfilled , +tat holychurche compleyne+t of :
CMROYAL-M34,254.237

' Ecce in pace amaritudo mea amarissima , ' Ysaie 38 capitulo -
CMROYAL-M34,254.238

' O fey+gthe in holy churche , my most bitter bitturnes is in my pece .
' CMROYAL-M34,254.239

I had a grett bitturnes in dethe of my marters , CMROYAL-M34,254.240

I had a grettur bitturnes in doctrine of heritikes , CMROYAL-M34,254.241

but now haue I my most bittur bitturnes in +te horribull synnes of
fey+gthfull pepull , CMROYAL-M34,254.242

whi +tei may not be chastised , +tei may not be dryven a-vey ,
CMROYAL-M34,254.243

wicked men be so many and multipled owte of nowmbur .
CMROYAL-M34,254.244

This veniaunce is perishyng myn herte withowte hope of hele .
CMROYAL-M34,254.245

Intestina est et insanabilis plaga . CMROYAL-M34,254.246

And +terfore of all my bitturnes +tis is +te gretest in pees .
CMROYAL-M34,254.247

But qwhat pes is +tis to +te churche ? " CMROYAL-M34,254.248

Seys Seynt Barnard , " Et pax est et non est pax - CMROYAL-M34,254.249

+ter is pece , " seys he , " in a maner , CMROYAL-M34,254.250

and +gitt itt is no pes . CMROYAL-M34,254.251

+Ter is pes for ethen men , CMROYAL-M34,254.252

+ter is pes for heretikes , CMROYAL-M34,254.253

but trewly +ter is no pes a+gens synnefull lyvyng in all degrees
temperall and spirituall of Cristes churche . CMROYAL-M34,254.254

Loo , whatt oure modur holychurche compleyne+t a+gens vs :
CMROYAL-M34,254.255

' Filios <P_255> enutriui et exaltaui ; ipsi autem spreuerunt me ,
CMROYAL-M34,255.256

' Ysaie primo capitulo . CMROYAL-M34,255.257

' I haue , ' seys she , ' norished many a Cristen man and woman and made
must of hem , CMROYAL-M34,255.258

and +tei sett ryght no+gthe by me : CMROYAL-M34,255.259

spreuerunt et maculauerunt me , ' et cetera . CMROYAL-M34,255.260

' +Tei sett not by me , ' seys oure modur holychurche ,
CMROYAL-M34,255.261

' but +te defoule me with +ter foule lyvyng +tat is full abhomynable , '
" CMROYAL-M34,255.262

inquid Barnardus in diebus suis . CMROYAL-M34,255.263

Se+t , +tan , holichurche compleyne+t +tus in Seynt Barnardes daies ,
she may now dredeles compleyne much more , CMROYAL-M34,255.264

for fro is tyme hidirward +te liff of +te Cristen pepull ha+t ben euer
wars and wars , as well in +te spirituallte as in +te temperalte .
CMROYAL-M34,255.265

For sicurly vertew is cast avey CMROYAL-M34,255.266

and man is fallyn in-to +te filthe of stynkyng synne .
CMROYAL-M34,255.267

Haa , good God , now mercy , CMROYAL-M34,255.268

for our synnes beth not vnpunyshed . CMROYAL-M34,255.269

Lo , sirs , I sey itt with sorefull hert , CMROYAL-M34,255.270

scismus and diuisions haue now reyned in oure daies amonge men of
holychurche , +tat welny+g holychurche standes in desolacionem : " Per
que peccat quis , per hec et torquetur , " Sapiencie 2 capitulo ; +tat
for-asmuche as we will not be ooned to God be charite , +ter-fore we
be+t dissevered amonge oure-self . CMROYAL-M34,255.271

Oure gentils also of all degrees be+t greuously punyshed ,
CMROYAL-M34,255.272

for batels be+t reysed welny+g in euery lond , CMROYAL-M34,255.273

Cristend Shedyng of Cristen blode continually , gret and huge .
CMROYAL-M34,255.274

And to sey shortely , welny+g in euery coost of +te marches Cristen mens
lordeshippes decresses CMROYAL-M34,255.275

and goys downeward , CMROYAL-M34,255.276

and +te lordeshippes of hethen men growe+t vpward CMROYAL-M34,255.277

and in-crese+t ; CMROYAL-M34,255.278

for seuerly oure Cristen prynces with-in +tis xl +gere and lasse ha+t
lost more +tan +te +tirde parte of Cristendom . CMROYAL-M34,255.279

Lo , +ter peyn answeres to +ter synnes . CMROYAL-M34,255.280

For lik as oure princes and lordes spoyleth and robbe+t +ter suggettus
and do+t daily , euen so God suffre+t +te ethen princes to robb and
spoile oure lordes and princes , euen as +tei do to o+tur :
CMROYAL-M34,255.281

" In qua mensura qua mensi fueritis , remicietur vobis , " Mathei 7
capitulo . CMROYAL-M34,255.282

The common pepull for +ter synnes and vnthrifty lyvyng and euell will to
holychurche and to +ter lordes , +tei ben oppressed ,
CMROYAL-M34,255.283

+tei ben robbed , CMROYAL-M34,255.284

+tei be mad pore welny+g in euery lond of Cristendom so far-forthe
sewerly +tat itt heuys hem to <P_256> lyve . CMROYAL-M34,256.285

Si+t , +tan , euery charite begynne+t of hym-selfe , and I see so gret
perils and by synne vertews distruccion , +ter-for I pray as +te
prophete dud , CMROYAL-M34,256.286

" Lord , make me sauf , CMROYAL-M34,256.287

for +te seyntus ben gon - CMROYAL-M34,256.288

saluum me fac , Domine , quoniam defecit sanctus . "
CMROYAL-M34,256.289

And +tus much for oure first principall and +te second to-ge+ture .
CMROYAL-M34,256.290

I seid also oure +tirde and fourth principall , now steryng , now
shewynge by experience of vertewe , how +tat Oure Ladie was all-wey
desirous to holines . CMROYAL-M34,256.291

She is full gracious and full of compassion to all Cristen pepull .
CMROYAL-M34,256.292

For declaracion of +tis wryte+t Seynt Ierom in a pistell ,
CMROYAL-M34,256.293

and Bonaventure reherse+t it also , De Vita Cristi , +tat +tis blessed
and glorious Ladie afore +tat she had conceyved oure Lord , euery
ny+gthe aftur mydny+gtht she was besy in prayour . CMROYAL-M34,256.294

She ashed and praied of +te Fadur of heuen vij peticions , of +te wich
too I will reherse vn-to you . CMROYAL-M34,256.295

On was +tat she my+gthe loue alvey +tat God loued and non o+tur +tinge :
CMROYAL-M34,256.296

Psalmo 17 , " Diligam te , Domine , fortitudo mea . "
CMROYAL-M34,256.297

+Te o+tur was +tat God wold +geue hur +tat grace , to hur +tat was +te
modur of God to do euer plesaund seruyse to God . CMROYAL-M34,256.298

Loo , +tis good Ladies peticion sowned alvey vn-to charite , loue , and
grace . CMROYAL-M34,256.299

" Quia plenitudo legis est dileccio operis , " Romanos , 13=mo= capitulo
. CMROYAL-M34,256.300

And so dud hur o+tur peticiens , +te wiche I leue ouer .
CMROYAL-M34,256.301

And +ter-fore +te Fadur of heven herd hur prayour CMROYAL-M34,256.302

and graunted hur more grace +tan she prayed fore . CMROYAL-M34,256.303

Inspeciall for +tat she of mekenes coveted to be seruaunte to Goddes
modur , +ter-for God chose hure to be is modur , CMROYAL-M34,256.304

" Quia respexit humilitatem ancille sue , " Luce primo ,
CMROYAL-M34,256.305

and send to hur +te archangell Gabriell vn is ambassate , to +tat entent
+tat suche +tinges by hur , a woman , shuld reflorish +tat by +te first
woman was brou+gthe to desolacion , CMROYAL-M34,256.306

Genesis 3 capitulo . CMROYAL-M34,256.307

For sicurly it was a comon repref to all women +tat by on of hem all
mankynd was lost and non of hem my+gthe helpe to restore it a+geyn , so
far-forth +tat all +te elementes and all o+tur beestes and briddes semed
per prosopopeiam crie vppon a womman , as Petrus Rauennas <P_257>
ymagine+t , sermone Gregorii , seynge +tus , " Redde depositum , mulier
, redde depositum Dei quod in Paradiso perdidisti ; redde ex te quod
perdidisti per te . " CMROYAL-M34,257.308

+Tis rebuke of o+tur creatures dyvers devoute women bare heuely ,
praying for hem-self to God to take from hem +tis comon reprefe or
suffur hem els no lenger to liff , CMROYAL-M34,257.309

vnde applicatur illud : " Ad te , Domine , faciem meam $conuerto ; ad te
oculos meos erigo . Peto , Domine , ut de vinculo improperij huius
absoluas me , aut certe desuper terram eripias me , " Tobie 3 .
CMROYAL-M34,257.310

But of all +tise women +ter was non hard vn-to Oure Ladie was borne ,
whom holychurche wurshippes +tis day . CMROYAL-M34,257.311

Bot +tis Ladie so pleyzed all-myghty God , +te Fadur of heuen , +tat he
send downe is angell vn-to hure to haue +tis reprefe holpon :
CMROYAL-M34,257.312

Malachie 3 , " Ecce ego mitto angelum meum , qui preparabit viam ante
faciem meam , " id est , ante filium meum . CMROYAL-M34,257.313

And as it may be taken of Seynt Austyn , primo sermone de Anunciacione
Dominica , whan Gabriel had knalage $+tat he was choson to do is message
, he com in-to +te presence of +te Fadur of heven CMROYAL-M34,257.314

and with all mekenes a-fore is most soueryn maieste , he seid on +tis
wise : " Fadur and Lord of euery heuenly and erthly creature , to +te is
all +tinge knowon CMROYAL-M34,257.315

<paren> Iudith $9=no= <$$paren> . CMROYAL-M34,257.316

+Tou knowist verely +te hi+g prudence of +tis nobull virgyn and also hur
sadnes in soule . CMROYAL-M34,257.317

+Tou knowist also , gracious Lord , +tis message +tat +tou commaundes me
to execute . CMROYAL-M34,257.318

It is a werke of gret prevete , keuered in derke seynges of prophetes of
old tyme . CMROYAL-M34,257.319

By hure +te dewell is putt in gret drede . CMROYAL-M34,257.320

So +tan when +tat I sey my message I shall besy me to encline +tis
blessed Ladies will vn-to my porpose and to shewe hur +tin signet , +te
wiche bothe man and angels ben marked with . CMROYAL-M34,257.321

<paren> ' Signatum est super nos lumen vultus tui , Domine , ' Psalmo
4=to= <$$paren> . CMROYAL-M34,257.322

And namely in so hi+g a matur of substaunce she parauntur will not anone
+geue credence to my wordes but ra+tur suppose me no trewe messanger of
so worthy astate . Where-fore +giff itt like to thy most gracious
lordshipp <P_258> me to do +tis message , I beseche +te , chef
soueraygne Lord , graunte me +ti signet , where-of when +tat she ha+t
knalage +ter-of , +tat she may applie hur will to +ti godly purpose . "
CMROYAL-M34,258.323

The Fadur of heven answerd Gabriell , CMROYAL-M34,258.324

" +Ti prayour is resonable , CMROYAL-M34,258.325

and it shall not be denyed +te . CMROYAL-M34,258.326

+Tou knawi+t well , Gabriell , +tat my signet is my speciall grace , +te
wiche I marke with my choson children fro +to +tat be repreved .
CMROYAL-M34,258.327

And it may well be called my signett , CMROYAL-M34,258.328

for itt is so secrete +tat +ter wote no man lyvynge withowte reuelacion
whe+tur +tat he be signett +ter-with or no . CMROYAL-M34,258.329

<paren> ' Nescit homo vtrum amore an odio dignus scit , ' Ecclesiastes
9=no= - CMROYAL-M34,258.330

' +ter knowi+t no man withowte reuelacion whe+tur +tat he be marked with
+te signett of grace or no ' - predestinatus . <$$paren>
CMROYAL-M34,258.331

But when +tou commest vn-to +tis maiden , in hur +tou shalt se my signet
of grace . CMROYAL-M34,258.332

+Tou seist it neuer so plentevows in no creature . CMROYAL-M34,258.333

When +tou commest to hur , gret hur well by +te token of my speciall
grace , and +tan she will resceyve +te as she ow+gth to do my messanger
. " CMROYAL-M34,258.334

Anone +tan +tis archangell was in +te cite of Nazareth
CMROYAL-M34,258.335

and he fownd +ter +tis virgyn , not walkynge abowte in +te stretis but
in hure deuocions in hur chambur , besily prayinge to all-mygthy God ,
CMROYAL-M34,258.336

" intra cubiculum orante , " Matheo . CMROYAL-M34,258.337

He shewed hur +tis signet , seying on +tis wize , " Aue , gracia plena ,
Dominus tecum ; benedicta tu in mulieribus - CMROYAL-M34,258.338

hail , full of grace , oure Lord is with +te ; CMROYAL-M34,258.339

blessed be +tou abowen all wommen . " CMROYAL-M34,258.340

And with +tise wordes he persceyved anon +tat she was wondur specially
merked with +te signet of oure Lordis grace . CMROYAL-M34,258.341

This blessed maiden with all reuerence and honour tretid +tis blessed
Lordis signet , in +te wiche signet ben graven succession of dyuers
+geres , +te meritis of angels and man , the begynnyng and +te
contynuaunce and <P_259> +te ende of all ryghtwisse pepull .
CMROYAL-M34,259.342

And +ter-fore she toke avisement afore hur answere , somwhat trowbeled
of so speciall a gretyng ; CMROYAL-M34,259.343

but +gitt she had spokon and seen aungels afore , as Seynt Barnard seis
vppon " Missus est . " CMROYAL-M34,259.344

But +te language of +te aungell was soleyn and gracius when +tat he seid
+tat she was full of grace and blissed hur abowon all women .
CMROYAL-M34,259.345

+Tis aungell as a wize messaunger see +tat she was somdell trowbled ,
CMROYAL-M34,259.346

and +ter-fore he spake to hure more famyliarly , callyng hur by hur name
, seying on +tis wise : " Ne timeas , Maria ; inuenisti enim graciam
apud Deum - CMROYAL-M34,259.347

drede +te not , maide Mari , CMROYAL-M34,259.348

for +tou hast fownden grace aneyns almy+gthy God . "
CMROYAL-M34,259.349

As hoo sei+t . " +Tou arte gracious of +ti-selfe CMROYAL-M34,259.350

and also shall be to all Cristen pepull . CMROYAL-M34,259.351

+Tat shewe I +tus : CMROYAL-M34,259.352

first , +tou shalte consceyve with-owten fleshly concupiscence and
brynge forthe a Sonne CMROYAL-M34,259.353

<paren> ibi Luce primo . <$$paren> CMROYAL-M34,259.354

+Te cause here-of is non o+tur bote +tou arte gracious in +ti-self and
shall be to all Cristen peple . CMROYAL-M34,259.355

But Ladi , +tis Sonne +tat +tou shalte haue shall not be litill of
valowe , but +te naturall Sonne of allmy+gthy God <paren> ' Filius
Altissimi vocabitur ' <$$paren> . CMROYAL-M34,259.356

What may be cause of +tis ? CMROYAL-M34,259.357

Sicurly , for +tou art gracious to +ti-selfe and shall be to all Cristen
pepull . CMROYAL-M34,259.358

Far+termare , Ladie , parauntur +tou ashes of +te maner here-of , how
God will haue itt don se+t +tou art purposed euer to be a mayde <paren>
' Quo modo fiet istud ? ' et cetera <$$paren> . CMROYAL-M34,259.359

I sey +te Holygoost shall li+gthe vppon +te and by is infenite vertewe
+tis werke shall be endid . " CMROYAL-M34,259.360

+Tis good Ladie , heryng +tis message , assentid vn-to +te will of God
CMROYAL-M34,259.361

and in +te most lowly wize answerd . CMROYAL-M34,259.362

For +ter-as +te aungell called hure +te modur of God , she calle+t
hure-self Goddes lowly seruaunt , seying , " Ecce ancilla Domini ; fiat
mihi secundum uerbum tuum " - ibi Luce primo . CMROYAL-M34,259.363

I may +tan perfitely conclude by hur wordes and +te aungels also +tat
+tis Ladie alwey is desirous to holynes and is gracious and full of
compassion vn-to all Cristen pepull , +te wiche is for oure third and
fourte principall . CMROYAL-M34,259.364

She , +tan , +tat was so gracious in hur liff here , is muche <P_260>
more gracious nowe +tat she is in heven . CMROYAL-M34,260.365

For +ter charite euer encrese+t , CMROYAL-M34,260.366

and +ter she is oure aduocate , and specially to hure choson seruauntes
, as Seynt Anselme declare+t full swetly in is boke De Excellentissima
$Virgine . CMROYAL-M34,260.367

And also +te story - est et cronicus - of Seynt Basilie and of Iulianus
, +te emperour and renegate , telle+t of hur grace wondirly , and on
+tis wize : CMROYAL-M34,260.368

+Tis cursed emperour Iulian , +te wiche som tyme was a Cristen man and
+gede avey from is fei+gthe and becom an ethen man , and lad is ost on a
tyme by +te citte of Cesare , where Seynt Basilie was +to bishopp .
CMROYAL-M34,260.369

And for +tinges +tat greved hym , +tis emperour avowed when +tat he com
homward fro Perse +tat he wold distrow +tat cite and all +te Cristen men
+ter-in . CMROYAL-M34,260.370

+Tan was +tis holy bishopp sory CMROYAL-M34,260.371

and praied God of grace and Oure Ladie with all is deuocions to helpe
+tat Cristen cite . CMROYAL-M34,260.372

Houre Ladie for+gate hym not , CMROYAL-M34,260.373

but graciously herd is prayoure CMROYAL-M34,260.374

and anon send downe an aungell CMROYAL-M34,260.375

and reysed a ded kny+gthe called Sir Mercury , +te wiche was don to
dethe by +tis cursed Iulian . CMROYAL-M34,260.376

+Te aungell armed hym CMROYAL-M34,260.377

and brou+gth hym an hors CMROYAL-M34,260.378

and seid vn-to hym +tat he shuld on Goddis by-half and at Our Ladies
commaundement , +tat he shuld ride in-to Persie and sle +tis terraunt ,
Goddes enmy . CMROYAL-M34,260.379

And so he dud . CMROYAL-M34,260.380

And when +tis cursed emperour conceyved hym-self +tus wonded to dethe ,
anon he +gelded vp is parte and is opinion , CMROYAL-M34,260.381

and cast is blode in-to +te eyre CMROYAL-M34,260.382

and cried vn-to oure Lord with lowde voyse , " Vicisti , Galilee ,
vicisti - CMROYAL-M34,260.383

+tou , Ihesu of Galilee , +tou hast ouercome me . " CMROYAL-M34,260.384

And +tus +te dampned wreche di+ged in bodie and soule .
CMROYAL-M34,260.385

Lo , how +tis Ladie hard +tis holy mans prayour and helped +te Cristen
pepull . CMROYAL-M34,260.386

And +giff +tou be a gret synner and drede +te +tat she will not here +ti
prayoure for +ti synne , +tan pray +tou with +te most synnefull man
Theophile , +te wiche +tat forsoke God vponly afore +te dewell , and
wrote is forsakyng and sealed it with is own seall , and tok it +te
dewell is own person and becam is man . CMROYAL-M34,260.387

But afturward he sore <P_261> repented hym CMROYAL-M34,261.388

and fled vn-to Oure Ladye for helpe . CMROYAL-M34,261.389

And aftur fourty daies penauns Oure Ladie apered vn-to hym
CMROYAL-M34,261.390

and blamed hym sore for is synne , CMROYAL-M34,261.391

but +gitt she gat hym for+geuenes , CMROYAL-M34,261.392

and brou+gthe a+geyn from +te dewell is writynge and is seall ,
CMROYAL-M34,261.393

and declared +tat God had for+geue hym and resceyved hym to grace .
CMROYAL-M34,261.394

+Tis is no fabull +tat I sey +gow . CMROYAL-M34,261.395

It is euery woke songe and rad in holychurch in remembrance of +te good
Ladies kyndenes and grace . CMROYAL-M34,261.396

We , +tan , +tat be not ryghtwis as Seynt Basile was , take we ensampull
of Theophile +te synner CMROYAL-M34,261.397

and pray we with hym , knowynge mekely oure defawtes , seying +tus to
+tis Lady +tat is most gracious in plesaunce : " Most comly of persone
and most holy in soule , +tou Ladie choson afore all o+tur , +tou most
holy and +tou most worshippfull , most excellent in auctorite , +tou
most benigne , and oure mercyfull Ladie of truste , we beseche +te to
helpe vs +tat we may recovere and haue , here grace sufficient , and
blisse eternall with +ti Sonne , oure Lord Ihesu , +te wiche is perfite
God , with +te Fadere and +te Holygoost , and with +te , oure speciall
helpe and all Cristen pepuls . CMROYAL-M34,261.398
